THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO AND CLEANTHES
With introduction and explanatory notes, by A. C. Pearson
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1891.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/fragmentsofzenoc0000acpe).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE FRAGMENTS

OF

ZENO AND CLEANTHES.

London: C. J. CLAY AND SONS,
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AVE MARIA LANE.

Cambridge: DEIGHTON, BELL, AND CO.
Leipzig: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
ew Work: MACMILLAN AND CO.

THE FRAGMENTS

OF

ZENO AND CLEANTHES

WITH INTRODUCTION AND EXPLANATORY
NOTES.

AN ESSAY WHICH OBTAINED THE HARE PRIZE

IN THE. YEAR 1889.

BY

A. C. PEARSON, M.A.

LATE SCHOLAR OF CHRIST’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,

LONDON:
C. J. CLAY AND SONS,
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE.
1891

[All Rights reserved.]

Cambridge:
PRINTED BY ©. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS,
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

PREFACE.

4 c dissertation is published in accordance with the
conditions attached to the Hare Prize, and appears
nearly in its original form. For many reasons, however,
I should have desired to subject the work to a more
searching revision than has been practicable under the
circumstances. Indeed, error is especially difficult to
avoid in dealing with a large body of scattered authorities,
the majority of which can only be consulted in a public
library.

The obligations, which require to be acknowledged for `
the present collection of the fragments of Zeno and
Cleanthes, are both special and general. The former are
soon disposed of. In the Neue Jahrbücher für Philo-
logie for 1873, p. 435 foll, Wellmann published an
article on Zeno of Citium, which was the first serious
attempt to discriminate the teaching of Zeno from that
of the Stoa in general. The omissions of Wellmann were
supplied and the first complete collection of the fragments
of Cleanthes was made by Wachsmuth in two Gottingen
programs published in 1874—1875 (Commentationes I
et II de Zenone Citiensi et Cleanthe Assio).  Mullach's
collection of the fragments of Cleanthes in vol. I of the
Fragmenta Philosophorum | Graecorum is so inadequate
as hardly to deserve mention.

vi PREFACE.

Among the general aids the first place is claimed by
Zeller’s Philosophie der Griechen, which has been con-
stantly consulted. "The edition referred to is the Second
edition of the English Translation of the part dealing with
the Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics, which appeared in
1880. In a few cases the fourth German edition has
also been quoted. Reference is also made to the English
Translations of the other parts of Zeller's book, wherever
available. Except incidentally, Zeller gives up the at-
tempt to trace the development of the Stoa in the hands
of its successive leaders, and this deficiency is to some
extent supplied by the ingenious work of Hirzel, die
Entwicklung der Stoischen Philosophie, forming the second
volume of his Untersuchungen zu Cicero’s Philosophischen
Schriften. To Hirzel belongs the credit of having vin-
dicated the originality of Cleanthes against ancient and
modern detractors, although in working out his views he
often argues on somewhat shadowy foundations, and has
unduly depreciated the importance of the contributions
made by Zeno. Lastly, Stein’s two books die Psychologie
der Stoa (1886), and die Erkenntnistheorie der Stoa (1888),
have been of great service, and his views, where he
disagrees with Hirzel, have been generally adopted. Many
other books have of course been consulted and will be
found cited from time to time, among which Krische’s
die theologischen Lehren der Griechischen Denker, and
Diels’ Doxographi Graeci, deserve special mention. Al-
though the results arrived at have been checked by the
aid of modern writers, the ancient authorities and es-
pecially Diogenes Laertius, Plutarch, Sextus Empiricus,
Stobaeus (Eclogae), and Cicero have been throughout
treated as the primary source of information. The refer-
ences to Stobaeus are accommodated to Wachsmuth’s
edition (Berlin, 1884). Susemihls article on the birth-

PREFACE. vil

year of Zeno in the Neue Jahrbücher für Philologie for
1889 appeared too late to be utilised for the introduction.

A word must be said with reference to the plan of
the present collection. No attempt has been made to
disentangle in every case the words of the writer from
the body of the citation in which they appear. Although
this is practicable in some cases, in others it is mere
guess-work, and a uniform system has therefore been
adopted. For similar reasons the fragments have been
arranged as far as possible in natural sequence, without
regard to the comparatively few cases in which we know
the names of the books from which they were derived.
However, the arrangement has been a matter of much
perplexity, especially in those cases where the authorities
overlap each other, and several modifications in the order
would have been introduced as the result of a larger
experience, were 1t not that each alteration throws all the
references into confusion. The collection was made and
put together practically in its present form before an
opportunity offered of consulting Wachsmuth's pamphlets,
and it was satisfactory to find that only a few of his
passages had been missed. On the other hand, the ad-
ditional matter which will be found here for the first time
is not large. It may, therefore, be reasonably concluded
that we now possess the greater portion of the material,
which is available for reconstructing the history of the
earlier Stoa. For the sake of completeness I have included
even those notices, whose authenticity is open to suspicion,
as well as a collection of the so-called Apophthegmata,
though it is often impossible to draw a strict line between
written and oral tradition.

I desire to thank Mr R. D. Hicks, Fellow of Trinity
College, for many valuable suggestions and criticisms.

is d P: P Í [ m.
i ` L ACH i 10 a E
i "IPG
idi
i
CORRIGENDA.

p. 37, 1. 13, for **he was only able" read “he alone was able”
p. 53, 1. 23, add “ see however on Cleanth. frag. 114.”

INTRODUCTION.

§ 1. Life of Zeno.

Tue chronology of Zeno’s life’, formerly a subject of much
dispute, has been almost entirely cleared up by an important
passage discovered in one of the papyrus rolls found at Hercu-
laneum, which contains a history of the Stoic philosophers and
was first edited by Comparetti in 1875*. From this we learn
that Cleanthes was born in 331 B.c., and, as we know from
other sources* that he lived to the age of 99, he must have
died in B.c. 232 in the archonship of Jason*. But, according
to the papyrus (col. 29), at the time of his death he had pre-
sided over the School for 32 years?, which fixes the death of
Zeno as having taken place in m.c. 264, thus confirming the
authority of Jerome, who says under the year Ol. 129, 1 = B.c.
264, 3° “Zeno Stoicus moritur post quem Cleanthes philosophus
agnoscitur." Now, in Diog. Laert. vit. 28 we have two distinct

! See Rohde in Rhein. Mus. 33, p. 622. Gomperz ib. 34, p. 154.
Susemihl’s article in Fleckeisen's Jahrb. for 1882, vol. 125, pp. 737—740,
does not add anything to our knowledge of the chronology of Zeno's life,

2 Col. 28, 29. Comparetti believes this book to be the work of
Philodemus.

3 Lucian Macrob. 19. "Val. Max. vir. 7, Ext. 11.

4 So too the papyrus col. 28 (4)rn\dd-y(n èr’ &pxovros 'I)ácovos.

5 Such at least is the restoration of Gomperz: Comparetti reads
Tpákovra kal ókro, but admits that dvo is possible. The word after kai
is illegible. :

$ So Rohde states, but in Migne's ed. of Eusebius r. p. 498 the state-
ment appears to belong to Ol. 128.

H. P. 1

2 INTRODUCTION.

accounts of his age at the time of his death, the one, that of
Persaeus, in his 76uKat cxoAai, who makes him 72, and the-
other apparently derived from Apollonius Tyrius’, declaring
that he lived to be 98 years old. Apart from internal con-
siderations, the authority of Persaeus is unquestionably the
higher, and reckoning backwards we are thus enabled to place
the birth of Zeno in the year 336 B.c.” Rohde suggests that
the other computation may have been deduced by Apollonius
Tyrius from the letter to Antigonus, now on other grounds
shown to be spurious, but which Diogenes unquestionably
extracted from Apollonius’ book on Zeno*. In this Zeno is
represented as speaking of himself as an octogenarian, so that
on the assumption that the letter was written in B.C. 282, shortly |
after Antigonus first became king of Macedonia, and, caleu-
lating to the true date of Zeno's death (B.c. 264), he would
have been 98 years of age in the latter year*.

Zeno, the son of Mnaseas*, was born at Citium, a Greek
city in the south-east of Cyprus, whose population had been
increased by Phoenician immigrants*. Whether he was of
pure Greek blood or not we cannot tell", but we can readily
believe that his birthplace, while it in no degree influenced his
philosophical genius, which was truly Hellenic, yet gave an

1 A Stoic philosopher (floruit in the earlier half of the 1st century
B.¢.), For his work on Zeno's life see Diog. L. vir. 1. 2. 24. 28. Strabo
xvi. 2. 24,

2 Gomperz 1l. c. undertook to prove that Zeno died in the month Sciro-
phorion (Ol. 128, 4) — June 264 ».c., offering to produce the proofs in a
later article, but this promise does not seem to have been fulfilled.

BSDio0gs D. yir 1:18.

4 The weakness of this hypothesis lies in the fact that Antigonus
Gonatas did not become King of Macedon until 278—277 s.c., although
no doubt he was struggling for the crown from the time of the death of
his father Demetrius in s.c. 283. This is met to some extent by Rohde
l. c. p. 624 n. 1.

5 Diog. L. vir. 1 mentions Demeas as another name given to his
father but elsewhere he is always Zjvwv Mvacéov.

$ Cimon died while besieging this place (Thue. x. 112).

7 Stein, Psychologie der Stoa n. 3 sums up, without deciding, in
favour of a Phoenician origin. So also Ogereau p. 4 whereas Heinze
thinks that everything points the other way (Bursian's Jahresbericht
vol. 50, p. 53).

INTRODUCTION. 3

Oriental complexion to his tone of mind, and affected the |
character of his literary style, so that the epithet ** Phoenician,”
afterwards scornfully cast in his teeth by his opponents}, is
in any case not altogether unwarranted.

Again following the authority of Persaeus (Diog. L. l.c.)’,
we may conclude that he arrived at Athens at the age of 22,
but as to the cause which brought him thither we are dif-
ferently informed, and it is uncertain whether he came for the
express purpose of studying philosophy?, or in furtherance of
some mercantile enterprise*. There is however a consensus of
testimony to the effect that he suffered shipwreck on his
voyage to Athens, a misfortune which he afterwards learnt to
bless as it had driven him to philosophy”. The story of his
first meeting with Crates is characteristic’: Zeno, who had
recently arrived at Athens, one day sat down by a bookseller’s
stall and became engrossed in listening to the perusal of the
second book of Xenophon’s Memorabilia, Suddenly he en-
quired of the bookseller where such men as Socrates were to
be found. At that moment Crates happened to pass down
the street, and Zeno, acting on a hint from the bookseller,
from that time attached himself to the Cynic teacher.

It is impossible to reconcile the dates, which we have
taken as correct, with the remaining indications of time,
which are scattered through the pages of Diogenes. Thus we
are told that Zeno was a pupil of Stilpo and Xenocrates for
ten years, that the whole time spent under the tuition of

_Crates, Stilpo, Xenocrates and Polemo was twenty years, and
that Zeno presided over the School, which he himself founded,
for fifty-eight years’. This last is the statement of Apollonius,

1 So dowxidiov Crates ap. Diog. L. vi. 3. Cf. Cic. de Fin. rv. 56 et saep.

2 Another account gives his age as thirty (Diog. L. vir. 2).

3 Diog. L. vn. 32.

4 Diog. L. vri. 3.

5 See Zeno apoph. 3, and the notes.

6 Diog. L. vu. 3.

7 Diog. L. vir. 2. 4. 28. The other tradition is traced by Rohde to
Apollodorus known as 6 rods xpóvovs dvaypawas. Evidence of his having
dealt with Zeno's chronology will be found in Philod. mepi $uXocó$ov

1—2

4 INTRODUCTION,

and must be taken in connection with his opinion that Zeno
lived till he was 98 years of age. Probably, Apollonius
adopted the tradition that Zeno came to Athens at the age of
thirty, and allowed ten years for the period of tuition. He
must have assigned B.c. 322 as the date of the foundation of
the Stoa, which is obviously far too early. According to the
chronology adopted above, Zeno came to Athens about B.C. 314,
and, if so, he cannot have been a pupil of Xenocrates, who
died in that year. All that can be said with any approach to
certainty is that after a somewhat extended period of study
under Crates, Stilpo, and Polemo, Zeno at length, probably
soon after 300 B.c.', began to take pupils on his own account,
without attaching himself to any of the then existing philo-
sophical schools. These pupils were at first called Zenonians,
but when their master held his lectures in the Stoa Poikile,
they adopted the name of Stoics which they afterwards
retained’.

Though not yet rivalling the Peripatetic school in respect
of the number of its followers”, the Stoic philosophy steadily
won its way into general esteem no less by the personal influ-
ence of its founder than through the fervour of its adherents.
So great, indeed, was the respect which the character of Zeno
inspired at Athens, that shortly before his death* a decree

col. xi: (Herc. vol. coll. prior vol. viu.) For Zeno’s teachers ef. Nume-
nius ap. Euseb. P. E. xiv. 5, p. 729 IloXéuevos dé èyévovro -yvópuuot
'Apkec(Naos kai Anvev...Zjvwva uèv ody péuynuar eimüw Revoxpare elra 0€
IloNéucyt porroa, adhıs 06 mapa Kparnre xvvicas. vuvi 06 aùr edoylobw,
ür. kal Dritrwvds Te ueréoxe, kal TOV NOywv Tov ‘“Hpaxdecrelwy. — émel yàp
cvudovrvres mapa IMoéuwvi EpidotiuHOnoay àNNjNows cvjwmrapeNaBov els Tiv
Tpós adAjAous u&xmv, ó ev 'HpákNevrov kal Zr(NmTGva dua kal Kpdrmra, wy
brd uév ZriXmQvos éyévero paxnThs, Vrd 0c 'HpakNelrov avornpds, Kuvixos dé
td Kpdrnros.

1 According to Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vir. 321, Zeno was a mpeoBirns
when he rpocewaptipnoey avro Thy etipeow THs ddnOelas. This refers to
the publication of his writings, but this must have shortly followed the
opening of the school. Jerome on Euseb. Chron. (r. p. 498 Migne) says
opposite Ol. 126 ** Zeno Stoicus philosophus agnoscitur."

2 Diog. L. vir. 5.

š Zeno apoph. 6.

5 The decree was carried in the archonship of Arrhenides, i.e. Nov.
265 n.c., if Arrhenides was archon 265—264 as seems to be Gomperz’s
opinion, vid. supr. p. 2, n. 2.

INTRODUCTION. 5

was passed by the assembly awarding him a golden crown
and entitling him to a public funeral in the Ceramicus on
his decease. The grounds mentioned in the body of the
decree, which is preserved by Diog. L. vir. 10, for conferring
this special honour on Zeno were the high moral tone of his
teaching and the example which he set to his pupils in the
blamelessness of his private life. Greatly however as he was
honoured by the Athenians, he steadily refused the offer of
their citizenship! and on one occasion, when holding an
official position, insisted on being described as a citizen of
Citium*. This devotion to his native town, whether a genuine
sentiment of the heart or assumed in order to avow his con-
viction of the worthlessness of all civic distinctions, seems to
have been appreciated by his countrymen, who erected his
statue? in their market-place, where it was afterwards seen
by the elder Pliny*.

In the later years of his life, Zeno's fame extended beyond
the limits of Athenian territory; there is ample record of his
intimacy with Antigonus Gonatas’, the son of Demetrius
Poliorcetes and king of Macedon, and from one anecdote we
learn that he had attracted the attention of Ptolemy Phila-
delphus®. Now that Athens had completely lost her freedom,
she became a hotbed of political intrigue in the interests of
the various successive pretenders to the Macedonian throne;
some beguiled her with the promise of liberty?, but by far the
most potent instrument to gain her favour was gold. Thus,
while the internal politics of Athens had become of purely
municipal interest, the greatest services to which Demochares,
the nephew of Demosthenes, could lay claim as meriting the
gratitude of the Athenians were the substantial money presents

1 Plut. Sto. Rep, 4, 1.

? Diog. L. vir. 12.

3 Diog. L. vir. 6.

4H. N. xxxiv. 19. 32,

5 See Zeno apoph. 25 and 26.

$ See note on apoph. 25.

7 So Demetrius Poliorcetes: Grote vol. x11. p. 196.

6 INTRODUCTION.

which he had obtained for the treasury from Lysimachus,
Ptolemy, and Antipater. We cannot be surprised that, in
such a period as this, Ptolemy and Antigonus, hoping to gain
him over by personal condescension and munificent liberality,
should have eagerly courted the adherence of one, whose influ-
ence like that of Zeno extended over a wide circle among the
youth of Athens, It seems clear however that, in general, Zeno
avoided politics altogether?^; and, although it may be doubtful
whether his friendship for Antigonus may not have induced
Zeno to espouse his political cause, we can at least be sure that
the presents of the king were not accepted as bribes by the Stoic
philosopher. If Zeno died in B.c. 264, he cannot have lived to
see the conclusion of the so-called Chremonidean war, when
Athens was besieged by Antigonus and defended by the joint
efforts of Ptolemy and the Spartans, and it is impossible to say
on which side his sympathies were enlisted, although he is said
to have been a lover of Chremonides*,

In voluntarily hastening his own end, Zeno only illustrated
the teaching of his school. One day, on leaving the Stoa, he
stumbled and fell breaking one of his fingers in his fall.
Regarding this as a warning of Providence, which it was
folly to neglect, and convinced that the right course for a
wise man is willingly to assist in carrying out the decrees of
destiny, he returned home and at once committed suicide’.

His personal appearance was evidently not attractive,
Timotheus’, in his work rept Biwv, described him as wrynecked,
while Apollonius called him lean, rather tall, and of a dark
complexion, with thick calves, flabby flesh, and a weak

1 See Grote vol. xır. p. 214.

2 Cf. Seneca de Trang. An. r. 7 Zenonem Cleanthem Chrysippum,
quorum nemo ad rempublicam accessit.

? Zeno apoph. 44.

4 Zeno apoph. 56. I

5 Nothing seems to be known of the date of this writer: see Dict.
Biog. These authorities are quoted by Diog. L. vit. 1.

ë An uncomplimentary epithet, cf. Theocr. x. 26 BouBixa xaplecca
ZXópav kaNéovrl rv mavres, loxvay adidxavoroy, èy% 0e uóvos ueMxNopov, id.
iii. 35 à ueNavóxpus. .

INTRODUCTION. 7

digestion. The last-named defect is said to have been the
cause of his frugal diet’, but this was no doubt also recom-
mended to him by his philosophical views. In spite of his
habitual abstinence, he enjoyed the company of his friends at
a convivial banquet, where his severity relaxed with the wine
he drank, just as (to use his own comparison) beans are im-
proved by soaking”. For the rest, he seems to have been a
man of few words, but quick at repartee, disliking all dis-
play and effeminacy, and generally of a somewhat stern and
reserved cast of mind, though not without consideration for
the wants of others.

82. Stoicism as established by Zeno.

It will be convenient at this point to summarise those
leading doctrines which the evidence here collected establishes
as having been introduced by Zeno into the Stoic school, with-
out paying regard to isolated expressions or to views of minor
philosophical importance.

Zeno divided philosophy into three parts, logic, physics
and ethics, and we may take them in the order named, as
being that which he recommended.

To the formal side of logic Zeno paid but little attention,
regarding it as useful only for the detection of error, rather
than as a means towards the establishment of truth. The
doctrine of the four categories, and the elaborate treatment of
aéwypara and syllogisms, belong almost entirely to Chrysippus,
and, when we remember that out of 750 books which he is
said to have written no fewer than 311 were devoted to
logical studies, it is not improbable that he owed much of his
reputation to his performances in this branch. In Zeno’s
eyes the most important division of logic was the question of
the standard of knowledge, although strictly speaking this
should rather be considered as belonging to psychology. He

1 els dpros, dWov loxas, érimety VSwp. Philemon ap. Diog. L. vm. 27.
2 See Zeno apoph. 27.

8 INTRODUCTION.

held that, though the senses themselves are unerring, the im-
pressions they convey are often erroneous, and that only such
impressions are to be trusted as are in themselves perspicuous.
The ultimate test of truth resides in the strength of tension
in the impression, as it strikes the sense-organ. If satisfied
in this way that the impression is such that it must proceed
from a real object, the mind in the exercise of its ever present
activity grasps the impression, and assents to it. This is the
meaning which Zeno expressed by saying that $avracía kara-
Anrrixy is the criterion of truth’, Diogenes Laertius, however,
mentions certain dpxaiórepou tov Xrowdv as teaching that
op0os Adyos is the standard of truth. This passage has been
treated by Hirzel (in whose judgment other authorities have
concurred) as proving that Zeno and Cleanthes were the philo-
sophers indicated, and that Chrysippus was the first to in-
troduce the definition of the $avraeía karaXqmTucej. The only
other evidence, by which he connects Zeno with op60s Adyos,
is Philo quis virtuti studet p. 880 appearing in our collection
as frag. 157. To this might have been added Arr. Epict. diss.
IV. 8. 12 (frag. 4) and Philodem. zepi eje. col. 8 (frag. 117).
It is submitted, however, that these passages by no means
prove the point in question, as against the positive testimony
which attributes to Zeno the $avracía koraXqmrTww. In Philo
there is no question of a logical criterion at all, but Zeno is

! As the matter is one of considerable importance, in order to relieve
the notes, it is desirable to quote Stein's remarks (Erkenntnistheorie,
p. 174):—“ Mit Zeller muss man annehmen, dass das xaraMymrikóv
ursprünglich einen aktiven Sinn halte, da der Tonus desselben Zweifels-
ohne auf die didvoa einwirkt. Andererseits muss man Hirzel wieder
darin Recht geben, dass die 0.&voia sich unmöglich rein leidend verhalten
kann, dass vielmehr das xara\nmrixdy auch einen passiven Beigeschmack
hat. Und doch lassen sich beide, sich scheinbar ausschliessende Stand-
punkte vereinigen, wenn man in das xaradnm7ixdy den von uns vermu-
teten Doppelsinn hineinlegt, den Zeno wohl absichtlich andeuten wollte.
Danach wären die $avracía und didvoa bei der karáňnņyıs gleicherweise
teils aktiv, teils passiv, woraus sich die schwankende Anwendung dieses
Ausdrucks sehr wohl erklärt.” For the connection of róvos with kard-
Anyıs, which is not however proved to be Zenonian, cf. Sext. Emp. adv.
Math. vr. 408 adda yàp aürm uév 7j dmrapaNNatla rQv Te karaNymTwOv Kal
TOv dkaraN(ymruv avraciOv karà TÒ évapyes kal Évrovov iðlwua maplorarat.

INTRODUCTION. 9

speaking of the state of mind of the wise man, whose soul is
in perfect conformity with the law of reason, and who has
mastered all his impulses and passions. This is still more plain
in the extract from Philodemus, where opOovs Aóyovs are coupled
with ozovdaias duabéces'. The weight of evidence the other
way must remain to be stated hereafter, but it may be re-
marked that, even if Cicero's testimony is discredited, the fact
of the controversy between Zeno and Arcesilas is not thereby
disproved’. Again, if Zeno defined $avracía as a +úmeocus, and
discriminated between the truth of various $avracía, he must
have pursued the subject still farther ; and, if art and memory
are defined with reference to karaàņyıs and opinion is dis-
tinguished therefrom, it follows of necessity that he must have
defined karaàņyıs itself. Still even admitting to the full the
ethical significance of ópÜós Aóyos?, the passage in Diogenes is
not thereby disposed of, for if Zeno and Cleanthes are not
indicated by the words oi apyadrepor rGv Xrowdv to whom
does this expression refer? Must we, then, suppose that Zeno
put forward two criteria of knowledge, rational thought (0p60s
Aoyos) as well as the experience of sense (karaàņyıs)? Such a
conclusion would be inconsistent with the clearness and direct-
ness of Zeno's teaching. The only way out of the difficulty*
is to adopt the theory of Stein, who regards the doctrine of
op0os Aóyos as a concession to rationalism. op0os Adyos be-
comes, in this view, a subsidiary and secondary criterion?, so
that the results of thought must be confirmed by experience.
In other words, the potential notions inspired in us by the
divine Aóyos require to be completed and corrected on the side

1 For Epict. 1. c. see note on Zeno frag. 4.

2 It is satisfactory to find that Stein, Erkenntnistheorie n. 341, claims
for Zeno the $avracía karadnrrixy on precisely similar grounds to those
stated in the notes to frag. 11.

3 For this see Stein, Erkenntnistheorie pp. 259—204,

4 It should be mentioned that Corssen de Posidonio Rhodio (1878)
pp. 17—19 proposed to eliminate Erwixôv as a blunder of Diogenes or
his authority, assuming that Posidonius was speaking of Empedocles,
the Pythagoreans, and Plato.

5 The meaning of the word ázoXetrovew should in this case be pressed.
Stein, Erkenntnistheorie p. 259. ç

10 INTRODUCTION.

of sensible experience before they can attain to objective
actuality’.

From this point of view, then, it is not unreasonable to
credit Zeno with the substance of the teaching recorded in
Cic. Acad. 1. 41, 42. If so much be admitted, it is most un-
likely that he should have refrained from enquiring into the
nature of knowledge and ignorance, which carry with them
the doctrine of assent. On the other hand, it is most probable
that he only touched lightly the doctrine of évvow and not at
all that of zpoAXqves?.

The remainder of the logical fragments are not of much
importance as regards the positive teaching of the school.
They include a nominalistic criticism of the Platonic theory of
ideas, a curious statement of the nature of causation, a few
scraps dealing with various rhetorical terms, a definition of
geometry, some discussion as to the meaning of the word
góňoos, and a symbolical explanation, recorded by Cicero, of
the different degrees of knowledge.

Zeno's contributions to Physies have been unduly de-
preciated by some authorities but, while it is true that the
development of this branch is largely due to Cleanthes, still a
fair estimate of the fragments here collected will lead us to
the conclusion that the essential groundwork of the Stoic
physical teaching. was laid by the founder of the school*.
Zeno started from the proposition that nothing exists but the
material, inasmuch as body alone is capable of acting and
being acted upon. All body is thus either active or passive
and the material world is itself the result produced from the

1 Stein, Erkenntnistheorie p. 314, 315.

2 Stein holds that mpóňņyıs was substituted by Chrysippus for Zeno's
ópüós Xóyos, in so far as the latter is concerned with epistemology
(Erkenntnistheorie p. 269, 270).

? See Stein, Psychologie p. 56 and n. 77, whose reference to the number
of fragments in Wachsmuth’s collection is however misleading. As
regards Zeno, Wachsmuth's fragments are only intended to be supple-
mentary to Wellmann's article in Fleckeisen's Jahrb. for 1873, so that no
inference can be drawn from the fact that there are more physical than

ethieal fragments. It will be seen from the present collection that the
numbers are very nearly equal.

INTRODUCTION. 11

operation of these two principles. The active principle is God,
and the passive is matter. God is more closely defined as the
fiery aether', which permeates the whole of the universe, even
as honey passes through the honeycomb. He is at once the
embodiment of reason and of law, and the power which binds
in one the various portions of the universe, who, though his
essence is constant, appears in different forms in everything
that exists. Nature, forethought and fate are thus only different
names for the same being ; as nature he creates the world, and
creates it in entire harmony with the law of fate. Matter, on
the other hand, is formless and indeterminate, though limited
in extent, and can exist only in conjunction with some active
quality; although it is itself eternal, its parts are subject
tochange. The creation of the world is brought about by the
action of God upon matter, whereby the creative fire through
an intermediate watery stage passes into the four elements
fire, air, water and earth out of which everything else is formed.
To explain the production of the individual thing by the in-
termingling of its elements, Zeno broached the celebrated
theory of kpácts 9t oXov, which is in effect a denial of the axiom
that two bodies cannot occupy the same space.

The world, however, will not last for ever, nor are we left
without indications of its destructibility. In the inequality of
the earth's surface, in the retrocession of the sea, in the mor-
tality of every substance with which we are acquainted, and
lastly in the fact that the human race and all living creatures
can be shown to have had a beginning in time Zeno saw clear
proofs that the universe itself is destined to pass away. "There
will come a time when by the unceasing law of fate the world
and all that it contains will again be merged in the primeval fire,
only to be created anew, as the embryo is formed from the
seed. For the process is unvarying no less than never-ending ;
a new Heracles will free à young world from its plagues, and
a new Socrates will plead his cause against the same accusers.

1 Stein, Psychologie p. 58, remarks that there is no evidence of Zeno
having used the term mve0ua in this connection.

12 INTRODUCTION.

The individual and the cosmos are thus partakers in the
same decree of fate, but their likeness does not stop here. Not
only is the world a unity, but also a living unity ; it is more-
over sentient, rational, intelligent, and wise.

Two characteristics are especially prominent in Zeno’s
system, first, his metaphysical contrast between God and
matter, and, secondly, his materialism. He seems to have
been animated by a desire to combine the results of later
thought with the simplicity and directness of the early Ionian
physicists. All is to be evolved out of fire: but fire is clothed
with divine attributes, and sharply contrasted with the passive
material on which it works. But Zeno did not observe that
the combination is in reality self-destructive, and that with a
materialistic system metaphysics are superseded, It remained
for his successors to eradicate the dualism which is here in-
volved, and, while thrusting into the background the points
borrowed from Aristotle, to take their stand upon pantheism
pure and simple.

Passing from the account of the cosmogony to the descrip-
tion of the different component parts of the universe, we find
that the circumference of the sphere is occupied by a revolving
belt of aether, in which are the sun, moon and stars, divine
beings formed of creative fire. No void exists within the
world, but outside it there is unlimited void; at the same
time the world is kept together and preserved from dissolution
into space by the attraction of its parts to the centre, in
which the earth is placed. Zeno also explains certain natural
phenomena such as eclipses, lightning, thunderbolts and
comets, and defines time and colour.

We proceed to his anthropology, in which the account of
the soul is most important. Although he apparently omitted
to describe God, who is the soul of the universe, as fiery breath,
yet the soul, which is the moving principle of the body, is
defined as a warm breath, or (after Heraclitus) as a sentient
exhalation. For the soul is fed by exhalation from the blood,
just as the heavenly bodies are by particles from the lower

INTRODUCTION. 13

elements. Moreover, it is corporeal and grows up with the
body, gradually expanding under the influence of external im-
pressions, so that the perfect power of reason is only developed
at the age of puberty. Though it is a simple essence, its
faculties are diverse, and being extended from the wyenovuxóv
which is situated in the heart to the various organs of sense,
it is said to have eight parts, namely, the yyeuovrxov itself, the
five senses, and the capacities of speech and generation. The
soul entirely permeates the body, and at its departure the
composite structure of soul and body is destroyed. The soul
itself endures for a time after its separation from the body
but is not immortal, and its condition after death is deter-
mined by the grade of purity to which it has attained. Such,
at least, seems to be a fair inference from a passage of
Lactantius in which Zeno speaks of the separation of the
unholy from the holy and contrasts the misery of the former
with the blessedness of the latter. On his discussion of the
voice, sleep, vision, and the seed we need not dwell.

It remains to consider Zeno’s attitude towards the popular
religion. Although, in the strict sense, he teaches that there
is but one God, yet he admits that there is a certain amount
of truth in polytheism, as implying a recognition of the
ubiquity of the divine presence. The manifestation of God
in the powers of nature is symbolised by Zeus, Here and
Poseidon, who represent the aether, the air, and the water
respectively. In his interpretation of Hesiod’s Theogony he
gives the reins to his etymological fancy, so as to bring the
cosmogony of the poet into accordance with Stoic views.
Lastly the existence of divination is inferred from the fore-
thought, which characterises the divine government.

Ethics, which are the crowning point of the Stoic system,
come next in order. The aim and object of life is to live in
agreement with nature, which is, in other words, to live
according to virtue: for this is the goal to which nature
conducts us. It would seem that Zeno did not accurately
explain what he meant by nature, since Chrysippus and

14 INTRODUCTION.

Cleanthes took divergent views of its character, but, recog-
nising the manner in which the different branches of the
Stoic system are interlaced with one another’, we may reason-
ably conclude that by the prominence given to nature Zeno
desired to connect his moral teaching with the divine creative
aether, which permeates the universe”. Our first impulses,
however, tend not to virtue but to self-preservation, and virtue
is impossible in the child or the brute, since neither of them
possesses the informing power of reason. These natural im-
pulses require the guidance of reason, and in their proper
subordination to it is to be found the condition of happiness,
which may be described as the unruffled flow of life. For
happiness nothing is required but virtue, and no external
circumstances, nothing but what is morally evil, can diminish
the satisfaction belonging to the virtuous. In this way we
are led to discriminate between dyaa and kaka: only virtue
and vice or their accessories can be classed as good and eyil;
everything else, even life and death, is morally indifferent.
But this classification does not exhaust the capacities of +a
xard vow. The value of virtue is absolute and for all time:
but, just as the supremacy of the monarch does not imply the
absolute equality of his subjects, so the d8ií$opa are ranged
between virtue and vice in a graduated scale of negative and
positive value (azaéía and a£ía), the middle place being oc-
cupied by ta xafaraé dduddopa, i.e. such matters as having an
even or odd number of hairs in one's head. Everything
possessing a£ía is kata pvow, and everything possessing azagia
is mapa dici. At the same time a£ía is not a permanent
attribute of any a3udopov, for that which is at one time kara

1 Cf. Stein, Psychologie p. 13.

2 Hirzel, Untersuchungen 11. p. 108, thinks otherwise and the point is
certainly a doubtful one. If Zeno spoke only of human nature, Cleanthes
may have here, as elsewhere, shown the connection of ethical with
physical doctrine by explaining @úcsu as kow!) Picts. Then Chrysippus
would have united both views. If this was the real development, there
would be some pretext for Stobaeus’ assertion that Cleanthes added 77
gicer to the definition, while the authority of Diogenes Laertius would
remain unimpaired. Sée however Stein, Erkenntnistheorie p. 260.

INTRODUCTION. p5

gvow might, under certain circumstances, become mapa vow.
Herein lies the vita] distinction between dòiapopa and ayaĝa,
for the latter are unaffected by any possible change of circum-
stances: a virtuous action can never be contrary to nature.
Still, although there is not an absolute, there is yet a practical
permanence in the value of certain things, which in the
absence of some paramount objection (=xata mpoynyovpevov
Aóyov or avev meptoTdoeos) we shall always choose in preference
to their contraries. These then are the zponypéva. Cor-
responding with this classification of objects, we have a scale
of actions ranging from xarópÜopa (virtuous action) to uap-
Typa (sinful action) wherein xa6jxov answers to the class of
adiadopa. Every xafjxov is thus directed to the choice of ta
kara pvow and the avoidance of rà mapa dew. The doctrines
of xaÜjkov and mpoņypévov are not to be regarded as an
excrescence foisted on to the Stoic system in consequence of
the pressure of the arguments of opponents, but are an
integral and necessary portion of the original structure as
established by Zeno. The apparent inconsistency, which the
application of these doctrines sometimes produces e.g. in the
remarks on marriage, often disappears when we remember that
the zoduteia proposed to establish a socialistic constitution
under which the importance of dona would be reduced to
a minimum.

Zeno held further that virtue is one and indivisible,
springing from the syeuovikov, of which it is a fixed and
permanent condition. Consistently with this, he maintains
that all sinful actions are equally wrong, since all alike imply
an aberration from a standard, which excludes increase or
diminution. None the less, however, can we distinguish
between different manifestations of virtue or separate virtues:
virtue itself is identical with wisdom (d$póvgo:), and justice,
courage, and temperance are the particular applications of
wisdom in diverse spheres. Whether Zeno also distinguished
between two different kinds of $povgow, one as the ground-
work, and the other as a particular species of virtue, must

16 INTRODUCTION,

remain doubtful. Hirzel (lc. p. 99) infers that he did, but
Plutarch’s words do not necessarily lead to such a conclusion,
and we ought to hesitate to attribute such an inconsistency to
Zeno without direct evidence, No doubt the Stoic school
generally put forward four cardinal virtues dpdvnats, 9ucauoo vq,
avopeta and gwdpoovvn, but inasmuch as Zeno’s position was
admittedly modified by his successors we are left to judge of
his views entirely from the two passages in Plutarch, in which
he is mentioned by name.

The theory of the emotions, which was introduced by Zeno,
constitutes one of the most distinctive features of Stoic ethics.
Whereas Plato and Aristotle agreed in admitting the legiti-
macy of certain emotions, Zeno declared all alike to be
sinful, as being due to an irrational and unnatural movement
in the soul, or an excess of impulse. The four chief emotions
are pleasure, grief, fear and desire, and Zeno in describing their
nature dwelt, if we may trust Galen’s statements, rather on
the psychological effects of the irrational impulse upon the
soul than on the mental conditions which produce them. The
special difficulties surrounding this subject will be discussed in
the notes to the fragments themselves.

The whole of mankind was divided by Zeno into two
classes, entirely distinct from one another, that of the wise
and that of the foolish. Every action of the wise man is
prompted by virtue and every action of the fool by vice.
Hence it is generally true that the wise man performs every
action well, and the fool fails in everything. Friendship,
freedom, piety, riches, beauty, the arts of kingship and general-
ship, even success in culinary operations belong to the wise
man alone: he is never mistaken, never regrets what he has
done, feels no compassion, and is absolutely free from every
form of emotion. At the same time, it is clear that Zeno
‘contemplates a progress from the state of folly to that of
wisdom as practicable; this advance is characterised by the
purgation of the soul from emotional and delusive affections
under the influence of reason. Even though he ultimately

M gi

INTRODUCTION. TZ

emerges from the conflict with success, the wise man still feels
the scars from the wounds he has received during its course,
and is often reminded of his former evil impulses after he has
completely suppressed them. Finally, since death belongs to
the class adidgopa, suicide is justifiable in the wise man, if
circumstances prescribe such a course.

It is obvious that a teacher, whose ethical views were of
the nature, which we have just indicated, could not rest
satisfied with the existing constitution of civic life in Greece.
Equally unsatisfactory to him was the aristocratical com-
munity of Plato, with the sharply drawn dividing line between
the guardians and the rest of the citizens. For this reason
Eros, the god of friendship and concord, is taken as the
presiding deity of Zeno's ideal state, a state which in no way
corresponds to the Greek zó)us, but comprises the whole of
mankind living together like a herd of cattle’. In this state
there will be no temples, law-courts, or gymnasia; no work of
human craftsmen is worthy of divine acceptance; the state
must be adorned not with costly offerings, but by the virtues
of its inhabitants. Zeno likewise advocates an abolition of
coinage, a community of wives, and a thorough revolution of
the current system of education.

The remaining fragments, dealing mainly with particular
kaðńýkovra, do not require to be summarised here.

839. Zeno’s relation to previous philosophers.

The opponents of the Stoic school were fond of accusing
its members of plagiarism and want of originality. Zeno is
the keen Phoenician trader, pilfering other men’s wares, and
passing them off as his own”: if all that belongs to others were
withdrawn from the voluminous writings of Chrysippus, we
should have a blank page*. Antiochus, in Cicero‘, represents

1 Cf. Newman, Politics of Aristotle, vol. 1. p. 88.

a CU Diog. D. vir. 25.

3 Diog. L. vu. 181.

4 Acad. 1.43. The same argument is put forward by Cicero himself
against Cato in the 4th book of the de Finibus.

H. P 2

18 INTRODUCTION.

the views of Zeno as merely immaterial changes in minor
points of the genuine Academic doctrine, while Juvenal
only repeats current opinion in speaking of the Stoic dogmas
as “a Cynicis tunica distantia"'. Even a slight acquaintance
with the Stoic system is sufficient to refute these gross
charges: indeed, its originality is abundantly vindicated when
we point to the influence it exercised for several centuries on
the intellectual life of Greece and Rome’. At the same time
it must be admitted that Zeno was largely indebted to his
predecessors—especially to Antisthenes and Heraclitus—for
the bricks and mortar with which he constructed so splendid an
edifice. Of Cynicism in particular he appropriated the kernel,
while discarding the husk. It is, however, when we look at
Stoicism as a whole that we are able to appreciate the skill
with which its incongruous elements were fused, and the
unity of thought which pervades a variety of detail. The Stoic
wise man is as far removed from Diogenes in his tub, as is the `
all permeating aether from the fiery element of Heraclitus.
We proceed to discuss in detail the various points in which
Zeno’s obligation to previous thinkers is most strongly marked.

A. To Antisthenes and the Cynics.

The resemblances between Zeno and the Cynics are natu-
rally to be found chiefly in their ethical doctrines. Physics
were almost entirely neglected by the Cynics, and their nomina-
listic logic was not of great importance for Stoicism, although
we may observe in passing that both schools maintained in
similar terms? that Plato's ideas were a mere fiction of the
brain and had no objective existence. The Stoic doctrine of
life in accordance with nature finds its historical origin in the

i xr. 121.
2 “Die Stoa war vielmehr die weitaus selbstiindigste Schule der
nacharistotelischen Philosophie,” Stein, Psychologie p. 10.

3 Antisthenes ap. Simpl. in Cat. p. 54b 6 IlAárew, mrov pev ope
immórnra 06 obx ópQ. Cf. Zeno frag. 23.

INTRODUCTION. 19

teaching as well as in the life of Diogenes’. Like Zeno,
Antisthenes teaches that virtue is in itself sufficient to secure
happiness’, that nothing is a Good but virtue, nothing an Evil
but vice, and that everything else is indifferent?, Accordingly
Diogenes held that death, since it involves no disgrace, cannot
be an Evil‘, Hence it is not surprising to learn that many of
the Cynics put an end to their lives by suicide, though we
have sayings both of Antisthenes and Diogenes on record
denying the legitimacy of such a course’. Virtue itself is
described, after Socrates, as consisting in wisdom and pru-
dence: “prudence,” says Antisthenes, “is the safest wall; it
cannot be undermined or betrayed"5*. At the same time the
futility of the ordinary course of Greek education is strongly
insisted on’. The distinction between virtue and vice draws
with it that between the wise and the foolish; the philoso-
pher's wallet preserves a chosen few from a condition border-
ing on madness*.

We are told, on the authority of Diogenes Laertius?, that
Zeno adopted the Cynic form of life. This is probably to be
taken with some limitation, as the incidents recorded of his
life only partially agree with it. It is certain, however, that
his life was one of abstinence and simplicity", and for this
reason he became the butt of the comic poets, who thus un-
consciously testified to his merit. Apollodorus Ephillus, a
later Stoic writer, declared that the wise man would cynicise,
and that Cynicism was a short cut to virtue". It should,
however, always be borne in mind that the Stoic ideal was

1 Diog. L. vi. 71 óéov otv dvrl rQv dxpüorev rover To)s karà plow
éXouévovs (fjv ebóauuóveos. Zeno frag. 120,

? Diog. L. vi. 11. Zeno frag. 125.

? Diog. L. vi. 105. Zeno frag. 128.

4 Arr. Epict. Diss. i. 24. 6. Zeno frag. 129.

5 Zeller Socrates, etc. Eng. Tr. p. 319, n. 5. Cf. Zeno frag. 161.

6 Diog. L. vi. 13. Zeno frag. 134.

7 Diog. L. vi. 103. Zeno frag. 167.

8 Diog. L. vr. 33, 35. Zeno frag. 148.

9 Diog. L. vr. 104. š

10 Diog. L. vi. 26, 27.

11 Diog. vr. 104. vir. 121.

20 INTRODUCTION.

humanised and elevated to an extent entirely incompatible
with Cynicism, mainly owing to the attention which was
bestowed on mental culture’.

Turning to the views of the two schools in applied moral
science, we find a curious agreement as to the relations of the
sexes: Zeno and Diogenes both held that, in the ideal state,
there should be a community of wives, and neither saw any-
thing revolting in marriage between the nearest relations’.
At the same time marriage and the begetting of children are
recommended for the wise man both by Zeno and Antisthenes,
and apparently we must regard this as intended to apply to
the existing condition of life, in which marriage was a civil
institution” Both teachers allow to the wise man the passion
of love, as he alone will be able to select a suitable object*:
both maintain that the virtuous alone are capable of genuine
friendship’.

Lastly, Zeno copied Antisthenes in his treatment of the
Homeric poems, and particularly in explaining certain ap-
parent contradictions as due to the fact that the poet speaks at
one time xard dogav and at another kar adyGeav®. The al-
legorising method of interpretation is common to both, and
was afterwards developed to an excessive degree by Cleanthes
and Chrysippus”.

Though we have thus seen that Zeno’s ethical teaching is
largely founded on Cynicism, we must not forget the many
points of divergence. Thus, for example, we find the Cynics
treating honour and wealth as absolute evils®; these things,

1 The difference of spirit in the two schools is well put by Sir A.
Grant (Ar. Eth. vol. r. p. 317 ed. 3).

2 Diog. L. vr. 72. Dio. Chrys. x. 29. Cf. Zeno frags. 176 and 179.
These passages are from the morela of Zeno, which is supposed to have
been written while he was still an exponent of orthodox Cynicism. Chry-
sippus, however, is reported to have also held this repulsive doctrine.

3 Diog. L. vi. 11. Zeno frag. 171.

4 Diog. L. vr. ll. Zeno frag. 172.

Diog. L. vr. 12. Zeno frag. 149.

Dio. Chrys. 53, 4. Zeno frag. 195.

See Cie. N. D. rr. 63 foll.

See the passages collected by Zeller Socrates, etc, E. T. p. 304,

arian

INTRODUCTION. 21

according to Zeno, belonged to the class of mponyuéva. Again,
to take their attitude towards the popular religion, we know
that Zeno expressly countenanced divination, while the ex-
istence of prophets made Diogenes think man the most foolish
of animals’.

B. To Heraclitus.

There can be no doubt that Zeno borrowed some important
principles in his physical teaching from the writings of He-
raclitus, and particularly from his account of the cosmogony.
There is, however, a difficulty in comparing the doctrines of
the two schools minutely, owing to the obscurity in which our
knowledge of the Heraclitean theories is involved, and which
is often increased by the doubt as to whether some particular
doctrine belonged equally to the Stoics and the philosopher
of Ephesus, or whether some later development, introduced by
the former, has not been wrongly ascribed to the latter by our
authorities. For instance, it was at one time stoutly main-
tained that the conflagration of the world was not taught by
Heraclitus but that it was first propounded by Zeno, although
the contrary opinion seems now to prevail. Again, it is not
entirely clear whether we are to class Heraclitus, as Aristotle
does*, with the early Ionian physicists, starting from his
dogma that all things are fire, or whether we are to regard
this principle as a metaphysical abstraction, metaphorically
shadowing forth the eternal flux of all things, a view which is
more in accordance with Plato’s criticism in the Theaetetus*.
However this may be, Heraclitus is essentially a hylozoist,
who, following Anaximenes, chooses fire as being the rarest
element, and insists on the continuity of change in order to
escape from the mechanical theories of Anaxagoras and Em-

1 Diog. vr. 24 and contrast Zeno frag. 118.

? See the elaborate discussion in Zeller, Pre-Socr. Phil. Eng. Tr. rr.
pp. 62—77. See however Bywater, Journ. Phil. r. 42.

? Met. 1. 3. 8. This is the view of Ueberweg p. 40 and is also held by
Dr Jackson.

* Zeller's position (p. 20 foll.) combines the two views.

22 INTRODUCTION.

pedocles on the one hand, and the Parmenidean immobility on
the other. The Adyos évvòs is with him the expression of the
truth that nothing can be known but the law of mutability,
the harmony in difference, which he likens to the stretching of
a bowstring’. This law he calls yvøun, 86$, eipappévn, Tò
Tepiéxov pas Xoywóv Te ðv kal jpevijpes, and ó Zevs?, but these
terms are mere metaphors and we should be wrong in straining
their philosophic import: they represent, in fact, the law of
change and nothing more. Still, there can be no doubt that
the use which Heraclitus made of his formula Adyos was one
of the chief points in his system which attracted the attention
of Zeno. As a disciple of Cynicism he was familiar with
Aóyos as a dialectical and an ethical principle: neither of these
aspects of Adyos was discarded by him in broaching his own
system. Yet, through the help of the Heraclitean Aóyos, he
was enabled to take one step further. Just as Plato gave to
the Socratic vzóÜecis or general conception a metaphysical
existence in the form of the idea, so did Zeno elevate the Aóyos
of Antisthenes from its position as a criterion for thought and
duty to that of the physical cause of being and movement’,
The Stoic deity is, like the Heraclitean Aóyos, provided with
many names, such as God, Mind, the all pervading Aether,
Fate, Forethought, and Zeus, but on the other hand it belongs
to an essentially later period of thought. We have here set
forth the teleological view of Nature, which is regarded as
creating all things out of itself for a good purpose*, The
Stoics, at least after Cleanthes, are also pantheists in so far as
they acknowledge that God and the world are identical. Even
where Zeno followed Heraclitus most closely there are essential
differences in treatment. The fire of Heraclitus becomes

1 Heraclitus frag. 56 ed. Bywater. Hirzel finds here the origin of the
Stoic róvos, but this is very questionable.

? For a detailed statement see Krische, Forschungen p. 368 foll.

3 The comparison is suggested by Hirzel r. p. 42. But Hirzel very
much underestimates the influence of Heraclitus on Zeno, as Heinze has
pointed out, It is quite contrary to the evidence to attribute the Hera-
clitean tendencies of the Stoa solely, or even mainly, to Cleanthes.

4 Cic. N. D. 11. 58.

INTRODUCTION. 23

aether or zip texvixov—for this distinction is unknown to the
Ephesian—and is thereby spiritualised and rarefied. Instead
of three elements the Stoics have four, according to the universal
practice of post-Aristotelian writers. Cleanthes, at least, re-
garded these four elements merely as graduations of róvos, a
notion entirely alien to Heraclitus. The doctrine of ravra
pet is replaced by that of peraBodr7, and addolwors gives way
to the characteristic theory of the mixture of substances,
known as xpácis ó oAwy. In stating the differences between
the two schools we have indicated how the Stoic physics were
built upon Heraclitus. The remaining resemblances are com-

paratively unimportant. It was a natural corollary to both “`

systems to maintain the unity of the cosmos'. Zeno seems to
have adopted Heraclitus’ definition of the soul as an ava-
Ovpíacos, but, instead of regarding this exhalation as imbibed
from the outer air (ro mepiéxov), he taught that the soul was
fed by emanation from the warm blood. Where Heraclitus
regarded dryness as an essential characteristic of the wise
soul’, the Stoics rather looked for warmth or evxpacía. Lastly,
we may observe that Heraclitus attributed immortality to
the soul,and that in Ethies he counselled submission to the
common law and the regulation of speech and thought in ac-
cordance with the demands of nature’.

C. To Plato and Aristotle.

It has often been observed as a remarkable fact that the
influence exercised both by Plato and Aristotle on their im-
mediate successors was comparatively small Zeno and Epi-
curus sought the ground work of their ethics in the systems of
Antisthenes and Aristippus, and followed in their physics,
with surprising closeness, the pre-Socratie philosophers He-
raclitus and Democritus. Indeed, the Peripatetic school itself
showed no great vitality after Theophrastus, the new Academy

1 Stob. Ecl. 1. 22. 3 b p. 199, 10.
? Heracl. frag. 74, Bywater.
3 Stob. Floril. rrr. 84.

24 INTRODUCTION.

of Arcesilas and Carneades bore no resemblance to that founded
by Plato, and Antiochus owed more to the Stoa than to the
old Academy which he professed to resuscitate. In the post-
Aristotelian philosophy, taken as a whole, we find a universal
tendency to materialistic views, a striking decline of interest
in purely intellectual research, as an end in itself, and a
general agreement in confining the area of speculation to the
two questions of the standard of ethics and the logical criterion.
However we are to explain this phenomenon, and even if we
consider inadequate the explanation of Zeller, who attributes
this result to the loss of political freedom and the consequent
concentration of thought on the needs of the individual, we
are more concerned with the fact itself than with its possible
causes’. It is enough to say that the system founded by Zeno
was in no sense the offspring of those of Plato and Aristotle,
although in many points it presupposes their existence.

In the case of Chrysippus we may go further, for there is
no doubt that his logic was largely a development, and that
not a very happy one, of the Aristotelian doctrine of the
syllogism. Zeno, however, although the titles of several of
his logical treatises have come down to us, was not considered
to have paid great attention to this branch of philosophy.
The principal contribution made by Zeno to the theory of
knowledge is the establishment of the davracia katadnrtiKxy
as the criterion: in this, the essential point, whereby the con-
vincing power of the impression is made the test of its reality,
is due entirely to Zeno, but he was obviously influenced by
the Aristotelian treatment of d$avracía, in which it appears as
“decaying sense,"^ and is more accurately defined as “the
movement resulting from the actual operation of the sense
faculty"?. Again, in the Zenonian definitions of memory
and art there will be found a familiarity with the progres-
sive stages in the growth of knowledge, as enunciated by

! This question is discussed in Benn's Greek Philosophers (Preface).
? Rhet. 1. 11. 1370 a 28.
3 de An. rr. 3. 429 a 1.

INTRODUCTION. 25

Aristotle’, and his terminology, at any rate, is recognisable in
a logical fragment preserved by Stobaeus’.

Diogenes Laertius introduces his discussion of the Stoic
physics by stating that the two apxaí posited by the school
were God and Indeterminate Matter: here we have not only
the well-known Aristotelian distinction between the formal
and the material cause, but also his description of matter as
that which is entirely formless and contingent?. The aether,
the so called quinta essentia of Aristotle, of which the heavenly
bodies were composed, has its representative under the system
of Zeno, who held that the circumference of the world was
surrounded by a moving belt of aether.

Cicero puts into the mouth of professed Antiocheans, and,
when speaking in the character of Antiochus, himself makes
the charge that Zeno’s Ethics are identical with those of the
Academy, and that the only change is one of terminology.
This is developed at length in the fourth book of the de Finibus,
where Cicero points out the inconsistency of denying that
external goods contribute to happiness, while admitting that
they have a certain positive value. There is considerable force
in the objection in so far as it lays bare a weak point in the
Stoic stronghold, but, if it is meant for a charge of plagiarism,
it is grossly unfair. In fact, as has been remarked, Antiochus,
who himself stole the clothes of Zeno, was always anxious to
prove that they never belonged to Zeno at all. As we know,
however, that Zeno was a pupil of Polemo, it is not unnatural
to find that he was to some extent influenced by his teaching.
Thus, life according to nature was one of Polemo’s leading
tenets, and Clement of Alexandria has preserved the title of
one of his books which deals with this subject*. Zeller well

1 Met, r. 1. Anal. Post. rr. 19.

2 Zeno frag. 24.

3 Metaph. vi. 3. 1029 a 20 Aéyw © UAnv 5 kað? abrhy mre Te pre
ocv wíre ado unõèv Névyerac ols Wpicrar TO bv.

4 Cic. Fin. tv. 6.14. Clem. Alex. Strom. vrr. p. 304 Sylb. Polemo
himself is represented as saying to Zeno :—où NavAdvers, © Züvwv, rais
Kntalas Tapewpéov Ovpas, kal rà Oo-yuara kNémraov powikuKGs peTaudrevvis
(Diog. L. vir. 25). One of the doctrines, which were in this way appro-

26 INTRODUCTION.

sums up the extent of Academic influence when he says! that
‘such points in Platonism as the Socratic building of virtue
on knowledge, the comparative depreciation of external goods,
the retreat from sensuality, the elevation and the purity of
moral idealism, and, in the older Academy, the demand for
life according to nature, the doctrine of the self-sufficiency of
virtue and the growing tendency to confine philosophy to prac-
tical issues—all these were questions for a Stoic full of in-
terest.” Amongst the particular points, in which Zeno seems
to have felt the influence of Plato, may be mentioned the
doctrines of the cardinal virtues (frag. 134) and the zá6»
(frag. 142) and the explanation of the world as Gov éuvxov
(frag. 62).

We have endeavoured briefly to indicate certain leading
points of doctrine in which Zeno was influenced by his pre-
decessors, leaving minor resemblances to be pointed out in
the notes,

§ 4. The writings of Zeno.

A list of the titles of Zeno’s works is preserved in Diog. L.
vil. 4, but is admittedly incomplete, as the same writer himself
makes additions to it in his exposition of the philosophical
views of the Stoic school. This list was probably derived by
Diogenes from two distinct sources, as it is divisible into two
separate portions. The first or main division gives the names
of 13 (or 14) works, of which 6 deal with ethical, 4 with
physical, and 3 (or 4) with logical and miscellaneous subjects ;
then follows a kind of appendix giving 4 (or 3) additional
titles. Apollonius Tyrius has been with much probability
suggested as the authority to whom the main division is due’,

priated by the Stoa, appears to be the third definition of pws preserved
by Andronicus zepi mahv c. 4 as úmnpecla Gedy els véov KaTakdounow Kal
kaXGv: cf, Plut. ad prin. iner. 780 p IloNéuwv &Xevye Tov epwra elvar Pedy
imnpeciay els véwy émuéNeiav (Kreuttner, Andronicus p. 49).

1 Stoics ete. p. 399.

? See Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, Antigonos p. 107: Zeller and Wachs-
muth adopt Nietzsche's hypothesis (Rhein. Mus. xxiv. 185) that all the
lists in Diog. are, with certain exceptions, derived from Demetrius of

INTRODUCTION. 27

for not only does Diogenes in several places cite him by
name (e.g. § 2) but also Strabo (xvi. 2. 24, p. 757) expressly
mentions a work of his with the title miva trav ard Zyvwvos
pirioc0guv kal tév BiBdtwv ; who supplied Diogenes with the
appendix has not been determined.

The works, of which any record has survived to us, may
be divided into four classes :—

I. Logical.

(1) mept Adyov. From this work, not mentioned in the
general catalogue, Diog. L. (vir. 39. 40) cites the triple division
of philosophy and the order of arrangement for its study, which
Zeno recommended. According to Susemihl, this book con-
tained Zeno’s epistemology, but, being superseded by the
writings of Chrysippus, lost its place in the canon.

(2) xafodixc. Nothing is known of this work but the
title (Diog. 4)': Wachsmuth thinks that xafodAcka mepi Aéfeov
is the title of a single work.

(3) mepi Aééeov (Diog. 4). In Stoic terminology Aé£ss is
defined as $o éyypdpparos as opposed to Adyos which is $o)
onpavTiKy amo Ouvoías éxmeumopév (Diog. vir. 56). It is pro-
bable, therefore, that this work dealt specially with the defini-
tion of terms, and to it may perhaps belong the fragments in
which Zeno explains the proper meaning of codAorkilew (frags.
30 and 31), Wellmann (Neue Jahrb. für Philol. 107, p. 478)
suggests that this treatise gave rise to the oft-repeated ac-
cusation made by Cicero that Zeno’s innovations in philosophy
were solely of a verbal character, and that Chrysippus had
defended his master from a similar charge in the work zepà
TOU Kupins kexprja Oa Zývova rots ovópacuv.

(4) réxvn (Diog. 4). This is identified by Zeller and

Magnesia, who is specified by name with reference to Xenophon's works
(Diog. L. rr. 57). Susemihl (Jahrbücher für Philol. 125, p. 741) thinks
that the Diogenes catalogue comprises only those writings of Zeno which
were included in the Stoic canon, and that the moMreía, the réxvy éporucj,
and the dvarpiBal were treated as apocryphal while their genuineness was
admitted.

1 See however on frag. 23.

28 INTRODUCTION,

Wellmann with the épwrixy réxvn of § 34, while Wachsmuth
writes téyvy kai Ames kal 2Aeyxo. [jas one title. The third
course, which at first sight seems the most natural inasmuch
as téxvn bears this special meaning from Corax and Tisias
downwards, is to regard it as an art of rhetoric. The ob-
jection to this view is that it is inferred from Cicero de Fin.
IV. 7 that no work of Zeno bearing this title was known to
Cicero or his authority, but too much reliance need not be
placed on this, as it is clear that Zeno's logical treatises had
been cast into the shade by the more elaborate performances
of Chrysippus. On the other hand, there is a fair amount of
evidence to show that Zeno did to some extent busy himself
with rhetoric (frags. 25, 26, 27, 32), and though Zeller suggests
that the definitions of dupyyors and rapaderyya may belong to
some other Zeno, this does not apply to the passages in Sextus
and Quintilian.

(5) Avoes kai ¿AXeyxo. B (Diog. 4). Possibly owing to
the influence of Stilpo the Megarian, Zeno may have devoted
some attention to this branch of logic, which in general he
regards as of less importance’: see frag. 6.

II. Physical.

(6) «epi rod oXov (Diog. 4) seems to have been the most
important of Zeno's physical writings. Diogenes refers to it as
containing Zeno's views about the elements (vir. 136) and the
creation and destruction of the world (ib. 142), and quotes
from it the statement that there is only one world (ib. 143).
It also contained an account of the eclipses of the sun and
moon (ib. 145), and explanations of the phenomena of thunder
and lightning (ib. 153).

(T) «epi dicews cited by Stobaeus Ecl. 1. 5. 15. p. 78, 18.
for Zeno's views on the subject of eikapuévg : Krische (p. 367)
would identify it with the last named treatise.

1 This is the only work which deals with the formal side of logie, so
that Stein’s argument in Erkenntnistheorie n. 689 might have been put
more strongly. He follows the old reading and speaks of two treatises,
Texvixal ices and &Xeyxoc B'.

INTRODUCTION. 29

(8) «epi ovcias unnecessarily identified by Wellmann (l.c.
p. 442) and Susemihl with mept cAov and cepi púsews is quoted
by Diog. (134) for Zeno's definition of the two first principles,
God and Matter.

(9) mepi onpetwv: a treatise on divination (Diog. 4).
Thus gavruw is defined in Stob. Ecl. rr. 122, 238 as émorypn
Gewpytixn onpetwv TOV aro lev 7) daipovwy Tpos avÜpoxrivov piov
evvrewóvrov. This is no doubt the work referred to by Cic. de
Div. 1. 3, 6 sed cum Stoici omnia fere illa diffunderent quod
et Zeno in suis commentariis quasi semina quaedam sparsisset.
Its position in the catalogue makes against Prantl’s hypo-
thesis', who classes it as a logical work.

(10) «epi Oyees only known by its title (Diog. 4) is re-
garded as logical by Stein.

(11) Ilv6ayopwa (Diog. 4) classed by Wachsmuth as a
physieal book owing to its position in the catalogue, but nothing
else is known concerning it.

III. Ethical.

(12) rept roô Ka@yxovros (Diog. 4). Here must belong
Zeno's definition of duty (frag. 145), from the terms of which
Wellmann conjectures without much probability that we should
identify this treatise with the following.

(13) rept rod kara piow Biov (Diog. 4).

(14). mep opps 7) epi avOpdrov picews (Diog. 4).
Diogenes quotes the Zenonian definition of the summum
bonum from this book (vu. 87); Fabricius (Bibl. Gr. ru. 580)
proposed to separate this title reading 7 = octo, and Weygoldt
adopting this further identified rept avOpwrov dicews with mepi
dvcews, but the latter is not an anthropological work.

(15) mepi a6óv (Diog. 4) containing the general defini-
tion of emotion and the discussion of its several subdivisions,
pain, fear, desire and pleasure (ib. 110).

(16) “orea. This seems to have been the most
generally known, as it is certainly the most often quoted, of
Zeno's writings; it was also one of the earliest in point of

l1,p.458. So also Stein, Erkenntnistheorie n. 689.

30 INTRODUCTION.

time, having been written while its author was still under the
influence of Cynicism (Diog. 4). Plutarch informs us that it
was written as a controversial answer to Plato’s Republic.
The allusions to it are too numerous to be specified here in
detail’.

(17) epi vópov (Diog. 4). From its position in the
catalogue this work must have belonged to the political side
of ethies, and Krische's supposition (p. 368) that it treated of
the divine law of nature is therefore rebutted.  Themist. Or.
xxii. p. 287 a speaks of the vópo: of Zeno but appears to be
referring generally to his philosophical precepts.

(18) mepi ris “EAAnvixns o4eías (Diog. 4): cf. frag. 167,
which however is stated to belong to the zoA«reía.

(19) époruc] vréxvm (Diog. 34). To this book pro-
bably belongs the interesting fragment (174) preserved by
Clem. Alex. relating to the behaviour suitable to young
men.

(20) duarpiBai (Diog. 34): a similar work, as we are
told by Diog. whose statement is confirmed by the passages
(frags. 179, 180) quoted from it by Sextus. As we are told
by Plutarch that something of the same kind was contained in
the zoAwreía, we may believe that this and the last three works
were written in close connection with it, as shorter appendages
dealing with special topies, and before Zeno had worked out
the distinctive features of Stoicism. From the general meaning
of “lectures, discussions" (for which cf. Plat. Apol. 37 D ras
èuas duatprBas kai rovs Adyous) carpi seems to have assumed
the special sense of a short ethical treatise, if we may trust
the definition of Hermogenes (Rhett. Gr. ed. Waltz, t. 111. p.
406) &urpuB:; ear Bpaxéos diavonpatos x0uo0 extacis. — Zeller's
identification with the xpet is improbable, and Susemihl

1 A summary will be found in Wellmann 1. c. p. 437 foll. As regards
its Cynic tendencies Susemihl observes :—Wer den Witz machte, er sei
bei ihrer Abfassung wohl schon über den Hund gekommen, aber noch
nieht über den Schwanz, schrieb eben damit dies Werk einer etwas
spütern Zeit, zu frühesten etwa als er von Krates zu Stilpon überge-
gangen war.

INTRODUCTION. ol

believes that the uwrpidai was excluded from the miva as
being an earlier Cynic work.

(21) Ona (Diog. 4). The title is somewhat doubtful,
as Wachsmuth reads azoguvquoveópara Kparytos cua as a
single title, and Wellmann would emend 7 ypeta for 56d:
more probably however it was a collection of short ethical
tpoBAypara.

IV. Miscellaneous.

(22) mpoBAnpdrwv 'Opgpuóv € (Diog. 4): we learn from
Dio. Chrys. 53, 4 that Zeno wrote on the Iliad, Odyssey
and Margites, and that his object was to show the general
consistency of Homer by explaining that a literal meaning
was not to be applied throughout the poems, which ought
in many instances to be interpreted allegorically. That he
in some cases proposed emendations may be seen from
Strabo vir 3. 6, cf. ib. r. p. 41, xvi. p. 1131.  Krische p. 392
shows that there is no foundation for the suggestion that
Zeno attributed the Iliad and the Odyssey to different
authors.

(23) epi movytixns axpoacews (Diog. 4). Stein, Er-
kenntnistheorie n. 689, speaks of this work, the zpoBX. “Opp.
and the wept “EAAnv. tað. as an educational series, and regards
them as an appendix to the zoAcreía.

(24). dropvnpovevpara Kparyros (Diog. 4) also mentioned
by Athen. iv. 162 B as Zwvevos aropvynpovedpata, from which
Persaeus is said to have made extracts. There seems little
doubt that this was identical with the ypeta: mentioned in Diog.
vi. 91 in connection with Crates, or that Wachsmuth is right
in referring to this book the story of Crates and the cobbler
(frag. 199). Aphthonius’ definition of xpe&a runs thus :—aro-
pvnpoverpa avvroj.ov eboTóxos eri Te mpógomov avaoepópevov.

(25) émwroAa( (Maxim. Floril ed. Mai, c. 6). This
reference was first pointed out by Wachsmuth, see frag. 190.

The passage in Cic. N. D. 1. 36 (cum vero Hesiodi Theo-
goniam interpretatur) led Fabricius to insert among his list of
Zeno's writings (111. p. 580) tzouvypoverpa eis mv “Howdov

o2 INTRODUCTION.

Geoyoviay', and there can be no doubt from the statements in
Proclus and the other Scholiasts? that Zeno's labours extended
to Hesiod as wellas to Homer. It is, however, impossible to
say in what work these fragments appeared, and we do not
feel much inclined to accept Krische's view (p. 367) that the
allegorical explanations of Hesiod were worked into the cepi
óXov?. May they not belong to the wept zoujrui]s axpoarews?

It remains to call attention to Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 9. 58
p. 245, S. p. 681, P. adda Kat of Srwrkoi Aéyovat Zývovi tS porro
yeypádÜa. twa à pù fpadiws émurpérouou Tois pabytais avaye-
yvóokev pa] ooxi meipav dedwxdar vpórepos e yvnoíws oiXocodotev,
but similar suggestions of esotericism are made against all
the post-Aristotelian schools, and especially against the New
Academy. (Mayor on Cic. N. D. r. 11.)

85. Zeno’s style.

The fragments which survive of Zeno’s writings are not
sufficient to enable us to form any satisfactory opinion of his
style, and it would be unsafe to generalise from such scanty
data. We shall therefore only attempt to point out those
characteristics about which there can be no doubt.

The later Greek philosophers troubled themselves but little
with the graces of literary ornament. Philosophy had now
become scientific in its treatment and ceased to be artistic in
form. Zeno was no exception to this rule, and was satisfied if
he presented his arguments to his readers with directness and
perspicacity. In this respect, he has been successful in avoid-
ing obscurity*, though he lays himself open to the charge of

1 See Flach, Glossen und Scholien zur Hesiodischen Theogonie, p. 29
foll.

2 Cf. also Diog. L. vrm. 48, Minue. Felix Octav. xrx. 10 Chrysippus
Zenonem interpretatione physiologiae in Hesiodi Homeri Orpheique
carminibus imitatur.

? Zeller who formerly supported this view (Stoics p. 40) now thinks
otherwise (Ph. d. Gr. 1.4 1. 32).

4 Fronto ad Verum Imperat. r. p. 114 ad docendum planissimus
Zenon. Cf. Diog. L. vir. 38 or: ëv otv abrod kal rà Tpoc^yeypauuéva Biba

INTRODUCTION. 33

abruptness and want of finish. To this tendency was due his
custom of couching his arguments in syllogistic formulae,
which often served to cloak a somewhat obvious fallacy’.
This formally logical style subsequently grew so habitual with
the Stoics that they earned for themselves the title of siae-
tiuxoi. Cicero (N. D. ur 22) especially observes on Zeno’s
fondness for certain *breues et acutulas conclusiones," and
several examples of these are to be found in his remaining
fragments. “That which is reasonable is better than that
which is unreasonable; but nothing is better than the world:
therefore the world is reasonable.” “That thing at whose
departure the living organism dies is corporeal: but the living
organism dies when the breath that has been united with it
departs: therefore this breath is corporeal: but this breath is
the soul; therefore the soul is corporeal.” ‘That is altogether
destructible all whose parts are destructible: but all the parts
of the world are destructible; therefore the world is itself
destructible,” cf. also frags. 59, 60, 61, 129, 130.

Passing to quite a different characteristic, we remark in
Zeno’s style a certain picturesqueness and love of simile, which
perhaps may be regarded as traceable to the Oriental influence
of his birth-place*. Particularly striking is his observation
that those who are in a state of zpoxor7 may from their
dreams discover whether they are making progress, if then
the imaginative and emotional part of the soul is clearly
seen dispersed and ordered -by the power of reason, as in the
transparent depth of a waveless calm (frag. 160). Zeno,
says Cicero (N. D. rr 22), “similitudine, ut saepe solet,
rationem concludit hoc modo." “If tuneful flutes were pro-
duced from an olive should not we regard some knowledge of

Tohid, èv ols éNáNqgoev ws ovdels TOv Erwikôv in which passage Stein,
Psychologie n. 2, finds evidence of ‘die Klarheit und Gediegenheit der
Schriften Zenos.”

1 In Cic. N. D. 11. 20 the Stoic claims that such arguments ‘‘apertiora
sunt ad reprehendendum.” Elsewhere Cicero calls them ‘ contortulis
quibusdam et minutis conclusiunculis nee ad sensum permanentibus."
'Tusc. 11. 42.

2 Cf. Wellmann l. c. p. 445.

H. P. 3

34 INTRODUCTION,

flute-playing as inherent in the olive?” (frag. 63). In like
manner he uses the simile of the minister in a royal court to
explain his doctrine of the zponyevov (frag. 131), and likens
his ideal commonwealth to a herd grazing on a common
pasture (frag. 162).

Not only in elaborate comparisons but also in single ex-
pressions may the same picturesque touch be seen. Thus
character is said to be the fountain of life (frag. 146), emotion
a fluttering of the soul (frag. 137), and happiness the unruffled
flow of life (frag. 124).

It will be remembered that Cicero, or his authority, con-
stantly taunts Zeno with being the inventor of new words,
and new words only’. When scrutinised, this appears to mean
not so much that he was a coiner of new expressions, as that
for the purposes of his system he appropriated words already
in existence as part of his special terminology. Putting aside
mponypévov and zozpowypuévov, which stand on rather a
different footing, we may instance zpoxo7y, évapyeia, cvyKata-
Ócows, karopÜopa, Katadnyis, kaOTnkov, évvou()), and mémocus :
mpóňņyıs is certainly not due to Zeno. Yet, although none
of these words are new coinages, xataAnyis and kaĝņkov are
instances specially selected by Cicero in support of his statement.

Diog. Laert. x. 27 speaking of Chrysippus observes :— xai
Ta paprópu. Togaðra écT(v, ws éke(vov póvov yéuew Ta BrBdia,
kaÜdzep Kal mapa Zývoví èst ebpév kai mapa 'ApwroréAet.
The existing fragments however do not justify this assertion.

Finally, although doubtless the circumstances under which
the fragments have been preserved render this tendency more
noticeable than it otherwise would be, we shall not be wrong
in attributing to Zeno a love of precise definition. The school
afterwards became famous for their definitions (cf. Sext.
Pyrrh. rn. 205—212), and it is not unreasonable to suppose
that the habit originated with the founder. Instances of this

1 Cic. Fin. nr. 5. 15. "Tusc. v. 32. 34. Legg. 1. 38, ete. Cf. Galen
de diff. puls. vir. 642 ed Kühn Zývwv 06 6 Kırıeùs ¿zL mpórepov éróNumce
kaworopely Te kal UrepBalvew Tò Tov 'EXNávcv &0os év Tots óvóuacuw.

INTRODUCTION. ; e735

will occur passim. In fact, his writings in their general
character were dogmatic and terse rather than discursive and
polemical. The longest extract in the following pages is of
dubious authenticity, and therefore for a specimen of the style
of our author we would refer to the description of youthful
modesty in frag. 174.

$6. Cleanthes.

In discussing the dates of Zeno's life we have seen that
there is good reason to believe that Cleanthes was born in the
year B.C. 331, and if so he was only five years younger than
Zeno. We also saw that he lived to the age of 99 and
presided over the Stoa for 32 years from s.c. 264 till his death
in B.C. 232. Against this computation there is to be taken
into account the fact that Diogenes (vir. 176) states that he
lived to the age of 80 and was a pupil of Zeno for nineteen
years. Unless we are prepared to reject the authority of the
papyrus altogether, we have in Diogenes' account either a
different tradition or a stupid blunder’, In any case,
Cleanthes was well advanced in life when he became head
of the Stoic School.

He was born at Assos, a town in the Troad, but at what
age he came to Athens or under what circumstances he be-
came a pupil of Zeno we have no information. His circum-
stances were those of extreme poverty: he is said to have been
a boxer before he embraced philosophy, and the story is well
known how he earned his living by drawing water at night, in
order to devote his daytime to study”. Hence the nickname
of @peavtAns was given to him by his opponents, while his
friends in admiration of his laborious activity called him a
“second Heracles.” The man's mind is shadowed forth in
these anecdotes: the same earnestness and thoroughness which

1 Rohde 1. e. p. 622 n. 1 suggests that Diogenes subtracted the 19
years passed under Zeno’s tuition from the years of his life, but this is
hardly credible.

2 Diog. L. vir. 168.

3—2

36 INTRODUCTION.

characterised his life are no less apparent in his teaching,
Whatever he did was marked by energy and completeness
and was grounded on deeply-rooted conviction. Philosophy
with him was not merely an intellectual exercise, but far
more a religious enthusiasm. This religious fervour led him
to regard the theological side of philosophy as of the highest
importance, and, feeling that the praise of the divine majesty
should be set forth in something higher than sober prose, his
genius expressed itself in poetical compositions of the greatest
merit. It is easy to believe that a man of this character may
have proved an unsuccessful teacher, and there is some eyi-
dence that under his presidency the Stoic school was in danger
of losing ground, ef. Diog. L. vir. 182 oros (Chrysippus)
Ovet0ur Geis vmó Tivos OTL OVX! Tapd 'Ap(orovu perd moAav axoAd£ou,
ei rots ToAÀXots, etre, mpoceixov, ovK av épitooddyca. His ap-
parent want of success possibly stimulated the unfavourable
estimate with which his written works were received by
antiquity’, The Stoa was now fiercely assailed by various
opponents—its ethics by the Epicureans, and its logical
theories by Arcesilas. Skill in controversy was more than
ever needed, if the position won by Zeno's efforts was to be
maintained.  Herein lay the special strength of Chrysippus,
who was very probably employed in defending Stoicism during
his predecessors life’, and who surpassed Cleanthes in fine-
ness and subtlety, even if he was inferior to him in depth*.
Most suggestive, in this view, becomes the passage in Diog.
L. vi. 179 dipvéx6n (Chrysippus)...mpós KAeavOsv © xol mod-
Adris &Xeye póvys ts TOv Ooypárov sidacKadias xpýćew, Tas

1 There is no direct evidence for this, but the whole of Diogenes’
account implies it.

? Cf. Diog. L. vir. 182 mpós 0€ róv kare£avwráuevov KXedvOous duaXexTe-
Kóv, kal mporelvovra aùT® coplouara, mémavoo, eire, TapéAkwy Tov mpeoBÜ-
TEpov dro rv mpayuaTikwrépwv, hui 0€ Tots véots Tatra mporlOet.

? So Hirzel rr. p. 180 “ Kleanthes war keine die Begriffe zerglie-
dernde, sondern eine anschauende Natur, er war wohl minder rührig aber
vielleicht tiefer angelegt als sein Schiiler,” and Stein, Psychologie p. 171
* Kleanthes erscheint als der rauhschaalige, mühsam stammelnde, aber
tiefe Denker, Chrysipp dagegen als der feinere, leichtbewegliche, elegant
vermittelnde Schónredner."

INTRODUCTION. 37

òè dmoóe(fews avrov evpycew. The anecdote leads us to infer
that Chrysippus was conscious of a want of originality in
himself, and a want of combative force in his master.

The position of Cleanthes among the early leaders of the
Stoie school has quite recently been subject to a considerable
modification in current opinion. He has been generally re-
garded as merely the exponent of his master’s teaching, and
as having contributed no new views of his own to the de-
velopment of the system. This opinion is not without justi-
fication in the ancient authorities. Diogenes Laertius ex-
pressly asserts that Cleanthes adhered to the same tenets as
his predecessor (vir. 168), and, that he did not object to be
called an ass, declaring that henas -mby- able to bear Zeno’s
burden (ib. 170). This estimate of his powers was for some
time acquiesced in by modern investigators, so that even
Zeller says of him (p. 41) :—“ Cleanthes was in every way
adapted to uphold his master’s teaching, and to recommend it
by the moral weight of his own character, but he was in-
capable of expanding it more completely, or of establishing it
on a wider basis” (see also Krische, Forschungen, pp. 417 and
418). Now however a reaction in his favour has set in, and
from a closer scrutiny of the notices concerning him the
opinion has been formed that “his contributions were more
distinctive and original than those of any other Stoic”
(Encycl Brit. Art. Stoics). In a question of such im-
portance it is singularly unfortunate that the hand of time
has dealt so hardly with him, not only in the actual amount
of the fragments which have been preserved to us, but also
in their relative importance for his philosophic system. For
one fragment of supreme value such as frag. 24 we have
six or seven trifling etymologies of the names of the gods,

1 Hirzel has carried this view to an extreme, which the facts do not
warrant. At rr. p. 137 he curiously says :—‘‘ Da wir aber nichts unver-
sueht lassen dürfen, um eine eigentümliche Lehre des Kleanthes heraus-
zubringen." On the other hand, Windelband, writing as late as 1888,
says of Cleanthes :—“ als Philosoph ist er unbedeutend gewesen" (Müller's
Handbuch, v. 292).

38 INTRODUCTION.

of so extravagant a character that it is hard to credit their
seriousness. The happy chance that has preserved to us the
Hymn to Zeus is counterbalanced by the consideration that
we only know of his theory of tension through two or three
passages.

Cleanthes divides philosophy into six branches, but in
reality this is only the triple division of Zeno, logic being
subdivided into dialectic and rhetoric, physics into physics
and theology, and ethics into ethics and politics,

In his estimate of logic he resembles Zeno: at least it
seems to have played only a subsidiary part in his system,
judging both from the number of his recorded works on this
subject (about 10 out of a total of 56) and from the in-
significance of the fragments which remain. Four only are
of any importance, and one of these, his criticism of the
Platonic idea, is involved in such obscurity that it will be
convenient to defer its consideration for the notes, As it is
clear throughout all his teaching that Cleanthes was the
most advanced materialist in the Stoic school, so we find that
his epistemology rests on a still stronger empirical basis than
that of his predecessor Zeno or his successor Chrysippus.
Zeno had not defined $avracía further than by describing it
as an impression on the soul. Cleanthes explained this as an
actual material concavity impressed by the object, an ex-
planation which found no favour with Chrysippus. There is
also high probability in the view which ascribes to Cleanthes
the authorship of the “tabula rasa" theory, a theory made
celebrated in modern philosophy owing to its adoption by
Locke, namely, that when a man is born his mind is like a
blank sheet of parchment ready to receive a copy. At least
we know of no other Stoie philosopher to whom the intro-
duction of this extreme result of sensualistic views so properly
belongs. Since Chrysippus, in express opposition to Cleanthes,
defined $avracía as érepoiwars ?jyep.ovukoU, it is less likely that
he should have propounded a theory which in its very terms
carries out the more materialistic doctrine of his opponent.

INTRODUCTION. 39

We have therefore, in accordance with Stein’s view, included
the passage of Plutarch, which attributes the doctrine to the
Stoics in general, among the fragments of Cleanthes. Stein,
however, goes further’. Zeno had conceded this much to
rationalism, that we derive directly from God the capacity
for abstract thought, and that certain notions are the pro-
duct of this potentiality when actualised by experience. In
an ingenious and closely-reasoned argument, whose force it
is difficult to reproduce within short limits, Stein contends
that this position was thrown over by Cleanthes. According
to the latter, the capacity given us by nature is solely that
for moral and not for intellectual activity?. The belief in
God himself does not, as with Zeno, arise from a ‘“‘certa
animi ratio” but rather from induction founded on empirical
observation”. The conclusion is that Cleanthes is a thorough-
going advocate of empiricism. But a divergence from the
rest of the school in a matter of such importance ought not
to be assumed on mere inference resting on ambiguous state-
ments, although were this doctrine explicitly ascribed to Cle-
anthes in a single passage we should not hesitate to accept
it, as being in entire consonance with his general bent of `
mind. What then is the evidence which Stein produces apart
from the passage of Cicero just referred to, which is by no
means conclusive? In the first place he appeals to two
passages which prove that moral impulses are transmitted to
us from our parents and implanted in us by nature?, and
lays stress on the fact that intellectual powers are not in-
cluded. This, however, is only negative evidence, and for
positive proof we are referred to frags. 106 and 100; in the
first of these we read that the uneducated differ from the
brutes only in shape, and in the second that the undiscerning
opinion of the many should be totally discarded. Surely
these grounds are insufficient to support the conclusion:

1 Erkenntnistheorie, pp. 322—328.
2 Cleanth. frags. 82 and 36.
3 Cleanth. frag. 52. (Cie. N. D. rr. 13.)

40 INTRODUCTION.

Plato himself might have greeted these sentiments with ap-
probation. But a more serious stumbling-block remains in
the oft quoted passage from Diog. L. vu. 54. If, as Stein
himself admits, Chrysippus substituted mpóàņyıs for the
Zenonian óp60s Adyos, Cleanthes must of necessity be included
in the term apxeuórepou TOv. Xroikóv, for there is no one else
to whom the words could apply’. Were further positive
evidence of Cleanthes “concession to rationalism” required,
it would surely be as reasonable to supply it from frag. 21
WuXAV...7)5 pépos jeréxovras "4às èuyvyoðsða as to deduce the
contrary from frags. 100 and 106. For these reasons we feel
bound to withhold assent to Stein's hypothesis, until some
weightier proof is put forward to support it.

Cleanthes was also involved in a controversy with reference
to the sophism known as ó xvprevov and first propounded by the
Megarian Diodorus. This sophism was concerned with the
nature of the possible ; and Cleanthes tries to escape from the
dilemma in which Diodorus would have involved him by deny-
ing that every past truth is necessary, or, in other words, by
asserting that since that which is possible can never become
impossible, it is possible for the past to have been otherwise,
in the same way that it is possible for a future event to occur
even though that event will never take place. Besides this
we learn that he introduced the term Xexrov in the sense of
carnyopypa, that he left definitions of art and rhetoric, and
that he explained the names given to a certain kind of slippers
and a drinking-cup.

The first five of the physical fragments need not detain us
here, containing, as they do, with one exception, merely a
restatement of positions already taken up by Zeno. The
exception referred to is the introduction of mvepa as the

1 Stein himself supplies the materials for his own refutation, At
p. 267 in dealing with a similar question he says :—“ Ohne Not sollte
Niemand unter dpyaorepx andere Stoiker als Zeno Kleanthes und
Chrysipp verstehen." Chrysippus is here excluded by the nature of the
case: the inference need not be stated.

? Bee Stein, Erkenntnistheorie p. 327.

INTRODUCTION. 41

truest description of the divine permeating essence, which
Zeno had characterised as aether. With frag. 17 however we
are on a different footing. Cleanthes teaches, according to
Cicero’s account, that the world is God, and it is significant
that, although the same doctrine is attributed by him to
Chrysippus (N. D. r. 39), no such statement is found with
regard to Zeno (ib. 36). Zeno had indeed declared that God
permeates every part of the universe: would he have gone so
far as to identify the universe with God? It is true that we
find among his fragments (frag. 66) ovaiav 80$ 0eo0 rov OXov
KOopov kai TOv ovpavov, but this is not conclusive. Not only
the general cast of the expression, but also the addition of the
words xai tov oùpavóv, make us hesitate to ascribe to these
words their full pantheistic sense. However, even if Cleanthes
was not following in his master's footsteps, he was only carry-
ing Zeno's teaching to its logical conclusion. The dualism
of God and Matter was inconsistent in a materialistic system.
But Cleanthes went further. Teaching that God creates the
world through the medium of the four elements}, and teaching
that these elements themselves do not remain stable but are
in a restless and continual mutation, he was led to search for
the cause of this ceaseless movement. The question may be
put in another form, why did God create the world? The
answer was found in a comparison of the structure of indi-
vidual things. Every creature is produced at the proper time
by means of certain proportions of the soul's parts, which are
found in the seed. The soul, however, is material and is
braced up by that tension which is elsewhere described as “a
stroke of fire.” This tension is ever varying and is the cause
of movement in the human frame. Now, since the individual
is a pattern of the universe, the cause of movement in the
cosmos must be the tension which permeates all its parts.

1 Not three in spite of Hirzel’s Excursus rr. 737—755. See Stein,
Psychologie n. 113.

2 This is probably the meaning of 1. 4 in the Hymn to Zeus, where
see note. For the doctrine of the macrocosm and the microcosm in
general see Stein's Appendix to Psych. pp. 205—214.

42 INTRODUCTION.

Thus the phenomenal world is created and again destroyed by
the successive phases in the ever varying tension of the fiery
breath, which is at once identified with God and with the
universe’.

As the syeuovixóv of the human soul is placed in the
breast, so did Cleanthes teach that the ruling part of the
world is in the sun, to which is due day and night and the
seasons of the year. He was led to this opinion by his inves-
tigations in natural science. Observing that nothing can
exist without warmth, he inferred that warmth constitutes
the essence of things. Since however warmth is given to the
whole world and to each individual thing from the sun, the
sun must be the %yegovucov of the world. In the sun is the
fiery breath found in its purest form, and at the conflagration,
when the world is destroyed, the sun will assimilate to itself
moon and stars and all the heavenly bodies. If Aristarchus
therefore taught that the earth revolves round the sun, he
was guilty of impiety for displacing the earth, which is the
hearth of the world. The sun is fed by exhalations from the
sea, and moves in an oblique course through the zodiac. The
stars are formed of the same fiery substance as the sun, and,
as the sun is the cause of life to everything, its essence must
be akin not to the earthly fire, which is destructive, but to
the creative. As the sun strikes the world with his rays,
he is called a plectrum. Sun, moon, and stars are alike
conical in shape.

Cleanthes proved that the soul is material by two syllo-
gistic arguments, founded on the mental resemblance between
parents and children and the sympathy of the soul with the
body. So far indeed did his materialism extend that he even
maintained that the act of walking was the extension of zveüpa
from the #yeuovixov to the feet. In other respects he seems to
have concurred in Zeno’s psychology, teaching that the

1 For the tension-theory in general see Stein, Psychologie, pp. 73 and
74, nn. 109 and 110. The notion of róvos is not entirely unknown to
Zeno : cf. Zeno frags. 56, 67, 103.

INTRODUCTION. 43

reasoning powers are developed by external impressions, and
that all souls exist after death till the time of the general con-
flagration, His views on zoology comprise a statement that
the pig was provided with a soul to keep him fresh for sacrifice
and a curious anecdote proving the intelligence of ants.

To the theological branch of physics Cleanthes devoted
considerable attention’, but in practice no sharp dividing line
can be drawn between physics and religion, since in the Stoic
system they necessarily overlap. It is hardly necessary to
analyse the Hymn to Zeus, but it may be observed that
Cleanthes refuses to admit that evil is due to the divine
agency, a remark which must be taken in connection with the
statement of Chalcidius that, while Chrysippus identified fate
with forethought, Cleanthes distinguished them. Five dis-
tinct reasons are given for the existence of God:—(1) the
ascending series of organisms from plants to man, which
shows that there must be some being who is best of all, and
this cannot be man with all his imperfections and frailties,
(2) the foreknowledge of coming events, (3) the fruitfulness of
the earth and other natural blessings, (4) the occurrence of
portents outside the ordinary course of nature, and (5) the
regular movements of the heavenly bodies. Zeus i.e. cp
aeigov is the only eternal god; the rest are perishable and
will be destroyed at the éxmópoc:s. The popular religion is a
representation of truth, but requires interpretation if we
would understand its real significance. Thus, the Eleusinian
mysteries are an allegory; Homer, if properly understood, is a
witness to truth; the very names given to Zeus, Persephone,
Dionysus, Apollo, and Aphrodite are indications of the hidden
meaning which is veiled but not perverted by the current
belief, and the same is true of the myths of Heracles and
Atlas. It is difficult now-a-days to enter into the spirit with
which the Stoic school pursued these etymological fancies.
At times it is hard not to aequiesce in Plutarch's opinion (see

+ Cie. N. Di i. 69, 111569.

AA INTRODUCTION.

frag. 55), who attributes them to maiia and eipove(a. But, if
this is so, it is impossible to account for the extreme diligence,
which was expended upon them. Rather, having once taken
up the position that the popular belief can only be explained
by Stoic methods, they were often driven to defend it by argu-
ments which they must themselves have perceived to be of
questionable validity. For example, Cleanthes may not have
been satisfied with the derivation of Dionysus from dvavveas,
but his explanation could not be disproved, and he was bound
to explain the name somehow, since, so long as it remained
unexplained, it was a standing objection to his method’.

The number of ethical works attributed to Cleanthes, 32 .
out of a total of 56, shows that he paid considerable attention
to this branch of philosophy. Yet, in the main, he seems to
have accepted the principles laid down by Zeno, except in
those cases where his physical innovations demanded a
separate treatment, and many of the fragments which have
come down to us deal rather with the practical than with the
theoretical side of morals. This agrees with what we are
told as to the titles of his books (see infra, p. 52). Defining
the aim of life and happiness in the same manner as Zeno,
Cleanthes laid special stress.on the agreement with the
general law of nature, while Chrysippus is said to have
emphasised the necessity for agreement with human nature no
less than with nature in general. This view is thoroughly in
consonance with the general bias of Cleanthes’ teaching. One
of the most striking and important of his doctrines is the
parallelism between the macrocosm of the world and the
microcosm of the individual. The more, therefore, that man
brings himself into harmony with the spirit which breathes
throughout the universe, the more does he fulfil the róle to
which he is destined. The same spirit may be traced in the

1 The etymologies of Plato in the Cratylus are quite as bad as any of
these, but they are professedly in part at least playful. The most recent
exposition of this dialogue is by Mr Heath in the Journal of Philology
XVII. 192.

INTRODUCTION. _ 45

lines in which the subordination of the individual to the
decrees of Zeus and of destiny is so forcibly advocated.
Cleanthes is perhaps the author of a distinction which subse-
quently became of some importance whereby happiness is de-
scribed as e«ozós, and the attainment of happiness as réAos'.

The doctrine of róvos was applied by Cleanthes, with im-
portant results, to two branches of his master's ethical system,
namely, the nature of virtue and the emotions. Zeno had
identified virtue with dpdvycis, but Cleanthes, while retaining
the intellectual basis which Zeno made the groundwork of
virtue, sought to explain its character more precisely.
Again he had recourse to his physical theories. Every body
contains within it a material air-current with ever-varying
tension. When this tension is strong enough to perform its
fitting duties it is regarded as strength and power, and this
strength and power as applied to different spheres of activity
gives rise to the four virtues éyxpdrewa, avdpeia, duxarooivy, and
cudpooivn, It will be observed that éyxparea here occupies
the position which by Chrysippus and his followers is assigned
to ppovyots. Thus Cleanthes fortifies his main position, that
strength of tension is the necessary starting-point of virtue,
by a tacit appeal to the authority of Socrates, who had pointed
to éykpáírea as kpw«mis apers. A recurrence to the same
teacher may also be recognised in the approbation with which
his identification of to ovudépov with rò ôikarov is cited. To
return to róvos; when the tension is relaxed, a weakness of
sou] follows, and in this weakness is to be found the explana-
tion of the way. Thus the essence of virtue and emotion,
which Zeno had left unexplained on the physical side, is
traced to a single source, and this source is the same power
which is the origin of all movement and life.

The application of róvos to the z46: leads us to the con-
sideration of another question, not indeed directly raised by
the fragments of Zeno and Cleanthes, but having an important

1 See however Hirzel u. p. 557.

AG INTRODUCTION.

bearing on our general view of their ethical doctrines. What
position do the may occupy in the classification of goods?
Zeno classified 78ovj and therefore presumably the other za675
among the dóui$opa, and the reason is not far to seek. He
regarded way as distinct from vice, because they have nothing
to do with ignorance (Plut. Virt. Mor. 10 tas ézwráces TOv
vaÓdv kai tas opodporntas ov pact ylyverOat kata THY Kpiow èv
7 TO GPApPTNTLKOV). Only kakia or TÒ péTExov kakias is kakóv,
according to Zeno, and zaos is neither, but rather an ëruyév-
vynpa. (Cf. ra érvyvyvomeva kpíaeow Zeno frag. 139 and for the
distinction between èrryevvýpara and peréxovra cf. Diog. L. vir.
95.) That this applies to all the za6y and not merely to
ndovn is made clear by the following considerations. In frag.
169 Zeno recommends the rational use of wealth ozws d8ef
kal déaópacTov mpos TaAAa Tv diabeow THs Wyns €xovres oca
byte kaňa oti pyre aicypa Tois èv Kata pow ws emt odd
Xpovrar Oy Ò évavríov pydev SBorxdtes Aóyo kal ur) POBw roúrov
aréxwvtat, This shows that the aduadopa are the field of
$óBos, and for Avan we may refer to Cic. Tusc. rr. 77 nihil
enim esse malum quod turpe non sit si /ugenti persuaseris...et
tamen non satis mihi videtur vidisse hoc Cleanthes, suscipi
aliquando aegritudinem posse ex eo ipso, quod esse summum
malum Cleanthes ipse fateatur. It is noteworthy, moreover,
that Cleanthes, who is allowed to have been the severest
opponent of pleasure’, declares ydovnv pyte xara dúcu elvat
pyre agiav éxew èv TO Biw (frag. 88) but does not venture to
class it as kaxov. The result of this discussion is that Zeno
and Cleanthes did not class Az» and dóflos with xaxd, and
therefore Wachsmuth cannot be right in attributing to Zeno
a passage in Stobaeus? where this classification is implied.

1 Zeller, Stoies p. 237. The remarks in the text are intended to
obviate the difficulty as to the classification of 2óoy? suggested by Heinze,
de Stoicorum affectibus p. 37.

2 See Wachsmuth's Stobaeus vol. rr. p. 58. That this question was
much debated appears from Cie. Tusc. rv. 20. Some appear to have held
that má6os was xaxov but not kakla (Stob. l. c.), because 7600s is (vous
but kakía is duabects (Cic. 1. e. 30).

l INTRODUCTION. Ms

That this view did not continue to be the orthodox view of the
school after their time is possible, but to pursue the subject
further would be foreign to our purpose.

The uncorrupted impulses given by nature tend towards
virtue, and, when they are suitably developed, wisdom founded
on firm apprehension, so that it can never be lost, follows in
due course. Secure in the possession of virtue, the wise man
partakes of the same excellence as God.

In the treatise mept 59ovjs Cleanthes seems to have en-
gaged in a spirited controversy with the Epicureans, and to
have attacked their moral teaching, just as he perhaps assailed
their physics in the work cepi drópov. Pleasure is a mere
useless ornament: it possesses no value whatever, nay, it is
absolutely contrary to nature. If, as we are told, pleasure is
the ultimate goal of life, it was an evil spirit which gave to
mankind the faculty of wisdom. He sarcastically likened his
opponents' position to an imaginary picture in which Pleasure,
seated on a throne in gaudy apparel, is ministered to by the
virtues, who form her willing slaves, declaring that this service
is the sole reason of their existence.

Passing to those fragments, which seem more strictly to
belong to the zapoeuverukós or uzoerukos Toros (i.e. the region of
applied morals), we notice that Cleanthes frequently refers his
precepts to the general principle, which is a leading character-
istic of Stoic morals, namely, that virtuous conduct depends
not on the nature of the deed but on the disposition of the
agent. The same action may be either vicious or virtuous,
according to the motive which prompts its performance. To
many of the subjects which fall under this branch separate
treatises were devoted, among which are the books cepi ev-
Bovdias, epi xapitos, mept dÜovepías, wept Turis, epi So€ys,
mepi bu) (as, mept avjmoaíov k.r.X. To the book zept xapitos we
may assign three of the extant fragments (frags. 97, 98, 99)
all of which are preserved by Seneca in the de Beneficiis,
The theory of consolation (frags. 93 and 94) may belong either
to the mept dpwy7s or the zepi duMas. Frags. 100—103 all in

48 INTRODUCTION,

verse and one in hexameter metre ought to be referred to the
cepi doéns.

One solitary fragment attests the political studies of Cle-
anthes, to which at least four of the works in the catalogue
must be referred.

The result of our investigation has been to show con-
clusively that all those doctrines which are most character-
istic of the true essence of Stoicism were contributed by Zeno
and Cleanthes. To Zeno belong the establishment of the
logical criterion, the adaptation of Heraclitean physics, and
the introduction of all the leading ethical tenets, Cleanthes
revolutionised the study of physics by the theory of tension,
and the development of pantheism, and by applying his
materialistic views to logic and ethics brought into strong
light the mutual interdependence of the three branches. The
task of Chrysippus was to preserve rather than to originate,
to reconcile inconsistencies, to remove superfluous outgrowths,
and to maintain an unbroken line of defence against his
adversaries. Although it might seem to many that this less
ambitious rôle requires less brilliant capacities in its per-
former, yet Chrysippus was commonly regarded as the second
founder of the Stoa, and the general opinion of his contem-
poraries is aptly summed up in the line & jx) yàp 7v Xpvourmos
ouk àv sv Xrod (Diog. L. vit. 183). The reason of this has
been already indicated. The extraordinary fertility of the
writer commanded admiration even where it failed to win
assent, nor was his dialectical skill (Diog. L. vir. 180) a
matter of small moment. Though logic was only the pro-
paedeutic of philosophy, it was the battleground of the
fiercest controversy. ^ Vitally opposed in other respects,
Epicureans and Stoies here at least were allied in maintaining
the possibility of knowledge against the universal scepticism of
the New Academy. It is not surprising, therefore, that the
foremost champion of dogmatism should have taken the highest
place in the Stoic triad.

INTRODUCTION. ~ 49

§7. The writings of Cleanthes.

The relation of the poetical to the prose writings of
Cleanthes has not been accurately determined, and the evi-
dence does not enable us to decide whether the former were
published separately from, or in conjunction with the latter.
The only indication we possess is in frag. 49, in which Cleanthes
describes poetry as being peculiarly adapted to theological
subjects. Yet the only book in the catalogue with a dis-
tinctively theological title is the work zepi 0eav, and there is
direct evidence that this contained etymological explanations
of the names of the gods, and that part of it, at any rate, was
written in prose. Krische p. 422 supposes that the Hymn
to Zeus was a poetical supplement incorporated with this
treatise, but such treatment would surely have produced
highly incongruous results. It is possible that we ought to
separate Cleanthes the philosopher from Cleanthes the poet,
and to infer that works published by him in the latter capacity
were not included in the list of his philosophical treatises.
At the same time we should remember that Chrysippus (Galen.
plac. Hipp. et Plat. p. 315) and Posidonius (ib. p. 399 pyoes
Te ToutiKas -apar(Üerau. Kal icTopías waaay mpagewv pap-
Tupovcas ois Aéye) were accustomed to freely interpolate
poetical quotations in their prose writings, and Cleanthes
may have composed his own florilegia, just as Cicero trans-
lated from the Greek where the Latin poets failed him
(Tusc. D. 11. 26). A catalogue of the titles known to us is
subjoined; where not otherwise indicated, the source of
reference is Diog. L. vir. 174, 175.

I. Logical.

(1) mepi iBíov. For ida cf. Ar. Top. i. 5, p. 102 a 17 : the
essential attributes of a thing are its td: thus ypapparTukqjs
dexrikos is an tiov of man.

(2) cepi rÓv arópov.

(3) epi diadextixys.

H. P. 4

50 INTRODUCTION.

(4) wept tpérwv. Probably this is logical rather than
rhetorical.

(5) mepi karwyopyguárov.. To this book may be referred
frag. 7.

(6) mepi peradywews (Athen. xr. 467 d, 471 b).

(7) epi rod kvpievovros (Arr. Epict. r. 19. 9). Krische
p. 427 n. gives to this work the title rept Ovvaróv, but Epict.
distinctly contrasts Chrysippus! work bearing the general title
with a treatise by Cleanthes on the particular fallacy (KAedv6ns
Ò iig yéypade wept rovrov), Wachsmuth, Comm. r. p. 18.

(8) epi réxvns may be the same work as the ars rhetorica
mentioned in Cic. Fin, iv. 3, but if so it is out of its place in
the catalogue, where it appears between nos. 4 and 5 of the
physical books.

(9) mepi rod Aóyov y. This and the following book ap-
pear in the catalogue among the ethical works.

(10) mepi ériorypys.

Stein, Erkenntnistheorie n. 722, counts among the logical
works the books zepi xpóvov mepi aicOynoews and mept ddéys, but
omits, probably by an oversight, the book wept rpózov. He
also observes that from the number of books treating of the
theory of knowledge Cleanthes must have displayed more
activity in treating of the subject than the remaining frag-
ments would lead us to suppose.

II. Physical.

(1) epi xpovov.

(2) epi js Zývovos $vatoXoyí(as B.

(3) àv 'HpakXe(rov é£wy5oeov 8. Cf. Diog. L. rx. 15
mreiorol re elolv door èéýynvrai aitod +Ó obyypappa. Kat yap
“Avriobévns kai “Hpaxdcidns ó IHovrikòs KXedvOns e kal Sqatpos
d Srwxds. The influence of Heraclitus on Cleanthes has been
variously estimated. Hirzel is the chief advocate in favour of
it, holding e.g. that Cleanthes agreed with him in his hypo-

INTRODUCTION. = 51

thesis of three elements, and that rdvos is traceable to zadiv-
rovos (or zaAMvrpozos) appovin. Stein’s more moderate estimate
appears to us truer.

(4) “epi aioOrjo eos.

(5) mpòs Anpoxprrov, perhaps the same as wept Tov atómov
(Diog. L. vir. 134) so Krische p. 430.

(6) “pos “Apicrapyov, see on frag. 27. Some have erro-
neously supposed that the Aristarchus here referred to was
the Homerie critic, whose date is a century later than
Cleanthes; cf. Krische p. 394 and Wilamowitz-Moellendorf in
Hermes xx. 631.

(T) vropvypara duoixa (Plut. Sto. Rep. c. 8).

The books next in order treat of 0coXoywóv.

(8) apxatodoyia has been identified with pda (Athen.
XIII. 572 e, Porphyr. vit. Pyth. c. 1), but the genuineness of the
latter work is seriously questioned. Müller frag. hist. Gr. rr.
p. 5. 9. 11 thinks that the td xara wodw pvOixa of Neanthes of
Cyzicus (cf. Plut. quaest. syrup. 1. 10) is referred to in both
passages and Zeller Pre-Socr. 1. p. 308 says:—The Cleanthes
of Porphyry is certainly not the Stoic but most likely a mis-
spelling for Neanthes of Cyzicus.

(9) epi Gedv, cf. Plut. de vit. aer. alien. c. 7. To this
work Wachsmuth refers frags. 47. 54. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61.
62. 63. Krische (p. 418, 422) also the statements in Cic.
N. D. 1. 37 (frags. 14—17) and the hymn to Zeus (frag. 48).
See also Osann Praef. Cornut. p. ix.

(10) mepi yeyávrov.

(11) wept ‘Ypevaiov. This is a curious title. Perhaps it
should rather be classed as ethical. Cf. Persaeus’ book mepi
y&pov (Diog. L. vit. 36).

(12) mepi tod roujrod. This book treated of the interpre-
tation of Homer, and Wachsmuth accordingly refers to it
frags. 55. 65. 66. 67. To these should be added frag. 63 and
perhaps frag. 54.

(13) Geopaxéa (ps.-Plut. de Fluv. v. 3. 4) was identified
by Krische with the book cepi ycyávrov supra (p. 434) but this

4—2

52

INTRODUCTION.

and the next book are rightly described by Wachsmuth as
“ficta ab impostore ps.-Plutarcho,” see note on frag. 69.

(14)

mepi opàv, ib. v. 17. 4.

Fabricius Bibl. Gr. mr p. 552 infers from Simplic. in
Epict. Man. c. 78 that one of Cleanthes works bore the title
"Tap Beta, but the words simply mean “in his well known Iambic

lines."

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

III. Ethical.

mpòs "HpiAXov, For Herillus see Zeller p. 42.
«epi opps Ë.

mepi TOD KaOyKOVTOS Y.

mept euBovA(as.

epi xdpuros.

mpotpentixos. Cf. Diog. L. vir. 91.

Tepi ApEeTav.

mepi evdvias.

wept Topyimmov “num «pós Tépywrzov qui idem fuerit

atque l'opyvrmíó:s ad quem complura scripta Chrysippus misit?"
Wachsm. Mohnike p. 100 wishes to read T'opyurz(8ov.

(10)

mepi $Üovepías.

mepi époros, Here belongs perhaps frag. 108.

mepi éXevÜepías.

pori) réxvy.

Trepi TYAS.

mepi Oo€ys.

ToMrwós. Here belongs frag. 104, cf. Plut. Sto.

mept Bovdgs.
Trepi VOMWY.

ç ^ $.
mepi Tov OukaCetv.
Tepl dpwyhs.

M ,
epi TéXovs.

Tepl ka Óv.

Trepi mpakewv.

mept [Jag etas.

INTRODUCTION. 53

(25) mept dirias.

(26) mept ovurosiov. Persaeus wrote ovjwrorwd vropwvj-
para or óuaÀoyot (Athen. rv. 162 b, xir. 607 a).

(27) epi rod dtu 5j aùr) aper) avópos kai yuvaikds. So
Antisthenes also taught (Diog. L. vr. 12) and cf. Socrates in
Xen. Symp. 11. 9. Otherwise Aristotle, Pol. r. 13. 1260 a 21.
Eth. vir. 14. 1162 a 26.

(28) mepi rod Tov ropov codworeiew.

(29) mepi xpeióv.

(30) SurpuBóv B'.

(31) mept ydovns. For this book see Krische p. 430 foll.

(32) mepi yaAxod (Diog. L. vir. 14). The title of this book
has been much discussed. It was altered to mept xdpuros by
Casaubon, to repi xpóvov by Menagius, Fabricius and Mohnike,
and to epi xpevóv by Wachsmuth, It is possible that xaAxo9
is due to the scribe’s eye catching the word xeAxov which
closely precedes in the citation, and, if so, we have no clue to
the true title.

(33) epi orods. This book is supposed to have existed
from a mutilated passage of Philodemus epi $iXooóoov in vol.
Here. Vu. col. 13 v. 18 às ai 7 dvaypadai róv z())vákov (at)re
Buon kac onpaivovow, (Tapa KX)edvOn èv T wept or(oas é)o(rw)
Awyévous airy *) pvýpn.

3 Q . 1 esi
Sç MV ow ev «1 o ln Clean Ha. — OL 4 ILE

- n iol
P ' E
ix ' FT] `
f: a 3 I AOE SMOG ' CAR
= ` d I eh
- yayta hive
l -) 117014 YEN TIT MENT "uv
| 107 sf PAT v vtt f Y Pox Ae n
P | tid imd » 1 ov ^ T 5 v" iq on “at [t "E
(£F vb, LE XN hu DP RSS
EVT el obatabtA,. satwithh XN
" APO
pettudenr voter. W sit Mm
MES u^ À waved ranir
m. "à T stes
Y TENGE) t Ü dd) wu ayn T4 dp
Lo Vae I , TEN: eon uy d si ge
I ` i vi OF Pan til A "EPI A | ive Veil m
' f °
k í I? Ty teat "TU | t iim 1 b rne Vn ag ott
mahi rAr Tna é +í `. wada N w al 0 0
E i. A i
dst R hg mte d) uulat 9g wiry itv oig
| TAD tU W Fi W Aa giu itethadf* quini wd. ^h?
» t
I EU
Kaastra vow] uf bas nii ^r Ww) AL a htt [1 0 (

m ST, " TIT. fade Mom wal wahai " H^ 6S j ENERT T.

TET was Gy Gode mde A aie Hi ETE C. JT S
' A e

i$ o opis 2 2 .) atau AA be) Ane :

HE LL " eT)

, E.

I
4 ‘ = °
i

a wa å š

* à
PA a

- f ,

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

1. Diog. L. vil. 39, rpuuepz daciv eivai tov Kata
pirocopiay Xóyov. iva yap avtod TÒ év TL bucucón' TO
dé HOvKov: TÒ Óë Xoyov. oŬTw Se Tpa@Tos rehe Zývæv ó
Kutvevs év TØ mepi Xóryov.

The triple division of philosophy was first brought into
prominence by Zeno and the Stoics, though it seems. to
have been adopted before them by Xenocrates and the
Peripateties, cf. Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vIr. 16 évreXécrepov
€...0¢ eimóvTes THS QuXoaodías TO uév TL ela, Dvoukóv TO
òè Okov TO O06 Xoyikóv: æv Svvapes uév Martov éaviv
apynyos, Tept oN) GU pév buo ig@u TONOV 06 NOLKaV ovk
oriyav è Noyixav SiareyGeis: pnrórara Sé of mept Tov
Eevoxpatny kal oí ATÒ ToU TepumdTou ére 66 of ATÒ THs
a'Tods ëyovrat 1108€ THs Svapécews. Ar. Top. I. p. 105 b 19
čare Ò ws TUTQ TepiXaBeiv TOY vrporáceov Kal TOV 7rpo-
BXquárov pépn rpia* ai uv yap nOtkal mpotacess eicív, ai
òè duoixai, ai 96 Noyixai must not be taken as indicating
that Aristotle had in view the triple division (see Waitz in
loc.). Cicero speaking of Speusippus, Aristotle, Xenocrates,
Polemo, and Theophrastus says (de Fin. Iv. 4):—totam
philosophiam tres in partes diviserunt, quam partitionem
a Zenone esse retentam videmus. In Acad. 1.19 he wrongly
attributes the division to Plato (fuit ergo jam accepta a
Platone philosophandi ratio triplex): Diog. L. tt. 56 only
says that Plato introduced the 8:aXekrukós Tomos, not that

56 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

he recognised the triple division. With the Stoics it
became so fundamental that they did not hesitate to refer
to it the three heads of Cerberus and Athene’s name Tpeto-
yéveca (Zeller, pp. 363, 364). Hirzel (de logica Stoicorum
in Sauppe’s Satura Philologa, p. 71) thinks that Zeno was
the inventor of the term oyiw) in place of Xenocrates’
OvaNEKTLKN.

2. Diog. L. VII. 40, dXXoc 86 mpõrTov èv TO Xoryucóv
TáTTOUGV' Sevtepov 86 TO $voukov: Kai Tpitov TÒ vÜucóv.
dv éa TL Lnvwv èv TO Tepi Xóyov.

As logic is obviously the least important to the Stoics
of the three divisions, Zeno regarded Ethics, not Physics,
as the kernel of his system. The authorities are however
very confusing on this point, for of Chrysippus, who is
coupled with Zeno in Diog. Plut. Sto. Rep. 9, 1 says:—
TovT@y (uepdv) čev rárreoÜaL mpõrTov pèv rd Xowyucd,
8evrepa 86 rà "Oud, rpí(ra è Tà bvowd—and yet in the
same passage we find attributed to Chrysippus the state-
ment 008’  dAXov Tivds Évekev THS bucucs Ücopías mapa-
AnTTNS ovens Ù mpòs THY Trepi ayabav 7) Kaxav SiacTacw,
which shows that he must have regarded ethics as con-
taining the consummation of philosophy. Again, the
Stoics compared the three parts of philosophy to a fruit
garden surrounded by a wall and also to an egg, but
whereas according to Diog. (vtr. 40) physics are likened to
the fruit of the garden and the yolk of the egg, in Sextus
(adv. Math. vit. 17—19) they are compared to the trees in
the garden and the white of the egg, having changed
places with ethics. But both alike in recording the
comparison, which Posidonius thought more apt, yield the
place of honour to ethics, which are compared to the soul
of man. It is not improbable, as Wellmann and Stein
(Erkenntnistheorie, p. 302) think, that the two former of

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 5T

these similes may be due to Zeno, on whose fondness for
such similes we have remarked in the Introd. p. 33, but
there is no evidence to decide. The confusion about the ,
whole matter seems to have arisen from the distinction
made by the Stoies between the order of relative im-
portance and the order of teaching (cf. Sext. 1. c. 22, 23).
At any rate, as regards Zeno, it is most natural to suppose
that the pupil of Crates and the admirer of Socrates
placed ethics in the forefront of his system. [Ritter and
Preller, § 390 n. and Ueberweg, p. 192 apparently regard as
the earlier view that which gave physics the most im-
portant position, but see Stein, Psychologie n. 7.]

LOGICA.

3. Arr. Epict. diss. Iv. 8, 12, Oeopruara tod posó-
Qov...ü Znvov Nye. yvdvat rà TOD Xóyov oToLyela, Toto
TL ExaoTov avTOv OTL Kal TÖS dpuórrera, TpÒS CAA
kai ora TOUTOLS üKÓXovÜa éar..

It is difficult, in the absence of Zeno's context, to !
decide the exact meaning of. rd tod Adyou crovwyeia.
There is no doubt that the Stoics used this phrase in the
sense of “parts of speech" (Diog. vir. 58 piua 8é esri...
oTovxyeiov Xóryov dz reor), but this meaning is not general
enough and is certainly excluded by the words im-
mediately preceding in Epictetus rí réXos ; jj Te dopetv
TpiBwva; ov, adda TÒ opOdv éyew TOV Xóyov. It is sug-
gested, therefore, that Zeno is here expressing, possibly in
an earlier work, the nominalism of Antisthenes and that
Aóyov orovyeia = the (indefinable) elements of definition.
It is now generally admitted (see e.g. Dr Jackson in
Journ. Phil x1. 262) that the opinion stated at some
length by Socrates in Theaet. p. 201 E—202 c is that of
Antisthenes, and the words crovyetov and Xoyos in this
sense must have belonged to his terminology (see the

58 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

whole passage and especially rà gë mpóra olovmepel
a Tovxeta...Xónyov ovK exes 201 E, oÜrc ù rà uèv a Tovxeia
dXoya kal àyvwra civar, aicOnta é, cf. 206 E Tò épwrn-
0évra Tí Ékacrov Ovvaróv civar THY dmórpiow cia TOV
cTowxeiev atrododvat TQ épouévo): with this should be
compared the passages in Ar. Metaph. vu. 3. 1043 b 23,
XIV. 3. 1091 a 7 dot ovcias Erte pèv ýs évdéyerat eivat
ópov Kal Xoyov oiov THs avvÜérov av re aicOnTn édv Te
vont) 4° é£ Ov Ò abro TpwTeY ovK got. It is nota
necessary inference from this passage that Zeno treated
opOos .Xóyos as KpiTnpiov dAnOeias, or that he and
Cleanthes are the Adot Twes THY apyatotépwv XTowkdv
whom Diogenes (vil. 54) mentions as holding this opinion,
although Hirzel thinks this established, comparing frag.
157 (Untersuchungen, Ir. pp. 14 f. 23) Indeed it is
difficult to understand how, except on the hypothesis of
a change of opinion, this is reconcilable with the fact that
Zeno introduced the davracía Katadnrrixn, as will
appear hereafter. Hirzel further remarks :—* Unter den
Tov amò THS XT0oás Ties des Alexand. Aphrod. zur Topik
(schol. Arist. p. 256 b 14) welche den Xóyos durch ti jv
definirten kónnte Zenon gemeint sein." The latter part
of this note requires some modification if Stein's view
referred to in the Introd. p. 9 be accepted. The same
writer (Erkenntnistheorie, p. 90, 91) explains yvóvac và
Tov AOyou oTorvyxeta as “die Erkenntnis der Elemente des
Denkens d. h. wie das Denken beschaffen sei und worin
die gegenseitige Verbindung der Gedanken bestehe und
welche Konsequenzen sich aus dieser Gedankenverbind-
ung ergeben."

4. Arr. Epict. diss. L 17. 10, 11, xai Td NOYA
y , > ` ` , ` , , > > 5 ^
dkapr €ort...kal mepi rovrov èv ojróneQa, ei Ò ovv Kai
Toro Soin Tis, exelva amapkei, OTL TOV ANNEV éeoTL

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 59

Siaxpitina Kal émioKkeTTiKa Kal ws dv Tis ETOL peTPN-
TUG Kal oTaTiKa’ Tis Eyes TadTAa; povos XpúcumTos
kai Znvev Kai KreavOns ;

This and the two following fragments show us the
view which Zeno took of the value of logical studies,
which were recommended not so much on account of the
value of the results obtained, as because they enable us to
test the theories and expose the fallacies of others and to
clear the ground for further enquiries, cf. Ar. Top. r. 104
b 1 7oóro & iov ù panora oiketov THs OtaXekTukjs
éaTiy* éËeraoTum yap ovca Tpos Tas ázracv rév webddwv
dpxds odov Exe, cf. also the title Opyavov given to
Aristotle’s logical treatises (Waitz 11. 294) and the name
Kavovixn adopted by the Epicureans. For the distinction
between the Peripatetic and Stoic views of logic see
Stein, Erkenntnistheorie n. 207. Hirzels remarks about
Zeno (de log. Stoic. p. 72) do not take into account this
evidence. M opa e

orarıká, “weighing.” The word is used by Plato, cf.

Phileb. 55 E oiov mac®ðv zov vexvóv dv Tis apiÜunruenv

P \ , e 4 > ^
xepítn Kal jerpnruc)v Kal oTatiKny, Ws mos cvrmeiv.

Charmid. 166 B.

5. Stob. Ecl. 11. 2. 12 p. 22, 12 Wachsm. [vulgo Floril.
LXXXII. 5], Zrjvev rds 7v Siarextixov réxvas eikate Tols
Sixaiows puérpows oU mupòv ovd àXXo TL TOV omovõalwov
MeTpovow dXX. ayupa kai kómrpia.

At first sight this and the next fragm. appear con-
tradictory, but probably this is directed against some
particular opponents. The Megarians, the Eristics of this
period, are most likely to be meant, and we know that
they were often called ó:aXexrucot, as the Stoics them-
selves are by Sextus (Zeller, Socrates etc. p. 250 n. 3).
Moreover Alexinus was a determined opponent of Zeno

^ ot

60 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO,

(Diog. 11. 109 dvepépero òè padiota mpòs Znvwva) and
Sextus tells us how he controverted Zeno's proof that the
world is Xoyucos (Math. rx. 107). Stein thinks that the
inconsistency is to be explained by the importance
attributed by Zeno to the question of the criterion
(Erkenntnistheorie, p. 303), but surely óiaXexrukóv in
frag. 5 and dvadextixny in frag. 6 must refer to the
same branch of logic. The explanation is however
perfectly valid to explain the difference of statement
between Cic. Fin. Iv. 9 and id. Acad. L 40. ré&vas =
treatises.

Skatos: so the three best Mss AM and S: eixaious
adopted by Mein. from Ms B (late and untrustworthy) is
virtually a conjecture. Wachsm. suggests yvdaious but, on
the interpretation given above, óweaíows is more forcible:
the methods are good enough (cf. uerpyrika frag. 4) but
they are put to base uses, ie. to mere quibbling. After
uérpois Gaisf. add. ois.

If the fragment be interpreted quite generally as a
depreciation of logical. studies, we have here an approxi-
mation to the position of Aristo (Stob. Ecl. rr 2. 14, 18,
22 = Floril. LXXXII. 7, 11, 18) in one of the points on
which he severed himself from the Stoic school.

v 6. Plut. Sto. Rep. VIII. 2, éxve 86 (scil. Zeno) soio-
pata kai Tuv OuiaXekTue)v ws ToÜTo TroLeétv Ovvajévqv
ékéXeve TraparauBavery To pabnras. Hence Schol.
ad Arist. 22 b 29 ed. Brandis speaking of Zeno of Elea
says that he was called adugotepdyAwaaos ovy OTe ča-
XexTukOs HV ws 0 Kureevs.

cob(cpara, cf. the anecdote related by Diog. vil 25.
A logician showed Zeno seven dvadextixal idéac in the

wis Reaper fallacy, and received 200 drachmas, although his

fee was only half that amount, ib. VII. 47 ov« dvev òè

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. - " | 61

THs Starextixyns Oewpias Tov sopiv amtwrov éverOar èv
Aóyo...ro re dudu9óNes Neyomevov SrevKpiweia has.

Tiv SwXekruejy. Strictly speaking, Aoyse7 is a wider
term than dsarextixn, cf. Diog. VIL 41 Td dé Xowyucóv
mépos pasiv évio eis úo SiatpetoGar eriotnuas, els
pytopixny kai eis dvadextixny, Sen. Ep. 89, 16.

T. davracía éotl tUmwois èv yuy. Sext. Emp.
Math. vir. 228, 236 distinctly attributes this definition to
Zeno. Diog. VIL 45 rjv 06 $avracíav ela, TUTMoW èv
arux], Tod Ovóuaros oikeíes peTevnveypévov amd TÖV
TUTeV v TQ KNPO VTO TOD SaKTUALOV yiyvopévwv, ib. 50
quoting Chrysippus gloss dXXoíecis: cf. Plut. Comm.
Not. 47.

For the use of trúmwcış see Introd. p. 34. That
Zeno did not define his meaning further than by the bare
statement is evident from the controversy which after-
wards arose between Cleanthes and Chrysippus as to the
exact meaning of tUmwois: for which see on Cleanth.
frag. 3. It would seem however from the expressions
“effictum” and “impressum” in Zeno’s definition of pav-
Tacía karaMymTuce) (frag. 11) that Cleanthes is a truer
exponent of his master’s teaching in this matter than
Chrysippus. Zeno must have been influenced by Aristotle’s
treatment of $avracía (de An. 11r. 3): see Introd. p. 24.
See further Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 157.

Y 8. rtas pèv aic@joes annleis trav 866 havtacidv Tas
pév dXmÜeis Tas O6 r>evdeis. This is attributed to the
Stoies generally by Stob. Ecl. r. 50. 21, Plut. plac. rv. 8.
9, but must belong to Zeno having regard to Sext. Emp.
adv. Math. vin. 355, Anoxpitos pèv macan aicOnr»v
Vmaptw  kekivnkev, Emikovpos òè wav aic@ntov éXefe
BéBauov civar ó 66 LrwiKds Zývov Svatpéces éypr)ro ; Cic.

62 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

N. D. r. 70 urgebat Arcesilas Zenonem, cum ipse falsa
omnia diceret quae sensibus viderentur; Zeno autem
nonnulla visa esse falsa, non omnia; Cic. Acad. I. 41 visis
non omnibus adjungebat fidem.

Zeno is not entirely a sensualist: Stein, Erkenntnis-
theorie, p. 307. For the general doctrine see ib. p. 142—
151. Zeno is here again following the lead of Aristotle,
cf. de An. rr. 3. 7 eira ai pev (scil. aio05oews) annleis
del, ai 66 havtaciat yivovtat ai mrXelovs Nrevóets. On the
other hand Epicurus held z4eas tds $avracías aXm0ets
etvat (Sext. Math. vir. 204).

“9. Cic. Acad. r 41, (Zeno) adjungebat fidem...iis
(visis) solum, quae propriam quamdam haberent decla-
rationem earum rerum, quae viderentur.

Cicero is here speaking of the Greek évapreia, for
which he elsewhere suggests as translations perspicuitas
or evidentia (ib. IL 17). Every sense impression is
évapyés according to the Epicureans (Zeller, p. 428), but
with Zeno évapyea is simply introduced as an attribute
of xatadnrtixn pavtacia: cf. Sext. Math. vir. 257 speaking
of the <. $. avtn ydp évapyns oca kai mAnKTLKD póvov
oUyi TOY TpuyGv Xauflávera. karaaTQca ńuâs eis ovy-
Kkatabecw Kal &XXov Qmóevós Seopévn eis TO TouaúTQ
TrpooT iT TELV Ù eis TO THY Tpós Tas Arras Siahopay vrro-
Barrew. Hirzel (Untersuchungen, I1. pp. 3, 6) attributes
évapyeva to the Cynics but his authorities merely show
that Diogenes proved the possibility of motion by walking
about (Diog. vr. 39), which Sextus (Math. x. 68) calls a
proof r avris THs évapyeias.

X 10. Sext. Math. vir 253, aXXd ydp of uév apyato-
Tepot TOV Xov KpLTNpLOY bacu elvari THS adnOelas THY
karaüMymTUC)v $avracíav. ib. 227 xpitypiov adnOelas
elval THY karaMpyrTuciv. pavtaciav, This is to be at-

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 63

tributed to Zeno partly as an inference from the word
dpxauorepor, partly as a necessary corollary from the next
fragment, and partly in accordance with the testimony of
Cic. Acad. r. 42 sed inter scientiam et inscientiam com-
prehensionem illam («catddnw) quam dixi collocabat
eamque neque in rectis neque in pravis numerabat sed
soli credendum esse dicebat. Diog. L. VII. 46 refers the
eitation to the school generally and in 54 quotes it from
Chrysippus év 77) 9vo8ekáT9 Tøv pucker.

For the doctrine of the xaraXmm Tw?» $avrac(a see
Zeller, pp. 87—89. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 167 foll.
Four different explanations of the meaning of the term
have been given (1) xara. active. The irresistible cha-
racter of the impression compels assent, Zeller. (2) xara.
passive: the perception is grasped by the mind, Hirzel.
(3) The object of representation (rò úmapyov) and not !
the perception is grasped by the mind, Ueberweg, p. 192
(now given up by Heinze) (4) karaX. both active and
passive, Stein, thus reconciling the apparent contra-
diction between Cic. Acad. r. 41, and Sext. Math. vir. 257.
For the exact meaning of raraáXqNris)(k«araNym Tuc) pav-
racia cf Sext. Emp. Math. xr. 182 kararņyris ée, karta-
AnTTUKHS havtacias avykaráDeois : a distinction, possibly
due to Zeno, which tends to disappear in practice. See
also Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 182. xatddrnWus rara-
MymTue), etc. were new terminology invented by Zeno,
according to Cic. Acad. I. 41 comprehensionem appel-
labat similem iis rebus, quae manu prehenderentur: ex
quo etiam nomen hoc dixerat eum eo verbo antea nemo
tali in re usus est, ib. IL. 145, but the verb karaAag-
Bavew had been used by Plato in the sense “to grasp
with the mind," Phaedr. 250 D epi 86 kaáXXovs, dorep
elmopev, pet éxeívov ve ÉXajwmev öv, Sedpo ve éXÓóvres
xateýpapev avrà bia ths évapyeorárgs aicOicews Tv

64 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

nuetépov otiiBov évapyéserara. Zeno, therefore, only
specialised the meaning of the word, see Introd. p. 34
and generally Introd. p. 9.

y 11. Sext. Math. virt 248, $avraeía karaMymTUw)
otw ý ATÒ Tov Uvmdpwovros kal KAT avTO TO ÚTAPYOV
eévaropepaypévy Kal evareoppayiouévn ómroía ovK àv yé-
vovro amo un) úmapyovrtos, ib. 426, Pyrrh. 11. 4. Diogenes
gives the definition in substantially the same words in
$ 50 adding however xai évatoteruT@pévny after varo-
pepaypévņ: in Š 46 he omits ómoia—úmapyovroşs but
adds :—axaranrnrrov è THY pù) aqo úmapyxovTos, 7) amo
ÚTApXOVTOS MEV, jy) KaT avTO 0ë TÒ Urápyov THY un) Tpavh
pnt čerurov, which very possibly belongs also to Zeno.
The evidence attaching the definition to Zeno is as fol-
lows :—Cic. Acad. II. 18 si illud esset, sicut Zeno definiret,
tale visum impressum effictumque ex eo unde esset quale
esse non posset ex eo unde non esset, id nos a Zenone defi-
nitum rectissime dicimus; ib. 113, ib. 1. 41 id autem visum
cum ipsum per se cerneretur comprehendibile (of Zeno)
ib. 11. 77. Speaking of the controversy between Arcesilas
and Zeno, Cic. states that the last words of the definition
were added by Zeno because of the pressure put upon
him by Arcesila. Numenius ap. Euseb. P. E. xiv. 6,
p. 733 Tò è Oóyua todto avtod (scil Zývwvos) TpæTov .
eŭúpouévov KaUTO TÓ Ovoua [JXémev evõoriuoðv èv Tals
"AOjvats THY karaMymTwe)v pavraciav maon unyavh
éypnto èr avtny (of Arcesilas). August. c. Acad. rir. 9,
18 sed videamus quid ait Zeno. Tale scilicet visum com-
prehendi et percipi posse, quale eum falso non haberet
signa communia.

The controversy between Arcesilas and Zeno is a his-
torical fact about which there can be no doubt, and, apart
from direct evidence, the chronology proves that our defi-

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 65

nition can hardly be due to Chrysippus, who only suc-
ceeded to the headship of the Stoa eight years after the
death of Arcesilas (cf. Plut. Com. Not. c. 1). This ques-
tion of the criterion was the chief battle-ground of the
Stoies and the New Academy, and in later times Carneades
maintained akaráXymTa mavra elvat ov vávra 86 ddnra
(Zeller, p. 555). In the second book of Cicero's Academica
the question is discussed at length. Sext. Math. vir. 248—
252 shows in detail the reason for the insertion of each
member of the definition: the impression must be from
the object to exclude the visions of madmen, and with
reference to the object to exclude a case like that of
Orestes, who mistook his sister for a F ury. It must be
imprinted and stamped on the mind to ensure that the
percipient shall have noticed all the characteristics of the
object. Lastly, the addition ózoía o/x av wyévovro ámó
A) VTápxovros was inserted to meet the Academic ob-
jection that two impressions, one true and the other false,
might be so entirely alike (avapdXXaxTov) as to be in-
capable of distinction, which of course the Stoics did not
admit. For évatropewaypévn cf. Ar. Ran. 1040 60ev 9)
p) arropakawévn Toras áperás éroincev.

12. Olympiodorus in Plat. Gorg. pp. 53, 54 (ed. Jahn
ap. Neue Jahrb. für Philol supplement bd. xiv. 1848
p. 239, 240) Znvwv 9é dyow ore téyvyn ori ocúcTmua èr
Katadyn yewv cvyyeyupvacpévov (? -ev) mpós Tv TENOS eÙ-
xpnotov Tay èv TO Big.

Cf. Lucian Paras. c. 4 réyvn striv, ds éyà Stapvn-
poveúw coho Tivos axovcas, oúcTnua èk ratrarjyrewv
ouyyeyupvacpévwy Tpós TL TÉNOS EVYpHaTOY TV Èv TO
Biw. Schol. ad. Ar. Nub. 317 obre yap ópitóueÜa tiv
Téxvnv oiov cvoTnwa èk karaMjeov éyyeyvuvacuévov
kai ta épeEns. Sext. Emp. Math. IH. 10 mâsa Toívvv

B P. 5

66 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

TéXUm cvoTQud stw èk KaTAadIpewv owvyyeyvuvacuévov
kal émi réXos eUypmorov TQ fo Xaufavóvrev THY ava-
gopav. The same definition partially in id. Pyrrh. mr.
188, 241, 251, Math. r. 75, vit 109, 373, 182. Wachsm.
also quotes (Comm. I. p. 12), Schol. Dionys. Thrac. p. 649,
31, ib. p. 721, 25 of Sro otros opifovtas rv Téyvqv
Téxvr sti ava rnpa TrEpl Nrvy?)v yevópevov éyxaTtadnewv
éyyeyvuvacuévov Kk. Cf. also Quintil. 11. 17, 41 Nam
sive, ut Cleanthes voluit, ars est potestas via, id est, ordine
efficiens: esse certe viam atque ordinem in benedicendo
nemo dubitaverit; sive ille. ab omnibus fere probatus
finis observatur SS constare ex praeceptionibus con-
sentientibus et coexercitatis ad finem vitae utilem. Cie.
frag. ap. Diomed 414 ed. Putsch ars est perceptionum
exercitarum constructio ad unum exitum utilem vitae
pertinentium. Cic. Acad. Ir. 22 ars vero quae potest esse
nisi quae non ex una aut duabus sed ex multis animi
perceptionibus constat. Fin. rr 18 artes...constent ex
cognitionibus et contineat quiddam in se ratione consti-
tutum et via (illustrating also the next frag.). N. D. r.
148 ex quibus (perceptis) collatis inter se et comparatis
artes quoque efficimus partim ad usum vitae. ..necessarias.
It is worth while to compare with Zeno's definition of
art those to be found in Aristotle: both philosophers
alike recognise its practical character (cf. Eth. vr. 4. 6
7 pèv oÜv Téxvo fus Tis erà Adyou dXm9Üoüs Trowyruc)
ctw) and that it proceeds by means of regulated prin-
ciples (ch Met. L1, 5 yiseras 86 réyvn Ürav èk moXXGv
THS Spreipías évvonudTov pia kaÜóXov yévnrat "epi TOV
opolwv tTrorAnWis). Aristotle’s distinction that TéxVn is
concerned with yéveow while èmiorýjun deals with àv
(Anal. Post. 11. 19. 4) is of course foreign to Zeno's system.
Zellers note on p. 266, 2 (Eng. Tr.) is inaccurate but
appears correctly in the 4th German ed. (1r. 1. 247).

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 67

13. Schol ad Dionys. Thracis Gramm. ap. Bekk.
Anecd. p. 663, 16, os nro? Kal ó Znvov Aéyou réxpn écviv
EEs odoTrountixy, Tovtéatt, OU 6800 Kal weOddou ToLoded Tt.

The authenticity of this fragment is rendered doubtful
(1) by the fact that Zeno had defined réyvņ differently,
as we have seen, (2) because Cleanthes defined réyv as
is 06@ Tavra aviovea (frag. 5). It is of course possible
that Zeno left two alternative definitions as in the case
of malos (frags. 136 and 137), and that Cleanthes adopted
one of these with verbal alterations, but it seems most
probable that the Schol. has made a mistake, and certainly
ó8o7rouruc) has a suspicious look. Stein however, Er-
kenntnistheorie, p. 312, accepts the definition.

| 14. prynpn Oncavpiopos ori $avracióv.

These words are shown to belong to Zeno by the
following considerations. Sext. Emp. Math. vir. 372 foll.
is describing the controversy between Cleanthes and
Chrysippus as to the meaning of Zeno's r/zwcis and
introduces one of Chrysippus arguments e yap xnpod
TpoTov TuToÛTaL ?) puy) havTacTiKas Tác xXovaa del TO
ca xarov rivna émicKkoTnoe TH porépa havtacia, orep
kai Ths Sevtépas odpayidos tUmos éfaXevmrTwós éoTu
TOÜ mpoTépov. dXX «ei TOTO, dvatpeirat p penn, On-
cavpugcuós ooa pavtaci@y, dvatwpebra, O6 mca TÉéyvm
oveTnua yap ñv Kal dÓpowcua karaN)Nreov k.T.M. Now
one might suspect from internal evidence alone that
Chrysippus is appealing to the school definitions of Memory
and Art as established by Zeno in support of his argument
against Zeno's pupil, but the inference becomes irresistible
when we find that the definition of Art is certainly Zeno's,
as has already been shown. Cf. Cic. Acad. rr. 22 quid
quisquam meminit quod non animo comprehendit et
tenet? ib. 106 memoria perceptarum comprehensarumque

5—2

A
4

68 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

rerum est. Plut. plac. Iv. 11. 2. Aristotle discusses the
relation between pyvnun and $avracía in the tract de
Memoria (see Grote's Aristotle, pp. 475, 476). umum = noun)
Tov aicOnuatos, An. Post. 11. 19. 99 b 36.

y 15. Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vir. 151, 8ó£av eivat Tv
acĝev) xal evd} evykardÜ0ecuv attributed to Zeno by
Cic. Acad. 1. 41 ex qua (inscientia) exsisteret etiam opinio,
quae esset imbecilla et cum falso incognitoque communis,
cf. ib. Tusc. Iv. 15 opinationem autem...volunt esse im-
becillam assensionem. Stobaeus speaks of two Stoic defi-
nitions of óofa Ecl. rr. 7. 11", p. 112, 2 [= rr. 231] àvrras
yàp eivai. Sofas THY uév akaraMymTO cvykaráÜeouv, T)v
8 vmóMwqWuv ace, cf. ib. rr. 7. 10. p. 89, 1[= rr. 169]
maparapBaverbat thy óav awr ths dcÜevoüs vmo-
Anews. It is possible from a consideration of the next
frag. that Zeno's word was oinovs. Thus, as with Plato,
ófa and ayvora are ultimately identical See further

' Stein, Erkenntnistheorie pp. 204, 205.

16. Diog. L. vir 23, Greve dé udev eivat Ts oin-
Tews AANOTPLØTEPOV TPÒS KATAAN iY TOY eTLTTHMOD.

Tóv émornpav. The plural is used because émiot un
in the narrower sense in which Zeno used the word is
a single catarxn is. The Stoics also defined èmiortyun
as a ovotnpa (cf. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 5! p. 73, 21 — 1r. 129)
of such perceptions. At the same time we must be-
ware of supposing that émietyun is according to Zeno
identical with xatadAn is. miorun is the conscious
knowledge of the wise man, whereas xatadnyus may be
possessed by the gdatros. The latter may occasionally
and accidentally assent to the araMmymTw) $avracía,
but the former's assent is regular and unerring. Cf. Sext.
Math. vir. 152 óv 772v uv émuoTiumu èv uóvois óoicracÓat
Aéyovcu Tois codois, thy 86 otav èv uóvows Tots pavois

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 69

TÜV 88 kardany ouv apdorépov civar. We have here,
in fact, the Platonic distinction between ófa àX565s and
ezio Tun in another form.

X 17. Cie. Acad. r 41, si ita erat comprehensum ut
convelli ratione non posset scientiam sin aliter inscientiam
nominabat (Zeno).

The Greek sources for this wil be found in Stob.
Ecl. 11. 7, 5' p. 73, 19 =. 129 eivau Tv émio rmv. kard-
AnYw achary kai duerám- rovrov vró Xoyov, ib. 11" p. 111,
20=11. 231, rjv d'voiav meTaTT@TLKNY elvat avykará-
eow kai da0evi, cf. Sext. Emp. Math. vri. 151, emo-
v)umv civari TV aopa kai BeBaiav kai áueráÜerov vd
Aóyov Katadyn, see also Stein, p. 311 and n. 711, who
concludes that these definitions are Zenonian. Diog.
L. vir. 47, avr5v ve thy èmiorjunv $aciv 9 Katadyn yw
aca, ù ew èv $avracióv mpocOéÉeu dueramrorov
vmod Xoyov. The definition of émuotyun as ZE, «7X. is
due to Herillus, ef. ib. vir. 165, but I am unable to see
why on that ground Zeller, p. 82, n. 1, and Wellmann,
p. 480, should also infer that it was introduced by Zeno.
It is far more natural to suppose that the simplest form
of the definition was first put forward by the founder of
the school, and that it was subsequently modified by his
successors in accordance with their different positions:
thus Herillus’ definition is undoubtedly modelled on Zeno’s,
but is adapted to his conception of évieT5yum as the
ethical TéXos.

18. Cic. Acad. I. 42, inter scientiam et inscientiam
comprehensionem collocabat, eamque neque in rectis
neque in pravis numerabat.

Cf. Sext. Math. VII. 151, ézioyzugv kai Gó£av kal Tu
èv ueÜopía rovrov TeTaypéevny Katadyn wv...catadrny òè

70 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Thy perat) TovT@y: ib. 153, ó 'Apkea(Xaos...Oeuvüs OTt
ovdev €ote weTakd eriotnuns Kat do—ns KpiTHpLov 7) katda-
Anus. (It will be observed that where Cicero speaks of
inscientia Sextus mentions óó£a, but, as has been shown,
they are practically identical.) Wellmann, p. 484, thinks
that either there is some mistake in the text or that
Cicero has misunderstood his authorities, but the passage
in Sextus lc, 151—153 makes the meaning perfectly
clear: see the note on frag. 16. The latter part of
Cicero’s statement may be either an inference by his
authority ex silentio, or a record of an express statement
by Zeno. In any case, it derives its force here simply
from the antithesis to scientia and inscientia: thus the
Stoics classed certain virtues (goods) as émotHwar and
certain vices (evils) as dyvoat, cf. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5°,
p. 58, 5—59, 3 — rr. 92—94.

/ 19. Cic. Acad. r. 41, Zeno ad haec quae visa sunt et
quasi accepta sensibus assensionem adiungit animorum:
quam esse vult in nobis positam et voluntariam.

In this case it is impossible to recover Zeno's actual
words, nor can we tell how much of the Stoie doctrine
handed down by Sext. Math. vir. 397, belonged to Zeno;
cf. especially cuyxatabeots Aris Sumdodv Eorxev ewar
mpâypa Kal TO bev TL Éyeiww aKxovatoyv TO b€ ExoVoLOY kai
él TH nueTépa Kpicer Keiwevov. A full list of authorities
is given by Zeller, Stoics, p. 88, n. 1. The free power of
assent must be understood only in the limited sense in
which free will is possible in consequence of the Stoic
doctrine of eiwapyévn: see Wellmann, l. c. pp. 482, 483.
It is moreover only the wise man who can distinguish
accurately the relative strength of divers impressions,
and he alone will consistently refuse assent to mere
pavtacpara.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. "od

X 20. Cie. Acad. r. 41, Quod autem erat sensu compre-

hensum, id ipsum sensum appellabat.

For the different meanings of alc@nous in the Stoic
school, see Diog. L. vit 52 aie0m5eus 86 Xéyerau Kata
TOUS Stwixodrs Td Te ad "yyeuovucoO mveðpa kai émi vds

> / A ` € > , ^ , ^ € `
aicOnoers SinKov, Kal 7 9 auTr@v Katadyn is, Kal  Tepl
Ta aicOyTHpia karackev), kab Hv Ties pol yivovTat:
the second of these definitions is thus attributed by Cicero
to Zeno. So Dr Reid: it is however possible that sensum
is past part. pass. of sentio and is a translation of aie @nrov
or aic@nrsxov rather than of aie@nous, in which case cf.
Diog. L. vit. 51 ræv 8é $avracióv rar avro)s ai pév
> > \ e o y H M x ° 3 5
elow aic@ntixas ai Ò ov. aicOntixal uev ai bv aiaOn-
THpLov 7) aicOnTnpiwy Nappavópevat K.T.r.

21. Cic. Acad. 1. 42, Zeno sensibus etiam fidem
tribuebat quod comprehensio facta sensibus et vera ilh
et fidelis videbatur, non quod omnia quae essent in re
comprehenderet sed quia nihil quod cadere in eam posset
relinqueret quodque natura quasi normam scientiae et prin-
cipium sui dedisset, unde postea notiones rerum in animis
imprimerentur, e quibus non principia solum sed latiores
quaedam ad rationem inveniendam viae reperiuntur.

For the general sense see Zeller, p. 80, n. 1.

non quod omnia: Dr Reid cites Sext. Pyrrh. 1. 92
ÉcacTov TOV dauvouévov juu aicOntav mowXov vTo-
mintew ore? olov TÒ piov Xeiov evades yrAvKv EavOov.
dómXov ovy ToTepoyv TOTE TavTas povas Óvres Ceu TAS
ToLoTnTas ù povoroiðv pév crti Tapa è Tyv Stadopov
karackev)v vOv aicOntnpiwv Svapopov paiverat 9 kai
TrElovas èv THY dauvouévov Eye TotoTmTas, mutu O6
oùy UroT/mTOUVGi Ties avTQv, ib. 97. These passages
however do not refer to Stoic teaching but are used in
furtherance of the Sceptical argument.

72 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

notiones: a translation of ëvvoraı. It seems certain that
the distinction between mporners and évvovas (for which
see R. and P. § 393 and note c. and Stein, Erkenntnis-
theorie, p. 237) is not at least in terms Zenonian, though
he may have spoken of kotak évvoias. Reid (on Acad. II.
30) suggests that the word zpdAn us was introduced by
Zeno, but cf. Cic. N. D. r. 44 ut Epicurus ipse mporn yes
appellavit, quam antea nemo eo verbo nominarat, so that
it is more probable that Chrysippus borrowed it from the
rival school; but see Stein, l. c. p. 248—250. évvova, on
the other hand, used by Plato (Phaed. 73 c) in quite a
general sense, and defined by the Peripatetics as ó a6potc-
pòs TOY TOU VOD davracuárov Kal 7) cUyKEpadaiwals TOV
émi uépovs eis TO ka0óXov (Sext. Emp. Math. vir. 224)
must have received its special Stoic sense from Zeno.

principia : it is difficult to determine whether this is
a translation of a Stoic technical term, cf. Acad. rr. 21.

X 99. Cic. Acad. I. 42, Errorem autem et temeritatem
et ignorantiam et opinationem et suspicionem et uno
nomine omnia quae essent aliena firmae et constantis
adsensionis a virtute sapientiaque removebat.

With this may be compared the Stoic definitions of
dTpomTOGía, avetxavoTns, avedeyEia, and apataorns
quoted by Diog. L. vir 46, 47. Temeritas is probably
a translation of mporéreia, a favourite word with Sextus
when speaking of the dogmatists (e.g. Pyrrh. r. 20) but
also used by the Stoics (Diog. vit. 48). Reid also quotes
(on Ac. rr. 66) Epict. d. 11. 22. 104 mporerùs cuykxara-
9ecus.

23. Stob. Ecl. r, 12. 3, p. 136, 21, Zyjvevos «xai tøv
am’ a/ToÜ». Td Évvojuará pace pynte Twa elvai NTE
Toia, Woavel O0€ TWa kai Woavel Trou bavracuara ruyhs*

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 73

A ` e \ ^ 5 , 3707 , ^
TaÜTa dé imo røv apxaLev idéas TpocayopevecÜa, TaV
yap karà Ta évyonwata Üomwrróvrov ela, vds idéas,
otov avOperwrv, imrmwv, kowórepov eimeétv TavT@Y TOY

, ` ^ y e , , NA 5 ,
foov kai TOV &XXcov óróccv Xéyovcuv iéas civar. [ravras
dé of Xerewol dirocodol Daci avuTrapKtous eivat kal TOV
uev évvoguárov peréyew nuas, Tév b€ Trdcewv, as Ó
Tpoonyopias Karodat, rwyxavew]. .—

Cf. Euseb. P. E. xv. 45, of amó Znvwvos Stwrxol évvon-
pata nuétepa tas idéas. Plut. Plac. 1. 10, 4, of amo
Znvevos Xrowoi évvorjuara nuétepa Tas idéas épacav.

Wellmann, p. 484, (followed by Stein, Erkenntnis-
theorie, n. 689) suggests that this may have come from
the book entitled xa@odcxa. Possibly this criticism of
the ideas formed part of the attack upon Plato mentioned
by Numenius, ap. Euseb. P. E. XIV. 6, p. 733, 0 © (Znvev)
z A 3 , ` € / » 3 £ >
ev TO acbevertéepw Ov ýovyiav àywv ov Suvapevos qÓ.

^ zA 3 » ^
«eia aL ` ApkeaiXdov èv abieto, TodAa ay eimeiv éxov,
arn ovK :30eXe, Taya 96 uüXNMov XAG, mpos 806 TOV
oUkérL. ev Caow övra llXarova éoxiapayel, Kal THY amo
[3 $ , ^ , , € EO NEL
auakns Touteiavy macau kareÜopi Bei, Xéyov ws obr àv

^ , , £ € ^ EL. ^ Bs
tod llXdrevos dpvvouévov, vrrepdixeiv Te avtod AX

2107 / . y , > , E
ovGévL uéXov' eire weAnoeLev ApkeotNaw, avTOS ye rep-
daveiv dero amorpeYrájevos ad) éavroU Tov 'ApkeaíAaov.
ToÜTo è yòn Kal 'AyaÜokXéa Tov Xvpakóciov Trowjcavra
TO codicua émi rovs Kapynooviouvs. At any rate, both
the circumstances and the chronology indicate that the
reference is not to the ILoXereía (Introd. p. 29).

éworpara. For the definition cf. Plut. Plac. IV. 11
gore 06 vonua davtacua dtavolas AoyiKod Fou, i.e., as he
goes on to explain, évvómua stands to $ávracua in the
relation of ei8os to yévos: davtacpata are shared with us
by all other animals whereas vvojpara belong to the
gods and mankind alone. Diog. vil. 61, évvógua 8é sri
pavracua Ouavoías, ovre TL dv obre Toróv, Waavel Sé TL

74 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

üv Kal ccavel Torov, otov vivera, avatiT@pa VmTOV Kal
ju "rapovTos.

Twa...moi&, le. they have no existence or definiteness.
For the Stoic conception of te and srowv, see Zeller,
pp. 98 f. and 102 f. It has been inferred from this passage
that the doctrine of the four categories does not belong
entirely to Chrysippus (Petersen, Chrys. phil. fundam.
p. 18).
iBéas. The meaning is that the Platonic ideas are
identical with évvyonwatra, inasmuch as they possess no
objective existence, but are mere figments of the mind.
Plato himself deals with this very point, Parm. 132 B
GXXd...p) TOV ei0dv ExacToV 7) TOVT@Y vonpa, Kal ouóanoo
avTQ "7poc)Kn €yyliyvea0a, adroOt 7 èv Nrvxais. Antis-
thenes had already criticised the theory of ideas from this
point of view: see Introd. p. 18.

trommrévrev: the regular word for the presentation
of external impressions to the organs of sense (e.g.
Sext. Pyrrh. L 40 oùy ai avrai...imomimtover dav-
Taciat).

émócov, «td. So far as it goes this passage is in
agreement with Aristotle’s statement that Plato recog-
nised ideas of ózróca duces only (Metaph. A. 3. 1070 a 18):
see Dr Jackson in Journ. Phil. x. 255, etc.

raóras—rvyxéávev. These words are not expressly attri-
buted to Zeno: hence Diels followed by Wachsm. adds
to the lemma Zývævos the words xai rdv am’ avro.

tév 8& mracewv, «7d. This passage is extremely diffi-
cult and is supposed to be corrupt by Zeller, rrt. 2. 79
and Wachsmuth. The latter suggests tds 06 movorntas
ETMVUMLLOY, K.T.A. or if rroóceov is corrupt for émw@vupiov
“in fine talia fere interciderint ras cosas wovorntas, cf.
Diog. vir. 58," the former (coll. Sext. Math. vit. 11) would
read rà Twyxyávovra in place of tuyyavew (die Gedanken

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 75

seien in uns, die Bezeichnungen gehen auf die Dinge).
The text, as it stands, has been interpreted in three ways:
(1) notitiae rerum rationi nostrae insitae sunt, nomina
fortuito obveniunt, Diels. (2) rrdcevs = omnes singulae
res cuiuscumque qualitatis )( yevexa mord, i.e. id€ar. These
impress themselves on the mind of man (rvyyávew),
Petersen, 1. c. p. 82, foll.: but this interpretation of rrdaus
is unwarranted and is founded on a misconception of
Diog. L. vir. 58. (3) Prantl’s interpretation (1. p. 421,
n. 63) is a combination of these two views. That the
text is sound in the main is, I think, proved by Simplic.
Cat. p. 54 (quoted by Petersen) of 8¢ amò trs 'Aka9uías
ékdXovv rà elektra amó TOD petéyerOar Kal Tas TTdTELS
TEUKTAS ATÒ TOD Tuyyxauveo Oat, and Clem. Alex. VIII. 9. 26 :
after saying that the mrõcıs for the xatnyopnua “ Téu-
vera," is “ TÒ TéuverOa,” and for vas yiyverar * rò vabv
yivec@ar” and explaining that Aristotle called the rraaus
mpoonyopia he proceeds y mrõcis 96 aowpatos eivat
opmoroyeitat: 10 Kal TO cddicpa éxeivo Núerat, Ò Aéyeuç
duépyetar cov Sia Tod otoparos, ómep adnOés, oixíav Sé
Aéyews, olkia dpa Sia Tod oTduatos cod Siépyetat Ómep
Aveddos* ovðè yap tiv oikiav Xéyouev oôpa obcav, GAA
THY TTOTW dowpaTov oÜcav, js oikia Tuyxaver A
consideration of the latter passage, which it is surprising
that no one has cited, warrants the suggestion that và
úmapyovra or some such words have fallen out after
Tvyxavew. All would then be plain: mrdovws = name
Xévvónua = thought. wradcis was also) (<armyópmua as
noun to verb (Plut. qu. Plat. x. 1, 2). For the present use
of Tc, cf. also Sext. Math. xr. 29, vr. 42, for =T@gsuç in
Aristotle see Waitz, Organon, vol. I. p. 328, 329. mpoon-
yopía is a common noun, such as * man " * horse" (Diog.
vit. 58, Sext. Pyrrh. 111. 14) tending in practice to become
identical with wr@ovs, though theoretically narrower.

76 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

24. Stob. Ecl r 13, 1*5 p. 138, 14 (Ar. Did. 457,
Diels), ariov © 6 Znvev dmoiv eivar 9v 6° ob 06 alto
cvj9efqkós* kal TO pèv aitiov opa, ob 66 altiov KaTy-
yópgpa' advvatov Ó eivau TÒ uv aitiov srapetva, ov 8é
otv altiov ui) vrápyew. TO dé Xeyyópevov ToLa’THY EEL
Suvamiv' aitiov èstre OU Ò yiyverai Tt, olov dia TH
ppdvnow yiverat TO hpoveiv Kal dia rv oxy yiverat
to Shv xal Sia Tu cwppoovvny yivetar TO cwppoverv.
advvatov yap eva, cwppoovvns Tepi Twa ovons um
a edopovety 7) uxns un) Ehv ù dbpovncews un) ppoveîv.

It is difficult to understand why Zeller, Stoics, p. 95,
n. 2, regards the main point of this fragment as a gram-
matical distinction between noun and verb: it appears
rather that Zeno is discussing the nature of ajTtov from a
logical standpoint, and that carnyopnua is introduced to
explain aitvov and not vice versa. The fragments of
Chrysippus and Posidonius which follow our passage in
Stobaeus should be compared with it. Zeno did not
, adopt the four Aristotelian causes because his material-
istic views led him to regard the efficient as the only
true cause.

cvpfeBnkós = “result” or “inseparable consequence,” cf.
Stob. Ecl. 1. 18 ad init. aïrıóv sri 0v 0 Tó dmrovéXeoya 7}
òt 0 cupBalver tr. This meaning of evuflefnkós is also to
be found in Aristotle, who uses the word in two distinct
senses: see an elaborate note of Trendelenburg on de An. I.
1 p. 402 a 8 who quotes amongst other passages Metaph.
A 30 1025 a 30 Aéyera, 66 Kal GAXws avueBukós otov
doa vrdpxet écáo TQ Kal” avTO uù èv TH oùcia vra olov
TO TpLyav@ TO Ouo opÜàs éyew. That evuBegnkos must
be used in this sense here and not in its more common
Aristotelian sense of “accident” seems indubitable, when
we read infra that the a/rvov can never be present unless
accompanied by the o? airov.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. ie

cépa: the materialism of the Stoics is well known: to
what lengths it was pushed may be seen from Zeller,
Stoics pp. 127—132, with the examples given in the
notes. gv

karqyópquo : the od aïrıov was therefore something in-
corporeal, and Chrys. and Posid. accordingly speak of it
as non-existent. Probably this inference did not present
itself to Zeno’s mind, as the question of the trap£s of
exta only arose later: see further on Cleanth. frag. T.
The present passage is illustrated by Sext. Pyrrh. rir. 14
oí èv ov capa, of Ó acwpartov TÒ aitiov eivai bacu.
Sofa Ò àv altiov eivas kowórepov Kat avtodvs Ov Q
évepryoÜv yiverat TÒ amoTéXecpa, oiov ws 6 HALOS Ù 7
Tov ndlov Oepuorns Tov yeiohat Tov KNpdv ?) THS xúceoçs
TOU KNpov. Kal yap èv TovT@ divaTrepwrnKacw, oi pèv
Mpoonyopiav aitvov eivat TO altiov áckovres, otov THs
Xúc eos, of è KaTHyopnuaTwr, otov Tod yetoOar. ib. Math.
IX. 211 roio èv mv aitiov oôpa dace codpate
dowpatov Tivos aitiov yevérOar, otov cdma ÈV TO e Mov,
copate 06 TH capKi, dowpatov O6 ToD TéuverOar karm-
yophpaTos, kai Tad apa uép TO TOP, cdbpaTe 06 TO
ÉUXo, dowparov 86 TOD KalecOat KaTHYyopHpuaTos.

dpévnow «.t.d. A parallel to this will be found at
Stob. Ecl. Ir. 7 11: p. 98, 3 77v yap ppóvnow aipovpeba
éyew xal Trjv cwppocúvyy, où uà Alia TO dpoveiv kai
codpoveiv, dowpata övra kal Katynyopnuata. Stein,
Erkenntnistheorie p. 307, infers from this passage that,
according to Zeno, not a single moment in life passes
without thought, but that the nyewovexoy always thinks.

25. Anonymi réyv» ap. Spengel Rhet. Gr. r. 434, 23,
Zivov 86 otto noi: Sinynois éstre àv ev TH VmoÜéaet
pay rev éxOeos eis TO ÚTÈp TOD Xéyovros TpoTwTOY
péovca.

78 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO,

Perhaps this frag. comes from the réyvņ of Zeno:
see Introd. p. 27. Zeller is inclined to doubt whether
the words do not belong to some other Zeno, but inas-
much as this anonymous writer also quotes Chrysippus
(p. 454, 4), the presumption is that he refers to Zeno of
Citium, and there is no a priori reason to discredit his
authorship.

Sujynors : the narrative portion of a speech contain-
ing the statement of facts, cf. Diog. L. VII. 43 cov 8é
pmropucóv Xóyov eis TE TO TpootuLoy Kal eis THY Sinynow
kai Ta mpòs Tovs avTidixovs Kal TOV émiroyov. Dion.
Hal. Ant. Rhet. x. 12 ore 06 ta ths vvoÜ0éceos csTovxeta
Téccapa, Tpooiwov, Sinynots, vrío eus, ériroyo. Lysias
especially excelled in his treatment of this branch of his
art. Dion. H. Lys. c. 18 év òè r9 OuyyetoOac rà Tpaypara,
ÓTrep, olua, uépos TrXelo qs Sitar HpovTidos kai dudakhs,
dvapduBóXes ýyoðuat KpaticToy avTov elvat Távrov
purópov K.T.r.

tmodica: cf Sext. Emp. Math. mL 4 úzó0ecis mpos-
aryopeverau èv pyTopLKy 1) TOV Tt népous NTNELS.

ds rò «td. “adapted to the character maintained on
behalf of the speaker." mpósæwrov is technical )( mpâypa.
TÓ Oé kejáXaiov TOD Tpoowiov Sofa Tpocorov Te kai
Tpayuarev Dion. H. Ant. Rhet. x. 13, cf. the Latin
persona, Cie. pro Mil. 8 32 itaque illud Cassianum cui
bono fuerit in his personis valeat, pro Cluent. § 78 huius
Staleni persona ab nulla turpi suspicione abhorrebat. For
péovca cf. Plat. Rep. 485 D 07@ ye eis & Te ai ériOupias
c$60pa péovsw... Ò) mpós rà paOnwata kai trav TÓ
TOLOUTOV éppvi)kacuw.

26. Anonymi réyvo ap. Spengel Rhet. Gr. r. 447, 11
ws è Znvwv' cmapaóevyuá oTt wyevouévov TpaypaTos
amopvnuóvevaus eis Omoiwow Tod vOv Entovpévov. Maxi-

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 79

mus Planudes ap. Walz. Rhet. Gr. v. 396 srapa8evyyua
&é éa riv, Os Zývæv aiv, yevouévov Tpaywatos atrouvy-
póvevats eis ópoíoctv Tod vOv Cnrovuévov.

This frag. must stand or fall with frag. 25.

mapdSeypa: a technical term in rhetoric. Aristotle
regards the example of the orator as an imperfect repre-
sentation of the Induction of the philosopher: cf. Anal.
Post. 1. 1, 71 a 9 ws 8 attas xai ot prroptxol cvpmei-
8ovauv' ?) yàp dia trapaderyparoy, 0 écTiv ath tue 7 Ov
evOupnuator, dep oTt TUANOYIT MOS.

27. Quintil. Inst. Or. Iv. 2. 117 hic expressa (verba)
et ut vult Zeno sensu tincta esse debebunt.

It has been supposed by some that these words are a
reference to apoph. 13, but inasmuch as sensu is a very
inappropriate translation of eie vodv, and Quintilian is
speaking of the narrative portion of a speech, the meaning
is rather “coloured by the actual impressions of sense"
Le. giving a vivid and clear representation of the actual
facts.

x 28. Anonymi variae collectiones mathematicae in
Hultschiana Heronis geometricorum et stereometricorum
editione p. 275, Tavpov XiWoviov čotw v7rouvnua eis
IIoXureíav IIXavovos év à éott rab0ra: wpicato ó IIXdTov
TH yewpetpiav... Apictorérns 8 ...Zqnvov Që éEw ev
mpocdéEe: pavTaci@y aweTaTTwWTOV ÚTÒ Xoyov.

This frag. is due to Wachsmuth (Comm. L p. 12)
who emends as above for the meaningless @&v mpos detEw
$avracióv dueramTOTos vrrodixov, coll. Diog. L. VII. 45.
It is barely credible that Zeno can have defined geometry
in the same words by which Herillus certainly and he
himself possibly defined knowledge. There is doubtless
some mistake in the tradition: possibly pa@nuatixdy has

80 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

dropped out. I cannot find any evidence to illustrate
Stoic views on mathematics.

29. Plut. Sto. Rep. 8, 1, pos tov eiróvra

unè Sixnv dSixaons mpiv (qu. add àv) ando 000v

aKovans

avtéreyev 6 Znvev, TotoÚTe T Xóyo xXpa@pevos: eir
améberEev ó 7rpóTrepos eizàv ovK dkovaTéov Tod Ocvrépov
Aéyovros' Trépas yap exes TO EnToúpevov' eit oU arréderEer"
öuorov yap ws el pndé varnKovce KANOEls ù vmakovcas
érepéticev’ ror Ó  améOe£ev Ù ovK améOeifev: ovr
dkovoTéov apa Tod GOevrépov Aéyovros. The same is
preserved by Schol. ad Lucian. Cal. 8 with unimportant
variations,

pn& «rd. A verse of uncertain authorship commonly
referred to Phocylides on the authority of the Schol. ad
Lucian. l.c. but called by Cicero Vevdnovodevov (Att. VIL.
18), see Bergk Poet. Lyr. Gk. p. 464: cf. Ar. Vesp. 725 7
vov co$ós nv batis É$aokev, Tpiv àv appoiv ulov
axovons oUk dv dixacats. Eur. Heracl. 179 ris av dienv
Kplvevev Ù yvoin Xóvyov Tpiv av map audoiy plov éxud0n
cados ;

Aéye. The argument is couched in the syllogistic
form which Zeno especially affected: see Introd. p. 33.
Whether the first speaker proves his case or not, the
argument of the second speaker is immaterial; but he
must have either proved his case or failed to do so:
therefore the second speaker should not be heard.

$m(ikovce: appeared in court when the case was called
on—answered to his name: cf. Dem. F. L. p. 423 § 257
"r(uocev UTaKovcarTa TW aúTo0 KaTHYyopov “procured
the disfranchisement of a man who had actually ap-
peared as his accuser.” The word was used indifferently
of plaintiff and defendant, ib. p. 434 § 290 ov& vzaxobcat

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 81

Kadovpevos 7/0eXev. Meid. p. 580, 581 xadXovpevos óvouacTí
*,..00a TaüT ovx vm)Kovce. Andoc. Myst. Š 112 kå?’ 6
kQpvE éexnpuTte tis T)v (xergpíav Katabein, kai ovdels
vT5kovcev. Isae. p. 49, 25 — 84 R. amovypadeis eis T)v
BovM)v kakovpydv vroywpev Gxyero kai ovy ÜmKOU-
cv.

kMpés : either (1) by the presiding magistrate, cf.
Dem. Olymp. p. 1174 með) Ó ékáXev ó dpxov eis To
dixaoTn piov áravras Tos audio BnroDvras kaTa TOv vóuov.
Ar. Vesp. 1441 t8pif ws àv Tv Sixny &pyev xaX, or (2)
by the offieer of the court solemnly calling him by name.
We know that this procedure (kAxrevous) was adopted in
the case of a defaulting witness, and it.may also have been
applied if one of the parties failed to put in an ap-
pearance.

30. Diog. L. vri. 18, éfpacke è rods uév TOv ücoXo(kcv
Aoyous Kal amnpoTiopuévovs ópolovs elvar TH apyupio Td
'AXe£avópeio' evopOardpous pév Kal mepryeypappévovs,
Kaba xal TÒ vopuopa, ovdév 66 Sia Tadta Bedtiovas. Tos
8é tovvavtiov apwpolov tots “Artixois Terpaópdx ous
elk? pèv kexoujévous Kal coroikws, kaÜéNkew juévTor
"rOXXdkis TAS kekaNMypadonuévas Xé£ets.

Aéyow. For the comparison of words to coins cf. Hor.
A. P. 59 licuit semperque licebit signatum praesente nota
producere nomen. Juv. VIL. 54 qui communi feriat carmen
triviale Moneta and Prof. Mayor's note. Possibly this and
the following frag. came from the work mepi Xé£ecv.

'AX&av8peo : in this phrase which recurs at viir. 85
I have followed Kohler (Rhein. Mus. xxxix. 297) in
reading 'AXe£avOpeío for 'AXe£avópive. It appears that
Alexandria had struck no coinage in the reign of the
Ptolemies (Head, Historia Numorum p. 718); on the
other hand the tetradrachm of Alexander was part of the

H. P. 6

82 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

current coinage all over Greece (ib. p. 198 foll. and see
Hultsch, Gr. and Rom. Metrologie pp. 243—245).

Kekop.pévous. ..codolKws, MSS. KEKOMmEVOLS. Bywater
(Journ. Phil. xvir. 76) reads xexoppévovs kai coXoíkovs
and the former certainly seems necessary to restore the
balance of the sentence.

kadedxew: this meaning of ka0éX«co is omitted by L.
and 8. s. v.

Aas bracketed by v. Wilamowitz and Köhler is
rightly retained by Bywater.

31. Zonarae Lex. s.v. cororxifew col. 1662, conorxiGew

3 , x \ \ ` , , 5 \ \
où povov TO karà hovny kai Xóyov yxopuceueo Qa, aXXa Kal
él évóvuárov oTav Tis ywopiKas évdidtoKnTat 7) ATAKTOS
ea bin 3) axoopas mepimath bs uou Zývæov. Wachsmuth,
Comm. I. p. 12, cites Cyrilli, Lex. cod. Bodl. ant. T. 1r. 11.
ap. Cramer anec. Paris Iv. p. 190 v. codoxiopos* OTe TuS
NUR / š / , / \ \ /
aTéxvos OuaXéyerav coroxifer ov pòvov TO Kata XË.

` ` > , 3 x` M ? ` , er
Kat poviy iOworevew, adda kai él hopnudTwyv, orav TIS
xcepukds évdédutat 7) arákros éoOlet ù dakoopws mrepuvmramet
ef li Sed € ,
«s poi Zyivev ó Kurievs.

coAew(tev. Zeno is not alone in using the word in
this extended sense, cf Xen. Cyr. vill. 3. 21 Aaigépyns
&é Tus Hv coXowcórepos AVÖPWTOS TH TpóT Q.

¿m &Supdrov. The Athenians attached great import-
ance to xoopiorns in dress as in other matters of
personal behaviour. The cloak was required to be of
a certain length, cf. Theophr. Char. 24 (Jebb) of the
Penurious Man:—dopobüvras éXarro TOv pnpov Ta
(parua; and to wear it in the fashionable style (èri d¢&ud
avaBarreoFat) was a mark of sobriety. Cf. Ar. Av. 1567
obros Tí Spas; èT dpia ép oŬTws dyméxev; ov wetaBarels
Ooipáriov GÒ emi Ge£uav;

dráxres rð. How carefully children were trained

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 83

in this respect may be seen from three passages of Plutarch
cited by Becker, Charicles, E. T. pp. 236, 237. Cf. e.g. de
Educ. Puer. 7 + uév 8e£ià cuvebifew à radia Oéyea0at
Tas TPOPAS, Kav mrporeívewe THY dpuarepáv, émvriuv.

dkócpes mepwrarj. Fast walking in the streets was so
severely criticised that it was a circumstance which
might be used to damage an opponent before a jury ; cf.
Dem. Pantaen. p. 981 § 52 Niuxófovxos 8 érribOoves eat,
kai tayéws Badiler kai péya dOéyyerau Kat Bakrupíav
dopet and see Sandys on id. Steph. r. §§ 68, 77. Lysias
protests against such matters being considered of any
importance in a law court, Or. xvi. Š 19 modot uév yap
pikpàóv Siareyomevot Kal koguícos aumeyójevoi peyarwv
kakaGv avrtot yeyovacw, érepo, 66 TOY TOLOUTÆV aj.eXoÜvTes
Toria kayaba Ups elo eipryao pévot.

32. Sext. Emp. Math. n. 7, évOev yotv kai Znvev
ó Kirs éperm0els bro dSiadéper Suarextixn pntopiris
avotpéas tiv xeipa Kal marw éEaTrAdcas ëpn “ rovro"
karà èv THY ovoTtpopyv TO cTpoyy/UXov kai Bpayd Tis
dvarextixyns TaTTeu liwa dia O6 THs éEaTAOTEWS Kal
éxTdcews THY SaKTUAMY TO TAATD THS PyTopLKHS Õvvapews
aivittopevos. Cic. Fin. I. 17 Zenonis est inquam hoc
Stoici omnem vim loquendi, ut jam ante Aristoteles,
in duas tributam esse partes, rhetoricae palmam, dialecti-
cam pugni similem esse dicebat, quod latius loquerentur
rhetores, dialectici autem compressius. Orat. 32, 113
Zeno quidem ille, à quo disciplina Stoicorum est, manu
demonstrare solebat quid inter has artes interesset, nam
cum compresserat digitos pugnumque fecerat, dialecticam
alebat eiusmodi esse; cum autem diduxerat et manum
dilataverat, palmae illius similem eloquentiam esse dicebat.
Quint. Inst. Or. IL 20 Itaque cum duo sint genera
orationis, altera perpetua, quae rhetorice dicitur, altera

6—2

84 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

concisa, quae dialectice; quas quidem Zeno adeo con-
iunxit ut hane compressae in pugnum manus, illam
explicitae, diceret similem.

Although this extract and the next purport to be
merely spoken remarks of Zeno, it has been thought
better to insert them at this place, as distinctly belonging
to oyiw). Very probably in their original form they
came from some written work.

tò cTpoyyóXov is used of a terse and compact as
opposed to a florid and elaborate style: thus Dion. Halic.
in contrasting the styles of Lysias and Isocrates says:—
ev T@ avo rpédeu TA voruara Kal oTpoyyrws éxoépeuw
ws 7rpós adnOiwors ayavas émitndevov Avoiav ameóexóumv
(Isocr. 11). The translation “well rounded” while seeming
to preserve the metaphor conveys a false impression.

33. Cic. Acad. 11. 145, At scire negatis quemquam.
rem ullam nisi sapientem. Et hoc quidem Zeno gestu
conficiebat. Nam, cum extensis digitis adversam manum
ostenderat, *visum" inquiebat *huiusmodi est." Deinde,
cum paullum digitos contraxerat, *adsensus huiusmodi."
Tum eum plane compresserat pugnumque fecerat, com-
prehensionem illam esse dicebat: qua ex similitudine
nomen ei rei quod antea non fuerat xaráXywNr imposuit.
Cum autem laevam manum adverterat et illum pugnum
arte vehementerque compresserat scientiam talem esse
dicebat, cuius compotem nisi sapientem esse neminem.

Stein, Erkenntnistheorie p. 181, 313, finds in this
passage an indication of the tension theory, but surely
this is somewhat far-fetched, for although it is no doubt,
true that the Stoie theory of knowledge is often made to
depend on tovos, yet probably the introduction of Trovos
is later than Zeno. He suggests with more reason p. 126
that the activity of the zyeuoruxóv in the process of

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 85

reasoning may be inferred from this, Le. the syewourxor is
not merely receptive (xara meîosw) but also productive
(kat évépryeuav).

scire: we have already seen that éwvoryun is peculiar
to the wise man, while catady us is also shared by the
paos: see note on frag. 16. Sextus speaking of the
inconsistency of the Stoics, who would not admit that
even Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus had attained to
perfect wisdom, cites as a Stoic dogma mdvra dryvoei ó
paños (Math. vir. 434). Reid quotes Sext. Pyrrh. rr. 83
duomep T?)v èv adynOeav èv uóvo otrovdaiw daciv elvai,
TO òè dXgÜés kal ev avXe' évdéyetar yap Tov $aÜXov
ares Tt eimetv.

visum = pavtacia frag. Y. adsensus = cvycatabecis
frag. 19. comprehensionem = catarnwuy, see on frag. 10.
scientiam, frag. 17.

PHYSICA.

34. Cic. Acad. r. 39, (Zeno) nullo modo arbitrabatur
quiequam effici posse ab ea (scil. natura) quae expers esset
corporis nec vero aut quod efficeret aliquid aut quod
efficeretur posse esse non corpus.

Zeno adopted the Platonie dogma that everything ,

which exists is capable either of acting or being acted
upon, cf Soph. 247 D Aéyo n TO kal ómoiavobv kekTm-
uévov Otvapav, elt eis TO Trotetv Érepov OTLobY mredvkós,
eiT eis TÓ vraÜeiv kai opiKpotatov úmò Tod havAoTaTou,
Kav el póvov eicáza£, wav roro Óvros eivav: he differed,
however, widely from Plato in limiting these things to
material objects. For Stoic materialism cf. Plut. plac. 1v.
20 wav yap to OÓpcjuevov 9 kai rowdy cdma (quoted by
Zeller, Stoics p. 126) and further references ap. Stein,
Psychologie n. 21. For the application of this doctrine

86 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

to theories of sensation and thought see the authorities
collected in Dr Reid’s note.

35. Diog. L. vi. 134, done? © avTois apyas eivat
TOV ÜXcev Ovo TO Torov Kal TO TácXov. TO pv otv
vrácxov civar THY ATroLov ovcíav T)v ANV’ TO O6 ToLODY
TOV èv aUTH AOyov TÓv Üeóv. TodTOv yap dvTa aiwv Ou
maons Urns Snutoupyeiy Exacta. TiOnor Sé TO Oóyua
Toro Znvev ó Kutieds èv T@ mept ovoías. Plut. plac.
I. 3. 39 Zývæv Mvacéov Kırieds apyas uév tov Oedv Kai
THY ANY, Sv Ó uév TL TOD Toev aiTLos 7 0ë TOD raa yew,
cTovyeia è rérrapa. Stob. Ecl. 1. 10. 14 f. 126, 17 Znvev
Mvacéov Kutievs apyxas tov eov Kat Tv VAqv oTovyeta, òè
rérrapa. Diels, p. 289, adds the following passages:—A chill.
Tat. p. 124 E Zyvæv ó Kerieis apyás eivat Néyer TOV óXov
Oedv kai UAV, 0cóv èv TO 7rotoOv, UAqv O6 TO TroLOUpEVOV, d.
dv rà Téccapa cov eta yeyovévat. Philo, de Provid. r. 22
Zeno Mnaseae filius aerem deum materiam et elementa qua-
tuor [aerem is a blunder arising from apyas (Diels), which
seems better than Stein's suggestion (Psych. n. 31) to sub-
stitute aethera]. Theodoret, Gr. cur. aff. rv. 12 Zývæv 86 ó
Keurievs, ó Mvacéov, ó Kpatntos $ovrgr)s ó Tis Xros
dpfas aipécews TOv Ücóv Kal tiv VXqv apxas ëpnoev eivai.

Cf. Sext. Math. rx. 11: further authorities for the
Stoic school in general are given by Zeller, p. 141.

In distinguishing between God as the active efficient
cause of the universe and formless indeterminate matter
as its underlying substratum Zeno is following on the
lines laid down by Plato in the Timaeus and by Aristotle,
cf. Theophr. frag. 48 Wimmer (speaking of Plato) 8vo tas
dpyds flo/Xerai Tovey TO uèv Vmwoke(uevov às Vany, Ó
Trpocaryopeveu. mavõeyés, TO Ó ws altiov xal kivoÜv, Ó
mepiartet TH TOU Oeod Kal TH TayaQo0 Ovvágew: see
Introd. p. 25. When we remember that God is by the

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 87

Stoics identified with fiery breath, the purest and rarest

k

3

of all substances, while on the other hand the world itself `

is merely a temporal manifestation of the primary fire, it
becomes apparent that the Stoic dualism is ultimately
reducible to a monism and that the system is essentially
hylozoistic, like those of the early Ionians (Zeller, Stoics,
p. 155, 6. Stein, Psychologie n. 25, collects the passages
which prove this). How far this was worked out by Zeno
may be doubted: indeed there is no evidence to show
that he ever passed beyond the stage of regarding the
dual origin of the world as fundamental, and the opinion
is now prevalent that Cleanthes by his principle of tovos
was the first to consciously teach the pantheistic doctrines,
which subsequently became characteristic of Stoicism.

Snprovpyetv: a favourite Platonic word, recalling the dnus-
oupyos of the Timaeus. For the distinction between apyai
and orovyeia cf. Diog. L. vit. 134 dcapépew 86 pasiv apyas
kal oToLyela* Tas pèv yap eivat dryevviyrovs Kal apOdptous:
Ta è o Tovyeta KaTA THY exTrUpwow d0e(peo Dau.

36. Hippolyt. Philosoph. 21, 1. p. 571 Diels Xpu-
ourmos Kai Zivev of vméÜevro kai avTol apyny pèv Oeòv
TOV TüvTOV opa Üvra TO kaÜaporarov bia TravTwY bE
dunkew THY Trpóvouav avTov. Galen. Hist. Philos. 16. p. 241.

Diels P. 608 IIxarov pév oov kai Vou 6 2ZTa Lo Tepi

| Tfjs ovalas Tod Oeod reah ulo Tes ovx prates Trepi TAVTNS

ScevonOncav, aN 6 pev IIXávov Gedy LOE: Znvev
òè cda "epi THs poppis pndev eipnxotes [if we may
rely on Diels’ text here, some modification will be required
in Stein, Psychologie n. 88, where Kühn's reading ov
KOgMOV GANA Tapa TavTa...TL dAdo is adopted].

Cf. generally Tatian ad Graec. c. 25 p. 162 c (speaking
of the Stoics) eG. tis eivas Xéyei Ücóv, éyà 86 dowmarTor.

August. adv. Acad. 111. 17. 38 (quoted below).

88 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Tò KaSapdrarov. “God is spoken of as being Fire,
Aether, Air, most commonly as being vveüua or Atmo-
spheric Current, pervading everything without excep-
tion, what is most base and ugly as well as what is
most beautiful" Zeller, Stoies p. 148, who gives the
authorities in the notes. xaÜaperarov is used with
special reference to dunxew, cf. Sext. Emp. vir 375 ovóé
TO TveÜpa iow exer mpós TovTO [TUT cw] émiT ELOY,
RNeTTOMEpésTaTOV Kal eUpovY Tapa Ta ToiaÜTa TOV THLd-
Tov vrdpyov. Ar. Metaph. r. 8. 3, 4 (speaking of those of
his predecessors who had explained generation by ovy«pi-
cis and Ouakpu us) TH uev yap àv Go£eve a TovyeuoOéo rarov
eivau srávrov é£ ob yiyvovtTat avykpíaeu TPWTOV, TOLOUTOY
86 TÒ uukpopepéo rarov Kal XemrOTarov àv ein TOV ccpdá-
tov, Oep boot tip apynv TiÜÉaci padtoTa ÓpoXo-
yovuévos dv TQ Nye rovro Aéyouev. Krische, Forschungen
p. 382.

mpóvouiy like rationem in the next frag. brings into pro-
minence the spiritual side of the Stoic conception of God,
which is everywhere strangely blended with the material.

37. Cic. N. D. 1. 36, rationem quandam per omnem
rerum naturam pertinentem vi divina esse affectam putat.
Cf. Epiphan. adv. Haeres. 111. 2. 9 (nr 36) Diels. p. 592
&Xeye 8e mavra Sunxewy TÒ Üctov.

rationem: the Heraclitean Xóyos, Introd. p. 22.

38. Tertullian, ad Nat. 11. 4, ecce enim Zeno quoque
materiam mundialem a deo separat et eum per illam
tamquam mel per favos transisse dicit. Cf. id. adv.
Hermog. 44 Stoici enim volunt deum sie per materiam
decucurrisse quomodo mel per favos (quoted by Stein,
Psychologie, p. 35, n. 43).

favos: xnpia. Zenos fondness for simile has been

, by
je l

nae

2 NU af

f

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 89

observed upon in the Introd. p. 33. Virgils lines are
well known, Georg. 1v. 219 sqq. His quidam signis atque
haec exempla secuti Esse apibus partem divinae mentis et
haustus Aetherios dixere; deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque tractusque maris caelumque profundum. It is
curious that bees should have suggested themselves to
both writers, though in a different way, in connection
with the same thought, cf. Cic. Acad. rr. 120 cuius
(divinae sollertiae) vos majestatem deducitis usque ad
apium formicarumque perfectionem ut etiam inter deos
Myrmecides aliquis minutorum opusculorum fabricator
fuisse videatur.

separat: if this is pressed, we must conclude that
Zeno never identified God with matter: see n. on frag. 35.

39. Cic. N. D. r. 36, Zeno naturalem legem divinam
esse censet eamque vim obtinere recta imperantem pro-
hibentemque contraria. Lactant. Inst. 1. 5 Item Zeno
(deum nuncupat) divinam naturalemque legem. — Minuc.
Felie. Octav. 19. 10 Zeno naturalem legem atque divinam...
omnium esse principium.

Cf. Diog. L. vil. 88, øs dmayopevew elwbev ó vopuos ó ,
«owvós OTrep éc Tiv 6 dpO0ds Aoyos bid mávrev épxópevos ó
avtos ov TQ Au kaÜmyeuovi. rovro THS TÖV Üvrov.Otoucj-
gews ovtt. Schol. on Lucan Ir 9 hoe secundum Stoicos
dieit, qui adfirmant mundum prudentia ac lege firmatum,
ipsumque deum esse sibi legem. Law regarded in its
moral rather than its physical aspect 1s defined in similar
terms in Stob. Ecl rr. 7. 11? p. 96, 10 = Floril. 46, 12 7óv
Te vóuov oovdaiov elvai bao, Xo*yov ópÜóv Ovra Tpos-
TAKTIKOY pèv év momrtéov, dvrayopevrukóv 66 dv oU Tot-
nréov repeated at IL. 7. 11', p. 102, 4.

Gods and men are influenced by the same law * quae
est recti praeceptio pravique depulsio" Cie. N.D. rr. 78.

90 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Law is the human counterpart of the “ratio summa
insita in natura" id. Leg. r. 18. The origin of law is
simultaneous with that of the divine mind: quamobrem
lex vera atque princeps apta ad jubendum et ad vetandum
ratio est recta summi Iovis, id. ib. 11. 10. For Zeno Right
exists use, and not merely Oéces, cf. Krische p. 371.
Stein, Erkenntnistheorie n. 708.

40. Philodemus repèt evceB. c. 8, det tiv <d>Vvapw
osav cuva<mT>Tumu oiKe<i>ws TOV LepQ«v» TpÒ<S
a>drAnra kai ék...ov THY Q ava<tor)>v 9«M ov Kal
KU<KANTW> Ù Trepío8ov.

The position of these words with reference to their
context corresponding to Cic. N.D. r. 36 points to Zeno's
authorship. “Stoica frustula dubitanter ad Zenonem
refero " Diels p. 542.

mv Sivan. This is evidently a Stoic description of
God as the power which binds the parts of the world
together and keeps them in union.

cwarrikyv. We should expect cuvextixnv, which is
the more natural word in this connection. Sext. Math.
IX, 84 dvayen dpa bro THs apiotns aùròv (TÓv KdcpoV)
QUceos ovvéyeo lar enei kal mrepiéyeu TAS TavTwY cers
...TovavTn 06 TUyXavouca Oeós éorw. On the other hand
cvvamTO cvva$» and the like are technically applied to
the structure of manufactured articles, which are said to
be èx cvvarTouévov) (nv@péva: ib. 78 èk avvamrouévov
86 Ta ëK Te mapakeuuévov Kal mpòs ev TL keDáXatov vevóv-
TOV TUVETTOTA ws adioEs Kal TUpyicKoL Kal ul es.

41. Cic. N.D. I. 36, aethera deum dicit (Zeno). Ter-
tullian adv. Marcion 1. 13 deos pronuntiaverunt...ut Zeno
aerem et aetherem. Minuc. Fel. 19. 10 aethera interdiu
omnium esse principium. Cic. Acad. rr. 126 Zenoni et
reliquis fere Stoicis aether videtur summus deus [if fere

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 91

is pressed here, it points to the exception of Cleanthes,
but see on Cleanth. fr. 15].

aethera not to be confounded with anp, which is one
of the four elements and subject to destruction ; aerem in
Tertull. is probably a blunder, unless with Stein, Psych.
n. 80, aut should be read for et. The aether here in
question is an equivalent of wvedwa or of rip Teyvukov,
Le. it is merely one of the labels convenient to express
the material essence of God. Neither wip nor ai675p is
regarded in itself as a complete description. For the
distinction between the Stoic a/07p and the Heraclitean
TÜp see Stein, Psychologie p. 26 and n. 31. The Stoic
deity is at once corporeal and rational: but how far it may
be said to have been personified cannot be determined: in
fact, as has been remarked, the ancients seem to have
grasped the notion of personification with much less
distinctness than modern thinkers.

42. Stob. Ecl. r. 1. 29" p. 35, 9, Zývæv ó Eres poor
«óc uov 7rUpuov (scil. Óeóv amepyvaro). August. adv. Acad.
III. 17. 38 nam et deum ipsum ignem putavit (Zeno).

Cf. Stob. Ecl. r. 1. 29" p. 38, 2 dverdáTo mavtræv voüv
évatÜépiov eivat Oeóv.

For the Stoic conception of the World-Soul see Stein,
Psychologie p. 41, who distinguishes the world soul from
the Aether God, the former being an offshoot from the
latter. “Die Weltseele ist nur ein Absenker jenes Ur-
pneumarestes der als Gott Aether unser Weltganzes
umspannt; sie ist als Ausfluss der Gottheit jenes künst-
lerische göttliche Feuer (mp reyvucóv) das die Keimkriifte
(eTrepuarucoüs Xóyous) der Weltbildung im allgemeinen
und der Einzelbildungen insbesondere in sich enthält.”
In regarding vods as an indwelling material essence Zeno
revived the position formerly taken up by Diogenes of

92 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Apollonia in opposition to Anaxagoras: see the fragment
quoted by Zeller, Pre-Socrati¢s, E. T. r. p. 287 n. 7.

The Mss xécpov was cortected to xócuov by Krische
p. 378, who supplies 0eóv amepývaro. Hirzel rr. p. 220, 2
prefers to put a comma after xdcuov: otherwise xai
TrÜpuvov is necessary.

48. Themist. de An. 72b [ed. Speng. 11. p. 64, 25]
Taya è Kal tots amd Zyvwvos aippwvos 7 Sofa dua
Taons ovalas mepoirnkévaı TOv Oeov TiÂepévois Kal Tov
pèv elvat voüv trod 0ë Nrvyr)v mod 66 óvcuv mod 06 éE.

This same force, appearing in different substances, is
called &&is as the bond of union for inorganic matter,
húss in the case of plants, yuy in the case of animals,
andvods as belonging to rational beings. Diog. L. v11.139 òr
óv pev yap ws Éis kexapmkev ws Sid TØV ooTaY Kal TOV
veupov v dv è ws vods ws bid TOD HyEemovexod, cf.
Cleanth. Frag. 51. Some Stoics seem however to have
denied this distinction between yvy) and voüs. Nemes.
Nat. Hom. c. 1 (quoted by Stein, Psych. pp. 92, 3) ruvés
òè ov OiéoreiXav amd THs Wuyxns TOV vov: dXXà THs
ovalas avTHs T/yejovucóv elvat TO voepóv 1ryoüvrat. Stein
however is not justified in holding that the living principle
of animals occupies a position midway between duets and
Wux7, as will be shown on Cleanth. frag. 44. That the
passage is good evidence that the distinction between
éérs, vci; and qvx?) is Zenonian may be inferred from
the words cvpdwvos 7 do€a.

44. Lactant. de Vera Sap. c. 9, Zeno rerum naturae
dispositorem atque artificem universitatis Aóyov praedicat
quem et fatum et necessitatem rerum et deum et animum
Iovis nuncupat. Tertull. Apol. 21 Apud vestros quoque
sapientes Xoyov id est sermonem atque rationem constat `
artificem videri universitatis. Hunc enim Zeno determinat

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 93

factitatorem qui cuncta in dispositione formaverit eundem
et fatum vocari et deum et animum Iovis et necessitatem
omnium rerum. Minuc. Fel. 19. 10 rationem deum vocat
Zeno. Lact. Inst. 1v. 9 siquidem Zeno rerum naturae dis-
positorem atque opificem universitatis Aóyov praedicat.
quem et fatum et necessitatem rerum et deum et animum
Iovis nuncupat: ea scilicet consuetudine qua solent Iovem
pro deo accipere.

45. Stob. Ecl. r. 5. 15. p. 78, 18, Zývæv 6 Xroeu«ós
¿p TO Trepi aeos (THY eiuapuévqv) Õúvaptv kunmruc)v Tfjs
Urns xarà raira kai ccavres Svrwa un Oudépew
mpovorav kal diow kare. Theodoret, Graec. Aff. Cur.
VL 14. p. 87, 26 Zsvev 96 6 Kiteds 8óvagw KéxrnKe
THY ei(papuévgv kwmru)v Tüs Uns T)v è a/T)v Kai
Trpóvotav kai vow wvópacev.

p? Siadépev. God receives different names, while his
essence is constant, owing to the various phases of his
union with matter (tds mpoonyopias neraXauávew bv
Ans Ths ÜXms Sv Hs key pmke-rapáNXa£av Stob. Ecl. r.
1. 29b p. 37, 23, according to Diels and Wachsmuth a
mistake for 642. ras 77s Uys Ov Hs key pmke rrapaXXá£eus).
Thus he is Fate as acting in accordance with a constant
law, Forethought as working to an end, and Nature as
creator of the word. Cf. Athenag. Supplic. c. 6. p. 7 B
of 66 amo TNS cTOoÓs KAV Tals TpocTyopíais karà TAS
zapaXMáEeis TIS VANS, Sv zs hace TO mveüua vopetv Tod
Oeod, TANOUYwot TO Oéeiov Tots ovOpact, TA *yoüv epyw
čva vowifovar Tov Üeóv ei yàp ó pèv eos Trip TeyviKoy
666 Badwfov émi yevécewg kóopov éwmepterNnbos &mavras
TOUS a7repj.aucoUs AGyous kal’ ods Exacta Kal’ e(uappévnv
yivetat, TÒ 06 mveðua avroU Sinker bv ÓXov TOD KdcpoV,
ó Oeds eis xar avtovs Zevs uév karà TO Léov ThS Urns
ovopatónevos "Hpa 96 xarà tov dépa kal rà Moira Kal’

94 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

éxaatov Ths VANS pépos bv Hs kexdprkev Kadovuevos. In
this connection it may be observed that Gercke (Chrysippea,
p. 697) is mistaken in speaking of a fragment of Zeno
as preserved by Aristocles ap. Euseb. P. E. xv. 14. The
reference there is to the Stoies generally and not to Zeno
in particular.

454. Diog. L. vir. 149, ca eiuapuévqv é pace và
mavra  wéyvecÜa. Xpvourmos...cai Iloseiðwvios... Kat
Zyvæv BonOos à.

Since eiwapyévy is identical with mpovora, it follows
that everything is produced xarà mpóvorav. Cleanthes,
however, demurred to this (frag. 18).

46. Cic. N.D. rr. 57, Zeno igitur ita naturam definit
ut eam dicat ignem esse artificiosum ad gignendum pro-
gredientem via. Censet enim artis maxime proprium
esse creare et gignere, quodque in operibus nostrarum
artium manus efficiat, id multo artificiosius naturam
efficere, id est, ut dixi, ignem artificiosum magistrum ar-
tium reliquarum. Cic. Acad. 1. 39 Zeno statuebat ignem
esse ipsam naturam. N.D. rn. 27 naturae artificiose
ambulantis, ut ait Zeno. Wachsmuth (Comm. r. p. 9) adds
Tertull. ad. Nat. rr. 2 cuius (ignis) instar vult esse naturam
Zeno.

The Greek of the definition is 1) dows srt Op Teyvi-
Kov ó0Q Badifov eis yéveow, Diog. L. vit. 156. Clem.
Alex. Strom. V. p. 597. veis is only another name for
God viewed in his creative capacity. Hence Stob. Ecl. 1.
1, 29" p. 37, 20 oí Xrrewol voepóv 0cóv amopaivovrat trip
rexvikóv 00g Dao èri yevéres kócuov, éumepuerM bos
Tüvras TOUS oTEpu“aTiKods Noyous kaÜ' ods (ravra Kal’
eiuappévqv vivera: Athenag.l c. Wellmann, p. 472 and
Weygoldt p. 35 think that Aóyos a7repuaTukós is a Zenonian
expression. So Stein, Psych. p. 49 and n. 87.

mM
E

| a Filed

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 95

47. Tatian ad Graec. c. 3, p. 1430, kai ó Oeds aro-

SevyOnoerar kakdv Kat avTOv (scil. Zývwva) moms, é |

ápápaus Te kai oKwANEL Kal dppnroupyols kara-ywóp.evos.

— Of. Clem. Alex. Protrept. 5 $ 66 o¥8é uv roUs arò THs
Xrods Twapedevoouar da maons VANS Kal Sia THS áTuuso-
Tatns TO Üciov Sinxew Xéyovras: ol KaTavayvVoUCLY ATEX-
vas THY pirocodiav: Sext. Pyrrh. rr. 218 Xrewcol òè
7rveüpa, SunKov kai dia Tov eideyOav: Cic. Acad. rr. 120 cur
deus ommia nostra causa cum faceret—sie enim voltis—
tantam vim natricum viperarumque fecerit? cur mortifera
tam multa et perniciosa terra marique disperserit? We
have no information as to what answer Zeno made to this

objection, but the later Stoics said that physical evils '

ultimately served a good purpose: so Chrysippus ap. Plut.
Sto. Rep. 21, 4 quoted by Zeller, p. 189. As to the
existence of moral evil see on Cleanth. fr. 48, 1.17 and
W ellmann's discussion at p. 472.

48. Cic. N. D. rr. 58, Ipsius vero mundi qui omnia
complexu suo coercet et continet natura non artificiosa
solum sed plane artifex ab eodem Zenone dicitur consultrix
et provida utilitatum opportunitatumque omnium.

An ingenious explanation of this difficult passage is
given by Stein, Psychologie, pp. 42, 43 in accordance
with his view of the distinction between World-Soul and
Aether-God. “Die natura artificiosa ist unseres Erach-
tens die Weltseele, wührend die natura plane artifex
sich auf den Gott Aether oder das syeuovucóv der Welt
bezieht." The vveüua which pérmeates the universe is
ignis artificiosus and only secondarily represents God,
since it is an efflux from him. It cannot be described
as plane artifex, a term which is applied to God (cdma
TÓ kaÜaporaTov), whereas the world-soul is less xafapov
from its combination with matter.—

96 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

artifex : probably a translation of rexvírgs Diog. L.
VIL 86, but Hirzel Ir p. 220 represents it by dnusoupyos,
in which case cf. Diog. L. vit. 137.

49. Chalcid. in Tim. c. 290, Plerique tamen silvam
separant ab essentia, ut Zeno et Chrysippus. Silvam
quippe dicunt esse id quod subest his omnibus quae
habent qualitates, essentiam vero primam rerum omnium
silvam vel antiquissimum fundamentum earum, suapte
natura sine vultu et informe: ut puta aes, aurum, ferrum,
et caetera huius modi silva est eorum, quae ex iisdem
fabrefiunt, non tamen essentia. At vero quod tam his
quam ceteris ut sint causa est, ipsum esse substantiam.

This passage shows that Zeno distinguished between
ovata and 9Xy—the former the indeterminate and formless
matter underlying the universe, and the latter the stuff
out of which a particular thing is made. UA» is thus
from one point of view the more general term, since ovcia
= po? vAm (frag. 51). Cf. Dexipp. ad Cat. Schol. Arist.
Brandis 45 a 21 éoti r0 úmoxeruévov Ovrróv kai xard Tos
amò THS eTods Kal kara ToUs mrpea Bvrépovs êv Mev TO Xeyó-
pevov TPOTov vmroke(uevov os 7) ATroLOS VAN Hy 6vváuer aua
ó 'ApwsaroTéM)s mol, Sevtepov è vmoxeluevov TÒ TroL0V
0 Kowvas 7) iiws Upiotato r.r.. Similarly Arist. Metaph.
VIL. 4. 1044 a 15 distinguishes mpwæry and oikeía Xx and
ib. rv. 24. 1023 a 27 says that material origin may be
specified in two ways 7) kara TO TpOrov yévos ù xard
TÒ ÜcTaTov cibos oiov ects uév ds ümavra rà TNKTA éÉ
vdaros (Le. brass as being fusible comes from water) ¿e
Ò ws ék xaXkoÜ ó avopias. The point of view of Posi-
donius is different: he holds ðrapépeiw Tv oVo(av Ts
dys Tv <avTnv> ovoav Kata T)v ÜnócTaciw, érwota
povov. Stob. Ecl. r. 11. 5°, p. 133, 22. Wellmann (Neue
Jahrb. vol. 115, p. 808) denies that it is a necessary inference

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 97

from this passage that Zeno taught the doctrine of the
four Stoic categories. Stein, Psych. n. 73, explaining the
passage generally as above, apparently identifies oucía
with xowdés Toto, and UX with (ies Toiv, but this
distinction is a subordinate one, for oúcía is entirely
distinct from «ouv, whether xoiós or idiws, as Dexipp.
l.c. shows.

50. Chalcid. in Tim. c. 292. Deinde Zeno hanc ipsam
essentiam finitam esse dicit unamque eam communem
omnium quae sunt esse substantiam, dividuam quoque
et usque quaque mutabilem: partes quippe eius verti,
sed non interire, ita ut de existentibus consumantur in
nihilum. Sed ut innumerabilium diversarum, etiam
cerearum figurarum, sic neque formam neque figuram nec
ullam omnino qualitatem propriam fore censet funda-
menti rerum omnium silvae, coniunctam tamen esse
semper et inseparabiliter cohaerere alicui qualitati. Cum-
que tam sine ortu sit quam sine interitu, quia neque de
non existente subsistit neque consumetur in nihilum,
non deesse ei spiritum ac vigorem ex aeternitate, qui
moveat eam rationabiliter totam interdum, nonnumquam
pro portione, quae causa sit tam crebrae tamque vehe-
mentis universae rei conversionis; spiritum porro motivum
illum fore non naturam, sed animam et quidem rationabi-
lem, quae vivificans sensilem mundum exornaverit eum
ad hane, qua nunc inlustratur, venustatem. Quem qui-
dem beatum animal et deum adpellant.

finitam, This is in strong contrast with Epicurean
teaching: it follows from the Stoic doctrine of the unity
of the world, and is connected with that of the infinity
of space, cf. Chrysippus ap. Stob. Ecl. 1. 18. 4? p. 161, 19
tov dé rórov (ie. full space) memepacpévoy bia TÒ wndev
capa ämrepov eva.  kaÜdmep O6 TÓ cwpatiKov mere-

H. P. E | 7

< N € < %4

98 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

pacpévov eivat oŬTws TO dowpatoy ameipov, Diog. VII. 150
cépa 66 écrit Kat avtTovs 7 ovala Kal mezepacuévg. The
Stoic view is refuted by Lucr. 1. 1008—1051, who con-
cludes thus:— infinita opus est vis undique materiai.
Similarly Diog. L. x. 41 eíre yàp v Tó Kevov dmeipov
rà 66 cópara wpio péva, ovdamod dv Éueve TA copata, ANN
épépeTo xarà TO ametpov kevóv SivecTrappéva, ovK éyovra
Ta UTEepeloovTa Kal a TéXXovra, KATA TAS AVTLKOTAS.

unamque eam etc. See on frag. 51.

cerearum : wax is chosen as being one of the most
pliable substances. Cf. Sext. Math. vir. 375 ó uaXako-
raros KNpOs...TUTODTaL èv vmró TLVOS ua vonmaTe Sia THY
UypoTnTa oU cuvéyes dé Tov TUTOV. A very close parallel
will be found in Ov. Met. xv. 169: (of Pythagoras)

utque novis facilis signatur cera figuris,
nec manet ut fuerat, nec formas servat easdem,
sed tamen ipsa eadem est; animam sic semper
eandem

esse, sed in varias doceo migrare figuras.

neque formam, etc. Cf. Posid. ap. Stob. Ecl. r. 11. 5°
p. 133, 18 Trjv TÓv ÓXev o/c(av Kal VAnv àmroiwov Kai
duopiov evar Kal ócov ovdév amorerauévov idiov éxet
oynpa ovde ToióTyTa kaf?’ adtny del Ò ëv tive oxnpate
kai mouóTmT, elvai, In this respect the Stoics simply
| adopted Aristotle’s conception of #d, cf. Metaph. Z. 3.
1029 a 20 rAéyw Š UAV 7) Kal” avdTHY umTe TL ENTE vroaóv
| phre GAXo pndev Aéyera, ols prorat TO dv. Arist. ap.
Stob. Ecl. r. 11. 4, p. 132 foll. concluding thus :—ôeîv yap
augoîv (ie. UAns kai eldous) THs ovvóOov mpos THY TOD
cwpatos UToctacw. The distinction between the two
schools is that, whereas the Stoics defined 0X as eua
(Stob. Ecl. r. 11. 5" p. 133, 16), Aristotle declared it to be
swpatixy merely, but this distinction is more apparent
‘than real.

ba WW

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 99

sine ortu: didvos, avyypovos TQ cQ, infra frag. 51.

neque de mon existente: the denial of admdas wéveoius
éx un Üvros is common to all ancient philosophy. See
Tyndall, fragments of Science p. 91 (quoted by Munro on
Lucr. L 150), “One fundamental thought pervades all
these statements, there is one taproot from which they
all spring: this is the ancient notion that out of nothing
nothing comes, that neither in the organic world, nor in
the inorganic, is power produced without the expenditure
of other power." Cf. Posidonius ap. Stob. Ecl. r. 20. 7,
p. 178, 2, tiv uév yap èk TeV ovr övTæv Kal THY eis OVK
outa (pOopay kai yévesw)...améyvwsav avvsapkrov ovaay.
M. Aurel. Iv. 4.

moveat, kuvmruc)v THs Urns, frag. 45.

non naturam: in apparent contradiction to frag. 46,
but we shall probably explain: the mveĝpa is not merely
húss, it is also uy, nay more it is yuy) Xoyov éxouca,
Le. vous.

animal, frag. 62. deum: observe that this is attributed
to the school in general and not to Zeno in particular,

. ef. frag. 66.

51. Stob. Ecl r. 11. 5%, p. 132, 26. Znvewvos’ ovaíav
86 eivat THY TOV Üvrev vavrov TpóTQv VAHY, TaUTHV Që
Tücav didiov Kal ote TXe(o vyvyvouévgv obre éXaTTw*
Td Õè uépm TauTns ovk aei ra/Tà Siapévery AANG iat-
peiaÜa, kal avyxeioÜa.. did Taúrms O6 OuaÜetv TOv ToU |
vravTOs Xoyov, dv čviot e(uapuévqv Kadovdaw, olóvmep èv TH
youn TO omépwa.  Epiphan. Haeres. rL 5, Diels, p. 558,
6 7 > N ? , regem , ^
packet oùv kai obros (Znvwv) Tv ÚX avyxpovov kaXdv
TQ Oe@ ica rais àXXaus aipéceow, eiwappévnv ve elvai
Kal ryévecuv é£ ýs rà mávra SvorKeirar Kal áo xev. Diog.
L. vi. 150, ovcíav 8é dace vOv Üvrev dmávrev Tv

, ith € , ^ M ^ , , `
mpetnv UrAnv ws...Znveov...careirat 66 dyads ovaía Te kai

7—2

100 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Ux dj re TOv TavTwY Kal 7) TOv émi pépous. 1 pèv oiv
TOV wv oUre TXeíov oUTe ÉXáTTOvV YyiveTar’ 7) 06 TOV
evi pépovs kai vXeíev kai éXarTev. Tertull. de Praes.
Cup. c. 7, et ubi materia cum deo exaequatur Zenonis
disciplina est.

Cf. Chaleid. in Tim. e. 294, Stoici deum scilicet hoc
esse quod silva sit vel etiam qualitatem inseparabilem
deum silvae, eundemque per silvam meare, velut semen
per membra genitalia.

oíre mrelo. The ¿moos try is, as we have seen,
cpicuévm and memepacuévn: being also díóws it is in-
capable of increase or diminution. Its parts however (Le.
matter as seen in the (dws morðv or individually deter-
mined thing) are subject to destruction and change. See
the further authorities cited by Zeller, Stoics, p. 101, n. 2.

Statpetrbar kal cvyxé9m. Strictly speaking both these
terms are to be distinguished from the theory of inter-
mingling which was characteristic of Stoicism (xpdacus
9v dAwv, and see infra). Thus daipeous is the sepa-
ration of substances which have been combined by
mapabects, e.g. a heap of barley, wheat or beans, while .
avyxvats is the chemical fusion of two distinct substances
which lose their essential properties in consequence of the
process (Chrysipp. ap. Stob. Ecl. 1. 17. 4, p. 154, 10—155,
14). The Stoic cpdovs or wikis is distinguished from the
former by its implication of entire permeation, and from
the latter owing to the retention of their properties by
the ingredients.

52. Stob. Ecl. r. 17. 3, p. 152, 19. Zyvova dé obres

, / SE S: x , X , 4 >

atvodaiverOar Siappyndnv' toradtnv dé Senoer elvat èv

mepióðw THv ToU ÓXov Siakdcpnow èr THs ovalas, brav èr
\ ` > [4 , +7 , ` É. €

7rvpós Tpom eis Vdwp Ov aépos yévntat, TO uév TL Vpio-
\ ^ , x > ^ ^ x

TacÜa. kai yiv cvvicracOa [kai] èk tod Morro Óë TÒ

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, ve 20]

pA

oly
pèv Siapévew VÕwp, éx 86 Tod dryskopévou aépa yiverOar
Aezrvvouévov 0é Tod áépos wip éfdmTeoÜai, Thv Sé ui£w
«xai? kpásiw yivecOar Tj eis QXAQAa TOv. o Tovyelov
petaBori} aw paros óXov Sv bov rwós érépov Bwepyopévov.
Diog. L. Vil. 135, 136, & ve eivat Oedv xai vodv kai
eiuapuévv kai Ala TroXXaí(s Te érépais dvopaciass Tpos-
ovouátea0at. kar dpxds pev obv kab avróv üvra rpémew
T)v Tücav ovcíav Ov dépos eis wp’ xai orep èv TH
yov TO omépua Tepiéyerat obre Kal TodTOV areppaucóv
Xoryov óvra. ToU kóa Lov, ToLdvde vrroXeirea0at év TH vypg
evepyov ajTQ Tou 0vra Tiv ÜXqv Tpós THY TOV éis
yévegiv* celra aroyevvâv Tpdmrov Tà TÉéccapa aTovyeia
Trip, ¥wp, dépa, ynv. réyer 86 Trepi avTOv Znvov èv T@
mept Tod óXov. Diog. L. vit. 142, yiverOar 88 àv Kédcpov
Órav èk mupòs 7) oVcía Tpam Or dépos eis úypórTmTa, eira
TO TayupEpes avroÜ avaràv droreXeaÓj yñ TO Se Xerrro-
Hepes éËaepe 00, Kai roUür éz mXéov XemrvvOey Tip dro-
yevunon’ celra Kata uitw èx rovrov puta ve kai (a Kai
Ta Gra yévm. Trepi dn ov THs yyevéceos xai THs $0opás
Tod kócuov moi LZnvov uë ev TQ mepi ÓXov, KTA.
Probus ad Verg. p. 10, 33 K. ex his (quatuor elementis)
omnia esse postea effigiata Stoici tradunt Zenon Citieus
et Chrysippus Solaeus et Cleanthes Assius.

iv mepió6o : these words seem to refer to the periodic
renewal of the world after each éxrvpwars and to a
constantly recurring cycle in the course of the universe,
rather than to the mutual interchange of the four elements
which goes on during the actual existence of the world,
cf. Mare. Aurel. X. 7, dee xai tadta avadndOjvar eis tov
Tod ÜXov Xóyov, elTe xard Trepío8ov ékrrvpovpévov eire K.T..
Numenius ap. Euseb. P. E. xv. 18. 1, adpéoxes Që Tots
spen Hvrárois TOV dT Ts aipécens Tar eEvypoto bau
Tara, Kata meptodous Tiwds Tas peylotas eis TÜp aide-
pads dvaXvouévov avrov.

œ

102 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Srav èk mvpós pom x.rX. The evolution of vdwp
from the vp Texvucóv is first described and then the
subsequent generation of the four elements from +ó
vypov. This appears more clearly in the first extract
from Diogenes than in the actual words of Zeno as
reported by Stobaeus. Zeno is here following very closely
in the footsteps of Heraclitus (supds tpomal prov
baracca’ Oaracons è TO pev cv y TO 96 uiou
-umpnatnp, R. and P. § 30) but differs from him m adopting
the theory of the four elements, and to this fact is due
the introduction of the words ê? aépos. Cf. also the
account of Anaximenes, ap. Simpl. Phys. p. 6 a, 'Ava£&-
pévns apavovpevoy pèv TOv dépa trip yiyverOai pno,
vrukvovjLevov è dvepov, etra. védos, etra ETL uáXXov Udwp,
eira yv, cira NiOous Ta è dXXa éx rovrov. The dvo
KaT@ 000s appears clearly in the passage in Stobaeus, cf.
Cleanth. frag. 21. There are certain difficulties in this
account of the Gakóe uos, which, although not discussed
in the authorities, it is right to state even if no satis-
factory solution of them can be given. (1) Is the é&v-
ypwors entirely distinct from and anterior to the formation
of the four elements? If Diog.’s account is based upon
Zeno, this question must be answered in the affirmative,
but in Stobaeus it appears rather as an ordinary stage in
the «dre 000v. That an entire resolution of the vp
Texvixoy into vypov (except as regards Tó écxarov Tod
mupos) was taught by the Stoa is also clear from Cornut.
c. 17, p. 85, Osann. gots 06 Xaos pév TO v po THs 0vakoc-
unoews yevópevov vypóv, amd Tis yUcEws obros @vo-
pacpévov, ?j TO Tip, Ó stiv olovel Kaos...nv Óé more, @
vai, Top TO Tav Kal yevnoctar Tdi èv mTepuóo@`
cfeoÜ0évros ò eis aépa aùroð petaBor) añpóa yiveras
eis ÜOcp' 0 ó) AapBaver Tod uév Vptotapévou pépous Tis
ovalas KATA TUKVwoW Tod 0ë NeTTTUVOLMEVOU KATA apalwow.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 103

(2) Is the é&vypwous merely a step in the creative process
or is it to be regarded, as it apparently was by Cleanthes,
as the antithesis of the éxa’pwais? Perhaps it is safest
to.regard Zeno as an exponent of the simple odes &vo
kare and to treat the complications in connection with
the róvos theory of Cleanthes (frag. 24).

spory, codd. corr. Heeren. pa77, Mein. (del. yévnraz)
coll. D. L. vir. 142.

Xerrvvopévov, x.r.A. 18 the corr. of Wachsm. for the Mss. é«
Tivos è roO dépos, coll. Chrysipp. ap. Plut. Sto. Rep. 41, 3.

pw. The mixture of dry substances )( xpdow the
fusion of moist. For a full discussion of the peculiar
Stoic doctrine, see Zeller, Stoics, p. 136 foll. It carries
with it practically a negation of the physical truth that
two bodies cannot occupy the same space. Chrysippus,
who devoted much attention both to the positive expo-
sition and controversial defence of this doctrine, illustrated
it by several practical examples, one of which, from its
obscurity, deserves consideration: aL yap eis méNayos
vos olivos BANOels er móaov avtimapextabnceTar ovp-
$0apycera. (Diog. L. vir. 151), i.e. the disappearance of the
wine particles can only be explained on the hypothesis of
their equable distribution. Stein observes (Psych. nn.29,35)
that the Ionian aAXoíecus is not found in the Stoa before
Marcus Aurelius, but this is inaccurate. Thus Posidonius,
ap. Stob. Ecl. 1. 25, p. 178, 7, after explaining that there
are four kinds of wetaBory, (1) xarà diaipecw, (2) Kar
dàXXoíociv, (3) xarà cvyxvciw, (4) èE OXev or rar
avadvow, proceeds :—To/rev 66 rjv kar àXXo(ecuv Trepi
thy ovolav yiverOat rds Ò dXXas Tpeis mept Tors TroLods
Xeyopévovs ToUs ézri THs ouc (as yivopévovs.

53. Galen, eis rò “Irmoxpatov úrópvnpa mept xvpdv °°:

I. (XVI. 32 K.) Zývæv ve 6 Kurveds [0s] tas mToróTnTas ovTw

Kale
i

ww

104 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

kai rds ovaias Ov ÜXov Kepavyvabar évojutev, id. de nat.
facult. I. 2, e? & orep Tas Toi0TyTas Kal rds ovcias OU
drwy Kepavvvcbar yp) vopitew, ws VoTepov amepnvato
Zynvev ó Kwrieós. (Galen says that this theory was uki-
mately due to Hippocrates, from whom Aristotle took it.)

The best commentary on this frag. is to be found in
Sext. Pyrrh. rr. 57—62, which contains a statement and
refutation of the doctrine here referred to. The following
short summary wil make the meaning clear :—Things
which are subject to the influence of «pác:s are them-
selves a combination of ovcia and ootntes: when
mixture takes place, we must either say that the ovoia
are mixed or that the qwootntes are mixed, or that both
or neither are mixed. The last alternative is obviously
absurd, and the same may be shown to be the case with
either of the two first, Xe(zrerau Xéyew STL kai al TOLOTNTES
TOV kipvauévov kai ai oUcía, ywpodar Ó) dXNjNov Kab
pvyvópevas THY kpáciw amoterovow (S 59). But this is
still more absurd. Mix one spoonful of hemlock juice
with ten of water: if both entirely permeate each other,
they must occupy the same space and be equal to each
other. The result of the mixture ought therefore to give
us either 20 spoonfuls or 2. The whole discussion is
one which strikes a modern reader as particularly barrem
and pedantic, but it should never be forgotten that to the
Stoics morts was material no less than oucía. “ Aris-
totle's eos becomes a current of air or gas (mveĝpa), the
essential reason of the thing is itself material, standing to
it in the relation of a gaseous to a solid body.” (Encycl.
Brit. Art. Stoics.)

54. Stob. Ecl. r. 20. 1°, p. 171, 2. Zrzjvovi kai KreavOer
kai. Xpucímme dpéokeu THY ovciav petaBadrew olov eis
oméppa TÒ Top, kal TAMV ÈK ToÚTOU ToLa’TNY aTroTe-

L AA
v^

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 105

XeioÜau thv Svaxdcpnow ola Tpórepov jv. Euseb. P. E.
XV. 18. 3, apéc et yap Tots Xereuots pirocddors Tu NNV
ovcíav uera aXXew eis Tp olov eis arépua, kai mddw èr
ToÚrou avtTny dToTeXMeioÜau tiv Siaxocpunow ola Tó Trpó-
repov HV Kal TOUTO TO Oóyua Tdv amò TS aipécews oi
TpOToL kai mpeocßúrarot tpoonxayvto Znvwv Te kai
KnreavOns cal Xpvovrmos. Arnob. ad Nat. 11. 9, qui ignem
minatur mundo et venerit cum tempus arsurum, non
Panaetio, Chrysippo, Zenoni (credit) ?

The Stoic authorities for the doctrine of é«mipwous
will be found collected in Zeller, p. 164 n. 2. On this
point they were opposed to the Peripatetics who held the
ad0apoí(a of the kóe pos, and even some of the later Stoics,
notably Panaetius and Boethus, diverged from the teaching
of their predecessors. It is doubtful whether Zeno derived
the ézripocis from Heraclitus (see Introd. p. 21): it may
however be observed that it was far more in accordance
with his historical position to maintain the destructibility
of the world, at any rate, so long as we concede any
materiality to his primal fire; if fire is a mere metaphor
to express mavra pei, the case is of course very different.
. Cf. Mare. Aurel ur. 3. The Christian writers often
allude to the ékz/pecis, which serves at once as a
parallel and a contrast to their own doctrine, e.g. Tatian,
adv. Graec. c. 25, p. 162 ©, éxmvpwow (Xéyev Tis) amo-
Baivew xarà xpóvovs yœ Óë cicama. Justin Martyr,
Apol. 1. 20. 20, p. 66 p.

tò wip, add. e/s Heeren whom Heinze, Logos, p. 111,
follows, but the alteration is needless. For ovépyua cf. M.
. Aurel. Iv. 36.

55. Tatian, adv. Graec. c. 5, rov Znvwva dia ths ékrrv-
pecews atropaivopevov avictacbat Tadw ToUs avTovs él
Tots avTois, Néyw è "Avvrov kai Médntov él T@ karn-

106 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

yopeiv Bovoupwy 06 em T@ Éevokrovetv kai 'HpakXéa marw
erri TO dÜXetv mapaurméov.

Cf. Nemes. Nat. Hom. c. 38, écecOar yap madw
Lewxpatn kai llAáreova kal Exactoy T@v avOpeTev c)v
Toîs avTois Kal pirots Kal TONTAS Kal rà avrà Trelaca Oat
Kal Tots avTois avvrevEeoÜat Kai Ta avrà perayeipreîc har
Kal cav TÓM Kal kem Kal aypov ópolws atoKabic-
Taca, The exact repetition in some future cycle of the
world's course of the events that have already happened
was maintained also by the Pythagoreans, cf. Simpl. Phys.
173 a, ei 8é Tus mio TeVoete ois IvÂayopelois, bs mav
Ta avTa apiu, Kayd pvOodoyevow rò paBdiov ëywv
vpiv KaOnpévors obro, Kal Ta Ada mávra opolws EEL
Kal TOV xpóvov eUXoyóv stt TOV avTOv eivai (quoted by
Zeller, Pre-Socratics r. p. 474, n. 2). The Stoics were the
more inclined to adopt such a view in consequence of
their belief in the unswerving operation of the decrees of
destiny. Somewhat analogous are the consequences which
flowed from the Epicurean theory of an infinite number
of worlds: cf. Cic. Acad. rr. 125, et ut nos nunc simus ad
Baulos Puteolosque videamus, sic innumerabilis paribus
in locis isdem esse nominibus, honoribus, rebus gestis, .
ingeniis, formis, aetatibus isdem de rebus disputantis ?
The subject is well treated by Ogereau, Essai, p. 70.

mapairnréov: Tatian’s objection to the Stoic theory is
based on the ground that there is no progress towards
perfection, the bad will be again more numerous than
the just: Socrates and Heracles belong to a very small
minority.

56. [Philo.] wept a$0apo (as kóa ov, cc. 23, 24, p. 510,
11, foll. Mang. p. 264, 3 Bern. p. 486, Diels. Oeoppacros
pévrot qoi Tors yéverw kai j0opàv tod kócpuov karm-
yopoüvras Ure rerrápov amaTnOnvar TOV peyiotTwv, yrs

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 107

3 , , 3. , [4 , ^ ^ t
avarias, QaxaTTs dvaxcopraeos, écdc ov TÖV Tod ÓXov
uepáv Siadrvoews, yepraiwyv dOopás kara yévn Cóov. kata-

^ / A `Ë
oxevate 0 TO uév TPÕTOV oUTws' ‘El ur) jevéceos apyu

X- € ^ , € M LENS ^ » 9 * € ^

EraBev 7) yñ, wépos úmaveortòs ovOcv àv ett avTHs évpáro,
MEE Sy orem up s , E t

xyOapara Ò 76g rà Opn TavT éyeyévnto, Kal oi yewrogot
, \ rz

mTavtes icomedoe TH melai’ ToTovTwY yap Kal’ ExacTov

> ` y > i8 , EN - ^ ,
éviauTov Op pov eË aidiov bepouévov eixós nv TOV Ówpuévov

Jt, vert $ A ,
mpos Urros Ta u&v yeiuappois arreppnyOat, rà Ò ÚTovosTh-
cavra Keyardacbat, mavra è diva rávrov jòn XeXeuavOa:

` Or ^ > / \ , SP NC EE ^
pun, 66 avveyós avopadiat kai TauToAwY ópdv ai Tpós
n^ er € ` , , 3 \ ^ \ ^ `
aiĝépiov yos vrep9oXai umuúnaT éoTi TOÔ THY yiv um
> 9 x + , € y , 3 / , ^
aidiov civar marar yap, os pny, év ámeipw xpóvo Talis
érrouBpiais amo Tepatwv émi mépara Tac’ dv Newhopos

> , 4 \ € v BW 3 ` , 5 1?
éyeyévnto. mépuxe yap 7) ÚÓaTos dicus kal pamorta ad
€ , / ` x y 0 - , \ Q\
Unrotatwv karaparrovca Ta pev éEwbev vj Bia, Ta Óë

TO cuveye? TOV Wexadwy koXamTovca koj(kaívew ÚTEp-
yátec0at Te THY TKANpOYéwY kai MOwðeoratrny dpUKTHPwV
oUk €XaTTov. ‘Kal jv 9 ye OdáXaoca, daciv, ‘dn

á
pepelwtar’ paprupes Ó ai vycwv evdoxipodtatat ‘Podos
\ ^ Q e N ^ 4 ` , ja
T€ kal Andros’ avtat yap TÒ èv Ta). npavicpéevat
Kata THS OaratTns ededvKecayv émikdAvGopevat, xpóvo Ó

Uotepov éhaTToumevys npéua kar OALyov avicxovaal, Os
ai Trepi avTOv avaypadgetoar pnvvovow ioopíav [Tv Óë
Ajrov kai Avay evopacav Ov audotépwv ovopaTtov
TLaTOUMEVOL TO Xeyójevov, émei0») yap SHAN avadaveioa
NR , , ` > ` E.) M , ` s
éyévero aðņAovpévņ kai apavns ovca To Taxa, 7pos dé

10

20

TOUTOLS eyadov TeXaryGv peyarovs KOATrOUS Kal 3a0eis 30

avaknpavbévtas nreipm@a0at Kab yeyevncbar THs Tapaxet-

évns yæpas uoipav ov Xvzpàv omeipouévovs Kal burTeuo-
pévys xøpas poîp p pop

pévovs, oig one? arra THS maħaiâs évatroNercipbat
Garatrocews Wnpidas Te Kal koyyas Kal boa ópotóTpora

mpos aiyiarovs elwOev amoBpatteaOar. [610 kai Iivõapos 35

AA ^ , /
eri THs Andov onoi’
Xaíp, à Gcoduata, MraporXokáuov

108 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

maidecot Aaroüs iwepoéotatov épvos -
Ilóvrov 0úyarep, yOovds evpetas axivntov Tépas* av
Te Bpotot
40 AáXov KixdynoKovew, pakapes Ó èv "OdvpTT@ THrE-
$avrov kvavéas xÜovós aotpov.

Ouyatépa yap llóvrov tiv AfjMov etomge TO Xex0év aivir-
Topmevos]. ci 67) wevodTar 7) ÓdXarTa, petwOnoeTar pèv ý
yy, pakpais ò évavtadv meptóðois Kal eis Grav éxatepov
eTowyelov avarwOycetat, SatravwOycetat <dé> Kal ó
45 c)j.Tas anp èk Tod Kat ddlyov éXaTToULevos, aTroKpt-

Onoerar Šë Tavr eis piav ovclav THY Tupds.
mpos 5é tiv TOD TpíTou Kepadaiov KaTacKEUnY xpavrat
Xóyo Tor@de’ ‘ POeiperar TavTws éxelvo, od TavTa Tà uépn
P0apta écart, Tod 86 Kocpov mavTa Tà pép POapta ort,
50 fOapros dpa ó Kdopos éotiv. Ò 8 umepeQéueQa viv èr-
oKeTTéov. “rotou mépos THs yhs, (v. amo tavTns apEdpcOa,
pettov ù éXarrov, ov xpovm SiadrvOncerar;  XiÜov ot
Kpata.oTatot ap oU pvddor Kal onmovtat Kata THY EEews
acbéverav—[n Ó éote mvevpatixds TÓvos, Serpos ovK
55 dppnketos, adda povov dvadcadutos|—OpuTrropevor Kal
péovres eis NeTTHY TO mpõrtov avadvovTa Kóvw ; [elf
borepov Samravnbértes eEavadvovtar] ti 06; eil pù pos
davépwv pimiforto TÒ wp, dxivntov éabev ovy bp’ navylas
vexpodrar; peraBaXXet vov kai Svawdéatatov yiyverat
60 ola 4Jrvy?v adnpnuévov ov. ai ye umu dépos $0opai
mavti Tq Òai’ vooeiv yap kal POive kai TpdTov Tu
amoĝvýorew Téjbukev. émel Ti dv Tus, pù) TToYalomevos
dvomatwv evmrpetrelas GANA TaX0o0s, erro, Aoruðv elvat
Tey dépos Üávarov Tò oikeiov TáÜos dvaxéovros émi
65 $0opà mávrev óra 4rvxXfjs pepoiparat; TÉ xp?) pakpm-
yopeiv mept Tvpós; atpodnoav ydp avríka c(gévvvrat
x«Xóv,  pacwy oi Total, yeyovòs é£ éavroD. 010 oKNpiT-
Topevov opOodrar Kata T)v THs dvajÜOeíans VANS voumv,
éEavadwbelons 8 ddaviterar. [rò mapamAnoiov uévrot

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 109

Kat Tovs Kata tv ‘Ivdixnv SpdKovtas pact macyew. TO
3 , * , ^ \ , ^ , > ,
dvépmovras yap émi và péyuTa TÓv Coev éA ébanras
^ \ \ [74 e. ^ e
mepl vàra kai vnddyv &macav eiXeio0au, préBa È Hv àv
, , A
TUX9 Siedovtas éumívew tod aluarTos, amAnoTws ÈT-
, , , ` , € y A ^
oTwpevous Buatc mvevpate kai avvróvo pollo. péypt uev
otv Tivos é£avaXovuévovs ékeívovs üávréyew úT aunyavias 15
GVATKIPT@VTAS kai TH Tpovopala THY Trkevpàv TUTTOVTAS
ws xaÜ0iEouévovs rv Opakóvrwv, eT aei kevovpévov Tod
fwtixod mndav pev pnkéte OvvaoÜat, kpaSawouévovs Š
éoTavat, pukpóv Ó votepov Kal TOv oKedav é£aaÜevgaáv-
, e. V / , , t. z
TOv Kataceobévras UTd X baruías amojúyeup" Teoóuras 80
; ^ , , a
Šë Tos aitiovs Tod Üavárov cuvaTrordUval Tpómo ToOL@dE’
e , N
bunker éyovres Tpopnv ot Spaxovtes, dv Tepiéhesav Seapov
3 ^ , , , \ » ^ P. Ñ \
emiyerpodaw exrAvew | amraNXavyr)v 75n woOodvTes, vid Që
tov Bapovs tav éXejávrov QXMBouevo, treLodvTat kai
^ X , , ` ^ ~
TOÀ) p&XXov émeiódv TUx9 oTépipov «v» Kal ALODSes 85
TO é0a$os' iXvoTOevou yap Kal vávra TotoÜvTes eig
Siddvow vd THs TOD TiécavTos Bias meóm0éuTreç éavroUs
TokuTpoTws èv apunyavols Kal drmópow *yvpvácavres
E] A ^ , ° , ` y
éEacbevovaot «xai» kaharep oí karaXevaÜévres ù Teíyovs
/ + 3
aipviðiov émevexOévres mpokararnphévrTes, odd ócov ava- 90
KdWar Ovvápevou Twvyj TedevTdow.] ei ù TOV pepõv
e ^ Z ` € / , ` e 3
€xactov Tod kóopov POopav vrrouéver, Snrovete kai ó éË
avTov Trayels kócos ApOaptos ovk &a rat! Tov dé Téraprov
xat Xovrróv Xóyov axpiBwréov bdé aou. ‘el Ò 6 Kdcpos
dios 7v, Hv àv Kal rà Soda aida Kal moM ye uáXXov TO 95
^ > , , er ^ PX » » > \
TOV avOpdtwy yévos 079 kat TOV àXXov dyewov. adda
^ > , A ^ / > a \ ,
Kal ovriyovoy davrvau Tots BovXouévots épevváv rà $vaeos.
cikos yap püXXov Ó  avaykaiov avOpemoiw cvvvrápta,
b 3 y A `
Tas Téxvas ws àv londikas où povoy OTL Xoyuc] TO upé-
^ 7
Oo8ov oiketov adda Kal OTe Env dvev rovrov ovk čorw' 100
iSwpev Tods ékáo TOv ypdvous aXoryraavres TOV émurparyo-
, ^ , > \ LA y 709
Sovpévæv Ücois wiOwv y & y cl pù aidios avOpwrros, ovà
wt tà el , y at 8e8e , ^ Ó ^
ano Ti Ldov, dat ovd ai ypévar TavTa Y@par yh

110 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO

kai tdwp kai anp. éË dw Tó d$Üapróv elvat Tov kóopov
Xov éorev.’

It will be seen that the writer attributes to Theo-
phrastus the statement and criticism of certain views as
to the creation and destruction of the world, which were
opposed to the Peripatetic doctrine of its eternity. After
the above extract this hostile view is refuted by arguments
obviously derived, in part at least, from Peripatetic
sources’, although the name of Theophrastus is not again
introduced. The question arises, assuming the good faith
of the extract, to whom do these criticised views belong ?
This point was first raised by Zeller in Hermes xr. 422—
429 and by an ingenious process of reasoning he concluded
that Zeno is the philosopher who is here attacked. First,
the four arguments, by which the proposition that the
world is mortal is supported, belong to the Stoic school.
They cannot belong to a pre-Aristotelian philosopher, for
the doctrine of the eternity of the world and of mankind,
against which they are directed, had not been broached
before Aristotle (see de Caelo r. 10. 279°12); of the post-
Aristotelians they obviously alone suit the Stoics, who
were alone in holding the periodical destruction of the
world. The second argument, built on the retrocession of
the sea, finds a parallel in the views of a world-flood
attributed to the Stoa by Alexander Aphrod. Meteor.
90* m.; and the dialectical form in which the third and
fourth arguments are couched suggests the same origin.
Again, the authority of Diog. L. VII. 141 is conclusive as to
the third argument, and the terminology of fw, Tóvos,
mvedua, and mvevpatixny vvas, to which may be added
ovata, avapbeions Vans, and $voce oietov, is undoubtedly
Stoic. Next, it being proved that these arguments belong
to the Stoic school, Zeno is the only Stoic whom Theo-

1 This point is proved in detail by Zeller, 1. c. p. 424, 5.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 111

phrastus could have criticised, for the latter died in
Ol. 128, that is between 288 and 284 B.C., at a time when
Zeno’s school had been founded for about 15 years. For
the avoidance of a direct mention of Zeno, if such was
really the case in the Theophrastean original, Zeller quotes
the parallel cases in which Aristotle combats the views of
Xenocrates and Speusippus without referring to them by
name. As an additional circumstance pointing to Zeno’s
authorship, we may refer to the form in which the
syllogism introducing the third argument is cast. This is
undoubtedly one of those breves et acutulae conclusiones, so
often mentioned by Cicero as characteristic of the style
of the founder of Stoicism and of which examples (in
addition to those in Cicero) have been preserved by
Sextus Empiricus and Seneca: see the collection in
Introd. p. 33. This is perhaps the right place to observe
that a supposed frag. of Zeno, extracted by Wachsmuth
(Comm. I. p. 8) from Philo de Provid. 1. 12, and to the
same effect as the third argument here, can no longer be
regarded as belonging to Zeno on the authority of that
passage after the explanation of Diels, Doxogr. Gr. proleg.
p. 3.

These views of Zeller have however been vigorously
criticised by Diels (Doxogr. Gr. pp. 106—108). His main
contention is that the authority of the compiler of the
pseudo-Philonian treatise is too weak to support so im-
portant a discovery as the alleged controversy between
Theophrastus and Zeno, of which no trace has come down
to us from other sources. He does not believe that this
“nebulo” had ever read Theophrastus, and suggests that,
finding the name of Theophrastus attached to the first
two arguments in some work of Critolaus, he left his
readers to assume that the elder Peripatetic was really
responsible for those passages in which Critolaus himself

12 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

attacks what is undoubtedly Stoic doctrine. The result
is that Diels, though he prints ce. 23—27 in the body of
his work, does not believe that they contain (even after
allowing for later accretions) a genuine excerpt from the
$vcikai dofat of the Eresian philosopher. Now it is
obvious that we are only concerned with the question of
the fontes of the Philonian treatise and its general credi-
bility, in so far as its solution enables us to authenticate
these fragments as belonging to Zeno. Thus, altogether
apart from its appearance in this passage, the Zenonian
authorship of the syllogism in ll. 48—50 is extremely
probable not only from internal indications, but also
because of the evidence of Diogenes Laertius vil. 141, 142
(observe especially the words mept 97 ody THs yevérews
kai Tç POopads Tod kócuov duoi Zyvæv év TH mept
óXov) But, as to the general body of the fragment, the
case is different: if we cannot trust the good faith of the
writer, as giving us a genuine statement of the refutation
by Theophrastus of his opponents' doctrine, it may well
be that the two earlier arguments represent early Jonian,
possibly Heraclitean, views (with Stoic additions) and
that in the later portions we have the work of one of
Zeno's successors as set out by a later Peripatetic. On
the other hand, if Theophrastus is responsible for the
exposition of all four arguments, they certainly belong to
a single teacher or a single school, and that teacher, as
has been shown above, must be Zeno. It is therefore
necessary for us to consider the tenor of Zeller's rejoinder
in Hermes xv. 137—146, which, briefly stated, resolves
itself into a theory as to the origin of the pseudo-Philonian
treatise. He fully admits the many absurdities with
which the text is strewn, but argues that they can all be
eliminated without interfering with the nexus of the
arguments; nay more, that the original writing, though

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 113

not of great value, was at least a clear and trustworthy
exposition of the views of the Peripatetic school, to which
the writer belonged, but that the sequence of its thought
has been distorted and its whole character changed by the
blundering additions of a later hand. We are able to
recognise in this treatise the work of two distinct authors,
the first probably an Alexandrian philosopher of the latter
half of the first century before Christ, and a contemporary
of Arius Didymus and Boethus, and the second an
Alexandrian Jew of the first or second century of the
Christian era. The references of the original writer to
Greek philosophy are found to be correct in all cases
where his statements can be scrutinised by the light of
other evidence: why then should we mistrust his citation
of Theophrastus? To test this theory in detail would
require a thorough examination of the treatise in question
with reference to the suggested additions, an examination
which would be out of place here. But we can gauge the
character of the proposed explanation by the three passages
which Zeller expels from our extract, and which may be
fairly said to be typical of the accretions in the general
body of the work. All three are certainly futile and
purposeless, but that which is especially remarkable is the
manner in which the course of the argument is improved
by their removal. In particular, the long digression about
the serpents and the Indian elephants prevents the con-
clusion founded on the destructibility of the several
elements from following in natural sequence the last of
the arguments by which this destructibility is proved of
each element in detail. The latest treatment of this
question is to be found in von Arnim’s Quellen Studien
zu Philo von Alexandria (Berlin 1888) p. 41 foll He
believes that the compilator of the treatise only had later
Peripatetie writings—especially those of Critolaus—before

H. P. 8

114 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

him, and that the main portion of our passage was derived
from one of them. All that belongs really to Theophrastus
is the statement of the headings of the four arguments
(ll. 1—5) and these headings, if taken alone, might refer
to pre-Aristotelians. Yet, holding in agreement with
Zeller and against Diels that the arguments by which .
the headings are supported are undeniably Stoic, he
concludes that a younger Peripatetic adopted the Theo-
phrastean scheme, originally a doxographical statement
of pre-Aristotelian doctrines, as a groundwork for his
polemic against the Stoics, who on their side had a-
dopted these four arguments, perhaps from Heraclitus
and Empedocles. Finally he suggests, on very inadequate
grounds (p. 47), that Antipater of Tarsus was the particular
Stoic whose views are summarised. If this theory is
correct, it is certainly an extraordinary coincidence that
Theophrastus should have selected from the older philo-
sophy four particular statements, which go to prove the
destructibility of the world, and that the Stoics should
have unconsciously taken up identically the same ground
in support of their own theory. Zeller’s opinion still
appears to me more reasonable: see also Stein, Psych. n. 86,
who has anticipated the argument used above from the
syllogism in ll. 33—35.

S. «à pw cf. Cornut. c. 17. p. 85 Osann, ta & pm
(yéyove) kata é£oo paw gv THs ys. Schol. Hes. Theog.
p. 238, rà dpn Tepl TO avdjaXov THs cuvitnoews éXafe
tas eEoyas kal kata é£oarpakw uv aÙThs.

tyeytvqro)(éyévero indicates that the process would
have been already complete at the time specified ie. long
ago. In the case of verbs denoting an action the dis-
tinction between plup. and aor. with àv is less apparent,
though always present: cf e.g. Dem. Timocr. p. 746 $ 146,
if imprisonment were contrary to the Ath. constitution

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, Nis

où ócwv evderEls éoTu  atTaywyn, TpoceyéypaTTo àv
êv Tots vouows K.T.. “There would not have been found
a clause enacted in the laws" etc.

16. dws mepárov «rd. “The whole earth would have
become a highway from end to end." ado’ àv: so Bü-
cheler and Diels for aca.

19. ri ewexe, MS. Med. whence Bücheler reads 77
guveyeia, recalling the line xotAaiver rétpny pavis VOaos
évdedeyx eía.

26. v—máXa. expelled by Zeller, Herm. xv. p. 140.

28. ydp: the sentence would run more smoothly if
this word were omitted.

33. ols ecwué' drra «rA. The observation of similar
facts induced in Xenophanes the belief that the earth
was originally in a fluid state: cf. Hippolyt. r. 14 (quoted
by Zeller, pre-Socrat. I. p. 570), ó 96 Eevooávgs uifw rhs
*yüjs mpos THY ÓdXaccav yevérbat Sore? Kal TS xpóvq dro
Tod vypod X/ecÓau. hacKwy Tova’Ttas ¿yeu drrodei€ets,
OTe év péon y Kal dpecw evpicKovto kóyyat kai èv
Lupaxovoas è èv rais NaTomiats Xéye, evpHaOar UTrov
¿x0úos xa) porov, év òè llápo TUmov addins & TO
Babe? Tod Xov, év 86 MeXityn maras avymrávrov añas-
color.

35. 88—aivirrépevos expelled by Zeller l. c. and also
by Biicheler.

37. Pindar, frag. 64[87] Bergk.

49.  mepidSois : see on frag. 52.

45.  dmokpibcera. “will be merged," ef. Thuc. 1. 3,
"EdAnvas...eis 6v üvoua amoxexpicba, Diog. L. vir. 148,
gpuaors...Tovadta dpaca ad olwy arerpí0n.

48—50. Cf. Diog. L. vir 141. Philo, de provid. I. 12.

53. s: lit. hold, an undoubtedly Stoic term. The
ékis of inorganic matter answers to the dcus of plants,
and the ywy) of animals: supra frag. 43. Cf. Sext. Math.

8—2

116 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

IX. 81, rÓv "veuévev coudrev rà pèv UO WidHs EEews
cvvéxerat...kal €Ëcos év, ws AiÂot Kal Evra (Zeller, p.
208).

54.  mvevporuós Tóvos : the favourite doctrine of Clean-
thes: if this passage belongs to Zeno, we have an indica-
tion here that the master prepared the way for the pupil,
cf. Cleanth. frag. 24. The words however may in any case
be a later addition, and under the circumstances they have
been bracketed.

56. péovres “ passing away” in the Heraclitean sense ;
yet even Plato has ef yàp péot Tó c'Gpa...(Phaed. 87 D).
Merry kóvv, cf. Soph. Ant. 256.

<le—étavad. Om. Med. MS. cf. Bücheler Rhein. Mus.
32. 442.

58. dvépov: the illustration is suggestive in connection
with the doctrine of mveðĝpa. For puriforro cf. frag. 106
KWOUMEVOV kai avapvmitój.evov ÚT ékeivov.

60. xiv appears to be attributed to animals in
general and not exclusively to man, see on frag. 43.

63. edmperetas. Cf. Plat. Euthyd. 305E, xai yap ëxet
óvros © Kpírev evmpémeiav paddov Ù) aX0ewav. It is
possible that there is a reference to some contemporary
school here, which had explained Aorpos after the manner
of Prodicus. For the definition cf. M. Aurel. Ix. 2.

69—91 ejected by Zeller, 1. c.

85. čv add. Diels. 89. ka add. Bernays.

99. ds dv not merely equivalent to orep but ellip-
tical. The full phrase would be os eixós 9v àv ei ioh-
Mes noav. Xen. Mem. rr. 6. 38, 7) et coe vreícauut Kot]
THY TOM wrev8óuevos Ws av oTpaTHYLKe Kal moMTucQ
éavr)v emurpéjra, where see Kühner. In this way is to
be explained Thue. 1. 33. 1.

102. “Deesse quibus evpnuatwy tempora explica-
verant vidit Mangey," Usener.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, LL

57. Philargyrius ad Verg. Georg. IT. 336, Zenon ex
hoc mundo quamvis aliqua intereant tamen ipsum perpetuo
manere quia inhaereant ei elementa e quibus generantur
materiae: ut dixit crescere quidem, sed ad interitum
non pervenire manentibus elementis a quibus revalescat.

If taken literally, the doctrine here referred to would
be inconsistent with the destructibility of the <ócuos,
which, as we have seen, was held by Zeno: again, ele-
menta can hardly be a translation of cTovwyeía, which
undoubtedly perished. We must suppose therefore that
Zeno is speaking not of the visible world, but of the
universe, and that elementa = apyat. According to Diog.
L. vir. 137 xdcpos is used by the Stoics in three senses:
the first of these is aùròv TÓv Oedv tov £x THs amans
oUcías idiws Toto 0s 0») dóÜaprós écrit kal ayévyntos, and
this is the sense which mundus must bear here. If this
explanation be thought impossible, we can only suppose
that there is à confusion with Zeno of Tarsus who is said
to have withheld assent to the doctrine of the ékzr/pocus,
Zeller, p. 168 n. 1. Stein, Psych. p. 64 and n. 92, thinks
that Zeno held that at the éxai’pwors the various mani-
festations of God—world-soul, Aóyos omeppatixos etc.—
lose themselves in the divine unity, but that the inde-
terminate matter (arovos VAn) remains, cf. ib. p. 34, n. 42.

58. Diog. Laert. vir. 143, Ors ve eis eotiy (ó Kdopos)
Znvev þnoiv èv TQ mept Tod ÓXov. Stob. Ecl. 1. 22. 3” p.
199, 10, Zývæv va eivac Tov kóa ov.

This was one of the points which distinguished the
Stoies from the Epicureans, who held that there are an
infinite number of worlds. See further Zeller, p. 183 and
the notes: the characteristic and important view of
cvyráÜeua pepõv or cvvrovía is one of the developments
introduced by Cleanthes.

TUS s THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO:

59. Sext. Math. 1x. 101, Zývæv è ó Kurwevs, amo
Eevoóóvros tv adopunv NaBdyv, o'twol cvveporá: TO
Tpotéuevov a7épja RoyiKod Kal avTO Xoyukóv égTu` Ó
òè kócpos Tpolerau. a7répja NoytucoO' Noyixdy àp otiw
ó KOTMOS. @ cuveicdyerau kai » Tovrov Vmaptiu. Cic-
N. D. rr. 22, nihil quod animi quodque rationis est
expers id generare ex se potest animantem compotem-
que rationis. Mundus autem generat animantes compo-
tesque rationis, Animans est igitur mundus composque
rationis.

We need not infer from this passage that Zeno ex-
pressed himself to be adopting Socrates' argument, for
in the preceding paragraphs in Sext. l. c. 92 f. the passage
referred to (Xen. Mem. r. 4 $$ 2—5. 8) is set out and
discussed. The parallel passage is § 8 xai rara eióds OTe
yrs TE pukpóv uépos ÈV TO apart TONAS OVENS EXELS KTA.
...vouv O6 uóvov dpa ovdamod ovra ce eUrvx Gs mws Ookeis
cuvapTacat, Kal Tade rà ÚmTepueyé0n Kal mM 0os drea
Ov adpocvyny Tua, ws ole, eUrdkros ëyew; cf. Sext.
Math. 1x. 77, M. Aurel, IV. 4 and see Stein, Psych. n. 53.

torov. Bekker with some plausibility suggests tod
Oeod. The Stoics argued from the existence of God that
the world must be reasonable and vice versa. For the
relation of God to the world see infra, frag. 66.

60. Cic. N. D. IL. 22, Idemque (Zeno) hoc modo:
* Nullius sensu carentis pars aliqua potest esse sentiens.
Mundi autem partes sentientes sunt: non igitur caret
sensu mundus."

Cf. Sext. Math. rx. 85, aXXa xai 1) Tas Xoyikas crepié-
xovca duces TavTws éoTl Moyi’ où yap olov Te TO ÓXov
Tod pépous xeipov civar GAN ei apiotn éoTi buúcus ý TOY
kógpuov OLotKoÜca voepa Te éctat Kal orrovdaia Kab

, t
aĝavaros.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 119

61. Sext. Math. IX. 104, xai manv ó Zm«vev $moiv
“ [ei] TO Noysxdv TOD jw) Xo'yuco0 «petrróv stiv ov8&v SE
ye kóopov kpeirTOV stiv Noyikòv dpa 6 kómpos. Kal
ccav/TOS ÉL ToU voepoð Kal éurpvyilas ueréxovros. TO yàp
voepóv TOU p voepoÜ Kal TO Cu rvxov ToU pr) eurrvyou
Kpeitrov stiv’ ovdey Oé ye kóopov kpeirrov' voepós dpa
Kal éuapuyos stw ó kócpos. Cic. N. D. r 21, quod
ratione utitur id melius est quam id quod ratione non
utitur. Nihil autem mundo melius: ratione igitur mun-
dus utitur. Cf ib. HT. 22, 93. J

Alexinus the Megarian attacked Zeno’s position with
the remark that in the same way the world might be
proved to be poetical and possessed of grammatical know-
ledge. The Stoics retorted that it is not true that in the
abstract Tó montixov is better than Tò um mTomTucv or TO
ypajuaTuKOv than Tó um ypappatixov: otherwise Archi-
lochus would be better than Socrates, Aristarchus than
Plato (Sext. l. c. 108—110). For the fact cf. Diog. VII.
139, orc 97) Kai Tov ÜXov kóc iov Yov övra Kal &udrvyov
Kat Moyikòv K.r.M. Stein adds Philo, de incorr. m. p. 506
M, ó Koopos kai búcus Xoyuci), oU uóvov éurpuyxos àv, adda
kai voepós mpos è xal dpóviuos. —Siebeck refers to
Arist. de Gen. An. rr. 1. 731" 25, rò Euapuyor rod ayuyou
BéXTL ov.

62. Sext. Math. rx. 107, duvayer dé tov avróv TG
Znveve Xóyov é£é0ero (scil. Plato) kai yap otros Tó Tv
káNMucTOV eivai moi Kata icu ameipyacpévov &pryov
Kal KaTa TOv eikóra Aóyov, ov Eurpuyov voepóv TE Kal
Xo*yucóv.

Hirzel's theory, 11. p. 217, 218, that Zeno called the
world guxrvyov and Xoywcóv only but not £dóov is con-
troverted by Stein, Psych. n. 82 from this passage. The
passage in Plato, part of which is quoted by Sextus, is

120 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO,

Timaeus, p. 29 foll.; and see esp. 30 A, B which illustrates
this and the last frag., ef. M. Aurel. Iv. 40.

63. Cic. N. D. 11. 22, Idemque similitudine, ut saepe
solet, rationem conclusit hoc modo: ‘si ex oliva modulate
canentes tibiae nascerentur, num dubitares quin inesset
in oliva tibieini quaedam scientia? quid? si platani
fidiculas ferrent numerose sonantes, idem scilicet censeres
in platanis inesse musicam. Cur igitur mundus non
animans sapiensque judicetur, quum ex se procreet
animantes atque sapientes ?'

This recalls the anecdote about Amoebeus : apoph. 19.

64. Stob. Ecl r. 23. 1, p. 200, 21, Zyvæv múpwov
eivau TOV oUpavóv.

Stobaeus couples Zeno with Parmenides, Heraclitus
and Strato. For the Stoic authorities see Zeller, p. 201.

65. Achill. Tat., Isag. in Arat. 5. p. 129 e, Zyjvev ó
Ketevs obros avtov wpicato’ 'ovpavós éotw ai0épos TÒ
€oxaTov: éË oS kal év à èstri mavra éupavas’ mepiéxet
yàp mavra TÀ) ávToÜ' ovdév ydp avrò mepiéyev GAN
érépov éa'i TEPLEKTLKOD.

aidépos rò Üexarov: cf. Diog. L. vir. 188 quoted below.
The genitive is partitive: “the extreme part of the
aether" This becomes clear when we remember that
Zeno is closely following Aristotle here, cf. Phys. Iv. 5 «al
51a ToUTo 1) uv yh €v TO VdaTL, TOUTO Ò év TO dép, oÛTOS
9 év T@ ai0ép, 0 Ò ailp èv TÈ ovpave, ó & ovpavos
ovKért é ddd. Just before he had said: év r9 ovpave
TavTa’ Ó yap ovpavos TÒ TÂV lows.

mepiéxe A direct parallel to this may be found in the
teaching of the Pythagoreans (Zeller, pre-Socratics, I.
p. 465), but there is possibly also a reminiscence of Plato,
Timaeus 31 A, where ovpayds is spoken of as +ó vrepiéyov

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 121

dura, óróca vonta ta: cf. also the qrepiéxov ppevnpes of
Heraclitus (Sext. Math. vir. 127 foll). M. Aurel. vu. 54.

66. Diog. L. vit. 148, odciavy òè Oeod Zyvav pno
TOV ÜXov KOGMOV Kal TOY ovpavóv.

Cf. Stob. Ecl. 1. 1. 29, p.38,1. The Stoics held Geovs...
TÜv kócpov Kal Tovs dcTépas kai THY wy5v. In so far as
God is manifested in the world, the world is God. Many
more references are given in Zeller, p. 157. The words
kal Tov ovpavóv are added because in it the material
essence of divinity exists in its purest form. Diog. L.
VII. 138, ovpavós é éc ww ý) eoxarn Tepipépeta, ev $ Trav
iSputa TÒ Óciov. Hence Chrysippus and Posidonius spoke
of the ovpavds as TO »yeuovukóv Tod róopov (ib. 139).
Certainly, if these words are pressed, pantheism, involving
the identifieation of God and matter, is distinctly at-
tributed to Zeno. Wellmann, p. 469, suggests that Zeno
may really only have said that the world is formed out of
the divine essence (ó kdayos ojcía Oeod) and that Diog.
through a confusion of subject and predicate interpreted
this as a definition of the essence of God. Another
possibility is that xócuos is used in the same sense as in
frag. 71. See also Stein, Psychologie n. 88.

67. Stob. Ecl. r. 19. 4, p. 166, 4, Zrvevos. trav 9 év
TO KkóguQ Tvrov TOv Kat idiay Éw cuvertdtwV TÀ
, ^ \ » > M a e , € , \ A
uépr THY hopay Éxew eis TO TOD ÓXov uécov, óoíes O6 kai
3 A A ^
avToÜ ToU kócpov' OióTep 0pÜcs AéyecOas mrávra rà uépm
ToÜ Kócjov mù TÒ uécov TOÔ kócuov THY $opàv ëye, 5
t \ \ , y , M 3 y 5 \
pariora òè Ta Bapos éyovra. TavTiv Ò aitiov eivar kai
THS TOD kÓc|Lov povis é ateipw KEVO, Kal THS ys Tapa-
Ano íos v TQ KOTUM mept TO rovrov kévrpov ka0ibpv-
, > a > / AY A £ y > >
pévns icokpards. ov mavtws è cua Bapos Éyew, adr
> a g > ` O tee / n \ NE,
aBaph eivai dépa xai wip’ teiverOar 86 Kal TadTa "res 10

122 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

eml TO Ts Ons c$aípas TOD kócpuov pécov, THY 9€

avoTacwW mpos THY Tepijépeiav avTod TroveiaOar’ púcer

yap dvdódovra rabT. civari dia TÒ pydevos ueréxyew | Bapovs.
mapaTAncios è TovToLs oUO avTdv aci TÓv KdcpMoY
15 Bapos éyew dia TO THY ÜMgv avToÜ oúcTaou EK TE TOY

Bapos éxyóvrev oTovxe(ou eivat kai èk tov aBapov. THY

Ò onv yiv cal éavtnv uév éyew apéoxes Bapos mapa 8€

tv Oéow Sid TÒ Tv peony éxew yopav (mpós 06 TO uécov

eiva. THY hopav Tols ToLovTOLS c'wpaciw) éL TOD TÓTOV
90 TovTov péveuv.

2. cwerórev. This is the most general term, else-
where opposed to evvarz rea Qar cvvéyeoOa. etc.

4. mávra td pépy «tA. This centralising tendency is
called by Diogenes (vir 140) tv trõv oVpavíev Tpós Ta
émiyera oUuTvotav Kat avvrovíav. In the Stoic doctrine
of the microcosm and the macrocosm there is one dis-
crepancy, in that while the »yewovrxoy of the world is at
its extreme periphery the zyeuovwóv of man is in the
breast. Stein, Psych. p. 211, finds in this passage an
attempt to remove this inconsistency by making the earth
the central point from which all motion originates and to
which it returns.

9. ot mávres 8 «tA. Cf. Stob. Ecl. 1. 14. 1 f. p. 142, 9,
oí Xrewikol dvo uev ex rdv Teccapwy aTowxeiov Kodpa
mop kai aépa' dvo dé Bapéa Vdwp xai yv. Koddhov yap
uTapyel PUgEL, 0 vevet amd Tod Ldtov uécov, Bapu Sé TO eis
pécov, ie. light is opposed to heavy not relatively, as in
our use of the words, but absolutely, implying motion in an
outward or upward direction. Cic. Tusc. I. 40, persuadent
mathematici...eam naturam esse quattuor omnia gignen-
tium corporum, ut, quasi partita habeant inter se ac
divisa momenta, terrena et umida suopte nutu et suo
pondere ad paris angulos in terram et in mare ferantur,
reliquae duae partes, una ignea, una animalis,..rectis.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 128

lineis in caelestem locum subvolent, sive ipsa natura
superiora adpetente, sive quod a gravioribus leviora natura
repellantur. N. D. 11 116, 117. The Stoics were following
Aristotle (ap. Stob. Ecl. r 19. 1, p. 163, 9, ris è xarà
TOTOV KIVnoEWS THY v ATÒ TOU uécov yiverOaL, THY 8e
emt TO uécov, THY 96 mepi TÒ uécov: mupòs uév ov kai
dépos amd Tod pécou, ys kal Varos rl TÓ uécov, roO
TELTTOV TEpl TO uécov.).

10. retverbar 8€: So Diels for MSS. yiveo@as, a correc-

tion more probable for palaeographical reasons and in itself

more attractive than Meineke’s xuveicOar. Cf. Nemes. 2.
p. 29, rovexny eivat kivnow Tepl Ta cwparTa eis TÓ &ao
apa kai rò čko xwovpévnv. Chrysipp. ap. Plut. Sto. Rep.
44. 7. 1054 E, obre € Tod bov reiwouévov eis ravTÓ Kal
Kiwovuévov k.r.M The explanation is as follows:—the
natural motion of the elements is restrained and modified
by the continual process of change (ueraßorý) by whose
action the world is formed and exists. Fire and Air are
perpetually being transformed into Water and Earth and
thus, before their upward tendency has time to assert
itself, they themselves becoming possessed of 4pos start
again in the opposite direction. Thus each of the four
elements is apparently stationary and remains constant:
in reality its component parts are in continual motion.
Cf. Chrysippus ap. Plut. Sto. Rep. 44. 6, a passage too
long to quote. This explanation is supported by the
statement which is attributed to the Stoics by Stobeus,
that at the éez/pecus the world is resolved into the void
(Ecl. 1. 18. 4 b. p. 160, 11 and Euseb. P. E. xv. 40): cf. ib.
L 21. 3 b, unre av&ecOar 86 ure. pevodabar Tov kócuov
Tois O€ uépecuv OTe uév TrapeKTeiver Oar mpòs TAElova Tórrou
óré è cvatéXdXecOar. This is not necessarily inconsistent
with Prof. Mayor’s explanation (on N. D. rr 116) that
“the all-pervading aether, while it has a naturally ex-

124 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

pansive and interpenetrative force, has also a strong
cohesive force and thus holds all things together round
the centre.” See also M. Aurel. xr. 20.

ll. cdatpas: for the Stoic doctrine of the rotundity of
the world, cf. Stob. Ecl. 1. 15. 6° oí Erewol e$atpocióf Tov
kóc pov amepnvavto, Diog. vit. 140, Cic. N. D. 1. 24, hence
avtimrodes Cic. Acad. rr. 123.

17. apd 8 rjv Cow: in itself earth Bapos éyer and
so tends to move mpòs Tò uécov, but owing to the accident
of its position in the centre of the «écpos its natural
motion has no opportunity of becoming apparent.

18. pérnv. For the position of the earth cf. Diog. L.
vil. 187, 155, Cie. N. D. 1. 108.

68. Stob. Ecl. r. 15. 6* p. 146, 21, Znvev épacke TO
TÜp kar eUÜciav kwetaÜau.

Cf. Stob. Ecl. r. 14. 1. f. p. 142, 12, Tò pèv crepíyeuov
ges xar evectav...xivetra. This is only true of vp
atexvov, for the aether or wip Teyvukóv has a circular
motion in the same manner as the méurmrtov cda of
Aristotle. So Ar. de Caelo, I. 2. 9, ró re yàp vp èm’
evOcías dvo péperar.

69. Stob. Ecl. r. 18. 1* p. 156, 27, Zijvev xai of am

> ST P] x \ ^ , ` LJ t » > > ^

avToOU évrós èv TOV koc ov unõèv elvat kevóv, EEw Ò avTOD

d'7reupov. OLadépew O6 kevóv, TÓóTOv, xópav' Kal TO pev

«evóv elvat épnuíav cdpatos, Tov È rómov TO éreyóuevov
imo caros, Tv 06 xópav TO € uépovs érreyóuevov.

Cf Diog. vir. 140, Ewen 86 avroÜ repixeyupévov
elvat TO kevóv dTeupov' Órep áocparov eivat / ác cparov
òè Tò olóv Te karréyec Qar UTO ow drov où kareyójevov: èv
òè TQ kóc quo 188v eivar kevóv. Plut. plac. r. 18, of Zrwuxol
, \ ` ^ , , \ » / > > > A
€vrós uév ToD kóoopov ovðèv eivar Kevov, EEwOev Ò avdrod
àmeipov. M. Aurel. x. 1. Diels adds Theodoret 1v. 14, évrós

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 125

Mev TOD TravTos punoev eivat kevóv, KTOS 66 avTOD TAUTONÚ
Te Kal d7eipov. The Epicureans held that without the
existence of void within the world motion was impossible
(Lucr. 1. 329 foll., Reid on Acad. 1. 27, 11. 125). The Stoics
were unaffected by this argument in consequence of their
doctrine of xpdous dv rwv, see further on frag. 50, supra.
Aristotle denied the existence of void altogether either
within or without the universe.

kevóv, Tómov, xópav. The Stoics and the Epicureans
were in virtual agreement in their definitions of these
terms: see Sext. Emp. adv. Math. x. 2,3. For a fuller
exposition cf. Chrysipp. ap. Stob. Ecl. r. 18. 4? p. 161, 8,
who compares «xevoy to an empty, +ó7os to a full, and yøpa
to a partially filled vessel, cf. the similar views of Aristotle
quoted by R. and P. $ 327.

70. "Themist. Phys. 40" Speng. 1r. 284, 10, (ro «evóv)
Kexwpiopévov Kai a0póov eivat ka? avTo Trepiéxov Tov
oUpavóv, WS TPOTEPOY MeV WoVTO TOV apyalwy TWÉS, PETA
òè ra)Ta of Tepi Zmvova tov Kereéa. Philopon. on Ar.
Phys. 1v. 6. p. 213 a 31, $aci dé kai Tos mept Zyvova tov
Kuriéa otro (scil éfe tod ovpavod civas xevóv TL kaf?
avTo) Go£dCew.

Tüy ápxa(ev mwis are probably the Pythagoreans who
believed in an mretpov mvedua outside the universe,
called kevóv by some of the authorities (Zeller, pre-So-
cratics I. pp. 467, 8).

la

71. Stob. Ecl. r. 25. 5, p. 213, 15, Zývæv TOv nrov
` x` , ` ^ »- y [4

Toi Kal THY ceXQvgv Kal TOV àXXov àgTpov EKATTOV
elvat voepóv kal dpóvuuov TÜpwov Tvpós crexvikoÜ.  Ovo
e \
yap yévn vrvpós, TO èv d'rexvov Kal peTaBadXov eis éavró
tiv Tpodwv, TO 06 rexvucóv, avENTLKOY TE kai THPNTLKOY,
aal > ^ ^ pa ` , A 67) , y `
olov év tots $vTois ote Kal wots, 0 Ó) vous eats Kai

126 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

ayuy’ tovovtouv 81) 7upos eivai THY THY doTpov oVcíav'
tov © jov kai THY cernvnv dvd dopas pépetOan, THY uev
UT0 TOU kócpov ar avaToAns eis àvaToMjv, THY Ò évavríav
TO Koco Colo èr Eodiov petaBatvovtas. tas Ò èk-
Aelpers Toúrov ylyverOar Siaddpas, ?)Mov pèv Trepi Tas
cuvodous, cednvns 96 mepi TAS TavoeNjvovs* yiyverOar Š
é apdotépwv tas ékXe(vew Kal pelous Kal éXaTTovs.
Stob. Ecl. r. 26. 1, p. 219, 12, Znvev tv cernvnv éonocv
daTpov voepóv kal ppovywov mupivov 0ë srvpós TEXVLKOD.

méipwov: they are situated in the external periphery
of aether, and are themselves composed of the same sub-
stance. The later Stoics, at any rate, held that the
heavenly bodies are fed by exhalations of grosser matter,
and hence their differentiation from their environment.
Cf. Cleanth. frags. 29 and 30.

8úo yé: cf. Cleanth. frag. 30.

pics refers to $vrois and yuy) to Cwous: cf. frag.
43.

dopds. The first movement is the diurnal revolution
from east to west (from one rising to another): the second
is the orbit described xarà tov @dvaxdv kUkXov, occupying
either a year or a month, as the case may be. For the
Zodiac cf. Diog. L. vir. 155, 156.

$mó Tro) kócgov, le. they move with the aether which
revolves round the three lower strata of the world. These
latter are themselves stationary, so that xóspov is used as
in Cleanth. frag. 48, l. 7, where see note. The whole
structure of the cosmos is very clearly expounded by
Chrysippus ap. Stob. Ecl. r. 21. f. p. 184, 185; and cf.
especially To0...k0cjsov TO èv eivat vrepubepópevov Trepi TO
uéaov TO Ò vmópevov Tepipepojevov uv TOV ai0épa. vzró-
j,evov O€ THY yiv Kal rà èr avTHS ypa Kal TOV áépa...TÓ
66 mepipepopevoyv avT@ éyxuKriws ai0épa eivat, ev à và
aotpa kaÜ(ópuvra,. rd T arhavi Kal tà TAaVepeEva, Octa

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 127

T)v dtow Óvra kal eurpvya kai ƏroucoÚneua Kata Tiv
Trpovoiuav.

£é8wv: according to Diels, the acc. is “insolenter
dictum" and requires the addition of e/s, but it has been
pointed out to me that the true explanation of the acc.
is to be found in the fact that édvov is a measure of
space = 30 potpar, Hippol Haer. v. 13: we should not
therefore compare petaBas Bíorov Eur. Hipp. 1292, which
is in any case different. For the fact cf. Diog. vtr. 144.

tàs 8 iles : see infra frag. 73.

pelfous kal Arrows: “entire and partial."

72. Cic. N. D. r. 36, idem (Zeno) astris hoc idem
(Le. vim divinam) tribuit tum annis, mensibus, annorum-
que mutationibus.

astris. On the other hand the Epicureans taught
that the stars could not possess happiness or move in
consequence of design. Diog. L. x. 77, pte ad mvpo97
TWA GcvveoTpajuéva T)v pakapióTQTa KEKTNHÉVA KATA
BoUNgsuw Tas kwr9jceis raras NapBavew.

annis: probably Zeno did not stop to enquire whether
the seasons etc. were corporeal or not: he regarded them
as divine “als regelmässig erfolgende Umlaufe der Sonne
und des Mondes" (Krische, p. 389). Chrysippus must have
been hard pressed when he delivered the extraordinary
opinion quoted by Plut. Comm. Not. 45, 5 (see Zeller,
Stoics p. 131). Krische appositely quotes Plat. Leg. X. p.
899 B, dorpwv dé 9r cepi mávrov Kal cednvns éviavróv
Te Kal pnvev Kal macðv copdv Tépi Tiva dXXov Xóryov
€povpev Ù Tov aUrOv TodTOY, ws erred) Puyn) uv ù puyat
mavTav ToUTwV altiat épàávgcav, adyabal 66 vrücav aperýv,
Geods avtas eivat þýoopev, ceire év cdpacw évodoa, Coa
üvrTa, KOTMODGL TavTa oUpavóv, eire OTN T€ Kal Orrws;
In Sext. Math. 1x. 184 an argument of Carneades is

128 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

quoted of the Sorites type, disproving the existence of
God. If the sun is a god, so are days, months and years.
This the Stoics might have admitted, but he concludes
thus:—ovv TQ dromov evar Thy èv jpépav eov elvai
Aéyew, Tv Óë Ew xai THY peonuBplav Kal Tm Sdeidnv
paonkéru.

73. Diog. L. vir. 145, 6, ékXeirrew è Tov pèv Hov
érumpocOovans a)TQ ceNjvgs karà TÒ TPOS Has pmépos,
ws Znvev avaypade èv TQ epi Xov. gaivetar yap
UTepyouevn Tais cvvóOows Kal amoxpumTouca avTov Kal
maw TapaXMárTovca. yvopiferar 06 ToDro Sud eKavns
Ydap eyovons. T 86 ceNjvqv euTintovoay eis TO TS
ys ek(acja. bev Kai Tais mavoeNyvoişs ékXeimrew
povats, kaimep Kata Owiperpov iarauévqv xarà uva TO
Alw ort KaTA XoÉoU ws Tpds TOV Mov kiovuévr Tapar-
NaTTEL TQ "drew Ù BopELotépa Ù voTLwTépa yivopévn.
órav pévTot TO TAATOS AUTS KATA TOV ndLAKOV Kal TOV
dua uésov yéevntas cra Stapetpnon Tov troy TóTe
ExNELTrEL.

adele. The eclipse of the sun owing to the interposi-
tion of the moon between it and the earth is a doctrine
attributed by Stobaeus to Thales, the Pythagoreans, and
Empedocles (Ecl. 1. 25. 1' 3" 3°): the same explanation was
also given by Anaxagoras (Zeller, pre-Socratics I. p. 361).
The same account is given by the Stoic in Cic. N. D. rr.
103, luna...subiecta atque opposita soli radios eius et
lumen obseurat, tum ipsa incidens in umbram terrae,
cum est e regione solis, interpositu interiectuque terrae
repente deficit.

rais cvvdsos “at the period of conjunction.” Cf. Cic.
Rep. L 25, Pericles...docuisse cives suos dicitur, id
quod ipse ab Anaxagora, cuius auditor fuerat, exceperat,
certo illud (eclipse of sun) tempore fieri et necessario,

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 129

cum tota se luna sub orbem solis subiecisset: itaque, etsi
non omni intermenstruo, tamen id fieri non posse nisi
certo intermenstruo tempore. Thuc. r. 28.

e'eXivnv, ef. Stob. Ecl. r. 26. 3, p. 221, 29; Xpvourtos
ékXeirrew THY aeNijvqv THS yüs avTH émwmpooÜovans kai
eis oktav avTíjs éuwmrrrovcav.

vavceMjvos: the fact was a matter of common observa-
tion: ef. Thuc. vit 50, 5 vm ékXe(mev érúyxave yap
TAVTEANVOS ovca.

kard dofod: hence édvxoevdn in Diog. L. vir. 144, see di

Krische p. 389.

8a pérov Scil CeO(ev. There is nothing distinctively
Stoic in these explanations. Zeno was simply repeating
the ordinary scientific theories of his age. Epicurus gave
alternative explanations,of which this 1s one (Diog. L. x. 96).

74. Diog. L. vit 153, 154, aotpamny òè &fawuw
vebóv maparpugouévov 7 pyyvvpévov Úm mveUparos, os
Zynvev év tH mept óXov. Bpovtnv 66 TOV TovTaY odor èr
mapatpipews 7) pr)£eos'" kepavvóv 06 é£axyww opodpav peta
TorAHs Bias Timtoveay éri yas vebóv maparpuBouévov
7? pnyvupevov.

Of. Chrysippus ap. Stob. Ecl. 1. 29. 1, p. 233, 9, acrpa-
mv é£axyiv. vepav éxvrpuBouévovw 7) piyyvupévov vd qvev-
patos, Bpovtny © civar Tov rovrov *ródov...Óórav dé 7) TOD
mvevpatos Popa chodporépa yévyntat kal upas, Kepav-
vov atrotedcia baz. ib. p. 234, 1 where the same views are
attributed to oí Xtwxoi. Here again there is nothing
specially characteristic of the Stoa: Epicurus, as was his
wont, gave a number of possible explanations and amongst
them these: see Diog. L. x. 100—103, cf. Lucr. vi. 96 f.
(thunder), 162 f. (lightning), 246 f. (thunderbolts) Lucan r.
151, qualiter expressum ventis per nubila fulmen aetheris
impulsi sonitu ete. Aristoph. Nub. 404 foll.

H. P. 9

130 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

75. Senec. Nat. Quaest. vir. 19. 1, Zenon noster in
illa sententia est: congruere iudicat stellas, et radios inter
se committere: hac societate luminis existere imaginem
stellae longioris.

On this point the majority of the Stoic school seem to
have deviated from the teaching of Zeno, considering his
view unsatisfactory: thus Diog. vir. 152, xourras òè Kal
Toywvias Kal Aautradlas Tupa eivau UpecT@Ta, Tráxovs
dépos eis TOV aiPepwdyn TóTov avevexÜérvros, cf. Stob. Ecl. r.
28. 1° p. 228, 6, BonOos aépos avnupévov $avracíav. Sen.
N. Q. VII 21, placet ergo nostris cometas...denso aere
creari.

76.: Stob. Ecl 1. 8. 40° p. 104, 7, Zývæv ednoe
xpóvov elvat kujaeos 0.40 T))ua, TOUTO O6 kai uérpov Kal
xpiTnplov Táxovs Te Kal BpadvTNTos Orrws Eyer «xao ra.
Kata TodTov 0ë yiyverOar TA yivópeva Kal rà TEpawopmeva
&ravra kai ta ovra eivai Simplic. ad Cat. 80 a 4,
tov O6 Erwikðv Zývæv péev do amA@s KIVNTEWS
SudaTynpa TÓv xpóvov elvat, who goes on to say that
Chrysippus limited the definition by adding the words
ToÜ Koopov. Cf. Diog. VIL 141, ër. è Kal Tov xpóvov
accparov, 9.áa Tyua, ÖVTA TS TOD KÖOHOU kunjceos.
Varro L. L. vi. 3 (quoted by Prof. Mayor on Cic. N. D. r.
21.), tempus esse dicunt intervallum mundi motus. See
also Zeller p. 198 and add Plotin. Ennead. 111. 7. 6, Sext.
Pyrrh. rr. 136 f Math. x. 170 f. Zeno held as against
Chrysippus that time existed from eternity, and that it is
not merely coeval with the phenomenal world. Stein,
Erkenntnistheorie, pp. 223—225.

kasra is added by Wachsm. and some word is clearly
wanted: Posidonius however in reproducing the clause
has mws éyes TO érivoovpevoy (Stob. Ecl. 1. 8. 42, p. 105,
21) It seems better to remove the comma usually placed

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 131

after Bpadvtntos, as the genitives depend at least as
much on bros éyer as on uérpov kai kpurmpiov, cf. e.g.
Thuc. 11. 90. 4, œs eiye Tayous ExacTos. —

&ravra must be corrupt, as some verb is required to

balance yívea Gas and cîvaı. Usener suggests araprifecbat, 7
which gives the required sense, cf. amaptiopóv. Chrysipp. ^

ap. Stob. Ecl. 1. 8. 42, p. 106, 17. Diels’ correction azav-
tay is less satisfactory in meaning.

77. Censorinus de die Nat. XVII. 2, quare qui annos
triginta saeculum putarunt multum videntur errasse. hoc
enim tempus genean vocari Heraclitus auctor est, quia
orbis aetatis in eo sit spatio. orbem autem vocat aetatis
dum natura ab sementi humana ad sementim revertitur.
hoc quidem geneas tempus alii aliter definierunt. Hero-
dicus annos quinque et viginti scribit, Zenon triginta.

genean: this substantially accords with the popular
reckoning as recorded by Herod. HL 142, yeveal yap
Tpeis avdpav ékaróv éred écTu.

Heraclitus: for the other authorities which attribute
this statement to Heraclitus see Zeller pre-Socratics II. p.
87, n. 4 and frags. 87 and 88 ed. Bywater.

sementi: saeculum is properly used with the meaning
* generation " and this supports the derivation from sero,
satus (Curtius G. E. r. p. 474 Eng. Tr.). For examples see
the Lexx.

Herodicus: either (1) the Alexandrian grammarian, or
(2) the physician of Selymbria: see D. Biog.

Zenon: according to Wachsmuth Jahn proposes to
substitute Xenon, but the agreement with Heraclitus
rather points to the founder of the Stoa.

78. Stob. Ecl. 1. 16. 1, p. 149, 8, Zrjvev ó Xreuós Ta
XpOmata TpoTovs eivat oxnuaticpovs THS VAs. The
9—2

sa

132 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

same words occur also in Plut. plac. 1. 15. 5 and in Galen
Hist. Phil. c. 10. xix. 258 Kühn.

The above extracts appear to represent all that is.
known of the Stoic theories about colour: for the Epi-
curean view cf. Lucr. 11. 795 foll. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie
p. 310, rightly observes that the definition, implying that
colour is an actual attribute of matter, indieates Zeno's
reliance on sense-impressions.

79. Epiphan. adv. Haeres. ur. 2. 9 (ur. 36), Diels p.
592, rds 8e aitias Tøv Tpaywatwv Tr?) uev ed nuiv qr) be
ovk èp ñutu, TouréoTi TA uév TOV Tpayuarov éd nui
Tà 06 ovK èp Hiv.

We have already seen that Zeno held xaf’ eiuapuévqv
Tu TavTa yiyvecOar, frag. 45. How then are we to
reconcile with this doctrine of necessity the fact that free
will is here allowed to mankind even in a limited degree ?
The Stoic answer is most clearly given by the simile with
which they supported their position, cf. Hippolyt. adv.
Haeres. 1. 18, kai avToi 06 TO Ka? e(uappuévqv eivat qrávro
dieBeBardoavto Tapadeiyuatse xprcoápevou TotoÚTe ÖTE
@oTep oxnpatos éàv ù é£nprmuévos kvov, éàv èv BovXgrat
ErecOat kal ErxeTat Kal érerau ékdv, TOLV Kal TÒ avTEEOU-
ciov perà THS avayKyns olov THs eipappévns éav Sé un
BovrAntas Eres Oar rávros avayKxacOncetat’ Tò avTÓ Or) rov
kai ¿mi Tov avOpeorav’ Kal p) BovXopevot yap akoXovOetv
avayxkacOnoovtat TavTws els TO meTpwpévov eiceMÜeiv.
The simile itself very possibly belongs to Cleanthes as it
accords exactly with his lines in frag. 91. Chrysippus
struggled vigorously with the difficulties in which he was,
involved in maintaining this theory: see the authorities
collected by Zeller p. 177 foll. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie
pp. 328—332, who ascribes to Cleanthes the introduction
of the Stoic answer to the dilemma, has omitted to notice

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 133

the present frag. and does an injustice to Zeno in
asserting that the conflict between free will and necessity
never presented itself to his mind.

80. Censorinus de die Nat. IV. 10, Zenon Citieus,
Stoicae sectae conditor, principium humano generi ex novo
mundo constitutum putavit, primosque homines ex solo
adminiculo divini ignis, id est dei providentia, genitos.

This doctrine is connected with that of the destructi-
bility of the world: cf. frag. 56, where however there
is unfortunately a lacuna at the point where the origin of
man is being discussed.  oyréyovov in that passage must
not be supposed to be at variance with this: the argu-
ment there is simply to show that the world cannot be
without beginning, because facts show that mankind has
not existed from eternity. Zeno is, therefore, distinctly
opposed to a theory of progression; mankind was produced
in the first instance, when the primary fire was in full
sway, and was entirely formed out of the divine essence;
the inference must be that men have degenerated through
the assimilation of coarser substances, and in this con-
nection we may perhaps point to Posidonius' belief in the
popular view of a golden age, when there was a complete
supremacy of wise men. Senec. Ep. 90, 5. There is a
parallel to this passage in Sext. Math. 1x. 28 where the
arguments given by various schools for the existence
of gods are being recited, rv 86 veorépev oTov paci |
TIVES TOUS TPWTOUS kai ynyevels THY avOpeTrwY karà TOAD!
TOV võv avvécet Siapépovtas yeyovévat, Ws TaperTt wabeiv
EK THS "uv Tpos TOUS apyatotépous Kal Hpwas m MT
d&o7ep TL TepiTTOY aigÓ5r)piov oxóvras TV óEUTqTa |
ts Ouavoías émijeB8Nnkévau TH Oela dices Kal voca |
twas duvdpes Bedv. Cf. Cic. Leg. r. 24. Tuse. nr. 2,'
nunc parvulos nobis dedit (natura) igniculos quos celeriter

134 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

malis moribus opinionibusque depravati sic restinguimus,
ut nusquam naturae lumen appareat. For the anthropo-
logical aspect of this passage see Stein, Psych. p. 115.

81. Varro de Re Rust. 11. 1, 3, sive enim aliquod fuit
principium generandi animalium, ut putavit Thales Milesius
et Zeno Citieus, sive contra principium horum exstitit
nullum, ut credidit Pythagoras Samius et Aristoteles
Stagirites.

It is obvious that only on the hypothesis of the world
in its present form being without beginning is the doctrine
of the eternity of the human race or of animals possible.
Aristotle, however, expressly says (de Caelo 1. 10 279 b 12)
that none of his predecessors had held the world to
be without beginning in this sense. Unless therefore
Aristotle is mistaken, the reference to Pythagoras in the
present passage must be erroneous: see the discussion
in Zeller pre-Socratics L pp. 439—442 and especially
p. 439 n. 2 and for the similar case of Xenophanes ib.
p. 570: see also Newman on Ar. Pol. 11. 8 1269 a 5. At
any rate Zeno is in agreement with the great majority of
those who went before him: the early philosophers held for
the most part that animal life was produced by the action
of the sun's rays on the primitive slime, as Anaximander,
Xenophanes, Parmenides, and Archelaus (Zeller l. c. 1. pp.
255, 577, 601, IL. p. 392), or on the earth, as Diogenes
of Apollonia (ib. r p. 296). Somewhat similar were the
views of Empedocles and Anaxagoras (ib. 11. pp. 160, 365).

82. Schol ad Plat. Alcib. r. p. 121 E dis émra éróv]
TOTE yap ó TéXNetos ev Jul atrodatveTar Nónos, bs ` Apuao-
TéANS kai Zyvov kai’ AXkuatov ó IlvOayopevos paou.

Cf. Stob. Ecl. 1. 48. 8, p. 317, 21, radu roívvv sept rob
vod Kal Tacav TOv kpevrróvov Ovváueov THS wWrvxns

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 135

oí pev Xrwwol Aéyouc, jw evOds eudverOar Tov Xoyov,
torepov óë cvvabpoifer bat amo TOv aicOncewy kai pavta-
civ Tepl Sexatécoapa érn. Plut. plac. tv. 11, ó 8e Xóyos
kaĵ òv mpocaryopevoueba Royixol èk TeV mporyyeov
cvTNnpoüaÓa, Aéyerat Kata THY mpærnv éf98ouá8a.
(This points to some slight divergence in the school itself
as to the exact period of life at which ó Aóyos reXetobrau :
secus Stein, Erkenntnistheorie p. 116, but how can evp-
twAnpotobar=“begin”?) Diog. VII. 55, pwv7...amd Scavolas
exTreuTropevn, Os 6 Avoyévns pnoiv' tyris amo SdexaTecoapev
érav tedevodtac. The mind at birth is a tabula rasa:
reason lies in the application of mpodrrn ers and évvoias,
which are themselves ultimately founded on external
impressions, cf. Cleanth. fr. 37 0/pa0ev eioxpiverOat tov
voov. The present fragment has been generally overlooked.

*Adxpatwv: this statement is not referred to in Zeller's
account of Alemaeon (pre-Socr. I. pp. 521—526). For
Aristotle cf. Pol. r. 13 1260 a 14.

83. Euseb. P. E. xv. 20, 2. Ar. Did. fr. phys. 39,
Diels p. 470, mept 96 4rvxyrs KAedvÓms uév ta Zývovos
Soypata TapariÜÉuevos pos avyKpiow THY TpÓs TOUS
dXXovus $voukots dynow, öre Zmvov tv Yrvy)nv Xéye
> % 3 / » € / ,
aic Onrixny avabupiacwy, kaÜarep'HpdkXevros. Bovrópevos
yàp éuoavíca,. ote ai yuyai dvabupr@pevar voepal act
yivovtat elikaaev avTàs Tots Tota pois Xéyov ovTOs 'ToTa-
fotos Toîow avtoiow éuBaivovew Érepa kai érepa, Vara
émippet’ Kal yuyai O6 aro røv vypdv avaO8vjuGvrav
> 0 » AY 5, € "4 ^ *H Xr , ^ `
avabupiacw èv oùv óuoíos TO 'HpakXeíro thy *rvxrv

amopaivet Znvwv, dw Ünrue)v dé avtny eivat dia TodTO

4 [4 ^ , , \ , M / ^

Neyer, OTL rvrroba at Te Õúvaraı [Td uéyeÜos] TO uépos TO

TyoUpevov avTHs amo TÖV üvrov kai vrapxóvrov Sia TOV

aic@nrnpiov Kal trapadéyerOar Tas Tvmo ces rabTa yap
dia Nrvxrjs eoru.

136 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO,

alcOnrixyv: the MSS. have ate Ono ù) but the correction
(made by Wellmann p. 475 and Zeller p. 212) is rendered
certain by the parallel passage in ps-Plut. vit. hom. c. 127,
T)v rpuxnv of Xrwewol dpifovrar mvedpa cvpudovés xai
avabuplacw aic@ntikny avartopévny ard TeV èv eduar.
Uypav.

dvabuptacw: cf. Ar. de Anim. r. 2. 16. 405 a 25, kal
"HpáxXevros 06 tv apyny eivai $mot uyny, etmep Thv
avabupiacw, é£ hs TáXXa cvvicrnowr, i.e. Aristotle identi-
fies the ava@upiacrs (“fiery process" Wallace) with $o.
Zeno adopts the word as an apt description of the warm
breath of which the soul is composed.

voa, The soul's rational power is constantly renewed
by the fiery process, because it is fed by the emanations
from the srepiéyov according to Heraclitus or from the
moist parts of the body, i.e. the blood, according to Zeno.
In this way Heraclitus explained his famous saying aùn
Arx?) copwtatn (frag. 74 ed. Bywater), while the Stoics
from their point of view regarded the excellence of the
soul as consisting in a suitable admixture of heat. Stein,
Psych. p. 105. Hence, as Diels observes, there is no
necessity to read érepa« aei.

dkacev attds: the principle of mavra pei applies
no less to the soul than to the world in general:
thus Arist. Lc. continues xal accgaroraróv T€ Kal péov
dei’ TO O6 KwWovpevoy kiwwovpéve ryvyvao keo Qar èv riwnoet
8 eiva, rà Üvra kákeivos wero Kal ot mool. The soul is
voepa because it is in flux. For vorapoiou cf. Plat. Orat.
402 A, 'HpaxAevros...zoTajLoÜ pon amewdtov ta Qura
Aéyeu de Sls és Top avTOv TroTapmov ovx àv éuBains. R and
P § 26.

kal...dvadvprdvrar. Bywater Heracl. fr. 42 ascribes these
words to Zeno and not to Heraclitus: the importance of
this will appear presently.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 137

épotws: i.e. in the same sense as Heraclitus: the latter
however would not have called the soul aic@nrixn, dis-
tinguishing as he did between sensation and knowledge:
kakoi waptupes dvÜporrev opOarpol kai ota BapBapous
Arvxds éxóvrov frag. 11 Sch. and Stein, Erkenntnistheorie,
p. 12: hence Sextus infers that Heraclitus held 72v aic Onow
àmıoTov civarı (Math. vir. 126).

Tvroóc0o.: cf. frag. 7, and for amó røv Ovrov x.T.X. frag.

11.
84. Rufus Ephes. de part. hom. p. 44 ed. Clinch,

Geppaciay 86 kai mveðua Znvev To avTO elvai pow.
This passage has been discovered by Stein, Psych. n.
81 to whose remarks the reader is referred.

85. Diog. L. vit. 157, Zývæv 86 6 Ketveds...rvetua
évOeppov eivai thy *rvx9v. TovT@ yap nuds elvat égmvó-
ous, Kal VTO ToUTOU KLVe(a Oat.

Cf. Alex. Aphr. de an. p. 26, 16 ed. Bruns, oí ao
TNS Yrods mvedwa avtynv Xéyovres elvat owykeiuevóv Tras
&x re Tupos Kal aépos. Sext. Pyrrh. 11. 70, met oiv 7 yuy)
TVeÜua kal TO ryyeuovucóv ij) Xerrrojepéa repóv TL rveUgaros
«tr. If any of the authorities seem to assert that
Heraclitus defined the soul as zvebügua, this is doubtless
either due to Stoic influence or is a mere gloss on ava-
Oupiacis: see the reff. in Zeller pre-Socratics ir. p. 80
where however the reference to Sext. Math. 1x. 363 (leg.
361) is a mistake, as the passage is dealing with tad rv
üvrov otovxeia. Not dissimilar is the Epicurean defini-
tion of the soul: Diog. L. x. 63, 7 wuyn cdma stt NeTTo-
pepés Tap OXov TO AOpoicpa TapeoTapjévov Tposeu-
Qepéa rarov òè mvevparTı Üepuo0 Tiva Kpdow éyovtt. Sext.
Emp. Math. IX. 71, Xezrrouepeis yàp ovcas (ai yuyai) kai
OvY 7jrrov Tupwoers 7) zrvevuaTO ets eis TOUS dvo uáXXov

ToTrous KovQodopooauv.

138 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.
rò TovTov Kiwetobar : frag. 91.

86. Cic. Acad. I. 39, (Zeno) statuebat ignem esse
ipsam naturam quae quidque gigneret et mentem atque
sensus. Fin. Iv. 12, cum autem quaereretur res admodum
difficilis, num quinta quaedam natura videretur esse ex
qua ratio et intellegentia oriretur, in quo etiam de animis
cuius generis essent quaereretur, Zeno id dixit esse ignem.
Tusc. r. 19, Zenoni Stoico animus ignis videtur.

See also Stein, Psychologie p. 101.

87. Galen plac. Hippocr. et Plat. 11. 8 (v. 283 Kühn),
et O€ ye Émovro (Atoyévns ó BafvXóvios) KXedvOet. kai
Xpvoinm@ kai Znvovi tpépecOar uév é£ aipatos dncace
THY Wuxny ova(av È adths úmápyew TO vrveüpa.

It is doubtful whether the doctrine of the nourishment
of the soul by the blood was held by Heraclitus and from
him derived by Zeno. The only authority, besides the
doubtful passage of Arius Didymus (frag. 83), from which
it can be argued that such a view belonged to him is
Nemes. Nat. Hom. c. 2 p. 28 (quoted by Zeller, pre-
Socratics 11. p. 80) Hparrerros 86 tv Tod mavròs Nrvxnv
avabuplacw èk TOv úypðv, who however goes on expressly
to distinguish the individual soul from the world-soul and
states that the former is composed aó rs éxrós (avabv-
piágeos) It is best therefore to regard this as a Stoic
innovation: just as the stars in the fiery aether are fed by
the moist particles rising from the watery zone which

| they enclose, so is the fiery soul fed by the moist blood:
| thus man is in himself an organic whole, and the microcosm

of the individual is an exact parallel to the macrocosm of
the universe. Further references ap. Zeller p. 212 n. 2.
With regard to this passage, Wachsmuth (Comm. t. p. 10)
suggests that there is here a confusion between Zeno of
Citium and Zeno of Tarsus, but there is no necessity

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 139:

to adopt this supposition: that Zeno held the soul to
be fed from the internal moisture of the body, which must
be the blood, is clear from frag. 83 even if we leave out of
account the frag. next following.

88. Longinus ap. Euseb. P. E. xv. 21, Znvew pév
yàp kai Kreavber veyearjoeié Tis àv Sixaiws obro adó0pa
VpicTucds epi avtns (sci. Wuyis) OuaXey0etau kai
TavTÓv duce tov cTepeoÜ aiuaros Elva thy "rvxm»v
avaOvpíaciv dyncact. Theodoret, gr. aff. cur. p. 934 Migne,
duo yap (Zyvev xai KreavOns) roD cTepeo0 aipatos
civari THY Nrvy7)v ava6vyuíaa uw.

In both cases the MSS. have ewuaros for atuaros, but
the words are often confused and o@patos yields no
satisfactory sense. The emendation is made by Stein,
Psychol. p. 107, and is confirmed by the passages which he
cites from Marcus Aurelius (v. 33, VI. 15). erepeo? a(uaros
is rather an odd expression, but was probably introduced
by way of contrast to yuy) as NerTopepéctatoy mrveüua.
For du$o Viger suggested audoty, but the word is some-
times indeclinable.

89. Tertullian de Anima, c. 5, denique Zeno con-
situm spiritum definiens animam hoc modo instruit, *quo"
inquit “digresso animal emoritur, corpus est: consito
autem spiritu digresso animal emoritur: ergo consitus
spiritus corpus est: consitus autem spiritus anima est:
ergo corpus est anima." Macrob. Somn. Sc. L 14. 19,
Zenon (dixit animam) concretum corpori spiritum.

Cf. Chrysipp. ap. Nem. Nat. Hom. c. 2, p. 33, 6
Oavatos ste ywpicpos Wrvxfjs amo coparos' ovdey O6
do@patov ard cwparos xopíterav ouóë yap ébam+Tera,
cwpaTtos acapatov’ 7 dé yuy) kai épartetat kal yopi-
fera. ToD a &uaTos. ca dpa yn Wyn. See Zeller, Stoics

140 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

p. 211, where further illustrations to this and the following
frag. will be found in the notes. concretum or consitum
corpori spiritum = Chrys. ap. Galen. Hipp. et Plat. ur 1
(v. 287 Kühn), 7 yvy) mvedpa ore cúupvrov ruv
cuveyes mavti TQ cwpartı Ovjkov (quoted by Zeller) For
quo digresso etc. cf. Cic. Tusc. r. 18, sunt qui discessum
animi a corpore putent esse mortem. Plat. Phaed. 64 c,
dpa pn &XXo Te (wyovjpeÜa TOv Üavarov eivai) j THY THS
Wuyis amo ro) auaros aTadrayny ;

90. Chalcid. in Tim. c. 220, Spiritum quippe animam
esse Zenon quaerit hactenus: quo recedente a corpore
moritur animal, hoc certe anima est. naturali porro
spiritu recedente moritur animal: naturalis igitur spiritus
anima est.

It is possible that this passage and the extract from
Tertullian (fr. 89) are derived from a common original,
but, as in their present form the syllogisms are directed
to distinct points, it has been thought better to keep :
them separate.

91. Galen, Hist. Phil 24, Diels, p. 613, rjv 9€
oc (av adTns (Nrvxfjs) of uév do@patov Epacav ws IIXdTov,
of 06 cwpata kwetv ws Znvov kai oí é£ avtod. mvedpa
yap elvat TavTHY UTEevonaay Kal obTot.

cópara kwév. So MS. A, but B has eopara cvyxivodv
and the Latin version of Nicolaus has “corpus simul
secum movens.” Wachsm. conj. cdua comata (a kwobv.
Usener: cpa Ta cbpata Kwkuobv. Diels: opa avo
kivoÜüv sive é£ éavroO Kiwwovpevov. Coll. Gal. def. Med. 30
kata 6é Tos YTwiKods capa XemTojuepégs ÈE éavroÜ rtv-
ovjevov. Whatever may be the right reading, cdma
certainly seems wanted as well as copara to point the
contrast with Plato, For the doctrine of the soul re-

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 141

garded as the principle of movement, see the summary of |
the views of previous philosophers given by Arist. de An. |
r 2, § 2—6, 403 b 27—404 b 7. That the soul was self-
moving as being the principle of motion, was a dis- |
tinctively Platonic dogma. Phaedr. 245 ©, uù) 4XXo Te
eiva, TO avTo éauT0 xivodv ?) Yrvxrjv. Legg. 895 A, puyu
... Thy Suvapévny avtTny kwetv Kivnowy, where the argument |
is made use of to prove the immortality of the soul.

For the Stoics cf Sext. Math. rx. 102, maons yap
QUceos Kal Yuyhs ý karapy THS kuijaeos yiverOat Goket
amò nyepovixod, and the references collected by Stein,
Psych. nn. 217 and 221 to which add M. Aurel. v. 19.
The theory of róvos throws an entirely new light on this,
as on many other Stoie doctrines, which were originally
adopted on independent grounds.

92. Stob. Ecl. r. 49. 33, p. 367, 18, adda uèv of ye
amó XpvaímOov kai Zhvovos didocopot kal mavtes boot
cama Tv wWuynv vooüc. Tas uëv Svvapers ds ev TO
UroKeéev TovoTnTas avufiuBatovei, T)v O6 ~uyny os
ovaíav mpovToKeméevny rais 6vvapecu TiÓéacuv, èk È audo-
Tépov rovrov cvvÜOerov iow é£ dvouoiev avvdyovau.

moiéTqras...o/c(av. This distinction we have already
met with in frag. 53. It properly belongs to the depart-
ment of logic but, in consequence of the Stoic materialism,
it has also a quasi-physical application: see Zeller, Stoics,
pp. 105, 127, Reid on Cie. Ac. r. 24 foll. The different
activities of the soul bear the same relation to the soul
as a whole, as the qualities of any particular object bear
to its substance: hence Sext. Emp. Math. vir. 234, $aci
yàp Wwuynv AéyerOar Bids Tó Te cvvéxyov THY ÓNqv úy-
Kpuctv Kal kar. idlay TÒ 1)yejovucóv.

mpotroxepévyy: for the significance of this expression,
see Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 310.

142 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

93. Nemes. de Nat. Hom. p. 96, Zývæv 96 ó YrwiKos
oxtapeph dynow elvai Tijv Wuynv, Svaipdv avy els TE TO
»yepovikóv kai eis Tas 7révre aiaÜ:jcew Kal eis TO povn-
TLKÜV Kal TO omeppatikóv. Stob. Ecl. r. 49. 34, p. 369, 6,
of ato Zuvevos bxtapeph Tv Nrvx5v ScaboEdfovcr "epi
«iv» tas duvapers eivat srXe(ovas, oTEp ÈV TO NYE MOVIKO
évuTapyoveay havracias, cvyxatabécews, oppns, Xoyov.

We must distinguish the pépn wuyjs from the ôv-
vapers, for they are not identical, as the passage in
Stobzeus shows. Sext. Emp. Math. vir. 237, kai yap 7
open kai 9) cvykaráÜegis kal 1) Katadyn is érepousa eus
eici Tod yepovikoð. In spite of this eightfold division
of local extension (see Zeller, p. 214 n. 2) the Stoics
held the unity of the soul as an essence: see especially
Stein, Psych. pp. 119, 122, who suggests “soul-functions "
as a more suitable expression for the Stoics than “ parts
of the soul".

Tó dyepovuóv. We have clear evidence here that the
term syepuovikóv is Zenonian. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie
nn. 219 and 693, is inconsistent on this point, in the
former passage attributing its introduction to Cleanthes
and in the latter to Zeno. It is very possible that
Cleanthes first spoke of Tò vyeuovikóv Tod kócjov, which
with him was the sun, in furtherance of his view of man
as a microcosm,

94. Tertullian de Anima, c. 14, dividitur autem in
partes nunc in duas a Platone, nunc in tres a Zenone.

This passage is at variance with the account given by
Nemesius. Wellmann, l. c. p. 476, prefers the authority
of Tertullian, thinking that the three divisions in question
are the syepovexdr, the dwvntixor, and the eveppuaruov,
and that the five organs of sense were regarded by Zeno
as parts of the body, though the centre of sense resides

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 143

in the 7yeuovwóv. On the other hand Weygoldt, l. c.
p. 36, and Heinze in Bursian's Jahresb. I. p. 191, think
Nemesius more trustworthy than Tertullian, and certainly
the better opinion is that Zeno taught the eightfold
division (see Stein's full discussion, Psych. pp. 158—160).
It is just possible that the triple division mentioned by
Tertullian is (1) rò 7euoviuxóv, (2) the five senses, and
(3) the voice and the reproductive organism, and that, if
we were in possession of the full text of Zeno, the dis-
crepancy would explain itself If all that we knew of
Plato's psychological divisions had been contained in this
passage and a statement that he divided the soul into Xóyov
éxov, Oupoerdés, and éziÜvumrwcóv, we should have had
some difficulty in reconciling the two. Hirzel, Ir p. 154,
155 appears to be unaware of the passage in Nemesius :
he accepts the evidence of Tertullian, but explains it as
an ethical rather than a physical distinction.

95. Epiphan. adv. Haeres. tr. 2. 9 (111. 36), Zyjvov ó
Kutveds 6 Sros épy...deiv...eyerv TO Üctov èv povw TO
và wadrov 86 Ocóv ryeicOar Tv vodv. Cert yap alava-
FORA... &Xeye O€ Kal pera ywptopòv TOD cwparos * * *
Kal ékaXeu THY *rvxnv ToXvypóviov rveOua, où unv 6
adGaptov Ov (Xov ÉXeyev aur elvai. éxdaTravarar yap
UTOÓ Tov TOXXoÜ xpóvov eis TO apavés, de nou Cf.
August. contra Acad. irr. 17, 38, quamobrem cum Zeno
sua quadam de mundo et maxime de anima, propter
quam vera philosophia vigilat, sententia delectaretur,
dicens eam esse mortalem, nec quidquam esse praeter
hune sensibilem mundum, nihilque in eo agi nisi corpore ;
nam et deum ipsum ignem putabat.

tò Qctov: cf. Cleanth. frag. 21, Stein, Psychol. p. 97.

moduxpéviov: the language of this extract recalls the
objection of Cebes in the Phaedo to Socrates’ proof of

144 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

the immortality of the soul p. 87 A—88 B, recapitulated
by Socrates p. 95 B—E, cf. especially ro dé avro$aívew bre
Ìoyupóv Tí otw 1) Yuy) Kal Oeoevdes Kal Hy ëtt grporepov
Tplv nuds duÜpomous yevécOat ovdéev Kwrvew ps TavTa
Tatra pynview abavaciav pèv py, OTL ÔÈ vroXvxpóvióv. Té
otw Wuyn, Kal av mou TpóTtepov apunyavov baov xpóvov
Kal joe! Te kai émparrev ToAAa atta «K.T... For the
limited future existence which the Stoics allowed to the
soul see Zeller, p. 218 foll. and add Schol. ad Lucan. 1x. 1,
alii (animas) solidas quidem, postquam exierint de corpore,
permanere, sed deinde tractu temporis dissipari: haee
opinio Stoicorum. There was considerable variation in
points of detail among the various members of the soul :
see on Cleanth. frag. 41.

rod ecóparos: Some such words as xpóvov Twa Siapévery
have fallen out here.

ov...dpdaprov: this is not inconsistent with a@avaros

.. above. The soul never perishes entirely, although event-

ually it passes into a higher power, Diog. vir 156.
uy peta Odvatov émuuévew, POaprny 06 eivai, Stein
Psychol. p. 145.

96. Themist. de An. 68 a Speng. 11. p. 30, 24, aXX
uws Znveve pev vmoke(mera( Tis dmoXoy(a kexpáa at
ornv Òr ÓXov TOV cóuaros PacKovTe THY WuynY Kal THY
é£odov avths avev POopas Tod avykpiuaros pù vrotoDvrt.

The passage of Aristotle is de An. r 3 $6, p. 406 a
30—65, where he says that one of the objections to
the view that the soul «ive? TO coda is that in that case
the soul's movements will correspond to those of the
body, so that if the body moves locally, the soul may do
the same and change its position with regard to the body
by leaving it. ei óë roüT évdéyetar, €mowr av TO avic-

pas Tà revera Tov Sowv. We might therefore
3 DU I P" 4

° THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 145

imfer from this passage that Zeno taught that the soul
moved the body (frag. 91).

Themistius says that Zeno is rescued from this dilemma
by the doctrine of xpaous Š wv, for which see on frag.
52. He seems to refer to the Stoic view of the soul as
the bond of union for the body, so that body cannot exist
qua body without the presence of soul, ef. Iambl. ap.
Stob. Ecl. r. 49. 33, p. 368, 6, xa0' ods d€ pia tow) TS
Wuyns stw ? Tod cvvOérov, cuyKexpapevns THS Wuyns
TQ cwpartı. ext. Math. IX. 72, ovdé yap mporepov Tó
copa Ouakparmrukóv nv avtav (Tøv :uyev) aX avrai
TO cwpartı ovupovis joav airiai K.A. The best illus-
tration however is Sext. Math. vir. 234, paol yap ux
AéyeoÜa, Suyds, TO Te avvéyov T)v ÜNqv cúykpiow Kal
kar iO(av TO Tryepovukóv. Tav yàp elmopev cvveoTávat
Tov avOpwrov ék Wuyis Kal couaTos, 7 TOV Üdvarrov eivat
xopucuóv *rvxüs amó capmatos, idiws kaXoÜpev TÒ TYe-
povixov, the meaning of which passage seems to be that
only the zyeuovuxóv and not the whole soul is said to
depart, inasmuch as the corpse must possess cuvextixn
dvvapis in the form of é&s, for otherwise it will be
altogether non-existent. (See Stein, Erkenntnistheorie,
p. 105 foll.) But there is no inconsistency with the
present passage, since the change of rò ouvéyov from
Avvx7) to és is $0opà tod cuvyKpiwatos (for $0opá
\(@avaros see on frag. 95).

97. Lactant. Inst. vir 7. 20, Esse inferos Zenon
Stoicus docuit et sedes piorum ab impiis esse discretas:
et ilos quidem quietas et delectabiles incolere regiones,
hos vero luere poenas in tenebrosis locis atque in caeni
voraginibus horrendis.

Cf. Tertull de anima c. 54, quos quidem miror quod
imprudentes animas circa terram prosternant cum illas

H. P. 10

146 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

a sapientibus multo superioribus erudiri adfirment. ubi
erit scholae regio in tanta distantia diversoriorum ? qua
ratione discipulae ad magistros conventabunt, tanto dis-
crimine invicem absentes? quid autem illis postremae
eruditionis usus ac fructus iam iam conflagratione peri-
turis? reliquas animas ad inferos deiciunt. Hirzel thinks
that Virgils description of the souls of the lost in Aen.
VI. is derived from Stoic sources, and therefore ultimately
from Zeno, and refers to Ecl. vr. 31, Georg. Iv. 220, Aen.
vi. 724, for the influence of Stoicism on Virgil. The same
writer correctly points out the distinction between the
treatment of popular religion in this doctrine of Zeno and
that which appears in those passages (to be presently
considered) where the attributes of the popular deities
are explained away by rationalistic allegory. He compares
the spirit of the present passage with the Platonic myths,
called by Grote *fanciful illustrations invented to expand
and enliven general views," and suggests that it may
have occurred in the zroXvreía, which Zeno, as we are told
by Plutarch, directed against the Platonie school (see
Hirzel, Untersuchungen I. pp. 25—31). It is certainly
hardly credible that Zeno can have attached any philo-
sophical importance to a theory stated in these terms,
and it is better to regard it as a concession to popular
belief in a matter which could not be formulated with
scientific precision. See also Stein, Psych. p. 149 and
162, who infers that Zeno agreed with Chrysippus rather
than with Cleanthes in the controversy appearing in
Cleanth. frag. 41. The general view~of the school was
that the soul after death ascends to the upper aether and
is preserved there among the stars to which it is akin:
Sext. Math. 1x. 73, 74, Cic. Tusc. 1. 42, 43.

98. Plut. plac. Iv. 21. 4, rò 6e pwvâev vr Tod Zrjvovos

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 147

3 / A ^ X ^ 4 ^ ^
eipnuévov, 0 kal dwvnv Kadovou, čari mveðpa Ouvreivov

ATÒ TOD hyepovikoð péxpe Papuyyos Kal yAOTTNS kai TOV
oixel@v opryávov.

Cf. on Cleanth. frag. 43.
99. Eustath. in Il. € 506, p. 1158, 37, jepopavous

knpuxas “Ounpos kávrabüÜa citov tov Kata Zovova THs
povis opov mpovméfaXev eitrovta’ “ bon] istw amp me-
TANY uévos."

Cf. Diog. L. vit. 55, gore 5€ dev?) amp memdnypévos.
This frag. is taken from Wachsmuth, Comm. r. p. 12.
Sound is produced by the breath coming in contact with
the external air; in the case of an animal the air is said
to be struck i7 copys, while the voice of man is évapOpos
kai amo OL.avoías éxmeurouévg, Diog. l. c. See also the
passages quoted by Stein, Psychol. n. 248.

Cf. Plato's definition, Tim. p. 67 B., ddAws pév oiv
hoviy Óduev tiv Ov drcov UT dépos éykepáXov Te Kal
aiparos péypti Nrvxrs mayyy Svadidopévnv. Ar. de An.
IL 8 discusses yodos, axon, and $ww?. Sound is formed
órav Vmouévy TANYEls ó amp ial pn) dvayvO7 (Š 3, p. 419
b 21): voice is then defined as woos tis èuypyúyov
(S 9, p. 420 b. 5) and is minutely described.

100. Galen, Hipp. et Plat. plac. Ir. 5, v. p. 241, K,
ó OÓavpatópevos m0 TOv aTaLKdY Xóyos ó Z»9vovos...
¿yet yàp de. “ bon) dia hapuyyos ywpe?. ei 86 zv amo
Tov éycebaxNou ywpodaa, ovK àv Sia Hapvyyos éx@pet.
60ev 06 Aoyos, Kal deo) éxeiÜev ywpe?. Royos è aro
Siavoias Xwpei, bat oUk èv TO eyxeparyo early 17) Scavora.”

It is tempting to suggest that Aóyos and $ex) have
changed places: the argument would certainly be more
transparent if the transposition were made: cf. the
following passage in Galen, speaking of Diogenes Baby-
lonius: 60ev éxméutretar 7) bon), ca ý évapÜpos* ovkoüv

10—2

148 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

kai *) onwalvovoa évapÜpos bon) éxeiÜev: roÜro dé Xóryos.
Kal Xóyos dpa ékeiÜev éxméumerau. bev Kai 7) pav.
Galen's comment is that Zeno has omitted some of the
necessary afwouara, while Diogenes has too many. He
also points out the fallacy underlying the preposition
amó, which is ambiguous; either é£ or zo ought to have
been used, in which case the argument could never have
stood the test of daylight. The gist however of his
argument against Zeno, which is given at some length,
is that Zeno has been deceived by the following fallacy:
olev. 6 Xóyos exméumeTa, éke? Sel Kal Tov Stadoyiomov
ylyver Oat, TovtéoTiy, v exeiv TO uopíe. TovTO dé dnoomev
aytiKpus eivat eddos, ov yap el TL kata Tpoaiperw EK
Tivos éxTéuTeTaL kar ékeivo TO moploy Oeíkvvrau TV
duavovav vrrápxew, KaVaTrep oVSE TO oDpov oVOe TO TTVENOV
ovdé » kopvta ovdé TO atroTatnua. Wachsmuth quotes
further passages from Galen’s argument in which Zeno’s
name is mentioned, but they add nothing to the words
cited above. Chrysippus, and after him Diogenes of Babylon
(Cic. N. D. r. 41), laboured to prove that the birth of
Athene from the head of Zeus in no way conflicted with
their view that the breast was the seat of reason (Zeller,
p. 364). See generally Stein, Psychol. p. 137.

101. Galen, Hipp. et Plat. plac. I 5, V. p. 247,
Kühn, xal roro BovXeraí ye Zývæv kai Xpúcummos Gua
TQ cderépe yop@ mavri SiadiSocGar T5)v k Tod mpoo-
meaovtos éÉoÜev éyyevouévgv TQ pople Kivnow els TU
adpynv THs Nrvxns, iv alaOnra Tò Eĝov.

This passage occurs in the course of the discussion
as to povn and Gutvora as a parenthetical argument, and
Galen objects that there is no perceptible interval of time
between the impression and the sensation. Cf. Plut. plac,
Iv, 23, 1, impressions are made on the organ of sense but

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 149

the seat of feeling is in the zyeuovikóv. Philo de mund.
Opif. p. 114 Pfeiff. (quoted on Cleanthes, frag. 3). See
also Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 306.

102. Galen, Hipp. et Plat. plac. mi 5, v. p. 322,
Kühn, ó te Zyjvov pds Tots érixXauflavouévovs, OTs rávra
rà Cntovpeva eis TO oTOma héper, Epyoev “AAN ov TavTa
KATATÍVETAL”, oUTe Ts karamóceons GANS AV OLKELÓTEpOV
Aeyouévgs oUTe THs KaTaBdcews Tov puÜévrov, ei uj
mept Tov Owpaka TO T"yeuovukóv "uiv nv, eis ò TadTa
“mavta pépetar.

pépes, so I. Müller for MSS. $épew. This obscure passage
was formerly punctuated as though Zeno's words extended
from aN ov srávra to péperas, but, if the context is read,
it is at once plain that I. Müller is right in putting the
inverted commas after karaíverat. Chrysippus, who is
being quoted, is aiming to prove the location of the %ye-
povukóv in the breast by the usage of ordinary speech:
e.g. avaBaívew tov Ovpov—Katarivey TV Yyoknv—aTa-
pdypara karamiveaÜa.—karamuidv TÒ pynOév amMOev:
then comes this reference to Zeno, and the conclusion
oUre—dépera, is the inference drawn by Chrysippus from
the facts stated. Still, it is by no means clear what was
the force of the objection made to Zeno or of his rejoinder.
Müller translates:—Et Zeno reprehendentibus, quod
omnia, quae in quaestionem vocarentur, in ore gestaret,
‘at, inquit, ‘non omnia a me devorantur, apparently
making Zeno the subject of épen but the Latin is in
other respects hardly less obscure than the Greek.
Wachsmuth, who has the old punctuation, interprets
mavta Ta EnTovpeva as “affectus” and suggests péperas
for $épei, but what meaning he deduces from the passage
I do not understand. In this perplexity, the following
explanation is suggested. avra ta Gntovpeva is the

150 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

subject of pépet and the objectors say :—all objects of
investigation are ultimately concerned with the mouth.
For épeit see L. and S. oí émwXauavouevo: are the
Epicureans, who denied the existence of any intermediate
onpavopevov (Xekróv) between onpaivoy (dwvy) and
Tvyxávov (TO éxrós vmoketuevov), cf. Sext. Math. vim. 11
foll. and esp. 13, of òè wept tov 'Errixovpov. ..$aívovraa...
epi TH povi TO adnbes Kal Yreddos amoXe(irew. Diog. L.
X. 33, way oiv Tpaypya ovopaTe TO TPWTWS ÉTwVreraryuévo
évapyés éste. But this nominalism went hand in hand
with the most absolute credence in every sense-perception. `
To the Stoic, however, not every $avracía is évapyns, but
only that which is KatadXynrtixyn. Hence Zeno's reply :—
however this may be, we can't swallow everything. xara-
miverac is substituted for caradkawBaveras, just as oTópa
takes the place of pævý. Some confirmation of this guess
may be found in the recurrence of +ó €nrovmevov, Entei,
etc. in Epicurean texts (Diog. x. 33, 37, 38, Sext. Math.
xI. 21). If Müllers punctuation is adopted, this fragment
ought rather to be numbered with the azo$0éyuara, but,
in a matter of so much uncertainty, I have not ventured
to remove it from the physical fragments, among which 1t
is placed by Wachsmuth.

ore x. X. It would not be correct to speak of *swallow-
ing” or “imbibing” another’s words, in any other case
unless (dAAws et 1j) the dominant part of the soul were
In the breast. For xatamocews cf Ar. Ach. 484 (of
Dicaearchus encouraging his vus to persevere in taking
the part of the Lacedaemonians) éornkas; ovk el karta-
mwv Evpvriómv ;

103. Cic. de Divin. ri. 119, contrahi autem animum
Zeno et quasi labi putat atque concidere et ipsum esse
dormire.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. T

Elsewhere sleep is said to be caused by a slackening
of the tension in the srveüua. Diog. L. vit. 158, tov dé
Umvov yiverar éxXvouévov ToD aicÜrnruco0 TOvov Tepl TO
7yeuovukov. Plut. plac. v. 23. 4, IIXarev of Srowot Tóv
pèv Varvov vyívea Ua, avéaeu roO aia ÜnrucoÜ mvevpaTos, oU
kar avaxaXac ov, kaharep él THS yÀs, epouévov è ws
émi TO »yyepovucóv wecoppvov. For Plato's theory of sleep
cf. Tim. p. 45 D, E, and for the Stoics, Stein, Psychol.
p. 144.

104. Stob. Flor. Monac. 198, ó avrós (Zývæv) ¿$m
THY uév ópaciv amó To) dépos AawBavew TO Pads, THY 86
Yuy amo röv pabnuatov.

For the Stoic theory of vision see Zeller, p. 221, n. 4
Stein, Psych. n. 241. In Plut. plac. Iv. 21, bpacus is
defined as «veüua Siatetvoy amd ýyepovikoð | uéxpus
ó$0aXuóv. The views of the ancient philosophers before
Aristotle will be found concisely stated in Grote's Plato,
IL. 265 n., and for Aristotle see Grote's Aristotle, p. 465.

105. Varro de L. L. v. 59, sive, ut Zenon Citieus,
animalium semen ignis is, qui anima ac mens.

Mueller's punctuation of the passage has been followed:
in Spengel's edition, Zeno's statement is made to extend
farther. ignis = vveüua in the next fragment. Zeller
remarks: “Plutarch (Plac. v. 16, 2. 17, 1. 24, 1) draws
attention to the inconsistency of saying that the animal
soul, which is warmer and rarer than the vegetable soul,
has been developed thereout by cooling and condensation,"
p. 213, n. 1. Stein's explanation of this paradox (Psych.
p. 115—117) is ingenious, but he is driven to assume
that $/c:s is warmer than yuy7, which seems question-

able.
106. Euseb. P. E. xv. 20. 1, Ar. Did. fr. phys. 39,

152 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Diels p. 470, +ó òè emépua dmciv ó Znvov eivar 6
LeOinow avOpwrros mveðpa pe? úypoð, Nrvxfjs pépos Kal
aATOCT ATLA kai TOU OTEPUATOS TOD TOY TPOYoVOY képac pa
kal piya TGv THS Nrvxüjs uepàv cvveMgXvO6s* Exov yap
ToÚç Aóyovs TQ ÜX« ToUs aUTOUS ToÜTO, ÜTav ade0 eis THY
würpav cvrAdnpbev úr dXXov TveUparos, uépos wWuyns
THS TOD OnrEos KpupOev Te vei kivovuevov Kal àvappurmi-
Copmevov vm. ékeivov mpocrAamBavov aet [eis] TO Vypov Kat
av&ouevov éË avro). Theodoret freely copies Euseb. gr.
aff. cur. v. 25, Zývæv 66 ó Kırieùs ó 7209€ THs aipécews
»yncdjevos Toraðe Tepl uyns Oofatew Tos oikeíovs
édidake dowrgrds: Tov yap Tow avOpwrivov Oopóv vypov
Óvra Kal peTéyovTa 7ueúuaTos THS Puys Epnoev eivai
pépos TE Kal amoomTagsna Kal TOD TOY TpoyovaY oTépuaTos
Képacua Te Kal piya é£ amávrov TOV THS Wuxs popiwv
cvvaO0powÜéy. Plut. de cohib. Ira, 15, kaitoi (xaOamep ó
Znvov ÉéXeye TO o Tépua cUppiypa Kal Képacua TAV THS
auyns Suvapéor vrapyew ameomaopévov) oro k.T.X.
ib. plac. v. 4. 1, Zývæv (ró oréppa) cdma Wuyns yap
eivau atootacua. Same in Galen, hist. phil. 31. xix.
322 K., cf. Galen, por tarp. 94 (XIX. 370 K.), cméppa éaviv
avOpwrou ò ueÜínowv avOpwros pef vypod >Aruyns uépovs
&pzaypa Kal cúppiypa Tod TOY Tpoyovwv yévous, olóv
TE AUTO HY Kal AUTO avuwxOev atrexplOn. Diog. vir. 158,
dvÜpexrov Sé oréppa, 0 weOinow ó dvOpwrros, pe?’ vypod
avykipvacGat (déyovow) Tots THs Wuys uépecu xarà
parypóv TOD TOV Tpoyovev Xóyov.

See also Zeller, p. 212, 213. Stein, Psych. n. 252,
collects the various points of resemblance between the
Stoics and the Hippocratean school of medicine.

ovhdnpoe : conceptum, cf. Sext. Math. v. 55 foll.

úe: is productive (not intrans) So perhaps in the
well known line: Hom. Il. vr. 149, ós avópóv ever, 7
pev iei ý Š arrodnyet. Otherwise, as re is not required

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 153

by the sense, we might suggest that reves arose from
dveras, cf. Diog. L. vit. 159, rv eis Tv yiv karta-
BaXXouévov oTeppárov à traratwbévta ovK ETL diera.
Cleanth. fr. 24, @omep yap évós Tivos Ta pépn mávra
pierar xT.. Diels suggests xepaoĝév re dves and Usener
Kpvha émio xe.

ds after aei is perhaps due to dittography.

107. Plut. plac. v. 5. 2, Znvov (rds Onretas) Anv
pèv vypav rpolea a4, olovel aro THs avyyvuvaaías (paras,
ov uv o7repuaukóv. The same in Galen, hist. phil. c. 31,
XIX. 322 K., cf. Diog. L. vir 159, rò è THs Onrelas
(c7répua) dyovoy aropaivovtar’ &rovóv ve yap eivau kai
OXbyov kai VdaT@bes, os 6 XLhaipos dyaiv.

ewepporwóv. Diels, p. 418 reads omépwa TemTucóuv.

108. Sext. Emp. adv. Math. IX. 133, Zyvwv dé xai
TOLOVTOY npwTa Xoyov: ToUs Üco)s EVAOYwS dv Tis TYLON.
Tovs dé u) dvTas ovK dv Tis EVAGYwS TIWN’ eiciv dpa
Geol. :
Sextus proceeds to describe the forced interpretation
which Diogenes of Babylon and others put upon Zeno's
words in order to get rid of the transparent sophistry
(ib. 133—136) Theon, Progymn. 12, p. 251 (Spengel,
Rhet. gr. p. 126, 16) gives proofs of the existence of the
gods, among which is: é£js óë ór. Kal rois codots 8oxei,
olov IIXdrovi, ' Apu ToTéXet, Zijvovt.

109. Lactant. de ira Dei c. 11, Antisthenes...unum
esse naturalem Deum dixit, quamvis gentes et urbes suos
habeant populares. Eadem fere Zeno cum suis Stoicis.
Cf. Philod. wep evoeB. p. 84 Gomp., ravtes ov oí amo
Znvevos, ei kai ázréNevrrov TÒ Sacpoviov...€va Oedv Aéyou-
ow eivat.

154 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

At first sight these passages are inconsistent with frag.
108, but in reality there is no such difficulty: cf. Athenag.
Suppl. c. 6, p. 73, quoted supra on frag. 45. The Stoics
strongly opposed the follies of the popular belief, while at
the same time they called attention to the germ of truth
which it contained, being no doubt anxious to preserve it
as a basis for morality. Zeller well observes, p. 347,
“Holding that the name of God belongs in its full and
original sense only to the one primary being, they did not
hesitate to apply it in a limited and derivative sense to
all those objects by means of which the divine power is
especially manifested." In testing how far this admission
goes, it should be observed that the Stoic in Cic. N. D. rr.
45 distinctly denies that the derivative gods are human
in shape, cf. Philod. vepi evoe8. p. 85 G., avOpwrrocióeis
yap éxeivoe oU vouítovcww GANA aépas kai Trevpata Kal
ai0épas. For Antisthenes cf. Philod. vepi evcef. p. 73 G.,
map ’Avticbéver Ò èv uév TO puoi Xéyera, TO Kara
vóuov eivau TroNXoUs cos, kara 66 búcu Eva.

110. Cic. N. D. r. 36, Cum vero Hesiodi eoyovíav
interpretatur, tollit omnino usitatas perceptasque cogniti-
ones deorum; neque enim Iovem neque Iunonem neque
Vestam neque quemquam qui ita appelletur in deorum
habet numero sed rebus inanimis atque mutis per quandam
significationem haec docet tributa nomina.

Hesiodi ®eoyoviav: Introd. p. 31.

lovem: see on frag. 111 and cf. Flach, Glossen u.
Scholien zur Hesiodischen Theogonie, p. 66.

Junonem = air : see infra and cf. Cic. N. D. 11. 66; she is
identified with air as being the wife of Iuppiter (— aether),
and air is regarded as feminine, quod nihil est eo mollius.
Similarly "Hp —air in Empedocles (R. and P. § 131). arp
is also one of Plato's derivations, who says the order of

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 155

the letters has been reversed, yvoins 9' àv ei ToNAGKLS
Aéyous TO THS” Hpas dvopa, Crat. p. 404 c.

Vestam: cf. N. D. r. 67. * Wahrscheinlich leitete
Zenon ihren Namen von éoravat ab und brachte hiermit,
anspielend auf den Altar der Hestia im Prytaneum, den
Stillstand der Erde im Mittelpunkt der Welt in Verbind-
ung.  Krische, p. 401.

This is perhaps the best place to refer to a supposed
fragment of Zeno contained in Philodem. mept 0eóv 8ua-
yoyns, Hercul. vol. vi. Tab. r. 1, «av» 98 «0» Zmnuvev
ÉcacTov «Tov Ücóv ameipa karéyew ón rd eve «Tr pua...
<oùk à»v cuvako<dovOe ei un TU TOV aiov«ov» Kal
à«£v» oda Quac» Üvcapecvos? ws pe<Tà rà»s Üeds. It
will be seen that so little of the papyrus is legible here
that the sense for which it is quoted by Zeller, p. 165
n. 5, is entirely due to the imagination of the Naples
editor. Prof. Scott (Fragm. Hercul. p. 181) rightly
characterises this as *gibberish," and wonders that Zeller
should have seriously quoted it: see also Wachsm. Comm.
L p. 9 n. If we are to follow the conjectures of the
Naples editor of this work of Philodemus, there are at
least three other fragments of Zeno preserved in it. In
no place but this, however, does the name of Zeno occur,
and, though the doctrines appear to belong to some Stoic,
there is no reason whatever for supposing that they
originated with Zeno. They will be found at Tab. rv. 7.
c. iv. col. I. c. xi. and ool. II. c. xii.

111. Minucius Felix Octav. 19. 10, Idem (Zeno)
interpretando Iunonem aera Iovem caelum Neptunum
mare ignem esse Vuleanum et ceteros similiter vulgi deos
elementa esse monstrando publicum arguit graviter et
revincit errorem.

lovem: it is clear that Zeus was identified with the

156 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

aether or pure fiery essence, of which caelum is here an
equivalent, as in Pacuvius ap. Cie. N. D. 11. 91, hoc quod
memoro nostri caelum Grai perhibent aethera. Cf. Chrysipp.
ap. Philod. zepi evdce8. p. 79 Gomp.,”"Hgasorov 96 rip
eivat...Aia dé Tov aidépa. Diog. L. vir. 147 God is the
creator of the universe, and, as it were, the father of all;
‘his various manifestations are described by different names.
Aía në yap act Òr bv rà mavra' Ziva 86 Kadodo Tap’
ócov ToD Cv altos otiw, 7) Sua TOD Shy kexopmnev......
"Hpav 86 kara thv eis dépa* kai “Hgavotov Kata thv eis
TO TeyvikOv TÜp' kai Iloceddéva Kata THY eis TO Úypov.
The extract from Minuc. Felix lends some slight weight
to Krische's theory (p. 398) that the whole of Diogenes'
description is ultimately derived from Zeno. The same
writer thinks that the explanation of the myths of the
mutilation of Uranus and the binding of Cronos (Cic.
N. D. 11. 63, 64) belongs to Zeno.

ignem. Diogenes’ vp rexvikóv is, according to Krische,
a blunder: Hephaestus is elsewhere identified with earthly
fire (rjv Prova in Plut. de Iside c. 66, for which however
see on Cleanth. frag. 23) But see Zeller, p. 359, 1.
These explanations were not novelties introduced by the
Stoa, except in so far as they were specially adapted to Stoic
dogmas. Cf. Sext. Math. 1x. 18 (after citing Euhemerus
and Prodicus), «ai dua ToÜTo Tov peéev prov Anuntpay
von Ovar Tov 66 oivov Arovucoy v0 06 bdwp Iloceióóva
To 8é rip" HdjaioTov iai 70 TGv eUxyprarovvrov ExacTor.

112. Valer. Probus in Virg. Ecl. vi. 31, p. 21, 14 Keil:
sunt qui singulis elementis principia adsignaverunt...
Thales Milesius magister eius (Anaximenis) aquam. Hane
quidem Thaletis opinionem ab Hesiodo putant manare
qui dixerit: 7/rou uév rper Ta, YAOS YÉVET , avràp &revra.
Nam Zenon Citieus sic interpretatur aquam dos ap-

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 157

pellatum azo Tod yéecPar, quamquam eandem opinionem
ab Homero possumus intellegere quod ait 'Qeavóv Te
Gedy yéverw xai umTépa TnOvv. This frag. is cited by
Wachsmuth Comm. 1. p. 11, who adds “eadem originatio
est apud Achill. Tat., Isag. in Arat. phaen. 3. 125 e. Petav."

The lines of Hesiod, Theog. 116 foll. are often quoted,
e.g. by Plato, Symp. 178 B, to prove the antiquity of love,
and by Ar. Met. r. 4. 1 as an indication that Hesiod
recognised both the efficient and the final cause, Aris-
totle also refers to the passage in Phys. 1v. 1 and de Caelo
m1. 1. 298 b. 25, and Krische suggests (p. 395) that the
applieation which is put upon it by him in the latter
place prevented Zeno from identifying ydos with his own
mpeTn UAn as might have been expected. Cf. also the
aneedote related of Epicurus in Sext. Math. x. 18, 19.

dmà roô xéo0a. Krische l. c. remarks that this deri-
vation is probably referred to in Plat. Cratyl. 402 B
where Socrates, after saying that Heraclitus likened all
things to a flowing river, and that Homer's line showed
that he was of the same opinion, proceeds: o2uac 96 Kal
“Haiodos.

113. Schol on Apoll Rhod. r 498, kai Zrjvev dé TÓ
map ‘“Howda yaos vdwp cvai mou, ob cvvitavovros
¿AMD yiver Oat, Hs Tnyvuwéerns 9?) y) oTepepvioðTat. TplTov
5é"Epota yeyovévar ca? 'Haío8ov, (va Tó rip Tapaothon
Tupwoéatepov yap Talos Epos.

This passage shows clearly that Zeno must have re-
jected or been ignorant of ll. 118 and 119 of the Theog.
see Krische, p. 396.

xáos. See on frag. 112 and add Cornut. c. 17, p. 85
Osann, gore 8é xdos uév TÒ mpd THS SvaKocpHoEwWs ye-
vópevov úypóv, amo THS XUaeos OUTS avopacévov.

Uv: similar views with regard to the formation of the

158 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

earth are attributed to Xenophanes. Hippolyt. 1.14, ratra
Sé moi yevécbas re mávra éernrAGOncay Taxa, Tov B6
TóTOv èv To THAM EnpavOnvar K.T.. and to Anaxagoras
(Zeller, pre-Socratics 1. p. 356). Hence Zeno himself
spoke of earth as ózroocTra0um mávrov, frag. 114.

mupwSéorepov: a familiar comparison. Pind. P. Iv. 219
Medea év $paci kavouévav. Virg. Aen. rv. 68, uritur in-
felix Dido. Georg. 11. 244, in furias ignemque ruunt:
amor omnibus idem. Cf. Schol. ad Hes. Theog. 120, 78
pos...€viot 86 mÜp* TÒ Tupwdes yap THs émiÜvpías.

The authorities give two further Stoic explanations of
Hesiod’s Eros; (1) with a reference to Xóyos arreppaTiKos.
Cornut. c. 17, p. 86 Osann, 6 òè "Epos ody avtois reyovévat
€ppnOn, 1) ópuz) mè trò yevvdy. (2) Fire regarded as
ovvextixn Gvapus: Schol. ad Hes. Theog. 120, rà Tpía
c'rouxeta. eizrày TÒ 8 Xéyev TÒ Tp rep Gawovíos čporá
not, cuvappole yap kai cvvayew ai évodv mépuxev.
On the passage generally cf. Flach, Glossen u. Scholien,
p. 37, who attributes to Zeno the words in the Schol. on
l. 115, èx 86 rod ÜOaTos éyévovro Tà cTouyxeta, yh KaTa
ouvitnow, d»p Kata avadoow’ TÓ 96 Xemrouepés Tod
dépos yéyove Trip, Ta 66 dpn Kata éfooTpakwuóv THS YÀS,
which appear also in Cornut. c. 17, p. 84 Osann. This is
likely enough, but there is no direct evidence. The same
remark applies to the derivation of Kpóvos from póvos
id. p. 44 (cf. Cic. N. D. 1r. 64). Flach refers many other
definitions to Zeno: a list of some of them will be found
at p. 48 of his work, but those of his inferences which are
not supported by direct evidence cannot be dealt with
here.

114. Schol on Hes. Theog. 117, Zývæv 86 ó Xros
èx Tod vypod THY vmocTáÜuqQv yiv yeyevvoðaí now,
tplrov 66 "Epwta yeyovévat, ó0ev ó éraryóuevos abereirat

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 159

eixos. Cf. Diog. L. vir. 187, brocrabunyv 06 mávrov
THY yiv, né qv dàmávrov o?cav.

Wachsmuth connects this with frag. 113. For the
general sense cf. frag. 52. The word v-oera0a is Platonic

(Phaed. 109 c).

115. Schol on Hes. Theog. 134 Gaisf. Gr. Poet. Min.
IL 482, 6 Znvov Qoi ros Torávas diva mavròs eiproOat
Ta aTovyeia TOD kócjuov. Kotov yap Xéyet THY ToLOTHTA
` ` > \ ^ ` \ K ^ 8é ^
Kata TpoT?v 'AioXucv tod T mpòs TO K, Kpetov dé TO
Bacirtxov kai "yejovcucóv, ‘Trepiova 06 Tu dvo Kivnow
amò Tod virepave iévat  émel 06 grow ever maura và
, > Z / y \ ^ t 3qu
Bapn dduégueva mimTtew &voOev Tò TovodTov eios "Idmrerov
ékaXece.
movotyta, frag. 53. mávra rà Bápn, frag. 67. Bdpn...dvalev...
«Bos: so Flach, p. 223 after Schoemann. The old reading
was Kodda...dvw...épos. Osann suggested imrew for
mimrew. Cf. Cornut. c. 17, p. 91 Osann, otros vid T@v
^ 3 , A > / € , P `
mararðv latreros èv @uonaoc 0] ó Aóyos xaO òv bounrTucd
` ^ / x. € € , > / Sis if
Ta baa éyéveto Kal bros ó *Jróios dvrereXéo 0n, idherós Tus
Mole 3^ \ € , ^ Ñ ? A At Nas
av’ ià yap ) pov. Koios óë xa? Ov Tota Twa Ta Üvra
éoti’ TQ yap k TOANaYOD ot loves dvri TOD T yp@vTat...
Kpios Šë xaf’ dy rà èv pyet kai Svvactever THY Tpay-
patov ta 8 vrorérakra, Kal duvvacteveras’ évreüÜev Taxa
Kal Tod èv rois Trouuviots KpLoD rpocayopevouévov. “Trrep-
lov òè kaf dv Urepava Tua érépov 7epvropeúera, See

Flach, Glossen u. Scholien zur Hes. Th. p. 42 foll.

116. Schol. on Hes. Theog. 139, Gaisf. Gr. Poet. Min.
IL 484. KüxXomas. Znvev 06 máMw d$vowerépos Tas
éykvKM/ovs popas eipjoOai pno cò Kal rà Ovóuara
tovtay éEéÜero Bpovrny te kai Zrepómmv' “Apyny oe
émresdy pact Tov apyita kepavvóv' taidas Qé $mow
avtovs Tod Otpavod rei) mávra tadta Tà 409 ep,

160 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

TÓv ovpavoy eici...[év wpóve yap Tu, éeyévovTo &yKuUKNOL
Tepipopat Tov Trvpós éx TOD aépos].

Flach’s arrangement of the text is quite different: he
inserts the words év ypovw—aépos after eipjabai mou,
altering opas into srepijopás. See his interpretation,
p. 90.

éykvkMovs dopds. The band of aether which formed the
external stratum of the world revolved in a circle round
it. Stob. Ecl. r. 14. 15 p. 142, 13, rò ai0épvov (pas) mept-
$epós xiveitat. In the matter of the revolving aether
Zeno followed Aristotle, whose quinta essentia is described
by Sextus as rò xvkXodopmurukóv oda (Pyrrh. Ir. 31).
Aristotle himself approves of the Platonic derivation from
del Üciv and censures Anaxagoras for referring it to al0w
(de Caelo 1. 2); see also Krische, p. 306 foll.

Bpóvrmv te Kal ZXrepómq. Wachsmuth says :—“immo
Bpóvrqv te kai cTepómmu, but surely Hesiod is the
subject to é£é0ero as to you below. riOecGar dvoua is
used regularly of the father: e.g. Isae. 11. 8 36, re èug
Tadiw é0éumu TO dvowa TO ékeívov.

èv xpóvo «rd. These words cannot belong to Zeno,
unless Flach's view of the passage is adopted, as they
are inconsistent with the rest of the explanation.

117. Philod. sepi e/ce. col 8, r<od>s 96 opOodrs
<doy>ous Kai o7rovOa(as Siabécers AvocKxovpous.

From the position of these words in the fragments of
Philodemus mepi evoeBeias it appears probable that they
belong to Zeno: see on frag. 40. Gomperz however p. 74
puts a full stop after d:abécess.

ép8ois Adyous: see Introd. p. 8, and for the ethical
importance of the expression Stein, Erkenntnistheorie,
p. 259 foll. Cic. Tusc. Iv, 34, ipsa virtus brevissime recta
ratio dici potest.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 161

8w8éres are opposed to é£eus as “permanent forms
admitting neither of increase nor diminution,” Zeller,
p. 103. Thus intellectual goods are divided into (1)
virtues = dvabécess, (2) avrovóaías €Ëess such as pavteKn,
and (3) évauverds évepyeias = ovre &Eeis ore Siabécers,
such as $povíuevua, Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 5, e and f, Diog. vir.
98, Cleanth. frag. 51, c£. Sext. Pyrrh. rr. 243, aùr) yap 7
ppoviun 6.40ecis akaráXsymrós éote ure eË ars amas
Kal avró0ev $auvouévm wire éx Tav épywv a)Tüs' Kowa
yap cti tadta kai TOv idvwtdv. For the distinction
between é&s and 8:440eois in Aristotle see Wallace on de
An, II. 5. 417 b. 15.

Avockoóposs: explained physically by Xenophanes as
clouds made to shine by their movement (Stob. Ecl. 1. 24.
1" p. 204, 18). See also the explanations cited by Sext.
Math. 1x. 37. 86: the latter passage appears to be Stoic,
as recognising the belief in demons.

118. Diog. L. vir. 149, kai wv kai pavtixny údec-
Tavat Tacav bacu, ei kal Trpóvotav cvai’ kai aUTIv Kal
Téyvqv atrobalvovar dud Twas ékB dae, s nor Zijvov.

pavrixy. The Stoic definition was as follows: Stob.
Ecl. 11 7. 5b 12, p. 67, 16, eiva, 8e THY pavtixny pasow
emo Trium Ocopnruerv onuciwv TOV amo Gedy 7) Gauuóvov
mpos 66 avOperwov Bíov evvrewovrov. Substantially the
same in Sext. Math. rx. 132.

& ka. Others read 7j xa, reversing the argument: in
fact, the Stoics seem to have appealed to the truth of
pavtixn as a proof of the existence of God, no less than
vice versa. See the references in Zeller, pp. 175, 3;
372, 2 and 3.

Téxvm». They prove that it is an art by the truth of
certain results, cf. Cic. de Divin. r. 23, Quid? quaeris,
Carneades, cur haec ita fiant aut qua arte perspici possint ?

E. P. 11

162 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Nescire me fateor, evenire autem te ipsum dico videre.
That its professors are sometimes deceived does not in-
validate the title of divination as an art (ib. § 24),
CPA NI0]) ur. 612. ^

ETHICA.

119. Diog. L. vir. 84, rò óë c0ucóv uépos THs duXo-
coóías Svacpovow els Te TOV "epi dpuns Kal eis TOY Trepi
ayaĵðv Kal rarðv TOTroV Kal eis TOV Tepl vraÜóv Kal Trepi
apetis Kal Trepi TéXovs Tepi re THS TpwWTNS aklas Kal TOV
mpakewy Kal "epi TÓv kaÜnkóvrov tTpotpoTay Te Kal
amotrporðv' kai ovTw Ò virodiatpodowy of Trepi Xpvoummov
kal Apyédnuov kai Znvwva tov Tapoéa k.r.X. 6 pèv yap
Kuriebs Zyvæv kai ó KXedvOns ws àv apyaorepot aderéo-
Tepov Tepl TOV Trpatryparov O.éXafov.

There is a full discussion of this passage in Zeller,
p. 223, 1: its difficulties, however, do not affect Zeno or
Cleanthes.

120. Diog. L. vil. 87, Oióvrep patos 0 Zývæv èv TO
^ 3 , , , ^ ` € / ^
mept avÜpevov búceoçs TéXos cime TO Ou oXoyovuévos TH
cer iv, orep otl kar apetny Env’ yet yap mpos
TavTny nuas 17) vows. Lactant. Inst. m1. 7, Zenonis
(summum bonum) cum natura congruenter vivere. id.
HI. 8, audiamus igitur Zenonem; nam is interdum vir-
tutem somniat. Summum, inquit, est bonum cum natura
consentanee vivere. Stob. Ecl. n. 7. 6%, p. 75, 11, ro òè
R € ` , Uu ERU CR Ad Ie /
Télos 6 èv Zývæv obTwos améðwre ‘TO Opmodoyoupévas
A1 3 ^ ,» »y > 4 , M , ^ e
Eñv’ Toro Ò čori kaf Eva Xoyov Kat aUVjdoevov Ehv, ws
TéV payopévøs Covrov KakodamovovyTey. Plut. Comm.
Not. 23, 1, ovyt xai Zývæv Toúrous (sciL Peripatetics)
5»koXovOnaev úmoTtiÂeuévois cTovyeia THS EVOaymovias THY
ucu kal to Kata ocu. (Cf. Cic. Fin. Iv. 72, videsne
igitur Zenonem tuum cum Aristone verbis consistere,

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 163

re dissidere; cum Aristotele et illis re consentire, verbis
discrepare? ib. v. 88) Clem. Alex. Strom. rr. 21. 129,
p. 496 P., 179 S., radu 9 aù Zyvov pev ò Xrow0g TéXos
nyeirat TÒ Kat áper?)v Env, cf. Cic. Fin. 1v. 14, hunc ipsum
Zenonis aiunt esse finem, declarantem illud, quod a te
dictum est, convenienter naturae vivere (where see Madv.):
ib. rr. 21, summum ...bonum, quod cum positum sit in eo,
quod óuoXoryíav Stoici, nos appellemus convenientiam, etc.

There is à conflict of testimony here between Diog.
and Stob. as to whether Cleanthes added the words c7
gvce to Zeno's definition or found them there already.
On the whole the fact that Diogenes quotes from a
named book of Zeno's makes his authority the more trust-
worthy. So Wellmann, l. c. pp. 446—448, cf. Krische,
p. 372, 3. Ueberweg, p. 199, adds that Diog.’s state-
ment is all the more credible, because Speusippus,
Polemo, and Heraclitus had enounced similar principles.
Zeller, p. 228, 2, does not decide the point. Hirzel, rm.
p. 105—112, argues the question at some length and
decides in favour of Stobaeus, but his arguments are
always biassed by the desire to vindicate the originality
of Cleanthes.. See also Introd. p. 14.

121. Plut. fragm. de an. ed. Wyttenb. v*. p. 899, xai
oike.oc eos TACNS Kal aXXoTpuóaeos apy?) TO aic Üavea0a,
...06 ATÒ Znvevos.

This frag. has been taken from Stein, Erkenntnis-
theorie, p. 271. Although we cannot with certainty
attribute to Zeno a statement, which is only expressed
to belong to oí ard Znvevos, yet there is no reason why
he should not have taught this. The soul at birth is only
open to the impressions of sensation, and its first impulse
is towards self-preservation. Cf. Plut. Sto. Rep. 12, 5,
p. 1038 c, aN’ ob? aicOncis stw ois pndev aic@nror,

153

on

p

164 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

ws PS PISA 7 \ Jm Rene \ 3v y
oUT oikeiwous ols under oiketov' 7) yap oikeiwsis ao Tots
14 ^ / -
čoike ToU OLKEloU kai avTiAn is elvat,

122. Porphyr. de Abstin. ur. 19, vv è oixeiwow
dpx?)v TiÂevrar Sixatocvyns oi amd Zivevos.
Sixatordvy is one of the four cardinal virtues (see infra.

|e frag. 134) and is founded on oixeiwots in the same sense

ww .

as aper) generally. The natural impulse of every animal
is towards self-preservation, so that it seeks after those
things which are cata úc and shuns those which are
mapa dvow. Diog. L. vir. 85; Cic. Fin. ur. 16; Alex.

‘Aphr. de an. p. 150, 28 ed. Bruns. oí uév ody XTwewoli ov

mavtes 06 Aéyovoiw prov oiKelov eivat TO Gov avT@”
éxactov yap ov evOds wevónevov mpós TE AUTO oikei-
ochar, kai Or Kal Tov dvOpwrov' oi O6 xapiéoTepov
8okoÜvres Xéyew avTaY Kal wadrXov StapOpodv Trepi TovdE
pacw mpos THY cvoTacW Kal THpHnoW wKEL@dcOaL evOUs
yevouévovs nuas tiv nuov avTOv. Stob. Ecl. rr 7. 13,
p. 118, 11 (where the doctrine is attributed to the Peri-
patetics) For rà mpõra cata dvow, see Madv. de Fin.
Exc. Iv. and especially p. 818°, “ Stoici...ita disputabant,
ut, quae postea demum, orto subito rationis lumine, quod
in infante nondum esset accensum, et animadversa con-
stantia convenientiaque naturae, nasceretur voluntas cum .
natura consentiendi, in qua et virtus et perfectio rationis
esset, eam omnino a prima conciliatione dirimerent,
bonumque constituerent, quod expeteretur, a primis, quae
appeterentur, genere seiunctum."

123. Epict. diss. r. 20. 14, kaíro, avros uév ô mpon-
yoUpevos Aóyos TOV Hitocddwv Xíav éeriv OALyoS. ei
OéXews yvadvat, avayvabs Tà Zývwvos, kai der’ Tí yap
x” ^ 5 A tf lá > Sere ^ Lm :
Exe paxpov eiretv OTL TéNos éa TL TO ErrecOat Ocoîs, ovaía
Ò ayabod ypiows ola Set Davracióv ;

5

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 165

mponyoupevos Aóyos, “leading doctrine”: not in the
technical sense to be noticed on frag. 169.

émeoOar 0eots is only another way of expressing duoroyla
Tj dvoe. This passage furnishes an argument in support
of the view taken in the Introd. p. 14 as to the character
of Zeno's $vous.

$avracwóv. Zeno went back to the Socratic doctrine
that virtue is knowledge, so that it is not surprising to
find that his epistemology is brought into connection with
practical morality. That particular class of impressions

na E D
which is directed towards the performance of some moralL--
action gives rise to corresponding ópyuai in the soul, cfi ©

Stob. Ecl. rt. 7. 9, p. 86. 17, rò òè xivoOv thy ópumu ovdév
Érepov eivat Aéyovow aAN 9 Davracíav ópumruv Tov
KaOnxovros aŭróĝev. Virtue consists in the proper direction
of these ópuai in accordance with the dictates of 0p60s
Aóvyos: hence Diog. L. vil. 86 says of reason :—teyvirns
yap obTos émuyiyvetas THS Opus, cf. Cleanth. frag. 66.
The doctrine depends on the freedom of the assent: supra,
frag. 19, cf. Stob. Ecl. 1r. 7. 95, p. 88, 1, wacas 9é Tas
óppds cvycatabécers elvat, Tas 66 rpakrucds Kal TO KINTI-
«àv Tepiéyeiw, and see Windelband in Miiller’s Handbuch,
V. 295. Stem, Erkenntnistheorie, pp. 166, 167, points
out that the ethical application of $avrac(a: is very often
mentioned by the younger Stoics, although not unknown
in the earlier period, cf. Diog. VII. 48, date eis axoopiay
Kal eiKaloTnTa Tpémeo Qa, Tovs ayupvacTous Éxyovras Tas
pavtacias.

124. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 6°, p. 77, 20, rjv dé evGauuoviav
ó Zývæv wpicato tov tporov rolrov' evdapovia Ó écviv
eUpora Biov. Sext. Math. XI. 30, evdammovia 0é stw, ws
[7d M ` , ` , ` bd , 3 /
ot te mepi Tov Zijvova kai KrXeavOnv kai Xpvourmov aré-

8ocav, eùpora Biov. Cf. Cleanth. frag. 74, Diog. vir. 88.

a

we
Ate
van
nde

166 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

M. Aurel. rr. 5, v. 9, X. 6. evdacpovia is not identical with
TéXos, which rather consists in rò Tvye(v THs evdatmovias.

125. Diog. vil. 127, avrapxn eivat apetny “pos
evoatmoviay, Kaba gdnot Zynvwv. August. contra Acad.
ut. 7. 16, clamat Zenon et tota illa porticus tumultuatur
hominem natum ad nihil esse aliud -quam honestatem ;
ipsam suo splendore in se animos ducere, nullo prorsus
commodo extrinsecus posito et quasi lenocinante mercede ;
voluptatemque illam Epicuri solis inter se pecoribus esse
communem; in quorum societatem et hominem et sapi-
entem tendere nefas esse. August. de trin. XII. 5. 8,
diximus ibi quosque posuisse beatam vitam quod eos
maxime delectavit...ut virtus Zenonem. Cic. Fin. v. 79, a
Zenone hoc magnifice tamquam ex oraculo editur : * virtus
ad bene vivendum seipsa contenta est." Cf. Acad. r. 7, 35 ;
IL 134, 135; Paradox. 11. This position was borrowed
from the Cynics, Introd. p. 19.

126. Cic. Fin. Iv. 47, errare Zenonem, qui nulla in re
nisi in virtute aut vitio propensionem ne minimi quidem
momenti ad summum bonum adipiscendum esse diceret,
et, eum ad beatam vitam nullum momentum cetera habe-
rent, ad appetitionem tamen rerum esse in iis momenta
diceret. ib. 1v. 60, Zeno autem quod suam quod propriam
speciem habeat cum appetendum sit, id solum bonum
appellat, beatam autem vitam eam solam, quae cum
virtute degatur.

This point constitutes the main gist of Cicero's argu-
ment against the Stoic virtue in de Fin. Iv., viz. that
while the rpéra xarà $ci are an object of desire, they
have no weight in the explanation of virtue itself. Madvig
points out (1) that Cicero has throughout confused the
-Stoic prima constitutio, which excludes virtue, with that

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 167

of Antiochus which includes it, (2) that throughout the
Fourth Book he attributes far more importance to the
doctrine of oixetwors than the Stoics themselves did
(pp. 820, 821), and (3) that he fails to notice the Stoic
distinction between rò Tvyxydvew TÓv Kata dvow and
TO mavra Tove Éveka Tod Tv'yyávew avrdv (Stob. Ecl.
II. 7. 6%, p. 76. 13; Plut. Sto. Rep. c. 26; Cic. Fin. 11. 22).
On the subject in general see Zeller, p. 278 foll. For the
nature of the mpra xarà $vciv cf. Stob. Ecl. r 7. 3°,
p.47. 12 £.; ib. 7°, p. 80. 9; 7%, p. 82. 12. The position of
Zeno will eee to be considered with reference to the
mponyueva, where the same inconsistency appears.

aut vitio: these words were bracketed by some of the
edd. and are, of course, logically indefensible, but see
Madv.

127. Cic. Tusc. rr. 29, Nihil est, inquit (Zeno), malum,
nisi quod turpe atque vitiosum est... Numquam quidquam,
inquit (scil. doleas necne interest) ad beate quidem vi-
vendum, quod est in una virtute positum, sed est tamen
reiciendum. Cur? Asperum est, contra naturam, difficile
perpessu, triste, durum. ib. v. 27, si Stoicus Zeno diceret
qui nisi quod turpe esset, nihil malum duceret. Cf. ib.
IL. 15.

In Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5°, p. 58, 14, we read aváXoyov òè
TOV kakQv rà uev civar karlas, rà Ò ov, and the examples
given of the latter class are Am and óoños. This occurs
in the course of a passage which Wachsmuth attributes
to Zeno, but see on frag. 128. Just before this, in what is
clearly Zeno's classification of dya@a and xaxa, we find
7/907) classed among the a9w4opa, cf. Diog. L. vir. 103,
and this agrees with the statement in the present passage
that dolor is an azro7pomnyuévov. So dolor is classed in
Cic. Fin. rm. 51, where Zeno’s name appears in the

168 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

immediate context, and it is to be observed that the
corresponding srpomyuévov in that passage is not 700v»)
but *doloris vacuitas. The entire subject of the relation
which the emotions bear to the classification of dya@a
and xaxa is extremely obscure, and the ancient authorities
are not only defective but, as we have seen, contradictory.
See Introd. p. 46, where this passage should have been
referred to. Zeller's account is not clear on this point:
at p. 253 he apparently asserts that the emotions are to
be classed as kaxa.

128. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5*, p. 57, 18, radr’ eival dnow ó
Zývav boa oÚc las ueréye,, TOV Ò üvrov rà uv ayaba, Ta
dé kara, rà 66 adiadopa. ayala uév rà ToLadTa’ bpoumou,
cwppocvrny, Oucatocivqv, avdpelav kai Tay 6 éew aper)
j peréxov dper?s' Kaka 86 Ta TotaOTa' appoovyny, aro-
Aaclav, adiciav, Serdiav, kai wav 6 oTi karia ?) ueréyov
kakías' adiahopa O6 Ta ToiaÜra' Conv Oavatov, dofav
dGo£íav, vróvov ndovnv, TNODTOY Teviav, vócov vyleLay, Kal
TA TOVTOLS Gola.

Substantially the same account appears in Diog. L.
vIr. 101, 102, where Hecaton, Apollodorus, and Chrysippus
are referred to as authorities.

tov 8' övrov «tA. This classification is attributed by
Sext. Math. x1. 3, 4, to the Old Academy, the Peripatetics,
and the Stoics in common: he quotes from Xenocrates,
may TO dv ù ayabov éotiw  KaKdv éotw 3) ovTE ayabov
éotw oUTe kakov stiv. In the same passage he states
that the name dôrapopov was applied to the third class
by all three schools, but probably this is a mistake, as all
the other evidence points to Zeno as having been the
first to use the word in this special ethical sense. On
the other hand, there is not much likelihood in Hirzel’s
opinion (IL p. 45 n.) that Aristotle was the first to in-

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 169

troduce the term ddvadopov, and that Zeno spoke of
péca.

dpdvacw «rd. cf. frag. 134.

máy Š terw dpery : cf. Sext. Math. XI. 77, àXXov m Znvor,
de o Thy apetnv dya0óv eivai 8e0ófakev. ib. 184, Kao
Kal opifopevot tives éË avtav dacw ayabov stw dperr) Ù
TO peréyov apers. The meaning of petéyov aperñs is
made clear by Diog. L. vir. 94, 95, where it is explained
as including actions in accordance with virtue, and good
men: the converse is true of ueréxov Kaxias.

WSovyv: cf. Aul. Gell. rx. 5,5. Zeno censuit voluptatem
esse indifferens, id est neutrum neque bonum neque malum,
quod ipse Graeco vocabulo advagopov appellavit. For the
attitude of the Stoics towards the Epicurean summum
bonum see Wellmann lc. pp. 449, 450. Heinze; de
Stoicorum affectibus p. 37, doubts, without sufficient
ground, whether Gellius' statement is accurate, thinking
that Zeno would rather have classed :58ov? among the
kaka. It wil be observed that, omitting vróvov ndovny,
every pair of advddopa here mentioned contains a mpony-
uévov and an atromponypévor, and that, except in the case of
vócov vyieuav (which Wachsm. transposes), the vpomyuévov
is mentioned first. We should naturally suppose the
same to be the case with 58ovy and sróvos, but which
then is the vrpowyuévov? Wachsmuth evidently thinks
7d0vy, since he transposes the words, and at first sight
Diog. L. vit. 102 is conclusive. But it should be observed
that Hecaton is the main authority there cited, and there
is reason to believe that this was one of the points on
which the view of the School altered as time went on.
With Zeno and Cleanthes, at least, it seems better to
suppose that zóvos is the zrpowyuévov, and 758ov) the
aToTponyuévov, and that 56ov» is contrasted with movos
rather than with Xv, because the latter certainly belonged

N

170 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

to the class of amomponypéva (frag. 127). For móvos cf.
Diog. L. vit. 172, Adkevós Tivos eimóvTos bTL Ó Tróvos
ayabov, Svayvbeis pnow (KXedvOms) atuaros eis ayaQoto
díXov téxos, Zeno, frag. 187, and for 7Sov7 cf. Sext. Math.
XI. 73, oí 86 amo THs ctoas advadopoy (scil. ndovnv eivat
faci) kai ov mponypévov. Cleanth. frag. 88.

Wachsmuth would continue to Zeno the passage follow-
ing this in Stobaeus down to p. 59. 3, but the evidence
is against this. The prominence given to ioys Wrvxrjs
rather points to an origin subsequent in date to Cleanthes,
and Avan and $óflos are here classed as xaxa, which is
inconsistent with frag. 127, not to speak of jov) in the
present fragment.

129. Senec. Epist. 82, 7, Zenon noster hac collec-
tione utitur: “Nullum malum gloriosum esse; mors
autem gloriosa est; mors ergo non est malum."

In the subdivision of the adupopa death belongs
to the azomponyuéva Diog. L. vit. 106; cf. Cic. Fin. tt.
29, ut enim, qui mortem in malis ponit, non potest eam
non timere, sic nemo ulla in re potest id, quod malum esse
decreverit, non curare idque contemnere.

130. Cic. Acad. I. 36, Cetera autem, etsi nec bona
nec mala essent, tamen alia secundum naturam dicebat
(Zeno), alia naturae esse contraria. His ipsis alia inter-
iecta et media numerabat. Quae autem secundum natu-
ram essent, ea sumenda et quadam aestimatione dignanda
dicebat, contraque contraria; neutra autem in mediis
relinquebat, in quibus ponebat nihil omnino esse momenti.

In this and the following §§ of Cicero it is unsafe to
attribute entirely to Zeno the summary of Stoic doctrines
there set forth, in the absence of other testimony pointing
in the same direction. At the same time there is no

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 171

reason a priori why Zeno should not have sub-divided
adidgopa into (1) ta xara drow, (2) ta mapa dict, and
(3) rà kalara advadopa = media, or have identified +a
Kata buo with Anrra or rà a£(av éyovra, and Ta Tapa
gvow with ddnrra or rà amaiav éyovra. Cf. Stob. Ecl.
Ip. 92, 115.75, p. 84, 3.

131. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 7%, p. 84, 21, røv Ò a£(av éxyóvrov
Ta pèv éyew TorAnY a£(av rà dé pa xeiav. ópoiws dé Kal
Tov amatíav éxoóvrev à uév ëyew ToXN)v dra£íav, à Që
Bpaxetav. Ta uév oûv TodAnY Éxyovra agiav mpowyuéva
eye Oat, rà SE TOAAHY atraklay amomponyuéva, Znvevos 5
Tatas Tas ovopacias Üeuévov Tporov Tois Tpáypuaact.
mponypévov © elvar Xévyovauv, 0 advapopov «Ov» ékXeyópeÜa
kata Tponyovpevoy Xóyov. Tov O6 Opotov Xoyov él TQ
aToTpomyuéve «iva. kal Ta Tapaéetyuara Kata THY
dvaXoyíav TavTd. ovdev 06 THY ayaÜ0dv elvat mponyuévov 1
did TÒ THY ueyio mv a£iav avrà ëyew. TO dé mpowyuévov, |
Tv Oevrépav xopav kai a£íav éxov, cvveyyítfew Tos TH |
rv d'yaÜdv düsev ovðè yap. v aUMj töv Tpowyuévov
eivau Tov Baciiéa dXXd TOs per aj/róv rmeraryuévovs.
mponypéva 66 Néyea Oat où TO Tpds évOauuovíav Tia ovp- 15
Barrecbar cvvepreiv Te pós avTHV, GANA TO avayKaiov
civar ToUTOV THY exAOYNY Troueto Qa, Tapa TA amomponypéva.
Plut. Sto. Rep. 30,1. Some of the rperBvrepox said that
Zeno's mponymévov was in as bad a way as the sour wine,
which its owner could not dispose of as wine or vinegar:
so the pomyuévov is neither an dyaĝðv nor an aĝıd-
popor.

4,  moXMjv čxovra á£av. In Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 71, p. 83, 10
every thing which is in accordance with nature is said
d£íav éyew. Diog. L. vil. 105 identifies zponyuéva with
ta éyovta a£íav, Sext. Emp. Math. xr. 62 with rà ¿wauu
iav éyovta, cf. Stob. Ecl. rt. 7. 7°, p. 80, 17. Cicero's

172 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO,

phrase, Acad. r. 37 (sed quae essent sumenda ex iis alia
pluris esse aestimanda, alia minoris), is of doubtful import :
see Reid in loc. In Fin. rr. 51 we have:—quae autem
aestimanda essent, eorum in aliis satis esse causae, quamob-
rem quibusdam anteponerentur, where Madvig remarks
that none of the authorities give examples of those things
which are Aņmra without being mponypéva.

9. Zrivevos: apart from the evidence of Stob. and
Plut. it is clear that the szrpomyuéva must have formed
part of Zeno's system from the fact that Aristo expressly
dissented from him on this point (Cic. Acad. rr. 130), cf.
Cic. Fin. rrr. 51. According to Hirzel p. 418 the word was
discarded by the later Stoics, and ev’ypnora substituted
by Posidonius,

8. mponyodpevov Aóyov : See on frag. 169.

+ dmompomypéve: SO Wachsmuth for TO dro pony wevov
MSS. Heeren reads tév—ov.

13. o8: ydp èv atdq: cf. Cic. Fin. 111. 52, ut enim, inquit
(Zeno), nemo dicit in regia regem ipsum quasi productum
esse ad dignitatem—id est enim rpomyuévov—sed eos qui
in aliquo honore sunt, quorum ordo proxime accedit, ut
secundus sit, ad regium principatum, sic in vita non ea,
quae primario loco sunt, sed ea, quae secundum locum
obtinent, mponypéva, id est, producta nominentur.

Tóy mponypévov: so Madv. ad de Fin. Lc. for MSS. rov
mpoayópevov: he is followed by Wachsmuth. Hirzel Ir
p. 823 prefers zrporyovuévov.

15. twa: so MSS. rivi Davies. <poîpav> twa Hense.

16. te: Mein. z; MSS.

dd rô «rA. On the subject of the zpomyuéva in
general consult Zeller, pp. 278—287. This sentence con-
tains the gist of the Stoic position in the matter. Al-
though sickness e.g. does not impede the happiness of the

| wise man, since he is secure in the possession of virtue, it
i

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. «iom

prefer health to sickness, cf. Stob. Ecl ir 7. 7, p. 79,

is at the same time impossible ceteris paribus not to |
12—17.

132. Diog. L. VII. 120, apéones te avtois ica Wiyeto Dat
Ta ápaptýpata, Kaba dnov...Znvwv. Sext. Math. vir
422, kdvreÜÜUev óppøpevot of "repi Tov Zujvova edidacKov
ór. loa strì Ta awaptnwata, Cic. Mur. § 61, omnia
peccata esse paria (among the sententiae et praecepta
Zenonis) Lactant. Inst. 11. 23, Zenonis paria peccata
quis probat ?

Cf. Cic. Paradox. m1. Hor. Sat. r. 3. 120 foll. Both
Sextus and Diog. give as the ground for this doctrine an:
argument from the relation of truth to falsehood. As one
true thing cannot be more true or one false thing more
false than another in respect of its truth or falsity, so one
sin cannot be more sinful than another. dpaprtnpa is the
correlative of xarópÜceua and is defined as Tò rapa tov
ópÜóv Xówyov parTÓuevov, j) èv @ mapaXéXevrrat TL
KaOnKov út NoytKod Egov, Stob. Ecl. rt. 7. 11*, p. 93, 16. `
See further Zeller, p. 267.

133. Cic. Mur. § 61, omne delictum scelus esse
nefarium, nec minus delinquere eum, qui gallum galli-
naceum, cum opus non fuerit, quam eum, qui patrem ;
suffocaverit.

This is quoted among the sententiae et praecepta
Zenonis, but it is extremely unlikely that the illustration
used is that of Zeno, Cicero attempts (Paradox. ur. 25)
to answer this objection by the remark, doubtless borrowed
from some Stoic source, that whereas the wrongful killing
of a slave involves a single awaptnua, many duaptnwata
are committed in the act of parricide.

134. Plut. Sto. Rep. vir. 1, 2, dperas 6 Znvav aro-

= _—

174 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Aeímeu TXelovas Kata Əsxadopds, domep ó lIXdTov, otov
dpovnow avbpelav cappocrvny Sikatocvyny, os axopiaTovs
pev ovoas, érépas 66 kai Suahepovoas GAAHA@V. mav Óë
Opilomevos aru Exdotnv, THY uev avdpelav qai ppóvnow
evar èv évepywréow: Tv è Sixavocvyny dpóvgsw èv
dTroveumTéows ws plav obcav dper)v tats O6 poç Ta
Tpaypata oxéceot Kata vds éveprye(as Stahépew Ookobcav.
Plut. de Virt. Mor. 2, čorxe è kai Zajvev eis ToÛTÓ Tes
vmopéeper Qa, ó Kurtevs, ópt£ó,evos thv ppovnow èv uév
dTroveumTéois Sixacocvynv’ èv dé Óuuperéow a bpoovvgv
èv è Uropevetéous ávópe(av: atrooyovpevot 66 akvovow èv
ToúTois THY éemioTnunv ppovnow úrò ToÜ Zývwvos ovo-
uda. Diog. L. vit. 161, aperas ve ore Todas eiayyev
(scil Aristo) és ó Zývæv. Cic. Acad. 1. 38, hie (Zeno)
omnis (virtutes) in ratione ponebat...nec ullo modo...
(seiungi) posse disserebat, nec virtutis usum modo...sed
ipsum habitum per se esse praeclarum, nec tamen virtutem
cuiquam adesse quin ea semper uteretur. Cf. ib. rr. 31,
Fin. 1v. 54.

Cf. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 5, p. 60, 12, xal 77v pèv $póvgauww
epi rà KAOnKoVTA yíueo Qar THY 66 cappociynY mepit Tas
óppds TOD avOpwrrou’ tv 06 dvOpeíav mept rds ÚTopovás'
thy 66 OucatocUvqv Tepi Tas atroveunoes. Diog. vit. 126.
Zeno taught that virtue 1s one and indivisible, but that in
different spheres it is manifested in different forms. He
resumed the Socratic position (for which see Zeller,
Socrates E. T. p. 140 foll, and especially Xen. Mem. rr. 9,
Plat. Men. 88 o), that virtue is knowledge, but adopted
the terminology of Aristotle by making use of the word
$póvgsis instead of émtatyun, and thus indicated that
moral insight is to be distinguished from intellectual
research (cf. Ar. Eth. vr 13) There is therefore high
probability in Zeller's suggestion (p. 258 n.) that *perhaps
Zeno had already defined $póvgous as èmiorun ayabar

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 175

kai kakdv.' At the same time he must have been in-
fluenced by the Platonic doctrine of the four cardinal
virtues (Rep. p. 441 foll.), but he traced the differences in
virtue to the diversity of the objects with which it is
concerned, while Plato treated them as arising from the
distinct parts of the soul, which produce different mental
states.

dmovepnréors = the rendering every man his due (drrove-
parue» THs aias éxaotw Stob. Lc.) cf. the definition
attributed to Simonides in Plat. Rep. i. p. 331 E, ore TÒ Ta
ójeiXópeva ékao o atobiddovat Oíkatov ote It is more
general in meaning than Aristotle's rò év tats Scavopais
dixacov (Eth. N. v. 2. 12).

Siaiperéors: distinguishing between things with a view
to choice: it deals with tas aipéoess kai éxxrécers (Cleanth.
frag. 76).

trropeveréous. . .¿vepyTréous. Hirzel suggests that there
is a lacuna in Plut. Sto. Rep. lc. and that we ought
to read there Ppovnow elvat èv <vropeveréous thv 86
cwppocvyny $póvqauw ev» aiperéois (in place of évepyynréous).
For doy. cf. Ar. Eth. nr. 6, 6, ó dvópetos...ov8els yàp
UrromeveTiKwtepos TOY Oewwdv: for the general sense cf.
Thue. Ir. 40. 3, xparto To, È av thy Nrvyrjv dixalws kpuÜetev
oí Ta re Oewà Kal ndéa cahéctata vvyvookovres Kal dia
TavTa p) ATOTPETOLEVOL ÈK TØV KLVOUVMD.

exérem. This word has a technical meaning with the
Stoics, being opposed to «ivnavs on the one hand (cf. Cic.
Tusc. Iv. 30), and to &£&is (non-essential)(essential) on the
other (Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 5*, p. 73, 1). The virtues themselves
are ó.a0éceus, for which see on frag. 117.

135. Plut. Virt. Mor. c. 3, kowds 606 &mavres oÚTot
(scil. Menedemus, Aristo, Zeno, Chrysippus) rv apetny Tod
5»yeuovikoU THs Wuyys 9.a0eoív Tua kai Olvapav yeyevn-

176 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

uévqv UO Aóyov, aXXov 66 Adyov osav avTY dmoroyoU-
pevov kai BéBacov Kal dajerámTOeTov vmoT(Üevrav Kal
vowitovtw ovK elvat TO TaOnTiKOY Kal droyov Siapopa
Tit Kal does Nrvxrjs TOD Xoyyucoü SiaKexpyévov, AANG TO
avTo THS Nrvy?)s pépos (ò 07) Kadodar Siavoav kai HryEepwovi-
Köv), SvoXov Tperópevov Kal weTaBarrAov ëv Te Tots malest
Kal tails kata ét yj Siabeow petaBorais, kakíav Te
yívecÜa, Kal apetny, kai pndev Éyew aroyov v éavrG*
AéyecÜa, 86 Xoyov, Stay TQ TXeovátovri THs puns
ioxup® '*yevouévo Kal KPATÝTAVTL mpos TL TOY aToT@Y
Tapa Tov aipoüvra Xóyov éxdépmrav Kal yap TO Taos
elvat Xóyov Trovnpov Kal axoXacTor, êk havrANs Kal ómuap-
THMEVNS Kploews GhodpoTHTa Kal pounv mpocXaóvra.

TÜV perv «wr. Cf. Stob. Ecl. rr. Ta Br » p. 64, 18, dperás e
civat 7rXelovs aci Kal aywpiotous am addANndwv Kal Tas
avTas TO NYEMOVLK@ pépet THS Wuyns kab vrdctacw.

ópoXoyospevov : frag. 120.

dperdrrwrov: cf. the definition of knowledge in frag. 17.
Virtue is knowledge as applied to conduct.

kal vopítovs: K... This is principally aimed at Plato
(see e.g. Rep. 436 A), but partly also at Aristotle, although
the latter denies that the soul is wepiot7 in the Platonic
sense (de An. 1. 5, 24, but cf. Eth. i. 13, 10). With Zeno
the local extension of the soul as a zrveüua throughout the
body does not detract from its unity either on the physical
or the moral side: zá0os and aper) are alike affections of
the PYEMOVLKOY : see on frag. 93. “The battle between

wa ? virtue and vice did not resemble a war between two
nts ! separate powers, as in Plato and Aristotle, but a civil war

| (on carried on in one and the same country. Reid on Acad.
AO 1:98.

iy Sidvorav Kal ryenovixdv. For the distinction between
* these two terms see Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 132, 306.
A" &w Ñ Sea: see on frag. 117. The wan are dis-

fic Ja
— - Far i Sc para fi. wd Aus
Bi aU f B fr pe dq Ld MAS d bad

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 177

tinguished, being neither &£ew nor 8:a8éceis but <unlcets,
Cic. Tusc. Iv. 30.

T$ mreovdtovr.. Zeno’s view of the za0» will be con-
sidered in the next following fragments. Cf. Stob. Ecl.
IL. 7. 10, p. 88, 10, etvas è ran maura, ToU hyepoviwoð THS
puns.

136. Diog. L. vir. 110, gore dé auto TO malos Karta
ZLnveva 7 dXoryos kai mapa pvow Wuyis «ívnats, Ù ópun)
wXeovátovaa. Cic. Tusc. Iv. 11, est igitur Zenonis haec
definitio ut perturbatio sit, quod zra6os ille dicit, aversa a
recta ratione, contra naturam animi commotio. Quidam
brevius, perturbationem esse appetitum vehementiorem.
ib. 47, definitio perturbationis, qua recte Zenonem usum
puto; ita enim definit ut perturbatio sit aversa a ratione
contra naturam animi commotio, vel brevius ut pertur-
batio sit appetitus vehementior.

Cf. Cie. Off. 1. S 136, perturbationes, id est, motus
animi nimios rationi non obtemperantes. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7.
2, p. 44, 4, zráv malos ópum) rrkeovátovaa. ib. 7.10, p. 88,8,
TáÜos © eivai bacu ¿puñu mXeovátovaav kai dmefj TO
ai(poüvru Adye 7) Kiwnow *rvyfs <ddoyov> Tapa pio.
Plut. in fragm. utr. anim. an corp. libid. et aegrit. c. VIL
Andron. epi va0dv c. 1. The comments in Stob. Le.
10°, p. 89, 3—90, 5, are important. They appear to belong
to Chrysippus and show that, while defining the maĝn as
xpicess, he did not give to that word the restricted inter-
pretation which Galen (see infra, frag. 139) places upon it,
and that he recognised the influence of the will in deter-
mining the nature of emotion. We may also infer that
the words amens TQ aipoðvre Xóyo are a gloss of
Chrysippus upon Zeno's term ¿Aoyos. This is also clear
from Galen, Hipp. et Plat. p. 368 K, 338 M, where the reason
is given, namely, the desire to enforce the doctrine of the

EH. P. 12

178 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

unity of the soul (frag. 135). In maintaining that every
malos is essentially dXoryov and rapa dci, Zeno goes
far beyond Plato and Aristotle, although he has much in
common with the Platonie point of view. Thus in the
Phaedo 83 B, we read 7) Tod ws aAm0@s $uiXocóQov Yuy
oUros améyeTas TOV NOovav Te Kal émiÜvuudv Kal NUTTOV
kai PoBov kaf? ócov dvvarat, although elsewhere Plato
| admits that certain pleasures and pains are allowable (see
| Zeller's Plato, p. 444). Similarly Aristotle, while classing
certain vra8» as ddoya, declares that under certain circum-
stances wrath and desire are legitimate (Eth. N. ur. 1.
24—26).

187. Stob. Ecl m. 7. 1, p. 39, 5, os Ó o Ste@cKos

s” NAR , E / e ` > ,
“@plaato Ziveav' malos éotly dpun mNeovatouca. ov Aéyet

‘meduxvia m Xeovatew ', AN 709 v TAEOVATU® oca oU
yàp Sud HEN Š evepryetg. dpicaro 06 KaKelvas’
malos stù mToia juyis, amo TAS TOV TTnVeY hopas TO
evKlvntov Tod TabnTLKOD Tapernac as.

Cf. ib. 11. 7. 10, p. 88, 11, 010 «ai macau mTolav aos
civar «kai» Mw «máv» malos mroiav. Wachsmuth
refers to Chrysipp. ap. Galen. de Hipp. et Plat. plac. 1v. 5,
p. 364, 23, Müll. ov«eíos 86 TQ Tøv ma0Gv yévet amo-
Gora. Kal  Trola Kata TO évoecoBnpuévov ToOTO kai
$epópevov cik), where the use of the word amoó(óora
points to Zeno’s authorship. «70 tis—raperkacas seems
to be merely the comment of Didymus, although it is
possible that Zeno derived mroia from méresĝaun as
Wachsmuth thinks.

138. Cic. Acad. r. 38, Zeno omnibus his (perturbati-
onibus) quasi morbis voluit carere sapientem...nam et
perturbationes voluntarias esse putabat opinionisque
iudicio suscipi et omnium perturbationum arbitrabatur
matrem esse immoderatam quandam intemperantiam.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 179

quasi morbis: see on frag. 144. dra} ela, tov coddy,
Diog. VII. 117.

opinionisque vudicio: in view of what follows this is
important, and the expression aptly illustrates Galen's
statement that Zeno regarded the zá05 as rà évwwywy-
vóueva kpíaea uv.

intemperantiam. The particular virtue which is con-
cerned with regulating the ópuai is cwppoavvn: see on
Cleanth. frag. 76, so that excess of impulse or años is
said to be produced by its opposite, axodacia (àyvoia
aiperav kai evkróv xal ov8erépow, Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5",
p. 60, 2), cf. Tusc. rv. 22, Quemadmodum igitur tempe-
rantia sedat appetitiones et efficit, ut eae rectae rationi
pareant, conservatque considerata iudicia mentis: sic huic
inimica intemperantia omnem animi statum inflammat
conturbat incitat; itaque et aegritudines et metus et
reliquae perturbationes omnes gignuntur ex ea.

139. Galen. Hippocr. et Plat. plac. v. 1, v. 429 K.,
Znvov ov tas kpícews avtas AàXXà Tas émuyuyvonéuas
atrais cvaToXds kal Noes émdpoets Te Kal [Tas] Traces
THs Yuyhs évóuitev eivat Tà mrá0m, ib. IV. 3, v. 377 K.
Chrysippus contradicts himself, Zeno, and other Stoics as
to this o? ov rds «pises avràs Ths uyns arra [xai] Tas
emi TavTais adoyous cvaToXds Kal rameuwaoets Kal SnEELS
émapoes Te Kal Siayvoens UToNapBavovow elvat TA TS
Arvxjs may. Wachsmuth, Comm, t. p. 7, adds ibid. rv. 2,
V. p. 367 K., rovadtny twa T) ovciay Tév Tabay (Le. or.
ai perwer Kal ai érápaeis Kal ai ovaoTtodal kai ai òia-
Xúcets...T0s ddoyou Suvduews esti Tapata rais Sofas
émvyvyvópeva) Exixoupos...cal Znvev úroraußaveri Galen
distinguishes between three different views of the nature
of wan, (1) that they have no connection at all with
Aoyispos or pisis, which is the view of Plato and

2 ma

180 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Posidonius, and in which Galen himself concurs. He
infers that Cleanthes was of the same opinion (but see
on Cleanth. frag. 84); (2) that they are «pises, cf. Diog.
L. vit. 111. This is the view of Chrysippus and is in
Galen's opinion the worst of the three; (3) between these
two extreme views that of Zeno in identifying them with
érriyiyvopeva Kpioeow occupies a middle position. It
would seem however that in this respect Galen has done
Chrysippus an injustice: for it is clear from other evidence
(see e.g. on frag. 136) that Chrysippus did not confine
himself to the view that zam are solely an intellectual
affection (Zeller, p. 245, 246). At the same it is probably
true that he made a distinct advance upon Zeno by
identifying v6» with «pisei and connecting them with
avyKxatabéces: cf. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 198, 199.

cveroAds. This refers to Az», which is defined as
avoTtoAn dXoyos (Diog. L. vir. 111, cf. M. Aurel. Ir 10)
or amens Aoyæ (Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 70°, p. 90, 14): in the
same way mapos refers to 200v; (Diog. L. vu. 114, Stob.
Lees el Gye

Meas. For this word Müller substitutes dvayvcers,
but this is perhaps: questionable, cf. Cic. Tusc. rr. 61,
ex quo ipsam aegritudinem Xuvm9 Chrysippus [quasi
Avcuv id est] solutionem totius hominis appellatam putat.

sds, delet Müller.

kal is expunged by Zeller, p. 246, and Müller, but
this corr. is by no means certain: see on frag. 143,
and cf. Heinze, Stoicorum de Affectibus doctrina, p. 37.

Sites. Zellers correction, accepted by Müller, for
de(Eevs, is made almost certian by Cie. Tusc. rv. 15, ut
aegritudo quasi morsum aliquem doloris efficiat, cf. Tusc.
III. 83, cited on frag. 158.

&uxóres. In Diog. L. vir. 114 this word appears as a
subdivision of 7o»; and is defined as áv4Xvews aperis.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 181

In Suidas, col 818, however :9ov itself is defined as
dXoryos Svaxyvers, cf. deliquescat in Cic. Tusc. Iv. 37. It is
worthy of observation that all these words (excepting
perhaps tazrevvécess) refer to A) and 58ov:5, and that
émiüvuía and $ófos are not so prominent. For rare-
vócew, cf exanimatione humili atque fracta connected
with metus in Cic. Tusc. rv. 13, and for v76ceeus demitti
(of aegritudo) ib. 14, 37. In the face of the evidence
already cited, Wellmann, p. 454, seems to be wrong in
supposing Aúces and wr@cess to be equivalent to pegis
and ékxAors in Diog. and Stob. ll. cc.

pelwoors refers to Avan, Chrysipp. ap. Galen, Iv. 2,
p. 367.

140. Themist. de An. 90 b, Spengel, 11. 197, 24, «ai ov
Kaks of ato Znvevos rà man Ts avOpwrivyns "rvxn)s
Tod Xoyov Svactpodas elvar TiÜÉuevou Kal Xónov kpíaeis
ńpaptnyévas.
~ In the face of Galen’s testimony this statement is |

of no importance so far as Zeno is concerned and may be /

discarded. |

141. Galen, Hipp. et Plat. plac. ur. c. 5, v. p. 322 K.,
oU uóvov Xpvowrmos adda Kal KnreavOns kai Znvev
éroiuws avta TiWéacw (rovs boBous Kal Tas AVTas Kal
wave boa troradra mahn karà THY Kapdiav cuvictacOat).
This passage is taken from Wachsmuth, Comm. I. p. 7.
The emotions are placed in the heart because it is the
seat of the syyeuovucóv (frag. 100), of which the maĝn are
affections (frag. 135), Zeller, p. 213, Stein, Psych. n. 258.

142. Diog. vir 140, róv va0óv ta dveráre (Kaba
dnow...Znvev èv TQ mepl mwaÓdv) eivau yévn rérrapa,
AU, PoBov, émiOvpiav, ndovnv.

Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 10, p. 88, 14, rpdta © eivat T@ yéves

182 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

TavTa Ta Téccapa, ériOupuiav, poBov, AUTH, Hdovnv, cf.
Cic. Off. 1. 69, Tusc. ur. 24, Iv. 11, Jerome Epist. exxxiil.
illi enim quae Graeci appellant «465 nos perturbationes
possumus dicere, aegritudinem videlicet et gaudium,
spem et metum, quorum duo praesentia, duo futura
sunt, asserunt extirpari posse de mentibus et nullam
fibram radicemque vitiorum in homine omnino residere,
meditatione et assidua exercitatione virtutum. Plato had
already recognised Az», $ófos, émiÜvuia and ov as
the four chief zam, cf. Phaed. 83 B, cited on frag. 136.
From rà aàveráTo...yévo it is obvious that Zeno classed
certain e/é7 under each of the principal za05, but how
much of the exposition in Diog. L. vir. 111—116, Stob.
Ecl. 11. 7, 10^** is derived from him the evidence does not
enable us to determine, nor can we tell whether the
doctrine of the ev7raGevat belongs to him.

143. Cic. Tusc. rr. 74, 75, Satis dictum esse arbitror
aegritudinem esse opinionem mali praesentis, in qua opini-
one illud insit, ut aegritudinem suscipere oporteat. Ad-
ditur ad hanc definitionem a Zenone recte ut illa opinio
praesentis mali sit recens. Galen de Hipp. et Plat. plac.
IV. 7, p. 416, ‘ó yodv ópos ob Tos’, pnoiv [Posidonius], ‘6 THs
Uns, Go7rep o)v Kal .dAXOL TONNO TOV TaÜQv UTO TE
Znveovos eipnwévoe Kal mpos Tod Xpvairzrov yeypappévoe
caQós éeEeXéyyxouo, Tmu yvounv avro). O0£fav yap elvat
vpócQarov Tov xaxov avT@ mapeivai «ou (? hace) THY
AvT«V. èv @ kai cvvrojuoTepov viore Xéyovres WOE TAS
mpoohépovtat’ Xv sri Sofa mpócQaros rakod Trapov-
alas. Ad’mns is the necessary correction of Cornarius,
Bake and I. Müller for the MSS. a@rns. The unfortunate
currency, which Kiihn’s dons has obtained, has given rise
to much perplexity.

These passages, and especially that of Cicero, have been

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 183

strangely neglected by the authorities. A difficulty arises
here, because it is generally inferred from frag. 139 that
the treatment of the v409 by Zeno and Chrysippus was
radically different, and it is strange that, if Zeno defined
Avy, for example, as dXoyos cvoTroXMj, he should also
have defined it as ófa mpoodhatos kako0 mapovoías.
(For the connection of Chrysippus with the latter defini-
tion cf. Galen, op. cit. Iv. p. 336 K., 336, 9 M., èv mois
Opltopols TOV yevixdv vraÜdv reXéos amox«pet THS yv uns
avtov [scil. his own writings] tv Xvzqv opitójevos 6ó£av
mpochatov kakoü Tapovaías Tov è dófov mpocOokíav
Kakod tyv O6 500v)» óav mpdadatov ayabod vrapovaías,
but at the same time defines ézi£vpuía as ħoyos Opes.)
For, in that case, how could Galen or Posidonius have
treated Chrysippus as diverging from Zeno by explaining
the man as xpícew, especially as Posidonius is the
ultimate authority on whom the attribution of the ófa
definition to Zeno rests ?

Now the evidence of Galen establishes almost beyond
a doubt that the definitions of Avan as dXoyos avoToX)
and of 58ovr as dXoyos ërmapois (Diog. L. vir. 111, 114)
were propounded by Zeno. From this it would seem to
follow as a natural corollary that he also defined éz8vyuía
as dXoryos ópefis (Diog. vil. 113), and $óflos as dXo'yos
éxxduors (Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 105, p. 90, 11, éco. amei&
oye), cf. Andron. wept va8óv, c. L, AUT: uév oiv Óociv
&Xoyos cvoToM), poBos è dXoyos &xiuous, émiÜvpía Që
dXoryos Ope£us, 80v?) è &Xoryos ëmapors ; and see Kreuttner,
p.31. On other grounds it seems probable (see on frag.
136) that Chrysippus is responsible for the substitution of
amens Xóyqe for dXoryos in Stob. l. c., but we cannot tell
who added the words ézi $ev«rQ Soxodvts and èp aíper@
8okoüvr. vmapyew (Galen, Hipp. et Plat. 1v. 2, p. 367),
which appear also in Diog. 114. It remains therefore to

184 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

decide whether the definitions of which d0£a vpóedaros
Kakov Tapovaias is a type were introduced by Zeno or
Chrysippus. The latter alternative would be the most
satisfactory solution and is generally adopted (e.g. by
Wellmann, p. 454, 455, Zeller, pp. 249, 250, Siebeck,
Geschichte der Psychologie, 11. 232, 233 and 504), but if
Posidonius’ evidence is to be accepted in the one case,
why is it to be discarded in the other, especially where it
tells most strongly against himself? cf. Galen, p. 390 K.,
(Iloserðwvios) reupárau un uóvov éavróv Tots IIXarcevucots
ara kai Tov Ketiéa Znveva mpocdayew. We must re-
member that Posidonius was anxious to pick holes in
Chrysippus, in order to excuse his own heresy. Hence
he charges Chrysippus not merely with divergence from
his predecessors but with inconsistency (tv avtod pos
avTov évavrioXoy(av Tod Xpvaimov, Galen, p. 390). It
would seem therefore that he is less worthy of credence
as a witness, when he affirms a discrepancy between Zeno
and Chrysippus than when he testifies to the identity of
their doctrine. Nor ought we to neglect the fact that
in Diog. L. vir. 112 $óños is defined as xaxod tpocdoxia,
being thus differentiated from the other zam, and that
this definition is ultimately traceable to Plato (Protag.
358 D, Lach. 198 p). If however we suppose that Zeno
made use of a double set of definitions, what was the
nature of the contribution made by Chrysippus? Only
two answers seem possible. If Zeno in his oral lectures
(etpnuévor), and subsequently to the publication of the
work rept za0Gv, put forward the óga definitions, it
would devolve on Chrysippus to reconcile as against
opponents the written and the oral tradition of the
school Or again it is quite conceivable that Posidonius
may have been misled by the desire of Chrysippus to
. represent his own developments as the natural out-growth

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 185

of Zeno's system. In any case the difference was com-
paratively unimportant: ‘hane differentiam levissimam
esse quis est quin videat, cum uterque id semper docuerit,
man esse voluntaria?’ (Heinze, Stoicorum de Affectibus
doctrina, p. 10, and see also pp. 23, 24, 36, 37).

144. Lactant. Inst. rr. 23, inter vitia et morbos
misericordiam ponit (Zeno) id. Epist. ad Pentad. 38,
Zeno Stoicorum magister, qui virtutem laudat, miseri-
cordiam...tamquam morbum animi diiudicavit.

It is probable that Zeno spoke of the za87» in general
terms as voco, and that Chrysippus is responsible for the
distinction between voonpara and dpeoT5uara, as the
passage in Cic. Tusc. Iv. 23 suggests. Cf Zeller, p. 251,
252, and Stein, Psych. n. 267. At the same time morbus
may here be simply the translation of maĝos, which Cicero
rejected (Tusc. ru. 7, 1v. 10). For éXeos, a subdivision of
Av, cf. Diog. VIL 111, Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 10*, p. 92, 12,
Cic. Tusc. 1v. 18.

145. Diog. vir. 107, 108, ër. è ka0kóv dacw eivat |
^ `Ë y , > y D Tcu: « SUCI P;
ô mpaxdev eÜXoryóv TW’ layer dmroXoyua ov: otov TO akó-
XovÜov év TÀ Cw), ómrep Kal émi Ta bura, kai Coa Ourretvet.
opacbar yàp kami rovrov KaOnKovTa. katœwvopaclat 66
jTÓ Tporov Zm9vevos Tò kakov amo tod Kata Twas
pana l n J Ui ms
jew ths rpooevouac(as eiAnupévns. Cf. ib. 25, baci òè
kai vpGrov KaOnKov ovopakévau Kal Xóyov Tepl avTOD
, = > X ^ ,

qemowkéva, (referring to the treatise «epi tod kaĝ-
«ovros, Introd. p. 29).

Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 8, p. 85, 13, opiferau è rò kaÜ/kov:

AU UA 5 a a N s > , y x
To dkOXovOov èv Coh, 0 mpayÂèv eUXorov amoroyiav ëyet
Tapa TÒ kaO7)kov 66 TÒ évavríes. TovTO SiaTelver kal eis
Ta droya T@v Cour, évepyel yap TL kakeiva akorovhlws TH
éavrOv duce.’ émi «06— røv AoyrKaY wwv oUTws aro- |

iN

186 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

didorat* TÒ akóXovÜov év Bio. Cic. de Fin. nr 58, est
autem officium quod ita factum est ut eius facti probabilis
ratio reddi possit (where see Madv.).

kaĝłņkov is, according to Zeno, any action for the
performance of which a sufficient reason can be given

-/ (and it is entirely distinct from virtuous action, which is
' | described as karópÜcpa. That Zeno must have treated of

| karopÜcepa is a supposition which is rendered necessary

by the circumstances of the case, but the evidence to
connect him with it is wanting. The doctrine of ca@jKov
is closely connected with that of mponyyévov (dkoXovOos
8 fcr. TQ mepi TÖV Tponypévov 6 mept TOD KaOnKOVTOS
Toros, Stob. l. c.) inasmuch as in the ordinary course of
life we are forced to regulate our conduct with regard to
external circumstances, which are strictly speaking aé.a-
$opa. Hence we must explain kara twas where «ard
means * over against" (die jenige Pflicht, die von aussen
an uns herantritt, von der unterschieden werden soll,
die in unserem eigensten Wesen, in der Vernunft selber
ihren Ursprung hat), as Hirzel has shown by a com-
parison of Epict. Enchir. 15, péuvņnoo ótt ws êv cuprocio
def ce àvaavpédeoÜaw. mepihpepópevov vyéyové TL KATA ae ;
ékreívas T)v weipa KoTmiws peTadaBe’ Tapépyerat ; pu)
kareye. oUm iei; pn émüBaXXe móppo T)v Opefw:
GANG Tepipeve, uéxpis àv névpra. kara oe. obro Tpós
TÉékva, OUTW TPOS vvvaika, obre Tpós dpxds, oÜrc pos
TrXoürov, kai Eon ToTE Eros TOV Dewy cvwróTqs. kralikov,
therefore, in Zeno's system is not a general term of which
karopÜcpara and pésa ka05kovra are subdivisions, but
rather «a075kovra and xaropÜcuara are mutually ex-
clusive, so that the distinctions between aei xaO5kovra
and ov« det kaO5kovra, and pésa xaÜ5jkovra and TéXeua
xa085kovra belong to later Stoics: see Hirzel, Unter-
suchungen, IL pp. 408—410. evAoyov does not imply

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 187

action in accordance with right reason, ie. virtue, as
Zeller and Ueberweg suppose, for reason in this sense
cannot be attributed to pura and adoya Coa, which are
nevertheless capable of xa@yjxovta according to the
authorities. (The use of evAoyos in this narrower sense is
justified by Hirzel, 11. 341, 1, from a comparison of Diog.
vir. 76. Seneca, de Benef. Iv. 33, sequimur qua ratio non
qua virtus trahit; Diog. vir. 130, evrAdyas é£áEew éavrov
Tov Biov tov codo.) lf Hirzels explanation is correct,
it follows that in Sext. Math. vir. 158, where catop@wpa
is defined as óvep mpaydev evroyou Eyer THY drroXovyíav,
Arcesilas adopts the Stoic definition of «a05xov as the
true basis of katép@wua. Wellmann, p. 461, believes that
xarópÜc,a belongs solely to the later Stoics, but surely
Zeno must have given some name to virtuous action, and
it is most reasonable to assume that this was «arópOcya.
It is unnecessary to observe that Zeno was not the first
to use kaO7ov in the sense of “duty”: all that is meant
is that he gave the word its special technical sense, cf.
karáMmNru. As to the divergence of Stobaeus from
Diogenes we should note (1) that có à«óXovOov év £f) is
made the main point in the definition, which is probably
a mistake, cf. Cic., (2) the distinction between Bios and
fn, for which cf. Arist. ap Ammon. in Steph. Thes. Bios
orti Xonyuc?) Ewn (quoted by Hirzel).

146. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 1, p. 38, 15, of 86 xarà Znvova
Tov Xeeuküv tTpoTiKds’ 7060s sre Twy!) Biov, ad ñs ai
Kata uépos mpakes péovar.

The Stoics regarded not so much the act itself as the
character of the agent (cf. omovõaia Siadeows). For
myyn cf. Plat. Leg. 808 c, who says that a young boy éye
qr»yn)v TOU ppovely wire KaTHPTUMENDY.

E

Or

10

188 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

147. Diog. L. vit. 173, cata Znveva karaMpymrTov
ela, TÒ 7)0os eÉ eiGovs.

Cf. Stob. Ecl. 1. 50. 34, of ZTreugol tov cov aicOnoe
karaXwmTÓv amd Tod eldous TekumpueOds. Euripides
regrets that it is impossible to distinguish men in this
manner. Med. 516—520,

© Zed, Ti 0» ypvcod uév ds KiBdnros 7
Texunpl avOpevrowiv wTacas cadi,
avdpav Ó ÓT@ wp» TÓv kakóv SieLdévat,
ovdels yapakTr)p euméepvKe CØHATI;
cf. Hippol. 924 foll. Cic. Lael. 62. So Shaksp. Macb. r. 4.
11, There's no art to find the mind's construction in the face.

g ç M ^
148. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 115, p. 99, 3, apéoxes yap T@ Te
Ziujvovi kai Tots ar avroð Xvrewots briNocodoss Svo yévn
^ 5 5 A Ë \ ^
TOV, dvÜpovrev eivai, TO “ev TOV omrovõalwv, TO O06 TeV
, \ \ \ ^ , `Ë \ ^ ,
$a/UXcov' kai TO uév TOV GTroVoaiwy Sia TavTOs ToD Biov
xpncÜaL. Tas apetais, To 06 THY $a/Xov Tais kariais’
t ` A ^ e / `
blev TO uév ael KaTtopOody èv atracw ols mpooTiOeTat, TO
06 ápaprávew. Kal Tov èv o7rovOatov Tals Trepi TOv Biov
^ € A
eutrerpiats ypw@mevov v Tois mpatTouévors ÚT avTov
mavr eÙ Troveiv, kaharep hpoviwws Kai codjpóves xal
ND SAAC yo. , pA \ \ ^ \ > /
kata TAS &àXXas dperds' Tov O6 $aÜXov kara ToUVvavríov
^ ^ c
kakðsş. kai TOV pev orovõaîov péyav kai adpov Kal
€ ^ xq» / / N eu , > ^
Unrov kai ia xvpóv. péyav èv OTe 6vvarau epixvetc Qa,
TOV KATA Tpoaiperty bVT@Y AUT@ Kal vrpokeuuévov' aópóv
, € » 7
dé, OTe éoviv nuEnpévos travtobev’ úyhòv Ò, OTe perel-

| Ande Tod éuBarrovtos rovs àvOpi yevvaiw xal copa.

\ > ` 3 e ^ > , > `
xai icxvpóv 8, ött T)v émuBaXXovcav ¿cX Tepume-
, , ` \ 5 , > a

ToinTal, ANTTNTOS Ov Kal akaTaywVLioTOS. Tap Ò Kal

` E . m , ,
ovTe avaykatera, vTÓ Tivos oÑoUTe avayKxafer Tiva, ovTE
, y , y , € / yia > `
KWAVETAL oUre KWAVEL, oUre PLafeTaL UTO TLVOS OUT AUTOS
, E , ^
Brafer Tiva, ote Oeo roter oUre Oeo mroCerat, oÜre KAKOTOLET
A , X ^ Ul ^ , eS
TIVA OUT. AUTOS KAKOTOLELT AL, OUTE KAKOLS TEPLTITTEL <OUT

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 189

dXXov moe? Kakols TepiTimtew>, ote éËamaTGaTa, ovre
éfamará dXXov, ovre Scarvevdetar ote ayvoet obTe Nav-
Paver éavróv, oUTe kaÜ0Xov Weddos VTONawBaver* evdaipor
8é dot paioTta Kal evTUYNS Kal waKapLos Kal OABLOS Kal
evaeBns Kal Oeopirns Kai a£woparucos, BaciduKds Te Kal
OTPATNYLKÒS Kal TONTLKOS Kal OLKOVOMLKOS Kal YPNUATLO-
TUKOS. TOUS 06 $a/Xovs &ravra ToVTOLS évavría čyew.

It is a matter of doubt how much of this extract can
be reasonably regarded as derived from Zeno, but if the
whole of it is to be traced to a single source, that source
may be Zeno, as there is some evidence for connecting
him with the statements appearing at the end of the
passage. On the doctrine of the wise man in general see
Zeller, p. 268 foll., Cie. Fin. 111. 75, 76.

9. mávr e$ mowiv: cf. infra frag. 156. Ambrosius, de
Abraham Ir. 7. 328, 37, cites Gen. xu. 14 and 15 and
continues, hinc tamquam a fonte hauserunt Stoici philo-
sophi dogmatis sui sententiam: omnia sapientis esse...
unde et Salomon in Proverbiis ait: eius qui fidelis sit
totus mundus divitiarum (Prov. xvir 6). Quanto prior
Salomon quam Zenon Stoicorum magister atque auctor
sectae ipsius.

12. péyav. Physical excellence can only be predicated
of the wise man, even if in the popular sense of the term
he does not possess it, for no kind of excellence can be

bo

attributed to the ¢adAos. Further, inasmuch as the only `

good is aper) or To ueréxov áperůs, physical advantages
only have value when found in conjunction with virtue.

17. darrntos. Cf. frag. 157, the parallelism of which
is perhaps a circumstance of some weight in favour of
Zeno’s authorship here.

19. fter: for this verb, see Shilleto on Thuc. r.
2.

20. Serméta: cf. Diog. L. vir. 122, 7 (8ovAe(a) AVTI-

190 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

TíÜera, ý Seatroteia þann osa xal airy. Stob. Ecl.
Hye LAS rcp2104;.5.

23. BwweóSera.: because falsehood consists not merely
in stating something contrary to fact but in doing so
advisedly in order to deceive others (Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 11",
p. 111, 10; Sext. Math. vir. 44, 45). So, on the other
hand the $a0Xos may speak adnOés rı but is devoid of
arnbeca.

26. evoeBrjs kal Geo. Similar assertions in an amplified
form occur in Diog. L. vir. 119.

dfwwpariés: this appears to mean “high in rank,” see
Plut. Mor. 617 D, and cf. the use of a£íeyua in Thuc. as
applied to Pericles. It can hardly mean “speaking axioms”
as when used of Arcesilas in Diog. Iv. 31.

Bacouxós. Among the sententiae et praecepta Zenonis
cited by Cie. Mur. § 61 occurs solos sapientes esse si
servitutem serviant reges. It is extremely probable that
this paradox was asserted by Zeno from Diog. L. vir. 122,
ara Kai Bacréas (ela, ToUs aodo/s) THs Bacirelas
ovons apys avuTevOvvov, TIS. mept povous àv Tods
copovs orain, Kaba do, Xpvourmos èv TQ Tepl Tov
kvpies kexprja 0a. Znvwva Tots óvóuaci. Cf. Hor. Sat. I.
3. 125, Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 11", p. 108, 26.

Die oTparnyikés. Plut., vit... Arat; 23, 3, quotes póvov
oTpaTnyov eivau Tov Godo as a óyua Znvevos.

149. Diog. VII. 33, radw èv TÑ) mroNre(a TaplotavTa
(Znveva) voX(ras Kai pirovs kai oixelovs kal éXevÜépovs
ToUs omrovõalovs uóvov. Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 14. 95, p. 703
p, 253.8, Zývæv te 6 Xrowós mapa llXdrovos Xaov, ó
dé amd THs BapBapov duXocodías, Tovs dryaÜo)s Tavtas
aXMjXov eivat dirovs Xéyei. The same in Euseb. P. E.
1/13, pa 6/

modelo. Introd. p. 29.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 191

mwoMres: the question naturally arises, how is this
statement to be connected with the cosmopolitanism which
Zeno in the same treatise advocated (see frag. 162, iva...
¿uras avOperrous nyapeba Snworas kal Toriras)? Zeno’s
ideal state is not a community of the wise alone, but of
all mankind. He seems to be arguing here against the
ordinary civic distinctions, which are utterly valueless as
compared with the broad line drawn between codoi and
$abXo. Presumably in the ideal state everyone would
be so trained in Stoic precepts as to become thereby
omroveaios.

dtrovs: cf. Diog. L. vir. 124, Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 11" p.
138, 15, where friendship is based upon óuóvoia which can
only be found among the wise. Cic. Off. r. 56, N. D. r. 121.
A full discussion of the subject is given by Zeller, p. 317
foll. This is one of the doctrines borrowed by Zeno from
the Cynics, see Introd. p. 19; it had already been taught
by Socrates (Xen. Mem. Ir. 6. 14 foll) The view is
rejected as inadequate by Plato in the Lysis (p. 214), but
no doubt Clement is thinking rather of the Phaedrus and
Symposium: he adds his usual comment that Plato's views
are borrowed from the Jews.

&evdépovs. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 117, p. 101, 18, Diog. L. VII.
191, Cie. Parad. v. This again is derived from the
Cynics: see Zeller, Socrates, p. 322.

150. Cic. Mur. Š 61, solos sapientes esse, si dis-
tortissimi, formosos. This occurs among the “Sententiae
et praecepta Zenonis" cited by Cicero in his banter
against Cato, so that the evidence is not very trustworthy,
a remark which also applies to frags. 152, 153 and 155.
The wise man is beautiful because virtue alone is
beautiful and attractive: Zeller, p. 270 and n. 4, to whose
references add Cic. Fin. 111. 75, recte etiam pulcher ap-

192 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

pellabitur: animi enim lineamenta sunt pulcriora quam
corporis.

151. Cic. Fin. v. 84, Zeno sapientem non beatum
. modo sed etiam divitem dicere ausus est. Cic. Mur. $ 61,
solos sapientes esse, si mendicissimi, divites.
For the sense cf. Cic. Paradox. VI., Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 11’,
p. 101, 18, and further references ap. Zeller p. 270, nn. 5
and 6.

152. Cic. Mur. § 61, sapientiam gratia nunquam
moveri, numquam cuiusquam delicto ignoscere; neminem
misericordem esse nisi stultum et levem; viri non esse
neque exorari neque placari.

The reasons for this opinion are given by Diog. VII.
123, éXenpovas Te u) elvat, cvyyvepnv Te éyew pndevi'
uù yap Taplévat Tas èk TOD vópov ériBaXXova as koXdaeus*
emel TO ye elke Kai Ó €Xeos avTH Te 7) èmieikera oUOéveud
oTt Wuyns TPOS koXdcew TMpPOTTOLOVMÉVNS YpHTTOTHTA
pndé olecÜa. oxAnpotépas avrds eivai The same at
greater length in Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 11%, p. 95, 25—96, 9 ; see
also Zeller, p. 254. It should be remembered that éXeos
is a subdivision of Avy (ézi TH SoKxodvTs avakiws raro-
vra0eiv Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 10°, p. 92, 12) and therefore one of
the 405: possibly this is all that is meant by Lactant.
Inst. 11. 23 (frag. 144).

153. Cic. Mur. § 61, sapientem nihil opinari, nullius
rei poenitere, nulla in re falli, sententiam mutare num-
quam. Lact. Inst. 11. 4, ergo si neque sciri quidquam
potest, ut Socrates docuit, nec opinari oportet, ut Zeno,
tota philosophia sublata est. Cic. Acad. 1r. 113, sapientem
nihil opinari..horum neutrum ante Zenonem magno
opere defensum est. August. contra Acad. IL 11, cum

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 193

ab eodem Zenone accepissent nihil esse turpius quam
opinari.

The Greek authorities for this fall partly under frag.
148, l. 22, ovrte ékamarâraı ovte karmar aAXov, obre
Svawevderat ote ayvoe? oUTe AavOaves éavróv ovre kaĝ-
óXov Weddos vrrorauSaver, and the rest may be supplied
from Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 11", p. 112, 1, ugàév Ò vroXauBávew
adobevas àXXà uáXXov achards kai BeBaiws 8.0 kai ume
8ofdfew tov codóv... p. 113, 5, ovdée petavoeiv È úro-
Aaj8ávovc,. Tov vodv éxovTa...ovdé peTaBdrrccbar Që
kar ovdéva TpoTroyv ovOé ueraT(ÜeoÜau, ovdé oharrec Oar.
Diog. vil. 121, čr. te u) 8o£doew tov copov. For Zeno's
definition of óta see on frag. 15.

154. Diog. vir. 32, éy@povs kai vroXeuíovs Kal GoUXovs
Kai G@AXoTpious Xéyew avrov (Znvwva) adAHrwV eivat
vrávras TOUS u) o7r0vOa(ovs Kal yovels Tékvev Kal ace-
jobs aderpar, oikeíovs oikeíov.

This is the natural antithesis of frag. 149. Even
parents are enemies to their children, if $aUXo;, because
natural relationship and parental love are absolutely
advadhopa as compared with aper. On the subject of
these paradoxes in general consult Ritter and. Preller
§ 420 with the notes.

155. Cic. Mur. § 61, nos autem, qui sapientes non
sumus, fugitivos, exules, hostes, insanos denique esse.

But for the sake of uniformity this might have been
omitted, as we can feel very little confidence that we have
here the actual words of Zeno. For exules cf. Stob. Ecl.
II. 7. 1T, p. 108, 9, Xéyouor òè Kal duyada vrávra $aÜXov
civar, Ka boov otépetat vópov Kal sroNreías karà plow
émiBarrovons.

156. Athen. Iv. 158 B, Xrowóv 96 Soypa éoTí(` Ste
H. P. 13

194 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

re TaVTA Ev momoe ó copos Kal baxñu hpovipas apricev
610 kal Tiwwv 6 PrLaowos Edy

kai [Znvdverov] ye parv érety òs pa dpoviues
pena Onkev

ws ovk dXXos Ovvauévgs EnOAvar pars ei pn rara
thy Zmvovetov tpynynow os py

els òè haxhy EuBadre Svw@déxaTov Kopiavvov.

6r. te «tA. This follows from the doctrine that all
virtue is wisdom ($povgous): since dpovnows is required
in the preparation of a $a«?, the wise man can alone
prepare it properly. This applies even if the wise man
has no experience in the particular practical task under
consideration, because he alone possesses the necessary
capacity, cf. frag. 148, 1. 9. Diog. L. vri. 125, mavra Te
ev Tovey TOV copóv, WS Kal maura Qauév TA AVANMATA eU
avnely Tov “Iounviav, which furnishes a close parallel to
Hor. Sat. 1. 3. 126 foll, ‘non nosti quid pater, inquit,
‘ Chrysippus dicat:' ‘sapiens crepidas sibi numquam nec
soleas fecit, sutor tamen est sapiens. qui? ‘ut quamvis
tacet Hermogenes, cantor tamen atque optimus est modu-
lator etc, Cf. also Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5°", p. 66, 14 foll.

157. Philo, liber quis virtuti studet, p. 880, d£iov Tó
Znvovevov éeripwvicat bts Üdrrov av dckóv Barricats
TMjpg Tvevmatos ù fiácato Tov omovõatov ovtwodv
dkovra Spadcai Te TOV aBovdAnTwv’ avévdoTos yap Kal
dnoontos Yuy) ju opOds Xóyos O0wygact Tawyíow è-
veipace.

Barrlcais...Bidoaro. So Mangey, followed by Wach-
smuth, for the MSS. Barricac...Bidcaito. The same
editor suggests the alternative of inserting rvs, which is
less probable.

Bideuo: for the freedom of the wise man’s will cf. Cic.
Tusc. Iv. 12, eiusmodi appetitionem Stoici BovAnow

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 195

appellant, nos appellamus voluntatem. Eam illi putant in
solo esse sapiente; quam sic definiunt: voluntas est, quae
quid cum ratione desiderat, and see Stein, Erkenntnis-
theorie, p. 196.

ávéySoros : cf. supra frag. 148, iexvpóv ó (róv coor) ott
Tv émiBáNXovcav iax)v TepiTETTOinTas ANTTNTOS àv Kal
axatayovictos. M. Aurel. r. 16 fin.

èpðòs Aóyos : see Introd. pp. 8, 9.

158. Seneca, de Ira, r. 16, 7, Nam, ut dixit Zeno, in
sapientis quoque animo etiam quum vulnus sanatum sit
cicatrix manet. Sentiet itaque suspiciones quasdam et
umbras affectuum, ipsis quidem carebit.

This is a concession to popular feeling, although at
the same time the absolute dra@eca (Diog. L. vir. 117,
Cic. Acad. I. 38) of the wise man is maintained. It would
be a mistake to infer from this passage that Zeno is
responsible for the doctrine of evmá8euai Further re-
ferences are given by Zeller, p. 291. Cf. Diog. vIr. 118,
Tpootecciabar pévTot TOTe avrQ $avracías aXXokóTovs,
did ueXayoMav Ù Anpnow K.T., where however the
point is rather different. Remembering that Zeno de-
scribed the effect of grief as ôņéeis, we may compare
Socrates' description of the result of violent love in Xen.
Symp. Iv. 28, orep vmO Ümpíov Tos OcÓmyuévos Tov
Te pov TXetov 7 mévre "uépas àOa£ov kai év TH Kapdia
orep kvfjoud te eddxovy ëyew. Cic. Tusc. nr 83, hoc
detracto, quod totum est voluntarium, aegritudo erit
sublata illa maerens, morsus tamen et contractiuncula
quaedam animi relinquetur. 'The best account of the
sensibility of the wise man to pain is given by Heinze,
Stoicorum de aff. doctr. pp. 14, 15. The wise man can-
not resist the impact of the $avracía, but will refuse
cvykaráÜeoiu. See further on Cleanth. frag. 94.

13—2

196 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

159. Seneca, Epist. 83. 8, Ebrio secretum sermonem
nemo committit: viro autem bono committit: ergo vir
bonus ebrius non erit.

Seneca finds no difficulty in refuting this fallacy, in
spite of the defence which he quotes from Posidonius.
For the syllogistic form of the argument see Introd.
p. 38. Von Arnim, Quellen Studien p. 104, has pointed
out the original in Philo de Plantatione Noë p. 350, ei 7a
peQvovTe ovK dv TLS EVAOYwS XAóyou aTOppNTOY TapakaTa-
Oovro <T@ 06 coo vapakaraTiÜevrav- ovk dpa peOver ó
ac Te0os.

ebrius non erit: cf. Diog. L. vir. 118, «ai otvwOncecbae
pév (Tov codóv), où ue0vcOroec0a, 8é. Stob. Ecl. rr 7,
11", p. 109, 5, ovx otov 86 wePvcOncecbas Tov voüv éxovTa’
THY yap péOnv amapTnTiKoy cepiéxew, ANpHoW eivai
«yàp» mapa Tov oivov, év pndevi 86 Tov orovóatov Guap-
Tavew k.T.M. Similarly Socrates in Xen. Symp. IL 26.
The Peripatetics held, on the contrary, according to
Stobaeus, that the wise man ue0voO79oecÜau kara ovp-
mepipopas, Kav ei ur) Trpomnvyovpévos (Ecl. 1t. 7. 24, p. 144,
10).

160. Plut. de prof. in virt. 12, dpa 6» xai to Tod
Znvevos oroiov éavw' ŅElov yàp amó vv Ove(pov Exactov
éavroÜ cvvaucÜdaveoÜa, mpokoTrrovTos, ei ure "jOópevov
aicxpQ Tui. éavróv UTE TL Trpoaiéuevov Ù) rpárrovra TOV
dewey kal adixwy dpa Kata tovs Vrvovs AAN olov èv Bulg
yadnvns dkMvoTQ Katahavel O.aXdjmev Ts Arvxüs TO
$avracTikOv kai TaOntiKdy vd TOD Xóyov Oukexv-

pévov.

dnd trav óvepov: 16 was a popular Greek notion that the
vision of the mind’s eye is clearer in sleep. Aesch. Eum.
104. Pind. frag. 108 [96], Fennell.

mpoxérrovros: Wellmann p. 462 argues that Zeno, while

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 197

maintaining to the full the possibility of acquiring virtue,
did not admit the practical non-existence of wise men or
the consequent distinction between of vrpokó7rrovres and of
e7rovOato,: these latter views, he thinks, may have
originated with Chrysippus. On mpoxo7 in general see
Zeller, p. 293 foll.

mpocépevov, “approving” (cf. Dem. Timocr. § 156). The
words aicyp® Sewov adixov point to the acquisition
of the three leading virtues cw¢pocvvn avdpeia and
OLkatoc vrn.

QAN olov x..X. The emotions are dispersed by reason
in the mind of the zpoxózrrev, which remains clear and
unsullied, like the transparent ocean on a calm day when
shingle and sand settle down to the bottom: cf. Cleanth.
frag. 66.

$avracnóv, has no objective reality but is merely
Sudxevos EXkva pos, ráÜos év TH Yuy ar ovdevos haytac-
Tod *yiwópevov (Plut. plac. Iv. 12). Observe that it is
described as a maĝos. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 156, n.
309. ;

161. Seneca, Epist. 104. 21, quod si convivere etiam
Graecis juvat [cum Socrate, cum Zenone versare: alter
te docebit mori, si necesse erit: alter, antequam necesse
erit.

antequam, necesse erit, Suicide (éEayaoym) is justifiable
under certain circumstances. It is important to re-
member that life and death belong to the class of the
adiagopa, and suicide therefore has no connection with
aper), but is merely to be regarded as a matter of
Kalikov (rois 06 KaOnKkovat kai Tois mapa TO KaOjKov
«mapa-erpeiocÜa, Tu Te onv xai tov Oavarov Stob.
Ecl m. 7. 11" p. 110, 13 and see on frag. 145) This
point is emphasised by Zeller p. 338.

198 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

162. Plut. Alex. virt. 6, cal umu 7 vro? Oavpatouévn
sroNwreia, TOD THY row Gv alperw karaßarouévov Zajvovos
eis €v TOTO cvvreíveu Keparatov iva u) kard TróXets ume
KaTa 6rpovs oikd uev, Liors ExaoTor Suwptopéevot Oukaots,
aAa Tavtas avÜpevmovs wyojueÜ0a Snudtas kai ToMíras,
els òè Bios 7) kal koopos, orep ayéANS cvvvóuov vojo
kow cvvTpedouévgs. ToÜTo Znvwv ev Éypawrev @oqrep
dvap 7) eldwrov evvoulas duXocódov kai moMwre(as dva-
Tturw@oapevos : id. de Sto. Rep. II. 1, évret roí(vvv TONNAG uév,
ws év Xóyots a)TQ Znvov...yeypaupeva Tvyxaver mept
TodTElas kai TOD dpweoÜau Kal apyew Kal Oucatew Kal
pntopevery. Chrysost. Hom. r. in Matth. 4, ov yap xadatrep
IIXárev ó thv KatayéXactov éxeivny ToQTe(au cuvels
kal Znvwov kai el tis €repos moMTelav Eyparrey ù vópovs
cuvednxer.

mávras áv0pómow: see on frag. 149. The idea of cos-
mopolitanism was largely developed by the later Stoics,
especially Seneca and Marcus Aurelius. Zeno’s disregard
of the fundamental distinction between Greeks and bar-
barians may partly be due to the influence of his birth-
place, as Zeller remarks, but at the same time he only
carries out Cynic teaching (Diog. L. vi. 72, uóvgv Te
opOnv moMreíau civari THv èv Koope@). As to Socrates, see
Zeller's Socrates p. 167 n. 8, R. and P. § 219°.

bomep dyédns cvvvdpov. As Zeno is generally admitted to
have written the vodvreta when he was stil under the
influence of the Cynic school, Zeller (Socrates p. 325)
treats this passage as being typical of Cynicism, and
suggests that Plato, in the Politicus (267 D, ovkoüv tøv
VOMEUTLKGV Tutu TOANGY haveta dv pTi TEXVOV pia TLS HV Ñ
TONLTLKN Kal “Las TLVOS dry ÀN) émrtuéXeua ; K.T.A.) and in his
description of the àv modus in Rep. 372 A. foll. is referring
to Antisthenes. The reference is however extremely
doubtful (see Ueberweg p. 93), and it is worth noticing

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 199

that the comparison of the ruler of a state to a herdsman
was a favourite one with Socrates. Xen. Mem. I. 2, 32, eizé
mov ò LwKpatns öre ÜavpacTóv oí oroin elvai, elris
yevój.evos Body ayérns voueds kai Tas Bods éXd rovs TE
Kal Yelpous vrovàv uN) oporoyoin kakós [BovkóXos elvari ert
66 Oavpactotepov el Tis TMporTaTns ryevomevos TddEwWS
K.T., With which cf. Plat. Gorg. 516 A. See also Newman,
Politics of Aristotle, vol. 1. p. 30.

163. Athen. xm. 561 ©, IIovriavós 86 Znveva čġn
Tov Kutiéa vroxauávew tov "Epoca eov eivat hias
Kal éXevÜOepías ër Óë Kal óuovoias TapacKevactiKor,
&XXov Ó ovdevds. 610 Kat èv TH vroNreía Epy “ Tov "Epora
Pedy eivai, ovvepyóv úÚmapyovra mpos THY THS TÓXeos
cetnpiav.” Plut. vit. Lycurg. 31. Lycurgus object was
not to leave Sparta with a large empire, dAN &o'rep évós
dvOpós Bio kal morews öns vouítev evdarpoviay at
aperis eyylverOar Kai Opovoías THs mpòs avTHy, Tpos
ToÜTo cvvérafe kal cuvpposev, Oras édevbépior Kal
avTapKels yevóuevot Kal ac povotvres Ti TAELTTOV ypóvov
dvateX@or. TavTnv kai IIXávrov éXaf89e ths IIoAvre(as varó-
Geow kal Avoyévns kai Zynvev k.T.X.

Tbv "Epera. Love is in Hesiod to be regarded as an
allegorical presentment of fire, frag. 113. In the ideal
state Love is taken as a presiding deity, because all
discord and party strife are to be banished from it, and the
wise men, who are its citizens, are to be united by friend-
ship and concord. Cf. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 11", p. 108, 15, èv
povois Te Tots Godois atronelrrovar duXav, émel èv uóvows
TOUTOLS OmovoLa yiverat epi TOY kara TOv Biov, THY Š
omovotay elvat kowdv ayabdy èmiotyunv. Chrysipp. ap.
Philod. zepi evcef. col. 12, p. 79, Gomp., xai rv aru etvat
ka, Evvouíav kai Aixny kai 'Ouóvoiav kai Eipnynv kai
"Adpoditny xai TO TapaTAnovov wav. It is probable that

200 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Zeno took the same objection, that of want of unity, to
Plato’s Republic as is taken by Aristotle Pol. rr. 5, p.
1264 a 24, èv uud yap mores dV0 ores dvarykatov eivat,
Kal raras vrevavrías dddnraus. Cf. also ib. IL 4 1262
b 7, Xen. Mem. tv. 4. 16, and contrast Ar. Pol. m. 2.
1261 b 10. Hirzel, II. p. 36, finds here a divergence from
Antisthenes, comparing Clem. Alex. Strom. II. 485 P., but
he apparently forgets Diog. L. vr. 12, which shows that the
inconsistency, if it exists, is with Antisthenes himself.

164. Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 12, 76, p. 691 P. 249 S.,
reyes 86 kal Zyvov, 6 THs Yroveyns kríoTQs aipécews, Èv
TQ Ts TodTelas BiBi pryjte vaods Qe mowiv pnTEe
ayadpata’ pndev yap cvai Tov Gedy d£iov KaTacKEvac pa,

| Kat ypadeu ov déSvev aùraîs Xé£eo, Tabe’ iepd Te oio80-

| peîv ovdev Senoes’ (epóv yap uù ToAdOD GË, Kal ayiov

ovdev yp) vopítew, ovdev O6 voXXo0 dfiov Kal &yiov
oixoðóuwv čpyov kai Bavavccev. The same in Orig. c.
Cels. 1. 5, p. 324. Plut. Sto. Rep. vr. 1, ër. 8óyua Zývævos
got’ iepa Oev pr) olkodopeiv' (epóv yap pù) TONNOÙ
àtıov kai &yiov oUk éotiv’ oixodouwv Ò épyov kal Bavav-
ccv ovdév oTt moddod dÉwov. Theodoret, Gr. Aff. Cur.
II p. 780— p. 49, 45, raóra cvvopdv kai Znvev ó
Kurtveds év TQ THs lloXere(as asraryopeveu BuBAiw Kal vaoùs
oikooopeiy Kal ayáXuara Textaive’ ovdév yap eivat
rovrov dmeiv edv tiv Kxatackedacpa. Epiphan.
Haeres. 11. 36, Zy9vev ó Kitied’s 6 Xræwòs ëpn ur) 9etv
0cois oikoGopetv iepa.

The Cynics also deny the sanctity of temples: Diog.
L. vi. 73, pndév Te dromwov ela, éÉ (epo0 te raPeiv.
Zeno's language in some particulars recalls St Paul's
address to the Athenians, Acts XVII. 24, 0 Oeós 6 zroujcas
TOV kÓc 0v Kal TravTa rà Èv AUTH, OUTOS ovpavoð Kal YAS
Kupios vrapxov oUk v yxeupoTmoulTots Yaols KATOLKEL.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 201

165. Stob. Floril. 43, 88, Zývæv &$y 9eiv tds móres
Kxoopmely oUk avabnpuacw dXXd. Tals TOV OLKOUVTÆV aperais.
In a similar spirit Crates promised to honour Hermes
and the Muses ov daravats rpvoepais adN aperats óoíaus
(Julian Or. vi. 200 A, quoted by Zeller, Socrates p. 329 n. 1).

166. Diog. L. vir 33, «ai xarà Tos Ouakociovs
otixous nO iepa wryre SiKacTHpLa ui)re yvuvacia èv Tals
vróAeatv oikoGopeto Oat.

xwrd...cr(xow. Prose writings were cited according to
the number of lines, cf. Diog. L. vir. 187, (Chrysippus) é
TO mepi TÓv dpxaíev dvcotoXóyev ovyypappwate Néywv
Kata To)s é£akocíovs otixyous. Dion. Hal. de Thuc. hist.
jud. c. 19, mpooipiov ths (oTopías péypt Trevrakoa iov
ékumkvveu o TUX v.

Sixarripia: “wozu Gerichtshófe, wo überall Gerechtigkeit
waltet? wozu Gymnasien, wenn Korperkraft und Gewandt-
heit ohne Wert sind?” Wellmann p. 438. The reference
to yvpvácia confirms the statement of Plutarch (Sto.
Rep. 8, 2) that Zeno wrote against Plato's Republic: with
Plato yvpvacrixn forms an important element in the
training of the $/Xax«es (Rep. ur. p. 410—411).

167. Diog. vir 32, čviot uévTow...6v vroXXoÜs KaTy-
yopoüvres Tod Znvwvos Tv éyxUKALOV Taicíav dxpnaoov
amopaivew Aéyovow év apy THS vroNwreías.

èykókňios masela, The ordinary course of Greek educa-
tion comprised the three branches of ypaypata, novo,
and yvurvacTw (Beckers Charicles E. T. p. 231 foll.).
Zeno intended to imply, probably again in opposition
to Plato, that, as compared with the acquisition of virtue
or true wisdom, the wisdom which education proposes
to supply is worthless (cf. Wellmann p. 437, 8). Such at
least seems to be the ground on which the Cynics put
forward a similar opinion, Diog. L. vi. 11, rz» re dpernv

202. THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

TOV épyov cevat, phTe Móyev TAEWVoOY Seouévnv, NTE
pabnuatov. 73, wovotkys Te Kal yewpeTplens Kal ág Tpo-
Xoyías Kal TOV ToLovTwY Quec ws dxprnorov Kal oUK
avaykaiov. 103, tapartodvtas 66 Kal Tà éyKUKALAa paĝh-
para. ypåppara yoðv un pavOavew épackev ó Avro-
Gévns todvs ocdpovas yevopévovs, iva um dtactpépowTo
Tots àXXoTp(o:s. Epicurus agreed with Zeno on this
point (see Prof. Mayor on Cic. N. D. 1. 72), while Aristotle
considered that rà éy«vkXia uaOrjuara are useful for the
acquisition of virtue (Diog. L. v. 31). It is important to
observe that Chrysippus held evxpmoretv ta éyk/kMua
pa85uara (Diog. L. vir. 129, cf. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7, 5°", p. 67, 5),
and it is possible that Zeno may at a later period of his
life have modified his conclusion on this point, just as he
diverged from the Cynics in recommending Dialectic and
Physics as well as Ethics, Zeller p. 63, 3, Hirzel 11. p. 523,
4, cf. Cleanth frag. 106.

168. Diog. VII. 33, epi re voulopatos ovTas ypadhewv
(Zývova), voutopa Ó ovr adrayns €vekev olecOar etv
karackevátew ovT atroonmias verev.

vipiopa. “Diogenes in the voA«reía proposed a coinage
of bones or stones (do pdáryaXor) instead of gold and silver,
Athen. Iv. 159 E.” Zeller, Socrates, p. 325 n.

éddayfs évexev. This again is pointed at Plato Rep. IL.
371 B, dyyopà 0) uiv Kal võuiopa EUufBoXov THS aXXaryjs
€veka, yevnoetat èr Tov Tov.  Aristotle's statement is more
exact, explaining that money is a security with a view to
future exchange: vép THs ueXXovomys àXXary9s, ei vüv
pndev Oe?rau OTe ¿oTa, àv ŠQem07, TO vópiopa olov èy-
yuntns éc0' ruv. Eth. v. 5. 14. Cf. especially Ar. Pol. r.
9. 1257 a 32 foll. and Newman on ib. 1257 b 11.

169. Athen. vi. 233 B, €, Zyvwv 06 ó amò THs

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 203

Xroüs mara rdXXa TAH TOD voutwos aùroîs (ie. gold
and silver) «al kaXds polar vojiaas advahopa, TH uev
aipeow avTÓV kai puynv ameviróv, THY pow 86 TOV TOV
kai amepírrev pomyovuéves DroueoÜa, mpoctaccwy’
Oros aden kai aÜavpaoov Tpòs TáXXa THY O.áÜeciv THS
Wuxns éyovres of avOpwrot, ösa pte kaNd. oTt Te
aicypa, rots pèv Kata drow ws él TOAD YpavTat, THY Ó
évavTiov uev ONGs SedorKdTes Xóyo Kal u) Qoo ToTov
aTÉXovTa.

The opinions professed with regard to money bear
the same relation to the last frag. as frag. 171 bears to
frag. 176. This passage affords another good illustration
of the doctrine of the xa85xovra as applied to those
things which are morally indifferent. The ozrovédaios,
who is unaffected either by fear or desire (a7a675s), and
whose ópuai are properly directed by right reason, will
know how to discriminate between td xarà dvow and ra
Tapa dvowv, so as to cling to the former and avoid the
latter. Thus vXoTos is a mpoņnypévov (Diog. L. vir. 106),
and possesses value as being of advantage for life in
accordance with nature (ib. 105), while 5 66) xpos
TXovrov which is characteristic of the o7rovéaios is sharply
distinguished from the ¢:Aordoutia (Stob. Ecl. 1. 7. 10,
p. 91, 18) of the $a0Xos.

alpecw: suggested by Schweighüuser and adopted by
Kaibel for the MSS. apyjv. After mv xpfjaw dé Schweig.
thought some words had fallen out such as 7v pèv
opOny eia.

Awáv. Cf M. Aurel. L. 3, To Avróv KaTa THY Gíavrav.

&mep(rrov. So Casaubon in place of MSS mepirrõv.
Contrast M. Aurel. v. 5 with id. rx. 32.

mponyoupéves. This word is difficult. In Sext. Emp., with
whom it occurs at least eight times, it always means
“principally” or “in the first place,” being often opposed

204 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO,

to dxoXovOcs. cf. mponyovpevos Xóyos frag. 123 = leading
doctrime. Here however it seems to have the special
Stoic sense —in the absence of overriding circumstances
(«ard mepíaTacuv, cf. Epict. diss. 111. 14, 7, Stob. Ecl. rr. 7.
24. p. 144, 19, frag. 131. In this connection we may
compare Diog.'s division of xa09«ovra into rà dvév mepi-
cTáceos, such as vyselas émipeneio bai (or kaXds xpo Oa.
mAovT@ as here), and ta xarà cepíoraci, such as «jv
kto Šuapp(TTeuv (VIL. 109). Hirzel, p: 825, denies that
mponyoupévas belongs to the elder Stoics, thinking that
it was taken over subsequently from the Academics and
Peripatetics. He would substitute here ws rponypéveov.
d8ej points to the purging of the soul from the in-
fluence of the man: 6éos is a subdivision of $ofos not
very explicitly defined ap. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 10° p. 92, 5.
åðavpacrov. Cf. Hor. Epist. r. 6. 1, 2, nil admirari prope
res est una Numici solaque quae possit facere et servare
beatum; where see Orelli, who properly observes that ro
Gavpatew, which Plato and Aristotle speak of as the
starting point of philosophy, is something quite different,
Cf. Marc. Aurel. 1. 15, Cic. Tusc. 111. 30. Hence Arr. Epict.
Diss. 1. 18, 11, p) Oavuate TO kdXXos THS yuvatKos Kal TO
pory ov xyaXeravets. For 6iá8ecuv see on frag. 117.

170. Seneca de Otio 30, 2, Zenon ait: accedet ad
rempublicam (sapiens), nisi si quid impedierit. id. Tranq.
An. I. 7, Promptus compositusque sequor Zenonem, Clean-
them, Chrysippum ; quorum tamen nemo ad rempublicam
accessit, nemo non misit.

The same doctrine is attributed to Chrysippus in
Diog. L. vil. 121, zroXwreveo Oat aci Tov codóv, av pn Te
korún, 6s $us. Xpvourmos é poro mept Biwv: cf. Cic.
Fin. nr. 68, Schol. on Lucan rr 380, Stoicorum sapiens
erit civilis, hoc est, in administratione rel publicae.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 205

TO ToAuTeverOae is another instance of xaOjK«Kov which
is to be undertaken xara tov mponyovpevov Xóyov (Stob.
Ecl. r1. 7. 11", p. 111, 5) = zrpomyovuévos (see on last frag.).
We may say then that, while +ó vroXwreveo Oat is KaOjKov
qrponyovpuévos or dvev Trepia rác eos, TO u) ToXTeúeo Oat is
kaÜfkov Kata Tepictacwy, just as a careful use of wealth
is contrasted with the condition of the spendthrift.

171. Diog. vir. 121, kal aya ew, øs 6 Zyvev dno
èv sroNwreía, (Tov codóv) Kal TradoTrouncer Oat.

C£. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 11™, p. 109, 16, Cic. Fin. tr. 68. The
statement refers to the duty of a wise man under existing
circumstances, and while living in an ordinary civil com-
munity. It has no reference to the ideal state in which
wives are to be held in common (frag. 176): yapos clearly
belongs to the advadopa and yapeiv is a KaOjKov. This
seems better that Wellmann's view p. 439, who strains
the meaning of yajos to bring this passage into con-
formity with frag. 176, and is strongly supported by the
analogous case of the duty of the wise man to enter public
life. The latter clearly refers to existing political in-
stitutions, cf Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 11°, p. 94, 9, zroXvrevec 0a.
Tov codo, Kal padiota é rais Tovav’Tals Tro Telaus Tals
euhawovoais Twa TpoKoTHY mpds Tas TeXeías TOMTEÍAS.
The same explanation will account for the two passages
in Diog. vi. 11 and 72, where similar views are attributed
to the Cynies, without supposing (with Zeller, Socrates
p. 320) a divergence of opinion between Antisthenes and
Diogenes.

172. Diog. L. vu. 129, «ai épacOncecOar dé tov

^ ^ 4 A x / \ ^ y \ \
copov rdv véwv TOV éuoauvovrov 51a Tod eidous Tv pds
àpetiv evpviav, ds now Zývov ëv TH moMreütg.

For the Cynics see Introd. p. 20. This passage is no

206 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

doubt inspired by the influence of the Phaedrus and
Symposium. Speaking of the épws of Socrates Dr
Thompson remarks (Phaedrus App. r. p. 152) :—“It was
not the beauty of Alcibiades, but his splendid mental
endowments, his great capacity for good or for evil, which
excited the admiration and the solicitude of Socrates."
Cf. Symp. 208 B foll. and for ev$víav ib. 209 B, wuy7
Karn Kal yevvaia kai eUdvuet, cf. frag. 147, karaNmmróv
eiva, Tò 700s èE eldovs. We must distinguish between
the épws of the oovdatos and the dadros. rò épáv
itself belongs to the class of aà¿adopa, and implies,
therefore, a corresponding xa07xov, the duty, that is,
TOD Kanes épáv, Stob. Ecl. ir. 7. 5^?, p. 66, 3—10. If then
the objection is raised that the ce"7rovóatos should avoid
pws, if he is to retain his da@eva, since épws is a sub-
division of éwv@upia and a vos, the answer is that this
is untrue of that particular form of épws which is defined
as ézru9oNi) dirotrotias bua raros éupawopevov (Stob. l. c.
l. 12, ib. 10° p. 91, 15, 11* p. 115, 1, Diog. L. vit. 113, 120,
Sext. Emp. Math. vir. 239), and which is not an éz¿0un(a.
Under éifupia are to be classed Epwtes cdoópoi only,
and in Diog. vir 113 the distinction between the two
classes of épws is clearly indicated. Cic., Fin. ur, 68, speaks
of amores sanctos.

173. Athen. xir. 563 E, kai ToÜTo péev étyXekores
TOV apynyov úuðv THs copias Zejveva TOv QOoí(vika, Os
ovder@mroTe yuvaikl éxyprjaaro TraduKols Ó dei? ws "Avrí-
yovos ó Kapvotios (oTopet év TQ "epi Tov Blov a)To0*
OpvNXe?re yap Te “ Sel uj) TOY ToUaToY aA THs Wuyns
LA o
epar.

Set pa) «tA. It is most natural to suppose that these
are Zeno’s words from the position of his name in the
context. For the sense see on frag. 172.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 207

174. Clem. Alex. Paedag. t. 11. 74, p. 296 P. 109 S.,
U7oypddoew ó Kurus &owe Zývwv eixóva veaviov xai
obres avTov avopuavrovpyet: éotw, $w«oí, kaÜapóv cO
Tpocwtror, opps un) kaOeuuiévn, und Supa avare ragévov,
pndée Siakekracpévoy, ur) UmTLos 6 Tpáxmkos, uro. avié-
peva TA TOD GwpmaTos médy, aXXa [rà] peTéwpa évróvous
Quot: opOds vos mpos TÓv Xoyov, €UTHS Kal KaTOKwWYN
TOV op0@s cipnuevav, Kal oYnMaTLC uoi Kal riwnoeis pnõèv
évo.bodaat Tois ákoXda Tots éXTLOOS. aides pev érravÜeiro
Kal appevevmía: améoTo O6 Kal 0 dmÓ TÖV pupomoALov
Kal ypuooyociwv kai éploT@Niwy (MS Kal 6 amò TOY
ardkwv épyactnpiov, &vÜa Kal érarpixds Kexoopnpévor,
darep èm téyous cabefomevos, Sinwepevovow.

This remarkable fragment was first restored by Cobet
in Mnemos. O. S. vr. p. 339, who saw that the writer was
necessarily speaking of young men and not of young
women, as the word appevorría of itself shows. It seems
probable, as Wachsmuth suggests, that this frag. comes
from the épwtexn réxv» (Introd. p. 30).

veavtov. So Cobet l.c. for veayida. Dind. with two MSS.
reads veavia.

kaðapóv. Cf. Plut. de Audiendo 13, p. 45 C, vpoc óc
karácTacis kalapa kai avéudparos.

dvamerrapévov: barefaced, impudent, cf. Xen. Mem. It. 1.
22, rà è Oppata Éxew avamemrauéva, of the woman
representing Vice in Prodicus' fable. See Aesch. Suppl.
198, 9 and the comm. pndé dcaxexAXacpévoy is an emen-
dation of Cobet’s (Mnemos. xi. 387) for the MSS. umo
dvakekMacgévov, the meaning of which is not clear.
With the alteration dva. est hominis protervi et petu-
lantis, dvax. mollis et impudici.

rá is rejected by Wachsm. with great improvement to
the sense.

ópübs vois, so Wachsm. for vulg. opOóvov: mpos k.T.X.

208 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Perhaps it would be better to place a comma after voids,
and connect mpòs Tov Xóyov with of/vvrgs. Dind. brackets
OÉUTNS.

k(yqeis. . .év8:809ca. Dind. with some MSS.

popomoMev: these shops are mentioned as the lounges
frequented by young men. Ar. Eq. 1375, rà pepara
Tauti Aéyo, Tav TQ pup. Lys. Or. 24 8 20, Exacros yap
Upov clorat Tpocportay ó uév mpòs puporwhecîov, ó 6€
mpos kovpetov, ó 66 pos akvrorouetov, ó Ó SrroL àv TÓxm:
id. Or. 23. § 3, Isoc. Or. 7. § 48, ov« év Tots oripagpeiois of
vewtepor OuérpuBov ovd ev rais avAnTpicw ovd èv mois
TOLOUTOLS TVANOYOLS GAN’ év rois emırnõcúpacıv Épevov èv
ois érayOncav. In Homer's time the smith's shop was.
used for this purpose: Od. xvirr. 38, Hes. Op. 491: later
the barbers shop is most frequently mentioned: see
the comm. on Hor. Sat. L 7. 3. Other authorities are
collected by Becker, Charicles E. T. p. 272.

Kekoc pa]pévot. . . ka et óp.evoc. So Cobet for Kekog unuevaL...
kabefouevac. For the former word cf. Xen. Mem. rir. 11.
4 where Theodota is spoken of as voXvreAds kekooum-
pevnv, and Lucian, Ver. Hist. 11. 46, yuvatcas mavu éra-
pixas Kexoounpuévat (quoted by Becker, Charicles E. T.
p. 249); and for the latter Aeschin. Timarch. § 74 ro/s èr}
TOV oiknurov kaleķopévovs (referred to by Wachsm.), and
Catull. XXXVII. 8, 14.

175. Diog. L. vir. 22, deity te ÉéXeye Toùs véous Tác
KocpuóTyTL XpoÂaı kal vopeía kal cxnjuaTi Kal mepi-
Bony.

Possibly this is only a reference to the preceding
frag. For vopeía see on frag. 31.  zrepu8oA7j = clothing.

176. Diog. L. vir. 131, apésxet è a/Tois kai Kowds
eivat Tas *yvvaikas Seiv Tapa Tois codo dore TOv èv-

| TuxovTa TH évrvyovom xprja0au, Kaba dou Zývæv èv vf)

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 209

TOXMwTe(g. ib. 33, Kowds Te Tas yuvaixas Soypariverw
opotos IIXdrovi èv TÀ monutela.

For the Cynics see Introd. p. 20. Observe, however,
that Chrysippus concurred in this opinion, which must
not therefore be treated as merely Cynical.

177. Diog. L. vit. 33, kai éoOjrs 06 TÀ avTH Kedever
(Zrjvov) ypicba dvdpas kai wyvvaikas kai pndév uópuov
avrokekpU Oa.

The same view seems to have been advocated by the
Cynics. Hence the point of Menander's lines quoted by
Diog. L. Vi. 93, euwrrepvraijoew yap tplBwv’ ëyouo” éuot,
deep Kpatnts to Kuve mo? 7 yuvy. Socrates in
Xen. Symp. 11. 3 says :—éo607s Grd pèv yuvarcl addy Óë
dvÓpl rary. With regard to the words pmdév popsov
amor. Zeller, p. 308 n. 2, remarks :—“ The latter act is
only conditional and allowed in certain cases, such as for
purposes of gymnastics.” But the limitation is Plato's
(Rep. v. 452 A, 457 A) and we have already seen that
Zeno proposed to abolish yupvdova: it may well be that
Zeno, like the Cynics, disclaimed the theoretical propriety
of the ordinary rules of modesty in dress. There is no
question here of the xa@jxovra of ordinary life, and
Zeno's departure from the Cynical point of view is largely
to be found in this direction.

178. Origen c. Celsum, vir 63, p. 739, éxxXívovoi
\ 7 e \ ^ n / ^

TO pmovyevew of rà TOD Kuriéos Zyvwvos diXoaodoóbvres...
dud TO kowovikòv Kal Tapa oci eivau TQ Xoyucd Cow
voBevew Tv UO TOv vóuev érépg TpoKaTadndOeicary

^ ` , \ » , [4 5
yuvaira kai b0e[peu Tov àNXov avOporrov otkov.

Since strictly speaking marriage is an a6t4dopov, Tó
povyevew cannot be contrary to virtue, and such an
offence would be impossible in the ideal state. Still, with

H. P. 14

210 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

society constituted as it is, y) poryeve is KaOjKov vev
mepiotacews and therefore cata púow. The wise man
will recognise the laws of the state in which he lives in
the same spirit in which he takes part in its public affairs
(Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 11^ 94, 8 foll.). In Sext. Pyrrh. mr. 209
we find Tous ye pry povyovs Korales map "uiv vopos,
mapa é Tu adiadhopoy oTt vrais THY érépov yuvar
plyvucOar Kal pirocodpar 8é rwés pacov adidopov elvat
TÒ GXXoTpía, yuvatki piyvucGat. The Stoics are probably
indicated, and the passage is in no way inconsistent with
the present, cf. Theoph. ad Autol. rr. 3 p. 118 D, ovxi
Kal Trepi ceuvóTQros Trecpadpmevor ypdpew aceryeias Kab
mopvelas Kal porxeas edldakay éritereioOar, ere pv al
Tas oTUYNTAS appnToTrotias eia1yy)jcavro ;

179. Sext. Emp. Pyrrh. ur. 245, ofov yotv 6 aipeot-
apyns avtav Zývæv ev rais duatpiBais dou Trepi Twaidov
dywys dXXa Te Opmo.a Kal Trace’ * StaunplFew pndev wadrov
unè Hooov madina ù) um madia pè Ondréa Ù dppeva:
ov yap [éorte] Tarðixois dXXa, ?) pi) TracdcKoils ouóë ÜnXelaus
j Gppecw, àXXà ra/Tà TpéTEL TE Kal mpémovra éoTiv.”
The same fragment is preserved by Sext. Emp. adv.
Math. xr. 190, introduced by the words ai umu epi uév
vaíóev aywyns é rais SvatpiBais ó alpecvapyns Zývov
TovavTa twa ÓLéÉe.c uv, and with the variant dAXa mat-
dicots for éotl maidixois dXXa.

iy rats SiarpiBats. For this book see Introd. p. 30.
The true aspect from which to regard this and the
four next following fragments is very clearly set forth
in a passage of Origen, c. Cels. Iv. 45 (quoted by Zeller,
p. 310, n. 1). “The Stoics made good and evil depend
alone on the intention, and declared external actions,
independent of intentions, to be indifferent: e?zov oiv èv
TQ mepi adiahdpwv TOT OTL TH idiw Oy (the action

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 211

taken by itself) Ouyatpaot piyvvcbar adsvadopoy écrív,
el kal p Xp) év tats Kalerracats modttelats TÒ ToLovTOV Trotév,
Kal wrobécews yapw...mapenypası Tov codo, perà
Ths Üvyarpós povns karaMeXeuuuévov TavTds Tod TÖV
dvÜpovrev yévous SiepOappévov, Kat CyroÜow ei Kabn-
KOVTWS Ó TaT)p GvveNeUcera, TH Üvyarpi Úmèp TOD Mu)
amoXéa Qa. ..T0 wav Tov dvÜpoyrev yévos.” This also illus-
trates frag. 178.

180. Sext. Emp. Pyrrh. rtr. 246, mept ðè rips eis ToUs
yoveis ooLoTnTos ó avTos avp (Zyvæv) pow eis rà Tept
tyv loxacrny kai tov Oldimoda ott ovK Hv Sewwov TpiBew
THY pntépa kai ei pèv acÜevoücav éÉrepóv TL uépos Tob

, iA A \ 3 $ 2AN 3 , P 5
coparos Tpídras tals yepoly wpéder ovóév aiapóv' ei
86 repa, uépm vpídrae eÜopauvev, odvvwpévny vavcas, Kal
maldas é< THs pnTpos yevvaious érrolncev, ata wpóv. Sext.
Emp. Math. xi. 191, xai ye ó uév Zr9vev ta cepi THs
5 , ` 307 e , n e 5 E
loxaorns kai Oidimodos ia Topovjevdá gnaw OTL ovK Ñv
8ewóv tpirar Tu pntépa. Kal ei pèv aoÜ0evoücav To

^ ^ \ / io ea DN > dad > Q,
cpa Talis yepol Tpólas edéXew ovdev aiexpóv' ei Se
€ / , / > 5 A » , / , `
érépw pépet TpbJras èp @ eÜpev ddvvmpévny Travcas kai
mTaioas k THS MNTPOS yevvalovs vrovjcas Tí V aiaxpóv ;
ib. Pyrrh. ur. 205, aña <a) ó Kutveds Zyvov dol pn
droTrov elvat TO uópuov THS uyrpós TQ EavTod popi Tpivrau
kaÜdmep ovdée AAO TL uépos TOD THpaTOS a’THS TH Xeupi
tpiyar padrov àv eio, vis eivai, Plut. Quaest. Conv. IIT.
6. 1, 8 6, ds &yevye vr) Tov Kiva Kal Tod Zrvevos àv
> t xy \ > + \ ` A
éBovAóumv ëpn craunpiopods év ovuTociw Twi kai aloud
LüXXMov 1) aTrovdns Toca’Tys eyouevw cuUyypdumaTe TH
TonwTela KaTaTeTax Oat.

It should be observed that Sextus does not state that
this extract as well as the last comes from the dsatpiBail,
so that we may perhaps refer Plutarch’s words to this
passage: Wellmann however, p. 440, thinks that both the

14—2

212 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO,

Sextus passages come from the dsatpuBai, in which case
Plutarch’s statement should form a. separate fragment.
Cf. Chrysipp. ap. Sext. Pyrrh. rr. 246, id. ap. Epiphanius
adv. Haeres. rrr. 2. 9 (rrr. 39), Diels, p. 593, éxeye yap 8etv
plyvuc Oat rais untpace Tovs maldas Tots è TaTpact Tas
Ovyarépas. Diog. L. vir. 188, Theoph. ad Autol. rir. 6,
120 p.

181. Sext. Emp. adv. Math. xr. 190, kai vá^v (ó
Znvov) * $uapeunpucas Tov épdjuevov; ovk ëywye. rórepov
oun éTreOUpnoas avróv Svaunpicat; Kal ada. AAN ème-
Ovpnoas Tapacyeiv cot avTOv 7) epoBnOns Kededoar; pa
A’. GAN éxéreveas; kal para, elt ovK úmmnpérmnoé c0;
où yap.”

The line taken here is that the intention is all impor-
tant, and not the act in itself: hence virtue belongs only
to omovéaia dabeors, cf. Cleanth. frag. 95,

doris émiÜvjudv dvéxer aia xpoD vrpdryuaros
obTos 7om)oe, TOUT eav, kaipòv XDQ.

Bekker suggests aan’ ézrifvuyjoas...eir. éboBnOns.

182. Sext. Emp. Pyrrh. rr. 200, kai Tí Oavpacrov

e \ . > X ^ ^ / ` . `
oTov ye kai ot amo THS KUVLKHS iNocodias Kal ot mept

tov Keriéa Zyvova <a KreavOnv kai Xpdourmov áóuá-
^ ° ° / 5 ,
Qopov Toro (i.e. appevopu£(av) eivai pacu ;

183. Sext. Emp. Pyrrh. m1. 206, +ó re aiexpovpryetv

éraparov ov Tap Tu 0 Zejvov ovk atrodoKxipacer.

184. Theoph. ad Autol. rm. 5, p. 119 c, ti cos &8o£e
ta Lnvwvos Ù rà Avoyévovs ka KXedvOovs, ómóaa mept-
éyovow ai BiBrou avrGv Oiódokovca, dvÜpwrroflopías,
matépas pv vrrà (oiov Tékvov &ea0at kai BiBpdacKecbar

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 213

Kal, eb TLS oU BovAoLTO ?) uépos TL TS pvcepás Tpodms
atroppiivevev, aÜTÓv zarec0íeo Qar Tov ur) aryóvra ;

Cf. Diog. L. vir. 121, yevoecÓaí te kal avOporivar
capkàv kara Téepictacy, ib. 188 (Chrysippus) év 8à To Y
Tepl Oucaíov Kata Tors xiMLovs cTíxXoUs, Kal ToUs ATO-
Üavóvras kareaO(ew Kkerevwov. Sext. Pyrrh. nr 207, 247
foll, Math. xr. 192—194, Mayor on Juv. xv. 107. Canni-
balism was also recommended by the Cynics, Diog. vI. 73,
pnd dvóciov eivat TÒ Kal avOpwretwv kpedv &raoÓau, ws
djrov kr TOV aXXorp(ev €Odv, with which cf. an amusing
summary of the various modes of disposing of the dead
prevalent in different countries, ap. Sext. Pyrrh. III.
226—229. It should be observed however that the Stoics
only enjoined this practice xard crepía raa.

185. Epiphan. Haeres. rr. 36, roùs dé TeXevrGvras
feos TapafáXXew yphvat 3) Tupi. Kal rois taLd.Kots
xpo 0a. dKwdUTas.

Chrysippus, ap. Sext. Emp. Pyrrh. rr. 248, Math. xr.
194, recommends that the flesh of deceased relations
should be eaten if suitable for food, but, if useless for that
purpose, j xaropvtavres TO vipa émoícovsiw Ù Kata-
kajcavres THY TéDpav adnoovow. The meaning of these
obscure words of Epiphanius appears to be similar, and
mapaSadrew is certainly commonly used in this sense
(see L. and S.) Others however have explained the
words very differently. Thus Stein, Psychol. p. 161, n. 314,
finds some allusion in them to the doctrine of metem-
psyehosis. In the same spirit Diogenes ordered his body
to be cast forth unburied (Diog. L. vi. 79, Cic. Tusc.
L 104) Chrysippus proved the absolute unimportance of
any particular form of burial from a comparison of the
varying practice of different nations (Cic. Tusc. r. 108,
Sext. Pyrrh. rri. 226—9).

214 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

186. Cic. Ep. Fam. Ix. 22. 1, Atqui hoc (libertas
loquendi) Zenoni placuit...sed ut dico placet Stoicis suo
quamque rem nomine appellare.

Cf. Cic. Off. 1. 128, nec vero audiendi sunt Cynici, aut
ei qui fuerunt Stoici poene Cynici, qui reprehendunt et
invident, quod ea quae re turpia non sunt nominibus
ac verbis flagitiosa ducamus: and see Zeller, Socrates,

p. 326.

187. Clem. Alex. Strom. rr. 20. 125 P. p. 494, S. p.
178, cares 6 Zývæv rmi røv Ivõðv ÉXeyev éva “Ivddv
TapoTT@pevov éÜéXew «v» ideiv 7) maras Tas Trepi sróvov
azro8eí£eus uaOetv.
The allusion to the Indians is explained by the words
the Indian philosophers are said to have used to Alexander:
| copara uev perá£eis ék TóTou eis TóTOV, Jrvyàs 9 nueTépas
ovK avayKacers Tout à pr) (8ovXóue0a. Tip avOpwrrois
| péyioTov koXac'T1)ptov, rovrov TELS KaTappovodpmev. Clem.
Alex. Strom. rv. 7. 50. Similarly Philo, in telling the
same story: quod omnis probus sit liber, p. 879, wip
peylotous rois Saat cwpacıi Tovous Kal POopav épyaterat,
| ToUTov viepavw nets yivoueOa, Cvres xatoueOa. The
historians attest the custom of burning themselves alive
said to have been practised by the Brahmans. Strabo,
xv. 1. 65, alcyxiotov Ó avrois vouiferOar vóoov ccpa-
tiv’ tov Ó vmrovoncavta kaf avtod ToÜro éEayeu
éavróv Sua Tvpós vnoavTa mupav, vraXevjráuevov Gà kai
kaÜ(cavra émi T)v Tupav payar kekevew, axivntov Që
kaíea 0a, Curt. VIII. 9. 32, apud hos occupare fati diem
pulerum, et vivos se cremari iubent, quibus aut segnis
aetas aut incommoda valitudo est:...inquinari putant
ignem nisi qui spirantes recipit. Cic. Tusc. r 40,
(Mueller) uri se patiuntur Indi. The case of Calanus is
particularly recorded, Cic. Tusc. 11. 52 ete.

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 215

ëv, added by Cobet, “Epis Aoyuos, I. p. 487.

rds...dmodetas. There is no doubt some particular
reference in this, the point of which it is difficult now to
ascertain. May it refer to Antisthenes? In Diog. L. vI. 2,
we read of him: ör: ó movos ayabov cuvéoTmoe Sia Tod
peyáXov ‘Hparréovs kai tod Kvpov, and in the list of his
works preserved by the same writer (VI. 15—18) we find
three with the title 'HpaxXjs, two of which bear the
alternative title 7) vepi ioxvos.

188. Galen de cogn. animi morbis, v. 13, otto yodv
xai Znvov r£(ov dura mpárTew nuds acpards, ws daqro-
oynoopuévous óXbyov VoTepov Tratdaywryois’ evóuate yap
oUTws ékeivos 6 avnp Tos TOAAOVS TOV avÜpovrev éro(jovs
üvras Tots "réXas émvriudy Kav nåes avTOVS TapaKaNy.

maSaywyois: for their duties see Becker, Charicles, E. T.
p. 226.

189. Stob. Flor. 14, 4 = Anton. Meliss. 1. 52,

pa / er - S \ /
éXeyyye cavTóv, OSTIS el, ur) mpós dpi
diov, apapod 86 korakov Trappraíav.

deyxe cavróv recalls yvaOt ccavróv, for which see the
authorities ap. Mayor on Juv. x1. 27.

mpds xdpw xov — do not listen to flatterers, is the
passive form of mpòs Sony Tı Xéyew (Thuc. 11. 65), pos
58ov)v Snunyopetv (Dem. Phil r. § 38), zpós yapıv épeis
(Soph. O. T. 1152). The best illustration however is
Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 115, p. 114, 23, the wise man ovre mpos-
pépet Tivù ote mpocierar Tov Trpós ydpiw Xóyov, Diog. L.
XE. 117.

Meineke would also ascribe to Zeno the couplet
quoted by Stob. Flor, 11. 12, where the lemma in the MSS.
is ZņvoðorTov.

216 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

190. Maxim. Floril. c. 6, ed. Mai, ó uév yewpyòs ad’
dv av TON)v Kal karov QéNoL kapmóv AaBeiv whérXLpov
éavrüv éxeivows mapéyerat kal mávra Tpómou émipmencirat
Kal Oepatrever’ TOAD è waAXov avOpwrros rois wperipois
mepvxact yapiferOar xai "epi Tovs TovovTovs pM Ta
orovOátew' kai Oavpacrov ovdév. kal yap Kal Tov pepõv
ToD caros éxeivwv émiueXoUue0a uádXXov &mep oper-
p.óTepa, éavrois pds Tv Üm»peaíav vopitopev elvat, 60ev
ópoles ú$ dv ev mácxew aktoduev, wperiuovs avrols
&pryous, GAG jr) Tots Xóyous eivau Sez. ove yap 7 ħala
TG Üepamevovr( avTnv émwyaXXerau, Arr  ékjépovoa
moAXOUS TE Kal kaNo)Ue kapmOo)Us émeucev éavTüs èri-
pereio at warrov.

This fragment is taken from Wachsmuth (Comm. 1.
p. 6): see Introd. p. 31.

9o: unless 0éXy be read, àv belongs to the verb.
Cf. Dem. de Cor. § 246, dara uyv dv y adv ó prep
UmevOuvos eim, vrácav é£éracw AapBave. But it is often
difficult to determine whether the optative is really
potential See Fennell on Pind. Nem. Iv. 8, Goodwin
§ 557, Madvig § 137.

spAmov, cf. Cleanth. frags. 75 and 77.

ävðporou, “oi addendum?” Wachsm.

éa.vrots Jelf § 654 b.

191. Athen. xir. 565 D, ó dé cops éketvos Zivov, ds
dnow Avtiyovos ó Kapiatios, vrpouavrevójevos vudv ws
TO eikós Trepi Tod (ov Kal THs TpocToinTou émurmóeúÚceos,
¿jm ws oí TapakovcavTes avToD TOV Nóyov Kal ur) cvvévres
écovtat putrapol Kal averevOepos’ Kabarrep oí THs Apic-
timmou TrapevexÜévres aipécews dowTot kal Opaceis.

Cie, N. D. rr. 77, attributes this remark to Aristo:
si verum est quod Aristo Chius dicere solebat, nocere
audientibus philosophos iis, qui bene dicta male interpre-

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 217

tarentur: posse enim asotos ex Aristippi, acerbos e Zenonis
schola exire. It should be observed, however, that Athe-
naeus specifies Antigonus of Carystus as the source of his
information, so that he is at least as much entitled to
credit as Cicero.

192. Stob. Floril 6. 62, ed yap etpmrau én, TÒ Tod
Zývwvos Ste ToUTov Éveka kapréov oů Kal kopmréov, Tod
kata dvow, tva wn Bapovpevos Tus vd THs kÓums umo
évoyXoUpevos 7) TPs unóeuíav évépyeav.

ToU kard $ócw. Conformity to nature, ie. external
environment, is taken as the basis of all those actions,
which, although unconnected with virtue, yet constitute
the objects of «a05jkovra, Diog. L. vir. 108, évépyymua dé
avrò (KaOjKov) civar, rais rata ocu karackevals oiketov,

Stob. Ecl. Ir. 7. 8*, p. 86, 13; Diog. L. vir. 105.

193. Diog. L. vir. 48, dXAà py Kal TÓv oùpavòv
mportov (ie. Pythagoras) dvowacas Koouov Kal Thy yiv
oTpoyyvAny’ ws 66 Oeoppacros lapueviógv: ws 96 Zyvev
"Hao8ov.

The lines of Hesiod supposed to be referred to are
Theog. 126—128, Tata é ro, mpadrov uév éyeivato ioov
éavrj o)pavóv da'TepóevO (va pav srepi vávra KANÚTTOL
öpp elm paxapecor Üeois Edos dodaXés aici, which are
a very poor basis for the two assertions. For the limited
sense in which xécpos is used, cf. Diog. vir. 138, «ai
aüT)v O6 THY Siakdopnow Tdv doTépev kócpov elvat

Aéyovatv, Krische, p. 396, 397.

194. Diog. L. vi. 91, Zyvov & au 6 Kites èv rats
xXpeíaus Kal køõiov avróv (Crates) dnot more poopádat
TQ Tpiwve avezvrper ovra.

iy rais xpelats. Introd. p. 31.

218 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

T6 tp(Bov. The Cynics adopted this as their charac-
teristic dress, following Socrates (Zeller, Socrates p. 316.
Becker, Charicles, E. T. p. 419). Zeno himself wore the
Tpi ov (cf. apoph. 3).

ávemvrpemro)vra i.e. “nec curavisse deformitatem." The
word is omitted in L. and S. and also in Steph. Th.

195. Dio. Chrysost. LIII. 4, yéypadoe 06 xai Zynvav ó
QuXócodos els re THY Inada kai ryv 'O8vaceíav kal mept
tov Mapyitov óé Soke? yàp Kal ToÜro TÒ Troinwa vro
“Opnpou yeyovévas vewrépov Kal atrotrerpwpévov THS avToD
duo éos mpòs Toinow. ó dé Zyvwv ovdev rdv Tod ‘Ounpov
avéyes dua Simyovpevos kai Siddoxwv ÖTL Ta uév KATA
dofav Tà 86 kara adynOevay yéypadev, bras uù paivntar
AUTOS a)TQ payowevos ëv Tiot Soxodaow évavrícs eiphabas.
ó Gà Xóyos ovTos '"AvrioÜÉvovs EoTi vpórepov OTL TA pe
oén rà dé arnOeia elpntat TS mot GAN Ó gév oUK
éÉewpyácaro a/Tóv, 6 86 ka?’ Exactov Tdv em pépous
eonro@cer.

For the object of Zeno’s Homeric studies cf. Krische
p. 393, 394, who points out that, although Zeno may have
incidentally controverted some of the Chorizontes of his
time, yet his main object was to fortify Stoic precepts by
appealing to Homer’s authority. For Antisthenes see
Zeller, Socrates p. 330.

Mapyirov. This work seems to have resisted the dis-
integrating process, which from early times was applied
to Homer’s works, better than any other of the poems
ascribed to him, except the Iliad and Odyssey. Aristotle
(Poet. Iv. 10) does not question Homer’s authorship.

196. Plut. comm. Hesiod. IX. Zývæv ó Yrarkds
éyndrXaTTE TOUS o TY oUS Néyov

^ N
keivos èv vravdpua Tos Os ev eimOvTi miOnTaL’
, ^ 3 Rz , ^ ^ s uS , 4
éc0Xós 8 av kdkeivos ðs aros TavTa vonon,

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO, 219

7 evmebela ta mpworela didots, T ppovjoet è và
Sevtepeta, The same in Proclus on Hesiod, Op. 291,
Gaisf. Poet. Gr. Min. rr. p. 200, cf. Diog. L. vir. 25, 26,
whose comment on the change of place in the lines is
as follows:—xpeitrova yap ela, TÓv dkoÜcat. kards
Ovvápevov TÒ Xeyóuevov kal yphjolat a)rQ, Tod Š” avTod
TO "rdv avvvo?jcavros. TO èv yap civar póvov TO cvveivau.
TQ 8 eù mewcÜÉvr. mpoceivas kai tiv mpá£iw. Themist.
Or. virt. 108 ©, uot òè kai. Znvev ó Kirieds Alav dpeoros
Thy evme(0euav aropnvapevos TIS dryywvoías apeTnY eivat
Bacirtxwrépay kai thy rá£iw tiv ‘Hodov petabels k.T.À.
id. Or. XIN, 171 D, óp0ós yap veda Bave Zijvov 6 Kirieùs
Bacihikwrépar eivat THS ayywwolas THY eÚTe(0etav.

The lines of Hesiod (Op. 291) are often quoted or
imitated: cf. Ar. Eth. 1. 4, 7, Liv. XXII. 29, 8, Soph. Ant.
720 pæ éywye mpeoBelew mort põvai Tov avdpa mavr
êmiorhuns TrXéov' ei Ò oDv...kai TOY Xeyóvrev cÚ kaXóv
TO pavOavew.

197. Plut. de aud. poet. p. 33 E, xai ó Zývæv érravop-
Oovpevos TO TOD XodokNéovs,
bortis Óë pos TUpavvov éumopevera,
keívov “att SodAos Kav éXeUÜepos porn,
peTéypagev
ovk gate odos àv (7v) éXeu0epos porn,
TQ ¿Xeu0épo viv avvekdaivov Tov aden Kal peyaróppova
kai ATATEVOTOV.
The fragm. is no. 711 (Dind.) This was also given to
Aristippus or Plato by other authorities: see Diog. L. rr.
82. For éXevOepos cf. frag. 149.

198. Strabo vir 3. 6, Homer never mentions Arabia
ei uù) Znvove TQ pirocodw mpocekréov ypapovri'

Ai0(oras & ixopnv kai XWoviovs "Apafás Te.

220 THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO.

Hom. Od. 1v. 83 where the edd. now adopt xai 'Epep-
Bovs the reading of Posidonius: Crates of Mallus pre-
ferred ’Epeuvovs (Krische p. 393).

199. Stob. Floril 95. 21, Z»9vev é$ó» Kpatntra
avaryvyvóa ew v akvreío Kabnuevov tov 'ApioToréXovus
mpotpemTixov òv éypawe mpds Oeuíceva tov Kutpiov
Bactréa Néyov OTe ovdevi vrXeío ayala Umapyer Tpds TO
pirocopnaat, TAODTOY Te yap TAEiaTOY avróv Ééyew dare
datravay eis abra ér( 066 SdEav Urdapyew avTe. avaryiyve-
ckovTos 06 avToÜ TOv akvréa pn mpocéxew Awa pámrovra,
kai Tov Kparnta eirreiv eyo pot 6okà, à Piore, ypayrew
Tpos cé TpoTpeTTTLKOV’ TAEiw yàp óp cou vTápxovra
Tpos TO Hirocodhaat dv &yparpev ' ApuaroréNgs.

This passage belongs to the work entitled Kparntos
atropvnpovevuata: Introd. p. 31.

200. Stob. Floril. 36. 26, Zývæv àv ua0nTév ¿bacxe
Tovs èv HirorXOyous elvat Tovs dé XotyodiXovs.

The meaning is made clear by Stob. Ecl. 1r. 7. 11* p.
105, 4, where it is said of the dadros :—pndé elvat QuXó-
Aoyov, Noyopirov O6 uXXov, péypt AaNLGS émwvmrOXa(ov
mpoBaivovta, unkére Óë Kal Tots épyous éxBeBavovpevor
TOV THS apers Xóyov.

201. Stob. Floril. 6. 34, ó Znvwv yrvato Tovs mheic-
Tovs Aéyov, éfóv amò THY Tovey rds nOovas jépew, amo
TOV payelpelov NauBavortas.

mwóvov. This passage should have been quoted in the
note on frag. 128.

202. Stob. Floril 4. 107, Zývæv 96 ën wyeXotov
ékdaTovs pev Tois Tpdypacw ws Set Ehv un) mpocéyew Ws
ovk €lddT@v, TOV dé Tapa mávrev ¿mato Oavudtew ws

THE FRAGMENTS OF ZENO. 221

éxópevov Kpicews. mpáypacıv is clearly corrupt and
Wachsmuth reads zaparyyetXaciv, but Mr R. D. Hicks
suggests Tols mapa tøv cooóv TapayyéApaciv which
restores the balance of the sentence.

For the sense cf. Cleanth. frag. 100.

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO.

1. Diog. L. VII. 2, ypnotnpiafopuévov avtod (Zývævos)
Tí mpatTov apiota BidceTat, atroxpivacOat Tov Oedv ei
avyxpatiforto Tots vexpois. 00ev Évvévra, rà TOV apyaiov
dvayvyvookew. The same in Suid. s. v. cvyxparifer Oar
col. 938.

2. Diog. L. VIL 3, sropó/pav éwmemopevuévos amo
^ , X ^ ^ , , , \ \
THs Powixns Tpós TQ lleipatet evavaynoev. avedOadyv 8€
eis Tas “AOnvas 799 TpLaxovTovTns, kalise Tapa Tua
BiBrorradrAny, üvaryvyvo o kovros 0ë ékeívov TO SevTEpov TOV
Eievobóvros atrouvnuoveupatav oleis ému0ero mod ĉia-
TpíBowv ot TotoDTo, dvOpes. evKaipws O6 rapióvros
Kparntos, 6 BiBdoTr@Ans óe(£as aUróv pno, Tovro Tapa-
KorovOncov. Cf. Themist. Or. XXII. 295 D, rà dé audi
Znvevos apidnra Te éote kal ddopeva ÚTÒ moXXMdv bre
9 EN e , 5 / 3 / > \ \
avtov ý) Eekparovs atroroyia é< Dowilkns eis THY IHoucov)v

HYAVEV.

3. Plut. de Inimic. Util. 2, Zývæv 8é, Tis vavednpias
avT@ cvvrpuBeioans, zrvÜojevos erev, eÙ ye, © TUYN, Totes
eis TOV TpiBava cvveXavvovca judas. Plut. de Tranq. An.
6, Znvevt TO Kirie? pla vaüs vrepugv hoptnyds’ muOdpevos
66 raúryv avTopoptov ámoXeXévau avykXvaÜOcicav, c) ye,
elev K.T.M. With xai tv oroav added after rpíBeva.
Substantially the same account in Plut. de Exilio 11, with

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO. 223

xai Biov duXócodov in place of kai rrjv oroav. Suidas
col. 1023 s. v. viv evrdonKka ote vevavayuka. émi TØV
map édmida eUrvynaávrov. Znvev yap ó Kvrieüs katarı-
mov Tovs Tplv didacKadovs kai Kparntos ToU didocogou
PosTnTNS yevójevos ToÜTo elpyKe, vavayio Tepumeo@u Kal
eim Ov, € ye Toe? y Ty?) TpocEeNa’YoVcA nuds pirocodia
* * * cttw tpatnvar mpos pirocodiav. That the story
was given in various forms appears from the account
in Diog. L. vir. 4,5. Senec. de Trang. An. 14, 2, Nun-
tiato naufragio Zeno noster, quum omnia sua audiret

submersa, * Iubet " inquit “me fortuna expeditius philoso-
phari." à

4. Diog. L. vil. 19, mpos 86 tov pacrovra ds Ta
TOAG avr Avticbévns ovk apéckes, ypelav ZodokXéovs
Trpoeveykdj.evos, NPOTHTEV ei Tiva Kal KAN eyELY AUTO
Soke. Tov Ó ovx eidévar dvjcavros, eir ovk aicyvvy,
x , » ^ 5 > / € 3 , Z
ëpn, cei pév Tte kakóv HY eipnuévov Úm  'AvricÜÉvovs
"m3 5 , ` / 5 n 1 303
TOÜT ékXeyópevos Kal uvnpovevwv, el Sé TL kaXóv, oÚÓ
emriBadropevos karréx ew ;

5. Diog. L. vir 20, Xéyovros 8é Tivos avTQ epi
IIoXéjovos, øs a^a rrpoÜéuevos Arra Aéyet okvOÓporrácas,
én, Trócov yap nyatras Ta Sidopeva ;

The explanation is thus given by Aldobrand: videbatur
ergo cupiditatis Polemonem accusare, ac si illa ita docere
consuevisset, quomodo a discipulis tractaretur.

6. Plut. de prof. in virt. c. 6, 6 06 Zyvæv ópóv tov
@cddpactov eri TH vroXXo)s ëyew na0nràs Üavuatóuevov,
ó éxelvou pèv yopos, épn, ueitov, ovpos dé cvpoovórepos.
Plut. de seips. citra inv. laud. e. 17, obre yap ó LZyvev
mpos TO 7MjÜos r&v Ocoppactov pabntar, ó éxeivou xopós,
» / x p bel X ,
dy, pelSav, ó éuós 0€ cumpwvorepos.

224 APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO.

7. Diog. L. vit. 24, $goi 9 ’Amodra@vi0s 6 Túpios
€xxovtos avtov Kparntos tod iwatiov dmó XriNTtovos
eimeiv, ó Kparns, MaB duXooóQwv éotiv éridéEvos 7) Sud
TOV Grcov' vreícas ovv Eke TOUTOV. el 5é pe fidt», TO
èv a dpa Tapa cot ŠoTau, ý Sé Nyvxr) Tapa Xrivmrovi.

Cf. Cleanth., frag. 108, and for the concluding words
of the anecdote Arist. Ach. 398, ó voüs uév é£v £vNXéyov
évTUAMua ovK évdov avtos Ó ëvõov xr... Plaut. Aulul.
179, nune domum properare propero: nam egomet sum
hic, animus domist. Pseudol. 32, nam istic meus animus
nune est non in pectore, and Lorenz ad loc.

8. Diog. L. vir. 21, &xeye è kal àv pirocddav ToUs
TElaTOUS, TA Mev TOANA daóQovs eivat, và SE mepa Kal
Tvynpà. ayaeis.

Wilamowitz(Antigonos p. 117) says:—“ die Philosophen
sind in den meisten Dingen ungeschickt, von den gewóhn-
lichen begreifen sie nichts: sie wissen nur das eine was
Not tut,’ but probably we should read eùpaĝeîs, with
Merie Casaubon.

9. Diog. L. VII. 20, eizróvros é Twos ÖTL pixpa avrà

, pp 2
8oket Tà Xoydápua TOV Hirocdparv, Aéyets, eire, TAXON.
del uévrot kal rds cvdAdaBds avtdv Bpayeias evar, ei

Suvarov.

10. Diog. L. vir. 25, xai mpòs rov SetEavta 86 avrQ
8,aXekrukóv ev TO ÜepíCovri AOyw Eta SvadexTiKas idéas
mu0écOar mosas elompattetar piocho axovicavta “Që
éxatov O.akocías avT@ ovat.

The fallacy known as Oepí£ev was concerned with the
nature of the possible. “ According to Ammon. de Inter.
106 a [83 p. 160 ed. Or.], Lucian, Vit. Auct. 22 the Oepifor
was as follows:—Either you will reap or you will not reap:

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO. S225

it is therefore incorrect to say, perhaps you will reap.”
Zeller, p. 182.

11. Suidas col. 1202 sv. 8éXros = Diog. L. vir. 37, ,
KreavOns, dv xai abwpotov Tots oxdnpoxnpots ÓéXrots, al
ps u&v ypahovTar, Svatnpovar de Tà ypadévra. Cf. Plut.
de Audiendo c. 18, orep ó Kħedvôns xal Revoxparns,
Bpabitepos Soxobytes eivat Tv avoxoXacTÓv, ovk aTrEbi-
dpackov èr Tod pavOavew ovdé arékauvov, Ada $Odvovres
eis EauTovs Erraslov, ayyelows Te BpaxyvoTouols Kal Twaris |
yxarnais dTewucdtovres, ws ods uev Trapadeyopevor ToÚs
Aóyovs daaXdós 66 kal BeBaiws tnpodvtes. For mivares

see Becker, Charicles, Eng. Tr. p. 162.

12. Diog. L. vit 18, 'Apícrevos è tod pabntod
movra duareyouévouv ovK evpuas, év.a dé Kal mrporerós
kai Opacéws, advvartor, eitrev, eb pn ce ó TaTHp peOvwv
5 , el > ` ` / 3 z /
éyévynoev. O0ev avTov Kai XáXov arrexadet, Bpayudoyos

dv. Attributed to Diogenes by Plut. de Educ. Puer. 3.

13. Stob. Flori. 36, 23, rGv tus é "Axadnuela
veavioxav Trepi émuTndevpatwv SuerdéyeTo adpovws’ ó 06
Znvov av u) TNV yAðTTav, edn, cis voüv amofpétas
diaréyn, TOND TrEiw ETL Kal év Tots Xóyows TANMMEAN TELS.
Plut. Phoc. v. 2, Zyvev éXeyev ore Se? Tov dirocodor eis
voOv àrroBárrovra m podépea bat rv Xé£iw. Cf. Suidas I. p.
328 (of Aristotle), Tis $/cecos ypappartevs Hv TOV káXapov
dTofpéxcv eis vodv. Some have regarded these words as
the original of Quintilian's sensu tincta (frag. 27, where
see note). Cf M. Aurel. v. 16.

14. Diog. L. vr. 20, det 86 éd Tov OuaXeyópevov,
orep Tods UTokpvrás, THY perv bon), Kal THY Ovvajauv
peyarnv EÉxew' TÒ pévtoe oTÓua pr) SiédAKEWV* Ò Troceiv
TOUS TOAAG Mev AaXOdDYTAs, advvaTta €.

HP. 15

226 APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO.

15. Diog. L. vit. 20, rots ed Xeyouévois oúg Edn etv
KatanrelrecOa vómov, @om7ep Tots ayaloîs Texvíraus eis
TÒ ÜeácacÜaw tovvavtiov Që Tov dkovovra obro pos
Tols Aeyouevors yiverOat, dove u) AawBavew xpovov eis
THY eTrLONMELoo LW.

f , el ,
+Tómov: perhaps we should read ypovov, #omep TóTov.

16. Diog. L. vit. 22, u) tas dwvds kai tas AéËeuç
dely avrouvmnuoveveww, aXXà Trepi THY SidOeow THs xpeías
Tov vodv dooxeto Qar pu) orep Anoly Twa ù exevacíav
‘avarapBdvorras.

.For the distinction between dwv7 and ré£€vs cf. Diog.
L. vut. 56, Xé£us Ò Erte ov) éyypáuparos. The meaning
is:—we ought not to commit to memory the words and
expressions of a maxim (xpeías as in apoph. 4), but to
exercise our mind as to its arrangement, without learning
it by heart like a cookery recipe. For avaħapßavew cf.
Plut. Agesil. 20, 3. Cobet, however, translates otherwise.

17. Diog. L. VIL 23, rò kardos eime THS opo vns
dvOos elvan.

So Cobet, followed by Wilamowitz, for MSS. davis...
boxu, cf. Diog. L. vir. 130, dpa àv0os apers. Zeno,
frag. 147, catadnrrov civari TÒ 7)0os é£ etóous.

18. Stob. Floril. Monac. 196, Zyvev ó duXócodos,
Xeyóvrov. TeV OTL Tapoa Xéyei, eisrev, GAN’ ov Tapa-
vopa. Cf. Cleanth. frag. 107.

19. Plut. de Virt. Mor. 4, kaitoi kai Zýyvová dacw
eis Üéarpov avióvra KiOapmdodvtos "ApouBéos Tpós Tods
pabnrtas, lwpev, eimeiv, dws karajá0cuev olay évrepa
kai vedpa kai ÉUXa kai dota Xóyou Kal apLOuod perac-
xóvra, kal ra£ées éuuéXevav Kal bon adinow.

Cf Plut. Arat. c. 17, 2, dOovros 'ApowBgées ev TO
Ücárpo, a passage which also fixes Amoebeus as a con-
temporary of Antigonus.

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO. 227

20. Stob. Floril. 36,19, Zýjvæv mpos Tov TXeio XaXetv
“ý vows mp
^ \ t ^ N S £ e 1
yMérrav» pèv piav dvo 06 dra Tapéoyev, iva OvmrXacíova
Ov Aéyopev àkovojuev." Diog. L. VII. 23, zrpós TO $AvapoUv
perpariov, Sia ToÜTo, eire, úo dTa Éxyopuev, oTÓua SE EV,
iva Thelova uév akovaper, ?yrrova dé Xéyopev, cf. Plut. de
Garrul. 1, caporns yap av0aíperós éotuv (scil. ý aorynoia)

Ui Xs , «c ] » 5
OÜéXovra Ù àkovew “veavioke,’ Eimer,

, n 5 / t , \ ^ "
avOpoTrov, oiuat, peppopévæov bts uiav pèv YAOTTaV ÓÚ0
z * Y \ ,
Ò àra éyovcu, id. de audiendo, 3, kai yàp tov Emap-
, € / > ^ P4 f / ,
vøvõðav ó XarívÜapos éraiwav ëd?) umTe TAELOVA rytwoa ovrt
, A ,
re éehdtrova j0eyyonéuo padiws évrvyetv érépp. Kal
T)v dow nuav ékáoTo Réyovor Svo pèv OTA SodvaL
, ` zx € > , , ` > , > /
piavy 06 yAoTTav ws éXaTTOVA Xéyew Ù dkovew ogei-
NovTt.

21. Diog. L. vit. 21, veavicxov moda XaXoÜUvros,
&$j, rà Ta cov eis THY yAOTTAV avveppinkev.

22. Diog. L. vit 26, éreyé Te xpebrrov eivat rots
tool onabety 7) TH YAOTTH.

This is found several times in the collections of yvapar,
and is sometimes attributed to Socrates (cf. Stein, Psych.
p. 7, n. 5): the references are given by Wachsmuth in
Sauppe's Satura Philologa, p. 29.

23. Diog. L. VII. 14, zXeióvov TE Trepuorávrov avTOv
delEas èv TH cTod Kat dkpov TÒ ÉUMuvov Tepubepës Tod
Bwpmod éd, TodTó vore év ése Exevto’ Sid dé TO êuTo-

/ 307 327 ve ^ `x > ^ , ,
- i iie èréðn. Kal vj.ets èv êk TOU néoou BactacavTes
A ,
AUTOS HTTOV uiv évoxXMic'ere.

Kohler in Rhein. Mus. xxxix. 297 proposes BaOpou
for Bwpod.

24. Diog. L. vir 24, épwrndeis mds eyes mpos Not-
Sopiav, kaÜdep, elmev, ei mpeo(gevrr)s dvamókpuros amo-
OTENXOLTO.

15—2

228 APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO.

The point of this bon mot appears to have been lost
in the tradition: it must originally have stood :—“ The
man who abuses me I send away like an ambassador
without an answer (xa@amep ei mpecRevtnv avamókpvrov
amootéorwt)”: so Wilamowitz.

25. Diog. L. VII. 24, év cuprociw KATAKELMEVOS CLYN,
\ 3277 > , y - zx [4 , ^
THY airíav npwTnOn. edn oov TO éykaXécavri amranyeiXat
mpos TOv Baciréa, OTL mapu Tis claTday émuTdagnevos.
5 te RY / ` / / 3
joav 0ë oi épor)jcavres mapà IlroXeuaíov mpéaBets agpi-
kópevot, kai [JovXópevou. paÜeiv Tí elmoiev map avTov
mpos Tov Bactréa. Stob. Floril. 33, 10, Zyvev, "Avrvyóvov
mpéoßeis “AOnvafe méuapavtos, kNuÜels úr avtav cvv
arrows pirocopors emt Seirvov, kákeívov Tapa TOTOV
omevddvTwy émiOe(kvvaÜa, Tv avtadv Ë, avrog éolya.
Tov è mpeoßéwv Cnrovvrov Ti atrayyelAwou Trepi avTOD
mpos "Avriyovov, “Todt avo,” ëpn, “Ò BXémere" Sdva-
KpatéoTatoy yap Távrev ó Aoyos. Plut. de Garrul. Iv.
"AOnvnas S€ Tus éorrðv mpéoßeis BaatNucovs, EpiroTipnOn
cTovOdLovcw avTois cuvayayeiy eig ravTÓ Tovs piho-
, Z ` ^ » , ` ^
có$ovs, ypwpévov è Tdv ÓdXXov kowoXoyía xai TAS
^ > 1 A \ , € / s
acupBoras atrodidovtay tod dé Zývævos jovyiav dyovros,
piroppovncapevot kai rporrióvres oí Eévot, mepi cov dé
/ \ / y 5 if. ^ ^ 3 A
Ti Xp!) Xéyew, Epacay, à Zývæv, TQ Bachet; kaxeivos,
arro pndév, etmev, ?) OTe mpeaBuTns éoTiv èv “AOnvas
Tapa ToTov cvwüv Ovvápevos. Also in an expanded
form ap. Theodor. Metoch. p. 334, Kiessling.

The anecdote in the form related in Diog. Laert. rests
on the authority of Antigonus of Carystus, and hence
Wilamowitz (Antig. p. 114) concludes that the king who
sent the embassy was Ptolemaeus and not Antigonus
Gonatas. It was natural that in later times, when the
friendly relations subsisting between Antigonus and Zeno
were remembered, the country of the ambassadors should

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO. 229

have been transferred from Egypt to Macedonia. Diogenes,
however, has misconceived the object of the embassy,
which appears in a less corrupted form in Plutarch. The
ambassadors were sent to Athens, not to Zeno, and the
assembly was not one of philosophers but of Macedonian
partisans. These the ambassadors were instructed to sound,
but they seem to have missed the mark in Zeno’s case.

26. Aelian, Var. H. 1x. 26, Zyvwva tov Kıriéa òr
> ^ » \ a 5 3 / € , /
aidods dyav kal omouóñns yev “Avtiyovos 6 [BactXeUs.. Kai
more o)v vrepTAnaGels oivov émekóuage TH Zrvwvi, kai
pdv avtov kai mep parov Gare &Eowos Gv, nEiov Tí
, r 7 \
avTov 7pooTaEa, Ogy kai veavievóuevos CÙV OpKM UN
atuxyncew HS aitnoews. 6 O6 Aéyer avT@, TropevOcis
»y ` ^ 4 \ T \ j ^ /
éuegov' TELVOS Apa kai weyadoppovas THV meOnv éréyEas
A ` ^
Kal oewüpevos avTov un vore Siappayyn vo mo povr)s.

27. Athen. 1. 55 F, 010 kal Zývæv ó Kirieús, oxdAnpos
@v kai vvv OupiKds Tpds ToUs yvwpipovs, él TXetov
Tov olvov o7rácas dvs éyívero Kal pelAvyos’ Tpos ToUs
tuvOavopévous ov Tod Tpómov Tv Svahopav ÉXeye TO
auto ToOls Oéppois macyew, kai yap éxeivous mpl ĝia-
Bpayfvat vrücpordrovs elvai, roruaÜévras Oe yAuKels kai
mpoonvertatous. Galen, de Anim. Mor. 3. Iv. 777 K., «ai
Znvov, &s pacw, éreyev bri, caQdamep of muKpol Oépyor
Bpexópj.evou TQ VõaTı yduKeis yivovtat, obro Kal aúT0 ÙT
oivov dvatibecOa. Eustath. on Hom. Od. $, 293, p. 1910,
42, Znvev ovv, pasiv, ó Kvrieüs okNjpós dXXos Gv TpOS
TOUS cuvnbes, Os ei 7rXetov olvov macete (leg. ozracete)
novs éyívero Kal ue(Xuxos, Méyov raUTóv TL Tots ÜÉppois
Trág x ew, ot Trucpórepou dvTES piv SiaBpayjvat ror.oÜévres
yMvkeis yivovtat kai Tpoonvéotepot. Similarly Diog. L.
VIL 26.

28. Athen. vil 3450, Zyvov 9 ó Kimes 6 rhs
Eroás río 2s, Trpós Tov ONrodayov © avvétn éri vXelova

230 APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO.

xpóvov, Kaba now’ Avriyovos ó Kapúorios év TQ Zývævos
Bíe (p. 119 Wil), ueyáXov Tas Kata Túxmu ¿x0úos
vapareÜévros, dXXov 8 ovdevds Tapeckevacpévov, Maß ov
ó Znvev amo tod Tívakos oios v kareoÜ(íew. Tod Ò
euBreavtos avT@’ Tí oÜv, pn, Tos cUfdvTas ToL olet
Taye, ei od plav nuépav pa) Sedvynoat éveyKeiv òro-
gayiav; The same in Diog. L. vir. 19.

29. Athen. v. 186 D, ó è Zývæv, mei Tis TØV
TapovtTov oopayav ámécvpev Gua TO TapaTeOnvar TO
érrávo Tod iyOvos, oTpérpas Kal avTos Tov ixOdy améoupev
émtréyov' (Eur. Bacch. 1129)

Ivo òè rami Oatep éEeipryátero.

The same story is told of Bion Borysthenites, id. VII.
344 A. Schweighiuser (Ind.) thinks it is rightly attri-
buted to Zeno.

30. Diog. L. vir. 17, dvoty Ò travaxepévow èv ToT,

| ^ € > 3 EN ^ e 2e N / ^ à
Kal TOD UT avTOv TOv Up éavróv oKipmariCovTos T@ Todé
aUTÓs éxelvov TQ yovati. èmıorpapévros Oé, TL oiv olet
TOV UTOKaTW cov TacyxELV VTO gov; see also Suidas, col.
792, s. v. oxiysadiow. Vulgo vrepavak. and úrèp aŭror:
corrected by Menage.

31. Stob. Floril. 57, 12, Zývæv ó Xrewós Pirocodos
ópdv Tiva TOV *yvepíuev v0 TOD d'ypoü Tepic Ojuevov
eimev: édv ur) od rolrov aTrohéans, obros cé ATrONETEL.

32. Boissonade, Anecd. Gr. vol. r p. 450, ZO; à
&vÜporre, un uóvov (va hayns kai wins GAN Qa tò Shy
mpos TO ev Env karayphon, attributed to Zeno in Cod.
Reg. Paris, 1168, seems to be another form of the well-
known saying of Socrates, ap. Stob. Floril. 17, 22, dev
ovk iva écÜiouev arr écbiouwer iva Eõpev. This forms
frag. eth. 10 in Wachsmuth’s collection (Comm. I. p. 8),
who refers to other passages giving the saying to Zeno.

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO. 231

33. Diog. L. vil. 21, «ai rpoehépeto rà Tod Kadyciov'
@s, émtBadouévov Tivós TOv pabnTav peydda dvoáv,
mataas elmev, os ovK év TO peyad@ TO €) keluevov elm,
ANN év TO ev TO péya.

The saying of Caphesias is recorded also by Athen.
XIV. 629, A.

34. Diog. L. VII. 26, rò ed yiverOar mapa wucpóp, ov
piv pukpóv eivar.

35. Plut. de vit. pud. 13, rò tod Zyvævos, és amav-
4 ` / ^ ^ N \ ^ e ^
THOAS Tipi veaviokm TOV cvvnÜdv Tapa TO Télxos 7)o vx7j
/ \ / er , /- , ^
Badifovts, kai ruOopevos, ort hevyer Pirov a£iobvra pap-
Tupely avT@ Ta revÓj Tí Xéyew, pnoiv, aBéNrepe ; cë
^ > ^ > A \ > ^ > , ?»065 ,
pèv ékeivos ayvapovav Kal dOucdv ov dédsev ovd aic-
, x \ e , ^ € \ ^ 8 / > 0 TIEFI.: €
xvvetar’ ad Ó éxetvov vrép TAY Sixalwy ov Oappets vro-
oTHVAL ;

36. Diog. L. vir. 16, 17, ofov ézi Tod kaXXovritouévov
more jm. Oxériov yap TL Ókvypós avTOD URE PE aua oss
dixaiws, eimev, Upopa Tov TINO ov yàp éotw èv a)rQ
karomTpícac bat.

37. Diog. L. VII. 19, wepaxiou dé vrepiepryorepov mapa

THY NALKiav EpwTarTos ENTNUA TL, Tpoanyaye TPOS KAaTOT-

\ > $- 3 n y , > ^ $ A

Tpov, kal éxérevoev EuPrEYas. ëmer npornoev ei ore?
a)TQ áppóTTovTa eivas des TA ToLadTa GhTýpaTA.

38. Diog. L. VII. 21, veavíokov dé Tiwos Üpacvirepov
Siareyouévov, ok àv elrowuw, ZT, ueupdkiov, à émépxeral
pot.

39. Diog. L. VII. 21, mpòs tov kaXóv eimóvra ÓT¿ oÙ
Soxei avre épacOncecbar ó copós, ovdév, éjy, úuðv
afMwTepov ¿secar THY kaXdGv (ei u) vjueis 6épacOmaó-
peĝa, added by Menage from Hesych. Mil). Cf. frag. 172.
Chrysipp. ap. Stob. Floril. 63. 21.

232 APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO.

40. Diog. L. vil. 22, wavrwv éXeyev dmpeméarepov
9 A ` ^
civar TOV. TÜQov, kai panora él TOY véov.

41. Diog. L. vir. 23, mpòs tov keypuouévov TO up,
Ts éa rwv, $n, ó yvvaucós Ofwv ; cf. Xen. Symp. IL. 3.

42. Stob. Ecl. rr. 31, 81, p. 215, 13 = Exc. e MS. Flor.
Ion Damasc. p. 11. c. 13, 81, Zrjvev épwrnbels mas dv Tis
véos éX yura, áuaprávo,, ei mpd POarwdy Eyer, ëpn, oùs
páMoTa TU Kal atexvveraa.

43. Stob. Floril. 15, 12, Zyvev mpòðs tovs adroNoyou-
pévovs vmép THS a0TOV aowTias Kal Aéyovras ëk TrOANOD
ToU Trepióvros üvaM/a ew ÉXeyev, À Trou Kal Tots payelpots

, s x € \ / y: x »
cvyyvoceoÓ0e, àv áXuvpa éywou Temowkévau Ta oa,
oT TAHOOS ANOV AVTOS UTApPKEV ;

44. Diog. L. vir 17, épwrixds 86 Siaxeiwevos Xpe-

n , hee ars \ " > 7
povidov, tTapaxabifovtwv avtod Te Kal KXeávÜovs, avéorn,
Oavuátovros dé rod KXedvÜovs, én, kai àv iatpaév axova
Tov d'yaÜGv Kpatiotov civat bapuakou mpos Tà bxXeyuaí-
vovra naovxiav. d.

For Chremonides cf. Introd. p. 6.

45. Diog. L. vir. 18, mpòs dé Tov pirdrraiéa, ote ToUs
diSackarous éjm dpévas eyew, dei Svatp(Bovtas èv mar-
dapious, oUTe ékelvovs.

46. Stob. Floril 17, 43, Zyvev ðè 6 Kiris ovdeé
voc v gero 9etv tpopnv mporpépecOar Tpupepwrépav, aXX
ée, 6 Oeparrev@y iarpós ékéXevev aùròv dayetv veorróv

^ > > , co ME” sf y “< `

mepiotepas, ovK dvaocxópnevos, “ws Maw ëm, “uë
Oepareve.”

Manes was a common slave’s name, cf. Ar. Av. 522,

wa

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO. 238

obros Upmas vávres vpórepov peyadous aylous T évópuCov,
vov Ó avdparrod, ndLOiovs, Mavds. See also Sandys on
Dem. Or. 45 $ 86; Or. 53 8 20. There is a reference here
to the Stoic cosmopolitanism (frag. 162): for their views
of slavery see Zeller p. 329.

47. Diog. L. vir. 17, es dé Kuvixos Tis où poas ¿Aaron
» > ^ , , DING , y ,
éyew èv TH ANKVO@ TpoonTHaEV avTOv ovK ë? Owcew.
, , , 37 Z € , xy >
ameM0óvra pévtoe ékéNeve aéraa au ómóTepos cin avat-

déoTepos.

48. Athen. IX. 370 C, cal ov mapadofov el KATA THS
KpapBns TIES dippvov, Tote kal orar ó Kiris 6 Ths
Eroás perap ppovpevos TOV KaTa THS KUvOS Ópkov
Lw@Kpatous kai avtTos Quuue THY KaTTapw, ws "Eumoóóç
now èv ` Amropvnuovevpacw, cf. Diog. L. vit. 32.

"EpmoBos: on this very doubtful name see Müller, Frag.
Hist. Gr. rv. 403, after whom Kaibel reads "Eyzredos.

49. Stob. Floril 98, 68, Zývæv éXeyev ovdevos nuds
ota TévecÜa. øs xpóvov. Bpaxds yap dvTws ó Bios, ý
06 TéyvN akp, kai püXXov 7 Tas THS Wrvxns vócovs
tacacOat Svvapévn, cf. Diog. L. vir. 23, undevos te nuds
obTtas eiva, évOeeis Ws xpóvov.

So Theophrastus ap. Cic. Tusc. ur. 69.

50. Stob. Floril. Monac. 197, ó aùròs (Znvwv) épatn-
Gels Tí ote díXos, Años olos éy&. Diog. L. vir. 23,
épatndeis tis ote piros; dXXos, épy, eyo.

So Arist. Eth. N. ix. 4, 5, éore yap ó (Nos ,dXXos
avtos, cf. Cic. Lael. § 80 verus amicus...est tamquam
alter idem, ib. § 23 and Reid’s note.

51. Origen adv. Cels. vr 35, p. 768, Znvewv Óë mpòs
Tov cimovrta, dToXoiumv éàv fon ce TYLwpHoa@paL, yo Oé,
eimrev, éàv ur) oe pirov KTHT@MAL.

234 APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO.

52. Diog. L. vir. 23, Avovuciov 86 roð Metabeuévou
eiróvTos avT@ bia Ti aUTÓv póvov ov diopOol ; ën, où yap
col TL TEVO.

For Dionysius cf. Diog. L. vir. 37, 166, 167. Cie. Fin.
v. 94. Athen. vil. 281 D.

53. Seneca de Benef Iv. 39. 1, Quare ergo, inquit,
Zeno vester, quum quingentos denarios cuidam promisisset
et illum parum idoneum comperisset, amicis suadentibus
ne crederet, perseveravit credere quia promiserat? Perhaps
the same circumstance is alluded to in Themist. Or. xxr.
252 B, mote á$fkas TQ Oe0avewgévo, kaharep Ziojvov ó
Kutvevs.

54. Diog. L. vit. 23, oov èri kXomr?), bac í, euacrti-
yov’ tod Ó eiróvTos, efuapto mou kMédrav Kal daphvat,
épn.

Seneca however says:—nullum servum fuisse Zenoni
satis constat (Cons. Helv. 12. 3). To have no slave was a
sign of abject poverty: see the comm. on Catull. xxi. 1.

55. Diog. L. vir. 23, rv yvæpipæov tivds maddaptov
pepororiopévov Ocacapuevos, Tpds a/TÓv, Ópà cov, ëpn,
TOU Oupod TA Vx.

56. Diog. L. vir. 28, 29, érerevta 97) ores. ér ths
cXoMjs amu pocérrauce Kal TOV OdkrvXov TepLéppnée.
maicas 06 THY yiv TH epl, nol tò éx THs Nuys,

4
¿pxouat, Tí mw’ avers ;

kai mapayphpa eTeXeúTmoeu, amomvífas éavróv. Stob.
Floril. vit. 45, Zývæv, ds ÒN yépov Ov Traicas karéreotv,
« > LJ [11 / y > ` 5 0 M [4 ^
épxopau elime, “ri pe abew ;" Kal eiceMÜdv éavràv
é&jyayev. Lucian Macrob. (LXII) 19, Zrjvev 8é...óv basu
eicepxój.evov eis THY ékkNnaíav kai TpOTTTaicavTAa dva-

APOPHTHEGMATA OF ZENO. 235

$0éy£ac0a, Ti ue Bods ; kal vrootpéavra olxade Kal
dmooyópevov Tpopys reXevrcat Tov Blov.

Nus: the author of the play is uncertain. Both
Aeschylus and Sophocles wrote plays with this title, but
Nauck thinks the words belong to the Niobe of Timo-
theus: cf. Soph. frag. 395 (Dind.) The situation must
have been similar to the concluding scene of the Oedipus
Coloneus, where Oedipus is summoned by a mysterious
voice: O. C. 1626 f.

57. Theodor. Metoch. p. 812, Kiessling, «ai ó pév
Znvov éreyev, Abe, wapHrOev, ovdev pos éué kaÜ0óXov,
epi TOV évTavda mparyuárov kai ToU Biou Pirocodar.

This recalls Marcus Aurelius, e.g. VI. 15.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

1. Diog. L. vir. 41, ó dé KreavOns èE pépn pyc
SuadextiKon, pmropucóv, Okov, TroduTLKOV, vauóv, Oeo-
Xoyucóv.

ë£ pép. These are only subdivisions of the triple
Zenonian division: thus óuaXekrucóv and pmropukóv to-
gether occupy the same ground as Xoyucóv (Diog. L. vir. 41
cited in Zeno frag. 6, where Cleanthes is probably meant).
For his rhetorical writings see Introd. p. 50. Hirzel rr.
p. 170—178 tries to establish two points in connection
with this statement, (1) that Cleanthes, unlike the other
Stoics, believed in the unity and indivisibility of philosophy
itself, but adopted six divisions for the purpose of exposi-
tion merely, and, (2) that the sixfold division is taken
from Heraclitus, cf. Diog. L. IX. 5, eis rpeis Adyous els Te
TOV Trepi TOD vravrÓs Kal TOY roMwrucóv Kal TOV ÜcoXonyuóv.
But see Stein, Psych. n. 95, Erkenntnistheorie n. 206.

moktrxéy. Similar is Aristotle's distinction between
$póvnc:s (practical thought) and moriren (Eth. vr. 8), in
which chapter dpovnots appears both as the general term
and as à special subdivision dealing with the individual.
The same may be said of z0ucóv here.

(coloywóv. Aristotle divides Speculative (Oeepmrur])
Philosophy into pvoń, ua8nparwu], Oeoroyrxn (Metaph.
v. 1,10). The last-named branch is identical with vcr
$uXocoóía and is the best of the three, because its subject-

——————— ww

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 237

matter is the most honourable (id. x. 7. 9). In the Stoic
system it would have been impossible to follow out this
distinction in practice, since their materialism was de-
structive of metaphysic, and it may be doubted whether
Peoroysxov does not simply refer to the treatment of
popular religion appearing in the book epi Gedy. The
hymn to Zeus belongs to 6eoXoywóv rather than to
Qvoukóv.

LOGICA.

2. Epict. Diss. 1. 17. 11, Tà Aoyixd dXXov èst. òta-
KpiTiKa Kal ÈTLOKETTIKA Kal, ws dv Tig ETOL, mETPNTLKA
Kal cTaTiKd. Tis Aéyes Tarta; uóvos Xpvovrmos kal
Znvev kai KreavOns ; See Zeno frag. 4.

3. Sext. Emp. Math. vir. 228, (rimus) mept ýs eu00s
Kal diéotnoav’ KXedvÜgs uév yap thy TUTecW Kara
eicox"jv Te kai éEoynv, Oorep kal Sia cv OakrvALov yi-
vojévgv TOD KNpod TUT@aLY. ib. 372, ei yap rir ocís éa Tw
êv pux ý Qavracía, 1yrou kar é€oyny kai eicoyny rm eaís
ést, WS oi mept TOV KXedvOmv vouíEovouv, ?) xarà pudnv
érepoíeciv yiverat K.T.M. ib. virt 400, KXedvOovse pév
Kuplos akovovTos THY pera eicoxfje Kal ¿Ëoxñs voovuévqv
(tUrwow). id. Pyrrh. r. 70, érret ody 5 uy Kal To
MYEMOVLKOV TED Ua STW T) NeTTOMEPETTEPOY TL TrveUparos,
as pası, ov Ovvijceraí Tis TUTMOW Éviwoety v avrQ oUTe
kar éfoxnv kal eicoyny, ws él THY odpayiiwy opauer,
OUTE KATA THY TEPATONOYOVMÉVNV ETEPOLWTLKND.

Zeno’s definition of davracia (frag. T) became a battle
ground for his successors: Cleanthes explained tvraous
as referring to a material impression like that made upon
wax by a seal, cf. Philo de mund. opif. p. 114, Pfeiff, 6

s ^ ` a L
(scil. và) rà $avévra éxrós eiae Kopifovaat, OuaryyéXXovot

238 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

kai érridelKvuvTas TOUS TUTrous ékdo Tov, eva pary£óuevas TO
óuorov malos. rnp yap éowds, SéyeTar Tas Sia Tov
aicÓ5ceov davracías, ais rà cwpara karaXapBdvet.
Chrysippus however objected that, on this view, if the soul
received at the same time the impression of a triangle and
a square, the same body would at the same time have
different shapes attached to it, and would become at the
same time square and triangular (Sext. l.c., Diog. L. vm.
45—50); and he accordingly interpreted T/7ecis by
érepoíocus and aXXoícous, cf. Cic. Tusc. I. 61 an imprimi,
quasi ceram, animum putamus, et esse memoriam sig-
natarum rerum in mente vestigia? Hirzel 11. pp. 160—168
finds here also the influence of Heraclitus, who, he believes,
is pointed at in Plat. Theaet. p. 191 foll., 0és Š?) mot Adyou
€veka, èv Tals Nrvxyais muon vov krpwor ékuayetov. KTA.
He relies however entirely on the disputed frag. «aoi
náprvpes dvÜpoyrois 6pOarwol Kal ota BapBapods JJruyas
éxóvrov, which Zeller interprets in exactly the opposite
sense to that of Schuster and Hirzel. The point cannot
therefore be regarded as established : see Stein, Erkenntnis-
theorie n. 734,

elooxiv. ..&£oxijy = concavity...convexity. Of Sext. Pyrrh.
I. 92, ai yoðv ypadal TH pèv Over Soxodow eicoxds kai
éfoyds eye, oU pv Kai TH addy, ib. I. 120. Plat. Rep.
602 D, xai ra0ra Kaya Te kai ev0éa èv Vdacl Te
Oewpévors kai Ew, kal koina Te Ó) kai é£éxovra Sia Thy
epi TA xpouara a) TAAYHY THs Oves.

Saxrudtev. For ancient Greek rings see Guhl and
Koner, E. T. p. 182, with the illustrations, and for «npo
see on Zeno frag. 50. Hirzel l.c. shows that the metaphor
was common, even apart from philosophie teaching: cf.
Aesch. P. V. 789, déA Tou $pevov, ete.

4. Plut. Plac. IV. 11, of Erewxoí paoi brav yeuum09

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 239

6 avOpwtros exer TO vyyeuovikóv pépos THS Nrvxfje orep
xaptnv evepryov (or évepryóv) eis atroypadyny’ eis roDro pilav
EKATTHY TOV évvouGv évamoypáderar.

The grounds upon which this is referred to Cleanthes
have been stated in the Introduction, p. 38, 39. For
the further illustration and exposition of the passage the
reader is referred to the exhaustive and interesting note
of Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 112, n. 230; but it may be
as well here to set out two quotations from Philo, which
make strongly in favour of the hypothesis that Cleanthes
was the originator of the * tabula rasa" theory: cf. Philo,
quod Deus sit immut. 1. 9, p. 279 Mang., davtacia 9 éors
TUT-OG'S €v ux, à yap eiorjyaryev ExdoTn rv aicOncewr,
orep OakTUMÓs Tis 7) oppayis, évameuá£aro Tov oiketov
XapakTijpa' knp ë orkos 6 vo)s. quis rer. div. haer. c.
37, p. 498 Mang., ý yàp yux Tó k')pwov, s, eirré Tis TOV
apxaíov.

5. Olympiodorus l.c. on Zeno frag. 12, KreavOns
Tolwuwy Aye, OTs TéXUQ écviv eis 656 mávra avvovaa.
Quintil. Inst. Or. rr. 17. 41, nam sive, ut Cleanthes voluit,
ars est potestas, via, id est, ordine efficiens.

Cf. also Cic. Fin. rr. 18, quoted on Zeno frag. 12.
Olympiodorus objects that the definition is too wide, and
that it would include $vc«s which is not a réyvy (cf. Cic.
N.D. u. 81), but Cleanthes might have replied that neither
is dows an C£. For téis cf. on dca0eors Zeno frag. 117,
and Stob. Ecl. rr. 7, 5* p. 73, 7, év €Ëe, Që ov uóvas eivai
Tas dperds, dXXd kai Tas Téyvas Tas év TO orrovdalp
avopl aXXowÜelcas vid THs apers Kal yevouévas dpera-
TTOTOUS, olovel yap aperas yiverOar,

6. Syrian. ad Ar. Metaph. 892 b 14—23, ws dpa ta
elon Tapa Tots Gelous ToUTOLs avdpacw (i.e. Socrates Plato

240 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Parmenides and the Pythagoreans) oùre mpos tiv pnow
THs TOV OvopTOov cuvnbelas TapnyeTo, 9s Xpúoimros Kal
" ApyéOnpos kai oi mrelous TOV Xrowv Vorepov Qxj0nsav...
ov uv ovd évvojuaTá ciot map avrois ai idéat, Os
KXeáv0ns Üaepov eipykev.

This difficult fragment has been variously interpreted.
Wellmann, p. 480, and Krische, p. 421, think that Cleanthes
described the ideas as “subjective Gedanken," in which
case the fragment is a restatement of Zeno's view: cf.
Zeno frag. 28. Stein discusses the passage at length
(Erkenntnistheorie, pp. 293—295): reading vornwara, he
supposes that Cleanthes words were ov« elow ai idéac
vonuara. Zeller also p. 85 has voryuara. However
évvonuata appears in the Berlin Aristotle edited by
Usener, and so Wachsmuth (Comm. r. p. 3) reads. Stein
explains as follows:—vonwara represent abstract ra-
tionalised knowledge resulting from our experience by
the agency of dp0ds Aóyos. By such voyuara are we
made aware of the existence of the gods (frag. 52), and
from these we must distinguish the class conceptions
(Gattungsbegriffe) which have no scientific value. Class
conceptions (évvo5uara) can never be the criterion of
knowledge, since they have no real existence. Cf. Simpl.
in Cat. f. 26 C: obra Ta kowd map avrois Xéyera.
But, even assuming that the distinction between vóņpa
and évvógua is well founded, which is by no means clear,
and that vo5yuara is to be read here, the context in
Syrian is conclusive against Stein. The meaning simply
is, “nor again are the ideas in Plato etc. to be treated as
évvonpata”: in other words, the negative ovóé is no part
of Cleanthes statement, but belongs to the commentator.
This is abundantly clear from the following words :—ov&
ws 'Avrovivos, meyvds tiv Aoyyivou kai KXeávOovs 9ó£av,
TO VO TapudictavTo KaTa Tas évvonTiKas iðéas.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 241

T. Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. 9. 26, 930 P, 332 S, ekta
yàp Ta KaTnyopnwata Kadovor KXedvOns xai ' Apyéónuos.

Aerá: the abstractions contained in thoughts as ex-
pressed in speech, as opposed to thoughts on the one hand
and the things thought of on the other (uécov Tod Te
vonuatos Kal Tov mpayyatos). Neither again are they
identical with the spoken words, which are corporeal (Sext.
Math. vil. 75). Being incorporeal they can have no real
existence, and yet the Stoics seem to have hesitated to
deny their existence altogether. In the ordinary termino-
logy of the school catnydpnua is a subdivision of Xe«róv,
and is described as Nextov éAMvrés (Diog. vir. 64). From
this passage, then, we must infer that Cleanthes was the
first to restrict xatnyopnwa to its narrower sense by the
introduction of the new term Aextov. An example of
KaTnyopnua given by Sextus is ayivOvov mut (Pyrrh. II.
230), but a new term was required to denote the abstrac-
tion of a complete assertion (e.g. Cato ambulat), for which
KaTnyopnua was obviously insufficient. For Nextov gene-
rally see Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, pp. 219—222.

"Apxénpos: Zeller p. 50. The most important fact
recorded about him is that he placed the syeuovikóv tod
«óc pov in the centre of the earth (Zeller p. 147).

8. Epict. Diss. 1m. 19. 1—4, 6 xvpievev Xoros amo
TOLOUT@Y TrivGv apoppðv 9porra0au oaíverav kowtjs yap
avons payns Tots Tpucl TovTOLs mpòs AAANAG, TQ Ta

\ , N , ^ - \ ^ ^
mapednrvbos aXmÜés avarykatov eivai, Kal TQ Ovvaro
OF AY) 2 ^ \ ^ ^ 5. ^ AP soar
dó/varov p ükoXovÜeiv, Kal TO Ovvaróv eivat 0 ovr. Ect
, \ x» 2» ° \ \ / , c /
adnGes or éco rav cuviddy Tiv paynv TavTnv ó Avodwpos

Tf Ttv TpwTwY Ovolv miÜavórqyri cuvexpncaro mpòs

/ ^ Ë s Š N A 4? y > 02
capácracie Tov pndév elvat Suvatov ð ovr Eat adnOés

v ^ , ^ ^
oUT état. AorTòv ó ué TIS TaÜTG THPHTEL TÖV Quot,
a pA , , ^ "3 y 5 N V. o9 a *
ÓTL čorı Té TL ÜÓvvaTóv, Ó oT éoTiv ares oT écTaL

H. P. 16

242 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

kai Quvar@ advvatov ovK akoXovOei: ov mav O6 Tapedn-
AvOds adnOes avayraîóv sti’ kaÜdarep ot wept KreavOnv
pépecbar Soxovaw, ols émi mord cuvnyopneev ' Avrirarpos.
ot 6€ TAANA Ovo, OTL Õuvarov T éoviv 0 ovT eat adnOes
ovT Zora, kal mâv TapeAnrvOds adrnOes avayxaiov otw’
OvvarQ Ò advvatov axonovbel. ta tpia Ò éketva Tupac
api] xavov, ià TO Kowny elvai avTOv paxynv. Cic. de Fato
7. 14, omnia enim vera in praeteritis necessaria sunt, ut
Chrysippo placet, dissentienti a magistro Cleanthe, quia
sunt immutabilia nec in falsum e vero praeterita possunt
convertere.

Three propositions are here mentioned, which are
inconsistent with each other in such a way that the
acceptance of any two involves the rejection of the third:—
(1) Every past truth is necessary. (2) That which is
possible can never become impossible. (8) A thing may
be possible which does not exist and never will exist.
Diodorus asserted the truth of (1) and (2) and denied (8):
thus Simplicius ad Cat. 65. 6—8 describes his followers
as aùr) TH éxBacer kpívovres TO duvardv. Cic. Fam. Ix.
4 (writing to Varro) mept Šuvar@u me scito cara Avodwpov
«piívew. Quapropter, si venturus es, scito necesse esse te
venire: sin autem non es, Tov advyatwy est te venire.
Cleanthes asserted the truth of (2) and (3) and denied (1).
Chrysippus asserted the truth of (1) and (3) and denied
(2), cf. Alexander ad An. Pr. 1. 15 p. 34 a 10 Xpvovrrros òè
Ayon pndev Kode xai duvatd advvatov ErecOat k.T.X.
Cleanthes maintained therefore that it is and was possible
for past events to have happened differently. See further
on this controversy Grote's Plato vol. rrr. p. 495 foll. On
p. 499 Hobbes is quoted, who is in agreement with
Diodorus. The dilemma itself was originally propounded
by Diodorus the Megarian, on whom see Zeller Socraties
p. 252. It went by the name of ó xupievwy Adyos =

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 243

argument getting the better of others: cf. Themist. Or. rr.
30 b who mentions it together with ó xeparívgs as the
discovery of Philo or Diodorus. In Lucian Vit. Auct.
c. 22 Chrysippus professes his ability to teach it as well
as the Oepifwv 'HAéerpa and éyxexadupupévos. Aul. Gell.
I, 2, 4, kvpieVovras 7o vxdtovras Kai cwpeitas. Cleanthes
wrote a special treatise on the subject (Introd. p. 50).

9. Quintil Inst. Or. i 15. 33—35. huic eius sub-
stantiae maxime conveniet finitio, rhetoricen esse bene
dicendi scientiam. nam et orationis omnes virtutes
semel complectitur, et protinus etiam mores oratoris, cum
bene dicere non possit nisi bonus. idem valet Chrysippi
finis ille ductus a Cleanthe, scientia recte dicendi (scil.
rhetorice).

Kiderlin (Jahrb. f. Class. Phil. 131, p. 123) conjectures
that the word Cleanthis has fallen out after substantiae,
so that, while Cleanthes defined rhetoric as miorun
tod ev Xéyeiw, the words roô opÜds Xéyew would be an
alteration of Chrysippus. See however Striller Rhet.
Sto. pp. 7, 8. For the usual Stoic definition cf. Diog.
L. vit 42, rjv Te pytopieny, émioT)uwgv osav Tod e)
Aéyew mepi TOv èv OwEó0p Xóyeov where rhetoric is
contrasted with dialectic, since dialectic was also defined
as émio T5) TOD ev Xéyew by the Stoics (Alex. Aphr. Top.
3. 6, quoted by Stein, Erkenntnistheorie n. 210). Sext.
Emp. Math. IL 6.

10. Varro de L. L. v. 9, quod si summum gradum non
attigero, tamen secundum praeteribo, quod non solum ad
Aristophanis sed etiam ad Cleanthis lucubravi [secundum
explained in $ 7 quo grammatica escendit antiqua, quae
ostendit quemadmodum quodque poeta finxerit verbum
confinxerit declinarit].

16—2

244 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

11. Athen. xr. 467 d, Kreavns 86 ó gidocodos èv Th
mepi peraj ews amó TaV KaTacKEevacavTaV «oiv ovo-
pacOnvat Thy Te Onpixkrevov KUALKA kai THY Seviada. ib.
471 b, KreavOns 8 èv TO Tepl petadyrens cuyypaupati
dnol, rà Tolvuy eUpyuara, Kal dca TroiaDTa éTs Kal Ta
Aoma éoTt, oiov Onpixrewos, Gewtds, "Idueparís, TadTa
[yàp] mpotepov cvvicroper To)s evpovtas, $aíverau Ó
ëtt kai viv’ ei 06 jw more? ToDTo, weTaBeBANKOS àv ein
pukpóv roUvoua. adda, kaÜdrep elpyntat, oUk &aTL Tria TeU-
Tal TO TUXÜVTL.

peradrypeos : the meaning of this word seems to be that
explained by Quintil vir. 6. 37, superest ex his, quae
aliter significent, wetarn wus, id est, transumtio, quae
ex alio in aliud velut viam praestat: tropus et varissimus
et maxime improprius, Graecis tamen frequentior, qui
Centaurum Chirona, et vious (? vats) 0oàs o£cías dicunt.
Nos quis ferat, si Verrem suem aut Laelium doctum
nominemus? cf. Arist. Top. Vr. 11, p. 149 a 6.

Onptkr\erov: à kind of drinking cup, said to be named
after Thericles, a Corinthian potter of some celebrity, and,
according to Bentley on Phalaris § 3, a contemporary
of Aristophanes. Welcker, however (Rhein. Mus. vi
404 foll.), maintains that these cups were so called because
they were decorated with the figures of animals.

Sewids and "Ipixparis are the names given to particular
kinds of slippers, the latter of which was so called after
the celebrated Athenian general. Cf. Poll. vit. 89, azo àé
Tov xpucapuévov “Idixpatides, Aewiades,  " AXkufdidua,
Z puvõvpiðra, Muvaxia amo Mvvákov. Diod. Sic. xv. 44,
Tas T€ UTOdéTELS Tos TTpaTLMTAaLs EVAUTOUS kai kovpas
émoínoe, TAS péypt TOD vüv idixpaTtidas am éxelvouv kaXov-
upas. Alciphr. Ep. 1. 57, évayyos Kpovioy évarávrov
"Idixparidas pot veovpyeis ëmepye. Beckers Charicles
E. T. p. 450, Müller Handbuch ty, 428.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 245

yàp is expunged by Meineke, whom Wachsm. follows.

cwirrépe is read by Casaubon for cvvectopetv. It seems
to mean “connoted.”

et 8: pý tr. “if it does not do this, the word must have
changed somewhat.” For the tense cf. Dem, xxx. 10.
Timocrates and Onetor were both men of substance doT
ovk àv id TovTO y elev oux evOUs OeOnkóres.

PHYSICA.

12. Diog. L. vir. 134, doe? Ò avrois apyas eivau TGv
brav dvo, TO Torov Kal TÒ TacyoV. TÒ uév oUv TATYOV
civar THY àroiov ovciay THY UAnV, TÒ S€ moroðv TOV èv

, ^ £ N , ^ \ PA y \ ,
aT Xoyov Tov Ücóv. TodTOV yap aidioy OuTa did 7aoos
auTns Snutoupyeiy Exacta, TtiOnar O6 TO Oóyua ToOTo...
KreavOns év TO Tepl atouwv. See Zeno frag. 35.

13. Tertull. Apol 21, haec (quae Zeno dixit Xóyov
esse cf Zeno frag. 44) Cleanthes in spiritum congerit
quem permeatorem universitatis affirmat.

spiritum = rvedua. So far as the evidence serves,
Cleanthes was the first to explain the Heraclitean wip as
vveüua. While not refusing to admit that Zeno's aether
is an emanation from the Godhead (see on frag. 15),
he differs from Zeno in identifying God with the sun, as
the ruling part of the universe, and the ultimate source of
the *Urpneuma." Stein Psych. p. 68. Hirzel's account
is inconsistent: at p. 211 he attributes zveüua to Chry-
sippus and restricts Cleanthes to wip, while at p. 216 he
allows that Cleanthes introduced the conception of
7veUna.

permeatorem. Gk. Gvjkew Zeno frag. 37, probably
indicates that Cl. accepted xpdows 80 óXwv, cf Alex.
Aphrod. de Mixt. 142 a, 7vócÓat tiv cipracav ovciar,

246 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

, / `Ë , 3 ^ " ey ?
Tvevpatos Twos Sia maons arms Oujkovros, Ud ob
ouvayetar Kal ovppéver.

14. Stob. Ecl. r. 1. 29^ p. 34, 20, Avoyévns kai KXeáv-
Ons kai Oivoridns (tov Oedv) tiv Tod róopov *rvymv.
Cic. N. D. r. 37, tum totius naturae menti atque animo
tribuit hoc nomen.  Minuc. Octav. xix. 10, Theophrastus
et Zeno et Chrysippus et Cleanthes sunt et ipsi multi-
formes, sed ad unitatem providentiae omnes revolvuntur.
Cleanthes enim mentem modo animum modo aethera
plerumque rationem Deum disseruit.

Cleanthes teaches the exact correspondence between
the microcosm of the individual and the macrocosm of
the world: there is therefore in the world a ruling
principle analogous to the soul of man. Sext. Math.
IX. 120, doe rel kai 6 Koopos Ud hicews Otowcetrat
vroXvpeprjs kaÜeads, eim dv TL €v aUrQ TÒ kvpieÜov Kal TO
vrpokarapyópevov THY kuoeov. o/0éy O6 OÓvvaróv eivai
TowodTov jÜ THY TÀv Üvrev cuv, Tu Oeds srw. čoTtw
dpa 0cós.

15. Cie. N. D. r. 37, tum ultimum et altissimum
atque undique circumfusum et extremum omnia cin-
gentem atque complexum ardorem, qui aether nominetur,
certissimum deum judicat. Lactant. Inst. r. 5, Cleanthes
et Anaximenes aethera dicunt esse summum Deum
(quoting in support Verg. Georg. IL. 325).

According to Krische, p. 428—430, Cicero has here
made a blunder by importing an explanation of his own
into the Greek original Oedv eivau tov ai0épa, and by a
confusion of the two senses in which a(05p is used in the
Stoic School (1)=7dp Teyvuxóv, (2) =the fiery zone
surrounding the world. Cleanthes, as will be presently
seen, disagreeing with the rest of the school, regarded the

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 247

sun and not the belt of aether as the 7yeuovuóv, or, in
popular language, as the abode of God (Cic. Acad. rr. 126).
Cleanthes therefore only meant to affirm the identity
of @eds and the vp texyvixdv. This may be true, but the
reasoning is not conclusive. Apart from the word
certissimum, which is not important, there is no reason
why Cleanthes should not have attributed divinity to the
ultimus omnia cingens aether, just in the same manner as
he does to the stars, where Krische feels no difficulty.
Similarly Stein, Psychol. n. 99: the aether emanates from
the “Urpneuma” and is a divine power, but not God
himself.

ultimum i.e. farthest removed from the earth which is
in the centre of the universe. Zeno, frag. 67. Cic. N. D. rr.
41.117. Diog. vir. 37.

16. Philod. wept evoeB. c. 9, `óyov nyovpevov Tay èv
To kócj. Cic. N. D. r. 37, tum nihil ratione censet esse
divinius.

This, it should be remembered, is in direct opposition
to the teaching of Epicurus, who speaks of the world
as duces dXóyo èk tøv aróuev cvveorOTa (Stob. Ecl.

1. 21. 3* p. 183, 10).

17. Cic. N. D. r. 37, Cleanthes...tum ipsum mundum
deum dicit esse. Cf. N. D. rr. 34. 45.

See Krische p. 424—426, according to whom we are to
interpre& mundum here in the first of the three senses
specified by Diog. L. vir. 137, 138, éote kóopos ó iðlws
Tolos Ths TGV 0Xcv ovcías. Cf. Chrysippus ap. Stob. Ecl.
L. 21. 5, p. 184, 11, Xéyera, Ò érépos kóopos ó eds, Kal?
òv 7) &uakóo uos yiveras Kal reXeio0rat, In any case, we
have here a distinct statement that Cleanthes was a
pantheist, and identified God with matter. The different
meanings given to xógpos in effect amount to this that it

248 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

may be regarded either as the sum total of all existence,
or as the transitory and derivative part of existence: the
distinction, however, as Zeller observes, is only a relative
one (see his remarks p. 159). For pantheism as advocated
by Cleanthes see Hirzel 11. p. 206. Stein, Psychol. p. 67
and n. 98.

18. Chalcid. in Tim. c. 144, ex quo fieri ut quae
secundum fatum sunt etiam ex providentia sint. eodem-
que modo quae secundum providentiam ex fato, ut Chry-
sippus putat. ali vero quae quidem ex providentiae
auctoritate, fataliter quoque provenire, nec tamen quae
fataliter ex providentia, ut Cleanthes.

Zeno had afürmed the identity of eíuapuévg and
mpovota (frag. 45), but omitted to discuss the difficulties
involved in so broad an explanation of fatalistic doctrine.
Cleanthes felt the difficulty that xaxov could not be said
to exist xarà vrpoóvouav, even if it existed xa? eiwappevny.
This point will recur in the Hymn to Zeus frag. 46, l. 17,
oU8é Te yiverar épyov mi yOovl cod diya Oaiuov...TrXiv
ómóca péfovet karkol operépnow avoiais, where we shall
have to discuss the nature of the solution which he
offered. In support of the position here taken up by
Chrysippus cf id. ap. Plut. Sto. Rep. 34, 3, xarà TobTov
dé TOV Xoyov rà TapaTrAncLa Epodmev Kal Trepi THS apers
"Gv kai Trepi THS kaklas Kal TO bdOV TOY Texyvov Kal TOV
atéyvav...ovdev yap éarw addros TOV KATA uépos yiyver Pat
ovdé ToUXaxic TOv ANN Ù karà THY kow?)v dvow Kal TOv
exelvns Xoyov. id. Comm. Not. 34, 5, el 86 ovdé roUXd xo Tov
cari TOV pepav Éyew AXXos AAN Ù) karà THY TOD Aus
BovrAnoww. Chrysippus also defined eíuapuévg as Xóyos
TOV é TQ koop% Tpovoia Owou.ovuévov. The Sceptic
objections on this head are put very clearly in Sext. Pyrrh.
III. 9—12.

m

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 249

19. Philo de provid. rr. 74 p. 94 Aucher: (astra erratica)
nota sunt non solum ratione verum etiam sensu ita movente
providentia, quae, ut dicit Chrysippus et Cleanthes, nihil
praetermisit pertinentium ad certiorem utilioremque dis-
pensationem. quod si aliter melius esset dispensari res
mundi, eo modo sumpsisset compositionem, qua tenus
nihil occurreret ad impediendum deum.

I have taken this fragment from Gercke (Chrysippea
p. 708).

quae nihil praetermisit...Much of the Stoic exposition
in the 2nd book of Ciceros de Natura Deorum is a
commentary on this. Thus for astra erratica cf. § 108
foll and esp. § 104, ergo, ut oculis adsidue videmus, sine
ulla mutatione et varietate cetera labuntur...caelestia...
quorum contemplatione nullius expleri potest animus
naturae constantiam videre cupientis. Generally cf. M.
Anton. II. 3, rà THs TUX7s ovk &vev buc'eos 7) a wykXadaeos
Kai émwmXokís THY Tpovoía Oioucovuévov' mavra éxeiÜev
pet mpocerts 06 TO avayKaiov, Kal TO TQ OAM kócuQ
cuppépov, ov uépos el.

qua tenus...At the same time we find elsewhere a
chain argument of Chrysippus in Alex. de fato c. 37 p.
118 ov mavra pèv ori Kal’ eipappévnv, ovk eats 6
dkd&vTos kai atapewmodictos 7) TOÜ Kdcpov ĞLOLKNTLS
&.r.M But inconsistency was inevitable in this matter,
when Chrysippus could account for the existence of evil
by saying (Plut. Sto. Rep. 36. 1) xaxíav 86 ka0óXov dapat
oUre Suvatov éotiy ovT ever Kadws apOAvar. See Zeller's
lucid exposition pp. 176—193.

20. Probus ad Verg. Ecl. 6. 31, p. 10, 33, Omnem
igitur hanc rerum naturae formam tenui primum et
inani mole dispersam refert in quattuor elementa con-
cretam et ex his omnia esse postea effigiata Stoici tradunt

250 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Zenon Citiaeus et Speusippus (leg. Chrysippus) Soleus
et Cleanthes Thasius (leg. Assius). See on Zeno frag. 52.

21. Hermiae Irris. Gent. Phil. 14, Diels p. 654, aXX
ó KXedy0ns ard Tod $péaros émápas THY Kepadnv katayerâ
cov ToU Soypatos Kai auros au Tas adybeis dpyds Oedv
kai Vany. Kal THY pv yiv petaBarrew eis vdwp, TO Óë
vdap eis aépa Tov 06 dépa «eis TUP> héperOau, TO dé Trip
els TA "repítyeua, yopetu, THY dé Wuyny Sv dou ToÜ cócuou
| Onjkeuw, Ñs pépos ueréyovras nas éurpuyoda Gaur.

-ppéaros. This is explained by the anecdote related by
Diog. VIL 168, dve80nOn dé émi dirorovia, ös ye mévns àv
dyav @pumee ptoOodopeiv’ Kal vókrop pev èv Tols knows
jvTAEL, MEO nucpav © èv rois OYyoLs éyvpuvátero: blev Kal
Ppeavràns kryn. The same idea is kept up by dva
Le. “hauls up.”

kal rdv piv yñv «A. This constant interchange of the
various elements is not so strongly brought out in the
Stoic system as it was by Heraclitus with his formula
mavra pet. Cf Krische p. 387. It is however always
implied, c£. Chrysipp. ap. Stob. Ecl. r. 10. 16° p. 129, 18,
TPOTHS MeV yryvopévns TNS èk "vpós karà oúoTacu eis
dépa uerafoXis, Sevtépas 8 amd rovrov eis ÜÓcp, Tpirns
86 re náNXov KATA TO üvaXoyov cvvicTajuévov TOD UdaTos
eis ynv. TAMY Ò ATÒ TAUTNS Svadvopevns Kal Siayeowevns
mpoTn nën ylyvetas xvas eis wp, Sevtépa 8 eE VdaTos
eis aépa, TpíTm 66 kal éoxyatn eis wip. Cic. N. D. I. 84, et
cum quattuor genera sint corporum, vicissitudine eorum
mundi continuata natura est. Nam ex terra aqua, ex
aqua oritur aér, ex aére aether, deinde retrorsum vicissim
ex aethere aér, inde aqua, ex aqua terra infima. Sic
naturis his, ex quibus omnia constant, sursus deorsus,
ultro citro commeantibus mundi partium coniunctio conti-
netur. For Heraclitus see R. and P. § 29.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 251

ds mip. Some words must be supplied here: Diels
inserts dvo.

Tà 8b wip: the reverse process is concisely stated.

Ñs pépos peréxovras: for the divine origin of the human
soul see Stein Psych. p. 96, n. 169.

22. Stob. Ecl. r. 20, 1° p. 171, 2, Zxvovi xai Kreavder
kai XpvaímTQ apéoxke, THY ovcíav peTaBadrew oiov eis
oTéppa TO TÜP, Kal TANW Èk rovrov ToLa’THY arroreXeia Qa,
Thy Stakocpnot, ola rpórepov nv. See Zeno frag. 54.

23. Philo, Incorr. Mundi p. 954, weraBarrAew yap Ù
eis $Aóvya 7) eis avv avarykalov' eis uév dXóya, bs dero
KXedvOns, eis Ò avynv, os ó Xpvourtros.

Philo is arguing that when everything becomes fire, it
must burn itself out and cannot be created anew, but
there is no importance in his objection, as he is confounding
the mip Texvucóv with wip drexvov. d$Xóf and avy
therefore alike express what Numenius, speaking of the
school in general, calls wip aifepades le. mÜp Texvucov
(Euseb. P. E. xv. 18. 1). What then is the meaning of the
divergence? Stein believes that we have here a piece of
evidence showing a substantial disagreement in the views
taken by Cleanthes and Chrysippus of the ékrvpwois and
that $Ao£ is used with reference to the Sun (see on frag.
24), and avy) as a representation of the finest aether.
For the connection of $xo£ with 5A:os he quotes Diog. L.
VIL 27, Aesch. Pers. 497, Soph. Trach. 693, O. T. 1425
(Stein, Psychologie pp. 70, 71 and the notes)  Hirzel's
explanation is similar (11. p. 211), except that he does not
see any reference to the sun: according to him, Cleanthes
spoke of a permeating zip for which vrveüua was substi-
tuted by Chrysippus: but see on frag. 13. For $Xóya cf.
exproyiaGévTos in frag. 24.

k N < '

252 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

24. Stob. Ecl. r. 17. 3, p. 153, 7, KreavOns dé obo
møs pnow' éexproyicbévtos TOD mavrós cvvítew TO uécov
aúroÜ mpõrTov, ira rà éxóueva drooßévvvoðar Š ÓXov.
tod dé mavròs éÉvypavÜOévros TÒ Ca yarov Tod Tupós, AVTI-
TUTNTAVTOS AUT@ TOV uécov, TpéTETOar maw eis rovvav-
tov, êO ovre TpeTomevoy Que pnoiv av&ecOar Kal dpxea-
Oat Siaxocpeiv TO Gov’ kai Tova’THY Tepiodoy aiel Kal
dvakdopnow Tovoupévou Tov év TH TOV ÜXov ojcíq TOVOY
uù TavecOa. woTrEp yap évós Twos rà pépn maura, derat
€x cTeppárov èv rois KaOnKovat ypovols, obro kai TOU
ddov Ta uépm, àv Kal rà (Qa kai rà þura Óvra Tvyxdvet,
èv Tots KaOnKovat xpóvois ierat. Kal davrep Tuwés Xóyot
TOV jLepdv eis oTépua ocvvióvres piyvuvraı kai av6is
SuaxplvovTar ey.vouévov TOV pepdv, OUTS é£ évós re TAaVTA
yivecOar kal èk mavrov eis Š cwykpívea at, 08d Kal
cuppodves O.efiovos THs mTepróðov.

The explanation of the first part of this difficult frag-
ment appears to be as follows :— When everything has been
set on fire and the tendency of all things to become
absorbed in the zp acerov has been satisfied, the reaction
commences in the centre, and spreads towards the ex-
tremities until everything except the outer rim is in a
watery mass. Seneca, N. Q. ur 13. 1, nihil relinqui...
aliud, igne restincto, quam humorem. In hoc futuri
mundi spem latere. Then the remaining portions of the
original fire, concentrated in the sun (Stein p. 71), in
spite of resistance from the centre, begin to exert their
creative influence, and by their ever-increasing activity,
the elements and the world are formed. Phenomenal
existence, then, is possible only when the tightening and
slackening influences are in equilibrium or nearly so ; the
exclusive predominance of either destroys the balance of
the universe. The centre of the e$atpos is always readier
to admit the loosening of tension, while the bracing in-

a

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 253

vigorating vivifying power, which knits together the frame
of the universe as of the individual, is in fullest sway in
the parts at the circumference (hence ¿ve atf£ec@ar).
This is the theory of tension as applied to the &«xóc-
pnois, and its statement constitutes the most important
contribution made by Cleanthes to Stoicism. A difficulty
in the above exposition remains to be stated:—Why is
there no created world in the period between é«m/pocis
and éf/ypwcus, as there must then be a time when the
two influences are of equal strength ? The answer, perhaps,
is that during the whole of this period there is an ever-
increasing slackening of tension, as the fire of the é«v-
pwors is gradually extinguished, and slackening of tension
produces not life but death (Plut. plac. v. 24 etc.) ; the
creation of the world only starts when +ó écxarov Tod
Tupos rpérera, eis Tovvavtiov. There is also a divergent
view, namely, that the destruction of the world may be
compassed by xataxAvopos as well as by éxm’pwors.
This implies that our world can exist during the tran-
sition towards éfvypwous. Cf. Sen. N. Q. rr. 29. 1 and
Heraclit. Alleg. Hom. c. 25, p. 53, quoted by Zeller p. 169,
1. Schol on Lucan vil. 813 ékzr/pocis, quam secuturam
KaTakAvopovs adserunt Stoici, seems to have been over-
looked, but is of doubtful import. Stein’s account of the
dtaxoopunots (Psych. p. 32 foll.) is radically different, but I
do not see how it can be reconciled with this passage:
(1) the creation of the world is due to a slackening of
tension in the original fiery substance, and (2) To éeyarov
Tov Tupos is what remains of the original * Urpneuma "
after the four elements have been formed, whereas ac-
cording to Cleanthes the creation of the world only begins
when this remnant of fire begins to exert its influence.
Hirzel diseusses the present passage at some length
(Untersuchungen rr p. 124—134). He strongly insists

254 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

that Tò de yarov meansextremum (das Feuer des Umkreises)
and not reliquum, and that Philo mept af@. kócpov 18,
(merà T)v éxmipwow émeibàv ó véos kócuos péddy ÒN-
puovpryeia Oar oúumau pèv Tò Tp ov a Bévvvra Troan 0é Tus
avtod poipa vroXeirerat) follows Chrysippus and not
Cleanthes. It would seem, however, that the distinction
is not important, as éoxarov must in this case be both
extremum and reliquum. Further on he suggests that
Cleanthes did not maintain the doctrime of the four
elements, but cf frag. 21. Two possible anticipations of
the tension theory have been noticed in Zeno's fragments,
but the passage in frag. 56 is probably spurious, while in
frag. 67, even if re(vea a, is sound, Zeno is confessedly
dealing with another point, viz. the explanation of how
the separate parts of the coopos are kept in one solid mass
and why they are not scattered into the void. Ogereau p.
10 attributes the introduction of Tóvos to Zeno, and
depreciates the performances of Cleanthes (p. 19); but he
insists throughout too strongly on the unity of the school,
without considering its historical development.

tò pécov, cf. Stob. Ecl. r 21, 3° p. 183, 3, aro yrs ôe
apEacbat Tv yéverw Tod kóopov, kaÜdzrep amo KévTpoU,
apy?) 66 eaípas TO kévrpov.

é&vypav0évros, cf. Diog. L. vir. 135, 136 quoted on Zeno
frag. 52.

Tpemopévov. MSS. corr. Canter.

vby...róvov. The MSS. have rov...rovov. The reading
in the text is due to Mein., whom Wachsm. now follows,
although he formerly (Comm. II. p. 11) kept the MSS.
reading, removing the colon after óXov and inserting
commas after xai and Tóvov. There is some mistake
in Stein's note on this point, Psychol. n. 41.

ik emeppárov. Cf. Zeno frag. 54 = Cleanth. frag. 22, and
see Ritter and Preller § 402.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 255

Aóyo. Was unnecessarily suspected by the older edd. of
Stobaeus. The conj. tover is tempting, but Wachsm.
quotes Marc. Aurel. IX. 1, épuncev (2) duces) él ryvõe Thv
Siaxoounow avXNXa(goücd Tivas OYoUS TOV é£couévov
K.T.M. The best parallel is Zeno frag. 106, which puts
the text beyond dispute. twés Xóyow THY pepov =
certain proportions of the constituent parts of the soul.

ywopévoy P. yewwouévov F, whence yevouévwy Mein.
Wachsm. Diels: but the present, accepted by Hirzel rr.
p. 126, seems preferable.

es is bracketed by Diels and Wachsm.

25. Plut. Comm. Not. 31, 10, ére Toivuv émaywutopevos
ó KreavOns tH exmupacer Xéyeu THY TEANVHY kai TA NoLTTA
dotpa Tov Non é£ouovsoew TavTa éavTo, Kal weTaBanelv
els EauTov.

As the sun is, according to Cleanthes, the syeuovucóv |
Tov Kocpov, the mip aevSeov may be supposed to exist
there in its purest form (cf. the authorities cited by
Zeller, Stoics p. 204, 3, Krische p. 386), and to this the
moon and the other stars will be assimilated at the
EKTTUPWOLS.

eEopordcrerv. MSS. have éEopormoar corr. Zeller, p. 165,
n. 4.

26. Stob. Ecl r. 15, 6* p. 146, 19, KXeavOns uóvos
TOV XLTwLKOY TO TOP aTredyvaTo KavoELdés.

Presumably this refers to the fire of the revolving
aether, for the doctrine appears to be borrowed from the
Pythagoreans cf. Stob. Ecl. r. 15, 6* p. 146, 14, of aro
Ilu@ayopov...uovov TÒ avadtatov Tp Kwvoedés, This is
supposed to refer to the Milky Way (Zeller, pre-Socratics,
I. p. 466 n. 2), cf. infra frags. 32, 33.

27. Plut. de facie in orbe lunae c. 6, 3, deep

256 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

"Apícrapxov gero Seiv KXeavOns tov Zapıov aceDe(as
mpooKanreia bar tors” EXAnvas, ws kwoüvra TOD KOTpMOU THY
éotiav, oTt <Ta> hawwomeva a otew avp érewpáro, uévew
TÓv ovpavov vioTibémevos, é£eXírreaÜa, Që kara Xofo0
KUkXov THY YHV, Gua Kal mepi TOV avTHs d£ova Owovpuévqv.

This comes from the treatise vpós ’Apiotapyov:
Introd. p. 51.

'Apterapxov: the celebrated mathematician. For the
_ theory here attacked cf. Sext. Math. x. 174, of ye pay zv
TOD kóc Lov Kivnow averovTes THY 06 yiv kwetoÜac boEa-
cavtes, Os of TEPL '"Apíarapxov Tov paOnuatiKov KTA.
| Stob. Ecl. r. 25, 3* p. 212, 2, "Aplotapyos tov hrtov lornet
era TOV dm Xavàv THY 06 yHV kwetoÜat epi TOV »)Xtakóv
kvkXorv. (This also illustrates xarà Xofo0 kUkXov.) It
appears however to be doubtful whether Aristarchus
propounded this view otherwise than hypothetically: cf.
Plut. quaest. Plat. vir. 1, 2, 3.

doeBelas mpookadeto bar. For the ypad) aceBelas see
Attischer Process ed. Lipsius, pp. 366—375, and cf. the
case of Anaxagoras (ib. p. 370). Every ypady, as well as
an ordinary civil action, commenced with the vpóekXgots
or writ of summons (ib. p. 770 £).

ícríav: alluding to the central position of the earth.
Aesch. Ag. 1056 éotias uecoudoaXov, Virg. Aen. rr. 512
aedibus in mediis nudoque sub aetheris axe ingens ara
fuit. It is possible that Cleanthes had in his mind the
Pythagorean description of the central fire as éotia ToO
mavtos: see Dr Thompson on Phaedr. 247 A, uévet yap
‘Eoria èv 0eàv oikq póvn.

tà þpawópeva cótev: “to save appearances:” for which
phrase see Prof. Mayor in Journ. Phil. vi. 171.

28. Euseb. P. E. xv. 15. 7, Ar..Did. fr. 29 ap. Diels,

p. 465, »yeuovucóv 06 Tob kóopov KXedvOet uév 7]pece Tov

-THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 957

Hrov eivat Sia TO péyiotov TaV doTpeov vmrápxew Kal |
TAeicra cuuBdarrecOar mpòs THY Tv wv S.oiKnowW, |
upay Kal éviavTov Tow 0vra Kat Tas ÓXXas Wpas. |
Censorin. frag. 1, 4, et constat quidem quattuor elementis '
terrà aqua igne aere. cuius principalem solem quidam
putant, ut Cleanthes. Diog. vir 139. Stob. Ecl. r. 21. 6°
p. 187, 4, KXeavOns ó Xtarkds èv nrio ëpnoev eivai Tó
"yeuovukóv Tod kócuov. Cic. Acad. rr. 126, Cleanthes,
qui quasi majorum est gentium Stoicus, Zenonis auditor,
solem dominari et rerum potiri putat.

There is no warrant whatever for Krische's suggestion
(p. 435), that Cleanthes probably (* wahrscheinlich ")
adopted the Heraclitean theory of the daily renewal of
the sun: everything points the other way. At the same
time, the important position assigned to the sun was
probably due to his Heraclitean studies (see Introd.
p. 50), for, though Heraclitus himself did not maintain
this doctrime, we read of the Heraclitean school in Plat.
Cratyl. 413 B, tov HrLov...dvalovta Kal káovra érvrporrevetw

ta üvra. Cf. Pliny, N. H. rr. 12 (cited by Hirzel, 11. p. 138).

29. Stob. Ecl. r. 25. 3! p. 211, 18, KXeav0ys dvaypa
voepov TO ék QaXaTTms Tov arov. Trepi dé THY TpoTÓwv
aci Kata TO SvacTnma THs Urrokeuuévgs TpopHs’ wreavòs

8 eor” * *

7s THY avabuplacw érivéuerat. cvyKaTadpépec-
Oar 66 Tov HALvov Kwovpevov EdtKa èv TH opaipa, amò TOD
ionmepwod ri Te dpkrov Kal vórov, &mep éoTi méÉpara
Ts €Xucos. Cic. N. D. rr 37, Quid enim? non eisdem
vobis placet omnem ignem pastus indigere nec permanere
ullo modo posse, nisi alitur: ali autem solem, lunam,
reliqua astra aquis, alia dulcibus, alia marinis? eamque
causam Cleanthes adfert cur se sol referat nec longius
progrediatur solstitiali orbi itemque brumali, ne longius

discedat a cibo. Macrob. Sat. r. 23, 2, ideo enim sicut et.
H. P. 17

258 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Posidonius et Cleanthes affirmant, solis meatus a plaga,
quae usta dicitur, non recedit, quia sub ipsa currit Oceanus,
qui terram ambit et dividit.

Wachsmuth regards Cic. and Stob. ll. cc. as containing
two distinct fragments (Comm. 1. fr. phys. 7 and 8), but
the passage in Cic. is only a verbal expansion of mepù
Tpo7rGv...-rpodfjs. Wachsm. does not cite Macrob. l c.
This is one of the points which attest Cleanthes' study of
Heraclitus, c£. Stob. Ecl. r. 25. 1* p. 239, 5. Hirzel con-
cludes (11. p. 122) from the evidence, that Cleanthes, like
Heraclitus, spoke only of the feeding of the sun by
exhalations, and not also of that of the moon and stars.

dvoppa «rd. cf. Plut. plac. r. 20. 3, epi, ovolas 7) Mov,
oí Ecol dvappa voepóv èk Oaratrns. Diog. VIL 145,
tpépecOar dé rd Éumvpa tadra (ie. the sun and moon)
kai Ta GANA doTpa' TOV pèv HALOV èk THs weyarns Qarar-
Ts voepóv övtTa avaupa, whereas the moon is fed with
fresh water, and is mixed with air. Chrysippus ap. Stob.
Ecl. 1. 25. 5, ròv Mov eivau TÒ ab porc bev éEappa voepov èr
Tov THs Oaratrns avabvurapatos. Wachsmuth adds Galen,
hist. phil. c. LVIII. p. 277 K., wxeavòv òè kai T) OadXaccav
Tapéxew TH nlp Tpopny Tv adTod vypoTnTa éyovcav èv
a)TQ kai THY yewðn avabvpiacwr.

rpomáv: a necessary correction by Bake for the mss.
Tpopav.

gac. MSS. Wachsm. suggests pno.

éert: there is a lacuna after this word. Wachsmuth
formerly (Comm. IL p. 10) supplied xai yù coll. Plut. plac.
IL. 23. 3, but he now writes: “lacuna fuit in Aetii exemplo,
quod cum Ps. Plutarcho legit Stobaeus; Plut. 2 yA add.;
Aetius xal ý ueyáN ÓáXacca vel simile scripsit," quoting
the passages cited above.

ovykarapéperat i.e. with the aether, which is itself in
motion.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 259

awa, cf. Diog. L. vit. 144, tov òè fov Xo£üv TÜv
/ ^ AY ^ ^ , € / N
vropeíav trovetabar Sia Tod LoOLako0 KUKNOV, opolws Kal

T)v cedknvnv éXucoeióz. The discovery of the inclination” HA

of the earth’s orbit to that of the sun is attributed by
some to Anaximander, and by others to Pythagoras (Zeller,
pre-Socratics I. p. 455, 2).

30. Cic. N. D. rr. 40, atque ea (sidera) quidem tota
esse ignea duorum sensuum testimonio confirmari Cleanthes
putat, tactus et oculorum. nam solis et candor illustrior
est quam ullius ignis, quippe qui immenso mundo tam
longe lateque colluceat, et is eius tactus est, non ut
tepefaciat solum, sed etiam saepe comburat. quorum
neutrum faceret, nisi esset igneus. “ergo,” inquit, “cum
sol igneus sit Oceanique alatur humoribus, quia nullus
ignis sine pastu aliquo possit permanere, necesse est aut
ei similis sit igni quem adhibemus ad usum atque ad
victum, aut el, qui corporibus animantium continetur.
atqui hie noster ignis, quem usus vitae requirit, confector
est et consumptor omnium idemque, quocumque invasit,
cuncta disturbat ac dissipat. contra ille corporeus vitalis
et salutaris omnia conservat, alit, auget, sustinet sensu-
que adficit" negat ergo esse dubium horum ignium sol
utri similis sit, cum is quoque efficiat ut omnia floreant
et in suo quaeque genere pubescant. quare cum. solis
ignis similis eorum ignium sit, qui sunt in corporibus
animantium, solem quoque animantem esse oportet, et
quidem reliqua astra, quae oriantur in ardore caelesti, qui
aether vel caelum nominatur.

testimonio: this passage illustrates two characteristics,
which are specially prominent in Cleanthes: (1) his
activity in the investigation of the problems of natural
science, and (2) his confidence in the results of sense obser-
vation. Stein, Psychol. p. 69, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 319.

17—2

260 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Oceani : cf. frag. 29.

€i...4gni : for the two kinds of fire cf. Zeno frag. 71.

corporeus: see on frag. 42.

aether vel caelum: hence in Zeno frag. 111 Zeus is
identified with caelum in place of the usual gloss aether.

31. Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 8. 48. 674 P. 243 S., ov«
dvéyvocav © oro, KXeávOgv tov duXócodov, ðs avtiKpus
TAHKTPOV TOV HALOV kaXet év ydp Tals dvaroNals èpelðwv
Tas avyas olov TAnTowY TOY KOTpOV, eis THY évappóviov
mopelav TO pas dye, ex 86 TOD nAlov onuaiver Kal Ta
Nowra doTpa.

màñkrpov: Krische p. 400 connects this with the Stoic
identification of Heracles with the sun. Thus Heracles is
TO TAHKTLKOY Kal StacpeTiKov (Plut. de Iside c. 40), and
his name is derived from ap and &Xdeis by Porphyrius
ap. Euseb. P. E. rrr. p. 112 c, and Nicomachus ap. Laur.
Lyd. de Mens. Iv. 46. vXfrpov is properly “any striking
instrument": hence lightning is described as mAnKTpor
6.6BoXov vrvpós kepavvóv (Eur. Ale. 128): cf. especially
Plut. de Pyth. orac. c. 16 ad fin. botepov uévrot mARKTpOV
avé0nkav TO 0eQ xpvaoOv émiat)jcavres, øs Couce, ExvÜ(vo
Aéyovri Trepi THS AUpas, Nv apuóterat Zyvos everdys ' Agróx-
Xov, Tacav apynv kai TéXos gvANABaY" ¿yet 66 Xaumrpóv
TAHKTpov HAlov haos (quoted by Hirzel, p. 181). Eur.
Suppl 650, Aaurpa pèv akrís, nriov Kavdv cadys.
Sandys on Bacch. 308, and Milton's * With touch ethereal
of Heaven's fiery rod."

32. Stob. Ecl. r. 26. 1! p. 219, 14, KrXedvOns mupoeiðn
THY TEAnVHY, "riNoeióf) SE TQ TXNMATL.

mvpoedq: but the fire of the moon is not so pure as that
of the sun, being fed with grosser matter. Cf. Diog. L. VII.
144, eiva, 06 Tov uév jov eiMmepivès TrÜp...145, yewdeo-
TÉépav O€ TNV ceMjvqv.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 261

mdoeSaq: the MSS. have +JAoetó9 corrected by Lipsius
(Phys. Stoic 11 13), who also suggests 7rodverdy, to mt-
Noevd7, in which correction he is followed by the editors
of Stobaeus. But what is the meaning of this word as
applied to shape? In this connection “like felt” (L. and
S.) is nonsense. Zeller translates “ball-shaped,” which
is improbable because, apart from other considerations, it
is almost certain that Cleanthes did not regard the moon as
Spherical. There remains Hirzel's suggested rendering:—
“shaped like a.skull-cap." The only justification for such
an absurdity is to be found in the Heraclitean cxagoesdys
(Stob. Ecl. 1. 26. 1° p. 218, 8), for no support can be derived
from muara aépos (Anaximander) or vé$os meminuévov
(Xenophanes), which simply refer to densely packed clouds.
Krische, p. 435, boldly reads xwvoerðń which gives the
required sense, but is not close enough to the MSS. It is
suggested therefore that the true reading is 7A40e:07, the
II being due to dittography of the following H. There
would be no obscurity in this, assuming Cleanthes or his
epitomiser to have previously described the sun as xevoetó7js
(cf. frag. 33). The other Stoics consistently describe the
moon as opaipoedys (Stob. Ecl. r. 26. 1* 1! p. 219, 20, 26).

33. Stob. Ecl. r. 24. 2* p. 205, 25, oí uév arrow
«Xrowoi» chaipixovs avtovs, KreavOns è kovoeióeis
(scil. the stars). Plut. plac. rr. 14. 2. Galen, hist. phil.
c. 13 (xix. 271 K.), KXeávOgs xcevoeiüeis tovs acrépas.
Achill. Tat. p. 133° KnXeavOns a/To)s (sc. ToUs acTépas)
kevoetüés éyew oxnuwa bo, Theodoret, Gr. Cur. aff. Iv.
20, p. 59. 16, kcvoetóets è KXeáyÓns ó XtwiKds.

Cleanthes attributed a conical shape to fire, sun, moon,
and stars. "There is no direct evidence as to the sun and
moon, but it is a fair inference from the authorities that
they also were conical It is probable, moreover, that

262 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Cleanthes was moved by the consideration that Heraclitus
described sun, moon and stars as boat-shaped (eade),
cf. Stob. Ecl. r. 25. 19.26. 1°, Diog. L. 1x. 9. Krische is
apparently right in inferring that the same is true of the
world, cf. Plut. plac. Ir. 2. 1, oí uév Xrewol opaipoerðh
TOV Kóc ov, dXXou SE K@VOELOH, Of 66 WoELON.

34. Plut. plac. 1r. 16. 1, 'Ava£ayópas kai AņpórpiTos
kai KreavOns amo àvaroXdv éri vouas épea at mrávras
ToU; aotépas. Galen, hist. phil. c. 13, xix. 272 K. 'A.
kai A. kal KX. aro avaroXdv eis ducpas Pépecbat Tos
aoTépas vojitovatv.

vavras in Plut. apparently includes aràavù &oTpa as
well as the màavøpeva: the former are said cuptrepi-
QépecÜa, TQ XM o)Upavo, Ta O6 sXavópeva kar idias
xwetoÜau woes (Diog. vil. 144). Full information
on the ancient theories as to the rising and setting of
the stars will be found in Achill. Tat. Isag. cc. 37, 38.

35. Gemin. elem. astrom. p.53 (in Petau's Uranologia),
úrò THY SvaKkexavpéevny Cóvgv Twés TOY apyaíev ameh-
vavro, ov oti Kal KreavOns ó Xveós. Pidocodos, vmro-
Kexvo0at perač THY TpoTLKaY TOV wKkeavóv.

This fragment is taken from Wachsmuth’s collection
(fr. phys. 27, Comm. 11. p. 14): cf. frag. 29 and Macrob. 1.
23, 2 there cited. Krische, p. 393, refers this to the in-
fluence of Zeno's studies on Homer. “Hiernach möchte
ich glauben, dass Zenon dort auch den Homerischen Ocean
aufgesucht und dadurch den Kleanthes und Krates auf-
gefordert habe, dieselbe Betrachtung zu erneuern." Cf.
Achill. Tat. Isag. c. 29, p. 89:— There are five zones: Arctic,
Antarctic, two temperate (evxparor), ula dé dvaxexavpéevn.
ý 66 rovrov éon Tacdy ¿oTu amo Tod ÜepiwwoÜ TpoTrLKOU
Méexpl TOD Xerueptvoð TpoTrLKOD' ToTODTOY yap TANATOS EXEL,

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 263

Ócov Kal 6 Hos vrepiépyerat. Kareiras 66 Ouakekavpérm
dua TO 7rupajÓns eivat, Tod 5) ALov Sv avTHs THY Topelay dci
movoupévov. Posidonius, as we learn from ib. 31, p. 90,
made six zones, dividing the torrid zone into two.

96. Tertullian de An. c. 5, vult et Cleanthes non
solum corporis lineamentis, sed et animae notis simili-
tudinem parentibus in filios respondere, de speculo scilicet
morum et ingeniorum et adfectuum : corporis autem simi-
litudinem et dissimilitudinem capere: et animam itaque
corpus similitudini vel dissimilitudini obnoxiam. item
corporalium et incorporalium passiones inter se non com-
municare. porro et animam compati corpori cui laeso
ictibus, vulneribus, ulceribus condolescit, et corpus animae,
cui adflictae cura, angore, amore, coaegrescit, per detri-
mentum scilicet vigoris, cuius pudorem, et pavorem rubore
atque pallore testetur. igitur anima corpus ex corporalium
passionum commutatione. Nemesius, Nat. Hom. p. 32,
ó KnyeavOns Towv8e méret  ovXAXoywouóv où  uóvov
gyno Ójotot Tots yovedor yivópela Kara TO cdpa àXXd
Kal kata THY Nrvxnv Tots malec, rots 7)0eot, Tals 6.a0éaect.
o@patos 66 TO Ë olov Kal TO avóuotov, OVX dé aceudrov,
oôpa dpa 1 shuXieeeTe dé ó Kaeatns pnoir oveey dow-
parov Eye et maar, ovdeé o coma, adda
eda Topar Gmel 86 ý arux?) TO apart vorovyTt
Kal TEUVOMEVO kal TÒ copa TH puyi aicyvvopevns ryoüv
épvOpov yiverac kal d$ofovuérvms coxpóv eua dpa 7
Arvx5. Tertullian de An. c. 25, unde oro te similitudine
animae quoque parentibus de ingeniis respondemus secun-
dum Cleanthis testimonium, si non ex animae semine
educimur?

The Nemesius passage is regarded as a distinct frag-
ment from the two places in Tertullian by Wachsmuth
(Comm. r1. fr. phys. 20, 21), but, as Hirzel has observed, they

10

215

20

264 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

obviously refer to the same original. Stein's observations
on this passage should be consulted (Erkenntnistheorie,
n. 736). The mind is a tabula rasa at birth, in the sense
that it possesses no definite knowledge. But through the
seed a capacity for knowledge, and ethical tendencies in
particular, are transplanted from father to son: see also
Introd. p. 38 f.

5. The ordinary punctuation of this passage puts a
full stop at animam, with no stop after capere, but this
gives no satisfactory sense. Mr Hicks would strike out
the words capere et, remove the stop after animam, and
alter obnoxium to obnoxiam. The latter change, which is
a decided improvement, I have adopted, and, by putting
the stop after capere, the required sense is obtained with-
out further alteration.

15. yoveiou: cf. Cic. Tusc. r. 79, vult enim (Panaetius)...
nasci animos, quod declaret eorum similitudo, qui pro-
creentur, quae etiam in ingeniis, non solum in corporibus
appareat. The child receives through the seed the
same grade of tension in the soul as his father, and, as
the activity of the soul depends on its inherent tension,
the mental resemblance between children and parents
is explained. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, pp. 130, 131.

16. ġe: Wachsmuth reads é@eou from the Oxf. ed. of
1671, but cf. Zeno, frag. 147, catadnrrov seluar TÒ 7009 éË
elOous.

Biabéceor: cf. on Zeno, frag. 117.

l7. odparos: agreeably to Stoic tenets, for likeness
and unlikeness cannot be predicated of the non-existent,
cf. Zeno, frags. 34 and 91.

19. evwmáexe: the cup7rabeva pepõðv is an indication to
the Stoic of the évecus of a body: this is true of the cosmos
no less than of the individual. Sext. Math. rx. 79, who
continues (80), él dé rv nvwpévwv cuptrabera Tis ect,

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES, 265

el ye 8akrÜXov Teuvouévov TO ÓNov cuVdtaTibeTaL opa.
7vejévov Toivuv oTi oôpa kai 6 kóopos. id. V. 44, ovdé
yàp oUTos HYwTaL TO Tepiéxov Ws TO dvÜpomrivov oôpa,
iva, Ov rpórrov TH kepar rà vmokeuuéva pépyn ovwmráoxet
kai Tois Vzrokeuuévous 1 kepar, OUT Kal Tols érovpavíous
rà émiyera. Cic. N.D. rr. 28. The question as between
body and soul is discussed in the pseudo-Aristotelian
$vcuoyvopukd. Cf. Plat. Phaed. 883 D. M. Aurel. 1x. 9.

37. Stob. Ecl. r. 48. 7, p. 317, 15, IIvOaryópas, ` Ava£-
ayopas, IIXdrev, Eevorpdrgs, KXedv0ns Ovpabev eiaxpí-
veoOat Tov voüv. X

This is an obscure statement which cannot be under-
stood in the same manner of the various philosophers
mentioned. Thus, as regards Pythagoras, it is simply a
deduction from the theory of metempsychosis (Zeller, pre-
Socratics I. p. 479): while for Plato and Xenocrates we
may understand a reference to the previous existence of
the soul before its entrance into the body (Zeller, Plato,
p. 596). The terminology however is Aristotle's (de
Generat. An. II. 3, p. 736 b 27, Neiweras Që Tov vody uóvov
Ovpabev érrevovévat kal Üetov eivau uóvov: ovO&y ydp avTod
TH evepyela kowovet copartiKn évépyera), whose doctrine is
widely different from Plato's. As regards Cleanthes, the
Stoics in general do not distinguish between vods and
ayuxn (see on Zeno, frag. 43): the latter is transmitted in the
seed, developed in the womb, and brought to maturity by
the action of the outer air, so that it is hard to see in
what sense yuy) Oúpaĝev eicxpiverat.. Perhaps the
meaning is that the reasoning powers (vo)s) are founded
on external impressions, from which Knowledge is derived:
cf. Zeno, frag. 82. Stein, however (Psychol. p. 163 foll.),
believes that by @vpa@ev is indicated the action of the

outer air on the embryo at birth, hereby the pex is
fu Zao Pras «$1 > Y c

`. Z, A = 7 2A. ot "1 wa 1 rapt
"He A foes «d i
f a ae SF »

266 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

developed out of a mere dvavs. In this case Cleanthes
anticipated the Chrysippean doctrine of repipuéis. Hirzel
(11. p. 156 foll.) uses this passage in support of his im-
probable view that Cleanthes maintained a tripartite
division of the soul: he sees here also the influence of
Heraclitus. Cic. N.D. m. 18 might suggest a more
general view, that the point referred to is the material
nature of the soul as 7vedua, but the context in Stobaeus
is against this.

38. = Zeno, frag. 83.

There is a curious contradiction in Stein’s Psychologie
on this point. At p. 107 and p. 155 he cites and upholds
the evidence which distinctly attributes to Zeno the
doctrine of the soul being fed by exhalations from the
blood. Yet at p. 165 he suggests that this mnovation
was made by Cleanthes.

39. = Zeno, frag. 87.
40. = Zeno, frag. 88.

41. Diog. L. vu. 157, KXeav0gs pèv otv masas
émdtapevery (Tas vuxds) uéxpu THs ékmvpooeos, Xpv-
olmmos 0ë Tas TOV TOPav uóvov.

Cf. R. and P. § 409. Cie. Tusc. 1 77, Stoici diu
mansuros.aiunt animos, semper negant, cf. Zeno frag. 95.
The teaching of Cleanthes is everywhere more materialistic
than that of Chrysippus, who was no doubt anxious to
vindicate the purity of the soul essence: see Stein Psychol.
n. 279 and pp. 145—147, who compares their divergence
as to the nature of rúrwcıs and the “Urpneuma” ($Ao£
and avy5j) Ar. Did. ap. Euseb. P. E. xv. 20. 3 follows
the account of Chrysippus, tiv 06 wuyny yevyntnv Te kai
$Üapr)v Xéyovciv' ovK eU0)e O6 Tod caros amarra-
yeticav POeiperOar, adr émuuévew Twas xpóvovs Kal?
éauTnv’ Tv uev TOV oTrovdaiwy pépi Tis eis TIP avadv-

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 267

ceos TOV vrávrav, THY 66 TØV àdpóvov Tpds vroco/s TLVAS
/ ` \ ^ 5 / \ 3 , , \
xpovous...tas è Tov ddpóvev Kal aXóyev wwv >Wuyas
cuvatóàvolar Tois copac.

42. Cic. N. D. 11. 24, quod quidem Cleanthes his etiam
argumentis docet, quanta vis insit caloris in omni corpore:
negat enim ullum esse cibum tam gravem, quin is die et
nocte concoquatur, cuius etiam in reliquiis inest calor iis,
' quas natura respuerit.

This must be regarded as an argument in favour of the
warmth of the vital principle: hence Zeno called the soul
mvedua évOepuov (frag. 85). The excellence of the human
soul consists peculiarly in a suitable mixture (evxpacia) of
warmth and cold. Cf. Galen quod animi mores etc. IV. 783
K. (quoted at length by Stein, Psychol. p. 105). Cleanthes
no doubt was influenced by Heraclitus: cf. frag. 54, Byw.
avyn Enp) yux) coporarn, but substituted warmth for
dryness. Itis highly probable that the words immediately
preceding this extract, which are of great importance for
the Tórvos theory, are ultimately derived from Cleanthes:
they are as follows: sic enim res se habet, ut omnia, quae
alantur et quae crescant, contineant in se vim caloris, sine
qua neque ali possent neque crescere. Nam omne, quod
est calidum et igneum, cietur et agitur motu suo, quod
autem alitur et crescit, motu quodam utitur certo et
aequabili, qui quamdiu remanet in nobis, tam diu sensus et
vita remanet, refrigerato autem et extincto calore occidimus
ipsi et exstinguimur. Compare with this the remarks of
Stein Psychol. p. 32, and Philo de incorr. mundi, p. 507,
Mang. dtrav epa avadvopevov eis Tip Siadverai re kal
Xetra, aBevvuuévgs 9à Ths év aùr $Xoryós avéNXerat kai
avvayetat. This is one of the many points of contact
between the Stoics and the medical school of Hippocrates.
We are reminded of the róvos of Cleanthes when we read

268 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

that Aristoxenus, the Peripatetic and musician, described
the soul as ipsius corporis intentionem quandam (Cic. Tuse.
I. 20), but the doctrines were totally dissimilar: see Munro
on Lucr. 111. 100.

43. Seneca, Epist. 113, 18, inter Cleanthem et dis-
cipulum eius Chrysippum non convenit quid sit ambulatio:
Cleanthes ait, spiritum esse a principali usque in pedes
permissum; Chrysippus ipsum principale.

ambulatio: the Stoics were led to this extreme
materialism by their insistence on the dogma that nothing
exists but the corporeal. Cf. Plut. Comm. Not. 45, 2, ara
mpos TovTos Kal Tas évepyelas ajuara Kal Ea TroLovat,
Tov mepitratov Yov, THY 6pynoww, THY vmró0ecu, THY mTpo-
aryópevatv, THY NoLdopiar.

spiritum: the Greek original of this would be mveĝpa
diateivoyv amò Tov "yepoviko0 uéxpt Toder (cf. Plut. plac.
Iv. 21). The deviation of Chrysippus from the teaching
of his predecessor was probably caused by a desire to
insist more strongly on the essential unity of the soul. Cf
Iambl. ap. Stob. Ecl. r. 49. 33, p. 368, 12, môs oiv ĉia-
kpivovrau ; Kata uéy Tors LtwcKods eviat šu Stahoporntt
<TOV> UTOKELMEVWY cacojárov Tvevpara Yap ATÒ TOD
nyemovixod acsi otto. Svateivery dXXa. KaT adda, TA
pev eis dbOarpovs, Ta dé eis ora, TA Që eis AXXA aicOn-
Týpia’ éviat 86 LÖLÓTNTL TOLÓTNTOS Trepi TO avTO ÚTOKEL-
Lévov GoTep yap TO pov év TO avrQ cóari THY
yNukÚTmTa exer Kal TV evwodiar, oÜro Kal TO Tyyeuovukóv
èv ra)rQ davracíav, evykaráÜeciv, óppýv, Xoyov cuv-
eiknde. Sext. Math. rx. 102, mâsaı ai éri và pépn tod
bov é£amooeNXóevat Suvdpets Ws amd TIWOS T» y)s TOD
nyewovixod é£amooTéNNovrau dore Tacay Ovvagav TV
epi TO uépos oócav kal mepl TÒ ÜXov clar Sia TÒ aro
Tod èv aUTQ nyewovixod SiadidocGa. The former passage

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 269

is, I find, also cited by Stein for the same purpose (Psychol.
p. 168). He points out that Cleanthes explained the
different soul functions by means of a mveðpa Ouretvov,
and Chrysippus by a cveüpdá mas éyov. The former
regarded only the grade, while the latter also distinguished
the kind of tension. It is possible that this passage also
points to the different treatment of pavrasia by Cleanthes
and Chrysippus (cf. frag. 3), Cleanthes insisting more
strongly on the immediate contact of the psychical air-
current with the sense organ (Stein, Erkenntnistheorie,
n. 728).  Hirzels explanation (II p. 201) is vitiated by his
fundamental error as to Cleanthes’ view of the »yeuovucóv.
See also on Zeno frag. 93. There is a certain affinity
between the doctrine here mentioned and that attributed
to Strato of Lampsacus by Sext. Emp. Math. vir. 350, ot
dé avtny (scil, rzv Oudvowav) seluar Tas aioO5jcews, kaÜdmrep
dia Tiev orv røv aicÜmropiev pok/rTovcav, ÑS
otacews "pfe Xtpatav ó dvoixds. Cf. Cic. Tusc. I. 46,
viae quasi quaedam sunt ad oculos, ad aures, ad nares, a
sede animi perforatae.

44. Clem. Alex. Strom. vir. 6. 33. 849 P. 304 S., 60ev
kai 6 Alccos oU kaKds &ébn Tovs bs kekpayévat péytoTov
Óray EXk@vTar. cuverdevar yap avTois eis ovdév AANO
xpna [uots 7) TÀ) eis THY Óvoíav: ciò Kal KreavOns dyoiv
av@ ardv avtords exew Tv Wuyny, iva p) carn Ta kpéa.
The same saying is attributed to Chrysippus by Cic. N.D.
IL. 160, sus vero quid habet praeter escam? cui quidem
ne putesceret animam ipsam pro sale datam dicit esse
Chrysippus: to which add Porphyry de Abstin. 111. 20, 7 dé
is, évtat0a ydp éoT, Tøv xapírev TÒ fjÓwrov (scil Tod
Xpvoímarov), ov bv’ AXXo Te TAN Queo Qa, eyeyoveEt, kai TH
capki THv ruynv ó Beds oiov áXas èvépiéev. Elsewhere
the statement is ascribed to no definite author. Cic. Fin.

270 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES,

v. 38, ut non inscite illud dictum videatur in sue, animum
illi pecudi datum pro sale, ne putisceret. Varro de R. R.
IL. 4, 10, suillum pecus donatum ab natura dicunt ad epu-
landum. itaque iis animam datam esse proinde ac salem
quae servaret carnem. Plut. Quaest. Conv. v. 10, 3, 610 al
TOV YT@LK@Y EvLOL THY Viv)» odpra kpéa yeyovévat Xéyovau,
T)s vbuyns dorep adrov Tapeomapuéns vmép Tov dia-
pévetv. Lastly, we have two passages of similar import
in which a suggested derivation of os from Over is referred
to: Clem. Alex. rr. 20. 105, p. 174 S. p. 484 P., Xéyera:
yoov twa TGV dirocodovvtwy érvpoXoryoÜvra Thy v 00v
elvai pava, ds eis Üvciv Kal ohayny uóvov érvrijóeww: Se-
800a. yap Oe TO Eww uy pos ovdév Érepov 7) vera
Tov Tas capras ofpuydv. Varro R. R. II 4, 9, sus Graece
dieitur 2s, olim 00s dictus ab illo verbo, quod dicunt Ove,
quod est inmolare. ab suillo enim [genere] pecore inmo-
landi initium primum sumptum videtur; cuius vestigia
quod initiis Cereris porci inmolantur.

Everything in the world is created for and adapted to
a special end; the existence of various animals is used as
an argument to prove the government of the world by
vrpóvota (cf. the context in Cie. N.D. l. c). In a similar
spirit Epict. Diss. I1. 8. 7 says that asses were intended to
bear burdens, and that, as for this purpose they must
walk, imagination has been given them to enable them to
do so.

The passages here collected, as well as Zeno frag. 43,
shew conclusively that Stein’s theory (Psych. p. 92 f.) that
the vital principle of animals is not yuy7, but something
midway between dvovs and yuy), ought not to be accepted.
He contends that Marcus Aurelius is the first Stoic who
expressly gives yvy) to animals, but cf. Zeno frag. 50,
spiritum...fore non naturam, sed animam et quidem
rationabilem, which clearly points to the adoyos yuy) of

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 271

animals )( yuy) Adyov éxyovca of men. Zeno frag. 56,
l. 41, Jrvyzv áónpnuévov oov, Ar. Did. ap. Euseb. P.E. xv.
20. 8, Tas óë rv adpoverv kai adoyor Edov jruyas. To
the passages cited by Stein from Marcus Aurelius add
v. 16, vi. 14.

45. Plut. de sollertia animalium XI. 2, 3, ó uév oiv
KXedvOgs éXeye, kaimep ov $dokov peréxew Xóyov rà fda,
TovavTn Üeopía maparvxeiv u/pumkas éXÜetv èri pupun-
Kav érépav uipumka, vexpov dépovras: dvióvras o)v èk TS
pupunkiâs érépovs oiov évrwyxávew avtois kal TANW
karépyeaÜav Kal TovTO Sis Ù Tpls tyevécÜav TéXos SE, roUs
pèv kárcÜev aveveyxeivy orep AUTpa TOD vekpoD aaa,
tovs Ò éxeivoy dpapévous, amroQóvras Oe TOV vekpàv olyeo-
Qa. Aelian Nat. An. vt. 50, KXeavOqv tov " Acctov karn-
vayKace kal dKxovta cilat Kal dmooTíjva, Tols wors Tod
Kal éxeiva Noto uo un SvawapTavew, avTiAéyovTa iayupas
Kal KaTa kpáros, ioTopia ToravTn, pasiv.  érvyev 6 Khe-
avOns kabypevos kai pévtor Kal cXOANY aywv uakporépav
MMos ovKody pipunKkes Tapa Tots Tolu joav avTÓ
mornrol’ 6 86 dpa opd éË atparod Tivos érépas vekpóv
púppnka uúpumkas dXXovs kouiķovras eis oixov Eérépar,
Kal éavrois où cuvtpodwy Kal émí ye TH elder THS pup-
unkiâs ExTOTAS AVTO vEeKpO, Kal aviovTas KaTwOeEV érépovs
Kal cuvoytas Tots Éévows ws émí Tupu Elta KaTLOVTAS TODS
QUTOUS, Kal TAEOVaKLIS TOUTO' Kal TEAEUTAVTAS TKOANKA,
otovel AWTpa, kopioar Tors 66 éxeivoy uév Xafetv, Tpoéa Oat
òè Üvmep ovv érnyovto vexpov' Kal éxeivous U7rodéEac bau
aopévos, Ws viðv Koplopévous ?) aGeXdóv.

peréxew Aóyov rà tga: for animals possess indeed uy,
but not yuy7v Xóyov éyovcav kal Otávo:av: hence the
term dXoya fea: cf. Sext. Math. xr. 99 foll:—the Stoics
say that the courage of certain of the nobler (yevvaia)
animals proves that +ó xaXov is dices aíperóv, but only

272 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

7?) Gpovium didBeors can discern rò kaXóv: hence ó adex-
Tpvwv Kal 6 Tavpos un) pmeTéyovTa THS $poviugs diabécews
ovk àv Brérrou TO kaXóv Te Kal drya0óv. Hermes ap. Stob.
Ecl. 1. 41. 6, p. 284, 12, was oiv ópduév Tiva TOV adoyov
émicT)Uum Kal Téxvy wpojeva, olov Tovs uvppmkas Tas
tpopas avo05cavpitouévovs Tov xeudvos. It was easier,
however, for the Stoics than for those who separate the
soul of man from that of animals by a sharp dividing line,
to make the admission which circumstances forced upon
Cleanthes. For the soul of man differs from that of

, animals in degree only and not in kind; it is the same
| substance, though varying in its degrees of purity, which

permeates inorganic matter as éfis, plants as $ ous, and
men and animals as wv (Diog. L. vir. 139). Chrysippus

| believed that dogs possessed the power of inference (Sext.

Pyrrh.r. 69). Stein, Psychol. n. 165, is mistaken in quoting
Ael. N.A. rv. 45 as an authority bearing on this subject.
The passage, when cited in full, is seen to have an entirely
different application: “Ounpos pèv o)v $moiv “os ayabov
kai maja KatabOipévoro XvrécÜau" ¿oe SE 7) aus
decxvvat, OTe Kal dirov éavrQ Topo, karaMmeiv, o
fire “Ounpe, Képdos éotiv, oióv Te kal Trepi Zyvwvos Kal
KXeáv0Oovs voodpev et Te (or etre) akovopmer, i.e. it was an
advantage to Zeno to leave his friend Cleanthes behind
him to uphold his doctrines.

pópprkas: cf. Cic. N.D. tr. 21, num existimas formicam
anteponendam esse huie pulcherrimae urbi, quod in urbe
sensus sit nullus, in formica non modo sensus sed etiam
mens ratio memoria? Aristotle allowed that some animals,
and especially bees, possessed vos (cf. Grote's Aristotle,
p. 483).

&dos: “aimlessly”: so Eur. Hipp. 375, 709 wor’ Aws
vukrOs év uakpQ ypove Ovntav éjpóvrw 7) 6iéóÜ0apra

Bios.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 279

i£ drparod twos érépas: alluding to the practice of ants to
use one narrow path in passing backwards and forwards
between their hole and any other place. Cf. Verg. Aen.
IV. 404, praedamque per herbas convectant calle angusto.
Georg. 1. 379, angustum formica terens iter, where Forbiger
refers to Arist. Hist. An. IX. 38, ael uíav adtpatov vrávres

Baditovew.
46. Cic. N. D. r. 37, idemque (Cleanthes) quasi

delirans in iis libris, quos scripsit contra voluptatem, tum
fingit formam quandam et speciem deorum, tum divini-
tatem omnem tribuit astris, tum nihil ratione censet esse
divinius.

quasi delirans: for the treatise wept 760v7)s see Introd.
p. 53. E

formam: quandam: either (1) an allusion to the alle-
gorical explanations of the popular deities, whereby they
are identifed with the powers of nature, or (2) referring
to awu) Tots èv xepoítv in the hymn to Zeus, as Prof. Mayor
suggests.

astris: this position is proved at length in N. D. rr
40—44, cf. Chrysippus ap. Stob. Ecl. r. 21. 5. p. 185, 5,
ev à (aidépr) rà dovpa Kabidputa...Ocia thy búocu dvTa
kai éuvjrvya kal cioicoúpeva kara THY "rpóvouav.

47. Plut. Comm. Not. 31, 5, GAXAà Xpvourmos kai
KXeávOns éuremAnkotes, às Eros eimeiv, TO Xóyo Oedv
a ,
TOV o)pavóv Ti yv Tov dépa THY ÜdXarTav ovdéva TOY
2 J^ / /
rocoUTOv dóÜaprov ovd aitov dvroNeXoiraat, THY Lovo
^ £ > "^ , 1 \ y
tov Atos, eig Ov TavTas KATAVANLOKOUOL TOUS GXXOUS...
^ ` t. ^ / e M 3 > ` ,
TaÜTa, O6 où...Toîşs Soypacw Emetat, ANN avTol péya
^ ^ \ e / `
Bodvres èv Trois mepi Üedv kai Tpovoias etuapuéyms Te kai
$Uceos ypappace Siappyndnv Xéyouo, Tos GXAAous Qeous
£ € ^ f
&Tavras eivat yeyovoras kai $0apmoopuévovs vd Tupos,
, bi / y
THKTOVS KAT AUTOS @oep kmpívovs 7) KATTLTEPWoUS OvTas.

H. P. 18

274 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

éumemAnkdres: the Stoics would readily admit this: Cicero
makes his Stoic say:—quidquid enim magnam utilitatem
generi adferret humano, id non sine divina bonitate erga
homines fieri arbitrabantur (N.D. 1. 60).

Avs: Zeus is here identified, as often, with the supreme
Stoic God: see Zeller, p. 358. i

iy rots mpi Oedv kA. Chrysippus wrote mept Oedv
(Diog. VIL 148), epi mpovotas (ib. 139), vrepi eipappéwis
(ib. 149), and $vewd Gb. 39). For Cleanthes nn edv
see Introd. p. 51.

$0apncop.évovs : cf. Chrysipp. ap. Plut. Sto. Rep. 38, 5.
Plut. de def. Or. c. 19, xaíro, tods Xrewo)s ywdoKopev
oU uovov karà Gauuóvov ijv Néyw 60£av &yovras, AAAA kai
Üedv üvrov TocovTov TO TXfÜos Evi ypwpévovs dióío Kal
abOaptw, Tovs Ó àXXovs Kal yeyovévar kai $0apreo0at
voptovras.

48. Stob. Ecl. r. 1. 12. p. 25, 3. KXAedv0ovs.
kvOvcT aÜavárov, moXvovvpe, mrarykparés alel,
Zed, puoews apynyé, vouov uéra Tavra KuBepvar,
xaipe cé yap Tavtecot Oéuis Ovntotcs mpocavddr.
€x cod yap yévos éopév, TTxou uiunpa Xaxóvres
uoüvot, boa Coe. Te Kal Zome, Ovnt èri yaîar

Or

TO ce kaÜvuv)ce kai góv KpaToS d4év delo.
col òn mas bbe Kocpos, Mo Ópevos "epi yata,
Tre(Üerau, Ñ) kev yns, Kal Exov Umo celo kpareirau
Tolov éxeus úmoepyòv aviKxnros èvè xepoiv
audnkn, TupoevT, aevCdovta kepavvóv 10
ToD ydp vm0 manys $vceos mavr éppiya <ow>'
@ cU) KatevOdvers kowüv Xóyov, 0s bid TavT@Y
Horta, pryvúpevos peyadows piKpols Te jbdaeccu
[Os Tróccos yeyaws Vmaros DBacwXeUs Sia mavrós,]
3 , , y > N \ ^ / ^ -
ovOé TL ylryverar épyov eri x0ovi cod Oba, Satuov, 15
oUre Kat aiPépiov Oeiov vróXov oUr evi TóvTQ,

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 275

t \ EM m \ j 9-7 a
mav ó70ca péCovat kakoi ahEeTépyow avoiats
> ` `Ë ` ^ , > Sane y 0 ^
| aQ cv kai Ta Tepicad- T »émioTaca, apTia Veta,
^ f. /
Kal Koopeiv Takocpa Kal ov dira col piña écTü,
40e yap eis €v TavTa cvv)puokas cra kakoisww, 20
rh te ef, ^? , + SA 37
@o0 éva yiyverOat TavT@Y OyoY arièv éóvra,
ov devryovtes dow boor Ovntadv Kaxol eic,
Svcpopot, of T aya0@u pèv del KTHoLW "roÜéovres
oUT écopdcu Oeod kowüv vóuov, oÜre kXvovauv,
Q xev mreiÜóuevou civ vd Bíov écOXóv Éxorev. 25
5 a
avtot Ò aù? ópuGoiv Quot kakóv adXos èT ANNO,
e ` € \ , m Z »
oí pev vmép SoEns omovdny OvcépioTov Éyovres,
oí © émi Kepdocivas TeTpapuévot ovdevl Koop,
s > > y \ E e Q 7 »
adot Ó eis aveow kai cdpatos ndéa ëpya
een eee er dAAorTe O dAXa déporres, 30
omevoovTes para Tauray évavría rvOe yevérOat.
b ` A / > ,
arra Led mavõwpe, Kerawedés, apyucépauue,
5 , N ^
avOpaTovs<pev>piouv dmerporúvns amo Xvyprs,
Nv ov, Tatep, cKédacov *rvyíjs àmo, Sos 06 Kuphoas
, e / ^ ^ m
yvouns, 7 "rícvvos où irns péra Tavta KuBepvas, 35
v > ` , > , , ^
opp àv ruwmÜévres dueiBodpecOa oe Tin,
vuvovvTes rà cà Epya Sunverés, Ws éméowe
OvnTOv dvr, émet ovre Bporois yépas &XXo vt perfor,
r. x ^ ^ \ 35s / 2 / € ^
oUTe Ücoís, 7) Kowov ael vóuov év cinn vpveiv.

l. roAvdévupe: not merely in the popular religion, but
more particularly from the Stoic standpoint, cf. Diog. L.
VIL 147 Ómuuovpyóv röv ÜXcov, kai dorep Tatépa Tav-
TOV’ KOLVOS TE, KAL TO uépos avTod TO SunKov Sia TAVTOÆV,
0 morais Tpocnyopiais TpocovomateTrar KaTa Tas vvd-
wets. See also Krische, p. 401; Stein, Psych. n. 74.

2. vépov: cf. Zeno, frag. 39.

4, èk cod yàp yévos spé. Cf. Act. Apost. XVII. 28,
where the words ro) yap xai yévos écuév are quoted by
St Paul. The divergence in reading points to the fact

18—2

276 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

that these words were taken from the Phaenomena of
Aratus, l. 5, rather than from the present passage.

ixov: so MS. F, an unmetrical and senseless reading,
not yet satisfactorily corrected. The vulg. is is a con-
jecture of Brunck, and is destitute of authority. Meineke
read yevópeo0a Xóyov; Wachsm. (Comm. IL p. 18) sug-
gested vod co (or à 6) cod) Tuua, and now proposes
Tina for piwnua; Usener ‘cum appareat Zxou ex glos-
semate natum esse’ vdyns (a word coined from óe).
None of these are convincing, and all are inferior to
Bergk’s óXov, which might have been adopted, had it
satisfactorily accounted for the MS. reading. Wachs-
muth indeed says that it introduces “sententiam a Stoicis
alienam,” but he must have failed to remember frag. 24,
which shows that it is a favourite thought with Cleanthes
to represent the individual as a counterpart of the divine
cosmos. lt appears to me that an allusion to “speech”
is not here appropriate, in spite of Zeller (p. 215). Mein-
eke’s Xóyov, if adopted, would mean “reason” (not
“speech”), cf. Euseb. P. E. xv. 15, p. 817 d (quoted by
Wachsm.) «owevíav Ó úmapyeiw mpòs dXX5Xovs (scil.
0co0 Kal avÜpevrcv) dua Tò Noyou ueréxew. If yevoperOa
is accepted for yévos éopév, perhaps uóvov or é< cod.

5. ca: for the omission of the antecedent cf. Soph.
Ai. 1050, Trach. 350, and for the sense Hom. Il. 17. 447,
Od. 18. 131. Hirzel argues (11. 201—210), mainly relying
on this passage, that Cleanthes was not a pantheist in the
full sense of the term, and that he allowed only a limited
extension to the divine 7vedua: but see Introd. p. 41.

6. deco: aidw F, whence deidw Wachsm.; but the
present is very awkward after ka0vuv5jow, and it is by no
means clear that Cleanthes would have preferred deloowac
(see the evidence collected by Veitch s. v.).

7. xécpos is here used, as Krische, p. 425, has observed,

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. rir

in the less extended sense mentioned in Diog. vir. 138,
kai dvT)v 06 THY Stakdopnow TOV aoTépov kóojuov eivai:
hence éuccópevos = kvkXodopn uos.

9. et. So Brunck and Wachsm. úro MS. F. wera
Mein. For the sense cf. Soph. O. C. 1515.

10. dpdrxn: alluding to forked lightning, cf. Aesch.
P. V. 1040 zrvpós augdnans Bootpuxos. Hesych. Zuonkes dé
eE Exatépou uépovs nKxovnuévov BéXos* ù kepavvós, ù Eidos.

xepavvév: for the physical explanation cf. Zeno frag.
74. But to Cleanthes xepavvós is only another name for
Amy 7rvpós, which he identifies with róvos, cf. Heraclit.
frag. 28. Byw. rà 8é maura, olaxifer kepavvós.

ll. &ftyacw: so Ursinus and most edd. for épnya F
“in quo postea spatium 10 litt," which might suggest
épya «9apac 057 : but there are similar spaces after vv.
12 and 13, and the text at this point is generally sus-
picious. Wachsm. formerly marked a lacuna after this
line, but now agrees with Hirzel, 11. p. 118, n. 1, in referring
o in v. 12 to Kepavvov.

13.  peyaXev pixpotor F, which Petersen tries to defend,
was corrected by Brunck. The reference is to the sun,
moon, and stars. For the general sense cf. Zeno frag. 45.
A lacuna was marked after this line by Mein, who is
followed by Wachsm. But it is equally possible that v.
14 is a spurious or corrupt addition, for (1) the sense is
complete without it, (2) dca mavròs is suspicious after dua
vávrov in v. 12, (3) it is difficult to imagine any context
which would prevent œs róccos yeyaos from being frigid,
if not obscure, (4) the excessive sigmatism is pointless.

17—20. iv éwóco «A. The explanations given by
the Stoies of this weak point in their system are hope-
lessly confused and contradictory, as may be seen from
an examination of the passages cited in the notes to
Zeller, p. 189—193. We have had occasion to refer to

278 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

this subject before (frag. 18), and, putting together that
passage and the present, we may perhaps suppose that
Cleanthes accounted for the existence of moral evil some-
what as follows :—evil is not directly due to God, but is a
necessary accompaniment of the process, whereby he
created the world out of himself. At the same time, the
omnipotence of God is vindicated by the consideration that
evil is ultimately swallowed up in good, and that the
apparent irregularity of nature is in reality only a phase
in the working of a higher law. Chrysippus is incon-
sistent here, as elsewhere (cf. Diog. L. vir. 180), but to
some extent, at least, he agreed with Cleanthes: œs róv
aioxpav TÒ Üetov vapaíriov yiverOat ovK eUXoyóv otw
(Plut. Sto. Rep. 33, 2). We may compare Plato's words
Rep. 11. 379 C, ovó' dpa ó eds, émeri) drya0ós, vrávreov àv
eln altlos, ws of TroANOl Xéyovoiv, GAN óXcycv uèv Tols
avOpeTro.s altios, TOAA@Y 06 avaitios’ TOAD yap éXaTT@
rayaÜdà r&v kakdv nuiv’ Kal TOv uév ayalðv ovdéva QN
Xov aitvatéov, TOV 0€ kakàv GAN atta Set Entelv Ta atria,
aNN ov Top Geov. See further Gercke Chrysippea, p. 699.

24. Kowdv vdpov. Cf. infra frag. 73. No doubt Cle-
anthes remembered Heracl. frag. 91. Byw. £vvóv stt race
TO ppovety.

25. xev belongs to the verb, Madv. $ 137.

26.  dvev kaxod...ddrga F, advo. Wachsm., caxov...adXo
Sauppe.

28. oùe kdopw: this phrase is used by Herod. and
Thuc. as an equivalent for araxtws. Here it means
“inordinately, recklessly.” ^ Cleanthes was probably in-
fluenced by Homer's fondness for pay arap ov Kata
xoopov (Il 2. 214 etc.) and the like. al. ovd ev
KOT MO.

30, 31. &ddorev Usener, pépovraı Meineke, while in 31
Wachsm. suggests éveo@as for vyevécOa.. The sense is

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 279

unsatisfactory, but as the text is so mutilated conjecture
seems hazardous. Mohnike (pp. 34—44) has a long dis-
cussion on these lines, which he calls the hardest in
the Hymn. As the text stands, l 31 must mean that
the effect of the actions of the paños is just the opposite
to that which they intend.

32. dpyxépavve. Cf. Zeds dpyns, an expression used
by Empedocles to denote fire (R. and P. § 131), Zeno
frag. 116, " A prymv dé éren pact Tov dpynta kepavvov.

33. pév: add. Scaliger, but perhaps we should read èx-
piov. dmepoovvns i.e. &yvora, the condition of the $aóXo:.

36. yvouns d$ mwícwos xA. Another reminiscence of
Heraclitus, frag. 19. Byw. êv v0 cod$óv, érictacbar
qvo, Ñ KuBepvatar wavta Sid mávrov.

49. Philodem. de Mus. col. 28, 1, ef u«xj ye w>apa
KXedv«0»ei( Xéyew «avrà» Oedjoove<ui>v, ös now
apelvo<va>ye eivau Ta Towyrukà Kal < OVT>IKÀ Tapa-
dei<yp>ata, kai, TOU <Ady>ou Tod THs duXocodQías
ixavo<s> pev é£ay«y»éXXeicv d>vuvapévou rà Oe<i>a Kal
d«v»0«p»dó-mwa, u»7 éxov«T»0s 06 Wirod Tv Oeiwv
peyeOov Mes oike(as, TA uér«pa- Kal Ta pex kal TOUS
pub bors OS Gus Trpoc ucveia Gat Tros Thv arnbevav
Ts TOV Üciov O<ew> pias.

For the general sense, cf. Plat. Rep. x. 607 A, ei8évat
OTe Ocoy povov Üpvovs Oeois kai évykce pua Tots ayabois
roujcecos vrapaGekréov eis Tod. The underlying thought
is that it is impossible to define the nature of God:
cf. Hermes, ap. Stob. Ecl. Ir 1. 26, 6eóv vojsa. pèv |
xaXemóv, ppaca dé advvarov. Plat. Tim. 280, 29 c, p.
The construction is not quite clear. Zeller, in citing
this passage (p. 342, 1), puts a full stop after o/xeías, but
this makes rà pétpa x.T.à. very abrupt, and it is better
to regard «ai before rod Xóyov as connecting ea, and

280 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

mpootkveto Oat, although this leaves aueivova without an
object.

poô: bare prose, ie. stripped’ of the advantages of
metre. The history of the word is well explained in
Jebb’s Appendix to Oed. Col. 866. Cf. Plat. Menex.
p. 239 B, C, wountal...év povoikf vuvnoavtes...€av oiv
jets émvxeupdev TA AVTA Xóyo WIG KoopElv. ANOS
Aóyos also means “abstract reasoning " (Dr Thompson on
Phaedr. 262 c), and a “bare statement” unsupported by
evidence, Dem. Androt. § 22, Aphob. 1. § 54.

Tv. . .ol«e(as, “ expressions suitable to the divine majesty.”

50. Senec. Epist. 108, 10, Nam, ut dicebat Cleanthes,
quemadmodum spiritus noster clariorem sonum reddit,
quum illum tuba, per longi canalis angustias tractum,
potentiorem novissimo exitu effudit; sic sensus nostros
clariores carminis arta necessitas efficit.

tuba. Greek trumpets were long and straight, ending
in a bell-shaped aperture (xøðwv), cf. Aesch. Eum. 567,
duatopos Tuponvixn cdXNrvyE Bpore(ou mvevpatos TAN-
povuévm vméprovov yńpvpa þawérw, and Soph. Ai. 17,
where Odysseus compares the voice of Athene to the
sound of a trumpet.

clariorem: more distinct, cf. Cic. Div. in Q. Caecil.
$ 48, clarius dicere (of an actor) )( multum summittere.

sensus: signification, meaning: as in Ov. Fast. v. 484,
hie sensus verbi, vis ea vocis erat. Cf. Sen. Ep. 7 ad fin.
114, 1. Hence Quintilian frequently uses the word for a
‘sentence’ or ‘ period.’

arta necessitas : cf. Pind. N. Iv. 33, rà waxpa ò é£evé-
mew epúket pe TEOMOS.

51. Sext. Math. Ix. 88, ó 86. KXeavOns ottas cuvn-
porta’ el dias piceds sti kpeírrov, ein av Tis aplioTn

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 281

, = > AS ^ , , y » a
püsis’ ei ruyn Puys esri kpevrrov, ein àv TLS aploT
Mrvx5* kai el Cdov tolvuv Kpeittov sti ov, ein dv T
Kpatiatov ov. ov yap eis dmeipov ékmrimrew mépuxe TAD
TovadTa, worepoðv ovTe 7 vais edUvaTO ém dmeipov
av&ecOat Kata TÓ KpeitTov ov ý yuy) oUTe TO Édov.

t

> N ^ , ^ , e
(89) aXXa. unv ov oov kpetrrov éow, ws Uros YENGVNS,
el TUXOL, Kal Tavpos òvov Kal Xécv Taúpou. Trávrev 06

axedov Tdv éÉmwye(ov Edwv Kal copaTiKH rat Wuyi 10
diabéces mpoéyes Te kal Kpatioteves ó avOpwros’ Toivuy
Kpatiotov àv elm Yov Kat adpiotov. (90) kal ov mavu Te
6 dvÜperros Kpatictov cla, dSvvatat tdov, otov. evbéws
Ort Oud KaKias vropevera, TOV TaVvTa xpóvov, el 5é u) Ye,

EY ^ \ \ y , ca ^ $ ` ”
TOV 7 Neto TOU (Kal yap el motre Trepvyévovro aperis, oe l5
Kal Tpós rais TOD Bíou Svopats Trepuylyvetat), émiknpóv T
éotl xai acbevés xal pupiwy Seduevov BonOnuator,
kaQamep Ttpopys Kal oxeTacuaTav Kal THs adANS TOD
Tw@patos eryserelas, TLKPOV TVOS rvpávvov TpóTov pec-
TOTOS "iiv Kal TOV "rpOs Huépav Sacpov avavroüvros, Kal 20

> ` / [/4 / EROS N zi / \
cet pn mapeyoipev woTE Xobvew aVTO Kal aXei(jew Kal

£ N , , - \ , , ^

mepiBarrEL Kal péoeuw, voaovs Kal Üavarrov áreiXoÜvros.

[/4 > / ^ € » 5 N NN N \
d&oTe oU TéXevov Lov 6 avOpwiros, dreXés Óë Kal mord

£ ^ / \ N I V

keywpiopévov Tod TeXeiov. (91) To dé TéNELOY Kal dpuoTov
Kpejrrov ev àv vmdpyor avOpdmov kai macais Ttais 25
dperais CUUTETANPOLÉVOV KAL TaVTOS KaKOD averióekTov,
TovTo dé ov dvoice: Oeod. oti apa Geos.

This argument for the existence of God is stated in
different language and a somewhat amplified form by
Cie. N. D. 11. 33—36 : cf. especially $ 35.

2. déc: the vital principle of plants. Zeno frag. 43.

d...iem...dm dv: in this form of the conditional
sentence the inference is stated less bluntly than if the
indicative were used: see Madv. § 135 n, la. This is
especially frequent with é@é\ or Bov’Aopuas in the pro-
tasis: cf. Stallb. ad Plat. Symp. 208 c. Eur. Alc. 1079.

282 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

A close parallel to the use here is Dem. XXXVI. 44,
ei òè TodTO ayvoeis, öre TíoTis adopp!) Tacadv éoTt
peyioTn Tpòs xpnparicóv, Wav av ayvoncetas.

ll. $8484«: cf. Zeno frag. 117.

12. xat: Bekker proposed to read a^a or «ai umu,
but Wachsmuth's airos is preferable.

15. mwepwévovro : for the optative in protasis, see Jebb
on Soph. Ai. 521, Ant. 666.

16. 8vepais: cf. Ar. Poet. c. 21,8 13, 1457 b 22, ù 0 ypas
mpos Biov kai éorépa mpós nucpav’ pe? Tolvuy TNV éomé-
pav yijpas "uépas, Kal TÒ ypas éomépav fov ù, orep
"EwreóokN5s, vouas Biov. Cf. Aesch. Ag. 1123, Biou
duvtos avyais. The difficulty of attaining dper7, in the
Stoic sense, is illustrated by the fact that even Socrates
and Antisthenes were only regarded as mpokomrovtes
(Diog. vir. 91); and Alexander says that they admit the
existence of a good man here and there, deep Te mapa-
8ofov Lov Kal mapa dvaw, otravidtepov tod Poivixos
(de Fato, c. 28). In Diog. l. c. the fact that padot can
become ayaĝo is given as a proof that virtue is teachable.
Hirzel has traced the development of the doctrine of the
wise man within the Stoa, and shews that by the earlier
Stoics (Zeno and his immediate pupils) the ideal was
regarded as attainable and as actually realised by them-
selves (pp. 274—277).

20. dmawoivros. The preposition conveys the idea of
demanding as of right: cf. amoðoðvaı as used in the
Halonnesus dispute (Aeschin. Ctes. § 83).

22. mepiBdddew, “to clothe,” cf. Zeno, frag. 175.

52. Cie. N. D. u. 138—15. Cleanthes quidem noster
quattuor de causis dixit in animis hominum informatas
deorum esse notiones. primam posuit eam, de qua modo
dixi quae orta esset ex praesensione rerum futurarum:

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 283

alteram quam ceperimus ex magnitudine commodorum, 5

quae percipiuntur caeli temperatione, fecunditate terrarum,
aliarumque commoditatum complurium copia: tertiam
quae terreret animos fulminibus, tempestatibus, nimbis,
nivibus, grandinibus, vastitate, pestilentia, terrae motibus

et saepe fremitibus, lapideisque imbribus et guttis imbrium 10

quasi cruentis tum labibus aut repentinis terrarum
hiatibus, tum praeter naturam hominum pecudumque
portentis, tum facibus visis caelestibus, tum stellis iis,
quae Graeci cometas nostri cincinnatas vocant...tum sole

geminato...quibus exterriti homines vim quandam essel5

caelestem et divinam suspicati sunt. quartam caussam
esse eamque vel maximam aequabilitatem motus, con-
versionem caeli, solis, lunae, siderumque omnium dis-
tinctionem, varietatem, pulcritudinem, ordinem, quarum

rerum aspectus ipse satis indicaret non esse ea fortuita. 20

Cic. N. D. m. 16, nam Cleanthes, ut dicebas, quattuor
modis formatas in animis hominum putat deorum esse
notiones. unus is modus est...qui est susceptus ex
praesensione rerum futurarum. - alter ex perturbationibus

tempestatum et reliquis motibus. tertius ex commoditate 25

rerum quas perspicimus et copia. quartus ex astrorum
ordine caelique constantia.

1. Cleanthes. Mr Bywater concludes (Journ. Phil.
vit 75 foll) that Cleanthes was largely indebted to
Aristotle’s dialogue wept piħoropias for his statement
of the four reasons given for the origin of a belief in gods,
and proves that the first and fourth in the series were
derived from that work.

2. 4nformatas. It is to be observed that Cleanthes
regards the idea of God's existence as derived entirely

from our experience of external objects, and not as an ,

innate conception. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, n. 737.
4. praesensione: this argument depends on the exis-

284 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

tence of mavti, » Òr Ove(pov Tpóppmois etc. (Sext.
Math. rx. 132), which are described as 73/j0os mpaypatTov
memioTevuévov dn Tapa civ avOpdros. Krische,
p. 419, attributes some further arguments to Cleanthes,
which the evidence does not warrant.

7. tertiam: there does not appear to be any extant
parallel to this in the Greek texts. Although there is no
reason to suppose that we have not here a reproduction of
the general argument of Cleanthes, at the same time it is
probable that Cicero has enlarged the list of portents
from Roman sources. The prodigies mentioned are those
which constantly meet us in Livy, as requiring expiation
by lustrationes, supplicationes, lectisternia ete. Lists of
prodigies illustrating those mentioned here by Cicero will
be found in Liv. XXL 62, XXII 1, xxiv. 44, XXVI. 23, ete.
Tac. H. r. 86, Juv. xir. 65—70, and above all in the
exhaustive account of Lucan, I. 525—583.

8. quae terreret: Prof Mayor quotes Democritus, ap.
Sext. Emp. 1x. 24.

14. cometas: for the physical explanation, cf. on Zeno,
frag. 75.

16. quartam: for a fuller statement of the fourth
argument, cf. Sext. Math. rx. 111—118, ib. Ix. 26—27:
in the last passage it is simply introduced by the term
éviot, but from its position between an argument of
Epicurus and one belonging to some “ younger Stoics,”
Mr Bywater (Journ. Phil. vir. 76) infers that its immediate
source was one of the earlier Stoics, possibly Cleanthes.

17. aequabilitatem. “Cicero is probably translating
some such phrase as óuañóTyTa kwrjacos, popay ovpavod,”

Prof. Mayor.

$3. Epiphan. adv. Haeres ur. 2. 9 (ur. 37), KXeavOns

EE] \ ` \ , - ` € , ç 30)
70 Gaya 0óv Kal Kadov Néyeu civar Tas Novas, Kai dvÜporrov

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES, 285

ékdXeu povnv Tv *Nrvxyjv, Kal Tovs cos #uoTuca oYnMaATA
éXeyev civar kal Kdyjoets lepas, Kal Sadodyov epacKer eivai
TOV ALOV, Kal TOY KÓTHOV uúcTas Kal TOUS KATOYOUS TOV
Oelwv TereTas Neye.

tò dyabðóv...ńjSovds. An obvious blunder. Krische, p.
431 n. 1, suggests that the writer of the epitome has con-
founded the statement by Cleanthes of his opponents’
position with his own teaching.

dvðporov x... Not much can be made of this mutilated
statement; possibly it points to the doctrine of the soul
regarded as the bond of union for the body. Stein, Psych.
p. 209, finds here a trace of the correspondence between
the macrocosm and the microcosm, and quotes frag. 106
TOUS aTraLdevTOUS uóvy TH poppi ràv Onpiwy tapépe.

tots Ocods «rA. These obscure words appear to repre-
sent an explanation of the Eleusinian mysteries from the
Stoic point of view, in which the sun as the »yewovexor is
symbolised by the torchbearer who marches at the head
of the procession of mystae, and (adopting Diels’ cor-
rections, v. infra) the world itself corresponds to the mys-
tery play, while those who are inspired with divine truth
are the priests. Cf. Porphyr. ap. Euseb. P. E. ur. 12.
p. 116, év è tots Kar’ "EXevoiva uuornpiois ó pèv iepo-
pavrTns eis eixova, ToÜ Snutoupyod évokeváterat, Sadod-yos
Që eis Tv HAiov. For the subject in general see Prof.
Mayor on Cic. N. D. 1.119. Mr Bywater however (Journ.
Phil vit. 78) believes that we have here a mutilated
argument, ultimately derived from Aristotle’s dialogue
mept pirocodias, and explaining the belief in the gods
as due to a feeling of awe and admiration consequent on
the contemplation of the heavenly bodies. The allusion
to the mysteries is brought in by way of comparison: “we
seem introduced into a temple like that at Eleusis, only
more august and solemn, because the figures [= the hea-

286 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

venly bodies] we see circling around us are not lifeless or
made with hands, and the celebrants are not men, but the
immortal gods.” This explanation is fortified by a re-
ference to Dio. Chrys. xir p. 387 B, Plut. de trang. 20,
p. 477 ©, D (also quoted by Diels). For puatixa oy-
pata see Lobeck Aglaoph. p. 130, and for KAnoeis tepds
ib. p. 62.

pócras...reerds. Diels, p. 592, who records other sug-
gestions, has pvotnpiov...teXeotas. Perhaps, from a
comparison of Chrysipp. ap. Etym. M. 751, 16 id. Plut.
Sto. Rep. 9, we ought to restore ro)e Katoyous rGv Oeiwv
<Noyous> TeXerds.

54. Philodem. mepi eoe. fr. 13. èv òè T@ 9evréc po»
(scil. zepi Pedy Xpvouros) Ta T<e> eis Opóéa «xau M»
ovcatov üvaóe«póu»e«v»a kai «r»à map « O»jpo kai
‘“Howdd<@> xai EvpicT 205 kai momrTais dXXots «d$
Kka<l>  KXedvÓÜgs <m>eipâra<ı ovv»owewÜü-v» Talis
d0E€ars avTO<y>.

Cicero’s paraphrase, which omits all mention of Cle-
anthes, is as follows (N. D. 1. 41):—in secundo autem vult
Orphei, Musaei Hesiodi Homerique fabellas accomodare
ad ea, quae ipse primo libro de dis immortalibus dixerat,
ut etiam veterrimi poetae, qui haec ne suspicati quidem
sint, Stoicl fuisse videantur. As far as Cleanthes is con-
cerned the direct evidence only applies to Homer: see
Introd. p. 51, but cf frag. 111. "This passage is included
by Wachsmuth (Comm. r. p. 16) under the fragments of
the book rept Gedy.

55. Plut. de audiendis poetis c. 11, de? 86 4586 Tøv
OVOMATWVY djeX8s AKoVELY, AAA THY wev KXeavOovs mar-
0idv zrapawreiaÜav. Kateipwvevetar yap éotw ÖTE Tpos-
Tovovpevos €Enyetabar TO

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 287

ie Zed marep "lón0ev pedéwr,
Kal TO
Zed dva Awdovaie,

Kerevan dvaryvyvookew vp ev, as TOv èk THS ys dvabup-
wopevov aépa dia T) avadocow ~Avadwbdwvaioy Óvra.
Wachsmuth cites Schol. BL Homer II 233 Zed va Ao-
Swvaie| rwés 86 dvadwdwvaie id’ êv Tapa THY avadoow
Tov ayabar (?)

This comes from the book epi tod 7rowro? according
to Krische, p. 433, and Wachsm., Comm. I. p. 17. Zed
marep "1850ev pedéwy, Il. 11. 276, 320: Zed dva, Awdwvaie,
Il. xvr. 233.

mau. It is worthy of observation that Plut. dis-
tinctly suggests that Cleanthes was not serious in his
etymologies: see Introd. p. 43, 44, and cf. Plat. Cratyl.
406 B, aXN' éotl yàp Kal orovdaiws eipmuévos 6 TpóTros
TOV OVOMAT@Y TOUTOLS Tots Ücots kai vratGueds.

dvaSupidpevov: a reference to the feeding of the celestial
bodies by exhalations of coarser material, cf. frag. 29
@Kkeavos Ó éoTl...475 THY àvaÜOvuíacuv érwwéuerai Cornut.
c. 17, p. 84 Osann. dùp cata avadoow. It may be ob-
served that the attribution of this doctrine to Thales by
Stob. Ecl. 1. 10, 12, p. 122, 18 cannot be relied upon.

56. Plut. de Is. et Osir. 66, Pepoepóvyv dé poi mov ,
KXeávOgs Tò dia vOv kapmGv depóuevov Kal hovevopevov
Tvebpa. J

Diibner translates: spiritus qui per fruges dum fertur
interimitur. Probably this, as well as the seven following
fragments, comes from the treatise mept Gedy (Wachsm.
Comm. r p. 15). Cf Plut. de Is. c. 40, where Demeter
and Persephone are explained as rò dia THs ys kai TOv
«apr. Gv ikov mveðpa. Chrysipp. ap. Philod. mepi evo.
col 12, p. 79 Gomp. «ai vv A9umTpa yiv ù To èv aur

288 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

mvevpa. Cic. N. D. ri. 66, ea (Proserpina) enim est quae
Pepoepovn Graece nominatur, quam frugum semen esse
volunt absconditamque quaeri a matre fingunt. Plato’s
derivations of the name will be found at Cratyl. 404 c, p.
For modern views see Jebb on Soph. Ant. 894.

57. Macrob. Sat. 1.18, 14, unde Cleanthes ita cogno-
minatum scribit (Dionysum) dó Tod dvavicas, quia coti-
diano impetu ab oriente ad occasum diem noctemque
faciendo caeli conficit cursum.

In the Orphie hymn, quoted just before the present
passage, Dionysus is derived from ówetoÜ0a.. He is else-
where explained by the Stoics (1) as wine, Cic. N. D. u.
60, cf. Plato's derivation from é/dwps and oivos, the latter

being resolved into olec@ar and vods, (2) as TO yovipov
| Tveĝpa kai Tpópipov, Plut. de Is. c. 40. For the identifi-
|cation of Dionysus with the sun see the commentators
on Verg. Georg. I. 5, vos, o clarissima mundi lumina, laben-
'tem caelo quae ducitis annum, Liber et alma Ceres.

58. Macrob. Sat. r. 17, 8, Cleanthes (Apollinem) os
am ÁXNov Kal àXXov TÓTOV Tas dvaToNas TroL0Uj.evOV,
quod ab aliis atque aliis locorum declinationibus faciat
ortus.

Chrysippus (Macrob. 1. e.) derived the word 'AvzróNXev
from z and rovs, while Plato explains the various func-
tions of the God by different etymologies of his name
(Crat. p. 405 A—E), so that he is at once d7Xo, dei
BadXovTos, áàrroXoVovros, and óporroXoÜvros (ib. p. 406 A).

59. Macrob. Sat. r. 17. 36, Cleanthes Lycium Apol-
linem appellatum notat quod, veluti lupi pecora rapiunt,
ita ipse quoque humorem eripit radiis.

Antipater in the same passage derives the name aro
Tov AevKalverOa maura, dwrifovTos ŅAlov, a guess, which,

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 289

so far as the etymology of Avxevos is concerned, has found
some favour in modern times (Müller Dor. 11. 6 $8). Pro-
bably Cleanthes did not recognise a distinction between
the two titles Av«os and Avxevos (Soph. El. 7), and the
best modern opinion seems to agree with him to this
extent: see Leaf on Il. rv. 101. The connection of Apollo
with wolves is indicated by the legends in Pausan. 11. 9. 7,
IL 19. 3. In Cornut. c. 32 the name is explained in con-
nection with the pestilences brought by Apollo on flocks,
which were therefore entrusted to him as Apollo Lycius.
humorem eripit: cf. frags. 29 and 55.

60. Macrob. Sat. 1. 17. 31, Ao£ías cognominatur, ut
ait Oenopides, 67 éxvopeverau TOv Xofóv kUkXov amo
8voudv èr avatoras Kwovpevos, id est quod obliquum
circulum ab occasu ad orientem pergit: aut, ut Cleanthes
Scribit, ére) kal’ éXuxas &wwebrai, Mokal yap cisi kal
aûraı, quod flectuosum iter pergit.

Cf. Achill Tat. Isag. 169 A, ó £eOiakós Kal Xofías
UTd TiWwY kaMeira,, éTELd) HALOS Tas ddovs ev aùr
mopevetat Xofós. év O€ TH aiw ó ATórov Os raretat
Ao£ías id tàv moitõv eivar mioTeverai. Cornut. c. 32
gives two explanations: Aofóv òè Kal mepuckeXgv Ovrov
TOY ypnopðv ods didwat Aokias ovópaota Ù ATÒ THs
No£ornTos THs Topelas Hv Trovetras Oud TOD CwdiaKov kUkXov.
For modern derivations of the name Loxias see Jebb on
Soph. O.T. 854.

was: for the obliquity of the sun's course cf. frag. 29
and Diog. L. vir. 144 there quoted.

61. Photius s.v. Aéc xau, p. 158 ed. Herm., KreavOns
8é now arroveveuncbar TQ 'AmóXXovi TAS Xéoxas, é£é-
Opaus 86 Opoías yiveo@at, Kal avTOv 86 Tov ATO Tap’
éviots Aeoxmvópiov érikaXeto0at. So Suidas I. 541 s. v.

BP 19

290 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

rNécyat. In Harpocrat. s.v. we get the additional informa-
tion that these remarks were contained in the treatise
mepi edv.

Cf. Plut. de ei ap. Delphos c. 2: Apollo is called Aec-
Xmvópuos, Ürav éveprydàc. Kal dmoXavoci wpojevoi TQ
diaréyec Oar Kal pirocodelyv pos aXXjXovs. The inference
drawn by Wachsmuth seems correct, viz., that Cornutus
took from Cleanthes the words found in c. 32, cal Neoyn-
vópuov 0 avtov ( AmOXXova) Tpocnyopevoay Sud TO Tas
ýuépas rais Méoyais Kal TO ÓjuXeiv GAAHAOLS avvéyeaOat
Toùs dvÜpovrovs, Tas 0é vókras Kal EavTovs avaTravedOat,
He remarks that Cornutus appears to have devoted much
attention to the study of Cleanthes. Cf. Pers. Sat. V. 63, .
cultor enim iuvenum purgatas inseris aures fruge Cle-
anthea.

&éSpars. These were recesses or alcoves sometimes
branching out from an open air court, and fitted with
stone seats; they were especially adapted for the con-
versation of philosophers and rhetoricians. Cf. Cic. Fin.
v. 4, ego illa moveor exedra; modo enim fuit Carneadis;
quem videre videor (est enim nota imago), a sedeque ipsa,
tanta ingeni magnitudine orbata, desiderari illam vocem
puto, “Vitruvius in his description of the palaestra, or
gymnasium, such as were attached to Roman villas of the
higher class, recommends that in three of the cloisters
surrounding the court there should be exedrae spatiosae
in quibus philosophi, rhetores, reliquique qui studiis
delectantur sedentes disputare possint v. 11." Prof Mayor
on Cic. N.D. r. 15. See also Becker, Charicles, p. 303.
Guhl and Koner, p. 403.

épotas: the distinction between A~oyar and éFédpas
seems to be that the former were separate buildings used
entirely as lounges, whereas the latter were attached
either to a private house or a public gymnasium.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 291

62. Cornut. c. 31 ad fin, rods è Sedexa d4OÜXovs
évÓéyerau uèv avayayetv oùe adXdoTpias ém Tov Üeóv, ws
xai KXedvOns éroincev’ ov Seiv è 8oket Tavtayod evpect-
Xo'yov 7rpeo Bevew.

It seems clear from the account of Cornutus that there
were two current modes of allegorical interpretation of the
myths which centre round Heracles. By one set of inter-
preters Heracles was regarded as an ordinary mortal and
by others as a god. Cleanthes apparently explained the
twelve labours from the latter point of view. An illustra-
tion of this line of interpretation may be seen in the
explanation given by Cornutus of Heracles as an archer:
kai ToEoTns 9 àv ó Qes mrapevadryovro, kara TE TO ravra oo
diixveto Qar x.7.X. But in the account of the twelve labours
in Heraclitus, All. Hom. c. 33, Heracles is represented
simply as a wise man who brought to light the hidden
truths of philosophy: 'HpaxAéa òè vojuoTéov ovK am
copatixns 6vvápeos avaxOévra ocoÜrov iaytdoas Tots
TOTE xpóvow. GAN avnp Eudpwv kai copias ovpaviov
mvoTns yeyovws, woTrepel kata. Babeias aydvos vTrode-
duxviav épatice THY dirocodiay, kaÜámep óporoyodo Kal
Zrowcdv oi Soximotato. Zeller, pp. 368, 369, relying on
the concluding words of the passage cited, thinks that the
account is derived from Cleanthes, but, if so, there is a
discrepancy with Cornutus. Krische (p. 400) on the other
hand says:—“irre ich nicht, so führte Kleanthes, gleichwie
später Porphyrius (bei Euseb. P.E. 111. 112 c), die zwölf Ar-
beiten des Herakles auf die Bahn der Sonne durch die zwölf
Zeichen des Zodiakus zurück (Cornut. de N. D. p. 91 6)."

ciperthoyov : *expectes rov," Lang. Osann interprets this
to mean that Cornutus apologises for referring to the
authority of Cleanthes by saying that such a trifler ought
not to be respected in all cases. "This derives a certain
amount of support from Plutarch de aud. poet. p. 31 where

19—2

292 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Chrysippus is spoken of as evpecuvioyav amıðavos. But
it seems strange that Cornutus should have alluded to
Cleanthes in this manner. Why cannot the word be used
in a good sense as in Diog. L. 1v. 37? Mr Hicks suggests
eUpeo LAoytav.

63. Schol in Hom. Il. mr 64, ap. Bekker, p. 99
b. 23, KXeávÓgs 06 èv AéoB@ obro timacbar ypuoñv
`A ppoðiTyv.

Wachsmuth (Comm. I. p. 15) classes this among the
fragments of the work mep} 0eóv, but there is more likeli-
hood in Krische's view (p. 433) that it belongs to the zrepi
Tov roujro), for there is no reason to separate it from
frags. 55 and 65. Perhaps Cleanthes tried to explain the
currency of the epithet ypucén by the existence of a gilded
statue of Aphrodite at Lesbos. For the figurative mean-
ing of xpvcoüs-— precious, which is perhaps all that is
implied in the epithet, see Jebb on Soph. Ant. 699.

64. Athen. xir 572f, mópvns dé 'AdpoOírgs (epóv
ori mapa "Afvógvois, ds poi Ilaudiros’ karexopévgs
yàp THs ToAEws SovrAcla Tos Ppovpovs Tovs v avTH "ore
Ovcavtas, ws totoper KreavOns év rois Muv@cxois, kai
j.e0vaÜévras éraípas srXe(ovas rpooXafetv: bv uiav, kara-
kotumÜévras avtovs iGo0cav, dvedoméevny Tas kXels kai TO
Teiyos úmepßâcav, dmamwyeikau Tots “ABudnvois. ToUs &
avtixa peb brrrwv adixopévous, àveXetv uév Tos PUAaKas,
kpar5cavras è Tdv TELydY Kal yevomévous érykpareis THS
&XevÜepías yaploTnpia TH Tópun aroðiðovras `A bpoŠírms
Ilopyns vaóv iópvcac6a..

TIópvms: cf. Aphrodite Pandemos, and the worship of
Aphrodite Ourania at Corinth (Becker's Charicles, p. 246).
The object of Cleanthes was doubtless to explain away the
discreditable legends attaching themselves to the gods,
and thus in the present instance the debased worship at

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 293

Abydos is shown to be due to the accident of a historical
circumstance, and not to the essential characteristics of
the goddess. There is however considerable doubt as to
the genuineness of this fragment, see Introd. p. 51.

65. Schol in Hom. Od. r. 52, ap. Cramer, Anecd.
Oxon. Ill. 416, oXoóopovos] KreavOns Oacvvev tod Trepi
TOV ON@Y dpovobvros.

Wachsmuth also quotes Eustath. in Hom. p. 1389, 55,
tov " ArXavTa...0í uev adAnYopodaw eis THY akdparov Kal
dkoTrlarov Tpóvotav T) zrávrov airíav kai ddooppova TOV
TOLoUTOV " ArXavra. yoovow, ws TOV UTép bAwY dpovoüvra
HYOUV TOV brov HpovTioTiKOV. 0,0 Kal 6 KreavOns, ws pao,
éÓdovve Tò O THS apyovons. Cf. Cornut. de nat. d. c. 26,
oroogppova Ò avrov (' ATXavra) eipjobar dia TO Tepl TOV
rwv hpovtifew kai mpovoetc0ar THs TavtTwy avTod TOV
Aepdv awtnpias. See also Flach Glossen u. Scholien zur
Hes. Th. p. 76. Cleanthes identified Atlas with "póvoia,
as holding together the framework of the world (cf. &£«).

66. Apollon. soph. lex. Homer, p. 114 ed. Bekk. v.
porv (x. 305), KreavOns 88 ó duXócodos dXNXyyopucós
$a Snrova Gat Tov Xoyov, 9t ob pwdbvovtat ai ópal Kal
Ta TráÜ.

This frag. is taken from Wachsmuth (Comm. I. p. 18):
cf. Zeno, frag. 160, dvadaprres THS Wuyns TO $avraoTucóv
xal va05Tucóv v0 ToÜ Xóyov Suakexvpévov. Stob. Ecl.
IL. 7. 10° p. 89, 16, mavres Ò of ev rois ma8ecw óvres
atoatpépovtat tov Xóryov. In this connection we may
observe that Odysseus was taken by the Stoic school as
one of the few typical wise men (Sen. de Const. 2. 1, de
Benef 13. 3) This is the earliest known instance of the
word aXXoyopta.

67. Certamen Homer. et Hesiod., p. 4, 18, ed. Nietzsch
(in act. societ. philol. Lips. tom. 1. fasc. 1), 'EXXdvi«os uév

204 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

yap kai KXeavOns Maíova (sic coni. Sturz, Hellanic. frg.
p. 171 et Welcker ep. cycl p. 149 pro Blova) Xéyovct
(zrarépa ‘Opnpov).

This frag. is taken from Wachsm. Comm. I. p. 17.
Cf. Procl vit. Hom. ap. Gaisford Hephaestion, p. 516, oi
sev o)v Xpupvatov avtov amopaiwópevoet Matovos pev
Tatpos Aéyouou eivai. ib. p. 517, Ma(ova yap pac (scil.
“EdXavixos kai AapaocTr)s kai Depexvdns) tov “Ounpov
TaTépa.

. 68. Porphyr. vit. Pythag. 1, 2, Kħeavôns év T@
méumTQ TOV wudcKav Xpov, ék Túpov ts Xvpías (scil.
Mnesarchus, the father of Pythagoras)  cwrooeías 06 karta-
AaBovons Tovs Xapíovs TpoomXe(cavra TOv Myvyjoap-
Xov Kat éwmopíav peta círov TH voe Kal amoðópevov

PS ^ / , >> / > ^
5 ruwmÜfjva, qroNreía. IlvOayopou Ò ég maiðwv eis vrácav
paOnow dvtos evpvods, Tov Mvrcapyov amawyayetu avTOv

> , F A N ^ / , A
eis Túpov, éket 5€ rots Xaddalous ovoravra peraoyeiv

, , \ ^ ^ J t 3 > M , /
ToUTwY €T TAELOY Trova at, éraverbovra © eis THY "lovíav
évreüOev tov llvOayópav mpórov èv Depexvdyn TO Xvpío

^ > f: ^
10 omirncat Sevtepov Ó “Eppodduarts TQ Kpewhurio èv
Sapo jòn ynpackovts. Néyet © 6 KreavOns QAAous eivai
of tov matépa aŭro Tupnvovy amodaivovtar Tdv Tv
Afjvov azouwncdvrov évreüÜev è Kata mpü£w eis Xáuov
€\ovta KaTapeivas kai aoTtòv yevécOat. | rXéovros dé TOD
15 Mvnodpyou eis Tu "lraMav cuprrevcavta tov llvOa-
yópav véov óvra kopu0f) opodpa osav evdaipova Kat TOP
VoTepov eis avTnY aToTAEboaL. KaTadéyet Ó av’Tod Kai
aderpovs úo Eùŭvovorov ral Tuppnvdv mpeoßvurépovs.
Wachsmuth also quotes Clem. Alex. Strom. I. p. 1295.
|! bs 66 Kreavôns (MSS. NeavOns) Svpios 9 Túpıos (fuit
Pythagoras). Theodoret, Graec. aff. cur. p. 8, 43, ó 8€
KXeáv0ys (MSS. NeavOns) Tupi (IuvÂayopav) óvoudatet.
This frag. must stand or fall with frag. 64. The facts

N h...

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 295

in the life of Pythagoras with which these statements are
concerned will be found fully discussed by Zeller, pre-
Socratics, I. p. 324 foll After evdaiuova in l. 16 some
such word as aioGécOar seems wanted.

69. Pseudo-Plut. de Fluviorum nominibus, v. 3,
vapákevra,. Ò [a)TrQ] Trò Kavedowoy dpos: karero &é
TÒ mpotepov Bopéov xoitn dv airíav tovavtnv. Bopéas
dc épwtixny émiÜvpíav Xuovnv apracas, Tu ' AperoUpov
Üvyarépa, Katnveyxev els Tua Xóoov. Nubavrqv. kaXov-
pevov, Kal éyévvgoev èk Tùs mpoeupnuévgs viov "Tpraxa, 5
tov diadeEapwevov '"Hrvióxov tiv BacíXNewav. | yerovopác07
òè Tò dpos Koitn Bopéov. mpoonyopevOn dé Kavkacos Oa
TeploTaciw TOLGUTTV. peTA THY "yvyavrouaxiav Kpovos
éxxdivav tas Ads atrethas, épuyev eis Tv aKkpepetav
Bopéov xoitns, Kai eis KpoxddetNov peTanoppabels <érabev: 10
ó 66 Ipounbevs> &a rv éyywpiov Towéva, Kavkacov,
avarapwv, kai karavonjcas avroð Thy diabecw TÖV
aTMáxvev, eiTev où paxpay eivat Tos TodEmious. 6
06 ZeUs érupaveis Tov uév marépa Əsas mXekTQ Epic,
kaTeraprápece' TO Ó Opos eis TLYunv TOD Trotmévos Kav- 15
kacov pnerovouácas, vrpoaéóncev avr TOV llpounÜéa kai
nvayKacey avTóv UTO ocmMayxvoóáyov dero0 facavt-
Cea Ua, OTL crapmvóumoev eis và omXáyxva, Ws ioTopEl
KXeávOns èv y 0copaxías.

The treatise de Fluviis was composed perhaps in the
reign of Hadrian or Trajan, but all or nearly all the
authorities which the author cites are impudent fictions.
For further information see the Preface to Hercher’s
edition of the tract (Lips. 1851) and especially § 3.

2. Bopéov xotrn: cf. Pind. Nem. 1. 3, 'Oprwyía Séuviov
'Apreuí8os. Hom. Il. xxiv. 615, év Surirdk@ 60 paci
0cacv éupevar eÜvàs vupoaov.

10. peragophe8«s.  Wyttenbach saw that some words

296 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

had fallen out here, since a reference to Prometheus is
required. He supplied therefore the words within brackets
and substituted dvarauv for avaraiov. For avamavcov
avaptatwv (Reinesius) and avaczóv (Dodwell) have also
been suggested.

70. Pseudo-Plut. de Fluv. V. 4, yevvadtas Ò èv avrQ
(Caucasus) Botavn Ilpou50ews xaXovuévg, Hv Mndeva
cvXAéyovca Kal RevoTpiBotca, mpós avtiTabelas Tov
matpos éyprjcaro, kalas iotopel 6 avrós (scil. Cleanthes).

` TIpoprfdetos, cf. Ap. Rhod. 111. 843,

ý 96 Téws yNadupys éÉe(Xero pwpiapoîo
happakov, 6 ppa re paci IIpoundevov xaréeoOat,

where a lengthy description of the plant and its virtues is
given. Prop. I. 12. 9, num me deus obruit, an quae
lecta Prometheis dividit herba iugis.

71. Pseudo-Plut. de Fluv. XVIL 4, yevvatrar Ò éw
a)rQ (Taygetus) Botavn kaXovuévp Xapicia iv <ai>
yuvaixes ¿apos apyouévov Tols Tpaxrows TEPLIATTOVOL
kai rò rdv avdpav cuuTabéctepoy ayaTavTa: rabos
iotopet KreavOns èv a’ mepi opov.

Xapita: Hercher thinks this word is invented from
the name of a city in Arcadia.

ETHICA.

72. Stob. Ecl rr 7. 6%, p. 76, 3, KXeáv8ns...obros
amédwKe* TéNos oT TO Ó,oXoryovuévos Tf) púoet Ehv. Cf.
Diog. L. vit. 87, Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. 21. 129, p. 497 P.,
179 S, KreavOns 8é (scil TéXos wyevrat) TO dpodoyou-
uévos TH hoes Civ èv TO ceÜXoywretv, 0 ev TH TOV KaTA
dicow éxroyn keto Qar SverapBavev.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 297

In the extract-from Clement, Krische, p. 423 n., pro-
poses to insert the words Acoyévns è between hv and èv
TQ eUXoyioTeiv on the evidence afforded by Diog. L. vir.
88, Stob. Ecl 1r 7. 6*, p. 76, 9, who both expressly
attribute the definition eUXoyieretv èv Tf THY karà
gvow croy) to Diogenes Babylonius. His suggestion
is approved by Wachsmuth (Comm. rr. p. 4) and Heinze,
Stoic. Eth. p. 11 n. For the question as to whether
Cleanthes first introduced the words 77 úcet into the
definition, see on Zeno, frag. 120.

T3. Diog. L. vir. 89, drow 96 Xpúcumaos uév é£akovet,
> , ^ ^ , N M 307 > /
akorovbes Set Cv, Thv Te kowr)v kai idiws avOpwrivny:

v Or Bo

^ ^ 3 / N ` b > \ , ,
axonrovbetvy Set, ovKéte O6 Kal Tv émi uépovs: THY Te
3, X

, > € , x > ` > € ^
apetny Siabecw eivai ópoXoyyovuévgv kai avtny 0v avTov |

y , b ^

eivat aipeTny, ov dia Tiva hoBov ù éXmr(Ga ù) rv TOv EEwOev:
> > y ^

èv aur Te elvat THY evdatpmoviay, &re otoy uy merom-

òè KareavOns Tyv kown5v póvgv éxdéxerar You, Ñ |

uévg TPOS THY óuoXovy(av vravrós TOD Riou: Siactpépec Oar |

N ^ ^ ^ ` \ ` ` ^ y
86 TO AoytKov E@ov ToTë uév Sia Tas TÖV &EwOev Tpay-

parewdv TuiÉavorqras, mote è Sua THY KaTHYNTW TOV |

c'vvóvTov, érrel 7) púcis adopuds didwoww adiactpodous.
Diogenes leads us to suppose that Cleanthes and
Chrysippus dissented as to the interpretation of dcus,
and that Cleanthes refused to allow that human nature
is included. This however is scarcely credible (cf. the
next frag.), although it is quite possible that Cleanthes
laid special stress on xow) púcıs and Kowvds vópos, cf.
frag. 48, l. 24, Cie. Fin. rr. 73, utrum conveniat necne
natura hominis cum universa. So Zeller, p. 229, who is
followed by Wellmann, p. 448. To attain this conformity
an acquaintance with physics is necessary (Cie. 1. c.,
Chrysipp. ap. Plut. Sto. Rep. 9). Hirzel rt. pp. 112—118,
thinks that Diogenes’ account is substantially right. He

298 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

regards Zeno as the upholder of Cynicism in preference
to which Cleanthes devoted himself to the study of
Heraclitus, ef. Heracl. fr. 7, Sch, 0:0 det EmecPar TG
Évvà, Tod Xóyov è éóvros Evvod Çwovow oi ToXNAOL wS
idiav éyovres ppovnaw. To the objection that Zeno had
already recognised the Heraclitean Aóyos as a leading
physical principle, Hirzel answers that it does not follow
that he also transferred it to the region of ethics, and
that Cleanthes must be credited with this innovation.
The latter part of the fragment has been included in
deference to the judgment of Wachsmuth, but it appears
extremely doubtful whether we are justified in tracing
the epitomised views back to Cleanthes, because his name
appears 1n the context.

Siddeciy Spodroyoupévyy: for duafecw see on Zeno, frag.
117, and for the general sense cf. Chrysipp. ap. Stob.
Ecl. 11. 7. 5", p. 60, 7, koworepov Që tiv apetny Siabecw
eivai hace Arvxfis oúupovov aút mepi óXov Tov Ü (ov.

är ojcg: Zeller (p. 238, 3) corrects ovons wWuyrs
TETTOLN LEV NS.

ddoppds, cf. frag. 82.

74. Stob. Ecl. rr 7. 6°, p. 77, 21, evdatuovia Ò éoriv
evpora Biov. | kéypmrau dé kal KreavOns TQ bpm Tovro èv
Tois éavroÜ ovyypdupuacu kai ó XpvovmTOS Kal oí ato
ToUTOV Tyres TQU eUOatuovíav civar NéyovTES oUx érépav
Tov evdaiuovos Biov, kaitoi ye Xéyovres TV pèv eUOa-
povíav ckomOv ékketoÜa. TéXos Ó eivat TO Tuye THS
evdatmovias, Tep Tavròv ela, TO eVdamovetv. Sext.
Emp. Math. xi. 30, evdamovia dé srw, ws of "epi Tov
KXedvOnv, evpora Biov.

exomóv. For the distinction between cxomds and réXos,
cf. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 3*, p. 47, 8, kal gore aos pev TÒ
mpokeluevov eis TO TvXeiv, olov doris ToEOTAaLs* TENOS Ó N

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 299

TOD 7rpoxeuuévou TeÜÉw. PBovrAovTas yap évépymua nmé-
Tepov elvat mpòs TÒ TéXos, ib. IL 7. 6*, p. 77, 1—5.
Wachsmuth believes the distinction to be due to Chry-
sippus. The difficult passage in Cie. Fin. rrt. 22 is not
really parallel to this: see Madv. in loc. On the whole
matter see Hirzel, p. 550 foll.: he argues that the dis-
tinction between exomós and réXos was foreign to the
earlier Stoa, and was introduced by Panaetius.

75. Clem. Alex. Protrept. vr 72, p. 21 S, 61 P.,
KreavOns 06 ó 'AcceUs, 6 ard ths Xtods pidocodos Os
oU Üeoryovíav Toitixny Oeoroylay è adnOwny évdeixvuTat,
ovK atrexpi\yato ToU Oeod mép OTL Tep eiyev jpovàv:

Tayabov épwras w oiov got’; dkove dn:
TeTayguévov, dSikatov, borov, evaePés,

ee éavToD, XPNT pov, Kanrov, Oéov,
avoTnpov, av0ékaaov, aiei cvpdépor,

adoBov, ddurop, AvavreXés, AVwOUVOP, 5
exéAuuov, evapertov, Go baXés, piov,

ëvTipov d = 2 óuooyoúpevov,
eUkXeés, aTupov, émiueXés, tpdov, ado8póv,

xpovitouevov, djie,rr rov, aiet Stapévov.

The same occurs in Strom. v. 14, 110, p. 715 P., 257 8.,
introduced by the words ëv rw. moryparı mept ToU Oeod
and also in Euseb. P. E. xii. 13, p. 679.

Clement's mistake in referring these lines to Cleanthes

conception of the deity, when they really refer to the |

ethical summum bonum, is obvious, and has been pointed |

out by Krische, p. 420 f. Krische thinks that they may |

have formed a poetical appendix to the prose work, which
is either the epi réXovs or the wept kaXav.

Seven of these epithets, viz. G(atov, xp*jawuov, xaXov,
8éov, cvpépov, XvovreXés, OhEXLpwov are predicated of

300 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

dya00v in Diog. L. vir 98, 99, with the addition of
aiperov and evypnotov: cf. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5% p. 69, 11,
mavta è rdyaÜà wpértpma civai kal evypnota Kal ovp-
dépovra Kat AvotTEAH Kal orovdaia xal pémovra Kal
Kanda Kal oikeia, ib. D, p. 72, 19, ib. 11^, p. 100, 15 foll.
Chrysippus proved similar statements by his favourite
chain arguments, Plut. Sto. Rep. c. 13, Cic. Fin. 11. 27,
Tusc. v. 45.

3.  kparoüy éavrod : pointing to the virtue éykpáreua
(frag. 76): reliquum est, ut tute tibi imperes, Cic. Tusc.
II. 47.

4. aiernpsv: cf. Diog. L. vit. 117, <a) avdornpods óé
dacw civarı Taytas Tovs o7rovOa(ovs, Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 11%,
p. 114, 22.

aidécarrov: in Ar. Eth. IV. 7. 4 the av@éxaotos is the
mean between the dñaķov and the e/pev, and is described
as adnGevtixos Kal TO Biw Kal TO Xóyg. We may com-
pare then Stob. Ecl. rr. 7, 11^, p. 108, 11, where the wise
man is said to be d7Xo0s xai &zaoTos while Tò eipwved-
eaa, belongs alone to the pados, ib. p. 111, 11, êv racun
arnbevew Tov coor.

5. ddboBov, dXvmov, dvdSuvov: because the wise man is
atradys.

7. Some word has dropped out here. In Clem. Alex.
Strom. v. l. c. the words dogarés $íXov Évruuov are
omitted and opuoroyovpevoy is placed at the end of L 6.
In Euseb. l. c. we have two complete lines but evaperrov
is repeated from l. 6, thus:—évruiuov evapectov ópoXo-
yovpevov: this is perhaps the original reading, where
the error is due to evapeoTorv having been copied from
the previous line in place of the genuine word. The
reading in book V. is due to the scribe's eye wandermg
from the first eùapeorov to the second.  Mohnike however
thinks (p. 51) that Eusebius had the work of Clement

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 301

before him while writing, and that the second evapearor
is mere patchwork to mend the metre.

8. adrvdov, cf. Diog. L. vir. 117, &rv$ov ve eivat Tov
coon.

mpgov, cf. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 115, p. 115, 10—12.

76. Plut. Sto. Rep. vir. 4, ó 66 KXedvOgs èv úmopvý-
pace $ucukois eimàv öte “Amy Tupds ó TÓvos éoTi,
Kav ikavos èv Tj Wuxh yévyras mpós TO émuTedely Ta
emiBarrovta ioyds Kadeitar Kal Kpatos,” émupépes kata
Xé£uv, “ý Ò ioyos aÚT kai TÒ kpáros Órav uév èm. Tots
pavetow èppeveréors eyyévyntat, éyepáreid. otw’ Órav Ò
€v Toig UTropeveréous, avdpela’ "epi Tas aias O6 Owawo-
cUvq' mepi rds a(péaeus Kal ékkNiaeis cwppociyn.”

Cf. Stob. Ecl. rir. 7. 5", p. 62, 24, xal duolws orep
ioxvs TOD cóparos Tóvos éaTiv ikavds èv vevpow obro
xal THS uyns loxds Tóvos stiv ixavos èv TH kpívew
kai mpatrey 3) wj. See also Zeller, p. 128, 2, 256, 2.

mXqyj wvpés. This is the material air-current which
forms the syeuovucóv of the individual, being an efflux
of the divine zveüpa. Cleanthes here brings his ethical
teaching into close dependence on his physical researches :
of the physical aspect of róvos we have spoken at frag. 24.
Zeno's dpovyccs is explained as íkavós Tovos *rvxfjs, i.e. as
icxU)s kal kparos. Possibly Cleanthes was influenced by
the Cynie use of róvos: see the passage quoted by Stein,
Psych. p. 30 n. 37. Not that Cleanthes intended to deny
the fundamental position of Zeno that virtue is wisdom,
for we shall find that he expressly declared it to be
teachable (frag. 79): and cf. frag. 89. Still, he expanded
and developed his master's teaching in two ways, (1) by
showing that the doctrine of virtue rests on a psycho-
logical basis, and (2) by clearing up an ambiguity in
Zeno's statement with regard to the four cardinal virtues.

302 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Zeno held, or appeared to hold, that ¢povnows is found in
a double sense, (1) as the essential groundwork of all
virtue, and (2) as the first of its four main divisions. This
inconsistency is therefore removed by retaining $póvgous
in the wider, but substituting éykparewa in the narrower
meaning: see Hirzel Ir p. 97 fol. Chrysippus on the
other hand restored $póvgous as the cardinal virtue, but
represented by éz¿oeTnum that notion of ppóvnois which
was common to Zeno and Cleanthes.

$avécw : SO Hirzel, Pp. 97, 2, for errupavec ty, coll. Stob.
Ecl. 11. 7. 5”, p. 61, 11, éyxparecav dé èmioThunv ávvmrép-
Barov tdv kard tov 0pÜóv Xóyov $avévrov. We find
also definitions of éyxpareva in Diog. L. vir. 93, Sext.
Math. rx. 153, which are substantially identical with that
cited from Stobaeus: in Stob. it appears as a subdivision
of cwdpoovvn, while both in Diog. and Stob. the word
éupeveréov is found in connection with xaptepia, a sub-
division of avópeia. No doubt their account is derived
from Chrysippus: it is noteworthy, however, that op80s
Ayos appears in these definitions: see Hirzel, l.c., Stein,
Erkenntnistheorie, p. 262. In giving this prominent
position to éyxpareca Cleanthes was following in the
steps of Socrates (Xen. Mem. I. 5. 4, dpa ye oU xp?) ranra
avdpa ýynoapevov THv éykpárewav apeThs elvat KpnTida),
and the Cynics (Diog. L. vr. 15).

á£as: the full definition, probably that of Chrysippus,
appears in Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5", p. 59, 11, 8ucatoo vvv 86
émLoT)uv amoveuntixny Tç akias éxdot@, ib. Ti, p.
84, 15.

aipéres kal exces: cwopPpoagvryn is concerned with the
regulation of the ópuaí (Stob. Ecl. rt. 7. 5% p. 60, 13,
ib. 55, p. 63, 16), and is therefore directed to the avoidance
of man, among which $6fos is defined as éxxArous
ameirs Ayo (Stob. Ecl. rrj 7. 10°, p. 90, 11).

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 7908

TT. Clem. Alex. Strom. rr. 22, 131, p. 499 P., 179 S.,
810 kai KXedvOms év T@ 8evrépo mept 58ov?s tov Xo-
Kpatnv mol Tap exaota dioacKkew as 6 adTos SiKatds
re kai evoaluwv avnp Kal TO TP@T@ SieNovTL TO Olkatov
amo Tov cvpujépovros Katapacbat ws ace(Jés TL Tpâypa
Sedpaxots’ aceBeis yap TQ GvTL oí TO cvudépov ard Tod
dixalov ToO kara vóuov ywpilorTes.

Cf Cie. Off nr. 11, itaque accepimus Socratem ex-
secrari solitum eos qui primum haec natura cohaerentia
opinione distraxissent. cul quidem ita sunt Stoici assensi
ut et quidquid honestum esset id utile esse censerent
nec utile quiequam quod non honestum. id. Leg. 1. 33,
recte Socrates exsecrari eum solebat qui primus utili-
tatem a iure seiunxisset: id enim querebatur caput esse
exitiorum omnium.

For Socrates, who identified rò œ@péňtuov with Tò
arya0óv, cf. Zeller, Socrates, p. 150 foll. Cleanthes, as we
have seen (frag. 75), asserted that the good was also
cuphépov and ed$éXuuov: for the school in general see
Zeller, Stoics, p. 229, 2.

78. Diog. L. vir. 92, zXetovas (eivas aperas Ù) rérrapas)
oí wept KXeávOmv kai Xpvourrov kai ' AvriraTpov.

Zeller, p. 258, thinks that this simply means that
Cleanthes enumerated the various subdivisions of the
four cardinal virtues. Hirzel, p. 97, 2, prefers to suppose
that it is due to the mistake of placing dpovgous, which
is the source of the several virtues, on the same level as
the four main divisions of virtue.

79. Diog. L. vir. 91, Sidaxtyv Te civar avtny (Aéyw
dé tiv apetnv) Kal Xpúcummos v TO "poro Trepi TéXovs
dyot cal) KXedvOns.

This is, of course, ultimately traceable to Socrates, but

904 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

was also enforced by the Cynics: cf. Diog. vI. 10 (Antis-
thenes) dvdaxtiv ameðeiwvve THY apeTny, ib. 105, apéorer &
avtots kai triv apeTny SidaxTHy civar, Kaba hyo `A uTu-
abévns èv Td 'HpakXet.

80. Diog. L. VII. 127, cai umu Tv aper?» X puc ummos
èv amroBrntnv, KreavOns è avamoBXrTouv, ó uv aro-
BAAT Sia wéOnv kai ueXaryyoN(av, ó 66 avaropAnTov Sia
BeBaiovs caradn ess.

On this point Cleanthes is in agreement with the
Cynics (Diog. L. vr. 105), whence Wellmann, p. 462, infers
that Zeno’s teaching must have been in agreement with
Cleanthes rather than with Chrysippus. See also the
authorities cited by Zeller, p. 295, 3, and add Cic. Tusc.
II. 32, amitti non potest virtus.

péqv: but Zeno held that the wise man ov pe@ucOn-
ceo Ua. (frag. 159).

peayxoMay : Cic. Tusc. rr. 11, quod (furor) cum maius
esse videatur quam insania, tamen eiusmodi est, ut furor
(ueMaryyoMia) in sapientem -cadere possit, non possit
insania.

BeBatovs karaMjes: although xardAn us is shared by
the wise man with the fool (see on Zeno, frag. 16), its
especial cultivation and possession belongs to the wise
man only: ef. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 184, 185. Cf.
also Sext. Math. rr. 6 (quoted on frag. 9). According to
Hirzel, p. 68, 3, the meaning is not that Cleanthes denied
that the wise man would get drunk and so lose his virtue,
but that the strength of his catadn evs is so great, that
even melancholy and drunkenness fail to shake him. In
support of this he quotes Epict. diss. r. 18. 21—23, ris
ody ó anttntos ; Öv oUx éElcTnow ovdév TOV atroTpoat-
pérov. Tl o)v àv kaña Ù) TOUT; Tí àv Olvemevos Ú ; TL
av pedayyorav; Tí é Ümvots; obrós pot Eotly Ò aviknTos

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 305

ants. 1L 17. 33, z0eXov Ò achards éyew kal aceloTas,
Kal où povov éypnyopws GANA Kal KaGevdov Kal oivøpevos
kai èv perayyodia. He thinks that the later Stoics
invented the distinction between ofvododa: and pedveww
to explain the divergence between Cleanthes and Chry-
sippus on so important a point as the loss of virtue.
So substantially Von Arnim, Quellen Studien zu Philo,
p. 106.

81. Diog. L. vir 128, apéoxeu O6 aùroîs xai da
\ ^ GU af ^ ° € `Ë , /
Tavtos ypñoQa, TH apet, Ws oí mept KreavOnv daciv.
davaróß ntos yap sti: Kal TavToTe TH Wuyh yphTar
ovon TedEla ó oouóatos.

82. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 5'5, p. 65, 8, vravras yap avOpa- |
mous apopuas &xew ék dicens pos apeTnv, Kal olovel TOV
Tov nurauPelwv Noyov éxew kara KXeávOnv: blev arexets
pèv dvTas elvat havrovs reXewÜÉvras dé orovõaiovs.

á$oppás. For this sense of the word cf. frag. 73
ddopuds advactpopovs “uncorrupted impulses.” Stob.
Kel. 11. 7. 59, p. 62, 9 éyew yap (Tov avOpwrrov) apopyas
Tapa Ts pvoews Kal mpòs THY TOD KaOynKOVTOS eUpeciv
Kal Tpos THY TOV Opudyv eUaTáÜeiav Kal mpós Tas ÚTo-
povàs Kal pos Tas atroveunoes. As a general rule, how-
ever, it is contrasted with opp as “aversion” )( * impulse
towards,” Stob. Ecl. rr, 7. 9, p. 87, 5, Sext. Pyrrh. m1. 273,
éykpáreuav...év Tals Tpos TO kaXóv óppaîs Kal èv rais aro
ToD Kakod adopyais, ib. Math. xr. 210. Cleanthes re-
garded our capacity for virtue as innate, but whether at
the same time he denied an innate intellectual capacity is
open to question, cf. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, n. 735.

Cf. M. Aurel. ix. 1, apopyas yàp rpoeiknder rapa ths
picews, dy aperjoas ovy olós Té ote viv Siaxpivery và
vrevàr) amo Tay arnOar.

H. P. 20

306 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

tóv: so Zeller, (p. 243, 1), for ro.

tjprapBelwv : so Wachsm. for MSS. xjuapueuaiov. Meineke
reads mpiapßeiwv. The meaning is that men possess
latent capacities which must be brought into play by
their own exertions, if they would attain to perfection,
cf. Cic. Tusc. nr. 2, sunt enim ingeniis nostris semina
innata virtutum, quae si adolescere liceret, ipsa nos ad
beatam vitam natura perduceret.

83. Themist. Or. 11. 27 C, ef òè a2 dyoevé Tus Kora-
«eíav civari TO Iubi vapaB4XXew Tov Bacidéa, Xpvovr-
Tos èv Uuiv kai KXeávOÓgs où cuyxopnce, kai bdov
Ovos duXoaodías 7) ó éx THs Tovkirns xopós oit ódakovres
civar THY avTnY dperzjv Kal dNij0evav avópós Kal Oeo.

This doctrine depends on the divine origin of the
human soul. Hence the Stoics could say that good men
were friends of the gods, and Chrysippus declared that the
happiness of the wise man was as great as that of Zeus,
since they only differ in point of time, which is immaterial
for happiness. Cf. Procl. in Tim. Plat. rr. 106 f, o£ òè azo
THs Yrods kal T avthy aperyv eivat Oedv kai avOporwv
eipnxacw. Cic. Leg. I. 25, iam vero virtus eadem in
homine ac deo est neque alio ullo ingenio praeterea.

84. Galen. Hipp. et Plat. plac. v. 6, v. p. 476 K., rip
uèv ToU KXedvOovs yvøunv úmèp tod caÜwrwkoÜ THs
~ouyns éx THvdE Qaívec0aí ono Tav émáv.

Aoyiopos. TL mor és? ote Bouxei Üvué; TodTO
pot bpacov.
Ovpds. yew, Moyiopé, wav 0 Botowar Trotetv.
A. vai BaoidtKov yer TNV OLOS eimróv TANW.
©. dy àv ériOupod rað bras yevncerat.
Tavri Ta apoiBaia KXeávOovs. ómcoi, eivar Tlocedavios
evapyas exdexvUpeva THY Trepi ToU TAaOHTLKOD THS Nrvxtjs

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 307

yvepnv avtod, ei ye 0») meroinke Tov Aoyiopòv TO Ovu
Siadeyopevov ws éraipov éraípq.

2, 3. à oyopév...Bacrtuccv ye MSS. ëyew, AoyurpEé,
Wyttenbach Bacidexov éote Mullach, 8aevXucóv:. eù ye
Scaliger, vai 8. y. Mein. Perhaps we should read moreîv
oylopov...eyo Bactr«LKos.

4. ëv Meineke, Mullach, øs MSS., óc" Wyttenbach.

Mohnike, p. 52, thinks that this fragment comes either
from epi opps or mept Xóryov.

Posidonius uses the verses to prove that Cleanthes
was in substantial agreement with himself in supposing
that the various functions of the vyeuovucóv are radically
distinct. Zeller, p. 215, 3, says that this is to confound a
rhetorical flourish with a philosophical view, and it may
- be added that Posidonius must have been hard pressed
for an argument to rely on this passage at all. Hirzel,
however, pp. 147—160, labours to prove that Posidonius
is right, but he mainly relies on frag. 37, @vpaev cicxpí-
veoĝaı Tov vo)v, where see note, and is well refuted by

Stein, Psych. pp. 163—167.

85. Galen, Hipp. et Plat. IX. 1, V. p. 653 K., Iose-
Sovios...delxvucw èv TH rep malv mparyyuareía StocKov-
uévous "4s vo TpuGv Suvapwewy, émiÜvumrwefs Te Kal
OvuoeiGo0s kai RoytotiKHs THs 9 avTüs ó lloceuibGvios
&XeÉev eivau Kal rov KXeavOmv.

Though there is no direct proof that Cleanthes adhered
to the eightfold division of the soul, yet everything points
that way, and Hirzels opinion (p. 138) that he only
recognised three divisions is unfounded: see on frag. 84.
The present passage of Galen ought perhaps rather to
be added as a testimonium to frag. 84 than cited as a
distinct fragment, since the whole argument of Posidonius,
so far as we know, was founded on the dialogue be-

20—2

308 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

tween Aoyicuós and Ovuós. For 9Svvapew see Hirzel, rr.
p. 486, 1.

86. Stob. Floril 108, 59, 6 8€ KreavOns éXeye Tv
AUT puys tapavo.

This appears to be the only remaining indication of
the position of Cleanthes as regards the definition of the
maĝðn, but it is not without significance. Zeno had pro-
bably defined AX as dXoyos avorton) >Wuyns (see on
Zeno frag. 143), but Cleanthes saw his way to a better
explanation from the standpoint of tovos: the soul
of the wise man, informed by right reason, is characterised
| by icxds, ixavos Tóvos, eUrovía, but if the emotions over-
| power the natural reason of a man, there supervenes a

resolution of tension, dTovía or dcÓOéveua. This view of
| the emotions was adopted by Chrysippus, cf. Galen, Hipp.
et Plat. v. 8387 K. 0p07) kpícis éEnyetras pera THs karta
THY Nrvx5v evTovías: see especially the long passage be-
ginning ib. p. 404 K. where the view of maĝos as atovia
or dc Oéveua, is explained at length by Chrysippus. With
regard to XVm» cf. Tusc. rr. 61, omnibus enim modis
fuleiendi sunt, qui ruunt nec cohaerere possunt, propter
magnitudinem aegritudinis. Ex quo ipsam aegritudinem
Aúmrnv Chrysippus quasi solutionem totius hominis appel-
latam putat. ib. IL. 54, animus intentione sua depellit
pressum omnem ponderum, remissione autem sic urgetur,
ut se nequeat extollere. No doubt Cleanthes, like Plato,
derived Av» from Ave: Plat. Crat. p. 419 c. See also
Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 130.

87. Galen, Hipp. et Plat. ur. 5, v. 332 K., où uóvov
Xpúcummos adra kat KreavOns kai Zaojvov éroi(guos avrà
TiOéacuv (scil. ro0s óBovs kai Tas AVTas Kal mávl boa
ToiaÜra may Kata THY Kapdiay ovvíaracÜat) = Zeno,

frag. 141.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 309

Hirzels contention (p. 152 f) that Cleanthes placed
the syeuovucóv in the brain, and that hence we are to
explain Plut. plac. Iv. 21. 5, is controverted by Stein,
Psych. p. 170, from this passage, for we have seen that
the vá: are affections of the nyewovexov. Hirzel replies
(p. 154) that opwal and man, though dependent on the
"»yeuovucóv, are yet distinct from it. The improbability
of Hirzel’s whole theory lies in the fact that, if it is cor-
rect, Cleanthes was in vital opposition to the whole Stoa
down to Posidonius on the most important doctrines of
‘psychology. Such an inference ought not to be accepted,
unless the evidence conclusively points to it, and no one
will affirm that such is the case here.

88. Sext. Emp. Math. xi 74, ara KXeávÓns pèv
ure kata $vouv avT5v (hõðovýv) elvar wr atfíav Éyew
[aUT»v] êv TO Piw, kaharep 86 TO kàXXvvrpov kata dia
u) eivat.

ńðovy is, according to Cleanthes, not merely an aéva-
$opov but also rapa púcıv, being entirely devoid of a£ía,
cf. Diog. L. vit. 105, and see on Zeno, frag. 192.

kéáAXvvrpoy cannot here mean “a broom,” but must be
“an ornament": see Suidas S.v. All kinds of personal |
adornment appeared to the Stoics, as to the Cynics, to
be contrary to nature: Zeno wore the cpígwov (Diog.
L. vir. 26), recommended the same dress for males and
females (frag. 177), and forbade young men to be éra-
piKas kexoo unuévou (frag. 174).

adv is bracketed by Bekker. Hirzel discusses this
passage at length (pp. 89—96). He thinks that the first
part (unte...8iw) contains a climax: hov) has no connec-
tion with virtue and therefore is not ayaĝov (xara ucu);
further, it has no a£ía and i is not even “ponya uo Hence
Zeno and Cleanthes did not identify rà card púow with

— 3

310 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

mponyeva: for in that case they could not have treated
mponypéva as dó.ádopa. Zeller and Wellmann are, there-
fore, wrong in regarding Cleanthes' attitude towards plea-
sure as cynical; rather, his position is that pleasure 4m
itself (for this is the force of the second arv which
should be retained) is aésapopov in the narrower sense.
Cf. Stob. Ecl. Ir 7. 7°, p. 81, 14 ovre 86 mponypéva oùt
aTroTponypéva...ndovnv cav kai Tovoyv kai el TL ANNO
tovodTo. Next, cata vow pù eivat is a gloss, and when
this is struck out we should supply a&iav éyew with
kaQatrep è kaddvyTpov. In short, Cleanthes treats plea- `
sure as an émruyévynua (Diog. L. vir. 86): cf. Seneca Ep.
116, 3, voluptatem natura necessariis rebus admiscuit, non
ut illam peteremus, sed ut ea, sine quibus non possumus
vivere, gratiora nobis faceret illius accessio. But it does
not follow that, because virtue consists in To Og oXo"yov-
uévos TH ice. Civ, therefore everything, which is cara
vow, is dper?) or ueréxov aperzs. Of. Stob. Ecl 7. 7",
p. 80, 9 dvote Kav, paci, Néywper adiahopa và copatika
Kal Ta ékTÓs, Tpos TO eUo xnuóvos Shy (év mép sti TO
evóauuóvos) advapopa dayev avrà eivai, ov pa Ala mpos
TÒ Kata dc éyew ovðè vrpós ópumu Kai adopunv. Rather,
we have seen reason to hold that the class of ta «ata
úc is wider, or, at any rate, certainly not narrower than
that of rà mponyuéva. Indeed, this is apparent from the
present passage :—ó 86 'Apyéónuos kara icu uév eivai
ws Tas é pasyan Tpíxas, oUyi dé ka, akiay Eye, le.
there are some things which may be xarà púow and yet

devoid of d&ia. Again, Sextus obviously treats Cleanthes

as more hostile to pleasure than Archedemus, but the view

= which Hirzel would attribute to Cleanthes is scarcely to

be distinguished from that of Archedemus. Certainly, the
passage from Seneca ought not to be quoted as an illustra-
tion of Cleanthes’ meaning: contrast js7jre xarà pvow

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES, 311

etva, with natura—admiscuit. The inelegant repetition
of uy...eivae has an object, namely, to contrast TÒ &dX-
Xvvrpov with Tas èv wacyary rpíxas, whereas, on the other
hand, if the second aùrùv is retained, it cannot be inter-
preted differently to the first aùrùv, and to press the latter
would make nonsense.

89. Stob. Floril 6. 37, KXeavOns éXeyev, ei TéXos
écTiv Oo), mpòs karod Tots àvÜpevrows THY ppóvņow
ded0c0au.

This is no doubt directed against the Epicureans.
Diog. L. x. 128, tiv 58ovy)v dpynv Kai TéXos Néyopev eivat
Tov pwakapios v. Chrysippus also wrote a treatise
described as amodevEts mpos TO jw) elvat THY "O0ovy)v TéXos
(Diog. L. vir. 202). tv dpovnow furnishes a proof that
Cleanthes upheld Zeno’s view of virtue as $póvgous: see
on frag. 76.

856c0a.: so Meineke for d/d00@ar. Cf. Cic. de Senec.
§ 40, cumque homini sive natura sive quis deus nihil
mente praestabilius dedisset, huic divino muneri ac dono
nihil tam esse inimicum quam voluptatem.

90. Cic. Fin. m. 69, pudebit te illius tabulae quam
Cleanthes sane commode verbis depingere solebat. iube-
bat eos qui audiebant secum ipsos cogitare pictam in
tabula Voluptatem, pulcherrimo vestitu et ornatu regali in
solio sedentem: praesto esse Virtutes ut ancillulas, quae
nihil aliud agerent, nullum suum officium ducerent, nisi
ut Voluptati ministrarent et eam tantum ad aurem admo-
nerent, si modo id pictura intellegi posset, ut caveret ne
quid faceret imprudens quod offenderet animos hominum
aut quiequam e quo oriretur aliquis dolor. “nos quidem
Virtutes sie natae sumus, ut tibi serviremus ; aliud negotii
nihil habemus." Cf. Aug. de civit. dei v. 20, solent

RA THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

philosophi, qui finem boni humani in ipsa virtute consti-
tuunt, ad ingerendum pudorem quibusdam philosophis,
qui virtutes quidem probant, sed eas voluptatis corporalis
fine metiuntur et illam per se ipsam putant adpetendam,
istas propter ipsam, tabulam quandam verbis pingere, ubi
voluptas in sella regali quasi delicata quaedam regina
considat, eique virtutes famulae subiciantur, observantes
eius nutum ut faciant quod illa imperaverit, quae pruden-
tiae iubeat ut vigilanter inquirat quo modo voluptas
regnet et salva sit; iustitiae iubeat ut praestet beneficia
quae potest ad comparandas amicitias corporalibus com-
modis necessarias, nulli faciat iniuriam, ne offensis legibus
voluptas vivere secura non possit; fortitudini iubeat, ut
si dolor corpori acciderit qui non compellat in mortem,
teneat dominam suam, id est, voluptatem, fortiter in
animi cogitatione ut per pristinarum deliciarum suarum
recordationem mitiget praesentis doloris aculeos; tem-
perantiae iubeat, ut tantum capiat alimentorum et si qua
delectant ne per immoderationem noxium aliquid valetu-
dinem turbet et voluptas, quam etiam in corporis sanitate
Epicurei maximam ponunt, graviter offendatur. ita vir-
tutes cum tota suae gloria dignitatis tanquam imperiosae
cuidam et inhonestae mulierculae servient voluptati;
nihil hac pictura dicunt esse ignominiosius et deformius
et quod minus ferre bonorum possit aspectus; et verum
dicunt.

Further references ap. Zeller, p. 235—239.  Epiphan.
Heres. r 2. p. 1090 c KreavOns Tó aya00v kai kaXóv
Aéyet elvat Tas HOovas is a stupid blunder of the epitoma-
tor: cf. Krische, p. 431. Hirzel, p. 96, 1, holds that it is
merely an exaggeration of Cleanthes' position: see on
frag. 88.

pulcherrimo . vestitu: this illustrates xaXXvvrpov in
frag. 88.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 313

si modo...possent: Madvig points out that these words
belong to Cleanthes’ statement, and are not a part of
Cicero’s comment.

Virtutes ut ancillulas: on the controversial character
of the work mept dovjs see Krische, pp. 430—432. In
the Epicurean system virtue has only a conditional value,
as furnishing a means to pleasure. Diog. L. x. 138 à 8e
Thy ndovny Kal rds aperas Seiv aipetoOar, ov Ó, avras’
Borrep kai THv iatpixny Sia THv Vryieuav, kaOd dou Avoyévns.

91. Epict. Man. c. 53. Sex flet-

ayou Oé w, © Zed, kai ovy 1 mem pouévy,
oot mo? uiv eiui &uareraryuévos,

ws Abouai y dokvos' jv 86 u) Oddo
KaKOS yevomevos, ovdev HTTOV Efromas.

The first line is quoted by Epict. diss. rr. 23. 42, and
two lines by id. ib. rrr. 22. 95, Iv. 1. 131, and Iv. 4. 34.
Senec. Epist. 107, 10, et sic adloquamur lovem cuius
gubernaculo moles ista dirigitur, quemadmodum Cleanthes
noster versibus disertissimis adloquitur; quos mihi in
nostrum sermonem mutare permittitur Ciceronis disertis-
simi viri exemplo. si placuerint boni consules; si dis-
plicuerint, scies me in hoc secutum Ciceronis exemplum.

duc, o parens celsique dominator poli,
quoeumque placuit; nulla parendi mora est.
adsum impiger. fac nolle, comitabor gemens,
malusque patiar, quod pati licuit bono.
ducunt volentem fata, nolentem trahunt.

See also the commentary of Simplicius on Epict. l. c.
p. 329. These celebrated lines constitute the true
answer of the Stoa to the objection that the doctrine
of mpóvora is incompatible with the assertion of free-

314 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

will. Zeller p. 182. The matter is put very plainly in
the passage of Hippolyt. Philosoph. 21, 2, Diels’ p. 571,
quoted at length in the note on Zeno frag. 79. The spirit
of Stoicism survives in the words of a modern writer :—
“It has ever been held the highest wisdom for a
man not merely to submit to Necessity,—Necessity will
make him submit,—but to know and believe well that the
stern thing which Necessity had ordered was the wisest,
the best, the thing wanted there. To cease his frantic
pretension of scanning this great God’s world in his small
fraction of a brain; to know that it had verily, though
deep beyond his soundings, a just law, that the soul of it
was Good ;—that his part in it was to conform to the
Law of the Whole, and in devout silence follow that; not `
questioning it, obeying it as unquestionable.” (Carlyle,
Hero-Worship, chap. 11) Marcus Aurelius often dwells on
the contrast between ta é$' nuiv and ta oix è npiv.
Cf. especially x. 28, xal 671 wove TO Moyin Cow SédoTat, TO
éxovaiws éreo Oa Toisyiwopévoris: T00€ reo Oar Widov, Tacw
avaykaiov. So ib. vi. 41, 42; vir. 54, 55; VIIL 7; xir. 32.

92. Seneca Epist. 94, 4, Cleanthes utilem quidem
iudicat et hanc partem (philosophiae quae dat cuique

| personae praecepta, nec in universum componit hominem,

sed marito suadet quomodo se gerat adversus uxorem,
patri quomodo educat liberos, domino quomodo servos
regat) sed imbecillam nisi ab universo fluit, nisi decreta
ipsa philosophiae et capita cognovit.

The branch of philosophy here referred to is known as
the vapauverucós or vroÜerucós TOTos. Aristo regarded it
as useless, and it is very possible that his *letters to
Cleanthes" (vwpós KXeávOmv émwToXóv ó Diog. L. vir.
163) dealt with this controversy. Cf. Sext. Math. vir. 12,

N.A z [1 ^ , , € / ^ t
kai Apiotwv 0 Xîos où póvov, ws act, mapnTeîro THY TE

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 315
guotkny kal Xoyucv Oeopíav Sia TO dvwperes Kal pos
KaKov *rois dirocopodow trapyew adda kai Tod nOLKOd
TOToUS TIVAS cu epiéypadev, kaÜamep TOV Te rapauverukóv
Kat TOv vroÜerukóv TÓTOw' ToUTOUS yap eis TírÜas Kal
matðaywyoùs TrTew. The words in which Philo of
Larissa described the rozros úroðerıxos illustrate Seneca’s
statement: Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 2, p. 42, 18, ézrel òè xai TOV uécws
O.akeuuévaov dvÜperrov tpovotav mrovyréov, ovaTIVas EK TOV
TapaweTiKav Aoyov @dbexeto Oar cvpPBaives, ph Svvapévous
vpocevkaupeiy Tois dueEodsxots mAaTeowW Ù Sid ypovou
aTevoxwpias 7) Sid Tiwas dvarykaías doyoNias, érrewrevekréov
TOv úmoberikòv Xóryov, St Ov Tas TpOS THY ác$áXeuav Kai
THY opOoTnTA THS écaoTou YpnTEws VTrOONKas év éTLTOMALS
é€ovo.. The importance attached by Cleanthes to zapat-
verien illustrates the practical spirit of Stoicism: see also
Hirzel, 11. p. 104.

93. Cic. Tusc. 11. 76, sunt qui unum officium con-
solantis putent malum illud omnino non esse, ut Cleanthi
placet. :

Consolatio (apauvOntiKy) is a branch of mapawertiKn
and is concerned with removing the wa@n, cf. Eudorus ap.
Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 2. p. 44, 15 ó Që srepi ràv amorpemóvrov
kaXeirau TapauvOntiKos, Os kaXo/juevós stt TPOS viov
vaÜoXoyucós. Cf. Sen. Epist. 95, 65. As emotion is
founded on false opinion (see on Zeno, frag. 138), the duty
of him who offers consolation to another is to explain that
what appears to the other to be an evil is not really so.

malum illud: the context in Cicero shows that the
reference is particularly to death, for which cf. Zeno, frag.
129. The construction is not to be explained by an ellipse
of docere or the like, but rather esse is nominalised so that
malum...esse = TÒ Kaxov...eivat. This is common in Lucr.,
see Munro on I. 331, 418 and cf. Verr. v. 170, quid dicam

316 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

in crucem tollere ? Cicero even writes: inter optime valere
et gravissime aegrotare (Fin. 11. 43). Draeger, $ 429.

94. Cic. Tusc. rr 77, nam Cleanthes quidem sapi-
entem consolatur, qui consolatione non eget. nihil enim
esse malum, quod turpe non sit, si lugenti persuaseris, non
tu illi luctum, sed stultitiam detraxeris; alienum autem
tempus docendi. et tamen non satis mihi videtur vidisse
hoc Cleanthes, suscipi aliquando aegritudinem posse ex
eo ipso, quod esse summum malum Cleanthes ipse
fateatur.

Cicero's criticism here is twofold: (1) that what is
called consolation is really only instruction, which is
ineffective to assuage grief, because it is inopportune, and
as regards the wise man, who is amans, is unnecessary ;
(2) that grief may be caused by baseness, which is an
evil. Of Tusc. 11. 30. <

This cannot be treated as merely containing Cicero's
comment on frag. 93, for we have the additional statement
sapientem, consolatur, which is surely not an inference
from Cleanthes definition. "The statement is strange and
perhaps not to be entirely explained in the fragmentary
state of our knowledge, but it is not inconceivable that
Cleanthes held that the wise man ought to be reminded
of Stoic principles when attacked by ueXayyyoXía or when
in severe pain, in spite of his Segaías karaXyNrews (see on
frag. 80 and cf. Stob. Flori. 7. 21 aXyetv uév tov coder,
un Bacavítec0a,. é. Cic. Fin. v. 94, quasi vero hoc
didicisset a Zenone, non dolere, quum doleret! Zeno,
frag. 158): cf generally Sext. Math. xr 130—140 and
esp. 139 ei & amdds SidacKer Tt Tovri uév ONryodeMés
ote, TAelovas Ò eyes Tas OxyMjoew, avykpuow ëoTaL
Tov aipécews kai buyñs pos érépav aiperw Kal puyny,
Kal ovK avaipecw THs Tapayns. Smep àtTomov' ó yap

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 317

oxAovpmevos oU BovreTar uaÜeiv Tí wadrov ÓyXet. Kal Tí
a 5 y 9 ^ ^ > , ,
7/rTov, aXX. aTradrAayHvat TNS OYANTEWS TETOONKED.

95. Stob. Floril. 6. 19.
ootis émibupav avéxyer aicypod Trpáryuaros
obTos 7omce, TOUT av Katpov Nafn.

For the doctrine that virtuous action depends on the

intention and not on the deed itself, see Zeller, p. 264 and
cf. Zeno frags. 146 and 181.

96. Stob. Floril. 28, 14, KreavOns én tov Ouvvovra
TOL evopKeiy ù émiopketv Kal òv Oguuo, xpóvov. éav
bev yàp obros ourin ws éritedécwy Ta kard TOV bpKOV
evopketv, éàv 06 mpodecw xo un) émvreXetv, émiopkety.

See on frag. 95, and cf. Chrysipp. ap. Stob. Floril. 28,
15.

97. Seneca de Benef. v. 14. 1, Cleanthes vehementius
agit: “licet,” inquit, “beneficium non sit quod accipit,
ipse tamen ingratus est: quia non fuit redditurus, etiam
Si accepisset. sic latro est, etiam antequam manus
inquinet: quia ad occidendum iam armatus est, et habet
spoliandi atque interficiendi voluntatem. exercetur et
aperitur opere nequitia, non incipit. ipsum quod accepit,
beneficium non erat,sed vocabatur. sacrilegi dant poenas,
quamvis nemo usque ad deos manus porrigat."

This and the two next following fragments probably
come from the book rept yaperos. Introd. p. 52. Eudorus
the Academic ap. Stob. Ecl. 11. 7. 2, p. 44, 20 speaks
in Stoic terminology of 6 «repli röv xap/írev Tómos as
arising x Tod Xóyov ToD KaTa THY Tpos Tos TANTO
oyéow úmapxeuuv.

beneficium non sit: because the question is concerning
an act of kindness to a bad man, on whom, according to

318 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Stoic principles, it was impossible to confer a favour
(Senec. Benef. v. 12. 3), cf. Stob. Ecl. 1r. 7. 114 p. 95, 5,
unodéva 86 hatrov unre ahereicbar ure àoeXeiv, Plut.
Comm. Not. 21.

sacrilegi: the edd. quote Phedr. Iv. 11. Senec. de .
Benef. VIL 7. 3, iniuriam sacrilegus Deo quidem non potest
facere: quem extra ictum sua divinitas posuit: sed punitur
quia tanquam Deo fecit. De Const. Sap. 4, 2.

98. Seneca de Benef. vr. 11. 1, beneficium voluntas
nuda non efficit: sed quod beneficium non esset, si
optimae ac plenissimae voluntati fortuna deesset, id aeque
beneficium non est, nisi fortunam voluntas antecessit; non
enim profuisse te mihi oportet, ut ob hoc tibi obliger,
sed ex destinato profuisse. Cleanthes exemplo eiusmodi
utitur: *ad quaerendum," inquit, *et arcessendum ex
Academia Platonem, duos pueros misi; alter totum porti-
cum perscrutatus est, alia quoque loca in quibus illum
invenirl posse sperabat, percucurrit, et domum non minus
lassus quam irritus rediit: alter apud proximum circul-
atorem resedit, et, dum vagus atque erro vernaculis congre-
gatur et ludit, transeuntem Platonem, quem non quaesierat,
invenit. illum, inquit, laudabimus puerum qui quantum
in se erat quod iussus est fecit: hunc feliciter inertem
castigabimus."

Another illustration of the value of the virtuous in-
tention apart from the results attained by it. Cf Cic.
Parad. 111. 20 nec enim peccata rerum eventu, sed vitiis
hominum metienda sunt.

Academia: see the description of this place in Diog.
L. rr. 7: there was doubtless a oroa attached to it, whence
totum porticum infra.

circulatorem: a quack, mountebank: cf. Apul. Met. 1.
c. 4, Athenis proximo ante Poecilen porticum circulatorem

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 319

adspexi equestrem spatham praeacutam mucrone infesto
devorare. Probably a translation of Oavuaromows: with
respect to these men see the passages collected by Becker,
Charicles. E. T. pp. 185—189, Jebb's Theophrastus, p. 227,
and add Ar. Met. i. 2. 15, Isocr. Or. 15 § 213, where tame
lions and trained bears are spoken of.

99. Seneca de Benef. vi. 12. 2, multum, ut ait
Cleanthes, a beneficio distat negotiatio, cf. ib. rr 31. 12,
a benefit expects no return: non enim sibi aliquid reddi
voluit (qui beneficium dat), aut non fuit beneficium sed
negotiatio.

negotiatio: probably a translation of xpmuaricuós, for
the Stoic wise man is described as the only true man of
business: Stob. Ecl rr. 7. 11%, p. 95, 21, uóvov dé tov
a7rovOatov avdpa ypnpaTıoTikòv elvat, ywooKovTa ap àv
Xpneatiatéov Kal TOTE Kal THs Kal uéxpu TOTE.

100. Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 3. 17, p. 655 P. 237 S.,
kal ý KXedvÜovs è tod Xmrcwo0 d$uXocóQov Tow)
dé TAS TA Chola ypader

pn mpòs 8ófav Opa, éÜéXov codbos aha yevéo Oar,
unde poBod voXXdv axpitov Kal dvaidéa óav

ov yap TX500os Exes cuveTiy Kpiow oUTe Oucaíav

” , > , ` 3 * , ^ , er
OUTE KAANV, oMiyois ÒÈ map avòpdaot TOUTS Kev eÜpous.

Clement also quotes an anonymous comic fragment
to the same effect:—aicypov è kpívew Tà Karta TO
TOAAG odo. Stein, Erkenntnistheorie, p. 326 says :—
“hatte auch er (Kleanthes) den sensus communis, die
Kowal évvovat oder mpornwpes gebilligt, wie konnte er
dann so wegwerfend und verüchtlich über das allgemeine
Laienurteil aburteilen?” He concludes therefore that
Cleanthes threw over altogether the Stoic concession to

320 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

rationalism implied in the doctrine of ôpĝòs Xóyos and
mpormpers, but see Introd. pp. 39, 40. Cf. generally Cic.
Tusc. ut. 3, 4.

8óé£av: this is changed to Bd£iw by Meineke, who is
followed by Wachsmuth, and Cludius is reported as
suggesting dAoyov for dxpirov. The reason given for
the change by Wachsmuth is that óav “male con-
iungitur cum d«purov, presumably because d0£a implies
Kpiots, but surely the words may mean “ undiscriminating
opinion " as explained by the next line. The text is con-
firmed by M. Aurel. Iv. 3,76 edueraBorov xai dpvrov TOV
evpynuety Gokovyrov. Of. ib. 11. 17.

od...o8re...o8re, is justified by Homer, Il. vr. 450, adn’
ov por Tpøwv Tóccov pédret aAyos ómíocc ovT av/rüs
‘ExaBys ovte Tpidporo dvaxtos, K.T.. Cf. Soph. Ant.
952.

101. Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 14. 110, p. 715 P. 257 S.,
ó òè autos (KXeavOns) Kata TO cwTOuevov THY TÖV
TOMY SiaBadrwv cidwroraTpiav èmipépet

averevOepos mâs bats ets otav BXérei
os 81) map éxeivns trevEduevos Kadod Twos.

In Clem. Alex. Protrept. vi. 72, p. 21 S. 61 P., the same
two lines are cited as the conclusion of frag. 75, but they
are obviously distinct.

86gav: for Zeno's definition, cf. Zeno, frag. 15. Cleanthes
wrote a separate treatise mwepi 80&ns, from which we
. may conjecture that the present and the preceding frag-
ments are derived. Introd. p. 52. The Cynics described
evyevelas Te kai Oo£as as tpoKxocunpata karlas (Diog. L.
vL 72). The Stoics regarded them as mpoņnyuéva (Diog.
L. vit. 106).

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 321

102. Mantiss. proverb. (in paroemiogr. Gr. vol. II.
p. 757) cent. 1. 85.

^ , P ^ ` ^
KüKGs akovew kpeicgov ?) Xéyew kakGs.

KXed»Üovs. This-is taken from Wachsmuth (Comm. rr.
p. 8), whose note is as follows :—* Inter ecclesiasticorum
scriptorum sententias hie trimeter laudatur ab Antonio
Meliss. 1. 53 et à Maximo 10, vid. Gregor. Nazianz. carm.
poss"

103. Stob. Floril. 42. 2.

^ y
Kakoupyotepov ovdev SiaBorns Ect Tro’
AdÜpa yap amaticaca TÓv meme uéuop
picos dvaTmXárTeL ps TOV ovdEeY aitov.

SiaBodys: defined, ap. Stob. Ecl. rr. 7. 115, p. 115, 21,
civar 86 THY Ora Box) G.4oraciw $auvouévev dirwv Wevdet
Aóye, and hence, reasoning on the basis that slander is
only connected with apparent and not with true friend-
ship, the Stoics declare that the wise man is adsaBonos
both in the active and the passive sense (ie. pre Sva-
BaXXew pte 6a BAXXea Gar), but their utterances are not
consistent on this point: see Zeller, p. 253 n. 6, who in
citing passages to the contrary effect fails to notice this
discrepancy.

104. Stob. Ecl 11. 7. 11), p. 103, 12, ikavós òè Kat
KXedvÜgs epi TÓ omovõaiov eivai THY TÓMv Xóyov
npoOTnce ToioUrov: TÓMs pev «ev» “cT oiKNTHpLOV
karackeVagpa, eig Ó Katadpevyovtas éote Sikny Sovvar
Kal Xaj9eiv, ovK da'etov 67) TONS eoTiv; GANA umu ToLOd-
Tov €oTLV h TOA OiKNTHPLOV* aaTEloV dp. EOTW 1) TONS.

Possibly this belongs to the aodutixds: Introd. p.
52. Cleanthes has here adopted the syllogistic form

H. P. 21

322 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

of argument, which occurs so frequently in Zeno's frag-
ments: see Introd. p. 33. The Cynics’ line of argument
is somewhat similar. Diog. L. vr 72 ov yap, dno
(Diogenes), dvev vóXeos àdeXós Ti elvat aoTelov’ aa'etov
dé) Wodus* vóuov Sé dvev, zróXecs ovðèv GHErOS* AaaTELOY
apa ó vóuos. Cicero's definition is as follows, Rep. 1. 39, res
publica est res populi, populus autem...coetus multitu-
dinis iuris consensu et utilitatis communione sociatus.
Cf. Ar. Pol. 1. 2. 1253 a 37.

&, inserted by Heeren, who is followed by Wachsm.
Meineke omits it and changes 67) before zóXs into ë 7.

105. Seneca Trang. An. L 7, promptus compositus-
que sequor Zenonem, Cleanthem, Chrysippum: quorum
tamen nemo ad rem publicam accessit, nemo non misit.

See on Zeno, frag. 170.

106. Stob. Floril. 4, 90, KreavOns ën rods ama-
devTous uóvy TH popp vv Onpiwv divadépenv.

The same occurs in Stob. Ecl. rr. 31. 64, p. 212, 22,
where Wachsmuth cites other authorities. Stein, Erkennt-
nistheorie, p. 326, quotes this frag. in support of his
theory that Cleanthes refused to admit any inborn intel-
lectual capacity. Zeno declared tv éyxvedov marðelav
axypnotoy (frag. 167 and note), with which opinion this
passage is not necessarily inconsistent, though it probably
implies an advance in teaching. See also on frag. 53.

107. Epict. diss. Iv. 1. 173, zrapáóo£a uév lows pasiv
oí pirdcopot, kaharep kai 6 KreavOns éXeyev, où pry
mTapanoya.

mapáBota: the Stoics themselves accepted and defended
this description of their doctrines. Cic. Paradox. Prooem.
4 quia sunt admirabilia contraque opinionem omnium ab
ipsis etiam vapá8ofa appellantur. Plut. Comm. Not. 3

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 323

^N i ` n ,

Tà Kowa Kal TepiBonta, à 85 vapáGofa Kal avToi, per

evkoALas óeyóuneuot THY aToTíau.

108. Plut. vit. Ale. vr. 2, ó uév ov KreavOns éXeye
TOv épóuevov UP éavroO pev ex TAV OTwV kpareiaÜat, ois
Ò avtepactais morras AaBas mapéyeiw abixrouvs éaur@,
THY yag Tépa, Xéyov Kal Ta aidota Kal Tov Xauuóv.

This may be referred to the épwtixy téyvn or cepi
épwtos, Introd. p. 52. See on Zeno, frags. 172 and 173,
and cf. Diog. L. vir. 24 Wests apoph. 7) Maf) Pragota

ea Tiv émidéEtos 7) Sia TOV WTOV.

109. Sext. Emp. Pyrrh. rr. 200, oí mept tov KrXeavOnv
advagopov Todto (TÒ THs appevourEias) eivai bacu = Zeno
frag. 182.

110. Stob. Floril. 6, 20.

mo0ev ToT dpa yiverat poryav yévos ;
, ^ 3 \ > , /
ex kpiÜL.Gvros avdpos èv adpodiciots.

powóv: for Stoic views on poryela, see Zeno, frag. 178.
kpt6iavros: for this word cf. Buttmann's Lexilogus, s. v.
axootnaas, E. T. p. 78.

111. Plut. de Aud. Poet. c. 12, p. 33, ev od ai
vapaó.opÜcceis pavrws éyovow, ais kai KreavOns éypr-
caro kai 'AvricÜévqs* 6 pév k.T.A....0 06 KXeávOms epi
TOU TAOUTOU,

dhirous te Sodvar oua T eis vóoovs Tecóv
OaTavaicu. coca,

petaypagpwv obro*
mopvas Te Sodvat aud T Els vócovs TETÒV
datravais émutpinvat.

The lines in question are from Eur. El. 428, 9, where
21—2

324 THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES.

Éévois is read in place of $íXow. Stob. Floril. 91, 6 quoting
the passage has $íXors.

The ordinary view of the school regarded srXo)Tos
as a mponypévov, and we have seen that Zeno concurred
in this (frag. 128). It would be hazardous to infer from
evidence of this kind that Cleanthes dissented from his
master’s opinion on this point: a similar question arises
with regard to d0€a (frag. 101), but that word is am-
biguous,

112. Diog. L. VII. 14, évíovs 8é kai yarov ecicé-
TparTe TOUS "repu ajévovs (6 Zývæv) dore 8e0ióras TO
didovar u) évoxXetv, kabla mou. KredvOns èv td epi
X a0.

For the title of the book see Introd. p. 53. The
above is Cobet's text; omitting date dedidtas, Wachs-
muth reads yaAX«oü for yadxov MSS., and also suggests `
éviore for éviovs, but éviovs implies that the payment
was not always exacted, while the article shows that,
when made, it was made by all Similarly Soph. O. T.
107 Tots aVToévras xeu Teuwpeîv Twas and Ar. Pac. 832.

113. Philodem. wept $iXocóoov ap. Vol. Hercul. vin.
col. 13, v. 18, x««ai KX»eavOgs èv <T> wept oT<HAN>s
«Tj)»s ALoyévovs a/Tf«s» uv9-uoveU-eu kai émauv«et»
Kal «uukpóv? Vare«p»ov èv avT<@t TOU>T<at kaÜaz «ep
ér>ép<o>0 viov «&»xX0eoucv» [l. &0ecw] <mror>e<î-
Tal.

Such is the restoration of Gomperz in Zeitschrift fiir
die Oesterr. Gymn. Jahrg. 29 (1878) p. 252 foll, who, in
justification of this somewhat strange title, refers to a
book by Aristocreon, the nephew of Chrysippus, entitled
ai Xpuc(mmou tapai (Comparetti, Papiro Ercolanense col.
46). For the circumstances of the burial of Diogenes cf.
Diog. L. VI. 78, airs refers to the vroXvreía of Diogenes.

THE FRAGMENTS OF CLEANTHES. 825

114. Schol. ad Nic. Ther. 447, p. 36, 12 Keil, «pav-
Tipes Xéyovrau oí Uotepov avafjaívovres ó0óvres Tapa TO
Kpaivey kai atromAnpody Ty yALKiav. vewTépwv yap 107)
5v yevouevwv dvVovrau oí 08óvres ovTOL. KreavOns dé
cwhpovicThpas avtovs Karel. viv adds Tors oddyTas.
codpovicthpes è Sid TO Qua TH aviévat avro)s Kal TO
odpov Tod vod Xayu8avew Huds.

For «pavrfpes cf. Arist. Hist. An. II. 4. gvovtas dé of
TedevTaiot rots avOperross youdtot, os KANODaL KpaYTHpas,
mepi rà elkociv étn Kal avdpac. kai yuvacéi. It seems
fairly safe to infer that Cleanthes the Stoic is meant, and
the account given above is probably more correct than
that appearing in Etym. M. p. 742, 35 xarà thy Tod
dpoveiv pay Trepi Tò eikoa'rüv éros, and Melet. ap. Cramer
Anecd. Ox. III. 82, 26 roUs òè uvA(ras røv 000vrov Tu
cappovicThnpas ékdXecav bia TO vecOar mept THY Tod
dpyerGat dpovetv To)s maidas dpav. Thus, while the
growth of the reasoning powers is complete in the four-
teenth year (Zeno, frag. 82), the attainment of ee$poevvn
may well have been assigned to the conclusion of the third
éBdomas.

115. = Zeno frag. 184.

APOPHTHEGMATA OF CLEANTHES.

1. Diog. L. vir. 169, dact dé kal “Avtiyovov a/ToO
y Y > , N / 5 ^ \ > ? ^
vvÜécÜ0a, óvra axpoatny, dia Tí avret; Tov Ò eimetv,
> ^ \ , / > D NI / , 3 , v
avTrAO yap povoyv; Tí Ó ovyi cxaTTw; Ti Ó ovK apse,
x , ^ / e \ N e f,
Kal TavTa Told duXocojías Éveka ; kai yap ó Znvev
FAIA , > ^ Hes 07 , `Ë 4
avTov cvveyUpvatev eis ToDTo, Kal ékéXevev OBorOV pépew
avopopas. Plut. de vitand. aere alieno 7, 5, KreavOn 8€
ó Bactreds "Avr(yovos pora dia xpóvov Ócacdgevos èv
tais “AOnvais, adeis ère, KXéav0es; aro, dnoiv, à Ba-
ctned, 0 trod €veka Tod Env ovos 06 dmooTfvaiu umoé
pirocodias. Cf. Stob. Floril. 17, 28, Xp/aewros 6 XoXeUs
érroveito TÓv Biov ëk mavu ordLywv, KreavOns dé Kal agro
édatrovev.  Epict. diss. 111. 26. 23, rds KreavOns é&noev
dpa oxoratov kai avtro@v. Senec. Ep. 44, 2, Cleanthes
aquam traxit et rigando hortulo locavit manus.

2. Diog. L. vil. 170, cat more a0powcÓév TÒ Képpa
EXOMLTED eis uécov THY yvopiuwv, Kal dnot, KreavOns pèv
xal addrov KXeavOmv ddvat’ av Tpédew, ei BovXovro. oí
Ò éyovtes olev tpadynoovrat, map érépov émitjrobot và
5 t / > , A e x \
émuTnoeta, kaimep aveuuévos hirtocopodytes. ev ù Kal
Sevtepos 'HpakXzs ó KXedvÓns écaxetro.

3. Diog. L. VII. 171, vpokpívev òè tov éavtod Blov
^ ^ , »- > * , 3 ^
TOD TOV TAOVTLWY, €Xeyev, Ev co ocdoawpitovouww éketvot

[ AS ^ ` A oM > f: ,
autòs Y)» ac kXnpav kai akapToV épryáteoOat, cxkamTov.

Ead

APOPHTHEGMATA OF CLEANTHES. OON

4. Diog. L. vit. 170, kai cxwmropevos 86 bro TÖV
cuppabntav nveixeto, kal dvos akovav "rpoceOéxero:
Xéyov avTos povos GUvac lar Bacrale To Zývævos dopríiov.

5. Diog. L. vit. 171, cat more óvei&iCópevos ws devdos,
dvd ToDTo, eizrev, oiya ápaprávo.

6. Diog. L. vit. 174, dvesdicavtos avrà Twos eis TÓ
ynpas, Kayo, ébn, amévat BovNowat: órav 66 mravraxó0cv
€uavróv vylatvovta mepwod Kal ypapovra Kai avayi-
VOCKOVTA, TAAL uévo.

7. Diog. L. vit. 171, voXMákus 06 kai éaur@ émé-
e 3 / > , "4 x 5 ,
TMyrrew OV ako)Ucas AploT@V, TiwL, EPN, ETUTANTTELS ;
NUN , , / \ \ x ^
Kal Os yedXacas, vrpea Bury, Pyci, TOLAS meV EXOVTL, VOY
Šë uh.

8. Diog. L. vit. 173, Xecu8éov Tod rrountov év 0cárpo
eim OvTOS TPOS aUTOV rapóvra,

ods 7 KXedvÜovs uopía Bonxaret,

sy $4 , ^ / 349 e 5 , .
guewev él taŭro oxnpatos. ef @ ayacÜévres oi
> / ^ N > , \ N / > /
dkpoaraí, Tov pèv èkpornoav, Tov 66 Xoací0cov é£éBaxov.
petaywoecKovra Që avrov èri TH Rovdopia tpoonKarto,
> M » T2 N A / \ \ € /
euma) roov civan Tov pèv Atóvvcov kai tov HpakAéa
prvapoupévous m0 TOV vrowrdv um opyítecÜas, avróv dé
émi Tf Tvxovon Praopnula Ovexepatvew. Cf. Plut. de
Adulat. 11.

9. Diog. L. vit. 171, e/óvros Qé twos 'ApkecíXaov
` a \ , ^ y \ \ / > \
um) Tovey Ta Oéovra, Tadcat, py, Kal un yréye. ei yàp
Kar Aoyo TO KAaOHKOV avatpel, Tots yoðv Epyous avTO Tiet.

«ai ó '"ApkeciMaos, ov koMakevouat, doi. pos Ov ó
Z
KXedvOns, vai, ëpn, oè koXakevo, pápevos Gra uèv Xéyeu,
Érepa, à moreîv.

328 APOPHTHEGMATA OF CLEANTHES.

10. Diog. L. VII. 173, éXeye òè kal Tos ék Tod Tepi-
vrarov buoy TL Tráa'Xew Tals AVpats ai kards POey—a-
eval AVTOV OUK dkovovct.

11. Cic. Tusc. rm 60, e quibus (philosophis) homo
sane levis Heracleotes Dionysius, cum a Zenone fortis esse
didicisset, a dolore dedoctus est. nam cum ex renibus
laboraret, ipso in eiulatu clamitabat falsa esse illa, quae
antea de dolore ipse sensisset. quem cum Cleanthes
condiscipulus rogaret quaenam ratio eum de sententia
deduxisset, respondit: quia si, cum tantum operae philo-
sophiae dedissem, dolorem tamen ferre non possem, satis
esset argumenti malum esse dolorem. plurimos autem
annos in philosophia consumpsi nec ferre possum: malum
est igitur dolor. tum Cleanthem, cum pede terram per-
cussisset, versum ex Epigonis ferunt dixisse:

Audisne haec, Amphiarae, sub terram abdite ?
Zenonem significabat a quo illum degenerare dolebat.

Dionysius ó petabéuevos is mentioned also in Zeno
apoph. 52, where see note. For the quotation from the
Epigoni, cf. Soph. fr. 194, 195. (Dind.)

3. renibus: but according to Diog. L. vil. 37, 166 and
Cic. Fin. v. 94 the disease was ophthalmia.

T. si: inserted by Madv. (on Fin. v. 94) who is
followed by the later editors.

12. Stob. Floril. 82, 9 — Ecl. tr. 2. 16, KreavOns
éperouevos dia Tí Tapa Tots apyaíois ou TOANG@Y proso-
dncavtav buws mXNe(ous Siéraprrav 7) viv, ÖTt, eire, TOTE
ev ëpyov HaoKelro, vüv 86 Noyos.

13. Diog. L. vir 172, pecpaxio orë duvadeyouevos
, , > > , A A > > , ó x f °
émú0ero ei aiaÜáverav tod Ò émueúcauTos, dua TL oÚ,
> > X > > , el 3 ,
elev, éyà ovk aicOavopmar ÖT aic Qavet ;

APOPHTHEGMATA OF CLEANTHES. 329

14. Diog. L. vr. 172, épouévov twos ví vrotibec Oar
Oei TQ vid, TO THs 'HAékrpas, Ey, oiya ciya Xerrvóv
ixvos.

The quotation is from Eurip. Orest. 140.

15. Stob. Floril 33, 8, eww"7róvros tot KXedv0Oovs,
> , x " ^ \ ^N € ^ ^ /- € ^
emel Tus ¿Óm, Ti cuyas; Kal uv nod Tots (Nos opsreiv.
58V, &pn, GAN Ócwmep Hrov Tooge uàXXov avTod Tots
pirows Tapaywpytéor.

16. Diog. L. vir. 174, mpòs è Tov porvnpn Kai éavTad
NarodvTa, oU hatro, ëpn, avOpdr@ XaXeis.

17. Exc. e MS. Ioan. Flor. Damasc. rr. c. 13. 125 =
Stob. Ecl. 11. 31. 125 Wachsm., 7) où rotolros mais éxeivos
ó Adkov, òs KreavOnv rov duXónooov npetncev ei ayabov
6 Tróvos stiv ; oŬTw yap éxeivos haiverar buce, mepuros
Kanes kai TeOpaupévos ed Tpds apeTnY doe čyyiov eivat
voultey Tov Tóvov THs Tayabod vices 7) Ts TOD kakob
bs ye WS OpoXoyovuévov TOD p) kakóv vmdpxew avTOv
ei ayadov tTuyxaver àv érrvvÜávero. olev kai ó KXeavOns
ayacOels Tod mardos eimev dpa Tpós avTóv, aipaTos eis
ayaboio, díXov Tékos, of ayopevers (Hom. Od. Iv. 611).
Diog. L. vit. 172. Adkwvos Tivos evmóvros, ÖTL Ó Tróvos
ayabov, GayvOeis pynow, aiwaros eis ayaboto, oXov rékos.

movos is an advdgopoy (Stob. Ecl. rr 7. 5* p. 58, 3.
Diog. L. vir. 102), but it may perhaps be inferred from
this passage that Cleanthes classed it among the zpony-
péva. See on Zeno frag. 128. Antisthenes regarded it as
ayabov (Diog. L. vi. 2).

18. Stob. Floril 95, 28, KreavOns, épwtepevos TØS
dv Tis ein TAOVGLOS, evmev, ei TOV ériÜvpadv ein TÉVNS.

19. Exc. e MS. Ioan. Flor. Damasc. 11. 13. 63 = Stob.
Ecl 1r 31. 63 Wachsm., KreavOns, éraípov amuiévai

330 APOPHTHEGMATA OF CLEANTHES.

LéXXovros Kal EpwTOVTOS TAS àv kiota áj.aprávot, erev,
el map éxacta wv TpárTeis Soxoins uè tapeivar. Cf.
Zeno, apoph. 42, and Maxim. Serm. 5.

20. Diog. L. vit. 173, Aéyeras 5é, dokovros avTov

kata Znveva karaMgrTOv eivat TÒ 4005 ÈE eldous, veavic-

Kovs Twas eUTpaméXovs ayayely poç a/TOv Kivaloov

> / > 5 ^ \ > ^ , , \

eoxAnpaywynwévov év ayp@, kai a&vobv dtrodaivea Oat mept

Tov Jove: tov Óë dtatropovpevov keXe0gcat amiévat TOV
^ ° 3 t

avOpwrrov, ws 66 dmiov éxeivos ëmTapev, Exo, eimev, avróv,

ó KXedvOns, waraxos éoriw. Cf. Zeno, frag. 147.

21. Diog. L. vit 172, dnci òè 6 'Exdrev èv rais
xpetaus, evpoppov perpaxiov eimróvros el ó eis THY yaoTépa
TU TOV yaoTpile, Kal ó eis TOUS npods TÚTTÆ@V pnpiteL,
én, c) pév Tors Svaunpiopods eye, perpaxcov. [ai &
dvadoyot oval Ta avadoya où TaVvTwS on palvovot Tpay-
pata.] Cobet brackets the concluding words.

22. Diog. L. vit. 176, xal terevta Tovde Tov TpoTrov:
0.g0noev avT@ TÒ ovAOV* atrayopevodvTav è TÀV larpdv
dvo ñuépas dmréa ero Tpodis. Kai mes Cae kards dare
To)s laTpors aVT@ Tdvra Ta Ju] cvyxyopeiv. Tov dé
pn avacxéoOar dXX. eimróvra òn aùr rpowdovrropha Oat
kai Tas Xovrás dmocyopevov TeXeuTHaaL. Lucian, Macrob.
19, KreavOns 86 ó Zrjvovos wants kai dvadoyos évvéa kai
EVEVKOVTA OUTOS yeyovas éTn düpa čëoyev Eri TOD xeíXovs
Kal amokaprepdv émeXÜóvrov a)TQ Tap éTaipov Twav
ypajuidrov vrpoceveykdgevos Tpodyy Kal mpakas mept ðv
nElouv oi piñoi, atoaxopevos avis tpophs é&édXume Tov
iov. Stob. Floril. 7, 54, KXeav0gs ao yAodtrns ÉXAxovs
avTQ ryevouévov THY Tpodny ovk éó/varo vraparéwrmrew: OS
8é padov rye kai ó larrpós avT@ Tpopny vrpooTyyayev, a) 0é
ue, ëpn, Bovrer 709 TO TAéov THS 0000 karav/cavra
avaotpépew, cira madw é£ úmapyhs thy aur epyecOa;
xai é£jXOev Tod Biov.

INDICES.

[The references are to the numbers of the fragments, except where p. is

prefixed.]
IL INDEX FONTIUM.
A Athenaeus xin. 563e ......... Z 173
Achill. Tat. Isag. 124 5 ......... Z 35 ane oe Ed N nc
129 x... 7 65 =: 9st. 512 f Lees 6
Pia d C 33 Augustin. c. Acad. rr. 11...... Z 153
Aelian. Nat. An. vr. 50......... C 45 RE EA OT

Ambros. de Abraham, rr. 7...Z 148
Anon. réxv7 ap. Spengel Rhet.

Anon, variae coll. math. in
Hulstchiana Heronis geom.
et stereom. edit. p. 275......

Anton. Meliss. r. 52............ Z 189

Apollon. soph. lex. Hom. p.

EEEE A MS C 66
Arnob. ad Nat. zr. 9 ............ Z 54
E Epict. diss. 1. 17. 10,

O SPS PUS drte san Z4, C2
joco Epiet. diss. r. 20. 14 ...Z 123

——  —— 1119.1—4.. C8

——  —— 1128.42 ... C91

—  — um.22.95... O91

—— ——— T, 1.181... C 91

ee ray. 1. 178 ,..0.107

—— — n tv. 4.34...... C 91

S —LW rv. 8.12...... Z 3
Athenaeus Iv. 158b ............ Z 156

EX “VT, 283b; 0.......«-- Z 169
——. xr. 4674............ C 11
EESE KT AY DID 2s esas deen C il
EE ZI DOLO vn Z 163

IT OL See Zt
r11.17.38...742,95
de Civ. Dei v. 20... C 90
de Trinit. x111.5,8...Z 125

Ame cellsuxo 5st. EI Z 128
c

Censorin. de die nat. 1v. 10... Z 80

e Fa XVII 2L LZ.

Trag. 3-4 u a oe C 28

Certamen Hom. et Hes. p. 4.

19 Niebzsch Wa uay hasa G 67
Chalcid. in Tim. e. 144 ...... C 18
— p.220. cones Z 90
——— l ——— 6. 290... Z 49
—— e.292 ...... Z 50

Chrysost. Hom, 1. in Matt. 4...Z 162
Cicero Acad it. 36............... Z 130
e OE 1 NES SER Z 134,138

ORI — TS 89.2. Z 34, 46, 86
— — TT.11...... Z 8,9, 11,15,
17, 19, 20

—. — 1. 42...Z 10, 18, 21, 22
—— — n.18............... Z11
— —Anur. 77............... Z 11
—— — n. 118 ...... Z 11, 153
—— —— x. 126...... Z 41, C 28

332

INDEX FONTIUM.

Muren. 61...Z 132, 133, 148,
150, 151, 152, 153, 155

Cicero Acad. rr, 145 ............ Z 33
qelbDiy rr lio n na Z 103

— Fam, tx. 22.1 ......... Z 186
—— IN AL, 17552. Z 32
— — t. 69 ............... C 90
— — mi. 52............... Z 131
—— — Iv. 12............... Z 86
—— —v.14............... Z 120
—— IV. 47............... Z 126
—— — iv. 60............... Z 126
—— — — IV. 72............... Z 120
—— — Vv. 88 ............... C 44
— $V. 19 ............... Z 125
— Ve 84.0 saa Z 151
—— V S8 eot aaa Ec Z 120
— Nat. De. r. 36 ...2 87, 39, 41,
72, 110

—— — 1. 37 ...014, 15, 16,17,
46

Cicero Nat. De. 1. 70 ......... Z8
—  —PI ar 13—15 C 52
—— —— n.21 ........ Z 61
—— —I rr. 22... 59, 60, 63
—— — h Im. 24 se C 42
Sy k= Y: 401. 2 C 30
— — rr. š7......... Z 46
—— — 11. 58......... Z 48
—— — r. 160 ...... C 44
———  — IL 16......... C 52
—— — H rr, 27......... Z 46
—— — IL 87......... C 29
——— Orat. 32.113 ......... Z 32
E PUG Ie LO W n Z 86
— —— 1129 ............ Z 127
— — n 74.75 ...... Z 143
—— — IIL 76 ............ C 93
—— — u. 77 ............ C 94
— —iv.ll ............ Z 136
—— — Iv. 47 ............ Z 136
— VV. 27 ............ Z 127

Clem. Alex. Poder rr. 11.74.. 7 174

—— Protrept. vr. 72...C 75, 101
Strom.1. 20.105... © 44
11. 20. 125...Z 187
11.21.129...2 120,

C 72
11, 22.131.. C 77
v. 9. 17 ...C 100
y. 8.48 ... O 31

v. 12. 76...Z 164
v. 14. 95...Z 149
v. 14. 110...C 75, 101

Clem. Alex. Strom. vir. 6. 33...
— vmi. 9. 26...
Cornut. de Nat. De. c. 31 ......
Cyrill. Lex. Bodl. rr. 11. ap.

Cramer Anecd. Par. 1v. 190... Z 31

C 44
C7
C 62

D

Dio Chrysost. uit. 4
Diog. Laert. vi. 91...... n
vir, 14

ated Porb4ng EEEE E RATE

INDEX FONTIUM.

picts Man 58... a... o. 1... C91
Epiphan. Haeres. r. 5 ......... Z 51
——— nr. 2. 9 (rr.

SOW asserere Z 37, 79, 95, 164, 185
Epiphan. Haeres, 111. 2. 9 (111.

ST: oco n DOMUI Db. s C 53
Euseb. P. E. xir. 13, 5 671...2 149
. 075

DOMOS. Z 106

Eara a. ORIGO CREE .Z 99

Galen de cogn. anim. morb.

v. 13. Kühn
Galen in Hippocr. de humor.

Taxe 32, K.) 1. u aaa. Z 53
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. rr.

5 (v. 241 K.)
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. rr.

DECAL KS) T la a. Z 101
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. 1.

BIYa2823 K.) L. .... s... Z 87, C 39
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. mz.

5 (v. 322 K.)
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac, mz.

020521)... ........ Z 141, C 87
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. rv.

P NORUNT) tas MES Z 139
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. 1v.

3 (v. 377 K.)
Galen, Hipp. et Plat. plac. rv.

CURE Ku. u. emer
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. v.

1 (v. 429 K.)
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. v.

BN Y32706 R3) t. u... ss C 84
Galen Hipp. et Plat. plac. rx.

PEO AGUD: R3) Cote ee eee C 85
Galen Hist, Phil. 5 (xix. 241K.) Z 36
——  Q9(xix.254K.) Z 91
— 10 (xix. 258 K.) Z 78
—— 13 (xix. 271K.) C 33
—— 13 (xix. 272 K.) 0 34
—— 31 (xix. 322K.)

...Z 106, 107

333

Galen. nat, facult.1. 2 (11.5 K.) Z 53
Gemin. Elem, Astron. p. 53

(in Petau's Uranol.)......... G 35
H
Harpocration s. v. Aéexa...... C 61

Hermias Irris. Gent. Phil. 14.
p. 654 Diels

Hippolyt. philosoph. 21.1... Z 36
L
Lactant. Epit. ad Pentad. 38...Z 144
— Inst. r. 5 ......... Z 39, C 15
— HL 4 ............ Z 153
— —— s I. 7 ............ Z 120
—— — IL 8 ............ Z 120
—— — — m. 23...... Z 132, 144
— — v. 9 ............ Z 44
— —- VIL T ............ Z 97
— dea dei 1 ......... Z, 109
— de Ver. Sap. 9......... Z 44
Longinus ap. Euseb. P. E. xv.
21e 5 3o ee TT e epsase Z88, C 40
M
Macrob. Sat. 1.17.8 ......... C 58
—— — 117.81 ......... C 60
— — L 17. 86 ......... C 59
= SSS ie 185 441.2. 5 G 57
L—— ——1.28.2 ......... C 29
—— Somn. Scip. 1.14.19... Z 89

Mantiss. Proverb. (in paroem.

Gr. rr. p. 757) cent. 1, 85...C 102
Maxim. Rloril e. 6... 5... Z 190
Minue, Fel. Octav. xix. 10... Z 39,

41, 44, 111, C 14

N
Nemes. Nat. Hom, p. 32 ...... C 36
— p. 96...... Z 93
Numenius ap. Euseb. P. E.
BHA Os p. 79520 4 ts Se Z11
(0)

Olympiodorus in Plat. Gorg.
D15922 n 1 ich 212,05

Origen c. Cels. 1. 5. p. 324 ...Z 164

vit, 63. p. 739...Z 178

334 INDEX FONTIUM.

12

Philargyriusad Verg.G. 11.336. Z 57
Philo liber quis virt. stud. p.

88005 SA ters na as Z 157
Philo mund. incorr. p. 505. 27. C 23
p. 510. 11. Z 56

Philo de Provid, r. 22 ......... Z 35
Ile 74 sa C 19

Philodemus Tepl evoeB.c.8 Z 40,117
—— 039m eG 16
— — c. 13... C 54
— p. 84 G....Z 109

——— Tepl movorxns c. 28. O 49
—— repli QuNoaóQov c. 13. C 118
Philoponus on Ar. Phys. 1v. 6.

b9152.95 San AN SA (ü
Photius g: v. NOx. eee eese C 61
I«Plutaroeh-A10650. 299 TETTE C 108
Alexovirt2 6. tees Z 162

PD PEGm ean Z 148

Aud. Poet, 11......... C 55
EMO RS Z 197

19 s € 111

Cohibir lire se Z 106

Comm. Hesiod 9 ...Z 196
— BENOUR OS #157 120

HHH

prof. in virt. 12....., Z 160
quaest. Cony. 111.6.1.. Z180

—  =—— 31.5... C47
91. 10. Ç 25

de facie in orbe lunae
dd dM mu edi (97,
Plutarch do guy bs) de C 69
— D. deesse C 70
zelo. m MAL ossbobubo C71

— frag. dean. Wytt. V?
SYL ARE X UR Z 191
Plutarch Is. et Osir. 66 | ...... C 56
youre no fn in Z 163
— plac. r. 8. 39 ......... Z 35
—— — — 1. 10. 4......... Z 23
— — 1.15.5 ......... Z 78
—— — m. 14. 2......... C 33
L—— —. r, 16. 1......... C 34
TT 20.3... T. C 29
— — T. ll. 1......... C4
— T 22 yy 21, wm Z 98
A b eee. Z 106
= YV 3022 a oed Z 107
— v. 10. 3 C 44
—AB8olbiansil 2 3. er Q 45
— Sto. Rep. 2. 1.. ...... Z 162
— ae) 6. lies Z 164

Plutarch Sto. Rep. 7. 1,2 ...Z 134
— —— T7.4......... C 76
= —  8&1....... Z 29
d —  82........ Z6
——- —— 80.1 ...... Z 131
—— Virt. Mor. 2 ......... Z 134

8.11. 310155

Porphyr. de Abstin. ur19...2199-

— in. 20 ... C 44

— vit. Pythag. 1. 2...... C 68
Probus ad Virg. Ed. vr. 31. p.
10. 33 Kell............... Z 52, C 20

31. 14 Kelli. ls 1... 5 2028 .Z112

Q

Quintil. Inst. Or. rx. 15. 383—835 C9
— r17. 41.. C5
—. — 20.7.. 282
tv. 2. 117... Z 27

R
Rufus Ephes. de part. hom.
p.44: “ee ee Z 84
8

Schol. ad Apoll. Rhod. 1.498...Z 113
— Arist. 22 b. 29 Brandis Z 6
—— Dionys. Thrae. ap.
Bekk. Anecd. p. 663. 16 ... Z 13

Schol. ad Hes. Theog. 117 ...Z 114

— C An A

—— —— ` 189 ...Z 116

— Hom. Il. m. 64 ... € 63

—— xvi. 288... C 55

Hom. Od. 1.52 (Cra-
mer'Á. O. sr: 4106). 0092 C 65

Schol. ad Lucian. Cal. 8 ...... Z 29

Nic. Ther. 447...... C 114

Plat. Ale. 1. 121 z... Z 82

Seneca de Benef, m. 31. 12 ... G 99

— v. l£ 1...... C 97

—— Epist. 82. 7 ............ Z 129
— 8848 sence Z 159
— — 94. 4 ............ G 92
ic za T M Z 161
—— — 107. 10 ......... C 91
—— — 108. 10 ......... G 50
—— — — 113.18 ......... C 43

h^ a

INDEX FONTIUM.

— Trang. An.1.7...Z 170, C105

Sext. Emp. Math. rr. 7......... Z 32
Vil 15102 27/15
vir. 227 ... Z 10
vit. 298...27, C8
Vite 250 7 71
vi 248 .. Z 11
vin 258 ...'Z210

vir. 372...214, C3
vir. 422 ...7 132
vit 426 ... Z11
VEER 950... 48
vin.. 400... C3
TRO M m. C 51

Ix: 101.252 72:59
1x: 104 77 4:061
1x; 107072702
rx. 133 —...2, 108

xi. 30...Z 124, C 74
RES 445... C 88
Xh di esse Z 128

x1.190...2 179,181

0 L ]

xr. 191 ...Z 180
Byres 3124.5... Zu
TES sess. aaa C3

WEEE

5

bo
re
Or
N
-1
[io]

HE 246 2... Z 180
Simplic. ad Cat. 80 a.4......... Z 76
in Epict. Man. 53... C 91
Stob. Ecl, 1, 1. 12. p. 25. 8... C 48
1. 29^, p. 34.20... C 14
p. 35. 9... Z 42
5. 15. p. 78. 18... Z 45
8. 40*. p. 104. 7. Z 76
10. 14. p. 126.17. Z 35
11. 5*. p. 132. 26. Z 51
12. 3. p. 136. 21. Z 23
13. 1°. p. 138. 14. Z 24
15.62, p. 146. 19. C 26
p. 146. 21, Z 68
16. 1. p.149. 8... Z 78
17. 3. p. 152. 19. Z 52
p.153. 7... C 24
18. 14. p. 156. 97. Z 69
19. 4. p. 166. 4... Z 67
20. 1°. p. 171. 2

...A 54, C 22
21. 6°. p. 187. 4... C 28

4

debe TUE ERTI

935

.— 118. 99. 3...... Z 148
— 11i. p. 103.12.. C 104
31. 64. p. 212.22.C 106

Stob. Ecl. r. 22. 35. p. 199. 10. Z 58
—  , 98. 1. p. 200. 21. Z 64
——— 24.29, p. 205. 25. C 33
—— 25. 34, p. 211. 18. C 29
— 25. 5. p. 213. 15. Z 71
—— 26. 1i. p. 219. 12. Z 71
c — p. 219.14. C 32
— 48,7. p. 317. 15. C 37
— 49.83. p.367. 18. Z 92
— 49. 34. p. 369. 6. Z 93
—— TI. 2.12. p. 22. 12.. Z5
—— T. 1. p. 88. 15...2 146
—— p. 89. 5...2 157
— — 5%. p. 57, 18...Z 128
— — 558, p. 65. 8... C 82
——  — 6, p.75. 11.,.Z 120
— — §*, p. 76. 8 ... C 72
— — 6°. p. 77. 20...Z 124
— — 6°, p. 77. 21... C 74
E 0-08, 9:04, 21... 191

Stoby Rloril-4: 90 <,........1:2. C 106
— 410585 1 m. Z 202
2 POS X. erase C 95
—— OS QO ee uq ae C 110
E NORD ky E. Z 201
—— GII M EIE te C 89
—— 6309 985 eise Z 192
—— Td d ede aes Z 189
—-— 285 14 Py u C 96
-— 3020 1... Z, 200
— 4959: g. st G 103
— 4948395 es Z 165
—— 95S 9175 EN Z 199
— 108; 5922153 9 C 86

Sirabosvin 8.0 n t u ects Z 198

Suidas s. v. Aéoxau
Syrian. ad Metaph. 892b.14... C6

ut

Tatian ad Graec. e. 3 ......... Z 47
— —TUV e. 5 `......... Z 55
Tertullian de Anim. e. 5..2 89, C 36
— o14...... Z 94

— — Ue. 25...... C 36
— Apol. 21......... Z44, C 18
——- Marce. 1.13 ......... Z 41
— Nat. rm. 2 ............ Z 46
—— — 4 Qe Z 38
—— Praes. Cup. 7 ...... Z51

. 8336 | INDEX FONTIUM. ,

"Themist. de An. 68a ......... Z96 Theodoret Gr. Cur. Aff, vr. 14. Z 45
— — 79b ......... Z43 Theon progymn. 12. p. 251...Z 108
— —— 90b ......... Z140 Theoph. ad Autol. mt. 5. p. I
— 5 Orit. 276...... C 83 119 6 Atean Z 184, 0115.
— Or. vii. 108 c......... Z 196 ,- REN
— Or. xr. 171p ...... Z 196 v
—— Phys. 40)b............ Z 70 : r

"mbsodorci Gr. Cur, P AT. Tir Varro Ling. Lat. v. 9 ......... C 10

— — s.59......... Z 105
iOS DE aM a CES Z 164 D P Z 81
Theodoret Gr. Cur, Aff. tv.12.°Z 8560 © foes re ara ee
das w 20.033 — OG) crocs C 44
—— v. 25. Z 106 Z

Theodoret Gr. Cur, Aff, v. 25

IL INDEX

A

Academics, Z 169.

Alemaeon, Z 82.

Alexander, Z 30.

Alexandria, Z 30.

Alexinus, Z 5, 61.

Amoebeus, p. 226.

Anaxagoras, Z 81, 113, C 27.

Anaximander, Z 81, C 29.

Anaximenes, Z 52.

Antigonus Carystius, p. 228.

Gonatas, p. 2, 5, 6, 228.

Antiochus, p. 17, 25, Z 126.

Antipater, p. 114, C59.

Antisthenes, p. 19, 20, 22, 53, Z 3,
23, 109, 162, 163, 171, 187, 195,
C 79.

Apollodorus, p. 19.

Apollonius, p. 2, 4, 26.

Arcesilas, Z11, 145.

Archedemus, C 7.

Archelaus, Z 81.

Aristarchus, p. 42, 51, C 27.

Aristippus, Z 197.

Aristo, p. 36, Z 5, 131, 191, C 92.

Aristotle, p. 24, 25, Z 12, 26, 35,
49, 50, 53, p. 110, Z 65, 67, 68,
69, 81, 99, 104, 112, 116, 117,
198, 134, 135, 136, 163, 167, 168,
169, 195, C 1, 87, 52, 58.

Aristoxenus, C 42.

B

Bion Borysthenes, p. 230.
Boethus, Z 54.

C

Caphesias, p. 231.
Carneades, Z 11.
Chremonides, p. 6, 232.

Ft P.

NOMINUM.

Chrysippus, p. 7, 20, 27, 28, 34, 36,
38, 40, 43, 45, 48, 49, 50, Z2, 7,
11, 14, 21, 23, 24, 49, 52, 66, 72,
74, 16, 79, 100, 102, 136, 139, 143,
144, 160, 167, 185, C 3, 8, 9, 13,
18, 19, 23, 24, 37, 41, 43, 44, 48
(17), 76.

Cicero, p. 34, Z 126,

Cleanthes, p. 1, 23, 35, 36—53, Z 3,
7, 18, 14, 35, 454, 52, 56 (54), 58,
79, 93, 120, 128.

Crates, p. 3, 31, 2165.

— of Mallus, Z 198.

Critolaus, p. 111.

Cynies, p. 18—21, 30, Z 9, 125, 149,
162, 164, 167, 171, 172, 176, 177,
184, 186, 194, C 76, 79, 80, 88,
101, 104.

D

Demetrius, p. 27.

Diodorus, p. 40, C 8.

Diogenes, p. 18, 19, 20, 21, Z9,
168, 171, 185, p. 225, C 113.

— of Apollonia, Z 42, 81.

of Babylon, Z 100, 108, C 72.

Dionysius (6 perabéuevos), p. 234,
328.

E
Empedocles, p. 114, Z 73, 81, 110.
Empedus, p. 233.
Epieurus and Epicureans, Z 8,
9, 21, 50, 55, 58, 69, 72, 73, 74,
85, 102, 112, 167, C 16, 89, 90.

H
Heraclitus, p. 21—23, 50, Z 52, 54,
p. 114, Z 64, 65, 77, 83, 85, 87,
C 1, 3, 21, 28, 29, 33, 48 (10, 24,

36).
22

338

Herillus, p. 52, Z 17.

Herodicus, Z 77.

Hesiod, p. 31, 32, Z 29, (Theog.
118, 119) Z 113, (Theog. 126—
128) Z 193, (Op. 291), Z 196.

Hippocrates, Z 106, O 42.

Homer, p. 31, 43, 51, Z 174, 195,
198.

Indians, Z 187.

M

Marcus Aurelius, Z 52, 162, C 44.
Megarians, Z 5.

N
Neanthes, p. 51.

p

Panaetius, Z 54.

Parmenides, Z 64, 81.

Peripateties, p. 110 f., Z 159, 169.

Persaeus, p. 31, 53.

Phocylides, Z 29.

Plato, p. 25, 26,80, Z 1, 16, 21, 23,
34, 35, 62, 65, 91, 99, 103, 110,
112, 134, 135, 136, 142, 149, 162,
163, 166, 167, 168, 169, 172, 177,
197, C 37, 57, 58.

— Cratylus, p. 44.

INDEX NOMINUM.

Polemo, p. 3, 25.

Posidonius, p. 49, Z 24, 49, 52, GEM
76, 80, 131, 143, 198, 'C 85, 84,
Ptolemy, Philadelphus, p. 5, 6, 228.
Pythagoras and Pythagoreans, Z 50,
55, 65, 70, 73, 81, C 26, 27, 29,

37, 68.

S

Seneca, Z 162.

Socrates, p. 45, 53, Z 59, 123, 134,
158, 159, 162, 194, p. 227, 230,
CO VIG EE

Sophocles (frag. 711), Z 197.

Stilpo, p. 3, 28.

Strato, Z 64, C 43.

T
Thales, Z 73.
Theophrastus, p. 110 f., 233.
V
Virgil, Z 97.
x
Xenocrates, p. 3, Z 1, 128, C 37.
Xenophanes, Z 56 (33), 81, 113, 117.
Z

Zeno, p. 1—35, 46, C 13, 18, 24, 76.
— of Tarsus, Z 57, 87.

HI. INDEX

ayadd, p. 14, 15, Z 197, 128, C 75.

ayéry ctvvomos, Z 162.

ayvoa, Z 18.

adens, Z 169.

adtdgopa, p. 14, 15, 17, 46, Z 127,
128, 129, 145, 154, 161, 171, 172,
178.

anrrnros, Z 148, 157.

á0ávaros (vods), Z 95.

abavpuacros, Z 169.

aldépos Tò Écxarov, Z 65.

alfo, Z 41, O 15.

aliua, Z 87, 88.

aicOjcews (mepi), p. 50, 51.

ala0ncis, Z 8, 20, 121.

aic@nrév, Z 20.

alrtov, Z 24.

ákoAacía, Z 138.

NN y), Z 168.

adrolwors, Z 52.

&AXws, G 45.

ddoya (9a, C 44, 45.

apudprnua, p. 15, Z 132, 133.

dperamtwrov, Z 135.

dupnkns, © 48 (10).

dv, Z 190.

dvadwiwvate, C 55.

àåvaðvulasıs, p. 23, Z 83, C 55.

dvahapBdavew, p. 226.

àvapua voepóv, C 29.

ávamerrauévov, Z 174.

ávópela, Z 134, C 76.

avemitperreiv, Z 194.

àvOpcrrofoplas, Z 184, C 115.

dva kárw 0060s, Z 52.

dila, p. 14, Z 130, 131.

a£woparwós, Z 148 (16).

amdGea, Z 158.

amadevrous, C 106.

dračia, p. 14, Z 130, 131.

dmépirros, Z 169.

&m Ads yéveots, Z 50.

VERBORUM.

dmokplvecQa,, Z 56 (45).

"AmóNNav, C 58.

arouvmuoveóuara Kparyros, p. 31,
Z 199.

amoveunréos, Z 134.

aT oT pon"yuévov, v. Tponyuévov.

dmópov (rept), p. 49.

"Apafes, Z. 198.

ap'yképavve, C 48 (32).

aperyn, Z 125, 128, 134, 135, C 78,
79, 80, 83.

dperdv (mepi), p. 52.

'"Apierapxov (mpós), p. 51.

appwornuata, Z 144.

apxal, Z 35.

apxavodoyla, p. 51.

apxadrepo, p. 40, Z 10.

apwyns (mepi), p. 47, 52.

ageBelas ypaph, C 27.

doóNoukos, Z 30.

aorépes, C 33, 34.

actpamn, Z 74.

drójov (mepi), p. 47.

arpamós, C 45.

atyh, C 28.

aD0ékacTos, C 75.

ath}, Z 181.

agpopual, C 82.

A dpodirn, C 63, 64.

Bápos, Z 67.

Bacirelas (Tepi), p. 52.
BacuNós, Z 148 (16).
Bidgerar, Z 148 (12).
los. Z 145.

Bovis (Tepi), p. 52.
BpovrT), Z 74.

yauos, Z 171.
“Yy&uou (mept), p. 51.
yeved, Z T7.
ycwuerpia, Z 28.

340

YyuyáyTreov (Tepi), p. 51.
T'opyytr Tov (mepi), p. 52.
yvuvácia, Z 166.
yuvaixes, Z 176.

Saxturiwy, C 3.

Aewids, C 11.

deordfer, Z 148 (12).
Snucoupyety, Z 35.
Onutovpryós, Z 48.
Anpoxptrov (mpós), p. 51.
o5&s, Z 139, 158.
&iaBoX, C 108.

9a0éc es, Z 117, 135, C 36, 51.
diaipeois, Z 51.
diarperéas, Z 134.
O.akekNaouévov, Z 174.
ó.akócumots, Z 52.
duadrextixy, Z 6, 32, C 1.
O.aNekrukts (mept), p. 49.
diadextixol, p. 33, Z 5.
O.ávoua, Z 100, 135.
OarpiBal, p. 30, Z 179.
duarpiBav B', p. 53.
Oaxiceis, Z 139.
duawedderar, Z 148 (14).
dunynows, Z 25.

Oujxewv, C 13.

Sid few (rept Tod), p. 52.
ólkatov, G 77.
Sikacootvn, Z 122, 134.
dixacrypia, Z 166.
Atévucos, © 57.
Avockovpous, Z 117.
Sta, Z 15, 148, 158.
Rm (zer, p. 47, 48, 50, 52, C 100,

ôvváueis YuxÎs, Z 93, G 85.
duvarov, C 8.

Suvarayv (repli), p. 50.
voual Blov, C 51.

éykpáreta, p. 45, C 76.

èykúkMos madela, Z 167.
eluapuévm, Z 19, 45, 45 A, C 18.
elcoxy, C 3.

éxxdots, Z 143, C 76.

éxrelWers, Z 71, 73.

èktúpwsıs, Z 52, 54, 55, C 22, 24.
&Xeyxe cavróv, Z 189.

Ecos, Z 144, 152.

&XevOepías (mept), p. 52.
¿Xeu0épous, Z 149.

eng, © 29, 60.

INDEX VERBORUM.

“Edqvixys marðelas (mepi), p. 30.

évarrowenaymuévos, Z 11,

évdpyea, p. 34, Z 9.

évóvudrov, Z 31.

évepynréos, Z 134.

évvonuara, Z 23, C 6.

&vvoua, p. 10, 34, Z 21.

étaywyn, Z 161.

éčéðpar, C 61.

&&s, Z 43, p. 110, Z 56 (53), 117, -
134, 135, C 5.

é£ox1j, C 3.

ètúypwois, Z 52, O 24,

érapows, Z 139, 143.

&reo0a« 0cots, Z 123.

emvyevvijuara, p. 46.

emcyvyvopeva Kploeow, Z 138, 139.

émiOuuta, Z 142, 172.

émiothun, Z 16, 17, 18, 33, 134.

emu r)ums (rept), p. 50.

emo ToAal, p. 31.

épws, Z 113, 163, 172.

épwrikh téxvn, p. 30, 52, Z 174,
C 108.

ëpwros (mepi), p. 52.
éaOns, Z 177.

eoblew åtáktTws, Z 31.
‘Eorla, Z 110, C 27.
éoxarov Tob mupés, C 24.
evBouNlas (mepi), p. 47, 52.
evdacuovla, Z 194, C 74.
evkpacta, p. 23, C 42.
e’royov, Z 145.
eùrpéreia, Z 56 (63).
evpeatroyos, © 62.

evpoa, Z 124, C 74.

eb vta, Z 172.

ebvtas (mepi), p. 52.

èp’ qui, Z 79, C 91.

Zevs, Z 111.

Znvwvos (rept Ths Z. puororoytas B'),
p. 50.

$àtov, Z 71.

(v9 dtaxexavpévyn, O 85.

§Gov (6 kbcpos), Z 62.

jrycuouixdy, p. 13, 42, Z 24, 33, 67,
93, 101, 135, 141, C 15, 25, 28,
84,

hõovh, p. 46, Z 127, 128, 139, 142,
143, C 88, 89, 90.

T)0ov7s (rept), p. 47, 53,

AOixd, p. 31.

INDEX VERBORUM.

HOrxov, Z 2, 119.

Oos, Z 146, 147, C 36.

qos, C 25, 28, 29, 30, 31.

' HpakAetrov é£yyrjoeov 5’, p. 50.
"HpakMfjs, O 62.

"Hoy, Z 110.

"Hpwov. (pds), p. 52.
“Hoacoros, Z 111.

0dvaros, Z 199.
8avuarorods, C 98.
8eoNovyuór, C 1.

8eouaxía, p. 51.

8eós, Z 35, 108, 109.

eds kakav Torys, Z 47, C 48 (17).
Geos POapnoopmevos, G 47.
ev (repi), p. 49, 51, C 47.
8eplgcv, p. 224.

Geppacta, Z 84.

8éc«, Z 39.

Onpikrevov, C 11.

85pa8ev, C 37.

"I&meros, Z 115.
idéar, Z 23, C 6.
lütov, p. 49.

idlwy (mept), p. 49.
idiws moby, Z 49.
lepd, Z 164.

lNós; Z 113.

cos, v. audprnua.
"Iguxparis, O 11.

kaara ddudpopa, Z 130.

kaBapós, Z 36, 174.

kaBéXkew, Z 30.

kaĝñkov, p. 15, 34, Z 145, 161, 169,
170, 171, 172, 177, 178, 192.

ka8jkovros (mepi), p. 29, 52.

ka8oNwá, p. 27, Z 23.

kaká, p. 14, Z 127, 128.

kakia, p. 46.

káAAvvTpov, C 88.

kaNGv (Tepl), p. 52.

xapüla, Z 141, C 87.

xara, Z 145.

kara púow, p. 14, 15, Z 130,169, 192,
C 88.

— —  (mepl rod Kk. ó. fiov), p.

29.

KaTadynTriky, v. pavtacta.

karaXqrTóv, Z 147.

Kary, p. 34, Z 10, 16, 18, 33,
C 80.

341

karativera, Z 102.

Karnyopnua, Z 23, 24, C 7.

KaTnyopnuatwy (mepi), p. 50.

KaropOwua, p. 15, 34, Z 145.

kKekocumuvos, Z 174.

kevóv, Z 69, 70.

xepauvds, Z 74, C 48 (10).

knpla, Z 38.

kmpós, Z 50.

knows, Z 91.

KrnOels, Z 29.

khoe Lepat, O 53.

Kowws otv, Z 49.

Kotos, Z 115.

kounra, Z 75.

kócuos, Z 57, 66, 71, 162, 193,
C 17, 48 (7).

kpavtnpes, C 114.

Kpaots 6’ ddov, p. 11, 23, Z 51, 52,
53, 96, C 13.

Kpetos, Z 115.

xploes, Z 136, 139, 143.

Kpovos, Z 113.

KókNores, Z 116.

kvp.ebcv, C 8.

kup.ebovros (mept), p. 50.

Kwvoedys, C 26, 33.

Xekróv, p. 40, Z 24, C T.

Aéexat, C 61.

Aecxnvopiov, C 61.

NéEewr (rept), p. 27, Z 30, 31.

Aé£s, p. 27, 226.

Anmrd, Z 130, 131.

Aeros, Z 169.

Aoywd, Z 4, C 2.

Moyi, Z 1.

Aoyixov, Z 2.

Noyos, p. 22, Z 3, 37, 44, C 16.
— omepparixos, Z 46, C 24.

Abou (repi), p. 27
— (rept rod), p. 50.
— oroxeta, Z 3.

ANoyoduros, Z 200.

Ao£ías, C 60.

Ao£ós, Z 73.

Adxewos, © 59.

Aúkos, G 59.

Mmm, p. 46, Z 127, 128, 139, 142,
143, 144, C 86.

Aícets kal Eeyxor, p. 28.

Aúsıs, Z 139.

Matova, C 67.

342

Mavis, p. 232.

uavtiký, p. 29, Z 118.
Mapyirns, Z 195.
uéyas, Z 148.

uéðn, C 80.

ue0úeu, Z 159.

welwors, Z 139.
medayxorla, C 80

uépn (Wuxijs), Z 93, 94.
uécov, C 24.

uéca, Z 145.

uera BáNNeao0ac, Z 153.
Kera Bo, p. 23.
Merahnwews (mept), p. 50, C 11.
ueravoetv, Z 153.
ueréxovra, p. 46, Z 128.
uks, Z 51, 52.

pin, Z 14.

uoixeúew, Z 178, C 110.
uv, p. 51.

upunkes, © 45.

uvpor Na, Z 174.
uvorikà ax)uara, O 53.
uov, G 66.

vaol, Z 164.
vonuata, O 6.
vomopna, Z 168.
vóuos, Z 39.

vóuov (Tepi), p. 30.
vomwv (Tepl), p. 52.
voonuwara, Z 144,
vócot, Z 144.

vols, Z 48, C 37.
vous (kócuov), Z 42,

6dorountikH, Z 13.

oinows, Z 15, 16.

olke[oo us, Z 121, 122, 126.

Odo0dgpovos, C 65.

ONov (Tepl), p. 28.

oporoyla pice, Z 120, 123, C 72.

òuovoia, Z 163.

óvelpov, Z 160.

üpacis, Z 104.

ópe&s, Z 143.

dpn, Z 56 (8).

óp0os Novos, pp. 8—10, 40, Z 3, 117,
123, 157.

óp8Qs Aéyew, C 9.

ópual, Z 123, 138.

opus (mept), p. 29, 52.

opQv (mept), p. 52.

obpavós, Z 66.

INDEX VERBORUM,

ovola, p. 41, Z 49, 50, 51, 53, p. 110.
ovalas (mepi), p. 29. -
Oews (mepi), p. 29.

rån, p. 45, Z 135—144, 172, Ü 86.

maddy (Tepl), p. 29, 184.

madaywyol, Z 188.

matdela, v. éyKUKNLOS.

mavoédnvos, Z 73.

mapaBáNNew, Z 185.

mapáóevyua, Z 26,

mapadoéa, C 107.

mapabeots, Z 51.

mapawerikh, p. 47, C 92,

mapddoya, C 107.

mapapvðnTikh, O 93, 94.

mapa óúou, p. 14, 15, Z 130, 169.

maoxov, Z 34, 35.

meptBory, Z 175.

mepiéxo, Z 65.

meploóos, Z 52, 56 (43).

mepvrareiv axdcuws, Z 31,

mepltatacis, p. 15, Z 169, 170, 184.

anyn, Z 146.

mocis, C 32.

tryyh mvpós, C 16.

TMjkrpov, C 31.

mdovros, Z 169, C 111.

mveÜua, p. 11, 40, 42, Z 41, 48, p.
110, Z 84, 85, C 13.

Ouureivov, C 43.

mvevpatiky vvas, p. 110.

mveuuarixos Tovos, Z 56 (54).

TonTiKhs akpodaoews (mept), p. 31.

monrod (mepi), p. 51.

toid, Z 23, 49.

mons, Z 53, 92.

mowtv, Z 34, 35.

mods, C 104.

montra, Z 149.

IloXcreía, p. 20, 29, Z 23, 97, 149,
162.

ToXrebea0at, Z 170.

moXurixov, C 1.

ToNTikos, p. 52.

mroNvxpóvtos, Z 95.

voNvévvpuos, C 48 (1).

movos, Z 128, 187, 201.

mopela, Z 175.

Iloceióóv, Z 111.

mpdtewv (mepl), p. 52.

mpoBrAnuatwr Ounpixar, p. 31.

mponyuévov, p. 15, 34, Z 127, 128,
131, 145, 169.

INDEX VERBORUM. 348

mponyovuevos, p. 15, Z 123, 131,
169, 170.

mpokorh, p. 94.

mpokórTovres, Z 160.

mpóNqyas, p. 10, 34, 40, Z 21.

mpovoa, Z 36, 45 a, C 18, 19, 44.

Tporéreia, Z 22.

mpocdoxta, Z 143.

mpocnyopla, Z 23.

mpoclecOa, Zi 160.

TpockaNeta0au C 27.

mpos xápw, Z 189.

mporwmov, Z 25.

MpoTpemTiKos, p. 52.

Tpüra kara $ícw, Z 122, 126.

TTola, Z 137.

mraots, Z 23, 139.

Ilv@ayopixa, p. 29.

mip Texvixov, p. 23, Z 41, 42, 46,
68, 71, C 18, 15, 23, 26, 30.

mupoedns, C 32.

péw, Z 25, 56 (56), C 21.
pnropixy, Z 32, C 9.

cekqvn, Z 73, G 32.
onpelwv (mepi), p. 29.
oxords, p. 45, C 74.
coNout(ew, Z 31.
codicpara, Z 6.
codóv (rept rod Tov c. copiarevew),
p. 53.
orépua, Z 106, 107, C 24.
orovéatos, Z 148—159.
orarixd, Z 4.
arndns (mept), C 113.
otlyo, Z 166.
oroas (mepi), p. 53.
gTotxeta, Z 3, 35.
otparnyikos, Z 148.
cTpoyyóNos, Z 32.
auykatadects, p. 34, Z 15, 19, 33,
123, 139, 158.
ovyxuots, Z 51.
svd\Anpbels, Z 106.
ovpBeBnkds, Z 24.
cvuumá0eu. uepv, Z 58.
cvproctov (mept), p. 47, 53.
cvuPéporv, p. 45, C 77.
cuvarrixy, Z 40.
ouvexrixy, Z 40.
evvearàrov, A 67.
owéxov, Z 96.
ouwictopev, C 11.

otvodos, Z 73.

cvoToAn, Z 139, 143.

sapa, Z 67.

opddrerba, Z 153.

oxéous, Z 184.

capa, Z 24, 34, 36, 91.
swppoviarnpes, C 114.
cwppootvn, Z 134, 138, C 76.

Tamewwoes, Z 139.

telvecOat, Z 67.

TéNetos Nóyos, Z 82.

reNerás, G 53.

TéNos, p. 45, Z 120, 124, C 74.

TéNous (mepl), p. 52.

Téxvm, p. 27, Z 5, 12, 13, 118, C 5.

Téxvms (tept), p. 50.

texvirns, Z 48.

ribecbar (voua), Z 116.

Tuwfjs (Tepi), p. 47, 52.

twa, Z 23.

Turüvas, Z 115.

Tóvos, p. 8, 22, 23, 42, 45, 51, Z 33,
35, p. 110, Z 91, 103, C 24, 42, 76.

Tómos, Z 69.

TplBev, Z 194.

Tpusepijs, Z 1.

Tproyévera, Z 1.

Tpomov (mepi), p. 50.

Tvyxávovra, Z 23.

TÜT 0615, p. 34, Z T.

UA, Z 35, 49, 50, 51.
bpevatou (mepi), p. 51
bmakobew, Z 29.

"Ymeplov, Z 115.

vmó0eats, Z 25.

bmo0erwós róm0s, p. 47, C 92.
Uroueveréas, Z 134.
tromlrrew, Z 23.

Uvrocrdbun, Z 114.

os, C 44.

pawóueva od(ew, O 27.

ak, Z 156,

Qavraacía, p. 24, 38, Z 7, 8, 33, 123,
158, C 3.

Karadnrriky, p. 8, 9, 24, Z
10, 11.

pdvracua, Z 23.

$avraarwóv, Z 160.

paos, Z 148, 154.

Pepseporn, O 56.

POoveplas (mept), p. 47, 52.

344 Ji? — INDEX VERBORUM. S. F

$0opà Tod Kocpov, Z 56. doe tnr p. 53,C 112. . ~
pia, Z 163. " xáos, Z 112, 1
pitas (mepi), p. 47, 53. xdpuros aan Dy 4T, 52, C 97—99.
prOdoyos, Z 200. xdpray evepyov, © 4.

pidouvs, 2149. ` xpeéias, p. 91, Z 194.9 <i. a it,
proé, © 23. Xperav (repi), p. 53.

póßos, p. 46, Z 128, 142, 143. EAR | AR E BEA

popå (¿ykúKkNos), Z o 116. xpóvov o Tu) b
Ppedvrhys, p. 35, C 2 xpóvos, Z

ppovnats, p. 15, 16, re Z 134, 156. xpáuara, H 78.

$vyás, Z 155. xópa.,. Z 69.

pice, Z 39, p. 110.

$c eus (Tepi), p. 28. : yós, C 49.

pvoóv, Z 2, vex Z 43, 56(60), 88—96, C 36—
$icis, p. 14, Z 48, 45, 46, C HY v. ;

duodoyla and kard.
: (kowń), € 73.
$c, Z 106. òs av, Z 56(99).
povaer, Z 98. . . ódéNuos, Z 190, C 75, Tus
gorh, Z 99, 100, p. 226. i
