The Pentagon Papers: Senator Gravel Edition, Vol. 3
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/pentagonpapers035197> (Beacon Press). Public domain.

The  Senator  Gravel  Edition


THE


Pentagon
Papers


The  Defense  Department
History  of  United  States
Decisionmaking  on

VIETNAM


VOLUME  THREE


DOES  NOT  CIRCULATE
CENTRAL  REFERiKCS


Digitized  by  tlie  Internet  Arcliive
in  2013


Iittp://archive.org/cletails/pentagonpapers035197


The  Senator  Gravel  Edition

The  Pentagon  Papers

The  Defense  Department
History  of  United  States
Decisionmaking  on  Vietnam

Volume  III


Beacon  Press  Boston


The  contents  of  this  volume  are  drawn  from  the
official  record  of  the  U.S.  Senate  Subcommittee
on  Public  Buildings  and  Grounds.  No  copyright  is  claimed
in  the  text  of  this  official  Government  document.
Library  of  Congress  catalog  card  number:  75-178049
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-8070-0526-6  (hardcover)

0-8070-0527-4  (paperback)
Beacon  Press  books  are  published  under  the
auspices  of  the  Unitarian  Universalist  Association
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America


EXPLANATORY  NOTE

The  preparation  of  the  subcommittee  record  was  performed  under  the  direction
ot  Senator  Gravel.  No  material  was  added  to  or  changed  in  the  study  or  appended
documents  and  statements.  In  some  cases,  material  was  illegible  or  missing.  If  this
occurred  withm  a  direct  quotation,  the  omission  was  indicated  with  a  bracketed
statement.  If  it  occurred  in  narrative  text,  it  was  bridged  by  removing  the  entire
sentence  in  which  it  appeared,  when  it  was  evident  that  no  substantive  material
wou  d  be  lost  by  this  procedure;  otherwise,  the  omission  was  indicated  by  a
bracketed  statement.  All  other  bracketed  insertions  appear  in  the  original  study


Contents


VOLUME  I

Introduction  by  U.S.  Senator  Mike  Gravel
Letter  of  Transmittal  by  Leslie  H.  Gelb
L  Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950

2.  U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954

3.  The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954

4.  U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956

5.  Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960

VOLUME  II

L  The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961

2.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963

3.  Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964

4.  The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November  1963

5.  US-GVN  Relations,  1964-1967

6.  The  Advisory  Build-up,  1961-1967

7.  Re-emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967

VOLUME  III

1.  U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  November  1963-April  1965

2.  Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  February  1964-January  1965

3.  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam:  Rolling  Thunder  Begins,  February-June,  1965

4.  American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July,  1965

VOLUME  IV

1.  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  1965-1968

2.  U.S.  Ground  Strategy  and  Force  Deployments,  1965-1968

[At  the  end  of  each  volume  is  a  collection  of  documents,  a  section  entitled
"Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements;'  and  a  Glossary]


vii


Contents  of  Volume  III


1.  U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  November  1963-April

1965  1

Summary  and  Analysis  1

Chronology  6

I.  NSAM-273  17

A.  NSAM-273— The  Aftermath  of  Diem  17

B.  First  Reappraisals  of  the  Situation  in  South  Vietnam  20

C.  First  Actions  on  NSAM-273  and  First  Misgivings  28

D.  Efforts  to  Improve  Intelligence  on  Progress  of  the  War  32

E.  The  Unrealized  January  Upturn  and  the  Khanh  Coup  35

F.  Deepening  Gloom  in  February  39

G.  Two  General  Alternative  Directions  on  Policy  42

H.  The  Fact  Finding  Mission  and  N SAM -2 8 8  46
/.  NSAM-288  50

II.  NSAM-288— Tonkin  Gulf  56

A.  General  Character  of  the  Period  from  NSAM-288  to  Tonkin
Gulf :  56

B.  NSAM-288  Programs  Mid-March  to  Mid-May  1964  59

C.  The  Secretary's  Visit  to  Saigon  May  1964  67

D.  The  Honolulu  Conference  of  30  May  1964  11

E.  Preparation  for  Increased  Pressure  on  North  Vietnam  11

F.  Increasing  U.S.  Involvement  and  Growing  GVN  Instability  79

III.  From  Tonkin  to  NSAM-328  83

A.  Tonkin  Gulf  and  Following  Political  Crises  83

B.  Policies  in  the  Period  of  Turmoil  87

C.  The  Period  of  Increasing  Pressures  on  NVN  89

IV.  NSAM-328  97

2.  Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  February  1964-
January  1965  106

Summary  ^  0^

Chronology  ^  ^  ^

Decisions  Regarding  Military  Pressure  Against  North  Vietnam  140

I.  February-June  1964  149

A.  Initiation  of  Covert  Operations  149


viii Contents  of  Volume  III

B.  Planning  for  Larger  Pressures

C.  Different  Policy  Perceptions  in  Planning

D.  Dealing  with  the  Laotian  Crisis

E.  The  Question  of  Pressure  Against  the  North
II.  July-October  1964

A.  Prologue:  Actions  and  Programs  Underway

B.  The  Tonkin  Gulf  Crisis

C.  [Title  and  partial  text  missing]

D.  Next  Courses  of  Action
III.  November  1964-January  1965

A.  Policy  Debate  in  November

B.  Policy  Decisions

C.  Implementing  the  Policy


3.  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam:  Rolling  Thunder  Begins,
February-June,  1965

Summary  and  Analysis
Chronology

I.  Introduction — Pleiku  Pulls  the  Trigger
II.  The  Long  Road  to  Pleiku — A  Retrospective  View

III.  DESOTO  Patrol  as  a  Reprisal  Opportunity — and  the  Decision  to
Suspend

IV.  Flaming  Dart  I  and  II — The  Imperceptible  Transition

V.  "Sustained  Reprisal"  and  Its  Variants — Advocacy  Shifts  into
High  Gear

VI.  Initiation  of  "Rolling  Thunder" — 18  Days  of  Maneuver  and
Delay

VII.  Rolling  Thunder  Becomes  a  Continuing  Program
VIII.  Target  Rationale  Shifts  Toward  Interdiction
IX.  Reassessment  as  of  April  1  and  the  NSAM-328  Decisions
X.  April  7th  Initiative — the  Billion  Dollar  Carrot
XI.  Honolulu,  April  20th — in  Search  of  Consensus
XII.  Project  Mayflower — the  First  Bombing  Pause
XIII.  Debate  over  Bombing  Strategy  and  Effectiveness  Continues

4.  American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July,  1965

Summary
Chronology

I.  Marine  Combat  Units  Go  to  Da  Nang,  March  1965

A.  Introduction

B.  The  Making  of  the  Decision

C.  The  Situation  in  Vietnam


152

157

165  i

171'

182

182

183  ,

192
206  I
206  I
236  I
251  ■


269

269
275
286

287

298
302

308

321
332
340
345
354
357
362
381


389

389
398
417
417
417
423


Contents  of  Volume  III  ix


D.  The  Developing  Debate  on  the  Deployment  of  U.S.  Forces  426

E.  Future  Expectations  430

F.  Analysis  431
II.  Phase  I  in  the  Build-up  of  U.S.  Forces,  March-July  1965  433

A.  The  Situation  in  Vietnam,  Spring  and  Early  Summer,  J 965  433

B.  The  Brief  Tenure  of  the  Strategy  of  Security,  and  Subsequent
Development  444

C.  The  Strategy  of  Experimentation:  Enclave  Strategy  452

D.  The  U.S.  Moves  to  Take  Over  the  Land  War:  The  Search  and
Destroy  Strategy  and  the  44  Battalion  Debate  462

E.  Expectations  478

Documents  486

Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  707


Glossary


744


Gravel  Edition  /  Pentagon  Papers  /  Volume  III


1


1.  U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,
Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965


Summary  and  Analysis

During  the  period  from  the  overthrow  of  the  Diem  government  in  November
1963  until  the  Honolulu  Conference  in  April  1965,  U.S.  policymakers  were  con-
cerned with  a  continuing,  central  dilemma  in  South  Vietnam.  An  agonizing,
year-long  internal  debate  took  place  against  the  double  backdrop  of  this  dilemma
and  Presidential  election  year  politics.  Although  the  results  of  this  debate  could
not  be  clearly  seen  until  mid- 1965,  the  seeds  which  produced  those  results  are
clearly  visible  in  the  official  files  at  least  a  year  earlier.

The  basic  problem  in  U.S.  policy  was  to  generate  programs  and  other  means
adequate  to  secure  the  objectives  being  pursued.  The  central  dilemma  lay  in
the  fact  that  while  U.S.  policy  objectives  were  stated  in  the  most  comprehen-
sive terms  the  means  employed  were  both  consciously  limited  and  purposely
indirect.  That  is,  the  U.S.  eschewed  employing  all  of  its  military  might — or
even  a  substantial  portion  of  it — in  a  battle  which  was  viewed  in  Washington  as
determinative  of  the  fate  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia,  probably  crucial  to  the  future
of  South  Asia,  and  as  the  definitive  test  of  U.S.  ability  to  counteract  communist
support  for  "wars  of  national  liberation."  Moreover,  this  limited  U.S.  resource
commitment  to  practically  unlimited  ends  took  an  indirect  form.  U.S.  efforts
*were  aimed  at  helping  the  Government  of  Vietnam  (GVN)  to  win  its  own  strug-
gle against  the  insurgents.  This  meant  that  the  newly  established  GVN  had  to
somehow  mobilize  its  human  and  other  resources,  improve  its  military  perform-
ance against  the  Viet  Cong,  and  shift  the  tide  of  the  war.

As  events  in  1964  and  1965  were  to  demonstrate,  the  GVN  did  not  succeed
in  achieving  political  stability.  Its  military  forces  did  not  stem  the  pattern  of
VC  successes.  Rather,  a  series  of  coups  produced  "revolving  door"  governments
in  Saigon.  The  military  pattern  showed,  particularly  by  the  spring  of  1965,  a
precipitous  decline  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Army  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam
(ARVN).  Yet  there  was  no  serious  debate  in  Washington  on  the  desirability  of
modifying  U.S.  objectives.  These  remained  essentially  fixed  even  as  the  means
for  their  realization — limited  U.S.  material  support  for  GVN — underwent  one
crisis  and  disappointment  after  another.

There  were  no  immediate  or  forceful  U.S.  reactions  in  1964  to  this  continu-
ing political  instability  and  military  frustration  in  South  Vietnam.  Declaratory
policy  raced  far  ahead  of  resource  allocations  and  use  decisions.  As  events  con-
tinued along  an  unfavorable  course  the  U.S.  pursued  an  ever-expanding  number
of  minor,  specific,  programmatic  measures  which  were  inherently  inadequate
either  to  reverse  the  decline  or  to  satisfy  broad  U.S.  objectives.  Concurrently,
the  U.S.  began  to  make  contingency  plans  for  increasing  pressures  against  NVN.
It  did  not  make  similar  plans  for  the  commitment  of  U.S.  ground  forces  in  SVN.

In  the  aftermath  of  President  Johnson's  landslide  electoral  victory  in  Novem-
ber 1964,  and  in  the  face  of  persistent  instability  in  SVN,  the  Administration
finally  expanded  the  war  to  include  a  limited,  carefully  controlled  air  campaign
against  the  north.  Early  in  1965  it  deployed  Marine  battalions  to  South  Vietnam.


2 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

By  April  1965,  while  continuing  to  follow  the  announced  policy  of  efforts  to
enable  GVN  to  win  its  own  war,  the  U.S.  had  adumbrated  a  policy  of  U.S.  mili-
tary participation  which  presaged  a  high  degree  of  Americanization  of  the  war
effort.

This  evolving  expansion  and  demonstration  of  commitment  was  neither  con-
tinuous nor  steady.  The  steps  forward  were  warmly  debated,  often  hesitant,
sometimes  reluctant. — But  all  of  the  steps  taken  were  still  forward  toward  a
larger  commitment;  there  were  none  to  the  rear.

THE  INITIAL  PERIOD:  NOVEMBER  1963-MARCH  1964

The  Diem  coup  preceded  President  Kennedy's  assassination  by  less  than  a
month.  Thus,  a  new  leader  took  the  helm  in  the  U.S.  at  a  natural  time  to  re-
evaluate U.S.  policies  and  U.S.-GVN  relations.  President  Johnson's  first  policy
announcement  on  the  Vietnamese  war,  contained  in  NSAM  273  (26  November
1963),  only  three  days  after  he  had  assumed  the  Presidency,  was  intended  pri-
marily to  endorse  the  policies  pursued  by  President  Kennedy  and  to  ratify  pro-
visional decisions  reached  in  Honolulu  just  before  the  assassination.  Even  in  its
attempt  to  direct  GVN's  efforts  toward  concentration  on  the  Delta  area,  NSAM
273  reflected  earlier  U.S.  preferences  which  had  been  thwarted  or  ignored  by
Diem.  Now  was  the  time,  many  of  the  top  U.S.  policymakers  hoped,  when  con-
vincing U.S.  support  for  the  new  regime  in  Saigon  might  allow  GVN  to  start
winning  its  own  war.

Two  developments — in  addition  to  the  VC  successes  which  followed  Diem's
downfall — undercut  this  aura  of  optimism.  First,  it  was  discovered  that  the
situation  in  SVN  had  been  worse  all  along  than  reports  had  indicated.  Examples
of  misleading  reports  were  soon  available  in  Washington  at  the  highest  levels.
Second,  the  hoped-for  political  stability  was  never  even  established  before  it
disintegrated  in  the  Khanh  coup  in  January  1964.  By  February  MACV's  year-
end  report  for  1963  was  available  in  Washington.  Its  gloomy  statistics  showed
downward  trends  in  almost  every  area.

Included  in  the  MACV  assessment  was  the  opinion  that  military  effort  could
not  succeed  in  the  absence  of  effective  political  leadership.  A  special  CIA  report,
forwarded  to  Secretary  McNamara  at  about  the  same  time  made  the  opposite
point:  military  victories  were  needed  to  nourish  the  popular  attitudes  conducive
to  political  stability.  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Roger  Hilsman — who  would
shortly  leave  office  after  his  views  were  rejected — stressed  the  need  for  physical
security  in  the  rural  areas  and  the  adoption  of  counterguerrilla  tactics  as  the  pre-
conditions to  success.  These  interesting  reversals  of  nominal  functional  prefer-
ences indicate  that  there  was  at  least  a  sufficiently  broad  awareness  within  U.S.
Officialdom  to  permit  a  useful  debate  on  U.S.  actions  which  might  deal  more  suc-
cessfully with  this  seamless  web  of  political-military  issues.  Certainly  the  intel-
ligence picture  was  dark  enough  to  prompt  such  a  debate:  the  SNIE  on  short-
term  prospects  in  Southeast  Asia  warned  that  ".  .  .  South  Vietnam  has,  at  best,
an  even  chance  of  withstanding  the  insurgency  menace  during  the  next  few  weeks
or  months."

The  debate  did  begin,  but  in  hobbles.  The  generally  agreed  necessity  to  work
through  GVN  and  the  felt  imperative  to  strengthen  GVN  left  the  U.S.  in  a
position  of  weakness.  It  was  at  least  as  dependent  on  GVN  leaders  as  were  the
latter  on  U.S.  support.  Moreover,  mid- 1964  was  not  an  auspicious  time  for  new
departures  in  policy  by  a  President  who  wished  to  portray  "moderate"  alterna-
tives to  his  opponent's  "radical"  proposals.  Nor  was  any  time  prior  to  or  im-


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  3

mediately  following  the  elections  very  appealing  for  the  same  reason.  Thus,
while  the  debate  in  high  official  circles  was  very,  very  different  from  the  public
debate  it  still  reflected  the  existence  of  the  public  debate.

LIMITED  MEASURES  FOR  LIMITLESS  AIMS

The  first  official  internal  pronouncement  to  reflect  this  difficult  policymaking
milieu  was  NSAM  288,  in  March  1964.  Approved  verbatim  from  the  report  of
the  most  recent  McNamara-Taylor  visit  to  Vietnam,  it  was  virtually  silent  on
one  issue  (U.S.  troops)  and  minimal  in  the  scale  of  its  recommendations  at  the
same  time  that  it  stated  U.S.  objectives  in  the  most  sweeping  terms  used  up  to
that  time.  The  U.S.  objective  was  stated  to  be  an  "independent,  non-communist
South  Vietnam,  free  to  accept  assistance  as  required  to  maintain  its  security"
even  though  not  necessarily  a  member  of  the  Western  alliance.  The  importance
of  this  objective  was  underscored  in  a  classic  statement  of  the  domino  theory:

Unless  we  can  achieve  this  objective  in  South  Vietnam,  almost  all  of
Southeast  Asia  will  probably  fall  under  Communist  dominance  (all  of  Viet-
nam, Laos,  and  Cambodia),  accommodate  to  Communism  so  as  to  remove
effective  U.S.  and  anti-Communist  influence  (Burma),  or  fall  under  the
domination  of  forces  not  now  explicitly  Communist  but  likely  then  to  be-
come so  (Indonesia  taking  over  Malaysia).  Thailand  might  hold  for  a
period  with  our  help,  but  would  be  under  grave  pressure.  Even  the  Philip-
pines would  become  shaky,  and  the  threat  to  India  to  the  west,  Australia
and  New  Zealand  to  the  south,  and  Taiwan,  Korea,  and  Japan  to  the  north
and  east  would  be  greatly  increased.

The  present  situation  in  SVN  was  painted  in  somber  tones  of  declining  GVN
control  and  deterioration  within  ARVN  while  VC  strength  and  NVN-supplied
arms  were  on  the  rise.  To  introduce  U.S.  combat  troops  for  the  protection  of
Saigon  under  these  circumstances,  McNamara  stated,  would  create  "serious
adverse  psychological  consequences  and  should  not  be  undertaken."  A  U.S.  move-
ment from  the  advisory  role  to  a  role  which  would  amount  to  command  of  the
war  effort  was  similarly  rejected  without  discussion  because  of  anticipated  ad-
verse psychological  effects.  Thus,  the  fear  of  undesirable  impacts  upon  a  weak
GVN  caused  at  least  one  major  course  of  action  to  be  ruled  out.  Although  fears
of  adverse  impacts  in  domestic  U.S.  politics  were  not  mentioned  it  is  inconceiv-
able that  such  fears  were  not  present.

Having  ruled  out  U.S.  active  leadership  and  the  commitment  of  U.S.  troops,
Secretary  McNamara  analyzed  three  possible  courses  of  action:  ( 1  )  negotiations
leading  to  the  "neutralization"  of  SVN;  (2)  the  initiation  of  military  actions
against  NVN;  and  (3)  measures  to  improve  the  situation  in  SVN.  The  first  of
these  was  incompatible  with  the  U.S.  objective  stated  at  the  beginning  of  the
NSAM;  the  time  was  not  propitious  for  adoption  of  the  second;  the  third  was
recommended  for  adoption.  Additionally,  Secretary  McNamara  recommended
NSAM  288  proclaimed  that  plans  be  made  so  that  the  U.S.  would  be  in  a  posi-
tion at  a  later  date  to  initiate  military  pressures  against  NVN  within  a  relatively
brief  time  after  any  decision  to  do  so  might  be  made.

Many  of  the  steps  approved  in  NSAM  288  were  highly  programmatic.  It
should  be  observed  that  they  were  also  palliative,  both  in  scope  and  degree.  Of
the  twelve  approved  actions,  two  addressed  possible  future  actions  beyond  the


4 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

borders  of  South  Vietnam.  Of  the  remaining  ten,  three  were  declaratory  in  nature
(e.g.,  "To  make  it  clear  that  we  fully  support  the  Khanh  government  and  are
opposed  to  any  further  coups").  The  seven  actions  implying  additional  U.S.
assistance  (some  of  it  advice)  dealt  with  such  matters  as  exchanging  25  VNAF
aircraft  for  a  newer  model,  replacing  armored  personnel  carriers  with  a  more
reliable  model,  and  trebling  the  fertilizer  program  within  two  years.  The  addi-
tional cost  of  the  programs  was  only  slightly  more  than  $60  million  at  the  most:
$30-$40  million  to  support  a  50,000  man  increase  in  RVNAF  and  to  raise  pay
scales;  $1.5  million  to  support  an  enlarged  civil  administrative  cadre;  and  a  one
time  cost  of  $20  million  for  additional  and  replacement  military  equipment.

It  is  clear  with  the  advantage  of  hindsight  that  these  steps  were  grossly  inade-
quate to  the  magnitude  of  the  tasks  at  hand — particularly  if  the  broad  U.S.  ob-
jectives stated  in  the  NSAM  were  to  be  realized.  But  such  hindsight  misses  the
policymakers'  dilemma  and  the  probable  process  by  which  the  approved  actions
were  decided  upon.  President  Johnson  had  neither  a  congressional  nor  a  popular
mandate  to  Americanize  the  war  or  to  expand  it  dramatically  by  "going  north."
U.S.  hopes  were  pinned  on  assisting  in  the  development  of  a  GVN  strong  enough
to  win  its  own  war.  Overt  U.S.  leadership  might  undercut  the  development  of
such  a  government  in  Saigon.  The  course  of  policy  adopted  was  not  the  product
of  an  attempt  to  select  the  "best"  alternative  by  means  of  examining  expected
benefits;  it  resulted  from  a  determination  of  the  "least  bad"  alternative  through
an  examination  of  risks  and  disadvantages.  It  reflected  what  was  politically  fea-
sible rather  than  what  was  desirable  in  relation  to  stated  objectives.  The  prac-
tical effect  of  this  understandable — perhaps  inescapable  and  inevitable — way  of
deciding  upon  U.S.  policy  was  to  place  almost  complete  responsibility  in  the
hands  of  the  GVN  for  the  attainment  of  U.S.  objectives — it  being  assumed  that
GVN's  objectives  were  compatible  with  ours.

Midway  through  1964  President  Johnson  changed  the  entire  top  level  of  U.S.
leadership  in  Saigon.  General  Maxwell  D.  Taylor,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  Staff,  retired  from  active  military  duty  (for  the  second  time)  to  become  the
U.S.  Ambassador.  An  experienced  and  highly  regarded  career  diplomat,  U.
Alexis  Johnson,  was  appointed  deputy  to  Taylor.  General  William  C.  Westmore-
land stepped  up  from  deputy  to  commander  of  U.S.  military  forces  in  Vietnam.
The  new  "first  team"  was  not  without  knowledge  about  Vietnam  but  it  ines-
capably lacked  the  close  personal  knowledge  of  leading  GVN  figures  which  only
time  and  close  association  can  develop.  It  set  about  attempting  to  help  the  Khanh
government  to  help  itself.

General  Khanh,  in  the  event,  proved  unable  to  marshal  SVN's  resources  and
to  establish  his  regime  in  a  position  of  authority  adequate  either  to  stem  or  to
turn  the  VC  tide.  Khanh's  failure  was,  however,  neither  precipitous  nor  easily
perceivable  at  the  time.  As  the  U.S.  entered  and  passed  through  a  Presidential
campaign  in  which  the  proper  policy  to  pursue  in  Vietnam  was  a  major  issue,
it  sometimes  appeared  that  the  GVN  was  making  headway  and  sometimes  ap-
peared that  it  was  not.

U.S.  policy  remained  virtually  unchanged  during  this  period  although  signifi-
cant planning  steps  were  accomplished  to  permit  the  U.S.  to  exercise  military
pressures  against  NVN  should  it  appear  desirable  (and  politically  feasible)  to  do
so.  Thanks  to  such  planning,  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  of  2-4  August  1964
were  answered  by  "tit-for-tat"  reprisal  raids  with  considerable  dispatch.  The  cost
was  minimal  in  terms  of  world  opinion  and  communist  reaction.  Moreover,
President  Johnson  used  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  as  the  springboard  to  a  broad
endorsement  by  the  Congress  of  his  leadership  and  relative  freedom  of  action.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  5

When  this  was  followed  in  November  by  what  can  only  be  described  as  a  smash-
ing victory  at  the  polls,  the  President's  hands  were  not  completely  untied  but  the
bonds  were  figuratively  loosened.  His  feasible  options  increased.

LIMITED  ESCALATION  LEADS  TO  OPEN-ENDED  INTERVENTION

Immediately  following  his  election,  the  President  initiated  an  intense,  month-
long  policy  review.  An  executive  branch  consensus  developed  for  a  two  phase
expansion  of  the  war.  Phase  I  was  limited  to  intensification  of  air  strikes  in  Laos
and  to  covert  actions  in  NVN.  Phase  II  would  extend  the  war  to  a  sustained,
escalating  air  campaign  against  North  Vietnamese  targets.  The  President  ap-
proved Phase  I  for  implementation  in  December  1964  but  approved  Phase  II
only  "in  principle."

The  effect  of  this  decision  was  to  increase  the  expectation  that  the  air  cam-
paign against  NVN  would  be  undertaken  if  the  proper  time  arose.  What  condi-
tions were  proper  was  the  subject  of  considerable  disagreement  and  confusion.
Tactically,  the  U.S.  desired  to  respond  to  North  Vietnamese  acts  rather  than  to
appear  to  initiate  a  wider  war.  But  the  strategic  purposes  of  bombing  in  NVN
were  in  dispute.  The  initiation  of  an  air  campaign  was  deferred  early  in  1964  as
a  prod  to  GVN  reform.  By  1965  such  initiation  was  argued  for  as  a  support
for  GVN  morale.  Some  adherents  claimed  that  bombing  in  NVN  could  destroy
the  DRV's  will  to  support  the  war  in  South  Vietnam.  Others  expected  it  to  raise
the  price  of  North  Vietnam's  effort  and  to  demonstrate  U.S.  commitment  but  not
to  be  decisive  in  and  of  itself.  The  only  indisputable  facts  seem  to  be  that  the
long  planning  and  debate  over  expanding  the  air  war,  the  claimed  benefits  (al-
though disputed),  and  the  relatively  low  cost  and  risk  of  an  air  campaign  as  com-
pared to  the  commitment  of  U.S.  ground  forces  combined  to  indicate  that  the
bombing  of  NVN  would  be  the  next  step  taken  if  nothing  else  worked.

Nothing  else  was,  in  fact,  working.  General  Khanh's  government  was  reor-
ganized in  November  1964  to  give  it  the  appearance  of  civilian  leadership.  Khanh
finally  fell  in  mid-February  1965  and  was  replaced  by  the  Quat  regime.  Harlier
that  month  the  insurgents  had  attacked  the  U.S.  base  at  Pleiku,  killing  eight
Americans.  Similar  attacks  late  in  1964  had  brought  about  recommendations
for  reprisal  attacks.  These  had  been  disapproved  because  of  timing.  On  this  oc-
casion, however,  the  President  approved  the  FLAMING  DART  retaliatory  meas-
ures.

Presidential  assistant  McGeorge  Bundy  was  in  SVN  when  the  Viet  Cong  at-
tacked the  U.S.  facilities  in  Pleiku.  He  recommended  to  the  President  that,  in
addition  to  retaliatory  measures,  the  U.S.  initiate  phase  II  of  the  military  meas-
ures against  NVN.  The  fall  of  the  Khanh  regime  a  week  later  resurrected  the  worst
U.S.  fears  of  GVN  political  instability.  The  decision  to  bomb  north  was  made,
announced  on  28  February,  and  strikes  initiated  on  2  March.  A  week  later,
after  a  request  from  Generals  Taylor  and  Westmoreland  which  was  debated
little  if  at  all,  two  battalion  landing  teams  of  Marines  went  ashore  at  DaNang
to  assume  responsibility  for  security  of  the  air  base  there.  U.S.  ground  combat
units  were  in  an  active  theater  on  the  mainland  of  Asia  for  the  first  time  since
the  Korean  War.  This  may  not  have  been  the  Rubicon  of  the  Johnson  administra-
tion's Vietnam  policy  but  it  was  a  departure  of  immeasurable  significance.  The
question  was  no  longer  one  of  whether  U.S.  units  should  be  deployed  to  SVN;
rather,  it  was  one  of  how  many  units  should  be  deployed  and  for  what  strategic
purposes.

The  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  General  Harold  K.  Johnson,  went  to  Saigon  m  mid-


6 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

March  and  recommended  that  bombing  restrictions  be  lifted  and  that  a  U.S.
division  be  deployed  to  SVN  for  active  combat.  General  Taylor  strongly  opposed
an  active  combat — as  distinct  from  base  security — role  for  U.S.  ground  forces.
But  the  President  decided  on  1  April  to  expand  the  bombing,  to  add  an  air  wing
in  SVN,  and  to  send  two  more  Marine  battalions  ashore.  These  decisions  were
announced  internally  on  6  April  in  NSAM  328.

General  Taylor  continued  to  voice  strong  opposition  to  a  ground  combat  role
for  U.S.  forces  but  his  voice  was  drowned  out  by  two  developments.  First,  the
air  campaign  against  NVN  (ROLLING  THUNDER)  did  not  appear  to  be
shaking  the  DRV's  determination.  Second,  ARVN  experienced  a  series  of  dis-
astrous defeats  in  the  spring  of  1965  which  convinced  a  number  of  observers
that  a  political-military  collapse  within  GVN  was  imminent.

As  the  debate  in  Washington  on  next  steps  revealed,  something  closely  akin
to  the  broad  objectives  stated  over  a  year  earlier  in  NSAM  288  represented  a
consensus  among  U.S.  policymakers  as  a  statement  of  proper  U.S.  aims.  The
domestic  political  situation  had  changed  materially  since  early  1964.  President
Johnson  was  now  armed  with  both  a  popular  mandate  and  broad  Congressional
authorization  (the  extent  of  which  would  be  challenged  later,  but  not  in  1965).
Palliative  measures  had  not  been  adequate  to  the  task  although  they  had  con-
tinued and  multiplied  throughout  the  period.  As  General  Taylor  wryly  remarked
to  McGeorge  Bundy  in  a  back  channel  message  quoted  in  the  following  paper,
the  U.S.  Mission  in  Saigon  was  charged  with  implementing  a  21-point  military
program,  a  41 -point  non-military  program,  a  16-point  USIS  program,  and  a  12-
point  CIA  program .  .  as  if  we  can  win  here  somehow  on  a  point  score."

As  fears  rose  in  Washington  it  must  have  seemed  that  everything  had  been
tried  except  one  course — active  U.S.  participation  in  the  ground  battle  in  SVN.
Palliative  measures  had  failed.  ROLLING  THUNDER  offered  little  hope  for  a
quick  decision  in  view  of  the  rapid  deterioration  of  ARVN.  The  psychological
barrier  against  the  presence  of  U.S.  combat  units  had  been  breached.  If  the
revalidated  U.S.  objectives  were  to  be  achieved  it  was  necessary  for  the  U.S.  to
make  quickly  some  radical  departures.  It  was  politically  feasible  to  commit  U.S.
ground  forces  and  it  seemed  desirable  to  do  so.

Secretary  McNamara  met  in  Honolulu  on  20  April  with  the  principal  U.S.
leaders  from  Saigon  and  agreed  to  recommend  an  enclave  strategy  requiring  a
quantum  increase  above  the  four  Marine  battalions.  An  account  of  the  rapidity
with  which  this  strategy  was  overtaken  by  an  offensively  oriented  concept  is
described  in  Chapter  4.  The  present  volume  describes  the  situational  changes,
the  arguments,  and  the  frustrations  as  the  U.S.  attempted  for  over  a  year  to  move
toward  the  realization  of  ambitious  objectives  by  the  indirect  use  of  very  limited
resources  and  in  the  shadow  of  a  Presidential  election  campaign.

End  of  Summary  and  Analysis
CHRONOLOGY

20  Nov  1963 Honolulu  Conference

Secretaries  McNamara  and  Rusk  and  their  party  meet  with  the
entire  US  country  team  and  review  the  South  Vietnamese  situa-
tion after  the  Diem  coup.

22  Nov  1963 Kennedy  Assassination

President  Kennedy  is  assassinated  in  Dallas.  Lodge  confers  with  the
new  President,  Johnson,  in  Washington,  during  the  next  few  days.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  1

26  Nov  1963 NSAM  273

Drawing  on  the  Honolulu  Conference  and  Lodge's  conversations
with  the  President,  NSAM  273  established  US  support  for  the
new  Minh  government  and  emphasized  that  the  level  of  effort,
economic  and  military,  would  be  maintained  at  least  as  high  as  to
Diem.  All  US  and  GVN  efforts  were  to  be  concentrated"  on  the
Delta  where  the  VC  danger  was  greatest.  But  the  war  remained
basically  a  South  Vietnamese  affair  to  win  or  lose.

6  Dec  1963 Report  on  Long  An  Province

A  report  by  a  USOM  provincial  representative  on  Long  An  Prov-
ince, adjacent  to  Saigon,  describes  the  near  complete  disintegra-
tion of  the  strategic  hamlet  program.  The  basic  problem  is  the
inability  or  unwillingness  of  the  ARVN  to  provide  timely  support
when  villages  are  under  attack.  Hamlets  are  being  overrun  by  the
VC  on  an  almost  daily  basis.  Ambassador  Lodge  forwards  the
report  to  Washington.

17  Dec  1963 NSC  Meeting

After  hearing  a  briefing  by  General  Krulak  that  falls  short  of  giv-
ing an  adequate  explanation  for  the  Long  An  report,  the  President
decides  to  send  McNamara  on  another  fact-finding  trip.

18-20  Dec SecDef  Trip  to  Vietnam

1963  During  this  quick  visit  to  South  Vietnam,  McNamara  ordered

certain  immediate  actions  to  be  taken  by  the  US  Mission  to  im-
prove the  situation  in  the  13  critical  provinces.  He  returns  directly
to  Washington  to  report  to  the  President.

21  Dec  1963 McNamara  Report  to  the  President

McNamara's  report  substantiates  the  existence  of  significant  de-
terioration in  the  war  since  the  preceding  summer.  He  recom-
mends strengthened  ARVN  formations  in  the  key  provinces,  in-
creased US  military  and  civilian  staffs,  the  creation  of  a  new  paci-
fication plan,  and  better  coordination  between  Lodge  and  Harkins.
His  report  is  especially  pessimistic  about  the  situation  in  the  Delta.

7  Jan  1964 McCone  Proposes  Covert  Reporting

The  serious  failure  of  the  reporting  system  to  indicate  the  critical
-  state  of  deterioration  of  the  war  prompts  McCone  to  recommend
to  McNamara  a  special  TDY  covert  CIA  check  on  the  in-country
reporting  system  to  make  recommendations  for  improving  it.

16  Jan  1964 McNamara  Accepts  Revised  McCone  Proposal

McNamara  accepts  a  revised  form  of  McCone's  proposal,  specifi-
cally ruling  out  any  IG-like  aspects  to  the  study.

28  Jan  1964 Khanh  Warns  US  Aide  of  Pro-Neutralist  Coup

General  Khanh,  I  Corps  Commander,  warns  his  US  advisor,
Colonel  Wilson  that  pro-neutralist  members  of  the  MRC — Xuan,
Don,  and  Kim — are  plotting  a  coup.


29  Jan  1964


Khanh  Warns  Lodge

Khanh  repeats  to  Lodge  the  warning  that  pro-neutralist  elements


8 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III


are  planning  a  coup.  Lodge  recommends  an  intervention  with
Paris  to  get  DeGaulle  to  restrict  his  activity  in  Saigon.  Khanh's
efforts  are  really  a  screen  for  his  own  planned  coup.

30  Jan  1 964 Khanh  Coup

Early  in  the  morning,  Khanh  acts  to  take  over  control  of  the  gov-
ernment in  a  bloodless  internal  coup  that  removes  the  civilian  gov-
ernment and  puts  him  in  power.

2  Feb  1964 MACV  Personal  Assessment  of  4th  Qtr  CY  1963

The  Diem  coup  and  the  subsequent  political  instability  in  the  fall
of  1963  are  given  by  MACV  as  the  main  reasons  for  the  rise  in
VC  activity  and  the  decline  in  GVN  control  of  the  country.  The
tempo  of  GVN  operations  was  good  but  the  effectiveness  low.
Military  failures  were  largely  attributed  to  political  problems.

10  Feb  1964 CAS  Group's  Preliminary  Report

The  preliminary  report  of  the  special  CAS  group  cross-checking
the  reporting  system  confirms  the  deterioration  of  the  strategic
hamlet  program.  It  documents  the  decline  in  rural  security  and
the  increase  in  VC  attacks.

12  Feb  1964 SN IE  50-64

This  intelligence  community  evaluation  of  the  short-term  prospects
for  Vietnam  confirms  the  pessimism  now  felt  in  all  quarters.  The
political  instability  is  the  hard  core  problem.

18  Feb  1964 Final  CAS  Group  Report

The  final  CAS  group  report  confirms  the  black  picture  of  its  initial
estimate  in  greater  detail  and  further  confirms  the  previous  fail-
ings of  the  reporting  system.

JCSM  136-64

In  addition  to  a  long  list  of  recommendations  for  GVN  action,  the
ICS  propose  to  SecDef  major  US  escalatory  steps  including  bomb-
ing of  the  North.

21  Feb  1964 MACV  Comment  on  CAS  Group  Findings

General  Harkins  takes  issue  not  with  the  specific  factual  reporting
of  the  CAS  Group,  but  with  their  broader  conclusions  about  the
direction  the  war  is  going,  and  the  respective  effectiveness  of  the
VC  and  GVN.

2  Mar  1 964 JCSM-l  74-64

The  JCS  outline  their  proposal  for  punitive  action  against  the  DRV
to  halt  Northern  support  for  the  VC  insurgency.  Bombing  is  spe-
cifically called  for.

8  Mar  1 964 SecDef  and  CJCS  Begin  Five-Day  Trip  to  SVN

The  President  sends  Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  on
another  fact-finding  trip  to  prepare  for  a  major  re-evaluation  of  the
war  and  US  involvement.  While  there,  a  set  of  recommendations
to  the  President  is  decided  upon.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  9

12  Mar  1964 McNamara-Taylor  see  Khanh

Prior  to  their  departure,  McNamara  and  Taylor  present  their
principal  conclusions  to  General  Khanh  who  is  responsive  to  their
suggestions  and,  in  particular,  declares  his  readiness  to  move
promptly  on  a  national  mobilization  and  increasing  ARVN  and
Civil  Guard.

14  Mar  1964 Hilsman  sends  Final  Memos  to  SecState

Having  resigned  over  policy  disagreement,  Hilsman  sends  Rusk
parting  memos  on  SEA  and  SVN.  He  describes  two  principles
basic  to  success  in  guerrilla  warfare:  (1)  the  oil  blot  approach  to
progressive  rural  security;  and  (2)  the  avoidance  of  large-scale
operations.  He  further  opposes  redirecting  the  war  effort  against
the  North.  Political  stability  is  absolutely  essential  to  eventual
victory.

JCSM-222-64

The  JCS,  in  commenting  on  McNamara's  proposed  recommenda-
tions to  the  President,  reiterate  their  views  of  2  March  that  a  pro-
gram of  actions  against  the  North  is  required  to  effectively  strike
at  the  sources  of  the  insurgency.  The  overall  military  recommenda-
tions proposed  by  McNamara  are  inadequate,  they  feel.

16  Mar  1964  SecDef  Recommendations  to  the  President

Largely  ignoring  the  JCS  reclama,  McNamara  reports  on  the  con-
clusions of  his  trip  to  Vietnam  and  recommends  the  full  civilian
and  military  mobilization  to  which  General  Khanh  has  committed
himself.  This  is  to  be  accompanied  by  an  extensive  set  of  internal
reforms  and  organizational  improvements.  Some  increases  in  US
personnel  are  recopimended  along  with  increased  materiel  support
for  the  GVN.

17  Mar  1964  N SAM  288

The  President  accepts  McNamara's  full  report  and  has  it  adopted
as  NSAM  288  to  guide  national  policy.  The  importance  of  South
Vietnam  to  US  policy  and  security  is  underlined  and  the  extent  of
the  US  commitment  to  it  increased.  While  significant  increases  in
actual  US  participation  in  the  war  are  rejected  as  not  warranted  lor
the  moment,  the  JCS  are  authorized  to  begin  planning  studies  for
striking  at  the  sources  of  insurgency  in  the  DRV.

1  Apr  1964 Embassy  Saigon  Msg  1880

*  Lodge  reports  per  State  request  that  Khanh's  proposed  mobiliza-
tion measures  call  for  both  civilian  and  niilitarv  build-ups.

4  Apr  1964 Khanh  Announces  MobiUzation

Khanh  announces  that  all  able-bodied  males  aged  20  to  45  will  be
subject  to  national  public  service,  etihcr  military  or  civilian.

W.  P.  Bundy  Letter  to  Lodge

In  a  letter  to  Lodge,  Bundy  asks  him  to  comment  on  a  scenario
for  mobilizing  domestic  US  political  support  for  action  against  the
DRV.

15  Apr  1964 Lodge  reports  on  Mobilization

Lodge  reports  that  Khanh's  4  April  announcement  was  only  the
precursor  of  the  legal  decrees  the  essence  of  which  he  described.


10 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill
15-20  Apr General  Wheeler,  CofS/USA,  Visits  Vietnam

1964  The  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  General  Earl  Wheeler  visits  Vietnam  to

make  a  survey  and  represent  the  SecDef  during  the  visit  of  Secre-
tary Rusk.  On  16  April,  he  meets  with  Khanh  who  first  mentions
his  view  that  the  war  will  eventually  have  to  be  taken  to  the  North.

Rusk  Visits  Saigon

Secretary  Rusk  and  party  visit  Saigon.  On  18  April,  Rusk  sees
Khanh  who  again  mentions  the  eventual  necessity  of  carrying  the
fight  to  the  North.  Rusk  replies  that  such  a  significant  escalation
of  the  war  would  require  much  thought  and  preparation.  At  the
19  April  meeting  with  the  Country  Team,  much  of  the  discussion
is  devoted  to  the  problem  of  pressures  against  the  North.

President  Names  General  Westmoreland  to  Succeed  General
Harkins

General  William  Westmoreland  is  named  to  succeed  General
Harkins  in  the  summer.

29  Apr  1964 JCS  Msg  6073  to  MACV

The  JCS,  worried  at  the  GVN  delay,  ask  MACV  to  submit  the
force  plan  for  1964  by  7  May.

30  Apr  1964  Lodge,  Brent  and  Westmoreland  See  Khanh
In  a  showdown  with  Khanh,  Lodge,  Brent  and  Westmoreland
state  that  the  fundamental  problem  is  lack  of  administrative  sup-
port for  the  provincial  war  against  the  VC,  particularly  the  inade-
quacy of  the  piastre  support  for  the  pacification  program.  Khanh
promises  more  effort.

Embassy  Saigon  Msg  1889  EXDIS  for  the  President
Lodge  informs  the  President  that  Khanh  has  agreed  to  US  advi-
sors in  the  pacified  areas  if  we  are  willing  to  accept  casualties.
Lodge  recommends  one  advisor  for  each  corps  area  and  one  for
Khanh,  all  reporting  to  Lodge.

Lodge  Reports  on  Delay  in  Mobilization

Lodge  reports  that  the  draft  mobilization  decrees  have  still  not
been  signed  or  promulgated.

Embassy  Saigon  Msg  2112

Having  asked  to  see  Lodge,  Khanh  asks  him  whether  he.  Lodge,
thinks  the  country  should  be  put  on  a  war  footing.  Khanh  wants
to  carry  the  war  to  the  North  and  sees  this  as  necessary  pre-
liminary.

NSC  Meeting

The  NSC  confirms  Rusk's  caution  to  Khanh  on  any  moves  against
the  North.  The  President  asks  McNamara  to  make  a  fact-finder  to
Vietnam.

MACV,  US /GVN  1964  Force  Level  Agreement
MACV  informs  the  JCS  that  agreement  has  been  reached  with
the  GVN  on  the  level  of  forces  to  be  reached  by  year's  end.

McNamara-Taylor  Mission

McNamara-Taylor  visit  SVN.  They  are  briefed  on  12-13  April  by


17-20  Apr
1964


25  Apr  1964


2  May  1964
4  May  1964


6  May  1964


7  May  1964


12-14  May
1964


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  11

the  Mission.  On  14  April  they  see  Khanh  who  again  talks  of  go-
ing North.  McNamara  demurs,  but  insists  on  more  political  sta-
bihty  and  program  effectiveness.

30  May  1964  Honolulu  Conference

Rusk,  McNamara,  McCone  and  aides  meet  in  Honolulu  with  the
Country  Team.  A  full  dress  discussion  of  pressures  takes  place,
but  no  decisions  or  recommendations  are  approved.  Rather,  more
emphasis  on  the  critical  provinces  is  approved,  along  with  an  ex-
panded advisory  effort.

Department  of  State  Msg  2184

Lodge  is  informed  of  the  President's  approval  of  the  expanded
effort  in  the  critical  provinces.

W.  P.  Bundy  memo  to  SecState  and  SecDef

Attached  to  a  Bundy  memo  for  consideration  at  a  meeting  later
the  same  day,  are  six  annexes  each  dealing  with  a  different  aspect
of  the  problem  of  getting  a  Congressional  resolution  of  support
for  the  current  US  Southeast  Asian  policy.  One  of  the  important
themes  is  that  an  act  of  irreversible  US  commitment  might  provide
the  necessary  psychological  support  to  get  real  reform  and  effec-
tiveness from  the  GVN.

President  Announces  JCS  Chairman  Taylor  as  New  Ambassador
President  Johnson  announces  the  appointment  of  JCS  Chairman,
Maxwell  Taylor,  to  succeed  Lodge,  who  is  returning  to  engage  in
Republican  Presidential  politics.

Taylor  Succeeds  Lodge

Lodge  leaves  Saigon  and  Taylor  takes  over  as  US  Ambassador
with  U.  Alexis  Johnson  as  Deputy.

Taylor  Forms  Mission  Council

In  an  effort  to  streamline  the  Embassy  and  increase  his  policy  con-
trol, Taylor  forms  the  Mission  Council  at  the  Country  Team  level.

Taylor  Calls  on  Khanh

Taylor  calls  on  Khanh  who  expresses  satisfaction  with  the  new
personnel,  approves  the  Mission  Council  idea  and  offers  to  create
a  counter  part  organization.

Department  of  State  Msg  108
"  The  President  asks  Taylor  to  submit  regular  month-end  progress
reports  on  all  aspects  of  the  program.

15  Jul  1964 Taylor  reports  increased  VC  strength,  Embassy  Saigon  Msgs  107
and  108

Taylor  raises  the  estimate  of  Viet  Cong  strength  from  the  previous
total  of  28,000  to  34,000.  This  does  not  represent  a  sudden  in-
crease, but  rather  intelligence  confirmation  of  long  suspected  units.

17  Jul  1 964 USOM  Meets  With  G  VN  NSC

As  he  had  promised,  Khanh  creates  a  coordinating  group  within
the  GVN  to  deal  with  the  new  Mission  Council  and  calls  it  the
NSC.


5Jun  1964
15Junl964

23  Junl964

30  Junl964

7  Jul  1964

8  Jul  1964

10  Jul  1964


12 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentcrpr  Par^-s  Vc'..  Ill

19  Jul  1 964 Khanh  Make  ence  to  G r .  \  ^

In  a  public  sr^;. rv  - :"e *:  .-.e  N::"  I"

a  separate  su:er:;  =  -:  .  ^  =  ^;  :  =  ::  ::.z
''march  Nonh.

23JuI1964 Taylor  Meets a  \'SC

In  a  meeting  K -  :he  NSC.  Tiy'.cr  is  :c'i  by  Khir.h
that  ::-c  r.-.:'e  -  .•."5:  :r.e  N::-.h  :s  - -:5?e::^..-;e  :c  :he  success  c:
the  cc.  n •  .  :  :  -  :-e  S:  :-.


24Jull964 Taylc-—-:.K:'  r:

In  a  c:>: :  -  : :  - :  .  r : K" .  : : : - -.'^  y.  :  is  US  sup-

ro::  ::  \[  -r. :s  re-.r.u  :--i  u-.e  ::c -  rle.  1 :e.:e:^:es  US

s.rr:::  :::

2Augl964 USS  :

The  :  . . .^  _:-:..eu :he  Tcnk;-  Gulf  by

DR\'  r.u::  .  ; j.  DE  SOTO  p^::o:  cf  :-e  DR\'  coasL

Seve-":  zy.::'.  s..r.^


4  Aug  1964 \:  -

C.  J

anac-::
N:::h.


US  -ck  seven!  DR\"  ri::o!  boi:  buses,  ces::-;..":  ships


7 1964 7  Resolutions

-  ■ T  ■ ■  --e  attacks,  the  Pre^iie-.:  ^-ie'ei  "eiie-^  C:-
resolution s.:rr:::  :::  US  r.  .  .u:::c_.;:^
ills  ■■■.-.r.  n- :- ..n  -  uu.u.  :  "  -::u  Hr_ses.  *


icy


K  -  :  „ e  ::  t  .  ziz'sacy  that  grves  him  rej^r-c:


10  Aug  1964 Taylors  - /  -

J- V:,  c.,.  ,  : _  _  p.


He


11  Aug  1964 President  Si^s  Tonkin  Resolution

" "u  T  - -  Cu  :  Re  : :  ?a  and  pledges  full

.  -  _  _ .....  ....  ^\  N.

12  Aug  1964 Taylor  and  Khanh  Meet

Khanh  discusses  with  ~  ^nstitutioa
enhancing  his  own  pc  :_^c  u.:ri.

14  Aug  1964 Khanh  shows  Taylor  L

At  GVN  NSC  meeting,  Khanh  shows  Taylor  his  proposed  draft
Constitution.  Taylor  dislikes  its  blatant  ratification  of  Khanh  as
dictator.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  13

16  Aug  1964 Khanh  Names  President

With  the  promulgation  of  the  new  constitution,  Khanh  is  elected
President  by  the  MRC.

27  Aug  1964 MRC  Disbands

After  ten  days  of  political  turmoil  and  demonstrations,  Khanh
withdraws  the  constitution,  the  MRC  names  Khanh,  Minh  and
Khiem  to  rule  provisionally  and  disbands  itself.

4  Sep  1964 Khanh  Resumes  Premiership

Khanh  returns  from  Dalat  and  ends  the  crisis  by  resuming  the
Premiership.

6  Sep  1964 Embassy  Saigon  Msg  768

Taylor  cables  an  assessment  that  ".  .  .  at  best  the  emerging  gov-
ernmental structure  might  be  capable  of  maintaining  a  holding
operation  against  the  Viet  Cong."

7  Sep  1964 Washington  Conference

Taylor  meets  with  the  President  and  the  NSC  Principals  and  de-
cisions are  made  to  resume  DE  SOTO  operations,  resume  34A
operations,  and  prepare  for  further  tit-for-tat  reprisals.

10  Sep  1964 N SAM  314

The  7  September  decisions  are  promulgated.

13  Sep  1964 Abortive  Phat  Coup

General  Phat  launches  a  coup  but  it  is  defeated  by  forces  loyal  to
Khanh.  This  establishes  the  power  of  younger  officers  such  as  Ky
and  Thi.

18  Sep  1964 DE  SOTO  Patrol  Attacked

The  first  resumed  DE  SOTO  patrol  comes  under  apparent  attack.
To  avoid  future  incidents,  the  President  suspends  the  patrols.

26  Sep  1964 Vietnam  High  National  Council

The  MRC  names  a  High  National  Council  of  distinguished  citizens
to  prepare  a  constitution.

20  Oct  1964 New  Constitution  Revealed

The  MRC  presents  the  new  constitution  drafted  by  the  High  Na-
tional Council.  A  prompt  return  to  civilian  government  is  promised.

1  Nov  1964 Huong  Names  Premier

Tcan  Van  Huong,  a  civilian,  is  named  Premier  after  the  appoint-
ment of  Phan  Khac  Suu  as  Chief  of  State,  thus  returning  the  gov-
ernment to  civilian  control.

1  Nov  1964 VC  Attack  Bien  Hoa  Airport

The  VC  launch  a  mortar  attack  on  the  Bien  Hoa  airfield  that  kills
Americans  and  damages  aircraft.  The  military  recommend  a  re-
prisal against  the  North;  the  President  refuses.

3  Nov  1964 Johnson  re-elected

Lyndon  Johnson  is  re-elected  President  with  a  crushing  majority.


Task  Force  Begins  Policy  Review

At  the  President's  request,  W.  P.  Bundy  heads  an  inter-agency  Task


14 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

Force  for  an  in-depth  review  of  US  Vietnam  policy  and  options.
The  work  goes  on  throughout  the  month.

26  Nov  1964  Bundy  Group  Submits  Three  Options

The  Bundy  Task  Force  submits  its  draft  conclusions  to  the  Princi-
pals. They  propose  three  alternative  courses  of  action:  (1)  con-
tinuation of  current  policy  with  no  escalation  and  a  resistance  to
negotiations;  (2)  a  significant  set  of  pressures  against  the  North
accompanied  by  vigorous  efforts  to  start  negotiations;  (3)  a  modest
campaign  against  the  North  with  resistance  to  negotiations.

30  Nov  1964  NSC  Principals  Modify  Bundy  Proposals

The  NSC  Principals  reject  the  pure  form  of  any  of  the  recom-
mendations and  instead  substitute  a  two-phase  recommendation
for  the  President:  the  first  phase  is  a  sUght  intensification  of  cur-
rent covert  activities  against  the  North  and  in  Laos,  the  second
after  30  days  would  be  a  moderate  campaign  of  air  strikes  against
the  DRV.

1  Dec  1964 President  Meets  with  NSC  and  Taylor

The  President,  in  a  meeting  with  the  NSC  Principals,  and  Taylor,
who  returned  on  23  November,  hears  the  latter's  report  on  the
grave  conditions  in  SVN,  then  approves  Phase  I  of  the  proposal.
He  gives  tentative  approval  to  Phase  II  but  makes  it  contingent
on  improvement  by  the  GVN.

3  Dec  1964 President  Confers  with  Taylor

In  a  last  meeting  with  Taylor,  the  President  stresses  the  need  to
get  action  from  the  GVN  before  Phase  II.

8  Dec  1964 Taylor  Sees  Huong

Taylor  presents  the  President's  requirements  to  Premier  Huong
who  promises  to  get  new  action  on  programs.

14  Dec  1964 BARREL  ROLL  Begins

BARREL  ROLL  armed  reconnaissance  in  Laos  begins  as  called
for  in  Phase  I  of  the  program  approved  1  December.

20  Dec  1 964 Military  Stage  Purge

The  struggle  within  the  MRC  takes  the  form  of  a  purge  by  the
younger  officers  Ky  and  Thi.  They  are  seeking  to  curb  the  power
of  the  Huong  Government.

21  Dec  1964 Khanh  Declares  Support  for  Purge

Khanh  declares  his  support  of  the  purge  and  opposes  the  US,  Tay-
lor in  particular.  He  states  he  will  not  "carry  out  the  policy  of  any
foreign  country."  Rumors  that  Taylor  will  be  declared  personna
non  grata  circulate.

24  Dec  1 964 US  Billet  in  Saigon  Bombed

The  VC  bomb  a  US  billet  in  Saigon  on  Christmas  Eve,  killing
several  Americans.  The  President  disapproves  military  recom-
mendations for  a  reprisal  against  the  North.

31  Dec  J  964 Embassy  Saigon  Msg  2010

Taylor  recommends  going  ahead  with  the  Phase  II  air  campaign
against  the  North  in  spite  of  the  political  instability  and  confusion


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  15

in  the  South.  He  now  argues  that  the  strikes  may  help  stabihze  the
situation.

6  Jan  1965 Bundy  Memo  to  SecState

In  a  memo  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  Wm  Bundy  urges  that  we  con-
sider some  additional  actions  short  of  Phase  II  of  the  December
plan  in  spite  of  the  chaos  is  Saigon.  It  is  the  only  possible  course
to  save  the  situation.

8  Jan  1965 ROK  Troops  go  to  SVN

South  Korea  sends  2,000  mihtary  advisors  to  South  Vietnam.

27  Jan  1965 McNaughton  Memo  to  SecDef

In  a  memo  to  SecDef,  McNaughton  underscores  the  importance  of
SEA  for  the  US  and  then  suggests  that  we  may  have  to  adopt
Phase  II  as  the  only  way  to  save  the  current  situation.

27  Jan  1965 Khanh  Ousts  Huong  Government

Khanh  and  the  younger  officers  oust  the  civilian  Huong  govern-
ment. Khanh  nominates  General  Oanh  to  head  an  interim  regime
the  next  day.

7  Feb  1 965 VC  Mortar  A  ttack  Pleiku

The  VC  launch  a  mortar  attack  on  a  US  billet  in  Pleiku  and  an
associated  helicopter  field.  Many  Americans  are  killed  and  helos
damaged.  The  President,  with  the  unanimous  recommendation  of
his  advisors,  authorizes  a  reprisal.

FLAMING  DART  I

The  reprisal  strikes  rnvolve  both  US  and  VNAF  planes.  A  second
mission  is  flown  the  following  day.

McGeorge  Bundy  Memo  to  the  President

In  an  influential  memo  to  the  President  after  a  fact-finding  trip
to  Vietnam,  Bundy  concludes  that  the  situation  can  only  be  righted
by  beginning  sustained  and  escalating  air  attacks  on  the  North
a  la  Phase  II.  He  had  telephoned  his  concurrence  in  the  FLAMING
DART  reprisal  to  the  President  from  Vietnam.

8  Feb  1 965 McNamara  Memo  to  JCS

In  a  memo  to  the  JCS,  McNamara  requests  the  development  of  a
limited  bombing  program  against  the  North.  The  JCS  later  submit
th^  "Eight-week  Program."

10  Feb  1965 VC  A  ttack  Qui  Nhon

Thumbing  their  noses  at  the  US  reprisal,  the  VC  attack  a  US  billet
in  Qui  Nhon  and  kill  23.

11  Feb  1965 FLA  MING  DART  II

The  second  reprisal  strikes  authorized  by  the  President  attack  tar-
gets in  the  North.

18  Feb  1965 Coup  Fails,  but  Khanh  Ousted

A  coup  against  the  new  Premier,  Quat,  fails  when  the  Armed
Forces  Council  intervenes.  They  seize  the  opportunity  to  remove
Khanh  and  he  is  forced  to  leave  the  country  several  days  later.


16 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

24  Feb  1965 ROLLING  THUNDER  Approved

The  President  approves  the  first  strikes  for  the  ROLLING
THUNDER  sustained,  escalating  air  campaign  against  the  DRV.

2  Mar  1 965 ROLLING  THUNDER  Begins

After  being  once  postponed,  the  first  ROLLING  THUNDER
strikes  take  place.

6  Mar  1965 Marines  to  DaNang

The  President  decides  to  send  two  US  Marine  Battalion  Landing
Teams  to  DaNang  to  take  up  the  base  security  function.  They
arrive  two  days  later.

14  Mar  1965 General  H.  K.  Johnson  Report

After  a  trip  to  Vietnam,  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  General  John-
son, recommends  a  21 -point  program  to  the  President.  Included
are  increased  attacks  on  the  North  and  removal  of  restrictions  on
these  missions.

29  Mar  1 965 US  Embassy  Bombed

Just  as  Ambassador  Taylor  is  leaving  for  a  policy  conference  in
Washington,  the  US  Embassy  in  Saigon  is  bombed  by  VC  terrorists
with  loss  of  life  and  extensive  property  damage.

31  Mar  1965 State  Memo  to  the  President

In  a  41 -point  non-military  recommendation  to  the  President,  State
elaborates  on  a  Taylor  proposal.

/  Apr  1965 President  Meets  With  NSC  and  Taylor

At  a  meeting  with  Taylor  and  the  NSC  Principals,  the  President
approves  the  41 -point  nan-military  proposal,  plus  General  John-
son's 21 -point  proposal.  In  addition,  he  decides  to  send  two  more
Marine  battalions  and  an  air  wing  to  Vietnam  and  to  authorize
an  active  combat  role  for  these  forces.  He  also  authorizes  18,000-
20,000  more  support  forces.

2  Apr  1965 McCone  Dissents  from  1  Apr  Decisions

In  a  memo  to  SecState,  SecDef,  and  Ambassador  Taylor,  CIA
Director  John  McCone  takes  exception  to  the  decision  to  give  US
troops  a  ground  role.  It  is  not  justified  unless  we  take  radically
stronger  measures  against  North  Vietnam.

6  Apr  1965 N SAM  288

NSAM  288  promulgates  the  decisions  of  the  1  April  meeting.

7  Apr  1 965 President's  Johns  Hopkins  Speech

The  President,  in  a  speech  at  John  Hopkins,  offers  unconditional
talks  with  the  DRV  plus  help  in  rebuilding  after  the  war  if  they
will  cease  aggression.

8  Apr  1965 Pham  Van  Dong  Announces  4  Points

DRV  Foreign  Minister,  Pham  Van  Dong,  announces  his  four
points  for  a  Vietnam  settlement.  They  are  a  defiant,  unyielding
repudiation  of  Johnson's  offer.

15  Apr  1 965 State  Department  Msg  2332

McGeorge  Bundy  informs  Taylor  that  further  increments  of  troops
are  being  considered,  plus  use  of  US  Army  civil  affairs  personnel.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  17

17  Apr  1965 Embassy  Saigon  Msg  3419

Taylor  takes  angry  exception  to  the  proposal  to  increase  troops
and  to  introduce  military  civil  affairs  personnel  into  the  provinces.
He  did  not  think  he  had  agreed  on  1  April  to  a  land  war  in  Asia.

20  Apr  1965 Honolulu  Conference

In  a  hastily  called  conference,  McNamara  informs  Taylor  in  detail
of  the  new  policy  directions  and  "brings  him  along."  An  attempt
is  made  to  mollify  him.

I.  NSAM-273

A. NSAM-273— THE  AFTERMATH  OF  DIEM

NSAM  273  of  26  November  1963  came  just  four  days  after  the  assassination
of  President  Kennedy  and  less  than  a  month  after  the  assassination  of  the  Ngo
brothers  and  their  replacement  by  the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  (MRC).
NSAM  273  was  an  interim,  don't  rock-the-boat  document.  Its  central  significance
was  that  although  the  two  assassinations  had  changed  many  things,  U.S.  policy
proposed  to  remain  substantially  the  same.  In  retrospect,  it  is  unmistakably  clear,
but  it  was  certainly  not  unmistakably  clear  at  that  time,  that  this  was  a  period
of  crucial  and  accelerated  change  in  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  NSAM  273
reflected  the  general  judgment  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam  that  had  gained  official
acceptance  during  the  previous  period,  most  recently  and  notably  during  the
visit  of  Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  to  Vietnam  in  late  September
of  that  year.

This  generally  sanguine  appraisal  had  been  the  basis  for  the  recommendation
in  that  report  to  establish  a  program  to  train  Vietnamese  to  carry  out,  by  the
end  of  1965,  the  essential  functions  then  performed  by  U.S.  military  personnel
— by  which  time  "it  should  be  possible  to  withdraw  the  bulk  of  U.S.  personnel."
As  an  immediate  gesture  in  this  direction,  the  report  recommended  that  "the
Defense  Department  should  announce  in  the  very  near  future,  presently  pre-
pared plans  to  withdraw  one  thousand  U.S.  military  personnel  by  the  end  of
1963."  The  latter  recommendation  was  acted  upon  the  same  day  (2  October
1963)  by  making  it  part  of  a  White  House  statement  of  U.S.  Policy  on  Vietnam.
This  White  House  statement  included  the  following  pronuncement.

Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  reported  their  judgment  that
the  major  part  of  the  U.S.  military  task  can  be  completed  by  the  end  of
1965,  although  there  may  be  a  continuing  requirement  tor  a  limited  number
of  U.S.  training  personnel.  They  reported  that  by  the  end  of  this  year  the
U.S.  program  for  training  Vietnamese  should  have  progressed  to  the  point
where  one  thousand  U.S.  personnel  assigned  to  South  Vietnam  can  be
withdrawn.

The  visit  of  the  Secretart'  of  Defense  and  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  to
Saigon  at  the  end  of  September  was  followed  by  the  report  to  the  President  in
early  October  and  agreements  reached  with  the  President  at  the  White  House
early  in  October  following  the  Diem  coup,  a  special  meeting  on  Vietnam  was
held  at  CINCPAC  headquarters  on  20  November.  Although  this  Honolulu  meet-
ing was  marked  by  some  concern  over  the  administrative  dislocation  that  had
resulted  from  the  coup  of  three  weeks  before,  the  tone  remained  one  of  optimism


18 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

along  the  lines  of  the  October  2  report  to  the  President.  Ambassador  Lodge  took
note  of  what  he  called  the  "political  fragility''  of  the  new  regime,  but  he  was  on
the  whole  optimistic,  and  even  mentioned  that  the  statement  on  U.S.  military
withdrawal  was  having  a  continued  ''tonic"  effect  on  the  Republic  of  Vietnam
(RVN).  General  Harkins  in  his  report  mentioned  a  sharp  increase  in  Viet  Cong
(VC)  incidents  right  after  the  coup,  but  added  that  these  had  dropped  to  normal
within  a  week,  and  that  there  had,  moreover,  been  compensating  events  such  as
additional  Montagnards  coming  out  of  the  hills  to  get  government  protection.
All  in  all  there  was  some  uneasiness,  perhaps,  about  unknown  effects  of  the  coup,
but  nothing  was  said  to  suggest  that  any  serious  departure  was  contemplated  from
the  generally  optimistic  official  outlook  of  late  September  and  early  October.  And
so,  with  reference  to  the  statements  of  October  2,  NSAM  273  repeated:

The  objectives  of  the  United  States  with  respect  to  the  withdrawal  of  U.S.
military  personnel  remain  as  stated  in  the  White  House  statement  of  Oc-
tober 2,  1963.

Before  examining  further  the  background  of  NSAM  273 — especially  the  ap-
praisals of  the  Vietnam  situation  that  it  reflected — it  is  well  to  review  some  of
the  main  provisions  of  that  policy  statement  of  26  November  1963.

NSAM  273  was  not  comprehensive,  as  the  McNamara-Taylor  report  of  2
October  (discussed  below)  had  been,  nor  as  NSAM  288  was  later  to  be.  Mainly
it  served  to  indicate  continuance  by  the  new  President  of  policies  already  agreed
upon,  and  to  demonstrate  full  support  by  the  United  States  of  the  new  govern-
ment of  Vietnam  (GVN).  Both  military  and  economic  programs,  it  was  empha-
sized, should  be  maintained  at  levels  as  high  as  those  in  the  time  of  the  Diem
regime.  In  addition,  there  was  an  unusual  Presidential  exhortation — reflecting
the  internal  U.S.  dispute  over  policy  concerning  Diem  and  Nhu  that  had  made
embarrassing  headlines  in  October — that:

The  President  expects  that  all  senior  officers  of  the  government  will  move
energetically  to  insure  the  full  unity  of  support  for  established  U.S.  policy
in  South  Vietnam.  Both  in  Washington  and  in  the  field,  it  is  essential  that
the  government  be  unified.  It  is  of  particular  importance  that  express  or
implied  criticism  of  officers  of  other  branches  be  assiduously  avoided  in  all
contacts  with  the  Vietnamese  government  and  with  the  press.

NSAM  273  was  specifically  programatic  so  far  as  SVN  was  concerned  only
in  directing  priority  of  effort  to  the  Delta.

(5)  We  should  concentrate  our  efforts,  and  insofar  as  possible  we  should
persuade  the  government  of  South  Vietnam  to  concentrate  its  effort,  on
the  critical  situation  in  the  Mekong  Delta.  This  concentration  should
include  not  only  military  but  political,  economic,  social,  educational  and
informational  effort.  We  should  seek  to  turn  the  tide  not  only  of  battle
but  of  belief,  and  we  should  seek  to  increase  not  only  the  controlled  ham-
lets but  the  productivity  of  this  area,  especially  where  the  proceeds  can
be  held  for  the  advantage  of  anti-Communist  forces.

In  general,  the  policies  expressed  by  NSAM  273  were  responsive  to  the  older
philosophy  of  our  intervention  there,  which  was  that  the  central  function  of  the
U.S.  effort  was  to  help  the  South  Vietnamese  to  help  themselves  because  only  if


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  19

they  did  the  major  job  themselves  could  that  job  in  reality  be  done  at  all.  We
would  assist  stabilization  of  the  new  regime  and  head  it  in  that  direction.

(3)  It  is  a  major  interest  of  the  United  States  government  that  the  present
provisional  government  of  South  Vietnam  should  be  assisted  in  con-
solidating itself  in  holding  and  developing  increased  public  support.

Definition  of  the  central  task  in  South  Vietnam  as  that  of  winning  the  hearts
and  minds  of  the  people  and  of  gaining  for  the  GVN  the  support  of  the  people
had  been  the  central  consideration  in  the  late  summer  and  early  fall  of  what  to
do  about  Diem  and  Nhu.  The  argument  concerning  the  Diem  government  cen-
tered on  the  concept  that  the  struggle  in  South  Vietnam  could  not  be  won  with-
out the  support  of  the  South  Vietnamese  people  and  that  under  the  Diem  regime
— especially  because  of  the  growing  power  and  dominance  of  Nhu — the  essential
popular  base  was  beyond  reach.  In  the  2  October  report  to  the  President  as  well
as  in  the  discussions  later  at  Honolulu  on  20  November  this  theme  was  prominent.
The  U.S.  could  not  win  the  struggle,  only  the  Vietnamese  could  do  that.  For
instance,  in  the  report  to  the  President  of  2  October,  there  were  these  words  in
the  section  on  "the  U.S.  military  advisory  and  support  effort."

We  may  all  be  proud  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  U.S.  military  advisory  and
support.  With  few  exceptions,  U.S.  military  advisors  report  excellent  rela-
tions with  their  Vietnamese  counterparts,  whom  they  characterize  as  proud
and  willing  soldiers.  The  stiffening  and  exemplary  effect  of  U.S.  behavior
and  attitudes  has  had  an  impact  which  is  not  confined  to  the  war  effort,  but
which  extends  deeply  into  the  whole  Vietnamese  way  of  doing  things.
The  U.S.  advisory  effort,  however,  cannot  assure  ultimate  success.  This  is  a
Vietnamese  war  and  the  country  and  the  war  must  in  the  end  be  run  solely
by  the  Vietnamese.  It  will  impair  their  independence  and  development  of
their  initiative  if  we  leave  our  advisors  in  place  beyond  the  time  they  are
really  needed  .  .  .  [emphasis  supplied]

Policy  concerning  aid  to  the  Vietnamese  may  be  considered  to  range  between
two  polar  extremes.  One  extreme  would  be  our  doing  almost  everything  diflicult
for  the  Vietnamese,  and  the  other  would  consist  of  limiting  our  own  actions  to
provision  of  no  more  than  material  aid  and  advice  while  leaving  everything  im-
portant to  be  done  by  the  Vietnamese  themselves.  Choice  of  a  policy  at  any  point
on  this  continuum  reflects  a  judgment  concerning  the  basic  nature  of  the  prob-
lem; i.e.  to  what  extent  political  and  to  what  extent  military;  to  what  extent
reasonable  by  political  means  and  to  what  extent  resolvable  by  military  means
even  by  outsiders.  But  in  this  case  the  choice  of  policy  also  reflected  confidence
that  success  was  being  achieved  by  the  kind  and  level  of  effort  that  had  already
been  devoted  to  this  venture.  The  policy  of  NSAM  273  was  predicated  on  such
confidence.  It  constituted  by  its  reference  to  the  2  October  statement  an  explicit
anticipation,  with  tentative  time  phases  expressly  stated,  of  the  assumption  by
the  Vietnamese  of  direct  responsibility  for  doing  all  the  important  things  them-
selves sometime  in  1965,  the  U.S.  thereafter  providing  only  material  aid  and
non-participating  advice  at  the  end  of  that  period.  That  optimism  was  explicit
in  the  report  to  the  President  of  2  October  wherein  the  conclusion  of  the  section
on  "The  US  Military  Advisory  and  Support  Effort"  consisted  of  this  paragraph:

Acknowledging  the  progress  achieved  to  date,  there  still  remains  the  question
of  when  the  final  victory  can  be  obtained.  If,  by  victory,  we  mean  the  reduc-


20 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

tion  of  the  insurgency  to  something  little  more  than  sporadic  banditry  in
outlying  districts,  it  is  the  view  of  the  vast  majority  of  military  commanders
consulted  that  success  may  be  achieved  in  the  I,  II,  and  III  Corps  area  by
the  end  of  CY  1964.  Victory  in  IV  Corps  will  take  longer — at  least  well  into
1965.  These  estimates  assume  that  the  political  situation  does  not  significantly
impede  the  effort,  [emphasis  supplied]

B. FIRST  REAPPRAISALS  OF  THE  SITUATION
IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

The  caveat  given  expression  in  the  last  sentence  of  the  conclusions  cited  above
offered  an  escape  clause,  but  it  was  clearly  not  employed  as  a  basis  for  planning
and  for  programming.  It  was  not  emphasized,  and  the  lack  of  emphasis  was
consistent  with  the  general  tone  of  optimism  in  the  report  as  a  whole.  This  general
optimism  in  fact  reflected  the  judgments  preferred  by  most  of  the  senior  officials
upon  whom  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  had
principally  relied  for  advice.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  optimism  was  scarcely
consistent  with  the  grave  apprehension  with  which  the  political  situation  was
viewed  at  the  time.

Ever  since  the  Buddhist  crisis  began  in  early  summer,  the  fear  had  been  felt
at  the  highest  U.S.  poHcy  levels  that  the  explosiveness  and  instability  of  the
political  situation  in  Vietnam  might  undermine  completely  our  efforts  there.  This
apprehension  had  been  the  reason  why  the  President  first  dispatched  the  Menden-
hall-Krulak  mission  to  Vietnam  in  early  September,  and  then,  a  fortnight  later,
sent  the  McNamara-Taylor  mission.  The  political  crisis  existing  in  Vietnam  was
indeed  a  subject  of  great  concern  at  the  very  time  of  the  latter  visit.  During  this
visit  a  decision  was  made  that  a  proposed  Presidential  letter  of  remonstrance  to
Diem  for  his  repressive  policies  concerning  the  Buddhists  was  tactically  unwise
and  that,  instead,  a  letter  over  the  signature  of  the  Joint  Chiefs,  ostensibly  di-
rected primarily  to  the  military  situation,  should  be  delivered  to  Diem  carrying
a  somewhat  modified  expression  of  protest.  That  letter  dated  October  1  was
delivered  to  Diem  on  October  2  and  included  these  judgments:

Now,  as  Secretary  McNamara  has  told  you,  a  serious  doubt  hangs  over  our
hopes  for  the  future.  Can  we  win  together  in  the  face  of  the  reaction  to  the
measures  taken  by  your  government  against  the  Buddhists  and  the  students?
As  a  military  man  I  would  say  that  we  can  win  provided  there  are  no  fur-
ther political  setbacks.  The  military  indicators  are  still  generally  favorable
and  can  be  made  more  so  by  actions  readily  within  the  power  of  your  gov-
ernment. If  you  allow  me,  I  would  mention  a  few  of  the  military  actions
which  I  believe  necessary  for  this  improvement.

And,  in  closing  the  letter  the  CJCS  expressed  himself  in  these  words:

In  closing,  Mr.  President,  may  I  give  you  my  most  important  overall  im-
pression? Up  to  now  the  battle  against  the  Viet  Cong  had  seemed  endless;
no  one  has  been  willing  to  set  a  date  for  its  successful  conclusion.  After
talking  to  scores  of  officers,  Vietnamese  and  American,  I  am  convinced  that
the  Viet  Cong  insurgency  in  the  North  and  Center  can  be  reduced  to  little
more  than  sporadic  incidents  by  the  end  of  1964.  The  Delta  will  take  longer
but  should  be  completed  by  the  end  of  1965.  But  for  these  predictions  to
be  valid,  certain  conditions  must  be  met.  Your  government  should  be  pre-
pared to  energize  all  agencies,  military  and  civil,  to  a  higher  output  of  ac-
tivity than  up  to  now.  Ineffective  commanders  and  province  officials  must


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  21

be  replaced  as  soon  as  identified.  Finally,  there  should  be  a  restoration  of
domestic  tranquility  on  the  homefront  if  political  tensions  are  to  be  allayed
and  external  criticism  is  to  abate.  Conditions  are  needed  for  the  creation  of
an  atmosphere  conducive  to  an  effective  campaign  directed  at  the  objectives,
vital  to  both  of  us,  of  defeating  the  Viet  Cong  and  of  restoring  peace  to
your  country.

This  letter  was  a  policy  instrument,  of  course,  rather  than  exclusively  an  ex-
pression of  an  appraisal.  As  a  matter  of  tactics  it  was  softened  considerably  from
the  first  proposed  letter  which  was  to  say  that  the  United  States  would  consider
disassociating  itself  from  the  Vietnam  Government  and  discontinue  support  un-
less the  GVN  altered  its  repressive  policies.  It  is  cited  here  mainly  to  indicate
the  concern,  made  explicit  by  the  senior  members  of  the  U.S.  Mission  in  late
September,  concerning  the  possible  effect  upon  military  effectiveness  of  the  po-
litical unrest.

About  a  week  later,  in  testimony  before  the  House  Committee  on  Foreign
Affairs,  Secretary  McNamara  repeated  the  theme  that  the  military  situation  was
good,  that  the  political  situation  was  bad,  that  the  political  situation  could  have
a  bad  effect  on  the  military  situation,  but  it  had  not  had  such  a  bad  effect  yet.

Following  an  appraisal  of  the  military  situation  by  Gen.  Taylor,  Chairman
Morgan  asked  the  SecDef  "Mr.  Secretary,  then  you  feel  and  I  am  sure  the
General  feels,  that  the  military  effort  is  going  very  well?"  To  this  the  SecDef's
response  was :

Secretary  McNamara.  Yes  we  do.  I  think  Gen.  Taylor  has  emphasized
and  I  would  like  to  emphasize  again,  that  while  we  believe  the  serious  po-
litical unrest  has  not  to  date  seriously  and  adversely  affected  the  military
effort,  it  may  do  so  in  the  future,  if  it  continues.

Chairman  Morgan.  General,  or  Mr.  Secretary,  could  we  say  that  the
military  situation  is  moving  <vell,  but  the  political  situation  is  not — the  po-
litical situation  is  bad?

Secretary  McNamara.  Yes,  I  think  that  is  a  fair  summary.

Chairman  Morgan.  Mr.  Secretary,  then,  from  your  observations,  both
you  and  the  General,  from  the  8  days  you  spent  in  the  country,  you  can't
see  any  deterioration  in  the  military  effort  of  SVN  because  of  the  political
situation  in  the  country?

Secretary  McNamara.  This  is  a  fair  statement.

Chairman  Morgan.  You  feel  that  the  Vietnamese  Army  is  moving  ahead
and  is  cooperating  with  our  forces  in  there?

Secretary  McNamara.  Yes.  Certain  of  the  affairs  of  the  Vietnamese  Army
have  been -affected  by  the  political  unrest  of  recent  months.  As  Gen.  Taylor
pointed  out,  some  of  their  relatives  have  been  arrested  and  subjected  to  a
violation  of  their  personal  freedoms  and  liberties,  and  undoubtedly  this  has
tended  to  turn  some  of  the  officers  away  from  support  of  their  government.

But  they  are  strongly  motivated  by  the  desire  to  resist  the  Communist
encroachment  .  .  .  and  their  anti-Communist  feelings  are  stronger  than
their  distrust  of  government.  So  to  date  there  has  been  no  reduction  in  the
effectiveness  of  their  military  operations.

There  is  no  record  that  this  express  recognition  that  the  bad  political  situation
might  affect  the  military  capability  was  considered  a  contingency  to  be  foreseen
in  the  program,  or  that  anyone  suggested  it  should  be.


22 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

Nearly  four  months  later  Secretary  McNamara  had  an  explanation  to  offer
concerning  his  view  of  the  situation  at  the  time  of  this  testimony.  Appearing  once
more  in  Executive  Session  to  testify  on  the  authorization  bill  for  the  fiscal  year
1965,  before  the  House  Committee  on  Armed  Services  on  27  January  1964,  the
Secretary  was  asked  by  Mr.  Chamberman  of  the  House  Committee  to  explain
why

his  press  conference  comments  on  the  situation  the  day  before  were  clearly
more  optimistic  than  those  in  his  Congressional  statement.  Both  were  more
optimistic  than  recent  news  reports  from  Viet  Nam.

In  response,  the  Secretary  went  back  to  his  Joint  Report  to  the  President  of  2
October,  to  cite  again  the  caveat  which  had  been  expressed  as  follows.

The  political  situation  in  South  Viet  Nam  remains  deeply  serious.  The
United  States  has  made  clear  its  continuing  opposition  to  any  repressive
actions  in  South  Viet  Nam.  While  such  actions  have  not  yet  significantly
affected  the  military  effort,  they  could  do  so  in  the  future.

In  further  amplification  of  this  point  the  Secretary  almost  claimed,  in  effect,  to
have  foreseen  and  to  have  forecast  the  degradation  of  capability  that  it  was  then
clear  (in  January  1964)  had  occurred  and,  had,  in  fact  continued  ever  since
November.  These  were  his  words,

We  didn't  say — but  I  think  you  could  have  predicted  that  what  we  had  in
mind  was — that  ( 1 )  either  Diem  would  continue  his  repressive  measures  and
remain  in  power,  in  which  case  he  would  continue  to  lose  public  support
and,  since  that  is  the  foundation  of  successful  counter  guerilla  operations,
the  military  operations  would  be  adversely  affected,  or  (2)  alternatively  he
would  continue  his  repressive  measures  and  build  so  much  resistance  that
he  would  be  thrown  out,  then  a  coup  would  take  place,  and  during  the
period  of  reorganization  following  .  .  .  there  would  be  instability  and  un-
certainty and  military  operations  would  be  adversely  affected.

No  fully  persuasive  explanation  has  been  discovered  of  the  apparent  dis-
crepancy between  this  foresight  concerning  the  possible  ill  effects  of  political
instability  and  the  generally  optimistic  prognosis  and  the  program  based  upon
that  optimism.  The  Secretary  had  had  no  enthusiasm  for  the  coup.  Possibly  he
adjusted,  though  reluctantly,  to  the  idea  and  decided  that  the  political  difficulties
would  either  be  overcome  by  means  he  did  not  feel  it  was  his  duty  to  explore,
or  would  not  be  serious  or  lasting  enough  to  be  critical.  However,  all  of  the
thinking  then  in  vogue  about  counterinsurgency  insisted  that  favorable  political
circumstances  were  essential  to  success.  Therefore,  unless  it  was  assumed  that
favorable  political  circumstances  could  be  brought  about,  the  counterinsurgency
effort  was  bound  to  fail.  So  long  as  the  adverse  case  was  not  proved  one  had  to
assume  ultimately  favorable  political  conditions  because  it  was  unthinkable  to
stop  trying.

Even  before  NSAM  273  was  adopted,  evidence  began  to  accumulate  that  the
optimistic  assumptions  underlying  it  were  suspect.  First,  there  was  unmistakable
and  accumulating  evidence  that,  in  the  period  immediately  after  the  coup,  the
situation  had  deteriorated  in  many  places  as  a  direct  result  of  the  coup.  Then
came  increasing  expression  of  a  judgment  that  this  deterioration  was  not  merely
an  immediate  and  short  lived  phenomenon,  but  something,  rather,  that  continued
well  after  the  worst  administrative  confusions  immediately  after  the  coup  had


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  23

been  reduced.  Finally,  the  impression,  developed  in  many  quarters,  and  eventually
spread  to  all,  that  before  the  coup,  the  situation  had  been  much  more  adverse
than  we  had  recognized  officially  at  the  time.  Before  the  end  of  December,  we
decided  to  institute  a  system  of  covert  checks  on  the  accuracy  of  our  basic  in-
telligence— a  large  part  of  which  came  from  Vietnamese  sources.  (There  was
suspicion  that  the  interests  of  these  officials  were  often  served  by  reporting  to  us
or  to  their  superiors  within  the  GVN  what  we  or  the  GVN  high  officials  wanted
to  hear.)  As  December  and  January  and  February  passed,  the  situation  reports
trended  consistently  downward,  the  accumulating  evidence  seemed  to  indicate
quite  clearly  that  appreciation  of  setbacks  and  of  adverse  developments  was
regularly  belated.  The  result  was  that  programs  tended  commonly  to  be  premised
upon  a  more  optimistic  appraisal  of  the  situation  than  was  valid  for  the  time
when  they  were  adopted,  whether  or  not  they  were  valid  for  an  earlier  period.

Judgments  of  the  trend  of  events  in  Vietnam  and  of  the  progress  of  our  pro-
gram had  long  been  a  subject  of  controversy,  both  public  and  within  the  councils
of  government.  That  there  had  been  an  undercurrent  of  pessimism  concerning  the
situation  in  Vietnam  was  no  secret  to  the  responsible  officials  who  visited  Vietnam
in  September  and  who  reported  to  the  President  on  2  October,  or  to  the  larger
group  that  convened  at  CINCPAC  HQ  on  20  November.  Most  of  the  qualifica-
tions in  their  minds  related  to  imponderables  of  the  political  situation,  which  it
was  always  hoped  and  assumed  would  be  successfully  resolved.  The  focus  of  the
disagreement  had  generally  been  the  policies  of  Diem  and  Nhu  especially  with
respect  to  the  Buddhists.  During  the  summer  of  1963,  disagreement  over  the
state  of  affairs  in  Vietnam  had  not  only  been  aired  in  closed  official  councils,  but
had  flared  into  open  controversy  in  the  public  press  in  a  manner  that  seemed  to
many  to  be  detrimental  to  the  U.S.  It  was  possible  to  get  directly  conflicting
views  from  the  experts.  One  of  the  better  known  illustrations  of  this  bewildering
diversity  of  opinions  among  those  with  some  claim  to  know  is  the  instance  re-
counted by  both  Schlesinger  and  fiilsman  of  the  reports  to  President  Kennedy
on  10  September  1963  by  General  Victor  Krulak  and  Mr.  Joseph  A.  Mendenhall
upon  their  return  from  their  special  mission  to  Vietnam.  General  Krulak  was  a
specialist  in  counterinsurgency  and  Mr.  Mendenhall  had,  not  long  before,  com-
pleted a  tour  of  duty  in  Saigon  as  Deputy  Chief  of  Mission  under  Ambassador
Durbrow.  After  hearing  them  both  out  (with  Krulak  painting  the  rosy  picture
and  Mendenhall  the  gloomy  one),  the  President,  in  the  words  of  the  Hilsman
account,  "looked  quizzically  from  one  to  the  other.  You  two  did  visit  the  same
country,  didn't  you?"

Much  of  the  disagreement  concerning  the  progress  of  the  anti-Vict  Cong
effort  during  the  middle  of  1963  was  related  intimately  to  issues  posed  by  the
Buddhist  revolt.  Where  there  was  pessimism  or  scepticism  about  the  progress  of
the  war  in  general  or  the  success  of  the  pacification  program,  the  attitude  was
generally  associated  with  the  judgment  that  Diem  and  Nhu  were  not  admin-
istering affairs  right  and  were  alienating  rather  than  winning  the  support  of  the
masses  of  South  Vietnamese  people.  Aside  from  Diem  and  Nhu  and  the  Buddhist
revolt,  the  major  center  of  controversy  was  the  situation  in  the  Delta.  The  fact
that  NSAM  273  called  for  priority  effort  in  the  Delta  rellectcd  oflicial  recognition
that  the  situation  in  the  Delta  demanded  it.  The  ground  work  for  this  was  laid
during  the  McNamara-Taylor  visit,  but  recognition  of  the  serious  problem  there
had  come  slowly  and  not  without  controversy.

A  public  controversy  on  the  subject  was  touched  off  by  an  article  filed  in  Saigon
on  15  August  1963  by  David  Halberstam  of  the  New  York  Times.  The  Halber-
stam  article  said  that  the  RVN  military  situation  in  the  Delta  had  deteriorated


24 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

seriously  over  the  past  year,  and  was  getting  increasingly  worse.  The  VC  had
been  increasing  greatly  in  number,  were  in  possession  of  more  and  better  arms
and  had  larger  stores  of  them,  and  their  boldness  to  operate  in  large  units — up
to  600  or  even  1,000  men — had  become  marked.  The  VC  weapon  losses  were
down,  and  the  GVN  weapon  losses  were  up.  U.S.  military  men  and  civilian  of-
ficials in  the  field,  according  to  this  article,  were  reported  to  be  very  apprehensive
of  the  effect  of  all  this  upon  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  and  the  whole  future
of  GVN  control  in  the  Delta  was  in  doubt.  But,  it  was  hinted  strongly,  higher
echelon  authorities  were  unwilling  to  perceive  the  dangers.  "Some  long-time  ob-
servers are  comparing  official  American  optimism  about  the  Delta  to  the  French
optimism  that  preceded  France's  route  from  Indochina  in  1954.  They  warn  of
high-level  self-deception."

The  official  refutation  of  the  Halberstam  article,  prepared  for  the  Secretary  of
Defense  and  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  bv  Sz\CSA,  categorically  denied
everything.  Based  upon  what  it  termed  "the  most  reliable  and  accurate  data  avail-
able from  both  classified  and  unclassified  sources"  the  analysis  showed,  in  the
language  of  its  summary,  that  "the  military  situation  is  improving  throughout
the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  not  as  rapidly  in  the  Mekong  Delta  as  in  the  North,
but  improving  markedly  none  the  less.  The  picture  is  precisely  the  opposite  of
the  one  painted  by  Mr.  Halberstam."  In  the  body  of  the  refutation,  13  of  the
principle  charges  in  the  Halberstam  article  were  analyzed,  one-by-one,  and  bat-
tered by  an  array  of  percentages,  statistics  presented  both  tabularly  and  in  graphs,
and  all  of  the  numbers  were  very  impressive  and  persuasive  if  taken  at  face  value.
They  showed,  for  instance,  that  the  VC  armed  attacks  and  VC  initiated  incidents
(not  armed),  in  mid-summer  1963  were  below  the  1962  average,  that  the  average
net  weekly  loss  of  GVN  weapons  to  the  VC  had  fallen  from  62  in  1961  to  12  in
1962  to  only  6  of  1963,  and  that  the  rate  of  both  company-sized  and  battalion-
sized  VN  attacks  had  fallen  markedly,  in  1963  from  the  1962  level.

Generalizations  about  how  the  different  groups,  agencies,  and  echelons  sided
on  the  issue  of  the  Vietnam  situation  tend  to  oversimplify  because  however  they
are  made,  there  are  exceptions.  Most  of  the  senior  officers  in-field  in  the  direct
line  of  operational  responsibility  tended  to  accept  the  more  optimistic  interpreta-
tion. Examples  in  this  category  would  include  CINCPAC  (Admiral  Felt),
COMUSMACV  (General  Harkins),  Ambassador  Nolting  (who  was  soon  to  be
replaced,  however,  by  Ambassador  Lodge,  who  tended  to  be  less  optimistic),  and
CIA  Station  Chief  Richardson.  Nolting  and  Richardson  had  been  charged  to
develop  a  close  and  friendly  relationship  with  Diem,  and  this  involved  necessarily
a  special  sort  of  sympathy  for  his  outlook.  The  lives  of  most  senior  officers
charged  with  operating  responsibility  have  been  pointed  to  giving  leadership  in
situations  of  stress.  This  leadership  includes  setting  an  example  of  high  morale,
by  their  own  conduct,  to  encourage  enthusiastic  esprit  de  corps  among  subordi-
nates, and  to  project  an  unfailing  image  of  confidence  to  the  outside  world.  Such
men  are  likely  to  find  it  almost  impossible  to  recognize  and  to  acknowledge
existence  of  a  situation  seriously  adverse  to  their  assigned  mission.  It  is  contrary
to  their  lifetime  training  never  to  be  daunted.  This  characteristic  makes  them
good  leaders  for  difficult  missions  but  it  does  not  especially  qualify  them  for
rendering  dispassionate  judgments  of  the  feasibility  of  missions  or  of  the  progress
they  are  making.  Admiral  Felt  and  General  Harkins  in  the  field,  and  General
Krulak  in  Washington,  appear  to  have  been  more  the  giing  ho  type  of  leaders  of
men  in  combat  situations  than  the  cautious  reflective  weighers  of  complex  cir-
cumstances and  feasibilities,  including  political  complications.

Officials  and  agencies  in  Washington  who  depended  directly  or  primarily  upon


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  25

these  officers  for  an  understanding  of  the  situation  tended,  very  naturally,  to  put
their  greatest  faith  in  the  judgment  of  those  in  the  field  who  were  administratively
responsible  and  who  had  access  to  the  most  comprehensive  official  reports  and
data.  If  there  were  disadvantages  in  the  position  of  these  people,  a  major  one  was
that  most  of  their  information  was  supplied  by  GVN  officials,  who  often  had  a
vested  interest  in  making  things  look  good.  Moreover,  the  U.S.  officials  in  posi-
tions of  operational  responsibility  had  a  professional  commitment  to  programs
which,  often,  they  had  had  a  hand  in  establishing.  This  normally  inhibited  them
from  giving  the  worst  interpretation  to  evidence  that  was  incomplete,  ambiguous
or  inconclusive — and  most  evidence  was  one  or  more  of  these.  Moreover,  the
public  relations  aspects  of  most  positions  of  operating  responsibility  make  it
seem  necessary  to  put  a  good  face  on  things  as  a  part  of  that  operating  responsi-
bihty.  The  morale  of  the  organization  seems  to  demand  it.  Finally,  the  intelligence
provided  on  an  official  basis  generally  followed  formats  devised  for  uniform
formal  compilation  and  standard  statistical  treatment.  All  along  the  line,  lower
echelons  were  judged,  rewarded  or  penalized  by  higher  echelons  in  terms  of  the
progress  revealed  by  the  reports  they  turned  in.  This  practice  encouraged  and
facilitated  feeding  unjustifiably  optimistic  data  into  the  reporting  machinery.

The  darker  view  was  easier  for  those  who  lacked  career  commitment  to  the
success  of  the  programs  in  the  form  in  which  they  had  been  adopted.  The  more
pessimistic  interpretations  were  generally  based,  also,  upon  sources  of  informa-
tion which  were  intimate,  personal,  out-of-channels,  and  with  non-official  per-
sonages. They  were  particularistic  rather  than  comprehensive,  intimate  and  in-
tuitive rather  than  formal,  impressionistic  rather  than  statistical.

Moreover,  some  of  the  principal  Cassandras  were  newsmen  whose  stories,
whether  correct  or  incorrect,  made  the  front  page  and  sometimes  even  the  head-
lines. This  suggested  a  vested  interest  in  what  for  one  reason  or  another  was
sensational.  Other  Cassandras  were,  military  advisors  of  junior  grades,  or  lesser
USOM  officers  especially  those  in  the  provinces,  whose  views  were  easy  to  dis-
count by  higher  officials  because,  however  familiar  the  junior  officers  might  be
with  local  acts  or  particular  details,  they  generally  lacked  knowledge  of  the
overall  picture.

There  was  unquestionable  ambivalence  in  U.S.  official  attitudes  concerning
progress  and  prospects.  Despite  the  repeatedly  expressed  qualifications  concern-
ing the  potentially  grave  effect  of  the  political  instability  in  Vietnam,  the  pro-
gramming and  policy  formulation,  as  already  noted,  was  without  qualification
based  on  optimistic  assumptions.  In  an  over-view  of  the  Vietnam  War  (1960-
1963)  prepared  by  SACSA  and  delivered  to  the  Secretary  shortly  alter  his  return
from  South  Vietnam,  the  mission's  assessment  of  military  progress  was  sum-
marized in  these  terms :

The  evidences  of  overall  military  progress  were  so  unmistakably  clear  that
the  mission,  acknowledging  the  implications  and  uncertainties  of  the  power
crisis  underway  in  Vietnam,  concluded  that  the  GVN  military  effort  had
achieved  a  momentum  of  progress  which  held  further  promise  of  ultimate
victory  over  the  Viet  Cong;  further,  that  victory  was  possible  within  reason-
able limits  of  time  and  investment  of  U.S.  resources.

The  high  priority  of  the  Delta  problem  was  recognized,  in  this  same  over-view,
with  the  statement  that  "the  mission  was  impressed  with  the  evidence  that  the
decisive  conflict  of  the  war  was  approaching  in  the  Mekong  Delta."  The  major
difficulty  there  was  identified  somewhat  euphemistically  as  due  to  the  fact  that


26 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

"the  mission  found  evidences  that  the  Government  of  Vietnam  had  overextended
its  hamlet  construction  program  in  these  southern  provinces."

Not  long  before  this,  however,  Michael  Forrestal  in  the  White  House  had
sent  to  Secretary  McNamara  a  copy  of  a  Second  Informal  Appreciation  of  the
Status  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  dated  1  September  1963,  and  prepared
by  USOM  Regional  Affairs  officers.  This  Appreciation  gave  province  by  province
summaries  that  were  far  from  encouraging  concerning  the  Delta.  In  addition  to
Long  An  and  Dinh  Tuong  provinces  which  were  the  worst,  it  was  said  of  Kien
Tuong  that

the  program  continues  to  be  slow  .  .  .  few  hamlets  are  completed  and  a
fraction  of  planned  militia  trained  ...  the  one  bright  spot  .  .  .  remains
the  Pri  Phap  area,  which  is,  however,  vulnerable  militarily  should  the  VC
decide  to  concentrate  their  efforts  against  it.  The  Chief  of  Province  .  .  .
we  feel  is  totally  unqualified.  Vinh  Binh,  although  the  hamlet  program  con-
tinued to  increase  in  numbers  ...  the  security  situation  deteriorated  in
July  and  August.  The  removal  of  a  recently  introduced  RVN  battalion
damaged  the  effort,  and  a  change  in  leadership  dislocated  projects  under-
way .  .  .  Nhi  Long  has  been  severely  threatened  in  August,  the  route  to
Vinh  Long  is  again  insecure  .  .  .  elsewhere  the  hamlet  program  appears  to
be  over-extended  and  with  insufficient  troop  support  is  under  serious  threat
in  former  VC  strongholds.  Security  in  southernmost  Long  Toan  District,  the
province  VC  haven,  continues  to  be  very  poor  .  .  .  Major  Thao,  an  ex-
tremely competent  leader,  .  .  .  was  replaced  in  late  July  .  .  .
Vinh  Long:  Although  most  signs  indicate  progress  .  .  .  evaluation  of  Vinh
Long  remains  largely  an  evaluation  of  Lt.  Col.  Phuoc,  Chief  of  Province
.  .  .  whose  idea  had  previously  led  him  to  construct  through  corvee  labor
kilometer  after  kilometer  of  useless  walls,  and  whose  insensitivity  to  the
population  had  led  to  considerable  popular  antipathy.  An  apparent  change
of  attitude  has  taken  place  .  .  .  and  Phuoc  now  says  that  the  strategic
hamlet  is  a  state  of  mind  rather  than  a  fortification.  Phuoc's  sincerity  and
commitment  to  the  program  are  still  problematical,  however,  as  is  public
acceptance  of  him  and  of  the  program  .  .  .  some  pessimists  feel  that  this
may  well  prove  ...  the  most  difficult  province  in  the  Delta  to  pacify.
Chuong  Thien:  The  Communists  still  control  most  of  the  people  and  land
in  Chuong  Thien  .  .  .  [the]  new  province  chief  .  .  .  has  been  evasive  and
has  shown  no  desire  really  to  cooperate  .  .  .  the  large  relocation  effort
.  .  .  risks  loss  of  the  province  to  the  VC  because  the  people  involved  have
been  alienated.

Ba  Xuyen:  Shortcoming  in  the  implementation  of  the  hamlet  program,  as
well  as  a  lack  of  confidence  in  the  province  chief  ...  led  to  the  recall  in
late  August  of  the  USOM  provincial  representative  and  possible  unofficial
suspension  of  USOM  ...  in  an  effort  to  build  statistics,  the  province  had
constructed  a  number  of  vulnerable  and  non-viable  hamlets.  There  has  been
a  forced  wholesale  relocation,  insufficiently  justified,  poorly  financed  .  .  .
numerous  occurrences  have  convinced  us  that  there  is  venality  .  .  .  and
lack  of  good  faith.  A  new  province  chief  (not  presently  in  prospect)  might
permit  progress  in  this  rich  and  important  area  ...  a  major  effort  to  gain
popular  support  for  government  is  needed  in  this  as  in  many  other  Deha
provinces.

An  Xuyen:  The  province  remains  under  VC  control  with  the  exception  of
a  handful  of  widely  separated  government  strong  points  ...  An  Xuyen,


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  27

comprising  much  of  the  enemy's  main  Delta  power  center,  is  a  primary
source  of  men,  money  and  supphes  for  the  Communists.

Whether  or  not  the  full  seriousness  of  the  situation  in  the  Delta  was  appreciated
at  the  time  of  the  McNamara-Taylor  mission  in  September  1963,  it  is  entirely
clear  that  the  Delta  was  recognized  as  a  high  priority  problem.  The  recommenda-
tions set  forth  in  their  joint  Report  to  the  President  of  2  October  called  for  "the
training  and  arming  of  hamlet  militia  at  an  accelerated  rate,  especially  in  the
Delta"  and  for  "a  consolidation  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  especially  in
the  Delta,  and  action  to  insure  that  in  the  future  strategic  hamlets  are  not  built
until  they  can  be  protected  and  until  civic  action  programs  can  be  introduced."
And  in  the  appraisal  of  overall  progress,  the  judgments  were  rendered  that

The  Delta  remains  the  toughest  area  of  all,  and  now  requires  top  priority  in
both  GVN  and  U.S.  efforts.  Approximately  40  percent  of  the  people  live
there;  the  area  is  rich  and  has  traditionally  resisted  central  authority;  it  is
the  center  of  Viet  Cong  strength — over  one-third  of  the  "hard-core"  are
found  there;  and  the  maritime  nature  of  the  terrain  renders  it  much  the  most
difficult  region  to  pacify.

During  the  Honolulu  meeting  of  20  November  when  Gen.  Harkins  presented
a  summary  of  the  situation  in  13  critical  provinces,  7  were  in  the  Delta.  Secretary
McNamara  in  a  detailed  discussion  on  that  occasion  of  the  situation  on  these
provinces  suggested  that  there  were  three  things  to  be  done  in  the  Delta:  (1)  to
get  the  Chieu  Hoi  program  moving;  (2)  to  get  the  fertilizer  program  going  in
order  to  irxrease  the  output  of  rice,  and  (3)  most  important,  to  improve  the
security  of  strategic  hamlets  by  arming  and  training  and  increasing  the  numbers
of  the  militia.  It  is  recorded  that  at  this  point  General  Taylor  made  a  suggestion
that  perhaps  we  needed  joint  U.S.-Vietnamese  province  teams  to  attack  problems
at  the  province  level  because  the  problems  were  in  fact  different  in  each  province.
This  latter  seems  worth  noting  in  view  of  the  emphasis  that  was  to  be  placed,
some  months  later,  upon  getting  more  Americans  into  a  supervisory  or  advisory
capacity  in  the  provincial  areas.

When  General  Harkins  presented  his  review  of  the  military  situation  at  this
meeting,  he  indicated  that  weapon  losses  were  quite  high,  particularly  in  Novem-
ber when  the  government  forces  lost  nearly  3  weapons  to  every  one  captured
from  the  VC.  The  losses  were  incurred  largely  by  the  Civil  Guard,  the  Self-
Defense  Corps  and  the  hamlet  militia.  It  was  also  indicated  at  the  meeting  that
the  greatest  single  difficulty  of  a  pacification  program  was  in  the  problem  of
security  in  the  hamlets.  The  assumptions  were  retained  that:  (1)  the  Com-
munist insurgency  would  be  brought  under  control  in  the  Northern  two-thirds
of  the  country  by  the  end  of  calendar  year  '64,  the  phase  down  of  the  RVNAF
could  be  started^at  the  beginning  of  calendar  year  1965  (instead  of  the  previous
estimate  of  calendar  year  '66);  and  this  resulted  in  a  reduction  from  previous
estimates  of  funding  for  the  RVNAF  (excluding  para-military  and  police)  as
follows:  (in  millions  of  dollars)


Fiscal  year  '65

Fiscal  year  '66

Fiscal  year  '67

Fiscal  year  '68

Fiscal  year  '69


225.2-213.3
225.5-197.4
143.5-131.2
122.7-119.7
121.9-119.5


28 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

While  those  from  Washington  who  were  attending  the  conference  at  Honolulu,
and  Ambassador  Lodge,  were  returning  to  Washington,  President  Kennedy  was
assassinated.  The  following  day,  on  23  November,  a  memorandum  was  prepared
to  guide  the  new  President  for  his  meeting  with  Ambassador  Lodge.  The  main
points  of  this  guidance  stressed  the  need  for  teamwork  within  this  U.S.  mission.

It  is  absolutely  vital  that  the  whole  of  the  country  team,  and  particularly
Ambassador  Lodge  and  General  Harkins,  work  in  close  harmony  and  with
full  consultation,  back-and-forth.  There  must  be  no  back-biting  or  sniping
at  low  levels  such  as  may  have  contributed  to  recent  news  stories  about
General  Harkins  being  out  of  favor  with  the  new  regime  .  .  .

C. FIRST  ACTIONS  ON  NSAM-273  AND  FIRST  MISGIVINGS

In  response  to  the  call  for  priority  of  effort  to  turn  the  tide  in  the  Delta,  an
additional  ARVN  division  was  shifted  to  the  Delta,  and  directives  were  issued
to  COMUSMACV  to  effect  an  increase  in  military  tempo  there,  especially  to
improve  tactics,  to  maintain  full  strength  in  combat  elements,  in  arming  and
training  hamlet  militia.  Along  with  this,  he  was  to  consolidate  strategic  hamlet
programs  to  bring  the  pace  of  construction  to  a  level  consistent  with  GVN
capabilities  both  to  provide  essential  protection  and  to  introduce  civic  action
programs.  AID  actions  to  increase  production  in  the  Delta  were  also  initiated  and
accelerated — fertilizer,  pesticides,  rice  seed,  the  hamlet  school  program  and
hamlet  medics,  generators  and  radio  sets,  etc.  USOM  had,  further,  conveyed  to
the  GVN  its  assurance  that,  subject  to  Congressional  appropriations,  the  U.S.
fully  intended  to  maintain  the  level  of  aid  previously  given  to  the  Diem  Govern-
ment.

Scarcely  more  than  a  week  after  the  formalization  of  NSAM  273  on  26  Novem-
ber 1963,  the  adverse  trend  of  events  that  previously  had  been  only  rumored
or  feared  moved  much  closer  to  being  acknowledged  to  be  an  unmistakable  and
inescapable  reality.  On  7  December  (Saigon  time).  Ambassador  Lodge  forwarded
a  report  of  USOM  provincial  representative  Young  on  the  situation  in  Long  An
province  as  of  6  Demember.  Part  of  that  report  was  as  follows:

( 1 )  The  only  progress  made  in  Long  An  province  during  the  month  of
November,  1963  has  been  by  the  Communist  Viet  Cong.  The  past  thirty
days  have  produced  a  day-by-day  elimination  of  US/Vietnamese  spon-
sored strategic  hamlets  and  the  marked  increase  in  Viet  Cong  influence,
military  operations,  physical  control  of  the  countryside  and  Communist
controlled  combat  hamlets.

(2)  At  the  end  of  September,  1963  province  officials  stated  that  219  strategic
hamlets  were  completed  and  met  the  6  criteria.  Effective  30  November
1963  this  figure  has  been  reduced  to  about  45  on  the  best  estimates  of
MAAG,  USOM  and  new  province  chief,  Major  Dao.  Twenty-seven
hamlets  were  attacked  in  November  compared  with  a  figure  of  77  for
June.  This  would  appear  to  be  an  improvement.  However,  the  explana-
tion is  a  simple  one:  so  many  strategic  hamlets  have  been  rendered  in-
effective by  the  Viet  Cong  that  only  27  were  worth  attacking  this
month  .  .  .

(4)  The  reason  for  this  unhappy  situation  is  the  failure  of  the  government  of
Vietnam  to  support  and  protect  the  hamlets.  The  concept  of  the  strategic
hamlet  called  for  a  self-defense  corps  capable  of  holding  off  enemy


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  29

attack  for  a  brief  period  until  regular  forces  (ARVN,  Civil  Guard,  or
SDC)  could  come  to  the  rescue.  In  hamlet  after  hamlet  this  assistance
never  came,  or  in  most  cases,  arrived  the  following  morning  during
daylight  hours  ...

(5)  Two  explanations  are  presented  for  the  lack  of  assistance:  (a)  there  are
not  sufficient  troops  to  protect  key  installations  and  district  headquarters
and  at  the  same  time  go  to  the  assistance  of  the  hamlet,  (b)  Both  official
orders  and  policy  prohibit  the  movement  of  troops  after  dark  to  go  to
the  assistance  of  hamlets  or  isolated  military  posts  .  .  .

(9)  The  strategic  hamlet  program  in  this  province  can  be  made  workable
and  very  effective  against  the  Viet  Cong.  But  help  must  come  immedi-
ately in  the  form  of  additional  troops  and  new  concepts  of  operation,
not  in  the  same  reheated  French  tactics  of  1954,  beefed  up  with  more
helicopters  and  tanks.  The  hamlets  must  be  defended  if  this  province
is  not  to  fall  under  complete  control  of  the  Viet  Cong  in  the  next  few
[material  missing]

(11)  See  also  General  Don's  statement  to  me  on  Long  An,  notably  his  state-
ment that  totally  useless  and  impractical  hamlets  were  built  with  forced
labor  so  that  grafters  would  receive  the  money  allocated  to  strategic
hamlets  .  .  .

(12)  I  am  asking  MACV  and  USOM  to  find  out  how  the  above  and  the
scandalous  conditions  described  by  General  Don  escaped  inspection.

This  report  on  Long  An  province  reached  Washington  about  the  same  time
that  a  Cabinet  level  meeting  at  the  Department  of  State  was  being  held  to  re-
view the  situation  in  Vietnam  and  discuss  possible  further  actions.  A  briefing
on  the  situation  was  presented,  on  behalf  of  the  Defense  Department  and  the
Secretary,  by  General  Krulak.  General  Krulak's  briefing  included  the  following
conclusions:

a.  The  new  GVN  shows  a  desire  to  respond  to  U.S.  advice  and  improve  its
military  effectiveness  and  has  the  capability  to  do  so.  Its  plans  are  basically
sound  but  it  is  in  a  state  of  organizational  turmoil  which  cannot  fail  to  affect
its  capabilities  adversely  for  the  short  term.

b.  The  VC  are  making  an  intensive  although  loosely  coordinated  effort  to
increase  their  hold  on  the  countryside  while  the  new  government  is  shaking
down.

c.  The  VC  have  exhibited  a  powerful  military  capability  for  at  least  a  brief
period  of  intensified  operations  and  their  skill  at  least  in  counter  airborne
operations  is  improving.

d.  There  is  ground  for  concern  that  infiltration  of  materiel  support  has  in-
creased in  the  Delta  area  but  there  is  little  hard  proof.  This  is  a  prime  in-
telligence deficiency  since  it  affects  not  only  the  military  tactics  but  our  over-
all Southeast  Asia  strategy.

The  prevailing  view  at  this  time  seems  to  have  been  more  apprehensive  than  Gen.
Krulak's  briefing  would  suggest.  It  was  immediately  decided  that  the  Secretary
should  have  another  look  at  the  situation  by  returning  from  the  December  NATO
meeting  via  Saigon.

The  Backup  Book  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense's  Saigon  trip  of  18-20  Decem-
ber contains  indications  of  the  major  questions  that  he  proposed  to  look  into  dur-
ing his  brief  projected  visit  to  Vietnam.  The  Young  Report  on  Long  An  Province


30 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

as  of  6  December  had  evidently  made  a  strong  impression,  and  it  seems  the
Secretary  was  especially  anxious  to  safeguard  against  being  misled  in  the  future
about  the  status  of  programs.  With  respect  to  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program
generally,  it  is  evident  that  there  was  apprehension  concerning  the  questionable
statistics  that  had  been  used  in  the  Diem  regime's  portrayal  of  the  program.  It
was  hoped  that  it  would  be  possible  to  identify  the  requirements  for  a  program
of  on-going  current  assessments  of  the  program  as  quickly  as  possible.  There  was
also  an  intention  to  publish  an  appropriate  set  of  new  guidelines  for  the  coordina-
tion of  construction,  civic  action  and  military  programs,  and,  perhaps  more  im-
portant, to  accomplish  the  consolidation  and  correction  of  hamlet  programs  in
the  shortest  possible  time.  Five  problem  areas  with  respect  to  the  strategic  hamlet
program  were  identified  prior  to  the  trip,  these  were :

a.  What  progress  is  being  achieved  by  the  surveys  and  when  will  the  reports
be  available?

b.  What  specific  actions  were  then  underway  to  coordinate  the  companion
military,  political  and  social  programs?

c.  When  would  the  new  guidelines  be  published?

d.  What  action  was  underway  to  indoctrinate  the  newly  assigned  province
officials  to  enable  them  to  pursue  the  program  effectively?

e.  Was  it  plain  that  one  big  problem  would  be  to  insure  that  the  province
and  district  officials  understood  and  executed  vigorously  their  revised  pro-
grams? Had  any  thought  been  given  to  adding  an  additional  advisor  or  two,
in  the  critical  provinces,  to  work  at  the  district  level  and  to  insure  that  the
officials  actually  drove  programs  forward.

A  point  to  be  noted  in  these  is  the  growing  idea  of  placing  an  increasing  num-
ber of  advisors  at  the  province  and  district  level.

The  Secretary  made  certain  decisions  of  an  immediate  nature  concerning  pro-
grams in  Vietnam  while  he  was  still  in  Saigon;  and  immediately  upon  his  return
he  made  his  report  to  the  President  in  which  he  described  the  situation  as  he  had
found  it,  and  made  further  recommendations  that  he  had  evidently  not  felt  em-
powered to  enact  without  Presidential  approval.

Among  the  actions  agreed  upon  during  the  visit  to  Saigon  on  19-20  December
were  the  following:

1.  The  GVN  should  be  pressed  to  increase  troop  density  in  six  provinces  in
III  Corps  by  about  100%  (ten  infantry  and  three  engineering  batallions),  in
accordance  with  plans  discussed  at  a  meeting  with  COMUSMACV  and  the
Ambassador.

2.  Revise  the  pacification  plans  for  critical  provinces  to  insure  that  they
reflect  scheduling  and  programming  "based  on  a  realistic  appraisal  of  the
actual  status  of  the  hamlets,  the  SDC  and  Civil  Guard  and  ARVN  as  well
as  the  rehabilitation  materials  available."

3.  Increase  U.S.  military  advisory  strength  in  the  thirteen  critical  provinces
(agreed  to  be  critical  at  Honolulu)  in  accordance  with  a  table  submitted  by
COMUSMACV.

4.  Reinforce  USOM  representation  in  thirteen  critical  provinces  starting
with  Long  An  in  accordance  with  a  proposal  from  USOM  Saigon.

5.  Provide  uniforms  for  the  SDC  with  priority  on  the  Delta  area.

6.  Press  the  GVN  for  a  clear  statement,  in  form  of  orders  to  province  chiefs,
for  continuance  and  reshaping  of  the  hamlet  program.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  31

7.  Press  the  GVN  to  provide  for  a  Joint  General  StafT  (JCS)  chief,  and
for  a  III  Corps  commander  with  no  other  responsibiHties.

8.  Continue  to  stress  to  the  GVN  the  need  for  forceful  central  leadership
and  effective  and  visible  popular  leadership.

The  Secretary's  report  for  the  President  dated  21  December  '63  [Doc.  521  was
gloomy  and  expressed  fear  that  the  situation  had  been  deteriorating  long  before
any  deterioration  had  been  suspected  (officially).  The  report  began  by  saying
that  the  situation  was  "very  disturbing,"  and  that  unless  current  trends  were  re-
versed within  two  or  three  months  they  would  "lead  to  neutralization  at  best  and
more  likely  to  a  Communist-controlled  state."  The  new  government  of  Big  Minh
was  identified  as  the  greatest  source  of  concern  because  it  seemed  indecisive  and
drifting.  There  seemed  to  be  a  clear  lack  of  administrative  talent  and  of  political
experience.  While  on  the  other  hand  generals  who  should  have  been  directing
military  affairs  were  preoccupied  with  political  matters  [i.e.,  working  to  assure
or  to  increase  their  own  political  power  within  the  RMC].

A  second  major  weakness  seemed  to  the  Secretary  to  be  the  Country  Team.
He  felt  that  it  lacked  leadership  and  had  been  "poorly  informed"  and  was  "not
working  according  to  a  common  plan."  He  had  found  as  an  example  of  con-
fusion conflicts  between  USOM  and  military  recommendations,  in  cases  of  recom-
mendations to  the  government  of  Vietnam  and  Washington  concerning  the  size
of  the  military  budget.  "Above  all,  Lodge  has  virtually  no  official  contact  with
Harkins."  The  Ambassador,  the  Secretary  felt,  simply  could  not  conduct  a  co-
ordinated administration — not  because  he  did  not  wish  to,  but  because  he  had
"operated  as  a  loner  all  his  life  and  cannot  readily  change  now."  Concerning
enemy  progress,  the  report  said

Viet  Cong  progress  has  been  great  during  the  period  since  the  coup,  with
my  best  guess  being  that  the  situation  has  in  fact  been  deteriorating  in  the
countryside  since  July  to  a  far,  greater  extent  than  we  realized  because  of
undue  dependence  on  distorted'  Vietnamese  reporting.  The  Viet  Cong  now
control  very  high  proportions  of  the  people  in  certain  key  provinces,  par-
ticularly those  directly  South  and  West  of  Saigon.  [Doc.  521  [emphasis
supplied]

As  remedial  measures  he  recommended  that  the  government  of  Vietnam  be
required  to  reallocate  its  military  forces  so  that  its  effective  strength  in  these  key
provinces  would  be  essentially  doubled.  There  would  also  have  to  be  major  in-
creases in  both  the  U.S.  military  staff  and  the  USOM  staff,  to  the  point  where
the  numbers  of  Americans  assigned  in  the  field  would  give  the  U.S.  a  reliable
independent  U.S.  appraisal  of  the  status  of  operations.  (This  was  a  clear  enough
indication  of  the  Secretary's  unhappiness  with  past  reporting.)  Third,  he  stated
that  a  "realistic  p*acification  plan"  would  have  to  be  prepared.  Specifically,  they
should  allocate  adequate  time  to  make  the  remaining  government  controlled
areas  secure,  and  only  then  work  from  them  into  contiguous  surrounding  areas.

The  Secretary  stressed  that  the  situation  was  worst  in  the  Delta  and  surround-
ing the  capitol,  and  that  in  the  North  things  were  better,  and  that  General
Harkins  remained  hopeful  that  the  latter  areas  could  be  made  reasonably  secure
late  in  the  year.  The  report  expressed  considerable  concern  over  the  increasing
infiltration  of  men  and  equipment  from  North  Vietnam.  Various  proposals  to
counter  this  infiltration  had  been  discussed  in  Saigon,  but  the  Secretary  was  not
yet  convinced  that  there  were  means  that  were  politically  acceptable  and  mili-
tarily feasible  of  stopping  that  infiltration.


32 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  HI

Minh  had  strongly  opposed  any  ideas  of  possible  neutralization  of  Vietnam.
(This  was  taken  to  dispose  of  proposals  suggested  by  Senator  Mansfield,  President
DeGaulle,  the  New  York  Times,  columnist  Walter  Lippman  and  others).

Concerning  a  possible  escalation  of  U.S.  effort,  the  Secretary  indicated  that
he  had  directed  supply  of  a  modest  increase  in  artillery,  but,  "US  resources  and
personnel  cannot  usefully  be  substantially  increased."

In  concluding,  the  Secretary  said  that  his  appraisal  might  be  overly  pessimistic,
and  that  Lodge,  Harkins  and  Minh,  while  agreeing  on  specific  points,  seemed  to
feel  that  January  might  bring  a  significant  improvement.

Following  his  report  to  the  President,  the  Secretary  made  the  following  remarks
to  the  press,  at  the  White  House:

.  .  .  We  have  just  completed  our  report  to  the  President  .  .  .  We  observed
the  results  of  the  very  substantial  increase  in  VC  activity,  an  increase  which
began  shortly  after  the  new  government  was  formed,  and  has  extended  over
a  period  of  several  weeks.

During  this  time,  the  Viet  Cong  have  attacked  and  attacked  successfully,  a
substantial  number  of  the  strategic  hamlets.  The  rate  of  that  VC  activity,
however,  has  substantially  dropped  within  the  past  week  to  ten  days.
This  rapid  expansion  of  activity,  I  think,  could  have  been  expected.  It  was
obviously  intended  to  take  advantage  of  the  period  of  organization  in  the
new  government  .  .  .  We  received  in  great  detail  the  plans  of  the  South
Vietnamese  and  the  plans  of  our  military  advisors  for  operations  during
1964.  We  have  every  reason  to  believe  they  will  be  successful.  We  are  de-
termined that  they  shall  be.

D. EFFORTS  TO  IMPROVE  INTELLIGENCE  ON  PROGRESS
OF  THE  WAR

The  Secretary  had  made  evident  in  his  memo  of  21  December  to  the  President
that  he  had  become  seriously  disturbed  at  the  failure  of  the  reporting  system  in
Vietnam  to  alert  him  promptly  to  the  deterioration  of  the  situation  there.  CIA
Director  McCone  had  accompanied  him  on  the  trip  to  Saigon  and,  immediately
upon  his  return,  Mr.  McCone  initiated  efforts  to  improve  the  reporting  system.
On  23  December  he  wrote  the  Secretary:

.  .  .  information  furnished  to  us  from  MACV  and  the  Embassy  concerning
the  current  Viet  Cong  activities  in  a  number  of  provinces  and  the  relative
position  of  the  SVN  Government  versus  the  Viet  Cong  forces  was  incorrect,
due  to  the  fact  that  the  field  officers  of  the  MAAG  and  USOM  had  been
grossly  misinformed  by  the  province  and  district  chiefs.  It  was  reported  to
us,  and  I  believe  correctly,  that  the  province  and  district  chiefs  felt  obliged
to  "create  statistics"  which  would  meet  the  approbation  of  the  Central
Government.

I  believe  it  is  quite  probable  that  the  same  practice  might  be  repeated  by
the  new  province  and  district  chiefs  appointed  by  the  MRC  .  .  .

McCone,  therefore,  proposed  development  of  a  new,  covert  method  of  checking
on  the  information  supplied  by  these  regular  reporting  authorities  on  the  progress
of  the  war  and  on  pacification  and  other  counterinsurgency  efforts.  A  plan  was
developed  within  CIA  by  3  January  1964  which  called  for  the  formation  of  a


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  196 3- Apr.  1965  33

mission  of  10  to  12  experienced  intelligence  officers,  all  drawn  from  CIA,  to
proceed  to  Saigon  for  a  60  to  90  day  TDY  beginning  about  12  January.  There,
under  the  direction  of  the  CAS  Station  Chief,  they  would  undertake:

1.  A  survey  of  Vietnamese/American  counterinsurgency  reporting  ma-
chinery;

2.  Develop,  assess,  and  recruit  new  covert  sources  of  information,  to  serve
as  a  check,  and  finally,

3.  Assist  the  station  chief  in  developing  recommendations,  for  submission
to  Washington  through  the  Saigon  country  team,  on  means  of  improving
overall  GVN  and  US  reporting  machinery.

McCone  forwarded  these  plans  to  McNamara  on  7  January  for  discussion  at
a  meeting  that  same  day.  Following  the  meeting  of  7  January  on  this  original
proposal,  a  revised  proposal  was  drawn  up  and  submitted  by  McCone  to  Mc-
Namara for  concurrence  on  9  January.  The  revision  was  largely  responsive  to
a  fear  of  the  Secretary  that,  as  originally  proposed,  the  TDY  team  would  serve
as  a  sort  of  Inspector  General  functioning  independently  of  both  the  Country
Team  and  the  CAS  Station /Saigon.  Accordingly  the  new  draft  expressly  specified
that  a  separate  reporting  system  would  not  be  established,  nor  a  reorganization
of  the  existing  reporting  system  attempted.  It  would  attempt,  however,  to  de-
velop through  covert  techniques  a  method  of  spot  checking  the  accuracy  of
regular  reporting  and  develop  also  new  covert  sources  of  information  on  the
progress  of  the  war.

In  accepting  the  proposal  in  a  written  reply  dated  16  January,  Secretary  Mc-
Namara expressed  insistence  on  making  this  a  team  effort,  first  by  emphasizing
that  "I  do  not  believe  that  the  team  should  have  an  inspectoral  function  for  the
overall  reporting  system,"  and  second  by  adding  to  the  draft  submitted  for  his
signature  the  clause,  "but  it  should  be  a  joint  program  involving  all  of  the
affected  members  of  the  country  team."  When  the  definitive  messages  went  out
to  Saigon  they  had  the  concurrence  of  State,  Defense  and  CIA.

It  is  understandable  enough  from  an  administrative  point  of  view  that  a
formally  coordinated  unified  effort  seemed  preferable.  There  had  been  notable
discords,  and  failures  of  communication,  and  policy  disagreement  within  the
Mission  in  the  past  and  these  had  caused  serious  problems.  Important  sources  of
disagreement  remained,  and  anything  resembling  an  IG  inquiry  might  have
brought  about  morale  problems  that  it  was  well  to  avoid.  The  reverse  of  the
coin  was  that  formalized  coordination  of  intelligence  stood  the  chance  of  stifling
or  concealing  minority  dissent.  It  was  indeed  the  basic  mission  of  the  group  to
set  up  checks.  But  in  the  extent  to  which  this  system  of  checks  was  to  be  co-
ordinated with  the  system  as  a  whole,  it  risked  losing  some  part  of  its  inde-
pendence of  the  accepted  view.  And  it  had  been  the  accepted  view  that  had  been
proved  wrong.

By  the  time  full  agreement  was  reached  on  the  terms  of  relcrence  lor  the
team,  the  team  was  already  in  Saigon.  A  month  later  it  submitted  a  report
evaluating  the  situation  in  Viet  Nam  at  about  the  same  time  that  the  CAS  station
chiefs  submitted  two  other  evaluations  which  were  apparently  for  a  time  mis-
takenly attributed  to  the  TDY  team.  These  evaluations  caused  enough  uneasiness
within  the  country  team  to  indicate  that  interpretation  of  intelligence  and  situa-
tion appraisals  remained  the  touchy  matter  that  the  Secretary  had  foreseen.  The
"Initial  Report  of  CAS  Group  Findings  in  SVN,"  dated  10  February  1964  began
by  acknowledging  that  the  group  activities  had  been  temporarily  disrupted  by


34 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

the  Khanh  Coup  of  30  January  (which  will  be  described  later),  and  did  not
attempt  to  report  on  the  covert  cross  checks  because  before  covert  cross  checks
could  be  established  it  was  necessary  to  learn  the  pattern  and  nature  of  the  re-
porting system  then  in  use,  both  American  and  Vietnamese.  The  first  appraisals,
therefore,  were  expressly  based  solely  on  a  new  look  at  what  the  existing  system
reported.  The  first  impression  of  the  group  was  that  for  the  most  part  the  Viet-
namese had  been  reporting  honestly  to  their  American  counterparts  since  the  1
November  coup  and  that  if  current  reporting  was  indeed  biased  it  was  biased
against  the  Diem  regime.

The  first  general  impression  of  the  situation,  expressly  subject  to  further  in-
quiry, was  that  "the  momentum  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program  has  slowed
practically  to  a  halt."  More  specific  evaluations,  which  focused  on  local  situations
north  and  east  of  Saigon  and  took  up  most  of  this  initial  report,  were  more
pessimistic  than  the  "general  impression."  Within  Binh  Long  Province,  security
had  deteriorated  rapidly  during  January  and  the  VC  now  controlled  route  13.
Well  planned  and  viciously  executed  VC  attacks  on  hamlets  had  caused  wide
fear,  and  produced  doubt  among  the  populace  that  the  GVN  could  protect  them.
The  former  province  chief  and  deputy  chief  for  military  operations  had  been
replaced  just  two  days  before  the  Khanh  coup.  The  response  to  the  Khanh  coup
had  been  one  of  disgust.  Phuoc  Thanh  Province,  according  to  the  province  chief,
was  80%  controlled  by  the  VC.  The  VC  controlled  the  roads,  making  GVN
travel  impossible  without  large  armed  escorts.  The  VC  were  moving  freely  in
battalion  size  units  with  heavy  weapons  throughout  the  province.  COMUSMACV
had  reported  that  the  one  to  one  GVN/VC  ratio  in  the  province  was  misleading
because  many  of  the  GVN  units  were  tied  down  in  static  positions  whereas  the
VC  were  mobile.

When  the  Special  CAS  group  turned  in  its  final  appraisal  on  18  February,
Gen.  Harkins  was  asked  by  the  CGCS  to  comment.  Gen.  Harkins  offered,  3  days
later,  a  paragraph  by  paragraph  commentary,  much  of  which  agreed  with  the
CAS  group  findings.  There  were  a  few  minor  points  of  fact  that  were  in  dis-
agreement. Where  General  Harkins  pointedly  disagreed  was  in  the  matter  of
interpretation  and  emphasis  and  where  both  the  CAS  group  and  Gen.  Harkins
agreed  that  past  performance  had  not  been  good,  Gen.  Harkins  tended  to  em-
phasize the  hope,  as  the  CAS  group  did  not,  that  under  Khanh  the  situation
would  perhaps  improve.  Beyond  this,  Gen.  Harkins  was,  in  general,  somewhat
disturbed  that  the  CAS  group  might  be  exceeding  its  terms  of  reference  by  re-
porting unilaterally,  and  misleading  the  national  decision  process  by  forwarding
information  not  coordinated  and  cleared  with  other  elements  of  the  U.S.  reporting
mechanism  in  Vietnam.  Perhaps  most  significant  of  all,  at  the  very  beginning  of
his  comments  he  offered  an  observation  that,  internationally  or  otherwise,  raised
very  basic  issues  of  the  nature,  function,  and  limitations  of  the  intelligence  and
estimation  process.

Except  for  the  spectacular  and  eye  catching  lead  sentence  ["Tide  of  in-
surgency in  all  four  corps  areas  appears  to  be  going  against  GVN"],  I  have
no  quarrel  with  most  of  the  statements  contained  in  the  CAS  Survey  Team
appraisal.  Where  the  statements  are  clean-cut,  the  supporting  information
was  usually  provided  by  my  field  personnel  and  reflected  in  reports  already
sent  to  Washington  by  this  headquarters.  Where  the  statements  are  sweep-
ing, they  are  based  on  opinion  or  an  unfortunate  penchant  for  generalizing
from  the  specific.  My  detailed  comments  follow  and  are  geared  to  the
specific  paragraphs  of  the  CAS  message,  [emphasis  supplied.]


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  196 3- Apr.  1965  35

If  we  examine  this  statement  with  particular  reference  to  the  words  and
phrases  underiined,  the  large,  epistemological  problem  of  the  junction  of  in-
telligence and  national  decision-making  is  pointedly  indicated.  By  "clean-cut,"
Gen.  Harkins  undoubtedly  referred  to  phenomena  that  were  concrete,  highly
specific  and  narrowly  factual.  These  were  the  sort  of  phenomena  about  which
there  could  seldom  or  never  be  any  serious  dispute.  By  "sweeping"  statements,
and  by  "unfortunate  penchant  for  generalizing  from  the  specific/'  he  was  re-
ferring to  the  mental  process  of  bridging  the  gap  from  the  small  concrete  detail
— which  was  seldom  or  never  by  itself  a  basis  for  large  decision — to  the  inter-
pretation of  that  detail — to  the  judgment  of  the  significant  of  that  detail.  Only
upon  the  basis  of  interpretations  (judgments)  of  the  importance,  meaning  and
relevance  of  things  could  policy  decisions  be  made.  And  that  judgment  or  inter-
pretation was  seldom  or  never  inescapably  inherent  in  the  measurable,  sharply
definable,  completely  unarguable  concrete  detail.  It  might  be  derived  from  or
directly  reflect  such  data,  but  its  form  would  be  determined  equally,  or  even
more,  from  the  perspective  in  which  it  was  viewed.  And  this  perspective  was
comprised  of  the  whole  context  of  incompletely  described,  not  fully  identified
values,  and  imperfectly  defined  priorities,  that  determined  the  weight  and  place
given  to  that  factual  detail  in  the  mysterious  calculus  of  the  decision-maker.  If
this  were  not  the  case,  any  bright  college  boy  given  the  same  set  of  "facts"  would
inevitably  derive  from  them  the  same  judgments  of  what  national  policy  should
be,  as  the  canniest,  most  generally  knowledgeable  and  experienced  veteran.

E. THE  UNREALIZED  JANUARY  UPTURN  AND  THE  KHANH
COUP

There  was  hope  that  as  January  1964  wore  on  the  situation  would  take  a  turn
for  the  better.  But,  as  the  CAS  reports  cited  in  the  foregoing  section  suggest,
things  did  not  get  better.  The  hope  was  that  the  Minh  regime  would  find  itself,
but  before  it  did  the  Khanh  coup  of  30  January  came  as  another  blow  to  progress
in  the  operating  program  and  as  a  disillusioning  surprise  to  the  hopes  for  the
stable  political  situation  generally  agreed  to  the  prerequisite  to  ultimate  success.

Despite  the  unfavorable  news — which  was  beginning  to  excite  the  first  serious
proposals  within  the  JCS  for  carrying  the  war  to  the  north  by  expanded  clandes-
tine operations  and  finally  by  overt  bombing — the  Secretary  managed  to  main-
tain the  earlier  philosophy  that  the  U.S.  involvement  would  remain  limited  and
that  in  fact  the  counterinsurgency  effort  could  not  really  attain  its  goals  unless
the  U.S.  role  continued  to  be  limited  and  the  South  Vietnamese  did  the  main
job  themselves.

Just  before  the  Khanh  coup,  in  testimony  on  27  and  29  January  before  the
House  Armed  Services  Committee,  the  Secretary  encountered  some  sharply  prob-
ing questions  on  the  continuing  costs  of  the  war.  The  questions  centered  on  the
inconclusiveness  of  the  efforts  to  date  and  upon  the  apparent  discrepancies  be-
tween autumnal  optimism  and  the  winter  discouragements,  and  between  official
optimism  and  the  pessimistic  reports  appearing  in  newspaper  stories.  Even  Mr.
Mendel  Rivers,  evidently  impatient  that  the  VC  had  not  already  been  subdued
and  perhaps  suspecting  that  this  was  due  to  lack  of  vigor  in  our  prosecution  of
the  war,  asked  during  these  hearings  if  we  were  planning  to  "do  anything  to
bring  this  war  to  the  VC,  any  more  than  what  we  have  done  already  .  .  ."  The
Secretary  tried  to  explain  that  ".  .  .  It  is  a  Vietnamese  war.  They  are  going  to
have  to  assume  the  primary  responsibility  for  winning  it.  Our  policy  is  to  limit
our  support  to  logistical  and  training  support."  To  this,  Mr.  Rivers  replied  with


36 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

the  following  question:  "There  are  no  plans  to  change  the  modus  operandi  of
this  war,  so  far  as  the  bleeding  of  this  country  is  concerned?"

A  little  later,  Representative  Chamberlain  asked  the  Secretary  if  he  continued
to  be  as  "optimistic"  about  the  scheduled  withdrawal  of  U.S.  personnel  as  he  had
been  in  October.  The  Secretarv'  in  reply  reaffirmed  that  he  believed  that:

.  .  .  the  war  in  South  Vietnam  will  be  won  primarily  through  the  South
Vietnamese  efforts;  it  is  a  South  Vietnamese  war.  It  is  a  war  of  the  counter
guerrillas  as  against  the  guerrillas.  We  are  only  assisting  them  through
training  and  logistical  support.

We  started  the  major  program  of  assistance  in  training  and  logistical
support  toward  the  latter  part  of  1961.  I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that
after  four  years  of  such  training  we  should  be  able  gradually  to  withdraw
certain  of  our  training  personnel.

Following  this,  Representative  Stratton  addressed  an  inquiry  to  the  Secretary:

Mr.  Secretarv,  I  am  a  little  bit  worried  about  your  statement  in  answer
to  Mr.  Chamberlain,  that  you  still  contemplate  continuing  withdrawal  of
our  forces  from  Vietnam,  in  line  with  your  previously  announced  plan.  Isn't
this  a  Httle  unrealistic,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  when  you  first  made  the
announcement  things  were  going  a  bit  better  than  they  appear  to  be  going
at  the  moment?  And  wouldn't  you  say  that  in  the  event  that  things  do  not
go  as  well  as  you  hope  they  will,  that  unquestionably  we  can't  continue  to
withdraw  any  more  of  our  forces?

Secretary  McNamara's  reply:

No  Sir,  I  would  not.  I  don't  believe  that  we  as  a  nation  should  assume
the  primary  responsibility  for  the  war  in  South  Vietnam.  It  is  a  counter-
guerrilla  war,  it  is  a  war  that  can  only  be  won  by  the  Vietnamese  themselves.
Our  responsibility  is  not  to  substitute  ourselves  for  the  Vietnamese,  but  to
train  them  to  carry  on  the  operations  that  they  themselves  are  capable  of.

The  theme  was  next  picked  up  by  Representative  Cohelan.  He  said  that  "One
of  the  things  that  some  of  us  are  quite  concerned  about  is  this  constant  tendency
toward  a  sanguine  approach  to  the  problem  of  Southeast  Asia."  He  went  on  to
recall  that  when  he  and  other  committee  members  had  been  out  to  South  Vietnam
in  November  of  1962,  when  General  Harkins  was  saying  the  war  would  be  won
in  2  years  and  Admiral  Felt  said  it  would  be  won  in  3  years — although  Halber-
stam  and  other  newsmen  were  pessimistic  at  that  time  and  now  seemed,  to  Repre-
sentative Cohelan,  to  have  been  right

[material  missing]

transport  anything  for  fear  of  ambush  by  ground,  although  the  Vietnamese
themselves  could  move  the  freight  by  some  kind  of  pay-off  to  the  Viet  Cong.

In  response  to  this  the  Secretary  said  that  we  were  in  a  very  different  position
than  the  French  had  been  and  that  in  this  sort  of  war  improvement  was  bound
to  be  slow — a  matter  of  years.  But  this  did  not  mean  we  should  retain  all  of  our
existing  personnel  in  South  Vietnam.  It  would  be  a  waste  to  do  so,  and  by  "keep-
ing the  crutch  there  too  long  we  would  weaken  the  Vietnamese  rather  than
strengthen  them. "


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  37

Within  a  day  or  two  after  this  testimony  was  given  there  came  the  Khanh
coup,  which  constituted  not  only  another  hard  blow  to  our  efforts  in  Vietnam
but  also  to  our  confidence  that  we  knew  what  was  going  on  there.  The  Khanh
coup  of  30  January  1964  came  as  an  almost  complete  surprise  to  the  mission  and
to  Washington.  What  may  be  considered  in  retrospect,  but  only  in  retrospect,  as
the  first  very  general  danger  signal  came  in  the  form  of  a  conversation  between
the  US  DCM  in  Saigon  and  Italian  Ambassador  D'Orlandi,  on  20  January,  and
reported  that  same  evening  to  Washington.  In  discussing  the  current  French
initiative  in  Asia  (recognition  of  Communist  China  and  advocacy  of  neutraliza-
tion of  SEA),  the  Italian  Ambassador  had  said  that  the  greatest  danger  to  the
U.S.  position  in  Southeast  Asia  lay  in  the  effect  it  might  have  upon  certain  pro-
French  and  potentially  neutralist  members  of  the  MRC.  When  asked  to  clarify,
D'Orlandi  named  Generals  Tran  Van  Don  and  Ton  Thap  Dinh  as  potential
leaders  of  a  group  that  might  accept  a  French  neutralization  formula,  especially
if  the  U.S.  position  on  that  issue  were  not  clarified  immediately.  In  reporting  the
incident  the  Embassy  commented  it  had  no  hard  evidence  of  either  of  these  two
flirting  with  neutralization,  although  because  of  French  training  they  were  fre-
quently cited  as  pro-French.

A  few  days  later  Ambassador  Lodge  issued  a  public  statement  which  acknowl-
edged existence  of  neutralization  rumors  and  proceeded  to  affirm  that  U.S.  policy
remained  unchanged  and  that  the  U.S.,  'Tn  solidarity  with  the  Government  of
the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  firmly  rejects  the  spurious  idea  of  "neutralizing'  South
Vietnam  since  'neutralization'  would  simply  be  another  means  of  Communist
take-over."

The  first  warning  of  the  coup  that  may  be  considered  specific  and  definite,
however,  did  not  come  until  28  January,  when  General  Khanh  told  Colonel
Jasper  Wilson,  U.S.  Senior  MAAG  advisor  for  I  Corps,  that  pro-French,  pro-
neutralist  members  of  the  MRC — Generals  Xuan,  Don,  and  Kim — were  planning
a  palace  coup  that  would  take  place  as  early  as  31  January.  Once  the  coup  was
effected,  they  would  call  for  neutralization  of  South  Vietnam.  It  was  not  reported
that  in  the  conversation  with  Wilson,  Khanh  had  expressly  suggested  that  he
might  try  a  counter  coup  action.  He  did  say,  however,  that  he  planned  to  go  to
Saigon  that  day  or  on  the  morrow.  In  reporting  this  conversation  to  Lodge  and
Harkins  in  Saigon  and  to  CIA  Washington,  CAS  cited  four  other  recent  intelli-
gence items,  from  other  sources,  which  might  have  lent  some  credence  to  the
Khanh  allegations  (although  in  the  course  oi  time  Khanh's  allegations  were  dis-
counted almost  entirely).  These  were  (1)  Tran  Van  Ly  gained  impression  in
conversation  with  Xuan  that  Xuan  favored  a  coup.  (2)  Lt.  Col.  Tran  Dinh  Lam,
recently  brought  back  from  Paris  at  the  request  of  Generals  Tran  Van  Don  and
Le  Van  Kim,  was  reported  to  have  French  authorization  to  spend  2  billion
piastres  to  achieve  a  neutrahzation  of  South  Vietnam.  (3)  An  American  had
observed  several  military  trucks  bringing  weapons  and  ammunition  to  Xuan's
police  headquarters  at  Camp  DuMare."(4)  Generals  Kim,  Don,  Nguyen  Van  Vy,
and  Duong  Van  Due  had  been  identified  by  Major  General  Le  Van  Nghiem  as
pro-French  and  privately  in  favor  of  neutralization.  Nevertheless,  Khanh's
charges  along  with  other  reports  were  described  by  CAS  as  difficult  to  evaluate;
and  it  was  "speculated  that  he  and  others  making  similar  charges  might  be
motivated  by  disgruntlement  over  failure  to  obtain  better  positions  for  themselves
within  the  MRC.

The  next  move  in  this  sequence  of  events  was  when  General  Khanh  talked  to
Ambassador  Lodge  in  Saigon  on  the  afternoon  of  29  January.  The  striking  thing
is  that  although  Khanh  evidently  made  his  intentions  clear,  the  Ambassador's


38 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  HI

first  thought  was  to  protest  to  DeGaulle  rather  than  to  warn  the  GVN.  That
evening  at  8:00  p.m.,  Ambassador  Lodge  filed  a  NODIS  (Embtel  1431)  suggest-
ing that  representations  should  be  made  to  DeGaulle  against  French  clandestine
plotting  to  upset  the  GVN  and  set  it  thereby  upon  a  neutralist  course.  General
Khanh  had  apparently  made  an  impression  on  the  Ambassador  with  his  allega-
tions of  French  machinations,  asking  for  assurance  that  the  U.S.  opposed  neu-
tralization and  if  necessary  would  help  him,  Khanh,  get  his  family,  then  in  Da
Nang,  out  of  the  country.  He  claimed  that  he  had  the  support  of  General  Khiem
of  III  Corps  and  General  Tri  of  II  Corps  as  well  as  90  percent  of  the  army  and
70  percent  of  the  existing  government.  Lodge  further  reported  that  Khanh  made
a  special  point  of  wanting  to  continue  to  use  Colonel  Jasper  Wilson  as  his  ex-
clusive contact  with  the  U.S.  Khanh  refused  absolutely  to  deal  with  any  other
than  Wilson  because  he  had  had  ""an  unfortunate  experience  with  a  CIA  repre-
sentative named  Spera,  before  the  31  October  coup."  Lodge  went  on  to  say  that
ahhough  he  had  no  great  faith  in  Xuan,  he  believed  that  Don  and  Kim  were
patriotic  Vietnamese  and  '"therefore,  what  General  Khanh  says  about  them  goes
against  my  deepest  instincts."  Lodge  sensed  the  intent  of  a  coup,  but  evidently
did  not  appreciate  its  imminence;  for  although  he  said  he  expected  that  there
would  be  more  to  report  later,  he  decided  not  to  alter  the  government  of  Vietnam
and  had  confided  the  news  from  Wilson  only  to  Harkins  and  DeSilva.

However,  it  was  a  matter  of  only  about  seven  hours  after  reporting  this  first
Khanh  feeler  that  Lodge  at  3:15  a.m.  of  30  January  (Saigon  time)  advised
Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara  that:

General  Khanh  has  informed  us  through  his  contact,  Colonel  Jasper  Wil-
son, MAAG  advisor  I  Corps,  that  he  together  with  General  Phat  and  Khiem
intend  to  move  at  0400  this  morning  to  secure  changes  in  the  composition
of  the  MRC.  General  Khiem  states  that  General  Minh  has  been  informed
of  his  move  and  agrees.  The  only  definite  statement  we  have  as  yet  is  that
Premier  Tho  must  go.

Over  the  next  two  or  three  days  Ambassador  Lodge  altered  considerably  his
first  opinions  about  the  justification  for  the  coup.  The  U.S.  chose  to  view  the  act
as  merely  a  change  of  personnel  within  the  same  MRC  format;  and  the  Ambas-
sador's first  attempt  to  explain  the  affair  revealed  his  hope  that  an  effort  to  put
a  good  face  on  it  might  not  be  amiss.  (There  was  little  else  he  could  do.)

Herewith  my  preliminary  assessment  of  the  new  Government  in  Viet  Nam.
It  is  very  much  subject  to  change  as  we  move  along.

L  General  Khanh's  coup  was  obviously  extremely  disconcerting  at  first
blush.  We  felt  we  were  beginning  to  make  real  progress  here  with  the  Minh
Government — in  the  conduct  of  the  effort  against  the  Viet  Cong;  and  in
making  General  Minh  into  a  popular  figure.  To  overthrow  a  Government
which  was  progressing  fairly  satisfactorily  seemed  like  a  violent  and  dis-
orderly procedure  .  .  .

2.  On  second  thought,  however,  one  realized  the  Generals  Don  and  Kim
nad  never  at  any  time  foresworn  the  possibility  of  a  neutral  solution  at
which  might  seem  to  them  to  be  the  proper  time.  They  had  clearly  been
working,  and  working  effectively,  to  strengthen  the  effort  against  the  Viet
Cong.  But  none  of  us  had  ever  discussed  what  the  next  step  would  be  after
the  Government  of  Viet  Nam  had  reached  a  position  of  strength.  Perhaps
they  did  favor  the  French  neutrality  solution  at  that  time.  We  had  all  con-


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  39

centrated  exclusively  on  winning  .  .  .  Finally,  Ambassador  D'Orlandi  of
Italy,  who  is  one  of  the  shrewdest  men  here,  has  thought  ever  since  Novem-
ber that  the  Minh  Government  was  actively  in  support  of  General  De
Gaulle's  ideas  and  would  turn  overtly  neutralist  at  the  proper  time.  He  had
said  this  to  me  several  times  and  had  made  much  of  the  fact  that  both  Don
and  Kim  were  still  French  citizens,  had  been  aides  to  Marshal  de  Lattre
when  he  was  here,  and  had  actively  worked  in  the  French  Secret  Service  in
the  past.  Therefore,  opinion  of  the  French  intentions  for  neutralization  coup
might  be  correct  .  .  .

4.  Finally,  in  this  country  it  rarely  occurs  to  anyone  that  an  election  is
an  efficient  or  appropriate  way  to  get  anything  important  accomplished.  The
traditional  way  of  doing  important  things  here  is  by  well  planned,  well
thought  out  use  of  force.  What  General  Khanh  has  done  does  not  appear  to
have  shocked  the  Vietnamese  .  .  .  However,  numerous  Vietnamese  have
expressed  the  opinion  to  members  of  my  staff  that  it  was  a  pity  that  General
Minh  was  removed  because  he  is  a  "good  man."

5.  The  real  question  is,  therefore:  Is  Khanh  able?  Will  he  really  supply
some  drive  in  connection  with  the  effort  against  the  Viet  Cong?  The  evidence
to  date  is  that  he  is  able,  that  he  has  a  lot  of  drive,  and  that  he  is  not
tolerating  any  delay  .  .  .

6.  If  Khanh  is  able,  his  advent  to  power  may  give  this  country  one-man
command  in  place  of  a  junta.  This  may  be  good.  We  have  everything  we
need  in  Viet  Nam.  The  U.S.  has  provided  military  advice,  training,  equip-
ment; economic  and  social  help;  and  political  advice.  The  Government  of
Viet  Nam  has  put  relatively  large  number  of  good  men  into  important  posi-
tions and  has  evolved  civil  and  military  procedures  which  appear  to  be  work-
able. Therefore,  our  side  knows  how  to  do  it;  we  have  the  means  with  which
to  do  it;  we  simply  need  to  do  it.  This  requires  a  tough  and  ruthless  com-
mander. Perhaps  Khanh  is  it.

Privately  we  continued,  however,  to  be  deeply  chagrined  and  even  shaken  that
we  had  not  seen  the  coup  coming.  We  recognized  it  was  a  severe  blow  to  the
stability  of  government  that  we  had  believed  was  so  necessary  for  South  Vietnam,
and  we  doubted  the  charges  that  Khanh  used  as  a  justification  for  his  actions.
But  we  accepted  his  explanations,  promised  to  support  him,  and  hoped  for  the
best.  About  all  we  could  do  was  threaten  to  withhold  aid  and  that  was  ineffective
because  it  was  increasingly  apparent  that  we  were  as  committed  to  the  struggle
as  our  clients  were — possibly  even  more  committed.  Whatever  the  real  possibili-
ties of  influence  may  have  been,  we  accepted  as  inescapable  the  fact  that  there
was  nothing  we  could  do  but  go  along  with  it.  The  President  of  the  United  States
quickly  offered  hi^  public  expression  of  recognition  and  strong  support.  And  one
of  our  strongest  resolves  was  to  see  what  we  might  hit  upon  as  a  means  to  assure
that  we  would  not  be  taken  again  by  a  similar  surprise.

F. DEEPENING  GLOOM  IN  FEBRUARY

Among  the  flood  of  SitReps  that  came  in  soon  after  the  coup  was  "Com-
mander's Personal  Military  Assessment  of  the  Fourth  Quarter,  CY-63."  This  was
a  report  that  MACV  had  been  directed  to  establish  at  the  end  of  the  September
1963  visit  of  the  Secretary  and  the  CJCS  in  order  to  establish  checkpoints  by
which  to  measure  progress  toward  achievement  of  the  goals  agreed  upon  at  that
time.  It  is  not  essential  here  to  review  all  of  MACV's  report  but  there  are  interest-


40 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

ing  details  that  are  worth  noting.  MACV's  report  gave  central  attention  to  the
fact  that  the  political  turbulence  during  the  last  quarter  of  1963  had  been  re-
flected in  a  regression  in  government  control,  and  corresponding  opportunities
for  the  VC.  The  political  instability  had  resulted,  especially,  in  a  decline  of  GVN
control  within  the  13  provinces  listed  as  critical  at  Honolulu  on  20  November.
The  strategic  hamlet  program  had  received  setbacks  which  forced  the  GVN's
military  forces  to  adopt  a  defensive  posture.  After  this  there  came  a  somewhat
equivocal  statement  that:

Analysis  disclosed  that,  in  spite  of  political  turbulence,  a  satisfactory
tempo  of  operation  was  maintained  during  this  quarter.  On  the  other  hand,
statistics  clearly  supported  previous  convictions  that  GVN  operations  were
not  effective  when  judged  by  reasonable  standards  of  results  versus  effort
expended.  The  immediate  response  to  this  analysis  is  to  focus  the  advisory
effort  at  all  levels  on  the  need  for  radical  improvement  in  the  effectiveness
of  operations.

What  this  seems  to  say  is  that  GVN  operations  were  satisfactory  by  the  criteria
which  had  been  adopted  for  judging  them,  yet  they  did  not  achieve  results.  This
seems  to  amount  to  an  admission  that  the  criteria  by  which  operations  were
judged  did  not  lead  to  good  judgments  concerning  the  results  that  were  being
achieved  by  these  operations.

This  appears,  indeed,  to  have  been  very  near  the  truth.  Throughout  this  report
there  was  a  recognition  of  the  effect  of  political  and  psychological  and  motiva-
tional factors  upon  real  and  effective  capabilities.  On  the  matter  of  training,  the
assessment  was  that  it  had  "proven  to  be  quantitatively  satisfactory  and  flexible
enough  to  meet  the  pressures  and  accelerated  time  schedules."  But  this  expression
of  satisfaction  that  the  nominal  goals  of  training  had  been  met  was  followed  by
the  qualification  that  "the  degree  to  which  training  can,  in  fact,  develop  combat
aggressiveness  or  compensate  for  the  lack  of  other  motivation  remains  a  matter
for  concern  and  continuing  scrutiny."  The  anomaly  was  expressed  in  words,  but
the  fact  of  it  seems  to  have  gone  almost  unrecognized.

When  he  turned  to  the  two  major  areas  of  military  action,  first  in  the  north
and  center  and  later  in  the  Delta,  MACV  was  obliged  to  admit  that  "there  was
little  substantial  progress  toward  completing  the  military  progress  in  either  of  the
two  major  regions."  But  he  seemed  to  have  been  so  thoroughly  imbued  with  a
chin-up,  never-say-die  spirit  that  he  rejected  the  pessimistic  implications  which
he  explicitly  acknowledged  were  present.

If  the  military  aspects  of  the  fourth  quarter  of  calendar  year  1963  were
viewed  in  isolation,  or  could  in  any  way  be  considered  typical,  the  forecast
would  be  pessimistic  in  nature  and  a  complete  reappraisal  of  U.S.  effort,
approach,  and  even  policy  would  be  indicated.  However,  viewed  in  the  light
of  January  operational  improvements,  the  forecast  remains  one  of  potential
long  term  military  progress.

The  improvements  cited  as  grounds  for  not  accepting  the  pessimistic  implica-
tions were  a  new  military  plan  to  support  the  pacification  program;  adoption  of
U.S.  advice  concerning  GVN  management  to  cope  with  increasing  VC  threats,
especially  around  Saigon;  and  some  government  operations  that  seemed  to  dem-
onstrate improved  military  leadership,  and  what  he  called  "victories"  while  ad-
mitting they  were  not  decisive.  The  difficulty  here  was  that  the  judgment  did  not
include  consideration  that  these  happier  signs  had  come  under  the  regime  which
had  just  been  overturned  by  the  Khanh  coup  a  day  or  two  before  this  report  was
dispatched,  which  coup,  it  was  acknowledged,  would  have  a  disturbing  and  dis-


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  41

ruptive  effect  upon  GVN  capabilities  as  they  had  existed  before  the  coup.  Al-
though it  was  still  too  soon  to  predict  the  full  impact  of  the  coup,  it  seemed
"likely  that  at  least  part  of  the  operational  momentum  which  was  being  slowly
generated  earlier  this  month  will  be  slowed  for  a  time  .  .  ."

In  closing  this  assessment,  MACV  philosophized,  in  words  with  which  few
would  disagree,  that  experiences  of  the  last  quarter  of  calendar  year  1963  dis-
closed "the  extent  to  which  military  opportunities  are  dependent  upon  political
and  psychological  policies  and  accomplishments  in  a  counter-insurgency  environ-
ment." And  he  found  the  big  lesson — "the  broad  implication" — was,  that

no  amount  of  military  effort  or  capability  can  compensate  for  poor  politics.
Therefore,  although  the  prospects  for  an  improved  military  posture  are  good,
the  ultimate  achievement  of  the  established  military  goal  depends  primarily
upon  the  quality  of  support  achieved  by  the  political  leadership  of  the  gov-
ernment of  Vietnam  at  all  levels.

Here  again  was  an  explicit  judgment  that  the  sine  qua  non  of  an  effective
counter-insurgency  operation  was  a  stable,  broadly  based,  popular  and  effective
government.  It  was  acknowledged  at  this  time,  as  it  had  been  acknowledged
before  concerning  other  governments,  that  a  government  of  these  qualities  did
not  exist.  But  along  with  the  acknowledgment  that  what  was  described  as  the
sine  qua  non  did  not  exist,  there  was  apparently  always  the  hope  that  fate  would
not  close  in  before  something  happened  to  change  the  situation.

The  U.S.  mission  Monthly  Status  Report,  dated  9  February  1964,  agreed  with
MACV  that  it  was  too  soon  to  judge  the  effects  of  the  Khanh  coup.  In  the  "over-
all evaluation,"  there  was  the  following  key  paragraph:

January  witnessed  distinct,  if  limited,  progress  in  GVN's  organization  and
action,  both  on  political  front  in  Saigon  and  on  counter-insurgency  front  in
countryside.  Nevertheless,  by  January  30,  when  General  Khanh  moved
swiftly  and  bloodlessly  to  take  pver  reins  of  government,  GVN  had  still  not
achieved  sufficient  momentum  either  to  stem  growing  tide  of  popular  criti-
cism against  it  or  to  register  meaningful  gains  against  VC.  In  retrospect,
greatest  single  positive  achievement  during  three  months  of  post-Diem
regime  was  measurable  success  of  General  Minh  in  establishing  himself  as
popular  national  leader.  Measure  of  his  success  reflected  in  General  Khanh's
obvious  effort  to  keep  Minh  on  his  side  and  exploit  Minh's  growing  popu-
larity for  benefit  of  second  post-Diem  regime.

On  the  same  day  that  the  Mission  Report  was  dispatched,  CIA  addressed  to
the  Secretary  of  Defense  a  special  report  which  had  just  been  received  by  the
Director  of  CIA  by  Mr.  Peer  de  Silva  (CAS  station  chief  in  Saigon)  and  Mr.
Lyman  D.  Kirkpatrick,  concerning  the  situation  in  Vietnam  with  particular  re-
spect to  the  conduct  of  the  war  and  the  prognosis  of  the  stability  of  the  Khanh
regime.  The  de  Silva  judgment  was  that

The  situation  at  this  moment  must  be  characterized  as  one  in  which  the
population  at  large  appears  apathetic,  without  enthusiasm  either  for  the
GVN  or  the  VC  sides  but  responsive  to  the  latter  because  it  fears  the  VC.
The  most  important  single  factor  appears  to  be  whether  or  not  the  rural
population  will  be  willing  to  defend  itself  against  the  VC  and  to  support
GVN  actions  against  the  VC.  In  this  sector  there  now  seems  to  be  less
conviction  and  resolution,  and  a  more  widespread  inclination  to  avoid  the
problems  of  opposing  the  VC,  and  to  play  both  sides  in  hopes  of  somehow
getting  on  peacefully  and  without  personal  commitment.


42 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

.  .  .  What  is  needed  in  this  regard  and  very  soon  are  a  series  of  GVN
successes  in  the  mihtary  sphere  which  would  go  toward  implanting  and
nourishing  a  popular  attitude  that  the  GVN  has  the  means  of  bringing
security  and  a  sense  of  ease  to  the  rural  population  and  is  clearly  deter-
mined to  do  so  on  an  ever  broadening  front  throughout  the  countryside.
Only  within  some  such  atmosphere  of  hopefulness  can  the  will  and  resolve
to  oppose  the  VC  be  strengthened,  and  it  must  be  if  this  war  is  to  be  won.

Mr.  Kirkpatrick's  comment  was  based  upon  his  recent  trip  to  South  Vietnam:

I  agree  with  the  above  but  must  note  that  even  armed  with  your  pessimis-
tic comments  following  your  last  visit,  I  have  been  shocked  by  the  number
of  our  fCIAj  people  and  of  the  military,  even  those  whose  jobs  is  always
to  say  we  are  winning,  who  feel  that  the  tide  is  against  us.  Admittedly,  this
is  based  on  a  limited  number  of  discussions  here  and  in  Danang  in  three
days.  There  are  ominous  indications  that  the  VC  are  able  to  mount  larger
operations  than  in  the  past  using  bigger  arms,  including  antiaircraft.  Viet-
namese government  reactions  are  still  slow,  defensive  and  reminiscent  of
French  tactics  here  a  decade  ago.  There  are  still  really  no  fundamental
internal  security  measures  of  any  effectiveness  such  as  identity  cards,  block
wardens,  travel  controls,  etc.  ...  It  is  evident  that  a  major  factor  in  VC
victories  is  their  superior  intelligence  based  on  nationwide  penetrations  and
intimidations  at  all  levels.  .  .  .  Finally,  with  the  Laos  and  Cambodia  bor-
ders opened,  this  entire  pacification  effort  is  like  trying  to  mop  the  floor
before  turning  off  the  faucet.

Two  days  later  the  Secretary  received  an  advance  copy  of  SNTE  50-64,  '"Short-
term  Prospects  in  Southeast  Asia."'  Its  leading  conclusion  was:

(aj  That  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  very  serious  and  prospects  un-
certain. Even  with  U.S.  assistance  as  it  is  now,  we  believe  that,  unless
there  is  a  marked  improvement  in  the  effectiveness  of  the  South  Viet-
namese government  and  armed  forces.  South  Vietnam  has,  at  best,  an
even  chance  of  withstanding  the  insurgency  menace  during  the  next
few  weeks  or  months.

In  further  explanation  of  this  judgment,  it  was  stated  that  the  situation  had  been
serious  for  a  long  time  and  in  recent  months  it  had  deteriorated  further.  The
VC  had  exploited  dislocations  caused  by  the  November  coup  and  then  more
recently  by  the  January-  coup.  Just  as  Minh's  reorganization  was  beginning  to  be
established,  Khanh"s  coup  upset  eventhing,  and  Khanh's  regime  was  not  yet
assessable.  Meanwhile,  the  VC  had  improved  in  their  organization  and  armament,
were  increasingly  aggressive  and  acting  in  larger  units.

G. TWO  GESERAL  ALTERXATIVE  DIRECTIOSS  OF  POLICY

Thus  as  winter  drew  to  an  end  in  February-March  1964,  it  was  recognized,
as  it  had  never  been  fullv  recognized  before,  that  the  situation  in  Vietnam  was
deteriorating  so  rapidly  that  the  dimensions  and  kinds  of  effort  so  far  invested
could  not  hope  to  reverse  the  trend.  This  was  indeed  a  turning  point.  The  pro-
posals for  neutralization  that  had  been  loosely  suggested  in  late  fall  and  early
winter  having  been  rejected,  the  issue  to  be  resolved  was  what  kinds  of  new
efforts,  and  what  new  dimensions  of  U.S.  effort,  would  be  decided  upon.  One


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  43

direction  of  effort  which  might  have  been  chosen  had,  as  its  most  articulate
advocate,  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  Roger  Hilsman.
This  was  the  policy  line  that,  for  better  or  for  worse,  was  largely  rejected.  Mainly
because  of  this  policy  disagreement,  Mr.  Hilsman  left  his  post  at  almost  the  time
it  became  evident  that  his  views  were  conclusively  overruled.  At  the  time  of  his
departure  he  wrote  two  memos  to  the  Secretary  of  State  (dated  14  March  1964) ;
one  on  the  Southeast  Asia  problem  generally,  one  on  South  Vietnam.  The  latter
of  the  two  affords  not  only  a  good  summary  of  his  views  on  the  subject,  but  also
a  statement  of  the  policy  alternatives  that  were,  in  significant  measure,  rejected.
(The  rejection  was  of  course  by  no  means  total.  It  was  a  matter  of  degree  and  a
question  of  where  emphasis  should  lie  among  some  programs  that  were  not  in
dispute  generically.  But  the  matter  of  degree  and  emphasis  was  in  dispute,  and
it  was  sufficient  not  only  to  induce  Hilsman  to  resign  but  to  alter  drastically  the
course  of  U.S.  involvement.)  Hilsman  wrote:

In  my  judgment,  the  strategic  concept  that  was  developed  for  South  Viet-
nam remains  basically  sound.  If  we  can  ever  manage  to  have  it  implemented
with  vigor,  the  result  will  be  victory.

The  concept  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  villages  in  Southeast  Asia
are  turned  inward  on  themselves  and  have  little  or  no  sense  of  identification
with  either  the  national  government  or  Communist  ideology — that  the  vil-
lagers are  isolated  physically,  politically,  and  psychologically.  In  such  circum-
stances it  is  not  difficult  to  develop  a  guerrilla  movement  .  .  .

A  corollary  ...  is  that  the  villagers'  greatest  desire  is  security  and  that
if  the  villagers  are  given  security,  some  simple  progress  towards  a  better  life,
and — most  important  of  all — a  sense  that  the  government  cares  about  them
and  their  future,  they  will  respond  with  loyalty  .  .  .

On  the  basis  of  .  .  .  [this]  assumption,  the  strategic  concept  calls  for
primary  emphasis  on  giving  security  to  the  villagers.  The  tactics  are  the  so-
called  oil-blot  approach,  starting  with  a  secure  area  and  extending  it  slowly,
making  sure  no  Viet  Cong  pockets  are  left  behind,  and  using  police  units  to
winkle  out  [sic]  the  Viet  Cong  agents  in  each  particular  village.  This  calls
for  the  use  of  military  forces  in  a  different  way  from  that  of  orthodox,  con-
ventional war.  Rather  than  chasing  Viet  Cong,  the  military  must  put  primary
emphasis  on  clear-and-hold  operations  and  on  rapid  reinforcement  of  villages
under  attack.  It  is  also  important,  of  course,  to  keep  the  Viet  Cong  regular
units  off  balance  by  conventional  offensive  operations,  but  these  should  be
secondary  to  the  major  task  of  extending  security  .  .  .

At  the  heart  of  this  strategic  concept  are  two  basic  principles:

The  first  is  that  of  the  oil  blot.  In  the  past  the  GVN  sought  to  blanket  the
whole  country  with  so-called  strategic  hamlets  .  .  .  The  result  was  to
blanket  the  Delta  with  little  Dienbienphus — indefensible,  inadequately  armed
hamlets  far  from  reinforcements  ...  In  effect  these  were  storage  places  of
arms  for  the  Viet  Cong  which  could  be  seized  at  any  time.  After  November
first,  the  military  began  to  demobilize  some  of  these  vulnerable  villages  .  .  .
and  a  race  developed  between  the  government  and  the  Vict  Cong.  The  race
may  have  ended  in  a  tie,  but  .  .  .  the  Viet  Cong  now  have  much  better
weapons  and  greater  stocks  of  ammunition  than  they  ever  had  before.

The  second  basic  principle  is  that  the  way  to  fight  a  guerrilla  is  to  adopt  the
tactics  of  a  guerrilla  ...  In  spite  of  all  our  pressures,  this  has  never  been
done  in  Vietnam.  Instead,  the  emphasis  has  been  on  large  operations  .  .  .

As  to  the  question  of  operations  against  North  Vietnam,  I  would  suggest


44 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

that  such  operations  may  at  a  certain  stage  be  a  useful  supplement  to  an
effective  counterinsurgency  program,  but  .  .  .  not  be  an  effective  sub-
stitute .  .  .

Mv  own  preference  would  be  to  continue  the  covert,  or  at  least  deniable
operations  .  .  .  Then,  after  we  had  made  sufficient  progress  in  the  Delta
so  that  all  concerned  began  to  realize  that  the  Viet  Cong  were  losing  the
support  of  the  population,  and  that  their  ability  to  continue  the  war  de-
pended soleh  on  North  Vietnamese  support,  I  think  we  should  indicate  as
much  privatelv  to  the  North  Vietnamese  and  follow  this  bv  selected  attacks
on  their  infiltration  bases  and  training  camps.

In  my  judgment,  significant  action  against  North  Vietnam  that  is  taken
before  we  have  demonstrated  success  in  our  counterinsurgency  program  will
be  interpreted  by  the  Communists  as  an  act  of  desperation,  and  will,  there-
fore, not  be  effective  in  persuading  the  North  Vietnamese  to  cease  and  desist.
What  is  worse,  I  think  that  premature  action  will  so  alarm  our  friends  and
allies  and  a  significant  segment  of  domestic  opinion  that  the  pressures  for
neutralization  will  become  formidable.

In  sum,  I  believe  that  we  can  win  in  Vietnam  with  a  number  of  provisos.

The  first  proviso  is  that  we  do  not  over-militarize  the  war — that  we  con-
centrate not  on  killing  Viet  Cong  .  .  .  but  on  an  effective  program  for  ex-
tending the  areas  of  security  gradually,  systematically,  and  thoroughly  .  .  .

Nfy  second  proviso  is  that  there  be  political  stability  in  Saigon  .  .  .

Some  of  the  Hilsman  recommendations  were  to  be  adopted,  none  rejected  out-
of-hand.  The  so-called  oil  blot  principle  had  many  adherents,  and  was  in  fact
already  coming  into  vogue.  Over  the  ensuing  months,  the  phrase  was  much  hon-
ored, though  the  execution  mav  have  faltered.  No  one  disputed  the  principle  that
the  hamlets  needed  security  above  all  else,  nor  that  everything  depended  on  a
stable  government  in  Saigon.  Nevertheless,  emphasis  shifted  toward  greater  em-
phasis on  militar)  operations,  perhaps  for  the  pressing  reason  that  the  VC  were
out  now  in  increasing  numbers,  with  more  and  better  weapons,  seeming  to  invite,
if  not  to  require,  conventional  military  operations  if  the  VC  threatening  the
hamlets  were  to  be  destroyed  or  reduced  to  powerlessness.  And,  above  all,  the
more  elusive  the  VC  were,  the  stronger  thev  grew,  and  the  more  unstable  and
unpopular  the  GVN  became,  the  more  tempting  the  idea  of  attacking  the  north
seemed  to  be.

Much  more  influential  than  these  Hilsman  views  were  those  of  the  JCS,  espe-
ciallv  as  set  forth  in  the  memorandum  of  18  February  1964  to  the  SecDef  from
the  CJCS:

1 .  Reference  is  made  to  the  memorandum  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,
dated  22  January  1964  ...  It  sets  forth  a  number  of  actions  which  the
United  States  should  be  prepared  to  take  in  order  to  ensure  victory  .  .  .  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  reviewed  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  with  the
view  of  determining  additional  actions  which  can  be  recommended  for  im-
plementation immediately.

2.  The  Government  of  Vietnam  has  developed,  with  the  close  collabora-
tion of  the  U.S.  Military  Assistance  Command,  a  new  National  Pacification
Plan  which  provides  for  the  orderly  pacification  of  the  insurgency  in  ac-
cordance with  a  realistic  phasing  schedule  .  .  .  and  it  provides  for  con-
soHdaiion  of  secure  areas  and  expansion  of  them  (the  "spreading  oil  drop").
U.S.  military  assets  in  Vietnam  will  fully  support  this  plan.  What  is  now


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  45

required  is  implementation  of  additional  actions  which  will  insure  an  in-
tegrated political,  socio-economic,  and  psychological  offensive  to  support
more  fully  the  military  effort.  Accordingly,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recom-
mend that  the  Country  Team  be  directed  to  implement  the  following  actions
at  the  earliest  practicable  time:

a.  Induce  the  GVN  (General  Khanh)  military  to  accept  U.S.  advisors  at
all  levels  considered  necessary  by  COMUSMACV.  (This  is  particularly  ap-
plicable in  the  critical  provinces)  .  .  .

b.  Intensify  the  use  of  herbicides  for  crop  destruction  against  identified
Viet  Cong  areas  as  recommended  by  the  GVN.

c.  Improve  border  control  measures  .  .  .

d.  Direct  the  U.S.  civilian  agencies  involved  in  Vietnam  to  assist  the  GVN
in  producing  a  civilian  counterpart  package  plan  to  the  GVN  National
Pacification  Plan  .  .  .

e.  Provide  U.S.  civilian  advisors  to  all  necessary  echelons  and  GVN
agencies  .  .  .

f.  Encourage  early  and  effective  action  to  implement  a  realistic  land  re-
form program.

g.  Support  the  GVN  in  a  policy  of  tax  forgiveness  for  low  income  popu-
lation in  areas  where  the  GVN  determines  that  a  critical  state  of  insurgency
exists  .  .  .

h.  Assist  the  GVN  in  developing  a  National  Psychological  Operations
Plan  ...  to  establish  the  GVN  and  Khanh's  "images,"  create  a  "cause"
which  can  serve  as  a  rallying  point  for  the  youth/students  of  Vietnam,  and
develop  the  long  term  national  objectives  of  a  free  Vietnam.

i.  Intensify  efforts  to  gain  support  of  U.S.  news  media  representatives  in
Washington  .  .  .

j.  Arrange  U.S.  sponsored  trips  to  Vietnam  by  groups  of  prominent  jour-
nalists and  editors.

k.  Inform  all  GVN  military  and  civilian  officials  .  .  .  that  the  United
States  (a)  considers  it  imperative  that  the  present  government  be  stabilized,
(b)  would  oppose  another  coup,  and  (c)  that  the  United  States  is  prepared
to  offer  all  possible  assistance  in  forming  a  stable  government  ...  all  U.S.
intelligence  agencies  and  advisors  must  be  alert  to  and  report  cases  of  dis-
sension and  plotting  in  order  to  prevent  such  actions.

3.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recognize  that  the  implementation  of  the  fore-
going measures  will  not  be  sufficient  to  exercise  a  decisive  effect  on  the
campaign  against  the  Viet  Cong.  They  are  continuing  study  of  the  actions
suggested  in  the  memorandum  of  22  January  1964,  as  well  as  other  pro-
posals .  .  .  Among  the  subjects  to  be  studied  as  a  matter  of  urgency  are  the
following:

a.  Intensified  operations  against  North  Vietnam  to  include  air  bombings
of  selected  targets.

b.  Removal  of  restrictions  for  air  and  ground  cross-border  operations.

c.  Intelligence  and  reporting.

d.  U.S.  organizational  changes.

e.  Increased  U.S.  Navy  participation  in  shore  and  river  patrol  activities.

f.  Introduction  of  jet  aircraft  into  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force  and  the  U.S.
Air  Commando  unit  .  .  .

Except  for  2f,  2g,  2i,  2j,  and  the  escalatory  military  actions  of  paragraph  3
that  had  been  suggested  previously  by  the  ICS,  this  memorandum  outlined  much


46 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


of  the  program  that  was  to  be  adopted  by  the  SecDef  in  March  after  his  trip  to
Saigon,  and  approved  by  the  President  thereafter  as  NSAM  288.

H. THE  EACT  EINDING  MISSION  AND  NSAM-288

Before  the  Secretary  left  for  Vietnam,  trip  books  were  prepared  for  his  use  and
the  use  of  others  in  his  official  party.  In  this  trip  was  an  appraisal  of  the  Vietnam
situation,  dated  3  March  1964,  prepared  especially  for  this  occasion  by  the  nor-
mally optimistic  SACSA.  It  began  with  this  summary:

The  RVN  faces  the  most  critical  situation  in  its  nearly  10  years  of  ex-
istence. This  situation  is  the  result  of  political  erosion,  culminating  in  two
changes  of  government  within  three  months  and  in  a  nationwide  revamping
of  civil  administrators,  and  of  the  continued  growth  of  a  well-organized,
dedicated  Communist  insurgency  movement.

This  was  followed  by  a  political  discussion  wherein  there  was  mention  of  the
chronic  shortage  of  competent  administrators.  The  government  was  credited  with
superior  material  resources,  but,  "unless  it  is  able  to  demonstrate  the  willpower
and  political  skill  to  bring  this  potential  to  bear,  the  political  and  security  situa-
tion will  continue  to  deteriorate."  It  was  considered  hopeful  that  Khanh  seemed
determined  to  provide  dynamic  leadership,  but  it  was  observed  that  he  would
have  to  overcome  "widespread  public  and  official  apathy,  lack  of  confidence,  low
morale,  and  factionalism  among  key  personnel."

Khanh's  efforts  and  attributes  were  catalogued  approvingly,  but  this  only  led
to  a  concluding  paragraph  as  follows:

Encouraging  as  Khanh's  performance  has  been  to  date,  he  has  not  been
able  to  counteract  the  overall  trend  of  events  in  South  Vietnam.  In  many  of
the  most  critical  provinces,  pacification  programs  remain  at  a  virtual  stand-
still and  there  is  an  evident  lack  of  urgency  and  clear  direction.

This  was  followed  by  a  section  entitled  "Military  and  Security  Situation."  This
section  contained  an  interesting  judgment,  which  represented  a  reversal  by
SACSA  of  opinions  expressed  six  months  or  more  before  concerning  the  time
when  the  situation  had  begun  to  deteriorate.

By  the  final  quarter  of  1963,  the  conclusion  was  inescapable  that  despite
the  considerable  improvement  in  the  offensive  capabilities  of  the  RVN's
counter-insurgency  forces,  the  VC  likewise  had  improved  their  own  capabili-
ties. It  became  apparent  that  a  gradual  erosion  of  the  government's  position
throughout  the  country  had  been  underway  since  at  least  August  1963.
This  erosion  became  progressively  worse  after  the  November  coup,  although
late  in  January  1964,  the  Minh  government  exhibited  some  signs  of  assum-
ing the  initiative.  This  initiative  dissolved  with  the  Khanh  coup  on  30
January.  Organizational  dislocations  brought  about  by  coups  have  weakened
the  national  direction  of  most  of  the  counter-insurgency  programs  under-
way throughout  the  country.  The  large  number  of  personnel  changes,  both
locally  and  nationally,  have  played  a  crucial  role  in  the  indecision  and  lack
of  energetic  direction  of  the  government's  programs.

Despite  General  Khanh's  expressed  determination  to  prosecute  the  war
vigorously,  available  statistics  since  his  coup  reflect  a  gradual  decline  in
small-scale  ARVN  operations.  In  addition,  Communist  forces  continue  to


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  47

enjoy  the  initiative  and  to  execute  disruptive  operations  at  times  and  places
of  their  own  choosing  .  .  .

All  available  evidence  points  to  a  steady  improvement  in  the  VC's  mili-
tary posture,  both  quantitatively  and  qualitatively,  throughout  1963  and
the  first  two  months  of  1964  .  .  .  [Emphasis  supplied.]

In  advising  the  Embassy  in  Saigon  of  the  intended  visit  of  Secretary  Mc-
Namara  and  General  Taylor  in  March,  a  Joint  State  Defense  message  out-
lined the  issues  that  it  was  hoped  would  be  taken  up  during  the  visit.  Five  major
subject  areas  were  named,  each  of  which  was  divided  into  parts.  Objectives  were
described,  in  general,  as  "to  produce  best  possible  evaluation  of  situation,  assist
you  in  measures  to  improve  it,  and  help  Washington  make  future  policy  de-
cisions."

The  first  subject  area  was  a  Review  of  Situation,  in  three  parts:  political,  eco-
nomic, and  military.  It  was  suggested  that  the  political  review  should  be  in
executive  session  limited  to  the  three  principals  (McNamara,  Lodge  and  Taylor)
and  the  DCM,  Harkins,  Brent,  de  Silva,  and  perhaps  Zorthian.  The  subjects  of
prime  interest  were  how  Khanh  was  taking  hold,  and  the  dangers  of  further
coups.  Next  in  importance  were  the  effectiveness  of  the  civil  administration  and
the  morale  of  major  religious  and  political  groups,  and  measures  to  strengthen
and  buttress  the  Khanh  regime.  On  the  economic  side,  the  Secretary  hoped  to  get
a  full  review  of  the  economy,  the  budget,  price  and  supply  trends,  AID  opera-
tions, and,  finally,  the  possibility  of  land  reform  and  tax  forgiveness.  On  the
military  side,  it  was  suggested  they  begin  with  the  broad  picture,  and  later  pro-
ceed to  selected  critical  provinces  and  specific  provincial  plans.

The  main  interest,  with  respect  to  intelligence  and  reporting,  was  to  review
Country  Team  recommendations  concerning  periodic  assessments  and  joint  re-
porting requirements.  After  this  the  interest  centered  on  intelligence  concerning
the  VC — specifically  the  extent  of  fheir  control  and  activities  in  the  provinces,
intentions  and  tactics,  and  indicators  thereof.  Then,  clearly  in  anticipation  of
possible  requirement  for  public  relations  materials  for  us  in  U.S.:

4.  Handling  of  intelligence  bearing  on  control  and  direction  of  Viet  Cong
from  North  Vietnam  including  infiltration  of  personnel  and  weapons  and
operation  of  communications  net.  One  of  our  basic  projects  here  is  pre-
paring strongest  possible  material  on  this  subject  for  use  as  appropriate  to
support  stronger  measures.  We  need  to  be  sure  your  intelligence  effort  is
geared  to  furnish  such  information  promptly  in  usable  form.

5.  Review  of  draft  (which  we  will  supply)  of  control  and  support  of  VC
by  North  Vietnam.

Concerning  current  operational  problems,  the  items  foreseen  to  be  of  interest
were  policy  on  possible  evacuation  of  dependents,  review  of  GVN  national  and
provincial  plans,  rural  rehabilitation  plans,  adequacy  and  deployment  of  ARVN,
status  and  problems  of  paramilitary  forces,  current  status  and  possible  expansion
of  the  U.S.  Special  Forces'  role  in  connection  with  Civilian  Irregular  Defense
Groups  (CIDG),  status  of  plans  to  reduce  or  reorganize  U.S.  forces  as  GVN
became  capable  of  performing  functions  currently  performed  by  U.S.,  review
of  political  and  psywar  progress,  and  of  military  tactics  against  VC,  and  "pos-
sible modification  of  existing  operation  [al]  restrictions."

The  special  third  country  problems  of  French  activities  in  RVN,  and  of
Cambodia  and  Laos,  would  be  dealt  with  in  executive  session.


48 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

The  last  item  listed  for  special  consideration  was  to  review  Operations  Plan
34A-64,  for  feasibility,  adequacy,  and  possible  expansion,  with  special  con-
sideration to  advantages  derivable  from  making  it  an  overt  Vietnamese  program
with  participation  by  U.S.  as  required  to  obtain  adequate  results."

The  language  and  the  tone  of  this  message  suggest  that,  however  pessimistic
may  have  been  the  appraisals  of  the  situation,  there  was  no  disposition  to  recog-
nize any  doubt  that  the  struggle  could  be  won  or  that  we  would  undertake
whatever  measures  were  necessary  to  win  it.  Previously  unprecedented  escalatory
measures  of  a  military  nature  were  beginning  to  be  studied  tentatively  as  a
response  to  the  bad  news  that  kept  coming.  Most  of  these  were  to  be  rejected,  for
the  time  being,  except  for  moves  to  convey  to  NVN  that  an  exchange  of  air  blows
between  NVN  and  SVN  was  a  possibility.  This,  it  was  hoped,  might  exploit
NVN  fears  that  if  they  persisted  aiding  the  VC  they  faced  the  loss  of  their  in-
dustrial establishment.  The  inferential  significance  of  our  considerations  at  this
time  seems  to  have  been  that  we  were  already  committed,  by  the  momentum
of  our  past  actions,  to  a  course  which  forbade  turning  back,  however  reluctant
we  might  be  about  taking  any  forward  step.

A  schedule  for  the  trip  was  set  up  extending  from  the  planned  arrival  on  8
March  1964  through  12  March.  In  the  course  of  five  days  of  briefings,  con-
ferences, and  field  trips,  most  of  the  details  of  a  program,  to  implement  policies
already  evidently  largely  agreed  upon,  were  decided  upon  in  the  light  of  views
and  information  elicited  from  our  own  and  GVN  officials.  In  the  final  meeting
with  General  Khanh  and  his  GVN  associates,  most  of  the  programs  for  Vietnam
which  were  later  to  be  recommended  to  the  President  by  Secretary  McNamara
were  discussed.  The  exchange  of  views  at  that  time  was  made  a  matter  of  record
by  a  memcon,  a  summary  of  which  was  transmitted  the  next  day  by  Ambassador
Lodge.

General  Khanh  .  .  .  proposed  National  Service  Act  for  SVN.  Khanh
said  his  government  prepared  embark  upon  program  to  mobilize  all  human
and  material  resources  to  fight  VC.  As  envisaged  by  General  Khanh  pro-
posed National  Service  Act  would  have  two  major  components:  military
service  and  civil  defense  .  .  .

Military  service  comprised  of:  RVNAF  .  .  .  (actual  strength:  227,000;
planned:  251,683);  Civil  Guard  (actual:  90,032;  planned:  119,636).  SDC
&  Hamlet  Militia  .  .  .  (actual:  257,960;  planned:  422,874).  Civil  Defense
comprised  of  Civil  Service  Corps,  Cadre  Corps,  National  Youth,  and  Po-
litical-Administration Corps  .  .  .

Civil  Defense  component  included  Civil  Administration  Corps  for  work
in  countryside.  Khanh  emphasized  that  in  civil  defense  sector  all  civilians
would  be  included  .  .  .

Khanh  emphasized  figures  were  planning  figures  only  and  designed  give
idea  of  number  of  military  and  civilians  required  and  indicate  financial
implications  of  plan  .  .  .

McNamara  stated  that  U.S.  .  .  .  would  wish  to  study  strength  figures
carefully;  however,  his  first  impression  was  that  figure  of  422,874  SDC  and
Hamlet  Militia  appeared  unduly  large  and  would  be  difficult  to  support.
Khanh  responded  that  in  actual  practice  total  numbers  may  not  reach  this
level.  In  fact,  number  may  not  exceed  300,000  SDC  and  Hamlet  Militia
actually  deployed  against  VC  .  .  .

Thieu  stated  that  all  men  from  age  18  through  40  would  be  required
to  participate  in  national  pacification  effort.  Most  of  them  .  .  .  would


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  196 3- Apr.  1965  49

serve  in  same  positions  they  now  occupy.  Others,  such  as  National  Youth
Group  up  to  age  40,  would  be  required  serve  in  city  and  countryside  and
would  be  organized  into  small  groups  to  assist  ARVN  and  Civil  Guard.
Category  of  Political-Administration  Corps  would  consist  of  cadres  planned
for  assignment  to  villages  and  hamlets.  General  Thieu  estimated  that  125,-
000  such  cadre  would  be  required  .  .  .  McNamara  stated  that  general
approach  appeared  excellent  but  he  questioned  whether  GVN  would  need
125,000  cadre  .  .  .  This  number  added  to  total  figures  for  Civil  Guard,
SDC  and  Hamlet  Militia,  constituted  an  extremely  large  figure  .  .  .  popu-
lation appeared  disproportionate  .  .  .  desirable  to  look  most  closely  at
planning  figures.

Khanh  replied  that  he  intended  make  maximum  effort  in  first  instance  in
8  critical  provinces  surrounding  Saigon  .  .  .  However,  a  National  Service
Act  would  have  a  very  good  effect  in  Saigon  and  the  other  urban  areas.

McNamara  inquired  whether  upon  his  return  to  Washington  he  could
tell  President  Johnson  that  General  Khanh's  government  was  prepared
embark  on  a  program  of  national  mobilization  of  human  and  material  re-
sources and  whether  President  Johnson  in  turn  could  inform  the  American
people  .  .  .  Khanh  replied  in  the  affirmative  .  .  .  McNamara  indicated
that  he  viewed  concept  favorably  and  .  .  .  Ambassador  stated  that  he
favored  general  concept  but  thought  that  detailed  figures  should  be  looked
into  carefully.  Ambassador  also  believed  that  emphasis  should  be  placed
first  on  8  critical  provinces  surrounding  Saigon  .  .  .

General  Harkins  noted  that  a  mobilization  law  was  in  fact  in  existence
but  that  few  people  know  about  it.  He  pointed  out  that  ARVN,  CG  and
SDC  were  not  up  to  their  authorized  military  strengths.  Khanh  said  that
he  realized  this  but  believed  it  still  desirable  to  have  a  new  law  setting
forth  a  national  service  or  mobilization  program.  Harkins  stated  that
MACV  and  other  elements  of  U.S.  Mission  would  like  to  work  closely
with  Khanh  ...  in  developing  such  a  law.  Khanh  replied  this  well  under-
stood. McNamara  said  it  was  agreed  on  American  side  that  general  concept
was  a  wise  one  and  that  we  should  proceed  on  this  basis.

Khanh  then  inquired  whether  it  was  desirable  to  raise  CG  to  same  rela-
tive status  as  ARVN  as  regards  salary,  pensions,  survivors  benefits,  etc.
He  estimated  that  total  cost  would  be  in  neighborhood  of  one  billion
piasters.  McNamara  thought  this  was  highly  desirable  .  .  .

McNamara  inquired  how  long  ...  it  would  take  to  recruit  and  train
administrative  cadre  for  8  critical  provinces  near  Saigon.  Khanh  estimated
approximately  one  month,  in  any  event  he  believed  cadres  could  be  in
place  by  end  of  April.  Khanh  said  GVN  would  aim  for  volunteers  for  this
effort  and  it  was  not  necessary  to  await  promulgation  of  National  Service
Act.

In  response  Taylor's  question  as  to  how  long  Khanh  anticipated  it  would
take  to  draft  and  promulgate  National  Service  Law,  Khanh  observed  that
.  .  .  law  could  be  ready  for  his  signature  in  very  short  time.  Taylor  pointed
to  necessity  give  due  regard  to  democratic  forms  in  developing  and  an-
nouncing a  National  Service  Act.  Khanh  agreed  and  said  that  at  same
time  a  major  effort  was  being  made  to  pacify  the  countryside.  He  intended
push  for  concurrent  development  of  democratic  institutions  and  forms.
McNamara  suggested  that  when  Khanh  ready  announce  a  National  Service
Act  that  he  also  re-emphasize  related  actions  .  .  .  such  as  those  for  ex-
pansion of  national  economy,  for  increased  educational  opportunities  in


50 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

hamlets,  for  increased  production  of  rice,  for  marketing  of  fish,  and  so
forth.  McNamara  believed  a  well  publicized  announcement  of  this  nature
would  find  ready  response  among  people  and  would  materially  assist  Khanh
to  obtain  and  hold  support  of  Vietnamese  people.  .  .  .

1.  NSAM-288

The  program  formulated  in  March  1964  in  connection  with  the  trip  to  Viet-
nam was  reported  orally  to  the  President  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  the
Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  on  their  return,  then  presented  formally  to  the
President  and  the  NSC  by  memorandum  to  the  President  dated  16  March.
[Doc.  54]  It  was  finally  approved  as  NSAM  288  dated  17  March  1964.  As  such
NSC  documents  go,  NSAM  288  was  comprehensive  and  programmatic.  It  re-
viewed U.S.  objectives,  appraised  the  situation,  discussed  various  alternative
courses  of  action,  and  finally  recommended  a  rather  detailed  program  intended
to  serve  the  defined  objectives  and  to  meet  the  situation  as  it  had  been  described.
It  consisted  of  seven  parts.  The  first  was  a  discussion  and  definition  of  objectives,
the  second  a  description  of  U.S.  policy,  the  third  an  appraisal  of  the  present
situation,  the  fourth  a  discussion  of  alternative  courses  of  action,  the  fifth  a
consideration  of  possible  actions,  the  sixth  a  mention  of  other  actions  considered
but  rejected,  and  seventh  and  last,  a  statement  of  specific  recommendations.

NSAM  288,  being  based  on  the  official  recognition  that  the  situation  in  Viet-
nam was  considerably  worse  than  had  been  realized  at  the  time  of  the  adoption
of  NSAM  273,  outlined  a  program  that  called  for  considerable  enlargement  of
U.S.  effort.  It  involved  an  assumption  by  the  United  States  of  a  greater  part  of
the  task,  and  an  increased  involvement  by  the  United  States  in  the  internal  affairs
of  South  Vietnam,  and  for  these  reasons  it  carried  with  it  an  enlarged  commit-
ment of  U.S.  prestige  to  the  success  of  our  effort  in  that  area.

In  tacit  acknowledgement  that  this  greater  commitment  of  prestige  called  for
an  enlargement  of  stated  objectives,  NSAM  288  did  indeed  enlarge  these  ob-
jectives. Whereas,  in  NSAM  273  the  objectives  were  expressly  limited  to  helping
the  government  of  South  Vietnam  win  its  contest  against  an  externally  directed
Communist  conspiracy,  NSAM  288  escalated  the  objectives  into  a  defense  of
all  of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  West  Pacific  and  redefined  American  foreign  policy
and  American  security  generally.  In  NSAM  273  the  statement  of  objectives  was
comparatively  simple  and  limited:

It  remains  the  central  object  of  the  United  States  in  South  Vietnam  to
assist  the  people  and  the  government  of  that  country  to  win  their  contest
against  the  externally  directed  and  supported  Communist  conspiracy.  The
test  of  all  U.S.  decisions  and  actions  in  this  area  should  be  the  effectiveness
of  their  contribution  to  this  purpose.

In  contrast  to  this,  the  statement  of  "U.S.  Objectives  in  South  Vietnam"  in
NSAM  288  was  considerably  more  extensive  and  more  central  to  U.S.  security
interests:

We  seek  an  independent  non-Communist  South  Vietnam.  We  do  not
require  that  it  serve  as  a  Western  base  or  as  a  member  of  a  Western  alliance.
South  Vietnam  must  be  free,  however,  to  accept  outside  assistance  as
required  to  maintain  its  security.  This  assistance  should  be  able  to  take  the
form  not  only  of  economic  and  social  measures  but  also  police  and  military
help  to  root  out  and  control  insurgent  elements.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  51

Unless  we  can  achieve  this  objective  in  South  Vietnam,  almost  all  of
Southeast  Asia  will  probably  fall  under  Communist  dominance  (all  of
Vietnam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia),  accommodate  to  Communism  so  as  to
remove  effective  U.S.  and  anti-Communist  influence  (Burma),  or  fall  under
the  domination  of  forces  not  now  explicitly  Communist  but  likely  then  to
become  so  (Indonesia  taking  over  Malaysia).  Thailand  might  hold  for
a  period  without  help,  but  would  be  under  grave  pressure.  Even  the  Philip-
pines would  become  shaky,  and  the  threat  to  India  on  the  West,  Australia
and  New  Zealand  to  the  South,  and  Taiwan,  Korea,  and  Japan  to  the  North
and  East  would  be  greatly  increased.

All  of  these  consequences  would  probably  have  been  true  even  if  the
U.S.  had  not  since  1954,  and  especially  since  1961,  become  so  heavily  en-
gaged in  South  Vietnam.  However,  that  fact  accentuates  the  impact  of  a
Communist  South  Vietnam  not  only  in  Asia  but  in  the  rest  of  the  world,
where  the  South  Vietnam  conflict  is  regarded  as  a  test  case  of  U.S.  capacity
to  help  a  nation  to  meet  the  Communist  "war  of  liberation."

Thus,  purely  in  terms  of  foreign  policy,  the  stakes  are  high  .  .  .

The  argument  in  the  next  to  last  paragraph  of  NSAM  288  that  "all  these  con-
sequences would  probably  have  been  true  even  if  the  U.S.  had  not  since  1954,
and  especially  since  1961,  become  so  heavily  engaged  in  SVN"  is  clearly  de-
batable. But  the  logic  that  the  increasing  U.S.  involvement  led  to  increasing  com-
mitment of  U.S.  prestige  is  probably  beyond  argument.  And  it  is  probably  also
true  that,  in  the  extent  to  which  we  defined  the  issues  simply  and  centrally  as  a
symbolic  confrontation  with  Communism,  wherein  far  more  is  at  stake  than
the  immediate  battlefield  (in  South  Vietnam)  on  which  we  fought — and  acted
upon  this  definition  and  proclaimed  it  as  the  issue — we  tended  more  and  more
to  endow  the  issue  with  that  significance  whether  or  not  it  had  in  fact  been  the
issue  in  the  first  place.  And  this  poiVit,  if  closely  examined,  might  logically  have
raised  the  question  of  whether  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  accept  any  challenge
put  to  us,  and  if  so  what  advantage  this  confers  upon  our  enemies  in  granting
them  the  choice  of  issue  and  of  battleground.  Finally,  a  struggle  so  defined  came
close  to  calling  for  war  a  outrance — not  the  centrally  political  war,  with
severe  restriction  upon  violent  means,  following  counter-guerrilla  warfare  theory.

Despite  the  encompassing  nature  of  the  definition  of  objectives,  and  although
NSAM  288  proposed  a  marked  increase  in  U.S.  involvement,  our  implementing
programs  remained  comparatively  limited  as  if  we  did  not  fully  believe  these
strong  words.  We  even  expressed  agreement  with  the  older  idea  of  helping  the
Vietnamese  help  themselvs.

We  are  now  trying  to  help  South  Vietnam  defeat  the  Vict  Cong,  supported
from  the  North,  by  means  short  of  the  unqualified  use  of  U.S.  combat
forces.  We  are  not  acting  against  North  Vietnam  except  by  a  modest
"covert"  program  operated  by  South  Vietnamese  (and  a  few  Chinese  Na-
tionalists)— a  program  so  limited  that  it  is  unlikely  to  have  any  significant
effect  .  .  .

There  was  a  further  statement  of  this  older  policy  theme:

There  were  and  are  some  sound  reasons  for  the  limits  imposed  by  the
present  policy — the  South  Vietnamese  must  win  their  own  fight;  U.S.  inter-
vention on  a  larger  scale,  and/or  GVN  actions  against  the  North,  would


52 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  III

disturb  key  allies  and  other  nations;  etc.  In  any  case,  it  is  vital  that  we  con-
tinue to  take  every  reasonable  measure  to  assure  success  in  South  Vietnam.
The  policy  choice  is  not  an  "either/or"  between  this  course  of  action  and
possible  pressures  against  the  North;  the  former  is  essential  and  without
regard  to  our  decision  with  respect  to  the  latter.  The  latter  can,  at  best,
only  reinforce  the  former.

At  the  end  of  this  section,  which  described  measures  that  we  would  take  to
assist  the  Khanh  government  in  administering  internal  programs,  there  was  a
final  admonition:

Many  of  the  actions  described  in  the  succeeding  paragraphs  fit  right
into  the  framework  of  the  [Pacification]  plan  as  announced  by  Khanh.
. Wherever  possible,  we  should  tie  our  urgings  of  such  actions  to  Khanh's
own  formulation  of  them,  so  that  he  will  be  carrying  out  a  Vietnamese  plan
and  not  one  imposed  by  the  United  States.  [Emphasis  supplied]

The  discussion  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam  began  with  the  statement  that
the  military  tools  and  concepts  that  had  been  adopted  were  sound  and  adequate.
But  much  needed  to  be  done  in  terms  of  a  more  effective  employment  both  of
military  forces  and  of  the  economic  and  civic  action  means  already  available.
This  improved  effort  might  require  some  selective  increases  in  the  U.S.  presence.
These  increases  were  not  considered  to  be  necessarily  major  in  nature  and  not  in
contradiction  to  "the  U.S.  policy  of  reducing  existing  military  personnel  where
South  Vietnamese  are  in  a  position  to  assume  the  functions  .  .  ."

No  major  reductions  of  U.S.  personnel  in  the  near  future  were  expected,  but
it  continued  to  be  the  basic  policy  that  there  would  be  gradual  U.S.  withdrawal
from  participation.  This  was  considered  to  be  sound  because  of  its  effect  "in
portraying  to  the  U.S.  and  the  world  that  we  continue  to  regard  the  war  as  a
conflict  the  South  Vietnamese  must  win  and  take  ultimate  responsibility  for."
And  along  this  line  there  was  the  continued  hope  that  "substantial  reductions  in
the  numbers  of  U.S.  military  training  personnel  should  be  possible  before  the
end  of  1965.  (The  language  here  suggested  a  beginning  retreat  from  NSAM
273).

It  was  conceded,  however,  that  "the  situation  has  unquestionably  been  grow-
ing worse,  at  least  since  September  .  .  ."  Forty  percent  of  the  territory  was
then  under  the  Viet  Cong  control  or  predominant  influence,  and  twenty-two
of  the  forty-three  provinces  were  controlled  fifty  percent  or  more  by  the  Viet
Cong.  Other  indications  of  the  continuing  deterioration  were  that  large  groups
of  the  population  displayed  signs  of  apathy  and  indifference,  while  frustration
was  evident  within  the  U.S.  contingent.  Desertion  rates  within  the  ARVN  and
the  Vietnamese  paramilitary  were  particularly  high  and  increasing — especially
in  the  latter.  Draft-dodging  was  high;  but  the  Viet  Cong  were  recruiting  ener-
getically and  effectively.  The  morale  of  the  hamlet  militia  and  of  the  SDC,  upon
which  the  security  of  the  hamlets  depended,  was  poor  and  falling.  The  position
of  the  government  within  the  provinces  was  weakening.

The  machinery  of  political  control  extending  from  Saigon  down  to  the
hamlets  had  virtually  disappeared  following  the  November  coup.  Of  forty-one
incumbent  province  chiefs  on  November  1,  thirty-five  had  been  replaced.  Nine
provinces  had  had  three  province  chiefs  in  three  months,  and  one  province  had
had  four.  Lesser  officials  had  been  replaced  by  the  score.  Almost  all  major  mili-
tary commands  had  changed  hands  twice  since  the  November  coup  and  the


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  53

faith  of  the  peasants  had  been  shaken  by  disruptions  in  experienced  leadership
and  loss  of  physical  security.

There  was  an  increase  in  North  Vietnamese  support,  and  communication
between  Hanoi  and  the  Viet  Cong  had  increased.  CHICOM  75  millimeter  re-
coilless  rifles  and  heavy  machine  guns  were  increasingly  in  evidence  among  the
Viet  Cong.

The  greatest  source  of  weakness  in  the  present  situation  was  the  uncertain
viability  of  the  Khanh  government.  The  greatest  need,  therefore,  was  to  do  the
things  that  would  enhance  the  stability  of  that  government,  and  at  the  same  time
provide  the  advice  and  assistance  that  was  necessary  to  increase  its  capabilities
to  deal  with  the  problems  confronting  it.

Among  the  alternatives  considered,  but  rejected  for  the  time  being  (along
with  complete  adoption  of  the  Hilsman  formulations),  were  overt  military  pres-
sure on  North  Vietnam,  neutralization,  return  of  U.S.  dependents,  furnishing  of
a  U.S.  combat  unit  to  secure  the  Saigon  area,  and  a  full  takeover  of  the  com-
mand in  South  Vietnam  by  the  U.S.  With  respect  to  this  last  proposal,  it  was  said
that

.  .  .  the  judgement  of  all  senior  people  in  Saigon,  with  which  we  concur,
was  that  the  possible  military  advantages  of  such  action  would  be  far  out-
weighed by  adverse  psychological  impact.  It  would  cut  across  the  whole
basic  picture  of  the  Vietnamese  winning  their  own  war  and  lay  us  wide
open  to  hostile  propaganda  both  within  South  Vietnam  and  outside.

The  areas  of  action  that  were  favored  and  that  formed  the  basis  of  the  specific
recommendations  to  which  the  paper  led,  fell  under  two  major  and  two  minor
headings.  The  two  major  headings  were,  ( 1 )  civil  and  military  mobilization  and
(2)  improvement  of  military  forces.  The  two  minor  headings  were  (1)  addi-
tional military  equipment  for  the  GVN  and  (2)  economic  actions.

The  first  point  under  civil  and  military  mobilization  was  to  put  the  whole
country  on  a  war  footing.  The  purpose  was  to  maintain  and  strengthen  the
armed  forces,  to  assist  other  national  efforts,  and  to  remedy  the  recognized
inequities  and  under-utilization  of  current  manpower  policies.  Specifically,  there
was  proposed  a  new  national  mobilization  plan  including  a  national  service
law,  which  was  to  be  developed  on  an  urgent  basis  by  the  Country  Team  in
collaboration  with  the  Khanh  Government.  To  this  end  the  third  of  the  several
recommendations  at  the  conclusion  of  the  report  called  lor  the  U.S.  to  "sup-
port a  program  of  national  mobilization  (including  a  national  service  law)  to
put  South  Vietnam  on  a  war  footing."

A  second  measure  under  this  heading  was  to  strengthen  the  armed  forces,  both
regular  and  paramilitary  by  at  least  50,000  men.  Of  these,  about  15,000  would
be  required  to  fill  the  regular  armed  forces  (ARVN)  to  their  current  authorized
strength,  5,000  would  be  needed  to  fill  the  existing  paramilitary  forces  to  their
authorized  strengths,  and  the  remaining  30,000  would  be  to  increase  the  strength
of  the  paramilitary  forces.  To  this  end  it  was  specifically  recommended  that  the
U.S.  "assist  the  Vietnamese  to  increase  the  armed  forces  (regular  plus  para-
military) by  at  least  50,000  men."

The  third  measure  of  mobilization  was  to  assist  in  an  increase  of"  the  civil
administrative  corps  of  Vietnam  by  an  additional  7,500  in  1964,  with  the  ulti-
mate target  of  at  least  40,000  men  for  service  in  8,000  hamlets  and  2,500
villages,  and  in  3  provincial  centers.  It  was  specified  that  in  accomplishing  this
the  United  States  should  work  with  the  GVN  to  devise  necessary  recruiting
plans,  training  facilities,  financing  methods  and  organizational  arrangements.


54 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

and  should  furnish  training  personnel  at  once  under  the  auspices  of  the  AID
mission.  The  specific  recommendation  was  "to  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  create
a  greatlv  enlarged  civil  administrative  corps  for  work  at  province,  district  and
hamlet  levels."

The  improvement  of  SVX  military  forces  was  to  be  accomplished  not  only
bv  the  increase  in  numbers  specified  above,  but  also  by  internal  reforms  and
organizational  improvements.  What  remained  of  the  current  hamlet  militia  and
related  forces  of  part-time  nature  for  hamlet  defense  should  be  consolidated
with  the  self-defense  corps  into  a  single  force  which  would  be  compensated
bv  the  national  government.  The  pay  and  collateral  benefits  of  the  paramilitary
groups  should  be  substantially  improved.  Strength  of  the  forces  should  be  main-
tained and  expanded  bv  effectivelv  enforced  conscription  measures  and  bv  more
centrally  directed  recruitment  policies.  It  was  recommended  that  U.S.  personnel
should  be  assigned  to  the  training  of  the  paramilitary  forces.  The  National  Police
required  further  special  consideration.  An  offensive  guerrilla  force  should  be
created  to  operate  along  the  border  and  in  areas  where  VC  control  was  dominant.
These  measures  were  included  in  specific  recommendations  to  "assist  the  Viet-
namese to  improve  and  reorganize  the  paramilitary  forces  and  to  increase  their
compensation"  and  "to  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  create  an  offensive  guerrilla
force."

Under  the  last  two  headings  there  were  recommendations  to  provide  the
Vietnamese  Air  Force  with  25  A-IH  aircraft  in  exchange  for  their  T-28s  and
to  provide  the  Vietnamese  Army  additional  M-113  APCs  (withdrawing  the
M-114s  there)  and  also  to  provide  additional  river  boats  and  approximately  5
to  10  million  dollars  worth  of  related  additional  materiel.  A  fertilizer  program
to  increase  the  production  of  rice  in  areas  safely  controlled  by  the  government
was  to  be  expanded  and  announced  verv  soon.

Although  VC  successes  in  rural  areas  had  been  the  prime  feature  of  the
downswing  over  the  past  half  year  or  more,  pacification  was  to  receive  less  com-
parative emphasis,  in  fact,  in  the  next  year  or  so  than  it  had  before.  Neverthe-
less, Khanh's  statement  of  a  pacification  strategy — which  was  later  to  form  a
conceptual  basis  for  the  ill-fated  Hop  Tac  program — was  approved  in  principle,
and  a  critique  of  it  was  accorded  a  place  as  Annex  B  of  NSAM  288.

In  simplified  outline,  the  plan  was  based  on  a  "clear  and  hold"  concept,  includ-
ing for  each  area  these  steps:

1.  Clearing  organized  VC  units  from  the  area  by  military  action;

2.  Establishing  permanent  securitv  for  the  area  bv  the  Civil  Guard,  Self
Defense  Corps,  hamlet  militia,  and  national  police;

3.  Rooting  out  the  VC  '"infrastructure"  in  the  hamlets  (particularly  the  VC
tax  collector  and  the  chief  of  the  VC  political  cadre);

4.  Providing  the  elements  of  economic  and  social  progress  for  the  people  of
the  area:  schools,  health  services,  water  supplv.  agricultural  improvements,  etc.

These  general  ideas  were  to  be  (1)  adapted  and  applied  flexibly  .  .  .  (2)
applied  under  the  clear,  undivided  and  decentralized  control  of  the  province
chief;  and  (3)  applied  in  a  gradually  spreading  area  moving  from  secure  to  less
secure  areas  and  from  more  populated  to  less  populated  areas  (the  "oil  drop"
principle)  .  .  .

The  major  requirements  for  success  of  the  Pacification  Plan  were:

First,  and  of  by  far  the  greatest  importance,  clear,  strong,  and  continuous

political  leadership  .  .  .

General  Khanh  and  his  top  colleagues  were  to  supply  this  requirement.  Their

ability  to  do  so  was  as  yet  untested,  but  some  early  evidence  was  good  .  .  .


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Sow  1 963- Apr.  1965  55

A  second  major  requirement  for  success  of  the  Pacification  Plan  was  the
adoption  of  government  policies  which  would  give  greater  promise  of  economic
progress  and  greater  incentives  to  rural  peoplef  The" three  kev  areas  were:

— the  price  of  rice  to  farmers,  which  was  artifically  depressed  and  held  sub-
stantially below  the  world  market  price:

— uncertain  or  oppressive  tenure  conditions  for  many  farmers  (a  land  reform
program  was  half  completed  some  years  ago):  the  VC  had  been  exploiting  the
situation  ver\'  effectively;

— oppressive  marketing  conditions  for  fishermen  (fisheries  accounted  for  25
per  cent  of  the  rural  product  of  S\'N) .

General  Khanh's  initial  statement  about  the  land  reform  problem  was  not
very  encouraging:  Mr.  Oanh  was  not  even  aware  of  the  rice  problem  until  a
conversation  with  U.S.  visitors  on  March  10th.

A  third  major  requirement  for  success  of  the  Pacification  Plan  was  to  improve
greatly  the  leadership,  pay.  training,  and  numbers  of  some  of  the  kinds  of
personnel  needed,  notably:

— pay  and  allowances  for  Civil  Guards  and  S.D.C.  .  .  .

— ^recruitment  and  training  for  more  civilian  technicians  .  .  .  also  increased
pay  and  supporting  costs  for  them;  and  recruitment  and  training  of  a  new-
kind  of  rural  worker — "hamlet  action  teams" — to  move  into  newly  cleared  ham-
lets and  start  improvement  programs  .  .  .

The  real  problems  were  managerial:  to  develop  concepts,  training  schools,
action  programs,  and  above  all,  leadership  at  the  provincial  level  and  below.

Other  requirements  for  success  of  the  Pacification  Plan  included:  improvement
in  the  leadership  and  attitudes  of  the  ARVN  particularly  at  levels  which  came
into  contact  with  villagers:  greatlv  increased  militan.'  civic  action  programs  by
the  ARVN;  much  more  flexibility  and  decentralization  of  authority  in  the
administration  of  GV'N  civilian  agencies;  and  a  far  clearer  and  more  consistent
pattern  of  rewarding  excellence  and  penalizing  poor  performance  in  the  man-
agement of  both  militarv'  and  civilian  agencies  of  the  GVN.

Finally,  there  was  one  predominant  recommendation  (it  was  in  fact  the  second
of  twelve) :  that  the  U.S.  "'make  it  clear  that  we  fully  support  the  Khanh  gov-
ernment and  are  opposed  to  any  further  coups."  This  reflected  our  deep  con-
cern over  the  political  instability  and  our  dismay  at  having  been  surprised  by
the  Khanh  coup  at  the  end  of  Januar\'.

An  immediate  measure  to  provide  this  kind  of  support  to  Khanh  was  the
issuance  on  the  following  day  (17  March)  of  a  White  House  release  which  gave
Presidential  public  blessing  to  the  Khanh  regime,  saying  in  part  that,  to  meet
the  difficulties  and  setbacks  that  had  arisen  since  last  October,  "General  Khanh
and  his  govemroent  are  acting  vigorously  and  effectively  .  .  .  [havingl  produced
a  sound  central  plan  for  the  prosecution  of  the  war,  recognizing  to  a  far  greater
degree  than  before  the  crucial  role  of  economic  and  social,  as  well  as  military
action  ..."

This  statement  helped  to  solidify  the  Khanh  regime  by  giving  it  explicit  assur-
ance of  continuing  U.S.  support.  It  did  not  fully  take  care  of  our  dismay  over
the  surprise  that  Ihe  Khanh  coup  had  been,  and  our  fear  that  such  a  coup
might  be  repeated.  In  addition  to  making  it  clear  that  we  fully  supported  the
incumbent  regime,  therefore,  it  seemed  necessary  that  we  should  discourage
attempted  coups,  or,  getting  wind  of  them,  head  them  off  before  they  passed
the  point  of  no  retum.'On  18  March,  VV.  H.  Sullivan  of  Slate  sent  out  a  message
to  Saigon  as  follows:


56 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  III

Point  2  ...  [of  NSAM  288]  stipulated  that  U.S.  government  agencies
should  make  clear  our  full  support  for  Khanh  government  and  our  opposi-
tion to  any  further  coups.  While  it  is  recognized  that  our  chances  of  de-
tecting coup  plotting  are  far  from  fool-proof  ...  all  elements  [of]  U.S.
mission  in  Vietnam  should  be  alerted  against  coup  contingencies.

Mission  should  establish  appropriate  procedure  v^hich  will  assure  that
all  rumors  of  coup  plotting  which  come  to  attention  [of]  any  U.S.  govern-
ment personnel  in  Vietnam  will  be  brought  to  attention  of  Ambassador
without  delay.  This  is  not,  repeat  not,  a  responsibility  solely  for  intelligence
elements  [of  the]  U.S.  mission.

The  program  embodied  in  NSAM  288  was  by  no  means  judged  adequate  by
all  concerned.  One  major  dissent  had  been  registered  by  the  JCS,  who  tended
to  view  the  problem  primarily  in  its  military  dimensions,  and  who  believed  that
the  source  of  VC  strength  in  the  North  must  be  neutralized.  In  a  memorandum
dated  14  March  1964,  the  CJCS  had  provided  the  Secretary  of  Defense  with
comments  on  the  SecDef's  draft  memo  to  the  President  (NSAM  288).  The  gen-
eral view  of  the  JCS  was  that  the  program  being  recommended  by  the  Secretary
of  Defense  was  inadequate  militarily,  and  that  much  more  aggressive  policies,
mainly  against  NVN,  but  also  against  the  Cambodian  sanctuaries  of  VC  forces,
were  necessary.

a.  The  JCS  do  not  believe  that  the  recommended  program  in  itself  will
be  sufficient  to  turn  the  tide  against  the  Viet  Cong  in  SVN  without  positive
action  being  taken  against  the  Hanoi  government  at  an  early  date.  They
have  in  mind  the  conduct  of  the  kind  of  program  designed  to  bring  about
cessation  of  DRV  support  for  operations  in  SVN  and  Laos  outlined  in
JCSM-1 74-64,  subject  "Vietnam,"  dated  2  March  1964.  Such  a  program
would  not  only  deter  the  aggressive  actions  of  the  DRV  but  would  be  a
source  of  encouragement  to  SVN  which  should  significantly  facilitate  the
counterinsurgency  program  in  that  country.  To  increase  our  readiness  for
such  actions,  the  U.S.  Government  should  establish  at  once  the  political
and  military  bases  in  the  U.S.  and  SVN  for  offensive  actions  against  the
North  and  across  the  Laotian  and  Cambodian  borders,  including  measures
for  the  control  of  contraband  traffic  on  the  Mekong.

b.  In  view  of  the  current  attitude  of  the  Sihanouk  Government  in  Cam-
bodia, the  JCS  recommend  authorizing  now  hot  pursuit  into  that  coun-
try  .  .  .

As  already  noted,  however,  this  sort  of  escalation  had  already  been  rejected
for  the  time  being.  And  in  any  event,  there  were  both  a  new  regime  in  Vietnam
and  an  enlarged  program  of  U.S.  aid  to  support  it,  although  not  as  enlarged
militarily,  as  the  JCS  would  wish.  (That  form  of  enlargement  would  not  come
until  later.)  But  it  was  the  first  program  since  1961  enlarged  in  explicit  recogni-
tion that  the  programs  preceding  it  had  not  succeeded,  had  indeed  fallen  far
short  of  their  goals.  And  in  that  sense  at  least  it  was  the  end  of  one  period  and
the  beginning  of  another.

II. NSAM-288— TONKIN  GULF

B.  GENERAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  PERIOD  FROM  NSAM-288  TO
TONKIN  GULF

In  enunciating  the  policies  of  NSAM-288  we  had  rhetorically  committed  our-
selves to  do  whatever  was  needed  to  achieve  our  stated  objectives  in  South


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  57

Vietnam.  The  program  decided  upon  and  spelled  out  in  NSAM-288  reflected
our  recognition  that  the  problem  was  greater  than  we  had  previously  supposed
and  that  the  progress  that  we  had  previously  thought  we  were  making  was  more
apparent  than  real.  The  program  constituted  a  larger  effort  than  we  had  under-
taken before;  it  corresponded  to  our  increased  estimates  of  the  magnitude  of
the  task  before  us.  Nevertheless,  we  might  have  chosen  to  do  more  along  the
lines  of  what  we  did  decide  to  do,  and  above  all  we  might  have  chosen  to  do
some  things  that  we  specifically  chose  not  to  do  at  this  time  (although  we
began  to  plan  for  some  of  these  on  a  contingency  basis).  If  there  were  to  be
new  or  greater  problems  in  the  future  it  was  because  we  did  not  correcdy  ap-
praise the  magnitude  of  the  problem  nor  fully  foresee  the  complexity  of  the  diffi-
culties we  faced.  There  were  indeed  some  who  believed  that  the  program  we
decided  upon  was  not  enough,  notably  the  JCS  who  had  gone  on  record  that
until  aid  to  the  VC  from  outside  of  South  Vietnam  was  cut  off,  it  would  be
impossible  to  eliminate  the  insurgency  there.  But  the  program  as  decided  upon  in
288  did  correspond  to  the  official  consensus  that  this  was  a  prescription  suited
to  the  illness  as  we  diagnosed  it.

There  were  many  inhibitions  that  discouraged  doing  more  than  the  bare  neces-
sity to  get  the  job  done.  There  inhibitions  related  to  the  image  of  the  U.S.  in
world  affairs,  to  possible  risks  of  over-action  from  the  Communist  side,  to
internal  American  hesitancies  about  our  operations  there,  and  finally  to  a  philoso-
phy concerning  the  basic  social  nature  of  what  was  happening  in  Vietnam  and
how  wise  it  was  for  the  U.S.  to  become  very  deeply  involved.  We  had  given
serious  thought  to  a  program  of  pressures  upon  the  North,  largely  covert  and
intended  more  to  persuade  them  to  compel.  This  was  on  the  theory  that  the  heart
of  the  problem  really  lay  not  in  South  Vietnam  but  in  North  Vietnam.  But  these
measures,  although  far  from  forgotten,  were  put  on  the  shelf  in  the  belief,  or
at  least  the  hope,  that  they  would  not  be  needed.

The  long  year  from  March  1964," to  April  1965  is  divisible  into  three  periods
that  correspond  to  major  modifications  or  reformulations  of  policy.  The  first
would  be  from  March  (NSAM-288)  to  the  Tonkin  Gulf  affair  in  early  August
1964,  the  second  would  be  from  August  1964  to  February  of  1965,  and  the
third  would  be  from  February  to  April  1965.

From  March  to  August  1965  we  tried  to  make  a  go  of  it  with  the  program
approved  in  NSAM-288,  in  hope  that  that  program  would  carry  us  toward  our
objectives  by  increasing  the  amount  of  aid  and  advice  we  gave  to  the  South  Viet-
namese in  order  to  enable  them  better  to  help  themselves.  But  almost  from  the
beginning  there  were  signs  that  this  program  would  not  be  enough.  And  as  time
passed  it  became  more  and  more  evident  that  something  more  would  be  needed.
Soon  we  began  to  be  turned  from  full  concentration  upon  the  NSAM-288  pro-
gram by  a  major  distraction — instability  and  inefficiency  of  the  GVN.  This  was
a  distraction  that  from  the  first  we  had  feared  but  had  hoped  against  hope
would  not  grow  to  major  proportions.

A  year  before,  in  1963,  it  had  become  more  and  more  evident  as  time  wore
on  that  the  unpopularity  and  inefficiencies  of  the  Diem-Ngu  regime  destroyed
the  hope  of  permanent  progress  in  the  pacification  program  and  the  ultimate
chance  of  success  of  the  whole  counter-insurgency  effort.  This  time  it  was  the
increasing  instability  of  the  Khanh  regime  and  the  inefficiency  of  his  govern-
ment—the regime  that  had  supplanted  the  regime  that  had  suupplanted  Diem
and  Ngu.  Now  we  feared  the  inability  of  the  Khanh  government  to  attract
and  hold  the  loyalties  of  the  politically  active  groups  within  the  cities,  and  we
had  no  confidence  in  its  competence  to  administer  the  pacification  programs,


58 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

and  thereby  win  the  support  of  the  politically  inert  peasantry  in  the  rural  areas.

But  we  wanted  no  more  coups.  Although  Khanh's  coup  had  surprised  us
and  even  shaken  our  confidence  somewhat,  we  quickly  made  him  our  boy,  put
the  best  possible  face  on  the  matter,  and  made  it  a  prime  element  of  U.S.  policy
to  support  Khanh  and  his  colleagues,  and  discourage  any  further  coups.  Each
coup  that  occurred,  it  seemed,  greatly  increased  the  possibility  of  yet  another
coup.

Through  the  first  period  from  March  until  July,  we  concentrated  upon
making  the  NSAM-288  program  work.  In  addition  to  the  increases  in  U.S.  aid
and  advice,  we  sought  to  strengthen  Khanh  by  patching  things  up  with  Big  Minh
and  mollifying  the  other  Generals  he  had  thrown  out.  We  hoped  he  could  some-
how subdue  the  politically  active  Buddhists,  the  Catholic  political  activists,  the
Dai  Viet,  and  the  miscellaneous  ambitious  colonels  and  generals.

But  execution  of  the  288  program  began  to  fall  behind  the  plans.  The  GVN
administration  of  the  program  had  troubles.  There  were  troubles  getting  piastres
— which  the  U.S.  government  in  effect  provided — from  the  central  government
to  the  provinces  and  districts  where  they  were  needed.  Agreed  pay  increases  and
force  increases  in  the  GVN  armed  forces  were  only  tardily  and  partially  met.
Civil  servants  needed  to  operate  the  program  in  the  provinces  and  districts
were  not  available,  were  not  trained,  or,  if  available  and  trained,  were  often  not
paid,  or  were  insufficiently  or  tardily  paid,  or  were  not  provided  with  necessary
expenses.  Funds  for  the  provision  of  necessary  goods  in  the  provinces  and  dis-
tricts were  not  met.  Payments  to  peasants  for  relocation  as  a  part  of  the  pacifica-
tion program  were  tardy  or  inadequate  or  not  made  at  all.  There  seemed  to  be
a  business  as  usual  attitude  in  the  central  government,  and  the  strength  of  the
RVNAF  declined.  Viet  Cong  depredations  continued  and  pacification  efforts  fell
behind.

As  we  pressured  Khanh  to  adopt  reforms  to  remedy  the  deficiencies  of  the
GVN  administration  of  programs  within  South  Vietnam,  his  frustrations  over
these  difficulties  and  failures  were  increased.  He  had  no  taste  for  the  long,  un-
spectacular social  reform  and  social  rebuilding  that  were  the  tasks  of  pacification.
He  soon  began  to  talk  increasingly  of  a  scapegoat — a  march  to  the  North.  He
wanted  to  get  the  struggle  over  with.  This  corresponded  to  the  means  that  we
had  considered  but  had  for  the  time  being  rejected — seeking  escape  from  our
own  frustrations  in  South  Vietnam  by  pressure  on  the  North.  We  moved  gradu-
ally in  this  direction,  impelled  almost  inevitably  to  ultimate  actions  of  this  sort,
but  always  reluctantly  and  always  hesitant  to  commit  ourselves  to  more  than
very  minor  moves,  until  suddenly  and  dramatically  the  Tonkin  Gulf  affair  of
early  August  provided  an  occasion  to  make  a  move  of  the  sort  we  had  long  been
anticipating  but  had  until  then  always  deferred.  But  during  this  period  the  debate
over  possible  measures  of  this  sort,  and  the  instability  of  the  Khanh  government,
increasingly  distracted  attention  from  programs  focussed  directly  on  the  problems
of  pacification  and  of  winning  the  loyalties  of  the  Vietnamese  for  the  GVN.

In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  Tonkin  Gulf  affair,  Khanh,  feeling  his  posi-
tion strengthened,  took  ill  advised  measures  to  consolidate  the  gains  that  he
believed  had  been  made  thereby,  and  quickly  precipitated  an  overriding  govern-
mental crisis.  Thereafter,  the  stability  of  the  regime  became  the  dominant  factor
in  all  considerations.  Atttention  had  to  shift  from  pacification  of  the  millions  of
rural  Vietnamese,  who  made  up  the  vast  majority  of  the  people,  to  the  very  few
in  Saigon,  Hue  and  Danang  who  were  struggling  for  power.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  59


B. NSAM-288  PROGRAMS  MID-MARCH  TO  MID-MAY  1964

Recommendation  #13  of  NSAM — 288  was  "to  support  a  program  for  national
mobilization  (including  a  national  service  law)  to  put  South  Vietnam  on  a  war
footing."  Responsibility  for  this  was  shared  between  ASD  /ISA  and  AID.

A  first  step  was  taken  on  20  March  when  the  country  team  was  asked  to
report  on  the  status  of  GVN  plans  and  also  country  team  views  concerning  the
adoption  of  a  national  service  act.  The  points  of  greatest  concern  were  what
would  be  the  main  provisions  of  the  act,  and  what  would  be  the  administrative
machinery  set  up  to  implement  it.  The  Country  Team  was  also  advised  that
economic  mobilization  measures  should  be  deferred  until  after  a  joint  U.S.-
GVN  survey  had  been  completed.

On  1  April  Ambassador  Lodge  replied,  with  MACV  concurrence,  that  Premier
Khanh  planned  two  categories  of  mobilization,  one  civil  and  one  military.  The
Ambassador  said  that  proposed  decrees  had  been  prepared  and  that  if  promul-
gated they  would  give  the  GVN  adequate  power.  Details  were  not  included,
however,  in  the  Ambassador's  report.  The  Ambassador  proposed,  on  a  personal
basis,  that,  if  Washington  approved,  he  would  try  to  persuade  Khanh  to  proceed
with  a  mass  media  presentation  of  it.  Washington  agreement  to  the  Embassy
evaluation  came  three  days  later,  although  only  the  general  concept  had  been
explained.  On  that  same  day,  4  April  1964,  Khanh  publicly  proclaimed  a  basic
decree  prescribing  broad  categories  of  national  service.  Its  main  terms  were  that
all  able-bodied  males  ages  20-45  were  subject  to  national  public  service.  This
national  public  service  was  to  consist  of  either  (a)  military  service  or  (b)  civil
defense  service.

This  initial  decree  of  4  April  1964  amounted  evidently  to  nothing  more  than
a  statement  of  intention  by  the  Prime  Minister.  This  was  quite  short  of  a  law
that  would  go  into  effect,  be  administered  and  thereby  made  to  accomplish  some-
thing.

On  10  April,  the  Embassy  was  informed  by  a  telegram  from  State  that  Khanh's
decrees  had  received  little  publicity  in  the  United  States,  and  the  Embassy  was
asked  for  a  text  of  the  implementing  decrees.  Five  days  later  on  15  April  1964,
Ambassador  Lodge  reported  in  more  detail  on  the  basic  terms  of  the  national
public  service  decree,  to  wit:

(1)  All  able-bodied  males  20-45  would  be  subject  to  national  public
service  and  females  would  be  permitted  to  volunteer.

(2)  National  public  service  would  consist  of  either  military  service  or
civil  defens;e  service.

(3)  Civil  defense  service  would  be  managed  by  the  Ministry  of  In-
terior.

(4)  The  duration  of  military  service  would  be  three  years  of  RVNAF
or  four  years  in  Regional  Forces  (Civil  Guard)  and  Popular  Forces
(Civil  Defense  Corps  and  Hamlet  Militia).

(5)  Call-up  priority  would  be  based  on  age  and  number  of  dependents.

(6)  Drafted  personnel  were  to  be  paid  by  the  force  to  which  they  were
assigned.

This  came  closer  to  a  law  to  be  administered,  but  on  28  April  Washington
told  the  Embassy  that  the  status  of  implementation  of  the  recommendations  was


60 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

still  not  clear.  Four  days  later,  on  2  May,  Ambassador  Lodge  reported  that  draft
decrees  were  still  not  signed  in  fact,  and  that  the  final  nature  of  the  Civil  De-
fense Decree  was  still  in  doubt.  However,  he  reported  agreement  on  the  principle
that  the  objectives  of  the  National  Mobilization  Plan  should  give  priority  to:
(1)  bringing  the  armed  forces  to  authorized  strength,  (2)  improving  their
morale,  (3)  carrying  out  conscription  more  effectively,  and  (4)  obtaining  quali-
fied civilian  workers.

Before  he  was  able  to  make  this  report  of  2  May,  however.  Ambassador  Lodge
had  a  showdown  meeting  with  Khanh  over  the  failure  of  the  GVN  to  carry
out  many  of  the  necessary  actions  called  for  by  the  NSAM-288  programs.  On
30  April,  accompanied  by  Westmoreland  and  Brent  (USOM  chief).  Lodge  met
with  Khanh,  Oanh,  Khien,  and  Thieu,  to  discuss  the  GVN  failure  to  provide
operating  funds  to  provincial  and  lower  local  levels,  and  to  correct  manpower
deficiencies.

Lodge  opened  the  meeting  with  a  prepared  statement  which  he  read  in  French.
He  said  that  direct  observation  by  U.S.  provincial  advisors  throughout  Vietnam
proved  that  nowhere  was  there  an  adequate  effort  to  provide  piastres  to  Corps,
Division  and  sectors,  to  increase  the  pay  of  ARVN  and  paramilitary  forces,  to
bring  these  troops  to  authorized  strength,  to  recruit  added  forces,  or  to  com-
pensate incapacitated  soldiers  or  families  of  those  killed.  In  fact,  he  said,  there
were  confirmed  reports  from  Corps  and  Division  headquarters  of  deceased  sol-
diers being  kept  on  the  roles  as  the  only  means  of  compensating  their  families
and  preventing  further  deterioration  of  ARVN  and  paramilitary  morale.  There
had  been  a  steady  decline  in  the  strength  of  RVNAF  since  October  1963,  notably
including  a  decrease  of  4,000  in  March  alone;  and  the  current  strength  was
almost  20,000  below  the  authorized  figure  agreed  necessary  by  both  govern-
ments. Likewise,  the  force  level  of  SDC  had  decreased  in  the  same  period  by
almost  13,000,  leaving  that  force  18,000  below  its  authorized  strength.  The
Civil  Guard  was  almost  5,000  below  the  required  strength.  The  ARVN  and  CG
desertion  rate  was  double  what  it  had  been  in  February,  and  SDC  desertion  rate
was  up  40%.  Only  55%  of  the  conscription  quotas  were  being  met  and  volun-
teers were  below  the  expected  level.

Failure  to  provide  funds  was  blamed  as  a  major  reason  for  these  military  man-
power deficiencies.  The  shortage  was  so  great  that  the  current  trend  in  effectives
could  not  be  reversed  before  August  in  any  event.  Lodge  went  on  to  say  that
USOM  and  MACV  visits  to  the  provinces  also  confirmed  that  failure  to  provide
piastres  to  local  headquarters  also  led  to  shortages  of  resources  for  pacification
efforts.  The  result  was  that  most  of  the  McNamara  program  of  reforms  and  im-
provements (of  NSAM-288)  was  failing,  not  due  to  lag  in  support  promised  by
the  United  States,  but  simply  because  the  Saigon  government  did  not  provide
piastre  support  for  the  joint  pacification  program  agreed  upon  by  the  two  govern-
ments. The  war.  Lodge  concluded,  was  being  lost  for  want  of  administrative
initiative  in  printing  and  distributing  the  necessary  local  funds  for  the  agreed
programs.  Lodge  conceded  that  the  government  had  made '  a  forward  step  in
announcing  its  intentions  to  decentralize  procurement  authority  from  the  Director
General  of  the  Budget  and  Foreign  Aid  to  the  ministries,  but  further  decentraliza-
tion to  provincial  and  district  authorities  was  advisable.

Khanh  passed  the  buck  to  Oanh,  who  explained  that  the  MRC  had  inherited
enormously  compHcatcd  bureaucratic  procedures  based  on  older  French  prac-
tices, with  checks  and  counterchecks  before  actions  could  be  effected,  and  that
these  practices  were  being  reformed.  New  regulations  were  about  to  go  into
effect  and  it  was  hoped  that  they  would  improve  the  situation.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  61

Recommendation  #5  of  288  had  been  "to  asist  the  Vietnamese  to  create  a
greatly  enlarged  administrative  corps."  Effective  action  upon  this  recommenda-
tion v^as  considered  essential  to  effective  progress  in  the  pacification  program,
as  is  clearly  implied  by  the  following  list  of  the  lines  of  action  that  were  \o  be
strengthened  by  the  enlarged  administrative  corps.  These  were:

1.  Training  and  pay  of  new  hamlet  action  cadres,  of  new  village  secre-
taries, of  district  chiefs  and  other  district  staff,  of  a  new  assistant  for  pacifica-
tion for  each  Province  Chief,  and  of  hamlet  school  teachers,  health  workers,
district  agricultural  workers,  and  rural  information  officers.

2.  Special  incentive  pay  for  government  workers  in  rural  areas.

3.  Selective  pay  raises  for  some  civil  servants.

4.  Increasing  enrollment  in  the  National  Institute  of  Administration
(NIA)  to  full  capacity  (this  was  a  training  school  for  civil  servants),  includ-
ing provision  of  short  term  in-service  training  by  NIA.

5.  Organization  of  a  joint  U.S.-GVN  Committee  on  governmental  reform
to  review,  recommend,  and  install  needed  provisions  in  governmental  pro-
cedures.

6.  Expanding  and  training  National  Police  especially  for  rural  areas  con-
sistent with  other  recommendations  to  strengthen  military  and  paramilitary
forces.

Along  with  this  increase  in  Vietnamese  administrative  personnel  there  was  to
be  increase  in  U.S.  advisory  personnel  to  assist  them.  On  2  April  the  Mission
advised  Washington  that  a  general  agreement  had  been  reached  with  the  GVN
and  estimated  that  12  additional  USOM  public  administration  personnel  were
needed.  On  the  following  day,  however,  the  Ambassador  expressed  his  reserva-
tions over  the  large  increase  in  staff.  On  30  April  in  an  EXDIS  to  the  President,
Lodge  said  that  Khanh  was  willing  tp  accept  U.S.  administrators  in  pacified  areas
provided  the  U.S.  felt  willing  to  accept  casualties.  Lodge  recommended  a  high
level  civil  administrative  advisor  to  Khanh  himself;  and  on  4  May  in  an  EXDIS
to  the  Secretary  of  State  he  recommended  four  AID  public  administrative  ad-
visors, one  to  each  of  the  four  Corps  areas,  all  to  be  directly  under  the  Am-
bassador.

As  of  mid-May,  however,  while  there  were  some  accomplishments,  on  the
whole  there  had  been  more  discussion  than  action.  Before  the  mid-May  meeting
for  Secretary  McNamara  in  Saigon  the  status  of  progress  was  summarized  for
him  in  the  Mid-May  Briefing  Book  as  follows:

L  The  initiation  of  a  two-week  training  program  for  district  chiefs  had
started  and  the  first  class  had  graduated.

2.  Assignment  had  been  made  of  one  entire  graduating  class,  82  of  them
with  three  full  years  of  training,  to  be  district  chiefs.

3.  Training  of  75  hamlet  action  cadres  for  use  in  the  Pacification  Plan
had  been  initiated.

4.  Assignment  of  700  Saigon  civil  servants  to  the  III  Corps  area  had
been  completed  (but  two-thirds  of  them  had  returned  by  mid-May  as  either
unfit  or  in  excess  of  needs).

5.  The  long  standing  training  programs  for  hamlet  workers  had  continued.

6.  A  course  to  train  2500  new  village  secretaries  had  been  initiated.

7.  Assurance  that  all  future  graduates  of  NIA  would  be  assigned  to  the
countryside  had  been  made.


62 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  III

8.  There  was  a  promise  to  undertake  to  double  the  output  of  graduates
from  the  NIA.

No  action  had  been  taken,  however,  on  other  measures.  The  most  salient  in-
action was  the  failure  to  set  up  the  promised  U.S.-GVN  committee  on  govern-
ment reform.  Further,  the  GVN  was  not  inclined  to  provide  incentive  pay  to
key  rural  workers.

At  the  time  that  Secretary  McNamara  and  his  party  went  to  Saigon  in  the
middle  of  May,  the  problem  areas  with  respect  to  implementation  of  NSAM-288
recommendations  were  identified  as  follows:

1.  Inadequate  provision  of  piastres  for  proper  utilization  of  already
trained  officials  and  technicians.

2.  Possible  inability  of  GVN  to  get  the  job  done  without  direct  U.S.
participation.

3.  Lack  of  information  from  the  field  on  plans  for  aggressive  implementa-
tion of  all  aspects  of  this  recommendation.

Recommendation  4,  6,  and  7  of  NSAM-288  concerned  increases  in  GVN
military  forces  and  capabilities  and  were  generally  considered  together:

4.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  increase  the  armed  forces  (regular  plus
paramilitary)  by  at  least  50,000  men.

6.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  improve  and  reorganize  the  paramilitary
forces  and  to  increase  their  compensation.

7.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  create  an  offensive  guerrilla  force.

On  23  March  1964  a  joint  State-Defense-AID  message  asked  the  country
team  to  refine  (and  elaborate)  these  concepts  and  recommend  a  program  of
implementing  actions.  The  mission  was  authorized  to  initiate  appropriate  first
steps  without  waiting  for  final  agreement  between  the  USG  and  the  GVN.  There
followed,  as  already  noted,  the  pertinent  proclamations  of  early  April,  but  they
were  only  proclamations,  nothing  more.  On  27  April  General  Harkins  reported
that  GVN  planning  for  reorganization  of  paramilitary  forces  and  development
of  a  concept  for  programs  was  still  in  process.  General  Phat,  the  Minister  of
Interior,  was  considering  a  merger  of  SDC  and  Combat  Youth  into  a  single
organization  (the  Popular  Forces)  under  the  Ministry  of  Interior.  The  Civil
Guard  would  go  under  the  Army  high  command.  Operational  control  of  Popular
Forces  would  be  vested  in  sector  and  sub-sector  commanders  at  province  and
district  levels.  At  village  levels.  Popular  Forces  would  encompass  the  total  local
security  force  and  would  include  both  full-time  and  part-time  personnel.  Details
of  compensation  and  the  logistic  mechanism  were  not  clear.  Harkins  judged
that  the  concept  was  consistent  with  the  Pacification  Plan,  but  the  total  anticipated
strength  of  Popular  Forces  could  not  be  projected  until  more  detailed  planning
had  been  accomplished.  Detailed  negotiations  with  the  GVN  were  continuing
and  a  further  report  was  to  be  made  on  10  May.

Two  days  later,  on  29  April  1964,  the  JCS  commented  on  the  slowness  of
the  GVN  in  implementing  recommendations  for  6  and  7  and  pointed  out  an
apparent  divergence  between  MACV  and  GVN  on  the  strength  and  organization
of  the  GVN  forces.  They  explained  that  the  50,000  figure  was  an  interim  plan-
ning figure,  and  that  further  increases  should  be  recommended  when  and  as
necessary.  COMUSMACV  was  asked  to  submit  his  detailed  plan  for  imple-
menting 4,  6,  and  7  by  the  7th  of  May.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  63


Almost  simultaneously  with  this  JCS  message,  Harkin's  deputy,  General  West-
moreland, was  accompanying  Ambassador  Lodge  to  see  Khanh  on  the  occasion,
already  described,  when  Ambassador  Lodge  made  his  strong  demarche  with  the
Vietnamese  Premier.  Westmoreland  expatiated  on  the  military  aspects  of  the
Ambassador's  complaint,  especially  the  RVNAF  deficiencies,  specifying  increased
desertion  rates  and  inadequate  enlistments  and  draft  callups.  He  calculated  that
at  the  current  rates  of  desertion,  casualties  and  recruitment  the  RVNAF  at  the
end  of  the  year  would  be  smaller  not  larger  than  at  present.

Finally,  on  7  May,  Harkins  was  able  to  report  that  a  USG-GVN  agreement
had  been  reached  on  calendar  year  1964  force  goals  for  the  RVNAF,  Civil
Guard  and  the  National  Police,  although  there  was  not  yet  an  agreement  on  the
SDC  and  Combat  Youth.  The  agreement  on  the  RVNAF,  CG,  and  SDC  force
levels  were  as  shown  in  the  tabulation  below:


RVNAF


Civil
Guard


SDC

Combat
Youth


National
Police


Current
Authorized
Strength

227,000


90,015


110,000

180,000
(trained)
80-90,000

(trained
and  armed)

24,250


Recommended
Strength
CY  64

237,600


97,615


110,000


200,000


34,900


Amount  Estimated
Increase  Cost

10,600 1.  GVN  = 1.4  billion
piastres
2.  U.S. = $18  million
for  pay;  $5  million
MAP

7,600 1. .8  billion  piastres
2.  $2.2  million  MAP  (no
estimate  of  cost  of  pay
increase)

— No  estimates  of  cost  (no
agreement  yet)

20,000 No  estimates  of  cost  (no
agreement  yet)


10,650 500,000  million  piastres
$1.2  million


With  respect  to  the  perennial  problem  of  assisting  the  Vietnamese  to  develop
their  own  offensive  guerrilla  force,  in  mid-May  there  was  some  progress  to  report,
although  the  accomplishments  were  less  than  had  been  hoped.  Efforts  were  con-
tinuing to  improve  the  distribution  of  Ranger  battalions  for  use  against  VC  base
areas  and  in  border  areas  of  I  and  II  Corps.  Plans  also  were  being  developed  at
that  time  for  better  border  control,  and  for  intelligence  integration,  coordination
of  Vietnamese  Special  Forces  operations,  and  air  surveillance.  Efforts  were  also
being  made  towards  integration  of  Vietnamese  Special  Forces  and  U.S.  Special
Forces  staffs  at  all  command  echelons.  Vietnamese  junior  officers  and  NCO's,
including  Montagnards,  were  being  initiated  to  training  and  guerrilla  warfare
techniques  in  the  new  VNSF/USSF  Center  at  Nha  Trang.  This  was  expected  to
encourage  the  VNSF  to  adopt  bolder  and  more  confident  tactics.

Recommendations  8,  9,  and  10  were  accomplished  rather  simply  and  expedi-


64 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

tiously  because  they  consisted  entirely  of  supplying  the  South  Vietnamese  materials
that  they  needed.  It  did  not  involve  our  inducing  the  Vietnamese  themselves  to
do  anything.  Recommendation  8  was  to  provide  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force  25
AlH  aircraft  in  exchange  for  present  T-28's.  Recommendation  9  was  to  provide
the  Vietnamese  army  additional  M-113  APC's  (withdrawing  the  M-114's  there),
additional  riverboats  and  approximately  $5-10  million  worth  of  additional  ma-
teriel. Recommendation  10  was  to  announce  publicly  the  fertilizer  program  and
to  expand  it  with  a  view  to  trebling  within  two  years  the  amount  of  fertilizer
currently  made  available.

MAP  funding  for  Recommendation  8  was  approved  by  ISA  on  25  March
1964  following  approval  of  the  delivery  schedule  on  22  March.  On  1  May  1964,
19  AlH's  were  delivered  and  six  more  scheduled  for  delivery  10  days  later.  A
Navy  unit  of  4  support  officers,  8  instruction  pilots  and  150  men  arrived  on  30
April  1964  to  train  Vietnamese  crews  until  they  could  assume  full  responsibility,
which  was  estimated  to  be  in  three  to  six  months.  By  early  May  planning  and
funding  action  for  the  provision  of  the  M-113's  had  been  completed.  According
to  the  schedule  developed  in  response  to  the  request  for  this  materiel  made  by
CINCPAC  and  COMUSMACV,  17  M-113's  were  shipped  to  arrive  in  Saigon  17
April,  16  were  due  to  arrive  29  April,  30  were  shipped  to  arrive  by  1  June,  and
30  more  were  to  arrive  by  10  July.  There  was  an  agreement  between  CINCPAC
and  COMUSMACV  that  no  additional  howitzers,  riverboats  or  AN  PRC/4  Is
were  to  be  recommended  at  that  time.  Eighty-five  thousand  tons  of  fertilizer  had
been  requested  and  procured  by  early  May  for  spring  planting,  and  this  had
been  publicized  by  the  GVN  and  in  Washington.  A  distribution  scheme  was
being  developed  and  refined  in  early  May  with  provision  for  further  expansion
including  a  probable  18,000  tons  requirement  in  the  fall.

There  were  two  important  visitations  to  Saigon  during  April.  The  first  was  by
General  Earle  G.  Wheeler,  then  Chief  of  Staff,  USA,  who  visited  Saigon  from
15-20  April  and  represented  Secretary  McNamara  and  the  JCS  during  the  visit
of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  Saigon  17-20  April.  It  was  during  these  meetings  that
Khanh's  desire  to  shift  the  emphasis  of  the  struggle  to  an  attack  on  the  North
first  become  emphatically  evident.  In  the  meeting  with  Khanh  on  16  April,
Wheeler,  in  company  with  General  Harkins,  was  informed  by  Khanh  that  even-
tually the  war  must  be  moved  north.  Harkins  later  told  Wheeler  that  this  was  the
first  time  Khanh  had  ever  said  that  extending  operations  to  the  North  was  inevita-
ble. Khanh  explained  that  when  the  move  to  the  North  occurred  MACV  would
have  to  take  over  all  the  logistics.  He  further  said  he  was  ready  to  start  planning
for  an  extension  of  operations  to  the  North.

Two  days  later  on  18  April  Khanh  again  brought  the  matter  up,  this  time
with  Secretary  of  State  Rusk.  Rusk  replied  that  this  was  a  big  problem,  that
political  preparation  would  be  needed,  and  that  while  the  U.S.  was  prepared  to
take  any  action  necessary  to  win  the  war,  it  had  to  be  very  clear  that  such  action
was  indeed  necessary  before  the  U.S.  would  embark  on  it.

A  fortnight  before  on  4  April  1964  W.  P.  Bundy  had  written  a  letter  to  Am-
bassador Lodge  with  enclosures  which  concerned  a  possible  political  scenario
to  support  action  against  North  Vietnam  and  for  the  earlier,  so-called  "Blue
Annex"  (considerations  of  extended  actions  to  the  North)  completed  during
the  McNamara-Taylor  visit  in  March  1964.  In  Washington  there  was  considerable
theorizing,  in  this  period,  about  the  best  manner  of  persuading  North  Vietnam
to  cease  aid  to  the  NLF-VC  by  forceful  but  restrained  pressures  which  would
convey  the  threat  of  greater  force  if  the  North  Vietnamese  did  not  end  their
support  of  the  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam.  In  certain  circles  in  Washington  at


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  65

least,  there  was  what  appears  now  to  have  been  an  amazing  level  of  confidence
that  we  could  induce  the  North  Vietnamese  to  abandon  their  support  of  the  SVN
insurgency  if  only  we  could  convince  them  that  we  meant  business,  and  that  we
would  indeed  bomb  them  if  they  did  not  stop  their  infiltration  of  men  and  supplies
to  the  South.

This  confidence,  although  ultimately  accepted  as  the  basis  for  decision,  was
neither  universal  nor  unqualified.  This  was  evident,  for  instance  in  the  meeting
of  19  April,  when  the  subject  was  discussed  in  Saigon  with  Rusk,  Lodge,  Harkins,
Nes,  Manfull,  DeSilva,  Lt.  Col.  Dunn,  General  Wheeler,  W.  P.  Bundy,  and
Solbert  of  ISA.  Much  of  the  discussion  on  that  occasion  centered  on  the  political
context,  objectives,  and  risks,  of  increasing  military  pressure  on  North  Vietnam.
It  was  understood  that  it  would  be  first  exerted  solely  by  the  Government  of
Vietnam,  and  would  be  clandestine.  Gradually  both  wraps  and  restraints  would
be  removed.  A  point  on  which  there  was  a  good  deal  of  discussion  was  what
contact  with  the  DRV  would  be  best  in  order  to  let  Hanoi  know  the  meaning  of
the  pressures  and  of  the  threats  of  greater  pressures.  Ambassador  Lodge  favored
a  Canadian  ICC  man  who  was  about  to  replace  the  incumbent.  The  new  man
he  had  known  at  the  UN.  While  Lodge  was  willing  to  participate  in  discussions
of  the  mechanisms,  he  was  explicitly  unsure  of  Hanoi's  reaction  to  any  level  of
pressure.  Lodge  was  not  always  fully  consistent  in  his  views  on  this  subject,  and
it  is  not  clear  that  his  reservations  on  this  score  led  him  to  counsel  against  the
move  or  to  express  other  cautions.  However,  he  did  say  he  doubted  that  we
could  meet  massive  intervention  by  the  DRV  by  purely  conventional  measures.
Rusk  hoped  that  the  threatened  pressures  against  Hanoi  would  induce  her  to
end  her  support  for  the  VC.  Rusk  emphasized  the  importance  of  obtaining  the
strongest  possible  evidence  of  DRV  infiltration.  It  was  during  this  discussion  that
the  question  of  the  introduction  of  U.S.  Naval  forces — and  hints  of  Cam  Ranh
Bay — arose  as  a  measure  which  it  was  hoped  would  induce  increased  caution  in
Hanoi.  The  presence  of  military  power  there,  it  was  hoped,  might  induce  Hanoi
to  be  more  restrained  in  its  actions  toward  South  Vietnam.  There  was  speculation
about  whether  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  against  North  Vietnam  would  bring  in
the  Russians.  Rusk  had  been  impressed,  so  he  said,  by  Chiang  Kai-shek's  recent,
strongly  expressed  opposition  to  any  use  by  the  United  States  of  nuclear  weapons.
There  was  mention  that  Khiem  had  sought  Chinese  Nationalist  military  forces
but  their  utility  was  generally  deprecated.  Bundy  conjectured,  for  argument's  sake,
that  nukes  used  in  wholly  unpopulated  areas  solely  for  purposes  of  interdiction
might  have  a  different  significance  than  if  used  otherwise.  It  is  not  reported  that
any  examination  of  effectiveness  or  of  obviously  possible  countcrmcasurcs  was
essayed;  and  no  decisions  were  made.  But  the  direction  of  thinking  was  clearly
away  from  measures  internal  to  Vietnam,  and  clearly  headed  toward  military
actions  against  the  North.

At  the  conclusion  of  his  visit  to  Vietnam  in  mid-April  Secretary  Rusk  drew
up  the  two-part  summary  list  of  added  steps  that  he  believed  necessary.  The  first
part,  composed  of  actions  presenting  no  substantive  policy  problems  listed  the
following  actions:

1.  Engage  more  flags  in  South  Vietnam.

2.  Increase  GVN  diplomatic  representation,  and  GVN  information  activ-
ity (to  widen  support  of  the  GVN  cause).

3.  Enlist  General  Minh  in  the  war  effort.

4.  Mobilize  public  support  for  war  effort  by  civilian  groups.

5.  Improve  the  psychological  warfare  effort.


66 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

6.  Discreetly  cooperate  with  Khanh  for  the  expulsion  of  "undesirable
characters."

7.  Empower  Ambassador  Lodge  to  make  on-the-spot  promotions  to  U.S.
civilians  in  Vietnam.

Among  the  actions  the  Secretary  felt  should  be  considered,  but  which  involved
policy  problems,  were:

1.  Maintain  U.S.  naval  presence  at  either  Tourane  or  Cam  Ranh  Bay,
as  a  signal  to  Hanoi  (to  suggest  to  them  our  deep  interest  in  affairs  in  Viet-
nam).

2.  Spend  more  money  in  developing  pacified  provinces  instead  of  con-
centrating efforts  almost  exclusively  on  trouble  spots.

3.  Push  GVN  anti-junk  operations  gadually  north  of  the  DMZ.

4.  Remove  inhibitions  on  the  use  of  Asian  intelligence  agents  in  Cam-
bodian-Laos border  areas.

By  the  end  of  another  fortnight  Khanh's  mood  had  turned  much  more  strongly
toward  insistence  upon  his  march  to  the  North.  On  the  morning  of  4  May  1964,
Khanh  asked  Lodge  to  call,  and  Khanh  began  by  asking  if  he  should  make  a
declaration  putting  the  country  on  a  war  footing.  This,  he  said  would  involve
getting  rid  of  "politicians"  in  the  government  and  having  a  government  composed
frankly  of  technicians.  It  would  involve  suspension  of  civil  rights  ("as  had  been
the  case  under  Lincoln  in  your  civil  war").  There  would  be  a  curfew,  Saigon
would  cease  to  be  a  city  of  pleasure,  and  plans  laid  to  evacuate  the  diplomatic
corps  and  two  million  people.  Khanh  then  said  that  an  announcement  should  be
made  to  Hanoi  that  any  further  interference  with  South  Vietnam's  internal  affairs
would  lead  to  reprisals,  and  Khanh  specifically  asked  if  the  U.S.  would  be  pre-
pared to  undertake  tit-for-tat  bombing  each  time  there  was  such  interference.

Continuing,  Khanh  talked  further,  somewhat  wildly,  of  defying  Cambodia
and  breaking  diplomatic  relations  with  France;  and  he  even  mentioned  a  declara-
tion of  war  against  the  DRV  at  one  point.  He  conveyed  the  impression  of  a
desperate  desire  to  press  for  an  early  military  decision  by  outright  war  with  the
DRV.  Lodge  sought  to  discourage  this  sort  of  adventurism,  but  acknowledged
that  if  the  DRV  invaded  South  Vietnam  with  its  Army,  that  act  would  raise  a
host  of  new  questions  of  acute  interest  to  the  U.S.  Possible  entry  of  Chinese
forces  would  have  to  be  considered.  The  question  then  would  be  whether  such  an
Army  could  be  made  ineffective  by  interdicting  its  supply  lines.  He  could  not
envision  the  U.S.  putting  into  Asia  an  Army  the  size  of  the  U.S.  Army  in  Europe
in  World  War  IL  Khanh  said  that  he  understood  this  but  that  an  "Army  Corps"
of  U.S.  Special  Forces  numbering  10,000  could  do  in  Asia  as  much  as  an  Army
group  had  done  in  Europe.  "One  American  can  make  soldiers  out  of  10
Orientals."  [Sic!]  It  was  illogical,  wasteful,  and  wrong  to  go  on  incurring  casualties
"just  in  order  to  make  the  agony  endure."

Near  the  end  of  his  report  of  this  conversation,  the  Ambassador  inserted  this
comment,  "this  man  obviously  wants  to  get  on  with  the  job  and  not  sit  here  in-
definitely taking  casualties.  Who  can  blame  him?"  Then  he  added,  as  a  further
comment:

His  desire  to  declare  a  state  of  war  .  .  .  seems  wholly  in  line  with  our
desire  to  get  out  of  a  "business  as  usual"  mentally.  He  is  clearly  facing  up  to
all  the  hard  questions  and  wants  us  to  do  it,  too.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  67

Lodge's  report  of  Khanh's  impatient  wish  to  strike  north  drew  an  immediate
flash  response  from  Rusk,  which  began  with  a  statement  that  made  it  clear  that
the  message  had  been  considered  carefully  at  the  White  House.  Extremely  grave
issues  were  raised  by  the  conversation,  and  reactions  had  to  be  developed  with
great  care.  There  would  still  be  another  meeting  with  the  President  on  the  matter,
on  6  May,  before  McNamara  departed  for  the  trip  that  would  take  him  to  Saigon
(after  Bonn).  McNamara  would  take  up  issues  with  Lodge  upon  his  arrival  there.
But  before  the  6  May  meeting  with  the  President,  would  Lodge  please  answer
seven  questions  as  a  contribution  to  the  Washington  consideration  of  the  issue.

The  questions  raised  by  the  Secretary  and  the  answers  provided  later  by  the
Embassy  follow:

L  What  were  Khanh's  motivations?  Does  he  believe  that  mobilization
makes  sense  only  as  a  preparation  for  military  action  against  North  Vietnam?
Reply:  Khanh  as  professional  soldier  thinks  in  terms  of  victory.  Not  a
matter  of  pique.  Honestly  seeking  a  means  of  putting  country  on  war  footing.

2.  Is  there  a  trace  of  despair  in  Khanh's  remarks?  Does  he  think  he  can
win  without  attacking  north?  Reply:  No.

3.  Previously  Khanh  told  McNamara  it  would  be  necessary  to  consolidate
a  base  in  South  Vietnam  for  attacking  North  Vietnam.  Previous  counter-
guerrilla  experience  in  Greece,  Malaya,  and  Korea  supports  this  judgment.
Reply:  Khanh  does  not  want  to  move  regardless  of  progress  in  the  South.

4.  Khanh's  talk  of  evacuating  seems  fantastic.  Reply:  Agree.  Khanh's
concern  was  an  ability  to  administer  the  city  if  attacked.  (This  referred  to
Khanh's  discussion  of  evacuating  the  city.)

5.  Were  Khanh's  talks  of  warning  to  Hanoi  and  Cambodia  and  action
against  the  French  integral  parts  of  mobilization?  Reply:  Yes.  But  he  should
have  evidence  against  French  nationals.

6.  How  to  interpret  Khanh's  remarks  about  U.S.  "Army  Corps?"  Reply:
Loose  talk.  This  reaction  came  after  (Lodge's)  discouraging  reply  about
the  possibility  of  the  U.S.  bringing  in  large  numbers  of  forces.

7.  Was  the  GVN  capable  of  administering  limited  mobilization?  Reply:
Question  is  a  puzzler.  However,  some  such  thing  might  be  a  way  of  over-
coming "business  as  usual."

The  response  to  Khanh's  proposal  that  came  out  of  the  6  May  meeting  was
that  the  Secretary  of  Defense  was  to  tell  Khanh,  when  he  was  in  Saigon,  that  the
U.S.  did  "not  intend  to  provide  military  support  nor  undertake  the  military  ob-
jective of  rolling  back  Communist  control  in  North  Vietnam."
»•

C. THE  SECRETARY'S  VISIT  TO  SAIGON  MAY  1964

Accompanied  by  General  Wheeler,  and  MM.  Sylvester  and  McNaughton,  and
his  military  aide,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  made  a  brief  visit  to  Saigon  12-14
May  enroute  home  from  Bonn.  In  informing  Saigon  on  4  May  of  his  projected
visit  he  said  that  his  primary  objective  was  to  get  full  information  as  to  the
current  status  and  future  plans,  with  targets  and  dates,  for  the  following  items
for  the  rest  of  calendar  year  1964:

\.  Augmentation  of  GVN  military  and  paramilitary  forces,  with  a  break-
down by  area  and  service  category.


68 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III


2.  Increased  compensation  for  GVN  military  and  paramilitary  personnel.

3.  Reorganization  of  military  and  paramilitary  forces.

4.  Creation  of  the  Civil  Administrative  Corps.

5.  Implementation  of  the  national  mobilization  plan.

6.  The  steps  and  timetables,  both  military  and  civil,  for  our  implementa-
tion of  the  oil-spot  concept  of  pacification.

Additionally,  it  was  further  specified  that  he  wanted  information  on  the  follow-
ing:

1.  A  map  of  population  and  areas  controlled  by  the  VC  and  the  GVN.

2.  Progress  of  military  operations  in  extending  control  by  the  oil-spot
theory.

3.  Brief  reports  on  the  critical  provinces.

4.  The  Country  Team's  appraisal  of  Khanh's  progress  in  strengthening
national,  provincial  and  district  governments.

5.  The  Country  Team's  evaluation  of  Khanh's  support  by  various  groups
(constituting  Vietnamese  political  power  centers).

6.  MACV's  forecast  of  likely  VC  and  GVN  military  activity  for  the  rest
of  1964.

7.  Recommendations  on  cross-border  intelligence  operations.

8.  Report  on  the  extent  to  which  the  U.S.  contribution  of  added  resources
or  personnel  (either  military  or  civilian)  for  civil  programs  could  strengthen
the  GVN  counterinsurgency  program.

The  trip  books  prepared  for  the  members  of  the  Secretary's  party  also  indicated
that  one  major  concern  was  to  reinforce  Lodge's  demarche  of  30  April  concerning
facilitating  the  flow  of  piastres  to  the  provinces  for  counterinsurgency  support.
It  was  suggested  that  possibly  the  rigid  and  conservative  director  of  the  budget,
Luu  Van  Tinh  might  have  to  be  dismissed  if  Oanh  couldn't  make  him  do  better.
A  list  of  problems  that  were  created  by  lack  of  piastres  in  the  provinces  followed:

1.  Health  workers  trained  by  AID  were  not  employed  for  lack  of  piastres.

2.  Provincial  and  district  officers  (both  health  and  agricultural  extension
workers)  were  severely  restricted  in  travel  to  villages  for  lack  of  per  diem
and  gasoline.

3.  Bills  for  handling  AID  counterinsurgency  cargo  at  the  port  of  Danang
were  not  paid,  resulting  in  refusal  and  threat  of  refusal,  by  workers  and
groups,  to  handle  more  cargo.

4.  Several  categories  of  GVN  workers  had  not  been  paid  salaries  owed
to  them  for  months.

5.  Truckers  were  threatening  to  refuse  to  handle  AID  counterinsurgency
cargo  because  they  had  not  been  paid  for  past  services  by  the  Government
of  Vietnam.

6.  There  were  inadequate  funds  to  compensate  villages  for  food,  lodging,
water  and  services  provided  by  peasants  to  the  ARVN,  the  CG,  and  the  SDC.

7.  There  had  been  nonpayment  or  delayed  or  only  partial  payment  of
promised  relocation  allowances  to  relocated  authorities.

In  the  light  of  these  problems  it  was  considered  that  two  USOM  piastre  cash
funds  might  be  established:  (1)  a  petty  cash  fund  to  support  the  Ministry  of
Education;  and  (2)  a  substantial  USOM-controlled  piastre  fund  to  break  bottle-
necks in  such  matters  as  transportation  of  goods,  spare  parts,  per  diem  payment


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  69

of  immobilized  Vietnamese  personnel,  and  emergency  purchases  on  the  local
market.  AID  Administrator  Bell  in  Washington  had  made  commitments  to
Secretary  McNamara  that  all  piastres  necessary  for  counterinsurgency  would  be
forthcoming  even  if  deficit  financing  were  needed.  But  because  there  were  plenty
of  commodity  imports  at  hand,  that  posed  no  problem.  USOM  and  MACV  and
the  public  administration  advisors  who  were  then  being  recruited  should  review
carefully  whether  U.S.  civil  administration  advisors  to  the  provincial  chiefs
could  facilitate  the  flow  of  funds  and  commodities,  and  expedite  paper  work.
Finally,  the  use  of  rural  affairs  provincial  staffs  should  be  increased  by  one  or
more  per  province,  perhaps  using  Filipinos  or  Chinese  Nationals.

The  first  day  of  the  Secretary's  stay  in  Saigon  was  spent  in  briefings,  and
not  all  of  what  he  heard  was  encouraging.  There  was  first  a  briefing  from  the
Ambassador,  who  said  the  administrative  mechanism  of  the  central  GVN  was
not  functioning  smoothly,  that  Khanh  overcentralized  authority,  and  that  al-
though the  situation  might  work  out  the  prospects  were  not  good.  One  bit  of
encouragement  was  that  Khanh  was  requesting  more  U.S.  advisors — this  was
taken  as  a  token  of  good  intentions  and  of  willingness  to  cooperate  with  the
U.S.  The  provincial  government  would  continue  to  be  weak,  and  the  corps  com-
manders' authority  handicapped  the  provinces.  Khanh's  23  new  province  chiefs
and  80  new  district  chiefs  had  improved  the  quality  of  leadership,  he  thought.  But
the  Buddhists,  although  fragmented,  remained  politically  active  and  Thich  Tri
Quang  was  agitating  strongly  against  Khanh.  The  Catholics  were  about  to  with-
draw their  chaplains  from  the  Army.  The  students  supported  Khanh  but  the  in-
tellectuals did  not.  Lodge  thought  that  the  current  U.S.  program  was  of  about
the  right  size  but  that  better  leadership  was  needed.  He  would  like  U.S.  civilian
advisors  in  each  corps  area.  When  USOM  Director  Brent  gave  his  briefing  he
made  the  point  that  USOM  was  25  percent  short  of  authorized  personnel  strength.
This  led  the  Secretary  to  ask  about  the  use  of  U.S.  military  personnel,  FSOs,  or
Peace  Corps  personnel  to  fill  the  shortage.  Forrestal  was  asked  to  look  into  the
problem  and  report.  The  NIA  was  short  of  faculty  because  seven  instructors
had  been  assigned  elsewhere  and  there  was,  moreover,  and  inadequate  budget.

In  the  afternoon  briefing,  General  Harkins  said  he  was  guardedly  optimistic
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  23  province  chiefs,  135  district  chiefs,  and  practically  all
senior  military  commanders  had  been  replaced  since  the  last  coup.  In  discussing
"Population  Control"  (pacification),  it  was  decided  to  use  1  April  1964  as  a
base  for  statistical  measurements  of  pacification  progress.  When  he  came  to  the
subject  of  the  planned  augmentation  of  ARVN  and  the  paramilitary  forces,  the
figures  presented  by  General  Harkins  showed  that  achievement  lagged  behind  the
agreed  goals.  Although  the  agreed  MAP  program  called  for  229,000  RVNAF
personnel  at  that  time  and  238,000  for  the  end  of  calendar  year  1964,  there  were
actually  only  207,000  currently  in  RVNAF.  (This  showed  no  improvement  over
March.)  The  strength  of  RVNAF  had  in  fact  been  decreasing  consistently  from
a  high  of  218,000  in  July  1963  because  of  increased  activity  (hence  losses  through
casualties),  desertions,  budget  problems  and  miscellaneous  lesser  causes.

Among  the  topics  receiving  considerable  attention  during  the  meeting  on  the
morning  of  the  13th  of  May  was  that  of  VNAF  pilot  training  program.  I  his
subject  assumed  special  importance  for  three  reasons.  First,  the  March  program
of  providing  helicopters  to  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force  called  also  for  the  provision
of  pilots  to  fly  them.  Second,  there  had  just  previously  been  some  embarrassing
publicity  concerning  the  participation  of  USAF  pilots  in  covert  combat  roles,  an
activity  that  had  not  been  publicly  acknowledge.  Third,  the  meeting  with  the
President  on  6  May  had  led  to  the  instructions  to  the  Secretary,  already  noted,


70 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

to  discourage  Khanh's  hopes  of  involving  the  United  States  in  his  March  to  the
North.  In  this  discussion  of  VNAF  pilot  training,  it  was  revealed  that  there  were
496  VNAF  pilots  currently  at  hand,  but  that  666  were  required  by  1  July.  Thirty
helicopter  pilots  were  to  finish  by  1  July,  30  liaison  pilots  to  finish  by  27  June,
and  226  cadet  pilots  were  in  the  United  States  whose  status  was  not  known  at
the  time  of  the  meeting.  The  Secretary  emphasized  that  it  had  never  been  intended
that  the  USAF  participate  in  combat  in  Vietnam,  and  current  practices  that  belied
this  were  exceptions  to  that  policy.  The  Administration  had  been  embarrassed
because  of  the  Shank  affair — letters  which  had  complained  that  U.S.  boys  were
being  killed  in  combat  while  flying  inferior  aircraft.  The  Secretary  emphasized
that  that  VNAF  should  have  a  better  pilot-to-aircraft  ratio.  It  should  be  2  to  1
instead  of  1.4  to  1  as  at  present.  And,  as  a  first  priority  project,  VNAF  pilots
should  transition  from  other  aircraft  to  the  A-lHs  to  bring  the  total  to  150
qualified  to  fly  that  aircraft.  It  was  tentatively  agreed  to  fix  that  objective  for  120
days  and  accept  the  consequent  degradation  of  transport  capability.

Following  this  there  was  a  discussion  of  offensive  guerrilla  operations  and
cross-border  operations,  both  of  which  were  agreed  to  be  inadequate.  Creation  of
an  offensive  guerrilla  force  had  been  one  of  the  Secretary's  March  recommenda-
tions. General  Westmoreland  said  that  Special  Forces  of  both  the  U.S.  and  the
GVN  were  over-extended,  and  he  added  he  believed  that  they  should  be  ex-
panded. As  a  result  of  this  conversation  MACV  was  directed  to  study  the  six-
month  duty  tour  of  the  U.S.  Special  Forces.  The  Secretary  considered  it  possibly
too  short  and  thought  it  might  have  to  be  extended  to  a  full  year.  On  the  subject
of  cross-border  operations,  the  concept  was  to  drop  six-man  teams  in  each  of
authorized  areas  in  North  Vietnam  and  Laos  and  pick  them  up,  30  days  later,
by  helicopter.  The  objective  was  two  teams  by  15  June;  and  this  potential  was  to
be  doubled  each  month  thereafter.  It  was  decided  that  operations  should  begin
approximately  15  June  1964.

In  his  subsequent  report  on  this  second  SecDef-MACV  conference,  MACV
reported  that  the  Secretary  of  Defense  had  expressed  disappointment  that  the
civil  defense  decree  of  the  GVN  did  not  constitute  a  counterpart  to  military  con-
scription. Furthermore,  MACV  recorded  that  in  the  course  of  the  discussion  of
means  of  strengthening  the  VNAF  the  Secretary  of  Defense  had  reaffirmed  basic
U.S.  policy  that  fighting  in  Vietnam  should  be  done  by  Vietnamese.  The  FARM-
GATE  concept  was  explained  as  a  specific,  reluctantly  approved  exception,  a
supplementary  effort  transitory  in  nature.

The  Secretary's  military  aide,  Lt.  Col.  Sidney  B.  Berry,  Jr.,  recorded  the
decisions  taken  by  the  Secretary  at  Saigon.  They  were  these:

1.  Have  the  first  group  of  six-man  reconnaissance  teams  for  cross-border
operations  ready  to  operate  by  15  June  1964,  then  double  the  number  of
teams  each  month  thereafter.  The  Secretary  was  anxious  to  get  hard  informa-
tion on  DRV  aid  to  the  VC.  The  Secretary  was  to  get  authority  for  addi-
tional cross-border  operations  in  addition  to  the  operations  already  author-
ized in  two  locations.

2.  Concerning  the  VNAF  training  program,  there  was  never  any  intent,
nor  was  it  the  policy  of  the  USG  to  have  USAF  pilots  participate  in  combat.
Exception  to  this  should  be  considered  undesirable  and  not  setting  a  prec-
edent. MACV  was  therefore  to  give  first  priority  to  manning  75  AlHs  with
two  Vietnamese  pilots  per  aircraft,  for  a  total  of  150  Vietnamese  pilots;
and  he  was  also  to  determine  the  optimum  size  of  the  VNAF,  tentatively
using  a  figure  of  125  to  150  AlH  aircraft.  In  connection  with  this  the


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  71

Secretary  approved  assignment  to  the  VNAF  of  25  more  AlHs  by  1  October
1964  to  replace  18  RT-28s  on  hand.

3.  When  the  Secretary  asked  Harkins  if  he  needed  additional  Special
Forces,  Harkins  replied,  -Yes."  The  Secretary  then  said  that  when  COMUS-
MACV  stated  requirements  he  would  approve  them  if  they  were  valid.
He  said  that  a  six-month  duty  tour  was  too  short  and  the  normal  tour  should
be  extended  to  one  year,  reserving  the  right,  of  course,  to  make  exceptions
for  special  cases.

4.  When  General  Harkins  handed  the  Secretary  a  shopping  list  for  items
and  funds  totalling  about  $7  million,  the  Secretary  immediately  approved  the
list.

5.  The  Secretary  directed  COMUSMACV  to  submit  in  writing  require-
ments for  South  Vietnamese  military  housing.

6.  Concerning  MACV  needs,  the  "SecDef  made  unequivocal  statement
that  MACV  should  not  hesitate  to  ask  for  anything  they  need.  SecDef  gives
first  priority  to  winning  the  war  in  SVN.  If  necessary  he  will  take  weapons
and  equipment  from  U.S.  forces  to  give  the  VNAF.  Nothing  will  be  spared  to
win  the  war.  But  U.S.  personnel  must  operate  in  compliance  with  USG
policies  and  objectives."

Near  the  end  of  the  Secretary's  stay  General  Khanh  met  with  McNamara,
Lodge,  Taylor  and  Harkins;  and  judging  from  the  report  of  the  meeting  sent
in  by  the  Ambassador,  Khanh  put  on  a  masterful  performance.  Khanh  began
his  talk  by  reviewing  the  recent  course  of  the  war  claiming  to  have  established
control,  in  the  last  three  months,  over  some  three  million  Vietnamese  citizens
[sic].  However,  the  danger  of  reinfiltration  by  the  Communists  still  existed.  Khanh
said  that  the  biggest  and  most  time-consuming  problems  were  political,  and  he
was  unskilled  in  such  things  and  wanted  to  lean  for  advice  on  Ambassador  Lodge.
But  religious  problems  were  also  pressing.  There  was  religious  conflict  between
Catholics  and  Buddhists  and  within  the  Buddhist  movement.  The  Government  of
Vietnam  was  in  the  middle.  The  real  trouble-maker  was  Thich  Tri  Quang.  Lodge
was  trying  to  help  Khanh  in  this.  There  was  also  a  problem  with  the  press,  and
with  "parlor  politicians"  (civilians).  Khanh  said  that  he  was  a  soldier,  not  a
politician,  and  wished  he  could  spend  his  time  mounting  military  operations  and
in  planning  long-term  strategy  instead  of  dealing  with  political  intrigues  and
squabbles.  But  he  had  to  think  about  the  security  of  his  regime.

The  Secretary  then  referred  to  the  Ambassador's  report  of  Khanh's  desire
not  to  "prolong  the  agony,"  and  said  that  he,  the  Secretary,  wanted  to  hear  more
about  this.  Khanh  said  that  in  speaking  of  not  wanting  to  "make  the  agony
endure"  he  did  not  mean  he  would  lose  patience,  but  rather  wanted  to  speed  up
the  effort  by  something  like  a  proclamation  that  South  Vietnam  was  being
attacked  from  the  north  and  was  therefore  being  put  on  a  war  footing.  The
statement  would  also  say  that  if  this  attack  from  the  north  did  not  stop  within
a  specified  period  of  time.  South  Vietnam  would  strike  back  in  ways  and  degrees
comparable  to  the  North  Vietnamese  attacks  on  South  Vietnam.

Whereas  the  north  attacks  us  with  guerrillas  that  squirm  through  the
jungle,  we  would  attack  them  with  guerrillas  of  our  own,  only  ours  would
fly  at  treetop  level  and  blow  up  key  installations  or  mine  the  Port  of
Haiphong.

The  Secretary  asked  in  return  if  Khanh  judged  it  wise  to  start  operations  at
that  time.  Khanh  replied  that  he  needed  first  to  consider  the  enemy's  probable
reaction,  including  the  reaction  of  Communist  China.  The  NLF  and  VC  were


72 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

only  arms  and  hands  of  the  monster  whose  head  was  in  Hanoi  "and  maybe
further  north."  To  destroy  the  thing  it  was  necessary  to  strike  the  head.  The
purpose  of  going  on  a  war  footing  was  to  prepare  for  ultimate  extension  of  the
war  to  the  north.  Taylor  asked  how  best  to  attack  the  North.  It  had  been  noted
that  small-scale  operations  had  had  no  success.  With  respect  to  RVNAF  capabili-
ties, Khanh  said  that  they  either  were  equal  to  the  task  already,  or  soon  would
be — the  problem  was  to  be  sure  of  enjoying  full  U.S.  support.  Khanh  conceded
that  there  were  always  unknowns  that  created  uncertainties.  Taylor  recalled  that
in  March  Khanh  had  favored  holding  off  the  attack  on  North  Vietnam  until
there  was  a  stabler  base  in  South  Vietnam.  Khanh  hedged  on  this  point  at  first;
then,  after  conceding  some  GVN  weakness,  said  an  attack  on  the  North  was  the
best  way  to  cure  that  weakness.  It  would  be  a  cure  for  weakness  to  draw  clear
lines  of  battle  and  thereby  engage  men's  hearts  in  an  all-out  effort.

The  Secretary  at  a  later  point  reminded  Khanh  of  the  72,000-man  increase  in
ARVN,  and  another  72,000-man  increase  in  paramilitary  forces,  that  had  been
agreed  upon  in  March;  and  pointed  out  that  accomplishments  in  April  did  not
suggest  that  the  GVN  was  on  schedule.  The  Secretary  emphasized  he  made  the
observation  only  to  introduce  his  main  point,  which  was  that  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment would  help  in  any  way  it  could  to  get  the  program  back  on  schedule.  Then
he  produced  a  chart  showing  what  should  have  been  achieved  and  what  actually
had  been  achieved.  The  USG  would  supply  any  needed  funds,  and  fighter-type
aircraft,  but  the  GVN  must  emphasize  to  the  provinces  that  program  funds
must  be  disbursed.  Khanh  blamed  the  piastre  disbursal  difficulties  on  inherited
French  budget  practices,  and  promised  to  pressure  the  province  chiefs  further
on  the  matter.  There  was  talk  about  incompetent  personnel  within  the  GVN  and
of  the  problems  of  replacing  them.

D. THE  HONOLULU  CONFERENCE  OF  30  MAY  1964

The  next  landmark  of  policy  formation  for  Vietnam  was  the  Honolulu  Con-
ference of  30  May  1964.  On  26  May,  the  President  sent  out  to  Lodge  his  call
for  the  Honolulu  Conference:

I  have  been  giving  the  most  intense  consideration  to  the  whole  battle  for
Southeast  Asia,  and  I  have  now  instructed  Dean  Rusk,  Bob  McNamara,  Max
Taylor  and  John  McCone  to  join  Felt  in  Honolulu  for  a  meeting  with  you
and  a  very  small  group  of  your  most  senior  associates  in  Southeast  Asia  to
review  for  my  final  approval  a  series  of  plans  for  effective  action.

I  am  sending  you  this  message  at  once  to  give  you  private  advance  notice
because  I  hope  this  meeting  can  occur  very  soon — perhaps  on  Monday.
Dean  Rusk  will  be  sending  you  tomorrow  a  separate  cable  on  the  subjects
proposed  for  the  meeting,  and  Bob  McNamara  will  put  a  plane  at  your
disposal  for  the  trip  .  .  .

Other  parts  of  the  message  referred  to  matters  related  to  imepnding  changes  in  the
mission  in  Saigon — the  retirement  of  General  Harkins  and  his  replacement  by
General  Westmoreland  and  the  strengthening  of  the  civilian  side  of  the  country
team.

The  promised  policy  guidance  followed  promptly.  It  constituted  both  an  ap-
praisal of  the  current  situation  and  a  statement  of  the  needs — flowing  from  that
appraisal — that  it  seemed  evident  had  to  be  met,  along  with  some  proposals  for
meeting  those  needs.

I.  You  will  have  surmised  from  yesterday's  telegram  from  the  President
and  the  Secretary  that  we  here  are  fully  aware  that  gravest  decisions  are  in


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  196 3- Apr.  1965  73

front  of  us  and  other  governments  about  free  world's  interest  in  and  com-
mitment to  security  of  Southeast  Asia.  Our  point  of  departure  is  and  must
be  that  we  cannot  accept  overrunning  of  Southeast  Asia  by  Hanoi  and
Peiping.  Full  and  frank  discussion  of  these  decisions  with  you  is  purpose  of
Honolulu  meeting  .  .  .

2.  President  will  continue  in  close  consultation  with  Congressional
leadership  (he  met  with  Democratic  leadership  and  Senate  Republicans
yesterday)  and  will  wish  Congress  associated  with  him  on  any  steps  which
carry  with  them  substantial  acts  and  risks  of  escalation.  At  that  point
there  will  be  three  central  questions:

a.  Is  the  security  of  Southeast  Asia  vital  to  the  U.S.  and  of  the  free
world?

b.  Are  additional  steps  necessary?

c.  Will  the  additional  steps  accomplish  their  mission  of  stopping  the
intrusions  of  Hanoi  and  Peping  into  the  south?

Whether  approached  from  b  or  c  above,  it  seems  obvious  that  we  must
do  everything  within  our  power  to  stiffen  and  strengthen  the  situation
in  South  Vietnam.  We  recognize  that  ...  the  time  sequence  of  Com-
munist actions  may  force  the  critical  decisions  before  any  such  pre-
paratory measures  could  achieve  tangible  success.

II.  Nevertheless,  in  Honolulu,  we  would  like  you  ...  to  be  prepared  to
discuss  with  us  several  proposals  .  .  perhaps  the  most  radical  ...  is  the
one  which  .  .  .  would  involve  a  major  infusion  of  U.S.  efforts  into  a  group
of  selected  provinces  where  Vietnamese  seem  currently  unable  to  execute
their  pacification  programs  .  .  .

We  would  therefore  propose  that  U.S.  personnel,  both  civilian  and
military,  drawn  from  the  U.S.  establishment  currently  in  Vietnam,  be  "en-
cadred"  into  current  Vietnamese  political  and  military  structure  .  .  .

Specifically,  this  would  invplve  the  assignment  of  civilian  personnel,
alternatively  military  personnel  with  a  civilian  function,  to  work  in  the  pro-
vincial administration,  and  insofar  as  it  is  feasible,  down  to  the  logistic  level
of  administration.  On  the  military  side  it  would  mean  the  introduction  of
mobile  training  teams  to  train,  stiffen  and  improve  the  state  of  the  Vietna-
mese paramilitary  forces  and  district  operation  planning  .  .  .

In  order  to  test  the  utility  of  such  a  proposal,  we  would  suggest  that
seven  provinces  be  chosen  for  this  purpose.  We  would  offer  the  provinces
of  Long  An,  Dinh  Tuong,  Kien  Hoa,  Tay  Ninh,  Hau  Nghia,  which  are  five
critical  provinces  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Saigon.  Additionally,  we  would
propose  Quang  Ngia.  .  .  .  and  finally  Phu  Yen.  .  .  .

.  .  .  U.S.  personnel  assigned  to  these  functions  would  not  appear  di-
rectly in  the  chain  of  command.  .  .  .  They  would  instead  be  listed  as
"assistants"  to  the  Vietnamese  officials.  In  practice,  however,  wc  would
expect  them  to  carry  a  major  share  of  the  burden  of  decision  and  action  .  .  .

.  .  .  This  proposal  might  also  require  a  close  integration  of  U.S.  and
Vietnamese  pacification  activities  in  Saigon.  .  .  .

III.  In  addition  to  these  radical  proposals  ...  we  continue  gravely  con-
cerned about  the  differences  between  Khanh  and  the  generals,  the  problem
of  Big  Minh,  and  the  religious  differences.  .  .  .

IV.  Finally,  we  wish  to  consult  with  you  on  the  manner  in  which  we  can
.  .  .  eliminate  the  business  as  usual  attitude  in  Saigon.  ...  We  will  also
wish  to  examine  the  best  means  of  reducing  the  problems  of  dependents.  .  .  .


74 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

On  the  same  day  that  the  foregoing  poUcy  guidance  went  out  to  Ambassador
Lodge,  a  meeting  was  held  in  Washington  at  WilUam  SulHvan's  suggestion.
Attended  by  Mr.  McGeorge  Bundy,  John  McNaughton,  General  Goodpastor
and  William  Colby,  it  considered  a  policy  memo  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Mendenhall
covering  most  of  the  same  points  raised  in  the  message  to  Lodge.  The  gist  of
the  memo  was  that  the  GVN  was  not  operating  effectively  enough  to  reverse  the
adverse  trend  of  the  war  against  the  VC,  that  the  Khanh  government  was  well
intentioned  but  its  good  plans  were  not  being  translated  into  effective  action,
and  that  it  was  necessary  therefore  to  find  means  of  broadening  the  U.S.  role  in
Vietnam  in  order  to  infuse  efficiency  into  the  operations  of  the  GVN.  In  general,
the  memo  argued  the  U.S.  should  become  more  deeply  involved  both  militarily
and  otherwise,  abandoning  the  passive  advisor  role  but  avoiding  visibility  as  a  part
of  the  chain  of  command.  Vietnamese  sensitivities  imposed  limitations,  and  if
it  should  appear  that  the  United  States  intruded,  the  Vietnamese  might  come  to
resent  our  presence.  The  memo  proposed,  nevertheless,  that  the  meeting  carefully
consider  a  phased  expansion  of  the  U.S.  role.  First,  military  advisors  might  be
placed  in  paramilitary  units  in  seven  provinces — about  300  added  advisors  would
be  needed  for  this  purpose.  Second,  in  the  same  seven  provinces — Long  An,
Dinh  Tuong,  Kien  Hoa,  Tay  Ninh,  Hau  Nghia,  Quang  Ngia,  and  Phu  Yen —
U.S.  civilian  and  military  personnel  should  be  interlarded  in  the  civil  administra-
tion, about  10  per  province  for  a  total  of  70.  Third,  as  an  experiment,  the  U.S.
might  try  civilians  at  district  levels  to  supplement  the  U.S.  military  personnel
being  assigned  there.  *Tn  view  of  the  traditional  distrust  of  the  Vietnamese
peasants  for  military  personnel,  it  is  of  considerable  importance  to  begin  an
introduction  of  American  civilian  presence  at  this  level  to  help  win  support  of
the  peasant  population."  [Sic]  To  back  up  these  field  operations  it  was  suggested
that  a  joint  Vietnamese-American  Pacification  Operations  Committee  be  estab-
lished, with  high  level  representation  from  MACV  and  USOM  on  the  U.S.  side,
and  from  the  Defense  Ministry,  the  Joint  General  Staff  (JGS),  the  Vice  President
for  Pacification,  and  the  Directorate  of  the  Budget  and  Foreign  Aid  on  the
Vietnamese  side.  This  Joint  Pacification  Operations  Committee  should  be  con-
cerned not  with  policy  but  with  ifupletnentation  of  policies.  (This  was  judged
the  weak  side  of  the  GVN.)  U.S.  personnel  might,  in  addition,  be  introduced  at
reasonably  high  levels  into  the  Ministries  of  Rural  Affairs,  Interior,  Information,
Education,  Health,  Public  Works,  and,  in  fact,  into  any  other  agency  concerned
with  pacification.  Finally,  the  U.S.  personnel  so  assigned  should  come  from  among
those  Americans  already  on  the  spot — partly  from  civilians  and  partly  from
military  officers  already  on  assignment  there — and  the  vacancies  caused  by  these
reassignments  should  be  filled  by  recruitment  from  the  U.S.

A  cable  from  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  to  CINCPAC  and
COMUSMACV  indicated  that  (in  addition  to  some  questions  on  Laos)  the
Secretary  of  Defense  wanted  the  views  of  the  two  senior  commanders  in  the
Pacific  (CINCPAC  and  MACV)  on  a  series  of  questions  largely  but  not  ex-
clusively military  in  nature:

1.  What  military  actions,  in  ascending  order  of  gravity,  might  be  taken
to  impress  Hanoi  with  our  intentions  to  strike  North  Vietnam?

2.  What  would  be  the  time  factors  and  force  requirements  involved  in
achieving  readiness  for  such  actions  against  North  Vietnam?

3.  What  should  be  the  purpose  and  pattern  of  the  initial  air  strike  against
North  Vietnam?


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam.  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  IS

4.  What  was  their  concept  of  the  actions  and  reactions  which  might  arise
from  progressive  implementation  of  CINCPAC  plans  37-64  and  32-64?

5.  How  might  North  Vietnam  and  Communist  China  respond  to  these
escalating  pressures?

6.  What  military  help  should  be  sought  from  SEATO  nations?

There  was  a  second  group  of  queries  which  referred  not  to  the  possibility  of
military  pressures  of  one  sort  or  another  against  North  Vietnam,  but  rather  were
directed  mainly  to  the  counterinsurgency  efforts  within  South  Vietnam.

1.  What  were  their  views  on  providing  four-man  advisory  teams,  at  once,
for  each  district  in  the  seven  selected  provinces,  and  later  in  all  of  the  239
districts  in  SVN?

2.  In  what  other  ways  could  military  personnel  be  used  to  advantage  in
forwarding  the  pacification  program  in  the  seven  selected  provinces?

3.  What  was  the  current  status  of:

a.  The  proposed  increase  in  regular  and  paramilitary  forces  of  the
GVN,  including  the  expansion  of  the  VNAF,  the  reorganization  of  para-
military forces  and  the  increased  compensation  for  GVN  military  forces?

b.  Formation  of  an  intelligence  net  of  U.S.  advisors  reporting  on  condi-
tions in  the  RVNAF?

c.  Development  of  a  capability  for  offensive  guerrilla  operations?

d.  Progress  under  decrees  for  national  mobilization?

e.  Progress  in  detailing  and  in  carrying  out  operational  plans  for  clear-
hold  operations  (the  oil-spot  concept)?

Along  with  the  solicitation  of  opinion  from  COMUSMACV  and  CINCPAC,
summary  proposals  were  developed  by  SACSA  on  the  "feasiblility  of  strengthen-
ing RVNAF,  CO  and  SDC  by  increased  advisory  efforts  and  or  encadrement."
SACSA's  proposals,  intended  for  consideration  at  the  Honolulu  meeting,  centered
on  three  subjects.  The  first  elaborated  a  concept  which  was  called  "U.S.  Advisory
Assistance  to  the  Vitenamese  Civil  Guard"  which  consisted  of  a  phased  program
of  U.S.  detachments  at  the  district  level  to  provide  operational  assistance  to  para-
military forces.  About  one  and  one-half  years  (or  until  the  end  of  calendar  year
1965)  would  be  needed  to  expand  the  current  effort — which  consisted  of  two-man
teams  for  only  13  districts — to  239  districts  with  larger  advisory  teams  (one
officer  and  3  NCO  specialists).  Thus,  by  the  end  of  1965,  according  to  this  plan,
approximately  1,000  men  would  be  assigned  to  the  districts.  To  support  this  effort
in  the  districts  about  500  more  personnel  would  be  needed,  raising  the  total  to
1500.  The  limiting  factor  on  this  effort  would  be  a  shortage  of  interpretors.

The  second  program  proposed  for  consideration  by  SACSA  was  a  "Pilot  Pro-
gram for  Provision  of  Advisory  Assistance  to  Paramilitary  Forces  in  Seven
Provinces."  This  was  directed  exclusively  to  the  seven  critical  provinces,  namely.
Long  An,  Dinh  Tuong,  Kien  Hoa,  Hau  Nghia,  Tay  Ninh,  Quang  Ngia  and  Phu
Yen.  The  concept  in  Ihis  case  was  to  assign  one  advisory  detachment  with  one
company  grade  officer  and  three  NCOs  to"  each  of  the  49  districts  in  the  seven
provinces.  In  addition  to  this  total  of  200  persons,  a  35  percent  manpower  over-
head slice  plus  some  augmentation  at  the  province  level  (70 -f- 30)  would  be
required.  This  would  mean  about  100  men  in  addition  to  the  4x49  in  the
districts,  or  an  overall  total  of  about  300.  In  addition,  a  minimum  of  49  inter-
pretors would  be  needed.


76 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

The  third  proposal  for  discussion  was  a  suggestion  that  U.S.  advisors  be  placed
at  company  level  in  regular  ARVN  units.  In  investigating  this  proposal,
CINCPAC,  COMUSMACV  and  advisors  on  the  spot  had  been  asked  their
judgment,  and  all  were  reported  to  believe  that  this  extension  of  advisors  to
company  level  was  not  necessary,  and  that  the  current  advisory  structure  to
ARVN  was  adequate.

The  problem  areas  cited  in  all  of  these  proposals  to  extend  the  advisory  system
were  the  questionable  acceptability  to  the  Vietnamese  of  further  intrusion  by
American  advisors,  the  shortage  of  interpretors,  and  finally  the  inevitable  increase
in  U.S.  casualties.

The  political  problems  demanding  solutions  in  order  to  permit  the  GVN  to
proceed  effectively  in  its  struggle  against  the  VC  were  identified  in  the  U.S
preparations  for  the  Honolulu  Conference  as:

a.  The  disposition  of  the  senior  political  and  military  prisoners  from  the
two  coups  (there  was  resentment  by  some  groups  over  the  detention  of
prisoners  at  Dalat;  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  possible  danger  to  the  Khanh
regime  if  they  were  released).

b.  The  rising  religious  tension  both  Catholic  and  Buddhist.

c.  The  split  between  Buddhists  under  Thich  Tam  Chau  (moderates  and
under  Thich  Tri  Quang  (extremists).

d.  Petty  politicking  within  the  GVN.

e.  GVN  failure  to  provide  local  lectures.

f.  GVN  failure  to  appoint  Ambassadors  to  key  governments.

g.  Inadequate  GVN  arrangements  to  handle  third  country  aid.

h.  RVNAF  failure  to  protect  the  population.

It  was  not  within  the  competence  of  the  Honolulu  Conference  to  come  to  any
decisions  concerning  the  touchy  matter  of  additional  pressures  against  the  North;
this  could  be  done  only  at  the  White  House  level.  Agreement  was  reached,
however,  on  certain  specific  actions  to  be  taken  with  respect  to  the  critical
provinces  and  very  shortly  after  the  return  of  major  participants  to  Washington
these  actions  were  approved  and  instructions  were  sent  to  the  field  accordingly.

On  5  June  the  Department  notified  the  Embassy  in  Saigon  that  actions  agreed
upon  at  Honolulu  were  to  be  taken  with  respect  to  the  critical  provinces  as
follows:

1 .  Move  in  added  South  Vietnamese  troops  to  assure  numerical  superior-
ity over  the  VC.

2.  Assign  contol  over  all  troops  in  each  province  to  the  province  chief.

3.  Execute  clear-and-hold  operations  on  a  hamlet-by-hamlet  basis  follow-
ing the  "oil  spot"  theory  for  each  of  the  approximately  40  districts  within
the  seven  critical  provinces.

4.  Introduce  population  control  programs  (curfews,  ID  papers,  intel-
ligence networks,  etc.).

5.  Increase  the  number  of  provincial  police.

6.  Expand  the  information  program.

7.  Develop  special  economic  programs  for  each  province.

8.  Add  U.S.  personnel  as  follows:

a.  320  military  advisors  in  provinces  and  districts.

b.  40  USOM  advisors  in  provinces  and  districts.

c.  74  battalion  advisors  (2  for  each  of  37  battalions).

434  TOTAL


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963- Apr.  1965  11

9.  Transfer  military  personnel  as  needed  to  fill  USOM  shortages.
10.  Establish  joint  US  GVN  teams  to  monitor  the  program  at  both  Na-
tional and  Provincial  levels.

E. PREPARATION  FOR  INCREASED  PRESSURE
ON  NORTH  VIETNAM

The  critical  question  of  pressures  against  North  Vietnam  remained  theoretically
moot.  The  consensus  of  those  formulating  policy  proposals  for  final  approval  by
highest  authority  appears  to  have  been  that  these  pressures  would  have  to  be
resorted  to  sooner  or  later.  But  the  subject  was  politically  explosive,  especially
in  a  presidential  election  year.  Accordingly,  not  only  did  the  basic  foreign  policy
issues  involved  need  careful  exploration,  but  the  domestic  political  framework
needed  preparation  before  any  binding  commitments  to  serious  actions  could
be  decided  upon.

On  15  June  1964,  McGeorge  Bundy  addressed  a  memorandum  to  the  Secre-
taries of  State  and  Defense  announcing  a  meeting  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  Con-
ference room  that  same  day  at  6:00  p.m.

The  principal  question  for  discussion  will  be  to  assess  the  desirability
of  recommending  to  the  President  that  a  Congressional  resolution  on  South-
east Asia  should  be  sought  [material  missing]

The  second  question  is  what  the  optimum  recommendation  for  action
should  be  if  in  fact  a  congressional  resolution  is  not  recommended.  .  .  .

There  were  six  enclosures  included  for  the  consideration  of  those  attending
the  conference.  The  first  was  a  memorandum  on  the  subject  of  "Elements  of  a
Southeast  Asia  Policy  That  Does  Not  Include  a  Congressional  Resolution."  The
second  was  a  Sullivan  memorandum  summarizing  the  current  situation  in  South
Vietnam.  The  third  was  a  memorandum  by  W.  P.  Bundy  dated  12  June  1964
on  "Probable  Developments  and  [the]  Case  for  Congressional  Resolution  on
Southeast  Asia."  The  fourth  was  a  draft  resolution  on  Southeast  Asia  for  Con-
gressional approval.  The  fifth  suggested  basic  themes  to  be  employed  in  present-
ing the  resolution  to  the  Congress.  The  sixth  and  last  consisted  of  a  long  series
of  questions  and  answers  regarding  the  resolution  of  the  public  relations  sort
that  it  was  thought  should  surround  the  effort.

The  proposed  "Elements  of  a  Policy  That  Does  Not  Include  a  Congressional
Resolution"  consisted  largely  of  an  elaboration  of  the  covert  measures  that  were
already  either  approved  or  nearing  approval.  This  included  RECCE  STRIKE  and
T-28  Operations  all  over  Laos  and  small-scale  RECCE  STRIKE  Operations  in
North  Vietnam  after  appropriate  provocation.  Apparently  the  sequence  of  actions
was  thought  of  as  T^eginning  with  VNAF  Operations  in  the  Laotian  corridor,
followed  by  limited  air  and  sea  deployments  of  U.S.  forces  toward  Southeast
Asia,  and  still  more  limited  troop  movements  in  that  general  area.  Military  actions
were  to  be  accompanied  by  political  actions  which  would  maximize  diplomatic
support  for  Laos  and  maximize  the  support  and  visible  presence  of  allies  in
Saigon.  This  last  was  explicitly  stated  to  be  particularly  desired  by  "higher  au-
thority." Diplomatic  moves,  it  was  hoped,  would  also  intensify  support  of  Sou-
vanna.  In  Vietnam,  the  paper  argued,  we  should  emphasize  the  critical  province
program,  strengthen  the  Country  Team,  shift  the  U.S.  role  from  advice  to  direc-
tion, discourage  emphatically  any  further  coup  plots,  and  give  energetic  support
to  Khanh.  In  the  U.S.  there  should  be  expanded  publicity  for  opposition  to  both
aggressive  adventure  and  withdrawal.  It  is  probably  significant  that  the  last  words


78 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

of  this  study  were  that  "this  outline  does  not  preclude  a  shift  to  a  higher  level  of
action,  if  actions  of  other  side  should  justify  or  require  it.  It  does  assume  that  in
the  absence  of  such  drastic  action,  defense  of  U.S.  interests  is  possible  within  these
limits  over  the  next  six  months."

The  Sullivan  memorandum  warrants  special  attention  because,  although  nom-
inally a  report  on  this  situation,  it  speculated  on  policy  and  courses  of  action  in
a  way  very  significant  to  the  policy  formulation  processes  at  this  time.  In  discus-
sing the  role  of  morale  as  a  future  consideration  it  approached  a  level  of  mys-
ticism over  a  pathway  of  dilettastism.  It  was  stated  that  at  Honolulu  both  Lodge
and  Westmoreland  had  said  the  situation  would  remain  in  its  current  stalemate
unless  some  "victory"  were  introduced.  Westmoreland  defined  victory  as  determi-
nation to  take  some  new  military  commitments  such  as  air  strikes  against  the  Viet
Cong  in  the  Laos  corridor;  while  Lodge  defined  victory  as  willingness  to  make
punitive  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  "The  significant  fact  .  .  .  was  that
they  [both  Westmoreland  and  Lodge]  looked  toward  some  American  decision
to  undertake  a  commitment  which  the  Vietnamese  would  interpret  as  a  willing-
ness to  raise  the  military  ante  and  eschew  negotiations  begun  from  a  position  of
weakness."  Although  Khanh  had  had  some  success,  Vietnamese  morale  was  still
not  good  and  needed  leadership  had  not  been  displayed.

If  we  can  obtain  a  breakthrough  in  the  mutual  commitment  of  the  U.S.
in  Vietnam  to  a  confident  sense  of  victory,  we  believe  that  we  can  introduce
this  sort  of  executive  involvement  into  the  Vietnamese  structure.  .  .  .  No
one  .  .  .  can  define  with  precision  just  how  that  breakthrough  can  be
established.  It  could  come  from  the  external  actions  of  the  U.S.,  internal
leadership  in  Vietnam,  or  from  an  act  of  the  irreversible  commitment  by
the  United  States.

The  "logic"  of  this  seemed  to  be  that  Khanh  had  not  been  able  to  provide  the
necessary  leadership,  despite  all  the  aid  and  support  the  U.S.  had  given.  No  level
of  mere  aid,  advice,  and  support  short  of  full  participation  could  be  expected  to
supply  this  deficiency,  because  Khanh  would  remain  discouraged  and  defeated
until  he  was  given  full  assurance  of  victory.  He  would  not  be  able  to  feel  that
assurance  of  victory  until  the  U.S.  committed  itself  to  full  participation  in  the
struggle,  even  to  the  extent  of  co-belligerency.  If  the  U.S.  could  commit  itself  in
this  way,  the  U.S.  determination  would  somehow  be  transfused  into  the  GVN.
The  problem  before  the  assembled  U.S.  policy-makers,  therefore,  was  to  find
some  means  of  breakthrough  into  an  irreversible  commitment  of  the  U.S.

The  actions  contemplated  in  this  memorandum  were  not  finally  decided  upon
at  this  juncture,  as  we  know.  But  we  were  gravitating  inexorably  in  that  direction
in  response  to  forces  already  at  work,  and  over  which  we  had  ceased  to  have  much
real  control.  The  situation  in  Vietnam  had  so  developed,  by  this  time,  that  by
common  consent  the  success  of  our  programs  in  Vietnam — and  indeed  of  our
whole  policy  there,  with  which  we  had  publicly  and  repeatedly  associated  our
national  prestige — depended  upon  the  stability  of  the  GVN.  Conditions  being
what  they  were,  the  GVN  equated,  for  the  future  to  which  plans  and  actions
applied,  with  the  Khanh  regime.  We  were  therefore  almost  as  dependent  upon
Khanh  as  he  was  beholden  to  us.  Circumstances  had  thus  forced  us  into  a
situation  wherein  the  most  immediate  and  pressing  goal  of  our  programs  in  Viet-
nam was  recognized  to  be  using  our  resources  and  prestige  to  perpetuate  a
regime  that  we  knew  was  only  one  faction — opposed  by  other  factions — and
without  any  broad  base  of  popular  support.  We  were  aware  of  that  weakness,


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  79

and  fully  intented,  whenever  it  was  expedient,  to  find  ways  to  broaden  that  basis
of  popular  support.  But  that  was  something  that  could  be — and  indeed  had  to
be — deferred.  Meantime  we  had  to  do  first  things  first — we  had  to  bolster  the
Khanh  regime,  and  since  this  could  only  be  done  by  endowing  it  with  some  of  our
own  sense  of  purpose  and  determination  for  the  cause  that  was  in  the  first  instance
theirs,  not  ours,  we  would  prepare  to  do  the  things  Khanh  indicated  were  neces-
sary to  give  him  courage.

F. INCREASING  U.S.  INVOLVEMENT  AND  GROWING  GVN
INSTABILITY

The  changing  of  the  guard  in  the  U.S.  mission  in  Saigon  at  the  half  year
point,  when  Ambassador  Lodge  returned  to  the  U.S.  to  participate  in  election
year  politics,  symbolized  the  growing  importance  attached  by  the  U.S.  to  its
Southeast  Asia  commitment.  The  combination  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint
Chiefs  as  Ambassador,  backed  up  by  a  Deputy  Ambassador  in  the  person  of
U.  Alexis  Johnson,  a  former  Under  Secretary  of  State  who  had  been  U.S.  Am-
bassador to  Thailand  and  was  well  known  in  SEA,  made  a  prestigious  and
impressive  team.  Moreover,  in  sending  the  new  Ambassador,  the  President
endowed  him  with  unusual  powers.

Dear  Ambassador  Taylor:  As  you  take  charge  of  the  American  effort
in  South  Vietnam,  I  want  you  to  have  this  formal  expression  not  only  of
my  confidence,  but  of  my  desire  that  you  have  and  exercise  full  responsi-
bility for  the  effort  of  the  United  States  government  in  South  Vietnam.  In
general  terms  this  authority  is  parallel  to  that  set  forth  in  President  Ken-
nedy's letter  of  May  29,  1961,  to  all  American  Ambassadors;  specifically,
I  wish  it  clearly  understood  that  this  overall  responsibility  includes  the
whole  military  effort  in  South  Vietnam  and  authorizes  the  degree  of  com-
mand and  control  that  you  consider  appropriate.

I  recognize  that  in  the  conduct  of  the  day-to-day  business  of  the  mili-
tary assistance  command,  Viefnam,  you  will  wish  to  work  out  arrangements
which  do  not  burden  you  or  impede  the  exercise  of  your  overall  direction.

At  your  convenience  I  should  be  glad  to  know  of  the  arrangements  which
you  propose  for  meeting  the  terms  of  this  instuction,  so  that  appropriate
supporting  action  can  be  taken  in  the  Defense  Department  and  elsewhere
as  necessary.

This  letter  rescinds  all  conflicting  instructions  to  US  officers  in  Vietnam.

Sincerely,

Lyndon  B.  Johnson

The  new  U.S.  team  set  out  immediately  to  systematize  U.S.  operations  in
Vietnam,  including  reorganization  of  the  upper  echelons  of  the  Mission.  Added
to  this  was  an  effort  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  the  GVN  and  USG-GVN
cooperation  by  developing  a  coordinate,  parallel  GVN  organization.  On  7  July
Ambassador  Taylor  reported  that,  following  recommendations  from  Deputy
Ambassador  Johnson  and  agency  heads  there,  he  had  organized  U.S.  mission
operations  under  the  direction  of  a  U.S.  Mission  Council,  over  which  he
would  preside.  The  Council  was  to  consist  of  himself,  Johnson,  Westmoreland,
Killen  (temporarily  Hurt),  Zorthian,  DeSilva  and  Sullivan.  This  group  was  to
meet  once  a  week  as  an  executive  organization.  To  support  this  council  he
also  established  a  Coordinating  Committee  to  be  chaired  by  Sullivan.  This  would


80 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

carry  out  Mission  Council  decisions  and  prepare  the  agenda  for  Council
meetings.  On  the  following  day,  8  July,  Ambassador  Taylor  reported  that  he
had  called  upon  Khanh,  and  that  Khanh  had  expressed  satisfaction  over  the
new  U.S.  personnel,  and  noted  the  rising  morale  their  appointments  had  caused
within  the  government.  Taylor  told  Khanh  about  the  formation  of  the  Mission
Council  and  Khanh  asked  for  an  organization  chart  so  that  he  could  develop
a  coordinate  set-up  within  the  GVN.  Khanh  said  moreover  that  the  U.S.  should
not  merely  advise,  but  should  actually  participate  in  GVN  operations  and  de-
cisions. "We  should  do  this  in  Saigon  (as  well  as  in  the  provinces),  between
GVN  ministries  and  offices  and  their  American  counterparts."

The  new  Ambassador  did  not  delay  in  plunging  into  the  substance  of  the
problems  that  were  plaguing  Vietnam.  In  his  first  conversations  with  Khanh
he  asked  about  the  status  of  the  religious  problem,  and  according  to  Taylor's
report  of  the  conversation,  Khanh  said  the  situation  was  still  delicate,  that  the
Catholics  were  better  organized  and  were  the  aggressors,  that  Thich  Tri  Quang
appeared  reasonable  when  in  Saigon  but  less  so  when  in  Hue.  When  the  Am-
bassador queried  Khanh  about  the  progress  of  the  recruiting  effort,  Khanh  said
that  it  was  not  going  as  well  as  he  would  like.  With  respect  to  the  new  pacifica-
tion plan,  HOP  TAC,  that  had  been  agreed  upon,  the  Ambassador  expressed  his
approval  of  the  general  idea  because  paramilitary  forces  existed  in  this  area
to  relieve  ARVN.  The  Ambassador  next  took  up  the  question  of  high  desertion
rates  to  which  Khanh  appears  to  have  replied  rather  fuzzily.  He  said  that  the
problem  was  complicated  by  many  factors,  that  the  Vietnamese  liked  to  serve
near  home  and  sometimes  left  one  service  to  join  another.  He  implied  that  the
figures  might  not  mean  exactly  what  they  seemed  to  mean.

The  lively  interest  of  the  President  at  this  time  was  indicated  by  his  10  July
request  directly  to  the  Ambassador  for  a  coordinated  Country  Team  report  at
the  end  of  each  month  to  show  "where  we  stand  in  the  process  of  increasing
the  effectiveness  of  our  military,  economic,  information,  and  intelligence  pro-
grams, just  where  the  Khanh  government  stands  in  the  same  fields,  and  what
progess  we  are  making  in  the  effort  to  mesh  our  work  with  theirs  along  the  lines
of  your  talk  with  General  Khanh.

Five  days  later  on  15  July,  Ambassador  Taylor  transmitted  estimates  (not
the  monthly  report)  of  VC  strength  which  raised  the  previous  estimate  from
28,000  to  34,000.  In  so  doing  he  explained  that  this  was  not  a  sudden  and  dra-
matic increase,  but  rather  amounted  to  acceptance  of  the  existence  of  units  that
had  been  suspected  for  two  or  three  years  but  for  which  confirming  evidence
had  only  recently  been  received.

This  increased  estimate  of  enemy  strength  and  recent  upward  trend  in
VC  activity  in  the  North  should  not  occasion  over-concern.  We  have  been
coping  with  this  strength  for  some  time  without  being  accurately  aware  of
its  dimensions.

The  figures  were  interpretable  as  a  reminder,  however,  of  the  growing  magnitude
of  the  problem,  and  of  the  need  to  raise  the  level  of  GVN/US  effort.  As  a  result
the  Ambassador  commented  that  he  was  expediting  formulation  of  additional
requirements  to  support  the  plans  in  the  ensuing  months.

For  a  while,  there  was  a  serious  effort  to  coordinate  USOM-GVN  planning,
and  on  17  July  1964,  USOM  met  with  Khanh,  Hoan,  Oanh  and  others — a
group  Khanh  called  the  National  Security  Council.  This  cooperation  was  ap-
proved, as  well  as  cooperation  between  USIS  and  the  GVN  information  office — a


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  196 3- Apr.  1965  81

more  sensitive  problem.  On  23  July  1964,  Taylor  and  Khanh  discussed  this  co-
operation in  another  NSC  meeting  and  it  was  agreed  that,  to  facilitate  things,
mutual  bureaucratic  adjustments  would  be  made.  In  this  same  meeting  of  23
July,  Khanh  revived  his  pressure  for  offensive  operations  against  North  Vietnam
and  expressed  again  his  impatience  with  the  long  pull  of  counterinsurgency  and
pacification  programs.

This  reopening  of  the  "march  to  the  north"  theme  on  23  July  was  not  the  first
revival.  On  19  July,  General  Ky  had  talked  to  reporters  about  plans  for  opera-
tions in  Laos,  and  on  the  same  day  Khanh  himself  had  made  indiscreet  remarks
about  "march  to  the  north"  at  a  unification  rally  in  Saigon.  This  led  to  stories
and  editorials  in  the  Saigon  press.  The  Ambassador  protested  the  campaign  as
looking  like  an  effort  to  force  the  hand  of  the  U.S.  This  became  a  central  pre-
occupation of  Ambassador  Taylor  thereafter.  He  firmly  opposed  Khanh's  pressure
on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  had  argued  for  patience  with  the  GVN  even
though  the  GVN  defense  ministry  put  out  an  embarrassing  press  release  im-
mediately after  the  long  Taylor-Khanh  talk  which  followed  on  24  July  1964.

The  political  pressures  in  Saigon  were  at  that  time  increasing  vastly.  Both
Khanh  and  other  top  Vietnamese  politicians  and  political  generals  were  reacting
in  increasingly  strong  ways.  The  very  evident  instability  of  the  current  regime
increased  rapidly  and  at  the  same  time  there  was  a  tendency  to  try  to  escape
from  the  dilemmas  posed  within  South  Vietnam  by  actions  against  North  Viet-
nam, actions  which  it  had  been  hoped  would  lead  to  a  unity  within  South  Viet-
nam impossible  under  the  current  circumstances.  There  was  a  CAS  report,  for
instance,  of  coup  plotting  on  24  July  that  said  a  decision  had  been  made  by  the
generals  to  remove  Khanh,  but  that  it  was  not  clear  who  would  replace  him  or
whether  the  planned  removal  would  be  opposed.  This  was  the  same  day  that  the
Ambassador,  who  had  scarcely  been  in  Saigon  a  fortnight,  had  first  protested  to
Khanh  concerning  his  indiscreet  remarks  about  a  march  to  the  north.  The  Am-
bassador also  talked  to  Khanh,  following  the  Mission  Council  meeting,  concern-
ing the  rumors  of  a  possible  coup.  Khanh  said  that  because  he  (Taylor — i.e.,  the
U.S.)  had  imposed  Minh  on  the  M.RC  as  Chief  of  State,  and  because  of  Minh's
support  of  Generals  Kim  and  Xuan  and  other  partisans  of  French  neutralist
policies.  Defense  Minister  Khiem  and  Chief  of  State  Thieu  were  leading  a  group
that  was  pressing  Khanh  to  get  rid  of  Minh.  This  Khiem  block  was  permeated
by  Dai  Viet  political  influence.  Khanh  asked  Taylor  if  he  should  resign.  Taylor
said  the  USG  could  not  contemplate  the  consequences  of  another  change  of  gov-
ernment. Because  no  other  leader  was  in  sight,  Khanh  had  our  support  and  he
must  continue  in  the  face  of  adversity.  "Could  we  help?"  Taylor  inquired.  Khanh
asked  that  we  let  it  be  known  that  we  wanted  no  more  changes  of  government
and  asked  Taylor  to  talk  to  Khiem  and  his  supporters  about  the  bad  effects  of
politics  in  the  armed  forces.

One  means  of  demonstrating  U.S.  support  of  Khanh  was  to  let  Khanh  make
the  first  announcement  of  increased  U.S.  aid,  followed  by  a  background  state-
ment by  the  Ambassador.  To  carry  this  out,  the  Ambassador  submitted  a  draft
statement  for  Khanh  to  use.  One  part  of  this  draft  statement  mentioned  the  in-
crease of  U.S.  military  advisors  and  their  extension  "to  the  district  level."  When
Taylor  and  Johnson  discussed  this  with  Khanh  at  Dalat  two  days  later,  Khanh
saw  advantages  to  the  proclamation  in  general,  but  preferred  to  change  the  refer-
ence "advisors  at  the  district  level"  to  read  "advisors  throughout  the  provinces,"
because  the  original  suggested  an  undesirably  deep  penetration  of  the  GVN  by
the  U.S.

When  Ambassador  Taylor  on  25  July  reported  further  on  Khanh's  revival  of


82 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

the  march  to  the  north  theme,  he  interpreted  it  as  response  to  political  and  morale
problems  within  South  Vietnam.  The  Ambassador  suggested  several  possible
motivations,  and  commented  that  if  Khanh  had  been  reasonably  sincere  his  ob-
jective probably  was  to :

.  .  .  talk  "march  north"  but  really  have  in  mind  getting  U.S.  committed
to  program  of  reprisal  bombing.  Such  a  limited  program  could  be  first  step
to  further  escalation  against  Hanoi. [Doc.  58]

On  10  August,  when  the  storm  clouds  had  already  appeared  but  before  the
gale  had  begun  to  blow,  Ambassador  Taylor  filed  his  first  monthly  U.S.  mission
report.  The  report  began  by  expressing  surprise  that  the  first  sampling  of  advisor-
level  opinion  revealed  more  optimism  than  among  the  senior  U.S.  officials  in
Saigon.  Following  this  preliminary  flourish,  the  report  gave  an  introductory
definition  of  the  problem  which  was,  in  simplest  terms,  that  the  Hanoi/NLF
startegy  was  not  to  defeat  GVN  military  forces  in  battle  but  rather  to  harass  and
terrorize  the  SVN  population  and  leadership  into  a  state  of  such  demoralization
that  a  political  settlement  favorable  to  NVN  would  ensue.  At  that  point  they
could  proceed  by  stages  to  the  full  attainment  of  their  goals.  To  oppose  this
strategy,  the  Khanh  government  had  a  complex  not  only  of  military  programs,
but  of  social,  economic,  psychological  and  above  all  administrative  programs.
This  complex  of  programs  Taylor  reported  on  under  three  captions:  "Political,"
"Military"  and  "Overall."  On  the  political  side  he  reported:

The  most  important  and  most  intractable  internal  problem  of  South
Vietnam  in  meeting  the  Viet  Cong  threat  is  the  political  structure  at  the  na-
tional level.  The  best  thing  that  can  be  said  about  the  Khanh  government  is
that  it  has  lasted  six  months  and  has  about  a  50-50  chance  of  lasting  out  the
year,  although  probably  not  without  some  changed  faces  in  the  Cabinet.
Although  opposed  by  Minh  and  resisted  less  openly  by  Dai  Viet  sympa-
thizers among  the  military,  Prime  Minister  Khanh  seems  for  the  time  being
to  have  the  necessary  military  support  to  remain  in  power.  However,  it  is
an  ineffective  government  beset  by  inexperienced  ministers  who  are  also
jealous  and  suspicious  of  each  other  .  .  .

On  the  positive  side,  Khanh  seems  to  have  allayed  the  friction  between
Buddhists  and  Catholics  at  least  for  the  moment,  has  won  the  cooperation
of  the  Hoa  Hao  and  Cao  Dai,  and  has  responded  to  our  suggestions  for
improved  relations  between  the  GVN  and  the  U.S.  mission  .  .  .
.  .  .  Khanh  has  not  succeeded  in  building  any  substantial  body  of  active
popular  support  in  the  countryside.  In  the  countryside  .  .  .  that  support
for  the  GVN  exists  in  direct  proportion  to  the  degree  of  security  established
by  government  forces  .  .  .

The  intriguing  inside  his  government  and  the  absence  of  dramatic  mili-
tary or  political  successes  react  upon  Khanh  .  .  .  moody  .  .  .  subjective
to  fits  of  despondency.  Seeing  the  slow  course  of  the  counterinsurgency
campaign  frustrated  by  the  weakness  of  his  government,  Khanh  has  turned
to  the  "march  north"  theme  to  unify  the  home  front  and  to  offset  the  war
weariness  which  he  asserts  is  oppressing  his  people  and  his  forces.  .  .  .
The  state  of  mind  of  Khanh  and  his  colleagues  would  be  an  important
factor  in  the  future  conduct  of  the  war,  Taylor  judged.

They  found  slow,  hard-slugging  contest  fatiguing  to  their  spirits.  The  reprisals
of  5  August  (Tonkin  Gulf)  had  given  them  a  lift,  but  if  indecisive  bloodshed


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  83

with  the  VC  continued,  they  would  probably  exert  continuing  and  increasing
pressure  for  direct  attack  upon  Hanoi.

Concerning  pacification,  the  Ambassador  observed  that  the  most  difficult  part
of  the  program  was  the  civilian  follow-up  after  the  clearing  operation  in  the
clear-and-hold  program.  The  difficulty  stemmed  from  the  inefficiency  of  the
ministries.  To  energize  these  civilian  functions,  USOM  had  increased  its  provin-
cial representation  from  45  in  March  to  64  in  July,  but  this  was  still  insufficient,
despite  the  judgment  of  critical  inefficiency  in  the  ministries.  Taylor  next  reported
that  "U.S.  observers  reported  in  July  that  in  about  of  the  provinces  GVN
provincial  and  district  officers  were  performing  effectively.  .  .  ."  It  was  too  soon
to  go  into  details  regarding  Hop  Tac,  and  the  report  on  that  program  was  in
effect  a  description  of  its  objectives  and  rationale  rather  than  a  progress  report.

The  Ambassador  reported  that  on  the  military  side,  the  personnel  strength  of
RVNAF  and  of  the  paramilitary  forces  was  slowly  rising  and  by  January  should
reach  about  98  percent  of  the  target  strength  of  446,000.  COMUSMACV  had
reported  at  the  end  of  July  that  the  actual  GVN  strength  stood  at  219,954
RVNAF,  88,560  Regional  Forces  (formerly  Civil  Guard),  and  127,453  Popular
Forces  (formerly  Self  Defense  Corps).

III. FROM  TONKIN  TO  NSAM-328

A. TONKIN  GULF  AND  FOLLOWING  POLITICAL  CRISES

As  already  noted,  the  Ambassador's  first  monthly  report  was  filed  just  before
the  internal  Vietnamese  political  storm  broke  in  full  force.  Through  the  late
spring  and  into  July  of  1964,  the  Buddhist-Catholic  quarrel  intensified.  Students
again  began  to  demonstrate  in  Saigon  and  Hue.  By  July  a  coup  plot  was  develop-
ing against  Khanh  led  by  his  disgruntled  Vice  Premier,  Dr.  Nguyen  Ton  Hoan,
who  was  backed  by  the  Dai  Viet  and  several  top  military  leaders.  But  according
to  one  of  the  best  authorities,  known  U.S.  opposition  to  a  coup  made  its  leaders
hesitate  and  nothing  immediately  developed.  Then  came  the  Tonkin  Gulf  affair
of  2-4  August,  and  the  U.S.  retaliatory  strikes  of  4-5  August.

An  immediate  effect  of  the  raids  was  to  shore  up  Khanh's  weakening  position.
But  contrary  to  prevailing  theories  and  hopes,  stability  was  very  short-lived.
Khanh  sought  to  exploit  the  affair  by  a  radio  appeal  for  unity  and  national  disci-
pline. He  did  not  arrest  the  coup  plotters  however,  which  many  Vietnamese — but
not  the  U.S.  Embassy — advised.  Instead,  on  7  August,  he  announced  a  state  of
emergency,  reimposed  censorship  and  other  prescriptions  and  restrictions  on  liber-
ties and  movements  of  the  Vietnamese  people.

Apparently  hoping  to  further  exploit  the  opportunity,  Khanh  hurriedly  sought
to  draw  up  a  new  charter  to  centralize  and  increase  his  powers.  On  12  August
he  discussed  this  for  the  first  time  with  Ambassador  Taylor.  The  Ambassador
made  two  comments,  one  suggesting  caution  lest  "renewed  instability  .  .  .  result
from  these  sweeping  changes,"  the  other  urging  a  public  explanation  of  the  need
for  the  changes  because  of  a  state  of  emergency.

Two  days  later  at  a  joint  NSC  planning  session,  Khanh  showed  Ambassador
Taylor  a  rough  translation  of  the  proposed  draft  of  a  new  charter.  It  was  hastily
drawn  and  included  both  dubious  provisions  and  gruff  language.  The  Ambassador
was  immediately  afraid  this  would  lead  to  criticism  in  the  U.S.  and  the  world
press;  he  assigned  Sullivan  and  Manfull  to  work  on  a  revision.  But  they  had
little  time  and  were  unable  to  exert  much  influence.  A  day  later,  August  15,  the
Ambassador  reported  the  document  still  did  not  satisfy  him  but  that  the  MRC


84 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

fully  intended  to  impose  it  and  he  saw  no  alternative  to  trying  to  make  the  best
of  it.  Certain  passages  evidently  had  been  toned  down  and  something  resembling
a  bill  of  rights  inserted.  Nevertheless  the  charter  gave  virtually  complete  power
to  Khanh.  A  special  session  of  the  MRC  approved  Khanh's  new  charter  and
elected  him  President.  Minh  was  expediently  removed:  the  charter  abolished  his
job  as  Chief  of  State.  Since  his  overthrow  at  the  end  of  January  Minh  had  been
inactive  and  sulky;  but  whatever  his  faults  he  had  a  considerable  following
within  South  Vietnam.  It  had  been  American  policy  to  convince  Khanh  to  bring
Minh  into  his  government  thereby  endowing  the  Khanh  regime  with  some  of
Minh's  popularity.  Khanh  had  acceded  to  U.S.  wishes.  But  Minh's  presence  had
not  yielded  the  hoped  for  unity.  Ambassador  Taylor,  Minh's  friend  for  several
years,  had  attempted  to  patch  up  the  deteriorating  relations  between  the  two
generals  but  these  efforts  only  incurred  Khanh's  suspicion  of  Taylor.

In  the  period  immediately  following  the  Tonkin  Gulf  affair,  Washington  offi-
cials sought  agreement  on  Southeast  Asian  policies.  We  were  entering  a  new  era.
On  14  August,  State  cabled  a  summary  of  a  tentative  policy  paper  to  Saigon,
Vientiane  and  CINCPAC  for  comment.  The  paper  began  by  stating  that  during
the  next  fortnight  no  precipitate  actions  that  might  relieve  the  Communists  of
the  onus  of  further  escalation  should  be  taken.  DESOTO  patrols  should  be  held
up;  there  should  be  no  extra  34A  operations.  But  low  morale  and  lost  momentum
in  SVN  had  to  be  treated.  The  best  means  to  improve  morale  in  South  Vietnam
and  at  the  same  time  pressure  North  Vietnam  at  the  lowest  level  of  risk  had  to
be  found.  This  was  the  guiding  philosophy.  Basically  required  were  military
pressures  plus  other  actions  to  convince  Hanoi  and  Peking  to  cease  aggression.
Negotiation  without  continued  military  pressure  would  not  achieve  these  objec-
tives. The  paper  listed  seven  [words  illegiblel  those  already  exerted,  then  dis-
cussed more  serious  actions.  Lesser  pressures,  it  was  stated,  were  to  relay  the
threat  of  systematic,  military  action  against  the  DRV.  Hanoi  was  to  be  informed
that  incidents  arising  from  the  lesser  actions  or  deterioration  in  South  Vietnam
— particularly  clear  evidence  of  increased  infiltration  from  the  North — could
trigger  that  sustained  action.  In  any  case,  for  planning  purposes  the  paper  looked
to  1  January  1965  as  the  starting  point  for  the  more  serious  systematic  pres-
sures.

The  Mission  comment  took  the  form  of  an  alternative  draft.  It  began  by  agree-
ing with  the  assumption  of  the  proposed  Department  paper,  that  the  present
pacification  plan,  by  itself,  was  insufficient  to  maintain  national  morale  or  to  offer
reasonable  hope  of  eventual  success.  Something  more  was  clearly  needed.  The
main  problem  in  the  immediate  future  was  to  gain  time  for  the  Khanh  regime
to  achieve  a  modicum  of  stability  and  thereby  provide  a  viable  base  for  opera-
tions.

In  particular,  if  we  can  avoid  it,  we  should  not  get  involved  militarily
with  North  Vietnam  or  possibly  with  Red  China  if  our  base  in  South
Vietnam  is  insecure  and  Khanh's  Army  is  tied  down  by  the  VC  insurgency.

A  second  objective  was  to  maintain  the  morale  of  the  GVN.  The  mission  judged
that  this  would  not  be  difficult  if  we  could  assure  Khanh  of  our  readiness  to  bring
added  pressure  on  Hanoi  in  return  for  evidence  of  his  ability  and  willingness  to
do  his  part.  A  third  objective  would  be  to  hold  the  DRV  in  check  and  restrain
further  infiltration  to  aid  the  VC  buildup.

1  January  65  was  agreed  upon,  for  planning  purposes,  as  the  date  to  begin  the
escalating  pressure  on  the  DRV.  Three  aspects  of  these  pressures  were  considered


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  85

by  the  Mission:  first,  actions  to  be  taken  with  the  Khanh  government;  second,
actions  against  Hanoi;  and  third,  after  a  pause,  "initiation  of  an  orchestrated  air
attack  against  North  Vietnam."  The  first  of  these  involved  a  commitment.  "We
should  express  our  willingness  to  Khanh  to  engage  in  planning  and  eventually  to
exert  intense  pressure  on  North  Vietnam  providing  certain  conditions  are  met
in  advance."  Thus,  before  we  would  agree  to  go  all  out  against  the  North,  Khanh
must  stabilize  his  government  and  make  progress  in  cleaning  out  his  own  back-
yard. Specifically,  he  would  be  required  to  execute  the  initial  phases  of  the  HOP
TAC  plan  successfully.  This  would  have  to  succeed  to  the  extent  of  pushing  the
VC  away  from  the  doors  of  Saigon.  Moreover,  the  overall  pacification  program,
including  HOP  TAC,  should  progress  sufficiently  to  allow  earmarking  at  least
three  division  equivalents  for  the  defense  of  the  I  Corps  area  should  the  DRV
step  up  military  operations  in  that  area.

In  making  these  commitments  to  Khanh,  the  Mission  would  make  clear  to
Khanh  the  limited  nature  of  our  objectives — that  we  were  not  ready  to  join  in
a  crusade  to  unify  the  North  and  the  South,  nor  to  overthrow  Ho  Chi  Minh.  Our
objective  was  to  be  limited  to  inducing  Hanoi  to  cease  its  subversive  efforts  in  the
South.  Pursuant  of  this  philosophy,  the  Mission  draft  proposed  a  program
roughly  comparable  to  that  suggested  by  Washington.  The  specific  difference  was
the  emphasis  in  the  Mission  draft  on  the  need  for  a  stable  base  in  South  Vietnam
before  beginning  overt  pressures  on  the  North;  and,  to  effect  this,  the  policy  of  a
quid  pro  quo — getting  Khanh  to  clean  up  his  house  and  make  some  progress  in
pacification  as  the  price  of  our  commitment  to  pressures  against  the  North.

During  the  fast  moving  events  of  the  third  week  of  August,  the  President
decided  to  bring  Ambassador  Taylor  back  to  Washington  for  consultation  early
in  September.  In  a  joint  State-Defense  message  on  20  August,  Taylor  was  advised
of  questions  that  officials  in  various  departments  would  want  to  ask  during  his
forthcoming  visit.  The  visit  was  first  scheduled  for  the  end  of  the  month,  but
along  with  the  draft  policy  paper  of  mid-month,  the  original  plans  were  over-
taken by  political  events  (turmoil)  in  Vietnam,  and  the  meeting  was  postponed
about  two  weeks,  from  late  August  to  mid-September.  It  is  worth  noting,  never-
theless, that  among  the  items  still* prominent  in  the  intended  discussions  with
Taylor,  at  the  time  of  the  first  notice  of  the  meeting,  were  the  status  of  pacifica-
tion programs — HOP  TAC  especially — Corps,  division  and  provincial  plans;  the
joint  US/GVN  committees;  the  newly  established  operations  center;  the  role  of
Popular  Forces  and  of  Regional  Forces;  and  the  RVNAF  police  and  local  secur-
ity plans.  Pacification  was  the  first  item,  and  detailed  interest  was  indicated.

Shaplen  calls  the  week  from  16  August — when  Khanh  publicly  announced  the
new  charter — to  23  August  critical,  because  of  Khanh's  failure  to  establish  a
broadly  based  civilian  government  under  the  authority  of  the  new  charter.  He
had  been  warned  by  many  Vietnamese  that  the  pressures  of  civilian  and  religious
demands  for  a  voice  in  the  government  were  building  up,  but  nothing  was  done
and  major  demonstrations  began  again  on  21  August.

This  account  will  not  detail  the  political  events  that  occurred  from  21  August
on.  However,  to  keep  our  American  concern  with  programs  in  Vietnam  in  con-
text it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  the  general  sequence  of  political  events  dur-
ing the  turmoil  of  the  next  several  weeks.  On  21  August  the  first  serious  student
demonsration  following  the  proclamation  of  the  16  August  charter  occurred.
Khanh  met  with  the  students,  but  did  not  satisfy  their  demands.  The  same  day
Thich  Tam  Chau,  President  of  the  Buddhist  Institute  for  Secular  Affairs,  de-
manded that  Khanh  take  action  against  the  Diemist  Can  Lao  Party,  whom  the
Buddhists  alleged  to  be  their  oppressors.  Both  Buddhists  and  Viet  Cong  began


86 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

to  infiltrate  the  fringes  of  the  student  demonstrations  about  this  time.  A  confused,
many-sided  contest  developed  with  Catholics,  Viet  Cong  and  Buddhists  seeking
to  manipulate  or  exploit  the  student  demonstrations.  On  23  August  the  Buddhists
in  Hue  formed  a  new  Movement  for  the  Salvation  of  Buddhism  in  Danger
(similar  to  the  organization  against  Diem).

On  the  night  of  24  August  another  coup  rumor  spread.  It  was  later  suspected
that  Dai  Viet  generals  had  indeed  been  ready  to  move  that  night,  but  that  Khiem,
who  had  been  wavering  between  Khanh  and  the  Dai  Viet,  told  them  to  wait.
That  same  night  Khanh  asked  three  top  bonzes  to  come  to  Cap  St.  Jacques  for
consultation.  They  refused,  and  Khanh  for  his  part  rushed  back  to  Saigon.  He
met  with  them  and  they  demanded,  first,  abolition  of  the  16  August  charter,
second  establishment  of  government  councils  to  assure  full  freedom  of  religion
and  expression,  and  third,  free  elections  by  1  November  1965.  Khanh  made  the
mistake  of  telling  them  he  wanted  to  consult  with  the  Americans.  At  1:00  a.m.
on  25  August,  Ambassador  Taylor  and  Deputy  Ambassador  Johnson  met  with
Khanh  and  they  "unofficially"  advised  him  to  accept  the  Buddhist  demands  in
principle,  but  otherwise  to  be  tough  and  not  to  knuckle  under  to  any  minority.
The  conference  lasted  until  about  3:00  a.m.

At  5:00  a.m.  of  25  August,  Khanh  issued  a  communique  promising  to  revise
the  new  constitution,  reduce  press  censorship,  rectify  local  abuses  by  arranging
special  courts,  and  permit  continued  demonstrations,  with  the  proviso  that  those
responsible  for  actions  of  disorder  be  punished.

But  these  concessions  again  were  not  enough  to  satisfy  the  students.  Later  that
morning  a  crowd  of  25,000  gathered  in  front  of  Khanh's  office.  Khanh  appeared
before  them  and  denied  that  he  wanted  to  be  a  dictator,  but  refused  to  make
further  concessions.  He  did  not,  however,  have  the  crowd  dispersed.  Instead,  he
withdrew  and  then,  without  warning,  issued  an  announcement  from  his  military
headquarters  that  the  16  August  charter  would  be  withdrawn  and  that  he,  Khanh,
was  quitting.  Further,  he  announced  that  the  MRC  would  meet  the  next  day,
26  August,  to  choose  a  new  Chief  of  State.

The  MRC  met  on  26  and  27  August.  Khanh  brought  in  the  three  generals  he
had  accused  of  participating  in  the  pro-French  neutralist  plot,  as  a  ploy  to  fore-
stall a  power  bid  by  Minh.  But  the  Council  refused  to  seat  them  and  they  were
returned  to  their  protective  custody  at  Dalat.  While  these  maneuvers  were  going
on  street  demonstrations  continued.  Within  the  MRC  Khiem  failed  in  an  attempt
to  name  himself  Chief  of  State  and  Minh  Prime  Minister.  Next  Khanh  was  named
Prime  Minister,  but  refused  to  accept  either  Khiem  or  Minh  as  President.  Finally,
when  he  refused  to  be  installed  alone,  the  triumvirate  of  Khanh,  Minh  and  Khiem
was  chosen.

Anarchy  in  the  streets  of  Saigon  intensified.  Khanh  again  nominally  Prime
Minister,  was  by  this  time  back  in  Dalat  in  a  state  of  exhaustion.  The  troika  of
Khanh,  Minh  and  Khiem  never  met,  and  Nguyen  Xuan  Oanh  was  made  acting
Prime  Minister.  Rumors  of  coups  continued — one  supposedly  by  the  Dai  Viet,
another  by  the  so-called  "colonels'  Group."

On  29  August  1964  Vietnamese  paratroopers  with  bayonets  were  used  to
restore  order  in  Saigon.  At  this  time  Khanh  was  in  Dalat.  On  1  September  Gen-
eral Westmoreland  went  to  see  Khanh  in  Dalat  to  urge  him  to  keep  ARVN  on
the  off'ensive  against  the  Viet  Cong  and  to  press  on  with  HOP  TAC  and  the  other
pacification  programs.  As  a  quid  pro  quo  for  this,  Westmoreland  revised  his
previous  position,  and  promised  that  U.S.  advisors  throughout  MACV  would  alert
Khanh  to  unusual  troop  movements  (movements  which  might  be  an  indication
of  a  coup).


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  87

Meanwhile,  because  of  this  turmoil,  Ambassador  Taylor's  trip  to  Washington
had  been  postponed  until  the  end  of  the  first  week  of  September.  There  was
further  excitement  on  the  night  of  2  September,  when  dissident  troops,  mostly
aligned  with  Dai  Viet  leaders,  began  to  converge  on  the  city.  But  some  of  the
Colonels'  Group  got  wind  of  the  movement  and  stopped  the  advance  before
midnight,  stringing  along  with  Khanh  for  the  time  being.  Meanwhile,  a  new
group  had  been  formed  in  Hue  called  the  People's  Revolutionary  Committee,
which,  according  to  Shaplen,  had  "distinct  tones  of  separatism,"  and  was  verbally
attacking  the  temporary  government.  On  4  September  Khanh  returned  to  Saigon
from  his  Dalat  retreat,  and  announced  a  tentative  formula  for  new  administrative
machinery  to  take  over  for  the  next  two  months,  after  which  a  new  government
of  civilians  would  replace  the  government  of  the  military.  Khanh  was  welcomed,
and  produced  a  letter,  signed  by  both  Thich  Tri  Quang  and  Thich  Tam  Chau,
pledging  support  and  unity.  Reportedly  this  had  been  paid  for  by  a  sum  equalling
$230,000.  Deals  of  this  kind  were  by  no  means  unknown  in  Vietnam.  Khanh  at
this  time  finally  got  rid  of  Dr.  Hoan,  who  had  been  plotting  against  him  for  a
long  time,  by  forcing  his  resignation  and  exile  to  Japan.  Following  this  there  was
enough  of  a  lull  to  permit  the  Ambassador  to  return  to  Washington.  He  would
not  complete  the  round  trip,  however,  before  turmoil  erupted  again  in  Saigon.

B. POLICIES  IN  THE  PERIOD  OF  TURMOIL

On  the  eve  of  his  6  September  departure  for  Washington,  Ambassador  Taylor
cabled  a  review  of  the  Vietnamese  situation

...  At  best  the  emerging  governmental  structure  might  be  capable  of
maintaining  a  holding  operation  against  the  Viet  Cong.  This  level  of  effort
could,  with  luck  and  strenuous  efforts,  be  expanded  to  produce  certain  limited
pacification  successes,  for  example,  in  the  territory  covered  by  the  HOP  TAC
Plan.  But  the  willingness  and  ability  of  such  a  government  to  exert  itself  or
to  attempt  to  execute  an  allout  pacification  plan  would  be  marginal.  It  would
probably  be  incapable  of  galvanizing  the  people  to  the  heightened  levels  of
unity  and  sacrifice  necessary  to  carry  forward  the  counterinsurgency  pro-
gram to  final  success.  Instead,  it  would  look  increasingly  to  the  United  States
to  take  the  major  responsibility  for  prying  the  VC  and  the  North  Vietnamese
off  the  backs  of  the  South  Vietnamese  population.  ...  In  the  cold  light  of
recently  acquired  facts,  we  need  2  to  3  months  to  get  any  sort  of  govern-
ment going  which  has  any  chance  of  being  able  to  maintain  order  in  the
cities  and  to  continue  the  pacification  efforts  of  past  levels.  There  is  no
present  urge  to  march  north  .  .  .  the  leadership  is  exhausted  and  frustrated
.  .  .  and  not  anxious  to  take  on  any  new  problems  or  obligations.  Hence,
there  is  no  need  to  hasten  our  plans  to  satisfy  an  impatinece  to  close  with
the  enemy .  .

On  4  September  the  Acting  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  for  International
Security  Affairs,  Peter  Solbert,  forwarded  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  a  mem-
orandum including  a  set  of  summary  recommendations  for  a  program  of  overall
social  development  called  "stability  for  the  GVN."  Copies  of  this  memorandum
were  seen  by  both  Vance  and  McNamara,  but  there  is  no  documentary  evidence
that  it  was  given  serious  consideration.  The  program  was  based  on  a  longer
RAND  study  by  C.  J.  Zwick,  and  it  proposed  a  series  of  measures  to  broaden
popular  support  of  the  Government  of  Vietnam.  The  measures  were  divided  into


88 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

an  Urban  Program  and  a  Rural  Program.  Summarily,  under  the  Urban  Program,
there  were  six  major  areas  of  development:

1.  a  reduction  of  consumer  prices  for  selected  commodities;

2.  an  increase  in  government  salaries;

3.  mass  low  cost  public  housing;

4.  urban  public  works;

5.  expanded  educational  programs;  and

6.  an  improved  business  climate  to  foster  private  business.

Under  the  proposed  Rural  Program  there  were  four  items:

1.  an  elimination  of  corvee  labor  and  provision  for  paid  public  works;

2.  subsidized  credit  to  peasants  under  GVN  control;

3.  an  increase  in  military  pay  and  benefits;  and

4.  educational  assistance  to  rural  youths.

This  memorandum  further  suggested  that  involving  in  the  program  the  leaders
of  the  various  political  factions  in  Vietnam  who  were  currently  causing  trouble
would  indirectly  enlist  them  in  what  amounted  to  stabilizing  efforts,  and  the  cur-
rent plague  of  factionalism  might  be  reduced.

The  policy  decisions  reached  in  the  high  level  discussions  of  7  September  were
formalized  in  NSAM-314.  These  decisions  were  approved:

1.  Resumption  of  U.S.  Naval  patrols  (DESOTO)  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin,
following  the  return  to  Saigon  of  the  Ambassador.

2.  34A  operations  by  the  GVN  to  be  resumed  after  completion  of  the  first
DESOTO  patrol.

3.  Discussions  with  the  government  of  Laos  of  plans  for  a  limited  GVN  air-
ground  operation  in  the  Laos  corridor  areas.

4.  Preparation  to  respond  against  the  DRV  to  any  attack  on  U.S.  units  or  any
spectacular  DRV/VC  acts  against  South  Vietnam.

Following  the  statement  of  these  specific  action  decisions,  NSAM-314  reem-
phasized  the  importance  of  economic  and  political  actions  having  immediate  im-
pact on  South  Vietnam  such  as  pay  raises  to  civilian  personnel  and  spot  projects
in  cities  and  selected  rural  areas.  The  emphasis  on  immediate  impact  should  be
noted.  Finally,  it  was  emphasized  that  all  decisions  were  "governed  by  a  prevail-
ing judgment  that  the  first  order  of  business  at  present  is  to  strengthen  the  fabric
of  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  .  .  ."

In  the  period  immediately  after  the  August  crisis,  Minh,  acting,  in  effect,  as
Chief  of  State,  although  he  did  not  actually  hold  the  title,  appointed  a  new  High
National  Council  to  represent  all  elements  of  the  population  and  prepare  a  new
constitution  for  the  return  of  civilian  government.

But  there  was  no  real  stability.  On  13  September,  while  Ambassador  Taylor
was  on  his  way  back  to  Saigon  from  his  visit  to  Washington,  a  bloodless  coup
was  staged  in  Saigon  by  General  Lam  Van  Phat  (who  had  been  scheduled  to  be
removed  as  Commander  of  IV  Corps).  Soon  after  the  coup  began  the  U.S.
announced  its  support  for  the  "duly  constituted"  troika  regime  of  Khanh,  Minh
and  Khiem.  This  plus  a  counter-coup  by  a  group  of  younger  officers  including
Nguyen  Cao  Ky  and  Nguyen  Chanh  Thi,  put  Khanh  back  in  power.  One  result
of  the  Phat  coup  attempt,  however,  was  that  it  established  the  power  of  the
younger  general  officers  headed  by  Ky  and  Thi.  Nguyen  Van  Thieu,  who  was
close  to  the  Dai  Viet  party,  was  reported  to  be  a  major  behind-the-scenes  manipu-
lator of  the  coup,  mainly  by  neutralizing  his  immediate  boss.  General  Khiem.


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  89

The  next  several  weeks  amounted  to  a  period  of  suspended  animation  for  the
GVN  (but  not  for  the  VC)  while  the  new  constitution  was  being  prepared.  Ex-
cept for  some  debatable  progress  in  HOP  TAC,  little  was  accomplished  in  pacifi-
cation. Moreover,  infusing  an  interim  government  with  an  efficiency  that  neither
it  nor  any  predecessor  had  had  was  too  much  to  expect.  In  Saigon,  much  attention
was  given  to  establishing  a  policy  coordination  center  for  covert  military  opera-
tions— i.e.,  34A,  Cross-Border,  Yankee  Team,  Lucky  Dragon,  etc.  These  opera-
tions, and  the  political  problems  of  the  central  government,  appear  to  have  been
the  principal  immediate  concerns  of  the  Embassy  during  this  period.

In  October,  Washington  queried  the  Embassy  as  to  whether  greater  progress
in  pacification  might  result  from  further  decentralization  of  the  program,  even
raising  the  question  of  whether  aid  might  not  bypass  the  GVN  in  Saigon  and  go
directly  to  the  provinces.  In  reply,  the  Mission  conceded  that  a  good  deal  of  de-
centralization was  already  in  effect  and  that  in  some  provinces  local  initiative
was  paying  off.  Progress  was  continuing  despite  the  turmoil  in  Saigon.  Neverthe-
less, recent  U.S.  advisor  reports  showed  that  the  number  of  provinces  where
pacification  was  not  going  satisfactorily  had  doubled  since  July — from  7  to  14.
This  in  part  was  due  to  concentration  of  most  of  the  pacification  efforts  on  HOP
TAC,  and  in  part  to  the  political  turmoil  in  Saigon.  However,  the  Mission  did
not  believe  that  further  decentralization  was  either  feasible  or  advisable.  The
central  problem  in  administering  pacification,  in  the  considered  view  of  the  Mis-
sion, was  to  establish  justified  requirements  at  the  provincial  level  and  then  fill
pipelines  to  meet  these  provincial  needs.  This  required  overall  coordination.

Two  weeks  after  the  13  September  coup,  the  High  National  Council,  composed
of  17  elderly  professional  men,  was  inaugurated.  Despite  the  continuing  air  of
crisis,  the  Council  fulfilled  its  promise  to  deliver  a  new  constitution  by  the  end  of
October  and  selected  Phan  Khac  Suu  (an  older,  non-aligned  politician)  as  the
new  Chief  of  Staff.  Suu  immediately  chose  a  civilian,  Tran  Van  Huong,  as  new
Premier.  Huong  almost  immediately  came  under  fire  from  several  factions  and
it  soon  became  apparent  that  Khanh  was  still  the  real  power  behind  the  throne.
Khanh  got  rid  of  Khiem,  sending  him  to  Washington,  and  Minh  went  abroad  on
a  "goodwill  tour."

As  the  year  moved  toward  a  close  it  came  time  again  for  the  Ambassador  to
return  to  Washington  for  policy  consultations.  Progress  in  the  program  within
South  Vietnam  had  been  spotty  at  best,  and  in  many  areas  retrogression  could
not  be  denied.  The  efforts  to  develop  efficient  administration  within  the  GVN
had  made  no  progress  at  all — the  game  of  musical  chairs  at  the  top  made  this
impossible.  It  was  generally  conceded  that  pacification  had  fallen  back,  at  best
marking  time  in  some  areas.  As  for  the  HOP  TAC  area  immediately  surrounding
Saigon,  opinions  were  divided.  The  official  view  reflected  in  the  statistical  analysis
was  that  slow  but  steady  progress  was  being  made.  Most  of  the  informal  and  local
judgments,  however,  were  less  sanguine.  Some  increases  in  RVNAF  recruitment
had  been  registered,  but  this  did  not  mean  that  action  against  the  VC  had  im-
proved, that  cap'abilities  had  increased,  that  lost  ground  was  being  retaken,  or
that  control  of  the  rural  population  was  being  wrested  from  the  Viet  Cong.

C. THE  PERIOD  OF  INCREASING  PRESSURES  ON  NVN

In  anticipation  of  the  Ambassador's  forthcoming  visit  to  Washington,  General
Westmoreland  provided  an  assessment  of  the  military  situation.  On  24  November
General  Westmoreland  observed  that  in  September  the  Mission  had  been  pre-
occupied with  the  problem  of  keeping  RVNAF  intact  in  the  face  of  internal


90 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


dissention  and  political  and  religious  purges  but  by  late  November  he  was  pleased
at  the  way  the  RVNAF  had  weathered  the  political  storm  and  encouraged  by
increased  RVNAF  strength  because  of  volunteers  and  enlistments.  RVNAF
strength  of  31  October  was  compared  to  figures  for  30  April:  230,474  RVNAF,
up  from  207,410;  92,265  Regional  Forces,  up  from  85,660;  159,392  Popular
Forces,  up  from  96,263.  During  September  and  October,  RVNAF  and  Regional
Forces  officers  and  NCOs  to  the  rank  of  first  corporal  had  received  a  10%
increase  in  basic  pay;  the  lowest  three  enlisted  grades  in  these  forces— plus  all
Popular  Force  personnel — had  received  300  more  piastres  per  month.  Cost  of
living  increases  to  NCOs  matched  those  given  to  officers.  Subsector  U.S.  advisory
teams  (two  officers,  three  enlisted  men)  were  operating  in  some  75  districts.
General  Westmoreland  reported  HOP  TAC  was  progressing  slowly.  Civil-military-
political  planners  were  working  together;  the  Saigon-level  coordinating  group,
the  HOP  TAC  Council,  was  operating.

General  Westmoreland  summarized  the  key  issues  as  he  viewed  them  at  the
time.  First,  there  was  a  need  to  establish  concrete  but  attainable  shortrange  goals
to  give  momentum;  second,  more  effective  means  of  asserting  U.S.  policy  and
plans  for  the  pacification  program  at  the  Saigon  level  was  needed;  third,  the
U.S.  should  take  a  positive  position  against  external  support  of  the  insurgency.

Also  on  24  November,  Westmoreland  recommended  an  increase  in  RVNAF
force  structure  and  requested  its  early  approval  to  permit  official  negotiations
with  the  GVN,  to  facilitate  MAP  planning.  This  recommendation  followed  a
joint  U.S./GVN  survey  and  a  COMUSMACV  staff  study.  Two  alternative  levels
of  increase  were  proposed:


Already


Increase  New  Total

A uthorized Alt  1  Alt  2  Alt  1  Alt  2

RVNAF 243,599 30,309 47,556 273,908  291,155


Para  Mil  No  alt.  for  Para.  322,187

Mil.

212,246  109,941

The  increase  in  U.S.  advisors  for  the  two  alternative  programs  would  be  446
and  606,  respectively.  The  first  (the  lower)  alternative  was  supported  by  the  JCS
on  17  December  1964  and  approved  by  Secretary  McNamara  on  13  January
1965.  This  January  decision  raised  the  total  U.S.  military  personnel  in  Vietnam
from  22,309  to  22,755.

Both  the  tenor  of  the  thinking  and  the  policies  that  emerged  from  the  meetings
of  early  December  are  reflected  in  the  draft  instructions  from  the  President  to
Ambassador  Taylor  possibly  written  by  Taylor  himself.  These  were  first  drawn
up  on  30  November  1964,  revised  on  2  December  and  used  at  the  meeting  of  the
principals  on  3  December.

During  the  recent  review  in  Washington  of  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam,
it  was  clearly  established  that  the  unsatisfactory  progress  being  made  in  the
pacification  of  the  VC  was  the  result  of  two  primary  causes  from  which
many  secondary  causes  stemmed;  first,  the  governmental  instability  in  Saigon
and  the  second,  the  continued  reinforcement  and  direction  of  the  VC  by  the
North  Vietnamese  government.  To  change  the  downward  trend  of  events,  it
will  be  necessary  to  deal  adequately  with  both  of  these  factors.
It  is  clear  however  that  these  factors  are  not  of  equal  importance.  There


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  196 3- Apr.  1965  91

must  be  a  stable,  effective  government  to  conduct  a  campaign  against  the
VC  even  if  the  aid  of  North  Vietnam  for  the  VC  should  end.  While  the
ehmination  of  North  Vietnamese  intervention  will  raise  morale  on  our  side
and  make  it  easier  for  the  government  to  function,  it  will  not  in  itself  end
the  war  against  the  VC.  It  is  rather  an  important  contributory  factor  to  the
creation  of  conditions  favoring  a  successful  campaign  against  the  VC  within
South  Vietnam.  Since  action  against  North  Vietnam  is  contributory,  not  cen-
tral, we  should  not  incur  the  risks  which  are  inherent  in  expansion  of  hos-
tilities until  there  is  a  government  in  Saigon  capable  of  handling  the  serious
problems  involved  in  such  an  expansion  and  of  exploiting  the  favorable
effects  which  may  be  anticipated  from  an  end  of  support  and  direction  by
North  Vietnam.

It  is  this  consideration  which  has  borne  heavily  on  the  recent  deliberations
in  Washington  and  has  conditioned  the  conclusions  reached.  There  have
been  many  expressions  of  admiration  for  the  courage  being  shown  by  the
Huong  government  which  has  the  complete  support  of  the  U.S.  government
in  its  resistance  to  the  minority  pressures  which  are  attempting  to  drag  it
down.  However,  the  difficulties  which  it  is  facing  raise  inevitable  questions
as  to  its  capacity  and  readiness  to  discharge  the  responsibilities  which  it
would  incur  if  some  of  the  new  measures  under  consideration  were  taken.
There  are  certain  minimum  criteria  of  performance  in  South  Vietnam  which
must  be  met  before  any  new  measures  against  North  Vietnam  would  be  either
justified  or  practicable.  At  a  minimum  the  government  should  be  able  to
speak  for  and  to  its  people  who  will  need  guidance  and  leadership  through-
out the  coming  critical  period.  It  should  be  capable  of  maintaining  law  and
order  in  its  principal  centers  of  population,  make  plans  for  the  conduct  of
operations  and  assure  their  efficient  execution  by  military  and  police  forces
completely  responsive  to  its  authority.  It  must  have  the  means  to  cope  with
the  enemy  reactions  which  must  be  expected  to  result  from  any  change  in
the  pattern  of  our  operations.

I  (the  President)  particularly  request  that  you  and  your  colleagues  in  the
American  Country  Team  deyelop  and  execute  a  concerted  effort  to  bring
home  to  all  groups  in  South  Vietnam  the  paramount  importance  of  national
unity  against  the  Communist  enemy  at  this  critical  time.  It  is  a  matter  of  the
greatest  difficulty  for  the  U.S.  government  to  require  great  sacrifice  of  Amer-
ican citizens  when  reports  from  Saigon  reportedly  give  evidence  of  heedless
self-interest  and  shortsightedness  among  nearly  all  major  groups  in  South
Vietnam  .  .  .

While  effectiveness  is  largely  a  subjective  judgement,  progress  in  certain
specific  areas  such  as  those  listed  below  provide  some  tangible  measure.  The
U.S.  mission  should  urge  upon  the  GVN  particular  efforts  in  these
fields.  .  .  .

(1)  Improve  the  use  of  manpower  for  military  and  pacification  purposes.

(2)  Bring  the  armed  forces  and  police  to  authorized  strength  and  max-
imize their  effectiveness.

(3)  Replace  incompetent  officials  and  commanders;  freeze  the  competent
in  place  for  extended  periods  of  service.

(4)  Clarify  and  strengthen  police  powers  of  arrest,  detention,  and  interro-
gation of  VC  suspects.

(5)  Clarify  and  strengthen  the  authority  of  provincial  chiefs.

(6)  Make  demonstrable  progress  in  the  HOP  TAC  operation  around
Saigon.


92 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

(7)  Broaden  and  intensify  the  civic  action  program  using  both  military
and  civilian  resources  to  produce  tangible  evidence  of  the  desire  of  the  gov-
ernment to  help  the  hamlets  and  villages.

(8)  Carry  out  a  sanitary  clean  up  of  Saigon.

While  progress  was  being  made  toward  these  goals,  the  U.S.  would  be  willing
to  strike  harder  at  infiltration  routes  in  Laos  and  at  sea  and,  in  conjunction  with
the  Lao  Government,  add  U.S.  air  power  to  operations  to  restrict  the  use  of
Laotian  territory  for  infiltration  into  South  Vietnam.  The  U.S.  would  also  favor
intensification  of  MAROPS  (covert  activities  against  the  DRV).  In  the  mean-
time, GVN  and  U.S.  armed  forces  should  be  ready  to  execute  prompt  reprisals
for  any  unusual  hostile  action.  When  these  conditions  were  met  (and  after  the
GVN  had  demonstrated  its  firm  control)  the  U.S.  would  be  prepared  to  consider
a  program  of  direct  military  pressure  on  the  DRV.  These  second  phase  operations
would  consist  of  a  series  of  air  attacks  on  the  DRV  progressively  mounting  in
scope  and  intensity  for  the  purpose  of  convincing  DRV  leaders  that  it  was  in
their  interest  to  cease  aid  to  the  VC,  to  respect  the  independence  and  security
of  the  South.  The  prospective  participants  in  such  attacks  were  the  Air  Forces  of
the  U.S.,  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  The  U.S.  Mission  was  to  be  authorized  to
initiate  planning  with  the  GVN  for  such  operations  immediately,  with  the  under-
standing that  the  U.S.  had  not  committed  itself  to  them.

Immediately  after  the  Ambassador's  return  to  Saigon  the  U.S.  began  to  in-
crease its  covert  operations  against  infiltration  from  the  North.  On  14  December
U.S.  aircraft  began  Operation  BARREL  ROLL  (armed  reconnaissance  against
infiltration  routes  in  Laos).  This  and  other  signs  of  increased  American  commit-
ment against  North  Vietnam's  involvement  in  the  South  showed  no  results  in
terms  of  increasing  GVN  stabiUty.  Jockeying  among  generals  behind  the  scenes
continued.  The  younger  generals  who  had  saved  Khanh  in  the  13  September
coup  demanded  the  High  National  Council  fire  nine  generals  and  30  other  of-
ficers, notably  Generals  Minh,  Don,  Xuan  and  Kim,  who  had  been  in  the  original
post-Diem  junta.  The  Council  refused  and  the  young  generals  began  a  life  and
death  struggle  against  the  Huong  regime.  On  20  December  Generals  Thi  and  Ky
led  their  group  in  a  purge — or  virtual  coup — of  the  Council.  This  was  followed
immediately  by  formation  of  an  Armed  Forces  Council  (AFC).  Nominally
headed  by  Khanh,  the  young  generals  aimed  to  curb  his  powers  through  the  new
council.  AFC  offered  to  mediate  conflicts  between  Buddhist  dissidents  and  the
Huong  government.  These  actions  exacerbated  already  unhappy  relations  be-
tween Khanh  and  politically  motivated  young  generals  and  the  American  Am-
bassador who  was  striving  to  foster  a  representative  civilian  government  and
discourage  coups  by  small-time  military  dictators.  The  struggle  (described  in
detail  in  other  papers)  was  intensified  at  this  time  and  continued  for  several
weeks.

Throughout  January  and  February  1965  the  weekly  Vietnam  Sitreps  pub-
lished by  the  Intelligence  and  Reporting  Subcommittee  of  the  Interagency  Viet-
nam Coordinating  Committee  warned  generally  and  repeatedly  that  progress
concerning  pacification  was  "slow"  or  that  there  was  a  "slow  down"  or  said
there  was  "little  progress  to  report."  The  Vietnamese  commander  of  the  HOP
TAC  area  generally  continued  to  report  "a  favorable  situation" — but  this  was
accompanied  frequently  by  a  statement  of  increased  Viet  Cong  activity  in  these
favorable  areas.

After  BARREL  ROLL,  U.S.  pressure  upon  North  Vietnam  was  notably  in-
creased by  the  FLAMING  DART  attacks  of  7-12  February  following  the


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  93

Pleiku  incident.  The  McGeorge  Bundy  group  (MacNaughton,  Cooper,  Unger
and  Bundy)  were  in  Saigon  at  the  time.  On  the  return  trip  to  Washington  shortly
after  Pleiku,  the  group  drafted  a  memorandum  for  the  President.  Intended  to
reflect  the  consensus  of  policy  discussions  with  the  Mission,  the  memorandum
really  reflects  Bundy's  point  of  view,  particularly  in  presentation  of  a  rationale
for  ROLLING  THUNDER  operations — soon  to  begin.  Analysis  of  this  memo
and  the  ROLLING  THUNDER  annex  is  part  of  another  report  in  this  series.
For  present  purposes  it  is  sufficient  to  note  that  the  memo  reported  the  situation
in  Vietnam  was  deteriorating  and  said  defeat  was  inevitable  unless  the  United
States  intervened  military  by  bombing  the  North  to  persuade  Hanoi  to  cease
and  desist.  South  Vietnam  was  to  be  rescued  not  by  measures  in  South  Vietnam
but  by  pressures  against  the  North.

The  idea  that  victory  could  be  achieved  quickly  was  explicitly  dismissed:
perhaps  "the  next  year  or  so"  would  be  enough  to  turn  the  tide.  And  this,  hope-
fully, could  be  accomplished  by  the  persuasive  power  of  aerial  bombardment.

ROLLING  THUNDER  was  to  be  a  program  of  sustained,  continuous,  in-
creasing reprisal  beginning  at  a  low  level  and  becoming  increasingly  violent.
The  level  of  violence  would  vary  according  to  the  North  Vietnamese  response:
if  they  persisted  in  infiltration,  violence  would  continuously  increase;  if  they
reduced  their  meddling,  we  would  respond  in  kind  and  degree.

This  subject  had  been  discussed  at  considerable  length  in  Saigon.  The  Bundy
memorandum  was  followed  by  a  cable  from  Taylor  which  presented  generally
similar  recommendations  under  the  heading  of  "graduated  reprisals."  CINCPAC
commented  on  the  Taylor  proposals,  urging  that  the  levels  of  attack  should  be
forceful  enough  to  be  militarily  effective,  not  merely  politically  persuasive.  On  8
February,  McNamara  requested  the  ICS  to  develop  a  program;  shortly  there-
after they  produced  their  "Eight-week-Program"  of  bombing.

In  Saigon,  the  FLAMING  DART  bombings  of  7-12  February — the  first
reprisal  bombings  since  August  1964 — were  promptly  followed  by  the  Armed
Forces  Council  selection  on  16  February  of  a  new  cabinet;  headed  by  Dr.  Pham
Huy  Quat,  the  cabinet  was  installed  on  18  February.  Another  coup  was  at-
tempted on  19  February  but  thwartpd  by  the  AFC.  And  General  Khanh  (whose
actions  against  Huong  in  January  had  lost  him  Taylor's  confidence)  was  re-
moved on  the  20th.  Four  days  later,  24  February,  Khanh  left  for  foreign  parts
and  ROLLING  THUNDER  began.  Any  positive  correlation  between  U.S.
pressure  on  North  Vietnam  and  the  stability  of  the  GVN  remained  to  be
established.

During  these  first  two  months  of  1965  almost  no  progress  was  made  toward
increasing  RVNAF  strength.  Goals  were  raised  but  actual  force  levels  were  not.
MACV  data  on  RVNAF  strength  were  later  provided  the  Secretary:

RVNAF  IN  THOUSANDS


Jan  65

Feb  65

Mar  65

Apr  65

May  65

Objective

252.1

259.5

266.9

274.3

Actual

244.7

245.5

248.5

252.3

256.9

Shortfall

(6.6)

(11.0)

(14.6)

(17.4)

KIA

.35

.32

.27

.27

.42

Desertions

2.4

2.5

5.0

3.6

3.1

94 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

Although  the  conditions  stipulated  in  December  had  not  been  met,  although
the  program  continued  to  fall  further  behind,  we  were  fully  committed  to
pressure  on  the  North  by  this  time.  On  1  March  1965,  in  a  memorandum  to  all
Service  Secretaries,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs,  Chief  of  Naval  Operations,
Army  and  Air  Force  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps,
the  Secretary  of  Defense  pledged  unlimited  funds  to  the  support  of  the  Vietnam
elTort.

Over  the  past  two  or  three  years  I  have  emphasized  the  importance  of
providing  all  necessary  military  assistance  to  South  Vietnam,  whether  it  be
through  MAP  or  through  application  of  U.S.  forces  and  their  associated
equipment.

Occasionally  instances  come  to  my  attention  indicating  that  some  in  the
Department  feel  restraints  are  imposed  by  limitations  of  funds.
I  want  it  clearly  understood  that  there  is  an  unlimited  appropriation  avail-
able for  the  financing  of  aid  to  Vietnam.  Under  no  circumstances  is  a  lack
of  money  to  stand  in  the  way  of  aid  to  that  nation.

signed/Robert  S.  McNamara

Early  in  March  the  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Army,  General  Harold  K.  Johnson,
evaluated  the  need  for  added  supporting  actions  in  Vietnam.  On  5  March  his
party  was  briefed  by  the  Ambassador.  Taylor  saw  the  basic  unresolved  problem
as  the  provision  of  adequate  security  for  the  population.  Without  it,  other
programs  were  either  impossible  or  of  marginal  effectiveness  at  best.  Given
security  and  reasonable  time,  however,  these  other  programs  would  fall  into
place.  The  three  primary  causes  of  insecurity  were  (1)  lack  of  satisfactory
progress  in  destroying  the  VC,  (2)  the  continuing  capability  of  the  VC  to  re-
place losses  and  increase  their  strength,  and  (3)  our  inability  to  establish  and
maintain  an  effective  government.

Inability  to  suppress  the  insurgency  was  considered  largely  the  consequence
of  insufficient  trained  paramilitary  and  police  manpower.  A  numerical  superiority
in  excess  of  five  to  one  over  the  VC  had  never  been  obtained;  historical  example
suggested  a  10-to-l  or  20-to-l  ratio  was  prerequisite  to  effective  operations
against  guerrilla  forces.  It  was  therefore  essential  to  raise  new  forces  and  im-
prove those  already  in  being.

Why  was  the  pacification  program  of  such  limited  effectiveness?  In  many
provinces  the  reason  was  poor — or  non-existent — civil  action  after  military
clearing  operations.  The  Ministries  of  Interior,  Health,  Agriculture,  Public
Works  and  Rural  Affairs  were  responsible  for  civilian  "follow-up"  but  these
departments  had  been  impotent  throughout  1964,  largely  because  of  general
government  instability.  Programs  lacked  continuity;  personnel  were  constantly
rotating.  Occasional  military  successes  achieved  in  clearing  operations  too  fre-
quently went  unexploited.  Areas  were  cleared  but  not  held.  Other  areas  were
cleared  and  held — but  were  not  developed;  the  VC  infra-structure  remained  in
place,  ready  to  emerge  when  the  troops  moved  on.

Counterinsurgency  was  plagued  by  popular  apathy  and  dwindling  morale,
some  the  consequences  of  a  long  and  seemingly  endless  war.  There  was  no
sense  of  dedication  to  the  GVN  comparable  to  that  instilled  in  the  VC.

Secondly,  South  Vietnam's  open  frontiers  could  not  be  sealed  against  infiltra-
tion. Continued  DRV  support  to  the  VC,  the  heart  of  the  infiltration  problem,
could  not  be  eliminated  by  closing  the  frontiers  from  inside  South  Vietnam  so
the  only  way  to  stop  infiltration  was  to  make  Hanoi  order  it  stopped.  Such  was


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  95

the  fundamental  justification  for  BARREL  ROLL  and  ROLLING  THUNDER
operations.  These,  plus  34A,  constituted  the  principal  hope  for  ending  in-
filtration.

It  was  conceded  that  even  without  its  support  from  the  North  the  VC  could
continue  to  recruit  in  the  South,  especially  in  areas  lacking  security  and  com-
mitment to  Saigon.  However,  it  was  hoped  that  pressure  on  Hanoi  would  help
to  change  many  conditions  unfavorable  to  the  GVN.  For  example,  offensive
action  against  NVN  would  raise  national  morale  in  South  Vietnam  and  might
provide  at  least  a  partial  antidote  against  the  willingness  of  country  boys  to
join  the  VC.

There  were  many  causes  of  the  failure  to  establish  and  maintain  an  effective
government.  South  Vietnam  had  never  been  a  nation  in  spirit;  a  government
which  the  people  could  call  their  own  was  new  to  them.  Even  now  their  instinct
said  any  government  was  intrinsically  their  enemy.  The  people  had  long  been
divided  by  racial  and  religious  differences  which  over  the  centuries  their  alien
rulers  had  sought  to  perpetuate.  No  cement  was  present  to  bind  together  the
heterogeneous  elements  of  this  society.  Since  the  fall  of  Diem  and  the  sudden
removal  of  the  restraints  imposed  by  his  dictatorial  regime,  the  natural  tendency
to  disunity  and  factionalism  had  been  given  free  play;  demonstrations,  bonze
immolations  and  military  coups  had  been  rife.  These  had  produced  the  political
turbulence  of  the  last  fifteen  months.

The  Ambassador  closed  his  briefing  by  suggesting  the  possibility  of  increased
activities  in  several  areas:

a.  improvement  in  training  and  mobility  of  existing  forces;

b.  establishment  of  priorities  in  the  use  of  existing  forces;

c.  expansion  of  the  capacity  of  the  training  establishment;

d.  means  to  give  greater  attractiveness  to  military  service;

e.  use  of  U.S.  manpower  to  offset  the  present  shortage  in  the  Vietnamese
armed  forces;

f.  use  of  U.S.  Navy  resources  to  strengthen  surveillance  of  coastal  and  inland
waterways;

g.  increased  tempo  for  BARREL  ROLL  and  ROLLING  THUNDER;

h.  expanded  use  of  peoples  action  teams;

i.  increased  U.S.  aid  in  combatting  economic  ills;

j.  preparations  to  cope  with  the  mounting  refugee  problem  in  central  Vietnam;
k.  improved  procedures  and  equipment  for  resource  control;
1.  vitalization  of  public  information  programs,  provision  of  a  250-kilowatt
transmitter  for  Saigon;  and

m.  prompt  response  to  all  personnel  requests  supporting  the  U.S.  mission.

General  Johnson  returned  on  12  March,  submitted  his  report  on  the  14th.  The
guts  of  the  report,  a  series  of  21  recommendations  plus  an  indication  of  marginal
comments  Secretary  McNamara  scribbled  on  his  copy  follow  (the  Secretary's
comments  are  irT  parentheses) :

1.  Provide  increased  mobility  for  existing  forces  by  introducing  more
Army  helicopter  companies.  (OK)

2.  Deploy  more  0-1  type  aircraft  to  give  saturation  surveillance  capa-
bility to  improve  intelligence.  (OK)

3.  Establish  Joint  U.S.-RVNAF  Target  Research  and  Analysis  Center  to
utilize  increased  info  effectively.  (OK)

4.  Evaluate  effects  of  COMUSMACV's  unrestricted  employment  of
U.S.  fighter-bombers  within  SVN.  (?)


96 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

5.  Increase  scope  and  tempo  of  U.S.  air  strikes  against  NVN.  (Discuss
with  Chiefs.)

6.  Remove  self  imposed  restrictions  on  conduct  of  U.S.  air  strikes  against
North  Vietnam.  (Some  already  removed.  Views  of  Chiefs.)

7.  Increase  tempo  and  scope  of  special  operations  activities  against  North
Vietnam.  (Ask  Max  for  plan.)

8.  Increase  Naval  and  air  RECCE  and  harassing  operations  against
North  Vietnam.  (Ask  Max  for  plan.)

9.  Re-orient  BARREL  ROLL  to  increase  effectiveness.  (OK)

10.  Commit  elements  of  7th  Fleet  to  air/surface  patrol  of  coastal  areas.
(OK,  ask  Max  for  plan.)

11.  Program  of  cash  awards  for  capture  of  DRV  junks.  (OK,  ask  Max
for  plan.)

12.  Streamline  procedure  to  give  MACV  quick  authority  and  funds  for
construction  projects  in  VN.  (See  13)

13.  Establish  stockpile  of  construction  materials  and  equipment  within  3
to  4  sailing  days  of  VN  controlled  by  MACV.  (Applicable  to  both  12  and
13 — John  to  work  with  Paul  and  Charlie.)  [ASD/ISA,  SecDef  and  Sec  Army
respectively]

14.  Get  Australian/New  Zealand  agreement  to  take  responsibility  for
establishing  regional  forces  training  center.  (Ask  State  to  try.)

15.  Integrated  U.S./GVN  psychological  warfare  operations  organization.
(USIA  job,— DOD  will  help.)

16.  Accelerate  positioning  of  remaining  sub-sector  advisory  teams.  (OK —
ask  Max  his  requirements.)

17.  Provide  cash  contingency  fund  to  each  sub-sector  advisory  group.
(OK — ask  Max  for  his  plan.)

18.  Establish  procedure  for  sub-sector  advisory  groups  to  draw  on  USOM
food  stuffs  and  building  materials.  (OK — ask  Max  for  his  plan.)

19.  Initiate  dredging  projects  at  Danang,  Qui  Nhon  and  Nha  Trang.  (OK
— ask  Max  for  his  requirements.)

20.  Provide  4  LSTs  and  6  LSVs  for  logistic  support  along  east-west  supply
axis.  (OK — ask  Max  for  his  requirements.)

21.  Accelerate  program  for  jet  applicable  airfield.  (What  is  the  program?
— John  will  follow.)

To  the  measures  the  Secretary  added  one  of  his  own:  "extend  tours."  It  was
incorporated  into  later  versions  of  the  list.

In  addition  to  the  above  the  Johnson  report  suggested  two  alternative  deploy-
ments of  a  tailored  division  force  to  assist  Vietnamese  units  in  offensive  action
in  II  Corps.  One  was  to  deploy  U.S.  combat  units  to  assume  responsibility  for
security  of  the  Bien  Hoa-Tan  Son  Nhut  air  base  complex,  Nha  Trang,  Qui  Nhon
and  Pleiku.  The  second  was  to  deploy  U.S.  combat  units  to  assume  responsibility
for  defense  of  Kontum,  Pleiku  and  Darlac  provinces  in  II  Corps.  On  the  first
alternative  the  Secretary  noted:  "Johnson  does  not  recommend  this";  he  sug-
gested that  ICS  should  study,  and  "Max's  and  Westy's  views"  toward  the  second
alternative  should  be  sought.

On  8  March,  when  Johnson  was  in  Vietnam,  the  first  two  Marine  battalions
landed  at  Danang.  Almost  all  of  the  intelligence  reports  during  that  month  indi-
cated our  programs  in  Vietnam  were  either  stalemated  or  failing.  Not  only  was
RVNAF  strength  considerably  below  the  goals  set  and  agreed  upon,  it  was  in


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  196 3- Apr.  1965  97

considerable  danger  of  actually  decreasing.  The  situation  on  this  score  was  indi-
cated by  the  following  table  included  in  the  March  MACV  report.


Authorized

28  Feb  65

31  March  65

Strength

Audited  Strength

Estimates

Regular  Force

274,163

245,453

246,500

Regional  Force

137,187

99,143

100,000

Popular  Force

185,000

162,642

160,000

Coastal  Force

4,640

4,137

4,150

CIDG

20,100

19,152

19,500

National  Police

51,500

33,599

34,500

Armed  Combat  Youth

44,244

44,500

Although  some  HOP  TAC  progress  was  occasionally  reported  the  pacification
situation  otherwise  was  quite  gloomy.  The  Vietnam  Sitreps  of  3  March  1965
reported  the  nationwide  pacification  effort  remained  stalled.  The  HOP  TAC
program  "continues  but  personnel  changes,  past  and  future,  may  retard  the
future  success  of  this  effort."  The  10  March  Sitrep  called  the  national  pacifica-
tion effort  "stagnated"  and  objectives  in  some  areas  "regressing."  In  the  I  and

11  Corps  pacification  has  "all  but  ceased."  Only  a  few  widely  scattered  places
in  the  rest  of  the  country  could  report  any  achievement.  In  the  HOP  TAC  area
the  anticipated  slow-down  in  pacification  had  arrived — the  result  of  shifting  mili-
tary commanders  and  province  and  district  chiefs.  On  17  March,  pacification
was  virtually  stalled,  refugee  problems  were  mounting  in  I  and  II  Corps.  Only  in
the  HOP  TAC  area  were  there  "modest  gains  ...  in  spite  of  increased  VC  area
activity."  By  24  March  the  word  used  for  pacification  efforts  generally  was
"stalled,"  and  the  effort  had  now  become  increasingly  devoted  to  refugee  centers
and  relief.  However,  the  Sitrep  sai4  356  hamlets  in  the  HOP  TAC  area  had  been
reported — by  Vietnamese  authorities — as  meeting  agreed  criteria  and  927,000
persons  were  living  in  zones  that  had  been  declared  clear.

At  the  time  of  the  Johnson  Mission,  concern  over  the  evident  failures  of  the
pacification  program  was  such  that  proposals  to  change  the  framework  within
which  it  was  conducted — proposals  to  put  the  USOM,  USIS  and  CIA  pacifica-
tion operations  all  under  MACV — were  examined  at  length.  Ambassadors  Tay-
lor and  Alexis  Johnson  as  well  as  General  Westmoreland  were  advocating  sweep-
ing changes  of  this  sort.  All  apparently  conceded  the  need  for  greater  coordina-
tion of  the  different  kinds  of  programs,  military  and  aid,  [words  illegible]  into
pacification  but  senior  mission  officials  strongly  opposed  any  major  revision  of
the  non-militaryi^ffort.

IV.  NSAM-328

Near  the  end  of  March  Ambassador  Taylor  returned  to  Washington  for
policy  conferences.  Four  sets  of  proposals  had  been  specifically  developed  for
consideration  at  the  1  April  meeting.  One  of  these  was  General  Johnson's  report
which  has  already  been  described  in  detail.  Another  was  a  suggested  program  of

12  covert  actions  submitted  by  the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence.  A  third  was
an  information  program  developed  by  USIS.  The  fourth  was  a  proposed  program


98 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

of  41  non-military  measures  initially  suggested,  by  Ambassador  Taylor,  then
worked  on  by  State  during  the  third  week  of  March,  and  finally  incorporated  in  a
memorandum  to  the  President  dated  31  March.

The  41  possible  non-military  actions  proposed  for  consideration  by  Ambassador
Taylor  were  arranged  in  9  groups.  The  first  group  was  entitled  "Decentraliza-
tion In  The  GVN  and  The  Rural  Program."  This  group  included  measures  to
urge  the  GVN  to  increase  the  power  and  responsibility  of  individual  province
chiefs,  and  to  persuade  the  peasants  they  had  a  stake  in  the  GVN  by  giving
rural  pacification  a  positive  label,  "new  rural  life  hamlet  program,"  and  com-
plexion.

The  second  group  of  non-military  actions  concerned  "Youth,  Religion,  and
Other  Special  Groups."  Within  this  group  were  a  series  of  actions  to  expand  the
support  of  the  GVN  Ministry  of  Youth  and  Sports,  to  reduce  the  draft  age  from
20  to  18  or  17,  to  persuade  the  GVN  to  meet  Montagnard  grievances,  and  to
increase  aid  to  the  Vietnamese  labor  movement.

Under  the  heading  "Economic  and  Social  Measures,"  there  were  specific  pro-
posals to  support  a  better  coastal  water  transportation  system  and  to  urge  the
GVN  to  promulgate  and  put  into  effect  an  equitable  land  reform  program.  By
sending  U.S.  and  possibly  nationalist  Chinese  experts  it  was  hoped  the  GVN
could  be  assisted  in  combating  the  growing  VC  capability  to  extract  financial
and  material  support  from  GVN  resources.  Measures  were  also  urged  to  expand
and  accelerate  slum  clearance  and  low  cost  housing  in  troublesome  urban  areas
and  to  improve  the  water  supply.

Specific  measures  advocated  under  the  heading  "Education"  included  a  general
increase  in  U.S.  assistance,  expansion  of  the  program  to  translate  American
textbooks  into  Vietnamese  and  to  establish  secondary  schools  on  American  prin-
ciples for  Vietnamese  students.

Among  the  five  specific  measures  under  the  rubric  "Security  and  Intelligence,"
one  urged  promulgation  of  an  effective  arrest  and  detention  law,  another  asked
for  a  great  increase  in  intelligence  funds,  a  third  called  for  a  system  of  rewards
for  information  leading  to  the  capture  or  death  of  VC  leaders,  and  the  last  was
a  suggestion  for  a  national  counterespionage  organization.

The  "Psychological  Operations"  proposed  were  mainly  additions  to  proposals
already  made  in  the  USIS  report  of  Mr.  Rowan.

The  specific  measures  under  "GVN  Personnel"  (and  its  systems  of  recruiting
and  training  officials  for  the  rural  program)  were  to  urge  the  GVN  to  establish
rewards  for  outstanding  performance,  and  give  double  or  triple  pay  to  rural  school
teachers  and  officials.

There  were  two  measures  to  aid  "Refugees  in  Emergency  Situations":  one  to
provide  additional  U.S.  support  for  the  refugee  program,  and  the  other  to  estab-
lish a  joint  U.S./GVN  reaction  team  for  quick  survey  and  immediate  action  in
war  disaster  situations.

The  last  group  of  proposals  was  a  revision  of  the  old  idea  of  encadrement  of
U.S.  officers  at  key  spots  within  the  GVN.  The  administrative  measures  to  in-
crease U.S.  effectiveness  included  such  suggestions  as  allowing  U.S.  officers  to
work  directly  with  special  interest  groups  including  Buddhists,  Catholics,  the  sects,
Montagnards,  students,  labor,  etc.;  and  assigning  other  U.S.  officers  to  work
directly  within  the  GVN,  including  the  Prime  Minister's  office  and  key  ministries.
Another  suggestion  was  for  the  establishment  of  a  U.S.  inter-agency  group  on
pacification  to  be  directed  by  a  senior  Mission  officer  reporting  directly  to  the
Ambassador.  (This  suggestion  was  evidently  directed  at  the  same  problem  as  the


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  99

suggestion  for  establishing  all  U.S.  pacification  effort  under  MACV  that  had
arisen  during  the  visit  of  General  Johnson.)

A  feature  of  this  proposed  program  that  should  be  noted  is  that  many  if  not
most  of  the  suggestions  began  with  such  phrases  as  "urge  the  GVN"  or  "persuade
the  GVN."  This  was  of  course  not  the  first  time  that  our  assistance  took  this
form.  This  had  been  going  on  for  a  long  time.  But  the  difference  between  merely
supplying  aid  and  also  trying  to  supply  initiative  is  significant.

In  preparation  for  the  important  1  April  meeting  a  White  House  paper  en-
titled "Key  Elements  For  Discussion,  Thursday,  April  1,  at  5:30  P.M."  was
circulated  to  participants.  In  summarizing  the  situation  the  paper  said  that  morale
had  improved  in  South  Vietnam  and  that,  although  the  government  had  not
really  settled  down,  it  seemed  "hopeful  both  in  its  capacity  and  its  sense  of  politi-
cal forces."  The  South  Vietnamese  armed  forces  were  in  reasonably  good  shape
although  its  top  leadership  was  not  really  effective  and  the  ratio  of  ARVN  to  VC
(whose  members  were  increasing)  was  not  good  enough.  The  situation  in  many
parts  of  the  countryside  continued  to  go  in  favor  of  the  VC  although  there  was,
at  that  writing,  what  was  believed  to  be  a  temporary  lull.  Turning  to  the  matter
of  the  bombing  this  statement  said  that:

Hanoi  has  shown  no  signs  of  give,  and  Peiping  has  stiffened  its  position
within  the  last  week.  We  still  believe  that  attacks  near  Hanoi  might  sub-
stantially raise  the  odds  of  Peiping  coming  in  with  air.

Hanoi  was  expected  to  continue  stepping  up  its  infiltration  both  by  land  through
Laos  and  by  sea.  There  were  clear  indications  of  different  viewpoints  in  Hanoi,
Peiping,  and  Moscow  with  respect  to  "so-called  wars  of  liberation,"  as  well  as
continued  friction  between  Moscow  and  Peiping.

However,  neither  such  frictions  nor  the  pressure  of  our  present  slowly
ascending  pace  of  air  attacks  on  North  Vietnam  can  be  expected  to  produce
a  real  change  in  Hanoi's  position  for  some  time,  probably  two  to  three
months  at  best.

The  argument  then  proceeded  to  the  key  question  of  whether  or  not  Hanoi
would  continue  to  make  real  headway  in  the  South.  If  it  continued  to  make  such
headway,  even  a  major  step-up  in  our  air  attacks  would  probably  not  make  them
much  more  reasonable.  On  the  other  hand  if  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam
began  to  move  against  the  VC  and  the  going  became  increasingly  tough,  then
the  "situation  might  begin  to  move  on  a  political  track — but  again  not  in  less
than  two  to  three  months,  in  our  present  judgment."  This  was  a  significant  depar-
ture from  the  theory  for  ROLLING  THUNDER  propounded  when  that  bomb-
ing pressure  was  inaugurated.

Following  som€  considerations  on  immediate  international  moves  and  more  gen-
eral political  posture,  the  memo  turned  to  "actions  within  South  Vietnam."
Employing  every  useful  resource  to  improve  the  efforts  in  the  South  was  de-
fined as  crucial.  The  paper  indicated  that  the  41 -point  program  of  non-military
measures  developed  mainly  by  Ambassador  Taylor  included  promising  elements
and  that  the  mission  as  well  as  agencies  in  Washington  should  develop  additional
points.  McCone's  suggestions  for  largely  covert  actions  were  recommended  for
further  study.  Both  the  Rowan  (USIS)  and  the  21 -point  program  of  General
Johnson  were  viewed  favorably,  as  well  as  an  increase  in  U.S.  military  support
forces  in  Vietnam  from  18,000  to  20,000  men.  An  increase  in  GVN  manpower


100 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

was  also  approved  with  increased  pay  scales  to  be  used  as  an  inducement  regard-
less of  the  monetary  costs.  On  one  copy  of  this  document  that  went  to  OSD,
there  was  a  handwritten  additional  point  that  was,  "change  mission  of  Marine
force."  This  significant  addition  was  later  adopted  in  NSAM-328.

The  remainder  of  the  paper  was  devoted,  first,  to  U.S.  and  third  country
combat  forces  in  South  Vietnam,  and  second,  to  actions  against  North  Vietnam
and  in  Laos.  These  are  of  interest  here  only  in  the  extent  to  which  they  distracted
from  or  supplanted  counterinsurgency  actions  within  South  Vietnam.  So  far  as
U.S.  combat  forces  within  South  Vietnam  were  concerned,  there  was  cautious
consideration  of  a  small  and  gradual  buildup.  But  it  was  emphasized  that  because
the  reaction  of  the  GVN  and  of  the  South  Vietnamese  people  to  any  major  U.S.
combat  deployment  was  uncertain,  and  because  the  net  effectiveness  of  U.S.  com-
bat forces  in  the  Vietnamese  environment  was  also  uncertain,  the  Secretary  of
State  and  the  Secretary  of  Defense  had  recommended  that  action  of  this  sort  be
limited.  Only  the  deployment  of  two  additional  Marine  battalions,  one  Marine
air  squadron  and  certain  logistical  forces  over  the  ensuing  sixty-day  period  was
approved.  Continuation  of  ROLLING  THUNDER  operations  on  a  slowly
ascending  scale  was  assumed.  It  was  also  assumed  that  preparations  would  be
made  for  additional  strikes  and  for  a  response  to  any  higher  level  of  VC  opera-
tions, as  well  as,  correspondingly,  to  slow  the  pace  in  the  unlikely  event  that  VC
actions  slacked  off  sharply.

In  the  NSC  meeting  of  1  April  1965,  the  President  gave  his  formal  approval,
"subject  to  modifications  in  the  light  of  experience,"  to  the  41 -point  program  of
non-military  actions  submitted  by  Ambassador  Taylor  and  described  above.  He
gave  general  approval  to  the  USIS  recommendations,  except  that  no  additional
funds  were  to  be  supplied  for  this  work — the  program  was  to  be  funded  and
supported  by  other  agencies.  The  President  further  approved  the  urgent  explora-
tion of  the  covert  actions  proposed  by  the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence.
Finally,  he  repeated  his  previous  approval  of  the  21 -point  program  of  military
actions  recommended  by  General  Johnson.  On  the  exclusively  military  side  the
President  authorized  the  18,000  to  20,000-man  increase  in  U.S.  military  support
forces,  the  deployment  of  two  additional  Marine  battalions,  and  the  change  of
mission  for  all  Marine  battalions  to  permit  their  use  in  active  combat  under  con-
ditions to  be  established  and  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  in  consulta-
tion with  the  Secretary  of  State.  However,  because  this  last  decision  was  con-
tingent upon  future  agreements  between  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Secretary
of  Defense  its  full  significance  was  not  immediately  apparent.  It  was  left  to  the
Ambassador  to  seek  South  Vietnamese  government  approval  and  coordination
for  all  of  these  measures.

NSAM-328  did  not  last  long  as  a  full  and  current  statement  of  U.S.  policy.
There  were  some  responsible  officials  who  had  misgivings  about  increasing  our
involvement  in  South  Vietnam  or  about  increasing  it  more  rapidly  than  might  be
necessary.  There  were  others  who  apparently  felt  that  NSAM-328  risked  falling
between  two  stools.  One  such  was  John  A.  McCone,  Director  of  CIA  (who  was
perhaps  also  unhappy  about  the  increasing  involvement  per  se) .  The  day  after
the  1  April  meeting  he  addressed  a  memorandum  expressing  second  thoughts  to
the  Secretary  of  State,  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  the  Special  Assistant  to  the
President  for  National  Security  Affairs  and  Ambassador  Taylor.  The  change  in
the  U.S.  role  from  merely  giving  advice  and  static  defense,  to  active  combat
operations  against  Viet  Cong  guerrillas,  appeared  to  bother  him.  He  felt  our
ground  force  operations  would  very  possibly  have  only  limited  effectiveness
against  guerrillas,  and  above  all,  he  felt  the  conduct  of  active  combat  operations


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  101

in  South  Vietnam  should  be  accompanied  by  air  strikes  against  the  North  suf-
ficiently heavy  and  damaging  to  really  hurt  the  North.  If  the  U.S.  were  to  com-
bine combat  operations  in  the  South  with  air  strikes  of  any  kind  in  the  North,  the
attacks  on  the  North  should  be  heavy  and  do  great  damage.  Without  expressly
saying  so,  his  point  seems  to  have  been  that  the  air  war  against  the  North  should
not  be  an  attempt  to  persuade,  but  an  effort  to  compel.  He  said  that  he  had
already  reported  that :

The  strikes  to  date  have  not  caused  a  change  in  the  North  Vietnamese
policy  of  directing  Viet  Cong  insurgency,  infiltrating  cadres  and  supplying
materials.  If  anything,  the  strikes  to  date  have  hardened  their  attitude.

Although  the  memo  as  a  whole  conveys  Mr.  McCone's  serious  doubt  that  the
ground  operations  in  the  South  would  in  any  event  serve  their  purpose,  he  clearly
advocated  bombing  more  heavily  if  we  decided  to  engage  in  ground  operations.
Unless  they  were  supported  by  really  strong  actions  against  North  Vietnam,  he
felt  such  ground  operations  would  be  doomed  to  failure:

I  believe  our  proposed  track  offers  great  danger  of  simply  encouraging
Chinese  Communists  and  Soviet  support  of  the  DRV  and  VC  cause  if  for
no  other  reason  than  the  risk  for  both  will  be  minimum.  I  envision  that  the
reaction  of  the  NVN  and  the  Chinese  Communists  will  be  to  deliberately,
carefully,  and  probably  gradually,  build  up  the  Viet  Cong  capabilities  by
covert  infiltration  of  North  Vietnamese  and,  possibly,  Chinese  cadres  and
thus  bring  an  ever  increasing  pressure  on  our  forces.  In  effect,  we  will  find
ourselves  mired  down  in  combat  in  the  jungle  in  a  military  effort  we  cannot
win,  and  from  which  we  will  have  extreme  difficulty  in  extracting  ourselves.

McCone  argued  that  if  we  were  going  to  change  the  mission  of  the  U.S.  ground
forces  we  also  needed  to  change  the  ground  rules  of  the  strikes  against  North
Vietnam,  and  he  concluded:

If  we  are  unwilling  to  take  this  kind  of  a  decision  now,  we  must  not  take
the  actions  concerning  the  ifiission  of  our  ground  forces  for  the  reasons
I  have  mentioned  above.

McCone's  views  notwithstanding,  U.S.  policy  was  promptly  and  sharply  re-
oriented in  the  direction  of  greater  military  involvement  with  a  proportionate
de-emphasis  of  the  direct  counterinsurgency  efforts.  It  is  not  fully  clear  to  this
writer  exactly  how  and  why  this  rapid  re-orientation  occurred.  On  7  April  the
President  made  his  famous  Johns  Hopkins  speech  in  which  he  publicly  committed
the  United  States  more  than  ever  before  to  the  defense  of  South  Vietnam,  but
also  committed  himself  to  engage  in  unconditional  discussions.  The  following  day,
Pham  Van  Dong  published  his  Four  Points  in  what  seemed  a  defiant,  and  un-
yielding response.  This  sharp  DRV  rebuff  of  the  President's  initiative  may  well
have  accelerated  the  re-orientation.  The  re-orientation  of  policy  itself,  however,
was  expressed  not  in  an  explicit  restatement  of  formal  policy,  but  in  a  series  of
action  decisions  over  the  following  fortnight  that  caught  the  Saigon  Mission
very  much  by  surprise.

The  Ambassador's  NODIS  to  the  President  on  13  April  had  a  comparatively
optimistic  tone.  It  began,  "We  have  just  completed  another  quite  favorable  week
in  terms  of  losses  inflicted  upon  the  Viet  Cong.  .  .  ."  The  critical  conditions  in
Bien  Dinh  Province  had  been  considerably  relieved  and  the  province,  it  was
believed,  was  about  back  to  normal.  Although  a  large  part  of  the  province  re-
mained under  Viet  Cong  control,  many  areas  had  been  restored  to  government


102 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

control  and  the  fear  of  the  loss  of  major  towns  seemed  past.  There  had  been
aggressive  action  by  a  new  division  commander,  and  there  seemed  to  be  improved
morale  attributable  to  the  air  actions  against  North  Vietnam.  There  was  a  pos-
sibility that  the  Viet  Cong  were  regrouping  and  they  would  probably  soon  en-
gage in  some  new  kind  or  phase  of  offensive  action.  But,  then  as  now,  there  were
what  some  interpreted  as  indications  that  the  Viet  Cong  morale  might  be  drop-
ping. Furthermore,  estimates — not  audited  figures — indicated  that  the  govern-
ment military  and  paramilitary  forces  had  been  increased  by  some  10,000  dur-
ing the  month  of  March  as  against  the  target  of  8,000  per  month.  Prime  Minister
Quat  was  continuing  his  program  of  visiting  the  provinces,  and  in  addition  to
making  himself  and  the  Saigon  government  known  to  the  hinterlands,  he  had
expressed  particular  interest  in  such  projects  as  rural  electrification,  agricultural
development,  water  supply  and  school  construction.  Quat's  principal  worry  con-
tinued to  be  the  unruly  generals  and  there  was  continued  evidence  of  disunity
within  the  senior  officers  corps.

Within  two  days,  however,  messages  went  out  from  Washington  indicating
that  decisions  had  been  made  at  the  highest  level  to  go  beyond  the  measures
specified  in  NSAM-328.  On  15  April,  McGeorge  Bundy  sent  a  personal  nodis
to  Ambassador  Taylor  saying  that  the  President  had  just  approved  important
future  military  deployments  and  that  some  personal  explanation  might  be
helpful.

The  President  has  repeatedly  emphasized  his  personal  desire  for  a  strong
experiment  in  the  encadrement  of  U.S.  troops  with  the  Vietnamese.  He
is  also  very  eager  to  see  prompt  experiments  in  use  of  energetic  teams  of
U.S.  officials  in  support  of  provisional  governments  under  unified  U.S.
leadership.  These  desires  are  the  source  of  corresponding  paragraphs  in  our
message.

On  further  troop  deployments,  the  President's  belief  is  that  current  situa-
tion requires  use  of  all  practical  means  of  strengthening  position  in  South
Vietnam  and  that  additional  U.S.  troops  are  important  if  not  decisive  rein-
forcements. He  has  not  seen  evidence  of  negative  result  of  deployments  to
date,  and  does  not  wish  to  wait  any  longer  than  is  essential  for  genuine  GVN
agreement.

President  always  intended  these  plans  be  reviewed  with  you  and  approved
by  Quat  before  final  execution,  and  we  regret  any  contrary  impression  given
by  our  messages  in  recent  days.

The  message  stated  that  "highest  authority"  believed  that,  in  addition  to  the
actions  against  the  North,  something  new  had  to  be  added  in  the  South,  to  achieve
victory.

1.  Experimental  encadrement  by  U.S.  forces  of  South  Vietnamese  ground
troops  both  to  stiffen  and  increase  their  effectiveness  and  also  to  add  to  their
fire  power.  Two  approaches  were  to  be  carried  out  concurrently,  one  involv-
ing integration  of  a  substantial  number  of  U.S.  combat  personnel  in  each
of  several  ARVN  battalions,  the  other  involving  the  combined  operation  of
approximately  three  additional  Army/Marine  battalions  with  three  or  more
South  Vietnamese  battalions  for  use  in  combat  operations.

2.  Introduction  of  a  brigade  force  into  the  Bien  Hoa-Vung  Tau  area  to
act  both  as  a  security  force  for  installations  and  to  participate  in  counterin-
surgency  combat  operations.

3.  Introduction  of  a  battalion  or  multi-battalion  forces  into  three  addi-
tional locations  along  the  coast,  such  as  Qui  Nhon.  The  purpose  here  would


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  103

be  to  experiment  further  with  using  U.S.  forces  in  counterinsurgency  role  in
addition  to  providing  security  for  the  base.

In  addition  to  these  three  steps,  which  were  intended  basically  to  increase  the
military  effectiveness  of  the  counterguerrilla  campaign,  a  series  of  other  steps
was  proposed.  One  was  a  substantial  expansion  of  the  Vietnamese  recruiting
campaign  using  U.S.  recruiting  experts,  techniques  and  procedures.  A  second
was  an  experimental  program  to  provide  expanded  medical  services  to  the  coun-
tryside utilizing  mobile  dispensaries.

The  next  one — and  the  one  that  caused  considerable  subsequent  discussion —
was  the  experimental  introduction  into  the  provincial  government  structure  of
a  team  of  U.S.  Army  civil  affairs  personnel  to  assist  in  the  establishment  of
stable  provincial  administration  and  to  initiate  and  direct  the  necessary  political,
economic  and  security  programs.  It  was  proposed  that  teams  be  introduced  first
into  only  one  or  two  provinces.  General  Peers  was  being  sent  to  work  with
COMUSMACV  in  developing  detailed  plans.

The  last  non-military  measure  was  an  experimental  plan  for  distributing  food
directly  to  regular  and  paramilitary  personnel  and  their  families.

Hot  on  the  heels  of  this  message  came  another  on  16  April  explaining  in  some
further  detail  the  proposition  to  experiment  with  U.S.  civil  affairs  officers  in
the  pacification  program.  Major  General  W.  R.  Peers'  party  was  scheduled  to
arrive  in  Saigon  on  19  April.  According  to  the  proposal  COMUSMACV  was
to  designate  a  senior  officer  to  direct  the  overall  U.S.  Army  Civil  Affairs  effort
in  the  one  or  two  test  provinces.  Within  these,  the  responsibility  for  all  U.S.
activities  would  be  vested  in  the  senior  U.S.  Army  sector  advisor.

This  last  message  was,  for  Taylor,  the  straw  that  broke  the  camel's  back.
Immediately  upon  receiving  it  the  Ambassador  dispatched  a  NODIS  to  McGeorge
Bundy:

....  Contrary  to  the  firm  understanding  which  I  received  in  Washington,
I  was  not  asked  to  concur  in  this  massive  visitation.  For  your  information,
I  do  not  concur.

Based  on  the  little  I  know  of  the  proposed  civil  affairs  experiment,  I  am
opposed  to  beginning  any  extensive  planning  exercise  which,  because  of
its  controversial  and  divisive  concept,  is  going  to  shake  this  mission  and
divert  senior  members  from  their  important  daily  tasks.  If  GVN  gets  word
of  these  plans  to  impose  U.S.  military  government  framework  on  their
country  (as  this  new  concept  seems  to  imply),  it  will  have  a  very  serious
impact  on  our  relations  here.

We  are  rocking  the  boat  at  a  time  when  we  have  it  almost  on  an  even  keel.
I  recommend  that  we  suspend  action  on  this  project  until  we  have  time  to
talk  over  its  merits  and  decide  how  to  proceed  with  order.

Shortly  after  dispatching  this  telegram,  the  Ambassador  sent  another  to
McGeorge  Bundy,  this  one  dealing  more  generally  with  the  defense  message  of
15  April  which  had  laid  out  the  new  program  of  added  measures  decided  upon
by  the  President.

I  am  greatly  troubled  by  DoD  15  April  15.  First,  it  shows  no  considera-
tion for  the  fact  that,  as  a  result  of  decisions  taken  in  Washington  during
my  visit,  this  mission  is  charged  with  securing  implementation  by  the  two-
month  old  Quat  government  of  a  21 -point  military  program,  a  41 -point  non-
military  program,  a  16-point  Rowan  USIS  program  and  a  12-point  CIA
program.  Now  this  new  cable  opens  up  new  vistas  of  further  points  as  if


104 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

we  can  win  here  somehow  on  a  point  score.  We  are  going  to  stall  the  machine
of  government  if  we  do  not  declare  a  moratorium  on  new  programs  for  at
least  six  months.  Next,  it  shows  a  far  greater  willingness  to  get  into  the
ground  war  than  I  had  discerned  in  Washington  during  my  recent  trip  .  .  .

My  greatest  concern  arises  over  para  6  reftel  [the  civil  affairs  experiment
proposal]  which  frankly  bewilders  me.  What  do  the  authors  of  this  cable
think  the  mission  has  been  doing  over  the  months  and  years?  We  have  pre-
sumably the  best  qualified  people  the  Washington  agencies  (State,  AID,
DoD,  USIA  and  CIA)  can  find  working  in  the  provinces  seven  days  a  week
at  precisely  the  task  described  in  paragraph  6.  Is  it  proposed  to  withdraw
these  people  and  replace  them  by  Army  civil  affairs  types  operating  on  the
pattern  of  military  occupation?  If  this  is  the  thought,  I  would  regard  such
a  change  in  policy  which  would  gain  wide  publicity,  as  disastrous  in  its  likely
efforts  upon  pacification  in  general  and  on  US/GVN  relations  in  particular.

Mac,  can't  we  be  better  protected  from  our  friends?  I  know  that  every-
.  one  wants  to  help,  but  there  is  such  a  thing  as  killing  with  kindness.  In  par-
ticular, we  want  to  stay  alive  here  because  we  think  we're  winning — and  will
continue  to  win  unless  helped  to  death.

Shortly  after  sending  this  cable,  the  Ambassador  sent  still  a  third  message,
this  one  suggesting  certain  steps  that  might  be  taken  in  Washington  to  facilitate
his  implementation  of  the  many  and  rapidly  changing  policies  and  programs  that
had  been  decided  upon  in  Washington  since  his  visit.  The  problem  was  winning
not  only  the  acquiescence,  but  the  support  and  active  cooperation  of  the  South
Vietnamese  government.  He  suggested  the  kind  of  instruction  that  Washington
should  provide  him  to  present  to  the  GVN — the  new  policy  of  third  country  par-
ticipation in  ground  combat.  Taylor's  proposed  instructions  are  quoted  in  full
here  because  they  provide,  for  better  or  worse,  an  internally  consistent  rationale
for  the  shifting  policies  of  that  month:

The  USG  has  completed  a  thorough  review  of  the  situation  in  South
Vietnam  both  in  its  national  and  international  aspects  and  has  reached  cer-
tain important  conclusions.  It  feels  that  in  recent  weeks  there  has  been  a
somewhat  favorable  change  in  the  overall  situation  as  the  result  of  the  air
attacks  on  the  DRV,  the  relatively  small  but  numerous  successes  in  the  field
against  the  VC  and  the  encouraging  progress  of  the  Quat  government.  How-
ever, it  is  becoming  increasingly  clear  that,  in  all  probability,  the  primary
objective  of  the  GVN  and  the  USG  of  changing  the  will  of  the  DRV  to
support  the  VC  insurgency  cannot  be  attained  in  an  accpetable  time  frame
by  the  methods  presently  employed.  The  air  campaign  in  the  North  must
be  supplemented  by  signal  successes  against  the  VC  in  the  South  before
we  can  hope  to  create  that  frame  of  mind  in  Hanoi  which  will  lead  to  the
decisions  we  seek.

The  ICS  have  reviewed  the  military  resources  which  will  be  available  in
SVN  by  the  end  of  1965  and  have  concluded  that  even  with  an  attainment
of  the  highest  feasible  mobilization  goals,  ARVN  will  have  insufficient  forces
to  carry  out  the  kind  of  successful  campaign  against  the  VC  which  is  con-
sidered essential  for  the  purposes  discussed  above.  If  the  ground  war  is  not
to  drag  into  1966  and  even  beyond,  they  consider  it  necessary  to  reinforce
GVN  ground  forces  with  about  twenty  battalion  equivalents  in  addition  to
the  forces  now  being  recruited  in  SVN.  Since  these  reinforcements  cannot
be  raised  by  the  GVN  they  must  inevitably  come  from  third  country  sources.

The  USG  accepts  the  validity  of  this  reasoning  of  the  ICS  and  offers  its


U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  Nov.  1963-Apr.  1965  105

assistance  to  the  GVN  to  raise  these  additional  forces  for  the  purpose  of
bringing  the  VC  insurgency  to  an  end  in  the  shortest  possible  time.  We  are
prepared  to  bring  in  additional  U.S.  ground  forces  provided  we  can  get  a
reasonable  degree  of  participation  from  other  third  countries.  If  the  GVN
will  make  urgent  representations  to  them,  we  believe  it  will  be  entirely
possible  to  obtain  the  following  contributions:  Korea,  one  regimental  com-
bat team;  Australia,  one  Infantry  battalion;  New  Zealand,  one  battery  and
one  company  of  tanks;  Philippine  Islands,  one  battalion.  If  the  forces  of
the  foregoing  magnitude  are  forthcoming,  the  USG  is  prepared  to  provide
the  remainder  of  the  combat  reinforcements  as  well  as  the  necessary  logistic
personnel  to  support  the  third  country  contingents.  Also,  it  will  use  its  good
offices  as  desired  in  assisting  the  GVN  approach  to  these  governments.

You  (the  Ambassador),  will  seek  the  concurrence  of  the  GVN  to  the
foregoing  program,  recognizing  that  a  large  number  of  questions  such  as
command  relationships,  concepts  of  employment  and  disposition  of  forces
must  be  worked  out  subsequently.

The  message  concluded  that,  armed  with  an  instruction  of  this  kind,  he,
Taylor,  would  be  adequately  equipped  to  initiate  what  might  be  a  sharp  debate
within  the  GVN.  Something  of  this  sort  was  needed  before  taking  up  the  matter
of  troop  arrangements  with  Quat.

Later  the  same  day,  Deputy  Ambassador  U.  Alexis  Johnson  sent  Washington
his  personal  observations  on  the  recent  decision  to  introduce  third  country  troops.
He  had  just  returned  from  one  day  at  Pleiku  with  Premier  Quat,  and  two  days
in  the  Danang-Hue  area,  where  he  had  had  "extended  visits  and  informal  con-
versations with  all  of  the  senior  Marine  officers  ashore."

I  fully  appreciate  considerations  both  internal  and  external  to  SVN  which
impel  move  on  our  part  to  bring  this  war  to  successful  conclusion  as  quickly
as  possible  .  .  .  However,  I  gravely  question  whether  this  result  can  be
achieved  at  this  time  by  massive  input  of  non-Vietnamese  military  forces.
As  we  have  learned,  we  are  djbaling  with  volatile  and  hyper-sensitive  people
with  strong  xenophobic  characteristics  never  far  below  the  surface.  We  have
thus  far  deployed  our  Marine  battalions  to  minimize  direct  contact  with
local  population.  This  not  only  from  our  choice  but  that  of  GVN,  especially
General  Thi.  On  this  I  think  Thi  is  right.  Hasty  and  ill  conceived  deployment
of  non-Vietnamese  in  combat  roles  where  they  are  substantially  involved  with
local  population  could  badly  backfire  on  U.S.  and  give  rise  to  cries  by
Buddhists  .  ,  .  and  others  to  "throw  out  foreigners"  and  "return  Vietnam
to  the  Vietnamese  .  .  ."

The  message  went  on  to  say  that  in  the  next  few  weeks  the  Marines  at  Danang
would  have  a  chance  to  test  their  success  as  a  reaction  force  in  support  of  ARVN
initiated  contact  with  the  enemy,  and  in  patrolling  thinly  populated  areas.  The
Deputy  Ambassador  recommended  that  we  await  the  outcome  of  this  testing
before  engaging  any  more  forces.

A  hastily  arranged  meeting  in  Honolulu  on  20  April  was  evidently  called  to
soothe  Taylor's  temper  over  the  hasty  decisions  to  deploy  third  country  troops,
and  to  get  agreement  to  them  by  the  senior  U.S.  policy  officials  concerned — not
to  reverse  or  alter  those  policies  or  to  shift  the  direction  of  our  commitments.  By
that  point  we  were  inexorably  committed  to  a  military  resolution  of  the  in-
surgency. The  problem  seemed  no  longer  soluble  by  any  other  means.


106


2.  Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,
February  1964-January  1965


Summary

February-June,  1964

The  first  half  of  1964  saw  the  unfolding  of  an  intensive  debate  and  planning
effort  within  the  Johnson  Administration  concerning  the  desirability,  limitations,
and  risks  of  mounting  major  military  pressures  against  North  Vietnam.  Actual
U.S.  involvement  in  SEA  increased  only  slightly  during  this  period.

The  single  notable  element  of  actual  increased  U.S.  involvement  during  this
period  was  a  program  of  covert  GVN  operations,  designed  to  impose  "progres-
sively escalating  pressure"  upon  the  North,  and  initiated  on  a  small  and  essen-
tially ineffective  scale  in  February.  The  active  U.S.  role  in  the  few  covert  opera-
tions that  were  carried  out  was  limited  essentially  to  planning,  equipping,  and
training  of  the  GVN  forces  involved,  but  U.S.  responsibility  for  the  launching
and  conduct  of  these  activities  was  unequivocal  and  carried  with  it  an  implicit
symbolic  and  psychological  intensification  of  the  U.S.  commitment.  A  firebreak
had  been  crossed,  and  the  U.S.  had  embarked  on  a  program  that  was  recognized
as  holding  little  promise  of  achieving  its  stated  objectives,  at  least  in  its  early
stages.  Thus,  a  demand  for  more  was  stimulated  and  an  expectation  of  more  was
aroused.

The  demands  came — mostly  from  U.S.  officials  in  Saigon  and  Washington
and  mostly  because  of  the  felt  need  to  do  something  about  a  deteriorating  situa-
tion in  SVN — to  increase  the  intensity  of  the  covert  operations  and  to  change
from  covert  to  overt  action.  The  Khanh  government,  it  should  be  noted,  opposed
these  demands  on  the  grounds  that  it  would  expose  the  vulnerable  GVN  to
greater  pressures  from  the  enemy.  With  each  successive  "crisis" — recognition  of
insufficient  intelligence  on  the  nature  and  scope  of  the  infiltration  (December
through  May),  realization  of  dramatic  communist  gains  in  SVN  (February),
threats  of  major  communist  advances  in  Laos  (late  May) — the  demands  were
redoubled  and  intensified.  The  basic  assumption  underlying  these  demands  was
that  the  DRV,  faced  with  the  credible  prospect  of  losing  its  industrial  and  eco-
nomic base  through  direct  attack,  would  halt  its  support  of  the  insurgencies  in
Laos  and  South  Vietnam.

Beginning  in  early  February,  a  series  of  valuable  studies  and  planning  exer-
cises were  undertaken,  with  participation  of  all  national  security  agencies,  to
examine  the  whole  panoply  of  problems — objectives,  options,  effects,  costs,  and
risks — of  mounting  overt  coercive  pressures  against  the  North.  The  planning
effort  served  to  develop  consensus  on  some  issues,  including  the  recognition
that  punitive  action  in  the  North  would  be,  at  best,  complementary  to  successful
counterinsurgency  in  the  South.  It  also  surfaced  significant  differences  among
the  participants  in  the  planning  effort  and  in  the  broader  debate  that  ensued,  in
their  respective  approaches  to  "pressure  planning"  as  well  as  in  the  substantive
content  of  their  recommendations.  Thus,  the  JCS  viewed  the  planning  task  as


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  107

preparation  of  an  action  program  for  near-term  implementation,  and  their  recom-
mendations tended  toward  immediate  and  forceful  military  measures.  The  State-
ISA  planning  group,  on  the  other  hand,  viewed  it  as  a  contingency  planning  ex-
ercise and  its  scenarios  and  recommendations  stressed  a  more  deliberate,  cautious
approach,  carefully  tailoring  proposed  U.S.  actions  in  SEA  to  the  unique  political
context  of  each  country.  Ambassador  Lodge,  in  turn,  developed  yet  a  third  "car-
rot and  stick"  approach,  stressing  a  diplomatic  effort  at  persuasion,  i.e.,  combin-
ing a  threat  of  punitive  strikes  with  an  offer  of  some  economic  assistance  to  the
DRV.  These  divergences  in  approach  and  concept  persisted,  though  varying  in
degree  and  emphasis,  throughout  the  planning  period.

By  June,  with  increasing  recognition  that  only  relatively  heavy  levels  of  at-
tack on  the  DRV  would  be  likely  to  have  any  signoficant  compelling  effect,  with
a  greater  awareness  of  the  many  imponderables  raised  by  the  planning  effort,  and
with  the  emergence  of  a  somewhat  more  hopeful  situation  in  SVN  and  Laos,
most  of  the  President's  advisers  favored  holding  off  on  any  attempts  to  pressure
North  Vietnam  through  overt  military  operations.  Only  the  JCS,  Ambassador
Lodge,  and  Walt  Rostow  continued  to  advocate  increased  military  measures,
and  even  Rostow  qualified  his  recommendations  with  the  claim  that  a  firm  public
stance,  and  supporting  actions  giving  the  impression  of  increased  military  opera-
tions, would  be  the  best  assurance  of  avoiding  having  to  employ  them.  More-
over, most  of  the  advisers  recognized  the  necessity  of  building  firmer  public
and  congressional  support  for  greater  U.S.  involvement  in  SEA  before  any  wider
military  actions  should  be  undertaken.

Accordingly,  with  the  political  conventions  just  around  the  corner  and  the
election  issues  regarding  Vietnam  clearly  drawn,  the  President  decided  against
actions  that  would  deepen  the  U.S.  involvement  by  broadening  the  conflict  in
Laos,  Cambodia  or  North  Vietnam.  In  his  view,  there  were  still  a  number  of
relatively  mild  military  and  intensified  political  actions  in  the  South  open  to  him
that  would  serve  the  national  interest  better  than  escalation  of  the  conflict.

July-October,  1964

During  the  spring  and  summer  of  1964,  there  was  disquiet  about  the  situation
in  South  Vietnam  and  disillusion  with  on-going  U.S.  actions  to  right  that  situa-
tion. During  the  third  quarter  of  1964,  a  consensus  developed  within  the  Johnson
Administration  that  some  form  of  continual  overt  pressures  mounting  in  severity
against  North  Vietnam  soon  would  be  required.  The  purpose  of  these  pressures
was  twofold:  (1)  to  effect  DRV  will  and  capabilities  in  order  to  persuade  and
force  the  leadership  in  Hanoi  to  halt  their  support  and  direction  of  the  war  in
the  South;  and  (2)  to  induce  negotiations  at  some  future  point  in  time  on  our
terms  after  North  Vietnam  had  been  hurt  and  convinced  of  our  resolve.  This
consensus  was  in  an  early  formative  stage — it  had  become  an  idea,  not  a  pro-
gram for  action;  it  was  a  belief,  not  as  yet  fully  staffed  and  considered.  Be-
cause of  this  and  because  of  important  tactical  considerations  (the  impending
U.S.  elections,  the  instability  of  the  GVN,  and  the  need  to  produce  further  evi-
dence of  VC  infiltration  into  the  South)  implementation  of  such  a  policy  was
deferred.  Nevertheless,  the  groundwork  was  being  laid.  The  Tonkin  Gulf  reprisal
constituted  an  important  firebreak,  and  the  Tonkin  Gulf  Resolution  set  U.S.
public  suport  for  virtually  any  action.

Since  the  fall  of  Diem  in  November  1963,  the  political  situation  in  South  Viet-
nam had  been  deteriorating.  The  Khanh  Government  had  succeeded  Minh  in
January  1964,  but  had  demonstrated  only  greater  capacity  for  survivability,  not


108 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

more  capacity  for  reversing  the  trend  toward  collapse.  In  the  wake  of  the  Tonkin
Gulf  reprisals,  when  South  Vietnamese  morale  was  still  temporarily  inflated,
Khanh  made  a  bold  bid  to  consolidate  his  personal  power  and  impose  semi-dic-
tatorial rule.  He  was  brought  to  heel,  however,  in  less  than  a  month  by  the  mili-
tary junta  which  continued  to  operate  behind  the  scenes.  By  September,  the  most
salient  aspect  of  the  confused  political  situation  in  South  Vietnam  was  the  like-
lihood that  it  would  continue  its  downward  slide  into  the  foreseeable  future.

In  this  setting,  a  program  of  covert  military  pressures  against  North  Vietnam
already  had  been  set  in  process.  These  were  basically  of  three  kinds:  (1)  low
level  recce  with  armed  escort  over  Laos;  (2)  De  Soto  patrols  within  4  n.m.  of
the  NVN  coast  to  acquire  visual,  electronic,  and  photographic  intelligence;  and
(3)  Oplan  34-A  which  included  a  variety  of  anti-infiltration,  sabotage,  and  psy-
war  measures.  The  portent  of  these  actions  was  being  conveyed  to  the  North
Vietnamese  through  private  and  public  channels.  A  Canadian,  Blair  Seaborn,  was
sent  to  Hanoi  to  state  that  U.S.  objectives  were  limited  but  that  our  commitment
was  deep,  and  that  "in  the  event  of  escalation  the  greatest  devastation  would  of
course  result  for  the  DRVN  itself."

Neither  the  situation  in  SVN  nor  the  failure  of  Hanoi  to  acquiesce  to  our
threats  diminished  the  basic  U.S.  commitment.  NSAM  288  expounding  the  need
to  do  what  was  necessary  to  preserve  an  "independent  non-communist  South
Vietnam"  was  the  guiding  policy  document.  At  no  time  in  this  period  was  the
NSAM  288  commitment  brought  into  question.  Rather,  American  concern  was
focused  on  how  the  U.S.  could  retrieve  the  situation.  The  usual  palliatives —
more  aid,  more  advice,  more  pressure  on  the  GVN  to  reform,  and  more  verbal
threats  to  Hanoi — were  no  longer  seen  as  satisfactory.  Nor  did  it  appear  to  U.S.
decision-makers  that  we  faced  a  stark  choice  between  complete  U.S.  withdrawal
from  the  struggle  or  a  large  scale  introduction  of  U.S.  ground  forces.  Nor  did
the  leadership  in  Washington  believe  that  a  massive  bombing  campaign  against
the  North  need  be  seriously  considered — although  such  a  program  was  proposed
by  the  ICS.  With  all  these  alternatives  implicitly  ruled  out  at  this  time,  the  choice
was  both  obvious  and  inevitable.  Although  it  did  not  take  the  form  of  decision,
it  was  agreed  that  the  U.S.  should  at  an  unspecified  date  in  the  future  begin  an
incremental  series  of  gradually  mounting  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  The
only  real  questions  were  precisely  what  actions  should  be  taken  and  when?  None
of  these  early  fall  discussions  in  Washington  really  confronted  the  hard  issues
of  what  a  bombing  campaign  would  buy  and  what  it  would  cost.  These  hard-
headed  discussions,  to  some  extent,  took  place  in  the  last  few  months  of  1964.

The  key  events  in  this  period  were  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  of  August  2nd
and  4th  and  the  U.S.  reprisal  on  North  Vietnam  PT  boats  and  bases  on  August
5th.  The  explanation  for  the  DRV  attack  on  U.S.  ships  remains  puzzling  (per-
haps it  was  simply  a  way  of  warning  and  warding  off  U.S.  patrols  close  to  North
Vietnam  borders).  The  swift  U.S.  reaction  was  to  be  expected.  While  there  was
some  momentary  uncertainty  about  the  actuality  of  the  second  attack  on  August
4th,  confirming  evidence  of  the  attack  was  received  before  the  U.S.  reprisal  was
launched.  The  U.S.  reprisal  represented  the  carrying  out  of  recommendations
made  to  the  President  by  his  principal  advisers  earlier  that  summer  and  subse-
quently placed  on  the  shelf.  The  existence  of  these  previous  recommendations
with  planning  down  to  detailed  targeting  made  possible  the  immediate  U.S.  re-
action when  the  crisis  came.

At  the  same  time  as  U.S.  reprisals  were  taken,  President  Johnson  decided  to
act  on  another  recommendation  that  had  been  under  consideration  since  at  least
May — a  Congressional  resolution  of  support  for  U.S.  policy.  Whereas  in  the


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  J 965  109

earlier  discussions,  such  a  resolution  had  been  proposed  as  a  vehicle  for  mobi-
lizing Congressional  and  public  support  behind  an  escalating  campaign  of  pres-
sures against  the  North,  the  President,  in  the  midst  of  an  election  campaign,  now
felt  impelled  to  use  it  to  solidify  support  for  his  overall  Vietnam  policy.  On  Au-
gust 5th  he  sent  a  message  to  Congress  on  the  Tonkin  incidents  and  asked  for
passage  of  a  joint  resolution  endorsing  his  policy.  The  resolution  itself  was  one
prepared  by  the  Administration  and  introduced  on  its  behalf  by  the  Chairmen
of  the  Foreign  Affairs  Committees  in  the  two  Houses.  It  was  passed  with  near
unanimous  support  on  August  7th.

The  net  effect  of  the  swift  U.S.  reprisals  and  the  Congressional  Resolution  was
to  dramatically  demonstrate,  publicly  state  and  formally  record  the  commitments
to  South  Vietnam  and  within  Southeast  Asia  that  had  been  made  internal  U.S.
policy  by  NSAM  288  in  March  1964.  They  were  also  conceived  and  intended
as  a  clear  communication  to  Hanoi  of  what  it  could  expect  if  it  continued  to
pursue  its  current  course  of  action.  They  were  portents  of  the  future  designed
to  demonstrate  the  firmness  of  U.S.  resolve  and  the  direction  its  poHcy  was  tend-
ing. The  psychological  impact  of  the  raids  on  the  Administration  and  the  Ameri-
can public  is  also  significant.  They  marked  the  crossing  of  an  important  thresh-
hold  in  the  war,  and  it  was  accomplished  with  virtually  no  domestic  criticism,
indeed,  with  an  evident  increase  in  public  support  for  the  Administration.  The
precedent  for  strikes  against  the  North  was  thus  established  and  at  very  little
apparent  cost.  There  was  a  real  cost,  however.  The  number  of  unused  measures
short  of  direct  military  action  against  the  North  had  been  depleted.  Greater
visible  commitment  was  purchased  at  the  price  of  reduced  flexibility.

But,  a  worried  Administration  went  to  some  lengths  to  insure  that  the  strikes
did  not  bind  or  commit  it  to  any  future  policies  or  actions  and  to  have  it  under-
stood that  the  strikes  had  been  pure  and  simple  reprisals  of  the  one  of  a  kind
variety.  Yet,  for  all  these  reasons,  when  a  decision  to  strike  the  North  was  faced
again,  it  was  much  easier  to  take.

The  Tonkin  reprisals  were  widely  regarded  within  the  Administration  as  an
effective,  although  limited  demonstration  of  the  firmness  of  American  resolve.
However,  they  also  served  to  stiffen  that  resolve  and  to  deepen  the  commitment.
Several  officials  within  the  Administration,  including  Ambassador  Taylor,  felt
that  to  have  any  lasting  impact  this  demonstration  of  resolve  would  have  to  be
followed  up  by  other  continuing  actions,  in  an  increasing  tempo.  The  positive
short-term  effect  of  the  reprisals  in  raising  South  Vietnamese  morale  was  noted
as  an  important  by-product  of  the  strikes  and  offered  as  one  justification  for  con-
tinuing pressures  against  the  North.  Also  figuring  importantly  in  calculation  of
resolve  and  intent  was  the  appreciable  improvement  in  our  position  in  Laos  as
a  result  of  the  vigorous  spring  offensive  by  Laotian  Government  forces.  This
improvement  had  led  us  to  oppose  a  14-nation  conference  on  Laos  for  fear  of
placing  the  new  gains  in  jeopardy,  and  convinced  many  that  only  military  meas-
ures were  unambiguously  understood  by  Hanoi's  communist  rulers.  This,  how-
ever, was  tempered  by  a  countervailing  concern  not  to  provoke  by  U.S.  action
any  communist  military  escalation  in  Laos.

Quite  another  set  of  arguments  for  strikes  against  the  North  were  advanced
by  Walt  Rostow,  then  Counselor  of  the  State  Department,  in  a  paper  that  cir-
culated widely  through  the  Administration  in  August  1964.  The  "Rostow  Thesis"
argued  that  externally  supported  insurgencies  could  only  be  successfully  dealt  with
by  striking  at  their  sources  of  support  and  neutralizing  them.  The  objective  of
such  attacks  would  be  psychological  rather  than  purely  military.  They  would  be
designed  to  alter  the  aggressor's  calculation  of  interests  in  supporting  the  insur-


110 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

gency  through  the  fear  of  further  mihtary  and  economic  damage,  the  fear  of
involvement  in  a  wider  conflict,  the  fear  of  internal  political  upheaval  and  the  fear
of  greater  dependence  on  a  major  communist  power.  Any  incidental  improvement
in  morale  in  the  country  troubled  by  insurgency  or  improvement  in  bargaining
leverage  were  to  be  regarded  as  bonuses.  To  achieve  the  desired  effect,  a  care-
fully orchestrated  series  of  escalating  military  measures,  coupled  with  simultane-
ous political,  economic  and  psychological  pressures  was  called  for.  The  "thesis"
was  articulated  in  general  terms,  but  the  immediate  case  in  everyone's  mind  was,
of  course.  Southeast  Asia.

A  thorough  critique  of  Rostow's  paper  was  prepared  in  OSD  ISA  with  in-
puts from  State's  Policy  Planning  Council.  This  analysis  argued  that  the  validity
of  the  "thesis"  would  depend  on  two  variables:  (1)  the  extent  of  the  commit-
ment of  the  nation  supporting  the  insurgency;  and  (2)  the  degree  to  which
vital  U.S.  interests  were  at  stake  in  the  conflict.  The  latter  question  having  been
settled  with  respect  to  South  Vietnam  by  NSAM  288,  the  remaining  problem  was
whether  the  kinds  of  actions  Rostow  recommended  could  succeed  given  the  level
of  determined  commitment  of  the  North  Vietnamese.  For  the  Rostow  approach
to  succeed,  the  DRV  would  have  to  be  persuaded  that:  (1)  the  U.S.  was  taking
limited  action  to  achieve  limited  goals;  (2)  the  U.S.  commitment  was  total;  and
(3)  the  U.S.  had  established  a  sufficient  domestic  consensus  to  see  the  policy
through.  If  the  DRV  was  not  so  convinced,  the  approach  would  fail  unless  there
were  a  major  U.S.  military  involvement  in  the  war.  The  critique  concluded  that
the  public  opinion  problems  of  such  an  approach,  both  domestic  and  international,
would  be  very  great,  and  that  in  view  of  the  inherent  problems  of  implementing
and  managing  such  a  discriminating  policy,  it  had  poor  chances  of  success.  These
reservations  notwithstanding,  the  outlook  embodied  in  the  "Rostow  thesis"  came
to  dominate  a  good  deal  of  Administration  thinking  on  the  question  of  pressures
against  the  North  in  the  months  ahead.

All  of  the  pressures-against-the-North  thinking  came  to  a  head  in  the  strategy
meeting  of  the  principals  on  September  7th.  It  appears  that  a  rather  narrow  range
of  proposals  was  up  for  consideration.  One  program  proposal  came  from  the
ICS.  It  was  a  repeat  of  the  94-target  list  program  which  the  ICS  had  recom-
mended on  August  26th.  The  ICS  called  for  deliberate  attempts  to  provoke  the
DRV  into  taking  acts  which  could  then  be  answered  by  a  systematic  U.S.  air
campaign.  The  ICS  argued  that  such  actions  were  now  "essential  to  preventing
complete  collapse  of  the  U.S.  position  in  the  RVN  and  SEA,"  because  "con-
tinuation of  present  or  foreseeable  programs  limited  to  the  RVN  will  not  produce
the  desired  result."  The  Chiefs  were  supported  bv  ISA  in  their  provocation  ap-
proach. For  ISA,  ASD  McNaughton  argued  that  our  acts  and  the  DRV  response
"should  be  likely  to  provide  good  grounds  for  us  to  escalate  if  we  wished."  Mc-
Naughton's  approach  was  for  a  "gradual  squeeze,"  not  simply  a  tit-for-tat  con-
tingency and  unlike  the  quick,  all-out  proposals  of  the  ICS.

The  principal  conferees  at  this  September  meeting  did  not  believe  that  de-
liberate acts  of  provocation  should  be  undertaken  "in  the  immediate  future  while
the  GVN  is  still  struggling  to  its  feet."  However,  thev  apparentlv  reached  a  con-
sensus that  they  might  recommend  such  actions — "depending  on  GVN  progress
and  communist  reaction  in  the  meantime" — by  early  October.  This  deferral  de-
cision was  strongly  supported  by  Mr.  McCone  of  the  CIA  and  Ambassador
Taylor.  Ambassador  Taylor,  revising  his  previous  position,  believed  that  the
conflict  should  not  be  escalated  to  a  level  beyond  South  Vietnamese  capacities
to  manage  it.  He  opposed  overt  actions  against  North  Vietnam  as  too  risky  and
urged  instead  that  further  measures  to  strengthen  the  GVN  be  taken  first.  Sim-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  111

ilarly,  Secretary  McNamara  affirmed  his  understanding  that  "we  are  not  acting
more  strongly  because  there  is  a  clear  hope  of  strengthening  the  GVN."  Mc-
Namara went  on  to  urge,  however,  that  the  way  be  kept  open  for  stronger
actions  even  if  the  GVN  did  not  improve  or  in  the  event  the  war  were  widened
by  the  communists.  In  notes  taken  at  this  meeting  the  President  asked:  "Can
we  really  strengthen  the  GVN?"

It  is  important  to  differentiate  the  consensus  of  the  principals  at  this  September
meeting  from  the  views  which  they  had  urged  on  the  President  in  the  preceding
spring.  In  the  spring  the  use  of  force  had  been  clearly  contingent  upon  a  major
reversal — principally  in  Laos — and  had  been  advanced  with  the  apparent  as-
sumption that  military  actions  hopefully  would  not  be  required.  Now,  however,
their  views  were  advanced  with  a  sense  that  such  actions  were  inevitable.

The  results  of  the  September  meeting  were  recorded  in  NSAM  314.  The  ac-
tions that  were  approved  against  the  DRV  for  the  next  three  month  period  were
highly  limited  and  marginal  in  character.  They  included  resumption  of  the  off-
shore U.S.  naval  patrols,  resumption  of  covert  GVN  coastal  operations  against
the  North,  limited  air  and  ground  operations  in  the  Laotian  corridor,  and  a  pre-
paredness to  respond  to  any  further  DRV  attacks  on  a  tit-for-tat  basis.

From  the  September  meeting  forward,  there  was  little  basic  disagreement
among  the  principals  on  the  need  for  military  actions  against  the  North.  What
prevented  action  for  the  time  being  was  a  set  of  tactical  considerations.  The
President  was  in  the  midst  of  an  election  campaign  in  which  he  was  presenting
himself  as  the  candidate  of  reason  and  restraint  as  opposed  to  the  quixotic  Barry
Goldwater.  Other  concerns  were  the  aforementioned  shakiness  of  the  GVN,  the
uncertainty  as  to  China's  response  to  an  escalation,  the  desire  not  to  upset  the
delicate  Laotian  equation,  the  need  to  design  whatever  actions  were  taken  so  as
to  achieve  the  maximum  public  and  Congressional  support,  and  the  implicit  be-
lief that  overt  actions  at  this  time  might  bring  pressure  for  premature  negotiations
— that  is,  negotiations  before  the  DRV  was  hurting.  In  summary,  the  period  saw
the  development  of  the  consensus  on  military  pressures  against  the  North  and  the
decision  to  defer  them  for  temporary  reasons  of  tactics.

«

November  1964-January  1965

In  the  late  fall  of  1964,  President  Johnson  made  a  tentative  decision  in  favor
of  limited  military  pressures  against  North  Vietnam.  He  acted  on  the  consensus
recommendation  of  his  principal  advisors,  a  consensus  achieved  by  a  process  of
compromising  alternatives  into  a  lowest-common-denominator  proposal  at  the
sub-cabinet  and  cabinet  level,  thereby  precluding  any  real  Presidential  choice
among  viable  options.  The  choices  he  was  given  all  included  greater  pressures
against  North  Vietnam.  The  Presidential  decision  itself  was  for  a  limited  and
tightly  controlled  two-step  build-up  of  pressures.  The  first  phase  involved  an  in-
tensification of  ^existing  harassment  activities  with  reprisals;  the  second,  which
was  approved  in  principle  only,  was  to  be  a  sustained,  slowly  escalating  air  cam-
paign against  the  North.  The  spectrum  of  choice  could  have  run  from  (a)  a  judg-
ment that  the  situation  in  the  South  was  irretrievable  and,  hence,  a  decision  to
begin  the  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces;  to  (b)  a  judgment  that  the  maintenance
of  a  non-communist  South  Vietnam  was  indispensable  to  U.S.  strategic  interests
and,  therefore,  required  a  massive  U.S.  intensification  of  the  war  both  in  the
North  and  in  the  South.  The  extreme  withdrawal  option  was  rejected  almost
without  surfacing  for  consideration  since  it  was  in  direct  conflict  with  the  inde-
pendent, noncommunist  SVN  commitments  of  NSAM  288.  The  opposite  option


112 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

of  massive  involvement,  which  was  essentially  the  JCS  recommendation  at  an
early  point  in  these  deliberations,  was  shunted  aside  because  both  its  risks  and
costs  were  too  high.

Short  of  those  extremes,  however,  were  two  other  alternatives  that  were  briefly
considered  by  the  Working  Group  as  fallback  positions  but  rejected  before  they
were  fully  explored.  While  both  came  into  some  conflict  with  the  commitments
to  South  Vietnam  of  NSAM  288,  they  could  have  been  justified  as  flowing  from
another  long-standing  U.S.  conviction,  namely  that  ultimately  the  war  would
have  to  be  won  in  the  South  by  the  South  Vietnamese.  These  fallback  positions
were  outlined  in  the  following  manner:

1.  To  hold  the  situation  together  as  long  as  possible  so  that  we  have  time  to
strengthen  other  areas  of  Asia.

2.  To  take  forceful  enough  measures  in  the  situation  so  that  we  emerge
from  it,  even  in  the  worst  case,  with  our  standing  as  the  principal  helper
against  Communist  expansion  as  little  impaired  as  possible.

3.  To  make  clear  ...  to  nations,  in  Asia  particularly,  that  failure  in  South
Vietnam,  if  it  comes,  was  due  to  special  local  factors  that  do  not  apply
to  other  nations  we  are  committed  to  defend.  .  .  .

In  operational  terms  the  first  would  have  meant  holding  the  line — placing  an
immediate,  low  ceiling  on  the  number  of  U.S.  personnel  in  SVN,  and  taking
vigorous  efforts  to  build  on  a  stronger  base  elsewhere,  possibly  Thailand.  The
second  alternative  would  have  been  to  undertake  some  spectacular,  highly  visible
supporting  action  like  a  limited-duration  selective  bombing  campaign  as  a  last
effort  to  save  the  South;  to  have  accompanied  it  with  a  propaganda  campaign
about  the  unwinnability  of  the  war  given  the  GVN's  ineptness  and;  then,  to
have  sought  negotiations  through  compromise  and  neutralization  when  the
bombing  failed.  Neither  of  these  options  was  ever  developed.

The  recommendation  of  the  Principals  to  the  President  left  a  gap  between  the
maximum  objective  of  NSAM  288  and  the  marginal  pressures  against  the  North
being  proposed  to  achieve  that  objective.  There  are  two  by  no  means  contra-
dictory explanations  of  this  gap.

One  explanation  is  the  way  in  which  pressures  and  the  controlled  use  of  force
were  viewed  by  the  Principals.  There  is  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  Principals
thought  that  carefully  calculated  doses  of  force  could  bring  about  predictable  and
desirable  responses  from  Hanoi.  The  threat  implicit  in  minimum  but  increasing
amounts  of  force  ("slow  squeeze")  would,  it  was  hoped  by  some,  ultimately
bring  Hanoi  to  the  table  on  terms  favorable  to  the  U.S.  Underlying  this  opti-
mistic view  was  a  significant  underestimate  of  the  level  of  the  DRV  commitment
to  victory  in  the  South,  and  an  overestimate  of  the  effectiveness  of  U.S.  pressures
in  weakening  that  resolve.  The  assumption  was  that  the  threat  value  of  limited
pressures  coupled  with  declarations  of  firm  resolve  on  our  part  would  be  suffi-
cient to  force  the  DRV  into  major  concessions.  Therefore,  the  U.S.  negotiating
posture  could  be  a  tough  one.  Another  factor  which,  no  doubt,  commended  the
proposal  to  the  Administration  was  the  relatively  low-cost — in  political  terms —
of  such  action.  Furthermore,  these  limited  measures  would  give  the  GVN  a
temporary  breathing  spell,  it  was  thought,  in  which  to  regroup  itself,  both  po-
litically and  militarily  should  stronger  action  involving  a  direct  confrontation
between  the  two  Vietnams  be  required  at  some  future  date.  And  lastly,  it  was
the  widely  shared  belief  that  the  recommendation  was  a  moderate  solution  that  did
not  foreclose  future  options  for  the  President  if  the  measures  did  not  fully  achieve
their  intended  results.  The  JCS  differed  from  this  view  on  the  grounds  that  if


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  113

we  were  really  interested  in  affecting  Hanoi's  will,  we  would  have  to  hit  hard  at  its
capabilities.

A  second  explanation  of  the  gap  between  ends  and  means  is  a  more  simple  one.
In  a  phrase,  we  had  run  out  of  alternatives  other  than  pressures.  The  GVN  was
not  reforming,  ARVN  was  being  hit  hard,  further  U.S.  aid  and  advice  did  not
seem  to  do  the  trick,  and  something  was  needed  to  keep  the  GVN  afloat  until
we  were  ready  to  decide  on  further  actions  at  a  later  date.  Bombing  the  North
would  fit  that  bill,  and  make  it  look  like  we  tried.

The  President  was  cautious  and  equivocal  in  approaching  the  decision.  Indica-
tive of  his  reluctance  to  widen  the  U.S.  commitment  and  of  his  desire  to  hedge
his  bets  was  the  decision  to  make  phase  II  of  the  new  policy  contingent  on  GVN
reform  and  improvement.  Ambassador  Taylor  was  sent  back  to  Saigon  in  De-
cember after  the  White  House  meetings  with  the  understanding  that  the  U.S.
Government  did  not  believe:

that  we  should  incur  the  risks  which  are  inherent  in  any  expansion  of
hostilities  without  first  assuring  that  there  is  a  government  in  Saigon  capable
of  handling  the  serious  problems  involved  in  such  an  expansion  and  of  ex-
ploiting the  favorable  effects  which  may  be  anticipated.  .  .  .

As  with  the  discussions  of  the  preceding  six  months,  the  decisions  at  the  end
of  1964  marked  another  step  in  the  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam.  The  following
is  a  summary  of  the  November-December,  1964  and  January,  1965  deliberations.

On  the  eve  of  the  November  election,  and  after  the  decision  not  to  retaliate
against  the  North  for  the  VC  attack  on  the  Bien  Hoa  airbase  on  November  1,
the  President  appointed  an  inter-agency  working  group  and  asked  it  to  conduct
a  thorough  re-examination  of  our  Vietnam  policy  and  to  present  him  with  al-
ternatives and  recommendations  as  to  our  future  course  of  action.  That  such  a
review  should  have  been  undertaken  so  soon  after  the  policy  deliberations  and
decisions  of  September  is  at  first  glance  surprising.  The  President,  however,  was
now  being  elected  in  his  own  right  with  an  overwhelming  mandate  and  all  the
sense  of  opportunity  and  freedom  tb  reconsider  past  policy  and  current  trends
that  such  a  victory  invariably  brings.  In  retrospect,  there  appears  to  have  been,
in  fact,  remarkably  little  latitude  for  reopening  the  basic  questions  about  U.S.
involvement  in  the  Vietnam  struggle.  NSAM  288  did  not  seem  open  to  question.
In  Vietnam,  our  now  substantial  efforts  and  our  public  affirmation  of  resolve  to
see  the  war  through  to  success  had  failed  to  reverse  either  the  adverse  trend  of
the  war  or  the  continuing  deterioration  of  South  Vietnamese  political  life.  The
September  deliberations  had  produced  only  a  decision  against  precipitate  action
and  had  done  nothing  to  redress  the  situation.  Significantly,  however,  they  had
revealed  the  existence  of  an  Administration  consensus  that  military  pressures
against  the  North  would  be  required  at  some  proximate  future  date  for  a  variety
of  reasons.  Now,  in  November,  with  a  new  electoral  mandate  and  the  abundant
evidence  of  the  inadequacy  of  current  measures,  the  President  was  once  again
looking  for  new  ideas  and  proposals — a  low-cost  option  with  prospects  for
speedy,  positive  results.

The  Working  Group's  first  job  had  been  to  examine  U.S.  interests  and  objec-
tives in  South  Vietnam.  This  subject  stirred  some  of  the  most  heated  debate  of
the  entire  Working  Group  Project.  At  the  outset,  the  maximum  statement  of  U.S.
interests  and  objectives  in  South  Vietnam  was  accompanied  by  two  fallback  posi-
tions— the  first  a  compromise,  the  second  merely  rationalizations  for  withdrawal.
The  JCS  representative  took  testy  exception  to  including  the  fallback  positions


114 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

in  the  Group's  paper  and  cited  JCS  Memoranda  on  the  critical  importance  of
South  Vietnam  to  the  U.S.  position  in  Asia.  His  forceful  objections  were  effec-
tive and  they  were  downgraded  in  the  final  paper  which,  while  also  pointedly  re-
jecting the  "domino  theory"  as  over-simplified,  nevertheless,  went  on  to  describe
the  effect  of  the  fall  of  South  Vietnam  in  much  the  same  terms.  Specifically
pointing  up  the  danger  to  the  other  Southeast  Asian  countries  and  to  Asia  in
general,  the  paper  concluded :

There  is  a  great  deal  we  could  still  do  to  reassure  these  countries,  but
the  picture  of  a  defense  line  clearly  breached  could  have  serious  effects  and
could  easily,  over  time,  tend  to  unravel  the  whole  Pacific  and  South  Asian
defense  structures.

In  spite  of  these  concessions,  the  JCS  refused  to  associate  itself  with  the  final
formulation  of  interests  and  objectives,  holding  that  the  domino  theory  was  per-
fectly appropriate  to  the  South  Vietnamese  situation.

One  of  the  other  important  tasks  assigned  to  the  Working  Group  was  the  in-
telligence assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  measures  against  the  North  in  im-
proving the  situation  in  the  South.  The  initial  appraisal  of  the  intelligence  com-
munity was  that  "the  basic  elements  of  Communist  strength  in  South  Vietnam
remain  indigenous,"  and  that  "even  if  severely  damaged"  the  DRV  could  con-
tinue to  support  a  reduced  level  of  VC  activity.  While  bombing  might  reduce
somewhat  the  level  of  support  for  the  VC  and  give  the  GVN  a  respite,  there  was
very  little  likelihood  that  it  would  break  the  will  of  Hanoi.  The  estimate  was
that  Hanoi  was  confident  of  greater  staying  power  than  the  U.S.  in  a  contest
of  attrition.  These  views  were  challenged  by  the  JCS  member  who  stressed  that
the  military  damage  of  air  strikes  would  appreciably  degrade  DRV  and  VC
capabilities.  In  deference  to  this  view,  the  final  Working  Group  estimate  gave
greater  emphasis  to  the  military  effectiveness  of  strikes,  although  it  was  pessi-
mistic about  the  extent  of  damage  the  DRV  leaders  would  be  willing  to  incur
before  reconsidering  their  objectives.  It  concluded  with  the  assessment  that  there
was  very  little  likelihood  of  either  Chinese  or  Soviet  intervention  on  behalf  of
the  DRV  if  pressures  were  adopted  by  the  U.S.

As  the  Working  Group  toiled  through  November  in  its  effort  to  develop  op-
tions, it  focused  on  three  alternative  courses  of  action.  Option  A  was  essentially
a  continuation  of  military  and  naval  actions  currently  underway  or  authorized
in  the  September  decisions,  including  prompt  reprisals  against  the  North  for
attacks  on  U.S.  forces  and  VC  "spectaculars."  It  also  included  a  resistance  to
negotiations  until  the  North  had  agreed  in  advance  to  our  conditions.  Option  B
augmented  current  policies  with  systematic,  sustained  military  pressures  against
the  North  and  a  resistance  to  negotiations  unless  we  could  carry  them  on  while
continuing  the  bombing.  Option  C  proposed  only  a  modest  campaign  against  the
North  as  compared  with  option  B  and  was  designed  to  bring  the  DRV  to  the
negotiating  table.  If  that  occurred  the  pressures  were  to  be  suspended — although
with  the  threat  of  resumption  should  negotiations  break  down.

In  the  course  of  the  month,  these  options  converged  and  the  distinctions  be-
tween them  blurred.  In  particular,  option  A  was  expanded  to  include  some  low-
level  pressures  against  the  North;  the  negotiations  element  of  option  B  was,  in
effect,  dropped  and  the  pressures  were  to  be  applied  at  a  faster,  less  flexible  pace;
and  option  C  was  stiffened  to  resemble  the  first  incarnation  of  option  B — the
pressures  would  be  stronger  and  the  negotiating  position  tougher.  Thus,  by  the
end  of  the  month  when  the  Working  Group's  proposals  were  presented  to  the
NSC  Principals  for  consideration  before  a  recommendation  was  made  to  the


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  115

President,  all  options  included  pressures  against  the  North,  and,  in  effect,  ex-
cluded negotiations  in  the  short-run,  since  the  terms  and  pre-conditions  proposed
in  all  three  options  were  entirely  unrealistic.  The  policy  climate  in  Washington
simply  was  not  receptive  to  any  suggestion  that  U.S.  goals  might  have  to  be
compromised.  And,  in  proposing  pressures  against  the  North,  the  Working  Group
was  conscious  of  the  danger  that  they  might  generate  compelling  world-wide
pressure  on  the  U.S.  for  negotiations.  How  large  a  role  the  specific  perception
of  the  President's  views,  validated  or  unvalidated,  may  have  played  in  the  Work-
ing Group's  narrowing  of  the  options  is  not  clear.  It  seems  likely,  however,  that
some  guidance  from  the  White  House  was  being  received.

During  the  last  week  in  November,  the  NSC  Principals  met  to  consider  the
Working  Group's  proposals.  They  were  joined  on  November  27  by  Ambassador
Taylor.  Taylor's  report  on  conditions  in  South  Vietnam  was  extremely  bleak.
To  improve  South  Vietnamese  morale  and  confidence,  and  to  "drive  the  DRV
out  of  its  reinforcing  role  and  obtain  its  cooperation  in  bringing  an  end  to  the
Viet  Cong  insurgency,"  he  urged  that  military  pressures  against  the  North  be
adopted.  His  report  had  a  considerable  impact  on  the  Principals  and  later  on
the  President.  As  the  discussions  continued  through  the  several  meetings  of  that
week,  opinion  began  to  converge  in  favor  of  some  combination  of  an  "extended
option  A"  and  the  first  measures  against  the  North  of  option  C.

In  the  end,  the  Principals  decided  on  a  two-phase  recommendation  to  the
President.  Phase  I  would  be  merely  an  extension  of  current  actions  with  some  in-
creased air  activity  by  the  U.S.  in  Laos  and  tit-for-tat  reprisals  for  VC  attacks
on  U.S.  forces  or  other  major  incidents.  During  this  period,  the  GVN  would
be  informed  of  our  desires  for  its  reform  and  when  these  were  well  underway,
phase  II,  a  campaign  of  gradually  escalating  air  strikes  against  the  North,  would
begin.  This  proposal  was  presented  to  the  President  on  December  1.  He  approved
phase  I  and  gave  assent,  at  least  in  principle,  to  phase  II.  In  approving  these
measures,  the  President  appears  to  have  been  reluctant  to  grant  final  authorization
for  phase  II  until  he  felt  it  was  absolutely  necessary.

If  a  consensus  was  reached  within  the  Administration  in  favor  of  military
pressures  against  the  North,  it  certainly  reflected  no  commonly  held  rationale
for  such  action.  Generally  speaking  the  military  (MACV,  CINCPAC,  JCS)  fa-
vored a  strong  campaign  against  the  North  to  interdict  the  infiltration  routes,  to
destroy  the  overall  capacity  of  the  North  to  support  the  insurgency,  and  to  de-
stroy the  DRV's  will  to  continue  support  of  the  Viet  Cong.  The  State  Depart-
ment (with  the  exception  of  George  Ball)  and  the  civilian  advisors  to  Secretary
McNamara  favored  a  gradually  mounting  series  of  pressures  that  would  place
the  North  in  a  slow  squeeze  and  act  as  both  carrot  and  stick  to  settling  the  war
on  our  terms.  As  would  be  expected,  State  was  also  concerned  with  the  interna-
tional political  implications  of  such  steps.  Bombing  the  North  would  demon-
strate our  resolve,  not  only  to  the  South  Vietnamese  but  also  to  the  other  South-
east Asian  countries  and  to  China,  whose  containment  was  one  of  the  important
justifications  of  the  entire  American  involvement.  Walt  Rostow,  the  Chairman
of  State's  Policy  Planning  Council,  took  a  slightly  differently  view,  emphasizing
the  importance  of  pressures  as  a  clear  signal  to  the  North  and  to  China  of  U.S.
determination  and  resolve  and  its  willingness  to  engage  the  tremendous  power
at  its  disposal  in  support  of  the  1954  and  1962  Geneva  agreements.  Ambassador
Taylor  supported  strikes  against  the  North  as  a  means  of  reducing  infiltration
and  as  a  way  of  bolstering  South  Vietnamese  morale.

As  is  readily  apparent,  there  was  no  dearth  of  reasons  for  striking  North.  In-
deed, one  almost  has  the  impression  that  there  were  more  reasons  than  were


116 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

required.  But  in  the  end,  the  decision  to  go  ahead  with  the  strikes  seems  to  have
resulted  as  much  from  the  lack  of  alternative  proposals  as  from  any  compelling
logic  advanced  in  their  favor.  By  January,  for  example,  William  Bundy,  while
still  supporting  the  pressures,  could  only  offer  the  following  in  their  favor:

on  balance  we  believe  that  such  action  would  have  some  faint  hope  of
really  improving  the  Vietnamese  situation,  and,  above  all,  would  put  us
in  a  much  stronger  position  to  hold  the  next  line  of  defense,  namely  Thai-
land. [And  it  would  put  us  in  a  better  position  in  our  Asian  relations]
since  we  would  have  appeared  to  Asians  to  have  done  a  lot  more  about
it.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  during  the  deliberations  of  September  one  of  the
preconditions  to  such  strikes  had  been  generally  acknowledged  as  a  unity  of
domestic  American  opinion  in  support  of  such  Presidentially  authorized  action.
During  the  November  debates,  this  is  no  longer  an  important  factor.  Indeed,  it
is  openly  conceded  that  such  action  is  likely  to  evoke  opposition  in  both  domestic
and  international  public  opinion.  Another  interesting  aspect  of  this  policy  debate
was  that  the  question  of  Constitutional  authority  for  open  acts  of  war  against  a
sovereign  nation  was  never  seriously  raised.

Phase  I  of  the  newly  approved  program  went  into  effect  in  mid-December.
The  BARREL  ROLL  "armed  recce"  by  U.S.  aircraft  in  the  Laotian  panhandle
began  on  a  limited  scale  on  December  14.  It  had  been  foreseen  that  the  number
of  sorties  would  slowly  increase  with  each  succeeding  week.  However,  once  the
first  week's  level  of  two  missions  of  four  aircraft  each  was  determined  by
Secretary  McNamara,  it  became  the  guideline  for  the  remainder  of  December
and  January.  Covert  GVN  operations  along  the  North  Vietnamese  coast  were
continued  at  about  the  level  of  the  previous  months  and  JCS  proposals  for  direct
U.S.  air  and  naval  support  were  rejected.  Furthermore,  the  public  disclosure  of
information  on  DRV  infiltration  into  the  South  was  deferred  at  the  request  of
Secretary  McNamara.  On  December  24,  the  Viet  Cong  bombed  a  U.S.  officers'
billet  in  Saigon  killing  two  Americans.  MACV,  CINCPAC,  the  JCS,  and  Ambas-
sador Taylor  all  called  immediately  for  a  reprisal  strike  against  the  North  of  the
kind  authorized  under  phase  I.  For  reasons  still  not  clear,  the  Administration
decided  against  such  a  reprisal.  Thus,  in  purely  military  terms,  the  phase  I  period
turned  out  to  be  little  more  than  a  continuation  of  measures  already  underway.
(The  BARREL  ROLL  activity  apparently  was  not  differentiated  by  the  DRV
from  RLAF  strikes  until  well  into  January.)

One  of  the  explanations  for  this  failure  to  fully  implement  the  December  1
decisions  was  the  political  crisis  that  erupted  in  South  Vietnam.  Ambassador
Taylor  had  returned  to  South  Vietnam  on  December  7  and  immediately  set  about
getting  the  GVN  to  undertake  the  reforms  we  desired,  making  clear  to  both  the
civilian  and  military  leaders  that  the  implementation  of  phase  II  was  contingent
on  their  efforts  to  revive  the  flagging  war  effort  and  morale  in  the  South.  For  his
efforts,  he  was  rewarded  with  a  military  purge  of  the  civilian  government  in  late
December  and  rumored  threats  that  he  would  be  declared  persona  non  grata.
The  political  crisis  boiled  on  into  January  with  no  apparent  solution  in  sight  in
spite  of  our  heavy  pressure  on  the  military  to  return  to  a  civilian  regime.  And,
while  Taylor  struggled  with  the  South  Vietnamese  generals,  the  war  effort  con-
tinued to  decline.

At  the  same  time  that  Taylor  had  been  dispatched  to  Saigon  a  vigorous  U.S.
diplomatic  effort  had  been  undertaken  with  our  Asian  and  NATO  allies  to  inform
them  of  the  forthcoming  U.S.  intensification  of  the  war,  with  the  expected


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  117


eventual  strikes  against  the  North.  The  fact  that  our  allies  now  came  to  expect
this  action  may  have  been  a  contributing  reason  in  the  February  decision  to
proceed  with  phase  II  in  spite  of  the  failure  of  the  South  Vietnamese  to  have
complied  with  our  requirements.  In  any  case,  it  added  to  the  already  considerable
momentum  behind  the  policy  of  striking  the  North.  By  the  end  of  January  1965,
William  Bundy,  McNaughton,  Taylor  and  others  had  come  to  believe  that  we  had
to  proceed  with  phase  II  irrespective  of  what  the  South  Vietnamese  did.

Clear  indication  that  the  Administration  was  considering  some  kind  of  escala-
tion came  on  January  25.  Ambassador  Taylor  was  asked  to  comment  on  a
proposal  to  withdraw  U.S.  dependents  from  Saigon  so  as  to  "clear  the  decks."
Previously,  this  action,  which  was  now  approved  by  the  JCS,  was  always  associ-
ated with  pressures  against  the  North.  While  there  is  no  indication  of  any
decision  at  this  point  to  move  into  phase  II,  it  is  clear  that  the  preparations  were
already  underway.

[End  of  Summary]


CHRONOLOGY

11  May  63 NSAM  52

Authorized  CIA-sponsored  covert  operations  against  NVN.

9  Sep  63 C  INC  PA  C  OPLA  N  34-63

JCS  approved  this  program  for  non-attributable  "hit  and  run"
GVN  covert  operations  against  NVN,  supported  by  U.S.  military
advisory  materiel  and  training  assistance.

I  Nov  63 Diem  overthrown

Military  junta  led  by  General  Minh  assumed  control.

20  Nov  63 Vietnam  Policy  Conference,  Honolulu

During  high-level  USG  discussions  of  the  probable  consequences,
political  and  military,  of  Diem's  downfall,  conferees  agreed  mili-
tary operations  against  the  Viet  Cong  had  not  been  and  would  not
be  particularly  upset  'by  the  changed  political  situation.  Develop-
ment of  a  combined  MACV-CAS  program  for  covert  operations
against  NVN  was  directed.

23  Nov  63 President  Kennedy  Assassinated

26  Nov  63 NSAM  273

Authorized  planning  for  specific  covert  operations,  graduated  in

intensity,  against  the  DRV.

II  Dec  63 State  Department  Views  on  Operations  in  Laos

State  (and  ISA)  opposed  overt  military  operations  in  Laos.  Ex-
tension of  CIA-sponsored  covert  activity  in  Laos  was  okayed:  this
neither  threatened  Souvanna's  sovereignty  nor  openly  violated
the  Geneva  Accords  which  State  termed  basic  to  eventual  political
stability  in  the  region.

19  Dec  63 OPLAN  34 A  Submitted  by  CINCPAC

The  MACV-CAS  plan  providing  a  "spectrum  of  capabilities  for
the  RVNAF  to  execute  against  North  Vietnam"  was  forwarded  to
the  JCS  with  CINCPAC's  comment  that  only  air  attacks  and  a
few  other  "punitive  or  attritional"  operations  were  likely  to
achieve  the  stated  objective  of  convincing  Hanoi  to  cease  sup-
porting insurgents  in  SVN  and  Laos.


118 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

30  Dec  63 Memo  for  the  Director,  CIA

Assessing  "Probable  Reactions  to  Various  Courses  of  Action  with
Respect  to  North  Vietnam"  the  Board  of  National  Estimates
studied  13  proposed  covert  operations.  The  BNE  did  not  think
any  would  convince  NVN  to  change  its  policies.  Hanoi's  reaction
to  them  was  forecast  as  mild.

2  Jan  64 Krulak  Committee  Report

"Least  risk"  activities  drawn  from  the  2062  in  OPLAN  34A
formed  the  basis  of  a  12-month,  three-phase  program  of  covert
operations.  MACV  would  exercise  operational  control,  CAS  and
CINCPAC  would  train  and  equip  the  GVN  or  third-nation  per-
sonnel involved.  Phase  One  (February-May)  included  intelligence
collection  (through  U-2  and  special  intelligence  missions),  psy-
chological operations  and  some  20  "destructive"  undertakings.
Similar  operations  would  be  increased  in  number  and  intensity
during  Phases  Two  and  Three;  destructive  acts  would  be  ex-
tended to  targets  "identified  with  North  Vietnam's  economic  and
industrial  well-being."  Committee  members  reasoned  that  Hanoi
attached  great  importance  to  economic  development,  that  progres-
sive damage  to  the  economy — or  its  threatened  destruction —
would  convince  Hanoi  to  cancel  support  of  insurgency.  But  the
committee  cautioned,  even  successful  execution  of  the  program
might  not  induce  Hanoi  to  "cease  and  desist."

22  Jan  64 JCSM  46-64

Criticizing  "self-imposed  restrictions"  on  operations  in  Laos,
arguing  that  Laotian  security  depended  on  that  of  South  Vietnam,
the  JCS  requested  authority  to  initiate  reconnaissance  operations
over  and  into  Laos.  Without  them  the  task  in  Vietnam  was  made
"more  complex,  time  consuming  .  .  .  more  costly."

30  Jan  64 Coup  in  Saigon

Minh's  junta  was  ousted  by  one  headed  by  General  Khanh.

Early  Situation  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam

Feb  64  NVA  troop  influx  into  Laos  rose  significantly  and  a  similar  rise

was  feared  in  SVN;  Viet  Cong  terrorism  continued  to  increase.

1  Feb  64 OPLAN  34 A

Phase  One  of  the  covert  activities  program  began.

20  Feb  64 Lodge  Msg.  to  McGeorge  Bundy

Ambassador  Lodge  urged  adoption  of  a  "carrot  and  stick"  ap-
proach to  North  Vietnam  (first  presented  to  Governor  Harriman
on  30  October  1963).  Lodge  envisaged  secret  contact  with
Hanoi  to  demand  NVN  cease  supporting  the  Viet  Cong.  In  ex-
change the  U.S.  would  offer  economic  aid  (especially  food  im-
ports). If  Hanoi  refused  the  offer,  previously  threatened  punitive
strikes  would  be  initiated.  The  U.S.  would  not  publicly  admit
to  the  attacks.


20  Feb  64


NSC  Meeting

President  Johnson  ordered  more  rapid  contingency  planning  for
pressures — covert  and  overt — against  North  Vietnam  and  ordered


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  119


pressures  shaped  to  produce  the  maximum  credible  deterrent
effect  on  Hanoi.

This  decision  reflects  the  convergence  of  ( 1 )  fear  that  the  Laos
situation  could  get  worse;  (2)  knowledge  that  this  would  affect
U.S.  operations  and  policies  in  Vietnam;  (3)  recognition  that
more  U.S.  military  assistance  to  the  GVN  was  required  to  exe-
cute OPLAN  34A;  (4)  and  the  increasing  articulation  by  policy
makers  (JCS,  SecState)  of  a  direct  relationship  between  the
challenge  of  halting  NVN  assistance  to  insurgents  and  broader
U.S.  strategic  interests.  Together,  these  factors  increased  the  at-
tractiveness of  proposals  for  punitive,  overt  actions  against  NVN.

25  Feb  64 Draft  Presidential  Memorandum

State  recommended  12  F-lOO's  be  deployed  to  Thailand  to  deter
further  NVN  activity  in  Laos  and  to  signal  U.S.  determination.

26  Feb  64 JCSM  159-64

"Steps  to  Improve  the  Situation  in  Southeast  Asia  with  Particular
Reference  to  Laos"  asked  authority  to  initiate  low-level  recon-
naissance flights  over  Laos  for  intelligence  collection  and  to  visibly
display  U.S.  power.  The  JCS  argued  the  "root  of  the  problem  is
in  North  Vietnam  and  must  be  dealt  with  there,"  but  if  operations
against  NVN  had  to  be  ruled  out,  operations  in  Laos  must  not  be.
They  urged  that  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  be  treated  as  an  in-
tegrated theatre.

29  Feb  64 Director,  DIA  Memorandum  for  the  Secretary

Reporting  on  "North  Vietnamese  Support  to  the  Viet  Cong  and
Pathet  Lao,"  DIA  said  certain  "intelligence  gaps"  related  to  kinds
and  amounts  of  arms,  supplies  and  men  infiltrating  SVN  through
Laos.  The  JCS  favored  closing  such  gaps  by  overt  military  opera-
tions; State  opposed.  .

1  Mar  64 Interim  Report:  "Alternatives  for  the  Imposition  of  Measured
Pressure  against  NVN"

An  Interagency  Study  Group  under  State's  Vietnam  Committee
listed  these  as  U.S.  objectives:  make  Hanoi  cease  support  of  the
Viet  Cong;  strengthen  GVN  and  Asian  morale  and  reduce  VC
morale;  prove  to  the  world  U.S.  determination  to  oppose  Com-
munist expansion.

Military  means  to  attain  those  objectives  were  explored — ranging
from  the  air  defense  of  Saigon  and  US/GVN  cross-border  opera-
tions to  the  massive  deployment  of  U.S.  ground  troops  and  air
strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  The  group  believed  unilateral  U.S.
actions  would  not  compel  Hanoi  to  call  off  the  Viet  Cong  (and
doubted  Hanoi  could  do  that  anyway);  operations  against  NVN
were  termed  no  substitute  for  successful  counterinsurgency  in
SVN.

However,  expanded  activity  could  demonstrate  U.S.  power,  de-
termination and  restraint  to  the  world,  reduce  somewhat  NVN
support  to  the  Viet  Cong,  cause  "some  reduction"  Viet  Cong
morale,  and  possibly  improve  the  U.S.  negotiating  position.  "New
U.S.  bolstering  actions"  in  South  Vietnam  and  considerable  im-
provement of  the  situation  there  were  required  to  reduce  VC


120 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

activity  and  make  victory  on  the  ground  possible,  according  to  the
report.

/  Mar  64 Embassy  Vientiane  Message  927  for  SecState

Reasoned  that  if  current  USG  policy  toward  Laos  is  changed
(e.g.,  if  the  Geneva  Accords  were  openly  violated),  large  numbers
of  U.S.  troops  will  eventually  be  required  to  enforce  political
stability.

2  Mar  64 JCSM  168-64

Requesting  "Removal  of  Restrictions  for  Air  and  Ground  Cross
Border  Operations,"  the  Joint  Chiefs  said  direct  action  had  to  be
taken  to  convince  NVN  the  U.S.  was  determined  to  eliminate
the  insurgents'  Laotian  sanctuary.  .  .  The  time  has  come  to
lift  the  restrictions  which  limit  the  effectiveness  of  our  military
operations."

2  Mar  64 JCSM  174-64

The  Chiefs  recommended  direct  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.
In  line  with  their  view  (JCSM  159-64)  that  the  root  of  the  prob-
lem was  North  Vietnam,  the  JCS  justified  the  need  for  overt
action  against  NVN  on  two  grounds:  first,  to  support  the  short-
term  policy  objective  of  stopping  Hanoi's  aid  to  the  insurgents;
second,  to  support  the  long-range  objective  of  forcing  a  change  in
DRV  policy  by  convincing  Hanoi  the  U.S.  was  determined  to  op-
pose aggression  in  Southeast  Asia.

15  Mar  64 Lodge  Msg.  for  the  President  {State  1757)

Reiterating  his  preference  for  the  "carrot  and  stick"  approach  to
Hanoi,  Lodge  opposed  initiation  of  overt  actions  against  North
Vietnam.

16  Mar  64 SecDef  Memo  for  the  President

Reporting  on  his  recent  trip  to  Honolulu  and  Saigon,  McNamara
recommended  against  overt  actions  (U.S.  or  GVN)  against  NVN
"at  this  time"  because  of  the  problems  of  justification,  communist
escalation  and  pressures  for  premature  negotiations.  McNamara
felt  the  practical  range  of  overt  actions  did  not  allow  assured
achievement  of  practical  U.S.  objectives.  (Like  the  Interagency
Group,  the  Secretary  distinguished  between  the  stated  aim  of
eliminating  Hanoi's  control  of  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  practical
objective  of  building  the  morale  of  the  Khanh  regime  while
eroding  VC  morale.)

The  Secretary  did  favor  military  action  against  NVN  in  Laos.  He
recommended  initiation  by  GVN  forces  of  "hot  pursuit"  and
small-scale  operations  across  the  Laotian  border,  plus  continua-
tion of  U.S.  high-level  reconnaissance  flights  over  Laos.  He
recommended  the  U.S.  prepare  planning  for  72-hour  readiness  to
initiate  Laos  and  Cambodian  border  control  actions  and  prepare
plans  for  "retaliatory  actions"  (overt  high  and/or  low  level  recon-
naissance flights,  "tit-for-tat"  bombing  strikes,  commando  raids)
against  NVN.  He  also  recommended  planning  for  30  days'  readi-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  121


ness  to  initiate  the  "program  of  Graduated  Overt  Military  Pres-
sure" against  North  Vietnam.*

17  Mar  64 N SAM  288

Approved  Mr.  McNamara's  report  and  his  twelve  recommenda-
tions to  improve  the  military  situation.  Planning  was  to  "proceed
energetically."

17  Mar  64 President's  Message  to  Lodge  {State  1454)

On  North  Vietnam,  the  President  indicated  agreement  with
Lodge's  "carrot  and  stick"  approach  and  said  he  had  reserved
judgment  on  overt  U.S.  measures  against  NVN.
On  Laos,  the  President  said  he  was  reluctant  to  inaugurate  overt
activities  unless  or  until  he  had  Souvanna's  support  and  a  stronger
case  had  been  made  for  the  necessity  of  overt  operations.  Other-
wise the  President  felt  such  action  ".  .  .  might  have  only  limited
military  effect  and  could  trigger  wider  Communist  action  in
Laos."

77  Mar  64 Lodge  Message  to  SecState  {State  1767)

Reported  GVN-RLG  agreement  on  political  and  military  issues.
Diplomatic  relations  had  been  reestablished.  Laos  granted  free
passage  into  southern  Laos  to  GVN  forces,  the  right  to  bomb  in-
filtration areas  with  unmarked  T-28s  and  to  conduct  hot  pursuit,
commando  raids  and  sabotage  operations  "without  limit"  into
Laotian  territory  to  combined  RLG-GVN  units.  A  combined
Laotian-Vietnamese  staff  was  to  be  created.

18  Mar  64 JCS  Message  5390  to  CINCPAC

The  JCS  directed  CINCPAC  to  begin  "Planning  Actions,  Viet-
nam" in  line  with  Recommendations  11  and  12  of  NSAM  288.
The  program  was  to  "permit  sequential  implementation"  of  three
actions  (border  controls,  retaliatory  cross-border  operations  with
72-hour  responsiveness,  graduated  overt  military  pressures  against
NVN  with  30-days  responsiveness).

20  Mar  64 President's  Message  to  Lodge  {State  1484)

Confirmed  that  actions  with  North  Vietnam  as  the  target  men-
tioned in  NSAM  288  were  regarded  strictly  as  contingency  plan-
ning and  that  interagency  study  was  so  oriented.

31  Mar  64 State /ISA  Draft  Scenarios

State  ISA  planners  presented  three  papers.  The  first  was  a  scenario
for  current  actions  (political  steps  to  increase  Congressional  and
international  understanding  of  U.S.  aims  plus  continued  military
action  by  GVN  with  U.S.  advisory  assistance).  The  second
scenario  called  for  overt  GVN/covert  U.S.  action  against  NVN
(characterized  by  the  GVN-USAF  FARMGATE  operation);  it
emphasized  political  initiatives  which  would  surface  in  Saigon
and  thus  retain  credibility  for  GVN  sovereignty. The  third


*  Here  McNamara  probably  referred  to  the  various  plans  for  graduated  pressure
against  NVN  then  being  discussed;  no  actual  "program"  had  yet  been  finalized  or
approved.


122 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

scenario — associated  with  overt  U.S.  response  to  DRV-CHICOM
escalation — also  included  diplomatic  and  political  preparations  for
overt  U.S.  activity.

13  Apr  64 J-5  Memorandum  for  the  ASD{ISA)

Commenting  on  the  31  March  scenario,  the  Joint  Staff  outlined  a
continually  intensifying  program  of  military  pressures — and  grad-
ually increasing  U.S.  military  involvement.  J-5  urged  the  31
March  scenario  be  fused  with  OPLAN  37-64  and  border  control
operations  be  moved  into  the  scenario  for  the  current  time  period.
Approximate  time-phasing  of  the  draft's  then  separate  scenarios
was  recommended.

8  and  17 Scenario  Drafts

Apr  64  Reflecting  the  JCS  influence  toward  development  of  a  continuous

scenario,  current  political  activities  were  treated  in  a  separate
section,  "Steps  Which  Should  be  Taken  Now."  The  other  political-
military  scenarios  included  increased  FARMGATE  operations,
separate  Laotian  and  Cambodian  border  control  actions,  separate
GVN  retaliatory  actions  against  NVN,  and  graduated  overt  U.S.
military  pressures  against  NVN.  The  detailed  scenario  for  GVN/
FARMGATE  operations  was  given  D-Day  minus  X  time-phasing;
apparently  it  was  the  basis  for  discussions  held  in  Saigon  on  19-
20  April.

18-20  Saigon  Conference

Apr  64  Scenarios  and  other  issues  were  discussed  by  Lodge,  William

Bundy,  Rusk,  Wheeler,  and  others.  Lodge  objected  to  planning
for — or  adopting — massive  publicity  and  massive  destruction  ac-
tions before  trying  a  well-reasoned,  well-planned  diplomatic  effort
to  convince  Hanoi  to  "call  off  the  VC."  His  "carrot/stick"  ap-
proach was  expanded:  Lodge  suggested  a  third  country  inter-
locuteur  be  selected  to  tell  Hanoi  of  U.S.  resolve,  that  the  threat
of  air  strikes  be  combined  with  an  economic  assistance  offer  and
that  as  part  of  the  "carrot"  the  U.S.  offer  to  withdraw  some  per-
sonnel from  South  Vietnam.

Rusk  wanted  the  extent  of  NVN  infiltration  and  support  to  be
satisfactorily  proved  to  U.S.  citizens,  allies  and  neutrals;  he
wanted  Asian  military  support  for  the  U.S.  Rusk  did  not  think
China  would  intervene  militarily  without  Soviet  support  and
thought  we  could  pressure  the  Chinese  economically  through  our
allies.  He  doubted  elimination  of  DRV  industrial  targets  would
have  much  adverse  impact  on  any  NVN  decision  to  stop  aiding
the  insurgency.

Results:  Canada  would  be  asked  to  act  as  interlocuteur.  Also,
Secretary  Rusk  recommended  the  U.S.  seek  "more  flags"  to  sup-
port the  GVN,  deploy  a  carrier  task  force  to  Cam  Ranh  Bay  to
establish  a  permanent  U.S.  Naval  presence,  initiate  anti-junk
operations  to  "inch  northward"  along  the  coast  and  enlist  SEATO
support  in  isolating  the  DRV  from  economic  or  cultural  rela-
tions with  the  Free  World.


23  Apr  64


SecDef  Memorandum  to  CJCS

This  forwarded  the  20  April  scenario  which  contained  three


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  123


stages:  uncommitting  steps  to  be  taken  now;  graduated  overt
pressures  on  the  DRV  (FARMGATE);  and  a  contingency  plan
for  overt  U.S.  response  to  DRV/CHICOM  escalation.  The  first
stage  could  stand  alone,  but  stage  two  could  not  be  launched  un-
less the  U.S.  was  prepared  to  take  the  third  step — perhaps  within
10  days  of  the  previous  "D-Day."

23  Apr  64 Rostow  Memorandum  for  SecState

Reasoning  that  deterioration  in  Laos  and  SVN  would  make  it
very  difficult  to  win  Hanoi's  adherence  to  the  Geneva  Accords
and  predicting  deterioration  was  imminent,  Rostow  implied  nec-
essary (U.S.)  actions  should  be  taken  soon.

30  Apr  64 Rusk  Visit  to  Ottawa

Set  up  the  Seaborn  Mission  (interlocuteur)  to  Hanoi  for  mid-
June.

4  May  64 Lodge  to  SecState  {State  2108)

This  reflects  the  deliberate,  cautious  approach  then  dominant.  In
talking  with  General  Khanh  (who  suggested  putting  SVN  fully  on
a  war  footing  and  wanted  to  tell  NVN  that  further  interference
in  GVN  affairs  would  bring  reprisals).  Lodge  urged  Khanh  to
keep  cool  and  asked  that  McNamara  similarly  emphasize  the  need
to  avoid  such  drastic  measures  during  his  12  May  meeting  with
Khanh.

7  May  64 Talking  Paper  for  the  Secretary

In  addition  to  the  Lodge  suggestions,  McNamara  was  to  tell
Khanh  the  U.S.  did  "not  intend  to  provide  military  support  nor
undertake  the  military  objective  of  'rolling  back'  communist  con-
trol in  NVN."

12—13  M cN amara/ Sullivan  Trip  to  Vietnam

May  64  Khanh  and  McNamara  met  and  apparently  discussed  the  issues

mentioned  above.  •

16  May  64 JCSM  422-64

JCS  criticized  the  final  draft  scenario  for  omitting  the  immediate
actions  mentioned  in  NSAM  288  (border  control  and  retaliatory
operations);  advocated  incorporating  retaliatory  and  overt  mili-
tary pressures  against  NVN  in  the  second  stage,  as  well  as  bat-
talion-size border  control  operations  in  Laos  to  include  striking
bridges  and  armed  route  reconnaissance.  These  were  justified  in
JCS  eyes  because  military  operations  against  the  DRV  to  help
stabilize  either  the  Laos  or  SVN  situation  involved  attacking  the
same  target  systems  and  to  a  large  extent,  the  same  targets.  JCS
felt 'attacks  would  assist  ".  .  .  in  the  achievement  of  the  objec-
tive" and  offer  ".  .  .  the  possibility  of  a  favorable  long-term  so-
lution to  the  insurgency  problem  in  Southeast  Asia."

17  May  64 Pathet  Lao  Offensive

The  Pathet  Lao  seized  a  significant  portion  of  the  Plaine  des
Jarres  in  Laos — a  major  setback  for  RLG  forces.

19  May  64 JCSM  426-64

Clearly  indicating  the  crisis  management  aspects  of  the  scene


124 Graxel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

created  b\  Pathet  Lao  gains,  the  JCS  now  called  for  new,  more
intensive  covert  operations  during  the  second  phase  of  OPLAN
34A.

21  May  64 At  the  US  .  .  .

Adlai  Stevenson's  major  speech  explaining  U.S.  policy  toward
Southeast  Asia  was  the  first  such  U.S.  move  at  the  UN.

21  May  64 Baltimore  Sun  Report

With  Souvanna's  permission,  the  U.S.  began  low -level  recon-
naissance operations  over  enemy-occupied  areas  in  Laos.

21  May  64 Rusk  Message  to  Lodge  (State  2027)

Rusk  said  Washington  saw  the  fragility  of  the  S\^^  situation  as  an
obstacle  to  further  U.S.  military'  involvement  in  Southeast  Asia.
He  asked  Lodge  to  suggest  ways  to  achieve  greater  solidarity  in
S\'N  saying,  "we  need  to  assure  the  President  that  evervihing
humanly  possible  is  being  done  both  in  Washmgton  and  the  Gov-
ernment of  Vietnam  to  provide  a  solid  base  of  determination  from
which  far-reaching  decisions  could  proceed."

23  May  64 JCSM  445-64

The  JCS  renewed  their  plea  for  prompt  "Readiness  to  Implement
NSAM  288."  Larger  border  control  and  retaliatorv  operations
were  called  for:  prompt  consultations  with  the  GXTs  and  im-
mediate joint  operations  were  said  to  be  needed.

23  May  64 Draft  Presidential  Memorandum

The  crisis  in  Laos  had  focused  interest  on  but  one  stage  of  earlier
scenarios:  overt  operations  against  N\'N.  The  scenario  for  steps
to  be  taken  now  had  been  dropped  (as  Rusk  explained  to  Lodge
on  22  May — State  2049 — because  initial  attacks  without  ac-
knowledgement were  not  feasible:  publicitv  seemed  inevitable).
The  scenario  called  for  30  davs  of  graduated  militarv  political
pressures  ( including  initiatives  to  enter  negotiations  with  Hanoi  i .
A  Congressional  Resolution  supporting  U.S.  resistance  to  DR\
aggression  was  called  for;  air  strikes  would  continue — despite
negotiations — until  it  was  clear  that  N\'N  had  ceased  subversion.
Negotiating  objectives  were:  terrorism,  armed  attack  and  armed
resistance  would  stop:  "communications  on  networks  out  of  the
North  would  be  conducted  entirely  in  uncoded  form."

25  May  64 SSIE  50-2-64

An  estimate  of  the  likelv  consequences  of  actions  proposed  in  the
23  May  DPM  (discussed  bv  the  Executive  Committee,  or  ExCom.
on  24.  25  and  26  May).  NVN  might  order  guerrillas  to  reduce
"the  level  of  insurrections  for  the  moment"  in  response  to  U.S.
force  deployments  or  FARMGATE  attacks:  with  Peking  and
Moscow.  Hanoi  might  count  on  international  actions  to  end  the
attacks  and  stabilize  communist  gains.  If  attacks  continued.  Hanoi
might  intensify  political  initiatives  and  possibly  increase  the  tempo
of  insurgency.  If  these  failed  to  bring  a  settlement  and  if  attacks
damaged  NVN  considerablv,  the  SNTE  estimated  NVN  would
lower  negotiating  demands  to  preserve  its  regime — and  plan  to
renew  insurgencv  later.  The  SNTE  saw  "significant  danger"  that


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  125


Hanoi  would  fight  because  (1)  NVN  did  not  think  the  U.S.
would  commit  ground  forces  and  (2)  even  if  U.S.  troops  were
sent,  NVN  believed  thev  could  be  defeated  a  la  1954.  Affecting
the  will  of  NVN  leaders  was  emphasized.  None  of  the  actions
forecast  in  the  DPM  would  affect  enemy  capabilities  because  the
major  sources  of  "communist  strength  in  SVN  are  indigenous."
The  SNIE  said  the  DRV  must  (be  made  to)  understand  "that  the
U.S. — not  seeking  to  destroy  NVN — is  willing  to  "bring  ascend-
ing pressure  to  bear  to  persuade  Hanoi  to  reduce  the  insurrections."
The  report  added  .  .  retaliatory  measures  which  Hanoi  might
take  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  might  make  it  increasingly  dif-
ficult for  the  U.S.  to  regard  its  objectives  as  attainable  by  limited
means.  Thus  difficulties  of  comprehension  might  increase  on  both
sides  as  the  scale  of  action  mounted."

25  May  64 McGeorge  Bundy  Memorandum  to  Rusk,  et  al.

The  ExCom  abandoned  the  scenario  approach — perhaps  because
entering  into  escalating  conflict  might  obscure  the  limited  U.S.
objectives.  The  ExCom  recommended  the  President  decide  that
the  U.S.  will  use  graduated  military  force  against  NVN  after  ap-
propriate diplomatic  and  political  warning  and  preparation;
evident  U.S.  determination  to  act — combined  with  other  efforts —
"should  produce  a  sufficient  improvement  of  non-communist
prospects  in  South  Vietnam  and  in  Laos  to  make  military  action
against  North  Vietnam  unnecessary."

OR:  The  ExCom  explicitly  assumed  that  a  decision  to  use  force
if  necessary — backed  by  resolute  deplovment  and  conveved  every
way  possible  .  .  gives  the  best  present  chance  of  avoiding  the
actual  use  of  such  force."  Other  actions  recommended  were:
communicate  U.S.  resolve  through  the  Canadian  interlocuteur;
call  a  high-level  Southeast  Asian  strategy  conference:  begin
diplomatic  efforts  at  th'e  UN  to  present  the  case  for  DRV  ag-
gression; consult  with  SEATO  allies  and  obtain  allied  force  com-
mitments; seek  a  Congressional  Resolution  in  support  of  U.S.
resistance  to  NVN  in  SEA;  deploy  forces  periodically  to  the
region;  consider  an  initial  strike  against  NVN  "designed  to  have
more  deterrent  than  destructive  impact"  and  accompany  it  by  an
active  diplomatic  offensive  to  restore  stability — including  an
agreement  to  a  Geneva  Conference.

26  May  64 Lodge  Message  to  Rusk  {State  2318)

Lodge  said  only  firm  action  against  North  Vietnam  by  the  U.S.
and  GVN  could  lead  to  a  significant  improvement  in  the  GVN
effort-.  (A  "new  wrinkle"  in  Lodge's  view.)

27  May  64 Polish  Initiative

Poland  proposed  a  Laos  conference  format  which  avoided  many
undesirable  aspects  of  those  formerly  supported  by  communist
governments.

29  May  64 State  Message  to  Rusk  {TOSEC  36)

The  ExCom,  preferring  to  initially  treat  Laos  independently  of
Vietnam,  recommended  the  President  accept  the  Polish  proposal.


126 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

The  U.S.  would  not  be  willing  to  write  off  Laos  to  the  communists
and  would  assure  Souvanna:  "We  would  be  prepared  to  give  him
prompt  and  direct  military  support  if  the  Polish  Conference  .  .  ."
failed.

30  May  64 JCSM  460-64

Advocating  "Air  Strikes  Against  North  Vietnam,"  the  JCS  felt
NVN  support  to  insurgents  could  be  reduced  by  armed  reconnais-
sance of  highways  leading  into  Laos,  striking  airfields  identified
with  supporting  insurgents,  striking  supply,  ammunition  and  POL
storage  sites  and  military  installations  connected  with  PL/VC
support.  The  JCS  said  Hanoi's  "military  capability  to  take  action
against  Laos  and  the  RVN"  would  result  from  hitting  "remain-
ing" airfields,  important  railroad  and  highway  bridges,  depots  in
northern  NVN  and  from  aerial  mining  and  bombing  of  POL
stores  in  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.  The  Chiefs  also  outlined  the
capability  to  effectively  destroy  the  entire  NVN  industrial  base.

2  Jun  64 JCSM  461-64  (CJCS  non-concurred)

Recommended  the  U.S.  seek  to  destroy  Hanoi's  will  and  capabil-
ities, as  necessary,  to  support  the  insurgency.  They  called  for
"positive,  prompt  and  meaningful  military  action" — mainly  air
strikes — to  show  NVN  "we  are  now  determined  that  (its  support
to  insurgency)  will  stop"  and  to  show  NVN  we  can  and  will
make  them  incapable  of  rendering  such  support.

2  Jun  64 SECTO  37

Rusk  reported  General  Khanh's  views:  Khanh  felt  the  GVN
could  not  win  against  the  Viet  Cong  without  some  military  action
outside  its  borders;  he  wanted  insurgent  forces  in  eastern  Laos
cleaned  out — by  GVN  forces  and  U.S.  air  support;  he  recom-
mended selected  air  attacks  against  NVN  "designed  to  minimize
the  chances  of  a  drastic  communist  response."

1-2  Jun  64 Honolulu  Conference

Conferees  assessing  overall  U.S.  policy  toward  Southeast  Asia
agreed  with  State  that  the  point  of  departure  ".  .  .  is  and  must
be  that  we  cannot  accept  (the)  over-running  of  Southeast  Asia  by
Hanoi  and  Peking."  "Operational" — not  policy — aspects  of  air
operations  against  NVN  were  the  main  points  of  discussion,  with
attention  centered  on  the  effect  of  pressures  in  Laos,  preparatory
steps  necessary  for  a  Laotian  contingency  and  probable  reper-
cussions.

Evaluating  possible  communist  reaction  to  pressures  against  NVN,
Mr.  McNamara  said  the  "best  current  view"  was  an  appropriately
limited  attack  against  NVN,  which  would  not  bring  CHICOM
air  or  NVN/CHICOM  ground  forces.  Westmoreland  felt  there
was  no  significant  unused  capability  left  to  the  VC;  Lodge  said
the  VC  had  a  major  capability  for  terrorism,  even  for  military
action  against  Saigon.  Like  Khanh,  Lodge  also  felt  selective  bomb-
ing would  build  morale  and  unity  in  South  Vietnam.
Results:  The  U.S.  would  seek  international  (beginning  with  U.S.-
Thai consultations)  and  domestic  support  (through  a  Congres-
sional Resolution)  for  wider  U.S.  actions.  ("Wider"  could  mean


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  127


committing  up  to  seven  U.S.  divisions  and  calling  up  the  reserves
.  .  as  the  action  unfolds.")  But  actual  expansion  of  the  U.S.
role  would  be  postponed  for  these  and  other  poUtico-mililary  rea-
sons.

3  Jiin  64 William  Biindy  Memorandum  for  SecState

The  report  to  the  President  on  Honolulu  was  probably  based  on
this  paper  in  which  Bundy  recapped  talks  there  and  called  for
time  to  "refine"  plans  and  estimates,  to  '"get  at"  basic  doubts
about  the  value  of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  importance  of  the  U.S.
stake  there.

Mid-Jun  64 Post-Honolulu  Military  Actions

Mr.  McNamara  discussed  NVN  targets,  troop  movement  capa-
bilities with  the  JCS  (8  June);  he  wanted  facts  and  statistics  on
Haiphong  tralfic,  existing  plans  for  and  estimated  impact  of  min-
ing the  harbor,  alternative  DRV  importation  facilities.  He  ordered
immediate  improvement  in  effectiveness  and  readiness  plus  some
expansion  of  prepositioned  stocks  in  Thailand  and  Okinawa.

Mid-Jun  64 Post-Honolulu  Non-Military  Activity

State  began  gathering  information  on  prevalent  public  questions
about  the  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  in  Southeast  Asia;  interagency  groups
studied  implications  of  a  Congressional  Resolution;  Rusk  (14
June),  President  Johnson  (23  June)  and  others  spoke  publicly  on
U.S.  goals  in  Asia,  U.S.  determination  to  support  its  Southeast
Asian  allies.

9  Jun  64 Memorandum  for  the  Director,  CIA

President  Johnson  asked:  "Would  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia
necessarily  fall  if  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  came  under  NVN
control?"  The  CIA  response  said  Cambodia  "might"  but  no  other
nation  "would  quickly  -succumb."  U.S.  prestige,  credibilitv  and
position  in  the  Far  East  would  be  profoundlv  damaged  but  the
wider  U.S.  interest  in  containing  overt  military  attacks  would  not
be  affected.  All  of  this  was  predicated  on  a  clear-cut  communist
victory  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  and  U.S.  withdrawal  from  the
area.  The  Agency  called  results  of  a  "fuzzy"  outcome  harder  to
evaluate.

10  Jun  64 SecDef  Memorandum  to  CJCS  (Response  to  CM-1451-64,  5  June

64)

McNamara  supported  Taylor's  criticism  of  JCSM  461-64  (2
June),  agreeing  that  the  two  courses  of  action  presented  by  the
Chiefs  were  neither  accurate  nor  complete.  Taylor  saw  three  ways
in  which  air  power  could  be  used  to  pressure  NVN — and  opted
for  the  least  dangerous.  He  recommended  demonstrative  strikes
against  limited  military  targets  to  show  U.S.  readiness  and  intent
to  move  up  the  scale  if  NVN  did  not  reduce  insurgent  support.
Up  the  scale  meant  moving  from  demonstrative  strikes  to  attacks
against  a  significant  part  of  the  DRV  military  target  system  and
ultimatelv,  to  massive  attacks  against  all  significant  military  tar-
gets in  NVN.  Bv  destroying  them  the  U.S.  would  destroy  NVN's
capacity  to  support  insurgency.


128 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

12  Jun  64 William  Bundy  Memorandum

Called  for  a  Congressional  Resolution  right  away  to  demonstrate
U.S.  resolve  (especially  to  Souvanna  and  Khanh)  and  provide
flexibility  for  executive  action.

75  Jun  64 McGeorge  Bundy  Memorandum  to  SecState,  SecDef,  et  al.

One  subject  was  made  the  agenda  for  final  talks  about  a  Congres-
sional Resolution:  actions  still  open  to  the  U.S.  if  both  major
military  operations  and  a  Congressional  Resolution  are  rejected  at
this  time.  White  House  guidance  indicated  that  by  taking  limited
military  and  political  actions,  the  U.S.  could  demonstrate  firm
resistance  without  risking  major  escalation  or  loss  of  policy  flexi-
bility.

McGeorge  Bundy  suggested  these  possible  limited  actions,  mili-
tary: reconnaissance,  strike,  T-28  operations  in  all  of  Laos;  small-
scale  reconnaissance  strikes — after  appropriate  provocation — in
NVN;  VNAF  strikes  in  Laotian  corridors;  limited  air  and  sea,
more  limited  ground  deployments.  (Bundy  said  major  ground
force  deployments  seem  more  questionable  without  a  decision
"to  go  north"  in  some  form.)  Political:  "Higher  authority"  wants
a  maximum  effort  to  increase  allied  real  and  visible  presence  in
support  of  Saigon;  make  intensive  efforts  to  sustain  Souvanna;
rapidly  develop  province  and  information  programs,  strengthen
the  country  team,  shift  the  U.S.  role  from  advice  to  direction;
opposing  both  aggressive  adventure  and  withdrawal,  explain  the
above  lines  of  action  (especially  in  the  U.S.)  and  leave  the  door
open  to  selected  military  actions.

Unless  the  enemy  provoked  drastic  measures,  the  ExCom  agreed
that  defense  of  "U.S.  interests  .  .  .  over  the  next  six  months"  is
possible  within  limits.  Both  a  Congressional  Resolution  and  wider
U.S.  action  were  deferred.

DESOTO  naval  patrols  off  North  Vietnam  reauthorized
Authority  was  given  to  resume  the  DESOTO  destroyer  patrols  off
North  Vietnam.  They  had  been  suspended  since  March.

Covert  GVN  attack  on  North  Vietnam

The  night  before  the  USS  MADDOX  is  to  resume  her  patrols  off
the  North  Vietnamese  coast.  South  Vietnamese  commandos  raid
two  North  Vietnamese  islands.

USS  MADDOX  resumes  patrol  off  North  Vietnam
After  a  six  month  suspension,  the  USS  MADDOX  resumed  the
DESOTO  patrols  off  the  coast  of  North  Vietnam.

British  seek  meeting  of  three  Laotian  princes

Acting  on  Souvanna  Phouma's  request,  the  British  government
urged  the  ICC  members  to  arrange  a  meeting  among  the  three
Laotian  political  factions  as  represented  by  the  three  rival  princes.

China  urges  USSR  not  to  resign  Geneva  co-chairmanship
The  Chinese  Communists  urged  the  USSR  not  to  carry  out  its
threat  to  abandon  its  co-chairman  role  in  the  Geneva  settlements,
apparently  viewing  such  a  development  as  jeopardizing  the  pos-
sibilities of  a  Geneva  settlement  of  the  current  Laotian  crisis.


77  Jul  1964
30  Jul  1964


31  Jul  1964

1  Aug  1964

2  Aug  1964


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  J 965  129
DRV  PT  boats  attack  MADDOX

Apparently  mistaking  the  MADDOX  for  South  Vietnamese,  three
DRV  patrol  boats  launched  a  torpedo  and  machine  gun  attack
on  her.  Responding  immediately  to  the  attack,  and  with  the  help
of  air  support  from  the  nearby  carrier  TICONDEROGA,  the
MADDOX  destroyed  one  of  the  attacking  boats  and  damaged
the  other  two.  The  MADDOX,  under  7th  Fleet  orders,  retired
to  South  Vietnamese  waters  where  she  is  joined  by  the  C.  TUR-
NER JOY.

3  Aug  1964 U.S.  protest  through  ICC

A  stiff  U.S.  protest  of  the  attack  on  the  MADDOX  is  dispatched
to  Hanoi  through  the  ICC.  It  warns  that  "grave  consequences"
will  result  from  any  future  attacks  on  U.S.  forces.

DESOTO  patrol  resumed

The  ICS  approved  a  CINCPAC  request  to  resume  the  DESOTO
patrol  at  1350  hours,  ordered  the  C.  TURNER  JOY  to  be  added
to  it  and  authorized  active  defensive  measures  for  the  destroyers
and  their  supporting  aircraft.  The  President  announced  the  action
later  that  day.

GVN  again  attacks  North  Vietnam

The  Rhon  River  estuary  and  the  Vinh  Sonh  radar  installation  were
bombarded  under  cover  of  darkness.

4  Aug  1964 Second  DRV  naval  attack  on  DESOTO  patrol

At  about  2140  hours,  after  several  hours  of  shadowing,  a  second
PT  boat  attack  on  the  augmented  DESOTO  task  force  was
launched.  This  engagement  in  the  dark  lasted  about  three  hours
and  resulted  in  two  patrol  boats  destroyed.

Reprisal  alerts

At  0030  hours  (5  Au'g  1964  Vietnam  time),  "alert  orders"  for
possible  reprisal  air  strikes  were  given  to  the  TICONDEROGA
and  a  second  carrier,  the  CONSTELLATION,  that  had  been
steaming  toward  the  area  from  Hong  Kong  since  Aug  3.

NSC  meeting

At  1230,  Washington  time,  the  NSC  convened  after  a  brief  meet-
ing of  the  ICS  with  the  President.  The  ICS,  McNamara  and  others
recommended  reprisals  against  the  patrol  craft  and  their  bases.
This  the  President  approved.

2nd  NSC  meeting

After  a  confusing  afternoon  in  which  the  attacks  were  double-
checked  and  verified,  the  NSC  met  again  at  1700,  confirmed  the
reprisal  order,  and  discussed  incremental  force  deployments  to
the  Western  Pacific.

Congressional  briefing

At  1845  the  President  met  with  16  Congressional  leaders,  briefed
them  on  the  proposed  attacks  and  informed  them  of  his  intention
to  ask  for  a  joint  Congressional  resolution  of  support.  None  raised
objections.


130 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


5  Aug  1964 U  Thant  calls  for  14-nation  conference  on  Laos

In  an  unrelated  development,  UN  Secretary  General  U  Thant
called  for  the  rescheduling  of  the  14-nation  conference  to  deal
with  the  Laotian  situation.

Presidential  message  to  Congress

In  a  formal  message  to  both  houses  of  Congress,  the  President
requested  passage  of  a  joint  resolution  of  support  for  U.S.  policy
in  Southeast  Asia.  Concurrently,  identical  draft  resolutions  pre-
pared by  the  executive  branch  were  introduced  in  the  Senate  by
Senator  Fulbright,  and  in  the  House,  by  Representative  Morgan.

6  Aug  1964 Tonkin  Gulf  Resolutions  discussed  in  committee

Both  houses  heard  top  Administration  officials,  including  Secretary
McNamara,  testify  in  behalf  of  the  pending  resolutions.

Force  deployments

The  additional  forces  deployments,  particularly  air  forces,  begin
to  move  to  the  theatre.

7  Aug  1964 Tonkin  Gulf  Resolution  passes  Congress

The  Tonkin  Gulf  resolution  was  passed  in  both  houses  by  near
unanimous  vote.

Khanh  proclaims  himself  President

Declaring  a  state  of  emergency.  General  Khanh  proclaimed  him-
self President  of  South  Vietnam  and  claims  virtual  dictatorial
powers.

State  message  136,  Rusk  to  Vietiane  and  others
Concern  over  not  provoking  a  communist  military  escalation  in
Laos,  particularly  in  view  of  the  Tonkin  Gulf  reprisals,  prompted
State  to  defer  temporarily  approval  of  air  and  ground  initiatives
in  the  Laotian  panhandle.

9  Aug  1964 Embassy  Saigon  message  363,  Taylor  to  Rusk

Taylor  opposes  a  14-nation  Geneva  Conference  as  likely  to  under-
mine the  little  stability  the  fragile  GVN  still  has.  He  further  states
that  the  reprisals,  while  effective  in  the  short  run,  do  not  deal
with  the  continuing  problem  of  DRV  infiltration  which  must  be
confronted.  He  felt  there  was  need  for  follow-up  action  to  demon-
strate to  the  DRV  that  the  rules  of  the  game  had  changed.

10  Aug  1964 U.S.  message  to  Hanoi  through  Canadian  ICC  representative

Through  the  Canadian  representative  on  the  ICC,  the  U.S.  com-
municated its  uncertainty  about  DRV  motives  in  the  Aug  4
Tonkin  Gulf  raids,  that  additional  air  power  deployed  to  SEA
was  precautionary,  that  U.S.  official  and  public  patience  was  wear-
ing thin,  that  the  Congressional  resolution  demonstrated  U.S.
determination  in  SEA,  and  that  if  the  DRV  pursued  its  present
course,  it  could  expect  to  suffer  the  consequences.

11  Aug  1964 William  Bundy  memo  to  SecDef,  "Next  Courses  of  Action  in

Southeast  Asia"

Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Bundy  felt  that  only  a  continuous
combination  of  military  pressure  and  communication  would  con-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  131

vince  Hanoi  that  they  were  facing  a  determined  foe  and  that  they
should  get  out  of  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.

14  Aug  1964  CJCS  memo  to  SecDef,  "Next  Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast
Asia"

Positive  assessment  of  the  impact  of  the  reprisal  actions  was  given
and  a  continuation  of  strikes  against  the  North  was  recommended.

State  message  439  to  Vientiane,  Saigon,  CINCPAC,  "Southeast
Asia,  August  1964"

In  opposing  both  a  new  14-nation  Geneva  Conference  on  South-
east Asia,  and  U.S.  air  operations  against  the  North,  State  stressed
the  shakiness  of  the  GVN  and  the  need  to  shore  it  up  internally
before  any  such  actions  were  started.  For  planning  purposes,  the
message  suggested  that  Ambassador  Taylor's  suggested  date  of
January  1,  1965,  be  used  for  any  sustained  U.S.  air  campaign
against  the  North.

75  Aug  1964  JCS  message  7947  to  CINCPAC,  "Rules  of  Engagement"

U.S.  forces  were  authorized  to  attack  any  vessels  or  aircraft  that
attack  or  give  positive  indication  of  intent  to  attack,  and  to  pur-
sue such  attackers  into  territorial  waters  or  air  space  of  all  South-
east Asian  countries,  including  North  Vietnam.

16  Aug  1964  COMUSMACV  message  to  CINCPAC,  "Cross-Border  Operations"

MACV  requested  authority  to  begin  the  Phase  I  of  the  covert
cross-border  operations  into  Laos  and  North  Vietnam.

17  Aug  1964 CINCPAC  message  to  JCS,  "Next  Courses  of  Action  in  South-

east Asia"

The  positive  impact  of  the  reprisals  on  South  Vietnamese  morale
is  noted,  and  a  strong  argument  made  for  continuing  actions
against  the  North  to  make  clear  to  Hanoi  and  Peking  the  cost  of
their  aggression.

The  momentum  of  the  Aug  5  raids  must  not  be  lost  or  the  benefits
of  the  initial  attacks  will  disappear.

18  Aug  1964  Embassy  Saigon  message  465

Taylor  reiterates  his  belief  that  the  reprisals  must  be  followed  up
with  other  actions  against  the  North.

21  Aug  1964  Henry  Rowen  memo  to  JCS,  et  al,  "The  Rostow  Thesis"

Initially  presented  in  Dec  1963,  the  "Rostow  Thesis"  was  recircu-
lated within  the  Administration  in  mid-August.  Its  fundamental
argument  was  that  military  pressure  against  the  external  sources
of  an  insurgency  would  bring  the  aggressor  to  an  appreciation  of
the  costs  of  his  interference  and  he  would  reduce  or  eliminate  his
support  for  the  insurgents.  The  exercise  was  primarily  psychologi-
cal, not  necessarily  strategic.  The  measures  should  greatly  increase
his  uncertainty  about  the  consequences  of  continued  support  of
the  insurgency.  Rowen's  critique  raised  serious  questions  about
the  general  validity  of  the  thesis,  pointing  out  the  requirement
for  solid  public  and  political  support  for  such  actions,  and  doubt-
ing that  anywhere  but  in  Southeast  Asia  U.S.  interests  were  so
critically  at  stake.  Even  in  that  area,  it  doubted  the  effectiveness
of  the  proposal.


132 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

26  Aug  1964  JCSM-746-64

In  response  to  State's  Aug  14  analysis,  the  ICS  proposed  a  con-
tinuous and  escalating  air  campaign  against  the  North  designed  to
both  the  physical  resources  and  the  psychological  will  to  support
the  insurgency  in  the  South.  It  called  for  deliberate  attempts  to
provoke  the  DRV  into  actions  which  could  then  be  answered  by
a  systematic  air  campaign.

27  Aug  1964 Three  Laotian  Princes  meet

The  three  Laotian  Princes  met  in  Paris  as  a  result  of  the  British
initiative  to  begin  discussions  on  the  current  crisis.

31  Aug  1964  CINCPAC  message  to  JCS,  "Immediate  Actions  to  be  taken  in
South  Vietnam"

CINCPAC  reiterates  the  request  for  approval  of  covert  cross-
border  operations.

3  Sep  1964 McNaughton  paper,  "Plan  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam"

In  anticipation  of  the  7  September  strategy  meeting,  McNaughton
prepared  a  paper  calling  for  actions  that  would  provoke  a  DRV
response  that  could  be  used  as  grounds  for  a  U.S.  escalation.

Khanh  reverts  to  Premiership

His  bid  for  dictatorial  power  having  been  rebuffed  by  the  Army
with  popular  support,  Khanh  reverted  to  his  former  title  of
Premier  with  greatly  reduced  power.  Minh  is  to  play  a  larger  role.

7  Sep  1964  JCS  Talking  Paper  for  CJCS,  "Next  Courses  of  Action  for  RVN"
The  JCS  repeated  its  recommendations  of  26  Aug  and  detailed
it  with  a  list  of  94  targets  for  air  strikes.

White  House  strategy  meeting;  decisions  in  William  Bundy  memo
to  SecDef,  et  al.,  "Courses  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam,"  8  Sep
1964

With  Ambassador  Taylor  returned  from  Saigon,  a  full  dress  strat-
egy review  of  actions  against  the  North  is  held  at  the  White
House.  The  Pentagon  spokesmen,  both  military  and  civilian,
favored  immediate  initiation  of  an  escalatory  air  campaign  against
the  North.  But  this  was  rejected  on  the  grounds  that  the  GVN
was  too  weak  to  sustain  the  expected  intensification  of  the  war  in
the  South  it  would  evoke.  This  was  the  view  of  CIA,  State  and
the  White  House.  But  a  decision  was  made  to  resume  the  DESOTO
patrols,  the  covert  GVN  coastal  operations  against  the  North,
and  to  authorize  limited  cross-border  operations  into  Laos  when
Souvanna  approved.  It  was  further  agreed  that  we  would  respond
to  any  future  DRV  attacks  on  U.S.  units  on  a  tit-for-tat  basis.
These  latter  measures  were  to  bolster  GVN  morale.

10  Sep  1964 NSAM  314

Formal  approval  of  the  7  September  decision  was  given  in  NSAM
314.

//  Sep  1964 Saigon  meeting  on  cross-border  operations

At  a  Saigon  meeting  of  representatives  of  the  U.S.  missions  in
Laos,  Thailand,  and  Vietnam,  it  was  agreed  that  the  air  opera-
tions in  Southern  Laos  would  be  carried  out  by  RLAF  aircraft


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  133

for  the  present.  As  to  ground  operations,  while  their  desirability
was  recognized,  they  were  disapproved  because  of  the  flagrant
violation  of  the  Geneva  Accords  they  would  constitute.  This
objection  by  Vientiane  was  subsequently  removed  and  company-
size  operations  up  to  20  kilometers  into  Laos  were  approved.

12  Sep  1964 DESOTO  patrols  resumed

The  destroyers  USS  MORTON  and  USS  EDWARDS  resumed
the  DESOTO  patrols  off  North  Vietnam.

18  Sep  1964 3rd  Tonkin  Gulf  incident

On  the  night  of  the  18th,  the  third  incident  in  the  DESOTO
patrols  occurred.  The  two  destroyers  fired  on  radar  identified  at-
tackers and  apparently  scored  a  number  of  hits.  No  return  fire
was  received  from  the  "attackers."  Later  on  the  18th  the  Presi-
dent suspended  the  DESOTO  patrols  which  were  not  to  be  re-
sumed until  February  1965.

30  Sep  1964 CJCS  memo  to  SecDef,  "Cross-Border  Operations"

The  CJCS  endorsed  the  proposals  of  the  mission  representatives
and  requested  immediate  authority  to  implement  air  operations
in  the  Laotian  panhandle  with  RLAF  T-28s  and  U.S.  aircraft  for
suppressive  fire  and  attacking  heavily  defended  targets.  Authority
for  GVN  ground  intelligence  acquisition  patrols  in  the  Laotian
corridor  was  also  sought.

1  Oct  1964 SNIE  53-2-64

The  deterioration  of  GVN  morale  and  effectiveness  continued
unabated  and  this  intelligence  estimate  did  not  think  that  the
hoped  for  civilian  government  would  be  able  to  reverse  it.  The  VC
were  not,  however,  expected  to  make  an  overt  military  effort  to
capture  the  government.

4  Oct  1964 Covert  GVN  coastal  operations  against  DRV  again  authorized

The  President  authorized  reactivation  of  the  covert  coastal  strikes
by  the  GVN  against  the  DRV,  under  very  tight  controls  with
each  action  to  be  cleared  in  advance  by  OSD,  State  and  the  White
House.

6  Oct  1964 Joint  State /Defense  message  313  to  Vientiane

The  Embassy  is  authorized  to  urge  the  Laotian  Government  to
begin  T-28  strikes  as  soon  as  possible  against  a  22-target  list
which  excluded  the  Mu  Gia  pass.  Some  of  the  targets  were  de-
signed for  U.S.  YANKEE  TEAM  strikes.

9  Oct  1964 SNIE  10-3-64

In  the  evaluation  of  the  likely  North  Vietnamese  reactions  to
the  actions  approved  in  the  September  7  meeting,  CIA  concluded
that  these  would  probably  be  limited  to  defensive  and  propaganda
measures  with  possibly  some  scaling  down  of  operations  in  the
South.  China  was  not  expected  to  enter  the  war  as  a  result  of
even  a  systematic  U.S.  air  campaign  against  the  North.

Embassy  Saigon  message  1068,  Taylor  to  Rusk
Taylor  reported  that  the  ARVN  would  be  unable  to  conduct
ground  operations  in  the  Laotian  corridor  in  the  foreseeable  fu-
ture and  therefore  U.S.  air  operations  are  urged.  At  a  minimum,


134 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

combat  air  patrols  supporting  RLAF  strike  missions  were  re-
quested.

13  Oct  1964 Embassy  Vientiane  message  609,  Unger  to  Rusk  and  McNamara

U.S.  air  strikes  against  four  defended  targets  are  requested  to
accompany  RLAF  T-28  strikes  in  the  northern  panhandle.

Washington  approves  only  combat  air  patrols

Washington,  responding  to  Unger's  request,  authorized  only  U.S.
combat  air  patrols  in  support  of  the  RLAF  operations,  not  the
U.S.  strikes.  U.S.  air  strikes  against  communist  LOCs  in  the  pan-
handle are  not  authorized  until  much  later.

14  Oct  1964 RLAF  makes  initial  U.S.  supported  attacks

The  RLAF,  with  U.S.  aircraft  in  combat  air  patrol  support,  make
the  first  strikes  against  the  communist  LOCs  in  the  panhandle.

16  Oct  64 Embassy  Saigon  Message,  J  PS  303,  Taylor  to  the  President

Ambassador  Taylor  reports  greatly  increased  infiltration  from  the
North,  including  North  Vietnamese  regulars,  and  a  steadily  wors-
ening situation  in  the  South.

21  Oct  64 JCSM  893-64

The  JCS  urge  Secretary  McNamara  to  back  military  measures  to
seize  control  of  the  border  areas  of  South  Vietnam  and  to  cut  off
the  supply  and  direction  of  the  Viet  Cong  by  direct  measures
against  North  Vietnam.

27  Oct  64 JCSM  902-64

On  the  basis  of  the  new  intelligence  on  infiltration  levels,  the  JCS
again  recommend  direct  military  pressures  against  the  North.

1  Nov  64 Viet  Cong  Attack  Bien  Hoa  Air  base

In  a  daring  strike,  the  Viet  Cong  staged  a  mortar  attack  on  the
large  U.S.  airbase  at  Bien  Hoa,  kilHng  four  Americans,  destroying
five  B-57s,  and  damaging  eight  others.

White  House  Decides  Not  to  Retaliate

Concerned  about  possible  further  North  Vietnamese  escalation
and  the  uncertainty  of  the  Red  Chinese  response,  the  White
House  decides,  against  the  advice  of  Ambassador  Taylor,  not  to
retaliate  in  the  tit-for-tat  fashion  envisaged  by  NSAM  314.  As
a  result  of  the  attack,  however,  an  interagency  Working  Group
of  the  NSC  is  established  to  study  future  courses  of  U.S.  action
under  the  Chairmanship  of  William  Bundy,  Assistant  Secretary  of
State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs.

3  Nov  64 Civilian  Named  Premier

Tran  Van  Huong  is  named  Premier  in  SVN.

First  Meeting  of  NSC  Working  Group

The  NSC  Working  Group  held  its  first  meeting.  Other  members
are  Michael  Forrestal  and  Marshall  Green  from  State,  John  Mc-
Naughton  from  ISA,  Harold  Ford  for  CIA,  and  Admiral  Lloyd
xMustin  from  JCS.  Work  continues  for  three  weeks.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  135
President  Re-elected

In  a  landslide  victory,  President  Johnson  is  re-elected  with  a  new
Vice  President,  Hubert  Humphrey.

4  Nov  64 JCSM  933-64

The  JCS  place  in  writing  their  request  for  reprisal  action  against
North  Vietnam  in  retaliation  for  the  Bien  Hoa  attack.  Failure  to
act  may  be  misinterpreted  by  the  North  Vietnamese  as  a  lack  of
will  and  determination  in  Vietnam.

14  Nov  64  CGCS  Memorandum  to  SecDef,  CM  258-64;  and  JCSM  955-64
In  separate  memos  to  the  Secretary,  the  JCS  recommend  covert
GVN  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  and  additional  U.S.  de-
ployments to  South  East  Asia  to  make  possible  implementation  of
U.S.  strikes  should  these  be  approved.

17  Nov  64 Working  Group  Circulates  Draft  "Options"  for  Comment

The  Working  Group  circulates  its  draft  paper  on  the  "Options"
available  to  the  U.S.  in  South  Vietnam.  They  are  three:  (A)
continuation  of  present  policies  in  the  hope  of  an  improvement  in
the  South  but  strong  U.S.  resistance  to  negotiations;  (B)  strong
U.S.  pressures  against  the  North  and  resistance  of  negotiations
until  the  DRV  was  ready  to  comply  with  our  demands;  and  (C)
limited  pressures  against  the  North  coupled  with  vigorous  efforts
to  get  negotiations  started  and  recognition  that  we  would  have  to
compromise  our  objectives.  Option  B  is  favored  by  the  Working
Group.

18  Nov  64 JCSM  967-64

The  JCS  renews  its  recommendation  for  strikes  against  the  North
tempering  it  slightly  in  terms  of  "a  controlled  program  of  sys-
tematically increased  military  pressures."

21  Nov  64 Revised  Working  Group  Draft

Having  received  comments  from  the  different  agencies,  the  Work-
ing Group  revises  its  draft  slightly,  takes  note  of  different  view-
points and  submits  its  work  to  the  NSC  Principals  for  their  con-
sideration.

23  Nov  64 Rostow  Memo  to  SecState

Taking  a  somewhat  different  tack,  the  then  Director  of  State's
Policy  Planning  Staff,  W.  W.  Rostow,  proposes  military  pressures
against  the  North  as  a  method  of  clearly  signaling  U.S.  determina-
tion and  commitment  to  the  North.

24  Nov  64 NSC  J^rinci pals  Meeting

No  consensus  is  reached,  but  Option  A  is  generally  rejected  as
promising  only  eventual  defeat.  Option  B  is  favored  by  the  JCS
and  CIA,  while  State  and  OSD  favor  Option  C.  No  firm  conclu-
sion is  reached  on  the  issue  of  sending  ground  troops  to  South
Vietnam.


27  Nov  64


Taylor  Meets  with  Principals

Having  returned  for  consultations.  Ambassador  Taylor  meets  with


136 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III


the  NSC  Principals  and  after  giving  a  gloomy  report  of  the  situa-
tion in  South  Vietnam,  recommends  that  to  shore  up  the  GVN
and  improve  morale  we  take  limited  actions  against  the  North  but
resist  negotiations  until  the  GVN  is  improved  and  the  DRV  is
hurting.  He  proposed  an  extended  Option  A  with  the  first  stages
of  Option  C.  This  proposal  was  adopted  by  the  Principals  as  the
recommendation  to  be  made  to  the  President.

28  Nov  64 NSC  Principals  Meeting

In  a  follow-up  meeting,  the  Principals  decide  to  propose  a  two
phase  program  to  the  President.  The  first  phase  would  be  a  thirty-
day  period  of  slightly  increased  pressure  such  as  the  resumption
of  the  DE  SOTO  patrols  and  U.S.  armed  recce  on  the  Laotian  cor-
ridor while  we  tried  to  get  reforms  in  South  Vietnam.  The  second
phase  would  involve  direct  air  strikes  against  the  North  as  in
Option  C.  William  Bundy  was  charged  with  preparing  a  draft
NSAM  to  this  effect  and  an  infiltration  study  was  commissioned.

30  Nov  64 NSC  Principals  Meeting

Meeting  to  review  the  draft  prepared  by  Bundy,  the  Principals  de-
cided not  to  call  it  a  NSAM.  Its  provisions  are  those  recommended
on  28  Nov.  Phase  II  would  be  a  graduated  and  mounting  set  of
primarily  air  pressures  against  the  North  coupled  with  efforts  to
sound  out  the  DRV  on  readiness  to  negotiate  on  U.S.  terms.  A
recommendation  on  linking  U.S.  actions  to  DRV  infiltration  is
deleted.

White  House  Meeting

While  the  exact  decisions  made  at  this  meeting  of  the  Principals
with  the  President  are  not  available,  it  is  clear  that  he  approved
in  general  terms  the  concept  outlined  in  the  Bundy  paper.  He  gave
his  approval  for  implementation  of  only  Phase  I,  however.  The
President  stressed  the  need  for  Taylor  to  get  improvement  from  the
GVN  and  the  need  to  brief  our  allies  on  our  new  course  of  action,
and  to  get  more  assistance  from  them  in  the  conflict.

Taylor  Meets  President

The  President  meets  privately  with  Taylor  and  gives  him  instruc-
tions that  he  is  to  explain  the  new  program  to  the  GVN,  indicate
to  its  leaders  that  the  Phase  II  U.S.  strikes  against  the  North  are
contingent  on  improvement  in  the  South,  and  explain  that  these
will  be  cooperative  efforts.

Cooper  Report  on  Infiltration

A  thorough  study  on  North  Vietnamese  infiltration  as  commis-
sioned by  the  Principals  is  submitted  to  the  NSC  and  later  for-
warded to  Saigon.  Decisions  on  its  release  are  continually  deferred.

Taylor  Meets  with  Premier  Huong

The  day  after  his  return  to  Saigon,  Taylor  meets  with  Premier
Huong  and  with  General  Khanh  and  outlines  the  new  U.S.  policy
and  states  the  requirements  this  places  on  the  GVN.

Prime  Minister  Wilson  briefed

In  Washington  on  a  state  visit,  British  Prime  Minister  Wilson  is
thoroughly  briefed  on  the  forthcoming  U.S.  actions.  On  4  Dec,


1  Dec  64


3  Dec  64


4  Dec  64


7  Dec  64


7-9  Dec  64


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  137


William  Bundy  had  gone  to  New  Zealand  and  Australia  to  present
the  new  policy  and  seek  support.  Other  envoys  were  meeting  with
the  remaining  Asian  allies.

9  Dec  64 Second  Taylor-H uong-Khanh  Meeting

At  a  second  meeting  with  Huong  and  Khanh,  Taylor  presents  a
detailed  set  of  actions  he  desires  the  GVN  to  take  to  improve  the
situation  and  receives  agreement  from  the  two  leaders.

10  Dec  64 Souvanna  Phouma  Approves  U.S.  Laos  Strikes

The  U.S.  proposal  for  armed  air  recce  over  the  Laotian  corridor  is
presented  to  Souvanna  Phouma  who  gives  his  assent.

11  Dec  64 GVN  Announces  Greater  Efforts

Complying  with  Taylor's  request,  the  GVN  announces  stepped-up
efforts  to  improve  the  campaign  against  the  VC  and  to  reform  the
government.

12  Dec  64 SecDef  Approves  JCS  Proposal  for  Naval  Actions

The  Secretary  approves  a  JCS  proposal  for  shore  bombardment,
naval  patrols  and  offshore  aerial  recce  for  the  first  thirty  days.  A
decision  on  the  Phase  II  was  deferred.

NSC  Principals  Approve  Armed  recce  in  Laos
As  planned,  the  NSC  approved  armed  air  recce  over  the  Laotian
corridor  with  the  exact  number  and  frequency  of  the  patrols  to  be
controlled  by  SecDef.

14  Dec  64 BARREL  ROLL  Begins

The  first  sorties  of  U.S.  aircraft  in  the  "armed  recce"  of  the  Laotian
corridor,  known  as  BARREL  ROLL,  take  place.  They  mark  the
beginning  of  the  thirty-day  Phase  I  of  the  limited  pressures.

18  Dec  64 Level  of  Laotian  Missions  Set

Secretary  McNamara  sets  two  missions  of  four  aircraft  each  as  the
weekly  level  of  BARREL  ROLL  activity.

1 9  Dec  64 NSC  Principals  Meeting

The  NSC  Principals  approve  McNamara's  recommendation  that
BARREL  ROLL  missions  be  held  at  constant  levels  through  Phase
I.  It  is  revealed  that  adverse  sea  conditions  have  brought  maritime
operations  against  the  DRV  to  a  virtual  halt.  At  McNamara's  in-
sistence it  is  agreed  that  the  infiltration  study  will  not  be  made
public.

Khanh  Purges  Civilian  Government

Late  in  the  evening,  the  military  high  command,  led  by  Khanh,
moved  to  remove  all  power  from  the  civilian  regime  of  Premier
Huong  by  dissolving  the  High  National  Council.  Khanh  assumes
power.

20  Dec  64 Taylor  Meets  With  ARVN  Leaders

In  a  meeting  with  the  leading  South  Vietnamese  military  officers,
Taylor  once  again  outlined  the  actions  required  from  the  GVN
by  the  U.S.  before  Phase  II  could  be  started.

22  Dec  64 Khanh  Publicly  Repudiates  Taylor

After  having  given  initial  appearances  of  understanding  the  dif-


138 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

ficultv  that  the  mihtary  purge  placed  the  U.S.  in.  Khanh  on  Dec.
22  holds  a  news  conference  and  states  that  the  military  is  resolved
not  to  carrv  out  the  policy  of  any  foreign  power.

24  Dec  64 Rumors  oj  Taylor  s  Expulsion

Rumors  are  received  by  the  Embassy  that  Khanh  intends  to  have
Tavlor  declared  persona  non  grata.  Vigorous  U.S.  efforts  to  dis-
suade him  and  the  use  of  Phase  II  as  leverage  cause  Khanh  to
reconsider.

U.S.  BOO  Bombed:  Embass\  Saigon  Message  1939:  CIS  CP  AC
Message  to  ICS.  26  Dec:  JCSM  1076-64

In  a  terror  attack  this  Christmas  Eve.  the  \'C  bomb  a  U.S.  BOQ
in  Saigon.  Two  U.S.  officers  are  killed,  58  injured.  Tavlor  urges
reprisals  against  the  North.  He  is  supported  bv  CINCPAC  and
the  JCS.

\SC  Principals  Meeting

At  the  meeting  of  the  NSC  Principals,  a  decision  against  reprisals
for  the  barracks  bombing  is  taken  in  spite  of  the  strong  recom-
mendations above.  At  the  same  meeting,  ISA  reponed  the  readi-
ness of  the  Philippines.  ROK.  and  GRC  to  send  military  assistance
to  South  Vietnam.

Embassy-  Saigon  Message  2010

Taylor  proposes  going  forward  with  the  Phase  II  U.S.  strikes
against  the  North  in  spite  of  the  political  crisis  in  the  South  and
under  any  conceivable  U.S.  relations  with  the  G\"N  shon  of  com-
plete abandonment.

CJCS  Mem.o  to  DepSecDej.  CM  347-64

The  JCS  recommend  the  addition  of  several  air  missions  to  already
approved  operations,  including  two  air  strikes  bv  unmarked  \'NAF
aircraft  against  the  North,  and  U.S.  air  escort  for  returning  G\'N
naval  craft.

3  Jan  65  Rusk  TV  Interview

Secretar}'  Rusk  appears  on  a  Sunday  T\'  inteniew  program  and
defends  U.S.  policy,  ruling  out  either  a  U.S.  withdrawal  or  a  major
expansion  of  the  war.  The  public  and  Congressional  debate  on
the  war  had  heaiec  ur  considerablv  since  the  Arm)  take-over  in
South  Vietnam  in  Decer/Z^er.  The  debate  continues  through  Jan-
uar\'  with  Senator  Morse  the  most  vocal  and  sharpest  critic  of  the
Administration.

Soviets  call  wr  nev.  Conference  on  Laos

Renewing  their  earlier  effons.  the  Soviets  call  again  for  a  confer-
ence on  the  Laotian  problem.

SSC  Principals  Meet

The  Principals  disapprove  the  JCS  recommendation  for  \'NAF
strikes  with  unmarked  aircraft  against  the  North.  The  JCS  voice
concern  at  the  failure  to  begin  pFanning  for  Phase  II  of  the  pres-
sures program.  But  no  decision  to  go  ahead  is  taken.

H'illiam  Bundy  Memo  to  Rusk

In  view  of  the  continued  deterioration  of  the  situation  in  the  South
and  the  prevailing  view  that  the  U.S.  was  going  to  seek  a  way  out.


29  Dec  64


31  Dec  64


4  Jan  65


5  Jan  65


6  Jan  65


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  139


Bundy  recommended  some  limited  measures,  short  of  Phase  II  (i.e.
recce,  a  reprisal,  evacuation  of  U.S.  dependents,  etc.),  to  strengthen
our  hand.  There  were  risks  in  this  course  but  it  would  improve  our
position  with  respect  to  the  other  SEA  nations  if  things  got  rapidly
worse  in  SVN  and  we  had  to  contemplate  a  withdrawal.

8  Jan  65 First  Korean  Troops  Go  to  South  Vietnam

The  first  contingent  of  2,000  South  Korean  troops  leave  for  South
Vietnam.

9  Jan  65  Generals  Announce  Return  to  Civilian  Government

Under  U.S.  pressure,  the  South  Vietnamese  generals  announce  that
matters  of  state  will  be  left  in  the  future  in  the  hands  of  a  civilian
government.  The  joint  Huong-Khanh  communique  promises  to
convene  a  constituent  assembly.

11  Jan  65 US-GVN  Aid  Discussions  Resume

With  the  return  to  civilian  government,  the  U.S.  resumes  its  dis-
cussions with  the  GVN  on  aid  and  measures  to  improve  the  mili-
tary situation.

14  Jan  65 U.S.  Laotian  Operations  Revealed

A  UPI  story  reveals  the  U.S.  BARREL  ROLL  armed  recce  mis-
sions in  Laos  and  tells  the  story  of  the  YANKEE  TEAM  armed
escort  for  the  RLAF.

1 7  Jan  65 Buddhist  Riots

Shortly  after  the  GVN  announcement  of  increased  draft  calls,
Buddhist  protest  riots  break  out  in  several  cities  against  the  al-
legedly anti-Buddhist  military  leaders.  Disturbances  continue
through  the  month.

22  Jan  65 Soviets  Affirm  Support  of  DRV

In  letters  to  Hanoi  and  Peking,  Gromyko  affirms  Soviet  support  for
the  DRV  struggle  against  American  imperialism.

23  Jan  65 USIS  Library  Burned  in  Hue

Rioting  Buddhists  burn  the  USIS  library  in  Hue.

27  Jan  65 McNaughton paper, "Observations re South Vietnam  After

Khanh's  'Re-Coup'  "

The  U.S.  stakes  in  South  Vietnam  were  defined  as  holding  buffer
land  for  Thailand  and  Malaysia  and  maintaining  our  national
honor.  They  required  continued  perseverance  in  a  bad  situation,
taking  some  risks  such  as  reprisals.  It  was  important  to  remember
that  our  objective  was  the  containment  of  China  not  necessarily
the  salvation  of  South  Vietnam.  In  this  effort,  however,  we  should
sooQ  begin  reprisal  strikes  against  the  North.  They  would  not
help  the  GVN  much  but  would  have  a  positive  overall  effect  on
our  policy  in  SEA.

Generals  Withdraw  Support  from  Huong

The  generals  under  Khanh's  leadership  act  once  again  to  eliminate
the  civilian  government.  This  time  they  succeed  in  their  coup  and
the  U.S.  only  protests.

28  Jan  65 General  Oanh  Named  Premier

General  Nguyen  Xuan  Oanh  is  named  acting  Premier  by  General
Khanh.


140 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

DECISIONS  REGARDING  MILITARY  PRESSURE  AGAINST
NORTH  VIETNAM

9  Mar  1961  NSAM  28  convevs  President  Kennedy's  instructions  that  "we  make
every  possible  effort  to  launch  guerrilla  operations  in  Viet-Minh
territory  at  the  earliest  possible  time."  SecDef  and  Director,  CIA,
asked  to  furnish  views  re  actions  to  be  taken  in  the  near  and  "the
longer"  future  periods.

11  May  1961  President  Kennedy  approves  program  for  covert  actions  proposed
bv  Vietnam  Task  Force.  Program  includes:  (1)  dispatch  of  agents
into  NVN,  (2)  aerial  resupply  of  agents  in  NVN  through  use  of
civilian  mercenary  air  crews,  (3)  infiltration  of  special  GVN
forces  into  SE  Laos  to  locate  and  attack  Communist  bases  and
LOC's,  (4)  formulation  of  "networks  of  resistance,  covert  bases
and  teams  of  sabotage  and  light  harrassment  "inside  NVN,  and
(5)  conduct  of  overflights  of  NVN  for  purpose  of  dropping  leaflets.
(NSAM  52)

11  Oct  1961  State  Department  proposes  concept  for  U.S.  intervention  in  Viet-
nam Laos  situation.  Concept  would  require  deployment  of  SEATO
ground  force  of  1 1,000  men  along  Laos  and  portion  of  Cambodian
borders,  along  with  options  for  "hot  pursuit"  of  VC  across  borders.
Proposal  sought  to  achieve  political  objective  of  responding  to  an
appeal  by  Diem  to  help  protect  his  borders  from  infiltrated  guer-
rilla forces  "inspired,  directed  and  supported  from  NVN."  Sup-
plemental Note,  appended  to  the  proposal  by  OSD  ISA  recom-
mended (among  other  measures)  that  the  U.S.  encourage  GVN
guerrilla  action  against  communist  aerial  resupply  missions  in  the
Tchepone  area  of  Laos,  through  the  commitment  of  U.S.  advisers
if  necessarv.  Operation  was  to  include  employment  of  indigenous
forces  equipped  with  .50  calibre  AA  weapons.

13  Oct  1961  President  Kennedy  directs  (among  other  measures)  that  we  "ini-
tiate guerrilla  ground  action,  including  the  use  of  U.S.  advisers  if
necessarv"  against  Communist  aerial  resupplv  missions  in  the  vi-
cinity of  Tchepone.  He  also  directed  the  Department  of  State  to
prepare  to  publish  its  White  Paper  on  DRV  responsibility  for  ag-
gression in  SVN.  (NSAM  104)

8  Dec  1961  Department  of  State  publishes  1st  White  Paper  on  DRV  aggres-
sion in  violation  of  the  1954  Geneva  Accords.

Mid-Decern- GVN  augments  its  CIA-sponsored  programs  of  infiltration  and
ber  1961 covert  operations  through  recruiting  candidates  "to  form  an  under-
water demolition  team  (to  operate)  ...  in  strategic  maritime
areas  of  NVN."  ("Status  Report  on  Covert  Actions  in  Vietnam,"
21  Dec.  '61)

2  Jun  1962  I.C.C.  report  states  that  DRV  has  violated  1954  Geneva  Agree-
ment through  its  encouragement  and  support  of  SVN  insurgency.
GVN  also  criticized,  on  two  counts.


1962


Signing  of  Geneva  Accords  on  Laos  reduces  considerably  the  scope
of  covert  operations  against  Communist  forces  outside  SVN.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  141


25  Jun  1963 President  Kennedy  rejects  portion  of  State  Department's  plan  of

actions  to  deal  with  a  deteriorating  situation  in  Laos,  which  called
for  actions  to  be  taken  against  NVN.  While  approving  two  other
phases  of  the  proposal  (one  only  for  planning  purposes),  he
urges  that  this  final  phase  be  reviewed  to  determine  whether  "addi-
tional U.S.  actions  should  be  taken  in  Laos  before  any  action  be
directed  against  NVN."  (NSAM  249)

9  Sep  1963  JCS  approve  CINCPAC  OPLAN  34-63,  which  called  for  MACV
and  CAS,  Saigon  to  provide  advice  and  assistance  to  the  GVN  in
certain  operations  against  NVN.  Phase  I  of  the  plan  was  to  con-
sist of  "Psychological  Operations";  Phase  II  of  "Hit  and  Run  At-
tacks." The  latter  included  "amphibious  raids  using  Vietnamese
UDT/SEAL  Team,  Rangers,  Airborne,  and  Marine  units  against
selected  targets  south  of  the  Tonkin  Delta  having  little  or  no  se-
curity." Apparently,  the  plan  was  not  forwarded  to  the  White
House  by  SecDef .

30  Oct  1963  Ambassador  Lodge  recommends  a  political-military  initiative  di-
rected at  NVN.  In  the  context  of  a  scheme  to  "neutralize  NVN,"
he  urges  "an  essentially  diplomatic  carrot  and  stick  approach,
backed  by  covert  military  means."

Mid-Novem-  Cross-border  operations  into  Laos  reported  to  be  resumed  by
ber  1963 CAS,  Saigon.  On  19  November,  CAS  reported  "first  results  just
coming  in."  (CAS  Saigon  2540)

26  Nov  1963  In  a  review  of  discussions  of  Vietnam  policy  held  at  Honolulu,

20  November  63,  newly  installed  President  Johnson  directs  (among
other  measures)  that  "planning  should  include  different  levels  of
possible  increased  activity,  and  in  each  instance  there  should  be
estimates  of  such  factors  as:

a.  Resulting  damage  to  NVN;

b.  The  plausibility  of  denial;

c.  Possible  NVN  "retaliation;

d.  Other  international  reaction."

The  directive  also  called  for  a  plan,  to  be  submitted  for  approval,
for  military  operations  "up  to  a  line  up  to  50  km.  inside  Laos,
together  with  political  plans  for  minimizing  the  international  haz-
ards of  such  an  enterprise."  (NSAM  273)

15  Dec  1963  In  response  to  JCS  request  of  26  Nov  63,  MACV  and  CAS,  Sai-
gon forward  a  joint  plan  of  combined  GVN/USG  operations
against  NVN.  Designated  OPLAN  34A,  the  proposal  providing
"a  spectrum  of  capabilities  for  RVNAF  to  execute  against  NVN"
that  would  "convince  the  DRV  leadership  that  they  should  cease
to  Support  insurgent  activities  in  the  RVN  and  Laos.  It  contained
72  actions,  many  of  which  were  covert  and  only  16  of  which  were
considered  "punitive  or  attritional."  In  forwarding  letter,  CINC-
PAC urges  that  Category  IV  actions,  largely  air  attacks,  "appear
to  have  the  highest  probability  of  success."  (CINCPAC  letter
to  JCS,  19  Dec  63)

Feb  1964  Interagency  study  group  chaired  by  Robert  Johnson,  Department
of  State  Policy  Planning  Council,  begins  examination  of  various
ways  of  applying  pressure  directly  to  NVN,  as  director  and  sup-
plier of  SVN  insurgency.


142 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111

20  Feb  1964  Ambassador  Lodge  recalls  his  recommendation  of  30  October  63,
urging  President  Johnson  to  apply  "various  pressures"  to  NVN
and  ehminate  the  sanctuary  for  guerrilla  support.  (Saigon  Em-
bassy Msg./State  1954)

21-25  Feb  Both  President  Johnson  and  Secretary  Rusk  (dates  respectively)
1964  make  public  statements  that  "those  engaged  in  external  direction

and  supply  [of  the  SVN  insurgency]  would  do  well  to  be  reminded
and  to  remember  that  this  type  of  aggression  is  a  deeply  danger-
ous game."  {Dept.  of  State  Bulletin,  March  16,  1964)

15  Mar  1964  Ambassador  Lodge  urges  President  Johnson  to  begin  reconnais-
sance flights  over  NVN  and  covert  actions  against  NVN  before
considering  any  "overt  U.S.  measures."

17  Mar  1964  President  Johnson  approves  Secretary  McNamara's  report  result-
ing from  an  inspection  trip  to  South  Vietnam  and  culminating  an
extensive  policy  review  by  the  Administration.  Report  recom-
mended against  overt  military  measures  directly  against  SVN
for  the  present  and  stressed  numerous  internal  actions  in  support
of  the  GVN's  progam  to  combat  the  VC  insurgency.  Report  did
urge  immediate  preparation  of  a  capability  to  "mount  new  and
significant  pressures  against  NVN,"  to  include  a  72-hour  capability
for  a  full  range  of  SVN  "border  control"  operations  and  "retalia-
tory actions  against  NVN,"  and  a  capability  to  initiate  "graduated
overt  military  pressure"  within  30  days  of  notification.  It  further
urged  authority  for  "continued  high-level  U.S.  overflights  of  SVN's
borders,"  and  "hot  pursuit"  and  GVN  ground  operations  into
Laos  for  purposes  of  border  control.  (NSAM  288)

17  Mar  1964  President  Johnson  requests  that  "political  and  diplomatic  prepara-
tions be  made  to  lay  a  basis  for  "high-  or  low-level  reconnaissance
over  NVN"  if  it  seems  necessary  or  desirable  after  a  few  weeks."
He  asks  Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara  to  further  study  and
make  recommendations  in  concert  on  "questions  of  further  U.S.
participation  and  of  air  and  ground  strikes  against  Laos,"  and
reserves  judgement  on  overt  U.S.  measures  against  NVN.  The
President  authorizes  Ambassador  Lodge  "to  prepare  contingency
recommendation  for  specific  tit-for-tat  actions  in  the  event  attacks
on  Americans  are  renewed."  (White  House  Msg.  to  Amb.  Lodge/
State  1454)

19  Apr  1964  Secretary  Rusk  decided  to  go  ahead  with  plan  suggested  by
Ambassador  Lodge  to  have  new  Canadian  I.C.C.  Commissioner
selected  and  briefed,  in  part,  for  purpose  of  conveying  to  Hanoi
the  seriousness  of  U.S.  purpose  and  the  limited  nature  of  U.S.
objectives  in  Vietnam.  Decision  was  made  in  the  context  of  a
Saigon  conference  to  discuss  the  categories  of  action  against  NVN
developed  by  the  interagency  study  group.  It  reflected  the  Am-
bassador's feeling  that  a  diplomatic  attempt  to  persuade  NVN  to
call  off  the  insurgency  (using  the  carrot  and  stick  approach)
should  precede  any  program  involving  "massive  publicity"  or
"massive  destructive  actions."


30  Apr  1964 In  Ottawa,  Secretary  Rusk  obtains  Canadian  agreement  to  co-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  143


operate  in  the  proposed  diplomatic  initiative  toward  Hanoi.  J.
Blair  Seaborn  named  as  I.C.C.  Commissioner  and  given  prelimi-
nary instructions.

14  May  1964  In  conversation  with  Secretary  McNamara,  General  Khanh  ex-

presses his  concern  that  the  GVN  will  not  be  ready  for  greater
actions  against  the  North  for  some  time.  However,  he  states  his
belief  that  they  will  be  inevitable  at  some  later  date.  (Saigon
Embassy  Msg.  to  Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara /State  2203)

15  May  1964  In  answer  to  President  Johnson's  query,  Ambassador  Lodge  con-

firms his  backing  of  the  idea  to  initiate  promptly  the  Hanoi  mis-
sion of  the  Canadian  I.C.C.  Commissioner.  Further,  he  urges
that  "if  .  .  .  there  has  been  a  terroristic  act  of  the  proper  magni-
tude ...  a  specific  target  in  NVN  'should  be  struck'  as  a
prelude  to  his  arrival."

23  May  1964  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  William  Bundy  (designated  as  co-
ordinating executive  by  President  Johnson  in  NSAM  288)  pre-
sents members  of  SEA  ExCom.  with  proposed  30-day  scenario
for  exerting  graduated  military  and  political  pressure  on  NVN.
Involving  a  planned  sequence  of  diplomatic  moves  and  public
statements  from  both  Saigon  and  Washington,  the  scenario  cul-
minated with  GVN,  and  eventually  US,  air  strikes  against  NVN
war-supporting  targets  and  a  call  for  international  conference  on
Vietnam.  Included  in  the  sequence  would  be  a  Joint  Congressional
Resolution  affirming  the  President's  freedom  of  action  to  use
force  if  necessary  in  protecting  the  security  of  SEA.  (Ambassador
Lodge  had  previously  expressed  strong  dissent  at  the  overt  nature
of  the  actions  included  in  the  scenario.)  (Draft  Memo  for  the
President)

25  May  1964  ExCom.  decided  not  to  recommend  the  30-day  scenario — ap-

parently because  of  the  estimated  high  probability  of  escalation
and  the  countervailing  diplomatic  image  of  larger  objectives  that
such  escalation  would  create.  Instead,  it  recommends  a  Presidential
decision  to  use  force  if  "appropriate  diplomatic  and  political
warning  and  preparation"  and  "other  efforts"  fail  to  "produce  a
sufficient  improvement  of  non-Communist  prospects  in  South
Vietnam  and  in  Laos."  Recommendation  was  based  on  the
premises  that  included:  "that  a  decision  to  use  force  if  necessary,
backed  by  resolute  and  extensive  deployment,  and  conveyed  by
every  possible  means  to  our  adversaries,  gives  the  best  present
chance  of  avoiding  the  actual  use  of  such  force."  The  ExCom.
further  recommends  that  all  parts  of  Southeast  Asia  be  treated
as  part  of  a  single  problem  and  that  a  sequence  of  diplomatic  and
public  actions  similar  to  those  in  the  scenario  and  including  a
well-publicized  strategy  conference  in  Honolulu,  be  set  in  motion.
(Draft  Memo  to  the  President)

26  May  1964  Ambassador  Lodge  cables  Secretary  Rusk  that  he  is  "coming  to

the  conclusion  that  we  cannot  reasonably  .  .  .  expect  a  much
better  performance  out  of  the  GVN  than  what  we  are  now  get-
ting unless  something  [like  US  retaliation  for  terrorist  acts]  is
brought  into  the  picture."  (State  2318)


144 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

31  May  1964  In  Saigon,  General  Khanh  tells  Secretary  Rusk  (on  way  to
Honolulu  Conference)  that  SVN  can  not  win  against  the  VC
without  military  actions  outside  its  borders.  He  urges  immediate
actions  by  ARVN,  with  air  support  (US  or  GVN  not  clear),  to
eUminate  Communist  forces  in  E.  Laos  and  end  the  VC  threat  to
cut  SVN  in  half  across  the  Highlands.  Secretary  Rusk  tells  Khanh
"We  are  purposely  giving  the  Sino-Soviet  bloc  many  indicators
that  we  are  about  to  react  to  recent  aggressions."  But  that  he
could  say  nothing  about  specific  American  intentions  in  the  im-
mediate future  ""because  he  simply  did  not  know.  The  Honolulu
meeting  would  produce  some  firm  recommendations  to  the  Presi-
dent and  some  plans,  but  ultimately  only  the  President  could  de-
cide. His  decision  would  be  influenced  by  consideration  of  all  im-
plications of  escalation  .  .  (CINCPAC  Msg.  1  June  64  SECTO
37)

2  Jun  1964  JCS  question  military  adequacy  ""for  the  present  situation""  of  the
currently  dominant  objective  to  ""cause  the  North  Vietnamese  to
decide  to  terminate  their  subversive  support  of  activity  in  Laos
and  SVN,"  but  agree  to  it  as  "an  initial  measure."  They  state  their
opinion  that  termination  of  the  DRV's  support  of  the  insurgencies
can  be  assured  only  by  ""military  actions  to  accomplish  destruction
of  the  NVN  will  and  capabilities  as  necessary  to  compel  the  DRV
to  cease  providing  support.""  In  case  national  authority  opts  for
the  lesser  (and  former)  objective,  the  JCS  propose  two  target
complexes  significantly  associated  with  support  of  the  effort  in
Laos  and  SVN,  the  destruction  of  which  can  be  achieved  quickly
and  preciselv  and  ""with  minimum  impact  on  civilian  populations."
(JCSM-471-64)

At  Honolulu,  Secretaries  McNamara  and  Rusk  and  CIA  Director
McCone  agree  ""emphatically,"'  in  response  to  Ambassador
Lodge"s  questioning,  that  a  Congressional  Resolution  was  a  neces-
sary element  in  any  preparations  for  wider  US  participation  against
.  .  .  NVN.  The  possibilities  of  (1)  having  to  deploy  as  many  as
seven  divisions,  (2)  having  to  call  up  reserves,  and  (3)  having  to
protect  SVN  from  possible  NVN  and  CHICOM  reprisals  were
cited  as  reasons  why  special  confirmation  of  the  Presidential  au-
thority was  needed.  Its  deterrence  effects  were  also  cited.  As  a  re-
sult of  discussions  of  current  military  plans  and  posture  for  SEA,
the  principals  acknowledge  numerous  factors  that  make  prompt
military  action  by  the  US  undesirable.  These  included:  (1)  force
build-up  necessary  to  support  current  plans,  (2)  the  possible  inter-
ference of  such  build-ups  with  our  intended  signal  of  limited  ob-
jective, (3)  the  need  for  more  precise  targeting  studies,  (4)  the
need  for  a  larger  ARVN  reserve,  (5)  the  need  for  a  stronger
GVN  base,  (6)  the  need  to  prepare  allied  governments  and  US
public  opinion,  and  (7)  the  impact  of  the  rainy  season,  inhibiting
offensive  operations  in  the  Laos  panhandle.  (Memo  of  Record,  3
June  64)

5  Jun  1964  CJCS  Taylor  sends  Secretary  McNamara  a  view  contrary  to  that
in  2  June  64  JCS  memo,  urging  three,  rather  than  two,  general
alternative  patterns  for  putting  military  pressure  on  NVN.  To


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  145


alternatives  roughly  corresponding  to  the  two  posed  by  the  JCS
he  adds  a  third  "demonstrative"  alternative  "to  show  US  readi-
ness and  intent  to  pass  to  [the  harsher]  alternatives."  Though
stating  his  preference  for  the  middle  alternative,  he  states  feeHng
"that  it  is  highly  probable  that  political  consideration  will  incline
our  responsible  civilian  official  to  opt  for  [the  mildest]  alternative,"
and  that,  therefore,  the  JCS  should  develop  a  plan  for  implement-
ing it.

9  Jun  1964  In  answer  to  the  President's  question  whether  control  of  SVN  and
Laos  by  NVN  would  necessarily  mean  the  loss  of  SEA,  CIA  re-
plies negatively.  It  asserts,  however,  that  such  an  eventuality
"would  be  profoundly  damaging  to  the  US  position  in  the  Far
East  .  .  .  would  be  damaging  to  US  prestige,  and  would  seriously
debase  the  credibility  of  US  will  and  capability  to  contain  the
spread  of  Communism  elsewhere  in  the  areas  [sic]  [by  later  elab-
oration, the  SEA  mainland]."  The  US  deterrence  posture  vis-a-vis
overt  military  aggression  by  Peking  and  Hanoi  was  viewed  as  not
suffering  appreciably  from  such  a  loss,"  as  long  as  the  US  can
effectively  operate  from  [its  island]  bases."  The  Department  of
State  view  agreed  and,  if  different,  was  slightly  more  alarmist.
(Memo  for  the  Director,  CIA)

11  Jun  1964  Laotian  Premier  Souvanna  Phouma  reaffirms  original  agreement
(8  June)  to  US  armed  escort  of  reconnaissance  flights  over  "South
Laos"  and  the  Plaine  des  Jarres,  with  authority  to  attack  ground
units  first  firing  on  them.  Situation  in  Laos  has  become  fairly
stabilized  and  non-threatening,  with  the  US  entered  on  a  "nego-
tiating track"  hopefully  leading  to  "the  convening  of  the  Polish
consultations  in  the  next  3-4  weeks  and  their  continuation  over
a  period  of  time."  This  State  Department  assessment  opines,  "We
do  not  expect  at  the  present  time  to  move  in  the  near  future  to
military  action  against  NVN."  (Memo  on  the  SEA  Situation,  12
June  64)

23  Jun  1964  Presidential  news  conference,  cited  in  State  Dept.  messages  to
embassies  as  "significant  and  precise  statement  of  the  US  posi-
tion in  SEA."  Previously,  military  posturing  actions  including:

(1)  deployment  of  a  B-57  wing  from  Japan  to  the  Philippines,

(2)  reinforcement  of  military  contingency  stockpiles  in  Thailand,
and  (3)  development  of  a  network  of  new  air  bases  and  opera-
tional facilities  in  SVN  and  Thailand  had  been  given  extensive
press  coverage.

Jul  1964  President  Johnson  directs  all  government  agencies  to  "seek  to
identify  actions  which  can  be  taken  to  improve  the  situation  in
Vietnam:  actions  which  would  produce  maximum  effect  with
minimum  escalation." [words  missing]

2-5  Aug Tonkin  Gulf  incident  and  US  reprisals  against  NVN  targets.
1964

6  Aug  1964  Congress  passes  a  joint  resolution  stating  that  international  peace
and  security  in  SEA  were  "vital  to"  the  national  interest.  The
resolution  authorized  President  Johnson  "to  take  all  necessary


146 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


steps,  including  the  use  of  armed  force,"  to  assist  any  SEATO
"member  of  protocol  state"  requesting  US  help  in  defending  its
freedom.  (Dept.  of  State  Bulletin  August  24,  1964)

Aug  1964  In  response  to  Secretary  McNamara's  request  for  NVN  targets,
the  ICS  submits  initial  "94-target  list."

14  Aug  1964  Department  of  State  cables  Saigon  and  Vietnam  embassies  and
CINCPAC  requesting  comment  on  key  points  in  a  "tentative
high  level  paper  on  next  courses  of  action  in  SEA."  In  summary
of  points,  is  included  statement,  "the  next  ten  days  to  two  weeks
should  be  short  holding  phase  in  which  we  would  avoid  action
that  would  in  any  way  take  onus  off  Communist  side  for  escala-
tion." Cable  then  specifies  that  DESOTO  patrol  will  not  be  re-
sumed and  new  34A  operations  will  not  be  undertaken.  After
sketching  "essential  elements  of  the  political  and  military  situa-
tions in  both  SVN  and  Laos,  as  well  as  respective  strategies  re
negotiations,  the  cable  then  lists  proposed  "limited  pressures"  to
be  exerted  on  the  DRV  in  Laos  and  in  NVN  during  the  period,
"late  August  tentatively  through  December."  (State  Msgs,  to
Saigon  439;  Vietnam  157)

Aug  1964  At  a  meeting  at  Udorn,  Ambassadors  Unger  and  Taylor  agree
that  MACV  should  work  out  a  division  of  targets  in  the  Laotian
panhandle  area  between  RLAF  and  RVNAF  aircraft  and  US  sup-
pressive strikes.  In  principle,  the  concept  of  cross-border  opera-
tions into  Laos  by  GVN  ground  forces,  is  agreed  to  within  specific
limits,  for  planning  purposes.

24  Aug  1964  After  re-examining  initial  targeting  proposals,  the  ICS  recom-
mend a  course  of  action  for  SEA.  They  call  for  a  "sharp  sudden
blow"  as  the  most  effective  way  "to  bring  home  .  .  .  the  intent
of  the  US  "to  bring  about  cessation  of  the  DRV's  support  of
insurgency  in  the  South.  They  present  a  revised  94-target  list"
as  the  basis  for  their  recommended  course  of  actions.  (JCSM
729/64)

Late  August  Joint  State  and  ISA  effort  to  develop  new  scenario  for  graduated
through  Octo-  pressures  against  NVN  apparently  in  progress
berl964

10  Sep  1964  President  authorizes  resumption  of  DESOTO  patrols  and
MAROPS  portion  of  the  34A  operations.

18  Sep  1964  President  suspends  DESOTO  patrol  operation,  in  the  wake  of  a
third  incident  (18  Sep  64)  involving  NVN  patrol  boat  threats  to
US  destroyer  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf.

3  Oct  1964  President  Johnson  authorizes  resumption  of  the  MAROPS  pro-
gram, involving  (during  October)  two  probes,  an  attempted  junk
capture  and  ship-to-shore  bombardment  of  radar  sites.

16  Oct  1964  Ambassador  Taylor  cables  President  Johnson  regarding  increased
infiltration  and  worsening  situation  in  SVN.

27  Oct  1964 The  ICS  express  judgement  that  "strong  military  actions  are  re-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  147

quired  now  in  order  to  prevent  the  collapse  of  the  US  position
in  Southeast  Asia,"  "making  specific  reference  to  SNIE  53-2-64
and  the  Taylor  cable.  They  recommend  a  program  of  actions
designed  to  support  a  strategy  of:

a.  Depriving  the  Viet  Cong  (VC)  of  out  of  country  as-
sistance by  applying  continuously  increasing  military  pres-
sures on  the  Democratic  Republic  of  North  Vietnam  (DRV)
to  the  extent  necessary  to  cause  the  DRV  to  cease  support
and  direction  of  the  insurgency.

b.  Depriving  the  VC  of  assistance  within  SVN  by  expand-
ing the  counterinsurgency  effort — military,  economic  and  po-
litical— within  SVN.

c.  Continuing  to  seek  a  viable  effective  government  in
SVN  based  on  the  broadest  possible  consensus.

d.  Maintaining  a  military  readiness  posture  in  Southeast
Asia  that:

(1)  Demonstrates  the  US  will  and  capability  to  escalate
the  action  if  required.

(2)  Deters  a  major  communist  aggression  in  the  area."

Further,  they  request  authority  "to  implement  now"  six  actions
within  SVN  and  eight  actions  outside  SVN,  including  GVN  and
US  FARMGATE,  also  attacks  on  the  infiltration  LOC's  in  South-
ern NVN.  (JCSM-902-64)

1  Nov  1964  Viet  Cong  forces  attack  the  US  air  base  and  billeting  at  Bien
Hoa.

3  Nov  1964 Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Bundy  convenes  newly  established

NSC  Working  Group  gn  SVN/SEA,  with  membership  from  State,
OSD/ISA,  the  JCS,  and  CIA.

Group  work  allocated  into  the  following  categories:
I.  The  Situation  in  SVN;  II.  US  Objectives  and  Stakes  in  SVN
and  SEA:  III.  The  Broad  Options;  IV.  Alternative  Forms  of
Negotiations;  V.  Analysis  of  Option  A;  VI.  Analysis  of  Option  B;
VII.  Analysis  of  Option  C;  VIII.  Immediate  Actions  in  the  Period
Prior  to  Decision;  IX.  Conclusions  and  Recommendations.  Initial
drafts  of  statements  covering  many  of  these  sections  were  under-
way prior  to  establishment  of  the  group.  (Memo  to  Working
Group  Members.)

4  Nov  1964 TheTJCS  urge  "prompt  and  strong"  military  actions  in  reprisal  for

the  Bien  Hoa  attacks.  The  actions  include  B-52  night  strikes  on
Phue  Yen  airfield,  attacks  on  Hanoi  and  Haiphong  POL  storage
and  other  high-value  targets.  (JCS  2339/153)

14  Nov  1964  In  response  to  Secretary  McNamara's  request  to  examine  possible
DRV/CHICOM  military  reactions  to  US  air  strikes  on  NVN,  the
JCS  also  reiterate  their  recommendation  for  "specific  actions"
made  on  4  Nov  64.  They  link  prepared  actions  to  the  "underlying


148 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

objective  ...  of  causing  the  DRV  to  cease  supporting  and  di-
recting the  insurgencies  in  RVN  and  Laos"  and  call  them  "equally
applicable  and  appropriate  for  other  serious  provocations  in
SEA."  (JCSM-955-64)

17  Nov  1964  NSC  Working  Group  circulates  draft  working  papers  for  each
of  the  topics  included  in  its  study  to  the  principal  participating
agencies  for  comment.  The  objective  of  the  group  is  to  prepare
recommended  courses  of  action  prior  to  the  arrival  of  Ambassa-
dor Lodge  for  a  high-level  SEA  policy  meeting.  Papers  present
three  alternative  courses  of  action:  A — Continued  emphasis  on
counterinsurgency  in  SVN  with  provision  for  reprisals  for  provo-
cations like  Bien  Hoa  along  with  somewhat  intensified  34A  opera-
tions and  air  operations  against  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  Trail  in  Laos;
B — Graduated  but  steadily  escalating  air  operations  against  LOCs
and  high-value  targets  in  NVN;  C — Graduated  but  variably
paced  military  actions  against  infiltration  routes  in  Laos  and
NVN.  C  would  differ  from  the  others  also  by  including  an  overt
willingness  to  negotiate  a  settlement  based  on  the  Geneva  Ac-
cords.

23  Nov  1964 The  JCS  criticize  the  NSC  Working  Group's  alternatives  and  some

of  its  supporting  rationale.  Arguing  that  the  loss  of  SEA  "would
lead  to  grave  political  and  military  consequences  in  the  entire
Western  Pacific,"  the  JCS  urge  stronger  military  options  than
those  of  the  Working  Group.  They  state  that  only  two  of  five
they  describe  give  promise  of  achieving  the  stated  US  objectives:
that  recommended  in  JCSM-967-64,  dated  18  Nov  64  and  the
stronger  (and  preferred)  option  recommended  in  JCSM-955-64,
dated  14  Nov  64.  (JCSM-98Z-64)

24  Nov  1964  At  a  meeting  of  the  NSC  Principals  for  SEA,  consensus  is

reached  that:

1.  If  the  DRV  did  withdraw  its  effort,  the  security  situation
in  the  South  could  be  handled  in  time  if  the  government  could
maintain  itself.  However,  the  struggle  would  still  be  long.

2.  The  South  Vietnam  situation  would  deteriorate  further  under
Option  A  even  with  reprisals,  but  that  there  was  a  significant
chance  that  the  actions  proposed  under  Option  B  or  Option  C
would  improve  GVN  performance  and  make  possible  an  im-
provement in  the  security  situation.

3.  Any  negotiating  outcome  under  Option  A  (with  or  without
US  negotiating  participation)  was  likely  to  be  clearly  worse  than
under  Option  C  or  Option  B.

4.  It  was  not  true,  as  the  draft  paper  states,  that  Option  B,
in  the  light  of  all  factors,  has  the  best  chance  of  attaining  our
full  objectives.

5.  The  loss  of  South  Vietnam  would  be  somewhat  more  serious
than  stated  in  Section  II  of  the  draft  paper,  and  it  would  be  at
least  in  the  direction  of  the  Joint  Staff  view  as  stated  in  the
footnote  to  page  7  of  the  draft.

6.  The  requirement  of  Option  C — maintaining  military  pressure
and  a  credible  threat  of  major  action  while  at  the  same  time  being
prepared  to  ncgotiote — could  in  practice  be  carried  out.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  149


7.  Under  Option  C,  our  early  military  actions  against  the  DRV
should  be  determined,  but  low  in  scale,  but  that  some  higher-
damage  actions  should  be  included  under  the  reprisal  heading.
Other  points  achieve  less  than  consensus,  and  various  aspects  of
executing  Options  B  and  C  are  discussed,  including  the  merits  of
committing  ground  forces  in  various  roles.  (Memo  of  ExCom
Meeting)

27  Nov  1964  At  a  meeting  of  the  NSC  Principals  with  Ambassador  Taylor,
consensus  is  expressed  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  US  to
continue  its  policies  in  SEA  "if  the  GVN  collapsed  or  told  us  to
get  out."  Westmoreland's  advice  to  delay  wider  actions  for  about
six  months  is  rejected  on  grounds  that  the  situation  may  not  hold
together  that  long.  Agreement  is  reached  that  although  stronger
action  by  the  US  would  "have  a  favorable  effect  on  GVN  .  .  .
performance  and  morale,"  it  may  not  really  improve  the  situation,
and  "the  strengthening  effect  of  Option  C  could  at  least  buy  time,
possibly  measured  in  years."  The  Principals  recommend  "that  over
the  next  two  months  we  adopt  a  program  of  Option  A  plus  the
first  stages  of  Option  C,"  and  that  "we  needed  a  more  precise
and  fully  spelled  out  scenario  .  .  .  with  or  without  a  decision  to
move  into  the  full  Option  C  program  at  some  time  thereafter."
(Memo  of  Meeting)

1  Dec  1964  President  Johnson  approves  Principals'  recommendation  to  initiate
immediate  actions  like  those  proposed  under  Option  A.  Principals
conceive  first  phase  of  pressures  against  NVN  as  continuing  30
days  or  more,  depending  on  GVN  progress  along  specified  lines.
Should  such  progress  be  made,  they  see  US  entering  a  second-
phase  program  consisting  "principally  of  progressively  more  seri-
ous air  strikes,"  as  in  Option  C,  "possibly  running  from  two  to  six
months."  The  President  also  grants  US  Mission  in  Saigon  au-
thority to  work  out  reprisal  plans  with  the  GVN.  Ambassador
Taylor  is  instructed  to  tell  the  GVN  that  SVN's  national  unity  and
firm  leadership  are  necessary  prerequisites  to  US  consideration  of
second  phase  operations.  (Attach  to  Memo  for  SEA  Principals,
29  Nov  64)

14  Dec  1964  JCS  order  initiation  of  armed  reconnaissance  operations  in  Laos
and  doubling  of  MAROPS  incident  rate — also  initiate  deployment
of  WESTPAC  force  augmentations  necessary  for  reprisal  actions
(All  Phase  I  operations).


I. FEB-JUNE  1964


A. INITIATION  OF  COVERT  OPERATIONS

On  1  February  1964,  the  United  States  embarked  on  a  new  course  of  action
in  pursuance  of  its  long-standing  policy  of  attempting  to  bolster  the  security
of  Southeast  Asia.  On  that  date,  under  direction  of  the  American  military  estab-
lishment, an  elaborate  program  of  covert  military  operations  against  the  state
of  North  Vietnam  was  set  in  motion.  There  were  precedents:  a  variety  of  covert
activities  had  been  sponsored  by  the  American  CIA  since  1961.  Intelligence


150 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111

agents,  resupplied  by  air,  had  been  dispatched  into  North  Vietnam;  resistance
and  sabotage  teams  had  been  recruited  inside  the  country;  and  propaganda  leaf-
lets had  been  dispensed  from  "civilian  mercenary"  aircraft.  But  the  program  that
began  in  February  1964  was  different,  and  its  impact  on  future  U.S.  policy  in
Southeast  Asia  was  far-reaching.

1.  Covert  Action  Program:  Scope  and  Character

The  covert  action  program  beginning  in  February  1964  was  different,  first  of
all,  because  it  was  a  program.  Designed  to  extend  over  a  period  of  12  months,
it  was  divided  into  three  phases  distinguished  by  the  character  and  intensity  of
their  respective  operations.  The  first  phase  (February  through  May)  called  for
intelligence  collection  through  U-2  and  communications  intelligence  missions
and  psychological  operations  involving  leaflet  drops,  propaganda  kit  deliveries,
and  radio  broadcasts.  It  also  provided  for  about  "20  destructive  undertakings,
all  within  .  .  .  early  prospective  [GVN]  capabilities  .  .  .  [and]  designed  to  re-
sult in  substantial  destruction,  economic  loss  and  harassment."  The  second  and
third  phases  involved  the  same  categories  of  action,  but  of  increased  tempo  and
magnitude,  and  with  the  destructive  operations  extending  to  "targets  identified
with  North  Vietnam's  economic  and  industrial  well-being."  Once  started,  the
program  was  intended  to  inflict  on  North  Vietnam  increasing  levels  of  punishment
for  its  aggressive  policies.

The  1964  program  was  different  also  because  it  was  placed  under  control
of  an  operational  U.S.  military  command.  Though  the  program  was  designed
to  be  carried  out  by  GVN  or  third  country  personnel,  plans  were  developed  by
COMUSMACV  and  the  GVN  jointly  and  given  interagency  clearance  in  Wash-
ington through  a  special  office  under  the  ICS.  CINCPAC  and  the  appropriate
CIA  station  furnished  the  necessary  training  and  equipment  support  and  COM-
USMACV exercised  operational  control.  Since  subsequent  phases  of  the  covert
program  were  to  be  based  on  a  continuous  evaluation  of  actions  already  taken,
operation  reports  were  submitted  periodically  through  ICS  staff  channels  for  re-
view by  various  Washington  agencies.

Normally  such  routine  staffing  arrangements  tend  to  encourage  expectations
of  continued  program  actions.  Moreover,  they  foreshadow  bureaucratic  pressures
for  taking  stronger  measures  should  previous  ones  fail  to  produce  desired  re-
sults. In  the  case  of  the  covert  operations  program,  these  tendencies  were  rein-
forced through  the  evocation  of  a  GVN  policy  commitment  and  the  involve-
ment of  GVN  officials  in  its  implementation.

2.  Origins  and  Development:  Presidential  Support  and  Approval

The  covert  program  was  spawned  in  May  of  1963,  when  the  ICS  directed
CINCPAC  to  prepare  a  plan  for  GVN  "hit  and  run"  operations  against  NVN.
These  operations  were  to  be  "non-attributable"  and  carried  out  "with  U.S.  mili-
tary materiel,  training  and  advisory  assistance."  Approved  by  the  ICS  on  9
September  as  CINCPAC  OPLAN  34-63,  the  plan  was  discussed  during  the
Vietnam  policy  conference  at  Honolulu,  20  November  1963.  Here  a  decision
was  made  to  develop  a  combined  COMUSMACV-CAS,  Saigon  plan  for  a  12-
month  program  of  covert  operations.  Instructions  forwarded  by  the  ICS  on  26
November  specifically  requested  provision  for:  "(1)  harassment;  (2)  diversion;
(3)  political  pressure;  (4)  capture  of  prisoners;  (5)  physical  destruction;  (6)


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  151

acquisition  of  intelligence;  (7)  generation  of  intelligence;  and  (8)  diversion  of
DRV  resources."  Further,  that  the  plan  provide  for  "selected  actions  of  gradu-
ated scope  and  intensity  to  include  commando  type  coastal  raids."  To  this  guid-
ance was  added  that  given  by  President  Johnson  to  the  effect  that  "planning
should  include  .  .  .  estimates  of  such  factors  as:  (1)  resulting  damage  to  NVN;
(2)  the  plausibility  of  denial;  (3)  possible  NVN  retaliation;  and  (4)  other  inter-
national reaction."  The  MACV-CAS  plan,  designated  OPLAN  34A,  and  providing
for  "a  spectrum  of  capabilities  for  RVNAF  to  execute  against  NVN,"  was  for-
warded by  CINCPAC  on  19  December  1963.

The  idea  of  putting  direct  pressure  on  North  Vietnam  met  prompt  receptivity
on  the  part  of  President  Johnson.  According  to  then  Assistant  Secretary  of  State,
Roger  Hilsman,  it  was  just  a  few  days  before  the  military-CIA  submission  that
State  Department  Counselor,  Walt  Rostow  passed  to  the  President  "a  well-
reasoned  case  for  a  gradual  escalation."  Rostow  was  well-known  as  an  advocate
of  taking  direct  measures  against  the  external  sources  of  guerrilla  support,  having
hammered  away  at  this  theme  since  he  first  presented  it  at  Fort  Bragg  in  April
1961.  In  any  event,  on  21  December,  President  Johnson  directed  that  an  inter-
departmental committee  study  the  MACV-CAS  plan  to  select  from  it  those  least
risk."  This  committee,  under  the  chairmanship  of  Major  General  Krulak,  USMC,
completed  its  study  on  2  January  1964  and  submitted  its  report  for  review  by
the  principal  officials  of  its  various  member  agencies.  The  report  recommended
the  3-phase  approach  and  the  variety  of  Phase  I  operations  described  earlier.
President  Johnson  approved  the  committee's  recommendations  on  16  January
and  directed  that  the  initial  4-month  phase  of  the  program  be  implemented  be-
ginning 1  February.

3. Concept  and  Rationale:  Convince  DRV  to  Desist  by  Raising  the  Cost

In  view  of  program  performance  and  later  decisions,  the  conceptualization
underlying  the  program  of  covert  operations  against  North  Vietnam  is  par-
ticularly significant.  JCS  objectives  for  the  initial  CINCPAC  formulation  were
to  increase  the  cost  to  the  DRV  of  its  role  in  the  South  Vietnamese  insurgency.
The  catalogue  of  operations  submitted  from  Saigon  was  intended  to  "convince  the
DRV  leadership  that  they  should  cease  to  support  insurgent  activities  in  the
RVN  and  Laos."  Although,  in  its  forwarding  letter,  CINCPAC  expressed  doubt
that  all  but  a  few  of  the  2062  separate  operations  detailed  by  MACV-CAS  could
have  that  kind  of  effect.  In  his  view,  only  air  attacks  and  a  few  other  "punitive
or  attritional"  operations  had  any  probability  of  success  in  achieving  the  stated
objectives.

Rationale  accompanying  the  interdepartmental  committee's  program  recom-
mendations, apparently  accepted  by  higher  authority,  reflected  both  the  coercive
objectives  and  the  reservations  associated  with  the  earlier  documents.  Through
its  recommended  program  of  "progressively  escalating  pressure,"  the  committee
aimed  "to  inflict  increasing  punishment  upon  North  Vietnam  and  to  create  pres-
sures, which  may  convince  the  North  Vietnamese  leadership,  in  its  own  self-
interest,  to  desist  from  its  aggressive  policies."  However,  it  expressed  the  caution
that  "it  is  far  from  clear  whether  even  the  successful  conduct  of  the  opera-
tions .  .  .  would  induce  Hanoi's  leaders  to  cease  and  desist."  Still,  after  enu-
merating a  number  of  specific  risks  involved,  it  expressed  the  opinion  that  they
were  "outweighed  by  the  potential  benefits  of  the  actions  [it]  recommended."  In
selecting  these  actions,  the  committee  stated  the  assumption  that  the  DRV's  cur-


152 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  HI

rent  strategy  was  to  support  the  Viet  Cong  "at  little  cost  to  itself  and  at  little
risk  to  its  industrial  complex,  while  counting  for  victory  upon  U.S.  and  South
Vietnamese  war  weariness  .  .  ."  It  calculated:

The  importance  attached  by  Hanoi's  leaders  to  the  development  of  North
Vietnam's  economy  suggests  that  progressive  damage  of  its  industrial  proj-
ects, attrition  of  its  resources  and  dislocation  of  its  economy  might  induce
a  decision  to  call  off  its  physical  support  of  the  Viet  Cong.  This  reaction
might  be  intensified  by  the  traditional  Vietnamese  fear  of  Chinese  domi-
nation, where  expanded  operations  by  our  side  could  arouse  concern  in
Hanoi  over  the  likelihood  of  direct  Chinese  Communist  intervention  in  North
Vietnamese  affairs.

Interagency  commentary  on  the  proposed  operations  provides  additional  in-
sight into  the  rationale  and  expectancies  associated  with  the  initial  4-month
program.  After  reviewing  13  of  these  operations,  the  Board  of  National  Esti-
mates concluded  that  "even  if  all  were  successful,"  they  would  not  achieve  the
aim  of  convincing  the  DRV  to  alter  its  policies.  The  Board  thought  it  possible  that
North  Vietnamese  leaders  might  view  these  operations  "as  representing  a  signif-
icant increase  in  the  vigor  of  U.S.  policy,  potentially  dangerous  to  them,"  but  with
a  likely  reaction  no  more  significant  than  a  DRV  effort  to  try  to  arouse  greater
international  pressure  for  a  Geneva-type  conference  on  Vietnam.  In  addition,
it  cautioned  that  at  least  three  operations  proposed  for  the  initial  period  were  too
large  and  complex  to  be  plausibly  denied  by  the  GVN.  The  committee  noted  this
CIA  caution  but  suggested  it  might  provide  a  psychological  advantage  "for  South
Vietnam  to  acknowledge  publicly  its  responsibility  for  certain  of  the  retaliatory
acts  taken  against  the  aggressor."  However,  the  State  Department  member  de-
murred, urging  that  only  those  operations  that  were  covert  and  deniable  by  both
the  GVN  and  the  United  States  be  undertaken.  His  caution  reflected  recognition
"of  the  risks  and  the  uncertainty  as  to  whether  operations  against  North  Vietnam
will  materially  contribute  to  our  objective  of  ending  the  war."

4. Implications:  Greater  Pressure  on  Hanoi

Thus,  by  early  February  1964,  the  United  States  had  committed  itself  to  a
policy  of  attempting  to  improve  the  situations  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  by
subjecting  North  Vietnam  to  increasing  levels  of  direct  pressure.  Despite  ex-
plicit assessments  that  the  contemplated  early  steps  could  not  achieve  its  objec-
tives, it  had  embarked  on  a  program  which  demanded  a  significant  commitment
for  its  South  Vietnamese  allies  and  which  in  its  expected  later  stages  could  ex-
pose them  to  considerable  risk.  Moreover,  by  initiating  a  program  recognized  as
giving  little  promise  of  achieving  its  stated  objectives  through  early  actions,  it
raised  expectancies  for  continued  and  intensified  operations  in  later  stages.  It
can  be  concluded  that  either  the  Administration  (1)  intended  to  continue  to
pursue  the  policy  of  pressuring  North  Vietnam  until  these  pressures  showed  some
propensity  for  success,  or  (2)  sought  through  the  covert  operations  program
to  achieve  objectives  different  from  those  anticipated  during  the  initial  planning.

B. PLANNING  FOR  LARGER  PRESSURES

As  indicated  by  reservations  expressed  by  an  ad  hoc  interdepartmental  com-
mittee on  "pressures"  against  North  Vietnam  chaired  by  General  Krulak,  covert
operations  were  seen  as  possessing  several  shortcomings  with  respect  to  influ-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  153

encing  decisions  in  Hanoi.  In  appraising  these  operations,  attention  was  drawn
increasingly  to  the  potential  for  undertaking  punitive  measures  that  appeared
likely  to  be  more  compelling.  The  Krulak  committee  assessed  the  likely  North
Vietnamese  response  as  follows:

Toughened,  as  they  have  been,  by  long  years  of  hardships  and  struggle,
they  will  not  easily  be  persuaded  by  a  punitive  program  to  halt  their  support
of  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency,  unless  the  damage  visited  upon  them  is  of
great  magnitude.

Moreover,  the  committee  rationale  reflected  the  idea  generally  held  that  the  DRV
would  be  responsive  to  more  damaging  actions.  For  example,  Walt  Rostow
pressed  the  view  on  Secretary  Rusk  that  "Ho  [Chi  Minh]  has  an  industrial  com-
plex to  protect:  he  is  no  longer  a  guerrilla  fighter  with  nothing  to  lose."

1. Conceptual  Origins  and  Motivations

In  early  February,  several  conceptual  elements  converged  to  focus  Administra-
tion attention  on  the  question  of  whether  U.S.  policy  should  embrace  readiness
to  undertake  larger  punitive  actions  against  North  Vietnam.  One  element  was
the  realization  that  the  GVN  would  be  incapable  of  increasing  the  number  or
size  of  its  maritime  operations  beyond  the  modest  "pin  pricks"  included  in  the
Phase  I  covert  actions  program.  Should  stronger  pressures  be  called  for  before
May  or  June,  they  would  have  to  be  applied  through  direct  air  strikes,  prob-
ably with  USAF/FARMGATE  assistance.  Another  element  was  the  prospect  of
serious  deterioration  within  Laos  and  South  Vietnam,  resulting  from  recent  North
Vietnamese  troop  influxes  into  Laos,  fear  of  similar  trends  in  South  Vietnam,
and  heightened  VC  activity  in  the  wake  of  the  latest  GVN  coup  of  30  January.
Concern  within  the  State  Department  was  such  that  discussions  were  held  on  the
desirability  of  the  President's  requesting  a  congressional  resolution,  drawing  a
line  at  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam.

A  third  element  was  the  increasing  articulation  of  a  direct  relation  between
the  challenge  of  halting  North  Vietnam's  assistance  to  the  Southeast  Asian  in-
surgents and  broader  U.S.  strategic  interests.  Stopping  Hanoi  from  aiding  the
Viet  Cong  virtually  became  equated  with  protecting  U.S.  interests  against  the
threat  of  insurgency  throughout  the  world.  For  example,  in  support  of  their
recommendation  to  "put  aside  many  of  the  self-imposed  restrictions  which  now
limit  our  efforts"  and  "undertake  a  much  higher  level  of  activity"  than  the
covert  actions  against  external  assistance  to  the  Viet  Cong,  the  JCS  argued:

In  a  broader  sense,  the  failure  of  our  programs  in  South  Vietnam  would
have  heavy  influence  on  the  judgment  of  Burma,  India,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,
Japan,  Taiwan,  the  Republic  of  Korea,  and  the  Republic  of  the  Philippines
with  respect  to  U.S.  durability,  resolution,  and  trustworthiness.  Finally,
this  being  the  first  real  test  of  our  determination  to  defeat  the  Communist
wars  of  national  liberation  formula,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  conclude  that
there  would  be  a  corresponding  unfavorable  effect  upon  our  image  in
Africa  and  in  Latin  America.

Similarly,  in  Secretary  Rusk's  perception.

We  must  demonstrate  to  both  the  Communist  and  the  non-Communist
worlds  that  the  wars  of  national  liberation  formula  now  being  pushed  so
actively  by  the  Communists  will  not  succeed.


154 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill


2. Interagency  Study,  February-March  1964

The  immediate  effect  of  the  heightened  interest  in  causing  Hanoi  to  alter  its
policies  by  exerting  greater  punitive  pressures  was  to  stimulate  a  variety  of
planning  activities  within  the  national  security  establishment.  For  example,  on
20  February,  at  a  meeting  with  the  Secretaries  of  State  and  Defense,  CIA  Di-
rector McCone,  CJCS  Taylor  and  members  of  the  Vietnam  Committee,  the
President  directed:

Contingency  planning  for  pressures  against  North  Vietnam  should  be
speeded  up.  Particular  attention  should  be  given  to  shaping  such  pressures
so  as  to  produce  the  maximum  credible  deterrent  effect  on  Hanoi.

Underway  at  the  time  was  a  detailed  interagency  study  intended  to  determine
ways  of  bringing  measured  pressures  to  bear  against  the  DRV.  Directed  by  Robert
Johnson,  of  the  Department  of  State  Policy  Planning  Council,  the  study  group
was  assembled  under  the  auspices  of  State's  Vietnam  Committee.  Its  products  were
funneled  through  William  Sullivan,  head  of  the  committee,  to  its  members  and
thence  to  the  principal  officials  of  the  agencies  represented.  However,  the  papers
produced  by  the  study  group  did  not  necessarily  represent  coordinated  inter-
departmental views.

The  study  examined  three  alternative  approaches  to  subjecting  North  Vietnam
to  coercive  pressures:  (1)  non-attributable  pressures  (similar  to  the  advanced
stages  of  the  covert  actions  program) ;  (2)  overt  U.S.  deployments  and  operations
not  directed  toward  DRV  territory;  and  (3)  overt  U.S.  actions  against  North
Vietnam,  including  amphibious,  naval  and  air  attacks.  In  addition,  it  encompassed
a  number  of  "supporting  studies"  on  such  subjects  as  U.S.  objectives,  problems  of
timing,  upper  limits  of  U.S.  action,  congressional  action,  control  arrangements,  in-
formation policy,  negotiating  problems,  and  specific  country  problems.  By  ad-
dressing such  a  range  of  subjects,  participants  in  the  study  came  to  grips  with  a
number  of  broader  issues  valuable  for  later  policy  deliberations  (e.g.,  costs  and
risks  to  the  U.S.  of  contemplated  actions;  impact  of  the  Sino-Soviet  split;  pos-
sible face-saving  retreats).

In  support  of  this  study  and  in  order  to  permit  necessary  political  evaluations
concerning  the  military  alternatives  available,  the  ICS  were  asked  to  furnish  their
views  on  the  following  issues:  (1)  the  overall  military  capabilities  of  the  DRV
and  Chinese  Communists  with  respect  to  logistical  capacity,  geographical  areas
of  operation,  time  required  to  initiate  operations,  and  capacity  for  concurrent  re-
actions in  different  regions;  (2)  military  actions  against  NVN,  using  air  and
naval  power  only,  which  the  GVN  might  undertake  alone  or  which  the  U.S.
might  undertake  both  with  and  without  public  acknowledgment;  (3)  NVN  tar-
gets, attack  on  which  would  be  most  effective  in  inhibiting  particular  DRV
military  capabilities;  (4)  course  of  action  likely  to  bring  about  cessation  of
DRV  support  for  the  conflicts  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam;  (5)  action  most
likely  to  deter  communist  attacks  on  various  parts  of  Asia  in  the  event  of  a
large-scale  communist  reaction  to  attacks  on  NVN;  (6)  the  extent  to  which  the
United  States  could  counter  such  reactions,  using  only  air  and  naval  operations
and  different  ordnance  combinations;  and  (7)  modifications  needed  in  current
contingency  plans  to  provide  for  U.S.  responses  depending  "primarily  upon  air
activities  rather  than  the  intervention  of  substantial  U.S.  ground  forces."

The  work  of  the  study  group  resulted  in  an  interim  report  on  1  March  1964,
just  prior  to  Secretary  McNamara's  and  CJCS  Taylor's  visit  to  South  Vietnam.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  155

This  they  carried  with  them  in  the  form  of  a  summary  analysis  of  the  group's
findings.  During  a  brief  stopover  in  Honolulu,  these  findings  and  the  issues  raised
by  the  Secretary's  memorandum  to  the  JCS  were  discussed.  Particular  emphasis
was  given  to  the  possible  advantage  to  be  derived  from  converting  the  current
operations  into  an  "overt  Vietnamese  program  with  participation  by  [the]  U.S.
as  required  to  obtain  adequate  results."

3. Study  Group  Analysis  of  Proposed  Actions

The  study  group  had  given  considerable  attention  to  overt  U.S.  actions  against
North  Vietnam.  Its  analysis  was  based  on  a  concept  of  exploiting  "North  Viet-
namese concern  that  their  industrialization  achievements  might  be  wiped  out  or
could  be  defended  (if  at  all)  only  at  the  price  of  Chicom  control"  and  of
demonstrating  "that  their  more  powerful  communist  allies  would  not  risk  their
own  interests  for  the  sake  of  North  Vietnam."  The  actions  it  proposed  were
aimed  at  accomplishing  five  objectives:  (1)  induce  North  Vietnam  to  curtail  its
support  of  the  Viet  Cong  in  South  Vietnam;  (2)  reduce  the  morale  of  the  Viet
Cong;  (3)  stiffen  the  Khanh  government  and  discourage  moves  toward  neutral-
ism; (4)  show  the  world  that  we  will  take  strong  measures  to  prevent  the  spread
of  communism;  and  (5)  strengthen  morale  in  Asia.  However,  the  study  group
cautioned  that  "public  justification  of  our  actions  and  its  expressed  rationale  must
be  based  primarily  upon  the  fact  of  Northern  support  for  and  direction  of  the
war  in  the  South  in  violation  of  the  independence  of  South  Vietnam."  It  then
outlined  a  series  of  public  informational,  domestic  political,  and  international
diplomatic  steps  desirable  for  establishing  this  justification.

In  seeking  to  achieve  the  objective  cited  above,  the  study  group  suggested
military  actions  with  the  best  potential  and  raised  some  vital  policy  issues.  In
ascending  order  of  the  degree  of  national  commitment,  the  study  group  believed
each  would  entail,  the  military  actions  were  as  follows:  (1)  "deploy  to  Thailand,
South  Vietnam,  Laos  and  elsewhere  the  forces,  sea,  air  and  land,  required  to
counter  a  North  Vietnamese  or  Chjcom  response  of  the  largest  likely  order";
(2)  "initiate  overt  air  reconnaissance  activities  as  a  means  of  dramatizing  North
Vietnamese  involvement";  beginning  with  high-level  flights  and  following  with
low-level  missions;  (3)  "take  limited  air  or  ground  action  in  Cambodia  and  Laos,
including  hot  pursuit  across  the  Cambodian  border  and  limited  operations  across
the  Laos  border";  (4)  "blockade  Haiphong,"  which  would  "have  dramatic  politi-
cal effect  because  it  is  a  recognized  military  action  that  hits  at  the  sovereignty  of
North  Vietnam  and  suggests  strongly  that  we  may  plan  to  go  further";  (5)
"establish  a  limited  air  defense  capability  around  Saigon";  and  (6)  conduct  air
strikes  on  key  North  Vietnamese  LOC's,  infiltrator  training  camps,  key  industrial
complexes,  and  POL  storage.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  order  of  commit-
ment perceived  in  early  1964  was  considerably  different  from  the  order  which
most  observers  wpuld  assign  to  such  actions  at  the  time  of  this  writing.  The
ground  force  deployments  (Item  1)  were  primarily  deterrent  deployments  to
Thailand,  on  the  model  of  those  made  during  the  1961-62  Laotian  crisis.  Block-
ading (Item  4)  was  considered  a  low-commitment,  low-risk  action  through  most
of  1964.  Significantly,  the  last  set  of  actions  "in  any  number"  was  cited  as  imply-
ing "a  U.S.  commitment  to  go  all  the  way  if  necessary."  Thus,  the  group  cau-
tioned that  before  embarking  on  such  steps  the  Administration  should  consider
how  far  it  would  be  willing  to  go  in  the  event  of  possible  reactions.  For  example,
how  long  would  we  persist  "in  defiance  of  international  pressures  for  a  cease-fire
and  conference"?  Or,  how  far  would  we  go,  either  within  the  proposed  concept


156 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

or  by  escalating  beyond  it,  in  continuing  military  pressures  if  the  DRV  did  not
comply — or  if  it  decided  to  escalate?

Although  warning  of  the  need  to  be  prepared  "to  follow  through  against
Communist  China  if  necessary,"  the  study  group  estimated  that  neither  China
nor  the  Soviet  Union  would  intervene  militarily,  other  than  to  supply  equipment.
In  view  of  these  estimates  and  the  study  group's  basic  assumption  of  DRV
sensitivity  to  industrial  losses,  its  assessments  of  the  likely  outcomes  of  the  actions
it  discussed  are  significant.  Asserting  that  pressures  against  North  Vietnam  were
"no  substitute  for  successful  counterinsurgency  in  South  Vietnam,"  the  group
listed  the  probable  positive  gains:  (1)  U.S.  action  could  demonstrate  U.S.  power
and  determination,  along  with  restraint,  to  Asia  and  the  world  at  large;  (2)  U.S.
action  would  lead  to  some  reduction  in  Viet  Cong  morale;  and  (3)  U.S.  action
if  carefully  planned  and  executed  might  improve  our  negotiating  position  over
what  it  would  otherwise  be.  (The  group  saw  negotiation  as  "virtually  inevitable.")
However,  it  then  countered  with  the  following  judgment:

It  is  not  likely  that  North  Vietnam  would  (if  it  could)  call  off  the  war
in  the  South  even  though  U.S.  actions  would  in  time  have  serious  economic
and  political  impact.  Overt  action  against  North  Vietnam  would  be  unlikely
to  produce  reduction  in  Viet  Cong  activity  sufficiently  to  make  victory  on
the  ground  possible  in  South  Vietnam  unless  accompanied  by  new  U.S.
bolstering  actions  in  South  Vietnam  and  considerable  improvement  in  the
government  there.  The  most  to  be  expected  would  be  reduction  of  North
Vietnamese  support  of  the  Viet  Cong  for  a  while  and,  thus,  the  gaining  of
some  time  and  opportunity  by  the  government  of  South  Vietnam  to  improve
itself.

When  he  returned  from  his  visit  to  South  Vietnam,  Secretary  McNamara
recommended  against  either  the  United  States  or  the  GVN  undertaking  overt
actions  against  North  Vietnam  "at  this  time."  One  compelling  reason  was  Gen-
eral Khanh's  expressed  wish  not  to  engage  in  overt  operations  until  a  firmer
GVN  political  base  had  been  established,  but  there  were  others  as  well.  Mr.
McNamara  regarded  such  actions  as  "extremely  delicate  .  .  .  both  from  the
military  and  political  standpoints,"  because  of  specific  problems.  These  were
identified  as:  (1)  the  problem  of  justifying  such  actions;  (2)  the  problem  of
"communist  escalation";  and  (3)  the  problem  of  pressures  for  premature  negoti-
ations. Moreover,  he  stated  the  judgment  that  the  practical  range  of  our  overt
options  did  not  permit  assured  achievement  of  our  practical  objectives.  In  identi-
fying these,  he  drew  a  distinction  similar  to  that  made  by  the  interagency  study
group — between  the  stated  objective  of  eliminating  Hanoi's  control  of  the  VC
insurgency  and  the  "practical"  objectives  of  "collapsing  the  morale  and  the  self-
assurance  of  the  Viet  Cong  cadres  .  .  .  and  bolstering  the  morale  of  the  Khanh
regime."  [Doc.  158]

What  Mr.  McNamara  did  recommend  for  military  actions  outside  South  Viet-
nam reflected  the  contemporary  concerns  over  Laos.  Prior  to  his  visit,  the  in-
creased NVA  activity  in  eastern  Laos  had  prompted  several  recommendations  for
military  measures  to  thwart  new  communist  territorial  gains  in  that  country  and
to  interrupt  the  flow  of  men  and  materiel  into  South  Vietnam  along  the  Laotian
infiltration  routes.  In  particular,  elements  within  the  Department  of  Defense  urged
eff'orts  to  lift  existing  restrictions  on  cross-border  pursuit  of  engaged  forces  into
Laos,  including  accompaniment  of  GVN  air  and  ground  forces  by  U.S.  advisory
personnel.  They  also  sought  authorization  for  both  GVN  and  U.S.  aircraft  to
overfly  Laos  for  reconnaissance  purposes.  The  ICS  urged  low-level  reconnais-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  157

sance  flights  over  Laos  as  advantageous  both  for  collecting  badly  needed  intelli-
gence and  for  visibly  displaying  U.S.  power.  The  State  Department  recommended
deploying  twelve  F-lOO's  to  Thailand,  with  a  view  toward  its  potential  deterrence
and  signalling  impacts  on  communist  activities  in  Laos.  On  his  return  from  South
Vietnam,  two  of  the  actions  for  which  Secretary  McNamara  sought  Presidential
authority  dealt  with  activities  affecting  Laos:  (1)  (Recommendation  11)  "hot
pursuit"  and  small-scale  operations  across  the  Laotian  border  by  GVN  ground
forces  "for  the  purpose  of  border  control"  and  "continued  high-level  U.S.  over-
flights" of  the  border;  and  (2)  (Recommendation  12)  preparations  to  be  ready
"to  initiate  the  full  range  of  Laotian  and  Cambodian  border  control  actions"
within  72  hours.

Actions  recommended  by  the  Secretary  to  provide  measures  aimed  directly  at
North  Vietnam  (Recommendation  12)  fell  into  two  categories:  (1)  preparation
for  "retaliatory  actions,"  defined  to  include  "overt  high  and/or  low  level  recon-
naissance flights  .  .  .  over  North  Vietnam"  as  well  as  "tit-for-tat"  bombing
strikes  and  commando-type  raids;  and  (2)  planning  and  preparations  "to  be  in
a  position  on  30  days'  notice  to  initiate  the  [sic]  program  of  'Graduated  Overt
Military  Pressure'  against  North  Vietnam."  The  wording  of  the  latter  recom-
mendation is  notable  because,  at  the  time,  there  apparently  was  no  planned  overt
"program"  in  existence;  the  discussion  of  overt  pressures  appended  to  the  Sec-
retary's report  was  considerably  less  than  even  a  recommendation  for  such  a
program.  The  concept  of  retaliatory  actions  was  more  explicitly  defined,  but
here  too,  it  was  apparent  that  important  questions  like,  "Retaliation  for  what?"
and  "Under  what  circumstances?"  had  yet  to  be  answered  clearly.  The  scenario
described  in  the  report's  appended  "Illustrative  Program"  of  retaliatory  pressure
seemed  to  mix  elements  appropriate  for  a  continuous  program  of  military  actions
against  North  Vietnam  with  those  suitable  as  tit-for-tat  response  to  specific
provocations.

Each  of  the  Secretary's  recommendations  was  approved  by  President  Johnson
at  a  National  Security  Council  meeting  on  17  March,  with  the  directive  for  all
agencies  "to  proceed  energetically"^  in  executing  them.  Subsequent  planning
activities  by  different  implementing  agencies  indicate  that  they  did  not  share  a
common  view  of  the  policy  implications  and  assumptions  contained  in  these
recommendations.

C. DIFFERENT  POLICY  PERCEPTIONS  IN  PLANNING

1. Two  Basic  Approaches:  JCS  and  State-ISA

The  principal  planning  agencies  responding  to  the  President's  directive  regard-
ing Recommendations  11  and  12  were  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  the  Depart-
ment of  State  together  with  OSD/ISA,  and  the  two  efforts  took  rather  diflerent
approaches.  The  JCS  responded  literally  to  the  instructions  and  tasked  CINCPAC
to  prepare  an  action  program  of  border  control  and  retaliatory  operations  with
72-hour  responsiveness  and  one  of  "graduated  overt  military  pressure  by  GVN
and  U.S.  forces"  against  North  Vietnam  with  30-day  responsiveness.  The  JCS
preparation  for  near-term  implementation  of  these  recommendations  went  beyond
the  usual  contingency  planning  as  indicated  by  their  instruction  that  CINCPAC's
plan  "permit  sequential  implementation"  of  the  three  actions.  The  JCS  approved
the  CINCPAC  submission,  as  OPLAN  37-64,  on  17  April  1964.

The  State-ISA  planning  activity  proceeded  under  the  apparent  belief  that  the
actions  included  in  Secretary  McNamara's  Recommendation  12  were  approved


158 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

as  contingency  options,  one  or  more  or  none  of  which  might  be  selected  for
implementation  at  some  time  in  the  future.  In  fact,  State  believed  the  Secretary's
categories  of  action  were  not  in  keeping  with  likely  developments — "that  [cross-
border]  actions  against  Cambodia  and  Laos  are  dependent  heavily  on  the  political
position  in  these  countries  at  the  time,  and  that,  in  general,  it  seems  more  likely
that  we  would  wish  to  hold  off  in  hitting  Cambodia  until  we  had  gone  ahead
hard  against  North  Vietnam  itself  .  .  .  there  appear  to  be  reasons  not  to  open
up  other  theaters  until  we  have  made  clear  that  North  Vietnam  is  the  main
theater  and  have  not  really  started  on  it."  Further,  it  questioned  the  utility  of
tit-for-tat  retaliatory  actions  because  of  ( 1 )  the  difficulty  of  responding  in  kind,
or  in  a  fitting  manner,  to  the  most  likely — terrorist — variety  of  VC  provocations
and  (2)  their  inappropriateness  for  conveying  "the  picture  of  concerted  and
steadily  rising  pressures  that  reflect  complete  U.S.  determination  to  finish  the  job."
Accordingly,  the  State-ISA  effort  began  by  developing  a  political  scenario
designed  to  accommodate  only  the  graduated  military  pressures  referred  to  in
Recommendation  12.  These  were  divided  into  three  major  categories:  (1)  covert
GVN  action  against  North  Vietnam  with  covert  U.S.  support;  (2)  overt  GVN
action  with  covert  U.S.  support;  and  (3)  overt  joint  GVN  and  U.S.  action.  The
two  categories  involving  overt  activities  were  conceived  of  as  possible  future
developments,  contingent  upon  a  Presidential  decision  that  clearly  had  not  been
made.

2. Different  Approaches:  Perceptions  of  the  Strategic  Problem  in  Southeast  Asia

The  differences  in  approach  taken  in  the  two  planning  efforts  cannot  be  ex-
planned  simply  by  the  obvious  military  and  political  division  of  labor.  It  is  clear
from  documents  of  the  period  that  there  was  considerable  coordination  between
the  two  groups,  with  the  JCS  planners  looking  to  State  and  ISA  for  political
guidance  and  the  latter  group  looking  to  the  former  for  recommendations  for
appropriate  military  actions.  During  the  early  months  of  1964,  these  are  well
illustrated  in  the  different  approaches  taken  to  the  problem  of  determining  the
extent  and  implications  of  the  movement  of  men  and  supplies  through  Laos.

At  the  end  of  1963  and  early  in  1964,  there  was  general  agreement  among
all  Washington  agencies  that  we  lacked  adequate  information  concerning  the
nature  and  magnitude  of  whatever  movement  of  men  and  materiel  was  occurring
along  the  Laotian  infiltration  routes.  For  example,  citing  the  "lack  of  clarity"
on  the  "role  of  external  intrusion"  in  South  Vietnam,  Walt  Rostow  urged  William
Sullivan  on  the  eve  of  his  March  visit  to  attempt  to  "come  back  from  Saigon
with  as  lucid  and  agreed  a  picture"  as  possible  on  the  extent  of  the  infiltration  and
its  influence  on  the  Viet  Cong.  A  few  days  later,  the  Defense  Intelligence  Agency
informed  Secretary  McNamara  that  "certain  intelligence  gaps"  were  "related
primarily  to  the  types  and  amounts  of  weapons  and  materiel  coming  into  South
Vietnam,  [and]  the  number  of  Viet  Cong  personnel  infiltrating  into  South
Vietnam  .  .  ."  To  alleviate  this  situation,  the  JCS  favored  such  measures  as
ground  probes  into  Laos  by  GVN  reconnaissance  teams  and  low-level  recon-
naissance flights  over  the  trail  areas  by  GVN  and  U.S.  aircraft.  The  State  Depart-
ment, supported  by  OSD  ISA,  opposed  such  operations  as  potentially  damaging
to  our  relations  with  the  Laotian  government.

In  supporting  its  recommendations  and  in  its  comments  on  State-ISA  pro-
posals, the  JCS  argued  that  an  integrated  approach  should  be  taken  to  the  security
of  Southeast  Asia,  with  our  actions  in  Laos  closely  related  to  those  taken  on
behalf  of  South  Vietnam.  They  saw  the  key  problem  for  all  of  Southeast  Asia  as


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  159

the  DRV's  aggressive  intent.  As  they  stated,  "the  root  of  the  problem  is  in
North  Vietnam  and  must  be  dealt  with  there."  Moreover,  they  felt  that  recon-
naissance operations  into  and  over  Laos  were  justified  because  they  saw
Laotian  security  as  dependent  on  that  of  South  Vietnam.  "Laos,"  they  argued,
"would  not  be  able  to  endure  the  establishment  of  a  communist — or  pseudo
neutralist — state  on  its  eastern  flank."  They  criticized  our  "self-imposed  restric-
tions" as  tending  to  make  the  task  in  Vietnam  "more  complex,  time-consuming,
and  in  the  end,  more  costly"  and  for  possibly  signalling  "irresolution  to  our
enemies."  Accordingly,  they  implied  that  the  United  States  should  convince  the
Laotian  Premier  of  the  need  to  take  direct  action  against  the  Viet  Minh  in-
filtration through  low-level  reconnaissance  and  other  cross-border  operations —
but  above  all,  to  carry  out  these  actions  in  order  to  impress  the  DRV  with  our
resolve  to  deny  its  insurgents  a  sanctuary.  In  the  specific  context  of  recommend-
ing these  kind  of  actions,  thev  stated  "that  the  time  has  come  to  lift  the  restric-
tions which  limit  the  effectiveness  of  our  military  operations."

The  State-ISA  policy  view  also  regarded  Laos  and  Vietnam  as  parts  of  the
overall  Southeast  Asian  problem,  but  in  earlv  1964  their  conception  of  how  U.S.
objectives  might  be  achieved  extended  beyond  the  need  to  thwart  the  com-
munist guerrilla  threat.  In  this  view,  policy  success  meant  "bolstering  the  capa-
bility of  all  free  countries  in  the  area  to  resist  communist  encroachment."  This
required  cooperating  with  the  foreign  governments  of  these  countries  and  being
careful  not  to  erode  their  authority  or  contribute  to  their  instability.  Thus,
instead  of  cross-border  ground  probes  or  low-level  reconnaissance  missions,
which  might  prove  politically  embarrassing  to  the  shaky  regime  of  Laotian
Premier  Souvanna  Phouma,  the  State-ISA  view  favored  extending  the  mission  of
Laotian  ground  reconnaissance  teams,  which  had  been  sponsored  covertly  by
the  CIA  with  the  Premier's  support.  Moreover,  this  approach  to  policy  included
the  view  that,  within  the  scope  of  broad  regional  policy  goals,  solutions  to
problems  in  individual  countries  should  be  tailored  to  the  unique  political  con-
text of  each  country.  Insofar  as  Laos  was  concerned,  this  meant  not  only  being
sensitive  to  Souvanna  Phouma's  political  status,  but  also  adhering  to  the  letter
and  spirit  of  the  1962  Geneva  Accords,  on  which  it  was  conceded  the  structure  of
a  stable  political  future  must  be  erected.  In  the  State-ISA  view,  the  only  alterna-
tive to  this  approach  would  be  an  eventual  large-scale  deplovment  of  U.S.  ground
forces  to  drive  out  the  Pathet  Lao  NVA  forces.

The  meaning  of  these  different  overall  policy  conceptions  for  the  planning
processes  of  April  and  early  May  1964  was  that  the  U.S.  Government  was  faced
with  a  dilemma — whether  to  take  remedial  military  actions  which  might  ease
the  short-term  problems  in  South  Vietnam  or  whether  to  dramatize  our  com-
mitment to  all  of  Southeast  Asia  with  the  long-term  solution  in  mind.  The
dilemma  was  particularly  complex  because  elements  of  one  alternative  were
needed  to  enable  progress  toward  the  other.  Specifically,  three  accomplishments
were  considered  vii^l  to  our  long-term  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia:  (1)  to  con-
vince Hanoi,  whose  direction  of  the  insurgencies  was  certain,  of  our  resolve  to
prevent  the  success  of  its  aggressive  policies;  (2)  to  maintain  the  cooperation  of
Souvanna  Phouma  and  the  Laotian  neutralist  political  structure  (which  also  re-
quired the  support  of  the  Geneva  members)  and  thereby  preserve  the  framework
of  the  1962  Geneva  Accords;  and  (3)  to  build  a  stable,  effective  political
authority  in  South  Vietnam.  Vital  to  the  third  accomplishment  was  our  major
short-term  objective — of  permanently  reversing  the  trends  in  the  guerrilla  war
in  South  Vietnam.  These,  in  turn,  were  believed  to  be  sustained  in  their  cur-
rently deteriorating  direction  by  the  infiltration  of  men  and  supplies  from  North


160 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

Vietnam.  The  possibility  was  recognized  that  determining  the  extent  of  this
infiltration  and  eliminating  it,  if  necessary,  might  be  a  decisive  element  in  a
solution  of  the  short-term  problem.

However,  the  short-term  solution  involved  potential  threats  to  the  long-term
policy  elements:  the  most  effective  measures  for  obtaining  the  necessary  intelli-
gence involved  actions  likely  to  alienate  Souvanna  and  damage  the  political  struc-
ture in  Laos.  Yet,  some  of  this  same  kind  of  intelligence  would  be  important  in
convincing  the  Premier  of  the  need  to  permit  low-level  reconnaissance  flights  and
other  kinds  of  operations.  On  the  other  hand,  the  impact  of  the  infiltration  on
the  war  in  South  Vietnam  was  far  from  certain.  For  example,  Ambassador  Unger
reported  in  December  that  the  recent  use  of  the  Laotian  corridor  was  not  ex-
tensive enough  to  have  influenced  significantly  the  then  intensive  VC  efforts  in
South  Vietnam.  Hence,  if  the  desired  military  operations  were  undertaken  without
Souvanna's  approval,  and  it  was  discovered  that  the  infiltration  was  not  really
crucial  to  the  war  in  the  South,  a  long-term  interest  would  have  been  compro-
mised without  receiving  any  real  short-term  advantage.

To  further  complicate  the  picture,  direct  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  were
being  advocated  as  a  means  to  obtain  both  long  and  short-term  goals.  On  the
one  hand,  overt  military  actions  had  been  recommended  to  convince  the  DRV
of  our  resolve.  On  the  other  hand,  they  were  proposed  as  a  means  to  force
Hanoi  to  stop  the  flow  of  material  assistance  to  the  South.  Moreover,  it  was
generally  agreed  within  policy  circles  that  such  actions  must  be  supported  by
public  disclosures  of  the  kind  of  convincing  evidence  of  Hanoi's  support  for  the
VC  that  the  Administration  did  not  yet  possess.

By  the  end  of  March,  one  aspect  of  policy  puzzle  had  been  resolved.  On  17
March,  Ambassador  Lodge  reported  a  long  conversation  between  General  Khanh
and  a  Laotian  representative,  with  Souvanna's  permission,  at  which  a  working
agreement  between  military  forces  of  the  two  governments  was  obtained.  Khanh
and  Phoumi  Nousavan,  Laotian  rightist  military  commander,  arranged  to  resume
diplomatic  relations  between  the  two  countries  during  that  week  and  came  to
other  more  specific  agreements  as  follows:

1.  Laotians  agreed  to  allow  South  Vietnam  to  have  free  passage  in
Southern  Laos,  to  create  a  combined  Laotian-Vietnamese  staff  to  use  all  the
bases  including  Tchepone,  and  to  conduct  bombardment  with  unmarked
T-28  planes  (in  the  areas  where  FAR  (Phoumi's)  forces  were  engaged).

2.  The  10-kilometer  limit  on  hot  pursuit  is  abrogated;  commando  raids
and  sabotage  can  be  undertaken  without  limit  by  combined  Laotian  and
South  Vietnamese  units;  South  Vietnamese  officers  will  serve  the  Laotian
units  to  provide  added  leadership.

Previously,  President  Johnson  had  indicated  approval  of  cross-border  ground
penetrations  into  Laos  "along  any  lines  which  can  be  worked  out  between
Khanh  and  Phoumi  with  Souvanna's  endorsement."  Although  asking  Secretaries
Rusk  and  McNamara  to  develop  a  joint  recommendation  concerning  U.S.  par-
ticipation in  air  strikes  within  Laos,  the  President  went  on  to  state  a  position
consonant  with  that  of  the  State-ISA  view:

My  first  thought  is  that  it  is  important  to  seek  support  from  Souvanna
Phouma  and  to  build  a  stronger  case  before  we  take  action  which  might
have  only  limited  military  effect  and  could  trigger  wider  Communist  action
in  Laos.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  J 965  161

3. Planning  Overt  Actions  on  Contingency  Basis  (April-May)

The  planning  efforts  of  April  and  early  May  attempted  to  accommodate  the
remaining  contradictory  aspects  of  the  policy  dilemma.  On  the  same  day  he
signed  NSAM  288  approving  Secretary  McNamara's  visit  report,  the  President
sent  the  first  of  two  closely  spaced  messages  to  Ambassador  Lodge  that  could
have  set  the  tone  for  the  planning  ahead.  (Presumably  the  President's  views
were  communicated  to  the  principal  officials  in  the  agencies  involved  in  planning
for  Southeast  Asia.)  Commenting  on  Lodge's  critique  of  the  McNamara  report,
he  indicated  favor  for  the  Ambassador's  expressed  preference  for  "carrot  and
stick"  pressures  short  of  overt  military  action,  and  specifically  "reserve[dl  judg-
ment on  overt  U.S.  measures  against  North  Vietnam."  Three  days  later  he
cabled  confirmation  that  actions  being  studied  with  North  Vietnam  as  a  target
were  regarded  strictly  as  contingency  planning.

Principal  focus  for  the  planning  during  April  was  OSD/ISA,  with  assistance
from  the  Far  Eastern  Bureau  and  the  Vietnam  Committee,  in  the  Department  of
State,  and  from  the  JCS.  During  the  first  three  weeks  of  April,  it  developed  three
or  four  versions  of  scenarios  of  political  actions  "to  set  the  stage  and  to  develop
support  both  at  home  and  abroad"  for  diff"erent  categories  of  military  action
against  North  Vietnam.  Initially,  the  categories,  and  their  scenarios,  were  re-
garded separately,  although  the  first  "Covert  SVN  action  against  the  North  (with
U.S.  covert  support),"  was  recognized  as  the  stage  of  political-military  activity
in  which  the  United  States  was  currently  engaged.  The  others,  (1)  covert  U.S.
support  of  overt  GVN  aerial  mining  and  air  strike  operations  and  (2)  overt  joint
U.S.  and  GVN  aerial  reconnaissance,  naval  displays,  naval  bombardments  and
air  attacks,  would  necessarily  have  to  follow.  In  subsequent  versions,  the  planning
evolved  more  explicitly  toward  a  continuous  scenario  in  three  sequential  phases.

In  each  version,  however,  the  "current"  scenario  included  such  political
measures  as:  (1)  a  speech  by  General  Khanh  stating  GVN  war  aims;  (2)  a
briefing  for  "friendly"  senators  and  congressmen  on  our  aims  in  Southeast  Asia
and  the  problem  of  DRV  directions  of  the  VC;  (3)  public  explanations  of  U.S.
policy  toward  South  Vietnam;  and  (4)  diplomatic  discussions  with  the  United
Kingdom  and  the  North  Atlantic  Council.  Each  of  the  second  scenarios,  which
came  to  be  characterized  by  GVN-USAF/FARMGATE  air  operations,  con-
tained similar  actions  but  placed  emphasis  on  political  initiatives  that  would
surface  in  Saigon  rather  than  in  Washington,  "so  as  to  maintain  the  credibility
of  the  sovereignty  of  the  GVN."  This  stage  also  included  such  measures  as:  (1)
another  trip  to  Saigon  by  Secretary  McNamara  for  the  specific  purpose  of  obtain-
ing General  Khanh's  agreement  to  begin  overt  GVN  actions  against  the  North;
(2)  consultations  with  Thailand  and  the  Philippines;  (3)  Presidential  con-
sultations with  key  congressional  leaders;  and  (4)  public  release  of  a  new  State
Department  White  Paper  on  North  Vietnamese  involvement  in  the  insurgency.
Each  of  the  final  scenarios,  which  came  to  be  associated  with  our  overt  responses
to  DRV/CHICOM  escalations,  included  diplomatic  and  political  preparations  for
direct  U.S.  actions.  Significantly,  the  scenarios  also  incorporated  initiatives
leading  to  an  international  conference  on  Vietnam  at  Geneva.

The  evolution  toward  a  continuous  sequential  scenario  reflects  the  influence
of  the  JCS.  Their  response  to  the  31  March  draft:  (1)  called  for  approximate
time-phasing  of  the  various  steps  in  "the  scenario";  (2)  urged  a  fusion  of  the
scenario  with  CINCPAC  operational  planning  (OPLAN  37/64);  and  (3)  at-


162 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


tempted  to  incorporate  Secretary  McNamara's  requested  border  control  opera-
tions into  the  political  actions  recommended  for  the  current  time  period.  More-
over, the  JCS  developed  a  "political  military  scenario"  for  graduated  overt
military  pressure  against  North  Vietnam,  as  called  for  in  Secretary  McNamara's
Recommendation  No.  12,  16  March  1964.  Within  this  scenario  the  JCS  included
"expanded  U.S.  overt  military  pressures"  against  the  DRV.  In  effect,  they  out-
lined a  continuallv  intensifying  program  of  military  pressures  which  increasingly
involved  U.S.  military  participation.

Complementing  the  thrust  of  JCS  advice,  the  next  draft,  8  April,  removed  cur-
rent political  actions  from  the  list  of  political  scenarios  and  treated  them  in  a
section  entitled  "Steps  Which  Should  be  Taken  Now."  The  current  scenarios  in-
cluded: (1)  GVN  FARMGATE  graduated  overt  military  pressures  against
North  Vietnam;  (2)  separate  Laotian  and  Cambodian  border  control  actions;
(3)  separate  GVN  retaliatory  actions  against  North  Vietnam;  and  (4)  overt  U.S.
graduated  military  pressures  against  North  Vietnam.  The  detailed  scenario  for
the  GVN  FARMGATE  operations  was  reviewed  by  Mr.  McNaughton  with
William  Sullivan  of  the  Department  of  State  and  Michael  Forrestal  of  the  White
House  staff.  The  scenario  version  resulting  from  this  conference,  contains  the
JCS-recommended  time-phasing,  in  terms  of  D-Day  minus  X  approximations.  It
also  incorporates  specific  military  actions  recommended  by  the  JCS  submission.
Apparently,  only  this  scenario  and  the  detailed  description  of  "Steps  Which
Should  be  Taken  Now"  were  circulated  for  comment  by  other  agencies.  Ap-
parently, this  draft  provided  the  basis  for  scenario  discussions  held  in  Saigon
among  Secretary  Rusk,  Assistant  Secretary  William  Bundy,  CJCS  Wheeler,
Ambassador  Lodge  and  certain  military  and  civilian  members  of  the  Country
Team  on  19-20  April  1964.

A  later  version  was  prepared  on  20  April  and  forwarded  to  the  Chairman,
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  on  23  April.  Significantly,  it  contained  only  three  scenarios:
I.  "Uncommitting"  steps  which  should  be  taken  now;  II.  GVN  FARMGATE
graduated  overt  pressures  on  DRV;  III.  Contingency  Plan  for  U.S.  overt  response
to  DRV  CHICOM  reactions.  It  also  carried  the  following  comment  concerning
their  relationship:

It  should  be  noted  that  carrying  out  Scenario  I  does  not  necessarily
commit  the  U.S.  to  commence  Scenario  II;  and  that  Scenario  II  may  be
carried  out  without  requiring  resort  to  Scenario  III.  However,  since  Scenario
II  cannot  be  launched  without  our  being  prepared  to  carry  out  Scenario  III,
you  should  assume  that  it  may  be  necessary  for  the  D-Day  of  Scenario  III
to  occur  as  soon  as  10  days  after  the  D-Day  of  Scenario  II.  Scenario  III
is  a  contingency  plan  of  action  which  we  would  contemplate  putting  into
effect  only  if  the  DRV's  or  Chicom's  reaction  to  Scenario  II  was  judged  by
the  President  to  require  overt  U.S.  response.

At  the  Saigon  meeting,  the  concerns  of  the  local  officials  for  initiating  some
immediate  measures  to  relieve  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  came  into  con-
flict with  the  longer-range  scenario  approach.  Ambassador  Lodge  "questioned  the
wisdom  both  of  massive  publicity  and  of  massive  destruction  actions  before  a
well-planned  and  well  executed  diplomatic  attempt  had  been  made  to  persuade
NVM  to  call  off  the  VC."  He  went  on  to  propose  communicating  to  Hanoi,
through  a  third-country  "interlocutor,"  our  intent  to  embark  on  a  "carrot  and
stick  program,"  combining  the  threat  of  increasing  air  strikes  with  the  granting
of  some  assistance  to  the  DRV.  His  supporting  rationale  explicitly  cautioned
that  the  VC  reaction  to  large-scale  measures  against  the  North  might  be


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  163

violent  and  damaging  to  the  South  Vietnamese  economy.  More  significant  may
have  been  the  fact  that  the  "large-scale  measures"  proposed  in  the  scenario  came
quite  late  in  the  second  stage,  a  stage  that  may  not  have  been  entered — at  least
for  some  time.

What  the  Ambassador  had  in  mind  regarding  a  carrot  and  stick  approach  was
not  entirely  new.  It  had  first  been  proposed  in  his  memorandum  to  Governor
Harriman  on  30  October  1963.  It  was  raised  again  in  cables  to  the  White  House
on  20  February  and  15  March  1964.  Initially  proposed  in  the  context  of  a
scheme  to  encourage  the  neutrality  of  North  Vietnam,  the  carrot  and  stick  con-
cept envisioned  a  secret  contract  with  Hanoi  at  which  an  ultimatum  would  be
delivered  demanding  the  DRV's  cessation  of  support  for  the  VC  insurgency.
Rewards  for  compliance  would  include  our  making  available  food  imports,  to
help  alleviate  the  known  shortages  affecting  North  Vietnam  in  late  1963  (and
early  '64).  In  the  case  of  non-compliance,  we  would  undertake  previously
threatened  punitive  strikes  to  which  we  would  not  admit  publicly.  What  was
new  in  the  proposal  of  19  April  were:  ( 1 )  the  suggestion  for  using  a  third  country
intermediary  and  (2)  that  one  element  of  the  "carrot"  might  be  our  pledge
to  withdraw  some  U.S.  personnel  from  South  Vietnam.  The  latter  suggestion  was
criticized  by  William  Bundy  on  the  basis  that  we  didn't  yet  know  how  many
and  what  types  of  American  military  personnel  were  needed  in  South  Vietnam.
Lodge  countered  with  the  comment  that  "it  would  be  very  hard  indeed  for  Ho
Chi  Minh  to  provide  a  salable  package  for  his  own  people  and  for  other  com-
munist nations  unless  we  can  do  something  that  Hanoi  can  point  to,  even  though
it  would  not  be  a  real  concession  on  our  part."

The  ensuing  discussion,  on  a  variety  of  points,  provided  an  indication  of  some
of  Secretary  Rusk's  paramount  concerns,  which  may  shed  important  light  on  later
policy  decisions.  For  example,  he  sought  opinions  on  the  likely  GVN  reaction
to  a  Geneva  Conference  specifically  for  Laos.  In  another  context,  he  stated  "his
concern  that  the  extent  of  infiltration  and  other  provisions  of  support  from  the
North  be  proven  to  the  satisfaction  of  our  own  public,  of  our  allies,  and  of  the
neutralists."  During  a  discussion  of  ♦the  availability  of  other  Asian  troops  to
fight  in  Vietnam,  Secretary  Rusk  stat'ed  "that  we  are  not  going  to  take  on  the
masses  of  Red  China  with  our  limited  manpower  in  a  conventional  war."  He
also  stated  the  opinion  that  the  Chinese  would  not  opt  to  intervene  militarily
unless  they  felt  they  could  count  on  Soviet  support  and  that  we  could  bring
great  economic  pressure  to  bear  on  the  Chinese  through  our  allies.  While  ex-
pressing the  opinion  that  Hanoi's  renunciation  of  the  Viet  Cong  would  "take  the
heart  out  of  the  insurgency,"  he  indicated  doubt  that  elimination  of  North  Viet-
nam's industrial  targets  would  have  much  of  an  adverse  impact  on  it.  More-
over, the  Secretary  acknowledged  the  possibility  that  such  an  act  "would  have
forfeited  the  'hostage'  which  we  hold  in  the  North  .  .  .  without  markedly  affect-
ing the  fight  against  the  Viet  Cong,  at  least  in  the  short  run."

The  major  immediate  outcome  of  the  meeting  was  a  decision  to  go  ahead
with  the  suggestion  to  arrange  for  the  visit  of  a  third  country  interlocutor  to
Hanoi.  On  30  April,  Secretary  Rusk  visited  Ottawa  and  obtained  an  agreement
from  the  Canadian  Government  to  include  such  a  mission  among  the  instruc-
tions for  its  new  I.C.C.  representative.  According  to  the  agreement,  the  new
official,  J.  Blair  Seaborn,  would:  (1)  try  to  determine  Ho's  attitude  toward
Chinese  support,  whether  or  not  he  feels  over-extended,  and  his  aims  in  South
Vietnam;  (2)  stress  U.S.  determination  to  see  its  objectives  in  South  Vietnam
achieved;  (3)  emphasize  the  limits  of  U.S.  aims  in  Southeast  Asia  and  that  it
wanted  no  permanent  bases  or  installations  there;  and  (4)  convey  U.S.  willing-


164 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III


ness  to  assist  North  Vietnam  with  its  economic  problems.  Other  results  of  the  I

Saigon  meeting  consisted  of  a  variety  of  actions  recommended  by  Secretary  a

Rusk.  Of  these,  only  four  were  related  to  the  issue  of  miUtary  pressures  against  i

North  Vietnam.  These  were  recommendations  to  (1)  engage  "more  flags"  in  c

efforts  directly  supporting  the  GVN;  (2)  deploy  a  carrier  task  force  to  establish  c

a  permanent  U.S.  naval  presence  at  Cam  Ranh  Bay;  (3) initiate  anti-junk  a

operations  that  would  "inch  northward"  along  the  Vietnam  coast;  and  (4)  enlist  n

SEATO  countries  in  an  effort  to  isolate  the  DRV  from  economic  or  cultural  a

relations  with  the  Free  World.  s

D

4. Conflict  of  Short  and  Long  Term  Views:  Caution  Prevails

During  the  last  week  of  April  and  the  early  weeks  of  May,  the  contention

between  those  urging  prompt  measures  and  those  counseling  a  deliberate,  ^
cautious  pacing  of  our  actions  continued.  For  example,  Walt  Rostow  urged

Secretary  Rusk  to  consider  how  difficult  it  would  be  to  make  a  credible  case  j
in  support  of  actions  to  force  Hanoi's  adherence  to  the  Geneva  Accords  if
political  deterioration  took  place  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam.  Predicting  such

an  eventuality  in  the  coming  months,  he  implied  that  the  necessary  actions  should  ^

be  taken  soon.  Similarly,  Ambassador  Lodge  continued  to  advocate  prompt  e

implementation  of  his  carrot  and  stick  approach  including,  if  VC  provocations  ?

warranted,  a  well-timed  reprisal  just  prior  to  Commissioner  Seaborn's  arrival  t

in  Hanoi.  These  views  were  communicated  to  Secretary  McNamara  and  William  \

Sullivan  during  their  visit  to  Saigon,  12-13  May,  and  confirmed  in  a  cable  to  !

the  President  three  days  later.  a

The  JCS  commented  on  the  final  version  of  the  State-ISA  political-military  1

scenarios  and  criticized  them  for  not  including  the  more  immediate  actions  re-  [
quested  in  NSAM  288:  namely,  border  control  and  retaliatory  operations.

Making  a  distinction  between  border  operations  already  arranged  for  (Recom-  I

mendation  11)  and  those  intended  by  Recommendation  12,  they  advocated  in-  [

corporating  in  the  second-stage  scenario  retaliatory  operations  and  overt  military  e

pressures  against  North  Vietnam.  They  also  urged  including  border  control  (

operations  of  battalion-size  or  larger,  low-level  reconnaissance  by  U.S.  aircraft,  !  i

and  VNAF  air  operations  in  Laos  that  include  strikes  on  bridges  and  armed  ;

route  reconnaissance.  In  justifying  such  actions,  they  stated:  t

.  .  .  military  operations  against  the  DRV  to  help  stabilize  the  situation  in
the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  and  other  operations  planned  to  help  stabilize  the  ,
situation  in  Laos,  involve  the  attack  of  the  same  target  systems  and  to  a
considerable  extent  the  same  targets.  Assistance  in  the  achievement  of  the
objective  in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  through  operations  against  NVN
could  likewise  have  a  similar  result  in  Laos,  offering  the  possibility  of  a
favorable  long-term  solution  to  the  insurgency  problem  in  Southeast  Asia.  1  '

However,  the  deliberate,  cautious  approach  continued  to  hold  sway.  Secre-
tary McNamara's  trip  to  Saigon,  called  for  early  in  the  second-stage  scenario  ,
as  a  means  to  obtain  General  Khanh's  agreement  to  initiate  overt  operations
against  the  North,  did  not  include  this  purpose.  On  the  contrary,  a  week  prior
to  the  visit  General  Khanh  had  raised  with  Ambassador  Lodge  the  issue  of
putting  his  country  on  a  fully  mobilized  war  footing — accompanying  it  with  a
declaration  that  further  interference  by  Hanoi  in  South  Vietnamese  affairs  would
bring  reprisals — and  Secretary  McNamara  was  instructed  to  impress  upon


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  165

Khanh  that  such  drastic  measures  and  threatening  gestures  were  unnecessary
at  the  moment.  More  important,  it  was  stressed  that  the  GVN  "systematically
and  aggressively  demonstrate  to  the  world  that  the  subversion  of  the  South  is
directed  from  Hanoi,"  through  sending  "capable  ambassadors  to  the  important
capitals  of  the  world  to  convince  governments  of  this  fact."  Moreover,  while
assuring  General  Khanh  that  our  commitment  to  his  country  and  Laos  "does
not  rule  out  the  use  of  force  .  .  .  against  North  Vietnam,"  the  Secretary  was
advised  to  remind  him  that  "such  actions  must  be  supplementary  to  and  not  a
substitute  for  successful  counterinsurgency  in  the  South" — and  that  "we  do
not  intend  to  provide  military  support  nor  undertake  the  military  objective  of
'rolling  back'  communist  control  in  North  Vietnam."


D. DEALING  WITH  THE  LAOTIAN  CRISIS

1. Laos  in  Danger:  "Pressure  Planning"

In  mid-May  1964,  a  new  factor  entered  the  policy-shaping  process — a  factor
which  cast  a  shadow  of  crisis  management  over  the  entire  decision  making
environment.  On  17  May,  pro-communist  forces  in  Laos  began  an  offensive
which  led  to  their  control  of  a  significant  portion  of  the  Plaine  des  Jarres.  On
the  21st,  the  United  States  obtained  Souvanna  Phouma's  permission  to  conduct
low-level  reconaissance  operations  over  the  occupied  areas.  For  several  weeks
the  offensive  threatened  to  destroy  the  security  of  the  neutralist-rightist  position —
and  with  it  the  political  underpinning  of  U.S.-Laotian  policy.  These  developments
lent  a  greater  sense  of  urgency  to  the  arguments  of  those  advisers  favoring
prompt  measures  to  strengthen  the  U.S.  position  in  Southeast  Asia.

The  most  avid  of  those  urging  prompt  action  were  the  JCS.  On  19  May  they
had  recommended  a  new,  more  intensive  series  of  covert  operations  for  the  four-
month  Phase  II  under  OPLAN  34-A.  [Doc.  161]  On  the  23rd,  referring  to  their
earlier  recommendations  to  incorporate  larger  border  contol  and  retaliatoy
operations  and  overt  graduated  pressures  in  the  next-phase  scenario,  they  ex-
pressed opinions  on  the  urgency  of  preparing  for  such  actions.  Particular  em-
phasis was  placed  on  the  need  to  consult  with  the  GVN  so  that  the  necessary
training  and  joint  operational  preparations  could  take  place.  The  JCS  prodded
State  with  the  comment,  "The  Department  of  State  should  take  the  lead  on
this  but  as  yet  has  not,"  at  the  same  time  recalling  that  the  operations  in  question
had  been  provided  for  under  the  approved  CINCPAC  OPLAN  37-64  (17
April  1964).  In  another  plea  for  prompt  implementation,  they  argued  that  since
these  operations  were  to  be  plausibly  deniable  by  the  United  States,  "efforts  to
create  the  necessary  climate  of  opinion  should  not  be,  of  necessity,  too  time  con-
suming."

Figuring  prominently  in  the  retaliatory  operations  and  the  graduated  pres-
sures advocated  by  the  JCS  against  North  Vietnam  were  air  strikes — some  by
the  VNAF  alone  and  some  in  cooperation  with  USAF/FARMGATE  and  other
U.S.  air  units.  What  they  thought  these  kinds  of  operations  could  accomplish
varied  according  to  the  targets  struck  and  the  composition  of  the  attacking  force.
Assuming  an  air  campaign  ordered  for  the  purpose  of:  (1)  causing  the  DRV
to  stop  supporting  the  Viet  Cong  and  Pathet  Lao  and  (2)  reducing  its  capability
to  renew  such  support,  the  JCS  perceived  the  following  categories  of  accom-
plishment: Category  A — They  believed  that  undertaking  "armed  reconnaissance


166 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

along  highways  leading  to  Laos,"  striking  "airfields  identified  with  supporting"
the  insurgents,  and  destroying  "supply  and  ammunition  depots,  petroleum  stor-
age and  military  (installations)  connected  with  PL/VC  support"  would  result  in
"a  reduction  of  DRV  support.''  Category  B — They  believed  that  striking  the
"remaining  airfields,"  destroying  "important  railroad  and  highway  bridges"  and
"depots  in  northern  NVN,"  conducting  aerial  mining  operations,  and  bombing
"petroleum  storage  in  Hanoi  and  Haiphong"  would  result  in  a  reduced  "DRV
military  capability  to  take  action  against  Laos  and  the  RVN."  Category  C —
They  cited  the  remaining  capability  for  effectively  destroying  the  North  Viet-
namese industrial  base.

In  the  same  appraisal,  the  ICS  went  on  to  estimate  the  time  required  to  achieve
85%  damage  against  the  various  target  categories,  using  different  force  com-
binations in  continuous  operations.  For  Category  A,  they  estimated,  it  would
take  the  VNAF  alone  more  than  seven  months,  //  they  could  sustain  combat
operations  that  long;  the  VNAF  plus  FARMGATE  B-57's  would  require  over
two  months.  By  using,  in  addition,  U.S.  land  and  carrier-based  air  units  readily
available  in  the  Western  Pacific,  they  claimed  that  targets  in  Category  A  could
be  eliminated  in  only  twelve  days;  those  in  all  categories  could  be  destroyed  in
46  days.  They  added  that  sustaining  this  destruction  on  LOC  targets  would  re-
quire restrikes  "conducted  for  an  indeterminate  period."

The  JCS  were  not  the  only  Presidential  advisers  to  sense  the  urgency  created
by  the  situation  in  Laos.  Referring  to  "recent  steps  with  regard  to  bombing  opera-
tions in  Laos  and  reconnaissance  which  step  up  the  pace,"  Secretary  Rusk  cabled
Ambassador  Lodge  to  seek  suggestions  for  ways  to  achieve  greater  solidarity  in
South  Vietnam.  He  explained  that  in  Washington,  the  fragility  of  the  situation  in
South  Vietnam  was  seen  as  an  obstacle  to  further  U.S.  military  involvement  in
Southeast  Asia.  As  he  stated,  "We  need  to  assure  the  President  that  everything
humanly  possible  is  being  done  both  in  Washington  and  by  the  government  of
Vietnam  to  provide  a  solid  base  of  determination  from  which  far-reaching  de-
cisions could  proceed."  Lodge's  reply  reflected  a  new  wrinkle  in  his  usual  pro-
posals for  prompt,  but  carefully  masked  actions.  He  expressed  the  attitude  that
some  kind  of  firm  action  against  North  Vietnam  by  U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese
forces  was  the  only  way  to  bring  about  a  significant  improvement  in  the  GVN
effort.  This  view  complemented  an  apparently  growing  belief  among  Presidential
advisers  "that  additional  efforts  within  South  Vietnam  by  the  U.S.  will  not  pre-
vent further  deterioration  there."

This  belief,  together  with  the  threat  presented  by  the  Pathet  Lao  offensive,  led
to  a  resumption  of  scenario  development.  However,  in  the  new  "crisis  manage-
ment" atmosphere,  several  new  elements  affected  the  process.  One  was  the  fact
that  the  latest  scenario  was  prepared  as  a  draft  memorandum  for  the  President.
Another  was  the  expectation  that  it  would  be  presented  to  and  discussed  among
the  principal  officials  of  the  participating  agencies,  serving  as  an  Executive  Com-
mittee of  the  National  Security  Council.  And  finally,  the  crisis  in  Laos  apparently
had  focused  advisory  interest  primarily  on  one  stage — that  dealing  with  overt
operations  against  North  Vietnam.  The  scenario  no  longer  contained  a  section
devoted  to  "uncommitting  steps  which  should  be  taken  now."  The  rationale  be-
hind this  shift  of  emphasis  was  explained  to  Ambassador  Lodge,  an  outspoken
critic  of  both  the  overt  approach  and  the  scenario,  by  Secretary  Rusk:

It  is  our  present  view  here  that  [substantial  initial  attacks  without  ac-
knowledgment] would  simply  not  be  feasible.  Even  if  Hanoi  itself  did  not
publicize  them,  there  are  enough  ICC  and  other  observers  in  North  Viet-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  167

nam  who  might  pick  them  up  and  there  is  also  the  major  possibility  of
leakage  at  the  South  Vietnam  end.  Thus,  publicity  seems  almost  inevitable
to  us  here  for  any  attack  that  did  significant  damage.

2. A  .Ww  Scenario:  30  Days  of  Sequential  Politico-Military  Action

On  the  same  day  that  the  JCS  urged  that  the  GVN  be  consulted  regarding
preparations  for  border  control  and  retaliatory  operations,  the  new  scenario  of
political  and  miHtary  actions  was  completed.  The  scenario  called  for  a  30-day
sequence  of  military  and  political  pressures  coupled  with  initiatives  to  enter
negotiations  with  Hanoi  (see  Table  1).  Military  actions  would  not  start  until
after  "favorable  action  on  a  U.S.  Congressional  Joint  Resolution"  supporting
U.S.  resistance  to  DRV  aggressions  in  Southeast  Asia.  Initially,  the  strikes  would
be  carried  out  by  GVN  aircraft,  but  as  they  progressed,  USAF  FARMGATE
and  other  U.S.  air  units  would  join  in.  These  ''would  continue  despite  negotia-
tions, until  there  was  clear  evidence  that  North  Vietnam  had  stopped  its  sub-
version of  the  South."  The  negotiating  objectives  would  be  to  obtain  both  agree-
ment and  evidence  that  (1)  "terrorism,  armed  attacks,  and  armed  resistance
stop"  and  (2)  "communications  on  the  networks  out  of  the  North  are  conducted
entirely  in  uncoded  form."

Presented  along  with  the  scenario  were  assessments  of  likely  communist  re-
actions and  the  possible  U.S.  responses  to  these  moves.  The  most  likely  mili-
tar\'  reactions  to  the  scenario  actions  were  seen  as  expanded  insurgency  opera-
tions, including  possible  "sizeable  infiltration"  of  North  Vietnamese  ground
forces,  and  a  drive  toward  the  Mekong  by  Pathet  Lao  and  North  Vietnamese
forces.  The  Soviet  Union  was  expected  to  intensify  its  diplomatic  opposition  to
U.S.  policies  and  China  was  expected  to  (1)  augment  North  Vietnamese  air
defense  capabilities,  and  (2)  successfully  dissuade  Hanoi  from  any  willingness
(particularly  after  U.S.  air  operations  began)  to  reduce  its  support  of  the  Viet
Cong.  To  counter  communist  reactions,  the  proposal  specified  in  each  contin-
gency that  intensified  operations  against  North  Vietnam  would  be  the  most  effec-
tive option.  In  response  to  intensified  insurgency,  considered  the  least  intense
(though  most  likely)  alternative  available  to  the  communist  powers,  the  pro-
posal included  provision  for  augmenting  South  Vietnamese  forces  "by  U.S.
ground  forces  prepositioned  in  South  Vietnam  or  on  board  ship  nearby."

The  May  23,  1964  scenario  read  as  follows:  (Table  1 )

1.  Stall  off  any  "conference  on  [Laos  or]  Vietnam  until  D-Day."

2.  Intermediary  (Canadian?)  tell  North  Vietnam  in  general  terms  that
U.S.  does  not  want  to  destroy  the  North  Vietnam  regime  (and  indeed  is
willing  "to  provide  a  carrot"),  but  is  determined  to  protect  South  Vietnam
from  North  Vietnam.

3.  (D-30)  "Presidential  speech  in  general  terms  launching  Joint  Resolu-
tion.

4.  (D-20)  Obtain  Joint  Resolution  approving  past  actions  and  authoriz-
ing whatever  is  necessary  with  respect  to  Vietnam.

Concurrently:  An  effort  should  be  made  to  strengthen  the  posture  in
South  Vietnam.  Integrating  (interlarding  in  a  single  chain  of  command)
the  South  Vietnamese  and  U.S.  military  and  civilian  elements  critical  to
pacification,  down  at  least  to  the  district  level,  might  be  undertaken.

5.  (D-16)  Direct  CINCPAC  to  take  all  prepositioning  and  logistic  ac-
tions that  can  be  taken  "quietly"  for  the  D-Day  forces  and  the  forces  de-
scribed in  Paragraph  17  below.


168 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

6.  (D-15)  Get  Khanh's  agreement  to  start  overt  South  Vietnamese  air
attacks  against  targets  in  the  North  (see  D-Day  item  15  below),  and  inform
him  of  U.S.  guarantee  to  protect  South  Vietnam  in  the  event  of  North
Vietnamese  and/or  Chinese  retaliation.

7.  (D-14)  Consult  with  Thailand  and  the  Philippines  to  get  permission
for  U.S.  deployments;  and  consult  with  them  plus  U.K.,  Australia,  New
Zealand  and  Pakistan,  asking  for  their  open  political  support  for  the  under-
taking and  for  their  participation  in  the  re-enforcing  action  to  be  under-
taken in  anticipation  of  North  Vietnamese  and/or  Chinese  retaliation.

8.  (D-13)  Release  an  expanded  "Jordan  Report,"  including  recent  pho-
tography and  evidence  of  the  communications  nets,  giving  full  docu-
mentation of  North  Vietnamese  supply  and  direction  of  the  Viet  Cong.

9.  (D-12)  Direct  CINCPAC  to  begin  moving  forces  and  making  specific
plans  on  the  assumption  that  strikes  will  be  made  on  D-Day  (see  Attach-
ment B*  in  backup  materials  for  deployments).

10.  (D-10)  Khanh  makes  speech  demanding  that  North  Vietnam  stop
aggression,  threatening  unspecified  military  action  if  he  does  not.  (He
could  refer  to  a  "carrot.")

1 1.  (D-3)  Discussions  with  Allies  not  covered  in  Item  7  above.

12.  (D-3)  President  informs  U.S.  public  (and  thereby  North  Vietnam)
that  action  may  come,  referring  to  Khanh  speech  (Item  10  above)  and
declaring  support  for  South  Vietnam.

13.  (D-1)  Khanh  announces  that  all  efforts  have  failed  and  that  attacks
are  imminent.  (Again  he  refers  to  limited  goal  and  possibly  to  "carrot.")

14.  (D-Day)  Remove  U.S.  dependents.

15.  (D-Day)  Launch  first  strikes  (see  Attachment  C**  for  targets).
Initially,  mine  their  ports  and  strike  North  Vietnam's  transport  and  related
ability  (bridges,  trains)  to  move  South;  and  then  against  targets  which
have  maximum  psychological  effect  on  the  North's  willingness  to  stop  in-
surgency— POL  storage,  selected  airfields,  barracks/training  areas,  bridges,
railroad  yards,  port  facilities,  communications,  and  industries.  Initially,
these  strikes  would  be  by  South  Vietnamese  aircraft;  they  could  then  be
expanded  by  adding  FARMGATE,  or  U.S.  aircraft,  or  any  combination
of  them.

16.  (D-Day)  Call  for  conference  on  Vietnam  (and  go  to  UN).  State
the  limited  objective:  Not  to  overthrow  the  North  Vietnam  regime  nor  to
destroy  the  country,  but  to  stop  DRV-directed  Viet  Cong  terrorism  and
resistance  to  pacification  efforts  in  the  South.  Essential  that  it  be  made
clear  that  attacks  on  the  North  will  continue  {i.e.,  no  cease-fire)  until  (a)
terrorism,  armed  attacks,  and  armed  resistance  to  pacification  efforts  in  the
South  stop,  and  (b)  communications  on  the  networks  out  of  the  North  are
conducted  entirely  in  uncoded  form."

The  scenario  was  circulated  among  members  of  the  ExCom  and  discussed
during  their  meetings  of  24  and  25  May.  Apparently,  modifications  were  made
in  the  course  of  these  meetings,  as  notations  in  the  SecDef  files  indicate  scenario
versions  of  24,  25  and  26  May.  In  addition  to  the  assessments  that  accompanied
the  scenario  proposal,  the  discussants  had  available  to  them  an  estimate  of
likely  consequences  of  the  proposed  actions,  prepared  by  the  Board  of  National
Estimates,  CIA,  with  State  and  DIA  assistance,  and  concurred  in  by  the  U.S.
Intelligence  Board.

The  national  estimate  agreed  essentially  with  the  proposal's  assessment  of


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  169

Soviet  and  Chinese  reactions  and  concluded  that  Hanoi's  would  vary  with  the
intensity  of  the  U.S.  GVN  actions.  The  national  intelligence  boards  believed
that  Hanoi  "would  order  the  Viet  Cong  and  Pathet  Lao  to  refrain  from  dramatic
new  attacks,  and  might  reduce  the  level  of  the  insurrections  for  the  moment"
in  response  to  U.S.  force  deployments  or  GVN-USAF/FARMGATE  attacks.
The  expected  DRV  rationale,  supported  by  Peking  and  Moscow,  would  be  to
bank  on  "a  new  Geneva  Conference  or  UN  action  .  .  .  [to]  bring  a  cessation  of
:  attacks"  and  to  stabilize  communist  gains  in  Vietnam  and  Laos.  Communist
agitation  of  world  opinion  would  be  employed  to  bring  on  the  conference.  If
attacks  on  North  Vietnam  continued,  the  intelligence  boards  saw  Hanoi  intensify-
ing its  political  initiatives,  but  also  possibly  increasing  "the  tempo  of  the  insur-
rections in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos."  If  these  tactics  failed  to  produce  a  settle-
ment "and  North  Vietnam  began  to  suffer  considerable  destruction,"  the  boards
estimated:

i  We  incline  to  the  view  that  [DRV  leaders]  would  lower  their  terms  for

a  negotiating  outcome;  they  would  do  so  in  the  interests  of  preserving  their
regime  and  in  the  expectation  of  being  able  to  renew  the  insurrections  in
South  Vietnam  and  Laos  at  a  later  date.  There  would  nevertheless  be  a
significant  danger  that  they  would  fight,  believing  that  the  U.S.  would
still  not  be  willing  to  undertake  a  major  ground  war,  or  that  if  it  was,  it
could  ultimately  be  defeated  by  the  methods  which  were  successful  against
the  French.

1 In  its  discussion  of  the  problem  of  compelling  Hanoi  to  halt  the  VC  insurgency,
the  national  estimate  emphasized  that  this  depended  on  affecting  the  will  of  the
DRV  leaders.  It  stressed  that  the  measures  called  for  in  the  scenario  "would
not  seriously  affect  communist  capabilities  to  continue  that  insurrection,"  stating
that  "the  primary  sources  of  communist  strength  in  South  Vietnam  are  indige-
I  nous."  On  the  other  hand,  it  predicted  that  withdrawal  of  material  assistance
!  from  North  Vietnam  would  badly  hurt  the  Pathet  Lao  capability.  Because  of
I  the  crucial  importance  of  Hanoi's  will,  the  estimate  argued  that  the  DRV  "must
'  understand  that  although  the  U.S.  is  hot  seeking  the  destruction  of  the  DRV
regime,  the  U.S.  is  fully  prepared  to  bring  ascending  pressures  to  bear  to
persuade  Hanoi  to  reduce  the  insurrections."  But,  while  comprehending  U.S.
purposes  in  the  early  phase  of  the  scenario  actions,  they  may  "tend  increasingly
j  to  doubt  the  limited  character  of  U.S.  aims"  as  the  scale  of  the  attacks  increases.
I  The  report  adds :

!

Similarly,  the  retaliatory  measures  which  Hanoi  might  take  in  Laos
I  and  South  Vietnam  might  make  it  increasingly  difficult  for  the  U.S.  to

regard  its  objectives  as  attainable  by  limited  means.  Thus  difficulties  of
comprehension  might  increase  on  both  sides  as  the  scale  of  action  mounted.

3. Rejection  of  Scenario:  "Use  Force  If  Necessary"

At  its  meeting  on  25  May,  the  ExCom  apparently  decided  not  to  retain  the
scenario  approach  in  the  courses  of  action  it  would  recommend  to  the  Presi-
dent. At  least,  it  abandoned  the  time-phasing  aspects  of  the  series  of  actions

I  contained  in  the  scenario  proposal,  and  it  made  explicit  its  purpose  not  to  embark
on  a  series  of  moves  "aimed  at  the  use  of  force  as  an  end  in  itself."  The  avail-

'  able  evidence  is  far  from  conclusive  on  the  reasons  why  the  scenario  approach
was  cast  aside,  but  it  seems  clear  that  the  potential  for  entering  into  an  escalating


170 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

conflict  in  which  our  Hmited  objectives  might  become  obscured  weighed  heavily
in  the  decision.

In  addition  to  the  evidence  already  cited,  a  strong  indication  of  the  ExCom's
desire  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  escalation  is  contained  in  the  draft  memorandum
prepared  for  President  Johnson,  as  a  result  of  the  25  May  meeting.  In  this
memorandum,  it  was  recommended  that  the  President  decide:

.  .  .  that  the  U.S.  will  use  selected  and  carefully  graduated  military
force  against  North  Vietnam,  under  the  following  conditions:  (1)  after
appropriate  diplomatic  and  political  warning  and  preparation,  (2)  and
unless  such  warning  and  preparation — in  combination  with  other  efforts —
should  produce  a  sufficient  improvement  of  non-Communist  prospects  in
South  Vietnam  and  in  Laos  to  make  military  action  against  North  Vietnam
unnecessary.

The  recommendation  was  based  on  an  explicit  assumption  "that  a  decision  to
use  force  if  necessary,  backed  by  resolute  and  extensive  deployment,  and  con-
veyed by  every  possible  means  to  our  adversaries,  gives  the  best  present  chance
of  avoiding  the  actual  use  of  such  force."  Reflecting  the  influence  of  the  na-
tional intelligence  boards'  rationale  concerning  "U.S.  preparatory  and  low-scale
action,"  the  ExCom  also  stated  the  belief  that  "selective  and  carefully  prepared
military  action  against  North  Vietnam  will  not  trigger  acts  of  terror  and  military
operations  by  the  Viet  Cong  which  would  engulf  the  Khanh  regime."  What  the
ExCom  meant  by  "selective  and  carefully  prepared  military  actions"  is  suggested
by  its  request,  on  the  same  day,  for  ICS  views  on  the  feasibility  of  telegraphing
intended  action  through  military  deployments.

Despite  its  abandonment  of  the  paced  scenario  approach,  the  ExCom  pro-
posed that  many  of  the  actions  incorporated  in  the  scenario  be  undertaken.
Although  proposing  a  particular  order  for  these  actions,  the  committee  suggested
that  the  sequence  may  need  to  be  modified  in  reaction  to  specific  developments,
especially  in  view  of  different  choices  available  to  the  enemy.  In  addition  to  the
Presidential  decision,  the  recommended  actions  included:  (1)  communication
of  our  resolve  and  limited  objectives  to  Hanoi  through  the  Canadian  intermedi-
ary; (2)  conducting  a  high-level  Southeast  Asian  strategy  conference  in  Hono-
lulu; (3)  diplomatic  initiatives  at  the  UN  to  present  the  case  for  DRV  aggres-
sion; (4)  formal  and  bilateral  consultation  with  SEATO  allies,  including  the
question  of  obtaining  allied  force  commitments;  (5)  seeking  a  Congressional
Resolution  in  support  of  U.S.  resistance  to  communist  aggression  in  Southeast
Asia;  (6)  periodic  force  deployments  toward  the  region;  and  (7)  an  initial  strike
against  North  Vietnam,  "designed  to  have  more  deterrent  than  destructive  im-
pact" and  accompanied  by  an  active  diplomatic  offensive  to  restore  peace  in  the
area — including  agreement  to  a  Geneva  Conference.  Further,  the  ExCom  recom-
mended that  in  the  execution  of  these  actions,  all  functional  and  geographic  ele-
ments "should  be  treated  as  parts  of  a  single  problem:  the  protection  of  [all]
Southeast  Asia  from  further  communist  encroachment."

If  all  of  the  decisions  and  actions  contained  in  the  draft  memorandum  were
in  fact  recommended  to  the  President,  all  of  them  were  not  approved  immedi-
ately. It  is  doubtful  that  the  President  made  the  decision  to  use  force  if  necessary,
since  some  advisers  were  still  urging  the  same  kind  of  decision  on  him  in  the
weeks  to  follow.  The  plan  to  convey  a  message  to  Hanoi  by  Canadian  channels
was  carried  out  on  June  18,  but  it  may  have  been  decided  on  already  before  the
meeting,  given  the  earlier  negotiations  with  Ottawa.  The  President  did  approve


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  171

the  calling  of  a  conference  in  Honolulu  "to  review  for  [his]  final  approval  a  series
of  plans  for  effective  action"  in  Southeast  Asia.  U.S.  policy  toward  Southeast
Asia  was  explained  by  Ambassador  Stevenson  in  a  major  UN  speech  on  21  May.
He  did  not  address  the  Security  Council  on  this  subject  again  until  6  August,
after  the  Tonkin  Gulf  episode.  It  is  doubtful  if  less  publicized  statements  at  the
UN  contained  the  "hitherto  secret  evidence"  suggested  in  the  ExCom  sessions
as  "proving  Hanoi's  responsibility"  before  the  world  diplomats.  It  is  likely  that
questions  of  consulting  with  SEATO  allies,  deploying  additional  forces  to
Southeast  Asia,  and  requesting  a  congressional  resolution  were  held  in  abeyance
pending  that  meeting.

One  of  the  kinds  of  developments  which  the  ExCom  thought  would  necessitate
a  flexible  approach  to  its  proposed  action  sequence  occurred  prior  to  the  Hono-
lulu meeting.  Its  effect  was  to  remove  some  of  the  "crisis  management"  pressure
from  further  policy  deliberations.  On  27  May,  the  Polish  Government  proposed
a  conference  format  for  Laos  that  avoided  many  of  the  undesirable  features  of
the  Geneva  proposals  which  had  been  supported  by  communist  governments  in
the  past.  After  two  days  of  deliberations,  during  which  time  Secretary  Rusk  de-
parted for  Nehru's  funeral  in  New  Delhi,  a  policy  group  composed  of  several
ExCom  members  determined  that  the  United  States  should  attempt  initially
"to  treat  [the]  Lao  question  separately  from  [the]  SVN-NVN  problem."  Rea-
soning that  "if  [a]  satisfactory  Lao  solution  [were]  not  achieved,  [a]  basis  should
have  been  laid  for  possible  subsequent  actions  that  would  permit  our  dealing
more  effectively  with  NVN  with  respect  [to]  both  SVN  and  Laos,"  the  group
decided  to  recommend  to  the  President  that  he  accept  the  Polish  proposal.  Inte-
gral to  the  approach  would  be  a  "clear  expression  of  U.S.  determination  .  .  .
that  U.S.  [is]  not  willing  [to]  write  off  Laos  to  [the]  communists,"  and  assurances
to  Souvanna  Phouma  "that  we  would  be  prepared  to  give  him  prompt  and  direct
military  support  if  the  Polish  Conference  was  [sic]  not  successful."  With  respect
to  our  larger  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia,  the  proposed  discussions  among
representatives  of  Laos,  the  I.C.C.  and  the  Geneva  co-chairmen  would  have  the
advantage  of  permitting  Souvanna  to  continue  to  insist  upon  his  preconditions
for  any  resumed  14-nation  conference,  and  would  avoid  the  issue  of  Vietnam.

E. THE  QUESTION  OF  PRESSURES  AGAINST  THE  NORTH

With  the  policy  line  and  the  courses  of  action  for  dealing  with  Laos  deter-
mined, and  with  the  Laotian  military  situation  having  become  somewhat  stabi-
lized, the  Administration  turned  to  the  broader  issues  of  its  Southeast  Asian
policy.  These  were  among  the  principal  concerns  of  the  Honolulu  Conference,
1-2  June  1964.

1. The  Honolulu  Conference:  Defining  the  U.S.  Commitment

The  Honolulu  Conference  was  approached  with  the  realization  that  the
"gravest  decisions  are  in  front  of  us  and  other  governments  about  [the]  free
world's  interest  in  and  commitment  to  [the]  security  of  Southeast  Asia."  The
State  Department  saw  such  decisions  focusing  on  three  "central  questions":
(1)  Is  the  security  of  Southeast  Asia  vital  to  the  United  States  and  the  Free
World?  (2)  Are  additional  steps  which  carry  risks  of  escalation  necessary?  (3)
Will  the  additional  steps  accomplish  our  goals  of  stopping  intrusions  of  Hanoi
and  Peking  into  South  Vietnam?  The  Conference  apparently  began  with  the
answer  to  the  first  question  as  a  basic  assumption.  Again  State:


172 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

Our  point  of  departure  is  and  must  be  that  we  cannot  accept  [the]  over-
running of  Southeast  Asia  by  Hanoi  and  Peiping.

In  addition  to  considering  specific  proposals  for  improving  conditions  in  South
Vietnam  (Administration  officials  entered  the  Conference  with  another  assump-
tion that  "we  must  do  everything  in  our  power  to  stiffen  and  strengthen  the
situation  in  South  Vietnam"),  the  discussions  in  Honolulu  were  intended  to  help
clarify  issues  with  respect  to  exerting  pressures  against  North  Vietnam.

i

2. At  Honolulu:  Exerting  Pressure  on  NVN  \

In  preparation  for  the  conference,  CINCPAC  and  COMUSMACV  had  been
asked  by  JCS  Chairman  Taylor  to  develop  their  views  on  such  questions  as:  I

( 1 )  What  military  actions  might  be  taken  in  ascending  order  of  gravity
to  impress  Hanoi  with  our  intention  to  strike  NVN?

(2)  What  should  be  the  purpose  and  pattern  of  the  initial  air  strikes
against  NVN?

(3)  What  is  your  concept  of  the  actions  and  reactions  which  may  arise
from  the  progressive  implementation  of  CINCPAC  37-64  and  32-64?  How
may  NVN  and  Communist  China  respond  to  our  escalating  pressures?

(4)  If  at  some  point  Hanoi  agrees  to  desist  from  further  help  to  VC  &
PL,  how  can  we  verify  fulfillment?  How  long  should  we  be  prepared  to  j
maintain  our  readiness  posture  while  awaiting  verification?  i

(5)  What  help  should  be  sought  from  SEATO  nations  in  relation  to
the  situation  (a)  in  Laos?  (b)  in  SVN?  '

Just  prior  to  the  conference,  the  JCS  also  submitted  their  views,  to  which
General  Taylor  did  not  subscribe.  Expressing  concern  over  "a  lack  of  definition"  i
of  U.S.  objectives,  the  JCS  asserted  that  it  was  "their  first  obligation  to  define  a  I
militarily  valid  objective  for  Southeast  Asia  and  then  advocate  a  desirable  mili-
tary course  of  action  to  achieve  that  objective."  With  its  basis  identified  as  "mili-
tary considerations,"  they  then  made  the  recommendation  that:

.  .  .  the  United  States  should  seek  through  military  actions  to  accomplish
destruction  of  the  North  Vietnamese  will  and  capabilities  as  necessary  to
compel  the  Democratic  Government  of  Vietnam  (DRV)  to  cease  providing
support  to  the  insurgencies  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  Only  a  course  of
action  geared  to  this  objective  can  assure  that  the  North  Vietnamese  sup-
port of  the  subversive  efforts  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  will  terminate.

However,  the  JCS  went  on  to  note  that  "some  current  thinking  appears  to  dis-
miss the  objective  in  favor  of  a  lesser  objective,  one  visualizing  limited  military
action  which,  hopefully,  would  cause  the  North  Vietnamese  to  decide  to  termi-
nate their  subversive  support  .  .  ."  Drawing  a  distinction  between  destroying
DRV  capability  to  support  the  insurgencies  and  "an  enforced  changing  of  pol-  ?
icy  .  .  .  which,  if  achieved,  may  well  be  temporary,"  they  stated  their  opinion
that  "this  lesser  objective"  was  inadequate  for  the  current  situation.  They  agreed,
however,  to  undertake  a  course  of  action  to  achieve  this  lesser  objective  as  an
"initial  measure."

What  the  JCS  proposed  as  this  "initial  measure"  were  a  pair  of  sustained  at-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  173

tacks  to  destroy  target  complexes  directly  associated  with  support  of  the  com-
munist efforts  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam.  Military  installations  at  Vinh,  which
served  as  a  major  resupply  facility  for  transshipping  war  materiel  into  Laos,
and  a  similar  facility  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  were  recommended.  In  support  of  these
operations,  which  would  require  U.S.  participation  to  achieve  "timely  destruc-
tion" as  necessary  to  achieve  the  objectives,  the  JCS  stated  a  need  to  demon-
strate forcefully  that  our  pattern  of  responses  to  Hanoi's  aggression  had  changed.
They  argued:

We  should  not  waste  critical  time  and  more  resources  in  another  pro-
tracted series  of  "messages,"  but  rather  we  should  take  positive,  prompt,
and  meaningful  military  action  to  underscore  our  meaning  that  after  more
than  two  years  of  tolerating  this  North  Vietnamese  support  we  are  now
determined  that  it  will  stop.

Aside  from  the  JCS,  whose  views  were  not  shared  by  their  spokesman  at
Honolulu,  the  main  voices  in  support  of  the  idea  of  attacking  the  North  in
early  June  1964  seemed  to  come  from  Saigon.  But  this  source  of  advocacy
seemed  to  anticipate  short-term  impacts  on  South  Vietnam,  rather  than  ultimate
effects  on  the  DRV.  On  the  way  to  Honolulu,  Secretary  Rusk  had  talked  with
General  Khanh,  who  argued  that  South  Vietnam  could  not  win  against  the
Viet  Cong  without  some  military  action  outside  its  borders.  In  particular,  the
General  urged  clearing  out  the  communist  forces  in  eastern  Laos,  who  might
move  across  the  border  and  attempt  to  cut  South  Vietnam  in  two,  with  the
implication  that  GVN  forces  could  carry  out  the  task  if  given  air  support.  He
also  favored  attacks  directly  on  North  Vietnam,  but  said  that  they  "should  be
selective  and  designed  to  minimize  the  chances  of  a  drastic  communist  re-
sponse."

At  the  conference's  initial  plenary  session,  Ambassador  Lodge  also  argued
in  favor  of  attacks  on  the  North.  In  answer  to  Secretary  Rusk's  query  about
South  Vietnamese  popular  attitudes,  which  supported  Hanoi's  revolutionary
aims,  the  Ambassador  stated  his  convicjtion  that  most  support  for  the  VC  would
fade  as  soon  as  some  "counter-terrorism  measures"  were  begun  against  the  DRV.
He  urged  "a  selective  bombing  campaign  against  military  targets  in  the  North"
and  predicted  this  would  "bolster  morale  and  give  the  population  in  the  South
a  feeling  of  unity."  When  asked  by  Mr.  McCone  how  the  political  differences
among  Vietnamese  leaders  might  be  overcome,  he  stated  the  opinion  that  "if  we
bombed  Tchepone  or  attacked  the  [NVN  motor  torpedo]  boats  and  the  Viet-
namese people  knew  about  it,  this  would  tend  to  stimulate  their  morale,  unify
their  efforts  and  reduce  [their]  quarreling."

If  other  comments,  either  pro  or  con,  were  made  at  the  plenary  session  about
the  desirability  of  attacking  North  Vietnam,  they  were  not  reflected  in  the
record.  General  Westmoreland  discussed  the  "military  and  security  situation"
in  South  Vietnam  and  apparently  did  not  mention  the  potential  impact  of  meas-
ures against  the  North.  Similar  discussions  of  the  military  situations  in  Laos
and  Cambodia  apparently  did  not  include  the  subject  either.  The  discussion  of
North  Vietnam,  as  indicated  by  the  record,  was  Hmited  to  assessments  of  the
DRV's  military  capabilities,  particularly  its  air  defenses,  and  their  implications
for  the  feasibility  of  an  air  attack.  Policy  aspects  of  air  operations  against  the
North  were  not  mentioned.

On  the  second  day  of  the  conference,  possible  pressures  to  be  applied  against
North  Vietnam  were  a  prominent  subject.  However,  as  reported  by  William


174 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

Bundy,  the  main  context  for  the  discussion  was  Laos — what  might  have  to  be
done  in  the  event  the  current  diplomatic  track  failed  or  the  mihtary  situation
deteriorated.  Not  contemplated,  it  seems,  were  initiatives  against  the  North  to
relieve  the  current  levels  of  pressure  on  Laos  or  South  Vietnam.  Rather,  con-
siderable attention  was  given  to  preliminary  steps  that  would  need  to  be  taken
in  order  to  prepare  for  actions  necessary  within  the  context  of  a  Laotian  mili-
tary contingency.

One  such  step  would  be  consultation  with  allies  who  might  contribute  to  a
ground  force  contingent  needed  for  the  defense  of  Laos.  The  UK  and  other
SEATO  nations  were  cited  as  particularly  important  contributors.  The  conferees
agreed,  however,  that  contingency  preparations  for  Laos  should  be  undertaken
outside  the  SEATO  framework.  As  Secretary  Rusk  pointed  out,  "Souvanna
Phouma  might  well  call  on  individual  SEATO  nations  for  help,  but  was  less
likely  to  call  on  SEATO  as  an  organization."  Besides,  the  French  and  Pakistani
were  expected  to  be  obstructive  and  the  Philippines  Government  was  regarded
as  presenting  a  constant  threat  of  untimely  leaks.  Consensus  was  reached  that
the  starting  point  for  our  bilateral  consultations  should  be  Thailand,  since  that
government's  confidence  in  the  sincerity  of  the  U.S.  commitment  seemed  par-
ticularly needful  of  being  shored  up.  At  the  meeting.  Ambassador  Martin
echoed  the  themes  which  he  had  reported  earlier  in  cables — that  the  Thais  were
not  convinced  that  we  meant  to  stop  the  course  in  Southeast  Asia  and  probably
would  not  participate  in  or  permit  allied  troop  build-ups  in  their  country  with-
out firmer  assurances  than  had  been  given  in  the  past.

Another  preliminary  step  discussed  by  the  conferees  was  the  desirability  of
obtaining  a  Congressional  resolution  prior  to  wider  U.S.  action  in  Southeast
Asia.  Ambassador  Lodge  questioned  the  need  for  it  if  we  were  to  confine  our
actions  to  "tit-for-tat"  air  attacks  against  North  Vietnam.  However,  Secretaries
McNamara  and  Rusk  and  CIA  Director  McCone  all  argued  in  favor  of  the
resolution.  In  support,  McNamara  pointed  to  the  need  to  guarantee  South  Viet-
nam's defense  against  retaliatory  air  attacks  and  against  more  drastic  reactions
by  North  Vietnam  and  Communist  China.  He  "added  that  it  might  be  necessary,
as  the  action  unfolded  ...  to  deploy  as  many  as  seven  divisions."  Rusk  noted
that  some  of  the  military  requirements  might  involve  the  calling  up  of  reserves,
always  a  touchy  Congressional  issue.  He  also  stated  that  public  opinion  on  our
Southeast  Asian  policy  was  badly  divided  in  the  United  States  at  the  moment
and  that,  therefore,  the  President  needed  an  affirmation  of  support.

Next,  the  discussion  turned  to  present  estimates  of  communist  reaction  to
attacks  on  North  Vietnam:

General  Taylor  summarized  the  present  Washington  view,  to  the  effect
that  there  would  certainly  be  stepped-up  Viet  Cong  activity  in  South  Viet-
nam, Communist  Chinese  air  might  be  sent  to  North  Vietnam,  Hanoi  it-
self might  send  some  ground  forces  south  (though  probably  only  on  a
limited  scale),  and  there  was  the  final  possibility  that  the  Communist  Chi-
nese would  respond  with  significant  military  action.  As  to  the  last,  he  made
clear  that  he  did  not  visualize  a  "yellow  horde"  of  Chinese  pouring  into
Southeast  Asia,  and  that  air  interdiction  could  have  a  significant  effect  in
reducing  the  number  of  forces  the  Communist  Chinese  could  send  down
and  support  ...  In  any  case,  he  said  that  the  military  judgment  was  that
seven  ground  divisions  would  be  needed  if  the  Communist  Chinese  em-
ployed their  full  capabilities  in  the  dry  season,  and  five  divisions  even  in
the  wet  season.  The  needed  five-seven  divisions  could  come  in  part  from


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  175

the  Thai  and  others,  but  a  major  share  would  have  to  be  borne  by  the  U.S.

Secretary  McNamara  said  that  before  we  undertook  attacks  against  the
North,  we  certainly  had  to  be  prepared  to  meet  threats  at  the  level  stated
by  General  Taylor.  Mr.  McCone  agreed  with  this  point,  but  when  on  to
say  that  there  was  a  serious  question  about  the  effect  of  major  deployments
on  Communist  Chinese  reactions.  The  intelligence  community  was  in-
clined to  the  view  that  the  more  substantial  the  deployment,  the  greater
the  possible  chance  of  a  drastic  Communist  Chinese  reaction.  General
Taylor  commented  that  under  present  plans  it  was  not  contemplated  that
we  should  have  deployment  of  all  the  potentially  necessary  forces  at  the
outset.  We  were  thinking  along  the  lines  of  a  brigade  to  the  northern  part
of  South  Vietnam,  two  to  three  brigades  to  Thailand,  considerable  naval
deployments,  and  some  alerting  of  other  forces  in  the  U.S.  and  elsewhere.
Even  this,  however,  added  up  to  a  significant  scale  of  activity  .  .  .

Secretary  McNamara  noted  that  all  this  planning  was  on  the  basis  that
a  really  drastic  communist  reaction  was  possible,  and  was  not  based  on
any  judgment  that  it  was  probable.  The  best  current  view  was  that  ap-
propriately limited  attacks  on  the  North  would  not  bring  in  Communist
Chinese  air  or  North  Vietnam  or  Communist  Chinese  ground  forces.  How-
ever, it  was  still  essential  that  we  be  prepared  against  these  eventualities.

Ambassador  Lodge  asked  whether  the  Communist  Chinese  could  not  in
fact  mount  almost  any  number  of  forces  they  chose.  General  Taylor  and
Admiral  Felt  said  they  could  not  do  so  and  support  them  to  the  extent
required  .  .  .  Secretary  McNamara  then  went  on  to  say  that  the  possi-
bility of  major  ground  action  also  led  to  a  serious  question  of  having  to
use  nuclear  weapons  at  some  point.  Admiral  Felt  responded  emphatically
that  there  was  no  possible  way  to  hold  off  the  communists  on  the  ground
without  the  use  of  tactical  nuclear  weapons,  and  that  it  was  essential  that
the  commanders  be  given  the  freedom  to  use  these  as  had  been  assumed
under  the  various  plans.  He  said  that  without  nuclear  weapons  the  ground
force  requirement  was  and  had  always  been  completely  out  of  reach.  Gen-
eral Taylor  was  more  doubtful  as  to  the  existence  or  at  least  to  the  degree
of  the  nuclear  weapon  requirement,  and  again  the  point  was  not  really  fol-
lowed up.

Secretary  Rusk  said  that  another  possibility  we  must  consider  would  be
the  Soviets  stirring  up  trouble  elsewhere.  We  should  do  everything  we
could  to  minimize"  this  risk,  but  it  too  must  be  considered.  He  went  on
to  stress  the  nuclear  question,  noting  that  in  the  last  ten  years  this  had
come  to  include  the  possibility  of  a  nuclear  exchange,  with  all  that  this
involved.

General  Taylor  noted  that  there  was  a  danger  of  reasoning  ourselves
into  inaction.  From  a  military  point  of  view,  he  said  that  the  U.S.  could
function  in  Southeast  Asia  about  as  well  as  anywhere  in  the  world  except
Cuba.  Mr.  McCone  made  the  point  that  the  passage  of  the  Congressional
resolution  would  in  itself  be  an  enormous  deterrent.  This  led  to  brief  dis-
cussion of  the  text  of  the  resolution,  which  was  read  by  Mr.  Sullivan  .  .  .

Discussion  then  shifted  to  what  the  Viet  Cong  could  do  in  South  Viet-
nam if  we  struck  the  North.  General  Westmoreland  thought  there  was  not
a  significant  unused  Viet  Cong  capability,  but  Ambassador  Lodge  thought
there  was  a  major  capability  for  terrorism  and  even  for  military  action
against  Saigon,  and  that  in  sum  the  Viet  Cong  'could  make  Saigon  unin-
habitable.'


176 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

Finally,  the  conferees  dealt  with  the  crucial  question  of  how  soon  the  United
States  and  the  GVN  would  be  prepared  to  engage  in  wider  military  actions
should  the  need  arise.  For  several  reasons,  the  consensus  seemed  to  be  that
such  actions  should  be  delayed  for  some  time  yet.  "Secretary  Rusk  thought  we
should  not  be  considering  quick  action  unless  the  Pathet  Lao  lunged  toward
the  Mekong."  Discussion  yielded  several  things  we  could  do  in  the  interim  to
strengthen  the  current  government  position  in  Laos  {i.e.,  re-equip  Kong  Le's
neutralist  forces  as  an  aid  to  Phouma's  FAR;  back  Souvanna's  demand  for  pre-
conditions before  any  reconvening  of  the  Geneva  Conference;  support  the  RLAF
T-28  operations).  General  Taylor  pointed  to  the  prior  need  to  educate  the
American  public  regarding  U.S.  interests  in  Southeast  Asia.  Secretary  McNa-
mara  thought  this  would  require  at  least  30  days.

Generals  Taylor  and  Westmoreland  then  listed  a  number  of  military  factors
that  affected  the  question  of  timing,  although  stating  that  these  referred  to  "an
optimum  military  posture":

1.  The  additional  Vietnamese  aircraft  would  not  be  available  until  July
for  two  squadrons  and  September  for  another.  However,  B-57's  could  be
introduced  at  any  time  and  operated  on  a  FARMGATE  basis.

2.  There  were  logistic  factors,  shipping  requirements,  and  the  call-up  of
some  logistic  reserve  units  involved  in  having  five-seven  divisions  ready  for
action,  and  these  would  take  two  months  to  be  sorted  out  properly.

3.  It  was  desirable  if  not  essential  to  build  up  military  manpower  in
South  Vietnam.  He  would  like  to  be  in  a  position  to  have  12  battalions
that  could  be  freed  for  deployment  along  the  Laos  border.

4.  The  rainy  season  was  a  factor  precluding  any  substantial  offensive  in
the  panhandle  area  until  mid-November.

They  added  that  General  Khanh's  political  base  was  not  as  strong  as  we  wished
and  that  it  might  not  be  so  until  the  end  of  the  year.  This  factor  was  also  cited
by  other  conferees  as  being  a  reason  for  delay.

3. The  Need  to  Refine  Plans  and  Resolve  Issues

Immediately  following  the  Honolulu  Conference,  its  Chairman,  Secretary
Rusk,  reported  to  President  Johnson,  presumably  making  some  recommenda-
tions. Although  a  record  of  this  discussion  is  not  available,  Ass't  Secretary
Bundy's  brief  to  Rusk  just  prior  to  his  White  House  meeting  may  provide  a
clue  to  the  thrust  of  the  Secretary's  remarks.  Citing  a  "somewhat  less  pessimis-
tic estimate"  of  conditions  in  South  Vietnam,  the  "somewhat  shaky"  but  hope-
ful situation  in  Laos,  and  the  military  timing  factors  reported  above,  Bundy
counseled  taking  more  time  "to  refine  our  plans  and  estimates."  Criticizing
CINCPAC's  presentation  on  military  planning,  he  stated  that  it  "served  largely
to  highlight  some  of  the  difficult  issues  we  still  have."  These  he  identified  as:
"(1 )  the  likely  effects  of  force  requirements  for  any  significant  operations  against
the  [Laotian]  Panhandle";  (2)  the  trade-off  between  the  precautionary  advan-
tages of  a  major  build-up  of  forces  prior  to  wider  action  and  the  possible  dis-
advantages of  distorting  the  signal  of  our  limited  objectives;  (3)  the  sensitivity
of  estimates  of  communist  reactions  to  different  levels  and  tempos  of  a  military
build-up;  and  (4)  the  need  for  "more  refined  targeting  and  a  clearer  definition
of  just  what  should  be  hit  and  how  thoroughly,  and  above  all,  for  what  ob-
jective."


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  177

In  particular,  Bundy  emphasized  to  Secretary  Rusk  the  need  for  immediate
etforts  in  the  information  and  intelligence  areas.  These  were  needed,  he  said,
''both  for  the  sake  of  refining  our  plans  and  for  preparing  materials  to  use  for
eventual  support  of  wider  action  if  decided  upon" — particularly  to  support  the
diplomatic  track  in  Laos.  He  called  for  "an  urgent  U.S.  information  effort"  to
"get  at  the  basic  doubts  of  the  value  of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  importance  of
our  stake  there  .  .  ."  However,  noting  the  problem  of  "handling  the  high  degree
of  expectations  flowing  from  the  conference  itself,"  Bundy  recommended  ''care-
ful guidance  and  consideration  of  high-level  statements  and  speeches  in  the  next
two  weeks"  to  assure  that  our  posture  appeared  firm.

Rusk  was  accompanied  at  the  White  House  meeting  by  other  high-ranking
Honolulu  conferees.  Bundy's  reactions  to  Honolulu  were  forwarded  to  Secretary
McNamara,  Mr.  McCone  and  General  Taylor  prior  to  the  meeting.  Events
which  followed  the  late  afternoon  meeting  of  3  June  provide  an  indication  of
the  discussion  that  probably  occurred.

4. The  Aftermath  of  Honolulu

The  importance  of  combining  appearances  of  a  firm  posture  with  efforts  to
reduce  public  doubts  on  U.S.  interests  in  Southeast  Asia  apparently  struck  a
responsive  chord  in  the  White  House.  In  the  military  area,  the  President  ap-
parently recognized  the  need  for  more  and  better  information,  but  did  not
convey  a  sense  of  urgency  regarding  its  acquisition.  Possibly  just  following  the
meeting.  Secretary  McNamara  expressed  his  wish  to  discuss  North  Vietnamese
targets  and  troop  movement  capabilities  with  the  JCS  on  8  June.  The  following
day,  he  communicated  interest  to  the  Joint  Staff  in  obtaining  "facts  and  sta-
tistics" on  Haiphong  harbor  traffic;  existing  plans  for  mining  the  harbor;  im-
pacts of  such  operations  on  different  import  categories;  and  alternative  DRV
importation  facilities.  On  the  other  hand,  non-committing  military  actions  which
could  improve  our  image  in  Southeast  Asia  were  given  immediate  approval.
On  the  same  day  he  received  the  request  for  Haiphong  mining  information,  the
Director  of  the  Joint  Staff  informed  the  Army  of  a  McNamara  directive  calling
for  "immediate  action  ...  by  the  Army  to  improve  the  effectiveness  and
readiness  status  of  its  materiel  prestocked  for  possible  use  in  Southeast  Asia."
Specifically,  the  Secretary  ordered  ( 1 )  augmenting  the  stockage  at  Korat,  in
Thailand,  to  support  a  ROAD  Infantry  Brigade  and  (2)  giving  first  priority  at
the  Okinawa  Army  Forward  Depot  to  stocking  non-air-transportablc  equip-
ment required  by  an  airlifted  ROAD  Infantry  Brigade.  In  keeping  with  the
Administration's  current  policy  rationale,  the  augmentation  of  contingency  war
stocks  in  Thailand  was  given  extensive  press  coverage.

In  non-military  areas,  the  President  apparently  encouraged  further  examination
of  the  vital  issues  which  impacted  on  national  commitment  and  public  support.
Soon  after  the  3  June  meeting,  work  was  begun  under  State  Department  guidance
to  assemble  information  in  answer  to  some  of  the  prevalent  public  questions  on
Southeast  Asian  involvement.  For  example,  on  10  June,  the  Department  of
Defense  was  asked  to  furnish  responses  to  27  questions  developed  in  State,  as  a
fall-out  of  the  discussions  in  Honolulu.  Similar  questions  became  a  frequent  focus
for  interdepartmental  correspondence  and  meetings  in  the  coming  weeks.
Paralleling  this  effort  was  an  examination  of  the  desirability  of  requesting  a  Con-
gressional resolution.  On  the  same  day  that  OSD  received  State's  request  to
furnish  information,  an  interagency  meeting  was  held  to  discuss  the  implications
which  a  resolution  would  have  for  the  U.S.  policy  position  and  the  public


178 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

rationale  which  its  acceptance  would  demand.  The  relative  advantages  of  having
or  not  having  a  resolution  were  also  considered.

To  supplement  recommendations  coming  from  Honolulu,  the  President  ap-
parently sought  additional  guidance  to  help  sort  out  the  alternatives  available  to
him.  Soon  after  receiving  reports  from  the  Honolulu  conference,  he  sent  a  request
to  Walt  Rostow  to  prepare  a  public  statement  for  him,  detailing  a  Governmental
view  of  U.S.  policy  and  commitments  in  Southeast  Asia.  As  most  likely  ex-
pected, the  rationale  and  discussion  which  resulted  took  a  more  aggressive  ap-
proach than  the  prevailing  views  at  Honolulu  and  were  not  used.  In  fact,  Presi-
dent Johnson  did  not  deliver  a  major  policy  address  during  the  coming  weeks,
relying  on  news  conferences  and  speeches  by  other  officials  to  state  the  official
view.  In  contrast  to  the  Rostow  approach,  his  news  conference  of  23  June  and
Secretary  Rusk's  speech  at  Williams  College,  14  June,  emphasized  the  U.S.
determination  to  support  its  Southeast  Asian  allies,  but  avoided  any  direct
challenge  to  Hanoi  and  Peking  or  any  hint  of  intent  to  increase  our  military
commitment.

In  addition,  the  President  asked  his  advisers  the  basic  question,  "Would  the
rest  of  Southeast  Asia  necessarily  fall  if  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  came  under
North  Vietnamese  control?"  On  9  June,  the  Board  of  National  Estimates,  CIA,
provided  a  response,  stating:

With  the  possible  exception  of  Cambodia,  it  is  likely  that  no  nation  in
the  area  would  quickly  succumb  to  communism  as  a  result  of  the  fall  of
Laos  and  South  Vietnam.  Furthermore,  a  continuation  of  the  spread  of
communism  in  the  area  would  not  be  inexorable,  and  any  spread  which
did  occur  would  take  time — time  in  which  the  total  situation  might  change
in  any  of  a  number  of  ways  unfavorable  to  the  communist  cause.

The  statement  went  on  to  argue  that  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  "would
be  profoundly  damaging  to  the  U.S.  position  in  the  Far  East,"  because  of  its
impact  on  U.S.  prestige  and  on  the  credibility  of  our  other  commitments  to
contain  the  spread  of  communism.  It  did  not  suggest  that  such  a  loss  would  affect
the  wider  U.S.  interest  in  containing  overt  military  attacks.  Our  island  base,  it
argued,  would  probably  still  enable  us  to  employ  enough  military  power  in  the
area  to  deter  Hanoi  and  Peking  from  this  kind  of  aggression.  It  cautioned,  how-
ever, that  the  leadership  in  Peking  (as  well  as  Hanoi)  would  profit  directly  by
being  able  to  justify  its  militant  policies  with  demonstrated  success  and  by  having
raised  "its  prestige  as  a  leader  of  World  Communism"  at  the  expense  of  the  more
moderate  USSR.

5. Sources  of  Moderate  Advice

The  strength  of  the  Board's  warning  was  weakened  by  two  significant  caveats.
The  first  linked  the  estimate's  less-than-alarmist  view  to  a  clearly  "worst  case":

This  memorandum  assumes  a  clear-cut  communist  victory  in  these
countries,  i.e.,  a  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces  and  virtual  elimination  of  U.S.
presence  in  Indochina,  either  preceded  or  soon  followed  by  the  establishment
of  communist  regimes  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam.  The  results  of  a  fuzzier,
piecemeal  victory,  such  as  one  staged  through  a  "neutralist"  phase,  would
probably  be  similar,  though  somewhat  less  sharp  and  severe.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  179

The  second  indicated  that  even  in  the  worst  case,  the  United  States  would  retain
some  leverage  to  affect  the  outcome.  They  argued  that  "the  extent  to  which  indi-
vidual countries  would  move  away  from  the  U.S.  towards  the  communists  would
be  significantly  affected  by  the  substance  and  manner  of  U.S.  policy  in  the  period
following  the  loss  of  Laos  and  South  Vietnam."

The  largely  moderating  tone  of  this  estimate  of  the  degree  to  which  U.S.  vital
interests  were  in  jeopardy  in  Southeast  Asia  tended  to  be  reinforced  by  the  views
of  the  President's  highest-level  advisers  on  military  matters.  On  his  way  to  the
Honolulu  Conference,  CJCS  Taylor  had  forwarded  without  detailed  comment  the
JCS  recommendation  for  courses  of  action  in  Southeast  Asia.  On  5  June,  after
his  return,  he  submitted  highly  critical  comments,  together  with  his  preferred
alternative  to  the  JCS  proposal,  to  Secretary  McNamara.  Five  days  later,  the
Secretary  communicated  his  approval  of  General  Taylor's  views  and  no  doubt
conveyed  the  flavor,  if  not  the  details,  of  them  to  the  White  House.

The  nature  of  these  views  shared  by  the  President's  two  top  military  advisers
indicates  a  rejection  of  the  concept  of  trying  to  force  the  DRV  to  reverse  its
policies  by  striking  North  Vietnam  with  punishing  blows.  The  JCS  had  stated
the  view  that  only  by  initiating  military  actions  designed  to  destroy  the  DRV's
will  and  capabilities  could  we  reasonably  expect  to  compel  it  to  terminate  its
support  of  the  insurgencies  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  But  they  had  expressed
their  support  of  certain  recommended  limited  actions  as  "an  initial  measure"
directed  toward  causing  the  DRV  "to  decide  to  terminate  their  subversive  sup-
port." General  Taylor  argued  that  these  two  alternatives  were  not  "an  accurate
or  complete  expression  of  our  choices."  He  suggested  three  patterns  from  which
the  United  States  "may  choose  to  initiate  the  attack  on  North  Vietnam,"  in
descending  order  or  weight:

a.  A  massive  air  attack  on  all  significant  military  targets  in  North  Vietnam
for  the  purpose  of  destroying  them  and  thereby  making  the  enemy  incapable
of  continuing  to  assist  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  Pathet  Lao.

b.  A  lesser  attack  on  some  significant  part  of  the  military  target  system  in
North  Vietnam  for  the  dual  purpose  of  convincing  the  enemy  that  it  is  to
his  interest  to  desist  from  aiding  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  Pathet  Lao,  and,  if
possible,  of  obtaining  his  cooperation  in  calling  off  the  insurgents  in  South
Vietnam  and  Laos.

c.  Demonstrative  strikes  against  limited  military  targets  to  show  U.S.
readiness  and  intent  to  pass  to  alternatives  b  or  a  above.  These  demonstra-
tive strikes  would  have  the  same  dual  purpose  as  in  alternative  b.

Stating  a  personal  preference  for  the  second,  he  noted  the  probability  that
"political  considerations  will  incline  our  responsible  civilian  oflicials  to  opt  for
[the  third]  alternative."  Therefore,  his  recommendation  to  the  Secretary  was  that
the  JCS  be  asked  to  develop  a  strike  plan  based  on  the  assumption  that  a  decision
was  made  to  implement  the  third  alternative.

It  is  clear  that  the  JCS  not  only  preferred  the  larger  attacks — directed  against
both  DRV  capabilities  and  will — but  intended  that  they  be  implemented  in  the
near  future.  However,  there  is  no  indication  that  the  CJCS  urged  prompt  imple-
mentation— even  of  the  limited  measures  he  linked  with  pressures  against  DRV
will  alone.  Neither  view  was  supported  with  an  explanation  of  why  it  was  ex-
pected that  the  preferred  course  of  action  might  be  successful  or  with  any
analysis  of  what  lesser  results  might  lead  to  in  t^he  way  of  next  steps  by  either
side  or  of  likely  public  reactions.


180 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


6. The  President  Decides

The  Presidential  reaction  to  these  various  patterns  of  advice  and  the  dif-
ferent assessments  of  national  interest  is  not  evident  in  the  available  documents.
However,  it  can  be  surmised  from  the  pattern  of  events  surrounding  the  effort
to  obtain  a  Congressional  resolution.  As  will  be  recalled,  a  resolution  was  recom-
mended to  the  President  in  late  May  as  one  of  a  series  of  events  to  include  the
Canadian's  mission  to  Hanoi,  the  Honolulu  Conference,  and  consultations  with
allies.  It  also  fit  in  with  the  emphasis  on  public  information  and  a  firm  posture
that  stemmed  from  the  Honolulu  meeting.  Its  intended  purpose  was  to  dramatize
and  make  clear  to  other  nations  the  firm  resolve  of  the  United  States  Govern-
ment in  an  election  year  to  support  the  President  in  taking  whatever  action  was
necessary  to  resist  communist  aggression  in  Southeast  Asia.

The  week  of  8  June  saw  the  planning  for  a  Congressional  resolution  being
brought  to  a  head.  By  10  June  there  was  firm  support  for  it  on  the  part  of  most
agencies,  despite  recognition  that  obtaining  it  would  require  a  vigorous  public
campaign,  a  likely  requirement  of  which  would  be  a  "substantial  increase  in  the
commitment  of  U.S.  prestige  and  power  to  success  in  Southeast  Asia."  There-
fore, at  the  meeting  held  on  that  day,  five  basic  "disagreeable  questions"  were
identified  for  which  the  Administration  would  have  to  provide  convincing  answers
to  assure  public  support.  These  included:  (1)  Does  this  imply  a  blank  check  for
the  President  to  go  to  war  in  Southeast  Asia?  (2)  What  kinds  of  force  could  he
employ  under  this  authorization?  (3)  What  change  in  the  situation  (if  any)  re-
quires the  resolution  now?  (4)  Can't  our  objectives  be  attained  by  means  other
than  U.S.  military  force?  (5)  Does  Southeast  Asia  mean  enough  to  U.S.  national
interests?

By  June  12,  after  a  temporary  diversion  caused  by  Souvanna  Phouma's  with-
drawal and  reaffirmation  of  permission  to  continue  the  reconnaissance  flights,
much  of  the  rationale  in  support  of  the  resolution  was  formulated.  Even  though
the  Administration  did  not  expect  "to  move  in  the  near  future  to  military  action
against  North  Vietnam,"  it  recognized  that  significant  changes  in  the  local
situations  in  both  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  were  beyond  our  control  and  could
compel  us  to  reconsider  this  position."  Although  our  diplomatic  track  in  Laos
appeared  hopeful,  and  our  now  firm  escorted  reconnaissance  operations  provided
an  image  of  U.S.  resolve  to  complement  the  Polish  negotiating  scheme,  we  needed
to  be  able  to  augment  this  posture  in  the  event  negotiations  stalemated.  If
Souvanna  were  to  become  discouraged,  or  if  Khanh  were  to  view  our  efforts
to  obtain  a  Laotian  settlement  as  a  sign  of  willingness  to  alter  our  objectives,  we
would  need  additional  demonstrations  of  our  firmness  to  keep  these  leaders  from
being  demoralized.  Since  additional  military  actions  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam
did  not  hold  much  promise,  actions  or  the  strong  threat  of  actions  against  the
North  might  need  to  be  considered.  For  these  reasons,  an  immediate  Congres-
sional resolution  was  believed  required  as  "a  continuing  demonstration  of  U.S.
firmness  and  for  complete  flexibility  in  the  hands  of  the  Executive  in  the  coming
political  months."

A  crucial  interagency  meeting  was  held  at  the  State  Department  on  15  June
to  hold  final  discussions  on  the  recommendation  for  a  resolution  to  be  sent  to
the  President.  The  meeting  was  scheduled  from  the  White  House  and  included
Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara,  their  principal  advisers  on  the  subject,  and


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  181

McGeorge  Bundy.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  meeting,  a  memorandum  was  dis-
tributed by  Bundy  to  the  participants,  which  provided  a  rather  clear  picture  of
current  White  House  attitudes  toward  the  resolution — and  by  implication,  of  the
President's  judgment  on  the  issue  of  preparing  to  take  harder  measures  against
North  Vietnam.

The  memorandum  dealt  with  one  subject  only — "actions  that  would  remain
open  to  us  in  varying  combinations  in  the  event  that  we  do  not  now  decide  on
major  military  operations  against  North  Vietnam  and  do  not  now  decide  to  seek
a  Congressional  resolution."  It  then  listed  under  the  categories  of  "military"  and
"political,"  those  actions  which  were  within  an  acceptable  range  of  U.S.  capa-
bility, as  follows:

Possible  military  actions

a.  Reconnaissance,  reconnaissance-strike,  and  T-28  operations  in  all
parts  of  Laos.

b.  Small-scale  reconnaissance  strike  operations,  after  appropriate  provoca-
tion, in  North  Vietnam  (initially  VNAF?).

c.  VNAF  strike  operations  in  Laotian  corridors.

d.  Limited  air  and  sea  deployments  toward  Southeast  Asia,  and  still  more
limited  ground  troop  movements.  (Major  ground  force  deployments  seem
more  questionable,  without  a  decision  "to  go  north"  in  some  form.)

Political  actions

a.  Internationally — a  continued  and  increased  effort  to  maximize  support
for  our  diplomatic  track  in  Laos  and  our  political  effort  in  South  Vietnam.
Higher  authority  particularly  desires  a  maximum  effort  with  our  allies  to
increase  their  real  and  visible  presence  in  support  of  Saigon.

b.  Laos — an  intensive  effort  to  sustain  Souvanna  and  to  restrain  the
right  wing  from  any  rash  act  against  the  French.  Possible  increase  of  direct
support  and  assistance  to  Kong  Le  in  appropriate  ways.

c.  South  Vietnam — rapid  development  of  the  critical  province  program
and  the  information  program,  strengthening  of  country  team,  and  shift  of
U.S.  role  from  advice  toward  direction;  emphatic  and  continued  discourage-
ment of  all  coup  plots;  energetic  public  support  for  Khanh  Government.

d.  In  the  U.S. — continued  reaffirmation  and  expanded  explanation  of  the
above  lines  of  action,  with  opposition  to  both  aggressive  adventure  and  with-
drawal, and  a  clear  open  door  to  selected  action  of  the  sort  included  in
above  Possible  military  actions.

The  files  contain  no  record  of  the  discussion  that  occurred  at  the  15  June
meeting,  but  in  this  memorandum,  the  guidance  provided  from  the  White  House
was  evident:  Unless  drastic  measures  were  provoked  from  "the  other  side,"  there
were  still  a  number' of  political  and  military  actions  available  which  appeared
to  enable  the  United  States  to  demonstrate  an  increasingly  firm  resistance  without
the  need  to  risk  major  escalation.  Moreover,  such  actions  would  not  risk
embarking  on  a  depth  or  direction  of  commitment  in  which  the  United  States
would  sacrifice  policy  flexibility.  As  the  White  House  memorandum  concluded,
the  actions  were  listed  with  the  assumption  that  "defense  of  U.S.  interests  is
possible,  within  these  limits,  over  the  next  six  months."


182 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III


11. JULY-OCTOBER  1964  *

A. PROLOGUE:  ACTIONS  AND  PROGRAMS  UNDERWAY

Several  forms  of  pressure  were  already  being  applied  against  North  Vietnam
by  July  of  1964.  Moreover,  contingency  plans  for  other  forms — should  politi-
cal and  military  circumstances  warrant  a  decision  to  use  them — were  continu-
ally being  adjusted  and  modified  as  the  situation  in  Southeast  Asia  developed.

The  best  known  of  these  pressures  was  being  applied  in  Laos.  Since  21  May,
U.S.  aircraft  had  flown  low-level  reconnaissance  missions  over  communist-occu-
pied areas.  In  early  June  Premier  Souvanna  Phouma  both  gave  and  reaffirmed
his  permission  for  armed  escort  of  these  missions,  which  included  the  right  to
retaliate  against  hostile  fire  from  the  ground.  This  effort  was  supplemented  at
the  end  of  the  month  when  the  United  States  decided  to  conduct  transport  and
night  reconnaissance  operations  and  furnish  additional  T-28  aircraft  and  muni-
tions to  support  a  Royal  Laotian  counteroffensive  near  Muong  Soui.  This  deci-
sion came  in  response  to  Souvanna's  request,  in  which  he  equated  the  protec-
tion of  Muong  Soui  with  the  survival  of  the  Laotian  neutralist  army.  Air  strikes
conducted  by  the  Royal  Lao  Air  Force,  with  T-28s  obtained  from  the  United
States,  were  later  credited  with  playing  a  major  role  in  the  success  of  the  RLG's
operations.

Other  actions  obviously  designed  to  forestall  communist  aggressive  intentions
were  taken  in  different  parts  of  Southeast  Asia.  In  June,  following  the  Honolulu
strategy  conference.  State  and  Defense  Department  sources  made  repeated
leaks  to  the  press  affirming  U.S.  intentions  to  support  its  allies  and  uphold  its
treaty  commitments  in  Southeast  Asia.  U.S.  contingency  ground-force  stockages
in  Thailand  were  augmented  and  publicly  acknowledged.  Revelations  were  made
that  USAF  aircraft  were  operating  out  of  a  newly  constructed  air  base  at  Da
Nang.  Moreover,  the  base  was  characterized  as  part  of  a  network  of  new  air
bases  and  operational  facilities  being  developed  in  South  Vietnam  and  Thailand.
On  10  July,  the  Da  Nang  base  was  the  site  of  a  well-publicized  Air  Force  Day
display  of  allied  airpower,  including  aircraft  from  a  B-57  wing  recently  ac-
knowledged to  have  been  permanently  deployed  to  the  Philippines  from  Japan.

Less  known  were  parallel  actions  taken  within  the  Government.  U.S.  resolve
to  resist  aggression  in  Southeast  Asia  was  communicated  directly  to  North  Viet-
nam by  the  newly  appointed  Canadian  member  of  the  International  Control
Commission,  Blair  Seaborn.  Stressing  that  U.S.  ambitions  were  limited  and  its
intentions  were  "essentially  peaceful,"  Seaborn  told  Pham  Van  Dong  that  the
patience  of  the  U.S.  Government  was  not  limitless.  He  explained  that  the  United
States  was  fully  aware  of  the  degree  to  which  Hanoi  controlled  the  Viet
Cong.

[Several  paragraphs  missing]
The  next  DE  SOTO  Patrol  did  not  occur  until  31  July,  on  which  the  U.S.S.
Maddox  was  restricted  to  a  track  not  closer  than  8  n.m.  off  the  North  Vietnamese
mainland.  Its  primary  mission,  assigned  on  17  July,  was  '"to  determine  DRV
coastal  activity  along  the  full  extent  of  the  patrol  track."  Other  specific  intelli-
gence requirements  were  assigned  as  follows:

*  A  number  of  pages  were  missing  from  the  manuscript  for  Subsections  A,  B,  and  C.
However,  the  available  material  has  been  included,  in  spite  of  these  gaps,  to  give  the
reader  at  least  the  flavor  of  the  material  contained  therein.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  183

(a)  location  and  identification  of  all  radar  transmitters,  and  estimate  of
range  capabilities;  (b)  navigational  and  hydro  information  along  the  routes
traversed  and  particular  navigational  lights  characteristics,  landmarks,  buoys,
currents  and  tidal  information,  river  mouths  and  channel  accessibility,  (c)
monitoring  a  junk  force  with  density  of  surface  traffic  pattern,  (d)  sampling
electronic  environment  radars  and  navigation  aids,  (e)  photography  of  op-
portunities in  support  of  above.  .  .  .

Separate  coastal  patrol  operations  were  being  conducted  by  South  Vietnamese
naval  forces.  These  were  designed  to  uncover  and  interdict  efforts  to  smuggle
personnel  and  supplies  into  the  South  in  support  of  the  VC  insurgency.  This
operation  had  first  been  organized  with  U.S.  assistance  in  December  1961;  to
support  it  a  fleet  of  motorized  junks  was  built,  partially  financed  with  U.S.  mili-
tary assistance  funds.  During  1964  these  vessels  operated  almost  continually  in
attempts  to  intercept  communist  seaborne  logistical  operations.  As  Secretary
McNamara  told  Senate  committees:

In  the  first  seven  months  of  this  year  [1964],  they  have  searched  149,000
junks,  some  570,000  people.  This  is  a  tremendous  operation  endeavoring  to
close  the  seacoasts  of  over  900  miles.  In  the  process  of  that  action,  as  the
junk  patrol  has  increased  in  strength  they  [sic]  have  moved  farther  and
farther  north  endeavoring  to  find  the  source  of  the  infiltration.

In  addition  to  these  acknowledged  activities,  the  GVN  was  also  conducting  a
number  of  operations  against  North  Vietnam  to  which  it  did  not  publicly  admit.
Covert  operations  were  carried  out  by  South  Vietnamese  or  hired  personnel  and
supported  by  U.S.  training  and  logistical  efforts.  Outlined  within  OPLAN  34A,
these  operations  had  been  underway  theoretically  since  February  but  had  experi-
enced what  the  ICS  called  a  "slow  beginning."  Despite  an  ultimate  objective  of
helping  "convince  the  North  Vietnamese  leadership  that  it  is  in  its  own  self-in-
terest to  desist  from  its  aggressive  policies,"  few  operations  designed  to  harass
the  enemy  were  carried  out  successfully  during  the  February-May  period.  Never-
theless, citing  DRV  reactions  tending  "to  substantiate  the  premise  that  Hanoi  is
expending  substantial  resources  in  defensive  measures,"  the  ICS  concluded  that
the  potential  of  the  OPLAN  34A  program  remained  high  and  urged  its  continua-
tion through  Phase  II  (June-September).

[Several  paragraphs  missing]

B. THE  TONKIN  GULF  CRISIS

Several  of  the  pressuring  measures  recommended  to  the  White  House  in  May
or  June  were  implemented  in  conjunction  with  or  in  the  immediate  aftermath
of  naval  action  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf.  It  is  this  fact  and  the  rapidity  with  which
these  measures  were  taken  that  has  led  critics  to  doubt  some  aspects  of  the  public
account  of  the  Tonkin  incidents.  It  is  also  this  fact,  together  with  later  Adminis-
tration assessments  of  the  Tonkin  Gulf  experience,  that  give  the  incidents  greater
significance  than  the  particular  events  seemed  at  first  to  warrant.

1. The  First  Incident

What  happened  in  the  Gulf?  As  noted  earlier,  U.S.S.  MADDOX  commenced
the  second  DE  SOTO  Patrol  on  31  July.  On  the  prior  night  South  Vietnamese
coastal  patrol  forces  made  a  midnight  attack,  including  an  amphibious  "com-


184 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  HI

mando"  raid,  on  Hon  Me  and  Hon  Nieu  Islands,  about  19°  N.  latitude.  At  the
time  of  this  attack,  U.S.S.  MADDOX  was  120-130  miles  away  just  heading  into
waters  off  North  Vietnam.  On  2  August,  having  reached  the  northernmost  point
on  its  patrol  track  and  having  headed  South,  the  destroyer  was  intercepted  by
three  North  Vietnamese  patrol  boats.  Apparently,  these  boats  and  a  fleet  of
junks  had  moved  into  the  area  near  the  island  to  search  for  the  attacking  force
and  had  mistaken  Maddox  for  a  South  Vietnamese  escort  vessel.  (Approximately
eleven  hours  earlier,  while  on  a  northerly  heading,  Maddox  had  altered  course  to
avoid  the  junk  concentration  shown  on  her  radar;  about  six  hours  after  that —
now  headed  South — Maddox  had  altered  her  course  to  the  southeast  to  avoid
the  junks  a  second  time.)  When  the  PT  boats  began  their  high-speed  run  at  her,
at  a  distance  of  approximately  10  miles,  the  destroyer  was  28  miles  from  the
coast  and  heading  farther  into  international  waters.  Two  of  the  boats  closed  to
within  5,000  yards,  launching  one  torpedo  each.  As  they  approached,  Maddox
fired  on  the  boats  with  her  5-inch  batteries  and  altered  course  to  avoid  the  tor-
pedoes, which  were  observed  passing  the  starboard  side  at  a  distance  of  100  to
200  yards.  The  third  boat  moved  up  abeam  of  the  destroyer  and  took  a  direct
5-inch  hit;  it  managed  to  launch  a  torpedo  which  failed  to  run.  All  three  PT
boats  fired  50-caliber  machine  guns  at  Maddox  as  they  made  their  firing  runs,
and  a  bullet  fragment  was  recovered  from  the  destroyer's  superstructure.  The
attacks  occurred  in  mid-afternoon,  and  photographs  were  taken  of  the  torpedo
boats  as  they  attacked.

Upon  first  report  of  the  PT  boats'  apparently  hostile  intent,  four  F-8E  aircraft
were  launched  from  the  aircraft  carrier  Ticonderoga,  many  miles  to  the  south,
with  instructions  to  provide  air  cover  but  not  to  fire  unless  they  or  Maddox  were
fired  upon.  As  Maddox  continued  in  a  southerly  direction,  Ticonderoga  s  aircraft
attacked  the  two  boats  that  had  initiated  the  action.  Both  were  damaged  with
Zuni  rockets  and  20mm  gunfire.  The  third  boat,  struck  by  the  destroyer's  five-
inch  guns  .  .  .

[Several  paragraphs  missing]
Vietnamese  coastal  targets — this  time  the  Rhon  River  estuary  and  the  Vinh  Sonh
radar  installation,  which  were  bombarded  on  the  night  of  3  August.  The  more
controversial  of  the  two,  this  incident  occurred  under  cover  of  darkness  and
seems  to  have  been  both  triggered  and  described  largely  by  radar  and  sonar
images.  After  the  action  had  been  joined,  however,  both  visual  sightings  and  in-
tercepted North  Vietnamese  communications  confirmed  that  an  attack  by  hostile
patrol  craft  was  in  progress.

At  1940  hours,  4  August  1964  (Tonkin  Gulf  time),  while  "proceeding  S.E.  at
best  speed,"  Task  Group  72.1  {Maddox  and  Turner  Joy)  radioed  "RCVD  INFO
indicating  attack  by  PGM  P-4  iminent."  Evidently  this  was  based  on  an  inter-
cepted communication,  later  identified  as  "an  intelligence  source,"  indicating  that
"North  Vietnamese  naval  forces  had  been  ordered  to  attack  the  patrol."  At  the
time,  radar  contacts  evaluated  as  "probable  torpedo  boats"  were  observed  about
36  miles  to  the  northeast.  Accordingly,  the  Task  Group  Commander  altered
course  and  increased  speed  to  avoid  what  he  evaluated  as  a  trap.  At  approximately
2035  hours,  while  west  of  Hainan  Island,  the  destroyers  reported  radar  sightings
of  three  unidentified  aircraft  and  two  unidentified  vessels  in  the  patrol  area.  On
receiving  the  report,  Ticonderoga  immediately  launched  F-8s  and  A-4Ds  to  pro-
vide a  combat  air  patrol  over  the  destroyers.  Within  minutes,  the  unidentified
aircraft  disappeared  from  the  radar  screen,  while  the  vessels  maintained  a  dis-
tance of  about  27  miles.  Actually,  surface  contacts  on  a  parallel  course  had  been
shadowing  the  destroyers  with  radar  for  more  than  three  hours.  ECM  contacts


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  185

maintained  by  the  C.  Turner  Joy  indicated  that  the  radar  was  that  carried  aboard
DRV  patrol  boats.

New  unidentified  surface  contacts  13  miles  distant  were  reported  at  2134
hours.  These  vessels  were  closing  at  approximately  30  knots  on  the  beam  and
were  evaluated  as  "hostile."  Six  minutes  later  (2140)  Maddox  opened  fire,  and
at  1242,  by  which  time  two  of  the  new  contacts  had  closed  to  a  distance  of  11
miles,  aircraft  from  Ticonderoga's  CAP  began  their  attacks.  Just  before  this,  one
of  the  PT  boats  launched  a  torpedo,  which  was  later  reported  as  seen  passing
about  300  feet  off  the  port  beam,  from  aft  to  forward,  of  the  C.  Turner  Joy.
A  searchlight  beam  was  observed  to  swing  in  an  arc  toward  the  C.  Turner  Joy
by  all  of  the  destroyer's  signal  bridge  personnel.  It  was  extinguished  before  it
illuminated  the  ship,  presumably  upon  detection  of  the  approaching  aircraft.
Aboard  the  Maddox,  Marine  gunners  saw  what  were  believed  to  be  cockpit  lights
of  one  or  more  small  boats  pass  up  the  port  side  of  the  ship  and  down  the  other.
After  approximately  an  hour's  action,  the  destroyers  reported  two  enemy  boats
sunk  and  no  damage  or  casualties  suffered.

In  the  meantime,  two  patrol  craft  from  the  initial  surface  contact  had  closed  to
join  the  action,  and  the  engagement  was  described  for  higher  headquarters —
largely  on  the  basis  of  the  destroyers'  radar  and  sonar  indications  and  on  radio
intercept  information.

[Several  paragraphs  missing!
Returning  from  this  session  shortly  after  1500,  Secretary  McNamara,  along
with  Deputy  Secretary  Vance,  joined  with  the  JCS  to  review  all  the  evidence
relating  to  the  engagement.  Included  in  this  review  was  the  communications  in-
telligence information  which  the  Secretary  reported,  containing  North  Vietnamese
reports  that  (1)  their  vessels  were  engaging  the  destroyers,  and  (2)  they  had  lost
two  craft  in  the  fight.  In  the  meantime,  however,  messages  had  been  relayed  to
the  Joint  Staff  indicating  considerable  confusion  over  the  details  of  the  attack.
The  DE  SOTO  Patrol  Commander's  message,  expressing  doubts  about  earlier
evidence  of  a  large-scale  torpedo  attack,  arrived  sometime  after  1330  hours.
Considerably  later  (it  was  not  sent  to  CINCPACFLT  until  1447  EDT),  another
message  arrived  to  the  effect  that  whil^  details  of  the  action  were  still  confusing,
the  commander  of  Task  Group  72.1  was  certain  that  the  ambush  was  genuine.
He  had  interviewed  the  personnel  who  sighted  the  boat's  cockpit  lights  passing
near  the  Maddox,  and  he  had  obtained  a  report  from  the  C.  Turner  Joy  that  two
torpedoes  were  observed  passing  nearby.  Accordingly,  these  reports  were  dis-
cussed by  telephone  with  CINPAC,  and  he  was  instructed  by  Secretary  McNa-
mara to  make  a  careful  check  of  the  evidence  and  ascertain  whether  there  was
any  doubt  concerning  the  occurrence  of  an  attack.  CINCPAC  called  the  JCS
at  least  twice  more,  at  1723  and  again  at  1807  hours,  to  state  that  he  was  con-
vinced on  the  basis  of  "additional  information"  that  the  attacks  had  taken  place.
At  the  time  of  the  earlier  call  Secretary  McNamara  and  the  JCS  were  discussing
possible  force  deployments  to  follow  any  reprisals.  On  the  occasion  of  the  first
call,  the  Secretary  was  at  the  White  House  attending  the  day's  second  NSC  meet-
ing. Upon  being  informed  of  CINCPAC's  call,  he  reports:

I  spoke  to  the  Director  of  the  Joint  Staff  and  asked  him  to  make  certain
that  the  Commander  in  Chief,  Pacific  was  willing  to  state  that  the  attack
had  taken  place,  and  therefore  that  he  was  free  to  release  the  Executive
Order  because  earlier  in  the  afternoon  I  had  told  him  that  under  no  circum-
stances would  retaliatory  action  take  place  until  we  were,  to  use  my  words,
'damned  sure  that  the  attacks  had  taken  place.'


186 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

At  the  meeting  of  the  National  Security  Council,  proposals  to  deploy  certain
increments  of  OPLAN  37-64  forces  to  the  Western  Pacific  were  discussed,  and
the  order  to  retaliate  against  North  Vietnamese  patrol  craft  and  their  associated
facilities  were  confirmed.  Following  this  meeting,  at  1845,  the  President  met  with
16  Congressional  leaders  from  both  parties  for  a  period  of  89  minutes.  Report-
edly, he  described  the  second  incident  in  the  Gulf,  explained  his  decisions  to
order  reprisals,  and  informed  the  legislators  of  his  intention  to  request  a  formal
statement  of  Congressional  support  for  these  decisions.  On  the  morning  following
the  meeting.  The  Washington  Post  carried  a  report  that  none  of  the  Congressional
leaders  present  at  the  meeting  had  raised  objections  to  the  course  of  action
planned.  Their  only  question,  the  report  stated,  "had  to  do  with  how  Congress
could  show  its  agreement  and  concern  in  the  crisis."

[Several  paragraphs  missing]
increase  pressures  for  an  international  conference  or  that  the  DRV  was  testing
U.S.  reactions  to  a  contemplated  general  offensive — have  lost  some  credibility.
Subsequent  events  and  DRV  actions  have  appeared  to  lack  any  consistent  rela-
tionship with  such  motives.  Perhaps  closer  to  the  mark  is  the  narrow  purpose  of
prompt  retaliation  for  an  embarrassing  and  well-publicized  rebuff  by  a  much-
maligned  enemy.  Inexperienced  in  modern  naval  operations,  DRV  leaders  may
have  believed  that  under  cover  of  darkness  it  would  be  possible  to  even  the  score
or  to  provide  at  least  a  psychological  victory  by  severely  damaging  a  U.S.  ship.
Unlike  the  first  incident,  the  DRV  was  ready  (5  August)  with  a  propaganda  blast
denying  its  own  provocation  and  claiming  the  destruction  of  U.S.  aircraft.  Still,
regardless  of  motive,  there  is  little  question  but  that  the  attack  on  the  destroyers
was  deliberate.  Having  followed  the  destroyers  for  hours,  their  course  was  well
known  to  the  North  Vietnamese  naval  force,  and  its  advance  units  were  laying
ahead  to  make  an  ambushing  beam  attack  fully  60  miles  from  shore.

The  reality  of  a  North  Vietnamese  attack  on  4  August  has  been  corroborated
by  both  visual  and  technical  evidence.  That  it  may  have  been  deUberately  pro-
voked by  the  United  States  is  belied  to  a  considerable  degree  by  circumstantial
evidence.  Operating  restrictions  for  the  DE  SOTO  Patrol  were  made  more  strin-
gent following  the  first  attack.  The  11  n.m.,  rather  than  8  n.m.,  off-shore  patrol-
ling track  indicates  an  intention  to  avoid — not  provoke — further  contact.  On  4
February  the  rules  of  engagement  were  modified  to  restrict  "hot  pursuit"  by  the
U.S.  ships  to  no  closer  than  1 1  n.m.  from  the  North  Vietnamese  coast;  aircraft
were  to  pursue  no  closer  than  3  n.m.  Given  the  first  attack,  the  President's  aug-
mentation of  the  partol  force  was  a  normal  precaution,  particularly  since  both
Ticonderoga  and  C.  Turner  Joy  were  already  deployed  in  the  immediate  vicinity
as  supporting  elements.  Moreover,  since  the  augmentation  was  coupled  with  a
clear  statement  of  intent  to  continue  the  patrols  and  a  firm  warning  to  the  DRV
that  repetition  would  bring  dire  consequences,  their  addition  to  the  patrol  could
be  expected  to  serve  more  as  a  deterrent  than  a  provocation.

The  often  alleged  "poised"  condition  of  the  U.S.  reprisal  forces  was  anything
but  extraordinary.  U.S.S.  Constellation  was  well  out  of  the  immediate  operating
area  as  the  patrol  was  resumed  on  3  August.  In  fact,  one  reason  for  delaying  the
launching  of  retaliatory  air  strikes  (nearly  1100  hours,  5  August — Tonkin  Gulf
time)  was  to  permit  Constellation  to  approach  within  reasonable  range  of  the
targets.  Target  lists  from  which  to  make  appropriate  selections  were  already  avail-
able as  a  result  of  routine  contingency  planning  accomplished  in  June  and  July.
In  preparation  for  the  resumed  DE  SOTO  Patrol  of  3-5  August,  the  patrol  track
was  moved  farther  north  to  make  clearer  the  separation  between  it  and  the  34-A
operations.  The  ways  in  which  the  events  of  the  second  Tonkin  Gulf  incident


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  187

came  about  give  little  indication  of  a  deliberate  provocation  to  provide  oppor-
tunity for  reprisals.

2. Broadening  the  Impact

[Several  paragraphs  missing]
bomber  squadrons  have  been  transferred  from  the  United  States  into  advance
bases  in  the  Pacific.  Fifthly,  an  antisubmarine  task  force  group  has  been
moved  into  the  South  China  Sea.

It  is  significant,  relative  to  the  broader  purpose  of  the  deployments,  that  few
of  these  additional  units  were  removed  from  the  Western  Pacific  when  the  im-
mediate crisis  subsided.  In  late  September  the  fourth  attack  aircraft  carrier  was
authorized  to  resume  its  normal  station  in  the  Eastern  Pacific  as  soon  as  the
regularly  assigned  carried  completed  repairs.  The  other  forces  remained  in  the
vicinity  of  their  August  deployment.

Other  actions  taken  by  the  Administration  in  the  wake  of  Tonkin  Gulf  were
intended  to  communicate  to  various  audiences  the  depth  and  sincerity  of  the
U.S.  commitment.  On  the  evening  of  4  August,  in  conjunction  with  his  testing
of  Congressional  opinion  regarding  reprisal  action.  President  Johnson  disclosed
his  intention  to  request  a  resolution  in  support  of  U.S.  Southeast  Asian  policy.
This  he  did  through  a  formal  message  to  both  houses  on  5  August.  Concurrently,
identical  draft  resolutions,  the  language  of  which  had  been  prepared  by  execu-
tive agencies,  were  introduced  in  the  Senate  by  J.  William  Fulbright  (D.,  Ark.)
and  in  the  House  by  Thomas  E.  Morgan  (D.,  Pa.)  and  co-sponsored  by  bi-
partisan leadership.  Discussed  in  committee  on  6  August,  in  response  to  testi-
mony by  leading  Administration  officials,  the  resolution  was  passed  the  following
day — by  votes  of  88  to  2  in  the  Senate  and  416  to  0  in  the  House.

Despite  the  nearly  unanimous  votes  of  support  for  the  Resolution,  Congres-
sional opinions  varied  as  to  the  policy  implications  and  the  meaning  of  such
support.  The  central  belief  seemed  to  be  that  the  occasion  necessitated  demon-
strating the  nation's  unity  and  collective  will  in  support  of  the  President's  action
and  affirming  U.S.  determination  to  oppose  further  aggression.  However,  beyond
that  theme,  there  was  a  considerable  variety  of  opinion.  For  example,  in  the
House,  expressions  of  support  varied  from  Congressman  Laird's  argument,  that
while  the  retaliation  in  the  Gulf  was  appropriate  such  actions  still  left  a  policy
to  be  developed  with  respect  to  the  land  war  in  Southeast  Asia,  to  the  more
reticent  viewpoint  of  Congressman  Alger.  The  latter  characterized  his  support  as
being  primarily  for  purposes  of  showing  unity  and  expressed  concern  over  the
danger  of  being  dragged  into  war  by  "other  nations  seeking  our  help."  Several
spokesmen  stressed  that  the  Resolution  did  not  constitute  a  declaration  of  war,
did  not  abdicate  Congressional  responsibility  for  determining  national  policy
commitments,  and  did  not  give  the  President  carte  blanche  to  involve  the  nation
in  a  major  Asian  w^r.

Similar  expressions  were  voiced  in  the  senior  chamber.  For  example.  Senator
Nelson  sought  assurances  that  the  resolution  would  not  tend  to  commit  the
United  States  further  than  .  .  .

[Several  paragraphs  missing]
addition  to  repeating  points  made  earlier,  Seaborn's  second  message  conveyed
the  U.S.  Government's  uncertainty  over  DRV  intentions  in  the  4  August  attack
and  explained  that  subsequent  U.S.  deployments  of  additional  airpower  to  South
Vietnam  and  Thailand  were  "precautionary."  In  addition,  the  new  message
stressed:  (1)  that  the  Tonkin  Gulf  events  demonstrated  that  "U.S.  public  and


188 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

official  patience"  was  wearing  thin;  (2)  that  the  Congressional  Resolution  reaf-
firmed U.S.  determination  "to  continue  to  oppose  firmly,  by  all  necessary  means,
DRV  efforts  to  subvert  and  conquer  South  Vietnam  and  Laos";  and  (3)  that
"if  the  DRV  persists  in  its  present  course,  it  can  expect  to  suffer  the  conse-
quences."

Thus,  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  provocation  handed  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment in  the  Tonkin  Gulf,  the  Administration  was  able  to  carry  out  most  of  the
actions  recommended  by  its  principal  officials  early  in  the  summer.  By  the  same
token,  it  was  reducing  the  number  of  unused  measures  short  of  direct  military
action  that  had  been  conceived  as  available  for  exerting  effective  pressure  on  the
DRV.  In  effect,  as  it  made  its  commitments  in  Southeast  Asia  clearer  it  also
deepened  them,  and  in  the  process  it  denied  itself  access  to  some  of  the  uncom-
mitting  options  which  it  had  perceived  earlier  as  offering  policy  flexibihty.  Mean-
while, other  events  were  also  having  the  effect  of  denying  options  which  had
been  considered  useful  alternatives  to  strikes  against  the  North.
C.  1.  [Title  and  several  paragraphs  missing]

over  Southeast  Asia  and  the  likelihood  that  back-corridor  discussions  of  the  Viet-
namese problem  would  be  an  almost  inevitable  by-product.  In  time  such  a  pro-
cedure might  be  useful,  but  for  the  balance  of  1964  it  was  to  be  avoided  in
order  to  promote  GVN  stability  and  encourage  a  more  vigorous  GVN  war
effort.

The  pressure  for  a  Geneva-type  conference  had  been  building  ever  since  the
resumption  of  fighting  in  Laos  in  May.  The  chief  protagonist  in  the  quest  for
negotiations  was  France,  who  first  proposed  reconvening  the  14-Nation  Con-
ference to  deal  with  the  crisis  on  20  May.  What  made  French  policy  so  danger-
ous to  U.S.  interests,  however,  was  that  its  interest  in  a  Geneva  solution  applied
to  Vietnam  as  well.  On  12  June,  DeGaulle  publicly  repeated  his  neutralization
theme  for  all  Indo-China  and  called  for  an  end  to  all  foreign  intervention  there;
on  23  July  he  proposed  reconvening  the  1954  Geneva  Conference  to  deal  with  the
problems  of  Vietnam.

The  Soviet  Union's  return  to  the  14-Nation  formula  in  July  (it  had  endorsed
the  original  French  proposal  before  indicating  willingness  to  support  the  6-Nation
approach)  indicated  solidarity  in  the  communist  camp.  The  call  was  endorsed  by
North  Vietnam  on  the  following  day.  Communist  China  first  announced  support
for  a  14-Nation  Conference  (on  Laos)  on  9  June,  repeating  this  through  notes
to  the  co-chairman  calling  on  the  13th  for  an  "emergency  meeting."  On  2  August,
the  Chinese  urged  the  USSR  not  to  carry  out  its  threat  to  abandon  its  co-chairman
role,  apparently  viewing  such  a  development  as  jeopardizing  the  possibilities  for
a  Geneva  settlement.

Great  Britain  also  urged  the  Russians  to  stay  on,  and  during  the  last  days  of
July  it  attempted  to  make  arrangements  in  Moscow  to  convene  a  14-Nation  as-
sembly on  Laos.  The  negotiations  failed  because  Britain  insisted  on  Souvanna's
prerequisite  that  the  communists  withdraw  from  positions  taken  in  May  and  was
unable  to  gain  Soviet  acquiescence.  However,  U.S.  leaders  were  aware  that
Britain's  support  on  this  point  could  not  be  counted  on  indefinitely  in  the  face
of  increasing  pressure  in  the  direction  of  Geneva.

In  the  meantime,  however,  Laotian  military  efforts  to  counter  the  communist
threat  to  key  routes  and  control  points  west  of  the  Plaine  des  Jarres  were  showing
great  success.  As  a  result  of  a  counteroffensive  (Operation  Triangle),  govern-
ment forces  gained  control  of  a  considerable  amount  of  territory  that  gave  prom-
ise of  assuring  access  between  the  two  capitals  (Vientiane  and  Luang  Prabang)
for  the  first  time  in  three  years.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  189

In  effect,  the  government's  newly  won  control  of  territory  and  communication
routes  in  central  Laos  created  a  new  and  more  favorable  balance  of  power  in
that  country,  which  in  the  perceptions  of  the  administration  should  not  be
jeopardized.

[Several  paragraphs  missing]
firmness  in  the  event  negotiating  pressure  should  become  compelling.

Reactions  to  this  tentative  policy  change  were  unfavorable.  It  was  seen  as
likely  to  have  a  demoralizing  impact  on  the  GVN.  It  was  also  seen  as  possibly
eroding  the  impression  of  strong  U.S.  resolve,  which  the  reprisal  air  strikes  were
believed  to  have  created.  For  example,  Ambassador  Taylor  cabled:

.  .  .  rush  to  conference  table  would  serve  to  confirm  to  CHICOMS  that
U.S.  retaliation  for  destroyer  attacks  was  transient  phenomenon  and  that
firm  CHICOM  response  in  form  of  commitment  to  defend  NVN  has  given
U.S.  "paper  tiger"  second  thoughts.  .  .  .

In  Vietnam  sudden  backdown  from  previously  strongly  held  U.S.  posi-
tion on  [Plaine  des  Jarres]  withdrawal  prior  to  conference  on  Laos  would
have  potentially  disastrous  effect.  Morale  and  will  to  fight  and  particular
willingness  to  push  ahead  with  arduous  pacification  task  .  .  .  would  be
undermined  by  what  would  look  like  evidence  that  U.S.  seeking  to  take
advantage  of  any  slight  improvement  in  non-Communist  position  as  excuse
for  extricating  itself  from  Indo-China  via  [conference]  route.  .  .  .

Under  circumstances,  we  see  very  little  hope  that  results  of  such  a  con-
ference would  be  advantageous  to  us.  Moreover,  prospects  of  limiting  it  to
consideration  of  only  Laotian  problem  appear  at  this  time  juncture  to  be
dimmer  than  ever.  .  .  .

2. Concern  Over  Tonkin  Reprisal  Signals

Contained  in  Ambassador  Taylor's  views  was  yet  another  of  the  Administra-
tion's reflections  on  the  impact  of  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents.  Officials  developed
mixed  feelings  regarding  the  effect  of  the  Tonkin  reprisals  for  signaling  firm  U.S.
commitments  in  Southeast  Asia.  On  one  hand,  it  was  conceded  that  the  reprisals
and  the  actions  which  accompanied  them  represented  the  most  forceful  expres-
sion of  U.S.  resolve  to  date.  Improvements  were  perceived  in  South  Vietnamese
morale,  and  the  combination  of  force  and  restraint  demonstrated  was  believed
effective  in  interrupting  communist  momentum  and  forcing  a  reassessment  of
U.S.  intentions.  On  the  other  hand,  they  reflected  concern  that  these  effects
might  not  last  and  that  the  larger  aspects  of  U.S.  determination  might  still  be
unclear.

Several  officials  and  agencies  indicated  that  our  actions  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf
represented  only  one  step  along  a  continually  demanding  route  for  the  United
States.  They  expressed  relief  that  if  a  persuasive  impression  of  firmness  were  to
be  created  relative  to  the  general  security  of  Southeast  Asia,  [words  illegible]

It  should  be  remembered  that  our  retaliatory  action  in  Gulf  of  Tonkin
is  in  effect  an  isolated  U.S.-DRV  incident.  Although  this  has  relation  .  .  .
to  [the]  larger  problem  of  DRV  aggression  by  subversion  in  Viet-Nam  and
Laos,  we  have  not  (repeat  not)  yet  come  to  grips  in  a  forceful  way  with
DRV  over  the  issue  of  this  larger  and  much  more  complex  problem.

Later,  he  decribed  a  need  for  subsequent  actions  that  would  convey  to  Hanoi
that  -the  operational  rules  with  respect  to  the  DRV  are  changing."  Assistant


190 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

Secretary  of  State  Bundy  believed  that  Hanoi  and  Peking  had  probably  been
convinced  only  "that  we  will  act  strongly  where  U.S.  force  units  are  directly
involved  .  .  .  [that]  in  other  respects  the  communist  side  may  not  be  so  per-
suaded that  we  are  prepared  to  take  stronger  action.  .  .  ."  He  saw  the  need  for
a  continuous  "combination  of  military  pressure  and  some  form  of  communica-
tion" to  cause  Hanoi  to  accept  the  idea  of  "getting  out"  of  South  Vietnam  and
Laos.  CINCPAC  stated  that  "what  we  have  not  done  and  must  do  is  make  plain
to  Hanoi  and  Peiping  the  cost  of  pursuing  their  current  objectives  and  impeding
ours.  .  .  .  Our  actions  of  August  5  have  created  a  momentum  which  can  lead
to  the  attainment  of  our  objectives  in  S.E.  Asia.  ...  It  is  most  important  that
we  not  lose  this  momentum."  The  ICS  urged  actions  to  "sustain  the  U.S.  advan-
tage [recently]  gained,"  and  later  cautioned:  "Failure  to  resume  and  maintain  a
program  of  pressure  through  military  actions  .  .  .  could  signal  a  lack  of  re-
solve."

What  these  advisors  had  in  mind  by  way  of  actions  varied  somewhat  but  only
in  the  extent  to  which  they  were  willing  to  go  in  the  immediate  future.  Bundy
stressed  that  policy  commitments  must  be  such  that  U.S.  and  GVN  hands  could
be  kept  free  for  military  actions  against  DRV  infiltration  routes  in  Laos.  Ambas-
sador Taylor,  CINCPAC  and  the  JCS  urged  prompt  air  and  ground  operations
across  the  Laotian  border  to  interrupt  the  current  (though  modest)  southward
flow  of  men  and  supplies.  Both  Taylor  and  CINCPAC  indicated  the  necessity  of
building  up  our  "readiness  posture"  to  undertake  stronger  actions — through
additional  deployments  of  forces  and  logistical  support  elements  and  strengthen-
ing of  the  GVN  political  base.

The  mood  and  attitudes  reflected  in  these  viewpoints  were  concrete  and  dra-
matic expressions  of  the  increased  U.S.  commitment  stemming  from  the  Tonkin
Gulf  incidents.  They  were  candidly  summed  up  by  CINCPAC  in  his  statement:

.  .  .  pressures  against  the  other  side  once  instituted  should  not  be  re-
laxed by  any  actions  or  lack  of  them  which  would  destroy  the  benefits  of
the  rewarding  steps  previously  taken.  .  .  .

Increasingly  voiced  by  officials  from  many  quarters  of  the  Administration  and
from  the  professional  agencies  were  arguments  which  said,  in  effect,  now  that  we
have  gone  [words  missing]  go  no  further;

[Several  paragraphs  missing]
destruction  of  specific  targets  by  aerial  bombardment  or  naval  gunfire.  They
could  be  supported  by  such  non-destructive  military  actions  as  aerial  reconnais-
sance, harassment  of  civil  aviation  and  maritime  commerce,  mock  air  attacks,
and  timely  concentrations  of  U.S.  or  allied  forces  at  sea  or  near  land  borders.
Following  a  line  of  reasoning  prevalent  in  the  Government  during  the  early  60's,
Rostow  observed  that  a  target  government  might  well  reduce  its  insurgency
supporting  role  in  the  face  of  such  pressures  because  of  the  communists'  pro-
verbial "tactical  flexibility."

The  thesis  was  subjected  to  a  rather  thorough  analysis  in  OSD/ISA  and  co-
ordinated with  the  Department  of  State.  The  nature  of  this  review  will  be  dis-
cussed on  later  pages  and  in  a  different  context.

3. Accompanying  Pause  in  Pressures

The  foregoing  policy  assessments  were  conducted  in  an  atmosphere  relatively
free  of  even  those  pressure  measures  that  preceded  the  Tonkin  Gulf  crisis.  Since


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  191

the  force  deployments  of  6  August,  little  military  activity  had  been  directed  at  the
DRV.  U-2  flights  over  North  Vietnam  and  reconnaissance  of  the  Laotian  Pan-
handle were  continued.  Military  operations  within  Laos  were  limited  to  the  con-
solidation of  gains  achieved  in  Operation  Triangle.  A  deliberate  stand-down  was
adopted  for  all  other  activities — including  DE  SOTO  Patrols  and  the  GVN's
covert  harassing  operations.  The  purpose  of  this  "holding  phase,"  as  it  was  called,
was  to  '"avoid  actions  that  would  in  any  way  take  the  onus  ofi"  the  Communist  side
for  [the  Tonkin]  escalation."

However,  during  the  "holding  phase"  some  of  the  administrative  impediments
to  wider  military  action  were  cleared  away.  One  measure  that  was  taken  was
to  relax  the  operating  restrictions  and  the  rules  of  engagement  for  U.S.  forces  in
Southeast  Asia.  This  was  accomplished  in  response  to  JCS  urging  that  attacking
forces  not  be  permitted  sanctuaries  from  which  to  regroup  and  perhaps  repeat
their  hostile  acts.  Prior  rules  had  not  permitted  pursuit  of  hostile  aircraft  outside
South  Vietnam  or  authorized  intercept  of  intruders  over  Thailand.  Under  the  re-
vised rules  of  15  August  1964,  U.S.  forces  were  authorized  to  attack  and  destroy
any  vessel  or  aircraft  "which  attacks,  or  gives  positive  indication  of  intent  to
attack"  U.S.  forces  operating  in  or  over  international  waters  and  in  Laos,  to
include  hot  pursuit  into  the  territorial  waters  or  air  space  of  North  Vietnam  and
into  the  air  space  over  other  countries  of  Southeast  Asia.  "Hostile  aircraft  over
South  Vietnam  and  Thailand"  could  be  engaged  as  well  and  pursued  into  North
Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia.

Another  prerequisite  to  wider  military  action  that  was  accomplished  was  the
combined  GVN-U.S.  planning  for  cross-border  ground  operations.  By  16  August,
this  had  proceeded  to  such  an  extent  that  COMUSMACV  believed  it  necessary
to  seek  approval  of  the  concept.  MACV  made  the  request  despite  explicit  com-
ment that  the  concept  was  "an  overly  ambitious  scheme."  Presumably,  he  con-
sidered it  likely  to  be  ineffective  militarily,  but  perhaps  important  in  stimulating
more  vigorous  GVN  efforts.  Whatever  his  particular  reasons  at  the  time,  MACV
repeated  the  recommendations  later  in  the  month  as  part  of  several  measures  to
be  taken  inside  and  outside  South  Vietnam.  These  were  designed  "to  give  the
VC  a  bloody  nose,"  to  steady  the  newly  reformed  South  Vietnamese  government,
and  to  raise  the  morale  of  the  population.  However,  the  earlier  MACV  cable
had  already  acknowledged  what  must  have  been  one  of  the  Administration's
key  inhibitions  against  undertaking  cross-border  actions:  General  Westmoreland
stated,  "It  should  be  recognized  that  once  this  operation  is  initiated  by  the  GVN,
U.S.  controls  may  be  marginal."

The  period  of  the  "holding  phase"  was  also  a  period  of  significant  develop-
ments within  South  Vietnam.  Ambassador  Taylor's  initial  report  (10  August)
made  clear  that  the  political  situation  was  already  precarious,  giving  Khanh  only
a  50-50  chance  of  staying  in  power  and  characterizing  the  GVN  as  ineffective
and  fraught  with  conflicting  purposes.  In  Taylor's  view,  the  leadership  in  Saigon
showed  symptoms.- of  "defeatism"  and  a  hesitancy  to  prosecute  the  pacification
campaign  within  South  Vietnam.  Meanwhile,  however,  its  popular  support  in
the  countryside  seemed  to  be  directly  proportional  to  the  degree  of  protection
which  the  government  provided.  In  view  of  this  shaky  political  base,  General
Khanh  seized  upon  the  occasion  of  post-Tonkin  euphoria — apparently  with  Am-
bassador Taylor's  encouragement — to  acquire  additional  executive  authority.  On
7  August,  announcing  the  necessity  for  certain  "emergency"  powers  to  cope
with  any  heightened  VC  activity,  he  proclaimed  himself  President  and  pro-
mulgated the  Vung  Tau  Charter.  This  action,  which  gave  him  virtually  dictatorial
power  over  several  aspects  of  South  Vietnamese  life,  met  with  hostile  reactions.


192 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

In  late  August,  Khanh's  authority  was  challenged  in  the  streets  of  Saigon,  Hue
and  Da  Nang,  during  several  days  of  student  protest  demonstrations  and  clashes
between  Buddhist  and  Catholic  groups.  In  response  to  student  and  Buddhist
pressures  primarily,  he  resigned  his  recently  assumed  post  as  President  and
promised  that  a  national  assemblage  would  be  called  to  form  a  more  popularly
based  government.  On  3  September,  Khanh  returned  to  assume  the  premiership,
but  clearly  with  weaker  and  more  conditional  authority  than  before  the  govern-
ment crisis.

Meanwhile,  as  the  GVN's  lack  of  cohesion  and  stability  was  being  demon-
strated, the  infiltration  of  communist  forces  into  South  Vietnam  may  have  been
on  the  increase.  At  least,  belief  in  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  this  infiltration  appar-
ently gained  currency  in  various  U.S.  agencies  at  this  time.  The  documents  avail-
able to  this  writer  from  the  period  neither  refute  nor  substantiate  the  increase,
but  several  of  them  contained  references  to  this  perception.  For  example,  a  State
Department  memorandum,  dated  24  August,  acknowledged  a  "rise  and  change
in  the  nature  of  infiltration  in  recent  months."  Later  analyses  confirmed  that
increases  had  taken  place,  but  the  precise  period  when  this  [words  illegible].

Possibly  influencing  the  judgments  of  August  was  the  fact  that  increased  com-
munist movement  of  men  and  supplies  to  the  South  was  expected,  resulting  in
part  from  a  DIA  assessment  (7  August)  of  the  most  likely  DRV  reactions  to
the  Tonkin  reprisals.  Moreover,  the  State  Department's  analysis  of  next  courses
of  action  in  Southeast  Asia  had  made  "clear  evidence  of  greatly  increased  in-
filtration from  the  North"  an  explicit  condition  for  any  policy  judgment  that
"systematic  military  action  against  DRV"  was  required  during  the  balance  of
1964.  And  leading  officials  from  several  agencies  were  beginning  to  feel  that
such  action  might  be  inevitable.

The  combined  effects  of  the  signs  of  increased  VC  infiltration  and  of  con-
tinuing upheaval  in  Saigon  caused  great  concern  in  Washington.  The  central  per-
ception was  one  of  impending  chaos  and  possible  failure  in  South  Vietnam.
Among  several  agencies,  the  emerging  mood  was  that  some  kind  of  action  was
urgently  needed — even  if  it  had  the  effect  merely  of  improving  the  U.S.  image
prior  to  pulling  out.  It  was  this  mood  that  prevailed  as  the  period  of  "pause"
drew  to  a  close.

D. Next  Courses  of  Action

By  early  September  a  general  consensus  had  developed  among  high-level  Ad-
ministration officials  that  some  form  of  additional  and  continuous  pressure  should
be  exerted  against  North  Vietnam.  Though  Laos  was  relatively  stabilized,  the
situation  there  was  recognized  as  dependent  ultimately  on  the  degree  of  success
achieved  in  solving  the  problems  of  Vietnam.  Pacification  efforts  within  South
Vietnam  were  regarded  as  insufficient  by  themselves  to  reverse  the  deteriorating
trends  in  that  country.  As  a  result,  officials  from  both  civilian  and  military
agencies  were  anxious  to  resume  and  to  extend  the  program  of  military  actions
against  communist  forces  outside  its  borders.

1. Strategy  Meeting  In  September

How  to  go  about  this  was  a  problem  of  great  concern  to  top-level  officials
(the  President,  Secretary  Rusk,  Secretary  McNamara,  General  Wheeler,  Am-
bassador Taylor,  CIA  Director  McCone)  as  they  assembled  in  Washington  on
7  September.  The  main  purpose  of  the  meeting  was  to  discuss  with  Ambassador


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  193

Taylor  future  courses  of  U.S.  and  GVN  action,  particularly  as  related  to  the
implications  of  the  recent  political  upheaval  in  Saigon.

The  alternatives  presented  for  discussion  were  based  largely  on  responses  to
the  tentative  analysis  circulated  by  the  State  Department  in  mid-August.  Replies
from  CINCPAC  and  the  Saigon  and  Vientiane  embassies  had  been  circulated,
and  they  provided  the  basis  for  a  number  of  questions  which  Ambassador  Taylor's
party  was  asked  to  be  ready  to  discuss.  JCS  reactions  to  the  analysis  and  to  the
earlier  replies  were  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  with  the  specific  intent
that  they  be  considered  at  the  meeting  and  presumably  were  passed  to  other
participating  agencies.  OSD/ISA  views  were  prepared  by  Assistant  Secretary
McNaughton  on  3  September  and  were  known  at  least  to  Assistant  Secretary  of
State  Bundy.  [Doc.  188]

Just  prior  to  the  meeting,  the  JCS  urged  that  General  Wheeler,  their  Chairman,
propose  a  course  of  action  involving  air  strikes  against  targets  in  North  Vietnam
appearing  on  the  JCS-approved,  94-target  list.  This  kind  of  action  had  been
recommended  before — most  recently  on  26  August,  in  response  to  the  Depart-
ment of  State  analysis — as  a  means  of  "destroying  the  DRV  will  and  capabilities,
as  necessary,  to  continue  to  support  the  insurgencies  in  South  Vietnam  and
Laos."  What  made  this  proposal  particularly  significant  was  that  it  called  for
deliberate  attempts  to  provoke  the  DRV  into  taking  action  which  could  then  be
answered  by  a  systematic  U.S.  air  campaign.  According  to  the  JCS  scheme,  the
campaign  "would  be  continuous  and  in  ascending  severity,"  with  its  tempo  and
intensity  varied  as  required  by  enemy  reactions.  Targets  would  eventually  include
airfields,  bridges,  railroads,  and  military  installations.

Whether  or  not  or  in  what  form  General  Wheeler  presented  this  proposal  to
the  assembled  officials  on  7  September  is  not  indicated  in  the  documentary
sources  available.  The  JCS  belief  in  the  necessity  of  bombing  North  Vietnam  was
discussed,  as  was  some  of  their  rationale.  Made  explicit,  for  example,  was  their
argument  that  there  was  no  reason  to  delay  the  bombing  since  (in  their  view)
the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  would  only  become  worse.  That  the  idea  of  de-
liberately provoking  a  DRV  reaction  was  discussed  in  some  form  is  indicated  in
a  record  of  the  consensus  arrived  at  in  the  discussions.  [Doc.  191]  However,  the
JCS  were  not  the  only  officials  who  favored  such  an  idea.  Assistant  Secretary
McNaughton's  "Plan  of  Action"  (3  September  1964)  also  called  for  actions  that
"should  be  likely  at  some  point  to  provoke  a  military  DRV  response."  The  latter,
in  turn,  "should  be  likely  to  provide  good  grounds  for  us  to  escalate  if  we  wished."

The  principal  conferees  did  not  believe  that  deliberately  provocative  actions
should  be  undertaken  "in  the  immediate  future  while  the  GVN  is  still  struggling
to  its  feet."  However,  they  apparently  reached  a  consensus  that  they  might  recom-
mend such  actions — "depending  on  GVN  progress  and  Communist  reaction  in
the  meantime" — by  early  October.

The  reasons  cited  for  their  opposition  to  provocative  acts  were  also  applied
in  rejecting  proposals  for  an  immediate  bombing  campaign.  The  GVN  was
expected  to  be  too  weak  for  the  United  States  to  assume  the  "deliberate  risks  of
escalation  that  would  involve  a  major  role  for,  or  threat  to.  South  Vietnam."  In
the  discussion,  Mr.  McCone  observed  that  undertaking  a  sustained  attack  on
the  DRV  would  be  very  dangerous,  due  to  the  weakness  and  unpredictability  of
the  political  base  in  South  Vietnam.  Secretary  Rusk  stated  the  view  that  every
means  short  of  bombing  must  be  exhausted.  Secretary  McNamara  affirmed  his
understanding  that  "we  are  not  acting  more  strongly  because  there  is  a  clear
hope  of  strengthening  the  GVN."  But  he  went  on  to  urge  that  the  way  be  kept
open  for  stronger  actions  even  if  the  GVN  did  not  improve  or  in  the  event  the


194 Gravel  Edition/ The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

war  were  widened  by  the  communists.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  President
asked  specifically,  "Can  we  really  strengthen  the  GVN?"

Even  though  the  principals  did  not  accept  the  JCS  proposal  and  apparently  did
not  agree  with  their  assessment  of  the  chances  for  improvement  in  South  Vietnam,
they  did  indicate  accord  with  the  JCS  sense  of  the  gravity  of  the  U.S.  predicament.
In  response  to  General  Wheeler's  statements  that  "if  the  United  States  loses  in
South  Vietnam,  it  will  lose  all  of  Southeast  Asia"  and  that  its  position  throughout
all  of  Asia  would  be  damaged,  both  McCone  and  Rusk  indicated  agreement.
Ambassador  Taylor  stated  the  view  that  the  United  States  could  not  afford  to  let
Ho  Chi  Minh  win  in  South  Vietnam.  Secretary  Rusk  added  the  consideration  that
the  whole  world  doubted  our  ability  to  pull  it  off.

The  meeting  resulted  in  consensus  among  the  principals  on  certain  courses  of
prompt  action  to  put  additional  pressure  on  North  Vietnam.  The  following
measures  were  recommended  to  the  President  for  his  decision:

1.  U.S.  naval  patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  should  be  resumed  imme-
diately (about  September  12).  They  should  operate  initially  beyond  the  12-
mile  limit  and  be  clearly  dissociated  from  34A  maritime  operations.  .  .  .

2.  34A  operations  by  the  GVN  should  be  resumed  immediately  thereafter
(next  week).  The  maritime  operations  are  by  far  the  most  important.  .  .  .

3.  Limited  GVN  air  and  ground  operations  into  the  corridor  areas  of
Laos  should  be  undertaken  in  the  near  future,  together  with  Lao  air  strikes
as  soon  as  we  can  get  Souvanna's  permission.  These  operations  will  have
only  limited  effect,  however.

4.  We  should  be  prepared  to  respond  on  a  tit-for-tat  basis  against  the
DRV  [against  specific  and  related  targets]  in  the  event  of  any  attack  on
U.S.  units  or  any  special  DRV/VC  action  against  SVN.

The  purposes  for  these  measures  were  conceived  as:  (1)  "to  assist  morale  in
SVN,"  (2)  to  "show  the  Communists  we  still  mean  business,"  and  (3)  "to  keep
the  risks  low  and  under  our  control  at  each  stage."

2. Implementing  Actions

These  recommendations  (and  presumably  the  purposes)  were  approved  by
the  President  and  became  the  basis  for  a  program  of  limited  (though  not  con-
tinuous) pressures  exerted  against  North  Vietnam  from  mid-September  to  mid-
December  1964.  On  10  September,  the  White  House  issued  a  National  Security
Action  Memorandum  [Doc.  195]  which  authorized  immediate  resumption  of  the
DE  SOTO  Patrols  and  prompt  discussions  with  the  Government  of  Laos  to
develop  plans  for  cross-border  operations.  It  also  authorized  resumption  of  34A
operations  following  completion  of  the  DE  SOTO  Patrol,  with  the  additional
guidance  that  "we  should  have  the  GVN  ready  to  admit  that  they  are  taking
place  and  to  justify  and  legitimize  them  on  the  basis  of  the  facts  of  VC  infiltration
by  sea."  It  is  significant  that  although  this  order,  in  effects  authorized  the  initiation
of  Phase  III  (October  through  December)  of  the  covert  operations  under  OPLAN
34A,  it  specified  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  Phase  III  that  "we  should  not  con-
sider air  strikes  under  34A  for  the  present."

Naval  Operations.  The  resumption  of  naval  patrol  and  covert  maritime  opera-
tions off  the  coast  of  North  Vietnam  did  not  proceed  exactly  as  planned.  The
destroyers  U.S.S.  Morton  and  U.S.S.  Edwards  embarked  on  the  third  DE  SOTO
Patrol  on  12  September.  On  the  night  of  14  September  [words  illegible]


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  195

Approximately  40  minutes  after  first  contact  and  after  firing  a  warning  shot,
Morton  and  Edwards  opened  fire,  both  scoring  hits.  Subsequently,  on  two  sepa-
rate occasions  after  the  target  images  had  disappeared  from  the  radar,  new
contacts  appeared  and  were  fired  on  at  a  range  of  approximately  8,500  yards,
hits  again  being  indicated  for  both  vessels.  In  all,  Morton  fired  56  five-inch  and
128  three-inch  rounds;  Edwards  fired  152  five-inch  and  6  three-inch  rounds.
There  were  no  rounds  or  torpedoes  reported  coming  from  the  radar  contacts.
Later  on  the  18th  (Washington  time).  President  Johnson  suspended  the  DE  SOTO
Patrols;  they  were  not  to  be  resumed  until  February  1965.

In  the  aftermath  of  the  third  destroyer  incident  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf,  covert
GVN  maritime  operations  were  not  resumed  until  October.  President  Johnson
authorized  reactivation  of  this  program  on  the  4th,  under  very  tight  controls.
The  proposed  schedule  of  maritime  operations  had  to  be  submitted  at  the  be-
ginning of  each  month  for  approval.  Each  operation  was  approved  in  advance
by  OSD  (Mr.  Vance),  State  (Mr.  L.  Thompson  or  Mr.  Forrestal)  and  the  White
House  (Mr.  McGeorge  Bundy).  During  October,  these  included  two  probes,  an
attempted  junk  capture,  and  ship-to-shore  bombardment  of  North  Vietnamese
radar  sites.  Later,  they  included  underwater  demolition  team  assaults  on  bridges
along  coastal  LOC's.  Unlike  the  DE  SOTO  Patrols,  these  unacknowledged  opera-
tions continued  throughout  the  year.

Actions  in  Laos.  Operations  in  the  Laotian  Panhandle  took  shape  with  fewer
unpredictable  developments.  On  1 1  September,  representatives  of  the  U.S.  mis-
sions in  Laos,  Thailand  and  Vietnam  met  in  Saigon  to  discuss  implementation
of  the  NSAM  314  provisions  for  cross-border  air  and  ground  operations.  [Doc.
196]  Regarding  air  operations,  they  agreed  that  if  their  primary  objective  was
military  in  nature,  "sharp,  heavy"  and  concentrated  attacks  would  be  needed  and
that  U.S.  and/or  VNAF/FARMGATE  forces  would  be  required.  If  their  impact
was  intended  to  be  primarily  psychological  (presumably  affecting  both  com-
munists and  the  GVN),  they  believed  that  the  operations  could  be  more  widely
spaced,  relying  primarily  on  Laotian  T-28s  with  some  U.S.  strikes  on  harder
targets.  In  view  of  Souvanna  Phouma's'  reported  opposition  to  VNAF  strikes  in
the  Panhandle,  the  representatives  conceded  that  the  slower  paced  operation
with  RLAF  aircraft  offered  the  best  course.  However,  they  saw  a  joint  Lao,  Thai,
RVN  and  U.S.  operation  as  particularly  desirable,  were  it  not  for  the  time
required  to  arrange  it.  As  one  means  of  symbolizing  four  power  support  for  the
operation,  they  recommended  that  the  Thai  Government  be  approached  regard-
ing use  of  the  Korat  base  by  participating  U.S.  aircraft.

Regarding  cross-border  ground  operations,  the  representatives  agreed  that  the
southern  and  central  Panhandle  offered  terrain  and  targets  consistent  with  the
available  GVN  assets.  Although  it  was  recognized  that  accompanying  U.S.  ad-
visers might  be  necessary  to  assure  the  success  of  the  operations,  the  planners
acceded  to  Vientiane's  objections  that  such  a  flagrant  violation  of  the  Geneva
Accords  would  endanger  the  credibility  of  our  political  stance  in  Laos.  Sub-
sequent to  the  meeting,  the  Vientiane  Embassy  removed  a  reservation  expressed
earlier  and  cleared  the  way  for  company-size  penetrations  of  up  to  20  km  along
Route  9,  near  Tchepone.  At  the  conference  this  operation  was  considered  of
high  priority  with  respect  to  infiltration  traffic  into  South  Vietnam.

The  mission  representatives  agreed  that,  once  the  operations  began,  they
should  not  be  acknowledged  publicly.  In  effect,  then,  they  would  supplement  the
other  covert  pressures  being  exerted  against  North  Vietnam.  Moreover,  while
the  Lao  Government  would  of  course  know  about  the  operations  of  their  T-28s,


196 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111

Souvanna  was  not  to  be  informed  of  the  GVN/U.S.  operations.  The  unacknowl-
edged nature  of  these  operations  would  thus  be  easier  to  maintain.  Accordingly,
the  representatives  recommended  to  Washington  that  Vientiane  be  authorized  to
approach  the  Laotian  Government  regarding  initiation  of  T-28  operations.  On
the  other  hand,  the  Administration  was  asked  to  approve  ground  operations  in
three  specified  areas  of  the  Panhandle.

Over  two  weeks  passed  before  these  recommendations  were  acted  on.  In  the
meantime,  the  JCS  also  submitted  proposals  for  implementing  NSAM  314,  re-
questing immediate  authority  to  implement  air  operations  in  the  Panhandle.
Endorsing  the  main  theme  of  the  mission  representatives,  they  called  for  com-
bined action  by  RLAF  T-28s  and  U.S.  aircraft  which  would  provide  "suppressive
fire"  and  attack  heavily  defended  bridges.  The  JCS  also  sought  authority  to  ini-
tiate GVN  ground  intelligence  collection  and  target  reconnaissance  patrols  in
the  Laotian  corridor.

On  6  October,  authority  was  given  to  Vientiane  Embassy  to  urge  the  Laotian
Government  to  begin  T-28  air  strikes  "as  soon  as  possible."  The  RLAF  targets
were  to  be  selected  from  a  previously  coordinated  22-target  list,  a  few  of  which
were  designed  for  U.S.  YANKEE  TEAM  strikes,  but  they  were  to  exclude  Mu
Gia  Pass.  The  latter  mission  was  known  to  require  U.S.  escort  and  suppressive
fire,  and  a  decision  on  whether  to  authorize  such  U.S.  operations  had  not  yet
been  made  in  Washington.  Moreover,  neither  had  the  Administration  authorized
YANKEE  TEAM  strike  missions  against  the  tougher  Panhandle  targets.  [Doc.
204]

Administration  rationale  on  the  issue  of  U.S.  participation  in  the  Panhandle  air
strikes  is  not  clear  from  the  sources  available  to  this  writer.  Contemporary  in-
telligence estimates  indicated  the  communist  responses  were  likely  to  be  limited
to  (1)  increases  in  antiaircraft  deployments  in  the  area,  (2)  propaganda  attacks
and  (3)  possible  sabotage  of  U.S. /GVN  supporting  bases.  However,  Washington's
viewpoint  on  another  Laotian  request  for  air  support  may  be  significant.  With
respect  to  air  strikes  against  targets  along  Route  7,  in  support  of  the  RLG  com-
paign  to  consolidate  its  holdings  west  of  the  Plaine  des  Jarres,  Administration
rationale  was  as  follows:

[material  missing]

[to]  defer  decision  on  Route  7  strikes  until  we  have  strong  evidence  [of]
Hanoi's  preparation  for  new  attack  in  [the  Plaine  des  Jarres],  some  of  which
might  come  from  RLAF  operations  over  the  Route.

On  13  October,  one  day  before  the  initial  RLAF  attacks,  U.S.  strikes  were
again  requested  on  four  defended  targets  near  Nape  and  Tchepone.  They  were  to
accompany  T-28  strikes  on  communist  military  installations  and  supply  points
in  the  northern  part  of  the  Panhandle.  The  significance  of  these  operations,  and
U.S.  participation  in  them,  was  indicated  a  few  days  earlier  in  another  meeting
among  representatives  of  the  three  missions.  It  was  reported  at  this  time  that
it  was  probable  "that  ARVN  will  be  unable  [to]  afford  detachment  [of]  any
significant  ground  capability  for  [the  Laotian]  Corridor  in  [the]  foreseeable  fu-
ture." Therefore,  air  operations  would  offer  the  only  dependable  means  of  com-
batting VC  infiltration  through  Laos.  The  participants  recorded  "unanimous
agreement  that  U.S.  participation  in  air  operations  in  [the]  corridor  is  essential
if  such  operations  are  to  have  desired  military  and  psychological  impact."  Em-
phasizing that  the  initiative  for  these  operations  came  from  the  United  States
Government,  they  pointed  out  that  failure  to  participate  could  result  in  loss  of


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  197

control  over  them  and  could  even  jeopardize  their  continuation.  At  minimum
the  group  recommended  that  U.S.  aircraft  fly  CAP  (combat  air  patrol)  over
the  RLAF  aircraft,  as  requested  by  the  Laotian  Government  and  as  permitted  by
a  "relatively  minor  extension"  of  existing  U.S.  rules  of  engagement.

CAP  missions  were  approved,  but  U.S.  air  strikes  against  communist  LOCs
in  the  Laotian  Panhandle  were  not  authorized  until  much  later  in  the  year.
Cross-border  ground  operations  did  not  receive  authorization  at  any  time  during
the  period  covered  in  this  study.

3. Negotiating  Posture  in  Laos

One  reason  for  the  delay  in  requesting  Laotian  air  strikes  in  the  Panhandle
was  the  need  to  await  the  uncertain  outcome  of  discussions  in  Paris  among
leaders  of  the  three  Laotian  political  factions.  Since  27  August,  when  they
first  met,  the  three  Princes  (Souvanna  Phouma,  Souphanouvang,  and  Boun  Oum)
had  reached  an  impasse  on  conditions  to  accompany  a  ceasefire.  Souvanna
Phouma  insisted  on  communist  withdrawal  from  positions  won  in  the  May  offen-
sive and  had  proposed  neutralization  of  the  Plaine  des  Jarres  under  LC.C.  super-
vision. On  15  September,  when  it  seemed  that  further  negotiations  had  become
fruitless,  Prince  Souphanouvang  offered  to  withdraw  communist  forces  from  the
Plaine  in  return  for  discussions  leading  to  a  new  14-Nation  Conference.  The
following  day,  Souvanna  countered  with  a  proposal  that  a  cease-fire  begin  on
1  October  and  attempted  to  verify  and  make  more  explicit  the  mutual  conces-
sions. The  pro-communist  leader  balked  over  stipulated  guarantees,  such  as  LC.C.
supervision,  that  pro-communist  forces  would  in  fact  withdraw  and  be  replaced
by  neutralists.  However,  on  the  21st,  the  leaders  arrived  at  [words  illegible]  and
preliminary  conditions  for  reconvening  a  Geneva  conference.

The  narrow  margin  by  which  the  cease-fire  agreement  failed  to  come  about
dramatized  the  delicate  nature  of  the  Administration's  diplomatic  position  in
Laos.  Having  agreed  to  support  the  tripartite  discussions  prior  to  the  Tonkin
Gulf  incidents  and  prior  to  the  political  upheaval  in  Saigon,  it  felt  constrained
to  go  along  with  them — particularly  if  they  served  to  forestall  movement  toward
a  Geneva-type  negotiation.  However,  a  Laotian  cease-fire  was  not  compatible
with  current  perceptions  of  U.S.  interest  even  if  it  resulted  in  communist  with-
drawal from  the  Plaine  des  Jarres.  Ambassador  Unger  pointed  out  the  con-
tradictory nature  of  our  position  in  his  reply  to  the  State  Department's  mid-
August  analysis  of  future  U.S.  courses  of  action.  Ambassador  Taylor  emphasized
the  need  to  maintain  the  option  of  operations  in  the  Panhandle  in  his  reply
also,  and  the  September  discussions  in  Washington  confirmed  that  his  view
was  shared  by  most  of  the  President's  advisors.  One  could  conclude  that  the
United  States  was  fortunate  that  Prince  Souphanouvang  was  so  intransigent  on
the  issue  of  LC.C.  supervision.  It  is  also  possible  that  in  insisting  on  this
provision  to  the  leftist  prince  Souvanno  Phouma  "knew  his  man" — perhaps
reflecting  perceptive  American  advice.

Certainly  the  course  of  the  tripartite  discussion  followed  a  pattern  commen-
surate with  prior  U.S.  calculation.  In  an  assessment  of  future  courses  of  action
used  as  the  basis  for  the  policy  analysis  cabled  to  affected  interested  embassies
and  CTNCPAC  by  the  State  Department,  Assistant  Secretary  Bundy  characterized
U.S.  strategy  with  the  statement,  "We  would  wish  to  slow  down  any  progress
toward  a  conference.  .  .  ."  He  then  referred  to  a  specific  negotiating  position
proposed  by  Ambassador  Unger  (a  proposal  for  tripartite  administration  of  the
Plaine  des  Jarres)  as  "a  useful  delaying  gambit."  Significantly,  this  proposal  was


198 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

advanced  at  Jaris  by  Souvanna  Phouma  on  1  September — illustrating  the  fact
that  Souvanna  was  carefully  advised  by  U.S.  diplomats  both  prior  to  and  during
the  Paris  meetings.  Other  features  of  Souvanna's  negotiating  posture  which
apparently  were  encouraged  as  likely  to  have  the  effect  of  drawing  out  the  dis-
cussions were  insistence  on  communist  acceptance  of  ( 1 )  Souvanna's  political
status  as  premier  and  (2)  unhampered  operations  bv  the  I.C.C.  It  will  be
recalled  that  the  latter  point  was  the  issue  on  which  progress  toward  a  cease-
fire became  stalled.

It  is  important  to  note  here  that  the  State  Department  recognized  that  Souvanna
Phouma  might  well  act  on  his  own  and  feel  compelled  to  move  toward  a  con-
ference, even  at  the  price  of  a  cease-fire.  In  such  an  event,  our  position  was  to
be  dependent  on  conditions  in  South  Vietnam:

[quotation  illegible]

It  is  apparent  from  this  and  other  documents  that  GVN  stability  and  morale  were
perceived  by  the  Administration  as  the  principal  pacing  elements  for  Southeast
Asian  policy  in  the  post-Tonkin  period.

4. Anticipation  of  Wider  Action

Through  most  of  the  strategy  discussions  of  early  autumn,  South  Vietnam
was  the  main  focus  of  attention.  However,  with  increasing  frequency  its  political
and  military  conditions  were  referred  to  in  a  new  way.  More  and  more  it  was
being  evaluated  in  terms  of  its  suitability  as  a  base  for  wider  action.  Ambassador
Taylor  cautioned  that  '"we  should  not  get  involved  militarily  with  North  Viet-
nam and  possibly  with  Red  China  if  our  base  in  South  Viet  Nam  is  insecure  and
Khanh's  army  is  tied  down  every  where  by  the  VC  insurgency."  At  the  September
meeting,  Mr.  McCone  criticized  the  actions  recommended  by  the  ICS  as  being
very  dangerous  because  of  the  current  weakness  of  the  GVN  base.  On  23
September,  Walt  Rostow  wrote  to  Ambassador  Taylor  of  the  need  for  building
a  more  viable  political  system  in  South  Vietnam  "which  will  provide  us  with
an  adequate  base  for  what  we  may  later  have  to  do.'*

General  Scheme.  The  kind  of  operations  for  which  "an  adequate  base"  was
increasingly  considered  essential  is  evident  in  a  number  of  strategy  discussions  of
the  period.  Moreover,  it  is  clear  that  several  officials  shared  the  expectation  that
these  operations  would  begin  earlv  in  the  new  vear.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the
series  of  actions  recommended  to  President  Johnson  by  his  top  advisers  at  the
end  of  May — most  of  which  had  been  completed  within  a  few  days  of  the
Tonkin  Gulf  incidents — were  intended  to  culminate,  if  necessary,  in  a  strike
against  North  Vietnam  accompanied  by  an  active  diplomatic  offensive  that
included  agreement  to  a  negotiated  settlement.  Further,  Phase  III  of  the  approved
contingency  OPLAN  37-64,  developed  in  response  to  NSAM  288,  provided  for
the  apphcation  of  overt  graduated  pressures  against  North  Vietnam — primarily
air  strikes.  These  were  to  be  carried  out  by  the  GVN,  but  which  would  also
include  operations  by  U.S.  air  and  naval  forces.  Deployments  of  additional
forces  to  Southeast  Asia  in  early  summer  and  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the
Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  were  based  on  force  requirements  identified  to  support  this
plan.  Its  perceived  significance  during  the  post-Tonkin  period  was  indicated
when  Ambassador  Taylor  reported  that  the  objectives  of  the  U.S.  Mission  in
Saigon  included  preparation  to  implement  OPLAN  37-64  "with  optimum  readi-
ness by  January  1,  1965."

Subsequent  strategy  discussions  reflected  the  extent  to  which  the  new  year


Military  Pressures  Against  Sorth  Vietnam,  Feb.  J 964— Jan.  1965  199


was  anticipated  as  the  occasion  for  beginning  overt  militarv'  operations  against
North  Vietnam.  Both  the  Stale  Department  s  mid-August  strategy  analysis  and
the  working  paper  on  which  it  was  based  indicated  that  the  "limited  pressures"
(subsequently  authorized  by  NSAM  314)  would  extend  "tentatively  through
December."  However,  these  actions  were  perceived  as  "foreshadowing  systematic
military  action  against  the  DR\',"  which  "we  might  at  some  point  conclude  .  .  .
[was  appropriate,  depending  on  the]  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  particularly  if
there  were  to  be  clear  evidence  of  greatly  increased  infiltration  from  the  north.*')
Should  specific  provocations  not  occur,  a  contingencv  target  of  1  Januar)'
1965  was  indicated:

...  in  [the]  absence  of  such  major  new  development  [incidents  or
increased  infiltration],  we  should  probablv  be  thinking  of  a  contingency  date
for  planning  purposes,  as  sussested  bv  Ambassador  Taylor,  of  1  Januarv
1965.

The  working  paper  elaborated  more  fully  than  the  cable  the  kind  of  pre-
liminarv  actions  considered  necessar}'  to  set  the  stage.  Some  of  this  elaboration
was  provided  in  suggested  language  changes  penciled-in  by  OSD  prior  to  an  inter-
agency meeting  called  to  discuss  its  contents.  Referring  to  air  strikes  in  the  Pan-
handle (proposed  to  begin  in  September),  a  suggested  OSD  addition  stated:  "The
strike  should  probably  be  timed  and  plotted  on  the  map  to  bring  them  to  the
borders  of  North  Metnam  at  the  end  of  December."  The  main  body  of  the
text  suggested  that  the  January-  operations  include  "action  against  infiltration
routes  and  facilities"  as  "probably  the  best  opening  gambit."  It  explained  that
"the  family  of  infiltration-related  targets  starts  with  clear  military'  installations
near  the  borders  [and]  can  be  extended  almost  at  will  northward."  The  "next
upward  move"  was  suggested  to  include  action  against  "militar\-related  targets,"
such  as  "POL  installations  and  the  mining  of  Haiphong  Harbor"  and  "key
bridges  and  railroads."  The  purposes  perceived  for  these  operations  was  "to
inflict  progressive  damage  that  would  have  a  meaningful  cumulative  effect."

Ambassador  Taylor  viewed  1  Januaty  1965  as  a  "target  D-Day"  before  which
the  U.S.  Mission  and  the  GVN  should  develop  "a  posture  of  maximum  readi-
ness for  a  deliberate  escalation  of  pressure  against  North  Viet  Nam."  The  nature
of  this  escalation  was  perceived  as  "a  carefully  orchestrated  bombing  attack  on
NVN,  directed  primarily  at  infiltration  and  other  militar}'  targets."  It  would
consist  of

U.S.  reconnaissance  planes.  VNAF  F.ARMGATE  aircraft  against  those
targets  which  could  be  attacked  safely  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  MIGs,
and  additional  U.S.  combat  aircraft  if  necessary  for  the  effective  execution

of  the  bombing  program.

He  qualified  this  assessment  with  the  observation,  "We  must  always  recognize,
however,  that  events  may  force  [the]  U.S.  to  advance  D-Day  to  a  considerably
eariier  date."  The  reason  for  this  qualification  was  Taylor's  concern  that  the
GVN  might  not  be  able  to  sustain  its  authority  until  Januar)'.  Thus,  in  order
to  "avoid  the  probable  consequences  of  a  collapse  of  national  morale"  it  would
be  necessarv,  he  felt,  "to  open  the  campaign  against  the  DRV  without  delay."

Similar  assessments  of  timing  in  relation  to  more  vigorous  militar)-  action
against  North  Vietnam  were  made  in  OSD  ISA.  The  immediate  measures  pro-
posed in  McNaughton's  draft  "Plan  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam"  (3  September)


200 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

were  conceived  not  only  as  means  to  provoke  North  Vietnam  into  responses
justifying  U.S.  punitive  actions.  They  were  also  believed  to  make  possible  the
postponement  "probably  until  November  or  December"  of  a  decision  regarding
the  more  serious  escalation.  In  McNaughton's  terminology  the  latter  were
referred  to  as  "a  crescendo  of  GVN-U.S.  military  actions  against  the  DRV,"
but  they  included  a  variety  of  possibilities:

The  escalating  actions  might  be  naval  pressures  or  mining  of  harbors;
or  they  might  be  made  up  of  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  moving
from  southern  to  northern  targets,  from  targets  associated  with  infiltration
and  by-then-disclosed  DRV-VC  radio  command  nets  to  targets  of  military
then  industrial  importance,  and  from  missions  which  could  be  handled  by
the  VNAF  alone  to  those  which  could  be  carried  out  only  by  the  U.S.

It  is  clear,  however,  that  what  was  contemplated  was  a  pattern  of  gradually
mounting  pressures  intended  to  impress  the  DRV  with  the  increasing  gravity  of
its  situation.

Records  of  the  September  conference  do  not  indicate  that  a  decision  was
made  relative  to  an  explicit  January  contingency  date.  In  several  respects  they
do  make  clear  that  the  possibility  of  escalation  at  the  end  of  the  year  was  con-
sidered. For  example,  hope  was  expressed  that  the  GVN  would  grow  stronger
over  the  following  two  to  three  months — by  implication,  strong  enough  to  per-
mit "major  deliberate  risks  of  escalation"  or  "deliberately  provocative"  U.S.
actions.  Directly  related  to  this  hope  was  the  intention  of  having  the  GVN  admit
publicly  to  its  conduct  of  maritime  operations  against  North  Vietnamese  coastal
installations  and  communications.  The  aim  was  "to  justify  and  legitimize  them
on  the  basis  of  the  facts  of  VC  infiltration  by  sea."  It  was  believed  that  this  step
would  be  useful  in  establishing  a  climate  of  opinion  more  receptive  to  expanded
(air)  operations  against  North  Vietnam  when  they  should  become  necessary.

Reservations.  By  October  1964,  therefore,  there  was  a  general  belief  among
the  President's  top  advisors  that  it  would  probably  be  necessary  eventually  to
subject  North  Vietnam  to  overt  military  pressure.  Many  were  convinced,  how-
ever reluctantly,  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  obtain  an  effective  solution
to  the  problem  of  DRV  sponsorship  of  the  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam  or  a
practical  solution  to  the  political  strife  in  Laos  without  such  direct  pressure  on
the  instigators  of  these  problems.  The  earlier  views  of  most  of  the  principal  ad-
visors had  been  clearly  contingent  upon  a  major  reversal — principally  in  Laos —
and  had  been  advanced  with  the  apparent  assumption  that  military  actions  hope-
fully would  not  be  required.  Now,  however,  their  views  were  advanced  with
a  sense  that  such  actions  were  inevitable.  Moreover,  they  were  advanced  despite
the  perspective  afforded  by  a  number  of  critical  evaluations  of  the  use  of  military
pressure.  In  addition  to  the  studies  made  during  the  first  half  of  1964,  all  of  the
principal  advisory  agencies  had  reviewed  a  detailed  critique  of  the  so-called
"Rostow  thesis"  just  prior  to  the  September  strategy  conference.

The  critique  was  accomplished  in  OSD/ISA  with  inputs  and  coordination  from
State's  Policy  Planning  Council.  The  assigned  task  was  to  make  "a  thorough
analysis  of  and  report  on  the  Rostow  thesis  that  covert  aggression  justifies  and
must  be  fought  by  attacks  on  the  source  of  the  aggression."  Copies  were  dis-
tributed to  the  Washington  recipients  of  the  Rostow  paper,  including  the  White
House,  Department  of  State,  Department  of  Defense,  the  ICS  and  each  of  the
services.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  201

In  their  summary  analysis  of  the  thesis,  the  critiquers  emphasized  two  variables
which  would  determine  its  utility:  (1)  the  extent  of  the  commitment  of  the
nation  furnishing  external  support  and  (2)  the  extent  to  which  the  insurgency
affected  vital  U.S.  interests.  With  regard  to  the  former  variable,  they  described
"three  fundamental  conditions"  which  would  have  to  exist  to  achieve  success
"in  cases  where  the  external  opponent  is  committed  to  the  extent  of  the  North
Vietnamese."  The  opponents  would  have  to  be  persuaded  that:  (1)  the  United
States  was  "taking  limited  actions  to  achieve  limited  objectives;"  (2)  '*the  com-
mitment of  the  military  power  of  the  United  States  to  the  limited  objective  is
a  total  commitment — as  total  as  our  commitment  to  get  the  missiles  out  of  Cuba
in  October  1962;"  (3)  the  United  States  has  "established  a  sufficient  consensus
to  see  through  this  course  of  action  both  at  home  and  on  the  world  scene."
Further,  unless  such  an  opponent  were  so  persuaded,  "the  approach  might  well
fail  to  be  effective  short  of  a  larger  U.S.  military  involvement."

Essential  to  creating  the  necessary  conviction  of  U.S.  intent  on  the  part  of  the
opposing  government,  the  analysis  argued,  was  a  firm  image  that  the  President
and  the  U.S.  public  were  in  agreement  that  vital  national  interests  were  at  stake.
Unless  vital  interests  were  clearly  at  stake,

the  limited  military  actions  envisaged  would  not  only  involve  much
greater  political  costs  at  home  and  abroad  .  .  .  but  there  would  be  much
greater  risk  that  the  program  would  not  be  effective  except  at  high  levels  of
involvement  and  risk,  and  that  it  might  be  allowed  to  fall  short  of  such
levels.

Assuming  that  vital  U.S.  interests  were  assessed  as  being  at  stake  by  an  Ad-
ministration in  some  unspecified  case,  the  critiquers  went  on  to  outline  some
additional  "conditions  for  success."  First,  an  Administration  would  have  to  pre-
sent a  solid  case  to  the  U.S.  Congress  and  public  and  to  our  allies  that  the  external
support  provided  by  the  target  nation  was  instrumental  in  sustaining  the  insur-
gency. In  the  interest  of  making  its  public  case  conclusive,  "the  U.S.  would  have
to  be  prepared  to  expose  intelligence  data."  Second,  it  would  have  to  identify
enemy  targets  "such  that  limited  attacks  and  the  threat  of  further  attacks  would
bring  great  pressure  on  him  to  comply."  Third,  the  U.S.  Government  would  have
to  be  able  to  communicate  its  case  to  the  target  nation  "including  the  high  degree
of  U.S.  commitment  and  the  limited  nature  of  our  objective."  This  would  involve
controlling  both  the  U.S.  and  its  ally's  actions  "to  convey  limited  objectives,
minimizing  incentives  to  comply."  Finally,  it  would  have  to  be  capable  of  deter-
mining enemy  compliance  with  our  demands.

The  critiquers'  analysis  included  an  assessment  of  the  costs  and  risks  to  be
incurred  in  applying  the  thesis  and  cautioned  against  its  adoption  as  a  general
declaratory  policy:

Given  present  attitudes,  application  of  the  Rostow  approach  risks  do-
mestic and  international  opposition  ranging  from  anxiety  and  protest  to
condemnation,  efforts  to  disassociate  from  U.S.  policies  or  alliances,  or  even
strong  countermeasures.  .  .  .

Currently,  then,  it  is  the  Rostow  approach,  rather  than  the  measures  it
counters  that  would  be  seen  generally  as  an  "unstabilizing"  change  in  the
rules  of  the  game,  an  escalation  of  conflict,  an  increasing  of  shared,  inter-
national risks,  and  quite  possibly,  as  an  open  aggression  demanding  con-
demnation .  .  .  particularly  in  general  terms  or  in  abstraction  from  a
specific,  immediately  challenging  situation.


202 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

On  the  other  hand,  the  controlled,  limited  military  actions  implied  in
the  Rostow  approach  would  be  far  more  acceptable  to  the  extent  that  they
were  seen  to  follow  from  Presidential  conviction  of  vital  national  necessity
in  a  specific  context,  and  even  more  to  the  extent  that  this  conviction  were
shared  by  Congress  and  the  U.S.  public.

An  attempt  to  legitimize  such  actions  in  general  terms,  and  in  advance
of  an  emergency  situation,  would  not  only  be  likely  to  fail,  but  might  well
evoke  public  expression  of  domestic  and  allied  opposition  and  denuncia-
tion .  .  .  from  opponents  that  would  make  it  much  more  difficult  for  the
President  to  contemplate  this  approach  when  an  occasion  actually  arose.  .  .  .

They  went  on  to  point  out  that  accepting  the  Rostow  thesis  as  a  principle  of
U.S.  declaratory  policy  would  require  making  it  public  before  applying  it.  The
need  to  be  assured  of  "Congressional  and  other  public  support  in  carrying  through
the  thesis  in  a  given  case"  would  require  this.  Therefore,  the  analysts  concluded,
"It  would  be  exceedingly  unwise  to  make  the  Rostow  thesis  a  declaratory  policy
unless  the  U.S.  were  prepared  to  act  on  it" — but  then  only  if  we  were  assured
of  the  public  commitment  and  the  capability  to  achieve  success.

With  regard  to  the  applicability  of  the  thesis  to  the  contemporary  situation
in  Southeast  Asia,  the  critiquers  summarized  their  views  as  follows:

.  .  .  the  situation  in  Vietnam  and  Laos  is  the  only  one  in  which  a  strong
case  can  be  made  that  the  two  major  indications  for  the  Rostow  approach
are  made:  the  ineffectiveness  of  alternatives  and  vital  U.S.  interests.  Even
in  this  case  the  degree  of  U.S.  interest,  the  degree  and  acceptability  of  the
risks,  and  the  potential  effectiveness  of  this  approach  are  subject  to  question.
In  particular,  the  likelihood  and  the  political  costs  of  failure  of  the  approach,
and  the  pressures  for  U.S.  escalation  if  early  moves  should  fail,  require
serious  examination.

5. Differing  Agency  Policy  Views

In  describing  the  evolution  of  Administration  strategy,  this  account  has  pre-
viously emphasized  the  points  of  general  agreement  among  the  President's
advisors.  Its  purpose  has  been  to  describe  the  existence  and  sense  of  a  policy
consensus  that  had  emerged  by  mid-October.  However,  significant  differences  of
opinion  existed  among  the  various  advisory  agencies  regarding  what  actions
should  be  taken  and  how  soon  they  should  be  initiated.  These  differences  can  be
discerned  with  respect  to  five  issues:  (1)  whether  and  how  soon  the  GVN
maritime  operation  should  be  acknowledged;  (2)  the  desirability  of  tit-for-tat
reprisals;  (3)  how  best  to  cope  with  enemy  reactions  to  increased  pressures  on  the
DRV;  (4)  the  degree  of  GVN/U.S.  readiness  required  before  increasing  the
pressures;  and  (5)  the  relationship  perceived  between  increased  pressures  and
negotiations.

JCS  views.  Senior  military  officials  differed  among  themselves  on  the  first  three
issues.  CINCPAC  apparently  perceived  difficulties  resulting  from  official  ac-
knowledgments of  GVN  maritime  operations  and  sugested  that  press  leaks  would
[words  illegible].  General  Wheeler  [words  illegible]  operations  and  thereby  ena-
ble their  scope  and  effectiveness  to  be  increased.  However,  he  was  not  supported
by  the  service  chiefs.  They  opposed  surfacing  the  GVN  operations  until  they


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  203

could  become  associated  with  the  DE  SOTO  Patrols  "or  until  the  United  States
is  prepared  openly  to  support  MAROPS  militarily."  All  of  these  officials  agreed
that  it  was  necessary  to  undertake  reprisals  for  a  variety  of  hostile  VC  or  DRV
actions.  In  particular  they  wanted  U.S.  responses  to  be  greater  in  degree,  not
necessarily  matching  in  kind,  than  the  provocations.  Where  they  came  to  differ
was  on  the  desirability  of  deliberately  provoking  DRV  actions  to  which  we  could
then  respond.  After  the  September  White  House  meeting  only  the  Air  Force
Chief  of  Staff  and  the  Marine  Commandant  favored  this  approach.

Differences  with  respect  to  preparation  for  coping  with  enemy  reactions  to
harsher  pressures  centered  around  the  issue  of  committing  greater  numbers  of
U.S.  ground  forces  to  South  Vietnam.  CINCPAC,  supporting  General  West-
moreland's request,  urged  provision  for  deployment  of  Marine  and  Army  units
to  provide  security  for  U.S./GVN  operating  bases.  The  JCS  disagreed  and  dis-
approved a  request  to  make  such  adjustments  in  OPLAN  37-64,  on  grounds  that
since  VC  capabilities  were  still  questionable  it  was  preferable  not  to  precommit
U.S.  forces  in  the  manner  urged.  At  issue  concurrently  was  an  Air  Force  proposal
to  reduce  the  number  of  ground  forces  provided  for  in  the  event  of  a  large  scale
DRV/CHICOM  intervention  in  Southeast  Asia  and  to  reply  more  heavily  on
tactical  air  capabilities.  The  other  chiefs  disagreed,  but  the  controversy  concerning
the  relative  emphasis  on  ground  and  air  forces  for  the  defense  of  Southeast  Asia
was  to  occupy  JCS  attention  for  several  months  to  come.

Regarding  the  issue  of  readiness  to  increase  pressures  on  North  Vietnam  and
the  role  of  negotiations,  the  military  chiefs  were  in  agreement  throughout  the
period.  Soon  after  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  they  urged  prompt  implementation
of  more  serious  pressures  using  U.S.  air  capabilities.  They  opposed  B-57  training
for  the  VNAF,  citing  its  limited  pilot  and  supporting  technical  resources  which
would  be  needed  for  counterinsurgency  missions.  In  response  to  warnings  that
we  should  not  get  deeply  involved  in  a  conflict  in  Southeast  Asia  until  we  were
surer  of  the  GVN's  commitment,  they  replied  that  "the  United  States  is  already
deeply  involved."  They  went  on  to  recommend  preparations  for  deploying  the
remaining  OPLAN  37-64  forces  needed  for  mounting  a  U.S.  air  strike  program
against  North  Vietnam.  While  the  JCS  did  not  address  the  subject  of  negotiations
explicitly  during  this  period,  their  statements  implied  a  lack  of  interest  in  a
negotiated  solution  to  the  Vietnam  problem.  At  every  opportunity  they  reiterated
their  recommendation  that  we  should  attack  North  Vietnamese  will  and  capabil-
ities as  necessary  to  force  a  DRV  decision  to  halt  its  support  and  direction  of
the  insurgency.

Saigon  Embassy  views.  Ambassador  Taylor  opposed  the  views  of  his  former
military  colleagues  on  most  issues.  Prior  to  the  September  meeting,  he  expressed
objections  to  the  idea  of  surfacing  or  leaking  to  the  press  the  nature  of  GVN
maritime  operations.  He  also  opposed  tit-for-tat  retaliation  bombing  for  the  reason
that  it  was  "likely  to  release  a  new  order  of  military  reaction  from  both  sides,  the
outcome  of  which  is  impossible  to  predict."  He  saw  enemy  ground  assaults  as  a
greater  threat  to  U.S.  bases  in  South  Vietnam  than  enemy  air  attacks  and  sup-
ported the  deployment  of  U.S.  ground  force  units  for  base  security  purposes.
This  was  to  occur  after  the  beginning  of  GVN  U.S.  ground  and  air  cross-border
operations  into  Laos.  However,  not  unlike  the  Chiefs,  one  of  the  criteria  he
employed  in  shaping  his  recommendation  was  the  avoidance  of  a  major  U.S.
ground  force  commitment.

Ambassador  Taylor's  views  were  apparently  based  on  an  underlying  rationale
that  actions  to  counter  the  VC/DRV  aggression  should  not  outstrip  the  GVN  and


204 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

that  if  it  could  be  avoided,  the  conflict  should  not  be  escalated  to  a  level  beyond
South  Vietnamese  capacities  to  manage  it.  Although  believing  firmly  that  the
United  States  would  have  to  apply  direct  pressure  against  North  Vietnam  eventu-
ally, to  force  her  to  abandon  her  objectives,  he  felt  that  the  major  burden  of  this
effort  should  be  borne  by  the  GVN.  Thus,  his  support  for  U.S.  base  security
deployment  was  based  in  part  on  concern  lest  ARVN  units  be  tied  down  in  such
roles  and,  thus,  unavailable  for  more  free-ranging  combat.  Similarly,  in  August,
the  Embassy  favored  immediate  initiation  of  B-57  training  for  the  VNAF  to
enable  it  to  play  a  substantial  role  in  the  overt  air  attacks  envisioned  for  1965.

This  training — like  Saigon's  discouragement  of  U.S.  eagerness  to  negotiate  in
Laos — was  also  advocated  for  its  value  in  bolstering  the  GVN's  morale  and
determination  to  continue  fighting  against  its  communist  enemies.  This  same
consideration  was  at  the  root  of  the  Ambassador's  belief  that  any  negotiations
which  affected  South  Vietnam  should  be  avoided  until  North  Vietnam  was  sub-
jected to  more  forceful  military  pressures.  He  also  felt  that  communication  with
Hanoi  should  be  preceded  by  a  thorough  discussion  and  understanding  of  our
limited  war  aims  with  the  GVN.

The  Ambassador's  basic  concern  that  the  GVN  be  capable  of  and  committed
to  supporting  the  evolving  levels  of  war  effort  against  the  communists  was  indi-
cated in  his  response  to  the  political  upheaval  in  Saigon.  Earlier,  his  recom-
mendations had  included  the  option  of  opening  "the  [air]  campaign  against  the
DRV  without  delay,"  in  the  event  of  threatened  collapse  of  the  Khanh  Govern-
ment. The  objective  was  to  have  been  "to  avoid  the  possible  consequences  of  a
collapse  of  national  morale."  At  the  September  meeting  and  subsequently,
however,  after  Khanh  had  already  been  forced  to  step  down  from  GVN  leadership
once  and  his  new  government  had  [words  illegible]  the  Ambassador  opposed
overt  action  [words  illegible]  urged  instead  [words  illegible].

OSD  views.  OSD  and  OSD  ISA  views  were  clearer  on  some  issues  than  on
others.  For  example,  the  source  documents  indicate  their  consistent  support
for  surfacing  the  GVN  maritime  operations.  Similarly,  it  is  clear  that  OSD
continually  regarded  negotiations  as  a  necessary  process  for  terminating  the  in-
surgency in  South  Vietnam  and  a  program  of  increased  pressures  against  the
DRV  as  a  means  of  improving  the  U.S.  bargaining  position.  Like  other  agencies,
it  saw  negotiations  as  something  that  should  not  be  entered  into  until  the  pressures
were  hurting  North  Vietnam,  but  it  emphasized  that  the  pattern  of  pressures
should  make  clear  our  limited  aims.

Equally  consistent  but  less  explicit  were  OSD  views  on  GVN/U.S.  readiness
to  mount  overt  attacks  on  North  Vietnam.  Secretary  McNamara  was  concerned
that  too  early  initiation  of  air  action  against  North  Vietnam  might  find  the
United  States  unprepared  to  cope  with  the  consequences.  At  the  end  of  August
he  directed  the  JCS  to  study  and  report  on  POL  and  ordnance  stocks  available  to
carry  out  approved  contingency  plans  to  combat  a  large-scale  communist  inter-
vention after  the  expenditures  required  for  the  pattern  of  attacks  which  they
proposed  against  North  Vietnam.  He  also  asked  for  specific  recommendations  on
next  steps  to  be  taken  in  the  event  destruction  of  the  proposed  JCS  targets  did
not  destroy  the  DRV  will  and  capability  to  continue.  Mr.  McNaughton's  "Plan
of  Action"  was  intended  to  make  unnecessary  any  decision  concerning  larger
operations  until  late  in  the  autumn.  Morever,  it  was  designed  explicitly  "to  create
as  little  risk  as  possible  of  the  kind  of  military  action  which  would  be  difficult  to
justify  to  the  American  public  and  to  preserve  where  possible  the  option  to  have
no  U.S.  military  action  at  all."  In  September,  OSD/ISA  was  on  record  as  favoring


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  205

the  initiation  of  bombing  against  North  Vietnam — after  suitable  provocation  by
Hanoi.  But  by  mid-October  the  OSD  view  was  apparently  that  overt  actions
against  the  North  should  be  held  off  at  least  until  the  new  year.

With  respect  to  the  other  issues,  the  most  consistent  aspect  of  OSD  views  was
their  prudence.  Its  attitudes  toward  tit-for-tat  reprisals  are  not  really  clear.  Soon
after  Tonkin  Gulf,  OSD  notified  the  JCS  that  the  events  there  precluded  any
further  need  for  their  work  on  retaliation  scenarios  in  support  of  NSAM  288.
Then,  just  three  weeks  later,  the  McNaughton  "Plan  of  Action"  proposed  de-
liberate provocation  of  DRV  actions  to  permit  U.S.  retaliation — but  as  a  means
to  begin  a  gradual  squeeze  on  North  Vietnam,  not  merely  tit-for-tat  reprisals.
Mr.  McNamara's  own  views  do  not  appear  except  by  implication,  in  that  he  did
not  indicate  any  opposition  to  them  when  shown  William  Bundy's  draft  summation
of  the  September  meeting  consensus.  Prudence  was  again  the  dominant  feature
of  OSD  views  on  preparations  to  cope  with  possible  enemy  reactions  to  the
harsher  pressures.  For  example,  "on  several  occasions"  Secretary  McNamara
expressed  to  the  JCS  his  interest  in  the  possibility  of  countering  a  massive  Chinese
intervention  in  Southeast  Asia  without  the  need  to  introduce  large  numbers  of
U.S.  ground  forces.

[material  missing]

proposal  to  reduce  provisional  ground  force  levels  for  Southeast  Asian  defense
concluded  that  the  issue  remained  "open."  It  was  critical  of  that  particular  study
because  of  its  methodology  and  assumptions.  Later,  however,  Mr.  McNamara
supported  the  JCS  in  their  disapproval  of  the  MACV  request  for  allocation  of
additional  ground  force  units  for  base  security  purposes.

State  views.  Various  documents  make  it  clear  that  there  were  several  different
points  of  view  prevalent  within  the  State  Department  during  the  period  in
question.  Reflected  here  are  those  channeled  through  the  Secretary  of  State  or
communicated  to  the  Department  of  Defense,  usually  through  the  Assistant
Secretary  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs.  With  few  exceptions,  the  courses  of  action
followed  by  the  Administration  were  those  advocated  by  State.  Its  proposal  for
B-57  training  for  the  VNAF  was  apparently  overruled  on  the  basis  of  JCS
recommendations,  but  otherwise  its  support  for  measures  to  further  strengthen
the  GVN  and  for  pressuring  actions  other  than  overt  military  attacks  throughout
1964  prevailed.  Its  support  for  the  acknowledgement  of  GVN  maritime  operations
failed  to  materialize  only  because  of  objections  on  the  part  of  the  GVN  itself.

State  Department  views  on  the  other  issues,  likewise,  were  reflected  in  U.S.
policy  positions.  Reprisals  for  VC  acts  that  could  be  matched  with  fitting  responses
were  favored  in  principle  but  were  not  necessarily  to  be  carried  out  in  all
instances.  Escalation  through  such  responses  was  seen  as  useful  for  purposes  of
assisting  GVN  morale,  but  State  did  not  believe  that  steps  should  be  taken  to  bring
about  such  situations  just  yet.  It  did,  however,  acknowledge  that  deliberate
provocations  might  be  useful  in  the  future.  Negotiation  of  a  Vietnam  solution
through  an  international  conference  was  viewed  as  inevitable,  but  it  should  be
permitted  only  after  hurting  North  Vietnam  and  convincing  South  Vietnam  of
U.S.  resolve  to  achieve  its  objectives.  Moreover,  Secretary  Rusk,  Assistant  Secre-
tary Bundy  and  Counselor  Rostow  were  each  known  to  view  avoidance  of  a
commitment  of  U.S.  ground  forces  to  Southeast  Asia  as  an  important  clement  in
policy.

CIA  views.  With  the  exception  of  Mr.  McCone's  opinions  rendered  in  the
September  strategy  meeting,  available  CIA  documents  provide  no  policy  recom-
mendations. However,  they  do  contain  assessments  bearing  directly  on  the  policy


206 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

issues  discussed  previously — particularly  with  respect  to  enemy  reactions  to  the
measures  contemplated.  For  example,  intelligence  estimates  indicated  little  likeli-
hood that  intensified  maritime  operations  would  result  in  retaliation  against  GVN
naval  bases.  Similarly,  they  predicted  few  serious  consequences  in  response  to
U.S.  limited  tit-for-tat  reprisal  strikes.  Rather,  the  CIA  believed  that  communist
responses  would  be  limited  to  defensive  measures,  increased  propaganda,  and
additional  logistical  assistance  from  China.  In  the  event  our  reprisal  actions  were
"heavier  and  sustained,"  the  DRV  was  expected  first  to  attempt  to  dissuade  the
United  States  through  international  political  moves,  [words  illegible]

CIA  estimates  of  communist  reaction  to  systematic  U.S. /GVN  air  attacks  on
North  Vietnam  were  less  certain.  While  acknowledging  "substantial  danger"
that  the  DRV  might  decide  to  send  its  own  armed  forces  on  a  large  scale  to  Laos
and  South  Vietnam,

("Hanoi  might  assume  that  United  States  would  be  unwilling  to  undertake
a  major  ground  war,  or  that  if  it  was,  it  could  ultimately  be  defeated  by  the
methods  which  were  successful  against  the  French.")

they  thought  it  more  likely  that  Hanoi  would  choose  a  more  conservative  course.
They  reasoned  that  "the  DRV  might  calculate  that  it  would  be  better  to  stop  VC
activity  temporarily  than  risk  loss  of  its  military  facilities  and  industry,"  but  that
they  would  make  no  meaningful  concessions  "such  as  agreeing  to  effective  inter-
national inspection  of  infiltration  routes."  In  any  event,  the  CIA  did  not  believe
that  Chinese  intervention  was  likely  unless  the  United  States  should  strike  the
Chinese  mainland  or  unless  U.S. /GVN  forces  should  attempt  to  "occupy  areas
of  the  DRV  or  communist-held  territory  in  Northern  Laos."  It  indicated  that  both
North  Vietnam  and  Communist  China  wished  to  avoid  direct  conflict  with  the
United  States  and  would  probably  "avoid  actions  that  would  in  their  view  unduly
increase  the  chances  of  a  major  U.S.  response"  against  them.

Rather  than  outright  military  victory  in  South  Vietnam,  CIA  estimates  indicated
belief  that  the  communists  expected  to  gain  control  through  a  "neutralist  coalition
government  dominated  by  pro-Communist  elements"  that  would  come  about
"soon."  This  concern  over  the  threat  of  neutralism  had  been  voiced  at  the  Sep-
tember meeting  by  Mr.  McCone  and  was  quite  prevalent  among  intelligence
discussions  of  the  period.  Altogether,  it  created  a  rather  gloomy  impression  of
GVN  readiness  to  support  sustained  overt  operations  against  North  Vietnam  and
absorb  likely  VC  countermeasures.  In  October  the  picture  became  even  gloomier
as  a  result  of  an  intelligence  assessment  which  described  continuing  deterioration
of  the  South  Vietnamese  political  situation  and  predicted  even  more:

...  we  believe  that  the  conditions  favor  a  further  decay  of  GVN  will
and  effectiveness.  The  likely  pattern  of  this  decay  will  be  increasing  defeat-
ism, paralysis  of  leadership,  friction  with  Americans,  exploration  of  possible
lines  of  political  accommodation  with  the  other  side,  and  a  general  petering
out  of  the  war  effort.

II. NOVEMBER  1964-JANUARY  1965

A. POLICY  DEBATE  IN  NOVEMBER

In  their  Southeast  Asia  policy  discussions  of  August-October  1964,  Admin-
istration officials  had  accepted  the  view  that  overt  military  pressures  against


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  207

North  Vietnam  probably  would  be  required.  Barring  some  critical  developments,
however,  it  was  generally  conceded  that  these  should  not  begin  until  after  the
new  year.  Preparations  for  applying  such  pressures  were  made  in  earnest  during
November.

1. Immediate  Antecedents

In  Administration  policy  discussions,  the  two  developments  most  often  cited  as
perhaps  warranting  implementation  of  overt  military  pressures  before  1965  were:
(1)  increased  levels  of  infiltration  of  guerrillas  into  South  Vietnam  and  (2)
serious  deterioration  of  the  GVN.  Evidence  of  both  was  reported  to  Washington
during  October.

National  intelligence  estimates  gave  the  GVN  little  hope  of  surviving  the
apathy  and  discouragement  with  which  it  was  plagued.  They  reported,  "Govern-
ment ministries  in  Saigon  are  close  to  a  standstill,  with  only  the  most  routine
operations  going  on."  U.S./GVN  planning  was  not  being  followed  by  GVN
action.  A  coup  by  disgruntled  South  Vietnamese  military  figures  was  believed
imminent  (one  had  been  attempted  unsuccessfully  on  13  September).  Moreover,
the  civilian  government  which  General  Khanh  had  promised  for  the  end  of
October  was  seen  as  unlikely  to  bring  about  any  real  improvement.

A  threat  of  GVN  capitulation  to  the  NLF,  in  the  form  of  accepting  a  coalition
government,  was  also  seen  as  a  real  possibility.  Citing  "numerous  signs  that
Viet  Cong  agents  have  played  a  role  in  helping  sustain  the  level  of  civil  disorder
.  .  .  in  the  cities,"  intelligence  reports  estimated  that  it  was  the  Communist
intention  to  seek  victory  through  a  "neutralist  coalition"  rather  than  by  force
of  arms.  Perhaps  straining  a  bit,  an  estimate  stated,  "The  principal  GVN  leaders
have  not  to  our  knowledge  been  in  recent  contact  with  the  Communists,  but  there
has  been  at  least  one  instance  of  informal  contact  between  a  lesser  governmental
official  and  members  of  the  NLF."  Another  estimate  portrayed  the  DRV  and
Chinese  as  regarding  South  Vietnam  as  a  "developing  political  vacuum,"  soon
to  be  filled  "with  a  neutralist  coalition  .government  dominated  by  pro-Communist
elements."

Reports  of  increasing  infiltration  began  arriving  in  mid-October.  Ambassador
Taylor  cabled  on  the  14th  [Doc.  210]  that  he  had  received  indications  of  a
"definite  step-up  in  infiltration  from  North  Vietnam,  particularly  in  the  northern
provinces  .  .  ."  He  went  on  to  report:

A  recent  analysis  suggests  that  if  the  present  rate  of  infiltration  is  main-
tained, the  annual  figure  for  1964  will  be  of  the  order  of  10,000.  Further-
more ...  we  are  finding  more  and  more  "bona  fide"  North  Vietnamese
soldiers  among  the  infiltrees.  I  feel  sure  that  we  must  soon  adopt  new  and
drastic  methods  to  reduce  and  eventually  end  such  infiltration  if  we  arc  ever
to  succeed  in  South  Vietnam.

A  similar  report  was  cabled  directly  to  the  White  House  on  16  October.  In  it.
Ambassador  Taylor  repeated  his  comments  on  infiltration  and  advised  the
President  of  the  steadily  worsening  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  The  Ambassador
reported  the  infiltration  of  northern-born  conscripts  and  relayed  GVN  claims
that  they  were  coming  in  organized  units.  He  pointed  out  that  with  the  advent
of  the  dry  season,  the  problem  would  assume  even  greater  magnitude  and  urged
that  it  be  given  immediate  attention.

The  Taylor  estimates  of  end-year  infiltration  totals  probably  were  quite  alarm-


208 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

ing.  If  accurate  they  indicated  that  the  rate  had  risen  sharply  during  September
and  early  October:  The  total  number  of  infiltrees  for  1964  as  of  1  September
was  then  estimated  as  4,700.  Of  particular  concern,  no  doubt,  was  the  apparent
emphasis  on  reinforcing  Communist  units  in  the  Central  Highlands  and  in  the
northern  provinces  of  South  Vietnam.  These  warnings  came  hard  on  the  heels  of
widespread  press  reports  of  badly  weakened  GVN  control  in  three  portions
of  the  country.

The  JCS  seized  on  these  fresh  reports  and  resubmitted  their  proposals  for  taking
prompt  measures  against  North  Vietnam.  On  21  October,  they  argued:

Application  of  the  principle  of  isolating  the  guerrilla  force  from  its  re-
inforcement and  support  and  then  to  fragment  and  defeat  the  forces  has
not  been  successful  in  Vietnam.  .  .  .  The  principle  must  be  applied  by
control  of  the  national  boundaries  or  by  eliminating  or  cutting  off  the
source  of  supply  and  direction.

On  the  27th  they  submitted  a  major  proposal  for  "strong  military  actions"  to
counteract  the  trends  cited  in  the  national  intelligence  estimates  and  in  the
Taylor  cables.  In  language  identical  to  that  used  in  two  August  memoranda  and
at  the  September  strategy  meeting,  they  stated  that  such  actions  were  "required
now  in  order  to  prevent  the  collapse  of  the  U.S.  position  in  Southeast  Asia."
They  then  recommended  a  program  of  actions  to  support  the  following  strategy:

a.  Depriving  the  Viet  Cong  of  out  of  country  assistance  by  applying  military
pressures  on  the  .  .  .  DRV  to  the  extent  necessary  to  cause  the  DRV  to  cease
support  and  direction  of  the  insurgency.

b.  Depriving  the  VC  of  assistance  within  SVN  by  expanding  the  counterin-
surgency  effort — military,  economic,  and  political — within  SVN.

c.  Continuing  to  seek  a  viable  effective  government  in  SVN  based  on  the
broadest  possible  consensus.

d.  Maintaining  a  military  readiness  posture  in  Southeast  Asia  that:

(1)  Demonstrates  the  U.S.  will  and  capability  to  escalate  the  action
if  required.

(2)  Deters  a  major  Communist  aggression  in  the  area.

The  program  recommended  by  the  JCS  included  a  list  of  actions  to  be  taken
within  South  Vietnam  and  a  separate  list  of  actions  outside.  The  Chiefs  had
listed  them  in  order  of  increasing  intensity,  and  they  requested  authority  "to
implement  now"  the  first  six  actions  within  the  country  and  the  first  eight
outside.  The  latter  included  air  strikes  by  GVN/FARMGATE  aircraft  against
Communist  LOC's  in  Laos  and  in  the  southern  portion  of  North  Vietnam.

In  the  context  of  the  reported  worsening  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  the
JCS  proposal  was  given  serious  consideration  in  OSD.  Since  Ambassador  Taylor
had  expressed  concern  over  initiating  overt  pressures  against  North  Vietnam
"before  we  have  a  responsible  set  of  authorities  to  work  with  in  South  Vietnam,"
a  copy  of  the  JCS  paper  was  forwarded  to  him  for  review  and  comment.  The
OSD's  stated  intention  was  to  consider  the  Ambassador's  views  before  develop-
ing a  proposal  to  present  to  President  Johnson.

While  this  proposal  was  still  under  consideration  (1  November  1964),  Viet
Cong  forces  attacked  U.S.  facilities  at  the  Bien  Hoa  airbase  with  81mm.  mortar
fire.  Four  American  servicemen  were  killed,  and  five  B-57  tactical  bombers  were
destroyed,  and  major  damage  was  inflicted  on  eight  others.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  209

Administration  attention  was  focused  immediately  on  the  question  of  what
the  United  States  should  do  in  response  to  the  Bien  Hoa  provocation.  It  will  be
recalled  that  such  an  eventuality  had  been  discussed  at  the  September  strategy
meeting.  The  Presidential  directive  which  resulted  from  it  stated:  "We  should
be  prepared  to  respond  as  appropriate  against  the  DRV  in  the  event  of  any
attack  on  U.S.  units  or  any  special  DRV  VC  action  against  SVN."  As  of  the
end  of  October  (in  anticipation  of  resumed  DE  SOTO  Patrols),  elements  of  our
Pacific  forces  were  reported  as  "poised  and  ready"  to  execute  reprisals  for  any
DRV  attacks  on  our  naval  vessels.  Thus,  there  was  a  rather  large  expectancy
among  Administration  officials  that  the  United  States  would  do  something  in
retaliation.

Apparently,  the  decision  was  made  to  do  nothing — at  least  not  of  a  retaliatory
nature.  At  a  White  House  meeting  to  discuss  possible  courses  of  action,  on  1
November,  "concern  was  expressed  that  proposed  U.S.  retaliatory  punitive  ac-
tions could  trigger  North  Vietnamese  CHICOM  air  and  ground  retaliatory  acts."
Questions  were  raised  about  "increased  security  measures  and  precautionary
moves  of  U.S.  air  and  ground  units  to  protest  U.S.  dependents,  units  and  in-
stallations against  such  retaliation.  [Doc.  215]  Following  the  meeting,  a  White
House  news  release  announced  that  the  President  had  ordered  the  destroyed
and  badly  damaged  aircraft  replaced.  Administration  officials  stated  that  "the
mortar  attack  must  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  Vietnamese  war  and  of  the
whole  Southeast  Asian  situation.  If  the  United  States  is  to  retaliate  against
North  Vietnam  in  the  future,"  they  reportedly  said,  "it  must  be  for  broader
reasons  than  the  strike  against  the  Bien  Hoa  base."  Moreover,  they  drew  a
contrast  between  this  incident  and  the  Tonkin  Gulf  attacks  where  our  destroyers
were  "on  United  States  business."

Source  documents  available  do  not  indicate  that  any  further  decisions  were
made  on  the  Bien  Hoa  matter.  A  second  meeting  to  discuss  possible  U.S.  actions
was  "tentatively  scheduled"  for  2  November,  but  the  available  materials  con-
tain no  evidence  that  it  was  held.  President  Johnson  was  scheduled  to  appear
in  Houston  that  afternoon,  for  his  final  pre-election  address,  and  it  may  be
that  the  second  White  House  meeting'  was  called  off.  In  any  event,  unofficial
reports  from  Saigon,  two  days  later,  stated  that  most  of  the  B-57s  had  been
withdrawn  from  the  Bien  Hoa  base.  While  acknowledging  that  "some"  had  been
removed  to  Clark  Air  Base,  in  the  Philippines,  official  spokesmen  in  Saigon
refused  to  comment  on  whether  or  not  a  wholesale  withdrawal  had  taken  place.
One  thing  is  certain;  there  were  no  retaliatory  strikes  authorized  following  the
attack  on  the  U.S.  bomber  base.

However,  retaliatory  measures  were  proposed.  On  1  November,  the  JCS  sug-
gested orally  to  Secretary  McNamara  that  air  strikes  be  authorized  on  key  Com-
munist targets  in  both  Laos  and  North  Vietnam.  According  to  the  JCS  plan,
those  in  Laos  would  be  hit  within  24-36  hours  after  approval,  with  forces
already  in  place,  and  these  attacks  would  divert  attention  from  the  preparation
necessary  for  the  stronger  actions  to  follow.  The  latter  would  include  a  B-52
night  attack  on  Phuc  Yen  airfield  (outside  Hanoi),  to  be  followed  by  a  dawn
strike  by  USAF  and  Navy  tactical  aircraft  against  other  airfields  and  POL
storage  in  the  Hanoi-Haiphong  area.

Ambassador  Taylor  immediately  cabled  a  Saigon  Embassy-MACV  recom-
mendation for  "retaliatory  bombing  attacks  on  selected  DRV  targets  by  com-
bined U.S./VNAF  air  forces  and  for  a  policy  statement  that  we  will  act  similarly
in  like  cases  in  the  future."  In  a  later  cable  he  made  specific  reference  to  "the
retaliatory  principle  confirmed  in  NSAM  314,"  stating  that,  if  his  initial  recom-


210 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

mendation  was  not  accepted,  at  least  a  lesser  alternative  should  be  adopted.  This
he  described  as  "intensifying  34A  operations  and  initiating  air  operations  against
selected  targets  as  an  interim  substitute  for  more  positive  measures."

On  4  November,  the  JCS  repeated  in  writing  their  recommendations  of  the
1st,  adding  some  explanatory  comment  and  taking  issue  with  certain  aspects
of  the  Taylor  recommendations.  They  explained  that  they  considered  the  VC
attack  on  Bien  Hoa  airfield  ''a  deliberate  act  of  escalation  and  a  change  of
the  ground  rules  under  which  the  VC  have  operated  up  to  now."  They  cautioned
against  "undue  delay  or  restraint"  in  making  a  response,  since  it  "could  be  mis-
interpreted by  our  allies  in  Southeast  Asia,  as  well  as  by  the  DRV  and  Com-
munist China"  and  "could  encourage  the  enemy  to  conduct  additional  attacks.
.  .  ."  Referring  to  Ambassador  Taylor's  recommendation  to  announce  a  policy
of  reprisal  bombing,  the  JCS  denounced  a  "tit-for-tat"  policy  as  "unduly  restric-
tive" and  tending  to  "pass  to  the  DRV  substantial  initiatives  with  respect  to
the  nature  and  timing  of  further  U.S.  actions."  They  concluded:

Early  U.S.  military  action  against  the  DRV  would  lessen  the  possibility
of  misinterpretation  by  the  DRV  and  Communist  China  of  U.S.  determina-
tion and  intent  and  thus  serve  to  deter  further  VC  attacks  such  as  that  at
Bien  Hoa.

In  the  meantime,  there  had  been  created  what  may  have  been  the  only  con-
crete result  from  the  high-level  policy  deliberations  following  the  Bien  Hoa
incident.  An  interagency  task  force,  known  as  the  NSC  Working  Group,  had
begun  an  intensive  study  of  future  U.S.  courses  of  action.  Recommendations
from  the  JCS  and  others  were  passed  on  to  that  group  for  incorporation  in
their  work.

2. Formation  of  the  NSC  Working  Group

The  "NSC  Working  Group  on  SVN/SEA"  held  its  first  meeting  at  0930  hours,
3  November,  thus  placing  the  decision  to  organize  such  a  group  at  sometime
earlier — probably  on  2  November  or  perhaps  even  at  the  high-level  meeting  on
1  November.  Its  charter  was  to  study  "immediately  and  intensively"  the  future
courses  of  action  and  alternatives  open  to  the  United  States  in  Southeast  Asia
and  to  report  as  appropriate  to  a  "Principals  Group"  of  NSC  members.  In
turn,  this  group  of  senior  officials  would  then  recommend  specific  courses  of
action  to  the  President.  Initially,  the  working  group  was  given  approximately
one  week  to  ten  days  to  complete  its  work.  Actually,  it  developed  and  recast  its
reports  over  a  period  of  three  weeks  or  more.

Four  agencies  were  represented  in  the  formal  membership  of  the  group.  The
Department  of  State  contingent  included  Assistant  Secretary  Bundy  (Chairman),
Marshall  Green,  Michael  Forrestal  (both  of  the  Bureau  of  Far  Eastern  Affairs),
and  Robert  Johnson  (of  the  Policy  Planning  Council).  Assistant  Secretary  (ISA)
McNaughton  represented  OSD.  Vice  Admiral  Lloyd  Mustin  was  the  JCS  mem-
ber. The  CIA  was  represented  by  Harold  Ford.  Other  staff  members  from  these
agencies  assisted  in  work  on  specific  topics.

The  Working  Group's  efforts  were  apportioned  among  seven  tasks,  the  initial
input  for  each  being  accomplished  by  a  particular  member  or  subcommittee,  as
shown  on  p.  211.  [Doc.  216]

Most  inputs  were  made  in  the  form  of  either  (1)  draft  papers  treating  fully
a  topic  intended  for  inclusion  in  the  Working  Group's  final  submission  or  (2)


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  211


TOPIC

Assessment  of  the  current  situation  in  South
Vietnam,  including  policy  direction  of  inter-
ested powers.

U.S.  objectives  and  stakes  in  South  Vietnam  and
Southeast  Asia.

Broad  options  (3)  available  to  the  United
States.

Alternative  forms  of  possible  negotiation.

Analyses  of  different  options  vis-a-vis  U.S.  ob-
jectives and  interests.


Immediate  actions  in  the  period  prior  to  Presi-
dential decision  on  options.


RESPONSIBILITY

Intelligence  community

William  Bundy

Bundy  and  ISA

State  Policy  Planning
Council

JCS  to  propose  specific  ac-
tions; Policy  Planning  Coun-
cil  to  examine  political  im-
pacts of  the  most  violent
option  first.

State/Far  East  Bureau


memoranda  commenting  on  an  initial  draft  paper  and  suggesting  alterations.
Because  of  the  unique  responsibilities  and  advisory  processes  of  the  JCS,  their
member  apparently  chose  to  make  initial  inputs  largely  through  references  to
or  excerpts  from  regular  JCS  documents;  he  also  contributed  to  the  redrafting
of  the  option  analyses.  The  initial  papers  on  each  of  the  topics  were  circulated
among  the  Working  Group  members,  reviewed  in  consultation  with  their  parent
organizations  and  modified.  Some  positions  passed  through  as  many  as  three
drafts  before  being  submitted  to  the  Principals.

3.  Working  Group  Assessments  of  the 'Utility  of  Pressures

The  NSC  Working  Group  approached  its  work  with  the  general  assessment
that  increased  pressures  against  North  Vietnam  would  be  both  useful  and
necessary.  However,  this  assessment  embraced  a  wide  range  of  considerations
stemming  from  the  developing  situation  in  South  Vietnam  and  a  variety  of
viewpoints  concerning  what  kinds  of  pressures  would  be  most  effective.

a.  Sense  of  Urgency.  As  the  working  group  began  its  deliberation,  an  aware-
ness that  another  Bien  Hoa  could  occur  at  any  time  was  prominent  in  both  the
official  and  the  public  mind.  The  tenuous  security  of  U.S.  bases  in  South  Vietnam
had  received  wide  publicity.  Moreover,  the  news  services  were  reporting  the
threat  of  civil  protest  against  the  new  Saigon  government,  and  the  increased
level  of  guerrilla  infiltration  from  the  North  was  being  publicly  aired.  These
developments  lent  an  added  sense  of  urgency  to  the  Group's  work.  The  Chair-
man of  the  Working  Group  was  sensitive  to  these  developments  and  to  related
attitudes  within  the  Administration.  For  example,  he  indicated  that  the  intel-
ligence agencies  were  "on  the  verge  of  .  .  .  agreement  that  infiltration  has  in
fact  mounted,"  and  that  the  Saigon  mission  was  "urging  that  we  surface  this  by
the  end  of  this  week  or  early  next  week."  He  stressed  that  "the  President  is
clearly  thinking  in  terms  of  maximum  use  of  a  Gulf  of  Tonkin  [rcprisall  ration-
ale." The  nature  of  such  a  decision  was  expected  to  be:


212 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol  III


either  for  an  action  that  would  show  toughness  and  hold  the  line  till  we
can  decide  the  big  issue,  or  as  a  basis  for  starting  a  clear  course  of  action
under  .  .  .  broad  options.

He  implied  that  our  intention  to  stand  firm  in  South  Vietnam  was  being  com-
municated to  the  USSR  (''Secretary  Rusk  is  talking  today  to  Dobrynin")  and
indicated  the  desirability  of  President  Johnson  signalling  something  similar
rather  soon  through  the  public  media.  This  was  seen  as  particularly  important
"to  counter  any  SVN  fears  of  a  softening  in  our  policy,"  presumably  in  view
of  our  not  responding  to  the  Bien  Hoa  attack.  [Doc.  219]

Chairman  Bundy  was  aware  also  of  the  significance  attached  by  some  ob-
servers to  the  first  U.S.  actions  after  the  Presidential  election.  As  was  pointed
out  to  him,  "all  Vietnamese  and  other  interested  observers"  would  be  watching
carefully  to  "see  what  posture  the  newly  mandated  Johnson  Administration  will
assume."  For  this  reason,  William  H.  Sullivan,  head  of  the  interagency  Vietnam
Coordinating  Committee  (and  soon  to  be  appointed  the  new  U.S.  Ambassador
to  Laos),  urged  ''that  our  first  action  be  .  .  .  one  which  gives  the  appearance
of  a  determination  to  take  risks  if  necessary  to  maintain  our  position  in  South-
east Asia."  An  immediate  retaliation  for  any  repetition  of  the  Bien  Hoa  attack
and  armed  reconnaissance  missions  in  the  Laotian  Panhandle  were  cited  as
specific  examples.  He  went  on  to  recommend  to  Mr.  Bundy:

I  feel  that  it  is  important  .  .  .  that  the  Administration  go  on  record
fairly  soon  placing  our  policy  in  Viet  Nam  within  the  larger  perspective  of
our  policies  in  the  Western  Pacific,  especially  as  they  involve  confrontation
with  Communist  China.  [Doc.  220]

A  sense  of  urgency  for  the  Working  Group's  efforts  was  also  derived  from
assessments  of  the  trends  within  South  Vietnam.  For  example,  the  intelligence
panel  composed  of  CIA,  DIA,  and  State  INR  members  saw  little  prospect  for
an  effective  GVN  despite  an  acknowledged  slowing  of  "adverse  political  trends."
In  their  view  the  political  situation  was  "extremely  fragile,"  with  the  Saigon  ad-
ministration "plagued  by  confusion,  apathy  and  poor  morale"  and  the  new
leadership  hampered  by  the  older  factionalism.  The  security  situation  in  the
countryside  was  assessed  as  having  continued  to  deteriorate,  with  "Viet  Cong
control  .  .  .  spreading  over  areas  heretofore  controlled  by  the  government."
Although  indicating  "better  than  even"  chances  that  the  GVN  could  "hang  on
for  the  near  future  and  thus  afford  a  platform  upon  which  .  .  .  [to]  prosecute
the  war  and  attempt  to  turn  the  tide,"  the  panel  painted  a  grim  picture  of  its
prospects.  This  assessment  was  probably  instrumental  in  prompting  Assistant
Secretary  McNaughton's  cryptic  observation  that  "progress  inside  SVN  is  im-
portant, but  it  is  unlikelv  despite  our  best  ideas  and  efforts."  Besides,  he  ob-
served, if  it  came  at  all,  it  would  take  "at  least  several  months."  In  his  view,
the  efforts  of  the  Working  Group  could  in  some  measure  compensate  for  this
slow  progress  inside  South  Vietnam:

Action  against  North  Vietnam  is  to  some  extent  a  substitute  for  strength-
ing  the  government  in  South  Vietnam.  That  is,  a  less  active  VC  (on  orders
from  DRV)  can  be  handled  by  a  less  efficient  GVN  (which  we  expect  to
have.

b.  Views  of  DRV  Susceptibility.  The  extent  to  which  "action  against  North
Vietnam"  might  affect  that  nation's  support  of  the  conflicts  in  South  Vietnam


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  213

and  Laos  was  a  matter  on  which  members  of  the  Working  Group  did  not  fully
agree.  The  intelligence  panel  members  tended  toward  a  pessimistic  view.  They
pointed  out  that  "the  basic  elements  of  Communist  strength  in  South  Vietnam
remain  indigenous,"  and  that  "even  if  severely  damaged"  the  DRV  could  con-
tinue to  support  the  insurrection  at  a  lessened  level.  Therefore,  they  stressed
that  the  U.S.  ability  to  compel  a  halt  to  the  DRV  support  depended  on  eroding
Hanoi's  will  and  persuading  the  DRV:

that  the  price  of  mounting  the  insurrection  in  the  South  at  a  high  level
would  be  too  great  and  that  it  would  be  preferable  to  reduce  its  aid  .  .  .
and  direct  at  least  a  temporary  reduction  of  V.C.  activity.

As  the  panel  members  saw  it,  this  respite  would  then  provide  an  opportunity  to
stabilize  and  improve  the  GVN.  But,  in  their  words,  "Even  so,  lasting  success
would  depend  upon  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  energy  and  effectiveness
of  the  RVN  government  and  pacification  machinery."

However,  the  intelligence  panel  did  not  concede  very  strong  chances  for
breaking  the  will  of  Hanoi.  They  thought  it  quite  likely  that  the  DRV  was  will-
ing to  suffer  damage  "in  the  course  of  a  test  of  wills  with  the  United  States  over
the  course  of  events  in  South  Vietnam."  To  support  this  view,  they  cited  Hanoi's
belief  that  international  pressures  would  develop  against  deliberate  U.S.  expan-
sion of  the  war.  Further,  that  given  present  trends  in  South  Vietnam,  both
Hanoi  and  Peking  had  good  reason  to  expect  success  without  having  to  initiate
actions  carrying  the  risk  of  the  kind  of  war  which  would  expose  them  to  "the
great  weight  of  superior  U.S.  weaponry."  The  panel  also  viewed  Hanoi  as  esti-
mating that  the  U.S.  will  to  maintain  resistance  in  Southeast  Asia  could  in  time
be  eroded — that  the  recent  U.S.  election  would  provide  the  Johnson  Administra-
tion with  "greater  policy  flexibility"  than  it  previously  felt  it  had.

This  view  was  challenged  by  the  Working  Group's  JCS  member  as  being  too
"negative."  Interpreting  the  panel's  non-specific  reference  to  "policy  flexibility"
in  an  extreme  sense,  he  wrote :

If  this  means  that  Hanoi  thinks  we  are  now  in  position  to  accept  world-
wide humiliation  with  respect  to  our  formerly  stated  objectives  in  Vietnam,
this  is  another  reason  why  it  is  desirable  that  we  take  early  measures  to  dis-
abuse their  thinking.

Moreover,  he  indicated  the  JCS  view  that  the  slightly  improved  hopes  for  gov-
ernment stability  (acknowledged  by  the  panel)  were  good  reason  why  "early
and  positive  actions"  should  be  taken.  This  point  was  reinforced  by  his  judgment
that  (in  contrast  with  its  impact  on  esprit  and  political  effectiveness)  the  GVN's
"principal  task  is  to  afford  the  platform  upon  which  the  RVN  armed  forces,  with
U.S.  assistance,  prosecute  the  war."

In  criticism  of  the  intelligence  panel's  emphasis  on  the  need  to  influence  DRV
will,  Admiral  Mustin  indicated  that  enemy  capabilities  represented  a  more  ap-
propriate target.  He  stated  the  JCS  assessment  that:

a.  The  actual  U.S.  requirement  with  respect  to  the  DRV  is  reduction  of
the  rate  of  delivery  of  support  to  the  VC,  to  levels  below  their  minimum
necessary  sustaining  level  .  .  .

b.  In  the  present  unstable  situation  something  far  less  than  total  destruc-
tion may  be  all  that  is  required  to  accomplish  the  above.  A  very  modest


214 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


change  in  the  government's  [GV'N]  favor  .  .  .  may  be  enough  to  turn  the
tide  and  lead  to  a  sucessful  solution.  Of  course  it  is  not  possible  to  predict
in  advance  ...  the  precise  level  of  measures  which  will  be  required  to
achieve  the  above.  This  is  the  reason  for  designing  a  program  of  progres-
sivelv  increasing  squeeze.

One  of  the  factors  encouraging  JCS  optimism,  he  pointed  out,  was  the  assess-
ment accepted  by  the  panel  that  both  Hanoi  and  Peking  wanted  to  avoid  direct
conflict  with  the  United  States.  This  would  act  as  a  deterrent  to  Communist
persistence,  particularly  if  bv  a  program  of  militarv  pressures  we  were  able  to
revise  their  assessment  that  thev  could  win  "without  much  risk  of  having  to  feel
the  weight  of  U.S.  response."

Apparently  as  a  result  of  these  criticisms  and  their  influence  on  other  Work-
ing Group  members,  the  Group's  final  assessment  of  DRV  susceptibility  to  mili-
tary- pressures  was  somewhat  modified.  While  continuing  to  emphasize  that  af-
fecting Hanoi's  will  was  important,  the  criticalitv  of  it  was  obscured  bv  conces-
sions to  the  possible  impact  of  damage  to  DR\'  capabilities  and  bv  greater
reliance  on  conditional  phrasing.  For  example:

the  nature  of  the  war  in  Vietnam  is  such  that  U.S.  abilitv  to  compel  the
DR\'  to  end  or  reduce  the  VC  insurrection  rests  essentiallv  upon  the  effect
of  the  U.S.  sanctions  on  the  will  of  DRV  leadership  to  sustain  and  enlarge
that  insurrection,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  upon  the  effect  of  sanctions  on  the
capabilities  of  the  DRV  to  do  so.

Although  giving  explicit  recognition  to  "a  rising  rate  of  infiltration."  and  con-
tinuing to  acknowledge  limits  to  U.S.  abilities  to  prevent  the  DRVs  material
support  for  the  \C,  the  assessment  stated  that  "U.S. -inflicted  destruction  in
North  \'ietnam  and  Laos  would  reduce  these  supporting  increments  and  damage
DRV  VC  morale."  It  qualified  this  statement,  however,  bv  pointing  out  that
the  degree  to  which  such  damage  would  provide  the  G\'N  with  a  breathing  spell
would  depend  largelv  on  '"whether  anv  DR\'  "removar  of  its  direction  and  sup-
port of  the  \  C  were  superficial  or  whole."  If  superficial  or  "limited  to  gestures
.  .  .  that  removed  only  the  more  visible  evidences  of  the  DRV  increment."  the
report  continued,  "it  would  probablv  not  be  possible  to  develop  a  viable  and
free  government  in  South  \'ietnam."

In  general,  the  final  assessment  of  DRV  susceptibility  to  pressures  was  less
discouraging  than  the  intelligence  panel's  initial  submission,  although  it  could
not  be  considered  particularlv  encouraging  either.  The  reference  to  U.S.  "policy
flexibilitv."  to  which  the  JCS  took  such  violent  objection,  was  removed,  and  the
following  non-committing  statement  was  used  instead:  "Hanoi's  immediate  esti-
mate is  probablv  that  the  passing  of  the  U.S.  election  gives  Washington  the
opportunitv  to  take  new  militarv  actions  against  the  DR\'  and  or  new  diplo-
matic initiatives."  If  new  militarv  pressures  were  applied,  the  report  indicated
that  Hanoi's  leaders  would  be  faced  with  a  basic  question:  "Is  the  U.S.  deter-
mined to  continue  escalating  its  pressures  to  achieve  its  announced  objectives
.  .  .  or  is  the  U.S.  escalation  essentiallv  a  limited  attempt  to  improve  the  U.S.
negotiating  position?"  It  continued:

Their  decision  .  .  .  would  be  affected  by  the  U.S.  military  posture  in
the  area,  by  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  U.S.  escalation,  the  character  of
the  U.S.  communication  of  its  intentions,  and  their  reading  of  domestic


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  215

U.S.  and  international  reactions  to  the  inauguration  of  U.S.  attacks  on  the
North.

The  report  [words  illegible]  not  to  predict  how  the  DRV  might  answer  the
"basic  question"  given  alternative  assessments  of  the  variables"  in  the  quoted
paragraph.  However,  it  did  offer  the  caveat  that  "comprehension  of  the  other's
intentions  would  almost  certainly  be  difficult  on  both  sides,  and  especially  so  as
the  scale  of  hostilities  mounted."

In  assessing  Hanoi's  ability  and  willingness  to  sustain  U.S.  attacks  in  order
to  pursue  its  goals,  the  report  continued  its  balanced  but  slightly  pessimistic
approach:

We  have  many  indications  that  the  Hanoi  leadership  is  acutely  and  nerv-
ously aware  of  the  extent  to  which  North  Vietnam's  transportation  system
and  industrial  plan  is  vulnerable  to  attack.  On  the  other  hand,  North  Viet-
nam's economy  is  overwhelmingly  agriculture  and,  to  a  large  extent,  decen-
tralized. .  .  .  Interdiction  of  imports  and  extensive  destruction  of  trans-
portation facilities  and  industrial  plants  would  cripple  DRV  industry.  These
actions  would  also  seriously  restrict  DRV  military  capabilities,  and  would
degrade,  though  to  a  lesser  extent,  Hanoi's  capabilities  to  support  guerrilla
warfare  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  .  .  .  We  do  not  believe  that  attacks
on  industrial  targets  would  so  greatly  exacerbate  current  economic  difficul-
ties as  to  create  unmanageable  control  problems.  .  .  .  DRV  leaders  .  .  .
would  probably  be  willing  to  suffer  some  damage  to  the  country  in  the
course  of  a  test  of  wills  with  the  U.S.  over  the  course  of  events  in  South
Vietnam.

The  assessment  concluded  with  estimates  of  likely  Chinese  Communist  and
Soviet  efforts  to  offset  pressures  directed  toward  North  Vietnam.  The  Working
Group  recorded  its  belief  "that  close  cooperation  exists  between  Hanoi  and
Peiping  and  that  Hanoi  consults  Peiping  on  major  decisions  regarding  South
Vietnam."  Because  the  VC  insurrection  served  "Peiping's  interests  in  undermin-
ing the  U.S.  position  in  Asia"  and  because  of  the  Sino-Soviet  dispute,  the  group
thought  it  likely  that  the  Chinese  would  "feel  compelled  to  demonstrate  their
readiness  to  support"  Hanoi  in  maintaining  pressure  on  South  Vietnam.  How-
ever, it  was  noted  that  "Chinese  Communist  capabilities  to  augment  DRV  offen-
sive and  defensive  capabilities  are  slight,"  being  limited  largely  to  modest  quan-
tities of  air  defense  equipment,  additional  jet  fighters  and  naval  patrol  craft.  On
the  other  hand,  the  group  believed  "Moscow's  role  in  Vietnam  is  likely  to  re-
main a  relatively  minor  one."  Khrushchev's  successors  were  believed  unwilling
to  run  substantial  risks  to  undermine  the  GVN.  Citing  Hanoi's  desire  for  con-
tinuing Soviet  military  and  economic  aid,  the  report  stated  an  ironic  judgment
concerning  the  less-militant  of  the  large  Communist  powers:

Moscow's  abtlity  to  influence  decisions  in  Hanoi  tends  consequently  to
be  proportional  to  the  North  Vietnamese  regime's  fears  of  American  action
against  it,  rising  in  moments  of  crisis  and  diminishing  in  quieter  periods.
Moscow's  willingness  to  give  overt  backing  to  Hanoi,  however,  seems  to  be
in  inverse  proportion  to  the  level  of  threat  to  North  Vietnam.

4. Perceptions  and  Development  of  U.S.  Pressure  Options

The  NSC  Working  Group  began  its  deliberations  with  a  variety  of  U.S.
actions  in  mind  and  with  an  apparently  flexible  approach  to  the  objectives  that


216 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


the  Administration  might  reasonably  seek  to  achieve.  As  ideas  were  exchanged
and  debated,  however,  objectives  became  somewhat  less  flexible  and  options
seemed  to  narrow.  Such  a  process  could  have  resulted  from  either:  (1)  pre-
conceptions on  the  part  of  particularly  influential  members;  (2)  a  bureaucratic
tendency  to  compromise;  or  (3)  simply  the  limited  availability  of  practical  alter-
natives. A  combination  of  these  factors  may  even  have  been  at  work  in  the  case
of  the  Working  Group.  An  assessment  of  this  nature  is  beyond  the  scope  of
this  primarily  documentary  research  effort.  Still,  the  question  is  an  important
one  to  reflect  on  in  tracing  the  development  of  Working  Group  recommenda-
tions.

a.  Perception  of  U.S.  Objectives  and  Interests.  National  objectives  in  South-
east Asia  were  regarded  in  two  categories:  existing  (sometimes  called  "initial")
policy  objectives  and  those  comprising  a  possible  fallback  position.  The  former
did  not  change  and  did  not  undergo  any  reinterpretation  during  the  course  of
the  Working  Group's  study.  These  were  seen  as  ( 1 )  "helping  a  government  [of
South  Vietnam]  defend  its  independence,"  and  (2)  "working  to  preserve  [in
Laos]  an  international  neutralized  settlement."  Three  basic  "factors"  were  rec-
ognized as  "standing  behind"  these  policy  objectives:

a.  The  general  principle  of  helping  countries  that  try  to  defend  their
own  freedom  against  communist  subversion  and  attack.

b.  The  specific  consequences  of  communist  control  of  South  Vietnam
and  Laos  for  the  security  of,  successively,  Cambodia,  Thailand  (most  seri-
ously), Malaysia,  and  the  Philippines — and  resulting  increases  in  the  threat
to  India  and — more  in  the  realm  of  morale  effects  in  the  short  term — the
threat  to  [other  nations  in  Asia].

c.  South  Vietnam,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  Laos,  as  test  cases  of  commu-
nist "wars  of  national  liberation"  world-wide.

Current  U.S.  objectives  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  were  seen  as  an  integral
part  of  the  "overall  policy  of  resisting  Communist  expansion  world-wide,"  and
particularly  a  part  of  the  "policy  of  resisting  the  expansion  of  Communist  China
and  its  allies,  North  Vietnam  and  North  Korea."  Thus,  for  South  Vietnam  to
come  under  Communist  control,  "in  any  form,"  was  seen  as

a  major  blow  to  our  basic  policies.  U.S.  prestige  is  heavily  committed  to
the  maintenance  of  a  non-Communist  South  Vietnam,  and  only  less  heavily
so  to  a  neutralized  Laos.

Unlike  the  current  objectives,  those  comprising  a  fall-back  position  dealt  only
with  South  Vietnam.  IVloreover,  they  were  modified  during  the  course  of  the
Working  Group's  effort.  The  modifications  occurred  in  the  way  the  objectives
were  presented — in  the  context  of  the  presentation — rather  than  in  their  specific
phrasing.  The  words  remained  the  same  throughout:

1.  To  hold  the  situation  together  as  long  as  possible  so  that  we  have
time  to  strengthen  other  areas  of  Asia.

2.  To  take  forceful  enough  measures  in  the  situation  so  that  we  emerge
from  it,  even  in  the  worst  case,  with  our  standing  as  the  principal  helper
against  Communist  expansion  as  little  impaired  as  possible.

3.  To  make  clear  ...  to  nations  in  Asia  particularly,  that  failure  in


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  217

South  Viet-Nam,  if  it  comes,  was  due  to  special  local  factors  that  do  not
apply  to  other  nations  we  are  committed  to  defend — that,  in  short,  our  will
and  ability  to  help  those  nations  defend  themselves  is  not  impaired.

At  first,  these  fall-back  objectives  for  South  Vietnam  were  presented  as  pos-
sible alternatives — to  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  a  reassessment  of  the
costs  and  risks  associated  with  currently  acknowledged  objectives.  Following  its
recognition  of  the  extent  to  which  U.S.  prestige  had  been  committed,  even  the
second  draft  (8  November)  stated:

Yet  ...  we  cannot  guarantee  to  maintain  a  non-Communist  South
Vietnam  short  of  committing  ourselves  to  whatever  degree  of  military  ac-
tion would  be  required  to  defeat  North  Vietnam  and  probably  Communist
China  militarily.  Such  a  commitment  would  involve  high  risks  of  a  major
conflict  in  Asia,  which  could  not  be  confined  to  air  and  naval  action  but
would  almost  inevitably  involve  a  Korean-scale  ground  action  and  possibly
even  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  at  some  point.

Despite  all  this,  it  was  acknowledged,  South  Vietnam  "might  still  come  apart,"
leaving  the  United  States  deeply  committed  but  with  much  of  its  initial  justifica-
tion disintegrated.  "Hence,"  the  evaluation  continued,

...  we  must  consider  realistically  what  our  over-all  objectives  and  stakes
are,  not  just  what  degree  of  risk  and  loss  we  should  be  prepared  to  make
to  hold  South  Vietnam,  or  alternatively,  to  gain  time  and  secure  our  further
lines  of  defense  in  the  world  and  specifically  in  Asia.

Significant,  in  shedding  light  on  the  subtle  changes  that  occurred  in  this  ra-
tionale during  the  ensuing  three  or  four  weeks,  was  its  treatment  of  the  third
fall-back  objective.  Observing  that  "most  of  the  world  had  written  off"  both
South  Vietnam  and  Laos  in  1954,  an  early  draft  acknowledged  that  neither  had
acquired  the  international  standing  of  such  former  targets  of  Communist  aggres-
sion as  Greece,  Iran  and  South  Korea.  'It  went  on  to  point  out  several  historical
characteristics  of  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  that  made  them  such  unique  cases,
including:  (1)  "a  bad  colonial  heritage"  and  inadequate  preparation  for  self-
government;  (2)  a  "colonialist  war  fought  in  half-baked  fashion  and  lost";  and
(3)  "a  nationalist  movement  taken  over  by  Communists  ruling  in  the  other  half
of  an  ethnically  and  historically  united  country.  .  .  ."  It  then  added:

The  basic  point,  of  course,  is  that  we  have  never  thought  we  could  de-
fend a  government  or  a  people  that  had  ceased  to  care  strongly  about  de-
fending themselves,  or  that  were  unable  to  maintain  the  fundamentals  of
government.  And  the  overwhelming  world  impression  is  that  these  are  lack-
ing elements  in  South  Viet-Nam.  .  .  .

Moreover,  the  commentary  noted  that  there  was  widespread  expectancy  that  if
South  Vietnam  were  lost  it  would  be  due  to  its  lack  of  these  elements.

Subsequent  to  circulation  of  the  initial  draft  of  the  "objectives  and  national
interest"  Section,  a  number  of  critical  or  related  comments  were  directed  toward
Group  Chairman  Bundy.  On  4  November,  Michael  Forrestal  suggested  that  "an
important  flavor"  was  lacking  in  the  original  analysis— namely,  "the  role  of
China"  and  her  need  for  "ideological  successes  abroad."  In  his  view,  given
Chinese  policy,  "the  effect  of  our  withdrawal  from  a  situation  in  which  the


218 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  HI


people  we  were  trying  to  help  seemed  unable  to  help  themselves"  would  be  '^^
more  politically  pervasive  in  Asia  than  if  China  did  not  exist.  He  thought  the
U.S.  object  should  be  to  "contain"  Chinese  political  and  ideological  influence
"for  the  longest  possible  period,"  thus  providing  time  to  create,  "at  the  very
least,  Titoist  regimes  on  the  periphery  of  China  .  .  ."  [Doc.  218]  On  6  Novem-  ''''
ber,  William  Sullivan  also  urged  placing  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam  in  the  "larger
perspective"  of  the  political  confrontation  with  Communist  China.  In  an  at-
tached, larger  exposition  of  policy  rationale  for  the  Western  Pacific,  he  presented  ^
conceptions  of  the  U.S.  problem  quite  similar  to  those  advocated  by  Forrestal.
The  political  future  of  the  peoples  of  East  Asia  was  portrayed  as  depending
largely  on  a  struggle  between  Washington  and  Peking.  Chinese  political  and
ideological  aggressiveness  was  viewed  as  a  threat  to  the  ability  of  these  peoples
to  determine  their  own  futures,  and  hence  to  develop  along  ways  compatible
with  U.S.  interests.  The  U.S.  commitment  to  defeat  North  Vietnamese  aggres-
sion,  even  at  the  risk  of  "direct  military  confrontation"  with  Communist  China,
was  perceived  as  part  of  the  longer-term  policy  of  establishing  conditions  which
permit  the  independent  nations  of  the  region  to  develop  the  ability  and  con-
fidence "to  cope  with  the  emerging  and  expanding  power  of  China."  These
comments  may  have  influenced  that  part  of  the  8  November  version  which
referred  to  current  U.S.  objectives  as  part  of  the  broader  policy  of  "resisting  \\
the  expansion  of  Communist  China  and  its  allies.  .  .  ."  pi
The  JCS  member  also  stressed  the  importance  of  not  falling  back  from  cur-  tr:
rent  policy  aims.  [Doc.  228]  He  stated  that  "in  the  eyes  of  the  world"  the
United  States  was  committed  to  its  initial  objectives  "as  matters  of  national  iii
prestige,  credibility,  and  honor."  Further,  that  U.S.  retention  of  "a  measure  of  fc
free-world  leadership"  required  "successful  defense"  in  South  Vietnam  against  \i
the  wars  of  national  liberation  strategy.  Admiral  Mustin  criticized  the  Bundy
draft  for  overstating  "the  degree  of  difficulty  associated  with  success  for  our  [}
objectives  in  SVN."  He  asserted:  d

Our  first  objective  is  to  cause  the  DRV  to  terminate  support  of  the  SEA
insurgencies.  ...  To  achieve  this  objective  does  not  necessarily  require
that  we  "defeat  North  Viet-Nam,"  and  it  almost  certainly  does  not  re-  j
quire  that  we  defeat  Communist  China.  Hence  our  commitment  to  SVN  !
does  not  involve  a  high  probability,  let  alone  "high  risks,"  of  a  major  con-  :
flict  in  Southeast  Asia.  '


He  characterized  the  draft's  expression  of  concern  over  risks  and  costs  as  an
inference  "as  though  the  harder  we  try  the  more  we  stand  to  risk  and  to  lose.
On  the  contrary,  he  stated,  the  "best  hope  for  minimizing  risks,  costs,  and  losses
in  achieving  our  objectives"  could  be  attained  though  "a  resolute  course  of
action."

Admiral  IVIustin  also  attacked  the  implication  that  there  was  "some  alterna-
tive to  our  holding  South  Vietnam.  There  is  none,"  he  stated,  adding:  "We  have
no  further  fall-back  position  in  Southeast  Asia  in  the  stated  view  of  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff."  Specifically,  he  warned  that  to  attempt  to  strengthen  other
areas  of  Asia,  "in  the  context  of  our  having  been  pushed  out  of  SVN,  would  be
a  thoroughly  non-productive  effort  militarily.  .  .  ."  Moreover,  characterizing
the  draft's  concessions  to  the  unique  difficulties  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  as
"sour  grapes,"  he  attacked  its  assumptions  that  we  could  convince  other  nations
that  failure  in  South  Vietnam  was  due  to  strictly  local  factors.  He  warned  that
other  nations  would  regard  any  such  explanation  on  our  part  as  "completely


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  219

transparent."  Concerning  any  lack  of  GVN  will  to  defend  itself,  he  commented,
"A  resolute  United  States  would  ensure  .  .  .  that  this  lack  were  cured,  as  the
alternative  to  accepting  the  loss."  The  JCS  member  portrayed  a  U.S.  failure  in
South  Vietnam  as  shaking  the  faith  and  resolve  of  the  non-Communist  nations
who  rely  on  the  United  States  for  major  help  against  Communist  aggression.  In
that  event,  he  saw  little  possibility  for  effective  U.S.  reassurances.

The  impact  of  these  criticisms  can  be  seen  in  the  working  Group's  final  as-
cessment  of  U.S.  interests  in  Southeast  Asia.  In  explaining  the  need  to  consider
a  fall-back  position,  the  statement  stressed  the  need  merelv  to  assess  "the  draw-
backs" associated  with  it.  Lending  to  this  judgment  were  admissions  that  "there
is  some  chance  that  South  Vietnam  might  come  apart  under  us  whatever  course
of  action  we  pursue"  and  "strong  military  action  necessarily  involves  some  risks
of  an  enlarged  and  even  conceivably  major  conflict  in  Asia."  Then  followed  the
statement:

These  problems  force  us  to  weight  in  our  analysis  the  drawbacks  and
possibilities  of  success  of  various  options,  including  the  drawbacks  of  ac-
cepting only  the  fall-back  objectives  set  forth  below. (Italics  added)

Missing  was  the  earlier  draft's  reference  to  potential  costs  and  risks  involved  in
pursuing  current  objectives.  Missing  also  was  any  suggestion  that  the  Adminis-
tration might  find  some  advantage  in  seeking  an  alternative  to  these  objectives.

The  Working  Group  went  on  to  assess,  in  terms  almost  identical  to  those  in
the  initial  draft,  the  likely  consequence  of  Communist  control  of  South  Vietnam
for  different  world  areas  of  interest  to  the  United  States.  The  group  saw  impor-
tant distinctions  between  the  likely  impact  on  U.S.  interests  in  Asia  and  those
in  the  world  at  large.  For  the  latter,  the  most  significant  variable  was  seen  as
the  degree  to  which  adverse  developments  in  Southeast  Asia  might  produce
domestic  public  revulsion  against  all  U.S.  commitments  overseas:

Within  NATO  (except  for  Greece  and  Turkey  to  some  degree),  the  loss
of  South  Vietnam  probably  would*  not  shake  the  faith  and  resolve  to  face
the  threat  of  Communist  aggression  or  confidence  in  us  for  major  help.
This  is  so  provided  we  carried  out  any  military  actions  in  Southeast  Asia
without  taking  forces  from  NATO  and  without  generating  a  wave  of  "iso-
lationism" in  the  U.S.  In  other  areas  of  the  world,  either  the  nature  of  the
Communist  threat  or  the  degree  of  U.S.  commitment  or  both  are  so  rad-
ically different  than  in  Southeast  Asia  that  it  is  difficult  to  assess  the  impact.
The  question  would  be  whether  the  U.S.  was  in  fact  able  to  go  on  with  its
present  policies.

For  Asia,  other  than  Southeast  Asia,  the  Working  Group's  assessment  went  as
follows:

The  effect  on  Asia  generally  would  depend  heavily  on  the  circumstances
in  which  South  Vietnam  was  lost  and  on  whether  the  loss  did  in  fact  greatly
weaken  or  lead  to  the  early  loss  of  other  areas  in  Southeast  Asia.  Nationalist
China  .  .  .  ,  South  Korea,  and  the  Philippines  would  need  maximum  re-
assurance. While  Japan's  faith  in  our  military  posture  and  determination
may  not  be  shaken,  the  growing  feeling  that  Communist  China  must  some-
how be  lived  with  might  well  be  accentuated.  India  and  Iran  appear  to  be


220 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III  1

the  Asian  problem  cases  outside  the  Far  East.  A  U.S.  defeat  could  lead  to
serious  repercussions  in  these  countries.  There  is  a  great  deal  we  could  still
do  to  reassure  these  countries,  but  the  picture  of  a  defense  line  clearly
breached  could  have  serious  effects  and  could  easily,  over  time,  tend  to
unravel  the  whole  Pacific  and  South  Asian  defense  structures.

The  consequences  for  Southeast  Asia  of  Communist  control  in  South  Vietnam
were  seen  as  highly  differentiated  and  by  no  means  automatic.  The  "domino
theory"  was  viewed  as  "over-simplified."  The  Working  Group  felt  that  it  might
apply  "if,  but  only  if,  Communist  China  .  .  .  entered  Southeast  Asia  in  force
and/or  the  United  States  was  forced  out  of  South  Vietnam,  in  circumstances  of
military  defeat."  Nevertheless,  the  group  judged  that  "almost  immediately,"  Laos
would  become  extremely  hard  to  hold  and  Cambodia  would  be  "bending  sharply
to  the  Communist  side."  These  developments  were  seen  as  placing  great  pressure
on  Thailand  and  encouraging  Indonesia  to  increase  its  pressure  on  Malaysia.
Thailand,  it  was  noted,  had  "an  historic  tendency  to  make  'peace'  with  the  side
that  seems  to  be  winning,"  and  Malaysia's  "already  serious  Malay-Chinese  prob-
lem" was  cited.  The  Working  Group  concluded:

We  could  do  more  in  Thailand  and  with  the  British  in  Malaysia  to  re-
inforce the  defense  of  these  countries,  the  initial  shock  wave  would  be
great  [sic]  .  .  .

This  assessment  was  quite  close  to  that  made  in  the  8  November  draft  in  which
Bundy  had  gone  on  to  point  out  that  even  if  we  succeeded  in  overcoming  the  |
shock  wave  in  Thailand  and  Malaysia,  "the  struggle  would  be  uphill  for  a  long  |;'
time  to  come."  But  in  neither  case  was  much  credence  placed  in  the  domino  j
theory.

It  should  be  noted  that  Admiral  Mustin  and  the  ICS  did  not  agree  with  this
assessment.  The  Admiral  commented  that  the  ICS  believed  the  so-called  domino  ■
theory  "to  be  the  most  realistic  estimate  for  Cambodia  and  Thailand,  probably  '
Burma,  possibly  Malaysia."  In  the  context  of  late  1964,  these  nations  were  ex-  ;
pected  to  collapse  "plainly  and  simply  as  the  corollary  to  our  withdrawal."  j
Accordingly,  a  specific  notation  of  the  differing  viewpoint  of  the  JCS  was  placed  j
in  the  Working  Group's  final  report.  \

In  describing  its  assessment  of  the  consequences  of  Communist  control  in  |i
South  Vietnam,  the  Working  Group  stated:  j

There  are  enough  "ifs"  in  the  above  analysis  so  that  it  cannot  be  con- 1
eluded  that  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  would  soon  have  the  totally  crippling  ,
effect  in  Southeast  Asia  and  Asia  generally  that  the  loss  of  Berlin  would
have  in  Europe;  but  it  could  be  that  bad,  driving  us  to  the  progressive  loss
of  other  areas  or  to  taking  a  stand  at  some  point  [so  that]  there  would
almost  certainly  be  a  major  conflict  and  perhaps  the  great  risk  of  nuclear
war.

b.  Evolution  of  Options.  The  alternative  courses  of  action  perceived  by  the
Working  Group  went  through  a  fairly  rapid  evolution.  As  conceived  by  Chair-  ^
man  Bundy  and  John  McNaughton,  who  apparently  collaborated  in  their  initial
formulation,  the  options  would  offer  a  wide  range  of  military  actions  and  diplo-
matic postures.  [Doc.  224]  As  the  views  of  other  members  and  interested  officials
were  expressed,  and  as  it  became  more  apparent  how  little  flexibility  was  per-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  221

ceived  with  respect  to  national  objectives,  subtle  changes  occurred.  The  effect  was
to  narrow  somewhat  the  range  of  effects  which  the  different  options  might  achieve
and  to  tend  to  blur  the  distinctions  between  them.  However,  the  process  occurred
so  early  in  the  life  of  the  Working  Group  that  it  is  difficult  to  pin-point  the
changes  and  somewhat  presumptuous,  relying  only  on  documentary  evidence,  to
explain  them.

The  perceived  options  were  three  in  number,  labeled  A,  B,  and  C.  Option  A
essentially  was  a  continuation  of  military  and  naval  actions  currently  underway
or  previously  authorized,  to  include  prompt  reprisals  for  attacks  on  U.S.  facilities
or  other  VC  "spectaculars"  in  South  Vietnam.  These  were  to  be  accompanied  by
continued  resistance  to  a  negotiated  settlement  unless  stringent  preconditions,
amounting  to  agreement  to  abide  by  U.S.  interpretations  of  the  Geneva  Accords,
were  met.  Option  B  consisted  of  current  policies  plus  a  systematic  program  of
progressively  heavy  military  pressures  against  North  Vietnam,  to  be  continued
until  current  objectives  were  met.  Negotiations  were  to  be  resisted,  as  in  A,
although  to  be  entered  ultimately,  but  they  were  to  be  carried  on  in  conjunction
with  continued  bombing  attacks.  Option  C  combined  current  policies  with  (1)
additional — but  somewhat  milder — military  pressures  against  North  Vietnam  and
(2)  a  declared  willingness  to  negotiate.  Once  negotiations  were  begun,  the  mili-
tary pressures  were  to  stop,  although  the  threat  to  resume  was  to  be  kept  alive.

In  a  general  sense,  these  distinctions  remained  constant  throughout  the  Work-
ing Group  effort.  However,  subtle  changes  occurred.  In  the  initial  conception  of
B,  it  was  perceived  as  "meshing  at  some  point  with  negotiation,"  based  on  an
underlying  assumption  that  negotiations  would  probably  be  unavoidable.  The  full
analysis  of  this  earliest  form  of  B  (discussed  more  fully  later)  makes  it  clear
that  some  kind  of  international  discussions  would  probably  begin  fairly  early  in
time  as  the  intensity  of  our  military  pressures  increased.  These  would  be  applied
deliberately  to  permit  evaluation  of  results  at  each  step.  Yet,  the  initial  form  of
B  was  intended  to  embrace  high  intensity  options — in  McNaughton's  terminology,
a  "full  squeeze."  It  will  be  recalled  from  the  discussions  earlier  in  the  fall,  that
this  term  was  applied  to  graduated  operations  that  included  mining  harbors,
bombing  bridges  and  LOG  targets  and  eventually  attacking  industries.  As  Option
B  developed,  however,  it  became  associated  with  prolonged  resistance  to  a
negotiated  settlement.  Moreover,  although  the  intensity  of  the  military  operations
it  embraced  remained  about  the  same,  they  were  perceived  as  being  applied  at  a
faster,  less  flexible  pace.  For  example,  in  a  comment  about  this  option  on  14
November,  Admiral  Mustin  wrote:

.  .  .  while  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  offer  the  capability  for  pursuing
Option  B  as  defined,  they  have  not  explicitly  recommended  that  the  opera-
tions be  conducted  on  a  basis  necessarily  that  inflexible.  All  implementing
plans  .  .  .  would  permit  suspension  whenever  desired  by  national  authority.

Perceptions  of  Option  C  became  more  like  B.  Initially,  the  additional  pressures
in  C  were  conceived  as  "additional  forceful  measures  and  military  moves."  They
included  such  operations  as  extension  of  the  current  armed  escort  of  reconnais-
sance flights  in  Laos  to  full-fledged  armed  route  reconnaissance — gradually  lead-
ing to  similar  attacks  against  infiltration  routes  in  the  southern  border  regions  of
North  Vietnam.  The  initial  Option  C  also  provided  for  authorization  of  the
already  planned  for  cross-border  ground  operations  in  Laos  and  possibly  in
Cambodia.  By  8  November,  however,  the  pressure  portion  of  this  option  was
perceived  as  ( 1 )  including  eventual  attacks  against  other-than-infiltration  targets


222 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill  1

in  North  Vietnam  and  (2)  giving  "the  impression  of  a  steady  deUberate  ap-  $
proach,"  the  pace  of  which  could  be  quickened  if  necessary.  Moreover,  in  this  |  po
later  development  of  C,  the  U.S.  negotiating  position  would  be  to  insist  from  the  '  iin
outset  on  full  acceptance  of  the  current  U.S.  objectives.  Initially  this  position  ;  als
would  incorporate  certain  additional  bargaining  elements  that  could  drop  out  in  in]
the  course  of  discussion.  iBi

This  modification  of  the  pressure  and  negotiation  aspects  of  C  led  other  mem-  |  io
bers  of  the  Working  Group  to  express  reservations.  Robert  Johnson  stated  that  |  lie
this  "proposed  stiffer  version"  was  little  different  from  B.  He  argued  that  the  0
only  real  differences  now  were  (1)  a  declared  willingness  to  negotiate  and  (2)
our  unwillingness  under  C  to  carry  the  action  through  to  its  ultimate  conclusion.  1
He  cautioned  that  the  new  version  was  unlikely  to  produce  the  hoped-for  ad-  li
vantages  of  "pure  C"  and  that  it  could  convince  the  Communists  that  our  nego-  ci
tiatory  spirit  was  not  sincere.  Enclosed  with  his  comments  were  the  views  of  the  '  0
CIA  member,  who  also  believed  there  would  be  confusion  between  B  and  the  li
new  C — particularly  as  observed  by  the  DRV.  Other  reservations  were  expressed  I
by  Assistant  Secretary  McNaughton,  who  urged  that  the  proposed  pace  of  the  d
new  C  be  slowed  down.  This  would  be  accomplished  by  dividing  the  additional  I
pressure  [words  illegible]  in  Laos  as  part  of  the  first  phase.  The  OSD  representa-  v
tive  also  urged  not  yielding  to  pressures  to  participate  in  a  Geneva  conference
until  after  several  military  actions  had  been  taken  against  the  DRV.  Of  all  the  j  |
reservations  stated  above,  only  the  last  (delaying  Geneva  participation)  was  re-  j  s
fleeted  in  subsequent  descriptions  of  Option  C.  (

Even  Option  A  was  altered  to  some  extent.  The  main  emphasis  for  A  continued  (
to  be  the  currently  adopted  policies.  At  some  time  prior  to  8  November  (when  (
the  final  analysis  was  drafted),  interest  was  shown  in  an  "extended  A."  This  i
version  retained  the  policy  of  resisting  negotiations  in  hope  that  the  situation  1
would  improve,  but  it  incorporated  low-level  pressure  action  akin  to  the  early i  i
stages  of  C.  The  type  and  intensity  of  the  action  "would  vary  in  direct  propor-  :
tion  to  our  success  in  convincing  the  world  and  our  own  public  of  the  truth
about  Hanoi's  support,  direction  and  control  of  the  VC."  It  might  begin  with  I
armed  reconnaissance  in  Laos,  include  greater  naval  activity  along  the  coast,  and  j
gradually  phase  into  strikes  against  LOC  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  In  terms  of  ;
military  actions  alone,  extended  A  resembled  closely  the  initial  version  of  C.  ,
However,  it  was  conceded  that  even  an  extended  Option  A  did  not  offer  a  very  !
promising  means  for  moving  toward  negotiations.

Why  did  these  changes  take  place?  The  available  documentary  materials  do
not  make  this  entirely  clear.  One  factor  which  may  have  influenced  the  modifica-
tions in  all  three  of  the  options  was  recognition  of  the  problem  of  conflicting
signals  that  could  result  from  reprisal  actions.  If  reprisals  were  designed  to  be
forceful  and  punitive  and  intended  to  match  the  seriousness  of  VC  provocations,
they  might  be  so  strong  as  to  interfere  with  the  messages  to  Hanoi  which  it  was
originally  intended  would  be  conveyed  by  the  graduated  pressures.  Indeed,  it  was
pointed  out  that  operations  orders  already  developed  by  CINCPAC  for  retalia-
tion in  response  to  attacks  on  DE  SOTO  Patrols  (should  they  be  resumed)  were
"of  magnitude  which  would  not  be  politically  viable"  except  under  extremely
serious  provocations.  Moreover,  it  was  feared  that  improperly  orchestrated  re-
prisals might  create  undue  international  pressures  for  negotiations  that  could
upset  the  negotiating  strategy  appropriate  for  the  selected  option.

Both  A  and  B  may  have  been  altered  as  a  result  of  changes  made  in  C.  The
objections  raised  to  the  new  C  may  have  encouraged  Chairman  Bundy  to  in-
clude an  extended  A  that  was  closer  in  the  military  sense  to  his  and  Mc-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  223


Naughton's  original  concept  of  graduated  pressures.  Moreover,  it  had  been
pointed  out  that  the  same  negotiating  situations  seen  as  appropriate  for  C  (to
include  discussions  of  Laos  and /or  Cambodia  as  well  as  South  Vietnam)  could
also  apply  to  eventual  negotiations  arrived  at  through  A.  Besides,  with  the  stiffen-
ing of  the  C  negotiating  formula,  the  distinctions  between  the  respective  bargain-
ing positions  for  A  and  C  had  become  somewhat  blurred.  Option  B's  faster  pace
in  expanding  operations  may  have  been  an  attempt  to  make  a  clear  distinction
between  it  and  the  new  C.  Use  of  the  term  "fast/full  squeeze"  in  reference  to
Option  B  began  concurrently  with  descriptions  of  the  stiflfer  version  of  Option  C.

In  addition,  it  is  possible  that  the  emphasis  on  a  fast-paced  B,  with  its  harsher
measures,  was  motivated  in  part  by  a  desire  to  make  this  option  unattractive  to
higher  authority.  This  may  explain  the  rather  perplexed  tone  of  the  previously
cited  Mustin  comment  comparing  the  JCS  and  Working  Group  approaches.
Other  than  the  JCS  member,  most  of  the  Working  Group  members  appear  to
have  favored  less  intensive  measures  than  those  being  advocate^  by  the  military.
Despite  a  sense  of  high  stakes  in  Southeast  Asia,  which  was  shared  by  several
members  and  other  interested  officials,  many  of  these  persons  did  not  want  the
United  States  to  plunge  ahead  with  deeply  committing  actions  as  long  as  there
was  some  doubt  about  the  GVN's  durability  and  commitment.

Not  incompatible  with  the  foregoing  argument  is  a  possible  additional  ex-
planation for  the  stiffening  of  Option  C.  As  U.S.  objectives  came  to  be  viewed
somewhat  less  flexibly,  it  is  possible  that  dominant  elements  in  the  Working
Group  thought  it  advisable  to  make  C  into  a  tougher  position.  There  is  little
question  that  Option  C  was  the  natural  heir  of  the  concept  of  graduated  pressures
coupled  with  a  negotiated  settlement  advocated  at  several  points  earlier  in  the
year.  Several  of  the  Working  Group  members  had  been  instrumental  in  shaping
those  proposals  and  were  quite  naturally  attached  to  them  conceptually.  Now,
advocates  of  the  graduated  approach  were  confronted  with:  (1 )  greater  pressures
from  the  JCS  and  their  like-thinkers  in  the  Congress;  (2)  recognition  of  little
flexibility  among  Administration  officials  regarding  interpretations  of  national
interest  and  objectives;  and  (3)  an  increasingly  critical  situation  in  South  Viet-
nam. It  is  likely  that  these  individuals.'  viewed  it  necessary  to  stiflen  their  pre-
ferred approach  in  order  to  improve  its  compatibility  with  the  current  policy
climate.

Whatever  the  reasons,  the  options  for  review  and  discussions  were  somewhat
more  closely  alike  than  the  original  conceptions  had  been.  Option  A  provided
for  intensified  efforts  to  improve  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  and  for  some-
what intensified  military  action  in  line  with  current  policy.  Inside  South  Vietnam,
it  provided  for  improvement  in  the  GVN  administrative  performance  and  lor
strengthening  different  elements  of  the  pacification  program.  These  internal
actions  were  stressed  as  necessary  regardless  of  whatever  other  measures  were
decided  on.  Option  A's  provisions  for  measures  outside  the  country  included:

(1)  continuing  and  increasing  the  GVN's  covert  maritime  harassment  program;

(2)  resuming  the  DE  SOTO  Patrol  operations;  (3)  increasing  the  scope  of
Laotian  T-28  attacks  on  infiltration  targets  in  Laos  and  (4)  when  feasible,  un-
dertaking small-scale  cross-border  GVN  ground  and  air  operations  into  the
Laotian  Panhandle.  The  option  also  included  individual  U.S.  reprisal  action  "not
only  against  such  incidents  as  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  attacks  but  also  against  any
recurrence  of  VC  'spectaculars'  such  as  Bicn  Hoa."  The  aim  of  these  actions
would  be  to  deter  repetitions  of  and  to  punish  for  such  actions  in  South  Viet-
nam, "but  not  to  a  degree  that  would  create  strong  international  negotiating
pressures."


224 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill  |

Basic  to  Option  A  was  its  provision  for  "continued  rejection  of  negotiation  in
the  hope  that  the  situation  will  improve."  However,  it  included  recognition  that
"the  GVN  itself,  or  individual  South  Vietnamese  in  potentially  powerful  posi-
tions" might  initiate  "discussions  with  Hanoi  or  the  Liberation  Front."  If  a
coalition  government  were  thus  arranged,  the  Working  Group  believed,  the  odds
were  that  it  would  eventually  "be  taken  over  by  the  Communist  element."  In
the  event  of  such  discussions,  the  U.S.  response  under  Option  A  might  be  either
(1)  "stand  aside,"  thus  disassociating  the  United  States  from  such  a  settlement,
or  (2)  "seek  to  cover  a  retreat  by  accepting  negotiations"  through  something
like  a  Geneva  conference,  which  might  buy  additional  time.

Option  B  provided  for  everything  included  in  A  plus  a  program  of  U.S.  mili-
tary pressures  against  North  Vietnam.  These  were  to  continue  "at  a  fairly  rapid
pace  and  without  interruption"  until  the  DRV  agreed  to  stop  supporting  and
directing  the  war  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  The  pressures  were  to  begin  with
attacks  on  infiltration  targets  and  increase  in  intensity;  however,  the  option  in-
cluded provision  that  an  early  attack  on  Phuc  Yen  airfield  and  certain  key  bridges
in  the  northern  part  of  North  Vietnam  might  be  required  "to  reduce  the  chances
of  DRV  interference  with  the  spectrum  of  actions"  that  were  contemplated.

Although  our  public  position  on  negotiations  would  be  "totally  inflexible"  un-
der Option  B,  it  provided  for  recognition  of  the  need  to  negotiate  eventually.
Under  B,  this  would  occur  simultaneously  with  a  continuation  and  escalation  of
the  pressures  and  would  be  based  on  "inflexible  insistence  on  our  present  objec-
tives." Nevertheless,  B  acknowledged  the  need  "to  deal  with  channels  of  [inter-
national] communication,  the  UN,  and  perhaps — despite  our  strong  opposition —
a  reconvened  Geneva  Conference  of  some  sort"  even  before  we  agreed  to  enter
into  settlement  talks.  Moreover,  while  resisting  negotiations,  the  option  provided
for  ( 1 )  making  "the  strongest  possible  public  case  of  the  importance,  increase,
and  present  intolerable  level  of  DRV  infiltration"  and  (2)  "strengthening  the
picture  of  a  military  situation  in  South  Vietnam  requiring  the  application  of
systematic  military  force."

Option  C  provided  for  every  military  action  included  in  A  plus  "graduated
military  moves  against  infiltration  targets,  first  in  Laos  and  then  in  the  DRV,
and  then  against  other  targets  in  North  Vietnam."  The  air  strikes  on  infiltration
routes  within  North  Vietnam  were  to  be  preceded  by  low-level  reconnaissance
flights  over  the  same  general  area.  Advantage  was  seen  in  initiating  such  measures
"following  either  additional  VC  'spectaculars'  or  at  least  strong  additional  evi-
dence of  major  infiltration."  Moreover,  Option  C  made  provision  for  the  possi-
bility of  making  a  "significant  ground  deployment  to  the  northern  part  of  South
Vietnam,  either  in  the  form  of  a  U.S.  combat  force  or  a  SEATO-members  force"
as  an  additional  bargaining  counter.  In  any  event,  C  was  intended  to  "give  the
impression  of  a  steady  deliberate  approach"  and  "designed  to  give  the  U.S.  the
option  at  any  time  to  proceed  or  not,  to  escalate  or  not,  and  to  quicken  the  pace
or  not."

In  C,  military  pressures  were  to  be  accompanied  by  "communications  with
Hanoi  and/or  Peiping"  indicating  in  essence  "a  willingness  to  negotiate  in  an
affirmative  sense."  From  the  outset  "we  would  be  .  .  .  accepting  the  possibility
that  we  might  not  achieve  our  full  objectives."  Accordingly,  the  concept  for  C
included  provision  for  an  initial  negotiating  position  that  added  "certain  bargain-
ing elements"  to  the  basic  U.S.  objectives.  Once  negotiations  started  the  military
pressures  would  cease.  As  in  B,  these  would  be  preceded  by  a  vigorous  program
of  public  information  efforts  and  political  consultations  with  Congressional  lead-
ers and  foreign  allies,  surfacing  information  on  DRV  infiltration  and  explaining


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  225

our  rationale  for  action.  The  latter  would  be  "that  documented  DRV  illegal
infiltration  of  armed  and  trained  insurgents,  and  over-all  DRV  direction  and
control  of  VC  insurgency,  had  now  reached  an  intolerable  level  and  that  it  was
now  necessary  to  hit  at  the  infiltration  .  .  .  and  to  bring  pressure  on  Hanoi  to
cease  this  infiltration  and  direction."

c.  Significance  of  Negotiations.  One  of  the  most  significant  aspects  of  the
NSC  Working  Group's  analyses  was  its  emphasis  on  a  negotiated  settlement  as
the  final  outcome  of  contemplated  U.S.  actions.  Regardless  of  the  option  selected
or  the  pressure  actions  employed,  international  negotiations  in  some  form  were
perceived  as  the  means  by  which  the  situation  in  Southeast  Asia  would  ultimately
be  relieved.  Even  in  the  event  of  a  unilateral  GVN  or  a  South  Vietnamese
splinter  negotiation  with  the  NLF,  under  circumstances  of  a  relatively  shallow
U.S.  commitment  (Option  A),  negotiation  under  a  Geneva  format  was  regarded
as  a  preferable  outcome.  However,  it  is  also  clear  that  a  parallel  aim  was  to
insure  that  pressures  on  behalf  of  such  negotiations  did  not  become  compelling
before  the  U.S.  bargaining  position  could  be  improved.

Also  significant  is  the  fact  that  the  kind  of  settlement  which  was  seen  as  the
purpose  of  negotiation  was  one  which  would  end  North  Vietnam's  participation
in  the  conflicts  in  Southeast  Asia — and  concurrently,  also  end  the  United  States'
direct  participation  (as  it  was  in  1964)  in  those  conflicts.  In  view  of  the  prevalent
Administration  perception  of  North  Vietnam  as  instigator  and  aggressor  in  the
conflict  within  South  Vietnam,  it  is  ironic  that  the  Working  Group's  considera-
tions of  a  negotiated  settlement  did  not  include  the  problems  of  a  political
settlement  in  the  South.  In  the  available  source  materials,  this  subject  was  raised
only  once  and  even  then  was  not  dealt  with  further.  The  one  instance  was  in  the
context  of  Robert  Johnson's  [words  illegible]  resulted  (one  to  which  the  DRV
in  fact  complied  with  our  demands  to  the  extent  that  we  ceased  our  pressure
actions)  "we  would  then  have  to  consider  .  .  .  whether  or  not  to  make  com-
promises— such  as,  for  example,  accept  less  than  perfection  for  international
supervisory  mechanism,  agree  to  permit  the  NLF  to  become  a  legitimate  political
party  in  the  South,  or  agree  to  political  consultations  between  GVN  and  DRV."
In  other  words,  at  the  level  of  the  Working  Group's  analysis,  the  political  stakes
for  which  the  game  in  Vietnam  was  really  being  played  and  the  very  powerful
and  relevant  ca'rds  held  by  the  DRV  and  the  VC  were  not  really  considered.  To
continue  the  analogy,  the  Working  Group  concerned  itself  only  with  the  various
opening  bids  the  United  States  niight  make  in  order  to  achieve  a  position  from
which  it  could  attempt  a  finesse.

The  main  problem  apparently  recognized  by  the  Working  Group  was  that,
given  its  current  objectives,  the  United  States  had  few  bargaining  points  with
which  to  negotiate.  In  essence,  it  was  primarily  to  fill  this  lack  that  many  group
members  and  Administration  oflicials  favored  initiation  of  direct  military  pres-
sures against  Norths  Vietnam.  To  some,  bombing  attacks  were  something  that
might  then  be  removed  as  an  inducement  for  the  DRV  to  stop  or  to  reduce  its
support  of  the  military  operations  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  To  others,  such
vigorous  measures  might  at  least  serve  as  a  demonstration  of  U.S.  resolve  to
combat  external  aggression  but  also  as  a  screen  behind  which  to  extract  ourselves
should  the  situation'in  South  Vietnam  deteriorate  further.

Gaining  maximum  bargaining  advantage  from  the  military  measures  contem-
plated under  each  of  the  options  was  one'of  the  major  emphases  in  the  Working
Group's  analyses.  For  example,  under  A,  emphasis  was  placed  on  obtaining
maximum  leverage  from  exploiting  the  threat  of  further  escalation — to  be  dem-


226 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

onstrated  primarily  through  reprisal  actions  and  deployments.  Under  B,  a  similar
kind  of  psychological  leverage  was  to  be  achieved  through  the  clearly  ascending  <
nature  of  the  actions,  particularly  if  some  time  were  permitted  to  assess  results.  ;
Under  C,  the  effect  was  to  be  achieved  by  the  combined  effects  of  (1)  maximiz-  !
ing  the  threat  of  impending  escalation  after  each  graduated  and  carefully  paced
step  and  (2)  minimizing  the  Communist  governments'  problems  of  "face"  as
they  moved  toward  negotiation.

It  was  the  recognized  lack  of  strong  bargaining  points  that  led  the  Working
Group  to  consider  the  introduction  of  ground  forces  into  the  northern  provinces
of  South  Vietnam.  In  advancing  this  proposal,  the  State  Policy  Planning  Council
member  pointed  out  that  "whatever  the  stated  U.S.  intentions,"  the  Communists
would  probably  expect  to  put  an  end  to  all  air  and  naval  attacks  on  North
Vietnam  merely  by  agreeing  to  enter  negotiations.  In  that  event,  he  gpinted  out,
the  United  States  could  not  use  these  pressures  (or  the  promised  relief  from
them)  as  a  bargaining  counter  during  negotiations.  If  ground  forces  were  de-
ployed prior  to  an  obvious  need  to  combat  invading  enemy  troops,  this  disposi-
tion could  be  read  as  such  a  counter.  Their  deployment,  "would,  moreover,
carry  with  it  the  threat  of  subsequent  air  and  naval  attacks  against  North  Viet-
nam. And,"  he  continued,  "threat  may  be  as  important  as  execution  ...  in
producing  desired  Communist  reactions."

Although  initially  advocated  as  a  valuable  bargaining  piece  for  all  the  options,  i
the  concept  of  deploying  ground  forces  for  this  purpose  became  associated  with
Options  A  or  C.  In  the  former  case,  it  was  urged  with  recognition  that  A
offered  little  leverage  for  bargaining  other  than  hoped-for  improvement  in  the
GVN's  internal  administration  and  pacification  efforts.  For  C,  it  was  perceived
much  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  originally  proposed — serving  as  an  additional
negotiating  ploy  before  it  might  be  needed  as  an  operational  military  capacity.
Such  a  force  was  seen  as  taking  either  of  two  forms:  (1)  a  U.S.  combat  force,
probably  of  division  strength,  or  (2)  a  force  composed  of  contingents  from
certain  SEATO  members  (Australia,  New  Zealand,  the  UK,  Thailand  and  the
Philippines).  Interesting,  in  view  of  subsequent  events,  is  the  fact  that  participa-
tion by  South  Korea  and  the  Republic  of  China  specifically  was  not  to  be  sought.
(This  may  also  have  been  significant  of  the  Administration's  tendency  at  the
time  to  view  Communist  China  as  co-instigator  of  the  Vietnamese  aggression.)
The  contemplated  ground  force  deployment  also  was  seen  as  serving  some  auxil-
iary functions:  (1)  to  deter  DRV  ground  force  deployment  into  South  Vietnam;
(2)  by  taking  blocking  positions,  to  reduce  the  infiltration  into  the  South  through
Laos;  and  (3)  (in  the  case  of  the  multi-national  force)  to  improve  the  internal
picture  of  our  actions  in  South  Vietnam  by  virtue  of  visible  international
participation.

As  stated  previously,  the  primary  bargaining  element  in  Option  B  was  the
application  of  clearly  ascending  military  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  These
would  be  halted  only  in  return  for  demonstrated  DRV  compliance  with  demands
that  it  stop  supporting  and  directing  military  operations  in  South  Vietnam  and
Laos.  It  was  pointed  out  that  DRV  compliance  under  pressure  would  be  tanta-
mount to  surrender.  Further,  if  we  insisted  that  compliance  include  calling  off
all  acts  of  VC  terrorism  and  of  resistance  to  pacification  efforts  in  South  Vietnam,
it  would  mean  "virtual  unconditional  surrender."  To  obtain  such  high  stakes,  the
group  recognized  that  intensive  pressures  would  be  required.  However,  it  also
recognized  that  the  combination  of  extreme  demands  and  harsh  actions  would
be  most  likely  to  produce  adverse  international  reaction  and  increased  pressures
for  an  early  cease-fire  and  negotiations.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  221

The  basic  political  objective  perceived  for  Option  B  was  to  "prevent  inter-
national consideration  .  .  .  from  interfering  with  our  continuing  pressures
against  the  DRV  until  the  DRV  has  taken  the  actions  we  desire  of  it."  In  view
of  the  expected  demands  for  an  early  cease-fire,  it  was  believed  advisable  to
present  the  U.S.  case  in  the  United  Nations  at  the  time  B  military  operations
were  initiated.  The  ensuing  discussions  would  likely  consume  considerable  time.
Moreover,  taking  such  initiatives  would  avoid  the  defensive  posture  that  the
United  States  would  be  placed  in  if  our  military  actions  were  introduced  for
condemnatory  purposes  by  another  government.  The  Working  Group  stressed
that  under  Option  B,  the  United  States  should  firmly  resist  a  Geneva-type  con-
ference until  it  had  obtained  assurances  of  DRV  compliance  with  its  demands.
Should  the  pressures  for  negotiation  become  too  formidable  to  resist  and  dis-
cussions begin  before  a  Communist  agreement  to  comply,  it  was  stressed  that  the
United  States  should  define  its  negotiating  position  "in  a  way  which  makes  Com-
munist acceptance  unlikely."  In  this  manner  it  would  be  made  "very  likely  that
the  conference  would  break  up  rather  rapidly,"  thus  enabling  our  military  pres-
sures to  be  resumed.

The  only  option  that  provided  for  bargaining  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word
was  Option  C.  The  Working  Group  intended  that  with  the  initiation  of  this  option
and  the  U.S.  declaration  of  willingness  to  negotiate,  the  Administration  would
have  embarked  on  a  bargaining  course.  In  the  group's  view,  we  would  stick  to
our  full  objectives  at  the  outset  "but  we  would  have  to  accept  the  possibility
that,  as  the  whole  situation  developed,  we  might  not  achieve  those  full  objectives
unless  we  were  prepared  to  take  the  greater  risks  envisaged  under  Option  B."
In  such  circumstances,  it  acknowledged,  "it  might  become  desirable  to  settle  for
less  than  complete  assurances  on  our  key  objectives."

Accepting  in  principle  the  possible  need  to  compromise  the  initial  U.S.  posi-
tion under  Option  C,  the  Working  Group  specified  a  somewhat  hardened  defini-
tion of  that  position.  The  initial  negotiating  objective  ("the  complete  termination
of  DRV  support  to  the  insurgency  .  .  .")  was  refined  to  specify  that  it  in-
corporated three  fundamentals:  (a)  that  the  DRV  cease  its  assistance  to  and
direction  of  the  VC;  (b)  that  an  independent  and  secure  GVN  be  reestablished;
and  (c)  that  there  be  adequate  international  supervisory  machinery."  Specific
areas  of  "give"  for  the  bargaining  process  were  identified  as  the  question  of  free
elections  and  the  degree  of  verification  we  would  require.  The  group  further
provided  that  during  negotiations  the  intensity  with  which  the  United  States
would  pursue  its  initial  objectives  would  vary  with  the  extent  of  improvement
within  the  GVN.  If  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  got  better,  the  United  States
would  press  harder  for  acceptance  of  its  initial  position.  If  the  situation  grew
worse,  "we  would  have  to  decide  whether  to  intensify  our  military  actions,
modify  our  negotiating  positions,  or  both."

Because  of  a  declared  willingness  to  negotiate  from  the  outset,  the  approach
to  a  negotiating  situation  under  Option  C  was  viewed  by  the  Working  Group  as
considerably  different  from  that  under  Option  B.  Whereas,  in  the  latter  case  it
was  believed  that  the  UN  would  provide  the  most  useful  medium  for  discussions,
the  preferred  approach  under  Option  C  was  through  a  Geneva-type  meeting.
The  channels,  both  direct  and  indirect,  to  Hanoi  were  not  believed  useful  for
negotiating.  The  UN  was  viewed  as  presenting  a  special  problem  because  of  the
approaching  annual  issue  of  Communist  China's  membership.  For  this  reason
the  Working  Group  felt  that  it  would  not  provide  an  effective  negotiating  forum
until  late  February  or  March  1965,  although  it  acknowledged  the  necessity  of
presenting  the  U.S.  case  before  the  Security  Council.  In  view  of  these  considera-


228 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill  \

tions,  the  Working  Group  viewed  it  most  desirable  to  yield  to  the  expected
pressure  for  a  Geneva  conference — but  only  after  conducting  "a  number  of
military  actions  against  the  DRV."

d.  Perceived  Reactions  to  Options.  The  Working  Group  evaluated  the  rela-
tive advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  three  options  and  concluded  that  Option
C  provided  the  most  promising  course  of  action.  The  evaluation  was  based  on
three  general  criteria:  (1)  likely  reactions  of  allied  and  non-aligned  foreign  gov-
ernments; (2)  reactions  within  South  Vietnam;  and  (3)  effectiveness  in  bringing
desired  responses  from  the  Communist  government.  With  respect  to  the  first,  the
group  reported :

Option  A  would  cause  no  adverse  reactions  but  if  it  failed  it  would  leave
a  considerable  after-taste  of  U.S.  failure  and  ineptitude;  Option  B  would
run  major  risks  of  sharply  expressed  condemnation,  which  would  be  erased
only  if  the  course  of  action  succeeded  quite  clearly  and  in  reasonable  time;
Option  C  would  probably  be  in  between  in  both  respects.

With  respect  to  the  remaining  criteria,  Option  A  seemed  likely  to  achieve  little
more  than  buying  some  time,  and  in  some  respects  it  appeared  counterproductive.
While  Option  B  was  viewed  as  standing  "a  greater  chance  than  either  of  the
other  two  of  attaining  our  objectives,"  it  also  was  seen  as  running  "considerably
higher  risks  of  major  military  conflict  with  Hanoi  and  possibly  Communist  China."
On  balance,  Option  C  was  considered  "more  controllable  and  less  risky  of  major
military  action"  than  B  and  more  likely  "to  achieve  at  least  part  of  our  objec-
tives" than  A.

The  Working  Group  reported  that  Option  A  appeared  to  offer  "little  hope  of
getting  Hanoi  out  or  an  independent  South  Vietnam  re-establishedv"  It  was  recog-
nized that  the  actions  included  in  this  option  could  not  physically  affect  the
extent  of  infiltration  from  the  North  and  would  not  be  likely  to  affect  Hanoi's
determination  to  continue  its  policies.  At  best,  the  group  believed,  "they  might
.  .  .  keep  the  DRV  from  engaging  in  further  spectaculars,  and  thus  keep  the
scale  of  the  conflict  in  the  south  within  some  limits."  However,  Option  A  was
conceded  little  chance  of  contributing  to  an  improved  GVN,  in  the  short
period  of  additional  time  its  effects  might  possibly  make  available.  The  group
recognized  sagging  morale  and  doubts  concerning  U.S.  intentions  as  the  "most
immediate  problem"  in  South  Vietnam.  Several  members  felt  that  without  further
U.S.  actions,  political  collapse  was  imminent — that  to  add  only  reprisals  for
VC  spectaculars  might  lift  morale  immediately,  but  would  not  have  lasting  effect.
At  best,  under  A,  it  was  believed  that  the  gradual  deterioration  in  the  country-
side of  South  Vietnam  would  continue.

Although  the  Working  Group  viewed  a  decision  to  continue  Option  A  indefi-
nitely as  ruling  out  either  B  or  C,  it  did  suggest  the  possibility  of  extending  A
to  its  limits  and  gradually  phasing  into  operations  like  those  in  Option  C.  It  was
suggested  that  this  might,  over  time,  generate  "favorable,  or  at  least  not  unfavor-
able," domestic  and  international  reaction  which  along  with  the  increasing  cost
of  gradual  disruption  in  North  Vietnam  might  cause  Hanoi  to  slow  down  its
infiltration.  However,  the  result  of  this  process,  at  best,  would  be  a  gradual  im-
provement of  the  U.S.  position  without  advancement  toward  a  meaningful  set-
tlement. Lacking  a  deliberate  attempt  to  phase  into  something  like  C,  Option  A
was  viewed  as  "an  indefinite  course  of  action."  As  such,  its  "sole  advantages"
were  seen  as :


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  229

(a)  defeat  would  be  clearly  due  to  GVN  failure,  and  we  ourselves  would
be  less  implicated  than  if  we  tried  Option  B  or  Option  C,  and  failed;

(b)  the  most  likely  result  would  be  a  Vietnamese-negotiated  deal,  under
which  an  eventually  unified  Communist  Vietnam  would  reassert  its  tradi-
tional hostility  to  Communist  China  and  limits  its  own  ambitions  to  Laos
and  Cambodia.

jiThe  group's  assessment  went  on  to  indicate  that  should  this  occur,  Thailand
would  likely  conclude  that  "we  simply  could  not  be  counted  on,  and  would  ac-
commodate somehow  to  Communist  China  even  without  any  marked  military
move  by  Communist  China."

The  Working  Group  reported  that  the  actions  in  Option  B  offered  a  number
of  unique  advantages  relative  to  the  other  options:

1.  Option  B  probably  stands  a  greater  chance  than  either  of  the  other
two  of  attaining  our  objectives  vis-a-vis  Hanoi  and  a  settlement  in  South
,  Vietnam.

j  2.  Our  display  of  real  muscle  in  action  would  undoubtedly  have  a  salu-

i tary  effect  on  the  morale  of  the  rest  of  non-Communist  Asia.

3.  The  course  of  military  events  vis-a-vis  Communist  China  might  give

us  a  defensible  case  to  destroy  the  Chinese  Communist  nuclear  production

capability.

However,  Option  B  was  also  seen  to  present  some  unique  problems  and  to
possibly  lead  to  some  undesirable  results.  For  example,  most  of  the  group  be-
lieved Option  B  would  risk  an  impairment  of  the  "U.S.  standing  in  NATO  and
European  framework."  The  option  was  believed  likely  to  produce  a  major  con-

:  flict,  and  these  effects  were  seen  as  quite  probable  if  it  "produced  anything  less
than  an  early  and  completely  satisfactory  outcome."  Problems  were  also  perceived

I  at  home.  It  was  pointed  out  that  any  U.S. -initiated  military  pressures  against
North  Vietnam  should  be  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  the  Joint  Congressional

I  Resolution  passed  following  the  Tonkin  .Gulf  incidents,  but  that  Option  B  would
be  difficult  to  justify  under  the  authorities  cited  in  this  resolution.

Characterizing  the  use  of  force  in  the  context  of  this  alternative  as  a
legitimate  exercise  of  the  right  of  individual  or  collective  self-defense  in
response  to  an  "armed  attack"  from  the  North  would  be  a  major  public
relations  effort.

Moreover,  given  the  pace  and  likely  intensity  of  escalation  in  this  option,  it  was
suggested  that  "the  constitutional  prerogatives  of  the  Congress,  for  example,  to
declare  war  [would]  become  pertinent."

As  seen  by  the  Working  Group,  the  most  disturbing  aspect  of  Option  B  was
its  almost  irreversible  commitment  to  a  major  military  effort,  the  ultimate  na-
ture of  which  was  difficult  to  predict.  That  Hanoi  would  yield  to  U.S.  demands

I  at  an  early  stage  of  B  was  considered  unlikely.  The  chances  were  considered  "sig-
nificantly greater"  that  the  DRV  would  retaliate,  either  by  air  attacks  on  the
South  or  a  ground  offensive  either  in  Laos  or  into  South  Vietnam.  It  was  con-
sidered most  likely,  however,  that  Hanoi  would  continue  to  hold  firm,  thus  re-
quiring the  United  States  to  "up  the  ante  militarily."  With  further  increases  in
our  military  pressure,  the  group  argued,  "the  odds  would  necessarily  start  to

I  increase  that  Hanoi  .  .  .  would  either  start  to  yield  by  some  real  actions  to  cut


230 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

down,  or  would  move  itself  to  a  more  drastic  military  response."  The  Working
Group  then  cautioned :

We  could  find  ourselves  drawn  into  a  situation  where  such  military  ac-  I  0
tions  as  an  amphibious  landing  in  the  DRV — proposed  as  one  of  our  further  i
actions — moved  us  very  far  toward  continuing  occupation  of  DRV  soil.  \  aoii
Alternatively,  the  volume  of  international  noise  .  .  .  could  reach  the  point  iiece
where,  in  the  interest  of  our  world-wide  objectives,  we  would  have  to  con-
sider accepting  a  negotiation  on  terms  that  would  relatively  but  not  neces-
sarily be  wholly  favorable  to  the  attainment  of  our  full  objectives.

Option  C  was  particularly  attractive  to  the  Working  Group  because  it  was
believed  to  be  more  controllable  and,  therefore,  less  deeply  committing  than  B.
The  reactions  to  C  expected  by  the  Working  Group  differed  from  B  primarily
as  a  result  of  the  U.S.  negotiating  posture.  The  initial  strikes  against  targets  in
North  Vietnam  were  seen  as  a  ''first  break-point,"  marking  the  beginning  of  ma-
jor international  pressures  for  negotiation.  Communist  reactions  to  the  early
pressures  were  regarded  as  little  different  from  B.  Some  change  of  military
response  was  conceded,  but  it  was  thought  more  likely  that  the  DRV  would
"hold  firm  while  stimulating  condemnation  of  [the  United  States]  by  world
opinion,  and,  if  in  negotiations,  take  a  tough  position."  Under  C,  however,  our
response  would  not  necessarily  be  an  immediate  increase  in  pressure.  If  the  GVN
situation  had  improved,  "we  would  try  to  capitalize  on  [it]  ...  by  pressing
harder  for  acceptance  of  our  initial  negotiating  position."  Barring  success,  the
pressures  would  continue,  and  the  Working  Group  recognized  that  the  likely
dragging  out  of  the  war  at  this  point  would  probably  lead  to  a  resumption  of
deteriorating  trends  in  South  Vietnam.  It  stated:  "In  this  case,  we  would  have
to  decide  whether  to  intensify  our  military  actions,  modify  our  negotiating  posi-
tions or  both."  If  U.S.  military  measures  were  increased  at  this  point,  it  was
expected  that  "there  would  be  a  progressively  increasing  chance  of  major  Com-
munist military  response,"  such  as  those  considered  under  B.  If  the  U.S.  negoti-
ating position  were  modified  at  this  point,  the  group  perceived  a  "major  prob-
lem, in  that  key  nations  on  both  sides  would  suspect  that  we  were  getting  ready
for  a  way  out."  Therefore,  it  suggested  that  additional  military  actions,  possibly
including  greater  deployments  to  Southeast  Asia,  would  need  to  accompany  the
modifying  moves.

The  major  disadvantages  of  Option  C  acknowledged  by  the  Working  Group
was  its  tendency  to  "stretch-out"  the  confrontation  and  expose  the  United
States  to  an  increasing  variety  of  pressures  and  criticism.  For  example,  the  group
acknowledged  that  GVN  morale  and  effectiveness  were  likely  to  suffer  at  several
points  in  the  course  of  the  options:  (1)  upon  initial  U.S.  agreement  to  enter
negotiations;  (2)  as  it  became  clear  that  the  war  was  dragging  on;  and  (3)
with  modification  of  the  U.S.  negotiating  position.  It  also  recognized  several
measures  that  the  Communists  might  take  during  a  prolonged,  indecisive  period
to  reduce  our  initial  advantage:  (1)  improving  air  defenses  in  North  Vietnam;
(2)  deploying  Chinese  ground  forces  southward;  and  (3)  hardening  their  propa-
ganda. While  increasing  the  enemy's  public  commitment  to  its  current  line  of
policy,  these  measures  would  not  serve  as  clear  acts  of  escalation.

These  difficulties  and  other  uncertainties  encompassed  by  Option  C  illustrate
the  intensity  with  which  most  members  of  the  NSC  Working  Group  wanted  the
United  States  to  couple  limited  military  commitments  with  a  negotiated  settle-
ment to  relieve  our  position  in  Vietnam.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  231

United  States  policy  in  Southeast  Asia  was  fraught  with  real  contradictions,
or  example,  the  one  feature  that  gave  Option  C  its  most  distinctive  character
-early  willingness  to  negotiate  without  the  concurrent  effects  of  continually
lounting  miUtary  pressures — was  its  most  uncertain  aspect.  This  particular  part
f  the  analysis  was  revised  twice  between  the  final  drafting  of  the  group's  findings
nd  their  considerations  by  the  Principals.  Moreover,  the  Working  Group  had
eceived  at  least  one  informed  judgment  to  the  effect  that,  given  Hanoi's  high
takes  in  South  Vietnam  and  its  perceived  opportunity  to  deal  the  United  States

major  blow,  the  DRV  would  not  be  likely  to  negotiate  in  response  to  any  of
he  options.  On  the  eve  of  the  initial  meeting  with  the  Principals,  Chairman
{undy  called  early  negotiations  "the  least  satisfactory  part  of  the  present  script."
n  particular,  it  was  recognized  as  difficult  to  "keep  up  our  show  of  determina-
ion  and  at  the  same  time  listen  for  nibbles."

In  many  respects  Option  C  seems  to  have  been  favored  primarily  for  what  it
incorporated — for  the  means  it  employed — rather  than  for  what  it  might  achieve.
it  certainly  was  not  presented  as  an  optimistic  alternative.  Under  C,  the  group
perceived  that  "at  best  .  .  .  the  DRV  might  feign  compliance  and  settle  for  an
opportunity  to  subvert  the  South  another  day."  This  stood  in  marked  contrast  to
vhdii  it  perceived  as  the  "at  best"  outcome  of  B,  namely  that  Hanoi  "might  be
eady  to  sit  down  and  work  out  a  settlement  in  some  form  that  would  give  a
estoration  of  the  1954  agreements,"  hopefully  with  firmer  guarantees.  Moreover,
vith  C,  the  group  believed  that  in  between  the  best  and  worst  outcomes,  the
Jnited  States  "might  be  faced  with  no  improvement  in  the  internal  South  Vietnam
situation  and  with  the  difficult  decision  whether  to  escalate  on  up  to  major  con-
lict  with  China."  This  kind  of  outcome  promised  little  more  than  the  group  per-
ceived as  available  through  A — and  without  the  additional  commitment  of  na-
ional  prestige  and  military  force.  But  it  was  an  outcome  readily  perceivable  from
i  policy  that  clung  tenaciously  to  rather  major  objectives  but  was  reticent  to
accept  major  risks.

). Views  from  Outside  the  NSC  Working  Group

While  the  NSC  Working  Group  was  preparing  its  findings  for  submission  to
the  Principals,  other  sources  of  influential  opinion  were  communicating  their
views  to  these  individuals.  In  addition,  it  is  important  to  consider  that  members
of  the  Working  Group  were  most  likely  communicating  their  respective  impres-
sions of  group  progress  to  the  principal  official  in  the  agencies  they  represented.
Thus,  William  Bundy  no  doubt  shared  ideas  with  Secretary  Rusk;  John  Mc-
Naughton  with  Secretary  McNamara;  Harold  Ford  with  CIA  Director  McCone;
and  Admiral  Mustin  with  General  Wheeler.  Some  of  these  Principals  no  doubt
had  injected  particular  ideas  into  the  group's  deliberations.  Whatever  the  source,
these  high  officials  were  exposed  to  a  variety  of  suggestions  and  viewpoints
before  reacting  directly  to  the  Working  Group.

The  following  sections  deal  with  two  rather  significant  sources  of  ideas  whose
communications  reached  Secretary  MacNamara.  However,  their  views  were
known  to  other  members  of  the  Principals  Group  as  well,  through  the  normal
inter-departmental  coordination  procedures.  These  proposals  are  significant  also
because  of  their  rather  contending  viewpoints  on  the  subject  of  U.S.  courses  of
action.

'  a.  JCS  Views.  On  four  different  occasions  during  the  period  of  the  Working
[Group's  existence,  the  JCS  submitted  formal  proposals  for  direct  military  strikes


232 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

against  North  Vietnamese  targets.  On  each  occasion  they  took  pains  to  remind
the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  other  readers  of  their  earlier  recommendation  for
a  preferred  course  of  action,  which  involved  a  systematic  pattern  of  air  attacks
on  major  targets.

On  14  November,  two  such  recommendations  were  made.  One  was  intended
to  bring  about  expansion  of  the  GVN's  covert  operations,  to  include  "air  strikes
by  unmarked  aircraft"  of  the  VNAF.  It  specified  that  these  were  to  be  "separate
and  distinct  from  larger  (more  decisive)  air  strike  actions  recommended  .  .  .
on  1  November  1964."  The  ICS  stated  that  such  smaller  attacks  would  be  useful
in:  (1)  continuing  the  pressure  on  the  DRV;  (2)  encouraging  GVN  leaders;
(3)  providing  useful  air  defense  data;  and  (4)  demonstrating  patterns  of  DRV/
Chinese  reactions  that  could  be  helpful  in  planning  larger  operations.  The  other
recommendations  came  in  response  to  Secretary  McNamara's  request  to  examine
possible  DRV/CHICOM  military  reactions  to  U.S.  air  strikes  against  North  Viet-
nam. In  answer,  they  discussed  various  Communist  military  alternatives  and  U.S.
means  to  counter  them,  and  they  described  what  they  viewed  as  the  most  likely
enemy  reactions.  These,  they  felt,  would  be  primarily  in  the  propaganda  and
diplomatic  spheres  because  of  what  was  perceived  as  China's  general  reluctance
to  become  directly  involved  in  conflict  with  the  United  States.  In  addition,  the
JCS  repeated  their  recommendations  of  4  November  (with  respect  to  the  VC
attacks  on  Bien  Hoa)  as  retaliatory  actions  equally  applicable  to  any  other  seri-
ous provocations.  They  went  on  to  recommend  deployments  "to  improve  capa-
bilities to  conduct  the  program  of  air  strikes"  recommended  on  4  November
1964.

Four  days  later  they  submitted  another  proposal,  in  response  to  Secretary
McNamara's  interest  in  a  possible  program  of  graduated  U.S.  pressures  against
North  Vietnam.  [Doc.  234]  This  possibility  was  described  as  "a  controlled  pro-
gram of  systematically  increased  military  pressures  against  the  Democratic  Re-
public of  Vietnam  (DRV)  applied  in  coordination  with  appropriate  political
pressures."  (Interestingly,  the  Secretary's  interest  was  expressed  on  the  same
day  as  McNaughton's  reactions  to  the  draft  analysis  of  Option  C.)  The  JCS
referred  to  their  statements  of  4  and  14  November,  describing  their  preferred
course  of  action  for  causing  the  DRV  "to  cease  supporting  and  directing  the
insurgencies"  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  However,  they  also  proposed  an  al-
ternative series  of  specific  actions,  "should  a  controlled  program  of  systematically
increased  pressures  .  .  .  be  directed."  This  would:

"a.  [Word  illegible]  the  willingness  and  determination  of  the  United  States
to  employ  increasing  force  in  support  of  ...  an  independent  and  stable  non-
communist  government  in  RVN  and  a  free  and  neutral  Laos.  .  .  .

"b.  Reduce,  progressively,  DRV  support  of  the  insurgencies  in  RVN  and
Laos  to  the  extent  necessary  to  tip  the  balance  clearly  in  favor  of  the  Govern-
ments of  RVN  and  Laos  by:

(1)  Reduction  of  the  amount  of  support  available  through  destruction  of
men,  material,  and  supporting  facilities;

(2)  .  .  .  [and]  through  diversion  of  DRV  resources  to  increased  home-
land defenses  and  alerts;  and

(3)  Reduction  of  the  rate  of  delivery  of  available  support  through  destruc-
tion of  bridges  and  other  LOC  choke  points  .  .  .  and  through  inter-
ruption of  movements.  .  .  .

"c.  Punish  the  DRV  for  DRV-supported  military  actions  by  the  Viet  Cong/
Pathet  Lao.  .  .  .


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  233

"d.  Terminate  the  conflict  in  Laos  and  RVN  only  under  conditions  which
would  result  in  the  achievement  of  U.S.  objectives."

The  final  JCS  proposal  to  be  submitted  relative  to  the  "courses  of  action"
debate  in  November  1964  came  in  direct  response  to  the  NSC  Working  Group's
draft  papers,  circulated  to  interested  agencies  for  comment  on  17  November.
Criticizing  the  group's  assessment  of  U.S.  stakes  and  interests,  the  JCS  called
Southeast  Asia  "an  area  of  major  strategic  importance  to  the  United  States,
the  loss  of  which  would  lead  to  grave  political  and  military  consequences  in  the
entire  Western  Pacific,  and  to  serious  political  consequences  world-wide."  They
reiterated  their  view  that  the  best  probability  of  success  in  attaining  the  cur-
rently recognized  U.S.  objectives  in  that  region  would  be  "by  achieving  the
prerequisite  objective  of  causing  the  cessation  of  DRV  support  and  direction  of
the  insurgencies  in  RVN  and  Laos."

The  JCS  also  criticized  the  three  options  described  by  the  Working  Group  and
outlined  five  alternatives  to  them,  in  an  ascending  order  of  intensity:

1.  Terminate  commitments  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  and  withdraw  as
gracefully  as  possible.  The  JCS  called  this  "implicit  in  the  context  of  the  Work-
ing Group  paper.

2.  Continue  actions  contained  within  present  policies,  including  reprisals  for
VC  provocations.  The  JSC  identifies  this  as  the  group  option  A  but  stated  that
the  added  demands  it  placed  on  the  DRV  were  "not  commensurate  with  those
proposed  by  DRV  on  RVN."  In  essence,  they  agreed  with  the  Working  Group's
evaluation  that  this  alternative  would  neither  accomplish  our  objectives  nor  al-
leviate the  critical  situation  in  South  Vietnam.

3.  Undertake  graduated  military  and  political  initiatives  to  apply  additional
pressures  against  the  DRV

without  necessarily  determining  in  advance  to  what  degree  we  will  commit
ourselves  to  achieve  our  objectives,  or  at  what  point  we  might  stop  to  nego-
tiate, or  what  our  negotiating  objectives  might  be.

The  JCS  stated  that  this  alternative  corresponded  to  the  NSC  Working  Group's
Option  C,  which  they  criticized  for  its  "uncertain  pace"  and  because  it  did  not
include  "a  clear  determination  to  see  things  through  in  full."  They  argued  that
such  an  "inconclusive"  option  "could  permit  and  encourage  enemy  build-ups  to
counter  our  own,"  and  thus  "raise  the  risks  and  costs  to  us  of  each  separate
military  undertaking."

4.  Undertake  a  "controlled  program"  of  graduated  military  and  political
pressures,  based  on  an  "advanced  decision  to  continue  military  pressures,  if
necessary,  to  the^full  limit  of  what  military  actions  can  contribute  toward  U.S.
national  objectives."  The  JCS  called  this  "a  variant  and  logical  extension"  of
Option  C  and  cited  their  proposal  of  18  November  as  a  detailed  description  of  it.

5.  Undertake  a  "controlled  program  of  intense  military  pressures  .  .  .  de-
signed to  have  major  military  and  psychological  impact  from  the  outset,  and
accompanied  by  appropriate  political  pressures."  The  JCS  offered  this  alterna-
tive in  lieu  of  the  Working  Group's  Option  B  which  they  stated  "is  not  a  valid
formulation  of  any  authoritative  views  known  to  the  JCS."  In  particular,  they
specified  that  their  intensive  program  would

be  undertaken  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be  carried  through,  if  necessary,  to
the  full  limit  of  what  military  actions  can  contribute  toward  national  objec-
tives; it  would  be  designed,  however,  for  suspension  short  of  those  limits
if  objectives  were  earlier  achieved.


234 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111

For  a  full  description  of  this  alternative,  they  referred  to  their  proposal  of  14
November.

The  last  two  alternatives  provided  for  sizable  force  build-ups  that  "should
make  miscalculation  of  U.S.  resolve  less  likely."  Option  C  was  objectionable  in
their  view  because  it  did  not  provide  "a  clear  set  of  agreed  military  objectives"
and  because  it  provided  for  "the  contingency  that  as  developments  are  analyzed,
it  may  be  thought  expedient  to  settle  for  less  than  completed  achievement  of  our
objectives  for  RVN  and  Laos."  It  is  important  to  note  that  in  outlining  the  last
two  options,  the  JCS  stressed  that  they  called  for  "controlled"  programs.  In  the
mode  of  Admiral  Mustin's  memorandum,  referred  to  earlier,  they  were  apparently
attempting  to  combat  the  Working  Group's  inferences  that  the  more  intensive
actions  which  the  JCS  advocated  were  not  controllable.  It  is  fairly  clear  that
group  members  favoring  Option  C  had  tagged  the  extreme  Option  B  with  a  JCS
label.

b.  Rostow  Views.  Whereas  the  JCS  emphasized  damaging  actions,  designed
to  affect  Hanoi's  will  by  destroying  a  significant  portion  of  their  capability,  Walt
Rostow  urged  a  different  approach.  [Doc.  238]  In  his  view,  emphasis  should
have  been  placed  on  signalling  to  Hanoi  and  Peking  our  commitment  to  use  our
vast  resources  to  whatever  extent  required  to  reinstate  effectively  the  provisions
of  the  1954  and  1962  Geneva  Accords.

With  respect  to  military  moves  most  useful  for  this  purpose,  Rostow  com-
municated to  Secretary  McNamara  his  concern  that  "too  much  thought  is  being
given  to  the  actual  damage  we  do  in  the  North,  not  enough  thought  to  the  sig-
nal we  wish  to  send."  Outlining  a  concept  similar  to  the  earliest  Option  C,  he
urged  that  the  initial  use  of  additional  force  against  North  Vietnam  "should  be
as  limited  and  unsanguinary  as  possible"  and  that  it

should  be  designed  merely  to  install  the  principle  that  [the  DRV]  will,  from
the  present  forward,  be  vulnerable  to  .  .  .  attack  ...  for  continued  viola-
tions of  the  1954  and  1962  Accords.  In  other  words,  we  would  signal  a  shift
from  the  principle  involved  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf  response.

Even  more  important,  in  his  view,  would  be  the  signals  communicated  by  addi-
tional military  moves  in  the  Southeast  Asia  region.  He  urged  deploying  U.S.
ground  forces  to  South  Vietnam  and  large-scale  retaliatory  forces  into  the  West-
ern Pacific.  Besides  their  value  as  a  bargaining  counter,  Rostow  saw  a  ground
force  commitment  as  a  clear  signal  that  "we  are  prepared  to  face  down  any  form
of  escalation  North  Vietnam  might  mount  on  the  ground."  He  argued  that  such
a  move  would  rule  out  "the  possibility  of  [the  Communists]  radically  extending
their  position  on  the  ground  at  the  cost  of  air  and  naval  damage  alone."  He
stated  that  the  increased  retaliatory  forces  would  signal :

that  we  are  putting  in  place  a  capacity  subsequently  to  step  up  [words
illegible]  be  required;  [and]  that  we  are  putting  forces  into  place  to  exact
retaliation  directly  against  Communist  China,  if  Peiping  should  join  in  an
escalatory  response  from  Hanoi.

The  broader  context  of  Rostow's  views  on  military  action  was  described  for
Secretary  Rusk  on  the  eve  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  Principals  to  discuss  the
Working  Group's  findings.  Stating  his  agreement  with  those  portions  of  the
latest  intelligence  estimate  which  stressed  the  Asian  Communist  powers'  desire


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  235

not  to  become  involved  in  a  direct  conflict  with  the  United  States,  he  framed
the  "most  basic"  U.S.  problem  as  follows:

.  .  .  how  to  persuade  [the  Communists]  that  a  continuation  of  their  pres-
ent policy  will  risk  major  destruction  in  North  Vietnam;  that  a  preemptive
move  on  the  ground  as  a  prelude  to  negotiation  will  be  met  by  U.S.
strength  on  the  ground;  and  that  Communist  China  will  not  be  a  sanctuary
if  it  assists  North  Vietnam  in  counter-escalation.

He  then  repeated  his  prescription  of  military  moves  earlier  urged  on  Secretary
McNamara.  However,  he  stressed  that  these  moves  would  not,  "in  themselves,
constitute  a  decisive  signal."  More  significant  in  Communist  eyes,  he  felt,  would
be  signals  to  answer  the  question :

Is  the  President  of  the  United  States  deeply  committed  to  reinstalling  the
1954-62  Accords;  or  is  he  putting  on  a  demonstration  of  force  that  would
save  face  for,  essentially  a  U.S.  political  defeat  at  a  diplomatic  conference?

In  Rostow's  view,  the  Communists  would  not  accept  a  setback  until  they  were
absolutely  certain  that  the  United  States  really  meant  business — an  assessment
that  could  only  come  as  a  result  of  firm  public  commitments  on  the  part  of  the
President  and  appropriate  follow-through  actions.  He  stated:

I  have  no  doubt  we  have  the  capacity  to  achieve  a  reinstallation  of  the
1954-1962  Accords  if  we  enter  the  exercise  with  the  same  determination  and
staying  power  that  we  entered  the  long  test  on  Berlin  and  the  short  test
on  the  Cuba  missiles.  But  it  will  take  that  kind  of  Presidential  commitment
and  staying  power.

Acknowledging  that  the  kind  of  conflict  we  faced  lent  itself  to  prolonged  un-
certainties and  that  the  Communists  could  pretend  to  call  off  the  guerrilla  war,
only  to  revive  it  again,  he  stressed  the  need  to  maintain  pressure  on  them  for
some  time.  The  installation  of  ground  forces  and  a  "non-sanguinary"  naval
blockade  were  suggested  for  this  purpose.  Rostow  urged  trying  "to  gear  this
whole  operation  with  the  best  counter-insurgency  effort  we  can  mount  with  our
Vietnamese  friends  .  .  .  and  not  withdraw  U.S.  forces  from  Vietnam  until  the
war  is  truly  under  control."

In  closing,  Rostow  outlined  a  scenario  of  action  that  would  follow  from  the
kind  of  Presidential  decision  described  above.  This  would  include,  in  sequence:

(1 )  Immediate  movement  of  relevant  forces  to  the  Pacific.

(2)  Immediate  direct  communication  to  Hanoi  .  .  .  including  a  clear  state-
ment of  the  limits  of  our  objectives  but  our  absolute  commitment  to
them.

(3)  Should  this  first  communication  fail  (as  is  likely)  installation  of  our
ground  forces  and  naval  blockade,  plus  first  attack  in  North,  to  be
accompanied  by  publication  [of  a  report  on  infiltration]  and  Presi-
dential speech.

Thus,  in  their  communications  to  senior  officials  in  the  latter  half  of  November,
both  Walt  Rostow  and  the  ICS  stressed  a  similar  point.  Although  advocating
different  solutions,  they  both  emphasized  that  the  Administration  could  not


236 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

expect  to  dissuade  Hanoi  and  Peking  from  continued  pursuit  of  the  DRV's  im-
portant and  strongly-held  commitments  without  making  correspondingly  strong
commitments  to  resist  them.  The  JCS,  for  their  own  reasons,  sought  to  avoid  a
commitment  of  ground  forces  to  Vietnam  and  argued  instead  for  punitive  air
and  naval  actions.  Rostow  felt  that  by  forceful  and  meaningful  demonstrations  of
national  resolve,  including  the  commitment  of  ground  forces  to  South  Vietnam,
direct  use  of  force  against  the  Communist  nations  need  be  minimal.


B. POLICY  DECISIONS

The  efforts  of  the  NSC  Working  Group  were  intended  to  be  completed  in
preparation  for  a  major  policy  review  late  in  November  1964.  Plans  were  made
for  Ambassador  Taylor  to  return  to  Washington  from  Saigon  to  join  in  a  series
of  strategy  meetings.  The  expectations  were  that  the  meetings  would  result  in  a
Presidential  action  order  to  supersede  the  one  issued  following  the  high-level  con-
ference in  September  (NSAM  314).

Meetings  with  the  President  were  scheduled  for  the  week  following  Thanks-
giving, when  he  returned  from  his  working  holiday  at  the  ranch.  Preliminary
meetings  between  Ambassador  Taylor  and  the  principal  officials  from  agencies
with  national  security  interests  in  Southeast  Asia  were  held  during  the  preced-
ing weekend,  27-29  November.  The  whole  episode  took  place  amid  widespread
speculation  that  a  major  policy  change  was  imminent  and  rumors  that  Taylor
had  returned  to  insist  on  the  bombing  of  infiltration  targets  in  North  Vietnam
and  Laos.  Public  and  Congressional  speculation  ran  so  high  on  the  eve  of  the
meetings  that  the  White  House  and  State  Department  sought  to  dampen  it  with
statements  that  Taylor's  reported  comments  "were  not  policy"  and  that  his  return
did  not  mean  that  "any  great,  horrendous  decision"  would  result.


1. Reactions  of  Principals  to  Working  Group  Analyses

Before  their  meetings  with  Taylor  and  the  President,  the  Principals  in  Wash-
ington met  to  consider  the  Working  Group's  findings  and  to  assess  the  major
issues  affecting  future  U.S.  courses  of  action.  Just  prior  to  their  initial  gathering,
on  24  November,  William  Bundy  had  forwarded  a  list  of  questions  and  com-
ments pertaining  to  the  Working  Group's  findings,  and  these  served  as  a  kind  of
agenda.  [Doc.  239]  Included  were  such  issues  as:  (1)  whether  the  relative  ad-
vantages among  the  three  options  were  actually  as  evident  as  the  group  had  found;
(2)  whether  or  not  the  papers'  assessment  of  U.S.  stakes  in  Southeast  Asia
should  be  revised  in  the  direction  of  JCS  attitudes;  (3)  whether  the  actions  as-
sociated with  the  various  options  could  in  fact  be  carried  out  to  achieve  the
results  expected;  and  (4)  whether  a  deployment  of  ground  forces  to  South
Vietnam  would  in  fact  provide  any  advantages.

a.  Consensus  Among  NSC  Officials.  As  the  Principals'  meeting  opened.  Secre-
tary Rusk  raised  an  issue  that  was  high  among  Administration  concerns —
namely,  that  the  American  public  was  worried  about  the  chaos  in  the  GVN,  and
particularly  with  respect  to  its  viability  as  an  object  of  an  increased  U.S.  com-
mitment. Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Wheeler  conceded  the  propriety  of
this  concern  but  warned  that  the  situation  in  the  GVN  would  only  get  worse  if
additional  steps  were  not  taken  to  reverse  present  trends.  Rusk  then  presented
a  question  which  addressed  the  whole  rationale  for  contemplated  U.S.  courses
of  action.  He  asked  whether  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  could  be  improved


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  237

in  time  to  save  it  if  the  DRV  were  not  to  withdraw  its  support.  CIA  Director
McCone  conceded  that  the  VC  would  still  have  plenty  of  capability  remaining
but  expressed  the  view  that  the  situation  could  be  coped  with  from  the  stand-
point of  internal  security  criteria.  At  this  point  Under  Secretary  of  State  George
Ball  asked  if  bombing  North  Vietnam  could  improve  the  situation  in  South
Vietnam  directly.  McNamara  replied  that  it  could  not  unless  the  bombing  ac-
tually cut  down  infiltration  into  the  South.  After  agreeing  with  the  Rusk  com-
ment that  the  struggle  would  be  a  long  one,  even  with  the  DRV  out  of  it,  the
group  reached  consensus  that  South  Vietnam  could  be  made  secure,  provided
the  Saigon  government  could  maintain  itself.  This  was  the  first  of  several  major
policy  judgments  reached  in  the  course  of  the  meeting.

Other  points  of  clear  consensus  (with  no  more  than  a  single  dissenting
opinion)  were  as  follows:

(2)  That  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  would  deteriorate  further  under
Option  A  even  with  reprisals,  but  that  there  was  a  "significant  chance"
that  the  actions  proposed  under  B  or  C  would  result  in  an  improved
GVN  performance  and  "make  possible"  an  improved  security  situa-
tion (George  Ball  indicated  doubt) .

(3)  That  any  negotiating  outcome  under  Option  A  (with  or  without  U.S.
negotiating  participation)  probably  would  be  clearly  worse  than  under
Option  B  or  C.

(4)  That  it  was  doubtful  (contrary  to  the  view  expressed  in  the  Working
Group  papers)  that  Option  B  would  have  the  best  chance  of  achieving
the  full  U.S.  objectives  (General  Wheeler  expressed  agreement  with
the  Working  Group  statement) .

(5)  That  the  requirement  of  Option  C,  "that  we  maintain  a  credible
threat  of  major  action  while  at  the  same  time  seeking  to  negotiate,"
could  be  carried  out  despitfe  acknowledged  public  pressures.

(6)  That  the  Administration  could  safely  assume  that  South  Vietnam
could  "only  come  apart  for  morale  reasons,  and  not  in  a  military
sense,"  as  a  result  of  intensified  VC  effort.

(7)  That  early  military  actions  against  North  Vietnam  under  Option  C
should  be  determined,  but  low  in  scale  (General  Wheeler  disagreed,
stating  that  our  losses  might  be  higher  in  the  long  run  with  such  an
approach) .

(8)  That  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  would  be  more  serious  than  stated  in
Section  II  of  the  Working  Group's  draft  papers  and  that  the  Adminis-
tration's assessment  should  be  revised  at  least  in  the  direction  of  the
JCS  viewpoint  (George  Ball  argued  against  this  judgment) .

The  context  of  the  Principals'  discussion  of  this  last  point  contained  some
significant  expressions  of  opinion.  Secretary  Rusk  stated  the  viewpoint  that  the
confidence  of  other  nations  in  the  United  States  would  be  affected  by  the  loss
of  South  Vietnam  despite  their  possible  indifference  to  the  political  struggle  in
Southeast  Asia.  He  added  that  if  we  did  nothing  to  affect  the  course  of  events
in  Vietnam  it  would  have  the  effect  of  giving  more  to  De  Gaulle.  However,
Rusk  did  not  accept  the  Working  Group's  rationale  that  we  would  obtain  inter-
national credit  merely  for  trying.  In  his  view,  the  harder  we  tried  and  then  failed,
the  worse  our  situation  would  be.  McGeorge  Bundy  disagreed  with  this  last
point,  except  to  acknowledge  that  to  attempt  something  like  Option  B  and  then
quit  would  clearly  be  damaging.  Secretary  McNamara  seemed  to  support  the


238 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

(McGeorge)  Bundy  view,  stating  that  B  followed  by  failure  would  clearly  be
worse  than  Option  C  followed  by  a  compromise  settlement.  George  Ball  ex-
pressed strong  agreement  with  the  last  Rusk  point,  saying  that  De  Gaulle  would
portray  us  as  being  foolish  and  reiterating  that  the  damage  to  U.S.  prestige
would  worsen  if  we  tried  either  B  or  C  and  failed.  General  Wheeler  stated  the
opinion  that  to  do  little  or  nothing  at  this  point  would  be  an  act  of  bad  faith.
Mr.  McCone  pointed  out  a  perpetual  dilemma  if  the  Administration  continued
to  act  despite  South  Vietnamese  deterioration;  hence,  he  urged  great  care.

It  is  interesting  to  note  the  views  and  associations  of  the  two  occasional  dis-
senters in  the  series  of  consensus  judgments  rendered  by  the  Principals.  Gen-
eral Wheeler,  Chairman  of  the  ICS,  expressed  viewpoints  consistent  throughout
with  the  recorded  ICS  views  of  future  courses  of  action.  On  the  other  hand,
George  Ball,  Under  Secretary  of  State,  had  no  obvious  jurisdictional  or  institu-
tional influences  to  affect  his  judgments.  Nevertheless,  known  to  Administration
observers  as  "the  devil's  advocate,"  he  had  developed  something  of  a  reputa-
tion as  an  independent  thinker.  At  about  the  time  of  the  Working  Group  de-
liberations, for  example,  he  developed  a  paper  suggesting  U.S.  diplomatic  strategy
in  the  event  of  imminent  GVN  collapse.  In  it,  he  advocated  working  through  the
UK,  who  would  in  turn  seek  cooperation  from  the  USSR,  in  arranging  an  inter-
national conference  (of  smaller  proportions  than  those  at  Geneva)  at  which  to
work  out  a  compromise  political  settlement  for  South  Vietnam.  In  addition.  Ball's
prevalent  occupation  with  European  affairs  may  have  influenced  him  to  view
Southeast  Asia  as  of  lesser  importance  to  the  U.S.  national  interest.

b.  Views  Backing  Consensus.  Also  discussed  at  the  24  November  Principals'
meeting  were  several  issues  on  which  consensus  was  not  reached.  Most  of  these
related  to  immediate  U.S.  actions  that  would  need  to  be  taken  irrespective  of  the
option  selected,  or  to  problems  faced  in  carrying  out  a  particular  option.  Since
earlier  agreements  had  indicated  little  interest  in  Option  A,  only  B  and  C  were
examined  further.

Discussion  of  Option  B  dealt  primarily  with  questions  of  the  intensity  of  blows
that  might  be  struck  in  North  Vietnam.  With  respect  to  whether  DRV  airfields
should  be  struck  early  or  as  a  part  of  a  more  gradual  sequence,  General  Wheeler
pointed  out  that  early  strikes  on  airfields  were  what  made  B  operations  so  dif-
ferent. It  was  these  strikes  at  potential  DRV  capabilities  to  interfere  with  U.S.
attacks,  or  to  retaliate,  that  made  systematic,  intensive  air  operations  possible.
In  response  to  a  specific  question  from  the  Working  Group,  the  possibility  of
using  nuclear  weapons  was  also  discussed.  Secretary  McNamara  stated  that  he
could  not  imagine  a  case  where  they  would  be  considered.  McGeorge  Bundy
observed  that  under  certain  circumstances  there  might  be  great  pressure  for
their  use  both  from  the  military  and  from  certain  political  circles.  General
Wheeler  stated  that  he  would  not  normally  vote  for  their  use — never,  for  exam-
ple, in  an  interdiction  role.  However,  he  suggested  that  they  might  be  considered
in  extremis — for  example,  to  hold  off  an  enemy  to  save  a  force  threatened  with
destruction,  or  to  knock  out  a  special  target  like  a  nuclear  weapons  facility.  In
response  to  Secretary  Rusk's  query  as  to  their  potential  for  cordoning  off  an  area,
both  McNamara  and  Wheeler  answered  negatively.

Discussions  of  Option  C  deaU  with  the  problem  of  early  negotiations  and,  at
greater  length,  with  that  of  deploying  ground  forces  to  South  Vietnam.  On  the
former,  there  was  little  interchange  noted  in  the  proceedings.  Despite  the  Work-
ing Group's  admitted  frustration  with  this  particular  issue,  only  two  Principals'
comments  were  recorded.  McGeorge  Bundy  stated  the  view  that  we  should  let


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  239

negotiations  come  into  play  slowly.  Secretary  Rusk  expressed  concern  that  the
GVN  would  be  very  sensitive  on  the  issue  of  a  negotiating  conference.  Earlier,
however,  he  indicated  his  opinion  that  pressure  for  a  conference  would  not  be
a  serious  problem  as  long  as  military  actions  continued.

On  the  issue  of  sending  ground  forces  to  South  Vietnam  in  the  early  stages  of
Option  C,  there  was  no  firm  conclusion.  Secretary  McNamara  stated  that  there
was  no  military  requirement  for  ground  forces  and  that  he  would  prefer  a
massive  air  deployment.  In  response  to  General  Wheeler's  suggestion  that  some
ground  forces  could  be  justified  for  air  defense  and  base  security  purposes,  he
acknowledged  that  "we  might  do  both."  Mr.  McCone  stated  the  opinion  that
U.S.  ground  forces  would  help  stabilize  South  Vietnam,  similar  to  their  effect
on  Lebanon  in  1958.  They  might  even  provide  a  general  security  force  in  the
South.  McNamara  disagreed.  Secretary  Rusk  and  McGeorge  Bundy  suggested
their  utility  in  proving  a  "preemptive  effect,"  presumably  equipped  in  ways  to
show  our  determination.  In  the  end,  it  was  agreed  to  raise  this  issue  with  Am-
bassador Taylor,  at  the  Principals'  next  meeting.  Significantly,  the  value  of
ground  forces  as  a  bargaining  counter  apparently  was  not  discussed,  thus  pro-
viding one  more  indication  of  the  Principals'  reticence  to  deal  with  the  issue  of
negotiation.  (It  is  interesting  to  note  in  this  respect  that  William  Bundy's  mem-
orandum, formally  summarizing  the  points  of  consensus  and  disagreement,  does
not  deal  with  the  early  negotiating  problem — despite  its  being  a  specific  agenda
item  which  he  had  suggested  as  Chairman  of  the  Working  Group.)

The  only  basic  issue  between  the  options  on  which  the  Principals  did  not
arrive  at  a  consensus  was  the  question  of  the  relative  risks  of  major  conflict  en-
tailed by  Options  B  and  C.  General  Wheeler  stated  that  there  was  less  risk  of  a
major  conflict  before  achieving  success  under  Option  B  than  under  Option  C.
Secretary  McNamara  believed  the  opposite  to  be  true.  Secretary  Rusk  argued
that  if  B  were  selected,  there  would 'be  no  chance  to  apply  the  JCS  variant  of  C,
whereas  under  the  Working  Group's  C,  this  would  still  be  left  available.  He
observed  that  entry  into  the  JCS  variant  of  C  would  feel  something  like  the
Cuban  Missile  Crisis.  McNamara  then  suggested  a  four-week  program  of  actions
following  the  general  pattern  of  Option  C.  Mr.  McCone  stated  that  they  sounded
"fine,"  but  that  in  his  opinion  the  "negotiating  mood"  interfered  with  their  po-
tential effect.  He  agreed  to  attempt  a  paper  to  deal  more  directly  with  the  rela-
tion of  risk  to  likely  success,  as  between  the  two  options.  In  the  end,  the  only
conclusion  that  could  be  drawn  was  that  there  was  not  complete  agreement  that
B  ran  a  higher  risk  of  major  conflict  than  C,  as  alleged  by  the  Working  Group.

During  the  meeting  of  24  November  there  was  no  clear  decision  as  to  which
option  was  favored  by  the  Principals.  It  seems  likely  that  A  was  favored  by
Ball.  Wheeler  clearly  favored  B,  and  he  may  have  had  support  from  McCone,
although  this  was  far  from  clear.  On  the  basis  of  either  their  participation  in  the
Working  Group  or  from  statements  of  preference  made  at  the  meeting,  it  is  clear
that  C  was  favored  by  McNamara,  McNaughton,  Rusk,  and  the  Bundy  brothers.
However,  McGeorge  Bundy  and  McNamara  apparently  preferred  a  "firm  C,"
whereas  the  other  three  wanted  a  more  restrained,  incremental  approach.

c.  Policy  Views  from  Saigon.  The  same  group  of  Principals  that  met  on  the
24th  reassembled  on  27  November  for  their  first  meeting  with  Ambassador  Taylor.
Present  also  was  Michael  Forrestal  who  had  gone  to  Saigon  to  help  prepare
Taylor  for  the  forthcoming  strategy  meeting  and  to  apprise  him  of  the  Working
Group  efforts.  Taylor  led  off  with  a  prepared  briefing  on  the  current  state  of
affairs  within  South  Vietnam.  [Doc.  242J


240 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

Ambassador  Taylor's  estimate  of  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  was  rather
bleak.  He  reported  continued  deterioration  of  the  pacification  program  and  con-
tinued weakness  in  the  central  government.  The  former  was  portrayed  as  related
to  increased  direction  and  support  of  VC  operations  from  Hanoi  and  increasing
VC  strength  despite  "very  heavy  losses  inflicted  almost  daily"  by  the  ARVN.
Particular  areas  of  concern  were  identified  as  the  area  surrounding  Saigon  and
the  northern  provinces  which  were  "now  in  deep  trouble."  Taylor  related  GVN
weakness  to  political  factionalism,  mounting  war  weariness  and  hopelessness,
"particularly  in  the  urban  areas,"  and  a  lack  of  "team  play  or  mutual  loyalty"
among  many  central  and  provincial  officials.  Calling  such  chronic  weakness  "a
critical  liability  to  future  plans,"  he  warned  that  lack  of  an  effective  central  gov-
ernment caused  U.S.  efforts  to  assist  South  Vietnam  to  have  little  impact.

To  alter  the  course  of  what  Taylor  called  "a  losing  game  in  South  Vietnam,"
he  recommended  three  measures:  (1)  "establish  an  adequate  government";  (2)
improve  the  counterinsurgency  effort;  and  (3)  "persuade  or  force  the  DRV"
to  stop  aiding  and  directing  the  insurgency.  With  respect  to  the  first,  Taylor  al-
lowed that  it  was  "hard  to  decide  what  is  the  minimum  government  which  is
necessary  to  permit  reasonable  hope"  of  success.  However,  he  stated:

...  it  is  hard  to  visualize  our  being  willing  to  make  added  outlays  of
resources  and  to  run  increasing  political  risks  without  an  allied  government
which,  at  least,  can  speak  for  and  to  its  people,  can  maintain  law  and  order
in  the  principal  cities,  can  provide  local  protection  for  the  vital  military
bases  and  installations,  can  raise  and  support  Armed  Forces,  and  can  gear
its  efforts  to  those  of  the  United  States.  Anything  less  than  this  would
hardly  be  a  government  at  all,  and  under  such  circumstances,  the  United
States  Government  might  do  better  to  carry  forward  the  war  on  a  purely
unilateral  basis.

With  regard  to  the  counterinsurgency  effort,  he  opined,  "We  cannot  do  much
better  than  what  we  are  doing  at  present  until  the  government  improves."

Ambassador  Taylor  saw  U.S.  military  actions  directed  at  the  DRV  as  ful-
filling a  twofold  purpose.  On  the  one  hand,  he  believed  that  even  if  an  effective
government  were  established,  "we  will  not  succeed  in  the  end  unless  we  drive
the  DRV  out  of  its  reinforcing  role  and  obtain  its  cooperation  in  bringing  an
end  to  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency."  On  the  other  hand,  he  saw  actions  outside
South  Vietnam  as  a  means  to  improve  GVN  morale  and  confidence.  Ac-
knowledging that  using  our  aid,  advice  and  encouragement  on  behalf  of  pro-
grams to  stabilize  the  government  would  probably  be  insufficient  for  this  pur-
pose, he  suggested  additional  measures:

One  way  to  accomplish  this  lift  .  .  .  would  be  ground  and  air  assault
counterinfiltration  attacks  within  the  Laotian  corridor.  While  the  former
would  be  covert  .  .  .  knowledge  of  their  occurrence  could  be  made  known
...  to  give  the  morale  lift  which  is  desired.  Additionally  we  could  engage
in  reprisal  bombings,  to  repay  outrageous  acts  of  the  Viet  Cong  in  South
Viet  Nam.  .  .  .

However,  he  added  that  even  all  these  actions  might  not  be  sufficient  "to  hold
the  present  government  upright,"  in  which  case  we  would  have  to  reconsider
our  policies.  Our  alternatives,  he  said,  would  be  either  to  support  one  form  or
another  of  a  replacement  government  or  to  "limit  our  contribution  to  military
action  directed  at  North  Viet  Nam."


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  241

In  addition  to  the  military  actions  already  identified  with  morale-raising  pur-
poses, Taylor  suggested:

...  we  could  begin  to  escalate  progressively  by  attacking  appropriate
targets  in  North  Viet  Nam.  If  we  justified  our  action  primarily  upon  the
need  to  reduce  infiltration,  it  would  be  natural  to  direct  these  attacks  on
infiltration-related  targets  such  as  staging  areas,  training  facilities,  com-
munications centers  and  the  like.  ...  In  its  final  forms,  this  kind  of
attack  could  extend  to  the  destruction  of  all  important  fixed  targets  in
North  Viet  Nam  and  to  the  interdiction  of  movement  on  all  lines  of  com-
munication.

Ambassador  Taylor's  views  regarding  the  circumstances  under  which  such
escalatory  actions  should  be  initiated  were  not  entirely  clear  in  his  briefing  to
the  Principals.  After  reiterating  the  necessity  of  stepping  up  the  34A  operations,
increasing  those  in  Laos,  and  undertaking  reprisals  as  part  of  the  efforts  to  raise
morale  and  strengthen  the  GVN,  he  stated  two  somewhat  different,  although
not  necessarily  contradictory,  viewpoints  on  the  question  of  stronger  military
actions :

If  this  course  of  action  is  inadequate,  and  the  government  falls,  then  we
must  start  over  again  or  try  a  new  approach.  ...  In  any  case,  we  should
be  prepared  for  emergency  military  action  against  the  North  if  only  to
shore  up  a  collapsing  situation.

If,  on  the  other  hand  .  .  .  the  government  maintains  and  proves  itself,
then  we  should  be  prepared  to  embark  on  a  methodical  program  of  mount-
ing air  attacks  in  order  to  accomplish  our  pressure  objectives  vis-a-vis  the
DRV.  ...

He  then  proposed  a  scenario  for  controlled  escalation,  the  actions  in  which
were  quite  similar  to  an  extended  Option  A  or  a  low-order  Option  C  without
declared  negotiating  willingness.

The  implication  is  that  Taylor  visualized  graduated  air  operations  having
primarily  psychological  impact  on  the  North  following  logically  from  successful
political  efforts  in  the  South — but  that  he  also  wanted  an  (perhaps  somewhat
stronger)  air  campaign  held  in  readiness  as  a  punitive  measure  in  the  event  of  a
critical  reversal  in  the  South.  This  impression  is  strengthened  by  his  earlier  com-
ment about  U.S.  alternatives  and  by  the  second  of  "three  principles"  which  he
recommended  to  the  Principals:

a.  Do  not  enter  into  negotiations  until  the  DRV  is  hurting.

b.  Never  let  the  DRV  gain  a  victory  in  South  Viet  Nam  without  having  paid
a  disproportionate  price.

c.  Keep  the  GVN  in  the  forefront  of  the  combat  and  the  negotiations.

Involving  the  GVN  in  all  phases  of  our  operations  was  an  important  aspect  of
the  Ambassador's  thinking  about  next  courses  of  action.  He  stressed  that  before
making  a  final  decision  on  the  course  we  would  follow,  it  would  be  necessary  to
obtain  the  reaction  of  Prime  Minister  Huong  and  General  Khanh  to  our  various
alternatives.  He  explained:

They  will  be  taking  on  risks  as  great  or  greater  than  ours  so  that  they  have
a  right  to  a  serious  hearing.  We  should  make  every  effort  to  get  them  to


242 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

ask  our  help  in  expanding  the  war.  If  they  decline,  we  shall  have  to  rethink
the  whole  situation.

"If,  as  is  likely,  they  urge  us,"  Taylor  added,  we  should  take  advantage  of  their
enthusiasm  "to  nail  down  certain  important  points"  on  which  we  want  their
agreement.  Included  were  GVN  pledges  to  maintain  military  and  police  strength,
to  replace  incompetent  officials,  and  to  suppress  disorder  and  agreements  to
stipulated  divisions  of  responsibility  for  conducting  military  operations.

Taylor's  briefing  made  clear  his  commitment  to  limited  U.S.  objectives  in
Southeast  Asia  and  his  belief  in  the  necessity  of  assuring  the  DRV  of  this  limita-
tion. Further,  he  made  explicit  his  expectation  that  the  DRV  would  not  accept
U.S.  offensive  actions  without  some  intensified  military  reaction  in  the  South
and  that  any  DRV  submission  to  our  demands  might  well  be  temporary.

d.  Discussions  with  Ambassador  Taylor.  Following  the  briefing,  the  Principals
commented  on  a  number  of  the  Ambassador's  observations  and  discussed  further
the  question  of  future  courses  of  action.  [Doc.  244]  Secretary  Rusk  asked  what
could  be  done  to  make  the  GVN  perform  better.  Taylor  replied  that  he  must  be
able  to  convey  a  strong  message,  but  that  we  couldn't  threaten  the  Saigon  govern-
ment. For  example,  a  threat  to  "withdraw  unless"  would  be  "quite  a  gamble."
The  issue  of  neutralism  was  raised  and  "Ambassador  Taylor  noted  that  neutra-
lism' as  it  existed  in  Saigon  appeared  to  mean  throwing  the  internal  political
situation  open  and  thus  inviting  Communist  participation."  Mr.  Ball  observed
that  a  neutralist  state  could  not  be  maintained  unless  the  VC  were  defeated  and
that  the  GVN  must  continue  to  be  free  to  receive  external  aid  until  that  occurred.
Therefore,  "neutralism  in  the  sense  of  withdrawal  of  external  assistance"  did  not
seem  to  be  a  hopeful  alternative.  In  apparent  reply  to  Taylor's  briefing  comments
to  the  effect  that  the  United  States  might  continue  military  action  against  North
Vietnam  despite  a  GVN  collapse,  Rusk  commented  that  he  "couldn't  see  a  uni-
lateral war"  in  this  event.  Taylor  indicated  that  he  meant  "only  punitive  actions."
Secretary  McNamara  agreed  with  Rusk,  but  added  that  if  the  GVN  continued  to
weaken  we  would  need  to  try  Option  C  or  A.  "The  consensus  was  that  it  was
hard  to  visualize  continuing  in  these  circumstances  [if  the  GVN  collapsed  or  told
us  to  get  out],  but  that  the  choice  must  certainly  be  avoided  if  at  all  possible."

After  a  discussion  of  some  of  the  administrative  problems  in  the  GVN,  "Am-
bassador Taylor  noted  that  General  Westmoreland  had  prepared  a  report  of  the
military  situation"  in  South  Vietnam.  (The  report  was  later  distributed  to  the
group.)  He  indicated  that  "Westmoreland  was  generally  more  optimistic  than  he
(Taylor)"  and  that  he  saw  better  morale,  increased  defections  and  the  like  as
signs  of  improvement  in  the  military  situation.  Further,  he  stated  that  West-
moreland would  be  inclined  to  wait  six  months  before  taking  further  action  in
order  to  have  a  firmer  base  for  them.  However,  Taylor  added  that  "he  himself
did  not  believe  that  we  could  count  on  the  situation  holding  together  that  long,
and  that  we  must  do  something  sooner  than  this."  Secretary  McNamara  also
disagreed  with  Westmoreland's  view,  expressing  doubts  that  the  military  situation
would  improve.  In  answer  to  specific  questions,  McNamara  stated  his  opinion
that  (1)  no,  the  political  situation  would  not  become  stronger,  but  (2)  yes,  we
would  be  justified  in  undertaking  Option  C  even  if  the  political  situation  did  not
improve.  Taylor  replied  that  "stronger  action  would  definitely  have  a  favorable
effect"  in  South  Vietnam,  "but  he  was  not  sure  this  would  be  enough  really  to
improve  the  situation."  Others,  including  McNamara,  agreed  with  Taylor's  eval-
uation, but  the  Secretary  added  that  "the  strengthening  effect  of  Option  C  could
at  least  buy  time,  possibly  measured  in  years."


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  243

Ambassador  Taylor  then  urged  that  "over  the  next  two  months  we  adopt  a
program  of  Option  A  plus  the  first  stages  of  Option  C."  He  argued  that  the
GVN  was  badly  in  need  of  some  "pulmotor  treatment,"  that  any  other  alterna-
tive would  probably  result  in  a  worsened  situation — perhaps  militarily.  He  added
that  the  likelihood  of  GVN  improvement  seemed  so  doubtful  that  "we  should
move  into  C  right  away."  Secretary  Rusk  asked  if  Option  C  would  give  Taylor
the  "bargaining  leverage"  needed  with  the  GVN.  The  Ambassador  replied  by
suggesting  certain  details  of  the  message  he  would  propose  passing  to  the  Saigon
government.  In  effect  these  called  for  the  GVN  to  agree  to  the  kind  of  internal
policies  and  command  arrangements  suggested  in  his  briefing,  in  return  for  a
prompt  U.S.  implementation  of  "Option  A  plus"  and  acknowledgment  of  the
intention  to  go  further  if  the  GVN  stabilized  itself.  It  is  important  to  note  that
the  official  memorandum  of  the  foregoing  discussion  implied  agreement  among
the  Principals  that  Option  A  plus  early  stages  of  C  should  be  recommended.  The
memorandum  states,  "It  was  urged  that  .  .  ."  and  "to  get  what  improvements
we  could  it  was  thought  that  we  should  move  into  some  parts  of  C  soon."

There  followed  a  discussion  of  the  infiltration  evidence,  during  which  Mr.
McCone  indicated  that  an  intelligence  team  had  made  a  further  investigation  of
it.

It  was  agreed  that  State  and  Defense  should  check  statements  made  by
Secretary  Rusk,  Secretary  McNamara,  and  General  Wheeler  on  this  subject,
so  that  these  could  be  related  to  the  previous  MACV  and  other  estimates
and  a  full  explanation  developed  of  how  these  earlier  estimates  had  been
made  and  why  they  had  been  wrong  in  the  light  of  fuller  evidence.

Before  the  meeting  adjourned  (with  agreement  to  meet  again  the  next  day),
Ambassador  Taylor  raised  a  number  of  questions  which  he  thought  the  Working
Group  papers  had  not  covered  adequately.  Only  a  few  received  answers  during
the  meeting,  and  he  agreed  to  furnish  the  Principals  with  the  complete  list.  How-
ever, it  was  indicated  that  Option  B  or  C  could  be  initiated  from  a  "standing
start" — presumably  with  no  incidents  necessarily  occurring  first.  The  GVN  were
acknowledged  to  have  "plenty  of  capabilities"  to  participate — even  before  arriving
at  the  intended  four-squadron  strength  of  A-1  aircraft.  It  was  stressed  that  the
VNAF  role  would  be  in  North  Vietnam  only — not  in  Laos — and  Secretary  McNa-
mara indicated  a  strong  role  for  them  against  targets  below  the  19th  Parallel.
Finally,  a  time-span  of  three  to  six  months  was  indicated  as  the  expected  duration
for  Option  C.

On  the  followmg  day,  when  the  Principals  reassembled,  William  Bundy  cir-
culated a  draft  scenario  of  actions  proposed  in  the  event  a  decision  were  made
to  undertake  measures  like  those  contained  in  Option  A.  [Doc.  2451  It  had  been
agreed  at  the  end  of  the  initial  meeting  that  these  would  be  reviewed  by  the  group
with  the  assumption  that  they  could  be  implemented  "with  or  without  a  decision
to  move  into  the  full  Option  C  program  at  some  time  thereafter."  (It  is  important
to  note  how  readily  the  attention  of  the  Principals  focused  on  the  similarity  of
prepartory  actions  and  early  military  measures  in  the  various  options,  apparently
without  regard  to  the  particular  negotiating  rationale  which  each  option  incor-
porated.) Bundy's  scenario  of  early  military,  political  and  diplomatic  actions  was
based  on  a  similar  assumption.  He  indicated,  however,  that  the  Working  Group
believed  "that  at  least  a  contingent  decision  to  go  on  /5'  now  required."  To  facili-
tate discussion  on  the  part  of  the  Principals,  worksheets  indicating  proposed


244 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

language  or  procedures  were  described,  to  include  the  following  action  cate-
gories:

1.  U.S.  public  action

a.  White  House  statement  following  1  December  meeting

b.  Background  briefing  on  infiltration

c.  Congressional  consultation

d.  Major  Presidential  speech

e.  Public  report  on  infiltration

2.  Consultation  with  the  GVN

3.  Consultation  with  key  allies

4.  Communications  with  Communist  nations

5.  Existing  forms  of  military  actions  (including  reconnaissance  and  RLAF
strikes  in  Laos,  GVN  maritime  operations,  etc.)

6.  Reprisal  actions  resulting  from  DE  SOTO  Patrols  and  "spectaculars"

7.  Added  military  and  other  actions

Certain  of  these  topics  received  more  attention  than  others  in  the  course  of  the
meeting,  with  emphasis  being  placed  on  "spelling  out"  the  exact  steps  that  the
Principals  would  be  asking  the  President  to  approve.  With  respect  to  actions
aimed  at  the  U.S.  public,  McGeorge  Bundy  stressed  that  the  Presidential  speech
must  both  (1)  affirm  U.S.  determination  and  (2)  be  consistent  with  the  infiltra-
tion evidence.  General  Wheeler  stated  that  earlier  infiltration  reports  could  be
defended  because  of  their  small  data  base  and  suggsted  that  the  discrepancies
could  be  used  to  explain  how  the  VC  operated.  It  was  determined  that  one  man
should  be  put  in  charge  of  assembling  the  available  infiltration  data  for  public
release,  and  Chester  Cooper  was  suggested  for  the  job.  With  respect  to  coordina-
tion with  the  GVN,  Ambassador  Taylor  pointed  out  the  need  to  prepare  a  draft
statement  to  the  GVN  for  the  President's  review  and  agreed  to  prepare  a  table
of  the  specific  GVN  actions  needed.  Secretary  Rusk  acknowledged  the  possible
desirability  of  delaying  until  GVN  leadership  issues  were  resolved,  but  that  "any-
thing now  would  cause  problems."  Mr.  Ball  reminded  that  it  would  be  necessary
to  query  the  GVN  regarding  release  of  some  of  the  infiltration  evidence.

Military  and  other  related  actions  were  also  discussed:  Secretary  Rusk  indi-
cated the  need  to  surface  the  GVN  maritime  operations,  and  Ambassador  Taylor
suggested  that  they  and  other  morale-raising  actions  could  be  made  public  "in
one  package."  In  discussing  the  possible  need  for  additional  airfields  in  the
northern  part  of  South  Vietnam,  it  was  pointed  out  that  a  new  jet  field  might
take  two  years.  Secretary  McNamara  said  he  thought  there  were  enough  fields  to
support  Option  C  now  if  certain  readily  accessible  improvements  were  added.
He  and  the  generals  (Wheeler  and  Taylor)  reminded  the  group  that  stopping  the
movement  of  U.S.  dependents  to  South  Vietnam  or  withdrawing  those  already
there  could  not  be  concealed  and  that  this  problem  must  be  resolved  promptly —
certainly  within  the  initial  30  davs.  Taylor  cautioned  that  actions  regarding  de-
pendents could  not  be  taken  until  our  full  course  was  decided,  presumably  be-
cause of  potential  GVN  fears  of  a  U.S.  withdrawal.  The  question  of  resumed
DE  SOTO  Patrols  was  raised  with  the  reminder  that  CINCPAC  wanted  them  for
intelligence  purposes.  Taylor,  McNamara  and  McGeorge  Bundy  opposed  the
idea,  while  General  Wheeler  strongly  supported  it.  Notes  of  the  meeting  indicate
resolution  to  the  efi'ect  that  the  patrols  should  not  be  resumed  during  the  first
30-day  period.  It  was  also  agreed  to  recommend  joint  U.S./GVN  planning  of
reprisal  actions  and  of  further  escalatory  measures.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  245

At  some  point  during  the  meeting  it  was  determined  that  William  Bundy  would
undertake  preparation  of  a  draft  national  security  action  paper  containing  policy
guidance  for  the  approaching  period.  The  paper  was  to  describe  the  strategic
concept,  outline  the  actions  to  be  taken  during  the  initial  30-day  period,  and
indicate  likely  follow-on  measures  and  the  conditions  under  which  they  might  be
implemented.  It  was  decided  that  the  paper  would  be  reviewed  at  another  meeting
of  the  Principals  on  30  November,  before  submission  to  the  President.  A  White
House  meeting  had  been  scheduled  for  the  following  day.

On  the  afternoon  of  the  30th,  in  Secretary  Rusk's  conference  room,  the  Prin-
cipals met  again.  Bundy's  draft  paper  had  been  distributed  to  them  earlier  after
being  generally  approved  (re  format)  by  Rusk  and  reviewed  for  substance  by
Messrs.  McNaughton  and  Forrestal.  [Doc.  246]

In  describing  the  basic  concept,  the  paper  presented  U.S.  objectives  as  "un-
changed," although  giving  primary  emphasis  to  our  aims  in  South  Vietnam.
However,  getting  the  DRV  to  remove  its  support  and  direction  from  the  in-
surgency in  the  South,  and  obtaining  their  cooperation  in  ending  VC  operations
there,  were  listed  among  the  basic  objectives — not  presented  as  a  strategy  for
attaining  them.  The  objectives  were  to  be  pursued  in  the  first  30  days  by  measures
including  those  contained  in  Option  A,  plus  U.S.  armed  route  reconnaissance
operations  in  Laos.  They  were  linked  with  Ambassador  Taylor's  rationale  that
these  actions  would  be  intended  primarily  "to  help  GVN  morale  and  to  increase
the  costs  and  strain  on  Hanoi."  The  concept  also  included  Taylor's  emphasis  on
persuading  the  GVN  to  make  itself  more  effective  and  to  push  forward  its  pacifi-
cation efforts.  For  the  period  beyond  the  first  30  days,  the  concept  provided  that

.  .  .  first-phase  actions  may  be  continued  without  change,  or  additional
military  measures  may  be  taken  including  the  withdrawal  of  dependents  and
the  possible  initiation  of  strikes  a  short  distance  across  the  border  against
the  infiltration  routes  from  the  DRV.  In  the  latter  case  this  would  become
a  transitional  phase.

The  kind  of  actions  that  the  transition  would  lead  to  were  described  in  a  care-
fully qualified  manner:

...  if  the  GVN  improves  its  effectiveness  to  an  acceptable  degree  and
Hanoi  does  not  yield  on  acceptable  terms,  or  if  the  GVN  can  only  be  kept
going  by  stronger  action,  the  U.S.  is  prepared — at  a  time  to  be  determined
— to  enter  into  a  second  phase  program  ...  of  graduated  military  pressures
directed  systematically  against  the  DRV.

The  concept  continued  with  a  mixture  of  suggested  actions  and  rationale  similar
to  that  in  Option  C.  The  air  strikes  would  be  "progressively  more  serious"  and
"adjusted  to  the  situation."  The  expected  duration  was  indicated  as  "possibly  run-
ning from  two  to  six  months."  "Targets  in  the  DRV  would  start  with  infiltration
targets  south  of  the  19th  Parallel  and  work  up  to  targets  north  of  that  point."
The  approach  would  be  steady  and  deliberate,  to  give  the  United  States  the  option
"to  proceed  or  not,  to  escalate  or  not,  and  to  quicken  the  pace  or  not."  It  con-
cluded with  the  following:

Concurrently,  the  U.S.  would  be  alert  to  any  sign  of  yielding  by  Hanoi,  and
would  be  preparted  to  explore  negotiated  solutions  that  attain  U.S.  objectives


246 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

in  an  acceptable  manner.  The  U.S.  would  seek  to  control  any  negotiations
and  would  oppose  any  independant  South  Vietnamese  efforts  to  negotiate.

Bundy's  draft  NSAM  also  included  a  summation  of  the  recommended  JCS
alternative  concept  and  a  brief  description  of  the  various  military,  political  and
diplomatic  measures  to  be  taken  during  the  first  30  days  following  implementa-
tion of  the  concept.  Significantly,  the  latter  included  reprisal  actions  "preferably
within  24  hours"  for  a  wide  range  of  specified  VC  provocations.  It  also  contained
a  specific  provision  that  DE  SOTO  Patrols  would  not  be  resumed  during  the
initial  30-day  period,  but  would  be  considered  for  the  follow-on  period.

In  the  documents  available  there  was  no  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the
meeting  on  30  November.  The  only  evidence  available  is  the  notes  and  comments
on  the  original  draft  NSAM,  filed  with  other  papers  from  the  NSC  Working
Group  at  the  State  Department.  Therefore,  the  following  assessment  of  what
occurred  is  limited  to  inferences  from  that  sparse  evidence.  Moreover,  based  on
this  evidence,  it  is  not  absolutely  certain  that  the  changes  indicated  came  as  a
result  of  the  Principals  meeting.

Several  changes  apparently  were  made  in  order  not  to  ask  the  President  to
commit  himself  unnecessarily  (e.g.,  the  language  was  changed  from  '"take"  to
"resume"  a  specific  action  in  the  second  phase,  to  "be  prepared  to  take,"  etc.).
Others  had  policy  implications.  The  only  significant  change  in  the  first  category
was  to  remove  any  reference  in  the  title  to  NSAM  and  to  call  it  merely  a  "posi-
tion paper."  In  the  latter  category,  several  changes  seem  significant.  For  example,
keeping  the  GVN  going  through  the  effects  of  stronger  U.S.  action  was  deleted
as  one  of  the  circumstances  under  which  we  might  initiate  a  program  of  "gradu-
ated military  pressures"  against  the  DRV.  Apparently  based  on  Secretary  McNa-
mara's  comment,  reference  to  the  United  States  seeking  to  control  the  negotia-
tions and  blocking  South  Vietnamese  efforts  in  this  direction  was  removed.  The
summary  of  JCS  views  was  also  removed  from  the  concept,  in  effect  presenting
a  united  front  to  the  President.  From  the  description  of  30-day  actions,
all  reference  to  the  intent  to  publicize  infiltration  evidence  or  present  it  to  allied
and  Congressional  leaders  was  eliminated,  including  the  intention  to  link  re-
prisal actions  to  DRV  infiltration  to  develop  "a  common  thread  of  justification."
Also  removed  was  reference  to  a  major  Presidential  speech,  apparently  on  the
advice  of  McGeorge  Bundy.

Although  there  is  a  bare  minimum  of  rationale  or  explanation  for  these  changes
in  the  available  evidence,  the  pattern  described  by  the  changes  themselves  is
significant.  In  effect.  Option  A  along  with  the  lowest  order  of  Option  C  actions
were  being  recommended  by  the  Principals  in  a  manner  that  would  represent  the
least  possible  additional  commitment.  This  represented  a  considerable  softening
of  the  positions  held  at  the  end  of  the  first  Principals  meeting,  on  the  24th.

It  also  represented  a  substantial  deviation  from  the  findings  of  the  Working
Group.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the  group  conceded  Option  A  little  chance  of
contributing  to  an  improved  GVN  and  saw  its  likely  impact  on  South  Vietnamese
morale  as  no  more  lasting  than  the  effects  of  the  Tonkin  Gulf  reprisals.  More-
over, even  extended  A  was  believed  "at  best"  to  be  capable  of  little  more  than
an  improved  U.S.  position — certainly  not  of  a  meaningful  settlement.  In  effect,
the  Principals  were  returning  to  the  initial  concept  of  Option  C  held  in  the  Work-
ing Group  by  Bundy,  Johnson  and  McNaughton — but  without  the  initially  flexi-
ble attitude  toward  national  interest  and  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia.

It  is  of  interest  to  consider  the  factors  that  may  have  brought  about  the  change.
( 1 )  It  may  have  resulted  as  a  reaction  to  the  persuasiveness  of  General  Taylor's


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  247

arguments.  (2)  It  may  have  represented  a  genuine  mellowing  of  individual  view-
points after  the  opportunity  to  consider  other  judgements  and  weigh  all  the  fac-
tors. (3)  It  may  have  resulted  from  the  Principals'  uneasiness  with  the  negotiat-
ing track  included  in  Option  C.  (4)  It  may  have  reflected  concern  over  public
pressure  for  harsher  measures  that  could  have  resulted  from  too  much  public
emphasis  on  the  increased  infiltration.  (5)  It  may  have  represented  an  attempt
to  enhance  the  chances  of  the  President's  approving  some  kind  of  stepped  up
U.S.  action  outside  of  South  Vietnam.  With  regard  to  the  latter,  McGeorge
Bundy,  as  the  President's  Assistant  for  National  Security  Affairs,  was  in  a  posi-
tion to  convey  President  Johnson's  mood  to  the  group.  Moreover,  notes  taken
at  the  White  House  meeting  tend  to  confirm  that  the  President's  mood  was  more
closely  akin  to  the  measures  recommended  than  to  those  in  Option  B  or  full
Option  C.  Then  again,  it  may  be  that  all  of  these  factors  operated  on  the  Princi-
pals in  some  measure.

Also  significant,  in  the  series  of  discussions  held  by  the  Principals,  was  their
apparent  lack  of  attention  to  the  policy  issues  related  to  negotiations.  Despite
the  fact  that  Option  C  measures  were  stipulated  for  the  second  phase  of  U.S.
actions,  the  early  negotiating  posture  intended  to  accompany  that  option  was  ap-
parently paid  little  heed.  According  to  the  meeting  notes,  the  only  reference  to
our  bargaining  capability  was  Secretary  Rusk's  concern  as  to  whether  Option  C
actions  would  enable  Ambassador  Taylor  to  bargain  in  Saigon.  Among  the
documents  from  the  Principals  meetings,  the  only  reference  to  Hanoi's  interest
in  negotiating  occurred  in  Bundy's  draft  NSAM,  where  he  reflected  apparent
Administration  expectations  that  after  more  serious  pressures  were  applied  the
DRV  would  move  first  in  the  quest  for  a  settlement.

In  retrospect,  the  Principals  appear  to  have  assumed  rather  low  motivation  on
the  part  of  the  DRV.  Either  this  or  they  were  overly  optimistic  regarding  the
threat  value  of  U.S.  military  might,. or  both.

For  example,  Ambassador  Taylor's  perception  of  how  a  settlement  might  be
reached — which  apparently  produced  little  unfavorable  reaction  among  the
others — indicated  the  assumption  that  DRV  concessions  to  rather  major  demands
could  be  obtained  with  relatively  weak  pressures.  In  his  suggested  scenario  (ac-
knowledged as  "very  close"  to  the  concept  accepted  by  the  Principals),  the  U.S.
negotiating  posture  accompanying  a  series  of  attacks,  limited  to  infiltration
targets  "just  north  of  the  DMZ,"  was  intended  to  be  as  follows:

...  in  absence  of  public  statements  by  DRV,  initiate  no  public  state-
ments or  publicity  by  ourselves  or  GVN.  If  DRV  does  make  public  state-
ments, confine  ourselves  and  GVN  to  statements  that  GVN  is  exercising
right  of  self-defense  and  we  are  assisting  ....  disclose  to  selected  allies,
and  possibly  USSR,  U.S./GVN  terms  for  cessation  of  attacks  as  follows:

A.  Demands:

1.  DRV  return  to  strict  observance  of  1954  Accords  with  respect
SVN — that  is,  stop  infiltration  and  bring  about  a  cessation  of  VC
armed  insurgency.

B.  In  return:

1.  U.S.  will  return  to  1954  Accords  with  respect  to  military  person-
nel in  GVN  and  GVN  would  be  willing  to  enter  into  trade  talks
looking  toward  normalization  of  economic  relations  between  DRV
and  GVN.

2.  Subject  to  faithful  compliance  by  DRV  with  1954  Accords,  U.S.
and  GVN  would  give  assurances  that  they  not  use  force  or  sup-


248 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

port  the  use  of  force  by  any  other  party  to  upset  the  Accords  with
respect  to  the  DRV.
3.  .  .  .  the  GVN  would  permit  VC  desiring  to  do  so  to  return  to  the
DRV  without  their  arms  or  would  grant  amnesty  .  .  .

Taylor  went  on  to  suggest  that  "if  and  when  Hanoi  indicates  its  acceptance,"  the
United  States  should  avoid  (1)  the  danger  of  a  cease-fire  accompanied  by
prolonged  negotiations  and  (2)  "making  conditions  so  stringent"  as  to  be  im-
practicable.

Significantly,  the  terms  were  to  be  conveyed  to  Hanoi  privately.  They  did  not
constitute  a  declaratory  policy  in  the  usual  sense  of  that  term.  Hence,  it  must  be
assumed  that  they  would  be  presented  to  the  DRV  with  the  attitude  of  "ac-
ceptance or  else" — that  they  were  not  perceived  primarily  as  conveying  a  firm
public  image.  Moreover,  the  terms  were  designed  to  accompany  what  became
known  as  "phase  two,"  the  graduated  pressures  of  Option  C — not  the  30-day
actions  derived  from  Option  A.  They  were  meant  to  represent  the  "early  nego-
tiating" posture  of  the  United  States — not  the  "no-negotiation"  posture  associated
with  Option  A.

This  general  attitude  toward  negotiations  was  apparently  shared  by  other
Principals.  This  is  indicated  by  changes  made  in  Option  C  procedures.  Es-
sentially, these  involved  an  adamant  resistance  to  any  formal  "Geneva  Con-
ference on  Vietnam."  Formerly,  such  a  conference  was  regarded  as  the  "best
forum" — after  conducting  a  number  of  military  actions  against  the  DRV.  Under
the  revised  approach,  the  U.S.  Government  would  merely  "watch  and  listen
closely"  for  signs  of  weakening  from  Hanoi  and  Peking.  If  the  DRV  held  firm
in  response  to  initial  military  actions  against  North  Vietnam  and  if,  along  with
these  actions,  an  improvement  had  occurred  in  the  GVN,  the  Administration
would  press  harder  for  acceptance  of  the  initial  negotiating  position.  Thus,  it
is  fairly  clear  that  the  policy  position  formulated  by  the  Principals  before
presentation  to  the  President  included  no  provision  for  early  bargaining  at  the
conference  table.

2. Courses  of  Action  Approved  in  the  White  House

On  1  December,  the  Principals  met  with  President  Johnson  and  Vice  President-
elect Humphrey  in  the  White  House.  During  a  meeting  that  lasted  two-and-one-
half  hours,  Ambassador  Taylor  briefed  the  President  on  the  situation  in  South
Vietnam,  and  the  group  reviewed  the  evidence  of  increasing  DRV  support  for
the  conflicts  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  Ways  of  countering  the  impact  of
infiltration  and  of  improving  the  situation  were  discussed.  At  the  conclusion  of
the  meeting  Secretary  McNamara  was  reported  to  have  been  overheard  saying  to
the  President,  "It  would  be  impossible  for  Max  to  talk  to  these  people  [waiting
reporters]  without  leaving  the  impression  that  the  situation  is  going  to  hell."  Ac-
cordingly, Ambassador  Taylor  slipped  out  the  White  House  rear  entrance,  and
only  a  brief,  formal  statement  was  given  to  the  press.

The  source  documents  available  at  the  time  of  this  writing  do  not  indicate  the
precise  nature  of  the  President's  decisions.  Since  a  NSAM  was  not  issued  follow-
ing the  meeting,  one  would  have  to  have  access  to  White  House  case  files  and
National  vSecurity  Council  meeting  notes  to  be  certain  of  what  was  decided.
Even  then,  one  might  not  find  a  clear-cut  decision  recorded.  However,  from
handwritten  notes  of  the  meeting,  from  instructions  issued  to  action  agencies,
and  from  later  reports  of  diplomatic  and  military  actions  taken,  it  is  possible
to  reconstruct  the  approximate  nature  of  the  discussion  and  the  decisions  reached.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  249

The  revised  "Draft  Position  Paper  on  Southeast  Asia,"  containing  the  two-
phase  concept  for  future  U.S.  policy  and  the  proposed  30-day  action  program,
provided  the  basis  for  the  White  House  discussions.  Handwritten  notes  of  the
proceedings  refer  to  various  topics  in  approximately  the  same  order  as  they  are
listed  in  that  portion  of  the  position  paper  dealing  with  the  30-day  action
program.  There  is  no  indication  that  the  over-all  concept  was  discussed.  How-
ever, it  is  evident  from  the  notes  that  the  various  actions  under  discussion  were
considered  in  terms  of  the  details  of  their  implementation.  The  instructions  to
Ambassador  Taylor  make  it  clear  that,  in  general  outline  at  least,  the  concept
submitted  by  the  Principals  was  accepted  by  the  President.  However,  as  will  be
seen,  it  is  also  clear  that  he  gave  his  approval  to  implement  only  the  first
phase  of  the  concept.

In  addition  to  Ambassador  Taylor's  report,  the  meeting  dealt  mainly  with
two  subjects:  (1)  Taylor's  consultations  with  South  Vietnamese  leaders  and
(2)  conversations  with  other  U.S.  allies  who  had  an  interest  in  the  Vietnamese
situation.

The  President  made  it  clear  that  he  considered  that  pulling  the  South  Viet-
namese together  was  basic  to  anything  else  the  United  States  might  do.  He
asked  the  Ambassador  specifically  which  groups  he  might  talk  to  and  what  more
we  might  do  to  help  bring  unity  among  South  Vietnam's  leaders.  He  asked
whether  we  could  not  say  to  them  "we  just  can't  go  on"  unless  they  pulled
together.  To  this,  Taylor  replied  that  we  must  temper  our  insistence  somewhat,
and  suggested  that  we  could  say  that  "our  aid  is  for  the  Huong  government,  not
necessarily  for  its  successor."  The  President  asked  whether  there  was  not  some
way  we  could  "get  to"  such  groups  as  the  Catholics,  the  Buddhists  and  the  Army.
Possible  additional  increments  of  military  aid  were  then  discussed  as  means  of
increasing  U.S.  leverage  among  military  leaders.  The  President  also  asked  about
"the  Communists"  in  South  Vietnam.*  Taylor's  reply  was  noted  rather  cryptically,
but  the  impression  given  is  that  the  Communists  were  being  used  already,  but
that  he  questioned  the  desirability  of  trying  to  pressure  them.  He  apparently
stated  that  they  were  "really  neutralists,"  but  that  the  French  were  "not  really
bothering"  to  use  them.  The  President  observed  that  the  situation  in  South
Vietnam  "does  look  blacker"  to  the  public  than  it  apparently  was.  He  wondered
if  something  could  not  be  done  to  change  the  impression  being  given  in  the
news.

Toward  the  end  of  the  discussion  of  consultations  with  the  South  Vietnamese,
President  Johnson  stated  his  conviction  that  the  GVN  was  too  weak  to  take  on
the  DRV  militarily.  He  acknowledged  that  the  South  Vietnamese  had  received
good  training,  but  emphasized  that  we  "must  have  done  everything  we  can"  to
strengthen  them  before  such  a  conflict  occurred.  This  attitude  was  reflected  in
the  guidance  given  to  Ambassador  Taylor  and  in  the  statement  he  was  authorized
to  make  to  the  GVN.  The  statement  contained  a  passage  asserting  that  the  U.S.
Government  did  not  believe

that  we  should  incur  the  risks  which  are  inherent  in  any  expansion  of  hos-
tilities without  first  assuring  that  there  is  a  government  in  Saigon  capable
of  handling  the  serious  problems  involved  in  such  an  expansion  and  of
exploiting  the  favorable  effects  which  may  be  anticipated.  .  .  .

The  White  House  discussions  of  U.S.  consultation  with  other  allies  were
prefaced  by  the  President's  strong  affirmation  that  we  needed  "new  dramatic,
effective"  forms  of  assistance  from  several  of  these  countries.  Australia,  New
Zealand,  Canada  and  the  Philippines  were  specifically  mentioned.  Secretary  Rusk


250 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

added  that  the  U.K.  also  could  do  more.  A  possible  Republic  of  China  con-
tribution was  discussed,  but  the  Secretary  expressed  concern  that  introduction  of
GRC  combat  units  would  tend  to  merge  the  problem  of  Vietnam  with  the
conflict  between  the  two  Chinese  regimes.  Apparently,  the  Principals'  proposal
to  end  a  representative  to  the  governments  of  Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  the
Philippines  was  approved.  In  each  case,  the  representative  was  to  explain  our
concept  and  proposed  actions  and  request  additional  contributions  by  way  of
forces  in  the  event  the  second  phase  of  U.S.  actions  were  entered.  Vice  Presi-
dent-elect Humphrey  was  suggested  for  consultations  with  the  Philippine  gov-
ernment. The  President  asked  about  the  possibility  of  a  West  German  con-
tribution, but  Secretary  McNamara  emphasized  that  German  political  problems
would  inhibit  such  a  pledge  from  Bonn.  Finally,  it  was  agreed  that  Ambassador
Taylor  would  cable  the  particular  kind  of  third  country  assistance  that  would
be  welcomed  after  he  had  a  chance  to  consult  with  the  GVN.

At  the  close  of  the  meeting,  the  White  House  released  a  press  statement
which  contained  only  two  comments  regarding  any  determinations  that  had
been  reached.  One  reaffirmed  '"the  basic  United  States  policy  of  providing  all
possible  and  useful  assistance""  to  South  Vietnam,  specifically  linking  this  policy
with  the  Congressional  Joint  Resolution  of  10  August.  The  other  stated:

The  President  instructed  Ambassador  Taylor  to  consult  urgently  with  the
South  Vietnamese  government  as  to  measures  that  should  be  taken  to  im-
prove the  situation  in  all  its  aspects.

During  the  subsequent  press  briefing,  George  Reedy  indicated  to  reporters
that  Taylor  would  be  working  on  the  specific  details  of  his  forthcoming  con-
versations in  Saigon  "for  another  two  to  three  days"  and  would  have  at  least
one  more  meeting  with  the  President  before  his  return.  However,  it  seems  clear
that  most  of  what  he  would  say  to  GVN  officials  was  settled  during  the  initial
White  House  meeting.  A  proposed  text  was  appended  to  the  Principals'  draft
position  paper,  and  it  is  clear  that  this  was  discussed  on  1  December.  Appar-
ently, the  only  change  made  at  that  time  was  to  remove  a  proposed  U.S.  pledge
to  furnish  air  cover  for  the  GVN  maritime  operations  against  the  North  Viet-
namese coast.

The  statement  was  recast  in  the  form  of  Presidential  instructions  to  Ambas-
sador Taylor — with  specific  authorization  for  the  Ambassador  to  alter  the  phras-
ing as  he  thought  necessarv  to  insure  effective  communications  with  the  GVN.
However,  the  concept  and  the  specific  points  for  communication  were  un-
changed. The  instructions  made  specific  provision  for  him  to  inform  senior  GVN
officials  of  the  U.S.  willingness  (1)  to  cooperate  in  intensifying  the  GVN  mari-
time operations  and  (2)  "to  add  U.S.  airpower  as  needed  to  restrict  the  use
of  Laotian  territory  as  an  infiltration  route  into  SVN."  These  pledges  were
prefaced  by  statements  to  the  effect  that  U.S.  actions  directly  against  the  DRV
could  not  be  taken  until  GNV  effectiveness  was  assured  along  certain  specified
lines.  The  statements  made  explicit  the  policy  view  that  "we  should  not  incur  the
risks  which  are  inherent  in  such  an  expansion  of  hostilities"  until  such  improve-
ments were  made.  As  evidence  of  our  desire  to  encourage  those  developments,
however,  the  rationale  stressed  that  the  Administration  was  "willing  to  strike
harder  at  the  infiltration  routes  in  Laos  and  at  sea."

The  instructions  also  included  specific  provision  that  the  U.S.  Mission  in  Sai-
gon was  to  work  with  the  GVN  in  developing  joint  plans  for  reprisal  operations
and  for  air  operations  appropriate  for  a  second  phase  of  new  U.S.  actions.  The


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  251

general  relationship  between  the  two  contemplated  phases  was  explained,  and
the  Phase  Two  purpose  "of  convincing  the  leaders  of  DRV  that  it  is  to  their  in-
terest to  cease  to  aid  the  Viet  Cong"  was  stated.  The  joint  character  of  the  '"pro-
gressively mounting"  air  operations  against  North  Vietnam,  should  they  be  de-
cided on  later,  was  emphasized.

As  indicated  earlier,  there  was  no  NSAM  issued  following  the  strategy  meeting
of  1  December.  The  reasons  why  are  clear.  In  effect,  the  actions  recommended
by  the  Principals  and  approved  by  the  President  did  not  constitute  a  significant
departure  from  the  actions  authorized  in  NSAM  314  (9  September  1964).  That
document  had  already  provided  for  discussions  with  the  Laotian  government
leading  to  possible  U.S.  armed  reconnaissance  operations  along  the  infiltration
routes.  Further,  it  had  provided  for  resumption  of  the  34A  maritime  operations,
which  had  continued  throughout  the  fall.  In  effect,  the  December  strategy  meet-
ing produced  little  change  except  to  make  more  concrete  the  concept  of  possible
future  operations  against  North  Vietnam  and  to  authorize  steps  to  include  the
GVN  in  preparations  for  these  possibilities.

It  is  clear  that  the  President  did  not  make  any  commitment  at  this  point  to
expand  the  war  through  future  operations  against  North  Vietnam.  The  assurances
intended  for  the  GVN  in  this  regard  were  conditional  at  best.  The  extent  to
which  the  President  was  committed  to  such  a  course  in  his  mind,  or  in  discus-
sions with  his  leading  advisers,  was  not  made  explicit  in  the  sources  available.
It  is  implied,  however,  in  brief  notes  which  were  apparently  intended  to  sum-
marize the  mood  of  the  meeting  on  1  December.  These  were  (1)  [illegible]  (2)
it  may  be  necessary  to  act  from  a  base  not  as  strong  as  hoped  for;  (3)  it  is  not  cer-
tain, however,  how  public  opinion  can  be  handled;  and  (4)  it  is  desirable  to  send
out  a  "somewhat  stronger  signal.  "In  addition,  a  comment  not  entirely  legible  stated
"Measures  can't  do  as  much (1)  UN  and  (2)  international  [negotia-

tions?]." In  the  context  of  the  discussions,  the  impression  left  by  these  notations
is  that  the  White  House  was  considerably  less  than  certain  that  future  U.S.  ac-
tions against  North  Vietnam  would  be  taken,  or  that  they  would  be  desirable.

C. IMPLEMENTING  THE  POLICY

When  Ambassador  Taylor  next  met  with  the  President  on  the  afternoon  of  3
December,  McGeorge  Bundy  was  the  only  other  official  present.  Prior  to  this
occasion,  Taylor  had  sat  with  the  other  Principals  to  review  specific  features  of
the  Administration's  position  and  to  work  out  details  of  the  scenario  that  was
about  to  go  into  production.  When  he  left  the  President's  office,  presumably  hav-
ing received  the  final  version  of  his  instructions,  the  Ambassador  told  reporters
that  he  was  going  to  hold  "across-the-board"  discussions  with  the  GVN.  Assert-
ing that  U.S.  policy  for  South  Vietnam  remained  the  same,  he  stated  that  his
aim  would  be  to  improve  the  deteriorating  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  Although
he  hinted  of  changes  "in  tactics  and  method,"  he  quite  naturally  did  not  disclose
the  kind  of  operations  in  which  the  United  States  was  about  to  engage  or  any
future  actions  to  which  immediate  activities  could  lead.

1. Early  Actions

Phase  One  actions  to  exert  additional  pressures  against  North  Vietnam  were
quite  limited.  Only  two,  the  GVN  maritime  operations  and  U.S.  armed  recon-
naissance missions  in  Laos,  were  military  actions.  The  others  involved  stage-
managing  the  public  release  of  evidence  of  the  increased  Communist  infiltration


252 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

into  South  Vietnam  and  the  acquisition  of  additional  assistance  for  that  country
from  other  governments.

a.  GVN  Maritime  Operations.  Maritime  operations  under  OPLAN  34A  repre-
sented nothing  new.  These  had  been  underway  steadily  since  4  October,  and  their
November  schedule  was  in  the  process  of  being  carried  out  at  the  time  the  de-
cisions on  immediate  actions  were  being  made.  On  25  November,  six  PTF  craft
bombarded  a  barracks  area  on  Tiger  Island  with  81mm  mortars,  setting  numerous
fires.  Moreover,  a  proposed  schedule  for  December  had  been  submitted  to
COMUSMACV  on  27  November.  This  included  a  total  of  15  maritime  opera-
tions involving  shore  bombardments,  a  junk  capture,  a  kidnap  mission,  and  a
demolition  sortie  against  a  coastal  highway  bridge.  According  to  the  concept,
these  were  to  be  intensified  during  Phase  One.

Soon  after  the  decisions  had  been  made  to  begin  Phase  One,  the  JCS  tasked
COMUSMACV  with  developing  a  revised  December  34A  schedule  to  better  re-
flect the  newly  adopted  pressure  concept.  CINCPAC  was  requested  to  submit
revised  34A  plans  so  as  to  arrive  in  Washington  not  later  than  8  December.  The
instructions  specified  that  these  were  "to  include  proposed  sequence  and  timing
for  increased  frequency  of  maritime  operations"  in  two  packages.  The  first  was
to  begin  on  15  December,  extend  over  a  period  of  30  days  and  provide  for  "shal-
low penetration  raids  ...  on  all  types  of  targets  which  would  provide  the
greatest  psychological  benefits  .  .  ."  Destructive  results  and  military  utility  were
to  be  strictly  secondary  considerations.  Package  Two  was  to  add  four  to  six
U.S.  aircraft  to  afford  protective  cover  and  incorporate  action  against  certain
North  Vietnamese  coastal  targets  above  the  19th  Parallel.  This  package  was  in-
tended to  begin  approximately  30  days  following  initiation  of  the  first,  although
the  instructions  cautioned  that  the  plans  should  be  "prepared  to  provide  for  an
indefinite  period"  of  operations  under  Package  One.

MACV's  new  proposal  for  maritime  operations  was  submitted  on  5  December,
with  proposals  for  psychological  operations  and  aerial  resupply /reinforce  mis-
sions following  close  behind.  On  the  10th,  approval  for  the  latter  two  was  com-
municated back  to  the  field.  At  the  time,  the  MAROPS  proposals  were  still  under
consideration  within  the  JCS.  On  the  12th,  the  JCS  submitted  their  two-package
proposal.  Included  in  their  first  30-day  package  were  coastal  bombardment  of
radar  sites,  barracks,  and  PT  boat  bases  plus  a  maritime  equivalent  of  aerial
armed  reconnaissance.  Patrol  boats  would  make  "fire  sweeps"  along  the  coast
against  "targets  of  opportunity."  In  addition,  upon  their  return  from  bombard-
ment missions,  it  was  proposed  that  the  GVN  PT  boats  attempt  the  capture  of
NVN  junks  and  SWATOW  craft.  With  the  single  exception  of  the  coastal  fire
sweeps,  all  of  these  initial  package  operations  were  approved  by  OSD,  and  in-
structions were  issued  to  implement  the  initial  increment  of  such  operations  on  or
about  15  December.

In  accord  with  the  instructions  initially  issued  regarding  intensified  maritime
operations,  OSD  decisions  on  the  proposed  second  package  were  deferred.  The
JCS  indicated  that  the  addition  of  U.S.  air  cover,  and  the  necessary  command
and  control  procedures  needed  to  support  such  operations,  could  be  implemented
on  or  about  15  January.  They  went  on  to  recommend  that  if  this  were  decided,
the  "maritime  operations  should  be  surfaced  .  .  .  prior  to  [implementation  of]
Package  Two."

The  JCS  were  disconcerted  over  disapproval  of  the  fire  sweeps  along  the  North
Vietnamese  coast.  However,  their  concern  stemmed  not  so  much  from  the  lack
of  support  for  these  particular  operations  as  from  their  view  that  the  disapproval


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  253

removed  from  the  package  the  only  significant  intensification  beyond  the  level
already  attained  before  the  President's  Phase  One  decision.  At  a  Principals  meet-
ing on  19  December,  acting  JCS  chairman,  General  Harold  H.  Johnson,  pointed
out  that  with  the  modifications  now  made  to  it,  the  34A  program  was,  in  ef-
fect, not  intensified  at  all.  Moreover,  as  discussion  revealed,  seasonal  sea  con-
ditions were  now  so  severe  that  no  maritime  operation  had  been  completed  suc-
cessfully during  the  previous  three  weeks.  In  effect,  therefore,  the  "intensified"
December  schedule  of  approved  maritime  operations  still  remained  to  be  imple-
mented as  the  month  drew  to  a  close.

[Words  illegible]  JCS  urged  that  several  air  missions  be  added  to  the  kinds  of
operations  already  approved.  Included  were  the  VNAF  air  strikes,  using  un-
marked aircraft  and  U.S.  air  escort  for  returning  surface  craft.  However,  both  of
these  items  were  disapproved;  only  the  air  operations  in  support  of  psychological
and  resupply  operations  gained  acceptance.  Apparently  there  was  little  additional
MAROPS  activity  during  January,  1965;  the  normal  documentary  sources  in-
clude very  little  for  this  period.

b.  Armed  Reconnaissance  in  Laos.  Like  the  maritime  operations,  armed  recon-
naissance in  Laos  was,  in  some  respects,  a  continuation  of  operations  that  had
been  underway  for  some  time.  At  least,  U.S.  aircraft  had  been  operating  over
Laos  since  the  previous  May,  performing  reconnaissance  functions  and  providing
armed  escort  for  these  and  (since  October)  the  RLAF  strike  missions.  Of  course,
armed  escort  was  carried  out  under  strict  rules  of  engagement  that  permitted  at-
tacking ground  targets  only  in  response  to  hostile  fire.  Given  the  operational  code
YANKEE  TEAM,  these  carrier  and  land-based  missions  had  been  following  a
constant  pattern  for  several  months.  This  pattern  included  roughly  four  day-
light reconnaissance  flights  in  the  Plaine  des  Jarres-Route  7  area  every  two
weeks,  and  during  a  like  period,  approximately  ten  reconnaissance  flights  in  the
Panhandle,  and  two  night-reconnaissance  flights  along  Route  7.  Complimenting
these  efforts  were  those  of  the  RLAF,  whose  T-28's  harassed  the  Pathet  Lao,
gave  tactical  air  support  to  Royal  Laotian  Army  units,  interdicted  Route  7  and
the  Panhandle,  and  performed  armed  route  reconnaissance  in  central  Laos.  Dur-
ing the  period  1  October-30  December,  there  were  a  total  of  724  T-28  sorties
in  the  Panhandle  alone.  These  had  already  precipitated  several  complaints  from
the  DRV,  alleging  U.S.-sponsored  air  attacks  on  North  Vietnamese  territory.

The  intended  U.S.  policy  was  discussed  with  Premier  Souvanna  Phouma  on
10  December  by  the  new  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Laos,  William  Sullivan.  He  re-
ported that  Souvanna  "Fully  supports  the  U.S.  pressures  program  and  is  pre-
pared to  cooperate  in  fufl."  The  Premier  particularly  wanted  interdiction  of
Routes  7,  8,  and"  12,  but  he  insisted  on  making  no  public  admission  that  U.S.
aircraft  had  taken  on  new  missions  in  Laos.  The  Administration  had  indicated
to  the  Vientiane  Embassy  a  few  days  earlier  that  it  wished  the  RLAF  to  intensify
its  strike  program  also,  particularly  "in  the  Corridor  area  and  close  to  the  DRV
border."

In  the  meantime,  the  JCS  developed  an  air  strike  program  to  complement  the
YANKEE  TEAM  operation  in  accordance  with  current  guidance,  and  had  in-
structed CINCPAC  to  be  prepared  to  carry  it  out.  The  program  included  mis-
sions against  targets  of  opportunity  along  particular  portions  of  Route  8  and
Routes  121  and  12.  It  also  included  secondary  targets  for  each  mission  that  in-
cluded barracks  areas  and  military  strongpoints.  The  second  mission  was  to  be
flown  not  earlier  than  three  days  following  the  first.  The  program  was  briefed
at  a  12  December  meeting  of  the  Principals  by  Deputy  Secretary  Vance  and


254 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

was  approved  by  them  with  one  exception.  They  amended  the  ordnance  instruc-
tions which  had  been  prepared  for  CINCPAC  to  specifically  exclude  the  use  of
napalm.  For  its  first  use  against  targets  in  Laos,  they  felt,  the  RLAF  would  be
the  only  appropriate  user.  McGeorge  Bundy  stated  that  the  amended  program
"filled  precisely  the  President's  wishes,"  and  that  he  (Bundy)  would  so  inform
the  President.  He  further  stated  that,  barring  separate  advice  to  the  contrary,  the
program  should  be  executed.  It  was  also  agreed  at  this  meeting  that  there  would
be  no  public  statements  about  armed  reconnaissance  operations  in  Laos  unless
a  plane  were  lost.  In  such  an  event,  the  Principals  stated,  the  Government  should
continue  to  insist  that  we  were  merely  escorting  reconnaissance  flights  as  re-
quested by  the  Laotian  government.

Armed  reconnaissance  operations  in  Laos,  called  BARREL  ROLL,  got  under-
way on  14  December.  This  first  mission  was  flown  by  USAF  jet  aircraft  along
Route  8.  It  was  followed  on  the  17th  by  carrier-based  A-1  and  jet  aircraft,  strik-
ing along  Routes  121  and  12.  On  the  18th,  this  pattern  of  two  missions  by  four
aircraft  each  was  determined  by  Secretary  of  Defense  or  higher  authority  to  be
the  weekly  standard — at  least  through  the  third  week.  Just  a  day  earlier,  the
JCS  had  proposed  a  second  week's  program  that  included  repetition  of  the  first
week's  operation  plus  missions  along  Routes  7,  9  and  23.  Their  proposals  were
prepared  with  a  statement  of  JCS  understanding  "that  a  gradual  increase  in  in-
tensity of  operations  is  intended  for  the  second  week."  Recalling  Souvanna
Phouma's  reported  request  for  such  operations,  they  also  included  a  strong  rec-
ommendation that  Route  7  be  struck  as  part  of  the  second  week's  mission.

This  same  rationale  was  voiced  by  General  Johnson  in  the  Principals  meeting
on  19  December.  He  pointed  out  that  the  BARREL  ROLL  program  briefed
there  by  Deputy  Secretary  Vance  did  not  represent  any  intensification  beyond  the
previous  week's  efi'ort.  Vance  confirmed  that  not  intensifying  the  program  had
been  one  of  the  criteria  applied  in  selecting  the  second  week's  missions.  Con-
sensus was  reached  by  the  Principals  that  the  program  should  remain  about  the
same  for  the  next  two  weeks,  in  accordance  with  the  most  recent  guidance.

At  the  end  of  December,  when  there  was  serious  question  about  the  efficacy
of  maintaining  the  direction  of  U.S.  policy  in  South  Vietnam,  Defense  officials
requested  an  evaluation  of  the  BARREL  ROLL  program.  In  particular,  they  were
concerned  as  to  "why  neither  the  DRV  nor  the  Communist  Chinese  had  made
any  public  mention  of  or  appeared  to  have  taken  cognizance  of  our  BARREL
ROLL  operations."  In  response,  a  DIA  assessment  indicated  that  the  Communists
apparently  had  made  no  "distinction  between  BARREL  ROLL  missions  on  the
one  hand  and  the  Laotian  T-28  strikes  and  YANKEE  TEAM  missions  on  the
other."  Attributing  all  stepped  up  operations  in  Laos  to  the  United  States  and
its  "lackeys,"  they  had  lumped  all  operations  together.  DIA  observed  that  "it
would  be  most  difficult  to  distinguish  between  YANKEE  TEAM  with  its  flat
suppression  aircraft  from  the  BARREL  ROLL  missions."  Further,  the  assessment
observed  that  "BARREL  ROLL  strikes  have  followed  T-28  strikes  by  varying
periods  of  time  and  have  been  of  lesser  intensity.  They  probably  appear  to  be
a  continuation  of  the  Laotian  program."  It  concluded:

On  balance,  therefore,  while  the  Communists  are  apparently  aware  of  some
increased  use  of  U.S.  aircraft,  they  probably  have  not  considered  the  BAR-
REL ROLL  strikes  to  date  as  a  significant  change  in  the  pattern  or  as  repre-
senting a  new  threat  to  their  activities.

Despite  the  lack  of  discernible  Communist  reaction  to  BARREL  ROLL  by
the  end  of  the  year  and  considerable  concern  among  the  JCS,  there  was  little


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  255

change  in  the  operation  during  early  January.  On  the  4th,  CINCPAC  was  au-
thorized to  go  ahead  with  the  fourth  week's  program:

One  U.S.  armed  reconnaissance /pre-briefed  air  strike  mission  in  Laos  for
the  week  of  4-10  January  1965,  is  approved.  Additional  missions  will  be
the  subject  of  later  message.  (Italic  added)

The  approved  mission  called  for  night  armed  reconnaissance  along  Route  7,  the
first  of  its  kind.  At  the  time,  the  JCS  were  awaiting  a  decision  on  their  proposals
for  a  complementary  mission,  but  the  Department  of  State  had  objected  to  their
choice  of  a  secondary  target  because  it  was  located  near  Cambodian  territory.
Earlier  in  the  series,  the  Tchepone  barracks  had  been  deleted  as  a  secondary
mission  by  the  White  House  because  a  Hanson  Baldwin  article  had  named  it  as
a  likely  target.  On  5  January,  the  JCS  representative  reminded  the  Principals
that  the  currently  approved  BARREL  ROLL  mission  constituted  the  fourth
week  of  these  operations  and,  therefore,  would  terminate  the  initial  30-day  period
of  Phase  One  pressures.  The  JCS  were  quite  concerned  that  there  had  not  yet
been  plans  made  for  a  "transition  phase"  of  stepped  up  attacks  to  begin  around
mid-January.

c.  Surfacing  Infihration  Evidence.  An  integral  part  of  the  Administration's
pressures  policy,  porticularly  if  U.S.  forces  were  to  be  involved  in  direct  attacks
on  North  Vietnam,  was  the  presentation  to  the  public  of  convincing  evidence
of  DRV  responsibility  for  the  precarious  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  As  seen
eariier,  a  former  intelligence  specialist,  Chester  Cooper,  was  selected  to  compile
a  public  account  of  the  infiltration  of  trained  cadre  and  guerrilla  fighters,  to  be
used  for  this  purpose.  His  account. was  to  be  developed  from  the  various  classi-
fied reports  that  had  been  produced  and  was  to  lay  particular  stress  on  the  alarm-
ing increase  in  the  rate  of  infiltration  in  [words  illegible]  1964.

[Words  illegible]  his  paper  on  4  December.  It  was  based  on  ( 1 )  a  State-
sponsored  updating  of  the  so-called  Jorden  Report,  which  described  also  the
DRV's  direction,  control  and  materiel  support  of  the  insurgency  (this  had  been
discussed  during  the  policy  discussions  in  the  Spring  and  initiated  during  the
Summer);  (2)  the  IVIACV  infiltration  study,  based  on  interrogations  of  VC
prisoners  and  completed  in  October;  and  (3)  reports  from  a  DIA/CIA/INR
team  who  went  to  Saigon  in  mid-November  to  evaluate  the  MACV  report  (they
confirmed  its  validity).  His  report  consisted  of  four  items:  (1)  a  summary  state-
ment and  a  more  detailed  public  discussion  of  VC  infiltration;  (2)  a  list  of
possible  questioQS  and  suggested  answers  for  use  with  the  press  or  the  Congress;
(3)  "a  reconciliation,  or  at  least  an  explanation  of  past  low  estimates  of  infiltra-
tion given  in  Congressional  testimony  and  to  the  press";  and  (4)  a  listing  of
available  documentary  evidence  and  graphic  materials  to  aid  in  public  presenta-
tions. In  his  covering  memorandum.  Cooper  urged  that  the  materials  be  for-
warded to  Saigon  so  as  to  make  MACV  and  Embassy  officials  fully  aware  of
the  proposed  approach  and  to  make  consistent  its  use  by  U.S.  and  GVN  per-
sonnel.

The  Cooper  materials  were  forwarded  for  review  to  the  Saigon  Embassy  on  8
December,  and  to  the  Principals  on  the  9th.  Shortly  thereafter.  Secretary  Rusk
cabled  Ambassador  Taylor,  expressing  his  concern  that  early  release  of  the
infiltration  data  "would  generate  pressures  for  actions  beyond  what  we  now
contemplate."  He  sought  Taylor's  advice  as  to  whether  release  would  be  wise.  In
the  Ambassador's  reply,  he  urged  early  release.  He  stated,  "I  do  not  feel  that.


256 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

at  this  point,  the  substance  of  the  release  will  generate  pressure  for  extreme
action."  Moreover,  he  expressed  the  view  that  release  would  serve  to  quiet  the
currently  rife  speculation  among  news  correspondents  and  parts  of  the  GVN
concerning  what  the  United  States  was  intending  to  do  in  SVN.  Citing  a  New
York  Daily  News  article  (7  December)  as  an  example  of  what  he  felt  were
increasingly  likely  leaks,  he  expressed  his  desire  to  make  planned  deliberate  an-
nouncements of  what  the  United  States  was  now  doing  and  what  might  be  done
in  the  future.  He  expressed  his  intention  to  have  the  GVN  release  the  report  on
infiltration,  complete  with  press  briefings  and  statements,  between  10-17  De-
cember.

Despite  strong  recommendations  from  the  field  to  release  the  infiltration  data,
the  Principals  determined  that  it  should  not  yet  be  made  public.  During  the
first  part  of  December,  the  chief  advocate  for  not  releasing  it  was  Secretary
McNamara.  At  their  meeting  on  12  December,  Mr.  Vance  stated  that  Mr.
McNamara  wanted  to  withhold  the  infiltration  data  for  the  time  being.  His
rationale  was  not  recorded  in  the  minutes.  The  State  Department  opinion  in
response  was  that  the  Department  "did  not  consider  it  of  any  great  moment."
Thereafter,  the  Principals  decided  that  release  should  be  withheld,  at  least  until
their  next  meeting,  on  19  December.  By  the  time  they  met  again  Ambassador
Taylor  had  reported  that  the  ARVN  intelligence  chief  had  reviewed  the
original  infiltration  report  and  the  proposed  press  release  and  had  "concurred
in  commending  declassification."  On  the  16th  Ambassador  Sullivan  praised  the
Cooper  report  and  suggested  passing  it  to  Souvanna  Phouma  prior  to  what  he
hoped  would  be  a  prompt  public  release.  At  the  Principals  meeting  these  views
were  cited  in  a  strong  statement  by  William  Bundy  concerning  the  problems  of
keeping  the  infiltration  evidence  out  of  the  press.  General  Johnson,  Acting
Chairman,  JCS,  favored  release  as  a  morale  boost  to  U.S.  personnel  in  South
Vietnam.  McGeorge  Bundy  and  Carl  Rowan  (USIA)  favored  gradual  or  piece-
meal release.  However,  Mr.  Vance  repeated  Secretary  McNamara's  wish  to  con-
tinue suppression  of  the  infiltration  report — possibly  for  an  indefinite  period.
This  view  finally  prevailed,  as  the  Principals  agreed  not  to  release  the  Cooper
report  either  in  Saigon  or  Washington.  Instead,  they  felt  that  the  President  might
disseminate  some  of  the  information  through  such  vehicles  as  his  State  of  the
Union  message  or  in  a  contemplated  Christmas  address  to  U.S.  forces  in  Saigon.

Following  the  meeting,  but  before  receiving  reports  concerning  the  current
political  upheaval  in  Saigon,  the  State  Department  cabled  the  Administration's
decision  not  to  make  a  formal  GVN/U.S.  release  of  the  infiltration  data.  It  gave
as  rationale  the  feeling  that  formal  release  "could  be  misinterpreted  and  become
vehicle  [for]  undesirable  speculation"  and  suggested  alternative  procedures.
Stating  that  "general  background  briefings  .  .  .  should  continue  to  indicate  in-
filtration has  increased  without  getting  into  specifics,"  it  indicated  that  under
pressure,  the  Saigon  Embassy  "could  have  one  or  more  deep  background  sessions
with  [the]  American  forces."  The  cable  cautioned,  however,  that  specific  numbers
and  comparisons  with  previous  years'  estimates  should  be  avoided.  These  would
not  be  released,  it  was  advised,  until  late  in  January  after  senior  Administration
officials  had  testified  to  Congress  in  a  scheduled  inquiry.  The  current  aim  was
stated  "to  get  general  picture  into  survey  stories  such  as  Grose  article  of  No-
vember 1  rather  than  as  spot  news  commanding  wide  attention."  The  cable
concluded  by  acknowledging  a  "just  received"  Taylor  message  and  approving
his  stated  judgment  to  proceed  with  periodic  background  briefings  in  Saigon,
along  lines  outlined  above.

Following  the  rift  between  the  South  Vietnamese  military  leaders  and  the


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  257

American  Embassy,  resistance  to  the  release  of  infiltration  data  hardened.  In
cables  of  24  December,  Ambassador  Taylor  was  instructed  to  avoid  background
briefings  on  the  infiltration  increases  until  the  political  situation  clarified.  He
was  counseled  that  release  of  the  data  would  be  "unwise"  unless  he  were  to
obtain  evidence  that  the  South  Vietnamese  military  was  planning  to  co  ahead
with  a  unilateral  release.  These  instructions  prevailed  until  well"  into  January
1965.


d.  Consultations  with  "Third  Countries."  In  the  days  immediately  following
the  policy  decisions  of  1-3  December,  several  U.S.  allies  were  consulted  con-
cerning the  intended  U.S.  approach  to  Southeast  Asia.  In  accord  with  the  Prin-
cipals' views,  the  governments  of  Thailand  and  Laos  were  briefed  by  the
respective  U.S.  Ambassadors  to  those  countries.  Foreign  minister  Thanat
Khoman  later  visited  the  President  in  Washington  and  presumably  pursued  the
matter  further.  The  Canadians  were  contacted  in  both  Ottawa  and  Washington.
William  Bundy  held  discussions  in  New  Zealand  and  Australia  on  4-5  Decem-
ber. Prime  Minister  Wilson  of  the  United  Kingdom  was  thoroughly  briefed
during  a  series  of  meetings  in  Washington,  7-9  December.  Later,  William  Bundy
told  the  Principals  that  the  U.K.,  Australia  and  New  Zealand  received  the  full
picture  of  immediate  U.S.  actions  and  its  stipulations  to  the  GVN  and  the
potential  two-phased  concept  of  graduated  pressures  on  North  Vietnam.  The
Canadian  government  was  told  slightly  less.  The  Philippines,  South  Korea  and
the  Republic  of  China  were  briefed  on  Phase  One  only.

One  of  the  aims  stressed  by  President  Johnson  in  the  meeting  of  1  and  3
December,  and  continually  thereafter,  was  obtaining  increased  assistance  for
the  GVN  and  for  our  efforts  on  its  behalf  from  our  allies.  During  the  12
December  Principals  meeting,  for  example,  William  Bundy  related  the  Presi-
dent's recent  wish  to  obtain  assistance  even  from  governments  without  strong
Southeast  Asia  commitments,  like  Denmark,  West  Germany,  and  India.  This  was
mentioned  in  the  context  of  a  summary  report  on  current  "third-country  as-
sistance of  all  kinds  to  South  Vietnam."

At  the  time,  however,  not  only  general  assistance  from  many  countries  but
specifically  military  assistance  from  a  select  few  was  particularly  sought.  During
the  consultations  with  allied  governments,  both  Australia  and  New  Zealand
were  pressed  to  send  troop  units  to  assist  ARVN.  Both  supported  the  U.S.
policy  decisions  as  probably  necessary,  but  neither  was  willing  at  the  time  to
make  a  commitment.  New  Zealand  officials  expressed  grave  doubts  that  Phase
Two  would  lead  to  negotiations,  predicting  instead  that  the  DRV  would  only
increase  the  clandestine  troop  deployments  to  the  South.  They  expressed  doubts
about  the  advisability  of  sending  allied  ground  forces  into  South  Vietnam.

The  concept  under  which  the  allied  troop  deployments  were  believed  de-
sirable was  related  to  that  which  the  NSC  Working  Group  had  recommended
as  deserving  further  study.  Contemplated  was  an  international  force  built  around
one  U.S.  division  to  be  deployed  just  south  of  the  DMZ  in  conjunction  with
stepped-up  U.S./GVN  air  operations  against  North  Vietnam.  In  essence,  there-
fore, it  was  a  Phase  Two  concept,  dependent  in  some  respects  on  the  degree  of
success  achieved  during  Phase  One  activities.  The  concept  was  examined  in
detail  by  the  Joint  Staff  in  early  December,  and  their  staff  study  was  forwarded
to  the  services  and  the  Joint  Pacific  Headquarters  "for  comment  and  recom-
mendations" on  10  December.  The  purposes  cited  for  such  a  force  deployment
by  the  Joint  Staff  were  stated  as  follows:  (1)  to  deter  ground  invasion  by  the
DRV;  (2)  to  hold  a  "blocking  position  against  DRV  attacks  to  down  the  coastal


258 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

plain  and  make  more  difficult  DRV  efforts  to  bypass";  and  (3)  to  be  "capable
of  holding  the  defensive  positions  against  attack  [words  illegible]  While  the
State  Department  and  other  non-military  agencies  apparently  favored  it,  the
Department  of  Defense  was  less  than  enthusiastic.  At  the  19  December  Prin-
cipals meeting,  for  example,  all  of  those  present  agreed  that  "suitable  planning
toward  such  a  force  should  go  forward"  except  Assistant  Defense  Secretary
McNaughton.  He  stated  that  he  thought  the  idea  had  been  shelved.  Later,  in
their  review  of  the  Joint  Staff's  study,  the  services  expressed  reservations  con-
cerning the  concept.  They  questioned  its  military  utility,  due  to  deployments
being  framed  essentially  within  a  narrow  deterrent  contour.  They  recommended
instead  a  continued  adherence  to  the  deployment  concept  in  the  approved
SEATO  plans,  which  in  their  totality  were  aimed  at  the  military  defense  of  all
Southeast  Asia.  The  Army,  in  particular,  expressed  concern  regarding  routes
and  modes  of  possible  DRV  advance  into  South  Vietnam  that  differed  from
those  assumed  by  the  study's  below-the-DMZ  concept.  The  Air  Force  pointed  out
that  the  international  force  concept  conflicted  with  the  JCS  concept  for  deterring
and  dealing  with  overt  DRV/CHICOM  aggression  as  submitted  on  14  De-
cember (JCSM-955-64).

Mr.  McNaughton's  comments  on  19  December  seem  to  have  been  correct.
The  case  files  containing  the  service  comments  in  the  international  force  concept
indicate  no  further  action  by  the  JCS  after  mid-January.

In  the  meantime,  however,  a  different  approach  to  attracting  wider  allied
participation  in  the  military  defense  of  South  Vietnam  appeared  promising.  On
29  December,  OSD/ISA  reported  readiness  on  the  part  of  the  Philippine,  ROK
and  GRC  Governments  to  provide  various  forms  of  assistance  to  South  Vietnam.
Included  in  the  available  Philippine  and  Korean  packages  were  an  assortment
of  military  forces.  The  ROK  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  offered  a  combat  engineer
battalion,  an  engineer  field  maintenance  team,  an  Army  transportation  company,
and  a  Marine  Corps  combat  engineer  company.  The  Philippine  Government
stated  its  willingness  to  send  a  reinforced  infantry  battalion,  an  engineer  con-
struction battalion,  and  some  Special  Forces  units.

2. Relations  with  the  GVN

Following  his  second  meeting  with  President  Johnson,  Ambassador  Taylor
returned  to  Saigon.  He  arrived  on  6  December  amid  press  speculation  con-
cerning the  details  of  his  instructions  and  subsequent  U.S.  actions.  The  basic
charge  given  him  by  the  President  had  been  well  publicized  since  their  meeting
on  the  1st:  "to  consult  urgently  with  the  government  of  Prime  Minister  Tran
Van  Huong  as  to  measures  to  be  taken  to  improve  the  situation  in  all  its
aspects."  However,  such  a  diplomatically  worded  statement  left  much  room  for
imaginative  interpretation — particularly  in  view  of  the  Ambassador's  "unan-
nounced stopover  in  Hong  Kong  to  get  a  briefing  by  U.S.  'China  Watchers'  in
that  listening  post."  Several  correspondents  speculated  on  the  likelihood  of  air
action.  An  apparent  inside  source  even  reported  that  these  would  be  held  in
abeyance  pending  the  outcome  of  strikes  in  Laos  and  the  GVN  reaction  to  U.S.
suggestions  for  improvement.

a.  Joint  Planning.  In  the  days  immediately  following  his  return,  Ambassador
Taylor's  schedule  precipitated  press  reports  of  frantic  activity  within  the  Em-
bassy and  other  parts  of  the  U.S.  Mission  in  Saigon.  Taylor  first  briefed  his
Embassy  Council  and  the  Embassy  staff  on  the  policy  discussions  in  Washington
and  the  joint  U.S. /GVN  courses  of  action  which  it  was  hoped  would  be  followed


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  259

in  South  Vietnam  during  ensuing  weeks.  On  7  December,  he  met  with  Premier
Huong  and  his  senior  ministers  and  with  General  Khanh.  On  these  occasions  he
outlined  the  military  and  diplomatic  actions  which  the  U.S.  Government  in-
tended to  take  during  Phase  One  and  explained  how  the  Administration  related
the  possibilities  of  Phase  Two  actions  to  GVN  performance.  The  Ambassador
described  in  general  terms  the  kinds  of  administrative  improvements  and  joint
planning  activities  which  U.S.  officials  thought  the  GVN  should  undertake.
Similar  sessions  were  held  during  the  next  few  days,  as  the  details  for  the  joint
I  GVN/U.S.  efforts  were  worked  out.  On  the  evening  of  the  8th,  Ambassador
Taylor  held  a  reception  for  members  of  the  high  National  Council,  and  General
Westmoreland  hosted  the  top  ARVN  generals  at  dinner.  At  both  occasions,
Taylor  briefed  the  assembled  on  U.S.  attitudes  toward  the  GVN  and,  presumably,
on  the  Administration's  calculations  of  U.S.  risk  relative  to  GVN  capability.  On
the  following  day,  he  held  a  lengthy  session  with  Premier  Huong,  Deputy
Premier  Vien  and  General  Khanh.  On  this  occasion,  he  distributed  a  paper  out-
lining nine  specific  actions  which  the  U.S.  Government  believed  were  needed
to  strengthen  the  GVN  and  in  which  the  local  U.S.  Mission  was  committed  to
help.  Taylor  reported  that  the  "paper  was  generally  well  received"  and  that
"specific  joint  action  responsibilities"  had  been  agreed  on.  These  were  to  be
confirmed  in  writing  on  the  following  day.  On  that  same  day,  he  submitted  a
proposed  GVN  press  release,  describing  in  general  terms  the  nature  of  the  new
U.S.  assistance  to  be  given  and  the  new  areas  of  GVN  and  joint  GVN/U.S.
planning,  designed  to  improve  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam.

On  the  11th,  having  obtained  Administration  approval,  an  official  GVN  state-
ment was  released  to  the  press.  It  related  that  "a  series  of  discussions  with  the
U.S.  Mission"  had  just  been  completed  and  that  the  U.S.  Government  had
offered  additional  assistance  "to  improve  the  execution  of  the  Government's
program  and  to  restrain  [not  'offset'  as  originally  worded]  the  mounting  infiltra-
tion of  men  and  equipment"  from  North  Vietnam.  Among  military  measures,
it  specified  that  U.S.  support  would  enable  "increased  numbers  of  [South  Viet-
namese] military,  paramilitary  and  police  forces"  and  would  permit  "the  strength-
ening of  the  air  defense  of  South  Vietnam."  It  also  mentioned  assistance  "for  a
variety  of  forms  of  industrial,  urban  and  rural  development"  and  promised  a
GVN  effort  to  emphasize  security  and  local  government  in  the  rural  areas."  The
statement  closed  with  the  following  two  paragraphs,  which  subsequent  events
made  to  appear  ironic  but  which  were  juxtaposed  with  great  care:

Together,  the  Government  of  Vietnam  and  the  United  States  Mission  are
making  joint  j)lans  to  achieve  greater  effectiveness  against  the  infiltration
threat.

In  the  course  of  the  discussions,  the  United  States  representatives  expressed
full  support  for  the  duly  constituted  Government  of  Prime  Minister  Huong.

As  the  following  section  will  show,  the  joint  planning  that  had  just  gotten
under  way  for  reprisal  action  and  Phase  Two  operations  was  soon  to  be  halted.
It  was  deferred  for  a  period  of  about  three  weeks  during  the  forthcoming  GVN
crisis.  However,  as  implicit  in  the  quoted  paragraphs  above,  its  resumption  pro-
vided effective  U.S.  leverage  to  help  bring  about  an  accommodation  between  the
military  dissidents  and  the  civilian  regime.

b.  GVN  Crises.  Late  in  the  evening  of  19  December,  high-ranking  South
Vietnamese  military  leaders,  led  by  General  Khanh,  moved  to  remove  all  power
from  the  civilian  regime  of  Premier  Huong.  The  move  came  in  the  announced


260 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

dissolution  of  the  High  National  Council,  which  had  been  serving  as  a  provi-
sional legislature  pending  adoption  of  a  permanent  constitution,  and  the  arrest
of  some  of  its  members.  Air  Commodore  Ky,  acting  as  spokesman  for  the  mili-
tary, claimed  that  their  intent  was  "to  act  as  a  mediator  [to  resolve]  all  differ-
ences in  order  to  achieve  national  unity."  The  immediate  apparent  conflict  was
with  the  Buddhists  who  had  been  demonstrating  and  threatening  to  provoke
civil  disorders  in  protest  against  the  Huong  government.  In  Ambassador  Taylor's
view,  however,  the  underlying  motive  was  growing  antipathy  with  particular
members  of  the  High  National  Council,  brought  to  a  head  by  the  Council's
refusal  to  approve  a  military  plan  to  retire  General  (Big)  Minh  from  active
service  (and  thus  remove  him  from  a  position  to  contend  with  the  ruling  mili-
tary clique).  Moreover,  the  military  had  become  quite  impatient  with  the
civilian  officials.

The  general  consensus  among  the  Ambassador,  General  Westmoreland  and
State  Department  officials  was  that  General  Khanh's  relationship  with  the  other
influential  generals  and  younger  officers  was  rather  uncertain.  Therefore,  they
sought  to  bolster  Premier  Huong's  resolve  to  remain  in  office  on  the  basis  of  an
understanding  with  the  generals — even  to  the  extent  of  seeking  Khanh's  resig-
nation or  dismissal.  When  presented  with  U.S.  views,  Khanh  gave  initial  ap-
pearances of  recognizing  that  the  military  seizure  had  directly  defied  the  U.S.
policy  position  and  the  stipulated  basis  for  continuing  joint  GVN/U.S.  efforts,
and  of  accepting  the  need  to  withdraw.  However,  he  quickly  attempted  to  turn
the  crisis  into  a  direct  confrontation  between  himself  and  Ambassador  Taylor.
On  the  22th,  he  issued  a  strong  public  affirmation  of  the  military  leaders'  actions,
[words  illegible]  views  "favorable  to  the  common  enemies  [communism  and
colonialism  in  any  form],"  and  of  the  military's  resolve  "not  to  carry  out  the
policy  of  any  foreign  country."  On  the  24th,  information  was  received  that  he
intended  to  pressure  Premier  Huong  into  declaring  Ambassador  Taylor  persona
non  grata.

Administration  reaction  to  this  challenge  indicated  that  it  considered  Khanh's
defiance  as  a  threat  to  the  foundations  of  U.S.  policy  in  South  Vietnam.  Am-
bassador Taylor  was  instructed  to  inform  Huong  that  the  U.S.  Government
regarded  the  PNG  issue  as  a  "matter  of  gravest  importance,"  and  that  "any
acceptance  of  [Khanh's]  demand  or  hesitation  in  rejecting  it  would  make  it
virtually  impossible  ...  to  continue  support  [of  the]  GVN  effort."  Suggesting
that  Huong  might  be  asked  if  he  thought  the  "American  people  could  be  brought
to  support  continued  U.S.  efforts  in  SVN  in  face  [of]  PNG  action  against  trusted
Ambassador,"  the  Administration  urged  persistence  in  encouraging  Huong  to
seek  an  accommodation  with  the  other  military  leaders.  JVIoreover,  high-ranking
MACV  personnel  were  urged  to  exploit  their  close  relationships  with  South
Vietnamese  counterparts  to  encourage  such  an  arrangement.  As  leverage,  Taylor
was  encouraged  to  emphasize  the  intended  directions  of  U.S.  policy,  subsequent
to  a  strengthened  and  stable  GVN.  Specifically,  he  was  urged  to  point  out  that
joint  reprisals  for  unusual  VC  actions  and  "any  possible  future  decision  to
initiate  [the]  second  phase"  were  impossible  as  long  as  current  conditions
persisted.  He  was  told,  "without  offering  anything  beyond  terms  of  your  in-
structions, you  could  use  these  to  their  fullest  to  bring  [Ky  and  the  other
generals]  around."

There  is  no  indication  in  the  available  sources  that  this  advice  was  directly
employed.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  Ambassador  Taylor  had  explained  the
dependency  of  further  U.S.  actions  on  GVN  progress  very  clearly  to  the  key
military  leaders  on  8  and  20  December.  Therefore,  they  were  well  aware  that


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  261

continued  U.S.  assistance  along  the  policy  line  explained  to  them  was  predicated
on  their  cooperation,  and  this  was  demonstrated  early  in  the  crisis.  Even  before
Khanh's  pubhc  declaration  of  independence  from  U.S.  policy,  it  became  known
that  joint  talks  concerning  increased  aid  to  the  South  Vietnamese  war  effort  had
been  suspended.  A  few  days  later  that  fact  was  given  additional  circulation,  with
emphasis  that  this  suspension  included  particularly  any  discussions  of  measures
to  reduce  the  infiltration  from  Laos  and  North  Vietnam.

The  degree  to  which  the  suspensions  of  joint  planning  actions  affected  the
judgments  of  the  South  Vietnamese  generals  is,  of  course,  not  clear.  What  is
apparent,  however,  is  that  this  factor  together  with  careful  Embassy  and  Ad-
ministration efforts  to  clarify  possible  misunderstandings,  led  the  generals  to
reconsider.  By  28  December,  Ambassador  Taylor  was  reporting  encouraging
signs  of  an  accommodation.  On  the  29th,  Secretary  Rusk  advised  the  President
that  the  "generals  were  having  second  thoughts"  and  that  "he  hoped  to  see
signs  of  political  unity  in  Saigon  soon."  Finally,  on  the  9th,  the  generals  pledged
to  return  to  terms  agreed  to  during  the  previous  August  whereby  matters  of
state  would  be  left  in  the  hands  of  a  civilian  government.  The  joint  communique
issued  by  Huong  and  Khanh  also  promised  to  speedily  convene  a  representa-
tive constituent  assembly  to  replace  the  High  National  Council.

The  general's  reassessments  were  no  doubt  helped  by  a  strong  U.S.  public
statement  directed  toward  the  South  Vietnamese  press,  explaining  the  U.S.  policy
position  toward  that  country's  political  situation.  In  language  strikingly  similar
to  the  President's  draft  instructions  to  Taylor,  it  included  the  following:

The  primary  concern  of  the  United  States  Government  and  its  representa-
tives is  that  there  be  in  Saigon  a  stable  government  in  place,  able  to  speak
for  all  its  components,  to  carry  put  plans  and  to  execute  decisions.  Without
such  a  government.  United  States  cooperation  with  and  assistance  to  South
Vietnam  cannot  be  effective.

.  .  .  The  sole  object  of  United  States  activities  has  been  and  continues
to  be  the  reestablishment  as  quickly  as  possible  of  conditions  favorable  to
the  more  effective  prosecution  of  the  war  against  the  Vietcong."

Consistent  with  the  expressed  U.S.  policy  position,  discussions  between  U.S.  and
GVN  officials  concerning  explained  assistance  to  the  South  Vietnamese  war
effort  were  resumed  on  1 1  January.

However,  the  aparent  reconciliation  of  South  Vietnam's  military  and  civilian
leadership  was  short-lived.  Close  on  the  heels  of  an  announced  GVN  decision
(17  January)  to  increase  its  military  draft  calls — long  advocated  by  the  U.S.
Mission — student  and  Buddhist  riots  swept  through  Hue  and  Dalat.  On  the
20th,  as  arrangements  were  completed  to  appoint  four  leading  generals  to
Premier  Huong's  cabinet,  a  leading  Buddhist  official  issued  a  proclamation
accusing  the  Huong  Government  of  attempting  to  split  the  Buddhist  movement.
On  the  21st,  Tri  Quang  issued  a  statement  charging  that  the  Huong  Govern-
ment could  not  exist  without  U.S.  support,  a  charge  that  gained  in  intensity  in
the  days  to  follow.  On  the  23rd,  Buddhist  leaders  ordered  a  military  struggle
against  the  United  States.  Denouncing  Premier  Huong  as  a  lackey  of  the  U.S.
Ambassador,  they  accused  Taylor  of  seeking  to  wipe  out  Buddhism  in  Vietnam.
In  Hue,  student-led  demonstrators  sacked  the  USIA  library  and  destroyed  an
estimated  8,000  books.  Two  days  later,  riots  and  strikes  were  in  progress  in  Hue,
Saigon  and  Da  Nang,  and  Hue  was  placed  under  martial  law.  Meanwhile,  mili-
tary leaders  were  attempting  to  convince  Buddhist  spokesmen  to  call  off  their


262 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  111

demonstrations  against  the  GVN  and  the  United  States.  Finally,  on  the  27th,
the  generals  [words  illegible]  issued  a  statement  that  he  was  resuming  power
"to  resolve  the  political  situation."  Soon  after,  the  Buddhist  leaders  issued  orders
to  their  followers  to  halt  their  demonstrations,  at  least  until  they  had  sufficient
opportunity  to  observe  the  performance  of  the  new  regime.

Thus,  in  late  January  the  United  States  Government  was  faced  with  a  dilemma.
In  December,  it  had  spoken  out  quite  clearly  to  the  effect  that  its  continued
assistance  along  previously  determined  policy  lines  was  dependent  upon  the
effective  functioning  of  a  duly  constituted  South  Vietnamese  government.  By
its  actions  and  statement  during  the  initial  December  crisis,  it  had  indicated  that
what  it  had  in  mind  was  a  civilian  regime  governing  without  interference  from
any  particular  group.  Now,  less  than  a  month  from  the  settlement  of  the  former
crisis  along  lines  compatible  with  the  preferred  U.S.  solution,  it  was  faced  with
another  military  coup.  A  time  for  reassessing  former  policy  decisions  and  taking
stock  of  the  shifting  debits  and  assets  in  the  U.S.  position  had  arrived.

c.  Joint  Reprisals.  Meanwhile,  an  issue  of  great  significance  to  the  Admin-
istration, as  well  as  to  future  relations  with  the  GVN,  was  adding  to  the  growing
dissatisfaction  with  progress  achieved  in  other  Phase  One  actions.  One  of  the
basic  elements  in  Phase  One  policy  was  to  have  been  joint  GVN/U.S.  reprisal
actions  in  response  to  any  "unusual  actions"  by  the  VC.  When  faced  with  a  sig-
nificant provocation  at  the  end  of  December,  the  Administration  failed  to
authorize  such  actions.  At  the  time,  the  circumstances  in  South  Vietnam  pro-
vided cogent  reasons  for  not  doing  so,  but  it  nevertheless  represented  a  significant
departure  from  the  agreed  policy  position.

At  the  height  of  the  first  government  crisis,  on  Christmas  Eve,  the  Brink
U.S.  officers  billet  in  downtown  Saigon  was  bombed  and  severely  damaged.  Two
Americans  were  killed  and  38  injured;  13  Vietnamese  also  were  injured.  No
suspicious  person  was  observed  near  the  building,  so  the  responsible  party  was
unknown.  In  reporting  the  incident.  Ambassador  Taylor  treated  it  as  an  occasion
for  reprisal  action.  The  immediate  administration  assessment  was  that  under
current  political  circumstances,  neither  the  American  public  nor  international
opinion  might  believe  that  the  VC  had  done  it.  Moreover,  with  clear  evidence
lacking,  it  felt  that  a  reprisal  at  this  time  might  appear  as  though  "we  are  trying
to  shoot  our  way  out  of  an  internal  political  crisis."  Given  the  political  disorder
in  Saigon,  the  administration  believed  it  would  be  hard  for  [the]  American
public  to  understand  action  to  extend  [the]  war."  Therefore,  so  the  reasoning
went,  it  would  be  undesirable  to  undertake  reprisals  at  this  time.

Calls  for  reprisal  action  came  from  several  quarters.  Citing  what  it  called  "a
further  indication"  of  Viet  Cong  responsibihty,  and  cautioning  against  adding
the  Brink  affair  to  the  Bien  Hoa  instance  of  unreciprocated  enemy  provocation,
CINCPAC  urged  a  reprisal  attack.  He  argued  that  the  "bombing  of  Brink  BOQ
was  an  act  aimed  directly  at  U.S.  armed  force  in  RVN"  and  that  failure  to
respond  would  only  encourage  further  attacks.  Ambassador  Taylor  forwarded
what  he  termed  "a  unanimous  recommendation"  by  himself  and  members  of  the
U.S.  Mission  Council  "that  a  reprisal  bombing  attack  be  executed  [as  soon  as
possible]"  on  a  specified  target  "accompanied  by  statement  relating  this  action  to
Brink  bombing."  He  stated  that  "no  one  in  this  part  of  the  world  has  [the]
slightest  doubt  of  VC  guilt"  and  pointed  out  that  the  NLF  was  publicly  taking
credit  for  the  incident.  Citing  Taylor's  request  and  concurring  in  his  recom-
mendation, even  to  the  specific  target  selection,  the  ICS  added  their  voices  to
those  arguing  for  reprisals.  In  their  proposed  execute  message  to  CINCPAC,


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  263

they  proposed  a  one-day  mission  by  40  strike  aircraft  against  the  Vit  Thii  Lu
Army  barracks.  Further,  they  recommended  that  the  VNAF  should  participate  if
their  state  of  readiness  and  time  permitted.

In  spite  of  these  strong  recommendations,  the  decision  was  made  not  to
retahate  for  the  Brink  bombing  incident.  On  29  December,  the  following
message  was  dispatched  to  the  U.S.  embassies  in  Southeast  Asia  and  to
CINCPAC:

Highest  levels  today  reached  negative  decision  on  proposal  ...  for
reprisal  action  for  BOQ  bombing.  We  will  be  sending  fuller  statement  of
reasoning  and  considerations  affecting  future  actions  after  Secretary's  re-
turn from  Texas  tonight.

Available  materials  do  not  include  any  further  explanation.

3. Policy  Views  in  January

As  the  new  year  began,  the  Administration  was  beset  with  frustration  over
an  apparent  lack  of  impact  from  Phase  One  operations,  over  its  failure  to  take
reprisals  after  an  attack  on  U.S.  personnel,  and  over  the  still  troublesome  crisis
within  the  GVN.  In  this  mood,  U.S.  policy  was  subjected  to  various  kinds  of
criticism  and  comment.  Some  came  from  within  the  Administration,  various
reactions  came  from  outside  it.

a.  Public  Debate.  At  the  height  of  the  GVN  crisis,  a  number  of  newspapers
and  periodicals  joined  with  the  already  committed  (in  opposition)  and  influential
New  York  Times  and  St.  Louis  Post  Dispatch  in  questioning  U.S.  objectives  in
Southeast  Asia  and/or  advocating  U.S.  withdrawal  from  the  entanglement  of
South  Vietnam.  In  the  midst  of  this  kind  of  public  questioning  a  major  debate
arose  among  members  of  Congress.

In  a  particularly  active  television  day,  Sunday  3  January,  Secretary  Rusk
defended  Vietnam  policy  in  the  context  of  a  year-end  foreign  policy  report.
Ruling  out  either  a  U.S.  withdrawal  or  a  major  expansion  of  the  war.  Rusk
gave  assurances  that,  with  internal  unity,  and  our  aid  and  persistence,  the  South
Vietnamese  could  themselves  defeat  the  insurgency.  On  another  network,  three
Senators  expressed  impatience  with  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam  and  urged  a  public
reevaluation  of  it.  Senator  Morse  criticized  our  involvement  in  South  Vietnam
on  a  unilateral  basis,  while  Senators  Cooper  and  Monroney  spoke  in  favor  of  a
full-fledged  Senate  debate  to  "come  to  grips"  with  the  situation  there.  Senator
Mansfield  also  appeared  on  the  3rd  to  urge  consideration  of  Church's  neutraliza-
tion idea  as  an  alternative  to  current  policy  but  in  keeping  with  the  President's
desire  neither  to  withdraw  nor  carry  the  war  to  North  Vietnam.  On  the  6th,  in
response  to  an  Associated  Press  survey,  the  views  in  the  Senate  were  shown  to  be
quite  divided.  Of  63  Senators  commenting,  31  suggested  a  negotiated  settlement
after  the  anti-comraunist  bargaining  positions  were  improved,  while  10  favored
negotiating  immediately.  Eight  others  favored  commitment  of  U.S.  forces  against
North  Vietnam,  3  urged  immediate  withdrawal  of  U.S.  advisers  and  military  aid,
and  11  stated  that  they  didn't  know  what  should  be  done  other  than  to  help
strengthen  the  GVN.  On  1 1  January,  Senator  Russell  reacted  to  a  briefing  by
CIA  Director  McCone  with  a  statement  that  "up  until  now  we  have  been  losing
ground  instead  of  gaining  it."  He  urged  reevaluation  of  the  U.S.  position  in
South  Vietnam,  cautioning  that  unless  a  more  effective  government  developed
in  Saigon  the  situation  would  become  a  prolonged  stalemate  at  best.

On  14  January,  as  a  result  of  reports  of  the  loss  of  two  U.S.  jet  combat


264 Gravel  Ediuon  The  Pentagon  Papers  \'ol.  Ill

aircraft  over  Laos,  accounts  of  U.S.  air  operations  against  Laotian  infiltration
routes  ga:  :..:  .-  jr  circulation  for  the  first  time.  One  in  particular,  a  U  P  I.
story  b\  A::n.:  Dcmmen,  in  effect  blew  the  hd  on  the  entire  Y  ANKEE
TEAM  operation  in  Laos  since  May  of  1964.  Despite  official  Slate  or  Defense
refusal  to  comment  on  the  nature  of  the  Laotian  air  missions,  these  disclosures
added  new  fuel  to  the  public  policy  debate.  In  a  Senate  speech  the  following
daw  in  which  he  expressed  his  uneasiness  over  '"recent  reports  of  American  air
strikes  in  Laos  and  North  \'ietnam,"  Senator  McGovern  criticized  what  he
called  "the  policy,  now  gaining  supjxjrt  in  \\'ashingion,  of  extending  the  war  to
the  North."  He  denied  that  bombing  Nonh  \'ieinam  could  '  seriously  weaken
guerrilla  fighters  1,000  miles  away"  and  urged  seeking  a  "pohtical  settlement"
with  North  \  ietnam.  Senator  Long  and  Congressman  Ford  indicated  on  a  TV
program  that  they  didn't  feel  that  such  operations  were  "a  particularlv  dangerous
course  "  for  the  nation  to  follow  and  that  they  were  the  kind  of  actions  that
could  help  protect  our  forces  in  South  N'ietnam.  Senator  Morse  criticized  the
bombings  as  part  of  the  Administration's  "foreign  policv  of  concealment  in
Southeast  Asia."  On  the  19th.  in  the  Senate,  he  repeated  his  blast,  charging  that
the  air  strikes  ignored  the  1962  Geneva  accord  and  violated  the  nation's  belief
in  "substituting  the  rule  of  law  for  the  jungle  law  of  militarv  might."  Broadening
his  attack,  he  warned  that  "there  is  no  hope  of  avoiding  a  massive  war  in  Asia"
if  the  U.S.  policy  toward  Southeast  Asia  were  to  continue  without  change.

b.  Policy  Assessments.  The  intensifying  public  debate  and  the  events  and
forces  which  precipitated  it  brought  about  an  equally  searching  reassessment  of
policy  within  the  Administration.  While  there  is  little  evidence  in  the  available
materials  that  shows  any  serious  questioning  of  foreign  policv  decisions  among
the  Principals,  questioning  did  occur  within  the  agencies  which  they  represented.
It  is  clear  that  some  of  the  judgments  and  alternative  approaches  were  discussed
with  these  NSC  members,  and  presumabh.  some  found  their  wa\  into  discus-
sions with  the  President.

One  ver\  significant  and  probablv  influential  \iewpoint  was  by  the

Saigon  Embassy.  In  a  message  described  as  the  reflections  of  —  Johnson
and  Ambassador  Taylor  on  which  General  Westmoreland  concurred,  the  thrust
of  the  advice  seemed  to  be  to  move  P'":^e  T.v?.  almost  in  spite  of  the
political  outcome  in  Saigon.  After  list:r_  ::  -  \.  "solutions"  to  the  then-
unsettled  G\'N  crisis,  Taylor  identified  eiir  nary  takeover  coupled  with
Huong's  resignation  or  a  successor  civilian  _  .  :nent  dominated  by  the  mili-
tary as  equally  the  worst  possible  outcomes.  <  Ii  ;s  important  to  note  here  that,
depending  on  how  one  interprets  the  structure  of  the  January'  27lh  regime,  one
or  the  other  of  these  was  in  fact  the  case  at  the  beginning  of  the  air  strikes  in
February,  1965).  In  the  event  of  such  an  outcome.  Taylor  argued  that  the
United  States  could  either  "carrv  on  about  as  we  are  now"  or  "seek  to  disengage
from  the  present  intimacy  of  relationship  with  the  G\  N  while  continuing  "to
accept  responsibility  for  [its]  air  and  maritime  defense  .  .  .  against  the  DRN  ."
In  the  case  of  disengagement,  he  argued,  the  United  States  could  offset  the
danger  of  South  \"ietnamese  leaders  being  panicked  into  making  a  deal  with  the
NLF  "  if  we  were  engaged  in  reprisal  attacks  or  had  initiated  Phase  Two  opera-
tions against  DR\'."  The  message  then  summarized  the  three  different  conditions
under  which  the  Mission  officials  thought  Phase  Two  operations  could  be  un-
dertaken.

A.  In  association  with  the  G\  N  after  the  latter  had  proved  itself  as  a
reasonably  stable  government  able  to  control  its  armed  forces.


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  265

B.  Under  a  situation  such  as  now  as  an  emergency  stimulant  hopefully  to
create  unity  at  home  and  restore  failing  morale.

C.  As  a  unilateral  U.S.  action  to  compensate  for  a  reduced  in-country  U.S.
presence.

In  other  words,  under  any  conceivable  alliance  condition  short  of  complete  U.S.
abandonment  of  South  Vietnam,  Ambassador  Taylor  and  his  top  level  associates
in  Saigon  saw  the  graduated  air  strikes  of  Phase  Two  as  an  appropriate  course
of  action.  As  they  concluded,  "without  Phase  Two  operations,  we  see  slight
chance  of  moving  toward  a  successful  solution."

Within  the  more  influential  sections  of  the  State  Department,  policy  re-
examination took  a  similar,  though  not  identical,  tack.  Rather  than  adjust  the
substance  or  projected  extent  of  the  pressures  policy,  the  tendency  was  to  re-
calculate and  adjust  the  conditions  under  which  it  was  considered  appropriate
to  apply  it.  The  motivation  for  a  reassessment  was  the  sense  of  impending
disaster  in  South  Vietnam.  What  the  Saigon  Embassy  reports  appear  to  have
portrayed  at  the  time  as  concrete  instances  of  foot-dragging,  political  maneu-
vering, and  sparring  for  advantage  among  political  and  military  leaders  seem  to
have  been  interpreted  in  Washington  as  an  impending  sell-out  to  the  NLF.  For
example,  the  Assistant  Secretary  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  who  had  been  an
important  participant  in  the  policy  and  decision-making  processes  through  most
of  1964,  offered  the  following  prognosis  [Doc.  248]:

...  the  situation  in  Vietnam  is  now  likely  to  come  apart  more  rapidly
than  we  had  anticipated  in  November.  We  would  still  stick  to  the  estimate
that  the  most  likely  form  of  coming  apart  would  be  a  government  or  key
groups  starting  to  negotiate  covertly  with  the  Liberation  Front  or  Hanoi,
perhaps  not  asking  in  the  first  instance  that  we  get  out,  but  with  that
necessarily  following  at  a  fairly  early  stage.

The  perceived  impact  of  a  collapse  in  Saigon  on  other  nations — perhaps  even
more  than  the  political  fortunes  of  South  Vietnam  itself — were  a  significant  part
of  the  State  Department  calculations.  If  a  unilateral  "Vietnam  solution"  were
to  be  arranged,  so  the  thinking  went  in  January  1965,  not  only  would  Laos  and
Cambodia  be  indefensible,  but  Thailand's  position  would  become  unpredictable.
Bundy  wrote:

Most  seriously,  there  is  grave  question  whether  the  Thai  in  these  circum-
stances would  retain  any  confidence  at  all  in  our  continued  support.  .  .  .
As  events  have  developed,  the  American  public  would  probably  not  be  too
sharply  critical,  but  the  real  question  would  be  whether  Thailand  and  other
nations  were  weakened  and  taken  over  thereafter.

There  was  also  a  perceived  lack  of  reaction  or  effectiveness  in  U.S.  policies
during  the  late  autumn.  Bundy  reflected  an  apparently  widely  shared  concern
that  Administration  actions  and  statements  since  the  election  had  convinced  the
Vietnamese  and  other  Asians  that  the  U.S.  Government  did  not  intend  to  take
stronger  action  and  was  "possibly  looking  for  a  way  out."  Moreover,  he  saw  this
impression  being  created  by  our  "insisting  on  a  more  perfect  government  than
can  reasonably  be  expected,  before  we  consider  any  additional  action — and  that
we  might  even  pull  out  our  support  unless  such  a  government  emerges."

To  change  this  impression  and  reverse  the  disturbing  trends,  Bundy  and  others


266 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  I'ol.  Ill

in  State  suggested  stronger  actions,  even  though  recognizing  thai  these  actions
incurred  certain  risks.  However,  the  immediate  actions  suggested  fell  somewhat
short  of  Phase  Two  (a  term  that  was  now  used  in  the  correspondence).  They
included:  (1)  "an  early  occasion  for  reprisal  action  .  .  (2)  "possibly  be-
ginning low-level  reconnaissance  of  DR\'  .  .  .";  (3)  '"an  orderly  withdrawal
of  our  dependents,"  which  was  termed  "a  grave  mistake  in  the  absence  of
stronger  action";  and  (4)  "introduction  of  limited  U.S.  ground  forces  into  the
northern  area  of  South  Vietnam  .  .  .  concurrently  with  the  first  air  attacks  into
the  DRV."  Thev  downgraded  the  potential  of  further  intensifving  the  air  opera-
tions in  Laos,  indicating  that  such  actions  "would  not  meet  the  problem  of
Saigon  morale"  and  might  precipitate  a  "Communist  intervention  on  a  sub-
stantial scale  in  Laos.  .  .  ."  The  perceived  risks  of  the  suggested  actions  were;
(1)  a  deepened  U.S.  commitment  at  a  time  when  South  Metnamese  will  ap-
peared weak;  (2)  the  hkelihood  of  provoking  open  opposition  to  U.S.  policies  in
nations  like  India  and  Japan;  (3)  the  uncertaintv  of  anv  meaningful  stiffening
effort  on  the  G\'N;  and  (4)  the  inability  of  "limited  actions  against  the  southern
DR\'"  to  sharply  reduce  infiltration  or  "to  induce  Hanoi  to  call  it  off."

If  the  graduated,  "progressivelv  mounting."  air  operations  of  Phase  Two  were
implied  by  these  suggestions,  it  appears  that  they  were  perceived  as  being  entered
rather  gingerly  and  with  little  intent  to  intensify  them  to  whatever  extent  might
be  required  to  force  a  decision  in  Hanoi.  Rather,  the  expectancies  in  State  were
quite  different:  "On  balance  we  beheve  that  such  action  would  have  some
faint  hope  of  really  improving  the  \'ietnamese  situation,  and.  above  all.  would
put  us  in  a  much  stronger  position  to  hold  the  next  line  of  defense,  namely
Thailand."  Moreover,  Bundv  and  others  felt  that  even  with  the  stronger  actions,
the  negotiating  process  that  thev  believed  was  bound  to  come  about  could  not
be  expected  to  bring  about  a  really  secure  and  independent  South  Metnam.
Still,  despite  this  shortcoming,  they  reasoned  that  their  suggested  "stronger  ac-
tions" would  have  the  desirable  effect  in  Southeast  Asia:  ".  .  .  we  would  still
have  appeared  to  Asians  to  have  done  a  lot  more  about  it."

High  among  the  State  Department's  concerns  over  the  impact  of  U.S.  \'iet-
nam  policy  on  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  were  current  developments  in  the
communist  world.  For  one  thing,  the  Soviet  Union  had  re-entered  Southeast
Asian  politics  in  an  active  wav,  after  a  period  of  nearlv  three  vears  of  diligent
detachment.  Following  a  reported  Soviet  pledge  in  November  to  increase  eco-
nomic and  military  aid  to  North  Vietnam,  the  Administration  held  a  series  of
conversations  in  December  with  representatives  of  the  new  Soviet  regime.
During  at  least  one  of  these — in  addition  to  exchanging  the  now  standard  re-
spective lines  about  who  violated  the  Geneva  Accord — Secretary  Rusk  stressed
the  seriousness  of  the  situation  created  by  Hanoi's  and  Peking's  policies,  im-
plying strongly  that  we  would  remain  in  South  Vietnam  until  those  policies  had
changed  or  had  resulted  in  "a  real  scrap."  Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Gromyko
replied  that  if  the  United  States  felt  so  stronglv  about  improving  the  situation
in  Vietnam,  it  should  be  willing  to  attend  an  international  conference  to  discuss
Laos  and  Vietnam.  However,  he  would  not  agree  with  Rusk's  request  for  assur-
ances that  Laos  would  be  represented  by  Souvanna  Phouma.

Within  a  few  weeks  of  this  conversation,  Mr.  Gromvko  sent  assurances  to
the  DR\'  that  the  Soviet  Union  would  support  it  in  the  face  of  aggressive  ac-
tions by  the  United  States.  Further,  he  expressed  the  official  Soviet  view  that  it
was  the  duty  of  all  participants  in  the  Geneva  agreements  to  take  the  steps
necessary  to  frustrate  U.S.  militar)'  plans  to  extend  the  war  in  Indo-China.
This  note,  sent  on  30  December,  was  made  public  in  a  renewed  call  on  4  Janu-


Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  Feb.  1964-Jan.  1965  261

ary  for  a  conference  on  Laos,  to  be  convened  without  preconditions.  On  17
January,  Pravda  carried  an  authoritative  statement  warning  that  "the  provoca-
tions of  the  armed  forces  of  the  United  States  and  their  Saigon  puppets  against
North  Vietnam"  carried  dangers  of  "large  armed  conflict,"  and  citing  naval
attacks  on  the  DRV  coast  and  U.S.  air  attacks  in  Laos  as  examples.  On  the  22nd,
in  letters  to  both  Hanoi  and  Peking,  Gromyko  reiterated  the  Soviet  pledge  to
aid  North  Vietnam  in  resisting  any  U.S.  military  action.

In  addition  to  renewed  Soviet  activity  in  Southeast  Asia,  that  of  Communist
China  also  appeared  ominous.  Fanned  by  Sukarno's  abrupt  withdrawal  of  Indo-
nesia's participation  in  the  U.N.,  some  U.S.  officials  voiced  concern  over  the
development  of  a  "Peking-Jakarta  axis"  to  promote  revolution  in  Asia.  North
Vietnam,  together  with  North  Korea,  were  seen  as  natural  allies  who  might  join
in  to  form  an  international  grouping  exerting  an  attraction  on  other  Asian  states
to  counter  that  of  the  U.N.  Peking  was  viewed  as  the  instigator  and  prime  bene-
factor of  such  a  grouping.

Complementing  the  State  Department  policy  assessments,  were  those  in  OSD.
For  example,  in  early  January,  Assistant  Secretary  McNaughton  regarded  U.S.
stakes  in  South  Vietnam  as  [Doc.  247]:  (1)  to  hold  onto  "buffer  real  estate"
near  Thailand  and  Malaysia  and  (2)  to  maintain  our  national  reputation;  and
the  latter  was  the  more  important  of  the  two.  Sharing  the  State  view  that  South
Vietnam  was  being  lost  ("this  means  that  a  government  not  unfriendly  to  the
DRV  would  probably  emerge  within  two  years"),  he  believed  that  the  U.S.
reputation  would  suffer  least  "if  we  continue  to  support  South  Vietnam  and  if
Khanh  and  company  continue  to  behave  like  children  as  the  game  is  lost."  How-
ever, he  pointed  out  that  "dogged  perseverance"  was  also  recommended  because
the  situation  might  possibly  improve.

In  specific  terms,  McNaughton  defined  perseverance  as  including  the  follow-
ing course  of  action:

a.  Continue  to  take  risks  on  behalf  of  SVN.  A  reprisal  should  be  carried
out  soon.  (Dependents  could  be  removed  at  that  time.)

b.  Keep  slugging  away.  Keep  help  flowing,  BUT  do  not  increase  the
number  of  U.S.  men  in  SVN.  (Additional  U.S.  soldiers  are  as  likely  to  be
counter-productive  as  productive.)

c.  Do  not  lead  or  appear  to  lead  in  any  negotiations.  Chances  of  re-
versing the  tide  will  be  better  and,  if  we  don't  reverse  the  tide,  our  repu-
tation will  emerge  in  better  condition.

d.  If  we  leave,  be  sure  it  is  a  departure  of  the  kind  which  would  put
everyone  on  our  side,  wondering  how  we  stuck  it  and  took  it  so  long.

In  the  event  of  inability  to  prevent  deterioration  within  South  Vietnam,  he  urged
the  development  of  plans  to  move  to  a  fallback  position  by  helping  shore-up
Thailand  and  Malaysia.

An  OSD  assessment  made  immediately  after  the  Khanh  coup  in  late  January
adds  perspective  to  this  viewpoint.  [Doc.  249]  In  it,  McNaughton  stated  and
Secretary  McNamara  agreed,  "U.S.  objective  in  South  Vietnam  is  not  to  'help
friend'  but  to  contain  China."  In  particular,  both  Malaysia  and  Thailand  were
seen  as  the  next  targets  of  Chinese  aggressiveness.  Neither  official  saw  any  al-
ternative to  "keep  plugging,"  insofar  as  U.S.  efforts  inside  South  Vietnam  were
concerned.  However,  outside  the  borders,  both  favored  initiating  strikes  against
North  Vietnam.  At  first,  they  believed,  these  should  take  the  form  of  reprisals;
beyond  that,  the  Administration  would  have  to  "feel  its  way"  into  stronger,
graduated  pressures.  McNaughton  doubted  that  such  strikes  would  actually


268 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

help  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  but  thought  they  should  be  carried  out
anyway.  McNamara  believed  they  probably  would  help  the  situation,  in  addi-
tion to  their  broader  impacts  on  the  U.S.  position  in  Southeast  Asia.

Though  different  in  some  respects,  all  of  these  policy  views  pointed  in  a
similar  direction.  In  his  own  way,  each  Principal  argued  that  it  was  unproduc-
tive to  hold  off  on  further  action  against  North  Vietnam  until  the  GVN  began
to  operate  in  an  effective  manner.  Each  suggested  broader  benefits  that  could
be  gained  for  the  United  States  if  firmer  measures  were  taken  directly  against  the
DRV.

The  impact  of  these  views  can  be  seen  in  the  policy  guidance  emanating  from
Washington  in  mid  and  late  January  1965.  For  example,  on  the  11th,  Ambassa-
dor Taylor  was  apprised  of  Administration  doubts  that  General  Khanh  had
put  aside  his  intentions  to  stage  a  coup  and  was  given  counsel  for  such  an
eventuality.  Essentially,  the  guidance  was  to  avoid  actions  that  would  further
commit  the  United  States  to  any  particular  form  of  political  solution.  The  un-
derlying rationale  expressed  was  that  if  a  military  government  did  emerge,  "we
might  well  have  to  swallow  our  pride  and  work  with  it."  Apparently,  the  Ad-
ministration's adamant  insistence  on  an  effective  GVN  along  lines  specified  by
the  United  States  had  been  eroded.  However,  on  the  14th  guidance  to  Taylor
indicated  that  the  Administration  had  not  yet  determined  to  move  into  a  phase
of  action  more  vigorous  than  the  current  one.  In  the  immediate  wake  of  public
disclosures  concerning  the  bombing  operations  in  Laos,  Secretary  Rusk  con-
curred in  Taylor's  proposal  to  brief  the  GVN  leaders  on  these  operations,  but
cautioned  against  encouraging  their  expectations  of  new  U.S.  moves  against  the
North.  Rusk  considered  it  "essential  that  they  not  be  given  [the]  impression  that
[BARREL  ROLL,  etc.]  represents  a  major  step-up  of  activity  against  the  DRV
or  that  it  represents  an  important  new  phase  of  U.S.  operational  activity."  The
immediate  matter  for  speculation  was  the  striking  of  a  key  highway  bridge  in
Laos,  but  the  program  still  called  for  two  missions  per  week.

Clear  indication  that  the  Administration  was  contemplating  some  kind  of
increased  military  activity  came  on  25  January.  Ambassador  Taylor  was  asked
to  comment  on  the  "Departmental  view"  that  U.S.  dependents  should  be  with-
drawn to  "clear  the  decks"  in  Saigon  and  enable  better  concentration  of  U.S.
efforts  on  behalf  of  South  Vietnam.  Previously,  the  JCS  had  reversed  their
initial  position  on  this  issue  and  requested  the  removal,  a  view  which  was  for-
warded to  State  "for  consideration  at  the  highest  levels  of  government"  in  mid-
January.  Recalling  the  Bundy  policy  assessment  of  6  January,  it  will  be  noted
that  clearing  the  decks  by  removing  dependents  was  recommended  only  in
association  with  "stronger  actions."  However,  there  is  no  indication  of  any
decision  at  this  point  to  move  into  Phase  Two.  The  Rusk  cable  made  specific
reference  to  a  current  interest  in  reprisal  actions.  Moreover,  consideration  of
later  events  and  decisions  compels  the  judgment  that  it  was  only  reprisals  which
the  Administration  had  in  mind  as  January  drew  to  a  close.


269


3. The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam:
RoUing  Thunder  Begins,  February-June,  1965

Summary  and  Analysis

The  United  States  decisions,  in  the  early  months  of  1965,  to  launch  a  program
of  reprisal  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam,  evolving  progressively  into  a  sus-
tained bombing  campaign  of  rising  intensity,  were  made  against  a  background  of
anguished  concern  over  the  threat  of  imminent  collapse  of  the  Government  of
South  Vietnam  and  of  its  military  effort  against  the  Viet  Cong.  The  air  war
against  the  North  was  launched  in  the  hope  that  it  would  strengthen  GVN  con-
fidence and  cohesion,  and  that  it  would  deter  or  restrain  the  DRV  from  continu-
ing its  support  of  the  revolutionary  war  in  the  South.  There  was  hope  also  that
a  quite  modest  bombing  effort  would  be  sufficient;  that  the  demonstration  of  US
determination  and  the  potential  risks  and  costs  to  the  North  implicit  in  the  early
air  strikes  would  provide  the  US  with  substantial  bargaining  leverage;  and  that
it  would  redress  the  "equation  of  advantage"  so  that  a  political  settlement  might
be  negotiated  on  acceptable  terms.

Once  set  in  motion,  however,  the  bombing  effort  seemed  to  stiffen  rather  than
soften  Hanoi's  backbone,  as  well  as  to  lessen  the  willingness  of  Hanoi's  allies,
particularly  the  Soviet  Union,  to  work  toward  compromise.  Moreover,  com-
promise was  ruled  out  in  any  event,  since  the  negotiating  terms  that  the  US  pro-
posed were  not  "compromise"  terms,  but  more  akin  to  a  "cease  and  desist"  order
that,  from  the  DRV/VC  point  of  view,  was  tantamount  to  a  demand  for  their
surrender.

As  Hanoi  remained  intractable  in  the  face  of  a  mere  token  demonstration  of
U.S.  capability  and  resolve,  U.S.  policy  shifted  to  a  more  deliberate  combination
of  intensified  military  pressures  and  modest  diplomatic  enticements.  The  carrot
was  added  to  the  stick  in  the  form  of  an  economic  development  gesture,  but  the
coercive  element  remained  by  far  the  more  tangible  and  visible  component  of
U.S.  policy.  To  the  slowly  but  relentlessly  rising  air  pressures  against  the  North
was  added  the  deployment  of  US  combat  forces  to  the  South.  In  response  to
public  pressures,  a  major  diplomatic  opportunity  was  provided  Hanoi  for  a  quiet
backdown  through  a  brief  bombing  pause  called  in  mid-May,  but  the  pause
seemed  to  be  aimed*more  at  clearing  the  decks  for  a  subsequent  intensified  re-
sumption than  it  was  at  evoking  a  reciprocal  act  of  de-escalation  by  Hanoi.  The
U.S.  initiative,  in  any  event,  was  unmistakably  rebuffed  by  North  Vietnam  and
by  its  Communist  allies,  and  the  opposing  positions  were  more  hopelessly  dead-
locked than  ever  before.

It  is  the  purpose  of  this  study  to  reconstruct  the  immediate  circumstances
that  led  up  to  the  U.S.  reprisal  decision  of  February  1965,  to  retrace  the  changes
in  rationale  that  progressively  transformed  the  reprisal  concept  into  a  sustained
graduated  bombing  effort,  and  to  chronicle  the  relationship  between  that  effort
and  the  military-political  moves  to  shore  up  Saigon  and  the  military-diplomatic
signals  to  dissuade  Hanoi,  during  the  crucial  early  months  of  February  through
May  of  1965.


270 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  III

Background  to  Pleiku.  The  growing  realization,  throughout  1964,  that  the
final  consolidation  of  VC  power  in  South  Vietnam  was  a  distinct  possibility,
had  led  to  a  protracted  US  policy  reassessment  and  a  determined  search  for  force-
ful military  alternatives  in  the  North  that  might  help  salvage  the  deteriorating
situation  in  the  South.  The  proposed  program  of  graduated  military  pressures
against  North  Vietnam  that  emerged  from  this  reassessment  in  late  1964  had
three  major  objectives:  (1)  to  signal  to  the  Communist  enemy  the  firmness  of
U.S.  resolve,  (2)  to  boost  the  sagging  morale  of  the  GVN  in  the  South,  and
(3)  to  impose  increased  costs  and  strains  upon  the  DRV  in  the  North.  Under-
lying the  rationale  of  the  program  was  the  hope  that  it  might  restore  some  equi-
librium to  the  balance  of  forces,  hopefully  increasing  the  moment  of  US/GVN
bargaining  leverage  sufficiently  to  permit  an  approach  to  a  negotiated  solution
on  something  other  than  surrender  terms.

Throughout  the  planning  process  (and  even  after  the  initiation  of  the  pro-
gram) the  President's  principal  advisors  differed  widely  in  their  views  as  to  the
intensity  of  the  bombing  effort  that  would  be  desirable  or  required,  and  as  to
its  likely  effectiveness  in  influencing  Hanoi's  will  to  continue  its  aggression.  The
JCS,  for  example,  consistently  argued  that  only  a  most  dramatic  and  forceful
application  of  military  power  would  exert  significant  pressure  on  North  Vietnam,
but  firmly  believed  that  such  application  could  and  would  affect  the  enemy's  will.
Most  civilian  officials  in  State,  OSD,  and  the  White  House,  on  the  other  hand,
tended  to  favor  a  more  gradual,  restrained  approach,  "progressively  mounting  in
scope  and  intensity,"  in  which  the  prospect  of  greater  pressure  to  come  was  at
least  as  important  as  any  damage  actually  inflicted.  But  these  officials  also  tended,
for  the  most  part,  to  have  much  less  confidence  that  such  pressures  would  have
much  impact  on  Hanoi's  course,  making  such  equivocal  assessments  as:  "on
balance  we  believe  that  such  action  would  have  some  faint  hope  of  really  im-
proving the  Vietnamese  situation."

Reprisal  Planning.  In  spite  of  these  rather  hesitant  judgments,  the  graduated
approach  was  adopted  and  a  program  of  relatively  mild  military  actions  aimed
at  North  Vietnam  was  set  in  motion  beginning  in  December  1964.  At  the  same
time,  detailed  preparations  were  made  to  carry  out  bombing  strikes  against  tar-
gets in  North  Vietnam  in  reprisal  for  any  future  attacks  on  U.S.  forces.  These
preparations  were  made  chiefly  in  connection  with  the  occasional  DESOTO
Patrols  that  the  US  Naw  conducted  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  which  had  been  fired
upon  or  menaced  by  North  Vietnamese  torpedo  boats  on  several  previous  oc-
casions during  1964.  In  order  to  be  prepared  for  an  attack  on  any  future  patrol,
a  pre-packaged  set  of  reprisal  targets  was  worked  up  by  CINCPAC  on  instruc-
tions from  the  JCS,  and  pre-assigned  forces  were  maintained  in  a  high  state  of
readiness  to  strike  these  targets  in  accordance  with  a  detailed  strike  plan  that
provided  a  range  of  retaliatory  options.

In  late  January,  a  DESOTO  Patrol  was  authorized  to  begin  on  Feb.  3  (later
postponed  to  Feb.  7)  and  Operation  Order  FLAMING  DART  was  issued  by
CINCPAC,  providing  for  a  number  of  alternative  US  air  strike  reprisal  actions
in  the  eventuality  that  the  DESOTO  Patrol  were  to  be  attacked  or  that  any
other  provocation  were  to  occur,  such  as  a  spectacular  VC  incident  in  South
Vietnam.  At  the  last  moment,  however,  the  Patrol  was  called  off  in  deference  to
Soviet  Premier  Kosygin's  imminent  visit  to  Hanoi.  U.S.  officials  hoped  that  the
USSR  might  find  it  in  its  interest  to  act  as  an  agent  of  moderation  vis  a  vis
Hanoi  in  the  Vietnam  conflict,  and  wished  to  avoid  any  act  that  might  be  inter-
preted as  deliberately  provocative.  Nevertheless,  it  was  precisely  at  the  beginning


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  271

of  the  Kosygin  visit,  during  the  early  morning  hours  of  February  7,  that  the  VC
launched  their  spectacular  attack  on  US  installations  at  Pleiku,  thus  triggering
FLAMING  DART  I,  the  first  of  the  new  carefully  programmed  US  GVN  re-
prisal strikes.

Imperceptible  Transition.  Bv  contrast  with  the  earlier  Tonkin  strikes  of  August.
1964  which  had  been  presented  as  a  one-time  demonstration  that  North  Vietnam
could  not  flagrantly  attack  US  forces  with  impunity,  the  February  1965  raids
were  explicitly  linked  with  the  ''larger  pattern  of  aggression"  by  North  Vietnam,
and  were  a  reprisal  against  North  Vietnam  for  an  off'ense  committed  by  the  VC
in  South  Vietnam.  When  the  VC  staged  another  dramatic  attack  on  Qui  Nhon
on  Feb.  10,  the  combined  US  GVN  response,  named  FLAMING  DART  II,
was  not  characterized  as  an  event-associated  reprisal  but  as  a  generalized  response
to  "continued  acts  of  aggression."  The  new  terminology  reflected  a  conscious
U.S.  decision  to  broaden  the  reprisal  concept  as  gradually  and  imperceptibly  as
possible  to  accommodate  a  much  wider  policy  of  sustained,  steadily  intensifying
air  attacks  against  North  Vietnam,  at  a  rate  and  on  a  scale  to  be  determined
by  the  U.S.  Although  discussed  publicly  in  very  muted  tones,  the  second  FLAM-
ING DART  operation  constituted  a  sharp  break  with  past  US  policy  and  set  the
stage  for  the  continuing  bombing  program  that  was  now  to  be  launched  in  ear-
nest.

Differences  in  Advocacy.  While  all  but  one  or  two  of  the  President's  principal
Vietnam  advisors  favored  the  initiation  of  a  sustained  bombing  program,  there
were  significant  differences  among  them.  McGeorge  Bundv  and  Ambassador
Maxwell  Taylor,  for  example,  both  advocated  a  measured,  controlled  sequence
of  raids,  carried  out  jointly  with  the  GVN  and  directed  solely  against  DRV
military  targets  and  infiltration  routes.'  In  their  view,  the  intensity  of  the  attacks
was  to  be  varied  with  the  level  of  VC  outrages  in  SVN  or  might  be  progressively
raised.  But  whereas  McGeorge  Bundy's  objective  was  to  influence  the  course  of
the  struggle  in  the  South  (boosting  GVN  morale,  improving  US  bargaining  power
with  the  GVN,  exerting  a  depressing  effect  on  VC  cadre),  Ambassador  Taylor's
principal  aim  was  "to  bring  increasing  pressure  on  the  DRV  to  cease  its  inter-
vention." It  was  coercion  of  the  North,  rather  than  a  rededication  of  the  GVN
to  the  struggle  in  the  South  that  Taylor  regarded  as  the  real  benefit  of  a  reprisal
policy.  CINCPAC,  on  the  other  hand,  insisted  that  the  program  would  have  to
be  a  very  forceful  one — a  ""graduated  pressures"  rather  than  a  '"graduated  re-
prisal" philosophy — if  the  DRV  were  to  be  persuaded  to  accede  to  a  cessation  on
U.S.  terms.  The  Joint  Chiefs,  in  turn  (and  especially  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff
General  McConnelD,  believed  that  the  much  heavier  air  strike  recomendations
repeatedly  made  by  the  JCS  during  the  preceding  six  months  were  more  appro-
priate than  the  mild  actions  proposed  by  Taylor  and  Bundy.

Initiating  ROLLING  THUNDER.  A  firm  decision  to  adopt  "a  program  of
measured  and  limited  air  action  jointly  with  the  GVN  against  selected  military
targets  in  the  DRV"  was  made  by  the  President  on  February  13,  and  communi-
cated to  Ambassador  Tavlor  in  Saigon.  Details  of  the  program  were  deliberately
left  vague,  as  the  President  wished  to  preserve  maximum  flexibility.  The  first
strike  was  set  for  February  20  and  Tavlor  was  directed  to  obtain  GVN  concur-
rence. A  semi-coup  in  Saigon,  however,  compelled  postponement  and  cancella-
tion of  this  and  several  subsequent  strikes.  Political  clearance  was  not  given
until  the  turbulence  was  calmed  with  the  departure  of  General  Nguyen  Khanh


272 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

from  Vietnam  on  Feb  25.  U.S.  reluctance  to  launch  air  attacks  during  this  time
was  further  reinforced  by  a  UK-USSR  diplomatic  initiative  to  reactivate  the
Cochairmanship  of  the  1954  Geneva  Conference  with  a  view  to  involving  the
members  of  that  conference  in  a  consideration  of  the  Vietnam  crisis.  Air  strikes
executed  at  that  moment,  it  was  feared,  might  sabotage  that  diplomatic  gambit,
which  Washington  looked  upon  not  as  a  potential  negotiating  opportunity,  but
as  a  convenient  vehicle  for  public  expression  of  a  tough  U.S.  position.  The  Co-
Chairmen  gambit,  however,  languished — and  eventually  came  to  naught.  The
first  ROLLING  THUNDER  strike  was  finally  rescheduled  for  Feb  26.  This
time  adverse  weather  forced  its  cancellation  and  it  was  not  until  March  2  that
the  first  of  the  new  program  strikes,  dubbed  ROLLING  THUNDER  V,  was
actually  carried  out.

In  the  closing  days  of  February  and  during  early  March,  the  Administration
undertook  publicly  and  privately  to  defend  and  propound  its  rationale  for  the
air  strikes,  stressing  its  determination  to  stand  by  the  GVN,  but  reaffirming  the
limited  nature  of  its  objectives  toward  North  Vietnam.  Secretary  Rusk  conducted
a  marathon  public  information  campaign  to  signal  a  seemingly  reasonable  but
in  fact  quite  tough  US  position  on  negotiations,  demanding  that  Hanoi  "stop
doing  what  it  is  doing  against  its  neighbors"  before  any  negotiations  could  prove
fruitful.  Rusk's  disinterest  in  negotiations  at  this  time  was  in  concert  with  the
view  of  virtually  all  the  President's  key  advisors,  that  the  path  to  peace  was  not
then  open.  Hanoi  held  sway  over  more  than  half  of  South  Vietnam  and  could
see  the  Saigon  Government  crumbling  before  her  very  eyes.  The  balance  of
power  at  this  time  simply  did  not  furnish  the  U.S.  with  a  basis  for  bargaining
and  Hanoi  had  not  reason  to  accede  to  the  hard  terms  the  U.S.  had  in  mind.
Until  military  pressures  on  North  Vietnam  could  tilt  the  balance  of  forces  the
other  way,  talk  of  negotiation  could  be  little  more  than  a  hollow  exercise.

Evolving  a  Continuing  Program.  Immediately  after  the  launching  of  the  first
ROLLING  THUNDER  strike,  efforts  were  set  in  motion  to  increase  the  effec-
tiveness, forcefulness  and  regularity  of  the  program.  US  aircraft  loss  rates  came
under  McNamara's  scrutiny,  with  the  result  that  many  restrictions  on  the  use
of  U.S.  aircraft  and  special  ordnance  were  lifted,  and  the  air  strike  technology
improved.  Sharp  annoyance  was  expressed  by  Ambassador  Taylor  over  what  he
considered  an  unnecessarily  timid  and  ambivalent  US  stance  regarding  the  fre-
quency and  weight  of  U.S.  air  attacks.  He  called  for  a  more  dynamic  schedule
of  strikes,  a  several  week  program,  relentlessly  marching  North,  to  break  the
will  of  the  DRV.  Army  Chief  of  Staff  General  Johnson,  returning  from  a  Presi-
dential survey  mission  to  Vietnam  in  mid-March,  supported  Taylor's  view  and
recommended  increasing  the  scope  and  tempo  of  the  air  strikes  as  well  as  their
effectiveness.  The  President  accepted  these  recommendations  and,  beginning  with
ROLLING  THUNDER  VII  (March  19),  air  action  against  the  North  was  trans-
formed from  a  sporadic,  halting  effort  into  a  regular  and  determined  program.

Shift  to  Interdiction.  In  the  initial  U.S.  reprisal  strikes  and  the  first  ROLLING
THUNDER  actions,  target  selection  had  been  completely  dominated  by  political
and  psychological  considerations.  With  the  gradual  acceptance,  beginning  in
March,  of  the  need  for  a  militarily  more  significant  sustained  bombing  program,
a  refocusing  of  target  emphasis  occurred,  stressing  interdiction  of  the  DRV's
lines  of  communication  CLOC's) — the  visible  manifestations  of  North  Vietnam-
ese aggression.  The  JCS  had  called  the  SecDef's  attention  to  this  infiltration  tar-
get complex  as  early  as  mid-February,  and  an  integrated  counter-infiltration


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  273

attack  plan  against  LOC  targets  south  of  the  20th  parallel  began  to  be  developed
by  CINCPAC,  culminating  at  the  end  of  March  in  the  submission  of  the  JCS
12-week  bombing  program.  This  program  was  built  around  the  "LOC-cut"  con-
cept developed  by  the  Pacific  Command  and  was  strongly  endorsed  by  General
Westmoreland  and  Ambassador  Taylor.  The  JCS  recommended  that  only  the
first  phase  (third  through  fifth  weeks)  of  the  12-week  program  be  adopted,  as
they  had  not  reached  agreement  on  the  later  phases.  The  JCS  submission,  how-
ever, was  not  accepted  as  a  program,  although  it  strongly  influenced  the  new
interdiction-oriented  focus  of  the  attacks  that  were  to  follow.  But  neither  the
SecDef  nor  the  President  was  willing  to  approve  a  multi-week  program  in  ad-
vance. They  preferred  to  retain  continual  personal  control  over  attack  concepts
and  individual  target  selection  and  to  communicate  their  decisions  through  weekly
guidance  provided  by  the  SecDef's  ROLLING  THUNDER  planning  messages.

April  1  Reassessment.  By  the  end  of  March,  in  Saigon's  view,  the  situation
in  South  Vietnam  appeared  to  have  rebounded  somewhat.  Morale  seemed  to  have
been  boosted,  at  least  temporarily,  by  the  air  strikes,  and  Vietnamese  forces  had
not  recently  suffered  any  major  defeats.  Washington,  on  the  other  hand,  con-
tinued to  regard  the  situation  as  "bad  and  deteriorating,"  and  could  see  no  signs
of  "give"  on  the  part  of  Hanoi.  None  of  the  several  diplomatic  initiatives  that
had  been  launched  looked  promising,  and  VC  terrorism  continued  unabated,  with
the  March  29  bombing  of  the  US  embassy  in  Saigon  being  by  far  the  boldest
provocation.

Ambassador  Taylor  returned  to  Washington  to  participate  in  a  Presidential
policy  review  on  April  1  and  2,  in  which  a  wide  range  of  possible  military  and
non-military  actions  in  South  and  North  Vietnam  were  examined.  The  discus-
sions, however,  did  not  deal  principally  with  the  air  war,  but  focused  mainly  on
the  prospect  of  major  deployments  oj  US  and  Third  Country  combat  forces  to
South  Vietnam.  As  a  result  of  the  discussions,  the  far-reaching  decision  was
made,  at  least  conceptually,  to  permit  US  troops  to  engage  in  offensive  ground
operations  against  Asian  insurgents.  With  respect  to  future  air  pressures  policy,
the  actions  adopted  amounted  to  little  more  than  a  continuation  of  "roughly
the  present  slowly  ascending  tempo  of  ROLLING  THUNDER  operations,"  di-
rected mainly  at  the  LOC  targets  that  were  then  beginning  to  be  struck.  The
Director  of  Central  Intelligence  John  McCone  demurred,  arguing  that  a  change
in  the  US  ground  force  role  in  the  South  also  demanded  comparably  more  force-
ful action  against  the  North.  He  felt  that  the  ground  force  decision  was  correct
only  "if  our  air  strikes  against  the  North  are  sufficiently  heavy  and  damaging
really  to  hurt  the  North  Vietnamese."

A  "Carrot'*  at  Johns  Hopkins.  Although  devoting  much  effort  to  public  ex-
planation and  private  persuasion,  the  President  could  not  quiet  his  critics.  Con-
demnation of  the  bombing  spread  and  the  President  was  being  pressed  from  many
directions  to  make  a  major  public  statement  welcoming  negotiations.  He  found
an  opportunity  to  dramatize  his  peaceful  intent  in  his  renowned  Johns  Hopkins
address  of  April  7,  in  which  he  (1)  accepted  the  spirit  of  the  17-nation  Appeal
of  March  15  to  start  negotiations  "without  posing  any  preconditions,"  (2)
offered  the  vision  of  a  "billion  dollar  American  investment"  in  a  regional  Mekong
River  basin  development  effort  in  which  North  Vietnam  might  also  participate,
and  (3)  appointed  the  illustrious  Eugene  Black  to  head  up  the  effort  and  to  lend
it  credibility  and  prestige.  The  President's  speech  evoked  much  favorable  public
reaction  throughout  the  world,  but  it  failed  to  silence  the  Peace  Bloc  and  it  failed


274 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

to  move  Hanoi.  Premier  Pham  Van  Dong  responded  to  the  President's  speech
by  proposing  his  famous  Four  Points  as  the  oniv  correct  way  to  resolve  the  Viet-
nam problem  and,  two  davs  later,  denounced  the  President's  proposal  as  simply
a  "carrot"  offered  to  offset  the  "stick"  of  aggression  and  to  allav  public  criticism
of  his  Vietnam  policy.  But  this  is  as  far  as  the  President  was  willing  to  go  in  his
concessions  to  the  Peace  Bloc.  To  the  clamor  for  a  bombing  pause  at  this  time,
the  Administration  responded  with  a  resounding  '"No."

Consensus  at  Honolulu.  By  mid-April,  communication  between  Washington
and  Saigon  had  become  badlv  strained  as  a  result  of  Ambassador  Taylor's  re-
sentment of  what  he  regarded  as  Washington's  excessive  eagerness  to  introduce
US  combat  forces  into  South  Vietnam,  far  beyond  anvthing  that  had  been  ap-
proved in  the  April  1-2  review.  To  iron  out  differences,  a  conference  was  con-
vened by  Secretary  McNamara  at  Honolulu  on  April  20.  Its  main  concern  was
to  reach  specific  agreement  on  troop  deployments,  but  it  also  sought  to  reaffirm
the  existing  scope  and  tempo  of  ROLLING  THUNDER.  The  conferees  agreed
that  sufficient  pressure  was  provided  bv  repetition  and  continuation  of  the  strikes,
and  that  it  was  important  not  to  "kill  the  hostage"  by  destroying  the  valuable
assets  inside  the  "Hanoi  do-not."  Their  strategy  for  victory  was  to  "break  the  will
of  the  DRV  VC  bv  denying  them  victorv."  Honolulu  apparentlv  succeeded  in
restoring  consensus  between  Washington  and  Saigon.  It  also  marked  the  relative
downgrading  of  pressures  against  the  North,  in  favor  of  more  intensive  activity
in  the  South.  The  decision,  at  this  point,  was  to  "plateau"  the  air  strikes  more
or  less  at  the  prevailing  level,  rather  than  to  pursue  the  relentless  dynamic  course
ardently  advocated  bv  Ambassador  Tavlor  and  Admiral  Sharp  in  February  and
March,  or  the  massive  destruction  of  the  North  Vietnamese  target  complex  con-
sistently pressed  by  the  Joint  Chiefs.

Following  Honolulu,  it  was  decided  to  publicize  the  fact  that  "interdiction"  was
now  the  major  objective  of  the  bombing,  and  Secretary  McNamara  devoted  a
special  Pentagon  briefing  for  the  press  corps  to  that  issue.

First  Bombing  Pause.  Pressure  for  some  form  of  bombing  halt  had  mounted
steadily  throughout  April  and  early  Mav  and,  ahhough  the  President  did  not
believe  that  such  a  gesture  would  evoke  any  response  from  Hanoi  he  did  order
a  brief  halt  effective  Mav  13.  "to  begin"  as  he  expressed  it  "to  clear  a  path  either
toward  restoration  of  peace  or  toward  increased  militarv  action,  depending  on
the  reaction  of  the  Communists."  The  political  purpose  of  the  pause — to  test
Hanoi's  reaction — was  kept  under  verv  tight  wraps,  and  the  project  was  given
the  code  name  MAYFLOWER.  A  great  effort  was  made  to  inform  Hanoi  of
the  fact  of  the  pause  and  of  its  political  intent.  Soviet  Ambassador  Dobrynin  was
given  an  oral  explanation  bv  Secretarv  Rusk,  confirmed  bv  a  tough  written  state-
ment, reasserting  Rusk's  public  position  that  the  cessation  of  the  DRV's  attacks
upon  South  Vietnam  was  the  onlv  road  to  peace  and  that  the  US  would  be  watch-
ful, during  the  pause,  for  anv  signs  of  a  reduction  in  such  attacks.  A  similar
statement  was  sent  to  U.S.  Ambassador  Kohler  in  Moscow,  for  personal  trans-
mittal to  the  DRV  Ambassador  there.  Kohler,  however,  met  with  refusal  both
from  the  DRV  Ambassador  to  receive,  and  from  the  Soviet  Foreign  Office  to
transmit,  the  message.  A  written  note,  sent  to  the  DRV  embassy,  was  returned
ostensibly  unopened.  Nevertheless,  it  is  quite  clear  that  Hanoi  was  more  than
adequately  advised  of  the  contents  of  the  U.S.  message  through  the  various  diplo-
matic channels  that  were  involved.

Given  the  "rather  strenuous  nature"  of  the  U.S.  note  to  Hanoi  and  the  brief-
ness of  the  pause,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  the  initiative  encountered  no  re-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  J 965  275

ceptivity  from  the  Soviet  government  and  evoked  no  positive  response  from
Hanoi.  The  latter  denounced  the  bombing  halt  as  "a  worn  out  trick  of  deceit  and
threat  .  .  ."  and  the  former,  in  the  person  of  Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Gromyko
in  a  conversation  with  Rusk  in  Vienna,  branded  the  U.S.  note  to  Hanoi  as  "in-
sulting."

Having  thus  been  unmistakably  rebuffed,  the  President  ordered  the  resump-
tion of  the  bombing  raids  effective  May  18.  The  entire  pause  was  handled  with
a  minimum  of  public  information,  and  no  announcement  was  made  of  the  sus-
pension or  of  the  resumption.  But  prime  ministers  or  chiefs  of  state  of  a  half
dozen  key  friendly  governments  were  briefed  fully  after  the  event.  A  still  some-
what ambiguous  diplomatic  move  was  made  by  Hanoi  in  Paris  on  May  18,  a
few  hours  after  the  bombing  had  been  resumed,  in  which  Mai  Van  Bo,  the  DRV
economic  delegate  there  seemed  to  imply  a  significant  softening  of  Hanoi's  posi-
tion on  the  Four  Points  as  "prior  conditions."  But  subsequent  attempts  at  clarifi-
cation left  that  issue  as  ambiguous  as  it  had  been  before.

End  of  Summary  and  Analysis


CHRONOLOGY  FEBRUARY-JUNE,  1965

6  Jan  1965 William  Bundy  Memorandum  for  Rusk

Taking  note  of  the  continued  political  deterioration  in  SVN,
Bundy  concludes  that,  even  though  it  will  get  worse,  the  US
should  probably  proceed  with  Phase  II  of  the  December  pressures
plan,  the  escalating  air  strikes  against  the  North.

8  Jan  1965 2,000  Korean  troops  arrive  in  SVN

South  Korea  sends  2,000  military  advisors  to  SVN,  the  first  such
non-US  support.

27  Jan  1965 Huong  Government  ousted

General  Khanh  ousts  the  civilian  government  headed  by  Huong
and  assumes  powers  of  government  himself.

McNaughton  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of  Defense
McNaughton  is  as  pessimistic  as  William  Bundy  about  prospects
in  the  South.  He  feels  the  US  should  evacuate  dependents  and
respond  promptly  at  the  next  reprisal  opportunity.  McNamara's
pencilled  notes  reveal  more  optimism  about  the  results  of  air
strikes  than  McNaughton.

28  Jan  1965 JCS  message  4244  to  CINCPAC

A  resumption  of  the  DESOTO  Patrols  on  or  about  3  February  is
authorized.

29  Jan  1965  JCSM-70-65

The  JCS  urge  again  that  a  strong  reprisal  action  be  taken  im-
mediately after  the  next  DRV/VC  provocation.  In  particular,  they
propose  targets  and  readiness  to  strike  should  the  forthcoming  re-
sumption of  the  DESOTO  Patrols  be  challenged.

4  Feb  1 965 CJCS  message  4612  to  CINCFA  C

In  view  of  Kosygin's  impending  visit  to  Hanoi,  authority  for  the
DESOTO  Patrol  is  cancelled.


276 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


SNIE  53—65  "Short  Term  Prospects  in  South  Vietnam"
The  intelligence  community  does  not  see  the  conditions  of  po-
litical instability  in  SVN  improving  in  the  months  ahead.  The
political  base  for  counterinsurgency  will  remain  weak.

6  Feb  1965 Kosygin  arrives  in  Hanoi

Soviet  Premier  Kosygin  arrives  in  Hanoi  for  a  state  visit  that  will
deepen  Soviet  commitment  to  the  DRV,  and  expand  Soviet  eco-
nomic and  military  assistance.

7  Feb  1965 VC  attack  US  base  at  Pleiku

Well-coordinated  VC  attacks  hit  the  US  advisors'  barracks  at
Pleiku  and  the  helicopter  base  at  Camp  Holloway.

President  decides  to  retaliate

The  NSC  is  convened  in  the  evening  (6  Feb.  Washington  time)
and  with  the  recommendation  of  McGeorge  Bundy,  Ambassador
Taylor  and  General  Westmoreland  from  Saigon,  decides  on  a
reprisal  strike  against  the  North  in  spite  of  Kosygin's  presence  in
Hanoi.

McGeorge  Bundy  Memorandum  to  the  President:  "The  Situation
in  South  Vietnam"

Completing  a  fact-gathering  trip  to  SVN  on  the  very  day  of  the
Pleiku  attack,  Bundy  acknowledges  the  bad  state  of  the  GVN  both
politically  and  militarily,  but  nevertheless  recommends  that  the
US  adopt  a  policy  of  "sustained  reprisal"  against  the  North  and
that  we  evacuate  US  dependents  from  Saigon.  The  reprisal  policy
should  begin  from  specific  VC  attacks  but  gradually  escalate  into
sustained  attacks  as  a  form  of  pressure  on  the  DRV  to  end  its
support  of  the  VC  and  or  come  to  terms  with  the  US.

8  Feb  1965 FLAMISG  DART  I

49  US  Navy  jets  conduct  the  first  FLAMING  DART  reprisal
attack  on  the  Dong  Hoi  army  barracks;  a  scheduled  VNAF  at-
tack is  cancelled  because  of  bad  weather.

13  Feb  1965 B-52s  sent  to  area

Approval  is  given  for  the  dispatch  of  30  B-52s  to  Guam  and  30
KC-135s  to  Okinawa  for  contingency  use  in  Vietnam.

ROLLING  THUNDER  approved  by  President;  DEPTEL  to  Sai-
gon 1718

The  President  decides  to  inaugurate  ROLLING  THUNDER  sus-
tained bombing  of  the  North  under  strict  limitations  with  pro-
grams approved  on  a  week-by-week  basis.

17  Feb  1965 CINCPAC  message  170217  February  to  JCS

Admiral  Sharp  urges  that  the  strikes  be  conceived  as  "'pressures"
not  ""reprisals"  and  that  any  premature  discussions  or  negotiations
with  the  DRV  be  avoided.  We  must  convince  them  that  the  cost
of  their  aggression  is  prohibitive.

UK  reports  Soviet  interest  in  Geneva  Talks

The  UK  Ambassador,  Lord  Harlech,  informs  Rusk  that  the
Soviets  have  approached  the  UK  about  reactivating  the  1954
Geneva  Conference  in  the  current  Vietnam  crisis.  After  an  initial
US  interest,  the  Soviets  back  off  and  the  matter  dies.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  277

18  Feb  1965 President  schedules  ROLLING  THUNDER

President  Johnson  sets  February  20  as  the  date  for  the  beginning
of  ROLLING  THUNDER  and  informs  US  Ambassadors  in  Asia.
SNIE  10-3/1-65

The  intelligence  community  gives  its  view  that  sustained  attacks
on  the  DRV  would  probably  cause  it  to  seek  a  respite  rather  than
to  intensify  the  struggle  in  the  South.

19  Feb  1965 Thao  "semi-coup"

Colonel  Thao,  a  longtime  conspirator,  launches  a  "semi-coup"
against  Khanh,  designed  to  remove  him  but  not  the  Armed  Forces
Council.  He  is  quickly  defeated  but  the  AFC  decides  to  use  the
incident  to  remove  Khanh  itself.  The  events  drag  on  for  several
days.

Embassy  Saigon  message  2665

Taylor  recommends  urgently  that  the  ROLLING  THUNDER
strike  be  cancelled  until  the  political  situation  in  Saigon  has  clari-
fied. The  President  agrees.

CM-438-65

In  a  memo  to  McNamara,  Wheeler  proposes  a  systematic  attack
on  the  DRV  rail  system  as  the  most  vulnerable  link  in  the  trans-
portation system.  Military  as  opposed  to  psychological  value  of
targets  is  already  beginning  to  enter  discussions.

21  Feb  1965 Khanh  resigns

Unable  to  rally  support  in  the  Armed  Forces  Council,  Khanh
resigns.

24  Feb  1965 U.S.  reassures  Peking

In  a  meeting  in  Warsaw  the  Chinese  are  informed  that  while  the
U.S.  will  continue  to  take  those  actions  required  to  defend  itself
and  South  Vietnam,  it  has  no  aggressive  intentions  toward  the
DRV.

27  Feb  1965 State  Dept.  issues  "White  Paper"  on  DRV  aggression

The  State  Department  issues  a  "White  Paper"  detailing  its  charges
of  aggression  against  North  Vietnam.

28  Feb  1965 ROLLING  THUNDER  announced

U.S.  and  GVN  make  simultaneous  announcement  of  decision  to
open  a  continuous  limited  air  campaign  against  the  North  in
order  to  bring  about  a  negotiated  settlement  on  favorable  terms.

2  Mar  1965 First' ROLLING  THUNDER  strike

104  USAF  planes  attack  Xom  Bang  ammo  depot  and  19  VNAF
aircraft  hit  the  Quang  Khe  Naval  Base  in  the  first  attacks  of
ROLLING  THUNDER.

President  decides  to  send  CSA,  H.K.  Johnson,  to  Vietnam
The  President  decides  to  send  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  Gen.  H.  K.
Johnson,  to  Saigon  to  explore  with  Taylor  and  Westmoreland  what
additional  efforts  can  be  made  to  improve  the  situation  in  the
South,  complementarily  to  the  strikes  against  the  North.

3  Mar  1965 Tito  letter  to  Johnson

Yugoslav  President  Tito,  in  a  letter  to  Johnson,  urges  immediate
negotiation  on  Vietnam  without  conditions  on  either  side.


278 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III


5—12  Mar Gen.  Johnson  trip  to  Vietnam

1965  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  Gen.  H.  K.  Johnson,  tours  Vietnam  on  a

mission  for  the  President.

6  Mar  1965 Marines  sent  to  Da  Nang

Two  Marine  Battalion  Landing  Teams  are  ordered  to  Da  Nang
by  the  President  to  take  up  base  security  functions  in  the  Da
Nang  perimeter.

8  Mar  1965 Marines  land  at  Da  Nang

The  two  Marine  battahons  land  at  Da  Nang  and  set  up  defensive
positions.

Embassy  Saigon  msgs.  2888,  and  2889

Taylor  expresses  sharp  annoyance  at  what  seems  to  him  an  un-
necessarily timid  and  ambivalent  U.S.  stance  on  air  strikes.  The
long  delay  between  strikes,  the  marginal  weight  of  the  attacks,  and
the  great  ado  about  diplomatic  feelers  were  weakening  our  signal
to  the  North.  He  calls  for  a  more  dynamic  schedule  of  strikes,  a
multiple  week  program  relentlessly  marching  North  to  break
Hanoi's  will.

U  Thant  proposes  big  power  conference

U  Thant  proposes  a  conference  of  the  big  powers  with  North  and
South  Vietnam  to  start  preliminary  negotiations.

9  Mar  1965 U.S.  rejects  Thant  proposal

The  U.S.  rejects  Thant's  proposal  until  the  DRV  stops  its  ag-
gression.

Some  bombing  restrictions  lifted

The  President  lifts  the  restriction  on  the  use  of  napalm  in  strikes
on  the  North,  and  eliminates  the  requirement  for  Vietnamese  co-
pilots in  FARMGATE  missions.

1 0  Mar  1 965 CJCS  memo  to  SecDef  CM-469-65

In  a  memo  to  SecDef  with  preliminary  reports  on  U.S.  aircraft
losses  in  hostile  action.  Wheeler  requests  better  ordnance,  more
recce,  and  greater  field  command  flexibility  in  alternate  target
selection  for  weather  problems.

12  Mar  1965  State  msg.  1975  to  Saigon

ROLLING  THUNDER  VI  is  authorized  for  the  next  day;  it  is
subsequently  delayed  until  the  14th  because  of  weather.

President  replies  to  Tito

In  his  reply  to  Tito  the  President  indicates  the  only  bar  to  peace
is  DRV  aggression  which  must  stop  before  talks  can  begin.

13  Mar  1965 Embassy  Saigon  msg.  2949

Taylor  complains  about  the  postponement  of  RT  VI,  stating  that
too  much  attention  is  being  paid  to  the  specific  target,  any  target
will  do  since  the  important  thing  is  to  keep  up  the  momentum  of
the  attacks.

13-18  Mar Conference  of  non-aligned  nations  in  Belgrade
1965  Tito  calls  a  meeting  of  15  non-aligned  nations  in  Belgrade.  The

declaration  calls  for  negotiations  and  blames  "foreign  interven-
tion" for  the  aggravation  of  the  situation.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  279


14-15  Mar ROLLING  THUNDER  VI

1965  The  delayed  RT  VI  is  carried  out  and  is  the  heaviest  attack  thus

far  with  over  100  U.S.  aircraft  and  24  VNAF  planes  hitting  two
targets.

14  Mar  1965 Gen.  Johnson  submits  his  report  to  SecDef

Gen.  Johnson  submits  a  21 -recommendation  report  including  a
request  that  the  scope  and  tempo  of  strikes  against  the  North
be  increased  and  that  many  of  the  restrictions  on  the  strikes  be
lifted.

15  Mar  1965  President  approves  most  of  Johnson  report

Having  reviewed  the  Johnson  report,  the  President  approves  most
of  his  recommendations  including  those  for  expanding  and  regu-
larizing the  campaign  against  the  North.  The  new  guidelines  apply
to  RT  VII  on  19  Mar.

19  Mar  1965  ROLLING  THUNDER  VII

The  first  week's  program  of  sustained  bombing  under  the  name
ROLLING  THUNDER  VII  begins.

20  Mar  1 965  STEEL  TIGER  Begins

Acting  on  a  CINCPAC  recommendation  the  Administration  had
approved  the  separation  of  the  anti-infiltration  bombing  in  the
Laotian  panhandle  from  the  BARREL  ROLL  strikes  in  support
of  Laotian  forces.  The  former  are  now  called  STEEL  TIGER.

21  Mar  1965 CINCPAC  msg.  to  JCS  210525  Mar.

In  a  long  cable,  CINCPAC  proposes  a  program  for  cutting,  in
depth,  the  DRV  logistical  network,  especially  below  the  20th
parallel.  The  plan  calls  for  initial  intensive  strikes  to  cut  the
system  and  then  regular  armed  recce  to  eliminate  any  residual
capacity,  or  repair  efforts.

24  Mar  1965  McNaughton  memo  "Plan  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam"

McNaughton  concludes  that  the  situation  in  SVN  probably  can-
not be  improved  without  extreme  measures  against  the  DRV  and/
or  the  intervention  of  US  ground  forces.  He  gives  a  thorough
treatment  to  the  alternatives  and  risks  with  particular  attention
to  the  strong  air  campaign  on  the  North.  He  takes  note  of  the
various  escalation  points  and  tries  to  assess  the  risks  at  each  level.
He  evaluates  the  introduction  of  US  troops  and  a  negotiations  al-
ternative in  the  same  manner.

27  Mar  1965  JCSM-221-65

The  JCS  formally  propose  to  SecDef  a  plan  already  discussed
with  him  for  an  escalating  12-week  air  campaign  against  the
North  with  a  primarily  military-physical  destruction  orientation.
Interdiction  is  the  objective  rather  than  will-breaking.

29  Mar  1965 VC  bomb  US  Embassy

In  a  daring  bomb  attack  on  the  US  Embassy,  the  VC  kill  many
Americans  and  Vietnamese  and  cause  extensive  damage.  Taylor
leaves  almost  simultaneously  for  talks  in  Washington.

31  Mar  1965 CINCPAC  msg.  to  JCS  310407  Mar.

CINCPAC  recommends  a  spectacular  attack  against  the  North


280 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


to  retaliate  for  the  bombing  of  the  Embassy.  The  Presidem  rejects
the  idea.

NSC  meeting  with  Taylor

The  President  meets  with  Taylor  and  the  NSC  to  begin  a  major
policy  review.

1  Apr  1965 McGeorge  Bundy  memo

Bundy  recommends  little  more  than  a  continuation  of  the  on-
going modest  RT  program,  gradually  hitting  the  LOC  choke
points.  He  does,  however,  recommend  removing  the  restriction  on
the  Marines  to  static  defense.  Focus  is  on  winning  in  SVN.
NSC  meeting

The  White  House  policv  review  continued  with  another  meeting
of  the  principals.
Rostow  memo  to  SecState

In  a  memo  to  Rusk,  Walt  Rostow  proposes  knocking  out  the  DRV
electric  power  grid  as  a  means  of  bringing  her  whole  urban  in-
dustrial sector  to  a  halt.

2  Apr  1965 NSC  meeting

At  the  NSC  meeting  the  President  approves  the  Bundy  recom-
mendations including  the  proposal  to  allow  US  troops  in  Vietnam
a  combat  role.

McCone  dissents  from  Presidential  decision

CIA  director  McCone  circulates  a  memo  dissenting  from  the
Presidential  decision  to  have  US  troops  take  part  in  active  combat.
He  feels  that  such  action  is  not  justified  and  wise  unless  the  air
attacks  on  the  North  are  increased  sufficiently  to  really  be  phys-
ically damaging  to  the  DRV  and  to  put  real  pressure  on  her.
Canadian  Prime  Minister  suggests  pause

Canadian  Prime  Minister  Lester  Pearson  in  a  speech  in  Phila-
delphia suggests  that  the  US  call  a  halt  to  the  bombing  in  the
interests  of  getting  negotiations  started.
5Aprl  965 JCSM'2 65-65

The  ICS  report  confirmation  of  the  construction  of  a  SAM  missile
site  near  Hanoi  and  request  authority  to  strike  it  before  it  be-
comes operational.  Their  request  is  not  acted  on  at  the  time.

6  Apr  1965 N SAM  328

The  Presidential  decisions  of  April  2  are  promulgated  using  the
verbatim  language  of  the  Bundy  memo.

7  Apr  1965 President's  Johns  Hopkins  Speech

In  a  major  speech  at  Johns  Hopkins  University,  the  President
outlines  his  hope  for  a  peaceful,  negotiated  settlement  in  Vietnam.
He  names  Eugene  Black  as  the  US  negotiator  and  offers  to  assist
both  North  and  South  Vietnam  on  a  regional  basis  to  the  tune  of
$1  billion  in  the  post-war  reconstruction  and  economic  develop-
ment of  SEA.

8  Apr  1965 Pham  Van  Dong's  "Four  Points"

Rejecting  the  President's  initiative,  the  DRV  Foreign  Minister,
Pham  Van  Dong  announces  his  famous  "Four  Points"  for  the
settlement  of  the  war.  Each  side  sees  settlement  in  the  capitulation
of  the  other.  Peking  denounces  the  President's  speech  also.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  281

17  Apr  1 965 Presidential  press  con ference

In  a  press  conference  the  President  acknowledges  the  failure  of
his  most  recent  peace  overtures.

Rusk  press  conference

Secretary  Rusk  rejects  suggestions  from  Canada  and  others  to
suspend  the  bombing  in  order  to  get  peace  talks  started.  He  re-
iterates the  President's  view  that  Hanoi  does  not  want  peace.

18  Apr  1965 Taylor  opposes  the  ground  build-up

Having  been  bombarded  with  cables  from  Washington  about  a
build-up  in  ground  forces  to  carry  out  NSAM  328,  Taylor  reacts
opposing  the  idea  in  a  cable  to  McGeorge  Bundy.

19  Apr  1 965 Hanoi  rejects  1 7 -nation  appeal

Hanoi  rejects  the  proposal  of  the  17  non-aligned  nations  for  a
peace  conference  without  pre-conditions  by  either  side.

20  Apr  1965 Honolulu  Conference

Secretary  McNamara  meets  with  Taylor,  Westmoreland,  Sharp,
Wm.  Bundy,  and  McNaughton  in  Honolulu  to  review  the  imple-
mentation and  interpretation  of  NSAM  328.  A  plateau  on  air
strikes,  more  effort  in  the  South,  and  the  specifics  of  force  de-
ployments are  agreed  to.

21  Apr  1965 SecDef  memo  to  the  President

Secretary  McNamara  reports  the  results  of  the  Honolulu  Con-
ference to  the  President  and  indicates  that  harmony  has  been
restored  among  the  views  of  the  various  advisors.

22  Apr  1965 Intelligence  assessment  TS  #185843-c

The  intelligence  community  indicates  that  without  either  a  massive
increase  in  the  air  campaign  or  the  introduction  of  US  combat
troops,  the  DRV  would  stick  to  its  goal  of  military  victory.

23  Apr  1965 Rusk  Speech

In  a  speech  before  the  American  Society  of  International  Law,
Rusk  makes  first  public  mention  of  interdiction  and  punishment  as
the  purposes  of  the  US  bombing  rather  than  breaking  Hanoi's
will.

24  Apr  1965 U  Thant  calls  for  pause

U  Thant  asks  the  US  to  suspend  the  bombing  for  three  months  in
an  effort  to  get  negotiations.  The  proposal  is  rejected  in  Washing-
ton.*

25  Apr  1965 McGeorge  Bundy  memo

In  an  effort  to  clarify  internal  government  thinking  about  negotia-
tions, Bundy  outlines  his  view  of  US  goals.  His  exposition  is  a
maximum  US  position  whose  acceptance  would  amount  to  sur-
render by  the  other  side.

26  Apr  1965 McNamara  press  briefing

In  a  special  briefing  for  the  press  complete  with  maps  and  charts,
McNamara  goes  into  considerable  depth  in  explaining  the  inter-
diction purposes  of  the  US  strikes  against  the  North.

28  Apr  1965 McCone  resigns  and  submits  last  memo

McCone  who  is  leaving  his  post  as  CIA  Director  (to  be  replaced


282 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


by  Admiral  Rabom)  submits  a  last  memo  to  the  President  op-
posing the  build-up  of  ground  forces  in  the  absence  of  a  greatly
intensified  campaign  against  the  North.

4  May  1965 President  denies  DRV  'willingness  to  negotiate

In  a  speech  at  the  Wliite  House,  the  President  indicates  that  the
DRV  has  turned  back  all  peace  initiatives,  either  from  the  US  or
from  neutral  parties.

Embassy  Saigon  msg.  3632

Taylor  confirms  the  President's  view  about  the  DRV  by  noting
that  in  Hanoi's  estimates  they  are  still  expecting  to  achieve  a
clear-cut  victor}'  and  see  no  reason  to  negotiate.

6  May  1965 CIA  Director  Raborn  assessment

Commenting,  at  the  President's  request,  on  McCone's  parting
memo  on  Vietnam,  Rabom  agrees  with  the  assessment  that  the
bombing  had  thus  far  not  hurt  the  North  and  that  much  more
would  be  needed  to  force  them  to  the  negotiating  table.  He  sug-
gests a  pause  to  test  DRV  intentions  and  gain  support  of  world
opinion  before  beginning  the  intensive  air  campaign  that  he  be-
lieves will  be  required.

CM-600-65

The  Chairman  of  the  ICS  recommends  to  the  Secretar.'  that  the
SAM  sites  already  identified  be  attacked.

10  May  1965  State  Department  msg.  2553

The  President  informs  Taylor  of  his  intention  to  call  a  temporary
halt  to  the  bombing  and  asks  Taylor  to  get  PM  Quat  s  concur-
rence. The  purpose  of  the  pause  is  to  gain  flexibility  either  to
negotiate  if  the  DRV  shows  interest,  or  to  intensify  the  air  strikes
if  they  do  not.  He  does  not  intend  to  announce  the  pause  but
rather  to  communicate  it  privately  to  Moscow  and  Hanoi  and
await  a  reply.

11  May  1965  Embassy  Saigon  msg.  3731

Taylor  reports  Quat's  agreement  but  preference  not  to  have  the
pause  Hnked  to  Buddha's  birthday.

State  Department  msg.  2557

State  confirms  the  decision,  agrees  to  avoid  reference  to  the  Bud-
dhist hoUday,  and  indicates  that  the  pause  will  begin  on  May  13
and  last  for  5-7  days.

Department  of  State  msg.  3101

Kohler  in  Moscow  is  instructed  to  contact  the  DRV  .\mbassador
urgently  and  convey  a  message  announcing  the  pause.  Simul-
taneously, Rusk  was  transmitting  the  message  to  the  Soviet  Am-
bassador in  Washington.

12  May  1965  Embassy  Mosco-w  msg.  3391

In  Moscow,  the  DRV  Ambassador  refuses  to  see  Kohler  or  re-
ceive the  message.  A  subsequent  attempt  to  transmit  the  message
through  the  Soviet  Foreign  Office  also  fails  when  the  Soviets  de-
cline their  assistance.

13  May  1965  Presidential  speech

The  President  avoids  reference  to  the  pause  in  a  major  pubhc


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  283

speech,  but  does  call  on  Hanoi  to  consider  a  "political  solution"
of  the  war.

14  May  1965  Embassy  Moscow  msg.  3425

Kohler  suggests  that  the  language  of  the  message  be  softened  be-
fore it  is  transmitted  to  Hanoi  via  the  British  Consul  in  the  DRV
capital.

British  Consul-Hanoi  transmits  the  pause  msg.

Having  rejected  Kohler's  suggestion,  State  has  the  British  Consul

in  Hanoi  transmit  the  message.  The  DRV  refuses  to  accept  it.

MACV  msg.  16006

Westmoreland,  with  Taylor's  concurrence,  recommends  the  use
of  B-52s  for  patterned  saturation  bombing  of  VC  headquarters  and
other  area  targets  in  South  Vietnam.

15  May  1965  Rusk-Gromyko  meet  in  Vienna

In  a  meeting  between  the  two  men  in  Vienna,  Gromyko  informs
Rusk  that  the  Soviet  Union  will  give  firm  and  full  support  to  the
DRV  as  a  "fraternal  socialist  state."

16  May  1965  Embassy  Saigon  msg.  3781

Taylor  suggests  that  the  DRV's  cold  response  to  our  initiative
warrants  a  resumption  of  the  bombing.  The  level  should  be  linked
directly  to  the  intensity  of  VC  activity  in  the  South  during  the
pause.

President  decides  to  resume  bombing

The  President  decides  that  Hanoi's  response  can  be  regarded  as
negative  and  orders  the  bombing  to  resume  on  May  18.

17  May  1965  Allies  informed  of  impending  resumption

US  Asian  and  European  allies  are  forewarned  of  the  impending
resumption  of  bombing.  In  a  separate  msg.  the  President  au-
thorizes the  radar  recce  by  B-52s  of  potential  SEA  targets.

18  May  1965  Bombing  resumes

After  five  days  of  "pause"  the  bombing  resumes  in  the  North.
Hanoi  denounces  the  pause

On  the  evening  of  the  resumption,  the  DRV  Foreign  Ministry
issues  a  statement  describing  the  pause  as  a  "deceitful  maneuver"
to  pave  the  way  for  further  US  acts  of  war.
Hanoi's  Paris  demarche

Somewhat  belatedly  the  DRV  representative  in  Paris,  Mai  Van
Bo  discusses  the  "four  points"  with  the  Quai  somewhat  softening
their  interpretation  and  indicating  that  they  are  not  necessarily
preliminary  conditions  to  negotiations.

20  May  1965  Rostow  memo  "Victory  and  Defeat  in  Guerilla  Wars"

In  a  memo  for  the  Secretary  of  State  Rostow  argues  that  a  clear-
cut  US  victory  in  SVN  is  possible.  It  requires  mainly  more  pressure
on  the  North  and  effective  conduct  of  the  battle  in  the  South.

21  May  1965  Peking  denounces  the  pause

Declaring  its  support  for  the  DRV,  Peking  denounces  the  Pres-
ident's bombing  pause  as  a  fraud.
2  J un  1965 SN IE  10-6-65

The  intelligence  community  gives  a  pessimistic  analysis  of  the


2S4 Gravel  Edirion  The  Ptrnai:on  Papers  \'oI.  Ill

likelihood  that  Hanoi  will  seek  a  respite  from  the  bombing  through
negotiation.

ICC  Cornrrussioricr  Seaborn  sees  Pharn  Van  Dong
In  a  meeting  in  Hanoi  with  DRV  Foreign  Minister  Pham  \'an
Dong.  ICC  Commissioner  Seaborn  (Canada)  confirms  Hanoi's
rejection  of  current  US  peace  initiatives.

Prer?:ier  Ouai  resigns
S\'N  Premier  Quat  hands  his  resignation  to  the  Armed  Forces
Council.

SecDej  r?ierr:o  lo  JCS

McNamara  disapproves  the  JCS  recommendation  for  air  strikes
against  the  SAM  sites  and  IL  2Ss  at  DR\'  air  bases  since  these
might  directh  challenge  the  Soviet  Union.

A'v  iissunies  po\^\'r

Brig.  Gen.  Nguven  Cao  Kv  assumes  power  and  decrees  new  meas-
ures to  strengthen  G\'N  prosecution  of  the  war.

A  CHRONOLOGY  OF  ROLLING  THUNDER  MISSIONS
FEBRUARY-JUNE.  1965^

ROLLING  THUNDER  1  was  scheduled  on  20  February  1965  as  a  one-day
reprisal  strike  by  L'.S.  and  N'NAF  forces,  against  Quang  Khe  Naval  Base  and
\  u  Con  Barracks.  Two  barracks  and  an  airfield  were  authorized  as  weather
alternates.  ROLLING  THUNDER  1  was  cancelled  because  of  a  coup  in  Saigon
and  -  .  :  c  moves  between  London  and  Moscow.  ROLLING  THUNDER
2.  3.  .1.  -  sjre  planned  as  reprisal  actions,  but  subsequentlv  cancelled  because
of  continued  political  instabilitv  in  Saigon,  during  which  N'NAF  forces  were  on
■"coup  alert."  Joint  participation  with  N'NAF  was  desired  for  political  reasons.

The  first  actual  ROLLING  THUNDER  strike  was  ROLLING  THUNDER
5.  a  one-day.  n.^  rccxc'.e  ike  on  2  M.^.rch  I9b5.  Targets  were  one  ammo  depot
and  one  naval  I  ,S.  .md  N'NAF  targets.  Four  barracks  were

ai;::v.^'  uc..::'c"  .i. 'criuiies. N'NAF  participation  was  mandator^'.  The

arpr^^^cc  e::o:-:  :or  ihc  week  was  substantiallv  below  the  level  recommended  by
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Stafi".

ROLLING  THUNDER  b  (U-15  March)  was  a  far  more  forceful  one-day
fixed-target  program  representing  a  week's  weight  of  attack.  Napalm  was  au-
thorized for  the  first  time,  but  aircraft  recvcle  was  prohibited.

ROLLING  THUNDER  "  (19-25  March)  relaxed  the  mandatory  one-day
strike  execution  to  a  week's  period,  with  precise  timing  being  left  to  field  com-
manders. It  included  five  primar\  targets  with  weather  alternates.  The  require-
ment for  concurrent  timing  of  L'.S.  and  N'NAF  strikes  was  lemoved.  One  L'.S.
and  two  N'NAF  armed  recce  missions  were  authorized  during  the  seven-day
period.  Specified  route  segments  were  selected  in  southern  North  N'ietnam.
Authority  was  given  to  strike  three  fixed  radar  sites  located  one  each  route.
The  strikes  were  no  longer  to  be  specificallv  related  to  N  C  atrocities  and  publicity
on  them  was  to  be  progressive! v  reduced.

ROLLING  THUNDER  8  (26  March-1  April)  included  nine  radar  sites  for

*  Bas<?d  on  information  in  JCS  compilations  and  ROLLING  THUNDER  execute
messages.


Jun  1065


i:  Jun  7  9(55
75  Jun  I  ^d5


24  Jim  7965


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  285

U.S.  strike,  and  a  barracks  for  VNAF.  The  radar  targets  reflected  primarily
policy-level  interest  in  additional  purely  military  targets  in  southern  NVN.  Three
armed  recce  missions  were  again  authorized,  against  specified  route  segments
with  U.S.  armed  recce  conducted  against  NVN  patrol  craft,  along  the  coast  from
Tiger  Island  north  to  20°  and  authority  granted  to  restrike  operational  radar
sites.  VNAF  armed  recce  was  conducted  along  Route  12  from  Ha  Tinh  to  two
miles  east  of  Mu  Gia  Pass.

ROLLING  THUNDER  9  (2-8  April)  inaugurated  a  planned  LOG  interdic-
tion campaign  against  NVN  south  of  latitude  20°.  The  Dong  Phuong  (ICS
target  No.  18.8)  and  Thanh  Hoa  bridges  (ICS  target  No.  14)  were  the  northern-
most fixed-target  strikes  in  this  campaign  to  be  followed  by  additional  armed
reconnaissance  strikes  to  sustain  the  interdiction.  ROLLING  THUNDER  9
(2-8  April)  through  ROLLING  THUNDER  12  (23-29  April)  completed  the
fixed-target  strikes  against  26  bridges  and  seven  ferries.

a.  ROLLING  THUNDER  9  permitted  three  armed  recce  missions  on  speci-
fied route  segments.  Sorties  were  increased  to  not  more  than  24  armed  recce
strike  sorties  per  24-hour  period  in  ROLLING  THUNDER  10  through  ROLL-
ING THUNDER  12.  This  eflfort  was  still  far  short  of  the  level  considered  by
the  ICS  to  be  "required  for  significant  efi'ectiveness."

b.  Prior  to  ROLLING  THUNDER  10,  armed  recce  targets  were  limited  to
locomotives,  rolling  stock,  vehicles,  and  hostile  NVN  craft.  For  ROLLING
THUNDER  10  through  ROLLING  THUNDER  12  the  rules  were  changed  to
provide  day  and  night  armed  recce  missions  to  obtain  a  high  level  of  damage  to
military  movement  facilities,  ferries,  radar  sites,  secondary  bridges,  and  railroad
rolling  stock.  It  also  included  interdiction  of  the  LOC  by  cratering,  restriking
and  seeding  choke-points  as  necessary.

c.  From  the  beginning,  armed  recce  geographical  coverage  was  limited  to
specified  segments  of  designated  routjbs.  By  ROLLING  THUNDER  9  it  had
increased  to  one-time  coverage  of  Routes  1  (DMZ  to  19-58-36N),  7,  8,  15,  101,
and  lateral  roads  between  these  routes.

d.  The  dropping  of  unexpended  ordnance  on  Tiger  Island  was  authorized  in
this  period.  Prior  to  this  time,  ordnance  was  jettisoned  in  the  sea.

ROLLING  THUNDER  13  (30  April-May  1965)  through  ROLLING  THUN-
DER 18  (11-17  June)  continued  U.S.  and  VNAF  strikes  against  52  fixed  mili-
tary targets  (five  restrikes)  as  follows:  six  ammo  depots,  five  supply  depots,  21
barracks,  two  airfields,  two  POL  storages,  two  radio  facilities,  seven  bridges,
two  naval  bases,  one  railroad  yard,  two  thermal  power  plants,  one  port  facility,
and  one  ferry.  It  was  argued  by  the  ICS  that,  as  some  barracks  and  depots  had
been  vacated,  political  insistence  on  hitting  only  military  targets  south  of  latitude
20°  was  "constraining  the  program  substantially  short  of  optimum  military
effectiveness."

a.  During  this  six-week  period  armed  recce  sorties  were  expanded  to  a  maxi-
mum allowable  rate  of  40  per  day  and  a  maximum  of  200  per  week  (60
additional  armed  recce  sorties  were  authorized  for  ROLLING  THUNDER  17).
Although  this  period  saw  a  significant  increase  in  armed  recce,  the  new  level  was
well  below  existing  capabilities  and,  so  the  ICS  argued,  "the  increase  was  au-
thorized too  late  to  achieve  tactical  surprise."

b.  With  ROLLING  THUNDER  13  armed  recce  authorizations  changed  from
stated  routes,  etc.,  to  more  broadly  defined  geographical  areas,  in  this  case  the
area  south  of  20°.

c.  Air  strikes  against  fixed  targets  and  armed  recce  were  suspended  over  NVN
during  the  five-day  and  twenty-hour  bombing  pause  of  13-17  May.


286 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

d.  Authority  was  requested  to  strike  the  first  SAM  site  during  the  ROLLING
THUNDER  15  period  (immediately  following  the  bombing  pause)  but  it  was
denied.

e.  Armed  recce  targets  were  expanded  during  this  six-week  period  to  include
railroad  rolling  stock,  trucks,  ferries,  lighters,  barges,  radar  sites,  secondary
bridges,  road  repair  equipment,  NVN  naval  craft,  bivouac  and  maintenance
areas.  Emphasis  was  placed  on  armed  recce  of  routes  emanating  from  Vinh  in
order  to  restrict  traffic  in  and  out  of  this  important  LOG  hub.  ROLLING  THUN-
DER 18  added  the  provision  that  authorized  day  armed  route  recce  sorties  could
include  selected  missions  to  conduct  small  precise  attacks  against  prebriefed
military  targets  not  in  the  JCS  target  list,  and  thereafter  conduct  armed  route
recce  with  residual  capability.

f.  ROLLING  THUNDER  14  added  authority  for  returning  aircraft  to  use
unexpended  ordnance  on  Hon  Nieu  Island  Radar  Site,  Hon  Matt  Island  Radar
Site,  Dong  Hoi  Barracks,  or  rail  and  highway  LOC's  targets,  in  addition  to
Tiger  Island  previously  authorized  for  this  purpose.

I. INTRODUCTION— PLEIKU  PULLS  THE  TRIGGER

At  2:00  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  February  7,  1965,  at  the  end  of  five  days  of
Tet  celebrations  and  only  hours  after  Kosygin  had  told  a  cheering  crowd  in
Hanoi  that  the  Soviet  Union  would  "not  remain  indifferent"  if  "acts  of  war"
were  committed  against  North  Vietnam,  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  carried  out  well-
coordinated  raids  upon  a  U.S.  advisers'  barracks  in  Pleiku  and  upon  a  U.S.
helicopter  base  at  Camp  Holloway,  some  four  miles  away.  Of  the  137  American
soldiers  hit  in  the  two  attacks,  nine  eventually  died  and  76  had  to  be  evacuated;
the  losses  in  equipment  were  also  severe:  16  helicopters  damaged  or  destroyed
and  six  fixed-wing  aircraft  damaged,  making  this  the  heaviest  communist  assault
up  to  that  time  against  American  installations  in  South  Vietnam.

The  first  flash  from  Saigon  about  the  assault  came  on  the  ticker  at  the  National
Military  Command  Center  at  the  Pentagon  at  2:38  p.m.  Saturday,  February  6,
Washington  time.  It  triggered  a  swift,  though  long-contemplated  Presidential
decision  to  give  an  "appropriate  and  fitting"  response.  Within  less  than  14  hours,
by  4:00  p.m.  Sunday,  Vietnam  time,  49  U.S.  Navy  jets — A-4  Skyhawks  and
F-8  Crusaders  from  the  Seventh  Fleet  carriers  USS  Coral  Sea  and  USS  Hancock
— had  penetrated  a  heavy  layer  of  monsoon  clouds  to  deliver  their  bombs  and
rockets  upon  North  Vietnamese  barracks  and  staging  areas  at  Dong  Hoi,  a
guerrilla  training  garrison  40  miles  north  of  the  17th  parallel.  On  the  following
afternoon,  a  flight  of  24  VNAF  (A-IH  Skyraiders,  cancelled  the  previous  day
because  of  poor  weather,  followed  up  the  attack  by  striking  a  military  com-
munications center  in  the  Vinh  Linh  area  just  north  of  the  border.

Though  conceived  and  executed  as  a  limited  one-shot  tit-for-tat  reprisal,  the
dramatic  U.S.  action,  long  on  the  military  planners'  drawing  boards  under  the
operational  code  name  FLAMING  DART,  precipitated  a  rapidly  moving
sequence  of  events  that  transformed  the  character  of  the  Vietnam  war  and  the
U.S.  role  in  it.  It  was  also  the  opening  move  in  what  soon  developed  into  an
entirely  new  phase  of  that  war:  the  sustained  U.S.  bombing  effort  against  North
Vietnam.  It  is  the  purpose  of  this  paper  to  reconstruct  the  immediate  circum-
stances that  led  up  to  the  FLAMING  DART  decision,  to  retrace  the  changes  in
rationale  that  progressively  transformed  the  reprisal  concept  into  a  sustained
graduated  bombing  effort,  and  to  chronicle  the  relationship  between  that  effort


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  287

and  the  military-political  moves  to  shore  up  Saigon  and  the  military-diplomatic
signals  to  dissuade  Hanoi,  during  the  crucial  early  months  of  February  through
May  of  1965.

II. THE  LONG  ROAD  TO  PLEIKU— A  RETROSPECTIVE  VIEW

A.  1964:  YEAR  OF  POLITICAL  AND  MILITARY  DECLINE

The  year  1964  was  marked  by  a  gradual  American  awakening  to  the  fact  that
the  Viet  Cong  were  winning  the  war  in  South  Vietnam.  Almost  uninterrupted
political  upheaval  in  Saigon  was  spawning  progressive  military  dissolution  in  the
countryside.  Constant  changes  within  the  Vietnamese  leadership  were  bringing
GVN  civil  administration  into  a  state  of  disarray  and  GVN  military  activities  to
a  near-standstill.  ARVN  forces  were  becoming  more  and  more  defensive  and
demoralized.  At  the  same  time,  the  communists  were  visibly  strengthening  their
support  base  in  Laos,  stepping  up  the  rate  of  infiltration  of  men  and  supplies
into  South  Vietnam,  and  mounting  larger  and  more  aggressive  attacks.  The  GVN
was  still  predominant,  though  not  unchallenged,  in  the  urban  population  centers;
there  were  also  a  few  areas  where  traditional  local  power  structures  (the  Hoa
Hao,  the  Cao  Dai,  etc.)  continued  to  exercise  effective  authority.  But  the  rest  of
the  country  was  slipping,  largely  by  default,  under  VC  control.  By  the  end  of
1964,  all  evidence  pointed  to  a  situation  in  which  a  final  collapse  of  the  GVN
appeared  probable  and  a  victorious  consolidation  of  VC  power  a  distinct  possi-
bility.

Ironically,  it  was  left  to  Senator  Fulbright  to  state  the  harsh  realities  in  terms
which  set  the  tone  for  much  of  Administration  thinking  as  it  was  to  emerge  in
the  months  to  come — though  his  viewjs  then  were  hardly  consistent  with  the  op-
position role  he  was  increasingly  to  take  later  on.  As  early  as  March  1964,  in  a
celebrated  speech  entitled  "Old  Myths  and  New  Realities"  he  observed  that  "the
hard  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  our  bargaining  position  is  at  present  a  weak  one;
and  until  the  equation  of  advantage  between  the  two  sides  has  been  substantially
altered  in  our  favor,  there  can  be  little  prospect  of  a  negotiated  settlement."

B.  EVOLUTION  OF  A  NEW  POLICY

With  the  growing  realization  that  the  ally  on  whose  behalf  the  United  States
had  steadily  deepened  its  commitment  in  Southeast  Asia  was  in  a  near  state  of
dissolution,  Washington  launched  a  protracted  reassessment  of  the  future  Ameri-
can role  in  the  war  and  began  a  determined  search  for  new  pressures  to  be
mounted  against  the  communist  enemy,  both  within  and  outside  of  South  Viet-
nam. High  level  deliberations  on  alternative  U.S.  courses  of  action  in  South-
east Asia  were  started  as  early  as  March  1964,  and  a  military  planning  process
was  set  in  motion  in  which  much  attention  was  given  to  the  possibility  of  imple-
menting some  sort  of  pressures  or  reprisal  policy  against  North  Vietnam.

The  first  of  these  planning  efforts,  authorized  by  the  President  on  17  March
1964  (NSAM  288),  led  to  the  development  of  CINCPAC  OPLAN  37-64,  a
three-phase  plan  covering  operations  against  VC  infiltration  routes  in  Laos  and
Cambodia  and  against  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  Phase  I  provided  for  air  and
ground  strikes  against  targets  in  South  Vietnam  and  hot  pursuit  actions  into
Laotian  and  Cambodian  border  areas.  Phase  II  provided  for  "tit-for-tat"  air
strikes,  airborne/amphibious  raids,  and  aerial  mining  operations  against  targets  in
North  Vietnam,  Phase  III  provided  for  increasingly  severe  air  strikes  and  other


288 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

actions  against  North  Vietnam,  going  beyond  the  "tit-for-tat"  concept.  Accord-
ing to  the  plan,  air  strikes  would  be  conducted  primarily  by  GVN  forces,  assisted
by  U.S.  aircraft.

As  part  of  OPLAN  37-64,  a  detailed  list  of  specific  targets  for  air  attack  in
North  Vietnam  was  drawn  up,  selected  on  the  basis  of  three  criteria:  (a)  reduc-
ing North  Vietnamese  support  of  communist  operations  in  Laos  and  South  Viet-
nam, (b)  limiting  North  Vietnamese  capabilities  to  take  direct  action  against
Laos  and  South  Vietnam,  and  finally  (c)  impairing  North  Vietnam's  capacity  to
continue  as  an  industrially  viable  state.  Detailed  characteristics  were  provided
for  each  target,  together  with  damage  effects  that  could  be  achieved  by  various
scales  of  attack  against  them.  This  target  list,  informally  called  the  "94  Target
List,"  became  the  basic  reference  for  much  of  the  subsequent  planning  for  air
strikes  against  North  Vietnam,  when  target  selection  was  involved.

The  Tonkin  Gulf  incident  of  4-5  August,  which  precipitated  the  first  U.S.
reprisal  action  against  North  Vietnam,  had  enabled  the  Administration  to  obtain
a  broad  Congressional  Resolution  of  support  and  had  brought  with  it  a  prompt
and  substantial  forward  deployment  of  U.S.  military  forces  in  Southeast  Asia,
to  deter  or  deal  with  possible  communist  reactions  to  the  U.S.  reprisal  strike.
Encouraged  somewhat  by  the  fact  that  no  such  reaction  occurred,  U.S.  officials
began  to  look  more  hopefully  toward  forceful  military  alternatives  that  might
help  salvage  the  deteriorating  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  A  new  wave  of  dis-
orders and  governmental  eruptions  in  Saigon  gave  added  impetus  to  a  succes-
sion of  JCS  proposals  for  intensified  harassing  and  other  punitive  operations
against  North  Vietnam.  Their  recommendations  included  retaliatory  actions  for
stepped  up  VC  incidents,  should  they  occur,  and  initiation  of  continuing  air
strikes  by  GVN  and  U.S.  forces  against  North  Vietnamese  targets.

A  Presidential  decision  was  issued  on  10  September.  Besides  some  modest  ad-
ditional pressures  in  the  Lao  panhandle  and  covert  actions  against  North  Vietnam,
it  authorized  only  preparations  for  retaliatory  actions  against  North  Vietnam  in
the  event  of  any  attack  on  U.S.  units  or  any  extraordinary  North  Vietnamese/VC
action  against  South  Vietnam.  The  forward  deployments  that  had  been  carried
out  in  connection  with  the  Tonkin  incident  and  in  accordance  with  OPLAN
37-64  were  kept  in  place,  but  the  forces  involved  were  precluded  from  action
in  South  Vietnam  and  no  decision  was  made  to  utilize  them  in  operations  in  Laos
or  North  Vietnam.

Throughout  September  and  October,  the  JCS  continued  to  urge  stronger  U.S.
action  not  only  in  North  Vietnam,  but  also  in  Laos,  where  infiltration  was  clearly
on  the  increase,  and  in  South  Vietnam,  where  GVN  survival  was  becoming  pre-
carious and  time  seemed  to  be  running  out.

These  urgings  reached  a  crescendo  on  1  November  1964  when,  just  three  days
prior  to  the  U.S.  Presidential  elections,  the  VC  executed  a  daring  and  dramatic
mortar  attack  on  the  U.S.  air  base  at  Bien  Hoa,  killing  five  Americans,  wound-
ing 76,  and  damaging  or  destroying  27  of  the  30  B-57's  that  had  been  deployed
to  South  Vietnam  to  serve  notice  upon  Hanoi  that  the  United  States  had  readily
at  hand  the  capacity  to  deliver  a  crushing  air  attack  on  the  North.  The  attack
was  the  most  spectacular  anti-American  incident  to  date  and  was  viewed  by  the
JCS  as  warranting  a  severe  punitive  response.  Their  recommendation,  accord-
ingly, went  far  beyond  a  mere  reprisal  action.  It  called  for  an  initial  24-36
hour  period  of  air  strikes  in  Laos  and  low-level  air  reconnaissance  south  of  the
19th  parallel  in  North  Vietnam,  designed  to  provide  a  cover  for  the  introduction
of  U.S.  security  forces  to  protect  key  U.S.  installations,  and  for  the  evacuation
of  U.S.  dependents  from  Saigon.  This  would  be  followed,  in  the  next  three  days,


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  289

by  a  B-52  strike  against  Phuc  Yen,  the  principal  airfield  near  Hanoi,  and  by
strikes  against  other  airfields  and  major  POL  facilities  in  the  Hanoi /Haiphong
area;  and  subsequently  by  armed  reconnaissance  against  infiltration  routes  in
Laos,  air  strikes  against  infiltration  routes  and  targets  in  North  Vietnam,  and
progressive  PACOM  and  SAC  strikes  against  remaining  military  and  industrial
targets  in  the  94  Target  List.

That  the  JCS  recommendations  were  not  accepted  is  hardly  surprising,  con-
sidering the  magnitude  and  radical  nature  of  the  proposed  actions  and  the  fact
that  these  actions  would  have  had  to  be  initiated  on  the  eve  of  the  election  by  a
President  who  in  his  campaign  had  plainly  made  manifest  his  disinclination  to
lead  the  United  States  into  a  wider  war  in  Vietnam,  repeatedly  employing  the
slogan  "we  are  not  going  North."  In  any  event,  as  subsequent  developments
indicate,  the  President  was  not  ready  to  approve  a  program  of  air  strikes  against
North  Vietnam,  at  least  until  the  available  alternatives  could  be  carefully  and
thoroughly  re-examined.

Such  a  re-examination  was  initiated  immediately  following  the  election,  under
the  aegis  of  a  NSC  interagency  working  group  chaired  by  Assistant  Secretary  of
State  William  Bundy.  After  a  month  of  intensive  study  of  various  options,
ranging  from  an  intensification  of  existing  programs  to  the  initiation  of  large-
scale  hostilities  against  North  Vietnam,  the  working  group  recommended  a
graduated  program  of  controlled  military  pressures  designed  to  signal  U.S.
determination,  to  boost  morale  in  the  South  and  to  increase  the  costs  and  strains
upon  the  North.  A  basic  aim  of  the  program  was  to  build  a  stronger  bargaining
position,  to  restore  an  "equilibrium"  in  the  balance  of  forces,  looking  toward  a
negotiated  settlement.

The  recommended  program  was  in  two  phases:  Phase  I,  which  was  to  last
about  30  days,  consisted  of  little  moce  than  an  intensification  of  earlier  "signals"
to  Hanoi  that  it  should  cease  supp6rting  the  insurgency  in  the  South  or  face
progressively  higher  costs  and  penalties.  Coupled  with  these  military  measures
was  to  be  a  continuous  declaratory  policy  communicating  our  willingness  to
negotiate  on  the  basis  of  the  Geneva  accords.  It  was  recommended  that  suc-
cessive actions  would  be  undertaken  only  after  waiting  to  discern  Hanoi's  re-
actions to  previous  actions,  with  the  commitment  to  later  stages,  such  as  initia-
tion of  air  strikes  against  infiltration  targets  across  the  17th  parallel,  kept  un-
specific  and  dependent  upon  enemy  reactions.

The  recommended  program  also  included  a  Phase  II,  a  continuous  program  of
progressively  more  serious  air  strikes  possibly  running  from  two  to  six  months.
The  attacks  would  at  first  be  limited  to  infiltration  targets  south  of  the  19th
parallel,  but  would  gradually  work  northward,  and  could  eventually  encompass
all  major  military-related  targets,  aerial  mining  of  ports,  and  a  naval  blockade,
with  the  weight  and  tempo  of  the  action  being  adjusted  to  the  situation  as  it
developed.  The  approach  would  be  steady  and  deliberate,  "progressively  mount-
ing in  scope  and  intensity,"  with  the  U.S.  retaining  the  option  to  proceed  or  not,
escalate  or  not,  or  quicken  the  pace  or  not,  at  any  time.  It  was  agreed,  how-
ever, that  this  second  phase  would  not  be  considered  for  implementation  until
after  the  GVN  had  demonstrated  considerable  stability  and  efi"ectiveness.

As  part  of  this  "progressive  squeeze,"  the  working  group  recommended  that
the  U.S.  be  willing  to  pause  to  explore  negotiated  solutions,  should  North
Vietnam  show  any  signs  of  yielding,  while  maintaining  a  credible  threat  of  still
further  pressures.  In  the  view  of  the  working  group,  the  prospect  of  greater
pressures  to  come  was  at  least  as  important  as  any  damage  actually  inflicted,
since  the  real  target  was  the  will  of  the  North  Vietnamese  government  to  con-


290 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  111

tinue  the  aggression  in  the  South  rather  than  its  capability  to  do  so.  Even  if  it
retained  the  capability,  North  Vietnam  might  elect  to  discontinue  the  aggression
if  it  anticipated  future  costs  and  risks  greater  than  it  had  bargained  for.

The  JCS  dissented  from  the  working  group's  program  on  the  grounds  that  it
did  not  clearly  provide  for  the  kinds  and  forms  of  military  pressures  that  might
achieve  U.S.  objectives.  They  recommended  instead  a  more  accelerated  program
of  intensive  air  strikes  from  the  outset,  along  lines  similar  to  the  actions  they
had  urged  in  response  to  the  Bien  Hoa  incident.  Their  program  was  in  consonance
with  the  consistent  JCS  view  that  the  way  to  exert  significant  military  pressure  on
North  Vietnam  was  to  bring  to  bear  the  maximum  practicable  conventional
military  power  in  a  short  time.

The  working  group's  proposals  for  a  graduated  approach  were  hammered  out
in  a  series  of  policy  conferences  with  Ambassador  Taylor,  who  had  returned  to
Washington  for  this  purpose  at  the  end  of  November,  and  were  then  presented
to  the  President,  who  approved  them  conditionally  on  1  December,  without,
however,  setting  a  timetable  or  specifying  precise  implementing  actions.  Allies
had  to  be  brought  in  line,  and  certain  other  diplomatic  preliminaries  had  to  be
arranged,  before  the  program  could  be  launched.  More  important,  it  was  feared
that  possible  enemy  reactions  to  the  program  might  subject  the  GVN  to  severe
counter-pressures  which,  in  its  then  enfeebled  state,  might  be  more  than  it  could
bear.  Thus  securing  some  GVN  leadership  commitment  to  improved  perform-
ance was  made  a  prerequisite  to  mounting  the  more  intensive  actions  contem-
plated. In  fact.  Ambassador  Taylor  returned  to  Saigon  with  instructions  to  hold
out  the  prospect  of  these  more  intensive  actions  as  an  incentive  to  the  GVN
to  "pull  itself  together"  and,  indeed,  as  a  quid  pro  quo,  for  achieving,  in  some
manner,  greater  stability  and  effectiveness.  The  instructions,  however,  contained
no  reference  to  U.S.  intentions  with  respect  to  negotiations.  Any  mention  of  U.S.
interest  in  a  negotiated  settlement  before  the  initiation  of  military  operations
against  North  Vietnam  was  regarded  as  likely  to  have  the  opposite  effect  from
the  desired  bolstering  of  GVN  morale  and  stamina,  as  well  as  being  premature
in  terms  of  the  hoped-for  improvement  in  the  U.S.  bargaining  position  vis-a-vis
Hanoi  that  might  result  from  the  actions.

The  President's  1  December  decisions  were  extremely  closely  held  during  the
ensuing  months.  The  draft  NSAM  that  had  been  prepared  by  the  working  group
was  never  issued  and  the  decisions  were  only  informally  communicated.  Ambas-
sador Taylor,  upon  returning  to  Saigon,  began  his  discussions  of  the  proposed
actions  with  the  GVN,  and  received  certain  assurances.  Several  allies,  including
the  UK,  Canada,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  were  given  a  fairly  complete
description  of  U.S.  intentions.  Others,  such  as  Thailand  and  Laos,  were  informed
about  Phase  I  only.  Still  others,  like  Nationalist  China,  Korea,  and  the  Philippines,
were  simply  given  a  vague  outline  of  the  projected  course  of  action.

The  first  intensified  military  pressures  in  the  program — more  high  level  recon-
naissance missions  over  North  Vietnam,  more  extensive  34A  maritime  operations
with  VNAF  cover  south  of  the  18th  parallel,  and  RLAF  air  strikes  against  PL/
NVA  forces  in  Laos — were  begun  on  14  December,  along  with  a  new  program
of  limited  USAF-Navy  armed  reconnaissance  missions  against  infiltration  routes
and  facilities  in  Northern  Laos  under  the  code  name  BARREL  ROLE.  The
strikes  were  not  publicized  and  were  not  expected  to  have  a  significant  military
interdiction  effect.  They  were  considered  useful  primarily  for  their  political
value  as  another  of  a  long  series  of  signals  to  Hanoi  to  the  effect  that  the  U.S.
was  prepared  to  use  much  greater  force  to  frustrate  a  communist  take-over  in
South  Vietnam.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February— June  1965  291


C. SIGNALS  TO  HANOI

Throughout  1964,  a  basic  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam  was  to  severely  restrain  any
expansion  of  the  direct  U.S.  combat  involvement,  but  to  carry  out  an  essentially
psychological  campaign  to  convince  Hanoi  that  the  United  States  meant  business.
The  campaign  included  repeated  reaffirmations  of  the  U.S.  commitment  to  the
defense  of  Southeast  Asia,  made  both  in  public  and  in  diplomatic  channels;  hints
and  warnings  that  the  U.S.  might  escalate  the  war  with  countermeasures  against
North  Vietnam,  such  as  guerrilla  raids,  air  attacks,  naval  blockade,  or  even  land
invasion,  if  the  aggression  persisted;  and  a  number  of  overt  military  actions  of  a
precautionary  nature,  intended  more  to  demonstrate  U.S.  resolve  than  to  affect
the  military  situation.  Taken  together,  however,  the  signals  were  somewhat
ambiguous.

Among  the  more  important  military -political  actions,  carried  out  with  con-
siderable publicity,  were  the  accelerated  military  construction  effort  in  Thailand
and  South  Vietnam,  the  prepositioning  of  contingency  stockpiles  in  Thailand  and
the  Philippines,  the  forward  deployment  of  a  carrier  task  force  and  land-based
tactical  aircraft  within  close  striking  distance  of  relevant  enemy  targets,  and  the
assignment  of  an  unprecedentedly  high-level  "first  team"  to  man  the  U.S.  Diplo-
matic Mission  in  Saigon.  These  measures  were  intended  both  to  convince  Hanoi
and  to  reassure  the  GVN  of  the  seriousness  and  durability  of  the  U.S.  commit-
ment.

In  addition,  the  U.S.  undertook  a  number  of  unpublicized  and  more  provoca-
tive actions,  primarily  as  low-key  indications  to  the  enemy  of  the  U.S.  willing-
ness and  capability  to  employ  increased  force  if  necessary.  Chief  among  these
were  the  occasional  DE  SOTO  Patrols  (U.S.  destroyer  patrols  conducted  deep
into  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  along  the  cost  of  North  Vietnam),  both  as  a  "show  of
strength"  and  as  an  intelligence  gathering  device:  Laotian  air  strikes  and  limited
GVN  cross-border  operations  against  VC  infiltration  routes  in  Laos;  GVN
maritime  raids  and  other  harassing  actions  against  North  Vietnam;  YANKEE
TEAM,  low-level  photo  reconnaissance  missions  over  Laos,  conducted  by  U.S.
jet  aircraft  with  fighter  escorts  for  suppressive  or  retaliatory  action  against
enemy  ground  fire;  and  finally,  the  initiation  at  the  very  end  of  1964  of  BARREL
ROLL,  armed  reconnaissance  missions  bv  U.S.  jet  fighters  against  VC  infiltration
routes  and  facilities  in  Laos.

The  fact  that  these  actions  were  not  publicized — although  most  of  them
eventually  became  public  knowledge — stemmed  in  part  from  a  desire  to  com-
municate an  implicit  threat  of  "more  to  come"  for  Hanoi's  benefit,  without
arousing  undue  anxieties  domestically  in  the  United  States  in  a  Presidential
election  year  in  which  escalation  of  the  war  became  a  significant  campaign
issue.

Within  this  general  pattern  of  subtle  and  not-so-subtle  warning  signals,  the
U.S.  reprisal  strike,  following  the  controversial  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident  of  4-5
August,  stands  out  as  a  single  forceful  U.S.  reaction,  the  portent  of  which  could
hardly  have  escaped  Hanoi.  Its  effect,  however,  may  have  been  gradually  diluted,
first  by  the  care  that  was  taken  to  allay  public  fears  that  it  represented  anything
more  than  an  isolated  event,  and  subsequently  by  the  failure  of  the  U.S.  to  react
to  the  November  1  attack  at  Bien  Hoa  or  to  the  Christmas  Eve  bombing  of  the
Brink  BOQ.  Even  this  signal,  therefore,  may  not  have  been,  in  Hanoi's  reading,
entirely  unambiguous.

For  Hanoi,  the  U.S.  public  declaratory  policy  during  most  of  1964  must  have


292 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

been  a  major  source  of  confusion.  Presidential  statements  alternated  between
hawk-like  cries  and  dove-like  coos.  Thus,  in  February  1964,  in  a  University  of
California  speech,  the  President  issued  the  thinly  veiled  threat  that  "those  en-
gaged in  external  direction  and  supply  would  do  well  to  be  reminded  and  to
remember  that  this  type  of  aggression  is  a  deeply  dangerous  game."  But  for  the
rest  of  the  year  and  particularly  during  the  election  campaign,  the  President  was
saying,  emphatically  and  repeatedly,  that  he  did  not  intend  to  lead  the  United
States  into  a  wider  war  in  Vietnam.  He  ridiculed  the  pugnacious  chauvinism  of
Barry  Goldwater  and  contrasted  it  with  his  own  restraint.  "There  are  those  that
say  I  ought  to  go  north  and  drop  bombs,  to  try  to  wipe  out  the  supply  lines,  and
they  think  that  would  escalate  the  war,"  he  said  in  a  speech  on  September  25.
"But  we  don't  want  to  get  involved  in  a  nation  with  seven  hundred  million
people  and  get  tied  down  in  a  land  war  in  Asia."

But  if  there  was  reason  for  confusion  in  Hanoi's  reading  of  the  public  declara-
tory signals,  there  was  no  shortage  of  opportunities  for  transmitting  more  un-
equivocal signals  through  quiet  diplomatic  channels.  The  clearest  explanations
of  U.S.  policy,  and  warnings  of  U.S.  intent,  were  communicated  to  Hanoi  on
June  18,  1964,  by  the  Canadian  International  Control  Commissioner  Seaborn.
In  a  long  meeting  with  Premier  Pham  Van  Dong,  Seaborn  presented  a  carefully
prepared  statement  of  U.S.  views  and  intentions  to  the  North  Vietnamese  Premier,
clearly  warning  him  of  the  destructive  consequences  for  the  DRV  of  a  continua-
tion of  its  present  course.  Pham  Van  Dong  fully  understood  the  seriousness  and
import  of  the  warning  conveyed  by  Seaborn.  But  in  this,  as  in  a  subsequent
meeting  with  Seaborn  on  August  15,  Pham  Van  Dong  showed  himself  utterly
unintimidated  and  calmly  resolved  to  pursue  the  course  upon  which  the  DRV
was  embarked  to  what  he  confidently  expected  would  be  its  successful  con-
clusion.

On  balance,  while  U.S.  words  and  actions  were  not  always  in  consonance,
while  public  and  private  declarations  were  much  in  conflict,  and  while  U.S.
reactions  fluctuated  between  the  unexpectedly  forceful  and  the  mystifyingly
hesitant,  the  action-signals  were  sufficiently  numerous  and  the  warnings  suffi-
ciently explicit  to  have  given  Hanoi  a  fair  awareness  that  the  U.S.  was  likely  to
respond  to  the  deteriorating  situation  by  intensifying  the  conflict.  How  far  this
intensification  would  go,  neither  Hanoi  nor  the  U.S.  could  have  foreseen.

D. OMINOUS  DEVELOPMENTS  IN  SAIGON

The  first  of  the  new  military  pressures  against  the  North — BARREL  ROLL
air  strikes  in  Laos — authorized  in  the  1  December  decision,  went  into  effect  on
14  December.  The  hoped-for  improvement  in  GVN  stability,  however,  did  not
materialize.  To  the  contrary,  on  20  December  the  erratic  SVN  Premier  Lt.  Gen.
Nguyen  Khanh  abruptly  dissolved  the  High  National  Council.

The  crisis  of  confidence  that  developed  was  one  reason  for  the  lack  of  a  U.S.
response  to  the  bombing  of  the  Brink  BOQ  in  Saigon  on  Christmas  Eve.  As
pointed  out  earlier,  it  was  the  kind  of  incident  which  had  been  contemplated  in
the  approved  Phase  I  guidelines  as  warranting  a  U.S.  reprisal  action,  and  the
JCS  did  recommend  such  an  action.  They  proposed  an  immediate  air  strike
against  Vit  Thu  Lu  army  barracks  just  north  of  the  17th  parallel,  employing
up  to  40  aircraft  sorties,  with  Vietnamese  participation  if  feasible.  It  was  to  be
a  one-day  strike,  on  a  much  smaller  scale  than  those  recommended  by  the  JCS
on  earlier  occasions.  However,  both  because  of  the  unsettled  situation  in  Viet-
nam and  because  of  the  Christmas  Season — which  caught  the  President  and  the


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  293

Secretary  of  Defense  out  of  town  and  Congress  in  recess — Washington  was  hesi-
tant and  reluctant  to  press  for  a  prompt  reaction.  By  the  time  the  issue  was
discussed  with  the  President  on  29  December,  it  seemed  too  late  for  an  event-
associated  reprisal  and  the  decision  was  negative.

In  the  meantime,  GVN  forces  had  experienced  major  reverses.  ARVN  as  well
as  the  Regional  and  Popular  Forces  had  been  seriously  weakened  by  defeat
and  desertions  in  the  last  few  months  of  1964.  A  highly  visible  setback  occurred
from  26  December  to  2  January  1965  at  Binh  Gia,  where  the  VC  virtually
destroyed  two  Vietnamese  Marine  battalions.  Viet  Cong  strength,  augmented  by
infiltrating  combat  forces  from  North  Vietnam,  increased,  and  their  hit-and-run
tactics  were  increasingly  successful.

The  government  of  Tran  Van  Huong  came  to  an  abrupt  end  on  27  January
1965  when  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces  Council  ousted  him,  leaving  only  a
facade  of  civilian  government.  The  continuing  power  struggle  clearly  impeded
military  operations.  Large  elements  of  VNAF,  for  example,  were  maintained  on
constant  "coup  alert."

Washington  reacted  to  these  developments  with  considerable  anguish.  "I  think
we  must  accept  that  Saigon  morale  in  all  quarters  is  now  very  shaky  in-
deed. .  .  ."  wrote  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  William  P.  Bundy  on  January  6,
and  he  continued:

We  have  not  yet  been  able  to  assess  the  overall  impact  of  the  continuing
political  crisis  and  of  the  Binh  Gia  military  defeat,  but  there  are  already
ample  indications  that  they  have  had  a  sharp  discouraging  effect  just  in
the  last  two  weeks.  By  the  same  token,  it  is  apparent  that  Hanoi  is  ex-
tremely confident,  and  that  the  Soviets  are  being  somewhat  tougher  and
the  Chinese  Communists  are  consolidating  their  ties  with  Hanoi  .  .  .  they
see  Vietnam  falling  into  their  laps  in  the  fairly  near  future.  .  .  .  The  sum
total  of  the  above  seems  to  us  to  point  ...  to  a  prognosis  that  the  situa-
tion in  Vietnam  is  now  likely  to  come  apart  more  rapidly  than  we  had
anticipated  in  November.

A  similarly  gloomy  view  was  taken  by  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  John
McNaughton.  In  a  February  1965  memorandum  (no  exact  date),  he  charac-
terized the  situation  as  "deteriorating" :

The  new  government  will  probably  be  unstable  and  ineffectual,  and  the
VC  will  probably  continue  to  extend  their  hold  over  the  population  and
territory.  It  can  be  expected  that  soon  (6  months?  two  years?)  (a)  govern-
ment officials  at  all  levels  will  adjust  their  behavior  to  an  eventual  VC
take-over,  (b)  defections  of  significant  military  forces  will  take  place,  (c)
while  integrated  regions  of  the  country  will  be  totally  denied  to  the  GVN,
(d)  neutral  and/or  left-wing  elements  will  enter  the  government,  (e)  a
popular-front  regime  will  emerge  which  will  invite  the  US  out,  and  (f)
fundamental  concessions  to  the  VC  and  accommodations  to  the  DRV  will
put  South  Vietnam  behind  the  Curtain.

These  views  were  fully  consistent  with  USIB-approved  national  intelligence
estimates  which,  as  early  as  October  1964,  predicted:

...  a  further  decay  of  GVN  will  and  effectiveness.  The  likely  pattern
of  this  decay  will  be  increasing  defeatism,  paralysis  of  leadership,  friction
with  Americans,  exploration  of  possible  lines  of  political  accommodation
with  the  other  side,  and  a  general  petering  out  of  the  war  effort.  .  .  .


294 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

By  February  1965,  the  intelligence  community  saw  "the  present  political  ar-
rangements in  Saigon  [as]  avowedly  temporary"  and  detected  no  more  than  "a
faint  chance  that  the  scenario  announced  for  the  ensuing  weeks  [would]  hold
promise  for  improved  political  stability  in  SVN."  It  judged  the  odds  as  "con-
siderably less  than  even  .  .  .  [that]  the  spring  and  summer  might  see  the  evo-
lution of  a  stronger  base  for  prosecuting  the  counter-insurgency  effort  than  has
heretofore  existed."

These  views  were  most  authoritatively  endorsed  by  the  President's  highest
national  security  staff  advisor,  McGeorge  Bundy,  who  undertook  an  urgent  fact-
finding trip  to  South  Vietnam  at  the  beginning  of  February.  In  a  pivotal  memo-
randum to  the  President  (which  will  be  referred  to  in  greater  detail  subsequently)
he  characterized  the  general  situation  as  follows:

For  the  last  year — and  perhaps  for  longer — the  overall  situation  in  Viet-
nam has  been  deteriorating.  The  Communists  have  been  gaining  and  the
anti-Communist  forces  have  been  losing.  As  a  result  there  is  now  great  un-
certainty among  Vietnamese  as  well  as  Americans  as  to  whether  Communist
victory  can  be  prevented.  There  is  nervousness  about  the  determination  of
the  U.S.  Government.  There  is  recrimination  and  fear  among  Vietnamese
political  leaders.  There  is  an  appearance  of  weariness  among  some  military
leaders.  There  is  a  worrisome  lassitude  among  the  Vietnamese  generally.
There  is  a  distressing  absence  of  positive  commitment  to  any  serious  social
or  political  purpose.  Outside  observers  are  ready  to  write  the  patient  off.
All  of  this  tends  to  bring  latent  anti-Americanism  dangerously  near  to  the
surface.

To  be  an  American  in  Saigon  today  is  to  have  a  gnawing  feeling  that
time  is  against  us.  Junior  officers  in  all  services  are  able,  zealous  and  effec-
tive within  the  limits  of  their  means.  Their  morale  is  sustained  by  the  fact
that  they  know  that  they  are  doing  their  jobs  well  and  that  they  will  not
have  to  accept  the  responsibility  for  defeat.  But  near  the  top,  where  re-
sponsibility is  heavy  and  accountability  real,  one  can  sense  the  inner  doubts
of  men  whose  outward  behavior  remains  determined.

Interestingly,  IVIcGeorge  Bundy  saw  the  military  situation  as  moderately  en-
couraging and  the  Vietnamese  people  still  remarkably  tough  and  resilient,  though
the  social  and  political  fabric  was  stretched  thin.  "Nevertheless,"  he  warned,

.  .  extremely  unpleasant  surprises  are  increasingly  possible — both  political
and  military."

E. MORE  AGONIZING  OVER  ADDITIONAL  PRESSURES

In  the  face  of  these  uniformly  discouraging  appraisals,  both  Saigon  and  Wash-
ington continued  their  long  debate  over  ways  and  means  of  mounting  new  or
more  intensive  pressures  against  the  enemy — and  most  notably  over  the  desira-
bility and  likely  effectiveness  of  reprisal  strikes  and  "Phase  II  operations"  against
the  DRV.  But  enthusiasm  for  these  operations  was  far  from  boundless.

The  intelligence  community,  for  example,  had  expressed,  ever  since  May  of
1964,  very  little  confidence  that  such  added  pressures  would  have  much  impact
on  Hanoi's  course.  The  9  October  1964  national  estimate  considered  probable
communist  reactions  to  "a  systematic  program  of  gradually  intensifying  US/
GVN  [air]  attacks  against  targets  in  the  DRV.  .  .  ."  The  estimate  tended  only
very  hesitantly  to  the  judgment  that  such  a  program  of  air  attasks,  if  pro-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  295

traded,  might  "on  balance"  cause  the  DRV  to  stop  its  military  attacks  in  SVN,
to  press  for  a  negotiated  cease-fire  in  the  South,  and  to  try  to  promote  an  in-
ternational conference  to  pursue  their  ends,  expecting,  however,  to  fight  another
day.  State  dissented  from  even  this  ambivalent  judgment,  believing  that  the  DRV
would  carry  on  the  fight  regardless  of  air  attacks.

In  February  1965,  they  reiterated  this  hesitant  view,  again  with  State  dis-
senting:

If  the  United  States  vigorously  continued  in  its  attacks  and  damaged
some  important  economic  or  military  assets,  the  DRV  .  .  .  might  decide
to  intensify  the  struggle,  but  ...  it  seems  to  us  somewhat  more  likely
that  they  would  decide  to  make  some  effort  to  secure  a  respite  from  US
attack.  .  .  .

Parenthetically,  even  this  equivocal  judgment  was  reversed  in  effect,  though
not  explicitly,  in  a  June,  1965  estimate,  this  time  with  USAF  ACS/I  dissenting:

Our  present  estimate  is  that  the  odds  are  against  the  postulated  US  attacks
leading  the  DRV  to  make  conciliatory  gestures  to  secure  a  respite  from  the
bombing;  rather,  we  believe  that  the  DRV  would  persevere  in  supporting
the  insurgency  in  the  South.

On  top  of  these  by  no  means  reassuring  estimates.  Ambassador  Taylor's  hopes
for  a  more  stable  GVN  had  been  badly  shaken  by  his  abrasive  experiences  with
General  Khanh  during  the  late-December  episode.  The  Ambassador-Premier
relationship  was  now  ruptured  beyond  repair,  and  highest-level  contacts  between
the  use  and  the  GVN  had  to  be  carried  on  through  Deputy  Ambassador  U.
Alexis  Johnson.  For  the  first  time  IVJaxwell  Taylor  talked  seriously  of  possible
U.S.  disengagement,  and  even  suggested  a  new  role  for  air  attacks  on  the  North
in  such  a  context.

In  a  year-end  joint  Taylor-Johnson  cable  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  the  Mission
leadership  actually  suggested,  as  one  possible  alternative,  "disengaging  from  the
present  intimacy  of  relationship  with  the  GVN,  withdrawing  the  bulk  of  our
advisers  .  .  .  while  continuing  sufficient  economic  and  MAP  aid  to  keep  the
GVN  going."  In  such  a  situation,  they  would  shrink  MACV  to  the  status  of  a
MAAG  and  USOM  to  that  of  an  economic-budgetary  advisory  group,  but  con-
tinue to  accept  responsibility  for  air  and  maritime  defense  of  South  Vietnam
against  the  DRV.  The  danger  in  such  a  course,  however,  would  be  that  "panicked
by  what  would  be  interpreted  as  abandonment,  the  [GVN]  leaders  here  would
rush  to  compete  vyith  each  other  in  making  deals  with  the  NLF."  Taylor  and
Johnson,  however,  believed  that  this  danger  could  be  offset  by  an  energetic  U.S.
program  of  reprisal  attacks  and  Phase  II  operations  against  the  DRV.

Thus,  in  the  Taylor/Johnson  view,  there  were  now  three  conditions  in  which
reprisal  attacks  and  Phase  II  operations  might  be  conducted:

(i)  In  association  with  the  GVN  after  the  latter  had  proven  a  reasonably
stable  government  "able  to  control  its  armed  forces" — the  condition  originally
laid  down  in  the  President's  1  December  decision,  but  which  now  appeared  un-
likely to  be  attained.

(ii)  Under  the  prevailing  acutely  unstable  conditions  "as  an  emergency  stimu-
lant hopefully  to  create  unity  at  home  and  restore  failing  morale."

(iii)  As  a  unilateral  U.S.  action  "to  compensate  for  reduced  in-country  U.S.
presence,"  if  such  reduction  were  to  be  undertaken.

A  similarly  unprepossessing  view  of  "stronger  [words  illegible]  was  probably


296 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

presented  to  the  President  by  Rusk.  There  is  no  direct  record  of  the  Secretary's
presentation  to  the  President  during  this  period,  but  a  set  of  notes  put  together  in
preparation  for  a  Rusk  meeting  with  the  President  on  January  6  by  Assistant
Secretary  WiUiam  Bundy,  Special  Assistant  Michael  Forrestal  and  Deputy  Assist-
ant Secretary  Leonard  Unger,  laid  out  the  alternatives  in  some  detail.  Recogniz-
ing that  a  "coming  apart"  of  the  GVN  would  most  likely  take  the  form  of  covert
negotiations  by  key  governmental  groups  with  the  NLF,  leading  eventually  to
the  U.S.  being  invited  out,  Rusk's  principal  Vietnam  advisers  argued  that  this
was  one  possible  "Vietnamese  solution,"  but  hardly  a  desirable  one:

It  would  still  be  virtually  certain  that  Laos  would  then  become  untenable
and  that  Cambodia  would  accommodate  in  some  way.  Most  seriously,  there
is  grave  question  whether  the  Thai  in  these  circumstances  would  retain  any
confidence  at  all  in  our  continued  support.  In  short,  the  outcome  would  be
regarded  in  Asia,  and  particularly  among  our  friends,  as  just  as  humihating
a  defeat  as  any  other  form.  As  events  have  developed,  the  American  public
would  probably  not  be  too  sharply  critical,  but  the  real  question  would  be
whether  Thailand  and  other  nations  were  weakened  and  taken  over  there-
after.

The  alternative  of  stronger  action  obviously  has  grave  difficulties.  It  com-
mits the  US  more  deeply,  at  a  time  when  the  picture  of  South  Vietnamese
will  is  extremely  weak.  To  the  extent  that  it  included  actions  against  North
Vietnam,  it  would  be  vigorously  attacked  by  many  nations  and  disapproved
initially  even  by  such  nations  as  Japan  and  India,  on  present  indications.
Most  basically,  its  stiffening  effect  on  the  Saigon  political  situation  would
not  be  at  all  sure  to  bring  about  a  more  effective  government,  nor  would
limited  actions  against  the  southern  DRV  in  fact  sharply  reduce  infiltration
or,  in  present  circumstances,  be  at  all  likely  to  induce  Hanoi  to  call  it  off.

Nonetheless,  on  balance  we  believe  that  such  action  would  have  some
faint  hope  of  really  improving  the  Vietnamese  situation,  and,  above  all,
would  put  us  in  a  much  stronger  position  to  hold  the  next  line  of  defense,
namely  Thailand.  Accepting  the  present  situation — or  any  negotiation  on
the  basis  of  it — would  be  far  weaker  from  this  latter  key  standpoint.  If  we
moved  into  stronger  actions,  we  should  have  in  mind  that  negotiations  would
be  likely  to  emerge  from  some  quarter  in  any  event,  and  that  under  existing
circumstances,  even  with  the  additional  element  of  pressure,  we  could  not
expect  to  get  an  outcome  that  would  really  secure  an  independent  South
Vietnam.  Yet  even  on  an  outcome  that  produced  a  progressive  deterioration
in  South  Vietnam  and  an  eventual  Communist  takeover,  we  would  still  have
appeared  to  Asians  to  have  done  a  lot  more  about  it.

Turning  then  to  specific  alternatives,  Bundy  and  his  colleagues  envisioned  five
proposals :

a.  An  early  occasion  for  reprisal  action  against  the  DRV.

b.  Possibly  beginning  low-level  reconnaissance  of  the  DRV  at  once.

c.  Concurrently  with  a  or  b,  an  early  orderly  withdrawal  of  our  depend-
ents. We  all  think  this  would  be  a  grave  mistake  in  the  absence  of  stronger
action,  and  if  taken  in  isolation  would  tremendously  increase  the  pace  of
deterioration  in  Saigon.  If  we  are  to  clear  our  decks  in  this  way — and  we  are
more  and  more  inclined  to  think  we  should — it  simply  must  be,  for  this
reason  alone,  in  the  context  of  some  stronger  action.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  297

d.  Intensified  air  operations  in  Laos  may  have  some  use,  but  they  will
not  meet  the  problem  of  Saigon  morale  and,  if  continued  at  a  high  level,
may  raise  significant  possibilities  of  Communist  intervention  on  a  substan-
tial scale  in  Laos  with  some  plausible  justification.  We  have  gone  about  as
far  as  we  can  go  in  Laos  by  the  existing  limiting  actions,  and,  apart  from
cutting  Route  7,  we  would  not  be  accomplishing  much  militarily  by  intensi-
fying US  air  actions  there.  This  form  of  action  thus  has  little  further  to
gain  in  the  Laos  context,  and  has  no  real  bearing  at  this  point  on  the  South
Vietnamese  context.

e.  Introduction  of  limited  US  ground  forces  into  the  northern  area  of
South  Vietnam  still  has  great  appeal  to  many  of  us,  concurrently  with  the
first  air  attacks  into  the  DRV.  It  would  have  a  real  stiffening  effect  in  Sai-
gon, and  a  strong  signal  effect  to  Hanoi.  On  the  disadvantage  side,  such
forces  would  be  possible  attrition  targets  for  the  Viet  Cong.  For  your  in-
formation, the  Australians  have  clearly  indicated  (most  recently  yesterday)
that  they  might  be  disposed  to  participate  in  such  an  operation.  The  New
Zealanders  are  more  negative  and  a  proposal  for  Philippine  participation
would  be  an  interesting  test.

Whether  and  how  these  alternatives  were  posed  for  the  President  is  not  re-
corded, but  at  least  two  of  the  actions — getting  the  U.S.  dependents  out  of  Viet-
nam and  reacting  promptly  and  firmly  to  the  next  reprisal  opportunity — were
also  recommended  to  another  top  presidential  advisor,  namely  to  Secretary  Mc-
Namara,  by  Assistant  Secretary  John  McNaughton,  in  a  McNaughton  memoran-
dum that  he  discussed  with  McNamara  on  January  27.  The  memorandum
contains  McNaughton's  pencil  notations  of  McNamara's  comments  on  various
points,  which  suggest  that  the  Secretary  of  Defense  was  dissatisfied  with  the  way
U.S.  Vietnam  policy  was  "drifting"  ^nd  seemed  a  good  deal  less  dubious  than
was  McNaughton  about  the  potential  benefits  to  be  derived  from  initiating  air
strikes  against  the  DRV.

In  the  meantime,  a  7  January  1965  conference  of  SEACORD  (the  coordinat-
ing mechanism  of  the  U.S.  ambassadors  and  military  commanders  in  Southeast
Asia)  had  reviewed  the  accomplishments  of  the  first  few  weeks  of  Phase  I — the
30-day  program  of  mild  BARREL  ROLL,  YANKEE  TEAM  and  other  opera-
tions— and  had  concluded  that  the  results  were  militarily  negligible.  SEACORD
recommended  an  extension  of  the  operations  for  another  30  days,  and  their  in-
tensification as  "an  effective  tonic  [for  the  GVN],  particularly  if  accompanied  by
serious  joint  preparations  and  timely  initiation  of  retaliatory  and  Phase  II  oper-
ations against  the  DRV."

The  most  forcelful  restatement  of  the  reprisal  policy,  however,  came  from
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  at  the  end  of  January,  in  the  form  of  a  memorandum
to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  reviewing  earlier  JCS  recommendations  on  reprisals
and  noting  that  the  continued  lack  of  a  U.S.  response  to  major  enemy  provoca-
tions risked  inviting  more  such  actions.  They  urged  that  the  next  significant
provocation  be  met  with  a  "positive,  timely,  and  appropriate  response  .  .  .
undertaken  preferably  within  twenty-four  hours,  against  selected  targets  in  the
DRV."  They  appended  to  their  memorandum  a  resume  of  possible  reprisal  ac-
tions of  varying  intensities,  for  which  plans  were  available  and  the  strike  forces
at  hand  to  carry  out  these  actions.  The  most  intensive  preparations  had  already
been  made,  particularly  in  connection  with  the  forthcoming  resumption  of  the
DESOTO  Patrols,  to  which  a  reprisal  operation  was  explicitly  linked  as  a  contin-
gency option,  under  the  code  name  FLAMING  DART.  These  preparations  and


298 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

the  evolution  of  the  readiness  posture  associated  with  this  and  other  potential
reprisal  actions  is  reviewed  briefly  in  the  next  section.

III. DESOTO  PATROL  AS  A  REPRISAL  OPPORTUNITY—
AND  THE  DECISION  TO  SUSPEND

Detailed  and  specific  reprisal  preparations  had  been  under  way  for  many
months  prior  to  February  1965,  most  prominently  in  connection  with  the
periodic  DESOTO  Patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.  The  patrols  were  suspended
after  the  August  2  and  4,  1964  incidents,  when  the  destroyer  patrol  group  had
been  fired  upon,  giving  rise  to  the  first  U.S.  retaliatory  strikes.  They  were  re-
sumed on  12  September,  and  at  that  time  were  believed  to  have  been  again
attacked,  or  at  least  "menaced,"  by  unfriendly  vessels  on  the  night  of  18  Sep-
tember. That  incident,  however,  was  considered  as  too  ambiguous  by  Washing-
ton officials  to  justify  a  reprisal  action.  The  patrol  was  once  more  suspended
on  20  September.

In  order  to  be  properly  prepared  for  an  attack  on  any  future  patrol,  military
authorities  began  to  work  up  a  pre-packaged  set  of  reprisal  targets  that  might
be  politically  acceptable,  with  pre-assigned  forces  that  would  be  in  a  high  state
of  readiness  to  strike  these  targets,  and  with  a  detailed  strike  plan  that  would
provide  a  range  of  retaliatory  options.  Accordingly,  CINCPAC,  on  instructions
from  the  ICS,  developed  appropriate  plans  and  issued  a  series  of  Fragmentary
Operations  Orders  under  the  colorful  caption,  "Punitive  and  Crippling  Reprisal
Actions  on  Targets  in  NVN."  The  orders  provided  for  air  strikes  to  be  con-
ducted against  selected  targets  in  North  Vietnam  in  retaliation  for  DRV  attacks
against  the  DESOTO  Patrol,  if  the  patrol  were  resumed  and  attacked.  Two
levels  of  retaliation  response  were  prescribed,  with  two  target  options  each  (all
located  south  of  the  19th  parallel),  with  the  various  options  scaled  to  the  ex-
tent and  severity  of  damage  inflicted  upon  the  patrol.  A  high  alert  posture  was
to  be  maintained  during  the  days  the  patrol  was  in  progress,  such  that  the
strikes  could  be  launched  within  one  hour  after  receipt  of  the  execution  order.
The  retaliatory  forces  were  to  be  carefully  prepositioned  and  rules  of  engage-
ment were  meticulously  spelled  out.

While  these  preparations  were  initially  associated  exclusively  with  the  DE-
SOTO Patrol,  it  was  recognized  that  reprisals  might  also  be  called  for  in  retalia-
tion for  any  type  of  serious  provocation  which  could  occur  without  warning,
could  be  caused  by  the  DRV  or  by  the  VC,  and  might  be  directed  against  US
or  GVN  forces.  But  the  high  alert  status  ordered  in  connection  with  the  DE-
SOTO Patrols  could  be  maintained  for  only  short  periods  of  time.  A  more  sus-
tained capability  was  also  needed,  and  the  ICS  prepared  an  outline  plan  for
further  elaboration  by  CINCPAC,  calling  for  a  more  limited  reprisal  action
that  could  be  launched  with  the  least  possible  delay  with  forces  in  place  and
with  a  readiness  posture  normafly  maintained.  The  forces  expected  to  be  avail-
able for  such  strikes  were  one  CVA  air  wing,  two  squadrons  of  B-57,  two
squadrons  of  F-105,  three  squadrons  of  F-lOO,  and  approximately  one  squadron
of  VNAF  A-IH;  and  the  targets  considered  most  suitable  were:

Target  No.  33 — Dong  Hoi  Barracks

36 — Vit  Thu  Lu  Army  Barracks
39 — Chap  Le  Army  Barracks
52 — Vinh  Army  Supply  Depot  E
71— Ben  Thuy  Port  Facilities


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  299


All  of  these  preparations  came  to  a  head  at  the  end  of  January,  when  a
tentative  decision  had  evidently  been  reached  in  Washington  to  authorize  resump-
tion of  the  DESOTO  Patrols  on  or  about  3  February.  A  JCS  directive  to  that
effect  went  out  to  CINCPAC  on  28  January,  requesting  CINCPAC  to  issue  the
necessary  Operational  Plan,  covering  a  two  destroyer  Patrol  Group  with  on-line
Crypto  RATT  and  Star  Shell  illumination  capabilities.  Interestingly,  the  in-
structions were  explicit  to  the  effect  that  the  "Patrol  track  shall  not  be  provoca-
tive with  the  Patrol  Group  remaining  30  nautical  miles  from  both  NVN  mainland
and  Hainan  Island  and  South  of  20  degrees  North  latitude."  The  Patrol  was  to
be  continued  for  a  period  of  three  days,  during  which  time  SP-2  aircraft  with
searchlight  and  flare  capability  were  to  support  the  Patrol  Group  during  hours
of  darkness  by  assisting  in  contact  investigation  and  clarification,  and  a  Combat
Air  Patrol  was  to  be  airborne  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Patrol  during  daylight  and
to  be  on  immediate  call  during  darkness.  Instructions  also  called  for  carefully
dissociating  the  Patrol  from  OPLAN  34A  operations  in  and  over  the  Gulf  of
Tonkin  48  hours  before,  during,  and  48  hours  following  completion  of  the  Pa-
trol.

Rules  of  engagement,  in  the  event  of  attack,  were  as  follows:

a.  The  Patrol  ships  and  aircraft  are  authorized  to  attack  with  the  ob-
jective of  insuring  destruction  of  any  vessel  or  aircraft  which  attacks,  or
gives  positive  indication  of  intent  to  attack,  US  forces  operating  in  inter-
national waters  or  airspace  over  international  waters.

b.  In  event  of  hostile  attack,  the  Patrol  ships  and  aircraft  are  directed
to  fire  upon  the  hostile  attacker  with  the  objective  of  insuring  destruction.
Ships  are  authorized  to  pursue  ^  the  enemy  to  the  recognized  three  mile
territorial  limit.  Aircraft  are  authorized  hot  pursuit  inside  territorial  waters
(three  miles)  against  surface  vessels  and  into  hostile  air  space  (includes
DRV,  Hainan  Island  and  Mainland  China)  against  attack  aircraft  when
necessary  to  achieve  destruction  of  identified  attack  forces.  Ships  and  air-
craft will  confine  their  actions  to  the  attacking  ships  and/or  aircraft.

In  the  days  following,  attention  centered  on  plans  for  the  reprisal  strike.  A
number  of  last-minute  changes  were  made  in  the  targets  that  had  been  recom-
mended by  CINCPAC  and  the  JCS,  in  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  aircraft  losses
and  to  reduce  sortie  requirements.  The  launching  date  for  the  DESOTO  Patrol
was  postponed  fropi  the  3rd  to  the  7th  of  February,  and  the  JCS  asked  CINC-
PAC to  re-order  its  reprisal  raids  into  three  attack  options,  consisting  respec-
tively of  three,  five,  and  seven  specified  targets,  and  to  plan  to  conduct  the  air
strikes  against  them,  as  directed,  by  option  or  by  target,  in  any  combination.  The
options  and  targets,  together  with  estimated  sorties,  were  as  follows:


Strike


Flak


CAP


Total


Option  One

Tgts  33 Dong  Hoi  Barracks
36 Vit  Thu  Lu  Barracks
39 Chap  Le  Barracks

Total


24
24
40
80


8
8
12
28


8
4
4
16


40
36
56
132


300 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


Strike


Flak


CAP


Total


Option  Two

Tgts  33,  36,  39  of  Option  One,  plus:
24 Chanh  Hoa  Barracks
32 Vu  Con  Barracks

Total  ...


28
10
126


12
8
48


12
4
32


52
22
206


Option  Three

Tgts  33,  36,  39,  24,  32  of  Option  Two,
14 Thanh  Hoa  Bridge
74 Quang  Khe  Naval  Base
Total


plus:


32
22
180


12
4
64


4
2
38


48
28
282


Of  these  seven  targets,  six  were  south  of  the  19th  parallel,  and  on  the  Novem-
ber working  group's  reprisal  target  list;  one,  the  Thanh  Hoa  Bridge,  Target  14
in  Option  Three,  was  north  of  the  19th  parallel.

The  strikes  against  these  targets  were  to  employ  the  US  forces  then  in  main-
land Southeast  Asia  in  their  alerted  and  augmented  state  (with  an  additional
F105  squadron  from  the  Philippines  at  Da  Nang),  plus  up  to  3  CVAs;  but  they
would  also  provide  for  strikes  from  a  non-alert  status,  i.e.,  with  US  forces
normally  in-country,  plus  CVA  normally  on  station.  Strikes  from  a  non-alert
status,  if  ordered,  would  be  simultaneous,  launched  within  the  minimum  feasi-
ble reaction  time,  and  as  near  as  practicable  to  first  light  following  the  reprisal
incident.  CINCPAC  was  also  asked  to  make  "preliminary  provisions"  for  a
strike  at  Target  32 — Vu  Con  Barracks  in  Option  Two  above — to  be  conducted
by  VNAF,  with  assistance  from  US  flak  suppression,  CAP,  pathfinder,  and  SAR.
These  provisions  were  not  to  be  revealed  to  the  GVN  at  that  time,  since  the
inclusion  of  this  VNAF  strike  might  or  might  not  be  ordered,  depending  on  the
circumstances.

CINCPAC  responded  the  following  day  by  issuing  Operation  Order  FLAM-
ING DART,  directing  its  Air  Force  and  Navy  Component  Commands  to  be
prepared  to  conduct  air  strikes  when  directed,  against  the  above  targets  by
option,  or  against  any  combination  of  the  above  targets  within  or  between  op-
tions, in  retaliation  for  attacks  on  the  DESOTO  Patrol.  CINCPACFLT  was
assigned  Targets  33  and  36  of  Option  One,  24  of  Option  Two,  and  74  of  Option
Three.  CINCPACAF  was  assigned  Targets  39  of  Option  One,  32  of  Option  Two,
and  14  of  Option  Three.  Aircraft  would  be  armed  with  optimum  conventional
ordnance  for  the  target  to  be  attacked,  excluding  napalm.

Operation  Order  FLAMING  DART  placed  the  US  in  a  highly  flexible  po-
sition. It  provided  a  vehicle  for  a  quick  reprisal  decision  in  the  eventuality  of
an  attack  on  the  DESOTO  Patrol  or  of  any  other  provocation,  such  as  a  dra-
matic VC  incident  in  South  Vietnam.  The  particular  targets  involved  had  been
briefed  to  the  principal  decision-makers,  had  the  virtue  of  being  known  and
understood  by  them,  and  even  had  their  tentative  approval.  Moreover,  nearly  all
the  targets  were  in  the  far  south  of  North  Vietnam  and  all  could  be  associated
with  infiltration,  which  were  two  of  the  conditions  laid  down  in  the  guidelines
for  retaliating  against  the  North  for  spectacular  incidents  in  the  South.  The
Operation  Order  therefore  served  well  as  a  generalized  pre-planned  reprisal  target
package,  offering  a  wide  spectrum  of  choices.

The  DESOTO  Patrol,  however,  which  had  been  the  major  focus  for  the  re-
prisal planning,  was  never  to  carry  out  its  assigned  role.  On  4  February,  three


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  301

days  before  the  Patrol  was  to  begin  its  operation,  the  Chairman  of  the  JCS  in-
formed CINCPAC  and  all  interested  posts  and  commands  that  authority  to  exe-
cute DESOTO  was  cancelled,  in  view  of  Soviet  Premier  Kosygin's  imminent
four-day  visit  to  Hanoi  that  was  to  begin  on  6  February.  "DESOTO  patrol
concurrent  with  Kosygin  visit  or  immediately  thereafter,"  wrote  the  CJCS,  "could
be  interpreted  as  reaction  to  visit,  thereby  impairing  and  complicating  US-Soviet
relations."

The  decision  to  call  off  the  Patrol  in  deference  to  Kosygin's  visit,  reflected  a
growing  feeling  in  some  parts  of  the  Administration  that  the  renewed  involve-
ment of  the  Soviet  Union  in  Southeast  Asia,  after  its  hands-off  policy  of  almost
three  years'  standing,  might,  on  balance,  be  a  good  thing  for  the  U.S.  While
some  American  experts  interpreted  Moscow's  November,  1964  pledge  of  military
assistance  to  Hanoi  and  Kosygin's  visit  in  February  1965  as  a  sure  sign  that
the  Soviet  Union  saw  the  collapse  of  the  US  venture  in  SVN  as  imminent  and
wanted  merely  to  stake  its  claim  in  apposition  to  Peking  before  it  was  too  late,
others  believed  that  the  USSR  might  well  find  it  in  its  interest  to  act  as  an  agent
of  moderation  and  compromise,  providing  the  U.S.  with  an  avenue  of  graceful
retreat  from  a  seemingly  irretrievable  situation.

This  view  was  certainly  held  by  some  State  Department  experts,  particularly
in  the  Office  of  Asian  Communist  Affairs  (ACA)  and  in  the  Office  of  Intelli-
gence and  Research  (INR).  In  an  interesting  memorandum  of  February  5,  1965
to  William  Bundy,  Lindsay  Grant  of  ACA  saw  the  implications  for  American
policy  of  the  Kosygin  visit  to  Hanoi  as  "enormous."

It  is  possible  to  hypothesize  that  the  Soviet  initiative  may  be  intended
to  present  the  United  States  with  an  acceptable,  albeit  difficult,  choice.  They
may  presume  that  the  situation  in  the  South  would  deteriorate  to  the  point
where  we  could  foresee  ourselves  confronted  with  the  possibility  of:

1 )  a  series  of  defeats  on  the*  ground  and/or  total  collapse  of  authority
in  Saigon,  or

2)  a  rapid  movement  in  the  direction  of  neutralism,  leading  to  our  be-
ing invited  out,  or

3)  some  kind  of  negotiated  settlement  which  would  permit  us  to  reduce
our  commitment  to  the  bare  bones,  and  thereby  at  least  minimize  a  gener-
ally distasteful  loss.  The  last  prospect,  which  would  represent  the  best  of
a  bad  choice,  could  possibly  result  from  an  increased  Soviet  presence  in
North  Viet-Nam.

Thus,  the  Soviets  might  find  it  in  their  own  interest  to  propose  to  Hanoi
a  solution  of  the  war  in  Viet-Nam  along  the  following  lines:

1 )  North  Viet-Nam  would  remain  untouched,  with  the  Soviet  Union
guaranteeing  to  provide  major  economic  and  other  help;

2)  South  Viet-Nam  would  be  neutralized,  with  some  sort  of  paper
guarantee  offered  by  outside  powers,  including  the  Soviet  Union;

3)  The  National  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South  Viet-Nam  would
participate  in  a  neutralist  coalition  government.

(The  Soviet  Union  would,  presumably,  give  North  Viet-Nam  private  as-
surances that  it  would  not  stand  in  the  way  of  further  Front  and  Viet  Cong
efforts  to  gain  a  complete  political  victory  in  the  South.)

The  author  of  the  memorandum,  of  course,  recognized  that  it  would  be  only
under  the  prospect  of  a  collapse  of  the  GVN  or  of  being  requested  to  leave
that  the  U.S.  would  be  willing  to  accede  to  the  solutions  suggested.  But  he
stressed,  as  the  major  benefit  of  this  course,  that:


302 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

...  the  Soviet  presence  would  represent  [words  missing]

A  somewhat  similar  view  was  echoed  subsequently  in  a  SEACORD  confer-
ence, the  sense  of  which  was  reported  in  a  Saigon  message  to  the  Secretary  of
State.  The  relevant  arguments  were  to  the  effect  that:

(1)  The  DRV  is  almost  entirely  dependent  both  economically  and  mili-
tarily upon  the  Chinese  Communists  who  see  great  value  in  having  the
DRV  continue  this  exclusive  dependence;

(2)  The  Soviet  Union  is  the  only  alternative  source  of  economic  and
military  support  to  Hanoi  which  would  enable  the  DRV  to  remain  viable
if  it  decided  to  cease  its  aggression;

(3)  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  Soviets  receive  accurate  indica-
tions that  we  would  not  oppose  a  continuing  Soviet  role  in  the  DRV,
although  this  is  not  a  matter  on  which  the  U.S.  can  take  an  initiative.

Subsequent  events  on  the  negotiating  front,  and  the  role  we  believed  the  USSR
could  play  on  that  front,  also  lend  support  to  the  view  that,  at  least  in  the
early  part  of  1965,  there  was  a  fairly  widespread  belief  among  U.S.  policy-
makers that  the  Soviet  Union  could  and  probably  would  exert  a  benign  influence
upon  Hanoi.

There  is,  indeed,  some  evidence  that  the  USSR  itself  had  some  such  thought
in  mind  in  connection  with  Kosygin's  February  visit.  Peking,  at  least,  has
charged  that  Kosygin  had  tried  at  that  time  to  persuade  both  Hanoi  and  Peking
to  negotiate  some  kind  of  settlement  with  the  United  States,  reportedly  involv-
ing a  "face-saving"  U.S.  withdrawal.

In  any  event,  there  seems  little  doubt  that  the  decision  to  forego  the  DESOTO
Patrol  was  inspired  by  the  hope,  if  not  expectation,  that  Kosygin  would,  from
the  US  point  of  view,  weigh  in  constructively  in  the  Vietnam  struggle.

IV. FLAMING  DART  I  AND  II
—THE  IMPERCEPTIBLE  TRANSITION

A. THE  FIRST  REPRISAL

The  long  months  of  contingency  planning,  hesitation,  and  agonized  debate
were  suddenly  cut  short  on  February  7th,  when  the  VC  struck  the  American
installations  at  Pleiku  and  Camp  Holloway.  This  time  the  President  showed  the
same  decisiveness  and  swift  reaction  that  he  had  displayed  six  months  earlier  in
the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.  The  decision  to  strike  back  was  reached  in  a  75  minute
meeting  of  the  National  Security  Council  on  the  evening  of  February  6  (Wash-
ington time)  in  the  Cabinet  Room  of  the  White  House,  and  in  the  presence  of
Senate  Majority  Leader  Mike  Mansfield  and  House  Speaker  John  McCormack.
McGeorge  Bundy,  on  his  mission  to  Saigon  at  the  time,  had  joined  Ambassador
Taylor  and  General  Westmoreland  in  recommending  prompt  retaliation  in  tele-
coms  with  the  President  from  the  communications  center  in  Saigon.

The  strike,  carried  out  during  the  early  morning  hours  of  the  7th  (Washing-
ton time)  was,  at  least  militarily,  something  of  a  fizzle.  The  mildest  of  the  three
attack  options  was  selected  for  the  strike,  but  when  the  executive  order  was
flashed,  only  one  of  the  three  CVA's  (USS  Ranger)  was  on  station  at  Point
Yankee.  The  other  two  (Hancock  and  Coral  Sea)  had  been  stood  down  to  a
96-hour  alert  after  the  cancellation  of  the  DESOTO  Patrol  and  were  enroute  to
assignments  elsewhere.  They  were  urgently  recalled  by  CINCPAC  to  participate
in  the  strike,  which  had  to  be  delayed  until  the  CVA's  returned  to  points  from


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  303

which  their  aircraft  could  reach  the  assigned  targets.  The  weather,  however,  was
very  adverse,  causing  a  large  number  of  sorties  to  abort,  with  the  result  that  only
one  of  the  three  assigned  targets  was  struck  in  force.  In  order  to  stiffen  the
reprisal  and  to  make  it  clearly  a  joint  US-GVN  response,  the  target  was  restruck
the  following  day  (February  8)  by  the  US  carrier  aircraft  that  had  aborted  the
previous  day,  and  a  VNAF  strike  by  24  A-lH's  supported  by  USAF  pathfinder,
flak  suppression  and  CAP  aircraft,  was  carried  out  against  target  32  (Vu  Con
Barracks)  concurrently.

B.  TIMING  OF  PLEIKU  AND  THE  KOSYGIN  VISIT

As  was  indicated  earlier,  the  U.S.  had  put  off  the  DESOTO  Patrol  that  had
been  scheduled  for  February  7  so  as  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  provocative-
ness  vis-a-vis  Kosygin,  who  was  to  arrive  in  Hanoi  on  February  6.  And  yet  it  was
precisely  then,  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  Kosygin  visit,  that  the  VC  launched
their  spectacular  attack  on  the  US  installations.  This  had  led  many  to  conjecture
that  the  raid  was  deliberately  organized  and  timed  by  the  hardliners  in  Hanoi
so  as  to  nip  in  the  bud  any  possible  Soviet  peace  initiative  or  in  other  ways
to  put  Kosygin  on  the  spot.

Whether  Hanoi  specifically  ordered  the  Pleiku  attack  or  whether  the  VC
merely  received  Hanoi's  blessing  for  the  attack  remains  speculative.  There  can
be  little  doubt,  however,  that  Hanoi  had  full  [words  missing]  ample  reason  to
favor  the  notion  [words  missing]

...  it  had  more  to  gain  than  lose  by  having  the  attack  take  place  while
Kosygin  was  present,  even  though  it  might  embarrass  him,  as  it  very  likely
did.  If  the  Americans  failed  to  respond,  the  North  Vietnamese  could  argue
that  the  United  States  was  indeed  a  paper  tiger,  and  that  all  that  was
needed  for  the  war  to  be  brought  to  a  successful  conclusion  in  the  south
was  some  additional  military  assistance.  If  the  United  States  did  respond,
the  North  Vietnamese  could  claim  that  more  aid  was  necessary  to  prosecute
the  war  under  more  diflftcult  circumstances,  and  they  could  then  reason-
ably ask  for  planes  and  defensive  missiles  with  which  to  protect  their  own
cities,  too.  Since  Kosygin  was  wooing  North  Vietnam  for  Russia's  own
purposes  as  much  as  Hanoi  was  wooing  him  to  help  it  regain  some  balance
between  Moscow  and  Peking,  the  Russian  Premier  was  hardly  in  a  position
to  leave  Hanoi  in  a  huff,  which  besides  would  have  made  him  look  foolish.

Although  the  onset  of  the  bombing  no  doubt  took  the  Russians  by  surprise,
they  probably  viewed  it  as  a  futile  last-ditch  effort  by  Washington  to  strengthen
its  bargaining  position  rather  than  as  a  prelude  to  new  escalation.  In  any  event,
Kosygin's  reaction  in  Hanoi  was  restrained.  He  pointed  out  that  the  situation
was  "fraught  with  serious  complications"  and  seemed  to  be  favoring  a  negotiated
termination.  In  any  event,  in  keeping  with  the  view  held  in  several  influential
Administration  quarters  that  the  USSR  might  be  a  valuable  moderating  influence
upon  Hanoi,  Washington  took  pains  to  assure  Moscow  that  Kosygin's  presence
in  Hanoi  during  the  US  reprisal  strikes  of  February  7-8  was  an  unfortunate
coincidence  and  no  affront  to  the  Soviet  Union  was  intended.

C.  THE  REPRISAL  RATIONALE  AND  ITS  PUBLIC  HANDLING

On  the  morning  after  the  reprisal  order  had  been  issued  (February  7),  a
second  NSC  meeting  was  convened  at  the  White  House  to  agree  on  an  appro-
priate text  for  the  White  House  statement  and  to  discuss  the  content  of  a


304 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  III

McNamara  press  briefing  at  the  Pentagon,  called  for  that  afternoon.  The
public  handling  of  the  raids  was  of  crucial  importance  in  conveying  to  Hanoi
some  inkling  of  what  the  implications  of  the  reprisal  action  were  for  future
U.S.  responses  and  for  the  future  U.S.  role  in  the  Vietnamese  war,  without  at
the  same  time  arousing  undue  anxieties  at  home  and  in  the  rest  of  the  world.

It  is  worth  noting  that  there  were  important  differences  between  the  February
7-8  raids  and  the  earlier  strikes  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident.  The  August
Tonkin  strikes  had  clearly  been  presented  as  a  one-time  retaliatory  action  in
response  to  a  North  Vietnamese  attack  on  US  naval  power  in  international
waters.

Publicly,  the  Tonkin  strikes  had  ben  depicted  as  a  "positive  reply" — one  which
was  "limited  but  fitting" — to  an  unprovoked  attack  on  US  vessels  operating
within  their  rights  on  the  high  seas.  The  "one-shot"  nature  of  the  strikes  was
stressed,  and  it  was  explicitly  stated  that,  provided  there  were  no  further  enemy
attacks,  the  US  considered  the  incident  closed.  Together  with  declarations  that
the  US  strikes  were  not  intended  to  expand  or  escalate  the  guerrilla  war  in
Southeast  Asia,  this  tended  to  make  the  strikes  appear  as  an  isolated  action,  bear-
ing only  incidental  relationship  to  the  war  itself.  The  war  continued  to  be  offi-
cially pictured  as  one  being  fought  by  the  South  Vietnamese,  with  the  US  in
a  strictly  limited  supporting  role.  It  is  true  that  stiff  warnings  were  sent  to  Hanoi
through  discrete  diplomatic  channels  (ICC  Commissioner  Seaborne's  August
visit),  stressing  that  US  patience  was  wearing  thin  and  that  the  DRV  could
expect  to  suffer  the  consequences  if  it  persisted  in  its  aggressive  course,  but  U.S.
public  statements  made  it  clear  that  the  strikes  were  not  intended  to  change  the
basic  ground  rules  of  the  conflict  at  that  time.  The  strikes  were  intended  pri-
marily to  demonstrate  that  North  Vietnam  could  not  flagrantly  attack  U.S.  forces
with  impunity;  but  nothing  was  said  publicly  to  imply  that  the  North  could  not
continue  its  activities  in  the  South  without  fear  that  its  own  territory  would  be
placed  in  jeopardy.

By  contrast  with  the  Tonkin  strikes,  the  February  1965  raids,  while  also
initiated  as  reprisals,  were  intended  to  be  explicitly  linked  with  the  "larger
pattern  of  aggression"  by  North  Vietnam,  and  were  designed  to  signal  a  change
in  the  ground  rules  of  the  conflict  in  the  South.  By  retaliating  against  North
Vietnam  for  a  VC  incident  in  the  South,  the  US  consciously  made  its  first  open
break  with  self-imposed  ground  rules  which  had  permitted  the  North  to  direct
and  support  the  war  in  the  South,  but  which  had  precluded  direct  US  counter-
measures  against  the  North's  territory.  The  strikes  thus  were  to  serve  clear
notice  upon  all  concerned  that  the  US  would  not  abide  by  such  rules  in  the
future.

But  the  change  in  ground  rules  also  posed  serious  public  information  and
stage  managing  problems  for  the  President.  Until  the  February  raids,  and  espe-
cially throughout  the  election  campaign  of  1964,  the  case  had  regularly  been
made  that  the  insurrection  in  the  South  was  essentially  a  home-grown  affair  and
largely  self-supporting;  now  the  argument  had  to  be  turned  around  and  public
opinion  persuaded  that  there  really  wouldn't  be  much  difficulty  cleaning  up
the  South  if  infiltrators  from  the  North  would  just  go  home  and  "leave  their
neighbors  alone."

In  the  White  House  press  release  immediately  following  the  reprisal,  there-
fore, major  emphasis  was  placed  on  Hanoi's  role  in  the  South:

.  .  .  these  attacks  were  only  made  possible  by  the  continuing  infiltration
of  personnel  and  equipment  from  North  Vietnam  .  .  .  infiltration  mark-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  305

edly  increased  during  1964  and  continues  to  increase.  .  .  .  "The  key  to  the
situation  remains  the  cessation  of  infiltration  from  North  Vietnam  and  the
clear  indication  that  it  is  prepared  to  cease  aggression  against  its  neighbors."

Another  major  new  departure  of  the  7-8  February  strikes  was  that  they
were  intended  to  be  at  least  a  first  step  in  more  directly  and  actively  associating
the  US  with  the  South  Vietnamese  in  "their"  war.  Thus  while  the  retaliation
was  precipitated  by  the  Pleiku  incident,  it  was  considered  essential  to  justify  it  in
broader  terms — not  merely  as  a  response  to  a  single  outrage  committed  against
Americans,  but  as  a  response  to  a  series  of  outrages,  committed  against  South
Vietnamese  as  well  as  Americans.

Thus,  the  White  House  press  release  and,  even  more  explicitly,  the  McNamara
press  briefing  of  February  7  spoke  of  three  VC  attacks,  all  "ordered  and  directed
by  the  Hanoi  regime,"  but  only  one  of  these  was  the  Pleiku-Camp  Holloway
raid  against  U.S.  installation.  The  two  others  cited  in  justification  of  the  reprisal
were  attacks  on  Vietnamese  villages  in  which,  it  was  carefully  pointed  out,  no
American  casualties  were  sustained.

Thtis  effort  to  link  the  reprisal  to  VC  offenses  against  both  parties  was  rein-
forced by  having  the  reprisal  strikes  conducted  by  both  South  Vietnamese  and
US  forces.  McNamara's  statement  heavily  stressed  the  fact  that  "elements  of
the  U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese  Air  Forces  were  directed  to  launch  joint  retalia-
tory attacks  .  .  ."

By  demonstrating  that  the  US  was  prepared  to  join  with  the  South  Vietnamese
in  military  reprisals  against  North  Vietnam  for  actions  committed  against  either
or  both  parties  in  the  South,  the  strikes  tended  to  weaken  the  policy  line,  assidu-
ously adhered  to  up  to  that  time,  that  the  war  was  essentially  a  Vietnamese  war
with  US  involvement  confined  to  advipe  and  support.  Once  the  US  began  par-
ticipating in  such  military  reprisals  oti  a  regular  basis,  it  would  unavoidably
begin  to  appear  as  more  of  a  co-belligerent,  along  with  South  Vietnam,  against
the  VC  and  their  sponsors  in  North  Vietnam.

The  practical  significance  of  this  point  is  obvious.  As  long  as  the  U.S.  main-
tained the  policy  line  that  it  was  not  really  directly  engaged  in  the  war,  it  had
to  deny  its  forces  many  proposed  military  actions  in  Southeast  Asia,  and  had  to
impose  on  itself  severe  political  constraints  in  its  military  operations.  The
abandonment  of  this  policy  line  as  a  result  of  reprisal  actions  like  FLAMING
DART  would  open  the  way  to  a  much  wider  range  of  politically  acceptable  US
military  options  in  Vietnam.

The  7-8  February  strikes,  however,  were  only  a  limited  and  tentative  first  step,
and  far  from  an  irrevocable  commitment  to  a  broader  course  of  action.  US  action
was  still  "tit-for-tat."  The  White  House  statement  stressed  the  phrase  "appro-
priate reprisal  action"  and,  likening  it  to  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident,  char-
acterized the  response  as  similarly  "appropriate  and  fitting."

The  idea  of  equivalent  punishment  was  conveyed  by  confining  the  strikes  to
a  quite  limited  number  of  targets  plausibly  associated  with  infiltration.  Thus  the
possibility  was  left  open  that  these  reprisals  were  strictly  one-shot  operations
that  would  be  carried  out  only  in  the  event  of  spectacular  enemy  actions.  But
the  public  language  was  both  ominous  and  ambiguous:  "As  the  U.S.  Government
has  frequently  stated,  we  seek  no  wider  war.  Whether  or  not  this  course  can  be
maintained  lies  with  the  North  Vietnamese  aggressors."  In  fact,  however,  there
was  little  expectation,  that  the  North  Vietnamese  would  "cease  their  aggression,"
and  every  expectation  that  the  U.S.  would  go  beyond  a  policy  of  event-asso-
ciated reprisals.  For  immediately  following  the  first  press  release,  the  White


306 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  I'ol.  Ill

House  issued  another  significant  presidential  statement,  ordering  what  had  long
been  recommended:

...  I  have  directed  the  orderly  withdrawal  of  .\merican  dependents
from  South  Vietnam  .  .  .  We  have  no  choice  now  but  to  clear  the  decks
and  make  absolutely  clear  our  continued  determination  to  back  South
Vietnam  .  .  .

And  as  further  indication  that  much  more  than  a  mere  occasional  reprisal  was
in  the  offing,  McNamara  met  with  the  JCS  on  the  following  day  to  request  that
they  prepare  and  submit  to  him  their  recommendations  for  an  eight-week  air
strike  campaign  against  infiltration-associated  targets  in  the  lower  ponion  of
North  Vietnam  as  a  sustained  reply  to  any  further  provocations.

D. A\  ACT  OF  DEFIAXCE

The  flashing  red  warning  signals — if  that  is  what  they  were — were  not  heeded
by  Hanoi.  On  the  contrary",  in  what  was  regarded  bv  some  observers  as  a  cal-
culated act  of  defiance,  the  VC  staged  another  dramatic  attack  on  10  Februan.',
this  one  against  a  US  enlisted  men's  billet  in  Qui  Nhon,  inflicting  the  heaviest
single  loss  of  American  personnel  yet.  Within  24  hours.  US  and  South  \'iet-
namese  aircraft  executed  the  largest  retaliatorv  air  strike  of  the  war  up  to  that
time.  Named  FLAMING  DARf  II.  2S  \'NAF  A-lH"s  and  20  US.AF  F-100"s
hit  Chap  Le.  Simultaneously.  Na\y  aircraft  struck  Chanh  Hoa  not  far  from
Dong  Hoi,  just  north  of  the  DMZ.

This  time,  significantly,  the  strikes  were  not  characterized  as  a  reprisal  linked
to  the  immediate  incident.  Instead,  the  White  House  release  of  February"  11,
listed  a  long  series  of  \'C  incidents  and  attacks  that  had  occurred  since  Februan."
8,  most  of  which  were  not  "spectacular"  but  quite  normal  features  of  the  Viet-
nam war.  The  statements  moreover  characterized  the  US  air  strikes  as  a  response
to  these  "further  direct  provocations  bv  the  Hanoi  regime."  and  to  these  "con-
tinued acts  of  aggression."  The  words  "retaliation"  and  "reprisal"  were  carefully
avoided  and  the  joint  US  GVN  statement  released  in  Saigon  the  same  day
actually  characterized  the  air  attack  action  for  the  first  time  as  "air  operations."

The  change  in  terminology  from  "retaliation"  or  "reprisal"  to  "response,"
from  a  specific  set  of  incidents  to  "continued  aggression,"  and  from  a  single
attack  to  "air  operations"  was  clearly  deliberate.  A  strict  reprisal  policy,  although
permitting  the  US  to  strike  the  North,  would  have  left  the  initiative  in  the
enemy's  hands  and  w^ould  have  restricted  the  US  to  the  kinds  of  re^ror^.^e^  that
could  be  represented  as  equivalent  or  "fitting."  But,  more  imporiaiit.  the  new-
terminology  reflected  a  conscious  U.S.  decision  to  broaden  the  reprisal  concept
as  gradually  and  as  imperceptiblv  as  possible  to  accommodate  a  much  wider
policy  of  sustained,  steadily  intensifying  air  attacks  against  North  X'ietnam.  at
a  rate  and  on  a  scale  to  be  determined  bv  the  U.S.  As  will  be  discussed  further
in  the  next  section,  that  decision  was  being  forcefully  pressed  upon  the  President
by  his  principal  advisers  immediately  after  FLAMING  DART  I  (Februar)'  7).
Whether  the  President  had  tacitly  or  explicitly  accepted  this  course  before
FLAMING  DART  II  (February  11),  is  not  recorded.  But  it  would  have  been
important  to  him  politicallv  in  any  event  to  play  it  with  a  minimum  of  drama
and  to  preserve  maximum  flexibilitv.  It  seemed  sensible  to  make  it  all  appear  as
a  logical  sequence  of  almost  unavoidable  steps,  to  avoid  portraying  any  single
move  as  a  watershed  or  anv  single  decision  as  irreversible.  The  Februar\'  1 1


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  307

strikes  did  constitute  a  much  sharper  break  with  past  policy  than  any  previous
US  action  in  Vietnam;  they  set  the  stage  for  the  continuing  bombing  program
that  was  now  to  be  launched  in  earnest;  but  they  were  presented  and  discussed
publicly  in  ver\'  muted  tones.

Some  of  the  President's  private  comments  on  the  attacks  are  reported  by  one
of  his  more  perceptive  biographers,  Philip  Geyelin,  in  the  following  terms:

His  discussion  of  the  first  two  retaliatory  attacks,  following  Pleiku  and
Qui  Nhon,  was  almost  offhand.  To  one  visitor,  he  lampooned  the  "crisis"
tones  of  the  television  broadcasters,  the  long  faces,  and  the  grim  talk  of
big,  black  limousines  assembled  for  weighty  policy-making.

They  woke  us  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  we  woke  them  up  in
the  middle  of  the  night.  Then  they  did  it  again,  and  we  did  it  again,  was  the
way  he  described  it.  If  he  suspected  he  was  on  the  front  edge  of  a  major
plunge  into  a  fair-sized  ground  war  in  Asia,  he  hid  his  concern  masterfully,
dismissing  all  the  excitement  as  the  sort  of  thing  that  happens  periodically.

Geyelin  gives  the  President  very  high  marks  for  his  performance:

...  his  handling  of  Vietnam  in  the  early  months  of  1965  was  more
than  skillful,  it  was  a  triumph  of  international  and  domestic  politics.  For  if
one  accepts  the  need  to  right  the  "equilibrium,"  then  it  cannot  be  denied
that  Lyndon  Johnson  moved  to  do  so  with  a  bare  minimum  of  dissent  at
home  and  less  foreign  opposition  than  might  have  been  expected.  And  he
did  it,  at  least  for  a  good  many  months,  without  giving  the  Communist
Chinese  or  the  Russians  provocation  in  such  intolerable  degree  that  they
felt  obliged  to  move  in  any  drastic  way  to  the  defense  of  Hanoi.

E. REACTIONS  AT  HOME  AND  'ABROAD

Official  and  public  reactions  to  the  retaliatory  strikes  were  fairly  predictable.
In  the  U.S.,  as  Newsweek  put  it,  the  decision  "touched  off  a  wave  of  national
concern  and  international  jitters  unequalled  since  the  US-Soviet  confrontation
over  the  Cuban  missile  build-up."  Much  of  the  US  press  expressed  serious  doubts
about  where  the  US  was  heading  in  Vietnam.  A  great  majority  of  the  nation's
newspapers  regarded  the  strikes  as  necessary  and  justified  and  the  notion  that
Pleiku  was  a  deliberate  VC  provocation  was  widely  accepted.  But  many  ad-
mitted to  confusion  as  to  just  what  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam  was:  (e.g.,  Kansas
City  Star:  'Do  we  have  a  specific,  unwavering  policy  or  are  we  improvising  from
crisis  to  crisis?"  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch :  'A  strike  for  strike  strategy  .  .  .  with-
out any  ultimate  objective  except  to  hang  on  in  Vietnam,  is  not  much  of  a  policy."
New  York  Times  (James  Reston):  "We  do  not  know  what  the  President  has  in
mind  .  .  .  For  the  moment  we  seem  to  be  standing  mute  in  Washington,  para-
lyzed before  a  great  issue  and  merely  digging  our  thought  deeper  into  the
accustomed  military  rut.")

In  Western  Europe  reactions  were  less  uniform.  To  the  dismay  of  leftist  mem-
bers of  his  own  Labor  Party,  the  U.K.'s  Harold  Wilson  phoned  a  message  of
solid  support  to  President  Johnson.  Moreover,  the  London  Economist  saw  the
bombing  as  part  of  a  drama  acted  out  for  the  benefit  of  Mr.  Kosygin  as  a  warn-
ing to  all  communist  countries  "that  there  are  limits  beyond  which  the  Viet  Cong
cannot  push  things  in  the  South  without  bringing  down  American  reprisals  on
the  North.  There  is  no  call  to  specify  exactly  what  these  limits  are;  but  to  make
it  clear  that  they  exist,  the  shot  across  Mr.  Kosygin's  bow  was  essential."  By  con-


30S Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

trast.  de  Gaulle  issued  a  cool  statement  that  the  Southeast  Asia  crisis  ''cannot  be
settled  by  force  of  arms"  and  called  again  for  a  new  Geneva  conference  to  end
the  war — a  recommendation  that  was  echoed  by  India's  Prime  Minister  Shastri
and  U.N.  Secretary  General  U  Thant.

The  pro-Western  nations  in  Southeast  Asia  that  live  in  the  shadow  of  Com-
munist China  were  visibly  cheered.  In  South  Vietnam,  General  Nguyen  Khanh
proclaimed  that  the  \'NAF  reprisal  strike  after  Pleiku  marked  "the  happiest  day
of  my  life."

The  most  interesting  reactions,  of  course,  were  those  of  the  Bloc  countries.
As  predicted  in  CIA's  October  1964  estimate,  the  reactions  of  the  three  principal
Communist  powers  to  the  limited  US  reprisal  strikes  were  relativelv  restrained,
with  both  Moscow  and  Peking  promptly  and  publiclv  pledging  unspecified  sup-
port and  assistance  to  Hanoi.  Beneath  the  verbiage  of  condemnation  of  the  U.S.
"provocation,"  however,  there  was  a  measure  of  caution  in  both  pledges.  Neither
raised  the  specter  of  a  broad  conflict  or  portraved  the  U.S.  actions  as  a  threat
to  "world"  peace.  Peking's  propaganda,  though  full  of  bellicositv  and  bluster,
and  publicizing  huge  anti-U.S.  rallies  organized  in  China's  major  cities,  carefully
avoided  threatening  anv  direct  Chinese  intervention.  Thus  it  warned  that,  if  the
U.S.  spread  the  flames  of  war  to  the  DRV.  "the  Vietnamese  people  will,  most
assuredly,  destroy  the  U.S.  aggressors  lock,  stock,  and  barrel  on  their  own  soil."
The  propaganda  line  also  suggested  that  onlv  actual  U.S.  invasion  of  North
N'ietnam  would  precipitate  direct  Chinese  intervention  in  the  war.

Moscow's  response  was  even  more  restrained.  "In  the  face  of  U.S.  actions"
the  Soviet  statement  said,  the  USSR  "will  be  forced,  together  with  its  allies  and
friends,  to  take  further  measures  to  safeguard  the  security  and  strengthen  the
defense  capabilitv  of  the  DRV."  And  it  added  that  "no  one  should  doubt  that
the  Soviet  people  will  fulfill  its  international  dutv  to  the  fraternal  socialist  coun-
try." Like  Peking,  however,  it  derided  U.S.  statements  that  the  air  strikes  were
retaliatory,  and  Soviet  media  widely  publicized  international  expressions  of  indig-
nation and  popular  protests  in  the  USSR.  ^^Tlile  indicating  that  "DRV  defenses"
would  be  strengthened,  some  Moscow  broadcasts  took  note  of  growing  interest
in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere  for  a  negotiated  settlement  in  Vietnam.

Hanoi's  voluble,  heated  propaganda  reaction  to  the  air  strikes  pictured  the
incident  as  a  sequel  to  previous  air  and  naval  "provocations"  against  the  DRV
rather  than  as  a  move  which  essentiallv  altered  either  America's  or  North  Viet-
nam's positions  in  the  conflict.  DR\'  propaganda  hailed  the  "heroic  exploit"  of
the  antiaircraft  units  and  claimed  that,  in  the  first  raid,  12  planes  were  downed.

Officiallv.  Hanoi  responded  in  a  more  carefully  worded  fashion.  A  Defense
Ministry  statement  on  the  7th  warned  that  the  United  States  must  "bear  the
responsibilitv"  for  the  "consequences"  of  its  "aggression"  and  demanded  an
end  to  "provocative  and  war-seeking  acts  against  the  DRV  and  the  aggressive  war
in  South  \'ietnam."  Implving  that  the  air  raids  would  not  deter  future  rebel
aggression  in  the  South,  the  DRV  Government  declared  that  "the  Vietnamese
people  will  never  shrink  before  any  threat  of  the  United  States"  and  will  "further
increase  their  forces  and  step  up  their  struggle."

\'. "SUSTAINED  REPRISAL"  AND  ITS  VARIANTS
—ADVOCACY  SHIFTS  INTO  HIGH  GEAR

A. THE  MCGEORGE  BUNDY  RECOMMENDATION

Pleiku.  and  the  first  FLAMING  DART  reprisal,  caught  the  McGeorge  Bundy
group  (which  also  included  Assistant  Secretar)'  of  Defense  John  McNaughton,


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  309

White  House  Aide  Chester  Cooper,  and  Chairman  of  the  Vietnam  Coordinating
Group  Leonard  Unger)  in  the  midst  of  intensive  discussions  with  the  US  Mission
in  Saigon.  These  discussions  covered  the  whole  range  of  US- Vietnam  poHcy
options,  particularly  the  complex  issue  of  future  pressures  on  the  North.  Imme-
diately following  the  reprisal  decision  of  February  7,  the  group  returned  to
Washington  via  Air  Force  One.  Enroute  and  airborne,  they  drafted  a  memoran-
dum to  the  President  which  was  intended  to  reflect  in  some  degree  the  consensus
reached  among  the  Bundy  group  and  with  the  U.S.  Mission  in  Saigon.  But  in  an
unmistakable  way,  the  memorandum  also  represents  a  highly  personal  Bundy
assessment  and  point  of  view.  For  this  reason,  and  because  of  its  unique  articula-
tion of  a  rationale  for  the  ROLLING  THUNDER  policy,  it  is  reproduced  here
in  considerable  detail.

The  Summary  Conclusions,  presented  at  the  very  outset  of  the  memorandum,
set  the  tone  of  the  more  detailed  elaboration  that  is  to  follow:

The  situation  in  Vietnam  is  deteriorating,  and  without  new  U.S.  action
defeat  appears  inevitable — probably  not  in  a  matter  of  weeks  or  perhaps
even  months,  but  within  the  next  year  or  so.  There  is  still  time  to  turn  it
around,  but  not  much.

The  stakes  in  Vietnam  are  extremely  high.  The  American  investment  is
very  large,  and  American  responsibility  is  a  fact  of  life  which  is  palpable  in
the  atmosphere  of  Asia,  and  even  elsewhere.  The  international  prestige  of
the  United  States,  and  a  substantial  part  of  our  influence,  are  directly  at
risk  in  Vietnam.  There  is  no  way  of  unloading  the  burden  on  the  Vietnamese
themselves,  and  there  is  no  way  of  negotiating  ourselves  out  of  Vietnam
which  offers  any  serious  promise  at  present.  It  is  possible  that  at  some  future
time  a  neutral  non-Communist  force  may  emerge,  perhaps  under  Buddhist
leadership,  but  no  such  force  currently  exists,  and  any  negotiated  U.S.  with-
drawal today  would  mean  surrender  on  the  installment  plan.

The  policy  of  graduated  and  continuing  reprisal  outlined  in  Annex  A  is
,the  most  promising  course  available,  in  my  judgment.  That  judgment  is
shared  by  all  who  accompanied  me  from  Washington,  and  I  think  by  all
members  of  the  country  team.

The  events  of  the  last  twenty-four  hours  have  produced  a  practicable
point  of  departure  for  this  policy  of  reprisal,  and  for  the  removal  of  U.S.
dependents.  They  may  also  have  catalyzed  the  formation  of  a  new  Viet-
namese government.  If  so,  the  situation  may  be  at  a  turning  point.

There  is  much  that  can  and  should  be  done  to  support  and  to  supplement
our  present  effort,  while  adding  sustained  reprisals.  But  I  want  to  stress  one
important  general  conclusion  which  again  is  shared  by  all  members  of  my
party:  the  U.S.  mission  is  composed  of  outstanding  men,  and  U.S.  policy
within  Vietnam  is  mainly  right  and  well  directed.  None  of  the  special  solu-
tions or  criticisms  put  forward  with  zeal  by  individual  reformers  in  govern-
ment or  in  the  press  is  of  major  importance,  and  many  of  them  are  flatly
wrong.  No  man  is  perfect,  and  not  every  tactical  step  of  recent  months  has
been  perfectly  chosen,  but  when  you  described  the  Americans  in  Vietnam
as  your  first  team,  you  were  right.

After  a  brief  description  of  the  general  situation  in  Vietnam  as  the  Bundy
group  found  it,  the  memorandum  explains  the  crucial  question  of  whether  and  to
what  degree  a  stable  government  is  a  necessity  for  the  successful  prosecution  of
U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam.  It  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  achievement  of  con-


310 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

siderable  government  stability  had  been  made,  in  all  previous  "pressure  guidance,"
a  sine  qua  non  of  any  transition  to  Phase  II  action  against  the  North.  And  yet
GVN  stability  continued  to  be  a  most  elusive  goal.  Bundy  now  seemed  to  be
arguing  that  the  U.S.  may  have  been  insisting  on  a  more  perfect  government  than
was  really  necessary,  at  least  in  the  short  run:

For  immediate  purposes — and  especially  for  the  initiation  of  reprisal
policy,  we  believe  that  the  government  need  be  no  stronger  than  it  is  today
with  General  Khanh  as  the  focus  of  raw  power  while  a  weak  caretaker
government  goes  through  the  motions.  Such  a  government  can  execute
military  decisions  and  it  can  give  formal  political  support  to  joint  US/GVN
policy.  That  is  about  all  it  can  do.

In  the  longer  run,  it  is  necessary  that  a  government  be  established  which
will  in  one  way  or  another  be  able  to  maintain  its  political  authority  against
all  challenges  over  a  longer  time  than  the  governments  of  the  last  year  and
a  half.

The  composition  and  direction  of  such  a  government  is  a  most  difficult
problem,  and  we  do  not  wholly  agree  with  the  mission  in  our  estimate  of
its  nature  .  .  .

We  believe  that  General  Khanh,  with  all  his  faults,  is  by  long  odds  the
outstanding  military  man  currently  in  sight — and  the  most  impressive  per-
sonality generally.  We  do  not  share  the  conclusion  of  Ambassador  Taylor
that  he  must  somehow  be  removed  from  the  military  and  political  scene.

There  are  strong  reasons  for  the  Ambassador's  total  lack  of  confidence
in  Khanh.  At  least  twice  Khanh  has  acted  in  ways  that  directly  spoiled  Am-
bassador Taylor's  high  hopes  for  December.  When  he  abolished  the  High
National  Council  he  undercut  the  prospect  of  the  stable  government  needed
for  Phase  II  action  against  the  North.  In  January  he  overthrew  Huong  just
when  the  latter,  in  the  Embassy's  view,  was  about  to  succeed  in  putting  the
bonzes  in  their  place.  .  .

.  .  .  our  principal  reasons  for  opposing  any  sharp  break  with  Khanh  is
that  we  see  no  one  else  in  sight  with  anything  like  his  ability  to  combine
military  authority  with  some  sense  of  politics.

Bundy  also  differed  from  the  Embassy  on  the  necessity  of  "facing  down"  the
Buddhist  leaders,  believing  instead  that  they  should  be  "incorporated"  into  GVN
affairs  rather  than  being  "confronted."  He  stressed  the  significance  of  these  dif-
ferences, but  then  generously  endorsed  the  Mission's  overall  relationship  to  and
handling  of  the  GVN.

Having  registered  these  two  immediate  and  important  differences  of  em-
phasis, we  should  add  that  in  our  judgment  the  mission  has  acted  at  about
the  right  level  of  general  involvement  in  the  problem  of  Vietnamese  gov-
ernment-making. American  advice  is  sought  by  all  elements,  and  all  try  to
bend  it  to  their  own  ends.  The  mission  attempts  to  keep  before  all  elements
the  importance  of  stable  government,  and  it  quietly  presses  the  value  of
those  who  are  known  to  be  good,  solid,  able  ministerial  timber  .  .  .

...  It  is  important  that  the  mission  maintain  a  constant  and  active
concern  with  the  politics  of  government-making.  This  it  is  doing.

Bundy  then  went  on  to  pay  obeisance  to  the  need  for  a  stronger  pacification
program  and  for  greater  recognition  that  the  Vietnamese  need  "a  sense  of  posi-
tive hope":


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  311

If  we  suppose  that  new  hopes  are  raised — at  least  temporarily — by  a
reprisal  program,  and  we  suppose  further  that  a  government  somewhat
better  than  the  bare  minimum  is  established,  the  most  urgent  order  of  busi-
ness will  then  be  the  improvement  and  broadening  of  the  pacification  pro-
gram, especially  in  its  non-military  elements  .  .  .

.  .  .  there  is  plainly  a  deep  and  strong  yearning  among  the  young  and
the  unprivileged  for  a  new  and  better  social  order.  This  is  what  the  Buddhist
leaders  are  groping  toward:  this  is  what  the  students  and  young  Turk  generals
are  seeking.  This  yearning  does  not  find  an  adequate  response  in  American
policy  as  Vietnamese  see  it.  This  is  one  cause  of  latent  anti-American  feeling.
We  only  perceived  this  problem  toward  the  end  of  our  visit.  We  think  it
needs  urgent  further  attention.  We  make  no  present  recommendations.  We
do  believe  that  over  the  long  pull  our  military  and  political  firmness  must
be  matched  by  our  political  and  economic  support  for  the  hopes  that  are
embodied  to  Vietnamese  in  the  word  "revolution."

Bundy  harbored  no  illusions  concerning  the  enemy's  abilitv  and  determination:

The  prospect  in  Vietnam  is  grim.  The  energy  and  persistence  of  the  Viet
Cong  are  astonishing.  They  can  appear  anywhere — and  at  almost  any  time.
They  have  accepted  extraordinary  losses  and  they  come  back  for  more.
They  show  skill  in  their  sneak  attacks  and  ferocity  when  cornered.  Yet  the
weary  country  does  not  want  them  to  win.

There  are  a  host  of  things  the  Vietnamese  need  to  do  better  and  areas  in
which  we  need  to  help  them.  The  place  where  we  can  help  most  is  in  the
clarity  and  firmness  of  our  own  commitment  to  what  is  in  fact  as  well  as  in
rhetoric  a  common  cause.

Finally,  Bundy  explained  the  central  rationale  of  his  recommendations:

There  is  one  grave  weakness  in  our  posture  in  Vietnam  which  is  within
our  own  power  to  fix — and  that  is  a  widespread  belief  that  we  do  not  have
the  will  and  force  and  patience  and  determination  to  take  the  necessary  action
and  stay  the  course.

This  is  the  overriding  reason  for  our  present  recommendation  of  a  policy
of  sustained  reprisal.  Once  such  a  policy  is  put  in  force,  we  shall  be  able
to  speak  in  Vietnam  on  many  topics  and  in  many  ways,  with  growing  force
and  effectiveness^

One  final  word.  At  its  very  best  the  struggle  in  Vietnam  will  be  long.  It
seems  to  us  important  that  this  fundamental  fact  be  made  clear  and  our
understanding  of  it  be  made  clear  to  our  own  people  and  to  the  people  of
Vietnam.  Too  often  in  the  past  we  have  conveyed  the  impression  that  we
expect  an  early  solution  when  those  who  live  with  this  war  know  that  no
early  solution  is  possible.  It  is  our  own  belief  that  the  people  of  the  United
States  have  the  necessary  will  to  accept  and  to  execute  a  policy  that  rests
upon  the  reality  that  there  is  no  short  cut  to  success  in  South  Vietnam.

Appended  to  the  Bundy  memorandum  as  Annex  A  [Doc.  250]  is  a  detailed,
carefully  formulated  explanation  of  his  "sustained  reprisal"  policy,  including
specific  action  recommendations.  Because  of  its  explicitness  and  clarity,  it  is
reproduced  in  full:


312 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


A  POLICY  OF  SUSTAINED  REPRISAL

/.  Introductory

We  believe  that  the  best  available  way  of  increasing  our  chance  of  success  in
Vietnam  is  the  development  and  execution  of  a  policy  of  sustained  reprisal
against  North  Vietnam — a  policy  in  which  air  and  naval  action  against  the
North  is  justified  by  and  related  to  the  whole  Viet  Cong  campaign  of  violence
and  terror  in  the  South.

While  we  believe  that  the  risks  of  such  a  policy  are  acceptable,  we  emphasize
that  its  costs  are  real.  It  implies  significant  U.S.  air  losses  even  if  no  full  air  war
is  joined,  and  it  seems  likely  that  it  would  eventually  require  an  extensive  and
costly  effort  against  the  whole  air  defense  system  of  North  Vietnam.  U.S.  casual-
ties would  be  higher — and  more  visible  to  American  feelings — than  those  sus-
tained in  the  struggle  in  South  Vietnam.

Yet  measured  against  the  costs  of  defeat  in  Vietnam,  this  program  seems  cheap.
And  even  if  it  fails  to  turn  the  tide — as  it  may — the  value  of  the  effort  seems
to  us  to  exceed  its  cost.

//. Outline  of  the  Policy

1.  In  partnership  with  the  Government  of  Vietnam,  we  should  develop  and
exercise  the  option  to  retaliate  against  any  VC  act  of  violence  to  persons  or  prop-
erty.

2.  In  practice,  we  may  wish  at  the  outset  to  relate  our  reprisals  to  those  acts
of  relatively  high  visibility  such  as  the  Pleiku  incident.  Later,  we  might  retaliate
against  the  assassination  of  a  province  chief,  but  not  necessarily  the  murder  of  a
hamlet  official;  we  might  retaliate  against  a  grenade  thrown  into  a  crowded  cafe
in  Saigon,  but  not  necessarily  to  a  shot  fired  in  a  small  shop  in  the  countryside.

3.  Once  a  program  of  reprisals  is  clearly  underway,  it  should  not  be  necessary
to  conect  each  specific  act  against  North  Vietnam  to  a  particular  outrage  in  the
South.  It  should  be  possible,  for  example,  to  publish  weekly  lists  of  outrages  in
the  South  and  to  have  it  clearly  understood  that  these  outrages  are  the  cause  of
such  action  against  the  North  as  may  be  occurring  in  the  current  period.  Such  a
more  generalized  pattern  of  reprisal  would  remove  much  of  the  difficulty  involved
in  finding  precisely  matching  targets  in  response  to  specific  atrocities.  Even  in
such  a  more  general  pattern,  however,  it  would  be  important  to  insure  that
the  general  level  of  reprisal  action  remained  in  close  correspondence  with  the
level  of  outrages  in  the  South.  We  must  keep  it  clear  at  every  stage  both  to  Hanoi
and  to  the  world,  that  our  reprisals  will  be  reduced  or  stopped  when  outrages  in
the  South  are  reduced  or  stopped — and  that  we  are  not  attempting  to  destroy  or
conquer  North  Vietnam.

4.  In  the  early  stages  of  such  a  course,  we  should  take  the  appropriate  occa-
sion to  make  clear  our  firm  intent  to  undertake  reprisals  on  any  further  acts,
major  or  minor,  that  appear  to  us  and  the  GVN  as  indicating  Hanoi's  support.
We  would  announce  that  our  two  governments  have  been  patient  and  forbearing
in  the  hope  that  Hanoi  would  come  to  its  senses  without  the  necessity  of  our
having  to  take  further  action;  but  the  outrages  continue  and  now  we  must  react
against  those  who  are  responsible;  we  will  not  provoke;  we  will  not  use  our
force  indiscriminately;  but  we  can  no  longer  sit  by  in  the  face  of  repeated  acts
of  terror  and  violence  for  which  the  DRV  is  responsible.

5.  Having  once  made  this  announcement,  we  should  execute  our  reprisal


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  313

policy  with  as  low  a  level  of  public  noise  as  possible.  It  is  to  our  interest  that  our
acts  should  be  seen — but  we  do  not  wish  to  boast  about  them  in  ways  that  make
it  hard  for  Hanoi  to  shift  its  ground.  We  should  instead  direct  maximum  attention
to  the  continuing  acts  of  violence  which  are  the  cause  of  our  continuing  reprisals.

6.  This  reprisal  policy  should  begin  at  a  low  level.  Its  level  of  force  and  pres-
sure should  be  increased  only  gradually — and  as  indicated  above  it  should  be
decreased  if  VC  terror  visibly  decreases.  The  object  would  not  be  to  "win"  an
air  war  against  Hanoi,  but  rather  to  influence  the  course  of  the  struggle  in  the
South.

7.  At  the  same  time  it  should  be  recognized  that  in  order  to  maintain  the
power  of  reprisal  without  risk  of  excessive  loss,  an  "air  war"  may  in  fact  be
necessary.  We  should  therefore  be  ready  to  develop  a  separate  justification  for
energetic  flak  suppression  and  if  necessary  for  the  destruction  of  Communist  air
power.  The  essence  of  such  an  explanation  should  be  that  these  actions  are
intended  solely  to  insure  the  effectiveness  of  a  policy  of  reprisal,  and  in  no  sense
represent  any  intent  to  wage  offensive  war  against  the  North.  These  distinctions
should  not  be  difficult  to  develop.

8.  It  remains  quite  possible,  however,  that  this  reprisal  policy  would  get  us
quickly  into  the  level  of  military  activity  contemplated  in  the  so-called  Phase  II
of  our  December  planning.  It  may  even  get  us  beyond  this  level  with  Hanoi  and
Peiping,  if  there  is  a  Communist  counteraction.  We  and  the  GVN  should  also
be  prepared  for  a  spurt  of  VC  terrorism,  especially  in  urban  areas,  that  would
dwarf  anything  yet  experienced.  These  are  the  risks  of  any  action.  They  should
be  carefully  reviewed — but  we  believe  them  to  be  acceptable.

9.  We  are  convinced  that  the  political  values  of  reprisal  require  a  continuous
operation.  Episodic  responses  geared  on  a  one-for-one  basis  to  "spectacular"  out-
rages would  lack  the  persuasive  force  of  sustained  pressure.  More  important  still,
they  would  leave  it  open  to  the  Communists  to  avoid  reprisals  entirely  by  giving
up  only  a  small  element  of  their  own  program.  The  Gulf  of  Tonkin  affair  pro-
duced a  sharp  upturn  in  morale  in  South  Vietnam.  When  it  remained  an  isolated
episode,  however,  there  was  a  severe  relapse.  It  is  the  great  merit  of  the  proposed
scheme  that  to  stop  it  the  Communists  would  have  to  stop  enough  of  their
activity  in  the  South  to  permit  the  probable  success  of  a  determined  pacification
effort.

///. Expected  Effect  of  Sustained  Reprisal  Policy

1.  We  emphasize  that  our  primary  target  in  advocating  a  reprisal  policy  is  the
improvement  of  the^  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  Action  against  the  North  is
usually  urged  as  a  means  of  affecting  the  will  of  Hanoi  to  direct  and  support  the
VC.  We  consider  this  an  important  but  longer-range  purpose.  The  immediate
and  critical  targets  are  in  the  South — in  the  minds  of  the  South  Vietnamese  and
in  the  minds  of  the  Viet  Cong  cadres.

2.  Predictions  of  the  effect  of  any  given  course  of  action  upon  the  states  of
mind  of  people  are  difficult.  It  seems  very  clear  that  if  the  United  States  and
the  Government  of  Vietnam  join  in  a  policy  of  reprisal,  there  will  be  a  sharp
immediate  increase  in  optimism  in  the  South,  among  nearly  all  articulate  groups.
The  Mission  believes  and  our  own  conversations  confirm — that  in  all  sectors  of
Vietnamese  opinion  there  is  a  strong  belief  that  the  United  States  could  do  much
more  if  it  would,  and  that  they  are  suspicious  of  our  failure  to  use  more  of  our
obviously  enormous  power.  At  least  in  the  short  run,  the  reaction  to  reprisal
policy  would  be  very  favorable.


314 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

3.  This  favorable  reaction  should  offer  opportunity  for  increased  American
influence  in  pressing  for  a  more  effective  government — at  least  in  the  short  run.
Joint  reprisals  would  imply  military  planning  in  which  the  American  role  would
necessarily  be  controlling,  and  this  new  relation  should  add  to  our  bargaining
power  in  other  military  efforts — and  conceivably  on  a  wider  plane  as  well  if  a
more  stable  government  is  formed.  We  have  the  whip  hand  in  reprisals  as  we
do  not  in  other  fields  .  .  .

4.  The  Vietnamese  increase  in  hope  could  well  increase  the  readiness  of  Viet-
namese factions  themselves  to  join  together  in  forming  a  more  effective  govern-
ment.

5.  We  think  it  plausible  that  effective  and  sustained  reprisals,  even  in  a  low
key,  would  have  a  substantial  depressing  effect  upon  the  morale  of  Viet  Cong
cadres  in  South  Vietnam.  This  is  the  strong  opinion  of  CIA  Saigon.  It  is  based
upon  reliable  reports  of  the  initial  Viet  Cong  reaction  to  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin
episode,  and  also  upon  the  solid  general  assessment  that  the  determination  of
Hanoi  and  the  apparent  timidity  of  the  mighty  United  States  are  both  major  items
in  Viet  Cong  confidence.

6.  The  long-run  effect  of  reprisals  in  the  South  is  far  less  clear.  It  may  be  that
like  other  stimulants,  the  value  of  this  one  would  decline  over  time.  Indeed  the
risk  of  this  result  is  large  enough  so  that  we  ourselves  believe  that  a  very  major
effort  all  along  the  line  should  be  made  in  South  Vietnam  to  take  full  advantage
of  the  immediate  stimulus  of  reprisal  policy  in  its  early  stages.  Our  object  should
be  to  use  this  new  policy  to  effect  a  visible  upward  turn  in  pacification,  in  govern-
mental effectiveness,  in  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong,  and  in  the  whole
US/GVN  relationship.  It  is  changes  in  these  areas  that  can  have  enduring  long-
term  effects.

7.  While  emphasizing  the  importance  of  reprisals  in  the  South,  we  do  not
exclude  the  impact  on  Hanoi.  We  believe,  indeed,  that  it  is  of  great  importance
that  the  level  of  reprisal  be  adjusted  rapidly  and  visibly  to  both  upward  and
downward  shifts  in  the  level  of  Viet  Cong  offenses.  We  want  to  keep  before
Hanoi  the  carrot  of  our  desisting  as  well  as  the  stick  of  continued  pressure.  We
also  need  to  conduct  the  application  of  the  force  so  that  there  is  always  a  prospect
of  worse  to  come.

8.  We  cannot  assert  that  a  policy  of  sustained  reprisal  will  succeed  in  changing
the  course  of  the  contest  in  Vietnam.  It  may  fail,  and  we  cannot  estimate  the
odds  of  success  with  any  accuracy — they  may  be  somewhere  between  25%  and
75%.  What  we  can  say  is  that  even  if  it  fails,  the  policy  will  be  worth  it.  At  a
minimum  it  will  damp  down  the  charge  that  we  did  not  do  all  that  we  could  have
done,  and  this  charge  will  be  important  in  many  countries,  including  our  own.
Beyond  that,  a  reprisal  policy — to  the  extent  that  it  demonstrates  U.S.  willingness
to  employ  this  new  norm  in  counter-insurgency — will  set  a  higher  price  for  the
future  upon  all  adventures  of  guerrilla  warfare,  and  it  should  therefore  some-
what increase  our  ability  to  deter  such  adventures.  We  must  recognize,  how-
ever, that  that  ability  will  be  gravely  weakened  if  there  is  failure  for  any  reason
in  Vietnam.

IV. Present  Action  Recommendations

1.  This  general  recommendation  was  developed  in  intensive  discussions  in  the
days  just  before  the  attacks  on  Pleiku.  These  attacks  and  our  reaction  to  them
have  created  an  ideal  opportunity  for  the  prompt  development  and  execution  of
sustained  reprisals.  Conversely  if  no  such  policy  is  now  developed,  we  face  the
grave  danger  that  Pleiku,  like  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin,  may  be  a  short-run  stimulant


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  315

and  a  long-term  depressant.  We  therefore  recommend  that  the  necessary  prepara-
tions be  made  for  continuing  reprisals.  The  major  necessary  steps  to  be  taken
appear  to  us  to  be  the  following:

( 1 )  We  should  complete  the  evacuation  of  dependents.

(2)  We  should  quietly  start  the  necessary  westward  deployments  of  back-up
contingency  forces.

(3)  We  should  develop  and  refine  a  running  catalogue  of  Viet  Cong  offenses
which  can  be  published  regularly  and  related  clearly  to  our  own  reprisals.  Such  a
catalogue  should  perhaps  build  on  the  foundation  of  an  initial  White  Paper.

(4)  We  should  initiate  joint  planning  with  the  GVN  on  both  the  civil  and  mili-
tary level.  Specifically,  we  should  give  a  clear  and  strong  signal  to  those  now
forming  a  government  that  we  will  be  ready  for  this  policy  when  they  are.

(5)  We  should  develop  the  necessary  public  and  diplomatic  statements  to
accompany  the  initiation  and  continuation  of  this  program.

(6)  We  should  insure  that  a  reprisal  program  is  matched  by  renewed  public
commitment  to  our  family  of  programs  in  the  South,  so  that  the  central  im-
portance of  the  southern  struggle  may  never  be  neglected.

(7)  We  should  plan  quiet  diplomatic  communications  of  the  precise  meaning
of  what  we  are  and  are  not  doing,  to  Hanoi,  to  Peking  and  to  Moscow.

(8)  We  should  be  prepared  to  defend  and  to  justify  this  new  policy  by  con-
centrating attention  in  every  forum  upon  its  cause — the  aggression  in  the  South.

(9)  We  should  accept  discussion  on  these  terms  in  any  forum,  but  we  should
not  now  accept  the  idea  of  negotiations  of  any  sort  except  on  the  basis  of  a  stand
down  of  Viet  Cong  violence.  A  program  of  sustained  reprisal,  with  its  direct  link
to  Hanoi's  continuing  aggressive  actions  in  the  South  will  not  involve  us  in
nearly  the  level  of  international  recrimination  which  would  be  precipitated  by  a
go-North  program  which  was  not  so  connected.  For  this  reason  the  international
pressures  for  negotiation  should  be  quite  manageable.


B. THE  TA  YLOR  CONCEPTION  OF  "GRADUA  TED  REPRISALS"

At  about  the  same  time  that  the  McGeorge  Bundy  memorandum  was  being
submitted  to  the  President,  Ambassador  Taylor  in  Saigon  conveyed  his  own  views
concerning  a  future  reprisal  program  to  Washington.  Not  surprisingly  (since
they  had  exchanged  ideas  extensively  in  Saigon)  Taylor's  concept  closely
paralleled  Bundy's  in  many  of  its  features.  But  in  at  least  one  significant  respect
it  diverged  sharply.  Whereas  Bundy's  main  objective  was  to  influence  the  course
of  the  struggle  in  the  South  (providing  a  boost  to  GVN  morale  and  cohesion,
affording  an  opportunity  for  increased  American  influence  upon  and  bargaining
power  with  the  GVN^,  and  exerting  a  depressing  effect  upon  VC  cadres),  Taylor's
principal  aim  was  "to  bring  increasing  pressure  on  the  DRV  to  cease  its  inter-
vention."

The  areas  of  agreement  between  Taylor  and  Bundy  were  considerable.  Like
Bundy,  he  recommended  "a  measured,  controlled  sequence  of  actions  against  the
DRV  taken  in  reprisal  for  DRV-inspired  actions  in  South  Vietnam  .  .  .  car-
ried out  jointly  with  the  GVN  and  .  .  .  directed  solely  against  DRV  military
targets  and  infiltration  routes.  .  ."  The  reprisals  could  be  "initiated  on  the  basis
of  a  general  catalogue  or  package  of  VC  outrages,  no  one  particularly  grave
itself.  .  .  ."  and  could  be  varied  "with  the  general  level  of  VC  outrages  in
SVN  or,  if  we  so  desired,  progressively  raised.  .  .  .  Thus  it  would  be  tantamount
to  the  so-called  Phase  II  escalation,  but  justified  on  the  basis  of  retaliation."  Like
Bundy,  he  believed  "that  we  should  limit  US  GVN  publicity  to  the  bare  mini-


316 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

mum  .  .  ."  and  he  also  cautioned  that  "we  should  attempt  to  avoid  in  the
present  situation  a  general  letdown  in  morale  and  spirit  which  followed  our
action  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf."

But  Taylor's  concept  was  much  more  directly  aimed  at  bringing  pressures  to
bear  against  the  DRV,  to  give  them  "serious  doubts  as  to  their  chances  for
ultimate  success"  and  to  cause  them  to  cease  their  aggression  and  to  accede  to  a
rigorously  enforced  1954/1962  Geneva-type  settlement.  It  was  this  focus  on  the
North,  rather  than  a  rededication  of  the  GVN  to  the  struggle  in  the  South,  that
Taylor  considered  to  be  the  real  benefit  of  a  reprisal  policy.  Integrating  the  Viet-
namese in  a  program  against  the  DRV,  he  believed,  would  have  an  exhilarating
effect  which,  if  exploited  early  "could  lead  to  a  greater  sense  of  purpose  and
direction  both  in  the  government  and  the  military  and  awaken  new  hope  for
eventual  victory  on  the  part  of  the  Vietnamese  people."

In  a  subsequent  cable,  Taylor  spelled  out  his  "graduated  reprisal"  concept  in
a  more  orderly  fashion:

In  review  of  the  rationale  for  concept  of  graduated  reprisals  we  are  of
the  opinion  that,  in  order  of  importance,  it  should  have  the  following  ob-
jectives:

(a)  The  will  of  Hanoi  leaders;

(b)  GVN  morale;  and

(c)  Physical  destruction  to  reduce  the  DRV  ability  to  support  the  VC.

Of  these  three,  the  first  appears  to  us  by  far  the  most  imporant,  since  our  effec-
tiveness in  influencing  Hanoi  leadership  will,  in  the  long  run,  determine  the  suc-
cess or  failure  of  our  efforts  in  both  North  and  South  Vietnam.  Second  objective,
effect  on  GVN  morale,  is  also  important  and  fortunately  the  requirements  for
building  morale  in  the  South  are  roughly  the  same  as  those  for  impressing  Hanoi
leaders  with  the  rising  costs  of  their  support  of  the  VC.  In  this  case,  what  is  bad
for  Hanoi  is  generally  good  for  Saigon.

Effect  of  the  physical  destruction  of  material  objects  and  infliction  of  casual-
ties will  not,  in  our  judgment,  have  a  decisive  bearing  upon  the  ability  of  DRV
to  support  VC.  However,  degree  of  damage  and  number  of  casualties  inflicted
gauge  the  impact  of  our  operations  on  Hanoi  leadership  and  hence  are  important
as  a  measure  of  their  discomfort.

.  .  .  We  should  keep  our  response  actions  controllable  and  optional  to  maxi-
mum degree  possible  so  that  we  can  act  or  withhold  action  when  and  as  we
choose.  This  need  for  flexibility  argues  strongly  for  vagueness  in  defining  criteria
for  situations  justifying  retaliation  and  for  retention  of  freedom  of  action  to
make  ad  hoc  decisions  in  light  of  our  interests  at  the  moment.  But  in  any  case,
complete  flexibility  will  not  be  possible  .  .  .

Assuming  that  we  have  achieved  control  and  flexibility,  we  will  then  need  to
think  of  the  tempo  which  we  wish  to  communicate  to  the  retaliatory  program,
with  primary  consideration  given  to  effect  of  the  program  on  Hanoi  leadership.
It  seems  clear  to  us  that  there  should  be  a  gradual,  orchestrated  acceleration  of
tempo  measured  in  terms  of  frequency,  size,  number  and/or  geographical  loca-
tion of  the  reprisal  strikes  and  of  related  activities  such  as  BARREL  ROLL  and
34-A.  An  upward  trend  in  any  or  all  of  these  forms  of  intensity  will  convey
signals  which,  in  combination,  should  present  to  the  DRV  leaders  a  vision  of
inevitable,  ultimate  destruction  if  they  do  not  change  their  ways.  The  exact  rate
of  acceleration  is  a  matter  of  judgment  but  we  consider,  roughly  speaking,  that
each  successive  week  should  include  some  new  act  on  our  part  to  increase  pressure
on  Hanoi  .  .  .


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  317

We  do  not  believe  that  our  reprisal  program  will  lead  the  GVN  to  believe  that
we  have  taken  over  their  war  and  that  they  can  reduce  their  anti-VC  activities.
We  hope  that  the  opposite  will  be  the  effect  and  the  retaliatory  actions  in  the
North  will  give  impulsion  to  the  defensive  efforts  in  the  South.  However,  the
Dept's  fear  can  certainly  not  be  ruled  out  and  we  shall  watch  closely  the  GVN
reaction  to  the  program.

One  of  Ambassador  Taylor's  major  concerns  was  that,  if  a  graduated  reprisals
program  were  adopted,  it  would  be  necessary  to  begin  discussions  with  the  GVN
to  seek  agreement  on  mutually  acceptable  terms  for  the  ultimate  settlement  of
the  conflict.  Taylor  thought  of  this  as  a  process  of  education  by  which  he  would
guide  the  GVN  towards  formulating  a  "framework  of  demands  to  be  made  on
the  DRV  as  well  as  the  general  negotiating  procedures."  He  outlined  his  proposed
"terms  for  cessation  of  our  reprisal  attacks"  as  follows:

A.  Demands

1.  DRV  return  to  strict  observance  of  1954  accords  with  respect  SVN
and  the  1962  agreement  with  respect  to  Laos — that  is,  stop  infiltration,  and
bring  about  a  cessation  of  VC  armed  insurgency.  (With  respect  to  Laos
strictly  observe  the  1962  accords  with  respect  to  Laos,  including  the  with-
drawal of  all  Viet  Minh  forces  and  personnel  from  Laos  and  recognize  that
the  freedom  of  movement  granted  therein  in  Laos  under  those  accords  is
not  subject  to  veto  or  interference  by  any  of  the  parties  in  Laos.)

B.  In  return  and  subject  in  each  instance  to  a  judgment  that  DRV  is
complying  faithfully  and  effectively:

1.  U.S.  will  return  to  1954  accords  with  respect  to  military  personnel
in  SVN  and  GVN  would  be  willing  to  enter  into  trade  talks  looking  toward
normalization  of  economic  relations  between  DRV  and  GVN.

2.  Subject  to  faithful  compliances  by  DRV  with  1954  accords,  U.S.
and  GVN  would  give  assurances  that  they  would  not  use  force  or  support
the  use  of  force  by  any  other  party  to  upset  the  accords  with  respect  to  the
DRV.

3.  Within  the  framework  of  the  1954  accords,  the  GVN  would  permit
VC  desiring  to  do  so  to  return  to  the  DRV  without  their  arms  and  would
grant  amnesty  to  those  peacefully  laying  down  their  arms  and  desiring  to
remain  in  SVN.

C.  If  and  when  Hanoi  indicates  its  acceptance  of  foregoing  conditions,
careful  consideration  must  be  given  to  immediate  subsequent  procedures
which  will  avoid  danger  of:  (a)  becoming  involved  in  a  cease  fire  vis-a-vis
the  DRV  and/or  the  VC  accompanied  by  strung-out  negotiations;  (b)  mak-
ing conditions  so'stringent  as  to  be  unworkable  from  practical  point  of  view.
Probably  best  procedure  would  be  to  have  the  GVN  and  DRV  meet  in  the
DMZ  at  the  military  level  under  ICC  auspices  with  U.S.  observers  to  reach
agreement  mechanics  of  carrying  out  understanding  while  action  against  the
VC  and  DRV  continues  at  least  in  principle.  RLG  would  have  to  be  associ-
ated with  these  negotiations  at  some  point.

It  is  evident  from  these  and  similar  tough  settlement  terms  and  cessation
"demands"  that  were  being  discussed  between  Saigon  and  Washington  at  that
time  that  there  was  a  real  expectation  that  the  kinds  of  reprisal  pressures  con-
templated would  inflict  such  pain  or  threat  of  pain  upon  the  DRV  that  it  would
be  compelled  to  order  a  stand-down  of  Viet  Cong  violence  and  accept  conditions
that,  from  their  point  of  view,  were  tantamount  to  surrender.  Such  a  view  is


318 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

even  more  clearly  implicit  in  the  comments  and  proposals  on  reprisal  programs
emanating  from  the  U.S.  military  leadership.

C.  CINCPACS  "GRADUATED  PRESSURES"  PHILOSOPHY

Admiral  Sharp,  commenting  on  Ambassador  Taylor's  reprisal  and  negotiating
concepts,  called  attention  to  the  need  to  make  the  reprisal  program  a  very  force-
ful one,  if  the  DRV  was  to  be  persuaded  to  accede  to  a  cessation  on  US  terms:

While  it  may  be  politically  desirable  to  speak  publicly  in  terms  of  a
"graduated  reprisal"  program,  I  would  hope  that  we  are  thinking,  and  will
act,  in  terms  of  a  ""graduated  pressures"  philosophy  which  has  more  of  a
connotation  of  steady,  relentless  movement  toward  our  objective  of  con-
vincing Hanoi  and  Peiping  of  the  prohibitive  cost  of  them  of  their  program
of  subversion,  insurgency  and  aggression  in  SEAsia.

If  a  firm  decision  is  made  to  embark  upon  a  graduated  pressures  program,
the  recommendation  contained  in  [Taylor's  Feb  11  message]  to  undertake
discussions  with  the  RVN  reference  joint  US  GVN  military  actions  is  most
necessary.  Failure  to  develop  firm  arrangements  concerning  roles  and  re-
sponsibiUties  could  result  in  over  reliance  on  the  U.S.  contribution  to  the
war  effort,  and  perhaps  GVN  resorting  to  rash  military  actions  from  which
we  would  have  to  bail  them  out.

There  is  no  question  of  the  desirability  of  concurrently  educating  the
GVN,  as  also  proposed  in  Ref  b,  toward  formulation  of  war  objectives,  de-
mands and  negotiating  procedures  to  be  employed  against  the  DRV.  I  be-
lieve that  such  an  educational  process,  combined  with  a  graduated  military
pressures  program  will  further  contribute  to  GVN  stability.

We  must  be  certain  that  we  are  dealing  from  a  posture  of  strength  before
we  sit  down  at  the  bargaining  table.  Successful  direct  increasing  military
pressures  against  NVN  must  be  complemented  by  a  reversal  of  the  trend
toward  VC  success  within  RVN.  We  must  also  exhibit  complete  confidence
in  ability  to  win  in  Vietnam  and  so  indicate  by  our  willingness  to  rely  on
our  military  superiority  if  need  be.

We  must  not  be  driven  to  premature  discussions  with  the  DRV  in  our
eagerness  to  find  a  solution  to  the  Southeast  Asian  problem.  We  should
continue  our  militarv  pressures,  making  (our)  general  objectives  publicly
known,  while  awaiting  some  sign  that  the  DRV  is  readv  to  negotiate  towards
achievement  of  those  objectives  .  .  .

.  .  .  Finally,  any  political  program  which  is  designed  to  formulate  terms
and  procedures  for  reaching  agreement  on  cessation  of  a  graduated  military
pressures  program,  will  be  successful  in  proportion  to  the  effectiveness  of
the  military  pressures  program  itself.

D.  ICS  EIGHT-WEEK  PROGRAM

As  these  discussions  continued,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  responding  to  a  Mc-
Namara  request  of  8  February,  sent  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  their  recom-
mendations for  an  initial  program  of  military  actions  against  the  DRV,  extend-
ing over  a  period  of  eight  weeks.  In  accordance  with  McNamara's  instructions,
the  program  was  to  be  confined  generally  to  targets  along  Route  7  and  south  of
the  19th  parallel,  was  to  employ  both  RVN  and  US  forces,  and  was  to  be  pri-
marily a  plan  for  air  strikes.  Since  it  was  so  constrained,  the  ICS  program  does


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  319

not  fully  reflect  the  preferences  of  the  Joint  Chiefs.  But  it  does  reveal  something
of  their  thinking.  The  context  in  which  the  program  would  be  undertaken  is
described  as  follows:

It  is  visualized  that  the  initial  overt  air  strikes  of  this  program  will  have
been  undertaken  as  a  retaliation  in  response  to  a  provocative  act  by  Viet
Cong  or  DRV  forces  against  US  or  RVN  personnel  or  installations.  Suc-
cessive overt  operations  to  provide  sustained  pressures  and  progressive  de-
struction will  be  continued  on  the  plausible  justification  of  further  provoca-
tions, which  on  the  basis  of  recent  past  experience  seem  quite  likely  to  exist.
As  this  program  continues  the  realistic  need  for  precise  event-association  in
this  reprisal  context  will  progressively  diminish.  A  wide  range  of  activities
are  within  the  scope  of  what  may  be  stated  to  be  provocations  justifying
reprisal.

The  program  called  for  two  to  four  US-VNAF  strikes  per  week,  initially
against  targets  along  Route  7  south  of  the  19th  parallel  and  near  the  Laos  border.
Specifically,  the  program  was  conceived  as  follows:

The  air  attacks  are  scheduled  for  the  first  eight  weeks  at  the  rate  of  four
fixed  targets  a  week  .  .  .  These  initial  targets  are  located  South  of  the  19th
parallel  with  the  exception  of  Target  89,  an  Armed  Route  Reconnaissance
of  Route  7,  in  the  DRV  close  to  the  Laos  border.  BARREL  ROLL  missions
in  Laos  will  be  coordinated  with  air  strikes  in  the  DRV  near  the  Laos  border
to  ensure  maximum  efi'ectiveness.

a.  The  targets  are  attacked  in  the  order  of  ascending  risk  to  attacking
forces  and  are  attacked  at  a  frequency  that  assures  that  continuous  and
regular  pressure  is  maintained  against  the  DRV.  Authority  should  be  dele-
gated to  CINCPAC  to  select  alternate  weather  targets  from  the  list  of  pre-
viously approved  targets  for  the  eight  weeks  program.  Subsequent  weekly
operations  would  be  adjusted  as  appropriate  when  alternate  targets  are
attacked.

b.  Airfields  north  of  the  19th  parallel  are  not  scheduled  for  attack  in  the
first  eight  weeks.  However,  if,  during  the  scheduled  attacks  in  this  program,
DRV  or  CHICOM  aircraft  attempt  "intercept  of  US /RVN  forces,  the  "com-
munist air  threat  involved  should  be  eliminated.  The  program  of  graduated
pressures  would  then  have  reached  a  higher  scale  of  escalation  and  would
require  reorientation.

The  program  also -provided  for  naval  gunfire  bombardment  and  for  continua-
tion of  already  ongoing  activity,  including  34A  operations,  resumption  of
DESOTO  Patrols,  and  authorization  for  ground  cross  border  operations.

To  carry  out  this  program,  the  JCS  wished  to  deploy  about  325  more  aircraft
to  the  Western  Pacific  to  deter  or  cope  with  any  escalation  that  might  result.
This  would  include  dispatch  of  30  B-52's  to  Guam,  deployment  of  9  more  USAF
tactical  fighter  squadrons  and  a  fourth  aircraft  carrier.  Some  Marine  and  Army
units  would  go  to  Thailand,  and  other  units  would  be  alerted.

As  for  the  risks  of  escalation,  the  JCS  considered  these  as  manageable:

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  that  the  DRV,  Communist  China,  and
the  Soviet  Union  will  make  every  effort  through  propaganda  and  diplo-
matic moves  to  halt  the  US  attacks.  The  DRV  also  will  take  all  actions  to


320 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

defend  itself,  and  open,  overt  aggression  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  by  the
DRV  might  occur.  In  addition,  the  mere  initiation  of  the  new  US  policy
almost  certainly  would  not  lead  Hanoi  to  restrain  the  Viet  Cong;  Hanoi
would  probably  elect  to  maintain  the  very  intense  levels  of  activity  of  the
past  few  days.  However,  if  the  United  States  persevered  in  the  face  of
threats  and  international  pressures,  and  as  the  degree  of  damage  inflicted
on  North  Vietnam  increased,  the  chances  of  a  reduction  in  Viet  Cong
activity  would  rise.  They  further  believe  that  the  Chinese  communists  would
be  reluctant  to  become  directly  involved  in  the  fighting  in  Southeast  Asia;
however,  as  the  number  and  severity  of  US  attacks  against  the  DRV  in-
crease, they  probably  would  feel  an  increased  compulsion  to  take  some
dramatic  action  to  counter  the  impact  of  US  pressures.  There  is  a  fair
chance  that  Peiping  would  introduce  limited  numbers  of  Chinese  ground
forces  as  "volunteers"  into  North  Vietnam,  and  or  northern  Laos,  intending
to  raise  the  specter  of  further  escalation,  to  underline  its  commitment  to
assist  the  North  Vietnamese,  and  to  challenge  the  Soviets  to  extend  cor-
responding support.  They  also  believe  that  the  probable  Soviet  response  to
these  US  courses  of  action  would  consist  both  of  a  vigorous  diplomatic  and
propaganda  effort  to  bring  the  United  States  to  the  conference  table  and  the
provision  of  military  support  to  North  Vietnam.  While  the  extent  and
nature  of  the  latter  are  difficult  to  predict,  it  almost  certainly  would  include
anti-aircraft  artillery  and  radars.  In  order  to  provide  a  more  effective  de-
fense against  the  US  air  attacks.  North  Vietnam  would  probably  press  for
surface-to-air  missiles.  The  chances  are  about  even  that  the  Soviets  would
agree  to  provide  some  SA-2  defenses,  but  they  would  do  so  in  ways  cal-
culated to  minimize  the  initial  risks  to  them.  By  providing  the  necessary
Soviet  personnel  in  the  guise  of  "technicians,"  the  USSR  could  preserve  the
option  of  ignoring  any  Soviet  casualties.  In  the  event  the  DRV  and  Com-
munist Chinese  openly  undertake  aggressive  actions,  the  United  States  and
its  allies  can  deal  with  them  adequately.  .  .  .

It  is  the  opinion  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  that  the  program  herein  pro-
posed will  demonstrate  to  the  DRV  that  continuation  of  its  direction  and
support  of  insurgencies  will  lead  progressively  to  more  serious  punishment.
If  the  insurgency  continues  with  active  DRV  support,  strikes  against  the
DRV  will  be  extended  with  intensified  efforts  against  targets  north  of  the
19th  parallel.

While  the  Joint  Chiefs  recommended  approval  of  the  recommendations,  not
all  considered  them  adequate.  General  McConnell,  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff,  be-
lieved that  the  much  heavier  air  strike  recommendations  made  by  the  ICS  in  late
1964  were  more  appropriate  than  the  mild  actions  now  proposed.  General
Wheeler  backed  deployment  of  more  USAF  and  other  air  units  but  pressed  for
an  integrated  air  program  against  the  North's  transportation  system,  especially
railroads.  He  also  believed,  along  with  General  Harold  K.  Johnson,  Army  Chief
of  Staff,  that  three  U.S.  ground  divisions  might  have  to  be  sent  to  Southeast
Asia.  The  JCS  chairman  directed  the  Joint  Staff  to  examine  the  possibility  of
placing  one  or  two  of  these  divisions  in  northeast  Thailand  and  a  third,  aug-
mented by  allied  personnel,  south  of  the  demilitarized  zone  in  South  Vietnam.

Some  of  these  JCS  recommendations  were  quickly  accepted,  particularly  those
having  to  do  with  Air  Force  deployments.  Thus  the  Administration  approved  the
dispatch,  from  11  to  13  February,  of  30  B-52's  to  Guam  and  30  KC-135's  to
Okinawa.  Designated  Arc  Light,  these  bombers  and  tankers  of  the  Strategic  Air


,1


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  321

Command  (SAC)  initially  were  earmarked  (though  never  used)  for  high-altitude,
all-weather  bombing  of  important  targets  in  the  North.

The  particular  JCS  air  strike  program,  on  the  other  hand,  was  never  adopted.
The  detailed  JCS  target  proposals  did  figure  prominently  in  the  intensive  highest-
level  reprisal  and  pressures  planning  that  continued  during  the  succeeding  weeks
and  months,  but  that  planning  was  conducted  essentially  on  an  ad  hoc  basis,
strike  by  strike,  and  did  not  at  this  stage  embrace  a  multi-week  program.

VI. INITIATION  OF  "ROLLING  THUNDER"— 18  DAYS  OF
MANEUVER  AND  DELAY

A. THE  PRESIDENTIAL  DECISION  AND  TAYLOR'S  RESPONSE

The  formal  Presidential  decision  to  inaugurate  what  eventually  emerged  as  the
ROLLING  THUNDER  program  was  made  on  Sunday,  February  13.  It  was
reported  to  Ambassador  Taylor  in  a  NODIS  cable  drafted  in  the  White  House
and  transmitted  to  Saigon  late  that  afternoon.  The  full  text  of  the  message
follows :

The  President  today  approved  the  following  program  for  immediate
future  actions  in  follow-up  decision  he  reported  to  you  in  Deptel  1653.
[The  first  FLAMING  DART  reprisal  decision.]

1.  We  will  intensify  by  all  available  means  the  program  of  pacification
within  SVN.

2.  We  will  execute  a  program  of  measured  and  limited  air  action  jointly
with  GVN  against  selected  military  targets  in  DRV  remaining  south  of
19th  parallel  until  further  notice.

FYI.  Our  current  expectation  is  that  these  attacks  might  come  about  once
or  twice  a  week  and  involve  two  or  three  targets  on  each  day  of  operation.
END  FYI.

3.  We  will  announce  this  policy  of  measured  action  in  general  terms  and
at  the  same  time,  we  will  go  to  UN  Security  Council  to  make  clear  case
that  aggressor  is  Hanoi.  We  will  also  make  it  plain  that  we  are  ready  and
eager  for  "talks"  to  bring  aggression  to  an  end.

4.  We  believe  this  3-part  program  must  be  concerted  with  GVN,  and  we
currently  expect  to  announce  it  by  Presidential  statement  directly  after  next
authorized  air  action.  We  believe  this  action  should  take  place  as  early  as
possible  next  week.

5.  You  are  accordingly  instructed  to  seek  immediate  GVN  agreement  on
this  program,  ^ou  are  authorized  to  emphasize  our  conviction  that  an-
nouncement of  readiness  to  talk  is  stronger  diplomatic  position  than  await-
ing inevitable  summons  to  Security  Council  by  third  parties.  We  would  hope
to  have  appropriate  GVN  concurrence  by  Monday  [Feb  14th]  if  possible
here.

In  presenting  above  to  GVN,  you  should  draw  fully,  as  you  see  fit,  on
following  arguments:

a.  We  are  determined  to  continue  with  military  actions  regardless  of
Security  Council  deliberations  and  any  "talks"  or  negotiations  that  may
ensue,  unless  and  until  North  Vietnam  [words  missing]  its  aggression  to  an
end.  Our  demand  would  be  that  they  cease  infiltration  and  all  forms  of
support  and  also  the  activity  they  are  directing  in  the  south.

b.  We  consider  the  UN  Security  Council  initiative,  following  another


322 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

strike,  essential  if  we  are  to  avoid  being  faced  with  really  damaging  initia-
tives by  the  USSR  or  perhaps  by  such  powers  as  India,  France,  or  even  the
UN.  .

c.  At  an  early  point  in  the  UN  Security  Council  initiative,  we  would
expect  to  see  calls  for  the  DRV  to  appear  in  the  UN.  If  they  failed  to
appear,  as  in  August,  this  will  make  doubly  clear  that  it  is  they  who  are
refusing  to  desist,  and  our  position  in  pursuing  military  actions  against  the
DRV  would  be  strengthened.  For  same  reason  we  would  now  hope  GVN
itself  would  appear  at  UN  and  work  closely  with  US.

d.  With  or  without  Hanoi,  we  have  every  expectation  that  any  "talks"
that  may  result  from  our  Security  Council  initiative  would  in  fact  go  on
for  many  weeks  or  perhaps  months  and  would  above  all  focus  constantly
on  the  cessation  of  Hanoi's  aggression  as  the  precondition  to  any  cessation
of  military  action  against  the  DRV.  We  further  anticipate  that  any  detailed
discussions  about  any  possible  eventual  form  of  agreement  returning  to  the
essentials  of  the  1954  Accords  would  be  postponed  and  would  be  sub-
ordinated to  the  central  issue.

For  your  private  guidance,  the  following  draft  language  is  under  con-
sideration for  Presidential  announcement:

BEGIN  QUOTE:

The  aggression  has  continued.  It  has  continued  against  the  Vietnamese,
and  it  has  continued  against  Americans.  In  support  of  the  independence  of
Vietnam,  in  the  service  of  our  nation,  and  in  fulfillment  of  the  solemn  public
obligation  of  our  nation,  and  in  our  individual  and  collective  self-defense,
the  Government  of  the  United  States,  with  the  Government  of  Vietnam,
has  now  decided  that  further  action  must  be  taken.

The  actions  we  have  agreed  upon  are  three :

First  and  most  important,  we  will  continue  and  will  intensify  still  further
our  campaign  against  terror  and  violence  in  South  Vietnam  itself.  The
establishment  of  civil  peace  and  the  disarming  of  the  Communist  forces  are
the  first  order  of  business  for  both  our  Governments.  Our  military  and
police  actions  will  be  increasingly  energetic  and  effective.  We  will  also
strengthen  and  enlarge  our  efforts  to  move  forward  with  the  peaceful  de-
velopment of  a  society  set  free  from  [words  illegible]  the  mistake  of  assum-
ing that  there  is  any  substitute  for  victory  against  aggression  where  it  shows
its  open  face — inside  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam  itself.

Second — and  at  the  same  time — we  will  carry  out  measured  but  effective
actions  against  military  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  These  actions  will  be
reported  to  the  United  Nations  Security  Council  under  the  Provisions  of
Article  51  of  the  United  Nations  Charter — and  each  such  report  will  in-
clude a  full  account  of  the  continuing  acts  of  aggression  which  make  our
actions  necessary.  These  actions  will  stop  when  the  aggression  stops.

Third,  we  will  press  with  urgency  for  talks  designed  to  bring  an  end  to
the  aggression  and  its  threat  to  peace.  I  have  today  instructed  Ambassador
Stevenson  to  seek  such  action  urgently,  in  the  Security  Council  of  the
United  Nations,  and  if  that  body  should  be  hamstrung  by  any  veto,  we  shall
then  press  for  talks  in  another  appropriate  forum.  We  believe  that  in  any
such  talks  the  first  object  must  be  an  end  of  aggression,  and  we  believe  that
the  government  in  Hanoi  must  be  brought  to  the  conference  room.  Our
common  purpose — and  our  only  purpose — is  to  restore  the  peace  and
domestic  tranquihty  which  others  have  so  savagely  attacked.  END  QUOTE


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  323

Several  aspects  of  the  message  are  of  interest.  First,  it  features  intensified
pacification  as  the  first  order  of  business  and  as  a  major  point  in  the  con-
templated Presidential  announcement.  This  stress  on  action  in  the  South  re-
flected a  serious  concern  at  high  levels  in  the  White  House  and  the  State  Depart-
ment at  that  time,  that  a  growing  preoccupation  with  action  against  the  North
would  be  likely  to  cause  the  US  Mission  and  the  GVN  leadership  to  neglect  the
all-important  struggle  within  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam.  Second,  the  descrip-
tion of  the  air  strike  program  in  the  message  is  extremely  cursory,  suggesting
that  the  President  at  this  time  still  wished  to  preserve  as  much  flexibility  as  pos-
sible concerning  the  future  scope  and  character  of  the  program.  And  third,  the
message  reveals  the  President's  intention,  as  of  that  date,  to  take  the  DRV
aggression  issue  and  the  US  bombing  response  promptly  before  the  UN  Security
Council — an  intention  that  was  dropped  several  days  later  in  favor  of  a  quite
different  approach,  namely  the  UK  USSR  Co-Chairmen  initiative  recounted
below.  In  actuality,  instead  of  mounting  a  major  UN  approach,  the  President
contented  himself  initially  with  a  brief  public  statement  of  US  objectives  in
Vietnam,  which  formed  the  keynote  of  the  official  line,  and  was  to  be  frequently
quoted  by  Administration  officials  in  subsequent  weeks:

As  I  have  said  so  many,  many  times,  and  other  Presidents  ahead  of  me
have  said,  our  purpose,  our  objective  there  is  clear.  That  purpose  and  that
objective  is  to  join  in  the  defense  and  protection  of  freedom  .  .  .

We  have  no  ambition  there  for  ourselves.  We  seek  no  dominion.  We
seek  no  conquest.  We  seek  no  wider  war.  But  we  must  all  understand  that
we  will  persist  in  the  defense  of  freedom  and  our  continuing  actions  will  be
those  which  are  justified  and  those  that  are  made  necessary  by  the  continu-
ing aggression  of  others.

These  actions  will  be  measured  ^nd  fitting  and  adequate.  Our  stamina  and
the  stamina  of  the  American  people  is  equal  to  the  task.

Ambassador  Taylor  received  the  news  of  the  President's  new  program  with
enthusiasm.  In  his  response,  however,  he  explained  the  difficulties  he  faced  in
obtaining  authentic  GVN  concurrence  "in  the  condition  of  virtual  non-govern-
ment" which  existed  in  Saigon  at  that  moment.  The  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces
Council  had  arrogated  unto  itself  the  authority  of  appointing  the  Chief  of  State
and  the  Premier,  and  had  left  him  to  his  own  devices  in  trying  to  form  a
cabinet.  Any  GVN  concurrence  that  Taylor  could  obtain  would  have  to  be  a
consensus  of  a  lame-duck  acting  prime  minister,  a  widely  mistrusted  military
commander-in-chief,  a  prime-minister-designate  with  uncertain  prospects,  and
assorted  other  power  figures  in  a  foundering  caretaker  government.  This  Alice-
in-Wonderland  atmosphere  notwithstanding,  Taylor  was  undaunted:

It  will  be  interesting  to  observe  the  effect  of  our  proposal  on  the  internal
political  situation  here.  I  will  use  the  occasion  to  emphasize  that  a  dramatic
change  is  occurring  in  U.S.  policy,  one  highly  favorable  to  GVN  interests
but  demanding  a  parallel  dramatic  change  of  attitude  on  the  part  of  the
GVN.  Now  is  the  time  to  install  the  best  possible  government  as  we  are
clearly  approaching  a  climax  in  the  next  few  months.  The  U.S.  Mission  and
the  GVN  will  have  serious  problems  to  work  out  together,  many  of  them
complicated  matters  in  the  field  of  foreign  affairs  where  the  GVN  must
strengthen  its  professional  representation.  We  need  the  first  team  and  we
need  it  fast.


324 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

There  is  just  a  chance  that  the  vision  of  possible  victory  may  decide
Khanh  to  take  over  the  government  at  this  juncture.  Alternately,  it  may
create  some  measure  of  national  unity  which  will  facilitate  the  task  of  Quat
or  of  any  other  Prime  Minister  who  succeeds  in  forming  a  new  government.

Quat's  chances  for  creating  national  unity — even  with  the  assist  of  an  im-
minent "dramatic  change  in  US  policy"' — were  slim  indeed.  Quat's  government
was  the  ninth  attempt  to  form  a  viable  structure  since  the  overthrow  of  Diem.
It  was  obvious  from  the  outset  that  it  would  be  under  the  domination  of  the
Armed  Forces  Council  which  had  publicly  declared  that  it  would  "act  as  a
mediator  until  the  government  [words  illegible].  The  mediator  himself,  however,
was  to  be  rent  asunder  within  days  of  Quat's  assumption  of  office  in  one  of  these
explosions  that  had  become  so  typical  in  Vietnam  since  Diem's  demise.  That
political  explosion  was  particularly  unfortunate  in  its  timing  in  relation  to  the
"dramatic"  new  ROLLING  THUNDER  program  just  then  set  to  get  under  way.

B. ROLLING  THUNDER  I  IS  LAID  ON— AND  CANCELLED

A  refinement  of  the  February  13  decision  on  ROLLING  THUNDER,  in-
cluding determination  of  the  timing  and  character  of  the  first  air  strike,  was
evidendy  made  by  the  President  on  February  18.  A  NODIS  cable  of  that  date
informed  nine  American  posts  in  the  Far  East  of  the  decisions  in  the  following
words:

Policy  on  Viet-Nam  adopted  today  calls  for  following:

1.  Joint  program  with  GVN  of  continuing  air  and  naval  action  against
North  Viet-Nam  whenever  and  wherever  necessary.  Such  action  to  be
against  selected  military  targets  and  to  be  limited  and  fitting  and  adequate
as  response  to  continuous  aggression  in  South  Viet-Nam  directed  in  Hanoi.
Air  strikes  will  be  jointly  planned  and  agreed  with  GVN  and  carried  out  on
joint  basis.

2.  Intensification  by  all  available  means  of  pacification  program  within
South  Viet-Nam,  including  every  possible  step  to  find  and  attack  VC  con-
centrations and  headquarters  within  SVN  by  all  conventional  means  available
to  GVN  and  US.

3.  Early  detailed  presentation  to  nations  of  world  and  to  public  of  docu-
mented case  against  DRV  as  aggressor.  Forum  and  form  this  presentation
not  yet  decided,  but  we  do  not  repeat  not  expect  to  touch  upon  readiness
for  talks  or  negotiations  at  this  time.  We  are  considering  reaffirmation  our
objectives  in  some  form  in  near  future.

4.  Careful  public  statements  of  USG,  combined  with  fact  of  continuing
air  action,  are  expected  to  make  it  clear  that  military  action  will  continue
while  aggression  continues.  But  focus  of  public  attention  will  be  kept  as  far
as  possible  on  DRV  aggression;  not  on  joint  GVN/US  military  operations.
There  will  be  no  comment  of  any  sort  on  future  actions  except  that  all  such
actions  will  be  adequate  and  measured  and  fitting  to  aggression.  (You  will
have  noted  President's  statement  of  yesterday,  which  we  will  probably  allow
to  stand.)

Addressees  should  inform  head  of  government  or  State  (as  appropriate)
of  above  in  strictest  confidence  and  report  reactions  .  .  .

You  may  indicate  that  we  will  seek  to  keep  governments  informed,  sub-
ject to  security  considerations,  of  each  operation  as  it  occurs;  as  we  did
with  respect  to  operations  of  February  7  and  1 1 .


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  325

Although  the  cable  does  not  indicate  it,  the  first  air  action  under  the  new
program  was  set  for  February  20th.  Dubbed  ROLLING  THUNDER  I,  it  caUed
for  US  strikes  against  Quang  Khe  Naval  Base  and  concurrent  VNAF  strikes
against  Vu  Con  Barracks,  with  appropriate  weather  alternates  provided.  The
above  cable  was  sent  from  Washington  at  8:00  p.m.  on  February  18th.  Five
hours  later,  at  1:00  p.m.,  February  19  (Saigon  time),  Colonel  Pham  Ngoc  Thao,
a  conspiratorial  revolutionary  figure  who  had  been  active  in  the  coup  against
Diem,  began  his  infamous  semi-coup  to  oust  General  Khanh — but  not  to  over-
throw the  Armed  Forces  Council.  Aided  by  General  Phat,  his  forces  succeeded
in  occupying  the  ARVN  military  headquarters  and  other  key  government  build-
ings in  Saigon,  including  the  radio  station.  Until  the  coup  was  defeated  and
Khanh's  resignation  submitted  some  40  hours  later,  pandemonium  reigned  in
Saigon.  Ambassador  Taylor  promptly  recommended  cancellation  of  the  February
20  air  strike  and  his  recommendation  was  equally  promptly  accepted.  In  a
FLASH  message  to  all  recipients  of  the  cable  quoted  above,  Washington  re-
scinded the  instructions  to  notify  respective  heads  of  state  until  further  notice
"in  view  of  the  disturbed  situation  in  Saigon."

The  '"disturbed  situation"  was  not  to  setde  down  completely  for  almost  a  week.
Even  though  the  semi-coup  failed  quickly  and  the  Armed  Forces  Council  re-
asserted its  full  authority,  the  AFC  continued  the  anti-Khanh  momentum  of  the
coup-plotters  by  adopting  a  "vote  of  no  confidence"  in  Khanh.  The  latter  made
frantic  but  unsuccessful  efforts  to  rally  his  supporters.  Literally  running  out  of
gas  in  Nha  Trang  shortly  before  dawn  on  February  21,  he  submitted  his  resigna-
tion, claiming  that  a  ""foreign  hand"  was  behind  the  coup.  No  one,  however,
could  be  quite  certain  that  Khanh  might  not  "re-coup"  once  again,  unless  he
were  physically  removed  from  the  scene.  This  took  three  more  days  to  accom-
plish. On  the  afternoon  of  February  25,^  after  some  mock  farewell  performances
designed  to  enable  Khanh  to  save  face,  he  left  Vietnam  to  become  an  Ambassa-
dor-at-Large.  At  the  airport  to  see  him  off  and  to  make  sure  that  he  was  safely
dispatched  from  the  country,  was  Ambassador  Taylor,  glassily  polite.  It  was  only
then  that  Taylor  was  able  to  issue,  and  Washington  would  accept,  clearance  for
the  long  postponed  and  frequently  rescheduled  first  ROLLING  THUNDER
strike.

C. THE  UK/USSR  CO-CHAIRMEN  GAMBIT

Political  turbulence  in  Saigon  was  not  the  only  reason  for  delaying  the  air
action.  Even  before  the  semi-coup  broke  out,  forcing  cancellation  of  the  Febru-
ary 20  strike,  a  diplomatic  initiative  was  taken  by  the  Soviet  Foreign  Office  in
Moscow  that  was  eagerly  picked  up  by  London  and  Washington.  .  .  .

On  February  7,  the  UK  Ambassador  to  Washington,  Lord  Harlech,  informed
Secretary  Rusk  that  the  Soviet  Foreign  Office  had  approached  the  British  with
the  suggestion  that  the  UK-USSR  Co-Chairmanship  of  the  1954  Geneva  Con-
ference might  be  reactivated  in  connection  with  the  current  Vietnam  crisis.
Secretary  Rusk  described  the  possibilities  of  such  a  gambit  in  a  message  to
Ambassador  Taylor  as  follows:

British  apparently  expect  that  next  Soviet  step  might  be  to  propose  a
joint  statement  by  two  Co-Chairmen  on  bombings  in  North  Viet-Nam  as
reported  to  Co-Chairmen  by  regime  in  Hanoi.  Interest  of  Soviet  Govern-
ment in  co-chairmanship,  though  not  yet  confirmed,  might  also  reflect  some
relief  for  Moscow  regarding  dilemma  in  which  they  may  find  themselves


326 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

in  dealing  with  Hanoi,  Peiping  and  Southeast  Asia  issues.  It  may  prove
desirable  for  us  to  provide  to  UK  and  USSR  full  statement  of  facts  as  we
see  them,  US  purposes  in  Southeast  Asia  and  our  concept  of  necessary
solution  .  .  .  We  would  stop  short  of  ourselves  proposing  formal  system-
atic negotiations  but  assumption  of  1954  co-chairmanship  by  two  govern-
ments would  imply  that  they  might  themselves  explore  with  interested  gov-
ernments possibilities  of  solution,  which  we  could  encourage  or  otherwise
as  we  see  lit.  If  message  is  made  to  two  Co-Chairmen,  which  would  be
made  public,  it  may  mean  that  better  procedure  would  be  to  present  full
documentation  on  North  Viet-Namese  aggression  to  [U.N.  Secretary  Gen-
eral] in  writing  for  circulation  to  members  rather  than  make  oral  presenta-
tion in  meeting  of  Security  Council  which  might  require  Soviets  to  act  as
defense  counsel  for  Hanoi.

Obviously,  this  has  bearing  on  timing  of  next  strike.  Hope  to  be  in  touch
with  you  within  next  several  hours  on  our  further  reflection  on  this  prob-
lem. Do  not  believe  a  Thursday  [February  18]  strike  therefore  feasible  be-
cause of  this  time  factor  and  because  these  possibilities  have  not  been
explored  here  at  highest  level.

With  encouragement  from  Rusk,  the  British  Foreign  Office  showed  itself
eager  to  pick  up  the  Soviet  hint.  London  proposed  to  make  a  formal  approach
to  the  Soviet  Government,  through  UK  Ambassador  Trevelyan  in  Moscow.
Specifically,  they  wished  to  instruct  the  Ambassador  to  propose  to  the  Soviet
Government  that  the  Co-Chairmen  of  the  1954  Geneva  Conference  request  the
Governments  which  were  members  of  that  Conference  and  those  represented  on
the  International  Control  Commission  "to  furnish  the  Co-Chairmen  without
delay  with  a  statement  of  their  views  on  the  situation  in  Viet-Nam  and,  in  par-
ticular, on  the  circumstances  in  which  they  consider  that  a  peaceful  settlement
could  be  reached.

In  a  further  discussion  with  Lord  Harlech  on  February  19,  Secretary  Rusk
agreed  to  the  proposed  British  action  and  Ambassador  Trevelyan  was  duly  in-
structed to  approach  the  Soviet  Foreign  Office  on  February  20.

[material  missing]

What  were  US  expectations  with  respect  to  this  initiative,  and  how  did  it
relate  to  the  new  policy  of  pressures  against  the  DRV?  An  excellent  indication
of  State  Department  thinking  on  these  matters  at  that  moment  is  contained  in
an  unfinished  draft  memorandum  dated  February  18,  prepared  by  William  P.
Bundy  and  entided  "Where  Are  We  Heading?"  Because  it  is  addressed  to  the
relevant  issues  of  that  moment  and  surveys  the  political-diplomatic  scene,  it  is
reproduced  here  in  full:

This  memorandum  examines  possible  developments  and  problems  if  the
US  pursues  the  following  policy  with  respect  to  South  Viet-Nam:

a.  Intensified  pacification  within  South  Vietnam.  To  meet  the  security
problem,  this  might  include  a  significant  increase  in  present  US  force
strength.

b.  A  program  of  measured,  limited,  and  spaced  air  attacks,  jointly  with
the  GVN,  against  the  infiltration  complex  in  the  DRV.  Such  attacks  would
take  place  at  the  rate  of  about  one  a  week,  unless  spectacular  Viet  Cong
action  dictated  an  immediate  response  out  of  sequence.  The  normal  pattern
of  such  attacks  would  comprise  one  GVN  and  one  US  strike  on  each  occa-
sion, confined  to  targets  south  of  the  19th  parallel,  with  variations  in  se-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  327

verity  depending  on  the  tempo  of  VC  action,  but  with  a  slow  upward  trend
in  severity  as  the  weeks  went  by.

c.  That  the  US  itself  would  take  no  initiative  for  talks,  but  would  agree
to  cooperate  in  consultations — not  a  conference — undertaken  by  the  UK
and  USSR  as  Co-Chairmen  of  the  Geneva  Conferences.  As  an  opening
move,  the  British  would  request  an  expression  of  our  views,  and  we  would
use  this  occasion  to  spell  out  our  position  fully,  including  our  purposes
and  what  we  regard  as  essential  to  the  restoration  of  peace.  We  would
further  present  our  case  against  the  DRV  in  the  form  of  a  long  written
document  to  be  sent  to  the  President  of  the  United  Nations  Security  Coun-
cil and  to  be  circulated  to  members  of  the  UN.

* * *  *

1.  Communist  responses.

a.  Hanoi  would  almost  certainly  not  feel  itself  under  pressure  at  any
early  point  to  enter  into  fruitful  negotiations  or  to  call  off  its  activity  in
any  way.  They  would  denounce  the  continued  air  attacks  and  seek  to  whip
up  maximum  world  opposition  to  them.  Within  South  Viet-Nam,  they
might  avoid  spectacular  actions,  but  would  certainly  continue  a  substantial
pattern  of  activity  along  past  lines,  probably  with  incidents  we  have  seen
this  week,  in  which  Communist  agents  stirred  up  a  village  protest  against
government  air  attacks,  and  against  the  US.  Basically,  they  would  see  the
situation  in  South  Viet-Nam  as  likely  to  deteriorate  further  (crumble,  as
they  have  put  it),  and  would  be  expecting  that  at  some  point  someone  in
the  GVN  will  start  secret  talks  with  them  behind  our  backs.

b.  Communist  China  might  supply  additional  air  defense  equipment  to
the  DRV,  but  we  do  not  believe  they  would  engage  in  air  operations  from
Communist  China,  at  least  up  to  the  point  where  the  MIGs  in  the  DRV
were  engaged  and  we  had  found  it  necessary  to  attack  Fukien  or  possibly
— if  the  MIGs  had  been  moved  there — Vinh.

c.  The  Soviet  would  supply  air  defense  equipment  to  the  DRV  and
would  continue  to  protest  our  air  attacks  in  strong  terms.  However,  we  do
not  believe  they  would  make  any  new  commitment  at  this  stage,  and  they
would  probably  not  do  so  even  if  the  Chicoms  became  even  more  deeply
involved — provided  that  we  were  not  ourselves  attacking  Communist  China.
At  that  point,  the  heat  might  get  awfully  great  on  them,  and  they  would
be  in  a  very  difficult  position  to  continue  actively  working  as  Co-Chairmen.
However,  their  approach  to  the  British  on  the  Co-Chairmanship  certainly
suggests  that  they  would  find  some  relief  in  starting  to  act  in  that  role,
and  might  use  it  as  a  hedge  against  further  involvement,  perhaps  pointing
out  to  Hanoi  that  the  Co-Chairman  exercise  serves  to  prevent  us  from  tak-
ing extreme  action  and  that  Hanoi  will  get  the  same  result  in  the  end  if  a
political  track  is  operating  and  if,  in  fact.  South  Viet-Nam  keeps  crum-
bling. They  might  also  argue  to  Hanoi  that  the  existence  of  the  political
track  tends  to  reduce  the  chances  of  the  Chicoms  having  to  become  deeply
involved — which  we  believe  Hanoi  does  not  want  unless  it  is  compelled  to
accept  it.

2.  Within  South  Viet-Nam  the  new  government  is  a  somewhat  better  one,
[Note:  this  was  written  one  day  before  the  semi-coup]  but  the  cohesive
effects  of  the  strikes  to  date  have  at  most  helped  things  a  bit.  The  latest
MACV  report  indicates  a  deteriorating  situation  except  in  the  extreme


328 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

south,  and  it  is  unlikely  that  this  can  be  arrested  in  any  short  period  of  time
even  if  the  government  does  hold  together  well  and  the  military  go  about
their  business.  We  shall  be  very  lucky  to  see  a  leveling  off,  much  less  any
significant  improvement,  in  the  next  two  months.  In  short,  we  may  have
to  hang  on  quite  a  long  time  before  we  can  hope  to  see  an  improving  situ-
ation in  South  Viet-Nam — and  this  in  turn  is  really  the  key  to  any  nego-
tiating position  we  could  have  at  any  time.

3.  On  the  political  track  we  believe  the  British  will  undertake  their  role
with  vigor,  and  that  the  Soviets  will  be  more  reserved.  The  Soviets  can
hardly  hope  to  influence  Hanoi  much  at  this  point,  and  they  certainly  have
no  leverage  with  Communist  China.  In  the  opening  rounds,  the  Soviets
will  probably  fire  off  some  fairly  sharp  statements  that  the  real  key  to  the
situation  is  for  us  to  get  out  and  to  stop  our  attacks,  and  the  opposing
positions  are  so  far  apart  that  it  is  hard  to  see  any  useful  movement  for
some  time  to  come.  We  might  well  find  the  Soviets — or  even  the  Canadians
— sounding  us  out  on  whether  we  would  stop  our  attacks  in  return  for  some
moderation  in  VC  activity.  This  is  clearly  unacceptable,  and  the  very  least
we  should  hold  out  on  is  a  verified  cessation  of  infiltration  (and  radio
silence)  before  we  stop  our  attacks.  Our  stress  on  the  cessation  of  infiltra-
tion may  conceivably  lead  to  the  Indians  coming  forward  to  offer  policing
forces — a  suggestion  they  have  made  before — and  this  would  be  a  con-
structive move  we  could  pick  up.  But,  as  noted  above,  Hanoi  is  most
unlikely  to  trade  on  this  basis  for  a  long  time  to  come.

4.  In  sum — the  most  likely  prospect  is  for  a  prolonged  period  without
major  risks  of  escalation  but  equally  without  any  give  by  Hanoi.

In  retrospect,  Bundy's  expectations  appear  appropriately  sober  and  realistic
in  comparison  with  more  euphoric  views  held  by  some  of  his  contemporaries.
Particularly  with  respect  to  the  Co-Chairmen  gambit;  his  predictions  were  strik-
ingly close  to  the  mark.  The  British  did  in  fact  "undertake  their  role  with  vigor"
and,  as  it  turned  out,  the  Soviets  were  indeed  "more  reserved."  So  much  so,
that  the  Co-Chairman  initiative  eventually  came  to  naught.

At  this  point  in  time,  however  (in  the  days  following  February  20th),  the  Co-
Chairman  proposal  was  in  orbit  and  real  hopes  were  held  out  for  it.  Trevelyan
had  approached  Soviet  Deputy  Foreign  Minister  Lapin  with  the  proposal  and
the  Soviet  officials  had  agreed  to  take  it  under  advisement,  warning  Trevelyan
that  absolute  secrecy  was  essential.  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Moscow  Foy  Kohler,
upon  learning  of  the  UK/Soviet  undertaking,  expressed  his  concern  that  the  air
strikes  on  the  DRV  planned  for  February  20  would  put  the  Soviets  on  the  spot,
and  would  cause  them  to  reject  the  British  proposal.

Washington  reassured  Kohler  by  advising  him  that  the  scheduled  strikes  were
being  postponed  and  also  informed  him  that,  when  rescheduled,  the  strikes
would  be  tied  to  a  major  DRV  aggressive  act  which  had  just  come  to  light.  It
appears  that,  on  February  16,  an  armed  ocean-going  North  Vietnamese  vessel,
carrying  large  quantities  of  arms  and  ammunition,  was  intercepted  and  captured
as  it  was  infiltrating  into  Vung  Ro  Bav  in  South  Vietnam,  to  deliver  its  cargo
to  the  VC.  By  pegging  the  strikes  primarily  to  that  boat  incident,  and  by  direct-
ing the  strikes  in  part  against  a  DRV  naval  base,  the  risk  of  an  adverse  Soviet
reaction  would  be  minimized.

During  the  next  several  days,  Washington  was  in  almost  continuous  com-
munication ( 1 )  with  Taylor  in  Saigon — to  ascertain  whether  the  political  situ-
ation had  stabilized  sufficiently  to  permit  rescheduling  the  postponed  air  strikec;


I  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  329

1(2)  with  Kohler  in  Moscow — to  feel  the  pulse  of  the  Soviet  government  and
its  likely  reaction  to  the  upcoming  air  operation;  and  (3)  with  Ambassador
Bruce  in  London — to  monitor  the  progress  of  the  Trevelyan  approach  to  the
Soviet  Foreign  Office  concerning  the  Co-Chairman  process.  Throughout  this
time,  Secretary  Rusk  was  visibly  torn  on  the  question  of  whether  or  not  to  pro-
,ceed  with  the  air  strikes.  He  wanted  very  much  to  push  ahead  immediately,  in
order  to  exploit  promptly  the  DRV  arms  ship  incident  which  seemed  to  beg  for
some  response.  But  he  hesitated  to  launch  a  strike  on  behalf  of  and  in  concert
with  a  government  that  was  teetering  and  whose  Commander-in-Chief  was  in
the  process  of  being  deposed;  he  also  wished  to  avoid  angering  the  Soviets,  thus
possibly  sabotaging  their  Co-Chairmen  effort.  On  the  other  hand,  he  wanted  to
make  it  clear  that  the  U.S.  would  not  indefinitely  accept  a  "unilateral  ceasefire"
while  the  Co-Chairman  effort  dragged  on.

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  Co-Chairmen  gambit  was  not  viewed  by  any-
one involved  on  the  US  side  as  a  negotiating  initiative.  On  the  contrary,  every
eff"ort  was  made  to  avoid  giving  such  an  impression.  Instead,  the  gambit  was
intended  to  provide  a  vehicle  for  the  public  expression  of  a  tough  U.S.  position.
This  was  clearly  implied  in  Washington  messages  to  Saigon  and  London  on  this
issue,  as,  for  example,  in  a  cable  from  Unger  to  Taylor:

You  should  not  reveal  possibility  this  UK/USSR  gambit  to  GVN  for
time  being.  We  naturally  wish  have  it  appear  entirely  as  their  initiative,  so
that  our  reply  would  not  be  any  kind  of  initiative  on  our  part  and  would,
in  its  content,  make  clear  how  stiff  our  views  are.

Finally,  by  February  24th,  since  no  reply  had  as  yet  been  received  from
Moscow  and  the  situation  in  Saigon  ha(J  begun  to  settle  down.  Secretary  Rusk
felt  he  could  hold  off  no  longer.  In  a  message  to  Bruce  in  London,  he  wrote:

We  have  decided  that  we  must  go  ahead  with  next  operation  Feb.  26
unless  there  should  be  further  political  difficulties  in  Saigon.  Taylor  will
be  seeking  political  clearance  afternoon  Feb.  25  Saigon  time  once  Khanh
is  off  the  scene.

We  told  Harlech  this  decision  today  stating  that  while  we  recognized
British  concern  and  possibly  some  Soviet  reaction  we  cannot  even  by
implication  get  into  [words  illegible]  continuation  of  program.  We  may
hear  further  from  London  following  his  report  but  would  now  expect  to
maintain  decision  and  indeed  Taylor  would  probably  have  gone  ahead  on
political  side.  If  ^matter  comes  up  you  may  of  course  note  that  we  have
held  off  five  days  but  that  British  have  not  had  any  indication  of  Soviet
response  so  that  further  delay  now  appeared  unwise.  We  continue  of  course
attach  major  importance  to  UK /Soviet  gambit  .  .  .

Confidence  that  the  Co-Chairman  initiative  would  pay  off  was  beginning  to
wane,  and  the  air  strikes  were  indeed  being  rescheduled  for  February  26.  A
continuous  readiness  to  launch  had  in  fact  been  maintained  ever  since  Feb-
ruary 20,  by  simply  postponing  the  strikes  for  24  hours  at  a  time  and  laying  on
new  strikes  whenever  a  change  in  targets  or  in  operating  rules  had  been  decided
upon.  The  February  26  operation  was  the  fourth  reprogramming  of  the  strikes
and  thus  went  by  the  code  designation  ROLLING  THUNDER  IV,  even  though
RT's  I  through  III  had  been  scratched.

Fully  expecting  that  the  February  26  air  operation  would  go  off  as  planned,


330 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  I'ol.  Ill

State  sent  out  a  cable  to  thineen  posts,  quoting  the  probable  text  of  a  joint
GVN  US  announcement  that  was  to  be  made  at  about  2:00  a.m.  Washington
time  on  February  26,  and  instructing  all  addressees  to  contact  their  respective
host  governments  as  soon  as  FLASH  notification  was  received  that  the  mission
had  in  fact  been  executed.  The  execution  messages  however,  never  came.
Weather  over  the  entire  target  area  in  North  X'ietnam  had  closed  in.  forcing
another  postponement  and,  ultimately,  cancellation  of  the  strikes.  The  weather
remained  adverse  for  four  more  days.  It  was  not  until  March  2  that  the  first
of  the  new  program  strikes,  dubbed  ROLLING  THUNDER  \'  v'.as  actually
carried  out.

D. EFFORTS  AT  JU STIFIC ATIOS  A\D  PERSl'ASIOX

The  need  to  communicate  the  new  policy  promptly  and  persuasively  to  the
public  had  been  recognized  throughout  the  1964  planning  process  as  an  essen-
tial ingredient  of  any  graduated  pressures  campaign.  Now  the  time  had  come
to  put  the  information  and  education  plans  into  effect.

Over  the  weekend  of  February  12,  serious  work  was  begun  in  the  State  De-
partment on  the  preparation  of  a  "White  Paper"  on  the  infiltration  of  men  and
supplies  from  the  North.  Such  a  public  report  was  considered  essential  to  justi-
fying any  program  of  U.S.  military  operations  against  North  Vietnam.  The
compilers  of  the  exhibits  for  the  public  record  were  handicapped  however,  by
the  fact  that  the  most  persuasive  evidence  on  DR\'  infiltration  and  support  was
derived  from  Special  Intelligence  sources  which  could  not  be  revealed  without
embarrassment  and  detriment  to  other  U.S.  securitv  intere^:^  The  White  Paper
that  was  submitted  to  the  U.S.  public  and  to  the  United  on  Fehruars-

27,  therefore,  did  not  make  as  strong  a  case  as  it  might  h-\  e  c:  :he  extent  and
nature  of  DRV  involvement  in  the  war  in  the  South.

Concurrently,  the  Administration  undertook  to  communicate  to  both  foreign
and  domestic  audiences  its  determination  to  prevent  Communist  destruction  of
the  Government  of  South  \'ietnam  and  to  underline  the  limited  character  of  its
objectives  in  Southeast  Asia.  A  series  of  ""leaked"  press  analyses  suggested  that
the  most  recent  and  the  anticipated  air  strikes  constituted  a  clear  threat  of  ex-
tensive future  destruction  of  North  Vietnam's  militarv  assets  and  economic
investments.  Thev  inferred  that  such  consequences  could  be  avoided  if  Hanoi
would  agree  to  cease  its  direct  support  of  the  insurgencv  in  the  South.

At  the  same  time,  privately  the  State  Department  asked  the  Canadian  ICC
representative  Blair  Seaborn  again  to  act  as  a  discreet  intermediary  with  Hanoi,
conveying  to  the  DRV  leadership  the  same  statement  on  \'ietnam  that  had  been
handed  bv  U.S.  Ambassador  Cabot  to  Chicom  Ambassador  Wang  Kuo-chuan
in  Warsaw  on  February  24.  reaffirming  that  the  United  States  had  no  designs
on  the  territorv  of  North  \'ietnam,  nor  anv  desire  to  destroy  the  DR\'.  On  his
March  visit  to  Hanoi,  Seaborn  sought  an  appointment  with  Prime  Minister
Pham  Van  Dong,  but  was  forced  to  settle  for  a  meeting  with  the  chief  of  the
North  Vietnamese  Foreign  Liaison  Section,  to  whom  he  read  the  statement.
This  officer  commented  that  it  contained  nothing  new  and  that  the  North  Viet-
namese had  already  received  a  briefing  on  the  Warsaw  meeting  from  the  Chicoms.
The  Canadian  Government  publicly  noted  in  April  that  Seaborn  had  two  im-
portant conversations  with  DRV  officials  in  recent  months,  but  did  not  go  into
details.

In  the  closing  days  of  February  and  continuing  through  the  first  week  of
March,  Secretary  Rusk  conducted  a  marathon  public  information  campaign  lo


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  331

explain  and  justify  the  new  U.S.  policy  and  to  signal  a  seemingly  reasonable  but
in  fact  quite  tough  U.S.  position  on  negotiations.  In  part,  the  Rusk  campaign
was  precipitated  by  a  press  conference  comment  by  U  Thant  at  the  United
Nations  on  February  24,  implying  that  the  U.S.  had  perhaps  not  been  as  zealous
in  its  quest  for  peace  as  it  might  have  been.  Thant  went  so  far  as  to  assert  that
"the  great  American  people,  if  they  only  knew  the  true  facts  and  the  background
to  the  developments  in  South  Vietnam,  will  agree  with  me  that  further  blood-
shed is  unnecessary."  The  suggestion  that  the  U.S.  Government  wasn't  leveling
with  the  U.S.  public  produced  a  sharp  retort  from  Secretary  Rusk:

We  have  talked  over  the  past  2  years  informally  and  on  a  number  of
occasions  with  the  Secretary-General  ...  as  well  as  with  many  govern-
ments in  various  parts  of  the  world  .  .  .  But  the  proposals  that  I  know
about  thus  far  have  been  procedural  in  nature.  The  missing  piece  continues
to  be  the  absence  of  any  indication  that  Hanoi  is  prepared  to  stop  doirig
what  it  is  doing  against  its  neighbors.  .  .  .  This  question  of  calling  a  con-
ference, under  what  circumstances — these  are  procedural  matters.  What  we
are  interested  in,  what  is  needed  to  restore  peace  to  Southeast  Asia,  is  sub-
stance, content,  and  indication  that  peace  is  possible  .  .  .

This  and  similar  themes  were  endlessly  reiterated  in  the  ensuing  days :

The  key  to  peace  in  Southeast  Asia  is  the  readiness  of  all  in  that  area  to
live  at  peace  and  to  leave  their  neighbors  alone.  ...  A  negotiation  aimed
at  the  confirmation  of  aggression  is  not  possible.  And  a  negotiation  which
simply  ends  in  bitterness  and  hostility  merely  adds  to  the  danger.

South  Viet-Nam  is  being  subjected  to  an  aggression  from  the  North,  an
aggression  which  is  organized  and  directed  and  supplied  with  key  personnel
and  equipment  by  Hanoi.  The  hard  core  of  the  Viet  Cong  were  trained  in
the  North  and  have  been  reinforced  by  North  Vietnamese  from  the  North
Vietnamese  army  .  .  .  Our  troops  would  come  home  tomorrow  if  the
aggressors  would  go  north — go  back  home,  and  stay  at  home  .  .  .  The
missing  piece  is  the  lack  of  an  indication  that  Hanoi  is  prepared  to  stop
doing  what  it  is  doing,  and  what  it  knows  that  it  is  doing,  to  its  neighbors.

But  when  asked  under  what  circumstances  the  U.S.  might  sit  down  to  talk  to
Hanoi,  Rusk  was  clearly  as  yet  unwilling  to  appear  publicly  receptive:

I  am  not  getting  into  the  details  of  what  are  called  preconditions,  because
we  are  not  at  that  point — we  are  not  at  that  point.  Almost  every  postwar
negotiation  that  has  managed  to  settle  in  some  fashion  some  difficult  and
dangerous  question  has  been  preceded  by  some  private  indication  behind
the  scenes  that  such  a  negotiation  might  be  possible.  That  is  missing  here —
that  is  missing  here.

Rusk's  disinterest  in  negotiation — except  on  "absolutist"  terms — was,  of  course,
in  concert  with  the  view  of  virtually  all  the  President's  key  advisors,  that  the
path  to  peace  was  not  open.  Hanoi,  at  about  that  time,  held  sway  over  more
than  half  of  her  southern  neighbor  and  could  see  the  Saigon  Government  crumb-
ling before  her  very  eyes.  The  balance  of  power  in  South  Vietnam  simply  did  not
furnish  the  United  States  with  a  reasonable  basis  for  bargaining  and  the  signals
from  Hanoi  and  Moscow — or  lack  thereof — did  not  encourage  optimism  about
the  sort  of  hard  settlement  the  U.S.  had  in  mind.  All  this  pointed  directly  to
military  pressures  on  North  Vietnam  and  to  other  urgent  measures  to  tilt  the
balance  of  forces  the  other  way.  Until  these  measures  could  have  some  visible


332 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

and  tangible  effect,  talk  of  negotiation  could  be  little  more  than  a  hollow  exercise.

At  the  same  time,  while  neither  Moscow  nor  Hanoi  seemed  in  the  least  inter-
ested in  U.S.  style  "conciliation,"  the  likelihood  of  explosive  escalation  also
seemed  remote.  So  far  there  were  no  signs  of  ominous  enemy  countermoves.  An
assessment  of  probable  Soviet  responses  to  the  evolving  U.S.  "'pressures""  policy,
cabled  to  the  Department  by  Foy  Kohler  in  Moscow,  was  moderately  reassuring
and  indeed  quite  perceptive:

1.  So\iets  will  make  noises  but  not  take  decisive  action  in  response  to
specific  retaliatory  strikes  in  southern  areas  DRV,  probably  including — after
publication  "White  Paper" — strike  against  DRV  sealift  capabilities  in  this
area.  Indeed.  Soviets  likely  to  read  our  failure  to  continue  carry  out  such
strikes  as  confirmation  their  estimates  re  weakness  our  basic  position  in  SVN.

2.  Soviet  military  aid  program  in  DRV  is  probably  defensive  in  nature
and  Soviets  would  wish  to  keep  it  that  way.  However,  if  attacks  on  DRV  be-
come general,  particularlv  if  thev  are  extended  to  industrial  or  urban  targets
and  areas  beyond  border  zone.  Soviets  will  reassess  our  intent  as  well  as
basic  politico-military  situation.  If  reassessment  leads  them  to  see  U.S.  aim
as  ending  existence  of  DRV  as  socialist  state,  Soviets  will  not  only  step  up
defensive  aid  but  supph  means  of  counterattack,  e.g.,  aircraft  for  raids  on
SVN  cities  and  heaw  ground  equipment.  While  aware  of  risk  that  this
might  bring  Peiping  actively  into  picture,  Soviets  will  not  hold  back  if  exist-
ence of  DRV  seems  threatened.

3.  There  seems  no  possibility  of  change  in  present  hard  Soviet  posture  at
least  until  after  March  1  CP  meeting  and  its  aftermath  or  until  they  some-
how convinced  of  real  danger  of  major  escalation  and  direct  confrontation.

4.  Major  factor  underlying  Soviet  position  is  conviction  that  in  Vietnam
situation,  unlike  Cuban  crisis,  we  are  almost  alone  among  allies  and  even
U.S.  public  opinion  seriouslv  divided;  any  real  and  publicized  improvement
in  this  picture  would  correspondinglv  influence  Soviet  policy.

5.  Apart  their  estimate  as  to  our  relative  isolation,  Soviet  failure  move
toward  negotiations  on  any  basis  conceivably  acceptable  to  USG  also  re-
flects DRV  and  CPR  posture  and  Moscow's  unwillingness  or  inability  to
impel  DRV  to  call  off  activities  in  SVN  or  yield  control  of  territory  they
now  hold.  To  extent  Soviets  can  influence  communist  attitude  toward  nego-
tiations, they  might  in  face  of  increasingly  dangerous  situation  decide  to
work  toward  settlement  based  on  coalition  Govt  in  SVN,  convincing  own
allies  that  this  only  temporary  situation.

6.  Major  Soviet  Dilemma — [words  illegible]  If  they  consider  necessary
to  protect  position  in  own  camp,  Soviets  are  probably  prepared  to  see  re-
lations with  US  suffer  for  indefinite  period.

With  the  immediate  fear  of  escalation  thus  somewhat  allayed  and  the  public
concern  temporarilv  pacified,  attention  began  to  shift  toward  developing  ROLL-
ING THUNDER  into  a  more  forceful  continuous  program.

VII. ROLLING  THUNDER  BECOMES  A  CONTINUING  PROGRAM

A.  MCNAMARA'S  CONCERN  OVER  COST-INEFFECTIVENESS  OF
STRIKES

As  has  been  indicated,  ROLLING  THUNDER  was  finally  inaugurated,  after
much  delav  and  postponement,  on  March  2.  On  that  day,  104  USAF  aircraft


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  333

(B-52's  F-lOO's  F-105's  and  refueling  KC-135's)  struck  the  Xom  Bang  Ammo
Depot,  while  19  VNAF  A-lH's  hit  the  Quang  Khe  Naval  Base.  This  was  the  first
strike  on  the  North  in  which  USAF  aircraft  played  the  dominant  role.  Although
the  attack  was  officially  proclaimed  "very  successful,"  the  loss  of  four  USAF
aircraft,  three  to  antiaircraft  fire,  intensified  earlier  OSD  concern  over  the
effectiveness  of  the  strikes  and  over  the  vulnerability  of  US  aircraft.

Shortly  after  the  first  two  February  reprisal  raids,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  had
received  some  disturbing  bomb  damage  assessment  reports  that  indicated  that,

.  .  .  with  a  total  of  267  sorties  (including  flak  suppression,  etc.)  directed
against  491  buildings,  we  destroyed  47  buildings  and  damaged  22.

The  reports  caused  McNamara  to  fire  off  a  rather  blunt  memorandum  to  the
CJCS,  dated  17  February  1965,  which  stated  in  part:

Although  the  four  missions  left  the  operations  at  the  targets  relatively
unimpaired,  I  am  quite  satisfied  with  the  results.  Our  primary  objective,  of
course,  was  to  communicate  our  political  resolve.  This  I  believe  we  did.
Future  communications  of  resolve,  however,  will  carry  a  hollow  ring  unless
we  accomplish  more  military  damage  than  we  have  to  date.  Can  we  not
better  meet  our  military  objectives  by  choosing  different  types  of  targets,
directing  different  weights  of  effort  against  them,  or  changing  the  composi-
tion of  the  force?  Surely  we  cannot  continue  for  months  accomplishing  no
more  with  267  sorties  than  we  did  on  these  four  missions.

The  Chairman  of  the  JCS  promptly  asked  his  staff  to  look  into  the  matter  and
reported  back  a  few  days  later  on  some  initial  points  of  interest:

(1)  We  do  not  have  sufficient  or  timely  information  about  the  results
of  the  strikes;

(2)  In  light  of  prior  detailed  study  of  the  targets  (94  Target  Study),  the
weight  of  effort  expended  against  at  least  two  of  them  is  open  to  question;

(3)  The  weaponeering  [words  illegible]  open  to  question.
In  view  of  these  deficiencies,  the  CJCS  continued,

...  I  intend  to  ask  the  Joint  Staff,  in  drafting  its  proposals  for  future
strikes,  to  insure  that  the  critical  elements  of  target  selection  and  weight  of
effort  are  evaluated  as  carefully  as  possible  against  specific  and  realistic  mili-
tary objectives.  At  the  same  time,  I  believe  the  commander  of  the  operating
force  should  have  a  degree  of  flexibility  with  respect  to  the  weaponeering  of
the  strikes  and  their  timing.  My  concern  here  is  that  the  operational  com-
mander be  given  adequate  latitude  to  take  advantage  of  his  first-hand  knowl-
edge of  the  target  and  its  defenses  as  well  as  of  the  changing  conditions  of
weather  and  light.

2.  I  am  also  asking  the  Director,  DIA,  to  propose  a  standardized  and
streamlined  system  of  after-action  reporting  so  that  prompt  and  responsive
analysis  of  strike  results  can  be  made  available  to  those  who  require  it.

Immediately  after  the  first  ROLLING  THUNDER  strike  on  March  2,  Deputy
Secretary  of  Defense  Cyrus  R.  Vance  convened  a  meeting  attended  by  Air  Force
Secretary  Eugene  M.  Zuckert  and  other  USAF  officials  to  consider  using  the
high-flying  B-52's  for  pattern  bombing  in  either  North  or  South  Vietnam  to
avoid  Communist  ground  fire.  The  Air  Staff  and  SAC  recommended  reserving


334 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

B-52's  for  use  against  major  targets  in  the  North.  The  idea  of  B-52  pattern  bomb-
ing was  not  again  seriously  considered  until  April.  On  the  same  date  (March  2)
Secretary  McNamara  asked  that  the  Joint  Staff  prepare  as  soon  as  possible  an
analysis  of  US  aircraft  losses  to  hostile  action  in  Southeast  Asia.  An  expedited
review  and  analysis  of  this  subject  was  promptly  undertaken,  covering  the  experi-
ence in  YANKEE  TEAM  (Reconnaissance),  BARREL  ROLL  (Armed  Recon-
naissance Interdiction),  BLUE  TREE  (Photo  Reconnaissance),  PIERCE  AR-
ROW (Tonkin  Gulf  Reprisal),  FLAMING  DART  and  ROLLING  THUNDER
operations.  The  results  were  reported  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  March  10,
and,  aside  from  presenting  some  early  and  not  too  revealing  statistical  findings,
the  report  urged  that  consideration  be  given  to  several  measures  that,  the  Chair-
man felt,  might  help  minimize  loss  rates:

( 1 )  Authorize  use  of  NAPALM.

(2)  Provide  "optimum"  strike  ordnance  not  yet  available  in  the  theater.

(3)  Allow  the  operational  commander  flexibility  in  strike  timing  and
selection  of  alternate  targets  so  as  to  minimize  weather  degradations  and
operational  interferences  at  target.

(4)  Conduct  random  and  frequent  weather  reconnaissance  and  medium
and  low-level  photo  reconnaissance,  over  prospective  strike  areas  of  North
Vietnam  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  signaUng  our  intentions.

(5)  Improve  security  and  cover  and  deception  measures  at  US  VNAF
air  bases.

These  and  other  measures  were  explored  in  greater  depth  in  a  USAF  Study
Team  effort  launched  on  March  15  and  reported  on  in  late  May.  Many  of  the
recommendations  to  lift  restrictions  and  improve  air  strike  technology  were  being
acted  upon  during  this  period  and  in  subsequent  days  and  weeks.  For  example,
the  restrictions  on  the  use  of  FARMGATE  and  PACOM  aircraft  were  lifted,  per-
mitting their  use  in  combat  operations  in  South  Vietnam  with  USAF  markings
and  without  VNAF  personnel  aboard,  effective  9  March;  and  use  of  napalm
against  North  Vietnamese  targets  was  approved  by  the  President  on  the  same
date.

B. TAYLOR'S  CONCERN  OVER  FEEBLE,  IRRESOLUTE  ACTION

Sharp  annoyance  over  what  seemed  to  him  an  unnecessarily  timid  and  am-
bivalent US  stance  on  air  strikes  was  expressed  by  Ambassador  Taylor.  The
long  delays  between  strikes,  the  marginal  weight  of  the  attacks,  and  the  great
ado  about  behind-the-scenes  diplomatic  feelers,  led  Taylor  to  complain:

I  am  concerned  from  standpoint  our  overall  posture  vis-a-vis  Hanoi  and
communist  bloc  that  current  feverish  diplomatic  activities  particularly  by
French  and  British  tends  to  undercut  our  ability  to  convey  a  meaningful  sig-
nal to  Hanoi  of  USG  determination  to  stick  it  out  here  and  progressively
turn  the  screws  on  DRV.  Seaborn's  estimate  of  mood  of  confidence  charac-
terizing DRV  leadership  despite  our  joint  air  strikes  to  date  almost  identical
our  estimate  ...  It  appears  to  me  evident  that  to  date  DRV  eaders  be-
lieve air  strikes  at  present  levels  on  their  territory  are  meaningless  and  that
we  are  more  susceptible  to  international  pressure  for  negotiations  than  are
they.  Their  estimate  may  be  based  in  part  on  activities  of  "our  friends"
to  which  we  seem  to  be  active  party.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  335

In  my  view  current  developments  strongly  suggest  that  we  follow  simul-
taneously two  courses  of  action:  (1)  attempt  to  apply  brakes  to  British  and
others  in  their  headlong  dash  to  conference  table  and  leave  no  doubt  in  their
minds  that  we  do  not  intend  to  go  to  conference  table  until  there  is  clear
evidence  Hanoi  (and  Peking)  prepared  to  leave  neighbors  alone;  and  (2)
step  up  tempo  and  intensity  of  our  air  strikes  in  southern  part  of  DRV  in
order  convince  Hanoi  [words  missing]  face  prospect  of  progressively  severe
punishment.  I  fear  that  to  date  ROLLING  THUNDER  in  their  eyes  has
been  merely  a  few  isolated  thunder  claps.

The  same  general  considerations  apply  re  our  urging  British  to  undertake
further  early  soundings  re  Article  19  Laos  Accords  as  Ambassador  Martin
so  cogently  states  in  his  EXDIS  1278  to  Dept.  [in  which  Martin  expresses
concern  over  the  risks  of  moving  to  the  conference  table  too  soon].  Many
of  the  problems  which  worry  him  are  also  applicable  to  Vietnamese  here
and  I  share  his  reasoning  and  concern.

It  seems  to  me  that  we  may  be  in  for  a  tough  period  ahead  but  I  would
hope  we  will  continue  to  do  whatever  is  required  and  that  we  try  to  keep
fundamental  objectives  vis-a-vis  Hanoi  clear  and  simple.

In  a  separate  cable  of  the  same  date,  Taylor,  with  General  Westmoreland's
explicit  concurrence,  offered  his  specific  recommendations  for  increasing  the
tempo  and  intensity  of  the  air  strikes.  In  effect,  he  called  for  a  more  dynamic
schedule  of  strikes,  a  several  week  program  relentlessly  marching  North  to  break
the  will  of  the  DRV:

We  have  a  sense  of  urgent  need  for  an  agreed  program  for  the  measured
and  limited  air  action  against  njilitary  targets  in  DRV  [previously]  an-
nounced. The  rate  of  once  or  twice  a  week  for  attacks  involving  two  or
three  targets  on  each  day  appears  to  us  reasonable  as  to  frequency,  and
leaves  open  the  possibility  of  increasing  the  effect  on  Hanoi  by  adding  to
the  weight  of  the  strikes  (in  types  of  ordnance  and  sorties  per  target)  and
by  moving  northward  up  the  target  system.  What  seems  to  be  lacking  is  an
agreed  program  covering  several  weeks  which  will  combine  the  factors,
frequency,  weight  and  location  of  attack  into  a  rational  pattern  which  will
convince  the  leaders  in  Hanoi  that  we  are  on  a  dynamic  schedule  which
will  not  remain  static  in  a  narrow  zone  far  removed  from  them  and  the
sources  of  their  power  but  which  is  a  moving  growing  threat  which  cannot
be  ignored.

I  have  seen  ^the  JCS  proposed  eight-week  program  which  has  much  to
recommend  it  but,  I  believe,  remains  too  long  South  of  the  19th  parallel.
[It  is]  Seaborn's  opinion  that  Hanoi  has  the  impression  that  our  air  strikes
are  a  limited  attempt  to  improve  our  bargaining  position  and  hence  are  no
great  cause  for  immediate  concern.  Our  objective  should  be  to  induce  in
DRV  leadership  an  attitude  favorable  to  US  objectives  in  as  short  a  time
as  possible  in  order  to  avoid  a  build-up  of  international  pressures  to  negotiate.
But  our  efforts  to  date  are  falling  far  short  of  anticipated  necessary  impact.
In  formulating  a  more  effective  program  of  future  attacks,  I  would  be  in-
clined to  keep  the  rate  as  indicated,  maintain  the  weight  on  target  as  for
recent  strikes,  but  begin  at  once  a  progression  of  US  strikes  North  of  19th
parallel  in  a  slow  but  steadily  ascending  movement.  The  targets  in  the  area
South  thereof  could  be  reserved  largely  for  VNAF  and  FARMGATE.  It  is
true  that  the  MIG  threat  will  grow  as  we  move  North  but  we  have  the


336 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

means  to  take  care  of  it.  If  we  tarry  too  long  in  the  South,  we  will  give  Hanoi
a  weak  and  misleading  signal  which  will  work  against  our  ultimate  purpose.
General  Westmoreland  concurs.

Taylor's  dissatisfaction  with  the  tempo  of  the  air  campaign  was  bv  no  means
mitigated  bv  the  decision  to  launch  the  next  scheduled  attack.  ROLLING
THUNDER  \T  on  March  13,  as  another  isolated,  stage-managed  joint  US  GVN
operation.  Notification  of  the  decision  to  strike  came  to  him  in  the  following
FLASH  message:

Decision  has  been  taken  here  to  execute  ROLLING  THUNDER  VI  during
daylight  hours  Saturdav  13  March  Saigon  time.  If  weather  precludes  effec-
tive strike  Phu  Qui  ammo  depot  (Target  40)  on  this  date,  US  portion  of
ROLLING  THUNDER  VI  will  be  postponed  until  14  March  Saigon  time
or  earliest  date  weather  will  permit  effective  US  strike  of  Target  40.  How-
ever if  US  strike  weathered  out,  VNAF  strike  (with  US  support)  on  its  own
primar}'  or  alternate  targets  is  still  authorized  to  go.  Request  you  solicit
Quat's  agreement  this  arrangement.

If  joint  US  GVN  strike  goes  .  .  .  would  expect  GVN  US  press  an-
nouncement be  made  in  Saigon.  NMCC  has  furnished  time  of  launch  in  past
and  this  has  proven  eminently  satisfactory.  Will  continue  this  arrangement.

If  US  strike  weathered  out  and  GVN  strike  goes,  recommend  that  GVN
make  brief  unilateral  press  statement  which  would  not  detract  from  already
agreed  US  GVN  statement,  which  we  would  probablv  wish  use  at  time  of
US  strike  against  Target  40.  GVN  unilateral  press  announcement  should  in-
dicate strike  made  by  GVN  aircraft  supported  by  US  aircraft.  Would  hope
that  announcement,  although  brief,  could  also  mention  target,  identifying  it
as  militarv  installation  associated  with  infiltration.

Request  reply  by  flash  cable.

Washington's  anticipation  that  the  strike  might  be  weathered  out  proved  cor-
rect, and  Taylor's  pique  at  the  further  delay  is  reflected  in  his  reply:

As  reported  through  military  channels.  VTS^AF  is  unable  to  fly  today.
Hence,  there  will  be  no  ROLLING  THUNDER  Mission  and  no  present
need  to  see  Quat.  I  am  assured  that  \'NAF  will  be  readv  to  go  tomorrow,
14  March.

With  regard  to  the  delays  of  ROLLING  THUNDER  VI,  I  have  the  im-
pression that  we  may  be  attaching  too  much  importance  to  striking  target
40  because  of  its  intrinsic  military  value  as  a  target.  If  we  support  the
thesis  (as  I  do)  that  the  really  important  target  is  the  will  of  the  leaders  in
Hanoi,  virtually  any  target  North  of  the  19th  parallel  will  convey  the
necessarv  message  at  this  juncture  as  well  as  target  40.  Meanwhile,  through
repeated  delays  we  are  failing  to  give  the  mounting  crescendo  to  ROLLING
THUNDER  which  is  necessary  to  get  the  desired  results.

When  the  strike  finallv  came  off,  however,  on  March  14  and  15,  it  was  the
most  forceful  attack  on  the  North  launched  to  date.  24  VNAF  Al-H's  supported
by  US  flak,  CAP  and  pathfinder  aircraft,  struck  weapon  installations,  depots,  and
barracks  on  Tiger  Island,  20  miles  off  the  North  Vietnamese  coast,  and  more
than  100  US  aircraft  (two-thirds  Nav\',  one-third  USAF)  hit  the  ammunition
depot  near  Phu  Qui,  only  100  miles  southwest  of  Hanoi.  Some  of  the  earlier
hesitancy  about  bombing  the  North  was  beginning  to  wear  off.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  337

C.  PRESIDENT'S  CONCERN  OVER  INSUFFICIENT  PRESSURE  IN
SOUTH  VIETNAM

While  attention  was  being  increasingy  focused  on  pressures  against  the  North,
disturbing  assessments  continued  to  come  to  the  President's  attention  concerning
developments  in  the  South.  One  such  estimate  was  Westmoreland's  analysis,  dated
February  25,  of  the  military  situation  in  the  four  corps  area.  It  was  essentially
in  agreement  with  a  grave  CIA  appraisal  issued  the  same  day.  Observing  that
the  pacification  effort  had  virtually  halted,  Westmoreland  foresaw  in  six  months  a
Saigon  government  holding  only  islands  of  strength  around  provincial  and  dis-
trict capitals  that  were  clogged  with  refugees  and  beset  with  "end  the  war"  groups
asking  for  a  negotiated  settlement.  The  current  trend  presaged  a  Viet  Cong  take-
over in  12  months,  althought  major  towns  and  bases,  with  U.S.  help,  could  hold
out  for  years.  To  "buy  time,"  permit  pressure  on  North  Vietnam  to  take  effect,
and  reverse  the  decline,  he  proposed  adding  three  Army  helicopter  companies,
flying  more  close  support  and  reconnaissance  missions,  opening  a  "land  line"
from  Pleiku  in  the  highlands  to  the  coast,  and  changing  U.S.  policy  on  the  use  of
combat  troops.

There  was  now  real  concern  at  the  highest  Administration  level  that  the  Viet-
namese military  effort  might  collapse  in  the  South  before  pressures  on  the  North
could  have  any  significant  impact.  On  March  2,  therefore,  the  President  decided
to  dispatch  Army  Chief  of  Staff  General  Harold  K.  Johnson  to  Saigon  with  a
high-ranking  team.  In  an  exclusive  message  for  Ambassador  Taylor,  Secretary
McNamara  described  General  Johnson's  mission  as  follows:

After  meeting  with  the  President  this  morning,  we  believe  it  wise  for
General  Johnson  to  go  to  Saigon  to  meet  with  you  and  General  Westmore-
land .  .  .  Purpose  of  trip  is  to  examine  with  you  and  General  Westmore-
land what  more  can  be  done  within  South  Vietnam.  He  will  bring  with
him  a  list  of  additional  actions  which  has  been  developed  for  your  con-
sideration. Would  appreciate  your  developing  a  similar  list  for  discussion
with  him.  In  developing  list,  you  may,  of  course,  assume  no  limitation
on  funds,  equipment  or  personnel.  We  will  be  prepared  to  act  immediately
and  favorably  on  any  recommendations  you  and  General  Johnson  may
make.  The  President  is  continuing  to  support  such  action  against  North
as  is  now  in  progress  but  does  not  consider  such  actions  a  substitute  for
additional  action  within  South  Vietnam.  The  President  wants  us  to  examine
all  possible  additional  actions — political,  military,  and  economic — to  see
what  more  can  be  done  in  South  Vietnam  .  .  .

General  Johnson  returned  from  his  survey  mission  on  March  14  with  a  21-
point  program  which  he  submitted  to  the  JCS  and  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and
which  was  reviewed  by  the  President  on  March  15.  General  Johnson's  recom-
mendations included  but  went  beyond  Westmoreland's  prescriptions.  With  re-
spect to  the  use  of  air  power  in  South  Vietnam,  he  proposed  more  helicopters
and  0-1  aircraft,  possibly  more  USAF  fighter-bombers  (after  further  MACV
evaluation),  better  targeting,  and  accelerated  airfield  expansion.  These  proposals
were  in  keeping  with  recommendations  that  had  been  made  previously  by
COMUSMACV,  and  especially  insistently  by  CINCPAC,  to  expand  the  use  of
US  airpower  in  SVN.  For  example,  on  February  26,  in  an  exclusive  message
to  General  Wheeler,  Admiral  Sharp  had  written:  ".  .  .  the  single  most  im-
portant thing  we  can  do  to  improve  the  security  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is
to  make  full  use  of  our  airpower.


338 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

For  Laos,  General  Johnson  favored  reorienting  BARREL  ROLL  operations
to  allow  air  strikes  on  infiltration  routes  in  the  Lao  Panhandle  to  be  conducted
as  a  separate  program  from  those  directed  against  the  Pathet  Lao  and  North
Vietnamese  units.  This  program  was  subsequently  authorized  under  the  nick-
name STEEL  TIGER  (see  below,  p.  341).

With  respect  to  air  action  against  the  North,  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff  made
two  recommendations  (designated  as  points  5  and  6  in  his  21 -point  program):

5.  Increase  the  scope  and  tempo  of  US  air  strikes  against  the  DRV.
This  action  could  tend  to  broaden  and  escalate  the  war.  However,  it  could
accomplish  the  US  objective  of  causing  the  DRV  to  cease  its  support  and
direction  of  the  Viet  Cong  aggression.  To  date,  the  tempo  of  punitive  air
strikes  has  been  inadequate  to  convey  a  clear  sense  of  US  purpose  to  the
DRV.

6.  Remove  self-imposed  restrictions  on  the  conduct  of  air  strikes  against
North  Vietnam  which  have  severely  reduced  their  effectiveness  and  made
it  impossible  to  approach  the  goal  of  4  missions  per  week.  Restrictions
which  should  be  lifted  are:

a.  Requirement  that  a  US  strike  be  conducted  concurrently  with  a
VNAF  strike.

b.  Requirement  that  US  aircraft  strike  the  primary  target  only.

c.  Ban  on  use  of  classified  munitions.

d.  Narrow  geographical  limitations  imposed  on  target  selection.

e.  Requirement  to  obtain  specific  approval  from  Washington  before
striking  alternate  targets  when  required  by  adverse  weather  conditions  or
other  local  conditions.

After  reviewing  these  recommendations,  the  President  approved  most  of
General  Johnson's  program.  In  regard  to  the  air  strikes  against  the  North,  the
President  authorized  important  new  actions,  as  subsequently  described  by  the
JCS:

Action  (paras  5  &  6):  The  scope  and  tempo  of  air  strikes  against  NVN
is  being  increased  in  current  plans.  Depots,  LOCs,  and  air  defense  ground
environment  facilities  will  be  stressed  in  operations  in  the  near  future.  The
requirement  for  concurrent  US-VNAF  strikes  has  been  removed.  Only
prime  targets  will  be  designated  as  primary  or  alternates  for  US  aircraft,
thus  lifting  restriction  in  6b  above.  Greater  timing  flexibility  will  be  pro-
vided for  weather  and  other  delays.  Tactical  reconnaissance  has  been  au-
thorized at  medium  level  for  targets  south  of  the  20th  parallel  to  support
the  expanded  program.  Specific  recommendations  on  para  6c,  quoted  above,
are  requested.  Restrictions  in  6d  and  e,  quoted  above,  have  been  lifted  in
ROLLING  THUNDER  SEVEN  and  will  so  remain  in  subsequent  pro-
grams.

The  Presidential  decision  marked  a  major  turning  point  in  the  ROLLING
THUNDER  operation.  Air  action  against  the  North  was  being  transformed
from  a  sporadic,  halting  effort  into  a  regular  and  determined  program.

D. ROLLING  THUNDER  Vll— ENTER  "REGULARITY"
AND  "DETERMINATION"

The  March  15  Presidential  guidelines  were  clearly  reflected  in  the  instructions
that  Washington  sent  Saigon  describing  the  new  character  of  ROLLING  THUN-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  339

DER  to  begin  with  RT  VII  [words  illegible]  the  instructions  contain  at  least
six  novel  ideas:

(1)  The  strikes  were  to  be  packaged  in  a  week's  program  at  a  time;

(2)  precise  timing  of  the  strikes  were  to  be  left  to  field  commanders;

(3)  the  requirement  for  US-VNAF  simultaneity  was  to  be  dropped;

(4)  the  strikes  were  no  longer  to  be  specifically  related  to  VC  atrocities;

(5)  publicity  on  the  strikes  was  to  be  progressively  reduced;  and

(6)  the  impression  henceforth  to  be  given  was  one  of  regularity  and
determination.

Here  is  the  full  text  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  message  to  Ambassador  Taylor,
describing  the  new  program :

Having  in  mind  considerations  raised  your  reftel  [Taylor's  Saigon  2889
of  March  8th,]  and  recommendations  of  General  Johnson  following  his
return,  longer  range  program  of  action  against  North  Viet  Nam  has  been
given  priority  consideration  here  and  program  for  first  week  for  ROLLING
THUNDER  VII,  has  been  decided,  for  execution  this  week.  Details  this
program  which  includes  one  US  and  one  VNAF  strike  together  with  one
US  and  two  VNAF  route  armed  recce  is  subject  of  instructions  being  sent
through  military  channels.  You  will  note  these  instructions  leave  to  military
commands  in  field  decisions  as  to  specific  timing  within  period  covered.
Execution  of  first  action  under  ROLLING  THUNDER  VII  may  take  place
anytime  from  daylight  March  19  Saigon  time.  Although  program  contains
full  measure  VNAF  participation,  requirement  that  US  and  VNAF  oper-
ations proceed  simultaneously  is  dropped.

You  are  requested  to  see  Pri  Min  ASAP  in  order  to  outline  to  him  this
further  program  we  have  in  mind  and  to  solicit  GVN  participation  as
specified  therein.  You  should  convey  to  PriMin  that  proposed  program,
on  which  you  will  be  providing,  him  with  further  information  in  successive
weeks,  is  designed  to  maintain  pressure  on  Hanoi  and  persuade  North
Vietnamese  regime  that  costs  of  continuing  their  aggression  becoming  un-
acceptably  high.  At  same  time  Quat  should  understand  we  continue  seek
no  enlargement  of  struggle  and  have  carefully  selected  targets  with  view
to  avoiding  undesirable  provocation.  Further  objective  is  to  continue
reassure  Government  and  people  [words  missing]  and  will  continue  fight
by  their  side  and  we  expect  they  will  also  be  making  maximum  efforts  in
South  Viet  Nam  where  a  real  setback  to  Viet  Cong  would  do  more  than
perhaps  anything  else  to  persuade  Hanoi  stop  its  aggression.

With  initiation  ROLLING  THUNDER  VII  we  believe  publicity  given
US  and  VNAF  strikes  should  be  progressively  reduced,  although  in  its
place  there  should  be  picture  of  GVN  and  US  pursuing  with  regularity  and
determination  program  against  the  North  to  enable  South  restore  its  inde-
pendence and  integrity  and  defend  itself  from  aggression  from  North.
Larger  strikes  (ROLLING  THUNDER  VII  A  and  VII  B)  be  announced  as
before  but  suggest  in  future  that  such  announcements  not  contain  refer-
ences to  Viet  Cong  atrocities,  etc.  Instead,  these  matters,  which  should  get
full  attention,  might  be  subject  of  separate  and  perhaps  regular  press  brief-
ings by  GVN  with  full  US  support.

As  regards  route  recce,  we  question  whether  we  should  take  initiative  to
announce  these  missions  since  this  could  contribute  to  impression  of  sub-


340 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

stantial  increase  in  activity.  At  same  time  we  presume  reporters  will  get
wind  of  these  missions,  Hanoi  will  report  them  and  VNAF  may  not  wish
maintain  silence.  Therefore  seems  difficult  avoid  replying  to  inevitable  press
questions.  Request  PIO  meeting  opening  tomorrow  Honolulu  to  look  into
this  one  and  give  us  and  Saigon  its  recommendations;  possibility  it  should
consider  passing  off  all  route  recce  missions  in  low  key  replies  to  queries
as  "routine  recce."

ROLLING  THUNDER  had  thus  graduated  to  the  status  of  a  regular  and
continuing  program.  What  now  remained  to  be  more  carefully  re-examined —
though  hardly  resolved — was  the  problem  of  target  emphasis.

VIIL TARGET  RATIONALE  SHIFTS  TOWARD  INTERDICTION

Late  February  and  early  March,  1965  saw  a  significant  refocusing  of  target
emphasis.  Up  to  that  time — in  the  initial  U.S.  reprisal  strikes  and  the  first
ROLLING  THUNDER  actions — target  selection  had  been  completely  dominated
by  political  and  psychological  considerations.  Paramount  in  the  Administration's
target  choices  were  such  complex  and  often  conflicting  objectives  as  boosting  the
GVN's  morale,  evidencing  the  firmness  of  U.S.  resolve,  demonstrating  the  poten-
tial for  inflicting  pain  upon  the  DRV,  providing  a  legal  rationale  for  our  actions,
and  so  forth.  Relatively  little  weight  was  given  to  the  purely  physical  or  more
directly  military  and  economic  implications  of  whatever  target  destruction  might
be  achieved.

With  the  gradual  acceptance,  beginning  in  March,  of  the  need  for  a  militarily
more  significant,  sustained  bombing  program,  serious  attention  began  to  be  paid
to  the  development  of  a  target  system  or  systems  that  would  have  a  more  tangible
and  coherent  military  rationale.  The  first  and  most  obvious  candidate  for  such
a  target  concept  was  that  of  interdicting  the  flow  of  men  and  supplies  into  South
Vietnam  by  striking  the  lines  of  communication  (LOC's)  of  the  DRV.  Since
North  Vietnamese  "aggression"  was  the  principal  legal  justification  for  U.S.
bombing  raids  upon  the  DRV,  attacking  and  impeding  the  visible  manifestations
of  this  aggression — the  infiltration — also  seemed  logical  and  attractive  from  this
international  legality  point  of  view.

The  Secretary  of  Defense's  attention  was  called  to  this  target  concept  as  early
as  13  February,  when  the  Joint  Chiefs  briefed  McNamara  in  the  Chairman's
office  on  an  analysis  of  the  southern  portion  of  the  North  Vietnamese  railway
system.  It  was  pointed  out  in  the  briefing  that  South  of  the  20th  parallel  there
exists  about  115  miles  of  operable  rail  systems  and  that  the  vulnerable  points  on
this  southern  portion  of  the  system  are  five  bridges  of  300  feet  or  greater  length
and  the  railway  classification  yards  at  Vinh.  It  was  argued  that  the  bridges  were
very  lightly  defended  and  that  only  the  rail  yards  at  Vinh  would  pose  any  serious
anti-aircraft  defense  problem.  The  CJCS  felt  that:

There  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  six  targets  mentioned  comprise  an  attrac-
tive, vulnerable  and  remunerative  target  system  which  would  hurt  the
North  Vietnamese  psychologically,  economically  and  militarily.  As  regards
the  latter,  the  destruction  of  the  southern  bridge  system  would  hamper  and
delay  the  movement  of  DRV/CHICOM  ground  forces  to  the  south  and,
likewise,  would  place  a  stricture  on  the  quantities  of  materiel  and  personnel
which  can  be  infiltrated  through  Laos  and  South  Vietnam.  A  minimum  of
201  strike  sorties  would  be  required  to  attack  with  a  high  degree  of  assurance


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  341

the  six  targets  simultaneously  which  would  be  militarily  the  most  desirable
timing  of  attack.

In  a  follow-up  memorandum,  the  CJCS  forwarded  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense
a  DIA  analysis  of  VC  attacks  on  the  South  Vietnamese  railway  system  during
1963  and  1964,  and  indicated  his  concurrence  with  Ambassador  Taylor  that  these
attacks  justified  US/GVN  strikes  against  the  rail  system  in  North  Vietnam.  The
CJCS  then  added  the  following  recommendation :

As  discussed  with  you  on  13  February,  while  I  strongly  recommend  that
we  attack  the  North  Vietnamese  rail  system  as  soon  as  possible,  I  would
recommend  against  first  striking  the  southern  elements  thereof.  Should  we
do  so  I  would  anticipate  that  the  DRV  would  take  both  passive  and  active
defense  measures  to  protect  rolling  stock  and  bridges  and,  probably,  would
start  work  on  train  ferries  or  truck  by-passes  in  order  to  ameliorate  the
effects  of  our  strike.  As  pointed  out  earlier  I  would  advocate  militarily  that
the  entire  southern  segment  of  the  rail  system  be  struck  simultaneously.
Should  this  be  politically  objectionable,  I  would  recommend  that  two  north-
ern targets — Dong  Phuong  rail/highway  bridge  and  Thanh  Hoa  bridge
(prestige  bridge) — be  the  first  targets  attacked  in  order  to  trap  the  maximum
quantity  of  rolling  stock  south  of  the  20th  parallel  where  we  could  destroy
it  at  least.

The  Secretary  of  Defense  responded  to  this  recommendation  by  inviting  the
JCS  to  develop  a  detailed  plan  for  an  integrated  attack  on  the  DRV  rail  system
south  of  the  20th  parallel,  with  the  option  of  attacking  the  targets  individually
on  an  incremental  basis  rather  than,  all  at  once.  This  request  set  in  motion  a
planning  effort  by  the  Joint  Staff  and  by  U.S.  military  commands  in  the  Pacific
area,  and  gave  rise  to  spirited  discussions  and  recommendations  that  culminated
at  the  end  of  March  in  the  submission  of  the  JCS  12-week  bombing  program,
essentially  built  around  the  LOC  interdiction  concept.

General  Westmoreland,  with  Ambassador  Taylor's  concurrence,  strongly  en-
dorsed the  interdiction  rationale  in  mid-March.  In  a  LIMDIS  cable  to  Admiral
Sharp  and  General  Wheeler,  he  called  attention  to  the  mounting  VC  attacks  on
transportation  targets  in  South  Vietnam,  and  argued  that:

The  Viet  Cong's  intensive  efforts  against  lines  of  communications  would
make  strikes  against  DRV  LOC's  highly  appropriate  at  this  time.  In  view
heavy  traffic -recently  reported  moving  south,  such  strikes  would  also  be
military  desirable.  Moreover,  these  attacks  by  interrupting  the  flow  of  con-
sumer goods  to  southern  DRV  would  carry  to  the  NVN  man  in  the  street,
with  minimum  loss  of  civilian  life,  the  message  of  U.S.  determination.
Accordingly,  early  initiation  of  ROLLING  THUNDER  strikes  and  armed
reconnaissance  is  recommended  against  DRV  [words  missing]

Counter-infiltration  operations  also  received  a  boost  from  the  recommendation
in  General  Johnson's  report  to  the  effect  that  BARREL  ROLL  be  re-oriented  to
increase  its  military  effectiveness  against  Lao  Panhandle  infiltation  routes  into
South  Vietnam.  Acting  upon  that  recommendation  and  upon  a  Presidential
directive  to  make  a  maximum  effort  to  shut  off  infiltration  into  SVN,  a  new
program,  nicknamed  STEEL  TIGER,  was  developed,  for  the  conduct  of  greatly


342 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

intensified  air  operations  against  routes  and  targets  in  Laos  associated  with  in-
filtration.

At  about  the  same  time,  a  Pacific  Command  study  group  developed  a  more
comprehensive  concept  of  air  operations  "to  attrit,  harass,  and  interdict  the
DRV  south  of  20  degrees."  In  a  lengthy  cable  to  the  Joint  Chiefs  excerpted  be-
low, Admiral  Sharp  described  the  concept  as  follows:

The  program  calls  for  an  integrated  strike,  armed  recce  and  recce  pro-
gram designed  to  cut,  in  depth,  the  NVN  logistic  network  south  of  20  de-
grees, and  to  continually  attrit  and  harass  by-pass  and  repair  reconstitution
efforts.

This  program  provides  for  primary  bridge/ferry  cuts  and  highway  block-
age/take out  cuts  on  major  long-haul  road  and  rail  routes.  It  additionally
cuts  the  full  road  network  including  all  feeder  and  by-pass  routes  which
develop  into  4  main  entry /funnels  to  Laos  and  SVN.  All  targets  selected
are  extremely  difficult  or  impossible  to  by-pass.  The  program  also  provides
for  concurrent  disruption  of  the  sea-carry  to  SVN  with  strikes  against  sus-
pect coastal  staging  points  supporting  end-running  shipping  into  the  area,
as  well  as  SVN.

LOC  network  cutting  in  this  depth  will  degrade  tonnage  arrivals  at  the
main  "funnels"  and  will  develop  a  broad  series  of  new  targets  such  as
backed-up  convoys,  off-loaded  materiel  dumps,  and  personnel  staging  areas
at  one  or  both  sides  of  cuts.  Coupling  these  strikes  with  seeding  and  re-
seeding  missions  to  hamper  repairs,  wide  ranging  armed  recce  missions
against  "developed"  targets,  and  coastal  harass  and  attrit  missions  against
coastal  staging  facilities,  may  force  major  DRV  log  flow  to  sea-carry  and
into  surveillance  and  attack  by  our  SVN  coastal  sanitization  forces  .  .  .

In  summary:  recommend  concerted  attacks  against  LOC  targets  recom-
mended herein  be  initiated  concurrently  with  interdiction  targets  pro-
grammed for  ROLLING  THUNDER  9-13.  Preferentially,  recommend  a
compressed  "LOC  cut  program"  similar  to  my  proposal  for  a  "Radar  Bust-
ing Day."  This  should  be  followed  by  completion  of  attacks  on  other  than
LOC  targets  in  ROLLING  THUNDER  10-13,  Phase  II  armed  recce  would
be  conducted  concurrently  with  these  actions  and  would  be  continued  in-
definitely to  make  DRV  support  to  the  VC  in  SVN  and  PL/VM  in  Laos
as  difficult  and  costly  as  possible.

As  these  recommendations  reached  the  ICS,  the  Joint  Chiefs  were  intensely
pre-occupied  with  an  interservice  division  over  the  issue  of  the  nature  and  extent
of  proposed  large-scale  U.S.  troop  deployments  to  South  Vietnam,  requiring
adjudication  among  at  least  10  separate  proposals,  and  among  widely  differing
views  of  the  several  Service  Chiefs.  There  were  also  substantial  differences  over
the  future  character  of  the  bombing  program.  On  this  latter  issue.  Air  Force
Chief  of  Staff  General  McConnell  took  a  maverick  position,  opting  for  a  28-day
air  program  against  North  Vietnam  to  destroy  all  targets  on  the  94-target  list.
He  proposed  beginning  the  air  strikes  in  the  southern  part  of  North  Vietnam
and  continuing  at  two-  to  six-day  intervals  until  Hanoi  itself  was  attacked.  "While
I  support  appropriate  deployment  of  ground  forces  in  South  Vietnam,"  Mc-
Connell wrote,  "it  must  be  done  in  concert  with  [an]  overall  plan  to  eliminate
the  source  of  [the]  insurgency."  IVTcConnell  believed  that  his  proposal  was  con-
sistent with  previous  ICS  views  on  action  against  the  North  and  would  be  a
strong  deterrent  against  open  Chinese  intervention.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  343

General  McConnell  withdrew  his  28-day  proposal  from  JCS  consideration
when  it  became  apparent  that  the  Joint  Chiefs  were  inclined  to  accept  much  of
the  CINCPAC  recommendation  for  a  "LOC-cut  program"  as  summarized  above,
and  to  incorporate  some  of  McConnell's  concepts  in  a  12-week  air  strike  program
that  the  Joint  Staff  was  preparing  in  response  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense's  re-
quest and  in  accordance  with  his  guidance.  The  JCS  12-week  program  was
briefed  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  conceptually  on  March  22  and  submitted  to
him  formally  on  March  27  under  cover  of  a  JCS  memorandum  of  that  date.

The  program  is  described  in  a  detailed  Annex  to  the  memorandum  as  follows:

1.  Concept.  The  concept,  simply  stated,  is  to  conduct  an  air  strike  pro-
gram during  the  remaining  10  weeks  of  a  12-week  program  which  increases
in  intensity  and  severity  of  damage  over  the  period.  The  program  can  be
considered  in  four  phases.

a.  The  initial  phase  consists  of  a  three-week  interdiction  campaign
against  the  vulnerable  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  (DRV)  LOCs
south  of  the  20th  parallel.  The  concept  of  this  campaign  is  to  conduct
strikes  against  a  number  of  interrelated  but  separated  choke  points  which
will  disrupt  the  flow  of  military  supplies  and  equipment  and  tax  the  DRV
capability  to  restore  these  facilities.  Essential  to  the  success  of  this  phase
is  the  initial  attacks  on  targets  No.  14  and  18.  The  dropping  of  at  least
one  span  in  either  and  preferably  both  of  these  bridges  will  sever  the  main
north-south  railroad  and  highway  routes  in  sufficient  depth  for  an  effective
follow-on  program.  This  initial  action  would  be  accompanied  by  an  intense
armed  reconnaissance  mission  to  destroy  the  isolated  transport  equipment.
Subsequent  strikes  against  choke  points  throughout  the  isolated  area  are
designed  to  make  the  program  effective  and  to  complicate  the  DRV  re-
covery program.  Day  and  night  armed  reconnaissance  would  be  conducted
at  random  intervals  to  harass  these  recovery  efforts  and  to  sustain  the  inter-
diction, including  armed  reconnaissance  against  junk  traffic  over  sea  LOCs.
This  initial  program  should  bring  home  to  the  population  the  effects  of  air
strikes  since  consumer  good  yvill  be  competing  with  military  supplies  for
the  limited  transport.  An  effective  interdiction  in  this  area  will  also  impede
the  DRV  capability  to  mass  sizeable  military  forces  and  to  deploy  air  defense
resources.  The  remaining  few  installation  targets  in  this  area  would  be  left
for  later  strikes  by  VNAF.  Also,  the  interdiction  in  this  area  would  be
sustained  by  VNAF  as  US  strikes  moved  to  the  north.

b.  The  second  phase,  the  launching  of  the  interdiction  campaign  north
of  the  20th  parallel,  introduces  a  consideration  which  was  not  a  major
factor  in  the  campaign  in  the  southern  DRV;  i.e.,  the  possibility  of  MIG
intervention  as  strikes  are  made  against  targets  progressively  closer  to  the
Hanoi-Haiphong  area.  In  order  to  reduce  this  possibility  to  a  minimum,  the
first  week  of  air  operations  north  of  the  20th  parallel  includes  strikes  against
the  radar  nel  in  the  delta  area  to  blind  or  minimize  DRV  early  warning  and
intercept  capability.  Following  these  preparatory  attacks,  operations  against
the  LOCs  north  of  the  20th  parallel  are  scheduled  with  the  primary  objective
of  isolating  the  DRV  from  external  overland  sources;  i.e.,  rail  and  highway
supply  routes  from  Communist  China.  Subsequent  to  cutting  these  primary
LOCs,  the  initial  phase  of  the  interdiction  campaign  would  be  completed
by  striking  LOC  targets  in  depth  throughout  the  area  of  the  DRV  north
of  the  20th  parallel.

c.  Having  completed  the  primary  interdiction  program  in  the  delta


344 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

area,  a  substantially  lower  effort  should  maintain  its  effectiveness.  With  his
overland  LOC  cut,  blocked,  and  harassed,  the  enemy  can  be  expected  to
turn  more  and  more  to  his  port  facilities  and  sea  LOC.  The  ninth  week
air  strikes  will  include  attacks  against  these  port  facilities  and  the  mining
of  seaward  approaches  to  block  the  enemy  from  relieving  his  resupply
problems  over  the  sea  LOC.  Strikes  will  be  initiated  during  the  tenth  week
against  ammunition  and  supply  dumps  to  destroy  on-hand  stores  of  supplies
and  equipment  to  further  aggravate  his  logistic  problems.

d.  In  the  wind-up  phase  of  the  12-week  program  (during  the  eleventh
and  twelfth  week),  strikes  against  on-hand  supplies,  equipment,  and  military
facilities  will  be  continued,  attacking  remaining  worth-while  targets  through-
out the  DRV.  As  a  part  of  this  phase,  industrial  targets  outside  of  population
areas  will  be  struck,  leading  up  to  a  situation  where  the  enemy  must  realize
that  the  Hanoi  and  Haiphong  areas  will  be  the  next  logical  targets  in  our
continued  air  campaign.

2.  [The  program  includesl  an  anti-MIG  strike  package;  however,  as
provided  in  the  policy  guidance  furnished  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  this
mission  will  not  be  executed  unless  the  DRV  MIG  aircraft  are  able  to
impair  the  effectiveness  of  the  strike  forces.  Combat  air  patrol  aircraft,  in
sufficient  numbers  to  deter  MIG  attack,  will  accompany  all  missions  and
will  engage  these  DRV  aircraft  as  required  to  protect  the  force.  Strike  forces
and  armed  reconnaissance  aircraft  may  persist  in  their  missions  but  other
reconnaissance  missions  will  break  off  mission  to  avoid  contact  with  MIG
aircraft  if  feasible.  Heavily  populated  areas  will  be  avoided  by  both  strike
and  armed  reconnaissance  missions.

3.  Strike  sorties  for  the  next  ten  weeks  would  total  approximately  3,000
or  roughly  300  per  week.  CINCPAC  has  reported  a  capability  to  conduct
approximately  1,600  strike  sorties  per  week  on  a  sustained  basis.  This  leaves
ample  margin  for  US  air  support  within  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  and
substantial  armed  reconnaissance  to  sustain  the  LOC  interdiction  .  .  .

Interestingly,  the  Joint  Chiefs  did  not  endorse  the  entire  air  strike  program
they  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  They  recommended  that  only  the
first  phase  (third,  fourth,  and  fifth  weeks  of  the  program)  be  approved  for
execution.  They  had  evidently  failed  to  reach  agreement  on  the  later  phases
(weeks  six  through  twelve),  and  indicated  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  that  they
were  still  in  the  process  of  "considering  alternatives  for  a  follow-on  program
of  air  strikes  beginning  with  the  sixth  week.  They  will  advise  you  further  in  this
regard,  taking  account  of  the  developing  situation,  the  current  policy  considera-
tions, and  military  measures  available  to  us."

As  matters  developed,  however,  even  the  three-week  program  endorsed  by
the  JCS  was  not  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  'though  it  strongly  in-
fluenced the  new  interdiction-oriented  focus  of  the  attacks  that  were  to  follow,  as
well  as  the  particular  targets  that  were  selected.  But  neither  the  Secretary  of
Defense  nor  the  President  was  willing  to  approve  a  multi-week  program  in  ad-
vance. They  clearly  preferred  to  retain  continual  personal  control  over  attack
concepts  and  individual  target  selection.  Consequently,  although  the  Joint  Chiefs
strongly  urged  that  "the  field  commander  be  able  to  detect  and  exploit  targets
of  opportunity  .  .  .  ,"  action  in  the  air  war  against  the  DRV  continued  to  be
directed  at  the  highest  level  and  communicated  through  weekly  guidance  pro-
vided by  the  Secretary  of  Defense's  ROLLING  THUNDER  planning  messages.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  345


IX. REASSESSMENT  AS  OF  APRIL  1  AND  THE  NSAM  328
DECISIONS

A. THE  SITUATION  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

A  curious  phenomenon  concerning  the  period  of  late  March  and  early  April
1965  was  the  great  divergence  among  views  that  were  being  expressed  about  the
then  prevailing  state  of  affairs  in  South  Vietnam.  Some  quite  favorable  assess-
ments emanated  from  Saigon.  For  example,  MACV's  Monthly  Evaluations  for
March  and  April  were  most  reassuring:

March,  1965:  Events  in  March  were  encouraging  .  .  .  RVNAF  ground
operations  were  highlighted  by  renewed  operational  effort  .  .  ,  VC  activ-
ity was  considerably  below  the  norm  of  the  preceding  six  months  and  indi-
cations were  that  the  enemy  was  engaged  in  the  re-supply  and  re-positioning
of  units  possibly  in  preparation  for  a  new  offensive  ...  In  summary,
March  has  given  rise  to  some  cautious  optimism.  The  current  government
appears  to  be  taking  control  of  the  situation  and,  if  the  present  state  of
popular  morale  can  be  sustained  and  strengthened,  the  GVN,  with  con-
tinued U.S.  support,  should  be  able  to  counter  future  VC  offensives  suc-
cessfully.

April,  1965:  Friendly  forces  retained  the  initiative  during  April  and  a
review  of  events  reinforces  the  feeling  of  optimism  generated  last  month
...  In  summary,  current  trends  are  highly  encouraging  and  the  GVN  may
have  actually  turned  the  tide  at  long  last.  However,  there  are  some  disquiet-
ing factors  which  indicate  a  need  to  avoid  overconfidence.  A  test  of  these
trends  should  be  forthcoming  in  tjie  next  few  months  if  the  VC  launch  their
expected  counter-offensive  and  the  period  may  well  be  one  of  the  most  im-
portant of  the  war.

Similarly  encouraging  comments  were  contained  in  Ambassador  Taylor's
NODIS  weeklies  to  the  President— e.g.,  in  Saigon  2908,  March  11,  1965:

The  most  encouraging  phenomenon  of  the  past  week  has  been  the  rise
in  Vietnamese  morale  occasioned  by  the  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam
on  March  2,  the  announcement  of  our  intention  to  utilize  U.S.  jet  aircraft
within  South  Vietnam,  and  the  landing  of  the  Marines  at  Danang  which
is  still  going  on.  The  press  and  the  public  have  reacted  most  favorably  to
all  three  of  these  events.

And  in  Saigon  2991,  March  17,  1965:

With  the  growing  pressure  on  North  Vietnam,  the  psychological  at-
mosphere continues  to  be  favorable.  What  is  still  missing  in  this  new  at-
mosphere is  the  image  of  a  Vietnamese  Government  giving  direction  and
purpose  to  its  [words  missing].

On  the  other  hand,  a  much  more  sobering  assessment  was  contained  in  Gen-
eral Westmoreland's  Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situation  in  South  Vietnam,
dated  26  March  1965,  which  bluntly  asserted  that  RVNAF  would  not  be  able
to  build  up  their  strength  rapidly  and  effectively  enough  to  blunt  the  coming  VC


346 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

summer  offensive  or  to  seize  the  initiative  from  them.  The  document  also  esti-
mated that  the  program  of  air  activity  against  the  North,  while  it  might  ulti-
mately succeed  in  causing  the  DRV  to  cease  its  support  of  the  war,  would  not
in  the  short  run  have  any  major  effect  on  the  situation  in  the  South.

The  view  from  Washington  was  even  less  hopeful.  Assistant  Secretary  of  De-
fense John  McNaughton  summed  up  the  situation  in  the  following  words:

The  situation  in  general  is  bad  and  deteriorating.  The  VC  have  the  initia-
tive. Defeatism  is  gaining  among  the  rural  population,  somewhat  in  the
cities,  and  even  among  the  soldiers — especially  those  with  relatives  in  rural
areas.  The  Hop  Tac  area  around  Saigon  is  making  little  progress;  the  Delta
stays  bad;  the  country  has  been  severed  in  the  north.  GVN  control  is
shrinking  to  enclaves,  some  burdened  with  refugees.  In  Saigon  we  have  a
remission:  Quat  is  giving  hope  on  the  civilian  side,  the  Buddhists  have
calmed,  and  the  split  generals  are  in  uneasy  equilibrium.

A  more  complete  and  balanced  overview  was  prepared  by  McGeorge  Bundy
in  a  memorandum  outlining  "Key  Elements  for  Discussion"  for  an  April  1
meeting  with  the  President:

Morale  has  improved  in  South  Vietnam.  The  government  has  not  really
settled  down,  but  seems  to  be  hopeful  both  in  its  capacity  and  in  its  sense
of  political  forces.  The  armed  forces  continue  in  reasonably  good  shape,
though  top  leadership  is  not  really  effective  and  the  ratio  of  armed  forces
to  the  VC  build-up  is  not  good  enough.

The  situation  in  many  areas  of  the  countryside  continues  to  go  in  favor
of  the  VC,  although  there  is  now  a  temporary  lull.  The  threat  is  particu-
larly serious  in  the  central  provinces,  and  the  VC  forces  may  be  regrouping
for  major  efforts  there  in  the  near  future.

Hanoi  has  shown  no  signs  of  give,  and  Peiping  has  stiffened  its  position
within  the  last  week.  We  still  believe  that  attacks  near  Hanoi  might  sub-
stantially raise  the  odds  of  Peiping  coming  in  with  air.  Meanwhile,  we
expect  Hanoi  to  continue  and  step  up  its  infiltration  both  by  land  through
Laos  and  by  sea.  There  are  clear  indications  of  different  viewpoints  in
Hanoi,  Peiping,  and  Moscow  (and  even  in  the  so-called  Liberation  Front),
and  continued  sharp  friction  between  Moscow  and  Peiping.  However,
neither  such  frictions  nor  the  pressure  of  our  present  slowly  ascending  pace
of  air  attack  on  North  Vietnam  can  be  expected  to  produce  a  real  change
in  Hanoi's  position  for  some  time,  probably  2-3  months,  at  best.

A  key  question  for  Hanoi  is  whether  they  continue  to  make  real  headway
in  the  south,  or  whether  the  conflict  there  starts  to  move  against  them  or
at  least  appear  increasingly  tough.  If  the  former,  even  a  major  step-up  in
our  air  attacks  would  probably  not  cause  them  to  become  much  more  rea-
sonable; if  the  latter,  the  situation  might  begin  to  move  on  a  political  track
— but  again  in  not  less  than  2-3  months,  in  our  present  judgment.

B. INTERNATIONAL  DIPLOMATIC  MOVES

On  the  diplomatic  front,  there  had  been  no  indication  of  any  desire  for  talks
from  Hanoi,  Peking,  or  Moscow.  The  British  Co-Chairmen  initiative  had  been
turned  down  by  the  Soviet  Goverment,  which  first  floated  a  totally  unacceptable
counterproposal — in  the  form  of  a  statement  condemning  the  U.S.  "gross  viola-
tion of  the  Geneva  Accords"  and  calling  on  the  U.S.  "to  immediately  cease  their
aggressive  acts  against  the  DRV  and  to  withdraw  their  troops  .  .  ." — and  then


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  347

totally  rejected  the  British  proposal.  By  March  16,  when  Gromyko  met  with  UK
Foreign  Secretary  Michael  Stewart  in  London,  it  had  become  quite  clear  that
the  two  Geneva  Co-Chairmen  would  not  be  able  to  agree  on  a  message  suf-
ficiently objective  to  be  mutually  acceptable  to  other  members  of  the  Conference.
Gromyko  had  made  a  public  statement  after  the  meeting  in  London  to  the  effect
that  the  United  States  would  have  to  deal  directly  with  Hanoi  on  the  Vietnam
situation,  to  which  Secretary  Rusk  had  replied.

I  agree  with  Mr.  Gromyko  that  Hanoi  is  the  key  to  peace  in  Southeast
Asia.  If  Hanoi  stops  molesting  its  neighbors,  then  peace  can  be  restored
promptly  and  U.S.  forces  can  come  home.  I  regret  that  the  Soviet  Union,
which  was  a  signatory  of  the  1954  and  1962  accords,  appears  disinclined
to  put  its  full  weight  behind  those  agreements.

A  second  initiative  had  been  launched  by  President  Tito  of  Yugoslavia  in
early  March.  Tito  had  written  to  President  Johnson  on  March  3,  urging  im-
mediate negotiations  on  Vietnam  without  either  side  imposing  conditions.  The
President  had  replied  on  March  12,  describing  the  background  of  our  involve-
ment in  Vietnam  and  stating  that  there  would  be  no  bar  to  a  peaceful  settlement
if  Hanoi  ceased  "aggression  against  South  Vietnam."

Tito's  concern  prompted  him  to  convene  a  conference  of  15  nonaligned  nations
which  met  in  Belgrade  from  March  13  to  18.  The  resulting  declaration  blamed
"foreign  intervention  in  various  forms"  for  the  aggravation  of  the  Vietnam
situation  and  repeated  Tito's  call  for  negotiations  without  preconditions.

Yet  another  third-party  peace  initiative  came  from  U.N.  Secretary  General
U  Thant.  U  Thant  proposed  a  three-month  period  in  which  there  would  be  "a
temporary  cessation  of  all  hostile  military  activity,  whether  overt  or  covert,  across
the  17th  parallel  in  Vietnam."

McGeorge  Bundy  commented  on  these  propositions  in  his  April  1  "Key  Ele-
ments for  Discussion"  Memorandum  in  a  manner  suggesting  that  he  had  very
little  expectation  that  any  of  these  initiatives  would  lead  to  an  early  conference:

We  think  the  U  Thant  proposal  should  be  turned  off.  (Bunche  tells  us
U  Thant  will  not  float  it  publicly  if  we  reject  it  privately).  It  is  not  clear
that  the  trade-off  would  be  to  our  advantage,  even  if  it  could  be  arranged,
and  in  any  case,  we  prefer  to  use  U  Thant  for  private  feelers  rather  than
public  proposals.  We  can  tell  U  Thant  that  we  have  no  objection  on  his
sounding  out  Hanoi  on  this  same  point,  however,  and  that  if  he  gets  a
response,  we  would  ge  glad  to  comment  on  it.

The  17  natiofi  proposal  is  more  attractive.  We  are  inclined  to  propose  to
Quat  that  both  South  Vietnam  and  the  U.S.  should  accept  it  with  a  covering
statement  of  our  good,  firm,  clear  objectives  in  any  such  negotiation.  The
President  has  already  made  it  clear  that  he  will  go  anywhere  to  talk  with
anyone,  and  we  think  the  17  nation  proposal  is  one  to  which  we  can  make
a  pretty  clear  response.  Tactically,  it  will  probably  not  lead  to  any  early
conference,  because  the  position  of  Hanoi  and  Peking  will  be  that  they
will  not  attend  any  meeting  until  our  bombings  stop.  The  Secretary  of  State
will  elaborate  on  these  propositions.

C. AN  END  TO  "REPRISAL"

In  mid-morning  of  March  29,  VC  terrorists  exploded  a  bomb  outside  the  U.S.
embassy  in  Saigon,  killing  and  wounding  many  Americans  and  Vietnamese.  It


348 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

was  the  boldest  and  most  direct  Communist  action  against  the  U.S.  since  the
attacks  at  Pleiku  and  Qui  Nhon  which  had  precipitated  the  FLAMING  DART
reprisals.  Almost  simultaneously,  Ambassador  Taylor  enplaned  for  talks  in  Wash-
ington— and  both  cities  were  instantly  abuzz  with  speculation  that  the  war  had
entered  a  new  and  perhaps  critical  phase.

Indeed,  Admiral  Sharp  prompdy  urged  the  JCS  to  make  a  forceful  reply  to
the  VC  outrage  [words  missing]  spectacular  bombing  attack  upon  a  significant
target  in  the  DRV  outside  of  the  framework  of  ROLLING  THUNDER.  The
plea,  however,  did  not  fall  on  responsive  ears.  At  this  point,  the  President  pre-
ferred to  maneuver  quiedy  to  help  the  nation  get  used  to  living  with  the  Vietnam
crisis.  He  played  down  any  drama  intrinsic  in  Taylor's  arrival  by  having  him
attend  briefings  at  the  Pentagon  and  the  State  Department  before  calling  at  the
White  House;  and  he  let  it  be  known  that  the  U.S.  had  no  intention  of  con-
ducting any  further  specific  reprisal  raids  against  North  Vietnam  in  reply  to  the
bombing  of  the  embassy.  Instead,  he  confined  himself  to  a  public  statement:

The  terrorist  outrage  aimed  at  the  American  Embassy  in  Saigon  shows  us
once  again  what  the  struggle  in  Viet-Nam  is  about.  This  wanton  act  of
ruthlessness  has  brought  death  and  serious  injury  to  innocent  Vietnamese
citizens  in  the  street  as  well  as  to  American  and  Vietnamese  personnel  on
duty."  He  added  that  the  Embassy  was  ''already  back  in  business,"  and  that
he  would  "at  once  request  the  Congress  for  authority  and  funds  for  the
immediate  construction  of  a  new  chancery.

After  his  first  meeting  with  Taylor  and  other  officials  on  March  31,  the  Presi-
dent responded  to  press  inquiries  concerning  dramatic  new  developments  by
saying,  "I  know  of  no  far-reaching  strategy  that  is  being  suggested  or  pro-
mulgated."

But  the  President  was  being  less  than  candid.  The  proposals  that  were  at  that
moment  being  promulgated,  and  on  which  he  reached  significant  decisions  the
following  day,  did  involve  a  far-reaching  strategy  change:  acceptance  of  the  con-
cept of  U.S.  troops  engaged  in  offensive  ground  operations  against  Asian
insurgents.  This  issue  greatly  overshadowed  all  other  Vietnam  questions  then
being  reconsidered.

D. NSAM  328— ISSUES  POSED  AND  DECISIONS  MADE

The  underlying  question  that  was  being  posed  for  the  President  at  this  time
was  well  formulated  by  Assistant  Defense  Secretary  John  McNaughton  in  a  draft
memorandum  of  March  24,  entitled  "Plan  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam."  The
key  question,  McNaughton  thought,  was:

Can  the  situation  inside  SVN  be  bottomed  out  (a)  without  extreme
measures  against  the  DRV  and/or  (b)  without  deployment  of  large  numbers
of  US  (and  other)  combat  troops  inside  SVN?  And  the  answer,  he  believed,
was  perhaps — but  probably  no.

To  get  closer  to  an  answer,  McNaughton  began  by  restating  U.S.  objectives  in
Vietnam,  and  by  attempting  to  weigh  these  objectives  by  their  relative  impor-
tance:


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  349

70% — To  avoid  a  humiliating  US  defeat  (to  our  reputation  as  a  guar-
antor) .

20% — To  keep  SVN  (and  then  adjacent)  territory  from  Chinese  hands.
10% — To  permit  the  people  of  SVN  to  enjoy  a  better,  freer  way  of  life.
ALSO — To  emerge  from  crisis  without  unacceptable  taint  from  methods
used.

NOT — To  "help  a  friend,"  although  it  would  be  hard  to  stay  in  if  asked
out.

McNaughton  then  proceeded  to  enumerate  some  twenty-odd  ways  in  which  the
GVN  might  collapse,  and  noted  that  in  spite — or  perhaps  precisely  because —
of  the  imminence  of  this  collapse  and  the  unpromising  nature  of  remedial  action,

I  U.S.  policy  had  been  drifting.  As  he  saw  it,  the  "trilemmas"  of  U.S.  policy  was
that  the  three  possible  remedies  to  GVN  collapse — (a)  heavy  will-breaking  air

I  attacks  on  the  DRV,  (b)  large  U.S.  troops  deployments  to  SVN,  and  (c)  exit

I  by  negotiations — were  all  beset  with  difficulties  and  uncertainties.  Strikes  against
the  North,  he  felt,  were  balked  "(1)  by  flash-point  limits,  (2)  by  doubts  that  the
DRV  will  cave  and  (3)  by  doubts  that  the  VC  will  obey  a  caving  DRV.
(Leaving  strikes  only  a  political  and  anti-infiltration  nuisance.)"  Deployment
of  combat  forces,  he  believed,  was  blocked  "by  French-defeat  and  Korea  syn-
dromes, and  Quat  is  queasy.  (Troops  could  be  net  negatives,  and  be  besieged.)"
And  negotiations  he  saw  as  "tainted  by  the  humiliation  likely  to  follow."

McNaughton  then  proceeded  to  review  in  detail  the  purposes,  alternatives,  and

1  risks  of  the  bombing  program  as  it  then  stood,  treating  the  issue  more  compre-
hensively and  systematically  than  it  has  been  considered  elsewhere.  His  schematic
exposition  is,  therefore,  reproduced  here  in  full:

Strikes  on  the  North  {program  of  progressive  military  pressure)

a.  Purposes:

(1)  Reduce  DRVA^C  activities  by  affecting  DRV  will.

(2)  To  improve  the  GVN/VC  relative  "balance  of  morale."

(3)  To  provide  the  US  'GVN  with  a  bargaining  counter.

(4)  To  reduce  DRV  infiltration  of  men  and  materiel.

(5)  To  show  the  world  the  lengths  to  which  US  will  go  for  a  friend.

b.  Program:  Each  week,  1  or  2  "mission  days"  with  100-plane  high  dam-
age US-VNAF  strikes  each  "day"  against  important  targets,  plus  3
armed  recce  missions — all  moving  upward  in  weight  of  effort,  value  of
target  or  proximity  to  Hanoi  and  China.

ALTERNATIVE  ONE: 12-week  DRV-wide  program  shunning  only

"population"  targets.
ALTERNATIVE  TWO: 12-week  program  short  of  taking  out  Phuc

Yen  (Hanoi)  airfield.

c  Other  actions:

( 1 )  Blockade  of  DRV  ports  by  VNAF  US-dropped  mines  or  by  ships.

(2)  South  Vietnamese-implemented  34A  MAROPS.

(3)  Reconnaissance  flights  over  Laos  and  the  DRV.

(4)  Daily  BARREL  ROLL  armed  recce  strikes  in  Laos  (plus  T-28s).

(5)  Four-a-week  BARREL  ROLL  choke-point  strikes  in  Laos.

(6)  USA^NAF  air  &  naval  strikes  against  VC  ops  and  bases  in  SVN.

(7)  Westward  deployment  of  US  forces.

(8)  No  DeSoto  patrols  or  naval  bombardment  of  DRV  at  this  time.


350 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

d.  Red  "flash  points"  There  are  events  which  we  can  expect  to  imply  sub-
stantial risk  of  escalation:

(1 )  Air  strikes  north  of  17°.  (This  one  already  passed.)

(2)  First  US/VNAF  confrontation  with  DRV  MIGs.

(3)  Strike  on  Phuc  Yen  MIG  base  near  Hanoi.

(4)  First  strikes  on  Tonkin  industrial /population  targets.

(5)  First  strikes  on  Chinese  railroad  or  near  China.

(6)  First  USA^NAF  confrontation  with  Chicom  MIGs.

(7)  First  hot  pursuit  of  Chicom  MIGs  into  China.

(8)  First  flak-suppression  of  Chicom-  or  Soviet-manned  SAM.

(9)  Massive  introduction  of  US  ground  troops  into  SVN.
(10)  US/ARVN  occupation  of  DRV  territory.

e.  Blue  "flash  points*'  China/DRV  surely  are  sensitive  to  events  which
might  cause  us  to  escalate:

(1)  All  of  the  above  "Red"  flash  points.

(2)  VC  ground  attack  on  Danang.

(3)  Sinking  of  a  US  naval  vessel.

(4)  Open  deployment  of  DRV  troops  into  South  Vietnam.

(5)  Deployment  of  Chinese  troops  into  North  Vietnam.

(6)  Deployment  of  FROGs  or  SAMs  in  North  Vietnam.

(7)  DRV  air  attack  on  South  Vietnam.

(8)  Announcement  of  Liberation  Government  in  1/11  Corps  area.

f.  Major  risks:

(1)  Losses  to  DRV  MIGs,  and  later  possibly  to  SAMs.

(2)  Increased  VC  activities,  and  possibly  Liberation  Government.

(3)  Panic  or  other  collapse  of  GVN  from  under  us.

(4)  World-wide  revulsion  against  us  (against  strikes,  blockade,  etc.).

(5)  Sympathetic  fires  over  Berlin,  Cyprus,  Kashmir,  Jordan  waters.

(6)  Escalation  to  conventional  war  with  DRV,  China  (and  USSR?).

(7)  Escalation  to  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons.

g.  Other  Red  Moves:

( 1 )  More  jets  to  NVN  with  DRV  or  Chicom  pilots.

(2)  More  AAA  (SAMs?)  and  radar  gear  (Soviet-manned?)  to  NVN.

(3)  Increased  air  and  ground  forces  in  South  China.

(4)  Other  "defensive"  DRV  retaliation  (e.g.,  shoot-down  of  a  U-2).

(5)  PL  land  grabs  in  Laos.

(6)  PL  declaration  of  new  government  in  Laos.

(7)  Political  drive  for  "neutralization"  of  Indo-China.

h.  Escalation  control.  We  can  do  three  things  to  avoid  escalation  too-much
or  too-fast:

(1)  Stretch  out:  Retard  the  program  (e.g.,  1  not  2  fixed  strikes  a  week).

(2)  Circuit  breaker.  Abandon  at  least  temporarily  [words  missing]
"plateau"  them  below  the  "Phuc  Yen  airfield"  flash  point  on  one
or  the  other  of  these  tenable  theories:  (a)  That  we  strike  as  neces-
sary to  interdict  infiltration,  (b)  That  our  level  of  strikes  is  generally
responsive  to  the  level  of  VC/DRV  activities  in  South  Vietnam.

(3)  Shunt.  Plateau  the  air  strikes  per  para  (2)  and  divert  the  energy
into:  (a)  a  mine-and/or  ship-blockade  of  DRV  ports,  (b)  Massive
deployment  of  US  (and  other?)  troops  into  SVN  (and  Laos?):  (1)
To  man  the  "enclaves,"  releasing  ARVN  forces.  (2)  To  take  over
Pleiku,  Kontum,  Darlac  provinces.  (3)  To  create  a  16+°  sea-
Thailand  infiltration  wall.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  351

i.  Important  Miscellany:

(1)  Program  should  appear  to  be  relentless  (i.e.,  possibility  of  employ-
ing "circuit-breakers"  should  be  secret).

(2)  Enemy  should  be  kept  aware  of  our  limited  objectives.

(3)  Allies  should  be  kept  on  board.

(4)  USSR  should  be  kept  in  passive  role.

(5)  Information  program  should  preserve  US  public  support.

McNaughton's  memorandum  dealt  in  similar  detail  with  the  two  other  forms
of  remedial  action  that  were  then  being  considered:  US  troop  deployments  and
exit  negotiations.  Neither  of  these,  however,  is  a  matter  of  prime  concern  within
the  scope  of  this  paper.  It  is  well  to  remember,  however,  that  the  April  1  Presi-
dential policy  review  was  not  confined  to  the  air  campaign  against  the  DRV.
It  embraced  the  whole  panoply  of  military  and  non-military  actions  that  might
be  undertaken  in  South  and  North  Vietnam,  but  the  main  focus  was  clearly
on  actions  within  South  Vietnam,  and  the  principal  concern  of  Administration
policy  makers  at  this  time  was  with  the  prospect  of  major  deployments  of  US
and  Third  Country  combat  forces  to  SVN.

Unlike  McNaughton's  memorandum,  the  McGeorge  Bundy  discussion  paper
of  April  1  which  set  forth  the  key  issues  for  consideration  and  decision  by  the
President,  gave  onlv  the  most  superficial  treatment  to  the  complex  matter  of
future  air  pressures  policy.  In  fact,  the  Bundv  paper  merely  listed  a  series  of
action  recommendations,  seemingly  providing  little  room  for  debate  or  for  con-
sideration of  alternatives.  The  actions  proposed  amounted  to  little  more  than
a  continuation  of  the  ongoing  modest  ROLLING  THUNDER  program,  directed,
with  slowly  rising  intensity,  at  the  LOG  targets  that  were  then  beginning  to  be
hit.  Recommendations  were  not  subjected  to  any  searching  debate  when  they
were  discussed  with  the  President  on  Apnl  2,  since  the  wording  of  the  President's
decision  in  the  NSAM  issued  on  April  6,  is  verbatim  identical  with  the  wording
of  the  McGeorge  Bundy  recommendation  that  was  circulated  to  the  Principals
before  the  meeting:

Subject  to  continuing  review,  the  President  approved  the  following  gen-
eral framework  of  continuing  action  against  North  Vietnam  and  Laos:

We  should  continue  roughly  the  present  slowly  ascending  tempo  of
ROLLING  THUNDER  operations,  being  prepared  to  add  strikes  in  re-
sponse to  a  higher  rate  of  VC  operations,  or  conceivably  to  slow  the  pace
in  the  unlikely  event  VC  slacked  off  sharply  for  what  appeared  to  be  more
than  a  temporary  operational  lull.

The  target  systems  should  continue  to  avoid  the  effective  GCI  range  of
MIGs.  We  should  continue  to  vary  the  types  of  targets,  stepping  up  attacks
on  lines  of  communication  in  the  near  future,  and  possibly  moving  in  a  few
weeks  to  attacks  on  the  rail  lines  north  and  northeast  of  Hanoi.

Leaflet  operations  should  be  expanded  to  obtain  maximum  practicable
psychological  effect  on  the  North  Vietnamese  population.

Blockade  or  aerial  mining  of  North  Vietnamese  ports  needs  further  study
and  should  be  considered  for  future  operations.  It  would  have  major  polit-
ical complications,  especially  in  relation  to  the  Soviets  and  other  countries,
but  also  offers  many  advantages.

Air  operation  in  Laos,  particularly  route  blocking  operations  in  the
Panhandle  area,  should  be  stepped  up  to  the  maximum  remunerative  rate.


352 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


E. THE  DIRECTOR  OF  CENTRAL  INTELLIGENCE  DEMURS

As  has  been  indicated,  the  dramatic  element  in  the  President's  decisions  of
April  2  was  not  in  the  sphere  of  air  strikes  against  the  North,  but  in  the  area
of  the  mission  of  US  ground  forces  in  South  Vietnam.  NSAM  328  promulgated
the  significant  decision  to  change  the  role  of  the  Marine  battalions  deployed  to
Vietnam  from  one  of  advice  and  static  defense  to  one  of  active  combat  opera-
tions against  the  VC  guerrillas.  The  fact  that  this  departure  from  a  long-held
policy  had  momentous  implications  was  well  recognized  by  the  Administration
leadership.  The  President  himself  was  greatly  concerned  that  the  step  be  given
as  little  prominence  as  possible.  In  NSAM  328  his  position  in  this  regard  was
stated  as  follows:

The  President  desires  that  with  respect  to  (these)  actions  .  .  .  prema-
ture publicity  be  avoided  by  all  possible  precautions.  The  actions  them-
selves should  be  taken  as  rapidly  as  practicable,  but  in  ways  that  should
minimize  any  appearance  of  sudden  changes  in  policy,  and  official  state-
ments on  these  troop  movements  will  be  made  only  with  the  direct  approval
of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  in  that  these  movements  and  changes  should  be
understood  as  being  gradual  and  wholly  consistent  with  existing  policy.

Whether  and  to  what  extent  there  was  support  or  opposition  to  this  step
among  top  Administration  advisers  is  not  recorded  in  the  documentation  avail-
able to  this  writer.  But  one  interesting  demurrer  was  introduced  by  the  Director
of  Central  Intelligence,  John  A.  McCone,  in  a  memorandum  he  circulated  on
April  2  to  Secretary  Rusk,  Secretary  McNamara,  McGeorge  Bundy,  and  Am-
bassador Taylor.

McCone  did  not  inherently  disagree  with  the  change  in  the  U.S.  ground  force
role,  but  felt  that  it  was  inconsistent  with  the  decision  to  continue  the  air  strike
program  at  the  feeble  level  at  which  it  was  then  being  conducted.  McCone  de-
veloped his  argument  as  follows:

I  have  been  giving  thought  to  the  paper  that  we  discussed  in  yesterday's
meeting,  which  unfortunately  I  had  little  time  to  study,  and  also  to  the
decision  made  to  change  the  mission  of  our  ground  forces  in  South  Vietnam
from  one  of  advice  and  static  defense  to  one  of  active  combat  operations
against  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas.

I  feel  that  the  latter  decision  is  correct  only  if  our  air  strikes  against  the
North  are  sufficiently  heavy  and  damaging  really  to  hurt  the  North  Viet-
namese. The  paper  we  examined  yesterday  does  not  anticipate  the  type  of
air  operation  against  the  North  necessary  to  force  the  NVN  to  reappraise
their  policy.  On  the  contrary,  it  states,  "We  should  continue  roughly  the
present  slowly  ascending  tempo  of  ROLLING  THUNDER  operations

 ,"  and  later,  in  outlining  the  types  of  targets,  states,  "The  target  systems

should  continue  to  avoid  the  effective  GCI  range  of  MIG's,"  and  these
conditions  indicate  restraints  which  will  not  be  persuasive  to  the  NVN  and
would  probably  be  read  as  evidence  of  a  U.S.  desire  to  temporize.

I  have  reported  that  the  strikes  to  date  have  not  caused  a  change  in  the
North  Vietnamese  policy  of  directing  Viet  Cong  insurgency,  infiltrating
cadres  and  supplying  material.  If  anything,  the  strikes  to  date  have  hardened
their  attitude.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  353


I  have  now  had  a  chance  to  examine  the  12-week  program  referred  to  by
General  Wheeler  and  it  is  my  personal  opinion  that  this  program  is  not
sufficiently  severe  or  [words  illegible]  the  North  Vietnamese  to  [words
illegible]  policy.

On  the  other  hand,  we  must  look  with  care  to  our  position  under  a  pro-
gram of  slowly  ascending  tempo  of  air  strikes.  With  the  passage  of  each
day  and  each  week,  we  can  expect  increasing  pressure  to  stop  the  bombing.
This  will  come  from  various  elements  of  the  American  public,  from  the
press,  the  United  Nations  and  world  opinion.  Therefore  time  will  run
against  us  in  this  operation  and  I  think  the  North  Vietnamese  are  counting
on  this.

Therefore  I  think  what  we  are  doing  is  starting  on  a  track  which  involves
ground  force  operations  which,  in  all  probability,  will  have  limited  effective-

I ness  against  guerrillas,  although  admittedly  will  restrain  some  VC  advances.

I  However,  we  can  expect  requirements  for  an  ever-increasing  commitment
of  U.S.  personnel  without  materially  improving  the  chances  of  victory.  I
support  and  agree  with  this  decision  but  I  must  point  out  that  in  my  judg-
ment, forcing  submission  of  the  VC  can  only  be  brought  about  by  a  decision
in  Hanoi.  Since  the  contemplated  actions  against  the  North  are  modest  in
scale,  they  will  not  impose  unacceptable  damage  on  it,  nor  will  they
threaten  the  DRV's  vital  interests.  Hence,  they  will  not  present  them  with
a  situation  with  which  they  cannot  live,  though  such  actions  will  cause  the
DRV  pain  and  inconvenience.

I  believe  our  proposed  track  offers  great  danger  of  simply  encouraging
Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  support  of  the  DRV  and  VC  cause,  if  for
no  other  reason  then  the  risk  for  both  will  be  minimum.  I  envision  that  the
reaction  of  the  NVN  and  Chinese  Communists  will  be  to  deliberately,  care-
fully, and  probably  gradually,  build  up  the  Viet  Cong  capabilities  by  covert
infiltration  on  North  Vietnamese  and,  possibly,  Chinese  cadres  and  thus
bring  an  ever-increasing  pressure  on  our  forces.  In  effect,  we  will  find  our-
selves mired  down  in  combat  in  the  jungle  in  a  military  effort  that  we  can-
not win,  and  from  which  we  will  have  extreme  difficulty  in  extracting  our-
selves.

Therefore  it  is  my  judgment  that  if  we  are  to  change  the  mission  of  the
ground  forces,  we  must  also  change  the  ground  rules  of  the  strikes  against
North  Vietnam.  We  must  hit  them  harder,  more  frequently,  and  inflict
greater  damage.  Instead  of  avoiding  the  MIG's,  we  must  go  in  and  take
them  out.  A  bridge  here  and  there  will  not  do  the  job.  We  must  strike  their
airfields,  their  patroleum  resources,  power  stations  and  their  military  com-
pounds. This,  in  my  opinion,  must  be  done  promptly  and  with  minimum
restraint.

If  we  are  unwilling  to  take  this  kind  of  a  decision  now,  we  must  not
take  the  actions  concerning  the  mission  of  our  ground  forces  for  the  reasons
I  have  mentioned.

The  record  does  not  show  whether  this  memorandum  was  ever  submitted
I  to  or  discussed  with  the  President.  In  any  event,  the  President  had  already
1  made  his  decision  by  the  time  the  above  memorandum  reached  the  addressees.
McCone,  however,  persisted  in  his  concern  over  what  he  felt  was  an  inadequately
forceful  air  strike  program  and  he  did  subsequently  make  his  views  known  to
j  the  President,  by  way  of  a  personal  memorandum  and  a  coordinated  intelligence
estimate  he  handed  to  the  President  on  April  28,  the  date  on  which  his  successor,


354 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

Admiral  Raborn,  was  sworn  in.  The  memorandum  itself  is  not  available  to  this
writer,  but  both  the  estimate  and  Admiral  Raborn's  reaction  to  the  two  docu-
ments are  at  hand.  They  are  discussed  in  Section  XIII  below.

X. APRIL  7TH  INITIATIVE— THE  BILLION  DOLLAR  CARROT

A. MOUNTING  PUBLIC  CRITICISM

During  the  latter  half  of  March  and  the  beginning  of  April,  from  near  and
far  more  and  more  brickbats  were  being  hurled  at  the  Administration's  position
on  Vietnam.  At  home,  columnist  Walter  Lippman  raised  his  voice  to  observe
that  U.S.  policy  "is  all  stick  and  no  carrot.  We  are  telling  the  North  Vietnamese
that  they  will  be  very  badly  hurt  if  they  do  not  quit  .  .  .  But  we  are  not  telling
the  North  Vietnamese  what  kind  of  future  there  would  be  for  them  and  the  rest
of  Indochina  if  the  war  ended  as  we  think  it  should  end."

Abroad,  in  an  emptv  but  well-publicized  gesture,  philosopher  Jean-Paul  Sartre
canceled  a  lecture  trip  to  the  U.S.  on  the  ground  that  Gallup  polls  indicated  most
Americans  are  in  favor  of  the  air  raids  into  North  Vietnam.  "Where  contradictory
opinions  thus  have  hardened,"  said  the  reluctant  Nobel  Prize  winner,  "dialogue
is  impossible."  And  in  a  considerably  more  potent  gesture,  the  government  of
Charles  de  Gaulle  chose  this  particular  juncture  to  renew  its  annual  trade
agreement  with  North  Vietnam  and  to  extend  Hanoi  medium-term  credits  for
the  purchase  of  French  goods.

Within  the  Administration  there  was  a  growing  feeling  that  somewhere  along
the  line  the  hand  had  been  misplaved,  that  somehow  the  mix  of  increased  military
pressure  and  increased  diplomatic  efforts  for  settlement  had  not  been  right.  In
late  March,  therefore,  the  President  began  to  try  to  alter  the  mix.  He  began  by
spending  much  time  on  efforts  at  personal  persuasion,  talking  to  Congressmen
and  other  visitors  in  his  office  about  the  restraint  and  patience  he  was  showing
in  operation  ROLLING  THUNDER.  Evans  and  Novak  describe  one  of  these
sessions  as  follows:

To  illustrate  his  caution,  he  showed  critics  the  map  of  North  Vietnam
and  pointed  out  the  targets  he  had  approved  for  attack,  and  to  the  many
more  targets  he  had  disapproved.  As  for  Communist  China,  he  was  watching
for  every  possible  sign  of  reaction.  Employing  a  vivid  sexual  analogy,  the
President  explained  to  friends  and  critics  one  day  that  the  slow  escalation
of  the  air  war  in  the  North  and  the  increasing  pressure  on  Ho  Chi  Minh
was  seduction,  not  rape.  If  China  should  suddenly  react  to  slow  escalation,
as  a  woman  might  react  to  attempted  seduction,  by  threatening  to  retaliate
(a  slap  in  the  face,  to  continue  the  metaphor),  the  United  States  would  have
plenty  of  time  to  ease  off  the  bombing.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  United
States  were  to  unleash  an  all-out,  total  assault  on  the  North — rape  rather
than  seduction — there  could  be  no  turning  back,  and  Chinese  reaction  might
be  instant  and  total.

But  despite  the  full  use  of  his  power  to  influence,  the  President  could  not  stop
the  critics.  Condemnation  of  the  bombing  spread  to  the  campuses  and  to  a
widening  circle  of  Congressmen.  From  many  directions  the  President  was  being
pressed  to  make  a  major  public  statement  welcoming  negotiations.

Up  to  this  time,  the  official  U.S.  position  had  been  unreceptive  to  negotiations,
although  the  President  had  paid  lip-service  to  his  willingness  to  "do  anything  and


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  355

go  anywhere  in  the  interests  of  peace."  Past  inaction  he  blamed  entirely  on  Hanoi.
It  was,  he  said,  Hanoi  that  would  not  talk  peace,  Hanoi  that  was  subverting  South
Vietnam,  Hanoi  that  was  making  it  possible  for  the  war  to  continue  by  funneling
supplies  and  manpower  over  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail.  Washington  was  not  to
blame.  But  now  the  formula  no  longer  seemed  adequate,  and  the  President  began
to  look  for  a  more  spectacular  way  of  dramatizing  his  peaceful  intent.  He  found
it  in  three  ingredients  which  he  combined  in  his  renowned  Johns  Hopkins
address  of  April  7th.

B. INGREDIENTS  FOR  JOHNS  HOPKINS

Three  elements  combined  to  make  the  President's  Johns  Hopkins  speech  an
important  initiative:  First,  a  new  formulation  of  U.S.  readiness  to  negotiate,
in  the  shape  of  an  acceptance  by  the  President  of  the  spirit  of  the  17-Nation
Appeal  of  March  15,  which  had  called  upon  the  belligerents  to  start  negotiations
as  soon  as  possible  "without  posing  any  preconditions."  Here  are  the  words  of
the  speech  which  the  President  hoped  would  satisfy  the  principal  demand  of
the  doves:

We  will  never  be  second  in  the  search  for  ...  a  peaceful  settlement  in
Viet-Nam.

There  may  be  many  ways  to  this  kind  of  peace:  in  discussion  or  negotia-
tion with  the  governments  concerned;  in  large  groups  or  in  small  ones;  in
the  reaffirmation  of  old  agreements  or  their  strengthening  with  new  ones.

We  have  stated  this  position  over  and  over  again  50  times  and  more  to
friend  and  foe  alike.  And  we  remain  ready  with  this  purpose  for  uncon-
ditional discussions.

A  second  key  element  of  the  speech  was  drawn  from  ideas  long  propounded
by  such  old  Southeast  Asia  hands  as  former  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Thailand
Kenneth  Young,  involving  a  massive  regional  development  effort  for  the  area,
based  on  the  Mekong  River  basin.  This  was  precisely  the  kind  of  hopeful  and
positive  gesture  the  President  needed  to  put  a  bright  constructive  face  on  his
Vietnam  policy.  Painting  the  picture  of  a  potentially  peaceful  five-nation  area,  the
President  said :

The  first  step  is  for  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  to  associate  themselves
[words  illegible]  take  its  place  in  the  common  effort  just  as  soon  as  peace-
ful cooperation  is  possible.

And  the  President  then  offered  his  munificant  carrot:

For  our  part  1  will  ask  the  Congress  to  join  in  a  billion-dollar  American
investment  in  this  effort  as  soon  as  it  is  underway.

And  he  underlined  the  grandioseness  of  the  vision  by  characterizing  the  effort
as  being  conceived  "on  a  scale  to  dwarf  even  our  TVA."

There  was  a  third  key  element  to  the  Johns  Hopkins  speech  which  the  Presi-
dent added  almost  literally  at  the  last  minute — an  illustrious  name,  a  person  of
unquestioned  stature,  to  lend  some  credibility  and  prestige  to  the  somewhat  im-
probable peaceful  development  gambit  in  the  midst  of  war.  The  President  found
that  ingredient  in  the  person  of  Eugene  Black,  former  President  of  the  World
Bank,  a  figure  of  high  prominence  in  international  finance,  and  a  politician  en-


356 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

joying  Congressional  confidence  and  open  lines  to  both  Democrats  and  Republi-
cans. In  a  whirlwind  performance,  the  President  recruited  Black  just  a  few  short
hours  before  his  scheduled  appearance  at  Johns  Hopkins,  and  was  able  to  an-
nounce that  appointment  in  his  speech.

C.  HANOI  AND  PEKING  "CLOSE  THE  DOOR"

While  the  President's  speech  evoked  a  good  press  and  much  favorable  public
reaction  throughout  the  world,  its  practical  consequences  were  meager.  It  failed
to  silence  the  Peace  Bloc  and  it  failed  to  bring  the  Communists  to  the  negotiat-
ing table.

It  is  worth  noting  that  the  President's  initiative  of  April  7  was  in  accord  with
the  "pressures-policy"  rationale  that  had  been  worked  out  in  November,  1964,
which  held  that  U.S.  readiness  to  negotiate  was  not  to  be  surfaced  until  after  a
series  of  air  strikes  had  been  carried  out  against  important  targets  in  North
Vietnam.  Significantly,  during  the  two  weeks  prior  to  the  President's  address,
ROLLING  THUNDER  VIII  (the  "Radar  Busting  Week")  and  IX  (the  first
week  of  the  "anti-LOC"  campaign)  had  inaugurated  an  almost  daily  schedule  of
bombing.  Thus  the  U.S.  was  now  attempting  to  achieve,  through  a  deliberate
combination  of  intensified  military  pressures  and  diplomatic  enticements,  what  it
had  hoped  would  result  from  a  mere  token  demonstration  of  capability  and
resolve.  The  carrot  had  been  aided  to  the  stick,  but  the  stick  was  still  the  more
tangible  and  visible  element  of  U.S.  policy.

But  neither  pressures  nor  blandishments  succeeded  in  moving  Hanoi.  On
the  day  following  the  President's  speech,  North  Vietnamese  Premier  Pham  Van
Dong  published  his  famous  "Four  Points,"  recognition  of  which  he  made  clear,
was  the  sole  way  in  which  "favorable  conditions"  could  be  created  for  peaceful
settlement  of  the  war.  Two  days  later,  in  a  telling  denunciation  of  the  President's
Johns  Hopkins  speech.  North  Vietnam  said  that  the  United  States  was  using  the
"peace"  label  to  conceal  its  aggression  and  that  the  Southeast  Asia  development
proposal  was  simply  a  "carrot"  offered  to  offset  the  "stick"  of  aggression  and
to  seek  to  allay  domestic  and  international  criticism  of  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam.
The  following  day,  an  article  in  a  Chinese  Communist  newspaper  denounced
President  Johnson's  proposal  for  unconditional  discussions  as  "a  swindle  pure  and
simple."  To  complete  the  rejection  of  Western  initiatives,  Hanoi  turned  down
the  appeal  of  the  seventeen  non-aligned  nations  on  April  19,  reiterating  that
Pham  Van  Dong's  "Four  Points"  were  the  "only  correct  way"  to  resolve  the
Vietnam  problem;  and  three  days  later  Peking's  Peoples'  Daily  gave  the  coup-
de-grace  to  the  17-nation  appeal,  saying  that  it  amounted  to  "legalizing  the
United  States  imperialist  aggression"  and  that  "the  Viet-Namese  people  will
never  agree  to  negotiations  'without  any  preconditions.'  "

D.  PRESIDENT'S  REPRISE:  TRAGEDY,  DISSAPPOINTMENT—
BUT  NO  BOMBING  PAUSE

The  rejection  of  the  President's  initiative  had  been  total.  And  other  Western
peace  feelers  were  equally  bluntly  turned  away.  British  former  Foreign  Secretary
Patrick  Gordon  Walker  who  sought  to  visit  Peking  and  Hanoi  on  a  self-appointed
peace  mission  to  sound  out  both  governments  on  the  possibilities  of  negotiations
was  unceremoniously  denied  entry  to  both  Mainland  China  and  North  Vietnam.

In  the  light  of  these  developments,  the  President  made  another  public  state-
ment, opening  with  the  words,  "This  has  been  a  week  of  tragedy,  disappoint-
ment, and  progress."


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  357

"We  tried  to  open  a  window  to  peace,"  the  President  said,  "only  to  be  met  with
tired  names  and  slogans  and  a  refusal  to  talk."  But  he  tried  once  more:

They  want  no  talk  with  us,  no  talk  with  a  distinguished  Briton,  no  talk
with  the  United  Nations.  They  want  no  talk  at  all  so  far.  But  our  offer
stands.  We  mean  every  word  of  it  .  .  .

To  those  governments  who  doubt  our  willingness  to  talk  the  answer  is
simple — agree  to  discussion,  come  to  the  meeting  room.  We  will  be  there.
Our  objective  in  Viet-Nam  remains  the  same — an  independent  South  Viet-
nam, tied  to  no  alliance,  free  to  shape  its  relations  and  association  with
all  other  nations.  This  is  what  the  people  of  South  Vietnam  want,  and
we  will  finally  settle  for  no  less.

But  this  is  as  far  as  the  President  was  willing  to  go  in  his  concessions  to  the
Peace  Bloc  at  this  time.

To  the  clamor  from  many  directions,  including  from  Senator  Fulbright  and
from  Canada's  Prime  Minister  Lester  Pearson,  that  the  U.S.  should  pause  in
its  air  strikes  to  bring  about  negotiations,  the  Administration  responded  with  a
resounding  "No."  Secretary  Rusk  made  the  U.S.  position  clear  on  this,  in  a
statement  read  to  news  correspondents  on  April  17:

We  have  thought  long  and  soberly  about  suspending,  for  a  period,  the
raids  on  North  Viet-Nam.  Some  have  suggested  this  could  lead  to  an  end
of  aggression  from  the  North.  But  we  have  tried  publicly  and  privately  to
find  out  if  this  would  be  the  result,  and  there  has  been  no  response.  Others
say  such  a  pause  is  needed  to  signal  our  sincerity,  but  no  signal  is  needed.
Our  sincerity  is  plain.

If  we  thought  such  action  would  advance  the  cause  of  an  honorable  peace,
we  would  order  it  immediately,  but  now  our  best  judgment  tells  us  it  would
only  encourage  the  aggressor  and  dishearten  our  friends  who  bear  the
brunt  of  battle.

XI. HONOLULU,  APRIL  20— IN  SEARCH  OF  CONSENSUS

A. BACKGROUND  AND  CONCLUSIONS  OF  CONFERENCE

By  the  middle  of  April,  communications  between  Washington  and  Saigon
were  becoming  increasingly  strained,  as  it  began  to  dawn  upon  Ambassador
Taylor  that  Washington  was  determined,  with  the  President's  sanction,  to  go  far
beyond  the  agreements  to  which  Taylor  had  been  a  party  at  the  beginning  of
April  and  that  had  been  formalized  in  NSAM  328.  From  April  8  onward,
Taylor  had  been  bombarded  with  messages  and  instructions  from  Washington
testifying  to  an  eagerness  to  speed  up  the  introduction  to  Vietnam  of  U.S.  and
Third  County  ground  forces  and  to  employ  them  in  a  combat  role,  all  far  be-
yond anything  that  had  been  authorized  in  the  April  2  NSC  decisions.  Ambassa-
dor Taylor's  ill-concealed  annoyance  at  these  mounting  pressures  and  progres-
sively more  radical  proposals  changed  to  outright  anger  and  open  protest  when,
on  April  18,  he  received  another  instruction,  allegedly  with  the  sanction  of
"highest  authority,"  proposing  seven  additional  complicated  measures  having  to
do  with  combat  force  deployment  and  employment,  on  the  justification  that
"something  new  must  be  added  in  the  South  to  achieve  victory."  Taylor's
exasperated  response  to  McGeorge  Bundy  the  same  day  made  it  clear  that  mean-


358 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

ingful  communication  between  Washington  and  Saigon  had  all  but  broken  down
and  that  something  needed  to  be  done  quickly  to  restore  some  sense  of  com-
mon purpose  and  to  provide  Taylor  with  a  revised  set  of  instructions.

It  was  with  this  background  that  Secretary  McNamara  convened  a  conference
in  Honolulu  on  very  short  notice,  bringing  together  most  of  the  key  personalities
involved  in  Vietnam  policy-making:  Chairman  Wheeler  of  the  ICS,  General
Westmoreland,  COMUSMACV,  Admiral  Sharp,  CINCPAC,  Ambassador  Taylor
from  Saigon,  William  Bundy  of  State,  and  John  McNaughton  of  Defense.

Precisely  what  transpired  during  the  one-day  meeting  in  Honolulu  on  April
20th  is  not  known  to  this  writer.  But  clearly  the  meeting  was  called  for  the
explicit  purpose  of  ironing  out  differences  and  smoothing  ruffled  feathers.  The
immediate  concern  was  to  reach  specific  agreement  on  troop  deployments;  but
an  underlying  objective  was  to  restore  a  semblance  of  consensus  about  assess-
ments and  priorities.

The  record  contains  two  documents  that  report  on  the  results  of  the  meeting.
(1)  The  minutes  of  the  meeting  prepared  by  John  McNaughton,  and  (2)  a
Memorandum  for  the  President  prepared  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  April
21  which  is  almost,  but  not  quite,  identical  with  McNaughton's  minutes.  The
differences  are  significant  in  that  they  suggest  an  effort  on  McNamara's  part  to
stress  even  more  than  did  McNaughton  the  unanimity  of  view  that  was  achieved
at  Honolulu.

Sections  of  the  two  documents  relevant  to  the  air  war  are  quoted  below.
Where  the  two  texts  differ,  both  versions  are  shown — McNamara's  in  brackets
[ 1,  McNaughton's  in  parentheses  ( ) :

(Secretary  McNamara,  accompanied  by) Mr.  William  Bundy  (and)
Mr.  McNaughton  [and  IJ  met  with  Ambassador  Taylor,  General  Wheeler,
Admiral  Sharp  and  General  Westmoreland  in  Honolulu  on  Tuesday,  April
20.  (The  minutes  of  that  meeting  follow: )
[Following  is  my  report  of  the  meeting:]

1.  (There  was  consensus  that)  [None  of  them  expect]  the  DRV/VC
(cannot  be  expected)  to  capitulate,  or  come  to  a  position  acceptable  to  us,
in  less  than  six  months.  This  is  because  they  believe  that  a  settlement  will
come  as  much  or  more  from  VC  failure  in  the  South  as  from  DRV  pain
in  the  North,  and  that  it  will  take  more  than  six  months,  perhaps  a  year
or  two,  to  demonstrate  VC  failure  in  the  South.

2.  With  respect  to  strikes  against  the  North,  (it  was  agreed)  [they  all
agree]  that  the  present  tempo  is  about  right,  that  sufficient  increasing  pres-
sure is  provided  by  repetition  and  continuation.  All  of  them  envisioned  a
strike  program  continuing  at  least  six  months,  perhaps  a  year  or  more,
avoiding  the  Hanoi-Haiphong-Phuc  Yen  areas  during  that  period.  There
might  be  fewer  fixed  targets,  or  more  restrikes,  or  more  armed  recon-
naissance missions.  Ambassador  Taylor  stated  what  appeared  to  be  a
(shared)  [majority]  view,  that  it  is  important  not  to  "kill  the  hostage"  by
destroying  the  North  Vietnamese  assets  inside  the  "Hanoi  do-nut."  (It  was
agreed)  [They  all  believe]  that  the  strike  program  is  essential  to  our  cam-
paign— both  psychologically  and  physically — but  that  it  cannot  be  expected
to  do  the  job  alone.  [They]  All  considered  it  very  important  that  strikes
against  the  North  be  continued  during  any  talks.

3.  None  of  (the  participants)  [them]  sees  a  dramatic  improvement  in  the
South  in  the  immediate  future.  (The)  [Their]  strategy  for  "victory"  (pro-
posed by  Ambassador  Taylor,  General  Wheeler,  Admiral  Sharp  and  Gen-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  359

eral  Westmoreland)  [however]  is  to  break  the  will  of  the  DRV  VC  by
denying  them  victory.  Ambassador  Taylor  put  it  in  terms  of  a  demonstra-
tion of  Communist  impotence,  which  will  lead  eventually  to  a  political
solution.  They  see  slow  improvement  in  the  South,  but  all  (participants)
emphasized  the  critical  importance  of  holding  on  and  avoiding — for  psycho-
logical and  moral  reasons — a  spectacular  defeat  of  GVN  or  US  forces.
And  they  all  suspect  that  the  recent  VC  lull  is  but  the  quiet  before  a
storm  .  .  .

The  documents  continue  with  specific  force  deployment  recommendations
that  were  agreed  upon  at  the  meeting.  In  addition,  McNaughton's  minutes  con-
tain the  following  concluding  item:

It  was  agreed  that  tasks  within  South  Vietnam  should  have  first  call  on
air  assets  in  the  area  [words  illegible]  necessary  tasks,  more  air  should  be
brought  in.  Secretary  McNamara  directed  that  this  policy  be  implemented
at  once.

From  this  evidence,  it  seems  apparent  that  Honolulu  marked  the  relative
downgrading  of  pressures  against  the  North,  in  favor  of  more  intensive  activity
in  the  South.  The  key  to  success,  it  was  now  felt,  was  not  to  destroy  or  defeat
the  enemy,  but  to  frustrate  him — "to  break  the  will  of  the  DRV/VC  by  denying
them  victory"  and,  above  all,  to  avoid,  for  our  part,  a  dramatic  defeat.  Thus
the  decision  at  this  point  was  to  "plateau"  the  air  strikes  more  or  less  at  the
prevailing  level,  relying  on  "repetition  and  continuation"  to  provide  increasing
pressure,  rather  than  to  pursue  the  relentless  dynamic  course  that  had  been
so  ardently  advocated  by  Ambassador  Taylor  and  Admiral  Sharp  in  February
and  March,  or  the  massive  destruction  of  the  North  Vietnamese  target  complex
so  consistently  advocated  by  the  Joint  Chiefs.  If  Honolulu  represented  more
than  a  "shotgun  wedding,"  if  it  reflected  in  fact  a  relatively  uncoerced  expres-
sion of  views,  the  leading  U.S.  actors  in  the  Vietnam  drama  must  have  under-
gone, in  the  intervening  weeks,  a  reordering  of  expectations  with  respect  to
the  results  that  bombing  might  achieve.  Their  views  at  this  point,  in  any  event,
were  strikingly  more  restrained  on  the  bombing  issue  than  they  had  been  pre-
viously.

An  alternative — and  less  charitable — explanation  might  be  that,  in  the  mean-
time, attention  had  shifted  from  the  air  war  to  the  subject  of  U.S.  combat  force
deployments,  and  had  thus  generated  a  need  to  concentrate  on  issues,  argu-
ments and  rationalizations  that  would  serve  to  promote  and  justify  these  new
actions.  Preoccupation  with  pressures  against  the  North  had  long  been  viewed
as  something  ot  a  competitor,  something  of  a  distraction,  by  many  advocates
of  a  more  forceful  U.S.  role  in  the  South.  Thus  it  seems  logical  that,  with  the
decision  to  begin  a  major  U.S.  ground  force  commitment,  the  air  campaign  should
have  been  reduced  in  rank  to  second  billing.


B. INTERDICTION  IS  SURFACED

Along  with  the  levelling-off  of  the  air  strikes  and  a  reordering  of  expectations
as  to  their  likely  effectiveness  came  the  decision  to  publicize  the  fact  that  "m-
terdiction"  was  now  a  major  objective  of  the  strikes.  It  will  be  recalled  that
LOC  interdiction  had  become  a  key  element  in  the  U.S.  target  rationale  begm-
ning  with  ROLLING  THUNDER  IX  (week  of  April  2).  After  Honolulu,  with
the  prospective  deepening  of  the  U.S.  involvement  on  the  ground  and  the  need


360 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

to  justify  that  involvement  in  terms  of  "resisting  NVN  aggression,"  it  seemed
desirable  to  stress  that  aspect  of  U.S.  action  more  explicitly  in  public.  Whereas
previously  there  had  been  only  passing  reference  to  the  fact  that  U.S.  air  attacks
on  North  Vietnam  had  been  aimed  at  targets  "associated  with  infiltration,"  it
was  now  decided  to  feature  interdiction  as  the  objective  of  U.S.  bombing.
Secretary  Rusk  made  first  public  mention  of  this  on  April  23,  when  he  stated:

The  bombing  is  designed  to  interdict,  as  far  as  possible,  and  to  inhibit,
as  far  as  may  be  necessary,  continued  aggression  against  the  Republic  of
Viet-Nam.

Three  days  later,  Secretary  McNamara  gave  a  special  briefing  to  the  press
corps  at  the  Pentagon,  complete  with  maps  and  photographs,  driving  home  the
point  of  massive  infiltration  from  the  North:

Now  the  current  [VNAF  and  U.S.]  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  have
been  designed  to  impede  this  infiltration  of  men  and  materiel,  and  infiltra-
tion which  makes  the  difference  between  a  situation  which  is  manageable
and  one  which  is  not  manageable  internally  by  the  Government  of  South
Vietnam.

The  air  strikes  have  been  carefully  limited  to  military  targets,  primarily
to  infiltration  targets.  To  transit  points,  to  barracks,  to  supply  depots,  to
ammunition  depots,  to  routes  of  communication,  all  feeding  the  infiltration
lines  from  North  Vietnam  into  Laos  and  then  into  South  Vietnam.

More  recently  there  has  been  added  to  this  target  system  railroads,  high-
ways, and  bridges  which  are  the  foundation  of  the  infiltration  routes  .  .  .

The  strikes  have  been  designed  to  increase  the  dependence  on  an
already  over-burdened  road  transport  system  by  denying  the  use  of  the
rail  hnes  in  the  South.  In  summary,  our  objectives  have  been  to  force  them
off  the  rails  onto  the  highways  and  off  the  highways  onto  their  feet  .  .  .

Supplementing  the  bridge  strikes,  armed  reconnaissance  is  being  con-
ducted along  truck  convoy  routes  against  maritime  traffic  and  rolling  stock
on  the  rail  lines  .  .  .

These  carefully  controlled  rail  strikes  will  continue  as  necessary  to  im-
pede the  infiltration  and  to  persuade  the  North  Vietnamese  leadership  that
their  aggression  against  the  south  will  not  succeed  .  .  .

C. POLITICAL  OBJECTIVES  ARE  REVIEWED

Now  that  interdiction  was  being  publicly  embraced  as  a  major  objective  of
the  bombing,  at  least  one  high-ranking  Administration  official  began  to  realize
that  insufficient  attention  had  been  paid  to  the  U.S.  political  posture  in  the  event
that  the  DRV  became  persuaded  "that  their  aggression  will  not  succeed."

As  early  as  April  1,  McGeorge  Bundy  expressed  his  concern  that  the  eventual
bargaining  tradeoffs  had  not  received  the  careful  consideration  that  they  de-
served. As  he  saw  it:

We  have  three  cards  of  some  value:  our  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,
our  military  presence  in  South  Vietnam,  and  the  political  and  economic
carrots  that  can  be  offered  to  Hanoi.  We  want  to  trade  these  cards  for
just  as  much  as  possible  of  the  following:  an  end  to  infiltration  of  men  and
supplies,  an  end  of  Hanoi's  direction,  control,  and  encouragement  of  the


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  361

Viet  Cong,  a  removal  of  cadres  under  direct  Hanoi  control,  and  a  dissolu-
tion of  the  organized  Viet  Cong  military  and  political  forces.  We  do  not
need  to  decide  today  just  how  we  wish  to  mesh  our  high  cards  against
Communist  concessions.  But  we  will  need  to  be  in  such  a  position  soon,  if
only  to  exchange  views  with  Quat.  On  this  more  general  point,  we  believe
more  exploratory  conversation  with  the  President  is  needed  todav.  [April  1]

Apparently,  however,  any  exploratory  conversation  that  took  place  on  that
and  other  occasions  failed  to  lead  to  a  clarification  of  what  the  U.S.  and  the
GVN  could  regard  as  "a  satisfactory  outcome"  in  Vietnam.  McGeorge  Bundy
continued  to  feel  a  sense  of  urgency  about  beginning  discussions  with  the  Saigon
Government  on  this  matter.  Thus  on  April  25  he  circulated  a  Memorandum  to
the  Principals,  lamenting  the  lack  of  progress  toward  such  discussions:

We  have  had  a  lot  of  discussion  among  ourselves  and  with  Embassy
Saigon  on  the  negotiating  track,  but  we  have  not  yet  had  serious  discus-
sions with  the  Republic  of  Vietnam.  Such  serious  discussions  are  the  neces-
sary preliminary  of  any  substantial  improvement  in  our  political  posture,
because  our  whole  position  depends  on  the  legitimacy  of  that  independent
government.

But  we  have  had  great  difficulty  in  talking  to  Quat  so  far  because  our
thinking  has  focused  so  sharply  on  the  complexities  of  the  bargaining  prob-
lem itself:

At  what  stage  would  we  stop  bombing?

At  what  point  and  with  what  guarantees  could  we  begin  to  withdraw?

What  are  the  real  terms  of  an  effective  cease-fire?
These  are  very  difficult  questions  and  the  truth  is  that  they  cannot  be  an-
swered today.  They  are  precisely  the  problems  which  will  have  to  be
settled  [words  illegible]  on  the  ground  and  hard  bargaining.  Moreover,  it
is  very  hard  for  us  to  look  these  questions  in  the  eye  with  Quat  &  Company
lest  each  of  us  begins  to  suspect  the  determination  of  the  other.

It  is  perhaps  worth  observing  that  these  very  same  questions  were  still  as
difficult  to  answer  and  as  devisive  in  April,  1968  as  they  seemed  to  Bundy  in
April,  1965.  But  at  that  time  Bundy  felt  that  a  different  approach  might  be
more  productive.  Thus  the  main  purpose  of  his  memorandum  was:

...  to  suggest  that  there  is  a  better  place  to  begin  on  this  problem:
namely,  by  getting  a  clearer  and  more  comprehensive  statement  of  the
elements  of  a  good  eventual  solution  inside  South  Vietnam.  We  can  and
should  work'ou't  with  Quat  a  program  whose  elements  could  include:

1.  Internationally  validated  free  elections,  first  locally,  than  regionally,
and  finally  on  a  national  basis.

2.  A  broad  and  generous  offer  of  political  amnesty  to  all  who  abandon
the  use  of  force,  coupled  with  the  right  of  repatriation  to  the  North,  or
opportunities  for  peaceful  resettlement  in  the  South.

3.  A  clear  opportunity  for  the  people  of  South  Vietnam  themselves  to
express  themselves  directly  on  the  peaceful  presence  of  Americans  and
other  foreigners  in  helping  with  the  peaceful  progress  of  Vietnam.

4.  Reciprocal  guarantees  against  any  border  violation  with  all  neighbors
of  South  Vietnam,  and  a  readiness  to  accept  international  patrols  along
these  borders.


362 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

5.  A  declaration  of  intent  to  work  for  the  unification  of  all  Vietnam  by
the  free  choice  of  its  people  and  a  readiness  to  accept  nationwide  free  elec-
tions for  this  purpose  if  this  position  is:

a.  Supported  by  the  people  of  South  Vietnam  in  appropriate  consti-
tutional process.

b.  Accepted  by  the  Government  of  North  Vietnam,  and

c.  Validated  by  effectively  guaranteed  rights  of  free  political  activity
for  all  parties  in  both  parts  of  the  country.

There  are  other  elements  to  a  strong  GVN  [words  missing]  our  own
political  position  needs  now  to  be  built  on  a  clearer  and  stronger  statement
of  objectives  from  Saigon  itself.

Once  this  stronger  position  of  Saigon  is  established,  the  US  could  add
its  own  support  and  its  own  determination  to  be  guided  by  the  freely  ex-
pressed wishes  of  the  people  of  South  Vietnam.  It  could  express  its  readi-
ness to  give  peaceful  help  to  such  a  settled  country,  and  it  could  reaffirm
its  readiness  to  participate  in  appropriate  international  guarantees.  It  could
also  reaffirm  its  determination  to  support  the  GVN  until  this  program  is
accepted.

But  the  "strong  GVN  program"  Bundy  had  in  mind  clearly  did  not  contemplate
any  serious  compromise  with  the  NLF.  It  was  a  politically  strengthened,  inter-
nationally guaranteed.  Western-oriented  government  Bundy  was  seeking  to  create
— at  least  in  appearance  if  not  in  reality.  The  grinding  problem  of  the  ultimate
role  of  the  NLF  was  left  unaddressed  and  in  limbo:

The  probability  is  that  any  such  program  would  and  should  leave  open
the  exact  opportunities  open  to  the  Liberation  Front  and  its  members  in
the  new  politics  of  South  Vietnam.  This  is  as  it  should  be,  since  this  point
is  precisely  the  one  which  can  only  be  settled  by  events  and  bargaining.

It  is  a  striking  fact  that,  in  April,  1968,  three  years  later,  this  crucial  point
was  still  viewed  as  one  which  can  only  be  settled  by  events  and  bargaining.

XII. PROJECT  MAYFLOWER— THE  FIRST  BOMBING  PAUSE

A. THE  BACKGROUND

Pressure  for  some  form  of  bombing  halt  had  mounted  steadily  throughout
April  and  early  May.  As  early  as  April  2,  Canada's  Prime  Minister  Lester  Pear-
son, on  his  way  to  meet  with  President  Johnson,  had  stopped  off  to  make  a
speech  in  Philadelphia  in  which  he  suggested  that  the  President  should  order  a
"pause"  in  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam.

Pearson's  gratuitous  advice  was  particularly  galling  to  the  President  because
the  pause  had  become  the  battle  slogan  of  the  anti-Vietnam  movement.  Students
had  picketed  the  LBJ  Ranch  in  Texas,  demanding  a  cessation  of  bombing.  A
massive  teach-in  had  been  scheduled  for  May  15  in  Washington,  with  academi-
cians who  wanted  withdrawal  of  American  influence  from  the  Asian  mainland,
ready  to  demand  as  a  first  step  an  immediate  end  of  the  bombing.  Pressure  for
a  pause  was  building  up,  too,  in  Congress  among  liberal  Democrats.  The  U.N.
Secretary  General  was  on  a  continual  bombing  pause  kick,  with  a  proposal  for
a  three  month  suspension  of  bombing  in  return  for  Hanoi's  agreement  to  cease
infiltration  in  South  Vietnam.  U  Thant  had  told  Ambassador  Stevenson  on  April


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  363

24  that  he  believed  such  a  gesture  would  facilitate  renewed  non-aligned  pressure
upon  Hanoi  to  negotiate.

Evidently,  however,  the  President  was  not  impressed  with  the  widespread
clamor  that  such  a  gesture  would  evoke  any  response  from  Hanoi.  He  had
responded  favorably  to  the  17-Nation  appeal  in  his  April  7th  speech,  only  to  be
answered  with  blunt  rejection  by  Hanoi  and  Peking.  The  US.  had  responded
favorably  to  the  idea  of  a  Cambodian  Conference  that  would  provide  oppor-
tunities for  "corridor  contacts"  with  Communist  powers  on  the  Vietnam  problem,
but  Peking  had  apparently  blocked  that  initiative.  Encouragement  had  been
given  to  a  UK  approach  to  the  Soviets  in  February  looking  toward  consultations
under  Article  19  of  the  1962  Geneva  Accords,  but  no  response  from  the  USSR
had  been  received.  The  Radhakrishnan  proposal  for  a  cease-fire  along  the  17th
parallel,  supervised  by  an  "Afro-Asian  Force"  was  being  favorably  considered
by  the  U.S.  only  to  be  denounced  as  a  "plot"  by  Peking  and  as  an  "offense"  by
Hanoi.  Publicly,  the  President  was  plaintive:

There  are  those  who  frequently  talk  of  negotiations  and  political  settle-
ment and  that  they  believe  this  is  the  course  we  should  pursue,  and  so  do
I.  When  they  talk  that  way  I  say,  welcome  to  the  club.  I  want  to  negotiate.
I  would  much  rather  talk  than  fight,  and  I  think  everyone  would.  Bring
in  who  you  want  us  to  negotiate  with.  I  have  searched  high  and  wide,  and
I  am  a  reasonably  good  cowboy,  and  I  can't  even  rope  anybody  and  bring
them  in  who  is  willing  to  talk  and  settle  this  by  negotiation.  We  send  them
messages  through  allies — one  country,  two  countries,  three  countries,  four
or  five  countries — all  have  tried  to  be  helpful.  The  distinguished  British
citizen,  Mr.  (Patrick  Gordon)  Walker,  has  been  out  there,  and  they  say,
we  can't  even  talk  to  you.  All  our  intelligence  is  unanimous  in  this  one  point,
that  they  see  no  need  for  negotiation.  They  think  they  are  winning  and
they  have  won  and  why  should  they  sit  down  and  give  us  something  and
settle  with  us.

But  while  the  public  clamor  persisted  and  became  more  and  more  difficult
to  ignore,  the  President  was  receiving  intelligence  assessments  from  Saigon  and
from  Washington  that  tended  to  confirm  his  reading  of  Hanoi's  disinterest  in
negotiations,  but  that  provided  him  with  a  quite  different  argument  for  a  bomb-
ing pause  at  this  time:  if  the  conflict  was  going  to  have  to  be  expanded  and
bombing  intensified  before  Hanoi  would  "come  to  reason,"  it  would  be  easier
and  pohtically  more  palatable  to  do  so  after  a  pause,  which  would  afford  an
opportunity  for  the  enemy's  intentions  to  be  more  clearly  revealed.

On  May  4,  in  response  to  an  urgent  request  from  Washington,  Ambassador
Taylor  submitted  a  U.S.  Mission  "Assessment  of  DRV/VC  Probable  Courses  of
Action  During  the  Next  Three  Months."  The  assessment  confirmed  the  Washing-
ton view  that  Hanoi  continued  to  have  a  very  favorable  view  of  its  prospects  for
victory:

.  .  .  Tone  of  statements  emanating  from  Hanoi  since  1  February  and
March]  indicate  that  the  DRV  has  not  weakened  in  its  determination  to
continue  directing  and  supporting  Viet  Cong  and  seeking  further  intensifica-
tion of  war  in  the  South.

From  DRV  viewpoint,  outlook  is  probably  still  favorable  despite  air
strikes  on  North.  Although  their  general  transportation  system  in  North
has  been  significantly  damaged,  thus  somewhat  reducing  their  infiltration


364 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

capability,  Hanoi  may  calculate  it  can  accept  level  of  damage  being  inflicted
as  reasonable  price  to  pay  for  chance  of  victory  in  South.  Viet  Cong  forces
in  south  retain  capability  of  taking  local  initiatives  on  ground,  although
they  must  accept  cost  of  heavier  losses  from  tactical  air  support,  and  their
morale  possibly  has  been  reduced  by  recent  developments.  GVN  force  levels
still  are  not  adequate  to  cope  with  these  Viet  Cong  capabilities.  Despite
relative  longevity  of  Quat  Govt.,  which  marks  improvement  over  previous
recent  Govts.,  political  situation  is  still  basically  unstable.  While  military
and  civilian  morale  has  risen,  rumblings  among  generals  continue,  suspicion
among  political  and  religious  groups  persist  and  are  subject  to  exploitation
by  communists.  On  balance,  Hanoi  probably  believes  it  has  [words  illegible]
for  expectation  that  Viet  Cong,  who  were  clearly  making  progress  as  re-
cently as  February,  can  regain  the  initiative  and,  by  the  application  of
offensive  power,  can  create  an  atmosphere  in  which  negotiations  favorable
to  the  DRV  can  be  instituted.

Given  this  situation,  the  report  argued,  the  most  probable  course  of  action  that
Hanoi  would  pursue  is  to  continue  its  efforts  to  expand  its  military  action  in  the
South,  "including  covert  introduction  of  additional  PAVN  units  on  order  of
several  regiments.  This  course  offers  .  .  .  the  prospect  of  achieving  major  mili-
tary gains  capable  of  offsetting  US/GVN  application  of  air  power.  Such  gains
would  expand  Viet  Cong  areas  of  control  and  might  lead  to  political  demoraliza-
tion in  South  Vietnam."

A  similarly  unencouraging  assessment  had  been  submitted  to  the  President  by
the  Board  of  National  Estimates  on  April  22.  In  a  "highly  sensitive,  limited  dis-
tribution" memorandum,  the  leading  personalities  of  the  U.S.  intelligence  com-
munity concurred  in  the  prediction  that:

If  present  US  policies  continue  without  the  introduction  of  large  addi-
tional forces  or  increased  US  air  effort,  the  Communists  are  likely  to  hold
to  their  existing  policy  of  seeking  victory  in  the  local  military  struggle  in
South  Vietnam.  They  will  try  to  intensify  that  struggle,  supporting  it  with
additional  men  and  equipment.  At  the  same  time,  DRV  air  defenses  will  be
strengthened  through  Soviet  and  perhaps  Chinese  aid.

If,  however,  the  U.S.  deepens  its  involvement  by  increasing  its  combat  role  and
intensifying  its  air  effort,  the  intelligence  officers  believed:

.  .  .  that  the  Viet  Cong,  North  Vietnam,  and  China  would  initially  .  .  .
try  to  offset  the  new  enemy  strength  by  stepping  up  the  insurgency,  rein-
forcing the  Viet  Cong  with  the  men  and  equipment  necessary.  They  would
likely  count  on  time  being  on  their  side  and  try  to  force  the  piecemeal  en-
gagement of  US  troops  under  conditions  which  might  bog  them  down  in
jungle  warfare,  hoping  to  present  the  US  with  a  de  facto  partition  of  the
country.  The  Soviet  Union  .  .  .  would  almost  certainly  acquiesce  in  a  de-
cision by  Hanoi  to  intensify  the  struggle.

This  lack  of  any  real  prospect  of  "give"  on  the  enemy's  part  was  also  con-
firmed by  Admiral  Raborn,  shortly  after  he  had  succeeded  John  McCone  as
Director  of  Central  Intelligence.  On  the  day  of  Raborn's  swearing-in  (April  28),
the  President  had  given  him  a  letter  from  McCone  (apparently  worded  along
the  lines  of  his  memorandum  described  in  Section  IX.E.  of  this  study)  which


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  365

McCone  had  handed  to  the  President  as  his  last  official  act.  The  President  had
asked  Raborn  for  his  own  comments  on  McCone's  views.  Raborn's  comments,
circulated  to  Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara  on  May  6,  included  the  following:

Our  limited  bombing  of  the  North  and  our  present  ground-force  build-up
in  the  South  are  not  likely  to  exert  sufficient  pressure  on  the  enemy  to
cause  him  to  meet  our  present  terms  in  the  foreseeable  future.  I  note  very
recent  evidence  which  suggests  that  our  military  pressures  are  becoming
somewhat  more  damaging  to  the  enemy  within  South  Vietnam,  but  I  am
inclined  to  doubt  that  this  damage  is  increasing  at  a  rate  which  will  bring
him  quickly  to  the  conference  table.

With  particular  reference  to  McCone's  recommendation  that  the  US  add  much
heavier  air  action  against  the  North  to  its  planned  combat  force  deployment  to
the  South,  Raborn  indicated  his  agreement,  and  expressed  his  belief  that  such  an
action  would  have  the  following  consequences :

The  DRV  is,  in  my  view,  unlikely  to  engage  in  meaningful  discussions  at
any  time  in  coming  months  until  US  air  attacks  have  begun  to  damage  or
destroy  its  principal  economic  and  military  targets.  I  thus  concur  with  the
USIB's  judgment  of  18  February  1965,  that,  given  such  US  punishment,
the  enemy  would  be  "somewhat  more  likely"  to  decide  to  make  some  effort
to  secure  a  respite,  rather  than  to  intensify  the  struggle  further  and  accept
the  consequent  risks.

And  then  he  added  the  following  advice :

Insofar  as  possible,  we  should  try  to  manage  any  program  of  expanded
bombings  in  ways  which  (1)  would  leave  the  DRV  an  opportunity  to  ex-
plore negotiations  without  complete  loss  of  face,  (2)  would  not  preclude
any  Soviet  pressures  on  Hanoi  to  keep  the  war  from  expanding,  and  (3)
would  not  suddenly  produce  extreme  world  pressures  against  us.  In  this
connection,  timing  and  circumstances  in  which  the  bombings  were  ex-
tended northward  could  be  of  critical  importance,  particularly  in  light  of
the  fact  that  there  have  been  some  indications  of  differing  views  between
Moscow,  Peiping,  and  Hanoi.  For  example,  it  would  probably  be  advan-
tageous to  expand  bombings  after,  not  before,  some  major  new  VC  move
(e.g.,  obvious  concentration  for  imminent  attack  on  Da  Nang  or  Kontum)
and  after,  not  before,  any  current  possibilities  of  serious  nci^otiations  have
been  fully  tested.  And  such  bombings  should  not  be  so  regular  as  to  leave  no
interval  for  the  Communists  to  make  concessions  with  some  grace.  Indeed,
we  should  keep  in  mind  the  possibility  of  a  pause  at  some  appropriate  time,
which  could  serve  to  test  the  Communist  intentions  and  to  exploit  any
differences  on  their  side.  (Emphasis  supplied)

One  other  consideration  may  have  entered  into  the  President's  bombing  pause
calculus  at  this  time.  On  April  5,  a  TROJAN  HORSE  photography  mission  had
revealed  the  first  SA-2  SAM  site  under  construction  fifteen  miles  SSE  of  Hanoi,
confirming  the  long-rumored  shipment  of  Soviet  surface-to-air  missiles  to  North
Vietnam.  Moreover,  the  SAMs  were  only  the  most  dramatic  form  of  considerably
increased  quantities  of  modern  military  equipment  beginning  to  be  furnished  to
the  DRV  by  the  Soviet  Union.  The  Soviet  Union  was  now  in  the  process  of


366 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol,  III

becoming  visibly  committed  to  assisting  North  Vietnam  in  resisting  U.S.  attacks
on  its  territory,  and  a  more  direct  confrontation  of  US  and  USSR  military  force
was  rapidly  approaching.  Indeed,  the  Joint  Chiefs  had  indicated,  on  April  14,
their  desire  to  obtain  approval  for  air  strikes  against  the  sites  on  short  notice  as
they  become  operational,  had  estimated,  on  May  6,  that  the  first  site  construction
could  be  completed  by  May  15,  and  had  instructed  CINCPAC  to  commence
planning  to  conduct  air  strikes  against  that  site.  A  decision  involving  a  major
Soviet  "flashpoint,"  therefore,  would  soon  have  to  be  faced,  and  the  President
may  well  have  wished  to  provide  a  prior  opportunity  for  a  quiet  Hanoi  back-
down, before  proceeding  with  more  forceful  military  activity.

B. SETTING  THE  STAGE

On  the  evening  of  May  10  the  President  sent  a  personal  FLASH  message  to
Ambassador  Taylor,  informing  him  that  he  (the  President)  had  decided  to  call
a  brief  halt  to  air  attacks  in  the  North  and  instructing  him  to  obtain  Premier
Quat's  agreement  to  the  plan.  The  text  of  the  message  follows:

I  have  learned  from  Bob  McNamara  that  nearly  all  ROLLING  THUN-
DER operations  for  this  week  can  be  completed  by  Wednesday  noon,
Washington  time.  This  fact  and  the  davs  of  Buddha's  birthday  seem  to  me
to  provide  an  excellent  opportunity  for  a  pause  in  air  attacks  which  might
go  into  next  week  and  which  I  could  use  to  good  effect  with  world  opinion.

My  plan  is  not  to  announce  this  brief  pause  but  simply  to  call  it  privately
to  the  attention  of  Moscow  and  Hanoi  as  soon  as  possible  and  tell  them
that  we  shall  be  watching  closely  to  see  whether  they  respond  in  any  way.
My  current  plan  is  to  report  publicly  after  the  pause  ends  on  what  we  have
done.

Could  you  see  Quat  right  away  on  Tuesday  and  see  if  you  can  persuade
him  to  concur  in  this  plan.  I  would  like  to  associate  him  with  me  in  this
decision  if  possible,  but  I  would  accept  a  simple  concurrence  or  even  willing-
ness not  to  oppose  my  decision.  In  general,  I  think  it  important  that  he  and
I  should  act  together  in  such  matters,  but  I  have  no  desire  to  embarrass  him
if  it  is  pohtically  difficult  for  him  to  join  actively  in  a  pause  over  Buddha's
birthday.

We  have  noted  your  [recent  cables]  but  do  not  yet  have  your  appreciation
of  the  political  effect  in  Saigon  of  acting  around  Buddha's  birthday.  From
my  point  of  view  it  is  a  great  advantage  to  use  Buddha's  birthday  to  mask
the  first  days  of  the  pause  here,  if  it  is  at  all  possible  in  political  terms  for
Quat.  I  assume  we  could  undertake  to  enlist  the  Archbishop  and  the  Nuncio
in  calming  the  Catholics.

You  should  understand  that  my  purpose  in  this  plan  is  to  begin  to  clear
a  path  either  toward  restoration  of  peace  or  toward  increased  military  action,
depending  upon  the  reaction  of  the  Communists.  We  have  amply  demon-
strated our  determination  and  our  commitment  in  the  last  two  months,  and
I  now  wish  to  gain  some  flexibility.

I  know  that  this  is  a  hard  assignment  on  short  notice,  but  there  is  no  one
who  can  bring  it  off  better.

I  have  kept  this  plan  in  the  tightest  possible  circle  here  and  wish  you  to
inform  no  one  but  Alexis  Johnson.  After  I  have  your  report  of  Quat's  re-
action I  will  make  a  final  decision  and  it  will  be  communicated  promptly  to
senior  officers  concerned.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  367

Ambassador  Taylor  promptly  relayed  the  President's  plan  to  Quai,  whose
major  objection  was  to  the  notion  of  linking  the  pause  in  any  way  with  Buddha's
birthday.  Taylor  reported  this  objection  to  Washington  and  received  the  follow-
ing additional  instructions  from  the  Department  in  return.

We  have  decided  here  to  go  ahead  commencing  on  Thursday  [May  13]
for  period  of  approximately  5-7  days.  Orders  through  military  channels
will  place  stand-down  on  basis  "in  order  to  observe  reaction  of  DRV  rail
and  road  transportation  systems"  and  will  order  increase  in  photo  recce  of
DRV  and  bombing  within  SVN.  You  should  tell  Westmoreland  true  basis
for  his  personal  use  only  so  that  you  and  he  and  Alex  Johnson  remain  the
only  three  Americans  in  Saigon  aboard.  We  have  informed  Dobrynin  to-
night and  are  instructing  Kohler  to  convey  message  to  Hanoi  through  DRV
Ambassador  in  Moscow.  I  will  also  be  telling  British  and  Canadian  Foreign
Ministers  personally  tomorrow  and  we  will  convey  message  to  Menzies
through  Embassy  here.  However,  each  of  these  being  informed  only  at
highest  levels  and  their  Saigon  representatives  will  not  repeat  not  be  witting.

You  should  take  following  actions:

1.  Inform  Quat  we  are  going  ahead.  You  should  not  specify  period  but
let  us  know  if  he  raises  question  or  still  insists  on  as  short  a  period  as
4-5  days  [words  illegible]  refrain  at  all  times  from  associating  action  with
Buddha's  birthday  and  that  our  initial  plan  will  be  to  refer  all  press  queries
to  Washington  and  to  hold  as  long  as  possible  simply  to  operational  factors
as  explanation.  You  should  raise  with  him  question  of  what  he  will  tell
generals  urging  in  strongest  terms  that  he  tell  them  only  what  we  are  saying
through  military  channel  and  preferably  delay  even  this  until  question  arises.
If  Quat  raises  question  of  what  we  are  saying  to  Communist  side,  you  will
have  copies  tonight's  talk  with  Dobrynin  and  instructions  to  Kohler  by
septels  and  may  draw  generally  .on  these  for  his  personal  use  only.

2.  To  deal  with  any  possibility  adverse  Catholic  reaction  you  should  in-
form Archbishop  and/or  Nuncio  very  privately  that  any  variation  in  actions
in  forthcoming  period  will  be  USG  decisions  not  related  in  any  way  to
Buddha's  birthday  or  any  appeal  or  issue  connected  with  it.  You  may  of

-  course  also  reiterate  that  any  such  variations  have  no  effect  whatever  on
our  determination  as  clearly  shown  in  recent  months.  We  leave  timing  this
approach  to  you  but  believe  it  should  be  done  earliest  before  any  speculation
arises.

3.  At  appropriate  time  you  should  instruct  Zorthian  to  report  simply  that
no  operations  other  than  reconnaissance  were  conducted  on  each  day  and
to  refer  press  queries,  preferably  by  indirection,  to  Washington.

A  few  hours  later,  Secretary  McNamara,  with  the  concurrence  of  Secretary
Rusk  and  McGeorge  Bundy,  sent  the  following  FLASH  joint  State  Defense
message  through  military  channels  to  Ambassador  Taylor,  CINCPAC  and
COMUSMACV:

In  order  to  observe  reaction  of  DRV  rail  and  road  transportation  systems,
bombing  (including  armed  recce  and  other  strike  operations)  of  targets
within  DRV  will  cease  for  several  days  effective  2400  12  May  Saigon  time.
CINCPAC  should  issue  the  necessary  instructions  to  US  forces  and  Am-
bassador should  seek  to  obtain  compliance  of  VNAF.


368 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  T'o/.  ///

During  the  period  in  which  bombing  operations  are  suspended,  photo  and
eyeball  reconnaissance  flights  over  DRV,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  carried
out  without  flak  suppression  escorts  and  within  currently  approved  rules
relating  to  altitudes  and  latitudes,  will  be  increased  to  the  level  required  to
permit  a  thorough  study  of  lines  of  communication.  The  bombing  sorties
which  would  have  been  directed  against  the  DRV  during  this  period,  to
the  extent  practical,  will  be  targeted  against  appropriate  targets  in  South
Vietnam.

ROLLING  THUNDER  15  as  outlined  in  ICS  1736  has  been  approved.
It  is  to  be  executed  upon  receipt  of  appropriate  execution  orders.

Press  guidance  for  the  period  during  which  bombing  operations  are
suspended  will  be  furnished  in  a  separate  message.

Acting  on  these  instructions,  Tavlor  saw  Quat  in  Saigon  on  the  morning  of
May  12.  and  reported  back  as  follows:

Along  with  Alex  Johnson,  I  called  this  morning  to  convey  to  Quat  the
information  contained  in  Department's  instructions.  I  told  him  that  his
views  with  regard  to  linking  the  pause  with  Buddha's  birthday  had  been
accepted  and  that  this  element  had  been  removed  from  the  plan.  I  explained
that  the  pause  begins  tomorrow  (Saigon  time)  and  will  continue  for  several
days.  As  he  did  not  raise  any  question  with  regard  to  the  precise  duration,
I  did  not  elaborate.  He  liked  the  militarv  justification  for  the  pause  as  ex-
plained in  REFTEL  and  undertook  to  remain  within  this  language  in  dealing
with  his  generals.  I  assured  him  that  General  Westmoreland  would  do  the
same  in  his  military  contacts.

We  explained  to  Quat  how  the  message  was  being  conveyed  to  the  USSR
and  Hanoi.  He  had  no  comment  except  to  express  doubt  that  any  detectable
change  in  DRV  conduct  will  take  place  during  the  suspension  of  attacks.

As  for  comment  to  the  press,  he  repeated  his  intention  to  ward  off  queries
by  references  to  "Operational  Requirements."

While  securing  Quat's  support  has  been  somewhat  easier  than  I  had
anticipated,  I  am  sure  that  he  and  his  colleagues  will  become  uneasy  very
quickly  if  this  pause  runs  beyond  the  "four  to  five  days'*  which  Quat  has
indicated  to  be  acceptable  from  his  point  of  view.  I  would  hope  that  our
purposes  can  have  been  fulfilled  within  the  five  day  period.

With  regard  to  paragraph  2  [of  Department's  instructions],  Johnson  and
I  feel  that  it  is  unnecessary  and  probably  undesirable  to  approach  Arch-
bishop Binh  or  the  Nuncio  at  this  time.  We  will  watch  closely  the  local
reaction  to  the  suspension  and  convey  the  message  to  the  Catholic  leader-
ship, if  necessary,  at  a  timely  moment.

Much  additional  attention  was  lavished  by  Washington  upon  maintaining  near-
absolute  secrecy,  preserving  a  plausible  front  vis-a-vis  the  press,  and  other  aspects
of  stage  management.  On  Mav  12,  the  operation  was  given  the  codeword  MAY-
FLOWER, and  all  communications  on  it  were  thenceforth  to  be  slugged  w^th
that  indication,  [words  illegible]  Johnson,  the  onlv  Americans  [words  illegible]
of  MAYFLOWER  were  William  Sullivan  in  Vientiane,  Foy  Kohler  in  Moscow,
and  Winthrop  Brown  in  Seoul — the  latter  only  for  the  purpose  of  informing
President  Park  Chung  Hee  who  was  about  to  embark  on  a  state  visit  to  Washing-
ton and  who,  the  Department  felt,  should  be  forewarned  so  that  he  might  more
effectively  fend  off  press  probings.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  369

On  the  evening  of  May  1 1 ,  Secretary  Rusk  made  two  moves  designed  to  in-
form "the  other  side"  of  the  fact  that  a  bombing  halt  was  being  called  and  of
its  political  purpose:

1.  He  sent  a  cable  to  Foy  Kohler  in  Moscow,  instructing  him  to  make  urgent
contact  with  the  DRV  Ambassador  in  Moscow  to  convey  a  carefullv  prepared
message  to  him,  as  quoted  below.  The  cable  set  forth  the  instructions  and  ra-
tionale as  follows:

.  .  .  We  are  using  you  as  channel  to  avoid  using  Soviets  as  intermediaries
and  also  to  insure  that  message  is  accurately  and  directly  delivered.  We
leave  appropriate  method  of  arranging  contact  to  you  and  are  not  concerned
if  Soviets  should  become  aware  you  are  making  such  contact.  You  should
of  course  make  maximum  effort  avoid  any  attention  by  any  third  party.

Message  you  should  deliver  should  be  oral  but  confirmed  by  written  piece
of  paper  which  you  should  hand  to  Ambassador  with  request  he  deliver
message  to  Hanoi.  Message  is  as  follows:

BEGIN  TEXT.  The  highest  authority  in  this  Government  has  asked  me
to  inform  Hanoi  that  there  will  be  no  air  attacks  on  North  Viet-Nam  for
a  period  beginning  at  noon,  Washington  time,  Wednesday,  May  12,  and
running  into  next  week.

In  this  decision  the  United  States  Government  has  taken  account  of
repeated  suggestions  from  various  quarters,  including  public  statements  by
Hanoi  representatives,  that  there  can  be  no  progress  toward  peace  while
there  are  air  attacks  on  North  Viet-Nam.  The  United  States  Government
remains  convinced  that  the  underlying  cause  of  trouble  in  Southeast  Asia
is  armed  action  against  the  people  and  Government  of  South  Vietnam  by
forces  whose  actions  can  be  decisively  affected  from  North  Vietnam.  The
United  States  will  be  very  watchful  to  see  whether  in  this  period  of  pause
there  are  significant  reductions  in  such  armed  actions  by  such  forces.  (The
United  States  must  emphasize,  that  the  road  toward  the  end  of  armed
attacks  against  the  people  and  -  Government  of  Vietnam  is  the  only  road
which  will  permit  the  Government  of  Vietnam  (and  the  Government  of  the
United  States)  to  bring  a  permanent  end  to  their  attacks  on  Nonh  Viet-
nam.) .  .  .  [words  illegible]  be  misunderstood  as  an  indication  of  weakness,
and  it  is  therefore  necessary  for  me  to  point  out  that  if  this  pause  should  be
misunderstood  in  this  fashion,  by  any  party,  it  would  be  necessary  to  demon-
strate more  clearly  than  ever,  after  the  pause  ended,  that  the  United  States
is  determined  not  to  accept  aggression  without  reply  in  Vietnam.  Moreover,
the  United  States  must  point  out  that  the  decision  to  end  air  attacks  for
this  limited  trial  period  is  one  which  it  must  be  free  to  reverse  if  at  any
time  in  the  coming  days  there  should  be  actions  by  the  other  side  in  Vietnam
which  required  immediate  reply.

But  my  Government  is  verv  hopeful  that  there  will  be  no  such  misunder-
standing and  that  this  first  pause  in  the  air  attacks  may  meet  with  a  response
which  will  permit  further  and  more  extended  suspension  of  this  form  of
military  action  in  the  expectation  of  equally  constructive  actions  by  the
other  side  in  the  future.  END  TEXT.

2.  He  summoned  Soviet  Ambassador  Anatol  Dobrynin  to  his  office  in  the
State  Department  and  made  virtually  the  same  oral  statement  to  him,  confirmed
by  a  parallel  written  version  handed  to  him.  Rusk,  that  same  evening  described
the  meeting  to  Foy  Kohler  in  a  second  cable,  sent  immediately  after  the  message
quoted  above:


370 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111

I  explained  we  were  not  indicating  any  precise  number  of  days,  that  we
retained  freedom  of  action,  and  that  we  would  convey  similar  message  to
Hanoi.  I  also  said  we  would  make  no  announcement  although  we  expected
press  pressures,  and  made  clear  our  action  related  only  to  strikes  of  any
sort  and  not  to  continued  reconnaissance.  (Paper  itself  makes  clear  action
confined  to  DRV  and  does  not  include  Laos  or  SVN.)

I  also  said  we  did  not  know  what  to  expect  but  that  Hanoi  knows  what  it
is  doing  and  can  find  a  way  to  make  its  response  clear.

Dobrynin  noted  we  were  merely  informing  Soviets  and  was  clearly  re-
lieved we  not  asking  them  to  act  as  intermediary.  Asked  about  my  trip  to
Vienna  and  indicated  there  might  be  further  conversations  there  Saturday
with  Gromyko.  Asked  basically  whether  action  represented  any  change  in
fundamental  US  position.

I  replied  that  it  did  not  and  that  this  should  be  no  surprise.

I  reviewed  recent  indications  that  Cambodia  conference  blocked  by
Peiping  despite  favorable  mention  in  DRV-Moscow  communique  and  that
three-party  talks  on  Laos  likewise  in  abeyance  apparently  following  Peiping
and  perhaps  Hanoi  pressure.  President  on  April  7  had  tried  open  up  dis-
course but  thus  far  channels  blocked.  If  attacks  on  DRV  were  part  of
problem,  Communist  response  to  present  action  might  open  up  channels.

Dobrynin  said  he  thought  we  would  get  some  answer  but  could  not  predict
what.

I  underscored  importance  action  not  be  misunderstood  in  Hanoi.  Hanoi
appears  to  have  impression  they  may  succeed,  but  US  will  not  get  tired  or
be  affected  by  very  small  domestic  opposition  or  by  international  pressures,
Hanoi  cannot  rely  on  Saigon  instability.  They  may  have  wrong  ideas  on
these  points  and  important  they  not  misunderstand  our  action.

Dobrynin  responded  he  saw  no  danger  of  misunderstanding  but  problem
was  to  find  way.

Parallel  with  the  Secretary's  diplomatic  moves,  the  President  made  a  major
public  address  on  the  first  day  of  the  bombing  pause,  in  which  he  made  no  refer-
ence to  the  pause,  but  in  which  he  urged  Hanoi  to  consider  a  "political  solution."
The  speech,  embracing  the  theme  of  the  "three  faces  of  war"  ( 1 .  armed  conflict,
2.  diplomacy  and  politics,  and  3.  human  need)  contained  the  following  passage:

The  second  face  of  war  in  Viet-Nam  is  the  quest  for  a  political  solution
— the  face  of  diplomacy  and  politics — of  the  ambitions  and  the  interests  of
other  nations.  We  know,  as  our  adversaries  should  also  know,  that  there  is
no  purely  military  solution  in  sight  for  either  side.  We  are  ready  for  un-
conditional discussions.  Most  of  the  non-Communist  nations  of  the  world
favor  such  unconditional  discussions.  And  it  would  clearly  be  in  the  interest
of  North  Vietnam  to  now  come  to  the  conference  table.  For  them  the  con-
tinuation of  war,  without  talks,  means  only  damage  without  conquest.  Com-
munist China  apparently  desires  the  war  to  continue  whatever  the  cost  to
their  allies.  Their  target  is  not  merely  South  Viet-Nam;  it  is  Asia.  Their
objective  is  not  the  fulfillment  of  Vietnamese  nationalism;  it  is  to  erode  and
to  discredit  America's  ability  to  help  prevent  Chinese  domination  over  all
of  Asia.

In  this  domination  they  will  never  succeed.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  371


C. TRANSMITTING  THE  MESSAGES

Foy  Kohler  in  Moscow,  upon  receiving  the  Secretary's  instructions,  directed
his  Deputy  Chief  of  Mission  to  telephone  the  North  Vietnamese  Embassy  on
the  morning  of  May  12  to  request  an  urgent  appointment  for  Ambassador
Kohler  with  the  North  Vietnamese  Ambassador.  The  latter  declined  to  receive
the  American  Ambassador  "in  view  of  the  absence  of  diplomatic  relations  be-
tween our  two  countries,"  and  suggested  instead  that  the  "important,  high  level
private  message"  from  the  US  Government  which  Ambassador  Kohler  wished  to
communicate  to  the  NVN  Ambassador  be  sent  to  the  Soviet  Government  "in
its  capacity  as  Co-Chairman  of  the  Geneva  Conference."

Kohler  felt  it  would  not  be  productive  to  press  the  NVN  embassy  further,
and  cabled  the  Department  for  instructions  as  to  which  of  two  alternatives  he
should  pursue:  "(1)  Transmit  message  by  letter  via  messenger  to  NVN  am-
bassador; or  (2)  seek  appointment  with  Acting  Foreign  Minister  Kuznetsov  to
convey  message."

The  Department's  reply  was  as  follows:

Believe  you  should  pursue  both  alternatives  urgently,  explaining  to
Kuznetsov  (who  will  by  now  have  heard  from  Dobrynin)  that  you  recognize
reluctance  of  Soviets  to  act  as  intermediary  and  are  asking  solely  that  Soviets
transmit  message  to  DRV  Ambassador  in  accordance  with  DRV  suggestion.

Kohler  acted  prompdy  on  both  alternatives.  He  transmitted  the  "oral"  com-
munication to  the  DRV  Ambassador  under  cover  of  a  letter  signed  by  Kohler,
which  read  as  follows :

In  accordance  with  the  suggestion  made  by  a  member  of  your  staff  today,
I  am  attempting  to  reach  the  Acting  Foreign  Minister  tonight.

Since  this  may  not  be  possible  and  because  of  its  importance,  I  enclose
the  message  I  had  hoped  to  be'  able  to  convey  to  you  personally  earlier
today.

However,  though  hand-delivered  by  an  American  embassy  employee  to  a  DRV
employee,  the  communication  was  returned  the  following  morning  in  a  plain  en-
velope addressed  simply  Embassy  of  US  of  A.

At  the  same  time,  Kohler  sought  an  urgent  appointment  with  Acting  Foreign
Minister  Kuznetsov  (Gromyko  being  out  of  town)  but  Kuznetsov  was  not  avail-
able and  Kohler  was  able  to  see  only  Deputy  Foreign  Minister  Firyubin.  The
latter,  after  some  temporizing,  flatly  refused  his  government's  services  as  an
intermediary  and  lectured  Kohler  at  length  upon  the  US  misconception  of  the
real  nature  of  the  conflict  in  Vietnam.  Kohler's  account  of  the  conversation
follows:

I  informed  Firyubin  that  as  he  must  know  from  report  of  Dobrynin's  con-
versation with  Secretary,  US  Government  has  made  decision  which  we
hoped  would  be  both  understood  and  not  misunderstood.  I  had  been  in-
formally [words  illegiblel  Soviet  agreed  that  decision  we  had  taken  was
precisely  what  was  called  for  but  none  had  been  in  position  to  predict  re-
action. Our  purpose  in  reaching  this  significant  decision  was  to  attempt  to
ascertain  if  a  way  could  be  found  to  peaceful  solution  of  current  crisis  in
Southeast  Asia.  We  had  hoped  we  would  be  able  to  deliver  oral  com-
munication conveying  this  decision  to  DRV  authorities  and  I  had  attempted


372 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

to  do  so  today  through  DRV  Ambassador.  Unfortunately  Ambassador  let  it
be  known  that  he  did  not  wish  to  receive  me  personally  and  when  his  em-
bassy was  informed  that  the  message  I  sought  to  deliver  was  of  extreme
importance,  it  was  suggested  that  we  transmit  the  message  through  the
Soviet  Government  in  its  capacity  as  Geneva  Co-Chairman.  It  was  because
of  these  circumstances  that  I  had  found  it  necessary  to  disturb  Mr.  Firyubin
tonight.  I  pointed  out  that  although  DRV  Ambassador  had  refused  to  re-
ceive me,  embassy  had  succeeded  in  delivering  a  copy  of  oral  communica-
tion to  employee  of  DRV  embassy  earlier  this  evening  (2015  Local)  who
agreed  to  bring  it  to  attention  of  Ambassador  (communication  as  set  forth
in  DEPTEL  3103  then  translated  in  full  for  Firyubin  with  sole  interruption
being  Firyubin's  inquiry  if  cessation  attacks  applied  only  to  those  from  air
— which  I  confirmed).  After  receiving  confirmation  from  me  that  com-
munication was  of  oral  nature,  Firyubin  said  he  viewed  communication  as
based  on  old  erroneous  conception  on  which  US  has  proceeded,  a  concep-
tion which  precludes  US  recognizing  that  the  South  Vietnamese  people  are
fighting  for  their  freedom  and  are  struggling  against  aggression  and  control
by  Saigon  puppets.  Furthermore  it  indicated  to  Firyubin  that  we  continued
to  view  the  picture  incorrectly  when  we  referred  again  to  the  struggle  in
South  Vietnam  as  being  organized  and  directed  by  the  DRV.  The  absurdity
of  this  view,  he  said,  is  obvious  and  naturally  the  Soviet  Government  cannot
agree  with  it  as  it  has  made  clear  in  numerous  statements.  Firyubin  could
only  view  the  communication  as  repetition  of  the  threat  against  the  DRV
— now  a  threat  of  renewed  and  expanded  aggression.  This  was  the  only
way  he  could  interpret  the  reference  to  the  risk  that  a  suspension  of  attacks
involved.  Obviously  we  are  suffering  from  a  gross  misunderstanding  if  we
think  that  such  aggression  will  go  unpunished,  without  response.  The  only
constructive  approach  to  a  peaceful  settlement  of  the  situation  in  South
Vietnam  was  to  end  the  aggression,  recall  troops  from  South  Vietnam  and
give  the  Vietnamese  people  the  right  to  choose  their  own  form  of  Govern-
ment— a  choice  which  can  be  made  freely  only  if  the  so-called  specialists
should  be  withdrawn  and  their  opportunity  of  exercising  influence  on  the
Vietnamese  thus  removed.  Firyubin  said  that  he  well  acquainted  with  the
countries  and  peoples  of  Southeast  Asia;  he  therefore  was  aware  and  could
understand  the  feelings  caused  by  our  actions  there  as  well  as  in  many  other
parts  of  the  world.

I  told  Firyubin  I  had  asked  to  see  him  to  put  a  very  simple  question  to
him.  Does  the  Soviet  Government  agree  to  transmit  the  oral  communica-
tion to  the  DRV?  I  said  this  was  the  whole  purpose  of  my  visit.

Firyubin  said  the  DRV  embassy  had  not  put  such  a  request  to  the  Soviet
Government.  I  must  agree  that  for  Soviets  to  act  as  intermediary  between
us  and  DRV  is  very  unusual.  Naturally  he  would  report  my  request  to  his
Government  and  if  the  DRV  should  request  this  service  he  would  not  ex-
clude the  possibility  of  transmitting  the  communication  to  the  DRV  Gov-
ernment. Meanwhile  he  would  be  interested  in  knowing  just  how  the  DRV
embassy  had  responded  to  our  approach.

I  again  described  for  Firyubin  our  efforts  to  deliver  the  message  to  the
DRV  through  its  embassy  in  Moscow  and  told  him  that  the  end  result  was
a  suggestion  by  the  embassy  that  we  transmit  the  message  through  the
Soviet  Government  in  its  capacity  as  Geneva  Co-Chairman.  Firyubin  re-
peated his  promise  to  report  my  request  to  his  Government  and  to  inform
me  of  the  results.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  373

While  the  conversation  continued  in  this  vein,  Firyubin  had  passed  a  note
to  a  Foreign  Office  assistant,  Kornienko,  who  attended  him,  and  the  latter  left
the  room.  After  some  time,  Kornienko  reappeared  and  handed  a  note  to  Firyu-
bin, which  the  latter  read  carefully.  After  reading  the  note,  Firyubin  said  flatly
that  the  Soviet  Government  would  not  transmit  the  U.S.  Government's  message
to  the  DRV,  that  the  DRV  embassy  had  not  requested  this  service  and  that  it
was  the  U.S.  responsibility  to  find  a  convenient  way  of  passing  the  message.
Kohler's  account  continues:

I  said  I  wished  to  understand  him  correctly.  Was  he  rejecting  my  request
to  transmit  the  communication  to  the  DRV?

He  said  this  was  a  correct  understanding  of  the  Soviet  Government  po-
sition. We  must  ourselves  find  the  way.

I  said  that  what  I  was  seeking  was  the  cooperation  of  the  Soviet  Gov-
ernment and  Firyubin's  remarks  indicated  clearly  that  the  Soviet  Govern-
ment was  refusing  this.  Firyubin  said,  "I  am  not  a  postman"  and  again
said  we  could  find  our  own  ways  of  transmitting  messages.

I  pointed  out  to  Firyubin  that  the  cooperation  I  had  requested  is  a
well-known  and  not  unprecedented  process  in  international  diplomacy.  I
had  great  difficulty  in  reconciling  Soviet  Government  refusal  to  cooperate
with  its  declaration  in  support  of  peaceful  settlement  of  all  questions.

Kornienko  chimed  in  that  he  had  recalled  statement  by  both  the  Presi-
dent and  Secretary  of  State  on  several  occasions  that  the  U.S.  Government
has  channels  for  transmitting  messages  direct  to  Hanoi.  On  this  the  con-
versation ended  but  it  should  be  noted  that  Firyubin  made  no  effort  to
return  to  me  the  text  of  the  oral  communication  which  I  had  handed  him
at  the  outset  of  the  conversation.

After  further  reflection  on  his  meeting  with  Firyubin,  Kohler  sent  a  follow-on
message  to  Washington  that  afternoon,  in  which  he  sought  to  present  the  Soviet
position  with  some  sympathy  and  to  promote  an  understanding  of  the  Soviet
rebuff  in  the  light  of  the  "rather  strenuous  nature"  of  the  document  we  were
asking  them  to  transmit.  Kohler's  comments  were  as  follows:

I  came  away  from  my  meeting  with  Firyubin  last  night  with  mixed  feel-
ings. On  the  one  hand,  I  was  annoyed  at  the  apparent  Soviet  rebuff  of  an
effort  to  take  heat  out  of  admittedly  dangerous  situation  in  SEA  and  im-
patient with  flimsy  rationale  for  Soviet  refusal  oflcred  by  Firyubin.  On  the
other  hand,  I  could  understand,  if  not  sympathize  with,  Soviet  sensitivity,
given  Chicom  eagerness  to  adduce  proof  of  their  charges  of  collusion
against  Soviets  and,  frankly,  given  rather  strenuous  nature  of  document
they  were  being  asked  to  transmit  to  DRV.

Implicit  in  latter  view,  of  course,  is  assumption  that  Soviets  in  fact  want
bombing  to  stop,  are  genuinely  concerned  at  possibilities  escalation,  and
are  interested  in  working  out  some  sort  of  modus  vivendi  which  would  take
heat  out  of  situation  while  not  undercutting  their  own  position  in  Commie
world  as  loyal  socialist  ally.  We  cannot  be  sure  that  this  is  way  Soviets
view  situation,  and  it  entirely  possible  they  so  confident  our  ultimate  de-
feat in  Vietnam  that  no  gesture  on  our  part  would  meet  with  encouraging
response.  Believe  at  this  point,  however,  we  lose  nothing  assuming  Soviets
have  not  completely  forgotten  lesson  Cuba  and  there  is  some  flexibility  in
Soviet  position  which  we  should  seek  to  exploit.


374 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

I  would  hope,  therefore,  we  would  not  regard  Firyubin's  reaction  last
night  as  evidence  conscious  hardening  of  Soviet  attitude.  It  may  simply
be  reflection  of  bind  Soviets  find  themselves  in  at  moment.  Meanwhile,  we
can  feel  sure  message  is  already  in  DRV  hands — copies  now  available  thru
Dobrynin,  Firyubin,  and  DRV  embassy  here — and  I  would  suggest  we  go
through  with  original  plan  and  be  on  alert,  both  here  and  on  the  scene
for  any  signs  reaction  from  other  side.  Seen  from  here,  we  would  lose
nothing  by  doing  so;  and  we  gain  at  least  with  our  friends  and  the  un-
aligned.

By  this  time  (1:00  p.m.  March  13,  Moscow  time),  though  Kohler  was  not
aware  of  it,  the  bombing  pause  had  already  been  in  eftect  for  seventeen  hours.
It  had  gone  into  effect  as  planned  at  2400  on  May  12,  Saigon  time,  and  the
Department  so  informed  Kohler.  The  Department  also  decided,  in  spite  of
Kohler's  confidence  that  the  U.S.  "oral"  communication  had  reached  Hanoi,
to  make  doubly  sure  by  asking  the  U.K.  Government  to  instruct  its  Consul  in
Hanoi  to  transmit  the  same  message,  in  writing,  to  his  normal  contact  in  the
DRV.  Informed  by  the  Department  that  this  step  was  about  to  be  taken,  Kohler
expressed  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  character  and  tone  of  the  communication
by  recommending  that,  in  any  resubmission,  the  message  be  shortened  and  soft-
ened:

...  I  would  recommend  we  shorten  and  revise  wording  of  "oral"  com-
munication to  DRV  if  we  plan  resubmit  through  British  Consul  Hanoi.  If
cast  is  present  form,  I  think  we  are  simply  inviting  rebuff,  and  exercise-
Hanoi  would  prove  as  fruitless  as  our  efforts  in  Moscow.  Something  along
lines  following  would  get  essential  message  across:

BEGIN  TEXT.  The  highest  authority  in  this  Government  has  asked  me
to  inform  Hanoi  that  there  will  be  no  air  attacks  on  North  Vietnam  for  a
period  beginning  at  noon,  Washington  time,  Wednesday,  May  12  and  run-
ning into  next  week.

In  this  decision  the  United  States  Government  has  taken  account  of
repeated  suggestions  from  various  quarters,  including  public  statements  by
Hanoi  representatives,  that  there  can  be  no  progress  toward  peace  while
there  are  air  attacks  on  North  Vietnam.

The  United  States  Government  expects  that  in  consequence  of  this  action
the  DRV  will  show  similar  restraint.  If  this  should  not  prove  to  be  the
case,  then  the  United  States  Government  will  feel  compelled  to  take  such
measures  as  it  feels  are  necessary  to  deal  with  the  situation  in  Vietnam.
END  TEXT.

Kohler's  recommendation  was  not  accepted,  and  the  message  was  transmitted
to  the  DRV  by  the  British  Consul  in  Hanoi  in  its  original  form.  As  in  the  Mos-
cow case,  the  message  was  shortly  thereafter  returned  to  the  sender,  ostensibly
unopened.

As  a  footnote  to  the  "unopened  letter"  episodes,  it  may  be  worth  noting  that
Canadian  ICC  Commissioner  Blair  Seaborn,  on  an  early-June  visit  to  Hanoi,  was
approached  by  the  Czech  Ambassador  to  the  DRV,  who  recounted  to  him  the
story  of  Kohler's  unsuccessful  effort  to  deliver  the  message  to  the  DRV  Am-
bassador in  Moscow,  with  the  message  having  been  returned  ostensibly  unopened.
The  Czech  Ambassador  said  "everybody"  in  Hanoi  knew  the  story.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  375


D. AWAITING  A  RESPONSE

While  the  Administration  expected  little  in  the  way  of  a  positive  Hanoi  re-
sponse, a  watchful  eye  was  kept  for  any  signals  or  actions  that  might  suggest
North  Vietnamese  or  Soviet  receptivity  to  any  further  diplomatic  explorations.
Such  signals  as  were  received,  however,  were  entirely  negative.  On  May  15  a
Hanoi  English  language  broadcast  noted  Western  news  reports  of  the  bombing
cessation,  terming  them  "a  worn  out  trick  of  deceit  and  threat  .  .  On  the
same  day,  in  a  conversation  with  British  Foreign  Secretary  Michael  Stewart  in
Vienna,  Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Andrei  Gromyko  indicated  the  USSR's  dis-
inclination to  participate  in  any  negotiations  on  Indochina.

In  the  meantime,  in  Saigon,  the  U.S.  Mission  was  hard  at  work  trying  to
clarify  its  own  thinking — and  that  of  Washington — on  the  persuasive,  or  rather
coercive,  possibilities  of  bombing  pauses.  In  particular,  the  Mission  was  hoping
to  link  the  intensity  of  US  bombing  after  the  resumption  closely  to  the  level
of  VC  activity  during  the  pause.  The  purpose  would  be  to  make  it  clear  to
Hanoi  that  what  we  were  trying  to  accomplish  with  our  bombing  was  to  get  the
DRV  to  cease  directing  and  supporting  the  VC  and  to  get  VC  units  to  cease
their  military  activities  in  the  South.  In  this  approach,  a  downward  trend  in  VC
activities  would  be  "rewarded"  in  a  similar  manner  by  decreasing  US  bombing.
Thus  it  was  hoped  that,  during  the  bombing  pause,  the  DRV  would  offer  the
first  step  in  a  series  of  events  which  might  ultimately  "lead  to  the  termination
of  hostilities  on  satisfactory  [i.e.,  U.S.]  terms,  without  engaging  in  formal  nego-
tiations."

Ambassador  Taylor  described  this  approach  to  Washington  in  a  lengthy  cable
concurred  in  by  Deputy  Ambassador  Johnson  and  General  Westmoreland.  The
Ambassador  recognized  that  there  were  one  or  two  minor  pitfalls  in  the  scheme,
but  seemed  undaunted  in  his  confidence  that  US  bombing  could  be  designed  to
have  powerful  coercive  effects.  Taylor, admitted  that:

Any  success  in  carrying  out  such  a  scenario  [would]  obviously  depend
on  a  considerable  amount  of  cooperation  from  the  DRV  side  based  on  a
conviction  arising  from  self-interest  that  the  DRV  must  accept  a  settlement
which  excludes  the  conquest  of  SVN  by  NVN.  There  is  little  likelihood  that
the  Hanoi  leaders  are  yet  ready  to  reach  such  a  conclusion,  but  a  rigorous
application  of  air  attacks  at  a  tempo  related  to  Uano'i/WC  activities  accom-
panied by  pressure  on  the  ground  to  compel  the  VC  to  engage  in  incidents
or  retreat  appears  to  us  to  have  possibilities.  Conceivably,  these  ground
operations  might  eventually  result  in  herding  VC  units  into  "safe  havens"
.  .  .  Whatever  its  other  weaknesses,  such  a  program  would  eliminate  in
large  measure^  the  danger  which  we  may  now  be  facing  of  equating  our
bombing  activity  to  VC  initiated  incidents  .  .  .

A  quite  different  approach  to  a  settlement  was  proposed  in  a  rather  puzzling
informal  contact  between  Pierre  Salinger  and  two  somewhat  shadowy  Soviet
officials  in  Moscow.  On  the  evening  of  May  1 1  (i.e.,  one  full  day  prior  to  the
inauguration  of  the  bombing  pause)  Salinger,  who  was  in  Moscow  at  the  time
on  private  movie  production  business,  was  invited  to  dinner  by  Mikhail  Saga-
telyan,  whom  Salinger  had  known  in  Washington  during  the  Kennedy  years  as
the  TASS  Bureau  Chief,  and  who  was  at  this  time  assigned  to  TASS  head-
quarters in  Moscow.  Salinger  reported  his  conversation  to  Ambassador  Kohler
who  related  it  to  Secretary  Rusk  in  a  cable  as  follows:


376 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

Sagatelyan  probed  Salinger  hard  as  to  whether  he  was  on  some  kind  of
covert  mission  and  seemed  unconvinced  despite  latter's  reiterated  denials.
In  any  case,  Sagatelyan,  protesting  he  was  speaking  personally,  talked  at
length  about  Viet-Nam.  He  wanted  Salinger's  opinion  on  hypothetical  for-
mula for  solution  approximatey  on  following  lines:

1.  US  would  announce  publicly  temporary  suspension  of  bombing  DRV;

2.  DRV  or  USSR  or  both  would  make  statement  hailing  suspension  as
step  toward  reasonable  solution;

3.  Soviet  Union  would  intercede  with  Viet  Cong  to  curtail  military  ac-
tivities;

4.  De  facto  cease  fire  would  thus  be  accomplished.

5.  Conference  would  be  called  on  related  subject  (not  specifically  Viet-
Nam).  Viet  Cong  would  not  be  participant  but  have  some  kind  of  observer
or  corridor  status  (this  followed  Salinger's  expression  of  opinion  US  Gov-
ernment would  never  accept  Viet  Cong  as  participant  in  any  conference).

6.  New  agreement  would  be  worked  out  on  Viet-Nam  providing  for
broader-based  SVN  Government  not  including  direct  Viet  Cong  participa-
tion but  including  elements  friendly  to  Viet  Cong.

In  a  follow-up  dinner  conversation  between  Salinger  and  Sagatelyan  two  nights
later,  in  which  a  Foreign  Office  representative,  identified  only  as  "Vassily  Serge-
yevich"  also  participated,  the  Soviet  interlocutors  generally  confirmed  the  pro-
posal quoted  above,  modifying  points  three  and  four  by  suggesting  that  an
actual  cease  fire  could  take  place  only  after  initiation  of  negotiations  and  that  a
cease  fire  would  in  fact  be  the  first  item  on  the  agenda  of  any  negotiations.
Additional  items  of  interest  were  reported  by  Kohler  as  follows:

Soviet  interlocutors  talked  at  length  about  President  Kennedy's  forebear-
ance  post-Cuba  period  and  broadly  implied  that  Soviets  now  interested  in
reciprocating  such  forebearance.  It  was  clear  from  their  remarks  that  Soviets
assume  we  would  welcome  some  avenue  of  withdrawal  so  long  as  this  would
not  involve  loss  of  American  prestige.

Soviets  informed  Salinger  that  Soviet  Government  had  received  a  "Rusk
proposal"  with  regard  Vietnam  but  would  not  answer  proposal  or  act  on  it
in  any  way  until  Soviet  Government  had  some  idea  as  to  how  current
exercise  with  Salinger  would  turn  out  .  .  .

As  to  mechanics  of  carrying  on  exercise,  Sagatelyan  suggested  Salinger
might  convey  proposal  to  US  Government  through  embassy  Paris  and  he
himself  would  fly  immediately  Paris  in  order  receive  from  Salinger  there
any  official  reaction.  Alternatively,  if  Salinger  wished  to  proceed  direct
Washington,  contact  could  be  designated  there,  probably  either  Zinchuk
(Soviet  embassy  counselor)  or  Vadvichenko  (TASS  Washington  Bureau).

Throughout  conversation  Soviets  made  clear  to  Salinger  that  because  of
sensitive  Soviet  position  any  progress  toward  political  settlement  Vietnam
problem  must  be  initiated  and  carried  through,  at  least  in  preliminary
stages,  on  basis  unofficial  contacts,  clear  implication  being  if  leak  should
occur  or  if  scheme  should  go  awry,  Soviet  Government  would  be  in  position
disavow  whole  affair.  At  same  time,  it  was  clear  from  remarks  as  well  as
presence  of  Foreign  Office  representative  that  proposal  by  Sagatelyan  had
official  backing.

Salinger  had  one  further  contact  with  Sagatelyan  and  Vassily  the  following
day,  where  it  became  apparent  that  the  Soviet  officials'  interest  in  the  proposal


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  311

had  waned.  By  the  time  Salinger  had  returned  to  Washington  and  saw  Ambassa-
dor Thompson  at  the  State  Department  on  May  18,  the  Soviet  disinterest  in  any
role  for  themseves  during  the  current  bombing  pause  had  been  made  clear
through  other  channels,  and  Salinger's  contacts  were  not  further  pursued.

Of  these  other  channels,  the  most  important  (and  also  the  most  casual)  was  a
brief  Kaffeeklatsch  between  Secretary  Rusk  and  Foreign  Minister  Gromyko  at
the  Austrian  Chancelor's  residence  in  Vienna  on  May  15.  The  proceedings  are
described  in  a  Rusk  cable  to  Undersecretary  Ball  as  follows:

Have  just  returned  from  Chancellor's  lunch  for  visiting  dignitaries.  After
lunch  Gromyko  and  I  [words  illegible]  were  in  something  of  a  dilemma
about  Southeast  Asia.  We  felt  there  might  be  some  value  in  a  serious  ex-
change of  views  between  our  two  Governments  but  that  we  did  not  know
whether  they  themselves  wished  to  discuss  it.

He  commented  with  considerable  seriousness  that  the  Soviets  will  not
negotiate  about  Viet-Nam.  He  said  there  were  other  parties  involved  in
that  situation  and  that  the  United  States  woud  have  to  find  ways  of  establish-
ing contact  with  them,  and  he  specifically  mentioned  the  DRV.  He  said
they  will  continue  to  support  North  Viet-Nam  and  will  do  so  "decisively."
He  then  made  reference  to  a  fellow  socialist  country  under  attack.

I  interrupted  to  point  out  that  the  problem  was  not  that  a  socialist  coun-
try was  subject  to  attack  but  that  a  socialist  country  was  attacking  somone
else.  I  said  that  American  military  forces  are  in  South  Vietnam  solely  be-
cause North  Vietnam  has  been  sending  large  numbers  of  men  and  arms
into  the  South.

He  denied  these  facts  in  the  usual  ritual  fashion  but  added  that  in  any
event  it  was  not  up  to  the  United  States  to  be  the  judge  between  Vietnamese.
I  reminded  him  that  he  must  know  by  now  that  a  North  Korean  attack
against  South  Koreans  would  not  be  accepted  merely  because  both  were
Korean.  He  merely  commented  ihat  there  were  important  differences  be-
tween those  two  situations.

He  referred  to  Dobrynin's  talk  with  me  and  said  that  the  temporary  sus-
pension of  bombing  was  "insulting."  I  said  I  could  not  understand  this  in
view  of  the  fact  that  Hanoi,  Peiping  and  Moscow  have  all  talked  about
the  impossibility  of  discussions  while  bombing  was  going  on.

At  this  point  Chancellor  Klaus  joined  the  table  to  express  great  happiness
that  Gromyko  and  I  were  sitting  together.  Neither  one  of  us  dispelled  his
illusion.

I  do  not  know  whether  Gromyko  will  pursue  the  matter  further  when
the  four  foreign  ministers  meet  briefly  with  Quaison-Sackey  this  afternoon
or  when  we  all  assemble  for  the  opera  tonight.

Thompson  and  I  both  have  the  impression  that  Ciromyko's  attitude
clearly  means  that  the  Salinger  talk  was  of  little  substance  and  that  we
should  now  merely  consider  what  kind  of  signal  we  wish  to  get  back  by
way  of  Salinger  as  a  part  of  the  closing  out  process.

I  do  not  believe  that  we  should  assume  from  Gromyko's  remarks  that
we  ourselves  should  not  put  to  Moscow  our  own  most  serious  views  of  the
situation,  whether  they  are  willing  to  discuss  them  or  not.  It  is  quite  clear,
however,  that  Gromyko  wanted  me  to  believe  that  they  are  not  prepared
to  work  toward  a  settlement  in  Hanoi  and  Peiping  and  that,  indeed,  un-
less we  abandon  our  effort  in  South  Viet-Nam  there  will  be  very  serious
consequences  ahead.


378 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


E. RESUMING  THE  BOMBING

Having  thus  been  unmistakably  rebuffed  by  Moscow,  Hanoi,  and  Peking,  the
President  determined  on  the  evening  of  May  16  that  the  bombing  raids  should
be  resumed,  beginning  on  the  morning  of  May  18  Saigon  time.  In  addition  to
the  ROLLING  THUNDER  XV  execute  message  sent  by  the  ICS  to  CINCPAC
on  the  16th,  Secretary  Rusk  sent  messages  of  a  political  nature  to  Saigon,  Lon-
don, and  Ottawa  on  May  17,  so  that  the  action  could  be  cleared  with  Premier
Quat  (which  Taylor  promptly  accomplished),  and  so  that  the  foreign  ministers
of  the  Commonwealth  countries  would  be  informed  beforehand.

You  should  see  Fon  Min  immediately  to  inform  that  beginning  Tuesday
morning,  Saigon  time,  bombing  of  North  Viet-Nam  will  be  resumed  by
US  and  South  Vietnamese  forces,  marking  the  end  of  a  five-day  suspension.

You  should  convey  message  from  me  that  we  regret  that  the  reception  of
the  other  side  to  the  idea  of  a  pause  was  not  merely  negative  but  hostile.
Gromyko  told  Rusk  that  our  message  to  Dobrynin  on  subject  was  "insult-
ing." Nevertheless  we  do  not  exclude  possibility  of  other  such  attempts  in
future.

There  will  be  no  public  announcement  of  the  resumption  of  bombing.
When  press  questions  are  asked,  it  will  be  pointed  out  that  there  have  been
and  may  again  be  periods  when  no  bombing  will  take  place  in  response  to
operational  factors  and  that  we  do  not  discuss  these  operational  questions.

Ambassador  Kohler,  upon  receiving  word  of  the  resumption,  suggested  that
the  US  might  inform  the  NATO  Council  and  the  17  non-aligned  nations  of  our
actions,  in  advance  of  any  resumption,  to  underline  the  seriousness  of  the  Presi-
dent's response  to  the  Unaligned  Appeal.  The  Department,  however,  responded
negatively  to  Kohler's  suggestion:

There  will  be  no  official  public  statement  from  here  concerning  suspen-
sion or  resumption.  Decision  at  highest  levels  is  to  avoid  any  discussion
Project  MAYFLOWER  [words  illegible]  concluded,  outside  of  resricted  cir-
cle designated  when  Project  begun.  Despite  disappointing  response,  we  wish
to  keep  open  channel  with  Soviets  on  this  subject  and  we  hope  eventually
with  DRV  via  Soviets.  We  feel  that  use  of  this  channel  another  time  might
be  precluded  if  we  appear  to  have  carried  through  Project  MAYFLOWER
solely  for  credit  it  might  earn  us  with  third  parties  and  public  opinion  in
general.  Therefore  we  would  not  now  wish  inform  NATO  Council  and
17  Non-aligned  countries.

Only  British,  Canadians,  Australians,  UN  Secreary  General  and  Korean
President  Park  (here  on  state  visit)  were  in  fact  informed  in  advance  of
resumption  bombing  and  also  of  negative  outcome  of  soundings  of  other
side.

In  addition  to  this  limited  circle  of  allied  intimates,  a  larger  circle  of  friendly
governments  was  provided  with  Ambassadorial  briefings  on  the  bombing  pause
after  the  resumption.  An  instruction  to  this  effect  went  out  to  American  ambas-
sadors in  New  Delhi,  Tokyo,  Bangkok,  Vientiane,  Manila,  Wellington,  and  Paris:

You  should  take  first  opportunity  see  Pri.  Minister,  Fon  Min,  or  other
appropriate  high  level  official  to  inform  him  that  the  U.S.  and  South  Viet-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  379

namese  Governments  suspended  bombing  against  North  Viet-Nam  for  a
period  of  five  days  which  ended  on  May  18.  The  initiation  of  this  pause  in
bombing  was  accompanied  by  an  approach  by  us  to  the  Governments  of
the  Soviet  Union  and  North  Viet-Nam  which  took  note  of  repeated  calls
from  that  side  for  cessation  of  bombing  and  their  statements  that  discussions
could  not  take  place  while  bombing  continued.  Unfortunately  the  reception
of  our  approach  was  not  merely  negative  but  hostile  ...  In  view  of  the
complete  absence  of  any  constructive  response,  we  have  decided  the  bomb-
ing must  be  resumed.  Nevertheless  we  do  not  exclude  possibility  of  other
such  attempts  in  the  future.

You  should  add  that  the  record  of  the  past  several  weeks  is  discouraging
in  that  Communists  and  particularly  Peking  appear  intent  on  rejecting  every
effort  from  whatever  quarter  to  open  up  contacts  and  conversations  which
might  lead  to  a  resolution  of  the  Viet-Nam  situation.  The  rejection  of
President  Johnson's  April  7  proposals  for  unconditional  discussions,  of
the  appeal  of  the  Seventeen  Non-aligned  countries  and  of  President
Radhakrishnan's  proposal  all  illustrate  the  point  together  with  Peking  and
Hanoi's  obvious  efforts  to  obstruct  the  convening  of  a  conference  on  Cam-
bodia. We  will  nevertheless  continue  to  explore  all  possibilities  for  con-
structive discussion,  meanwhile  maintaining  with  the  Government  of  South
Viet-Nam  our  joint  military  efforts  to  preserve  that  country's  freedom.

On  the  evening  of  May  16,  the  DRV  Foreign  Ministry  issued  a  statement
denouncing  the  gesture  as  a  "deceitful  maneuver  designed  to  pave  the  way  for
new  U.S.  acts  of  war,"  and  insisted  U.S.  planes  had,  since  May  12,  repeatedly
intruded  into  DRV  airspace  "for  spying,  provocative  and  strafing  activities."

Communist  China's  Foreign  Ministry  issued  a  statement  May  21  fully  en-
dorsing Hanoi's  position  and  denouncing  the  suspension  with  characteristic  in-
temperateness.

F.  AFTERMATH

A  still  somewhat  ambiguous  diplomatic  move  was  made  by  Hanoi  on  May
18,  shortly  after  the  bombing  had  been  resumed.

It  appears  that  in  Paris,  on  the  morning  of  May  18,  Mai  Van  Bo,  head  of
the  DRV  economic  delegation  there,  approached  the  Asian  Direction  of  the
Quai  d'Orsay  to  explain  the  reasons  for  the  DRV's  rejection  of  the  Radhakrish-
nan  proposals  (involving  a  cordon  sanitaire  by  Afro-Asian  troops  along  the  17th
parallel).  More  important,  however.  Bo  explained  with  text  in  hand  that  the
Pham  Van  Dong  Four  Points,  enunciated  on  April  8,  should  not  be  isolated  from
the  declaration  that  had  followed  the  four  points.  He  then  softened  the  language
of  that  declaration  by  pointing  out  that  the  four  points  constituted  the  "best
basis"  from  which  to  find  the  "most  just"  solution,  and  that  recognition  of
these  principles  would  create  favorable  conditions  for  a  solution  of  the  problem
and  would  open  the  possibility  of  convoking  a  conference.

When  asked  if  Hanoi  recognized  that  realization  of  its  proposed  "principle  of
withdrawal"  of  American  forces  would  depend  upon  the  "conclusions  of  a
negotiation,"  Bo  responded  "exactly,"  and  indicated  that  if  there  were  agree-
ment on  the  "bases,"  the  "ways  and  means"  of  application  of  "principles"  would
be  found  and  in  a  peaceful  manner;  the  possibilities  were  many;  a  way  out
(porte  de  sortie)  should  be  found  for  the  US;  "our  suggestion  humiliates  no
one."


380 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

This  happening,  which  occurred  on  May  18,  was  first  reported  bv  a  Quai
official  to  the  US  Embassy's  Political  Counsellor  in  Paris  unofficially  on  Nlay  19,
in  a  highly  glossed  version,  making  it  appear  that  the  DRV  was  clearly  respond-
ing to  the  bombing  pause  by  a  significant  softening  of  its  position  on  "prior
conditions."  In  the  official  version  that  Lucet.  the  Director  of  Political  Affairs  of
the  French  Foreign  Office  conveved  to  the  DCM  on  May  20,  however,  the  con-
tinued ambiguitv  of  the  DR\'  position — as  to  whether  or  not  recognition  of
the  four  points  remained  a  precondition  to  talks  of  any  sort — was  fullv  revealed.

This  ambiguity  was  in  no  sense  resolved  a  few  weeks  later,  when  Blair  Sea-
bom  raised  this  question  with  the  DRV  Foreign  Minister  in  Hanoi.  The  U.S.
had  asked  Seaborn  in  late  May  to  seek  a  meeting  with  Pham  Van  Dong  and
on  its  behalf  reiterate  the  March  message  and  U.S.  determination  to  persist  in
the  defense  of  South  Vietnam,  to  regret  that  Hanoi  had  not  responded  posi-
tively to  the  various  recent  initiatives,  including  the  bombing  pause,  and  to  state
that,  nevertheless,  the  United  States  remained  ready  "to  consider  the  possibility
of  a  solution  by  reciprocal  actions  on  each  side."'  If  the  Vietnamese  brought  up
Pham  \'an  Dong's  four  points.  Seaborn  was  authorized  to  endeavor  to  establish
whether  Hanoi  insisted  that  thev  be  accepted  as  the  condition  for  negotiations.
On  June  3.  Seaborn  succeeded  in  gaining  an  audience  with  the  DRV  Foreign
Minister  (and  concurrent  Deputy  Premier)  Nguvgen  Duv  Trinh,  who  reluctantly
heard  him  out  after  stating  that  the  U.S.  position  was  too  well  known  to  re-
quire restatement.  Trinh's  reaction  to  the  message  was  totally  negative,  and  in
the  exchange  preceding  its  recitation  he  studiously  avoided  going  beyond  the
vague  statement  that  Pham  Van  Dong's  four  points  were  the  "basis  for  solution
of  the  Vietnam  question."

As  there  was  considerable  misunderstanding  concerning  the  Mai  Van  Bo  ap-
proach of  May  18.  and  misleading  accounts  of  it  were  circulating,  the  State
Department  informed  several  U.S.  ambassadors  (Saigon,  Paris,  Bonn)  of  what
it  considered  the  true  facts  in  the  case.

Facts  are  that  bombing  was  actually  resumed  on  morning  May  18
Saigon  time.  Subsequently  on  morning  Mav  18.  Paris  time,  but  undoubt-
edly on  antecedent  instructions.  DRV  economic  delegate  in  Paris,  Mai  Van
Bo.  approached  Quai  urgently  for  appointment.  His  message  was  to  ex-
plain negative  Hanoi  attitude  toward  Indian  proposal  (cessation  of  hostili-
ties on  both  sides  and  Afro-Asian  force)  but  second,  and  more  important,
to  discuss  Pham  Van  Dong's  four  points  originally  stated  April  8  and  later
included  in  Hanoi  statement  referring  to  appeal  of  17  Non-aligned  na-
tions ...  Bo  repeated  four  points  with  slight  variations  from  public
statements,  apparently  softening  language  bv  indicating  that  four  points
might  be  "best  basis"  for  settlement  and  apparently  insisting  less  strongly
that  their  recognition  was  required  as  condition  to  negotiations.  During
course  of  conversations.  French  asked  whether  withdrawal  US  forces  visual-
ized as  prior  condition  or  as  resulting  from  negotiations,  and  Bo  responded
that  latter  was  correct.

French  passed  us  this  message  on  May  20  (delaying  two  days)  so  that
we  had  in  fact  resumed  well  before  we  heard  of  it.  More  important,  message
still  left  ambiguity  whether  recognition  of  four  points  remained  precondi-
tion to  talks  of  any  sort.  Accordingly,  we  saw  no  reason  to  alter  con-
clusion based  on  Hanoi  propaganda  denunciation  of  pause,  plus  fact  that
pace  of  Hanoi-directed  basic  actions  in  South  had  continued  and  even


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  381

increased — that  Hanoi  not  ready  to  respond  to  pause  and  that  we  must
resume.

Subsequently,  Canadian  ICC  Representative,  Seaborn,  visited  Hanoi  com-
mencing May  31.  He  himself  raised  same  questions  with  DRV  Foreign
Minister  and  response  indicated  DRV  evasive,  and  in  effect  negative,  ap-
parently taking  position  recognition  four  points,  plus  some  element  US
withdrawal,  were  preconditions  to  any  talks.

XIII.  DEBATE  OVER  BOMBING  STRATEGY  AND  EFFECTIVENESS
CONTINUES


A. THE  ROSTOW  ''VICTORY"  THESIS

With  the  resumption  of  the  bombing  at  0600  on  18  May  (Saigon  time),  the
arguments  over  the  usefulness  and  intensity  of  the  U.S.  air  attacks  against  the
North  were  taken  up  again  with  full  energy.

ROLLING  THUNDER  XV  (week  of  18-24  May)  was  designed  to  attack
principally  fixed  military  installations,  while  continuing  the  interdiction  of  LOC's
south  of  the  20th  parallel.  The  attacks  were  carried  out  with  a  weight  of  effort
similar  to  the  pre-pause  level,  i.e.,  40  sorties  per  day,  with  a  maximum  of  200
sorties  for  the  entire  week.

It  was  at  this  time  that  Walt  W.  Rostow,  then  State  Department  Counselor
and  Chairman  of  the  Policy  Planning  Council,  floated  a  memorandum  entitled
"Victory  and  Defeat  in  Guerrilla  Wars:  The  Case  of  South  Vietnam,"  in  which
he  argued  that  a  clear-cut  victory  for  the  U.S.  in  Vietnam  was  a  possibility  and
that  what  it  required  mainly  was  more  pressure  on  the  North  and  effective  con-
duct of  the  battle  in  the  South.  Rostow's  memo  follows:

In  the  press,  at  least,  there  is  a  certain  fuzziness  about  the  possibility  of
clear-cut  victory  in  South  Viet-Nam;  and  the  President's  statement  that  a
military  victory  is  impossible  is  open  to  misinterpretation.

L  Historically,  guerrilla  wars  have  generally  been  lost  or  won  cleanly:
Greece,  China,  mainland,  North  Viet-Nam,  Malaya,  Philippines.  Laos  in
1954  was  an  exception,  with  two  provinces  granted  the  Communists  and  a
de  facto  split  imposed  on  the  country.

2.  In  all  the  cases  won  by  Free  World  forces,  there  was  a  phase  when
the  guerrillas  commanded  a  good  part  of  the  countryside  and,  indeed,
placed  Athens,  Kuala  Lumpur,  and  Manila  under  something  close  to  siege.
They  failed  to  win  because  all  the  possible  routes  to  guerrilla  victory  were
closed  and,  in  Jailing  to  win,  they  lost.  They  finally  gave  up  in  discourage-
ment. The  routes  to  victory  are:

a)  Mao  Stage  Three:  going  to  all-out  conventional  war  and  winning
as  in  China  in  1947-49;

b)  Political  collapse  and  takeover:  North  Viet-Nam;

c)  Political  collapse  and  a  coalition  government  in  which  the  Com-
munists get  control  over  the  security  machinery;  that  is,  army  and  or
police.  This  has  been  an  evident  Viet  Cong  objective  in  this  war,  but
the  nearest  precedents  are  Eastern  European  takeovers  after  1945,  rather
than  guerrilla  war  cases.


382 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

d)  Converting  the  bargaining  pressure  generated  by  the  guerrilla
forces  into  a  partial  victory  by  splitting  the  country:  Laos.  Also,  in  a
sense,  North  Viet-Nam  in  1954  and  the  Irish  Rebellion  after  the  First
World  War.

3.  If  we  succeed  in  blocking  these  four  routes  to  victory,  discouraging
the  Communist  force  in  the  South,  and  making  the  continuance  of  the
war  sufficiently  costly  to  the  North  there  is  no  reason  we  cannot  win  as
clear  a  victory  in  South  Viet-Nam  as  in  Greece,  Malaya,  and  the  Philip-
pines. Unless  political  morale  in  Saigon  collapses  and  the  ARVN  tends
to  break  up,  case  c),  the  most  realistic  hope  of  the  VC,  should  be  avoid-
able. This  danger  argues  for  more  rather  than  less  pressure  on  the  North,
while  conducting  the  battle  in  the  South  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  VC
hopes  of  military  and  political  progress  wane.

4.  The  objective  of  the  exercise  is  to  convince  Hanoi  that  its  bargaining
position  is  being  reduced  with  the  passage  of  time;  for,  even  in  the  worst
case  for  Hanoi,  it  wants  some  bargaining  position  (rather  than  simply
dropping  the  war)  to  get  U.S.  forces  radically  reduced  in  South  Viet-Nam
and  to  get  some  minimum  face-saving  formula  for  the  VC.

5.  I  believe  Hanoi  understands  its  dilemma  well.  As  of  early  February
it  saw  a  good  chance  of  a  quite  clean  victory  via  route  c).  It  now  is  star-
ing at  quite  clear-cut  defeat,  with  the  rising  U.S.  strength  and  GVN
morale  in  the  South  and  rising  costs  in  the  North.  That  readjustment  in
prospects  is  painful;  and  they  won't,  in  my  view,  accept  its  consequences
unless  they  are  convinced  time  has  ceased  to  be  their  friend,  despite  the
full  use  of  their  assets  on  the  ground  in  South  Viet-Nam,  in  political  war-
fare around  the  world,  and  in  diplomacy.

6.  Their  last  and  best  hope  will  be,  of  course,  that  if  they  end  the  war
and  get  us  out,  the  political,  social,  and  economic  situation  in  South  Viet-
Nam  will  deteriorate  in  such  a  way  as  to  permit  Communist  political  take-
over, with  or  without  a  revival  of  guerrilla  warfare.  It  is  in  this  phase  that
we  will  have  to  consolidate,  with  the  South  Vietnamese,  a  victory  that  is
nearer  our  grasp  than  we  (but  not  Hanoi)  may  think.

Rostow  had  long  been  a  strong  bombing  advocate,  and  an  outspoken  pro-
ponent of  air  attack  on  elements  of  the  North  Vietnamese  industrial  target  sys-
tem. As  early  as  April  1,  he  had  expressed  a  conviction  that  Hanoi  attaches  a
high  premium  to  the  maintenance  of  its  industrial  establishment  and  that  the
optimum  U.S.  bombing  objective  should  be  not  the  destruction,  but  the  paralysis
of  the  DRV's  industrial  and  urban  life.  By  taking  out  all  the  major  electric
power  stations,  he  believed,  Hanoi  would  be  presented  "with  an  immediate
desperate  economic,  social,  and  political  problem  which  could  not  be  evaded."

In  the  May  memorandum,  however,  he  was  not  confining  his  confident  ex-
pertise to  the  sphere  of  targeting  strategy,  but  extending  it  to  the  much  larger
sweep  of  the  U.S.  policy  objectives  in  Vietnam.  Rostow's  grand  historic  per-
spective of  the  road  to  victory,  unfortunately,  never  focused  down  upon  the
nagging  practical  problem  of  how  the  U.S.  might  "make  VC  hopes  of  military
and  political  progress  wane"  when  compelled  to  fight  in  behalf  of  a  long-
besieged,  teetering  GVN  that  was,  by  this  time,  hopelessly  incapable  of  coping
with  the  military  and  political  tasks  required  of  it.  The  critical  problem  of  how
to  preserve  and  restore  political  effectiveness  in  the  GVN  never  engaged  Ros-


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  383

tow's  serious  attention  nor,  for  that  matter,  that  of  his  contemporaries  in  the
administration.

B. "ARC  LIGHT"  COMES  TO  SOUTH  VIETNAM—ATTACKS
ON  THE  NORTH  EDGE  UPWARD

In  line  with  the  April  decision  to  give  priority  to  South  Vietnam  over  North
Vietnam  in  the  employment  of  U.S.  air  power,  a  major  administration  decision
was  taken  after  the  bombing  pause  to  assign  saturation  bombing  missions  in  the
South  to  SAC  B-52  bombers  which  had  long  been  alerted,  but  never  used,  to
attack  North  Vietnam.  General  Westmoreland,  with  Ambassador  Taylor's
political  endorsement,  presented  his  case  to  CINCPAC  in  the  following
terms:

1.  During  recent  months  firm  intelligence  has  been  collected  using  all
possible  sources  which  confirms  existence  of  various  VC  headquarters  com-
plexes and  troop  concentrations  in  RVN.  Each  of  these  targets  (COSVN,
NAMBO,  Military  Region  Hqs,  VC  battalions  in  jungle  assembly  areas,
etc.)  is  spread  over  a  relatively  large  area  and  consists  of  groups  of  build-
ings or  huts,  foxholes,  trenches,  tunnels,  etc.,  connected  by  trails.  General
topography  is  more  suitable  for  area  carpet  bombing  than  for  pinpoint
tactical  fighter  weapon  delivery.  In  most  areas  two  and  three  canopy
jungle  growth  hides  surface  target.  Even  if  accurate  coordinates  fixed  on
maps  (with  inherent  map  inaccuracies)  or  photos,  solid  jungle  canopy  pro-
vides few  reasonable  aiming  points  for  delivery  aircraft.

2.  Operation  Black  Virgin  1  on  15  April  1965  was  an  attack  on  the  mili-
tary component  of  the  Central  Office  South  Vietnam  (COSVN),  (the  main
VC  military  headquarters).  443  sorties  were  applied  against  an  area  of  ap-
proximately 12  square  kilometers,  dropping  approximately  900  tons  of
ordnance.  As  a  result  of  this  eff"ort,  the  existence  of  the  target  complex  was
confirmed  by  the  uncovering  of  over  100  buildings  and  the  occurrence  of
several  large  secondary  explosions.  We  have  determined  that  the  attack
created  a  drastic  effect  within  the  VC  military  headquarters.  Individual  com-
ponents were  disrupted  for  several  days,  and  even  though  these  components
now  appear  to  be  functioning  again,  they  have  not  re-assembled  into  an
integrated  headquarters  complex  as  they  were  before  the  attack.  In  spite
of  the  apparent  success  of  the  attack  we  still  have  no  information  concern-
ing the  number  of  casualties  caused  and  have  only  fragmentary  information
concerning  other  damage  accomplished.

3.  During  the  attack  the  target  area  became  completely  covered  by  smoke
and  resulting'  bomb  pattern  was  spotty.  BDA  photography  shows  that  as
a  result,  the  distribution  of  bombs  throughout  the  target  was  poor.  Some
areas  received  a  heavy  concentration  of  bomb  impacts  while  other  parts  of
the  target  area  received  no  hits.  If  an  attack  could  have  been  launched
in  which  the  bombs  were  evenly  distributed,  results  would  have  been  far
more  effective.  An  attack  compressed  into  a  shorter  period  of  time  would
also  have  been  much  more  likely  to  kill  V(^  before  they  could  evacuate
the  area  and  would  have  allowed  ground  troops  to  enter  the  area  the  same
day.

4.  It  is  essential  that  we  keep  these  selected  VC  headquarters  and  units
under  attack.  We  are  developing  target  information  on  the  headquarters  of


384 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

the  325th  PAVN  Division,  Headquarters  Military  Region  V  and  Head-
quarters MiUtary  Region  VII  where  current  reports  indicated  a  large  VC
troop  bui'.d-up.  We  know  from  interrogation  of  VC  captives  and  from
agent  reports  that  VC  fear  air  attacks.  We  also  know  that  their  plans  can
be  upset  by  unexpected  events.  The  best  way  for  us  to  keep  them  off
balance  and  prevent  large-scale  VC  attacks  is  to  keep  them  under  constant
pressure  in  their  base  areas.

5.  Continued  use  of  tactical  fighters  for  pattern  bombing  does  not  get  the
job  done  properly;  it  diverts  them  from  other  important  work  for  which
they  are  better  suited;  it  creates  an  unacceptable  drain  on  ordnance  assets;
and  it  disrupts  all  SEA  air  programs  in  and  out  of  country.  We  will,  of
course,  continue  to  use  tactical  fighters  as  the  major  punch  against  tactical
targets  which  constitute  the  vast  majority  of  the  in-country  air  requirements,
but  for  attacks  on  VC  base  areas,  we  must  provide  a  capability  which  will
permit  us  to  deliver  a  well  planned  pattern  of  bombs  over  large  areas  and
preferably  within  a  short  period  of  time.

6.  The  problem  has  been  discussed  with  representatives  of  the  Strategic
Air  Command  and  believe  that  their  conventional  bombing  tactics  based
on  pattern  bombing  techniques  are  ideally  suited  to  meet  this  requirement.
I  strongly  recommend,  therefore,  that  as  a  matter  of  urgency,  we  be  au-
thorized to  employ  SAC  B-52  aircraft  against  selected  area  targets  in
RVN  .  .  .

Washington  first  authorized  the  use  of  ARC  LIGHT  B-52  forces  for  night
photography  over  target  areas  in  the  Kontum  and  War  Zone  D  regions  on  May
1.  A  month  later,  despite  the  misgivings  of  the  Air  Staff  and  the  SAC  com-
mander, the  first  B-52  bombing  raid  was  authorized  (ARC  LIGHT  I,  June  18,
1965)  attacking  the  War  Zone  D  VC  stronghold  near  Saigon.  On  July  4  and  7
further  attacks  were  undertaken,  and  ARC  LIGHT  became  a  regular  bombing
program  in  South  Vietnam.

As  the  weight  of  air  attacks  increased  significantly  in  South  Vietnam,  there
was  also  some  rise  in  the  level  of  air  strikes  in  the  North.  Combined  U.S.-VNAF
combat  sorties  totaled  about  3,600  in  April,  4,000  in  May,  and  4,800  in  June.
USAF  aircraft  flew  less  than  half  the  mission.  But  an  analysis  by  ICS  Chairman
Wheeler  on  4  April  and  another  by  the  CIA  and  the  Defense  Intelligence  Agency
(DIA)  early  in  July  showed  that  the  strikes  had  not  reduced  appreciably  North
Vietnam's  ability  to  defend  its  homeland,  train  its  forces,  and  infiltrate  men
and  supplies  into  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.

But  this  rising  level  of  attacks  did  not  satisfy  the  Air  Staff.  At  the  end  of
June,  General  McConnell  continued  to  stress  the  need  for  more  air  pressure
on  Hanoi,  saying  he  was:

more  convinced  than  ever  that  these  [air]  operations  cannot  be  divorced
from  and  are  the  essential  key  to  the  eventual  defeat  of  the  Viet  Cong.
In  November  1964  .  .  .  [the]  JCS  unanimously  agreed  that  direct,  decisive,
action  against  the  DRV  was  needed  immediately.  This  course  of  action
was  not  adopted  and  intelligence  reports  indicate  that  the  current  air  strike
program,  while  inconveniencing  the  DRV  had  done  little  to  curtail  or
destroy  their  will  and  capability  to  support  the  insurgency,  largely  due  to
the  restraints  on  the  air  strike  program.  In  fact,  the  restraints  have  provided
the  DRV  with  the  incentive  and  opportunity  to  strengthen  both  their
offensive  and  defensive  capabilities.


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  385

So  [the]  C/S  USAF  considers  an  intensified  application  of  air  power  against
key  industrial  and  military  targets  in  North  Vietnam  essential  to  the  result
desired.  During  the  period  of  time  required  to  introduce  more  forces,  any
build-up  of  and  support  for  the  Viet  Cong  offensive  should  be  denied.  .  .  .
Failing  this,  more  serious  difficulties  and  casualties  for  U.S.  and  allied
troops  can  be  expected.

McConnell  urged  again  that  the  Air  Force  be  allowed  to  strike  targets  in  the
94  target  list,  as  well  as  others.

C. MCNAMARA  REVIEWS  THE  PROGRAM

At  the  end  of  July,  in  response  to  a  Presidential  request.  Secretary  McNamara
undertook  a  review  and  evaluation  of  the  bombing  program  against  North  Viet-
nam. The  results  of  this  review  were  forwarded  to  the  President  in  a  memo-
randum, dated  July  30,  1965.  Since  it  represents  an  effective  wrap-up,  the
memorandum  is  reproduced  in  full.

1.  Rationale  for  bombing  the  North.  The  program  of  bombing  RVN
began  in  an  atmosphere  of  reprisal.  We  had  had  the  August  Tonkin  Gulf
episode;  we  had  absorbed  the  November  1  attack  on  Bien  Hoa  Airfield  and
the  Christmas  Eve  bombing  of  the  Brinks  Hotel  in  Saigon.  The  attacks  at
U.S.  installations  at  Pleiku  on  February  7  and  Qui  Nhon  on  February  10
were  the  immediate  causes  of  the  first  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  The
strike  following  Pleiku  was  announced  as  a  "response" — a  "reprisal";  our
strike  following  Qui  Nhon  was  called  a  response  to  more  generalized  VC
terrorism.  The  major  purposes  of  the  bombing  program,  however,  were:

a.  To  promote  a  settlement.  The  program  was  designed  ( 1 )  to  influence
the  DRV  to  negotiate  (explicitly  or  otherwise),  and  (2)  to  provide  us
with  a  bargaining  counter  within  negotiations.

b.  To  interdict  infiltration.  The  program  was  calculated  to  reduce  the
flow  of  men  and  supplies  from  the  North  to  the  South — at  the  least,  to
put  a  ceiling  on  the  size  of  war  that  the  enemy  could  wage  in  the  South.
[Author's  Note:  This  is  not  entirely  accurate;  interdiction  did  not  be-
come a  program  rationale  within  the  Administration  until  late  March,
and  publicaly  not  until  late  April  (see  Sections  VIII  and  XI.B).l  Supple-
mental purposes  of  the  program  were  (c)  to  demonstrate  to  South  Viet-
nam, North  Vietnam  and  the  world  the  U.S.  commitment  to  see  this
thing  through,  (d)  to  raise  morale  in  South  Vietnam  by  punishing  North
Vietnam,  the  source  of  the  suffering  in  the  South,  and  (e)  to  reduce
criticism  of  the  Administration  from  advocates  of  a  bombing  program.

2.  Achievement  of  major  purposes.  The  potential  targets,  targets  struck
and  per  cent  of  destruction  are  shown  at  Tab  A.  In  terms  of  the  purposes  of
the  program,  its  results  have  been  as  follows:

a.  To  promote  a  settlement.  Obviously,  this  objective  has  not  yet  been
attained.  We  recognized  at  the  start  of  the  program,  as  we  do  now,  that
the  influence  of  the  bombing  on  a  settlement  would  not  be  great  until
the  North  Vietnamese  had  been  disappointed  in  their  hopes  for  a  quick
military  success  in  the  South.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  bombing  pro-


386 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111

gram  has  become  an  important  counter  in  the  current  tacit  and  explicit
bargaining  process  and  will  be  an  important  counter  in  any  future
bargaining.

b.  To  interdict  infiltration.  It  is  believed  that  regular  North  Vietnamese
units  now  in  South  Vietnam  (estimated  to  be  one  division)  require  about
4  tons  of  supplies  daily  for  the  "current"  level  of  combat  but  would
require  67  tons  of  supplies  daily  for  "light"  combat.  ("Current"  levels
are  operations  conducted  largely  in  small  units;  "light"  combat  would
involve  larger  elements  in  action  on  the  average  of  every  third  day,  with
expenditures  of  one-third  of  each  unit's  basic  load  of  ammunition  on  each
action.)  It  is  believed  that  regular  North  Vietnamese  units  and  Pathet
Lao  forces  in  the  Laos  Panhandle  require  about  21  and  51  tons  daily
respectively  for  the  two  levels  of  combat.  Viet  Cong  arms,  ammunition
and  other  supply  requirements  are  estimated  at  8  tons  daily  for  "current"
combat  and  115  tons  for  "light"  combat.  The  effect  of  the  interdiction
program  on  the  movement  of  supplies  is  summarized  below:

The  440-ton  per  day  rail  traffic  from  Hanoi  south  to  Vinh  has  been
cut  off  at  Ninh  Binh  (40  miles  south  of  Hanoi).  Supplies  still  move  by
sea  and  over  the  parallel  highway  system.  The  latter  has  been  badly
damaged  and  is  subject  to  armed  reconnaissance;  sea  traffic  into  SVN
is  under  surveillance.  At  a  minimum,  supply  is  slower  and  less  regular
and  delivered  at  increased  cost  in  resources  and  energy  expended.  Roads
into  Laos  have  been  subjected  to  similar  interdiction  and  armed  recce.
Only  limited  interdiction  has  been  imposed  on  the  key  rail  and  road  net
northwest  of  Hanoi,  and  none  on  the  railway  net  northeast  of  Hanoi;
and  port  destruction  has  been  minimal.  Thus,  substantially  uninterrupted
supply  continues  from  China  by  rail  into  Hanoi  and  by  sea  into  Haiphong
to  meet  major  North  Vietnamese  military,  industrial  and  civilian  needs.

The  effect  of  the  bombing  on  military  operations  is  estimated  to  have
been  as  follows :

(1)  For  regular  North  Vietnamese  and  Pathet  Lao  forces.  The  inter-
diction program  has  caused  North  Vietnam  increasing  difficulty  in  sup-
plying their  units  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam.  How  severe  this  difficulty
is  or  how  stretched  North  Vietnam's  supply  capabilities  are  cannot  be
estimated  precisely.  Our  interdiction  efforts  may  have  either  prevented
or  deterred  the  North  from  sending  more  troops  than  they  already  have.
The  interdiction  programs  in  North  Vietnam  and  Laos  also  may  have
influenced  a  Communist  decision  to  forego  a  1965  offensive  in  Laos.

(2)  For  Viet  Cong  forces.  Because  the  VC  require  significantly  less
infiltrated  arms  and  ammunition  and  other  supplies  than  do  the  North
Vietnamese  and  Pathet  Lao  forces,  the  interdiction  program  probably
has  had  less  of  an  adverse  effect  on  their  operations.  By  raising  VC
fears  concerning  adequacy  of  supplies,  however,  the  program  may  have
caused  the  VC  summer  offensive  to  be  less  intense,  aggressive  and  un-
relenting than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.

It  should  be  noted  that  the  program  has  not  been  a  "strategic"  bombing
program;  it  has  been  limited  to  selected  targets  of  fairly  direct  military
relevance.  Populations  and  targets  such  as  dikes  and  basic  industries  have
not  been  struck.  Furthermore,  the  immediate  vicinities  of  Hanoi  and
Haiphong  have  been  avoided,  partly  because  the  targets  there  are  primarily


The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  February-June  1965  387

of  the  "strategic"  type  and  partly  because  strikes  there  would  involve  even
more  serious  risks  of  confrontations  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  China.

3.  Other  effects  of  the  program.

a.  Deterrence  of  VC  terrorism.  There  is  no  evidence  that  strikes  against
North  Vietnam  have  affected  one  way  or  another  the  level  or  kind  of
VC  incidents  of  terror  in  South  Vietnam.

b.  Morale  in  South  Vietnam.  Morale  in  South  Vietnam  was  raised  by
the  initiation  of  the  bombing  program  (as,  later,  hv  the  deplovment  of
additional  troops).  Now — with  the  bombing  programs  having  become
commonplace  and  with  the  failure  of  the  situation  to  improve — morale
in  South  Vietnam  is  not  discernibly  better  than  it  was  before  the  bomb-
ing program  began.  In  a  sense,  South  Vietnam  is  now  "addicted"  to  the
program:  a  permanent  abandonment  of  the  program  would  have  a  distinct
depressing  effect  on  morale  in  South  Vietnam.

c.  Reduction  of  criticism  of  the  Administration.  Some  critics,  who
advocated  bombing,  were  silenced:  others  are  now  as  vocal  or  more
vocal  because  the  program  has  been  too  limited  for  their  taste.  The
program  has  generated  a  new  school  of  criticism  among  liberals  and
"peace"  groups,  whose  activities  have  been  reflected  especialh  in  teach-ins
and  newspaper  criticisms.

d.  Damage  to  peaceful  image  of  the  US.  The  price  paid  for  improv-
ing our  image  as  a  guarantor  has  been  damage  to  our  image  as  a  country
which  eschews  armed  attacks  on  other  nations.  The  hue  and  cry  correlates
with  the  kind  of  weapons  (e.g..  bombs  vs.  napalm),  the  kind  of  targets
(e.g.,  bridges  vs.  people),  the  location  of  targets  (e.g.,  south  vs.  north),
and  not  least  the  extent  to  which-  the  critic  feels  threatened  by  Asian
communism  (e.g.,  Thailand  vs.  the*  UK).  Furthermore,  for  a  given  level
of  bombing,  the  hue  and  crv  is  less  now  than  it  was  earlier,  perhaps  to
some  extent  helped  bv  Communist  intransigence  toward  discussions.  The
objection  to  our  "warlike"  image  and  the  approval  of  our  fulfilling  our
commitments  competes  in  the  minds  of  manv  nations  (and  individuals)
in  the  world,  producing  a  schizophrenia.  Within  such  allied  countries  as
UK  and  Japan,  popular  antagonism  to  the  bombings  per  se,  fear  of
escalation  and  belief  that  the  bombings  are  the  main  obstacle  to  negotia-
tion, have  created  political  problems  for  the  governments  in  their  sup-
port of  US  policy.

e.  Pressures  to  settle.  More  countries  are  now,  as  a  consequence  of  the
bombing  program,  more  interested  in  taking  steps  to  help  bring  the  war
to  an  end.

f.  Impact  on  US-Soviet  detente.  The  bombing  program — because  it
appears  to  reject  the  policy  of  "peaceful  co-existence,"  because  it  involves
an  attack  on  a  "fellow  socialist  country,"  because  the  Soviet  people  have
vivid  horrible  memories  of  air  bombing,  because  it  challenges  the  USSR
as  she  competes  with  China  for  leadership  of  the  Communist  world,  and
because  US  and  Soviet  arms  are  now  striking  each  other  in  North  Viet-
nam has  strained  the  US-Soviet  detente,  making  constructive  arms-
control  and  other  cooperative  programs  more  difllcult.  How  serious  this
effect  will  be  and  whether  the  detente  can  be  revived  depend  on  how  far
we  carry  our  military  actions  against  the  North  and  how  long  the  cam-
paien  continues.  At  the  same  tinie,  the  bombing  program  offers  the  Soviet


388 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

Union  an  opportunity  to  play  a  role  in  bringing  peace  to  Vietnam,  by
gaining  credit  for  persuading  us  to  terminate  the  program.  There  is  a
chance  that  the  scenario  could  spin  out  this  way;  if  so,  the  effect  of  the
entire  experience  on  the  US-Soviet  detente  could  be  a  net  plus.

g.  Risk  of  escalation.  The  bombing  program — especially  as  strikes
move  toward  Hanoi  and  toward  China  and  as  encounters  with  Soviet/
Chinese  SAMs/MlGs  occur — may  increase  the  risk  of  escalation  into  a
broader  war.

4.  The  future  of  the  program.  Even  with  hindsight,  I  believe  the  decision
to  bomb  the  DRV  was  wise  and  I  believe  the  program  should  be  continued.
The  future  program  should:

a.  Emphasize  the  threat.  It  should  be  structured  to  capitalize  on  fear
of  future  attacks.  At  any  time,  "pressure"  on  the  DRV  depends  not
upon  the  current  level  of  bombing  but  rather  upon  the  credible  threat
of  future  destruction  which  can  be  avoided  by  agreeing  to  negotiate  or
agreeing  to  some  settlement  in  negotiations.

b.  Minimize  the  loss  of  DRV  "face."  The  program  should  be  designed
to  make  it  politically  easy  for  the  DRV  to  enter  negotiations  and  to  make
concessions  during  negotiations.  It  may  be  politically  easier  for  North
Vietnam  to  accept  negotiations  and/or  to  make  concessions  at  a  time
when  bombing  of  their  territory  is  not  currently  taking  place.

c.  Optimize  interdiction  vs.  political  costs.  Interdiction  should  be
carried  out  so  as  to  maximize  effectiveness  and  to  minimize  the  political
repercussions  from  the  methods  used.  Physically,  it  makes  no  difference
whether  a  rifle  is  interdicted  on  its  way  into  North  Vietnam,  on  its  way
out  of  North  Vietnam,  in  Laos  or  in  South  Vietnam.  But  different  amounts
of  effort  and  different  political  prices  may  be  paid  depending  on  how
and  where  it  is  done.  The  critical  variables  in  this  regard  are  (1)  the
type  of  targets  struck  (e.g.,  port  facilities  involving  civilian  casualties
vs.  isolated  bridges),  (2)  type  of  aircraft  (e.g.,  B-52s  vs.  F-105s),
(3)  kind  of  weapons  (e.g.,  napalm  vs.  ordinary  bomb),  (4)  location  of
target  (e.g.,  in  Hanoi  vs.  Laotian  border  area),  and  (5)  the  accompanying
declaratory  policy  (e.g.,  unlimited  vs.  a  defined  interdiction  zone).

d.  Coordinate  with  other  influences  on  the  DRV.  So  long  as  full  victory
in  the  South  appears  likely,  the  effect  of  the  bombing  program  in  pro-
moting negotiations  or  a  settlement  will  probably  be  small.  The  bombing
program  now  and  later  should  be  designed  for  its  influence  on  the  DRV
at  that  unknown  time  when  the  DRV  becomes  more  optimistic  about
what  they  can  achieve  in  a  settlement  acceptable  to  us  than  about  what
they  can  achieve  by  continuation  of  the  war.

e.  Avoid  undue  risks  and  costs.  The  program  should  avoid  bombing
which  runs  a  high  risk  of  escalation  into  war  with  the  Soviets  or  China
and  which  is  likely  to  appall  allies  and  friends.


389


4.  American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,
March-July  1965


Summary

MARINE  COMBAT  UNITS  GO  TO  DA  NANG,  MARCH  1965

On  March  8,  1965,  two  United  States  Marine  Corps  Battalion  Landing  Teams
arrived  at  Da  Nang  with  the  Mission  to  help  secure  the  air  base  and  associated
installations.  What  was  the  rationale  behind  the  decision  to  put  the  first  U.S.
ground  combat  units  into  Vietnam?  Was  this  a  conscious  prelude  to  U.S.
assumption  of  a  ground  combat  role  in  the  Vietnam  war?

On  February  22,  1965,  COMUSMACV,  General  Westmoreland,  recom-
mended the  landing  and  the  mission.  The  United  States  at  the  time  was  already
conducting  Flaming  Dart  airstrikes  against  the  DRV.  Since  Da  Nang  was  sup-
porting those  strikes  in  addition  to  concomitant  air  activity  within  SVN,  there
was  concern  in  many  quarters  that  Da  Nang  might  suffer  the  same  fate  as  had
Bien  Hoa  the  previous  November.  Ambassador  Taylor  supported  Westmore-
land's request  for  the  Marines,  but  with  serious  reservations.  He  saw  this  de-
ployment as  the  removal  of  the  last  barrier  to  U.S.  assumption  of  the  ground
war.  In  addition,  he  argued  that  two  Marine  BLTs  would  not  be  able  to  guar-
antee base  security  and  that  "white-faced"  troops  would  be  unable  to  assimilate
and  would  have  great  difficulty  identifying  the  enemy.*  There  is  no  documentary

*  Back  in  August  1964,  when  he  was  less  well-acquainted  with  the  Vietnamese  war  and
the  proclivities  of  the  side  we  were  supporting,  Ambassador  Taylor  was  more  readily
inclined  to  recommend  prudent  actions  involving  the  deployment  of  U.S.  ground  forces
to  Vietnam.  He  is  on  record  in  Embtel  465  of  18  August  1964,  as  being  in  favor  of
"taking  such  visible  measures  as  introducing  U.S.  HAWK  units  to  Da  Nang  and  Saigon,
[and]  landing  a  Marine  Force  at  Da  Nang  for  defense  of  the  airfield  and  beefing  up
MACV's  support  base.  .  .  ."

There  is  no  agonizing  over  "white-faced"  soldiers  and  their  difficulties  in  Embtel  465.
The  cable  contains  the  discussion  of  two  specific  courses  of  action,  labeled  appropriately
A  and  B,  aimed  at  increasing  the  pressure  on  North  Vietnam  through  the  use  of  Ameri-
can air  and  naval  power  primarily.  Course  of  Action  A  presumed  that  the  government
of  General  Nguyen  Khanh  would  respond  to  the  input  of  increased  American  assistance,
get  itself  organized  and  make  enough  military  progress  to  "free  Saigon  from  the  VC
threat  which  presently  rings  it  and  assure  that  sufficient  GVN  ground  forces  will  be
available  to  provide  a  reasonable  measure  of  defense  against  any  DRV  ground  reaction
which  may  develop  in  the  execution  of  our  program  and  thus  avoid  the  possible  re-
quirement for  a  major  U.S.  ground  force  commitment."  Course  of  Action  B  was  based
upon  the  inability  of  Khanh  government  to  overcome  its  difficulties  or  make  any  sig-
nificant military  progress  in  the  South.  Course  of  Action  B  presumed  that  the  U.S.
would  go  ahead  with  its  program  to  increase  pressure  on  the  DRV  notwithstanding;
"however,  it  increases  the  likelihood  of  U.S.  involvement  in  ground  action,  since  Khanh
will  have  almost  available  ground  forces  which  can  be  released  from  pacification  em-
ployment to  mobile  resistance  of  DRV  attacks."


1


390 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

evidence  to  indicate  that  any  of  the  other  decision-making  principals  shared
Ambassador  Taylor's  reservations.

Approval  to  send  the  Marines,  contingent  on  GVN  concurrence,  came  on
February  26,  1965,  and,  except  for  an  abortive  attempt  by  the  Defense  Depart-
ment to  substitute  Army  airborne  troops  for  the  Marines  at  the  last  minute,  all
progressed  smoothly  through  the  landing  of  the  Marines  and  the  preparation  of
their  defensive  positions.

Estimates  of  the  political /military  situation  in  SVN  in  early  1965,  both  from
the  official  viewpoint  and  from  other  observers,  were  universally  gloomy.  No
one  foresaw  ultimate  US/GVN  victory  without  reversal  of  the  then-current
trend.  The  GVN  was  seen  to  be  well  on  its  way  to  complete  collapse.  The  most
optimistic  estimate  was  that  the  VC  would  take  over  within  a  year.

Prior  to  the  request  for  Marines,  the  principal  advisors  to  the  President  had,
for  some  time,  been  debating  possible  U.S.  courses  of  action  in  SVN.  The  pos-
sible use  of  ground  forces  for  security  and  as  deterrent  or  reaction  forces  against
possible  DRV/CPR  ground  action  in  SEA  was  included  in  these  discussions,  and
indeed  both  CINCPAC  and  COMUSMACV  had  prepared  detailed  contingency
plans  in  expectation  of  a  decision  to  so  employ  ground  forces.  However,  no
plan  to  engage  U.S.  ground  forces  in  offensive  action  against  the  Viet  Cong  had
been  considered.  From  the  documentary  record,  it  appears  that  the  U.S.  offensive
role  was  to  be  limited  to  airpower.  On  February  7,  1965,  for  example,  McGeorge
Bundy  sent  to  the  President  a  memorandum  which  outlined  the  policy  of  grad-
uated reprisal  airstrikes  against  the  DRV.  There  is  no  reference  in  that  memoran-
dum to  the  use  of  ground  troops  in  SVN,  despite  the  fact  that  it  was  a  major
document  outlining  what  was  to  become  U.S.  strategy.

While  it  appears  as  though  all  the  principals  in  the  decision-making  process,
including  Ambassador  Taylor  and  CINCPAC,  chose  to  view  the  Marine  deploy-
ment as  an  isolated  phenomenon  rather  than  as  part  of  a  sequence,  there  is  evi-
dence to  indicate  that  COMUSMACV  saw  it  as  the  first  step  presaging  a  U.S.
ground  force  build-up  in  SEA.  A  fair  proportion  of  the  newspaper  writers  at  the
time  were  equally  prescient.

Regardless  of  what  was  said  or  believed  at  the  time  the  Marines  were  landed,
it  was  obvious  to  them  from  the  outset  that  they  had  neither  the  capability  nor
the  flexibility  to  adequately  secure  the  airbase  at  Da  Nang,  and  they  believed
that  the  restrictions  placed  on  them  were  ill-considered.

PHASE  1  IN  THE  BUILD-UP  OF  U.S.  FORCES,  MARCH-JULY  1965

The  U.S.  decision  to  deploy  44  US/FW  battalions  to  Vietnam  was  the  prod-
uct of  a  debate  over  strategy,  but  more  basicially,  a  debate  over  objectives.  Once
the  consensus  developed  that  the  U.S.  would  neither  opt  out  of  the  conflict  nor
settle  for  a  stalemate,  44  BLT's  made  more  sense  than  17  BLT's  (agreed  to  at
Honolulu  in  April)  or  fewer.  When  it  emerged  that  the  U.S.  objective  was  to
defeat  the  VC/NVA  on  the  ground  in  order  to  assure  an  "independent,  non-


In  anticipation  of  having  to  proceed  with  Course  of  Action  B,  Taylor  recommended
"raising  the  level  of  precautionary  military  readiness"  by  deploying  forces  as  described
above.  He  did  not  address  the  involvement  of  U.S.  ground  forces  in  the  war  against  the
insurgents  in  the  South,  but  rather  was  concerned  with  the  possibility  of  provoked  DRV
aggression  from  the  North,  and  the  necessity  to  counter  it  if  it  occurred.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  391

communist  South  Vietnam,"  an  aggressive  search  and  destroy  strategy  had  to
prevail  over  the  more  experimental  and  cautionarv  enclave  approach.

The  decision  was  made  swiftly  and  in  an  atmosphere  of  crisis.  After  almost
three  months  of  euphoria  (RVNAF  was  holding  together  and  the  Saigon  gov-
ernment was  stable),  four  factors  converged  in  late  May  and  early  June  to
set  the  decision  full  speed  in  motion:  (1)  Rolling  Thunder  was  recognized  in
itself  as  insufficient  to  convince  Hanoi  to  negotiate:  (2)  on  12  June,  the  Quat
government  fell,  and  all  the  nightmares  about  no  Saigon  political  authority
reappeared;  (3)  the  Viet  Cong,  it  was  supposed,  was  about  to  launch  an  all-
out  offensive,  cut  the  country  in  two,  and  establish  an  alternate  government-in-
country;  and  (4)  RVNAF,  faced  with  an  unfavorable  force  ratio,  quickly
demonstrated  that  it  could  not  cope.

The  major  participants  in  the  decision  knew  the  choices  and  understood  the
consequences.  The  strategy  of  base  security  for  the  air  war  against  North  Viet-
nam and  the  strategy  of  coastal  enclaves  were  rejected  with  the  knowledge  that
a  quick  solution  was  no  longer  possible.  Unlike  the  sending  of  Marines  to  Da
Nang,  the  44  BLT  decision  was  perceived  as  a  threshold — entrance  into  Asian
land  war.  The  conflict  was  seen  to  be  long,  with  further  U.S.  deployments  to
follow.  The  choice  at  that  time  was  not  whether  or  not  to  negotiate,  it  was  not
whether  to  hold  on  for  a  while  or  let  go — the  choice  was  viewed  as  winning  or
losing  South  Vietnam.  Should  negotiations  come,  should  North  Vietnam  or  the
Viet  Cong  elect  to  settle  before  this  victory,  the  U.S.  would  then  be  in  a  position
of  strength.

I. EVOLUTION  OF  THE  SITUATION

In  the  historv  of  the  Metnam  War.  the  Year  1965  is  notable  for  momentous
and  fateful  U.S.  decisions.  In  February,  after  a  dramatic  increase  in  activity
initiated  by  the  Viet  Cong,  the  United  States  responded  by  increasing  its  own
level  of  commitment  to  the  Republic  of  Vietnam.  For  the  first  time,  U.S.  jet
aircraft  were  authorized  to  support  the  RVNAF  in  ground  operations  in  the
South  without  restriction.  In  immediate  retaliation  for  guerrilla  raids  on  U.S.
installations  in  the  South,  U.S  aircraft  also  began  bombing  targets  in  the
southern  reaches  of  North  Vietnam.  In  early  March,  the  latter  program  evolved
into  Rolling  Thunder,  the  sustained  bombing  of  the  North.  Also,  during  March,
two  U.S.  Marine  battalions  were  landed  at  Da  Nang  on  the  coast  of  Central
Vietnam.  The  airbase  at  Da  Nang  was  a  major  supporter  of  the  Rolling  Thunder
bombing,  and  the  mission  of  the  Marines  was  to  strengthen  its  defenses.  Those
troops  represented  the  first  U.S.  ground  combat  commitment  to  the  Asian
mainland  since  Korea.

While  the  pace  of-militarv  activitv  in  1965  was  on  the  rise,  the  political  situa-
tion in  South  Vietnam  remained  as  unpredictable  as  it  had  been  throughout
the  previous  year.  A  very  confusing  series  of  events  in  the  middle  of  February
culminated  in  the  departure  from  Vietnam  of  the  volatile  General  Nguyen
Khanh.  Left  in  his  stead  were  two  civilians.  Prime  Minister  Phan  Huy  Quat
and  Chief  of  State  Phan  Khac  Suu.

The  rate  of  ground  combat  activity  dropped  off  in  March  and  remained  low
for  the  next  month  and  a  half.  The  Viet  Cong  eased  the  pressure  on  the  GVN
considerably  and  yielded  the  initiative  to  the  government  armed  forces.  The
performance  of  the  RVNAF,  whose  effectiveness  was  called  into  question  with
the  deployment  of  U.S.  troops  to  look  after  major  bases,  began  to  improve
according  to  the  statistical  indicators  used  to  measure  the  progress  of  the  war.


392 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

Whenever  the  RVNAF  succeeded  in  locating  and  fixing  the  Viet  Cong,  the  gov-
ernment troops  and  their  officers  seemed  to  demonstrate  more  offensive  spirit
and  willingness  to  engage.

Parallel  to  hopeful  signs  on  the  military  side,  Premier  Quat,  a  quietly  deter-
mined man,  showed  promise  that  for  the  first  time  the  Vietnamese  might  be  close
to  solving  their  frustrating  political  problems.  Under  Quat,  the  progressive  de-
terioration in  governmental  stability  seemed  at  long  last  to  have  halted.

The  reaction  of  the  U.S.  community  to  the  period  of  quiescence  in  the  spring
of  1965  was  mixed.  Pessimistic  predictions  in  March  as  to  the  capability  of  the
RVNAF  to  withstand  the  next  wave  of  Viet  Cong  offensive  activity  were  offset
by  convictions  that  ongoing  U.S.  aid  programs  were  adequate  to  meet  the  situa-
tion provided  the  GVN  resolved  its  internal  contradictions  and  devoted  its
energies  to  the  war.  Expressions  of  cautious  optimism,  and  of  conviction  that
radical  changes  to  U.S.  strategy  were  unwarranted — Ambassador  Taylor's
notable  among  them — continued  to  reach  Washington  from  Saigon  through
April  and  May.  Among  the  less  sanguine,  even  General  Westmoreland  expressed
hope  that  perhaps,  with  the  aid  of  increased  U.S.  air  activity  and  signs  of  greater
RVNAF  resolve,  a  corner  had  indeed  been  turned.  In  the  absence  of  dramatic
action  in  Vietnam,  most  observers  were  prepared  to  wait  and  see  what  was  to
transpire  when  the  military  hiatus  ended.

The  drop  in  activity  during  the  spring  of  1965  was  not  unprecedented.  The
Viet  Cong  had  traditionally  yielded  the  initiative  to  the  more  highly  mobile
RVNAF  during  the  dry  season,  and  they  were  expected  to  reappear  with  the
advent  of  the  summer  season,  or  rainy  season,  in  May  and  June.  The  official
estimates  of  the  Viet  Cong  Order  of  Battle,  including  in  April  confirmed
presence  in  the  South  of  at  least  one  battalion  of  the  North  Vietnamese  Army,
provided  little  cause  for  comfort.  Coupled  with  reports  that  the  Viet  Cong  were
concentrating  their  forces  in  a  few  critical  areas,  the  estimates  of  enemy  capabil-
ity were  a  sure  indication  that  the  coming  summer  monsoon  in  1965  would  pro-
vide a  sore  test  of  the  RVNAF's  ability.

The  test  began  in  earnest  in  May  as  the  Viet  Cong  mounted  a  regiment-sized
attack  on  the  capital  of  Phuoc  Long  Province.  The  enemy  scored  again  with  the
successful  ambush  of  an  ARVN  infantry  battalion  and  its  rescue  force  near
Quang  Ngai  in  I  Corps  later  that  month.  The  Quang  Ngai  action  left  two  ARVN
battalions  decimated,  and  American  officers  who  had  witnessed  the  battle  went
away  with  the  distinct  impression  that  the  RVNAF  were  close  to  collapse.  The
impression  was  confirmed  during  the  battle  of  Dong  Xoai  in  mid-June.  In  a
textbook  display  of  tactical  ineptitude,  battalions  of  ARVN's  finest  reserves  were
frittered  away  piecemeal  during  the  fighting.  The  violence  of  the  action  at  Dong
Xoai  and  the  level  of  RVNAF  casualties  during  the  second  week  of  June  1965
were  both  unprecedented.

As  the  summer  wore  on,  the  focus  of  the  enemy  campaign  shifted  to  the  high-
lands of  the  II  Corps.  By  early  July,  Viet  Cong  successes  in  taking  remote  Dis-
trict Headquarters  heralded  the  expected  loss  of  the  entire  highlands  area  and
the  possible  establishment  there  of  a  National  Liberation  Front  government.

General  Westmoreland  responded  immediately  to  the  marked  upsurge  in  Viet
Cong  activity  by  requesting  in  June  U.S.  and  Third  Country  reinforcements  to
spell  the  RVNAF  during  their  time  of  trial  and  to  blunt  the  Viet  Cong  offensive
by  conducting  operations  throughout  the  country  against  them.  The  collapse  of
the  Quat  government  in  mid-June  and  its  succession  by  an  untested  military
regime  further  increased  the  urgency  associated  with  Westmoreland's  request.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  393

The  debate  in  U.S.  official  circles  over  the  extent  of  American  involvement  in
the  war — a  debate  which  had  followed  a  devious  course  all  through  the  spring
of  1965 — moved  onto  a  higher  plane  at  this  juncture.

II. THEMES  GERMANE  TO  THE  STRATEGY  DEBATE

Official  hopes  were  high  that  the  Rolling  Thunder  program  begun  in  March
would  rapidly  convince  Hanoi  that  it  should  agree  to  negotiate  a  settlement  to
the  war  in  the  South.  After  a  month  of  bombing  with  no  response  from  the  North
Vietnamese,  optimism  began  to  wane.  In  the  middle  of  April  it  was  recognized
that  in  addition  to  the  bombing  some  manifestation  of  the  Viet  Cong's  inability
to  win  in  the  South  was  needed  before  the  Communists  would  agree  to  negoti-
ate. By  the  end  of  April,  the  North  Vietnamese  showed  signs  of  preparing  for
a  long  seige  under  the  bombing,  while  they  waited  for  what  they  saw  as  the
inevitable  victory  of  the  Viet  Cong  in  the  South.  Indeed,  the  North  Vietnamese
proved  their  intractability  when  they  failed  to  respond  meaningfully  to  overtures
made  during  a  week-long  pause  in  the  bombing  in  May.  By  June,  U.S.  officials
recognized  that  something  dramatic  was  going  to  have  to  be  added  to  the  bomb-
ing program  if  the  Communists  were  ever  to  be  persuaded  to  call  off  their
campaign  in  the  South.

All  through  early  1965,  officials  in  the  U.S.  Government  debated  the  level  of
effort  required  of  the  United  States  in  order  to  achieve  its  objectives  in  South
Vietnam.  Generally  stated,  those  objectives  were  to  insure  that  the  Communist
insurgents  were  defeated  in  their  efforts  to  take  over  the  government  of  South
Vietnam  and  that  a  stable  and  friendly  government  was  maintained  in  their
place.  The  U.S.  embarked  on  the  Rolling  Thunder  bombing  program  in  order
to  convince  the  North  Vietnamese  to  cease  their  direction  and  support  of  the
insurgency  in  the  South.  When  the  bombing  program,  which  could  have  been
halted  almost  as  easily  as  it  was  initiated,  gave  indication  that  it  was  not  going
to  succeed  by  itself,  the  U.S.  was  presented  essentially  with  two  options:  (1)  to
withdraw  unilaterally  from  Vietnam  leaving  the  South  Vietnamese  to  fend  for
themselves,  or  (2)  to  commit  ground  forces  in  pursuit  of  its  objectives.  A  third
option,  that  of  drastically  increasing  the  scope  and  scale  of  the  bombing,  was
rejected  because  of  the  concomitant  high  risk  of  inviting  Chinese  intervention.

This  paper  deals  essentially  with  the  decision  by  the  U.S.  Government  to
intervene  on  the  ground  in  South  Vietnam.  The  debate  over  ground  strategy  was
characterized  by  an  almost  complete  lack  of  consensus  throughout  the  first  half
of  1965.  Proposals  for  levels  of  commitment  ranging  from  a  couple  of  battalions
to  several  divisions  were  under  consideration  simultaneously.  For  each  identi-
fiable strategy — and  there  are  three  discussed  in  this  paper — security,  enclave,
and  search  and  destroy — there  were  many  proponents,  some  of  them  quite
vociferous.  The  announcements  of  decisions  regarding  the  ground  build-up  were
invariably  couched  in  terms  which  gave  clear  indication  to  more  aggressive  pro-
ponents that  their  turn  might  yet  come.

The  initial  steps  in  ground  build-up  appear  to  have  been  grudgingly  taken,
indicating  that  the  President  of  the  United  States  and  his  advisers  recognized
the  tremendous  inertial  implications  of  ground  troop  deployments.  Halting  ground
involvement  was  seen  to  be  a  manifestly  greater  problem  than  halting  air  or
naval  activity.  In  addition,  the  early  build-up  may  have  been  permitted  some
leisure  because  of  the  lack  of  immediate  urgency  in  the  situation  in  Vietnam
and  the  necessity  to  improve  on  an  inadequate  logistical  base  there.


394 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


III. STRATEGIES  FOR  GROUND  FORCE  EMPLOYMENT

A.  STRATEGY  OF  SECURITY

The  strategy  of  security  arose  with  the  beginning  of  the  bombing  programs
and  was  designed  simply  to  increase  security  of  U.S.  bases  and  installations  sup-
porting those  programs.  It  was  conceived  at  a  time  when  enthusiasm  for  the
bombing  programs  was  high  and  its  proponents  were  at  pains  to  insure  that  U.S.
troops  did  not  get  involved  in  the  ground  war.  All  9  of  the  U.S.  battalions  de-
ployed to  Vietnam  by  June  1965  had  base  security  as  their  primary  mission,  and
21  of  the  44  U.S.  and  Third  Country  battalions  deployed  by  the  end  of  1965
were  so  oriented.  In  part,  however,  most  of  those  units  were  deployed  for  far
more  ambitious  reasons.  At  a  maximum,  four  Marine  and  possibly  two  Army
battalions  were  recommended  for  deployment  solely  under  the  provisions  of
the  security  strategy,  and  the  strategy  was  a  dead  letter  by  the  time  most  of
those  deployments  had  been  approved.

The  strategy  of  security  expired  along  with  the  early  hopes  that  Rolling
Thunder  could  succeed  by  itself.  The  non-involvement  of  the  "security  troops"
in  the  ground  war  was  designed  to  keep  U.S.  casualties  to  a  minimum  and  to
facilitate  withdrawal.  By  deploying  its  own  troops  to  secure  bases,  the  U.S.
showed  lack  of  confidence  in  the  RVNAF,  but  by  keeping  U.S.  troops  out  of  the
fighting  it  demonstrated  at  the  same  time  belief  that  the  RVNAF  would  be  able
to  hold  on  until  the  other  side  decided  it  had  had  enough.  Because  of  the  well-
known  shibboleth  about  U.S.  involvement  in  an  Asian  ground  war  and  because
of  the  ponderous  nature  of  ground  force  deployments,  it  was  inevitable  that
some  observers  would  see  in  the  strategy  of  security  the  crossing  of  a  threshold.

B.  ENCLAVE  STRATEGY

The  President  decided  during  NSC  meetings  on  1  and  2  April  1965  to  get
U.S.  ground  combat  units  involved  in  the  war  against  the  insurgents.  He  did
this  in  the  sober  awareness  that  Rolling  Thunder  was  unlikely  to  produce  im-
mediate results,  but  also  with  the  caveat  that  U.S.  troops  might  not  do  too  well
in  an  Asian  insurgency  environment.  The  enclave  strategy,  which  had  been  pre-
sented by  Ambassador  Taylor  as  a  way  to  get  U.S.  troops  engaged  at  relatively
low  risk,  was  implicitly  endorsed  by  the  President.  The  strategy  proposed  that
U.S.  troops  occupy  coastal  enclaves,  accept  full  responsibility  for  enclave
security,  and  be  prepared  to  go  to  the  rescue  of  the  RVNAF  as  far  as  50  miles
outside  the  enclave.  Initially,  the  U.S.  was  to  experiment  with  four  Marine
battalions  in  two  coastal  enclaves  to  see  if  the  concept  and  the  rules  for  operat-
ing with  the  RVNAF  (which  were  to  be  worked  out  with  the  GVN)  were
feasible.

Without  the  benefit  of  any  experimentation  the  number  of  battalions  was  in-
creased at  Honolulu  in  mid-April  to  17  and  the  number  of  enclaves  to  5.  The
enclave  strategy  as  formalized  at  Honolulu  was  designed  to  frustrate  the  Viet
Cong  in  the  South  while  Rolling  Thunder  continued  to  hammer  the  North.  The
intent  was  not  to  take  the  war  to  the  enemy  but  rather  to  deny  to  him  certain
critical  areas  while  simultaneously  providing  ready  assistance  to  the  RVNAF
if  they  should  run  into  difficulty.  The  RVNAF  were  expected  to  continue
aggressively  prosecuting  the  war  against  the  enemy's  main  forces,  thereby  bear-
ing the  brunt  of  the  casualties.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  395

The  enclave  strategy  was  controversial  and  expectations  for  it  ran  the  gamut
from  extreme  optimism  to  deep  pessimism.  The  Ambassador  expected  it  to  buy
some  time  for  the  Vietnamese  to  eventually  save  themselves.  General  Westmore-
land and  other  military  men  expected  it  to  guarantee  defeat  for  the  U.S.  and  the
RVNAF,  who  were  already  demonstrating  that  they  were  incapable  of  defeating
the  enemy.

A  masterpiece  of  ambiguity,  the  enclave  strategy  implied  a  greater  commit-
ment to  the  war  on  the  part  of  the  U.S.,  but  simultaneously  demonstrated  in
the  placing  of  the  troops  with  their  backs  to  the  sea  a  desire  for  rapid  and  early
exit.  While  purporting  to  provide  the  basis  for  experimentation  with  U.S.
soldiers  in  an  unfamiliar  environment,  it  mitigated  against  the  success  of  the
experiments  by  placing  those  troops  in  close  proximity  to  the  Vietnamese  people,
where  the  greatest  difficulty  would  be  encountered.  In  order  to  prove  the  viability
of  its  reserve  reaction  foundation,  it  required  testing;  but  the  rules  for  com-
mitment were  not  worked  out  until  the  strategy  was  already  overtaken  by  events.
As  a  consequence  of  this  delay,  several  opportunities  were  passed  up  when  the
RVNAF  really  needed  help  and  U.S.  troops  were  available.  The  whole  enclave
concept  implied  that  the  RVNAF  would  ultimately  prevail,  but  in  any  case  the
Viet  Cong  could  never  win  as  long  as  certain  areas  were  denied  to  them.  The
enclave  strategy  tacitly  yielded  the  initiative  to  the  enemy,  but  the  initiative  was
not  seen  as  the  vital  factor.  The  key  was  to  be  able  to  outlast  the  enemy  at
lowest  cost  to  the  United  States.

C. SEARCH  AND  DESTROY  STRATEGY

Almost  in  reaction  to  the  dearth  of  proposals  to  seize  the  initiative  from  the
enemy.  General  Westmoreland  provided  consistent  pressure  for  a  free  hand  to
maneuver  U.S.  and  Third  Country  forces  in  South  Vietnam.  His  search  and
destroy  strategy,  which  was  given  Presidential  sanction  during  the  summer  of
1965,  was  articulated  by  both  Westmoreland  and  the  JCS  in  keeping  with  sound
military  principles  garnered  by  men  accustomed  to  winning.  The  basic  idea
behind  the  strategy  was  the  desire  to  take  the  war  to  the  enemy,  denying  him
freedom  of  movement  anywhere  in  the  country  and  taking  advantage  of  the
superior  firepower  and  maneuverability  of  U.S.  and  Third  Country  forces  to  deal
him  the  heaviest  possible  blows.  In  the  meantime,  the  RVNAF,  with  superior
knowledge  of  the  population  and  the  role  of  the  Viet  Cong,  would  be  free  to
concentrate  their  efforts  in  populated  areas.

The  strategy  of  search  and  destroy  was  given  approval  at  a  time  when  there
was  very  little  hope  for  results  from  the  Rolling  Thunder  program.  The  bombing
became,  therefore,  an  adjunct  to  the  ground  strategy  as  the  war  in  the  South
assumed  first  priority.  Accompanying  the  strategy  was  a  subtle  change  of
emphasis — instead  of  simply  denying  the  enemy  victory  and  convincing  him
that  he  could  not  win,  the  thrust  became  defeating  the  enemy  in  the  South.
This  was  sanctioned  implicitly  as  the  only  way  to  achieve  the  U.S.  objective  of
a  non-communist  South  Vietnam.  It  was  conceivable,  of  course,  that  sometime
before  total  defeat  the  North  Vietnamese  and  the  Viet  Cong  might  decide  that
they  had  had  enough.  In  this  event,  the  U.S.  could  halt  its  efforts  short  of  com-
plete defeat  of  the  insurgents  and  negotiate  a  settlement  to  the  conflict  from  a
much  stronger  position  than  that  offered  by  any  of  the  alternate  strategies.

The  strategy  described  above  with  all  its  implications  evolved  in  piecemeal
fashion  during  June  and  July  1965.  Westmoreland  was  first  given  authority  in
June  to  commit  U.S.  ground  forces  anywhere  in  the  country  when,  in  his


396 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

judgment,  they  were  needed  to  strengthen  the  relative  position  of  the  RVNAF.
His  first  major  operation  with  U.S.  troops  under  the  new  aegis  was  on  27  June,
and  that  force  made  a  deep  penetration  into  the  Viet  Cong  base  area  of  War
Zone  '"D"  NW  of  Saigon.  Once  the  forces  had  been  Hberated  from  the  restric-
tions of  the  coastal  enclaves,  the  next  step  was  to  decide  how  much  reinforce-
ment was  needed  in  order  to  insure  that  the  Viet  Cong  and  their  North  Viet-
namese allies  could  not  win.  The  force  decided  upon  was  44  U.S.  and  Third
Country  battalions,  and  the  President  approved  that  number  sometime  in  mid-
July.  Finally,  the  amount  of  additional  force  required  to  seize  the  initiative  from
the  enem\  and  to  commence  the  "'win'"  phase  of  the  strategy  was  the  next  topic
of  discussion  after  the  44  battalions  had  been  approved.  Secretary  McNamara
received  Westmoreland's  first  estimate  during  talks  in  Saigon,  16  to  20  July
1965.  Based  on  what  he  knew  then  of  Viet  Cong  and  DRV  intentions  and
capabilities,  Westmoreland  asked  for  24  additional  maneuver  battalions  and  a
healthy  support  package.  The  figure  was  revised  upward  several  times  later  in
the  year  as  increased  intelligence  revealed  the  extent  of  DRV  infiltration  and
Viet  Cong  build-up.

Force  levels  for  the  search  and  destroy  strategy  had  no  empirical  limits.  The
amount  of  force  required  to  defeat  the  enemy  depended  entirely  on  his  response
to  the  build-up  and  his  willingness  to  continue  the  fight.  The  44  battalions  seen  in
mid-summer  1965  as  the  amount  required  to  deny  victory  to  the  Viet  Cong
exceeded  the  amount  forecast  by  the  enclavists  to  achieve  that  end  for  two
reasons.  First,  the  enemy  had  by  the  end  of  June  revealed  that  he  was  much
stronger  than  had  originally  been  surmised.  Second,  the  44  battalions  had  a  dual
mission:  they  were  not  only  to  hold  the  fort,  but  were  also  to  lay  the  ground-
work for  the  subsequent  input  of  forces  to  implement  the  next  phase  of  the
strategy.

Ambassador  Taylor  expected  the  search  and  destroy  strategy  and  the  force
associated  with  it  to  accomplish  little  more  than  would  have  been  accomplished
by  the  enclave  strategy  at  less  cost.  He  was  convinced  that  only  the  Vietnamese
could  save  their  own  country,  and  too  aggressive  use  of  foreign  troops  might
even  work  against  them  in  that  regard.  George  Ball  of  the  State  Department
wrote  that  there  was  no  assurance  no  matter  what  the  U.S.  did  that  it  could
defeat  the  enemv  on  the  battlefield  or  drive  him  to  the  conference  table.  The
larger  force  associated  with  the  search  and  destroy  strategy  signified  to  Ball
no  more  than  acceptance  by  the  U.S.  of  a  higher  cost  to  uhimately  be  incurred.
The  44  battalion  force  seemed  to  William  Bundy  of  State  to  be  an  ultimatum
presented  to  the  DRV  which  would  in  all  probability  trigger  some  sort  of  dire
response.  Westmoreland  expected  the  44  battalions  and  the  search  and  destroy
strategv  to  hold  things  together  long  enough  to  prepare  the  way  for  later  input
of  greater  force.  With  enough  force  to  seize  the  initiative  from  the  Viet  Cong
sometime  in  1966,  Westmoreland  expected  to  take  the  offensive  and,  with  ap-
propriate additional  reinforcements,  to  have  defeated  the  enemy  by  the  end  of
1967.  Exactly  what  the  President  and  his  Secretary  of  Defense  expected  is  not
clear,  but  there  are  manifold  indications  that  they  were  prepared  for  a  long  war.

The  acceptance  of  the  search  and  destroy  strategy  and  the  eclipse  of  the
denial  of  victory  idea  associated  with  the  enclave  strategy  left  the  U.S.  commit-
ment to  Vietnam  open-ended.  The  implications  in  terms  of  manpower  and  money
are  inescapable.  Written  all  over  the  search  and  destroy  strategy  was  total  loss  of
confidence  in  the  RVNAF  and  a  concomitant  willingness  on  the  part  of  the  U.S.
to  take  over  the  war  effort.  U.S.  involvement  in  an  Asian  ground  war  was  a
reality.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  397


IV.  CAVEATS

The  bulk  of  this  paper  is  taken  up  in  describing  the  various  proposals  put
forward  by  exponents  of  the  strategies.  The  numerous  decision  points  are  identi-
fied and  the  expectations  of  decision-making  principals  involved  are  analyzed.
Ancillary  reasons  for  advancing  proposals  are  identified  as  such  and  discussed.
The  position  of  each  of  the  principals  is  described  only  as  clearly  as  it  emerges
from  the  files  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  Thus,  the  JCS  are  treated  as  a
monolith,  although  it  is  common  knowledge  that  there  is  always  considerable
dissension  and  debate  amongst  the  Chiefs  themselves.  While  they  might  have
been  unanimous  in  their  recognition  that  U.S.  bases  needed  securing,  the  Chiefs
did  not  see  eye  to  eye  during  ensuing  debates  over  enclave  or  search  and  destroy.
The  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Air  Force  and  the  Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps
were  known  proponents  of  the  enclave  concept,  but  the  Chairman  of  the  JCS
and  the  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Army  were  equally  determined  to  see  the  deploy-
ment of  several  divisions  of  troops  for  unlimited  combat  operations.  The  record
of  their  debate,  interesting  though  it  may  be,  remains  in  the  JCS  files.

Through  all  of  the  strategy  debate  in  early  1965  ran  a  common  thread — the
concern  with  possible  intervention  in  the  conflict  by  elements  of  the  North
Vietnamese  Army  or  the  Communist  Chinese  Army  or  a  combination  of  both.
A  variety  of  CINCPAC  contingency  plans  were  in  existence  at  the  time  which
addressed  the  problem  and  called  for  various  deployments,  some  of  them  pre-
emptive, to  deal  with  it.  The  JCS  consistently  mentioned  the  problem  as  an
additional  justification  for  deployments  they  were  advocating,  but  the  Na-
tional Intelligence  Board  just  as  consistently  discounted  the  possibility  of  such
intervention.  Covert  infiltration  of  elements  of  the  North  Vietnamese  Army,
however,  was  another  matter.  It  was  Recognized  early  in  the  debate  as  some-
thing to  be  reckoned  with  even  though  the  real  extent  of  the  infiltration  was  not
confirmed  for  some  time.  In  any  case,  contingency  deployments  were  not  intended
to  deal  with  the  latter  type  of  provocation.

V.  ISSUES

In  conclusion,  it  seems  clear  that  the  debate  over  ground  commitments
and  accompanying  strategy  followed  closely  the  course  of  expectations  about  the
Rolling  Thunder  bombing  program  and  the  development  of  the  situation  in
South  Vietnam  itself.  The  strategy  of  security  was  eclipsed  because  Rolling
Thunder  was  taking  Joo  long.  The  enclave  strategy  was  never  unanimously
endorsed  and  it  never  got  off  the  ground.  It  was  based  on  the  assumption  that
victory  could  be  denied  to  the  enemy  in  the  South  while  Rolling  Thunder  punished
him  in  the  North.  Eventually,  the  U.S.  would  achieve  its  objectives  because  the
enemy  in  frustration  would  give  up.  The  whole  enclave  idea  was  conceived  in  a
period  of  relative  quiet,  and  certainly  the  experimentation  aspect  of  it  pre-
supposed a  relatively  stable  situation.  In  the  heat  of  the  summer  monsoon
offensive,  it  became  a  moot  question  whether  or  not  a  negative  approach  like
the  enclave  strategy  could  deny  victory,  and  more  important,  whether  or  not
there  would  be  an  RVNAF  left  to  shore  up.

In  June,  Rolling  Thunder  and  the  ground  strategy  switched  places  in  the
order  of  priorities  as  far  as  achieving  U.S.  objectives  was  concerned.  First,  a
positive  strategy  for  the  employment  of  the  forces,  the  search  and  destroy  strat-
egy, was  approved.  Secondly,  a  force  of  44  battalions  was  recognized  as  suffi-


39S Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

cient  to  prevent  collapse  while  the  stage  was  being  set  for  further  deployments.
44  battalions  was  probably  about  the  maximum  the  traffic  would  have  borne  at
that  juncture  in  any  case.  Final  acceptance  of  the  desirabilitv  of  inflicting  defeat
on  the  enemy  rather  than  merely  denying  him  victorv  opened  the  door  to  an
indeterminate  amount  of  additional  force.

The  44  battalions,  or  Phase  I  as  they  were  later  called,  were  supposed  to  stem
the  tide  of  the  V'iet  Cong  insurgencv  and  enable  the  friendly  forces  to  assume
the  offensive.  As  the  GVN  did  not  collapse,  it  can  reasonably  be  concluded  that
they  did  stem  the  tide.  It  is  just  possible,  however,  that  rather  than  stem  the
tide,  they  increased  it  through  provocation  of  greater  infiltration  from  North
Metnam.  In  anv  case,  it  is  debatable  whether  the  allied  forces  actuallv  did
assume  the  offensive  the  following  vear.

No  further  proof  of  the  monumental  implications  of  the  endorsement  in  the
summer  of  1965  of  the  search  and  destrov  strategy,  the  44  battalions,  and  the
"win"  concept  is  required  bevond  the  present  state  of  the  war  in  Vietnam.  At
this  writing,  the  U.S.  has  reached  the  end  of  the  time  frame  estimated  by  Gen-
eral Westmoreland  in  1965  to  be  required  to  defeat  the  enemv.  It  has  com-
mitted 107  battalions  of  its  own  forces  and  a  grand  total  of  525,000  men.  The
strategy  remains  search  and  destrov,  but  victorv  is  not  vet  in  sight.


End  of  Summary

CHROWOLOGY


\fARI\E  CO.\fBAT  UMTS  GO  TO  DA  \ANG,  MARCH  1965

IS  Aug  64 EMBTEL  465

In  a  discussion  of  proposed  U.S.  air  and  naval  action  to  increase
pressure  on  North  Vietnam.  Tavlor  told  State  that  as  a  hedge
against  the  failure  of  the  GVTvf  to  do  its  part,  the  U.S.  "should
raise  the  level  of  precautionary  military'  readiness  (if  not  already
done)  by  taking  such  visible  measures  as  introducing  U.S.  Hawk
units  to  Da  Nang  and  Saigon,  [and]  landing  a  Marine  force  at
Da  Nang  for  defense  of  the  airfield  and  beefing  up  MACV's  sup-
port base.  .  .

/  Oa  64  SNIE

The  National  Intelligence  Board  expected  the  political  situation
in  South  \'ietnam  to  continue  to  decay,  the  war  effort  gradually
peter  out  and  the  Vietcong  to  seek  a  neutralist  coalition  which
they  could  easily  dominate.  Two  latent  strengths  of  the  GVN
were  cited:  the  endurance  of  the  people  and  the  ability  of  ad-
ministrators to  carr\'  out  routine  tasks  without  guidance  from
Saigon.

3  Nov  64 William  Bundy  Memorandum  for  the  NSC  Working  Group

Convening  a  new  group  on  Southeast  Asia,  Bundy  mentioned
three  courses  of  action  open  to  the  U.S.  in  Vietnam — none  of
which  involved  the  use  of  U.S.  ground  troops  except  in  response
to  overt  CHICOM  DRV  attacks  as  called  for  by  CINCPAC
OPLANS  32-64  and  39-65.

13  Nov  64 Draft  Memorandum

William  Bundy  said  he  did  "not  envisage  the  introduction  of


PAC


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  399

substantial  ground  forces  into  South  Vietnam  or  Thailand  in  con-
junction with  these  initial  actions" — the  three  courses  of  action
then  under  study.  The  use  of  U.S.  ground  troops  for  base  security
was  not  mentioned  although  sending  a  multilateral  force  to  north-
ern SVN  was  suggested.

23  Nov  64 JCSM  982-64

This  first  JCS  proposal  for  sending  U.S.  ground  troops  to  Viet-
nam suggested  Marines  go  to  Da  Nang,  other  ground  troops  to
Tan  Son  Nhut  Airbase  for  security  and  deterrence.

30  Nov  64 "Alternatives  to  Air  Actions  on  North  Vietnam"

(State  Dept)  A  proposal  to  use  ground  troops  "in  support  of
diplomacy":  deploy  them  to  prove  U.S.  resolve,  then  launch  a
major  diplomatic  offensive.  This  paper  was  considered  by  the
NSC  Working  Group,  but  went  no  further.

1  Dec  64 Presidential  Decision

President  Johnson  approved  the  recommendation  of  Ambassador
Taylor  and  NSC  principals  to  implement  the  Working  Group's
"Course  of  Action  A";  after  about  a  month  and  after  GVN
progress  in  certain  areas.  Course  C — a  program  "principally  of
progressively  more  serious  air  strikes"  against  NVN  would  be
initiated.  Again,  ground  troop  commitment  was  not  discussed.

1  Jan  65 OPLAN  32-64

The  "alert"  or  first  phase  of  the  plan  in  effect.  (MACV  Command
History  shows  planning  had  begun  for  the  dispatch  of  U.S.  ground
troops  into  South  Vietnam  in  connection  with  this  and  other
contingency  plans.)

Jan  and  Feb MACV  Monthly  Evaluation  Reports;  CIA  Situation  Reports
1965  General  Westmoreland  said  recently  initiated  "Flaming  Dart"  air

campaign  against  the  North  was  beneficial  for  morale  in  South
Vietnam.  He  called  GVN  social  and  political  institutions  "re-
markably intact"  despite  the  "disintegrating  blows"  of  political
upheaval.  (Huong's  government  fell  in  January;  Premier  Quat's
regime  was  shaky.)  But  enemy  gains  continued.  The  Viet  Cong
struck  Pleiku  and  other  bases  in  early  February;  12  battalions
(6000  men)  had  reportedly  moved  into  the  I  Corps.  Westmore-
land hoped  air  attacks  in  North  and  South  Vietnam  would  be
enough  to  reverse  the  trend.

CIA  assessments  were  more  pessimistic.  In  February  Binh  Dinh
Province  was  said  to  be  just  about  lost  to  the  enemy.  Intelli-
gence indicated  the  Viet  Cong  might  try  to  take  Kontum  Province
and  split  the  GVN  through  II  Corps  during  the  rainy  season.

7  Feb  65 McGeorge  Bundy  Memorandum  for  the  President

Bundy  felt  the  GVN  would  collapse  by  1966  without  substantially
more  U.S.  help  and  action.  To  avert  collapse  and  to  counter  latent
anti-Americanism  and  the  growing  feeling  among  Vietnamese  that
U.S.  was  going  to  quit,  Bundy  recommended  a  policy  of  gradu-
ated, continuing  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  He  did  not
mention  a  base  security  problem;  he  did  not  suggest  deployment
of  U.S.  ground  troops — then  or  in  the  future.


400 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

(This  document — and  the  absence  of  others — supports  the  inter-
pretation that  the  forthcoming  Marine  deployment  to  Da  Nang
was  intended  as  a  one-shot  response  to  a  particularly  serious  se-
curity problem,  not  as  the  first  in  a  planned  series  of  U.S.  troop
commitments.)

7  Feb  65 McNamara  News  Conference

The  Secretary  announced  elements  of  a  USMC  HAWK  missile
battalion  would  be  deployed  to  Da  Nang  to  improve  security
against  air  attack.

11  Feb  65 JCSM  100-65

A  proposal  for  the  first  eight  weeks  of  military  action  against
North  Vietnam.  As  expected,  air  strikes  were  paramount  but  the
JCS  recommended  collateral  deployment  of  a  Marine  Expedi-
tionary Brigade  (MEB)  to  Da  Nang  and  an  Army  brigade  to
Thailand — not  for  counterinsurgency  duties  but  to  deter  overt
DRV/CHICOM  retaliation  to  the  air  strikes,  to  improve  U.S.
ability  to  respond  if  retaliatory  attacks  were  launched.

18  Feb  65  SNIE

A  new  ingredient  in  the  still  critical  situation  in  South  Vietnam
was  to  be  the  inauguration  of  the  Rolling  Thunder  air  campaign.
This  evaluation  showed  Viet  Cong  attacks  against  U.S.  bases
would  probably  continue  at  about  their  present  level  of  intensity
despite  increased  air  action  against  North  Vietnam.

22  Feb  65 MACV  Msg  to  C  IN  CP  AC  2207 43Z

General  Throckmorton,  Deputy  COMUSMACV,  visited  Da
Nang,  called  the  situation  grave,  and  doubted  ARVN's  ability  to
provide  adequate  security.  Throckmorton  recommended  that  the
entire  9th  MEB  be  sent  to  Da  Nang,  but  General  Westmoreland
cut  this  to  two  Battalion  Landing  Teams  (BLTs)  with  a  third  to
be  held  off-shore  in  reserve.  The  troops  were  to  assist  GVN
forces  in  guarding  Da  Nang  against  enemy  ground  attacks.

22  Feb  65 EMBTEL  2699

Ambassador  Taylor  voiced  several  strong  reservations  to  the  idea

of  sending  Marines  to  Da  Nang:

It  reversed  a  long-standing  policy  of  avoiding  commitment  of
ground  combat  forces  in  SVN.  Taylor  was  sure  the  GVN  would
"seek  to  unload  other  ground  force  tasks  upon  us";  he  was
sure  this  deployment  would  invite  requests  for  more  troops
to  meet  additional  and  ultimately  defensive  offensive  require-
ments.

Two  BLTs  would  not  release  significant  numbers  of  ARVN
for  mobile  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong;  the  Marines  would
simply  be  performing  static  defense  tasks  inadequately  done
by  ARVN  in  the  past.

Anticipating  that  using  U.S.  troops  for  active  operations  would
grow  more  attractive,  Taylor  warned  against  it.  The  "white-
faced"  soldier  cannot  be  assimilated  by  the  population,  he  can-
not distinguish  between  friendly  and  unfriendly  Vietnamese;  the
Marines  are  not  armed,  trained  or  equipped  for  jungle  guerrilla


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  401

warfare.  Taylor  prophesied  that  the  U.S. — like  France — would
fail  to  adapt  to  such  condition.

Two  BLTs  could  help  but  could  not  make  Da  Nang  secure.
The  entire  MEB  might  significantly  improve  things,  but  no
force  could  prevent  surprise  mortar  attacks,  a  favorite  VC
tactic.

However,  because  Westmoreland  was  so  concerned  about  Da
Nang's  safety  and  because  Taylor  felt  security  was  a  legitimate
mission  for  U.S.  troops  although  he  objected  to  it,  the  Am-
bassador would  support  MACV's  recommendation  for  one
BLT.  He  suggested  GVN  approval  be  sought  prior  to  the
Marine  deployment.

22  Feb  65 MACV  Message  to  JCS

Claimed  the  Marine  deployment  to  Da  Nang  would  free  four
Regional  Force  companies,  one  tank  platoon  and  another  RF
battalion  then  being  formed  for  active  anti-VC  operations.  (The
March  MACV  Evaluation  Report  showed  only  two  RF  companies
had  been  released.)

CINCPAC  Message  to  JCS

Recommended  immediate  deployment  of  two  BLTs;  recom-
mended one  squadron  of  F-4s  be  sent  to  Da  Nang  for  close  air
support  of  the  troops  and  "for  other  missions  along  with  the
primary  mission."  The  tone  was  urgent:  deploy  now  "before  the
tragedy"  of  a  Viet  Cong  attack.

CINCPAC  disagreed  with  Taylor;  called  attention  to  the  Marine
Corps'  distinguished  record  in  counterinsurgency  operations;
claimed  U.S.  presence  would  free  ARVN  for  mobile  patrol  opera-
tions and  make  Da  Nang  a  tougher  target  for  enemy  forces.

JCSM  130-65

Forwarded  and  supported  CINCPAC's  recommendations.
DEPTEL  1840

Approved  the  deployment;  said  the  Marines  were  on  their  way
and  instructed  Taylor  to  secure  GVN  approval.

EMBTEL  2789

Taylor  agreed  to  seek  GVN  concurrence  to  the  deployment — and
planned  an  approach  designed  to  stress  U.S.  reluctance  to  deploy
any  men  even  temporarily,  emphasize  the  limited  mission  of  the
M^arines  and  discourage  GVN  hopes  for  further  commitments.
Taylor  would  open  by  discussing  the  severe  security  problem  at
Da  Nang  and  USG  concern  about  it.  Although  he  wished  more
GVN  battalions  could  be  sent  there,  Taylor  would  say  he  knew
ARVN  troops  were  chronically  short  in  I  Corps  and  he  knew  any
redeployment  would  impose  prohibitive  costs  to  security  in  other
areas.  Thus,  he  would  say  "the  USG  has  been  driven  to  consider
a  solution  which  we  have  always  rejected  in  the  past:  the  intro-
duction of  U.S.  ground  combat  forces  to  reinforce  the  defense  of
Da  Nang  until  GVN  forces  become  available  for  the  purpose."

CJCS  Letter  to  SecDef  {forwarding  JSOP-70)
General  Wheeler  said  the  JCS  were  addressing  Southeast  Asia


24  Feb  65

24  Feb  65
26  Feb  65

28  Feb  65


1  Mar  65


402 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

force  levels  separately  because  that  was  a  "specific  problem  area"
requiring  a  "near  term  and  long  term  solution."  This  suggests  the
JCS  probably  had  been  considering  deployment  of  U.S.  troops  to
Vietnam — perhaps  for  active  operations — before  the  Marine  de-
ployment to  Da  Nang.

2  Mar  65 DOD  Tel  6166

ASD  (ISA)  McNaughton  cabled  Taylor  that  the  173d  Airborne
Brigade  (then  on  Okinawa)  would  be  deployed  to  Da  Nang  instead
of  the  Marines.  (This  last  minute  change  may  have  been  Mr.
McNaughton's  attempt  to  emphasize  the  limited,  temporary  na-
ture of  the  U.S.  troop  deployment  and  to  reduce  the  conspicuous-
ness  of  the  U.S.  presence.  Airborne  troops  carry  less  equipment
and  look  less  formidable  than  the  Marines  plus  they  have  no  his-
tory of  peace-keeping  intervention  in  foreign  wars.)

2  Mar  65 EMBTEL  1954

Taylor  and  Westmoreland — who  argued  that  the  Marines  were
more  self-sustaining  than  the  airborne — objected  to  the  proposed
substitution  of  Army  airborne  for  Marine  troops.

3  Mar  65 C  IN  CP  AC  Message  to  JCS  0302 3 OZ

CINCPAC  strongly  objected  to  Mr.  McNaughton's  proposal.  It
denied  him  the  only  airborne  assault  force  in  the  theater  and,
more  importantly,  completely  upset  his  contingency  plans  for
combat  operations  in  Southeast  Asia.  CINCPAC  said  that  since
1959  when  OPLAN-32  was  approved,  the  Marines  had  been
scheduled  for  deployment  to  Da  Nang;  seven  CINCPAC  and
SEATO  contingency  plans  plus  many  supporting  plans  rested  on
this.  All  the  preparations  had  been  made  for  the  landing  of  the
BLTs — and  some  forces  were  already  embarked.  CINCPAC
concluded:  "The  situation  in  Southeast  Asia  has  now  reached  a
point  where  the  soundness  of  our  contingency  planning  may  be
about  to  be  tested."  Some  1300  Marines  were  then  in  Da  Nang;
tasking  of  new  forces  had  been  completed;  logistics,  communica-
tions, command  arrangements  had  been  set.  It  would  be  "impru-
dent to  shift  forces  in  a  major  sector  and  to  force  changes  in  U.S.
contingency  posture  for  other  parts  of  Southeast  Asia."  (The
McNaughton  proposal  was  killed.)

3  Mar  65 DEPTEL  1876

State  requested  Taylor's  views  on  the  possible  use  of  an  inter-
national force  in  Vietnam.

3  Mar  65 EMBTELs  2014
and  3112

Taylor  first  reported  the  views  of  the  Australian  envoy  to  the
GVN  on  a  multilateral  force — views  which  Taylor  supported.  It
would  heighten  Vietnamese  xenophobia;  it  might  cause  the  GVN
to  "shuck  off  greater  responsibility  onto  the  USG."  In  his  second
message  Taylor  said  he  had  no  idea  what  the  GVN  attitude
toward  a  MLF  might  be,  said  many  problems  were  involved
which  had  yet  to  be  faced.  (The  MLF  was  just  a  concept  at  the
time — but  Taylor  readily  looked  beyond  immediate  tactical  needs


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  403

to  the  long-term  ramifications  of  such  a  move  just  as  he  had  in
evaluating  the  proposal  to  deploy  Marines  to  Da  Nang.)

4  Mar  65 JCSM  100-65

The  proposal  for  an  eight-week  air  strike  program  (and  possible
deployment  of  some  ground  troops)  was  resubmitted  to  the  Secre-
tary. Again,  the  use  of  U.S.  troops  for  active  anti-insurgent  opera-
tions was  not  mentioned.

5  Mar  65 CINCPAC  Eyes  Only  Message  to  Wheeler

This  said  the  9th  MEB  was  needed  as  soon  as  possible  for  base
security,  to  boost  the  GVN  war  against  the  Viet  Cong,  to  provide
insurance  in  case  the  GVN  was  unable  to  resist  collapse  in  the
critical  Da  Nang  area  where  so  much  was  already  committed.
CINCPAC  said  the  "single  most  important  thing  we  can  do
quickly  to  improve  the  security  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  to
make  full  use  of  our  air  power."

6  Mar  65 OSD{PA)  News  Release

Announced  two  USMC  Battalion  Landing  Teams — 3500  men —
were  being  deployed  to  Vietnam  on  a  limited  mission:  to  provide
base  security  and  relieve  GVN  forces  for  pacification  and  offen-
sive operations  against  the  Viet  Cong.

6  Mar  65 ICS  Message  to  CINCPAC

Ordered  the  BLTs  to  commence  landing.

7  Mar  65 Statement  by  Secretary  of  State  to  National  TV  Audience

Secretary  Rusk  said  the  Marines  would  shoot  back  if  shot  at,  but
their  mission  was  to  put  a  tight  security  ring  around  Da  Nang —
not  to  kill  Viet  Cong.

II  Mar  65 "Estimate  of  the  Situation  in  SVN"  Saigon  Air  gram  to  State

The  Mission  Council  reported  insurgency  would  grow  unless
".  .  .  NVN  support  is  checked,  GVN  military  and  paramilitary
resources  increased,  pacification  goals  and  concepts  refined,  ad-
ministrative efficiency  improved  and  an  adequate  political-psy-
chological base  created.  .  .  .  Only  U.S.  resources  can  provide
the  pressures  on  NVN  necessary  to  check  Hanoi's  support  al-
though some  measure  of  GVN  armed  forces  participation  will
be  required  for  psychological  reasons;  the  other  measures  and
programs  required  to  stem  the  tide  ...  are  largely  internal  to
SVN  but  even  here  success  will  require  a  marked  increase  in  U.S.
support  and  participation."

14  Mar  65  General  Harold  Johnson  s  "Report  on  Trip  to  South  Vietnam"
General  Johnson,  in  SVN  from  5-12  March,  was  as  impressed  by
the  gravity  of  the  situation — particularly  in  I  Corps — as  were
Saigon  officials.  He  submitted  several  proposals — including  deploy-
ment of  additional  U.S.  ground  troops — for  attaining  U.S.  objec-
tives (persuade  NVN  to  abandon  support  and  direction  of  the
insurgency,  defeat  the  insurgents,  create  a  stable  GVN).  He  said
more  U.S.  action  was  necessary  because  "what  the  situation
requires  may  exceed  what  the  Vietnamese  can  be  expected  to  do."
To  release  ARVN  for  offensive  action.  General  Johnson  proposed
sending  a  U.S.  division  either  to  the  Bien  Hoa/Tan  Son  Nhut


404 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


area  plus  some  coastal  enclaves  or  to  Kontum,  Pleiku  and  Darlac
Provinces  in  the  highlands.  Both  General  Johnson  and  Mr.
McNamara  preferred  the  second  alternative — but  McNamara
found  neither  efficient  in  terms  of  ARVN  released  per  U.S.  input
and  he  also  favored  a  ROK  division  rather  than  U.S.  troops.
General  Johnson  recommended  the  SEATO  Treaty  be  invoked  and
a  four-division  MLF  be  deployed  across  the  DMZ  "from  the
South  China  Sea  to  the  Mekong  River"  to  counter  infiltration.
Finally  he  said  to  evaluate  MACV's  requests  properly  a  policy
decision  "must  be  made  now  to  determine  what  the  Vietnamese
should  be  expected  to  do  for  themselves  and  how  much  more  the
U.S.  must  contribute  directly  to  the  security  of  South  Vietnam."
Mr.  McNamara  noted  in  the  margin:  "Policy  is:  anything  that
will  strengthen  the  position  of  the  GVN  will  be  sent.  .  .  ."

20  Mar  65 JCSM  204-65

The  JCS  proposed  that  U.S.  troops  be  deployed  to  South  Vietnam
for  active  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong.

27  Mar  65 MACV  Message  to  CI  NCR  AC

Westmoreland  submitted  his  estimate  of  the  situation  and  his
request  for  U.S.  troops  for  offensive  action  against  the  Viet  Cong.
Preparation  of  both  estimate  and  troop  input  recommendation
had  began  on  13  March  (five  days  after  the  Marines  arrived;  one
day  after  General  Johnson  completed  his  trip).

6  Apr  65 NSAM  328

President  Johnson  approved  General  Johnson's  specific  proposals
for  more  U.S.  action.  This  meant  more  U.S.  involvement  in  terms
of  money,  ships,  aircraft,  materiel  and  advisors,  but  deployment
of  ground  combat  units  of  division  size  was  not  approved  at  this
time  (2  additional  Marine  BLTs  were  approved).


BUILD-UP  ACTIVITY:  PHASE  I

11  Feb  65 JCSM  100-65

JCS  recommended  in  conjunction  with  program  for  the  1st  eight
weeks  of  air  activity  against  NVN  the  collateral  action  of  land-
ing one  MEB  at  Da  Nang  for  security  of  the  air  base.

20  Feb  65 JCSM  121-65

JCS  reiterated  CINCPAC  recommendation  to  land  MEB  at  Da
Nang.  Presence  of  the  Marines  would  serve  to  deter  VC/DRV
action  against  the  base  and  would  enhance  readiness  posture  for
other  contingencies.

22  Feb  65 MACV  220743Z

Westmoreland  recommended  landing  of  %  of  MEB  to  secure  base
and  installations  at  Da  Nang.

22  Feb  65 Embtel  2699

Taylor  concurred  in  MACV's  request  to  the  extent  of  V3  MEB  for
security  but  warned  against  further  foreign  troop  deployments.

23  Feb  65 MACV  231230Z

Westmoreland  backed  down  to  V3  MEB  with  proviso  that  more
could  follow  after  1st  battalion  was  in  place.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  405

24  Feb  65 CINCPAC  240315Z

Sharp  recommended  %  MEB  for  security  at  Da  Nang.

24  Feb  65 JCSM  130-65

JCS  recommended  Vs  MEB  for  security.  Approved  25  Feb.

26  Feb  65 Deptel  1840

State  told  Ambassador  %  MEB  approved  for  landing  contingent
on  GVN  approval.  [Dep  SecDef  approval  on  25  Feb.]  Remaining
elements  of  MEB  deferred.

28  Feb  65 Embtel  2789

Taylor  told  State  he'd  get  GVN  approval  for  2  BLTs  to  land  at
Da  Nang.  He  said  that  should  be  all  we  send  and  that  they  would
eventually  be  relieved  by  Viet  forces.

2  Mar  65 Deptel  6166

McNaughton  told  Taylor  that  it  would  be  desirable  to  substitute
173d  Airborne  for  the  Marines  at  Da  Nang.

2  Mar  65 Embtel  1954

Taylor  supported  Westmoreland  in  opposing  substitution  of  173d.

3  Mar  65 CINCPAC  0302 3 OZ

CINCPAC  opposed  attempted  substitution  citing  seven  OPLANS
calling  for  Marines  into  Da  Nang.

4  Mar  65 JCSM  121-65

JCS  recommended  deployment  of  entire  MEB  to  Da  Nang,  one
Army  Bde  to  Thailand,  reconstitution  of  MEB  in  WestPac,  and
alert  of  III  MEF  (-)  and  25  Inf  Div  as  insurance  in  support  of
deterrence  deployments.,

4  Mar  65 JCSM  144-65

JCS  urged  SecDef  to  reconsider  deferred  funds  for  Chu  Lai  air-
strip. Facility  was  needed  to  "prepare  for  a  wide  variety  of  courses
of  action."  Approved  by  SecDef  18  Mar  65.

6  Mar  65 Press  Release

DOD  said  U.S.  at  request  of  GVN  will  put  2  BLTs  at  Da  Nang
for  security.

7  Mar  65 JCS  070001Z

JCS  ordered  CINCPAC  to  commence  landing  Marines  and  build
up  to  two  battalions  ashore.

8  Mar  65 3500  Marines  landed  at  Da  Nang.  (Totals  bns.  in  SVN:2)

14  Mar  65 CSA  Memo  for  SecDef  &  JCS

Gen  Johnson  recommended  21  separate  measures  for  increased
support  of  the  GVN.  Measures  merely  were  increases  in  the  same
vein  as  previous  steps.  He  also  proposed  deployment  of  up  to  a
full  U.S.  division  for  security  of  various  bases  with  the  con-
comitant release  of  Viet  troops  from  security  mission  for  combat.
The  U.S.  Division  could  go  either  to  coastal  enclaves  and  Saigon
or  into  the  II  Corps  highlands.  Finally,  Johnson  proposed  a  four-
division  force  comprised  of  U.S.  and  SEATO  troops  along  the
DMZ  and  into  Laos  to  contain  NVN  infiltration  of  men  and


406 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


supplies.  President  approved  21  parts  15  Mar  &  again  on  1  Apr;
deferred  the  rest.

15  Mar  65 JCS  met  w  Pres.

President  urged  the  JCS  to  come  up  with  measures  to  ''kill  more
VC";  he  approved  most  of  Gen  Johnson's  recommendations.

17  Mar  65 "Strength  of  VC  Military  Forces  in  SVN"

Joint  CIA,  DIA,  State  Memo  showing  VC  Order  of  Battle  (con-
firmed) as  follows:
37,000  Regular  Forces
100,000  ±  frregulars  and  Militia
Confirmed  strength  up  33 over  1964.
5  Regimental  Hq
50  Battalions
145  Separate  Companies

17  Mar  65 MACV  170747Z

Westmoreland  recommended  landing  one  Marine  BLT  at  Phu  Bai,
near  Hue,  to  secure  airfield  there  and  enable  thereby  movement  of
helicopters  from  congested  area  at  Da  Nang  to  Phu  Bai.  Recom-
mended a  4th  BLT  within  a  month.

18  Mar  65 Embtel  3003

Taylor  supported  Westmoreland's  Phu  Bai  request  above  and
went  on  to  discuss  pro's  and  con's  of  introduction  of  U.S.  Division
without  offering  a  recommendation.

19  Mar  65 C  IN  CP  AC  192 207 Z

Sharp  recommended  to  JCS  that  remainder  of  MEB  be  landed
within  a  month  and  one  BLT  at  Phu  Bai  be  landed  ASAP.

20  Mar  65 JCSM  204-65

JCS  proposed  sending  2  US  and  1  ROK  division  to  SVN  for
active  operations  against  VC.  Marines  to  I  CTZ  could  be  had
quickly  in  concert  with  US  SEATO  contingency  plans  for  DRV/
Chicom  aggression.  (A  portion  of  this  proposal  could  have  been
construed  as  a  deterrent  measure  to  Chicom  aggression.)  All
forces  were  to  engage  in  offensive  operations  with  or  without
centralized  command  structure.  Location  for  ROK  Div  not  speci-
fied, but  Army  Div  was  to  go  to  II  CTZ  highlands  to  release
AR\'N  battalions  for  operations  along  the  coast.  The  JCS  proposed
resupplying  it  by  air  until  Rte  19  could  be  opened.  This  recom-
mendation considered  by  the  JCS  to  be  an  essential  component  of
the  broader  program  to  put  pressure  on  the  DRV  VC.

25  Mar  65 JCSM  2 1 6-65

JCS  reiterated  CINCPAC's  recommendation  that  1  BLT  and  re-
maining MEB  elements  be  landed  at  Da  Nang  and  one  BLT  be
landed  at  Phu  Bai — all  to  improve  securitv  situation.  Approved  by
Pres.  1  Apr  &  in  NSAM  328  6  Apr.

26  Mar  65 "Commander's  Estimate  of  The  Situation  in  SVN"

Westmoreland  predicted  that  air  activity  would  not  bear  fruit  in
the  next  six  months,  and  in  the  interim,  RVNAF  needed  3d  coun-
try reinforcements  to  enable  it  to  offset  VQ  DRV  build-up  and


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  407

enjoy  favorable  force  ratios  while  permitting  an  '"orderly"  build-up
of  its  own  forces.  MACV  wanted  the  equivalent  of  two  divisions
by  June  '65  and  possibly  more  thereafter  if  bombing  failed.  West-
moreland proposed  deploying  Marines  as  described  in  JCSM
216-65,  an  Army  brigade  in  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau,  and  an  Army
division  to  the  II  CTZ  highlands  with  a  couple  of  battalions  to
protect  coastal  bases.  The  mission  of  these  forces  was  to  be  de-
fense of  vital  installations  and  defeat  of  VC  efforts  to  control
Kontum,  Pleiku,  Binh  Dinh  region.

27  Mar  65  Embtel3120

Taylor  told  State  that  if  U.S.  forces  were  to  come  in  for  combat,
he  favored  offensive  enclave — mobile  reaction  concept  of  employ-
ment rather  than  territorial  clear  and  hold  in  highlands  or  defen-
sive enclave.

29  Mar  65 SecDef  &  JCS  met  with  Amb  Taylor

JCS  three  division  plan  presented  to  Taylor.  The  latter  inclined  to
disfavor  it  because  too  many  troops  were  involved,  the  need  wasn't
manifest,  and  the  Viets  would  probably  resent  it.  SecDef  was  in-
clined to  favor  the  proposal  but  desired  more  information  in
reference  to  the  Taylor  qualifications.

1-2  Apr  65 NSC  meetings  with  Amb  Taylor  present

President  Johnson  decided  to  send  two  more  Marine  battalions
to  Da  Nang  and  Phu  Bai  and  to  alter  the  mission  of  U.S.  combat
forces  "to  permit  their  more  active  use"  under  conditions  to  be
established  by  the  Secy  of  State  in  consultation  with  SecDef.  He
also  approved  18  to  20,000  man  increase  in  U.S.  forces  to  fill  out
existing  units  and  provide  needed  logistic  personnel.  (All  of  these
changes  were  to  be  contingent  on  GVN  concurrence.)  A  slowly
ascending  tempo  in  response  to  rises  in  enemy  rates  of  activity
was  approved  for  the  Rolling  Thunder  program.  The  President
agreed  to  overtures  to  GOA,  GNZ,  and  to  ROK,  seeking  combat
support  from  them.

2  Apr  65 CIA  Director  Memo  to  SecDef  &  others

McCone  said  present  level  of  RT  not  hurting  DRV  enough  to
make  them  quit.  He  warned  against  putting  more  U.S.  troops  into
SVN  for  combat  operations,  since  that  would  merely  encourage
the  USSR  and  China  to  support  the  DRV/VC  at  minimum  risk.
He  predicted  covert  infiltration  of  PAVN  and  the  U.S.  getting
mired  down  in  a  war  it  could  not  win.

2  Apr  65 JCSM  238-65

JCS  asked  SecDef  to  clear  the  decks  of  "all  administrative  im-
pediments that  hamper  us  in  the  prosecution  of  this  war."  Spe-
cifically, they  asked  for:  increases  in  funds,  a  separate  MAP  tor
SEA,  improved  communications  systems,  quicker  response  to
CINCPAC's  requests,  exemption  of  SEA  from  balance  of  pay-
ments goals,  authority  to  extend  military  terms  of  service  and  to
consult  with  Congress  on  the  use  of  Reserves,  relaxation  of
civilian  and  military  manpower  ceilings,  and  a  substantial  increase
in  military  air  transport  in  and  out  of  SVN.


408 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

4  Apr  65 CINCPAC  042058Z  {For  Taylor)

Taylor  told  State  that  in  absence  of  further  guidance,  he  will  tell
GVN  that  Marine  mission  is  now  mobile  counterinsurgency,  plus
reserve,  in  support  of  ARVN  up  to  50  miles  of  base.

5  Apr  65 SecDef  Memo  to  CJCS

McNamara  told  Wheeler  that  he  understood  the  JCS  to  be  plan-
ning for  the  earliest  practicable  introduction  of  2-3  Div  into
SVN.

8  Apr  65 JCSM  265-65

JCS  recommended  RVNAF  build-up  be  accelerated  through  an
additional  17,247  MAP-supported  spaces  plus  160  advisors.  Sec-
Def approved  12  Apr.

9-10  Apr  65 Planning  Conference  in  Honolulu

PACOM  and  JCS  representatives  recommended  deployment  of
173d  Airborne  Brigade  to  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  for  security  of  the
installations  there  and  an  Army  brigade  to  Qui  Nhon/Nha  Trang
to  prepare  for  the  later  introduction  of  a  division.  They  also  rec-
ommended that  the  173d  be  replaced  by  a  CONUS  brigade  ASAP.
They  treated  the  two  Marine  BLTs  of  NSAM  328  as  approved
and  described  as  "in  planning"  the  remainder  of  the  ICS's  three-
division  force  (III  MEF  (-),  ROK  Div,  and  U.S.  Army  Div).
They  recommended  that  I  MEF  be  deployed  to  WESTPAC  to
improve  readiness  posture.

11-14  Two  Marine  BLTs  land  at  Phu  Bai  and  Da  Nang.  (Total  bns.  in

Apr  65  SVN:4)

11  Apr  65 MACV  110825Z

Westmoreland  told  CINCPAC  that  he  still  wanted  a  U.S.  division
in  the  highlands,  even  though  it  was  apparent  Washington  was
not  of  a  mind  to  approve  it.  He  also  reaffirmed  the  need  for  an
Army  brigade  in  the  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  area  for  security,  to
strengthen  the  eastern  flank  of  the  Hop  Tac  area,  and  to  act  as  a
mobile  reserve  in  case  needed  in  the  highlands.  To  forestall  politi-
cal difficulty,  Westmoreland  said  he'd  like  to  see  a  joint  staff  with
the  RVNAF  and  an  international  Military  Assistance  Force  under
U.S.  hegemony  in  the  Da  Nang  area.

12  Apr  65 Meeting,  SecDef  &  JCS

McNamara  agreed  with  JCS  that  Marines'  "Enclave"  build-up
plan  would  be  adopted.  Concept  was  to  initially  provide  base
security  and  then  phase  into  combat  operations  from  logistically
supportable  base  areas.  The  logistics  base  extant  at  that  juncture
was  recognized  to  be  inadequate.

12  Apr  65  Embtel3372

Taylor  told  State  that  with  the  18  to  20,000  man  increase  in  sup-
port forces  authorized  by  NSAM  328,  "some  preliminary  work  in
anticipation  of  the  arrival  of  additional  U.S.  forces"  could  be
accomplished  but  that  for  "significant  progress  toward  the  estab-
lishment of  a  logistic  base  to  support  additional  forces,"  about
5000  more  engineers  would  be  required.  He  went  on  to  say  that
despite  studies  dealing  with  ambitious  plans  for  reinforcement,  he


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  409

hoped  that  "they  do  not  interfere  with  essential  work  in  prepara-
tion for  less  ambitious  but  more  probable  deployments."  He  indi-
cated favorable  disposition  toward  the  establishment  of  brigade-
sized  enclaves  at  Qui  Nhon  and  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  "if  the
Marines  demonstrate  effectiveness  .  .  ."

13  Apr  65 McNamara  approved  deployment  of  173d  Airborne  to  Bien  Hoa/

Vung  Tau  subject  to  GVN  concurrence  (with  Presidential  sanc-
tion).

14  Apr  65 JCS  140050Z

JCS  asked  CINCPAC  to  deploy  the  173d  to  SVN  as  soon  after
GVN  concurrence  as  possible.  Their  mission  would  be  to  initially
secure  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  and  then  phase  into  counterinsurgency
operations.

14  Apr  65  Embtel3373

Taylor  surprised  at  decision  to  deploy  the  173d.  He  requested  a
hold.

Embtel  3374

Taylor  &  Westmoreland  both  embarrassed  at  amount  of  heavy
equipment,  not  appropriate  for  counterinsurgency,  brought  ashore
in  Da  Nang  by  Marines.
Embtel  3384

Taylor  advised  Washington  to  keep  additional  U.S.  forces  out  of
SVN,  perhaps  just  offshore,  until  need  for  them  is  incontrovertible.

15  Apr  65 JCSM  281-65

JCS  replied  to  Taylor's  traffic  of  the  previous  day.  They  said  the
173d  was  needed  for  security  of  air  operations  and  logistic  bases
and  for  subsequent  phasing  into  counterinsurgency  operations.
They  added  that  the  security  of  existing  or  proposed  bases  at
Chu  Lai,  Qui  Nhon  and  Nha  Trang  required  a  battalion  each.
They  added  that  to  djeploy  the  Marines  without  their  full  comple-
ment of  equipment  would  be  imprudent.  They  (the  Marines)
were  now  prepared  to  meet  any  contingency.

15  Apr  65  Deftel9164

McNaughton  told  Saigon  that  "highest  authority"  felt  situation  in
SVN  was  deteriorating,  and  proposed  seven  actions  to  help  remedy
the  situation,  including:  (1)  encadrement  of  U.S.  troops  in  ARVN
units  either  50  U.S.  to  each  of  10  ARVN  battalions  or  combined
operations  of  3  U.S.  and  3  ARVN  battalions;  (2)  a  brigade
force  into  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  for  security  and  subsequent  com-
bat operations;  (3)  battalions  into  coastal  enclaves  for  further
experimentation  with  U.S.  forces  in  counterinsurgency  role;  (4)
application  of  U.S.  recruiting  techniques  in  RVN;  (5)  expansion
of  MEDCAP;  (6)  pilot  experimentation  in  2  or  3  provinces  with
a  team  of  U.S.  civil  affairs  personnel  integrated  into  gov't  struc-
ture; and  (7)  provision  of  food  directly  to  RVNAF  troops.

17  Apr  65 Embtel  3419  iSc  3421

Taylor  told  McGeorge  Bundy  that  7-point  program  plus  all  visit-
ing firemen  were  rocking  the  boat  and  asked  for  respite.


410 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

17  Apr  65  Embtel3423

Taylor  sent  to  Washington  the  kind  of  guidance  he  felt  he  should
have  received  in  order  to  carry  out  all  that  Washington  had
proposed  in  the  past  week.

17  Apr  65 JCSM  288-65

ICS  proposed  sending  one  Marine  BLT  to  Chu  Lai  to  secure  the
CB's  constructing  the  airstrip  there.

17  Apr  65 ICS  17 1847 Z

JCS  described  to  CINCPAC  the  concept  for  U.S.  combat  units
deploying  to  SEA  as  assistance  in  arresting  the  deteriorating  situ-
ation against  the  VC  and  as  an  assurance  that  the  U.S.  would  be
ready  to  counter  overt  DRV  or  Chicom  action  should  such  occur.

20  Apr  65 Honolulu  Conference

McNamara,  McNaughton,  W.  Bundy,  Taylor,  Wheeler,  Sharp  and
Westmoreland  reached  consensus  that:  (1)  the  DRV  was  un-
likely to  quit  in  the  next  six  months  and  probably  would  only
give  up  because  of  VC  "pain"  in  the  South  rather  than  bomb
damage  in  the  North;  (2)  RT  was  about  right  but  wouldn't  do
the  job  alone;  (3)  best  strategy  would  be  to  break  the  DRV/VC
will  by  effectively  denying  them  victory  and  bringing  about  negoti-
ations through  the  enemy's  impotence.  They  proposed  establishing
four  brigade-sized  enclaves,  in  addition  to  Da  Nang-Hue/Phu  Bai,
at  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  (3  Army  battalions  plus  1  GOA  battal-
ion); Chu  Lai  (3  BLTs  plus  3  Marine  TPS);  Qui  Nhon  (3  Army
battalions);  and  Quang  Ngai  (3  ROK  battalions).  Added  on  to  the
4  USMC  BLTs  (33,000  U.S.  troops)  and  2000  ROK  troops  al-
ready in  Vietnam,  the  total  was  to  be  82,000  U.S.  and  7250  3d
country  troops.  Mentioned  for  possible  later  deployment  were:  a
U.S.  Airmobile  Division,  a  Corps  Hq,  an  ROK  Div  (-),  and  the
remainder  of  the  III  MEF  (2  battalions).  It  was  agreed  that
ARVN  and  U.S.  units  would  be  "brigaded"  for  operations,  that  the
U.S.  would  try  single  managers  of  U.S.  effort  in  3  provinces  as  an
experiment,  that  MEDCAP  would  be  expanded,  and  that  a  study
of  fringe  benefits  for  RVNAF  would  be  undertaken.

21  Apr  65 SecDef  Memo  for  The  President

McNamara  sent  the  Honolulu  recommendations  to  the  President
essentially  as  described  above.

21  Apr  65 CIA  Memo  to  SecDef  &  others

McCone  said  the  communists  still  saw  the  tide  going  their  way.
They  would  see  in  the  Honolulu  expansions  of  U.S.  involvement
the  acceptance  by  the  U.S.  of  a  greater  commitment,  but  they
would  assume  U.S.  was  reluctant  to  widen  the  war.  The  DRV
and  Chicoms  might  reinforce  with  men  and  equipment,  but  would
not  intervene.

21  Apr  65 CIA-DIA  Memo  "An  Assessment  of  Present  VC  Military  Ca-
pabilities"

The  presence  in  Kontum  Province  since  February  1965  of  one
regiment  of  the  325th  PAVN  Division  confirmed.  As  of  late  1964
the  supply  of  repatriated  southerners  infiltrated  back  from  NVN
had  dried  up  and  NVN  volunteers  were  coming  down  the  trail.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  411

22  Apr  65  Deptel2397

Unger  told  Taylor  that  if  Quat  agrees  to  the  Honolulu  program,
the  U.S.  intention  was  not  to  announce  the  whole  thing  at  once
"but  rather  to  announce  individual  deployments  at  appropriate
times."

23  Apr  65 CINCPAC  2 3042 3 Z

Sharp  recommended  replacing  the  173d,  if  it  deployed,  with  a
CONUS  brigade.

23  Apr  65  Embtel2391

Taylor  told  State  that  Quat  was  extremely  reluctant  to  discuss
foreign  reinforcements.  Taylor  feared  GVN  reaction.

30  Apr  65 Deftel  1097

Saigon  informed  by  McNaughton  that  the  173d  and  3  BLTs  to
Chu  Lai  approved  for  deployment  at  Ambassador's  call.

30  Apr  65 JCSM  321-65

JCS  as  a  result  of  Honolulu  and  subsequent  discussions  recom-
mended a  detailed  program  to  deploy  48,000  U.S.  and  5250  Free
World  troops  to  SVN.  The  forces  included  two  Army  brigades,
one  MEB,  an  ROK  Regt.  Combat  Team,  and  an  ANZAC  bat-
talion. They  were  to  bolster  GVN  forces  during  their  continued
build-up,  secure  bases  and  installations,  conduct  combat  operations
in  co-ordination  with  the  RVNAF,  and  prepare  for  the  later  intro-
duction of  an  airmobile  division  to  the  central  plateau,  the  re-
mainder of  III  MEF  to  the  Da  Nang  area,  and  the  remainder  of
an  ROK  division  to  Quang  Ngai.  173d  &  MEB  appr.  30  Apr.

5  May  65 ISA  Memo  to  Dep  SecDef

McNaughton  informed  Vance  that  a  portion  of  the  force  package
listed  as  "approved"  by  the  JCS  in  JCSM  321-65  was  in  fact  a
part  of  the  not-yet  sanctioned  three-division  plan.

5  May  65 Main  body  of  173d  Airborne  Brigade  arrived  at  Vung  Tau.  (Total
bns.  in  SVN:  6)

7  May  65 Marines  began  landing  at  Chu  Lai  (Total  bns,  in  SVN:  9)

7  May  65 CINCPAC  072130Z

Sharp  reminded  JCS  that  he  wanted  to  reconstitute  WESTPAC
reserve  after  deployment  of  173d  and  additional  Marines.  Move-
ment of  I  MAF  to  WESTPAC  approved  by  SecDef  15  May.

8  May  65 MACV  15182

Westmoreland  with  Taylor  concurrence  forwarded  concept  of  op-
erations by  U.S./allied  ground  combat  forces  in  support  of
RVNAF:

Stage  I — Security  of  base  area  (extended  TAOR  out  to  light  artil-
lery range).

Stage  II — Deep  patrolling  and  offensive  operations  (with  RVNAF
coordination  and  movement  out  of  TAORs) .

Stage  III — Search  and  destroy  plus  reserve  reaction  operations.
Westmoreland  saw  the  U.S.  role  in  the  Vietnam  war  evolving
through  four  phases:

Phase  I — Securing  and  improving  coastal  enclaves


412 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111


Phase  II — Operations  from  the  enclaves
Phase  III — Securing  inland  bases  and  areas
Phase  IV — Operations  from  inland  bases  after  occupying  and
improving  them.

Westmoreland  recommended  locations  for  various  forces  then
being  discussed  for  future  deployment:

III  MEF — Da  Nang,  Hue,  Chu  Lai  Airmobile  Division — Qui
Nhon,  Nha  Trang  ROK  Division — Quang  Ngai,  Chu  Lai  (relieve
USMC)  173d— Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  (already  landing)

11  May  65 Embtel  3727

Taylor  described  arrival  of  173d  and  Marines;  predicted  boredom
would  be  a  problem.

14  May  65 JCS  142228Z

JCS  told  CINCPAC  that  SecDef  approved  combined  coordinating
staff  with  RVNAF  and  knew  that  MACV  was  planning  a  Joint
General  Staff.

15  May  65 MACV  150900Z

Westmoreland  told  DA  he  was  preparing  concept  for  employment
of  a  division-sized  force,  possibly  the  airmobile  division,  and  re-
quested experts  to  help  plan.

17  May  65 Embtel  3788

Taylor  told  State  Quat  was  agreeable  to  deployment  of  an  Army
brigade  to  Qui  Nhon/Nha  Trang.  If  build-up  of  Cam  Ranh  Bay
as  a  base  were  to  be  approved,  he  said,  Westmoreland  wanted  to
divert  one  battalion  there  for  security.

19  May  65 Embtel  3808

Taylor  told  State  that  RVN  could  absorb  80,000  US/3d  country
troops.  He  recommended  a  pause  before  considering  further  ex-
pansion and  wanted  to  hold  off  logistics  support  for  contingency
follow-on  until  there  was  a  case  of  clear  and  indisputable  neces-
sity.

21  May  65 JCSM  634-65

JCS  recommended  to  SecDef  that  Cam  Ranh  Bay  be  developed
to  either  (1)  enable  further  contingency  deployments,  or  (2)  to
fully  support  troops  already  there.  Approved  by  SecDef  8  Jun.

24  May  65 Embtel  3855

Taylor  told  State  that  joint  command  structure  was  repugnant  to
Viets  and  should  not  be  raised  at  that  time.  Problem  of  command
needed  to  be  sorted  out,  however,  prior  to  input  of  large  numbers
of  U.S.  forces.

24  May  65 MACV  17292

Westmoreland  told  CINCPAC  that  despite  SecDef  approval  of
joint  planning  staff,  the  Viets  were  cool  to  the  idea.

27  May  65 JCSM  41 7-65

JCS  recommended  approval  of  2369  MAP  supported  spaces  for
RVNAF  to  organize  a  tenth  division  using  assets  of  three  existing
regiments.  Approved  by  SecDef  4  Jun.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  413


June  65  1st  battalion,  Royal  Australian  Regiment,  closed  RVN  in  early

June  and  joined  the  173d  at  Vung  Tau.  (Total  bns.  in  SVN:10)

5  June  65 Embtel  4074

Mission  Jntelligence  Committee  with  concurrence  of  Taylor,  John-
son, and  Westmoreland  told  State  that  a  series  of  recent  ARVN
defeats  raised  the  possibility  of  collapse.  To  meet  a  shortage  of
ARVN  reserves,  U.S.  ground  troops  would  probably  have  to  be
committed  to  action.

7  June  65 MACV  19118  070335Z

Westmoreland  told  C  IN  CP  AC  that  a  summer  offensive  was  under
way  to  destroy  GVN  forces  and  isolate  and  attack  district  and
province  towns.  The  enemy  had  yet  to  realize  his  full  potential,
and  RVNAF's  capability  to  cope  was  in  grave  doubt.  RVNAF
build-up  was  halted  because  of  recent  losses.  No  choice  but  to
reinforce  with  additional  US/3d  country  forces  as  rapidly  as  pos-
sible. Westmoreland  asked  that  all  forces  then  in  the  planning
stages  be  approved  for  deployment,  plus  he  identified  more  forces
(9  maneuver  battalions  in  a  division  (-)  and  one  MEB)  which
might  be  required  later  and  for  which  planning  should  begin.  He
asked  that  the  173d  be  held  in  SVN  until  the  Airmobile  Division
was  operational.

7  June  65 CINCPAC  072 32 5 Z

Sharp  supported  Westmoreland's  request  for  more  troops  but
added  that  he  felt  the  airmobile  division  should  go  to  Qui  Nhon
rather  than  inland  and  should  operate  in  Binh  Dinh  instead  of  up
in  the  highlands.  He  felt  600  to  800  tons  of  aerial  resupply  for
the  division  if  it  went  to  the  highlands  was  asking  too  much  of
air  facilities.  He  also  felt  the  ROK  division  should  go  to  Quang
Ngai  rather  than  to  Qui  Nhon,  where  it  would  be  unproductive,
or  to  Cam  Ranh  as  Westmoreland  had  suggested.

8  June  65 Press  Conference

McCloskey,  State  Dept  Press  Officer,  told  the  press  that  U.S.
troops  would  be  made  available  to  fight  alongside  Viet  forces
when  and  if  necessary.

9  June  65 White  House  Press  Release

Statement  released  which  said  that  there  had  been  no  recent
change  in  mission  of  U.S.  combat  units.  They  would  help  the
Viets  if  help  was  requested  and  COMUSMACV  felt  U.S.  troops
were  required.

11  June  65 CINCPAC  112210Z

Sharp  elaborated  on  his  earlier  objections  to  airmobile  division
going  into  highlands  and  clarified  his  views  on  employment  of
the  ROKs  in  either  Quang  Ngai,  Nha  Trang,  or  the  Delta.

11  June  65 JCSM  457-65

JCS,  after  discussing  MACV  and  CINCPAC  requests  with  Taylor,
recommended  that  the  airmobile  division  go  to  Qui  Nhon,  and
recommended  everything  else  that  Westmoreland  had  requested.
Total  strengths  recommended  were:  U.S. — 116,793;  FW — 19,750.


414 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


11  June  65 JCS  112347Z

JCS  told  Sharp  that  somewhat  less  than  MACV's  19118  was  close
to  being  approved  as  an  alternative.  Force  described  amounted  to
one  additional  Army  brigade  instead  of  the  airmobile  division.
JCS  wanted  to  know  where  Westmoreland  would  put  the  brigade
were  it  to  be  approved.

13  June  65 MACV  131515Z

Westmoreland  objected  to  Taylor  s  questioning  of  the  seriousness
of  the  situation  and  pointed  out  that  to  date  ARVN  had  lost  5
battalions  and  the  end  was  not  in  sight.  He  justified  his  request
for  troops  by  Corps  area  and  asked  for  a  free  hand  in  maneuver-
ing units.  He  included  his  concept  for  the  employment  of  ROK
and  ARVN  troops.

75  June  65 McNamara  gave  the  green  light  for  planning  to  deplov  the  air-
mobile division  to  SVN  by  1  September.

16  June  65 Press  Conference

McNamara  announced  deplovments  to  SVN  that  would  bring
U.S.  strength  there  to  between  70,000  and  75,000  men.  20,000
of  these  would  be  combat  troops  and  more  would  be  sent  if
necessary.  He  said  U.S.  troops  were  needed  because  the  RVT^AF
to  VC  force  ratio  of  less  than  4  to  1  was  too  low  to  enable  the
GVN  to  cope  with  the  threat.  Total  U.S.  Bns  after  deployments
would  be  15.

17  June  65 Embtel  4220

Taylor  confirmed  to  State  the  seriousness  of  the  military  situation
in  SVN.  GVN  had  to  either  give  up  outlying  outposts  or  face
being  ambushed  trying  to  reinforce  them.

18  June  65 White  House  Memo  to  SecDef

McGeorge  Bundy  passed  on  to  McNamara  the  President's  con-
cern that  "we  find  more  dramatic  and  effective  actions  in
SVN  .  .  ."

18  June  65 JCSM  482-65

JCS  further  refined  recommended  troop  Ust  showing  the  airmobile
division  to  deploy  bv  1  September  1965  along  with  its  support  and
the  brigade  of  the  101st  airborne  division  to  return  to  CONUS
when  the  airmobile  division  was  operational.  Total  strength  recom-
mended was:

U.S.— 120.839;  FW— 19,750

22  June  65 Unsigned  Memo  to  SecDef

McNamara  told  that  the  President  could  wait  until  10  July  to  ap-
prove the  deployment  of  the  airmobile  division  if  SecDef  is  im-
mediatelv  given  the  go-ahead  for  readiness  preparation.  The  ques-
tion of  removal  of  the  two  Army  brigades  was  to  be  reconsidered
in  August.

22  June  65 JCS  2400

JCS  told  C  IN  CP  AC  and  Westmoreland  that  a  force  of  44  battalions
was  being  considered  for  deplovment  to  Vietnam.  The  Chairman
wished  to  know  if  that  would  be  enough  to  convince  the  DRV  VC
they  could  not  win.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  415

23  June  65 Deptels  3078  &  3079

Approval  for  landing  of  one  Marine  BLT  at  Qui  Nhon  for  security
and  an  additional  BLT  at  Da  Nang  sent  to  Saigon.

24  June  65 MACV  3320

Westmoreland  told  CIS  CP  AC  and  the  JCS  that  there  was  no  as-
surance the  DRV  VC  would  change  their  plans  regardless  of  what
the  U.S.  did  in  the  next  6  months.  The  44  battalions,  however,
should  be  enough  to  prevent  collapse  and  establish  a  favorable
balance  of  power  by  year's  end.

26  June  65 Memo,  Sec  Army  to  SecDef

Resor  told  McSamara  that  Air  Cav  Div  must  have  its  movement
directive  by  8  July  at  the  latest  in  order  to  meet  its  readiness  dead-
lines. Security  would  be  impossible  after  issuing  the  directive.

26  June  65 Deptel  3057

W.  Bundy  told  Taylor  that  Westmoreland  could  commit  U.S.
troops  to  combat  "in  any  situation  in  which  the  use  of  such  troops
is  required  by  an  appropriate  G\'iS  commander  and  when,  in
COMUSMACV's  judgment,  their  use  is  necessar}-  to  strengthen  the
relative  position  of  G\'N  forces."

26  June  65 ISA  Memo  of  Conversation  u  Dep  Amb.

On  25  June  Alexis  Johnson  told  McNaughton  that  in  many  re-
spects the  situation  in  SVN  was  no  worse  than  the  previous  year.
Even  if  it  were,  large  numbers  of  foreign  troops  could  do  no  more
than  hold  a  few  enclaves.  The  Vietnamese  feared  massive  inputs
of  foreign  troops  would  degrade  their  control  over  the  country.

1  July  65 Memo  for  The  President

Ball  of  State  described  the  X'ieinam  war  as  one  the  U.S.  cannot
win  regardless  of  etfort.  Rather  than  have  the  U.S.  pour  its  re-
sources down  the  drain  in  the  wrong  place,  he  recommended  that
U.S.  force  levels  be  Ijeld  to  15  battalions  and  72.000  men  an-
nounced by  SecDef  in  June.  The  combat  role  of  the  U.S.  forces
should  be  restricted  to  base  security  and  reserve  in  support  of
ARVN.  As  rapidly  as  possible  and  in  full  realization  of  the  diplo-
matic losses  which  might  be  incurred,  the  U.S.  should  exit  from
Vietnam  and  thereby  cut  its  losses.

/  July  65 Memo  for  The  President

W.  Bundy  of  State  proposed  a  "middle  way"  to  the  President
which  would  avoid  the  ultimatum  aspects  of  the  44  battalions  re-
quest and  also  the  Ball  withdrawal  proposal,  both  of  which  were
undesirable.  Bundy  offered  further  experimentation  with  U.S.
troops  from  coastal  enclaves.  The  numbers  would  be  held  to
planned  deployments  of  18  battalions  and  85.000  men.  The  air-
mobile division  and  the  1st  Infantry  Division  would  be  got  ready
but  not  deploved.  Furious  diplomatic  activity  concomitantly  should
find  a  gracious  exit  for  the  U.S.

1  July  65 One  Marine  BLT  landed  at  Qui  Nhon  to  strengthen  security  there.

(Total  bns.  in  SVN:  11)

2  July  65 JCSM  515-65

Pursuant  to  their  meeting  with  SecDef  on  28  June,  the  JCS  for-


416 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


warded  a  program  for  the  deployment  of  "such  additional  forces
at  this  time  as  are  required  to  insure  that  the  VC/DRV  cannot  win
in  SVN  at  their  present  level  of  commitment."  Concurrently,  the
JCS  recommended  expansion  of  the  air  activity  against  NVN  as  an
indispensable  part  of  the  overall  program.  Total  U.S.  strength  at
completion  of  these  deployments  was  to  be  175,000.

6  July  65 One  Marine  BLT  landed  at  Da  Nang  to  strengthen  the  defenses

there.  (Total  bns  in  SVN:  12)

7  July  65  Deftel5319

McNamara  informed  Westmoreland  that  the  purpose  of  the  forth-
coming visit  to  Saigon  scheduled  for  16-20  July  was  to  "get  your
recommendations  for  forces  to  year's  end  and  beyond."

10  July  65 Deftel  5582

McNaughton  told  Taylor  that  it  had  been  decided  to  deploy  10,400
logistic  and  support  troops  by  15  August  to  support  current  force
levels  and  to  receive  the  airmobile  division,  if  deployed.  GVN  con-
currence sought.

11  July  65 Embtel  108

Estimate  of  the  situation  prepared  by  the  Mission  Intelligence
Committee  reaffirmed  the  need  for  U.S./3d  country  forces  to  stem
the  tide  then  flowing  against  the  RVNAF.

12  July  65 2d  Brigade,  1st  Infantry  Division  arrived  in  Vietnam  (Total  bns

in  SVN:  15)

16-20  Conference  in  Saigon

July  65  McNamara  and  Wheeler  met  with  Westmoreland  and  Taylor,

heard  presentation  of  COMUSMACV's  concept  for  operations  in
SVN.  The  44  battalions  were  to  be  the  Phase  I  of  the  build-up  and
were  enough  to  prevent  defeat.  In  order  to  move  to  Phase  II  and
seize  the  initiative,  Westmoreland  told  SecDef  he'd  require  a  fur-
ther 24  battalions  in  1966.

1 7  July  65 NMCC  1 72042Z

Vance  told  McNamara  that  the  President  had  decided  to  go  ahead
with  the  plan  to  deploy  34  U.S.  battaUons  and  that  he  was  favor-
ably disposed  to  the  call-up  of  reserves  and  extension  of  tours  of
active  duty  personnel.

28  July  65 Presidential  Press  Conference

The  President  told  the  press  that  he  had  ordered  the  airmobile
division  and  other  units  to  SVN.  Strength  after  these  deployments
would  be  125,000  and  more  would  be  sent  if  required.  He  also
said  he'd  decided  not  to  call  up  reserve  at  that  juncture.

29  July  65 1st  Brigade,  101st  Airborne  Division  arrived  in  Vietnam.  (Total

bns.  in  SVN:  18)

30  July  65 JCSM  590-65

Annex  showed  34  battalions  and  193,587  men  as  planned  for  de-
ployment to  RVN.

14-15  Marine  BLTs  landed  at  Chu  Lai  and  Da  Nang.  Coupled  with  the

Aug  65  SLF  BLT,  they  brought  USMC  maneuver  strength  in  RVN  to  12

battalions,  9  from  III  MAF  and  3  from  I  MAF.  (Total  bns.  in

SVN:  21)


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  417

28  Sept  65 1st  Air  Cavalry  Division  closed  in  RVN  and  assumed  responsibility
for  its  TAOR.  (Total  bns.  in  SVN:  29)

7  Oct  65 Remainder  of  the  1st  Infantry  Division  closed  in  RVN.  (Total  bns.

in  SVN:  35)

8  Nov  65 A  full  division  of  ROK  forces  closed  into  RVN.  (Total  bns.  in

SVN:  44)

10  Nov  65 JCSM  811-65

After  numerous  adjustments  in  required  support  for  Phase  I
deployments,  the  ICS  proposed  a  final  ceiling  of  219,000  on  that
portion  of  the  build-up  and  then  addressed  on-going  Phase  II  pro-
posals.

31  Dec  65 Phase  I  U.S.  strength  in  RVN  at  year's  end  was  184,314.


I. MARINE  COMBAT  UNITS  GO  TO  DA  NANG,  MARCH  1965


A.  INTRODUCTION

At  approximately  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  8  March  1965,  the  United
States  Marine  Corps'  Battalion  Landing  Team  3/9  splashed  ashore  at  Da  Nang
on  the  mainland  of  Southeast  Asia.  Although  there  were  already  over  20,000
American  servicemen  in  Vietnam,  this  was  the  first  time  that  U.S.  ground  com-
bat units  had  been  committed  to  action.  The  mission  assigned  3/9  and  its  com-
panion battalion  1/3  (which  landed  by  air  later  the  same  day)  was  "to  occupy
and  defend  critical  terrain  features  in  order  to  secure  the  airfield  and,  as  di-
rected, communications  facilities,  U.S.  supporting  installations,  port  facilities,
landing  beaches  and  other  U.S.  installations  against  attack.  The  U.S.  Marine
Force  will  not,  repeat  will  not,  engage  in  day  to  day  actions  against  the  Viet
Cong."  The  overall  responsibility  for  the  security  of  that  base  complex  was  to
remain  within  the  purview  of  the  A^IVN  Commander  of  the  I  Corps  Tactical
Zone,  General  Nguyen  Chanh  Thi.  It*  was  hoped  that  with  the  provision  of  rein-
forcements for  Da  Nang  security,  General  Thi  would  be  able  to  release  some
of  his  own  troops  from  that  mission  to  undertake  offensive  action  against  the
Viet  Cong.  In  light  of  subsequent  events,  it  would  be  facile  to  conclude  that
the  modest  input  of  some  3,500  Marines  at  this  juncture  presaged  the  massive
buildup  of  U.S.  fighting  power  in  Vietnam  which  brought  American  mili-
tary strength  in  country  to  over  180,000  by  the  end  of  1965.  Except  for
COMUSMACV  who  did  see  it  as  a  first  step  and  welcomed  it  and  Ambassador
Taylor  who  saw  it  as  an  unwelcome  first  step,  official  Washington  regarded  the
deployment  as  a  one  shot  affair  to  meet  a  specific  situation.


B. THE  MAKING  OF  THE  DECISION
1. COMVSMACV's  Request

On  22  February  1965,  after  a  visit  to  Da  Nang  by  General  Throckmorton,
then  Deputy  COMUSMACV,  General  Westmoreland  cabled  CINCPAC  re-
questing two  Marine  BLT's  to  assist  in  protecting  the  base  against  Viet  Cong
raids,  sabotage,  and  mortar  attacks.  As  a  result  of  his  visit,  General  Throck-
morton told  General  Westmoreland  that  he  questioned  the  capability  of  the


418 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

Vietnamese  to  protect  the  base  and  recommended  the  deployment  of  the  entire
9th  Marine  Expeditionary  Brigade.  General  Westmoreland  concurred  with  the
security  evaluation  but  requested  only  two  of  the  three  BLT's  organic  to  the
9th  MEB  with  the  third  BLT  to  be  held  offshore  as  a  reserve.

2. The  Ambassador's  Opinion

Ambassador  Taylor  sent  to  the  State  Department  on  the  same  day  the  follow-
ing cable:

The  ref  cable  requests  CINCPAC,  MACV  and  Ambassador's  views  as
to  requirement  for  force  deployments  to  this  area  in  view  of  security
situation  of  SVN.  General  Westmoreland  and  I  agree  that  there  is  no  need  to
consider  deployments  to  SVN  at  this  time  except  possibly  for  protection  of
airfield  at  Da  Nang.

As  I  analyze  the  pros  and  cons  of  placing  any  considerable  number  of
Marines  in  Da  Nang  area  beyond  those  presently  assigned,  I  develop  grave
reservations  as  to  wisdom  and  necessity  of  so  doing.  Such  action  would  be
step  in  reversing  long  standing  policy  of  avoiding  commitment  of  ground
combat  forces  in  SVN.  Once  this  policy  is  breached,  it  will  be  very  difficult
to  hold  line.  If  Da  Nang  needs  better  protection,  so  do  Bien  Hoa,  Ton  Son
Nhut,  Nha  Trang  and  other  key  base  areas.  Once  it  becomes  evident  that
we  are  willing  assume  such  new  responsibilities,  one  may  be  sure  that
GVN  will  seek  to  unload  other  ground  force  tasks  upon  us.  Increased  num-
bers of  ground  forces  in  SVN  will  increase  points  of  friction  with  local
population  and  create  conflicts  with  RVNAF  over  command  relationships.
These  disadvantages  can  be  accepted  only  if  there  is  clear  and  unchallenged
need  which  can  be  satisfied  only  by  US  ground  forces.  Turning  to  possible
uses  for  additional  Marines  in  Da  Nang  area,  I  can  see  several  which  are
worth  examining.  First,  they  could  be  used  to  reinforce  protection  of  Da
Nang  airbase  against  Bien  Hoa-type  of  attack  by  fire  or  against  combined
VC  fire  and  ground  attack.

More  ambitious  mission  would  be  readiness  to  engage  in  mobile  opera-
tions against  VC  in  Da  Nang  area  to  keep  VC  units  at  distance  from  base
and  make  positive  contribution  to  pacification  of  area.  Such  US  forces
would  concurrently  be  available  to  join  in  conventional  defense  of  area  if
DRV  army  moved  southward  in  resumption  of  formal  hostilities.

In  defense  of  the  Da  Nang  airbase  against  surprise  attack  by  fire,  it
would  be  necessary  for  Marines  to  be  in  place  on  ground  in  considerable
strength.  (MACV  has  estimated  that  about  six  battalions  would  be  neces-
sary to  keep  81mm  mortar  fire  off  large  airfield.)  Even  if  whole  MEB  were
deployed,  they  could  not  provide  complete  assurance  that  surprise  mortar
fire  by  small  groups  attacking  at  night  would  be  kept  off  field.  Protection
of  field  against  VC  ground  attack  would  be  considerably  simpler  and  would
require  fewer  Marines.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  an  attack  on  field  by  more
than  VC  regiment  and  even  an  attack  in  those  numbers  would  be  extremely
risky  in  face  of  superior  friendly  air  and  ground  fire.  To  meet  such  an
attack,  battalion  of  Marines  supported  by  local  ARVN  forces  should  be
sufficient.  On  other  hand,  as  indicated  above,  effective  perimeter  defense
against  mortar  fire  would  require  at  least  whole  brigade  of  Marines.

It  has  been  suggested  that  an  ancillary  benefit  to  deployment  of  addi-
tional Marines  to  Da  Nang  would  be  freeing  of  ARVN  units  for  use  else-


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  419

where  in  mobile  operations.  While  some  ARVN  troops  of  order  of  battal-
ion might  be  so  relieved,  number  would  not  be  sufficient  to  constitute
strong  argument  for  bringing  in  Marines.  Generally  speaking,  Marines
would  be  performing  task  which  has  not  been  done  adequately  in  past.

The  use  of  Marines  in  mobile  counter-VC  operations  has  the  attraction
of  giving  them  an  offensive  mission  and  one  of  far  greater  appeal  than  that
of  mere  static  defense.  However,  it  would  raise  many  serious  problems
which  in  past  have  appeared  sufficiently  formidable  to  lead  to  rejection  of
use  of  US  ground  troops  in  a  counter-guerrilla  role.  White-faced  soldier
armed,  equipped  and  trained  as  he  is  not  suitable  guerrilla  fighter  for
Asian  forests  and  jungles.  French  tried  to  adapt  their  forces  to  this  mission
and  failed;  I  doubt  that  US  forces  could  do  much  better.  Furthermore,
we  would  have  vastly  complicating  factor  of  not  running  war  and  hence
problem  of  arranging  satisfactory  command  relationships  with  our  Vietna-
mese allies.  Finally,  there  would  be  ever  present  question  of  how  foreign
soldier  would  distinguish  between  a  VC  and  friendly  Vietnamese  farmer.
When  I  view  this  array  of  difficulties,  I  am  convinced  that  we  should  ad-
here to  our  past  policy  of  keeping  our  ground  forces  out  of  direct  counter-
insurgency  role.

If  there  were  any  great  likelihood  of  DRV  forces  crossing  the  Demili-
tarized Zone  in  conventional  attack,  there  would  be  no  question  of  need
for  strong  US  Ground  force  to  assist  ARVN  in  defense  of  coastal  plain.
However,  this  situation  would  not  arise  suddenly  and  we  should  have  ample
time  to  make  our  deployments  before  situation  got  out  of  hand.

In  view  of  foregoing  considerations,  I  conclude  that  only  mission  worth
considering  now  for  additional  Marines  in  Da  Nang  area  is  to  contribute
to  defense  of  base  against  mortar  fire  and  ground  attack.  However,  to
defend  against  fire  would  require  at  least  full  brigade  and  I  do  not  believe
threat  and  possible  consequences  of  mortar  attack  are  so  great  as  to  war-
rant pinning  down  so  valuable  force  in  static  defensive  mission.  However,
in  view  of  General  Westmoreland's  understandable  concern  for  safety  of
this  important  base,  I  would  be*  willing  to  recommend  placing  in  Da  Nang
Marine  battalion  landing  team'.  Such  force  would  strengthen  defense  of
base  and,  at  same  time,  would  be  manageable  force  from  point  of  view  of
accommodating  it  on  base  and  absorbing  it  into  Da  Nang  community.
Such  force  with  those  Marines  already  present  should  remove  any  substan-
tial danger  of  VC  ground  attack  and  in  conjunction  with  available  ARVN
forces  provide  an  acceptable  level  of  security  against  attack  by  fire.

If  Washington  decision  is  to  introduce  additional  Marines  into  [Vietnam,
it  should],  of  course,  be  made  contingent  upon  getting  concurrence  of
GVN.  It  would  be  useful  and,  I  believe,  not  difficult  to  get  GVN  to  ini-
tiate request  for  additional  forces  to  which  USG  could  then  accede.  Taylor.

3. CINCPAC's  Support

CINCPAC  cabled  the  ICS  on  24  February  and  recommended  immediate
deployment  of  two  Marine  BLT's,  one  over  the  beach  and  one  by  air  and  sur-
face. He  advised,  in  addition,  that  a  squadron  of  Marine  F4's  be  deployed  to
Da  Nang  simultaneously.  Those  aircraft  would  be  for  close  air  support  of  the
defenders  and  could  be  used  "for  other  missions  along  with  primary  mission.
.  .  .  All  CINCPAC  contingency  plans  for  SEA  provide  for  employment  of
Marine  aircraft  from  Da  Nang."  The  tone  of  CINCPAC's  cable  was  urgent.


420 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  III


He  encouraged  deployment  now  "before  the  tragedy."  and  he  added  that  were
the  base  to  be  attacked  before  the  BLT's  were  put  ashore,  the  landing  force
afloat  would  be  unable,  because  of  the  time  required  to  get  forces  to  the  scene,
to  influence  the  outcome.  One  of  the  references  cited,  in  this  lengthy  CINCPAC
cable  was  the  Ambassador's  message  of  22  February.  In  addressing  that  ref-
erence, CINCPAC  disagreed  openly  with  Ambassador  Taylor  and  cited  the
Marines'  "distinguished  record,"  saying:

In  ref  F  the  Ambassador  discusses  the  pros  and  cons  of  deploying  the
MEB  to  Da  Nang.  The  Ambassador  comments  on  the  difficulty  of  pro-
viding complete  assurance  of  security  from  surprise  mortar  fire  even  with
the  whole  of  MEB.  This  is  true  and  consequently,  what  we  are  obliged  to
do  here  is  to  reduce  within  the  limits  of  our  capability  the  hazards  to  our
people.  I  believe  that  the  vulnerability  of  the  U.S.  investment  in  Da  Nang
is  as  apparent  to  the  VC  DRV  as  it  is  to  us.  With  a  strong  mobile  force
in  the  area  providing  a  tight  defense  of  the  airfield  complex  and  good  secu-
rity of  U.S.  outlying  installations.  I  believe  that  two  ancillary  benefits  will
emerge.  First,  the  RVNAF  will  be  encouraged  to  use  the  forces  thus  freed
for  patrol  and  security  operations,  and  second,  the  VC  DRV  will  be
obliged  to  regard  Da  Nang  as  a  tougher  target.  Finally,  the  Ambassador
rejects  the  usefulness  of  U.S.  ground  elements  in  a  counter-guerrilla  war
because  of  our  color,  armament,  equipment  and  training.  This  stands
athwart  past  performance  in  this  function.  The  Marines  have  a  distin-
guished record  in  counter-guerrilla  warfare.

The  JCS  forwarded  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  the  substance  of  CINCPAC's
recommendations  in  JCSM-1 30-65.

4. Contingent  Approval

On  26  February  the  State  Department  cabled  Ambassador  Taylor  that  the
Marines  were  on  the  way,  and  that  he  was  to  secure  approval  from  the  Govern-
ment of  Vietnam  for  their  deployment  to  Da  Nang.  Ambassador  Taylor  cabled
the  State  Department  in  reply  on  28  February  and  said:

After  discussion  of  Ref  A  with  Johnson  and  Throckmorton  (Westmore-
land was  temporarily  unavailable),  we  have  decided  to  proceed  as  follow-
ing.

I  shall  seek  an  appointment  with  Quat  at  first  opportunity  (probably
tomorrow  March  1)  and  raise  the  matter  of  our  concern  (but  not  alarm)
over  the  security  of  the  Da  Nang  airfield  and  environs  along  following
lines.  It  is  the  most  important  military  installation  in  the  country  which  is
indispensable  in  air  defense  and  in  support  of  air  and  sea  operations
against  the  DRV.  It  must  be  at  or  near  the  top  of  the  target  list  which  the
VC  DRV  wish  to  destroy.  I  visited  Da  Nang  on  February  27  for  the  first
time  in  several  months  and  am  deeply  impressed  with  the  increasing  mag-
nitude of  the  security  problem  as  are  General  Westmoreland  and  his  prin-
cipal military  colleagues.

Except  for  the  chronic  shortage  of  GVN  forces  in  I  Corps,  we  would  be
inclined  to  urge  GVN  to  allocate  several  additional  battalions  to  the  Da
Nang  area.  But  we  know  that  such  forces  could  not  be  made  available
except  as  prohibitive  cost  to  the  security  of  other  areas  in  SVN.  For  these


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  421


reasons,  we  are  driven  to  consider  a  solution  which  we  have  always  re-
jected in  the  past,  the  introduction  of  US  ground  combat  forces  to  rein-
force the  defense  of  Da  Nang  until  GVN  forces  become  available  for  the
purpose.  In  spite  of  many  cogent  reasons  against  this  solution.  General
Westmoreland  and  I  are  now  reluctantlv  prepared  to  recommend  it  to
Washington  if  the  PM  so  desires  and  requests.

Quat  mav  agree  at  once  but  is  likelv  to  want  to  take  time  to  discuss  the
matter  with  Thieu  and  Minh.  Even  if  he  should  acquiesce,  I  would  suggest
another  meeting  on  the  subject  with  Quat,  Thieu,  Iviinh  and  Thi  at  which
Westmoreland  and  I  would  emphasize  the  limited  mission  of  the  Marines
and  their  non-involvement  in  pacification.

If  all  goes  well  and  concurrence  is  received,  there  should  be  no  problem
about  a  press  release.  We  would  envision  this  to  be  a  short,  joint  GVN  US
statement  issued  at  once  to  the  effect  that,  at  the  request  of  GVN,  the  USG
is  landing  two  battalions  of  Marines  to  strengthen  the  security  of  the  Da
Nang  area  until  such  time  as  thev  can  be  relieved  by  GVN  forces.  The
first  BLT  could  then  land  at  once  and  the  second  on  call  from  MACV.

I  strongly  urge  a  deferment  of  decision  on  landing  in  remainder  of  MEB
until  the  first  two  BLT's  are  ashore  and  in  place.  Bv  that  time  we  will  have
around  7300  U.S.  militarv  personnel  in  the  Da  Nang  area  and  I  doubt
ability  to  absorb  or  usefullv  emplov  the  rest  of  the  MEB.  We  can  tell  better
after  the  two  BLT's  are  shaken  down.  Taylor.

In  a  subsequent  meeting  with  GVN  officials,  Ambassador  Taylor  secured  their
approval  for  the  deplovment.  Generals  Thieu  and  "Little"  Minh  expressed  their
concern  about  the  possible  reaction  of  the  populace  in  the  Da  Nang  area  and
asked  that  the  Marines  be  "brought  ashore  in  the  most  inconspicuous  way
feasible."

5. Eleventh  Hour  Change

One  final  obstacle  to  the  Marine  deployment  was  raised  when  Assistant  Sec-
retary of  Defense  McNaughton  cabled  the  Ambassador  in  Saigon  on  2  March
stating  that  the  173rd  Airborne  Brigade,  then  stationed  on  Okinawa,  would  be
substituted  for  the  Marines.  Other  than  exchange  of  cables,  there  is  no  docu-
mentary evidence  in  the  files  to  indicate  what  might  have  been  the  rationale
behind  the  belated  attempt  to  deploy  the  173rd  Airborne  to  Da  Nang  in  place
of  the  Marines.  One  can  only  surmise  the  reasons  behind  such  a  move,  but
certain  characteristics  of  the  two  forces  may  provide  a  clue.  The  Marines
present  prima  facie  a  more  formidable  appearance  upon  arrival  on  the  scene.
They  have  organized  a  complement  of  heavy  weapons,  amphibious  vehicles,  and
various  other  items  of  weightv  hardware,  including  tanks,  in  contrast  to  the
smaller  and  lighter  airborne.  Together  with  their  accompanying  armada  of
ships,  the  Marines  might  be  seen  as  a  more  permanent  force  than  the  airborne.
This,  coupled  with  the  common  knowledge  that  the  Marines  have  a  long  history
of  interventions  in  foreign  countries  for  purposes  of  peacekeeping  and  stability,
might  have  influenced  someone  in  the  decision  apparatus  to  consider  using  the
airborne  in  their  stead  as  a  positive  signal  that  the  Da  Nang  deplovment  was
to  be  of  short  duration.  If  this  was  indeed  the  case,  it  suggests  that  there  were
still  high-ranking  people  in  Washington  who  were  hoping  to  make  the  deploy-
ment of  U.S.  troops  temporary  and  limited.

General  Westmoreland  objected  to  the  proposed  change  on  the  grounds  that


422 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

the  Marines  were  more  self-sustaining  and  the  Ambassador  agreed  with  him.
CINCPAC,  in  objecting  to  the  proposed  change,  sent  the  following  telegram  to
theJCS:

The  action  outlined  in  Ref  A,  which  would  place  the  173rd  Airborne
Brigade,  a  two-battalion  brigade,  at  Da  Nang,  embodies  several  features
which  are  undesirable.  A  light  and  flexible  airborne  force  would  be  com-
mitted to  a  fixed  task  depriving  CINCPAC  of  his  air  mobile  reserve.  It  is
the  only  airborne  assault  force  in  the  theater.  A  comprehensive  array  of
plans  and  logistic  preparations  which  alTect  many  of  our  forces,  and  the
forces  of  other  countries,  would  be  undermined.  The  action  would  employ
units  which  are  less  adequately  constituted  for  the  purpose.

Since  the  origination  of  OPLAN  32  in  1959,  the  Marines  have  been
scheduled  for  deployment  to  Da  Nang.  Seven  CINCPAC  and  SEATO
contingency  plans  and  a  myriad  of  supporting  plans  at  lower  echelons
reflect  this  same  deployment.  As  a  result,  there  has  been  extensive  plan-
.  ning,  reconnaissance,  and  logistics  preparation  over  the  years.  The  CG,
9th  MEB  is  presently  in  Da  Nang  finalizing  the  details  of  landing  the
MEB  forces  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  minimum  impact  on  the  civilian
populace.  The  forces  are  present  and  ready  to  land,  some  now  embarked,
with  plans  for  execution  complete.  The  deployment  has  been  thoroughly
explored  by  Amb  Taylor  with  Prime  Minister  Quat  and  the  method  in
which  the  Marines  would  be  introduced  was  mutually  agreed  upon  as
pointed  out  in  Ref  B.

Another  practical  consideration  is  the  fact  that  1300  Marines  are  al-
ready at  Da  Nang.  The  Marines  have  been  there  in  varying  numbers  for
more  than  two  years  and  thus  have  long  since  established  the  logistics  and
administrative  base  for  future  Marine  deployments.  They  have  a  long  stand-
ing and  effective  local  relationship  with  the  populace  and  the  RVNAF.
Then,  there  is  the  matter  of  adaptability  for  the  task.  Da  Nang  is  on  the
sea  coast.  Each  Marine  BLT  has  its  own  amphibian  vehicles,  which  are
adaptable  to  continuing  seaborne  supply.  Each  one  has  a  trained  shore
party  to  insure  the  flow  of  material  across  the  beach  in  an  area  where
port  facilities  are  marginal.  They  embody  amphibious  bulk  fuel  systems
which  serve  as  a  cardinal  stand-by  in  case  of  interruption  of  commercial
fuel  supply.  Their  communications  equipment  and  procedures  are  com-
patible with  the  hawks,  helicopters  and  other  Marine  formations  now  in
Da  Nang  and  their  organic  heavy  engineer  equipment  will  be  effective  in
developing  the  defensive  works  needed  for  accomplishing  the  task.  The
Marine  MEB  includes  tanks  and  artillery.  The  airborne  battalions,  on  the
other  hand,  being  designed  for  a  different  task,  are  deficient  in  each  of
these  important  particulars — in  varying  degrees — and  are  thus  less  desirable
for  the  assignment.

The  situation  in  Southeast  Asia  has  now  reached  a  point  where  the
soundness  of  our  contingency  planning  may  be  about  to  be  tested.  The
tasking  has  been  completed.  Logistic  arrangements  and  lines  of  communi-
cation are  establishing  and  operating.  Command  arrangements  have  been
made  and  agreed  upon  and  plans  for  landing  and  disposition  of  forces
ashore  have  been  made  and  these  forces  are  ready  to  execute  them.  It
therefore  seems  imprudent,  at  this  time,  to  shift  forces  in  a  major  sector
and  to  force  changes  in  contingency  posture  for  other  parts  of  Southeast
Asia.  [Emphasis  added]


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  423

Whatever  force  is  landed,  its  strength  should  be  adequate  for  the  job.
The  airborne  force,  if  selected,  would  require  substantial  and  diverse  aug-
mentation to  achieve  the  desired  combat  capability.

If  the  final  decision  is  to  deploy  and  [sic]  Army  Brigade  instead  of  the
MEB  to  Da  Nang,  then  I  would  recommend  a  one  Brigade  Task  Force
of  the  25th  Infantry  Division.  This  would  provide  a  ground  combat  capa-
bility reasonably  similar  to  the  ground  elements  of  the  MEB.  The  com-
mand and  control  elements  and  the  initial  light  infantry  elements  of  this
task  force  could  be  airlifted  to  provide  some  early  security  at  Da  Nang.
Achievement  of  a  more  adequate  capability  similar  to  the  MEB  would
require  air  and  sealift  from  Hawaii  and  CONUS  augmentation  of  some
support  units  for  the  task  force.  The  DAFFD  should  not  be  used  since  it
is  an  essential  element  of  other  contingency  plans.

I  recommend  that  the  MEB  be  landed  at  Da  Nang  as  previously  planned.

6. Final  Approval

The  objections  were  sustained,  and  on  6  March  1965  the  Pentagon  issued  the
following  news  release:

TWO  U.S.  MARINE  BATTALIONS  TO  BE  DEPLOYED  IN  VIET
NAM.  After  consultation  between  the  governments  of  South  Vietnam  and
the  United  States,  the  United  States  Government  has  agreed  to  the  request
of  the  Government  of  Vietnam  to  station  two  United  States  Marine  Corps
Battalions  in  the  Da  Nang  area  to  strengthen  the  general  security  of  the
Da  Nang  Air  Base  complex.

The  limited  mission  of  the  Marines  will  be  to  relieve  Government  of
South  Vietnam  forces  now  engaged  in  security  duties  for  action  in  the
pacification  program  and  in  offensive  roles  against  Communist  guerrilla
forces.

On  the  same  day  the  Joint  Chiefs  o£  Staff  ordered  CINCPAC  to  commence  the
landing  of  the  BLT's,  and  on  7  March  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  told  a  national
television  and  radio  audience  that  the  Marines  would  shoot  back  if  shot  at,  but
their  mission  was  to  put  a  tight  security  ring  around  Da  Nang  Air  Base,  thus
freeing  South  Vietnamese  forces  for  combat.

C. THE  SITUATION  IN  VIETNAM

1. Da  Nang  Local

Prior  to  the  landing  of  the  Marines,  Da  Nang  had  yet  to  be  attacked  by  the
VC,  but  the  official  estimates  of  enemy  intentions  and  capabilities  in  the  I  Corps
area  were  none  top  encouraging.  There  were  reported  to  be  12  battalions  num-
bering some  6,000  men  within  striking  distance  of  the  base,  and  on  the  night
of  7  March  the  town  of  Mieu  Kong,  three  miles  south  of  the  airfield,  had  been
probed  by  a  VC  unit  of  unknown  size.  General  Throckmorton's  estimate  of
ARVN  lack  of  capability  to  prevent  Viet  Cong  depradations  against  the  sizeable
and  expensive  stocks  of  U.S.  equipment  on  the  base  was  colored,  no  doubt,  by
recent  Viet  Cong  attacks  at  Pleiku  and  Qui  Nhon  and  by  the  raid  on  Bien  Hoa
airfield  on  1  November  1964.  In  all  of  these  attacks,  the  GVN  security  forces
had  not  been  able  to  prevent  a  determined  Viet  Cong  attempt  to  penetrate  the


424 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

defenses  around  important  installations.  Moreover,  it  was  apparent  that  U.S.
personnel  in  South  Vietnam  were  vulnerable.  With  the  beginning  of  the  Flam-
ing Dart  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  in  early  February  1965,  communist
retaliation  against  the  bases  which  supported  those  strikes  became  a  distinct
probability.  In  order  to  cope  with  possible  communist  reprisal  air  attacks  on
Da  Nang,  elements  of  a  Marine  HAWK  Missile  Battalion  were  ordered  to  that
base  on  7  February.  However,  communist  air  attacks  were  less  probable  and
offered  higher  risk  than  a  ground  attack  by  Viet  Cong  forces  in  country,  and
Da  Nang,  which  was  heavily  supporting  air  activity  over  North  and  South  Viet-
nam, was  a  lucrative  target.  If,  as  General  Westmoreland  reported  in  his  Feb-
ruary 1965  Monthly  Evaluation,  the  air  strikes  in  North  and  South  Vietnam
were  having  a  beneficial  effect  on  morale  in  the  GVN,  then  it  was  highly  likely
that  the  Viet  Cong  would  at  least  make  an  effort  to  stop  or  slow  down  the  fre-
quency of  the  raids.

2.  GVN  Instability

Both  the  CIA  and  MACV  were  sober  and  somber  in  their  estimates  of  the
political  situation  in  South  Vietnam  in  early  1965.  The  fall  of  the  Huong  gov-
ernment in  January  and  the  confused  events  of  16-21  February  which  culmi-
nated in  General  Khanh's  departure  from  Vietnam  made  any  predictions  diffi-
cult at  best.  The  CIA  thought  Quat's  government  was  shaky,  and  the  Chairman
of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  in  a  message  to  General  Westmoreland  conveyed
his  fears  that  despite  U.S.  actions  against  North  Vietnam,  the  GVN  might  col-
lapse. General  Westmoreland's  reply  to  the  Chairman  stated  in  part:

History  may  well  record  that  the  real  significance  of  1964  was  not  major
VC  advance  and  corresponding  GVN  retrogression  but  rather  that  South
Vietnam's  social  and  political  institutions  remained  remarkably  intact  under
the  powerful  disintegrating  blows  to  which  subjected — most  of  them  not
of  VC  making  .  .  .  Nonetheless,  we  do  have  the  very  real  asset  of  a
resilient  people  and  this  gives  hope  that  there  is  more  time  available  than
we  might  think;  time  in  which,  if  properly  exploited,  the  needed  national
leadership  could  evolve  .  .  .

CINCPAC  added  a  telling  note  to  General  Westmoreland's  comments  when
he  said  we  needed  the  9th  MEB  for  insurance  should  the  GVN  be  unable  to
resist  collapse  in  the  critical  area  of  Da  Nang  where  so  much  was  already
committed.

3.  Enemy  Capabilities

Despite  some  encouraging  signs  in  January  1965,  the  oflficial  assessments  of
the  military  situation  emanating  from  Saigon  were  bleak.  The  GVN  armed
forces  had  suffered  a  major  defeat  at  Binh  Gia,  Phuoc  Tuy  Province,  in  late
December-early  January.  There,  the  Viet  Cong,  fighting  for  the  first  time  with
coordinated  units  of  regimental  size,  had  stood  off  the  best  that  ARVN  could
offer  and  held  their  ground.  To  many  observers,  including  General  Westmore-
land, Binh  Gia  signaled  the  long-expected  beginning  of  Phase  III  of  the  insur-
gency. The  Viet  Cong  were  confident  enough  to  abandon  their  hit-and-run  guer-
rilla tactics  and  engage  the  GVN  armed  forces  in  conventional  ground  combat.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  425

Although  the  rate  of  Viet  Cong  activity  in  January  was  the  lowest  in  1 1
months,  it  was  surmised  that  they  were  merely  regrouping  and  planning  their
next  steps.  Sure  enough,  during  the  month  of  February  the  VC  reappeared  in
force  and  carried  out  a  series  of  successful  raids  and  attacks,  including  those
on  the  U.S.  installations  in  Pleiku  and  Qui  Nhon.  The  CIA  in  its  February
Sitrep  was  prompted  to  declare  that  the  critical  province  of  Binh  Dinh  in  the
II  Corps  area  was  just  about  lost  to  the  Viet  Cong.  Binh  Dinh  is  a  key  province
for  a  number  of  reasons.  Highway  1,  the  major  north-south  road  artery  con-
necting the  I  Corps  with  Saigon,  runs  the  length  of  Binh  Dinh.  Of  equal  impor-
tance is  Highway  19  which  runs  west  from  Qui  Nhon  through  An  Khe  to  the
city  of  Pleiku.  Qui  Nhon,  a  coastal  city  at  the  eastern  end  of  Highway  19,
offers  one  of  the  few  viable  port  alternatives  to  Saigon  and  is  a  major  logistical
base  for  resupply  to  the  upland  bases  and  camps.  Loss  of  control  of  Highway
19  dictates  that  friendly  forces  in  the  highlands  be  resupplied  entirely  by  air —
a  staggering  prospect.  Finally,  the  large  population  in  Binh  Dinh,  numbering
some  800,000,  offers  great  prospects  for  manpower  and  sustenance  to  the  side
able  to  control  the  province.

Intelligence  estimates  began  stating  that  the  coming  rainy  season  would  be
accompanied  by  a  major  Viet  Cong  attempt  to  cut  the  country  in  half  in  the  II
Corps.  It  was  quite  possible  that  the  VC  would  attempt  during  such  a  campaign
to  seize  complete  control  of  one  of  the  highland  provinces,  most  probably
Kontum,  and  would  then  proceed  to  set  up  a  NLF  government  therein.  The
political  and  psychological  effect  of  such  a  move  might,  some  observers  feared,
sound  the  death  knell  for  the  GVN.  General  Westmoreland,  in  his  February
Monthly  Evaluation  added  plaintively  that  he  hoped  the  air  activity  in  North
and  South  Vietnam  would  help  reverse  the  trend.

In  October  of  1964,  the  National  Intelligence  Board  in  Washington  had  pub-
lished a  grave  picture  of  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  In  summary,  they  said
that  the  political  situation  would  continue  to  decay  with  a  gradual  petering  out
of  the  war  effort.  Coup  after  coup,  intractable  Buddhists,  Montagnard  revolt,
and  strikes  were  all  evidence  of  the  lack  of  leadership,  and  no  charismatic  leader
was  in  sight.  The  Viet  Cong  were  unlikely  to  make  an  overt  bid  to  seize  power
as  things  were  going  their  way,  and  they  were  looking  for  a  neutralist  coalition
which  they  could  easily  dominate.  The  endurance  of  the  people  and  the  ability
of  the  administration  to  carry  on  routine  duties  without  any  guidance  from
Saigon  were  cited  as  latent  strengths  as  was  the  fact  that  no  identifiable  power
group  had  yet  called  for  an  end  to  the  fighting  or  had  sought  accommodation
with  the  Viet  Cong.

The  events  of  the  next  few  months  added  no  new  ingredients  to  this  gloomy
picture  until  the  decision  to  initiate  Rolling  Thunder.  In  estimating  probable
communist  reactions  to  the  latter,  the  National  Intelligence  Board  stated  "we
accordingly  believe  that  the  DRV  VC  reaction  to  a  few  more  air  attacks  like
those  of  early  February  would  probably  be  to  continue  their  pressures  in  the
South  more  or  less  on  the  scale  of  recent  weeks  ...  It  is  possible  that  they
would,  for  a  week  or  two,  refrain  from  direct  attacks  on  U.S.  installations,  but
we  cannot  estimate  that  such  restraint  is  probable."

McGeorge  Bundy  in  his  Memorandum  to  the  President  dated  7  February
1965  estimated  that  without  additional  U.S.  action,  the  GVN  would  collapse
within  the  next  year.  He  saw  latent  anti-Americanism  near  the  surface  in  South
Vietnam  and  detected  amongst  the  Vietnamese  the  attitude  that  the  U.S.  was
going  to  quit.  Bundy  recommended  the  initiation  of  a  policy  of  gradual  and  con-


426 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol  III

tinuing  reprisal,  but  he  did  not  even  mention  the  question  of  U.S.  installation
security  nor  did  he  mention  the  possibility  of  committing  U.S.  ground  forces.

4. Contemporary  Accounts

Contemporary'  accounts  of  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  from  the  non-
official  viewpoint  are  unanimous  in  their  recognition  of  the  continuing  decay  in
the  political  and  military  capacity  of  the  GVN  to  resist.  The  prospect  for  suc-
cess if  the  U.S.  did  not  change  its  approach  to  the  war  was  nil.  The  Viet  Cong
were  clearly  winning.  To  writers  like  Halberstam  and  Mecklin,  the  choice  for
the  U.S.  boiled  down  to  two  alternatives:  either  get  out  or  commit  land  forces
to  stem  the  tide.  Neither  of  these  writers  was  likely  to  view  the  arrival  of  the
Marines  as  anything  else  but  indication  of  a  decision  to  take  the  second  course.
Shaplen  treated  the  landing  of  the  Marines  as  an  isolated  incident,  but  he  did
not  accept  the  rationale  that  thev  were  in  Vietnam  for  strictly  defensive  reasons.
In  commenting  on  the  subsequent  arrival  of  more  Marines  and  the  concomitant
expansion  of  their  mission  to  include  offensive  patrol  work,  he  says:  .  .  and
sooner  or  later,  it  was  surmised,  they  would  tangle  direcdy  with  the  Viet  Cong:
in  fact,  it  was  obvious  from  the  outset  that  in  an  emergencv  they  would  be  air-
lifted to  other  areas  away  from  their  base."

A  glance  at  some  of  the  commentary  of  early  March  1965  in  newspapers  and
periodicals  gives  clear  indication  that  the  landing  of  the  two  Marine  BLTs
was  seen  as  an  event  of  major  significance.  Analvsis  of  the  import  of  the  event
varies,  as  would  be  expected,  from  writer  to  writer,  but  almost  without  excep-
tion they  read  more  into  the  deployment  than  was  made  exphcit  by  the  brief
Defense  Department  press  release.  By-lines  from  Saigon,  where  reporters  had
readv  access  to  "reliable  sources"  in  the  U.S.  Mission,  give  clear  indication
that  there  had  been  a  major  shift  in  attitude  as  regards  the  use  of  U.S.  ground
forces  in  Asia.  Ted  Sell,  a  Los  Angeles  Times  staff  writer,  wrote  on  10  March
1965.  'The  landing  of  the  two  infantry  battalions  is  in  its  own  way  a  far  more
significant  act  than  were  earlier  attacks  by  U.S.  airplanes,  even  though  those
attacks  were  directed  against  a  country — North  Vietnam — ostensibly  not  taking
part  in  the  direct  war."  Speaking  after  the  Marines  were  ordered  in,  one  high
official  said  of  the  no-ground-troops-in-Asia  shibboleth,  "Sure,  it's  undesirable.
But  that  doesn't  mean  we  won't  do  it."  It  is  especially  significant  that  among
the  writers  attempting  to  gauge  the  extent  of  U.S.  resolve  in  the  Vietnamese
situation,  the  deployment  of  ground  forces  was  somehow  seen  as  a  much  more
positive  and  credible  indication  of  U.S.  determination  than  any  of  the  steps,
including  the  air  strikes  on  the  DRV,  previously  taken.

D. THE  DEVELOPING  DEBATE  0\  THE  DEPLQYMEST
OF  U.S.  FORCES

1. Proposals  for  Actions  Before  the  National  Security  Council
Working  Group,  Late  1964

Events  in  the  late  1964^arly  1965  period  moved  at  such  a  rapid  pace  as  almost
to  defy  isolated  analysis.  On  3  November  1964,  just  two  days  after  the  Viet  Cong
successfully  attacked  the  U.S.  air  base  and  billetting  at  Bien  Hoa,  Assistant  Secre-
tary of  State  William  Bundy  convened  the  newly  established  NSC  Working  Group
on  SVN  SEA.  Membership  in  the  group  included  the  Slate  Department,  OSD


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  421

ISA,  the  ICS,  and  CIA.  Debate  within  the  group  centered  around  three  proposed
courses  of  action,  none  of  which  contained  a  major  U.S.  ground  troop  com-
mitment to  SVN.  Ground  troop  commitment  was  addressed  in  draft  papers  cir-
culated within  the  group  by  the  principals,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  anyone  was
thinking  in  terms  of  a  major  U.S.  effort  on  the  ground  in  counterinsurgency  op-
erations. William  Bundy's  own  papers  mentioned  CINCPAC  OPLAN  32-64  and
CINCPAC  OPLAN  39-65,  both  of  which  contingency  plans  provided  for  the  input
of  US  ground  combat  forces  into  SEA  in  response  to  Chicom  or  DRV  aggression
or  a  combination  of  the  two.  In  a  draft  dated  13  November  1964,  Bundy  discussed
ground  troop  commitment  and  said  in  part  that  he  did  "not  envisage  the  intro-
duction of  substantial  ground  forces  into  South  Vietnam  or  Thailand  in  conjunc-
tion with  these  initial  actions."  The  initial  actions  to  which  he  referred  were  the
three  basic  options  under  consideration  at  the  time  by  the  Working  Group.  Bundy
went  on  in  the  same  draft  memorandum  to  state  that  the  question  of  ground
troop  involvement  needed  further  consideration,  including  the  possibility  of  the
introduction  of  a  multilateral  force  into  the  northern  provinces  of  South  Vietnam.
In  discussing  the  pros  and  cons  of  ground  troops,  Bundy  did  not  mention  the
security  of  bases  but  he  did  suggest  that  the  presence  of  troops  in  South  Vietnam
might  invite  Viet  Cong  activity  against  them.

Other  drafts  circulated  in  the  NSC  Working  Group  dealt  with  ground  forces.
In  a  memorandum  to  the  Working  Group  dated  30  November  1964,  and  entitled
"Alternative  to  Air  Attacks  on  North  Vietnam:  Proposals  for  the  Use  of  U.S.
Ground  Forces  in  Support  of  Diplomacy  in  Vietnam,"  Messrs.  lohnson  and
Kattenburg  of  the  State  Department  proposed  the  introduction  of  a  token  ground
force  to  provide  proof  of  our  resolve  as  a  prelude  to  a  major  diplomatic  offensive.
The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  also  made  a  proposal  for  the  introduction  of  ground
troops  in  their  23  November  1964  memo  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  In  that
JCSM,  which  was  principally  concerned  with  analysis  of  various  courses  of  action
to  increase  pressure  on  the  DRV,  the  ICS  recommended  the  collateral  deployment
of  Marine  units  to  Da  Nang  and  other  units  from  Okinawa  to  Ton  Son  Nhut  Air
Base  for  purposes  of  security  and  deterrence  in  accordance  with  CINCPAC
OPLANS.  There  is  no  documentary  evidence,  however,  that  these  drafts  were  in
any  way  included  in  the  memo  sent  to  the  President.

On  1  December  1964,  the  President  approved  the  recommendations  of  Am-
bassador Taylor  and  the  NSC  Principals  to  proceed  with  the  implementation  of
the  Working  Group's  Course  of  Action  A  and,  after  30  days  or  more  and  with
some  GVN  progress  along  specified  lines,  to  enter  a  second  phase  program  con-
sisting "principally  of  progressively  more  serious  air  strikes,"  as  in  Option  C.
Again,  the  U.S.  focus  was  on  the  air  war,  not  on  the  ground.

2. The  Focus  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

In  forwarding  on  11  February  1965  their  proposed  program  for  the  first  eight
weeks  of  military  actions  against  North  Vietnam,  the  ICS  told  the  Secretary  of
Defense  that  their  plan  called  primarily  for  airstrikes  but  also  included  the  col-
lateral deployment  of  a  MEB  to  Da  Nang  and  an  Army  Brigade  to  Thailand.
Neither  of  these  deployments  were  for  purposes  of  counterinsurgency  but  rather
were  intended  to  deter  any  overt  DRV  Chicom  retaliation  and  to  put  us  in  a
better  posture  in  case  the  deterrent  failed.  The  ICS  forwarded  this  proposal  to  the
Secretary  again  on  4  March  1965,  still  without  mention  of  the  possibility  of
ground  combat  action  against  the  Viet  Cong.  The  first  proposal  from  the  ICS
that  U.S.  troop  units  be  sent  to  SVN  for  active  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong


428 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  111

came  on  20  March  1965,  well  after  the  landing  of  the  Marines  at  Da  Nang.  That
the  JCS  were  considering  such  a  proposal  before  the  Marines  were  landed  is  in-
dicated obliquely  in  Chairman  Wheeler's  cover  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense
of  1  March  1965,  under  which  he  forwarded  the  JSOP-70  and  in  which  he  said:
"In  arriving  at  the  proposed  force  levels  the  present  situation  in  Southeast  Asia
was  only  indirectly  considered,  and  had  little,  if  any,  influence  upon  the  JSOP-70
force  levels.  This  is  pointed  out  to  identify  a  specific  problem  area  that  requires
a  near  term  and  long  term  solution.  By  separate  action  the  JCS  are  addressing
the  problem  and  will  provide  you  with  their  views  on  this  subject."  While  the
Marines  were  landing  at  Da  Nang,  a  key  man  from  the  Washington  scene  was
a  visitor  in  Saigon.  Although  his  visit  was  unconnected  with  the  Marine  landings
per  se,  his  actions  on  return  to  Washington  provided  a  fair  measure  of  the  atti-
tudes prevalent  in  the  U.S.  community  in  Vietnam  at  that  juncture.

General  Johnson,  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Army,  was  in  Vietnam  from  the  5th
through  the  12th  of  March  1965.  He  was  given  a  thorough  briefing  on  the  situa-
tion by  General  Westmoreland  and  other  members  of  the  United  States  mission,
and  he  brought  back  to  Washington  detailed  situation  reports  prepared  by  MACV
and  the  Ambassador.  The  view  from  Saigon,  as  reflected  in  those  reports,  was
very  grave  indeed.  A  succinct  summation  of  the  views  of  the  entire  U.S.  Mission
Council  in  Saigon  appeared  in  the  Ambassador's  Sitrep  forwarded  to  the  State
Department  on  11  March  1965:

Unless  (and  this  is  primary),  NVN  support  is  checked,  GVN  military  and
paramilitary  resources  increased,  pacification  goals  and  concepts  refined,
administrative  efficiency  improved,  and  an  adequate  poHtical-psychological
base  created,  there  is  little  likelihood  of  stemming  the  tide  of  the  VC  in-
surgency. Only  U.S.  resources  can  provide  the  pressures  on  NVN  necessary
to  check  Hanoi's  support,  although  some  measure  of  SVN  armed  forces
participation  will  be  required  for  psychological  reasons;  the  other  measures
and  programs  required  to  stem  the  tide  of  VC  insurgency  are  largely  internal
to  SVN,  but  even  here  success  will  require  a  marked  increase  in  U.S.  support
and  participation.

There  is  little  doubt  that  General  Johnson  was  impressed  by  the  gravity  of  the
situation  in  SVN  as  presented  to  him  at  the  very  time  the  Marines  were  landing
at  Da  Nang.  The  report  which  he  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  14
March  contains  specific  proposals,  including  some  for  deployment  of  additional
U.S.  ground  combat  forces,  which  Johnson  felt  should  be  implemented  if  the
U.S.  was  to  realize  its  objectives  in  SVN.  Those  objectives  as  seen  by  Johnson
were:  (1)  to  persuade  the  DRV  to  abandon  its  support  and  direction  of  the  in-
surgency, (2)  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong  insurgents,  and  (3)  to  create  a  stable
GVN.  In  accord  with  the  Ambassador,  General  Johnson  called  for  U.S.  action
because  "what  the  situation  requires  may  exceed  what  the  Vietnamese  can  be
expected  to  do."  To  arrest  the  current  deterioration  Johnson  presented  a  list  of
21  specific  actions  to  be  taken.  The  upshot  of  these  21  points  was  greater  U.S.
involvement  in  terms  of  money,  ships,  aircraft,  advisors,  and  assorted  hardware,
but  no  ground  combat  units  were  involved.  They  meant  essentially  more  of  the
same,  and  all  21  points  were  approved  by  the  President  on  1  April  1965.  There
was  more  to  the  Johnson  recommendations,  however.  To  release  RVNAF  for
offensive  action,  he  proposed  deploying  a  U.S.  division  either  to  defend  the  Bien
Hoa/Ton  Son  Nhut  airfield  complex  plus  some  coastal  enclaves  or  to  defend  the


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  429

highland  provinces  of  Kontum,  Pleiku  and  Darlac.  Johnson  obviously  preferred
the  latter  alternative  because  the  enemy  in  the  Montagnard  populated  highlands
would  be  more  easily  identified  by  U.S.  forces.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  in  com-
menting on  the  proposed  deployment  also  preferred  the  second  alternative  although
he  thought  neither  afforded  an  efficient  return  in  terms  of  RVNAF  forces  released
per  U.S.  force  input  (alternative  1  called  for  23,000  U.S.  forces  to  release  5,000
ARVN;  alternative  2  ratio  was  15,000  U.S.  to  6,000  ARVN).  Secretary  McNa-
mara  directed  the  JCS  to  consider  the  2d  alternative  while  emphasizing  that  he
preferred  an  ROK  division  to  one  of  our  own.  The  culmination  of  General  John-
son's report  was  his  recommendation  that  the  SEATO  treaty  be  invoked  to  get
allied  participation  in  a  four  division  force  counter-infiltration  cordon  to  be  placed
across  the  DMZ  and  the  Laotian  panhandle  from  the  South  China  Sea  to  the
Mekong  River.  In  closing  his  report,  General  Johnson  observed:

In  order  for  the  USG  to  evaluate  his  [COMUSMACV's]  requests  properly
when  submitted,  a  policy  determination  must  be  made  in  the  very  near  future
that  will  assure  the  question:  What  should  the  Vietnamese  be  expected  to  do
for  themselves  and  how  much  more  must  the  U.S.  contribute  directly  to  the
security  of  South  Vietnam?

In  reference  to  this  observation  Secretary  McNamara  wrote  that  the  "Policy  is:
anything  that  will  strengthen  the  position  of  the  GVN  will  be  sent  .  .

3. Attitudes  West  of  CON  US

Both  CINCPAC  and  General  Westmoreland  were  very  much  concerned  during
early  1965  with  the  possible  implementation  of  existing  contingency  plans,  at  least
two  of  which  as  already  mentioned,  called  for  the  input  into  Southeast  Asia  of
U.S.  troop  units.  The  alert  (Phase  I)  of  OPLAN  32-64  was  in  effect  as  of
1  January  1965.  CINCPAC  clearly  indicated  that  his  thinking  was  geared  to  con-
tingency plans  in  his  cabled  objections  to  the  proposed  deployment  of  the  173rd
Airborne  vice  the  Marines  into  Da  Nang.  All  of  his  OPLANs  had  buildup  pred-
icated on  the  Marines'  use  of  Da  Nang  as  a  base.  CINCPAC  is  equally  clear  in
his  cable  traffic  of  this  period,  however,  that  he  is  not  immediately  thinking  in
terms  of  the  commitment  of  U.S.  ground  forces  in  operations  against  the  Viet
Cong.  In  a  cable  to  Chairman  Wheeler  on  5  March  1965  he  said  that  "the  single
most  important  thing  we  can  do  quickly  to  improve  the  security  situation  in  SVN
is  to  make  full  use  of  our  air  power."  He  went  on  in  the  same  cable  to  say  that
the  MEB  should  be  deployed  to  Da  Nang  as  soon  as  possible  for  security  and
also  to  give  the  GVN  a  boost  and  the  Viet  Cong  a  warning.

General  Westmoreland  and  his  staff  had  been  concerned  with  planning  for  the
input  of  U.S.  ground  troops  into  South  Vietnam  in  conjunction  with  the  afore-
mentioned CINCPAC  contingency  plans  since  late  1964.  In  view  of  the  enemy's
capabilities  and  the  obvious  deficiencies  of  the  ARVN,  both  of  which  were  all  too
apparent  to  observers  in  Vietnam  (by  early  1965),  it  is  hard  to  see  how  the  mili-
tary planners  in  MACV  could  have  disassociated  the  deployment  of  the  Marines
from  further  troop  input.  In  the  MACV  Command  History  for  1965  there  are
several  statements  which  would  tend  to  confirm  sequential  thinking  in  the  MACV
staff.  On  the  day  the  Marines  were  landing  at  Da  Nang  it  is  said  in  the  History
that  "thus  step  one  in  the  buildup  of  forces  had  been  taken  and  subsequent  steps
appeared  to  be  assured."  The  History  also  states  that  "the  Phase  II,  RVN,  por-


430 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

tions  of  OPLAN  32-64  were  essentially  implemented  by  the  U.S.  buildup  during
1965,  although  on  a  larger  scale  than  planned."  On  27  March  1965,  General
Westmoreland  forwarded  to  CINCPAC  his  estimate  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam
and  his  recommendation  for  U.S.  troop  input  for  offensive  action  against  the
Viet  Cong.  In  that  cable  COMUSNLACV  states  that  his  staff  commenced  prepara-
tion of  the  estimate  and  troop  recommendations  on  13  March,  five  davs  after  the
Marines  went  into  Da  Nang,  and  the  day  after  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff's  depar-
ture from  Saigon.

Ambassador  Taylor  was  not  enthusiastic  about  any  continuation  of  troop
buildup  after  the  landing  of  the  Marines.  He  had  already  stated  his  reasons  in  the
lengthy  cable  of  22  February  contained  herein.  On  3  March,  in  response  to  a
Department  of  State  query  regarding  the  possible  employment  of  an  international
force,  Tavlor  conveyed  the  text  of  a  conversation  about  the  MLF  between  Am-
bassador Johnson  and  the  Australian  envoy  to  South  Vietnam.  The  Australian
had  voiced  fears  similar  to  Taylor's  in  that  he  foresaw  an  increased  manifestation
of  Vietnamese  xenophobia  with  the  input  into  South  Vietnam  of  foreign  troops,
and  he  feared  such  a  move  would  cause  the  GVN  *"to  shuck  off  greater  respon-
sibility onto  USG."  Taylor  told  the  Secretary  of  State  in  another  cable  on  the
same  day  that  he  had  no  idea  what  the  GVN  attitude  toward  a  MLF  might  be
and  that  there  were  many  problems  involved  with  such  a  move  that  had  yet  to
be  ironed  out.  The  MLF  was  clearlv  onlv  in  the  talking  stage,  while  the  Marine
BLT's  were  a  fact.  The  discussion  of  the  MLF  is  included  to  illustrate  that  the
Ambassador  was  consistent  in  looking  bevond  the  immediate  tactical  need  to
support  a  faltering  G\'N — a  need  which  Taylor  saw  just  as  clearly  as  did  MACV
— to  analyze  the  long-term  ramifications  of  the  introduction  into  Vietnam  of
foreign  combat  troops.  Taylor's  warnings  in  this  regard  were,  in  light  of  the
present  situation  in  SVN,  prophetic  indeed.

E. FUTURE  EXPECT ATIOSS

There  seems  to  be  sufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that  General  Westmoreland
and  his  staff  saw  in  the  deployment  of  the  Marines  the  beginning  of  greater  things
to  come.  The  1965  Command  Historv  savs  as  much,  and  the  rapidity  with  which
the  staff  followed  on  the  Marine  BLT's  with  more  proposals  would  tend  to  back
up  such  a  conclusion.  It  hardlv  seems  a  coincidence  that  General  Johnson,  im-
mediately following  his  briefings  by  MACV,  returned  to  Washington  and  recom-
mended, among  other  things,  that  a  U.S.  division  be  deployed  to  SVN.
CINCPAC,  although  obviously  concerned  with  OPLANs  and  their  focus  on  troop
deployments,  comes  out  clearly  in  his  cable  traffic  for  reliance  on  air  power  for
the  moment  and  for  troop  commitment  to  secure  bases  only.  The  ICS.  because
they  had  yet  to  address  the  overall  question  of  U.S.  ground  force  deployments,
necessarily  saw  the  Marine  deplovments  as  a  stopgap  measure  to  insure  the  se-
curity of  U.S.  lives  and  propertv  in  case  of  a  partial  or  total  GVN  collapse.
Traffic  between  the  Embassy  and  the  Department  of  State  indicated  that  further
ground  force  deployments  as  a  deterrent  to  NVN  invasion  were  in  the  thinking
but  were  not  yet  in  the  proposal  stage,  and  the  Ambassador  clearly  had  serious
objections  to  further  troop  input.  It  appears  that  for  the  moment,  with  the  pos-
sible exception  of  General  Westmoreland,  his  staff,  and  perhaps  an  important  ally
in  the  person  of  General  Johnson  in  Washington,  the  Marine  deployment  was
taken  at  face  value  and  that  the  official  Washington  hopes  were  pinned  on  early
NVN  response  to  the  Rolling  Thunder  pressure,  then  just  in  its  beginning  stages.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965 43 1


F.  ANALYSIS

This  paper  has  raised  basically  two  analytical  questions.  First,  what  was  the
significance  of  the  landing  of  the  two  Marine  battalions  rather  than  other  units,
such  as  the  173rd  Airborne?  Second,  what  was  the  mix  of  objectives  behind  the
deployment,  and  did  the  deployment  meet  these  objectives?

The  significance  of  putting  the  Marines  into  Da  Nang  turns  on  whether  this
deployment  was  intended  or  was  viewed  ( 1 )  as  the  first  elements  in  a  phased
build-up  of  U.S.  ground  combat  forces,  or  (2)  as  a  one-shot  response  to  a  peculiar
security  need  at  Da  Nang.  There  is  evidence  for  both  propositions.

There  are  two  pieces  of  evidence  in  support  of  the  phased  build-up  proposition.
First,  no  less  than  seven  CINCPAC  contingency  plans  treated  Da  Nang  as  a  base
for  U.S.  Marine  Corps  activity,  and  at  least  two  of  those  plans  provided  for
major  Marine  ground  forces  in  the  I  Corps  tactical  zone  of  South  Vietnam.  Ex-
cept for  Phase  II  of  OPLAN  32-64,  however,  contingencv  plan  build-ups  of
force  were  predicated  on  overt  DRV  or  Chinese  Communist  action.  At  the  time
of  the  initial  landings,  such  overt  action  was  anticipated  in  the  OPLAN  but  had
not  yet  occurred.  It  was  a  fact,  on  the  other  hand,  that  some  sort  of  action  was
needed  in  the  South  to  halt  the  course  of  the  insurgency  there,  and  that  two
Marine  BLT's  would  not  do  the  trick.

The  second  piece  of  evidence  was  the  last  minute  attempt  by  Ass't  Secretary
of  Defense  McNaughton  to  substitute  the  173rd  Airborne  for  the  Marines,  and
CINCPAC's  strong  reaction  against  this  attempt.  The  only  apparent  rationale  for
the  McNaughton  move  is  as  a  blocking  measure  against  expected  pressures  for
further  build-ups  as  embodied  in  the  contingencv  plans.  The  substitution  would
have  created  planning  tangles  for  the  Chiefs  and  CINCPAC  and,  therefore,
would  have  delayed  pressures  for  further  deployment  pending  the  development
of  new  plans.  CINCPAC's  vigorous  response,  based  on  administrative  and  logistic
arguments,  coupled  with  concern  for  the  loss  of  an  airmobile  reserve  force,  per-
suaded Washington  and  thwarted  the  McNaughton  effort.  It  is  interesting  to  note,
in  this  regard,  that  McNaughton,  at  least  on  the  record,  did  not  receive  any  sup-
port for  his  attempt.  Conceivably,  Ambassador  Taylor,  who  had  expressed  serious
reservations  about  the  implications  of  the  ground  force  deployment,  could  have
joined  forces  with  McNaughton.  Taylor's  failure  to  do  so  was  probably  based  on
the  fact  that  he  did  not  believe  the  pressures  could  be  significantly  thwarted  by
the  substitution,  and  that,  therefore,  it  made  much  more  military  sense  to  proceed
as  planned.

The  evidence  against  the  phased  build-up  proposition  and  for  the  one-shot-
security  hypothesis  rests  on  one  major  document,  and  paradoxically,  on  the  ab-
sence of  other  documents.  The  major  document  is  the  McGeorge  Bundy  Memo-
randum for  the  President  of  February  7,  1965.  In  this  memorandum,  Bundy
reviews  the  entire  situation  in  Vietnam  without  any  reference  to  future  ground
force  deployment — even  though  the  request  for  the  Marine  BLT's  was  only  two
weeks  away.  Moreover,  the  usual  flood  of  documentation  preceding  a  decision  of
significance  is  not  to  be  found.  In  other  words,  it  appears  that  the  key  decision-
makers in  Washington  are  not  focusing  hard  on  the  importance  of  the  deploy-
ment. The  attention-getter,  as  the  Bundy  memo  indicates,  was  the  impending  air
war  against  North  Vietnam.

The  significance  of  the  Marine  BLT  deployment  must  also  be  measured  up  to


Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

e: es  intended  by  the  deployment.  There  were  four  distinguishable  ra-


(1  '  F-ee  r:  AR\'N  rcrces  ::om  static  defense  to  base  security;

(2  1  P:: ::  r  ^ c^e^  securitv  for  U.S.  air  bases  beine  used  in  the  air  war

3 ^  _  A  -  £  Hi:-;  -.reaped  U.S.  determination  to  pay  a  higher  price


The  - - .v.  c  -he  :-e  r:-.:s:  stressed  publicly — to  release  R\'N.-\P  for

cne'^.  e  ^" -r  \  c:  C:-z.  General  Westmoreland  cabled  the  JCS

cr.  11  ¥z~:.-"- :  r  ctr.?vment  of  the  Marines  to  Da  Nang  would

res^h  _  RF  companies,  one  tank  platoon,  and  another

RF  r  -  ng  formed.  The  MACV  Monthly  Evaluation  of  March  1965

s:i:ec  ; "  — ^-.id  >  fact  been  released.  It  is  apparent,  then,

!■":"  .  ^z-^r.  :aken  ver\'  seriouslv.  While  it  can  be

ent  in  the  local  force  ratios  vis-a-vis  the  Met
_  ■ ^.  _ . .  ...z  .  ost  optimistic  prediction  of  releasable  RN^Nh-VF

units  would  not  have  had  much  importance.

A  ^e:  -  -  -  ,v  ;  --e  notion  of  security  for  a  major  U.S.  air  base  being
^  -gainst  North  Vietnam.  Da  Nang  was  exposed  and

^  attack  on  it  could  not  be  ignored.  \Miile  the  two
-  ; .  Itself,  was  recognized  as  being  insufficient  for  high

ee  about  base  security .  there  can  be  httle  doubt  that  U.S.  troops
~^e  more  secure.  In  retrospect,  it  could  be  construed
I'  . :  U.S.  awareness  of  RVNAF  inadequacy.  There  is,

j-.iar;.  evidence  available  to  suppon  this  view  and.  in  fact,
.  , -  '-defectiveness  was  not  recognized  until  a  few  months  later.

A  :r  ^ e  been  to  signal  Hanoi  with  the  seriousness  of  the

US  ^  ■ hhstanding  the  relatively  minute  combat  power

:r:  "  .  fact  that  they  were  deployed  would  be  a  much

c.c. ^  _:  ^ ^c'.ermination  in  the  fleeting  appearance  of  a  few

ie:  -  - .  rrc^e-ee  offshore  of  a  mighty  fleet  of  ships.  Taken  in

c  :-  .  r  :  .  ch--  - U.S.  shibboleth  against  involvement  in  a  major

-A^ h  ^  e  ivr  - "d  have  been  a  highly  visible  step  unequivo-

c^.  r -z,^--_ ;  K  .re  is  no  evidence  that  anyone  in  the  U.S.

governn-.c^"  re  ^er. .  :\z".  to  convev  such  a  signal  and  there  was  no

discussic:-  ::  ■^■'s:  -c^r:-^^>  ...  ^  exrected  from  Hanoi.  If  this  indeed  were  an
r^r  •  --^  -  e::  e,  r  ;e  httle  dent  on  N\?s'  designs.  If  an\ihing.  it  may  have
a:cc^  :r c  -  -:ed  :r  -e-d  :  r:  '  ^- regular  N\'A  units  into  SVN.

-A  :h  -  r  h  ^  - r_  -vithin  the  GVN  and  the  con-

c  "  rei.s  10  z  r._-r -  __iite  reasonable  to  assume  that

:r.z  - J  the  air  s:  N\  N  :r.„:  r:c.  =  ded  them,  did  have  a  beneficial

effect  on  morale.  It  is  ec  •  lous,  however,  that  any  such  effects  would  be

transitor).  Long-:e-—  ~  .r r  ents  in  morale  could  only  come  with  dramatic
and  lasting  alter:-  tuation,  and  the  two  Marine  battalions  did  not  have

that  capabil;-  .rnvei.es.

It  ^ee'T^s  -  antage  point  that  only  the  objective  of  base  security  really

mac  ent  of  the  Marines  to  Da  Nang  might  have  deterred  an

atta>..-.  .  regiment  of  main  force  Viet  Cong.  The  Marine  Infantry

were  dug  ir.  nanding  terrain  facing  the  North  and  West  along  the  most


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War.  \f arch-July  1965  433

likely  avenues  of  approach.  The  security  of  the  base  was  by  no  means  assured  by
their  presence,  however,  as  by  their  own  admission  they  were  in  no  position  to
prevent  determined  attack — or,  especially,  raids  and  mortar  attacks — the  kind
that  had  done  so  much  damage  to  Bien  Hoa  the  year  before.  The  U.S.  forces
onlv  had  responsibilitv  for  half  of  the  base  complex,  and  it  was  doubted  that  the
R\  N.-VF  could  prevent  the  Viet  Cong  infiltrating  sabotage  squads  through  the
heavilv  populated  areas  on  the  G\Ts  side.  The  Marines  did  not,  as  Secretary
Rusk  said  thev  would,  put  a  tight  securitv  ring  around  the  base.  The  ring  was  not
closed  until  considerablv  later,  and  even  then,  the  \'iet  Cong  successfullv  pene-
trated the  defenses  and  caused  considerable  damage  in  a  raid  on  1  July  1965 —
the  first  of  a  series  of  raids  that  have  continued  up  to  the  present.

The  landing  of  the  Marines  at  Da  Nang  was  a  watershed  event  in  the  history
of  the  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam.  It  represented  a  major  decision  made  with-
out much  fanfare — and  without  much  planning.  WTiereas  the  decision  to  begin
bombing  North  \'ietnam  was  the  product  of  a  year's  discussion,  debate,  and  a  lot
of  paper,  and  whereas  the  consideration  of  pacification  policies  reached  talmudic
proportions  o\er  the  vears,  this  decision  created  less  than  a  ripple.  A  mighty
commandment  of  U.S.  foreign  policv — thou  shall  not  engage  in  an  Asian  land
war — had  been  breached.  Besides  CINCPAC  and  General  Westmoreland  who
favored  the  deplovment.  Ambassador  Taylor  who  concurred  with  deep  reserva-
tion, and  ASD  McNaughton  who  apparently  tried  to  add  a  monkey  wrench,  this
is  a  decision  without  faces.  The  seeming  ease  with  which  the  Marines  were  intro-
duced and  the  mild  reaction  from  Hanoi  ser\ed  to  facilitate  what  was  to  come.
It  also  weakened  the  position  of  those  who  were,  a  few  scant  months  later,  to
oppose  the  landing  of  further  U.S.  ground  combat  forces.


II.  PHASE  I  IN  THE  BUILD-UP  OF  U.S.  FORCES.
MARCH-JULY  1965


A.  THE  SITUATIOX  IX  VIETXAM.  SPRIXG  AXD  EARLY  SLWfMER,
1965

\'ietnam  in  February.  1965.  r^rief  flurr}-  of  enemy  activity  and  the  de-

parture of  the  volatile  General  Nguven  Khanh  as  a  result  of  another  coup.  The
installation  of  Phan  Huv  Quat  as  Piime  Minister  and  Phan  Khac  Suu  as  Chief
of  State  was  followed  bv  a  period  of  ominous  quiescence.  The  drop  in  intensity
of  the  fighting  coincided  with  the  dn.'  season  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  countr\',
with  the  beginning  of  the  United  States  Rolling  Thunder  program  of  continuous
air  strikes  against  North  \'ietnam,  and  with  the  arrival  of  the  first  U.S.  ground
combat  troops  committed  to  Asian  soil  since  Korea.

1. The  PolUical  Situation

Despite  its  rather  inauspicious  beginning  in  Februar),  the  government  had  by
earlv  April  convinced  the  CIA  that  for  the  first  time  the  progressive  deterioration
in  the  South  \  ietnamese  political  situation  had  come  to  a  halt.  All  the  disruptive
elements  in  the  Vietnamese  body  politic  remained,  but  Quat  displayed  consider-
able talent  in  placating  dissidents  and  was  setting  about  in  his  own  quiet  manner
to  tidv  up  the  chaotic  Saigon  government.  Quat  was  no  charismatic  leader.  If
anything,  he  was  the  opposite  with  his  self-effacing,  mild  manner.  But  he  im-


434 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

pressed  Ambassador  Taylor  with  his  businessUke  approach,  and  the  latter  had
high  hopes  for  Quat's  success.

By  mid-May,  to  the  dismay  of  the  U.S.  Mission,  Quat's  govenmient  began  to
manifest  considerable  strain.  The  Buddhists,  a  not  always  consistoit  pressure
group,  felt  that  Quat  was  too  busv  tr\mg  to  please  ever)"one  instead  of  initiatiiig
a  strong  action  program.  The  Catholics,  on  the  other  hand,  were  fearful  of  a
Buddhist-dominated  government  and  Saigon  was  full  of  rumors  of  the  formation
of  Cathohc  paramihtary  units.  Colonel  Pham  Ngoc  Thao,  a  familiar  plotter,  was
said  to  have  unsuccessfullv  attempted  a  coup  on  behalf  of  the  Catholics  around
the  20th  of  May.

An  apparently  routine  cabinet  shuffle  proposed  by  Premier  Quat  at  the  end  of
May  precipitated  a  crisis  which  led  to  the  fall  of  his  government.  Quat  had
intended  to  replace  three  cabinet  ministers  with  southerners:  but  the  incumbents,
with  the  support  of  Chief  of  State  Suu,  refused  to  resign.  .\11  the  dissident  ele-
ments on  the  Saigon  pohtical  scene  seized  on  the  incident  as  an  excuse  to  rain
invectives  on  Quat  and,  finding  Suu  all  too  ready  to  hsien  to  their  complaints,
used  him  to  effectivelv  paralvze  the  government.  The  crisis  came  to  a  head  on
9  June  when  Quat  asked  the  senior  generals  of  the  R\  NAF  to  mediate  the
dispute  between  himself  and  Suu.  Instead,  the  generals  icrcec  Quat  to  resign  and
took  over  the  government  themselves.

Following  the  militar\-  takeover,  a  National  Leadership  Committee  was  formed.
On  21  June,  Major  General  Nguven  Van  Thieu  was  installed  as  Chief  of  State
with  Air  Vice  Marshall  Nguven  Cao  Ky  as  the  ne%v  P:  r.-.e  M  rister  The  ::es-
sion  of  Thieu-Ky  ended  for  the  moment  any  hopes  of  .\naPassadc:  :  and

others  for  the  establishment  of  effective  civilian  government  in  \'ieina:

The  sole  bright  spot  in  an  otherwise  ver)  gloomy  situ^: .  ^  .=
absence  of  any  violence  associated  with  the  mihtar\'  takeo%e:  Tr.e  r.c.v  ;e..^.:s
came  to  office  with  an  announced  determination  to  maintain  stabihry  and  to
vigorously  prosecute  the  war.  Given  the  militar\'  situation  at  that  time,  hrtle
credence  could  be  lent  to  their  pronouncements.

2. The  Military  Situation

The  Viet  Cong  were  unusually  inactive  throughout  March  and  April.  There
had  been  no  major  defeat  of  the  enemv's  forces  and  no  signs  of  any  major  shift
in  strategy  on  his  part.  Hence  it  was  assumed  that  he  was  merely  pausing  :c  re-
group and  to  assess  the  effect  of  the  changed  .\merican  participation  in  .re  v  .-:
embodied  in  air  strikes  and  in  the  Marines.

During  the  spring  months  an  emboldened  ARV>.'  displayed  a  ne  •  :fe-^  e
spirit  and  scored  a  few  successes  at  the  expense  of  an  elusive  enen/  ::
the  standard  statistical  indicators  used  bv  MACV  to  measure  AR\"N  e"e::  e-  e^s
showed  favorable  trends.  The  rate  of  enemy  to  friendly  IdHec  -  -e

government's  favor,  and  for  a  brief  but  encouraging  spell  the  -  "  ^

lost  to  the  enemy  compared  with  weapons  captured  from  him  ar
A  major  effort  by  the  GVN  forces  in  March  to  open  highway  1^
in  Binh  Dinh  Province  to  Pleiku  in  the  highlands  met  v.
enemy  resistance.  Despite  reports  of  hea\^'  enemv  force  .
impending  offensive  in  that  area,  the  road  remained  open.  Incr.
over  the  country  contributed  to  an  air  of  euphoria  manifested
expression  of  cautious  optimism  which  crept  into  we^y  or  :
reports,  such  as  Ambassador  Tavlor  s  NODIS  to  the  President  O).
State  3359,  13  April  1965)  quoted  below:


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March— July  1965  435

We  have  just  completed  another  quite  favorable  week  in  terms  of  losses
inflicted  upon  the  Viet  Cong,  643  of  whom  were  killed  in  action  to  135  on
the  government  side.  Binh  Dinh  Province  which  was  considererd  to  be  in
critical  condition  two  months  ago  has  now  been  restored  to  what  might  be
called  normalcy;  that  is  to  say,  the  fear  of  the  loss  of  major  towns  appears
to  be  past  although  a  large  part  of  the  province  remains  under  Viet  Cong
control.  The  success  in  Binh  Dinh  is  attributable  to  three  factors;  a  new
and  aggressive  division  commander,  the  commitment  of  five  general  reserve
battaUons  to  the  province,  and  the  improved  morale  generated  by  the  air
actions  in  the  North.

We  still  have  the  feeling  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  regrouping  in  the  prov-
inces in  the  northern  half  of  the  country  and  are  probably  preparing  some
kind  of  offensive  action.  However,  there  are  a  few  indications  that  suggest
that  Viet  Cong  morale  may  be  dropping.  They  have  given  up  four  major
arms  caches  during  the  month  without  a  sustained  fight  and  the  number  of
defectors  during  the  week  ( 129  Viet  Cong  military  personnel  and  23  political
cadre)  is  the  highest  defection  figure  since  weekly  statistics  were  initiated
in  January  1964.

On  the  manpower  side,  unaudited  figures  indicate  that  government  mili-
tary and  paramilitary  forces  increased  by  some  10,000  during  the  month  of
March  of  whom  two-thirds  were  volunteers.  This  rate  exceeds  the  target  of
8,000  accessions  per  month  which  we  had  considered  the  best  the  govern-
ment could  do  with  a  maximum  effort.

Quat  continued  his  program  of  provincial  visits,  making  a  tour  of  the
Delta  area  from  which  he  returned  full  of  new  ideas  and  bubbling  with
enthusiasm.  He  was  quite  impressed  with  the  senior  officers  whom  he  met
in  the  IV  Corps  and,  as  always,  enjoyed  talking  to  the  country  people  who
assembled  to  greet  him.

His  principal  concern  remains  the  unruly  generals  and  the  continued  evi-
dence of  lack  of  unity  in  the  senior  officers  corps.  You  have  probably  noted
the  case  of  insubordination  in  the  Navy  wherein  several  senior  naval  officers
petitioned  the  removal  of  Admiral  Cang,  the  Chief  of  Naval  Operations.
Quat  is  handling  this  matter  routinely  by  a  board  of  inquiry  but  is  disturbed
by  this  new  evidence  of  lack  of  discipline  in  the  armed  forces.  In  his  cam-
paign to  bring  the  generals  under  some  kind  of  control,  he  is  about  to  take
the  step  of  abolishing  the  position  of  Commander-in-Chief,  while  increasing
the  functions  of  the  Minister  of  National  Defense.  This  is  a  move  in  the
right  direction  but  his  troubles  will  not  end  as  long  as  the  militarv'  command
structure  is  clouded  by  the  presence  of  the  Armed  Forces  Council.  Quat  is
fully  aware  of  this  problem  and  intends  to  resolve  it,  but  slowly  and
cautiously.

Your  Johns  Hopkins  speech  and  the  reply  to  the  17-nation  overture
attracted  much  attention  in  Saigon  where  the  reaction  was  generally  very
favorable.  As  one  might  expect,  the  phrase  "unconditional  discussion"
brought  forth  considerable  editorial  comment,  but  the  conclusion  was  that
the  term  suggested  no  real  difference  in  aims  between  the  Vietnamese  and
the  United  States  Government.  On  two  occasions,  I  have  urged  Quat  to  sit
down  with  Alex  Johnson  and  me  to  discuss  various  alternative  courses  of
international  political  action  which  may  require  consideration  during  the
coming  weeks  and  months.  He  has  not  responded  affirmatively  to  this  sug-
gestion apparently  because  his  own  thoughts  are  not  yet  in  order.

The  mission  has  been  very  busy  since  my  return  with  all  agencies  review-


436 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

ing  their  programs  to  see  that  they  are  aligned  with  the  recent  decisions
taken  in  Washington.  USOM  Director  Killen  has  discussed  the  41  point
non-military  program  with  Quat  who  has  expressed  particular  interest  in
such  projects  as  rural  electrification,  agricultural  development,  water  supply
and  school  construction.  The  Acting  CAS  Chief,  Mr.  Jorgensen,  is  giving
priority  attention  to  the  12  outline  projects  which  Mr.  McCone  tabled
during  our  Washington  discussions  and  will  soon  have  specific  proposals  for
the  Mission  Council.

And  the  following  excerpts  from  COMUSMACV's  Monthly  Evaluations  for
March  and  April  1965:

March,  1965:  Events  in  March  were  encouraging  .  .  .  RVNAF  ground
operations  were  highlighted  by  renewed  operational  effort  .  .  .  VC  activity
was  considerably  below  the  norm  of  the  preceding  six  months  and  indica-
tions were  that  the  enemy  was  engaged  in  the  re-supply  and  re-positioning
of  units  possibly  in  preparation  for  a  new  offensive,  probably  in  the  II  Corps
area  ...  In  summary,  March  has  given  rise  to  some  cautious  optimism.
The  current  government  appears  to  be  taking  control  of  the  situation  and,
if  the  present  state  of  popular  morale  can  be  sustained  and  strengthened,  the
GVN,  with  continued  U.S.  support,  should  be  able  to  counter  future  VC
offenses  successfully.

April,  1965:  Friendly  forces  retained  the  initiative  during  April  and  a
review  of  events  reinforces  the  feeling  of  optimism  generated  last  month
...  In  summary,  current  trends  are  highly  encouraging  and  the  GVN  may
have  actually  turned  the  tide  at  long  last.  However,  there  are  some  disquiet-
ing factors  which  indicate  a  need  to  avoid  overconfidence.  A  test  of  these
trends  should  be  forthcoming  in  the  next  few  months  if  the  VC  launch  their
expected  counter-offensive  and  the  period  may  well  be  one  of  the  most
important  of  the  war.  [Emphasis  added]

In  view  of  the  fact  that  nothing  had  basically  changed  in  the  South,  it  seems
inconceivable  that  anyone  was  really  fooled  by  the  dramatic  drop  in  enemy-
initiated  activity.  Most  official  observers  were  hardheaded  and  realistic  following
the  landing  of  the  two  Marine  BLT's  in  March.  COMUSMACV  certainly  was
in  the  long  and  detailed  Commanders  Estimate  of  the  Situation  which  he  com-
pleted on  26  March  and  which  will  be  analyzed  at  length  later  in  this  paper.  In
summary.  General  Westmoreland  said  in  the  Estimate  that  the  program  of  air
activity  against  the  North,  while  it  might  ultimately  succeed  in  causing  the  DRV
to  cease  its  support  of  the  war,  would  not  in  the  short  run  have  any  major
effect  on  the  situation  in  the  South.  The  RVNAF,  although  at  the  moment  per-
forming fairly  well,  would  not  be  able  in  the  face  of  a  VC  summer  offensive  to
hold  in  the  South  long  enough  for  the  bombing  to  become  effective.

Realistic  assessments  of  the  situation  in  March  notwithstanding,  some  of  the
parlance  in  cables  and  messages  between  Washington  and  Saigon  expressed  con-
viction that  the  situation  in  Vietnam  was  well  in  hand,  and  resisted  radical
changes  or  even  urgent  revision  of  ongoing  U.S.  programs.  Ambassador  Taylor,
for  example,  reacted  strongly  to  proposals  that  U.S.  military-civil  affairs  person-
nel be  introduced  into  the  aid  effort,  and  told  McGeorge  Bundy  that  the  GVN
was  winning  the  war  without  such  help.  Taylor  said:

I  am  greatly  troubled  by  DOD  152339Z  April  15  [a  cable  from  Mc-
Naughton  to  Saigon  containing  a  seven  point  program  with  "highest  author-
ity" sanction].  First,  it  shows  no  consideration  for  the  fact  that,  as  a  result


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  437

of  decisions  taken  in  Washington  during  my  visit,  this  mission  is  charged
with  securing  implementation  by  the  two  month  old  Quat  government  of  a
21  point  military  program,  a  41  point  non-military  program,  a  16  point
Rowan  USIS  program  and  a  12  point  CIA  program.  Now  this  new  cable
opens  up  new  vistas  of  further  points  as  if  we  can  win  here  somehow  on  a
point  score.  We  are  going  to  stall  the  machine  of  government  if  we  do  not
declare  a  moratorium  on  new  programs  for  at  least  sL\  months.

Next,  it  shows  a  far  greater  willingness  to  get  into  the  ground  war  than
I  had  discerned  in  Washington  during  my  recent  trip.  Although  some  addi-
tional U.S.  forces  should  probably  be  introduced  after  we  see  how  the
Marines  do  in  counterinsurgency  operations,  mv  own  attitude  is  reflected  in
EMBTEL  3384,  which  I  hope  was  called  to  the  attention  of  the  President.

My  greatest  concern  arises  over  para  6  reftel  which  frankly  bewilders  me.
Wliat  do  the  authors  of  this  cable  think  the  mission  has  been  doing  over  the
months  and  years?  We  have  presumably  the  best  qualified  personnel  the
Washington  agencies  (State,  AID,  DOD.  USIA,  and  CIA)  can  find  work-
ing in  the  provinces  seven  days  a  week  at  precisely  the  tasks  described  in
para  6.  Is  it  proposed  to  withdraw  these  people  and  replace  them  by  Army
civil  affairs  types  operating  on  the  pattern  of  militarv  occupation?  If  this  is
the  thought,  I  would  regard  such  a  change  in  policv  which  will  gain  wide
publicity,  as  disastrous  in  its  likely  efforts  upon  pacification  in  general  and
on  US/GVN  relations  in  particular.

Mac,  can't  we  be  better  protected  from  our  friends?  I  know  that  every-
one wants  to  help,  but  there's  such  a  thing  as  killing  with  kindness.  In
particular,  we  want  to  stav  alive  here  because  we  think  we're  winning — and
will  continue  to  win  unless  helped  to  death.  [Emphasis  added]

The  conferees  who  met  in  Honolulu  three  davs  later  reached  a  joint  agreement
which  was  somewhat  less  optimistic  than  the  Ambassador's  pronouncement.
Present  in  Honolulu  were  Secretary  McNamara,  Assistant  Secretaries  William
Bundy  of  State  and  John  McNaughtou  of  Defense,  Ambassador  Taylor,  Gener-
als Wheeler  and  Westmoreland,  and  'Admiral  Sharp.  Some  of  these  men  had
helped  produce  the  current  optimism  in  situation  reports  and  cables,  and  yet  the
consensus  of  their  meeting  was  that  the  then  present  level  of  Viet  Cong  activity
was  nothing  but  the  lull  before  the  storm.

The  situation  which  presented  itself  to  the  Honolulu  conferees  was  in  many
ways  the  whole  Vietnam  problem  in  microcosm.  What  was  needed  to  galvanize
everyone  into  action  was  some  sort  of  dramatic  event  within  South  Vietnam
itself.  Unfortunately,  the  very  nature  of  the  war  precluded  the  abrupt  collapse
of  a  front  or  the  loss  of  large  chunks  of  territory'  in  lightning  strokes  by  the
enemy.  The  enemy  in  this  war  was  spreading  his  control  and  influence  slowly
and  inexorably  but  without  drama.  The  political  infrastructure  from  which  he
derived  his  strength,  took  years  to  create,  and  in  most  areas  the  expansion  of
control  was  hardlv  felt  until  it  was  a  fait  accompli.  Only  when  he  organized  into
units  of  battalion  and  regiment  size,  did  the  enemy  voluntarily  lend  some
dramatic  elements  to  the  war.  Whenever  these  units  appeared  and  engaged  the
RVNAF,  the  government  and  its  U.S.  helpers  had  something  they  could  handle.
Unfortunately  at  the  time  of  the  April  1965  Honolulu  Conference  the  Viet  Cong
Main  Force  units  were  underground  and  the  conferees  had  little  or  no  tangible
threat  to  which  to  react.

There  were,  however,  plentv  of  indications  in  the  early  spring  of  1965  of  what
was  to  come.  There  had  been  no  major  degradations  in  the  Viet  Cong  strength


438 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

nor  in  their  order  of  battle.  On  the  contrar),  the  enemy  was  recruiting  apace
and  more  than  offseuing  his  losses.  From  throughout  the  countr\"  came  reports
that  \'iet  Cong  troops  and  cadre  were  moving  into  Central  \'ietnam  and  into
areas  adjacent  to  the  rmg  of  provinces  comprising  the  "Hop  Tac"  area  around
Saigon.

Constant  political  turmoil  involving  many  of  the  senior  R\"NAF  officers  and
few  significant  victories  combined  to  have  a  deleterious  effect  on  the  effectiveness
of  the  G\'N  armed  forces.  The  JCS  on  20  March  identified  the  degradation  of
R\"N\\F  as  a  new  phenomenon  after  months  of  political  instability.  They  used
the  decline  as  justification  to  argue  for  the  deployment  of  three  divisions  of  re-
inforcements from  the  U.S.  and  Korea.

Finally  and  most  ominous  of  all,  a  CLVDL\  memorandum  dated  21  April
1965  reflected  the  acceptance  into  the  enemy  order  of  battle  of  one  regiment  of
the  325th  PA\"N  Division  said  to  be  located  in  Kontum  Province.  The  presence
of  this  regular  North  \'ietnamese  unit,  which  had  been  first  reponed  as  early  as
February",  was  a  sobering  harbinger  of  things  to  come.

The  storm  broke  in  earnest  on  1 1  Mav  when  the  Met  Cong  attacked  the
capital  of  Phuoc  Long  Province.  Song  Be,  using  more  than  a  regiment  of  troops.
The  enemy  overran  the  town  and  its  MACV  advisor}"  compound,  causing  heaNy
casualties  among  the  U.S.  and  \'ietnamese  defenders.  After  holding  the  town  for
a  day,  the  Viet  Cong  withdrew.  Subsequent  ARVN  operations  revealed  that  the
enemy  also  had  suffered  heavily  in  the  battle.

Significantly,  while  the  Met  Cong  were  preparing  their  auack  on  Song  Be.  the
G\^'  was  pushing  to  completion  a  new  Special  Forces  camp  at  Dong  Xoai  not
far  away  on  the  N^^'  comer  of  War  Zone  C.  That  camp  w^as  opened  in  May.  and
in  less  than  a  month  the  enemy  was  to  reveal  his  interest  in  it.

Before  Nlay  was  over,  however,  the  \'iet  Cong  appeared  again  in  strength,  this
time  in  Quang  Ngai  Province  in  the  nonhem  I  Corps.  Near  the  small  outpost  of
Ba  Gia  a  few  kilometers  west  of  Quang  Ngai  City,  a  battalion  of  the  ARVN
51st  Regiment  was  ambushed  and  ovemm.  Although  the  size  of  the  enemy  force
was  unkno'wn,  the  AR\'N  commanders  in  the  area  rushed  reinforcements  out  to
the  scene  only  to  have  them  ambushed  in  turn.  The  banle  dragged  on  for  several
days  and  ended  in  total  defeat  for  the  AR\'N.  Two  battalions  were  completely
decimated  and.  what  was  worse,  the  AR\"S  senior  commanders  on  the  scene  had
displayed  tactical  stupiditv  and  cowardice  in  the  face  of  large  enemy  forces.
From  Ba  Gia  came  a  sense  of  urgency,  at  least  among  some  of  the  senior  U.S.
officers  who  had  been  \^itness  to  the  battle.  The  ver\"  real  possibiliu-  of  AR\'N
collapse  had  been  made  manifest.

On  the  7th  of  June,  shonlv  after  Ba  Gia.  General  Westmoreland  sent  to
CINCPAC  this  message  (LIMDIS  19118.07  Jun  65):

As  indicated  Ref  A  [COMUSMACV  04  NOTAL].  a  broad  review  of
force  rexjuirements  has  been  conducted  in  light  of  the  changing  situation  in
Southeast  Asia  and  within  R\'N.

There  are  indications  that  the  conflict  in  Southeast  Asia  is  in  the  process
of  moving  to  a  higher  level.  Some  PA\"N  forces  have  entered  SVN  and
more  may  well  be  on  the  wav.  Additional  jet  fighters  and  some  jet  light
bombers  have  been  deploved  in  the  DRV.

Specificallv.  elements  of  the  325th  PAX'N  Division  are  in  the  northern
zone  of  II  Corps.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  major  portion,  if  not  all,  of
the  Division  is  now  deployed  in  the  Kontum.  Pleiku.  Phu  Bon  area.  Elements
of  the  304th  PA\'N  Di\ision  are  suspected  to  be  in  the  panhandle  and.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-Jmbf  1965  419


therefore,  capable  of  foUowing  the  325th.  The  recent  heavy  actkms  m  Pfauoc
Long  and  Qua^  Ngai,  and  VC  imtiatives  in  Pleiku,  KonttMn,  Pbo  Bon  and
Thua  Thien  are  demomtntions  of  VC  tfrenglh  and  their  apparent  detcr-
nunatkn  to  employ  their  fofces  aggrenhndy.  Recent  events  as  wefl  as  cap-
tured VC  pdsoners  and  documents  suggest  that  a  summer  canqnign  is  now
underway  to  destroy  govenmnent  forces  and,  concuncntly,  to  fim  Holate
and  then  attack  dionct  and  pfovinoe  toims.

So  tai^  the  VC  haw  not  employed  their  foil  capabflities  in  diis  can^aigp.
Only  two  of  the  nine  Viet  Cong  regiments  haipe  been  heavily  engaged  (one
in  Phuoc  Long  and  one  in  Quang  Ngai),  and  probably  only  a  similar  pro-
portion of  thor  separate  battalions  has  been  oommitted.  In  mott  ct^^igp-
ments,  VC  Main  Foioe  units  have  di^iaycd  improwd  training  and
cspiine,  heavier  firepower  from  the  new  family  of  weapons  with  which  most
Main  Force  units  have  been  equipped,  and  a  willingness  to  take  heavy  losses
in  ofdo- to  addeve  objectives.

In  piesnng  their  campaign,  the  Viet  Cong  are  capable  of  mwmting  r^i-
mental-size  operations  in  all  four  ARVN  Corps  areas,  and  at  least  battabon-
sized  attadK  in  virtually  aD  provinces.  Known  dispontions  indiratf  nuqor
actions  are  likely  in  the  near  future  in  the  Binh  Duong-Pliuoc  Thanh-Phooc
Long  area  north  of  Saigon,  in  the  Quang  Ngv-Quang  Tin  area  in  Central
Vietnam,  and  in  Kontmn,  Pleiku,  Phu  Bon  and  Binh  Dinh  Piovincesu
Major  attacks  could  occur  also  in  other  areas;  the  Viet  Cong  have  shown
that  they  are  capable  of  concentrating  in  r^imental  strength  widi  little  or
no  warning.  Whether  or  not  the  304th  Div  is  in,  or  moving  toward  SVN,
die  DRV  has  a  "'doorstep"  capability  to  reinforce  the  VC  widb  sizable  forces.

ARVN  forces  on  the  other  hand  are  already  experiencing  difficulty  in
coping  with  this  increased  VC  capability.  Desertion  rales  are  inordinatdy
Battle  losses  have  been  Ugjher  dian  expected;  in  fact,  four  ARVN
battalions  have  been  rendoed  ineffective  by  VC  action  m  the  I  and  D  Corps
zones.  Therefore,  effective  flirting  strength  of  many  infantry  and  ranger
battalions  is  unacoeptaUy  low.  As  a  result,  ARVN  troops  are  b^pnning  to
show  sigps  of  ndodtance  to  assume  the  offensive  and  in  some  cases  their
steadfastness  imder  fire  is  coming  into  doubt.  In  order  to  bring  existing
battalions  up  to  acceptable  battlefield  strength,  it  win  be  necessary  to  dcdare
at  least  a  temporary  moratorium  on  the  activation  of  new  battalions.  Tfauts,
the  GVN/VC  force  ratios  upon  which  we  based  our  estimate  of  the  situa-
tion in  March  have  taken  an  adverse  trend.  You  win  recaO  that  I  recom-
mended die  deployment  of  a  division  in  II  Corps  to  cover  the  period
of  the  RVNAF  bufldup  and  to  weight  the  force  ratios  in  that  impMtant
area.  We  assumed  at  that  time  that  the  ARVN  battalions  would  be  brought
to  fun  strength  by  now  and  that  the  force  buildup  would  proceed  on
schedule.  Neither  of  these  assumptions  has  materialized.

The  problem,  of  low  battlefield  strength  in  ARVN  has  forced  us  to  plan
the  use  of  personnel  now  training  in  1 1  new  battalions  as  fillers  for  old
battalions.  In  effect,  these  1 1  battalioiis  win  be  deferred  and  during  the  p&>
riod  from  mid-July  to  early  November  no  new  ARVN  battalions  will  be-
come available.  Thus  the  gap  to  be  filled  is  both  deeper  and  wider.

In  summary,  the  force  ratios  continue  to  change  in  favor  of  the  \  C.  I
believe  that  the  DRV  wifi  commit  whatever  forces  it  deems  necessary  to  tip
the  balance  and  that  the  GVN  cannot  stand  up  successfully  to  this  kind  of
pressure  without  reinforcement.  Even  if  DRV  VC  intentions  are  debatable;
their  capabilities  most  be  acknowledged  and  faced.  Additionally,  it  is  prudent


440 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

to  consider  possible  enemy  air  action,  leading  to  significant  escalation  and  a
broadening  of  the  arena  of  conflict.  We  must  be  prepared  to  face  such  a  con-
tingency.

In  order  to  cope  with  the  situation  outlined  above,  I  see  no  course  of  ac-
tion open  to  us  except  to  reinforce  our  efforts  in  SVN  with  additional  U.S.  or
Third  Country  forces  as  rapidly  as  is  practical  during  the  critical  weeks
ahead.  Additionally,  studies  must  continue  and  plans  develop  to  deploy
even  greater  forces,  if  and  when  required,  to  attain  our  objectives  or  counter
enemy  initiatives.  Ground  forces  deployed  to  selected  areas  along  the  coast
and  inland  will  be  used  both  offensively  and  defensively.  U.S.  ground  troops
are  gaining  experience  and  thus  far  have  performed  well.  Although  they  have
not  yet  engaged  the  enemy  in  strength,  I  am  convinced  that  U.S.  troops  with
their  energy,  mobility,  and  firepower  can  successfully  take  the  fight  to  the
VC.  The  basic  purpose  of  the  additional  deployments  recommended  below
is  to  give  us  a  substantial  and  hard  hitting  [offenjsive  capability  on  the
ground  to  convince  the  VC  that  they  cannot  win.  .  .  .

There  were  some  who  thought  COMUSMACV's  assessment  of  the  situation
was  a  bit  precipitous,  but  the  dissenters  were  effectively  silenced  the  following
week  as  the  Viet  Cong  atttacked  the  aforementiond  Special  Forces  camp  and  the
adjoining  district  headquarters  at  Dong  Xoai.  ARVN  reinforcements  were  com-
mitted piecemeal  to  the  fray  and  were  devoured  by  the  enemy,  who  was  on  the
scene  with  better  than  two  regiments  of  troops.  The  battle,  which  lasted  for  five
days  and  nearly  saw  the  commitment  of  the  U.S.  173rd  Airborne  Brigade  to  bail
the  ARVN  out,  marked  the  bitterest  fighting  of  the  war  to  date.

The  GVN  casualties  of  the  second  week  in  June  were  twice  as  high  as  any
previous  week  of  the  war.  The  VC  casualties,  which  were  reported  to  exceed  the
ARVN  total  of  1,672,  were  a  mute  testimony  to  the  enemy's  regenerative  capa-
bility and  to  his  willingness  to  pay  a  heavy  price  in  order  to  destroy  the  GVN's
fighting  power.  The  success  of  his  efforts  so  far  was  made  explicit  on  the  26th  of
June  when  COMUSMACV  rated  5  ARVN  regiments  and  9  separate  battalions
combat  ineffective.  At  the  end  of  May  the  figure  had  been  2  regiments  and  3
battalions.

By  mid-June  1965,  the  Viet  Cong  summer  offensive  was  in  full  stride.  Shifting
the  emphasis  away  from  the  areas  of  their  early  successes  on  the  periphery  of
"Hop  Tac''  and  in  the  southern  portion  of  I  Corps,  they  began  the  long-expected
offensive  in  the  highlands  of  II  Corps.  On  the  25th  of  June  the  district  head-
quarters at  Tou  Morong  in  Kontum  Province  was  invested  and  then  taken  by
an  enemy  force  said  to  be  a  PAVN  regiment  reinforced  with  some  Viet  Cong
troops.  Other  remote  district  headquarters  came  under  enemy  pressure  in  the
ensuing  weeks  until  by  7  July  a  total  of  six  of  them  had  been  abandoned  or  over-
run. The  Viet  Cong  were  systematically  forcing  the  GVN  to  yield  what  little
control  it  still  exercised  in  rural  areas  outside  the  Mekong  Delta.

Summing  up  the  situation  at  the  end  of  the  week  of  14  July,  the  CIA  said:
"The  initiative  and  momentum  of  military  operations  continue  in  favor  of  the
Viet  Cong.  The  impact  of  Viet  Cong  operations  is  being  felt  not  only  by  the
RVNAF  but  by  the  nation's  internal  economy  as  well.  Nothing  this  week  points
to  the  RVN  wresting  the  initiative  from  the  VC."

A  major  part  of  counterinsurgency  thinking  and  planning  in  early  1965  was
based  on  the  concept  of  force  ratios.  In  order  to  defeat  the  insurgent,  it  was
thought  necessary  to  have  a  preponderance  of  force  in  favor  of  the  GVN  of
somewhere  around  10  to  1.  The  actual  ratio  for  that  time  period  was  considerably


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  441

less  than  10  to  1  and  was  inclining  in  favor  of  the  insurgents.  In  order  to  redress
the  situation,  General  Westmoreland  advocated  accelerating  the  build-up  of  the
RVNAF.  To  accomplish  this,  he  said,  measures  to  increase  induction  and  to  cur-
tail the  shocking  rates  of  desertion  would  have  to  be  found.  Unfortunately,  any
build-up  strategy  was  obviated  by  the  events  of  late  May-early  June.  General
Westmoreland  informed  CINCPAC  on  7  June  that  the  RVNAF  build-up  was  to
be  suspended  until  November  and  that  trainees  would  be  used  as  fillers  in  heavily
attrited  units.  If  force  ratios  still  were  of  paramount  importance,  then  reinforce-
ments for  the  GVN  side  would  have  to  come  from  other  than  domestic  Viet-
namese sources.

The  enemy  side  of  the  force  ratio  was  open  to  question  since  historically  Viet
Cong  strength  tended  to  be  understated.  The  enemy  order  of  battle  as  reported
on  17  March  1965  was  as  follows:

Confirmed  strength —  37,000  Regular  Troops

100,000  Irregulars  and  Guerrillas  (approx)
5  Regimental  Headquarters
50  Battalions
145  Separate  Companies
35  Separate  Platoons

All  of  these  figures  reflected  substantial  increases  over  the  previous  year.  In  fact,
the  confirmed  strength  had  risen  no  less  than  33%  since  1964.  After  the  Viet
Cong  had  demonstrated  rather  bluntly  that  the  March  1965  statistics  were  a
trifle  conservative,  the  order  of  battle  was  revised  and  on  21  July  appeared  as
follows:

Confirmed  strength —  53,000  Regular  Troops

100,000  Irregulars  and  Guerrillas  (no  change
from  previous  figure  which  was  itself
an  estimate)
10  Regional  Headquarters
72  Batlalions
192  Separate  Companies
1 0 1  Separate  PI  atoons

In  light  of  subsequent  information,  even  the  above  estimate,  gloomy  as  it  was,
understated  the  enemy  strength.  Opposing  the  Viet  Cong  forces  were  the  RVNAF
Regular,  Regional,  and  Popular  Forces  totaling  some  570,000  men  and  boasting
at  best  133  infantry-type  battalions.  At  a  quick  glance,  the  force  ratios  in  July
were  seen  to  be  about  3.8  to  1  in  favor  of  the  GVN  in  manpower  (with  the  RVN
Police  and  some  paramilitary  forces  such  as  the  Armed  Combat  Youth  not  being
counted  and  about  1.9  to  1  in  favor  of  the  GVN  in  maneuver  battalions.  Un-
doubtedly the  force  ratios  as  seen  in  mid- 1965  were  far  from  optimum  for
theoretical  counterinsurgency  operations.

3.  Pacification

The  program  to  pacify,  or  extend  government  control  over,  the  countryside
never  really  recovered  from  the  political  turmoil  of  1964  and  early  1965.  The
1965  master  plan  for  "Rural  Reconstruction"  (one  of  many  such  euphemisms)
was  not  approved  by  the  RVNAF  High  Command  until  after  the  first  quarter
of  the  year.  Situation  reports,  both  MACV  and  CIA,  described  incremental
plusses  and  minuses  in  what  was  obviously  overall  a  stalled  program.


442 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

On  6  April,  a  MACV  military  spokesman  gave  the  following  answers  to  ques-
tions from  the  press  after  a  presentation  summing  up  the  month  of  March  1965:

Q.  Have  the  figures  on  VC  control  of  territory  and  population  changed
appreciably?  A.  The  statistic  that  counts  is  people,  and  in  the  month  of
March  the  statistics  that  are  here  do  not  have  percentiles.

Q.  Can  you  give  us  figures  on  the  number  of  people  brought  under  gov-
ernment control  in  January  and  in  March — or  to  the  closest  month?  A.
It's  not  significant.  I'd  say  it  was  a  slow  gain  basically  in  the  Hop  Tac  area.
Any  place  else,  you've  had  a  trade-off.

Q.  Would  it  be  a  fair  assumption  to  say  that,  outside  of  Hop  Tac  the
government  held  its  own? A. In  the  overall,  held  its  own.

Q.  There  was  no  significant  progress,  then.  The  government  held  its  own?
A. That's  correct.

Q.  It  was  a  stalemate,  then?  A.  No,  I  wouldn't  call  it  a  stalemate.  I
don't  consider  the  fact  that  you  pacified,  or  asserted  control  over  20  addi-
tional hamlets  which  might  house  as  many  as  six  or  seven  thousand  people
a  stalemate.

Q.  At  the  same  time  we  lost  ...  A.  No,  you  misunderstand  me  .  .  .
the  losses  and  the  gains  were  counter  balanced  outside  the  Hop  Tac  area.
In  the  Hop  Tac  area,  there  were  gains.

CIA  and  MACV  Situation  Reports  contained  the  following  observations  on
pacification :

CIA  Monthly  Report,  21  January  1965:

"Pacification  on  a  nationwide  basis,  has  generally  been  stalled  for  the  past
month.  Although  there  are  pacification  plans  in  effect  in  all  provinces  (except
Con  Son  Island),  there  has  been  little  significant  progress;  in  some  areas  there
has  been  an  appreciable  deterioration  of  governmental  control.  Even  though  South
Vietnamese  officials  report  continuing  progress  in  the  high  priority  Hop  Tac  ef-
fort around  Saigon,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  these  are  more  than  paper
achievements.  To  date  there  has  been  no  major  effort  by  the  Viet  Cong  to  strike
at  areas  which  are  now  claimed  as  "secure,"  and  therefore  the  validity  of  govern-
ment claims  remains  untested.  The  Viet  Cong  have  increased  their  numbers  and
the  tempo  of  their  operations  in  areas  adjacent  to  Hop  Tac  and  what  is  ap-
parently an  attempt  to  draw  off  government  forces  committed  to  this  major  paci-
fication effort."

CIA  Monthly  Report,  17  February  1965:

"Nationwide,  the  pacification  effort  has  barely  moved  ahead  since  1  January;
there  has  been  a  serious  deterioration  in  some  areas,  mainly  the  I  and  II  Corps.
The  slowdown  in  the  pace  of  pacification  is  due  to  several  factors  which  include:
the  preoccupation  of  some  senior  commanders  with  Saigon  politics,  the  Tet
holiday  period,  and  VC  strength,  which  in  some  areas  has  forced  the  GVN  mili-
tary forces  into  static  or  defensive  roles."

MACV  Monthly  Evaluation  Report  for  February  1965:

"The  only  pacification  progress  during  February  was  registered  in  Hop  Tac
and  other  areas  of  III  Corps,  while  other  sections  of  the  country  either  held


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  443

earlier  gains  or  showed  deterioration.  Contributing  factors  were  increased  VC
activity,  especially  in  the  I  and  II  Corps  and  the  administrative  confusion  as-
sociated with  the  attempted  coup  of  19  February.  At  month's  end,  the  1965
pacification  plans  were  still  undergoing  a  review,  with  the  result  that  pacification
funds  had  not  yet  been  released  to  the  provinces.  A  stopgap  allocation  of  3
million  $VN  per  province  was  made  by  the  New  Rural  Life  Directorate  to  permit
programs  to  continue  pending  release  of  regular  funds.  Even  so,  many  province
chiefs  are  reluctant  to  push  forward  without  more  specific  authorization  and
direction  from  higher  authorities."

MACV  Monthly  Evaluation  Report  for  March  1965:

"Although  there  was  a  lull  in  VC  activity  during  the  last  half  of  the  month,
field  commanders  failed  to  capitalize  on  the  situation  and  pursue  pacification
goals  vigorously.  During  the  month  the  pacification  generally  experienced  regres-
sion in  I  and  II  CTZ  while  parts  of  III  and  IV  Corps  recorded  slow  but  steady
progress.  In  the  Hop  Tac  area  consistent  gains  were  recorded  throughout  the
month."

CIA  Weekly  Report,  24  March  1965:

"Pacification  efforts  during  the  past  week  remained  stalled  throughout  most  of
the  country.  Some  progress  was  seen  in  II  Corps  in  pacification  efforts."

MACV  Monthly  Evaluation  for  April  1965:

"Despite  improved  psychological  conditions  and  the  continued  lull  in  VC  ac-
tivity, there  was  little  tangible  evidence  of  progress  in  rural  reconstruction  during
the  month  .  .  .  Overall,  the  slow  but  steady  progress  in  III  and  IV  Corps  was
offset  by  losses  in  I  and  II  Corps.  Contributing  factors  to  this  standstill  were  the
GVN  delay  in  approving  provincial  budgets  and  a  continued  lack  of  aggressive-
ness in  operations  directly  supporting  rural  reconstruction.  There  was  no  ap-
preciable increase  in  the  number  of  refugees  this  month  and  relief  measures  taken
by  the  Minister  of  Social  Welfare  and  the  province  chiefs  appear  to  be  progress-
ing satisfactorily,  particularly  in  Binh  Dinh  and  Quang  Ngai  provinces."  The
sole  bright  spot  in  all  of  this  was  the  highly  touted  "Hop  Tac"  program  which
concentrated  resources,  human  and  material,  on  a  few  key  provinces  around  the
capital  of  Saigon.  A  lot  of  favorable  things  were  being  said  about  Hop  Tac.  Mc-
George  Bundy  told  the  President  in  an  apparently  pivotal  memorandum  dated  7
February  1965  that  although  American  air  power  would  have  to  be  used  to  buy
time  for  us  to  break  the  Viet  Cong  hold  on  the  countryside,  the  Hop  Tac  pro-
gram offered  hope  for  the  future.  (See  Section  I. A.  in  the  Study  on  The  Rc-
emphasis  of  Pacification.)  During  the  6th  of  April  press  conference,  the  MACV
spokesman  told  the  press  that  "Hop  Tac  continues  to  move  along  a  plus
curve  ..."

Even  without  the  dogged  optimism,  it  is  difficult  in  the  absence  of  hard  data
to  accurately  assess  the  real  situation  in  the  countryside  in  early  1965,  or  to  tell
how  much  of  the  Hop  Tac  program  was  merely  bluster  and  bravado.  In  regard
to  the  latter,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  sent  to  the  Chairman  of  the  JCS  on  4
June  1965  the  following  query:  "How  did  the  Viet  Cong  mobilize  a  battalion
to  attack  Binh  Chanh  district  town  only  10  miles  from  Saigon  in  the  center  of  the
Hop  Tac  area?"  Whatever  the  case,  the  pacification  program  was  overtaken  by
events  of  May  and  June.  Prior  to  this,  the  II  Corps,  including  the  coastal  prov-


G  JVC.  E^:::on/The  Pentagon  Papm/Vol.  HI

- ^  e -  i  B  -  :  1^ h  and  all  of  the  h::h r:c -:e^  ■■■■ -  rejidv


.:e.  ^-c  \":c:-::~  hjis  i:^  rime  of  peace
modirv".  T  e  \  e:  C:":  v  rmignedto


by  :

ro


II


earlier.

w:l5  ?  -


of  Ben  Cai


"•  n  and  ihe  ::-::e> : .:--cition.


1960  :,^::::-s

1961  :  :-s

19^2  2.--'':~s

19--

19-? 5  7-^5  ions

B-  c  -  • -----  -"-e  ::  De.ia  rice  had  aire  a  i-.  bee-  h:Lr-."e>:ei,  i::d


ot  soing  to  £  :  :e  :r re  vrrin

•  :e  indices  sbc-.-.  :::  ::^:-c;e  :.-d


c  II  C::r>


v. -  :-e  G\"N.  >e;ec-


that  the-  .  r:  ..  e:  e  :o  the  Cj\  N  with  which


B.  THE  BRIEF  TEM'RE  OF  THE  STRATEGY  OF  SECURITY
A\D  SL'BSEOUES'T  DEVELOPMENTS


1. S{cunr\  as  a  R.:


BLTs  inio  Da  Nang  in  Y
jsed  suq>risin§ly  link  ou


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  445

advanced  on  several  subsequent  occasions  as  additional  troops  were  deployed  to
various  locations  in  Vietnam.  Whether  or  not  it  was  publicly  offered  as  a  rationale,
the  strategy  of  deploying  troops  for  the  security  of  bases  was  short-lived.  The
Marines  hardly  had  their  feet  dry  when  several  proposals  were  brought  forward
to  get  U.S.  troops  actively  engaged  in  the  ground  war.  These  proposals,  the  first
of  which  followed  close  on  General  Johnson's  return  from  his  Vietnam  inspec-
tion trip  of  5-12  March,  were  the  center  of  much  private  debate  in  the  spring
and  early  summer  of  1965.  That  debate  went  on  largely  behind  the  scene  while
the  American  public  was  in  ignorance  of  the  proceedings.  The  strategy  of  security
effectively  became  a  dead  letter  on  the  first  of  April,  but  the  change  in  strategy
was  not  revealed  pubhcly  until  the  8th  and  9ih  of  June.

2. SSC  Meetings  of  1-2  April  1965

On  the  17th  of  March.  General  Westmoreland  sought  Ambassador  Taylor's
concurrence  in  a  proposal  to  deploy  an  additional  USMC  BLT  to  Phu  Bai  near
Hue  on  the  northern  coast  in  I  Corps.  Westmoreland  wanted  to  cut  down  some  of
the  density  of  aircraft  at  Da  Nang  bv  moving  helicopters  to  the  strip  at  Phu  Bai.
The  Marine  BLT  was  needed  to  protect  that  strip.  Taylor  cabled  to  W^ashington:
(EMBTEL  3003.  18  Mar  65)

General  Westmoreland  has  just  sought  my  concurrence  in  his  recom-
mendation for  the  landing  of  the  Third  BLT  of  the  9th  MEB  at  Phu  Bai  for
the  purpose  of  protecting  the  8th  RRU  and  the  air  strip  there.  He  intends
to  move  helicopters  from  Da  Nang  to  the  strip  and  thereby  reduce  field
congestion  at  Da  Nang.  Because  of  the  military  advantages  of  thus  rounding
out  the  MEB.  I  have  no  reluctance  in  agreeing  to  the  merit  of  his  recom-
mendation which,  of  course,  should  receive  the  concurrence  of  the  GVN
after  that  of  Washington.

This  proposal  for  introducing  the  BLT  is  a  reminder  of  the  strong  likeli-
hood of  additional  requests  for  increases  in  U.S.  ground  combat  forces  in
SVN.  Such  requests  may  come  from  the  U.S.  side,  from  the  GVN  side  or
from  both.  All  of  us  here  are  keenly  aware  of  the  GVN  trained  military
manpower  shortage  which  will  exist  throughout  1965  and  which  probably
can  be  rectified  only  in  part  by  an  accelerated  mobilization.  We  will  soon
have  to  decide  whether  to  try  to  get  b\  with  inadequate  indigenous  forces  or
to  supplement  them  with  Third  Country  troops,  largely  if  not  exclusively
U.S.  This  matter  was  discussed  with  General  Johnson  during  his  recent  visit
who  no  doubt  has  raised  it  following  his  return  to  Washington.  This  message
examines  the  pros  and  cons  of  such  an  action — specifically  defined  as  the
introduction  of  a  U.S.  division  (appropriately  modified)  into  SVN.

The  purpose  of  introducing  of  a  division  would  be  primarily  to  relieve
the  present  shortage  of  ARVN  units  either  by  replacing  ,ARVN  in  the  defense
of  kev  installations  or  bv  engaging  in  active  operations  against  the  VC  in
conjunction  with  ARVN.  Such  a  reinforcement  would  allow  a  strengthening
of  military  efforts  in  the  1  and  II  Corps  areas  where  the  situation  is  deteri-
orating and  would  give  a  boost  to  GVN  morale,  military  and  civilian.  Like-
wise, It  should  end"  any  talk  of  a  possible  U.S.  withdrawal  and  convince
Hanoi  of  the  depth  of  our  resolve  to  see  this  thing  through  to  a  successful
conclusion.

This  statement  of  the  purpose  of  introducing  a  U.S.  division  is,  in  effect,
a  tabulation  of  the  arguments  in  favor  of  so  doing.  However,  there  are


446 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

counter  arguments  on  the  other  side  of  the  case.  The  introduction  of  a  U.S.
division  obviously  increases  U.S.  involvement  in  the  counterinsurgency,
exposes  greater  forces  and  invites  greater  losses.  It  will  raise  sensitive  com-
mand questions  with  our  GVN  allies  and  may  encourage  them  to  an  attitude
of  "let  the  United  States  do  it."  It  will  increase  our  vulnerability  to  Com-
munist propaganda  and  Third  Country  criticism  as  we  appear  to  assume  the
old  French  role  of  alien  colonizer  and  conqueror.  Finally,  there  is  consider-
able doubt  that  the  number  of  GVN  forces  which  our  action  would  relieve
would  have  any  great  significance  in  reducing  the  manpower  gap.

It  is  possible  to  reach  a  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  overall  merit  of  this
action  without  first  examining  in  some  detail  the  possible  missions  which
could  be  assigned  a  U.S.  division.  There  are  two  obvious  possibilities:  the
first,  the  assignment  of  the  division  to  one  or  more  of  the  provinces  of  the
high  plateau  where  the  climate  is  good,  the  terrain  relatively  open,  and  the
Montagnard  population  more  readily  distinguishable  from  the  alien  Viet
Cong.  Here,  our  forces  could  utilize  their  mobility  and  firepower  effectively
and  make  an  important  contribution  in  cutting  off  the  growing  infiltration
into  and  through  this  area.  For  the  most  part,  the  Montagnards  are  friendly
to  the  U.S.  and  our  forces  would  thus  be  operating  in  a  relatively  friendly
environment.

On  the  other  hand,  such  a  mission  in  the  highlands  would  place  our  forces
in  an  area  with  highly  exposed  lines  of  communication  leading  to  the  coast.
Their  location  in  this  area  would  create  serious  logistic  problems  because  of
the  difficulty  of  the  movement  of  land  transport  through  areas  infested  by
the  Viet  Cong.  There  would  be  problems  both  of  reinforcement  and  of  with-
drawal because  of  this  precariousness  of  land  communications.  Finally,  the
GVN  may  question  the  introduction  of  sizeable  U.S.  forces  into  the  Mon-
tagnard area  where  we  have  often  been  accused  of  favoring  the  Montagnards
over  the  Vietnamese  and  of  encouraging  Montagnard  separatism.

The  other  role  which  has  been  suggested  for  U.S.  ground  forces  is  the
occupation  and  defense  of  key  enclaves  along  the  coast  such  as  Quang  Ngai,
Qui  Nhon,  Tuy  Hoa  and  Nha  Trang.  Such  a  disposition  would  have  the  ad-
vantage of  placing  our  forces  in  areas  of  easy  access  and  egress  with  mini-
mum logistic  problems  associated  with  supply  and  maintenance.  The  presence
of  our  troops  would  assure  the  defense  of  these  important  key  areas  and
would  relieve  some  GVN  forces  for  employment  elsewhere.  The  troops
would  not  be  called  upon  to  engage  in  counterinsurgency  operations  except
in  their  own  local  defense  and  hence  would  be  exposed  to  minimum  losses.

On  the  other  hand,  they  would  be  engaged  in  a  rather  inglorious  static
defensive  mission  unappealing  to  them  and  unimpressive  in  the  eyes  of  the
Vietnamese.  Operating  in  major  population  areas  would  maximize  the  points
of  contact  with  Vietnamese  and  hence  maximize  the  possible  points  of  fric-
tion. The  division  would  be  badly  fragmented  to  the  extent  that  its  command,
control  and  supervision  would  be  awkward.

The  foregoing  analysis  leads  me  to  the  following  tentative  conclusions.
First,  it  is  not  desirable  to  introduce  a  U.S.  division  into  South  Vietnam
unless  there  are  clear  and  tangible  advantages  outweighing  the  numerous
disadvantages,  many  of  which  have  been  noted  above.  One  must  make  a
definite  determination  of  the  numbers  and  types  of  GVN  forces  relieved  by
the  introduction  of  the  U.S.  unit  and  thus  the  effect  of  the  increased  U.S.
presence  in  closing  the  manpower  gap  of  1965.  Obviously,  our  division  would
make  some  contribution  but  it  remains  to  be  proved  that  it  will  be  sufficient


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  447

to  reverse  the  downward  trend  and  give  such  a  lift  to  the  GVN  forces  that
they  would  perform  better  by  the  stimulation  of  the  U.S.  presence  rather
than  worse  in  a  mood  of  relaxation  as  passing  the  Viet  Cong  burden  to  the
U.S.

If  the  evidence  of  the  probable  effectiveness  of  this  U.S.  contribution  is
convincing,  then  the  matter  of  mission  becomes  the  primary  question.  The
inland  mission  in  the  highlands  is  clearly  the  more  ambitious  and,  if  well
done,  will  make  a  greater  contribution  during  the  present  critical  period.  On
the  other  hand,  it  is  the  more  exposed  and  even  permits  one  to  entertain  the
possibility  of  a  kind  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  if  the  coastal  provinces  should  col-
lapse and  our  forces  were  cut  off  from  the  coast  except  by  air.

The  coastal  enclave  mission  is  safer,  simpler  but  less  impressive  and  less
productive  than  the  inland  mission.  The  contrast  of  the  pros  and  cons  of  the
two  suggests  the  desirability  of  reexamining  the  question  to  see  whether  the
advantages  of  the  inland  disposition  could  not  be  combined  in  some  way
with  the  retention  of  a  base  coastal  area,  linked  with  a  position  inland.  In  any
case,  considerable  additional  study  is  required  before  we  are  prepared  to
make  a  recommendation  either  for  the  introduction  of  a  division  or  for  the
assignment  of  its  mission.  In  the  meantime,  we  should  be  giving  much
thought  both  in  South  Vietnam  and  in  Washington  as  to  the  right  course  of
action  [if]  and  when  this  issue  becomes  pressing — as  it  shortly  will.

CINCPAC  forwarded  General  Westmoreland's  Phu  Bai  proposal  to  the  JCS  on

19  March  and  further  recommended  that  the  remainder  of  the  9th  MEB,  one
BLT  plus  headquarters  elements,  be  landed  at  Da  Nang  within  a  month  in  order
to  consolidate  command  and  control  and  build  up  the  defense  of  that  base.  The
JCS  recommended  both  measures  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  25  March,  and
they  were  discussed  by  the  National  Security  Council  and  Ambassador  Taylor
during  the  latter's  visit  to  the  United  States  in  late  March-early  April  1965.  The
President  himself,  in  National  Security  Action  Memorandum  328,  approved  the
deployment  of  those  two  BLT's  and  at  the  same  time,  by  changing  the  Marines'
mission  to  include  offensive  operations,  he  ended  the  strategy  of  security.  (For
full  text  of  NSAM  328,  see  Doc.  254)

NSAM  328  is  a  pivotal  document.  It  marks  the  acceptance  by  the  President
of  the  United  States  of  the  concept  that  U.S.  troops  would  engage  in  offensive
ground  operations  against  Asian  insurgents.  It  indicates  as  well  the  anxiety  of  the
President — his  decision  to  proceed  very  slowly  and  carefully  so  that  U.S.  policy
should  appear  to  be  wholly  consistent.  Thus  the  President  only  approved  the
deployment  of  two  Marine  BLT's,  although  he  was  doubtless  aware  of  a  JCS
proposal  favored  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  forwarded  by  the  Chiefs  on

20  March,  which  called  for  the  deployment  of  a  three  division  force,  two  U.S.
and  one  Korean.  At  the  President's  request,  all  NSC  members  were  admonished
in  NSAM  328  not  to  allow  the  release  of  any  premature  publicity  for  the  actions
dealing  with  the  Marines  and  their  mission.  As  a  result,  the  change  of  mission
was  not  publicized  until  it  crept  out  almost  by  accident  in  a  State  Department
release  on  8  June.

Nor  was  the  change  of  mission  clearly  defined  in  NSAM  328.  The  Marine
BLT's  were  to  be  permitted  more  active  use  "under  conditions  to  be  established
and  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  in  consultation  with  the  Secretary  of
State"  and,  of  course,  their  new  mission  was  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  GVN.
During  his  return  trip  to  Saigon,  Ambassador  Taylor  sent  the  following  cable  to
the  State  Department:


448 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

In  Washington  discussions  of  new  Marine  mission  in  Da  Nang-Phu  Bai
area,  it  was  my  understanding  that  SecDef  would  provide  text  of  revised
mission.  If  no  guidance  beyond  language  of  reftel  [Deptel  2184  containing
the  summarized  guidance]  is  to  be  provided  by  Washington,  I  propose  to
describe  the  new  mission  to  Quat  as  the  use  of  Marines  in  a  mobile  counter-
insurgency  role  in  the  vicinity  of  Da  Nang  for  the  improved  protection  of
that  base  and  also  in  a  strike  role  as  a  reserve  in  support  of  ARVN  opera-
tions anywhere  within  fifty  miles  of  the  base.  This  latter  employment  would
follow  acquisition  of  experience  on  local  counterinsurgency  missions.

It  is  pretty  clear,  then,  that  the  President  intended,  after  the  early  April  NSC
meetings,  to  cautiously  and  carefully  experiment  with  U.S.  forces  in  offensive
roles.  There  was  sober  awareness  that  the  North  Vietnamese  were  not  going  to
quit  and  that  the  U.S.  was  well  on  its  way  to  being  committed  on  the  ground.  The
Rolling  Thunder  program,  if  it  was  going  to  bear  any  fruit  at  all,  certainly  was
not  going  to  do  so  in  the  next  few  months.

The  U.S.  decision-makers  really  were  on  what  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense
McNaughton  described  as  "the  horns  of  a  trilemma."  While  addressing  General
Johnson's  proposals  for  action  in  South  Vietnam,  McNaughton  jotted  down  some
notes  on  24  March  which  accurately  described  the  predicament  facing  the  U.S.
Government.  The  question,  according  to  McNaughton,  was:  "Can  the  situation
inside  South  Vietnam  be  bottomed  out  (a)  without  extreme  measures  against  the
DRV  and  (b)  without  deployment  of  large  numbers  of  U.S.  (and  3rd  Country)
combat  troops  inside  SVN?"  McNaughton's  answer  was  "perhaps,  but  probably
no."  Because  that  was  the  case,  he  went  on,  the  U.S.  was  faced  with  the  "tri-
lemma." Policy  appeared  to  be  drifting  even  though  there  was  consensus  that
present  action  probably  would  not  prevent  collapse  of  the  GVN.  All  three  choices
for  remedial  action  so  far  presented  had  been  rejected.  These  choices  were  (1)
will-breaking  strikes  against  the  DRV  which  risked  escalation  flash  and  were  thus
too  risky,  (2)  large  U.S.  troop  input  which  raised  the  old  spectre  of  an  Asian
land  war  and  recalled  memories  of  the  French  defeat,  and  (3)  exit  from  the  scene
through  negotiation  which  insured,  because  of  the  current  situation,  humiliation
of  the  U.S.  The  alternatives,  as  described  above  by  Mr.  McNaughton,  went  into
the  National  Security  Council  discussions  which  took  place  during  the  Am-
bassador's visit.  What  came  out  of  those  discussions  was  NSAM  328  and  the
decision  to  proceed  ahead  very  slowly  with  ground  force  involvement.

Missing  from  NSAM  328  was  the  elucidation  of  a  unified,  coherent  strategy.
Ambassador  Taylor,  among  others,  had  raised  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not
Western  troops  could  fight  effectively  in  Vietnam.  No  one  could  forget  the  French
failure,  and  the  Ambassador's  reservations  received  due  attention.  Before  devising
a  strategy  for  the  use  of  U.S.  ground  forces,  however,  it  was  deemed  necessary
to  experiment  with  small  numbers  of  them  to  see  how  they  would  do.  There  was
time  to  indulge  the  luxury  of  a  leisurely  build-up.  The  situation  was  bad,  but
currently  the  GVN  was  doing  a  bit  better,  and  nothing  pointed  to  immediate
collapse.

The  early  April  NSC  meetings  signalled  the  beginning  of  an  enclave  strategy.
U.S.  forces  would  operate  within  strictly  limited  boundaries  (originally  not  to
exceed  50  miles  from  base)  and  would  have  their  backs  to  the  sea.  No  Dien
Bien  Phu's  would  be  presented  for  the  enemy  to  exploit  as  supplies  and  reinforce-
ments could  be  brought  in  with  ease  over  sea  LOC's  controlled  entirely  by  the
U.S.  Navy.  As  a  corollary,  the  U.S.  forces  could  be  withdrawn  with  equal  ease
should  the  situation  so  dictate.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War.  \f arch-July  1965  449

Although  NSAM  328  only  approved  2  Marine  BLT's  for  deployment  to  Viet-
nam, there  was  also  included  an  18-20.000  man  increase  in  U.S.  forces  in  order
to  "fill  out  existing  units  and  supply  needed  logistic  personnel."  Just  what  the
President's  intent  was  in  approving  that  number  of  personnel  became  the  subject
of  some  debate.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  on  21  April  told  the  President  that
11,000  of  the  approved  increase  was  to  augment  various  existing  forces  while  a
further  7,000  were  logistic  troops  to  support  '"previously  approved  forces."  Ac-
cording to  a  memorandum  from  McNaughton  to  \'ance  dated  5  May,  the  JCS
misconstrued  the  add-ons  to  mean  logistic  build-up  for  coastal  enclaves  and  the
possible  later  introduction  of  two  to  three  divisions.  It  isn't  entirely  clear  from  the
documents  exactly  what  the  President  did  have  in  mind  for  the  support  troop
add-ons.  What  is  clear,  however,  and  was  made  explicit  in  a  memorandum  from
the  Secretary  of  Defense  to  the  Chairman.  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  on  5  April  was
that  the  JCS  were  continuing  to  plan  for  the  earliest  possible  introduction  of  two
to  three  divisions  into  RVN.  The  Ambassador  indicated  to  the  State  Department
in  a  cable  on  12  April  that  he  too  thought  the  18-20.000  man  increase  was  for
something  more  than  those  forces  already  approved.  Taylor  said:

I  have  been  following  with  interest  the  logistic  studies  which  are  going
on  at  PACOM  and  MACV  in  anticipation  of  the  possible  introduction  of
several  divisions  into  SVN.  Several  comments  occur  to  me  w'hich  are  passed
on  for  what  they  are  worth.  There  appears  to  be  no  question  about  the  need
for  the  18,000^20,000  logistic  build-up  (the  Category  A  force)  recom-
mended by  General  Westmoreland.  The  introduction  of  this  force  has  been
approved  and  should  be  implemented  as  rapidly  as  the  elements  can  be
moved  and  MACV  can  accept  them.  I  am  surprised  to  learn  from  MACV
that  May  1  is  the  earliest  date  for  the  arrival  of  the  engineer  element  which
paces  the  rate  of  arrival  of  the  other  components.  If  possible,  this  date  should
be  advanced.

The  Category  A  package  will  provide  support  for  about  50,000  U.S.
personnel  in-country,  i.e.,  the  present  strength  plus  the  additional  Marines
now  landing  in  the  Da  Nang-Hue  area  and  will  permit  some  preliminary
work  in  anticipation  of  the  arrival  of  additional  U.S.  forces.  To  make  any
significant  progress  toward  the  establishment  of  a  logistic  base  to  support
additional  forces,  it  will  be  necessary  to  bring  in  rapidly  about  5.000  more
engineers  (above  those  in  Category  A).  MACV  estimates  they  could  arrive
about  August  1  (if  the  Category  A  engineers  arrive  on  May  1).  I  would
concur  in  the  desirability  of  this  reinforcement,  feeling  that  these  engineers
can  be  very  useful  in  SVN  whether  or  not  we  ever  introduce  additional  di-
visions.

Taylor  went  on  in  the  same  cable  (as  though  he  were  summing  up  the  results  of
the  meetings  which  led  to  the  NSAM) :

With  regard  to  the  imminence  of  the  need  for  those  divisions,  I  do  not
share  the  fear  that  the  I  and  II  Corps  areas  are  about  to  fall  apart  which  is
expressed  in  some  of  the  traffic  bearing  on  the  logistic  build-up.  In  any  case,
if  a  debacle  is  going  to  take  place  in  the  next  few  months,  the  time  factors
developed  in  the  logistic  studies  indicate  that  very  little  advance  logistic
preparation  can  be  made  in  time.  In  such  an  unlikely  contingency,  U.S.
combat  reinforcements  will  have  to  deploy  concurrently  with  their  logistic
units  and  build  their  base  as  they  go.


450 G^u.€:  Ea::-.0K  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

Wmle  recognizing  the  importance  of  the  current  siudies  in  developing  the
logistic  facts  of  life  as  they  bear  on  the  reinforcement  of  S\^',  I  hope  that
they  do  not  interfere  with  essential  work  in  preparation  for  less  ambitious
but  more  probable  devel<^wiicnts.  It  was  my  understanding  in  Washington
that,  if  the  Marines  demonstrate  effectiveness  in  operating  out  of  Da  Nang
in  an  c^ensive  counterinsurgency  role,  other  offensive  enclaves  may  be  es-
taUished  along  the  coast  and  gaimooed  with  brigade-sized  contingents  for
employment  similar  to  the  Marines.  General  Westmoreland  is  ver)  anxious
to  establish  such  a  force  as  soon  as  possible  in  the  Ken  Hoa-Vung  Tau  area.
Qui  NhoD  is  also  well  situated  for  similar  purposes.  I  would  recommend  that
logistic  prqiaratioos  be  initiated  at  once  to  permit  each  of  these  two  areas
to  lecove  a  \5S.  brigade.  Whatever  is  done  for  this  purpose  wUl  assist  in
acconounodating  any  larger  forces  which  may  be  subsequently  introduced.  It
is  impOTtant  that  this  lesser  program  be  earned  out  rapidly  enough  to  make
a  contribution  to  the  situation  which  is  now  unfolding.  This  requires  rapid
action.

3.  The  Additional  Marines  Land

From  the  11th  through  the  14th  of  April  the  two  %farine  BLTs  s4iproved  b
the  President  in  NSAM  328  were  deployed  to  Hue  Phu  Bai  and  E>a  Nang.  The::
landing  brought  the  total  number  of  U.S.  maneuver  battalions  in  South  Vietnam
to  four,  an  Marines.  Althou^  security  was  no  longer  the  only  authorized  mission
for  these  units,  it  certainly  was  their  primar\-  mission.  The  Marines  set  about
conscdidating  and  developing  their  two  coastal  base  areas,  and,  although  the;
pushed  dieir  patrol  perimeters  out  beyond  their  tactical  wire  and  thereby  con-
ducted active  rather  than  passive  defense,  they  did  not  engage  in  any  offensive
operations  in  support  of  ARVN  for  the  next  few  numths.  (Major  General  Rip
Coffins,  CG  in  MAP,  was  on  the  scene  while  ARVN  was  being  beaten  at  Ba  G  a
at  the  end  of  May,  and  his  Marine  troops  were  almost  committed  to  that  fight. )

4.  Westmoreland  Tries  to  Slide  the  173rd  in  for  Security

As  a  kind  of  postscript  to  the  strategy  of  security,  it  was  used  by  General
WestmorelaDd  as  justificaticHi  for  an  attemfrt:  to  get  some  Army  ground  troops  on
the  stage  in  eariy  ApriL  Westmoreland  had  recommended  in  March  that  a
separate  Army  Brigade  (possibly  the  173rd)  be  deployed  to  the  Bien  Hoa  Vur  .
Ta.  "in  order  to  secure  vital  U.S.  installations."  That  recommendatic

a:,  -d  Westmoreland's  request  for  up  to  two  divisions  of  forces  and  wa

coDuiinca  m  his  ~Commander^s  Eftimate  of  the  Situation,"  which  will  be  cor-
sidered  later  in  some  detail.  On  the  1 1th  of  April,  Westmoreland  cabled  CINCPAC
that  he  understood  from  news  of  the  Taylor  meetings  in  Washington  that  the
requested  divisions  of  forces  were  not  immediately  in  the  oflBng.  Nevertheless
Westmoreland  wanted  a  brigade  in  the  Bien  Hoa-Vung  Tau  area  because  "it  w>
as  necessary  from  a  purely  military  standpoint  as  the  deployments  in  the  D
Nang-Phu  Bai  area  which  have  already  won  acceptance."  (Securit)  of  Bien  Hoa
Vung  Tau  was  not  all  COMUSMACV'^  had  in  mind,  however,  for  the  same  mes-
sage mentioned  the  need  to  offset  a  Viet  Cong  threat  embodied  in  t\*o  regiments
and  t^'o  separate  battalions  perched  on  the  eastern  flank  of  III  Corps.  He  also
wanted  a  light  reserve  force  which  could  be  airlifted  to  the  Central  Highlands  in
case  of  emergency. )

The  173rd,  a  two-battalion  airborne  brigade,  was  then  located  in  Okinawa.  V


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  451

constituted  CINCPAC's  airmobile  reserve.  When  an  earlier  attempt  had  been
made  to  deploy  the  173rd  to  Da  Nang  in  place  of  the  Marines,  CINCPAC  had
stringently  opposed  the  removal  of  his  only  quick-reaction  force.

What  followed  General  Westmoreland's  request  of  11  April,  a  request  that  Am-
bassador Taylor  "had  noted,"  was  a  rapid-fire  series  of  cables,  proposals,  and
false  starts  which,  if  nothing  else,  indicated  that  Washington  was  well  ahead  of
Saigon  in  its  planning  and  in  its  anxiety.  The  first  event  in  the  chain  was  a  plan-
ning conference  held  in  Honolulu  8-10  April  and  attended  by  representatives
of  PACOM  and  the  Joint  Staff.  The  conferees  recommended  the  deployment  of
the  173rd  and,  in  deference  to  CINCPAC's  concern  for  his  airmobile  reserve,
they  also  recommended  that  the  173rd  be  replaced  by  another  brigade  from
CONUS  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  JCS  ordered  on  14  April  that  the  173rd  be
deployed  temporarily  to  Bien  Hoa  Yung  Tau  for  security  of  air  operations  and
logistical  bases  and  at  the  same  time  tasked  CINCSTRIKE  to  provide  a  brigade
to  replace  the  173rd.

The  decision  to  deploy  the  173rd  apparently  caught  the  Ambassador  flat-
footed,  for  he  had  quite  obviously  not  been  privy  to  it.  He  cabled  the  State
Department  on  the  14th  and  said:

I  have  just  learned  by  the  reference  JCS  message  to  CINCPAC  that  the
immediate  deployment  of  the  173rd  Airborne  Brigade  to  Bien  Hoa-Vung  Tau
has  apparently  been  approved.  This  comes  as  a  complete  surprise  in  view
of  the  understanding  reached  in  Washington  that  we  would  experiment  with
the  Marines  in  a  counterinsurgency  role  before  bringing  in  other  U.S.  con-
tingents This  decision  seemed  sound  to  me  at  the  time  and

continues  to  appear  so.  I  recommend  that  this  deployment  be  held  up  until
we  can  sort  out  all  matters  relating  to  it.

Whatever  was  motivating  those  in  Washington  who  had  decided  to  make  this
deployment,  the  Ambassador  held  the  trump  card  as  he  had  to  clear  the  move
with  the  GVN  before  the  troops  could  come  in.  The  Prime  Minister  had  not  been
told  at  this  juncture  about  the  proposed  landing  of  more  U.S.  troops,  and
Taylor  informed  his  superiors  on  17  April  that  he  did  not  intend  to  tell  Quat
without  clearer  guidance  explaining  Washington's  intentions.

That  Washington  was  determined,  with  the  President's  sanction,  to  go  be-
yond what  had  been  agreed  to  and  formalized  in  NSAM  328  was  manifested  un-
mistakably in  a  cable  sent  under  joint  Defense  ^State  auspices  by  Mr.  McNaugh-
ton  to  the  Ambassador  on  15  April.  That  message,  which  will  be  treated  in
detail  in  a  later  section,  contained  the  following  preamble:  "Hightest  authority  be-
lieves the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  has  been  deteriorating  and  that,  in  addition
to  actions  against  the  North,  something  new  must  be  added  in  the  South  to  achieve
victory.  As  steps  to  that  end,  we  believe  the  following  actions  should  be  under-
taken .  .  ."  The  message  goes  on  to  list  seven  specific  actions  including  the  de-
ployment of  "a  brigade  force"  to  Bien  Hoa  Yung  Tau  "to  act  as  a  security  force
for  our  installations  and  also  to  participate  in  counterinsurgency  combat  opera-
tions" according  to  plans  to  be  prepared  by  General  Westmoreland.

The  documents  do  not  reveal  just  exactly  when  Presidential  sanction  was  ob-
tained for  the  expanded  scope  of  the  above  proposals.  It  is  possible  that  the  Am-
bassador may  have  caught  the  Defense  Department  and  the  JCS  in  a  little
cart-before-the-horsemanship.  The  day  following  the  order  from  the  JCS  to  de-
I  ploy  the  173rd  and  the  Ambassador's  reclama  thereto,  the  JCS  submitted  a  mem-
i  orandum  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  in  which  they  addressed  the  Ambassador's


452 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

objection  to  the  deployment  and  offered  their  own  position,  which  was  that  "the
U.S.  had  need  of  the  173rd  in  Bien  Hoa/Vung  Tau  to  insure  the  security  of  air
operations  and  logistics  bases  as  had  been  recommended  by  COMUSMACV  and
by  CINCPAC  in  CINCPAC  to  JCS  DTG  13  April  1965."  The  173rd  was  also
needed,  they  said,  for  subsequent  phasing  into  counterinsurgency  operations.
Whether  or  not  the  JCS  wrote  that  memorandum  with  red  faces,  the  Secretary  of
Defense  dates  approval  for  final  deployment  of  the  173rd  as  of  the  30th  of  April,
which  is  considerably  later.  Even  when  the  173rd  was  finally  ordered  to  deploy,
it  went  on  a  temporary  duty  basis.  It  remained  in  that  anomalous  status  well  into
the  summer  of  1965,  expecting  any  day  to  be  recalled  to  Okinawa  and  replaced
by  another  unit.  The  troops  continued  to  draw  TDY  pay,  and  their  dependents
remained  at  the  permanent  base  on  Okinawa  instead  of  returning  to  the  U.S.

With  the  173rd  successfully  held  in  abeyance,  the  principals  took  that  issue,
along  with  the  seven  points  of  the  15  April  cable,  to  Honolulu,  where  a  conference
convened  on  20  April  and  structured  the  outlines  of  the  ever  popular  enclave
strategy.

5. Security  as  the  Primary  Mission  for  Most  Phase  I  Units

The  security  of  U.S.  bases  in  mainland  Southeast  Asia  may  well  have  been
dead  as  a  basis  for  a  strategy,  but  the  bases  nonetheless  needed  to  be  secured.
The  security  rationale  was  consistently  offered,  along  with  other  reasons,  to
justify  the  further  deployment  of  ground  combat  units.  In  fact,  looking  back  on
the  force  deployments  which  were  the  main  subject  of  this  paper,  the  JCS  in  No-
vember 1965  stated  that  21  of  the  original  44  "Phase  I"  U.S./3rd  Country  bat-
talions, whose  deployment  to  Vietnam  was  accomplished  in  the  latter  half  of  1965,
were  committed  to  base  and  installation  security.

C. THE  STRATEGY  OF  EXPERIMENTATION:
ENCLAVE  STRATEGY

1 .  Geography

The  geography  of  Vietnam  lends  itself  to  enclave  thinking — that  is,  to  opera-
tions based  on  coastal  cities  and  with  restricted  extension  of  lines  of  communi-
cation inland.  The  central  portion  of  Vietnam,  encompassing  the  I  and  II  Corps
Tactical  Zones  and  a  portion  of  the  III  Corps,  is  long  and  narrow.  The  area  near
the  coast  is  for  the  most  part  fairly  flat  and  hospitable  and  contains  the  bulk  of
the  population.  The  interior  is  mountainous  and  is  sparsely  populated  throughout.
In  some  places  the  mountains  come  right  down  to  the  coast,  but  the  coastal
plain  is  well  defined  for  most  of  the  length  of  Central  Vietnam.  Scattered  along
this  coast  are  the  mouths  of  numerous  streams,  each  with  a  small  delta  which
serves  as  an  area  for  rice  production  and  concentration  of  population,  and  as  a
focus  for  commercial  activity.

Several  cities,  such  as  Da  Nang,  Qui  Nhon,  and  Nha  Trang,  are  located
contiguous  with  the  coastal  population  and  have  good  deep  water  anchorages  for
ocean-going  maritime  activity.  All  three  of  these  cities  were,  in  early  1965,  likely
candidates  for  bases  in  an  enclave  strategy.  There  were  other  areas  along  the
coast  which  did  not  have  deep  water  anchorages  but  which  were,  nevertheless,
readily  accessible  for  amphibious  resupply  from  the  sea.  Chu  Lai,  little  more  than
a  sandy  hamlet,  and  Phu  Bai  fell  into  this  category  and  were  very  much  a  part  of
enclave  thinking.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  453

In  between  the  central  coast  and  the  Mekong  Delta — which  itself  offered  no
good  coastal  access  and  egress  and  hence  was  never  a  part  of  any  enclave  strategy
— was  the  port  of  Vung  Tau.  Located  at  the  end  of  the  Cap  St.  Jacques  pen-
insula and  easily  defended,  Vung  Tau  was  the  logical  alternative  to  the  port  of
Saigon,  access  to  which  required  a  risky  trip  up  the  Saigon  River  from  a  point  not
far  from  Vung  Tau.  Vung  Tau  could  be  called  the  southern  limit  of  a  chain  of
coastal  enclaves  beginning  with  Hue/Phu  Bai  in  I  Corps.

2.  Development  of  the  Strategy

General  Johnson,  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Army,  brought  back  from  his  March
1965  inspection  trip  to  Vietnam  the  germ  of  an  idea  to  establish  U.S.  ground
forces  in  coastal  enclaves.  The  idea  is  included  in  one  of  two  alternatives  proposed
by  Johnson  for  the  deployment  of  a  U.S.  division  to  Vietnam  to  supplant  ARVN
units  in  security  missions  and  free  them  for  offensive  operations  against  the  Viet
Cong.  One  alternative  proposed  sending  the  division  to  secure  bases  at  Bien  Hoa/
Ton  Son  Nhut  (near  Saigon),  Qui  Nhon  and  Nha  Trang  (both  coastal  cities),  and
Pleiku  (in  the  highlands).  The  other  alternative  proposed  the  deployment  of  a
division  to  the  highland  provinces  of  Kontum,  Pleiku,  and  Darlac.  Significantly,
the  coastal  city  deployment  and  the  second  alternative  were  the  two  principal
contenders  for  the  location  of  the  1st  Cavalry  Division  (Airmobile)  debated  later
in  the  year.  The  second  alternative  was  the  one  favored  by  both  Johnson  and  JCS
Chairman  Wheeler.

By  far  the  most  dogged  protagonist  of  the  enclave  strategy  was  Ambassador
Taylor.  He  was  consistent  in  his  opposition  to  the  initial  involvement  of  U.S.
forces  in  ground  combat.  As  he  saw  his  position  being  eroded  on  that  question,
it  would  seem  natural  for  him  to  have  fallen  back  in  an  only  slightly  less  con-
servative posture.  On  18  March  1965,  in  a  cable  already  quoted  in  its  entirety
in  Section  II,  Taylor  brought  up  the  question  of  the  deployment  of  a  U.S.  di-
vision and  presented  the  highland  and  coastal  enclave  alternatives.  While  not  back-
ing either  alternative  at  that  juncture,  he  did  say  that  "the  coastal  enclave  mis-
sion is  safer,  simpler  but  less  productiye  than  the  inland  mission."  In  regard  to
the  latter,  he  said:  "The  inland  mission  in  the  highlands  is  clearly  the  more  am-
bitious and,  if  well  done,  will  make  a  greater  contribution  during  the  present
critical  period.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  more  exposed  and  even  permits  one
to  entertain  the  possibility  of  a  kind  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  if  the  coastal  provinces
should  collapse  and  our  forces  were  cut  off  from  the  coast  except  by  air."

The  Ambassador  received  no  response  from  Washington  to  the  cable  quoted
above.  He  sent  another  one  on  the  27th  of  March  in  which  he  reminded  Wash-
ington that  it  was  high  time  to  make  some  decisions  concerning  U.S.  strategy
in  Vietnam.  According  to  Taylor,  there  were  three  choices:  (1 )  to  carry  on  with
the  present  level  of  commitment  and  hope  that  Rolling  Thunder  would  cause  the
DRV  to  cease  its  support,  (2)  to  try  and  reverse  the  trend  at  least  in  a  few  key
areas,  and  (3)  to  try'and  win  as  quickly  as  possible.  If  U.S.  forces  were  to  come,
Taylor  offered  three  alternatives  for  their  mission:  (1)  defensive  or  offensive  en-
clave, (2)  territorial  clear  and  hold,  and  (3)  general  reserve.  For  himself,  Taylor
preferred  a  combination  of  the  offensive  enclave  plus  reserve  in  case  of  an  emer-
gency. This  was  essentially  the  position  that  he  carried  into  the  NSC  meetings  in
Washington  of  1-2  April  1965.

Ambassador  Taylor  met  with  Secretary  McNamara  and  the  JCS  in  Washing-
ton just  prior  to  the  NSC  meetings.  He  was  shown  the  ICS's  plan  to  intro-
duce three  divisions  of  U.S.  and  Korean  troops  into  Vietnam  for  combat  opera-


454 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


tions  against  the  Viet  Cong.  That  plan,  which  Taylor  was  inclined  to  oppose  but
which  had  the  qualified  support  of  McNamara,  was  undoubtedly  also  a  focus  of
discussion  within  the  NSC.

NSAM  328,  the  product  of  the  NSC  meetings  of  1-2  April  1965,  had  its
primary  focus  on  air  action  against  the  DRV  and  Laos.  In  regard  to  that  air
activity  the  text  of  the  NSAM  said  this :

Subject  to  continuing  review,  the  President  approved  the  following
general  framework  of  continuing  action  against  North  Metnam  and  Laos:

We  should  continue  roughly  the  present  slowly  ascending  tempo  of
ROLLING  THL'NDER  operations,  being  prepared  to  add  strikes  in  re-
sponse to  a  higher  rate  of  VC  operations,  or  conceivably  to  slow  the  pace
in  the  unlikely  event  VC  slacked  off  sharply  for  what  appeared  to  be  more
than  a  temporary  operational  luU.

The  target  systems  should  continue  to  avoid  the  effective  GCI  range  of
MIGs.  We  should  continue  to  var\'  the  types  of  targets,  stepping  up  attacks
on  lines  of  communication  in  the  near  future,  and  possibly  moving  in  a  few-
weeks  to  attacks  on  the  rail  lines  north  and  northeast  of  Hanoi.

And,  also:

Air  operation  in  Laos,  particularly  route  blocking  operations  in  the  Pan-
handle area,  should  be  stepped  up  to  the  maximum  remunerative  rate."

In  regard  to  action  on  the  ground,  NSAM  328  said  in  relation  to  force  level
increases :

The  Persident  approved  an  18-2.000  man  increase  in  U.S.  military  sup-
port forces  to  fill  out  existing  units  and  supply  needed  logistic  personnel.

The  President  approved  the  deployment  of  two  additional  Marine  Bat-
talions and  one  Marine  Air  Squadron  and  associated  headquarters  and
support  elements.

And,  also:

The  President  approved  the  urgent  exploration,  with  the  Korean,  Aus-
tralian, and  New  Zealand  Governments,  of  the  possibility  of  rapid  deploy-
ment of  significant  combat  elements  from  their  armed  forces  in  parallel  with
the  additional  Marine  deployment  approved.  .  .  .

NSAM  328  sanctioned  a  change  in  mission  for  U.S.  ground  forces  in  Vietnam,
but  it  did  so  in  very  cautious  language:

The  President  approved  a  change  of  mission  for  all  Marine  battalions
deployed  to  Vietnam  to  permit  their  more  active  use  under  conditions  to  be
established  and  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  in  consultation  with
the  Secretary  of  State.

This  language  may  indicate  that  the  President  wanted  to  experiment  very  care-
fully with  a  small  amount  of  force  before  deciding  whether  or  not  to  accept  any
kind  of  ground  war  commitment.  Implicit  in  the  size  of  that  force  and  in  its  loca-
tion was  the  option  to  quickly  evacuate  it,  should  the  U.S.  so  desire.

It  appears  that  the  Ambassador  interpreted  the  NSAM  change  of  mission  as
approval  of  his  27  March  recommendation.  He  cabled  Washington  on  the  4th


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  455

of  April  that  he  would  approach  Quat  with  a  proposal  that  the  Marines  be  per-
mitted to  conduct  mobile  operations  within  their  TAOR's  and  that  they  be  used  by
the  RVNAF  as  a  reserve  for  operations  up  to  50  miles  from  their  bases.  The
Vietnamese  Prime  Minister  acquiesced  in  the  deployment  of  the  two  Marine  BLT's
plus  one  Tactical  Fighter  Squadron  (F4)  on  the  6th  of  April  and  in  the  change
in  mission  on  the  8th.

Taylor  was  at  this  juncture  quite  prepared  to  settle  into  a  period  of  careful  ex-
perimentation with  the  level  of  combat  power  fixed  at  four  battalions.  He  said  in
a  message  dated  17  April  that  he  had  about  60  days  in  mind  as  the  appropriate
period  for  the  experiment,  and  he  indicated  he  was  chagrined  by  some  apparent
anxiety  in  Washington  to  move  considerably  faster.  In  a  message  also  dated  17
April  he  questioned  the  Washington  panic  manifested  in  a  whole  panoply  of
"hasty  and  ill-conceived"  proposals  for  the  deployment  of  more  forces.  In  another
message  he  again  cautioned  against  precipitous  action  and  offered  the  palliative
that  "things  weren't  going  so  badly"  out  there.

Four  Marine  battalions  were  enough  for  experimentation,  but  not  so  large  as  to
alarm  the  xenophobic  Vietnamese.  In  fact,  the  Ambassador's  sensitivity  to  the
proclivities  of  the  Vietnamese  Prime  Minister  on  the  question  of  foreign  troops
helps  explain  the  Embassy's  footdragging  during  this  critical  period  of  U.S.  build-
up debate.  Thus,  the  Ambassador  was  surprised  to  discover  that  the  Marines  had
come  ashore  with  tanks,  self-propelled  artillery,  and  various  other  items  of  weighty
equipment  not  "appropriate  for  counterinsurgency  operations."  That  equipment,
bland  ICS  explanations  mentioning  contingency  plans  and  full  TOE  prudence  not-
withstanding, implied  a  permanence  not  communicated  to  Quat  when  clearance
for  their  entry  had  been  sought.  Similarly,  the  decision  to  deploy  the  173rd,  had
it  been  executed,  would  have  placed  Taylor  in  an  exceedingly  embarrassing
position  as  he  had  not  mentioned  it  to  the  GVN.

From  analysis  of  the  cable  traffic  of  early  April,  it  appears  that  Taylor  was
the  only  major  figure  opposed  to  further  expansion  of  the  U.S.  combat  role  be-
yond what  was  agreed  at  the  NSC  meetings  in  Washington.  His  defense  was
tenacious,  but  as  proposals  from  Washington  got  progressively  more  radical,  his
patience  began  to  wear  thin.  Then  Taylor  communicated  his  ire  to  McGeorge
Bundy  in  a  message  quoted  in  full  in  Section  I  of  this  paper  and  in  which  he
maintained  that  Quat's  government  had  quite  enough  to  do  without  the  ad-
dition of  more  U.S.  programs  or  more  U.S.  forces.  The  chorus  of  suggestions  and
programs  from  Washington  reached  a  crescendo  with  the  joint  State  Defense
message  of  18  April  which,  with  the  blessing  of  "highest  authority"  in  Washington,
proposed  the  following  measures  be  considered  to  add  "something  new"  to  the
equation:

(1)  Experimental  encadrement  of  U.S.  troops  into  RVNAF  either  through
the  assignment  of  50  U.S.  soldiers  to  each  of  10  ARVN  battalions  or  through
the  "brigading"  of  ARVN  and  US  battalions  for  operations;

(2)  The  introduction  of  a  brigade  force  into  Bien  Hoa  Vung  Tau  for  se-
curity of  installation^  and  later  expansion  into  counterinsurgency  operations  under
conditions  to  be  spelled  out  by  General  Westmoreland;

(3)  The  introduction  of  several  battalions  into  coastal  enclaves  such  as  Qui
Nhon  in  accordance  with  proposals  to  be  submitted  by  the  Ambassador  and
COMUSMACV.  The  purpose  was  "to  further  experiment  with  US  forces  in  the
counterinsurgency  role";  {Sic\  The  phrase  "to  further  experiment"  is  misleading
since  up  to  the  date  of  this  cable,  there  had  been  no  U.S.  counterinsurgency
operations  worthy  of  the  name.)

(4)  Expansion  of  Vietnamese  recruiting,  using  proven  U.S.  techniques;


456 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

(5)  Expansion  of  the  MEDCAP  program  using  mobile  dispensaries  under
guidelines  to  be  worked  out  between  COMUSMACV  and  the  Surgeon  General,
U.S.  Army;

(6)  Experimentation  in  two  or  three  provinces  with  a  team  of  U.S.  civil
affairs  personnel  introduced  into  provincial  government  structure  under  conditions
to  be  worked  out  between  MG  Peers  and  General  Westmoreland;

(7)  The  supplement  of  low  RVNAF  pay  through  a  program  to  provide  some
of  the  troops  with  a  food  ration.  General  Timmes  would  be  seeing  COMUSMACV
to  work  out  the  details.

Although  this  cable  was  well-meaning  in  its  intent,  the  Ambassador  was  amazed
by  its  naivete  and  justifiably  chargrined  by  its  impertinence.  Taylor's  cable,
[Doc.  6]  one  of  many  he  sent  to  Washington  during  the  tumultuous  days  just
prior  to  the  April  Honolulu  Conference,  is  worth  quoting  in  its  entirety  as  it
contains  the  kind  of  guidance  the  Ambassador  felt  he  should  have  been  re-
ceiving from  Washington.

Thus  was  the  Ambassador  propelled  into  the  conference  of  20  April  1965,  only
one  step  ahead  of  the  Washington  juggernaut,  which  was  itself  fueled  by  en-
couragement from  Westmoreland  in  Saigon.  Taylor  was  not  opposed  to  the  U.S.
build-up  per  se,  but  rather  was  concerned  to  move  slowly  with  combat  troop  de-
ployments, which  tended  to  cause  alarm  in  an  already  delicate  situation,  while
proceeding  quietly  with  the  prerequisite  development  of  logistic  bases  to  support
later  troop  introduction.  He  was  overtaken  at  Honolulu.

Honolulu  brought  the  Saigon  and  Washington  decision  makers  together  to
sanctify  an  expanded  enclave  strategy.  In  the  preliminary  discussions  they
agreed  that:

(1)  The  DRV  was  not  likely  to  quit  within  the  next  six  months;  and  in
any  case,  they  were  more  likely  to  give  up  because  of  VC  failure  in  the  South
than  because  of  bomb-induced  "pain"  in  the  North.  It  could  take  up  to  two
years  to  demonstrate  VC  failure.

(2)  The  level  of  air  activity  through  Rolling  Thunder  was  about  right.
The  U.S.  did  not,  in  Ambassador  Taylor's  words,  want  "to  kill  the  hostage."
Therefore,  Hanoi  and  environs  remained  on  the  restricted  list.  It  was  recognized
that  air  activity  would  not  do  the  job  alone.

(3)  Progress  in  the  South  would  be  slow,  and  great  care  should  be  taken
to  avoid  dramatic  defeat.  The  current  lull  in  Viet  Cong  activity  was  merely
the  quiet  before  a  storm.

(4)  The  victory  strategy  was  to  "break  the  will  of  the  DRV/VC  by  deny-
ing them  victory."  Impotence  would  lead  eventually  to  a  political  solution.

Going  into  the  Honolulu  Conference  the  level  of  approved  U.S.  forces  for
Vietnam  was  40,200.  In-country  strength  of  33,500  showed  that  not  all  the  ap-
proved forces  had  closed.  To  accomplish  the  "victory  strategy"  described  above,
the  conferees  agreed  that  the  following  additional  U.S.  deployments  should  be
made:

A.  United  States

(1)  An  Army  Brigade  (3  Bns)  to  Bien  Hoa-Vung  Tau  to  close  by
1  May

(2)  3  USMC  BLT's  and  3  Tactical  Fighter  Squadrons  to  Chu  Lai  by
5  May

(3)  An  Army  Brigade  (3  Bns)  to  Qui  Nhon-Nha  Trang  to  close  by
15  June

(4)  Augmentations  of  existing  forces  and  added  logistical  support


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  457

If  approved,  these  recommended  forces  would  have  brought  U.S.  strength  to
a  grand  total  of  thirteen  maneuver  battalions  and  82,000  men.

The  U.S.  Government  also  should  approach  the  respective  foreign  govern-
ments and  request:

B.  Third  Country

(1)  An  Australian  Army  Battalion  to  Vung  Tau  to  close  by  21  May

(2)  A  Korean  Regimental  Combat  Team  to  Quang  Ngai  by  15  June

If  approved,  these  recommended  forces  would  bring  Third  Country  strength  to
a  grand  total  of  4  maneuver  battalions  and  7,250  men.

As  an  adjunct  to  the  units  above,  the  conferees  mentioned,  but  did  not
recommend,  the  possible  later  deployment  of:

C.  United  States

(1)  An  Army  Airmobile  Division  (9  Bns)

(2)  The  remainder  of  the  III  MEF  (2  Bns)

(3)  An  Army  Corps  Headquarters

D.  Third  Country

An  ROK  Division  (-)  consisting  of  6  Battalions

The  posited  future  add-ons  comprised  a  further  17  maneuver  battalions,  which,
if  added  to  the  approved  totals,  would  have  brought  US/Third  Country  combat
capability  in  South  Vietnam  to  34  battalions.

After  they  had  dealt  with  the  questions  of  troop  deployments,  the  conferees
then  turned  to  the  remaining  points  contained  in  the  joint  State/Defense  7-point
program.  It  was  decided  to  drop  the  idea  of  encadrement  of  U.S.  forces  in
ARVN  in  favor  of  emphasis  on  combined  operations.  Recruiting,  it  was  agreed,
was  less  a  problem  of  organization  and  method  than  it  was  a  product  of  the
limited  manpower  base  and  competing  agencies  (including  the  Viet  Cong).  The
plan  to  improve  MEDCAP  was  endorsed  with  enthusiasm,  and  it  was  agreed
to  experiment  with  a  "single  manager"  'concept  in  three  pilot  provinces.  Finally,
the  proposed  plan  to  distribute  food  to  some  RVNAF  troops,  an  earlier  version
of  which  had  merely  encouraged  greater  corruption,  was  quietly  deferred  pend-
ing further  study.

As  a  final  note,  the  conferees  considered  the  guidance  which  the  Ambassador
had  prepared  for  himself  in  the  event  that  more  U.S.  and  Third  Country  forces
were  to  be  committed  in  Vietnam.  The  text  remained  essentially  as  Taylor  had
written  it  in  his  cable  of  17  April.  A  few  changes  were  made  to  reflect  that  the
commitment  was  not  limited  to  the  current  proposed  deployments  and  that  the
U.S.  was  anxious  to  seize  the  initiative  from  the  enemy.  Taylor  had  said,  "if  the
ground  war  is  not  to  drag  into  1966  and  even  beyond."  That  phrase  was  changed
to  read,  "if  the  ground  war  is  not  to  drag  on  indefinitely.''  [Emphasis  added]
The  conferees  appear  to  have  realized  not  only  that  the  forces  they  had  recom-
mended be  deployed  to  Vietnam  might  not  be  enough,  but  also  that  it  would
be  unwise  to  attempt  to  affix  any  time  limit  to  the  war.

The  President  received  the  Honolulu  recommendations  in  a  memorandum
from  Secretary  McNamara  on  the  21st  of  April.  Noted  therein,  but  not  recom-
mended, were  possible  deployments  of  an  Army  Airmobile  Division  and  the
remainder  of  the  III  MEF.

The  Honolulu  Conference  omitted  to  provide  for  reconstitution  of  CINC-
PAC's  airborne  reserve  after  the  deployment  of  the  173rd  to  Bien  Hoa-Vung


458 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

Tau,  largely  because  the  designation  and  type  of  brigade  which  was  to  go  to
that  location  had  not  been  specified.  That  the  173rd  would  go,  however,  was
common  knowledge  and,  indeed,  had  been  recommended  by  the  PACOM-JCS
planning  conference  on  10  April  and  abortively  approved  by  the  JCS  on  the
14th.  CINCPAC  cabled  the  JCS  on  the  23rd  to  remind  them  that  the  173rd
should  be  replaced  by  a  CONUS  brigade  as  soon  as  possible.

Discussion  and  refinement  of  the  Honolulu  proposals  continued  on  after  the
Conference.  On  30  April,  a  JCSM  summarized  the  planning  as  the  Chiefs  saw
it  and  presented  a  detailed  program  for  the  deployment  to  Vietnam  of  some
48,000  U.S.  and  5,250  Third  Country  forces,  all  of  which  were  listed  as  ap-
proved. Included  were  all  the  units  mentioned  in  the  Honolulu  recommenda-
tion plus  a  healthy  support  package.  These  forces  were,  according  to  the  JCS,
to  "bolster  GVN  forces  during  their  continued  build-up,  secure  bases  and  in-
stallations, conduct  counterinsurgency  combat  operations  in  coordination  with
the  RVNAF,  and  prepare  for  the  later  introduction  of  an  airmobile  division  to
the  central  plateau,  the  remainder  of  the  111  MEF  to  the  Da  Nang  area,  and  the
remainder  of  a  ROK  division  to  Quang  Ngai."  [Emphasis  added]  Logistic  forces
of  all  services  were  "to  strengthen  support  of  in-country  forces,  provide  sup-
port for  the  new  forces,  prepare  bases  and  installations  for  possible  future  de-
ployments, and  be  prepared  to  support  those  additional  forces."  From  the  thrust
of  this  JCSM  it  is  apparent  that  the  enclave  strategy  was  no  stopping  place  as
far  as  the  Chiefs  were  concerned.  They  continued  to  push  hard  for  the  earliest
possible  input  of  three  full  divisions  of  troops.  They  were  still  well  ahead  of
the  pack  in  that  regard.

None  of  the  Honolulu  recommendations  had  been  approved  at  the  time  the
30  April  JCSM  was  forwarded,  although  the  173rd  was  approved  for  Bien  Hoa-
Vung  Tau  and  three  Marine  battalions  for  Chu  Lai  on  the  same  day.  Included
in  the  logistics  package  listed  by  the  JCS  as  "approved"  were  some  4,700  troops
later  identified  by  Mr.  McNaughton  as  belonging  to  the  three  division  program
and  definitely  not  approved.  Secretary  McNamara  replied  to  the  JCSM  on  the
15th  of  May,  after  the  landing  of  the  173rd  on  the  5th  and  the  Marines  at  Chu
Lai  on  the  7th.  The  Secretary  said  that  he  considered  as  approved  only  so  much
of  the  remainder  of  the  Honolulu  recommendations  as  applied  to  the  Australian
Battalion,  the  ROK  Regimental  Combat  Team  and  some  MACV  augmentations.
He  went  on  to  approve:  (1)  movement  of  the  I  MEF  from  California  to  WEST-
PAC  to  reconstitute  CINCPAC's  floating  reserve,  and  (2)  preparation  for  the
deployment  of  an  Army  brigade  to  Qui  Nhon-Nha  Trang  with  final  decision
on  21  May  and  closure  on  27  June.  This  latter  move,  when  approved,  together
with  individual  add-ons  was  to  bring  total  permanent  in-country  strength  to
69,143  (the  173rd  having  been  deployed  on  a  temporary  basis).  Secretary  Mc-
Namara deferred  decision  on  all  JCS  proposals  dealing  with  the  three  division
plan,  thereby  giving  the  enclave  strategy  temporary  respite.

3. Difficulties  in  Experimentation

As  of  the  landings  of  the  Marines  at  Chu  Lai  and  the  Airborne  at  Bien  Hoa-
Vung  Tau,  the  U.S.  forces  in  Vietnam  with  some  nine  maneuver  battalions  had
yet  to  conduct  a  major  offensive  operation,  with  or  without  the  RVNAF.  The
experimentation  with  U.S.  forces  in  an  offensive  role,  a  large  factor  in  the  de-
cision to  accept  the  enclave  concept,  was  delayed  because  some  knotty  prob-
lems involving  command  and  contral  remained  to  be  ironed  out  with  the  Viet-
namese.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March— July  1965  459

In  the  early  days  when  the  Marines  arrived  to  secure  bases  and  installations,
the  control  measure  devised  for  their  emplo\Tnent  was  the  Tactical  Area  of  Re-
sponsibility (TAOR).  Under  the  overall  suzerainty  of  the  Vietnamese  Corps
Commander,  the  Marines  were  given  a  well-defined  geographical  area  in  which
the  U.S.  exercised  command  authority  over  militar\-  forces  and  for  which  the
U.S.  accepted  defensive  responsibility.  The  original  Marine  TAOR  consisted
literally  of  their  half  of  the  Da  Nang  airfield  and  a  portion  of  a  couple  of  hills
on  which  the  Marines  were  entrenched  and  which  they  covered  by  the  fields
of  fire  of  their  small  arms.  Assured  by  this  conservative  assignation  was  mini-
mum contact  between  U.S.  troops  and  the  Vietnamese  population.  In  fact,  there
were  only  some  1.930  people  living  within  the  original  Marine  TAOR.  From
this  humble  beginning  there  followed  a  period  of  gradual  expansion  altogether
compatible  with  the  securitv  mission  until  bv  the  end  of  March  the  Da  Nang
TAOR  was  12  square  miles  in  size  and  incorporated  some  11,141  Vietnamese
souls.

Accompanying  the  NSAM  328  change  of  mission  of  U.S.  forces  to  permit
limited  offensive  operations  was  a  dilemma.  Mere  expansion  of  the  TAOR's
would  not  suflftce  since  U.S.  forces  did  not  have  enough  combat  power  to  ade-
quately secure  an  area  the  size  of  which  thev  desired  for  offensive  operations.
Some  arrangement  was  needed  to  allow  U.S.  commanders  to  share  tactical  re-
sponsibilitv  with  the  Vietnamese.

Years  of  experience  advising  the  Vietnamese  armed  forces  was  enough  to
convince  knowledgeable  U.S.  officers  that  the  U.S.  did  not  want  to  relinquish
command  authority  over  its  troops  to  the  Vietnamese.  Of  equal  import,  it  was
felt,  was  the  Vietnamese  experience  under  the  French  and  the  resultant  ab-
horrence of  foreign  command  over  their  forces.  As  a  further  complication,  the
Viet  Cong  were  ready  to  cry  '"imperialist  puppet"  at  the  first  sign  of  GV>J  weak-
ness. Washington  was  less  sensitive  to  this  problem  than  were  the  members  of
the  Mission  in  Saigon.  In  May  Secretary  McNamara  urged  Westmoreland  and
Taylor  to  form  a  joint  command  structure  with  the  GVN.  Unfortunately,  both
of  those  gentlemen  were  well  aware  that  the  GVN  was  very  cool  to  the  idea.
On  the  23rd  of  April  Taylor  had  visited  with  Prime  Minister  Quat  for  the  first
time  since  the  Honolulu  Conference.  Although  Quat  was  well  aware  of  the
Ambassador's  intention  to  convey  the  text  of  the  Honolulu  recommendations,
to  Taylor's  distress,  he  was  reluctant  to  even  discuss  foreign  reinforcements
much  less  command  arrangements.

In  an  attempt  to  get  things  unstuck.  General  Westmoreland  produced  a  con-
cept for  the  employment  of  U.S.  Allied  ground  combat  forces  in  support  of
RVNAF.  With  Ambassador  Taylor's  concurrence,  he  forwarded  the  concept
through  CINCPAC  to  Washington  on  8  Mav.  Westmoreland  proix>sed  that  the
"basic  concept  underlying  command  relations  between  U.S.  Allied  forces  and
RVNAF  will  be  one  of  combat  support  through  coordination  and  cooperation
in  the  mutual  self-interest  of  both  commands."  That  this  tenuous  arrangement
might  break  down  in  the  face  of  imminent  disaster  was  foreseen  and  included
was  an  emergencv  escape  clause  whereby  alternate  arrangements  could  be  made
through  mutual  agreement  of  the  tactical  commanders  on  the  ground.  West-
moreland suggested  that  U.S.  Allied  forces  would  pass  through  three  distinct
stages  of  commitment  to  the  war.  Stage  I  (to  which  were  already  committed
9  U.S.  battalions)  entailed  the  security  of  base  areas  with  TAOR's  extended
out  to  the  range  of  light  artillery.  Stage  11  called  for  deep  patrolling  and  offensive
operations,  both  predicated  on  movement  outside  the  TAOR  in  coordination  with
RVNAF.  Finally,  progress  would  be  made  into  Stage  III  with  long  range  search


460 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

and  destroy  and  reserve  reaction  operations  in  concert,  of  course,  with  Viet-
namese wishes  and  desires.

Along  with  the  concept  Westmoreland  presented, -without  any  time  frame,  a
crude  sketch  showing  the  evolution  of  strategies  for  U.S. /Allied  forces  in  the
Vietnamese  war.  The  war  was  to  evolve  through  four  phases.  During  Phase  I
coastal  enclaves  were  to  be  secured  and  improved.  In  Phase  II,  operations  would
be  conducted  against  the  enemy  from  the  above.  In  Phase  III  the  forces  would
move  inland  to  secure  additional  bases  and  areas,  and  finally  in  Phase  IV  would
operate  from  the  latter.  At  the  time  the  concept  was  forwarded,  the  U.S.  com-
bat forces  in  Vietnam  were  in  Phase  I,  Stage  I.  Progress  to  a  more  ambitious
stage  was  stymied  while  negotiations  went  on  with  the  GVN  to  refine  the  ground
rules.  In  the  meantime,  the  Ambassador  observed  that  the  troops  would  suffer
from  boredom  and  lose  their  edge.

The  long  official  silence  between  the  sanction  for  U.S.  offensive  operations
contained  in  NSAM  328  and  the  final  approval  of  the  conditions  under  which
U.S.  troops  could  be  committed  was  not  without  cost.  The  President  had  ad-
monished each  of  the  NSC  members  not  to  allow  release  of  information  con-
cerning the  provisions  of  the  NSAM.  but  the  unduly  long  interregnum  inevitably
led  to  leaks.  The  Marines  incurred  some  200  casualties,  including  18  killed,
as  they  went  about  tidying  up  their  TAOR's  in  April  and  May.  The  Comman-
dant of  the  Marine  Corps  raised  the  tempo  of  speculation  by  saying  to  the  press
during  an  inspection  trip  to  Vietnam  in  April  that  the  Marines  were  not  in
Vietnam  to  ''sit  on  their  dittyboxes" — they  were  there  to  "kill  Viet  Cong."  An
honest  and  superficially  innocuous  statement  by  Department  of  State  Press  Offi-
cer Robert  McCloskey  on  8  June  to  the  effect  that  "American  forces  would  be
available  for  combat  support  together  with  Vietnamese  forces  when  and  if
necessary"  produced  an  immediate  response.  The  press  reaction  to  McCloskey's
candor  is  best  summed  up  in  this  New  York  Times  clip  of  9  June:

The  American  people  were  told  by  a  minor  State  Department  official
yesterday  that,  in  effect,  they  were  in  a  land  war  on  the  continent  of  Asia.
This  is  only  one  of  the  extraordinary  aspects  of  the  first  formal  announce-
ment that  a  decision  has  been  made  to  commit  American  ground  forces  to
open  combat  in  South  Vietnam:  The  nation  is  informed  about  it  not  by  the
President,  not  by  a  Cabinet  member,  not  even  by  a  sub-Cabinet  official,
but  by  a  public  relations  officer.

The  White  House  was  hoisted  by  its  own  petard.  In  an  attempt  to  quell  the
outcry,  a  statement  was  issued  on  the  9th  of  June  which,  because  of  its  am-
biguity, only  served  to  further  exacerbate  the  situation  and  to  widen  what  was
being  described  as  "the  credibility  gap."  The  White  House  statement  said  in  part:

There  has  been  no  change  in  the  mission  of  United  States  ground  com-
bat units  in  Vietnam  in  recent  days  or  weeks.  The  President  has  issued  no
order  of  any  kind  in  this  regard  to  General  Westmoreland  recently  or  at
any  other  time.  The  primary  mission  of  these  troops  is  to  secure  and  safe-
guard important  military  installations  like  the  air  base  at  Da  Nang.  They
have  the  associated  mission  of  .  .  .  patrolling  and  securing  actions  in  and
near  the  areas  thus  safeguarded.

If  help  is  requested  by  the  appropriate  Vietnamese  commander.  General
Westmoreland  also  has  authority  within  the  assigned  mission  to  employ
these  troops  in  support  of  Vietnamese  forces  faced  with  aggressive  attack


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  461

when  other  effective  reser\es  are  not  available  and  v^hen.  in  his  iudcrment.
the  general  military  situation  urgentlv  requires  it.

The  documents  do  not  reveal  whether  or  not  the  ground  rules  for  engage-
ment of  U.S.  forces  had  actuallv  been  worked  out  to  e\ervone"s  satisfaction  at
the  time  of  the  White  House  statement.  There  is  good  mdication  that  thev  had
not.  During  at  least  two  of  the  major  battles  in  late  Mav  and  early  June.  Ba
Gia  and  Dong  Xoai,  the  RVNAF  were  desperately  in  need  of  assistance.  Al-
though U.S.  troops  were  available  in  both  instances,  the  Marines  at  Ba  Gia  and
the  173rd  at  Dong  Xoai.  they  were  not  commined  and  the  result  in  both  cases
was  defeat  for  the  RVNAF.

The  first  major  ground  combat  operation  bv  U.S.  forces  in  the  Vietnam  War
took  place  in  War  Zone  D.  NW  of  Saigon,  from  27  to  30  June  1965.  Par-
ticipants were  the  173rd  Airborne  Brigade,  the  1st  Battalion  of  the  Royal  Aus-
tralian Regiment,  two  battalions  from  the  ARV^N  Airborne  Brigade,  and  the
ARV^N  48th  Regiment.  The  operation  could  by  no  stretch  of  definition  have
been  described  as  a  reserve  reaction.  It  was  a  search  and  detroy  operation  into
Viet  Cong  base  areas  and  its  purpose  was  to  deny  to  the  enemy  "freedom  of
action  ...  in  these  safe  havens."  The  War  Zone  D  excursion  was  a  direct
result  of  the  sanction  given  to  General  Westmoreland  on  the  26th  of  June  to
"commit  U.S.  troops  to  combat,  independent  of  or  in  conjunction  with  GVN
forces  in  any  situation  in  which  the  use  of  such  troops  is  re<]iiested  by  an  ap-
propriate GVN  commander  and  when,  in  COMUSMACVs  jiKlgment,  their  use
is  necessar}-  to  strengthen  the  relative  position  of  GVN  forces."

At  that  juncture  the  44  Battalion  debate  was  in  full  swing  and  the  enclave
strateg}\  as  a  means  to  limit  the  amount  and  use  of  U.S.  combat  force  in  Viet-
nam, was  certainly  overcome  by  events.  It  was  not  until  the  18th  of  August
that  an  operation  fitting  the  paradigm  description  of  the  Taylor  enclave  con-
cept. Operation  STARLIGHT,  was  conducted  with  dramatic  success  15  miles
south  of  the  Chu  Lai  enclave.  It  established  the  viability  of  enclave  operations
limited  to  the  northern  coast  of  South  Vietnam,  a  fact  which  no  one  disputed,
but  such  operations  were  bv  that  time  pnlv  one  facet  of  a  much  more  ambitious
strategy  sanctioned  by  the  President  and  in  the  process  of  being  implemented
by  Westmoreland.

4. Where  the  U.S.  Stood  on  1  June  1965

The  beginning  of  the  decisive  month  of  June  1965  saw  the  U.S.  in  the  infant
stages  of  its  enclave  strategy.  Established  in  coastal  enclaves  were  Marine  forces
in  Phu  Bai,  Da  Nang  and'^Chu  Lai  and  Army  forces  in  Vung  Tau.  Enclaves  at
Qui  Nhon  and  Nha  Trang  were  in  the  planning  as  locations  for  an  Army  bri-
gade, and  Korean  troops  were  being  considered  for  the  defense  of  the  provincial
capital  of  Quang  Ngai  near  the  coast  and  as  possible  relief  for  the  Marines  at
Chu  Lai.  The  Secretlrv  of  Defense  was  also  considering  proposals  from  General
Westmoreland  and  others  to  open  up  a  major  logistics  base  and  enclave  around
the  fine  deep  water  harbor  at  Cam  Ranh  Bay.

As  of  the  1st  of  June  1965.  the  U.S.  h^d  approved  for  permanent  deplo>-
ment  to  South  Vietnam  forces  which,  when  all  had  closed,  v^ould  bring  total
combat  strength  to  approximately  70.000  and  the  number  of  maneuver  baitaJ-
ions,  Army  and  Marine,  to  13.  Included  in  this  total  were  7  Marme  BLTs
already  located  at  Phu  Bai.  Da  Nang,  and  Chu  Lai.  Also  included  were  3  bat-
talions' in  a  brigade  of  the  Army's  Ist  Division  to  be  landed  at  Qui  N^o-  and


462 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

3  battalions  in  a  brigade  of  the  Army's  101st  Airborne  Division  scheduled  to
replace  the  173rd.  In  the  planning  stages  but  not  yet  approved  were  a  further
11  maneuver  battalions,  the  remaining  2  from  the  III  MAF  ("MEF"  was
changed  to  "MAF"  because  the  word  "Expeditionary"  was  offensive  to  the
Vietnamese  and  was  therefore  changed  to  "Amphibious")  and  9  battalions
planned  for  the  new  Army  Airmobile  Division.

Third  Country  forces  considered  approved  at  this  time  amounted  to  7,250
men  of  which  1,250  were  already  in-country  in  the  1st  Battalion,  Royal  Aus-
tralian Regiment,  2,000  were  Korean  service  troops  also  already  in-country,  and
the  rest  were  to  be  deployed  sometime  later  in  a  ROK  Regimental  Combat  Team
of  3  battalions.  Still  in  the  talking  stages  were  a  further  6  battalions  of  ROK
troops  totaling  12,000  men.  The  grand  total  of  approved  U.S. /3rd  Country
forces  was  17  maneuver  battalions  and  approximately  77,250  men.  If  the  ad-
ditional forces  then  being  discussed  were  thrown  in,  the  total  would  have  been
34  maneuver  battalions  and  about  134,750  men.  This,  then,  was  the  state  of  the
build-up  when  General  Westmoreland  asked  on  7  June  for  reinforcements  from
the  U.S.  and  Third  Countries  "as  rapidly  as  possible."

D. THE  U.S.  MOVES  TO  TAKE  OVER  THE  LAND  WAR:  THE
SEARCH  AND  DESTROY  STRATEGY  AND  THE  44  BATTALION
DEBATE

General  Westmoreland's  message  #19118,  of  7  June  1965,  already  quoted
in  part  in  Section  I  of  this  paper,  punctuated  a  very  grim  period  of  ARVN  de-
feats in  Vietnam  and  stirred  up  a  veritable  hornet's  nest  in  Washington.  Up
to  that  time,  most  of  the  Washington  decision  makers  had  been  content  to  in-
dulge in  relatively  low-key  polemics  about  the  enclave  strategy  and  to  advocate
some  experimentation  with  small  numbers  of  U.S.  troops  in  Vietnam.  West-
moreland's request  for  reinforcements  on  a  large  scale,  accompanied  as  it  was
by  a  strategy  to  put  the  troops  on  the  offensive  against  the  Viet  Cong,  did
not  contain  any  of  the  comfortable  restrictions  and  safeguards  which  had  been
part  of  every  strategy  debated  to  date.  Washington  saw  that  it  was  Westmore-
land's intention  to  aggressively  take  the  war  to  the  enemy  with  other  than  Viet-
namese troops,  and  in  such  a  move  the  spectre  of  U.S.  involvement  in  a  major
Asian  ground  war  was  there  for  all  to  see.  With  no  provision  for  quick  with-
drawal, and  there  was  none,  the  long-term  implications  for  the  U.S.  in  terms  of
lives  and  money  could  not  be  averted.  Temperatures  rose  rapidly  after  7  June,
and  the  debate  was  acrimonious  and  not  without  its  casualties.

Just  as  Ambassador  Taylor  was  consistent  in  his  resistance  to  proposed  in-
volvement of  U.S.  forces  in  the  Vietnamese  War,  so  also  was  General  Westmore-
land equally  determined  to  get  enough  US/3rd  Country  force  into  Vietnam  to
influence  the  situation.  In  addition  to  the  level  of  force,  Westmoreland  was  also
bent  on  having  a  free  hand  in  the  use  of  it.

1. Westmoreland  Provides  the  Push

It  has  been  suggested  that  COMUSMACV  elected  to  interpret  the  landing
of  two  Marine  BLT's  at  Da  Nang  as  the  first  step  in  a  build-up  of  U.S.  combat
forces  in  Vietnam.  It  seems  clear  that  General  Westmoreland  had  reached  the
conclusion  by  early  March  that  the  RVNAF  simply  did  not  have  the  capability
to  overcome  the  Viet  Cong  by  itself.  Outside  forces  were  going  to  be  required
to  take  up  the  slack  until  the  GVN  forces  could  be  revamped  and  built  up.  It
appears  that  General  Westmoreland  had  a  powerful  ally  in  the  person  of  General


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  463

Johnson,  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  who  was  in  Saigon  from  the  5lh  through  the
12th  of  March  1965,  and  who  returned  to  Washington  to  submit  the  first  of
many  recommendations  that  the  U.S.  send  significant  numbers  of  combat  troops
to  Vietnam.  Westmoreland  was  not  far  behind  Johnson  in  submitting  to  Wash-
ington his  own  ideas  on  the  subject.

The  "Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situation"  prepared  bv  General  West-
moreland and  his  staff  during  the  early  weeks  of  NIarch  and  completed  on  the
26th  was  a  classic  Leavenworth-stvle  analysis,  detailed  and  thorough  in  its  con-
sideration of  possible  U.S.  courses  of  action.  Copies  of  the  Estimate,  which  in
bulk  amounted  to  a  full  half  inch  of  foolscap  paper,  were  delivered  to  Washing-
ton by  Brigadier  General  De  Puy,  Westmoreland's  J-3,  who  was  traveling  with
Ambassador  Taylor  to  the  NSC  meetings  of  1-2  April.  If  the  awesome  bulk  of
the  Estimate  deterred  anyone  from  giving  it  the  careful  studv  it  merited,  that
is  most  unfortunate.  As  Westmoreland  himself  said:

Recognizing  recent  marked  changes  in  situation  in  SVN,  we  considered
it  appropriate  to  undertake  a  classical  Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situa-
tion to  think  through  in  a  logical  and  precise  manner  strategy,  objectives,
enemy  capabilities  and  our  own  possible  courses  of  action  before  making
what  may  prove  to  be  in  the  light  of  history  a  momentous  recommenda-
tion. In  addition,  by  reducing  the  Estimate  to  writing  we  expose  our
thoughts  to  others,  thus  making  possible  careful  review  bv  higher  authority
and  perhaps  introduction  of  new  considerations  that  were  not  apparent
here.

The  Estimate  is  as  good  as  the  Commander's  word.  The  basic  considerations
to  be  analyzed  are  all  laid  out  for  the  reader  to  see.  First,  the  Mission  as  General
Westmoreland  interpreted  it:

Forces  of  the  Government  of  Vietnam  supported  and  assisted  by  forces  of
the  U.S.  Military  Assistance  Command,  N'ietnam,  together  with  additional
supporting  U.S.  and  Free  Worl4  forces,  take  as  rapidly  as  possible  those
necessary  actions  to:

A.  Cause  the  DRV  to  cease  its  political  and  militarv  support  of  the  VC
in  SVN,  and

B.  Enable  an  anti-communist  GVN  to  survive  so  that  ultimately  it  may
defeat  the  VC  insurgency  inside  SVN.

Secondly,  the  Basic  U.S.  Strategy:

The  analysis  is  predicated  upon  the  assumption  that  basic  strategy  of
retaliatory  and  punitive  air  strikes  against  NVN  will,  in  time,  bring  about
desired  results,  that  is,  supplv  and  support  of  the  insurgency  will  be  ter-
minated by  DRV  and  hopefully  DRV  VC  High  Command  will  direct  the
cessation  of  offensive  operations.  In  any  event,  without  external  support  the
forces  of  RVNAF  supported  by  U.S.  would  be  able  at  first  to  contain  and
then  to  defeat  VC.  Therefore,  Estimate  addresses  itself  primarily  to  the  in-
terval in  time  between  now  and  time  at  which  basic  strategy  takes  effect.  It
any  time  VC  unilaterally  cease  fire  and  effect  a  cessation  of  mcidents.  this
would  mark  end  of  the' interval  and  end  of  pressure  on  GVN.  Until  pres-
sure eases,  stability  of  GVN  is  a  prime  concern  and  objective.  Consequently,
courses  of  action  examined  are  measured  as  much  in  terms  of  their  impact


464 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

on  stability  and  effectiveness  as  upon  their  purely  military  value,  although,
of  course,  these  two  matters  are  closely  interwoven.

As  an  adjunct  to  this,  Westmoreland  said:

If  basic  strategy  of  punitive  bombing  in  RVN  (sic!)  does  not  take  effect
by  mid-year  additional  deployments  of  U.S.  and  3rd  Country  forces  should
be  considered,  including  introduction  of  full  MEF  into  I  Corps.

Third,  Main  VC  Capabilities:

A.  Continue  with  present  strategv  and  build-up  and  conduct  large  at-
tacks whenever  favorable.

B.  Above  plus  a  major  uprising  to  break  the  back  of  the  GVN.

C.  By  infiltration,  commit  PAVN  up  to  a  division  in  the  I  II  Corps.

D.  Create  peace  movement  through  subversion  of  existing  organizations;
get  neutral  government  established,  dominate  it,  and  sue  the  North  for  peace
and  reunification.

E.  Unilaterally  cease  firing,  causing  the  U.S.  forces  to  leave  and  per-
mitting the  co\  ert  VC  infrastructure  to  survive  intact.

Courses  of  action  in  the  Estimate  were  analyzed  in  relation  to  the  main  enemy
capabilities  outlined  above.  Maximum  weight  was  given  to  the  first  three,  which
were  considered  to  be  the  most  likely.  In  addition,  the  following  considerations
formed  part  of  the  analysis  matrix:

A.  Attainment  of  critical  military  objectives  of

( 1 )  Security  of  bases  and  ports,

(2)  Denial  of  critical  areas  to  the  Viet  Cong  (areas  such  as  the  high-
lands of  II  Corps) ,

(3 )  Provision  of  a  quick  reaction  reserve,  and

(4)  Provision  of  a  basis  for  a  combined  command.

B.  Preservation  of  the  stability  and  effectiveness  of  the  GVN  and  of  its
armed  forces.

C.  Improvement  of  force  ratios  as  thev  changed  with  time,

D.  Remaining  within  the  restrictions  imposed  by  logistical  limitations.

In  order  to  achieve  its  objectives,  the  U.S.  was  presented,  as  Westmoreland  saw
it,  essentially  with  three  possible  courses  of  action,  there  being  several  variations
on  one  of  the  choices.  The  choices  were:

1.  Accelerate  the  build-up  of  RVNAF,  commit  the  7th  Fleet  to  quaran-
tine the  coast  against  infiltration  of  men  and  arms,  and  continue  U.S.
logistical  support  as  required.  No  outside  combat  power  other  than  Naval
and  Air  support  would  be  provided  the  GVN  under  this  option.

2.  The  above  plus  the  commitment  of  up  to  two  U.S.  divisions  with  their
support,  either

a.  to  secure  vital  U.S.  installations  and  defeat  VC  efforts  to  control
the  Kontum,  Pleiku,  Binh  Dinh  region,  or

b.  to  secure  critical  enclaves  in  coastal  regions,  or

c.  to  do  a  combination  of  both  of  the  above.

3.  Both  of  the  major  choices  above  plus  a  cordon  across  SVN  and  the
Laotian  panhandle  manned  by  up  to  three  U.S.  divisions  coupled  with
ARVN,  Thai  and  Laos  forces.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  465

In  his  subsequent  analysis  and  comparison  of  courses  of  action,  General  West-
moreland gave  each  thorough  coverage  in  light  of  all  the  considerations  already
enumerated.  Course  of  Action  1,  RVNAF  build-up  without  outside  ground
force  reinforcement,  was  certainly  logistically  feasible,  but  it  failed  to  promise
improvement  in  any  of  the  other  areas  of  consideration.  Course  of  Action  3,
the  cordon  plus  the  other  courses,  promised  to  attain  all  the  military  objectives,
to  provide  a  basis  for  improving  GVN  stability,  and  to  improve  force  ratios  in
critical  areas.  Because  of  port  and  inland  communications  difficulties,  however,
the  cordon  force  probably  could  not  have  been  fully  deployed  before  the  end  of
Calendar  Year  1965,  which  would  have  been  too  late  to  take  up  the  slack  dur-
ing the  critical  phase  of  the  RVNAF  build-up.  Also,  if  the  basic  strategy  of
punitive  bombing  had  been  successful,  then  the  provision  of  a  force  of  165,000
men — 132,000  of  them  from  the  U.S. — would  have  been  out  of  proportion  to
the  results  expected.  Should  the  bombing  strategy  fail  or  take  effect  only  very
slowly,  then  Westmoreland  felt  the  cordon  should  be  reconsidered.

The  most  propitious  course  of  action  to  emerge  from  the  analysis  in  the  Esti-
mate was  the  second  one  dealing  with  the  commitment  of  up  to  two  U.S.  divi-
sions, including  17  maneuver  battalions,  with  support.  Over  and  above  what
was  in  or  authorized  to  be  in  Vietnam,  Course  of  Action  2  called  for  an  ad-
ditional 33,000  men.

In  order  to  illustrate  trends  in  force  ratios,  Westmoreland  postulated  that  one
USMC  BLT  was  the  equivalent  of  three  ARVN  battalions,  and  one  U.S.  Army
battalion  was  the  equivalent  of  two  ARVN  battalions.  Using  that  rationale,  the
combat  battalions  added  on  through  Course  of  Action  2  would  have  amounted
to  38  ARVN  battalion-equivalents.  Input  on  that  scale  would  have  had  a  fair
effect  on  force  ratios  overall  and  a  very  dramatic  effect  locally  in  the  areas  where
they  were  to  operate.

Without  the  benefit  of  the  increased  battalion-equivalents  provided  by  Course
of  Action  2,  the  ratio  of  ARVN  (and  the  two  Marine  BLT's  then  in  Vietnam)
battalions  to  Viet  Cong  battalions  would  have  degraded,  according  to  the  Esti-
mate, from  1.7  to  1  in  March  1965  to  1.6  to  1  in  December  of  that  year.  This
would  have  been  the  case  despite  an  accelerated  RVNAF  build-up  and  only
a  modest  rate  of  Viet  Cong  build-up  as  in  1964.  With  the  input  of  Course  of
Action  2,  the  equivalent  of  a  10  month  acceleration  in  the  RVNAF  build-up
could  have  been  accomplished  by  mid-year  and  by  the  end  of  the  build-up  period
the  forces  could  have  been  doubled — that  is,  assuming  that  the  forces  in  Course
of  Action  2  were  introduced  during  April,  May,  and  June,  a  proposal  which
was  barely  feasible  logistically  and  which  was  urged  by  General  Westmoreland.

At  the  conclusion  of  his  Estimate,  General  Westmoreland  recommended  that
the  U.S.  build-up  its  combat  force  in  Vietnam  to  17  battalions  by  early  June  at
the  latest.  He  rejected  the  enclave  alternative  because  it  was  too  negative,  be-
cause it  brought  U.S.  troops  into  too  intimate  contact  with  the  population,  and
because  it  posed  some  almost  insurmountable  problems  in  real  estate  acquisition.
In  the  highlands  the^U.S.  troops  would  have  had  no  difficulty  recognizing  the
enemy  among  the  few  montagnards  who  lived  there,  therefore  Westmoreland
recommended  that  a  full  U.S.  division  be  deployed  along  the  Qui  Nhon-Pleiku
axis  with  a  brigade  each  at  An  Khe,  Pleiku,  and  Kontum.  This  deployment  would
have  altered  the  force  ratios  in  the  critical  II  Corps  from  1.9:1  to  2.9:1  in  favor
of  the  RVNAF  immediately.  The  ports  of  Qui  Nhon  and  Nha  Trang,  rather  than
serving  as  enclave  bases,  would,  according  to  the  recommendation,  have  been
developed  as  logistic  support  bases  for  the  forces  in  the  highlands  and  would
have  been  provided  with  a  battalion  each  for  security.  The  rest  of  the  17  battal-


466 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

ions  were  to  provide  base  and  installation  security  in  the  Da  N^ng  Hue  (4
USMC  BLT"s )  and  the  Bien  Hoa-\'ung  Tau  (  3  Army  battalions)  areas.

This  was  the  position  of  COMUSMAC\'  in  March  1965.  In  concluding  his  Esti-
mate. Westmoreland  recognized  the  possibility  that  the  GVN  might  infer  from
either  Course  of  Action  2  or  Course  of  Action  3  that  the  U.S.  was  determined  to
fight  on  alone.  That  possibility-  was  outweighed  in  his  eves,  however,  by  the  tacti-
cal benefits  to  be  gained  plus  the  guarantee  of  a  "more  orderly  buildup"  than
could  have  been  the  case  under  Course  of  Action  1.

In  regard  to  the  build-up  of  the  R\^NAF.  MAC\'  had  in  late  1964  two  alter-
native proposals  under  discussion.  Alternative  1  called  for  increases  of  30,309
in  the  regular  forces,  plus  35.387  in  the  Regional  Force  and  10,815  in  the  Popu-
lar Force.  .Alternative  2  called  for  the  same  increases  in  RF  PF  but  for  an  ac-
celerated figure  for  the  regular  forces  of  47,556.  Taking  into  account  the  limited
leadership  resources  available  to  the  GVN  and  the  restricted  training  facilities.
General  Westmoreland  in  January  1965  recommended  the  more  modest  Alterna-
tive 1  build-up  for  Military-  Assistance  Program  funding.  The  Secretary  of  De-
fense approved  the  recommended  increases  on  23  January,  thereby  bringing  the
MAP  supported  R\'NAF  to  levels  of  275,058  for  the  regulars."  plus  137.187
for  RF  and  185.000  for  PF.

In  response  to  COMUSMACV's  Estimate  of  the  Situation  of  March  1965  and
a  memorandum  from  the  Joint  Chiefs  which  followed  it.  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense approved  the  accelerated  Alternative  2  force  level  for  the  regulars  and
authorized  MAP  funding  for  an  additional  17.247  spaces  in  RVNAF  on  12
April  1965.  Also  provided  was  an  increase  in  the  MAC\'  JTD  of  160  spaces  for
advisors  to  work  with  the  enlarged  RV^'AF.

In  late  Mav,  the  JCS  asked  the  Secretary  of  Defense  to  authorize  MAP  sup-
port for  another  2.369  spaces  for  AR\"N.  The  purpose  was  to  fatten  out  a
division  base  for  the  eventual  organization  of  a  tenth  AR\'N  division  from  exist-
ing separate  regiments.  The  request  was  approved  on  the  4th  of  June.

Any  funher  plans  to  build  up  the  RVNAF  were  torpedoed  by  the  extremely
heavy  losses  suffered  in  combat  during  late  Mav  and  earlv  June.  On  7  June.  Gen-
eral Westmoreland  told  CINCPAC  and  Washington  that  a  moratorium  on
R\'NAF  build-up  was  unavoidable  as  anv  trainees  in  the  pipeline  would  have  to
be  used  as  fillers  in  existing  units.  No  new  AR\'N  battalions  would  be  coming
on  the  scene  until  November  of  that  year.

General  Westmoreland  was  not  in  attendance  at  the  NSC  meetings  of  1-2
April  1965.  Having  gone  on  record  in  his  Estimate  in  favor  of  the  earliest  pos-
sible input  of  up  to  two  division  equivalents  of  U.S.  forces,  he  was  understand-
ably disappointed  with  the  ven,^  modest  increases  sanctioned  by  the  President.
He  communicated  to  CINCPAC  his  concern  that,  while  he  understood  that  divi-
sions were  not  immediately  in  the  ofifing.  he  nevertheless  felt  a  pressing  need
for  a  division  in  the  highlands.  Throughout  the  earlv  part  of  April  prior  to  the
Honolulu  Conference,  Westmoreland  also  kept  up  the  pressure  to  get  an  Army
brigade  into  Bien  Hoa-\'ung  Tau.  The  latter  action  happened  to  dovetail  with
the  current  Washington  strategy  options  and  hence  was  favorably  considered  at
Honolulu  while,  as  has  already  been  noted,  proposals  to  deploy  divisions  were
not.

Only  on  one  occasion  through  the  spring  of  1965  did  General  Westmoreland
display  any  inclination  to  abandon  his  aggressive  highlands  campaign  in  favor
of  the  more  conservative  enclave  strategy.  On  8  May  he  cabled  to  CINCP.AC.
with  Ambassador  Tavlor's  concurrence,  his  Concept  of  Operations  by  US  Allied
Ground  Combat  Forces  in  Support  of  RVNAF.  The  Concept,  as  spelled  out  in


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  467

that  message,  has  already  been  discussed  at  length  in  an  earlier  section  of  this
paper.  Not  discussed  were  some  proposed  deployments  of  U.S.  and  Third  Coun-
try forces  included  bv  Westmoreland.  Perhaps  in  deference  to  the  Ambassador's
known  preference.  Westmoreland  suggested  that  the  U.S.  Airmobile  Division
be  deploved  to  Qui  Nhon  and  Nha  Trang.  In  light  of  his  previous  recommenda-
tions and  subsequent  ones  to  be  discussed,  it  is  difficult  to  conclude  that  West-
moreland reallv  seriouslv  entertained  this  recommendation  or  that  it  was  any-
thing other  than  an  aberration.  On  the  15th  of  the  same  month.  Westmoreland
sent  a  message  to  the  Department  of  the  Armv  indicating  that,  as  far  as  he  was
concerned,  the  concept  for  employment  of  the  Airmobile  Division  was  still  to  be
determined.  Since  he  preferred  an  Airmobile  Division,  he  asked  the  Department
of  the  Army  to  send  airmobile  experts  to  Vietnam  to  assist  him  in  the  prepara-
tion of  "a  concept  of  operations  for  a  division  size  force.**

In  his  message  ~  19118  of  7  June.  General  Westmoreland  asked  for  U.S.  and
Third  Country  reinforcements  after  he  had  explained  that  redressing  deteriorat-
ing force  ratios  was  beyond  the  capability  of  the  R\'NAF.  He  said.  '"I'ne  force
ratios  continue  to  change  in  favor  of  the  VC.  I  believe  that  the  DR\'  will  com-
mit whatever  force  it  deems  necessar)'  to  tip  the  balance  and  that  the  GN'N
cannot  stand  up  successfully  to  this  kind  of  pressure  without  reinforcement."
Westmoreland  was  convinced  that  U.S.  troops  could  "'successfully  take  the  fight
to  the  \"C,"  and  he  explained  that  the  forces  he  was  requesting  were  "to  give  us
a  substantial  and  hard-hitting  offensive  capability  on  the  ground  to  convince  the
VC  that  they  cannot  win."  [Emphasis  added]

At  the  time  Westmoreland  submitted  his  recommendations  in  his  19118,  which
has  erroneously  been  dubbed  '"the  44  Banalion  request."  there  were,  in  addition
to  one  Australian  battalion.  7  U.S.  Marine,  and  2  U.S.  .Army  battalions  in  Viet-
nam. In  his  message,  Westmoreland  said  this:

In  sub-paragraph  A"  below,  deployments  and  actions  are  recommended
on  which  decisions  should  be  made  now.  In  sub-paragraph  "B**  we  have
identified  further  actions  on  which  planning  should  start  and  on  which
separate  recommendations  will  be  forthcoming.

(3 )  One  additional  MAB  to  reinforce  the  III  MAP.

(4)  Tactical  air  units  for  support  of  increased  U.S.  force  (additional
airfields  in  S\"N  and  Thailand  may  be  required).

(5)  Required  combat  and  logistic  support  forces  to  include  helicopter
units  to  support  the  foregoing.

Message  has  been  discussed  with  Ambassador  Taylor  and  Johnson.  Am-
bassador Taylor  is  prepared  to  comment  thereon  during  current  visit  to
Washington.

In  his  subparagraph  "A*  General  Westmoreland  did  no  more  than  request  ex-
peditious approval  of  forces  which  had  been  in  the  planning  stages  for  some
time.  If  his  request  had  been  approved  as  written,  the  grand  total  of  maneuver
battalions  so  provided  would  have  been  33.  This  is  one  less  than  the  total  in-
dicated in  Section  II  of  this  paper  as  approved  and  planned  because  the  Airmo-
bile Division,  when  it  was  finally  organized,  had  8  rather  than  9  airmobile  bat-
talions. If  the  173d  Airborne,  which  was  only  to  be  retained  until  the  .Airmobile
Division  was  readv  to  besin  operations,  were  counted,  then  the  total  of  ma-
neuver battalions  requested  bv  Westmoreland  on  7  June  was  35.  In  subparagraph
'B'  he  identified  a  funher  9  battalions  which  might  be  needed  and  requested  at
some  later  date.


468 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagori  Papers  Vol.  Ill


2.  CIXCPAC  Backs  Into  Enclaves

The  CINCPAC,  Admiral  Sharp,  was  bv  and  large  a  consistent  supporter  of
General  Westmoreland  in  the  latter's  drive  to  get  more  forces  into  South  Viet-
nam. With  regard  to  the  momentous  recommendation  of  7  June,  CINCPAC
concurred  in  General  Westmoreland's  evaluation  of  the  situation  and  agreed
also  that  Allied  troops  were  needed  to  enable  the  friendlv  side  to  take  the  offen-
sive. He  said:  "W^e  will  lose  by  staying  in  enclaves  defending  coastal  bases."
Having  said  that.  Admiral  Sharp  then  went  on  to  disagree  with  Westmoreland
as  to  the  proper  place  for  the  Airmobile  Division.  Rather  than  have  it  deployed
inland  on  the  Qui  Nhon-Pleiku  axis  as  planned  by  Westmoreland,  CINCPAC
would  have  had  it  based  on  Qui  Nhon  with  the  primary  mission  of  clearing
Binh  Dinh  Province  before  moving  inland.  Sharp  was  verv  concerned  that  lo-
gistic backup  for  the  Airmobile  Division  be  assured  before  it  be  sent  into  the
highlands.  Securing  one  division's  LOC  with  another  division  (Westmoreland
intended  to  send  the  ROK's  to  Qui  Nhon)  was  counterproductive,  and  Sharp
felt  that  600  to  800  tons  of  aerial  resupply  per  day,  should  highway  19  be  closed,
would  overtax  the  already  limited  airfield  facilities  in  the  highland  areas  where
the  Airmobile  Division  was  to  go.

Sharp's  initial  objections  to  Westmoreland's  deplo\ment  plans  smacked  of
conservatism  and  mav  well  have  pla\ed  into  the  hands  of  those  who  continued
to  advocate  the  enclave  strategy.  The  Ambassador  was  in  Washington  on  9
June,  and  one  of  the  questions  put  to  him  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  was  whether  or
not  the  Airmobile  Division  should  go  into  the  highlands.  Taylor  convinced  them
that  it  should  not.  Perhaps  without  Sharp's  backing  for  the  coastal  deplovment,
the  Joint  Chiefs  might  not  have  been  convinced.

It  seems  clear,  however,  that  Admiral  Sharp  was  not  reallv  an  exponent  of
the  enclave  strategy.  His  insistence  that  the  Airmobile  Division  stick  to  Binh
Dinh  was  prompted  bv  his  con\iction  that  the  U.S.  forces  should  operate  in
close  proximity  to  the  objective  of  the  Viet  war — the  people.  He  was  consistent
in  this  approach  when  he  pushed  for  deployment  of  the  ROK  RCT  to  Quang
Ngai,  where  it  was  originally  supposed  to  go  and  where  there  were  plenty  of
people  to  be  pacified,  instead  of  to  sparsely  populated  Cam  Ranh  for  unremunera-
tive  security  duty.  He  also  recommended  that  the  remaining  ROK  division  (-),
which  would  have  been  superfluous  at  Qui  Nhon,  be  sent  instead  to  Nha  Trang
or  perhaps  even  into  the  Mekong  Delta.

3.  The  JCS  Yields  the  Torch

The  JCS  put  the  first  major  recommendation  for  ground  troop  commitment
on  the  docket,  as  it  were,  on  20  March,  shortlv  after  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Army
Johnson  returned  from  Saigon.  Because  the  Viet  Cong  were  stronger  and  be-
cause the  leaders  of  the  RVNAF  were  overlv  involved  in  political  matters,  there
had  been,  according  to  the  JCS,  for  the  first  time  a  downward  turn  in  what  had
been  a  relatively  stable  militarv  situation.  Unless  the  trend  could  be  reversed,  the
Chiefs  said,  the  war  would  be  lost  and  it  would  be  seen  as  a  U.S.  defeat.  That
would  be  intolerable;  hence,  the  Chiefs  recommended  that  U.S.  and  Allied  forces
be  introduced  with  a  new  mission  to  stem  the  tide  and  assume  the  offensive.  The
Chiefs  were  manifestlv  not  interested  in  any  kind  of  holding  action.  As  they
said,  "'the  requirement  is  not  simpK  to  withstand  the  Viet  Cong,  howe\er.  but  to
gain  effective  operational  superiorit\  and  assume  the  offensi\e.  To  turn  the  tide
of  the  war  requires  an  objective  of  destro\ing  the  \'iet  Cong,  not  merely  to  keep


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  469

pace  with  them,  or  slow  down  their  rate  of  advance."  The  level  of  force  which
they  recommended  to  carry  out  this  aggressive  mission  and  which  they  saw  as  an
essential  component  of  the  broader  program  to  put  pressure  on  the  DRV/VC
and  to  deter  Chinese  Communist  aggression,  was  three  divisions,  one  ROK  and
two  U.S.

In  summary,  the  JCS  recommended  that  one  U.S.  Marine  division  conduct,
on  order,  offensive  operations  to  kill  Viet  Cong  with  or  without  centralized
GVN/US  command  structure.  The  Marines  should  operate  out  of  their  existing
TAOR,  and  expand  it  as  the  force  grew  in  size.  The  U.S.  Army  division  should
go  to  Pleiku,  where  it  should  operate  with  the  RF/PF  and  CIDG  troops  there
under  U.S.  command.  The  ARVN  battalions  thus  released  and  shielded  by  a  U.S.
buffer  along  the  Laotian  border  should  then  move  to  the  populous  coastal  prov-
inces. No  location  was  specified  for  the  ROK  division,  but  the  Chiefs  recom-
mended that  its  mission  be  similar  to  that  of  the  U.S.  divisions.  They  felt  the
Koreans'  presence  would  have  good  "psychological  effect."

This  "three-division  plan,"  as  it  was  dubbed,  was  discussed  with  the  Secre-
tary of  Defense  and  Ambassador  Taylor  on  the  29th  of  March  and  was  un-
doubtedly the  topic  of  some  discussion  during  the  subsequent  NSC  meetings.  In
any  case,  even  though  the  recommended  deployments  were  not  sanctioned  in
NSAM  328,  the  JCS  continued  to  plan  for  ultimate  implementation.

In  earlier  sections  of  this  paper  the  possibility  that  the  JCS  may  have  gotten
ahead  of  some  of  the  other  decision-makers  in  the  U.S.  Government  was  dis-
cussed. Thus,  in  early  April  they  were  forced  to  back  down  on  the  deployment
they  had  ordered  of  the  173rd  Airborne  to  Bien  Hoa-Vung  Tau,  and  in  JCSM
321-65,  30  April  1965,  they  erroneously  described  as  "approved"  a  package  of
some  4,700  logistical  troops  which  were  part  of  the  three-division  plan  and  still
in  the  talking  stage.  The  mission  of  forces  listed  in  JCSM  321-65  as  "approved"
by  the  JCS  was  to  be  as  follows:

These  forces  are  to  bolster  GVN  forces  during  their  continued  build-up,
secure  bases  and  installations,  conduct  counterinsurgency  combat  opera-
tions in  coordination  with  the  RVNAF,  and  prepare  for  the  later  introduc-
tion of  an  airmobile  division  to  the  central  plateau,  the  remainder  of  III
MEF  to  the  Da  Nang  area,  and  the  remainder  of  a  ROK  division  to  Quang
Ngai.

Logistic  forces  of  all  services  will  strengthen  support  of  in-country  forces,
provide  support  for  the  new  forces,  prepare  bases  and  installations  for  pos-
sible future  developments,  and  be  prepared  to  support  those  additional
forces.

The  tone  of  JCSM  321-65  was  consistent  with  the  JCS'  advocacy  of  a  full
three  divisions  of  troops  for  Vietnam  plus  an  aggressive  mission  for  those  troops.
It  was  not  in  keeping,  however,  with  the  cautious  language  of  the  "Victory
Strategy"  sanctioned  at  the  Honolulu  Conference  of  20  April.  That  strategy  was
the  basis  for  the  enclavists  and  it  promised  success  through  denial  of  victory  to
the  Viet  Cong.  The  enemy  was  to  be  denied  victory  because  he  would  be  unable
to  seize  a  certain  number  of  decisive  areas  held  by  U.S.  and  Third  Country
forces,  despite  any  successes  he  might  enjoy  throughout  the  rest  of  the  country.
Realizing  his  own  impotence,  the  enemy  would  be  moved  to  seek  a  negotiated
settlement  to  the  conflict.  The  level  of  commitment  recommended  to  the  Presi-
dent after  the  Honolulu  Conference  and  in  keeping  with  the  "Victory  Strategy"
as  described  above  was  considerably  less  than  three  divisions  as  has  been  pointed


470 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

out  in  earlier  sections  of  this  paper.  The  JCS  should  have  been  addressing  the
"Victory  Strategy"  in  their  30  April  memorandum,  but  preferred  instead  to  con-
tinue the  push  for  three  divisions.

COMUSMACV's  request  of  7  June  altered  drastically  the  role  of  the  JCS  in
the  build-up  debate.  Up  to  that  time  the  JCS  had,  if  anything,  been  ahead  of
General  Westmoreland  in  advocating  Allied  forces  for  Vietnam.  The  27  battalions
of  their  three-division  plan  were  in  themselves  more  than  Westmoreland  ever
requested  until  7  June.  After  that  date,  the  big  push  came  from  Westmoreland  in
Saigon,  and  the  JCS  were  caught  in  the  middle  between  the  latter  and  the
powerful  and  strident  opposition  his  latest  request  for  forces  had  surfaced  in
Washington.  The  JCS  memoranda  of  June  and  July  1965  were  numerous  and
reflected,  apparently  without  guiding,  the  44  Battalion  debate's  progress.  They
showed  the  Airmobile  Division  in  and  out  of  Qui  Nhon  as  the  debate  on  the
strategy  for  its  employment  ebbed  and  flowed.  The  173rd  Airborne  Brigade  and
the  brigade  form  101st  Airborne  Division  were  first  counted  and  then  dropped
and  then  counted  again  as  the  total  permanent  force  to  be  deployed  to  Vietnam
approached  44  maneuver  battalions  as  a  limit.  On  the  9th  of  June,  the  JCS
favored  the  deployment  of  the  Airmobile  Division  to  the  highlands.  On  the  11th
they  favored  its  going  to  Qui  Nhon  after  discussing  the  matter  with  the  Ambas-
sador. On  the  11th,  the  total  recommended  force  was  33  battalions,  23  U.S.
with  the  173rd  coming  out,  and  10  Third  Country.  On  the  18th  of  June,  the
total  had  dropped  to  22  and  10  as  the  173rd  was  scheduled  to  stay  but  the
brigade  from  the  101st  was  to  leave.  Final  sanction  for  both  airborne  units  to
remain  in  Vietnam  was  not  secured  until  August.

4. Search  and  Destroy  as  a  Strategy  and  44  Battalions  as  a  Force

It  was  not  at  all  clear  that  with  the  advent  of  the  44  battalion  debate  the
vestiges  of  the  enclave  strategy  and  the  conservatism  which  had  characterized
it  had  expired.  On  the  contrary,  enclave  thinking  was  still  very  much  alive.  On
the  11th  of  June,  the  JCS  cabled  CINCPAC  and  informed  him  that  somewhat
less  than  Westmoreland's  19118  was  very  close  to  being  approved  for  deployment.
The  force  described  amounted  to  two  Marine  BLT's  and  three  Army  brigades,
two  of  which  had  already  been  approved.  The  JCS  wanted  to  know  where
Westmoreland  intended  to  put  this  force  in  Vietnam.  The  implicit  intention  to
keep  a  string  on  every  unit  going  into  Vietnam  was  obvious  to  General  West-
moreland. In  reply  to  this  query  and  in  response  to  the  rising  volume  of  criticism
directed  at  his  estimate  of  the  seriousness  of  the  situation  and  his  proposed
utilization  of  combat  forces,  Westmoreland  sent  the  following  cable  to  CINCPAC:

A.  Actions  recommended:

(1)  Deploy  at  once  to  I  CTZ  the  remaining  two  BLT's  of  the  3d
Marine  Division  and  appropriate  supporting  division  and  air  elements
(approximately  8,000  personnel).  Reconstitute  the  SLF  as  a  floating
reserve.

(2)  Deploy  balance  of  increment  1  and  all  increment  2  (as  defined
in  Reference  C  [Ref  C  was  an  earlier  MACV  message  of  26  May  1965]
of  Army  logistic  and  other  support  units  in  accordance  with  schedule
set  out  in  Reference  D.  [Ref  D  was  a  U.S.  Army  Support  Command
Vietnam  message  of  31  May]  (Approximately  8,000  personnel)

(3)  Deploy  the  U.S.  Army  Air  Mobile  Division  (and  logistic  incre-
ment 3)  through  Qui  Nhon  to  An  Khe,  Pleiku  and  Kontum  (approxi-


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  471

mately  21,000  personnel).  Qui  Nhon  will  be  ready  to  receive  the  division
approximately  1  August  upon  the  closure  of  increment  2  forces.

(4)  Concurrently  with  the  Air  Mobile  Division,  deploy  I  Corps  Head-
quarters (approximately  1,500  personnel).

(5)  Deploy  the  ROK  Marine  RCT  to  Cam  Ranh  Bay  as  soon  after
1  July  as  the  unit  can  be  readied  for  movement  (approximately  4,000
personnel).  Deploy  balance  of  the  ROK  division  force  (approximately
14,500  personnel)  plus  U.S.  logistic  increment  4  (1,500  personnel);  start-
ing 15  September  to  the  general  area  of  Qui  Nhon.  (This  answers  Ref  E
[CINCPAC  message  of  5  June]  in  part — separate  message.  [Doc.  8])

(6)  Deploy  additional  tactical  fighter  squadrons  to  Cam  Ranh  Bay
when  expeditionary  landing  field  complete  at  that  location.  Also  provide
naval  aircraft  carried  support  of  in-country  operations  as  required;  we
believe  the  latter  will  engage  one  carrier  full  time.

(7)  Hold  the  173d  Airborne  Brigade  in-country  until  the  Air  Mobile
Division  has  deployed  and  is  ready  for  operations.

(8)  Continue  air  attacks  against  the  DRV.  (Reference  F  [MACV
message  of  20  May]  applies)

B.  Additional  deployment  that  may  be  required  and  on  which  planning
should  begin:  [Emphasis  added]

(1)  Three  U.S.  Army  Hawk  battalions  to  TSN  Bien  Hoa,  Qui  Nhon
and  Cam  Ranh  in  that  priority.

(2)  The  remainder  of  the  1st  Infantry  Division  or  the  101st  Airborne
Division  beginning  1  October.

This  message  was  extremely  important,  for  in  it  COMUSMACV  spelled  out
the  concept  of  keeping  U.S.  forces  away  from  the  people.  The  search  and  destroy
strategy  for  U.S.  and  Third  Country  forces  which  continues  to  this  day  and  the
primary  focus  of  RVNAF  on  pacification  both  stem  from  that  concept.  In
addition,  Westmoreland  made  a  big  pitch  in  this  cable  for  a  free  hand  to
maneuver  the  troops  around  inside  the  country.  That  is  the  prerogative  of  a
major  field  commander — there  is  good -indication  that  at  this  stage  Westmore-
land saw  himself  in  that  light  rather  than  as  advisor  and  assister  to  the  Viet-
namese armed  forces.

Ambassador  Taylor  returned  to  Vietnam  from  Washington  shortly  after  the
battle  at  Dong  Xoai,  just  as  the  new  Thieu-Ky  government  was  being  installed.
His  first  report  confirmed  the  seriousness  of  the  military  situation  as  reported  by
General  Westmoreland  and  also  pointed  up  the  very  tenuous  hold  the  new
government  had  on  the  country.  This  report  apparently  helped  to  remove  the
last  obstacles  to  consideration  of  all  of  the  forces  mentioned  in  Westmoreland's
request  of  7  June.  On  22  June,  the  Chairman  of  the  JCS  cabled  Westmoreland
and  CINCPAC  to  inform  them  that  the  ante  had  gone  up  from  35  to  44
battalions,  counting  all  forces  planned  and  programmed  and  including  the  173rd.
Westmoreland  was  asked  if  44  battalions  would  be  enough  to  convince  the  VC/
DRV  that  they  could  not  win.  General  Westmoreland  replied  that  there  was  no
evidence  the  VC/DRV  would  alter  their  plans  regardless  of  what  the  U.S.  did
in  the  next  six  months.  The  44  battalion  force  should,  however,  establish  a
favorable  balance  of  power  by  the  end  of  the  year.  If  the  U.S.  was  to  seize  the
initiative  from  the  enemy,  then  further  forces  would  be  required  into  1966
and  beyond.

On  the  26th  of  June,  as  has  already  been  noted,  General  Westmoreland  was
given  the  authority  to  commit  U.S.  forces  to  battle  in  support  of  RVNAF  "in


472 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

any  situation  .  .  .  when,  in  COMUSMACV's  judgment,  their  use  is  necessary
to  strengthen  the  relative  position  of  GVN  forces."  This  was  about  as  close  to
a  free  hand  in  managing  the  forces  as  General  Westmoreland  was  likely  to  get.
The  enclave  strategy  was  finished,  and  the  debate  from  then  on  centered  on
how  much  force  and  to  what  end.  There  were  some  attempts  to  snatch  the
chestnuts  from  the  fire,  however.

Westmoreland's  opposition,  while  far  from  presenting  a  united  front,  had  its
day  in  court  during  late  June  and  early  July  1965.  The  Embassy  in  Saigon,
while  recognizing  the  seriousness  of  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  was  less  than
sanguine  about  the  prospects  for  success  if  large  numbers  of  foreign  troops  were
brought  in.  Deputy  Ambassador  U.  Alexis  Johnson  told  Assistant  Secretary  of
Defense  McNaughton  on  25  June  that  the  U.S.  should  not  bring  in  more  troops.
The  situation,  according  to  Johnson,  was  in  many  ways  no  more  serious  than
the  previous  year.  Even  if  it  were  more  serious,  he  went  on,  massive  input  of
U.S.  troops  was  unlikely  to  make  much  difference.  The  best  they  could  do  would
be  to  hold  a  few  enclaves.  Johnson  pointed  out  that  the  Vietnamese  were  afraid
they  would  lose  authority  if  more  U.S.  troops  were  brought  in.  He  advised  that
the  U.S.  allow  the  forces  already  in  the  country  to  settle.  After  some  experimenta-
tion with  them,  the  way  would  be  much  clearer.  Once  in,  troops  could  not,
without  difficulty,  be  taken  out  again.

The  views  expressed  by  Johnson  to  McNaughton  parallel  those  of  Ambassador
Taylor  throughout  the  build-up  debate.  Both  men  were  very  much  concerned
with  the  effect  of  the  proposed  build-up  on  the  Vietnamese.  They  were  not
directly  opposed  to  the  use  of  U.S.  forces  to  help  the  GVN;  they  merely  wanted
to  go  very  slowly  to  insure  against  loss  of  control.

At  the  opposite  end  of  the  spectrum  from  General  Westmoreland  was  Under
Secretary  of  State  George  Ball.  Convinced  that  the  U.S.  was  pouring  its  resources
down  the  drain  in  the  wrong  place.  Ball  placed  himself  in  direct  opposition  to  the
build-up.  In  a  draft  memorandum  he  circulated  on  the  28th  of  June,  Ball  stated
that  Westmoreland's  intention  was  to  go  to  Phase  III  combat  (Phase  III  of  the
8  May  Concept  of  Operations  which  called  for  US/Allied  forays  inland  to
secure  bases  and  areas  for  further  operations).  In  Ball's  view  there  was  abso-
lutely no  assurance  that  the  U.S.  could  with  the  provision  of  more  ground  forces
achieve  its  political  objectives  in  Vietnam.  Instead,  the  U.S.  risked  involving  itself
in  a  costly  and  indeterminate  struggle.  To  further  complicate  matters,  it  would  be
equally  impossible  to  achieve  political  objectives  by  expanding  the  bombing  of  the
North — the  risks  of  involving  the  USSR  and  the  CPR  were  too  great,  besides
which  such  action  would  alienate  friends.  No  combination  of  the  two  actions
offered  any  better  prospect  for  success.  Since  the  costs  to  achieve  its  objectives
if  the  U.S.  embarked  on  an  expanding  program  were  indeterminate,  the  U.S.
should,  in  Ball's  view,  not  elect  to  follow  such  a  course  of  action.  It  should  in-
stead "cut  its  losses"  by  restricting  itself  to  the  programmed  15  battalions  and
72,000  men  made  public  at  a  press  conference  in  mid-June  by  the  Secretary  of
Defense.  By  holding  those  forces  to  a  very  conservative  Phase  II  strategy  of  base
defense  and  reserve  in  support  of  RVNAF,  U.S.  combat  losses  could  be  held  to
a  minimum  while  the  stage  was  being  set  for  withdrawal.

Ball  was  cold-blooded  in  his  analysis.  He  recognized  that  the  U.S.  would  not
be  able  to  avoid  losing  face  before  its  Asian  allies  if  it  staged  some  form  of
conference  leading  to  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces.  The  loss  would  only  be  of  short
term  duration,  however,  and  the  U.S.  could  emerge  from  this  period  of  travail  as
a  "wiser  and  more  mature  nation."  On  1  July,  Ball  sent  to  the  President  a  memo-
randum entitled  "A  Compromise  Solution  for  South  Vietnam."  In  that  memo-


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  J  965  473

randum,  Ball  presented  his  case  for  cutting  losses  essentially  as  it  is  described
above.

Assistant  Secretary  of  State  William  Bundy,  like  so  many  others,  found
himself  in  between  Westmoreland  and  Ball.  The  U.S.  needed  to  avoid  the
ultimatum  aspects  of  the  44  battalions  and  also  the  Ball  withdrawal  proposal,
both  of  which  were  undesirable  in  Bundy's  estimation.  On  1  July,  Bundy  sug-
gested to  the  President  that  the  U.S.  should  adopt  a  policy  which  would  allow
it  to  hold  on  without  risking  disasters  of  scale  if  the  war  were  lost  despite
deployment  of  the  full  44  battalions.  For  the  moment,  according  to  Bundy,  the
U.S.  should  complete  planned  deployments  to  bring  in-country  forces  to  1 8
maneuver  battalions  and  85,000  men.  The  Airmobile  Division  and  the  remainder
of  the  1st  Division  should  be  brought  to  a  high  state  of  readiness,  but  the  de-
cision as  to  their  deployment  should  be  deferred.  By  so  acting  the  U.S.  would
gain  time  in  which  to  work  diplomatically  to  realign  Southeast  Asia  and  thereby
salvage  its  honor  and  credibility.  The  forces  in  Vietnam,  which  Bundy  assumed
would  be  enough  to  prevent  collapse,  would  be  restricted  to  reserve  reaction  in
support  of  RVNAF.  This  would  allow  for  some  experimentation  without  taking
over  the  war  effort — a  familiar  theme.  Bundy  felt,  as  did  Ambassador  Taylor,
that  there  remained  considerable  uncertainty  as  to  how  well  U.S.  troops  would
perform  in  the  Vietnam  environment.  We  needed  to  find  out  before  going  big.

5. The  Influence  of  the  President  and  His  Secretary  of  Defense

It  is  difificult  to  be  precise  about  the  position  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense
during  the  build-up  debate  because  there  is  so  little  of  him  in  the  files.  In  March,
Ambassador  Taylor  sent  to  Saigon  the  following  description  of  the  Secretary's
views  regarding  the  ICS's  three-division  plan:

a.  The  ICS  has  recommended  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  the  early  de-
ployment of  a  three  division  force  with  appropriate  combat  and  logistic
support.  This  force  would  include  the  entire  MEF  and  I  Corps  area.  An
Army  Division  in  the  high  plateau,  and  a  Korean  Division,  location  un-
specified. The  Chairman,  ICS  emp*hasized  the  urgent  necessity  to  deploy  a
logistical  command  and  the  forward  deployment  of  tactical  fighter  squadrons
as  well  as  the  earliest  possible  construction  of  the  airfield  at  Chu  Lai  and  a
runway  at  Da  Nang.

b.  Ambassador  Taylor  indicated  that  3  divisions  seemed  high;  that  Quat
was  not  persuaded  that  more  troops  were  necessary;  that  anti-American  senti-
ment lies  just  below  the  surface  and  that  finally  there  are  two  very  real
limitations  on  the  number  and  rate  of  introduction  of  U.S.  and  Third
Country  forces.  First  is  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the  country  and  second
logistical  limitations.

c.  The  Chairman,  ICS  outlined  the  importance  of  establishing  a  goal
against  which  logistics  planning  could  proceed.

d.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  indicated  that  further  U.S.  deployments
must  be  accompanied  by  deployment  of  Koreans  for  reasons  of  domestic
reaction.

e.  After  an  exchange  of  views  on  the  missions  and  operating  methods
of  U.S.  forces  the  Secretary  of  Defense  stated  that  he  was  impressed  with
the  adverse  force  ratios  and  favored  deployment  of  U.S.  forces  conditioned
by:

(1) political  (psychological)  absorption  capacity


474 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

(2)  logistical  absorption  capacity

(3)  operational  absorption — (that  is  operational  requirements).

In  his  official  reply  to  the  JCS  memorandum  containing  the  three-division  plan,
the  Secretary  said  this:

I  have  considered  the  views  of  the  JCS  presented  in  referenced  memo-
randum. As  you  are  aw^are  the  substance  of  their  recommendations  was  con-
sidered in  the  high-level  discussions  which  took  place  in  connection  with  the
recent  visit  of  Ambassador  Taylor.  I  believe  that  the  decisions  made  at  that
time  reflect  the  views  of  the  JCS  to  the  extent  required  at  this  time.

It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  (after  the  NSC  meetings  of  1-2  April
1965)  Mr.  McNamara  was  interested  in  the  JCS  continuance  of  planning  for
the  earliest  possible  introduction  of  the  three  divisions.  In  reply  to  the  JCSM
of  30  April  in  which  the  Chiefs  summed  up  the  results  of  the  Honolulu  Con-
ference and  subsequent  discussions  and  in  which  they  made  another  pitch  for  the
three-division  plan,  the  Secretary  said  in  regard  to  the  latter:

The  other  deployments  described  will  be  considered  in  conjunction  with
continuing  high-level  deliberations  on  the  Southeast  Asia  situation  and  as
further  requested  by  the  JCS.

In  the  files  are  several  other  bits  of  information  which,  while  perhaps  not  always
directly  attributable  to  the  Secretary's  personal  philosophy,  nevertheless  are  an
indication  of  how  he  interpreted  his  guidance  from  the  President.  On  1  March
he  sent  this  memorandum  to  all  departments:

I  want  it  clearly  understood  that  there  is  an  unlimited  appropriation
available  for  the  financing  of  aid  to  Vietnam.  Under  no  circumstances  is
lack  of  money  to  stand  in  the  way  of  aid  to  that  nation.

In  response  to  a  query  by  General  Johnson,  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  as  to  how
much  the  U.S.  must  contribute  directly  to  the  security  of  South  Vietnam,  the
Secretary  said:

Policy  is:  anything  that  will  strengthen  the  position  of  the  GVN  will  be
sent.

On  2  April,  the  JCS  sent  the  Secretary  a  bold  memorandum  in  which  they
recommended  clearing  the  decks  of  all  "administrative  and  procedural  impedi-
ments that  hamper  us  in  the  prosecution  of  this  war."  They  went  on  to  list  a
whole  panoply  of  problems  which  they  felt  were  causing  unnecessary  headaches
in  providing  support  to  General  Westmoreland.  The  JCSM  was  a  direct  slap
at  some  of  the  Secretary's  management  techniques  and  an  appeal  that  the  mili-
tary staff  be  allowed  to  run  the  show.  McNamara  was  silent  for  a  long  time.  He
replied  to  the  memorandum  on  14  May  and  addressed  each  of  the  JCS  recom-
mendations in  turn.  The  gist  of  his  reply  was  that  he  was  not  yet  ready  to  yield
the  reins  to  the  military.  He  said:

I  am  sure  it  is  recognized  that  many  of  these  recommendations  have
received,  or  are  now  receiving,  separate  action  review  in  appropriate


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  475

channels.  Also,  it  appears  clear  that  many  of  the  actions  recommended
should  be  implemented  only  if  execution  of  a  major  CINCPAC  OPLAN
were  ordered.

There  are  plenty  of  other  indications  in  the  files  that  the  Secretary  was  very
carefully  and  personally  insuring  that  the  Defense  Establishment  was  ready
to  provide  efficient  and  sufficient  support  to  the  fighting  elements  in  Vietnam.
From  the  records,  the  Secretary  comes  out  much  more  clearly  for  good  manage-
ment than  he  does  for  any  particular  strategy.

During  the  more  heated  debate  following  Westmoreland's  request  of  7  June,
there  is  hardly  a  trace  in  the  files  of  the  Secretary's  opinion.  In  a  letter  to
Representative  Mahon  of  the  House  Appropriations  Committee  on  9  June,
McNamara  indicated  that  the  reserve  stocks  provided  for  combat  consumption
in  the  Fiscal  Year  1966  Budget  might  have  to  be  replenished  as  the  situation  in
South  Vietnam  developed.  He  was  not  sure,  however,  and  in  any  case  could
afford  to  wait  and  see.  Perhaps  there  would  be  a  request  for  a  supplementary
appropriation  when  the  Congress  reconvened  the  following  January.  (The  Presi-
dent asked  for  a  1.7  billion  supplementary  appropriation  in  August  of  1965  for
military  operations  in  Vietnam.)

Secretary  McNamara  went  out  to  Vietnam  for  a  firsthand  look  from  16  to
20  July.  He  wanted  to  hear  Westmoreland's  concept  for  the  employment  of  the
44  battalions,  and  he  sought  the  answers  to  a  number  of  other  questions  in-
cluding what  forces  Westmoreland  thought  would  be  required  through  January
1966  and  beyond.  When  McNamara  left  Washington,  the  44  battalion  debate
remained  unresolved.  While  he  was  in  Saigon,  he  received  a  cable  from  Deputy
Secretary  of  Defense  Vance  informing  him  that  the  President  had  decided  to  go
ahead  with  the  plan  to  deploy  all  34  of  the  U.S.  battalions.  The  debate  was
over.  McNamara  left  Saigon  bearing  Westmoreland  recommendations  for  an
even  greater  increase  in  forces  which  will  be  the  subject  of  a  later  paper.  "In
many  respects,"  McNamara  told  the  press  on  leaving  Vietnam,  "it  [the  situation]
has  deteriorated  since  15  months  ago  when  I  was  last  here."

There  is  no  question  that  the  key  figure  in  the  early  1965  build-up  was  the
President  of  the  United  States.  In  NS'AM  328,  he  only  approved  the  modest
input  of  two  Marine  battalions  even  though  he  was  presented  with  a  JCS  recom-
mendation that  three  full  divisions  be  sent.  The  whole  tone  of  the  NSAM  is  one
of  caution.  The  President  was  determined  that  any  changes  authorized  in  that
NSAM  be  understood  as  "being  gradual  and  wholly  consistent  with  existing
policy."  He  was  terribly  concerned  with  control  over  release  of  information  to
the  press,  and  a  premature  leak  from  Saigon  of  some  of  the  details  of  the  1-2
April  NSC  meetings  brought  a  sharp  response  from  him.  The  subdued  tones  of
NSAM  328  notwithstanding,  the  President  apparently  lent  his  sanction  to  the
broader  proposals  contained  in  the  joint  State/Defense  7-point  cable  of  15
April,  and  in  so  doing  he  upset  the  Ambassador.

Most  of  the  recommendations  which  came  out  of  the  Honolulu  Conference
received  early  attention  by  President  Johnson,  but  during  May  things  tended  to
slow  down  as  his  focus  was  diverted,  no  doubt,  by  the  situation  in  the  Dominican
Republic.

On  the  4th  of  May,  the  President  sent  a  special  message  to  the  Congress  in
which  he  requested  a  supplemental  appropriation  of  $700  million  "to  meet
mounting  military  requirements  in  Vietnam."  He  described  in  that  message  the
landing  of  U.S.  Marines  at  Da  Nang  and  Phu  Bai  the  more  recent  arrival  of  the
173rd  Airborne.  He  went  on  to  say:


476 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

Nor  can  I  guarantee  this  will  be  the  last  request.  If  our  need  expands  I
will  turn  again  to  the  Congress.  For  we  will  do  whatever  must  be  done  to
insure  the  safety  of  South  Vietnam  from  aggression.  This  is  the  firm  and
irrevocable  commitment  of  our  people  and  Nation.

And  later  in  the  same  message:

I  do  ask  for  prompt  support  of  our  basic  course :  Resistance  to  aggression,
moderation  in  the  use  of  power,  and  a  constant  search  for  peace.

On  18  June,  McGeorge  Bundy  sent  this  memorandum  to  the  Secretary  of
Defense :

The  President  mentioned  to  me  yesterday  his  desire  that  we  find  more
dramatic  and  effective  actions  in  South  Vietnam.  He  also  mentioned  his
desire  for  a  report  on  the  progress  of  his  idea  that  we  need  more  light  planes
for  operations  there.  Finally,  he  asked  if  we  have  enough  helicopters.

On  the  16th  of  June  Secretary  McNamara  had  given  the  Army  permission  to
proceed  with  the  organization  of  an  Airmobile  Division  using  the  assets  of  the
11th  Air  Assault  Division  and  the  2nd  Infantry  Division.  On  the  22nd,  four  days
after  the  Bundy  Memorandum,  the  Secretary  proceeded  with  readiness  prepara-
tion of  the  Airmobile  Division  for  deployment  to  South  Vietnam,  and  the
number  of  maneuver  battalions  being  considered  for  eventual  deployment  rose
from  23  U.S.  to  34  U.S.  or  44  U.S./3rd  Country  total.  On  the  23rd  of  June  the
deployments  of  one  Marine  BLT  to  Da  Nang  and  one  to  Qui  Nhon  were  ap-
proved. The  latter  move  provided  the  needed  security  for  the  port  of  Qui  Nhon
in  preparation  for  the  arrival  of  the  Airmobile  Division  and  also  allowed  West-
moreland to  divert  the  Army  brigade  originally  scheduled  for  Qui  Nhon  to  Cam
Ranh  Bay  and  Bien  Hoa.

6. Presidential  Sanction  for  Phase  I

On  17  July,  McNamara  was  in  Saigon  with  the  new  Ambassador,  Mr.  Lodge,
when  he  received  the  cable  from  Vance  telling  him  that  the  President  had  decided
to  proceed  with  the  deployment  of  all  34  U.S.  battalions  then  under  con-
sideration. At  that  time,  the  Chief  Executive  was  said  by  Vance  to  be  favorably
inclined  toward  calling  up  reserves  to  make  the  deployments  a  little  less  of  a
strain  on  the  military  establishment.

Upon  his  return  from  Vietnam,  Secretary  McNamara  prepared  a  draft  release
to  the  press  which  stated  that  the  total  increase  in  U.S.  forces  with  the  latest
approved  add-ons  would  be  about  100,000.  That  information  was  not  given  out.
Instead,  after  a  week  of  deliberation,  the  President  held  a  press  conference  on  the
28th  of  July  in  which  he  told  the  American  people  "the  lesson  of  history"
dictated  that  the  U.S.  commit  its  strength  to  resist  aggression  in  South  Vietnam.
He  said:

We  did  not  choose  to  be  the  guardians  at  the  gate,  but  there  is  no  one
else.

Nor  would  surrender  in  Vietnam  bring  peace,  because  we  learned  from
Hitler  at  Munich  that  success  only  feeds  the  appetite  of  aggression.  The
battle  would  be  renewed  in  one  country  and  then  another  country,  bringing
with  it  perhaps  even  larger  and  cruder  conflict,  as  we  have  learned  from
the  lessons  of  history.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  All

Moreover,  we  are  in  Vietnam  to  fulfill  one  of  the  most  solemn  pledges  of
the  American  Nation.  Three  Presidents — President  Eisenhower,  President
Kennedy,  and  your  present  President — over  1 1  years  have  committed  them-
selves and  have  promised  to  help  defend  this  small  and  valiant  nation.

Strengthened  by  that  promise,  the  people  of  South  Vietnam  have  fought
for  many  long  years.  Thousands  of  them  have  died.  Thousands  more  have
been  crippled  and  scarred  by  war.  We  just  cannot  now  dishonor  our  word,
or  abandon  our  commitment,  or  leave  those  who  believed  us  and  who
trusted  us  to  the  terror  and  repression  and  murder  that  would  follow.

This,  then,  my  fellow  Americans,  is  why  we  are  in  Vietnam.

As  far  as  increases  in  U.S.  forces  were  concerned,  the  President  said  this:

First,  we  intend  to  convince  the  Communists  that  we  cannot  be  defeated
by  force  of  arms  or  by  superior  power.  They  are  not  easily  convinced.  In
recent  months  they  have  greatly  increased  fighting  forces  and  their
attacks  and  the  number  of  incidents.  I  have  asked  the  commanding  general.
General  Westmoreland,  what  more  he  needs  to  meet  this  mounting  aggres-
sion. He  has  told  me.  We  will  meet  his  needs.

I  have  today  ordered  to  Vietnam  the  Airmobile  Division  and  certain
other  forces  which  will  raise  our  fighting  strength  from  75,000  to  125,000
men  almost  immediately.  Additional  forces  will  be  needed  later,  and  they
will  be  sent  as  requested.  This  will  make  it  necessary  to  increase  our  active
fighting  forces  by  raising  the  monthly  draft  call  from  17,000  over  a  period
of  time  to  35,000  per  month,  and  for  us  to  step  up  our  campaign  for
voluntary  enlistments.

After  this  past  week  of  deliberations,  I  have  concluded  that  it  is  not
essential  to  order  Reserve  units  into  service  now.  If  that  necessity  should
later  be  indicated,  I  will  give  the  matter  most  careful  consideration  and  I
will  give  the  country  due  and  adequate  notice  before  taking  such  action,
but  only  after  full  preparations.

We  have  also  discussed  with  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  lately
the  steps  that  we  will  take  to  substantially  increase  their  own  effort,  both
on  the  battlefield  and  toward  reform  and  progress  in  the  villages.  Ambas-
sador Lodge  is  now  formulating  a  new  program  to  be  tested  upon  his
return  to  that  area.

During  the  questioning  period  which  followed  the  President's  presentation,  the
following  dialogue  between  the  President  and  one  of  his  interlocutors  is  recorded:

Question:  Mr.  President,  does  the  fact  that  you  are  sending  additional
forces  to  Vietnam  imply  any  change  in  the  existing  policy  of  relying  mainly
on  the  South  Vietnamese  to  carry  out  ofi'ensive  operations  and  using  Ameri-
can forces  to  guard  installations  and  to  act  as  emergency  backup?

The  President:  It  does  not  imply  any  change  in  policy  whatever.  It  docs
not  imply  change  of  objective.

The  Annex  to  JCSM  590-65,  forwarded  by  the  JCS  on  30  July  1965,  reflected
the  final  Phase  I  package  approved  for  deployment  as  44  maneuver  battalions  and
a  total  strength  in  South  Vietnam  after  all  units  had  closed  of  193,887  U.S.
fighting  men.  During  ensuing  discussions  concerning  Phase  II  of  the  build-up,


478 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

the  Phase  I  package  was  further  refined  and  increased.  By  10  November,  the
Phase  I  package  was  fixed  at  219,000  U.S.  personnel.

The  build-up  progressed  apace  while  the  debate  continued.  In  July  two  more
Army  brigades  arrived  followed  closely  by  a  corps  headquarters.  The  2d  Brigade,
1st  Infantry  Division,  which  had  originally  been  scheduled  to  protect  Qui  Nhon,
went  to  Bien  Hoa,  leaving  one  battalion  at  Cam  Ranh  Bay  for  security.  That
battalion  rejoined  its  parent  unit  when  relieved  at  Cam  Ranh  by  the  1st  Brigade,
101st  Airborne  Division.  In  August  the  landing  of  the  7th  Marine  Regiment
brought  III  MAF  to  a  total  strength  of  one  Marine  Division  plus  one  regiment
or  12  BLT's.  The  airmobile  division,  organized  on  1  July  as  the  1st  Air  Cavalry
Division,  was  fully  deployed  and  responsible  for  its  TAOR  on  28  September.
The  remainder  of  the  1st  Infantry  Division  closed  on  7  October,  and  the  ROK
forces  were  fully  deployed  by  8  November,  bringing  the  US/3rd  Country  forces
in-country  to  a  total  fighting  force  of  44  maneuver  battaHons.  U.S.  strength  in
South  Vietnam  at  the  end  of  1965  was  184,314  men.

E.  EXPECTATIONS

The  first  four  sections  of  this  paper  have  presented  the  development  of  the
situation  in  South  Vietnam  through  the  early  months  of  1965  and  discussed  the
three  strategies  (1)  Strategy  of  Security,  2)  Enclave  Strategy,  and  3)  Search
and  Destroy  Strategy)  which  were  considered  during  the  same  time  span  for  the
employment  of  United  States  ground  forces.  Each  of  the  strategies  had  its  hey-
day and  its  proponents,  and  each  was  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  decision-
making principals  who  were  weighing  it  with  certain  expectations.

1. The  Strategy  of  Security

The  short-lived  strategy  of  security  saw  the  deployments  as  a  necessary  evil
to  meet  an  immediate  need — the  bolstering  of  base  security  in  South  Vietnam  for
the  air  effort  against  North  Vietnam.  Few  of  the  principals  read  any  more  into
it  than  that.

The  only  intelligence  estimate  dealing  with  the  ramifications  of  this  strategy
came  when  the  intelligence  community  was  tasked  to  predict  probable  com-
munist reactions  to  the  input  of  an  entire  Korean  division  for  base  security  duty
in  South  Vietnam.  The  SNIE  resulting,  dated  19  March  1965,  indicated  that
input  of  Chinese  or  North  Korean  "volunteers"  was  very  unlikely  to  occur.  In-
evitably there  would  be  a  great  upsurge  in  propaganda  and  vilification  directed
against  the  Koreans  and  the  U.S.  for  making  such  a  move.  In  the  main,  however,
communist  reaction  depended  on  how  the  signal  was  interpreted.  They  would
almost  certainly  estimate  that  the  input  of  a  ROK  division  would  "not  in  itself
significantly  alter  the  military  situation.  They  might  consider,  however,  that  it
portended  a  substantial  further  build-up  of  foreign  forces  .  .  .  e.g.,  Nationalist
Chinese,  Thai,  Philippines,  and  U.S.  ...  for  ground  combat."

The  strategy  of  security  was  intimately  tied  to  the  Rolling  Thunder  bombing
program.  It  remained  alive  only  so  long  as  the  decision-making  principals  were
reasonably  confident  that  the  bombing  was  going  to  produce  the  desired  effects
on  the  DRV/VC  will  to  persist.  Expectations  for  the  security  strategy  were  quite
modest  if  the  foot-in-the-door  aspects  of  it  are  discounted.  No  input  of  "volun-
teers" from  China  or  other  communist  allies  of  the  DRV  was  expected  to  occur
in  response  to  the  provision  of  a  few  foreign  troops  to  look  after  the  bases  in
the  South.  It  was  merely  expected  that  those  bases  would  be  better  protected
from  attack.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  479


2. The  Enclave  Strategy

At  the  NSC  meetings  of  1-2  April,  those  in  attendance  could  see  that  Ho  Chi
Minh  was  not  quite  ready  to  throw  in  the  towel.  The  McNaughton  'Irilemma"
was  addressed  and  it  was  decided  to  embark,  albeit  cautiously,  on  a  program
of  ground  troop  deployments  in  excess  of  the  requirements  of  base  security.  To
insure  control  of  troops  untested  in  the  environment  of  Asian  insurgency,  to
provide  security  for  the  orderly  construction  of  an  expandable  logistics  base,
and  to  provide  for  rapid  and  easy  exit  if  the  situation  suddenly  deteriorated,  the
forces  were  to  be  placed  in  coastal  enclaves  with  their  backs  to  the  sea.

The  proponents  of  the  enclave  strategy  expected  it  to  frustrate  the  DRV/VC
by  denying  them  victory.  This  denial  of  victory  strategy  spelled  out  at  the  Hon-
olulu Conference,  the  high  water  mark  of  the  enclave  strategy,  predicted  that
enemy  impotence  would  lead  eventually  to  a  political  solution.  The  enemy  would
be  denied  victory  simply  because  a  modicum  of  U.S.  and  3rd  Country  force
would  enable  the  RVNAF  to  be  expanded  at  a  controlled  rate  without  undue
risk  of  collapse,  loss  of  a  key  area,  or  a  major  defeat.  The  brunt  of  the  war  against
the  enemy's  regular  units  would  still  be  borne  by  the  RVNAF.  The  Allied  forces,
operating  from  their  secure  bases,  would  be  prepared  to  come  to  the  aid  of  the
Vietnamese  if  necessary.  The  relatively  low  intensity  of  operations  to  which  the
Allied  forces  would  be  exposed  would  permit  low  risk  experimentation  with
them.  The  information  gained  from  such  experiments  would  be  useful  if  the
strategy  failed  and  more  forces  had  to  be  brought  in.  If  the  experiments  verified
that  foreign  soldiers  could  not  fight  effectively  in  the  Vietnamese  environment,  a
stronger  case  could  be  made  for  resisting  any  future  attempts  to  get  foreign  troops
enmeshed  in  the  war.

Ambassador  Taylor  wanted  to  give  the  Vietnamese  maximum  opportunity  to
save  themselves.  He  was  quite  sanguine  about  their  prospects  in  the  spring  of
1965  and  therefore  was  predisposed  to  hold  the  foreign  troops  down  to  the  bare
minimum.  He  thought  things  would  remain  stable  enough  to  permit  leisurely  ex-
perimentation with  four  U.S.  Marine  battalions  for  two  months  before  thought
should  be  given  to  bringing  in  any  more.  As  Taylor  saw  the  situation  at  that
time,  the  enclave  strategy  would  buy  enough  time  for  the  preparation  of  an  entire
logistics  base.  Any  additional  foreign  reinforcements  needed  could  be  brought  in
later.  As  far  as  the  few  U.S.  troops  already  in  the  country  were  concerned,  Taylor
expected  their  most  serious  problem  would  be  boredom.

General  Westmoreland  expected,  and  CINCPAC  supported  him  in  this,  that
the  war  would  be  lost  if  the  Allied  forces  were  put  into  enclaves.  The  difference
between  Westmoreland  and  Taylor  was  the  former's  insistence  on  using  U.S.
and  3rd  Country  forces  to  take  the  war  to  the  enemy.  Taylor  was  quite  content
to  let  RVNAF  do  that  with  the  occasional  assist  from  the  Allied  forces  if  they
got  into  difficulty.  Westmoreland  did  not  think  they  could  do  it,  and  he  was
convinced  that  no  kind  of  victory  could  be  had  unless  some  pressure  were  put
on  the  VC/DRV  forces  in  South  Vietnam.

Westmoreland  was  convinced  that  there  would  be  an  enemy  offensive  in  the
II  Corps  highlands  sometime  during  the  1965  summer  monsoon.  If  Allied  forces
weren't  there  to  meet  it,  he  was  sure  the  highlands  would  be  lost  to  the  DRV/VC
forces,  who  would  then  proceed  to  establish  a  front  government  there.  West-
moreland expected  this  to  happen  if  U.S.  and  3rd  Country  forces  went  into
coastal  enclaves  in  lieu  of  moving  directly  into  the  interior.

CINCPAC  expected  the  Airmobile  Division  to  exhaust  its  supply  lines  if  it
were  to  move  directly  inland.  He  was  not  convinced  that  it  could  be  supplied


480 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

adequately  by  air  as  Westmoreland  had  suggested.  The  Ambassador  expected
the  VQT)RV  to  try  for  another  Dien  Bien  Phu  if  a  U.S.  division  were  to  go
inland  to  the  highlands.

Westmoreland  expected  U.S.  troops  to  have  an  abrasive  effect  on  the  Viet-
namese population  if  they  w^ere  in  too  close  proximity  to  one  another.  The  Am-
bassador was  inclined  to  agree  with  him,  but  CINCPAC  expected  U.S.  and  3rd
Country  forces  to  concentrate  their  efforts  in  areas  where  there  were  plenty  of
people,  and  he  expected  them  to  succeed.  The  Ambassador  was  prepared  to
put  up  with  the  prospect  of  poor  relations  between  foreign  troops  and  the  Viet-
namese in  return  for  the  low  risk  prospects  offered  by  the  enclave  strategy.

It  is  not  at  all  clear  that  the  ICS  ever  endorsed  the  enclave  strategy  with  any
enthusiasm  or  that  they  expected  much  from  it.  From  analysis  of  their  recom-
mendations it  seems  that  they  strove  constantly  to  override  the  enclavists  and
get  enough  force  into  the  country  to  do  some  good.  In  their  three-division  plan,
they  derided  those  who  wanted  to  "merely  keep  pace"  with  the  enemy  or  "slow
down  the  rate"  of  his  advance.  The  ICS  said  that  to  turn  the  tide  of  the  war  re-
quired "an  objective  of  destroying  the  VC."  The  only  way  to  win  was  to  provide
enough  force  to  both  stem  the  tide  and  assume  the  offensive.  They  recommended
three  divisions  to  accomplish  the  latter.  The  enclave  strategists  advocated  neither
the  objective  nor  the  amount  of  force.

Probably  the  last  enclavist  to  be  heard  during  the  build-up  debate  was  William
Bundy.  His  "A  Middle  Way  Course  of  Action  in  South  Vietnam"  memorandum
was  submitted  to  the  President  on  the  1st  of  July.  Bunudy  expected  18  battalions
and  85,000  men  operating  in  conservative  fashion  from  coastal  enclaves  to  be
enough  to  hold  the  whole  facade  together  while  the  U.S.  made  concerted  efforts
to  shore  up  Southeast  Asia  and  extricate  itself  honorably  from  South  Vietnam.
He  did  not  expect  a  victory  from  such  a  move,  but  he  did  not  expect  a  loss
either.

The  reaction  of  the  intelligence  community  to  the  enclave  strategy  was  con-
sistently less  than  optimistic.  Immediately  following  the  NSC  meetings  of  the
1st  of  April,  CIA  Director  McCone  circulated  a  memorandum  in  which  he
argued  that  changing  the  mission  of  U.S.  troops  in  Vietnam  to  offensive  opera-
tions would  merely  lead  to  requests  for  more  and  more  troops  for  a  war  the
U.S.  "cannot  win."  In  the  same  memorandum,  McCone  argued  that  a  marked  in-
crease in  the  tempo  of  air  operations  against  NVN  was  an  indispensable  con-
comitant of  a  change  in  ground  strategy.  The  NSAM  which  sanctioned  the
change  of  ground  strategy  called  for  no  more  than  "slowly  ascending  tempo"  for
Rolling  Thunder  operations.

McCone  circulated  another  memorandum  on  the  day  after  the  Honolulu  Con-
ference in  which  he  estimated  probable  enemy  reactions  to  greater  U.S.  involve-
ment in  the  war.  The  enemy,  McCone  said,  still  saw  things  essentially  going  his
way.  An  increased  U.S.  involvement  on  the  ground  would  be  seen  by  the  enemy
as  an  acceptance  by  the  U.S.  of  a  greater  commitment,  but  he  would  also  infer
from  the  cautious  enclave  approach  that  the  U.S.  was  quite  reluctant  to  widen
the  war.  It  was  probable  that  the  VC  would  be  reinforced  with  men  and  equip-
ment, but  direct  intervention  by  the  DRV  or  the  Chinese  Communists  was  un-
likely.

On  the  28th  of  April,  a  SNIE  entitled  "Communist  Reactions  to  Certain  U.S.
Actions"  described  what  could  be  expected  of  the  enemy:

The  policies  and  tactics  of  the  Communist  powers  engaged  by  the  Viet-
namese crisis  have  settled  into  a  fairly  definitive  pattern.  It  appears  that  the


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  481

DRV,  with  strong  Chinese  encouragement,  is  determined  for  the  present  to
ride  out  the  U.S.  bombardment.  Both  the  DRV  and  Communist  China  have
hardened  their  attitude  toward  negotiations,  without  categorically  excluding
the  possibility  under  all  conditions.  They  apparently  calculate  that  the  DRV
can  afford  further  punishment  and  that,  in  the  meantime,  U.S.  determination
to  persist  will  weaken  because  of  increasing  DRV  air  defense  capability,
the  threat  of  broader  conflict,  and  the  pressure  of  international  and  U.S.
domestic  opinion.  Moreover,  they  consider  that  the  tide  is  running  in  their
favor  in  the  South  .  .  .

If  the  enemy's  attitudes  were  as  hard  as  described  above,  then  a  great  deal  of
patience  was  going  to  be  required  of  those  who  expected  the  Honolulu  strategy
to  come  to  fruition.

3. The  Search  and  Destroy  Strategy

There  are  many  aspects  of  the  enclave  strategy  which  were  galling  to  pro-
fessional military  men.  Many  of  those  were  brought  out  by  the  military  men
themselves  in  documents  quoted  in  this  paper.  Probably  the  single  most  disturb-
ing factor  in  the  enclave  approach  was  the  implicit  failure  to  try  and  seize  the
initiative  from  the  enemy.  Instead,  it  was  proposed  that  the  U.S.  and  the  GVN
try  and  ride  out  the  war  by  denying  the  enemy  a  victory.  The  initiative  to  come
to  the  conference  table  and  thus  end  the  fighting  was  left  strictly  to  the  enemy
and  depended  on  his  appreciation  of  his  own  impotence.  It  looked  as  though  the
communists  were  to  have  all  the  options.

The  ICS  expected  any  strategy  to  fail  if  it  did  not  include  among  its  courses
of  action  some  provision  for  the  seizure  of  the  initiative.  They  said  as  much  in
each  of  their  recommendations.  General  Westmoreland  was  of  a  similar  bent,
and  he  stated  explicitly  that  the  enclave  strategy  was  "too  negative."  Neverthe-
less, both  Westmoreland  and  the  ICS  are  on  record  stating  that  44  battalions
would  not  be  enough  to  seize  the  initiative  from  the  enemy  either.  Westmoreland
told  the  ICS  on  24  June  that  he  felt  substantial  increases  of  forces  would  be
required  over  and  above  the  44  battalions  in  1966.  The  U.S.  would  be  too  busy
building  up  its  forces  in  1965  to  seize  the  initiative  from  the  enemy  during  that
year.  JCSM-5 15-65  of  2  July,  which  contained  the  JCS  recommendation  for  the
full  44  battalions,  included  the  following  paragraph:

Pursuant  to  your  discussions  with  the  JCS  on  28  June  1965,  there  is
furnished  in  the  Annex  hereto  a  program  for  the  deployment  of  such  addi-
tional forces  to  South  Vietnam  at  this  time  as  are  required  to  insure  that
the  VC/DRV  cannot  win  in  South  Vietnam  at  their  present  level  of  commit-
ment. [Emphasis  added]

The  JCS  went  on  te  recommend  the  concurrent  implementation  of  stcpped-up
air  action  against  the  DRV  as  "an  indispensable  component  of  this  overall  pro-
gram." Thus,  the  JCS,  who  in  March  1965  were  recommending  27  battalions  to
"stem  the  tide  and  assume  the  offensive,"  were  ready  to  admit  in  July  of  that
year  that  44  battalions  would  only  be  enough  to  hold  the  fort  and  that  even
greater  effort  would  be  required  to  seize  the  initiative.

When  the  Secretary  of  Defense  came  to  Saigon  during  the  third  week  of  July
1965,  he  was  introduced  to  General  Westmoreland's  latest  ideas  concerning  the
employment  of  U.S.  and  Free  World  Military  Assistance  Force  (FWMAF)


482 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

forces.  Westmoreland  laid  out  for  the  Secretary  the  force  requirements  projected
into  1966.  Force  ratios  based  on  estimates  of  enemy  build-up  capability  and
projections  of  the  RVNAF  rate  of  build-up  called  for  the  44  US-FWMAF
battalions  through  the  end  of  1965.  In  concert  with  Westmoreland's  Concept  of
Operations,  later  formalized  and  published  on  30  August,  the  44  battalions  were
labeled  Phase  I  forces.  Secretary  McNamara  left  Saigon  with  the  first  estimate
by  Westmoreland  of  the  requirements  for  assuming  the  offensive  in  1966.  Phase
II  was  anticipated  by  Westmoreland  to  require  24  additional  maneuver  battalions.

As  an  indication  of  Westmoreland's  expectations  for  the  44  Phase  I  maneuver
battalions  which  are  the  subject  of  this  paper,  there  is  no  better  source  then  his
Concept  of  Operations.  The  Concept  was  developed  through  three  distinct
phases:

Phase  I — The  commitment  of  US/FWMAF  forces  necessary  to  halt  the
losing  trend  by  the  end  of  1965.

Phase  II — The  resumption  of  the  offensive  by  US/FWMAF  forces  during
the  first  half  of  1966  in  high  priority  areas  necessary  to  destroy  enemy
forces,  and  reinstitution  of  rural  construction  activities.

Phase  III — If  the  enemy  persisted,  a  period  of  a  year  to  a  year  and  a
half  following  Phase  II  would  be  required  for  the  defeat  and  destruction
of  the  remaining  enemy  forces  and  base  areas.

Withdrawal  of  US/FWMAF  forces  would  commence  following  Phase  III  as
the  GVN  became  able  to  establish  and  maintain  internal  order  and  to  defend  its
borders.

The  overall  Concept  was  based  on  some  assumptions :

(1)  That  the  VC  would  fight  until  convinced  that  military  victory  was  im-
possible and  then  would  not  be  willing  to  endure  further  punishment.

(2)  That  the  Chinese  Communists  would  not  intervene  except  to  provide  aid
and  advice.

(3)  That  friendly  forces  would  maintain  control  of  the  air  over  RVN.

The  specific  military  tasks  associated  with  each  phase  of  the  Concept  were
spelled  out  as  follows:

Phase  I

(1)  Secure  the  major  military  bases,  airfields  and  communications  centers.

(2)  Defend  major  political  and  population  centers.

(3)  Conduct  offensive  operations  against  major  VC  base  areas  in  order  to
divert  and  destroy  VC  main  forces.

(4)  Provide  adequate  reserve  reaction  forces  to  prevent  the  loss  of  secure  and
defended  areas.

(5)  Preserve  and  strengthen  the  RVNAF.

(6)  Provide  adequate  air  support,  both  combat  and  logistic.

(7)  Maintain  an  anti-infiltration  screen  along  the  coast  and  support  forces
ashore  with  naval  gunfire  and  amphibious  lift.

(8)  Provide  air  and  sea  lifts  necessary  to  transport  the  necessary  but  minimum
supplies  to  the  civil  populace.

(9)  Open  up  necessary  critical  lines  of  communication  for  essential  military
and  civil  purposes.

(10)  Preserve  and  defend,  to  the  extent  possible,  areas  now  under  effective
governmental  control.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  483


Phase  II

( 1 )  All  Phase  I  measures.

(2)  Resume  and/or  expand  pacification  operations.  Priority  will  be  given  to
the  Hop  Tac  area  around  Saigon,  to  that  part  of  the  Delta  along  an  east-west
axis  from  Go  Cong  to  Chau  Doc,  and  in  the  provinces  of  Quang  Nam,  Quang
Tri,  Quang  Ngai,  Binh  Dinh  and  Phu  Yen.

(3)  Participate  in  clearing,  securing,  reserve  reaction  and  offensive  operations
as  required  to  support  and  sustain  the  resumption  of  pacification.

Phase  III

(1)  All  Phase  I  and  II  measures.

(2)  Provide  those  additional  forces  necessary  to  extend  and  expand  clearing
and  securing  operations  throughout  the  entire  populated  area  of  the  country
and  those  forces  necessary  to  destroy  VC  forces  and  their  base  areas.

General  Westmoreland  went  on  in  his  Concept  to  lay  out  the  tactics  to  be
associated  with  the  various  military  tasks  and  to  list  explicit  tasks  to  be  accom-
plished within  each  RVNAF  Corps  area.  The  above  is  sufficient  for  the  needs  of
this  paper,  however,  as  it  shows  that  General  Westmoreland  expected  by  the
end  of  1965  to  have  effectively  stemmed  the  tide  of  the  VC  insurgency  through
the  input  of  44  US/FWMAF  maneuver  battalions  and  their  accompanying  sup-
port. It  further  shows  that  in  the  first  half  of  1966,  with  the  input  of  more  force,
Westmoreland  expected  to  shift  his  emphasis  from  the  strategic  defensive  to  the
strategic  offensive.

In  his  25  June  interview  with  McNaughton,  Deputy  Ambassador  Johnson
summed  up  the  expectations  for  Ambassador  Taylor  and  himself.  In  Johnson's
view  what  was  expected  depended  on  how  serious  the  situation  actually  was.  If
it  were  as  bad  as  Westmoreland  said  it  was,  then  large  numbers  of  foreign  troops
could  do  little  more  than  hold  on  to  a  few  enclaves.  If  the  situation  were  not
significantly  worse  than  the  year  beforje  (and  Johnson  apparently  felt  in  many
ways  it  was  not)  then  the  U.S.  was  merely  bringing  in  more  foreign  troops  than
were  needed  and  could  be  expected  to  have  difficulty  getting  them  out  again.
Finally,  Johnson  expected  the  Vietnamese  reaction  to  the  massive  input  of  foreign
troops  to  be  a  major  problem.

Under  Secretary  George  Ball  clearly  felt  that  the  U.S.  was  already  engaged
in  an  indeterminate  struggle  in  Vietnam.  Raising  the  US/FWMAF  force  levels
to  44  battahons  would,  he  expected,  accomplish  nothing  more  than  raise  the
cost  to  the  U.S.  when  it  finally  lost  the  war  and  pulled  out.

Assistant  Secretary  Bundy  saw  in  the  44  battalion  request  some  ultimatum
aspects  that  he  felt  were  undesirable.  Apparently,  although  he  did  not  say  so,
he  expected  approval  of  that  request  and  announcement  of  it  to  trigger  some
kind  of  dire  response  from  the  other  side.

The  person  among  the  principals  whose  views  can  be  found  in  the  files  dared
to  attach  a  probability  to  his  expectations.  Assistant  vSecretary  McNaughton  gave
Secretary  McNamara  on  the  13th  of  July  a  memorandum  entitled  "Analysis  and
Options  for  South  Vietnam."  McNaughton  described  three  possible  courses  the
war  could  take:

(1)  Success  for  the  US/GVN.  (Actions  one  should  expect  to  see  in  such  a
case  were  the  extension  of  GVN  control  throughout  the  country,  the  disarming
of  the  VC  armed  units,  the  cessation  of  infiltration  and  other  DRV  support,  and


484 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  III

the  relegation  of  the  terror  and  other  insurgent  activity  to  little  more  than  a  rural
police  problem.)

(2)  Inconclusive  for  either  side  (self-explanatory)".

(3)  GVN  collapse  and  concomitant  U.S.  defeat  (self-explanatory).

McNaughton  recommended  to  Secretary  McNamara  that  the  U.S.  deploy  the  44
battalions  and  be  prepared  to  send  more  force  to  try  for  a  win  as  defined  above.
McNaughton's  expectations  for  such  a  course,  as  expressed  in  probabilities,  are
laid  out  below.  The  assumed  U.S.  force  level  to  develop  these  probabilities  was
between  200,000  and  400,000  men.  With  that  amount  of  force,  the  probability
of  Success/Inconclusive/CoUapse  was
for  the  year  1966:  .2/.7/.1
for  the  year  1967: .4/.45/.15  and

for  the  year  1968: .5/.3/.2 — no  further  projection  being  made.

It  is  noteworthy  that  while  McNaughton  expected  the  probability  of  success  to
increase  with  each  year  of  investment,  he  also  expected  the  probability  of  failure
to  increase,  although  not  by  as  much.  The  probability  that  the  war  would  end
inconclusively  was  expected  by  McNaughton  to  shrink  dramatically  after  the
first  year.  In  concluding  his  memorandum,  McNaughton  observed  that  the  U.S.
might  decide  at  any  time  in  mid-course  to  try  for  a  compromise  solution  to  the
conflict.  Such  an  option,  while  not  assigned  a  probability  of  achievement,  was
defined  as  a  situation  in  which  the  VC  remained  armed  and  in  defense  of  areas
they  controlled  in  the  country,  the  NLF  was  represented  in  the  GVN,  and  the
GVN  agreed  to  keep  hands  off  the  VC  areas.

Neither  the  President  nor  the  Secretary  of  Defense  is  on  record  in  1965  with
expectations  as  to  the  duration  of  the  war  or  the  impact  of  the  44  battalions.  It
looks  as  though  they  both  were  prepared  for  the  moment  to  go  along  with
General  Westmoreland's  predictions  about  the  course  of  the  war.  The  decision
not  to  call  up  the  Reserves,  which  was  made  some  time  during  the  week  just
prior  to  the  President's  press  conference  of  28  July,  indicated  that  the  President
expected  the  war  to  last  in  Vietnam  well  beyond  a  year.  No  doubt  the  Secretary
of  Defense  told  him  that  without  a  declaration  of  national  emergency — a  move
the  President  found  politically  unpalatable — the  Reserves  as  an  asset  would  be
fully  expended  in  one  year,  leaving  the  military  establishment  in  worse  shape
than  before  if  the  war  still  continued.

The  final  element  in  the  expectations  matrix  was  provided  by  the  NIB  in  a
SNIE  issued  on  23  July  entitled  "Communist  and  Free  World  Reactions  to  a
Possible  U.S.  Course  of  Action."  The  analysis  was  predicated  on  the  following
proposed  action:

(1)  The  U.S.  would  increase  its  strength  in  SVN  to  175,000  by  1  November,

(2)  225,000  U.S.  Reserves  would  be  called  up,

(3)  20,000  tours  of  duty  per  month  would  be  extended,

(4)  The  regular  strength  of  the  U.S.  Armed  Forces  would  be  increased  by
400,000  over  the  next  year,  and

(5)  U.S.  draft  calls  would  be  doubled.

In  conjunction  with  the  above,  the  U.S.  would  also  make  public  statements
reiterating  its  objectives  and  its  readiness  to  negotiate.  The  forces  going  to  Viet-
nam would  be  deployed  so  as  not  to  threaten  the  17th  parallel.  Also  considered
was  a  possible  step-up  of  U.S.  air  activity  against  the  DRV  land  lines  of  com-
munication with  China.


American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July  1965  485

In  reaction  to  the  above,  the  Communists  would  probably  see  the  U.S.  moves
as  indication  that  the  U.S.  held  little  hope  of  negotiation.  They  would  probably
expect  some  increase  in  US  3rd  Country  forces  anyway  as  they  clearly  felt  they
were  winning.  In  order  to  offset  the  increases  of  US  3rd  Countrv'  forces  in  South
Vietnam,  the  Communists  would  probablv  build  up  their  own  strength  with  the
input  of  20,000  to  30,000  PAVN  regulars  by  the  end  of  1965.  This,  of  course,
they  were  already  in  the  process  of  doing.

It  was  seen  as  possible,  but  less  probable,  that  the  Communists  might  attack
GVN  forces  and  installations  in  hopes  of  achieving  victory  before  the  US  3rd
Countr}'  build-up  took  effect.  Barring  that,  thev  might  avoid  direct  confrontation
with  U.S.  forces  and  just  peck  away  at  them  through  harassing  actions.  By  so
doing,  they  might  hope  to  demonstrate  to  the  foreigner  his  own  impotence  in  a
Vietnamese  war.

If  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  were  going  badly  for  the  VC,  the  DRV  might
show  some  interest  in  negotiations.  If  the  U.S.  did  increase  its  air  activity,  the
DRV  was  most  likely  to  respond  by  asking  the  Soviets  for  more  air  defense
hardware.

As  far  as  the  Chinese  Communists  were  concerned,  it  was  estimated  that  they
were  very  unlikely  to  intervene  in  the  air  war  over  North  Vietnam.  They  might
put  service  troops  into  North  Vietnam,  but  they  would  not  be  likely  to  introduce
combat  troops.  The  Chinese,  the  Estimate  said,  "•would  believe  that  the  U.S.
measures  were  sufficient  only  to  postpone  defeat  while  magnifying  its  eventual
effect."

It  could  be  expected  that  the  Soviets  would  step  up  their  aid  to  the  DRV,
especially  in  the  field  of  air  defense,  and  at  the  same  time  harden  their  attitude
towards  the  U.S.  without  making  any  major  challenge  to  U.S.  interests  around
the  world.  It  would  come  as  no  surprise  if  the  Soviets  raised  the  level  of  their
military  spending  in  response  to  this  U.S.  action.

It  was  felt  that  most  of  the  allies  of  the  United  States  realized  that  the  U.S.
was  going  to  have  to  increase  its  commitment  in  Vietnam.  It  was  recognized,
however,  that  they  would  find  it  increasingly  difficult  to  give  U.S.  policy  any
public  support.

In  order  to  mitigate  somewhat  the  crisis  atmosphere  that  would  result  from
this  major  U.S.  action,  the  Estimate  concluded  with  the  recommendation  that
announcements  about  it  be  made  piecemeal  with  no  more  high  level  emphasis
than  necessary.

Predictably,  the  expectations  of  those  outside  of  the  official  pale  ran  the  gamut
from  supporters  of  Oregon  Senator  Wayne  Morse  ("the  Administration  policy
is  leading  the  United  States  to  the  abyss  of  total  war" — "there  are  doubts  be-
ginning to  show  at  the  grass  roots  about  our  policy  there,  [in  Vietnaml  and
when  the  coffins  begin  coming  home  those  doubts  will  grow" — "the  war  in  Asia
cannot  be  won;  ...  in  the  end  the  United  States  will  be  kicked  out")  to  equally
misguided  zealots  on  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  such  as  Jack  Foisie  of  the
Los  Angeles  Times  ("I  foresee  the  day  of  mixed  American-Vietnamese  units
under  American  command — to  make  our  junior  leadership  stretch  as  far  as  pos-
sible"— "we  are  going  to  drive  to  the  Laos  border — lying  only  50  to  75  miles  in-
land in  the  central  waist  of  Vietnam.  Everything  taken  will  be  held,  initially  with
firstline  troops,  and  later — as  a  rear  area — by  second  line  militia").

Whatever  their  personal  assessments  of  the  ramifications  of  the  44  battalion
decision  might  have  been,  all  interested  observers  had  one  thing  in  common —
they  recognized  the  crossing  of  a  major  threshold  and  the  embarkation  on  a
major  new  course  the  end  of  which  was  not  in  sight.


486


Volume  III List  of  Documents


1963

Document  156 {page  494)

Memorandum  for  the  President  from  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  the  Vietnam
situation,  21  December  1963.

1964

Document  157 (page  496)

Memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense  from  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  on
Vietnam  and  Southeast  Asia,  JCSM-46-64,  22  January  1964.

Document  158 (page  499)

Memorandum  for  the  President  from  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  the  present
situation  in  South  Vietnam,  16  March  1964.

Document  159 (page  510)

Cable  from  JCS  to  CINCPAC  re:  planning  actions  against  North  Vietnam,  JCS
5390,  18  March  1964.

Document  160 (page  511)

Cable  from  the  President  for  Ambassador  Lodge,  State  1484,  20  March  1964.
Document  161 (page  511)

Summary  of  JCSM-426-64,  "North  Vietnam  Operations",  19  May  1964  (author
unknown).

Document  162 (page  512)

Cable,  Saigon  214  to  State  Department  on  GVN  reaction  to  "Marching  North",

25  July  1964.

Document  163 (page  514)

Cable,  State  89  to  Vientiane  requesting  views  on  crossborder  operations  into  Laos,

26  July  1964.

Document  164 (page  515)

Cable,  Vientiane  170  to  State  on  reactions  to  crossborder  operations,  27  July
1964.

Document  165 (page  517)

Cable,  probably  JCS  to  CINCPAC,  on  rules  of  engagement  currently  in  effect,
5  August  1964.

Document  166 (page  518)

Cable,  State  136  to  Vientiane  on  actions  in  Laos,  7  August  1964.


Documents  487


Document  167 {page  519)

Draft  cable  for  Embassy  Ottawa  on  points  for  Seaborn  to  make  in  Hanoi,  7  Au-
gust 1964.

Document  168 {page  521)

Final  message  re:  points  Seaborn  should  be  urged  to  make,  given  to  Shenstone,
Canadian  Embassy  by  Green,  8  August  1964.

Document  169 {page  522)

Cable,  CINCPAC  176  from  Saigon  on  reactions  to  Tonkin,  9  August  1964.
Document  170 {page  524)

Joint  State/Defense  cable  to  Saigon,  Vientiane,  and  Bangkok  re:  air  and  ground
operations  in  Laos,  9  August  1964.

Document  171 {page  524)

Memorandum  by  William  Bundy,  titled  Next  Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast
Asia,  11  August  1964.

Document  172 {page  529)

Letter  from  McNaughton  to  William  Bundy  re:  rules  of  engagement,  11  August
1964.

Document  173 {page  530)

Memorandum  for  Military  Assistant  to  Secretary  of  Defense  from  JCS  Special
Assistant  for  Counterinsurgency  and  Special  Activities,  re:  Ambassador  Taylor's
report  from  South  Vietnam,  14  August  1964.

Document  174 {page  530)

Taylor  Situation  Report  on  the  RVN,  presented  10  August  1964.
Document  175 {page  533)

Cable  from  State  to  Saigon,  Vientiane,  tlNCPAC,  giving  key  points  in  tentative
high  level  paper,  14  August  1964.

Document  176 {page  537)

Cable,  JCS  7947  to  CINCPAC,  on  rules  of  engagement,  15  August  1964.
Document  177 {page  539)

Cable,  COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  re:  planning  on  crossborder  operations,
16  August  1964.

Document  178 {page  541)

Cable,  Vientiane  310  to  State  re:  Laos  air  strikes,  17  August  1964.
Document  179 {page  542)

Cable,  CINCPAC  17  to  JCS  re:  next  courses  of  action  in  Southeast  Asia,  17
August  1964.

Document  180 {page  545)

Extract  from  JCS  memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  "Combat  Air  Ca-
pability in  North  Vietnam,"  17  August  1964.


4SS Gravel  Edition  Jr.-:  Pcnta^^o^.  Papers  Vol.  Ill

C  - ^ > - -  ' ^  e  problem  in  South  Vietnam,  18  x\ugust  1964.

Document  182  ipo:

^^e^:-.c:aadum  for  the  Se:-r  .  -  Defense  from  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense
I  Ccr:-r:7o!!er)  re:  ^e^  ^  '  SAF  studv:  "Relationship  of  Tactical  Mr  to

G:c F:-ces,  Southc.  -64  and  1969,"  24  August  1964.

Document  183  {pa^-

Memorandum  for  the  Secretan.  of  Defense  from  JCS  re:  recommended  courses
of  actioD  in  Southeast  Asia,  JCSM-746-64.  26  August  1964.

Document  I  S-i {page  552)

State  Der -^-.t  cable  on  SAR  and  T-2S  missions  (addressee  unknown),  26

A-.::.  ^- -  -


^. - -.-d  J.  T.  McNaushton  from  JCS  SACSA,  re:
Sep  -  PLAN  3-A.  27  August  1964.

Document  186 {page  555)

Memorandum  for  the  Sec.  of  Defense  from  John  T.  McNaughton,  re:  response  to
JCS  target  study  of  North  Vietnam,  29  August  1964.

Document  187 {page  555)

Memorandum  for  the  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  from  Robert  McNamara,
on  JCS  targ^  study  of  North  Vietnam,  31  August  1964.

Document  188 {page  556)

Paper  by  McNau^ton  (2nd  draft),  Plan  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam,  3  Sep-
tember 1964.

Document  189 {page  559)

MemcH^ndum  to  Robert  Manning  from  McGeorge  Bundy  on  possible  problems
in  current  form  of  Q&A  booklet  on  Vietnam,  4  September  1964.


Document  190 r ^ .  :  r  >
Draf:  r^-e:  rv  W~.  B.-^-.,  C
1964.


Action  for  South  Vietnam,  8  September


Document  191 {page  561)

Memorandum  recordine  Principals'  consensus  on  courses  of  action  for  South

v:e:r:i:r. S.er:e-:~e-  :^64.

r  : r :  :53)

^:r.t  De c  :c Saigon,  Vientiane,  Bangkok  re:  Laos  corridor  opera-

tic-s.  9  Ser:e~ -e:  :  r:-

Document  193 {page  563)

Memorandum  for  the  Secietarv^  of  Defense  from  the  JCS  on  8  September  Bundy
draft,  CM-124-^.  9  September  1964.


Document  194 {page  565)

Rules  of  engagement,  DeSoto  Patrol,  recommended  by  JCS,  9  September  1964.


Documents  489


Document  195 {page  565)
NSAM  314,  10  September  1964.

Document  196 {page  566)

Cable,  Saigon  913  to  State,  summary  of  conclusions  of  meeting  of  three  em-
bassies held  in  Saigon  on  1 1  September  to  review  air  and  ground  operations  in
the  Lao  corridor,  19  September  1964.

Document  197 {page  568)

Cable,  CINCPAC  to  JCS  re:  DeSoto  Patrols,  21  September  1964.
Document  198 {page  569)

Cable,  CINCPAC  to  JCS  re:  planning  for  future  contingencies,  25  September
1964.

Document  199 {page  570)

Cable,  JCS  9117  to  CINCPAC  re  rules  of  engagement  applying  to  Laos,  28  Sep-
tember 1964.

Document  200 {page  571)

Memorandum  to  McNaughton  from  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Vance  re:  34A
MAROPS  procedures,  30  September  1964.

Document  201 {page  571)

Questions  and  answers  on  covert  actions.  Questions  by  J.  T.  McNaughton,  an-
swers by  JCS  and  ISA,  September  1964.

Document  202 {page  575)

Cable,  CINCPAC  to  JCS  on  use  of  Thai-based  U.S.  air  forces,  2  October  1964.
Document  203 {page  576)

Cable,  Saigon  to  State  on  SEACOORD,  3  October  1964.
Document  204 {page  576)

State/Defense  message  to  Vientiane  authorizing  commencement  of  air  attacks
against  infiltration  routes  and  facilities  in  the  Laos  Panhandle,  6  October  1964.

Document  205 {page  577)

Cable,  State  to  Saigon  re:  convening  organizing  session  for  SEACOORD,  7
October  1964.

Document  206 {page  578)

Deptel  763  from  Saigon  on  organizing  session  for  SEACOORD,  9  October  1964.
Document  207 {page  579)

Cable,  Saigon  1080  to  State  transmitting  approved  terms  of  reference  for
SEACOORD,  10  October  1964.

Document  208 {page  580)

Memorandum  to  J.  A.  Califano  (author  unknown)  re:  views  of  Lao  Deputy
Prime  Minister  on  expanded  military  operations  in  Northern  Laos,  early  October
1964.


490 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill
Document  209 {page  580)

Paper  by  McNaughton  (1st  draft),  Aims  and  Options  in  Southeast  Asia,  13
October  1964.

Document  210 (page  583)

Cable,  Saigon  1129  to  State  re  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  14  October  1964.
Document  211 (page  584)

Memorandum  to  Secretary  of  Defense  from  McNaughton  re;  U.S.  search  and
rescue  operations  in  Southeast  Asia,  23  October  1964.

Document  212 {page  585)

State  Defense  message  to  Saigon  and  Vientiane  re:  recommendations  for  expan-
sion of  SAR  operations  into  Laos,  26  October  1964.

Document  213 {page  586)

State  Defense  message  for  Saigon,  exclusive  for  Tavlor,  re:  expanded  operations,
29  October  1964.

Document  214 {page  586)

State  Defense  937  to  Saigon  re:  legitimization  of  OP  34A,  29  October  1964.

Document  215 {page  587)

Cable,  JCS  to  Sharp,  Westmoreland,  Taylor  on  reactions  to  Bien  Hoa  attack,
JCS  1451,  1  November  1964.

Document  216 {page  588)

Project  outline  for  working  group  on  Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast  Asia,  3
November  1964.

Document  217 {page  590)

Cable,  Saigon  to  Washington,  comments  on  plans  for  action  against  North  Viet-
nam, 3  November  1964.

Document  218 {page  592)

Memorandum  for  Wm.  Bundy  from  Michael  Forrestal  commenting  on  paper,  U.S.
Objectives  and  Stakes  in  South  Vietnam  and  Southeast  Asia,  4  November  1964.

Document  219 {page  593)

Paper  by  Wm.  Bundy,  Conditions  for  Action  and  Key  Actions  Surrounding  Any
Decision,  5  November  1964.

Document  220 {page  594)

Memorandum  for  Wm.  Bundy  from  Wm.  H.  Sullivan  re:  courses  of  action  in
Vietnam,  6  November  1964.

Document  221 {page  596)

Working  group  draft.  Probable  Reactions  to  Options  B  and  C,  6  November  1964.
Document  222 {page  598)

Paper  by  McNaughton  (2nd  draft)  for  Bundy  Working  Group,  Action  for  South
Vietnam,  6  November  1964.


Documents 49 1


Document  223 {page  601)

Paper  by  McNaughton  (3rd  draft)  for  Bundy  Working  Group,  Action  for  South
Vietnam.  7  November  1964.

Document  224 {page  604)

Draft  paper  by  Wm.  Bundy,  ///.  The  Broad  Options,  7  November  1964.
Document  225 {page  606)

Paper  bv  Marshall  Green,  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  State,  Immediate  Actions
in  the  Period  Prior  to  Decision  (Part  VIII  of  Working  Group  Outline),  7  Novem-
ber 1964.

Document  226 {page  610)

Draft  paper  by  Wm.  Bundy,  Vll.  Analysis  of  Option  C  (''progressive  application
of  military  pressure"),  8  November  1964  (transmitted  10  November  1964).

Document  227 {page  619)

JCS  Staff  comments  on  NSC  Working  Group  paper,  Section  I — The  Situation,
10  November  1964.

Document  228 (page  621)

Memorandum  for  the  Chairman,  NSC  Working  Group  on  Southeast  Asia,  from
L.  M.  Mustin,  JCS  Staff,  re:  comments  on  draft  for  Part  II  U.S.  Objectives  and
Stakes  in  SVN  and  SEA.  10  November  1964.

Document  229 {page  628)

EMBTEL  1438,  Saigon  to  State,  on  U.  Alexis  Johnson  talk  with  Seaborn,  14
November  1964.

Document  230 {page  628)

JCS  Memorandum  955-64  on  actions  against  North  Vietnam,  14  November  1964
(first  section  missing).

Document  231 {page  630)

Memorandum  for  Wm.  Bundv,  Chairman  of  NSC  Working  Group  on  Southeast
Asia,  from  L.  M.  Mustin.  JCS  Staff,  providing  additional  material  for  project  on
Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast  Asia,  14  November  1964.

Document  232 {page  632)

Memorandum  to  Secretary  of  Defense  from  Walt  Rostow  re:  military  dispositions
and  political  signals,  16  November  1964.

Document  233 {page  633)

Part  VI  (Analysis  of  Option  B),  Section  F — Likely  Developments  and  Problems
if  the  Communist  Side  Engaged  in  Major  Retaliation  at  Some  Point,  unsigned,
undated.

Document  234 {page  639)

Memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense  from  JCS  re:  courses  of  action  in
Southeast  Asia,  18  November  1964.

Document  235 {page  641)

Memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense  re:  JCS  position  on  resumption  of
DESOTO  Patrols,  18  November  1964.


492 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  111
Document  236 ( page  642 )

Memorandum  from  Henry  Rowen  to  William  Bundy  enclosing  Rowen  and
McNaughton  comments  on  draft  paper,  23  November  1964.

Document  237 {page  644)

Memorandum  to  Wm.  Bundy  from  Michael  Forrestal  commenting  on  draft  paper
Section  II — U.S.  Objectives  and  Stakes  in  South  Vietnam  and  Southeast  Asia,
23  November  1964.

Document  238 {page  645)

Memorandum  to  Secretary  of  State  from  Walt  Rostow,  Some  Observations  As  We
Come  to  the  Crunch  in  Southeast  Asia,  23  November  1964.

Document  239 {page  648)

Memorandum  for  Rusk,  McNamara,  McCone,  Wheeler,  Ball,  and  McGeorge
Bundy  on  issues  raised  by  papers  on  Southeast  Asia,  from  Wm.  Bundy,  24  No-
vember 1964.

Document  240 {page  651 )

NSC  Working  Group  paper,  Section  I — Intelligence  Assessment:  The  Situation  in
Vietnam,  24  November  1964.

Document  241 {page  656)

Revised  paper  by  Wm.  Bundy  and  McNaughton,  Summary:  Courses  of  Action  in
Southeast  Asia,  26  November  1964.

Document  242 {page  666)

Taylor  briefing  on  the  current  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  27  November  1964.
Document  243 {page  673)

Paper  titled  Summary  of  Recent  MACV  and  CIA  Cables  on  Infiltration,  author
unknown,  27  November  1964.

Document  244 {page  674)

Memorandum  of  meeting  on  Southeast  Asia,  distributed  by  Wm.  Bundy  to  those
present  at  meeting:  Rusk,  McNamara,  Taylor,  McCone,  Wheeler,  Ball,  McGeorge
Bundy,  William  Bundy,  McNaughton,  Forrestal,  27  November  1964.

Document  245 {page  676)

Memorandum  for  Southeast  Asia  Principals  from  Wm.  Bundy,  Scenario  for  Im-
mediate Action  Program,  28  November  1964.

Document  246 {page  677)

Memorandum  for  Southeast  Asia  Principals  from  Wm.  Bundy  attaching  draft
action  paper  for  review  at  meeting,  29  November  1964.

1965

Document  247 {page  683)

McNaughton  observations  re:  South  Vietnam,  4  January  1965.
Document  248 {page  684)

Memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  State  from  Wm.  Bundy  on  the  South  Viet-
namese situation  and  alternatives,  6  January  1965.


Documents  493


Document  249 {page  686)

McNaughton  observations  re:  South  Vietnam  after  Khanh's  "re-coup,"  with
McNamara  comments,  27  January  1965.

Document  250 (page  687)

Paper  by  McGeorge  Bundy,  Annex  A,  A  Policy  of  Sustained  Reprisal,  1  Febru-
ary 1965.

Document  251 ( page  691 )

Memorandum  for  McGeorge  Bundy  from  Wm.  Bundy,  Additional  Military  and
Diplomatic  Possibilities,  10  February  1965.

I Document  252 {page  692)

Draft  paper  by  Wm.  Bundy,  Where  Are  We  Heading?,  18  February  1965.

Document  253 {page  694)
, Memorandum  for  Robert  S.  McNamara  from  McNaughton,  Proposed  Course
of  Action  re:  Vietnam  (draft),  24  March  1965.

Document  254 { page  702 )
NSAM  328,  6  April  1965.

Document  255 {page  704)

Cable,  Taylor  to  Rusk  re:  step-up  in  ground  forces,  17  April  1965.
Document  256 {page  705)

McNamara  report  of  meeting  in  Honolulu  with  Wm.  Bundy,  McNaughton,  Tay-
lor, Wheeler,  Sharp,  and  Westmoreland,  21  April  1965.


t


494 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


[Document  156]

THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Washington

21  December  1963

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

Subject:  Vietnam  Situation

In  accordance  with  your  request  this  morning,  this  is  a  summary  of  my  con-
clusions after  my  visit  to  Vietnam  on  December  19-20.

1.  Summary.  The  situation  is  very  disturbing.  Current  trends,  unless  reversed
in  the  next  2-3  months,  will  lead  to  neutralization  at  best  and  more  likely  to  a
Communist-controlled  state.

2.  The  new  government  is  the  greatest  source  of  concern.  It  is  indecisive  and
drifting.  Although  Minh  states  that  he,  rather  than  the  Committee  of  Generals,
is  making  decisions,  it  is  not  clear  that  this  is  actually  so.  In  any  event,  neither
he  nor  the  Committee  are  experienced  in  political  administration  and  so  far
they  show  little  talent  for  it.  There  is  no  clear  concept  on  how  to  re-shape  or
conduct  the  strategic  hamlet  program;  the  Province  Chiefs,  most  of  whom  are
new  and  inexperienced,  are  receiving  little  or  no  direction;  military  operations,
too,  are  not  being  effectively  directed  because  the  generals  are  so  preoccupied
with  essentially  political  affairs.  A  specific  example  of  the  present  situation  is
that  General  Dinh  is  spending  little  or  no  time  commanding  III  Corps,  which
is  in  the  vital  zone  around  Saigon  and  needs  full-time  direction.  I  made  these
points  as  strongly  as  possible  to  Minh,  Don,  Kim,  and  Tho.

3.  The  Country  Team  is  the  second  major  weakness.  It  lacks  leadership,  has
been  poorly  informed,  and  is  not  working  to  a  common  plan.  A  recent  example
of  confusion  has  been  conflicting  USOM  and  military  recommendations  both
to  the  Government  of  Vietnam  and  to  Washington  on  the  size  of  the  military
budget.  Above  all,  Lodge  has  virtually  no  official  contact  with  Harkins.  Lodge
sends  in  reports  with  major  military  implications  without  showing  them  to
Harkins,  and  does  not  show  Harkins  important  incoming  traffic.  My  impression
is  that  Lodge  simply  does  not  know  how  to  conduct  a  coordinated  administra-
tion. This  has  of  course  been  stressed  to  him  both  by  Dean  Rusk  and  myself
(and  also  by  John  McCone),  and  I  do  not  think  he  is  consciously  rejecting  our
advice;  he  has  just  operated  as  a  loner  all  his  life  and  cannot  readily  change  now.

Lodge's  newly-designated  deputy,  Davis  Nes,  was  with  us  and  seems  a  highly
competent  team  player.  I  have  stated  the  situation  frankly  to  him  and  he  has
said  he  would  do  all  he  could  to  constitute  what  would  in  effect  be  an  executive
committee  operating  below  the  level  of  the  Ambassador.

As  to  the  grave  reporting  weakness,  both  Defense  and  CIA  must  take  major
steps  to  improve  this.  John  McCone  and  I  have  discussed  it  and  are  acting
vigorously  in  our  respective  spheres.

4.  Viet  Cong  progress  has  been  great  during  the  period  since  the  coup,  with
my  best  guess  being  that  the  situation  has  in  fact  been  deteriorating  in  the
countryside  since  July  to  a  far  greater  extent  than  we  realized  because  of  our
undue  dependence  on  distorted  Vietnamese  reporting.  The  Viet  Cong  now  con-
trol very  high  proportions  of  the  people  in  certain  key  provinces,  particularly
those  directly  south  and  west  of  Saigon.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  was
seriously  over-extended  in  these  provinces,  and  the  Viet  Cong  has  been  able


Documents  495


to  destroy  many  hamlets,  while  others  have  been  abandoned  or  in  some  cases
betrayed  or  pillaged  by  the  government's  own  Self  Defense  Corps.  In  these  key
provinces,  the  Viet  Cong  have  destroyed  almost  all  major  roads,  and  are  col-
lecting taxes  at  will.

As  remedial  measures,  we  must  get  the  government  to  re-allocate  its  military
forces  so  that  its  effective  strength  in  these  provinces  is  essentially  doubled.  We
also  need  to  have  major  increases  in  both  military  and  USOM  staffs,  to  sizes
that  will  give  us  a  reliable,  independent  U.S.  appraisal  of  the  status  of  opera-
tions. Thirdly,  realistic  pacification  plans  must  be  prepared,  allocating  adequate
time  to  secure  the  remaining  government-controlled  areas  and  work  out  from
there.

This  gloomy  picture  prevails  predominantly  in  the  provinces  around  the  capi-
tal and  in  the  Delta.  Action  to  accomplish  each  of  these  objectives  was  started
while  we  were  in  Saigon.  The  situation  in  the  northern  and  central  areas  is
considerably  better,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  deteriorated  substantially  in
recent  months.  General  Harkins  still  hopes  these  areas  may  be  made  reasonably
secure  by  the  latter  half  of  next  year.

In  the  gloomy  southern  picture,  an  exception  to  the  trend  of  Viet  Cong  suc-
cess may  be  provided  by  the  possible  adherence  to  the  government  of  the  Cao
Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  sects,  which  total  three  million  people  and  control  key  areas
along  the  Cambodian  border.  The  Hoa  Hao  have  already  made  some  sort  of
agreement,  and  the  Cao  Dai  are  expected  to  do  so  at  the  end  of  this  month.
However,  it  is  not  clear  that  their  influence  will  be  more  than  neutralized  by
these  agreements,  or  that  they  will  in  fact  really  pitch  in  on  the  government's
side.

5.  Infiltration  of  men  and  equipment  from  North  Vietnam  continues  using  (a)
land  corridors  through  Laos  and  Cambodia;  (b)  the  Mekong  River  waterways
from  Cambodia;  (c)  some  possible  entry  from  the  sea  and  the  tip  of  the  Delta.
The  best  guess  is  that  1000-1500  Viet  Cong  cadres  entered  South  Vietnam  from
Laos  in  the  first  nine  months  of  1963.  The  Mekong  route  (and  also  the  possible
sea  entry)  is  apparently  used  for  heavier  weapons  and  ammunition  and  raw
materials  which  have  been  turning  up  in  increasing  numbers  in  the  south  and
of  which  we  have  captured  a  few  shiprrlents.

To  counter  this  infiltration,  we  reviewed  in  Saigon  various  plans  providing  for
cross-border  operations  into  Laos.  On  the  scale  proposed,  I  am  quite  clear  that
these  would  not  be  politically  acceptable  or  even  militarily  effective.  Our  first
need  would  be  immediate  U-2  mapping  of  the  whole  Laos  and  Cambodian
border,  and  this  we  are  preparing  on  an  urgent  basis.

One  other  step  we  can  take  is  to  expand  the  existing  limited  but  remarkably
effective  operations  on  the  Laos  side,  the  so-called  Operation  HARDNOSE,  so
that  it  at  least  provides  reasonable  intelligence  on  movements  all  the  way  along
the  Laos  corridor;  plans  to  expand  this  will  be  prepared  and  presented  for  ap-
proval in  about  two  weeks.

As  to  the  waterways,  the  military  plans  presented  in  Saigon  were  unsatisfactory,
and  a  special  naval  team  is  being  sent  at  once  from  Honolulu  to  determine
what  more  can  be  done.  The  whole  waterway  system  is  so  vast,  however,  that
effective  policing  may  be  impossible.

In  general,  the  infiltration  problem,  while  serious  and  annoying,  is  a  lower
priority  than  the  key  problems  discussed  earlier.  However,  we  should  do  what
we  can  to  reduce  it.

6.  Plans  for  Covert  Action  into  North  Vietnam  were  prepared  as  we  had
requested  and  were  an  excellent  job.  They  present  a  wide  variety  of  sabotage


496 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


and  psychological  operations  against  North  Vietnam  from  which  I  believe  we
should  aim  to  select  those  that  provide  maximum  pressure  with  minimum  risk.
In  accordance  with  your  direction  at  the  meeting,  General  Krulak  of  the  JCS
is  chairing  a  group  that  will  lay  out  a  program  in  the  next  ten  days  for  your
consideration.

7.  Possible  neutralization  of  Vietnam  is  strongly  opposed  by  Minh,  and  our
attitude  is  somewhat  suspect  because  of  editorials  by  the  New  York  Times  and
mention  by  Walter  Lippmann  and  others.  We  reassured  them  as  strongly  as  pos-
sible on  this — and  in  somewhat  more  general  terms  on  the  neutralization  of
Cambodia.  I  recommend  that  you  convey  to  Minh  a  Presidential  message  for  the
New  Year  that  would  repeat  our  position  in  the  strongest  possible  terms  and
would  also  be  a  vehicle  to  stress  the  necessity  of  strong  central  direction  by  the
government  and  specifically  by  Minh  himself.

8.  U.S.  resources  and  personnel  cannot  usefully  be  substantially  increased.  I
have  directed  a  modest  artillery  supplement,  and  also  the  provision  of  uniforms
for  the  Self  Defense  Corps,  which  is  the  most  exposed  force  and  suffers  from
low  morale.  Of  greater  potential  significance,  I  have  directed  the  Military  De-
partments to  review  urgently  the  quality  of  the  people  we  are  sending  to  Viet-
nam. It  seems  to  have  fallen  off  considerably  from  the  high  standards  applied
in  the  original  selections  in  1962,  and  the  JCS  fully  agree  with  me  that  we
must  have  our  best  men  there.

Conclusion.  My  appraisal  may  be  overly  pessimistic.  Lodge,  Harkins,  and
Minh  would  probably  agree  with  me  on  specific  points,  but  feel  that  January
should  see  significant  improvement.  We  should  watch  the  situation  very  care-
fully, running  scared,  hoping  for  the  best,  but  preparing  for  more  forceful  moves
if  the  situation  does  not  show  early  signs  of  improvement.

Robert  S.  McNamara


[Document  157]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
Washington  25,  D.C.
JCSM-46-64
22  Jan  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
Subject:  Vietnam  and  Southeast  Asia

1.  National  Security  Action  Memorandum  No.  273  makes  clear  the  resolve
of  the  President  to  ensure  victory  over  the  externally  directed  and  supported
communist  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam.  In  order  to  achieve  that  victory,  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  United  States  must  be  pre-
pared to  put  aside  many  of  the  self-imposed  restrictions  which  now  limit  our
efforts,  and  to  undertake  bolder  actions  which  may  embody  greater  risks.

2.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  increasingly  mindful  that  our  fortunes  in
South  Vietnam  are  an  accurate  barometer  of  our  fortunes  in  all  of  Southeast
Asia.  It  is  our  view  that  if  the  US  program  succeeds  in  South  Vietnam  it  will
go  far  toward  stabilizing  the  total  Southeast  Asia  situation.  Conversely,  a  loss
of  South  Vietnam  to  the  communists  will  presage  an  early  erosion  of  the  re-
mainder of  our  position  in  that  subcontinent.


Documents  497


3.  Laos,  existing  on  a  most  fragile  foundation  now,  would  not  be  able  to
endure  the  establishment  of  a  communist — or  pseudo  neutralist — state  on  its
eastern  flank.  Thailand  less  strong  today  than  a  month  ago  by  virtue  of  the
loss  of  Prime  Minister  Sarit,  would  probably  be  unable  to  withstand  the  pres-
sures of  infiltration  from  the  north  should  Laos  collapse  to  the  communists  in
its  turn.  Cambodia  apparently  has  estimated  that  our  prospects  in  South  Viet-
nam are  not  promising  and,  encouraged  by  the  actions  of  the  French,  appears
already  to  be  seeking  an  accommodation  with  the  communists.  Should  we
actually  suffer  defeat  in  South  Vietnam,  there  is  little  reason  to  believe  that
Cambodia  would  maintain  even  a  pretense  of  neutrality.

4.  In  a  broader  sense,  the  failure  of  our  programs  in  South  Vietnam  would
have  heavy  influence  on  the  judgments  of  Burma,  India,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,
Japan,  Taiwan,  the  Republic  of  Korea,  and  the  Republic  of  the  Philippines  with
respect  to  US  durability,  resolution,  and  trustworthiness.  Finally,  this  being  the
first  real  test  of  our  determination  to  defeat  the  communist  wars  of  national
liberation  formula,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  conclude  that  there  would  be  a
corresponding  unfavorable  effect  upon  our  image  in  Africa  and  in  Latin  America.

5.  All  of  this  underscores  the  pivotal  position  now  occupied  by  South  Viet-
nam in  our  world-wide  confrontation  with  the  communists  and  the  essentiality
that  the  conflict  there  be  brought  to  a  favorable  end  as  soon  as  possible.  How-
ever, it  would  be  unrealistic  to  believe  that  a  complete  suppression  of  the  in-
surgency can  take  place  in  one  or  even  two  years.  The  British  effort  in  Malaya
is  a  recent  example  of  a  counterinsurgency  effort  which  required  approximately
ten  years  before  the  bulk  of  the  rural  population  was  brought  completely  under
control  of  the  government,  the  police  were  able  to  maintain  order,  and  the
armed  forces  were  able  to  eliminate  the  guerrilla  strongholds.

6.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  convinced  that,  in  keeping  with  the  guidance
in  NSAM  273,  the  United  States  must  make  plain  to  the  enemy  our  determina-
tion to  see  the  Vietnam  campaign  through  to  a  favorable  conclusion.  To  do  this,
we  must  prepare  for  whatever  level  of  activity  may  be  required  and,  being
prepared,  must  then  proceed  to  take  actions  as  necessary  to  achieve  our  pur-
poses surely  and  promptly.

7.  Our  considerations,  furthermore,  cannot  be  confined  entirely  to  South
Vietnam.  Our  experience  in  the  war  thus  far  leads  us  to  conclude  that,  in  this
respect,  we  are  not  now  giving  sufficient  attention  to  the  broader  area  problems
of  Southeast  Asia.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  that  our  position  in  Cam-
bodia, our  attitude  toward  Laos,  our  actions  in  Thailand,  and  our  great  effort
in  South  Vietnam  do  not  comprise  a  compatible  and  integrated  US  policy  for
Southeast  Asia.  US  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia  cannot  be  achieved  by  either
economic,  political,  or  military  measures  alone.  All  three  fields  must  be  inte-
grated into  a  single,  broad  US  program  for  Southeast  Asia.  The  measures  recom-
mended in  this  memorandum  are  a  partial  contribution  to  such  a  program.

8.  Currently  we  and  the  South  Vietnamese  are  fighting  the  war  on  the  enemy's
terms.  He  has  determined  the  locale,  the  timing,  and  the  tactics  of  the  battle
while  our  actions  are  essentially  reactive.  One  reason  for  this  is  the  fact  that
we  have  obliged  ourselves  to  labor  under  self-imposed  restrictions  with  respect
to  impeding  external  aid  to  the  Viet  Cong.  These  restrictions  include  keeping
the  war  within  the  boundaries  of  South  Vietnam,  avoiding  the  direct  use  of
US  combat  forces,  and  limiting  US  direction  of  the  campaign  to  rendering  ad-
vice to  the  Government  of  Vietnam.  These  restrictions,  while  they  may  make
our  international  position  more  readily  defensible,  all  tend  to  make  the  task  in
Vietnam  more  complex,  time  consuming,  and  in  the  end,  more  costly.  In  ad-


498 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

dition  to  complicating  our  own  problem,  these  self-imposed  restrictions  may
well  now  be  conveying  signals  of  irresolution  to  our  enemies — encouraging  them
to  higher  levels  of  vigor  and  greater  risks.  A  reversal  of  attitude  and  the  adop-
tion of  a  more  aggressive  program  would  enhance  greatly  our  ability  to  con-
trol the  degree  to  which  escalation  will  occur.  It  appears  probable  that  the
economic  and  agricultural  disappointments  suffered  by  Communist  China,  plus
the  current  rift  with  the  Soviets,  could  cause  the  communists  to  think  twice  about
undertaking  a  large-scale  military  adventure  in  Southeast  Asia.

9.  In  adverting  to  actions  outside  of  South  Vietnam,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
are  aware  that  the  focus  of  the  counterinsurgency  battle  lies  in  South  Vietnam
itself,  and  that  the  war  must  certainly  be  fought  and  won  primarily  in  the  minds
of  the  Vietnamese  people.  At  the  same  time,  the  aid  now  coming  to  the  Viet
Cong  from  outside  the  country  in  men,  resources,  advice,  and  direction  is  suffi-
ciently great  in  the  aggregate  to  be  significant — both  as  help  and  as  encourage-
ment to  the  Viet  Cong.  It  is  our  conviction  that  if  support  of  the  insurgency
from  outside  South  Vietnam  in  terms  of  operational  direction,  personnel,  and
material  were  stopped  completely,  the  character  of  the  war  in  South  Vietnam
would  be  substantially  and  favorably  altered.  Because  of  this  conviction,  we
are  wholly  in  favor  of  executing  the  covert  actions  against  North  Vietnam
which  you  have  recently  proposed  to  the  President.  We  believe,  however,  that
it  would  be  idle  to  conclude  that  these  efforts  will  have  a  decisive  effect  on  the
communist  determination  to  support  the  insurgency;  and  it  is  our  view  that  we
must  therefore  be  prepared  fully  to  undertake  a  much  higher  level  of  activity,
not  only  for  its  beneficial  tactical  effect,  but  to  make  plain  our  resolution,  both
to  our  friends  and  to  our  enemies.

10.  Accordingly,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  the  United  States  must
make  ready  to  conduct  increasinglv  bolder  actions  in  Southeast  Asia;  specifically
as  to  Vietnam  to:

a.  Assign  to  the  US  military  commander  responsibilities  for  the  total
US  program  in  Vietnam.

b.  Induce  the  Government  of  Vietnam  to  turn  over  to  the  United  States
military  commander,  temporarily,  the  actual  tactical  direction  of  the  war.

c.  Charge  the  United  States  military  commander  with  complete  responsi-
bihty  for  conduct  of  the  program  against  North  Vietnam.

d.  Overfly  Laos  and  Cambodia  to  whatever  extent  is  necessary  for  ac-
quisition of  operational  intelligence.

e.  Induce  the  Government  of  Vietnam  to  conduct  overt  ground  opera-
tions in  Laos  of  sufficient  scope  to  impede  the  flow  of  personnel  and  ma-
terial southward.

f.  Arm,  equip,  advise,  and  support  the  Government  of  Vietnam  in  its
conduct  of  aerial  bombing  of  critical  targets  in  North  Vietnam  and  in
mining  the  sea  approaches  to  that  country.

g.  Advise  and  support  the  Government  of  Vietnam  in  its  conduct  of
large-scale  commando  raids  against  critical  targets  in  North  Vietnam.

h.  Conduct  aerial  bombing  of  key  North  Vietnam  targets,  using  US
resources  under  Vietnamese  cover,  and  with  the  Vietnamese  openly  assum-
ing responsibility  for  the  actions.

i.  Commit  additional  US  forces,  as  necessary,  in  support  of  the  combat
action  within  South  Vietnam.

j.  Commit  US  forces  as  necessary  in  direct  actions  against  North  Viet-
nam.


Documents  499


11.  It  is  our  conviction  that  any  or  all  of  the  foregoing  actions  may  be  re-
quired to  enhance  our  position  in  Southeast  Asia.  The  past  few  months  have
disclosed  that  considerably  higher  levels  of  effort  are  demanded  of  us  if  US
objectives  are  to  be  attained.

12.  The  governmental  reorganization  which  followed  the  coup  d'etat  in  Saigon
should  be  completed  very  soon,  giving  basis  for  concluding  just  how  strong  the
Vietnamese  Government  is  going  to  be  and  how  much  of  the  load  they  will  be
able  to  bear  themselves.  Additionally,  the  five-month  dry  season,  which  is  just
now  beginning,  will  afford  the  Vietnamese  an  opportunity  to  exhibit  their  ability
to  reverse  the  unfavorable  situation  in  the  critical  Mekong  Delta.  The  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  will  follow  these  important  developments  closely  and  will  recom-
mend to  you  progressively  the  execution  of  such  of  the  above  actions  as  are
considered  militarily  required,  providing,  in  each  case,  their  detailed  assessment
of  the  risks  involved.

13.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  the  strategic  importance  of  Viet-
nam and  of  Southeast  Asia  warrants  preparations  for  the  actions  above  and
recommend  that  the  substance  of  this  memorandum  be  discussed  with  the
Secretary  of  State.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:
Maxwell  D.  Taylor
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


[Document  158]

THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Washington

16  March  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

SUBJECT:  South  Vietnam

This  report  addresses  two  questions:

1.  What  is  the  present  situation  in  Vietnam?  (What  is  the  trend  of  the
counterinsurgency  program,  how  stable  is  the  Khanh  government,  and  what
is  the  effectiveness  of  our  current  policy  of  assisting  the  South  Vietnamese
Government  by  economic  aid,  military  training  and  logistical  support?)

2.  How  can  we  improve  that  situation?  (What  are  the  plans  and  pros-
pects of  the  Khanh  government  and  what  more  should  they  be  doing,  and
what  more  should  the  U.S.  be  doing  under  present  or  revised  policy,  in
South  Vietnam  or  against  North  Vietnam?)

To  answer  the  questions,  the  report  will  review:  I.  U.S.  Objectives  in  South
Vietnam;  II.  Present  U.S.  Policy  in  South  Vietnam;  III.  The  Present  Situation;
IV.  Alternative  Present  Courses  of  Action;  V.  Possible  Later  Actions;  VI.  Other
Actions  Considered  But  Rejected;  and  VII.  Recommendations.

I. U.S.  OBJECTIVES  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

We  seek  an  independent  non-Communist  South  Vietnam.  We  do  not  require
that  it  serve  as  a  Western  base  or  as  a  member  of  a  Western  Alliance.  South


500 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

Vietnam  must  be  free,  however,  to  accept  outside  assistance  as  required  to
maintain  its  security.  This  assistance  should  be  able  to  take  the  form  not  only
of  economic  and  social  measures  but  also  police  and  military  help  to  root  out
and  control  insurgent  elements.

Unless  we  can  achieve  this  objective  in  South  Vietnam,  almost  all  of  South-
east Asia  will  probably  fall  under  Communist  dominance  (all  of  Vietnam,  Laos,
and  Cambodia),  accommodate  to  Communism  so  as  to  remove  effective  U.S.
and  anti-Communist  influence  (Burma),  or  fall  under  the  domination  of  forces
not  now  explicitly  Communist  but  likely  then  to  become  so  (Indonesia  taking
over  Malaysia).  Thailand  might  hold  for  a  period  with  our  help,  but  would  be
under  grave  pressure.  Even  the  Philippines  would  become  shaky,  and  the  threat
to  India  to  the  west,  Australia  and  New  Zealand  to  the  south,  and  Taiwan,
Korea,  and  Japan  to  the  north  and  east  would  be  greatly  increased.

All  of  these  consequences  would  probably  have  been  true  even  if  the  U.S.
had  not  since  1954,  and  especially  since  1961,  become  so  heavily  engaged  in
South  Vietnam.  However,  that  fact  accentuates  the  impact  of  a  Communist  South
Vietnam  not  only  in  Asia,  but  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  where  the  South  Vietnam
conflict  is  regarded  as  a  test  case  of  U.S.  capacity  to  help  a  nation  meet  a  Com-
munist "war  of  liberation."

Thus,  purely  in  terms  of  foreign  policy,  the  stakes  are  high.  They  are  increased
by  domestic  factors.

II.  PRESENT  U.S.  POLICY  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

We  are  now  trying  to  help  South  Vietnam  defeat  the  Viet  Cong,  supported
from  the  North,  by  means  short  of  the  unqualified  use  of  U.S.  combat  forces.
We  are  not  acting  against  North  Vietnam  except  by  a  very  modest  "covert"
program  operated  by  South  Vietnamese  (and  a  few  Chinese  Nationalists) — a
program  so  limited  that  it  is  unlikely  to  have  any  significant  effect.  In  Laos,
we  are  still  working  largely  within  the  framework  of  the  1962  Geneva  Accords.
In  Cambodia  we  are  still  seeking  to  keep  Sihanouk  from  abandoning  whatever
neutrality  he  may  still  have  and  fulfilling  his  threat  of  reaching  an  accommoda-
tion with  Hanoi  and  Peking.  As  a  consequence  of  these  policies,  we  and  the
GVN  have  had  to  condone  the  extensive  use  of  Cambodian  and  Laotian  territory
by  the  Viet  Cong,  both  as  a  sanctuary  and  as  infiltration  routes.

III.  THE  PRESENT  SITUATION  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM
The  key  elements  in  the  present  situation  are  as  follows:

A.  The  military  tools  and  concepts  of  the  GVN/US  effort  are  generally  sound
and  adequate.*  Substantially  more  can  be  done  in  the  effective  employment  of
military  forces  and  in  the  economic  and  civic  action  areas.  These  improvements
may  require  some  selective  increases  in  the  U.S.  presence,  but  it  does  not  appear
likely  that  major  equipment  replacement  and  additions  in  U.S.  personnel  are
indicated  under  current  policy.

B.  The  U.S.  policy  of  reducing  existing  personnel  where  South  Vietnamese
are  in  a  position  to  assume  the  functions  is  still  sound.  Its  application  will  not

*  Mr.  McCone  emphasizes  that  the  GVN/US  program  can  never  be  considered  com-
pletely satisfactory  so  long  as  it  permits  the  Viet  Cong  a  sanctuary  in  Cambodia  and
a  continuing  uninterrupted  and  unmolested  source  of  supply  and  reinforcement  from
NVN  through  Laos.


Documents  501


lead  to  any  major  reductions  in  the  near  future,  but  adherence  to  this  poHcy  as
such  has  a  sound  effect  in  portraying  to  the  U.S.  and  the  world  that  we  con-
tinue to  regard  the  war  as  a  conflict  the  South  Vietnamese  must  win  and  take
ultimate  responsibility  for.  Substantial  reductions  in  the  numbers  of  U.S.  mili-
tary training  personnel  should  be  possible  before  the  end  of  1965.  However,
the  U.S.  should  continue  to  reiterate  that  it  will  provide  all  the  assistance  and
advice  required  to  do  the  job  regardless  of  how  long  it  takes.

C.  The  situation  has  unquestionably  been  growing  worse,  at  least  since  Sep-
tember:

1.  In  terms  of  government  control  of  the  countryside,  about  40%  of  the
territory  is  under  Viet  Cong  control  or  predominant  influence.  In  22  of
the  43  provinces,  the  Viet  Cong  control  50%  or  more  of  the  land  area,
including  80%  of  Phuoc  Tuy;  90%  of  Binh  Duong;  75%  of  Hau  Nghia;
90%  of  Long  An;  90%  of  Kien  Tuong;  90%  of  Dinh  Tuong;  90%  of
Kien  Hoa;  and  85%  of  An  Xuyen.

2.  Large  groups  of  the  population  are  now  showing  signs  of  apathy  and
indifference,  and  there  are  some  signs  of  frustration  within  the  U.S.  con-
tingent:

a.  The  ARVN  and  paramilitary  desertion  rates,  and  particularly  the
latter,  are  high  and  increasing.

b.  Draft  dodging  is  high  while  the  Viet  Cong  are  recruiting  energeti-
cally and  effectively.

c.  The  morale  of  the  hamlet  militia  and  of  the  Self  Defense  Corps,
on  which  the  security  of  the  hamlets  depends,  is  poor  and  falling.

3.  In  the  last  90  days  the  weakening  of  the  government's  position  has
been  particularly  noticeable.  For  example:

a.  In  Quang  Nam  province,  in  the  I  Corps,  the  militia  in  17  hamlets
turned  in  their  weapons.

b.  In  Binh  Duong  province  (III  Corps)  the  hamlet  militia  were  dis-
armed because  of  suspected  disloyalty.

c.  In  Binh  Dinh  province,  in  the  II  Corps,  75  hamlets  were  severely
damaged  by  the  Viet  Cong  (in  contrast,  during  the  twelve  months  end-
ing June  30,  1963,  attacks  on  strategic  hamlets  were  few  and  none  was
overrun ) .

d.  In  Quang  Ngai  province,  at  the  northern  edge  of  the  II  Corps,
there  were  413  strategic  hamlets  under  government  control  a  year  ago.
Of  that  number,  335  have  been  damaged  to  varying  degrees  or  fallen
into  disrepair,  and  only  275  remain  under  government  control.

e.  Security  throughout  the  IV  Corps  has  deteriorated  badly.  The  Viet
Cong  control  virtually  all  facets  of  peasant  life  in  the  southernmost
provinces  and  the  government  troops  there  are  reduced  to  defending  the
administrative  centers.  Except  in  An  Giang  province  (dominated  by  the
Hoa  Hao  religious  sect)  armed  escort  is  required  for  almost  all  move-
ment in  both  the  southern  and  northern  areas  of  the  IV  Corps.

4.  The  political  control  structure  extending  from  Saigon  down  into  the
hamlets  disappeared  following  the  November  coup.  Of  the  41  incumbent
province  chiefs  on  November  1,  35  have  been  replaced  (nine  provinces
had  three  province  chiefs  in  three  months;  one  province  had  four).  Scores
of  lesser  officials  were  replaced.  Almost  all  major  military  commands  have
changed  hands  twice  since  the  November  coup.  The  faith  of  the  peasants
has  been  shaken  by  the  disruptions  in  experienced  leadership  and  the  loss


juz, vjravti  rLuiiiun / 1  ne  reniagon  rapers/  v  oi.  m

of  physical  security.  In  many  areas,  power  vacuums  have  developed  causing
confusion  among  the  people  and  a  rising  rate  of  rural  disorders.

5.  North  Vietnamese  support,  always  significant,  has  been  increasing:

a.  Communications  between  Hanoi  and  the  Viet  Cong  (see  classified
annex).

b.  Since  July  1,  1963,  the  following  items  of  equipment,  not  previously
encountered  in  South  Vietnam,  have  been  captured  from  the  Viet  Cong:

Chicom  75  mm.  recoilless  rifles.
Chicom  heavy  machine  guns.

U.S.  .50  caliber  heavy  machine  guns  on  Chicom  mounts.
In  addition,  it  is  clear  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  using  Chinese  90  mm
rocket  launchers  and  mortars.

c.  The  Viet  Cong  are  importing  large  quantities  of  munitions  and
chemicals  for  the  production  of  explosives:  Approximately  50,000  pounds
of  explosive-producing  chemicals  destined  for  the  Viet  Cong  have  been
intercepted  in  the  12  months  ending  March  1964.  On  December  24,  five
tons  of  ammunition,  of  which  one  and  one-half  tons  were  75  mm  recoil-
less  rifle  ammunition,  was  captured  at  the  Dinh  Tuong  Viet  Cong  arsenal.
Ninety  percent  was  of  Chicom  manufacture.

D.  The  greatest  weakness  in  the  present  situation  is  the  uncertain  viability
of  the  Khanh  government.  Khanh  himself  is  a  very  able  man  within  his  ex-
perience, but  he  does  not  yet  have  wide  political  appeal  and  his  control  of  the
Army  itself  is  uncertain  (he  has  the  serious  problem  of  the  jailed  generals).  After
two  coups,  as  was  mentioned  above,  there  has  been  a  sharp  drop  in  morale  and
organization,  and  Khanh  has  not  yet  been  able  to  build  these  up  satisfactorily.
There  is  a  constant  threat  of  assassination  or  of  another  coup,  which  would
drop  morale  and  organization  nearly  to  zero.*  Whether  or  not  French  nationals
are  actively  encouraging  such  a  coup,  de  Gaulle's  position  and  the  continuing
pessimism  and  anti-Americanism  of  the  French  community  in  South  Vietnam
provide  constant  fuel  to  neutralist  sentiment  and  the  coup  possibility.  If  a  coup
is  set  underway,  the  odds  of  our  detecting  and  preventing  it  in  the  tactical  sense
are  not  high.

E.  On  the  positive  side,  we  have  found  many  reasons  for  encouragement  in
the  performance  of  the  Khanh  government  to  date.  Although  its  top  layer  is
thin,  it  is  highly  responsive  to  U.S.  advice,  and  with  a  good  grasp  of  the  basic
elements  of  rooting  out  the  Viet  Cong.  Opposition  groups  are  fragmentary,  and
Khanh  has  brought  in  at  least  token  representation  from  many  key  groups
hitherto  left  out.  He  is  keenly  aware  of  the  danger  of  assassination  or  coup  and
is  taking  resourceful  steps  to  minimize  these  risks.  All  told,  these  evidences  of
energy,  comprehension,  and  decision  add  up  to  a  sufficiently  strong  chance  of
Khanh's  really  taking  hold  in  the  next  few  months  for  us  to  devote  all  possible
energy  and  resources  to  his  support.

IV. ALTERNATIVE  PRESENT  COURSES  OF  ACTION

A. NEGOTIATE  ON  THE  BASIS  OF  "NEUTRALIZATION'*

While  de  Gaulle  has  not  been  clear  on  what  he  means  by  this — and  is  probably
deliberately  keeping  it  vague  as  he  did  in  working  toward  an  Algerian  settle-

*  Mr.  McCone  does  not  believe  the  dangers  of  another  coup  (except  as  a  result  of  a
possible  assassination)  at  this  time  are  as  serious  as  he  believes  this  paragraph  implies.


Documents  503


ment — he  clearly  means  not  only  a  South  Vietnam  that  would  not  be  a  Western
base  or  part  of  an  alliance  structure  (both  of  which  we  could  accept)  but  also
withdrawal  of  all  external  military  assistance  and  specifically  total  U.S.  with-
drawal. To  negotiate  on  this  basis — indeed  without  specifically  rejecting  it —
would  simply  mean  a  Communist  take-over  in  South  Vietnam.  Only  the  U.S.
presence  after  1954  held  the  South  together  under  far  more  favorable  circum-
stances, and  enabled  Diem  to  refuse  to  go  through  with  the  1954  provision  call-
ing for  nationwide  "free"  elections  in  1956.  Even  talking  about  a  U.S.  with-
drawal would  undermine  any  chance  of  keeping  a  non-Communist  government
in  South  Vietnam,  and  the  rug  would  probably  be  pulled  before  the  negotiations
had  gone  far.


B. INITIATE  GVN  AND  U.S.  MILITARY  ACTIONS  AGAINST
NORTH  VIETNAM

We  have  given  serious  thought  to  all  the  implications  and  ways  of  carrying  out
direct  military  action  against  North  Vietnam  in  order  to  supplement  the  counter-
insurgency  program  in  South  Vietnam.  (The  analysis  of  overt  U.S.  action  is
attached  as  Annex  A.)  In  summary,  the  actions  break  down  into  three  cate-
gories :

1.  Border  Control  Actions.  For  example:

a.  An  expansion  of  current  authority  for  Laotian  overflights  to  per-
mit low-level  reconnaissance  by  aircraft  when  such  flights  are  required
to  supplement  the  currently  approved  U-2  flights.

b.  Vietnamese  cross-border  ground  penetrations  into  Laos,  without
the  presence  of  U.S.  advisors  or  re-supply  by  U.S.  aircraft.

c.  Expansion  of  the  patrols  into  Laos  to  include  use  of  U.S.  advisors
and  re-supply  by  U.S.  aircraft.

d.  Hot  pursuit  of  VC  forces  moving  across  the  Cambodian  border
and  destruction  of  VC  bases  oii  the  Vietnam /Cambodian  line.

e.  Air  and  ground  strikes  against  selected  targets  in  Laos  by  South
Vietnamese  forces.

2.  Retaliatory  Actions.  For  example:

a.  Overt  high  and/or  low  level  reconnaissance  flights  by  U.S.  or  Farm-
gate  aircraft  over  North  Vietnam  to  assist  in  locating  and  identifying  the
sources  of  external  aid  to  the  Viet  Cong.

b.  Retaliatory  bombing  strikes  and  commando  raids  on  a  tit-for-tat
basis  by  the  GVN  against  NVN  targets  (communication  centers,  training
camps,  infiltration  routes,  etc.).

c.  Aerial  mining  by  the  GVN  aircraft  (possibly  with  U.S.  assistance)
of  the  major  NVN  ports.

3.  Graduated  Overt  Military  Pressure  by  GVN  and  U.S.  Forces.

This  program  would  go  beyond  reacting  on  a  tit-for-tat  basis.  It  would
include  air  attacks  against  military  and  possibly  industrial  targets.  The  pro-
gram would  utilize  the  combined  resources  of  the  GVN  Air  Force  and  the
U.S.  Farmgate  Squadron,  with  the  latter  reinforced  by  three  squadrons  of
B-57s  presently  in  Japan.  Before  this  program  could  be  implemented  it
would  be  necessary  to  provide  some  additional  air  defense  for  South  Viet-
nam and  to  ready  U.S.  forces  in  the  Pacific  for  possible  escalation.

The  analysis  of  the  more  serious  of  these  military  actions  (from  2(b)


504 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

upward)  revealed  the  extremely  delicate  nature  of  such  operations,  both
from  the  military  and  political  standpoints.  There  would  be  the  problem
of  marshalling  the  case  to  justify  such  action,  the  problem  of  communist
escalation,  and  the  problem  of  dealing  with  the  pressures  for  premature
or  "stacked"  negotiations.  We  would  have  to  calculate  the  effect  of  such
military  actions  against  a  specified  political  objective.  That  objective,  while
being  cast  in  terms  of  eliminating  North  Vietnamese  control  and  direction
of  the  insurgency,  would  in  practical  terms  be  directed  toward  collapsing
the  morale  and  the  self-assurance  of  the  Viet  Cong  cadres  now  operating
in  South  Vietnam  and  bolstering  the  morale  of  the  Khanh  regime.  We
could  not,  of  course,  be  sure  that  our  objective  could  be  achieved  by  any
means  within  the  practical  range  of  our  options.  Moreover,  and  perhaps
most  importantly,  unless  and  until  the  Khanh  government  has  established
its  position  and  preferably  is  making  significant  progress  in  the  South,  an
overt  extension  of  operations  into  the  North  carries  the  risk  of  being
mounted  from  an  extremely  weak  base  which  might  at  any  moment  collapse
and  leave  the  posture  of  political  confrontation  worsened  rather  than  im-
proved.

The  other  side  of  the  argument  is  that  the  young  Khanh  government
needs  the  reinforcement  of  some  significant  success  against  the  North  and
without  them  the  in-country  program,  even  with  the  expansion  discussed
in  Section  C  below,  may  not  be  sufficient  to  stem  the  tide.

On  balance,  except  to  the  extent  suggested  in  Section  V  below,  I  recom-
mend against  initiation  at  this  time  of  overt  GVN  and/or  U.S.  military
actions  against  North  Vietnam.

C. INITIATE  MEASURES  TO  IMPROVE  THE  SITUATION
IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

There  were  and  are  sound  reasons  for  the  limits  imposed  by  present  policy —
the  South  Vietnamese  must  win  their  own  fight;  U.S.  intervention  on  a  larger
scale,  and/or  GVN  actions  against  the  North,  would  disturb  key  allies  and  other
nations;  etc.  In  any  case,  it  is  vital  that  we  continue  to  take  every  reasonable
measure  to  assure  success  in  South  Vietnam.  The  policy  choice  is  not  an
"either/or"  between  this  course  of  action  and  possible  pressures  against  the
North;  the  former  is  essential  without  regard  to  our  decision  with  respect  to
the  latter.  The  latter  can,  at  best,  only  reinforce  the  former.

The  following  are  the  actions  we  believe  can  be  taken  in  order  to  improve
the  situation  both  in  the  immediate  future  and  over  a  longer  term  period.  To
emphasize  that  a  new  phase  has  begun,  the  measures  to  be  taken  by  the  Khanh
government  should  be  described  by  some  term  such  as  "South  Vietnam's  Pro-
gram for  National  Mobilization."

Basic  U.S.  Posture

1.  The  U.S.  at  all  levels  must  continue  to  make  it  emphatically  clear
that  we  are  prepared  to  furnish  assistance  and  support  for  as  long  as  it
takes  to  bring  the  insurgency  under  control.

2.  The  U.S.  at  all  levels  should  continue  to  make  it  clear  that  we  fully
support  the  Khanh  government  and  are  totally  opposed  to  any  further
coups.  The  ambassador  should  instruct  all  elements,  including  the  military


Documents  505


advisors,  to  report  intelligence  information  of  possible  coups  promptly,
with  the  decision  to  be  made  by  the  ambassador  whether  to  report  such
information  to  Khanh.  However,  we  must  recognize  that  our  chances  would
not  be  great  of  detecting  and  preventing  a  coup  that  had  major  military
backing.

3.  We  should  support  fully  the  Pacification  Plan  now  announced  by
Khanh  (described  in  Annex  B),  and  particularly  the  basic  theory — now
fully  accepted  both  on  the  Vietnamese  and  U.S.  sides — of  concentrating
on  the  more  secure  areas  and  working  out  from  these  through  military
operations  to  provide  security,  followed  by  necessary  civil  and  economic
actions  to  make  the  presence  of  the  government  felt  and  to  provide  eco-
nomic improvements.  This  so-called  "oil  spot"  theory  is  excellent,  and  its
acceptance  is  a  major  step  forward.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  push  hard
to  get  specific  instructions  out  to  the  provinces,  so  that  there  is  real  unity
of  effort  at  all  levels.  A  related  matter  is  to  stabilize  the  assignment  of
province  chiefs  and  senior  commanders  and  clarify  their  responsibilities  and
relationships.

Many  of  the  actions  described  in  succeeding  paragraphs  fit  right  into
the  framework  of  the  Plan  as  announced  by  Khanh.  Wherever  possible,
we  should  tie  our  urging  of  such  actions  to  Khanh's  own  formulation  of
them,  so  that  he  will  be  carrying  out  a  Vietnamese  plan  and  not  one  im-
posed by  the  U.S.

Civil  and  Military  Mobilization

4.  To  put  the  whole  nation  on  a  war  footing — to  obtain  the  manpower
for  these  efforts  described  below  and  to  remedy  present  inequities  and  in-
adequacies in  the  use  of  manpower — a  new  National  Mobilization  Plan
(to  include  a  National  Service  Law)  should  be  urgently  developed  by
the  Country  Team  in  collaboration  with  the  Khanh  Government.  The
present  structure  of  decrees,  dating  from  the  Diem  Government,  is  hap-
hazard and  produces  substantial  injustices.  The  new  Program  for  National
Mobilization  would  both  greatly  increase  the  effectiveness  of  the  war  effort
and  be  a  strong  visible  sign  of  the  Government's  determination  and  will.
Full  attention  should  be  given  to  the  way  it  is  presented  so  that  it  appears
as  a  remedy  for  past  injustices  and  not  as  a  repressive  or  totalitarian  act.

5.  The  strength  of  the  Armed  Forces  (regular  plus  paramilitary)  must  be
increased  by  at  least  50,000  men.  About  15,000  of  these  are  required  to
fill  the  regular  Armed  Forces  (ARVN)  to  their  present  authorized  strength.
Another  5,000  would  fill  the  existing  paramilitary  forces  to  authorized
strengths.  The  balance  of  30,000  men  is  required  to  increase  the  strength
of  the  paramilitary  forces,  in  whatever  form  these  may  be  organized  (see
paragraph  7  below).  (All  of  the  foregoing  strength  figures  are  illustrative
and  subject  to  review,  which  review  I  have  directed  General  Harkins  to
make  in  consultation  with  General  Khanh.)

6.  A  Civil  Administrative  Corps  is  urgently  required  to  work  in  the  pro-
vincial capitals,  the  district  towns,  the  villages,  and  the  hamlets.  "Hamlet
civic  action  teams"  of  five  men  each  are  now  beginning  to  be  trained,  on
a  small  scale,  to  go  into  hamlets  after  they  have  been  cleared,  start  the
rehabilitation  process,  and  train  hamlet  leaders  to  carry  on.  School  teach-
ers and  health  technicians  are  now  assigned  in  some  hamlets,  many  more
are  needed,  and  those  on  the  job  need  to  be  retrained  to  higher  com-


506 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

petence.  Many  other  types  of  technicians  (e.g.,  agricultural  workers)  are
needed,  in  varying  numbers.  Taking  into  account  the  fact  that  many  ham-
lets are  not  now  secure,  and  that  adequate  training  is  required,  the  initial
goal  during  1964  should  be  at  least  7,500  additional  persons;  the  ultimate
target,  at  least  40,000  men  for  the  8,000  hamlets,  in  2500  villages  and  43
provinces.  The  administrators  would  come  largely  from  the  areas  in  which
they  serve  and  would  be  paid  by  the  national  government.  The  U.S.  should
work  with  the  GVN  urgently  to  devise  the  necessary  recruiting  plans,
training  facilities,  financing  methods,  and  organizational  arrangements,  and
should  furnish  training  personnel  at  once,  under  the  auspices  of  the  AID
Mission.  Further,  maximum  effort  should  be  made  to  make  use  of  the
available  trained  personnel  by  assignment  to  provincial  and  village  admin-
istration where  needed.


Improved  Military  Forces

7.  The  paramilitary  forces  are  now  understrength  and  lacking  in  effective-
ness. They  must  be  improved  and  reorganized.

Specifically:

a.  What  remains  of  the  present  hamlet  militia  (and  related  forces  of
a  part-time  nature  for  hamlet  defense)  should  be  consolidated  with  the
Self  Defense  Corps  into  a  single  force  compensated  by  the  national  gov-
ernment.

b.  Pay  and  collateral  benefits  must  be  substantially  improved  at  once.
A  reasonable  course  of  action  would  be  to  raise  the  pay  scale  of  the
Civil  Guard  approximately  to  that  of  the  regular  Armed  Forces,  and  to
raise  the  pay  scale  of  a  reorganized  Self  Defense  Corps  approximately  to
the  present  level  of  the  Civil  Guard.  In  addition,  measures  should  be
taken  to  improve  the  housing  and  allowances  of  the  families  of  both
forces,  so  that  they  can  live  decently  in  areas  near  where  the  forces  are
operating.

c.  Strength  should  be  maintained  and  expanded  by  conscription,  effec-
tively enforced,  and  by  more  centrally  directed  recruitment  policies.

d.  Additional  U.S.  personnel  should  be  assigned  to  the  training  of  all
these  paramilitary  forces.

e.  The  National  Police  require  special  consideration.  Their  strength
in  the  provinces  should  be  substantially  increased  and  consideration
should  be  given  to  including  them  as  part  of  an  overall  "Popular  De-
fense Force."  In  expanding  and  improving  the  police,  the  AID  Mission
should  make  special  arrangements  to  draw  on  the  advice  of  the  present
British  training  mission  under  Brigadier  Thompson  because  of  its  experi-
ence in  Malaya.  (Mr.  Bell  has  instructed  Mr.  Brent,  the  USOM  Chief,
to  accomplish  this.)

8.  An  offensive  Guerrilla  force  should  be  created  to  operate  along  the
border  and  in  areas  where  VC  control  is  dominant.  Such  a  force  could  be
organized  around  present  Ranger  Companies  and  ARVN  Special  Forces
and  provided  with  special  training  and  advice  by  U.S.  Special  Forces.  The
force  should  carry  the  fight  to  the  VC  on  their  own  basis  in  advance  of
clear-and-hold  operations  on  the  conventional  pattern.


Documents  507


Additional  Military  Equipment  for  the  GVN

9.  The  Vietnamese  Air  Force  should  be  strengthened  at  once  by  the
substitution  of  25  A-IH  aircraft  for  the  present  25  T-28s.  The  A-IH
aircraft  has  a  much  greater  bomb  load  and  slightly  better  speed.*

10.  Although  there  are  no  major  equipment  deficiencies  in  other  forces,
we  should  act  at  once  to  replace  the  present  M-114  armored  personnel  car-
riers by  63  M-113s  and  to  provide  additional  river  boats.  Additional  lesser
deficiencies  should  also  be  met  at  an  estimated  cost  of  approximately  $10
million.


Economic  Actions

11.  The  approved,  but  unannounced,  Fertilizer  Program  should  be  par-
ticularly stressed  and  expanded  and  publicly  announced.  Its  target  of
85,000  tons  for  the  present  planting  season  (April-June)  should  probably
be  doubled  for  the  next  season  and  trebled  the  following  season,  both  to
provide  immediate  and  direct  benefits  to  peasants  in  secure  areas  and  to
improve  the  rice  crops  and  export  earnings.  Estimates  are  that  an  ad-
ditional ton  of  fertilizer  costing  around  $70  can,  if  properly  applied,  pro-
duce additional  yield  of  an  equivalent  two  tons  of  rice,  which  might  be
sold  for  $110  per  ton.  Thus,  the  potential  export  improvement  alone  could
be  on  the  order  of  $20  million  from  this  year's  85,000  ton  input.


US  and  GVN  Costs  of  the  Above  Actions

The  above  actions  will  involve  a  limited  increase  in  U.S.  personnel  and
in  direct  Defense  Department  costs.  More  significantly,  they  involve  sig-
nificant increase  in  Military  Assistance  Program  costs  and  in  the  budget
of  the  GVN  itself,  with  the  latter  requiring  additional  US  economic  aid.
The  estimates  of  additional  annual  costs  are  as  follows:


Action

a.  Raise  military  and
paramilitary  numbers
and  pay  scales

b.  Enlarge  civil  ad-
ministrative cadre

c.  Furnish  additional
military  equipment


GVN  Budget  Costs
5-6  billion  piastres


250  million  piastres
( 1st  year)


Cost  to  U.S.
$30-40  milliont

$1,500,000  (first  year)
$20  million  (one  time)


*  Concurrently,  the  effectiveness  of  the  USAF's  Farmgate  operation  will  be  increased
by  assignment  of  A-IE  aircraft  in  replacement  of  B-26s  and  T-28s.  Furthermore,  in
another  important  area,  we  are  strengthening  the  U.S.  intelligence  and  reporting  sys-
tem.

t  Increases  in  GVN  budget  expenditures  do  not  automatically  require  equal  increases
in  U.S.  economic  aid.  As  a  rough  approximation,  subject  to  later  refinement,  an  in-
crease of  5-6  billion  piastres  of  GVN  budget  expenditures  might  require  an  increase
of  $30-40  million  worth  of  imports  financed  through  U.S.  economic  aid.  Some  of  the
imports  undoubtedly  could  be  obtained  under  P.L.  480.


508 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


Conclusion

If  the  Khanh  Government  can  stay  in  power  and  the  above  actions  can  be
carried  out  rapidly,  it  is  my  judgment  that  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  can  be
significantly  improved  in  the  next  four  to  six  months.  The  present  deterioration
may  continue  for  a  part  of  this  period,  but  I  believe  it  can  be  levelled  out  and
some  improvement  will  become  visible  during  the  period.  I  therefore  believe  that
this  course  of  action  should  be  urgently  pursued  while  we  prepare  such  additional
actions  as  may  be  necessary  for  success.

V.  POSSIBLE  LATER  ACTIONS

If  the  Khanh  government  takes  hold  vigorously — inspiring  confidence,  whether
or  not  noteworthy  progress  has  been  made — or  if  we  get  hard  information  of
significantly  stepped-up  VC  arms  supply  from  the  North,  we  may  wish  to  mount
new  and  significant  pressures  against  North  Vietnam.  We  should  start  preparations
for  such  a  capability  now.  (See  Annex  C  for  an  analysis  of  the  situation  in  North
Vietnam  and  Communist  China.)  Specifically,  we  should  develop  a  capability  to
initiate  within  72  hours  the  "Border  Control"  *  and  "Retaliatory  Actions"  re-
ferred to  on  pages  5  and  6,  and  we  should  achieve  a  capability  to  initiate  with
30  days'  notice  the  program  of  "Graduated  Overt  Military  Pressure."  The  reason-
ing behind  this  program  of  preparations  for  initiating  action  against  North  Viet-
nam is  rooted  in  the  fact  that,  even  with  progress  in  the  pacification  plan,  the
Vietnamese  Government  and  the  population  in  the  South  will  still  have  to  face
the  prospect  of  a  very  lengthy  campaign  based  on  a  war-weary  nation  and  operat-
ing against  Viet  Cong  cadres  who  retain  a  great  measure  of  motivation  and  assur-
ance.

In  this  connection,  General  Khanh  stated  that  his  primary  concern  is  to  estab-
lish a  firm  base  in  the  South.  He  favors  continuation  of  covert  activities  against
North  Vietnam,  but  until  such  time  as  "rear-area  security"  has  been  established,
he  does  not  wish  to  engage  in  overt  operations  against  the  North.

In  order  to  accelerate  the  realization  of  pacification  and  particularly  in  order
to  denigrate  the  morale  of  the  Viet  Cong  forces,  it  may  be  necessary  at  some
time  in  the  future  to  put  demonstrable  retaliatory  pressure  on  the  North.  Such  a
course  of  action  might  proceed  according  to  the  scenario  outlined  in  Annex  D.

VI.  OTHER  ACTIONS  CONSIDERED  BUT  REJECTED

We  have  considered  the  following  actions,  but  rejected  them  for  the  time
being  except  to  the  extent  indicated  below:

1.  Return  of  Dependents.  We  recommend  that  the  present  policy  be  con-
tinued of  permitting  dependents  to  return  home  on  a  voluntary  basis,  but
not  ordering  them  to  do  so.  The  security  situation  in  Saigon  appears  to
have  improved  significantly,  and  ordering  dependents  home  would  now,  in
the  universal  judgment  of  our  senior  people  in  Saigon,  have  a  serious  impact
on  South  Vietnamese  morale.  It  would  also  raise  a  serious  question  whether
tours  of  duty  for  AID  personnel  would  not  have  to  be  shortened.  Thus,  unless
there  are  further  serious  incidents,  or  unless  we  were  taking  more  drastic

*  Authority  should  be  granted  immediately  for  covert  Vietnamese  operations  into  Laos,
for  the  purposes  of  border  control  and  of  "hot  pursuit"  into  Laos.  Decision  on  "hot
pursuit"  into  Cambodia  should  await  further  study  of  our  relations  with  that  country.


Documents  509


measures  generally,  we  believe  compulsory  return  should  not  be  undertaken.

2.  Furnishing  a  U.S.  Combat  Unit  to  Secure  the  Saigon  Area.  It  is  the
universal  judgment  of  our  senior  people  in  Saigon,  with  which  we  concur,
that  this  action  would  now  have  serious  adverse  psychological  consequences
and  should  not  be  undertaken.

3.  U.S.  Taking  Over  Command.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  U.S.  move
from  its  present  advisory  role  to  a  role  that  would  amount  in  practice  to
effective  command.  Again,  the  judgment  of  all  senior  people  in  Saigon  with
which  we  concur,  is  that  the  possible  military  advantages  of  such  action
would  be  far  outweighed  by  its  adverse  psychological  impact.  It  would  cut
across  the  whole  basic  picture  of  the  Vietnamese  winning  their  own  war  and
lay  us  wide  open  to  hostile  propaganda  both  within  South  Vietnam  and  out-
side. Moreover,  the  present  responsiveness  of  the  GVN  to  our  advice —
although  it  has  not  yet  reduced  military  reaction  time — makes  it  less  urgent.
At  the  same  time,  MACV  is  steadily  taking  actions  to  bring  U.S.  and  GVN
operating  staffs  closer  together  at  all  levels,  including  joint  operating  rooms
at  key  command  levels.

VII.  RECOMMENDATIONS

I  recommend  that  you  instruct  the  appropriate  agencies  of  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment:

1.  To  make  it  clear  that  we  are  prepared  to  furnish  assistance  and  sup-
port to  South  Vietnam  for  as  long  as  it  takes  to  bring  the  insurgency  under
control.

2.  To  make  it  clear  that  we  fuUv  support  the  Khanh  government  and  are
opposed  to  any  further  coups.

3.  To  support  a  Program  for  National  Mobilization  (including  a  national
service  law)  to  put  South  Vietnam  on  a  war  footing.

4.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  increase  the  armed  forces  (regular  plus
paramilitary)  by  at  least  50,000  men.

5.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  create  a  greatly  enlarged  Civil  Administra-
tive Corps  for  work  at  province,  district  and  hamlet  levels.

6.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  improve  and  reorganize  the  paramilitary
forces  and  to  increase  their  compensation.

7.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  create  an  offensive  guerrilla  force.

8.  To  provide  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force  25  A-IH  aircraft  in  exchange
for  the  present  T-28s.

9.  To  provide  the  Vietnamese  Army  additional  M-113  armored  personnel
carriers  (withdrawing  the  M-114s  there),  additional  river  boats,  and  approx-
imately $5-10  million  of  other  additional  material.

10.  To  announce  publicly  the  Fertilizer  Program  and  to  expand  it  with  a
view  within  two  jears  to  trebling  the  amount  of  fertilizer  made  available.

11.  To  authorize  continued  high-level  U.S.  overflights  of  South  Vietnam's
borders  and  to  authorize  "hot  pursuit"  and  South  Vietnamese  ground  opera-
tions over  the  Laotian  line  for  the  purpose  of  border  control.  More  ambitious
operations  into  Laos  involving  units  beyond  battalion  size  should  be  author-
ized only  with  the  approval  of  Souvanna  Phouma.  Operations  across  the
Cambodian  border  should  depend  on  the  state  of  relations  with  Cambodia.

12.  To  prepare  immediately  to  be  in  a  position  on  72  hours'  notice  to
initiate  the  full  range  of  Laotian  and  Cambodian  "Border  Control"  actions


510 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

(beyond  those  authorized  in  paragraph  11  above)  and  the  "Retaliatory  Ac-
tions" against  North  Vietnam,  and  to  be  in  a  position  on  30  days'  notice  to
initiate  the  program  of  "Graduated  Overt  Military  Pressure"  against  North
Vietnam.

Robert  S.  McNamara


[Document  159]

Date:  18  March  1964

FM:  JCS  5390

(M/Gen  F.  T.  Unger)

TO:  CINCPAC

Refs:  a.  JCS  5375;

b.  OPLAN34A;

c.  OPLAN33;

d.  OPLAN99;

e.  JCS  2343/326-6.

Subj:  Planning  Actions,  Viet  Nam

1.  As  a  result  of  approval  of  recommendations  in  paragraph  12,  section  VII,
reference  a,  planning  for  military  actions  in  support  of  RVN  has  been  identified
in  the  following  categories:

a.  Border  control  actions

b.  Retaliatory  actions

c.  Graduated  overt  military  pressures.

In  light  of  the  above,  planning  for  current  and  future  military  actions  in
support  of  the  RVN  must  be  aligned  with  the  appropriate  categories.  It  is  ap-
preciated that  elements  of  several  of  these  actions  are  contained  in  several  extant
plans  (refs  b,  c,  and  d);  however,  these  must  now  be  drawn  together  in  a
cohesive  plan  or  plans  to  permit  sequential  implementation  as  may  be  desired
by  higher  authority  within  categories  above.  JCS  views  on  operations  in  para  c
above  are  contained  in  ref  e.

2.  The  product  of  the  new  planning  should  include:

a.  Mission  and  objectives

b.  Time-phased  US  and  GVN  deployments,  pre-positioning  and  augmenta-
tion required  to  implement  envisaged  operations,  as  well  as  to  deter  enemy  re-
action, within  the  time  parameters  of  para  12,  Section  VII,  ref  a.  (Time  param-
eters are  now  under  review  and  may  be  changed.)

c.  Complete  target  lists  together  with  desired  damage  criteria  as  well  as
impact  on  enemy  capability;  or  specific  objective  area.

d.  Actions  to  be  taken  in  event  of  enemy  escalation.

e.  US  support  required  for  unilateral  RVNAF  operations.

f.  Reconnaissance  operations  and  planning.

3.  Planning  should  be  in  such  detail  as  to  permit  review  of  individual  actions
or  small  increments  in  progressing  through  operations  outlined  above.  As  a
matter  of  urgency,  it  is  requested  that  planning  be  undertaken  in  the  following
order:  border  control  actions,  retaliatory  actions,  and  graduated  overt  military
pressures,  and  that  elements  of  planning  be  forwarded  to  the  JCS  as  completed.
Request  ASAP  your  schedule  for  completion  of  planning  actions.


Documents 5 1 1


P>ocuinent  160]

Date:  20  March  1964

FM:  State  1484  (The  Secretary)
TO:  Saigon

For  Ambassador  Lodge  from  the  President

1.  We  have  studied  your  1776  and  I  am  asking  State  to  have  Bill  Bundy  make
sure  that  you  get  out  latest  planning  documents  on  ways  of  applying  pressure  and
power  against  the  North.  I  understand  that  some  of  this  was  discussed  with  you
by  McNamara  mission  in  Saigon,  but  as  plans  are  refined  it  would  be  helpful  to
have  your  detailed  comments.  As  we  agreed  in  our  previous  messages  to  each
other,  judgment  is  reserved  for  the  present  on  overt  military  action  in  view  of
the  consensus  from  Saigon  conversations  of  McNamara  mission  with  General
Khanh  and  you  on  judgment  that  movement  against  the  North  at  the  present
would  be  premature.  We  have  share  General  Khanh's  judgment  that  the  im-
mediate and  essential  task  is  to  strengthen  the  southern  base.  For  this  reason  our
planning  for  action  against  the  North  is  on  a  contingency  basis  at  present,  and
immediate  problem  in  this  area  is  to  develop  the  strongest  possible  military  and
political  base  for  possible  later  action.  There  is  additional  international  reason
for  avoiding  immediate  overt  action  in  that  we  expect  a  showdown  between  the
Chinese  and  Soviet  Communist  parties  soon  and  action  against  the  North  will  be
more  practicable  after  than  before  a  showdown.  But  if  at  any  time  you  feel  that
more  immediate  action  is  urgent,  I  count  on  you  to  let  me  know  specifically  the
reasons  for  such  action,  together  with  your  recommendations  for  its  size  and
shape.

2.  On  dealing  with  deGaulle,  I  continue  to  think  it  may  be  valuable  for  you
to  go  to  Paris  after  Bohlen  has  made  his  first  try.  (State  is  sending  you  draft
instruction  to  Bohlen,  which  I  have  not  yet  reviewed,  for  your  comment.)  It
ought  to  be  possible  to  explain  in  Saigon  that  your  mission  is  precisely  for  the
purpose  of  knocking  down  the  idea  of.  neutralization  wherever  it  rears  its  ugly
head,  and  on  this  point  I  think  that  nothing  is  more  important  than  to  stop  neu-
tralist talk  wherever  we  can  by  whatever  means  we  can.  I  have  made  this  point
myself  to  Mansfield  and  Lippmann  and  I  expect  to  use  every  public  opportunity
to  restate  our  position  firmly.  You  may  want  to  convey  our  concern  on  this
point  to  General  Khanh  and  get  his  ideas  on  the  best  possible  joint  program  to
stop  such  talk  in  Saigon,  in  Washington,  and  in  Paris.  I  imagine  that  you  have
kept  General  Khanh  abreast  of  our  efforts  in  Paris.  After  we  see  the  results  of
the  Bohlen  approach  you  might  wish  to  sound  him  out  on  Paris  visit  by  you.

[Document  161]

Summary  of  JCSM-426-64,  19  May  1964

"North  Vietnam  Operations"

ICS  appraised  "achievements  and  limitations"  of  first  3  months  of  34A  opera-
tions: Overall  objective  cited  as  "to  help  convince  NVN  leadership  that  it  is  in
its  own  self-interest  to  desist  from  its  aggressive  policies."  "Ancillary  objectives":
(1)  to  gain  more  info  (2)  intensify  current  psychological  war  and  resistance
operations  to  weaken  Hanoi's  control  of  the  population  of  NVN  and  commit
regime  to  costly  counter-measures.


512 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


Past  three  months  indicate  "slow  beginning."  "There  are,  however,  indications
that  attempts  at  infiltration  and  continuing  psychological  activities,  together  with
widespread  press  and  radio  speculation  over  the  extension  of  the  war,  have  had
an  effect  ?  on  the  DRV.  Its  reaction  tends  to  substantiate  the  premise  that
Hanoi  is  expending  substantial  resources  in  defensive  war."

JCS  conclude:  (1)  GVN's  general  lack  of  program  direction  caused  by  30
Januarv  coup:  (2)  program  begun  before  special  material  and  personnel  required
were  assembled:  (3)  overflights  of  Laos  essential  to  it  for  operational  reasons;
(4)  bad  weather  and  insufficient  intelligence  have  hampered  operations;  (5)
•■potential  of  the  program  remains  high."

JCS  advocate  continuing  for  Phase  II  period  (Jan  thru  Sep)  "at  rate  com-
mensurate with  growing  operational  capacities  of  MACV  and  GVN  forces.
(Electronic  intelligence:  sabotage  teams:  C-123  airlift:  NASTY  PT  craft;  all
cited  as  new  and  invaluable  resources  available  to  program.)  VNAF  air  strikes
recommended.


[Document  162]

25  July  1964

From:  Saigon  214
To:  State

The  G\'N  public  campaign  for  "Marching  North"  (reported  EMBTEL  201)
may  take  several  courses.  In  the  face  of  US  coolness  and  absence  of  evidence  of
real  grass  roots  support  outside  certain  militarv  quarters,  it  mav  die  down  for
a  while  although  it  is  hardlv  likelv  to  disappear  completelv.  On  the  other  hand,
the  proponents  of  a  "Quick  Solution"  mav  be  able  to  keep  it  alive  indefinitely
as  an  active  issue,  in  which  case  it  is  likelv  to  foment  an  increasing  amount  of
dissatisfaction  with  the  US.  (assuming  that  we  continue  to  give  it  no  support)
to  the  serious  detriment  of  our  working  relations  with  the  GVN  and  hence  to
the  ultimate  chances  of  success  of  the  in-countrv  pacification  program.  In  such
a  case,  Vietnamese  leaders  in  and  out  of  sovernment.  unable  to  find  a  vent  to
their  frustration  in  "Marching  North."  mav  seek  other  panaceas  in  various  forms
of  negotiation  formulas.  General  Khanh  ma\  find  in  the  situation  an  excuse  or
a  requirement  to  resign.

Finally,  this  "March  North"  fever  can  get  out  of  hand  in  an  act  of  rashness
— one  Maverick  pilot  taking  off  for  Hanoi  with  a  load  of  bombs — which  could
touch  off  an  extension  of  hostilities  at  a  time  and  in  a  form  most  disadvantageous
to  US  interests.

Faced  with  these  unattractive  possibilities,  we  propose  a  course  of  action  de-
signed to  do  several  things.

We  would  try  to  avoid  head-on  collision  with  the  G\'N  which  unqualified
US  opposition  to  the  "March  North"  campaign  would  entail.  We  could  do  this
by  expressing  a  willingness  to  engage  in  joint  contingency  planning  for  various
forms  of  extended  action  against  G\'N.  Such  planning  would  not  only  provide
an  outlet  for  the  martial  head  of  steam  now  dangerously  compressed  but  would
force  the  generals  to  look  at  the  hard  facts  of  life  which  lie  behind  the  neon
Hghts  of  the  "March  North"  slogans.  This  Planning  would  also  gain  time  badly
needed  to  stabilize  this  government  and  could  provide  a  useful  basis  for  military


Documents  513


action  if  adjudged  in  our  interest  at  some  future  time.  Finally,  it  would  also
III  afford  US  an  opportunity,  for  the  first  time,  to  have  a  frank  discussion  with
ad  GVN  leaders  concerning  the  political  objectives  which  they  would  envisage  as
lat  the  purposes  inherent  in  military  action  against  the  DRV.  We  do  not  really  know

whether  they  feel  that  Viet-nam  can  indeed  be  unified  by  military  action,  or
]0  whether  such  action  is  intended  only  to  introduce  a  pressure  which  would  be
id  equivalent  to  Viet  Cong  terror  in  order  to  induce  DRV  to  desist  for  aiding  VC
is;  and  to  improve  bargaining  opportunities  for  a  political  negotiation  wtih  Hanoi.
I) It  would  be  important,  however,  in  initiating  such  a  line  of  action  that  we

make  a  clear  record  that  we  are  not  repeat  not  assuming  any  commitment  to
n-  implement  such  plans.  Therefore,  I  would  recommend  that  I  be  authorized  to
s,  give  General  Khanh  the  following  written  statement:

ill "The  United  States  Government  has  noted  recent  public  statements  by  various
;s  leaders  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  proposing  military  action  against  the  sources
of  aggression  in  North  Vietnam.  The  reasons  which  have  prompted  these  state-
ments are  clear  and  the  impatience  of  the  people  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  in
the  face  of  continuing  subversive  warfare  from  the  North  is  understandable.
~  1 "In  considering  ways  and  means  to  bring  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency  under

i control,  authorities  in  Washington  have  given  serious  study  over  a  considerable
period  to  the  question  of  bringing  military  pressure  to  bear  on  the  leaders  of
I  North  Vietnam.  It  has  been  their  conclusion  that  this  is  a  complex  problem  in-
^  1  volving  judgments  and  decisions  in  both  the  political  and  military  fields  which
neither  the  United  States  nor  Vietnam  can  take  independently.  The  current
activity  of  the  United  States  Government  consists  in  the  provision  of  massive
assistance  to  your  government  in  the  extension  of  its  ICRCNNTPI  (as  received)
approved  pacification  programs  in  South  Vietnam.  The  question  of  extending
this  assistance  by  the  United  States  Government  to  a  program  of  action  outside
^ the  territorial  limits  of  South  Vietnam  has  not  been  seriously  discussed  up  to
now,  but  it  is  my  belief  that  the  time  has  come  for  giving  the  matter  a  thorough
analysis.

"In  the  view  of  the  United  States  Government,  the  best  method  of  producing
such  an  analysis  would  be  in  the  form  of  a  joint  contingency  planning  study,
undertaken  by  appropriate  representativbs  of  our  two  governments,  without  ad-
vance commitments  by  either  side  as  to  subsequent  actions.  If  the  government
of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  agrees,  the  government  of  the  United  States  has
authorized  me  to  appoint  representatives  who  would  be  able  to  meet,  under  con-
ditions of  maximum  discretion  and  security,  with  representatives  of  the  Republic
of  Vietnam  to  undertake  such  discussions."

It  is  my  opinion  that  such  discussions,  if  initiated  with  responsible  Vietnamese
officials,  would  not  only  develop  some  of  the  fundamental  political  thinking
which  is  currently  motivating  the  Vietnamese  leadership,  but  would  also  reveal
the  need  for  the  completion  of  a  number  of  preliminary  actions  which  should  be
taken  before  serious  consideration  can  be  given  to  expanding  the  war.  Such
actions  should  include  the  absorption  of  the  new  AIH  aircraft  by  November  1,
the  filling  of  the  ranks  of  understrength  ARVN  units,  air  defense  measures  for
urban  centers  and  the  establishment  of  a  greater  degree  of  control  over  the  VC
than  now  exists  in  order  to  secure  the  rear  and  flanks  of  fighting  forces.

It  would  be  most  helpful  if  approval  for  the  above  statement  can  be  received
to  permit  its  use  at  my  next  meeting  with  Khanh  scheduled  for  1600  July  27
(Saigon  Time).


514 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


[Document  163]

26  July  1964

TO:  Vientiane
FROM:  State  89

1.  Primarily  for  reasons  of  morale  in  South  Vietnam  and  to  divert  GVN  atten-
tion from  proposal  to  strike  North  Vietnam,  we  are  considering  proposing  to
Ambassador  Taylor  that  he  discuss  with  Khanh  air  attacks  on  VC  supply  lines
in  the  Laotian  Panhandle.  For  meeting  of  Secretaries,  request  by  0600  our  time
Monday  your  views  on  such  operations,  your  estimate  of  reaction  of  Souvanna
and  other  Lao  leaders,  and  your  advice  as  to  best  way  to  obtain  Souvanna's
acquiescence.

2.  Our  preliminary  views  as  to  possible  air  attacks  are  as  follows:

a.  The  military  objective  would  be  to  interdict  and  destroy  facilities  supporting
infiltration  into  SVN.  (It  is  possible  that  the  political  objective  might  be  achieved
by  fewer  targets  and /or  sorties  than  indicated  below.)

b.  Initial  targets,  which  would  be  programmed  for  moderate  to  severe  damage,
would  probably  be  Muong  Phine  army  barracks  (12  sorties),  Ban  Thay  military
camp  and  4  AAA  gun  emplacements  (18  sorties),  Ban  Na  Nhom  military  camp
(12  sorties),  Tchepone  army  barracks  (68  sorties),  Muong  Nong  military  area
(10  sorties),  and  Ban  Trim  barracks  and  supply  area  (34  sorties).  Also  con-
sidering Mu  Gia  border  control  point  just  inside  North  Vietnam  (14  sorties).  At
same  time,  attacks  of  opportunity  would  be  carried  out  on  lines  of  communica-
tion by  armed  reconnaissance.

c.  Aircraft  would  be  either  AlH  with  only  GVN  pilots,  or  AlH  plus  AlE
with  American  instructors  also  aboard  in  case  of  AlEs.  Our  present  thinking
does  not  RPT  not  include  use  of  Lao  T-28s.

d.  Armament  would  be  napalm  unless  politically  unacceptable,  in  which  case
armament  would  be  less  effective  conventional  bombs,  rockets  and  20  mm.

e.  Estimate  that  attacks  could  begin  in  early  August  and  could,  without  serious
degration  of  air  support  for  pacification  in  SVN,  be  carried  out  at  rate  of  20
sorties  a  day.  Our  proposal,  however,  may  be  that  strikes  be  conducted  on  inter-
mittent basis  at  a  slower  rate  than  indicated  depending  on  political  requirements.

f.  Estimated  aircraft  losses  at  less  than  two  per  cent  in  early  stages,  meaning
that  some  planes  will  probably  be  downed  in  Laos  during  attacks  on  initial
targets.

g.  We  may  recommend  certain  readiness  measures  in  Laos  and  Thailand  to
cope  with  possible  communist  reaction  or  escalation  (e.g.,  PL  moves  on  Pan-
handle towns  or  even  toward  Mekong) .

h.  It  is  assumed  that  attacks  would  promptly  become  known  and  responsi-
bility would  be  acknowledged  by  GVN;  that  if  US  instructors  are  on  board,  US
would  acknowledge  this  fact;  that  operation  would  be  justified  on  grounds  of
infiltration  of  personnel  and  supplies  through  corridor  in  violation  of  Geneva
Accords;  and  that  we  would  publicize  relevant  evidence  from  photography  and

POW  interrogation.  We  would  hope  Souvanna  would  publicly  support  such  a
rationale  but  at  minimum  would  do  or  say  nothing  to  undermine  it.

3.  As  you  know,  joint  US-GVN  planning  is  underway  not  only  for  air  attacks
but  also  for  ground  operations  up  to  battalion  size  in  Panhandle.  We  may  be
querying  you  shortly  for  your  reaction  regarding  such  ground  operations.


Documents  515


[Document  164]

27  July  1964

FM:  Vientiane  170
TO:  State
REF:  Deptel  89

Air  attacks  on  Viet  Cong  supply  lines  in  Laotian  Panhandle,  while  helping
morale  South  Vietnam  and  diverting  government  there  from  its  proposals  to
strike  North  Vietnam,  would  have  only  marginal  effect  on  problem  on  infiltra-
tion via  Laos  and  would  greatly  complicate  Laotian  situation  which  already
threatens  get  out  of  hand  as  result  Soviet  threat  withdraw  from  Co-Chairman
role.

When  various  cross-border  actions  proposed  earlier,  also  including  air  strikes,
I  pointed  out  fundamental  attitude  of  Souvanna,  which  generally  shared  by  Lao,
that  use  of  corridor,  even  though  involving  Lao  territory,  not  primarily  their
problem,  and  anyway  they  have  their  hands  full  trying  to  protect  heart  of  their
country  for  defense  of  which  corridor  not  essential.  Our  creating  new  military
as  well  as  inter-national  political  conflict  over  corridor  will  be  regarded  by  them
as  another  instance  Laos  being  involuntarily  involved  in  struggle  among  big
powers  on  matter  outside  Laos'  own  prime  interests.  There  is  hope  Souvanna's
view  (no  doubt  nurtured  by  French)  that  GVN  is  fighting  a  hopeless  war.
Souvanna  Phouma  and  other  Lao  leaders  want  help  in  immediate  present  to
assure  they  can  continue  in  secure  possession  of  present  territory  of  free  Laos.
If  any  new  military  initiatives  are  contemplated  with  attendant  risk  of  escalation
they  would  wish  above  all  that  they  be  directed  at  retaking  Plaine  des  Jarres.
More  immediately  they  want  maximum  effort  be  made  to  cut  route  seven  and
they  also  wish  be  assured  of  fullest  support  for  Muong  Soui  if  again  actively
threatened,  to  say  nothing  of  protection  of  routes  toward  Mekong  if  Muong  Soui
falls.

Likely  reaction  to  proposals  for  air  attacks  in  corridor  would  be:  Why  com-
plicate our  problem  and  risk  creating  dangerous  military  threat  in  central  and
southern  areas  where  it  does  not  now  exist;  why  does  not  US  apply  its  power
to  source  of  problem  and  bomb  Hanoi  or  move  effectively  in  some  other  way
against  North  Vietnam?  North  Vietnam  is  cause  of  trouble  and  ought  to  be
target;  moreover  we  are  not  bound  by  international  agreements  there  as  we
are  in  Laos.  Department  will  recall  this  line  of  thinking  has  been  pressed  by
Iking  and  Souvanna  Phouma  and  is  undoubtedly  view  even  more  strongly  held
by  right  wing  leaders.

In  this  connection,  wish  point  out  with  respect  para  g  reftel  that  there  are  vir-
tually no  uncommitted  Lao  resources  to  deal  with  whatever  PLA^M  reaction
may  be.  Energies  anfl  staff  capacity  as  well  as  troops  and  planes  are  tied  down
in  operation  triangle  and  literally  only  reserve  in  country  is  two  DNC  para
battalions  which  for  political  reasons  unlikely  leave  Vientiane.  Therefore  pre-
paredness measures  in  Laos  would  have  to  be  taken  by  US.

Thus  if  we  proceed  with  projected  action  Panhandle  we  must  be  prepared  also
to  meet  any  responsible  Lao  request  for  help  in  defending  what  they  regard  as
part  of  their  country.  If  we  hesitate  under  such  circumstances  Souvanna's
occasional  dissatisfaction  with  what  he  has  regarded  as  foot  dragging  by  US


516 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

will  be  greatly  accentuated  and  arguments  on  our  part  that  certain  actions
should  be  avoided  because  of  international  complications  or  risks  of  escalation
will  not  carry  much  weight.  Nothing  could  illustrate  point  better  than  question
Napalm,  which  being  proposed  for  use  in  corridor  operation  at  same  time,  I  am
obliged  turn  down  request  from  Souvanna  to  use  it  in  area  he  considers  vital  for
defense  his  country.

In  view  foregoing  I  believe  proposed  action  would  probably  bring  to  an  end
possibility  our  preserving  even  facade  of  government  national  union  under
Souvanna  and  Geneva  Accords,  keeping  open  possible  road  back  to  peaceful
solution  and  avoiding  resumption  full  scale  civil  war.  There  certainly  has  been
no  sign  from  Pathet  Lao,  DRV  or  Chicoms  of  any  change  in  their  attitude
to  encourage  US  to  believe  they  are  ready  to  start  living  by  Geneva  Accords
and  end  their  interference  in  Laos.  Nevertheless  it  has  been  our  hope  that  our
recent  assumption  of  stiffer  political  posture  and  careful  application  of  stronger
military  measures  would  at  least  bring  nibbling  to  an  end.  However,  as  result
initiatives  in  corridor  we  may  find  ourselves  turned  entirely  away  from  guiding
principles  of  last  two  years  under  which  we  have  accepted  uneasy  equilibrium
of  de  facto  division  of  Laos  as  best  we  could  get  for  present  and  better  than
resumption  large  scale  fighting.  Following  strikes  in  Panhandle  we  might  even
find  ourselves  being  pressed  hard  into  a  major  military  effort  aimed  at  pushing
North  Vietnamese  out  of  Panhandle  (when  it  becomes  clear  air  attacks  do  not
halt  infiltration)  and  eventually  entirely  out  of  Laos  and  reestablishing  authority
of  RLG  throughout  country.

I  realize  proposed  action  envisages  employment  primarily  GVN  personnel  but
from  international  point  of  view  we  must  be  prepared  accept  full  responsibility.
Action  will  also  solidly  link  questions  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  which  at  earlier
date  we  appeared  to  be  intent  on  keeping  separate  as  possible,  at  least  in  context
any  international  discussion.

From  here  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  all  international  repercussions  of  projected
Panhandle  action  might  be  but  I  can  foresee  serious  complications  with  British
and  Canadians  on  whom  we  depend  for  Co-Chairman  and  ICC  help.  They  may
well  ask  US  to  demonstrate  that  the  installations  to  be  hit  have  some  important
connection  with  infiltration  problem  and  that  strikes  will  appreciably  improve
situation  South  Vietnam.  On  other  hand  they  will  be  most  apprehensive  about
dangers  of  escalation  as  well  as  major  complications  in  handling  international
aspects  of  problem  as  illustrated  by  Soviet  note  just  received.

Souvanna's  acquiescence  in  proposed  action  not  be  enough.  If  we  proceed  he
will  undoubtedly  be  beseiged  by  press  and  posture  of  PriMin  of  Laos  can  only
be  acquiescence  in  other  countries'  taking  action  on  his  territory.  If  we  are  to
make  effort  to  bring  him  along,  his  position  would  have  to  be  supported  in
advance  by  build  up  of  public  evidence  of  use  of  corridor  and  its  aggravation
of  problem  in  SVN.  Public  indications  that  corridor  problem  really  much  less
than  represented  (for  example  see  July  26  wireless  file  story  by  Robert  Brunn,
C.  S.  Monitor)  must  also  be  overcome.  Against  this  background  we  might  try
sell  Souvanna  on  line  that  action  against  corridor  is  fundamental  to  resolving
what  is  basic  cause  of  Laos'  present  plight,  namely  war  in  South  Vietnam.  In
other  words,  block  corridor  so  that  GVN  can  again  assume  full  authority  over
its  territory  at  which  point  DRV  can  make  no  further  use  of  corridor.  Unless
Souvanna  can  be  persuaded  action  in  Panhandle  really  serves  his  cause  more
than  it  endangers  it,  his  support  will  be  very  hard  to  secure.  Even  if  support
is  squeezed  out  (perhaps  only  as  result  of  right  wing  pressure),  his  remaining
on  the  job  becomes  problematical.


cm

ii  w

Foie?
aid  ibis'


Documents  517


Specific  comments  follow:

1)  Delete  Muong  Phine  from  target  list  para  2B  because  of  probable  presence
loi  Ihere  of  C-46  surv  ivors.

am  i2)  Foregoing  reservations  do  not  apply  to  Mu  Gia  control  point  or  other  points

tor  inside  North  Vietnam.

'3)  Attacks  of  opportunity  on  convoys  (if  related  to  RECCE  flights)  and  re-
.ponsive  strikes  to  ground  fire  would  be  less  objectionable  than  proposed  action,
ind  this  would  be  even  truer  of  T-28  strikes.

ji  summary,  I  believe  it  would  be  exceptionally  difficult  to  persuade  Souvanna
a  Phouma  to  approve  stepped  up  military  actions  in  Panhandle  without  triggering
ie  virtually  irresistible  pressures  for  similar  escalation  in  this  part  of  Laos,  involving
is  increased  commitments  here  of  sort  we  have  thus  far  shied  away  from.  Perhaps
:r  can  successfully  withstand  these  pressures,  but  more  likelv  outcome,  in  my
iriudgment,  would  be  heightened  political  instability  and  a  situation  in  which  we
it  night  well  lose  Souvanna  and  the  international  recognition  has  government  com-

Hands,  ending  up  with  albatross  around  our  neck  in  form  of  rightist  regime  lack-
n  !.ng  in  international  support  and  able  to  survive  internal  and  external  pressures

only  with  our  outright  military  support.


[Document  165]

5  Aug  64
RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT

A.  JCS  7700

B.  CINCPAC  INSTR  03710.2  OF  24  MAY  1961

C.  CINCPAC  04

D.  JCS  2084/80  OF  1  JUL  1964

E.  JCS  3796  MAR  62

1.  Events  in  Gulf  of  Tonkin  accentuate  need  for  clarification  and  changing
rules  of  engagement  under  which  US  forces  must  operate  in  situations  short  of
open  hostilities.

2.  Following  are  rules  of  engagement  currently  in  effect  as  understood  here:

A.  Situation:  unprovoked  attack  by  hostile  vessels  against  vessels  in  inter-
national waters.

(1)  Rule:  US  vessels  authorized  to  defend,  pursue  and  destrov  attacking
vessels  up  to  11  miles  from  NVN  coast  and  4  miles  from  offshore  islands.  US
aircraft  authorized  to  pursue  and  destroy  attacking  vessels  while  operating  in
airspace  up  to  3  miles  from  NVN  coast.  Authorized  by  ref  A.

B.  Situation:  unprovoked  attack  by  hostile  aircraft  against  U.S.  vessels,  air-
craft, or  personnel.

(1)  Rule:  US  aircraft  authorized  to  take  immediate  and  aggressive  pro-
tective measures,  including  immediate  pursuit  into  hostile  airspace  if  necessary
and  feasible.  Authorized  by  ref  B  and  C  in  case  of  attacks  against  any  US  forces;
page  11  of  reference  D  in  case  of  attacks  against  US  aircraft  only.  (Note:  there
are  no  geographic  restrictions  on  U.S.  aircraft  in  case  of  attacks  by  hostile
aircraft) .


518 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

C.  Situation:  overflight  of  RVN  by  hostile  aircraft.

(1)  Rule:  US  aircraft  operating  in  RVN  authorized  to  engage  and  de-
stroy hostile  aircraft  within  airspace  over  RVN  territorial  airspace.  Authorized
by  ref  E  (original  R/E  for  v^ater  glass/candy  machine).

3.  Above  compilation  of  current  rules  indicates  following  voids  which  should
be  filled  ASAP.

A.  There  are  no  R/E  for  intercept,  pursuit  and  destruction  of  hostile  air-
craft which  violate  Thailand  airspace.

B.  US  forces  intercepting  hostile  aircraft  over  RVN  are  not  authorized
immediate  pursuit  outside  of  RVN  territorial  airspace.

4.  Recommend  following  R/E  be  promulgated:

A.  R/E  to  authorize  US  forces  based  in  Thailand  or  operating  within
Thailand  airspaces  to  intercept,  engage  and  destroy  hostile  aircraft,  to  include
immediate  pursuit  into  hostile  airspace  if  necessary  and  feasible.  Such  rules
would,  of  course,  require  concurrence  of  rtg.  R/E  for  RVN  (ref  E)  could  serve
as  model,  with  minor  modifications.

B.  Amend  ref  E  to  include  immediate  pursuit  into  hostile  airspace.

5.  General  comments.

A.  Hostile  forces  which  initiate  unprovoked  attacks  against  our  forces
whether  on  the  high  seas  or  ashore  should  not  be  afforded  sanctuary  from  which
they  can  repeat  the  attack.  The  best  way  to  preclude  repeated  attacks  is  to
pursue  and  destroy  the  attackers.  Such  action  is  not  punitive  per  se  but  pri-
marily defensive.  For  self  protection,  US  forces  should  be  authorized  immediate
and  unrestricted  pursuit.


[Document  166]

TO:  Vientiane
FROM:  State  136
LIMDIS

1.  As  pointed  out  in  your  219,  our  objective  in  Laos  is  to  stabilize  the  situation
again,  if  possible  within  framework  of  the  1962  Geneva  settlement.  Essential  to
stabilization  would  be  establishment  of  military  equilibrium  in  the  country.
Moreover,  we  have  some  concern  that  recent  RLG  successes  and  reported  low
PL  morale  may  lead  to  some  escalation  from  Communist  side,  which  we  do  not
now  wish  to  have  to  deal  with.

2.  Until  now,  Souvanna's  and  our  position  has  been  that  military  equilibrium
would  require  Pathet  Lao  withdrawal  from  areas  seized  in  PDJ  since  May  15
and  that  such  withdrawal  is  also  basic  precondition  to  convening  14-nation  con-
ference. Question  now  arises  whether  territorial  gains  of  Operation  Triangle,
provided  they  can  be  consolidated,  have  in  practice  brought  about  a  situation  of
equilibrium  and  whether,  therefore,  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to  insist  on  Pathet
Lao  withdrawal  from  PDJ  as  precondition  to  14-nation  conference.  This  is  in
fact  thought  which  has  previously  occurred  to  Souvanna  (Vientiane's  191)  and
is  also  touched  on  in  Secretary's  letter  to  Butler  (Deptcl  88  to  Vientiane).  If
Souvanna  and  we  continued  to  insist  on  IM).I  withdrawal  other  side  would  in-
evitably insist  on  our  yielding  I  riangle  gains,  and  our  judgment  is  that  such
arrangement  substantially  worse  than  present  fairly  coherent  geographical  di-
vision. If  withdrawal  precondition  were  to  be  dropped,  it  could  probably  best  be


Aug  7  '64

ACTION:  Amembassy  VIENTIANE


Documents


519


done  at  tripartite  meeting  where  it  might  be  used  by  Souvanna  as  bargaining
counter  in  obtaining  satisfaction  on  his  other  condition  that  he  attend  con-
ference as  head  of  Laotian  Government.  Remaining  condition  would  be  cease-
fire. While  under  present  conditions  cease-fire  might  not  be  of  net  advantage  to
Souvanna — we  are  thinking  primarily  of  T-28  operations — Pathet  Lao  would
no  doubt  insist  on  it.  If  so,  Souvanna  could  press  for  effective  ICC  policing  of
cease-fire.  Latter  could  be  of  importance  in  upcoming  period.

3.  Above  is  written  with  thought  in  mind  that  Polish  proposals  have  effec-
tively collapsed  and  that  pressures  continue  for  Geneva-type  conference  and  will
no  doubt  be  intensified  by  current  crisis  brought  on  by  DRV  naval  attacks.  Con-
ference on  Laos  might  be  useful  safety  valve  for  these  generalized  pressures
while  at  same  time  providing  some  deterrent  to  escalation  of  hostilities  on  that
part  of  the  "front."  We  would  insist  that  conference  be  limited  to  Laos  and
believe  that  it  could  in  fact  be  so  limited,  if  necessary  by  our  withdrawing  from
the  conference  room  if  any  other  subject  brought  up,  as  we  did  in  1961-62.  Side
discussions  on  other  topics  could  not  be  avoided  but  we  see  no  great  difficulty
with  this;  venue  for  informal  corridor  discussions  with  PL,  DRV,  and  Chicoms
could  be  valuable  at  this  juncture.

4.  In  considering  this  course  of  action,  key  initial  question  is  of  course
whether  Souvanna  himself  is  prepared  to  drop  his  withdrawal  precondition  and
whether,  if  he  did,  he  could  maintain  himself  in  power  in  Vientiane.  We  gather
that  answer  to  first  question  is  probably  yes  but  we  are  much  more  dubious
about  the  second.  Request  Vientiane's  judgment  on  these  points.  Views  of  other
addressees  are  so  requested,  including  estimated  reactions  host  governments.
It  is  essential  that  these  estimates  take  account  of  recent  developments:  military
successes  non-communist  forces  in  Laos  and  latest  demonstration  US  determina-
tion resist  communist  aggression  in  Southeast  Asia.

END

RUSK


[Document  167]

Draft

8/7/64  McNaughton

EMBASSY  OTTAWA  IMMEDIATE  EX  DIS

You  should  ask  Seaborn  during  August  10  visit  to  make  following  points  (as
having  been  conveyed  to  him  by  US  Government  since  August  6):

A.  Re  Tonkin  Gulf  actions,  which  almost  certainly  will  come  up:

1.  The  DRV  has  stated  that  Hon  Ngu  and  Hon  Me  islands  were  attacked
on  July  30.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  USS  MADDOX  was,  all  of  that  day  and
into  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  over  100  miles  south  of  those  islands,  m
international  waters  near  the  17th  Parallel,  and  that  the  DRV  attack  on  the
MADDOX  took  place  on  August  2nd,  more  than  two  days  later.  The  destroyer
was  not  in  any  way  associated  with  any  attack  on  the  DRV  islands.

2.  Regarding  the  August  4  attack  by  the  DRV  on  the  two  US  destroyers,
the  Americans  were  and  are  at  a  complete  loss  to  understand  the  DRV  motive.
They  had  decided  to  absorb  the  August  2  attack  on  the  grounds  that  it  very  well
might  have  been  the  result  of  some  DRV  mistake  or  miscalculation.  The  August
4  attack,  however — from  the  determined  nature  of  the  attack  as  indicated  by
the  radar,  sonar,  and  eye  witness  evidence  both  from  the  ships  and  from  their
protecting  aircraft — was,  in  the  American  eyes,  obviously  deliberate  and  planned
and  ordered  in  advance.  In  addition,  premeditation  was  shown  by  the  evidence


520 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

that  the  DRV  craft  were  waiting  in  ambush  for  the  destroyers.  The  attack  did
not  seem  to  be  in  response  to  any  action  by  the  South  Vietnamese  nor  did  it
make  sense  as  a  tactic  to  further  any  diplomatic  objective.  Since  the  attack  took
place  at  least  60  miles  from  nearest  land,  there  could  have  been  no  question
about  territorial  waters.  About  the  only  reasonable  hypothesis  was  that  North
Vietnam  was  intent  either  upon  making  it  appear  that  the  United  States  was  a
"paper  tiger"  or  upon  provoking  the  United  States.

3.  The  American  response'was  directed  solely  to  patrol  craft  and  installa-
tions acting  in  direct  support  of  them.  As  President  Johnson  stated:  ''Our
response  for  the  present  will  be  limited  and  fitting."

4.  In  view  uncertainty  aroused  by  the  deliberate  and  unprovoked  DRV
attacks  this  character,  US  has  necessarily  carried  out  precautionary  deployments
of  additional  air  power  to  SVN  and  Thailand.

B.  Re  basic  American  position:

5.  Mr.  Seaborn  should  again  stress  that  US  policy  is  simply  that  North
Vietnam  should  contain  itself  and  its  ambitions  within  the  territory  allocated  to
its  administration  by  the  1954  Geneva  Agreements.  He  should  stress  that  US
policy  in  South  Vietnam  is  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  that  state's  territory  against
guerrilla  subversion.

6.  He  should  reiterate  that  the  US  does  not  seek  military  bases  in  the  area
and  that  the  US  is  not  seeking  to  overthrow  the  Communist  regime  in  Hanoi.

7.  He  should  repeat  that  the  US  is  fully  aware  of  the  degree  to  which
Hanoi  controls  and  directs  the  guerrilla  action  in  South  Vietnam  and  that  the
US  holds  Hanoi  directly  responsible  for  that  action.  He  should  similarly  indicate
US  awareness  of  North  Vietnamese  control  over  the  Pathet  Lao  movement  in
Laos  and  the  degree  of  North  Vietnamese  involvement  in  that  countrv.  He  should
specifically  indicate  US  awareness  of  North  Vietnamese  violations  of  Laotian
territory  along  the  infiltration  route  into  South  Vietnam.

8.  Mr.  Seaborn  can  again  refer  to  the  many  examples  of  US  policy  in
tolerance  of  peaceful  coexistence  with  Communist  regimes,  such  as  Yugoslavia,
Poland,  etc.  He  can  hint  at  the  economic  and  other  benefits  which  have  accrued
to  those  countries  because  their  policy  of  Communism  has  confined  itself  to  the
development  of  their  own  national  territories  and  has  not  sought  to  expand  into
other  areas.

9.  Mr.  Seaborn  should  conclude  with  the  following  new  points:

a.  That  the  events  of  the  past  few  days  should  add  credibility  to  the
statement  made  last  time,  that  "US  public  and  official  patience  with  North
Vietnamese  aggression  is  growing  extremely  thin."

b.  That  the  US  Congressional  Resolution  was  passed  with  near  unanimitv,
strongly  re-aflfirming  the  unity  and  determination  of  the  US  Government  and
people  not  only  with  respect  'to  any  further  attacks  on  US  military  forces  but
more  broadly  to  continue  to  oppose  firmly  by  all  necessarv  means,  DRV  eftorts
to  subvert  and  conquer  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.

c.  That  the  US  has  come  to  the  view  that  the  DRV  role  in  South  Viet-
nam and  Laos  is  critical.  If  the  DRV  persists  in  its  present  course,  it  can  expect
to  continue  to  suffer  the  consequences.

d.  That  the  DRV  knows  what  it  must  do  if  the  peace  is  to  be  restored.

c.  That  the  US  has  ways  and  means  of  measuring  the  DRVs  participa-
tion, direction  and  control  of,  the  war  on  South  Vietnam  and  in  Laos  and  will  be
carefully  watching  the  DRVs  response  to  what  Mr.  Seaborn  is  telling  them.


Documents  521


[Document  168]

Copy  handed  to  Mr.  Shenstone,
Canadian Embassy,  by  Mr.
Green  8-8-64.

Canadians  are  urgently  asked  to  have  Seaborn  during  August  10  visit  make
following  points  (as  having  been  conveyed  to  him  by  US  Government  since
August  6) :

A.  Re  Tonkin  Gulf  actions,  which  almost  certainly  will  come  up:

1.  The  DRV  has  stated  that  Hon  Ngu  and  Hon  Me  islands  were  attacked
on  July  30.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  USS  MADDOX  was,  all  of  that  day  and
into  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  over  100  miles  south  of  those  islands,  in
international  waters  near  the  17th  parallel,  and  that  the  DRV  attack  on  the
MADDOX  took  place  on  August  2,  more  than  two  days  later.  Neither  the
MADDOX  or  any  other  destroyer  was  in  any  way  associated  with  any  attack  on
the  DRV  islands.

2.  Regarding  the  August  4  attack  by  the  DRV  on  the  two  US  destroyers,
the  Americans  were  and  are  at  a  complete  loss  to  understand  the  DRV  motive.
They  had  decided  to  absorb  the  August  2  attack  on  the  grounds  that  it  very  well
might  have  been  the  result  of  some  DRV  mistake  or  miscalculation.  The  August
4  attack,  however — from  the  determined  nature  of  the  attack  as  indicated  by  the
radar,  sonar,  and  eye  witness  evidence  both  from  the  ships  and  from  their  pro-
tecting aircraft — was,  in  the  American  eyes,  obviously  deliberate  and  planned  and
ordered  in  advance.  In  addition,  premeditation  was  shown  by  the  evidence  that
the  DRV  craft  were  waiting  in  ambush  for  the  destroyers.  The  attack  did  not
seem  to  be  in  response  to  any  action  by  the  South  Vietnamese,  nor  did  it  make
sense  as  a  tactic  to  further  any  diplomatic  objective.  Since  the  attack  took  place
at  least  60  miles  from  nearest  land,  there  could  have  been  no  question  about
territorial  waters.  About  the  only  reasonable  hypothesis  was  that  North  Vict-Nani
was  intent  either  upon  making  it  appear  that  the  United  States  was  a  "paper
tiger"  or  upon  provoking  the  United  States.

3.  The  American  response  was  directed  solely  to  patrol  craft  and  installa-
tions acting  in  direct  support  of  them.  As  President  Johnson  stated:  "Our
response  for  the  present  will  be  limited  and  fitting."

4.  In  view  of  uncertainty  aroused  by  the  deliberate  and  unprovoked  DRV
attacks  this  character,  US  has  necessarily  carried  out  precautionary  deploy-
ments of  additional  air  power  to  SVN  and  Thailand.

B.  Re  basic  American  position:

5.  Mr.  Seaborn  should  again  stress  that  US  policy  is  simply  that  North
Viet-Nam  should  contain  itself  and  its  ambitions  within  the  territory  allocated
to  its  administration  by  the  1954  Geneva  Agreements.  He  should  stress  that  US
policy  in  South  Viet-Nam  is  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  that  state's  territory
against  guerrilla  subversion.

6.  He  should  reiterate  that  the  US  does  not  seek  military  bases  in  the
area  and  that  the  US  is  not  seeking  to  overthrow  the  Communist  regime  in
Hanoi.

7.  He  should  repeat  that  the  US  is  fully  aware  of  the  degree  to  which  Hanoi
controls  and  directs  the  guerrilla  action  in  South  Viet-Nam  and  that  the  US
holds  Hanoi  directly  responsible  for  that  action.  He  should  similarly  indicate
US  awareness  of  North  Vietnamese  control  over  the  Pathet  Lao  movement  in


522 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

Laos  and  the  degree  of  North  Vietnamese  involvement  in  that  country.  He  should
specifically  indicate  US  awareness  of  North  Vietnamese  violations  of  Laotian
territory  along  the  infiltration  route  into  South  Viet-Nam.

8.  Mr.  Seaborn  can  again  refer  to  the  many  examples  of  US  policy  in
tolerance  of  peaceful  coexistence  with  Communist  regimes,  such  as  Yugoslavia,
Poland,  etc.  He  can  hint  at  the  economic  and  other  benefits  which  have  accrued
to  those  countries  because  their  policy  of  Communism  has  confined  itself  to  the
development  of  their  own  national  territories  and  has  not  sought  to  expand
into  other  areas.

9.  Mr.  Seaborn  should  conclude  with  the  following  new  points:

a.  That  the  events  of  the  past  few  days  should  add  credibility  to  the
statement  made  last  time,  that  "US  public  and  oflficial  patience  with  North
Vietnamese  aggression  is  growing  extremely  thin."

b.  That  the  US  Congressional  Resolution  was  passed  with  near  unanimity,
strongly  re-affirming  the  unity  and  determination  of  the  US  Government  and
people  not  only  with  respect  to  any  further  attacks  on  US  military  forces  but
more  broadly  to  continue  to  oppose  firmly,  by  all  necessary  means,  DRV
efforts  to  subvert  and  conquer  South  Viet-Nam  and  Laos.

c.  That  the  US  has  come  to  the  view  that  the  DRV  role  in  South  Viet-
Nam  and  Laos  is  critical.  If  the  DRV  persists  in  its  present  course,  it  can  expect
to  continue  to  suffer  the  consequences.

d.  That  the  DRV  knows  what  it  must  do  if  the  peace  is  to  be  restored.

e.  That  the  US  has  ways  and  means  of  measuring  the  DRV's  participation
in,  and  direction  and  control  of,  the  war  on  South  Viet-Nam  and  in  Laos  and
will  be  carefully  watching  the  DRV's  response  to  what  Mr.  Seaborn  is  telling
them.


[Document  169]

CINCPAC  176  FROM  SAIGON  AUG  9,  1964
LIMDIS

REF:  DEPTEL  378

From  our  vantage  point  we  can  see  positive  disadvantages  to  our  position  in  SEA
in  pursuing  course  of  action  outlined  Reftel.

1.  In  first  place  rush  to  conference  table  would  serve  to  confirm  to  Chicoms
that  US  retaliation  for  destroyer  attacks  was  transient  phenomenon  and  that
firm  Chicom  response  in  form  of  commitment  to  defend  NVN  has  given  us
"paper  tiger"  second  thoughts.  Moreover,  much  of  beneficial  effects  elsewhere
resulting  from  our  strong  reaction  to  events  in  Gulf  of  Tonkin  would  be  swiftly
dissipated.

2.  In  Viet-Nam  sudden  backdown  from  previous  strongly  held  US  position  on
PDJ  withdrawal  prior  to  conf  on  Laos  would  have  potentially  disastrous  effect.
Morale  and  will  to  fight  particularly  willingness  to  push  ahead  with  arduous
pacification  task  and  to  enforce  stern  measures  of  Khanh's  new  emergency
decree,  would  be  undermined  by  what  would  look  like  evidence  that  US  seeking
to  take  advantage  of  any  slight  improvement  in  non-communist  position  as
excuse  for  extricating  itself  from  Indochina  via  conf  rout.  This  would  give
strength  to  probable  pro-Gaullist  contention  that  GVN  should  think  about
following  Laotian  example  by  seeking  negotiated  solution  before  advantage  of
temporarily  strengthened  anti-communist  position  recedes.


Documents  523


3.  General  let  down  in  Viet-Nam  which  would  result  from  softening  of  our
stand  in  Laos  just  after  we  had  made  great  show  of  firmness  vis-a-vis  communists
would  undoubtedly  erode  Khanh's  personal  position,  with  prospects  of  increased
political  instability  and  coup  plotting.

4.  It  should  be  remembered  that  our  retaliatory  action  in  Gulf  of  Tonkin  is  in
eflfect  an  isolated  US-DRV  incident.  Although  this  has  relation,  as  Amb.  Steven-
son has  pointed  out,  to  larger  problem  of  DRV  aggression  by  subversion  in
Viet-Nam  and  Laos,  we  have  not  RPT  not  yet  come  to  grips  in  a  forceful  way
with  DRV  over  the  issue  of  this  larger  and  much  more  complex  problem.  Instead,
we  are  engaged,  both  in  Viet-Nam  and  Laos,  in  proxv  actions  against  proxy
agents  of  DRV.  If,  as  both  Khanh  and  Souvanna  hope,  we  are  to  parlav  the
consequences  of  our  recent  clash  with  the  DRV  into  actions  which  specifically
direct  themselves  against  DRV  violations  of  the  1954  and  1962  agreements,  we
must  avoid  becoming  involved  in  political  engagements  which  will  tie  our  hands
and  inhibit  our  action.  For  example,  any  effort  to  undertake  credible  joint
planning  operations  with  GVN  re  interdictory  air  strikes  upon  infiltration  net-
work in  southern  DRV  and  especially  in  Panhandle  would  be  completely  under-
cut if  we  were  engaged  in  conf  discussing  the  Laos  territory  in  question.

5.  Similarly,  it  would  seem  to  us  that  Souvanna's  willingness  to  hold  fast  on
pre-conditions  or  substantive  negotiations  bears  direct  relationship  to  his  assess-
ment of  US  willingness  to  meet  the  problem  where  it  originates — in  North
Vietnam  itself.  This  fact  shines  clearly  through  his  recent  brief  letter  to  Pres
Johnson.  Moreover,  it  would  be  folly  to  assume  that  Khanh,  who  is  now  in  fairly
euphoric  state  as  result  of  our  Gulf  of  Tonkin  action,  would  do  anything  other
than  slump  into  deepest  funk  if  we  sought  to  persuade  him  to  send  GVN  del  to
conf.  EMB  prediction  is  that  he  \vould  resign  rather  than  send  del.

Intensified  pressures  for  Geneva-type  conf  cited  in  Reftel  would  appear  to  US
to  be  coming  almost  entirely  from  those  who  are  opposed  to  US  policy  objectives
in  SEA  (except  possibly  UK  which  seems  prepared  jump  on  bandwagon).  Under
circumstances,  we  see  very  little  hope  that  results  of  such  conference  would  be
advantageous  to  US.  Moreover,  prospects  of  limiting  it  to  consideration  of  only
Laotian  problem  appear  at  this  time  juncture  to  be  dimmer  than  ever.  Even
though  prior  agreement  reached  to  limit  conf,  we  do  not  see  how  in  actual
practice  we  could  limit  discussion  solely  to  Laos  if  others  insist  on  raising  other
issues.  To  best  our  knowledge,  we  never  "withdrew"  from  room  when  DRV
attempted  raise  extraneous  issues  during  1961-1962  conf.  Instead  we  insisted  to
chair  on  point  of  order  and  had  DRV  7uled  out  of  order.  Prospect  of  informal
corridor  discussjons  with  PL,  DRV  and  Chicoms  is  just  what  JGVN  would
fear  most  and  may  well  increase  pressures  on  GVN  to  undertake  negotiated
solution  so  as  to  avoid  their  fear  of  being  faced  with  "fait  accompli"  by  US.
7.  Rather  than  searching  for  "safety  valve"  to  dissipate  current  "generalized
pressures"  SEA,  it  seems  to  us  we  should  be  looking  for  means  which  will  channel
those  pressures  against  DRV.  Seems  to  us  "safety  valve,"  if  needed  (for  example
by  Soviets),  exists  in  current  UNSC  discussion.  We  should  continue  to  focus
attention  in  all  forums  on  communist  aggressive  actions  as  root  cause  of  tension
in  SEA  and  reinforce  our  current  stance"  In  the  final  analysis,  this  stance  would
be  more  valid  deterrent  to  escalation  by  PL  VM  than  attempt  seek  accommoda-
tion within  context  Laos  problem  alone.

While  not  RPT  not  specifically  within  our  province,  we  would  point  out  that
PL/VM  appear  to  have  capability  of  retaking  territory  regained  by  RLG  in
operation  triangle  at  any  time  of  their  choosing  and  that  therefore  "territorial
swap"  envisaged  in  Deptel  may  be  highly  illusory.  Moreover,  any  territorial


524 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

deal  which  seems  to  confirm  permanent  PL/VM  control  over  corridor  as  an
arrangement  acceptable  to  US  would  be  anathema  to  GVN  and  indicate  our
willingness  accept  infiltration  network  as  tolerable  condition  on  GVN  frontiers.
Such  situation  would  in  their  and  US  mission  opinions  vitiate  against  any  hope
of  successful  pacification  of  GVN  territory.

TAYLOR


[Document  170]

AUG  9  '64

ACTION:  Amembassy  Saigon  622

Amembassy  Vientiane  229
Amembassy  Bangkok  357

Joint  State /Defense  Message

Refs:  Vientiane  296  and  305  to  Bangkok

Saigon  67  to  Vientiane,  repeated  Dept  778

Meeting  today  approved  in  principle  early  initiation  air  and  limited  ground
operations  in  Laos  corridor  as  soon  as  politically  and  militarily  feasible.  There-
fore believe  meeting  this  week  as  proposed  by  Saigon  would  be  useful  way  to
clarify  scope  and  timing  possible  operations.  Following  questions  appear  crucial:

1.  Air  operations.

a.  Best  targeting  division  as  between  GVN  and  RLAF,  and  what  targets
would  be  recommended  for  US  suppressive  strikes.

b.  Latest  reading  political  acceptabiUty  GVN  strikes  and  US  suppressive
strikes  and  whether  we  should  inform  Souvanna  before  undertaking,  or  go  ahead
without  informing  him.  Related  question  is  whether  to  publicize.

2.  Ground  operations.

a.  Review  of  latest  plans  and  possible  timing  of  action  especially  for
limited  bridgehead  along  lines  indicated  Saigon  485."

b.  Requirement  for  US  advisors  and  support.  These  not  covered  by  today's
decisions  and  might  require  another  review  when  plans  develop.

c.  Same  political  questions  as  to  Souvanna  and  publicity.

3.  In  light  of  answers  to  above  what  should  be  GVN,  RLG,  and  US  public
stance  re  operations?

Believe  that  it  would  be  desirable  for  Bangkok  be  represented  at  meeting,  in
view  possible  Thai  involvement  in  some  operations.
Ambassador  Taylor  concurs.

END

RUSK


[Document  171]

SECOND  DRAFT
W.  P.  Bundy
August  II,  1964

NEXT  COURSES  OF  ACTION  IN  SOUTHEAST  ASIA
1 .  INTRODUCTION

This  memorandum  examines  the  courses  of  action  the  US  might  pursue,  com-
mencmg  in  about  two  weeks,  assuming  that  the  Communist  side  does  not  react
further  to  the  events  of  last  week.


Documents  525


We  have  agreed  that  the  intervening  period  will  be  in  effect  a  short  holding
phase,  in  which  we  would  avoid  actions  that  would  in  any  way  take  the  onus  off
the  Communist  side  for  escalation.  We  will  not  send  the  DESOTO  patrol  back;
will  hold  up  on  new  34A  operations  (continuing  only  essential  re-supply  of  air-
dropped missions,  plus  relatively  safe  leaflet  drops);  continue  intensive  recon-
naissance of  the  DRV  and  the  Panhandle  (PDJ  if  necessary)  but  hold  up  on
U-2s  over  Communist  China  at  least  until  we  can  use  Chinat  polots  and  unless
we  have  evidence  suggesting  major  military  moves.  Within  Laos,  the  attempt  to
secure  Phou  Kout  would  continue,  as  would  consolidation  of  the  Triangle  gains,
but  nothing  further  would  be  done  or  indicated.

We  are  not  yet  sure  what  the  Communist  side  may  do  in  this  period.  They
have  introduced  aircraft  into  North  Vietnam,  and  may  well  send  in  at  least
token  ground  forces.  VC  activity  should  step  up  markedly  at  any  moment.
Ahhough  the  volume  of  Chicom  propaganda  and  demonstrations  is  ominous,
it  does  not  yet  clearly  suggest  any  further  moves;  if  they  were  made,  we  would
act  accordingly.  This  memorandum  assumes  the  Communist  side  does  not  go
beyond  the  above.

II. ESSENTIAL  ELEMENTS  IN  THE  SITUATION

A.  South  Vietnam  is  not  going  well.  The  Mission's  monthly  report  (Saigon  877)
expresses  the  hope  that  there  can  be  significant  gains  by  the  end  of  the  year.
But  it  also  says  Khanh's  chances  of  staying  in  power  are  only  50-50,  that  the
leadership  (though  not  so  much  the  people  or  the  army)  has  symptoms  of
defeatism  and  hates  the  prospect  of  slugging  it  out  within  the  country,  that
there  will  be  mounting  pressures  for  wider  action  which,  if  resisted,  will  create
frictions  and  irritations  which  could  lead  local  politicians  to  serious  considera-
tion of  a  negotiated  solution  or  local  soldiers  to  a  military  adventure  without
US  "consent."  In  other  words,  even  if  the  situation  in  our  own  view  does  go
a  bit  better,  we  have  a  major  problem  of  maintaining  morale.  Our  actions  of
last  week  lifted  that  morale  temporarily,  but  it  could  easily  sag  back  again  if
the  VC  have  some  successes  and  we  do  nothing  further.

B.  Laos,  on  the  other  hand  has  righted  itself  remarkably — so  much  so  that  a
Communist  retaliatory  move  is  a  real  possibility.  If  Phou  Kout  can  be  secured,
the  present  military  areas  of  control  are  if  anything  better  for  Souvanna  than
the  line  of  last  April.  T-28  operations  have  been  a  major  factor,  and  really  hurt
PL  morale.  Souvanna's  internal  position  is  also  stronger,  though  the  right-wing
generals  could  make  fools  of  themselves  again  at  any  time.

C.  Laos  negotiations  may  well  start  to  move  in  the  near  future  whatever  we  do.
Souvanna  has  agreed  to  a  tripartite  meeting  in  Paris,  and  has  suggested  August
24th.  With  his  gains  in  hand,  he  has  already  indicated  he  is  likely  not  to  insist
on  his  previous  precondition  of  Communist  withdrawal  from  the  PDJ  before
agreeing  to  a  14-nation  conference.  The  USSR,  India,  and  France— and  the  UK
and  Canada  only  slightly  less  so — are  pressing  for  a  conference  or  at  least  clear
motion  toward  one.  While  it  is  not  yet  clear  that  Souphanouvang  will  accept  the
tripartite  as  proposed  by  Souvanna,  we  must  recognize  that  if  he  does  it  will
be  a  real  step  toward  an  eventual  conference.  We  can  and  will  urge  Souvanna
to  go  slow,  but  our  control  will  be  limited.

D.  As  of  now,  Hanoi  and  Peiping  are  certainly  not  persuaded  that  they  must
abandon  their  efforts  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  The  US  response  to  the  Viet-
namese naval  attacks  has  undoubtedly  convinced  the  Communist  side  that  we
will  act  strongly  where  US  force  units  are  directly  involved— as  they  have  pre-


526 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

viously  seen  in  our  handling  of  Laos  reconnaissance.  But  in  other  respects
the  Communist  side  may  not  be  so  persuaded  that  we  are  prepared  to  take
stronger  actions,  either  in  response  to  infiltration  into  South  Vietnam  or  VC
activity.  The  Communists  probably  believe  that  we  might  counter  air  action  in
Laos  quite  firmly,  but  that  we  would  not  wish  to  be  drawn  into  ground  action
there.

in. ESSENTIAL  ELEMENTS  OF  US  POLICY

A.  South  Vietnam  is  still  the  main  theater.  Morale  and  momentum  there  must
be  maintained.  This  means:

1.  We  must  devise  means  of  action  that  get  maximum  results  for  mini-
mum risks.

2.  We  must  continue  to  oppose  any  Viet-Nam  conference  and  must  play
the  prospect  of  a  Laos  conference  very  carefully.  We  must  particularly  avoid
any  impression  of  rushing  to  a  Laos  conference,  and  must  show  a  posture
of  general  firmness  into  which  an  eventual  Laos  conference  would  fit  with-
out serious  loss.

3.  We  particularly  need  to  keep  our  hands  free  for  at  least  limited  meas-
ures against  the  Laos  infiltration  areas.

B.  Laos.  It  is  our  interest  to  stabilize  the  Laos  situation  as  between  the  Gov-
ernment forces  and  the  PL/VM,  and  to  reduce  the  chances  of  a  Communist
escalating  move  on  this  front.  (If  such  a  move  comes,  we  must  meet  it  firmly,  of
course.  We  should  also  be  stepping  up  Thai  support  to  deter  and  prevent  any
Communist  nibbles.)  However,  Souvanna  should  not  give  up  his  strong  cards,
particularly  T-28  operations,  without  getting  a  full  price  for  them  in  terms  of
acceptance  of  his  position  and  a  really  satisfactory  military  status.  Moreover,  we
must  seek  to  reduce  as  much  as  possible  the  inhibiting  effect  of  any  Laos  talks  on
actions  against  the  Panhandle.

C.  Solution.  Basically,  a  solution  in  both  South  Viet-Nam  and  Laos  will  re-
quire a  combination  of  military  pressure  and  some  form  of  communication  under
which  Hanoi  (and  Peiping)  eventually  accept  the  idea  of  getting  out.*  Negotia-
tion without  continued  pressure,  indeed  without  continued  military  action,  will
not  achieve  our  objectives  in  the  foreseeable  future.  But  military  pressure  could
be  accompanied  by  attempts  to  communicate  with  Hanoi  and  perhaps  Peiping —
through  third-country  channels,  through  side  conversations  around  a  Laos  con-
ference of  any  sort — provided  always  that  we  make  it  clear  both  to  the  Com-
munists and  to  South  Viet-Nam  that  the  pressure  will  continue  until  we  have
achieved  our  objectives.  After,  but  only  after,  we  have  established  a  clear  pattern
of  pressure,  we  could  accept  a  conference  broadened  to  include  the  Viet-Nam
issue.  (The  UN  now  looks  to  be  out  as  a  communication  forum,  though  this
could  conceivably  change.)

*  We  have  never  defined  precisely  what  we  mean  by  "getting  out" — what  actions,  what
proofs,  and  what  future  guarantees  we  would  accept.  A  small  group  should  work  on
this  over  the  next  months.


Documents  527


TIMING  AND  SEQUENCE  OF  ACTIONS

A. PHASE  ONE — "Military  Silence"  (through  Aui^ust) [see  Sec.  I]
PHASE  TWO — Limited  Pressures  (September  through  December)

There  are  a  number  of  limited  actions  we  could  take  that  would  tend  to
maintain  the  initiative  and  the  morale  of  the  GVN  and  Khanh,  but  that  would
not  involve  major  risks  of  escalation.  Such  actions  could  be  such  as  to  foreshadow
stronger  measures  to  come,  though  they  would  not  in  themselves  go  far  to
change  Hanoi's  basic  actions,

1.  34A  operations  could  be  overtly  acknowledged  and  justified  by  the  GVN.
Marine  operations  could  be  strongly  defended  on  the  basis  of  continued  DRV
sea  infiltration,  and  successes  could  be  publicized.  Leaflet  operations  could  also
be  admitted  and  defended,  again  on  the  grounds  of  meeting  DRV  efforts  in  the
South,  and  their  impunity  (we  hope)  would  tend  to  have  its  own  morale  value
in  both  Vietnams.  Air-drop  operations  are  more  doubtful;  their  justification  is
good  but  less  clear  than  the  other  operations,  and  their  successes  have  been  few.
With  the  others  admitted,  they  could  be  left  to  speak  for  themselves — and  of
course  security  would  forbid  any  mention  of  specific  operations  before  they
succeeded.

2.  Joint  planning*  between  the  US  and  the  GVN  already  covers  possible  ac-
tions against  the  DRV  and  also  against  the  Panhandle.  It  can  be  used  in  itself
to  maintain  morale  of  the  GVN  leadership  as  well  as  to  control  and  inhibit  any
unilateral  GVN  moves.  With  34A  surfaced,  it  could  be  put  right  into  the  same
framework.  We  would  not  ourselves  publicize  this  planning,  but  it  could  be
leaked  (as  it  probably  would  anyway)  with  desirable  effects  in  Hanoi  and  else-
where.

3.  Stepped-up  training  of  Vietnamese  on  jet  aircraft  should  now  be  under-
taken in  any  event  in  light  of  the  presence  of  MIG's  in  North  Vietnam.  The
ICS  are  preparing  a  plan,  and  the,' existence  of  training  could  be  puhlici/cd  both
for  its  morale  effect  in  the  GVN  and  as  a  signal  to  Hanoi  of  possible  future
action.

4.  Cross-border  operations  into  the  Panhandle  could  be  conducted  on  a  lim-
ited scale.  To  be  successful,  ground  operations  would  have  to  be  so  large  in
scale  as  to  be  beyond  what  the  GVN  can  spare,  and  we  should  not  at  this  time
consider  major  US  or  Thai  ground  action  from  the  Thai  side.  But  on  the  air
side,  there  are  at  least  a  few  worthwhile  targets  in  the  infiltration  areas,  and
these  could  be  hit  by  US  and/or  GVN  air.  Probably  we  should  use  both:  prob-
ably we  should  avoid  publicity  so  as  not  to  embarrass  Souvanna:  the  Communist
side  might  squawk,  but  in  the  past  they  have  been  silent  on  this  area.  The  strikes
should  probably  be  timed  and  plotted  on  the  map  to  hring  them  to  the  borders
of  North  Vietnam  at  the  end  of  December.

5.  DESOTO  patrols  could  be  reintroduced  at  some  point,  for  present
purposes  and  to  maintain  the  credibility  of  our  account  of  the  events  ol  last
week,  they  must  be  clearly  dissociated  from  34A  operations  hoth  in  fact  and
in  physical  appearance.  In  terms  of  course  patterns,  we  should  probably  avoid


*  This  is  in  Phase  One  also.


528 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

penetrations  of  1 1  miles  or  so  and  stay  at  least  30  miles  off;  whatever  the  im-
portance of  asserting  our  view  of  territorial  waters,  it  is  less  than  the  interna-
tional drawbacks  of  appearing  to  provoke  attack  unduly.

6.  Specific  tit-for-tat  actions  could  be  undertaken  for  any  VC  or  DRV  activ-
ity suited  to  the  treatment.  These  would  be  "actions  of  opportunity."  As  Saigon
877  points  out,  the  VC  have  "unused  dirty  tricks"  such  as  mining  (or  attacks)
in  the  Saigon  River,  sabotage  of  major  POL  stocks,  and  terrorist  attacks  on  US
dependents.  The  first  two,  at  least,  would  land  themselves  to  prompt  and  precise
reprisal,  e.g.,  by  mining  the  Haiphong  channel  and  attacking  the  Haiphong
POL  storage.  Terrorism  against  US  dependents  would  be  harder  to  find  the  right
reprisal  target,  and  reprisal  has  some  disadvantages  in  that  it  could  be  asked
why  this  was  different  from  the  regular  pattern  of  terrorism.

C,  PHASE  THREE — More  Serious  Pressures  {January  1965  and  following).

All  the  above  actions  would  be  foreshadowing  systematic  military  action
against  the  DRV,  and  we  might  at  some  point  conclude  that  such  action  was
required  either  because  of  incidents  arising  from  the  above  actions  or  because
of  deterioration  in  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  particularly  if  there  were
to  be  clear  evidence  of  greatly  increased  infiltration  from  the  north.  However,
in  the  absence  of  such  major  new  developments,  we  should  probably  be  think-
ing of  a  contingency  date,  as  suggested  by  Ambassador  Taylor,  of  1  January
1965.  Possible  categories  of  action  beginning  at  about  that  time,  are:

L  Action  against  infiltration  routes  and  facilities  is  probably  the  best  opening
gambit.  It  would  follow  logically  the  actions  in  the  Sept.-Dec.  Phase  Two.  It
could  be  strongly  justified  by  evidence  that  infiltration  was  continuing  and,  in
all  probability,  increasing.  The  family  of  infiltration-related  targets  starts  with
clear  military  installations  near  the  borders.  It  can  be  extended  almost  at  will
northward,  to  inflict  progressive  damage  that  would  have  a  meaningful  cumu-
lative effect,  and  would  always  be  keyed  to  one  rationale.

2.  Action  in  the  DRV  against  selected  military-related  targets  would  appear
to  be  the  next  upward  move.  POL  installations  and  the  mining  of  Haiphong
Harbor  (to  prevent  POL  import  as  its  rationale)  would  be  spectacular  actions,
as  would  action  against  key  bridges  and  railroads.  All  of  these  could  probably
be  designed  so  as  to  avoid  major  civilian  casualties.

3.  Beyond  these  points  it  is  probably  not  useful  to  think  at  the  present  time.

D.  Handling  of  Laos  Negotiations.

1.  We  would  wish  to  slow  down  any  progress  toward  a  conference  and  to
hold  Souvanna  to  the  firmest  possible  position.  Unger's  suggestion  of  tripartite
administration  for  the  PDJ  is  one  possibility  that  would  be  both  advantageous
and  a  useful  delaying  gambit.  Insistence  on  full  recognition  of  Souvanna's  posi-
tion is  another  point  on  which  he  should  insist,  and  there  would  also  be  play
in  the  hand  on  the  question  of  free  ICC  operations.  As  to  a  cease-fire,  we  would
certainly  not  want  this  to  be  agreed  to  at  the  tripartite  stage,  since  it  would
remove  Souvanna's  powerful  T-28  lever.  But  since  Souvanna  has  always  made
a  cease-fire  one  of  his  preconditions,  we  must  reckon  that  the  other  side  might
insist  on  it  before  a  conference  were  convened — which  we  would  hope  would
not  be  until  January  in  any  case.

2.  If,  despite  our  best  efforts,  Souvanna  on  his  own,  or  in  response  to  third-


Documents  529


country  pressures,  started  to  move  rapidly  toward  a  conference,  we  would  have
a  very  difficult  problem.  If  the  timing  of  the  Laos  conference,  in  relation  to
the  degree  of  pressures  we  had  then  set  in  motion  against  the  DRV,  was  such
that  our  attending  or  accepting  the  conference  would  have  major  morale  draw-
backs in  South  Viet-Nam,  we  might  well  have  to  refuse  to  attend  ourselves  and
to  accept  the  disadvantages  of  having  no  direct  participation.  In  the  last  analy-
sis, GVN  morale  would  have  to  be  the  deciding  factor.


[Document  172]

1 1  Aug  64

Honorable  William  P.  Bundy
Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for

Far  Eastern  Affairs
Department  of  State
Washington,  D.C.  20520

Dear  Bill:

Events  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  and  the  subsequent  decision  to  deploy  additional
forces  to  Southeast  Asia  accentuate  the  need  for  clarification  and  certain  changes
to  the  Rules  of  Engagement  under  which  U.S.  forces  must  operate  in  situations
short  of  open  hostilities.

A  review  of  current  rules  indicates  the  following  voids  should  be  filled  as  soon
as  possible:

a.  There  are  no  Rules  of  Engagement  for  intercept,  hot  pursuit,  and  destruc-
tion of  hostile  aircraft  which  violate  Thailand  air  space.

b.  U.S.  forces  intercepting  hostile  aircraft  over  South  Vietnam  are  not  au-
thorized hot  pursuit  outside  of  the  South  Vietnam  territorial  air  space.
Hostile  forces  which  initiate  unprovoked  attacks  against  our  forces  whether  on
the  high  seas  or  ashore  should  not  be  afforded  sanctuary  from  which  they  can
repeat  the  attack.  The  best  way  to  preclude  repeated  attacks  is  to  pursue  and
destroy  the  attackers.  Such  action  is  not  punitive  per  se  but  primarily  defensive
for  self-protection.  U.S.  forces  should  be  authorized  immediate  and  unrestricted
pursuit.

The  Joint  Chiefs  have  recommended  that  the  Rules  of  Engagement  be  handled
as  a  matter  of  urgency.  Their  recommendations  have  been  reviewed  in  a  joint
meeting  with  members  of  your  staff  and  mine.  Certain  changes  were  tentatively
agreed.  The  revised  rules  are  attached  in  the  form  of  a  proposed  message  which
the  Joint  Chiefs  will  be  authorized  to  forward  to  CINCPAC  subject  to  your
concurrence.

I  would  appreciate  your  approval  of  the  Rules  of  Engagement  or  your  com-
ments as  soon  as  possible.


cc:  Chan  JCS  w/Encl
[Enclosure  missing]


Sincerely,

John  T.  McNau^hton


530 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  HI


[Document  173]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
WASHINGTON,  D.C.  20301

OFFICE  OF  THE  SPECIAL  ASSISTANT  FOR
COUNTERINSURGENCY  AND  SPECIAL  ACTIVITIES

SACSA-M  400-64
14  August  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  COLONEL  ALFRED  J.  F.  MOODY

MILITARY  ASSISTANT  TO  THE  SECRETARY
OF  DEFENSE

Subject:  Ambassador  Taylor's  Initial  Report  from  South  Vietnam

1.  Attached  to  this  memorandum  for  Mr.  McNamara's  information  is  a  brief
of  Ambassador  Taylor's  initial  report  from  South  Vietnam.

2.  This  brief  was  furnished  to  the  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  and  Secre-
tary^ Vance  as  background  material  for  their  appearance  before  the  Vinson
Committee  on  Tuesday,  18  August  1964.

A.  R.  Brownfield

Colonel,  USA

Acting  Special  Assistant

Attachment


[Document  174]

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR'S  SITUATION  REPORT  ON  THE  RVN

10  Aug  1964

1.  On  10  July  1964  the  President  requested  Ambassador  Taylor  (Deptel  108)
to  furnish  him  a  coordinated  country  team  report  at  the  end  of  the  month.

2.  On  10  August  1964  Ambassador  Taylor  complied  with  the  President's
request.  A  breakout  of  Ambassador  Taylor's  report  follows:

General:

The  report  is  not  intended  as  a  comparison,  since  the  turmoil  following  the
two  coups  and  the  invalidation  of  the  earlier  data  base  (Strategic  Hamlet  Pro-
gram) provide  no  meaningful  base  on  which  a  comparison  could  be  made.  How-
ever, this  report  is  intended  to  establish  a  baseline  from  which  future  progress
may  be  measured.

The  basis  of  this  report  and  monthly  reports  hereafter  are  the  results  of  a
country-wide  canvass  of  responsible  US  advisors  and  observers.  The  canvass
deah  with:  Army  and  public  morale,  combat  effectiveness  of  military  units,
US/GVN  counterpart  relationships,  and  effectiveness  of  GVN  officials.

In  broad  terms,  the  canvass  results  are  surprisingly  optimistic  at  the  opera-
tional levels  of  both  the  civil  and  military  organizations.  This  feeling  of  optimism
exceeds  that  of  most  senior  US  officials  in  Saigon.  Future  reports  Should  deter-
mine who  is  right.


Documents  531


Viet  Cong  Situation:
Strategy:

The  communist  strategy  as  defined  by  North  Vietnam  and  the  puppet  National
Liberation  Front  is  to  seek  a  political  settlement  favorable  to  the  communists.
This  political  objective  to  be  achieved  by  stages,  passing  first  through  "neutral-
ism," using  the  National  Liberation  Front  machinery,  and  then  the  technique  of
a  coalition  government.

Tactics:

The  VC  tactics  are  to  harass,  erode  and  terrorize  the  VN  population  and  its
leadership  into  a  state  of  demoralization  without  an  attempt  to  defeat  the
RVNAF  or  seize  and  conquer  terrain  by  military  means.  US,  GVN  progress
should  be  measured  against  this  strategy  and  these  tactics.

Status:

In  terms  of  equipment  and  training,  the  VC  are  better  armed  and  led  today
than  ever  in  the  past.

VC  infiltration  continues  from  Laos  and  Cambodia.

No  indication  that  the  VC  are  experiencing  any  difficulty  in  replacing  their
losses  in  men  and  equipment.

No  reason  to  believe  the  VC  will  risk  their  gains  in  an  overt  military  con-
frontation with  GVN  forces,  although  they  have  a  sizeable  force  with  consider-
able offensive  capability  in  the  central  highlands.

GVN  Situation:
Political:

The  slow  pace  of  the  CI  campaign  and  the  weakness  of  his  government  has
caused  Khanh  to  use  the  March  North  theme  to  rally  the  homefront,  and  offset
the  war  weariness.

US  observers  feel  the  symptoms  of  defeatism  are  more  in  the  minds  of  the
inexperienced  and  untried  leadership  in  Saigon  than  in  the  people  and  the  Army.

We  may  face  mounting  pressure  from  the  GVN  to  win  the  war  by  direct
attack  on  Hanoi  which  if  resisted  will  cause  local  politicians  to  seriously  con-
sider negotiation  or  local  soldiers  to  consider  a  military  adventure  without  US
consent.

For  the  present,  the  Khanh  government  has  the  necessary  military  support  to
stay  in  power.

It  is  estimated  that  Khanh  has  a  50/50  chance  of  lasting  out  the  year.

The  government  is  ineffective,  beset  by  inexperienced  ministers  who  are
jealous  and  suspicious  of  each  other.

Khanh  does  not  have  confidence  or  trust  in  most  of  his  ministers  and  is  not
able  to  form  them  into  a  group  with  a  common  loyalty  and  purpose.

There  is  no  one  in  sight  to  replace  Khanh.

Khanh  has,  for  the  moment,  allayed  the  friction  between  the  Buddhists  and
Catholics.

Khanh  has  won  the  cooperation  of  the  Hoa  Hao  and  Cao  Dai.
Khanh  has  responded  to  our  suggestions  for  improved  relations  between  GVN
and  US  Mission.

The  population  is  confused  and  apathetic.

Khanh  has  not  succeeded  in  building  active  popular  support  in  Saigon.
Population  support  in  the  countryside  in  directly  proportionate  to  the  degree
of  GVN  protection.  .
There  are  grounds  to  conclude  that  no  sophisticated  psychological  approach  is


532 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

necessary  to  attract  the  country  people  to  the  GVN  at  this  time.  The  assurance  of
a  reasonably  secure  life  is  all  that  is  necessary.

The  success  of  US  attacks  on  North  Vietnam,  although  furnishing  a  psycholog-
ical lift  to  the  GVN,  may  have  whetted  their  appetite  for  further  moves  against
the  DRV.

Economic-
Prices  are  stable  and  inflation  is  under  control.

Industrial  production  has  shown  a  slight  increase  from  140%  of  the  1962
level  on  1  April  1964  to  143%  on  31  July  1964.

End  CY  64  industrial  production  is  projected  to  be  150%  of  the  1962  level.

Any  increase  in  capital  goods  imports  would,  if  not  covered  by  US  assistance,
lead  to  a  major  balance  of  payments  problem.

USOM  is  examining  the  GVN  tax  structure,  import  policy,  present  multiple
exchange  rate  system,  competence  and  effectiveness  of  government  administra-
tion, and  proper  use  of  total  resources  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war.

Pacification  Support:

The  inexperienced  ministries  of  Police,  Education,  Public  Works,  Interior,
Information,  Rural  Affairs,  Health  and  Finance  are  not  represented  in  follow-up
actions  in  the  areas  that  have  been  cleared  by  the  armed  forces.  This  advisory
task  is  the  responsibility  of  USOM  and  USIS.

USOM  CY64  provincial  manpower  objective  has  been  established  as  two
Americans  in  each  province,  often  reinforced  with  a  third  Public  Safety  Officer.
A  considerable  increase  from  the  current  strength  of  64.

USIS  has  16  US  personnel  in  the  field  and  anticipates  no  increase.

GVN  representation  at  the  province  and  district  level,  although  inexperienced,
is  reported  by  US  observers  to  be  performing  effectively  with  good  US/GVN
working  relationships.

Capitol  Military  District  (CMD)  Pacification  Program  {Hop  Tac)  is  designed

to  induce  the  Vietnmese  to:

Work  together  as  a  functioning  government.

Build  within  both  urban  and  rural  areas  a  more  sound  administrative,  social
and  economic  platform.

Achieve  some  pragmatic  military  successes  which  will  bolster  Vietnamese
morale,  engage  the  energies  of  their  best  qualified  personnel  and  drive  the  VC
effectively  away  from  the  nation's  heartland.

Military:

The  regular  and  paramilitary  personnel  strengths  are  slowly  rising  and  by
January  1965  should  reach  98%  of  the  target  strength  of  446,000.

The  RVNAF  desertion  rate  has  decreased  to  5.72%  or  V2  the  rate  of  last
March.

Three  VNAF  squadrons  of  A-IH  aircraft  will  be  combat  ready  by  30  Sep-
tember 1964  and  the  fourth  by  1  December  1964  with  a  two  to  one  pilot  to
cockpit  ratio.

The  evaluation  of  RVNAF  units  reports  the  following  number  combat  effec-
tive:

28  of  30  regiments

100  of  101  infantry,  marine  and  airborne  battalions
17  of  20  ranger  battalions
19  of  20  engineer  battalions


I


Documents  533


The  principal  defects  are  low  present  for  duty  strengths  and  weak  leadership
at  the  lower  levels.  Both  are  receiving  corrective  treatment.

Extensive  intelligence  programs  are  underway  to  improve  our  intelligence
capability  by  the  end  of  the  year.

GVN  Overall  Objective:

Increase  in  percentage  of  population  control  represent  progress  toward  sta-
bilizing the  in-countr\-  situation.  Using  July  figures  as  a  base,  the  following  per-
centages should  be  attainable.


Rural  Urban
31  July  64 31  Dec  64 31  July  64 31  Dec  64


GVN  control

33

40%

44%

47%

VC  control

20%

16%

18%

14%

Contested

47%

44%

42%

39%

US  Mission  Objectives:

Do  everything  possible  to  bolster  the  Khanh  Government.

Improve  the  in-countr\-  pacification  campaign  against  the  VC.

Concentrating  efforts  on  strategically  important  areas  such  as  the  provinces
around  Saigon  (The  Hop  Tac  Plan).

Undertake  "show-window"  social  and  economic  projects  in  secure  urban  and
rural  areas.

Be  prepared  to  implement  contingency  plans  against  North  Vietnam  with  opti-
mum readiness  bv  January-  1,  1965.

Keep  the  US  public  informed  of  what  we  are  doing  and  whv.

3.  Ambassador  Taylor's  report,  because  of  its  across  the  board  approach  to
the  counterinsurgency  problem,  should  be  of  significant  value  to  all  governmental
agencies  in  determining  how  much  success  their  departmental  programs  are
achieving.


[Document  175]

Date:  14  August  1964

FM:  State

TO: Saigon  439
Vientiane  157
CINCPAC

Following  are  key  points  tentative  high  level  paper  on  next  courses  of  action
in  Southeast  Asia.  Request  addressee  comments  by  Tuesday  morning  for  further
review  and  refinement.

SUMMARY

I.  INTRODUCTION

The  next  ten  days  to  two  weeks  should  be  short  holding  phase  in  which  we
would  avoid  actions  that  would  in  any  way  take  onus  off  Communist  side  for
escalation.


534 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

We  will  not  send  DESOTO  patrol  back,  will  hold  up  on  new  34A  operations
(continuing  only  essential  re-supply  of  air-dropped  missions,  plus  relatively
safe  leaflets  drops),  but  will  continue  intensive  reconnaissance  of  DRV  and
Panhandle  (PDJ  if  necessary).  Within  Laos,  attempt  secure  Phou  Kout  would
continue  (napalm  use  discretion  of  Unger)  as  would  T-28  operations  and  con-
solidation Triangle  gains,  but  no  further  military  action  would  be  done  or  indi-
cated. In  view  possible  Communist  moves  in  Laos,  road  watch  and  other  intelli-
gence efforts  should  be  intensified  accepting  some  greater  risks.

We  not  yet  sure  what  Communist  side  may  do  in  this  period.  They  have  intro-
duced aircraft  into  North  Viet  Nam  and  may  well  send  in  at  least  token  ground
forces.  VC  activity  could  step  up  markedly  any  moment.  Although  volume
Chicom  propaganda  and  demonstrations  ominous,  it  does  not  yet  clearly  suggest
any  further  moves;  if  they  were  made,  we  would  act  accordingly.  This  paper
assumes  Communist  side  does  not  go  beyond  above.

IL ESSENTIAL  ELEMENTS  IN  SITUATION

A.  South  Viet  Nam  not  (rpt  not)  going  well.  Mission's  monthly  report  (Saigon
377)  expresses  hope  significant  gains  by  end  of  year.  But  also  says  Khanh's
chances  of  staying  in  power  are  only  50-50,  that  leadership  (though  not  so
much  people  or  army)  has  symptoms  defeatism  and  hates  prospect  of  slugging
it  out  within  country,  that  there  will  be  mounting  pressures  for  wider  action
"which,  if  resisted,  will  create  frictions  and  irritations  which  could  lead  local
politicians  to  serious  consideration  negotiated  solution  or  local  soldiers  to  military
adventure  without  US  consent."

In  other  words,  even  if  situation  in  our  view  does  go  bit  better,  we  have  major
problem  maintaining  morale.  Our  actions  of  last  week  lifted  that  morale  tempo-
rarily, but  also  aroused  expectations,  and  morale  could  easily  sag  back  again  if
VC  have  successes  and  we  do  nothing  further.

B.  Laos  on  other  hand  has  shown  real  military  progress — so  much  so  that
Communist  retaliatory  move  is  real  possibility.  If  Phou  Kout  can  be  secured,
present  military  areas  of  control  are  if  anything  better  for  Souvanna  than  line
of  last  April.  T-28  operations  have  been  major  factor  and  really  hurt  PL  morale.
Souvanna's  internal  position  also  stronger,  though  right-wing  generals  and  colonels
could  make  fools  of  themselves  any  time.

C.  Laos  negotiations  may  start  to  move  in  near  future  whatever  we  do.  Sou-
vanna has  accepted  tripartite  meeting  in  Paris,  and  suggested  August  24.  With
gains  in  hand,  he  already  indicated  he  likely  not  insist  on  previous  precondition
of  Communist  withdrawal  from  PDJ  before  agreeing  to  14-nation  conference.
USSR  (at  least  publicly),  India,  and  France — and  UK  and  Canada  only  slightly
less  so— pressing  for  conference  or  at  least  clear  motion  toward  one.  Souvanou-
vong's  silence  and  other  indicators  suggest  Communist  side  may  still  not  accept
early  tripartite  meeting  or  push  for  conference  but  we  must  recognize  that,  if
they  do  accept  tripartite,  it  will  be  real  step  toward  eventual  conference.  We
can  and  will  urge  Souvanna  go  slow,  but  our  control  limited.

D.  Hanoi  and  Peiping  as  of  now  certainly  not  persuaded  they  must  abandon
eff"orts  in  South  Viet  Nam  and  Laos.  US  response  to  North  Vietnamese  naval
attacks  undoubtedly  convinced  Communist  side  we  will  act  strongly  when  US
force  units  directly  involved — as  they  have  previously  seen  in  our  handling  Laos
reconnaissance.  But  in  other  respects  Communist  side  may  not  be  so  persuaded
we  prepared  take  stronger  actions,  either  in  response  infiltration  into  SVN  or
VC  activity.  C  ommunists  probably  believe  we  might  counter  air  action  in  Laos
quite  firmly  but  we  would  not  wish  be  drawn  into  ground  action  there.


Documents  535


III.  ESSENTIAL  ELEMENTS  OF  US  POLICY

A.  South  Viet  Nam  still  main  theater.  Morale  and  momentum  there  must  be
maintained.  This  means:

L  There  advantage  devising  best  possible  means  of  action  that  for  minimum
risks  get  maximum  results  in  terms  of  SVN  morale  and  pressure  on  DRV.

2.  We  must  continue  oppose  any  Viet  Nam  conference  and  must  play  pros-
pect of  Laos  confernce  very  carefully.  We  must  particularly  avoid  any  impression
rushing  to  Laos  conference  and  must  show  posture  general  firmness  into  which
eventual  Laos  conference  might  fit  without  serious  loss.

3.  We  particularly  need  keep  our  hands  free  for  at  least  limited  measures
against  Laos  infiltration  areas.

B.  It  is  in  our  interest  stabilize  Laos  situation  as  between  Government  forces
and  Communist  side,  and  reduce  chances  of  Communist  escalating  move  on
this  front.  (If  such  move  comes,  we  must  meet  it  firmly.  We  should  also  be
stepping  up  Thai  support  deter  and  prevent  any  Communist  nibbles.)  However,
Souvanna  should  not  give  up  his  strong  cards,  particularly  T-28  operations,
without  getting  full  price  for  them.  Moreover,  we  must  seek  reduce  as  much  as
possible  inhibiting  effect  any  Laos  talks  on  actions  against  Panhandle.

C.  Basically  solution  in  both  South  Viet  Nam  and  Laos  will  require  com-
bination military  pressure  and  some  form  of  communication  under  which  Hanoi
(and  Peiping)  eventually  accept  idea  of  getting  out.  Negotiation  without  con-
tinued military  action  will  not  achieve  our  objectives  in  foreseeable  future.  But
military  pressures  could  be  accompanied  by  attempts  communicate  with  Hanoi
and  perhaps  Peiping — through  third-country  channels,  through  side  conversations
around  Laos  negotiations  of  any  sort — provided  always  that  we  make  clear  both
to  Communists  and  South  Viet  Nam  that  military  pressure  will  continue  until
we  have  achieved  our  objectives.  After,  but  only  after,  we  have  established  clear
pattern  pressure  hurting  DRV  and  Jeaving  no  doubts  in  South  Viet  Nam  of  our
resolve,  we  could  even  accept  conference  broadened  to  include  Viet  Nam  issue.
(UN  now  looks  to  be  out  as  communication  forum  though  this  could  conceivably
change. )

IV.  TIMING  AND  SEQUENCE  OF  ACTIONS

A.  Limited  Pressures  (late  August  tentatively  through  December)

There  are  a  number  of  limited  actions  we  could  take  that  would  tend  to
maintain  our  initiative  and  morale  of  GVN  and  Khanh,  but  that  would  not  involve
major  risks  of  escalation.  Such  actions  could  be  such  as  to  foreshadow  stronger
measures  to  come,  though  they  would  not  in  themselves  go  far  to  change  Hanoi's
basic  actions.

L  34 A  Operations  could  be  overtly  acknowledged  and  justified  by  GVN.
Marine  operations  could  be  strongly  defended  on  basis  of  continued  DRV  sea
infiltration,  and  successes  could  be  publicized.  Leaflet  operations  could  also  be
admitted  and  defended,  again  on  grounds  of  meeting  DRV  efforts  in  South,  and
their  impunity  (we  hope)  would  tend  to  have  its  own  morale  value  in  both
Vietnams.  Air-drop  operations  are  more  doubtful;  their  justification  is  good  but
less  clear  than  other  operations,  and  successes  have  been  few.  With  the  others
admitted,  they  could  be  left  to  speak  for  themselves — and  of  course  security
would  forbid  any  mention  of  specific  operations  before  they  succeeded.

2.  Joint  US/GVN  planning  already  covers  possible  actions  against  DRV  and


536 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

the  Panhandle.  It  can  be  used  in  itself  to  maintain  morale  of  GVN  leadership,
as  well  as  to  control  and  inhibit  any  unilateral  GVN  moves.  With  34A  surfaced,
it  could  be  put  right  into  same  planning  framework.  We  would  not  ourselves
publicize  this  planning,  but  it  could  be  leaked  (as  it  probably  would  anyway)
with  desirable  effects  in  Hanoi  and  elsewhere.

3.  Stepped-up  training  of  Vietnamese  on  jet  aircraft  should  now  be  under-
taken in  any  event  in  light  of  presence  of  MIG's  in  North  Viet  Nam.  JCS  are
preparing  a  plan,  and  existence  of  this  training  could  be  publicized  both  for  its
morale  elfect  in  GVN  and  as  a  signal  to  Hanoi  of  possible  future  action.

4.  Cross-border  operations  into  Panhandle  could  be  conducted  on  a  limited
scale.  To  be  successful,  ground  operations  would  have  to  be  so  large  in  scale  as
to  be  beyond  what  GVN  can  spare,  and  we  should  not  at  this  time  consider
major  US  or  Thai  ground  action  from  Thai  side.  But  for  air  operations  there  are
at  least  a  few  worthwhile  targets  in  infiltration  areas,  and  these  could  be  hit  by
GVN  air  US  reconnaissance  missions  in  Panhandle  would  of  course  continue
in  any  event;  suppressive  missions  might  be  considered  at  some  point,  but  not
until  after  GVN  has  acted  in  this  area.  (Our  Panhandle  reconnaissance  does
not  have  the  justification  of  a  request  from  Souvanna,  as  our  PDJ  operations  do.)
Probably  we  should  avoid  publicity  on  air  operations  so  as  not  to  embarrass
Souvanna;  Communist  side  might  squawk,  but  in  past  they  have  been  silent  on
this  area.

5.  DESOTO  patrols  could  be  reintroduced  at  some  point.  Both  for  present
purposes  and  to  maintain  credibility  of  our  account  of  events  of  last  week,  they
must  be  clearly  dissociated  from  34A  operations  both  in  fact  and  in  physical
appearance.  In  terms  of  course  patterns,  we  should  probably  avoid  penetrations
of  1 1  miles  or  so  and  stay  at  least  20  miles  off;  whatever  the  importance  of
asserting  our  view  of  territorial  waters,  it  is  less  than  international  drawbacks
of  appearing  to  provoke  attack  unduly.  The  20-mile  distance  would  not  apprecia-
bly change  chances  of  a  North  Vietnamese  reaction,  while  it  would  deprive  them
of  a  propaganda  argument  (since  a  great  many  other  countries  also  assert  a  12-
mile  territorial  waters  limit).

6.  Specific  tit-for-tat  actions  of  opportunity  could  be  undertaken  for  any
special  VC  or  DRV  activity.  As  Saigon  377  points  out,  VC  have  "unused  dirty
tricks"  such  as  mining  (or  attacks)  in  Saigon  River,  sabotage  of  major  POL
stocks,  and  terrorist  attacks  on  US  dependents.  First  two,  at  least,  would  lend
themselves  to  prompt  and  precise  reprisal,  e.g.,  by  mining  Haiphong  channel
and  attacking  Haiphong  POL  storage.

1.  US  Dependents.  This  has  two  aspects.  If  there  were  substantial  terrorism
against  our  dependents,  we  should  consider  some  specific  reprisal  against  DRV;
however,  this  has  disadvantages  in  that  it  might  appear  that  we  were  reacting
only  when  US  nationals  were  hit,  and  ignoring  regular  pattern  of  terrorism
against  South  Vietnamese.  Second  aspect,  whether  or  not  there  are  terrorist
attacks,  is  possible  withdrawal  of  our  dependents.  If  situation  should  reach
another  intense  point,  withdrawal  might  be  useful  in  itself  as  signal  to  Hanoi
that  we  were  really  getting  ready  for  business.

8.  Sequence  and  mix  of  US  and  GVN  actions  needs  careful  thought.  At  this
point,  we  should  emphasize  both  the  GVN  role  in  actions  and  rationales  directly
relating  actions  to  what  is  being  done  to  GVN.  Overt  34A  actions  should  be  the
first  moves,  and  GVN  would  go  first  in  air  attacks  against  Panhandle.  But  there
are  advantages  in  other  respects  to  actions  related  to  US  forces.  If  we  lost  an
aircraft  in  Panhandle,  we  could  act  hard  and  fast,  and  of  course  similarly  for
any  attack  on  DESOTO  patrols.  Probably  sequence  should  be  played  somewhat


Documents  537


by  ear,  with  aim  of  producing  a  slightly  increased  tempo  but  one  that  does  not
commit  us  prematurely  to  even  stronger  actions.

Summary.  Above  actions  are  in  general  limited  and  controllable.  However,
if  we  accept — as  of  course  we  must — necessity  of  prompt  retaliation  especially
for  attacks  on  our  own  forces,  they  could  amount  to  at  least  a  pretty  high  noise
level  that  might  stimulate  some  pressures  for  a  conference.  New  DRV  air  and
AA  capability  may  also  produce  incidents.

These  actions  are  not  in  themselves  a  truly  coherent  program  of  strong
enough  pressure  either  to  bring  Hanoi  around  or  to  sustain  a  pressure  posture
into  some  kind  of  discussion.  Hence,  we  should  continue  absolutely  opposed  to
any  conference.

B.  More  Serious  Pressures

All  above  actions  would  be  foreshadowing  systematic  military  action  against
DRV,  and  we  might  at  some  point  conclude  such  action  was  required  either
because  of  incidents  arising  from  above  actions  or  because  of  deterioration  in
SVN  situation,  particularly  if  there  were  to  be  clear  evidence  of  greatly  increased
infiltration  from  the  north.  However,  in  absence  of  such  major  new  develop-
ments, we  should  be  thinking  of  a  contingency  date  for  planning  purposes,  as
suggested  by  Ambassador  Taylor,  of  1  January  1965.

End  Summary

Among  key  questions  above  program  are:

1.  What  is  Saigon's  best  judgment  whether  it  would  maintain  morale  GVN
leadership?

2.  What  is  Vientiane's  judgment  how  much  Panhandle  action  Souvanna  could
accept  without  danger  right-wing  problems  or  his  general  position?  Would  it
help  to  establish  early  pattern  suppressive  strikes  and  GVN  air  operations  so
that  noise  from  this  area  became  familiar  background  music,  or  would  such  early
actions  impair  Souvanna's  position?  How  much  would  Saigon  like  to  see  done  in
Panhandle  to  help  GVN  morale  and  achieve  useful  military  results?

3.  CINCPAC  views  on  military  aspects  and  specific  action  sequence  should
be  conveyed  JCS.  Your  general  comments  also  welcome.


[Document  176]

15  Aug  64

FROM:  JCS  .
TO:  CINCJAC
JCS  7947

Subject:  Rules  of  Engagement  (U)

1.  This  message  rescinds  JCS  3976.

2.  The  JCS  authorize  the  destruction  of  hostile  aircraft  and  seaborne  forces  by
US  forces  in  Southeast  Asia  under  the  following  rules  of  engagement:

a.  US  forces  operating  in  Southeast  Asia  are  authorized  to  attack  and  destroy
any  vessel  or  aircraft  which  attacks,  or  gives  positive  indication  of  intent  to


538 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

attack  US  forces  operating  in  the  international  waters  and  air  space  over  inter-
national waters  of  Southeast  Asia.  This  includes  hot  pursuit  into  territorial  waters
or  territorial  air  space  as  may  be  necessary  and  feasible.

b.  US  forces  operating  in  Southeast  Asia  are  authorized  to  engage  and  destroy
hostile  aircraft  over  South  Vietnam  and  Thailand.  Hot  pursuit  may  be  conducted
as  necessary  and  feasible  over  international  waters  or  into  North  Vietnam,  Laos,
and  Cambodia  against  hostile  aircraft  as  defined  in  subpara  2  f  (1)  (b)  below.

c.  US  forces  operating  in  Laos  are  authorized  to  attack  and  destroy  any  air-
craft which  attacks  or  gives  positive  indication  of  intent  to  attack  US  forces.
Hot  pursuit  may  be  conducted  as  necessary  and  feasible  into  North  Vietnam,
Cambodia,  South  Vietnam,  and  Thailand.

d.  No  pursuit  is  authorized  at  this  time  into  the  territorial  waters  or  air  space
of  Communist  China.

e.  US  forces  entering  territorial  waters  and/or  territorial  air  space  as  author-
ized by  these  rules  are  not  authorized  to  attack  other  hostile  forces  or  installa-
tions therein  unless  attacked  first  by  them,  and  then  only  to  the  extent  necessary
for  self  defense.

f.  Definitions:

(1)  Hostile  aircraft — A  hostile  aircraft  is  defined  as  one  which  is:

(a)  Visually  identified,  or  designated  by  the  US  director  of  a  Joint  Opera-
tions Center  or  his  authorized  US  representatives,  as  a  communist  bloc
aircraft  over-flying  RVN-Thailand  territory  without  proper  clearance  from
the  government  concerned;

(b)  Observed  in  one  of  the  following  acts:

7.  Attacking  US  or  friendly  ground  forces  or  installations.

2.  Attacking  US  or  friendly  aircraft.

3.  Laying  mines  within  friendly  territorial  waters.

4.  Attacking  US  or  friendly  vessels.

5.  Releasing  parachutes  or  gliders  over  sovereign  territory  when  ob-
viously not  in  distress;  or

6.  Acting  or  behaving  in  a  manner  which  is  within  reasonable  certainty
that  air  attack  on  US  or  forces  is  intended.

(2)  Territorial  waters  include  the  territorial  sea  and  waters.  The  territorial
sea  is  the  belt  of  sea  adjacent  to  three  miles  in  breadth  measured  from  the
low  water  mark  [word  missing].  Inland  waters  are  waters  to  landward  of  the
territorial  sea.

These  rules  are  not  intended,  in  any  manner,  to  infringe  traditional  responsi-
bility of  a  military  commander  to  guard  against  unprovoked  armed  attack.  In
the  event  of  such  attack,  commander  concerned  will  take  immediate,  aggressive
action  [word  missing]  attacking  force  with  any  available  means  at  his  command.
Declaration  of  aircraft  or  vessels  as  hostile  will  be  made  with  judgment  and
discretion.  There  may  be  cases  where  destruction  of  communist  bloc  forces
would  be  contrary  to  US  interests,  examples  of  such  cases  are:  due  to  navigation
error,  communist  civilian  aircraft  over-fly  RVN-Thailand  territory;  communist
aircraft  or  vessels,  manned  by  defectors  attempting  to  land  with  the  intention  of
surrendering  themselves.  All  available  intelligence  should  be  considered  in  deter-
mining action  to  be  taken  in  such  cases.


Documents  539


[Document  177]

16  Aug  64

FM  COMUSMACV

TO  RUHPA  CINCPAC

CROSS  BORDER  OPERATIONS

A.  MACJ312  JULY

B.  JCS  DTD  0420127

C.  CINCPAC  1101527

1.  Combined  planning  with  JGS  on  cross  border  operations  has  reached  a  point
where  your  approval  or  further  guidance  is  necessar\'.

2.  After  a  slow  start  and  under  the  impetus  of  US  actions  against  the  DRV,
the  JGS  is  now  energetically  participating  in  combined  cross  border  planning.
.  .  .  The  liaison  bureau  headed  by  Lt  Col  Ho  Tieu  is  the  high  command  control
headquarters  for  this  operation,  which  has  been  entitled  "Anh  Dung."  A  war
room  is  being  set  up  at  the  liaison  bureau  headquarters  in  the  old  special  forces
compound.  Radio  communications  are  being  established  direct  with  Vietnamese
special  forces  headquarters  at  Nha  Trang  and  with  I  and  II  Corps.

4.  Cross  border  mission  type  orders  will  be  issued  by  the  bureau  over  the  signa-
ture of  General  Khiem,  RVN  Commander  in  chief.  Detailed  implementing
plans  will  be  prepared  by  I  and  II  Corps,  Hq  VNSF  and  at  a  later  date,  VNAF,
and  submitted  to  the  bureau  for  approval.  JGS  estimates  from  time  the  plan  is
approved  it  will  take  10  days  to  get  the  operation  underway.

5.  The  concept  follows:

A.  First  Phase:

(1 )  Three  bridgeheads  to  be  established  in  Laos;  one  astride  route  9  opposite
Lao  Bao,  approximately  50  km  wide  bv  15  km  deep;  one  Ref  C  not  held,  will
furnish  on  request,  if  obtainable  the  same  size  opposite  Dak  Prou;  and  one  20
kilometers  wide  by  1 1  km.  deep  opposite  Dak  To.  VNSF  to  have  responsibility
for  northern  (Lao  Bao)  bridgehead,  I  Corps  for  central  (Dak  Prou),  and  II
Corps  for  southern.

(2)  VNSF  to  have  available  strike  force  of  the  CIDG  camp  at  Kee  Sanh,  4
ABN  ranger  companies,  3  recon  teams  from  "Leaping  Lena"  group,  and,  in
later  stages  one  airborne  battalion.  The  corps  to  use  strike  forces  from  CIDG
camps  at  A  Ro  and  Kham  Due  (I  Corps)  and  Dak  Pek  and  Dak  To  (II  Corps),
plus  one  ranger  battalion  each  and  such  infantry  elements  as  can  be  spared
from  pacification  "effort,  estimated  at  this  time  as  not  more  than  one  battalion
from  each  of  corps  involved.

(3)  Reconnaissance  patrols  by  squad  and  platoon  elements  initiate  opera-
tions followed  progressively  and  methodically  by  raids  and  ambushes  of  platoon
and  company  size  upon  targets  and  infiltration  routes  developed  by  patrols.
Larger  scale  and  deeper  penetrations  of  company  and  battalion  size  to  follow
hopefully  to  dominate  the  bridgehead  area.

(4)  Close  air  support  missions  and  air  strikes  against  known  or  strongly
suspected  critical  targets  to  be  blown  (Ref  C).  .  .  .  Preplanned  air  missions
to  require  personal  a'pproval  of  .  .  .  INCRVNAF  and  COMUSMACV.

B.  Second  Phase  (as  visualized  by  GVN):


540 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

1)  Expand  and  connect  bridgeheads.  I  and  II  Corps  to  be  charged  with
responsibility  for  operating  in  and  dominating  a  strip  of  the  Laotian  side  of  the
border  40  km  deep.

2)  Within  and  beyond  this  strip,  destruction  operations  to  be  mounted
by  air  strikes,  airborne  ranger  company  and  airborne  battalion  raids  against
major  VC  targets.

C.  Because  of  extremely  rugged  terrain  in  the  area  of  the  bridgeheads  opera-
tions will  be  slow  in  developing.  After  initiation  of  operation,  troops  will  prob-
ably be  limited  to  company  size  in  each  bridgehead  for  a  period  of  several  weeks.
There  will  be  ample  opportunity  to  review  and,  if  necessary,  direct  operations
before  substantially  larger  forces  become  involved.

It  would  be  essential  for  US  advisors  to  accompany  CIDG,  ranger,  airborne
ranger  and  airborne  troops.  Air  strikes  would  .  .  .  conducted  VNAF.  US
Army  and  US  Marine  and  VNAF  helicopters  would  have  to  be  used  in  support-
ing roles.  US  Air  Force  C-123's  would  be  required  for  airborne  operations.
Considering  the  forces  which  could  be  made  available  this  is  .  .  .  overly
ambitious  scheme.  However,  the  desirability  of  getting  such  a  program  under-
way, coupled  with  GVN  apparent  willingness  to  .  .  .  started  now,  argues  for
US  encouragement  and  indorsement  .  .  .  first  phase  of  concept.  Although  an
effort  will  be  made  to  build  in  US  controls  .  .  .  should  be  recognized  that  once
this  operation  is  initiated  .  .  .  the  GVN,  US  control  may  be  marginal.  While
they  would  no  doubt  be  willing  to  attack  targets  suggested  by  US  or  to  mount
intelligence  and  reconnaissance  operations  in  areas  desired  by  US,  they  may
undertake  operations  at  their  own  initiative  and  against  targets  of  their  choosing
without  our  knowledge  or  consent.  In  other  words,  our  control  over  their  military
actions  in  a  compat  situation  could  not  be  expected  to  change  from  the  present.
Advisory  pattern.  The  VC  are  probably  in  the  corridor  in  strength  and  there
will  be  a  number  of  tactical  engagements  requiring  reinforcement  and  air  support
which  from  an  operational  standpoint  must  be  controlled  by  the  Corps  CTOC/
ASOC.  Therefore,  this  type  operation  does  not  lend  itself  to  single  mission
control  from  Saigon.

In  view  of  the  disrupting  effect  these  operations  could  have  .  .  .  VC  infiltration
CAGTES  and  bases  in  Laos  approval  of  the  concept  is  recommended  plan
would  be  susceptible  to  execution  in  total  or  in  part  and  can  develop  as  experi-
ence is  gained.

Coordination  with  Laotian  government  will  be  necessary  and  it  is  assumed
Washington  will  take  initiative  in  this  matter  at  the  appropriate  time.
.  .  .  combined  cross  border  planning  under  the  original  terms  of  reference  did
not  include  the  use  of  FARMGATE  aircraft  for  airstrikes  into  the  Panhandle.
However,  in  view  later  authority  to  plan  unilaterally  for  use  of  FARMGATE
and  in  view  fact  that  the  use  of  FARMGATE  would  put  COMUSMACV  in  posi-
tion to  insist  on  participation  in  decision  making  and  combined  control  through
the  AOC,  strongly  recommend  that  FARMGATE  be  included  within  the  scope  of
cross  border  operations  outlined  in  this  message.

12.  Concept  has  been  discussed  with  Ambassador  Taylor  who  has  not  taken  a
position  at  this  time.


Documents  541


[Document  178]

17  August  1964

From:  Vientiane
To:  State
Reference:  EXDIS  157.

Very  much  appreciate  REFTEL  as  guidance  our  actions  over  coming  months.
Once  paper  finally  approved  would  appreciate  being  informed,  including  any
amendments.

In  reply  to  second  key  question  I  frankly  find  it  difficult  to  say  in  abstract  how
much  panhandle  action  Souvanna  could  and  would  accept.  Principal  danger  as
already  noted  in  earlier  messages,  aside  from  his  understandable  preoccupation
about  provoking  Communist  escalation,  is  that  stepped-up  action  in  Panhandle
makes  it  more  difficult  for  U.S.  to  enforce  counsels  of  moderation  as  regards  his
and  Lao  military  actions  in  areas  of  country  which  are  of  more  immediate  con-
cern to  them.

As  earlier  noted  I  believe  we  could  gradually  establish  pattern  U.S.  suppressive
strikes  in  panhandle  without  adverse  Souvanna  reaction  and  this  perhaps  even
truer  of  T-28  strikes.  Even  though  strictly  speaking  suppressive  strikes  would  not
be  in  response  to  RLG  request  nevertheless  believe  Souvanna  would  back  U.S.
up  if  we  represented  them  as  being  authorized  by  RLG.  On  other  hand  I  would
expect  less  ready  acquiescence  and  certainly  no  support  from  him  concerning
GVN  air  operations  in  Laos.  I  of  course  appreciate  importance  panhandle  action
as  help  to  GVN  morale  but  continue  question  its  achieving  significant  military
results  and  I  believe  we  should  approach  problem  with  this  point  realistically  in
mind.

With  regard  to  introductory  section 'of  DRASO  paper,  I  cannot  guarantee  "No
further  military  action"  in  Laos.  We  are  now  assessing  pressures  for  initiative
against  PDJ  and  if  this  confirms  there  is  danger  Lao  adopting  foolhardy  plans
we  will  move  forcefully  to  persuade  them  abandon  them,  including  visit  by  me
to  King  in  LUASG  PRABANG  if  necessary.  There  may  however  be  other  more
limited  and  rational  military  actions  we  would  not  wish  to  obstruct  and  there-
fore would  prefer  avoid  categorical  prohibition  on  this  subject.  Unfortunately
also  it  would  be  our  repression  in  this  field  that  would  most  likely  encourage
right-wing  generals  and  colonels  to  make  fools  of  themselves.
Point  A-3  under  Section  III  again  points  up  our  contradictory  position.  I  would
conclude  from  this  we  should  influence  Souvanna  to  go  very  slow  on  any  cease-
fire agreement  during  forthcoming  Paris  talks.  With  regard  Point  B  same  section,
what  is  full  price  .  .  .  and  if  it  is  either  withdrawal  from  PDJ  (or  unified  admin-
istration PDJ)  combined  with  ceasefire,  how  can  we  avoid  inhibiting  effect  on
panhandle  actions?

With  respect  Section  IV  Point  A-4  I  thoroughly  agree  ground  operations  should
not  at  this  time  be  considered.  Agree  concerning  suppressive  measures,  as  al-
ready noted,  but  do  not  understand  why  this  would  have  to  follow  GVN  action.
I  also  agree  concerning  wisdom  avoiding  publicity  and  would  apply  this  same
reasoning  to  point  A-2  same  section.  Making  public  that  U.S.  and  GVN  planning
actions  in  Laos  objectionable:  in  first  place  on  grounds  this  certainly  also  [words
missing]  and  RLG  should  have  voice  in  matter  but  presents  even  greater  prob-
lem in  that  Souvanna  and  others  would  probably  strongly  resist  such  overt


542 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

acknowledgment  of  intentions  and  plans,  even  while  they  might  be  prepared
countenance  activities  which  would  be  denied  if  Communists  made  public  accusa-
tions.

In  sum,  if  I  read  correctly  between  the  lines,  draft  paper  based  on  premise  that
resolution  Laos  problem  depends  fundamentally  on  resolution  Vietnam  and
therefore  our  policy  here  (leaving  aside  corridor  question)  is  necessarily  an
interim  one  of  holding  the  line  but  trying  avoid  escalation  of  military  contest.


[Document  179]

17  August  1964

From:  CINCPAC
To:  JCS

Next  Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast  Asia
A. State  439  to  Saigon,  14  August  8  PM

1.  This  message  responds  to  Ref  A  with  coments  and  views  on  military  assets
and  specific  sequence  of  next  courses  of  action  in  Southeast  Asia.  Para  2  follow-
ing is  my  general  assessment  of  the  situation  and  course  to  be  pursued.  Para  3
and  those  thereafter  follow  same  sequence  of  subjects  as  Ref  A.

2.  Recent  U.S.  military  actions  in  Laos  and  North  Vietnam  demonstrated  our
intent  to  move  toward  our  objectives.  Our  operations  and  progress  in  Laos  con-
stitute one  step  along  the  route.  Our  directness  and  rapidity  of  reaction  in  bomb-
ing North  Vietnamese  installations  and  deploying  U.S.  combat  forces  to  South-
east Asia  were  others.  Each  step  played  a  part.  (Their  effect  was  to  interrupt  the
continually  improving  Communist  posture,  catch  the  imagination  of  the  South-
east Asian  peoples,  provide  some  lift  to  morale,  however  temporary,  and  force
CHICOM/DRV  assessment  or  reassessment  of  U.S.  intentions.)  But  these  were
only  steps  along  the  way.  What  we  have  not  done  and  must  do  is  make  plain  to
Hanoi  and  Peiping  the  cost  of  pursuing  their  current  objectives  and  impeding
ours.  An  essential  element  of  our  military  action  in  this  course  is  to  proceed  in
the  development  of  our  physical  readiness  posture:  deploying  troops,  ships,  air-
craft, and  logistic  resources  in  a  manner  which  accords  a  maximum  freedom  of
action.  This  is  the  thrust  we  should  continue  to  pursue,  one  which  is  intended
to  provide  more  than  one  feasible  course  for  consideration  as  the  changed  and
changing  Southeast  Asian  situation  develops.  Remarks  in  the  paragraphs  which
follow  are  submitted  in  light  of  this  assessment  and  with  the  view  that  pressures
against  the  other  side  once  instituted  should  not  be  relaxed  by  any  actions  or
lack  of  them  which  would  destroy  the  benefits  of  the  rewarding  steps  previously
taken  in  Laos  and  North  Vietnam.  These  remarks  are  in  same  sequence  as  sub-
jects and  paragraphs  in  Ref  A.

3.  Para  I

The  proposed  two  weeks  suspension  of  operations  is  not  in  consonance  with
desire  to  get  the  message  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping.  Pierce  arrow  showed  both  force
and  restraint.  Further  demonstration  of  restraint  alone  could  easily  be  interpreted
as  period  of  second  thoughts  about  pierce  arrow  and  events  leading  thereto  as
well  as  sign  of  weakness  and  lack  of  resolve.  Continous  and  effective  pressure
should  be  implied  to  the  Communists  in  both  the  PDJ  and  panhandle.  Con-


Documents  543


sequently,  concur  in  continued  RECCE  of  DRV,  panhandle  and  PDJ.  Concur  in
attempt  to  secure  Phou  Kout  and  continued  T-28  and  triangle  operations.  Re-
sumption of  34A  actions  and  Desoto  Patrols  is  considered  appropriate.  Each
can  be  carefully  conducted  to  avoid  interference  with  the  other.

Desired  changes  in  situation  South  Vietnam  can  only  occur  as  result  of  long,
hard  process.  Quick,  dramatic  changes  not  possible.  While  South  Vietnam  opera-
tion not  going  well,  effects  of  alternatives  we  have  taken  have  not  been  realized
yet  and  sufficient  time  has  not  passed  to  achieve  an  improved  situation.

4.  [missing]

5.  Para  II B  and  C

Progress  in  Laos  due  almost  entirely  to  T-28  operations  and  Thai  artillery.
Prime  objective  of  Communists  in  any  conference  will  be  to  arrange  agreement
to  cease  T-28  and  other  air  operations.  If  operations  cease  as  result  of  confer-
ence, Communists  could  then  move  back  to  their  former  positions,  continue  their
nibbling  process  and  we  would  have  to  live  with  agreement  not  to  use  T-28s.
At  that  point,  situation  would  be  same  as  it  formerly  was.  Related  subject  is
stepup  of  air  attacks  in  panhandle.  Since  we  do  not  have  ground  capability  to
halt  or  severely  interdict  enemy  surface  movements  in  panhandle,  air  attacks
in  panhandle  should  be  intensified,  else  we  invite  or  insure  uninterrupted  flow
of  enemy  units  and  material  southward.

6.  Para  II  D

Concur.  Hanoi  and  Peiping  are  not  persuaded  they  must  abandon  efforts  in
Vietnam  and  Laos.  On  the  contrary,  reduction  of  military  actions  for  two  weeks
may  encourage  them  to  expand  their  efforts  in  S.E.  Asia.

7.  Para  III A  1

Concur  that  South  Vietnam  is  current  hot  spot  and  main  concern  in  S.E.  Asia.
RVN  cannot  be  reviewed  apart  from  S.E.  Asia.  It  is  merely  an  area  in  a  large
theater  occupied  by  the  same  enemy.  Action  to  produce  significant  results  in
terms  of  pressure  on  DRV  and  improvements  of  morale  in  RVN  must  entail  risk.
Temptation  toward  zero  action  and  zero  risk  must  be  avoided.

8.  Para  III A  2
Concur.

9.  Para  III A  3
Concur.

10.  Para  III  B

Concur,  but  stabilization  by  negotiation  has  failed  in  Laos  with  only  one  side
following  agreements.

11.  Para  III  C

Concur  with  the  thesis  set  forth  that  we  make  clear  to  all  that  military  pressure
will  continue  until  we  achieve  our  objectives.  Our  actions  must  keep  the  Com-
munists apprehensive  of  what  further  steps  we  will  take  if  they  continue  their
aggression.  In  this  regard,  we  have  already  taken  the  large  initial  step  of  putting
U.S.  combat  forces  into  Southeast  Asia.  We  must  maintain  this  posture;  to  reduce
it  would  have  a  dangerous  impact  on  the  morale  and  will  of  all  people  in  South-
east Asia.  And  we  must  face  up  to  the  fact  that  these  forces  will  be  deployed
for  some  time  and  to  their  need  for  protection  from  ground  or  air  attack.  RVN
cannot  provide  necessary  ground  security  without  degraduation  of  the  counter-
insurgency  effort  and  has  little  air  defense  capability.  A  conference  to  include
Vietnam,  before  we  have  overcome  the  insurgency,  would  lose  U.S.  our  allies  in
Southeast  Asia  and  represent  a  defeat  for  the  United  States.
12  Para  IV A  1

Knowledge  of  success  of  34A  operations  would  have  a  highly  beneficial  effect


544 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

morale  in  the  RVN.  Suggest  that  these  operations  might  be  leaked  to  the  press
rather  than  overtly  acknowledging  them.  34A  operations  should  be  resumed  to
keep  up  external  pressure  on  the  DRV.

13.  Para  IV A  2

While  joint  U.S./GVN  planning  is  necessary,  it  cannot  in  itself  maintain
morale  or  control  and  inhibit  unilateral  GVN  moves.  Leaking  this  sort  of  pe-
ripheral activity  is  of  little  value  and  in  the  absence  of  action  is  unlikely  to  have
quote  desirable  effects  on  Hanoi  and  elsev^here  unquote.

14.  Para  IV A  3

Training  of  RVN  pilots  in  jet  aircraft  would  work  against  the  development
of  the  kind  of  Air  Force  the  RVN  is  able  to  support  and  maintain  by  diverting
scarce  pilots  and  maintenance  resources  to  the  training  program.

The  job  of  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force  is  counterinsurgency.  We  are  presently
engaged  in  a  program  of  converting  the  VNAF  to  AlHS.  It  is  straining  the  re-
sources of  Vietnam  to  accomplish  this  program.  The  United  States  should  reserve
as  its  own  task  the  operation  of  modern  military  jets  against  the  Communists.

15.  Para  IV A  4

Cross  border  air  operations  should  commence  as  soon  as  possible,  utilizing
not  only  RVN  but  also  U.S.  aircraft.  Shortly  thereafter,  RVN  ground  operations
can  commence  as  indicated  in  COMUSMACV  160943Z.

16.  Para  IV A  5

We  should  have  another  Desoto  Patrol  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkinsson.

17.  Para  IV A  6

Concur  that  Tit-for-Tat  operations  should  be  undertaken.  CINCPAC  has  not
received  Saigon  377  and  thus  cannot  comment  on  the  implications  thereof.

18.  Para  IV A  7

Withdrawal  of  dependents  should  be  resisted  as  long  as  possible  since  it  would
be  a  psychological  blow  to  the  Vietnamese.  While  it  might  have  some  indication
of  a  determination  to  act,  it  also  indicates  that  Saigon  is  not  secure.

19.  Para  IV A  8

Concur  that  sequence  and  mix  of  U.S.  and  GVN  actions  need  careful  thought,
and  believe  this  being  done.  Our  plans  for  graduated  military  pressures  against
NVN  (OPlan  37-64  as  example)  have  been  submitted  and  are  considered  valid.

20.  In  considering  more  serious  pressure,  we  must  recognize  that  immediate
action  is  required  to  protect  our  present  heavy  military  investment  in  RVN.  We
have  introduced  large  amounts  of  expensive  equipment  into  RVN  and  a  success-
ful attack  against  Bien  Hoa,  Tan  Ssn  Nhut,  Danang,  or  an  installation  such  as
a  radar  or  communication  site  would  be  a  serious  psychological  defeat  for  U.S.
MACV  reports  that  inability  of  GVN  to  provide  requisite  degree  of  security  and
therefore  we  must  rely  on  U.S.  troops.  MACV  has  requested  troops  for  defense
of  the  three  locations  mentioned  above.  My  comments  on  this  request  are  being
transmitted  by  separate  message.  In  addition  to  the  above,  consideration  should
be  given  to  creating  a  U.S.  base  in  RVN.  A  U.S.  base  in  RVN  would  provide  one
more  indication  of  our  intent  to  remain  in  S.E.  Asia  until  our  objectives  are
achieved.  It  could  also  serve  as  a  U.S.  command  point  or  control  center  in
event  of  the  Caos  which  might  follow  another  Coup.  By  an  acknowledged  con-
crete U.S.  fas  received)  commitment,  beyond  the  advisory  effort,  it  informs  the
Communists  that  an  overt  attack  on  the  RVN  would  be  regarded  as  a  threat  to
U.S.  forces.  Such  a  base  should  be  accessible  by  air  and  sea,  possessed  of  well
developed  facilities  and  installations,  and  located  in  an  area  from  which  U.S.
operations  could  be  launched  effectively.  Danang  meets  these  criteria.

In  summary,  following  actions  should  be  taken  in  order  to  further  the  accom-


Documents  545


plishment  of  U.S.  objectives  in  S.E.  Asia.  While  maintaining  current  U.S.  com-
mitments in  S.E.  Asia  and  continuing  present  RECCE  operations  we  should:

A.  Resume  34A  operations  and  Desoto  Patrol.

B.  Introduce  sufficient  U.S.  units  into  South  Vietnam  to  provide  for  adequate
air  and  ground  defense  of  deployed  units.

C.  Obtain  rights  to  establish  and  occupy  U.S.  base  in  the  Danang  area.

D.  Commence  cross-border  operations  in  accordance  with  combined  U.S./
GVN  plans.

These  actions  will  help  to  maintain  the  strength  of  our  present  position  and
emphasize  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping  the  cost  of  pursuing  their  objectives  and  im-
peding ours.

22.  In  conclusion,  our  actions  of  August  5  have  created  a  momentum  which  can
lead  to  the  attainment  of  our  objectives  in  S.E.  Asia.  We  have  declared  ourselves
forcefully  both  by  overt  acts  and  by  the  clear  readiness  to  do  more.  It  is  most
important  that  we  not  lose  this  momentum.


[Document  180]

Extract:  Memo  for  SecDef  from  CJCS  "Combat  Air  Capability  in  North  Viet-
nam" 17  AUG  64  (JCSM-707-64)

6.  CINCPAC  OPLANS  37-64  (Military  Actions  to  Stabilize  the  Situation  in
RVN)  and  99-64  (Military  Actions  to  Stabilize  the  Situation  in  Laos)  provide
inter  alia  for  the  conduct  of  selected  operations  against  NVN.  Further,  the  JCS
have  directed  that  CINCPAC  be  prepared  with  the  full  range  of  action  capabili-
ties against  NVN,  including  the  readiness  to  execute  selective  strike  or  to  initiate
coordinated  air  campaign  along  the  lines  of  OPLAN  37-64  or  OPLAN  99-64
on  the  shortest  possible  notice,  if  and  when  directed.  In  addition,  they  have
requested  that  CINCPAC  complete  as  soon  as  possible  detailed  operational  plan-
ning and  preparations  for  employment  of  US  and  VNAF  air  resources,  utilizing
the  "94  target  list"  as  a  basis,  in  order  to  facilitate  obtaining  decisions  of  higher
authority  as  to  the  scale,  tempo,  and  target  categories  to  be  struck,  CINCPAC
Fragmentary  Operation  Order  No.  1-64  implements  applicable  portions  of
CINCPAC  OPLANS  37-64  and  99-64,  and  provides  a  framework  for  selected
air  operations  against  NVN.


[Document  181]  ^

FM:  Saigon  465  Date:  18  August  1964

TO:  State

Ref:  Deptel  439

This  is  a  US  Mission  message.

In  preparing  our  reply,  we  have  found  it  simpler  to  produce  a  new  paper  which
undertakes  to  state  the  problem  in  South  Viet  Nam  as  we  see  it  in  two  possible
forms  and  then  to  provide  course  of  action  responding  to  each  statement  of  the
problem.


546 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

Underlying  our  analysis  is  the  apparent  assumption  of  Deptel  439  (which  we
believe  is  correct)  that  the  present  in-country  pacification  plan  is  not  enough  in
itself  to  maintain  national  morale  or  to  offer  reasonable  hope  of  eventual  success.
Something  must  be  added  in  the  coming  months.

Statement  of  the  problem — A.  The  course  which  US  policy  in  South  Viet  Nam
should  take  during  the  coming  months  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  four  objec-
tives. The  first  and  most  important  objective  is  to  gain  time  for  the  Khanh  gov-
ernment to  develop  a  certain  stability  and  to  give  some  firm  evidence  of  viability.
Since  any  of  the  courses  of  action  considered  in  this  cable  carry  a  considerable
measure  of  risk  to  the  US,  we  should  be  slow  to  get  too  deeply  involved  in  them
until  we  have  a  better  feel  of  the  quality  of  our  ally.  In  particular,  if  we  can
avoid  it,  we  should  not  get  involved  militarily  with  North  Viet  Nam  and  possibly
with  Red  China  if  our  base  in  South  Viet  Nam  is  insecure  and  Khanh's  army  is
tied  down  everywhere  by  the  VC  insurgency.  Hence,  it  is  our  interest  to  gain
sufficient  time  not  only  to  allow  Khanh  to  prove  that  he  can  govern,  but  also  to
free  Saigon  from  the  VC  threat  which  presently  rigns  (as  received)  it  and  assure
that  sufficient  GVN  ground  forces  will  be  available  to  provide  a  reasonable
measure  of  defense  against  any  DRV  ground  reaction  which  may  develop  in  the
execution  of  our  program  and  thus  avoid  the  possible  requirement  for  a  major
US  ground  force  commitment.

A  second  objective  in  this  period  is  the  maintenance  of  morale  in  South  Viet
Nam,  particularly  within  the  Khanh  Government.  This  should  not  be  difficult  in
the  case  of  the  government  if  we  can  give  Khanh  assurance  of  our  readiness  to
bring  added  pressure  on  Hanoi  if  he  provides  evidence  of  ability  to  do  his  part.
Thirdly  while  gaining  time  for  Khanh,  we  must  be  able  to  hold  the  DRV  in  check
and  restrain  a  further  buildup  of  Viet  Cong  strength  by  way  of  infiltration  from
the  North.  Finally,  throughout  this  period,  we  should  be  developing  a  posture  of
maximum  readiness  for  a  deliberate  escalation  of  pressure  against  North  Viet
Nam,  using  January  1,  1965  as  a  target  D-Day.  We  must  always  recognize,  how-
ever, that  events  may  force  US  to  advance  D-Day  to  a  considerably  earlier  date.
Course  of  action — A.  If  we  accept  the  validity  of  the  foregoing  statement  of  the
problem,  we  then  need  to  design  a  course  of  action  which  will  achieve  the  four
objectives  enumerated  above.  Such  a  course  of  action  would  consist  of  three
parts;  the  first,  a  series  of  actions  directed  at  the  Khanh  Government;  the  second,
actions  directed  at  the  Hanoi  Government;  the  third,  following  a  pause  of  some
duration,  initiation  of  an  orchestrated  air  attack  against  North  Viet  Nam.
In  approaching  the  Khanh  Government,  we  should  express  our  willingness  to
Khanh  to  engage  in  planning  and  eventually  to  exert  intense  pressure  on  North
Viet  Nam,  providing  certain  conditions  are  met  in  advance.  In  the  first  place
before  we  would  agree  to  go  all  out  against  the  DRV,  he  must  stabilize  his  gov-
ernment and  make  some  progress  in  cleaning  up  his  operational  backyard.  Specifi-
cally, he  must  execute  the  initial  phases  of  the  Hop  Tac  Plan  successfully  to  the
extent  of  pushing  the  Viet  Cong  from  the  doors  of  Saigon.  The  overall  pacifica-
tion program,  including  Hop  Tac,  should  progress  sufficiently  to  allow  earmark-
ing at  least  three  division  equivalents  for  the  defense  in  I  Corps  if  the  DRV  step
up  military  operations  in  that  area.

Finally,  we  should  reach  some  fundamental  understandings  with  Khanh  and  his
government  concerning  war  aims.  We  must  make  clear  that  we  will  engage  in
action  against  North  Viet  Nam  only  for  the  purpose  of  assuring  the  security  and
independence  of  South  Viet  Nam  within  the  territory  assigned  by  the  1954  agree-
ments; that  we  will  not  (rpt  not)  join  in  a  crusade  to  unify  the  north  and  south;
that  we  will  not  (rpt  not)  even  seek  to  overthrow  the  Hanoi  regime  provided


Documents  547


the  latter  will  cease  its  efforts  to  take  over  the  south  by  subversive  warfare.
With  these  understandings  reached,  we  would  be  ready  to  set  in  motion  the
following:

(1)  Resume  at  once  34A  (with  emphasis  on  Marine  operations)  and  Desoto
patrols.  These  could  start  without  awaiting  outcome  of  discussions  with  Khanh.

(2)  Resume  U-2  overflights  over  all  NVN.

(3)  Initiate  air  and  ground  strikes  in  Laos  against  infiltration  targets  as  soon  as
joint  plans  now  being  worked  out  with  the  Khanh  Government  are  ready.  Such
plans  will  have  to  be  related  to  the  situation  in  Laos.  It  appears  to  US  that
Souvanna  Phouma  should  be  informed  at  an  appropriate  time  of  the  full  scope
of  our  plans  and  one  would  hope  to  obtain  his  acquiescence  in  the  anti-infiltration
actions  in  Laos.  In  any  case  we  should  always  seek  to  preserve  our  freedom  of
action  in  the  Laotian  corridor.

By  means  of  these  actions,  Hanoi  will  get  the  word  that  the  operational  rules  with
respect  to  the  DRV  are  changing.  We  should  perhaps  consider  message  to  DRV
that  shooting  down  of  U-2  would  result  in  reprisals.  We  should  now  lay  public
base  for  justifying  such  flights  and  have  plans  for  prompt  execution  in  con-
tingency to  shoot  down.

One  might  be  inclined  to  consider  including  at  this  stage  tit-for-tat  bombing  oper-
ations in  our  plans  to  compensate  for  VC  depredations  in  SVN.  However,  the
initiation  of  air  attacks  from  SVN  against  NVN  is  likely  to  release  a  new  order
of  military  reaction  from  both  sides,  the  outcome  of  which  is  impossible  to  pre-
dict. Thus,  we  do  not  visualize  initiating  this  form  of  reprisal  as  a  desirable  tactic
in  the  current  plan  but  would  reserve  the  capability  as  an  emergency  response  if
needed.

Before  proceeding  beyond  this  point,  we  should  raise  the  level  of  precautionary
military  readiness  (if  not  already  done)  by  taking  such  visible  measures  as  intro-
ducing US  Hawk  units  to  Danang  and  Saigon,  landing  a  Marine  force  at  Danang
for  defense  of  the  airfield  and  beefing  up  MACV's  support  base.  By  this  time
(assumed  to  be  late  fall)  we  should  h-ave  some  reading  on  Khanh's  performance.
Assuming  that  his  performance  has  been  satisfactory  and  that  Hanoi  has  failed
to  respond  favorably,  it  will  be  time  to  embark  on  the  final  phase  of  course  of
action  A,  a  carefully  orchestrated  bombing  attack  on  NVN,  directed  primarily
at  infiltration  and  other  military  targets.  At  some  point  prior  thereto,  it  may  be
desirable  to  open  direct  communications  with  Hanoi  if  this  not  been  done  bctore.
With  all  preparations  made,  political  and  military,  the  bombing  program  would
begin,  using  US  reconnaissance  planes,  VNAF/Farmgate  aircratt  against  those
targets  which  could  be  attacked  safely  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  MICTs,  and
additional  US  combat  aircraft  if  necessary  for  the  effective  execution  ol  the
bombing  programs.

Pros  and  cons  of  .course  of  action — A.  If  successful,  course  of  action  A  will
accomplish  the  objectives  set  forth  at  the  outset  as  essential  to  the  support  ol
US  policy  in  South  Viet  Nam.  I  will  press  the  Khanh  Government  into  doing  its
homework  in  pacification  and  will  limit  the  diversion  of  interest  to  the  out-of-
country  ventures  it  gives  adequate  time  for  careful  preparation  estimated  at
several  months,  while  doing  sufficient  at  once  to  maintain  internal  morale.  It  also
provides  ample  warning  to  Hanoi  and  Peking  to  allow  them  to  adjust  their  con-
duct before  becoming  over-committed.

On  the  other  hand,  course  of  action  A  relies  heavily  upon  the  durability  of  the
Khanh  government.  It  assumes  that  there  is  little  danger  of  its  collapse  with
notice  or  of  its  possible  replacement  by  a  weaker  or  more  unreliable  success.
Also,  because  of  the  drawn-out  nature  of  the  program,  it  is  exposed  to  the  danger


548 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


of  international  political  pressure  to  enter  into  negotiations  before  NVN  is  really
hurting  from  the  pressure  directed  against  it.

Statement  of  the  Problem — B.  It  may  well  be  that  the  problem  of  US  policy  in
SVN  is  more  urgent  than  that  depicted  in  the  foregoing  statement.  It  is  far  from
clear  at  the  present  moment  that  the  Khanh  Government  can  last  until  January  1,
1965,  although  the  application  of  course  of  action  A  should  have  the  effect  of
strengthening^ the  government  internally  and  of  silencing  [words  missing]  that  we
do  not  have  the  time  available  which  is  implicit  in  course  of  action  A  (several
months),  we  would  have  to  restate  the  problem  in  the  following  terms.  Our
objective  avoid  the  possible  consequences  of  a  collapse  of  national  morale.  To
accomplish  these  purposes,  we  would  have  to  open  the  campaign  against  the
DRV  without  delay,  seeking  to  force  Hanoi  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  resist  from
aiding  the  VC  and  to  convince  the  DRV  that  it  must  cooperate  in  calling  off  the
VC  insurgency.

Course  of  Action — B.  To  meet  this  statement  of  the  problem,  we  need  an  acceler-
ated course  of  action,  seeking  to  obtain  results  faster  than  under  course  of  Action
A.  Such  an  accelerated  program  would  include  the  following  actions:
Again  we  must  inform  Khanh  of  our  intentions,  this  time  expressing  a  willingness
to  begin  military  pressures  against  Hanoi  at  once,  providing  that  he  will  under-
take to  perform  as  in  course  of  Action  A.  However,  US  action  would  not  await
evidence  of  performance.

Again  we  may  wish  to  communicate  directly  on  this  subject  with  Hanoi  or  await-
ing effect  of  our  military  actions.  The  scenario  of  the  ensuing  events  would  be
essentially  the  same  as  under  Course  A  but  the  execution  would  await  only  the
readiness  of  plans  to  expedite,  relying  almost  exclusively  on  US  military  means.
Pros  and  cons  of  Course  of  Action  B.  This  course  of  action  asks  virtually  nothing
from  the  Khanh  Government,  primarily  because  it  is  assumed  that  little  can  be
expected  from  it.  It  avoids  the  consequence  of  the  sudden  collapse  of  the  Khanh
Government  and  gets  underway  with  minimum  delay  the  punitive  actions  against
Hanoi.  Thus,  it  lessens  the  chance  of  an  interruption  of  the  program  by  an  inter-
national demand  for  negotiation  by  presenting  a  fait  accompli  to  international
critics.  However,  it  increases  the  likelihood  of  US  involvement  in  ground  action
since  Khanh  will  have  almost  no  available  ground  forces  which  can  be  released
from  pacification  employment  to  mobile  resistance  of  DRV  attacks.
CONCLUSION:  It  is  concluded  that  Course  of  Action  A  offers  the  greater
promised  achievement  of  US  policy  objectives  in  SVN  during  the  coming  months.
However,  we  should  always  bear  in  mind  the  fragility  of  the  Khanh  Government
and  be  prepared  to  shift  quickly  to  Course  of  Action  B  if  the  situation  requires.
In  either  case,  we  must  be  militarily  ready  for  any  response  which  may  be
initiated  by  NVN  or  by  Chicoms.

MISCELLANEOUS:  As  indicated  above,  we  believe  that  34A  operations  should
resume  at  once  at  maximum  tempo,  still  on  a  covert  basis;  similarily,  Desoto
patrols  should  begin  advance,  operating  outside  12-mile  limit.  We  concur  that
a  number  of  VNAF  pilots  should  be  trained  on  B-57's  between  now  and  first  of
year.  There  should  be  no  change  now  with  regard  to  policy  on  evacuation  of
US  dependents.  5  F  J'

RECOMMENDATION:  It  is  recommended  that  USG  adopt  Course  of  Action
A  while  maintaining  readiness  to  shift  to  Course  of  Action  B.


Documents  549


[Document  182]

ASSISTANT  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE  (COMPTROLLER)
WASHINGTON  25,  D.C.

24  AUG  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

SUBJECT:  Review  of  USAF  Study:  "Relationship  of  Tactical  Air  to  Ground
Forces,  Southeast  Asia,'  1964  and  1969"

The  subject  study  examines  the  use  of  land-based  tactical  airpower  as  an
alternative  to  the  use  of  U.S.  ground  forces  in  the  event  of  a  large  scale  inter-
vention in  Southeast  Asia  by  CHICOM  DRV  forces.  You  have  "requested  the
Chairman,  JCS,  to  review  this  study,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the  sections
dealing  with  the  use  of  non-nuclear  ordnance  in  1964.  Completion  of  this  review
is  expected  by  August  28.  In  the  interim,  my  Systems  Analysis  office  has  com-
pleted a  parallel  and  independent  review.

The  Air  Force  study  contains  the  following  sentence:

The  evidence  supports  the  conclusion  that  tactical  air  with  nonnuclear
munitions  can  prevent  the  takeover  of  Southeast  Asia  by  CHICOM  ground
forces  opposed  by  minimal  friendly  ground  forces.

However,  I  cannot  agree  that  the  evidence  presented  in  the  report  is  sufficient
to  support  (or  deny)  such  a  conclusion.  I  have  attached  a  paper  commenting  in
some  detail  on  the  study.  Briefly,  my  objections  are  as  follows:

Some  critically  important  calculations  are  incorrect.  These  include  weapons
effectiveness  and  the  resulting  requirements  for  combat  sorties.

Some  significant  issues  are  largely  ignored.  Among  these  are  (1)  the  effects  of
weather,  particularly  with  respect  to  non-average  conditions;  (2)  the  effects  of
aircraft  losses  due  to  enemy  action;  (3)  the  logistic  support  requirements  for  the
proposed  force;  (4)  the  vulnerability  of  the  friendly  airbases  to  enemy  ground
and  or  air  forces;  (5)  the  ability  of  the  force  to  conduct  the  basic  interdiction
campaign  in  the  event  that  suppression  of  enemy  airbases  should  also  be  neces-
sary; (6)  the  time  required  to  deploy  the  proposed  force,  and  the  effects  of  a
CHICOM  DRV  intervention  prior  to  completion  of  our  build-up;  and  (7)  the
use  of  carrier-based  tactical  airpower.

Some  assumptions  are  inadequately  supported.  Among  these  are  ( 1  )  the  ade-
quacy of  the  existing  airbases  to  support  the  large  proposed  force;  and  the  lack
of  alternative  modes  of  transport  available  to  the  enemy.

Some  assumptions  appear  optimistic.  Among  these  are  ( 1  )  the  high  [word
missing]  rate  achieved;  and  (2)  the  small  number  of  flak  suppression  sorties
[word  missing].

In  my  opinion,  the  question  of  the  relationship  between  tactical  air  and  ground
forces  in  Southeast  Asia  remains  open.  Not  only  is  a  far  more  [word  missing]
and  comprehensive  analvsis  needed,  but  the  use  of  naval  and,  probably.  Army
forces,  in  addition  to  land-based  tactical  air,  must  be  considered.

As  to  who  might  be  the  best  candidate  for  such  a  study,  I  feel  that  there  is
much  to  be  said  for  CINCPAC,  who  would  ultimately  have  the  operational  re-
sponsibility for  implementing  his  own  analytical  recommendations,  should  it


550 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

come  to  that.  However,  I  recommend  that  you  discuss  this  problam  with  the
Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  In  the  interim,  I  will  take  no  formal  action
relating  to  the  current  Air  Force  study.

Charles  J.  Hitch


[Document  183]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
WASHINGTON,  D.C.  20301

JCSM-746-64
26  AUG  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
Subject:  Recommended  Courses  of  Action — Southeast  Asia

1.  In  their  memorandum  to  you  dated  14  August  1964,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff  advised  that  they  were  analyzing  the  next  military  courses  of  action  in
Southeast  Asia  and  that  appropriate  recommendations  would  be  forwarded  for
your  consideration  before  implementing  actions  are  taken  on  the  Bundy  memo-
randum dated  13  August  1964.  They  also  reiterated  the  views  of  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  Staff,  less  the  Chairman,  of  2  June  1964  that  military  courses  of  action  should
include  attack  of  targets  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  (DRV)  with
the  objective  of  destroying,  as  necessary,  the  DRV  will  and  capabilities  to  con-
tinue support  of  insurgent  forces  in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  (RVN)  and  Laos.

2.  In  analyzing  courses  of  action,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  considered  the
views  of  CINCPAC  and  Ambassadors  Taylor  and  Unger.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff  also  noted  the  DIA  assessment  dated  7  August  1964  of  Asian  communist
capabilities  and  15  probable  courses  of  action  following  the  5  August  retaliatory
attack  on  North  Vietnam  and  the  current  US  buildup  in  the  Western  Pacific.
This  assessment  indicates  that  the  most  likely  course  of  action  would  be  stepped
up  actions  in  RVN  and  Laos  with  attendant  increased  flow  of  men  and  supplies.

3.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  considered  Ambassador  Taylor's  statements
of  objectives  and  courses  of  action.  In  recognition  of  recent  events  in  SVN,
however,  they  consider  that  his  proposed  course  of  action  B  is  more  in  accord
with  the  current  situation  and  consider  that  such  an  accelerated  program  of
actions  with  respect  to  the  DRV  is  essential  to  prevent  a  complete  collapse  of
the  US  position  in  Southeast  Asia.  Additionally,  they  do  not  agree  that  we  should
be  slow  to  get  deeply  involved  until  we  have  a  better  feel  for  the  quality  of  our
ally.  The  United  States  is  already  deeply  involved.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
consider  that  only  significantly  stronger  military  pressures  on  the  DRV  are  likely
to  provide  the  relief  and  psychological  boost  necessary  for  attainment  of  the
requisite  governmental  stability  and  viability.

4.  Recent  US  military  actions  in  Laos  and  against  the  DRV  have  demon-
strated our  resolve  more  clearly  than  any  other  US  actions  in  some  time.  These
actions  showed  both  force  and  restraint.  Failure  to  resume  and  maintain  a
program  of  pressure  through  military  actions  could  be  misinterpreted  to  mean
we  have  had  second  thoughts  about  Pierce  Arrow  and  the  events  leading  thereto,
and  could  signal  a  lack  of  resolve.  Accordingly,  while  maintaining  a  posture  of
increased  readiness  in  the  Western  Pacific,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believed  that
the  US  program  should  have  as  concurrent  objectives:  (1)  improvements  in


Documents


551


South  Vietnam,  including  emphasis  on  the  Pacification  Program  and  the  Hop
Tac  plan  to  clear  Saigon  and  its  surroundings;  (2)  interdiction  of  the  relatively
unmolested  VC  lines  of  communication  (LOC)  through  Laos  by  operations  in
the  Panhandle  and  of  the  LOC  through  Cambodia  by  strict  control  of  the  water-
ways leading  therefrom;  (3)  deniaf  of  Viet  Cong  (VC)  sanctuaries  in  the
Cambodia-South  Vietnam  border  area  through  the  conduct  of  "hot  pursuit"  oper-
ations into  Cambodia,  as  required;  (4)  increased  pressure  on  North  Vietnam
through  military  actions.  As  part  of  the  program  for  increased  pressures,  the
OPLAN  34A  operations  and  also  the  Desoto  patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin
should  be  resumed,  the  former  on  an  intensified  but  still  covert  basis.

5.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe,  however,  that  more  direct  and  forceful
actions  than  these  will,  in  all  probability,  be  required.  In  anticipation  of  a  pattern
of  further  successful  VC  and  Pathet  Lao  (PL)  actions  in  RVN  and  Laos,  and
in  order  to  increase  pressure  on  the  DRV,  the  US  program  should  also  provide
for  prompt  and  calculated  responses  to  such  VC/PL  actions  in  the  form  of  air
strikes  and  other  operations  against  appropriate  military  targets  in  the  DRV.

6.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recognize  that  defining  what  might  constitute  ap-
propriate counteroperations  in  advance  is  a  most  difficult  task.  We  should  there-
fore maintain  our  prompt  readiness  to  execute  a  range  of  selected  responses,
tailored  to  the  developing  circumstances  and  reflecting  the  principles  in  the  Gulf
of  Tonkin  actions,  that  such  counter-operations  will  result  in  clear  military  dis-
advantage to  the  DRV.  These  responses,  therefore,  must  be  greater  than  the
provocation  in  degree,  and  not  necessarily  limited  to  response  in  kind  against
similar  targets.  Air  strikes  in  response  might  be  purely  VNAF;  VNAF  with  US
escort  to  provide  protection  from  possible  employment  of  MIGs;  VNAF  with
US  support  in  the  offensive  as  well  as  the  defensive  role;  or  entirely  US.  The
precise  combination  should  be  determined  by  the  effect  we  wish  to  produce  and
the  assets  available.  Targets  for  attack  by  air  or  other  forces  may  be  selected
from  appropriate  plans  including  the  Target  Study  for  North  Vietnam  consisting
of  94  targets,  recently  forwarded  to  you  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.

7.  While  a  US  program  as  discussed  above  will  not  necessarily  provide  de-
cisive end  results,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  advocate  its  adoption  and  implementa-
tion at  once.  Anything  less  could  be  interpreted  as  a  lack  of  resolve  on  the  part
of  the  United  States.  The  military  course  of  action  which  offers  the  best  chance
of  success  remains  the  destruction  of  the  DRV  will  and  capabilities  as  necessary
to  compel  the  DRV  to  cease  providing  support  to  the  insurgencies  in  South
Vietnam  and  Laos.

8.  Attached  as  Appendices  to  this  memorandum  are  discussions  of  the  fol-
lowing:

a.  Operations  in  the  Laos  Panhandle — Appendix  A.

b.  OPLAN  34A  operations — Appendix  B.

c.  Other  possible  actions  against  North  Vietnam — Aerial  mining  against  the
DRV  and  resumptions  of  the  Desoto  patrol  in  the  Gulf  of  lonkin— Appen-
dix C.

d.  Other  actions  in  RVN — Strict  control  of  waterborne  traffic  on  the  Me-
kong and  Bassac  rivers  and  direct  action  against  Vict  Cong  leadership —
Appendix  D.

9.  In  summary,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  that:

a.  The  following  military  actions  receive  priority  (not  necessarily  in  the  order
listed):

(1)  Continuation  of  the  Pacification  Program  in  RVN  with  emphasis  on
the  Hop  Tac  program  to  establish  the  security  of  Saigon  and  its  surroundings;


552 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

(2)  Continuation  of  the  present  forward  deployment  of  US  combat  units;

(3)  Resumption  and  intensification  of  OPLAN  34 A  operations  with  em-
phasis on  maritime  operations  and  with  initiation  of  air  operations  against
selected  targets  when  practicable.  OPLAN  34  A  operations  should  remain
covert  for  the  time  being.

(4)  Resumption  of  Desoto  patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin;

(5)  Operations  against  the  VC  LOC,  including  staging  base  areas  and  in-
filtration routes  in  the  Laos  Panhandle  by:

(a)  TheRLAF;

(b)  GVN  and  Thai  forces  in  cross-border  operations  with  US  support
as  required;

(c)  US  Armed  aerial  reconnaissance,  attacking  infiltration  installations.

(6)  Retaliatory  actions  by  GVN/US  forces  against  appropriate  targets  in
the  DRV  in  response  to  stepped  up  Viet  Cong/Pathet  Lao  actions  should  such
occur.

(7)  Institution  of  "hot  pursuit"  operations  into  Cambodia.

b.  The  following  related  actions  be  taken:

(1 )  Institution  of  strict  controls  on  the  Mekong  and  Bassac  rivers;

(2)  Direct  action  against  the  Viet  Cong  leadership  in  RVN.

c.  Since  the  above  actions  will  probably  not  in  themselves  accomplish  our
objectives  of  compelling  the  DRV  to  respond  favorably,  we  should  be  prepared
to:

(1)  Commerce  deployment  of  remaining  Category  III  OPLAN  37-64
forces;

(2)  Commence  a  US  air  strike  program  against  targets  in  North  Vietnam
in  accordance  with  current  planning.

10.  In  light  of  recent  developments  in  South  Vietnam  and  the  evaluations
furnished  by  COMUSMACV,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  conclude  that  accelerated
and  forceful  action  with  respect  to  North  Vietnam  is  essential  to  prevent  a
complete  collapse  of  the  US  position  in  Southeast  Asia.  They  consider  that  a
decision  as  to  specific  actions  and  the  timing  of  these  actions  is  urgent  and
recommend  that  conversations  with  Ambassador  Taylor  focus  on  this  issue  with
a  view  to  its  early  resolution.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:

Curtis  E.  Le  May
Acting  Chairman
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

Attachments


[Document  184]

Aug.  26,  1964

State  Cable
[addressee  missing]

We  agree  with  your  assessment  of  importance  SAR  operations  that  Air  Amer-
ica pilots  can  play  critically  important  role,  and  that  SAR  efforts  should  not
discriminate  between  rescuing  Americans,  Thais  and  Lao.  You  are  also  hereby
granted  as  requested  discretionary  authority  to  use  AA  pilots  in  T-28's  for  SAR
operations  when  you  consider  this  indispensable  rpt  indispensable  to  success  of
operation  and  with  understanding  that  you  will  seek  advance  Washington  author-
ization wherever  situation  permits.


Documents  553


At  same  time,  we  believe  time  has  come  to  review  scope  and  control  ar-
rangements for  T-28  operations  extending  into  future.  Such  a  review  is  especially
indicated  view  fact  that  these  operations  more  or  less  automatically  impose
demands  for  use  of  US  personnel  in  SAR  operations.  Moreover,  increased  AA
capability  clearly  means  possibilities  of  loss  somewhat  increased,  and  each  loss
with  accompanying  SAR  operations  involves  chance  of  escalation  from  one  action
to  another  in  ways  that  may  not  be  desirable  in  wider  picture.  On  other  side,
we  naturally  recognize  T-28  operations  are  vital  both  for  their  miUtary  and
psychological  effects  in  Laos  and  as  negotiating  card  in  support  of  Souvanna's
position.  Request  your  view  whether  balance  of  above  factors  would  call  for
some  reduction  in  scale  of  operations  and/or  dropping  of  some  of  better-defended
targets.  (Possible  extension  T-28  operations  to  Panhandle  would  be  separate
issue  and  will  be  covered  by  septel.)

On  control  problem,  our  understanding  is  that  Thai  pilots  fly  missions  strictly
controlled  by  your  Air  Command  Center  with  AIR  A  in  effective  control,  but
that  this  not  true  of  Lao  pilots.  We  have  impression  latter  not  really  under  any
kind  of  firm  control.

Request  your  evaluation  and  recommendations  as  to  future  scope  T-28  opera-
tions and  your  comments  as  to  whether  our  impressions  present  control  structure
correct  and  whether  steps  could  be  taken  to  tighten  this.

End

RUSK


[Document  185]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
WASHINGTON,  D.C.  20301
OFFICE  OF  THE  SPECIAL  ASSISTANT  FOR
COUNTERINSURGENCY  AND  SPECIAL  ACTIVITIES

27  August  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  MR.  WILLIAM  BUNDY

MR.  J.  T.  McNAUGHTON

Subject:  OPLAN  34A — September  Schedule

Reference:  MACSOG  Message  8618  DTG  240855Z  August

1.  Attached  hereto  is  COMUSMACV's  proposed  schedule  of  34A  actions  lor
September.

2.  All  of  the  actions  listed  have  either  been  specifically  approved  previously
or  are  similar  to  such  approved  actions.  For  example.  Action  (3)  (d)  was
specifically  approved  by  consideration  of  JCSM-426-64  dated  19  May  1964,
while  Action  (3)  (b)  is  similar  to  a  previously  approved  action  against  a  secu-
rity post.

3.  The  method  of  attack  has  been  changed  in  some  instances  from  destruc-
tion by  infiltration  of  demolition  teams  to  the  concept  of  standoff  bcMubardmciit
from  PTE's.  These  actions  are  so  indicated  in  the  attachment.

Rollcn  H.  Ant  his
Major  General,  USAF

Attachment


554 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

The  proposed  September  34A  actions  are  as  follows:

(1)  Intelligence  Collection  Actions

(a)  1-30  September — Ariel  photography  to  update  selected  targets  along
with  pre-  and  post-strike  coverage  of  approved  actions.

(b)  1-30  September — Two  junk  capture  missions;  remove  captives  for
36-48  hours  interrogation;  booby  trap  junk  with  antidisturbance  devices
and  release;  captives  returned  after  interrogation;  timing  depends  upon  sea
conditions  and  current  intelligence.

(2)  Psychological  Operations

(a)  1-30  September — In  conjunction  with  approved  overflights  and  mari-
time operations,  delivery  of  propaganda  leaflets,  gift  kits,  and  deception  de-
vices simulating  resupply  of  phantom  teams.

(b)  1-30  September — Approximately  200  letters  of  various  propaganda
themes  sent  through  third  country  mail  channels  to  North  Vietnam.

(c)  1-30  September — Black  Radio  daily  30-minute  programs  repeated
once,  purports  to  be  voice  of  dissident  elements  in  North  Vietnam.

(d)  1-30  September — White  Radio  broadcast  of  eight-and-one-half  hours
daily,  propaganda  "Voice  of  Freedom."

(3)  Maritime  Operations

(a)  1-30  September — Demolition  of  Route  1  bridge  by  infiltrated  team
accompanied  by  fire  support  teams,  place  short-delay  charges  against  spans
and  caissons,  place  antipersonnel  mines  on  road  approaches.  (This  bridge
previously  hit  but  now  repaired).

(b)  1-30  September — Bombard  Cape  Mui  Dao  observation  post  with  81
MM  mortars  and  40  MM  guns  from  two  PTFs.

(c)  1-30  September — Demolition  of  another  Route  1  bridge  (see  map),
concept  same  as  (3)  (a)  above.

(d)  1-30  September— Bombard  Sam  Son  radar,  same  as  (3)  (b).

(e)  1-30  September — Bombard  Tiger  Island  barracks,  same  as  (3)  (b).

(f)  1-30  September— Bombard  Hon  Ngu  Island,  same  as  (3)  (b).

(g)  1-30  September— Bombard  Hon  Matt  Island,  same  as  (3)  (b)  and
run  concurrently  with  (3)  (f).

(h)  1-30  September — Destruction  of  section  of  Hanoi-Vinh  railroad  by
mfiltrated  demolition  team  supported  by  two  VN  marine  squads,  by  rubber
boats  from  PTFs,  place  short-delay  charges  and  anti-personnel  mines  around
area.

(i)  1-30  September— Bombard  Hon  Me  Island  in  conjunction  with  (3)
(a)  above,  concept  same  as  ( 3 )  ( b ) .

(j)  1-30  September— Bombard  Cape  Falaise  gun  positions  in  conjunction
with  (3)  (h)  above,  concept  same  as  (3)  (b).

(k)  1-30  September— Bombard  Cape  Mui  Ron  in  conjunction  with  junk
capture  mission,  concept  same  as  (3)  (b).

(4)  Airborne  Operations—Ughi-oi-moon  period  16-28  September

(a)  Four  missions  for  resupply  of  in-place  teams.

(b)  Four  missions  for  reinforcement  of  in-place  teams.

(c)  Four  missions  to  airdrop  new  psyops/sabotage  teams  depending  upon
development  of  drop  zone  and  target  information.  These  are  low-key  propa-
ganda and  intelligence  gathering  teams  with  a  capability  for  small-scale  sabo-
tage on  order  after  locating  suitable  targets.

(5)  Dates  for  actual  launch  of  maritime  and  airborne  operations  are  con-
tmgent  upon  the  intelligence  situation  and  weather  conditions.


Documents  555


[Document  186]

29  AUG  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

SUBJECT: Response  to  JCSM-729-64: Target  Study— North  Vietnam  (S)

1.  JCSM  729-64  forwards  to  you,  as  Appendix  A,  the  detailed  JCS  analysis
of  the  94  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  The  JCSM  sumarizes  the  types  of  targets
included,  the  status  of  ordnance  and  POL  requirements,  aircraft  availabilities
and  capabilities  and  sorties  required.  It  also  outlines  the  types  of  detailed  strike
plans  now  being  developed  by  CINCPAC.

2.  No  response  to  the  JCSM  is  required;  it  makes  no  specific  recommendations
and  amounts  to  what  is,  in  effect,  an  interim  progress  report.  I  think,  however,
that  a  word  of  appreciation  is  appropriate  given  the  very  substantial  efforts
devoted  by  the  Joint  Staff  and  DIA  toward  the  compilation  of  what  seem  to  me
to  be  first-rate  studies  of  the  94  targets.  Such  is  the  purpose  of  paragraph  1  of
the  attached  response.

3.  Paragraphs  2,  3  and  4,  which  request  additional  information  from  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff,  are  self-explanatory.

4.  Recommend  signature.

John  T.  McNaughton
Enclosure  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense

Memo  for  Chairman,  JCS  International  Security  Affairs


[Document  187]

31  AUG  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  CHAIRMAN,  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
SUBJECT:  JCSM-729-64:  Target  Study— North  Vietnam

1.  I  have  examined  with  great  interest  and  satisfaction  your  recent  analysis
of  the  94  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  The  detail  and  precision  with  which  you
have  described  and  defined  the  targets,  the  attack  objectives,  and  the  weapons
and  sorties  required  to  accomplish  those  objectives  testify  to  the  care  with
which  you  have  undertaken  your  task  and  the  weeks  of  effort  which  you  have
devoted  to  it.  Earlier  versions  of  your  target  studies  have  already  proved  to  be
of  great  value  in  connection  with  the  recent  reprisals  against  North  Vietnam.

2.  Would  there  be  sufficient  stocks  of  ordnance  and  POL  in  the  theater  to
carry  out  OPLAN  32,  Phase  IV,  after  carrying  out  the  largest  pattern  of  attack
shown  in  your  memorandum  (paragraph  8d)?

3.  I  should  like  to  receive,  within  the  next  several  weeks,  your  views  con-
cerning the  economic  and  military  effect  upon  North  Vietnam  of  the  patterns
of  attack  contemplated.  To  put  the  matter  more  precisely,  assume  that  attacks
8b,  c  and  d  were  carried  out  and  that  the  attacks  resulted  in  the  damage  levels
described  in  your  target  studies.  In  these  circumstances,  what  would  be  your
estimate:

(a)  Of  the  effects  upon  the  capabilities  of  North  Vietnam

i.  to  support  and  assist  the  PL  and  VC.

ii.  to  escalate  through  the  use  of  DRV  forces  against  SVN  and  Laos.


556 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  111

(b)  Of  the  effects  upon  the  economy  of  North  Vietnam  (in  terms  of  such
factors  as  internal  transportation,  imports  and  exports,  industrial  production  and
food  production  and  distribution)  within  the  short  run  (say  three  months)  and
in  the  long-run  (say  five  years).

4.  If  the  destruction  of  the  94  targets  were  not  to  succeed  in  its  objective  of
destroying  the  DRV  will  and  capability,  what  courses  of  action  would  you  rec-
ommend? Would  you  recommend  further  attack  on  the  94  targets  or  the  addi-
tion of  more  targets?  What  preparations  would  be  necessary  (e.g.,  target  analy-
sis, logistics)  in  order  to  carry  out  such  attacks?

Signed

Robert  S.  McNamara


[Document  188]

2nd  Draft

9/3/64

McNaughton
ISA

PLAN  OF  ACTION  FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM

1.  Analysis  of  the  present  situation.  The  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  deteri-
orating. Even  before  the  government  sank  into  confusion  last  week,  the  course
of  the  war  in  South  Vietnam  had  been  downward,  with  Viet  Cong  incidents
increasing  in  number  and  intensity  and  military  actions  becoming  larger  and
more  successful,  and  with  less  and  less  territory  meaningfully  under  the  control
of  the  government.  Successful  ambushes  had  demonstrated  an  unwillingness  of
the  population  even  in  what  were  thought  to  be  pacified  areas  to  run  the  risk
of  informing  on  the  Viet  Cong.  War  weariness  was  apparent.  The  crisis  of  the
end  of  August — especially  since  the  competing  forces  have  left  the  government
largely  "faceless"  and  have  damaged  the  government's  ability  to  manage  the
pacification  program— promises  to  lead  to  further  and  more  rapid  deterioration.
Even  if  Khanh  makes  a  recovery  soon,  the  government  is  bound  to  be  less  effec-
tive at  all  levels  for  a  time;  South  Vietnam  will  be  a  weakened  target.  Hanoi
is  certain  to  assess  the  situation  this  way,  and  it  is  quite  likely  that  the  Viet
Cong  in  the  next  month  or  two  will  make  an  all-out  effort  to  shake  South  Viet-
nam apart.

US  policy  has  been  to  pacify  South  Vietnam  by  aid  and  advice  and  actions
within  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam.  This  policy  will  not  work  without  a  strong
government  in  Saigon.  It  has  become  apparent  that  there  is  no  likelihood  that
a  government  sufficiently  strong  to  administer  a  successful  pacification  program
will  develop.  It  follows  that  our  current  US  policy,  which  is  based  on  such  a
program,  will  not  succeed.

The  odds  are  very  great  that  if  we  do  not  inject  some  major  new  elements —
and  perhaps  even  if  we  do— the  situation  will  continue  to  deteriorate;  there  is
a  substantial  chance  that  the  twords  missing]  completely  apart,  with  dramatic
VC  military  victories  putting  intolerable  pressure  on  a  weakened  Saigon  gov-
ernment. The  result  within  a  few  months,  or  even  a  few  weeks,  could  be  a  suc-
cession of  governmental  changes  ending  in  a  demand  for  a  negotiated  settlement.

The  objective  of  the  United  States  is  to  reverse  the  present  downward  trend.


Documents  557

Failing  that,  the  alternative  objective  is  to  emerge  from  the  situation  with  as
good  an  image  as  possible  in  US,  allied  and  enemy  eyes.

2.  Inside  South  Vietnam.  We  must  in  any  event  keep  hard  at  uork  inside
South  Vietnam.  This  means,  inter  alia,  immediate  action:

(a)  to  press  the  presently  visible  leaders  to  get  a  real  government  in  opera-

tion;

(b)  to  prevent  extensive  personnel  changes  down  the  hne;

(c)  to  see  that  lines  of  authority  for  carrying  out  the  pacification  program

are  clear.

New  initiatives  might  include  action:

(d)  to  establish  a  US  Naval  base,  perhaps  at  Danang;

(e)  to  embark  on  a  major  effort  to  pacify  one  province  adjacent  to  Saigon.
A  separate  analysis  is  being  made  of  a  proposal :

(f)  to  enlarge  significantly  the  US  military  role  in  the  pacification  program

inside  South  Vietnam — e.g.,  large  numbers  of  US  special  forces,
divisions  of  regular  combat  troops,  US  air,  etc.,  to  "interlard"  with
or  to  take  over  functions  or  geographical  areas  from  the  South  Viet-
namese armed  forces.
A  combination  of  actions  confined  to  the  territory  of  South  Vietnam,  however,
offers  much  promise  to  slow  the  deteriorating  situation  appreciably.

3.  Outside  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam.  There  is  a  chance  that  the  down-
ward trend  can  be  reversed — or  a  new  situation  created  offering  new  opportuni-
ties, or  at  least  a  convincing  demonstration  made  of  the  great  costs  and  risks
incurred  by  a  country  which  commits  aggression  against  an  ally  of  ours — if
the  following  course  of  action  is  followed.  The  course  of  action  is  made  up  of
actions  outside  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam  designed  to  put  increasing  pressure
on  North  Vietnam  but  designed  also  both  to  create  as  little  risk  as  possible  of  the
kind  of  military  action  which  would  be  difficult  to  justify  to  the  American  public
and  to  preserve  where  possible  the' option  to  have  no  US  military  action  at  all.

Timing.  The  scenario  should  begin  approximately  October  1.  This  date  docs
not  appear  to  be  appreciably  less  desirable  than  a  September  date  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  deteriorating  situation.  Its  advantages  are  that  it  allows  time  for
consultation  in  Washington  with  Ambassador  Taylor,  and  it  allows  time  for
some  kind  of  a  "voice"  to  emerge  which  can  speak  for  South  Vietnam  (a  pre-
requisite to  the  proposed  course  of  action),  and  it  postpones  probably  until
November  or  December  any  decision  as  to  serious  escalation.

Objectives.  The  purpose  of  the  course  of  action  would  be  to  iinpro\c  our  po-
sition in  at  least  one  of  the  following  four  ways:

i.  Increase  the  unity  and  therefore  the  effectiveness  ot  the  CiVN  govern-
ment, thus  facilitating  pacification  of  South  Vietnam.

ii.  Decrease  DRV  support  for  the  Viet  Con^,  thus  facilitating  pacification
of  South  Vietnam.

iii.  Increase  the  actual  and  portended  cost  of  the  war  to  DRV.  thus  im-
proving our  bargaining  position  in  the  event  of  negotiations.

iv.  Increase  the  actual  and  apparent  cost  of  the  war  to  the  DRV  and  the
actual  and  apparent  contribution  in  risk  and  effort  by  the  US,  thus  improving
our  image  as  a  trustworthy  ally  no  matter  what  the  ultimate  outcome.

Actions.  The  actions,  in  addition  to  present  continuing  "cxtra-territoriar"  ac-
tions (US  U-2  recce  of  DRV,  US  jet  recce  of  Laos,  T-28  activity  m  l  aos),
would  be  by  way  of  an  orchestration  of  three  classes  of  actions,  all  designed  to
meet  these  five  desiderata— ( 1)  From  the  US,  GVN,  and  hopefully  allied  points
of  view,  they  should  be  legitimate  things  to  do  under  the  circumstances,  (2)  they


558 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

should  cause  apprehension,  ideally  increasing  apprehension,  in  the  DRV,  (3)
they  should  be  likely  at  some  point  to  provoke  a  military  DRV  response,  (4)
the  provoked  response  should  be  likely  to  provide  good  grounds  for  us  to  esca-
late if  we  wished,  and  (5)  the  timing  and  crescendo  should  be  under  our  con-
trol, with  the  scenario  capable  of  being  turned  off  at  any  time.  The  three  classes
of  actions  are  :

a.  South  Vietnamese  air  attacks  on  the  Laotian  infiltration  routes.  The  strikes
should  begin  in  Laos  near  the  South  Vietnamese  border  and  slowly  "march"  up
the  trails  to  and  eventually  across  the  North  Vietnamese  border.  The  case  for
action  of  this  kind  has  already  been  made  in  the  relevant  bodies  of  opinion.  The
tacit  consent  of  Souvanna  would  have  to  be  and  probably  could  be  obtained.
Ground  fire  at  the  VNAF  aircraft  would  be  sufficient  but  not  necessary  cause
for  US  suppression  of  the  A  A  batteries;  MIG  opposition  to  the  VNAF  aircraft
would  be  encountered  probably  only  late  in  the  "march"  up  the  trails  and  like-
wise would  be  sufficient  but  not  necessary  cause  for  US  jet  cap  for  the  VNAF
aircraft,  hot  pursuit  of  the  MIGs,  and  even  strikes  at  the  MIG  airfields  in  North
Vietnam.  The  pace  would  be  under  our  control.

b.  South  Vietnamese  sea  attacks  on  North  Vietnamese  junks  and  shore  facili-
ties by  bombardment  and  landings.  These  operations  can  be  fully  justified  as
necessary  to  assist  in  interdiction  of  infiltration  by  sea.  North  Vietnamese  op-
position by  sea  or  air  could,  but  would  not  have  to  be,  used  by  the  US  as  grounds
for  giving  sea  or  air  protection  for  the  South  Vietnamese  craft  or  even  for
undertaking  such  actions  as  the  mining  of  certain  North  Vietnamese  harbors.
While  the  North  Vietnamese  would  be  able  to  select  the  time  and  place  of  their
response  to  the  South  Vietnamese  strikes,  the  US  would  in  any  instance  retain
the  choice  whether  and  how  to  escalate.

c.  De  Soto  patrols.  These  patrols  should  be  fully  protected  by  naval  and  air
units,  disassociated  from  any  South  Vietnamese  sea  raids,  and  far  out  in  inter-
national waters  of  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.  There  is  a  demonstrable  and  increasing
military  requirement  for  these  patrols  because  of  the  likely  changes  in  North
Vietnamese  equipment  and  procedures  since  August  5;  and  the  US  public  is
sympathetic  to  reasonable  insistence  on  the  right  of  the  US  Navy  to  ply  inter-
national waters.  We  could  not  ignore  a  DRV  sea  or  air  attack  on  such  a  De  Soto
destroyer.  Such  an  attack  would  require  us  either  to  apply  the  August  5  limited-
retaliation  formula  again  or,  especially  if  a  US  ship  were  sunk,  to  commence  a
full-fledged  squeeze  on  North  Vietnam.  (It  is  unlikely  that  the  DRV  will  attack
our  ships  if  they  are  outside  the  "12-mile  limit.")

4.  Actions  of  opportunity.  While  the  above  course  of  action  is  being  pursued,
we  should  watch  for  other  DRV  actions  which  would  justify  a  limited  retalia-
tion or  the  commencement  of  a  squeeze  on  North  Vietnam.

Among  such  DRV  actions  might  be  the  following:

a.  Downing  of  US  recce  or  US  rescue  aircraft  in  Laos  (likely  by  AA,  un-
likely by  MIG).

b.  MIG  action  in  Laos  or  South  Vietnam  (unlikely).

c.  Mining  of  Saigon  Harbor  (unlikely).

d.  VC  attacks  on  South  Vietnamese  POL  storage,  RR  bridge,  etc.  (dramatic
incident  required).

e.  VC  attacks  (e.g.,  by  mortars  on,  or  take-over  of,  air  fields  on  which  US
aircraft  are  deployed  (likely).

f.  Some  barbaric  act  of  terrorism  which  inflames  US  and  world  opinion
(unlikely).

5.  Graduated  pressure  on  DRV.  The  concept  of  the  course  of  action  described


Documents  559

above  in  essence  is:  by  doing  legimate  things  to  provoke  a  DRV  response  and
to  be  in  a  good  position  to  seize  on  that  response,  or  upon  an  unprovoked  DRV
action,  to  commence  a  crescendo  of  GVN-US  military  actions  against  the  DRV.
The  escalating  actions  might  be  naval  pressures,  mining  of  harbors;  or  thcv  might
be  made  up  of  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  moving  from  southern  "to
northern  targets,  from  targets  associated  with  infiltration  and  by-then-disclosed
DRV-VC  radio  command  nets  to  targets  of  military  then  industrial  importance,
and  from  missions  that  could  be  handled  by  the  VNAF  alone  to  those  which
could  be  carried  out  only  by  the  US.  The  effect  of  such  escalation  on  Saigon  and
on  other  Vietnamese  cities — the  populations  of  which  would  be  fearful  of^counter
strikes — would  have  to  be  weighed.  And  the  possibility  that  such  actions  would
escalate  further,  perhaps  bringing  China  into  the  war,  would  have  to  be  faced.
Substantial  contingency  deployments  of  ground,  sea  and  air  forces  to  Southeast
Asia  would  have  to  be  made  at  some  point — at  the  latest,  just  before  any  overt
US  actions  were  taken  against  the  territory  of  North  Vietnam.

6.  Chances  to  resolve  the  situation.  Throughout  the  scenario,  we  should  be
alert  to  chances  to  resolve  the  situation :

a.  To  back  the  DRV  down,  so  South  Vietnam  can  be  pacified.

b.  To  evolve  a  tolerable  settlement:

i.  Explicit  settlement  (e.g.,  via  a  bargaining-from-strength  conference,

etc.).

ii.  Tacit  settlement  (e.g.,  via  piecemeal  live-and-let-live  Vietnamese  "set-
tlements," a  de  facto  "writing  off"  of  indefensible  portions  of  SVN,  etc.).

c.  If  worst  comes  and  South  Vietnam  disintegrates  or  their  behavior  be-
comes abominable,  to  "disown"  South  Vietnam,  hopefully  leaving  the  image  of
"a  patient  who  died  despite  the  extraordinary  efforts  of  a  good  doctor."

7.  Special  considerations  during  next  two  months.  The  relevant  "audiences"
of  US  actions  are  the  Communists  (who  must  feel  strong  pressures),  the  South
Vietnamese  (whose  morale  must  be  buoyed),  our  allies  (who  must  trust  us  as
"underwriters"),  and  the  US  public  (which  must  support  our  risk-taking  with
US  lives  and  prestige).  During  the  next  two  months,  because  of  the  laek  of  "re-
buttal time"  before  election  to  justify  particular  actions  which  may  be  distorted
to  the  US  public,  we  must  act  with  special  care — signaling  to  the  DRV  that
initiatives  are  being  taken,  to  the  GVN  that  we  are  behaving  energetically  despite
the  restraints  of  our  political  season,  and  to  the  US  public  that  we  are  behaving
with  good  purpose  and  restraint.


[Document  189]

THE  WHITE  HOUSE
WASHINGTON

CONFIDENTIAL  September  4.  1964

MEMORANDUM  TO:  Mr.  Robert  Manning

Subject:  Possible  problems  in  the  current  form  of  the  Q  &  A  booklet  on  \  letnam

Yesterday  when  we  agreed  to  hold  up  this  booklet,  I  undertook  to  let  you  know
what  parts  of  it  might  give  trouble  as  of  now.  Obviously,  as  the  situation  shifts
the  problem  changes,  but  the  following  items  occurred  to  me  in  a  careful  reading
two  days  ago:


560 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

1.  On  page  4  in  the  last  paragraph  we  use  some  adverbs  about  the  new  gov-
ernment that  are  a  little  hard  to  justify  this  week.

2.  On  page  9  we  describe  the  military  situation  as  "stabilized,"  which  seems
optimistic.

On  page  10  the  discussion  of  VC  mihtary  activities  seems  a  trifle  dated,  and  the
estimate  of  the  improvement  of  government  forces  optimistic.

3.  On  pages  19  to  21,  questions  21,  22,  and  23  might  be  outdated  by  decisions
in  coming  weeks.  There  is  no  certainty  about  this,  but  I  doubt  if  we  wish  to  be
pinned  to  a  course  from  which  we  might  wish  to  shift.

4.  On  page  22,  I  doubt  if  it  is  enough  to  call  the  M-1  rifle  "adequate."

5.  On  page  24,  I  think  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  action  should  not  be  quite  so  sharply
separated  from  possible  future  operations.  I  would  correct  the  paragraph  by  in-
cluding the  possibility  of  retaliation  and  counteraction  against  maritime  infiltra-
tion, without  giving  the  implication  that  any  such  force  is  definitely  agreed  on
now.

6.  In  a  similar  way,  on  page  25,  I  think  we  ought  to  leave  the  door  a  little
more  open  to  appropriate  action  against  the  north,  but  a  very  marginal  change
would  satisfy  me.

McGeorge  Bundy

[Document  190]

DRAFT— Bundy

COURSES  OF  ACTION  FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM

The  Situation

1.  Khanh  will  probably  stay  in  control  and  may  make  some  headway  in  the
next  2-3  months  in  strengthening  the  government.  The  best  we  can  expect  is  that
he  and  the  government  will  be  able  to  maintain  order,  keeping  the  pacification
program  ticking  over  (but  not  progressing  markedly),  and  keep  up  the  appearance
of  a  valid  government.

2.  Khanh  and  the  GVN  leaders  are  temporarily  too  exhausted  to  be  thinking
much  about  moves  against  the  North.  However,  they  do  need  to  be  reassured  that
the  US  continues  to  mean  business,  and  as  Khanh  goes  along  in  his  government  ef-
forts, he  will  probably  want  more  US  effort  visible.

3.  The  GVN  over  the  next  2-3  months  will  be  too  weak  for  us  to  take  any
deliberate  major  risks  of  escalation  that  would  involve  any  important  contribu-
tion by  South  Vietnam.  However,  escalation  arising  from  and  directed  against
US  action  would  tend  to  lift  GVN  morale.  [Temporarily  only;  not  worth  US
action  for  this  purpose  alone.]

4.  The  Communist  side  will  probably  avoid  provocative  action,  and  it  is  un-
certain how  much  they  will  step  up  VC  activity.  They  do  need  to  be  shown  that
we  and  the  GVN  are  not  simply  sitting  back  after  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.

Courses  of  Action

We  should  in  any  event:

1.  Resume  34A  operations  very  soon.  The  operations  selected  should  be
related  to  the  case  against  VC  infiltration  by  sea,  and  this  case  should  be
made  publicly  by  the  GVN  to  legitimize  and  surface — in  a  general  sense —
the  maritime  operations.  Other  34A  air  drop  operations  should  also  be  re-
sumed but  are  secondary  in  importance.  We  should  not  consider  air  strikes
under  34A  for  the  present.


Documents  561


2.  US  naval  patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  should  be  resumed  very  soon,
initially  beyond  the  twelve-mile  limit  and  clearly  dissociated  from  34A
maritime  operations.

3.  Limited  GVN  air  and  ground  operations  into  the  Corridor  areas  of
Laos  should  be  undertaken  in  the  near  future,  together  with  Laos  air  strikes
as  soon  as  we  can  get  Souvanna's  permission.  These  operations  will  have
only  limited  effect,  however.

4.  We  should  be  prepared  to  respond  on  a  tit-for-tat  basis  against  the
DRV  in  the  event  of  any  attack  on  US  units  or  any  special  DRV  VC  action
against  SVN.

The  main  further  question  is  the  extent  to  which  we  should  add  elements  to
the  above  actions  that  would  tend  to  provoke  a  DRV  reaction,  and  consequent
retaliation  by  us.  The  main  action  to  be  considered  would  be  running  US  naval
patrols  increasingly  close  to  the  North  Vietnamese  coast  and  or  associating  them
with  34A  operations.  Such  extension  might  be  undertaken  if  the  initial  US  naval
patrols  had  not  aroused  a  reaction.

As  to  timing,  the  above  actions  would  get  underway  late  in  September  or  early
in  October.  The  more  provocative  variations  would  be  considered  for  insertion
not  earlier  than  mid-October.

W.  P.  Bundy/bmm
September  8,  1964


[Document  191]

8  September  1964

COURSES  OF  ACTION  FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM

This  memorandum  records  the  consensus  reached  in  discussions  between  Am-
bassador Taylor  and  Secretary  Rusk,  Secretary  McNamara,  and  General  Wheeler,
for  review  and  decision  by  the  President.

The  Situation

1.  Khanh  will  probably  stay  in  control  and  may  make  some  headway  in  the
next  2-3  months  in  strengthening  the  government  (GVN).  The  best  we  can
expect  is  that  he  and  the  GVN  will  be  able  to  maintain  order,  keep  the  pacifica-
tion program  ticking  over  (but  not  progressing  markedly),  and  give  the  appear-
ance of  a  valid  government.

2.  Khanh  and  the  GVN  leaders  are  temporarily  too  exhausted  to  be  thinking
much  about  moves  against  the  North.  However,  they  do  need  to  be  reassured
that  the  US  continues  to  mean  business,  and  as  Khanh  goes  along  in  his  govern-
ment efforts,  he  will  probably  want  more  US  effort  visible,  and  some  GVN  role
in  external  actions.

3.  The  GVN  over  the  next  2-3  months  will  be  too  weak  for  us  to  take  any
major  deliberate  risks  of  escalation  that  would  involve  a  major  role  for,  or  threat
to,  South  Vietnam.  However,  escalation  arising  from  and  directed  against  US
action  would  tend  to  lift  GVN  morale  at  least  temporarily.

4.  The  Communist  side  will  probably  avoid  provocative  action  against  the  US,
and  it  is  uncertain  how  much  they  will  step  up  VC  activity.  They  do  need  to  be
shown  that  we  and  the  GVN  are  not  simply  sitting  back  after  the  Gulf  of  Tonkm.


562 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill


Courses  of  Action

We  recommend  in  any  event:

1.  US  naval  patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  should  be  resumed  immediately
(about  September  12).  They  should  operate  initially  beyond  the  12-mile
limit  and  be  clearly  dissociated  from  34A  maritime  operations.  The  patrols
would  comprise  2-3  destroyers  and  would  have  air  cover  from  carriers;  the
destroyers  would  have  their  own  ASW  capability.

2.  34A  operations  by  the  GVN  should  be  resumed  immediately  thereafter
(next  week).  The  maritime  operations  are  by  far  the  most  important.  North
Vietnam  is  likely  to  publicize  them,  and  at  this  point  we  should  have  the
GVN  ready  to  admit  that  they  are  taking  place  and  to  justify  and  legitimize
them  on  the  basis  of  the  facts  on  VC  infiltration  by  sea.  34A  air  drop  and
leaflet  operations  should  also  be  resumed  but  are  secondary  in  importance.
We  should  not  consider  air  strikes  under  34A  for  the  present.

3.  Limited  GVN  air  and  ground  operations  into  the  corridor  areas  of
Laos  should  be  undertaken  in  the  near  future,  together  with  Lao  air  strikes
as  soon  as  we  can  get  Souvanna's  permission.  These  operations  will  have  only
limited  effect,  however.

4.  We  should  be  prepared  to  respond  on  a  tit-for-tat  basis  against  the
DRV  in  the  event  of  any  attack  on  US  units  or  any  special  DRV/VC  action
against  SVN.  The  response  for  an  attack  on  US  units  should  be  along  the
lines  of  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  attacks,  against  specific  and  related  targets.  The
response  to  special  action  against  SVN  should  likewise  be  aimed  at  specific
and  comparable  targets.

The  main  further  question  is  the  extent  to  which  we  should  add  elements  to  the
above  actions  that  would  tend  deliberately  to  provoke  a  DRV  reaction,  and  conse-
quent retaliation  by  us.  Examples  of  actions  to  be  considered  would  be  running
US  naval  patrols  increasingly  close  to  the  North  Vietnamese  coast  and/or  as-
sociating them  with  34A  operations.  We  believe  such  deliberately  provocative
elements  should  not  be  added  in  the  immediate  future  while  the  GVN  is  still
struggling  to  its  feet.  By  early  October,  however,  we  may  recommend  such  actions
depending  on  GVN  progress  and  Communist  reaction  in  the  meantime,  especially
to  US  naval  patrols.

The  aim  of  the  above  actions,  external  to  South  Vietnam,  would  be  to  assist
morale  in  SVN  and  show  the  Communists  we  still  mean  business,  while  at  the
same  time  seeking  to  keep  the  risks  low  and  under  our  control  at  each  stage.

Further  actions  within  South  Vietnam  are  not  covered  in  this  memorandum.
We  believe  that  there  are  a  number  of  immediate-impact  actions  we  can  take,
such  as  pay  raises  for  the  police  and  civil  administrators  and  spot  projects  in  the
cities  and  selected  rural  areas.  These  actions  would  be  within  current  policy  and
will  be  refined  for  decision  during  Ambassador  Taylor's  visit.  We  are  also  con-
sidering minor  changes  in  the  US  air  role  within  South  Vietnam,  but  these  would
not  include  decisions  until  November.

W.  P.  Bundy/bmm


Documents  563


[Document  192]

Amembassy  SAIGON  [number  missing]
Amembassy  VIENTIANE  229
Amembassy  BANGKOK  357
EXDIS


Sept.  9,  1964


Joint  State/Defense  Message

Refs:  Vientiane  296  and  305  to  Bangkok

Saigon  67  to  Vientiane,  repeated  Dept  778

Meeting  today  approved  in  principle  early  initiation  air  and  limited  ground
operations  in  Laos  corridor  as  soon  as  politically  and  militarily  feasible.  There-
fore believe  meeting  this  week  as  proposed  by  Saigon  would  be  useful  way  to
clarify  scope  and  timing  possible  operations.  Following  questions  appear  crucial:

1.  Air  operations

a.  Best  targeting  division  as  between  GVN  and  RLAF,  and  what  targets
would  be  recommended  for  US  suppressive  strikes.

b.  Latest  reading  political  acceptability  GVN  strikes  and  US  suppressive
strikes  and  whether  we  should  inform  Souvanna  before  undertaking,  or  go
ahead  without  informing  him.  Related  question  is  whether  to  publicize.

2.  Ground  operations

a.  Review  of  latest  plans  and  possible  timing  of  action  especially  for
limited  bridgehead  along  lines  indicated  Saigon  485.

b.  Requirement  for  US  advisors  and  support.  These  not  covered  by  to-
day's decisions  and  might  requii^e  another  review  when  plans  developed.

c.  Same  political  questions  as  to  Souvanna  and  publicity.

3.  In  light  of  answers  to  above  what  should  be  GVN,  RlXi,  and  US  public
stance  to  operations?

Believe  it  would  be  desirable  for  Bangkok  be  represented  at  meeting,  in  view
possible  Thai  involvement  in  some  operations.
Ambassador  Taylor  concurs.


[Document  193]

CM-1 24-64

9  September  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Subject:  Courses  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam

L  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  considered  the  draft  paper  prepared  by  As-
sistant Secretary  William  Bundy,  subject  as  above,  and  have  expressed  the  views
set  forth  in  subsequent  paragraphs.

2.  De  Soto  patrols— These  patrols  should  be  resumed  shortly  after  the  return
(two  to  three  days)  of  Ambassador  Taylor  to  Saigon.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


564 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

believe  that  the  first  De  Soto  patrol  should  complete  its  operation  and  clear  the
Gulf  of  Tonkin  before  MAROPS  are  resumed.  Rules  of  engagement,  attached
hereto,  should  be  consonant  with  those  earlier  established  to  deal  with  hostile
acts  by  DRV  military  forces.

3.  MAROPS — Marine  operations  should  be  resumed  as  set  forth  above.

a.  The  Chief  of  Staff  Army,  the  Chief  of  Naval  Operations,  the  Chief  of
Staff  Air  Force,  and  the  Commandant  Marine  Corps  consider  that  MAROPS
should  not  be  made  overt  (legitimized)  until  these  operations  and  De  Soto  patrol
operations  become  so  intertwined  that  they  can  be  associated,  or  until  the  US  is
prepared  openly  to  support  MAROPS  militarily.

b.  The  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  does  not  agree  with  a  above.
He  considers  that  failure  to  legitimize  MAROPS  until  the  circumstances  postu-
lated above  are  realized  could  cause  us  to  limit  the  scope  and  thereby  the  effec-
tiveness of  MAROPS  and  could  inhibit  the  United  States  as  to  the  nature  and
extent  of  our  response  to  hostile  attack  on  US  forces  on  or  over  the  high  seas.
In  making  this  judgment,  the  Chairman  considers  that  the  fact  the  GVN  is  con-
ducting maritime  operations  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  must  not  inhibit  the  mounting
of  De  Soto  patrols  in  those  waters.

4.  Air  and  ground  operations  in  Laos — The  JCS  consider  that  the  proposed
actions  should  be  somewhat  expanded  as  follows:  GVN  air  and  ground  operations
should  be  undertaken  in  the  near  future  against  the  VC  LOC  in  the  Laotian
corridor  to  include  attacks  against  staging  bases  and  infiltration  routes.  US  armed
aerial  reconnaissance  flights  should  be  used  to  supplement  the  foregoing  actions.
We  should  attempt  to  gain  Thai  participation  in  ground  action  in  this  area.

5.  Response  to  attack — The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  that  the  term  "tit  for
tat"  could  be  interpreted  to  limit  too  narrowly  our  response  to  an  attack  on  US
units  or  any  specific  DRV  VC  action  against  SVN.  This  action  should  be  re-
phrased to  state,  "We  should  be  prepared  to  respond  as  appropriate  against  the
DRV  in  the  event  of  any  attack  on  US  units  or  any  special  DRV/VC  action
against  SVN."

6.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  agree  that  the  present  in-country  pacification  plan,
including  the  foregoing  actions,  is  not  enough  in  itself  to  maintain  national  morale
or  to  offer  reasonable  hope  of  eventual  success.  Military  action  by  GVN  and  US
forces  against  the  DRV  will  be  required.

7.  The  Chief  of  Staff  Air  Force  and  Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps  believe
that  time  is  against  us  and  military  action  against  the  DRV  should  be  taken  now.
They  concur  that  the  American  public  should  support  any  action  taken  by  the
United  States  Government  against  the  DRV.  They  consider  that,  linked  to  the
next  significant  incident,  we  should  comence  a  retaliatory  GVN  and  US  air  strike
program  against  the  DRV  in  accordance  with  the  94  target  plan.  In  this  regard,
they  consider  that  a  battalion-size  VC  attack  on  South  Vietnam  should  be  con-
strued as  "significant."

8.  The  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  the  Chief  of  Staff,  Army,  and
Chief  of  Naval  Operations  consider  that,  based  upon  Ambassador  Taylor's  recom-
mendations, we  should  not  purposely  embark  upon  a  program  to  create  an  inci-
dent immediately  but  that,  as  indicated  above,  we  must  respond  appropriately
against  the  DRV  in  the  event  of  an  attack  on  US  units.

Attachment :

Rules  of  Engagement,

De  Soto  Patrol  Earic  G.  Wheeler

Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


Documents  565


[Document  194]

JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF

9  September  1964

Rules  of  Engagement,  De  Soto  Patrol

The  following  rules  of  engagement  are  recomended  for  De  Soto  patrols  in  the
Gulf  of  Tonkin :

a.  In  the  event  of  hostile  attack,  the  patrol  ships  and  aircraft  are  directed  to
fire  upon  the  hostile  attacker  with  the  objective  of  insuring  destruction.  Ships  are
authorized  to  pursue  the  enemy  to  the  recognized  three  mile  territorial  limit.  Air-
craft are  authorized  hot  pursuit  inside  territorial  waters  (3  miles)  against  surface
vessels  and  into  hostile  airspace  (includes  DRV,  Hainan  Island  and  Mainland
China)  against  attacking  aircraft  when  necessary  to  achieve  destruction  of  identi-
fied attacking  forces.

b.  Ships  and  aircraft  will  confine  their  actions  to  the  attacking  ships  and  or
aircraft.


[Document  195]

September  10,  1964

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  314

TO:  The  Secretary  of  State

The  Secretary  of  Defense

The  President  has  now  reviewed  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  with  Ambassador
Taylor  and  with  other  advisers  and  has  approved  the  following  actions:

1.  U.S.  naval  patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  will  be  resumed  promptly  after
Ambassador  Taylor's  return.  They  will  operate  initially  well  beyond  the  12-mile
hmit  and  be  clearly  dissociated  from  34A  maritime  operations.  The  patrols  will
comprise  two  to  three  destroyers  and  would  have  air  cover  from  carriers;  the
destroyers  will  have  their  own  ASW  capability.

2.  34A  operations  by  the  GVN  will  be  resumed  after  completion  ot  a  first
De  Soto  patrol.  The  maritime  operations  are  by  far  the  most  important.  North
Vietnam  has  already  publicized  them,  and  is  likely  to  publicize  them  even  more,
and  at  this  point  we  should  have  the  GVN  ready  to  admit  that  they  arc  taking
place  and  to  justify  and  legitimize  them  on  the  basis  of  the  facts  of  VC  infiltration
by  sea.  34A  air  drop  and  leaflet  operations  should  also  be  resumed  but  arc  second-
ary in  importance.  [We  should  not  consider  air  strikes  under  34 A  lor  the  present.)

3.  We  should  promptly  discuss  with  the  Government  of  Laos  plans  for  limited
GVN  air  and  ground  operations  into  the  corridor  areas  of  Laos,  together  with
Lao  air  strikes  and  possible  use  of  U.S.  armed  aerial  reconnaissance.  On  the  basis
of  these  discussions  a  decision  on  action  will  be  taken,  but  it  should  be  recognized
that  these  operations  will  in  any  case  have  only  limited  cITcct.

4.  We  should  be  prepared  to  respond  as  appropriate  against  the  DRV  in  the
event  of  any  attack  on  US  units  or  any  special  DRV  VC  action  against  SVN.

5.  The  results  of  these  decisions  will  be  kept  under  constant  review,  and  recom-
mendations for  changes  or  modifications  or  additions  will  be  promptly  considered.


566 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  'Vol  111

6.  The  President  reemphasizes  the  importance  of  economic  and  political  actions
having  immediate  impact  in  South  Vietnam,  such  as  pay  raises  for  civilian  per-
sonnel and  spot  projects  in  the  cities  and  selected  rural  areas.  The  President  em-
phasizes aeain  that  no  activity  of  this  kind  should  be  delayed  in  any  way  by  any
feeling  that  our  resources  for  these  purposes  are  restricted.  We  can  find  the  money
which'^  is  needed  for  all  worthwhile  projects  in  this  field.  He  expects  that  Am-
bassador Tavlor  and  the  countrv  team  will  take  most  prompt  and  energetic  action
in  this  field.

7.  These  decisions  are  governed  by  a  prevailing  judgment  that  the  first  order
of  business  at  present  is  to  take  actions  which  will  help  to  strengthen  the  fabric
of  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam;  to  the  extent  that  the  situation  permits,
such  action  should  precede  larger  decisions.  If  such  larger  decisions  are  required
at  any  time  bv  a  change  in  the  situation,  they  will  be  taken.

McGeorge  Bundy


[Document  196]

ACTION  PRIORITY  SECSTATE  913

SEPTEMBER  19.  5  PM.  FROM  AMEMBASSY  SAIGON,
SIGNED  TAYLOR.

STATE  PASS  DOD  AND  CINCPAC

SECTION  ONE  OF  TWO

EXDIS

DEPTEL  622.

Following  is  a  summar\\  coordinated  with  Vientiane  and  Bangkok,  of  the  con-
clusions of  the  meeting  of  the  three  posts  held  at  Saigon  September  1 1  to  review
air  and  limited  ground  operations  of  the  Lao  corridor:

1.  Air  operations  in  Corridor.  This  involves  attack  of  22  targets  for  which  folders
available  at  Vientiane  and  Saigon.  If  objective  is  primarily  military,  i.e.,  to  inflict
maximum  damage  to  targets,  to  prevent  \?<  PL  dispersal  and  protective  meas-
ures, and  impede  rapid  VN  PL  riposte,  it  was  agreed  that  a  series  of  sharp,  heavy
attacks  must  be  made  in  a  relatively  short  time  span,  which  would  involve  sub-
stantial US  and  or  VNAF  FARMGATE  attacks.  If  objective  primarily  psycho-
logical, military  disadvantages  of  attacks  over  longer  time  frame  would  be  ac-
ceptable and  chief  reliance  could  be  placed  on  RLAF  T-28s  with  some  YANKEE
TEAM  strikes  against  harder  targets,  e.g.,  five  bridges.  Established  sortie  require-
ments for  this  second  option  188  T  28  sorties  and  80  USAF  sorties.  Time  re-
quired 12  days.  Vientiane  representatives  believe  Souvanna  would  probably  go
along  with  second  option  but  would  probably  wish  to  have  such  attacks  spread
out  over  considerable  period  of  time.  Also  felt  Souvanna  would  prefer  VNAF
not  conduct  air  strikes  in  corridor.  It  was  general  consensus  that  best  division  of
targeting  for  immediate  future  would  be  RLAF  YANKEE  TEAM  mix.
Vientiane  is  very  reluctant  to  see  VNAF  participation  such  strikes  and  would
hope  that  by  keeping  GVN  informed  of  actions  being  taken  bv  RLAF  and  US  in
corridor,  psychological  needs  of  GVN  could  reasonably  be  met.  Saigon  will  seek
to  do  this,  but  if  there  are  compelling  reasons  for  covert  VNAF  ^participation
Vientiane  would  be  given  prior  info  on  necessity,  timing,  and  place  of  such  strikes.
Alternatively,  it  was  agreed  that,  if  possible,  joint  Lao,  Thai,  RVN,  and  US


Documents  567


participation  in  a  common  effort  against  a  common  enemy  would  be  desirable
but,  recognizing  that,  even  if  possible,  arrangements  for  such  an  effort  would  take
some  time  to  achieve.  If  such  negotiations  are  conducted,  however,  RLAF/
YANKEE  TEAM  strikes  should  not  be  precluded.  Vientiane  has  since  stated  it
does  not  consider  that  it  would  be  desirable  to  seek  to  formalize  such  four  coun-
try participation  in  corridor  operations  as  to  do  so  would  raise  question  of  degree
of  Souvanna  Phouma's  knowledge  and  involvement  which  Vientiane  feels  would
jeopardize  success  of  operations.
2.  Ground  operations.

A.  Although  it  was  agreed  that  northern  Route  9  area  offered  most  profitable
targets,  conference  proceeded  on  assumption  that  Vientiane  would  find  operations
astride  Route  9  politically  unacceptable  at  this  time.  However,  Vientiane's  448
to  Dept.  dispatched  after  return  of  conferees,  now  indicates  that  "shallow
penetration  raids  (20  kilometers).  ...  In  Rte  9  area  .  .  .  bv  company-sized
units"  would  be  acceptable  and  would  not  require  clearance  bv  the  RLG.

B.  Conference  also  agreed  that  central  and  southern  areas  offered  targets  and
terrain  consistent  with  capabilities  of  current  assets.

C.  Saigon  concept  is  that  operations  astride  Rte  9  would  be  initiated  by  8-man
intelligence  and  reconnaissance  teams  infiltrated  overland  or  by  air.  Exploitation
of  targets  developed  bv  these  teams  would  be  bv  airborne  ranger  companies  (80-
100  men),  committed  by  parachute,  helicopter  or  overland.  Operations  in  order
two  areas  would  be  conducted  by  reconnaissance  combat  patrols  of  up  to  com-
panv  size.  In  southernmost  area  operations  would  be  characterized  by  limited  but
ever  expanding  overland  ground  probes:  in  central  area  combination  overland
and  air  launch  methods  probablv  required.  In  each  area  operations  would  be
limited  to  20  kilometers  penetration  not  to  exceed  two  companies  at  any  one
time.  In  addition  airborne  ranger  companies,  assets  include  CIDG  strike  compa-
nies and  AR\^^  rangers.

D.  Air  supplv  for  these  operations  can  in  normal  foreseeable  circumstances  be

handled  exclusivelv  within  VNAF  assets.

This  would  include  not  rpt  not  onlv  air  drop  and  air  exfiltration  requirements
but  also  air  strike  support  and  SAR  operations  in  the  event  of  emergency.  FARM-
GATE  and  or  overt  US  support  would  be  called  upon  only  in  the  event  of  un-
foreseen contingency  which  would  exceed  available  VNAF  capability.  No  problem
was  foreseen  infuse  of  US  jumpmasters  observers.  Saigon  group  stated  that  under
these  operating  rules,  operations  could  be  initiated  within  fifteen  days  of  decision
to  execute.

E.  It  was  the  view  of  Saigon  group  that  authority  for  US  advisors  to  accompany
units  is  a  prerequisite  to^  successful  operations.  Without  this  US  participation
probability  of  suceess  is  judaed  so  low  that  the  advisability  of  conducting  cross
border  operations  would  be  questionable.  Vientiane  representatives  were  strongly
opposed  to  presence  US  advisors  because  of  difficulty  with  current  SAR  opera-
tions in  Laos  and  political  importance  of  US  maintaining  credible  stance  of
adhering  to  provisions  Geneva  Accords.

F.  Embassy  Vientiane  had  earlier  indicated  that  they  would  insist  on  advanced
clearance  of  cross  border  operations.  All  representatives  agreed  that  this  require-
ment would  be  met  bv  VIENTIANE  having  opportunity  to  comment  on  all  plans
submitted  to  Washington  for  approval.  Once  approval  to  execute  is  received,
Vientiane  would  be  kept  informed  of  day-to-day  operations  as  information  ad-
dressed on  operational  traffic  between  Saigon  Washington  CINCPAC.

[The  remainder  of  this  document  was  available  only  with  the  left-hand  portion
missing,  as  follows.]


568 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III


stance.  It  was  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  group

ould  be  preferable  to  have  no  pubHcity  with  regards

nal  details,  and  that  no  comment  should  be  made  in

questions  or  accusations  other  than  our  unawareness

ch  matters.  Additionally,  it  was  agreed  that  Souvanna

t  be  informed  of  any  of  these  GVN/US  actions.  Use

ould,  of  course,  have  to  be  cleared  by  him.

mary,  recommend  we  proceed  as  follows:

Team  escort  strike  hard  targets  (5  bridges),  RLAF

of  22-target  list.  Accordingly,  VIENTIANE  should  be

d  make  approach  to  RLG  on  initiation  T-28  strikes

H  2,  Vientiane's  448  to  department).

ize  ground  operations  in  all  three  areas,  with  timing

of  employment  of  available  assets  as  determined

te  by  COMUSMAC  and  CINCRVNAF,  subject  to  provision

(19)  relative  depth  of  penetration  and  size  of

be  committed;  para  2(D)  relative  air  support;

2(F)  relative  coordination  with  Vientiane.

tions,  ground  and  air,  to  be  initiated  as  rapidly

ionally  feasible.

licity  and  no  public  acknowledgement  of  any  operational
ground  or  air.  .

er  to  give  some  four  nation  "flavor"  to  operations,
Bangkok  to  approach  TG  for  authority  to  use  KORAT
or  some  of  US  aircraft  participating  in  foregoing
am  operations.

t  earliest  Washington  decision  as  to  use  of  US  advisors,
ng  Saigon's  serious  reservations  as  to  changes  of
if  their  suse  is  denied  and  Vientiane's  concern  over
political  impact  of  capture  by  PL/VM  of  US  military
in  ALAOS.

Bangkok  and  Vientiane.  Foregoing  has  been  modified
ginal  draft  sent  you  in  light  your  comments  and:
's  448  to  Dept.


[Document  197]

FMCINCPAC  21  Sept  64

TO  RUEKDA/JCS

DESOTO  Patrol  OPS

A.  COMUSMACV  MAC  5147

1.  Believe  it  urgent  that  we  operate  another  DESOTO  patrol  in  the  immediate
future  and  certainly  within  a  month.  Failure  to  do  so  will,  in  my  opinion,
materially  increases  the  likelihood  of  enemy  reaction  to  operations  in  the  Gulf  of
Tonkin  later  on.  The  DRV  must  not  be  given  any  reason  to  believe  that  the  U.S.
considers  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  too  hot  for  comfort.  Much  has  been  made  both
publicly  and  in  our  own  government's  planning  of  our  determination  to  get
the  message  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping  that  continuation  of  their  present  course  in
sea  will  cost  them  heavily.  But  to  discontinue  the  DESOTO  patrols  now  would
convey  the  opposite  message.


Documents  569


2.  Beyond  that  there  are  other  substantial  military  advantages  which  can
accrue  to  the  U.S.  and  to  the  RVN  by  continuation  of  destroyer  patrols  in  the
Gulf  of  Tonkin.  These  are:

A.  Determine  DRV  coastal  defense  posture  including  their  capability  to  de-
tect, track  and  intercept  hostile  targets.  Of  special  significance  are  types/numbers
of  forces  committed  in  reaction  to  DESOTO  ships'  presence  and  that  point  at
which  DRV  forces  attempt  to  harass  aggressively  or  attack.

B.  Identify  visually  and  photograph  naval  units.

C.  Collect  sigint,  including  attempts  at  deception  and  jamming.

D.  Determine  possible  relocation/repositioning  of  enemy  naval  forces.

E.  Determine  any  revision  to  enemy  operational  procedures  recent  inci-
dents.

F.  Conduct  area  familiarization  under  QUASI-COMBAT  conditions  in  a
region  of  possible  future  naval  combat  operations.  All  personnel  involved  in
the  patrol  are  motivated  to  peak  performance.  The  potentially  hostile  environ-
ment demands  positive  and  realistic  reaction  to  any  indicated  threat.

G.  Divert  attention  of  the  DRV  naval  forces  from  an  area  where  34a  mari-
time operations  may  be  in  progress.

H.  Determine  movements  of  DJV  junk  forces  possibly  employed  for  infil-
tration along  the  RVN  coastline.

T.  Deny  the  free,  unobserved  use  of  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  to  the  DJV  and
CHICOM  naval  forces.

J.  Determine  the  attitude  of  DRV  toward  US  Navy  maritime  patrols  by
measuring  their  response  to  the  patrol,  i.e.  establish  the  degree  and  success  of  de-
livering the  "message  to  Hanoi."

3.  There  are  still  other  justifications  for  the  continuance  of  these  patrols
as  COMUSMACV  points  out  so  clearly  in  REF  A.


[Document  198]

FM: CINCPAC  25  Date:  25  September  1964

TO: ICS  EXCLUSIVE  FOR  WHEELER

1.  FYI,  I  have  sent  the  following  message  to  my  component  commanders:
"For  Gen.  Waters,  Adm.  Moorer,  Gen.  Harris  from  Sharp

"1.  The  political  situation  in  RVN  is  now  so  unstable  as  to  raise  some  serious
questions  about  our  future  courses  of  action.  For  example,  we  may  find  our-
selves suddenly  faced  with  an  unfriendly  government  or  no  government  at  all.  U.S.
personnel  in  Vietnam,  both  dependent  and  military,  may  find  themselves  isolated
and  in  danger.  Saigon  itself  may  become  untenable.

"2.  The  above  are  illustrative  contingencies  which  may  develop  in  which  event
CINCPAC  will  be  called  on  both  for  recommendations  and  for  action.  Con-
ceivably the  decision  could  be  one  of  disengagement.  In  this  case  the  problem
would  be  how  to  go  about  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  salvage  the  maximum  in  terms
of  safety  of  U.S.  lives,  recoupment  of  material  and  national  pride,
"3.  On  the  other  hand  the  decision  might  be  to  remain  in  Vietnam  in  order  to
maintain  a  foothold  on  the  mainland.  This  latter  course  would  once  again  raise  the
question  of  a  U.S.  base  in  Vietnam  and  what  it  would  take  to  man  and  hold  it.
"4.  Though  we  have  not  yet  reached  a  point  where  these  decisions  might  be  made,
events  are  moving  rapidly  and  it  is  essential  that  we  consider  as  a  matter  of


570 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

urgency  our  future  in  RVN  in  the  light  of  all  possible  contingencies,  bearing  in
mind  that  any  course  of  action  we  follow  will  have  a  direct  and  possibly  final
bearing  on  the  U.S.  role  in  Southeast  Asia.

"5.  Request  your  views  on  specific  actions  which  we  might  take  in  event  of:

A.  A  national  decision  to  disengage  in  RVN.

B.  A  national  decision  to  maintain  a  U.S.  foothold  in  the  country.

C.  A  national  decision  to  take  a  stronger  hold  on  the  SVN  government
together  with  increased  U.S.  participation  in  SVN  and  offensive  actions  against
NVN.

"6.  Any  other  thoughts  you  might  have  on  other  actions  which  might  be  taken."


[Document  199]

FROM:  JCS  28  Sept  64

TO:  CINCPAC
JCS  9117

Subj : Definitive  Rules  of  Engagement  Applying  to  Laos

Refs:  a.  JCS  7947,  DTG  151318Z  Aug;  b.  Vientiane  380  to  State  29  Aug
(NOTAL) ;  and  c. CINCPAC  to  JCS,  DTG  041  lOOZ  Aug

1.  Ref  a  remains  in  effect.  This  message  supplements  and  provides  specific
guidance  for  friendly  forces  and  installations — (See  subpara  2c,  ref  a.)

2.  Rules  of  Engagement  for  US  air  defense  forces  operating  in  Southeast  Asia,
as  agreed  to  by  Royal  Laos  Government  (RLG),  are:

a.  US  air  defense  forces  are  authorized  to  engage  and  destroy  hostile  air-
craft in  Laos.  Hot  pursuit  may  be  conducted  as  necessary  and  feasible  over
Thailand  and  South  Vietnam.

b.  No  pursuit  is  authorized  at  this  time  into  North  Vietnam  or  Cambodia  ex-
cept when  actually  engaged  in  air  combat.  No  pursuit  is  authorized  into  Com-
munist China.

c.  Unless  specifically  directed  otherwise,  US  air  defense  forces  are  not
authorized  to  attack  other  hostile  forces  or  installations  unless  attacked  first,  and
then  only  to  extent  necessary  for  self-defense.

3.  Definitions

a.  Hostile  aircraft — A  hostile  aircraft  is  defined  as  one  which  is:

(1)  Visually  identified,  or  designated  by  the  US  Director  of  a  Joint
Operations  Center  or  his  authorized  US  representatives,  as  a  communist  bloc
or  Cambodian  aircraft  overflying  Laos  territory,  and

(2)  Observed  in  one  of  the  following  acts:

(a)  Attacking  US  or  friendly  ground  forces  or  installations;

(b)  Attacking  US  or  friendly  aircraft  (including  Air  America  or  Bird
and  Son  aircraft) ;

(c)  Laying  mines  within  friendly  territorial  waters;

(d)  Attacking  US  or  friendly  vessels;

(e)  Releasing  parachutes  or  gliders  over  friendly  sovereign  territory
when  obviously  not  in  distress;  or

(f)  Acting  or  behaving  in  a  manner  which  indicates  within  reasonable
certainty  that  air  attack  on  US  or  friendly  forces,  installations,  and  aircraft  (in-
cluding Air  America  and  Bird  and  Son  aircraft)  is  intended.


Documents 57 1


4.  These  rules  are  not  intended,  in  any  manner,  to  infringe  upon  the  tra-
ditional responsibility  of  a  military  commander  to  defend  against  unprovoked
armed  attack.  In  the  event  of  such  attack,  the  commander  concerned  will  take
immediate,  aggressive  action  against  the  attacking  force.

5.  Declaration  of  aircraft  as  hostile  will  be  tempered  with  judgement  and  dis-
cretion. There  may  be  cases  where  the  destruction  of  Cambodian  or  communist
bloc  forces  would  be  contrary  to  US  and  allied  interests.  Examples  of  such  cases
are:  due  to  navigational  error,  civilian  aircraft  which  penetrate  Laos  sovereign  ter-
ritory; communist  aircraft  or  vessels,  manned  by  defectors  attempting  to  land
with  the  intention  of  surrendering  themselves.  All  available  intelligence  should  be
considered  in  determining  action  to  be  taken  in  such  cases.

6.  Info  on  any  action  taken  under  this  authority  will  be  provided  JCS  by  flash
precedence.


[Document  200]

30  September  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  MR.  McNAUGHTON

This  will  confirm  the  procedures  to  be  used  in  connection  with  34A  maritime
operations.

At  the  beginning  of  each  month,  I  will  coordinate  with  Mr.  Bundy  and  Mr.
Thompson  the  proposed  schedule  for  the  forthcoming  month.  This  document  will
then  be  the  agreed  schedule  for  planning  purposes.  Thereafter,  until  further
notice,  each  operation  listed  on  the  above-mentioned  schedule  will  be  approved
in  advance  by  State,  Defense  and  the  White  House.  General  Anthis  will  be  re-
sponsible for  preparing  the  draft  message  and  will  submit  it  to  me  for  initialling.
Thereafter,  you  will  be  responsible  for  coordinating  the  message  with  State  and
the  White  House.  In  this  connection,  you  or  your  designee  will  take  with  him
General  Anthis  or  his  designee  to  answer  any  questions  which  State  or  the  White
House  may  have.  Each  such  message  will  be  initialled  by  Mr.  Thompson  and  Mr.
McGeorge  Bundy  or  their  respective  designees.

Any  changes  in  the  schedule  of  maritime  operations  after  it  has  been  agreed  upon
must  be  approved  by  Mr.  McNamara  or  me  upon  recommendation  of  General
Wheeler.

Cyrus  R.  Vance

cc:  General  Wheeler


[Document  201]

Questions  and  Answers  on  Covert  Activities,  Sept.  1964
Questions  by  John  T.  McNaughton
Answers  by  JCS  and  ISA

1.  What  if  the  DRV  and/or  DRV  air  patrol  boats  attack  our  DeSoto  patrols
in  the  future?

2.  What  if  Chicom  air  is  involved  in  attacks  on  our  DeSoto  Patrols

3.  What  if  DRV  patrol  boats  engage  34 A  Marops  in  hot  pursuit?


572 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

4.  What  if  T-28s  are  attacked  by  North  Vietnam  fighters?

5.  What  if  U.S.  Yankee  Team  strikes  in  Laos  are  engaged  by  DRV  fighters?

6.  What  if  U.S.  low-level  reconnaissance  in  North  Vietnam  is  attacked  by
ground  fire  and/or  fighters?

7.  What  if  Chinese  redeploy  offensive  air  to  bases  within  strike  distance  of
South  Vietnam?

8.  What  if  VC  "spectaculars"  in  South  Vietnam  come  as  direct  response
to  U.S.  strikes  in  the  Panhandle?  Or  U.S.  strikes  in  North  Vietnam?

9.  What  if  North  Vietnam  aircraft  attack  targets  in  South  Vietnam?

10.  What  if  the  Pathet-Lao  reenforced  by  North  Vietnamese  units  seize
vulnerable  targets  such  as  Attopeu  and  Saravane?

11.  What  if  the  VC  launch  mortar  attacks  on  Tan  Son  Nhut  or  Denau  U.S.
Embassy?  Attack  U.S.  hotels,  transportation  facilities?

12.  What  if  the  DRV  steps  up  infiltration  sharply,  including  organized  units?

13.  What  if  there  is  a  large-scale  augmentation  of  North  Vietnam  units  in
Laos?

14.  What  if  in  response  to  U.S.  attacks  against  targets  in  North  Vietnam,  the
Communists  make  major  forces  movements  on  redeployments?

15.  What  if  Chinese  forces  enter  North  Vietnam  in  strength?

16.  What  if  the  Chicoms  along  with  the  DRV  move  into  Laos  in  strength?

17.  What  if  Chinese  "volunteers"  are  employed  in  Laos?

18.  What  if  North  Vietnam  and/or  Chinese  air  is  employed  in  Laos?

19.  What  if  the  DRV  responds  to  attacks  on  North  Vietnam  by  full  scale
invasion  of  South  Vietnam  and  Laos?  And,  then  Laos  alone?  What  if  Chinese
forces  join  this  invasion?

20.  What  if  the  Chinese  Communists  launch  attacks  against  Burma,  Thailand?

21.  What  if  the  GVN  collapses  in  the  midst  of  the  campaign  against  the
North?


[JCS]  Answers

1.  Severe  attacks  might  compel  temporary  withdrawal  of  DeSoto  patrols  from
the  gulf.  U.  S.  would  respond  by  attacking  bases  from  which  the  attacks  were
mounted  and  associated  targets.

2.  Greater  likelihood  of  damage.  Hit  Chinese  bases  from  which  attack  was
launched  (Hainan).

3.  In  hot  pursuit,  employ  all  available  air  and  naval  to  repulse  the  attack.
Continue  pursuit  until  attackers  are  destroyed.

4.  Provide  U.  S.  air  caps  for  all  T-28s  strength.  Include  provisions  for  hot
pursuit.

5.  Such  DRV  attacks  are  likely  to  be  of  nuisance  value  only.  U.  S.  assault
fighters  engage  DRV  fighters  and  employ  hot  pursuit  as  necessary.  If  attacks
persist,  hit  bases  from  which  DRV  fighters  came.

6.  Suppressive  fire  and  same  as  5  above.  North  Vietnam  attacks  are  not  likely
to  be  effective.

7.  Alert  U.  S.  forces  to  possible  Chinese  air  attack.  Have  to  press  preparations
for  defense  against  Chinese  air  attack  in  South  Vietnam  to  include  augmentation
of  air  defense  radar,  fighters  and  Hawks.

8.  Materially  increase  severity  of  attacks  in  North  Vietnam.  Continue  attacks
in  the  Panhandle  and  attack  certain  targets  in  North  Vietnam  associated  with
infiltration.

9.  Mount  large  scale  South  Vietnam  and  U.  S.  air  attacks  on  all  air  facilities


Documents  573


in  North  Vietnam,  with  the  intention  of  destroying  North  Vietnam  air  capability.
North  Vietnam  air  attacks  are  not  Hkely  to  be  mihtarily  effective,  but  could  have
great  psychological  impact.

10.  Respond  by  large-scale  interdiction  of  Pathet-Lao  and  North  Vietnamese
supply  routes  employing  T-28s  and  U.  S.  and  South  Vietnamese  fighter  bomber
aircraft.  Attempt  to  get  Laotians  to  recapture  towns  when  military  situation
permits.

11.  Mount  attacks  against  attacked  targets  on  the  94  target  list,  and  consider
stepping  up  scale  of  U.  S.  activities  in  Laos.  Evacuate  remaining  U.  S.  depend-
ents, if  any.  Such  attacks  could  be  highly  effective  and  could  cause  substantial
loyal  deterioration.  Release  U.S.  air  to  support  South  Vietnamese  anti-guerilla
action.  If  high  ranking  U.  S.  personnel  are  associated,  seek  evidence  of  a  North
Vietnamese  involvement  and  if  established,  direct  reprisals  against  North  Vietnam
command  and  control  facilities.

12.  Mount  heavy  air  strikes  against  infiltrated  associated  targets  in  Panhandle
and  South  Vietnam.

13.  Hit  infiltration  associated  targets  in  the  Panhandle  and  DRV  LOC  in
North  Vietnam.

14.  Increase  intelligence  gathering  activities,  including  high  and  low-level
reconnaissance  in  North  Vietnam  and  China.  U.  S.  would  be  compelled  to  make
counter-deployments  in  expectation  of  major  Communist  movements.

15.  Commit  U.  S.  ground  forces  to  develop  positions  on  border  of  North  and
South  Vietnam.  Increase  reconnaissance  activities  to  include  low  level.

16.  If  unopposed,  Chinese  forces  could  move  into  the  Mekong  in  a  relatively
short  period  of  time.  Include  initial  air  interdiction.

[ISA]  ANSWERS

1.  Patrol  boats  unlikely  to  cause  damage;  daytime  air  attack  more  likely  to  be
damaging.  US  would  respond  by  attacking  bases  from  which  the  attacks  were
mounted  and  associated  targets;  on  scale  related  to  extent  of  damage.

2.  Greater  likelihood  of  damage.  Hit  Chinese  bases  from  which  attack  was
launched  e.g.  (Hainan).

3.  Commit  SVN  air  and  naval  forces  plus  FARMGATE  to  repulse  the  attack
and  destroy  attackers.

4.  Provide  US  cap  for  all  T-28  strikes.  Include  provisions  for  hot  pursuit.

5.  Such  DRV  attacks  are  likely  to  be  of  nuisance  value  only.  US  assault
fighters  engage  DRV  fighters  and  employ  hot  pursuit  as  necessary.  If  attacks
persist,  hit  bases  from  which  DRV  fighters  launched.

6.  Suppressive  fire  and  same  as  5  above.  North  Vietnam  attacks  are  not  likely
to  be  effective.

7.  Alert  US  forces  to  possible  Chinese  air  attack.  Press  preparations  for
defense  against  Chinese  air  attack  in  South  Vietnam  to  include  augmentation  of
air  defense  radar,  fighters  and  Hawks.

8.  Continue  attacks  in  the  Panhandle  and  attack  certain  targets  in  southern
North  Vietnam  associated  with  infiltration.

9.  Mount  large  scale  South  Vietnam  and  US  air  attacks  on  all  air  facilities  in
North  Vietnam,  with  the  intention  of  destroying  North  Vietnam  air  capability.
North  Vietnam  air  attacks  are  not  likely  to  be  militarily  effective,  but  could  have
great  psychological  impact.

10.  Respond  by  large  scale  interdiction  of  Pathet-Lao  and  North  Vietnamese
supply  routes  employing  T-28s  and  US  and  South  Vietnamese  fighter  bomber


574 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

aircraft.  Attempt  to  get  Laotians  to  recapture  towns  when  military  situation
permits.

11.  Such  attacks  could  be  highly  effective  and  could  cause  substantial  deteri-
oration of  morale.  Mount  attacks  against  selected  targets  on  the  94  target  list.
Release  US  air  to  support  South  Vietnamese  anti-guerilla  action.  If  high  rank-
ing US  personnel  are  assassinated,  seek  evidence  of  a  North  Vietnamese  involve-
ment and  if  established,  direct  reprisals  against  North  Vietnam  command  and
control  facilities.

12.  Mount  heavy  air  strikes  against  infiltration — associated  targets  in  Pan-
handle and  South  Vietnam.

13.  Hit  infiltration  associated  targets  in  the  Panhandle  and  DRV  LOC  in
North  Vietnam.

14.  Increase  intelligence  gathering  activities,  including  high  and  low-level
reconnaissance  in  North  Vietnam  and  China.  Make  counter-deployments  in  ex-
pectation of  major  Communist  movements.

15.  Commit  US  ground  forces  to  defensive  positions  on  border  of  North  and
South  Vietnam.  Increase  reconnaissance  activities  to  include  low  level  recon.

16.  If  unopposed,  Chinese  forces  could  move  into  the  Mekong  in  a  relatively
short  period  of  time.  Initiate  air  interdiction.

LESSER  COMMUNIST  RESPONSES
TO  US  MILITARY  PRESSURES

A.  DRV/Chicom  Attacks  on  DeSoto  Patrols
US/GVN  Responses.

a.  Conduct  one  of  4  retaliatory  punitive  reprisal  attack  options  against  DRV
targets  from  94  target  list  (CINCPAC  FRAG  Order  3).  Attack  options  repre-
sent graduated  response  according  to  level  of  damage  to  DeSoto.  lA  and  IB  with
lowest  order  of  response  the  options  are —

IA.  Phouc  Yen  Airfield

PT  port  facilities  and  associated  POL

IB.  Key  army  barracks:  supply  and  ammo  depots,  and  major  naval  base
and  associated  port  facility.

2 A.  Effected  in  2  strike  days  and  includes  all  targets  in  lA  plus.  Secondary
airfields,  naval  base  and  port  facilities.

2B.  Effected  in  2  days  and  includes  all  targets  in  lA  plus.  Secondary  air-
fields and  3  preselected  highway  bridges.

b.  Pursue  surface  and  air  attackers  in  accordance  with  current  rules  of  engage-
ment for  DeSoto,  to  be  announced.

B.  Pursue  34A  MAROPS  craft  south  of  17th  Parallel.

In  response,  SVN  air  and  naval  forces  to  include  Farmgate  attack  to  repulse
and  destroy  attackers  (ICS  msg  9109).

C.  NVN  air  attacks  X-Border  air  and/or  YT  aircraft  in  Laos.
In  response,  the  US

1.  Provides  US  CAP  for  all  T-28  strikes  (currently  CAP  is  as  requested  by
RLAF).

2.  Hot  pursuit  (current  rules  of  engagement  for  SEA  and  for  Laos)

3.  If  attacks  persist,  strike  DRV  home  and  staging  bases  from  94  target  list
with  increasing  severity  with  the  objective  of  destroying  them  and  with  them  the
DRV  capabilities  to  continue  air  support  of  the  Viet  Cong  and  Pathet  Lao.  (Part
VI,  NSC  working  paper) .


Documents  575


D.  Introduce  NVN  air  into  Laos  in  attack  of  ground  targets.
The  US  response  is  the  same  as  in  paragraphs  C2  and  3,  above.

E.  Introduce  organized  DRV  units  into  Laos  reinforcing  P  L  and  seizing  key
objectives  (Saravane,  Attopeu).  This  could  include  covert  or  volunteer  Chi-

Com  support  in  Laos.
The  US  GVN  forces:

1.  Interdict  DRV  and  Pathet  Lao  LOC  in  Laos  and  NVN  with  US  VNAF;
air  attacks  of  increasing  severity  on  military  and  industrial  targets  selected  from
94  target  list  (JCSM  in  draft  16  Nov) .

2.  Concurrently  with  a  prior  to  initiating  air  strikes  above.  Implement
CINCPAC  OPLAN  99-64.

3.  Reintroduce  a  MA  AG-type  supply  and  training  mission  (SATM)  into  Laos.

4.  Implement  when  required  Phase  II  (Laos)  OPLAN  32-64.

F.  DRV  effect  air  strikes  on  northern  SVN  air  facilities.

Initiate  or  continue  in  coordination  with  GVN  an  air  strike  campaign  against
DRV  bases  and  associated  targets  (OPLAN  37-64  and  94  target  list);  (Section
VI,  para  2,  NSC  paper) .


IDocument  202]

FROM:  CINCPAC  2  Oct  64

TO:  ICS

Use  of  Thai  Based  US  Air  Forces

A.  BANGKOK  2116  TO  STATE,  JUN  10,  2:25  PM  NOTAL

B.  CHJUSMAG  THAILAND  061230Z  AUG  PASEP

C.  CINCPAC  070424Z  AUG  NOTAL

D.  DEPCOMUSMACTHAI  071402Z  AUG  PASEP

E.  AMEMB  BANGKOK  190625Z  SEP  NOTAL

F.  ICS  7947  DTG  1513 18Z  AUG  NOTAL

G.  JCS9117DTG  281438ZSEPNOTAL

1.  Ref  A  advises  that  armed  strikes  by  Thai  based  US  forces  quote  limited
repeat  limited  to  SAR  operations  only  and  on  further  condition  no  public  men-
tion be  made  of  use  of  Thai  bases  unquote.

2.  During  early  August  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident,  F-lOO's  and  F-105's  were
deployed  to  Thailand.  Ref  B  stated  that  country  clearance  did  not  repeat  not
include  clearance  to  launch  sorties  out  of  Thailand  and  in  event  this  needed  addi-
tional coordination  was  required,  Ref  C  requested  Amemb  Bangkok  guidance  on
extent  of  our  latitude  in  the  operational  use  of  US  Thai  based  forces  and  limita-
tions that  may  be  imposed  by  necessity  for  prior  clearance.  In  Ref  D,  DEPCOM-
USMACTHAI quoted  Bangkok  Embtel  157  which  stated  inter  alia,  the  Dawee,
after  considerable  discussion  agreed  remove  any  restrictions  on  launch  of  combat
sorties  out  of  Thailand  by  US  aircraft  on  Thai  bases  in  event  this  becomes  neces-
sary. Need  for  utmost  discretion  in  exercising  this  authority  was  emphasized.
Para  3  of  Ref  D  states,  however,  that  authority  granted  unlimited  repeat  un-
limited— except  by  request  for  lateral  info  at  time  of  launch.

3.  Ref  E  stated  that  present  authority  from  RTG  to  dispatch  US  aircraft  from
Thai  bases  to  strike  points  outside  Thailand  limited  to  armed  escort  for  recce
missions  and  cap  for  SAR.  In  addition,  they  are  available  for  any  defense  of  Thai
airspace.

4.  Planning  is  currently  underway  to  conduct  Yankee  team  operations  in  Laos


576 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


north  of  20  degrees  latitude.  Refs  F  and  G  provide  adequate  rules  of  engagemei
for  US  forces  operating  in  Seasia.  However,  due  to  the  above  conflicting  info,  n(
clear  here  what  latitude  we  have  in  use  of  US  Thai  Based  Forces.  Believe  it  mil
tarily  desirable  to  provide  air  defense  effort  which  would  implement  Ref  G  froi
Thai  bases.  Also  to  provide  escort  for  Yankee  team  missions  in  nothern  Lac
when  they  are  approved  for  implementation.  More  flexible,  effective  and  ec(
nomical  escort  can  be  provided  by  US  aircraft  based  in  Thailand.

5.  Prior  to  finalization  of  concept  of  operations  and  imitation  of  Yankee  teai
missions  in  northern  Laos,  request  clarification  of  current  authorization  re  use  c
US  Thai  Based  Aircraft  for  Yankee  team  escort  SAR,  and  Air  Defense  of  US  an
friendly  forces  in  Laos.


[Document  203]

FROM:  AMEMBASSY  SAIGON  3  Oct  6

EXDIS

For  Secretary  Rusk
Embtel  870  and  Deptel  727.

Mike  Forrestal's  State/RCI  30  raises  an  aspect  of  the  coordination  problei
discussed  in  Embtel  870  and  indicates  belief  that  Emb  Saigon  Saigon  should  b
coordination  center.

I  continue  to  favor  the  procedure  contained  in  Embtel  870  which  has  the  coi
currence  of  Ambassadors  Unger  and  Martin.  In  my  opinion,  the  ad  hoc  methoc
mentioned  in  Deptel  727  are  not  likely  to  suffice  to  handle  the  growing  requin
ments  for  prompt  regional  recommendations  on  politico-military  matters  affec
ing  several  embassies  and  CINCPAC.  I  would  think  it  to  the  interest  of  Stat(
Defense  to  fix  responsibility  for  coordination  in  this  field  and  not  trust  to  th
initiatives  of  the  moment.

If  you  agree,  I  suggest  issuance  of  a  directive  to  embassies  Saigon,  Vientiane,  an
to  CINCPACHO  stablish  in  Saigon  under  Executive  Agency  of  Embassy  Saigo
a  committee  for  coordinating  policy  recommendations  and  military  operationi
matters  arising  from  the  following  activities:  34-A  program  (to  include  its  cc
ordination  with  DeSoto  patrols);  crossborder  operations  (air  and  ground)  fror
SVN  into  Laos;  air  operations  from  SVN  and  Laos  into  NVN;  Lucky  Dragor
Yankee  team;  Blue  Springs;  Hardnose  and  any  other  operations  in  Laos  requii
ing  coordination  with  crossborder  operations.  Such  a  directive  would  indicat
general  approval  of  organization  proposed  in  Embtel  870  and  leave  to  principal
of  committee  to  work  out  the  details.

TAYLOi


[Document  204]

Ref:  Deptel  275  to  Vientiane  and  Vientiane's  6  Oct  6

545,550,  568  and  581

JOINT  STATE-DEFENSE  MESSAGE

EXDIS

You  are  authorized  to  urge  the  RLG  to  begin  air  attacks  against  Viet  Con
infiltration  routes  and  facilities  in  the  Laos  Panhandle  by  RLAF  T-28  aircral


Documents  577


as  soon  as  possible.  Such  strikes  should  be  spread  out  over  a  period  of  several
weeks,  and  targets  should  be  limited  to  these  deemed  suitable  for  attack  by  T-28s
and  listed  Para.  8  Vientiane's  581,  (excluding  Mu  Gia  pass  and  any  target  which
Lao  will  not  hit  without  U.S.  air  cover  or  fire  support)  since  decision  this  matter
not  yet  made.

You  are  further  authorized  to  inform  Lao  that  YANKEE  TEAM  suppressive
fire  strikes  against  certain  difficult  targets  in  Panhandle,  interspersing  with  fur-
ther T-28  strikes,  are  part  of  the  over-all  concept  and  are  to  be  anticipated  later
but  that  such  US  strikes  are  not  repeat  not  authorized  at  this  time.

Report  soonest  proposed  schedule  of  strikes  and,  upon  implementation,  all
actual  commitments  of  RLG  T-28s,  including  targets  attacked,  results  achieved,
and  enemy  opposition.  Also  give  us  any  views  in  addition  to  those  in  Vientiane's
581  as  to  any  targets  which  are  deemed  too  difficult  for  RLG  air  strikes  and  on
which  US  suppressive  strikes  desired.

FYL  Highest  levels  have  not  authorized  YANKEE  TEAM  strikes  at  this  time
against  Route  7  targets.  Since  we  wish  to  avoid  the  impression  that  we  are  taking
first  step  in  escalation,  we  inclined  defer  decision  on  Route  7  strikes  until  we  have
strong  evidence  Hanoi's  preparation  for  new  attack  in  PDJ,  some  of  which  m.ight
come  from  RLAF  operations  over  the  Route.  END  FYL

You  may  inform  RLG,  however,  that  US  will  fly  additional  RECCE  over  Route
7  to  keep  current  on  use  being  made  of  the  Route  by  the  PL  and  to  identify
Route  7  targets  and  air  defenses.  The  subject  of  possible  decision  to  conduct
strikes  on  Route  7  being  given  study  in  Washington.

FYL  Cross  border  ground  operations  not  repeat  not  authorized  at  this  time.
End  FYL

END

RUSK


[Document  205]

Amembassy  SAIGON  783  IMMEDIATE  7  Oct  64

INFO:  Amembassy  BANGKOK  FOR  MARTIN  486
Amembassy  VIENTIANE  FOR  UNGER  306
CINCPAC  FOR  ADMIRAL  SHARP

FOR  THE  AMBASSADOR  FROM  THE  SECRETARY

Ref :  Embtel  1017  and  1032,  Vientiane's  564

EXDIS

Concur  convening  organizing  session  as  suggested  reftels.  We  are  completely
sympathetic  to  need  for  coordinating  politico-military  recommendations  afi'ecting
Vietnam  through  some  regional  arrangement  and  agree  that  this  job  would  best
be  done  by  establishment  group  under  chairmanship  Alexis  Johnson  in  Saigon.

We  have,  however,  two  concerns  here.  The  first  is  that  existence  of  this  group
remain  completely  confidential,  since  we  do  not  wish  give  any  impression  at  this
time  establishment  of  SLA  political  and  military  command  structure  in  Saigon.
In  this  connection  wish  avoid  large  movements  military  or  civilian  personnel  from
CINCPAC  or  other  two  posts.

Our  second  concern  is  that  group  should  restrict  itself  to  acting  as  clearing


578 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

house  for  information  on  operations  mentioned  Saigon's  1017  and  formulation
of  recommendations  to  Washington.  Group  should  not  repeat  not  exercise  ex-
ecutive authority  over  other  posts.

Perhaps  at  your  meeting  you  and  your  colleagues  could  frame  specific  recom-
mendation for  terms  of  reference  and  method  of  operation  which  you  consider
desirable.

END

RUSK


[Document  206]

Action  Priority  Dept.  1063  from  Saigon  Oct  9,  7  PM

EXDIS

DEPTEL  763

Organizing  session  was  held  October  8  and  terms  of  reference  agreed  and  referen-
dum to  Ambassadors  linger  and  Martin.  Agreed  text  will  be  transmitted  Depart-
ment.

Group  also  discussed  all  operations  of  common  interest  mentioned  Saigon's  1017
with  particular  emphasis  on  rules  of  engagement  for  US  aircraft  three  countries
and  SAR  operations,  particularly  problems  of  SAR  for  OPLAN  34A  crews  that
may  be  downed  in  Laos.  Discussion  rules  of  engagement  disclosed  possible  grey
area  with  respect  to  status  of  RTG  clearance  for  Thai-based  US  aircraft  to  take-
off on  air  defense  mission  over  Laos  prior  to  actual  initiation  of  attacks  over  Laos
by  hostile  aircraft.  Bangkok  will  seek  to  clarify.

Very  useful  discussion  of  problem  of  SAR  for  OPLAN  34A  crews  clarified  situa-
tion for  Vientiane  which  will  undertake  definitive  comments  on  Saigon's  1030  to
Dept.  as  basis  for  Washington  decision.

Bangkok  will  also  seek  to  clarify  situation  with  respect  to  Thai  ranger  cadres
for  Hard  Nose  as  discussed  at  previous  Udorn  meeting.

There  was  also  discussion  of  sharpening  existing  coordination  and  responsive-
ness of  all  intelligence  assets  to  Viet  Cong  movements  through  Lao  corridor,
specifically,  a  military  targeting  sub-committee  was  formed  to  extend  and  im-
prove the  target  list  and  reaction  time.

In  view  of  stand  down  on  ground  cross  border  operations  and  good  possibility
that  ARVN  will  be  unable  afford  detachment  any  significant  ground  combat
capability  for  corridor  in  foreseeable  future,  air  strikes  are  sole  remaining  de-
pendable alternative.

Fixed  targets  (the  22  target  list)  will  soon  be  destroyed  if  the  RLAF  performs
as  advertised  and  authorization  received  for  Yankee  Team  strikes.  Thus,  the
group  discussed  at  length  problem  of  acquisition  additional  targets  in  corridor
and  particularly  problem  of  quick  air  reaction  on  targets  of  opportunity  devel-
oped by  ground  observers.  Saigon  and  Vientiane  will  further  examine  their
assets  and  possibilities  in  this  regard.  Bangkok  will  explore  availability  and  possi-
bility of  extending  use  of  Thai  assets  in  this  connection.

There  was  also  unanimous  agreement  that  US  participation  in  air  operations  in
corridor  is  essential  if  such  operations  are  to  have  desired  military  and  psy-
chological impact,  particularly  since  initiative  for  operations  came  from  us.  US
failure  to  participate  could  diminish  US  influence  over  these  operations  (whether


Documents  579


we  wish  to  expand  or  to  limit  them)  and  their  continuation  could  well  be
jeopardized  if  Lao  are  expected  to  do  job  unassisted.  Although  Vientiane  be-
lieves Lao  prepared  to  go  ahead  with  strikes  against  first  twelve  targets  au-
thorized DEPTEL  765  to  Saigon,  their  initial  enthusiasm  may  not  survive  loss
of  a  few  aircraft.

If  so,  if  Lao  do  not  hit  those  four  targets  for  which  US  strikes  [word  illegible]
and  are  discouraged  from  strikes  on  Mu  Gia  Pass,  [words  illegible]  targets  in
the  corridor  will  go  unscathed.  These  omissions  will  grossly  diminish  the  military
benefits  of  these  bombings.  The  group  thus  hoped  that  Washington  would  re-
consider present  ban  on  RLAF  attack  on  Mu  Gia  Pass  and  approve  soonest
Yankee  Team  strike  on  other  targets.

It  was  noted  that  Washington  is  still  considering  the  Lao  recommendations  that
the  US  provide  CAP  over  RLAF  strike  aircraft.  The  present  rules  of  engagement
for  US  aircraft  currently  permit  US  attack  on  Communist  Bloc  aircraft  attacking
Laotian  aircraft  over  Laos.  Provisioning  of  a  CAP  would  hence  be  a  relatively
minor  extension  of  existing  authority.  Since  the  Lao  have  requested  such  CAP,
it  would  have  psychological  value  and  group  recommends  early  Washington
approval.  Vientiane  anticipates  RLAF  would  initiate  operations  October  14.
Affirmative  decision  re  CAP  prior  to  that  date  would  be  most  helpful.
Vientiane  does  not  expect  RLG  will  initiate  any  publicity  on  strikes  but  will
probably  acknowledge  RLAF  operations  in  response  [words  missing]  to  queries.
Saigon  and  Bangkok  will  privately  inform  Khanh  and  Thanom  prior  to  initiation
operations.  Vientiane  will  undertake  keep  Souvanna  currently  informed.

TAYLOR


[Document  207]

Date:  10  October  1964

FM:  SAIGON  1080
TO:  STATE
REF:  Embtel  1068

Transmitted  herewith  are  the  approved  Terms  of  Reference  by  Bangkok,  Vien-
tiane, and  Saigon

"1.  Group  to  be  known  as  Coordinating  Committee  for  US  Mission  Southeast
Asia  (SEACOORD).

"2.  The  objectives  of  the  Committee  are  to  coordinate  policy  recommendations
and  military  operational  matters  afl'ecting  more  than  one  mission.

"With  respect  to  military  and  relating  operational  matters,  the  Committee
will  coordinate  the  operations  and  actions  of  their  respective  missions  and  com-
ponent elements  within  the  sphere  of  their  competence  and  authority  from
Washington.  The  Committee  will  also  act  as  a  clearing  house  for  the  exchange
of  information  on  all  military  or  other  operations  aff"ecting  more  than  one  post.

"In  making  coordinated  recommendations  to  Washington  on  proposed  opera-
tions, the  Committee  will  seek  to  take  into  account  all  relative  political  and  mili-
tary considerations.

"The  Committee  will  not  rpt  not  exercise  executive  authority  over  any  mission
or  military  command.

"3.  Membership  will  normally  consist  of  the  US  Missions  in  Saigon,  Vientiane


580 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

and  Bangkok.  Other  US  missions  in  Southeast  Asia  may  be  included  in  specific
meetings  if  subject  matter  makes  this  desirable.

"4.  Missions  will  normally  be  represented  by  the  DCM's  at  Bangkok  and  Vien-
tiane and  by  the  Deputy  Ambassador  at  Saigon,  together  with  military  and  CAS
representation  as  appropriate.  Ambassadors  may,  of  course,  attend  at  their  dis-
cretion. In  addition  to  the  representation  provided  CINCPAC  through  his  mili-
tary representatives  in  the  area,  CINCPAC  and  his  subordinate  commands  may
be  represented  as  appropriate.

"5.  Meetings  will  normally  be  held  at  Saigon  not  rpt  not  less  than  once  a  month
and  will  be  chaired  by  the  Deputy  Ambassador.

"Meetings  may  be  called  more  frequently  at  the  initiative  of  any  of  the  three
missions.

"6.  The  Chairman  will  be  responsible  for:  [material  missing]

B)  Proposing  and  circulating  an  Agenda  prior  to  each  meeting,

C)  Arranging  appropriate  briefings  of  participants,

D)  Transmitting  to  Washington  such  conclusions  and  recommendations  as
may  be  agreed.

"7.  The  Committee  may  form  such  other  relating  Committees  as  may  be  re-
quired.

"8.  As  an  element  of  SEACOORD,  a  Standing  Military  Committee  is  hereby
established  composed  of  COMUSMACV,  or  his  representative,  as  Chairman,
Deputy  COMUS  MACTHAI  or  representative,  and  a  Military  Representative
designated  by  the  Ambassador  Vientiane,  and  a  CAS  Saigon  Representative.  The
Military  Committee  may  form  such  Subcommittees  as  may  be  required.  CINC-
PAC or  subordinate  CINCPAC  Commands  may  participate  as  required,  as  well
as  political  and  CAS  representation  from  Vientiane  and  Bangkok."

[Document  208]

MEMORANDUM  FOR  MR.  JOSEPH  A.  CALIFANO,  JR.
SUBJECT:  Item  for  Weekly  Report  to  the  President

Lao  Deputy  Prime  Minister  Would  Like  to  Expand  Military  Operations  in  the
North.

General  Phoumi  Nosavan,  Deputy  Prime  Minister  in  the  coalition  government
of  Laos,  visited  Washington  from  October  3  to  7.  His  chief  objective  in  his
talks  in  Washington  seemed  to  be  to  sound  out  U.S.  attitudes  toward  Laos,  also
toward  possible  changes  in  the  government  of  National  Union  and,  during  con-
versations at  the  Department  of  Defense,  to  seek  support  for  expending  military
operations  largely  of  a  clandestine,  guerrilla  type  in  Northern  Laos.  These  pro-
posed operations,  which  would  cut  deeply  into  territory  held  by  the  Pathet  Lao
at  the  time  of  the  Geneva  1962  settlement,  would  seek  to  deny  communist  access
from  North  Viet  Nam  to  the  strategic  Plaine  des  Jarres.  General  Phoumi  was
informed  that  the  U.S.  would  continue  its  efforts  to  gain  adherence  to  the  1962
Geneva  agreements  and  stabilize  the  situation  in  Laos.


[Document  209]

1st  Draft  (McNaughton)  10/13/64

AIMS  AND  OPTIONS  IN  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

1.  US  aims  in  SEA  are:

a)  To  help  SVN  and  Laos  to  develop  as  independent  countries.


Documents  581


b)  To  get  DRV  to  leave  its  neighbors  alone.

c)  To  protect  US  power  and  prestige  (see  para  13  below).

2.  In  Laos,  intermediate  aims  are:

a)  To  preserve  Souvanna's  position  (no  coup).

b)  To  prevent  significant  PL  land  grabs.

3.  In  SVN,  intermediate  aims  are:

a)  To  create  and  maintain  a  viable  govt.

b)  To  make  progress  in  pacification  (see  no  progress).

4.  New  efforts  in  SVN:

a)  Firmly  based  provisional  government.

b)  Increased  pay  for  civil  servants.

c)  RAND  initiatives  in  cities.

d)  Some  responsibility  dispersed  to  Corps.

e)  Large-scale  Filipino  participation.

5.  To  change  DRV  behavior  (change  can  be  tacit),  US  should  "negotiate"  by
an  optimum  combination  of  words  and  deeds.  Words  across  any  conference  table
should  be  orchestrated  with  continuing  military  pressures.  (In  particular,  there
should  be  no  one-way,  Korea-type,  cease  fires.)

6.  Likely  word  negotiations:

a)  UN  Security  Council  debates  (ending?).

b)  Paris  talks  re  Laos  (buying  time).

c)  14-Nation  conference  (Soviet  threat  to  quit).

d)  US/DRV  dialogue  of  some  kind  (slow  and  hard).

7.  Actions  for  deed  negotiations:

a)  34A  (MAROPS,  black  bomber?).

b)  DeSoto  missions  in  Gulf  of  Tonkin.

c)  Recce

high  over  Laos,  DRV,  China,
medium  over  Laos,  DRV.
low  (return-fire)  over  Laos,  DRV.
low  (suppressive)  over  Laos,  DRV.

d)  GVN  ground  attacks  in  Corridor  (US  advisers).

e)  MAAG,  White  Star  teams  in  Laos.

f)  Air  attacks

T-28  in  PDJ  and  Corridor.

US  "June  9"  in  PDJ  and  Corridor.

VNAF  in  Corridor.

VNAF  (US?)  in  DRV.

US  on  VC  targets  in  SVN.

g)  Aerial  mining  of  DRV  harbors.

h)  Destroy  DRV  naval  craft  in  international  waters.

i)  Further  US  force  deployments.

8.  DRV  must

a)  stop  training  and  sending  personnel  to  wage  war  in  SVN  and  Laos.

b)  stop  sending  arms  and  supplies  to  SVN  and  Laos.

c)  stop  directing  and  controlling  military  actions  in  SVN  and  Laos.

d)  order  the  VC  and  PL  to  stop  their  insurgencies  and  military  actions.

e)  remove  VM  forces  and  cadres  from  SVN  and  Laos.


582 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


g)  see  that  VC  and  PL  cease  resistance  to  government  forces.

h)  see  that  VC  and  PL  turn  in  weapons  and  relinquish  bases.

i)  see  that  VC  and  PL  surrender  for  amnesty  or  expatriation.

9.  It  is  important  that  USSR  and  China  understand  the  Hmited  nature  of  our
deeds — i.e.,  not  for  colony  or  base  and  not  to  destroy  DRV,  but  only  para  1
above.

10.  Likely  Communist  deeds:

a)  More  jets  to  NVN  with  NVN  or  Chicom  pilots.

b)  AAA  and  radar  gear  to  NVN.

c)  Increased  air  and  ground  forces  in  South  China.

d)  Increased  VC  activities  (kill  top  leaders,  Americans?).

e)  Major  infiltrated  VC  unit  activities  (take  a  city?).

f )  Cause  major  military  or  civilian  defections  in  SVN.

g)  PL  land  grabs  in  Laos.

h)  -DRV"  jet  attacks  on  US  DD's  (and  on  Saigon?).

i)  Other  "defensive"  DRV  retaliation  (shoot  down  U-2?).
j) Political  drive  for  "neutralization"  of  Indo-china.

k)  PL  declaration  of  new  government  in  Laos.
1) NOT  invade  South  Vietnam.

IL  Misc.  problems:

a)  Excuses  for  militar\-  actions  in  the  future.

b)  Get  the  deployed  forces  back  out  of  SEA.

c)  Watch  for  Saigon  and  Vientiane  hanky  panky  with  Reds.

d)  Withdrawal  of  US  dependents  from  Saigon.

e)  More  third-country  participation  in  SEA  effort.

f)  Carrot  and  "golden  bridge"  for  Hanoi.

12.  Misc.  ideas:

a)  That  we  welcome  a  SEA  conference  with  a  two-way  ceasefire  (i.e.,  with
a  VC  and  PL  stand-down) .

b)  That  future  pressures  on  DRV  be  overt.

c)  That  the  theory  of  actions  against  DRV  be  "provocations  of  oppor-
tunity"— either  (1)  in  response  to  such  things  as  Aug  2  PT  attacks  on
US  DDs  or  (2)  in  response  to  fresh  incidents  and  outrages  in  SVN  and
Laos.

d)  That  we  start  laying  public-opinion  base  for  reprisal  against  North  jus-
tified, in  particular,  by  VC  outrages  in  South.

13.  It  is  essential — however  badly  SEA  may  go  over  the  next  2-A  years — that
US  emerge  as  a  "good  doctor."  We  must  have  kept  promises,  been  tough,  taken
risks,  gotten  bloodied,  and  hurt  the  enemy  very  badly.  We  must  avoid  appear-
ances which  will  affect  judgments  by,  and  provide  pretexts  to,  other  nations  re-
garding US  power,  resolve  and  competence,  and  regarding  how  the  US  will  be-
have in  future  cases  of  particular  interest  to  those  nations.  The  questions  will  be:

a.  Has  US  policy  of  containment  against  overt  and  covert  aggression
changed,  at  least  as  to  SEA?  How  will  we  behave  in  new  confrontations  a
la  South  Vietnam,  Korea  (1950),  Italy  (1948)  Berlin?  (We  want  to  be
particularly  careful  that  any  loss  in  SVN  is  not  generalized  to  overt  ag-
gression.)

b.  Is  US  power  to  contain  insufficient,  at  least  at  the  fringes?

c.  Is  the  US  hobbled  by  restraints  which  might  be  relevant  in  future  cases


Documents  583


(fear  of  illegality,  of  UN  or  neutral  reaction,  of  domestic  pressures,  of  US
losses,  of  deploying  US  ground  forces  in  Asia,  of  war  with  China  or  Russia,
of  use  of  nuclear  weapons,  etc.)?

It  follows  that  care  should  be  taken  to  attribute  any  set-backs  to  factors:

a.  Which  cannot  be  generalized  beyond  South  Vietnam  (i.e.,  weak  govern-
ment, religious  dissention,  uncontrollable  borders,  mess  left  by  French,  unfavor-
able terrain,  distance  from  US,  etc.) .

b.  Which  are  not  US  mis-  or  non-feasance  (e.g.,  overexposure  of  "white  faces"
or  unwise  actions,  or  failure  to  take  risks  or  provide  sufficient  aid  of  the  right
kind).

14.  Recommended  Military  Scenario:

Phase  One  {November-December) .  Limited  pressures  not  involving  major
risks  of  escalation,  that  would  maintain  GVN  morale  and  initiative  against  the
DRV:

Continue  leaflet  drops  over  DRV,  and  T-28  and  recce  over  Laos.
Joint  US-GVN  planning  proceeds  covering  all  actions  described  below.
34A  MAROPS  (cutting  sea  infiltration)  and  leaflet  drops  (countering  DRV
radio-propaganda).  These  operations  should  be  acknowledged.
Cross-border  operations  (air  and  ground)  along  the  corridor.
Resume  occasional  desoto  patrols  (not  within  12  miles  of  NVN).
Specify  "opportunities"  (responding  to  mining,  POL  sabotage,  terrorism).
Phase  Two  {January  et  seq).  More  serious  pressures — inside  DRV:
Mine  DRV  harbors.

Strike  infiltration  routes,  working  in  from  border.
Strike  other  military  targets.
Strike  industrial  targets.


[Document  210]

Date:  October  14,  1964

FM:  SAIGON  1129
TO:  STATE
REF:  Embtel  1046

My  impressions  this  week  are  colored  by  the  receipt  of  the  monthly  reports
from  the  field  for  JSeptember.  That  month  and  October  thus  far  have  seen  little
or  no  progress  in  the  overall  situation  (except  possibly  in  the  work  of  the  High
National  Council)  and  some  deterioration,  particularly  in  the  northern  provinces.
It  has  been  a  period  characterized  by  government  instability,  civil  disorders  (now
quieting  down),  indications  of  increased  infiltration  from  the  north,  and  a  high
level  of  military  activity  both  on  the  part  of  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  Government
Forces.

During  the  past  week,  our  attention  and  efforts  have  been  focused  primarily  on
the  activities  of  the  High  National  Council  and  its  efforts  to  lay  the  foundation
of  a  strong  provisional  government.  We  have  been  trying  hard  to  influence  it
in  the  right  direction  and  to  bring  about  some  understanding  between  the  council
and  the  military.  I  have  been  encouraged  by  the  seriousness  of  purpose  of  the
council  and  the  evidence  of  having  made  considerable  progress.  We  expect
momentarily  the  announcement  of  a  provisional  charter  which  will  provide  for


5S4 Gruv^l  EJi::or  The  P.-.:.:^:-  F.ipc^s  ^'ol.  111

a  Chief  of  State,  a  Prime  Minister  .:nd  eventihUly  to: onal  assembly  chosen

at  least  in  pan  bv  elec::o".s  I:  : seen  what  kmd  of  a  reception  the

charter  will  receive  from  the  p^iri-c  .^r.c "terested  minorities.
According  to  our  contacts  with  members  or  the  council.  Gc-^c:.-i  M.nh  is  the
leading  candidate Chief  of  State,  but  there  is  no  consensus  as  lo  the  Prime
Minister  who.  it  .>  r.cr.c.  will  be  a  strong  civilian.  The  council  members  are
worried  about  Gener.h.  Rn.."h  s  :o\v.\:d  their  p'..:-< Thev  want  him  in

the  sovemment  but  are  ::e  \v.;.  r.o:  i.^nc  a  reduction  :rom  iPrime  Minister

to  Minister  of  Defense  or  Commander-in-Chief  as  they  would  prefer.  My  talks
with  Khanh  lead  me  to  hope  they  are  wrong  in  their  misgi\in^s  .-nd  that  both
Minh  and  Kh?.nh  will  undertake  appropriate  roles  in  the  new  go  ernment.  There
rem::  c-no:'-  o'  :he  selection  of  the  civilian  Prime  Minister.

Prob-.n.  ....  .  .......n..  .  :>n.cie  novs  .n  the  p^.th  of  the  new  government.

On  the  miliiar)  front,  the  \  let  Cong  .-nnc  :  to  nc  noiding  down  the  number  of
attacks  on  miliiarv  force<  . n^o.  JO'^  je-::  : :  o:'  t.cts  of  sabotage  and  terrorism
directed  at  impressing  :n.  .  n  n .  ;  o- One  reason  for  this  emphasis  is

undoubtedly  the  heavy  losses  tr. ..  .  n_  -  .  .  ncc  -  :..king  in  engagements  with

government  forces.  The  ctn^^-:h'  :  chcj;  o:  titc^e  io>^es  must  be  creating  man-
power problems  for  them  .  \;blv  explains  the  definite  step-up  in  infiltration
fron:  No:-:"  \  e::^:ni.  panic in  the  northern  provinces  of  South  \'ietnam.  A
rCv.:":  ::csts  that  if  the  present  rate  of  infiltration  is  maintained  the
annn.-i :c  :o:  ■  ' ' ^  -  '^ermore.  as  has  prob-

abh  hcc::  j. :o  :o .  . . .  ....  _  .  ...  ..nd  more  '"bona  fide"

North  \  .. .  soldiers  among  the  infiltrees.  I  feel  sure  that  we  must  soon

adopt  new  ..::o  or.t^::.-  n:e:".ods  to  reduce  and  eventually  end  such  infiltration
if  we  .-re  ever  to  so.jj.co - .:th  \"ietnam.

P.  . "  h  j:;-.  :  c  v  'Ac:e  sluggish  during  the  week  except  in  the  Hop  Tac

--:.n  >-..go::  \\  ;:e:e  son^.e  rroeress  is  being  made.  In  particular,  the  iHop

T.,j  no ..re  being  so:~  .  :.  ."jctive  in  controlling  the  movement  of

con::.-:n  :-n  ntended  for  tnc ^n  :::e  \he:  Cong.

The  no. :  :j;ogical  climate  seems  to  be  about  the  same,  with  some  ner^-ousness
in  S;o.:o::  o  .  er  the  outco:n.e  o'  :"c  v.  o^k  o:'  :he  iHigh  National  Council.  There
are  rt::n.o:>  Khanh  n^.::\  enco-.:..:c  oe:n.o;:>::.:::ons  to  maintain  himself  in  oi^ice.
I  am  inclined  to  o  s  but  Khanh  could  be  plaving  a  deeper  game  than  we

presently  think.


[Document  211]

23  OCT  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

SUBJECT:  US  Search  and  Rescue  Operations — Southeast  Asia

COMUSMAC\"  (Tab  A  ■  .ouested  the  inclusion  of  34A  operations  in  ex-
isting SAR  plans  for  L.:o>  ..nu  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.  CINCPAC  (Tab  B)
supports  the  MACV  concept  and  recommends  expanding  SAR  coverage  to
include  cross-border  operations  into  Laos.  Ambassador  Tavlor  (Tab  C)  concurs
in  SAR  support  for  34A  crews  downed  in  Laos.  Ambassador  Unger  (Tab  D  &  E)
has  expressed  reservations  with  respect  to  use  of  his  resources  for  SAR  operations
in  support  of  N'NAF  or  34A  personnel  in  Laos.  The  Joint  Chiefs  (JCSM  839-64)
(Tab  F)  have  proposed  an  expansion  of  existing  SAR  coverage  alone  the  lines
advocated  by  CINCPAC  and  COMUSMACV.


Documents


585


The  Joint  Chiefs  of  StaflF  proposal  would  authorize  US  SAR  assistance  to:

fa,;  RVTsAF  forces  engaged  in  cross-border  operations  into  Laos  and  also
34A  aircraft  in  distress  in  Laos,  and

<^bi  Both  34A  surface  and  aircraft  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.
Regarding  SAR  support  for  RVN  forces  which  might  be  involved  in  possible
cross-border  operations,  the  State  Departement  desires  to  defer  decision.  I  sug-
gest that  we  go  along  with  State  on  this  point  for  the  time  being.
With  respect  to  SAR  support  for  34A  operations,  State  Department  (Tab  G)  has
opposed  any  US  support  in  either  Laos  or  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin,  tbou^  it  agrees  to
GVN  SAR  assistance  to  34A  MAROPS.

As  a  result  of  further  discussions  with  Saigon  on  die  question  of  SAR  c^ierations
for  34A  overflights  of  Laos,  Ambassador  Unger  (Tab  E)  has  now  proposed  that
he  be  authorized  to  determine,  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  whether  to  employ
in-countr\  assets  available  to  him  (RLAF,  Air  America,  Krd  &  Sons)  in  SAR
operations.  Slate  believes  this  is  a  more  acceptable  arrangement  than  the  employ-
ment on  field  initiative  of  idoitifiable  US  SAR  resources  (ix.,  Yankee  Team  and
other  US  air  assets  in  SEA)  and  would  concur.

State  also  notes  that,  unlike  the  SAR  problem  for  Yankee  Team  or  RLAF  (T-28)
aircraft,  the  location  of  a  downed  34A  aircraft  may  be  difficult  to  determine  (i.e.,
radio  silence,  ni^  ffi^ts,  unaccompanied,  etc.)  and  bdieves  that  tbe  first  effort
should  therefore  be  restricted  to  seardi  for  the  aircraft.  Once  it  is  located,  is
idCTtifiaUe  US  resources  appear  to  be  required  for  rescue.  State  would  have
.Ambassador  Unger  refer  the  problan  to  Washington  for  deciaon.
In  sunmiary,  resolution  of  the  34A  question  depends  on  the  extent  of  recognition
we  wish  to  accord  34A  forces.  If  they  are  characterized  as  "friendly^,  the  exist-
ing Rules  of  Engagement  would  make  them  digible  now  for  US  protection  If
attacked  under  all  dicumstances  except  when  in  or  over  DRV,  and  would  entitle
them  to  SAR  assistance.  Since  it  is  current  policy  that  34A  operations  remain
covert.  US  rir:::ri:::^n  in  their  defense  or  rescue  should  be  limited  at  this  time.
I  recc r  er  ::  mature  to  the  attached  self-explanatory  memorandum  to

the  Chairrn  ' J  of  Staff  and  your  approval  of  the  attached  message

which  has  beer. _  with  the  Department  of  State  and  White  House  staff.


John  T.  McNaughton

Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense


Enclosures  (2 )

1.  Mem- Ch  JCS

2.  D:


[Document  212]


JOINT  STAJE-DEFE\SE  MESSAGE


ACTION:  SAIGON

\IETIANE
JCS


INFORMATION


MAC\"  BANGKOK
CINCPAC


C


en  to  recommendations  for  the  expansion  of  search
c-ver  OPLAN  34A  operations  and  cross  border


operations  mt


R\  N  :


586 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

In  this  connection  it  should  be  clearly  understood  that,  since  34A  operations  are
covert  and  not  acknowledged  by  the  United  States,  they  are  not  entitled  to  be
characterized  as  "friendly"  under  the  US  Rules  of  Engagement  which  have  been
promulgated  for  Southeast  Asia  and  Laos.  In  the  event  of  a  34A  aircraft  being
downed  in  Laos,  SAR  operations  are  authorized  as  determined  in  the  discretion
of  the  United  States  Ambassador  to  Laos  using  only  in-country  resources  avail-
able to  him.  In  such  a  case,  the  Ambassador  could  employ  (RLAF,  Air  Amer-
ica, and  Bird  and  Sons  assets)  (including  those  based  Udorn,  as  necessary)  but
would  not  be  authorized  to  include  other  United  States  resources  (i.e.,  Yankee
Team  and  USAF  aircraft).  The  question  of  employing  such  identificable  US
resources  will  be  referred  in  each  instance  to  Washington  for  decision.
In  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin,  SAR  operations  in  behalf  of  34A  forces  should  be  the
responsibility  of  the  RVN  and  should  include  no  US  forces  without  prior  ap-
proval from  Washington.

A  decision  regarding  SAR  operations  in  behalf  of  RVN  forces  involved  in
possible  cross-border  operations  into  Laos  is  deferred  for  consideration  until  such
time  as  it  may  be  decided  to  proceed  with  such  operations.


[Document  213]

29  Oct  1964

AMEMBASSY

Jt  State/Defense  Msg  fr  OASD/ISA

EXCLUSIVE  FOR  AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR

The  ICS  have  proposed  a  program  of  military  and  supporing  political  actions
with  respect  to  the  RVN  envisaging  accelerated  forceful  actions  both  inside  and
outside  RVN.  A  copy  of  their  memorandum,  JCSM  902-64,  has  been  trans-
mitted to  you  this  [word  missing]  via  courier  to  arrive  Saigon  31  October.  In
anticipation  high  level  discussions,  your  comments  on  the  ICS  recommendations
desired  as  soon  as  possible.


[Document  214]

ACTION:  AMEMBASSY  SAIGON  PRIORITY  937  29  Oct,  1964

EXDIS

SAIGON  FOR  AMBASSADOR  AND  PASS  TO  COMUSMACV
JOINT  STATE/DEFENSE  MESSAGE
SUBJECT:  Legitimation  of  OP34A

Refs:  Saigon  (a)  1221,  Deptels  (b)  678,  (c)  680,  Saigon  804
(d)  COMUSMACV  210147E  Oct  64

Suggest  your  further  exploration  with  Khanh  the  question  of  surfacing  34A
MAROPS.  His  thinking  is  not  clear  here  as  to  whose  interests  (US  and/or
GVN)  he  believes  would  be  adversely  affected,  and  how.  It  would  be  helpful  too


Documents  587


to  have  his  rationale  for  acknowledging  all  34A  SABOTAGE  OPS  rather  than
MAROPS  only.

FYI  In  view  current  situation  SVN  and  possible  need  additional  operations
against  NVN,  public  exposure  of,  and  subsequent  US  support  for,  MAROPS
could  provide  politically  useful  basis  for  expanded  activities.  END  FYI

Desire  you  continue  press  for  legitimizing  34A  MAROPS,  leave  to  your  dis-
cretion however,  whether  you  should  press  Khanh  for  public  exposure  of  34A
MAROPS  at  next  session  or  limit  discussion  to  obtain  his  complete  thinking  on
the  subject.

END

BALL


[Document  215]

From:  JCS  1451
To:  CINCPAC

1  Nov  1964
PERSONAL  FOR

ADMIRAL  SHARP,  GENERAL  WESTMORELAND  AND  AMBASSADOR
TAYLOR  FROM  CJCS.

1.  Highest  level  meeting  to  discuss  courses  of  action  related  to  Bien  Hoa  attack
tentatively  scheduled  for  1300  hours  Washington  time  2  November.

2.  At  preliminary  meeting  same  subject  this  date,  concern  was  expressed  that
proposed  US  retaliatory/punitive  actions  could  trigger  North  Vietnamese/
CHICOM  air  and  ground  retaliatory  acts.  Highest  authority  desires  to  consider
in  conjunction  with  US  military  actions,  increased  security  measures  and  pre-
cautionary moves  of  US  air  and  ground  units  to  protect  US  dependents,  units
and  installations  against  North  Vietnamese/CHICOM  retaliation.

3.  JCS  are  considering  the  following  in  connection  with  proposed  US  puni-
tive actions  against  the  DRV :

a.  Outshipment  of  US  dependents  prior  to  or  simultaneous  with  initiation  of
US  air  strikes.

b.  Movement  of  SLF  afloat  to  Da  Nang  airbase  and  two  Army  or  Marine
battalions  by  air  to*  Saigon  area  to  provide  local  security  to  US  personnel  and
installations.

c.  Movement  one  Marine  HAWK  battalion  from  29  Palms,  California  to  SVN.

d.  Movement  of  augmentation  land-based  and  carrier-based  air  required  to
optimize  execution  of  course  of  action  lA  CINCPAC  Frag  Order  3.

e.  Forward  movement  from  CONUS  or  within  PACOM  of  ground,  sea,  and
air  units  to  WESTPAC  and  alert  of  additional  units  in  CONUS  as  might  be
required  to  implement  appropriate  portions  of  CINCPAC  OPLAN  32-64  and/or
CINCPAC  OPLAN  39-65.

4.  In  addition  to  above,  JCS  are  considering  military  utility  of  employing  US
aircraft  in  South  Vietnam  in  country  to  augment  VNAF  and  FARMGATE.

5.  Request  comments  of  addressees  ASAP.


588 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


[Document  216]

November  3.  1964

PROJECT  OUTLINE

Working  Group  on  Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast  Asia

(The  following  is  an  outline  of  inputs  now  being  prepared.  It  will  probably
correspond  closely  to  the  outline  of  a  final  paper  for  high-level  review,  but  the
order  and  emphasis  might  var}".  The  main  purpose  of  the  outline  is  so  that
\\orking  Group  members  will  have  a  common  index  and  be  able  to  keep  track
of  what  is  being  prepared.)

I.  Situation  in  South  Viet-Nam.

A.  Prospects  for  political  stabilitv  and  effectiveness.

B.  Security  situation  and  prospects.

C.  The  DRV  role  and  DR\'  policy.  State  of  infiltration  and  probably  VC
tactics  and  actions.

D.  Chicom  policy  and  present  relevant  actions.

E.  Soviet  policy.

F.  Evaluation  of  prospects  assuming  present  policies  pursued  fi.e.,  maximum
US  assistance  and  limited  external  actions  in  Laos  and  covertly  against
North  Viet-Nam ) .

G.  Close  analysis  of  the  DR\'  role,  directed  to  the  question  of  what  the  pros-
pects would  be  if  that  role  were  removed  (1)  wholly;  (2)  by  superficial
gestures  of  compliance  that  removed  the  more  visible  evidences  of  DRV
participation.

Status:  This  paper  will  be  prepared  bv  an  intelligence  communitv  special  work-
ing group,  for  review  by  the  major  USIB  members  concerned.  It  will  presumably
be  combined  with  a  second  section  dealing  with  Communist  and  other  reactions
to  the  courses  of  action  described  in  Option  B  below.

II.  US  Objectives  and  Stakes  in  South  VietSam  and  Southeast  Asia.

A.  US  objectives  and  the  present  basis  of  US  action.

B.  Possible  alternative  objectives.

C.  Consequences  of  Communist  control  of  South  Viet-Nam  in  a  worldwide
sense.

D.  Consequences  in  Southeast  Asia  and  Asia  generally  of  Communist  control
in  South  Viet-Nam.

(Both  C  and  D,  in  this  paper,  would  deal  with  a  generalized  case  of  Communist
control,  noting  the  variations  that  would  generally  arise  with  different  circum-
stances of  loss,  but  aiming  to  put  more  precise  evaluation  into  the  concluding
section  on  Conclusions  and  Recommendations.)

E.  The  attitudes  of  major  US  allies  and  the  general  impact  of  various  courses
of  action  on  the  US  leadership  role  with  these  countries.

F.  Attitudes  in  other  relevant  nations  and  the  general  impact  of  possible  US
courses  of  action  on  US  capacity  to  affect  their  behavior  in  ways  consistent


Documents  589


with  our  worldwide  objectives  (i.e.,  not  the  US  "image"  but  the  reality  of
US  relations  and  of  the  conduct  of  these  countries) .

Status:  Mr.  Bundy  will  prepare  this  section  on  the  basis  of  the  earlier  draft  al-
ready circulated  to  members  of  the  Working  Group.  CIA  also  has  an  analysis,
and  various  JCS  papers  cover  highly  important  points.  The  CIA  and  JCS  papers
will  be  made  available  to  Mr.  Bundy  and  to  the  Working  Group  as  soon  as
possible.

III.  The  Broad  Options.

A.  Continue  on  present  lines.

B.  Present  policies  plus  a  systematic  program  of  military  pressures  against
the  north,  meshing  at  some  point  with  negotiation,  but  with  pressure  ac-
tions to  be  continued  until  we  achieve  our  central  present  objectives.

C.  Present  policies  plus  additional  forceful  measures  and  military  moves,
followed  by  negotiations  in  which  we  would  seek  to  maintain  a  believable
threat  of  still  further  military  pressures  but  would  not  actually  carry  out
such  pressures  to  any  marked  degree  during  the  negotiations.

Status:  This  would  be  a  brief  paper  amplifying  the  above  definitions  only  slightly.

rV.  Alternative  Forms  of  Negotiation.

This  paper  would  be  an  analysis  of  all  the  possible  avenues  of  negotiation,
including  the  UN,  Geneva  conferences,  bilateral  communications,  use  of  inter-
mediaries, etc.  The  analysis  would  be  designed  to  be  relevant  to  the  negotiations
that  might  ensue  under  any  of  the  three  options  stated  in  Section  III.  but  with
greatest  emphasis  on  the  negotiating  a\Tsnues  relevant  to  Options  B  and  C.

Status:  First  draft  being  prepared  by  State,  S  P,  in  conjunction  with  10  and
others  in  State.

V.  Analysis  of  Option  A.

This  paper  would  virtually  write  itself  in  the  light  of  Section  I  and  the  negotia-
ting discussions  in  Section  IV.  It  can  be  left  to  one  side  for  the  moment.

VI.  Analysis  of  Option  B.

A.  Initial  military  actions.

B.  Probably  Communist  response  to  such  actions.

C.  Further  actions  in  the  event  of  Communist  reaction  of  a  strong  character,
to  include  the  full  possible  gamut  of  DRV  and  Chicom  reactions  and  how
we  would  deal  with  each  from  a  military  standpoint.

D.  Political  scenario  to  accompany  all  the  above.

Status:  The  major  initial  input  for  this  paper  will  come  from  JCS  in  consultation
with  DOD.  The  proposed  line  of  action  should  then  be  subjected  to  an  intelligence
estimate  of  the  likelihood  of  different  types  of  Communist  reactions — this  being
the  second  part  of  the  intelligence  initial  input.  The  political  scenario  is  being
drafted  in  State  to  be  meshed  with  the  initial  actions  in  a  comprehensive  scenario
with  dates  fixed  as  exactly  as  possible  in  relation  to  a  hypothetical  date  of  deci-
sion.


590 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


VII.  Analysis  of  Option  C.

A  more  exact  definition  of  this  option  will  be  derived  from  the  paper  on  nego-
tiating avenues  (Section  IV)  and  the  analysis  of  military  actions  (Section  VI).
The  preparation  of  this  paper  will  follow  the  preparation  of  drafts  of  those  two
sections.


VIII.  Immediate  Actions  in  the  Period  Prior  to  Decision.

This  is  being  urgently  reviewed  in  State  FE.  It  will  probably  come  up  for  deci-
sion before  the  project  is  completed,  and  it  will  then  drop  out  of  the  final  paper.
In  general,  the  Working  Group  has  agreed  that  our  aim  should  be  to  maintain
present  signal  strength,  showing  no  signs  of  determination  but  equally  avoiding
actions  that  would  tend  to  pre-judge  the  basic  decision.

IX.  Conclusion  and  Recommendations.

This  speaks  for  itself  and  might  come  at  the  end  as  a  short  paper  synthesizing
the  whole  project  for  the  President.

FE:WPBundy:mk


[Document  217]

Nov.  3,  1964

FROM  SAIGON  FOR  STATE
CINCPAC  FOR  POLAD
EXDIS

REF.  DEF.  1342.

In  compliance  with  request  of  DOD,  I  submit  the  following  personal  comments
to  JCSM  902-64  dated  October  27,  1964.  SNIE  53-2-64  is  not  RPT  not
available  in  Saigon  and  hence  has  not  influenced  my  views.  I  assume  that  a
political  psychological  scenario  is  being  prepared  to  support  the  military  actions
considered  in  the  ICS  study.

As  indicated  in  EMBTEL  465  and  elsewhere,  I  am  in  complete  agreement  with
the  thesis  that  the  deteriorating  situation  in  SVN  requires  the  application  of
measured  military  pressures  to  DRV  to  induce  that  government  to  CEUE  (sic)
to  provide  support  to  VC  and  to  use  its  authority  to  cause  VC  to  cease  or  at
least  to  moderate  their  depredations.  The  evidence  of  increased  infiltration  cited
in  EMBTEL  1189  [words  missing]  and  eff"ective  action.  The  Bien  Hoa  incident
of  November  1,  1964  poses  an  even  more  pressing  requirement  for  action  under
the  retaliatory  principle  confirmed  in  NSAM  314.

EMBTEL  1357  contains  the  response  to  the  Bien  Hoa  action  which  Embassy-
MACV  recommended.  In  eff"ect,  this  recommendation  is  for  retaliation  bombing
attacks  on  selected  DRV  targets  by  combined  US  VNAF  air  forces  and  for


Documents  591


a  policy  statement  that  we  will  act  similarly  in  like  cases  in  the  future.  If
this  recommendation  is  not  RPT  not  accepted,  I  would  favor  intensifying  34-A
operations  and  initiating  air  operations  against  selected  targets  as  an  interim
substitute  for  more  positive  measures.

With  ref  to  the  JCS  recommendations  for  the  first  five  courses  of  action  of
Appendix  A,  they  are  all  being  implemented  but  the  implementation  has  been
weak  in  direct  proportion  to  the  ineffectiveness  of  the  local  government.  This
situation  not  RPT  not  likely  to  change  for  the  better  in  time  to  effect  the  situa-
tion in  the  short  term.  The  new  government  in  its  likely  composition  appears
to  have  potentialities  for  improvement  but  it  will  be  composed  largely  of  men
without  governmental  experience  who  will  have  to  learn  their  trade  on  the  job.
It  will  take  three  to  four  months  under  favorable  circumstances  to  get  it  func-
tioning well.

Item  6  is  new  and  I  would  have  trouble  in  justifying  it.  It  amounts  to  a  departure
for  no  RPT  no  clear  gain  from  the  principle  that  the  Vietnamese  fight  their  own
war  in  SVN.  Added  air  strength  in-country  is  not  RPT  not  going  to  have  a  sig-
nificant effect  on  the  outcome  of  the  counterinsurgency  campaign.
Under  Appendix  B,  I  see  no  RPT  no  advantage  in  resuming  Desoto  patrols
[words  missing]  if  we  are  seeking  an  excuse  for  action,  it  is  to  our  interest  to
strike  Hanoi  for  its  malefactions  in  SVN  and  not  RPT  not  for  actions  in  the
Bay  of  Tonkin  against  the  US  Navy.  We  need  to  tie  our  actions  to  Hanoi
support  of  the  VC,  not  RPT  not  to  the  defense  of  purely  US  interests.  Hence,
the  excuse  for  our  actions  should  ideally  grow  out  of  events  in  SVN  and  LAOS.
Such  events  are  available  for  our  exploitation  now  in  the  form  of  infiltration
activities  in  the  Laotian  Corridor  and  the  DRV,  the  Bien  Hoa  incident  and  the
increasing  sabotage  by  the  VC  of  the  Saigon-Danang  RY.  With  these  [words
missing]  there  is  no  RPT  no  need  to  jseek  others  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf  where  the
second  incident  developed  in  such  a  way  as  to  reduce  our  ability  to  use  subse-
quent episodes  as  a  credible  basis  for  action.

Similarly,  I  see  nothing  but  disadvantage  in  further  stirring  up  the  Cambodian
border  by  implementing  hot  pursuit.  We  don't  often  catch  the  fleeing  VC  in
the  heart  of  SVN;  I  see  little  likelihood  of  doing  better  in  Cambodia.  Sihanouk
does  not  RPT  not  have  much  in  the  way  of  ground  forces  but  a  few  counter-
incursions  from  his  side  could  be  very  awkward  in  requiring  the  diversion  of
further  ARVN  to  cover  the  frontier.  We  are  presently  short  of  trained  SVN
manpower  and  need  to  conserve  it  for  essential  purposes.  The  present  unfriendly
frontier  is  much  preferable  to  one  actively  hostile.

With  regard  to  low  level  reconnaissance  probes,  they  are  not  RPT  not  needed
as  signals  of  intentions  as,  as  I  hope,  we  launch  forth  on  a  bombing  program,
overt  or  covert,  against  the  north.  In  the  latter  case,  low  level  RECCE  should
be  flown  [words  missing]

Actions  7,  8,  and  10  I  tend  to  view  as  a  package  for  concurrent  implementation.
In  the  aggregate,  these  actions  constitute  an  attack  on  a  coherent  target  system
all  of  which  may  need  to  be  progressively  destroyed  if  infiltration  is  to  be
checked,  [words  missing]  At  some  point,  both  would  probably  merge  into  a
single  pressure  vector  on  the  DRV.

As  a  final  word,  it  is  well  to  remind  ourselves  that  "too  much"  in  this  matter
of  coercing  Hanoi  may  be  as  bad  as  "too  little."  At  some  point,  we  will  need
a  relatively  cooperative  leadership  in  Hanoi  willing  to  wind  up  the  VC  insur-
gency on  terms  satisfactory  to  us  and  our  SVN  allies.  What  we  don't  want
is  an  expanded  war  in  sea  and  an  unresolved  guerrilla  problem  in  SVN.

Taylor


592 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


[Document  218]

November  4.  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR:  Mr.  William  Bundy— FE
FROM:  Mr.  Michael  V.  Forrestal— S  \  N

SUBJECT:  Comments  on  Your  Input — II  U.S.  Objectives  and  Stakes  in  South
Vietnam  and  Southeast  Asia

It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  an  important  flavor  lacking  in  the  excellent
"hard  look"  of  your  week-end  paper  at  our  stakes  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.
It  is  the  role  of  China.  I  think  it  would  be  helpful  both  to  our  thinking  here
and  also  as  a  basis  for  any  discussion  we  may  someday  have  with  our  European
friends  to  weave  into  your  expose  a  paragraph  or  two  on  the  nature  and  prob-
able development  of  Chinese  policy.

I  think  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  the  effects  of  an  American  panial  with-
drawal in  Southeast  Asia  without  taking  into  account  the  effect  this  would
have  on  Chinese  policy.  Putting  it  another  way,  (if  China  did  not  exist,  the
effect  of  our  withdrawal  from  a  situation  in  which  the  people  we  were  trying
to  help  seemed  unable  to  help  themselves  might  not  be  politically  so  pen-asive
in  Asia).

As  I  see  it.  Communist  China  shares  the  same  internal  political  necessity"  for
ideological  expansion  today  that  the  Soviet  Union  did  during  the  time  of  the
Comintern  and  the  period  just  following  the  Second  World  War.  Since  China's
problems  with  respect  to  her  internal  political  and  economic  management  are
even  greater  than  those  of  Russia,  one  would  expect  that  the  need  to  justif\'  the
sacrifices  she  demands  of  her  people  will  continue  for  the  plannable  future.
This  will  impel  her.  I  suggest,  to  achieve  ideological  successes  abroad,  at  least
where  these  can  be  achieved  without  grave  risk  to  the  Mainland  itself.

Since  any  ideological  success  will  stimulate  the  need  for  further  successes
during  the  period  of  her  internal  tension,  our  objective  should  be  to  "contain"
China  for  the  longest  possible  period.  We  would  realize,  of  course,  that
eventually  China  must  be  expected  to  exercise  some  degree  of  political  pre-
aminence  on  the  fringes  of  Asia.  But  if  we  can  delay  the  day  when  this  happens
and  at  the  same  time  strengthen  the  political  and  economic  structure  of  the
bordering  countries,  we  might  indeed  succeed  in  creating,  at  the  ver\'  least,
Titoist  regimes  on  the  peripher}'  of  China  and  at  best  Western  oriented  nations,
who  nevertheless  maintain  normal  relationships  with  Peking.  Somebody  put  this
to  me  the  other  day  in  culinar}-  terms.  We  should  delay  China's  swallowing  up
Southeast  Asia  until  (a)  she  develops  better  table  manners  and  (b)  the  food
is  somewhat  more  indigestible.

I  have  been  trving  some  of  this  reasoning  on  Lippman.  and  he  appears  to  be
toying  with  it,  although  I  would  not  hope  for  much  from  that  quaner.


Documents  593


[Document  219]

Draft

WPBundy
11-5-64

CONDITIONS  FOR  ACTION  AND  KEY  ACTIONS
SURROUNDING  ANY  DECISION

1.  Bien  Hoa  may  be  repeated  at  any  time.  This  would  tend  to  force  our  hand,
but  would  also  give  us  a  good  springboard  for  any  decision  for  stronger  action.
The  President  is  clearly  thinking  in  terms  of  maximum  use  of  a  Gulf  of  Tonkin
rationale,  either  for  an  action  that  would  show  toughness  and  hold  the  line
till  we  can  decide  the  big  issue,  or  as  a  basis  for  starting  a  clear  course  of
action  under  the  broad  options.

2.  Congress  must  be  consulted  before  any  major  action,  perhaps  only  by  notifica-
tion if  we  do  a  reprisal  against  another  Bien  Hoa,  but  preferably  by  careful
talks  with  such  key  leaders  as  Mansfield,  Dirksen,  the  Speaker,  Albert,  Halleck,
Fulbright,  Hickenlooper,  Morgan,  Mrs  Bolton,  Russell,  Saltonstall,  Rivers,
(Vinson?),  Arends,  Ford,  etc.  He  probably  should  wait  till  his  mind  is  moving
clearly  in  one  direction  before  such  a  consultation,  which  would  point  to  some
time  next  week.  Query  if  it  should  be  combined  with  other  topics  (budget?)
to  lessen  the  heat.

3.  We  probably  do  not  need  additional  Congressional  authority,  even  if  we
decide  on  very  strong  action.  A  session  of  this  rump  Congress  might  well  be
the  scene  of  a  messy  Republican  effort.

4.  We  are  on  the  verge  of  intelligence  agreement  that  infiltration  has  in  fact
mounted,  and  Saigon  is  urging  that  we  surface  this  by  the  end  of  the  week  or
early  next  week.  Query  how  loud  we  want  to  make  this  sound.  Actually  Grose
in  the  Times  had  the  new  estimate  on  Monday,  so  the  splash  and  sense  of  hot
new  news  may  be  less.  We  should  decide  this  today  if  possible.  ...  In  general,
we  all  feel  the  problem  of  proving  North  Vietnamese  participation  is  less  than
in  the  past,  but  we  should  have  the  Jorden  Report  updated  for  use  as  necessary.

5.  A  Presidential  statement  with  the  rationale  for  action  is  high  on  any  check
list.  An  intervening  fairly  strong  Presidential  noise  to  prepare  a  climate  for  an
action  statement  is  probably  indicated  and  would  be  important  in  any  event
to  counter  any  SVN  fears  of  a  softening  in  our  policy.  We  should  decide  the
latter  today  too  if  possible.

6.  Secretary  Rusk  is  talking  today  to  Dobrynin.  For  more  direct  communica-
tion Seaborn  can  be  revved  up  to  go  up  the  15th  if  we  think  it  wise.  He  is  not
going  anyway,  and  we  could  probably  hold  him  back  so  that  the  absence  of
any  message  was  not  itself  a  signal.

7.  Our  internal  soundings  appear  to  divide  as  follows:

a.  We  should  consult  with  the  UK,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  possibly
Thailand  before  we  reach  a  decision.  We  would  hope  for  firm  moral  support
from  the  UK  and  for  participation  in  at  least  token  form  from  the  others.

b.  SEATO  as  a  body  should  be  consulted  concurrently  with  stronger  action.
We  should  consult  the  Philippines  a  day  or  so  before  such  action  but  not  neces-
sarily before  we  have  made  up  our  minds.

c.  The  NATO  Council  should  be  notified  on  the  Cuban  model,  i.e.,  concur-
rently, by  a  distinguished  representative.


594 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

d.  For  negative  reasons,  France  probably  deserves  VIP  treatment  also.

e.  In  the  UN,  we  must  be  ready  with  an  immediate  affirmative  presentation
of  our  rationale  to  proceed  concurrently  either  with  a  single  reprisal  action  or
with  the  initiation  of  a  broader  course  of  action.

f.  World-wide,  we  should  select  reasonably  friendly  chiefs  of  state  for  special
treatment  seeking  their  sympathy  and  support,  and  should  arm  all  our  rep-
resentatives with  the  rationale  and  defense  of  our  action  whether  individual
reprisal  or  broader.

8.  USIA  must  be  brought  into  the  planning  process  not  later  than  early  next
week,  so  that  it  is  getting  the  right  kind  of  materials  ready  for  all  our  informa-
tion media,  on  a  contingency  basis.  The  same  is  true  of  CIA's  outlets.


[Document  220]

MEMORANDUM  FOR  MR.  WILLIAM  BUNDY  November  6,  1964

SUBJECT:  Courses  of  Action  in  Viet  Nam

I  have  read  your  memorandum  outlining  the  options  open  to  us  in  Viet  Nam.
It  seems  to  me  of  the  complete  catalogue  of  the  possibilities  facing  the  President
at  this  moment.  I  would  offer  the  following  comments  derived  from  the  recent
perspective  of  Saigon.

First,  I  think  it  highly  important  that  we  recognize  the  anticipation  which
has  built  up  in  Viet  Nam  concerning  the  nature  of  the  first  U.S.  actions  after
the  election.  All  Vietnamese  and  other  interested  observers  as  well  will  be  watch-
ing very  closely  to  see  what  posture  the  newly  mandated  Johnson  Administra-
tion will  assume.  I  feel  that  the  character,  therefore,  of  our  first  action,  no  matter
how  limited  that  action  in  itself  may  be,  will  produce  exaggerated  reactions  in
many  quarters.

Given  this  state  of  affairs,  I  think  it  is  imperative  that  our  first  action  be  a
positive  one  and  one  which  gives  the  appearance  of  a  determination  to  take
risks  if  necessary  to  maintain  our  position  in  Southeast  Asia.  This  posture  is
essential  no  matter  which  option  the  President  chooses  since  we  must  indicate
an  attitude  of  strength  if  we  are  to  take  any  of  the  steps  open  to  us.

Secondly,  I  feel  that  it  is  important  not  only  in  terms  of  national  policies  but
in  terms  of  international  attitudes  that  the  Administration  go  on  record  fairly
soon  placing  our  policy  in  Viet  Nam  within  the  larger  perspective  of  our  policies
in  the  Western  Pacific,  especially  as  they  involve  confrontation  with  Communist
China.  I  have  done  a  paper  (attached  as  Tab  A)  which  indicates  the  sort  of
statement  that  I  feel  is  necessary.  This  paper  was  drafted  as  a  possible  article
to  be  issued  with  authoritative  anonymity  in  some  mass  circulation  medium,
such  as  the  New  York  Times  Magazine.  It  is  a  first  draft  and  contains  a  number
of  statements  which  would  probably  give  trouble  to  our  "specialists"  but  which
ought  to  be  able  to  be  said,  with  some  editing,  as  a  political  document.

Having  made  these  two  generalized  observations,  I  would  move  on  to  the
following  specific  suggestions.  For  self-evident  reasons,  I  have  broken  them
into  those  matters  which  need  immediate  decision  and  those  which  have  a
somewhat  longer  time  fuze.

A. IMMEDIATE  DECISIONS

1.  The  Viet  Cong  maintain  an  ability  to  repeat  the  Bien  Hoa  performance  at
any  one  of  a  number  of  installations.  Danang,  the  major  communications  in-


Documents  595


stallation  at  Nha  Trang,  and  the  facility  at  Phi  Bai  are  only  three  of  those
which  could  be  successfully  damaged  by  the  Viet  Cong  in  the  same  sort  of
hit  and  run  mortar  attack.  I  believe  a  decision  should  be  taken  now  that  any
action  of  this  type  meets  with  an  immediate  response  tailored  to  an  appropriate
target  of  retaliation,  taking  into  account  such  variable  factors  as  the  poor  weather
in  North  Viet  Nam  during  the  month  or  so  ahead.

2.  The  build  up  of  supplies  coming  in  on  Route  7  and  the  increase  in  infiltra-
tion units  observed  in  the  Panhandle  indicate  the  need  for  a  more  active  Yankee
Team  operation.  As  it  is  now  we  fly  photo  reconnaissance  with  armed  escort.  I
think  a  decision  should  be  made  to  convert  these  operations  to  genuine  armed
reconnaissance  flights  which  will  have  the  authority  to  destroy  targets  of  oppor-
tunity, particularly  truck  convoys  when  sighted.

3.  If  we  are  to  maintain  our  position  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf,  we  should  renew  de
Soto  patrols  soonest.  This  introduces  the  prospect  of  a  torpedo  boat  attack
against  the  destroyers.  (CINCPAC,  at  JCS  direction,  has  developed  a  FRAG-
ORDER  for  a  retaliatory  attack  in  the  event  of  torpedo  boat  action  against  the
destroyers.)  In  my  opinion,  the  retaliation  strike  is  of  magnitude  which  would
not  be  politically  viable  unless  the  destroyers  were  actually  sunk  or  severely
damaged.  Since  either  of  these  is  an  unlikely  possibility,  it  seems  to  me  that  the
retaliation  action  ought  to  be  reviewed  on  this  side  of  the  River  to  make  it
measure  somewhat  closer  to  political  realities.

B. LONGER  RANGE  ACTIONS

All  of  the  foregoing  suggestions  are  actions  which  seem  required  by  the
immediate  nature  of  the  Viet  Cong  North  Viet  Nam  current  operations.  None
of  them  crosses  any  particular  threshold  of  decision  beyond  the  level  that  we
have  generally  taken  in  the  past.  However,  if  we  are  to  contemplate  actions
designed  to  reverse  the  pattern  of  current  difficulties  in  Viet  Nam  we  ought  to
lay  the  ground  work  for  longer-range  actions  moving  toward  a  more  decisive
resolution.  In  this  sense,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  time  has  come  for  us  to  begin
briefing  responsible  newspaper  people  on  a  background  basis  concerning  both
the  degree  of  control  which  the  North  Vietnamese  exercise  over  the  Viet  Cong
and  the  nature  of  the  infiltration  process  as  derived  from  recent  intelligence.  I
think  both  of  these  actions  could  be  taken  without  breaching  ultra-sensitive  secur-
ity information.  Both  of  them,  however,  are  essential  if  we  are  to  make  our
case  clearly  understood  that  North  Viet  Nam  is  the  responsible  element  in  the
Viet  Cong  campaign.

Once  these  facts  Jiave  been  better  established  in  the  public  record,  we  can
begin  harassing  action  against  the  infiltration  structure  not  only  in  Laos  but
more  particularly  in  its  operational  roots  in  North  Viet  Nam.  I  am  convinced
that  air  attacks  up  and  down  this  structure  will  produce  a  tremendous  uproar
but  probably  not  anything  in  the  way  of  a  major  military  confrontation.  Indeed,
it  is  doubtful  whether  they  will  produce  international  political  pressures  of
such  a  level  that  we  would  feel  compelled  to  take  responsive  action.

Pressures  mounted  along  this  channel  have  two  distinct  advantages:  1  )  they
are  clearly  reactions  to  an  established  and  persistent  threat;  and  2)  their  intensity
can  be  controlled  at  our  discretion  and  initiative  and  doesn't  rest  upon  Com-
munist initiatives.  Moreover,  their  nature  would  be  such  that  for  the  moment
all  options  continue  to  be  preserved  by  the  President.  We  do  not  need  to  stipu-
late our  ultimate  intentions  in  beginning  this  particular  course  of  action.

I  think  this  latter  observation  is  important  because  of  current  variables.  First,


596 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

there  is  the  quality  of  the  new  government  in  Viet  Nam.  While  it  is  true  that  our
own  actions  and  our  own  decisions  will  have  distinct  effects  upon  the  nature  and
determination  of  that  Government,  we  do  also  need  some  assurances  that  the
Government  itself  will  be  able  to  survive  before  we  make  definitive  commit-
ments bevond  our  current  involvement.  Secondly,  there  is  the  question  of  Sino-
Soviet  relations.  We  should  know  better  in  the  next  few  weeks  whether  these
are  moving  toward  a  rapprochement  or  whether  the  national  and  institutional
factors  of  the  dispute  will  persist.

This  state  of  affairs,  of  course,  decidedly  effects  the  timing  of  any  deliberate
pressures  we  may  undertake.  The  most  important  aspect  of  timing  it  seems  to  me
is  for  us  to  maintain  the  appearance  of  a  steady  deliberative  approach.  There-
fore, I  would  recommend  that  the  set  of  decisions  above  be  put  into  effect  im-
mediately so  that  their  signal  will  reach  the  Communists  soonest.  At  the  same
time,  I  believe  an  authoritative  exposition  of  our  position  is  needed  in  the
immediate  future.

As  for  movement  toward  the  more  deliberative  pressure  campaign,  I  would
recommend  that  a  meeting  on  this  subject  be  held  in  Washington  a  couple  of
weeks  from  now.  ostentatiously  bringing  in  Ambassador  Taylor  and  Admiral
Sharp.  (In  this  connection,  the  timing  has  to  be  fixed  so  as  not  to  interfere
with  the  CINCPAC  weapons  demonstration.)  By  the  time  that  meeting  is  held,
we  should  not  only  have  been  able  to  observe  the  effects  of  our  initial  and
immediate  attacks  but  also  we  should  have  a  better  reading  of  both  the  ability
of  the  Saigon  Government  and  the  relations  in  the  Sino-Soviet  campaign.

William  H.  Sullivan

Attachment:

Tab  A — Draft  Article


[Document  221]

6  November  1964

CIA*DIA*INR  PANEL  DRAFT

SECTIONS  VI-VII:  PROBABLE  REACTIONS  TO  OPTIONS  B  AND  C.

A.  COMMUNIST  REACTIONS  IN  THE  INDOCHINA  AREA

(We  refer  the  reader  to  SNIE  10-3-64,  "Probable  Reactions  to  Certain  Pos-
sible US  GVN  Courses  of  Action,"  of  9  October  1964.  We  feel  that  the  judg-
ments of  this  SNIE  apply  to  the  general  levels  of  US  military  actions  against
the  DRV  which  might  be  taken  under  the  broad  Options  B  or  C  of  our  present
project  outline — note  especially  the  similarity  with  Category  IV  generalized  US
actions  in  pages  7-12  of  the  SNIE.  Once  Options  B  and  C  have  been  defined
more  precisely,  the  intelligence  community,  or  intelligence  community  person-
nel, can  estimate  how  Communist  reactions  would  differ,  if  at  all,  from  those
in  response  to  the  assumed  general  US  categories  of  action  of  SNIE  10-3-64.)

B.  COMMUNIST  MOVES  ELSEWHERE  IN  THE  WORLD

We  believe  that  the  USSR  would  be  sufficiently  concerned  over  the  prospect
of  escalation  of  the  crisis  and  of  possible  general  war  that  it  would  not  risk


Documents  597


trying  the  American  temper  by  provoking  major  crises  in  Berlin,  Cuba,  or  else-
where. We  similarly  doubt  that  Communist  China  would  seek  to  create  any
major  diversions  outside  of  Southeast  Asia  during  a  US-DRV  confrontation  for
fear  of  US  nuclear  retaliation.

C.  REACTIONS  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

1.  The  initial  reaction  would  probably  be  one  of  elation,  in  the  belief  that  the
US  was  at  last  bringing  its  great  power  to  bear  against  the  enemy.  Such  attitudes
would  persist  in  the  event  that  VC  activity  noticeably  diminished  or  if  the  DRV
soon  indicated  a  serious  interest  in  a  cease-fire  and  negotiations.  The  South  Viet-
namese would  be  given  a  great  psychological  boost,  and  we  would  probably  see
at  least  a  spurt  of  much  more  effective  GVN  military  and  administrative  per-
formance. Initial  South  Vietnamese  elation  and  support  would  almost  certainly
quickly  wane,  however,  if  the  war  seemed  to  drag  on  despite  the  new  US  moves,
and  especially  if  the  VC  were  able  to  increase  their  military  and  terrorist  pres-
sures.

2.  In  such  event,  the  belief  would  almost  certainly  rapidly  spread  that  eventual
DRV/VC  victory  was  inevitable,  that  the  US  was  unable  or  unwilling  to  save
the  situation,  and  that  prudence  dictated  an  early  accommodation.  In  such  an
atmosphere,  VC  exploitive  efforts  would  bear  considerable  fruit.  There  would
doubtless  be  some  protest  among  South  Vietnamese  at  the  "inhuman"  US  actions
against  their  kinsmen  in  the  North.  Deteriorating  South  Vietnamese  morale,  VC
pressures,  and  perhaps  French  political  action  in  South  Vietnam  could  prob-
ably succeed  in  soon  casting  up  a  new  government  committed  to  a  cease-fire
and  a  negotiated  end  to  the  war  on  almost  any  terms.  The  US  would  probably
have  the  capability  to  install  and  protect  a  GVN  subservient  to  US  wishes,  but
the  scene  would  have  deteriorated  to  such  an  extent  that  there  would  be  little
nation-wide  support  for  this  government.

3.  VC  tactics  and  capabilities.  The  general  level  of  VC  activity — whether
more,  less,  or  about  as  at  present — would  of  course  be  the  result  of  Hanoi's
basic  decision  of  the  moment  as  to  how  to  respond  to  the  US  attacks.  Involved
in  such  decision  would  be  Hanoi's  estimate  of  the  fragility  of  the  political  situa-
tion in  the  South  and  whether  "victory"  might  be  quickly  attained  by  a  short,
sudden  burst.  Available  intelligence  data  do  not  warrant  a  confident  estimate  of
VC  "burst"  capabilities,  but  we  incline  to  the  view  that  the  VC  does  have  mili-
tary capabilities  it  has  not  yet  committed.  This  may  also  be  the  case  with  VC
terrorism,  subversion,  and  political  action,  though  we  feel  that  any  "unused"
capabilities  in  these  fields  are  less  than  in  the  case  of  the  military.  In  any  event,
the  VC  would  be  hesitant  to  commit  large-scale  VC  forces  for  fear  that  the
GVN,  with  US  assistance,  could  chew  up  such  military  units  much  more  effec-
tively than  it  has  small  VC  groups.  The  VC,  accordinglv,  would  probably  not
attempt  to  administer  such  a  coup  de  grace  unless  the  demise  of  Saigon's  author-
ity appeared  to  be  imminent.

D.  NON-COMMUNIST  REACTIONS

1.  The  reactions  of  the  non-aligned  states,  and  even  of  some  US  allies,  to
increased  US  military  initiatives  would  tend  to  be  adverse.  The  more  severe
the  attacks  were,  and  the  longer  they  lasted,  the  greater  and  more  articulate  the
the  adverse  reaction  would  be.  Such  reactions  would  be  mitigated  considerably
if  the  moves  appeared  to  achieve  US  objectives,  and  in  any  case  some  gov-


598 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

ernments  would  be  privately  more  sympathetic  to  the  US  than  would  appear
in  their  public  stance  or  in  public  opinion  media.

2.  The  most  important  non-Communist  reactions  would  be  those  of  the  Asian
states  and  of  France  and  the  UK.

a.  In  the  Rep.  of  Korea,  the  Rep.  of  China,  the  Philippines,  and  Thailand
there  would  be  considerable  elation  that  the  US  had  adopted  a  tough  new
line  which  might  check  or  cut  back  Communist  expansion.  These  allies  could
probably  be  counted  upon  to  lend  some  active  support,  use  of  bases,  etc.,  to
the  US  effort,  but  to  balk  at  any  US  efforts  to  enlist  their  support  for  a  negotiated
settlement.  The  Japanese  government,  and  considerable  informed  opinion  in
Japan,  would  be  quietly  pleased  by  the  US  action  against  the  DRV.  The  Japan-
ese government  would  probably  attempt  to  stay  fairly  aloof  from  the  ques-
tion, however,  for  fear  of  provoking  extreme  domestic  pressures  or  possible
Chinese  Communist  action  against  Japan.  In  such  process,  the  Japanese  govern-
ment, especially  one  headed  by  Kono,  might  seek  to  restrict  certain  US  base
rights  in  Japan.

b.  The  Indian  government,  and  considerable  informed  opinion  in  India,
would  probably  be  quietly  pleased  by  the  US  toughness,  but  the  official  Indian
line  would  doubtless  be  one  pressing  for  a  quick  end  to  hostilities  and  for  US
entry  into  negotiations.  Prince  Sihanouk  would  probably  be  the  most  trouble-
some neutralist,  but  his  position  would  largely  depend  on  his  estimate  of  which
was  the  stronger  side.  Sukarno  can  be  confidently  expected  to  lend  at  least  verbal
support  to  the  Communist  cause.

c.  In  the  event  US  actions  against  the  DRV  were  accompanied  by  an
apparent  US  willingness  to  negotiate,  the  UK  would  probably  prove  our  firmest
political  aide  at  this  point,  pressing  for  negotiations  but  resisting  Communist
efforts  to  make  a  mockery  of  them.  The  French  would  probably  condemn  US
military  action  and  associate  themselves  with  Communist  demands  for  negotia-
tions without  preconditions.

3.  Longer-term  world  reactions  would  be  influenced  by  success  of  the  US  sanc-
tions: if  they  halted  Communist  expansion  in  Indochina  and  led  to  an  easing
of  tensions,  US  firmness  would  be  retrospectively  admired,  as  in  the  Chinese
offshore  islands  and  Cuba  missile  showdowns.

4.  The  US  would  probably  find  itself  progressively  isolated  in  the  event  the
US  sanctions  did  not  soon  achieve  either  a  Communist  reduction  of  pressures  in
South  Vietnam  or  some  progress  toward  meaningful  negotiations,  and  would
almost  certainly  find  itself  isolated  in  the  event  that  the  crisis  developed  to  the
point  where  a  US-Communist  Chinese  war  seemed  imminent.  Some  US  allies,
such  as  the  GRC,  the  Philippines,  and  Thailand,  would  probably  back  the  US
wholeheartedly,  with  the  GRC,  at  least,  demanding  to  participate.  Reactions  of
other  US  allies  would  depend  in  part  upon  the  manner  in  which  the  situation
had  developed.

[Document  222]

Bundy  Working  Group

2nd  Draft— 11/6/64
McNaughton

ACTION  FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM
1.  US  aims: (a)  To  protect  US  reputation  as  a  counter-subversion  guarantor,
(b)  To  avoid  domino  effect  especially  in  Southeast  Asia.


Documents  599


(c)  To  keep  South  Vietnamese  territory  from  Red  hands.

(d)  To  emerge  from  crisis  without unacceptable  taint  from
methods.


2.  Present  situation:  The  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  deteriorating.  Unless
new  actions  are  taken,  the  new  government  will  probably  be  unstable  and
ineffectual,  and  the  VC  will  probably  continue  to  extend  their  hold  over  the
population  and  territory.  It  can  be  expected  that,  soon  (6  months?  two
years?),  (a)  government  officials  at  all  levels  will  adjust  their  behavior  to  an
eventual  VC  take-over,  (b)  defections  of  significant  military  forces  will  take
place,  (c)  whole  integrated  regions  of  the  country  will  be  totally  denied  to
the  GVN,  (d)  neutral  and/or  left-wing  elements  will  enter  the  government,
(e)  a  popular-front  regime  will  emerge  which  will  invite  the  US  out,  and  (f)
fundamental  concessions  to  the  VC  and  accommodations  to  the  DRV  will
put  South  Vietnam  behind  the  Curtain.

3.  Urgency:  "Bien  Hoa"  having  passed,  no  urgent  decision  is  required  regarding
military  action  against  the  DRV,  but  (a)  such  a  decision,  related  to  the  gen-
eral deteriorating  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  should  be  made  soon,  and  (b)
in  the  event  of  another  VC  or  DRV  "spectacular,"  a  decision  (for  at  least  a
reprisal)  would  be  urgently  needed.

4.  Inside  South  Vietnam:  Progress  inside  SVN  is  important,  but  it  is  unlikely
despite  our  best  ideas  and  efforts  (and  progress,  if  made,  will  take  at  least
several  months).  Nevertheless,  whatever  other  actions  might  be  taken,  great
efforts  should  be  made  within  South  Vietnam:  (a)  to  strengthen  the  govern-
ment, its  bureaucracy,  and  its  civil-military  coordination  and  planning,  (b)  to
dampen  ethnic,  religious,  urban  and  civil-military  strife  by  a  broad  and  posi-
tive GVN  program  designed  (with  US  Team  help)  to  enlist  the  support  of
important  groups,  and  (c)  to  press  the  pacification  program  in  the  country-
side.


5.  Action  against  DRV:  Action  against  North  Vietnam  is  to  some  extent  a  sub-
stitute for  strengthening  the  government  in  South  Vietnam.  That  is,  a  less
active  VC  (on  orders  from  DRV)  can  be  matched  by  a  less  efficient  GVN.
We  therefore  should  consider  squeezing  North  Vietnam.

6.  Options  open  to  us:  We  have  three  options  open  to  us  (all  envision  reprisals
in  the  DRV  for  DRV/VC  "spectaculars"  against  GVN  as  well  as  US  assets  in
South  Vietnam)  :

OPTION  A.  Continue  present  policies.  Maximum  assistance  within  SVN  and
limited  external  actions  in  Laos  and  by  the  GVN  covertly  against  North  Viet-
nam. The  aim  of  any  reprisal  actions  would  be  to  deter  and  punish  large  VC
actions  in  the  South,  but  not  to  a  degree  that  would  create  strong  international
negotiating  pressures.  Basic  to  this  option  is  the  continued  rejection  of  nego-
tiating in  the  hope  that  the  situation  will  improve.

OPTION  B.  Fast /full  squeeze.  Present  policies  plus  a  systematic  program  of
military  pressures  against  the  North,  meshing  at  some  point  with  negotiation,
but  with  pressure  actions  to  be  continued  at  a  fairly  rapid  pace  and  without
interruption  until  we  achieve  our  central  present  objectives.


600 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

OPTION  C.  Progressive  squeeze-and-talk.  Present  policies  plus  an  orchestration
of  communications  with  Hanoi  and  a  crescendo  of  additional  military  moves
against  infiltration  targets,  first  in  Laos  and  then  in  the  DRV,  and  then  against
other  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  The  scenario  would  be  designed  to  give  the
US  the  option  at  any  point  to  proceed  or  not,  to  escalate  or  not,  and  to
quicken  the  pace  or  not.  The  decisions  in  these  regards  would  be  made  from
time  to  time  in  view  of  all  relevant  factors.

7.  Analysis  of  OPTION  A.  [To  be  provided.]

8.  Analysis  of  OPTION  B.  [To  be  provided.]

9.  Analysis  of  OPTION  C.

(a)  Military  actions.  Present  policy,  in  addition  to  providing  for  reprisals
in  DRV  for  DRV  actions  against  US,  envisions  ( 1 )  34A  Airops  and
Marops,  (2)  deSoto  patrols,  for  intelligence  purposes,  (3)  South  Viet-
namese shallow  ground  actions  in  Laos  when  practicable,  and  (4)
T28  strikes  against  infiltration-associated  targets  in  Laos.  Additional  ac-
tions should  be:

PHASE  ONE  (in  addition  to  reprisals  in  DRV  for  VC  "spectaculars"  in  South
Vietnam) :

(5)  US  strikes  against  infiltration-associated  targets  in  Laos.

PHASE  TWO  (in  addition  to  reprisals  in  DRV  against  broader  range  of  VC
actions) :

(6)  Low-level  reconnaisance  in  southern  DRV,  (7)  US/VNAF  strikes
against  infiltration-associated  targets  in  southern  DRV.

PHASE  THREE:  Either  continue  only  the  above  actions  or  add  one  or  more
of  the  following,  making  timely  deployment  of  US  forces:  (8)  Aerial
mining  of  DRV  ports,  (9)  Naval  quarantine  of  DRV,  and  (10)  Us/
VNAF,  in  "crescendo,"  strike  additional  targets  on  "94  target  list."
South  Vietnamese  forces  should  play  a  role  in  any  action  taken  against  the
DRV.

(b)  Political  actions.  Establish  immediately  a  channel  for  bilateral  US-
DRV  communication.  This  could  be  in  Warsaw  or  via  Seaborn  in
Hanoi.  Hanoi  should  be  told  we  do  not  seek  to  destroy  North  Viet-
nam or  to  acquire  a  colony  or  base,  but  that  North  Vietnam  must:

( 1 )  Stop  training  and  sending  personnel  to  wage  war  in  SVN  and  Laos.

(2)  Stop  sending  arms  and  supplies  to  SVN  and  Laos.

(3)  Stop  directing  and  controlling  military  actions  in  SVN  and  Laos.

(4)  Order  the  VC  and  PL  to  stop  their  insurgencies  and  military  ac-
tions.

(5)  Remove  VM  forces  and  cadres  from  SVN  and  Laos.

(6)  Stop  propaganda  broadcasts  to  South  Vietnam.

[(7)  See  that  VC  and  PL  stop  attacks  and  incidents  in  SVN  and
Laos?]

[(8)  See  that  VC  and  PL  cease  resistance  to  government  forces?]
[(9)  See  that  VC  and  PL  turn  in  weapons  and  relinquish  bases?]
[(10)  See  that  VC  and  PL  surrender  for  amnesty  of  expatriation?]


Documents  601


US  demands  should  be  accompanied  by  offers  ( 1 )  to  arrange  a  rice-barter
deal  between  the  two  halves  of  Vietnam  and  (2)  to  withdraw  US  forces
from  South  Vietnam  for  so  long  as  the  terms  are  complied  with.
We  should  not  seek  wider  negotiations — in  the  UN,  in  Geneva,  etc. — but
we  should  evaluate  and  pass  on  each  negotiating  opportunity  as  it  is  pressed
on  us.

(c)  Information  actions.  The  start  of  military  actions  against  the  DRV
will  have  to  be  accompanied  by  a  convincing  world-wide  public  in-
formation program.  (The  information  problem  will  be  easier  if  the
first  US  action  against  the  DRV  is  related  in  time  and  kind  to  a  DRV
or  VC  outrage  or  "spectacular,"  preferably  against  SVN  as  well  as  US
assets.)

(d)  VC/DRV/Chicom/USSR  reactions.  [To  be  elaborated  later.]  The
DRV  and  China  will  probably  not  invade  South  Vietnam,  Laos  or
Burma,  nor  is  it  likely  that  they  will  conduct  air  strikes  on  these  coun-
tries. The  USSR  will  almost  certainly  confine  herself  to  political  actions.
If  the  DRV  or  China  strike  or  invade  South  Vietnam,  US  forces  will
be  sufficient  to  handle  the  problem.

(e)  GVN  reactions.  Military  action  against  the  DRV  could  be  counter-
productive in  South  Vietnam  because  (1)  the  VC  could  step  up  its
activities,  (2)  the  South  Vietnamese  could  panic,  (3)  they  could  re-
sent our  striking  their  "brothers,"  and  (4)  they  could  tire  of  waiting  for
results.  Should  South  Vietnam  disintegrate  completely  beneath  us,  we
should  try  to  hold  it  together  long  enough  to  permit  us  to  try  to
evacuate  our  forces  and  to  convince  the  world  to  accept  the  uniqueness
(and  congenital  impossibility)  of  the  South  Vietnamese  case.

(f)  Allied  and  neutral  reactions.  [To  be  elaborated  later.]  (1)  Even  if
OPTION  C  failed,  it  would,  by  demonstrating  US  willingness  to  go  to
the  mat,  tend  to  bolster  allied  confidence  in  the  US  as  an  ally.  (2)  US
military  action  against  the  DRV  will  probably  prompt  military  actions
elsewhere  in  the  world — e.g.,  Indonesia  against  IVIalaysia  or  Timor,  or
Turkey  against  Cyprus.


[Document  223]

3rd  Draft— 1 1/7/64— IVlcNaughton

ACTION  FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM

1.  US  aims: (a)  To  protect  US  reputation  as  a  counter-subversion  guarantor.

(b)  To  avoid  domino  effect  especially  in  Southeast  Asia.

(c)  To  keep  South  Vietnamese  territory  from  Red  hands.

(d)  To  emerge  from  crisis  without  unacceptable  taint  from  meth-
ods used.

2.  Present  situation:  The  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  deteriorating.  "Bien
Hoas"  cannot  be  prevented;  the  new  government  will  probably  be  unstable
and  ineffectual,  and  the  VC  will  probably  continue  to  extend  their  hold  over
the  population  and  territory.  It  can  be  expected  that  soon  (6  months?  two
years?)  (a)  government  officials  at  all  levels  will  adjust  their  behavior  to  an
eventual  VC  take-over,  (b)  defections  of  significant  military  forces  will  take


602 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


place,  (c)  whole  integrated  regions  of  the  country  will  enter  as  totally  denied
to  the  GVN,  (d)  neutral  and/or  left-wing  elements  will  enter  the  government,

(e)  a  popular-front  regime  will  emerge  which  will  invite  the  US  out,  and

(f)  fundamental  concessions  to  the  VC  and  accommodations  to  the  DRV
will  put  South  Vietnam  behind  the  Curtain.

3.  Urgency: (a)  For  GVN  morale,  risky  US  action  needed  now  (post-11/3)

to  prove  mettle.

(b)  Reprisal  for  new  DRV  or  VC  "spectacular"  would  require
urgent  decision.

(c)  General  deteriorating  situation  in  SVN  requires  decision  soon.

4.  Inside  South  Vietnam:  Progress  inside  SVN  is  important,  but  it  is  unlikely
despite  our  best  ideas  and  efforts  (and  progress,  if  made,  will  take  at  least
several  months).  Nevertheless,  whatever  other  actions  might  be  taken,  great
efforts  should  be  made  within  South  Vietnam:  (a)  to  strengthen  the  gov-
ernment, its  bureaucracy,  and  its  civil-military  coordination  and  planning,
(b)  to  dampen  ethnic,  religious,  urban  and  civil-military  strife  by  a  broad
and  positive  GVN  program  designed  (with  US  Team  help)  to  enlist  the  sup-
port of  important  groups,  and  (c)  to  press  the  pacification  program  in  the
countryside.  ISeparate  paper  on  this  subject  needed.]

5.  Options  against  DRV:  Action  against  North  Vietnam  is  to  some  extent  a  sub-
stitute for  strengthening  the  government  in  South  Vietnam.  That  is,  a  less
active  VC  (on  orders  from  DRV)  can  be  handled  by  a  less  efficient  GVN
(which  we  expect  to  have).  We  have  three  options  open  to  us  (all  envision
reprisals  in  the  DRV  for  DRV/VC  "spectaculars"  against  GVN  as  well  as
US  assets  in  South  Vietnam) :

OPTION  A.  Continue  present  policies.  Maximum  assistance  within  SVN  and
limited  external  actions  in  Laos  and  by  the  GVN  covertly  against  North  Viet-
nam. The  aim  of  any  reprisal  actions  would  be  to  deter  and  punish  large
VC  actions  in  the  South  (but  not  to  a  degree  that  would  create  strong  in-
ternational negotiating  pressures).  Basic  to  this  option  is  the  continued  re-
jection of  negotiating  in  the  hope  that  the  situation  will  improve.

OPTION  B.  Fast/full  squeeze.  Present  policies  plus  a  systematic  program  of
military  pressures  against  the  North,  meshing  at  some  point  with  negotiation,
but  with  pressure  actions  to  be  continued  at  a  fairly  rapid  pace  and  without
interruption  until  we  achieve  our  central  present  objectives.

OPTION  C.  Progressive  squeeze-and-talk.  Present  policies  plus  an  orchestra-
tion of  (a)  communications  with  Hanoi  and  (b)  a  crescendo  of  additional
military  moves  against  infiltration  targets,  first  in  Laos  and  then  in  the  DRV,
and  then  against  other  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  The  scenario  should  give
the  impression  of  a  steady  deliberate  approach.  It  would  be  designed  to  give
the  US  the  option  at  any  point  to  proceed  or  not,  to  escalate  or  not,  and  to
quicken  the  pace  or  not.  These  decisions  would  be  made  from  time  to  time
in  view  of  all  relevant  factors.

Analysis  of  OPTION  A .  [To  be  provided.]
Analysis  of  OPTION  B.  [To  be  provided.]
Analysis  of  OPTION  C.


Documents  603


(a)  Military  actions.  (South  Vietnamese  should  play  as  large  a  role  as  pos-
sible.)

PRESENT  (in  addition  to  reprisals  in  DRV  for  DRV  actions  against  US  assets) :

(1)  High-level  reconnaissance  of  North  Vietnam.

(2)  34A  Marops  and  Airops  (legitimated?  including  "black  bomber"?).

(3)  DeSoto  patrols,  for  intelligence  purposes.

(4)  South  Vietnamese  shallow  ground  actions  in  Laos  when  practicable.

(5)  T28  strikes  against  infiltration-associated  targets  in  Laos.

PHASE  ONE  (in  addition  to  reprisals  in  DRV  for  VC  "spectaculars"  in  South
Vietnam)  :

(6)  US  armed-recce  strikes  against  infiltration-associated  targets  in  Laos.
PHASE  TWO  (in  addition  to  reprisals  in  DRV  against  broader  range  of  VC

actions) :

(7)  Low-level  reconnaissance  in  southern  DRV.

(8)  US/VNAF  strikes  against  infiltration-associated  targets  in  southern
DRV.

PHASE  THREE:  Continue  only  the  above  actions  or  add  one  or  more  of  the
following,  making  timely  evacuation  of  dependents  and  deployment  of  US
forces :

(9)  Aerial  mining  of  DRV  ports.

(10)  Naval  quarantine  of  DRV.

(11)  US/VNAF,  in  "crescendo,"  strike  additional  targets  on  "94  target  list."

(b)  Political  side:  (1)  After  OPTION  C  decision,  Taylor  "noisily"  to  Wash-

ington.

(2)  Before  PHASE  ONE,  set  up  covert  US-DRV  talking
channel.

(3)  As  larger  forums  (US,  Geneva)  pressed  on  us,  judge
them.

(c)  Terms: (1)  We  do  not  seek  to  destroy  North  Vietnam  or  to  acquire  a

base,

(2)  We  will  arrange  a  rice-barter  deal  between  the  two  Viet-
nams,  and

(3)  We  will  stop  squeeze  on  DRV  (no  promise  to  withdraw
from  SVN),

but (4)  DRV  must  stop  training  and  sending  personnel  to  SVN
and  Laos,

(5)  DRV  must  stop  sending  arms  and  supplies  into  SVN  and
Laos,

(6)  DRV  must  stop  directing  military  actions  in  SVN  and  Laos,

(7)  DRV  must  order  the  VC  and  PL  to  stop  their  insurgencies,

(8)  DRV  must  stop  propaganda  broadcasts  to  South  Vietnam,
and

(9)  DRV  must  remove  VM  forces  and  cadres  from  SVN  and
Laos,

[(10)  DRV  must  see  that  VC  and  PL  stop  incidents  in  SVN  and
Laos?]

[(11)  DRV  must  see  that  VC  and  PL  cease  resistance?]
[(12)  DRV  must  see  that  VC  and  PL  turn  in  weapons  and  bases?]
[(13)  DRV  must  see  that  VC  and  PL  surrender  for  amnesty  of
expatriation?]


604 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

(d)  Information  actions.  The  start  of  military  actions  against  the  DRV  will
have  to  be  accompanied  by  a  convincing  world-wide  public  information
program.  Briefings  of  responsible  newspaper  people  along  "Jorden  Re-
port" lines  (without  disclosing  sensitive  information)  should  start  before
PHASE  ONE.  Our  actions  then  would  clearly  be  reactions  to  an  estab-
lished Communist  perfidy,  but  the  scenario  would  be  under  our  control.

(e)  VC/DRV /Chicom/USSR  reactions,  [to  be  elaborated  later.]  The  DRV
and  China  almost  certainly  will  not  invade  South  Vietnam,  Laos  or
Burma,  or  conduct  air  strikes  on  these  countries  in  response  to  PHASES
ONE  and  TWO;  and  the  same  is  probably  true  in  response  to  PHASE
THREE.  The  USSR  will  almost  certainly  confine  herself  to  political
actions.  If  the  DRV  or  China  strike  or  invade  South  Vietnam,  US  forces
will  be  sufficient  to  handle  the  problem.

(f)  GVN  reactions.  Military  action  against  the  DRV  could  be  counter-produc-
tive in  South  Vietnam  because  ( 1 )  the  VC  could  step  up  its  activities,
(2)  the  South  Vietnamese  could  panic,  (3)  they  could  resent  our  striking
their  "brothers,"  and  (4)  they  could  tire  of  waiting  for  results.  Should
South  Vietnam  disintegrate  completely  beneath  us,  we  should  try  to  hold
it  together  long  enough  to  permit  us  to  try  to  evacuate  our  forces  and  to
convince  the  world  to  accept  the  uniqueness  (and  congenital  impossi-
bility) of  the  South  Vietnamese  case.

(g)  Allied  and  neutral  reactions.  [To  be  elaborated  later.]  (1)  Even  if
OPTION  C  failed,  it  would,  by  demonstrating  US  willingness  to  go  to  the
mat,  tend  to  bolster  allied  confidence  in  the  US  as  an  ally.  (2)  US  military
action  against  the  DRV  will  probably  prompt  military  actions  elsewhere  in
the  world — e.g.,  Indonesia  against  Malaysia  or  Timor,  or  Turkey  against
Cyprus.

(h)  Evaluation.  OPTION  C,  as  compared  with  OPTION  A,  stands  a  better
chance  of  coming  out  better  (though,  involving  a  somewhat  larger  chance
of  big  escalation  than  OPTION  A,  it  stands  some  chance  of  coming  out
very  badly).  If  OPTION  C  is  tried  and  fails,  we  are  in  no  worse  position
than  we  would  be  under  OPTION  A;  but  whatever  form  a  failure  took,
OPTION  C  would  leave  behind  a  better  odor  than  OPTION  A:  It  would
demonstrate  that  US  was  a  "good  doctor"  willing  to  keep  promises,  be
tough,  take  risks,  get  bloodied,  and  hurt  the  enemy  badly.  OPTION  C
stands  a  better  chance  of  avoiding  appearances  which  will  affect  judg-
ments by,  and  provide  pretexts  to,  other  nations  regarding  US  power,
resolve  and  competence,  and  regarding  how  the  US  will  behave  in  future
cases  of  particular  interest  to  those  nations.


[Document  224]

Draft

WPBundy:mk

11/7/64

III.  The  Broad  Options

We  believe  there  are  three  broad  options  as  to  our  future  course  of  action  in
reference  to  vSouth  VN.


Documents  605


Option  A  would  be  to  continue  present  policies  indefinitely.  This  would  in-
volve maximum  assistance  within  South  VN,  together  with  limited  external
actions  in  Laos  and  by  the  GVN  covertly  against  North  VN.  We  would  con-
tinue to  seek  every  possible  additional  measure  for  expansion  of  the  present
effort  that  would  fit  within  the  present  policy  framework.  We  would  also  take
specific  individual  reprisal  actions  not  only  against  such  incidents  as  the  Gulf  of
Tonkin  attack  but  also  against  any  recurrence  of  VC  "spectaculars"  in  South  VN
(particularly  but  not  solely  if  such  spectaculars  were  aimed  at  US  installations).
Under  this  option,  the  aim  of  such  reprisal  actions  would  be  to  deter  and  punish
such  VC  actions  in  the  south,  but  not  to  a  degree  that  would  create  strong  inter-
national negotiating  pressures.  Basic  to  this  option  is  the  continued  rejection  of
negotiation  in  the  hope  that  the  situation  will  improve.

As  to  the  basic  forms  of  negotiation  that  might  arise  under  this  course  of
action  there  are  two  possibilities:

1.  We  would  accept  the  risk  that  South  Vietnamese  elements  would  them-
selves open  negotiations  with  the  Liberation  Front  or  with  Hanoi  directed
probably  to  a  cease-fire  and  a  coalition  government  that  would  admit  the  Libera-
tion Front.

2.  We  might  ourselves  initiate,  or  acquiesce  in  having  others  initiate,  a  negotiat-
ing track,  probably  through  the  convening  of  a  Geneva  Conference  on  VN  or —
if  a  Laos  conference  had  otherwise  come  about — letting  such  a  conference  in
practice  extend  itself  to  cover  VN.

Option  B  would  call  for  continuing  present  policies  as  above,  but  its  key
ingredient  would  be  a  systematic  program  of  military  pressures  against  the  north,
meshing  at  some  point  with  negotiation,  but  with  pressure  actions  to  be  con-
tinued at  a  fairly  rapid  pace  and  without  interruption  until  we  achieve  our
present  objective  of  getting  Hanoi  completely  out  of  South  VN  and  an  inde-
pendent and  secure  South  VN  reestablished.  This  option  can  be  labelled  a  "fast/
full  squeeze."  Basic  to  it  is  that  we  would  approach  any  discussions  for  negotia-
tion with  absolutely  inflexible  insistence  on  our  present  objectives.

Option  C  might  be  labelled  "progressive  squeeze  and  talk."  It  would  consist  of
present  policies,  plus  an  orchestration  of  ( 1 )  communication  with  Hanoi  and/or
Peiping,  and  (2)  additional  graduated  military  moves  against  infiltration  targets,
first  in  Laos  and  then  in  the  DRV,  and  then  against  other  targets  in  North  VN.
The  military  scenario  should  give  the  impression  of  a  steady  deliberate  approach,
and  should  be  designed  to  give  the  US  the  option  at  any  time  to  proceed  or  not,
to  escalate  or  not,  and  to  quicken  the  pace  or  not.  These  decisions  would  be  made
from  time  to  time  in  view  of  all  relevant  factors.

The  negotiating  part  of  this  course  of  action  would  have  to  be  played  largely
by  ear.  But  in  essence  we  would  be  indicating  from  the  outset  a  willingness  to
negotiate  in  an  affirmative  sense.  We  would  at  the  outset  clearly  be  sticking  to
our  full  present  objectives,  but  we  would  have  to  accept  the  possibility  that,
as  the  whole  situation  developed,  we  might  not  achieve  these  full  objectives  un-
less we  were  prepared  to  take  the  greater  risks  envisaged  under  Option  B.  In
essence.  Option  C  is  a  medium  risk/medium  hope  of  accomplishment  option.

A  decision  to  go  no  further  than  Option  A  as  our  ultimate  course  of  action
would  in  itself  rule  out  Option  B  or  Option  C.  However,  the  opening  mihtary
actions  for  Option  B  and  Option  C  have  much  in  common  and  it  is  theoretically
possible  to  initiate  these  actions  without  having  made  a  decision  as  to  which
option  would  ultimately  be  followed.

Nonetheless,  we  believe  that  in  practice  a  breakpoint  would  very  quickly  be
reached,  at  which  we  would  have  to  make  clear  whether  we  did  in  fact  mean  to


606 Gravel  Ediuon  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

pursue  our  military  actions  in  an  unrelenting  fashion,  and  whether  we  were  pre-
pared to  negotiate  in  anv  sense  other  than  inflexible  insistence  on  our  present
full  objectives.  Hence,  it  is  our  view  that  a  clear  decision  would  in  fact  have  to
be  made  at  the  outset  whether  we  were  pursuing  Option  B  or  Option  C.  A
decision  favor  of  Option  C  would  not  foreclose  the  taking  of  some  additional
militar\'  measures  as  the  situation  unfolded,  but  the  whole  spirit  and  thrust  of
these  operations  would  be  different  than  under  Option  B.


[Document  225]

IMMEDIATE  ACTIONS  IN  THE  PERIOD  PRIOR  TO  DECISION
(PART  VIII  OF  THE  BUNDY  OUTLINE)

November  7,  1964

The  US,  together  with  the  RLG  and  GVN,  are  involved  in  a  number  of
operations — 34A.  Yankee  Team,  Recce,  and  RLAF  T-28  ops — designed  to
warn  and  harass  North  X'ietnam  and  to  reduce  enemv  capabilities  to  utilize  the
Lao  Panhandle  for  reinforcing  the  Viet  Cong  in  South  Vietnam  and  to  cope
with  PL  VM  pressures  in  Laos.  The  US  also  has  under  consideration  DeSoto
Patrols  and  Cross  Border  Ground  Operations.  The  present  status  and  outlook
of  these  operations  are  described  below,  together  with  a  checklist  of  outstanding
problems  relating  to  each  of  the  field  of  operations.

In  general  the  working  group  is  agreed  that  our  aim  should  be  to  maintain
present  signal  strength  and  level  of  harassment,  showing  no  signs  of  lessening  of
determination  but  also  avoiding  actions  that  would  tend  to  prejudge  the  basic
decision.

A. OPLAN  34 A

Although  not  all  of  Oplan  34A  was  suspended  after  the  first  Tonkin  Gulf
incident,  in  effect  little  was  accomplishd  during  the  remainder  of  August  and  the
month  of  September.  Several  successful  maritime  and  airborne  operations  have
been  conducted  under  the  October  schedule.  A  schedule  for  November  is  under
discussion  and  will  probablv  be  approved  November  7.

1.  Maritime  Operations

Since  the  resumption  of  Marops  under  the  October  schedule,  the  following
have  been  completed:

Recon L  Dav  (Oct. 4)  Probe  to  12  miles  of  Vinh  Sor.
Recon L-2(Oct.  10) " "3 " "  "
Loki  rV L  -t-  5  Junk  capture  failed

32&45  E  L  +  8  (Oct.  28  29)  Bombard  Vinh  Son  radar  and  Mui  Dao  observa-
tion post.

The  following  operation  was  refused  approval:

44C L-hlO  Demolition  by  frog  men  supported  by  fire  team  of

bridge  on  Route  1.


Documents  607


Currently  approved  is:

34B  L  —  12  (Nov.  4,  on)  Bombardment  of  barracks  on  Hon  Matt

and  Tiger  Island.

The  following  maritime  operations  remain  on  the  October  schedule  and  pre-
sumably will  appear  on  the  November  schedule  along  with  some  additional
similar  operations:


L  —  13  Capture  of  prisoner  by  team  from  PTF

L  —  15  Junk  Capture

L  —  19  Bombard  Cap  Mui  Ron  and  Tiger  Island

L  —  25  Bombard  Yen  Phu  and  Sam  Son  radar

L  —  28  Blow  up  Bridge  Route  1  and  bombard  Cap  Dao

L  —  30  Return  any  captives  from  L  15

L  —  3 1  Bombard  Hoo  Ne  and  Hon  Me

L  —  36  Blow  up  frier  at  Phuc  Loi  and  bombard  He  r.  N^^

L  —  38  Cut  Hanoi-Vinh  rail  line

L  —  41  Bombard  Dong  Hoi  and  Tiger  Island

L  —  2-  Bombard  Nightingale  Island


2.  Airborne  Operations

Five  teams  and  one  singleton  agent  were  in  place  at  the  beginning  of  October.
Since  then  one  of  the  teams  has  been  resupplied  and  reinforced.  The  remaining
four  were  scheduled  to  be  resupplied  and  reinforced  but  weather  prevented  flights.
Tr.ese  operations,  plus  the  dropping  of  an  additional  team,  will  appear  on  the
November  schedule.

Tv^o  of  the  teams  carried  out  successful  actions  during  October.  One  de-
r-.olished  a  bridge,  the  other  ambushed  a  North  Vietnamese  patrol.  Both  teams
suiTered  casualties,  the  latter  sufficient  to  cast  doubt  on  the  wisdom  of  the
action.

3.  Psychological  Operations

Both  black  and  white  radio  broadcasts  have  been  made  daily.  Black  broad-
casts ha\e  averaged  ei^t  to  ten  hours  weekly, — white  broadcasts  sixty  hours

weekly.

Letters  posted  through  Hong  Kong  have  averagpd  about  from  50  to  100
weekly.

During  Sepieml>er  and  October  only  one  leaflet  delivery  was  made  by  air.
This  was  done  in  conjunction  with  a  resupply  mission.

The  November  schedule  will  call  for  a  large  number  of  leaflet  and  deception
operations.

4.  Reconnaissance  Flights

An  average  of  four  flights  per  v^eek  have  covered  the  bulk  of  Oplan  34A
targets.

Problems

1.  Surfacing  of  Marops — ^The  question  of  whether  to  surface  Marops  remains
unresolved.  While  Washington  has  suggested  this  be  done.  General  Khanh  has
been  reluctant  to  do  so.  It  is  argued  that  surfacing  the  operations  would  enable


608 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

the  US  to  offer  some  protection  to  them;  the  counter  argument  postulates  US
involvement  in  North  Vietnam  and  consequent  escalation.

2.  Security  of  Operations — The  postponement  of  an  operation,  whether  be-
cause of  unfavorable  weather  or  failure  of  Washington  to  approve  at  the  last
moment,  jeopardizes  the  operation.  Isolation  of  teams  presents  hazards.

3.  Base  Security — After  the  Bien  Hoa  shelling  some  attention  has  been  given
to  the  security  of  the  Danang  base.  Perimeter  guard  has  been  strengthened,  but
action  remains  to  be  taken  for  marine  security,  although  a  survey  is  underway.

4.  Team  Welfare — In-place  teams  Bell  and  Easy  have  been  in  dire  need  of
supplies  for  several  weeks.  Weather  has  prevented  resupply,  which  will  be  at-
tempted again  during  the  November  moon  phase.

5.  NVN  Counteraction — The  capability  of  the  North  Vietnamese  against
Marops  has  improved  somewhat,  although  not  yet  sufficiently  to  frustrate  these
operations.

B.  YANKEE  TEAM  OPERATIONS

For  several  months  now  the  pattern  of  Yankee  Team  Operations  has  .  .  .
over  a  two-week  period  and  about  ten  flights  during  the  same  time  interval
slated  for  Panhandle  coverage.  Additionally,  we  have  recently  been  authorized
a  maximum  of  two  shallow  penetration  flights  daily  to  give  comprehensive  de-
tailed coverage  of  cross  border  penetration.  We  have  also  recently  told  MACV
that  we  have  a  high  priority  requirement  for  night  photo  recce  of  key  motorable
routes  in  Laos.  At  present  about  2  night  recce  flights  are  flown  along  Route  7
areas  within  a  two-week  span.

YT  supplies  cap  for  certain  T-28  corridor  strikes.  Cap  aircraft  are  not  au-
thorized to  participate  in  strike  or  to  provide  suppressive  fire.

Pending  questions  include:  (a)  whether  YT  strikes  should  be  made  in  sup-
port of  RLAF  T-28  corridor  operations;  (b)  whether  YT  recce  should  be  made
of  areas  north  of  20°  parallel;  (c)  YT  suppressive  attacks  against  Route  7,  espe-
cially Ban  Ken  Bridge;  and  (d)  YT  activity  in  event  of  large-scale  ground  offen-
sive by  PL  (this  issue  has  not  arisen  but  undoubtedly  would,  should  the  PL
undertake  an  offensive  beyond  the  capabilities  of  Lao  and  sheep-dipped  Thai
to  handle).

C.  T-28  OPERATIONS

There  are  now  27  T-28  (including  three  RT-28)  aircraft  in  Laos,  of  which
22  are  in  operation.  CINCPAC  has  taken  action,  in  response  to  Ambassador
Unger's  request  to  build  this  inventory  back  up  to  40  aircraft  for  which  a  pilot
capability,  including  Thai,  is  present  in  Laos.

The  T-28's  are  conducting  the  following  operations:

1.  General  harassing  activities  against  Pathet  Lao  military  installations
and  movements,  primarily  in  Xieng  Khouang  and  Sam  Neua  Provinces.
This  also  includes  efforts  to  interdict  Route  7.

2.  Tactical  support  missions  for  Operation  Anniversary  Victory  No.  2
(Saleumsay),  the  FAR/Meo  clearing  operation  up  Route  4  and  north  of
Tha  Thom.

3.  Tactical  support  for  Operation  Victorious  Arrow  (Sone  Sai),  a  FAR
clearing  operation  in  southern  Laos.


Documents  609


4.  Strikes  on  targets  of  opportunity,  including  in  support  of  FAR  de-
fensive actions  such  as  at  Ban  Khen  northwest  of  Thakhek.

5.  Corridor  interdiction  program.  The  13  original  targets  under  this  pro-
gram have  been  hit  and  plans  are  now  underway  to  hit  four  additional
targets  (including  in  the  Tchepone  area),  plus  restriking  some  of  the
original  13  targets.  Ambassador  Unger  has  submitted  for  approval  under
this  program  6  additional  targets.

6.  The  Ambassador  has  been  authorized  to  discuss  with  the  RLAF
RT-28  reconnaissance  in  northwest  Laos  along  the  area  just  north  of  and
to  the  east  and  west  of  the  line  from  Vieng  Phou  Kha-Muong  Sai.

In  recent  weeks,  the  T-28's  have  been  dropping  a  large  number  of  surrender
leaflets  on  many  of  their  missions.  These  have  already  led,  in  some  cases,  to
PL  defections.

US  participation  in  SAR  operations  for  downed  T-28's  is  authorized.  We  are
faced  by  the  following  problems  in  connection  with  the  T-28's:

1.  Authority  for  Yankee  Team  aircraft  to  engage  in  suppressive  strikes
in  the  corridor  area,  in  support  of  the  T-28  strike  program  there,  has  not
been  given  as  yet.

2.  Also  withheld  is  authorization  for  YT  suppressive  fire  attack  on  Ban
Ken  Bridge  on  Route  7.

3.  We  are  investigating  reports  of  greatly  increased  truck  movement
along  Route  7  as  well  as  enemy  build-up  of  tanks  and  other  equipment
just  across  the  border  in  NVN.  Counteraction  may  be  required  involving
attack  on  Ban  Ken.

4.  Thai  involvement.  Hanoi  claims  to  have  shot  down  a  T-28  over  DRV
territory  on  August  18  and  to  have  captured  the  Thai  pilot  flying  the  plane.
Although  the  information  the  North  Vietnamese  have  used  in  connection
with  this  case  seems  to  be  accurate,  it  is  not  clear  the  pilot  is  alive  and
can  be  presented  to  the  ICC.  The  possibility  cannot  be  excluded,  however,
nor  that  other  Thai  pilots  might  be  captured  by  the  PL.

5.  The  DRV  claims  T-28's  have  violated  North  Vietnamese  airspace
and  bombed/strafed  NVN  villages  on  August  1  and  2,  and  on  October  16
and  17  and  again  on  October  28.  The  charges  are  probably  accurate  with
respect  to  the  first  two  dates  (along  Route  7)  and  the  last  one  (Mu  Gia
Pass  area).  The  October  16  and  17  strikes  were  actually  in  disputed  terri-
tory which  was  recognized  by  the  1954  Geneva  Agreement  as  being  in
Laos.

6.  The  Pathet  Lao  has  called  to  the  attention  of  the  ICC  T-28  strikes  in
the  corridor  area  and  called  for  the  ICC  to  stop  them  and  inform  the  Co-
Chairmen.  The  ICC  has  already  agreed  to  investigate  another  PL  charge
concerning  alleged  US/SVN  activities  in  the  corridor  area  in  violation  of
the  Geneva  Agreements.

D. DeSOTO  PATROLS

Further  DeSoto  Patrols  have  been  held  in  abeyance  pending  top-level  decision.
Ambassador  Taylor  (Saigon's  1378)  sees  no  advantage  in  resuming  DeSoto
Patrols  except  for  essential  intelligence  purposes.  He  believes  we  should  tie  our
actions  to  Hanoi's  support  of  Viet  Cong,  not  to  the  defense  of  purely  US  inter-
ests.


610 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


E.  CROSS  BORDER  GROUND  OPERATIONS

Earlier  in  the  year  several  eight-man  reconnaissance  teams  were  parachuted
into  Laos  as  part  of  Operation  Leaping  Lena.  All  of  these  teams  were  located
by  the  enemy  and  only  four  survivors  returned  to  RVN.  As  a  result  of  Leap-
ing Lena  Cross  Border  Ground  Operations  have  been  carefully  reviewed  and
COMUSMACV  has  stated  that  he  believes  no  effective  Cross  Border  Ground
Operations  can  be  implemented  prior  to  January  1,  1965  at  the  earliest.

F.  COVERT  OPERATIONS  IN  LAOS

Consideration  is  being  given  to  improving  Hardnose  (including  greater  Thai
involvement)  and  getting  Hardnose  to  operate  more  effectively  in  the  corridor
infiltration  areas.

No  change  in  status  of  Kha.

G.  OTHER  SENSITIVE  INTELLIGENCE  OPERATIONS

These  include  "Queen  Bee,"  "Box  Top,"  "Lucky  Dragon"  and  "Blue  Springs."

FE:MGreen:ej
11/7/64


[Document  226]

November  10,  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  MEMBERS  OF  NSC  WORKING  GROUP

I  am  enclosing  copies  of  draft  Sections  VII,  IX,  and  X,  which  contain  Mr.
McNaughton's  comments,  for  your  general  use.  These  should  be  considered
working  papers  only  and  should  not  go  outside  the  Working  Group.

William  P.  Bundy

Enclosures :

Draft  Sections  VII,  IX,  and  X.


DRAFT

W.  P.  Bundy/bmm

Nov.  8,  1964

VII. ANALYSIS  OF  OPTION  C

A. RATIONALE  AND  PREPARATORY  ACTIONS

1 .  Rationale

a.  This  course  of  action  consists  of  progressive  application  of  increasing  mili-
tary pressures,  undertaken  in  concert  with  appropriate  political  pressures,  to


Documents  611


cause  the  DRV  to  terminate  its  support  of  the  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam
(SVN)  and  Laos.  It  would  be  designed  for  maximum  control  at  all  stages,  and
to  permit  interruption  at  some  appropriate  point  or  points  for  negotiations,
while  seeking  to  maintain  throughout  a  credible  threat  of  further  military  pres-
sures should  such  be  required.

b.  The  object  of  negotiations  would  initially  be  the  complete  termination  of
DRV  support  to  the  insurgency  in  SVN  and  Laos,  in  order  to  re-establish  an
independent  and  secure  SVN  and  the  integrity  of  the  1962  Geneva  Accords  in
Laos.  However,  the  program  would  provide  for  the  contingency  that,  as  the
result  of  politico-military  evaluation  of  developments  during  its  progress,  it
might  become  desirable  to  settle  for  less  than  complete  assurances  on  our  key
objectives.

c.  A  stated  basis  for  our  actions  would  place  maximum  stress  on  the  docu-
mented illegal  infiltration  of  armed  and  trained  insurgents  from  the  DRV,  and
over-all  DRV  direction  and  control  of  VC  insurgency  all  along.  Our  posture
would  be  that  these  DRV  activities  had  now  reached  an  intolerable  level  re-
quiring action  against  the  DRV  by  the  US  and  the  GVN.  Additional  VC  major
actions  in  the  south  would  be  used  to  strengthen  this  posture,  particularly  if
such  actions  included  major  further  attacks  on  US  installations.

2. Preparatory  Actions

Substantial  preparation  for  this  course  of  action  would  already  have  been
taken  under  the  "Immediate  Program"  set  forth  in  Section  IX.  The  headings  of
preparatory  action  appear  to  be  as  follows:

a.  A  firm  Presidential  statement  setting  forth  our  rationale.

b.  Key  information  actions  addressed  to  the  US  public  and  to  international
audiences,  notably  the  surfacing  of  all  our  useable  information  on  infiltration.

c.  Consultation  with  key  leaders  of  Congress.  We  believe  that  the  present
Congressional  Resolution  provides  an  adequate  legal  basis  for  initiating  this
course  of  action.

d.  With  the  GVN,  we  would  make  clear  what  we  were  planning  to  do,  pro-
vide for  GVN  participation  to  the  maximum  degree  militarily  feasible,  but
above  all  take  a  very  tough  position  insisting  that  the  GVN  set  its  own  house
in  order,  maintain  political  stability,  and  get  ahead  with  the  military  and  pacifica-
tion programs.

e.  Certain  key  allies — UK,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Thailand,  and  the  Philip-
pines— would  be  fuHy  informed  in  advance  of  our  plans  and  would  be  asked  to
contribute  in  various  ways  to  the  maximum  possible  extent.  A  SEATO  meeting
might  be  used  to  obtain  a  strong  general  declaration  of  support,  but  the  actions
would  not  be  placed  on  an  explicit  SEATO  basis  (unless  perhaps  France  and
Pakistan  had  in  the  meantime  dropped  out  of  SEATO).

f.  Key  involved  nations  such  as  Canada,  India,  and  France,  would  require
special  individual  treatment.

g.  Laos  would  require  practically  full  consultation.

h.  In  Asia  and  GRC  and  ROK  would  be  informed  in  advance,  but  their  ac-
tive participation,  except  in  limited  GRC  intelligence  ways,  would  not  be  sought.

i.  In  NATO,  we  would  make  our  basic  position  clear  and  seek  their  sympathy
and  moral  support,  but  not  seek  to  enlist  them  in  military  actions.

j.  With  non-aligned  nations,  we  would  make  our  position  clear,  combining
individual  approaches  with  our  UN  statements.


612 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


B. OPENING  MILITARY  ACTIONS

1.  Conditions  of  Action:  "oo\d  blood"  versus  "hot  blood*"

There  would  be  man}'  ad\'antages  if  the  course  of  action  could  be  initiated
following  either  an  additional  VC  "spectacular"  or  at  least  strong  additional
evidence  of  a  major  infiltration.  However,  we  should  be  prepared  to  go  ahead
even  without  these,  on  the  basis  of  a  picture  of  over-all  deterioration.

2.  Specific:  Military  Actions

a.  Intensified  conduct  of  existing  activities,  such  as  34-A  MAROPS.  De  Soto
patrols.  Lao  and  US-armed  recce  strikes  on  infiltration-associated  targets  in
Laos,  high-level  recce  of  the  DRV.  and  shallow  S\^^  ground  actions  in  Laos
to  the  degree  practicable.

b.  The  key  additional  air  actions  in  the  first  phase  would  be  US  \7<-AF  low-
level  reconnaissance  in  the  southern  DR\'  and  the  initiation  of  strikes  against
infiltration-associated  targets  in  the  southern  DRV.  These  actions,  actuallv  hit-
ting the  DRV  on  an  oven  basis,  would  constitute  the  first  real  break-point  in
terms  of  both  the  beginning  of  real  pressures  on  the  DR\^  and  international
pressures  for  negotiation.

c.  In  conjunction  with  these  air  actions,  we  would  be  taking  maximum
securit}'  measures,  with  the  GVN,  in  the  south,  and  would  also  carr\'  out  a
mfifiiiim  level  of  additional  readiness  deplo^'ments  in  the  area.  Dependents  would
already  have  been  evacuated  from  S\^^  in  the  last  stages  of  the  "immediate
program."

d.  Reprisal  actions  at  this  point  would  be  fitted  into  the  larger  script.  We
must  recognize,  however,  that  such  reprisal  actions  might  necessarily  be  more
major  individual!}-  than  the  attacks  on  the  DR\'  contemplated  under  b.  above.

e.  Present  military'  planning  does  not  en\isage  the  introduction  of  substantial
gnniod  forces  into  'S\'N  or  Thailand  in  conjunction  with  the  first  phase.  We
"believe  this  needs  further  consideration.  Among  the  proposals  that  should  be
considered  would  be  the  introduction  of  substantial  ground  forces  into  Thailand
and,  more  dramatically,  the  introduction  of  a  US  or  multilateral  ground  force
into  the  northern  provinces  of  South  \^ietnam.  (Contributors  to  the  multilateral
force  might  include  Australia.  Ne\^-  Zealand.  Thailand,  and  the  Philippines.  In
oliier  words,  it  would  be  a  SEATO-member  force  prepared  to  act  firmly  on
the  ground,  as  opposed  to  a  "neutralizing"  force  drawn  from  India,  Canada,
and  similar  nations,  \^'e  believe  the  latter  to  be  impracticable. )

f.  The  degree  of  action  against  Cambodia  needs  further  thought.  ICS  plans
would  pro\'ide  for  hot  pursuit  at  least.  Others  believe  Cambodia  should  be
treated  on  present  lines  unless  Cambodia  itself  starts  crossing  the  border.

g.  Actions  in  Laos  also  need  further  thought.  The  military  script  now  pro-
vides only  for  a  more  intensive  application  of  present  types  of  action.  If  the
situation  in  Laos  simply  rocks  along,  without  major  Conimunist  action,  or  if
Laos  negotiations  have  moved  forward,  this  is  probabh  the  right  course.  How-
ever, the  introduction  of  substantial  ground  forces  to  seal  the  Panhandle  might
be  considered  at  some  early  military  stage,  especially  if  the  Communist  side  had
attacked  in  Laos.  Such  action  would  mo\'e  us  a  ver}'  long  way  toward  de  facto
partition  of  Laos;  in  effect,  we  would  be  adopting  a  strong  blocking  posture  in
Laos,  necessarily  balked  bv  deplo}'ments  in  Thailand.


i


Documents  613


C. EARLY  NEGOTIATING  ACTIONS

This  raises  two  questions:  the  inter-relation  of  various  possible  channels  of
communication  and  negotiating  avenues,  and  the  initial  negotiating  position  to
be  taken  by  the  US.

1. Communication  and  Negotiating  Avenues

a.  Channels  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping

( 1 )  We  would  continue  to  use  the  existing  channel  to  Hanoi.

(2)  We  could  conceivably  start  direct  conversations  with  Hanoi  in  some
third  country.

(3)  Use  of  third  countries  as  intermediaries  for  actual  negotiations  does  not
appear  promising.  We  could  hope  that  countries  such  as  India,  and  perhaps
Pakistan  and  France,  would  be  useful  in  making  clear  the  limited  nature  of
our  objectives.  Moscow  might  likewise  play  a  key  role  in  this  respect,  and  it  is
possible  that  Moscow  would  report  back  to  us  useful  interpretations  of  the
positions  of  Hanoi  and  Peiping.  However,  it  seems  most  unlikely  that  Moscow
would  go  so  far  as  to  serve  as  a  useful  intermediary.  In  sum,  not  much  hope
can  be  held  that  we  would  have  useful  negotiations  through  such  channels.
Hanoi  and  Peiping  might  give  us  indications  of  their  position,  but  they  would
probably  be  pressing  for  some  type  of  conference  as  an  actual  negotiating
locale.

b.  The  UN

It  is  virtually  certain  that  the  initiation  of  attacks  against  the  DRV  would  cause
some  form  of  UN  discussion,  and  we  believe  it  essential  that  we  and  the  GVN
take  the  initiative  to  explain  our  position  and  its  justification,  in  the  Security
Council.  It  is  just  possible  that  we  would  have  to  fend  off  some  condemnatory
move  in  the  General  Assembly  or  the  Security  Council,  and  an  affirmative  initia-
tive would  be  the  best  way  to  forestall  this,  as  well  as  providing  an  essential
forum  for  stating  our  position.

The  question  arises  whether,  beyond  such  use  of  the  UN,  we  should  seriously
consider  letting  the  UN  become  the  scene  of  serious  negotiations,  either  through
inscription  of  a  continuing  item  on  the  agenda  or  through  de  facto  use  of  UN
contacts.  Here  we  encounter  a  major  timing  problem  in  relation  to  the  issue  of
Chinese  Communist  representation.  If  a  UN  item  were  actually  inscribed,  be-
fore we  had  disposed  of  the  Chinese  issue  in  this  General  Assembly,  there  would
be  great  pressures  both  to  invite  Hanoi  and  Peiping  to  the  UN  and  to  admit  at
least  Peiping.  Since  we  do  not  think  the  ChiRep  issue  will  be  disposed  of  before
February,  or  perhaps  even  March,  this  timing  factor  argues  almost  insuperably
against  any  formal  inscription  of  the  SVN  problem,  or  the  Southeast  Asia  prob-
lem generally,  prior  to  that  time.

c.  A  Geneva  Conference

Once  we  had  started  attacks  on  the  DRV,  the  USSR  might  well  try  to  con-
vene a  Geneva  Conference.  Although  the  UK  Government  might  be  responsive
to  any  pressures  we  exerted  against  doing  so,  UK  public  opinion  would  almost


614 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

certainly  exert  enormous  pressure  for  the  UK  to  join  in  calling  a  conference.
France  would  of  course  join  in  the  hue  and  cry,  and  India  would  probably  do
likewise.  In  short,  the  aggregate  pressure  for  a  Geneva  Conference  would  be
very  great  in  any  event.

In  these  circumstances,  we  believe  that  the  best  course  would  be  for  the  US
to  yield  fairly  early  to  such  pressures,  and  in  effect  to  accept  a  Geneva  Con-
ference as  the  best  available  negotiating  forum.  At  the  same  time,  we  must
recognize  the  difficulty  inherent  in  such  action — and  indeed  in  the  whole  of
Option  C — that  our  early  acceptance  of  negotiation  would  in  itself  have  morale
effects  in  South  Vietnam,  Thailand,  and  perhaps  Laos.  Thus,  we  would  prob-
ably want  to  put  on  some  show  of  resistance.

d. An  Expanded  Laos  Conference

The  present  prospects  are  that  a  Laos  Conference  will  not  be  convened  in  the
near  future  on  the  basis  of  satisfaction  of  Souvanna's  present  preconditions.
We  are  trying  out  some  variations  that  might  ease  these  preconditions  without
hurting  morale  in  Laos,  and  these  might  result  in  a  conference — or  at  least  make
a  record  that  the  onus  for  rejecting  one  is  on  the  Communist  side.  If  a  Laos
Conference  were  in  fact  convened,  it  could  be  the  locale  for  quiet  negotiations
with  somewhat  less  disadvantage  than  the  formal  convening  of  a  Geneva  Con-
ference on  Vietnam  itself.  But  we  would  have  to  weigh  this  advantage  against
the  disadvantages  of  any  interim  concessions  making  a  Laos  Conference  possi-
ble.

2. Initial  US  Negotiating  Position

Our  initial  position  would  be  basically  to  insist  on  our  present  objectives,  plus
certain  bargaining  elements:

a.  The  1954  settlement  in  South  Vietnam  must  be  restored.  (We  would  duck
the  question  of  elections  in  all  Vietnam,  or  insist  that  any  such  elections  must
be  truly  free,  after  a  period  of  consolidation.)  This  means  a  South  Vietnam  not
free  to  enter  alliances,  with  any  external  military  presence  reduced  to  minimal
"normal  MAAG"  levels,  but  free  to  accept  external  military  equipment.

b.  The  DRV  must  observe  the  1954  agreement  by  totally  ceasing  its  support
for  the  VC  in  SVN.  We  would  specify  an  end  to  infiltration  of  arms  and  equip-
ment, an  end  to  propaganda,  closing  down  of  command  and  other  communica-
tions, and  removal  of  personnel  from  SVN.

c.  The  ending  of  DRV  activity  in  SVN  must  be  verified  by  some  new  en-
forcement machinery  replacing  the  present  ineffective  ICC.

d.  The  DRV  itself  should  be  neutralized  to  the  same  extent  as  SVN,  and
this  policed  by  effective  [word  illegible]  enforcement  machinery.  This  goes  be-
yond 1954,  and  might  later  be  traded  out.

e.  A  new  form  of  international  guarantee  should  be  provided  against  any
violation  of  the  above.  This  could  take  the  form  of  declaration  by  all  powers
and  the  designation  of  some  to  provide  forces  in  case  of  need.

In  sum,  we  would  use  the  negotiation  in  part  as  a  propaganda  forum  to  air
the  DRV  violations  and  force  other  nations  to  endorse  them.  We  also  would
set  our  sights  high,  so  that  "compromises"  might  still  leave  us  in  a  defensible
position.


Documents  615


D.  PROBABLE  COMMUNIST  RESPONSES

There  are  three  possible  Communist  responses:

1.  Hanoi  might  start  to  yield  visibly.  This  is  unlikely.

2.  Hanoi  might  retaliate  militarily  by  some  form  of  overt  military  action  such
as  limited  air  attacks  against  South  Vietnam,  or  an  offensive  in  Laos.  This  is
possible,  but  any  major  degree  of  military  retaliation  initially  is  less  likely  than:

3.  Hanoi  would  hold  firm,  possibly  avoiding  major  new  attacks  in  South
Vietnam  but  keeping  up  continued  strong  VC  pressure.  Hanoi  and  Peiping
would  do  their  utmost  to  stimulate  condemnation  of  the  attacks  in  world  opinion
and,  if  negotiations  began,  would  take  a  tough  initial  position.  This  appears
the  most  likely  response.

E.  IN  THE  EVENT  OF  THE  THIRD  TYPE  OF  COMMUNIST
RESPONSE,  LIKELY  DEVELOPMENTS  AND  PROBLEMS

1.  Within  SVN,  the  initial  reaction  to  attacks  on  the  DRV  would  probably
be  one  of  elation,  in  the  belief  that  the  US  was  at  last  bringing  its  great  power
to  bear  against  the  enemy.  The  South  Vietnamese  would  be  given  a  substantial
psychological  boast,  and  we  would  quickly  see  at  least  a  spurt  of  much  more
effective  GVN  military  and  administrative  performance.

However,  initial  South  Vietnamese  elation  and  support  would  almost  cer-
tainly quickly  wane,  if  the  war  seemed  to  drag  on  despite  the  new  US  moves,
and  especially  if  the  VC  were  able  to  increase  their  military  and  terrorist  pres-
sures.

In  short,  the  appearance  of  a  stalemate  could  easily  produce  a  resumption
in  present  deteriorating  trends,  and  this  could  lead  to  a  new  government  com-
mitted to  a  cease  fire  and  a  negotiated  end  of  the  war  on  almost  any  terms.  The
US  would  probably  have  the  capability  to  install  and  protect  a  GVN  sub-
servient to  US  wishes,  but  the  situation  might  have  deteriorated  to  such  an  ex-
tent that  there  would  be  less  nation-wide  suport  for  this  government.

If  this  somewhat  gloomy  prognosis  of  developments  in  South  Vietnam  proved
correct,  we  could  be  driven  at  a  fairly  early  point  to  consider:

2.  Moving  up  to  a  second  phase  involving  further  increases  of  military  pres-
sure. Here  the  actions  to  consider  would  be  extensions  of  the  target  system  in
the  DRV  to  include  additional  targets  on  the  "ninety-four  target  list,"  aerial
mining  of  DRV  pr)rts,  and  a  naval  quarantine  of  the  DRV.  The  aim  of  such
actions  would  be  to  hold  morale  in  South  Vietnam  and  to  increase  the  pressure
on  Hanoi.

3.  Either  in  conjunction  with  such  expanded  action,  or  to  some  degree  alter-
natively, the  US  might  intensify  its  initial  tough  negotiating  positions.  Such
modification  would  be  a  crucial  break-point  in  the  course  of  action.  At  this
point,  both  the  Communist  side  and  such  key  nations  as  Thailand,  as  well  as
the  GVN  itself,  would  be  tempted  to  conclude  we  were  getting  ready  for  a
way  out.  Hence,  the  synchronizing  of  such  modifying  moves  with  our  military
actions  would  have  to  be  extremely  careful.  In  addition:

4.  We  should  be  conducting  substantial  actions  to  strengthen  and  reassure  the
nations  of  the  area.  Both  for  this  purpose  and  to  convey  a  continuing  threat  of
further  military  action,  we  should  probably  [word  illegible!  consider  major  ad-
ditional deployments  to  the  area.


616 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


F.  LIKELY  DEVELOPMENTS  AND  PROBLEMS  IF  THE  COMMU-
NIST SIDE  ENGAGED  IN  MAJOR  MILITARY  RETALIATIONS
AT  SOME  POINT

1.  Although  we  reckon  this  to  be  unlikely  at  the  early  stages,  some  sharp
reprisal  action,  or  Communist  misreading  of  our  intent,  could  change  this  cal-
culation.

2.  In  the  second  phase  of  military  actions,  there  would  be  a  progressively
increasing  chance  of  some  major  Communist  military  response.  This  might  take
the  form  of :

a.  Air  attacks  against  the  south.  Effective  air  defense  measures  probably
should  be  taken  as  part  of  the  initial  deployment,  in  any  event  prior  to  the
second  phase.

b.  DRV  ground  action  in  South  Vietnam  or  Laos.  This  would  call  for  re-
taliatory air  and  ground  action  that  underscores  the  need  for  ground  deploy-
ments either  early  or  in  the  second  phase.

c.  Chinese  Communist  ground  action  does  not  seem  likely  in  Vietnam,  but
might  conceivably  take  place  into  Laos  or  even  elsewhere.  While  we  believe
this  very  unlikely,  it  cannot  be  excluded  as  a  response  to  the  hitting  of  major
targets  in  the  DRV.  It  would  call  for  very  substantial  US  deployments  and  a
major  scale  of  military  action.

G.  POSSIBLE  OVER-ALL  OUTCOMES

The  variable  factors  are  too  great  to  permit  a  confident  evaluation  of  how
this  course  of  action  would  come  out.

1.  At  best,  we  might  (judo)  our  way  to  a  settlement  that  would  involve
some  modification  but  that  would  give  South  Vietnam  a  fair  chance  to  survive
and  get  going.

2.  At  worst,  South  Vietnam  might  come  apart  while  we  were  pursuing  the
course  of  action  so  that  we  had  to  fight  a  military  action  for  a  non-existent
client  or  the  conflict  might  escalate  to  war  with  China.

H.  PROS  AND  CONS  OF  OPTION  C
Pros

1.  Option  C  is  more  hopeful  than  Option  A,  more  controlable  and  less  risky
of  major  military  action  than  Option  B.

2.  If  the  outcome  were  in  the  end  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  to  Communist
control,  our  having  taken  stronger  measures  would  still  leave  us  a  good  deal
better  off  than  under  Option  A  with  respect  to  the  confidence  and  willingness
to  stand  firm  of  the  nations  in  the  next  line  of  defense  in  Asia.  This  would  apply
particularly  to  Thailand,  where  much  might  depend  on  the  course  events  had
taken  in  Laos.  Another  factor  would  be  the  degree  of  military  deployments  we
had  taken  to  Thailand.

3.  On  a  worldwide  basis,  we  would  be  on  the  whole  reasonably  well  off  with
our  European  allies  for  having  made  an  effort  but  at  the  same  time  not  having
become  inextricably  involved  in  major  action.


Documents  617


Cons

1.  This  course  of  action  is  inherently  likely  to  stretch  out  and  to  be  subject
to  major  pressures  both  within  the  US  and  internationally.  As  we  saw  in  Korea,
an  '"in-between"  course  of  action  will  always  arouse  a  school  of  thought  that
believes  things  should  be  tackled  quickly  and  conclusively.  On  the  other  side,
the  continuation  of  military  action  and  a  reasonably  firm  posture  will  arouse
sharp  criticism  in  other  political  quarters.  Internationally,  the  latter  line  of
criticism  would  be  more  prevalent,  but  the  first  would  be  the  position  of  key
Asian  nations  such  as  Thailand,  the  GRC,  and  the  ROK.

2.  The  course  of  action  probably  cannot  achieve  our  full  objectives  even  in
the  best  case.

3.  The  course  of  action  has  lesser  risks  of  military  actions  than  Option  B,  but
such  risks  cannot  by  any  means  be  eliminated.

IX. IMMEDIATE  ACTIONS  OVER  THE  NEXT  FEW  WEEKS

To  meet  the  problem  of  sustaining  South  Vietnamese  morale,  and  to  convey
a  firm  signal  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping  as  a  prelude  to  the  carrying  out  of  Option  C,
the  following  program  could  be  adopted  during  the  coming  weeks.  Basic  to  this
program  would  be  an  immediate  decision  that  Option  C  was  our  preferred  course
of  action,  and  that  we  would  move  into  that  course  of  action,  probably  early
in  the  new  year,  unless  Hanoi  showed  clear  signs  of  yielding.

The  basic  ingredients  of  the  program  would  be:

A.  [words  illegible]  communications  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping  in  the  same  way.

B.  Military  build  up  and  other  measures  clearly  foreshadowing  stronger  action.

C.  Vigorous  actions  within  present  policy,  with  reference  to  actions  in  South
Viet-Nam.  actions  within  Laos,  and  overt  actions  against  North  Viet-Nam.

D.  Reprisals  against  any  repetition  here  of  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident  or  any
major  VC  "spectacular"  such  as  the  Bien  Hoa  attack,  in  South  Viet-Nam.

Specific  actions  under  the  above  headings  would  be  as  follows:

A.  Talking  Tough.

1.  A  continued  picture  of  intense  government  activity  and  concern,  leading
up  to  the  return  of  Ambassador  Taylor  for  consultation  about  November  18.

2.  Issuance  of  a  public  statement,  following  an  NSC  meeting  at  which  Am-
bassador Taylor  reported,  that  would  convey  the  general  flavor  that  North  Viet-
Nam  had  been  continuing  and  increasing  its  activity  in  the  South  and  that  we
were  getting  fed  up  with  it.  This  statement  would  not  commit  us  to  a  specific
date  for  stronger  action,  but  would  carrv  the  unmistakable  threat  of  such  action.

3.  A  generalized  strong  message  to  Hanoi  through  the  existing  channel,  to  be
conveyed  about  November  15.  This  would  definitely  foreshadow  the  Washington
statement  expected  about  November  18,  but  would  not  wholly  scoop  it.

4.  As  a  part  of  the  above  specific  actions,  we  would  in  some  way  convey  on
a  background  basis  that  our  objectives  and  our  position  on  negotiation  were
unchanged,  i.e.,  that  we  would  accept  a  negotiated  settlement  if  but  only  if
Hanoi  got  out  and  the  situation  was  restored.


618 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


B.  Miscellaneous  Actions.

1.  Order  a  strengthening  of  our  naval,  air,  and  ground  readiness  posture  in
the  area,  not  at  a  crash  tempo  but  so  as  to  be  clearly  spotted  by  the  other  side.

2.  As  to  US  dependents,  an  early  order  stopping  the  sending  of  additional
dependents,  followed  by  the  orderly  removal,  probably  at  some  time  in  Decem-
ber, first  of  families  with  children  and  finally  of  all  dependents  from  South  Viet-
Nam.

3.  Tough  conversations  with  GVN  civilian  and  military  leaders  indicating,
on  the  one  hand,  that  we  were  preparing  to  move  to  stronger  action,  but  making
it  perfectly  clear,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  GVN  must  set  its  house  in  order.
This  would  include  such  specific  GVN  measures  as  intensifying  the  Hop  Tac
program,  putting  its  military  forces  on  a  totally  wartime  operations  basis,  tighten-
ing security  in  Saigon  and  elsewhere,  etc.

C.  Vigorous  Actions  within  Current  Policy.

1.  A  strong  34A  MAROPS  schedule  (already  approved).  Consider  US
air  cover  if  required  for  specific  operations.  Surfacing  of  MAROPS  probably  not
to  be  pressed,  unless  GVN  itself  indicates  willingness.

2.  Continued  strong  air  activity  in  the  Panhandle  area  of  Laos,  including
at  least  a  few  US  armed  reconnaissance  strikes.

3.  Continued  strong  air  activity  in  central  Laos,  both  Lao  T-28's  and  US
reconnaissance,  possibly  including — if  evidence  of  the  Communist  build-up  con-
tinues— a  major  armed  reconnaissance  strike  on  Route  7.

4.  A  DESOTO  patrol,  probably  in  early  December,  dissociated  from  any
specific  MAROPS.

5.  Consider  explicit  use  of  US  air  in  South  Viet-Nam  if  a  lucrative  target
appears.  (This  could  be  part  of  the  reprisals  under  D  below  or  new.)

D.  Reprisals.

L  In  case  of  another  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident,  extend  the  reprisal  to
Haiphong  facilities  and  other  major  naval-related  targets.

2.  In  case  of  another  Bien  Hoa,  attack  infiltration-related  targets  in  the
southern  part  of  South  Viet-Nam,  using  GVN  and  FARMGATE  aircraft.

In  addition,  this  program  must  include  the  following  collateral  actions:

a.  Early  discussion  with  Congressional  leaders.

b.  Early  discussion  with  major  allies,  probably  through  the  immediate  crea-
tion of  a  special  consultative  group  to  include  the  UK,  Australia,  New  Zealand,
Thailand,  and  possibly  the  Philippines.

c.  Early  surfacing  in  Saigon  of  the  usable  evidence  of  greatly-increased
DRV  infiltration  into  the  south.  Pending  a  decision  to  adopt  this  program,  to-
gether with  Option  C  at  a  later  date,  this  material  should  not  be  surfaced  in  any
formal  fashion  (even  on  a  background  basis),  although  of  course  we  should  not
deny  or  contradict  accurate  indications  in  this  direction  that  may  be  starting
to  come  out  of  the  GVN  almost  at  once.

Among  the  problems  that  this  program  may  raise,  and  with  which  we  would
have  to  deal,  would  be  the  following:


Documents  619


a.  Possible  Communist  reaction  to  our  stronger  signal,  including  the  pos-
sibility of  additional  military  deployments.  This  needs  an  intelligence  judgment.

b.  Possible  pressures  for  early  negotiations  before  we  start  on  Option  C.
Such  pressures  will  come  in  any  event  from  the  French  and  perhaps  others,  and
we  should  be  prepared  to  fight  them  off.

X. CONCLUSIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
We  recommend  that  the  President:

A.  Approve  the  program  for  immediate  actions  within  the  next  few  weeks
stated  in  Section  IX;

B.  Make  the  decision  that,  if  the  Communist  side  does  not  respond  favorably
to  the  Section  IX  program,  the  US  will  initiate  early  in  the  new  year  a  course  of
action  along  the  lines  of  Option  C.


[Document  227]

ENCLOSURE  (to  Joint  Staff  memo,  10  Nov  64)
WORKING  PAPER

NSC  WORKING  GROUP  PROJECT— COURSES  OF  ACTION  IN
SOUTHEAST  ASIA

Subject:  Comments  on  CIA-DIA-INR  Panel  Draft  Section  I — The  Situation

1.  Introductory  Note:  The  subject  draft,  dated  6  Nov.  1964,  has  been  circu-
lated as  a  proposed  Section  I  of  the  NSC  Working  Group  project,  subject  as
above.  In  the  following  paragraphs  ^re  comments  on  the  draft  which  have  been
developed  as  the  result  of  Joint  Staff  judgments  assisted  by  DIA  advice  in
premises.

2.  Para  3,  last  sentence:  This  sentence  notes  that  "pressures  and  open  criti-
cism" of  the  new  government  have  already  appeared,  stated  in  a  context  such
that  this  seems  intended  as  an  additional  sign  of  weakness  in  the  situation.  We
suggest  that  the  fact  that  these  matters  are  open  may  instead  be  a  favorable  sign
— the  pressures  and  criticisms  in  our  own  country  are  certainly  open.

3.  Para  6,  last  sentence:  This  sentence  takes  note  of  the  view  that  hopes  for
government  stability  now  appear  to  have  improved  somewhat,  though  the
chances  for  real  stability  are  still  less  than  even.  This  is  one  of  the  key  factors
behind  the  recommendations  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  for  early  and  positive
actions  in  SVN.  It  would  appear  that  the  point  should  be  made  more  prominent
in  this  paper  than  it  is  in  its  present  rather  obscure  position.

4.  Para  7:  This  paragraph  appears  to  address  the  wrong  point.  The  new  gov-
ernment may  help  improve  GVN  esprit  and  thus  effectiveness,  but  its  principal
task  is  to  afford  the  platform  upon  which  the  RVN  armed  forces,  with  US
assistance,  prosecute  the  war.  Its  capabilities  in  this  area  have  not  been  tested,
but  appear  reasonably  favorable.  The  paragraph  as  written  appears  to  pre-judge
contrarily.  We  recognize  there  are  substantial  internal  political  interactions  in  the
question  of  over-all  counterinsurgency  success;  there  seems  to  be  a  valid  ques-
tion about  governmental  capacities  in  that  regard,  which  do  not  appear  to  be
addressed  by  the  paragraph.

5.  Para  8:  This  paragraph  appears  to  overstate  the  basic  problem,  in  that  it
identifies  the  minimum  essential  US  achievement  as  total  destruction  of  both  the


620 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

DRV  will  and  capabilities  to  support  the  VC  insurrection,  and  then  proceeds  to
develop  estimates  of  our  capability  to  accomplish  these  ends.  We  believe  that  a
better  expression  of  the  problem  would  result  from  an  examination  which  in-
cluded the  following  considerations:

a.  The  actual  US  requirement  with  respect  to  the  DRV  is  reduction  of  the
rate  of  delivery  of  support  to  the  VC,  to  levels  below  their  minimum  necessary
sustaining  level.  After  that  is  accomplished,  effective  corollary  actions  in  SVN
can  end  the  insurgency,  which  is  the  US  objective.

b.  In  the  present  unstable  situation  something  far  less  than  total  destruction
may  be  all  that  is  required  to  accomplish  the  above.  A  very  modest  change  in
the  government's  favor,  accomplished  through  positive  measures  with  US  as-
sistance, may  be  enough  to  turn  the  tide  and  lead  to  a  successful  solution.  Of
course  it  is  not  possible  to  predict  in  advance  with  complete  assurance  the  precise
level  of  measures  which  will  be  required  to  achieve  the  above.  This  is  the  reason
for  designing  a  program  of  progressively  increasing  squeeze.

c.  Obviously  that  program  may  have  to  continue  through  substantial  levels
of  military,  industrial,  and  governmental  destruction  in  the  DRV.

d.  It  is  informative  to  estimate  the  influence  of  progressive  levels  of  the
above  destruction  upon  the  will  and  capabilities  of  the  DRV  internally  in  their
own  country.  It  is  more  pertinent  to  our  problem,  however,  to  estimate  the  cor-
responding rates  of  delivery  of  support  in  South  Vietnam,  which  remain  attain-
able after  US  attacks,  in  relation  to  what  the  VC  require.  Even  this  cannot  be
estimated  with  high  precision  in  advance,  so  that  judgments  would  have  to  be
applied  progressively  during  the  development  of  the  squeeze  program,  a  point
which  appears  to  merit  recognition  in  this  paragraph:

6.  Para  8d,  fourth  sentence:  Here  is  another  example  of  what  appears  to
be  unwarranted  emphasis  on  the  negative  side  of  the  problem.  DRV  capability
to  continue  to  operate  from  the  bush,  as  against  the  French,  is  not  a  valid  basis
for  estimation.  What  is  pertinent,  instead,  would  be  continued  VC  capability  to
operate  against  a  national  population  (a  different  problem  from  operating  against
foreign  colonialists).

7.  Para  9b,  last  sentence:  This  notes  that  Hanoi  and  Peiping  are  probably
anxious  not  to  become  involved  in  a  war  in  which  greatly  superior  US  weaponry
would  be  brought  to  bear  against  them;  and  that  they  almost  certainly  feel  that
they  can  win  without  having  to  undertake  the  risk  of  that  occurring.  The  sen-
tence includes  two  important  thoughts  bearing  upon  proposals  for  US  action:

a.  Its  first  thought  forms  the  basis  for  the  effectiveness  of  our  deterrence  to
Communist  adventures,  through  powerful  visible  deployments  of  the  kind  of
weaponry  they  should  indeed  fear.  We  believe  that  this  deterrent  factor  has  a
substantial  probability  of  success.  The  draft,  however,  appears  to  include  no
reckonings  with  respect  either  to  deterrence  or  the  chances  it  will  work.

b.  The  second  thought  is  the  Communist  judgment  that  they  can  continue
a  winning  program  without  much  risk  of  having  to  feel  the  weight  of  US  re-
sponse. To  revise  their  thinking  in  this  respect  is  among  the  main  reasons  for
the  recommended  program  of  military  pressures.  Hence  it  seems  that  the
thought  should  be  brought  out  more  prominently  amongst  the  pertinent  basic
considerations.

8.  Para  10a,  last  sentence:  It  is  unclear  what  is  meant  by  expressing  Hanoi's
estimate  that  the  election  results  give  Washington  greater  policy  "flexibility."
If  this  means  that  Hanoi  thinks  we  are  now  in  position  to  accept  world-wide


Documents  621


humiliation,  with  respect  to  our  formerly  stated  objectives  in  Vietnam,  this  is
another  reason  why  it  is  desirable  that  we  take  early  measures  to  disabuse  their
thinking.

9.  Para  10c,  last  sentence:  This  expression  of  judgment,  negative  in  implica-
i tions,  appears  to  be  beyond  the  scope  of  the  paper  and  an  unwarranted  in-
ference with  which  we  do  not  concur.

10.  Para  11:  This  paragraph,  on  the  subject  of  DRV  ability  and  willingness  to
sustain  damage,  does  not  provide  a  valid  measure  of  their  capability  to  support

r  the  necessary  level  of  VC  action  against  the  government  and  people  of  SVN.
It  should  be  substantially  revised  to  refocus  upon  the  problem  at  hand.  In  par-
ticular, its  illusion  to  the  results  of  aerial  operations  in  the  Korean  and  French-
Viet  Minh  wars  is  invalid.

11.  Para  13:  (DRV  judgment  of  the  weight  to  attach  to  world  pressures
against  the  United  States).  It  could  be  postulated  that  the  DRV  believe  that
pressures  might  be  developed  from  quarters  we  would  respect  (as  distinguished
from  the  familiar  communist-neutralist  bray),  and  that  the  United  States  would
back  down  and  sacrifice  its  vital  world  issues  in  response  to  these  pressures.  Such
an  image  of  a  United  States  which  will  back  down  from  defense  of  its  vital
interests  in  response  to  mere  words  (the  paper  tiger)  would  be  one  of  the
strongest  encouragements  to  further  communist  adventures,  in  Southeast  Asia
and  everywhere  else.  If  this  estimate  of  Hanoi  views  is  valid,  it  emphasizes  the
importance  of  our  taking  actions  to  insure  against  the  spread  of  such  a  notion.

12.  Para  15:  This  paragraph  appears  to  overstate  the  implications  of  Chicom
capabilities  to  support  NVN  in  respects  which  concern  the  United  States.  Chicom
air  defense  and  naval  capabilities  are  inadequate  in  their  entirety  against  existing
PACOM  resources  (a  circumstance  which  we  believe  is  understood  in  Peiping).
Foreseeable  diversions  of  these  inadequate  resources  to  the  assistance  of  North
Vietnam  should  have  little  significant  bearing  upon  the  situation.  Thus  we  believe
there  should  be  added  to  this  paragraph  a  sentence  to  the  effect  "These  changes
will  not  alter  significantly  the  communist  defensive  posture  against  potential  US
actions."


[Document  2281

10  November  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  CHAIRMAN,  NSC  WOKING  GROUP  ON
SOUTHEAST  ASIA  (Mr.  William  P.  Bundy,  Department  of  State)

Subject:  Comment  on  Draft  for  Part  II  of  Project  Outline  on  Courses  of  Action
in  Southeast  Asia — "US  Objectives  and  Stakes  in  SVN  and  SEA"

1.  Furnished  herewith  are  comments  on  the  subject  draft,  which  earlier  you
requested.

2.  The  draft,  which  provides  a  well-written  examination  of  a  broad  range  of
considerations,  has  been  studied  carefully  within  the  Joint  Staff.  Principal  con-
clusions are:

a.  It  appears  to  understate  rather  substantially  the  gravity  to  the  United
States  of  the  possible  loss  of  SVN  to  the  communists,  under  whatever  cir-
cumstances, and


622 Gravel  Editior.  Ike  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

b.  It  appears  to  overstate  rather  markedly  the  magnitude,  difficulty,  and
potential  risks  in  measures  bv  the  United  States  to  prevent  that  loss.

3.  The  attached  copv  of  the  draft,  with  line-bv-line  insertion  of  comments,
will  indicate  wherein  the  above  impressions  tend  to  be  formed.

L.  M.  MUST  IS
\  zt  Ac-::.:,  USN
WoTKir.g  Grc^p  Member

Enclosure
As  Stated


ENCLOSURE
WORKING  PAPER

NSC  WORKING  GROUP  PROJECT-
COURSES  OF  ACTION.  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

Subject:  Comments  on  Draft  Section  II — US  Orjeciives  and  Stakes  in  South
\'iemam  and  Southeast  Asia

ISTRODUCTORY  XOTE:  In  an  early  working-group  meeting  Mr.  Bundy  pro-
vided drafts  of  material  intended  for  Section  II  of  the  NSC  working  group
project,  subject  as  above,  and  asked  for  comments.  Below  is  reproduced,  in
quotes,  the  current  version  of  Section  II,  with  interspersed  comments  developed
from  a  search  of  related  JCS  expressions  of  views  in  the  premises.

II.  US  Objectives  and  Stakes  in  South  Viet-Xam  and  Southeast  Asia

A.  US  Objectives  and  the  Present  Basis  of  US  Action

In  South  \'iet-Nam  we  are  helping  a  government  defend  its  independence.
In  Laos,  we  are  working  to  presen.e.  in  its  essence,  an  international  neu-
tralized settlement  willfully  flouted  bv  the  communist  side.  Paradoxically,
while  American  opinion  weights  the  former  well  ahead  of  the  laner.  there
are  some  quarters — such  as  Britain  and  India — where  the  laner  is  a  more
appealing  cause  both  legallv  and  practically.  But  our  basic  rationale  is
defensible  in  both  cases.

Comment:  I  believe  the  United  States  is  committed  in  the  eyes  of  the
world  to  both  of  these  tasks  as  matters  of  national  prestige,  credibility,
and  honor  with  respect  to  world-wide  pledges.  Later  material  in  the  paper
seems  to  agree.  This  then  would  not  appear  to  be  a  subject  on  which  we
should  permit  ourselves  to  be  swaved  undulv  by  other  nations'  views,
paradoxical  or  other,  and  possiblv  more  useful  than  noting  that  our
rationale  ""is  defensible"  would  be  to  affirm  that  it  needs  no  defense.

Behind  our  policy  have  been  three  factors:

a.  The  general  principle  of  helping  countries  that  try  to  defend  their  own
freedom  against  communist  subversion  and  attack.

b.  The  specific  consequences  of  communist  control  of  South  Viet-Nam
and  Laos  for  the  security  of,  successively,  Cambodia,  Thailand  (most  seri-
ously), Malaysia,  and  the  Philippines — and  resulting  increases  in  the  threat


Documents  623


to  India  and — more  in  the  realm  of  morale  effects  in  the  short  term —
the  threat  to  South  Korea  and  perhaps  the  GRC,  and  the  effect  on  Japanese
attitudes  through  any  development  that  appears  to  make  Communist  China
and  its  allies  a  dominant  force  in  Asia  that  must  be  lived  with.

c.  South  Viet-Nam,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  Laos,  as  test  cases  of  com-
munist "wars  of  national  liberation"  world-wide.

Comment:  The  third  factor  above,  which  is  broadly  stated,  is  related
to  but  appears  distinguishable  from  what  may  be  considered  a  fourth,
more  specific  issue:  Now  that  we  are  publicly,  officially,  and  heavily  com-
mitted in  SVN,  US  prestige  has  been  rather  specifically  put  at  issue,  and
requires  successful  defense  if  we  are  to  retain  a  measure  of  free-world
leadership.  This  thought  is  brought  out  later  in  the  paper;  it  could  well
be  listed  here  as  part  of  the  subject  introduction.

In  other  words,  our  policy  toward  South  Viet-Nam  and  Laos  is  an  integral
part  of  our  over-all  policy  of  resisting  Communist  expansion  world-wide,  and  a
particularly  close  part  of  our  policy  of  resisting  the  expansion  of  Communist
China  and  its  allies.  North  Viet-Nam  and  North  Korea.

Thus,  the  loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  to  Communist  control,  in  any  form,  would
be  a  major  blow  to  our  basic  policies.  US  prestige  is  heavily  committed  to  the
maintenance  of  a  non-Communist  South  Viet-Nam,  and  only  less  heavily  so  to  a
neutralized  Laos.

Yet  we  must  face  the  fact  that,  on  any  analysis  we  can  now  make,  we  cannot
guarantee  to  maintain  a  non-Communist  South  Viet-Nam  short  of  committing
ourselves  to  whatever  degree  of  military  action  would  be  required  to  defeat  North
Viet-Nam  and  probably  Communist  China  militarily.  Such  a  commitment  would
involve  high  risks  of  a  major  conflict  in  Asia,  which  could  not  be  confined  to
air  and  naval  action  but  would  almost  inevitably  involve  a  Korean-scale  ground
action  and  possibly  even  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  at  some  point.  Even  if  all
these  things  were  done.  South  Vietnam  might  still  come  apart  under  us.

Comment:  The  above  paragraph  appears  to  overstate  rather  markedly
the  degree  of  difficulty  associated  with  success  for  our  objectives  in  SVN.
Our  first  objective  is  to  cause  the  DRV  to  terminate  support  of  the  SEA
insurgencies.  Once  this  is  done,  then  we  have  a  period  of  stabilization  and
maturing  in  SVN,  during  which  we  can  consider  what  next  we  need  do.
To  achieve*  this  objective  does  not  necessarily  require  that  we  "defeat
North  Viet-Nam,"  and  it  almost  certainly  does  not  require  that  we  defeat
Communist  China.  Hence  our  commitment  to  SVN  does  not  involve  a
high  probability  let  alone  "high  risks,"  of  a  major  conflict  in  Southeast
Asia.  One  reason  it  does  not  is  our  capability  to  show  the  CHICOMs
that  if  there's  a  "risk"  of  such  a  war,  the  main  "risk"  is  theirs.  Certainly
no  responsible  person  proposes  to  go  about  such  a  war,  if  it  should  occur,
on  a  basis  remotely  resembling  Korea.  "Possibly  even  the  use  of  nuclear
weapons  at  some  point"  is  of  course  why  we  spend  billions  to  have  them.
If  China  chooses  to  go  to  war  against  us  she  has  to  contemplate  their
possible  use,  just  as  does  anyone  else — this  is  more  of  the  "risk"  to  them.
And  of  course  SVN  might  nevertheless  come  apart  under  us,  but  an  alert
initiative  commensurate  with  the  stakes  should  make  the  likelihood  of
this  quite  remote.


624 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

Hence,  we  must  consider  realistically  what  our  over-all  objectives  and  stakes
are,  and  just  what  degree  of  risk  and  loss  we  should  be  prepared  to  make  to  hold
South  Vietnam,  or  alternatively  to  gain  time  and  secure  our  further  lines  of
defense  in  the  world  and  specifically  in  Asia.

Comment:  Here  again  is  emphasis  on  "risk"  and  "loss"  to  us,  as  though
the  harder  we  try  the  more  we  stand  to  risk  and  to  lose.  On  the  contrary,
a  resolute  course  of  action  in  lieu  of  half  measures,  resolutely  carried  out
instead  of  dallying  and  delaying,  offers  the  best  hope  for  minimizing  risks,
costs,  and  losses  in  achieving  our  objectives.  The  paragraph  also  im-
plies there  is  some  alternative  to  our  holding  South  Viet-Nam.  There  is
none.

B.  Possible  Alternate  US  Objectives

Bluntly  stated,  our  fall-back  objectives  in  South  Viet-Nam  would  be:

1.  To  hold  the  situation  together  as  long  as  possible,  so  that  we  have
time  to  strengthen  other  areas  of  Asia.

2.  To  take  forceful  enough  measures  in  the  siutation  so  that  we  emerge
from  it,  even  in  the  worst  case,  with  our  standing  as  the  principal  helper
against  Communist  expansion  as  little  impaired  as  possible.

3.  To  make  clear  to  the  world,  and  to  nations  in  Asia  particularly,  that
failure  in  South  Viet-Nam,  if  it  comes,  was  due  to  special  local  factors  that
do  not  apply  to  other  nations  we  are  committed  to  defend — that,  in  short,
our  will  and  ability  to  help  those  nations  defend  themselves  is  not  impaired.

Comment:  We  have  no  further  fall-back  position  in  Southeast  Asia
in  the  stated  view  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  The  three  courses  outlined
above  add  emphasis  to  that  reality:

(1)  Strengthening  other  areas  of  Asia,  in  the  context  of  our  having
been  pushed  out  of  SVN,  would  be  a  thoroughly  non-productive  effort
militarily,  and  politically  it  seems  dubious  we'd  even  be  offered  the
opportunity  to  attempt  it.

(2)  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  how  our  "standing  as  the  principal
helper  against  communist  expansion"  could  suffer  a  more  abject  humili-
ation, trumpeted  more  widely  to  the  world,  than  for  us  now  to  lose
SVN.

(3)  Course  number  three  is  a  slight  paraphrase  of  Aesop's  fox  and
grapes  story.  No  matter  how  we  talk  it  up  amongst  ourselves  it  could
only  be  completely  transparent  to  intelligent  outside  observers.

The  first  two  of  these  speak  for  themselves.  The  third  calls  for  a  review  of  the
elements  in  the  South  Vietnamese  situation  that  do  truthfully  lend  themselves  to
this  thesis.

The  honest  fact  is  that  South  Viet-Nam  and  Laos  have  not  really  been  typical
cases  from  the  beginning,  which  accounts  in  part  for  our  inability  to  enlist  the
kind  of  international  support  we  had  in  Korea  and  for  our  having  to  carry  the
load  so  largely  alone.  Most  of  the  world  had  written  off  both  countries  in  1954,
and  our  ability  to  keep  them  going — while  an  extraordinary  and  praiseworthy
effort — has  never  given  them  quite  the  standing  of  such  long-established  national
entities  as  Greece,  Turkey,  and  Iran,  or  the  special  ward-of-the-UN  status  that
South  Korea  had  in  1950.


Documents  625


Comment:  This  is  illusory.  First,  we  had  no  significant  support  in
Korea,  other  than  verbal.  Except  for  the  South  Koreans  themselves,  the
US  did  essentially  all  the  fighting,  took  all  the  casualties,  and  paid  all  the
bills.  Second,  regardless  of  how  many  or  what  kinds  of  countries  had
written  ofl"  Laos  and  SVN  in  1954,  we  did  not — and  we've  committed  our-
selves accordingly.  It  is  our  judgment,  skill,  capability,  prestige,  and
national  honor  which  are  at  stake,  and  we  put  them  there.  And  it  doesn't
seem  particularly  pertinent,  in  that  context,  how  these  countries  may
compare  with  Greece,  etc.

Moreover,  the  recent  courses  of  events  has  already  highlighted — and  could
be  brought  even  more  to  highlight — the  atypical  features  that  in  sum  have  made
South  Viet-Nam  and  Laos  so  difficult.  A  bad  colonial  heritage  of  long  standing,
totally  inadequate  preparation  for  self-government  by  the  colonial  power,  a
colonialist  war  fought  in  half-baked  fashion  and  lost,  a  nationalist  movement
taken  over  by  Communist  ruling  in  the  other  half  of  an  ethnically  and  historically
united  country,  the  Communist  side  inheriting  much  the  better  military  force
and  far  more  than  its  share  of  the  talent — these  are  the  facts  that  dog  us  to  this
day.

Comment:  This  seems  mainly  to  be  more  in  the  sour  grapes  vein.  Be-
cause things  may  be  atypical  or  difficult  doesn't  afford  a  very  persuasive
basis  for  giving  up  on  them  with  standards  unblemished.

The  basic  point,  of  course,  is  that  we  have  never  thought  we  could  defend
a  government  or  a  people  that  had  ceased  to  care  strongly  about  defending
themselves,  or  that  were  unable  to  maintain  the  fundamentals  of  government.
And  the  overwhelming  world  impression  is  that  these  are  lacking  elements  in
South  Viet-Nam,  and  that  its  loss  will  be  due,  if  it  comes,  to  their  lack.

Comment:  A  resolute  United  States  would  ensure,  amongst  other  things,
.  that  this  lack  were  cured,  as  the  alternative  to  accepting  the  loss.

To  get  across  these  points,  there  would  be  much  merit  to  non-government
information  activity  getting  across  this  picture,  primarily  of  past  French  errors.

Comment:  French  errors  also  included  major  political  delays  and  in-
decisions, which  amongst  other  things  tolerated  if  not  enforced  a  military
fiasco.  Rather  than  now  lamely  resurrecting  the  story  of  how  the  French
couldn't  do  the  job,  it  seems  to  me  we  should  instead  make  sure  we  don't
repeat  their  mistakes.  (The  French  also  tried  to  build  the  Panama  Canal).

C.  Consequences  of  Communist  Control  of  South  Viet-Nam  in  a  World-
wide Sense.

How  badly  wouM  the  loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  shake  the  faith  and  resolve  of
other  non-Communist  nations  that  face  the  threat  of  Communist  aggression  or
subversion  and  rely  on  us  for  major  help?

Comment:  In  JCS  view,  near-disastrously,  or  worse.

Within  NATO,  probably  not  at  all,  provided  we  had  carried  out  any  military
actions  in  Southeast  Asia  without  taking  forces  from  NATO  for  this  purpose,
and  provided  further  that  adverse  developments  in  Southeast  Asia  had  not  pro-
duced a  wave  of  revulsion  in  American  public  opinion  against  [words  illegible]


626 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

commitments  overseas.  The  latter  possibility  raises  a  [words  illegible]  question,
that  probably  cannot  now  be  estimated  with  any  precision;  too  much  would
depend  on  the  US  casualties  and  the  total  circumstances  of  the  loss.

Comment:  This  paragraph  appears  to  be  predicated  on  an  assumed
campaign  of  such  magnitude  we  have  to  draw  on  CINCLANT/
CINCEUR  resources  for  it  (which  is  in  excess  of  anything  on  the  books),
heavy  casualties  in  that  campaign,  but  nevertheless,  its  loss.  This  seems  so
remote  a  postulate  that  it  only  confuses  the  basic  question  as  to  the  NATO
evaluation,  with  which  we  do  not  agree.

Greece  and  Turkey  might  be  affected  to  some  degree,  and  this  would  call  our
taking  reassuring  action  there.

Iran  and  India  appear  to  be  the  next  problem  cases  outside  the  Far  East.  Iran
has  not  concerned  itself  at  all  with  Southeast  Asia,  and  India  has  been  from
time  to  time  deeply  concerned,  but  has  done  little  about  it.  Yet  we  must  face
the  chance  that,  as  a  US  defeat  sank  in,  there  could  be  serious  adverse  repercus-
sions in  these  countries.  We  do  not  have  alliance  commitments  to  either;  yet
in  fact  both  rely  on  us  in  the  background  of  all  their  calculations.  Again,  we
would  have  to  consider  reassuring  action,  but  the  effects  do  not  appear  beyond
reach.

Comment:  In  the  context  here  concerned,  actions  that  would  be  truly
"reassuring"  seem  beyond  our  physical  and  fiscal  capabilities.  As  to  words,
they  could  only  be  regarded  by  others  as  starkly  empty,  and  much
propaganda  would  be  devoted  to  pointing  that  out.

In  other  areas  of  the  world,  notably  the  Middle  East,  Africa,  and  Latin
America,  either  the  nature  of  the  Communist  threat,  or  the  degree  of  US  com-
mitment, or  both,  are  so  radically  different  than  in  Southeast  Asia  that  it  is
difficult  to  assess  the  impact.  Almost  everything  would  depend  on  whether  the
US  was  in  fact  able  to  go  on  with  its  present  policies.  If  it  did  so,  the  results
would  probably  not  be  too  serious.

Comment:  We  do  not  share  the  feeling  of  reassurance  implied  by  the
last  sentence.

D.  Consequences  in  Southeast  Asia  and  in  Asia  Generally  of  Communist
Control  in  South  Vietnam.


1.  In  Southeast  Asia.

The  so-called  domino  theory  implies  that  Cambodia,  Thailand,  possibly
Burma,  and  Malaysia,  would  fall  almost  automatically  to  Communist
domination  if  South  Vietnam  does.

Comment:  We  hold  this  to  be  the  most  realistic  estimate  for  Cambodia
and  Thailand,  probably  Burma,  possibly  Malaysia.

Comment:  Perhaps  the  British  could  save  Malaysia  if  they  undertook
resolutely  to  do  so,  but  we  estimate  that  Thailand  goes  if  SVN  is  lost.


Documents  627


These  are  the  key  pressure  points  that  would  immediately  become  crucial.
If  either  Thailand  or  Malaysia  were  lost,  or  went  badly  sour  in  any  way,  then
the  rot  would  be  in  real  danger  of  spreading  all  over  mainland  Southeast  Asia.

Comment:  Since  we  are  convinced  Thailand  would  indeed  go.  this
underscores  the  especiallv  grave  concern  relative  to  S\'N  on  the  part  of
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.

2.  In  Asia  generally:

Both  the  initial  and  ultimate  effects  would  depend  heavily  on  the  circum-
stances in  which  South  Vietnam  was  lost,  and  on  whether  the  loss  did  in
fact  greatly  weaken  or  lead  to  the  early  loss  of  other  areas  in  Southeast  Asia.

Comment:  We  do  not  agree  with  the  reasoning  leading  to  this  reason-
ing relative  to  SVN,  and  estimate  the  results  would  be  most  grave  almost
regardless  of  foreseeable  variants  as  to  circumstance.

Yet  the  initial  effects  would  be  substantial  in  any  event.  There  is  already  some-
thing of  a  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  GRC.  arising  from  the  Chinese  Communist
nuclear  explosion  and  possibly  to  be  accentuated  by  developments  in  the
ChiRep  situation  in  the  UN.  In  South  Korea,  there  is  a  tremendous  sense  of
dependence  on  the  US.  and  some  discouragement  at  the  failure  to  make  as  much
progress  politically  and  economically  as  North  Korea  (from  a  much  more
favorable  initial  position)  has  made.  And  in  the  Philippines,  there  is  also  a
strong  sense  of  dependence  on  the  US.

All  three  of  these  would  need  maximum  reassurance  in  any  case.

We  must  also  weigh  the  effects  on  Japan,  where  the  set  is  already  in  the  direc-
tion of  closer  ties  with  Communist  China,  with  a  clear  threat  of  early  recognition.
While  Japan's  faith  in  our  military  posture  and  determination  might  not  be
shaken,  the  growing  feeling  that  Communist  China  must  somehow  be  lived  with
might  well  be  accentuated.

Beyond  this  point — if  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  did  in  fact  succumb  over
time — these  effects  would  be  multiplied  manv  times  over.  This  is  not  to  say
that  there  would  not  be  a  great  deal  we  could  still  do  to  reassure  these  countries.
But  the  picture  of  a  defense  line  clearly  breached  could  have  serious  effects,  and
could  easily,  over  time,  tend  to  unravel  the  whole  Pacific  defense  structure.

Commenr.  We  do  not  share  the  views  indicated  above  as  to  the  po-
tential value  of  "reassurance"  to  others  if  we  lose  SVN.  There  would  be
no  words  left  that  won't  have  been  shown  to  be  hollow,  and  there  would
be  few  deeds  left,  short  of  general  war,  that  will  be  within  our  capabili-
ties. We  agree  with  the  last  "sentence,  and  estimate  the  time  concerned  to
be  short.

3.  Summary

In  sum,  there  are  enough  "ifs"  and  enough  possibilities  of  offsetting  action
in  the  above  analysis  so  that  it  cannot  be  concluded  that  the  loss  of  South
Vietnam  would  soon  have  the  totally  crippling  effect  in  Southeast  Asia  and  Asia
generally  that  the  loss  of  Berlin  would  have  in  Europe.  Nonetheless,  the  loss
would  be  extremely  serious,  and  it  could  be  as  bad  as  Berlin,  driving  us  to  the


628 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

progressive  loss  of  other  areas  or  to  taking  a  stand  at  some  point  where  there
would  almost  certainly  be  major  conflict  and  perhaps  the  great  risk  of  nuclear
war.

Comment:  We  do  not  agree.  Berlin  per  se  means  much  symbolically,
but  little  militarily.  SVN  means  just  as  much  symbolically,  and  is  a
military  keystone.


[Document  229]

Nov  14,  1964

EXDIS

EMBTEL  1438

In  reply  to  his  query  Johnson  told  Seaborn  today  that  we  had  not  yet  received
any  indication  as  to  whether  dept  would  have  message  for  him  on  his  next  trip
but  that  if  convenient  thought  it  would  be  preferable  for  Seaborn  to  postpone
trip  until  Nov  30  as  if  there  was  to  be  message  it  would  be  more  likely  at  that
time  than  on  Nov  23.  Seaborn  said  postponement  to  Nov  30  presented  no  prob-
lem if  he  did  it  now  and  that  he  would.

Do  so.  He  expressed  hope  that  if  we  had  message  he  could  receive  it  as  long
before  Nov  30  as  possible  in  order  that  he  could  absorb  it  and  have  opportunity
discuss  any  obscure  points.

He  said  Ottawa  had  strongly  endorsed  point  he  had  made  to  Johnson  previously,
that  is,  that  general  theme  of  last  two  messages  had  been  played  as  far  as  they
could  go  and  if  we  had  anything  to  deliver  on  next  trip  it  was  hoped  that  it
would  be  something  specific.  He  also  said  Ottawa  does  not  plan  to  approach  dept
but  will  await  dept  initiative.

TAYLOR


[Document  230]

14  November  1964

JCSM  955-64

[first  section  missing]

4.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  do  not  concur  with  a  concept  of  "tit-for-tat"
reprisals  nor  with  Ambassador  Taylor's  recommendation  that  the  United  States
and  the  Government  of  Vietnam  (GVN)  jointly  announce  such  a  policy  which
ties  our  action  to  equivalency.  "Tit  for  tat"  is  considered  unduly  restrictive,
inhibits  US  initiative,  and  implies  an  undesirable  lack  of  flexibility  both  as  to
the  nature  and  level  of  response.  Adoption  and  announcement  of  a  policy  of  a
"tit-for-tat"  basis  only  would  serve  to  pass  to  the  DRV  substantial  initiatives  with
respect  to  the  nature  and  timing  of  further  US  actions.

5.  On  1  November,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommended  and  hereby  confirm
that  the  following  specific  actions  be  taken:

a.  Within  24-36  hours.  Pacific  Command  (PACOM)  forces  take  initial
US  military  actions  as  follows:


Documents  629


(1)  Conduct  air  strikes  in  Laos  against  targets  #3  (Tchepone  bar-
racks, northwest),  #4  (Tchepone  military  area),  #19  (Ban  Thay
miHtary  area),  #8  (Nape  highway  bridge),  and  the  Ban  Ken  bridge
on  Route  7.

(2)  Conduct  low-level  air  reconnaissance  of  infiltration  routes  and
of  targets  in  North  Vietnam  south  of  Latitude  19  degrees.

b.  Prior  to  air  attacks  on  the  DRV,  land  the  Marine  special  landing  force
at  Da  Nang  and  airlift  Army  or  Marine  units  from  Okinawa  to  the  Saigon/
Tan  Son  Nhut/Bien  Hoa  area,  to  provide  increased  security  for  US  per-
sonnel and  installations.

c.  Use  aircraft  engaged  in  airlift  (subparagraph  b,  above)  to  assist  in
evacuation  of  US  dependents  from  Saigon,  to  commence  concurrently  with
the  daylight  air  strikes  against  the  DRV  (subparagraph  d,  below).

d.  Assemble  and  prepare  necessary  forces  so  that:

(1)  Within  60  to  72  hours,  30  B-52s  from  Guam  conduct  a  night
strike  on  DRV  target  #6  (Phuc  Yen  airfield) .

(2)  Commencing  at  first  light  on  the  day  following  subparagraph
(1),  above,  PACOM  air  and  naval  forces  conduct  air  strikes  against
DRV  targets  #6  (Phuc  Yen  airfield)  (daylight  follow-up  on  the  above
night  strike),  #3  (Hanoi  Gia  Lam  airfield),  #8  (Haiphong  Cat  Bi
airfield),  #48  (Haiphong  POL),  and  #49  (Hanoi  POL).

(3)  Concurrently  with  subparagraph  (2),  above,  the  Vietnamese
Air  Force  (VNAF)  will  strike  DRV  target  #36  (Vit  Thu  Lu  barracks).

(4)  Combat  air  patrols  (CAP),  flak  suppressive  fire,  strike  photo-
graphic reconnaissance,  and  search  and  rescue  operations  (SAR)  are
conducted  as  appropriate.

(5)  The  above  actions  are  followed  by:

(a)  Armed  reconnaissance  on  infiltration  routes  in  Laos.

(b)  Air  strikes  against  infiltration  routes  and  targets  in  the  DRV.

(c)  Progressive  PAtOM  and  SAC  strikes  against  the  targets
listed  in  the  94  Target  Study.

e.  Thai  bases  be  used  as  necessary  in  connection  with  the  foregoing,  with
authority  to  be  obtained  through  appropriate  channels.

6.  As  to  the  specific  actions  recommended  above,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
consider  that  initiation  of  our  response  by  attacking  targets  in  Laos  and  con-
ducting low-level  reconnaissance  in  the  southern  DRV  will  provide  militarily  use-
ful operations  within  the  immediate  capabilities  of  forces  in  place  and,  at  the
same  time,  will  serve  to  divert  notice  from  the  preparations  and  force  deploy-
ments necessary  for  the  ensuing  stronger  actions.  Recognizing  that  security  of
this  plan  is  of  critical  importance,  they  consider  that  external  agencies,  such  as
the  VNAF,  should  be  apprised  only  of  those  parts  of  the  plan  necessary  to  insure
proper  and  effective  coordination.  The  same  limited  revelation  of  plans  should
govern  discussions  with  the  Thais  in  securing  authority  for  unlimited  use  of
Thai  bases.

7.  The  night  B-52  strike  on  Phuc  Yen  airfield  as  the  first  major  military  re-
sponse is  designed  to  destroy  a  major  component  of  present  and  potential  DRV
air  capability,  by  use  of  an  all-weather  weapon  system.  The  specific  strikes  recom-


630 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

mended  for  PACOM  forces  during  the  next  daylight  will  destroy  additional  DRV
capabilities,  including  facilities  otherwise  available  for  CHICOM  reinforcing  ac-
tions, and  set  the  stage  for  the  follow-on  US  and  VNAF  operations.  The  recom-
mended VNAF  strike  provides  GVN  participation  and  is  within  VNAF  ca-
pability.

8.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  the  approximately  1600  US  Gov-
ernment dependents  should  be  evacuated  from  SVN  in  connection  with  the  fore-
going, to  commence  concurrently  with  the  first  daylight  US  strike  against  the
DRV.  In  this  regard,  they  note  that  there  are  an  additional  3100  nonmilitary  US
nationals  and  US-sponsored  personnel  in  country.  Objections  to  their  evacuation
have  been  made  primarily  because  of  the  adverse  psychological  impact  upon  the
Government  and  people  of  SVN.  It  is  considered  that  these  impacts  will  be  more
than  offset  by  the  results  of  military  actions  now  proposed.  The  demonstrated
vulnerability  to  VC  actions  of  carefully-secured  areas  makes  retention  of  US
dependents  after  the  start  of  overt  US  military  operations  no  longer  prudent.
Their  withdrawal  is  appropriate  in  light  of  the  proposed  increased  tempo  and
scale  of  activity.

9.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  requested  and  will  consider  CINCPAC's
recommendations  for  any  augmentation  forces  required,  to  include  increased  air
defense,  a  Marine  light  antiair  missile  battalion  from  CONUS  to  Da  Nang,  and
any  tactical  air  or  CVA  augmentation.  A  follow-on  memorandum  on  this  will  be
forwarded  to  you.

10.  In  summary,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  that:

a.  We  have  reached  a  major  decision  point  in  Southeast  Asia;

b.  The  United  States  should  continue  to  pursue  its  stated  objective  of
keeping  Laos,  Thailand,  and  SVN  free  from  communist  domination.  Mili-
tary actions  such  as  recommended  herein  are  necessary  contributions  to
this  objective;  and

c.  Early  US  military  action  against  the  DRV  would  lessen  the  possibility
of  misinterpretation  by  the  DRV  and  Communist  China  of  US  determina-
tion and  intent  and  thus  serve  to  deter  further  VC  attacks  such  as  that  at
Bien  Hoa.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:

Earle  G.  Wheeler
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


[Document  231]

14  November  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  CHAIRMAN,  NSC  WORKING  GROUP  ON
SOUTHEAST  ASIA  (Mr.  William  P.  Bundy,  Department  of  State)

Subject:  Additional  Material  for  Project  on  Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast  Asia

References:  a.  Your  Memorandum  of  13  November  1964
to  the  NSC  Working  Group

b.  JCSM  932-64,  dated  27  October  1964

c.  JCSM  933-64,  dated  4  November  1964

d.  JCSM  955-64,  dated  14  November  1964

1.  Reference  a  requests  ICS  views  spelling  out  Option  "B"  as  a  preferred  alter-
native, with  something  like  Option  "C"  as  a  fall-back  alternative.  Because  of  the


Documents 63 1


way  in  which  formal  JCS  views  in  the  premises  have  been  developed  and  ex-
pressed, this  requires  some  degree  of  interpretation.

2.  Reference  b  is  the  most  recent  recommendation  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
for  courses  of  action  with  respect  to  South  Vietnam,  framed  in  the  context  of
initiation  "in  cold  blood."  Various  JCS  papers,  the  most  recent  dated  22  October
1964,  identify  the  corresponding  recommendations  with  respect  to  Laos.  Refer-
ence b  specifically  identifies  certain  of  its  listed  actions  to  begin  now,  with  the
balance  of  them  "implemented  as  required  to  achieve  US  objectives  in  Southeast
Asia."

3.  Reference  c  formalized  the  most  recent  JCS  recommendation  for  reprisal
(hot  blood)  actions  and  reference  d  provided  an  analysis  of  DRV/CHICOM
reactions  to  these  strikes,  and  the  probable  results  thereof.  The  proposed  actions
are  essentially  the  same  as  in  reference  c  except  for  the  principal  difference  that
the  "hot  blood"  actions  are  initiated  at  a  substantial  higher  level  of  military
activity.

4.  Only  in  that  the  courses  of  action  in  either  of  these  sets  of  documents  can
be  completed  in  minimum  time  consistent  with  proper  conduct  of  military  opera-
tions do  they  match  Option  "B"  as  defined  for  purposes  of  the  NSC  Working
Group  study.  The  distinction  is  that  while  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  offer  the
capability  for  pursuing  Option  "B"  as  defined,  they  have  not  explicitly  recom-
mended that  the  operations  be  conducted  on  a  basis  necessarily  that  inflexible.
All  implementing  plans  do  in  fact  explicitly  recognize  a  controlled  phase  which
would  permit  suspension  whenever  desired  by  national  authority.

5.  I  believe  my  draft  contribution  to  PART  VI  provides  a  reasonable  ap-
plication of  the  JCS  recommendations  to  Option  "B"  as  defined  for  the  study,
but  this  does  not  mean  that  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  recommended  Option
"B"  as  defined  in  the  study.

6.  There  is  in  an  advanced  state  of  completion  a  JCS  fall-back  recommendation
for  a  course  of  action  which,  subject  to  possible  further  modifications  by  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  will  provide  essentially  the  same  military  actions  listed  in
my  draft  input  to  PART  VII.  These  include  the  same  military  actions  listed  in
the  above,  but  without  the  stress  upon  starting  forthwith,  and  with  more  specific
emphasis  on  some  extension  of  the  over-all  time  for  execution  of  the  complete
list.  Thus  it  imposes  what  amount  to  some  arbitrary  delays,  which  would  provide
additional  intervals  for  diplomatic  exchanges.

7.  Because  of  the  time  delays  which  it  reflects,  it  is  specifically  the  JCS  fall-
back position.

8.  For  information,  the  analysis  in  reference  d  develops  and  supports  the  con-
clusion that  the  United  States  and  its  Allies  can  deal  adequately  with  any  course
of  action  the  DRV  and/or  CHICOMs  decide  to  pursue.  You  may  note  that  this
conclusion  is  developed  in  the  context  of  the  most  intense  of  all  courses  of  action
proposed  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  This  reflects  a  position  less  pessimistic  than
some  which  have  appeared  in  project  drafts.

9.  A  final  over-alhcomment  by  the  Joint  Staff  member  of  the  Working  Group:
We  recognize  quite  clearly  that  any  effective  military  action  taken  by  the

United  States  will  generate  a  hue  and  cry  in  various  quarters.  The  influence  that
this  kind  of  "pressure"  may  have  upon  the  United  States  acting  in  support  of
its  national  interests  will  be  no  more  than  what  we  choose  to  permit  it  to  be.
There  are  repeated  expressions  in  various  project  draft  materials  indicating  that
this  influence  will  necessarily  be  great.  We  do  not  agree.  There  are  too  many
current  examples  of  countries  acting  in  what  they  presumably  believe  to  be  their
own  enlightened  self-interest,  in  utter  disregard  for  "world  opinion,"  for  us  to


632 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

accept  the  position  that  the  United  States  must  at  all  times  conduct  all  its  affairs
on  the  basis  of  a  world  popularity  contest.  In  short,  we  believe  that  certain  strong
US  actions  are  required  in  Southeast  Asia,  that  we  must  take  them  regardless  of
opinion  in  various  other  quarters,  and  that  results  of  our  failing  to  take  them
would  be  substantially  more  serious  to  the  United  States  than  would  be  any
results  of  world  opinions  if  we  did  take  them.  And  as  far  as  that  goes,  we  do  not
believe  that  if  we  took  the  necessary  actions  the  adverse  pressures  from  other
countries  would  prove  to  be  very  serious  after  all — at  least  from  countries  that
matter  to  us.

L.  M.  Mustin
Vice  Admiral,  USN
Working  Group  Member


[Document  232]

November  16,  1964

PERSONAL

TO :  Secretary  McNamara
FROM:  W.  W.  Rostow

SUBJECT:  Military  Dispositions  and  Political  Signals

Following  on  our  conversation  of  last  night  I  am  concerned  that  too  much
thought  is  being  given  to  the  actual  damage  we  do  in  the  North,  not  enough
thought  to  the  signal  we  wish  to  send.

The  signal  consists  of  three  parts :

a)  damage  to  the  North  is  now  to  be  inflicted  because  they  are  violating  the
1954  and  1962  Accords;

b)  we  are  ready  and  able  to  go  much  further  than  our  initial  act  of  damage;

c)  We  are  ready  and  able  to  meet  any  level  of  escalation  they  might  mount
in  response;  if  they  are  so  minded.

Four  points  follow.

1.  I  am  convinced  that  we  should  not  go  forward  into  the  next  stage  without
a  US  ground  force  commitment  of  some  kind:

a.  The  withdrawal  of  those  ground  forces  could  be  a  critically  important  part
of  our  diplomatic  bargaining  position.  Ground  forces  can  sit  during  a  conference
more  easily  than  we  can  maintain  a  series  of  mounting  air  and  naval  pressures.

b.  We  must  make  clear  that  counter  escalation  by  the  Communists  will  run
directly  into  US  strength  on  the  ground;  and,  therefore,  the  possibility  of  radically
extending  their  position  on  the  ground  at  the  cost  of  air  and  naval  damage  alone,
is  ruled  out.

c.  There  is  a  marginal  possibility  that  in  attacking  the  airfield  they  were  think-
ing two  moves  ahead;  namely,  they  may  be  planning  a  pre-emptive  ground  force
response  to  an  expected  US  retaliation  for  the  Bien  Hoa  attack.

2.  The  first  critical  military  action  against  North  Vietnam  should  be  designed
merely  to  install  the  principle  that  they  will,  from  the  present  forward,  be  vul-


Documents  633


nerable  to  retaliatory  attack  in  the  north  for  continued  violations  for  the  1954
and  1962  Accords.  In  other  words,  we  would  signal  a  shift  from  the  principle
involved  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf  response.  This  means  that  the  initial  use  of  force
in  the  north  should  be  as  limited  and  as  unsanguinary  as  possible.  It  is  the  in-
stallation of  the  principle  that  we  are  initially  interested  in,  not  tit  for  tat.

3.  But  our  force  dispositions  to  accompany  an  initial  retaliatory  move  against
the  north  should  send  three  further  signals  lucidly:

a.  that  we  are  putting  in  place  a  capacity  subsequently  to  step  up  direct  and
naval  pressure  on  the  north,  if  that  should  be  required;

b.  that  we  are  prepared  to  face  down  any  form  of  escalation  North  Vietnam
might  mount  on  the  ground;  and

0.  that  we  are  putting  forces  into  place  to  exact  retaliation  directly  against
Communist  China,  if  Peiping  should  join  in  an  escalatory  response  from  Hanoi.
The  latter  could  take  the  form  of  increased  aircraft  on  Formosa  plus,  perhaps,  a
carrier  force  sitting  off  China  as  distinguished  from  the  force  in  the  South  China
Sea.

4.  The  launching  of  this  track,  almost  certainly,  will  require  the  President  to
explain  to  our  own  people  and  to  the  world  our  intentions  and  objectives.  This
will  also  be  perhaps  the  most  persuasive  form  of  communication  with  Ho  and
Mao.  In  addition,  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  most  direct  communication  we  can
mount  (perhaps  via  Vientiane  and  Warsaw)  is  desirable,  as  opposed  to  the  use
of  cut-outs.  They  should  feel  they  now  confront  an  LBJ  who  has  made  up  his
mind.  Contrary  to  an  anxiety  expressed  at  an  earlier  stage,  I  believe  it  quite
possible  to  communicate  the  limits  as  well  as  the  seriousness  of  our  intentions
without  raising  seriously  the  fear  in  H,anoi  that  we  intend  at  our  initiative  to  land
immediately  in  the  Red  River  Delta,  in  China,  or  seek  any  other  objective  than
the  re-installation  of  the  1954  and  1962  Accords.


[Document  233]

Part  VI  (Analysis  of  Option  B),  Section  F.  Likely  Developments  and  Problems
if  the  Communist  Side  Engaged  in  Major  Retaliation  at  Some  Point.

Right  from  the  outset,  this  course  of  action  would  entail  some  chance  of  a
Communist  military  response  against  the  south.  Furthermore,  as  we  move  to
the  stage  of  "further  increases  of  military  pressure,"  the  chance  of  the  more
severe  types  of  response  would  increase.  We  need  a  more  precise  judgment  of
just  how  likely  various  contingencies  discussed  below  are,  but  each  must  be  con-
sidered from  the  standpoint  of  what  it  would  require  on  our  side  to  deal  with  it.

Four  classes  of  serious  Communist  responses  to  increased  military  pressures
will  be  discussed  here:  a  VC  offensive  in  South  Vietnam;  DRV  or  Chicom  air
attacks  in  South  Vietnam;  DRV  ground  offensives  into  South  Vietnam;  and
Chicom/DRV  offensives  into  South  Vietnam  or  Laos.  These  could  occur  in  com-
binations. Extensive  planning  is  applicable  to  the  latter  two  cases  and  we  shall
summarize  the  force  requirements  implied  by  current  plans.  We  shall  not  discuss
here  the  circumstances — considered  in  SNIE  10-3-64  and  in  other  sections  of
this  paper — that  would  make  these  various  Communist  actions  more  or  less
probable;  it  is  enough  to  assume  that  pressures  upon  the  North  have  progressed
to  a  point  that  makes  the  respective  Communist  military  reactions  significantly
likely.


634 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

1.  VC  Offensive  in  South  Vietnam.  Under  a  wide  range  of  US/RVN  pressures,
Hanoi  might  direct  greatly  intensified  VC  operations  in  South  Vietnam.  These
could  take  various  forms:

a.  Increased  sabotage  and  terrorism  countrywide;

b.  Assaults  upon  US  personnel,  including  high  diplomatic  figures,  or  their  de-
pendents;

c.  Terrorism  and  attacks  in  and  around  Saigon,  or  in  provincial  capitols;

d.  Attacks  up  to  regimental  strength,  on  airfields,  particularly  Danang,  Bien
Hoa  and  Tan  Son  Nhut;

e.  Facilities  such  as  communications,  POL  or  transportation  facilities  (includ-
ing roads,  bridges,  railroad  lines  and  inland  waterways) .

US  ground  forces — such  as  the  Marine  SLF  afloat  and  Army  or  Marine  units
from  Okinawa — will  have  been  deployed  to  defend  bases  in  the  Da  Nang  and
Saigon  areas  prior  to  undertaking  air  operations  against  the  DRV.  The  position-
ing of  US  forces  at  these  major  bases  and  population  centers  releases  ARVN
forces  for  security  duty  at  other  locations  and  for  combat  in  the  field  against  the
VC,  which  are  primary  responsibilities  of  the  RVNAF.

Prior  to  or  concurrently  with  the  introduction  of  US  ground  forces,  US  de-
pendents will  be  evacuated.

Depending  on  developments,  further  security  measures  and  US  forces  may  be
required.  US  fixed-wing  aircraft  could  be  committed  to  direct  support  within
South  Vietnam.

For  purposes  of  such  a  burst  of  operations,  the  VC  is  believed  to  have  military
capabilities  it  has  not  yet  committed  and  may,  to  a  lesser  extent,  have  unused
capabilities  for  terrorism  and  subversion.  As  in  the  mortar  attack  on  Bien  Hoa,
the  VC  could  inflict  serious  damage  on  US  materiel  and  personnel  based  within
South  Vietnam,  though  this  would  not  affect  the  major  US  resources  in  the  area
on  carriers  or  based  outside  South  Vietnam.  Large-scale,  protracted  combat  oper-
ations by  the  VC  would  expose  them  to  heavy  and  possibly  disastrous  counter-
attack by  RVN  regular  forces,  perhaps  directly  supported  by  US  air.  But  against
this  risk  would  be  the  hope  that  intense  VC  operations  could  produce  mass  de-
fections, government  shifts  toward  "neutralism,"  or  an  atmosphere  of  public
demoralization  and  war-weariness  such  that  US  advisors  and  support  could  re-
main in  South  Vietnam  only  against  strong  popular  wish.

2.  Chicom  or  DRV  Air  Attacks.  North  Vietnam  would  be  limited  to  fighter
strikes  against  the  south.  Of  their  117  military  aircraft,  36  are  MIG  15-17  jet
fighters,  all  now  located  at  Phuc  Yen  Airfield  northwest  of  Hanoi,  out  of  range
of  targets  in  South  Vietnam.  If  relocated  to  Dong  Hoi  airfield,  these  fights  could
reach  targets  in  northern  South  Vietnam,  such  as  Danang  and  Hue.

Significant  air  actions  would  have  to  originate  with  Communist  China,  which
has  in  addition  to  jet  fighters  (including  80  MIG- 19s  and  about  15  MIG-21s,
which  can  reach  the  17th  parallel  from  Hanoi  or  Hainan  Island)  290  ll-28s,
2  TU-16s  and  13  TU-4s.  The  11-28  light  jet  bomber  can  reach  Danang  from
Phuc  Yen  on  a  two-way  mission.  With  a  normal  bomb  load,  it  could  reach
Saigon  only  on  a  one-way  sortie — unless  Dong  Hoi  airfield  is  improved,  or
Hainan's  Lingshui  used.  From  Hainan,  the  11-28  can  cover  Laos,  Cambodia,
South  Vietnam  and  western  Thailand.


Documents  635


DRV  attacks  would  be  essentially  nuisance  raids,  and  even  the  Chicom  attacks
would  have  primarily  psychological  rather  than  military  effort.

The  US  response  to  DRV  air  action  in  SVN  would  be  to  initiate  or  to  continue
in  coordination  with  the  RVN  forces  an  air  strike  campaign  against  DRV  air
bases  and  associated  targets.  In  case  of  Chicom  air  attacks,  including  attacks  on
a  US  aircraft  carrier  US  forces  would  attack  air  bases,  nuclear  production  facili-
ties and  other  selected  military  targets  in  Communist  China.

DRV  OFFENSIVE  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM:  LAOS

1.  DRV  capabilities:

a.  Attack  across  the  Demarcation  Zone  (DMZ)  with  two  infantry  divisions
(20,000  troops)  within  48  hours  after  initiation  of  strikes  on  DRV.

b.  In  conjunction  with  the  attack  into  SVN,  move  into  southern  Laos  with
two  infantry  divisions  and  two  infantry  brigades,  supported  by  one  tank  regiment
and  eight  artillery  regiments  (total  45,000  troops).

2.  CHICOMs  could  provide  support  to  the  DRV  offensive  with  increased  ship-
ments of  military  weapons  and  equipment,  food  and  medical  supplies  and  pro-
vide the  DRV  with  covert  or  "volunteer"  air  defense,  engineer,  ordnance  and
medical  personnel.

3.  US  response  to  defend  the  area  under  attacks  and  to  push  back  the  communist
offensive  would  require  implementation  of  CINCPAC  OPLAN  32-64,  Phase  III.
US  force  deployments  into  mainland  Southeast  Asia,  totaUng  nearly  five  divisions
with  supporting  air  and  naval  units,  are  summarized  as  follows:

a.  Into  South  Vietnam —

D  +  1 III  Marine  Expeditionary  Force  Hq.  (Da  Dang)

D  +  2 One  Marine  Division  (Da  Dang)

to  One  Marine  Air  Wing  (Da  Dang)

D  4-  35  One  Army  Airborne  Brigade

D  +  15  Hq.  COMUSSFASIA  (augmented)

One  Army  Corps  Hq.  *
D  -f  60  One  Army  Infantry  Division

Army  Combat  and  Combat  Support  Units

b.  Into  Thailand —

D  +  15  One  Army  Corps  Hq.
to  One  Army  Infantry  Division

D  H-  35  One  Army  Airborne  Brigade
One  Army  Logistic  Command  Hq.

D  4-  40  One  Army  Mechanized  Infantry  Brigade  (Reinforced)
D  +  60  Army  Combat  and  Combat  Support  Units

c.  Air  and  air  support  units  as  required  in  addition  to  forces  presendy  in  place.

d.  Naval  forces  available  for  direct  support  or  to  reinforce  COMUSSEASIA —

1-  2  Attack  Carrier  Groups

1  ASW  Carrier  Group

2  Patrol  Squadrons

2  Submarines

3  Minesweep  Divisions
3-4  Amphibious  Squadrons

2-  3  Landing  Ship  Squadrons
2-3  LCU  Divisions

1  Marine  Expeditionary  Force


636 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

4.  The  mission  of  CINCPAC  OPLAN  32-64  Phase  III  is  to  bring  about  an  early
cessation  of  hostilities  under  conditions  representing  a  net  advantage  to  the  Free
World.  In  conjunction  with  the  campaign  of  the  above  deployed  forces  in  the
areas  under  invasion,  air  and  naval  strikes  against  the  DRV  and  a  naval  blockade
will  contribute  toward  bringing  the  superior  aUied  military  power  into  play
against  the  enemy.  The  plan  envisages  further  an  early  ground  attack  northward
to  seize,  liberate  and  occupy  North  >/ietnam.

CHICOM  OFFENSIVE  IN  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

1.  CHICOM  capabilities

a.  Reinforce  a  DRV  attack  into  southern  Laos  with  six  infantry  divisions.
These  divisions  could  close  the  Vinh  area  in  about  seven  days.

b.  Attack  against  indigenous  forces  in  South  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Thailand  with
a  combined  CHICOM  DRV  force  equivalent  to  up  to  31  divisions,  supported
by  one  tank  regiment,  13  artillery  regiments  and  combat  support  and  service
support  troops  of  five  Army  headquarters.  Against  US/Allied  opposition  an
attack  could  be  launched  with  the  equivalent  of  22  infantry  divisions  supported
by  five  artillery  regiments.

c.  The  above  estimates  are  for  dry  season  operations.  During  the  wet  season,
the  increased  problems  of  movement  through  a  difficult  terrain  and  of  maintain-
ing logistic  support  could  reduce  effective  combat  forces  up  to  fifty  per  cent.

d.  In  conjunction  with  the  above  ground  attacks  the  CHICOM  DRV  could
support  the  employment  of  540  jet  fighters  and  120  jet  fight  bombers  and  attack
US  RVN  forces  with  a  sustained  sortie  rate  of  650  air  defense  combat  patrol
and  85  bomber  sorties  per  day.  It  is  most  likely  that  over  50  per  cent  of  the
540  jet  fighters  would  be  used  to  control  air  space  and  to  perform  air  defense
missions  over  south  southwest  China  and  North  Vietnam.  From  south/southwest
China  bases  jet  light  bombers  could  deliver  4,400  pound  bomb  loads  to  targets
northward  of  Saigon  and  Bangkok.  FAGOT  FRESCO  jet  fighters,  with  external
fuel  and  guns  only,  would  have  the  same  combat  radii  as  the  jet  light  bombers.
In  a  ground  support  role  FAGOT  FRESCOs,  with  guns  only,  operating  from
southern  Hainan  Island  could  cover  little  more  than  the  northern  part  of  South
Vietnam  and  northeastern  Thailand.  If  jet  fighters  were  operated  from  Dong  Hoi
airfield,  they  could  penetrate  farther  into  South  Vietnam.

e.  At  sea  the  CHICOMs  could  attack  US  RVN  naval  forces  in  the  Tonkin
Gulf  and  South  China  Sea  with  45  motor  torpedo  boats  and  20  motor  gunboats.
Transfer  of  submarines  from  the  North  and  East  Sea  Fleets  could  be  accom-
plished, with  an  estimated  limit  of  six  submarines  on  station  in  the  South  China
Sea  area.

2.  US  response  to  meet  a  CHICOM  drive  into  Southeast  Asia  would  require
implementation  of  CINCPAC  OPLAN  39-65  and  or  OPLAN  32-64  Phase  IV.

a.  CINCPAC  OPLAN  39-65  is  designed  to  employ  massive  US  naval  and  air
power  against  Communist  China  and  her  satellites  at  times  and  places  of  our
choice  to  force  termination  of  the  aggression.  It  visualizes  minimum  use  of  US
ground  forces  and  maximum  use  of  indigenous  forces.  The  plan  can,  however,
be  implemented  in  conjunction  with,  or  preliminary  to,  other  contingency  plans
for  the  area  concerned;  such  as,  for  Southeast  Asia,  OPLAN  32-64,  Phase  IV
(see  below).  Deployments  under  OPLAN  39-65  provide  for  a  significant  increase
in  US  strength  in  the  Western  Pacific,  mostly  naval  and  air,  by  movements  from


Documents  637


the  Continental  US  and  the  Eastern  Pacific.  Forces  will  be  positioned  initially
throughout  WestPac,  from  Japan  and  Korea  to  the  Philippines  and  Thailand,  with
adjustments  to  be  made  within  the  area  for  best  effective  employment.  The
following  summarizes  the  major  force  increases  visualized  to  meet  the  Southeast
Asia  situation:


US  AIR  FORCE


NORMAL
WEST-PAC
STRENGTH


TAC  FTR  SQDNS  9

TAC  BOMB  SQDNS  2

FTR  INTERC  SQDNS  5

MED  BOMB  SQDNS  (B-47)  —

HVY  BOMB  SQDNS  (B-52)  —

TROOP  CARRIER  SQDNS  8
Plus  reconnaissance,  refueling  and  support  units.

US  NAVY

ATTACK  CARRIERS  (CVA)  3
Plus  following  embarked  squadrons

FIGHTER  7

ATTACK  9

HVY  ATTACK  V/i
Plus  reconnaissance  and  airborne  early  warning  units.


INCREASE
30

2
3
2
6


ASW  CARRIERS  (CVS)
CRUISERS
DESTROYER  TYPES
SUBMARINES
AMPHIBIOUS  SHIPS


1

2

30-32

8-9
22


Plus  reconnaissance  and  patrol  squadrons,  minecraft  and  support  units.


US  MARINE  CORPS
DIVAVING  TEAMS
FTR  SQDNS
FTR/ ATTACK  SQDNS
ATTACK  SQDNS

Plus  reconnaissance,-refueling  and  support  units.


US  ARMY
DIVISIONS


6

9


1

2

20-28

6-7
30


2  (Korea)


1  (from  Hawaii
to  Thailand)

ABN  DIVISIONS  1  ABN  BDE  (Okinawa)  1  (to  Hawaii)

Plus  air  defense,  missile  artillery,  aviation  and  support  forces.

CONUS  Army  forces  to  be  alerted:  1  ABN  DIVISION

2  INF  DIVISIONS
2  MECH  BRIGADES

b.  CINCPAC  OPLAN  32-64  Phase  IV  is  designed  to  counter  aggression  by
Communist  China  in  Southeast  Asia,  either  independently  or  in  conjunction  with
North  Vietnam.  The  objective  is  to  bring  about  an  early  cessation  of  hostilities


638 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

under  conditions  representing  a  net  advantage  to  the  Free  World,  including
liberation  and  control  of  North  Vietnam  and  reunification  of  Vietnam  under  a
government  aligned  with  the  Free  World.  US  forces  are  increased  to  nearly  six
divisions,  and  air  strike  and  blockade  actions  are  extended  to  south  China.
Major  force  deployments  to  mainland  Southeast  Asia  are  summarized  as  follows:

To  South  Vietnam —

D  +  1 III  Marine  Expeditionary  Force  Hq.  (Da  Nang)

One  Air  Force  Control  Center  Hq.  (Saigon)
D  +  5 1st  ANGLICO  (Da  Nang)
D  +  15  Army  Hq.  COMUSSEASIA  (augmented)

One  Army  Corps  Hq.
D  +  9 One  Army  Airborne  Brigade
to

D  +  20

D  +  2 One  Marine  Division
to  One  Marine  Air  Wing

D  +  35

D  -|-  60  One  Army  Infantry  Division
To  Thailand —

D  +  15  One  Army  Corps  Hq.

One  Army  Logistics  Command  Hq.  (augmented)
D  -h  8 One  Army  Airborne  Division
to

D  +  45  Two  Army  Infantry  Divisions

One  Army  Mech.  Infantry  Brigade  (Reinforced)

Follow  on  to  Vietnam  and  Thailand —

Army  air  defense,  combat  and  combat  support  and  logistics  support  units.
Navy  and  Marine  Corps  construction  battalion  units.

Back-Up  Forces —

Back-up  forces  include  one  Army  airborne  division  from  CONUS  to  Hawaii,
one  Marine  division  from  CONUS  to  Okinawa,  and  one  Marine  Air  Wing  from
CONUS  to  Japan.

Air  Forces —

Air  Force  units  are  assumed  to  be  largely  in  place  as  result  of  implementation
of  earlier  phases  of  OPLAN  32-64  or  preparations  for  implementation  of  OPLAN
39-65.  Supporting  augmentation  units  to  be  deployed  to  West  Pac  include:

Combat  and  service  support  units.

Logistic  support  units.

Composite  air  strike  force  units.

Two  C-123  squadrons.


Documents  639


Naval  Forces —

Following  forces  are  available  for  direct  support  in  Southeast  Asia  area  or  to
reinforce  COMUSSEASIA:

1-3  Attack  carrier  groups

1-  2  ASW  Carrier  Group
3  Patrol  Squadrons

4-6  Submarines

6  Minesweep  Divisions

3-4  Amphibious  Squadrons

2-  3  Landing  Ship  Squadrons
2-3  LCU  Divisions

1  Marine  Expeditionary  Force  combat  and  service  support  units  as  required

3.  In  Initial  operations  against  CHICOM  aggression  the  serious  enemy  air  threat,
his  naval  capability,  and  the  potential  threat  of  his  ponderous  ground  forces  will
require  the  greatest  magnitude  of  over-all  US  effort.  Priority  of  effort  will  be
directed  toward  gaining  and  maintaining  air  superiority  in  the  area,  preventing
the  advance  of  enemy  troops  and  their  supplies,  and  altering  the  enemy's  intent
to  continue  the  aggression.  As  operations  develop,  air  and  naval  attacks  will  be
increased  in  scope  and  in  intensity  against  Chinese  forces  and  into  southern  China
to  increase  the  pressure  on  the  Chinese  communists.  Both  OPLANs  32-64  and
39-65  provide  for  either  non-nuclear  or  nuclear  options.  Strategic  Air  Command
forces  are  to  be  utilized  to  strike  selected  targets  within  China  using  nuclear
and/or  non-nuclear  weapons,  as  directed  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.

As  early  as  practicable,  counteroffensive  operations  to  regain  friendly  territory
and  to  liberate  North  Vietnam  will  be  initiated.  Amphibious  forces  will  launch  a
major  assault  in  North  Vietnam  to  seize  the  initiative,  cut  enemy  supply  lines  and
routes  of  withdrawal,  and  facilitate  the  ground  offensive.  Concurrently,  US/
Allied  ground  forces  will  mount  a  major  offensive  along  the  coastal  axis  north-
ward from  Da  Nang;  forces  in  other  areas  will  launch  simultaneous  attacks;  and
air  and  naval  attacks  will  be  intensified.  The  magnitude  and  intensity  of  opera-
tions will  be  increased  until  favorable  conditions  are  achieved  to  force  the  enemy
to  accept  terms  for  the  cessation  of  hostilities,  the  reunification  of  Vietnam,  and
the  curtailment  of  communist  influence  in  Southeast  Asia.


[Document  234]

DOCUMENT  234

18  NOV  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Subject:  Courses  of  Action  in  Southeast  Asia

1.  This  memorandum  derives  from  your  conversation  with  the  Chairman,  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff,  on  10  November  1964  concerning  a  possible  US  program  of
actions  in  Southeast  Asia  comprising  a  controlled  program  of  systematically  in-
creased military  pressures  against  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  (DRV)
applied  in  coordination  with  appropriate  political  pressures.


640 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

2.  It  is  desirable  that  a  clear  set  of  military  objectives  be  agreed  upon  before
further  military  involvement  in  Southeast  Asia  is  undertaken.  In  this  connection,
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  JCSM-955-64  dated  14  November  1964,
sets  forth  their  preferred  course  of  action  to  reverse  the  unfavorable  trend  in  the
Republic  of  Vietnam  (RVN)  and  Laos  with  the  objective  of  causing  the  DRV
to  cease  supporting  and  directing  the  insurgencies  in  those  countries.  However,
should  a  controlled  program  of  systematically  increased  pressures  referred  to  in
paragraph  1  above  be  directed,  the  views  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  set  forth
herein  on  how  such  a  program  should  be  implemented.

3.  For  a  program  of  graduated  military  pressures,  the  following  objectives  are
appropriate:

a.  Signal  the  willingness  and  determination  of  the  United  States  to  employ
increasing  force  in  support  of  national  objectives  with  respect  to  RVN  and
Laos;  namely,  an  independent  and  stable  noncommunist  government  in  RVN
and  a  free  and  neutral  Laos  under  the  terms  of  the  Geneva  Accords  of  1962.

b.  Reduce,  progressively,  DRV  support  of  the  insurgencies  in  RVN  and
Laos  to  the  extent  necessary  to  tip  the  balance  clearly  in  favor  of  the  Govern-
ments of  RVN  and  Laos  by:

(1)  Reduction  of  the  amount  of  support  available  through  destruction  of
men,  material,  and  supporting  facilities;

(2)  Reduction  of  the  amount  of  support  available  through  diversion  of
DRV  resources  to  increased  homeland  defenses  and  alerts;  and

(3)  Reduction  of  the  rate  of  delivery  of  the  available  support  through
destruction  of  bridges  and  other  LOC  choke  points;  staging  facilities  and
transport;  and  through  interruption  of  movements  by  attacks  on  selected
fixed  targets,  armed  route  reconnaissance,  raids,  and  waterborne  inter-
dictions.

c.  Punish  the  DRV  for  DRV-supported  military  actions  by  the  Viet  Cong/
Pathet  Lao  (VQTL)  against  the  Governments  of  RVN  and  Laos,  including
the  US  casualties  which  have  resulted  from  those  actions.

d.  Terminate  the  conflicts  in  Laos  and  RVN  only  under  conditions  which
would  result  in  the  achievement  of  US  objectives.

4.  In  JCSM-955-64,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  analyzed  certain  possible  enemy
reactions  to  US  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  and  appropriate  US/allied
responses  thereto.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  reaffirm  the  salient  conclusion  which
arose  from  that  analysis,  which  is  equally  applicable  to  this  program,  that  the
United  States  and  its  allies  can  deal  adequately  with  any  course  of  action  the
DRV  and  or  CHICOMs  decide  to  pursue.  The  logistic,  personnel,  and  intelli-
gence considerations  contained  in  the  above  memorandum  are  also  applicable  to
this  program.

5.  Should  a  course  of  action  to  apply  controlled,  systematically  increased
pressures  against  the  DRV  be  directed,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  the
program  of  actions  contained  in  the  Appendix  and  the  objectives  contained  in
paragraph  3,  above.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:

Earle  G.  Wheeler
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

Attachment


Documents  641


[Document  235]

ASSISTANT  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.  20301

18  NOV  1964

INTERNATIONAL  SECURITY  AFFAIRS

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

SUBJECT:  Immediate  Resumption  of  the  DESOTO  Patrols

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  in  JCSM  894-64  (Tab  A),  recommended  a  resumption
of  the  DESOTO  Patrols  which  have  been  suspended  since  mid-September.  Action
on  the  memorandum  in  question  was  deferred  pending  State-Defense  review  of
all  proposed  future  courses  of  action  for  Southeast  Asia.  In  the  interim,  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  incorporated  a  general  recommendation  for  the  resumption  of
DESOTO  patrols  in  their  memorandum,  JCSM  902-64,  which  you  will  recall  was
forwarded  for  Ambassador  Taylor's  review  and  comment.  Ambassador  Taylor's
views  on  this  subject  as  reported  in  message  Saigon  1378  to  State  (Tab  B)  stated
that  he  perceived  no  advantage  in  resuming  DESOTO  patrols  unless  they  be  for
essential  intelligence  gathering  purposes.  However,  as  this  course  of  action,  among
others,  is  under  current  consideration,  I  shall  keep  it  in  mind  for  possible  use.
Recommend  your  signature  to  the  attached  self-explanatory  memorandum  ad-
dressed to  the  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  qf  Staff.

Peter  Solbert

Deputy  Assistant  Secretary

Enclosure:
Memo  to  Ch/JCS

Your  reference:
JCSM  894-64

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  CHAIRMAN,  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
Subject:  Immediate  Resumption  of  the  DESOTO  Patrols

I  have  noted  the  recommendation  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  as  expressed  in
the  referenced  memorandum  for  the  resumption  of  DESOTO  Patrols.  Their  views
were  stated  again  in  a  subsequent  memorandum  (JCSM  902-64)  as  a  proposed
future  course  of  action  for  Southeast  Asia.

This  proposal  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  among  other  recommendations  for
courses  of  action  in  Southeast  Asia,  is  under  active  consideration.

Robert  S.  McNamara

[Sent  20  November  1964  as  drafted]


642 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


[Document  236]

OFFICE  OF  THE  ASSISTANT  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

23  Nov  1964

TO:  Mr.  Bundy
FROM:  Mr.  Rowen
BUI:

These  comments  are  parth'  McNaughton's  and  partly  mine.  If  John  disagrees
with  any  of  them,  he'll  let  you  know  later  in  the  dav.

(Signed)
Harry

23  November  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR  MR.  WILLIAM  P.  BUNDY
Subject:  Comments  due  Monday  Noon,  November  23,  1964

I  make  the  following  suggestions  relevant  to  your  draft  paper:

1.  Add  to  the  "US  Objectives  and  Slakes"  this  factor:  "The  desire  of  the  US  to
emerge  from  the  crisis  without  an  unacceptable  taint  because  of  the  methods  it
used."

2.  With  respect  to  Option  A  in  '"Broad  Options,"  restore  the  concept  you  had
in  your  original  draft  to  the  effect  that  "We  would  accept  the  risk  that  South
Vietnamese  elements  would  themselves  open  negotiations  with  the  liberation
front  or  with  Hanoi  directlv  probablv  to  a  cease  fixe  and  to  a  coalition  govern-
ment that  would  admit  the  liberation  front."

3.  With  respect  to  Option  C  in  "Broad  Options/'  the  negotiating  pan  of  the
definition  should  be  changed  to  indicate  that  the  United  States  would  not  be  a
pany  to  negotiations  in  the  early  stages.  Talks  of  some  kind  should  start  fairly
early  but  they  should  be  carried  on  bv  the  South  Metnamese.

4.  We  think  that  the  following  three  points  should  be  made  in  connection  with
the  advocacy  of  the  Option  A  position:

a.  It  gives  us  more  time  than  Option  C  before  actions  are  taken  against  North
Vietnam  and  before  any  US  negotiations  are  begun.  I  suspect  that,  taking  account
of  the  possibility  that  the  new  Government  may  surprise  us  all  by  achieving  some
success,  this  increased  delav  mav  be  a  good  thing.

b.  It  is  more  consistent  with  the  image  of  a  "Vietnamese  war"  with  only  US
"requested  help."  This  minimizes  the  price  that  the  United  States  will  pay  if,
despite  our  efforts,  an  unfavorable  outcome  results.

c.  Specifically,  it  lends  itself  better  than  Option  C  to  the  Vietnamese  doing
their  own  negotiating — which,  as  indicated  above,  is  better  than  a  course  of  ac-
tion in  which  the  United  States  is  doing  the  negotiating.

5.  Regarding  the  analvsis  of  Option  B,  we  have  no  comments  other  than  that
this  option  appears  highly  undesirable — (a)  it  is  quite  unlikely  to  work,  (b)
it  involves  substantial  risks  of  escalation,  (c)  it  will  appear  to  the  world  to  be
an  "extremist"  course  of  action,  (d)  it  commits  much  more  of  the  prestige  of
the  US  to  a  highly  dubious  course  of  action.

6.  Regarding  the  analysis  of  Option  C:


Documents  643


a.  Our  main  point  is  the  one  regarding  negotiations  made  in  para  3  above.
Course  C  (and  even  more  Course  B)  involves  an  increase  in  the  US  stake  in
\'ietnam  without  having  a  high  probabilitv  of  success.  If  it  turns  out  badly,  it
may  be  quite  important  for  the  G\'N  to  have  negotiated  its  future  with  the  US
being  in  the  position  of  a  good  friend  willing  to  take  risks  of  a  major  war  in
SEA:  the  US  should  not  put  itself  in  a  position  where  it  can  be  plausibly  accused
of  having  '"sold  out  Southeast  Asia."

b.  We  doubt  the  wisdom  of  anv  "firm  Presidential  statement"  at  the  beginning
of  such  a  moderate  course  of  military-  actions.  The  deeds  themselves  should  carry
the  freight.

c.  Somewhere  in  the  analysis  of  Option  C  should  appear  the  concept  that  we
might  achieve  a  level  of  harassment  of  Nonh  \'ietnam  that  would  be  adequate
for  our  purpose;  this  is  the  "Corcoran"  idea.

d.  We  must,  somewhere,  wrestle  with  the  JCS  problem  regarding  the  DRV
air  capability.  That  is,  they  have  stated  that,  as  a  military  matter,  the  DRV
airfields  and  POL  have  to  be  taken  out  ver^-  soon  in  any  sequence  of  strikes
against  North  Metnam.  This  is  a  problem  with  both  Options  B  and  C.

e.  The  issue  on  US  ground  deployments  to  S\"N  should  flag  the  point  that  this
would  increase  the  sense  or  US  commitment  without  contributing  much  directly
to  the  conduct  of  the  war.

f.  Option  C  should  state  clearlv  our  judgment  that  the  DR\'  would  probably
"hold  firm"  not  only  through  our  initial  military  actions  but  also  well  into  and
perhaps  through  all  the  way  of  a  second  phase  of  US  actions.

g.  Reprisals  should  be  given  a  special  para^r-rh — :r.c  which  (ii  notes  that
we  could  have  an  escalation  of  reprisals,  and  (ii)  may  make  much  more  "noise"'
than  the  controlled  squeeze  that  we  ire  trains  to  applv  to  North  Metnam.  As
for  the  first  of  these  two  observations,  there  mav  be  some  merit  in  being  able  to
pursue  this  route  in  harassing  North  \'ietnam:  it  avoids  US  commitment  to  a
program  unrelated  to  any  specific  acts  bv  the  \'C.

7.  As  for  "Immediate  Actions,"  some  of  the  above  comments  applv:

a.  We  think  the  United  States  should  avoid  "tough  public  statements."  but
should  rely  rather  on  its  deeds.

b.  Although  it  is  not  stated  in  your  draft,  we  thmk  it  should  be  understood
that  there  will  be  no  US  negotiations  going  on  during  this  phase.

8.  I  suggest  that  your  Recommendations  section  be  something  like  the  following:
The  choice  between  Options  B  and  C  on  the  one  hand  and  Option  A  on  the

other  turns  largely  on  the  degree  of  confidence  we  have  in  six  estimates:

1.  That  the  situalion  in  South  \'ietnam  is  in  fact  ver\  bad  and  that  it  will
continue  to  deteriorate  rapidlv.  despite  the  best  we  can  do  under  the  present
ground  rules  (or  any  ground  rules  not  allowing  at  least  some  strikes  on  North
Vietnam ) .

2.  That  we  can  devise  and  will  be  able  politically  and  militarily  to  carr\-  out  a
scheme  of  militarv  pressure  on  North  \'ietnam  suflricient  to  cause  the  DRV
leadership  to  knuckle  and  to  diminish  meaninsfullv  its  assistance  and  direction
tothe\C.

3.  That  VC  activities  in  South  Vietnam  will  be  meaningfully  reduced  by  such
a  DR\'  reduction  in  assistance  and  direction.

4.  That  the  GVN  would  remain  intact  during  a  campaign  against  the  North

and  would  make  profitable  use  of  a  respite  in  VC  activities.

5.  That  the  risk  is  not  high  of  escalation  to  major  conflict  or  of  having  to
disengage  later  when  we  have  even  more  chips  on  the  table.

6.  That  the  US  would  not  be  tainted  too  much  because  of  the  methods  used


644 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

or  because  a  compromise  settlement  coming  out  of  Option  C  might  be  widely
interpreted  as  a  US  "sell  out"  of  Southeast  Asia.

It  is  our  judgment  that  the  odds  are  better  than  even  that  all  six  of  the  above
propositions  are  true  if  a  moderate  course  of  pressure  on  North  Vietnam  is
pursued.  We,  therefore,  recommend  that  Options  A  and  B  be  rejected  in  favor  of
Option  C.


[Document  237]

[This  duplication  of  Document  218  was  noted  late  in  the  manufacturing- process.]

Position  Papers
Nov  23,  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR:  Mr.  William  Bundy— FE

FROM:  Mr.  Michael  V.  Forrestal— SA'N

It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  an  important  flavor  lacking  in  the  excellent  "hard
look"  of  your  weekend  paper  at  our  stakes  in  SVN  and  Laos.  It  is  the  role  of
China.  I  think  it  would  be  helpful  both  to  our  thinking  here  and  also  as  a  basis
for  any  discussion  we  may  someday  have  with  our  European  friends  to  weave
into  your  expose  a  paragraph  or  two  on  the  nature  and  probable  development  of
Chinese  policy.

I  think  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  the  effects  of  an  American  partial  with-
drawal in  Southeast  Asia  without  taking  into  account  the  effect  this  would  have
on  Chinese  policy.  Putting  it  another  way,  if  China  did  not  exist,  the  effect  of
our  withdrawal  from  a  situation  in  which  the  people  we  were  trying  to  help
seemed  unable  to  help  themselves  might  not  be  politically  so  pervasive  in  Asia.

As  I  see  it.  Communist  China  shares  the  same  internal  political  necessity  for
ideological  expansion  today  that  the  Soviet  Union  did  during  the  time  of  the
Comintern  and  the  period  just  following  the  Second  World  War.  Since  China's
problems  with  respect  to  her  internal  political  and  economic  management  are
even  greater  than  those  of  Russia,  one  would  expect  that  the  need  to  justify  the
sacrifices  she  demands  of  her  people  will  continue  for  the  plannable  future.  This
will  impel  her,  I  suggest,  to  achieve  ideological  successes  abroad,  at  least  where
these  can  be  achieved  without  grave  risk  to  the  Mainland  itself.

Since  any  ideological  success  will  stimulate  the  need  for  further  successes  dur-
ing the  period  of  her  internal  tension,  our  objective  should  be  to  "contain"
China  for  the  longest  possible  period.  We  would  realize,  of  course,  that  eventually
China  must  be  expected  to  exercise  some  degree  of  political  pre-eminence  on
the  fringes  of  Asia.  But  if  we  can  delay  the  day  when  this  happens  and  at  the
same  time  strengthen  the  political  and  economic  structure  of  the  bordering  coun-
tries, we  might  indeed  succeed  in  creating,  at  the  very  least,  Titoist  regimes  on
the  periphery  of  China  and  at  best  Western  oriented  nations  who  nevertheless
maintain  normal  relationships  with  Peking.  Somebody  put  this  to  me  the  other
day  in  culinary  terms.  We  should  delay  China's  swallowing  up  Southeast  Asia
until  (a)  she  develops  better  table  manners  and  (b)  the  food  is  somewhat  more
indigestible.

I  have  been  trying  some  of  this  reasoning  on  Lippman,  and  he  appears  to  be
toying  with  it,  although  I  would  not  hope  for  much  from  that  quarter.


Documents  645


[Document  238]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
Counselor  and  Chairman
Policy  Planning  Council
Washington

November  23,  1964

TO:  The  Secretary

THROUGH:  S/S

FROM:  S/P— W.  W.  Rostow

SUBJECT:  Some  Observations  As  We  Come  to  the  Crunch  in  Southeast  Asia

I  leave  for  Lima  this  Saturday  for  the  CIAP  and  CIES  meetings.  I  presume
that  in  early  December  some  major  decisions  on  Southeast  Asia  will  be  made.
I  should,  therefore,  like  to  leave  with  you  some  observations  on  the  situation.
I  have  already  communicated  them  to  Bill  Bundy.

1.  We  must  begin  by  fastening  our  minds  as  sharply  as  we  can  around  our
appreciation  of  the  view  in  Hanoi  and  Peiping  of  the  Southeast  Asia  problem.
I  agree  almost  completely  with  SNIE  10-3-64  of  October  9.  Here  are  the  critical
passages :

While  they  will  seek  to  exploit  and  encourage  the  deteriorating  situation
in  Saigon,  they  probably  will  avoid  actions  that  would  in  their  view  unduly
increase  the  chances  of  a  major  yS  response  against  North  Vietnam  (DRV)
or  Communist  China.  We  are  almost  certain  that  both  Hanoi  and  Peiping
are  anxious  not  to  become  involved  in  the  kind  of  war  in  which  the  great
weight  of  US  weaponry  could  be  brought  against  them.  Even  if  Hanoi  and
Peiping  estimated  that  the  US  would  not  use  nuclear  weapons  against  them,
they  could  not  be  sure  of  this.  .  .  .

In  the  face  of  new  US  pressures  against  the  DRV,  further  actions  by
Hanoi  and  Peiping  would  be  based  to  a  considerable  extent  on  their  es-
timate of  US  intentions,  i.e.,  whether  the  US  was  actually  determined  to  in-
crease its  pressures  as  necessary.  Their  estimates  on  this  point  are  probably
uncertain,  but  we  believe  that  fear  of  provoking  severe  measures  by  the  US
would  lead  them  to  temper  their  responses  with  a  good  deal  of  caution.  .  .  .

If,  despite  Communist  efforts,  the  US  attacks  continued,  Hanoi's  leaders
would  have  to  ask  themselves  whether  it  was  not  better  to  suspend  their
support  of  Viet  Cong  military  action  rather  than  suffer  the  destruction  of
their  major  military  facilities  and  the  industrial  sector  of  their  economy.  In
the  belief  that  the  tide  has  set  almost  irreversibly  in  their  favor  in  South  Viet-
nam, they  might  calculate  that  the  Viet  Cong  could  stop  its  military  attacks
for  the  time  being  and  renew  the  insurrection  successfully  at  a  later  date.
Their  judgment  in  this  matter  might  be  reinforced  by  the  Chinese  Commu-
nist concern  over  becoming  involved  in  a  conflict  with  US  air  and  naval
power.

Our  most  basic  problem  is,  therefore,  how  to  persuade  them  that  a  continuation
of  their  present  policy  will  risk  major  destruction  in  North  Viet  Nam;  that  a
preemptive  move  on  the  ground  as  a  prelude  to  negotiation  will  be  met  by  US
strength  on  the  ground;  and  that  Communist  China  will  not  be  a  sanctuary  if
it  assists  North  Viet  Nam  in  counter-escalation.


646 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Ptipc^s  ^'ol.  Ill


2.  In  terms  of  force  dis{>ositions.  the  cri:  j./  r  oves  are.  I  believe,  these.

a.  The  introduction  of  some  ground  forces  m  South  Viet  Nam  and.  pos-
sibly, in  the  Laos  corridor.

b.  A  minimal  installation  of  the  principle  that  from  the  present  forward
North  Viet  Nam  will  be  vulnerable  to  retaliatorv  attack  for  continued  violation
of  the  1954-1962  Accords.

c.  Perhaps  most  imponant  of  all,  the  introduction  into  the  Pacific  Theater
of  massive  forces  to  deal  with  anv  escalator)  response,  including  forces  evidently
aimed  at  China  as  well  as  North  \'iet  Nam.  should  the  Chinese  Communists  enter
the  game.  I  am  increasinglv  confident  that  we  can  do  this  in  ways  which  would
be  understood — and  not  dangerouslv  misinterpreted— -in  Hanoi  and  Peiping.

3.  But  the  movement  of  forces,  and  even  bombing  operations  in  the  north,
will  not,  in  themselves,  constitute  a  decisive  signal.  Thev  will  be  searching,  with
enormous  sensitivitv,  for  the  answer  to  the  following  question:  Is  the  President
of  the  United  States  deeplv  committed  to  reinstalling  the  1954-1962  Accords;
or  is  he  putting  on  a  demonstration  of  force  that  would  save  face  for.  essentially,
a  US  political  defeat  at  a  diplomatic  conference?  Here  their  judgment  will  de-
pend not  merely  on  our  use  of  force  and  force  dispositions  but  also  on  the  pos-
ture of  the  President,  including  commitments  he  makes  to  our  own  people  and
before  the  world,  and  on  our  follow-through.  The  SNTE  accurately  catches
the  extent  of  their  commitments  and  their  hopes  in  South  N'iet  Nam  and  Laos.
They  will  not  actually  accept  a  setback  until  they  are  absolutely  sure  that  we
really  mean  it.  They  will  be  as  searching  in  this  matter  as  Khrushchev  was  be-
fore he  abandoned  the  effort  to  break  our  hold  on  Berlin  and  as  Khrushchev
was  in  searching  us  out  on  the  Turkish  missiles  before  he  finallv  dismantled
and  removed  his  missiles  from  Cuba.  Initial  rhetoric  and  mUitan  moves  will
not  be  enough  to  convince  them.

4.  Given  the  fundamental  assessment  in  this  SNIE.  I  have  no  doubt  we  have
the  capacin-  to  achieve  a  reinstallation  of  the  195-^-1962  Accords  if  we  enter
the  exercise  with  the  same  determination  and  staging  power  that  we  entered
the  long  test  on  Berlin  and  the  short  test  on  the  Cuba  missiles.  But  it  will  take
that  kind  of  Presidential  commitment  and  staving  power.

5.  In  this  connection,  the  SNIE  is  quite  sound  in  emphasizing  that  they  will
seek,  if  they  are  permined.  either  to  pretend  to  call  off  the  war  in  South  Met
Nam,  without  actuallv  doing  so:  or  to  revive  it  again  when  the  pressure  is  off.
(We  can  see  Castro  doing  this  now  in  \'erezuela.)  The  nature  of  guerrilla  war,
infiltration,  etc.,  lends  itself  to  this  kind  of  ambiguous  letdown  and  reaccelera-
tion.  This  places  a  high  premium  on  our  defining  preciselv  what  they  have  to  do
to  remove  the  pressure  from  the  north.  It  is  because  we  may  wish  to  maintain
pressure  for  some  time  to  insure  their  compliance  thai  we  should  think  hard
about  the  installation  of  troops  not  merely  in  South  \"iet  Nam  south  of  the
seventeenth  parallel,  but  also  in  the  infiltration  corridor  of  Laos.  The  same  con-
sideration argues  for  a  non-sanguinarv  but  important  pressure  in  the  form  of
naval  blockade  which  will  be  easier  to  maintain  during  a  negotiation  or  quasi-
negoiiaiion  phase  than  bombing  operations.

6.  The  touchstones  for  compliance  should  include  the  following:  the  removal
of  \'iei  Minh  troops  from  Laos:  the  cessation  of  infiltration  of  South  \'iet  Nam
from  the  north:  the  turning  off  of  the  tactical  radio  network:  and  the  overt  state-
ment on  Hanoi  radio  that  the  Viet  Cong  should  cease  their  operations  and  pur-
sue their  objectives  in  South  Viet  Nam  bv  political  means.  On  the  latter  point,
even  if  contrarv  covert  instructions  are  given,  an  overt  statement  would  have
important  political  and  psychological  impact.


Documents  647


7.  As  I  said  in  my  memorandum  to  the  President  of  June  6,  no  one  can  be  or
should  be  dogmatic  about  how  much  of  a  war  we  still  would  have — and  for
how  long — if  the  external  element  were  thus  radically  reduced  or  eliminated.
The  odds  are  pretty  good,  in  my  view,  that,  if  we  do  these  things  in  this  way,
the  war  will  either  promptly  stop  or  we  will  see  the  same  kind  of  fragmentation
of  the  Communist  movement  in  South  Viet  Nam  that  we  saw  in  Greece  after
the  Yugoslav  frontier  was  closed  by  the  Tito-Stalin  split.  But  we  can't  proceed
on  that  assumption.  We  must  try  to  gear  this  whole  operation  with  the  best
counter-insurgency  effort  we  can  mount  with  our  Vietnamese  friends  outside
the  country;  and  not  withdraw  US  forces  from  Viet  Nam  until  the  war  is  truly
under  control.  (In  this  connection,  I  hope  everyone  concerned  considers  carefully
the  RAND  proposal  of  November  17,  1964,  entitled  "SIAT:  Single  Integrated
Attack  Team,  A  Concept  for  Offensive  Military  Operations  in  South  Viet-
Namr)

8.  I  do  not  see  how,  if  we  adopt  this  line,  we  can  avoid  heightened  pressures
from  our  allies  for  either  Chinese  Communist  entrance  into  the  UN  or  for  a  UN
offer  to  the  Chinese  Communists  on  some  form  of  two-China  basis.  This  will  be
livable  for  the  President  and  the  Administration  if — but  only  if — we  get  a  clean
resolution  of  the  Laos  and  South  Viet  Nam  problems.  The  publication  of  a  good
Jorden  Report  will  help  pin  our  allies  to  the  wall  on  a  prior  reinstallation  of  the
1954  and  1962  Accords.

9.  Considering  these  observations  as  a  whole,  I  suspect  what  I  am  really  saying
is  that  our  assets,  as  I  see  them,  are  sufficient  to  see  this  thing  through  if  we
enter  the  exercise  with  adequate  determination  to  succeed.  I  know  well  the
anxieties  and  complications  on  our  side  of  the  line.  But  there  may  be  a  tendency
to  underestimate  both  the  anxieties  and  complications  on  the  other  side  and  also
to  underestimate  that  limited  but  real  margin  of  influence  on  the  outcome  which
flows  from  the  simple  fact  that  at  this  stage  of  historv  we  are  the  greatest  power
in  the  world — if  we  behave  like  it.

10.  In  the  President's  public  exposition  of  his  policy,  I  would  now  add  some-
thing to  the  draft  I  did  to  accompany  the  June  6  memorandum  to  the  President.
I  believe  he  should  hold  up  a  vision  of  an  Asian  community  that  goes  beyond
the  Mekong  passage  in  that  draft.  The  vision,  essentially,  should  hold  out  the
hope  that  if  the  1954  and  1962  Accords  are  reinstalled,  these  things  are  possible:

a.  peace;

b.  accelerated  economic  development;

c.  Asians  taking  a  larger  hand  in  their  own  destiny;

d.  as  much  peaceful  coexistence  between  Asian  Communists  and  non-
Communists  as  the  Communists  wish.

11.  A  scenario  to  launch  this  track  might  begin  as  follows:

A.  A  Presidential  decision,  communicated  to  but  held  by  the  Congressional
leaders.  Some  leakage  would  not  be  unhelpful.

B.  Immediate  movement  of  relevant  forces  to  the  Pacific.

C.  Immediate  direct  communication  to  Hanoi  to  give  them  a  chance  to
back  down  before  faced  with  our  actions,  including  a  clear  statement  of  the
limits  of  our  objectives  but  our  absolute  commitment  to  them.

D.  Should  this  first  communication  fail  (as  is  likely)  installation  of  our
ground  forces  and  naval  blockade,  plus  first  attack  in  North,  to  be  accompanied
by  publication  up-dated  Jorden  Report  and  Presidential  speech.


648 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


[Document  239]

November  24,  1964

MEMORANDUM  FOR: Secretary  Rusk

Secretary  McNamara
Mr.  McCone
General  Wheeler
Mr.  Ball

Mr.  McGeorge  Bundy

SUBJECT:  Issues  Raised  by  Papers  on  Southeast  Asia

Although  the  official  comments  are  not  all  in  at  this  writing,  I  think  it  will
be  useful  for  your  meeting  this  afternoon  to  have  a  list  of  the  issues  that  appear
to  one  mind  to  warrant  priority  discussion.  Some  are  explicitly  disagreed,  others
have  been  lurking  and  should  be  surfaced  in  my  judgment.

I. BASIC  ISSUES  AS  BETWEEN  THE  OPTIONS

A.  Is  it  true  that  the  South  Vietnam  situation  would  deteriorate  further  under
Option  A  even  with  reprisals,  but  stands  a  significant  chance  of  improving  under
Option  B  or  Option  C?

Comment:  Advocates  of  A  maximize  the  chances  of  decay  even  under  B  and
C,  advocates  of  B  and  C  think  the  lift  from  greater  action  could  really  take
hold  and  move  us  forward  in  South  Vietnam,  whereas  A  is  doomed.  All  con-
cede there  is  some  chance  that  the  GVN  would  come  apart  under  any  Option.

B.  Is  the  negotiating  outcome  under  Option  A  (with  or  without  US  negotiat-
ing participation)  likely  to  be  clearly  worse  than  under  Option  C?

Comment:  Advocates  of  A  doubt  that  it  would  be.

C.  What  are  the  best  estimates  of  the  risks  of  major  conflict  under  Option  B
and  Option  C?  If,  as  the  intelligence  paper  states,  they  are  about  the  same  as
between  Option  B  and  Option  C  at  its  highest,  is  there  enough  chance  that  C
would  succeed  before  it  reached  this  point  to  make  a  real  difference  on  the  risk
factor?

D.  Is  it  true,  as  the  draft  paper  states,  that  Option  B  has  the  best  chance  of
attaining  our  full  objectives?

E.  As  to  our  stakes  in  SEA,  is  the  paper  valid  as  written,  or  should  it  be
revised  in  the  direction  of  the  Joint  Staff  comments  that  loss  of  SVN  would  be
necessarily  catastrophic?  Is  the  analysis  of  the  attitudes  of  non-Asian  key  allies
right,  and  what  weight  should  we  give  to  this?

Comment:  The  point  of  the  Joint  Staff  comments  really  is  that  greater  risks  of
major  conflict  are  worth  accepting  in  view  of  their  view  of  the  stakes.  The  Joint
Staff  view  would  also  imphcitly  assign  less  weight  to  key  non-Asian  allies,  and
still  less  to  the  non-ahgned  countries.

F.  Can  Option  C  be  carried  out  in  practice  under  the  klieg  lights  of  a  democ-
racy, in  view  of  its  requirement  that  we  maintain  a  credible  threat  of  major
action  while  at  the  same  time  seeking  to  negotiate,  even  if  quietly?

Comment:  This  is  a  key  point  raised  by  advocates  of  A.  The  parallel  to
Korea  in  1951-53  is  forbidding.  Even  advocates  of  C  concede  the  difficulties.

G.  Are  we  safe  in  assuming  that  SVN  can  only  come  apart  for  morale  reasons,
and  not  in  a  military  sense  as  well?


Documents  649


Comment:  The  intelligence  estimate  is  not  confident  on  VC  "burst  capabili-
ties." The  President's  repeated  concern  on  protecting  the  south  has  not  really
been  met  in  these  papers,  but  we  have  all  felt  that  the  purely  military  aspects
of  the  VC  could  be  contained.  This  is  a  first  question  to  ask  of  Ambassador
Taylor.

II.  ISSUES  RELATING  TO  THE  IMMEDIATE  COURSES  OF  ACTION
(SECTION  VII)

A.  Is  our  reprisal  planning  in  proper  shape  to  produce  varied  options  on  de-
mand? Does  it  provide  adequately  for  GVN  participation?

Comment:  CINCPAC  Frag  Order  No.  3  is  the  current  basis  of  planning.  It
provides  for  optional  clusters  of  targets,  but  no  one  option  calls  for  less  than
about  175  strikes,  under  very  high  damage  criteria.  Such  a  high  order  of  action
could  throw  off  all  calculations  based  on  the  theory  of  "squeeze"  under  Option
C  and  even  under  Option  B.  As  to  GVN  participation,  the  latest  plans  do  crank
this  in,  at  some  sacrifice  of  destructiveness.

B.  What  do  we  mean  to  take  as  a  basis  for  reprisal?

Comment:  We  all  agree  that  another  Bien  Hoa  would  call  for  reprisal,  but  it
would  help  to  refine  our  thinking  somewhat  further.  Incidents  not  solely  directed
at  the  US  would  be  desirable  for  political  reasons.  What  kind  might  these  be?

C.  What  sort  of  high-level  statement  is  needed  if  we  adopt  the  immediate
program?

Comment:  Should  it  be  generalized,  with  the  infiltration  evidence  speaking  for
itself  separately,  or  should  it  make  express  use  of  the  infiltration  evidence?  Is
the  latter  wholly  ready  for  surfacing?  Is  }he  new  Jorden  Report?

III.  ISSUES  CONCERNING  THE  EXECUTION  OF  OPTION  A

A.  Can  this  Option  really  be  extended  to  include  continued  (non-reprisal)
actions  against  the  DRV  even  at  a  low  scale?

Comment:  The  longer  draft  had  so  extended  it.  Most  of  us  think  this  is  a
mistake  in  definition,  in  that  any  continued  actions  against  the  DRV  create  inter-
national and  other  pressures  and  are  in  effect  the  early  stages  of  Option  C.

B.  Could  or  should  ground  forces  be  put  into  northern  SVN  even  under  this
Option?

Comment:  Advocates  of  A  urge  this  as  a  bargaining  counter.  Most  of  us
think  that,  apart  from  lacking  any  military  necessity  in  the  absence  of  attacks
on  the  DRV,  it  would  appear  as  a  bluff  and  not  help  any  negotiation.

C.  Assuming  the  situation  does  deteriorate  under  this  Option,  should  wc  let
Vietnamese  negotiations  develop,  or  ourselves  seek  a  forum?

Comment:  This  is  a  less  urgent  issue,  and  perhaps  cannot  be  answered  now.

IV.  ISSUES  CONCERNING  THE  EXECUTION  OF  OPTION  B

A.  Should  we  hit  major  targets,  especially  airfields,  at  once,  or  only  after  and
if  the  DRV  has  hurt  us  from  them?

Comment:  Even  under  this  Option,  many  of  us  feel  the  actions  should  be  pro-
gressive, with  the  prospect  of  more  to  come  at  least  as  important  psychologically
as  present  damage.  We  all  accept  the  will  of  the  DRV  as  the  real  target.

B.  Is  ground  invasion  of  the  DRV  (at  Vinh  per  present  plans)  a  military
necessity  or  advantage  that  outweighs  the  increased  risks  the  Chicoms  would
then  come  in  force?  (This  applies  to  C  as  well  as  B.)


650 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

Comment:  The  intelligence  estimate  (p.  9  of  "Probable  Communist  Reac-
tions," dated  19  November)  highlights  this  as  significantly  raising  the  odds.  It
would  also  tend  to  change  our  objectives  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  Is  it  worth  it?

C.  At  what  stage,  if  ever,  might  nuclear  weapons  be  required,  and  on  what
scale?  What  would  be  the  implications  of  such  use?

Comment:  This  is  clearly  a  sensitive  issue.  The  President  may  want  a  more
precise  answer  than  appears  in  the  papers.

V.  ISSUES  CONCERNING  THE  EXECUTION  OF  OPTION  C

A.  Should  ground  forces  be  introduced  into  northern  SVN  at  the  early  stages?
Comment:  The  pros  and  cons  of  this  are  argued  in  Section  VII  of  the  long

draft.

B.  Is  our  early  targeting  properly  thought  through?

Comment:  This  is  partly  the  question  of  whether  to  hit  Phuc  Yen  early.  But
also  some  individual  comment  has  highlighted  the  possible  utility  of  focussing
at  length  on  low-key  targets,  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  damage  as  to  show  how
helpless  the  DRV  is,  to  cause  it  to  strain  its  security  apparatus,  and  ask  for
help  from  the  Chicoms  in  ways  the  Chicoms  may  not  be  able  to  give  effectively.
Also  to  keep  our  losses  low.  Such  an  wAidramatic  "water-drip"  technique  would,
in  the  opinion  of  many  Chicom  experts,  both  hit  the  DRV  will  harder  than
more  dramatic  attacks  and  strain  the  key  DRV-Chicom  relationships  more.  Put
differently,  this  school  of  thought  argues  that  dramatic  acts,  with  probably
higher  US  losses,  would  tend  to  knit  the  DRV  people  and  the  DRV  and  Chi-
coms; US  losses  are  also  a  key  factor  in  DRV  morale,  as  their  propaganda  has
shown  for  months.  If  we  were  acting  with  impunity,  this  would  have  a  major
effect,  and  the  falseness  of  their  propaganda  would  become  a  major  weakness
in  their  hold  over  their  people.

C.  How  do  we  handle  any  early  negotiations?

Comment:  This  is  the  least  satisfactory  part  of  the  present  script.  To  keep  up
our  show  of  determination  and  at  the  same  time  listen  for  nibbles  is  a  tough
job  in  any  case.  We  need  to  consider  use  of  third  countries  at  the  outset  perhaps
more.

D.  Do  we  even  listen  to  nibbles  till  we  have  established  a  clear  "common
law"  pattern  of  attacks?

Comment:  The  point  is  not  made  as  clear  as  it  should  be.  I  think  not.

VI.  ACTIVE  ISSUES  APPLICABLE  TO  ANY  DECISIONS

A.  White  House  statement.

B.  High-level  speech.

C.  Congressional  consultation,  including  whether  Ambassador  Taylor  should
testify  if  Committees  ask.

D.  Key  Allies — UK,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Thailand,  Philippines.  In-
dividually or  would  we  now  form  a  group  as  in  Korea?  (I  am  inclined  against
a  formal  group,  with  or  without  publicity — the  interests  are  too  diverse.)
SEATO?

E.  US  Government  machinery.  Do  we  not  need  a  designated  ExCom  now,
with  a  subordinate  working  group?

William  P.  Bundy

cc:  Members  of  Working  Group  (for  individual  use  only  until  directed  other-
wise).


Documents  651


[Document  240]

24  November  1964

NSC  WORKING  GROUP  ON  VIETNAM

SECTION  1.  INTELLIGENCE  ASSESSMENT:  THE  SITUATION
IN  VIETNAM*

A. SOUTH  VIETNAM

1.  As  compared  with  sharply  accelerated  political  deterioration  last  August,
adverse  political  trends  appear  at  least  to  have  slowed.  There  has  been  no  repeti-
tion of  the  flurry  of  riots  and  demonstrations  of  serious  proportions,  or  of  labor
strikes,  armed  revolts,  urban  lawlessness,  and  coup  plotting  that  seemed  to  be
bringing  South  Vietnam  close  to  the  brink  of  internal  chaos  and  disintegration,
although  pressures  and  open  criticism  have  already  appeared  from  various  sectors
in  response  to  the  new  civilian  government.  The  outlook  for  the  government  is
still  uncertain.  Its  success  so  far  in  avoiding  open  mass  opposition  is  encouraging,
but  even  if  the  government  can  avoid  a  direct  public  confrontation,  the  lack  of
positive  support  from  various  key  segments  of  the  populace  seems  certain  to
hamper  its  effectiveness.  The  generally  strong  stand  of  Huong  so  far,  however,
may  make  his  government  more  viable  than  his  critics  now  predict.  Finally,
although  General  Khanh  has  given  up  his  position  as  Prime  Minister,  his  power
position  does  not  appear  to  have  been  weakened  as  a  result  of  the  civilian  cabinet
and  indeed  may  have  improved  somewhat.

2.  The  political  situation,  nonetheless,  remains  critical  and  extremely  fragile.
Direction  and  a  sense  of  purpose  are  still  lacking.  Administration  in  both  Saigon
and  the  provinces  remains  seriously  plagued  by  confusion,  apathy,  and  poor
morale.  A  cohesive  leadership  or  even  a  modus  operandi  between  the  various
power  forces  has  not  been  established.  The  present  government  is  composed
primarily  of  technicians  and  has  about  it  a  caretaker  aura.  Basic  differences
have  not  been  resolved  and,  despite  the  restraint  exhibited  in  recent  weeks,  open
conflict  could  emerge  at  any  moment.

3.  The  military  leadership  remains  factionalized,  and  even  the  extent  of
Khanh's  support  among  these  factions  is  uncertain.  Khanh  and  some  of  his
military  colleagues,  while  supporting  the  new  government,  have  made  it  clear
that  they  intend  to  remain  the  real  power  in  South  Vietnam  and  that  they  will
not  countenance  any  interference  from  the  civilians  in  the  conduct  of  the  war.

The  Security  Situation

4.  The  security  situation  in  the  countryside  has  continued  to  deteriorate.  The
Viet  Cong  retain  the  initiative  and  are  applying  increasing  pressure  on  a  nation-
wide scale,  from  the  northern  coastal  lowlands  to  the  Camau  peninsula.  They
have  improved  their  firepower  and  capabilities  for  large  operations  and  have
demonstrated  increased  daring  and  improved  coordination  and  planning  in  their
attacks,  ambushes,  and  sabotage.  They  have  strengthened  their  armed  forces

♦Note:  The  judgments  of  this  Section  are  based  as  closely  as  possible  on  existing
National  Estimates:  SNIE  53-2-64,  'The  Situation  in  South  Vietnam.*'  dated  1  October
1964;  SNIE  10-3-64,  "Probable  Communist  Reactions  to  Certain  Possible  US/GVN
Courses  of  Action,"  dated  9  October  1964;  and  SNIE  50-2-64,  "Probable  Consequences
of  Certain  US  Actions  with  Respect  to  Vietnam  and  Laos,"  dated  25  May  1964.


652 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

and  military  organization,  in  part  from  increased  infiltration,  particularly  in  the
northern  provinces.  Finally,  Viet  Cong  control  is  spreading  over  areas  hereto-
fore controlled  by  the  government,  and  the  insurgent  military  presence  is  now
closer  than  ever  before  to  an  increasing  number  of  urban  centers,  major  installa-
tions, and  transportation  lines.

5.  By  and  large,  government  military  operations  continue  to  be  reactions  to
Viet  Cong,  initiatives  and  the  government  has  not  been  able  to  disrupt  the
overall  Viet  Cong  efi:ort.  The  total  number  of  military  operations  making  con-
tact with  the  Viet  Cong  remains  small.  The  GVN  does  seem  presently  capable
of  curbing  or  repelling  major  military  initiatives  on  the  part  of  the  VC.  Further-
more, there  are  recurrent  instances  of  encouraging  initiative  and  success  on  the
part  of  individual  GVN  units.  Meanwhile,  however,  political  stresses,  factional-
ism and  power  struggles  within  the  military  leadership,  and  numerous  military
command  changes  have  adversely  affected  military  morale  and  organization.
South  Vietnamese  field  commanders  are  finding  it  increasingly  difficult  to  en-
gender wholehearted  interest  in  military  matters  and  pacification  operations.
The  pacification  effort  itself,  limited  in  scope  and  effectiveness  over  the  past
months,  is  now  showing  a  noticeable  slackening  of  momentum  in  many  areas.
The  Embassy  has  noted  in  a  recent  assessment  that  the  deleterious  effects  of
political  turmoil,  administrative  and  military  disruptions,  and  growing  Viet
Cong  capabilities  have  been  greater  than  heretofore  appeared.

Present  Prospects,  Assuming  No  Major  Changes  in  US  Policies

6.  Arrest  or  reversal  of  the  deteriorating  military  trend  will  in  part  depend
on  the  ability  of  the  new  government  to  hold  together,  gain  a  base  of  popular
support,  and  energize  the  administration.  It  is  too  early  to  assess  the  prospect
that  the  present  untested  leadership  can  achieve  these  goals.

7.  It  is  possible  that  the  new  government  can  improve  GVN  esprit  and  effec-
tiveness, though  on  the  basis  of  present  indications  this  appears  unlikely.  It  is
also  possible  that  GVN  determination  and  authority  could  virtually  give  way
suddenly  in  the  near  future,  in  response  to  VC  pressures  or  South  Vietnamese
defeatism,  though  the  chances  seem  better  than  even  that  the  new  GVN  can
hang  on  for  the  near  future  and  thus  afford  a  platform  upon  which  its  armed
forces  can,  with  US  assistance,  prosecute  the  war  and  attempt  to  turn  the  tide.
Success  in  this  effort  requires  that,  at  least,  the  Saigon  Government  not  be  so
unstable  and  inept  as  to  increase  the  difficulties  of  the  counterinsurgency  cam-
paign in  the  countryside.  Even  under  the  best  of  circumstances,  however,  re-
versal of  present  military  trends  will  be  extremely  difficult.  Moreover,  given  the
extent  of  Viet  Cong  capabilities  and  control  of  the  countryside,  failure  to  reverse
existing  military  trends  within  the  next  few  months  will  increasingly  reduce  the
prospects  for  survival  of  the  present  or  any  successor  anti-Communist  govern-
ment.

B. THE  DRV/VC

8.  Lasting  success  in  South  Vietnam  depends  upon  a  substantial  improvement
in  the  energy  and  effectiveness  of  the  RVN  government  and  pacification
machinery.  The  nature  of  the  war  in  Vietnam  is  such  that  US  ability  to  com-
pel the  DRV  to  end  or  reduce  the  VC  insurrection  rests  essentially  upon  the
effect  of  US  sanctions  on  the  will  of  DRV  leadership  to  sustain  and  enlarge  that
insurrection,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  upon  the  effect  of  sanctions  on  the  capabilities
of  the  DRV  to  do  so.


Documents  653


a.  The  basic  elements  of  Communist  strength  in  South  Vietnam  remain
indigenous:  South  Vietnamese  grievances,  war-weariness,  defeatism,  and  poUtical
disarray;  VC  terror,  arms  capture,  discipHned  organization,  highly  developed

la  intelligence  systems,  and  ability  to  recruit  locally;  and  the  fact  that  the  VC
enjoys  some  status  as  a  nationalist  movement.  The  high  VC  morale  is  sustained
by  successes  to  date  and  by  the  receipt  of  outside  guidance  and  support.

b.  The  DRV  contribution  is  substantial.  The  DRV  manages  the  VC  insur-
rection. It  gives  it  general  tactical  direction,  maintaining  a  steady  flow  of  com-
munications between  Hanoi  and  senior  VC  echelons.  It  exercises  similar  control

er over  the  political/propaganda  activities  of  the  "National  Liberation  Front."  It
ihe provides  the  VC  senior  officers,  key  cadre,  military  specialists  and  certain  key
al military  and  communications  equipment.  The  tactical  direction  of  VC  efforts  is
;:v in  effect  provided  by  Vietnamese  who  are  North  Vietnamese  officers  on  a  de-
tached  duty.  Consequently,  we  believe  that  any  orders  from  Hanoi — to  step  up
or  to  desist  from  further  military  action — would  in  large  measure  be  obeyed  by
Communist  forces  in  South  Vietnam.

c.  The  DRV  contribution  may  now  be  growing.  There  appears  to  be  a  rising
rate  of  infiltration,  providing  additional  DRV  stiffening  to  VC  units.  This  may  be
reflected  in  a  raised  level  of  VC  aggressiveness  and  in  further  VC  exploitation

e of  political  disarray  in  the  cities.

d.  US-inflicted  destruction  in  North  Vietnam  and  Laos  would  reduce  these
supporting  increments  and  damage  DRV/VC  morale.  It  might  give  the  GVN/
ARVN  a  breathing  spell  and  opportunity  to  improve.  However,  it  would  almost
certainly  not  destroy  DRV  capability  to  continue  supporting  the  insurrection
in  the  South,  although  at  a  lessened  level,  should  Hanoi  so  wish.  Much  would
depend  on  whether  any  DRV  "removal"  of  its  direction  and  support  of  the  VC
were  superficial  or  whole.  If  the  latter  situation  obtained,  the  South  Vietnamese
could  in  time  probably  develop  enough  military  and  political  dynamism  them-
selves to  reduce  the  VC  threat  to  manageable  proportions — assuming  the  DRV
did  not  thereafter  attempt  once  more  to  subvert  their  country.  If  any  DRV
"removal"  were  superficial  or  permitjted  to  become  so,  however,  limited  to
gestures  to  compliance  that  removed  only  the  more  visible  evidences  of  the  DRV
increment,  it  would  probably  not  be  possible  to  develop  sufficient  GVN/ARVN
capability — and,  most  importantly,  will — to  establish  and  maintain  a  viable  and
free  government  in  South  Vietnam.

9.  DRV  POLICY  and  the  DRV  View  of  the  Situation  in  South  Vietnam

a.  The  Communist  leaders  in  Hanoi  undoubtedly  feel  that  present  trends  in
South  Vietnam  are  much  in  their  favor.  They  anticipate  that  a  political  vacuum
is  forming  which  they  can  probably  soon  fill  with  a  "neutralist"  coalition  even-
tually designed  [words  missing]  Communist  elements.  They  see  .  .  .  [words
missing]  .  .  .  become  more  favorable  to  them  as  soon  as  South  Vietnam  slips
a  bit  more;  in  the  meantime  their  major  concern  in  Laos  is  to  keep  the  corridor
and  the  areas  bordering  North  Vietnam  and  China  in  Communist  hands.

b.  The  North  Vietnamese  regime  (DRV)  is  intensely  committed  to  the  final
y aim  of  bringing  South  Vietnam  under  its  control,  an  outcome  which  for  Hanoi's

leaders  would  mark  the  completion  of  their  revolution.  In  pursuing  its  ends  in
South  Vietnam  the  DRV  has  been  patient,  careful  to  avoid  the  costs  and  risks
J.  of  direct  involvement.  Both  Hanoi  and  Peiping  are  almost  certainly  anxious  not
,j  to  become  involved  in  the  kind  of  war  in  which  the  great  weight  of  superior  US
j(  weaponry  might  be  brought  to  bear  against  them,  and  they  almost  certainly  feel
,5  — under  present  circumstances  at  least — that  they  will  not  have  to  initiate  actions
carrying  great  risk  of  such  US  response  in  order  to  win  the  day  in  time.


654 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

c.  The  recent  mortar  attack  on  US  equipment  and  personnel  at  Bien  Hoa
airfield  may  indicate  a  willingness  to  take  somewhat  greater  risk  of  increased  US
counteraction.  In  any  case,  it  is  obvious  that  DRV  leaders  had  decided  that  the
humiliation  to  the  US,  the  damage  to  RVN  morale,  and  the  boost  to  the  morale
of  their  own  forces  justified  running  such  risks  as  they  estimated  were  entailed.

d.  The  DRV  leaders  probably  believe  that  victory  may  be  near  through  a
collapse  of  anti-Communist  government  in  South  Vietnam.  They  probably  feel
that  the  GVN's  will  to  continue  the  fight  is  waning,  that  the  South  Vietnamese
are  uncertain  of  the  extent  of  future  US  support,  and  that  blows  such  as  that  at
Bien  Hoa  can  further  this  doubt  and  perhaps  critically  depress  South  Vietnamese
will  to  resist.  To  this  extent  the  DRV  VC  operations  may  be  entering  a  new
stage  involving  carefully  selected  blows  against  US  units.  It  is  not  likely  however,
that  Hanoi  believes  the  time  has  arrived  for  launching  upon  General  Giap's
"third  stage" — engagement  of  the  ARVN  in  conventional  (i.e.,  non-guerrilla)
warfare.  Indeed,  as  a  means  of  averting  heavier  US  involvement  in  Indochina,
Hanoi  may  soon  opt  to  make  a  serious  call  for  negotiations,  perhaps  using  the
vehicle  of  Sihanouk's  repeated  demands  for  an  international  conference  to  guar-
antee Cambodia's  neutral  status.

10.  Hanoi's  comprehension  of  US  intentions.

a.  The  course  of  actions  the  Communists  have  pursued  in  South  Vietnam
over  the  past  few  years  implies  a  fundamental  estimate  on  their  part  that  the  dif-
ficulties facing  the  US  are  so  great  that  US  will  and  ability  to  maintain  resistance
in  that  area  can  be  gradually  eroded — without  running  high  risks  that  the  US
would  wreak  heavy  destruction  on  the  DRV  or  Communist  China.  Hanoi's  im-
mediate estimate  is  probably  that  the  passing  of  the  US  election  gives  Washington
the  opportunity  to  take  new  military  actions  against  the  DRV  and/or  new  diplo-
matic initiatives.

b.  Initiation  of  new  levels  of  military  pressure  against  the  DRV  with  the
declared  aim  of  getting  Hanoi  to  stop  its  support  of  the  VC  in  the  South  and  the
PL  in  Laos  would  confront  Hanoi's  leaders  with  a  basic  question.  Is  the  US
determined  to  continue  escalating  its  pressures  to  achieve  its  announced  objec-
tives regardless  of  the  danger  of  war  with  Communist  China  and  regardless  of
the  international  pressures  that  could  be  brought  to  bear  against  it,  or  is  the
US  escalation  essentially  a  limited  attempt  to  improve  the  US  negotiating  posi-
tion? They  would  also  have  to  decide  whether  US  aims  were  indeed  limited.
Their  decision  on  these  questions  would  be  affected  by  the  US  military  posture
in  the  area,  by  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  US  escalation,  the  character  of  the
US  communication  of  its  intentions,  and  their  reading  of  domestic  US  and  inter-
national reactions  to  the  inauguration  of  US  attacks  on  the  North.  In  any  event,
comprehension  of  the  other's  intentions  would  almost  certainly  be  difficult  on
both  sides,  and  especially  so  as  the  scale  of  hostilities  mounted.  10c.  (removed)
(ICS  criticism)

11.  DRV  ability  and  willingness  to  sustain  damage.  We  have  many  indica-
tions that  the  Hanoi  leadership  is  acutely  and  nervously  aware  of  the  extent  to
which  North  Vietnam's  transportation  system  and  industrial  plant  is  vulnerable  to
attack.  On  the  other  hand.  North  Vietnam's  economy  is  overwhelmingly  agricul-
tural and,  to  a  large  extent,  decentralized  in  a  myriad  of  more  or  less  economi-
cally self-sufficient  villages.  Interdiction  of  imports  and  extensive  destruction  of
transportation  facilities  and  industrial  plants  would  cripple  DRV  industry.  These
actions  would  also  seriously  restrict  DRV  military  capabilities,  and  would  de-
grade, though  to  a  lesser  extent,  Hanoi's  capabilities  to  support  guerrilla  warfare
in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  We  do  not  believe  that  such  actions  would  have  a


Documents  655


crucial  effect  on  the  daily  lives  of  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  North  Viet-
namese population.  We  do  not  believe  that  attacks  on  industrial  targets  would
so  greatly  exacerbate  current  economic  difficulties  as  to  create  unmanageable
control  problems.  It  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  DRV  leaders  have  a  psycholog-
ical investment  in  the  work  of  reconstruction  they  have  accomplished  over  the
last  decade.  Nevertheless,  they  would  probably  be  willing  to  suffer  some  damage
to  the  country  in  the  course  of  a  test  of  wills  with  the  US  over  the  course  of
events  in  South  Vietnam.

12.  DRV  appraisal  of  the  value  and  hazards  of  Chinese  Communist  rescue.
Strong  US  pressures  on  North  Vietnam  would  pose  painful  questions  for  the  DRV
leadership  and  doubtless  occasion  sharp  debates  within  the  upper  echelons  of
the  hierarchy.  We  believe,  however,  that  Hanoi  would  refrain  as  long  as  possible
from  requesting  such  Chinese  assistance  as  might  endanger  DRV  independence:
for  example,  large-scale  ground  force  "volunteer"  intervention.  This  hesitancy
would  of  course  be  overcome  if  DRV  leaders  considered  the  existence  of  their
regime  to  be  at  stake.

13.  DRV  judgment  of  the  weight  to  attach  to  world  pressure  against  the  US.
Hanoi  probably  believes  that  considerable  international  pressure  would  develop
against  a  US  policy  of  expanding  the  war  to  the  North  and  that  this  might  impel
the  US  to  relax  its  attacks  and  bring  the  US  to  an  international  conference  on
Vietnam.  With  both  open  and  covert  USSR  and  Communist  Chinese  propaganda
and  political  action  support,  Hanoi  would  endeavor  to  intensify  such  free  world
sentiments — probably  overestimating  their  impact  on  the  US.  Hanoi  would
probably  be  confident  that  in  any  case — while  this  game  was  being  played  or
while  an  international  conference  was  being  held — the  VC  and  Pathet  Lao  could
continue  to  undermine  non-Commupist  authority  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.


C.  THE  INTERESTS  AND  CAPABILITIES  OF  COMMUNIST  CHINA  IN
THE  AREA

14.  Although  there  is  little  evidence  on  the  matter,  we  believe  that  close  co-
operation exists  between  Hanoi  and  Peiping  and  that  Hanoi  consults  Peiping
on  major  decisions  regarding  South  Vietnam.  Peiping  clearly  supports  Hanoi's
decision  to  maintain  pressure  in  the  South  even  at  the  risk  of  US  attacks  on
North  Vietnam.  Pieping's  interests  in  undermining  the  US  position  in  Asia  is
well  served  by  Hanoi  and  the  Viet  Cong.  Preoccupation  with  the  security  of
their  frontiers  alscrhas  been  a  factor  behind  the  Chinese  leaders'  announcement
of  their  readiness  to  assist  in  North  Vietnam's  defense,  despite  their  evident  desire
to  avoid  provoking  a  direct  clash  with  the  US.  The  Sino-Soviet  relationship
provides  added  incentive  for  Peiping  to  honor  its  commitments  to  Hanoi.  Despite
any  current  efforts  to  modify  the  polemics,  the  Chinese  Communists  still  will  feel
compelled  to  demonstrate  their  readiness  to  support  "wars  of  natural  liberation,"
particularly  in  the  case  of  Vietnam.

15.  Short  of  large-scale  introduction  of  ground  forces,  Chinese  Communist
capabilities  to  augment  DRV  offensive  and  defensive  capabilities  are  slight,  cer-
tainly as  compared  with  US  forces  at  hand.  Peiping  could  provide  the  DRV  some
air  defense  equipment.  It  could  send  additional  jet  fighters  and  naval  patrol
craft  in  limited  numbers,  though  at  some  cost  to  its  own  defensive  posture.
Recent  Chinese  Communist  deployments  into  South  China  indicate  that  im-
provements are  being  made  in  their  defense  posture  which  would  also  strengthen
their  offensive  capabilities.


656 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

D.  THE  INTERESTS,  ROLE  AND  CAPABILITIES  OF  THE  USSR  IN  THE
AREA

16.  In  the  wake  of  Khrushchev's  ouster  there  are  some  tenuous  indications  that
Khrushchev's  successors  may  intend  to  pursue  a  somewhat  more  active  policy
in  Indochina.  Nevertheless,  Moscow's  role  in  Vietnam  is  likely  to  remain  a  rela-
tively minor  one.  In  general  the  Soviets  remain  committed  to  a  Communist  gov-
ernment in  the  North  and  continuing  efforts  to  undermine  South  Vietnam,  but
they  are  unwilling  to  run  substantial  risks  to  bring  it  about.  Soviet  influence  in
North  Vietnam  is  based  upon  Moscow's  ability  to  provide  strategic  nuclear
protection  and  upon  the  North  Vietnamese  desire  for  continuing  Soviet  military
and  economic  aid.  Moscow's  ability  to  influence  decisions  in  Hanoi  tends  con-
sequently to  be  proportional-  to  the  North  Vietnamese  regime's  fears  of  American
action  against  it,  rising  in  moments  of  crisis  and  diminishing  in  quieter  periods.
Moscow's  willingness  to  give  .  .  .  seems  to  be  in  inverse  proportion  ...  to
North  Vietnamese  .  .  .


[Document  241]

Revised  Draft  11/21/64
WPBundy/JMcNaughton

Revised  page  11/26/  64

Summary

COURSES  OF  ACTION  IN  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

I.  INTELLIGENCE  ASSESSMENT:  THE  SITUATION  IN  SOUTH  VIET-
NAM

A.  South  Vietnam.  The  political  situation  remains  critical  and  extremely  fragile.
The  security  situation  in  the  countryside  has  continued  to  deteriorate.

It  is  possible  that  the  new  government  in  Saigon  can  improve  South  Vietnamese
esprit  and  effectiveness,  though  on  the  basis  of  current  indications  this  appears
unlikely.  It  is  also  possible  that  GVN  determination  and  authority  could  virtually
give  way  suddenly  in  the  near  future,  though  the  chances  seem  better  than  even
that  the  new  GVN  can  hang  on  for  this  period  and  thus  afford  a  platform  upon
which  its  armed  forces,  with  US  assistance,  can  prosecute  the  war  and  attempt
to  turn  the  tide.  Even  under  the  best  of  circumstances,  however,  reversal  of
present  military  trends  will  be  extremely  difficult.

B.  The  VC  and  the  North  Vietnamese  Role.  The  basic  elements  of  Com-
munist strength  in  South  Vietnam  remain  indigenous,  but  the  North  Vietnamese
(DRV)  contribution  is  substantial  and  may  now  be  growing.  There  appears  to
be  a  rising  rate  of  infiltration.

We  believe  any  orders  from  Hanoi  would  in  large  measure  be  obeyed  by
Communist  forces  in  South  Vietnam.  US  ability  to  compel  the  DRV  to  end  or
reduce  the  VC  insurrection  rests  essentially  upon  the  effect  of  US  sanctions  on
the  will  of  the  DRV  leadership,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  on  the  effect  of  such
sanction  on  DRV  capabilities.  US-inflicted  destruction  in  North  Vietnam  and
Laos  would  reduce  the  elements  of  DRV  support  and  damage  DRV/VC  morale.
It  might  give  the  GVN  a  breathing  spell  and  chance  to  improve.  However,  it


Documents  657


would  almost  certainly  not  destroy  DRV  capabilities  to  continue,  although  at  a
lessened  level.

If  the  DRV  did  in  fact  remove  wholly  its  direction  and  support  to  the  VC,
the  South  Vietnamese  could  in  time  probably  reduce  the  VC  threat  to  manage-
able proportions.  But  if  any  DRV  "removal"  were  superficial  only,  the  South
Vietnamese  probably  could  not  develop  the  capability  to  establish  and  maintain
a  workable  and  free  government  in  South  Vietnam.

Despite  a  large  and  growing  North  Vietnamese  contribution  to  the  Viet  Cong
insurrection,  the  primary  sources  of  Communist  strength  in  the  South  remain
indigenous.  Even  if  severely  damaged,  North  Vietnam — should  it  choose — could
still  direct  and  support  the  Viet  Cong  insurrection  at  a  reduced  level.  Increased
US  pressures  on  North  Vietnam  would  be  effective  only  if  they  persuaded  Hanoi
that  the  price  of  maintaining  the  insurrection  in  the  South  would  be  too  great
and  that  it  would  be  preferable  to  reduce  its  aid  to  the  Viet  Cong  and  direct
at  least  a  temporary  reduction  of  Viet  Cong  activity.*

II.  U.S.  OBJECTIVES  AND  STAKES  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM  AND  SOUTH-
EAST ASIA

A.  US  objectives  and  the  Present  Basis  of  US  Action.  Behind  our  policy  in
South  Vietnam  and  Laos  have  been  three  factors,  all  closely  related  to  our  over-
all policy  of  resisting  Communist  expansion:

1.  The  general  principle  of  helping  countries  that  try  to  defend  their  own
freedom  against  Communist  subversion  and  attack.

2.  The  specific  consequences  of  Communist  control  of  South  Vietnam  and
Laos  on  the  security  of  other  natioiis  in  Asia.

3.  The  implications  worldwide  of  South  Vietnam,  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  Laos
as  test  cases  of  Communist  "wars  of  national  liberation."

Essentially,  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  to  Communist  control,  in  any  form
would  be  a  major  blow  to  our  basic  policies.  US  prestige  is  heavily  committed
to  the  maintenance  of  a  non-Communist  South  Vietnam,  and  only  less  heavily
so  to  a  neutralized  Laos.

Yet  we  must  face  the  facts  that  (a)  there  is  some  chance  that  South  Vietnam
might  come  apart  under  us  whatever  course  of  action  we  pursue;  (b)  strong
military  action  necessarily  involves  some  risks  of  an  enlarged  and  even  con-
ceivably major  conflict  in  Asia.  These  problems  force  us  to  weigh  in  our  analysis
the  drawbacks  and  •possibilities  of  success  of  various  options,  including  the  draw-
backs of  accepting  only  the  fallback  objectives  set  forth  below.

B.  Possible  Alternate  US  Objectives.  Our  fall-back  objectives  in  South  Viet-
nam would  be:

L  To  hold  the  situation  together  as  long  as  possible,  so  that  we  have  time
to  strengthen  other  areas  of  Asia.

2.  To  take  forceful  enough  measures  in  the  situation  so  that  we  emerge  from
it,  even  in  the  worst  case,  with  our  standing  as  the  principal  helper  against  Com-
munist expansion  as  little  impaired  as  possible.

3.  To  make  clear  to  the  world,  and  to  nations  in  Asia  particularly,  that  failure
in  South  Vietnam,  if  it  comes,  was  due  to  special  local  factors — such  as  a  bad
colonial  heritage  and  a  lack  of  will  to  defend  itself— that  do  not  apply  to  other
nations.

*  DIA  reserves  its  position  on  the  final  two  sentences,  believing  that  they  understate
the  importance  of  reduced  North  Vietnamese  capabilities.


658 Gravel  Edition  The  Peiitagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


C.  Consequences  of  Communist  Control  of  South  Vietnam

1.  In  Southeast  Asia.  The  so-called  "domino"  theon^  is  oversimplified.  It
might  apply  if,  but  onlv  if,  Communist  China  entered  Southeast  Asia  in  force
and  or  the  US  was  forced  out  of  South  Vietnam  in  circumstances  of  military
defeat.  Nonetheless,  Communist  control  of  South  Vietnam  would  almost  imme-
diately make  Laos  extremely  hard  to  hold,  have  Cambodia  bending  sharply  to
the  Communist  side,  place  great  pressure  on  Thailand  (a  countr}"  which  has  an
historic  tendency  to  make  "peace"*  with  the  side  that  seems  to  be  winning),  and
embolden  Indonesia  to  increase  its  pressure  on  Malaysia.  We  could  do  more  in
Thailand  and  with  the  British  in  Malaysia  to  reinforce  the  defense  of  these
countries,  but  the  initial  shock  wave  would  be  great.

2.  In  Asia  Generally.  The  effects  in  Asia  generally  would  depend  heavilv  on
the  circumstances  in  which  South  Vietnam  was  lost  and  on  whether  the  loss  did
in  fact  greatly  weaken  or  lead  to  the  earlv  loss  of  other  areas  in  Southeast  Asia.
Nationalist  China  (shaken  already  by  the  Chicom  nuclear  explosion  and  the
UN  membership  crisis),  South  Korea,  and  the  Philippines  would  need  maximum
reassurance.  While  lapan's  faith  in  our  militar\-  posture  and  determination  might
not  be  shaken,  the  growing  feeling  that  Communist  China  must  somehow  be
lived  with  might  well  be  accentuated.  India  and  Iran  appear  to  be  the  Asian
problem  cases  outside  the  Far  East.  A  US  defeat  could  lead  to  serious  repercus-
sions in  these  countries.  There  is  a  great  deal  we  could  still  do  to  reassure  these
countries,  but  the  picture  of  a  defense  line  clearly  breached  could  have  serious
effects  and  could  easily,  over  time,  tend  to  unravel  the  whole  Pacific  and  South
Asian  defense  structures.

3.  In  the  World  at  Large.  Within  NATO  (except  for  Greece  and  Turkey  to
some  degree),  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  probably  would  not  shake  the  faith
and  resolve  to  face  the  threat  of  Communist  aggression  or  confidence  in  us  for
major  help.  This  is  so  provided  we  carried  out  anv  military  actions  in  Southeast
Asia  without  taking  forces  from  NATO  and  without  generating  a  wave  of  "isola-
tionism" in  the  US.  In  other  areas  of  the  w^orld.  either  the  nature  of  the  Com-
munist threat  or  the  degree  of  US  commitment  or  both  are  so  radically  different
than  in  Southeast  Asia  that  it  is  difficult  to  assess  the  impact.  The  question  would
be  whether  the  US  was  in  fact  able  to  go  on  with  its  present  policies.

4.  Summary.  There  are  enough  "ifs"  in  the  above  analysis  so  that  it  cannot  be
concluded  that  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  would  soon  have  the  totally  crippling
effect  in  Southeast  Asia  and  Asia  generally  that  the  loss  of  Berlin  would  have  in
Europe:  but  it  could  be  that  bad.  driving  us  to  the  progressive  loss  of  other
areas  or  to  taking  a  stand  at  some  point  so  that  there  would  almost  certainly  be
major  conflict  and  perhaps  the  great  risk  of  nuclear  war.*

D.  ATTITUDES  OE  OTHER  NATIONS  REGARDISG  US  ACTIONS

1.  .Major  US  Allies.  We  must  maintain,  particularly  to  our  key  NATO  allies,
the  picture  of  a  nation  that  is  strong  and  at  the  same  time  wise  in  the  exercise

*  The  Joint  Staff  believes  that  early  loss  of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  progressive  un-
raveling of  the  wider  defense  structures  would  be  almost  inevitable  results  of  the  loss
of  South  Vietnam  in  any  circumstances.


Documents  659


of  its  power.  As  for  France,  we  are  damned  either  way  we  go.  Both  Britain  and,
to  a  lesser  extent,  Germany  sympathize  in  principle  with  our  whole  policy  of
seeking  to  restrain  Communist  Chinese  expansion,  and  the  British  recognize
their  own  specific  parallel  stake  in  the  closely  related  problem  of  Malaysia.  All
European  countries  could  be  affected  in  their  view  of  the  US  and  their  willing-
ness to  accept  continued  US  leadership  by  the  way  we  handle  Southeast  Asia.
Despite  the  fact  that  their  Far  East  "experts"  tend  to  believe  that  Western
influence  in  Asia  is  on  the  wane  in  any  case,  our  key  European  allies  probably
would  now  understand  our  applying  an  additional  measure  of  force  to  avoid
letting  the  ship  sink:  but  thev  could  become  seriously  concerned  if  we  get  our-
selves involved  in  a  major  conflict  that  degraded  our  ability  to  defend  Europe
and  produced  anything  less  than  an  early  and  completely  satisfactory  outcome.

2.  "Nonaligned"  Nations.  In  these  countries,  the  issue  is  our  continued  ability
to  exert  influence  on  these  countries,  to  keep  the  peace  in  and  among  them,  and
to  keep  the  waverers  from  wavering  clear  over  to  Communist  answers.  The
'"nonaligned"  nations,  with  the  possible  exception  of  India,  would  by  and  large
be  opposed  to  any  stronger  action  we  might  take.  Indeed,  they  cannot  be  ex-
pected to  support  any  course  of  action  we  follow  in  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.  A
program  of  systematic  attacks  against  the  DRV  would  find  many  of  these  na-
tions supporting  a  condemnaton,'  resolution  in  the  UN.  But,  as  we  saw  in  the
Cuban  missile  crisis,  the  nonaligned  and  Afro-Asian  nations  will  accept  and
even  admire  and  be  grateful  for  actions  that  achieve  the  result  we  want  in  a
strong  and  wise  way.

3.  Summary.  As  for  likely  foreign,'  reactions  to  our  three  possible  courses  of
action  in  Part  III  below,  it  appears  that  Option  A  (continue  present  course  in-
definitely) would  cause  no  adverse  reactions  but  if  it  failed  it  would  leave  a
considerable  after-taste  of  US  failure  and  ineptitude;  Option  B  (fast  unyielding
pressure)  would  run  major  risks  of  sharply  expressed  condemnation  which
would  be  erased  only  if  the  course  of  action  succeeded  quite  clearly  and  in  a
reasonable  time:  Option  C  (progressive  pressure-and-talk)  would  probably  be
in-between  in  both  respects.

III.  THE  BROAD  OPTIONS

A.  Option  A  would  be  to  continue  present  policies  indefinitely:  Maximum
assistance  within  St)uth  Vietnam,  limited  external  actions  in  Laos  and  by  the
GVN  covertly  against  North  Vietnam,  specific  individual  reprisal  actions  not
only  against  such  incidents  as  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  attack  but  also  against  any
recurrence  of  VC  "spectaculars"  such  as  Bien  Hoa.  Basic  to  this  option  is  the
continued  rejection  of  negotiations.

B.  Option  B  would  add  to  present  actions  a  systematic  program  of  military
pressures  against  the  north,  with  increasing  pressure  actions  to  be  continued  at  a
fairly  rapid  pace  and  without  interruption  until  we  achieve  our  present  stated
objectives.  The  actions  would  mesh  at  some  point  with  negotiation,  but  we  would
approach  any  discussions  or  negotiations  with  absolutely  inflexible  insistence  on
our  present  objectives.

C.  Option  C  would  add  to  present  actions  on  orchestration  of  ( 1 )  com-
munications with  Hanoi  and  or  Peiping,  and  (2)  additional  graduated  military
moves  against  infiltration  targets,  first  in  Laos  and  then  in  the  DRV,  and  then
against  other  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  The  military  scenario  should  give  the


660 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

impression  of  a  steady  deliberate  approach,  and  should  be  designed  to  give  the
US  the  option  at  any  time  to  proceed  or  not,  to  escalate  or  not,  and  to  quicken
the  pace  or  not.  These  decisions  would  be  made  from  time  to  time  in  view  of
all  relevant  factors.  The  negotiating  part  of  this  course  of  action  would  have
to  be  played  largely  by  ear,  but  in  essence  we  would  be  indicating  from  the
outset  a  willingness  to  negotiate  in  an  affirmative  sense,  accepting  the  possibility
that  we  might  not  achieve  our  full  objectives.

IV  (old  V)  ANALYSIS  OF  OPTION  A

Option  A  is  a  continuation  of  present  policies,  with  the  additional  element  of
deciding  to  have  reprisal  action  not  only  against  another  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident,
but  against  any  repetition  of  a  spectacular  attack  by  the  VC  within  South  Viet-
nam, particularly  but  not  solely  an  attack  involving  US  forces  or  installations.

As  far  as  they  go,  Option  A  actions  are  in  fact  common  to  all  three  Options,
and  would  be  pursued  with  equal  force  under  Option  B  or  Option  C.  It  is  basic
that  the  situation  in  the  south  be  improved  by  all  possible  means  whatever  else
we  do.

A.  Actions  within  South  Vietnam.  There  is  a  great  deal  that  can  be  done  to
improve  GVN  performance  and  to  strengthen  the  whole  pacification  program.
We  must  continue  to  seek  additional  third-country  contributions  (though  these
will  probably  remain  limited).  We  are  working  to  improve  the  key  police  pro-
gram, military  tactics,  the  air  effort,  the  economic  program  including  a  stronger
emphasis  on  the  cities,  etc.  We  continue  to  reject  the  introduction  of  US  combat
forces  or  a  US  taking  over  of  command — but  short  of  such  changes  in  policy
we  are  working  as  hard  as  we  can  on  all  major  avenues  for  improvement.

The  point  is  that  the  effectiveness  of  all  such  measures  depends  on  having  an
increasingly  effective  GVN,  with  sustained  government  and  popular  morale.  We
do  not  yet  have  this,  though  we  have  hopes  that  the  present  government  will
settle  down  and  become  effective  over  a  period  of  2-4  months.  The  issue  is
whether  this  can  happen  if  we  do  no  more  than  Option  A  over  this  period.

B.  Actions  Outside  South  Vietnam.  We  would  in  any  event  continue  and
intensify  the  various  covert  forms  of  action  against  North  Vietnam,  and  the
various  Lao  and  US  actions  in  Laos,  adding  GVN  air  and  ground  action  in  Laos
on  a  limited  scale.  We  would  also  conduct  reprisals  as  indicated  above.

C.  Prognosis.  The  above  actions  will  not  physically  affect  the  DRV  scale  of
infiltration,  nor  do  we  believe  they  would  affect  Hanoi's  determination  and  will.
They  might,  however,  keep  the  DRV  from  engaging  in  further  spectaculars,  and
thus  keep  the  scale  of  the  conflict  in  the  south  within  some  limits.

The  question  is  whether  the  GVN  could  start  to  make  real  and  visible  headway
on  these  terms,  with  no  indication  on  the  US  side  that  we  were  prepared  to  go
further.  We  think  that  reprisal  actions  would  tend  to  lift  GVN  morale  and  per-
formance for  a  time,  but  their  lifting  effect  would  decline  with  each  successive
case.  For  a  period  of  time,  perhaps  some  months,  this  Option  might  keep  the
GVN  afloat  and  even  get  it  moving  slowly  toward  effectiveness.  Most  of  us
doubt  that  it  can  do  more  than  that.

D.  Negotiating  Avenues.  We  ourselves  would  be  rejecting  negotiation,  as  at
present,  at  the  outset.


Documents  661


But  this  still  leaves  the  chance  that  the  GVN  itself,  or  individual  South  Viet-
namese in  potentially  powerful  positions,  might  at  any  time  start  discussions
with  Hanoi  or  the  Liberation  Front.  If  the  situation  continued  to  deteriorate,
the  chances  of  this  taking  place  would  increase.  If  it  did,  Hanoi  might  not
insist  on  early  US  withdrawal,  but  the  way  would  be  paved  for  a  Vietnamese
"deal"  that  would  end  up  with  the  US  being  withdrawn  and  a  coalition  govern-
ment with  Communist  representation  installed  in  Saigon.  The  odds  would  be
heavy  that  over  time  such  a  government — as  in  Poland  in  1946-47 — would  be
taken  over  by  the  Communist  element,  and  eventually  merged  with  the  north
into  a  unified  Communist  Vietnam.

We  might  stand  aside  in  such  a  process,  which  would  at  least  avoid  our  name
going  into  the  deal.  Alternatively,  if  the  situation  was  deteriorating  beyond
repair,  we  might  seek  to  cover  a  retreat  by  accepting  negotiations,  most  likely
through  a  Geneva  conference  that  would  improve  the  above  deal  by  adding
elements  of  international  supervision  that  might  stretch  out  the  process  of  Com-
munist control  and  buy  time.

E.  Pros  and  Cons  of  Option  A.  There  is  clearly  a  case  for  Option  A  as  a
means  of  buying  a  short  period  of  time.  We  would  have  gone  the  last  mile  in
restraint,  and  in  putting  the  show  up  to  the  Vietnamese.  We  would  be  giving  the
Sino-Soviet  relationship  time  to  clarify — which  we  think  would  be  a  reaffirmed
deep  split.  And  we  could  hope  for  some  improved  GVN  performance  before
we  did  more.  But  the  odds  are  against  the  latter,  and  on  balance  it  seems  more
likely  we  would  later  have  to  decide  whether  to  take  Options  B  or  C  under  even
worse  circumstances.

As  an  indefinite  course  of  action.  Option  A  appears  to  offer  little  hope  of
getting  Hanoi  out  or  an  independent  South  Vietnam  re-established.  Its  sole  ad-
vantages would  be  that  (a)  defeat  would  be  clearly  due  to  GVN  failure,  and
we  ourselves  would  be  less  implicated  than  if  we  tried  Option  B  or  Option  C,
and  failed;  (b)  the  most  likely  result  would  be  a  Vietnamese-negotiated  deal,
under  which  an  eventually  unified  Communist  Vietnam  would  reassert  its  tradi-
tional hostility  to  Communist  China  and  limit  its  own  ambitions  to  Laos  and
Cambodia.  In  such  a  case  .  .  .  whether  the  rot  spread  to  Thailand  would  be
hard  to  judge;  it  seems  likely  that  the  Thai  would  conclude  we  simply  could  not
be  counted  on,  and  would  accommodate  somehow  to  Communist  China  even
without  any  marked  military  move  by  Communist  China.

V  (old  VI)  ANALYSIS  OF  OPTION  B

a.  Rationale  and  Preparatory  Actions.

The  basic  headings  of  preparatory  action  are  the  same  as  for  Option  C.

b.  Opening  Military  Actions.

The  opening  military  actions  under  Option  B  would  be  major  air  attacks  on
key  targets  in  the  DRV,  starting  with  the  major  Phuc  Yen  airfield.

c.  Early  Negotiating  Actions.

Even  though  we  would  be  taking  a  totally  inflexible  position  on  negotiating,
we  would  have  to  deal  with  channels  of  communication,  the  UN,  and  perhaps —
despite  our  strong  opposition — a  re-convened  Geneva  conference  of  some  sort.


662 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


d.  Probable  Communist  Responses.

The  possible  Communist  responses  again  fall  under  three  headings,  but  with
different  orders  of  likelihood  than  under  Option  C.

1.  It  is  still  considered  unlikely  that  Hanoi  would  really  yield,  at  least  in
the  early  stages.

2.  The  chances  are  significantly  greater  than  under  Option  C  that  Hanoi
might  retaliate  at  least  by  limited  air  attacks  in  South  Vietnam,  possibly  an  offen-
sive in  Laos,  conceivably  a  ground  offensive  into  South  Vietnam,  and — least
likely  but  necessarily  to  be  considered — Chicom  ground  action  into  Laos  pri-
marily.

3.  The  most  likely  general  course  of  action  would  still  be  for  Hanoi  to
hold  firm,  doing  its  utmost  to  stimulate  condemnation  of  our  actions,  but  possi-
bly trying  to  pretend  that  it  had  reduced  its  activity  in  the  south.

e.  In  the  Event  of  the  Third  Type  of  Communist  Response,  Likely  Devel-
opments and  Problems.

1.  Within  South  Vietnam,  the  initial  reaction  to  attacks  on  the  DRV  would
probably  be  one  of  elation,  and  there  would  probably  be  a  spurt  of  more  effective
GVN  performance.

However,  as  in  Option  C,  there  would  be  offsetting  factors  that  would  come
into  play,  and  still  leave  us  with  a  continuing  danger  that  the  situation  would
resume  its  present  deteriorating  course.  The  Vietnamese  people  are  clearly  war-
weary.  Probably  they  would  hold  fairly  firm  under  Option  B,  perhaps  firmer
than  under  Option  C  once  the  latter  became  entwined  with  real  negotiations.
But  there  is  the  lesser  chance  that  things  would  weaken.

Either  for  this  reason,  or  because  Hanoi  was  not  caving — the  latter  in  almost
any  event — we  would  be  driven  to  up  the  ante  militarily.

2.  Our  further  increases  in  military  pressure  would  then  be  the  same  gener-
ally as  under  Option  C,  but  applied  considerably  more  rapidly  and  toughly.  And
at  this  point,  the  odds  would  necessarily  start  to  increase  that  Hanoi,  no  longer
able  to  temporize,  would  either  start  to  yield  by  some  real  actions  to  cut  down,
or  would  move  itself  to  a  more  drastic  military  response.

3.  Our  position  internationally  could  become  very  difficult  at  this  point.  We
must  face  the  fact  that  we  would  incur  a  really  serious  barrage  of  criticism
including  the  dominant  public  opinion  in  some  of  our  key  allies  such  as  the
UK.  Our  influence  might  not  be  drastically  affected  on  such  issues  as  MLF  and
NATO,  where  the  issues  are  less  affected  by  popular  opinion,  but  the  effect  could
be  much  more  serious  on  such  opinion-related  issues  as  the  Kennedy  Round,
African  views  on  Communist  China,  etc.,  etc.

f.  Likely  Developments  and  Problems  if  the  Communist  Side  Engaged  in
Major  Retaliation  At  Some  Point.

Right  from  the  outset,  this  course  of  action  would  entail  some  chance  of  a
Communist  military  response  against  the  south.  Furthermore,  as  we  move  to  the
stage  of  "further  increases  of  military  pressure,"  the  chance  of  the  more  severe
types  of  response  would  increase.  These,  and  the  required  responses,  are  covered
in  the  Military  Annex.

g.  Possible  Over-all  Outcomes.

1.  At  best,  conceivably  in  the  early  stages,  but  much  more  likely  only  after


Documents  663


we  had  engaged  in  the  further  military  pressures  covered  under  E  above.  Hanoi
might  decide  that  the  pain  it  was  incurring  was  greater  than  the  gains  of  con-
tinuing its  present  strategy-  in  South  Vietnam.  They  might  be  ready  to  sit  down
and  work  out  a  settlement  in  some  form  that  would  give  us  a  restoration  of  the
1954  agreements,  hopefullv  supplemented  by  more  effective  international  ma-
chinery and  guarantees  to  maintain  such  a  senlement.

2.  At  worst.  South  Vietnam  might  come  apart  while  we  were  pursuing  the
course  of  action.  In  such  a  case,  we  would  be  in  the  position  of  having  got  into
an  almost  irreversible  sequence  of  military  actions,  but  finding  ourselves  fighting
on  behalf  of  a  country  that  no  longer  wished  to  continue  the  struggle  itself.

3.  Between  these  fno  outcomes,  there  is  much  less  chance  than  under  Option
C  that  the  struggle  would  continue  indecisively  for  a  considerable  period.  We
could  find  ourselves  drawn  into  a  situation  where  such  militarv'  actions  as  an
amphibious  landing  in  the  DRV — proposed  as  one  of  our  further  actions —
moved  us  ver\'  far  toward  continuing  occupation  of  DRV  soil.  Alternatively,
the  volume  of  international  noise  and  desire  for  a  peaceful  settlement  could
reach  the  point  where,  in  the  interest  of  our  world-wide  objectives,  we  would
have  to  consider  accepting  a  negotiation  on  terms  that  would  be  relatively  but
not  necessarily  wholly  favorable  to  the  attainment  of  our  full  objectives.

h.  Pros  and  Cons  of  Option  B.

Pros

1.  Option  B  probably  stands  a  greater  chance  than  either  of  the  other  two  of
attaining  our  objectives  vis-a-vis  Hant>i  and  a  settlement  in  South  Vietnam.

2.  Our  display  of  real  muscle  in  action  would  undoubtedly  have  a  salutary
effect  on  the  morale  of  the  rest  of  non-Communist  Asia.

3.  The  course  of  military  events  vis-a-vis  Communist  China  might  give  us  a
defensible  case  to  destroy  the  Chinese  Communist  nuclear  production  capability.

Cons

1.  This  course  of  action  has  considerably  higher  risks  of  major  military
conflict  with  Hanoi  and  possibly  Communist  China.

2.  If  we  found  ourselves  thus  committed  to  a  major  militarv-  effort  the  results
could  be  e.xtremeU'  adverse  to  our  position  in  other  areas,  and  perhaps  to
American  resolve  to  maintain  present  world-wide  policies,  unless  we  achieved  a
clearly  satisfactory  outcome  in  a  fairly  short  time.

VI  (old  VII)  ANALYSIS  OF  OPTION  C

A.  Rationale  and  Preparatory  Actions.  The  rationale  of  Option  C  is  explained
in  para  III  C  above.  The  stated  basis  for  our  action  would  be  that  documented
DRV  illegal  infiltration  of  armed  and  trained  insurgents,  and  over-all  DRV  di-
rection and  control  of  VC  insurgency,  had  now  reached  an  intolerable  level  and
that  it  was  now  necessar\  to  hit  at  the  infiltration  from  the  DRV  and  to  bring
pressure  on  Hanoi  to  cease  this  infiltration  and  direction.  The  immediate  prepara-
tory actions  (consistent  with  all  three  options)  are  set  out  in  Part  VII  (old  IX)
below.  Under  this  Option  C,  the  following  preparatory  action  should  be  taken:
1.  A  firm  Presidential  statement  setting  forth  our  rationale.


664 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

2.  Information  actions,  surfacing  useable  information  on  DRV  infiltration
and  direction.

3.  Consultation  with  leaders  of  Congress  (no  new  Resolution  needed).

4.  Talks  with  the  GVN  explaining  our  plans,  providing  for  GVN  participa-
tion, and  insisting  that  the  GVN  "shape  up."

5.  Appropriate  consultation  and  talks  with  allies  and  neutrals — especially
the  UK,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Thailand,  the  Philippines  and  Laos.

B.  Early  Military  Actions.  There  would  be  advantages  if  Option  C  could  be
initiated  following  either  another  "Bien  Hoa"  or  at  least  strong  additional  evi-
dence of  major  infiltration.  Absent  these  "pegs,"  the  actions,  in  addition  to  any
reprisal  actions  required  from  time  to  time,  would  be  these:

1 .  Intensification  of  GVN  sea  harassment,  one  or  more  US  destroyer  patrols,
Lao  strikes  on  infiltration  targets  in  Laos,  high-level  recce  of  the  DRV,  and
shallow  GVN  ground  actions  in  Laos.

2.  US  air  strikes  on  infiltration  targets  in  Laos,  including  Route  7.

3.  US/VNAF  low-level  reconnaissance  in  southern  DRV.

4.  US/VNAF  air  strikes  against  infiltration  targets  in  southern  DRV  (after
removal  of  US  dependents  and  taking  security  measures  in  SVN).  In  addition  to
such  actions,  there  is  an  issue  whether  we  should  at  an  early  stage  make  a  sig-
nificant ground  deployment  to  the  northern  part  of  South  Vietnam,  either  in
the  form  of  a  US  combat  force  (perhaps  a  division)  or  a  SEATO-members  force
including  at  least  token  contingents  from  Australia,  New  Zealand,  the  UK,  Thai-
land, and  the  Philippines.  Such  a  force  is  not  a  military  requirement — at  least
until  or  unless  the  DRV  threatened  a  ground  move  to  the  south — but  there  is  a
strong  political  argument  that  it  would  demonstrate  resolve  and  also  give  us  a
major  bargaining  counter  in  negotiations.

C.  Early  Negotiating  Actions.

1.  UN.  We  would  have  to  defend  our  position  in  the  Security  Council  in  any
case.  We  would  hope  that  this  could  be  a  brief  proceeding  and  we  believe  that
the  reactions  would  be  such  as  to  make  it  crystal  clear  that  the  UN  could  not
act  usefully.  (The  latter  point  would  be  useful  to  meet  critics  in  the  US.)

2.  We  would  resist  any  formal  Geneva  conference  on  Vietnam,  since  the
mere  convening  of  such  a  conference  would  have  serious  morale  effects.

3.  We  would  use  all  available  channels  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping  to  make  clear
our  objectives  and  our  determination.

4.  At  the  same  time,  we  would  watch  and  listen  closely  for  reactions  from
Hanoi  and  Peiping.  If  these  showed  any  signs  of  weakening  in  their  positions,
we  would  then  try  to  follow  up  as  quietly  as  possible  to  see  what  they  had  in
mind.  At  this  stage  we  would  be  insisting  on  three  fundamentals:  (a)  that  the
DRV  cease  its  assistance  to  and  direction  of  the  VC;  (b)  that  an  independent
and  secure  GVN  be  reestablished;  and  (c)  that  there  be  adequate  international
supervising  and  verification  machinery.  (These  fundamentals  would  not  be  fully
spelled  out;  in  practice  they  leave  room  for  minor  concessions  at  later  stages.)

D.  Probable  Communist  Responses  to  Initial  Military  Actions.

There  are  three  possible  Communist  responses  to  the  above  initial  military
actions:


Documents  665


1.  Yield  visibly  (quite  unlikely).

2.  Retaliate  militarily — e.g.,  by  air  attacks  against  South  Vietnam  or  by  an
offensive  in  Laos  (initially  unlikely).

3.  Hold  firm  while  stimulating  condemnation  of  US  by  world  opinion,  and,
if  in  negotiations,  take  a  tough  position  (most  likely).

E.  //  Hanoi  Holds  Firm.  The  initial  reaction  in  South  Vietnam  to  attacks  on
the  DRV  would  probably  be  one  of  elation  and  might  cause  a  spurt  of  more
effective  performance.  We  would  try  to  capitalize  on  any  improvement  in  the
GVN  situation  by  pressing  harder  for  acceptance  of  our  initial  negotiating  posi-
tion, continuing  (not  needing  to  step  up)  our  military  pressures  and  trying  to
establish  a  ''common  law"  justification  for  attacks  on  infiltration  and  other  limited
targets  in  the  DRV.  But  the  elation  in  South  Vietnam  would  probably  wane  if
the  war  dragged  on,  and  deteriorating  trends  would  probably  resume.*  In  this
case,  we  would  have  to  decide  whether  to  intensify  our  military  actions,  modify
our  negotiating  positions,  or  both.  A  second  phase  in  our  military  pressure
would  here  include  (5)  extension  of  the  target  system  in  the  DRV  to  include
additional  targets  on  the  "94  target  list,"  (6)  aerial  mining  of  DRV  ports,  and
(7)  a  naval  quarantine  of  the  DRV.  Any  visible  modification  of  our  negotiating
position  at  this  point  would  create  a  major  problem,  in  that  key  nations  on  both
sides  would  suspect  that  we  were  getting  ready  for  a  way  out.  Hence,  any  such
modifying  moves  would  have  to  be  synchronized  with  military  actions.  (Simul-
taneously, we  should  strengthen  and  reassure  the  nations  of  the  area,  possibly
involving  major  additional  deployments  there.)

Meanwhile,  even  if  the  Communists  did  not  attack  South  Vietnam,  they  might
take  steps  to  reduce  our  initial  advantage  by  improving  air  defenses  in  North
Vietnam,  deploying  Chinese  ground  forces  southward,  and  hardening  their  prop-
aganda (thus  hardening  their  public  commitment).

F.  //  the  Communist  Side  Engaged  in  Major  Military  Retaliation.  We  reckon
major  Communist  retaliation  to  be  unlikely  in  the  early  stages,  although  a  sharp
US/GVN  reprisal  or  a  Communist  misreading  of  our  intent  could  change  this
estimate.  In  the  second  phase  of  military  action,  there  would  be  a  progressively
increasing  chance  of  major  Communist  military  response.

The  more  serious  Communist  responses  are  (1)  stepped-up  VC  activities  in
South  Vietnam,  (2)  air  attacks  on  South  Vietnam,  (3)  DRV  ground  offensive
in  South  Vietnam  or  Laos,  and  (4)  Chicom  ground  offensive  in  Southeast  Asia.
The  US  plans  and  capabilities  to  counter  these  Communist  responses  are  con-
tained in  the  Milifary  Annex  to  this  memorandum.

G.  Possible  Over-all  Outcomes.  The  variable  factors  are  too  great  to  permit
a  confident  evaluation  of  how  the  Option  C  course  of  action  would  come  out.
At  best:  To  avoid  heavy  risk  and  punishment,  the  DRV  might  feign  compliance
and  settle  for  an  opportunity  to  subvert  the  South  another  day.  That  is,  a  respite
might  be  gained.  At  worst:  South  Vietnam  might  come  apart  while  we  were  pur-
suing the  course  of  action.  In  between:  We  might  be  faced  with  no  improvement
in  the  internal  South  Vietnam  situation  and  with  the  difficult  decision  whether
to  escalate  on  up  to  major  conflict  with  China.

H.  Pros  and  Cons  of  Option  C.  Option  C  is  more  controllable  and  less  risky
of  major  military  action  than  Option  B.  Being  a  "stretched  out"  course  of  action,

*  The  Joint  Staff  believes  there  is  less  chance  that  deterioration  would  resume  and
more  chance  that  a  listing  upward  trend  - in  SVN  would  come  about.


666 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill


however,  it  is  likely  to  generate  criticism  in  some  quarters.  It  is  more  likely  than
Option  A  to  achieve  at  least  part  of  our  objectives,  and,  even  if  it  ended  in  the
loss  of  South  Vietnam,  our  having  taken  stronger  measures  would  still  leave  us
a  good  deal  better  off  than  under  Option  A  with  respect  to  the  confidence  and
willingness  to  stand  firm  of  the  nations  in  the  next  line  of  defense  in  Asia.

VII (old  IX)  IMMEDIATE  ACTIONS  OVER  THE  NEXT  FEW  WEEKS

To  bolster  South  Vietnamese  morale  and  to  convey  a  firm  signal  to  Hanoi
and  Peiping,  we  need  in  any  event  a  program  of  immediate  actions  during  the
coming  weeks.  The  following  program  could  be  conducted  for  a  period  of  four
weeks  or  might  be  extended  to  eight  weeks  or  longer  as  desired:

A.  A  strong  White  House  or  Presidential  statement  following  the  meeting
with  Ambassador  Taylor,  with  the  disclosure  of  the  evidence  of  increased  DRV
infiltration  to  be  included  or  to  follow  promptly.

B.  An  order  stopping  the  sending  of  further  dependents  to  Vietnam.

C.  Stepped-up  air  operations  in  Laos  against  infiltration  targets  particularly.

D.  Increased  high-level  reconnaissance  of  the  DRV.

E.  Starting  low-level  reconnaissance  of  the  DRV.

F.  A  small  number  of  strikes  just  across  the  DRV  border  against  the  infiltra-
tion routes.

G.  A  destroyer  patrol  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf  and  also  (but  separately)  inten-
sified GVN  maritime  operations  along  present  lines.

H.  Major  air  deployments  to  the  Philippines  and  at  sea,  in  position  to  hit
North  Vietnam.

I.  At  any  time,  reprisal  air  strikes  against  the  DRV  might  be  undertaken  for
a  spectacular  DRV  or  VC  action  whether  against  US  personnel  or  not.  Reprisals
would  be  linked  to  DRV  activity,  and  the  scale  of  the  reprisal  action  would  be
determined  on  a  flexible  basis  in  accordance  with  the  magnitude  of  the  hostile
action.

In  conjunction  with  the  above  sequence  of  actions,  we  would  consult  with  the
GVN  to  "shape  up"  in  every  possible  way,  through  intensifying  all  present  pro-
grams, putting  military  forces  on  a  totally  wartime  operations  basis,  tightening
security  in  Saigon  and  elsewhere,  etc.

Congress  and  our  major  allies  would  have  to  be  consulted  at  an  early  stage.
Our  basic  rationale  would  be  that  the  increasing  DRV  infiltration  required  this
degree  of  action.

None  of  these  actions  are  inconsistent  in  theory  with  a  decision  to  stick  with
Option  A  at  least  for  the  next  few  months.  Nonetheless,  to  the  degree  they  fore-
shadow stronger  action,  they  would  tend  to  have  diminishing  effect  on  GVN  per-
formance unless  taken  concurrently  with  at  least  an  internal  US  government
decision  that  we  were  ready  to  move  to  Option  C  early  in  1965  unless  the  situation
changed.


[Document  242]

Taylor  briefing  27  Nov  64

Subject:  The  Current  Situation  in  South  Vietnam — November  1964

After  a  year  of  changing  and  ineffective  government,  the  counter-insurgency
program  country-wide  is  bogged  down  and  will  require  heroic  treatment  to  as-


Documents  667


sure  revival.  Even  in  the  Saigon  area,  in  spite  of  the  planning  and  the  special
treatment  accorded  the  Hop  Tac  plan,  this  area  also  is  lagging.  The  northern
provinces  of  South  Vietnam  which  a  year  ago  were  considered  almost  free  of
Viet  Cong  are  now  in  deep  trouble.  In  the  Quang  Ngai-Binh  Dinh  area,  the  gains
of  the  Viet  Cong  have  been  so  serious  that  once  more  we  are  threatened  with  a
partition  of  the  country  by  a  Viet-Cong  salient  driven  to  the  sea.  The  pressure
on  this  area  has  been  accompanied  by  continuous  sabotage  of  the  railroad  and  of
Highway  1  which  in  combination  threaten  an  economic  strangulation  of  the
northern  provinces.

This  deterioration  of  the  pacification  program  has  taken  place  in  spite  of  the
very  heavy  losses  inflicted  almost  daily  on  the  Viet-Cong  and  the  increase  in
strength  and  professional  competence  of  the  Armed  Forces  of  South  Vietnam.
Not  only  have  the  Vietcong  apparently  made  good  their  losses,  but  of  late,  have
demonstrated  three  new  or  newly  expanded  tactics:  The  use  of  stand-off  mortar
fire  against  important  targets,  as  in  the  attack  on  the  Bien  Hoa  airfield;  eco-
nomic strangulation  on  limited  areas;  finally,  the  stepped-up  infiltration  of  DRV
military  personnel  moving  from  the  north.  These  new  or  improved  tactics  em-
ployed against  the  background  of  general  deterioration  offer  a  serious  threat  to
the  pacification  program  in  general  and  to  the  safety  of  important  bases  and
installations  in  particular.

Perhaps  more  serious  than  the  downward  trend  in  the  pacification  situation,
because  it  is  the  prime  cause,  is  the  continued  weakness  of  the  central  govern-
ment. Although  the  Huong  government  has  been  installed  after  executing  faith-
fully and  successfully  the  program  laid  out  by  the  Khanh  government  for  its
own  replacement,  the  chances  for  the  long  life  and  effective  performance  of  the
new  line-up  appear  small.  Indeed,  in. view  of  the  factionalism  existing  in  Saigon
and  elsewhere  throughout  the  country,  it  is  impossible  to  foresee  a  stable  and
effective  government  under  any  name  in  anything  like  the  near  future.  None-
theless, we  do  draw  some  encouragement  from  the  character  and  seriousness  of
purpose  of  Prime  Minister  Huong  and  his  cabinet  and  the  apparent  intention  of
General  Khanh  to  keep  the  Army  out  of  politics,  at  least  for  the  time  being.

As  our  programs  plod  along  or  mark  time,  we  sense  the  mounting  feeling  of
war  weariness  and  hopelessness  which  pervade  South  Vietnam,  particularly  in
the  urban  areas.  Although  the  provinces  for  the  most  part  appear  steadfast,  un-
doubtedly there  is  chronic  discouragement  there  as  well  as  in  the  cities.  Although
the  military  leaders  have  not  talked  recently  with  much  conviction  about  the
need  for  "marching  North,"  assuredly,  many  of  them  are  convinced  that  some
new  and  drastic  action  must  be  taken  to  reverse  the  present  trends  and  to  offer
hope  of  ending  the  insurgency  in  some  finite  time.

The  causes  for  the  present  unsatisfactory  situation  are  not  hard  to  find.  It
stems  from  two  primary  causes,  both  already  mentioned  above,  the  continued
ineffectiveness  of  the  central  government,  the  increasing  strength  and  effective-
ness of  the  Vietcong  and  their  ability  to  replace  losses.

While  in  view  of  the  historical  record  of  South  Vietnam,  it  is  not  surprising
to  have  these  governmental  difficulties,  this  chronic  weakness  is  a  critical  liability
to  future  plans.  Without  an  effective  central  government  with  which  to  mesh
the  US  effort,  the  latter  is  a  spinning  wheel  unable  to  transmit  impulsion  to  the
machinery  of  the  GVN.  While  the  most  critical  governmental  weaknesses  are  in
Saigon,  they  are  duplicated  to  a  degree  in  the  provinces.  It  is  most  difficult  to
find  adequate  provincial  chiefs  and  supporting  administrative  personnel  to  carry
forward  the  complex  programs  which  are  required  in  the  field  for  successful
pacification.  It  is  true  that  when  one  regards  the  limited  background  of  the


668 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


provincial  chiefs  and  their  associates,  one  should  perhaps  be  surprised  by  the
results  which  thev  have  accomplished,  but  unfortunately,  these  results  are  gen-
erallv  not  adequate  for  the  complex  task  at  hand  or  for  the  time  schedule  which
we  would  like  to  estabhsh.

As  the  past  history  of  this  countrv  shows,  there  seems  to  be  a  national  attri-
bute which  makes  for  factionalism  and  limits  the  development  of  a  truly  na-
tional spirit.  Whether  this  tendency  is  innate  or  a  development  growing  out  of
the  conditions  of  political  suppression  under  which  successive  generations  have
lived  is  hard  to  determine.  But  it  is  an  inescapable  fact  that  there  is  no  national
tendencv  toward  team  plav  or  mutual  lovaltv  to  be  found  among  many  of  the
leaders  and  political  groups  within  South  Vietnam.  Given  time,  many  of  these
conditions  will  undoubtedly  change  for  the  better,  but  we  are  unfortunately
pressed  for  time  and  unhappilv  perceive  no  short-term  solution  for  the  establish-
ment of  stable  and  sound  government.

The  ability  of  the  Vietcong  continuouslv  to  rebuild  their  units  and  to  make
good  their  losses  is  one  of  the  mysteries  of  this  guerrilla  war.  We  are  aware  of
the  recruiting  methods  by  which  local  bovs  are  induced  or  compelled  to  join
the  Viet  Cong  ranks  and  have  some  general  appreciation  of  the  amount  of  in-
filtration of  personnel  from  the  outside.  Yet  taking  both  of  these  sources  into
account,  we  still  find  no  plausible  explanation  of  the  continued  strength  of  the
Vietcong  if  our  data  on  Viet  Cong  losses  are  even  approximatelv  correct.  Not
only  do  the  Viet  Cong  units  have  the  recuperative  powers  of  the  phoenix,  but
they  have  an  amazing  abilitv  to  maintain  morale.  Only  in  rare  cases  have  we
found  evidences  of  bad  morale  among  Viet  Cong  prisoners  or  recorded  in
captured  Viet  Cong  documents.

Undoubtedly  one  cause  for  the  growing  strength  of  the  \'ietCong  is  the  in-
creased direction  and  support  of  their  campaign  bv  the  government  of  North
Vietnam.  This  direction  and  support  take  the  form  of  endless  radioed  orders  and
instructions,  and  the  continuous  dispatch  to  South  Vietnam  of  trained  cadre  and
military  equipment,  over  infiltration  routes  bv  land  and  by  water.  While  in  the
aggregate,  this  contribution  to  the  guerrilla  campaign  over  the  years  must
represent  a  serious  drain  on  the  resources  of  the  DRW  that  government  shows
no  sign  of  relaxing  its  support  of  the  Viet  Cong.  In  fact,  the  evidence  points
to  an  increased  contribution  over  the  last  year,  a  plausible  development,  since
one  would  expect  the  DRV  to  press  hard  to  exploit  the  obvious  internal  weak-
nesses in  the  south.

If,  as  the  evidence  shows,  we  are  plaving  a  losing  game  in  South  Vietnam,  it
is  high  time  we  change  and  find  a  better  way.  To  change  the  situation,  it  is  quite
clear  that  we  need  to  do  three  things:  first,  estabhsh  an  adequate  government
in  SVN;  second,  improve  the  conduct  of  the  counter  insurgency  campaign;  and,
finally,  persuade  or  force  the  DRV  to  stop  its  aid  to  the  Viet  Cong  and  to  use
its  directive  powers  to  make  the  Viet  Cong  desist  from  their  efforts  to  overthrow
the  government  of  South  Vietnam.

With  regard  to  the  first  objective,  it  is  hard  to  decide  what  is  the  minimum
government  which  is  necessary  to  permit  reasonable  hope  for  the  success  of  our
efforts.  We  would  certainly  like  to  have  a  government  which  is  capable  of
maintaining  law  and  order,  of  making  and  executing  timelv  decisions,  of  carry-
ing out  approved  programs,  and  generallv  of  leading  its  people  and  gearing  its
efforts  effectively  with  those  of  the  United  States.

As  indicated  above,  however,  it  seems  highly  unlikely  that  we  will  see  such
a  government  of  South  Vietnam  in  the  time  frame  available  to  us  to  reverse  the
downward  trend  of  events.  It  seems  quite  probable  that  we  will  be  obliged  to
settle  for  something  considerably  less.


Documents  669


However,  it  is  hard  to  visualize  our  being  willing  to  make  added  outlays  of
resources  and  to  run  increasing  political  risks  without  an  allied  government
which,  at  least,  can  speak  for  and  to  its  people,  can  maintain  law  and  order  in
the  principal  cities,  can  provide  local  protection  for  the  vital  military  bases  and
installations,  can  raise  and  support  Armed  Forces,  and  can  gear  its  efforts  to
those  of  the  United  States.  Anything  less  than  this  would  hardlv  be  a  govern-
ment at  all,  and  under  such  circumstances,  the  United  States  Government  might
do  better  to  carry  forward  the  war  on  a  purely  unilateral  basis.

The  objective  of  an  improved  counter  insurgency  program  will  depend  for
its  feasibihty  upon  the  capacity  of  the  South  Vietnamese  government.  We  cannot
do  much  better  than  what  we  are  doing  at  present  until  the  government  im-
proves. However,  we  need  to  have  our  plans  and  means  organized  on  the  as-
sumption that  some  improvement  will  occur  and  will  permit  intensified  efforts
toward  the  pacification  of  the  country.

In  any  case,  we  feel  sure  that  even  after  establishing  some  reasonably  satis-
factory government  and  effecting  some  improvement  in  the  counterinsurgency
program,  we  will  not  succeed  in  the  end  unless  we  drive  the  DRV  out  of  its
reinforcing  role  and  obtain  its  cooperation  in  bringing  an  end  to  the  Viet  Cong
insurgency.

To  attain  these  three  objectives,  we  must  consider  what  are  the  possible  courses
of  action  which  are  open  to  us.  To  improve  the  government  we  will,  of  course,
continue  to  aid,  advise  and  encourage  it  much  as  we  are  doing  at  the  present
time.  We  will  try  to  restrain,  insofar  as  we  can,  the  minority  groups  bent  upon
its  overthrow.  We  will  indicate  clearly  the  desire  of  the  United  States  Govern-
ment to  see  an  end  to  the  succession  of  weak  and  transitory  governments  and
we  will  throw  all  of  our  influence  or)  the  side  of  stabilizing  programs  both  for
organizations  and  for  personnel.

As  these  efforts  in  themselves  will  probably  be  inadequate,  we  should  also
consider  ways  and  means  to  raise  the  morale  and  restore  the  confidence  both
of  the  government  and  of  the  South  Vietnamese  people.  One  way  to  accomplish
this  lift  of  morale  would  be  to  increase  the  covert  operations  against  North  Viet-
nam by  sea  and  air  and  the  counter-infiltration  attacks  within  the  Laotian  cor-
ridor. While  the  former  would  be  covert  in  the  sense  of  being  disavowed,
nonetheless  the  knowledge  of  their  occurrence  could  be  made  known  in  such
a  way  as  to  give  the  morale  lift  which  is  desired.  Additionally,  we  could  engage
in  reprisal  bombings,  to  repay  outrageous  acts  of  the  Vietcong  in  South  Viet-
nam, such  as  the  attack  on  Bien  Hoa.

All  these  actions;  however,  may  not  be  sufficient  to  hold  the  present  govern-
ment upright.  If  it  fails,  we  are  going  to  be  in  deep  trouble,  with  limited  re-
sources for  subsequent  actions.  It  is  true  that  we  could  try  again  with  another
civilian  government  but  the  odds  against  it  would  be  even  higher  than  those
which  have  confronted  the  Huong  government.  We  might  try  in  a  second  civilian
government  to  take  over  operational  control  by  US  officials  if  indeed  the  GVN
would  agree  to  this  change.  However,  there  are  more  objections  to  this  form
of  US  intervention  than  there  are  arguments  in  favor  of  it.  Another  alternative
would  be  to  invite  back  a  military  dictatorship  on  the  model  of  that  headed  of
late  by  General  Khanh.  However.  Khanh  did  very  poorly  when  he  was  on  the
spot  and  we  have  little  reason  to  believe  that  a  successor  military  government
could  be  more  effective.  Finally,  we  always  have  the  option  of  withdrawing,
leaving  the  internal  situation  to  the  Vietnamese,  and  limiting  our  contribution
to  military  action  directed  at  North  Vietnam.  Such  action,  while  assuring  that
North  Vietnam  would  pay  a  price  for  its  misdeeds  in  the  South,  would  probably
not  save  South  Vietnam  from  eventual  loss  to  the  Viet  Cong.


670 Gravel  Edition  The  Peiuagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

There  is  little  to  sav  about  the  ways  and  means  of  intensifying  the  in-country
counterinsurgencv  program  except  to  recognize  again  that  this  program  depends
entirely  upon  the  government.  If  we  can  solve  the  governmental  problem,  we
can  improve  the  in-country  program.

In  bringing  military  pressure  to  bear  on  North  Vietnam,  there  are  a  number
of  variations  which  are  possible.  At  the  bottom  of  the  ladder  of  escalation,  we
have  the  initiation  of  intensified  covert  operations,  anti-infiltration  attacks  in
Laos,  and  reprisal  bombings  mentioned  above  as  a  means  for  stiffening  South
Vietnamese  morale.  From  this  level  of  operations,  we  could  begin  to  escalate
progressively  by  attacking  appropriate  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  If  we  justified
our  action  primarilv  upon  the  need  to  reduce  infiltration,  it  would  be  natural
to  direct  these  attacks  on  infiltration-related  targets  such  as  staging  areas,  train-
ing facilities,  communications  centers  and  the  like.  The  tempo  and  weight  of
the  attacks  could  be  varied  according  to  the  eflfects  sought.  In  its  final  forms,
this  kind  of  attack  could  extend  to  the  destruction  of  all  important  fixed  targets
in  North  Vietnam  and  to  the  interdiction  of  movement  on  all  lines  of  communi-
cation.

Before  making  a  final  decision  on  any  of  the  courses  of  action,  it  will  be  nec-
essary to  ha\e  a  heart-to-heart  talk  with  Prime  Minister  Huong  and  General
Khanh  to  find  out  their  reaction  to  the  alternatives  which  we  are  considering.
They  will  be  taking  on  risks  as  great  or  greater  than  ours  so  that  they  have  a
right  to  a  serious  hearing.  We  should  make  every  effort  to  get  them  to  ask  our
help  in  expanding  the  war.  If  they  decline,  we  shall  have  to  rethink  the  whole
situation.  If,  as  is  likely,  they  urge  us  with  enthusiasm,  we  should  take  advantage
of  the  opportunity  to  nail  down  certain  important  points  such  as:

a.  The  GVN  undertakes  ( 1 )  to  maintain  the  strength  of  its  military  and  police
forces;  (2)  to  replace  incompetent  military  commanders  and  province  chiefs
and  to  leave  the  competent  ones  in  place  for  an  indefinite  period;  (3)  to  suppress
disorders  and  demonstrations:  (4)  to  establish  effective  resources  control:  and
(5)  to  obtain  US  concurrence  for  all  military  operations  outside  of  South  Viet-
nam.

b.  The  US  undertakes  responsibility  for  the  air  and  maritime  defense  of  South
Vietnam.

c.  The  GVN  takes  responsibility  for  the  land  defense  of  South  Vietnam  to
include  the  protection  of  all  US  nationals  and  installations.

d.  The  GVN  accepts  the  US  statement  (to  be  prepared)  of  war  aims  and
circumstances  for  negotiations.

Shortly  after  initiating  an  escalation  program  it  will  be  important  to  com-
municate with  the  DRV  and  the  CHICOMS  to  establish  certain  essential  points
in  the  minds  of  their  leaders.  The  first  is  that  under  no  circumstances  will  the
United  States  let  the  DRV  go  unscathed  and  reap  the  benefits  of  its  nefarious
actions  in  South  Vietnam  without  paying  a  heavy  price.  Furthermore,  we  will
not  accept  any  statement  from  the  DRV  to  the  eflfect  that  it  is  not  responsible
for  the  \'iet  Cong  insurgency  and  that  it  cannot  control  the  Viet  Cong  actions.
We  know  better  and  will  act  accordingly.  However,  the  enemy  should  know
that  the  United  States  objectives  are  limited.  We  are  not  seeking  to  unify  North
and  South  Vietnam:  we  are  seeking  no  permanent  military  presence  in  Southeast
Asia.  But  on  the  other  hand,  we  do  insist  that  the  DRV  let  its  neighbors,  South
Vietnam  and  Laos,  strictly  alone.

Furthermore,  we  are  not  trying  to  change  the  nature  of  the  government  in
Hanoi.  If  the  North  Vietnamese  prefer  a  Communist  government,  that  is  their
choice  to  make.  If  the  DRV  remain  aloof  from  the  CHICOMS  in  a  Tito-like


Documents  671


state,  we  would  not  be  adverse  to  aiding  such  a  government  provided  it  con-
ducted itself  decently  with  its  neighbors.

But  with  all,  we  are  tired  of  standing  by  and  seeing  the  unabashed  efforts  of
the  DRV  to  absorb  South  Vietnam  into  the  Communist  orbit  against  its  will.
We  know  that  Hanoi  is  responsible  and  that  we  are  going  to  punish  it  until  it
desists  from  this  behavior.

Just  how  and  when  such  a  communication  should  be  transmitted  should  be
a  subject  of  careful  study.  But,  some  such  transmission  is  required  to  assure
that  the  Communists  in  the  North  know  exactly  what  is  taking  place  and  will
continue  to  take  place.

We  can  be  reasonably  sure  that  the  DRV,  and  Viet  Cong  will  not  take  such
offensive  actions  on  our  part  without  a  reaction.  Already  the  Viet  Cong,  assisted
from  Hanoi,  are  doing  many  things  to  hamper  and  harass  the  central  and  local
governments  of  South  Vietnam,  to  encourage  minorities  to  resist  Saigon  and  to
foster  the  spirit  of  neutralism  and  defeatism  everywhere.  They  are  quite  capable
of  intensifying  such  actions,  of  raising  the  level  of  harassments  of  people  and
officials,  of  mounting  mortar  attacks  on  the  model  of  Bien  Hoa,  and  of  con-
tinuing to  try  to  effect  the  economic  strangulation  of  many  areas  within  South
Vietnam.

There  are  several  courses  of  action  which  thev  could  adopt  which  are  pres-
ently not  on  their  program.  They  can  call  for  international  intervention  to  force
us  to  desist  from  our  pressures.  They  can  engage  in  limited  air  and  ground  at-
tacks in  South  Vietnam  using  formed  units  of  the  armies  of  North  Vietnam  and
perhaps  volunteers  from  Red  China.  It  is  quite  likely  that  they  will  invite  some
CHICOM  military  forces  into  the  ,DRV  if  onlv  to  reinforce  its  air  defense.
Furthermore,  they  have  some  limited  seaborne  capability  for  raids  against  the
South  Vietnamese  coast.

If  their  counter  actions  failed  and  our  pressures  became  unbearable,  the  DRV
might  feign  submission  and  undertake  to  lie  low  for  a  time.  They  would  prob-
ably, however,  insist  that  they  do  not  have  the  capability  of  compelling  the  Viet
Cong  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  become  law-abiding  citizens.  Any  temporary
reduction  of  their  support  of  the  Viet  Cong  could,  of  course,  be  resumed  at  any
time  after  the  United  States  had  been  cajoled  into  leaving  the  scene  of  action.

In  view  of  the  foregoing  considerations,  we  reach  the  point  where  a  decision
must  be  taken  as  to  what  course  or  courses  of  action  we  should  undertake  to
change  the  tide  which  is  running  against  us.  It  seems  perfectly  clear  that  we
must  work  to  the  ^maximum  to  make  something  out  of  the  present  Huong  gov-
ernment or  any  successor  thereto.  While  doing  so,  we  must  be  thinking  con-
stantly of  what  we  would  do  if  our  efforts  are  unsuccessful  and  the  government
collapses.  Concurrently,  we  should  stay  on  the  present  in-country  program,  in-
tensifying it  as  possible  in  proportion  to  the  current  capabilities  of  the  govern-
ment. To  bolster  the  local  morale  and  restrain  the  Viet  Cong  during  this  period,
we  should  step  up  the  34-A  operations,  engage  in  bombing  attacks  and  armed
recce  in  the  Laotion  corridor  and  undertake  reprisal  bombing  as  required.  It  will
be  important  that  United  States  forces  take  part  in  the  Laotian  operations  in
order  to  demonstrate  to  South  Vietnam  our  willingness  to  share  in  the  risks  of
attacking  the  North.

If  this  course  of  action  is  inadequate,  and  the  government  falls,  then  we  must
start  over  again  or  try  a  new  approach.  At  this  moment,  it  is  premature  to  say
exactly  what  these  new  measures  should  be.  In  any  case,  we  should  be  pre-
pared for  emergency  military  action  against  the  North  if  only  to  shore  up  a
collapsing  situation.


672 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers,  Vol.  Ill

If,  on  the  other  hand  as  we  hope,  the  government  maintains  and  proves  itself,
then  we  should  be  prepared  to  embark  on  a  methodical  program  of  mounting
air  attacks  in  order  to  accomplish  our  pressure  objectives  vis-a-vis  the  DRV  and
at  the  same  time  do  our  best  to  improve  in-country  pacification  program.  We
will  leave  negotiation  initiatives  to  Hanoi.  Throughout  this  period,  our  guard
must  be  up  in  the  Western  Pacific,  ready  for  any  reaction  by  the  DRV  or  of  Red
China.  Annex  I  suggests  the  train  of  events  which  we  might  set  in  motion.

Whatever  the  course  of  events,  we  should  adhere  to  three  principles:

a.  Do  not  enter  into  negotiations  until  the  DRV  is  hurting.

b.  Never  let  the  DRV  gain  a  victory  in  South  Vietnam  without  having  paid
a  disproportionate  price.

c.  Keep  the  GVN  in  the  forefront  of  the  combat  and  the  negotiations.

Maxwell  D.  Taylor

ANNEX  I

SUGGESTED  SCENARIO  FOR  CONTROLLED  ESCALATION

(The  following  suggests  a  sequence  of  events  without  at  this  time  attempting
to  establish  precise  time  intervals.  It  assumes  that  34-A  operations  and  corridor
strikes  including  armed  reconnaissance  in  Laos  have  been  continuing  for  some
period  prior  to  initiating  scenario.  It  also  assumes  that  background  briefing  on
infiltration  has  been  given  in  both  Saigon  and  Washington.)

1.  Definitive  discussions  with  GVN  to  obtain  firm  GVN  request  for  joint
action  against  DRV  and  to  reach  agreement  on  the  framework  of  demands  to
be  made  on  the  DRV  as  well  as  on  general  negotiating  procedures.  (See  15
below )

2.  Initiate  discussions  with  Thai  Government.

3.  Initiate  discussions  with  other  selected  friendly  governments.

4.  Quietly  initiate  necessarv  preparatory  military  moves  that  have  thus  far
not  been  taken.  (Preparatory  military  moves  should  have  included  or  include
stationing  of  Hawk  battalion  and  F-105's  at  Danang,  a  MEB  afloat  off  Danang
and  the  alerting  of  the  173rd  ABG).

5.  Initiate  discussions  with  RLG.

6.  Cease  travel  to  Vietnam  of  additional  dependents,  but  take  no  action
to  evacuate  dependents  already  in  Vietnam  pending  further  developments.

7.  An  appropriate  intermediary  tells  Hanoi  nothing  has  been  heard  from
the  US;  he  is  concerned  over  the  situation;  and  does  Hanoi  have  anything  to
pass  on  to  the  US?

8.  Yankee  Team  strikes  Route  Seven  targets  in  Laos.

9.  RLAF  attack  on  DRV  side  of  Mua  Gla  Pass  with  US  air  CAP.

10.  A  single  VNAF  air  strike  against  an  infiltration  target  in  DRV  just  north
of  DMZ.

1 1.  A  significant  MAROP  supported  by  US  air  cover.

12.  GVN-US  air  strike  on  an  infiltration  target  just  north  of  DMZ.

13.  Continue  limited  military  actions  in  the  foregoing  categories  sequentially
with  not  more  than  a  few  days  gap  between  each,  while  being  prepared  promptly
to  make  higher  level  responses  to  attacks  from  MIGs  or  V-C  spectaculars  in  SVN.

14.  Throughout  the  foregoing,  in  absence  of  public  statements  by  DRV,
initiate  no  public  statement  or  publicity  by  ourselves  or  GVN.  If  DRV  does
make  public  statements,  confine  ourselves  and  GVN  to  statements  that  GVN
is  exercising  right  of  self-defense  and  we  are  assisting.


Documents  673


15.  In  light  of  developments,  disclose  to  selected  allies,  and  possibly  USSR,
US  GVN  terms  for  cessation  of  attacks  as  follows:  (It  will  be  important  to
assure  that  one  of  these  channels  undertakes  accurately  and  fully  to  communi-
cate these  terms  to  both  Hanoi  and  Peking)

A.  Demands:

1.  DRV  return  to  strict  observance  of  1954  Accords  with  respect  to
SVN — that  is,  stop  infiltration  and  bring  about  a  cessation  of  VC  armed
insurgency.  (Query — should  demand  include  DRV  observance  of  1962
accords  with  respect  to  Laos  and  how  should  such  demand  be  framed
so  as  to  give  ICC  Laos  effective  role  in  monitoring  infiltration  through
Laos?)

B.  In  return:

1.  US  will  return  to  1954  Accords  with  respect  to  military  personnel
in  GVN  and  GVN  would  be  willing  to  enter  into  trade  talks  looking
toward  normalization  of  economic  relations  between  DRV  and  GVN.

2.  Subject  to  faithful  compliance  by  DRV  with  1954  Accords,  US  and
GVN  would  give  assurances  that  they  would  not  use  force  or  support
the  use  of  force  by  any  other  party  to  upset  the  Accords  with  respect
to  the  DRV.

3.  Within  the  framework  of  the  1954  Accords,  the  GVN  would  permit
VC  desiring  to  do  so  to  return  to  the  DRV  without  their  arms  or  would
grant  amnesty  to  those  peacefully  laying  down  their  arms  and  desiring
to  remain  in  SVN.

C.  If  and  when  Hanoi  indicates  its  acceptance  of  foregoing  conditions,
careful  considerations  must  be  given  to  immediate  subsequent  procedures  which
will  avoid  dangers  of  (a)  becoming  involved  in  a  cease  fire  vis-a-vis  the  DRV
and/or  the  VC  accompanied  by  strung-out  negotiations;  (b)  making  conditions
so  stringent  as  to  be  unworkable  from  practical  point  of  view.  Probably  best
procedure  would  be  to  have  the  GVN  and  DRV  meet  in  the  DMZ  under  ICC
auspices  with  US  observers  to  reach  agreement  on  mechanics  of  carrying  out
understanding  while  action  against  the  VC  and  DRV  continues,  at  least  in
principle.


[Document  243]  *

27  November  1964

SUMMARY  OF  RECENT  MACV  AND  CIA  CABLES
ON  INFILTRATION

1.  The  working  team  in  Saigon  has  examined  the  MACV  materials  and
methods  and  concludes  that  the  31  October  MACV  study  of  infiltration  is  essen-
tially correct  in  reporting  a  larger  number  of  infiltrators  than  was  reported  by
MACV  in  its  April  1964  study.

2.  The  team  concluded  that  on  the  "basis  of  the  presently  available  informa-
tion, it  considers  19,000  infiltrators  from  1959  to  the  present  as  a  firm  (con-
firmed) minimum.  In  regard  to  the  estimated  figure  given  in  the  MACV  31  Oc-
tober study  for  the  total  number  of  infiltrators  since  1959  (approximately
34,000),  the  team  believes  that  it  represents  a  maximum  on  the  basis  of  present
information.


€1A Gwawd  EdUkm/The  Pentagon  Papm/  VoL  Bl


3.  Tf!e  team  \Kdk&  die  PW  iuiemigatioD  reports  and  c^tfared  docmnents  into
e:i'  :r-:::i«s:  Category  A  laimnis  of  sources  and  documents  which  have
: whole  or  in  part  hf  odier  sources  or  docinnents;  Categorv'  B
infonnation  is  probably  trae  but  not  yet  coi^&nned
:ory  C  is  all  odien.  The  total  for  Calory  A  from  1959
^  ^of  diese  some  2,756  may  be  dopGodions,  leading  the
19433  inffltralofs  .  .  .  Ca^oiy  B  consists  c/t  7,433
:\jiisidcf5  probable.  Another  4,646  arc  in  Category  C

-  . w  .  r;y  October  1964  study  are  baaed  on  a  com-
:  on  die  same  standards  as  die  rqiorts  used
^tudiesw  The  drastic  inoease  rqimted  in
rrfmarily,  according  to  die  team,  from
-  reports.  The  Ajpril  1964  study,  for
r  October  study  on  187.  Previous


:i¥e  approach,  according  to
hat  as  additional  data  con-
tinues to  -  ely.  Furdiermore,  there
afanoitoer -p-^ .-.t^ii^i^n ^^hich  there  is  no  present
knowibdse

~ "  ::  die  wide  d:~  :etween  confirmed,

r^'-Qcance  c:  "i-'ration  to  the  in-

:  :  ti-  .-at  most  of  the
irpears  that  in-
:  :e  units  in  the

'  _  . :  ng  the  in-

- MaC\'  that  there


Nov  27,  1964!


Sec  Ruik
Sec  McNamara
Amb  Taylor
Mr.  MoCone
Gen.  Wheeler


ASSISTANT  SECRETARY


OF


N^EETING  ON  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

vember  2".  19^-


1


The  question  was  raivd  of  what
perform  better.  Ambassador  Taylor  thought
but  diat  any  threat  of  ^^wiihdrawal  unleu^
noted  that  it  was  stiD  possible  to  stress  that
die  GVN  did  sinpe  up.
2.  There  was  Ascussioo  of  whether  we


e  GVN  would  make  them
lust  have  a  strong  message
ite  a  "g^ble.""  It  was
h^  as  we  would  like

ry  on  "^milateraP  military


Documents  675


actions  if  the  GVN  collapsed  or  told  us  to  get  out.  The  consensus  was  that  it
was  hard  to  visualize  continuing  in  these  circumstances,  but  that  the  choice  must
certainly  be  avoided  if  at  all  possible.

3.  Ambassador  Taylor  noted  that  "neutralism"  as  it  existed  in  Saigon  appeared
to  mean  throwing  the  internal  political  situation  open  and  thus  inviting  Com-
munist participation.  There  was  discussion  of  neutralism  in  the  sense  of  with-
drawal of  external  assistance,  and  the  opinion  was  expressed  that  external  assist-
ance would  remain  essential  unless  the  VC  was  defeated  and  that  neutralism
either  in  the  sense  of  no  more  external  assistance  or  in  the  sense  of  a  free  political
system  could  not  be  maintained  unless  this  was  done.

4.  Ambassador  Taylor,  upon  being  asked  about  the  problem  of  administrative
cumbersomeness,  said  that  some  progress  had  been  made  and  that  this  problem
could  be  handled  if  the  GVN  itself  got  going.  He  expressed  the  general  view  that
newspaper  reports  exaggerated  the  weakness  of  the  present  government,  that
Huong  had  many  fine  qualities,  and  that  he,  Vien,  and  Khanh  could  mesh  into  a
reasonably  effective  team  if  they  could  handle  sniping  from  the  Buddhists  and
students.  The  Ambassador  noted  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  a  widely  based
Assembly  for  some  months,  but  that  such  an  Assembly,  if  it  came,  could  be
serious  in  causing  general  static  and  possibly  leading  to  some  Communist  repre-
sentation. In  answer  to  a  question.  Ambassador  Taylor  said  that  General  Khanh
was  performing  quite  effectively,  was  out  in  the  field  except  for  weekends,  and
had  made  many  military  command  changes  of  which  General  Westmoreland  ap-
proved. Khanh  had  said  that  he  would  make  no  more  changes.

5.  Ambassador  Taylor  noted  that  General  Westmoreland  had  prepared  a  report
of  the  military  situation,  which  he  would  distribute  to  the  group.  Westmoreland
was  generally  more  optimistic  than  he,  Taylor,  and  saw  many  signs  and  possi-
bilities of  improvement  on  the  military  side.  Westmoreland  would  be  inclined  to
wait  six  months  to  have  a  firmer  base  for  stronger  actions.  However,  the  Am-
bassador said  that  he  himself  did  not  believe  that  we  could  count  on  the  situation
holding  together  that  long,  and  that  we  must  do  something  sooner  than  this.
Secretary  McNamara  noted  his  disagreement  with  General  Westmoreland's  views.
The  view  was  expressed  that  the  political  situation  was  not  likely  to  become
stronger  but  that  nonetheless  the  US  was  justified  in  taking  measures  along  the
lines  of  Option  C.  Ambassador  Taylor  noted  that  stronger  action  would  definitely
have  a  favorable  effect  on  GVN  and  South  Vietnamese  performance  and  morale,
but  he  was  not  sure  this  would  be  enough  really  to  improve  the  situation.  Others
in  the  group  agreed  with  this  evaluation,  and  the  view  was  expressed  that  the
strengthening  effect  of  Option  C  could  at  least  buy  time,  possibly  measured  in
years.

It  was  urged  that  over  the  next  two  months  we  adopt  a  program  of  Option  A
plus  the  first  stages  of  Option  C.  The  likelihood  of  improvement  in  the  govern-
ment seemed  so  doubtful  that  to  get  what  improvement  we  could  it  was  thought
that  we  should  move  into  some  parts  of  C  soon.

6.  Ambassador  Taylor  gave  details  of  the  kind  of  message  he  would  propose
giving  to  the  GVN.  (This  will  be  incorporated  into  the  draft  scenario  for  dis-
cussion at  the  next  meeting.)

7.  There  was  discussion  of  the  infiltration  evidence,  and  it  was  agreed  that
State  and  Defense  should  check  statements  made  by  Secretary  Rusk,  Secretary
McNamara,  and  General  Wheeler  on  this  subject,  so  that  these  could  be  related
to  the  previous  MACV  and  other  estimates  and  a  full  explanation  developed  of
how  these  earlier  estimates  had  been  made  and  why  they  had  been  wrong  in  the
light  of  fuller  evidence.


676 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

8.  Ambassador  Taylor  stressed  the  importance  of  police  forces  and  said  that
we  would  recommend  holding  the  Popular  Forces  at  the  present  level  but  stressing
additional  police.  He  noted  that  the  police  had  better  pay  and  perquisites  than  the
armed  forces  and  thought  that  this  was  right.

Ambassador  Taylor  raised  a  series  of  questions  which  he  did  not  think  had
been  adequately  covered  in  the  papers.  (This  hst  will  be  circulated  separately.)

9.  It  was  agreed  that  we  needed  a  more  precise  and  fully  spelled  out  scenario
of  what  would  be  proposed  if  a  decision  were  taken  to  adopt  a  general  program
along  the  lines  of  Section  VII  of  the  Draft  Summary  (Immediate  Actions),  with
or  without  a  decision  to  move  into  the  full  Option  C  program  at  some  time  there-
after. Mr.  Wm.  Bundy  undertook  to  produce  a  draft  scenario  along  these  lines
for  discussion  at  the  next  meeting  of  the  group,  which  was  scheduled  for  11:00
am  on  Sat.,  Nov.  28.

FE:WPBundy:mk


[Document  245]

November  28,  1964
MEMORANDUM  FOR  SOUTHEAST  ASIA  PRINCIPALS
Subject:  Scenario  for  Immediate  Action  Program

I  have  gone  over  with  the  Working  Group  the  problem  of  a  scenario  for  carry-
ing out  the  Immediate  Action  Program  (Section  VII  of  the  draft  summary)  or
Ambassador  Taylor's  recommended  sequence,  which  comes  very  close  to  the  same
ingredients.  We  have  tried  to  work  on  this  on  the  alternative  assumption,  that  a
decision  is  or  is  not  taken  to  go  on  with  Option  C  thereafter  if  Hanoi  does  not
bend  or  the  GVN  come  apart.  Frankly,  the  Working  Group  inclines  more  and
more  to  the  view  that  at  least  a  contingent  decision  to  go  on  is  now  required.

The  problem  is  a  difficult  one,  a  real  jigsaw  puzzle  in  which  you  have  to  weigh
at  every  point  the  viewpoints  of:

a.  The  American  Congress  and  public.

b.  Saigon.

c.  Hanoi  and  Peiping.

d.  Key  interested  nations.

At  this  point,  I  don't  see  how  all  can  be  met  at  all  points,  but  I  have  attacked  it
by  listing  the  actions  that  might  be  included  and  setting  up  worksheets  for  each,
with  an  indication  of  their  possible  timing  and  substance.  So  much  depends  on
the  actual  terms  of  the  President's  decision  that  we  should  in  any  case  avoid  get-
ting too  firmly  fixed  on  all  elements.  This  will  need  a  lot  of  work  before  the
Tuesday  meeting,  and  quite  possibly  after  as  well.

William  P.  Bundy

CHECKLIST  FOR  SCENARIO  ACTIONS

I.  US  Public  Actions

A.  White  House  statement  following  Tuesday  meeting

B.  Background  briefing  on  infiltration  in  both  Saigon  and  Washington

C.  Congressional  Consultation


Documents  677


D.  Major  speech

E.  Jorden  Report
II.  GVN

A.  Consultation  with  GVN

B.  GVN  statement
III.  Key  Allies

A.  Consultation  with  RLG

B.  Consultation  with  Thai

C.  Consultation  with  UK.  AustraUa,  New  Zealand,  and  Philippines.

D.  SEATO  Council  statement  (?)
I\'.  Communist  Nations

A.  Signals  and  messages  to  Hanoi  and  Peiping

B.  \\Tiat  to  say  to  Soviets  (and  Poles?)
\\  Other  \ations

A.  Canada.  India,  and  France

B.  UN  is  required

\T.  Existing  Categories  of  Military  Actions

A.  US  Laos  reconnaissance

B.  RL.AF  attacks  in  Laos

C.  GVN  NLAROPS

D.  US  high-level  reconnaissance  of  DR\'
VII.  Reprisal  Actions

A.  Renewed  DESOTO  patrol

B.  Another  Bien  Hoa  or  other  spectacular
\TII.  Added  Military  or  Other  Actions

A.  Stopping  flow  of  dependents

B.  YT  strikes  in  Laos:  infiltration  areas.  Route  7

C.  US  low-level  reconnaissance  over  DRV

D.  Strikes  across  the  border  into  DR\':  GVN  and  US  roles


[Document  246]

November  29.  1964

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
Assistant  Secretary^

MEMORANDUM  FOR  SOUTHEAST  ASIA  PRINCIPALS:

I  attach  a  draft  action  paper  for  review  at  the  meeting  at  1:30  on  Monday  in
Secretary  Rusk's  Conference  Room.  Secretary  Rusk  has  generally  approved  the
format  of  these  papers,  and  thev  have  been  given  a  preliminary  review  tor  sub-
stance by  Ambassador  Tavlor  and  Messrs.  McNaughton  and  Forrestal.  However,
I  am  necessarily  responsible  for  the  way  they  are  now  drafted.

William  P.  Bundy

Attachment :


Draft  action  paper.
FE:\VPBundv:mk


678 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

DRAFT
WPBundy:mk
11/29  64

DRAFT  POSITION  PAPER  ON  SOUTHEAST  ASIA
I.  Concept

A.  US  objectives  in  South  Vietnam  (SVN)  are  unchanged.  They  are  to:

1.  Get  Hanoi  and  North  Vietnam  (DRV)  support  and  direction  removed  from
South  Vietnam,  and,  to  the  extent  possible,  obtain  DRV  cooperation  in  ending
Viet  Cong  (VC)  operations  in  SVN.

2.  Re-establish  an  independent  and  secure  South  Vietnam  with  appropriate
international  safeguards,  including  the  freedom  to  accept  US  and  other  external
assistance  as  required.

3.  Maintain  the  security  of  other  non-Communist  nations  in  Southeast  Asia
including  specifically  the  maintenance  and  observance  of  the  Geneva  Accords  of
1962  in  Laos.

B.  We  will  continue  to  press  the  SVN  Government  (GVN)  in  every  possible
way  to  make  the  government  itself  more  effective  and  to  push  forward  with  the
pacification  program.

C.  We  will  join  at  once  with  the  South  Vietnamese  and  Lao  Governments  in  a
determined  action  program  aimed  at  DRV  activities  in  both  countries  and  de-
signed to  help  GVN  morale  and  to  increase  the  costs  and  strain  on  Hanoi,  fore-
shadowing still  greater  pressures  to  come.  Under  this  program  the  first  phase  ac-
tions (see  Tab.  D)  within  the  next  thirty  days  will  be  intensified  forms  of  action
already  under  way,  plus  (1)  US  armed  reconnaissance  strikes  in  Laos,  and  (2)
GVN  and  possibly  US  air  strikes  against  the  DRV,  as  reprisals  against  any  major
or  spectacular  Viet  Cong  action  in  the  south,  whether  against  US  personnel  and
installations  or  not.

D.  Beyond  the  thirty-day  period,  first  phase  actions  may  be  continued  without
change,  or  additional  military  measures  may  be  taken,  including  the  withdrawal
of  dependents  and  the  possible  initiation  of  strikes  a  short  distance  across  the
border  against  the  infiltration  routes  from  the  DRV.  In  the  latter  case  this  would
become  a  transitional  phase.

E.  Thereafter,  if  the  GVN  improves  its  effectiveness  to  an  acceptable  degree
and  Hanoi  does  not  yield  on  acceptable  terms,  [or  if  the  GVN  can  only  be  kept
going  by  stronger  action]  the  US  is  prepared — at  a  time  to  be  determined — to
enter  into  a  second  phase  program,  in  support  of  the  GVN  and  RLG,  of  graduated
military  pressures  directed  systematically  against  the  DRV.  Such  a  program  would
consist  principally  of  progressively  more  serious  air  strikes,  of  a  weight  and  tempo
adjusted  to  the  situation  as  it  develops  (possibly  running  from  two  to  six  months).
Targets  in  the  DRV  would  start  with  infiltration  targets  south  of  the  19th  parallel
and  work  up  to  targets  north  of  that  point.  This  could  eventually  lead  to  such
measures  as  air  strikes  on  all  major  military-related  targets,  aerial  mining  of  DRV
ports,  and  a  US  naval  blockade  of  the  DRV.  The  whole  sequence  of  military
actions  would  be  designed  to  give  the  impression  of  a  steady,  deliberate  approach,
and  to  give  the  US  the  option  at  any  time  (subject  to  enemy  reaction)  to  proceed
or  not,  to  escalate  or  not,  and  to  quicken  the  pace  or  not.  Concurrently,  the  US
would  be  alert  to  any  sign  of  yielding  by  Hanoi,  and  would  be  prepared  to  explore
negotiated  solutions  that  attain  US  objectives  in  an  acceptable  manner.  [The  US
would  seek  to  control  any  negotiations  and  would  oppose  any  independent  South
Vietnamese  efforts  to  negotiate.]


Documents  679


Note

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  immediate  initiation  of  sharply  intensified
military  pressures  against  the  DRV,  starting  with  a  sharp  and  early  attack  in
force  on  the  DRV,  subsequent  to  brief  operations  in  Laos  and  US  low-level
reconnaissance  north  of  the  boundary  to  divert  DRV  attention  prior  to  the  attack
in  force.  This  program  would  be  designed  to  destroy  in  the  first  three  days  Phuc
Yen  airfield  near  Hanoi,  other  airfields,  and  major  POL  facilities,  clearly  to  es-
tablish the  fact  that  the  US  intends  to  use  military  force  to  the  full  limits  of  what
military  force  can  contribute  to  achieving  US  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia,  and
to  afford  the  GVN  respite  by  curtailing  DRV  assistance  to  and  direction  of  the
Viet  Cong.  The  follow-on  military  program — involving  armed  reconnaissance  of
infiltration  routes  in  Laos,  air  strikes  on  infiltration  targets  in  the  DRV,  and  then
progressive  strikes  throughout  North  Vietnam — could  be  suspended  short  of  full
destruction  of  the  DRV  if  our  objectives  were  earlier  achieved.  The  military  pro-
gram would  be  conducted  rather  swiftly,  but  the  tempo  could  be  adjusted  as
needed  to  contribute  to  achieving  our  objectives.

DRAFT  STATEMENT  TO  GVN

During  the  recent  review  in  Washington  of  the  situation  in  SVN,  it  came  out
clearly  that  the  unsatisfactory  progress  being  made  in  the  pacification  of  the  Viet
Cong  was  the  result  of  two  primary  causes  from  which  many  secondary  causes
stemmed;  first,  the  governmental  instability  in  Saigon  and  the  second,  the  con-
tinued reinforcement  and  direction  of  the  VC  by  the  DRV.  To  change  the  down-
ward trend  of  events,  it  will  be  necessary  to  deal  adequately  with  both  of  these
factors.

It  is  clear,  however,  that  these  factors  are  not  of  equal  importance.  There
must  be  a  stable,  effective  government  to  conduct  a  successful  campaign  against
the  VC  even  if  the  aid  of  the  DRV  for  the  VC  should  end.  While  the  elimina-
tion of  DRV  intervention  will  raise  morale  on  our  side  and  make  it  easier  for
the  government  to  function,  it  is  not  an  end  in  itself  but  rather  an  important
contributory  factor  to  the  creation  of  conditions  favoring  a  successful  counter-
insurgency  campaign.  But  to  obtain  this  contribution,  we  do  not  believe  that
we  should  incur  the  risks  which  are  inherent  in  any  expansion  of  hostihties
without  first  assurigg  that  there  is  a  government  in  Saigon  capable  of  handling
the  serious  problems  involved  in  such  an  expansion  and  of  exploiting  the  favor-
able effects  which  may  be  anticipated  from  the  elimination  of  the  DRV.

It  is  this  consideration  which  has  borne  heavily  on  the  recent  deliberations  in
Washington  and  has  conditioned  the  conclusions  reached.  There  have  been
many  expressions  of  admiration  for  the  courage  being  shown  by  the  Huong
government  which  has  the  complete  support  of  the  USG  in  its  resistance  to  the
minority  pressure  groups  which  are  attempting  to  drag  it  down.  However,  the
difficulties  which  it  is  encountering  raise  inevitable  questions  as  to  its  viability
and  as  to  its  readiness  to  discharge  the  responsibilities  which  would  devolve  upon
it  if  some  of  the  new  measures  under  consideration  were  taken.

There  has  been  discussion  of  the  minimum  criteria  for  governmental  per-
formance which  would  justify  or,  indeed,  make  possible,  the  taking  of  these  new
measures.  At  a  minimum,  the  government  should  be  able  to  speak  for  and  to  its
people  who  will  need  guidance  and  leadership  throughout  the  coming  critical
period.  It  should  be  capable  of  maintaining  law  and  order  in  its  principal  cen-


680 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers/  Vol.  Ill

ters  of  population,  make  plans  for  the  conduct  of  operations  and  assure  their
effective  execution  by  miUtary  and  poHce  forces  completely  responsive  to  its
authority.  It  must  have  the  means  to  cope  with  the  enemy  reactions  which  must
be  expected  to  result  from  anv  change  in  the  pattern  of  our  operations.  Through-
out, it  will  be  essential  that  the  GVN  and  the  USG  cooperate  closely  and  effec-
tively as  loyal  allies  dedicated  to  the  attainment  of  the  same  objectives.  These
objectives  in  the  broadest  terms  are  to  cause  the  DRV  to  respect  the  rights  of  its
neighbors,  to  terminate  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency  and  to  effect  a  return  to  the
conditions  of  the  1954  agreement.

Until  we  are  reasonably  sure  that  such  a  government  is  in  place  in  Saigon,
the  USG  considers  it  unwise  for  itself  and  its  allies  to  commit  themselves  to  a
deliberate  expansion  of  operations  against  the  territory  of  the  DRV.  It  is  will-
ing, however,  to  take  an  important  step  in  that  direction  by  striking  harder  at
the  infiltration  routes  leading  out  of  the  DRV  both  by  land  and  by  sea.  In
conjunction  with  the  RLG,  it  is  prepared  to  add  US  air  power  as  needed  to  re-
strict the  use  of  Laotian  territory  as  an  infiltration  route  into  SVN.  At  sea,  it
is  ready  to  reinforce  the  so-called  covert  MAROPS  using  US  aircraft  to  cover
these  operations.  To  provide  this  cover,  it  will  be  necessary  to  divest  MAROPS
of  their  present  covert  character  and,  sooner  or  later,  the  USG  will  be  obliged
to  explain  its  actions  to  its  own  people.

While  these  intensive  operations  are  going  on,  the  armed  forces  of  the  GVN
and  the  USG  must  be  ready  to  execute  prompt  reprisals  for  any  unusual  hos-
tile action  such  as  the  attack  on  U.S.  vessels  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  or  on  the
airfield  at  Bien  Hoa.  The  U.S.  Mission  is  authorized  to  work  out  with  the  GVN
appropriate  plans  and  procedures  to  this  end.

It  is  hoped  that  this  phase  will  prove  to  be  merely  preliminary  to  direct  mili-
tary pressure  on  the  DRV  after  the  GVN  has  shown  itself  firmly  in  control.
Indeed,  the  actions  undertaken  in  this  first  phase  should  provide  encouragement
and  enlist  popular  support  for  the  government  and  thus  facilitate  its  task.  The
time  provided  by  this  phase  can  be  used  to  advantage  in  filling  up  the  strength
of  the  RVNAF  and  the  police,  in  making  operational  the  four  VNAF  squadrons,
in  assuring  that  the  most  competent  officials  and  officers  are  in  the  key  positions
of  the  government  and  the  Armed  Forces,  and  in  preparing  for  the  next  phase —
direct  pressure  on  the  DRV.

This  second  phase,  in  general  terms,  would  constitute  a  series  of  air  attacks
progressively  mounting  in  scope  and  intensity  for  the  purpose  of  convincing
the  leaders  of  the  DRV  that  it  is  to  their  interest  to  cease  to  aid  the  VC  and  to
restore  the  conditions  contemplated  in  the  agreements  of  1954.  The  participants
in  these  attacks,  as  we  visualize  them,  would  be  the  air  forces  of  the  GVN,  of
the  USG  and,  we  hope,  of  the  RLG.  The  USG  would  participate  (as  at  present)
in  support  of  the  RVNAF  and  at  the  request  of  the  GVN.  We  would  work  out
joint  plans  and,  prior  to  implementation,  would  agree  on  war  aims,  joint  dec-
larations, and  the  manner  of  conducting  operations  outside  of  SVN.  The  U.S.
Mission  is  authorized  to  initiate  such  planning  now  with  the  GVN  with  the
understanding  that  the  USG  does  not  commit  itself  now  to  any  form  of  imple-
mentation.

The  USG  would  be  grateful  to  receive  as  soon  as  possible  the  reaction  of  the
GVN  to  the  foregoing  expression  of  views.

A.  A  White  House  Statement  will  be  issued  following  the  meeting  with  Am-
bassador Taylor,  with  the  text  as  in  Tab  A,  attached.

B.  Ambassador  Taylor  will  consult  with  the  GVN  promptly  on  his  return,
making  a  general  presentation  in  accordance  with  the  draft  instructions  in  Tab


Documents  681


B,  attached.  He  will  further  press  for  action  on  specific  measures  such  as  those
listed  in  Tab  B.

C.  At  the  earliest  feasible  date,  we  will  publicize  the  evidence  of  increased
DRV  infiltration.  This  action  will  be  coordinated  by  Mr.  Chester  Cooper  in
order  to  insure  that  the  evidence  is  sound  and  that  senior  government  officials
who  have  testified  on  this  subject  in  the  past  are  in  a  position  to  defend  and
explain  the  differences  between  the  present  estimates  and  those  given  in  the  past.
The  publicizing  will  take  four  forms:

1.  An  on-the-record  presentation  will  be  made  to  the  press  in  Washington,
concurrently  with  an  on-the-record  or  background  presentation  to  the  press  in
Saigon.

2.  Available  Congressional  leaders  will  be  given  special  briefings.  (No
special  leadership  meeting  will  be  convened  for  this  purpose.)

3.  The  Ambassadors  of  key  allied  nations  will  be  given  special  briefings.

4.  A  written  report  will  be  prepared  and  published  within  the  next  ten
days  giving  greater  depth  and  background  to  the  evidence.

D.  Laos  and  Thailand.  The  US  Ambassadors  in  these  countries  will  inform
the  government  leaders  in  general  terms  of  the  concept  we  propose  to  follow
and  of  specific  actions  requiring  their  concurrence  or  participation.  In  the  case
of  Laos,  we  will  obtain  RLG  approval  of  an  intensified  program  of  US  armed
reconnaissance  strikes  both  in  the  Panhandle  area  of  Laos  and  along  the  key
infiltration  routes  in  central  Laos.  These  actions  will  not  be  publicized  except
to  the  degree  approved  by  the  RLG.  It  is  important,  however,  for  purposes  of
morale  in  SVN,  that  their  existence  be  generally  known.

Thailand  will  be  asked  to  support  our  program  fully,  to  intensify  its  own
efforts  in  the  north  and  northeast,  and  to  give  further  support  to  operations  in
Laos,  such  as  additional  pilots  and  possibly  artillery  teams.

E.  Key  Allies.  We  will  consult  immediately  with  the  UK,  Australia,  New
Zealand  and  the  Philippines.

1.  UK.  The  President  will  explain  the  concept  and  proposed  actions  fully
to  Prime  Minister  Wilson,  seeking  full  British  support,  but  without  asking  for
any  additional  British  contribution  in  view  of  the  British  role  in  Malaysia.

2.  Australia  and  New  Zealand  will  be  pressed,  through  their  Ambassadors,
not  only  for  support,  but  for  .  .  .

3.  The  Philippines  will  be  particularly  pressed  for  additional  contributions
along  the  lines  of  the  program  for  approximately  1800  men  already  submitted
to  President  Macapagal.

F.  We  will  press  generally  for  more  third  country  aid,  stressing  the  gravity
of  the  situation  and  our  deepening  concern.  A  summary  of  existing  third  country
aid  and  of  the  types  of  aid  that  might  now  be  obtained  is  in  Tab  C,  attached.

G.  Communist  Countries.

1.  We  will  convey  to  Hanoi  our  unchanged  determination  and  our  objec-
tives, and  that  we  have  a  growing  concern  at  the  DRV  role,  to  see  if  there  is
any  sign  of  change  in  Hanoi's  position.

2.  We  will  make  no  special  approaches  to  Communist  China  in  this  period.

3.  We  will  convey  our  determination  and  grave  concern  to  the  Soviets,
not  in  the  expectation  of  any  change  in  their  position  but  in  effect  to  warn  them
to  stay  out,  and  with  some  hope  they  will  pass  on  the  message  to  Hanoi  and
Peiping.

H.  Other  Countries.

1.  We  will  convey  our  grave  concern  to  key  interested  governments  such
as  Canada,  India,  and  France,  but  avoid  spelling  out  the  concept  fully.


682 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

2.  In  the  event  of  a  reprisal  action,  we  will  explain  and  defend  our  action
in  the  UN  as  at  the  time  of  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident.  We  do  not  plan  to
raise  the  issue  otherwise  in  the  UN.  (The  Lao  Government  may  stress  the  DRV
infiltration  in  Laos  in  its  speech,  and  we  should  support  this  and  spread  the
information.)

L  Intensified  Military  Actions.

1.  GVN  maritime  operations  (MAROPS)  will  be  intensified,  including  US
air  protection  of  GVN  vessels  from  attacks  by  Migs  or  DRV  surface  vessels.
We  will  urge  the  GVN  to  surface  and  defend  these  as  wholly  justified  in  re-
sponse to  the  wholly  illegal  DRV  actions.

2.  Lao  air  operations  will  be  intensified,  especially  in  the  corridor  areas
and  close  to  the  DRV  border.  US  air  cover  and  flak  suppression  may  be  sup-
plied if  needed.

3.  US  high-level  reconnaissance  over  the  DRV  will  be  stepped  up.

4.  US  armed  air  reconnaissance  and  air  strikes  will  be  carried  out  in  Laos,
first  against  the  corridor  area  and  within  a  short  time  against  Route  7  and  other
infiltration  routes  in  a  major  operation  to  cut  key  bridges.  (These  actions  will
be  publicized  only  to  the  degree  agreed  with  Souvanna.)

J.  Reprisal  Actions.  For  any  VC  provocation  similar  to  the  following,  a  re-
prisal will  be  undertaken,  preferably  within  24  hours,  against  one  or  more  se-
lected targets  in  the  DRV.  GVN  forces  will  be  used  to  the  maximum  extent,
supplemented  as  necessary  by  US  forces.  The  exact  reprisal  will  be  decided  at
the  time,  in  accordance  with  a  quick-reaction  procedure  which  will  be  worked
out.

The  following  may  be  appropriate  occasions  for  reprisals,  but  we  should  be
alert  for  any  appropriate  occasion :

1.  Attacks  on  airfields.

2.  Attack  on  Saigon.

3.  Attacks  on  provincial  or  district  capitals.

4.  Major  attacks  on  US  citizens.

5.  Attacks  on  major  POL  facilities.

6.  Attacks  on  bridges  and  railroad  lines  after  the  presently  damaged  fa-
cilities have  been  restored  and  warning  given.

7.  Other  "spectaculars"  such  as  earlier  attack  on  a  US  transport  carrier  at
a  pier  in  Saigon.

In  these  or  similar  cases,  the  reprisal  action  would  be  linked  as  directly  as
possible  to  DRV  infiltration,  so  that  we  have  a  common  thread  of  justification.

A  flexible  list  of  reprisal  targets  has  been  prepared  running  from  infiltration
targets  in  the  southern  part  of  the  DRV  up  to  airfields,  ports,  and  naval  bases
also  located  south  of  the  19th  parallel.

K.  US/ GVN  Joint  Planning  will  be  initiated  immediately  both  for  reprisal
actions  and  for  possible  later  air  strikes  across  the  border  into  the  DRV.

L.  Major  Statement  or  Speech.  Depending  on  US  public  reaction,  a  major
statement  or  speech  may  be  undertaken  by  the  President  during  this  period.
This  will  necessarily  be  required  if  a  reprisal  action  is  taken,  but  some  other  sig-
nificant action,  such  as  the  stopping  of  the  flow  of  US  dependents,  might  be  the
occasion.  Such  a  statement  or  speech  would  re-state  our  objectives  and  our  de-
termination, why  we  are  in  South  Vietnam,  and  how  gravely  we  view  the  situation.
It  should  in  any  event  follow  the  full  publicizing  of  infiltration  evidence.

M,  Dependents.  The  flow  of  dependents  to  South  Vietnam  will  be  stopped
[at  an  early  date,  probably  immediately  after  Ambassador  Taylor  has  consulted


Documents  683


with  the  GVN]  [at  the  start  of  the  second  phase],  and  this  will  be  pubHcly  an-
nounced.

N.  Deferred  Actions,  (see  Tab  D)

The  following  actions  will  not  be  taken  within  the  thirty-day  period,  but
will  be  considered  for  adoption  in  the  transitional  or  second  phases  of  the  pro-
gram:

1 .  Major  air  deployments  to  the  area.

2.  Furnishing  US  air  cover  for  GVN  M AROPS.

3.  Be  prepared  to  resume  destroyer  patrols  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.  If  at-
tacked, these  would  be  an  alternative  basis  for  reprisals,  and  should  be  consid-
ered primarily  in  this  light.

4.  US  low-level  reconnaissance  into  the  DRV.

5.  GVN/US  air  strikes  across  the  borders,  initially  against  the  infiltration
routes  and  installations  and  then  against  targets  south  of  the  19th  parallel.

6.  Be  prepared  to  evacuate  US  dependents.


[Document  247]


DRAFT:  January  4,  1965— Observations  Re  South  Vietnam— JTM

1)  (Scarcely  needs  to  be  said:  Pique  should  not  be  allowed  to  make  policy.)
[This  is  a  comment  on  Max  Taylor's  attitude  toward  Khanh  and  his  dissolution
of  the  high  national  council.]  [Authof  of  bracketed  material  not  known.]

2)  Our  stakes  in  South  Vietnam  are:

(a)  Buffer  real  estate  near  Thailand  and  Malaysia  and

(b)  Our  reputation.

The  latter  is  more  important  than  the  former;  the  latter  is  sensitive  to  how,  as
well  as  whether,  the  area  is  lost.

3)  The  best  present  estimate  is  that  South  Vietnam  is  being  "lost."  From  the
point  of  view  of  the  real  estate  this  means  that  a  government  not  unfriendly  to
the  DRV  will  probably  emerge  within  two  years;  from  the  point  of  view  of  our
reputation,  it  will  suffer  least  if  we  continue  to  support  South  Vietnam  and  if
Khanh  and  company  continue  to  behave  like  children  if  the  game  is  lost.

4)  The  situation  could  change  for  the  better  over  night,  however.  This  hap-
pened in  the  Philippines.  This  is  another  reason  for  d  perseverance.

5)  We  should  continue  to  try  to  do  better  inside  wSouth  Vietnam.  ('The
people  do  not  support  the  government;  their  indication  is  that  the  GVN  treats
prisoners  badly;  etc.")

6)  Essentials  of  U.S.  conduct:  (a)  continue  to  take  risks  on  behalf  of  South
Vietnam.  A  reprisal  should  be  carried  out  soon.  (Dependents  could  be  removed
at  that  time.)  [This  attitude  reflected  my  own  arguments,  for  better  or  worse.];
(b)  keep  slugging  away.  Keep  help  flowing  but  do  not  increase  the  number  of
U.S.  men  in  South  Vietnam.  (Additional  U.S.  soldiers  are  as  likely  to  be  coun-
terproductive as  productive.)  [MACV  and  the  JCS  were  pushing  for  a  logistic
command  and  increased  logistic  support  troops  in  Vietnam;  McNaughton  with-
holding the  line  on  total  U.S.  troops  at  this  time.]  (c)  do  not  appear  to  lead  in
any  negotiations.  Chances  of  reversing  the  tide  will  be  better  and,  if  we  don't
reverse  the  tide,  our  reputation  will  emerge  in  better  condition;  (d)  if  we  leave,


684 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  Ill

be  sure  it  is  a  departure  of  the  kind  which  would  put  everyone  on  our  side,
wondering  how  we  stuck  it  and  took  it  so  long.

7)  If  things  slip,  have,  plans  to  shore  up  Thailand  and  Malaysia.

Note  from  a  McNaughton  Draft  in  1964:

There  has  been  no  decision  taken  putting  on  the  same  value  scale  (a)  de-
sirability of  various  outcomes,  (b)  undesirability  of  various  efforts  and  (c)
undesirability  of  having  tried  and  failed.  For  example:

( 1 )  Is  a  collapse  at  a  75,000  level  worse  than  an  inclusive  situation  at  a
200,000-400,000+  level?  Probably  yes;

(2)  Is  a  60  percent  chance  of  a  compromise  better  than  a  40  percent  chance
of  winning?  Probably  yes  if  the  compromise  is  tolerable;

(3)  Is  a  40  percent  chance  of  compromise  in  1966  better  than  a  40  percent
chance  of  winning  in  1967?  Query.


[Document  248]

January  6,  1965

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY

SUBJECT:  Notes  on  the  South  Vietnamese  Situation  and  Alternatives

For  your  meeting  this  afternoon  with  the  President,  and  even  though  Ambas-
sador Taylor's  incoming  messages  have  not  been  released  by  the  President  ex-
cept to  yourself  and  Mr.  Ball,  I  thought  it  might  be  helpful  to  have  notes
prepared  among  Mike  Forrestal,  Len  Unger,  and  myself.

1.  I  think  we  must  accept  that  Saigon  morale  in  all  quarters  is  now  very
shaky  indeed,  and  that  this  relates  directly  to  a  widespread  feeling  that  the  US
is  not  ready  for  stronger  action  and  indeed  is  possibly  looking  for  a  way  out.
We  may  regard  this  feeling  as  irrational  and  contradicted  by  our  repeated  state-
ments, but  Bill  Sullivan  was  very  vivid  in  describing  the  existence  of  such  feel-
ings in  October,  and  we  must  honestly  concede  that  our  actions  and  statements
since  the  election  have  not  done  anything  to  offset  it.  The  blunt  fact  is  that
we  have  appeared  to  the  Vietnamese  (and  to  wide  circles  in  Asia  and  even  in
Europe)  to  be  insisting  on  a  more  perfect  government  than  can  reasonably  be
expected,  before  we  consider  any  additional  action — and  that  we  might  even
pull  out  our  support  unless  such  a  government  emerges.  We  have  not  yet  been
able  to  assess  the  over-all  impact  of  the  continuing  political  crises  and  of  the
Binh  Gia  military  defeat,  but  there  are  already  ample  indications  that  they
have  had  a  sharp  discouraging  effect  just  in  the  last  two  weeks.

2.  By  the  same  token,  it  is  apparent  that  Hanoi  is  extremely  confident,  and
that  the  Soviets  are  being  somewhat  tougher  and  the  Chinese  Communists  are
consolidating  their  ties  with  Hanoi.  All  three  have  called  for  a  Laos  conference
without  preconditions  but  have  refrained  from  mentioning  a  conference  on
Vietnam.  We  think  the  explanation  is  extremely  simple:  that  they  are  not  too
happy  with  the  way  things  have  gone  in  Laos,  but  that  they  see  Vietnam  fall-
ing into  their  laps  in  the  fairly  near  future.  At  the  same  time,  as  to  Laos,  none
of  us  think  that  the  Communist  side  would  concede  in  any  meaningful  fashion
on  any  of  the  preconditions;  they  probably  hope  that  Souvanna  or  we  would
abandon  these  preconditions,  and  they  probably  share  our  judgment  that  for


Documents  685


Souvanna  to  do  so  would  drastically  weaken  his  own  position  in  Vientiane  if
not  destroy  it.

3.  In  key  parts  of  the  rest  of  Asia,  notably  Thailand,  our  present  posture  also
appears  weak.  As  such  key  parts  of  Asia  see  us,  we  looked  strong  in  May  and

t  early  June,  weaker  in  later  June  and  July,  and  then  appeared  to  be  taking  a
quite  firm  line  in  August  with  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.  Since  then  we  must  have
seemed  to  be  gradually  weakening — and,  again,  insisting  on  perfectionism  in
the  Saigon  government  before  we  moved.  With  all  the  weaknesses  that  we  all
recognize  in  the  Saigon  political  situation,  the  fact  is  that  it  is  not  an  unusual
or  unfamiliar  one  to  an  Asian  mind,  and  that  our  friends  in  Asia  must  well  be
asking  whether  we  would  support  them  if  they  too  had  internal  troubles  in  a
confrontation  situation.

4.  The  sum  total  of  the  above  seems  to  us  to  point — together  with  almost
certainly  stepped-up  Viet  Cong  actions  in  the  current  favorable  weather — to  a
prognosis  that  the  situation  in  Vietnam  is  now  likely  to  come  apart  more  rapidly
than  we  had  anticipated  in  November.  We  would  still  stick  to  the  estimate  that
the  most  likely  form  of  coming  apart  would  be  a  government  of  key  groups
starting  to  negotiate  covertly  with  the  Liberation  Front  or  Hanoi,  perhaps  not
asking  in  the  first  instance  that  we  get  out,  but  with  that  necessarily  following
at  a  fairly  early  stage.  In  one  sense,  this  would  be  a  "Vietnam  solution,"  with
some  hope  that  it  would  produce  a  Communist  Vietnam  that  would  assert  its
own  degree  of  independence  from  Peiping  and  that  would  produce  a  pause  in

I Communist  pressure  in  Southeast  Asia.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  still  be
virtually  certain  that  Laos  would  then  become  untenable  and  that  Cambodia
would  accommodate  in  some  way.  Most  seriously,  there  is  grave  question  whether
\ the  Thai  in  these  circumstances  would  retain  any  confidence  at  all  in  our  con-
^ tinued  support.  In  short,  the  outcome  would  be  regarded  in  Asia,  and  particu-
larly among  our  friends,  as  just  as  humiliating  a  defeat  as  any  other  form.  As
events  have  developed,  the  American  public  would  probably  not  be  too  sharply
S critical,  but  the  real  question  would  be  whether  Thailand  and  other  nations
were  weakened  and  taken  over  thereafter.

5.  The  alternative  of  stronger  action  obviously  has  grave  difficulties.  It  com-
mits the  US  more  deeply,  at  a  time  when  the  picture  of  South  Vietnamese  will
is  extremely  weak.  To  the  extent  that  it  included  actions  against  North  Vietnam,
it  would  be  vigorously  attacked  by  many  nations  and  disapproved  initially  even
by  such  nations  as  Japan  and  India,  on  present  indications.  Most  basically,  its
stiffening  effect  on  the  Saigon  political  situation  would  not  be  at  all  sure  to
bring  about  a  more  effective  government,  nor  would  limited  actions  against  the
southern  DRV  in  fact  sharply  reduce  infiltration  or,  in  present  circumstances,  be
at  all  likely  to  induce  Hanoi  to  call  it  off.

6.  Nonetheless,  on  balance  we  believe  that  such  action  would  have  some
faint  hope  of  really  improving  the  Vietnamese  situation,  and,  above  all,  would
put  us  in  a  much  stronger  position  to  hold  the  next  line  of  defense,  namely
Thailand.  Accepting  the  present  situation — or  any  negotiation  on  the  basis  of  it
— would  be  far  weaker  from  this  latter  key  standpoint.  If  we  moved  into
stronger  actions,  we  should  have  in  mind  that  negotiations  would  be  likely  to
emerge  from  some  quarter  in  any  event,  and  that  under  existing  circumstances,
even  with  the  additional  element  of  pressure,  we  could  not  expect  to  get  an
outcome  that  would  really  secure  an  independent  South  Vietnam.  Yet  even  on
an  outcome  that  produced  a  progressive  deterioration  in  South  Vietnam  and  an
eventual  Communist  takeover,  we  would  still  have  appeared  to  Asians  to  have
done  a  lot  more  about  it.


686 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

7.  In  specific  terms,  the  kinds  of  action  we  might  take  in  the  near  future
would  be :

a.  An  early  occasion  for  reprisal  action  against  the  DRV.

b.  Possibly  beginning  low-level  reconnaissance  of  the  DRV  at  once.

c.  Concurrently  with  a  or  b,  an  early  orderly  withdrawal  of  our  dependents.

We  all  think  this  would  be  a  grave  mistake  in  the  absence  of  stronger  action,
and  if  taken  in  isolation  would  tremendouslv  increase  the  pace  of  deterioration
in  Saigon.  If  we  are  to  clear  our  decks  in  this  way — and  we  are  more  and  more
inclined  to  think  we  should — it  simply  must  be,  for  this  reason  alone,  in  the
context  of  some  stronger  action.

d.  Intensified  air  operations  in  Laos  may  have  some  use,  but  they  will  not
meet  the  problem  of  Saigon  morale  and  if  continued  at  a  high  level,  may  raise
significant  possibilities  of  Communist  intervention  on  a  substantial  scale  in  Laos
with  some  plausible  justification.  We  have  gone  about  as  far  as  we  can  go  in
Laos  by  the  existing  Hmiting  actions,  and,  apart  from  cutting  Route  7,  we  would
not  be  accomplishing  much  mihtarily  by  intensifying  US  air  actions  there.
This  form  of  action  thus  has  litde  further  to  gain  in  the  Laos  context,  and  has
no  real  bearing  at  this  point  on  the  South  Vietnamese  context.

e.  Introduction  of  Hmited  US  ground  forces  into  the  northern  area  of
South  Vietnam  still  has  great  appeal  to  many  of  us,  concurrently  with  the  first
air  attacks  into  the  DRV.  It  would  have  a  real  stiflfening  effect  in  Saigon,  and
a  strong  signal  effect  to  Hanoi.  On  the  disadvantage  side,  such  forces  would  be
possible  attrition  targets  for  the  Viet  Cong.  For  your  information,  the  Aus-
tralians have  clearly  indicated  (most  recendy  yesterday)  that  they  might  be  dis-
posed to  participate  in  such  an  operation.  The  New  Zealanders  are  more  nega-
tive and  a  proposal  for  Philippine  participation  would  be  an  interesting  test.

William  P.  Bundy


[Document  249]

DRAFT:  27  January  1965  by  J.  T.  McNaughton— Observations  Re  South
Vietnam  After  Khanh's  "Re-Coup"

1)  Khanh  has  given  the  U.S.  a  pretext  to  •"dump""  South  Vietnam.  This  option
should  not  be  exercised.

2)  The  new  Khanh  government  could  be  a  "'good"*  one  but  history  is  against

it.

3 )  Max  Taylor's  effectiveness,  with  Khanh  government,  is  doubtful.

4)  The  situation  in  South  Vietnam  in  general  continues  to  deteriorate.

5)  Steady  efforts  inside  South  Vietnam  can,  probably,  only  slow  that  dete-
rioration.

6)  U.S.  objective  in  South  Vietnam  is  not  to  "help  friend"  but  to  contain
China.

7)  Loss  in  South  Vietnam  would  merely  move  the  conflict  to  Malaysia  or
Thailand  (marginal  comment  by  McNamara — These  will  go  fast).  U.S.  won't
repeat  South  Vietnam  there!  Continue  with  side  effects  of  accommodation  else-
where in  Asia.

8)  The  three  options:


Documents  687


(a)  Strike  the  DRV;

(b)  "Negotiate";  or

(c)  Keep  plugging.

RSM  comment:  "Drifting."

9)  Negotiation,  with  so  few  counters,  is  no  way  to  improve  the  actual  situ-
ation; it  might  serve  to  diffuse  and  confuse  to  some  extent  the  psychological
impact  of  loss.

McNamara  comment:  "This  is  better  than  drifting."

10)  (The  Fulbright-Mansfield  Church  School,  for  example,  has  written  off
South  Vietnam;  they  are  seeking  solely  to  cut  the  damage  to  our  prestige  as  South
Vietnam  goes  down  the  drain.)

11)  Striking  DRV  might,  but  probably  won't.  RSM  comment:  Dissent.  Help
the  actual  situation.  The  most  serious  RSM  comment:  Dissent.  Risk  is  that  the
U.S.  public  will  not  support  a  squeeze  unless  results  show  soon.

12)  Strikes  against  DRV  should  be  done  anyway,  first  as  reprisals.  RSM  com-
ment to  reprisals:  "Too  narrow.  Can  use  34A,  Desoto,  infiltration  data,  etc.
Feel  way  from  there.

13)  It  is  essential  that  we  keep  plugging  in  South  Vietnam  in  any  event.  Im-
mediate action:  (a)  Ride  along  with  the  new  government,  make  no  adverse  com-
ments; (b)  continue  vigorous  advisory  effort,  but  add  no  more  U.S.  men.  RSM
comment:  "They  are  in  for  6500  more.!";  (c)  get  dependents  out;  (d)  authorize
Westmoreland  to  use  jets.  RSM  comment:  Yes,  in  emergencies  in  South  Vietnam;
(e)  React  promptly  and  firmly  to  next  reprisal  opportunity;  (f )  start  re-educating
U.S.  public  that  Southeast  Asia  confrontation  will  last  years.

(Note:  I  handed  this  to  RSM  0745,  on  January  27,  1965,  and  discussed  it  for  twenty-five
minutes.  He  commented  as  indicated.)


[Document  250]

McG.  Bundy
7  Feb  1965

A  POLICY  OF  SUSTAINED  REPRISAL

I.  INTRODUCTORY

We  believe  that  the  best  available  way  of  increasing  our  chance  of  success  in
Vietnam  is  the  development  and  execution  of  a  policy  of  sustained  reprisal  against
North  Vietnam — a  policy  in  which  air  and  naval  action  against  the  North  is
justified  by  and  related  to  the  whole  Viet  Cong  campaign  of  violence  and  terror
in  the  South.

While  we  believe  that  the  risks  of  such  a  policy  are  acceptable,  we  emphasize
that  its  costs  are  real.  It  implies  significant  U.S.  air  losses  even  if  no  full  air  war
is  joined,  and  it  seems  likely  that  it  would  eventually  require  an  extensive  and
costly  effort  against  the  whole  air  defense  system  of  North  Vietnam.  U.S.  cas-
ualties would  be  higher — and  more  visible  to  American  feelings — than  those
sustained  in  the  struggle  in  South  Vietnam.

Yet  measured  against  the  costs  of  defeat  in  Vietnam,  this  program  seems  cheap.
And  even  if  it  fails  to  turn  the  tide — as  it  may — the  value  of  the  effort  seems  to
us  to  exceed  its  cost.


688 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  111


II. OUTLINE  OF  THE  POLICY

L  In  partnership  with  the  Government  of  Vietnam,  we  should  develop  and
exercise  the  option  to  retaliate  against  any  VC  act  of  violence  to  persons  or
property.

2.  In  practice,  we  may  wish  at  the  outset  to  relate  our  reprisals  to  those  acts  of
relatively  high  visibility  such  as  the  Pleiku  incident.  Later,  we  might  retaliate
against  the  assassination  of  a  province  chief,  but  not  necessarily  the  murder  of  a
hamlet  official;  we  might  retaliate  against  a  grenade  thrown  into  a  crowded  cafe
in  Saigon,  but  not  necessarily  to  a  shot  fired  into  a  small  shop  in  the  countryside.

3.  Once  a  program  of  reprisals  is  clearly  underway,  it  should  not  be  necessary
to  connect  each  specific  act  against  North  Vietnam  to  a  particular  outrage  in  the
South.  It  should  be  possible,  for  example,  to  publish  weekly  lists  of  outrages  in  the
South  and  to  have  it  clearly  understood  that  these  outrages  are  the  cause  of  such
action  against  the  North  as  may  be  occurring  in  the  current  period.  Such  a  more
generalized  pattern  of  reprisal  would  remove  much  of  the  difficulty  involved  in
finding  precisely  matching  targets  in  response  to  specific  atrocities.  Even  in  such
a  more  general  pattern,  however,  it  would  be  important  to  insure  that  the  general
level  of  reprisal  action  remained  in  close  correspondence  with  the  level  of  out-
rages in  the  South.  We  must  keep  it  clear  at  every  stage  both  to  Hanoi  and  to
the  world,  that  our  reprisals  will  be  reduced  or  stopped  when  outrages  in  the
South  are  reduced  or  stopped — and  that  we  are  not  attempting  to  destroy  or
conquer  North  Vietnam.

4.  In  the  early  stages  of  such  a  course,  we  should  take  the  appropriate  occasion
to  make  clear  our  firm  intent  to  undertake  reprisals  on  any  further  acts,  major  or
minor,  that  appear  to  us  and  the  GVN  as  indicating  Hanoi's  support.  We  would
announce  that  our  two  governments  have  been  patient  and  forbearing  in  the
hope  that  Hanoi  would  come  to  its  senses  without  the  necessity  of  our  having  to
take  further  action;  but  the  outrages  continue  and  now  we  must  react  against  those
who  are  responsible;  we  will  not  provoke;  we  will  not  use  our  force  indiscrimi-
nately; but  we  can  no  longer  sit  by  in  the  face  of  repeated  acts  of  terror  and  vio-
lence for  which  the  DRV  is  responsible.

5.  Having  once  made  this  announcement,  we  should  execute  our  reprisal  policy
with  as  low  a  level  of  public  noise  as  possible.  It  is  to  our  interest  that  our  acts
should  be  seen — but  we  do  not  wish  to  boast  about  them  in  ways  that  make  it
hard  for  Hanoi  to  shift  its  ground.  We  should  instead  direct  maximum  attention
to  the  continuing  acts  of  violence  which  are  the  cause  of  our  continuing  reprisals.

6.  This  reprisal  policy  should  begin  at  a  low  level.  Its  level  of  force  and  pres-
sure should  be  increased  only  gradually — and  as  indicated  above  it  should  be
decreased  if  VC  terror  visibly  decreases.  The  object  would  not  be  to  "win"  an
air  war  against  Hanoi,  but  rather  to  influence  the  course  of  the  struggle  in  the
South.

7.  At  the  same  time  it  should  be  recognized  that  in  order  to  maintain  the
power  of  reprisal  without  risk  of  excessive  loss,  an  "air  war"  may  in  fact  be  neces-
sary. We  should  therefore  be  ready  to  develop  a  separate  justification  for  energetic
flak  suppression  and  if  necessary  for  the  destruction  of  Communist  air  power.  The
essence  of  such  an  explanation  should  be  that  these  actions  are  intended  solely
to  insure  the  effectiveness  of  a  policy  of  reprisal,  and  in  no  sense  represent  any
intent  to  wage  offensive  war  against  the  North.  These  distinctions  should  not  be
difficult  to  develop.

8.  It  remains  quite  possible,  however,  that  this  reprisal  policy  would  get  us


Documents  689


quickly  into  the  level  of  military  activity  contemplated  in  the  so-called  Phase  II
of  our  December  planning.  It  may  even  get  us  beyond  this  level  with  both  Hanoi
and  Peiping,  if  there  is  Communist  counter-action.  We  and  the  GVN  should  also
be  prepared  for  a  spurt  of  VC  terrorism,  especially  in  urban  areas,  that  would
dwarf  anything  yet  experienced.  These  are  the  risks  of  any  action.  They  should
be  carefully  reviewed — but  we  believe  them  to  be  acceptable.

9.  We  are  convinced  that  the  political  values  of  reprisal  require  a  continuous
operation.  Episodic  responses  geared  on  a  one-for-one  basis  to  "spectacular"
outrages  would  lack  the  persuasive  force  of  sustained  pressure.  More  important
still,  they  would  leave  it  open  to  the  Communists  to  avoid  reprisals  entirely  by
giving  up  only  a  small  element  of  their  own  program.  The  Gulf  of  Tonkin  affair
produced  a  sharp  upturn  in  morale  in  South  Vietnam.  When  it  remained  an
isolated  episode,  however,  there  was  a  severe  relapse.  It  is  the  great  merit  of  the
proposed  scheme  that  to  stop  it  the  Communists  would  have  to  stop  enough  of
their  activity  in  the  South  to  permit  the  probable  success  of  a  determined  pacifica-
tion effort.

III. EXPECTED  EFFECT  OF  SUSTAINED  REPRISAL  POLICY

1.  We  emphasize  that  our  primary  target  in  advocating  a  reprisal  policy  is  the
improvement  of  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  Action  against  the  North  is
usually  urged  as  a  means  of  affecting  the  will  of  Hanoi  to  direct  and  support  the
VC.  We  consider  this  an  important  but  longer-range  purpose.  The  immediate
and  critical  targets  are  in  the  South — in  the  minds  of  the  South  Vietnamese  and
in  the  minds  of  the  Viet  Cong  cadres.

2.  Predictions  of  the  effect  of  any  given  course  of  action  upon  the  states  of
mind  of  people  are  difficult.  It  seems  very  clear  that  if  the  United  States  and  the
Government  of  Vietnam  join  in  a  policy  of  reprisal,  there  will  be  a  sharp  im-
mediate increase  in  optimism  in  the  South,  among  nearly  all  articulate  groups.
The  Mission  believes — and  our  own  conversations  confirm — that  in  all  sectors
of  Vietnamese  opinion  there  is  a  strong  belief  that  the  United  States  could  do
much  more  if  it  would,  and  that  they  afe  suspicious  of  our  failure  to  use  more  of
our  obviously  enormous  power.  At  least  in  the  short  run,  the  reaction  to  reprisal
policy  would  be  very  favorable.

3.  This  favorable  reaction  should  offer  opportunity  for  increased  American
influence  in  pressing  for  a  more  effective  government — at  least  in  the  short  run.
Joint  reprisals  would  imply  military  planning  in  which  the  American  role  would
necessarily  be  controlling,  and  this  new  relation  should  add  to  our  bargaining
power  in  other  military  efforts — and  conceivably  on  a  wider  plane  as  well  if  a
more  stable  government  is  formed.  We  have  the  whip  hand  in  reprisals  as  we  do
not  in  other  fields.

4.  The  Vietnamese  increase  in  hope  could  well  increase  the  readiness  of  Viet-
namese factions  themselves  to  join  together  in  forming  a  more  effective  govern-
ment.

5.  We  think  it  plausible  that  effective  and  sustained  reprisals,  even  in  a  low
key,  would  have  a  substantial  depressing  effect  upon  the  morale  of  Viet  Cong
cadres  in  South  Vietnam.  This  is  the  strong  opinion  of  CIA  Saigon.  It  is  based
upon  reliable  reports  of  the  initial  Viet  Cong  reaction  to  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin
episode,  and  also  upon  the  solid  general  assessment  that  the  determination  of
Hanoi  and  the  apparent  timidity  of  the  mighty  United  States  are  both  major
items  in  Viet  Cong  confidence.

6.  The  long-run  effect  of  reprisals  in  the  South  is  far  less  clear.  It  may  be  that


690 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

like  other  stimulants,  the  value  of  this  one  would  decline  over  time.  Indeed  the
risk  of  this  result  is  large  enough  so  that  we  ourselves  believe  that  a  very  major
effort  all  along  the  line  should  be  made  in  South  Vietnam  to  take  full  advantage
of  the  immediate  stimulus  of  reprisal  policy  in  its  early  stages.  Our  object  should
be  to  use  this  new  policy  to  effect  a  visible  upward  turn  in  pacification,  in  govern-
mental effectiveness,  in  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong,  and  in  the  whole  U.S./
GVN  relationship.  It  is  changes  in  these  areas  that  can  have  enduring  long-term
effects.

7.  While  emphasizing  the  importance  of  reprisals  in  the  South,  we  do  not  ex-
clude the  impact  on  Hanoi,  We  believe,  indeed,  that  it  is  of  great  importance  that
the  level  of  reprisal  be  adjusted  rapidly  and  visibly  to  both  upward  and  down-
ward shifts  in  the  level  of  Viet  Cong  offenses.  We  want  to  keep  before  Hanoi
the  carrot  of  our  desisting  as  well  as  the  stick  of  continued  pressure.  We  also
need  to  conduct  the  application  of  the  force  so  that  there  is  always  a  prospect
of  worse  to  come.

8.  We  cannot  assert  that  a  policy  of  sustained  reprisal  will  succeed  in  changing
the  course  of  the  contest  in  Vietnam.  It  may  fail,  and  we  cannot  estimate  the  odds
of  success  with  any  accuracy — they  may  be  somewhere  between  25%  and  75%.
What  we  can  say  is  that  even  if  it  fails,  the  policy  will  be  worth  it.  At  a  minimum
it  will  damp  down  the  charge  that  we  did  not  do  all  that  we  could  have  done,
and  this  charge  will  be  important  in  many  countries,  including  our  own.  Beyond
that,  a  reprisal  policy — to  the  extent  that  it  demonstrates  U.S.  willingness  to  em-
ploy this  new  norm  in  counter-insurgency — will  set  a  higher  price  for  the  future
upon  all  adventures  of  guerrilla  warfare,  and  it  should  therefore  somewhat  in-
crease our  ability  to  deter  such  adventures.  We  must  recognize,  however,  that
that  ability  will  be  gravely  weakened  if  there  is  failure  for  any  reason  in  Vietnam.

IV. PRESENT  ACTION  RECOMMENDATIONS

1.  This  general  recommendation  was  developed  in  intensive  discussions  in  the
days  just  before  the  attacks  on  Pleiku.  These  attacks  and  our  reaction  to  them
have  created  an  ideal  opportunity  for  the  prompt  development  and  execution  of
sustained  reprisals.  Conversely,  if  no  such  policy  is  now  developed,  we  face  the
grave  danger  that  Pleiku,  like  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin,  may  be  a  short-run  stimulant
and  a  long-term  depressant.  We  therefore  recommend  that  the  necessary  prepara-
tions be  made  for  continuing  reprisals.  The  major  necessary  steps  to  be  taken  ap-
pear to  us  to  be  the  following:

( 1 )  We  should  complete  the  evacuation  of  dependents.

(2)  We  should  quietly  start  the  necessary  westward  deployments  of  back-up
contingency  forces.

(3)  We  should  develop  and  refine  a  running  catalogue  of  Viet  Cong  offenses
which  can  be  published  regularly  and  related  clearly  to  our  own  reprisals.  Such
a  catalogue  should  perhaps  build  on  the  foundation  of  an  initial  White  Paper.

(4)  We  should  initiate  joint  planning  with  the  GVN  on  both  the  civil  and
military  level.  Specifically,  we  should  give  a  clear  and  strong  signal  to  those  now
forming  a  government  that  we  will  be  ready  for  this  policy  when  they  are.

(5)  Wc  should  develop  the  necessary  public  and  diplomatic  statements  to
accompany  the  initiation  and  continuation  of  this  program.

(6)  We  should  insure  that  a  reprisal  program  is  matched  by  renewed  public
commitment  to  our  family  of  programs  in  the  South,  so  that  the  central  impor-
tance of  the  southern  struggle  may  never  be  neglected.

(7)  We  should  plan  quiet  diplomatic  communication  of  the  precise  meaning
of  what  we  are  and  arc  not  doing,  to  Hanoi,  to  Peking  and  to  Moscow.


Documents  691


(8)  We  should  be  prepared  to  defend  and  to  justify  this  new  policy  by  con-
centrating attention  in  every  forum  upon  its  cause — the  aggression  in  the  South.

(9)  We  should  accept  discussion  on  these  terms  in  any  forum,  but  we  should
not  now  accept  the  idea  of  negotiations  of  any  sort  except  on  the  basis  of  a  stand
down  of  Viet  Cong  violence.  A  program  of  sustained  reprisal,  with  its  direct  Hnk
to  Hanoi's  continuing  aggressive  actions  in  the  South,  will  not  involve  us  in  nearly
the  level  of  international  recrimination  which  would  be  precipitated  by  a  go-
North  program  which  was  not  so  connected.  For  this  reason  the  International
pressures  for  negotiation  should  be  quite  manageable.


[Document  251]

February  10,  1965

MEMORANDUM  FOR  MR.  McGEORGE  BUNDY

SUBJECT: Additional  Military  and  Diplomatic  Possibilities

Ambassador  Thompson  and  I  discussed  the  status  of  planning  last  night,  and
he  came  up  with  two  thoughts  that  should  be  very  much  in  our  minds.

1.  In  light  of  the  very  mild  official  Soviet  reaction  to  date,  but  their  obvious
concern  at  any  immediate  repetition  of  our  action,  he  believes  that  we  should
take  serious  account  of  the  March  1  date  of  the  Communist  Party  meeting.  He
thinks  that  the  Soviets  would  be  put.  even  more  sharply  on  the  spot  by  any  US
action  taken  prior  to  March  1 .

Comment:  I  realize  that  this  would  defer  our  next  action  well  beyond  the  4-10
days  discussed  in  your  group  last  night.  However,  we  need  to  see  whether  that
gap  might  not  be  filled  in  by  a  predominantly  GVN  action  related  directly  to
some  action  against  the  South  Vietnamese — e.g.,  railroad  atrocity.  I  think  we
would  all  agree — and  you  may  be  interested  to  know  that  this  was  stressed  to  me
by  several  senators  yesterday,  as  well  as  by  the  Chinese  Ambassador  on  Sunday —
that  we  have  a  terrific  problem  to  avoid  appearing  to  be  reacting  just  when  the  US
is  hit  and  turning  this  into  a  US/DRV  situation  exclusively.

2.  On  the  diplomatic  track,  Ambassador  Thompson  noted  that  the  Soviets
would  be  much  more  ready  to  play  some  kind  of  moderately  constructive  role
in  relation  to  Laos.^He  therefore  wondered  if  we  could  somehow  get  Laos  negotia-
tions going  and  make  this  a  test  of  DRV  willingness  to  negotiate,  in  effect  argu-
ing that  if  they  were  not  ready  to  see  the  1962  Accords  observed,  how  could  we
possibly  expect  anything  from  them  in  Vietnam  negotiations.

Comment:  I  have  hitherto  thought  Laos  negotiations  were  so  fraught  with
internal  problems  in  Vietnam  that  t'hat  alone  argued  strongly  against  making  this
our  negotiating  initiative — although  it  could  well  play  in  its  own  way.  The  dust
has  not  settled  from  the  latest  troubles  in  Vientiane,  and  we  probably  should
check  with  Sullivan  to  see  what  he  now  thinks  Souvanna's  position  would  be.
More  basically,  however,  I  would  have  grave  doubt  about  whether  Laos  negotia-
tions could  in  fact  be  pressed  to  the  point  of  doing  anything  effective  about  the
corridor,  which  as  a  practical  matter  Souvanna  regards  more  as  our  issue  than
his.  Finally,  any  Lao  negotiations  would  be  likely  to  get  tied  into  knots  in  which
a  lot  of  our  own  activities  would  be  pilloried  as  just  about  as  bad  as  anythmg  the
Communists  have  done.

In  short,  I  am  very  skeptical  that  we  can  really  make  use  of  this  gambit  either
for  profit  in  itself  or  as  a  plausible  way  of  holding  off  Vietnamese  negotiations.


692 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

However,  I  think  it  needs  further  study,  and  I  am  asking  my  staff  to  look  at  it
hard  today,  with  of  course  crucial  advice  from  Len.

William  P.  Bundy

Copies  to:  Ambassador  Thompson
Mr.  McNaughton
Mr.  Green
Mr.  Unger
Mr.  Cooper
Mr.  Trueheart


[Document  252]

DRAFT

FE:WPBundy:mk

2/18/65

Where  Are  We  Heading?

This  memorandum  examines  possible  developments  and  problems  if  the  US
pursues  the  following  policy  with  respect  to  South  Viet-Nam:

a.  Intensified  pacification  within  South  Viet-Nam.  To  meet  the  security  prob-
lem, this  might  include  a  significant  increase  in  present  US  force  strength.

b.  A  program  of  measured,  limited,  and  spaced  air  attacks,  jointly  with  the
GVN,  against  the  infiltration  complex  in  the  DRV.  Such  attacks  would  take  place
at  the  rate  of  about  one  a  week,  unless  spectacular  Viet  Cong  action  dictated
an  immediate  response  out  of  sequence.  The  normal  pattern  of  such  attacks  would
comprise  one  GVN  and  one  US  strike  on  each  occasion,  confined  to  targets  south
of  the  19th  parallel,  with  variations  in  severity  depending  on  the  tempo  of  VC
action,  but  with  a  slow  upward  trend  in  severity  as  the  weeks  went  by.

c.  That  the  US  itself  would  take  no  initiative  for  talks,  but  would  agree  to
cooperate  in  consultations — not  a  conference — undertaken  by  the  UK  and  USSR
as  Co-Chairmen  of  the  Geneva  Conferences.  As  an  opening  move,  the  British
would  request  an  expression  of  our  views,  and  we  would  use  this  occasion  to
spell  out  our  position  fully,  including  our  purposes  and  what  we  regard  as  essen-
tial to  the  restoration  of  peace.  We  would  further  present  our  case  against  the
DRV  in  the  form  of  a  long  written  document  to  be  sent  to  the  President  of  the
United  Nations  Security  Council  and  to  be  circulated  to  members  of  the  UN.

* *  *

1.  Communist  responses.

a.  Hanoi  would  almost  certainly  not  feel  itself  under  pressure  at  any  early
point  to  enter  into  fruitful  negotiations  or  to  call  off  its  activity  in  any  way.  They
would  denounce  the  continued  air  attacks  and  seek  to  whip  up  maximum  world
opposition  to  them.  Within  South  Viet-Nam,  they  might  avoid  spectacular  actions,
but  would  certainly  continue  a  substantial  pattern  of  activity  along  past  lines,
probably  with  emphasis  on  the  kind  of  incidents  we  have  seen  this  week,  in  which
Communist  agents  stirred  up  a  village  "protest"  against  government  air  attacks,
and  against  the  US.  Basically,  they  would  see  the  situation  in  South  Viet-Nam
as  likely  to  deteriorate  further  ("crumble,"  as  they  have  put  it),  and  would  be
expecting  that  at  some  point  someone  in  the  GVN  will  start  secret  talks  with
them  behind  our  backs.


Documents  693


b.  Communist  China  might  supply  additional  air  defense  equipment  to  the
DRV,  but  we  do  not  believe  they  would  engage  in  air  operations  from  Communist
China,  at  least  up  to  the  point  where  the  MIGs  in  the  DRV  were  engaged  and
we  had  found  it  necessary  to  attack  Fukien  or  possibly — if  the  MIGs  had  been
moved  there — Vinh.

c.  The  Soviets  would  supply  air  defense  equipment  to  the  DRV  and  would
continue  to  protest  our  air  attacks  in  strong  terms.  However,  we  do  not  believe
they  would  make  any  new  commitment  at  this  stage,  and  they  would  probably
not  do  so  even  if  the  Chicoms  became  even  more  deeply  involved — provided  that
we  were  not  ourselves  attacking  Communist  China.  At  that  point,  the  heat  might
get  awfully  great  on  them,  and  they  would  be  in  a  very  difficult  position  to  con-
tinue actively  working  as  Co-chairmen.  However,  their  approach  to  the  British
on  the  Co-chairmanship  certainly  suggests  that  they  would  find  some  relief  in
starting  to  act  in  that  role,  and  might  use  it  as  a  hedge  against  further  involve-
ment, perhaps  pointing  out  to  Hanoi  that  the  Co-chairmen  exercise  serves  to
prevent  us  from  taking  extreme  action  and  that  Hanoi  will  get  the  same  result
in  the  end  if  a  political  track  is  operating  and  if,  in  fact,  South  Viet-Nam  keeps
crumbling.  They  might  also  argue  to  Hanoi  that  the  existence  of  the  political
track  tends  to  reduce  the  chances  of  the  Chicoms  having  lo  become  deeply  in-
volved— which  we  believe  Hanoi  does  not  want  unless  it  is  compelled  to  accept
it.

2.  Within  South  Viet-Nam  the  new  government  is  a  somewhat  better  one,  but
the  cohesive  effects  of  the  strikes  to  date  have  at  most  helped  things  a  bit.  The
latest  MACV  report  indicates  a  deteriorating  situation  except  in  the  extreme
south,  and  it  is  unlikely  that  this  can  be  arrested  in  any  short  period  of  time  even
if  the  government  does  hold  together  well  and  the  military  go  about  their  busi-
ness. We  shall  be  very  lucky  to  see  a  leveling  off,  much  less  any  significant  im-
provement, in  the  next  two  months.  In  short,  we  may  have  to  hang  on  quite  a
long  time  before  we  can  hope  to  see  an  improving  situation  in  South  Viet-Nam —
and  this  in  turn  is  really  the  key  to  any  negotiating  position  we  could  have  at
any  time.

3.  On  the  political  track  we  believe  the  British  will  undertake  their  role  with
vigor,  and  that  the  Soviets  will  be  more  reserved.  The  Soviets  can  hardly  hope
to  influence  Hanoi  much  at  this  point,  and  they  certainly  have  no  leverage  with
Communist  China.  In  the  opening  rounds,  the  Soviets  will  probably  fire  off  some
fairly  sharp  statements  that  the  real  key  to  the  situation  is  for  us  to  get  out  and
to  stop  our  attack^  and  the  opposing  positions  are  so  far  apart  that  it  is  hard  to
see  any  useful  movement  for  some  time  to  come.  We  might  well  find  the  Soviets
— or  even  the  Canadians — sounding  us  out  on  whether  we  would  stop  our  attacks
in  return  for  some  moderation  in  VC  activity.  This  is  clearly  unacceptable,  and
the  very  least  we  should  hold  out  on  is  a  verified  cessation  of  infiltration  (and
radio  silence)  before  we  stop  our  attacks.  Our  stress  on  the  cessation  of  in-
filtration may  conceivably  lead  to  the  Indians  coming  forward  to  offer  policing
forces — a  suggestion  they  have  made  before — and  this  would  be  a  constructive
move  we  could  pick  up.  But,  as  noted  above,  Hanoi  is  most  unlikely  to  trade  on
this  basis  for  a  long  time  to  come.

4.  In  sum — the  most  likely  prospect  is  for  a  prolonged  period  without  major
risks  of  escalation  but  equally  without  any  give  by  Hanoi.  If,  contrary  to  our
present  judgment,  the  GVN  should  start  to  do  better,

[material  missing]


694 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


[Document  253]

JTM  to  MCN  3/24/65  (first  draft)

PROPOSED  COURSE  OF  ACTION  RE  VIETNAM

1.  Assessment  and  prognosis.  The  situation  in  Vietnam  is  bad  and  deteriorat-
ing. Even  with  great,  imaginative  efforts  on  the  civilian  as  well  as  military  sides
inside  South  Vietnam,  the  decline  probably  will  not  ''bottom  out"  unless  major
actions  are  taken.

2.  The  "trilemma."  US  policy  appears  to  be  drifting.  This  is  because,  while
there  is  near-consensus  that  efforts  inside  SVN  will  probably  fail  to  prevent
collapse,  all  3  of  the  possible  remedial  courses  of  action  have  been  rejected  for
one  reason  or  another:  (a)  Will-breaking  strikes  on  DRV;  (b)  large  troop  de-
ployments; (c)  exit  by  negotiations.

3.  Urgency.  Even  with  a  stretched-out  strike-North  program,  we  could  reach
flash  points  within  a  few  weeks  (e.g.,  confrontation  with  DRV  MIGs,  hot  pursuit
of  Chicom  MIGs,  DRV  air  attack  on  SVN,  massive  VC  attack  on  Danang,
sinking  of  US  naval  vessel,  etc.).  Furthermore,  there  is  now  a  hint  of  flexibility
on  the  Red  side:  The  Soviets  are  struggling  to  find  a  Gordian  knot-cutter;  the
Chicoms  may  be  wavering  (PARIS  5326) .

4.  Actions:

(1)  Redouble  and  redouble  efforts  inside  SVN  (get  better  organized  for
it!).

(2)  Prepare  to  deploy  US  combat  troops,  first  to  Pleiku  (and  more  to
Danang) .

(3)  Continue  distended  strike-North  program,  postponing  Phuc  Yen
until  June.

(4)  Initiate  quiet  talks  along  the  following  lines:
PHASE  ONE:

(A)  When?  Now,  before  a  flash  point.

(B)  Who?  US-USSR,  perhaps  US-China  in  Warsaw  or  Moscow,  or  US-
DRV  via  Seaborn  in  Hanoi.  (Not  with  Liberation  Front  or  through
UK,  France,  India  or  UN;  be  alert  for  GVN  officials  talking  under
the  table.)

(C)  How?  With  GVN  consent;  private  and  quiet.  (Refuse  formal  talks
until  Phase  Two.)

(D)  What?

( 1 )  Offer  to  stop  strikes  on  DRV  and  to  withhold  deployment  of  division-
size  US  forces  in  exchange  for  DRV  withdrawal  of  named  units  in
SVN,  and  stoppage  of  infiltration,  communications  to  VC,  and  VC
attacks,  sabotage  and  terrorism.

(2)  Compliance  would  be  policed  unilaterally.  If,  as  is  likely,  complete
compliance  by  the  DRV  is  not  forthcoming,  we  would  carry  out
occasional  strikes.

(3)  Do  not  demand  stoppage  of  propaganda  or  public  renunciation  of
doctrines.

(4)  Regarding  "defensive"  VC  attacks — i.e.,  VC  defending  VC-held  areas
from  encroaching  ARVN  forces — we  take  the  public  position  that


Documents  695


ARVN  forces  must  be  free  to  operate  throughout  SVN,  especially
in  areas  where  amnesty  is  offered  (but  in  fact,  restraint  and  discre-
tion will  be  exercised  by  the  ARVN) .
(5)  Terrorism  and  sabotage,  however,  must  be  dampened  markedly
throughout  SVN — e.g.,  civilian  administrators  must  be  able  to  move
and  operate  freely,  certainly  in  so-called  contested  areas,  and  roads
and  railroads  must  be  open.
PHASE  TWO:

(A)  When?  At  the  end  of  Phase  One.

(B)  Who?  All  interested  nations.

(C)  How?  Publicly  in  large  Geneva-type  conference.

(D)  What?

( 1 )  Offer  to  remove  US  combat  forces  from  South  Vietnam  in  exchange
for  repatriation  (or  regroupment?)  of  DRV  infiltrators  and  hard-
core sympathizers  and  for  erection  of  international  machinery  to
verify  the  end  of  infiltration  and  coded  communication.

(2)  Offer  to  seek  to  determine  the  will  of  the  people  under  international
supervision,  with  an  appropriate  reflection  of  those  who  favor  the
VC.

(3)  Any  recognition  of  the  Liberation  Front  would  have  to  be  accom-
panied by  disarming  the  VC  and  at  least  avowed  VC  independence
from  DRV  control.

NOTE:  If  the  DRV  will  not  "play"  the  above  game,  we  must  be  prepared  (1)
to  risk  passing  some  flash  points  in  the  Strike-North  program,  (2)  to  put  more
US  troops  into  SVN,  and/or  (3)  to  reconsider  our  minimum  acceptable  outcome.

5.  Outcomes.  In  between  "victory"  and  "defeat"  in  SVN  lie  (a)  a  Laos-like
"government  of  national  unity"  attempting  to  rule  all  of  SVN;  (b)  a  live-and-let-
live  stand-down  (ceasefire)  tacitly  recognizing  current,  or  recent,  areas  of  in-
fluence; (c)  a  "semi-equilibrium"  or  "slow-motion  war"  with  slowly  shifting
GVN-VC  areas  of  control.

3/24/65  (first  draft)

ANNEX— PLAN  OF  ACTION  FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM

1.  US  aims:

70% — To  avoid  a  humiliating  US  defeat  (to  our  reputation  as  a  guarantor).
20% — To  keep  SVN  (and  then  adjacent)  territory  from  Chinese  hands.
10% — To  permit  the  people  of  SVN  to  enjoy  a  better,  freer  way  of  life.
ALSO — ^To  emerge  from  crisis  without  unacceptable  taint  from  methods
used.

NOT — To  "help  a  friend,"  although  it  would  be  hard  to  stay  in  if  asked  out.

2.  The  situation:  The  situation  in  general  is  bad  and  deteriorating.  The  VC
have  the  initiative.  Defeatism  is  gaining  among  the  rural  population,  somewhat  in
the  cities,  and  even  among  the  soldiers — especially  those  with  relatives  in  rural
areas.  The  Hop  Tac  area  around  Saigon  is  making  little  progress;  the  Delta  stays
bad;  the  country  has  been  severed  in  the  north.  GVN  control  is  shrinking  to  en-
claves, some  burdened  with  refugees.  In  Saigon  we  have  a  remission:  Quat  is
giving  hope  on  the  civilian  side,  the  Buddhists  have  calmed,  and  the  split  generals
are  in  uneasy  equilibrium.


696 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

3.  The  preliminary  question:  Can  the  situation  inside  SVN  be  bottomed  out
(a)  without  extreme  measures  against  the  DRV  and/or  (b)  without  deployment
of  large  numbers  of  US  (and  other)  combat  troops  inside  SVN?  The  answer  is
perhaps,  but  probably  no.

4.  Ways  GVN  might  collapse:

(a)  VC  successes  reduce  GVN  control  to  enclaves,  causing:

(1)  insurrection  in  the  enclaved  population,

(2)  massive  defections  of  ARVN  soldiers  and  even  units,

(3)  aggravated  dissension  and  impotence  in  Saigon,

(4)  defeatism  and  reorientation  by  key  GVN  officials,

(5)  entrance  of  left-wing  elements  into  the  government,

(6)  emergence  of  a  popular-front  regime,

(7)  request  that  US  leave,

(8)  concessions  to  the  VC,  and

(9)  accommodations  to  the  DRV.

(b)  VC  with  DRV  volunteers  concentrate  on  I  &  II  Corps,

(1)  conquering  principal  GVN-held  enclaves  there,

(2)  declaring  Liberation  Government,

(3)  joining  the  I  &  II  Corps  areas  to  the  DRV,  and

(4)  pressing  the  course  in  (a)  above  for  rest  of  SVN.

(c)  While  in  a  temporary  funk,  GVN  might  throw  in  sponge:

(1)  dealing  under  the  table  with  the  VC,

(2)  asking  the  US  to  cease  at  least  military  aid,

(3)  bringing  left-wing  elements  into  the  government,

(4)  leading  to  a  popular-front  regime,  and

(5)  ending  in  accommodations  to  the  VC  and  DRV.

(d)  In  a  surge  of  anti-Americanism,  GVN  could  ask  the  US  out  and  pursue
course  otherwise  similar  to  (c)  above.

5.  The  "trilemma":  US  policy  appears  to  be  drifting.  This  is  because,  while
there  is  consensus  that  efforts  inside  SVN  (para  6)  will  probably  fail  to  prevent
collapse,  all  three  of  the  possible  remedial  courses  of  action  have  so  far  been
rejected :

a.  Will-breaking  strikes  on  the  North  (para  7)  are  balked  (1)  by  flash-point
limits,  (2)  by  doubts  that  the  DRV  will  cave  and  (3)  by  doubts  that  the
VC  will  obey  a  caving  DRV.  (Leaving  strikes  only  a  political  and  anti-
infiltration  nuisance.)

b.  Large  US  troop  deployments  (para  8)  are  blocked  by  "French-defeat"
and  "Korea"  syndromes,  and  Quat  is  queasy.  (Troops  could  be  net
negatives,  and  be  besieged.)

c.  Exit  by  negotiations  (para  9)  is  tainted  by  the  humiliation  likely  to
follow.

6.  Efforts  inside  South  Vietnam:  Progress  inside  SVN  is  our  main  aim.  Great,
imaginative  efforts  on  the  civilian  political  as  well  as  military  side  must  be  made,
bearing  in  mind  that  progress  depends  as  much  on  GVN  efforts  and  luck  as  on
added  US  efforts.  While  only  a  few  of  such  efforts  can  pay  off  quickly  enough
to  affect  the  present  ominous  deterioration,  some  may,  and  we  arc  dealing  here
in  small  critical  margins.  Furthermore,  such  investment  is  essential  to  provide  a
foundation  for  the  longer  run.


Documents  697


a.  Improve  spirit  and  effectiveness,  [fill  out  further,  drawing  from  State
memo  to  the  President]

(1)  Achieve  governmental  stability.

(2)  Augment  the  psy-war  program.

(3)  Build  a  stronger  pro-government  infrastructure.

b.  Improve  physical  security,  [fill  out]

c.  Reduce  infiltration,  [fill  out]

.  Strikes  on  the  North  (program  of  progressive  military  pressure).

a.  Purposes:

(1)  To  reduce  DRV/VC  activities  by  affecting  DRV  will.

(2)  To  improve  the  GVN/VC  relative  "balance  of  morale."

(3)  To  provide  the  US/GVN  with  a  bargaining  counter.

(4)  To  reduce  DRV  infiltration  of  men  and  materiel.

(5)  To  show  the  world  the  lengths  to  which  US  will  go  for  a  friend.

b.  Program:  Each  week,  1  or  2  "mission  days"  with  100-plane  high-damage
US-VNAF  strikes  each  "day"  against  important  targets,  plus  3  armed
recce  missions — all  moving  upward  in  weight  of  effort,  value  of  target  or
proximity  to  Hanoi  and  China.

ALTERNATIVE  ONE:  12-week  DRV-wide  program  shunning  only
"population"  targets.

ALTERNATIVE  TWO:  12-week  program  short  of  taking  out  Phuc
Yen  (Hanoi)  airfield.

c.  Other  actions:

(1)  Blockade  of  DRV  ports  by  VNAF/US-dropped  mines  or  by  ships.

(2)  South  Vietnamese-implemented  34A  MAROPS.

(3)  Reconnaissance  flights  over  Laos  and  the  DRV.

(4)  Daily  BARREL  ROLL  armed  recce  strikes  in  Laos  (plus  T-28s).

(5)  Four-a-week  BARREL  ROLL  choke-point  strikes  in  Laos.

(6)  USA^NAF  air  &  naval  strikes  against  VC  ops  and  bases  in  SVN.

(7)  Westward  deployment  of  US  forces.

(8)  No  deSoto  patrols  or  naval  bombardment  of  DRV  at  this  time.

d.  Red  "flash  points."  There  are  events  which  we  can  expect  to  imply  sub-
stantial risk  of  escalation:

[(1)  Air  strikes  north  of  17°.  (This  one  already  passed.)]

(2)  First  US/VNAF  confrontation  with  DRV  MIGs.

(3)  Strike  on  Phuc  Yen  MIG  base  near  Hanoi.

(4)  First  strikes  on  Tonkin  industrial/population  targets.

(5)  First  strikes  on  Chinese  railroad  or  near  China.

(6)  First  US/VNAF  confrontation  with  Chicom  MIGs.

(7)  First  hot  pursuit  of  Chicom  MIGs  into  China.

(8)  First  flak-suppression  of  Chicom-  or  Soviet-manned  SAM.

(9)  Massive  introduction  of  US  ground  troops  into  SVN.

(10)  US/ARVN  occupation  of  DRV  territory  (e.g.,  He  de  Tigre).

(11)  First  Chi/Sov-US  confrontation  or  sinking  in  blockade.

e.  Blue  "flash  points."  China/DRV  surely  are  sensitive  to  events  which
might  cause  us  to  escalate:

(1)  AW  of  the  above  "Red"  flash  points.

(2)  VC  ground  attack  on  Danang.

(3)  Sinking  of  a  US  naval  vessel.

(4)  Open  deployment  of  DRV  troops  into  South  Vietnam.


698 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

(5)  Deployment  of  Chinese  troops  into  North  Vietnam.

(6)  Deployment  of  FROGs  or  SAMs  in  North  Vietnam.

(7)  DRV  air  attack  on  South  Vietnam.

(8)  Announcement  of  Liberation  Government  in  I/II  Corps  area.

f.  Major  risks:

(1)  Losses  to  DRV  MIGs,  and  later  possibly  to  SAMs.

(2)  Increased  VC  activities,  and  possibly  Liberation  Government.

(3)  Panic  or  other  collapse  of  GVN  from  under  us.

(4)  World-wide  revulsion  against  us  (against  strikes,  blockade,  etc.).

(5)  Sympathetic  fires  over  Berlin,  Cyprus,  Kashmir,  Jordan  waters.

(6)  Escalation  to  conventional  war  with  DRV,  China  (and  USSR?).

(7)  Escalation  to  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons.

g.  Other  Red  moves:

( 1 )  More  jets  to  NVN  with  DRV  or  Chicom  pilots.

(2)  More  AAA  (SAMs?)  and  radar  gear  (Soviet-manned?)  to  NVN.

(3)  Increased  air  and  ground  forces  in  South  China.

(4)  Other  "defensive"  DRV  retaliation  (e.g.,  shoot-down  of  a  U-2).

(5)  PL  land  grabs  in  Laos.

(6)  PL  declaration  of  new  government  in  Laos.

(7)  Political  drive  for  "neutralization"  of  Indo-China.

h.  Escalation  control.  We  can  do  three  things  to  avoid  escalation  too-much
or  too-fast:

(1)  Stretch  out.  Retard  the  program  (e.g.,  1  not  2  fixed  strikes  a  week).

(2)  Circuit  breaker.  Abandon  at  least  temporarily  the  theory  that  our
strikes  are  intended  to  break  DRV  will,  and  "plateau"  them  below
the  "Phuc  Yen  airfield"  flash  point  on  one  or  the  other  of  these
tenable  theories:

[a]  That  we  strike  as  necessary  to  interdict  infiltration.

[b]  That  our  level  of  strikes  is  generally  responsive  to  the  level  of
VC/DRV  activities  in  South  Vietnam.

(3)  Shunt.  Plateau  the  air  strikes  per  para  (2)  and  divert  the  energy  into:

[a]  A  mine-  and/or  ship-blockade  of  DRV  ports.

[b]  Massive  deployment  of  US  (and  other?)  troops  into  SVN  (and
Laos?) :

[1]  To  man  the  "enclaves,"  releasing  ARVN  forces.
[2]  To  take  over  Pleiku,  Kontum,  Darlac  provinces.
[3]  To  create  a  16+°  sea-Thailand  infiltration  wall.

i.  Important  miscellany:

(1)  Program  should  appear  to  be  relentless  (i.e.,  possibility  of  employing
"circuit-breakers"  should  be  secret).

(2)  Enemy  should  be  kept  aware  of  our  limited  objectives.

(3)  Allies  should  be  kept  on  board.

(4)  USSR  should  be  kept  in  passive  role.

(5)  Information  program  should  preserve  US  public  support.

8.  Program  of  large  US  ground  effort  in  SVN  and  SEA.

a.  Purposes:

(1)  To  defeat  the  VC  on  the  ground.

(2)  To  improve  GVN/VC  relative  "morale  balance."

(3)  To  improve  US/GVN  bargaining  position.

(4)  To  show  world  lengths  to  which  US  will  go  to  fulfil  commitments.


Documents  699


b.  Program:

(1)  Continue  strike-North  "crescendo"  or  "plateau"  (para  7  above).

(2)  Add  any  "combat  support"  personnel  needed  by  MACV;
and

(3)  Deploy  remainder  of  the  III  Marine  Expeditionary  Force  to  Danang;
and

(4)  Deploy  one  US  (plus  one  Korean?)  division  to  defeat  VC  in  Pleiku-
Kontum-Darlac  area,

or

(5)  Deploy  one  US  (plus  one  Korean?)  division  to  hold  enclaves  (Bien
Hoa/  Ton  Son  Nhut,  Nha  Trang,  Qui  Non,  Pleiku);

and/or

(6)  Deploy  3-5  US  divisions  (v^ith  "international"  elements)  across
Laos-SVN  infiltration  routes  and  at  key  SVN  population  centers.

c.  Advantages:

(1)  Improve  (at  least  initially)  manpower  ratio  vs.  the  VC.

(2)  Boost  GVN  morale  and  depress  DRV//VC  morale.

(3)  Firm  up  US  commitment  in  eyes  of  all  Reds,  allies  and  neutrals.

(4)  Deter  (or  even  prevent)  coups  in  the  South.

d.  Risks:

( 1 )  Deployment  will  suck  Chicom  troops  into  DRV.

(2)  Deployment  will  suck  counterbalancing  DRV/Chinese  troops  into
SVN.

(3)  Announcement  of  deployment  will  cause  massive  DRV/Chicom
effort  pre-emptively  to  occupy  new  SVN  territory.

(4)  US  losses  will  increase.

(5)  Friction  with  GVN  (and  Koreans?)  over  command  will  arise.

(6)  GVN  will  tend  increasingly  to  "let  the  US  do  it."

(7)  Anti-US  "colonialist"  m6od  may  increase  in-  and  outside  SVN.

(8)  US  forces  may  be  surrounded  and  trapped.

e.  Important  miscellany:

(1)  There  are  no  obvious  circuit-breakers.  Once  US  troops  are  in,  it
will  be  difficult  to  withdraw  them  or  to  move  them,  say,  to  Thailand
without  admitting  defeat.

(2)  It  will  take  massive  deployments  (many  divisions)  to  improve  the
GVN/US:VC  ratio  to  the  optimum  10+:1.

(3)  In  any  event,  our  Project  22  planning  with  the  Thais  for  defense  of
the  Mekong  towns  must  proceed  apace.

9.  Exit  by  negotiations.

a.  Bargaining  counters.

(1)  What  DRV  could  give:

[a]  Stop  training  and  sending  personnel  to  SVN/Laos.

[b]  Stop  sending  arms  and  supplies  into  SVN/Laos.

[c]  Stop  directing  military  actions  in  SVN/Laos.

[d]  Order  the  VC/PL  to  stop  their  insurgencies.

[e]  Stop  propaganda  broadcasts  to  South  Vietnam.

[f]  Remove  VM  forces  and  cadres  from  SVN  and  Laos.

[g]  See  that  VC/PL  stop  incidents  in  SVN  and  Laos.

[h]  See  that  VC/PL  cease  resistance.

[i]  See  that  VC/PL  turn  in  weapons  and  bases.


700 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  HI

[j]  See  that  VC/PL  surrender  for  amnesty/expatriation.
(2)  What  GVN/US  could  give:

[a]  Stop  (or  not  increase)  air  strikes  on  DRV.

[b]  Remove  (or  not  increase)  US  troops  in  SVN.

[c]  Rice  supply  to  DRV.

[d]  Assurance  that  US/GVN  have  no  designs  on  NVN.

[e]  Assurance  that  US/GVN  will  not  demand  public  renunciation
by  DRV  of  Communist  goals.

[f]  Assurance  that  "peaceful  coexistence"  (e.g.,  continuation  of  Red
propaganda  in  SVN)  is  acceptable.

[g]  Capitulation:  Leftists  in  GVN,  coalition  government,  and  even-
tual incorporation  of  SVN  into  DRV.

b.  Possible  outcomes.

(1)  Pacified  non-Communist  South  Vietnam.

(2)  "Laotian"  solution,  with  areas  of  de  facto  VC  dominion,  a  "gov-
ernment of  national  unity,"  and  a  Liberation  Front  ostensibly  weaned
from  DRV  control.

(3)  Explicit  partition  of  SVN,  with  each  area  under  a  separate  govern-
ment.

(4)  A  "semi-equilibrium" — a  slow-motion  war — with  slowly  shifting
GVN-VC  lines.

(5)  Loss  of  SVN  to  the  DRV.

c.  Techniques  to  minimize  impact  of  bad  outcomes.  If /when  it  is  estimated
that  even  the  best  US/GVN  efforts  mean  failure  ("flash"  or  defeat),  it
will  be  important  to  act  to  minimize  the  after-damage  to  US  effectiveness
and  image  by  steps  such  as  these:

(1)  Publicize  uniqueness  and  congenital  impossibility  of  SVN  case  (e.g.,
Viet  Minh  held  much  of  SVN  in  1954,  long  sieve-like  borders,  un-
favorable terrain,  no  national  tradition,  few  administrators,  mess
left  by  French,  competing  factions.  Red  LOC  advantage,  late  US
start,  etc.) .

(2)  Take  opportunity  offered  by  next  coup  or  GVN  anti-US  tantrum
to  "ship  out"  (coupled  with  advance  threat  to  do  so  if  they  fail  to
"shape  up"?) .

(3)  Create  diversionary  "offensives"  elsewhere  in  the  world  (e.g.,  to
shore  up  Thailand,  Philippines,  Malaysia,  India,  Australia;  to  launch
an  "anti-poverty"  program  for  underdeveloped  areas).

(4)  Enter  multi-nation  negotiations  calculated  to  shift  opinions  and
values.

d.  Risks:  With  the  physical  situation  and  the  trends  as  they  are,  the  risk  is
overwhelming  that  an  exit  negotiated  now  would  result  in  humiliation  for
the  US.

10.  Evaluation:  It  is  essential — however  badly  SEA  may  go  over  the  next  1-3
years — that  US  emerge  as  a  "good  doctor."  We  must  have  kept  promises,  been
tough,  taken  risks,  gotten  bloodied,  and  hurt  the  enemy  very  badly.  We  must
avoid  harmful  appearances  which  will  affect  judgments  by,  and  provide  pretexts
to,  other  nations  regarding  how  the  US  will  behave  in  future  cases  of  particular
interest  to  those  nations — regarding  US  policy,  power,  resolve  and  competence  to
deal  with  their  problems.  In  this  connection,  the  relevant  audiences  are  the
Communists  (who  must  feel  strong  pressures),  the  South  Vietnamese  (whose


Documents  701


morale  must  be  buoyed),  our  allies  (who  must  trust  us  as  "underwriters")  and
the  US  public  (which  must  support  our  risk-taking  with  US  lives  and  prestige).

a.  Urgency.  If  the  strike-North  program  (para  7)  is  not  altered:  we  will
reach  the  MIG  Phuc  Yen  flash  point  in  approximately  one  month.  If  the
program  is  altered  only  to  stretch  out  the  crescendo:  up  to  3  months  may
be  had  before  that  flash  point,  at  the  expense  of  a  less  persuasive  squeeze.
If  the  program  is  altered  to  "plateau"  or  dampen  the  strikes:  much  of
their  negotiating  value  will  be  lost.  (Furthermore,  there  is  now  a  hint  of
flexibility  on  the  Red  side:  The  Soviets  are  struggling  to  find  a  Gordian
knot-cutter;  the  Chicoms  may  be  wavering  (Paris  5326).)

b.  Possible  course:

(1)  Redouble  efforts  inside  SVN  (get  better  organized  for  it).

(2)  Prepare  to  deploy  US  combat  troops  in  phases,  starting  with  one
Army  division  at  Pleiku  and  a  Marine  MEF  at  Danang.

(3)  Stretch  out  strike-North  program,  postponing  Phuc  Yen  until  June
(exceed  flash  points  onlv  in  specific  retaliations).

(4)  Initiate  talks  along  the  following  lines,  bearing  in  mind  that  formal
partition,  or  even  a  "Laos'"  partition,  is  out  in  SVN;  we  must  break
the  VC  back  or  work  out  an  accommodation.

PHASE  ONE  TALKS:

(A)  When:  Now,  before  an  avoidable  flash  point.

(B)  Who:  US-USSR,  perhaps  also  US-India.  (Not  with  China  or  Lib-
eration Front;  not  through  UK  or  France  or  U  Thant;  keep  alert
to  possibility  that  GVN  officials  are  talking  under  the  table.)

(C)  How:  With  GVN  consent,  private,  quiet  (refuse  formal  talks).

(D)  What:

(1)  Offer  to  stop  strikes,  on  DRV  and  withhold  deployment  of  large
US  forces  in  trade  for  DRV  stoppage  of  infiltration,  com-
munications to  VC,  and  VC  attacks,  sabotage  and  terrorism,
and  for  withdrawal  of  named  units  in  SVN.

(2)  Compliance  would  be  policed  unilaterally.  If,  as  is  likely,  com-
plete compliance  by  the  DRV  is  not  forthcoming,  we  would
carry  out  occasional  strikes.

(3)  We  make  clear  that  we  are  not  demanding  cessation  of  Red
propaganda  nor  a  public  renunciation  by  Hanoi  of  its  doctrines.

(4)  Regarding  "defensive"  VC  attacks — i.e.,  VC  defending  VC-
held  areas  from  encroaching  ARVN  forces — we  take  the  pub-
lic position  that  AR\'N  forces  must  be  free  to  operate  through-
out SVN,  especially  in  areas  where  amnesty  is  offered  (but  in
fact,  discretion  will  be  exercised).

(5)  Terrorism  and  sabotage,  however,  must  be  dampened  markedly
throughout  the  country,  and  civilian  administrators  must  be
free  to  move  and  operate  freely,  certainly  in  so-called  contested
areas  (and  perhaps  even  in  VC  base  areas).

PHASE  TWO  TALKS:

(A)  When:  At  the  end  of  Phase  One.

(B)  Who:  All  interested  nations.

(C)  How:  Publicly  in  large  conference.

(D)  What:

(1)  Offer  to  remove  US  combat  forces  from  South  Vietnam  in
exchange  for  repatriation  (or  regroupment?)  of  DRV  infiltra-


702 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  III

tors  and  for  erection  of  international  machinery  to  verify  the
end  of  infiltration  and  communication.

(2)  Offer  to  seek  to  determine  the  will  of  the  people  under  inter-
national supervision,  with  an  appropriate  reflection  of  those
who  favor  the  \C.

(3)  Any  recognition  of  the  Liberation  Front  would  have  to  be
accompanied  by  disarming  the  VC  and  at  least  avowed  VC  in-
dependence from  DRV  control.

PHASE  THREE  TALKS:  Avoid  any  talks  regarding  the  future  of  all

of  Southeast  Asia.  Thailand's  future  should
not  be  up  for  discussion;  and  we  have  the
1954  and  1962  Geneva  Accords  covering  the
rest  of  the  area.

c.  Special  Points:

(1)  Play  on  DRV's  fear  of  China.

(2)  To  show  good  will,  suspend  strikes  on  North  for  a  few  days  if  re-
quested by  Soviets  during  efforts  to  mediate.

(3)  Have  a  contingency  plan  prepared  to  evacuate  US  personnel  in  case
a  para-9-type  situation  arises.

(4)  If  the  DRV  will  not  "play"  the  above  game,  we  must  be  prepared

[a]  to  risk  passing  some  flash  points,  in  the  Strike-North  program,

[b]  to  put  more  US  troops  into  SVN,  and  or  [c]  to  reconsider  our
minimum  acceptable  outcome.


[Document  254]

THE  WHITE  HOUSE
WASHINGTON

April  6,  1965

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  328

MEMORANDUM  FOR

THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE

THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

THE  DIRECTOR  OF  CENTRAL  INTELLIGENCE

On  Thursday,  April  1,  the  President  made  the  following  decisions  with  respect  to
Vietnam :

1 .  Subject  to  modifications  in  the  light  of  experience,  and  to  coordination  and
direction  both  in  Saigon  and  in  Washington,  the  President  approved  the  41 -point
program  of  non-military  actions  submitted  by  Ambassador  Taylor  in  a  memoran-
dum dated  March  31,  1965.

2.  The  President  gave  general  approval  to  the  recommendations  submitted  by
Mr.  Rowan  in  his  report  dated  March  16,  with  the  exception  that  the  President
withheld  approval  of  any  request  for  supplemental  funds  at  this  time — it  is  his
decision  that  this  program  is  to  be  energetically  supported  by  all  agencies  and
departments  and  by  the  repro^ramming  of  available  funds  as  necessary  within
USIA.

3.  The  President  approved  the  urgent  exploration  of  the  12  suggestions  for
covert  and  other  actions  submitted  by  the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence  under
date  of  March  31.


Documents  703


4.  The  President  repeated  his  earlier  approval  of  the  21 -point  program  of
military  actions  submitted  by  General  Harold  K.  Johnson  under  date  of  March
14  and  re-emphasized  his  desire  that  aircraft  and  helicopter  reinforcements
under  this  program  be  accelerated.

5.  The  President  approved  an  18-20,000  man  increase  in  U.S.  military  sup-
port forces  to  fill  out  existing  units  and  supply  needed  logistic  personnel.

6.  The  President  approved  the  deployment  of  two  additional  Marine  Battalions
and  one  Marine  Air  Squadron  and  associated  headquarters  and  support  elements.

7.  The  President  approved  a  change  of  mission  for  all  Marine  Battalions  de-
ployed to  Vietnam  to  permit  their  more  active  use  under  conditions  to  be  estab-
lished and  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  in  consultation  with  the  Secretary
of  State.

8.  The  President  approved  the  urgent  exploration,  with  the  Korean,  Australian,
and  New  Zealand  Governments,  of  the  possibility  of  rapid  deployment  of  sig-
nificant combat  elements  from  their  armed  forces  in  parallel  with  the  additional
Marine  deployment  approved  in  paragraph  6.

9.  Subject  to  continuing  review,  the  President  approved  the  following  general
framework  of  continuing  action  against  North  Vietnam  and  Laos:

We  should  continue  roughly  the  present  slowly  ascending  tempo  of  ROLLING
THUNDER  operations,  being  prepared  to  add  strikes  in  response  to  a  higher  rate
of  VC  operations,  or  conceivably  to  slow  the  pace  in  the  unlikely  event  VC
slacked  off  sharply  for  what  appeared  to  be  more  than  a  temporary  operational
lull.

The  target  systems  should  continue  to  avoid  the  effective  GCI  range  of  MIGs.
We  should  continue  to  vary  the  types  of  targets,  stepping  up  attacks  on  lines  of
communication  in  the  near  future,  and  possibly  moving  in  a  few  weeks  to  attacks
on  the  rail  lines  north  and  northeast  of  Hanoi.

Leaflet  operations  should  be  expanded  to  obtain  maximum  practicable  psycho-
logical effect  on  the  North  Vietnamese  population.

Blockade  or  aerial  mining  of  North  Vietnamese  ports  needs  further  study  and
should  be  considered  for  future  operations.  It  would  have  major  political  compli-
cations, especially  in  relation  to  the  Soviets  and  other  third  countries,  but  also
offers  many  advantages.

Air  operation  in  Laos,  particularly  route  blocking  operations  in  the  Panhandle
area,  should  be  stepped  up  to  the  maximum  remunerative  rate.

10.  Ambassador  Taylor  will  promptly  seek  the  reactions  of  the  South  Viet-
namese Government  to  appropriate  sections  of  this  program  and  their  approval  as
necessary,  and  in  the  event  of  disapproval  or  difficulty  at  that  end,  these  deci-
sions will  be  appropriately  reconsidered.  In  any  event,  no  action  into  Vietnam
under  paragraphs  -6  and  7  above  should  take  place  without  GVN  approval  or
further  Presidential  authorization.

11.  The  President  desires  that  with  respect  to  the  actions  in  paragraphs  5
through  7,  premature  publicity  be  avoided  by  all  possible  precautions.  The  ac-
tions themselves  should  be  taken  as  rapidly  as  practicable,  but  in  ways  that
should  minimize  any  appearance  of  sudden  changes  in  policy,  and  official  state-
ments on  these  troop  movements  will  be  made  only  with  the  direct  approval  of
the  Secretary  of  Defense,  in  consultation  with  the  Secretary  of  State.  The  Presi-
dent's desire  is  that  these  movements  and  changes  should  be  understood  as  being
gradual  and  wholly  consistent  with  existing  policy.

McGeorge  Biindy


704 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


[Document  255]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

April  17,  1965

FM:  AMEMBASSY  SAIGON

TO:  SECSTATE  IMMEDIATE  3423

EXDIS

This  message  undertakes  to  summarize  instructions  which  I  have  received  over
the  last  ten  days  with  regard  to  the  introduction  of  third-country  combat  forces
and  to  discuss  the  preferred  way  of  presenting  the  subject  to  the  GVN.

As  the  result  of  the  meeting  of  the  President  and  his  advisors  on  April  1  and
the  NSC  meeting  on  the  following  day,  I  left  Washington  and  returned  to  Saigon
with  the  understanding  that  the  reinforcement  of  the  Marines  already  ashore  by
two  additional  BLT's  and  a  F-4  squadron  and  the  progressive  introduction  of
IIAWPNPPP  support  forces  wefe  approved  but  that  decision  on  the  several  pro-
posals for  bringing  in  more  U.S.  combat  forces  and  their  possible  modes  of  em-
ployment was  withheld  in  an  offensive  counterinsurgency  role.  State  was  to  ex-
plore with  the  Korean,  Australian  and  New  Zealand  govts  the  possibility  of  rapid
deployment  of  significant  combat  elements  in  parallel  with  the  Marine  reinforce-
ment.

Since  arriving  home,  I  have  received  the  following  instructions  and  have  taken
the  indicated  actions  with  respect  to  third-country  combat  forces.

April  6  and  8.  Received  GVN  concurrence  to  introduction  of  the  Marine  re-
inforcements and  to  an  expanded  mission  for  all  Marines  in  Danang-Phu  Bai  area.

April  8.  Received  Deptel  2229  directing  approach  to  GVN,  suggesting  re-
quest to  Australian  govt  for  an  infantry  battalion  for  use  in  SVN.  While  await-
ing a  propitious  moment  to  raise  the  matter,  I  received  Deptel  2237  directing
approach  be  delayed  until  further  orders.  Nothing  further  has  been  received  since.

April  14.  I  learned  by  JCS  009012  to  Cincpac  of  apparent  decision  to  deploy
173rd  airborne  brigade  immediately  to  Bien  Hoa-Vung  Tau.  By  Embtel  3373,
delay  in  this  deployment  was  urgently  recommended  but  no  reply  has  been  re-
ceived. However,  Para  2  of  Doc  152339  apparently  makes  reference  to  this  project
in  terms  which  suggest  that  is  something  less  than  as  an  approved  immediate
action.  In  view  of  the  uncertainty  of  its  status,  I  have  not  broached  the  matter
with  Quat.

April  15.  Received  Deptel  2314  directing  that  embassy  Saigon  discuss  with
GVN  introduction  of  Rok  regimental  combat  team  and  suggest  GVN  request
such  a  force  Asap.  Because  of  Quat's  absence  from  Saigon,  I  have  not  been
able  to  raise  matter.  As  matter  of  fact,  it  should  not  be  raised  until  we  have  a
clear  concept  of  employment.

April  16.  I  have  just  seen  state-defense  message  Dod  152339  cited  above  which
indicates  a  favorable  attitude  toward  several  possible  uses  of  U.S.  combat  forces
beyond  the  NSC  decisions  of  April  2.  I  am  told  to  discuss  these  and  certain  other
non-military  matters  urgently  with  Quat.  The  substance  of  this  cable  will  be
addressed  in  a  separate  message.  I  can  not  raise  these  matters  with  Quat  without
further  guidance.

Faced  with  this  rapidly  changing  picture  of  Washington  desires,  and  intentions
with  regard  to  the  introduction  of  third-country  (as  well  as  U.S.)  combat  forces,
I  badly  need  a  clarification  of  our  purposes  and  objectives.  Before  I  can  present


I  Documents  705

our  case  to  GVN,  I  have  to  know  what  that  case  is  and  why.  It  is  not  going  to
be  easy  to  get  ready  concurrence  for  the  large-scale  introduction  of  foreign
troops  unless  the  need  is  clear  and  explicit.

Let  me  suggest  the  kind  of  instruction  to  the  AMB  which  it  would  be  most
)5 helpful  to  receive  for  use  in  presenting  to  GVN  what  I  take  to  be  a  new  policy
of  third-country  participation  in  ground  combat.

"The  use  has  completed  a  thorough  review  of  the  situation  in  SVN  both  in  its
national  and  international  aspects  and  has  reached  certain  important  conclusions.
It  feels  that  in  recent  weeks  there  has  been  a  somewhat  favorable  change  in  the
overall  situation  as  the  result  of  the  air  attacks  on  DRV,  the  relatively  small  but
:r numerous  successes  in  the  field  against  the  VC  and  the  encouraging  progress  of
:s the  Quat  govt.  However,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  clear  that,  in  all  probability,
the  primary  objective  of  the  GVN  and  the  USG  of  changing  the  will  of  the  DRV
J to  support  the  VC  insurgency  can  not  be  attained  in  an  acceptable  time-frame  by
j[ the  methods  presently  employed.  The  air  campaign  in  the  North  must  be  supple-
mented by  signal  successes  against  the  VC  on  the  South  before  we  can  hope  to
create  that  frame  of  mind  in  Hanoi  which  will  lead  to  the  decisions  we  seek.

"The  JCS  have  reviewed  the  military  resources  which  will  be  available  in  SVN
by  the  end  of  1 965  and  have  concluded  that  even  with  an  attainment  of  the  high-
est feasible  mobilization  goals,  ARVN  will  have  insufficient  forces  to  carry  out  the
1  kind  of  successful  campaign  against  the  VC  which  is  considered  essential  for  the
purposes  discussed  above.  If  the  ground  war  is  not  to  drag  into  1966  and  even
beyond,  they  consider  it  necessary  to  reinforce  GVN  ground  forces  with  about  23
battalion  equivalents  in  addition  to  the  forces  now  being  recruited  in  SVN.  Since
these  reinforcements  can  not  be  raised  by  the  GVN,  they  must  inevitably  come
from  third-country  sources.

"The  USG  accepts  the  validity  of  this  reasoning  of  the  JCS  and  offers  its  as-
sistance to  the  GVN  to  raise  these  additional  forces  for  the  purpose  of  bringing
the  VC  insurgency  to  an  end  in  the  shortest  possible  time.  We  are  prepared  to
bring  in  additional  U.S.  ground  forces  provided  we  can  get  a  reasonable  degree
of  participation  from  other  third  countries.  If  the  GVN  will  make  urgent  repre-
sentations to  them,  we  believe  it  entirely*  possible  to  obtain  the  following  contribu-
tions; Korea,  one  regimental  combat  team;  Australia,  one  infantry  battalion;  New
Zealand,  one  battery  and  one  company  of  tanks;  PI,  one  battalion.  If  forces  of
the  foregoing  magnitude  are  forthcoming,  the  USG  is  prepared  to  provide  the
remainder  of  the  combat  reinforcements  as  well  as  the  necessary  logistic  person-
nel to  support  the  third-country  contingents.  Also  it  will  use  its  good  offices  as
desired  in  assisting  the  GVN  approach  to  these  govts.

"You  (the  Ambassador)  will  seek  the  concurrence  of  the  GVN  to  the  foregoing
I  program,  recognizing  that  a  large  number  of  questions  such  as  command  rela-
tionships, concepts  of  employment  and  disposition  of  forces  must  be  worked  out
!  subsequently."  Armed  with  an  instruction  such  as  the  foregoing,  I  would  feel
I  adequately  equipped,to  initiate  what  may  be  a  sharp  debate  with  the  GVN.  I  need
I  something  like  this  before  taking  up  the  pending  troop  matters  with  Quat.


[Document  256]

21  April  1965:  W.  Bundy,  JTM  and  I  met  with  Amb  Taylor,  Wheeler,  Sharp  and
Westmoreland  in  Honolulu  on  April  20.  Following  is  my  report  of  that  meeting.

1.  None  of  them  expects  the  VC  to  capitulate  or  to  come  to  a  position  accept-
able to  us,  in  less  than  six  months.  This  is  because  they  believe  that  a  settlement


706 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

will  come  as  much  or  more  from  VC  failure  in  the  South  as  from  DRV  pain  in
the  North,  and  that  it  will  take  more  than  six  months,  perhaps  a  year  or  two,  to
demonstrate  VC  failure  in  the  South.

2.  With  respect  to  strikes  against  the  North,  they  all  think  that  the  present
tempo  is  about  right,  that  sufficient  increasing  pressure  is  provided  by  repetition
and  continuation.  All  of  them  envisioned  a  strike  program  continuing  at  least  six
months,  perhaps  a  year  or  more,  avoiding  the  Hanoi-Haiphong-Phuc  Yen  areas
during  that  period.  There  might  be  fewer  fixed  targets,  or  more  restrikes,  or  more
armed  reconnaissance  missions.  Amb  Taylor  stated  what  appears  to  be  a  shared
view;  that  it  is  important  not  to  "kill  the  hostage"  by  destroying  the  NVNese
assets  inside  the  "Hanoi  donut."  They  all  believe  that  the  strike  program  is  essen-
tial to  our  campaign — both  psychologically  and  physically — but  that  it  cannot
be  expected  to  do  the  job  alone.  They  all  considered  it  very  important  that
strikes  against  the  North  be  continued  during  any  talks.

3.  None  of  them  sees  a  dramatic  improvement  in  the  South  in  the  immediate
future.  Their  strategy  for  "victory"  over  time,  is  to  break  the  will  of  the  DRV  ^VC
by  depriving  them  of  victory.  Amb  Taylor  put  it  in  terms  of  a  demonstration  of
Communist  impotence,  which  will  lead  eventually  to  a  political  solution.  They  see
slow  improvement  in  the  South,  but  all  emphasized  the  critical  importance  of
holding  on  and  avoiding — for  psychological  and  morale  reasons — a  spectacular
defeat  of  GVN  or  US  forces.  And  they  all  suspect  that  the  recent  VC  lull  is  but
the  quiet  before  a  storm.

4.  To  bolster  the  GVN  forces  while  they  are  building  up,  they  all  recommend
the  following  deployments  in  addition  to  the  2000  Koreans  and  33,500  US  troops
already  in-country  (including  the  4  Marine  battalions  at  Danang-Hue) :

(13  US  battalions:  82,000;  ROK  and  ANZAC  4  bns:  7250.  Possible  later  de-
ployments, not  recommended  now;  US  Airmobile  div  (15,800),  rest  of  Korean
division,  rest  of  MEF  24,800).

McNamara


707


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements


CONTENTS
Summary {page  710)

JOHNSON  ADMINISTRATION
1964

Public  Statement  1 ( page  711)

Secretary  Rusk  stated,  "Our  troops  are  there  assisting  the  South  Vietnamese  be-
cause people  in  the  north  have  been  putting  pressures  on  Southeast  Asia."

Public  Statement  2 {page  712)

President  Johnson  expresses  support  of  President  Kennedy's  belief  in  the  "domino
theory."

Public  Statement  3 {page  7 12)

Secretary  McNamara  cites  organized  aggression  from  NVN  as  requiring  U.S.  to
fulfill  its  SEATO  commitment.  He  emphasizes  the  strategic  significance  of  South-
east Asia  in  the  forward  defense  flank  and  the  importance  of  meeting  squarely  the
"test  case  for  the  new  Communist  strategy,"  wars  of  liberation.

Public  State  men  t  4 {page  715)

Ambassador  Stevenson  stresses  the  point  that  the  U.S.  presence  in  Vietnam  is
in  response  to  request  from  government  of  South  Vietnam  to  assist  in  combating
aggression  from  the  North.

Public  Statement  5 ( page  71 7 )

Secretary  McNamara  discusses  the  forward  defense  nations  and  their  relationship
to  U.S.  security.

Public  Statement  6 {page  717)

Secretary  Rusk  states  that  withdrawal  from  Vietnam  would  result  in  "a  drastic
loss  of  confidence  jn  the  will  and  capacity  of  the  free  world  to  oppose  aggression."

Public  State  men  t  7 { page  71 8 )

President  Johnson  cites  four  basic  themes:  (1 )  America  keeps  her  word;  (2)  the
issue  is  the  future  of  Southeast  Asia;  (3)  our  purpose  is  peace  and  (4)  this  is  a
struggle  for  freedom.

Public  Statement  8 {page  718)

President  Johnson  tells  the  nation,  "Aggression  by  terror  against  the  peaceful
villagers  of  South  Vietnam  has  now  been  joined  by  open  aggression  on  the  high
seas  against  the  United  States  of  America."

Public  Statement  9 {page  718)

President  Johnson  cites  aggression,  the  commitments  of  his  predecessors,  SEATO,


708 Gravel  Edition/ The  Pentagon  Papers  .Vol.  Ill


the  attack  on  the  Maddox  and  our  established  pohcy  of  assisting  countries  vic-
timized bv  aggression  as  leading  to  U.S.  actions.

Public  Statement  10 ( page  720  )

President  Johnson  recalls  SEATO  commitment  to  South  Vietnam  in  address  to
Congress:  he  stressed  consistency  in  U.S.  policy  as  enunciated  on  June  2  (D-7  ).

Public  Statement  11 {page  721  )

Secretary  Rusk  explains  swiftness  of  U.S.  response  to  Gulf  of  Tonkin  attack  as
necessitated  by  act  of  war  and  the  importance  of  conveying  to  Hanoi  the  serious-
ness of  the  situation.

Public  Statement  12 ( page  722  )

Gulf  of  Tonkin  resolution  cites  the  attack  on  an  American  ship  in  combination
with  aggressive  acts  of  NX'N  in  S\'N  as  justifying  "all  necessary  measures  to
repel  any  armed  attack  against  the  forces  of  the  U.S.  and  to  prevent  further
aggression."

Public  Statement  13 (page  722 )

Secretary  Rusk  slates,  "...  South  Vietnam  is  a  critical  test-case  for  new  Com-
munist strategv."

Public  Statement  14 (page  723  )

William  Bundy  relates  the  fall  of  S\'N  and  the  success  of  the  wars  of  liberation
strategy  to  the  future  of  other  Asian  countries,  including  India  and  Japan,  Aus-
tralia and  the  underdeveloped  nations  throughout  the  world.

Public  Statement  15 (page  723 )

Secretars  Rusk  suggests  that  U.S.  securitv  is  threatened  bv  persistent  aggression
which  remains  unchecked:  while  not  supporting  the  "domino  theory**  designation,
he  points  out  the  Communist  appetite  for  revolution  as  expressed  in  their  procla-
mations.

1965

Public  Statement  1 6 i page  725 )

Secretary  Rusk  again  suggests  one  does  not  need  the  domino  theory  to  predict
Communist  threat;  Peiping  proclamations  and  actions  provide  ample  evidence  of
expansionist  doctrine:  relates  validitv  of  NATO  commitment  to  U.S.  response  to
aggressive  acts  to  a  SEATO  protocol  state.

Public  Statement  1 7 (  page  725 )

President  Johnson  emphasizes  again  U.S.  presence  in  response  to  request  from
S\  N  to  help  meet  aggression  and  its  relation  to  U.S.  security  interests.

Public  Statement  18 i  page  725 )

William  Bundv  relates  actions  in  Korea  to  spells  out  action  initiated  in  1954
bv  President  Eisenhower  and  the  support  provided  by  Congress  in  terms  of
SEATO  ratification  and  budget  approvals.  He  cites  effect  of  the  outcome  of  VN
struggle  on  neighboring  stales  and  on  the  prestige  and  power  of  the  Communist
movement's  new  strategy,  wars  of  liberation.

Public  Statement  19 {page  727)

William  Bundy  cites  the  U.S.'s  intent  to  permit  nations  lo  develop  freely  the  po-
tential consequences  to  neighboring  countries  if  SVN  should  fall  under  Communist


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  709

control  and  the  importance  of  demonstrating  that  "wars  of  Hberation"  are  not
to  be  tolerated  as  paramount  among  U.S.  concerns.

Public  Statement  20 {page  727)

Secretary  Rusk  states  the  legal  basis  of  U.S.  bombing  to  be  "self  defense  of  SVN
and  the  commitments  of  U.S.  with  respect  to  the  security  and  self-defense  of
SVN."

Public  Statement  21 (page  727)

Ambassador  Stevenson  cites  record  of  aggression  in  SVN  in  communication  to
UN.

Public  Statement  22 (page  729)

Secretary  Rusk  refers  to  lessons  of  World  War  II  and  SEATO  pact  as  important
reasons  for  meeting  aggression  in  SVN  before  it  spreads  further.

Public  Statement  23 (page  729)

Department  of  State  statement  cites  Constitutional  authority  of  President  to  meet
obligation  under  SEATO  in  response  to  aggression  in  SVN.

Public  Statement  24 (page  730)

President  Johnson  relates  aggression  in  SVN  as  "part  of  wider  pattern  of  aggres-
sive purposes"  urged  on  by  Peiping;  vows  to  fulfill  U.S.  commitment  supported  by
his  three  predecessors.

Public  Statement  25 (page  731 )

Leonard  Unger  emphasizes  strategic  significance  of  region  to  U.S.  and  "test  case
for  wars  of  liberation"  strategy  in  explaining  U.S.  concerns  in  VN.

Public  Statement  26 (page  733)

Secretary  Rusk  defines  "wars  of  liberation"  as  endorsed  by  Communist  leaders,
explains  SVN's  right  of  self-defense  in  legal  terms  and  details  the  nature  of  the
struggle  in  SVN.

Public  Statement  27 (page  736)

President  Johnson  cites  aggression  as  requiring  firm  stand  by  U.S.  Secretary
McNamara  in  response  to  a  question  defines  the  "wars  of  liberation"  strategy  as
urged  by  Communist  leaders.

Public  Statement  28 (page  737)

Secretary  Ball  cites  "wars  of  liberation"  as  threatening  the  existence  of  small  states
everywhere.

Public  Statement  29 (page  738)

President  Johnson  states  the  Communist  aim  in  VN  is  to  show  the  "American
commitment  is  worthless";  success  in  that  effort,  he  predicts,  would  remove  the
one  obstacle  standing  between  "expanding  communism  and  independent  Asian
nations."

Public  Statement  30 (page  738)

William  Bundy  explains  myths  surrounding  the  question  of  "reunification  elec-
tion" and  the  relationship  between  the  opposition  to  Diem  and  the  Viet  Cong;
he  documents  U.S.  concerns  regarding  the  "wars  of  liberation"  threat.

Public  Statement  31 (page  741)

President  Johnson  states  Communist  China's  "target  is  not  merely  SVN,  it  is


710 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

Asia"  and  their  objective  in  VN  is  "to  erode  and  to  discredit  America's  ability  to
help  prevent  Chinese  domination  over  all  of  Asia."

Public  Statement  32 {page  741 )

William  Bundy  discusses  the  threat  of  Communist  China  which  underlies  the
American  presence  in  Asia,  and  the  relationship  of  Hanoi  to  the  Communist
movement.

Public  Statement  33 ( page  743 )

President  Johnson  states  our  failures  in  the  1930's  resulted  from  inaction  rather
than  action.

JOHNSON  ADMINISTRATION

Summary

1964

President  Johnson  succeeded  to  the  Presidency  upon  the  assassination  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy  in  November  1963  only  three  weeks  after  the  coup  d'etat  which
saw  the  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  regime  crushed  and  Diem  himself  murdered.  Confronted
with  a  crisis,  the  U.S.  renewed  its  pledge  to  support  the  military  junta  and  the
free  government  of  Vietnam.  The  U.S.  increased  its  support  even  as  the  GVN
wavered  through  a  series  of  government  changes  each  reflecting  the  control  re-
tained by  the  military.  U.S.  involvement  deepened  with  the  increased  advisory
strength  and  the  introduction  of  combat  troops  in  1964.  The  Tonkin  Gulf  crisis
and  the  subsequent  resolution  became  benchmarks  for  the  U.S.  commitment.
The  new  Administration  emphasized  the  following  points:

a.  Organized  aggression  from  the  North  obligated  the  United  States  to  fulfill  its
commitments  under  the  SEATO  treaty.

b.  The  strategic  importance  of  Southeast  Asia  to  the  security  of  the  United
States  and  the  test  of  "wars  of  liberation"  there  as  important  to  the  future  peace
and  freedom  of  South  Vietnam.

c.  The  Gulf  of  Tonkin  action  showed  that  "aggression  by  terror"  had  been
joined  by  "open  aggression  on  the  high  seas"  against  the  United  States  and  the
resolution  which  followed  justified  measures  to  "repel  any  armed  attack."

d.  The  communist  "appetite  for  aggression"  through  "wars  of  liberation"
threatened  not  only  other  Asian  countries,  but  also  the  United  States  if  left  un-
checked. The  U.S.  seeks  no  wider  war.

e.  Four  basic  themes  govern  U.S.  policy,  essentially  unchanged  since  1954:
America  keeps  her  word;  the  future  of  Southeast  Asia  is  the  issue;  "our  purpose
is  peace;  and,  this  war  is  a  "struggle  for  freedom."

1965

The  level  of  war  was  escalated  by  introduction  of  increased  U.S.  combat  troop
strength  and  the  initiation  of  air  strikes  against  targets  in  North  Vietnam.  The
Administration  justified  the  escalation  on  the  basis  of  increased  infiltration  of
North  Vietnamese  units  into  South  Vietnam  and,  in  general,  justified  U.S.  in-
volvement using  much  the  same  rationale  as  the  Kennedy  Administration.  The
"domino  theory,"  however,  was  de-emphasized  in  light  of  communist  proclama-
tions and  predictions  for  success.  The  role  of  Communist  China  was  given  more
publicity.  The  Administration's  public  pronouncements  stressed  the  following:

a.  The  U.S.  had  been  committed  ten  years  before  and  had  pledged  help  to
the  people  of  South  Vietnam.  "Three  Presidents  have  supported  that  pledge"


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  711


and  it  would  not  be  broken.  The  "integrity  of  the  American  commitment"  is  at
the  heart  of  the  problem  as  a  point  of  national  honor.

b.  The  security  of  the  U.S.  was  tied  closely  to  the  expansion  of  communism  in
Southeast  Asia:  if  the  American  counterinsurgency  efl'orts  are  defeated  in  Viet-
nam, they  can  be  defeated  anywhere  in  the  world.  Failure  to  halt  aggression
through  "wars  of  national  liberation"  would  see  increasing  communist  pressure  on
neighboring  states  and  subsequently  greater  aggression.  "These  are  big  stakes  in-
deed."

c.  The  basic  issue  of  the  conflict  was  "letting  the  nations  of  the  area  develop
as  they  see  fit";  if  South  Vietnam  fell  to  communist  control  it  would  be  difficult
to  prevent  the  fall  of  neighboring  states.  The  "domino  theory"  was  not  considered
a  suitable  explanation  for  the  SEA  situation.

d.  "The  confused  nature  of  this  conflict  cannot  mask  the  fact  that  it  is  the
new  face  of  an  old  enemy.  Over  this  war — and  all  Asia — is  another  reality:  the
deepening  shadow  of  Communist  China.  The  rulers  in  Hanoi  are  urged  on  by
Peiping."

e.  South  Vietnam  represented  a  major  test  of  communism's  new  strategy
of  "wars  of  liberation."  Veiled  aggression  under  this  strategy  had  its  source  in
North  Vietnam — previously  a  privileged  sanctuary —  and  free  nations  had  to  de-
fend themselves.  "The  simple  issue  is  that  military  personnel  and  arms  have  been
sent  across  an  international  demarcation  line  contrary  to  international  agreements
and  law  ,  .  ."

Johnson  Administration

1. Secretary  Rusk  Interviewed  on  Voice  of  America,  15  February  1964,
Department  of  State  Bulletin,  2  March  1964,  p.  333:

Mr.  O'Neill:  "Well,  Hanoi  has  just  publicly  now  identified  itself  as  supporting
the  guerrillas  in  South  Vietnam  and  also  threatening  that  Red  China  would  inter-
vene in  any  action  against  North  Vietnam.  Do  you  see  any  connection  between
that  and  the  French  recognition,  or  do  you  think  this  is  an  isolated  development?"

Secretary  Rusk:  "I  haven't  seen  anything  that  would  lead  me  to  say  there  was
an  organic  connection  between  what  Hanoi  has  just  said  and  what  Paris  has  done.
It  is  true  that  Hanoi  has  made  no  secret  of  this  policy  since  1959.  They  have
publicly  declared  that  they  are  out  to  take  over  South  Vietnam,  and  in  this  same
statement  to  which  you  are  referring  they  made  it  very  clear  that  North  Vietnam
is  not  going  to  be  neutralized  and  that  their  interest  in  South  Vietnam  is  not  so
much  neutrality  as  taking  it  over.  So  I  think  the  issues  have  been  drawn  very
clearly  out  there."

Mr.  O'Neill:  "While  we  are  on  that  area,  how  is  the  fighting  in  South  Vietnam?
Are  we  going  to  be  able  to  win  out,  and  do  you  have  any  idea  as  to  how  soon
that  might  be?"

Secretary  Rusk:  "Well,  I  think  we  will  have  to  wait  a  bit  before  we  can  speak
with  complete  confidence  about  it  in  the  short  run.  In  the  long  run,  I  have  no
doubt  that  the  resources,  the  will,  the  material  are  present  in  South  Vietnam  to
enable  the  South  Vietnamese  to  do  this  job.  We  are  determined  that  Southeast
Asia  is  not  going  to  be  taken  over  by  the  communists.  We  must  insist  that  these
basic  accords  be  adhered  to.  And  so  we  are  in  this  to  the  point  where  the  South
Vietnamese  are  going  to  be  independent  and  secure."


712 Gravel  Edition/ The  Peniagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

Mr.  Ward:  "Mr.  Secretary.  I  wish  you'd  say  something  about  this  word  "neu-
traUzation' — not  whether  Southeast  Asia  or  some  parts  thereof  should  be  neutral-
ized, but  what  the  word  itself  means.  It  seems  to  me  there  is  a  great  deal  of
misunderstanding  that  flows  from  varied  uses  of  the  word.""

Secretary  Rusk:  "Well,  the  word  gets  confused  because  it  has  meant  so  many
different  things  to  different  people.  I  suppose  in  the  strictest  sense  a  neutral  is,  in
time  of  peace,  a  so-called  "unaUgned"  country,  that  it  is  not  committed  to  one  of
the  two  major  power  blocs  in  the  world,  the  NATO  bloc  or  the  communist  bloc.

"Well.  now.  we  don't  object  to  neutrals  or  policies  of  neutrality  or  neutraliza-
tion in  that  sense.  There  are  a  great  many  countries  who  are  unaligned  with  whom
we  have  very  close  and  friendly  relations.  We  are  not  looking  for  allies.  We  are
not  looking  for  military  bases  out  in  Southeast  Asia.  We  are  not  even  looking  for
a  military  presence  in  that  part  of  the  world.

"Our  troops  are  there  assisting  the  South  \'ietnamese  because  people  in  the
north  have  been  putting  pressures  on  Southeast  Asia.  If  those  pressures  did  not
exist,  those  troops  wouldn't  be  there.  But  when  one  talks  about  neutralizing  South
\'ietnam  in  the  present  context,  this  means,  really,  getting  the  Americans  out.
That  is  all  that  that  means.

"Now.  North  N'ietnam  is  not  going  to  be  neutralized.  It's  going  to  remain  a
member  of  the  communist  camp.  And  from  the  time  that  it  was  established,
North  X'ietnam  has  broken  agreements  and  has  applied  pressure  on  its  neighbors,
particularly  Laos  and  South  Vietnam.  So  that  if  anyone  has  in  mind  that  South
Metnam  should  be  neutralized,  meaning  that  Americans  should  simply  go  home
and  leave  it  exposed  to  takeover  from  the  north,  then  this  isn't  going  to  happen.

"Now.  if  South  N'ietnam  were  independent  and  secure,  it  would  be  perfectly
free  to  pursue  its  own  policv.  It  can  be  unaligned,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned."

*  *  *

2.  rr  Interview  with  President  Johnson,  15  March  1964.  Public  Papers  of  The
Presidents,  Johnson.  1963-64,  p.  370:

Mr.  Sevareid:  *'Mr.  Kennedy  said,  on  the  subject  of  \^ietnam.  I  think,  that  he
did  believe  in  the  falling  domino'  theory,  that  if  Vietnam  were  lost,  that  other
countries  in  the  area  would  soon  be  lost."

The  President:  "I  think  it  would  be  a  ver\  dangerous  thing,  and  I  share  Presi-
dent Kennedy's  view,  and  I  think  the  whole  of  Southeast  Asia  would  be  involved
and  that  would  involve  hundreds  of  millions  of  people,  and  I  think  it's — it  cannot
be  ignored,  we  must  do  everMhing  that  we  can.  we  must  be  responsible,  we  must
stay  there  and  help  them,  and  that  is  what  we  are  going  to  do."

*  *  *

3.  "L'niicd  States  Policy  in  Vietnam,"  by  Robert  S.  McNamara,  Secretary  of
Defense,  26  March  1964.  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  13  April  1964,  p.
562:

*  «  *

"At  the  Third  National  Congress  of  the  Lao  Dong  (Communist)  Party  in  Hanoi,
September  1960.  North  N'ietnam's  belligerency  was  made  explicit.  Ho  Chi  Minh
stated.  'The  North  is  becoming  more  and  more  consolidated  and  transformed  into
a  firm  base  for  the  struggle  for  national  reunification.'  At  the  same  congress  it


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  713

was  announced  that  the  party's  new  task  was  'to  liberate  the  South  from  the
atrocious  rule  of  the  U.S.  imperialists  and  their  henchmen.'  In  brief,  Hanoi  was
about  to  embark  upon  a  program  of  wholesale  violations  of  the  Geneva  agree-
ments in  order  to  wrest  control  of  South  Vietnam  from  its  legitimate  government.

"To  the  communists,  liberation'  meant  sabotage,  terror,  and  assassination:  at-
tacks on  innocent  hamlets  and  villages  and  the  coldblooded  murder  of  thousands
of  schoolteachers,  health  workers,  and  local  officials  who  had  the  misfortune  to
oppose  the  communist  version  of  'liberation.'  In  1960  and  1961  almost  3,000
South  Vietnamese  civilians  in  and  out  of  government  were  assassinated  and  an-
other 2,500  were  kidnaped.  The  communists  even  assassinated  the  colonel  who
served  as  liaison  officer  to  the  International  Control  Commission.

'This  aggression  against  South  Vietnam  was  a  major  communist  effort,  meticu-
lously planned  and  controlled,  and  relentlessly  pursued  by  the  government  in
Hanoi.  In  1961  the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  unable  to  contain  the  menace  by  itself,
appealed  to  the  United  States  to  honor  its  unilateral  declaration  of  1954.  Presi-
dent Kennedy  responded  promptly  and  affirmatively  by  sending  to  that  country
additional  American  advisers,  arms,  and  aid.

U.S.  Objectives:

"I  turn  now  to  a  consideration  of  United  States  objectives  in  South  Vietnam.
The  United  States  has  no  designs  whatever  on  the  resources  or  territory  of  the
area.  Our  national  interests  do  not  require  that  South  Vietnam  serve  as  a  Western
base  or  as  a  member  of  a  Western  alliance.  Our  concern  is  threefold.

"First,  and  most  important,  is  the  simple  fact  that  South  Vietnam,  a  member
of  the  free  world  family,  is  striving  to  preserve  its  independence  from  communist
attack.  The  Vietnamese  have  asked  our  help.  We  have  given  it.  We  shall  continue
to  give  it.

"We  do  so  in  their  interest;  and  ^e  do  so  in  our  own  clear  self-interest.  For
basic  to  the  principles  of  freedom  and  self-determination  which  have  sustained
our  country  for  almost  two  centuries  is  the  right  of  peoples  everywhere  to  live
and  develop  in  peace.  Our  own  security  is  strengthened  by  the  determination  of
others  to  remain  free,  and  by  our  commitment  to  assist  them.  We  will  not  let  this
member  of  our  family  down,  regardless  of  its  distance  from  our  shores.

"The  ultimate  goal  of  the  United  States  in  Southeast  Asia,  as  in  the  rest  of  the
world,  is  to  help  maintain  free  and  independent  nations  which  can  develop  politi-
cally, economically,  and  socially  and  which  can  be  responsible  members  of  the
world  community.  In  this  region  and  elsewhere  many  peoples  share  our  sense  of
the  value  of  such  freedom  and  independence.  They  have  taken  the  risks  and  made
the  sacrifices  linked  to  the  commitment  to  membership  in  the  family  of  the  free
world.  They  have  done  this  in  the  belief  that  we  would  back  up  our  pledges  to
help  defend  them.  It  is  not  right  or  even  expedient — nor  is  it  in  our  nature — to
abandon  them  when  the  going  is  difficult.

"Second,  Southeast  Asia  has  great  strategic  significance  in  the  forward  defense
of  the  United  States.  Its  location  across  east-west  air  and  sea  lanes  flanks  the
Indian  subcontinent  on  one  side  and  Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  the  Philippines
on  the  other  and  dominates  the  gateway  between  the  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans.
In  communist  hands  this  area  would  pose  a  most  serious  threat  to  the  security  of
the  United  States  and  to  the  family  of  free-world  nations  to  which  we  belong.  To
defend  Southeast  Asia,  we  must  meet  the  challenge  in  South  Vietnam.

"And  third.  South  Vietnam  is  a  test  case  for  the  new  communist  strategy.  Let
me  examine  for  a  moment  the  nature  of  this  strategy.


714 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

"Just  as  the  Kennedy  administration  was  coming  into  office  in  January  1961,
Chairman  Khrushchev  made  one  of  the  most  important  speeches  on  communist
strategy  of  recent  decades.  In  his  report  on  a  party  conference  entitled  'For  New
Victories  of  the  World  Communist  Movement,'  Khrushchev  stated:  'In  modern
conditions,  the  following  categories  of  wars  should  be  distinguished:  world  wars,
local  wars,  liberation  wars  and  popular  uprising.'  He  ruled  out  what  he  called
'world  wars'  and  'local  wars'  as  being  too  dangerous  for  profitable  indulgence  in
a  world  of  nuclear  weapons.  But  with  regard  to  what  he  called  'liberation  wars,'
he  referred  specifically  to  Vietnam.  He  said,  'It  is  a  sacred  war.  We  recognize
such  wars  .  .  .'  "

* *  *

"President  Kennedy  and  President  Johnson  have  recognized,  however,  that  our
forces  for  the  first  two  types  of  wars  might  not  be  applicable  or  effective  against
what  the  communists  call  'wars  of  liberation,'  or  what  is  properly  called  covert
aggression  or  insurgency.  We  have  therefore  undertaken  and  continue  to  press  a
variety  of  programs  to  develop  skilled  specialists,  equipment,  and  techniques  to
enable  us  to  help  our  allies  counter  the  threat  of  insurgency.

"Communist  interest  in  insurgency  techniques  did  not  begin  with  Khrushchev,
nor  for  that  matter  with  Stalin.  Lenin's  works  are  full  of  tactical  instructions,
which  were  adapted  very  successfully  by  Mao  Tse-tung,  whose  many  writings  on
guerrilla  warfare  have  become  classic  references.  Indeed,  Mao  claims  to  be  the
true  heir  of  Lenin's  original  prescriptions  for  the  worldwide  victory  of  com-
munism. The  North  Vietnamese  have  taken  a  leaf  or  two  from  Mao's  book — as
well  as  Moscow's — and  added  some  of  their  own.

"Thus  today  in  Vietnam  we  are  not  dealing  with  factional  disputes  or  the
remnants  of  a  colonial  struggle  against  the  French  but  rather  with  a  major  test
case  of  communism's  new  strategy.  That  strategy  has  so  far  been  pursued  in
Cuba,  may  be  beginning  in  Africa,  and  failed  in  Malaya  and  the  Philippines  only
because  of  a  long  and  arduous  struggle  by  the  people  of  these  countries  with  assist-
ance provided  by  the  British  and  the  United  States.

"In  Southeast  Asia  the  communists  have  taken  full  advantage  of  geography —
the  proximity  to  the  communist  base  of  operations  and  the  rugged,  remote,  and
heavily  foliated  character  of  the  border  regions.  They  have  utilized  the  diverse
ethnic,  religious,  and  tribal  groupings  and  exploited  factionalism  and  legitimate
aspirations  wherever  possible.  And,  as  I  said  earlier,  they  have  resorted  to  sabo-
tage, terrorism,  and  assassination  on  an  unprecedented  scale.

"Who  is  the  responsible  party — the  prime  aggressor?  First  and  foremost,  with-
out doubt,  the  prime  aggressor  is  North  Vietnam,  whose  leadership  has  explicitly
undertaken  to  destroy  the  independence  of  the  South.  To  be  sure,  Hanoi  is  en-
couraged on  its  aggressive  course  by  Communist  China.  But  Peiping's  interest  is
hardly  the  same  as  that  of  Hanoi.

"For  Hanoi,  the  immediate  objective  is  limited:  conquest  of  the  South  and
national  unification,  perhaps  coupled  with  control  of  Laos.  For  Peiping,  however,
Hanoi's  victory  would  be  only  a  first  step  toward  eventual  Chinese  hegemony  over
the  two  Vietnams  and  Southeast  Asia  and  toward  exploitation  of  the  new
strategy  in  other  parts  of  the  world.

"Communist  China's  interests  are  clear:  It  has  publicly  castigated  Moscow  for
betraying  the  revolutionary  cause  whenever  the  Soviets  have  sounded  a  caution-
ary note.  It  has  characterized  the  United  States  as  a  paper  tiger  and  has  insisted
that  the  revolutionary  struggle  for  'liberation  and  unification'  of  Vietnam  could
be  conducted  without  risks  by,  in  effect,  crawling  under  the  nuclear  and  convcn-


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  715

tional  defense  of  the  free  world.  Peiping  thus  appears  to  feel  that  it  has  a  large
stake  in  demonstrating  the  new  strategy,  using  Vietnam  as  a  test  case.  Success  in
Vietnam  would  be  regarded  by  Peiping  as  vindication  for  China's  views  in  the
worldwide  ideological  struggle.

"Taking  into  account  the  relationship  of  Vietnam  to  Indochina — and  of  both
to  Southeast  Asia,  the  Far  East,  and  the  free  world  as  a  whole — five  U.S.  Presi-
dents have  acted  to  preserve  free-world  strategic  interests  in  the  area.  President
Roosevelt  opposed  Japanese  penetration  in  Indochina;  President  Truman  resisted
communist  aggression  in  Korea;  President  Eisenhower  backed  Diem's  efforts  to
save  South  Vietnam  and  undertook  to  defend  Taiwan;  President  Kennedy  stepped
up  our  counterinsurgency  effort  in  Vietnam;  and  President  Johnson,  in  addition
to  reaffirming  last  week  that  the  United  States  will  furnish  assistance  and  support
to  South  Vietnam  for  as  long  as  it  is  required  to  bring  communist  aggression  and
terrorism  under  control,  has  approved  the  program  that  I  shall  describe  in  a  few
minutes.

"The  U.S.  role  in  South  Vietnam,  then,  is  first,  to  answer  the  call  of  the  South
Vietnamese,  a  member  nation  of  our  free-world  family,  to  help  them  save  their
country  for  themselves;  second,  to  help  prevent  the  strategic  danger  which  would
exist  if  communism  absorbed  Southeast  Asia's  people  and  resources;  and  third,
to  prove  in  the  Vietnamese  test  case  that  the  free-world  can  cope  with  communist
'wars  of  liberation'  as  we  have  coped  successfully  with  communist  aggression  at
other  levels."

*  *  *

4.  "U.S.  Calls  for  Frontier  Patrol  to  Help  Prevent  Border  Incidents  Between
Cambodia  and  Vietnam."  Statement  by  Adlai  Stevenson  to  Security  Council,
21  May  1964,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  8  June  1964,  p.  908:

*  *  *

First,  the  United  States  had  no,  repeat  no,  national  military  objective  any-
where in  Southeast  Asia.  United  States  policy  for  Southeast  Asia  is  very  simple.
It  is  the  restoration  of  peace  so  that  the  peoples  of  that  area  can  go  about  their
own  independent  business  in  whatever  associations  they  may  freely  choose  for
themselves  without  interference  from  the  outside.

I  trust  my  words  have  been  clear  enough  on  this  point.

Second,  the  United  States  Government  is  currently  involved  in  the  affairs  of
the  Republic  of  Vietnam  for  one  reason  and  one  reason  only:  because  the  Re-
public of  Vietnam  requested  the  help  of  the  United  States  and  of  other  govern-
ments to  defend  jtself  against  armed  attack  fomented,  equipped,  and  directed
from  the  outside.

"This  is  not  the  first  time  that  the  United  States  Government  has  come  to  the
aid  of  peoples  prepared  to  fight  for  their  freedom  and  independence  against
armed  aggression  sponsored  from  outside  their  borders.  Nor  will  it  be  the  last
time  unless  the  lesson  is  learned  once  and  for  all  by  all  a^^ressors  that  armed
aggression  does  not  pay — that  it  no  longer  works — that  it  will  not  be  tolerated.

The  record  of  the  past  two  decades  makes  it  clear  that  a  nation  with  the  will
for  self-preservation  can  outlast  and  defeat  overt  or  clandestine  aggression — even
when  that  internal  aggression  is  heavily  supported  from  the  outside,  and  even
after  significant  early  successes  by  the  aggressors.  I  would  remind  the  members
that  in  1947,  after  the  aggressors  had  gained  control  of  most  of  the  country,
many  people  felt  that  the  cause  of  the  Government  of  Greece  was  hopelessly


716 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  III

lost.  But  as  long  as  the  people  of  Greece  were  prepared  to  fight  for  the  life  of
their  own  country,  the  United  States  was  not  prepared  to  stand  by  while  Greece
was  overrun.

This  principle  does  not  change  with  the  geographical  setting.  Aggression  is
aggression;  organized  violence  is  organized  violence.  Only  the  scale  and  the
scenery  change;  the  point  is  the  same  in  Vietnam  today  as  it  was  in  Greece
in  1947  and  in  Korea  in  1950.  The  Indochinese  Communist  Party,  the  parent
of  the  present  Communist  Party  in  North  Vietnam,  made  it  abundantly  clear
as  early  as  1951  that  the  aim  of  the  Vietnamese  Communist  leadership  is  to  take
control  of  all  of  Indochina.  This  goal  has  not  changed — it  is  still  clearly  the
objective  of  the  Vietnamese  Communist  leadership  in  Hanoi.

Hanoi  seeks  to  accomplish  this  purpose  in  South  Vietnam  through  subversive
guerrilla  warfare  directed,  controlled,  and  supplied  by  North  Vietnam.  The  com-
munist leadership  in  Hanoi  has  sought  to  pretend  that  the  insurgency  in  South
Vietnam  is  a  civil  war,  but  Hanoi's  hand  shows  very  clearly.  Public  statements
by  the  Communist  Party  in  North  Vietnam  and  its  leaders  have  repeatedly
demonstrated  Hanoi's  direction  of  the  struggle  in  South  Vietnam.  For  example,
Le  Duan,  First  Secretary  of  the  Party,  stated  on  September  5,  1960,  "At  present
our  Party  is  facing  [a]  momentous  task:  ...  to  strive  to  complete  .  .  .  revolu-
tion throughout  the  country  .  .  ."  He  also  said  this:  "The  North  is  the  com-
mon revolutionary  base  of  the  whole  country."  Three  months  after  the  Com-
munist Party  Congress  in  Hanoi  in  September  1960,  the  so-called  "National
Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South  Vietnam"  was  set  up  pursuant  to  plans  out-
lined publicly  at  that  Congress.

The  International  Control  Commission  in  Vietnam,  established  by  the  Geneva
accords  of  1954,  stated  in  a  special  report  which  it  issued  in  June  1962  that  there
is  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  North  Vietnam  has  violated  various  articles
of  the  Geneva  accords  by  its  introduction  of  armed  personnel,  arms,  munitions,
and  other  supplies  from  North  Vietnam  into  South  Vietnam  with  the  object  of
supporting,  organizing,  and  carrying  out  hostile  activities  against  the  Govern-
ment and  armed  forces  of  South  Vietnam.

Infiltration  of  military  personnel  and  supplies  from  North  Vietnam  to  South
Vietnam  has  been  carried  out  steadily  over  the  past  several  years.  The  total
number  of  military  cadres  sent  into  South  Vietnam  via  infiltration  routes  runs
into  the  thousands.  Such  infiltration  is  well  documented  on  the  basis  of  numerous
defectors  and  prisoners  taken  by  the  armed  forces  of  South  Vietnam.

Introduction  of  communist  weapons  into  South  Vietnam  has  also  grown  stead-
ily. An  increasing  amount  of  weapons  and  ammunition  captured  from  the  Viet
Cong  has  been  proven  to  be  of  Chinese  Communist  manufacture  or  origin.  For
example,  in  December  1963  a  large  cache  of  Viet  Cong  equipment  captured  in
one  of  the  Mekong  Delta  provinces  in  South  Vietnam  included  recoilless  rifles,
rocket  launchers,  carbines,  and  ammunition  of  Chinese  Communist  manufacture.

The  United  States  cannot  stand  by  while  Southeast  Asia  is  overrun  by  armed
aggressors.  As  long  as  the  peoples  of  that  area  are  determined  to  preserve  their
own  independence  and  ask  for  our  help  in  preserving  it,  we  will  extend  it.  This,
of  course,  is  the  meaning  of  President  Johnson's  request  a  few  days  ago  for
additional  funds  for  more  economic  as  well  as  military  assistance  for  Vietnam.

And  if  anyone  has  the  illusion  that  my  Government  will  abandon  the  people
of  Vietnam — or  that  we  shall  weary  of  the  burden  of  support  that  we  are  render-
ing these  people — it  can  only  be  due  to  ignorance  of  the  strength  and  the  con-
viction of  the  American  people.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  111

5.  "The  Defense  of  the  Free  World,"  Robert  S.  McNamara,  Secretary  of  De-
fense, before  the  National  Ind  Conf  Bd,  21  May  1964,  Department  of  State
Bulletin,  8  June  1964,  p.  895:

*  *  *
The  "Forward  Defense"  Nations:

Our  military  assistance  program  today  is  oriented  mainly  toward  those  coun-
tries on  the  periphery  of  the  major  communist  nations  where  the  threats  are
greatest  and  in  which  the  indigenous  resources  are  least.  In  the  fiscal  year  1965
program  now  before  the  Congress,  about  two-thirds  of  the  total  amount  is
scheduled  to  go  to  the  1 1  nations  on  the  southern  and  eastern  perimeters  of  the
Soviet  and  Red  Chinese  blocs.  These  sentinels  of  the  free  world,  in  a  sense,  are
in  double  jeopardy  from  potential  military  aggression  from  without  and  from
attempted  subversion  from  within.  These  countries  are  under  the  Red  shadow.
They  face  the  major  threat,  and  they  are  the  ones  most  affected  by  the  modern-
ization of  communist  forces.  For  this  group  we  requested  $745  million  in  mili-
tary assistance.  They  best  illustrate  the  points  I  want  to  make.

Imagine  a  globe,  if  you  will,  and  on  that  globe  the  Sino-Soviet  bloc.  The
bloc  is  contained  at  the  north  by  the  Arctic.  To  the  west  are  the  revitalized
nations  of  Western  Europe.  But  across  the  south  and  to  the  east  you  find
the  1 1  "forward  defense"  nations — Greece,  Turkey,  Iran,  Pakistan,  India,  Laos,
Thailand,  South  Vietnam,  the  Philippines,  and  the  Republics  of  China  and
Korea.  These  nations,  together  with  stretches  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  bearing  the
U.S.  Fleet,  describe  an  arc  along  which  the  free  world  draws  its  frontlines  of
defense.

The  frontlines  are  there  in  the  interests  of  those  1 1  nations;  the  lines  are  there
also  in  the  interests  of  the  United  .States  and  the  rest  of  the  free  world.  The
areas  which  this  11 -nation  arc  protects  are  of  obvious  strategic  importance  to
the  United  States.  More  significant,  however,  is  the  importance  of  the  arc  to  the
principle  that  nations  have  a  right  to  be  independent — a  right  to  develop  in
peace,  in  freedom,  and  according  to  the  principle  of  self-determination.  United
States  support  of  these  rights  at  the  frontiers  thickens  the  blood  of  the  free-world
family;  it  strengthens  our  security  at  home.

We  must  recognize,  however,  that  the  United  States  does  not  have  the  re-
sources to  maintain  a  credible  force  by  itself  along  all  of  this  great  arc  of  forward
positions.  Such  a  strategy  would  be  unbearably  costly  to  us  in  both  money  and
human  resources.  The  United  States  maintains  major  combat  units  ashore  in
forward  positions  only  in  Europe  and  in  parts  of  the  Far  East.  Such  deploy-
ments are  costly  .and  hurt  our  balance-of-payments  position.  We  do  not  now
contemplate  additional  semipermanent  deployments  of  forces  abroad.

*  *  *

6.  "Laos  and  Viet-Nam — A  Prescription  for  Peace,"  Address  by  Secretary  Rusk
before  the  American  Law  Institute,  Washington,  D.C.,  22  May  1964,  Depart-
ment of  State  Bulletin,  8  June  1964,  p.  890:

*  *  ♦

Four  Alternatives  in  Vietnam:

You  are  all  aware  of  the  four  principal  alternatives  in  South  Vietnam  which
have  been  referred  to  in  recent  discussion.  The  first  would  be  to  withdraw  and


718 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  111


forget  about  Southeast  Asia.  That  would  mean  not  only  grievous  losses  to  the
free  world  in  Southeast  and  southern  Asia  but  a  drastic  loss  of  confidence  in
the  will  and  capacity  of  the  free  world  to  oppose  aggression.  It  would  also  bring
us  much  closer  to  a  major  conflagration.  Surely  we  have  learned,  in  the  course
of  the  last  35  years,  that  a  course  of  aggression  means  war  and  that  the  place
to  stop  it  is  at  its  beginning.

*  *  *

At  the  meeing  of  the  Council  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organization  in
Manila  last  month,  seven  of  the  eight  members  joined  in  declaring  the  defeat
of  the  aggression  against  South  Vietnam  to  be  "essential  not  only  to  the  security
of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  but  to  that  of  Southeast  Asia."  And,  they  said,  its
defeat  will  also  be  convincing  proof  that  communist  expansion  by  such  tactics
will  not  be  permitted.

*  *  *

7.  "President  Outlines  Basic  Themes  of  U.S.  Policy  in  Southeast  Asia,"  State-
ment by  President  Johnson  at  his  News  Conference  on  June  2,  1964,  Depart-
ment of  State  Bulletin,  22  June  1964,  p.  953:

It  may  be  helpful  to  outline  four  basic  themes  that  govern  our  policy  in
Southeast  Asia.

First,  America  keeps  her  word.

Second,  the  issue  is  the  future  of  Southeast  Asia  as  a  whole.
Third,  our  purpose  is  peace.

Fourth,  this  is  not  just  a  jungle  war,  but  a  struggle  for  freedom  on  every
front  of  human  activity.

On  the  point  that  America  keeps  her  word,  we  are  steadfast  in  a  policy  which
has  been  followed  for  10  years  in  three  administrations.

*  *  *

8.  "Address  to  the  Nation  by  President  Johnson,"  4  August  1964,  Department
of  State  Bulletin,  24  August  1964.  p.  259:

*  *  *

In  the  larger  sense  this  new  act  of  aggression,  aimed  directly  at  our  own
forces,  again  brings  home  to  all  of  us  in  the  United  States  the  importance  of  the
struggle  for  peace  and  security  in  Southeast  Asia.  Aggression  by  terror  against
the  peaceful  villagers  of  South  Vietnam  has  now  been  joined  by  open  aggression
on  the  high  seas  against  the  United  States  of  America.

*  *  *

9.  ''Address  by  the  President,  Syracuse  University,  5  August  1964"  Depart-
ment of  State  Bulletin,  24  August  1964,  p.  260:

*  *  *

Aggression — deliberate,  willful,  and  systematic  aggression — has  unmasked  its
face  to  the  entire  world.  The  world  remembers — the  world  must  never  forget —
that  aggression  unchallenged  is  aggression  unleashed.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  719

We  of  the  United  States  have  not  forgotten.  That  is  why  we  have  answered
this  aggression  with  action.

America's  course  is  not  without  long  provocation.

For  10  years,  three  American  Presidents — President  Eisenhower,  President
Kennedy,  and  your  present  President — and  the  American  people  have  been
actively  concerned  with  threats  to  the  peace  and  security  of  the  peoples  of  South-
east Asia  from  the  communist  government  of  North  Vietnam.

President  Eisenhower  sought — and  President  Kennedy  sought — the  same  ob-
jectives that  I  still  seek:

— That  the  governments  of  Southeast  Asia  honor  the  international  agreements
which  applv  in  the  area;

— That  those  governments  leave  each  other  alone;

— That  they  resolve  their  differences  peacefully;

— That  they  devote  their  talents  to  bettering  the  lives  of  their  peoples  by
working  against  poverty  and  disease  and  ignorance.
In  1954  we  made  our  position  clear  toward  Vietnam.

In  July  of  that  vear  we  stated  we  would  view  anv  renewal  of  the  aggression
in  violation  of  the  1954  agreements  "with  grave  concern  and  as  seriously  threat-
ening international  peace  and  security.*"

In  September  of  that  year  the  United  States  signed  the  Manila  Pact,  on  which
our  participation  in  SEATO  is  based.  That  pact  recognized  that  aggression  by
means  of  armed  attack  on  South  Vietnam  would  endanger  the  peace  and  the
safetv  of  the  nations  signing  that  solemn  agreement.

In  1962  we  made  our  position  clear  toward  Laos.  We  signed  the  Declaration
on  the  Neutrality  of  Laos.  That  accord  provided  for  the  withdrawal  of  all  for-
eign forces  and  respect  for  the  neutrality  and  independence  of  that  little  country.

The  agreements  of  1954  and  1962  were  also  signed  by  the  government  of
North  Vietnam.

In  1954  that  government  pledged  that  it  would  respect  the  territory  under
the  military  control  of  the  other  partv  and  engage  in  no  hostile  act  against  the
other  party.

In  1962  that  government  pledged  that  it  would  "'not  introduce  into  the  King-
dom of  Laos  foreign  troops  or  military  personnel."

That  government  also  pledged  that  it  would  "not  use  the  territory  of  the
Kingdom  of  Laos  for  interference  in  the  internal  affairs  of  other  countries."

That  government  of  North  Vietnam  is  now  willfullv  and  systematically  vio-
lating those  agreements  of  both  1954  and  1962.

To  the  south,  it  is  engaged  in  aggression  aaginst  the  Republic  of  Vietnam.

To  the  west,  it  is  engaged  in  aggression  against  the  Kingdom  of  Laos.

To  the  east,  it -has  now  struck  out  on  the  high  seas  in  an  act  of  aggression
against  the  United  States  of  America.

There  can  be  and  there  must  be  no  doubt  about  the  policy  and  no  doubt
about  the  purpose.

So  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  responsibilities  of  men  and  the  responsi-
bilities of  nations  that  are  devoted  to  peace.

Peace  cannot  be  assured  merelv  by  assuring  the  safety  of  the  United  States
destroyer  MADDOX  or  the  safety  of  other  vessels  of  other  flags.

Peace  requires  that  the  existing  agreements  in  the  area  be  honored.

Peace  requires  that  we  and  all  our  friends  stand  firm  against  the  present  ag-
gressions of  the  government  of  North  Vietnam.

The  government  of  North  Vietnam  is  today  flouting  the  will  of  the  world


720 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol  III

for  peace.  The  world  is  challenged  to  make  its  will  against  war  known  and  to
make  it  known  clearly  and  to  make  it  felt  and  to  make  it  felt  decisively.

So,  to  our  friends  of  the  Atlantic  alliance,  let  me  say  this  this  morning.  The
challenge  that  we  face  in  Southeast  Asia  today  is  the  same  challenge  that  we
have  faced  with  courage  and  that  we  have  met  with  strength  in  Greece  and
Turkey,  in  Berlin  and  Korea,  in  Lebanon  and  in  Cuba,  and  to  any  who  may
be  tempted  to  support  or  to  widen  the  present  aggression  I  say  this:  There  is
no  threat  to  any  peaceful  power  from  the  United  States  of  America.  But
there  can  be  no  peace  by  aggression  and  no  immunity  from  reply.  That  is  what
is  meant  by  the  actions  that  we  took  yesterday.

*  *  *

10.  "President's  Message  to  Congress,  5  August  1964,"  Department  of  State
Bulletin,  24  August  1964,  p.  261:

*  *  *

These  latest  actions  of  the  North  Vietnamese  regime  have  given  a  new  and
grave  turn  to  the  already  serious  situation  in  Southeast  Asia.  Our  commitments
in  that  area  are  well  known  to  the  Congress.  They  were  first  made  in  1954  by
President  Eisenhower.  They  were  further  defined  in  the  Southeast  Asia  Collec-
tive Defense  Treaty  approved  by  the  Senate  in  February  1955.

This  treaty  with  its  accompanying  protocol  obligates  the  United  States  and
other  members  to  act  in  accordance  with  their  constitutional  processes  to  meet
communist  aggression  against  any  of  the  parties  or  protocol  states.

Our  policy  in  Southeast  Asia  has  been  consistent  and  unchanged  since  1954.
I  summarized  it  on  June  2  in  four  simple  propositions:

1.  America  keeps  her  word.  Here  as  elsewhere,  we  must  and  shall  honor  our
commitments.

2.  The  issue  is  the  future  of  Southeast  Asia  as  a  whole.  A  threat  to  any
nation  in  that  region  is  a  threat  to  all,  and  a  threat  to  us.

3.  Our  purpose  is  peace.  We  have  no  military,  political,  or  territorial  ambitions
in  the  area.

4.  This  is  not  just  a  jungle  war,  but  a  struggle  for  freedom  on  every  front  of
human  activity.  Our  military  and  economic  assistance  to  South  Vietnam  and  Laos
in  particular  has  the  purpose  of  helping  these  countries  to  repel  aggression  and
strengthen  their  independence.

The  threat  to  the  free  nations  of  Southeast  Asia  has  long  been  clear.  The
North  Vietnamese  regime  has  constantly  sought  to  take  over  South  Vietnam
and  Laos.  This  communist  regime  has  violated  the  Geneva  accords  for  Vietnam.
It  has  systematically  conducted  a  campaign  of  subversion,  which  includes  the
direction,  training,  and  supply  of  personnel  and  arms  for  the  conduct  of  guerrilla
warfare  in  South  Vietnamese  territory.  In  Laos,  the  North  Vietnamese  regime
has  maintained  military  forces,  used  Laotian  territory  for  infiltration  into  South
Vietnam,  and  most  recently  carried  out  combat  operations — all  in  direct  vio-
lation of  the  Geneva  agreements  of  1962.

In  recent  months,  the  actions  of  the  North  Vietnamese  regime  have  become
steadily  more  threatening.  In  May,  following  new  acts  of  communist  aggression
in  Laos,  the  United  States  undertook  reconnaissance  flights  over  Laotian  terri-
tory, at  the  request  of  the  Government  of  Laos.  These  flights  had  the  essential
mission  of  determining  the  situation  in  territory  where  communist  forces  were
preventing  inspection  by  the  International  Control  Commission.  When  the  com-


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  721

munists  attacked  these  aircraft,  I  responded  by  furnishing  escort  fighters  with
instructions  to  fire  when  fired  upon.  Thus,  these  latest  North  Vietnamese  at-
tacks on  our  naval  vessels  are  not  the  first  direct  attack  on  armed  forces  of  the
United  States.

As  President  of  the  United  States  I  have  concluded  that  I  should  now  ask
the  Congress,  on  its  part,  to  join  in  affirming  the  national  determination  that
all  such  attacks  will  be  met,  and  that  the  United  States  will  continue  in  its
basic  policy  of  assisting  the  free  nations  of  the  area  to  defend  their  freedom.

As  I  have  repeatedly  made  clear,  the  United  States  intends  no  rashness,  and
seeks  no  wider  war.  We  must  make  it  clear  to  all  that  the  United  States  is
united  in  its  determination  to  bring  about  the  end  of  communist  subversion  and
aggression  in  the  area.  We  seek  the  full  and  effective  restoration  of  the  inter-
national agreements  signed  in  Geneva  in  1954,  with  respect  to  South  Vietnam,
and  again  in  Geneva  in  1962,  with  respect  to  Laos.

* *  *

11.  "Secretary  Rusk  Discusses  Asian  Situation  on  NBC  Program,"  5  August
1964,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  24  August  1964,  p.  268:

Following  is  the  transcript  of  an  interview  of  Secretary  Rusk  by  NBC  corre-
spondent Elie  Abel,  broadcast  over  nationwide  television  on  August  5.

Mr.  Abel:  "Mr.  Secretary,  are  we  going  to  get  through  this  situation  without
touching  off  a  bigger  war?"

Secretary  Rusk:  "Well,  Mr.  Abel,  one  can't  be  a  reliable  prophet  when  the
other  side  helps  to  write  the  scenario.  But  I  do  want  to  insist  upon  one  point,
that  the  purpose  of  the  United  States  in  Southeast  Asia  for  these  past  10  years
or  more  has  been  a  part  of  a  general  policy  of  the  United  States  since  World
War  II,  that  is,  to  organize  a  decent  world  community  in  which  nations  will
leave  their  neighbors  alone  and  in  which  nations  can  have  a  chance  to  live  at
peace  with  each  other  and  cooperate  on  a  basis  of  their  common  interests.

"Now,  in  Southeast  Asia  we  have  been  saying  over  and  over  again,  in  con-
ferences such  as  the  Geneva  conference  of  1962  and  elsewhere,  that  there  is
only  one  problem  with  peace  in  Southeast  Asia  and  that  is  these  pressures  from
the  north,  that  if  the  north  would  leave  their  neighbors  to  the  south  alone,  these
peoples  of  that  area  could  have  their  peace  and  could  have  a  chance  to  work
out  their  own  lives  in  their  own  way.  That  is  the  problem,  and  to  come  to  the
decision  to  leave  their  neighbors  alone  is  a  necessary  decision  which  Hanoi  and
anyone  supporting  Hanoi  must  reach."

Q.  "Why  was^  it  necessary,  Mr.  Secretary,  for  us  to  strike  as  swiftly  and
abruptly  as  we  did  without  taking  time  even  to  notify  our  allies?"

A.  "Well,  in  the  first  place,  we  had  some  ships  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  who  were
under  attack,  and  they  were  dodging  torpedoes.  Here  is  a  vast  expanse  of  inter-
national waters  in  which  we  have  a  perfect  right  to  be.  We  had  to  strike  imme-
diately because  we  didn't  expect  to  ask  those  ships  to  run  a  continuing  gauntlet  of
torpedoes  on  their  way  back  to  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  when  their  mission  was  com-
pleted, nor  were  we  prepared  to  have  them  denied  international  waters  in  the
Gulf  of  Tonkin.

"Further  than  that,  if  under  these  attacks  there  had  not  been  an  immediate
and  appropriate  response,  then  Hanoi  and  those  who  might  be  standing  behind
Hanoi  in  this  might  well  have  come  to  a  very  formidable  mistaken  judgment
about  what  is  possible  in  the  Southeast  Asian  situation."


722 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

Q.  "You  mean  their  view  that  we  are  a  paper  tiger  might  have  been  con-
firmed?"

A.  "That's  correct.  They  could  have  made  a  basic  miscalculation  about  what
the  commitment  of  the  United  States  means  in  a  situation  of  this  sort."

*  *  *

12.  Text  of  Joint  Resolution,  August  7,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  24  August
1964,  p.  268:

"To  promote  the  maintenance  of  international  peace  and  security  in  Southeast
Asia.

"Whereas  naval  units  of  the  communist  regime  in  Vietnam,  in  violation  of  the
principles  of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  and  of  international  law,  have
deliberately  and  repeatedly  attacked  United  States  naval  vessels  lawfully  present
in  international  waters,  and  have  thereby  created  a  serious  threat  to  international
peace;  and

"Whereas  these  attacks  are  part  of  a  deliberate  and  systematic  campaign  of
aggression  that  the  communist  regime  in  North  Vietnam  has  been  waging  against
its  neighbors  and  the  nations  joined  with  them  in  the  collective  defense  of  their
freedom;  and

"Whereas  the  United  States  is  assisting  the  peoples  of  Southeast  Asia  to  protect
their  freedom  and  has  no  territorial,  military  or  political  ambitions  in  that  area,
but  desires  only  that  these  peoples  should  be  left  in  peace  to  work  out  their  own
destinies  in  their  own  way:  Now,  therefore,  be  it

"Resolved  by  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  of  the  United  States
of  America  in  Congress  assembled,  That  the  Congress  approves  and  supports
the  determination  of  the  President,  as  Commander  in  Chief,  to  take  all  necessary
measures  to  repel  any  armed  attack  against  the  forces  of  the  United  States  and
to  prevent  further  aggression.

"Sec.  2.  The  United  States  regards  as  vital  to  its  national  interest  and  to  world
peace  the  maintenance  of  international  peace  and  security  in  Southeast  Asia.
Consonant  with  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  and  the  Charter  of  the
United  Nations  and  in  accordance  with  its  obligations  under  the  Southeast  Asia
Collective  Defense  Treaty,  the  United  States  is,  therefore,  prepared,  as  the  Presi-
dent determines,  to  take  all  necessary  steps,  including  the  use  of  armed  force,  to
assist  any  member  or  protocol  state  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Collective  Defense
Treaty  requesting  assistance  in  defense  of  its  freedom.

"Sec.  3.  This  resolution  shall  expire  when  the  President  shall  determine  that
the  peace  and  security  of  the  area  is  reasonably  assured  by  international  condi-
tions created  by  action  of  the  United  Nations  or  otherwise,  except  that  it  may  be
terminated  earlier  by  concurrent  resolution  of  the  Congress."

13.  "Freedom  in  the  Postwar  World,"  by  Secretary  Rusk  before  American  Veter-
ans of  WW  II  and  Korea,  Philadelphia,  29  August  1964,  Department  of
State  Bulletin,  14  September  1964,  p.  365:

*  *  *

"In  Southeast  Asia  the  free  world  suffered  a  setback  in  1954  when,  after  the
defeat  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  Vietnam  was  divided  and  a  communist  regime  was
consolidated  in  Hanoi.  We  helped  South  Vietnam  to  get  on  its  feet  and  to  build
its  military  defenses.  It  made  remarkable  progress  for  a  few  years — which  is


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  123

perhaps  why  Communist  North  Vietnam,  with  the  backing  of  Communist  China,
renewed  its  aggression  against  South  Vietnam  in  1959.  In  1961  President  Ken-
nedy reviewed  the  situation,  concluded  that  the  assault  from  the  north  had  been
underestimated,  and  substantially  increased  our  assistance  to  the  Government
and  people  of  South  Vietnam."

*  *  *

"Hanoi  and  Peiping  have  not  yet  learned  that  they  must  leave  their  neighbors
alone.  But  this  is  a  decision  which  they  must  reach.  We  and  our  SEATO  allies
have  declared  that  the  communist  aggressions  in  Southeast  Asia  must  be  defeated.
As  you  said.  Commander  Gulewicz,  in  your  statement  to  the  platform  committees
of  the  two  major  parties,  '.  .  .  we  cannot  afford  to  abandon  the  free  people  of
Vietnam.  The  world  watches  because  South  Vietnam  is  a  critical  test-case  for  new
communist  strategy.'  "

*  *  *

14.  "Progress  and  Problems  in  East  Asia:  An  American  Viewpoint,"  by  William
P.  Bundy,  Assistant  Secretary  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  Address  made  before
the  Research  Institute  of  Japan  at  Tokyo,  29  September  1964,  Department
of  State  Bulletin,  19  October  1964,  p.  537:

*  *  *

"A  word  further  about  the  situation  in  Southeast  Asia,  especially  in  South
Vietnam.  Here  the  aim  of  our  policy  is  to  assist  the  Government  of  South
Vietnam  in  maintaining  its  independence  and  its  control  over  the  territory
allotted  to  it  by  the  Geneva  accords  of  1954.  We  do  not  aim  at  overthrowing
the  communist  regime  of  North  Vietnam  but  rather  at  inducing  it  to  call  off
the  war  it  directs  and  supports  in  South  Vietnam.

"We  believe  it  essential  to  the  interests  of  the  free  world  that  South  Vietnam
not  be  permitted  to  fall  under  communist  control.  If  it  does,  then  the  rest  of
Southeast  Asia  will  be  in  grave  danger  of  progressively  disappearing  behind  the
Bamboo  Curtain  and  other  Asian  countries  like  India  and  even  in  time  Australia
and  your  own  nation  in  turn  will  be  threatened.  If  Hanoi  and  Peiping  prevail
in  Vietnam  in  this  key  test  of  the  new  communist  tactics  of  'wars  of  national
liberation,'  then  the  communists  will  use  this  technique  with  growing  frequency
elsewhere  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  Latin  America."

*  *  *

15.  Secretary  Rusk's  News  Conference  of  December  23,  Press  Release  dated
23  December  1964,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  11  January  1965,  p.  37:

*  *  *

American  Interest  in  Vietnamese  Independence:

Q.  "Mr.  Secretary,  it  is  sometimes  stated  that  one  of  the  reasons  for  American
assistance  to  Vietnam  is  the  fact  that  vital  Western  interests  are  involved  in
the  situation  there.  Now  that  we  are  once  again  confronted  with  what  apparently
is  a  critical  situation,  could  you  define  for  us  the  precise  nature  and  extent  of
those  vital  Western  interests,  as  you  see  them?"

A.  "Well,  our  interest  in  Southeast  Asia  has  been  developed  and  expressed
throughout  this  postwar  period.  Before  SEATO  (Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organi-
zation) came  into  existence,  we  and  Britain  and  France  were  in  very  close


724 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill


touch  with  that  situation.  SEATO  underlined  the  importance  we  attached  to  the
security  of  the  countries  of  that  area.

"But  actually  the  American  interest  can  be  expressed  in  very  simple  terms.
Where  there  is  a  country  which  is  independent  and  secure  and  in  a  position  to
work  out  its  own  policy  and  be  left  alone  by  its  neighbors,  there  is  a  country
whose  position  is  consistent  with  our  understanding  of  our  interests  in  the
world.  It's  just  as  simple  as  that.

"If  we  have  military  personnel  in  Southeast  Asia,  it  is  because  we  feel  that
they  are  needed  to  assist  South  Vietnam  at  the  present  time  to  maintain  its
security  and  independence.  If  South  Vietnam's  neighbors  would  leave  it  alone,
those  military  people  could  come  home.

"We  have  no  desire  for  any  bases  or  permanent  military  presence  in  that
area.  We  are  interested  in  the  independence  of  states.  That  is  why  we  have  more
than  40  allies.  That  is  why  we  are  interested  in  the  independence  and  security
of  the  nonaligned  countries.  Because,  to  us,  the  general  system  of  states  repre-
sented in  the  United  Nations  Charter  is  our  view  of  a  world  that  is  consistent
with  American  interests.  So  our  own  interest  there  is  very  simple.

"But  it  is  very  important,  because  we  feel  that  we  have  learned  in  the  last
many  decades  that  a  persistent  course  of  aggression  left  to  go  unchecked  can
only  lead  to  a  general  war  and  therefore  that  the  independence  of  particular
countries  is  a  matter  of  importance  to  the  general  peace."

Peiping's  Militant  Doctrine:

O.  "Mr.  Secretary,  could  I  put  that  question  slightly  differently?  In  the  last
decade  or  so,  over  three  or  four  administrations,  this  Government  has  taken
the  position  that  the  Indochina  peninsula  had  an  importance  to  this  country
beyond  the  actualities  of  the  countries  involved;  that  is,  that  it  had  a  relationship
to  the  American  problem  with  China,  and  out  of  this  developed,  over  a  long
period  of  time,  the  so-called  falling-domino  theory.  Could  you  tell  us  whether
you  subscribe  to  that  theory  and  whether  you  look  upon  our  interest  in  Vietnam
and  Laos — or  how  you  look  upon  our  interest  in  Vietnam  and  Laos  in  relation
to  China?"

A.  "Well,  I  would  not  myself  go  to  the  trouble  of  trying  to  outline  a  'domino'
theory.  The  theory  of  the  problem  rests  in  Peiping.  It  rests  in  a  militant  ap-
proach to  the  spread  of  the  world  revolution  as  seen  from  the  communist  point
of  view.  And  we  know,  given  their  frequently  and  publicly  proclaimed  ambi-
tions in  this  respect  and  what  they  say  not  only  about  their  neighbors  in  Asia
but  such  continents  as  Africa — Africa  is  ripe  for  revolution,  meaning  to  them
ripe  for  an  attempt  on  their  part  to  extend  their  domination  into  that  continent
— there  is  a  primitive,  militant  doctrine  of  world  revolution  that  would  attempt
to  destroy  the  structure  of  international  life  as  written  into  the  United  Nations
Charter.

"Now,  these  are  appetites  and  ambitions  that  grow  upon  feeding.  In  1954  Viet-
nam was  divided.  North  Vietnam  became  communist.  The  next  result  was  pres-
sures against  Laos,  contrary  to  those  agreements;  pressures  against  South  Viet-
nam, contrary  to  those  agreements.  In  other  words,  until  there  is  a  determination
in  Peiping  to  leave  their  neighbors  alone  and  not  to  press  militantly  their  notions
of  world  revolution,  then  we  are  going  to  have  this  problem.

"And  it's  the  same  problem  we  have  had  in  another  part  of  the  world  in  an
earlier  period  in  this  postwar  period  in  such  things  as  the  Berlin  blockade,  the
pressures  against  Greece.  Those  things  had  to  be  stopped.  They  were  stopped  in
the  main.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  725

"Now  the  problem  is  out  in  the  Pacific.  And  we  have  a  large  interest  in  the
way  these  problems  evolve  in  the  Pacific,  because  we  have  allies  and  we  have
interests  out  there.  Southeast  Asia  is  at  the  present  time  the  point  at  which  this
issue  of  militant  aggression  against  one's  neighbors  for  ideological  reasons  is
posed."

*  *  *

16.  A  Conversation  with  Dean  Rusk,  NBC  News  Program  on  January  3,  1965,
Department  of  State  Bulletin,  January  18,  1965,  p.  64.

*  *  *

Secretary  Rusk:  .  .  .  Now,  when  North  Viet-Nam  was  organized  as  a  Com-
munist country,  almost  immediately  its  neighbor,  Laos,  and  its  neighbor.  South
Viet-Nam,  came  under  direct  pressure  from  North  Viet-Nam.  Now,  this  is
the  nature  of  the  appetite  proclaimed  from  Peiping.  One  doesn't  require  a
'domino'  theory  to  get  at  this.  Peiping  has  announced  the  doctrine.  It  is  there
in  the  primitive  notion  of  a  militant  world  revolution  which  has  been  promoted
by  these  veterans  of  the  long  march  who  now  control  mainland  China.  So  we
believe  that  you  simply  postpone  temporarily  an  even  greater  crisis  if  you  allow
an  announced  course  of  aggression  to  succeed  a  step  at  a  time  on  the  road  to  a
major  catastrophe.

*  *  *

Now,  there  are  some  in  other  countries,  for  example,  who  seem  to  be  rela-
tively indifferent  to  problems  of  this  sort  in  Southeast  Asia,  and  yet  they  are  the
first  ones  to  say  that  if  we  were  to  abandon  Southeast  Asia,  this  would  cause
them  to  wonder  what  our  commitments  under  such  arrangements  as  NATO
would  mean.  Do  you  see?

In  other  words,  the  issue  here  is  the  capability  of  halting  a  course  of  aggression
at  the  beginning,  rather  than  waiting  for  it  to  produce  a  great  conflagration.

*  *  *

17.  The  State  of  the  Union  Address  of  the  President  to  the  Congress,  January
4,  1965,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Johnson,  1965,  p.  3.

*  *  *

We  are  there,  first,  because  a  friendly  nation  has  asked  us  for  help  against
the  Communist  aggression.  Ten  years  ago  our  President  pledged  our  help.  Three
Presidents  have  supported  that  pledge.  We  will  not  break  it  now.

Second,  our  own  security  is  tied  to  the  peace  of  Asia.  Twice  in  one  generation
we  have  had  to  fight  against  aggression  in  the  Far  East.  To  ignore  aggression
now  would  only  increase  the  danger  of  a  much  larger  war.

Our  goal  is  peace  in  Southeast  Asia.  That  will  come  only  when  aggressors
leave  their  neighbors  in  peace.

*  *  *

18.  America  Policy  in  South  Viet-Nam  and  Southeast  Asia,  William  P.  Bundy,
Remarks  Made  Before  the  Washington  {Mo.)  Chamber  of  Commerce  on
January  23,  1965,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  February  8,  1965,  p.  168.

*  ♦  *

In  retrospect,  our  action  in  Korea  reflected  three  elements:

— a  recognition  that  aggression  of  any  sort  must  be  met  early  and  head-on


726 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  \  ol.  Ill


or  it  will  have  to  be  met  later  and  in  tougher  circumstances.  We  had  releamed
the  lessons  of  the  1930*s — Manchuria.  Ethiopia,  the  Rhineland.  Czechoslovakia.

— a  recognition  that  a  defense  line  in  Asia,  stated  in  terms  of  an  island
perimeter,  did  not  adequately  define  our  vital  interests,  that  those  vital  interests
could  be  affected  by  action  on  the  mainland  of  Asia.

— an  understanding  that,  for  the  future,  a  power  vacuum  was  an  invitation
to  aggression,  that  there  must  be  local  political,  economic,  and  militar\'  strength
in  being  to  make  aggression  unprofitable,  but  also  that  there  must  be  a  demon-
strated willingness  of  major  external  power  both  to  assist  and  to  intervene  if
required.

*  *  *

Such  was  the  situation  President  Eisenhower  and  Secretary  Dulles  faced  in
1954.  Two  things  were  clear:  that  in  the  absence  of  external  help  communism
was  virtually  certain  to  take  over  the  successor  states  of  Indochina  and  to
move  to  the  borders  of  Thailand  and  perhaps  bevond.  and  that  with  France
no  longer  ready  to  act.  at  least  in  South  Viet-Nam.  no  power  other  than  the
United  States  could  move  in  to  help  fill  the  vacuum.  Their  decision,  expressed
in  a  series  of  actions  starting  in  late  1954,  was  to  move  in  to  help  these  coun-
tries. Besides  South  Viet-Nam  and  more  modest  efforts  in  Laos  and  Cambodia,
substantial  assistance  was  begun  to  Thailand.

The  appropriations  for  these  actions  were  voted  bv  successive  Congresses,
and  in  1954  the  Senate  likewise  ratified  the  Southeast  Asia  Treat)-,  to  which
Thailand  and  the  Philippines  adhered  along  with  the  United  States.  Britain,
France.  Australia.  New  Zealand,  and  Pakistan.  Although  not  signers  of  the
treaty.  South  Viet-Nam.  Laos,  and  Cambodia  could  call  on  the  SEATO  members
for  help  against  aggression.

So  a  commitment  was  made,  with  the  support  of  both  political  panies.  that  has
guided  our  policy  in  Southeast  Asia  for  a  decade  now.  It  was  not  a  commitment
that  envisaged  a  United  States  position  of  power  in  Southeast  Asia  or  United
States  military"  bases  there.  We  threatened  no  one.  Nor  was  it  a  commitment  that
substituted  United  States  responsibiliu-  for  the  basic  responsibilit}-  of  the  nations
themselves  for  their  own  defense,  political  stabilitv.  and  economic  progress.  It
was  a  commitment  to  do  what  we  could  to  help  these  nations  attain  and  main-
tain the  independence  and  security-  to  which  they  were  entitled — ^both  for  their
own  sake  and  because  we  recognized  that,  like  South  Korea.  Southeast  Asia
was  a  key  area  of  the  mainland  of  Asia.  If  it  fell  to  Communist  control,  this
would  enormouslv  add  to  the  momentum  and  power  of  the  expansionist  Com-
munist regimes  in  Communist  China  and  North  Viet-Nam  and  thus  to  the
threat  to  the  whole  free-world  position  in  the  Pacific.

*  *  *

...  In  simple  terms,  a  victor\-  for  the  Communists  in  South  \'iet-Nam
would  inevitably  make  the  neighboring  states  more  suceptible  to  Communist
pressure  and  more  vulnerable  to  intensified  subversion  supported  by  militar)'
pressures.  Aggression  by  'wars  of  national  liberation"  would  gain  enhanced
prestige  and  power  of  intimidation  throughout  the  world,  and  many  threatened
nations  might  well  become  less  hopeful,  less  resilient,  and  their  will  to  resist
undermined.  These  are  big  stakes  indeed.


Justification  of  the  H'ar — Public  Statements  111

19.  William  Bundy  Discusses  Vietnam  Situation.  February  7.  7965.  Department
of  State  Bulletin,  March  8,  1965.  p.  292.

♦  *  *

.  .  .  Why  are  we  there?  What  is  our  national  interest?  I  think  it  was  prettv
well  stated  by  Congress  last  August  when  it  passed  a  resolution,  following  the
Gulf  of  Tonkin  affair,  in  which  it  stated  that  the  United  States  "regards  as  vital
to  its  national  interest  and  world  peace  the  maintenance  of  international  peace
and  security  in  southeast  Asia."  And  that's  the  basic  reason  right  there — peace
in  the  area,  letting  the  nations  of  the  area  develop  as  thev  see  fit  and  free  from
Communist  external  infiltration,  subversion,  and  control.

Secondly,  it's  obvious  on  the  map  that  if  South  Viet-Nam  were  to  fall  under
Communist  control  it  would  become  ver)-  much  more  difficult — I'm  not  using
what's  sometimes  called  "the  domino  theory,'  that  anvthing  happens  automati-
cally or  quicklv — but  it  would  become  verv  much  more  difficult  to  maintain  the
independence  and  freedom  of  Thailand.  Cambodia,  of  Malaysia,  and  so  on.
And  the  confidence  of  other  nations  in  the  whole  perimeter  of  Southeast  Asia
would  necessarilv  be  affected,  and  the  Communists  would  think  thev  had  a  win-
ning game  going  for  them.  So  that's  a  very  important,  strategic  reason  in  addi-
tion to  the  fact  that  we're  helping  a  nation  under  aggression.

And  thirdlv,  this  technique  thev're  using — thev  call  it  "wars  of  national
liberation" — is  a  technique  that  will  be  used  elsewhere  in  the  world  if  they  get
away  with  this  one,  and  thev'll  be  encouraged  to  do  that.

So  those  are  the  three  basic  reasons  why  our  national  interest — and  basically
our  national  interest  in  peace  in  this  whole  wide  Pacific  area  with  which  we
have  historically  had  great  concern  and  for  which  we  fought  in  World  War  II
and  in  Korea — are  deeply  at  stake.'  in  this  conflict.

♦  ♦  4=

20.  Secretary  Rusk's  News  Conference  of  February  25.  1965.  Deparnncni  of
State  Bulletin,  March  15,  1965,  p.  367.

*  *  *

O.  Mr.  Secretary,  what  kind  of  legal  basis  did  the  United  States  have  to  bomb
the  targets  of  North  Viet-Nam?

A.  Self-defense  of  South  \'iet-Nam  and  the  commitments  of  the  United  States
with  respect  to  the  securitv  and  the  self-defense  of  South  Viet-Nam."

*  *  *

21.  Statement  Submitted  by  Adlai  Stevenson  to  U.N.  Summarizing  a  Significant
Report  Entitled,  "Aggression  from  the  North,  the  Record  of  North  Viet-
nam's Campaign  to  Conquer  South  Vietnam."  It  was  released  as  Department
of  State  Publication  7839.  February  27.  1965.

EXCELLENCY:  For  the  information  of  the  Members  of  the  Security  Coun-
cil, I  am  transmitting  a  special  report  entitled  Aggression  from  the  North,  the
Record  of  North  Viet-Nam' s  Campaign  to  Conquer  South  \'iet-Nam.  which  my
Government  is  making  public  today.  It  presents  evidence  from  which  the  fol-
lowing conclusions  are  inescapable:


728 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

First,  the  subjugation  by  force  of  the  RepubUc  of  Viet-Nam  by  the  regime
in  northern  Viet-Nam  is  the  formal,  official  policy  of  that  regime;  this  has  been
stated  and  confirmed  publicly  over  the  past  five  years.

Second,  the  war  in  Viet-Nam  is  directed  by  the  Central  Committee  of  the
Lao  Dong  Party  (Communist)  which  controls  the  government  in  northern  Viet-
Nam.

Third,  the  so-called  People's  Revolutionary  Party  in  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam
is  an  integral  part  of  the  Lao  Dong  Party  in  North  Viet-Nam.

Fourth,  the  so-called  liberation  front  for  South  Viet-Nam  is  a  subordinate
unit  of  the  Central  Office  for  South  Viet-Nam,  an  integral  part  of  the  govern-
mental machinery  in  Hanoi.

Fifth,  the  key  leadership  of  the  Viet-Cong — officers,  specialists,  technicians,
intelligence  agents,  political  organizers  and  propagandists — has  been  trained,
equipped  and  supplied  in  the  north  and  sent  into  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam
under  Hanoi's  military  orders.

Sixth,  most  of  the  weapons,  including  new  types  recently  introduced,  and
most  of  the  ammunition  and  other  supplies  used  by  the  Viet-Cong,  have  been
sent  from  North  to  South  Viet-Nam.

Seventh,  the  scale  of  infiltration  of  men  and  arms,  including  regular  units  of
the  armed  forces  of  North  Viet-Nam,  has  increased  appreciably  in  recent
months.

Eighth,  this  entire  pattern  of  activity  by  the  regime  in  Hanoi  is  in  violation
of  general  principles  of  international  law  and  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations,
and  is  in  direct,  violation  of  the  Geneva  Accords  of  1954.  Such  a  pattern  of
violation  of  the  treaty  obligations  undertaken  at  Geneva  was  confirmed  by  a
special  report  of  the  International  Control  Commission  in  1962  and  it  has  been
greatly  intensified  since  then.

These  facts  about  the  situation  in  Viet-Nam  make  it  unmistakably  clear  that
the  character  of  that  conflict  is  an  aggressive  war  of  conquest  waged  against
a  neighbor — and  make  nonsense  of  the  cynical  allegation  that  this  is  simply
an  indigenous  insurrection.

I  request  that  you  circulate  copies  of  the  Report,  together  with  copies  of  this
letter,  to  the  Delegations  of  all  Member  States  as  a  Security  Council  document.

In  making  this  information  available  to  the  Security  Council,  my  Government
wishes  to  say  once  more  that  peace  can  be  restored  quickly  to  Viet-Nam  by  a
prompt  and  assured  cessation  of  aggression  by  Hanoi  against  the  Republic  of
Viet-Nam.  In  that  event,  my  Government — as  it  has  said  many  times  before —
would  be  happy  to  withdraw  its  military  forces  from  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam
and  turn  promptly  to  an  international  effort  to  assist  the  economic  and  social
development  of  Southeast  Asia.

In  the  meantime,  my  Government  awaits  the  first  indication  of  any  intent  by
the  government  in  Hanoi  to  return  to  the  ways  of  peace  and  peaceful  resolution
of  this  international  conflict.

Accept,  Excellency,  the  assurance  of  my  highest  consideration.

ADLAI  E.  STEVENSON.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  119


22.  "Some  Fundamentals  of  American  Policy,"  Address  by  Secretary  Rusk  Be-
fore the  U.S.  Council  of  the  International  Chamber  of  Commerce  at  New
York,  March  4,  1965,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  March  22,  1965,  p.
401.

*  *  *

The  defeat  of  these  aggressions  is  not  only  essential  if  Laos  and  South  Viet-
Nam  are  to  remain  independent;  it  is  important  to  the  security  of  Southeast
Asia  as  a  whole.  You  will  recall  that  Thailand  has  already  been  proclaimed  as
the  next  target  by  Peiping.  This  is  not  something  up  in  the  clouds  called  the
domino  theory.  You  don't  need  that.  Listen  to  the  proclamation  of  militant,
world  revolution  by  Peiping,  proclaimed  with  a  harshness  which  has  caused  deep
division  within  the  Communist  world  itself,  quite  apart  from  the  issues  posed
for  the  free  world.

The  U.S.  Stake  in  Viet-Nam

So  what  is  our  stake?  What  is  our  commitment  in  that  situation?  Can  those
of  us  in  this  room  forget  the  lesson  that  we  had  in  this  issue  of  war  and  peace
when  it  was  only  10  years  from  the  seizure  of  Manchuria  to  Pearl  Harbor;  about
2  years  from  the  seizure  of  Czechoslovakia  to  the  outbreak  of  World  War  II
in  Western  Europe?  Don't  you  remember  the  hopes  expressed  in  those  days:  that
perhaps  the  aggressor  will  be  satisfied  by  this  next  bite,  and  perhaps  he  will  be
quiet?  Remember  that?  You  remember  that  we  thought  that  we  could  put  our
Military  Establishment  on  short  rations  and  somehow  we  needn't  concern  our-
selves with  peace  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  But  we  found  that  ambition  and
appetite  fed  upon  success  and  the.  next  bite  generated  the  appetite  for  the  fol-
lowing bite.  And  we  learned  that,  by  postponing  the  issue,  we  made  the  result
more  terrible,  the  holocaust  more  dreadful.  We  cannot  forget  that  experience.

We  have  a  course  of  aggression  proclaimed  in  Peiping,  very  clear  for  all  to
see,  and  proclaimed  with  a  militancy  which  says  that  their  type  of  revolution
must  be  supported  by  force  and  that  much  of  the  world  is  ripe  for  that  kind
of  revolution.  We  have  very  specific  commitments — the  Manila  Pact,  ratified
by  the  Senate  by  a  vote  of  82  to  1,  a  pact  to  which  South  Viet-Nam  is  a  protocol
state.  We  have  the  decision  of  President  Eisenhower  in  1954  to  extend  aid.  .  .  ."

*  *  *

23.  "Viet-Nam  Action  Called  'Collective  Defense  Against  Armed  Aggression,'  "
[Departmenf  Statement  read  to  news  correspondents  on  March  4,  1965
by  Robert  J.  McCloskey,  Director,  Office  of  News],  Department  of  State
Bulletin,  March  22,  1965,  p.  403.

The  fact  that  military  hostilities  have  been  taking  place  in  Southeast  Asia
does  not  bring  about  the  existence  of  a  state  of  war,  which  is  a  legal  character-
ization of  a  situation  rather  than  a  factual  description.  What  we  have  in  Viet-
Nam  is  armed  aggression  from  the  North  against  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam.
Pursuant  to  a  South  Vietnamese  request  and  consultations  between  our  two
Governments,  South  Viet-Nam  and  the  United  States  are  engaged  in  collective
defense  against  that  armed  aggression.  The  inherent  right  of  individual  and  col-
lective self-defense  is  recognized  in  article  51  of  the  United  Nations  Charter.

If  the  question  is  intended  to  raise  the  issue  of  legal  authority  to  conduct  the


730 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill

actions  which  have  been  taken,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  actions  fall
within  the  constitutional  powers  of  the  President  and  within  the  congressional
resolution  of  August  1964.

*  *  *

24.  "Pattern  for  Peace  in  Southeast  Asia,''  Address  by  President  Johnson  at  Johns
Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  Maryland  on  April  7,  1965,  Department  of
State  Bulletin,  April  26,  1965,  p.  607.

*  *  *

The  confused  nature  of  this  conflict  cannot  mask  the  fact  that  it  is  the  new
face  of  an  old  enemy.

Over  this  war — and  all  Asia — is  another  reality:  the  deepening  shadow  of
Communist  China.  The  rulers  in  Hanoi  are  urged  on  by  Peiping.  This  is  a
regime  which  has  destroyed  freedom  in  Tibet,  which  has  attacked  India,  and
has  been  condemned  by  the  United  Nations  for  aggression  in  Korea.  It  is  a
nation  which  is  helping  the  forces  of  violence  in  almost  every  continent.  The
contest  in  Viet-Nam  is  part  of  a  wider  pattern  of  aggressive  purposes.

Why  Are  We  in  South  Viet-Nam?

Why  are  these  realities  our  concern?  Why  are  we  in  South  Viet-Nam?

We  are  there  because  we  have  a  promise  to  keep.  Since  1954  every  American
President  has  offered  support  to  the  people  of  South  Viet-Nam.  We  have
helped  to  build,  and  we  have  helped  to  defend.  Thus,  over  many  years,  we  have
made  a  national  pledge  to  help  South  Viet-Nam  defend  its  independence.

And  I  intend  to  keep  that  promise.

To  dishonor  that  pledge,  to  abandon  this  small  and  brave  nation  to  its  enemies,
and  to  the  terror  that  must  follow,  would  be  an  unforgivable  wrong.

We  are  also  there  to  strengthen  world  order.  Around  the  globe,  from  Berlin
to  Thailand,  are  people  whose  well-being  rests  in  part  on  the  belief  that  they
can  count  on  us  if  they  are  attacked.  To  leave  Viet-Nam  to  its  fate  would
shake  the  confidence  of  all  these  people  in  the  value  of  an  American  commit-
ment and  in  the  value  of  America's  word.  The  result  would  be  increased  unrest
and  instability,  and  even  wider  war.

We  are  also  there  because  there  are  great  stakes  in  the  balance.  Let  no  one
think  for  a  moment  that  retreat  from  Viet-Nam  would  bring  an  end  to  conflict.
The  battle  would  be  renewed  in  one  country  and  then  another.  The  central  lesson
of  our  time  is  that  the  appetite  of  aggression  is  never  satisfied.  To  withdraw  from
one  battlefield  means  only  to  prepare  for  the  next.  We  must  say  in  Southeast
Asia — as  we  did  in  Europe — in  the  words  of  the  Bible:  "Hitherto  shalt  thou
come,  but  no  further.''

There  are  those  who  say  that  all  our  effort  there  will  be  futile — that  China's
power  is  such  that  it  is  bound  to  dominate  all  Southeast  Asia.  But  there  is  no
end  to  that  argument  until  all  of  the  nations  of  Asia  are  swallowed  up.

There  are  those  who  wonder  why  we  have  a  responsibility  there.  Well,  we
have  it  there  for  the  same  reason  that  we  have  a  responsibility  for  the  defense
of  Europe.  World  War  II  was  fought  in  both  Europe  and  Asia,  and  when  it
ended  we  found  ourselves  with  continued  responsibility  for  the  defense  of
freedom.

Our  objective  is  the  independence  of  South  Viet-Nam  and  its  freedom  from
attack.  We  want  nothing  for  ourselves — only  that  the  people  of  South  Viet-


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  731

Nam  be  allowed  to  guide  their  own  country  in  their  own  way.  We  will  do
everything  necessary  to  reach  that  objective,  and  we  will  do  only  what  is  abso-
lutely necessary.

In  recent  months  attacks  on  South  Viet-Nam  were  stepped  up.  Thus  it  be-
came necessary  for  us  to  increase  our  response  and  to  make  attacks  by  air.  This
is  not  a  change  of  purpose.  It  is  a  change  in  what  we  believe  that  purpose  re-
quires.

We  do  this  in  order  to  slow  down  aggression.

We  do  this  to  increase  the  confidence  of  the  brave  people  of  South  Viet-Nam
who  have  bravely  borne  this  brutal  battle  for  so  many  years  with  so  many  casu-
alties.

*  *  *

25.  Address  by  Leonard  Unger,  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  for  Far  Eastern
Affairs,  before  the  Detroit  Economic  Club,  "Present  Objectives  and  Future
Possibilities  in  Southeast  Asia,"  April  19,  1965,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,
May  10,  1965,  p.  712.

*  *  *

These  objectives  are  not  just  pious  generalities,  nor  is  Southeast  Asia  just  a
configuration  on  a  map.  Distant  though  it  may  seem  from  Detroit,  that  area  has
great  strategic  significance  to  the  United  States  and  the  free  world.  Its  location
across  east-west  air  and  sea  lanes  flanks  the  Indian  subcontinent  on  one  side  and
Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  the  Philippines  on  the  other,  and  dominates  the
gateway  between  the  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans.

In  Communist  hands  this  area  would  pose  a  most  serious  threat  to  the  security
of  the  United  States  and  to  the  family  of  free-world  nations  to  which  we  belong.
To  defend  Southeast  Asia,  we  mus(  meet  the  challenge  in  South  Viet-Nam.

Communist  'Wars  of  Liberation'

Equally  important,  South  Viet-Nam  represents  a  major  test  of  communism's
new  strategy  of  'wars  of  liberation.'  "

*  *  *

After  the  Communists'  open  aggression  failed  in  Korea,  they  had  to  look  for
a  more  effective  strategy  of  conquest.  They  chose  to  concentrate  on  'wars  of
national  liberation' — the  label  they  use  to  describe  aggression  directed  and  sup-
plied from  outside  a  nation  but  cloaked  in  nationalist  guise  so  that  it  could  be
made  to  appear  an  indigenous  insurrection.

That  strategy  was  tried  on  a  relatively  primitive  scale,  but  was  defeated  in
Malaya  and  the  Philippines  only  because  of  a  long  and  arduous  struggle  by  the
people  of  those  countries,  with  assistance  provided  by  the  British  and  the  United
States.  In  Africa  and  Latin  America  such  'wars  of  liberation'  are  already  being
threatened.  But  by  far  the  most  highly  refined  and  ambitious  attempt  at  such
aggression  by  the  Communists  is  taking  place  today  in  Viet-Nam.  .  .  .

*  *  *

In  order  to  cope  with  this  veiled  aggression,  free  nations  must  determine  the
real  source  ot  the  aggression  and  take  steps  to  defend  themselves  from  this
source.  In  Viet-Nam  this  has  meant  ending  privileged  sanctuary  heretofore
afforded  North  Viet-N  am — the  true  source  of  the  Viet  Cong  movement.


732 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  \'oL  111


The  "wars  of  national  liberation"  approach  has  been  adopted  as  an  essential
element  of  Communist  Chma's  expansionist  policy.  If  this  technique  adopted  bv
Hanoi  should  be  allowed  to  succeed  in  \'iet-Nam,  we  would  be  confirming
Peiping's  contention  that  militant  revolutionary  struggle  is  a  more  productive
Communist  path  than  Moscow's  doctrine  of  peaceful  coexistence.  We  could
expect  "wars  of  national  liberation"  to  spread.  Thailand  has  already  been  identi-
fied by  Communist  China  as  being  the  next  target  for  a  so-called  "liberation
struggle."  Peiping's  Foreign  Minister  Chen  Yi  has  promised  it  for  this  vear.
Laos,  Malaysia.  Burma — one  Asian  nation  after  another — could  expect  increas-
ing Communist  pressures.  Other  weakly  defended  nations  on  other  continents
would  experience  this  new  threat  of  aggression  bv  proxy.

E\en  the  Asian  Communists  ha\e  acknowledged  that  \'iet-Nam  represents  an
important  test  situation  for  indirect  aggression.  North  \"iet-Nam"s  Premier  Pham
\'an  Dong  recently  commented  that:

'The  experience  of  our  compatriots  in  South  \'iet-Nam  attracts  the  attention
of  the  world,  especiallv  the  peoples  of  South  America."

General  [\o  Nguyen]  Giap,  the  much-touted  leader  of  North  \'iet-Nam"s
army,  was  even  more  explicit.  In  another  recent  statement,  he  said  that.

"South  \'iet-Nam  is  the  model  of  the  national  liberation  movement  of  our
time.  ...  If  the  S|>ecial  warfare  that  the  U.S.  imperialists  are  testing  in  South
\'iet-Nam  is  overcome,  then  it  can  be  defeated  ever\Avhere  in  the  world."

Our  strong  posture  in  \'iet-Nam  then  seeks  peace  and  security  in  three  dimen-
sions: for  South  Viet-Nam.  for  the  sake  of  Southeast  Asia's  independence  and
security  generally,  and  for  the  other  small  nations  that  would  face  the  same  kind
of  subversive  threat  from  without  if  the  Communists  were  to  succeed  in  \"iet-
Nam.  .  .  .

*  *  «

All  this,  of  course,  is  contrarv  to  the  1954-  Geneva  accords  on  \'iet-Nam  and  the
1962  agreement  on  Laos.  I  mention  the  latter  because  it  is  an  established  fact  that
Hanoi  has  been  both  threatening  Laos  and  using  Laos  as  a  corridor  for  supply-
ing personnel  and  arms  to  the  Met  Cong.

Our  State  Department  has  documented  the  character  and  intensity  of  Nonh
\"iet-Nam's  aggressive  efforts  since  1959  in  the  recent  white  paper,  and  in  the
similar  report  issued  in  1961.  The  1962  report  of  the  International  Control  Com-
mission for  Viet-Nam  also  spelled  out  North  \'iet-Nam"s  aggressive  actions  in
flagrant  violation  of  the  1954  and  1962  agreements.

*  *  *

The  Communists  are  fond  of  saying  that  whether  the  Viet  Cong  are  bom  in
the  North  or  South,  thev  are  still  Vietnamese  and  therefore  an  indigenous  revolt
must  be  taking  place.  Certainly,  ihev  are  Vietnamese,  and  the  North  Koreans
who  swept  across  their  boundary  in  1950  to  attack  South  Korea  were  also
Koreans.  However,  this  did  not  make  the  Korean  war  an  indigenous  revolt  from
the  point  of  view  of  either  world  securit\  or  in  terms  of  acceptable  standards  of
conduct.

Bv  the  same  token,  if  W  est  Germany  were  to  take  similar  action  against  East
Germany,  it  is  doubtful  that  the  East  Germans,  the  Soviet  Union,  and  the  rest
of  the  Communist  bloc  would  stand  aside  on  the  grounds  that  it  was  nothing
more  than  an  indigenous  affair.

The  simple  issue  is  that  military  personnel  and  arms  have  been  sent  across
an  international  demarcation  line  (just  as  valid  a  border  as  Korea  or  Germany)


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  733

contrar)'  to  international  agreements  and  law  to  destroy  the  freedom  of  a
neighboring  people."

♦  *  ♦

....  It  is  for  that  reason,  and  because  Hanoi  has  stepped  up  its  aggression,
that  the  Government  of  South  Viet-Nam  and  the  United  States  have  been  forced
to  increase  our  response  and  strike  through  the  air  at  the  true  source  of  the
aggression — North  Viet-Nam.  This  does  not  represent  a  change  of  purpose  on
our  part  but  a  change  in  the  means  we  believe  are  necessar\-  to  stem  aggression.

And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  our  actions  are  fully  justified  as  an  exercise  of
the  right  of  individual  and  collective  self-defense  recognized  bv  article  51  of
the  United  Nations  Charter  and  under  the  accepted  standards  of  international
law.

*  *  ♦

26.  Address  by  Secretary  Rusk,  Made  before  the  American  Society  of  Inter-
national Law  on  April  23,  1965,  "The  Control  of  Force  in  International  Re-
lations." Department  of  State  Bulletin,  May  10,  1965,  p,  697.

=^  *  *

What  Is  a  "War  of  National  Liberation"?

What  is  a  "war  of  national  liberation"?  It  is,  in  essence,  any  war  which  furthers
the  Communist  world  revolution — what,  in  broader  terms,  the  Communists  have
long  referred  to  as  a  "'just"  war.  The  term  "war  of  national  liberation"  is  used
not  onlv  to  denote  armed  insurrection  bv  people  still  under  colonial  rule — there
are  not  many  of  those  left  outside- the  Communist  world.  It  is  used  to  denote
any  effort  led  by  Communists  to  overthrow  bv  force  any  non-Communist  govern-
ment.

Thus  the  war  in  South  \'iet-Nam  is  called  a  ""war  of  national  liberation."  And
those  who  would  overthrow  various  other  non-Communist  governments  in  Asia.
Africa,  and  Latin  America  are  called  the  "forces  of  national  liberation."

Nobody  in  his  right  mind  would  deny  that  Venezuela  is  not  only  a  truly  in-
dependent nation  but  that  it  has  a  government  chosen  in  a  free  election.  But  the
leaders  of  the  Communist  insurgencv  in  \'enezuela  are  described  as  leaders  of  a
fight  for  "national  liberation" — not  onlv  bv  themselves  and  by  Castro  and  the
Chinese  Communists  but  bv  the  Soviet  Communists.

A  recent  editorial  in  Pravada  spoke  of  the  "peoples  of  Latm  .-Xmerica  .  .  .
marching  firmlv  along  the  path  of  struggle  for  their  national  independence"  and
said.  ".  .  .  the  upsurge  of  the  national  liberation  movement  in  Latin  American
countries  has  been  to  a  great  extent  a  result  of  the  activities  of  Communist
parties."  It  added:

"The  Soviet  people  ha\e  regarded  and  still  regard  it  as  their  sacred  duty  to
give  suppon  to  the  peoples  fighting  for  their  independence.  True  to  their  inter-
national dutv  the  Soviet  people  have  been  and  will  remain  on  the  side  of  the
Latin  American  patriots."

In  Communist  doctrine  and  practice,  a  non-Communist  government  may  be
labeled  and  denounced  as  "colonialist."  "reactionary."  or  a  "puppet."  and  any
state  so  labeled  by  the  Communists  automatically  becomes  fair  game — while
Communist  intervention  by  force  in  non-Communist  states  is  justified  as  "self-
defense"  or  part  of  the  "struggle  against  colonial  domination."  "Self-determina-


734 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill


tion"  seems  to  mean  that  any  Communist  nation  can  determine  bv  itself  that  any
non-Communist  state  is  a  victim  of  colonialist  domination  and  therefore  a  justi-
fiable target  for  a  "war  of  liberation.

As  the  risks  of  overt  aggression,  whether  nuclear  or  with  conventional  forces,
have  become  increasingly  evident,  the  Communists  have  put  increasing  stress  on
the  ""war  of  national  liberation."  The  Chinese  Communists  have  been  more
militant  in  language  and  behavior  than  the  Soviet  Communists.  But  the  Soviet
Communist  leadership  also  has  consistently  proclaimed  its  commitment  in
principle  to  support  wars  of  national  liberation.  This  commitment  was  reaffirmed
as  recentlv  as  Monday  of  this  week  bv  Mr.  Kosvgin  [Aleksai  N.  Kosvgin.  Chair-
man of  the  U.S.S.R.  Council  of  Ministers].

International  law  does  not  restrict  internal  revolution  within  a  state  or  revolu-
tion against  colonial  authority.  But  international  law  does  restrict  what  third
powers  mav  lawfully  do  in  support  of  insurrection.  It  is  these  restrictions  which
are  challenged  b\  the  doctrine,  and  violated  bv  the  practice,  of  "wars  of  libera-
tion."

It  is  plain  that  acceptance  of  the  doctrine  of  "wars  of  liberation"  would  amount
to  scuttling  the  modern  international  law  of  peace  which  the  charter  prescribes.
And  acceptance  of  the  practice  of  "wars  of  liberation,"  as  defined  bv  the  Com-
munists, would  mean  the  breakdown  of  peace  itself.

South  \'iet-\am's  Right  of  Self-Defense

\"iet-Nam  presents  a  clear  current  case  of  the  lawful  versus  the  unlawful  use
of  force.  I  would  agree  with  General  Giap  [V'o  Nguyen  Giap.  North  Metnamese
Commander  in  Chief]  and  other  Communists  that  it  is  a  test  case  for  "wars  of
national  liberation."  We  intend  to  meet  that  test.

Were  the  insurgency  in  South  \'iet-Nam  truly  indigenous  and  self-sustained,
international  law  would  not  be  involved.  But  the  fact  is  that  it  receives  vital
external  support — in  organization  and  direction,  in  training,  in  men.  in  weapons
and  other  supplies.  That  external  support  is  unlawful  for  a  double  reason.  First,
it  contravenes  general  international  law,  which  the  United  Nations  Charter  here
expresses.  Second,  it  contravenes  panicular  international  law:  the  1954  Geneva
accords  on  Met-Nam  and  the  1962  Geneva  agreements  on  Laos.

In  resisting  the  aggression  against  it.  the  Republic  of  \'iet-Nam  is  exercising
its  right  of  self-defense.  It  called  upon  us  and  other  states  for  assistance.  And  in
the  exercise  of  the  right  of  collective  self-defense  under  the  United  Nations
Charter,  we  and  other  nations  are  providing  such  assistance.

The  American  policv  of  assisting  South  \'iet-Nam  to  maintain  its  freedom
was  inaugurated  under  President  Eisenhower  and  continued  under  Presidents
Kennedy  and  Johnson.  Our  assistance  has  been  increased  because  the  aggression
from  the  North  has  been  augmented.  Our  assistance  now  encompasses  the
bombing  of  North  Viet-Nam.  The  bombing  is  designed  to  interdict,  as  far  as
possible,  and  to  inhibit,  as  far  as  mav  be  necessary,  continued  aggression  against
the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam.

\\'hen  that  aggression  ceases,  collective  measures  in  defense  against  it  will
cease.  As  President  Johnson  has  declared:

*.  .  .  if  that  aggression  is  stopf>ed.  the  people  and  Government  of  South  N'iet-
Nam  will  be  free  to  settle  their  own  future,  and  the  need  for  supporting  American
military  action  there  will  end."

The  fact  that  the  demarcation  line  between  North  and  South  Viet-Nam  was
intended  to  be  temporary  does  not  make  the  assault  on  South  \  iet-Nam  any


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  735

less  of  an  aggression.  The  demarcation  lines  between  North  and  South  Korea  and
between  East  and  West  Germany  are  temporary.  But  that  did  not  make  the  North
Korean  invasion  of  South  Korea  a  permissible  use  of  force.

Let's  not  forget  the  salient  features  of  the  1962  agreements  on  Laos.  Laos
was  to  be  independent  and  neutral.  All  foreign  troops,  regular  or  irregular,  and
other  military-  personnel  were  to  be  withdrawn  within  75  days,  except  a  limited
number  of  French  instructors  as  requested  by  the  Lao  Government.  No  arms
were  to  be  introduced  into  Laos  except  at  the  request  of  that  Government.  The
signatories  agreed  to  refrain  "from  ail  direct  or  indirect  interference  in  the
internal  affairs"  of  Laos.  Thev  promised  also  not  to  use  Lao  territory  to  inter-
vene in  the  internal  affairs  of  other  countries — a  stipulation  that  plainly  pro-
hibited the  passage  of  arms  and  men  from  North  Viet-Nam  to  South  Viet-Nam
by  way  of  Laos.  An  International  Control  Commission  of  three  was  to  assure
compliance  with  the  agreements.

What  happened?  The  non-Communist  elements  complied.  The  Communists
did  not.  At  no  time  since  that  agreement  was  signed  have  either  the  Pathet  Lao
or  the  North  Viet-Nam  authorities  complied  with  it.  The  North  Vietnamese  left
several  thousand  troops  there — the  backbone  of  almost  every  Pathet  Lao  battal-
ion. Use  of  the  corridor  through  Laos  to  South  Viet-Nam  continued.  And  the
Communists  barred  the  areas  under  their  control  both  to  the  Government  of
Laos  and  the  International  Control  Commission.

\ature  of  Struggle  in  VietSam

To  revert  to  Viet-Nam:  I  continue  to  hear  and  see  nonsense  about  the  nature
of  the  struggle  there.  I  sometimes  wonder  if  the  gullibility  of  educated  men  and
the  stubborn  disregard  of  plain  facts  by  men  who  are  supposed  to  be  helping
our  young  to  learn — especially  to  learn  how  to  think.

Hanoi  has  never  made  a  secret  of  its  designs.  It  publicly  proclaimed  in  1960
a  renewal  of  the  assault  on  South  Viet-Nam.  Quite  obviously  its  hopes  of  taking
over  South  Viet-Nam  from  within  had  withered  to  close  to  zero — and  the
remarkable  economic  and  social  progress  of  South  Viet-Nam  contrasted,  most
disagreeably  for  the  North  Vietnamese  Communists,  with  their  own  miserable
economic  performance.

The  facts  about  the  external  involvement  have  been  documented  in  white
papers  and  other  publications  of  the  Department  of  State.  The  International
Control  Commission  has  held  that  there  is  evidence  -beyond  reasonable  doubt"
of  North  Vietnamese  intervention.

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Viet  Cong  has  any  significant  popular  following
in  South  Viet-Nam.  It  relies  heavily  on  ^terror.  Mosl  of  its  reinforcements  in
recent  months  have  been  North  Vietnamese  from  the  North  Vietnamese  .Army.

Let  us  be  clear  about  what  is  involved  today  in  Southeast  Asia.  We  are  not
involved  with  empty  phrases  or  conceptions  which  ride  upon  the  clouds.  We
are  talking  about  the  vital  national  interests  of  the  United  States  in  the  peace
of  the  Pacific.  We  are  talking  about  the  appetite  for  aggression — an  appetite
which  srows  upon  feedine  and  which  is  proclaimed  to  be  insatiable.  We  are
talking  about  the  safety  of  nations  with  whom  we  are  allied — and  the  integrity  of
the  American  commitment  to  join  in  meeting  attack.

It  is  true  that  we  also  believe  that  every  small  state  has  a  right  to  be  un-
molested by  its  neighbors  even  though  it  is  within  reach  of  a  great  power.  It  is
true  that  we  are  committed  to  general  principles  of  law  and  procedure  which
reject  the  idea  that  men  and  arms  can  be  sent  freely  across  frontiers  to  absorb


736 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  Ill

a  neighbor.  But  underlying  the  general  principles  is  the  harsh  reality  that  our
own  security  is  threatened  by  those  who  would  embark  upon  a  course  of  aggres-
sion whose  announced  ultimate  purpose  is  our  own  destruction.

Once  again  we  hear  expressed  the  views  which  cost  the  men  of  my  generation
a  terrible  price  in  World  War  II.  We  are  told  that  Southeast  Asia  is  far  away —
but  so  were  Manchuria  and  Ethiopia.  We  are  told  that,  if  we  insist  that  someone
stop  shooting,  that  is  asking  them  for  unconditional  surrender.  We  are  told  that
perhaps  the  aggressor  will  be  content  with  just  one  more  bite.  We  are  told  that,
if  we  prove  faithless  on  one  commitment,  perhaps  others  would  believe  us  about
other  commitments  in  other  places.  We  are  told  that,  if  we  stop  resisting,  per-
haps the  other  side  will  have  a  change  of  heart.  We  are  asked  to  stop  hitting
bridges  and  radar  sites  and  ammunition  depots  without  requiring  that  the  other
side  stop  its  slaughter  of  thousands  of  civilians  and  its  bombings  of  schools  and
hotels  and  hospitals  and  railways  and  buses.

Surely  we  have  learned  over  the  past  three  decades  that  the  acceptance  of
aggression  leads  only  to  a  sure  catastrophe.  Surely  we  have  learned  that  the
aggressor  must  face  the  consequences  of  his  action  and  be  saved  from  the
frightful  miscalculation  that  brings  all  to  ruin.  It  is  the  purpose  of  law  to  guide
men  away  from  such  exents,  to  establish  rules  of  conduct  which  are  deeply
rooted  in  the  reality  of  experience.

27.  Statement  by  President  Johnson  at  a  News  Conference  at  the  White  House
on  April  27,  1965  and  Transcript  of  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNa-
mara's  News  Conference  of  April  26,  1965  on  the  Situation  in  Viet-Nam,
Department  of  State  Bulletin,  May  17,  1965,  p.  78.

Statement  by  President  Johnson

*  *  *

Independent  South  Viet-Nam  has  been  attacked  by  North  Viet-Nam.  The
object  of  that  attack  is  conquest.

Defeat  in  South  Viet-Nam  would  be  to  deliver  a  friendly  nation  to  terror  and
repression.  It  would  encourage  and  spur  on  those  who  seek  to  conquer  all  free
nations  within  their  reach.  Our  own  welfare  and  our  own  freedom  would  be  in
danger.

This  is  the  clearest  lesson  of  our  time.  From  Munich  until  today  we  have
learned  that  to  yield  to  aggression  brings  only  greater  threats — and  more  destruc-
tive war.  To  stand  firm  is  the  only  guarantee  of  lasting  peace.

*  *  *

Viet  Cong  Weapons  from  External  Sources

The  latest  step  has  been  the  covert  infiltration  of  a  regular  combat  unit  of
the  North  Vietnamese  Army  into  South  Viet-Nam.  Evidence  accumulated
within  the  last  month  now  confirms  the  presence  in  northwest  Kontum  Province
— that  is  in  the  central  highland  area  of  South  Viet-Nam,  around  Pleiku  and
north  of  Pleiku — recent  evidence  which  we  have  received  confirms  the  presence
in  that  northwest  Kontum  Province  of  the  2d  Battalion  of  the  325th  Division  of
the  regular  North  Vietnamese  Army.  It  is  important  to  recognize,  I  think,  that


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  737

the  great  bulk  of  the  weapons  which  the  Viet  Cong  are  using  and  with  which
they  are  suppHed  come  from  external  sources.

*  *  *

[Secretary  McNamara]

Communist  Strategy

Q.  "Mr.  Secretary,  a  personal  question.  As  the  fighting  has  increased  in  Viet-
Nam,  more  and  more  of  the  U.S.  critics  of  the  administration's  policy  have  been
referring  to  this  as  'McNamara's  war.'  What  is  your  reaction?  Does  this  annoy
you?"

A.  "It  does  not  annoy  me  because  I  think  it  is  a  war  that  is  being  fought  to
preserve  the  freedom  of  a  very  brave  people,  an  independent  nation.  It  is  a  war
which  is  being  fought  to  counter  the  strategy  of  the  Communists,  a  strategy  which
Premier  Khrushchev  laid  out  very  clearly  in  the  very  famous  speech  which  he
made  on  January  6,  1961.

"You  may  recall  that  at  that  time  he  divided  all  wars  into  three  categories.  He
spoke  of  world  wars,  meaning  nuclear  wars;  he  spoke  of  local  wars,  by  which  he
meant  large-scale  conventional  wars;  and  then  he  spoke  of  what  he  called  'wars
of  liberation.'

"He  ruled  out  world  wars  as  being  too  dangerous  to  the  existence  of  the  Com-
munist states.  He  ruled  out  local  wars  because  he  said  they  could  very  easily
escalate  into  nuclear  wars  which  would  lead  to  the  ultimate  destruction  of  the
Communist  states.  But  he  strongly  endorsed  'wars  of  liberation'  and  made  it
perfectly  clear  that  it  would  be  through  application  of  that  strategy  that  the
Communists  would  seek  to  subvert  independent  nations  throughout  the  world,
seek  to  extend  their  domination,  their  political  domination,  of  other  nations.

"It  is  very  clear  that  that  is  the  Communist  Chinese  strategy  in  Southeast  Asia.
It  is  a  strategy  I  feel  we  should  oppose,  and,  while  it  is  not  my  war,  I  don't
object  to  my  name  being  associated  with  it."

*  *  *

28.  Statement  by  Secretary  Ball  on  May  3,  1965  at  the  Opening  Session  of  the
SEATO  Council  Ministers'  1 0th  Meeting  at  London,  Department  of  State
Bulletin,  June  7,  1965,  p.  922.

*  *  *

We  have,  however,  come  to  realize  from  the  experience  of  the  past  years  that
aggression  must  be  dealt  with  wherever  it  occurs  and  no  matter  what  mask  it
may  wear.  Neither  we  nor  other  nations  of  the  free  world  were  always  alert
to  this.  In  the  1930's  Manchuria  seemed  a  long  way  away,  but  it  was  only  10
years  from  Manchuria  to  Pearl  Harbor.  Ethiopia  seemed  a  long  way  away.  The
rearmament  of  the  Rhineland  was  regarded  as  regrettable  but  not  worth  a
shooting  war.  Yet  after  that  came  Austria.  And  after  Austria,  Czechoslovakia.
Then  Poland.  Then  the  Second  World  War.

The  central  issue  we  face  in  South  Viet-Nam  should,  I  think,  be  clear  for  all
to  see.  It  is  whether  a  small  state  on  the  periphery  of  Communist  power  should
be  permitted  to  maintain  its  freedom.  And  that  is  an  issue  of  vital  importance  to
small  states  everywhere.

Moreover,  it  is  an  issue  that  affects  the  security  of  the  whole  free  world.


738 Gravel  Edition,  The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  Ill


Never  has  that  point  been  more  succinctly  stated  than  by  one  of  the  greatest  of
all  Englishmen,  Sir  Winston  Churchill.  'The  belief,"  he  said,  "that  security  can
be  obtained  by  throwing  a  small  state  to  the  wolves  is  a  fatal  illusion."  And  let
us  not  forget  that  General  [Vo  Nguyen]  Giap,  the  head  of  the  North  Vietnamese
armed  forces,  has  said  quite  explicitly  that  if  the  so-called  "war  of  liberation"
technique  succeeds  in  Viet-Nam,  it  can  succeed  "everywhere  in  the  world."

*  *  *

29.  Remarks  by  President  Johnson  at  White  House  Before  House  and  Senate
Committees  on  May  4,  1965,  "Congress  Approves  Supplemental  Appropia-
tion  for  Vietnam,"  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  May  24,  1965,  p.  817.

*  *  *

This  is  not  the  same  kind  of  aggression  which  the  world  has  long  been  used
to.  Instead  of  the  sweep  of  invading  armies  there  is  the  steady  and  the  deadly
attack  in  the  night  by  guerrilla  bands  that  come  without  warning,  that  kill  people
while  they  sleep.

In  Viet-Nam  we  pursue  that  same  principle  which  has  infused  American
action  in  the  Far  East  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.  There  are  those  who  ask  why
this  responsibility  should  be  ours.  The  answer,  I  think,  is  simple.  There  is  no  one
else  who  can  do  the  job.  Our  power  alone,  in  the  final  test,  can  stand  between
expanding  communism  and  independent  Asian  nations.

Thus,  when  India  was  attacked,  it  looked  to  us  for  help,  and  we  gave  it  im-
mediately. We  believe  that  Asia  should  be  directed  by  Asians.  But  that  means  that
each  Asian  people  must  have  the  right  to  find  is  own  way,  not  that  one  group
or  one  nation  should  overrun  all  the  others.

Now  make  no  mistake  about  it,  the  aim  in  Viet-Nam  is  not  simply  the  con-
quest of  the  South,  tragic  as  that  would  be.  It  is  to  show  that  American  com-
mitment is  worthless,  and  they  would  like  very  much  to  do  that,  and  once  they
succeed  in  doing  that,  the  gates  are  down  and  the  road  is  open  to  expansion  and
to  endless  conquest.  Moreover,  we  are  directly  committed  to  the  defense  of
South  Viet-Nam  beyond  any  question.

In  1954  we  signed  the  Southeast  Asia  Collective  Defense  Treaty  and  that
treaty  committed  us  to  act  to  meet  aggression  against  South  Viet-Nam.  .  .  .

*  *  *

30.  Address  by  William  P.  Bundy  Before  Dallas  Council  on  World  Affairs  on
May  13,  1965,  "Reality  and  Myth  Concerning  South  Vietnam,"  Department
of  State  Bulletin,  June  7,  1965,  p.  893.

*  *  *

Myths  on  the  South  Viet-Nam  Story

"This  is  the  simple  basic  story  of  what  has  happened  in  South  Viet-Nam  since
1954.  Let  me  now  turn  to  certain  myths  that  have  arisen  concerning  that  story.

"First,  there  is  the  question  of  the  attitude  of  the  South  Vietnamese  Govern-
ment and  ourselves  toward  the  reunification  of  Viet-Nam  through  free  elections.
The  1954  Geneva  accords  had  provided  for  free  elections  by  secret  ballot  in
1956,  and  it  has  been  alleged  that  the  failure  to  proceed  with  these  elections  in


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  739

some  way  justified  Hanoi's  action  in  resorting  to  military  measures,  first  slowly
and  then  by  the  stepped-up  infiltration  beginning  in  1959  and  1960.

The  facts  are  quite  otherwise.  The  Eisenhower  administration  had  fully  sup-
ported the  principle  of  free  elections  under  international  supervision,  in  Viet-
Nam  as  in  other  situations  where  a  country  was  divided,  Korea  and  Germany.

A  similar  position  was  taken  by  President  Diem  of  South  Viet-Nam.  For
example,  in  January  1955  Diem  made  it  clear  to  an  American  correspondent
that:

"The  clauses  providing  for  the  1956  elections  are  extremely  vague.  But  at  one
point  they  are  clear — in  stipulating  that  the  elections  are  to  be  free.  Everything
will  now  depend  on  how  free  elections  are  defined.  The  President  said  he  would
wait  to  see  whether  the  conditions  of  freedom  would  exist  in  North  Viet-Nam
at  the  time  scheduled  for  the  elections.  He  asked  what  would  be  the  good  of
an  impartial  counting  of  votes  if  the  voting  had  been  preceded  in  North  Viet-
Nam  by  the  ruthless  propaganda  and  terrorism  on  the  part  of  a  police  state."

I  do  not  think  any  of  us  would  dissent  from  this  description  of  what  is  re-
quired for  free  elections.  And  the  simple  fact  is  that,  when  the  issue  arose  con-
cretely in  1956,  the  regime  in  Hanoi — while  it  kept  calling  for  elections  in  its
propaganda — made  no  effort  to  respond  to  the  call  of  the  Soviet  Union  and
Great  Britain,  as  cochairmen  of  the  1954  Geneva  conference,  for  the  setting  up
of  the  appropriate  machinery  for  free  elections.

The  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.  For  North  Viet-Nam  in  1956 — and  indeed
today — is  a  Communist  state  and  in  1956  North  Viet-Nam  was  in  deep  trouble.
Its  own  leaders  admitted  as  much  in  their  party  congress  in  the  fall  of  1956  in
a  statement  by  General  [Vo  Nguyen]  Giap  referring  to  widespread  terror,  failure
to  respect  the  principles  of  faith  and  worship  in  the  so-called  land  reform  pro-
gram, the  use  of  torture  as  a  normal  practice,  and  a  whole  list  of  excesses  which
even  the  Communists  had  come  to  realize  went  too  far.

So  the  answer  is,  I  repeat,  simple.  There  was  no  chance  of  free  elections  in
North  Viet-Nam  in  1956.  We  shall  wait  to  see  whether  there  will  ever  be  such  a
chance  in  the  future.

Second,  there  is  the  myth  that  the  Viet  Cong  movement  has  any  significant
relationship  to  the  political  opposition  to  President  Diem,  I  have  referred  already
to  the  unfortunate  trends  that  developed  after  1959  in  President  Diem's  rule.
There  was  unquestionably  opposition  to  him  within  South  Viet-Nam,  and  that
opposition  included  many  distinguished  South  Vietnamese,  some  of  whom  went
into  exile  as  a  result.  Others  stayed  in  Saigon,  and  some  were  imprisoned.

But  the  point  is  this.  The  men  who  led  the  opposition  to  Diem  are  not  today
in  the  Viet  Cong.  On  the  contrary,  the  present  Prime  Minister,  Dr.  [Phan  Huyl
Quat,  and  his  group  of  so-called  Caravellistes,  all  of  whom  opposed  Diem,  are
today  the  leaders  of  the  Government.  These  men,  and  their  followers,  are  na-
tionalists and  strongly  anti-Communist;  not  one  of  them,  of  any  significance,
went  over  to  the  Viet  Cong.

This  brings  me  to  the  question  of  the  so-called  National  Liberation  Front,  which
is  the  political  facade,  made  in  Hanoi,  for  the  Viet  Cong  movement.  I  doubt  if
any  of  you  can  name  a  single  leader  of  the  National  Liberation  Front.  But  these
are  faceless  men  installed  by  Hanoi  to  give  the  appearance  of  bourgeois  and
truly  South  Vietnamese  support  for  the  operation.

Lest  you  think  I  exaggerate,  I  refer  you  to  the  excellent  recent  account  by
Georges  Chaffard,  a  French  correspondent  for  UExpress  in  Paris,  who  recently
visited  the  Viet  Cong  and  interviewed  some  of  its  "leaders."  Chaffard  describes
vividly  what  these  men  are,  including  their  strong  desire  to  find  a  replacement


740 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  Ill

for  the  obscure  lawyer  named  Tho  who  is  the  titular  head  of  the  front  and  who
apparently  is  the  only  figure  Hanoi  can  find  who  was  even  in  Saigon  or  participat-
ing in  South  Vietnamese  political  life  during  the  latter  Diem  period.  Chaffard's
conclusion,  which  I  quote,  is  that:

"The  Front  for  National  Liberation  structure  is  the  classic  structure  of  a
'National  Front'  before  the  taking  over  of  power  by  the  Communists."

So  there  should  be  no  doubt  of  the  true  nature  of  the  Viet  Cong  and  its  Libera-
tion Front,  or  that  they  are  a  completely  different  movement  from  the  political
opposition  to  Diem.  As  to  the  latter,  and  its  present  emergence  into  a  truly  na-
tionalistic amalgam  of  forces — regional,  religious,  military,  and  civilian — I  can
perhaps  best  refer  you  to  the  excellent  lead  article  by  Mr.  George  Carver,  an
American  with  long  experience  in  Saigon,  in  the  April  issue  of  Foreign  Affairs.
Mr.  Carver  tells  a  fascinating  story  of  the  emergence  of  these  new  nationalistic
forces  in  South  Viet-Nam,  with  all  their  difficulties  and  weaknesses,  but  with  the
fundamental  and  overriding  fact  that  they  are  the  true  new  voice  of  South  Viet-
Nam  and  that  they  have  never  had  anything  to  do  with  the  Viet  Cong.

*  *  *

The  Korean  War  also  had  an  important  message  for  the  Communists — and  as
a  result  we  may  have  seen  the  last  of  the  old  classical  war  of  open  invasions.  Korea
proved  to  the  Communists  that  they  had  to  find  a  more  effective  strategy  of
conquest.  They  chose  to  refine  a  technique  that  they  had  used  on  a  primitive
scale  and  to  their  ultimate  defeat  in  Greece,  Malaya,  and  the  Philippines.  I  am
referring  to  the  so-called  "war  of  national  liberation."  This  is  the  label  Khrushchev
employed  in  1961  to  describe  Communist  strategy  for  the  future — aggression
directed  and  supplied  from  outside  a  nation,  but  disguised  in  nationalist  trappings
so  that  it  might  pass  as  an  indigenous  insurrection.

*  *  *

The  Communists  have  expanded  upon  their  "wars  of  liberation"  technique.
Africa  and  Latin  America  are  already  feeling  the  threat  of  such  thrusts.  But  by
far  the  most  highly  sophisticated  and  ambitious  attempt  at  such  aggression  by
the  Communists  is  taking  place  today  in  Viet-Nam.

*  *  *

The  "wars  of  liberation"  strategy  is  at  this  time  an  essential  element  of  the
expansionist  policy  of  Communist  China  and  her  Asian  ally.  North  Viet-Nam.  If
we  allow  it  to  succeed  in  Viet-Nam,  we  would  be  confirming  Peiping's  assertion
that  armed  struggle  is  a  more  productive  Communist  course  than  Moscow's  doc-
trine of  peaceful  coexistence.  "Wars  of  national  liberation"  would  most  certainly
spread.  Red  China  has  already  identified  Thailand  as  the  next  target  for  a  so-called
"liberation  struggle,"  and  its  Foreign  Minister  Chen  Yi  has  promised  that  it  will
be  launched  before  the  end  of  this  year.

The  major  test  to  date  of  this  new  Communist  strategy  is  taking  place  today
in  Viet-Nam.  Even  the  Asian  Communists  have  acknowledged  the  larger  impli-
cations of  this  confrontation.  Not  long  ago  General  Giap,  the  well-known  leader
of  North  Viet-Nam's  army,  declared  that,

"South  Viet-Nam  is  the  model  of  the  national  liberation  movement  of  our  time.
...  If  the  special  warfare  that  the  U.S.  imperialists  are  testing  in  South  Viet-
Nam  is  overcome,  then  it  can  be  defeated  everywhere  in  the  world."

In  another  recent  comment,  North  Viet-Nam's  Premier  Pham  Van  Dong  said
that:


Justification  oj  the  War — Public  Statements  741


"The  experience  of  our  compatriots  in  South  Viet-Nam  attracts  the  attention
of  the  world,  especially  the  peoples  of  South  America."

The  People's  Daily,  Peiping's  official  newspaper,  echoed  those  statements  in
an  editorial  on  May  Day  of  this  year.  It  said:

"The  Vietnamese  people's  struggle  against  U.S.  imperialism  has  become  the
focal  point  of  the  international  class  struggle  at  this  moment.  This  is  an  acid  test
for  all  political  forces  in  the  world."

Our  firm  posture  in  Viet-Nam,  then,  seeks  peace  and  security  in  three  related
dimensions:  for  South  Viet-Nam,  for  the  sake  of  Southeast  Asia's  independence
and  security  generally,  and  for  the  other  small  nations  everywhere  that  would
face  the  same  kind  of  subversive  threat  from  without  if  the  Communists  were  to
succeed  in  Vietnam.  .  .  .

*  *  *

31.  Address  by  President  Johnson  Before  the  Association  of  American  Editorial
Cartoonists  at  the  White  House  on  May  13,  1965,  "Viet-Nam:  The  Third
Face  of  the  War,"  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  May  31,  1965,  p.  838.

*  *  *

....  Communist  China  apparently  desires  the  war  to  continue  whatever  the
cost  to  their  allies.  Their  target  is  not  merely  South  Viet-Nam;  it  is  Asia.  Their
objective  is  not  the  fulfillment  of  Vietnamese  nationalism;  it  is  to  erode  and  to
discredit  America's  ability  to  help  prevent  Chinese  domination  over  all  of  Asia.

*  *  *

32.  Address  by  William  P.  Bundy,,  Assistant  Secretary  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,
Before  the  Faculty  Forum  of  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  on
May  27,  1965,  ''A  Perspective  on  U.S.  Policy  in  Viet-Nam,"  Department  of
State  Bulletin,  June  21,  1965,  p.  1001.

*  *  *

For  the  underlying  fact  is  that  there  cannot  be  a  balance  of  power  in  Asia
without  us.  Under  the  control  of  a  Communist  regime  still  at  the  peak  of  its
ideological  fervor,  a  unified  mainland  China  today  does  threaten  the  outnumbered
newly  independent  nations  of  Asia,  not  merely  in  the  sense  of  influence  but  in
the  sense  of  domination  and  the  denial  of  national  self-determination  and  inde-
pendence— not  necessarily  drastically  or  at  once,  for  the  Chinese  Communist
leaders  are  patient;  not  necessarily,  or  even  in  their  eyes  preferably,  by  conven-
tional armed  attack,  but  surely  and  inexorably,  as  they  see  it,  through  the  tech-
nique of  spurious  national  movements  deriving  their  real  impetus  and  support
from  external  and  Communist  sources.

And  in  this  central  Communist  effort,  the  other  Communist  nations  of  Asia,
North  Viet-Nam  and  North  Korea,  are  willing  partners.  They  have  their  na-
tional character,  they  are  not  true  satellites — indeed,  deep  down,  they  too  fear
Chinese  domination.  Yet,  so  long  as  the  spoils  are  fairly  divided,  they  are  work-
ing together  with  Communist  China  toward  a  goal  the  opposite  of  the  one  we
seek,  subjugation  of  the  true  national  independence  of  smaller  countries,  an  Asia
of  spheres  of  domination."


742 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol  III

For  South  Viet-Nam  is  the  outcome  of  a  very  particular  sHce  of  recent  Asian
history.  Only  in  Viet-Nam  was  a  genuine  nationalist  movement  taken  over  by
Communist  leaders  and  transmuted  into  the  Communist  state  of  North  Viet-
Nam.  And  so  the  French,  instead  of  yielding  gradually  or  with  the  fullest  possible
preparation  for  self-government,  as  the  British  wisely  did  in  India,  Pakistan,  and
Malaysia,  were  effectively  driven  out  in  1954  and  Viet-Nam  was  divided.

*  *  *

By  1956,  to  paraphrase  the  same  eminent  scholar,  Communist  China  and
North  Viet-Nam,  all  propaganda  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  simply  were
not  willing  to  risk  the  loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  in  elections,  and,  perhaps  most
crucial,  the  conditions  for  free  elections  did  not  prevail  in  either  North  or  South
Viet-Nam.  So  the  date  passed,  and  the  dividing  line  between  the  two  Viet-Nams
became  a  political  division  as  in  Germany  and  Korea,  with  reunification  left  to
the  future.  And  in  the  course  of  time  another  30-odd  nations  recognized  South
Viet-Nam,  and  recognize  it  today.

(By  the  way,  the  eminent  scholar  I  have  just  been  citing  was  Professor  Hans  J.
Morgenthau,  writing  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  "America's  Stake  in  Viet-Nam,"
published  in  1956.  One  of  the  other  participants  in  that  conference  was  the
then  junior  Senator  from  Massachusetts.  He  was  a  bit  more  downright  than  the
professor,  saying  that  "neither  the  United  States  nor  Free  Viet-Nam  is  ever
going  to  be  a  party  to  an  election  obviously  stacked  and  subverted  in  advance.")

Since  1956  two  different  strands  have  dominated  developments  in  South  Viet-
Nam.  One  is  a  genuine  nationalist  internal  political  ferment,  in  which  the  South
Vietnamese  themselves  are  seeking  a  lasting  political  base  for  their  country — in
the  face  of  the  same  problems  other  new  nations  have  faced,  but  compounded  by
the  colonial  heritage  of  lack  of  training  and  divide-and-rule  tactics.  That  ferment
should  not  surprise  us;  almost  every  new  nation  has  gone  through  it — for  example,
Korea  and  Pakistan.  Under  Diem  it  drove  many  distinguished  South  Vietnamese
to  exile  or  prison,  from  1962  until  early  this  year  it  seriously  weakened  the  de-
fense of  the  nation,  and  it  now  has  brought  into  power  a  regime  led  by  men  who
were  the  real  opponents  of  Diem  and  are  something  close  to  the  true  voice  of
South  Vietnamese  nationalism — men,  too,  who  are  already  widening  the  base  of
support  and  holding  local  elections.

*  *  *

The  other,  and  entirely  different,  strand  has  been  Hanoi's  effort  to  take  over
the  South  by  subversive  aggression.  On  this  the  facts  are  plain  and  have  been  fully
set  out,  though  still  in  summary  form,  in  the  white  papers  published  in  December
of  1961  and  February  1965.  If  these  do  not  convince  you,  read  Hanoi's  own
pronouncements  over  the  years,  the  eyewitness  accounts  of  the  tons  of  weapons
found  just  in  recent  months,  the  personal  interrogation  of  a  typical  infiltrated
Viet  Cong  by  Seymour  Topping  in  Sunday's  New  York  Times,  or  the  recent
accounts  by  the  Frenchman,  George  Chaffard,  who  concluded  that  the  so-called
National  Liberation  Front  was  a  classic  example  of  the  type  of  Communist
organization  used  to  take  over  another  country.

In  short,  North  Viet-Nam  has  been  from  the  start,  quite  proudly  and  un-
ashamedly, what  President  Johnson  has  called  the  heartbeat  of  the  Viet  Cong.
As  in  Greece,  the  Viet  Cong  have  won  control  of  major  areas  of  the  country,
playing  in  part  on  propaganda  and  the  undoubted  weaknesses  of  Diem  and  his
successors,  but  relying  basically  on  massive  intimidation  of  civilians.  Over  the
years,  the  rate  of  civilian  casualties — deliberate  action  casualties,  killed,  wounded


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  743

and  kidnapped — has  been  about  40  a  day  in  South  Viet-Nam;  civilian  officials
have  been  particular  targets,  with  the  obvious  aim  of  crippling  the  government
structure.

*  *  *

I  come  now  to  the  choice  of  methods.  Till  1961  President  Eisenhower  and
President  Kennedy  limited  our  help  to  a  massive  economic  effort  and  to  the
supply  of  military  equipment  under  the  terms  of  the  Geneva  accords.  When,  after
2  years  of  intensified  effort  from  the  North,  the  situation  had  become  serious  in
late  1961,  President  Kennedy  made  the  decision  to  send  thousands  of  our  military
men  for  advisory  and  other  roles  short  of  the  commitment  of  combat  units.
President  Johnson  intensified  this  effort  in  every  possible  way  and  only  in  Febru-
ar\'  of  this  year  took  the  further  decision,  urged  by  the  South  Vietnamese  them-
selves, to  do  what  would  have  been  justified  all  along — and  had  never  been  ex-
cluded— engage  in  highly  selective  and  measured  military  bombing  of  the  North
itself,  still  coupled  with  every  possible  effort  to  assist  in  the  South  in  the  struggle
which  only  the  South  Vietnamese  can  win  there.

*  *  *

33.  Address  by  President  Johnson  in  Chicago,  Illinois  on  June  3,  1965,  "The
Peace  of  Mankind,"  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  June  21,  1965,  p.  987.

*  *  *

In  the  1930's  we  made  our  fate  not  by  what  we  did  but  what  we  Americans
failed  to  do.  We  propelled  ourselves  and  all  mankind  toward  tragedy,  not  by
decisiveness  but  bv  vacillation,  not  by  determination  and  resolution  but  by  hesi-
tancy and  irresolution,  not  by  action  but  by  inaction.

The  failure  of  free  men  in  the  1930's  was  not  of  the  sword  but  of  the  soul.
And  there  just  must  be  no  such  failure  in  the  1960's.


744


Glossary


AAA Antiaircraft  Artillery
ACR Armored  Cavalry  Regiment
ABM Antiballistic  Missile
ABN  Airborne

ADP Automatic  Data  Processing
AFB Air  Force  Base
AID Agency  for  International  Develop-
ment

AIROPS Air  Operations
AM  Airmobile
AMB  Ambassador
ANG Air  National  Guard
APB Self-propelled  barracks  ship
ARL Landing  craft  repair  ship
ARVN Army  of  the  Republic  of  [South]
Vietnam

ASA U.S.  Army  Security  Agency
ASAP As  soon  as  possible
ASD Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense
BAR Browning  automatic  rifle
BDE  Brigade

BLT Battalion  Landing  Team

BN  Battalion

BOB Bureau  of  the  Budget

B-52 U.S.  heavy  bomber

B-57 U.S.  medium  bomber

CAP Combined  Action  Platoon

CAS Saigon  Office  of  the  U.S.  Central

Intelligence  Agency
CDC Combat  Development  Command
CG Civil  Guard
CHICOM Chinese  Communist
CHMAAG Chief, Military  Assistance

Advisory  Group
CI  Counterinsurgency
CIA Central  Intelligence  Agency
CIDG Civilian Irregular  Detachment
Group

CINCPAC Commander  in  Chief,  Pa-
cific

CIP Counterinsurgency  Plan

CNO  VNN Chief  of  Naval  Operations,

Vietnamese  Navy
CJCS Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
CMD Capital  Military  District
COMUS U.S.  Commander
COMUSMACV Commander,  U.S.  Mili-
tary Assistance  Com-
mand, Vietnam


CONARC Continental  Army  Command
CONUS Continental  United  States
CORDS Civil  Operations  and  Revolu-
tionary Development  Support
[pacification]
COS Chief  of  Station,  CIA
CPR Chinese  Peoples  Republic
CPSVN Comprehensive  Plan  for  South

Vietnam
CTZ Corps  tactical  zone
CY Calendar  year
DCM Deputy  Chief  of  Mission
DCPG Defense Command  Planning
Group

DEPTEL [State]  Department  telegram
DESOTO Destroyer  patrols  off  North
Vietnam

DIA Defense  Intelligence  Agency
DMZ Demilitarized Zone  separating

North  and  South  Vietnam
DOD Department  of  Defense
DPM Draft  Presidential  Memorandum

[from  the  Secretary  of  Defense]
DRV Democratic  Republic  of  [North]

Vietnam

DULTE Cable  identifier,  from  Secretary

of  State  Dulles  to  addressee
ECM Electronic  Countermeasures
EXDIS Exclusive  (high  level)  distribu-
tion

FAL  and  FAR Royal  Armed  Forces  of
Laos

FARMGATE  Clandestine  U.S.  Air
Force  unit  in  Vietnam,
1964

FE  and  FEA Bureau  of  Far  Eastern
Affairs  in  the  State  De-
partment
EEC French  Expeditionary  Corps
FLAMING  DART Code name  of
bombing  opera-
tions, in  reprisal  for
attacks on  U.S.
forces

FOA Foreign Operations  Administra-
tion

FWMA Free  World  Military  Assistance
FWMAF Free  World  Military  Assist-
ance Force


Glossary  745


FY Fiscal  Year

FYI For  your  information

GRC Government  of  the  Republic  of

China  (Nationalist  China)
GVN Government  of  [South]  Vietnam
G-3 U.S.  Army  General  Staff,  Branch

for  Plans  and  Operations
HES Hamlet  Evaluation  System
HNC High  National  Council
Hop  Tac Program  to  clear  and  hold

land  around  Saigon,  1964
IBP International  Balance  of  Payments
ICA International  Cooperation  Admin-
istration

ICC International  Control  Commission
IDA Institute  for  Defense  Analyses
IMCSH Inter-ministerial  Committee  for

Strategic  Hamlets
INR Bureau  of  Intelligence  and  Re-
search in  the  Department  of  State
ISA Office  of  International  Security  Af-
fairs in  the  Department  of  Defense

I  Corps Northern military region  of

South  Vietnam

II  Corps Central military region  in

South  Vietnam

III  Corps Military  region  in  South  Viet-

nam surrounding  Saigon

IV  Corps Southern  military  region  in

South  Vietnam
ICS Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
JCSM Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  Memoran-
dum

JGS Vietnamese  Joint  General  Staff

JOC Joint  Operations  Center

Joint  Staff Staff organization for  the

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
JUSPAO Joint  United  States  Public  Af-
fairs Office,  Saigon
J-2 Intelligence  Branch,  U.S.  Army
KANZUS Korean, Australian,  New

Zealand,  and  U.S.
KIA Killed  in  action
LANTFLT Atlantic  Fleet
LOC Lines  of  communications  (roads,

bridges,  rail)
LST Tank  Landing  Ship
LTC Lt.  Col.

MAAG Military Assistance  Advisory
Group

MAB Marine  Amphibious  Brigade
MAC Military  Assistance  Command
MACCORDS Military  Assistance  Com-
mand,  Civil  Operations
and  Revolutionary  Devel-
opment Support
MAF Marine  Amphibious  Force
MAP Military  Assistance  Program


MAROPS Maritime  Operations
MEB Marine  Expeditionary  Brigade
MEF Marine  Expeditionary  Force
MIA Missing  in  action
MDAP Mutual  Defense  Assistance  Pro-
gram

MOD Minister  of  Defense
MORD Ministry  of  Revolutionary  De-
velopment

MRC  Military  Revolutionary  Commit-
tee

MRS Highland  Area
NATO North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organiza-
tion

NCO Non-commissioned  officer
NFLSV National  Front  for  the  Libera-
tion of  South  Vietnam
NIE National  Intelligence  Estimate
NLF National  Liberation  Front
NODIS No distribution (beyond  ad-
dressee)

NSA  National  Security  Agency  (special-
izes in  electronic  intelligence,  i.e.
monitoring  radio  communications)

NSAM  National  Security  Action  Mem-
orandum (pronounced  nas-sam;
described  presidential  decisions
under  Kennedy  and  Johnson)

NSC National  Security  Council

NVA North  Vietnamese  Army

NVN North  Vietnam

OB Order  of  battle

OCO  Office  of  Civil  Operations  [pacifi-
cation]

O&M Operations  and  Management
Opcon Operations  Control
OPLAN Operations  Plan
Ops  Operations

OSA  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  the
Army

OSD Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense
PACFLT Pacific  Fleet
PACOM Pacific  Command
PAT Political  Action  Team
PAVN People's  Army  of  [North]  Viet-
nam

PBR River  Patrol  Boat
PDJ Plaine  Des  Jarres,  Laos
PF Popular  Forces
PFF Police  Field  Force
PL Pathet  Lao

PNG Provisional  National  Government
POL Petroleum,  oil,  lubricants
POLAD Political  adviser  (usually.  State
Department  representative  as-
signed to a military  com-
mander)

PRV People's  Republic  of  Vietnam


746  Glossary


PSYOP Psychological  Operations
qte  Quote

RAS River  Assault  Squadron
RCT Regimental  Combat  Team
RD Rural  (or  Revolutionary)  Develop-
ment

RECCE  Reconnaissance

Reclama Protest  against  a  cut  in  budget

or  program
RF Regional  Forces
RLAF Royal  Laotian  Air  Force
RLG Royal  Laotian  Government
RLT Regimental  Landing  Team
ROK Republic  of  [South]  Korea
Rolling  Thunder Code  name  for  sus-
tained bombing  of
North  Vietnam

rpt  Repeat

RSSZ Rung  Sat  Special  Zone  (east  of
Saigon)

RT Rolling  Thunder  Program

RTA Royal  Thai  Army

RVN Republic  of  [South]  Vietnam

RVNAF  Republic  of  Vietnam  Air
Force  or  Armed  Forces

R\'NF Republic  of  Vietnam  Forces

SA  Systems  Analysis  Office  in  the  De-
partment of  Defense

SAC Strategic  Air  Command

SACSA  Spe^cial  Assistant  [to  the  JCS]
for  Counterinsurgency  and  Spe-
cial [covert]  Activities

SAM Surface-to-air  missile

SAR Search  and  Rescue

SDC Self  Defense  Corps

SEA Southeast  Asia

SEACOOR  Southeast  Asia  Coordina-
ting Committee

SEATO  Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organi-
zation

SecDef Secretary  of  Defense

SECTO Cable  identifier,  from  Secretary

of  State  to  addressee
Sitrep Situation  Report
SMM Saigon  Military  Mission
SNIE Special  National  Intelligence  Esti-
mate
SQD  Squadron
STRAF Strategic  Army  Force


SVN South  Vietnam

TAOR Tactical  Area  of  Responsibility

TCS Tactical  Control  System

TEDUL Cable  identifier,  overseas  post

to  Secretary  of  State  Dulles
TERM Temporary  Equipment  Recovery

Mission
TF Task  force

TFS Tactical  Fighter  Squadron
TO&E Table  of  organization  and  equip-
ment (for  a  mihtary  unit)
TOSEC Cable  identifier,  from  overseas

post  to  Secretary  of  State
TRIM Training  Relations  and  Instruc-
tion Mission
TRS Tactical  Reconnaissance  Squadron
34A 1964 operations plan  covering
covert  actions  against  North  Viet-
nam

T-28 U.S.  fighter-bomber
UE Unit  equipment  allowance
UH-1  Helicopter
UK United  Kinsdom
USAF U.S.  Air  Force
USARAL U.S.  Armv,  Alaska
USAREUR U.S.  Army,  Europe
USASGV U.S.  Army  Support  Group,
Vietnam

USG United  States  Government
USIA U.S.  Information  Agency
USIB U.S.  InteUigence  Board
USIS U.S.  Information  Service
USOM U.S. Operations  Mission  (for

economic  assistance)
VC Viet  Cong
VM Viet  Minh
VN  Vietnam

VNA Vietnamese  National  Army
VNAF [South]  Vietnamese  Air  Force

or  Armed  Forces
VNQDD Vietnam  Quocdandang  (pre-

independence,  nationalistic  po-

htical  party)
VNSF [South] Vietnamese  Special

Forces
VOA Voice  of  America
WESTPAC Western  Pacific  Command
WIA Wounded  in  action


Beacon  Paperback  414— National  Affairs,  Political  Science


THE  SENATOR  GRAVEL  EDITION
THE  PENTAGON  PAPERS
Volume  III

Late  in  June  1971,  when  the  Federal  Government  had  succeeded  in  delay-
ing the  publication  of  even  newspaper  synopses  and  brief  excerpts  from
the  secret  Pentagon  Papers,  Senator  Mike  Gravel  convened  a  special
meeting  of  his  Subcommittee  on  PubHc  Buildings  and  Grounds.  The  Senator
had  recently  received  4,100  pages  of  the  Papers,  and  on  the  night  of
June  29,  at  that  extraordinary  meeting,  he  entered  them  into  the  ofiQcial
record  of  the  subcommittee.

That  record  is  published  here  for  the  first  time,  in  order  that  the
American  public  can  have  access  to  the  full  story  of  American  involvement
in  Vietnam  from  the  early  1940s  to  March  of  1968.

The  Pentagon  Papers  reveal  the  inner  workings  of  a  bureaucracy,  set
up  to  defend  this  country,  but  now  managing  an  international  empire  by
garrisoning  American  troops  around  the  world.  The  papers  show  that  it  has
created  client  regimes,  made  secret  commitments,  toppled  governments,  and
kept  from  the  American  people  the  true  facts  and  its  real  intentions.

As  the  Senator  states  in  his  introduction,  "If  ever  there  was  a  time  for
change,  it  is  now.  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  I  hope  the  past,  as  revealed  in  the
Pentagon  Papers,  will  help  us  make  a  new  beginning,  toward  that  better
America  which  we  all  seek."

Mike  Gravel  was  elected  to  the  United  States  Senate  in  1968  after  serving
two  terms  in  the  Alaska  State  House  of  Representatives,  one  of  them  as
Speaker.  A  native  of  Massachusetts,  Senator  Gravel  moved  to  Alaska  after
his  graduation  from  Columbia  University.  In  the  Senate,  he  is  presently  a
member  of  the  Commitee  of  Interior  and  Insular  Affairs,  the  Public  Works
Committee,  and  the  Joint  Committee  on  Congressional  Operations.


J  Volume  III  ISBN:  0-8070-0533-9

■  Paperback  set:  ISBN:  0-8070-0527-4

^^S\^___  Individual  volumes  available  for  text  use  at  $5.00


^ —  a _,i  $20.00  per  set


ffiSf  BEACON  PRESS BOSTON  02108
