The Pentagon Papers: Senator Gravel Edition, Vol. 2
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/pentagonpapers025197> (Beacon Press). Public domain.

The  Senator  Gravel  Edition


THE


en


o


apers


The  Defense  Departmen
History  of  United  States
Decisionmaking  on

VIETNAM


VOLUME  TWO


£)0£S  NOyCiKCUliATS.
CENTRAL  REFLniMCS:


Gravel  Edition  /  Pentagon  Papers  /  Volume  II


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2013


http  ://arc  h  i  ve .  o  rg/detai  I  s/pe  ntag  o  n  pape  rs0251 97


The  Senator  Gravel  Edition

The  Pentagon  Papers

The  Defense  Department
History  of  United  States
Decisionmaking  on  Vietnam

Volume  n


Beacon  Press  Boston


The  contents  of  this  volume  are  drawn  from  the
official  record  of  the  U.S.  Senate  Subcommittee
on  Public  Buildings  and  Grounds.  No  copyright  is  claimed
in  the  text  of  this  official  Government  document.
Library  of  Congress  catalog  card  number:  75-178049
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-8070-0526-6  (hardcover)

0-8070-0527-4  (paperback)

Beacon  Press  books  are  published  under  the
auspices  of  the  Unitarian  Universalist  Association
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America


EXPLANATORY  NOTE

The  preparation  of  the  subcommittee  record  was  performed  under  the  direction
of  Senator  Gravel.  No  material  was  added  to  or  changed  in  the  study  or  appended
documents  and  statements.  In  some  cases,  material  was  illegible  or  missing.  If  this
occurred  within  a  direct  quotation,  the  omission  was  indicated  with  a  bracketed
statement.  If  it  occurred  in  narrative  text,  it  was  bridged  by  removing  the  entire
sentence  in  which  it  appeared,  when  it  was  evident  that  no  substantive  material
would  be  lost  by  this  procedure;  otherwise,  the  omission  was  indicated  by  a
bracketed  statement.  All  other  bracketed  insertions  appear  in  the  original  study.


Contents


VOLUME  I

Introduction  by  U.S.  Senator  Mike  Gravel
Letter  of  Transmittal  by  Leslie  H.  Gelb

1.  Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950

2.  U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954

3.  The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954

4.  U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956

5.  Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960

VOLUME  II

1.  The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961

2.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963

3.  Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964

4.  The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November  1963

5.  US-GVN  Relations,  1964-1967

6.  The  Advisory  Build-up,  1961-1967

7.  Re-emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967

VOLUME  III

1.  U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  November  1963-April  1965

2.  Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  February  1964-January  1965

3.  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam:  Rolling  Thunder  Begins,  February-June,  1965

4.  American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July,  1965

VOLUME  IV

1.  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  1965-1968

2.  U.S.  Ground  Strategy  and  Force  Deployments,  1965-1968

[At  the  end  of  each  volume  is  a  collection  of  documents,  a  section  entitled
"Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements,"  and  a  Glossary]


vii


Contents  of  Volume  II


1.  The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  1

Sumtnary  and  Analysis  1

Chronology  5

I.  Background  17
n.  The  Counterinsurgency  Plan  23

III.  The  Spring  Decisions — I  30

IV.  From  May  to  September  55

V.  The  Fall  Decisions — I  73

VI.  The  Fall  Decisions— II  102

2.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  128

Summary  and  Analysis  128

Chronology  131

I.  Introduction  132

II.  The  Formulation  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  135

III.  Developing  a  Consensus  Among  the  Advisors  140

IV.  The  Advisors  "Sell"  Diem  (or  Vice-Versa)  143
V.  Differing  Perspectives  and  Expectations  145

VI.  The  National  Plan  Emerges  148

VII.  The  Path  to  the  End  153

VIII.  An  Inconclusive  Summary  158

3.  Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  160

Summary  160

Chronology  165

1.  1962  173

II.  1963  177
III.  1964  192

4.  The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  201

Summary  and  Analysis  201

Chronology  207

I.  Introduction  224


viii Contents  of  Volume  II

II.  The  Buddhist  Crisis:  May  8-August  21  225

A.  The  Crisis  Erupts  225

B.  The  U.S.  ''No  Alternatives  to  Diem"  Policy  228

III.  Lodge  vs.  Diem:  August  20-October  2  232

A.  The  Pagoda  Raids  and  Repercussions  232

B.  Mis-Coup  236

C.  Toward  a  New  Policy  240

D.  The  McNamara-Taylor  Mission  247

IV.  The  Coup  Matures:  October  2-November  1  252

A.  The  South  Vietnamese  Situation  in  October  252

B.  The  New  American  Policy  253

C.  Renewed  Coup  Plotting  256

V.  The  Coup  and  Its  Aftermath:  November  1-23  264

A.  The  Coup  264

B.  Establishment  of  an  Interim  Regime  270

C.  The  Honolulu  Conference  and  NSAM  273  274

5.  US-GVN  Relations,  1964-1967  277

Summary  and  Analysis  277

Chronology  290

I.  Aftermath  of  the  Diem  Coup,  First  Half  of  1964  303

II.  Ambassador  Taylor's  First  Seven  Months:  Planning  for  "Bomb

North"  Amid  Turbulence  in  the  South  326

III.  The  U.S.  Enters  the  War:  Flaming  Dart  to  the  Steady  Influx  of
U.S.  Forces,  June,  1965  353

IV.  The  Ky  Government's  Early  Months:  The  Coup  to  the  Embrace  at
Honolulu,  February,  1966  362

V.  A  Rebellion,  a  Constituent  Assembly,  and  the  Hardships  of  Nego-
tiating with  a  ''Weak"  Government  369

VI.  A  Seven-Nation  Conference,  Legitimate  Government,  and  High
Hopes  for  the  Future,  October,  r966-September,  1967  387

6.  The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  408

Summary  and  Analysis  408

Chronology  415

L  Advisory  Stability,  1954-1960  431

A.  The  U.S.  Gamble  with  Limited  Resources  431

B.  The  Transition  Period:  1 959-1 96 1  435
II.  The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  438

A.  The  Kennedy  Programs  (^1961-1963)  438

B.  District  Advisors  and  the  Beef-Up  of  Battalion  Advisory  Teams
(1964-1965)  457


Contents  of  Volume  II  ix


C.  U.S.  Combat  Forces  and  the  Possibility  of  New  Relationships
(1965)  474

D.  Organization  as  the  Key  to  Effectiveness  in  Pacification  {1966-
1967) '  483

7.  Re-emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  515

Summary  5 1 5

I.  Threads  That  Met  at  Honolulu  521

A.  Hop  Tac  521

B.  Ambassador  Lodge  and  the  ''True  Believers"  527

C.  The  III  Marine  Amphibious  Force  533

D.  Washington  Grumbles  About  the  Effort  536

E.  Presidential  Emphasis  on  the  "Other  War"  and  Press  Reaction  542

F.  Meanwhile,  Back  at  the  War  .  .  .  545
II.  Honolulu  548

A.  The  Conference — February  1966  548

B.  Impact  on  Public  in  U.S.  on  U.S.  Mission  in  Vietnam,  and  on
Vietnamese  554

III.  Honolulu  to  Manila  560

A.  Saigon:  Porter  in  Charge  560

B.  Washington:  Komer  as  the  Blowtorch  567

C.  Study  Groups  and  Strategists:  Summer  1966  576

D.  The  Single  Manager  589

E.  The  Manila  Conference  607

IV.  OCO  to  CORDS  609

A.  OCO  on  Trial:  Introduction  609

B.  OCO  on  Trial:  Too  Little  Too  Late — Or  Not  Enough  Time?  612

C.  Time  Runs  Out  615

D.  The  CORDS  Reorganization  619
£.  The  Mission  Assessment  as  CORDS  Begins  621

Documents  624

Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  794


Glossary


832


r


Gravel  Edition  /  Pentagon  Papers  /  Volume


1


1. The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961


Summary  and  A  nalysis

When  Kennedy  took  office,  the  prospect  of  an  eventual  crisis  in  Vietnam  had
been  widely  recognized  in  the  government,  although  nothing  much  had  yet
been  done  about  it.  Our  Ambassador  in  Saigon  had  been  sending  worried  ca-
bles for  a  year,  and  twice  in  recent  months  [in  September  1960  and  again  in
December]  had  ended  an  appraisal  of  the  situation  by  cautiously  raising  the
question  of  whether  the  U.S.  would  not  sooner  or  later  have  to  move  to  replace
Diem.  Barely  a  week  after  taking  office,  Kennedy  received  and  approved  a
Counter-Insurgency  Plan  (CIP)  which,  at  what  seems  to  have  been  a  rather
leisurely  pace,  had  been  going  through  drafting  and  staffing  for  the  previous
eight  months.

The  CIP  was  a  most  modest  program  by  the  standard  we  have  become  ac-
customed to  in  Vietnam.  It  offered  Diem  financial  support  for  a  20,000  man
increase  in  his  army,  which  then  stood  at  150,000;  plus  support  for  about  half
of  the  counter-guerrilla  auxiliary  force  known  as  the  Civil  Guard.  In  return,  it
asked  Diem  for  a  number  of  reforms  which  appeared  to  the  American  side  as
merely  common  sense — such  as  straightening  out  command  arrangements  for
the  army  under  which  42  different  officials  directly  responsible  to  Diem  (38
province  chiefs,  3  regional  commanders,  and  a  Chief  of  Staff)  shared  opera-
tional command.

The  CIP  was  superseded  in  May  by  an  enlarged  version  of  the  same  program,
and  the  only  longer  term  significance  the  original  program  held  was  that  it
presumably  offered  the  Administration  a  lesson  in  dealing  with  Diem  (and
perhaps,  although  it  was  not  foreseen  then,  a  lesson  in  dealing  with  Vietnamese
governments  generally).  The  negotiations  dragged  on  and  on;  the  U.S.  military
and  eventually  most  of  the  civilians  both  in  Saigon  and  Washington  grew  im-
patient for  getting  on  with  the  war;  Diem  promised  action  on  some  of  the  Amer-
ican points,  and  finally  even  issued  some  decrees,  none  of  which  were  really
followed  up.  For  practical  purposes,  the  list  of  "essential  reforms"  proposed  as
part  of  the  CIP,  including  those  Diem  had  given  the  impression  he  agreed  to,
could  have  been  substituted  unchanged  for  the  list  of  reforms  the  U.S.  requested
at  the  end  of  the  year,  with  equal  effect,  as  the  quid  pro  quo  demanded  for  the
much  enlarged  U.S.  aid  offer  that  followed  the  Taylor  Mission.

Negotiations  with  Diem  came  to  an  end  in  May,  not  because  the  issues  had
been  resolved,  but  because  the  U.S.  decided  to  forget  trying  to  pressure  Diem
for  a  while  and  instead  try  to  coax  him  into  reforming  by  winning  his  confi-
dence. Partly,  no  doubt,  this  reflected  the  view  that  pressure  was  getting  no-
where and  the  alternative  approach  might  do  better.  Mainly,  however,  the
changed  policy,  and  the  somewhat  enlarged  aid  program  that  accompanied  it,
reflected  the  pressures  created  by  the  situation  in  neighboring  Laos.  (We  will
see  that  there  is  a  strong  case  to  be  made  that  even  the  Fall,  post-Taylor  Mis-
sion, decisions  were  essentially  dominated  by  the  impact  of  Laos.  But  in  May


2 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  situation  was  unambiguous.  Laos,  not  anything  happening  in  Vietnam,  was
the  driving  force.)

A  preliminary  step  came  April  20.  Immediately  following  the  Bay  of  Pigs
disaster,  and  with  the  prospect  of  a  disaster  in  Laos  on  the  very  near  horizon,
Kennedy  asked  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Gilpatric  to  work  up  a  program
for  saving  Vietnam.  The  program  was  delivered,  as  requested,  a  week  later.  It
was  a  somewhat  enlarged  version  of  the  CIP,  with  the  implication,  not  spelled
out  in  the  paper,  that  the  new  effort  would  be  put  into  effect  without  making
any  demands  on  Diem.  (Simultaneously,  Ambassador  Durbow,  who  had  been
in  Vietnam  for  four  years,  was  being  replaced  by  Nolting,  and  this  added  to
the  hope  that  a  new  start  might  be  made  with  Diem.)  There  is  nothing  to  sug-
gest that  anything  more  was  expected  of  Gilpatric's  program,  and  indeed  all
the  evidence  suggests  that  the  main  point  of  the  exercise  was  to  work  General
Lansdale  into  the  role  of  government-wide  coordinator  and  manager  of  the
country's  first  major  test  in  the  new  art  of  counter-insurgency.  Lansdale  served
as  Executive  Officer  of  the  Task  Force  which  Gilpatric  organized  and  which
he  proposed  should  be  given  a  continuing,  dominant  role  in  managing  the  Viet-
namese enterprise.

By  the  time  the  report  was  subm.itted  on  April  27  when  the  Laos  crisis  was
reaching  its  peak,  a  new  Geneva  conference  had  been  agreed  upon.  But  there
were  serious  doubts  that  the  pro-western  side  in  Laos  would  be  left  with  any-
thing to  negotiate  about  by  the  time  the  conference  opened.  Even  the  U.S.-
favored  settlement  (a  coalition  government)  represented  a  major,  if  prudent,
retreat  from  the  previous  U.S.  position  taken  during  the  closing  months  of  the
Eisenhower  Administration.)  So  the  situation  in  Laos  was  bad,  if  unavoidable;
and  it  followed  right  on  the  heels  of  the  Bav  of  Piss,  and  at  a  time  when  the
Soviets  were  threatening  to  move  against  Berlin.  The  emphasis  of  the  Gilpatric
Task  Force  shifted  from  shaping  up  the  counter-insurgency  aid  program  for
Vietnam,  to  finding  ways  to  demonstrate  to  the  South  Vietnamese  (and  others)
that  a  further  retreat  in  Laos  would  not  foreshadow  an  imminent  retreat  in  Viet-
nam.

On  April  28,  an  annex  to  the  Task  Force  report  proposed  to  counter  the  im-
pact of  Laos  with  U.S.  support  for  an  increase  in  South  Vietnamese  forces  (the
original  report  had  proposed  only  more  generous  financial  support  for  forces
already  planned  under  the  CIP)  and,  further,  a  modest  commitment  of  U.S.
ground  combat  units  in  South  Vietnam,  with  the  nominal  mission  of  establish-
ing two  training  centers.  On  April  29,  Kennedy  endorsed  the  proposals  of  the
original  draft,  but  took  no  action  on  the  far  more  significant  proposals  in  the
annex.  On  May  1,  a  revised  Task  Force  draft  came  out,  incorporating  the  Laos
Annex  proposals,  and  adding  a  recommendation  that  the  U.S.  make  clear  an
intent  to  intervene  in  Vietnam  to  the  extent  needed  to  prevent  a  Viet  Cong
victory.  At  this  point,  practical  control  of  the  Task  Force  appears  to  have
shifted  out  of  Gilpatric's  (and  Defense's)  hands  to  State  (and,  apparently,
George  Ball.)  A  State  redraft  of  the  report  came  out  May  3,  which  eliminated
the  special  role  laid  out  for  Lansdale,  shifted  the  chairmanship  of  the  continuing
Task  Force  to  State,  and  blurred,  without  wholly  eliminating,  the  Defense-
drafted  recommendations  for  sending  U.S.  combat  units  to  Vietnam  and  for
public  U.S.  commitments  to  save  South  Vietnam  from  Communism.  But  even
the  State  re-draft  recommended  consideration  of  stationing  American  troops  in
Vietnam,  for  missions  not  involving  combat  with  the  Viet^Cong,  and  a  bilateral
U.S.-SVN  security  treaty.  On  May  4  and  5,  still  acting  under  the  pressure  of  the
Laos  crisis,  the  Administration  implied  (through  a  statement  by  Senator  Ful-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  3

bright  at  the  White  House  following  a  meeting  with  Kennedy,  and  at  Kennedy's
press  conference  the  next  day)  that  it  was  considering  stationing  American
forces  in  Vietnam.  On  May  6,  a  final  draft  of  the  Task  Force  report  came  out,
essentially  following  the  State  draft  of  May  3.  On  May  8,  Kennedy  signed  a
letter  to  Diem,  to  be  delivered  by  Vice  President  Johnson  the  next  week,  which
promised  Diem  strong  U.S.  support,  but  did  not  go  beyond  the  program  out-
lined in  the  original  Task  Force  report;  it  offered  neither  to  finance  expanded
South  Vietnamese  forces,  nor  to  station  American  troops  in  Vietnam.  On  May
11,  the  recommendations  of  the  final,  essentially  State-drafted,  report  were
formalized.  But  by  now,  the  hoped  for  cease-fire  in  Laos  had  come  off.  Vice
President  Johnson  in  Saigon  on  the  12th  of  May  followed  thiough  on  his  in-
structions to  proclaim  strong  U.S.  support  for  and  confidence  in  Diem.  When
Diem  talked  of  his  worries  about  U.S.  policy  in  Laos,  Johnson,  obviously  acting
on  instructions,  raised  the  possibility  of  stationing  American  troops  in  Vietnam
or  of  a  bilateral  treaty.  But  Diem  wanted  neither  at  that  time.  Johnson's  in-
structions were  not  available  to  this  study,  so  we  do  not  know  how  he  would
have  responded  if  Diem  had  asked  for  either  troops  or  a  treaty,  although  the
language  of  the  Task  Force  report  implies  he  would  only  have  indicated  a  U.S.
willingness  to  talk  about  these  things.  With  Johnson,  came  the  new  Ambassador,
Fritz  Nolting,  whose  principal  instruction  was  to  "get  on  Diem's  wavelength"
in  contrast  to  the  pressure  tactics  of  his  predecessor.

A  few  weeks  later,  in  June,  Diem,  responding  to  an  invitation  Kennedy  had
sent  through  Johnson,  dispatched  an  aide  to  Washington  with  a  letter  outlining
Saigon's  "essential  military  needs."  It  asked  for  a  large  increase  in  U.S.  support
for  Vietnamese  forces  (sufficient  to  raise  ARVN  strength  from  170,000  to
270,000  men),  and  also  for  the  dispatch  of  "selected  elements  of  the  American
Armed  Forces",  both  to  establish  training  centers  for  the  Vietnamese  and  as  a
symbol  of  American  commitment  to  Vietnam.  The  proposal.  Diem  said,  had
been  worked  out  with  the  advice  of  MAAG  Saigon,  whose  chief,  along  with
the  JCS  and  at  least  some  civilian  officials,  strongly  favored  getting  American
troops  into  Vietnam.

The  question  of  increased  support  for  Vietnamese  forces  was  resolved  through
the  use  of  the  Staley  Mission.  This  was  normally  a  group  of  economic  experts
intended  to  work  with  a  Vietnamese  group  on  questions  of  economic  policy.
Particularly  at  issue  was  whether  the  Vietnamese  could  not  be  financing
a  larger  share  of  their  own  defenses.  But  the  economic  proposals  and  programs,
all  of  which  turned  out  to  be  pretty  general  and  fuzzy,  comprised  a  less  impor-
tant part  of  the  report  than  the  discussion  of  ^/ietnamese  military  requirements.
Here  the  study  group  reflected  the  instructions  of  the  two  governments.  On  the
basis  of  the  Staley  Report,  the  U.S.  agreed  to  support  a  further  increase  of
30,000  in  the  RVNAF,  but  deferred  a  decision  on  the  balance  of  the  South
Vietnamese  request  on  the  grounds  that  the  question  might  not  have  to  be  faced
since  by  the  time  the  RVNAF  reached  200,000  men,  sometime  late  in  1962,  the
Viet  Cong  might  already  be  on  the  run.  The  Staley  Report  also  contained  what
by  now  had  already  become  the  usual  sorts  of  nice  words  about  the  importance
of  social,  political,  and  administrative  reforms,  which  turned  out  to  have  the
usual  relevance  to  reality.  The  U.S.  was  still  sticking  to  the  May  formula  of  try-
ing to  coax  Diem  to  reform,  instead  of  the  equally  unsuccessful  January  formula
of  trying  to  pressure  him  to  reform.

The  other  issue — the  request  for  "elements  of  the  American  Armed  Forces"
— was  left  completely  obscure.  From  the  record  available,  we  are  not  sure  that
Diem  really  wanted  the  troops  then,  or  whether  Kennedy  really  was  willing  to


4 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

send  them  if  they  were  wanted.  All  we  know  is  that  Diem  included  some  lan-
guage in  his  letter  that  made  the  request  a  little  ambiguous,  and  that  Washing-
ton— either  on  the  basis  of  clarification  from  Diem's  aide  who  delivered  the
letter,  or  on  its  own  initiative,  or  some  combination  of  both — interpreted  the
letter  as  not  asking  for  troops,  and  nothing  came  of  the  apparent  request.

A  new,  and  much  more  serious  sense  of  crisis  developed  in  September.  This
time  the  problem  was  not  directly  Laos,  but  strong  indications  of  moderate  de-
terioration of  Diem's  military  position  and  very  substantial  deterioration  of
morale  in  Saigon.  There  was  a  sharp  upswing  in  Viet  Cong  attacks  in  Septem-
ber, including  a  spectacular  raid  on  a  province  capital  55  miles  from  Saigon
during  which  the  province  chief  was  publicly  beheaded  by  the  insurgents.  At
the  end  of  September,  Diem  surprised  Nolting  by  asking  the  U.S.  for  a  U.S.-
GVN  defense  treaty.  By  Diem's  account  the  loss  of  morale  in  Saigon  was  due  to
worries  about  U.S.  policy  growing  out  of  the  Laos  situation.  Both  U.S.  officials
in  Washington  and  South  Vietnamese  other  than  those  closest  to  Diem,  though,
put  most  of  the  blame  on  deterioration  within  South  Vietnam,  although  the
demoralizing  effect  of  Viet  Cong  successes  was  unquestionably  magnified  by  un-
certainties about  the  U.S.  commitment  to  Vietnam.  In  response,  President
Kennedy  sent  General  Taylor  and  Walt  Rostow,  then  both  on  the  White  House
staff,  to  Vietnam,  accompanied  by  some  less  prominent  officials  from  State  and
Defense.

What  Taylor  and  Rostow  reported  was  that  Saigon  faced  a  dual  crisis  of  con-
fidence, compounded  out  of  doubts  arising  from  Laos  that  the  U.S.  would  stick  by
South  Vietnam,  and  doubts  arising  from  the  Viet  Cong  successes  that  Diem's
unpopular  and  inefficient  regime  could  beat  the  Viet  Cong  anyway.  The  report
said  that  a  U.S.  military  commitment  in  Vietnam  was  needed  to  meet  the  first
difficulty;  and  that  the  second  could  best  be  met  by  supplying  a  generous  in-
fusion of  American  personnel  to  all  levels  of  the  Vietnamese  government  and
army,  who  could,  it  was  hoped,  instill  the  Vietnamese  with  the  right  kind  of
winning  spirit,  and  reform  the  regime  "from  the  bottom  up"  despite  Diem's
weaknesses.  The  report  recommended  the  dispatch  of  helicopter  companies
and  other  forms  of  combat  support,  but  without  great  emphasis  on  these  units.
Probably,  although  the  record  does  not  specifically  say  so,  there  was  a  general
understanding  that  such  units  would  be  sent  even  before  the  report  was  sub-
mitted, and  that  is  why  there  is  relatively  little  emphasis  on  the  need  for  them.

The  crucial  issue  was  what  form  the  American  military  commitment  had  to
take  to  be  effective.  Taylor,  in  an  eyes  only  cable  to  the  President,  argued
strongly  for  a  task  force  in  the  delta,  consisting  mainly  of  army  engineers  to
work  where  there  had  been  a  major  flood.  The  delta  was  also  where  the  VC
were  strongest,  and  Taylor  warned  the  President  that  the  force  would  have  to
conduct  some  combat  operations  and  expect  to  take  casualties.  But  Taylor
argued  that  the  balance  of  the  program,  less  this  task  force,  would  be  insuffi-
cient, for  we  had  to  "convince  Diem  that  we  are  willing  to  join  him  in  a  show-
down with  the  Viet  Cons  .  .  ."

We  do  not  know  what  advice  President  Kennedy  received  from  State:  Soren-
son  claims  all  the  President's  advisors  on  Vietnam  favored  sending  the  ground
force;  but  George  Ball,  at  least,  who  may  not  have  been  part  of  the  formal  "de-
cision group,  is  widely  reported  to  have  opposed  such  a  move;  so  did  Galbraith,
then  Ambassador  to  India,  who  happened  to  be  in  Washington;  and  perhaps
some  others.  From  Defense,  the  President  received  a  memo  from  McNamara
for  himself,  Gilpatric,  and  the  ICS,  stating  that  they  were  "inclined  to  recom-
mend" the  Taylor  program,  but  only  on  the  understanding  that  it  would  be


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  5

followed  up  with  more  troops  as  needed,  and  with  a  willingness  to  attack  North
Vietnam.  (The  JCS  estimated  that  40,000  American  troops  would  be  needed
to  "clean  up"  the  Viet  Cong.)  The  Taylor  Mission  Report,  and  Taylor's  own
cables,  had  also  stressed  a  probable  need  to  attack,  or  at  least  threaten  to  at-
tack, North  Vietnam.

The  McNamara  memo  was  sent  November  8.  But  on  November  11,  Rusk
and  McNamara  signed  a  joint  memo  that  reversed  McNamara's  earlier  position:
it  recommended  deferring,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  the  dispatch  of  combat
units.  This  obviously  suited  Kennedy  perfectly,  and  the  NSAM  embodying  the
decisions  was  taken  essentially  verbatim  from  the  recommendations  of  the
Rusk/McNamara  paper,  except  that  a  recommendation  that  the  U.S.  was  com-
miting  itself  to  prevent  the  loss  of  Vietnam  was  deleted.

But  where  the  Taylor  Report  had  implied  a  continuation  of  the  May  policy
of  trying  to  coax  Diem  into  cooperating  with  the  U.S.,  the  new  program  was
made  contingent  on  Diem's  acceptance  of  a  list  of  reforms;  further  Diem  was  to
be  informed  that  if  he  accepted  the  program  the  U.S.  would  expect  to  "share
in  decision-making"  .  .  .  rather  than  "advise  only."  Thus,  the  effect  of  the
decision  was  to  give  Diem  less  than  he  was  expecting  (no  symbolic  commitment
of  ground  forces)  but  to  accompany  this  limited  offer  with  demands  for  which
Diem  was  obviously  both  unprepared  and  unwilling  to  accede  to.  On  top  of
this,  there  was  the  enormous  (and  not  always  recognized)  extent  to  which  U.S.
policy  was  driven  by  the  unthinkability  of  avoidably  risking  another  defeat  in
Southeast  Asia  hard  on  the  heels  of  the  Laos  retreat.

Consequently,  the  U.S.  bargaining  position  was  feeble.  Further,  Galbraith
at  least,  and  probably  others,  advised  Kennedy  that  there  was  not  much  point
to  bargaining  with  Diem  anyway,  since  he  would  never  follow  through  on  any
promises  he  made.  (Galbraith  favored  promoting  an  anti-Diem  military  coup
at  the  earliest  convienient  moment.)  Kennedy  ended  up  settling  for  a  set  of
promises  that  fell  well  short  of  any  serious  effort  to  make  the  aid  program  really
contingent  on  reforms  by  Diem.  Since  the  war  soon  thereafter  began  to  look  bet-
ter, Kennedy  never  had  any  occasion  to  reconsider  his  decision  on  combat  troops;
and  no  urgent  reason  to  consider  Galbraith's  advice  on  getting  rid  of  Diem  until
late  1963.

End  of  Summary  and  Analysis
CHRONOLOGY

1960-1961 Situation  in  Vietnam

According  to  Ambassador  Durbrow  there  was  widespread  popular
dissatisfaction  with  the  Diem  Government  and  a  growing  guerrilla
threat.  At  the  same  time,  there  had  been  a  very  gradual  growth  of
U.S.  involvement  in  assisting  the  GVN  to  counter  the  VC.
In  the  U.S.  two  questions  influenced  decisions  about  Vietnam:
first,  what  should  the  U.S.  give  Diem  to  counter  the  communists;
secondly,  what — if  any — demands  should  be  posed  as  a  quid  pro
quo  for  assistance?

US-Soviet  Relations

The  problems  of  dealing  with  Moscow  were  far  more  pressing
than  those  related  to  Vietnam.  A  feeling  that  America's  position


6 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

in  the  world  had  been  eroded  by  the  USSR  prevailed;  Kennedy
was  particularly  determined  to  regain  American  strength,  prestige
and  influence.  Anything  which  could  be  construed  as  American
weakness  vis-a-vis  the  USSR  was  to  be  avoided.  This  affected
policy  toward  Vietnam.

Situation  in  Laos

The  US-backed,  pro-American  faction  under  Phoumi  Nosavan
was  losing  to  the  pro-Communist/neutralist  faction  supported  by
the  Soviet  Union.

Commitment  of  U.S.  forces  was  rejected  and  on  May  2,  1961
a  cease-fire  was  declared.  President  Kennedy  decided  to  support
a  coalition  solution,  even  though  the  odds  on  coalition  leader
Souvanna  Phouma's  staying  in  power  were  very  low.  As  a  con-
sequence of  this  decision,  Washington  believed  that  Southeast
Asian  leaders  doubted  the  sincerity  of  the  U.S.  commitment  to
the  area,  and  the  U.S.  felt  compelled  to  do  something  to  restore
confidence,  demonstrate  U.S.  resolve  and  dispel  any  idea  Moscow
might  have  that  the  U.S.  intended  to  withdraw  from  Southeast
Asia.  Laos  was  thus  particularly  influential  in  development  of
policy  toward  Vietnam.

20  Jan  1961 President  Kennedy  Inaugurated

28  Jan  1961  Kennedy  Approves  the  Counterinsurgency  Plan  (CIP)  for  Vietnam
Gradually  developed  during  1961,  the  CIP  was  to  be  the  basis  for
expanded  U.S.  assistance  to  Vietnam.  Kennedy  automatically  ap-
proved its  main  provisions;  negotiations  with  Diem  about  the
CIP  began  13  February  and  continued  through  May  of  1961.
The  U.S.  offered  $28.4  million  to  support  a  20,000-man  increase
in  the  ARVN  (for  a  new  total  of  170,000);  to  train,  equip  and
supply  a  32,000-man  Civil  Guard  at  $12.7  million.  The  full  pack-
age added  less  than  $42  million  to  the  current  $220  million  aid
program.

The  CIP  called  for  consolidation  of  the  RVNAF  chain  of  com-
mand (never  fully  accomplished  under  Diem.)  No  agreement  was
reached  on  the  question  of  strategy  during  this  period.  (Diem
wanted  "strategic"  outposts,  Agrovilles,  lines  of  strength  through-
out the  country;  the  MAAG  favored  a  "net  and  spear"  concept —
small  units  operating  out  of  pacified  areas  to  find  the  enemy,  call
in  reserve  forces,  gradually  extend  security  to  all  of  Vietnam.)
Civil  reforms  included  urging  Diem  to  broaden  his  government,
include  opposition  political  leaders  in  the  cabinet,  give  the  National
Assembly  some  power,  institute  civic  action  to  win  hearts,  minds
and  loyalty  of  the  peasants.

The  CIP  assumed  the  GVN  had  the  potential  to  cope  with  the
VC  if  necessary  corrective  measures  were  taken  and  if  adequate
forces  were  provided.  The  implicit  bargain  of  the  plan:  the  U.S.
would  support  "adequate  forces"  //  Diem  would  institute  "neces-
sary corrective  measures."  Again,  although  sociopolitical  reforms
were  sought  through  the  CIP  and  other  plans,  they  were  not
realized  during  the  early  Kennedy  years.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  1

Mid- J  an  1961  A  Lansdale  Report  on  Vietnam

Following  a  trip  to  Vietnam,  Major  General  E.  G.  Lansdale  called
for  strong  support  for  Diem  and  recommended  the  U.S.  demon-
strate that  support  immediately.  Only  if  Diem's  confidence  in  the
U.S.  were  restored  would  U.S.  influence  be  effective,  said  Lansdale.
He  recommended  the  immediate  transfer  of  Durbrow  (he  was
"too  close  to  the  forest"  and  was  not  trusted  by  the  GVN)  and
immediate  adoption  of  social,  economic,  political  and  military
programs  to  prove  U.S.  backing  for  Diem  as  well  as  help  Diem
stabilize  the  countryside.

February-  Durbrow  Negotiations  with  Diem  on  the  CIP
May  1961  Diem  stalled  the  implementation  of  his  "major  promises"  (to
establish  a  central  intelligence  organization,  put  operational  con-
trol for  counterinsurgency  operations  under  the  military  command
system,  reform  the  cabinet  and  governmental  administration).
Washington  held  up  the  "green  light"  on  aid  as  long  as  Diem
stalled — although  the  JCS  and  MAAG  in  Saigon  were  impatient
to  get  on  with  the  war  and  were  annoyed  by  the  delay.  Finally,
in  mid-May  (after  Durbrow  had  ended  his  four-year  tour  in  Viet-
nam) Diem  implemented  some  "major  promises"  by  decree.  But
nothing  changed.

12  Apr  1961 Rostow  Memorandum  for  President  Kennedy

W.  W.  Rostow  suggested  several  ways  for  "gearing-up  the  whole
Vietnam  operation."  These  included:  assigning  a  first-rate,  full-
time  backstop  man  in  Washington  to  Vietnam  affairs  (Lansdale);
a  Vice  Presidential  visist  in  Southeast  Asia;  exploring  ways  to  use
new  American  techniques  and  gadgets  in  the  fight  against  the  VC;
replacing  the  ICA  (AID)  chief;  high-level  discussion  of  tactics
for  persuading  Diem  to  broaden  his  government;  a  Presidential
letter  to  Diem  in  which  Kennedy  would  reaffirm  support  for  him
but  express  the  urgency  attached  to  finding  a  "more  effective
political  and  morale  setting"  for  military  operations.

20  Apr  1961 The  Presidential  Program  for  Vietnam

Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Gilpatric  was  directed  to  appraise
the  current  status  and  future  prospects  of  the  VC  drive  in  South
Vietnam,  then  recommend  a  series  of  actions  to  prevent  com-
munist domination  of  the  GVN.

(At  this  same  time:  the  Bay  of  Pigs  invasion  force  surrendered
and  the  Laos  crisis  was  coming  to  a  head.)

Gilpatric  and  Lansdale  headed  a  Task  Force  established  imme-
diately to  carry  out  these  instructions.

27  Apr  1961  Gilpatric  Task  Force  Report  Submitted;  the  NSC  Meets

This  first  Task  Force  draft  called  for  a  moderate  acceleration  of
the  CIP  program  approved  in  January,  with  stress  on  vigor,  en-
thusiasm and  strong  leadership.  The  report  recommended  building
on  present  US-GVN  programs,  infusing  them  with  a  new  sense  of
urgency  and  creating  action  programs  in  almost  every  field  to
create  a  viable  and  increasingly  democratic  government  in  SVN  to
prevent  communist  domination.  No  ARVN  increase  beyond  the
already-authorized  20,000-man  addition  was  recommended;  a


8 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

modest  MAAG  increase  was  proposed.  The  US  would  support  the
Civil  Guard  and  Self-Defense  Corps.  Emphasis  was  on  stabilizing
the  countryside,  not  on  pressing  Diem  for  political  or  administra-
tive reforms.  (Gilpatric  wanted  Lansdale  to  go  to  Vietnam  imme-
diately after  the  program  was  approved  to  consult  with  Vietnamese
and  US  leaders  and  make  further  recommendations  for  action;
but  McNamara  made  Lansdale's  mission  contingent  upon  an  in-
vitation from  the  US  Ambassador  in  Saigon — an  invitation  that
never  came.)

The  NSC  was  to  discuss  this  report  but  the  27  April  meeting  was
dominated  by  the  acute  Laotian  crisis.

28  Apr  1961 Laos  Annex  to  (first)  Task  Force  Report

A  report — a  response,  really — concerning  the  critical  situation  in
Laos  and  its  effect  on  Vietnam  was  prepared  for  the  NSC  on  28
April.  It  recommended  a  two-division  ARVN  increase  and  deploy-
ment of  3600  US  troops  to  Vietnam  (two  1600-man  teams  to
train  each  new  division;  400  Special  Forces  troops  to  speed  over-
all ARVN  counterinsurgency  training).  Rationale:  to  enable
ARVN  to  guard  against  conventional  invasion  of  South  Vietnam.
(Both  the  increased  forces  and  their  justification  were  different
from  two  earlier  reports.  Lansdale  had  advocated  no  ARVN
increase  but  felt  some  US  force  build-up  was  called  for  as  a
demonstration  of  American  support  for  the  GVN.  Gilpatric's
military  aide.  Colonel  E.  F.  Black,  wrote  the  other  report  which
saw  no  need  for  more  US  troops  but  recommended  expansion  of
ARVN  to  meet  the  threat  of  increased  infiltration.  These  views
were  rejected  in  favor  of  Black's  second  paper  which  advocated
more  ARVN  troops — to  counter  overt  aggression,  not  increased
infiltration — and  commitment  of  US  troops  for  training  purposes
— not  for  political  reassurance  or  demonstration  of  US  resolve.
Black's  second  paper  was  sent  to  the  NSC.)

29  Apr  1961 Kennedy  Decisions  on  the  Draft  Report

Kennedy  did  not  act  on  the  Laos  Annex.  He  approved  only  the
limited  military  proposals  contained  in  the  first  Gilpatric  Task
Force  report.  The  685-man  MAAG  would  be  increased  to  785
to  enable  it  to  train  the  approved  20,000  new  ARVN  troops.  Ken-
nedy also  authorized  the  MAAG  to  support  and  advise  the  Self
Defense  Corps  (40,000  men);  authorized  MAP  support  for  the
entire  Civil  Guard  of  68,000  (vice  32,000  previously  supported);
ordered  installation  of  radar  surveillance  equipment  and  okayed
MAP  support  and  training  for  the  Vietnamese  Junk  Force.

1  May  1961 NSC  Meets;  New  Draft  of  the  Task  Force  Report  Issued

Kennedy  again  deferred  decision  on  sending  troops  into  Laos
apparently  because  the  feeling  that  the  US  would  not  make  such
a  move  was  now  firm.

The  1  May  draft  report  was  little  different  from  the  28  April  ver-
sion. The  Laos  Annex  was  incorporated  into  the  main  paper;  the
US  was  to  make  known  its  readiness  to  "intervene  unilaterally"
in  Southeast  Asia  to  fulfill  SEATO  commitments  (vice  intervene
in  conjunction  with  SEATO  forces).  ARVN  increases  were  now


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  9

justified  by  the  threat  of  overt  aggression  as  well  as  increased  in-
filtration.

3  May  1961 State  (George  Ball)  Revision  of  Task  Force  Report

This  draft  was  very  different  from  the  original.  Lansdale's  role
was  eliminated;  the  Gilpatric-Lansdale  Task  Force  was  to  be
replaced  by  a  new  group  chaired  by  Ball,  then  Undersecretary  of
State.  (Lansdale  reacted  with  a  ''strong  recommendation"  that
Defense  stay  out  of  the  directorship  proposed  by  State  and  said
the  ''US  past  performance  and  theory  of  action,  which  State
apparently  desires  to  continue,  simply  offers  no  sound  basis  for
winning.  .  .")  In  State's  rewritten  political  section  of  the  report,
the  Defense  recommendation  to  make  clear  US  determination  to
intervene  unilaterally  if  necessary  to  save  South  Vietnam  from
communism  was  replaced  by  a  proposal  to  explore  new  bilateral
treaty  arrangements  with  Diem  (arrangements  which  might  mean
intervention  against  the  guerrillas  but  might  mean  intervention
only  against  DRV  attack).  The  need  for  new  arrangements  was
tied  to  the  "loss"  of  Laos.  State  incorporated  unchanged  the  De-
fense draft  as  the  military  section  of  its  revised  report,  but  im-
plied "further  study"  would  be  given  to  some  Defense  recom-
mendations. Overall,  the  State  revision  tried  to  tone  down  commit-
ments to  Vietnam  suggested  in  the  Defense  version.  It  left  the
President  a  great  deal  of  room  to  maneuver  without  explicitly  over-
ruling recommendations  presented  him.

5  May  1961  NSC  Meeting

Again,  Laos  was  the  main  subject.  Most  agreed  the  chance  for
salvaging  anything  out  of  the  cease-fire  and  coalition  government
was  slim  indeed.  Ways  in  which  to  reassure  Vietnam  and  Thailand
were  sought.  The  Vice  President's  trip  to  Southeast  Asia  was  an-
nounced after  the  meeting.
6  May  1961 Second  State  Re-Draft  of  the  Task  Force  Report

Here,  military  actions  were  contained  in  an  annex;  the  political
section  reflected  less  panic  over  the  loss  of  Laos;  deployment  of
US  troops  was  less  definite — called  something  which  "might  result
from  an  NSC  decision  following  discussions  between  Vice  Presi-
dent Johnson  and  President  Diem."  The  matter  is  being  studied,
said  the  draft.  The  report  said:  Diem  "is  not  now  fully  confident
of  US  support,"  that  it  is  "essential  (his)  full  confidence  in  and
communication  with  the  United  States  be  restored  promptly."
(Lansdale's  recommendations  of  January,  April,  etc.)  The  report
called  for  a  "major  alteration  in  the  present  government  struc-
ture," "believed"  a  combination  of  inducements  plus  discreet
pressures  might  work,  but  it  was  unenthusiastic  both  about  Diem,
and  his  chances  of  success.  The  Diem-is-the-only-available-leader
syndrome  is  evident  here.

10  May  1961 JCSM  320-61

"Assuming  the  political  decision  is  to  hold  Southeast  Asia  outside
the  communist  sphere,"  the  JCS  emphatically  recommended  de-
ployment of  sufficient  US  forces  to  provide  a  visible  deterrent  to
potential  DRV  CHICOM  action,  release  ARVN  from  static  to
active  counterinsurgency  operations,  assist  training  and  indicate


10 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

US  firmness.  (In  JCSM  311-61  of  9  May,  the  Chiefs  recom-
mended deployment  of  US  forces  to  Thailand  also.)

IJ  May  1961 NSAM  52

Directed  ''full  examination"  by  DOD  of  a  study  on  the  size  and
composition  of  forces  which  might  comprise  a  possible  commit-
ment of  troops  to  Southeast  Asia.  In  effect,  Kennedy  "took  note"
of  the  study  but  made  no  decision  on  the  issue  of  troop  commit-
ment. The  Ambassador  in  Saigon  was  empowered  to  open  negotia-
tions about  a  bilateral  treaty  but  was  directed  to  make  no  com-
mitments without  further  review  by  the  President.  These  recom-
mendations from  the  May  6  Task  Force  report  were  approved:
help  the  GVN  increase  border  patrol  and  counterinsurgency
capability  through  aerial  surveillance  and  new  technological  de-
vices; help  set  up  a  center  to  test  new  weapons  and  techniques;
help  ARVN  implement  health,  welfare  and  public  work  projects;
deploy  a  400-man  special  forces  group  to  Nha  Trang  to  accelerate
ARVN  training;  instruct  JCS.  CINCPAC,  MAAG  to  assess  the
military  utility  of  an  increase  in  ARVN  from  170,000  to  200,000
(the  two-division  increase  recommended  previously).

9—15  May Vice  President  Johnson  Visits  Southeast  Asia

1961  Purpose:  to  reassure  Asian  leaders  that  despite  Laos,  the  United

States  could  be  counted  on  to  support  them.  Johnson  reported  the
mission  had  halted  the  decline  of  confidence  in  the  United  States,
but  did  not  restore  confidence  already  lost.  Johnson  strongly  be-
lieved that  faith  must  be  restored,  the  "battle  against  communism
must  be  joined  in  Southeast  Asia  with  strength  and  determination"
(or  the  US  would  be  reduced  to  a  fortress  America  with  defenses
pulled  back  to  California's  shores);  he  believed  there  was  no
alternative  to  US  leadership  in  Southeast  Asia  but  that  any  help
extended — military,  economic,  social — must  be  part  of  a  mutual
effort  and  contingent  upon  Asian  willingness  to  "take  the  necessary
measures  to  make  our  aid  effective."  He  reported  that  American
troops  were  neither  required  nor  desired  by  Asian  leaders  at  this
time.

Calling  Thailand  and  Vietnam  the  most  immediate,  most  im-
mediate, most  important  trouble  spots,  the  Vice  President  said  the
US  "must  decide  whether  to  support  Diem — or  let  Vietnam  fall,"
opted  for  supporting  Diem,  said  "the  most  important  thing  is
imaginative,  creative,  American  management  of  our  military  aid
program,"  and  reported  $50  million  in  military  and  economic  as-
sistance "will  be  needed  if  we  decide  to  support  Vietnam."  The
same  amount  was  recommended  for  Thailand.
The  Vice  President  concluded  by  posing  this  as  the  fundamental
decision:  "whether  ...  to  meet  the  challenge  of  Communist
expansion  now  in  Southeast  Asia  or  throw  in  the  towel."  Caution-
ing that  "heavy  and  continuing  costs"  would  be  required,  that
sometime  the  US  "may  be  faced  with  the  further  decision  of
whether  we  commit  major  United  States  forces  to  the  area  or  cut
our  losses  and  withdraw  should  our  other  efforts  fail,"  Johnson
recommended  "we  proceed  with  a  clear-cut  and  strong  program
of  action."


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  11

18  May  1961 Lansdale  Memorandum  for  Gilpatric

Landsdale  noted  Diem's  rejection  of  US  combat  forces  per  se  at
this  time  but  pointed  out  Diem  seemed  willing  to  accept  troops
for  training  purposes  only.  At  this  same  time,  MAAG  Chief
McGarr  requested  16,000  US  troops  (combat  units)  be  sent,
nominally  to  establish  centers  to  train  RVNAF  divisions.  If  Diem
would  not  accept  16,000,  McGarr  would  settle  for  10,000  men.

5  June  1961 Rostow  Note  to  McNamara

Saying  "we  must  think  of  the  kind  of  forces  for  Thailand  now,
Vietnam  later,"  Rostow  suggested  "aircraft,  helicopters,  com-
munications, men,  Special  Forces,  militia  teachers,  etc."  would  be
needed  to  support  a  "counter-guerrilla  war  in  Vietnam."  Rostow
does  not  mention  combat  units.

9  June  1961 Diem  Letter  to  Kennedy

Here,  in  response  to  Vice  President  Johnson's  request  that  he  out-
line military  needs.  Diem  did  request  US  troops  explicitly  for
training  RVNAF  "officers  and  technical  specialists" — not  entire
divisions.  He  proposed  ARVN  be  increased  from  170,000  to
270,000  to  "counter  the  ominous  threat  of  communist  domination"
— a  threat  he  documented  by  inflated  infiltration  figures  and  words
about  the  "perilous"  situation  created  by  the  Laos  solution.  To
train  these  100,000  new  ARVN  troops  Diem  asked  for  "consider-
able expansion"  of  the  MAAG  in  the  form  of  "selected  elements
of  the  American  Armed  Forces."

Mid-June  to The  Staley  Mission

July  1961  A  team  headed  by  Eugene  Staley  (Stanford  Research  Insitute)
was  to  work  with  Vietnamese  officials  in  an  effort  to  resolve  the
continuing  problem  of  how  Vietnam  was  to  finance  its  own  war
effort  (deficit  financing,  inflation,  the  commodity  import  program,
piaster/dollar  exchange  rates,  all  presented  difficulties).  But  the
Staley  group  became  the  vehicle  for  force  level  discussions  and
economic  issues  were  treated  rather  perfunctorily.  The  group
"does  not  consider  itself  competent  to  make  specific  recommenda-
tions as  to  desired  force  levels"  but  adopted  two  alternative  levels
for  "economic  planning  purposes":  200,000  if  the  insurgency  in
Vietnam  remains  at  present  levels,  if  Laos  does  not  fall;  270,000
if  the  Vietcong  significantly  iiicrease  the  insurgency  and  if  the
communists  win  de  facto  control  of  Laos.

11  Aug  1961 Kennedy  Decision  NSAM  65

President  Kennedy  agreed  with  the  Staley  Report  (of  4  August)
that  security  requirements  demanded  first  priority,  that  economic
and  social  programs  had  to  be  accelerated,  that  it  was  in  the  US
interest  to  promote  a  viable  Vietnam.  He  agreed  to  support  an
ARVN  increase  to  200,000  if  Diem  in  turn  agreed  to  a  plan  for
using  these  forces.  The  270,000  level  was  thus  disapproved.  But
the  plan  for  using  ARVN  forces  had  not  yet  been  drawn.  Diem  had
not  yet  designed — much  less  implemented — social  reforms  sup-
posedly required  in  return  for  US  assistance.

15  Aug  1961 NIE  14-3/53.61

Although  collapse  of  the  Saigon  regime  might  come  by  a  coup  or


12 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

from  Diem's  death,  its  fall  because  of  a  "prolonged  and  difficult"
struggle  was  not  predicted.

Theodore  White  Reports

"The  situation  gets  worse  almost  week  by  week  .  .  ."  particularly
the  military  situation  in  the  delta.  If  the  U.S.  decides  it  must  inter-
vene, White  asked  if  we  had  the  people,  instruments  or  clear  ob-
jectives to  make  it  successful.

General  McGarr  Reports

The  ARVN  has  displayed  increased  efficiency,  a  spirit  of  renewed
confidence  is  "beginning  to  permeate  the  people,  the  GVN  and
the  Armed  Forces."

27  Sep  1961 Nolting  Reports

Nolting  was  "unable  report  .  .  .  progress  toward  attaining  task
force  goals  of  creating  viable  and  increasingly  democratic  society,"
called  the  government  and  civil  situation  unchanged  from  early
September.  A  series  of  large  scale  VC  attacks  in  central  Vietnam,
the  day-long  VC  seizure  of  Phuoc  Vinh,  capital  of  [former]  Phuoc
Thanh  Province — 55  miles  from  Saigon — in  which  the  VC  pub-
licly beheaded  Diem's  province  chief  and  escaped  before  govern-
ment troops  arrived  and  increased  infiltration  through  Laos  dem-
onstrated "that  the  tide  has  not  yet  turned"  militarily.

1  Oct  1961 Diem  Request

Diem  requested  a  bilateral  treaty  with  the  U.S.  This  surprised
Nolting  but  probably  did  not  surprise  the  White  House,  already
warned  by  White  of  the  grave  military  situation.

/  Oct  1961 State  "First  12 -Month  Report"

This  political  assessment  mirrored  Nolting's  "no  progress"  report
but  State  found  the  military  situation  more  serious  than  Embassy
reports  had  indicated.

5  Oct  1961 The  "Rostow  Proposal"

Suggested  a  25,000-man  SEATO  force  be  put  into  Vietnam  to
guard  the  Vietnam/Laos  border  between  the  DMZ  and  Cambodia.
(The  Pathet  Lao  had  gained  during  September,  as  had  VC  infiltra-
tion through  Laos  to  the  GVN.  This  prompted  plans  for  U.S.
action.)

9  Oct  1961 JCSM  717-61

The  JCS  rejected  the  Rostow  proposal:  forces  would  be  stretched
thin,  they  could  not  stop  infiltration,  and  would  be  at  the  worst
place  to  oppose  potential  DRV  CHICOM  invasion.  The  Chiefs
wanted  to  make  a  "concentrated  effort  in  Laos  where  a  firm  stand
can  be  taken  saving  all  or  substantially  all  of  Laos  which  would,
at  the  same  time,  protect  Thailand  and  protect  the  borders  of
South  Vietnam."  But  if  this  were  "politically  unacceptable"  the
Chiefs  "provided  .  .  .  a  possible  limited  interim  course  of  action":
deployment  of  about  20,000  troops  to  the  central  highlands  near
Pleiku  to  assist  the  GVN  and  free  certain  GVN  forces  for  of-
fensive action  against  the  VC.


Late  Aug
1961


1  Sep  1961


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  13

10  Oct  1961 "Concept  of  Intervention  in  Vietnam"

Drafted  by  Alexis  Johnson,  the  paper  blended  Rostow's  border
control  proposal  with  the  JCS  win-control-of-the-highlands  counter-
proposal for  the  initial  mission  of  U.S.  forces  in  Vietnam.  "The
real  and  ultimate  objective"  of  U.S.  troops  was  also  addressed.
To  defeat  the  Vietcong  and  render  Vietnam  secure  under  a  non-
Communist  government,  Johnson  "guessed"  three  divisions  would
be  the  ultimate  force  required  in  support  of  the  "real  objective."
The  paper  estimated  a  satisfactory  settlement  in  Laos  would  reduce
but  not  eliminate  infiltration  into  South  Vietnam,  that  even  if
infiltration  were  cut  down,  there  was  no  assurance  that  the  GVN
could  "in  the  foreseeable  future  be  able  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong."
Unilateral  U.S.  action  would  probably  be  necessary.  The  plan's
viability  was  dependent  on  the  degree  in  which  the  GVN  acceler-
ated "political  and  military  action  in  its  own  defense."

11  Oct  1961 NSC  Meeting  on  Vietnam

The  NSC  considered  four  papers:  the  Alexis  Johnson  draft;  an
NIE  estimate  that  SEATO  action  would  be  opposed  by  the  DRV,
Viet  Cong  and  the  vSoviet  Union  (airlift),  that  these  forces  stood
a  good  chance  of  thwarting  the  SEATO  intervention;  third,  a  JCS
estimate  that  40,000  U.S.  troops  would  be  required  to  "clean  up
the  Viet  Cong  threat"  and  another  128,000  men  would  be  needed
to  oppose  DRV/CHICOM  intervention  (draining  3  to  4  reserve
divisions).  Finally,  a  memorandum  from  William  Bundy  to  Mc-
Namara  which  said  "it  is  really  now  or  never  if  we  are  to  arrest  the
gains  being  made  by  the  Viet  Cong,"  and  gave  "an  early  and  hard-
hitting operation"  a  70  percent  chance  of  doing  that.  Bundy  added,
the  chance  of  cleaning  up  the  situation  "depends  on  Diem's  effec-
tiveness, which  is  very  problematical,"  favored  going  in  with  70-30
odds  but  figured  the  odds  would  slide  down  if  the  U.S.  "let,  say,
a  month  go  by"  before  moving.

13  Oct  1961 Saigon  Message  488

Reversing  his  previous  position.  Diem  requested  an  additional
fighter-bomber  squadron,  civilian  pilots  for  helicopters  and  C-47
transports  and  U.S.  combat  units  for  a  "combat-training"  mission
near  the  DMZ,  possibly  also  in  the  highlands.  He  asked  considera-
tion be  given  a  possible  request  for  a  division  of  Chiang  Kai-shek's
troops  to  support  the  GVN.  Nolling  recommended  "serious  and
prompt"  attention  for  the  requests.

14  Oct  1961 New  York  Times

In  an  article  leaked  by  the  government — perhaps  by  Kennedy
himself — leaders  were  called  reluctant  to  send  U.S.  combat  units
into  Southeast  Asia.  Obviously  untrue,  the  leak  was  probably
designed  to  end  speculation  about  troop  deployment  and  guard
Kennedy's  freedom  of  action.

20  Oct  1 961 CINCPA  C  Recommendation

Admiral  Felt  felt  the  pros  and  cons  of  U.S.  troop  deployment
added  up  in  favor  of  no  deployment  until  other  means  of  helping
Diem  had  been  exhausted.


c


14 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II
18-24  Oct Taylor  Mission  to  Vietnam

1961  On  the  18th,  Diem  said  he  wanted  no  U.S.  combat  troops  for  any

mission.  He  repeated  his  request  for  a  bilateral  defense  treaty,
more  support  for  ARVN  and  combat-support  equipment  (heli-
copters, aircraft,  etc.).

23  Oct  1961 ChMAAG  Message

General  McGarr  suggested  that  the  serious  Mekong  River  flood
could  provide  a  cover  for  U.S.  troop  deployment:  combat  units
could  be  disguised  as  humanitarian  relief  forces  and  be  dispatched
to  the  delta.

25  Oct  1961 Saigon  Message  536

Taylor  reported  the  pervasive  crisis  of  confidence  and  serious  loss
in  Vietnamese  national  morale  created  by  Laos  and  the  flood,
weakened  the  war  effort.  To  cope  with  this  Taylor  recommended:
Improvement  of  intelligence  on  the  VC;  building  ARVN  mobility;
blocking  infiltration  into  the  highlands  by  organizing  a  border
ranger  force;  introduction  of  U.S.  forces  either  for  emergency,
short-term  assistance,  or  for  more  substantial,  long-term  support
(a  flood  relief  plus  military  reserve  task  force).  Diem  had  reacted
favorably  "on  all  points."

1  Wov  1961 BAGUIO  Message  0005

Taylor  told  the  President,  Rusk  and  McNamara  "we  should  put
in  a  task  force  (6-8,000  men)  consisting  largely  of  logistical  troops
for  the  purpose  of  participating  in  flood  relief  and  at  the  same  time
of  providing  a  U.S.  military  presence  in  Vietnam  capable  of  as-
suring Diem  of  our  readiness  to  join  him  in  a  military  showdown
with  the  Viet  Cong  .  .

1  Nov  1961 BAGUIO  0006  EYES  ONLY  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

Taylor  concluded  that  the  communist  strategy  of  taking  over
Southeast  Asia  by  guerrilla  warfare  was  "well  on  the  way  to  suc-
cess in  Vietnam";  he  said  the  GVN  was  caught  in  "interlocking
circles"  of  bad  tactics  and  bad  administrative  arrangements  which
allow  VC  gains  and  invite  a  political  crisis.  He  recommended
more  U.S.  support  for  paramilitary  groups  and  ARVN  mobility;
the  MAAG  should  be  reorganized  and  increased  and  the  task  force
introduced  to  "conduct  such  combat  operations  as  are  necessary
for  self-defense  and  for  the  security  of  the  area  in  which  (it)  is
stationed,"  among  other  things.  Taylor  felt  the  disadvantages  of
deployment  were  outweighted  by  gains,  said  SVN  is  "not  an  ex-
cessively difficult  or  unpleasant  place  to  operate"  and  the  "risks  of
backing  into  a  major  Asian  war  by  way  of  SVN"  are  not  impres-
sive: North  Vietnam  "is  extremely  vulnerable  to  conventional
bombing  .  .  .  there  is  no  case  for  fearing  a  mass  onslaught  of
communist  manpower  .  .  .  particularly  if  our  air  power  is  al-
iOwed  a  free  hand  against  logistical  targets  .  .  ."

3  Nov  1961 Taylor  Report

The  "Evaluation  and  Summary"  section  suggested  urgency  and
optimism:  SVN  is  in  trouble,  major  U.S.  interests  are  at  stake;
prompt  and  energetic  U.S.  action — military,  economic,  political —


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  15

can  lead  to  victory  without  a  U.S.  take-over  of  the  war,  can  cure
weaknesses  in  the  Diem  regime.  That  the  Vietnamese  must  win  the
war  was  a  unanimous  view — but  most  mission  participants  be-
lieved all  Vietnamese  operations  could  be  substantially  improved
by  America's  "limited  partnership"  with  the  GVN.  The  GVN  is
cast  in  the  best  possible  light;  any  suggestion  that  the  U.S.  should
limit  rather  than  expand  its  commitment — or  face  the  need  to  enter
the  battle  in  full  force  at  this  time — is  avoided.  Underlying  the
summary  was  the  notion  that  "graduated  measures  on  the  DRV
(applied)  with  weapons  of  our  own  choosing"  could  reverse  any
adverse  trend  in  the  South.  And  ground  troops  were  always  pos-
sible. The  Taylor  Report  recommended  the  U.S.  make  obvious  its
readiness  to  act,  develop  reserve  strength  in  the  U.S  "to  cover
action  in  Southeast  Asia  up  to  the  nuclear  threshold  in  that  area"
and  thereby  sober  the  enemy  and  discourage  escalation.  However,
bombing  was  a  more  likely  Vietnam  contingency  than  was  use  of
ground  troops;  the  latter  option  was  tied  to  a  U.S.  response  to
renewed  fighting  in  Laos  and/or  overt  invasion  of  South  Vietnam.
But  Taylor  suggested  troops  be  sent  to  Diem;  the  Taylor  Report
and  cables  recommend  combat  troop  deployment  to  Vietnam.  (A
message  from  Nolting  summarizing  the  Diem-Taylor  meeting  on
which  the  recommendations  apparently  rest  [Saigon  message  541,
25  Oct  61]  does  not  indicate  any  enthusiasm  on  Diem's  part  to
deployment  of  troops,  however.  He  hinted  U.S.  troops  for  training
might  be  requested,  then  dropped  the  subject.)
Appendices  to  the  Taylor  Report  written  by  members  of  the  group
give  a  slightly  different  picture.  There  is  less  optimism  about  the
GVN's  chances  of  success,  less  optimism  about  chances  of  U.S
action — political  or  military — tipping  the  balance.  For  example:
William  Jordan  (State)  said  almost  all  Vietnamese  interviewed
had  emphasized  the  gravity  of  the  situation,  growing  VC  successes
and  loss  of  confidence  in  Diem.  The  ARVN  lacked  aggressiveness,
was  devoid  of  any  sense  of  urgency,  short  of  able  leaders.  Sterling
Cottrell  (State)  said:  It  is  an  open  question  whether  the  GVN
can  succeed  even  with  U.S.  assistance.  Thus  it  would  be  a  mistake
to  make  an  irrevocable  U.S.  commitment  to  defeat  communists  in
South  Vietnam.  Foreign  military  forces  cannot  win  the  battle  at
the  village  level — where  it  must  be  joined;  the  primary  responsibil-
ity for  saving  Vietnam  must  rest  with  the  GVN.  For  these  reasons
Cottrell  argued  against  a  treaty  which  would  either  shift  ultimate
responsibility  to  the  U.S.  or  engage  a  full  U.S.  commitment  to
defeat  the  Vietcong.

5  Nov  1961 SNIE  10-4-61

This  estimated  the  DRV  would  respond  to  an  increased  U.S
troop  commitment  by  increasing  support  to  the  Vietcong.  If  U.S.
commitment  to  the  GVN  grew,  so  would  DRV  support  to  the  VC.
Four  possible  U.S.  courses  were  given:  airlift  plus  more  help  for
ARVN;  deployment  of  8-10,000  troops  as  a  flood  relief  task  force;
deployment  of  25-40,000  combat  troops;  with  each  course,  warn
Hanoi  of  U.S.  determination  to  hold  SVN  and  U.S.  intention  to
bomb  the  DRV  if  its  support  for  the  VC  did  not  cease.  The  SNIE


16 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

estimated  air  attacks  against  the  North  would  not  cause  its  VC
support  to  stop  and  figured  Moscow  and  Peking  would  react
strongly  to  air  attacks.

8  Nov  1961 McNamara  Memorandum  for  the  President

Secretary  McNamara,  Gilpatric  and  the  JCS  were  "inclined  to
recommend  that  we  do  commit  the  U.S.  to  the  clear  objective  of
preventing  the  fall  of  South  Vietnam  to  communism  and  that  we
support  this  commitment  by  the  necessary  military  actions."  The
memorandum  said  the  fall  of  Vietnam  would  create  "extremely
serious"  strategic  implications  worldwide,  that  chances  were  "prob-
ably sharply  against"  preventing  that  fall  without  a  U.S.  troop
commitment  but  that  even  with  major-troop  deployment  (205,000
was  the  maximum  number  of  ground  forces  estimated  necessary
to  deal  with  a  large  overt  invasion  from  the  DRV  and  or  China)
the  U.S.  would  still  be  at  the  mercy  of  external  forces — Diem,
Laos,  domestic  political  problems,  etc. — and  thus  success  could
not  be  guaranteed.  McNamara  recommended  against  deployment
of  a  task  force  (the  8,000-man  group  mentioned  in  the  Taylor
Report)  "unless  we  are  willing  to  make  an  affirmative  decision"
to  fully  support  a  commiment  to  save  South  Vietnam.

11  Nov  1961 Rusk/McNamara  Memorandum  for  the  President

This  may  have  been  prepared  at  Kennedy's  specific  instruction;
it  recommended  what  Kennedy  wanted  to  hear:  that  the  decision
to  commit  major  ground  forces  could  be  deferred.  In  this  paper,
rhetoric  is  escalated  from  that  of  McNamara's  8  November  memo-
randum but  U.S.  actions  recommended  are  far  less  significant,  less
committing.  Military  courses  are  divided  into  two  phrases:  first,
promptly  deploy  support  troops  and  equipment  (helicopters,  trans-
port aircraft,  maritime  equipment  and  trainers,  special  intelligence
and  air  reconnaissance  groups,  other  men  and  materiel  to  improve
training,  logistics,  economic  and  other  assistance  programs).  Then
study  and  possibly  deploy  major  ground  combat  forces  at  a  later
date.  Despite  the  clear  warning  that  even  deployment  of  major  U.S.
units  could  not  assure  success  against  communism,  the  memo-
randum's initial  recommendation  was  that  the  U.S.  "commit  itself
to  the  clear  objective  of  preventing  the  fall  of  South  Vietnam  to
Communism,"  be  prepared  to  send  troops  and  to  "strike  at  the
source  of  aggression  in  North  Vietnam."  A  number  of  diplomatic
moves  (in  the  U.N.,  in  NATO  and  SEATO  councils,  etc.)  are
suggested  to  signal  U.S.  determination:  economic,  social  and  other
programs  designed  to  help  South  Vietnam  are  suggested;  ways  to
elicit  improvements  from  Diem  are  recommended.

14  Nov  1961 DEPTEL  619  to  Saigon

This  was  Nolting's  guidance,  based  on  the  Rusk  McNamara  mem-
crandum.  Nolting  was  told  the  anti-guerrilla  effort  "must  essen-
tially be  a  GVN  task  .  .  .  No  amount  of  extra  aid  can  be  sub-
stituted for  GVN  taking  measures  to  permit  [itl  to  assume  offensive
and  strengthen  the  adminij>trative  and  political  bases  of  government
.  .  .  Do  not  propose  to  introduce  into  GVN  the  U.S.  combat
troops  now  but  propose  a  phase  of  intense  public  and  diplomatic


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  17


activity  to  focus  on  infiltration  from  North.  Shall  decide  later
on  course  of  action  should  infiltration  not  be  radically  reduced."
Diem's  taking  necessary  measures — political,  military,  economic
— to  improve  his  government  and  relations  with  the  people  were
a  prerequisite  to  further  U.S.  assistance:  "Package  should  be
presented  as  first  steps  in  a  partnership  in  which  the  U.S.  is  pre-
pared to  do  more  as  joint  study  of  facts  and  GVN  performance
makes  increased  U.S.  aid  possible  and  productive."  Strictly  for
his  own  information,  Nolting  was  told  Defense  was  "preparing
plans  for  the  use  of  U.S.  combat  forces  in  SVN  under  various
contingencies,  including  stepped  up  infiltration  as  well  as  organized
.  .  .  (military)  intervention.  However,  objective  of  our  policy
is  to  do  all  possible  to  accomplish  purpose  without  use  of  U.S.
combat  forces."  And,  Nolting  was  to  tell  Diem:  "We  would  expect
to  share  in  the  decision-making  process  in  the  political,  economic
and  military  fields  as  they  affect  the  security  situation."

22  Nov  1961  NSAMlll

Called  the  "First  Phase  of  Vietnam  Program"  this  NSAM  approved
all  Rusk/McNamara  recommendations  of  11  November  except
the  first  one:  their  initial  recommendation  that  the  U.S.  commit
itself  to  saving  South  Vietnam  was  omitted.

7  Dec  1961 Alexis  Johnson/Rostow Redraft ("Clarification") of  Nolting's
14  November  Guidance

"What  we  have  in  mind  is  that  in  operations  directly  related  to  the
security  situation,  partnership  will  be  so  close  that  one  party  will
not  take  decisions  or  actions  affecting  the  other  without  full  and
frank  prior  consultation."  This  is  different  from  the  idea  that
American  involvement  should  be  so  intimate  that  the  GVN  would
be  reformed  "from  the  bottom  up" — despite  Diem.
(Although  Washington  gave  in — or  gave  up — on  the  kind  and
degree  of  pressure  to  exert  on  Diem,  Washington  did  not  soften
on  Lansdale.  Despite  four  requests  from  Diem  and  the  recom-
mendations from  Cottrell,  the  Taylor  Report  and  William  Bundy
that  Lansdale  be  sent  to  Saigon,  he  did  not  get  there  until  late
1965.)

11  Dec  1961  New  York  Times

Two  U.S.  helicopter  companies  ''33  H-21Cs,  400  men)  arrived
in  Vietnam,  the  first  direct  U.S.  military  support  for  the  GVN,
ICC  reaction:  shall  we  continue  functioning  here  in  the  face  of
U.S.  assistance  (increase  barred  by  the  Geneva  Accords)?

15  Dec  1961 New  York  Times

Reported  the  formal  exchange  of  letters  between  Kennedy  and
Diem  announcing  a  stepped-up  aid  program  for  Vietnam.


I.  BACKGROUND


A.  INTRODUCTION

In  the  summer  of  1959,  it  was  hard  to  find  an  American  official  worried
about  Vietnam.  This  was  not  because  things  were  going  well.  They  were  not.


18 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

A  National  Intelligence  Estimate  published  in  August  portrayed  Diem  as  un-
popular, his  economy  as  developing  less  rapidly  than  its  rival  in  the  North,  and
his  government  under  pressure  from  guerrillas  encouraged  and  in  part  sup-
ported from  the  North.  Nevertheless,  the  NIE  suggested  no  crisis  then  or  for
the  foreseeable  future.  What  the  NIE  called  ""harassment"  (i.e.,  support  for
the  VC)  from  the  North  would  continue,  but  overt  invasion  seemed  most  un-
likely. Neither  communist  nor  anti-communist  enemies  within  South  Vietnam
were  seen  as  an  immediate  threat.  Diem  would  remain  as  President,  said  the
NIE,  "for  many  years."  In  sum,  the  NIE  saw  the  situation  in  Vietnam  as  un-
happy, but  not  unstable.  That  was  to  be  about  as  close  to  good  news  as  we
would  hear  from  South  Vietnam  for  a  long  time.

From  then  on,  the  classified  record  through  the  end  of  1961  shows  a  succes-
sion  of  bleak  appraisals  of  the  regime's  support  in  the  cities,  and  among  the
military,  almost  always  accompanied  by  increasingly  bleak  estimates  of  in-
creased VC  strength  and  activity  in  the  countryside.  A  dispatch  from  our  Em-
bassy in  Saigon  in  March,  1960,  described  the  situation  in  grave  terms,  but  ended
on  the  hopeful  note  that  as  of  January  Diem  was  recognizing  his  problems  and
promising  to  do  something  about  them.  In  August,  an  NIE  analysis  reported  a
"marked  deterioration  since  January."  In  November,  a  military  coup  barely
failed  to  overthrow  Diem.

In  January,  1961  an  old  counterinsurgency  hand.  General  Edward  Lans-
dale,  went  to  Vietnam  to  look  things  over  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  He
returned  with  a  report  that  "the  Viet  Cong  hope  to  win  back  Vietnam  south
of  the  17th  parallel  this  year,  if  at  all  possible,  and  are  much  further  along  to-
wards accomplishing  this  goal  than  I  had  realized  from  reading  the  reports  re-
ceived in  Washington."

Nevertheless,  the  situation  was  never  seen  as  nearlv  so  grave  as  these  re-
ports, read  years  later,  might  suggest.  We  will  see  that  at  least  up  until  the  fall
of  1961,  while  appraisals  of  the  situation  sometimes  suggested  imminent
crisis,  the  recommendations  made  to  the  President  (by  the  authors  of  these
frightening  appraisals)  always  implied  a  less  pessimistic  view.

The  top  levels  of  the  Kennedy  Administration  dealt  only  intermittently  with
the  problem  of  Vietnam  during  1961.  There  was  a  flurry  of  activity  in  late
April  and  early  May,  which  we  will  see  was  essentially  an  offshoot  of  the  Laos
crisis  which  had  come  to  a  head  at  that  time.  A  much  more  thorough  review
was  undertaken  in  the  fall,  following  General  Taylor  s  mission  to  Saigon,  which
then  led  to  an  important  expansion  of  the  American  effort  in  Vietnam.

No  fundamental  new  American  decisions  on  Vietnam  were  made  until  the
Buddhist  unrest  in  the  last  half  of  1963.  and  no  major  new  military  decisions
were  made  until  1965.  Consequently,  the  decisions  in  the  fall  of  1961  (essen-
tially, to  provide  combat  support — for  example,  helicopter  companies — but  to
defer  any  decision  on  direct  combat  troops)  have  come  to  seem  very  important.
This  paper  tries  to  describe  what  led  up  to  those  decisions,  what  alternatives
were  available  and  what  the  implications  of  the  choices  were.

The  story  is  a  fairly  complicated  one.  For  although  it  is  hard  to  recall  that
context  today,  Vietnam  in  1961  was  a  peripheral  crisis.  Even  within  Southeast
Asia  it  received  far  less  of  the  Administration's  and  the  world's  attention  than
did  Laos.  The  New  York  Times  Index  for  1961  has  eight  columns  of  Vietnam,
twenty-six  on  Laos.  Decisions  about  Vietnam  were  greatly  influenced  by  what
was  happening  elsewhere.  In  the  narrow  Vietnamese  context,  the  weaknesses
and  peculiarities  of  the  Diem  government  had  a  substantial,  if  not  always  ob-
vious, impact  on  the  behavior  of  both  the  Vietnamese  officials  seeking  Ameri-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  19

can  aid  and  the  American  decision-makers  pondering  the  nature  and  terms  of
the  aid  they  would  offer.

As  it  happens,  the  Eisenhower  Administration  was  never  faced  with  a  need
for  high-level  decisions  affecting  the  crisis  developing  in  Vietnam  during  1960.
A  formal  Counterinsurgency  Plan,  intended  to  be  the  basis  of  an  expanded
program  of  assistance  to  Vietnam,  was  being  worked  on  through  most  of  that
year,  but  (presumably  reflecting  a  subdued  sense  of  urgency),  it  took  eight
months  to  reach  the  White  House.  By  that  time,  a  new  Administration  had
just  taken  office.  President  Kennedy  promptly  approved  the  plan,  but  this
merely  set  off  lengthy  negotiations  with  the  Vietnamese  about  whether  and
when  they  would  do  their  share  of  the  CIP.  In  April,  though,  a  crisis  atmos-
phere developed,  not  because  of  anything  fresh  out  of  Vietnam,  but  because
of  a  need  to  shore  up  the  Vietnamese  and  others  in  Southeast  Asia  in  the  face
of  a  likely  collapse  of  the  U.S.  position  in  Laos.  This  led  to  a  U.S.  offer  to  dis-
cuss putting  American  troops  into  Vietnam,  or  perhaps  negotiate  a  bilateral
security  treaty  with  the  Vietnamese.  When,  however,  Vice  President  Johnson
mentioned  the  possibility  of  troops  to  Diem  in  May,  Diem  said  he  wanted  no
troops  yet.  The  idea  of  a  bilateral  treaty  similarly  slipped  out  of  sight.  Conse-
quently, although  the  United  States  had  itself  indicated  a  willingness  in  May
to  discuss  a  deeper  commitment,  the  South  Vietnamese  did  not  take  up  the
opportunity,  and  the  Administration  had  no  occasion  to  face  up  to  really  hard
decisions.

But  by  October,  the  situation  in  Vietnam  had  worsened.  The  VC  were  be-
coming disturbingly  aggressive.  Now,  Diem  did  raise  the  question  of  a  treaty.
This  request,  coming  after  the  American  offer  in  May  to  consider  such  steps
and  in  the  context  of  a  worsening  situation  in  Vietnam,  could  hardly  be  ignored.
The  Taylor  Mission  and  the  Presidential  review  and  decisions  of  November
followed.

The  present  paper  is  organized  around  these  natural  climaxes  in  the  policy
process.  The  balance  of  Part  I  describes  the  situation  inherited  by  the  new  Ad-
ministration. Part  II  covers  the  period  through  the  May  peak.  Part  III  covers
the  fall  crisis.

B. THE  CONTEXT

In  January,  1961,  there  were  five  issues  that  were  going  to  affect  American
policy  toward  Vietnam.  They  turned  on:

1. The  VC  Insurgency  Itself

An  illustration  of  the  growth  of  the  insurgency,  but  also  of  the  limits  of
U.S.  concern  can  be  seen  in  the  1960  CINCPAC  Command  History.  For  sev-
eral years  prior  to  1960,  CINCPAC  histories  do  not  mention  the  VC  insurgency
at  all.  In  1960,  the  development  of  a  counterinsurgency  plan  for  Vietnam  (and
simultaneously  one  for  Laos)  received  a  fair  amount  of  attention.  But  when,
in  April,  MAAG  in  Saigon  asked  for  additional  transports  and  helicopters  for
the  counterinsurgency  effort,  CINCPAC  turned  down  the  requests  for  trans-
ports, and  OSD  overruled  the  recommendation  CINCPAC  forwarded  for  6
helicopters.  By  December,  OSD  was  willing  to  approve  sending  1 1  helicopters
(of  16  newly  requested)  on  an  "emergency"  basis.  But  the  emergency  was
partly  a  matter  of  reassuring  Diem  after  the  November  coup,  and  the  degree  of
emergency  is  suggested  by  the  rate  of  delivery:  4  in  December,  and  the  bal-
ance over  the  next  three  months.


20 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

The  record,  in  general,  indicates  a  level  of  concern  such  as  that  illustrated  by
the  helicopter  decisions:  growing  gradually  through  1960,  but  still  pretty  much
of  a  back-burner  issue  so  far  as  the  attention  and  sense  of  urgency  it  com-
manded among  policy-level  officials.  As  we  will  see,  the  new  Kennedy  Adminis-
tration gave  it  more  attention,  as  the  Eisenhower  Administration  undoubtedly
would  have  had  it  remained  in  office.  But  it  is  important  (though  hard,  now
that  Vietnam  has  loomed  so  large)  to  keep  in  mind  how  secondary  an  issue  the
VC  threat  to  Vietnam  seemed  to  be  in  early  1961 .

2. Problems  with  the  Diem  Government

Yet,  although  the  VC  gains  were  not  seen — even  in  the  dispatches  from
Saigon — as  serious  enough  to  threaten  the  immediate  collapse  of  the  Diem
government,  those  gains  did  have  the  effect  of  raising  difficult  questions  about
our  relations  with  Diem  that  we  had  never  had  to  face  before.  For  bv  late  1960,
it  was  a  quite  widely  held  view  that  the  Diem  government  was  probably  going
to  be  overthrown  sooner  or  later,  barring  major  changes  from  within.  In  con-
trast to  the  May  1959  NIE's  confident  statement  that  Diem  "almost  certainly"
would  remain  president  "for  many  years,"  we  find  the  August  1960  NIE  pre-
dicting that  the  recent  "adverse  trends,"  if  continued,  would  "almost  certainly
in  time  cause  the  collapse  of  Diem's  regime."

The  simple,  unhappy  fact  was  that  whatever  his  triumphs  in  1955  and  1956,
by  the  end  of  the  1950s  the  feeling  was  growing  that  the  best  thing  that  could
be  said  for  Diem  was  that  he  was  holding  the  country  together  and  keeping  it
from  succumbing  to  the  communists.  Once  even  this  came  into  doubt,  talk
among  Vietnamese  and  eventually  among  Americans  of  whether  it  might  be
better  to  look  for  alternative  leadership  became  inevitable.

The  sense  of  trouble  shows  through  even  among  the  optimists.  We  find  Ken-
neth Young,  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Thailand  and  a  strong  believer  in  Diem,
warning  him  in  October,  1960  that  "there  seems  to  be  somewhat  of  a  crisis
of  confidence  in  Vietnam."

But  the  long  list  of  measures  Young  suggested  were  all  tactical  in  nature,  and
required  no  basic  changes  in  the  regime.

Our  Ambassador  in  Saigon  (Eldridge  Durbrow)  was  more  pessimistic:

.  .  .  situation  in  Viet-Nam  [December,  1960]  is  highly  dangerous  to  US
interests.  Communists  are  encased  in  large-scale  guerrilla  eff"ort  to  take
over  countryside  and  oust  Diem's  Government.  Their  activities  have
steadily  increased  in  intensity  throughout  this  year.  In  addition.  Diem  is
faced  with  widespread  popular  dissatisfaction  with  his  government's  in-
ability to  stem  the  communist  tide  and  its  own  heavy-handed  methods  of
operation.  It  seems  clear  that  if  he  is  to  remain  in  power  he  must  meet
these  two  challenges  bv  improvements  in  his  methods  of  conducting  war
against  communists  and  in  vigorous  action  to  build  greater  popular  sup-
port. We  should  help  and  encourage  him  to  take  effective  action.  Should
he  not  dt  so,  we  may  well  be  forced,  in  not  too  distant  future,  to  under-
take difficult  task  of  identifying  and  supporting  alternate  leadership.

But  the  difficulties  (and  risks)  of  that  task  looked  forbidding.  During  the
November,  1960  coup  attempt  the  U.S.  had  apparently  used  its  influence  to  get
the  coup  leaders  to  negotiate  with  Diem  for  reforms,  allowing  Diem  to  retain


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  21

his  position  with  reduced  powers.  Whether  because  of  their  own  indecision  or
U.S.  pressure,  the  coup  leaders  allowed  a  delay  that  let  Diem  bring  loyalist
troops  in  to  regain  control.  (Three  years  later,  a  leader  of  the  November,  1963
coup  "somewhat  emphatically"  told  an  American  agent  that  "it  would  do  no
good  to  send  anyone  around  to  attempt  to  stop  things,  as  happened  in  No-
vember, I960.")  '

The  situation  that  was  left — with  a  number  of  American  officials  unhappy
with  Diem  and  doubtful  that  he  was  capable  of  winning  the  war,  yet  unwilling
to  risk  a  coup — produced  strains  within  the  American  government.  Short  of
encouraging  a  coup,  we  seemed  to  have  two  alternatives:  attempt  to  pressure
Diem  or  attempt  to  so  win  his  confidence  that  he  would  accept  our  advice  will-
ingly. The  only  effective  form  of  U.S.  pressure,  however,  was  to  withhold  aid,
and  doing  so  would  sooner  or  later  weaken  the  war  effort.

Consequently  a  division  developed,  mainly  (but  not  purely)  along  the  lines
of  Defense  against  State,  about  the  advisability  of  using  pressure.  The  division
was  particularly  sharp  since  Diem  seemed  willing  to  go  part  way,  at  least,  in
meeting  our  military  suggestions,  so  that  the  Defense  view  tended  to  be  that  the
U.S.  would  be  weakening  the  war  effort  if  aid  were  withheld  to  seek  to  gain
civil  reforms  that  not  many  people  in  Defense  regarded  as  crucial.  Besides,  it
was  argued.  Diem  would  not  succumb  to  pressure  anyway.  We  would  just  en-
courage another  coup,  and  the  communists  would  exploit  it.

Given  this  sort  of  argument,  there  would  always  (at  least  through  1961)  be
at  least  two  lavers  to  decisions  about  aid  to  Vietnam:  What  should  the  U.S.  be
willing  to  give?  and  What,  if  any,  demands  should  be  made  on  Diem  in  return
for  the  aid?

3. Problems  with  the  Soviets

But  from  Washington,  both  problems  within  Vietnam — how  to  deal  with
the  Viet  Cong,  and  how  to  deal  with  Diem — seemed  quite  inconsequential
compared  to  the  problems  of  dealing  with  the  Soviets.  There  were  two  elements
to  the  Soviet  problem.  The  first,  which  only  indirectly  affected  Vietnam,  was
the  generally  aggressive  and  confident  posture  of  the  Russians  at  that  time,  and
the  generally  defensive  position  of  the  Americans.  To  use  W.W.  Rostow's  termi-
nology, the  Soviets  were  then  entering  the  third  year  of  their  "post-sputnik"
offensive,  and  their  aggressiveness  would  continue  through  the  Cuban  missile
crisis.  On  the  U.S.  side  there  was  dismay  even  among  Republicans  (openly,  for
example,  by  Rockefeller;  necessarily  subdued  by  Nixon,  but  reported  by  any
number  of  journalists  on  the  basis  of  private  conversations)  at  what  seemed  to
be  an  erosion  of  the  American  position  in  the  world.  The  Coolidge  Commission,
appointed  by  the  President,  warned  him  in  January,  1960,  to,  among  other
steps,  "close  the  missile  gap"  and  generally  strengthen  our  defenses.  Kennedy,
of  course,  made  erosion  of  our  position  in  the  world  a  major  campaign  issue.
All  of  this  made  1961  a  peculiarly  difficult  year  for  Americans  to  make  con-
cessions, or  give  ground  to  the  Soviets  when  it  could  be  avoided,  or  even  post-
poned. That  was  clear  in  January,  and  everything  thereafter  that  was,  or  could
be  interpreted  to  be  a  weak  U.S.  response,  only  strengthened  the  pressure  to
hold  on  in  Vietnam.

A  further  element  of  the  Soviet  problem  impinged  directly  on  Vietnam.  The
new  Administration,  even  before  taking  office,  was  inclined  to  believe  that  un-
conventional warfare  was  likely  to  be  terrifically  important  in  the  1960s.  In
January  1961,  Krushchev  seconded  that  view  with  his  speech  pledging  Soviet


22 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

support  to  "wars  of  national  liberation/'  Vietnam  was  where  such  a  war  was
actually  going  on.  Indeed,  since  the  war  in  Laos  had  moved  far  beyond  the  in-
surgency stage,  Vietnam  was  the  only  place  in  the  world  where  the  Administra-
tion faced  a  well-developed  Communist  effort  to  topple  a  pro-Western  govern-
ment with  an  externally-aided  pro-communist  insurgency.  It  was  a  challenge
that  could  hardly  be  ignored.

4.  The  Situation  in  Laos

Meanwhile,  within  Southeast  Asia  itself  there  was  the  peculiar  problem  of
Laos,  where  the  Western  position  was  in  the  process  of  falling  apart  as  Ken-
nedy took  office.  The  Eisenhower  Administration  had  been  giving  strong  sup-
port to  a  pro-American  faction  in  Laos.  As  a  consequence,  the  neutralist  faction
had  joined  in  an  alliance  with  the  pro-communist  faction.  The  Soviets  were
sending  aid  to  the  neutralist/communist  alliance,  which  they  recognized  as  the
legitimate  government  in  Laos;  the  U.S.  recognized  and  aided  the  pro-western
faction.  Unfortunately,  it  turned  out  that  the  neutralist  communist  forces  were
far  more  effective  than  those  favored  by  the  U.S.,  and  so  it  became  clear
that  only  by  putting  an  American  army  into  Laos  could  the  pro-Western  fac-
tion be  kept  in  power.  Indeed,  it  was  doubtful  that  even  a  coalition  govern-
ment headed  by  the  neutralists  (the  choice  the  U.S.  adopted)  could  be  salvaged.
Thj  coalition  government  solution  would  raise  problems  for  other  countries  in
Southeast  Asia:  there  would  be  doubts  about  U.S.  commitments  in  that  part
of  the  world,  and  (since  it  was  obvious  that  the  communist  forces  would  be  left
with  de  facto  control  of  eastern  Laos),  the  settlement  would  create  direct  se-
curity threats  for  Thailand  and  Vietnam.  These  problems  would  accompany  a
"good"  outcome  in  Laos  (the  coalition  government);  if  the  Pathet  Lao  chose
to  simply  overrun  the  country  outright  (as,  short  of  direct  American  interven-
tion, they  had  the  power  to  do),  the  problem  elsewhere  in  Southeast  Asia  would
be  so  much  the  worse.  Consequently,  throughout  1961,  we  find  the  effects  of
the  Laos  situation  spilling  over  onto  Vietnam.

5.  The  Special  American  Commitment  to  Vietnam

Finally,  in  this  review  of  factors  that  would  affect  policy-making  on  Viet-
nam, we  must  note  that  South  Vietnam,  (unlike  anv  of  the  other  countries  in
Southeast  Asia)  was  essentiallv  the  creation  o^'  the  United  States.

Without  U.S.  support  Diem  almost  certainly  could  not  have  consolidated  his
hold  on  the  South  during  1955  and  1956.

Without  the  threat  of  U.S.  intervention.  South  Vietnam  could  not  have  re-
fused to  even  discuss  the  elections  called  for  in  1956  under  the  Geneva  settle-
ment without  being  immediately  overrun  bv  the  Viet  Minh  armies.

Without  U.S.  aid  in  the  vears  following,  the  Diem  regime  certainly,  and  an
independent  South  Vietnam  almost  as  certainlv.  could  not  have  survived.

Further,  from  1954  on  there  had  been  repeated  statements  of  U.S.  sup-
port for  South  Vietnam  of  a  sort  that  we  would  not  find  in  our  dealings  with
other  countries  in  this  part  of  the  world.  It  is  true  there  was  nothing  unqualified
about  this  support:  it  was  alwavs  economic,  and  occasionally  accompanied  by
statements  suggesting  that  the  Diem  regime  had  incurred  an  obligation  to
undertake  reforms  in  return  for  our  assistance.  But  then,  until  1961,  there
was  no  occasion  to  consider  anv  assistance  that  went  beyond  economic  support


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  23

and  the  usual  sort  of  military  equipment  and  advice,  and  no  suggestion  that
our  continued  support  was  in  doubt.

Consequently,  the  U.S.  had  gradually  developed  a  special  commitment  in
South  Vietnam.  It  was  certainly  not  absolutely  binding,  even  at  the  level  of  as-
sistance existing  at  the  start  of  1961,  much  less  at  any  higher  level  the  South
Vietnamese  might  come  to  need  or  request.  But  the  commitment  was  there;  to
let  it  slip  would  be  awkward,  at  the  least.  Whether  it  really  had  any  impact  on
later  decisions  is  hard  to  say.  Given  the  other  factors  already  discussed,  it  is  not
hard  to  believe  that  in  its  absence,  U.S.  policy  might  have  followed  exactly  the
same  course  it  has  followed.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  absence  of  a  pre-existing
special  relation  with  South  Vietnam,  the  U.S.  in  1961  possibly  would  have  at
least  considered  a  coalition  government  for  Vietnam  as  well  as  Laos,  and
chosen  to  limit  direct  U.S.  involvement  to  Thailand  and  other  countries  in  the
area  historically  independent  of  both  Hanoi  and  Peking.  But  that  is  the  mootest
sort  of  question.  For  if  there  had  been  no  pre-existing  commitment  to  South
Vietnam  in  1961,  there  would  not  have  been  a  South  Vietnam  to  worry  about
anyway.

C.  SUMMARY

Looking  over  the  context  we  have  been  reviewing,  it  seems  like  a  situation  in
which  mistakes  would  be  easy  to  make.  The  Viet  Cong  threat  was  serious
enough  to  demand  action;  but  not  serious  enough  to  compete  with  other
crises  and  problems  for  the  attention  of  senior  decision-makers.  A  sound  de-
cision on  tactics  and  levels  of  commitment  to  deal  with  the  Viet  Cong  involved
as  much  a  judgment  on  the  internal  politics  of  non-communists  in  Vietnam  as
it  did  a  judgment  of  the  guerrillas'  strength,  and  character,  and  relation  with
Hanoi.  (Even  a  judgement  that  the  war  could  be  treated  as  a  strictly  military
problem  after  all,  involved  at  least  an  implicit  judgement,  and  a  controversial
one,  about  Vietnamese  politics.)  Even  if  Diem  looked  not  worth  supporting  it
would  be  painful  to  make  a  decision  to  let  him  sink,  and  especially  so  in  the
world  context  of  1961.  Faced  with  a  challenge  to  deal  with  wars  of  national
liberation,  it  would  be  hard  to  decide  that  the  first  one  we  happened  to  meet
was  "not  our  style."  And  after  the  U.S.  stepped  back  in  Laos,  it  might  be  hard
to  persuade  the  Russians  that  we  intended  to  stand  firm  anywhere  if  we  then
gave  up  on  Vietnam.  Finally,  if  the  U.S.  suspected  that  the  best  course  in  Viet-
nam was  to  seek  immediately  an  alternative  to  Diem,  no  one  knew  who  the
alternative  might  be,  or  whether  getting  rid  of  Diem  would  really  make  things
better.

Such  was  the  prospect  of  Vietnam  as  1961  began,  and  a  new  Administra-
tion took  office.

IL THE  COUNTERINSURGENCY  PLAN

A. WINTER,  1961

The  Vietnam  Counter-Insurgency  Plan  which  was  being  worked  on  through
most  of  1960  finally  reached  the  White  House  in  late  January,  apparently  just
after  Kennedy  took  office.  We  do  not  have  a  document  showing  the  exact  date,
but  we  know  that  Kennedy  approved  the  main  provisions  of  the  Plan  after  a
meeting  on  January  28th,  and  negotiations  with  Diem  began  February  13.

The  provisions  of  the  CIP  tell  a  good  deal  about  how  the  Viet  Cong  threat


24 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

looked  to  American  and  Vietnamese  officials  at  the  beginning  of  1961,  for  there
is  nothing  in  the  record  to  suggest  that  anyone — either  in  Saigon  or  Washing-
ton, Vietnamese  or  American — judged  the  CIP  to  be  an  inadequate  response  to
the  VC  threat.

The  U.S.  offered  Diem  equipment  and  supplies  to  outfit  a  20,000  man  increase
in  his  army.  The  cost  was  estimated  at  $28.4  million.  The  U.S.  also  offered  to
train,  outfit  and  supply  32,000  men  of  the  Civil  Guard  (a  counterguerrilla  auxil-
iary) at  a  cost  of  $12.7  million.  These  two  moves  would  help  Diem  expand  the
RVNAF  to  a  total  of  170,000  men,  and  expand  the  Civil  Guard  to  a  total  of
68,000  men.  There  were  some  further  odds  and  ends  totalling  less  than  another
million.  The  full  package  added  up  to  less  than  $42  million,  which  was  a  sub-
stantial but  not  enormous  increment  to  on-going  U.S.  aid  to  Vietnam  of  about
$220  million  a  year.  (Since  most  of  these  costs  were  for  initial  outfitting  for
new  forces,  the  package  was  mainly  a  one-time  shot  in  the  arm.)

For  their  part,  the  Vietnamese  were  supposed  to  pay  the  local  currency
costs  of  the  new  forces,  and  carry  out  a  number  of  military  and  civil  reforms.

The  key  military  reforms  were  to  straighten  out  the  chain  of  command,  and
to  develop  an  agreed  overall  plan  of  operations.

The  chain  of  command  problem  was  that  control  of  the  counterinsur-
gency  effort  in  the  provinces  was  divided  between  the  local  military  com-
mander and  the  Province  Chief,  a  personal  appointee  of  Diem,  and  re-
porting directly  to  Diem.  Even  at  a  higher  level,  3  regional  field  commands
reported  directly  to  Diem,  by-passing  the  Chief  of  Staff.  So  a  total  of  42
officials  with  some  substantial  (and  overlapping)  control  of  the  war  effort
reported  directly  to  Diem:  38  Province  Chiefs,  3  regional  commanders,
and  the  Chief  of  Staff.  The  "reform"  eventually  gotten  from  Diem  put  the
regional  commanders  under  the  Chief  of  Staff,  and  combined  the  office  of
Province  Chief  (usually  a  military  man  in  any  event)  and  local  field  com-
mander. But  the  Province  Chiefs  still  were  personally  responsible  to  Diem,
and  could  appeal  directly  to  him  outside  the  nominal  chain  of  command.
Diem's  reform,  consequently,  turned  out  to  be  essentially  meaningless.  His
reluctance  to  move  on  this  issue  was  not  surprising.  After  all,  the  division
and  confusion  of  military  authority  served  a  real  purpose  for  a  ruler  like
Diem,  with  no  broad  base  of  support:  it  lessened  the  chance  of  a  coup  that
would  throw  him  out.

The  overall  plan  issue,  on  which  not  even  a  paper  agreement  was
reached  during  the  period  covered  by  this  account,  was  really  an  argument
over  strategy.  It  has  a  familiar  ring.

Diem  seemed  oriented  very  much  towards  maintaining  at  least  the  pre-
tense of  control  over  all  of  South  Vietnam.  Consequently,  he  favored
maintaining  military  outposts  (and  concentrating  the  population  in  Agro-
villes,  the  predecessors  of  the  strategic  hamlets)  along  "lines  of  strength"
(generally  main  roads)  which  stretched  throughout  the  country.  To  as-
sert at  least  nominal  control  over  the  countryside  between  these  lines  of
strength,  the  military  forces  would  periodically  organize  a  sweep.  In  con-
trast to  ;his,  the  American  plan  stressed  what  MAAG  called  a  "net  and
spear"  concept.  Small  units  would  scour  the  jungles  beyond  the  pacified  area.
When  this  "net"  found  an  enemv  unit,  they  would  call  in  reserves  (the
spear)  for  a  concentrated  attempt  to  destroy  the  unit.  As  new  areas  were
thus  cleared,  the  net  would  be  pushed  further  out  into  previously  uncon-
tested areas.  It  is  not  clear  how  well  refined  either  concept  was,  or  (with


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  25

hindsight)  whether  the  American  plan  was  really  a  great  deal  more  real-
istic than  Diem's.  But  the  American  interest  is  getting  Diem  to  agree  to
a  plan  does  seem  to  have  been  primarily  oriented  to  getting  him  to  agree
to  some  systematic  procedure  for  using  forces  to  clear  areas  of  VC  con-
trol, instead  of  tying  up  most  of  his  forces  defending  fixed  installations,
with  periodic  uneventful  sweeps  through  the  hinterland.

On  the  civil  side,  the  stress  in  the  CIP  was  on  trying  to  shore  up  the  regime's
support  within  the  cities  by  such  steps  as  bringing  opposition  leaders  into  the
government,  and  giving  the  National  Assembly  the  power  to  investigate  charges
of  mismanagement  and  corruption  in  the  executive.

The  Plan  also  called  for  "civic  action"  and  other  steps  to  increase  the  change
of  winning  positive  loyalty  from  the  peasants.

A  good  deal  of  bureaucratic  compromise  had  gone  into  the  CIP.  Ambassador
Durbrow  only  reluctantly  conceded  any  real  need  for  the  20,000  man  force  in-
crease. The  stress  on  civil  reforms,  in  particular  on  civil  reforms  as  part  of  a
quid  pro  quo,  came  into  the  plan  only  after  the  Saigon  Embassy  became  in-
volved, although  there  were  general  allusions  to  such  things  even  in  the  original
military  draft  of  the  CIP.

Nevertheless,  there  was  at  least  a  paper  agreement,  and  so  far  as  the  record
shows,  substantial  real  agreement  as  well.  No  one  complained  the  plan  was
inadequate.  It  would,  "if  properly  implemented,"  "turn  the  tide."  And,  by  im-
plication, it  would  do  so  without  any  major  increase  in  American  personnel  in
Vietnam,  and  indeed,  aside  from  the  one-shot  outfitting  of  the  new  units,  with-
out even  any  major  increase  in  American  aid.

None  of  this  meant  that  the  warnings  that  we  have  seen  in  the  Saigon  Em-
bassy's dispatches  or  in  the  August  SNIE  were  not  seriously  intended.  What  it
did  mean  was  that,  as  of  early  1961,  the  view  that  was  presented  to  senior  of-
ficials in  Washington  essentially  showed  the  VC  threat  as  a  problem  which
could  be  pretty  confidently  handled,  given  a  little  more  muscle  for  the  army
and  some  shaping  up  by  the  Vietnamese  administration.  Any  doubts  expressed
went  to  the  will  and  comptence  of  the  Diem  regime,  not  to  the  strength  of
the  VC,  the  role  of  Hanoi,  or  the  adequacy  of  U.S.  aid.

Consequently,  among  the  assumptions  listed  as  underlying  the  CIP,  we  find
(with  emphasis  added) :

That  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam  has  the  basic  potential  to  cope
with  the  Viet  Cong  guerrilla  threat  //  necessary  corrective  measures  are
taken  and  adequate  forces  are  provided.

That  of  course  was  the  heart  of  the  CIP  bargain:  the  U.S.  would  provide
support  for  the  "adequate  forces"  if  Diem  would  take  the  "necessary  corrective
steps."  The  hinted  corollary  was  that  our  commitment  to  Diem  should  be  con-
tingent on  his  performance:

That  at  the  present  time  the  Diem  government  offers  the  best  hope  for
defeating  the  Viet  Cong.

B. LANSDALE'S  REPORT

Running  against  these  suggestions  (of  a  firm  bargaining  position  contingent
on  Diem's  performance),  was  concern  that  if  Diem  were  overthrown  his  sue-


26 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

cessors  might  be  no  better;  and  that  the  VC  might  exploit  the  confusion  and
perhaps  even  civil  war  following  a  coup.  Further,  there  was  an  argument  that
part  of  Diem's  reluctance  to  move  on  reforms  was  that  he  was  afraid  to  make
any  concession  that  might  weaken  his  grip:  consequently  the  U.S.  needed  to
reassure  him  that  he  could  count  on  our  firm  support  to  him  personally.

A  strong  statement  of  this  point  of  view  is  contained  in  a  report  submitted
in  January  by  Brig.  General  Edward  Lansdale,  then  the  Assistant  to  the  Secre-
tary of  Defense  for  Special  Operations.  Lansdale  had  become  famous  for  his
work  in  the  Philippines  advising  on  the  successful  campaign  against  the  Huk
insurgents.  In  1955  and  1956,  he  was  a  key  figure  in  installing  and  establishing
Diem  as  President  of  South  Vietnam.  As  mentioned  in  the  Introduction,  Lansdale
visited  Vietnam  in  early  January.  Here,  from  his  report,  are  a  few  extracts  on
Diem  and  how  Lansdale  felt  he  should  be  handled:

.  .  .  We  must  support  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  until  another  strong  executive
can  replace  him  legally.  President  Diem  feels  that  Americans  have  attacked
him  almost  as  viciously  as  the  Communists,  and  he  has  withdrawn  into  a
shell  for  self-protection.  We  have  to  show  him  by  deeds,  not  words  alone,
that  we  are  his  friend.  This  will  make  our  influence  effective  again.

...  If  the  next  American  official  to  talk  to  President  Diem  would  have
the  good  sense  to  see  him  as  a  human  being  who  has  been  through  a  lot  of
hell  for  years — and  not  as  an  opponent  to  be  beaten  to  his  knees — we
would  start  regaining  our  influence  with  him  in  a  healthy  way.  Whatever
else  we  might  think  of  him,  he  has  been  unselfish  in  devoting  his  life  to
his  country  and  has  little  in  personal  belongings  to  show  for  it.  If  we  don't
like  the  heavy  influence  of  Brother  Nhu,  then  let's  move  someone  of  ours  in
close.  This  someone,  however,  must  be  able  to  look  at  problems  with  un-
derstanding, suggest  better  solutions  than  does  Nhu,  earn  a  position  of  in-
fluence. .  .  .

Ambassador  Durbrow  should  be  transferred  in  the  immediate  future.
He  has  been  in  the  "forest  of  tigers"  which  is  Vietnam  for  nearly  four  years
now  and  I  doubt  that  he  himself  realizes  how  tired  he  has  become  or  how
close  he  is  to  the  individual  trees  in  this  big  woods.  Correctly  or  not,  the
recognized  government  of  Vietnam  does  not  look  upon  him  as  a  friend,
believing  he  sympathized  strongly  with  the  coup  leaders  of  1 1  November.

.  .  .  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  is  still  the  onlv  Vietnamese  with  executive  ability
and  the  required  determination  to  be  an  effective  President.  I  believe
there  will  be  another  attempt  to  get  rid  of  him  soon,  unless  the  U.S.  makes
it  clear  that  we  are  backing  him  as  the  elected  top  man.  If  the  1 1  Novem-
ber coup  had  been  successful,  I  believe  that  a  number  of  highly  selfish  and
mediocre  people  would  be  squabbling  among  themselves  for  power  while
the  Communists  took  over.  The  Communists  will  be  more  alert  to  exploit  the
next  coup  attempt.  .  .  .

Lansdale's  view  was  not  immediatelv  taken  up,  even  though  Hilsman  re-
ports that  his  presentation  impressed  Kennedy  enough  to  start  the  President
thinking  about  sending  the  General  to  Saigon  as  our  next  Ambassador.  In-
stead, Kennedy  made  what  was  under  the  circumstances  the  easiest,  least  time-
consuming  decision,  which  was  simplv  to  let  the  Ambassador  he  had  inherited
from  the  Eisenhower  Administration  go  forward  and  make  a  try  with  the  plan
and  negotiating  tactics  alreadv  prepared.

Durbrow's  guidance  specificallv  tells  him  (in  instructions  he  certainly  found
suited  his  own  view  perfectlv) :


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  27

.  .  .  considered  U.S.  view  (is)  that  success  requires  implementation  en-
tire plan  ...  If  Ambassador  considers  GVN  does  not  provide  necessary
cooperation,  he  should  inform  Washington  with  recommendations  which
may  include  suspension  U.S.  contribution.

C. NEGOTIATING  THE  CIP

Kennedy's  approval  of  the  CIP  apparently  was  seen  as  quite  a  routine  action.
None  of  the  memoirs  of  the  period  give  it  any  particular  attention.  And,  al-
though both  Schlesinger  and  Hilsman  refer  to  General  Lansdale's  report  as
shocking  the  President  about  the  state  of  things  in  Vietnam,  that  report  itself
does  not  criticize  the  CIP,  or  the  adequacy  of  its  programs.

The  guidance  to  Durbrow  assumed  agreement  could  be  reached  "within  two
weeks."  This  choice  of  language  in  the  guidance  cable  implies  that  we  be-
lieved Diem  would  quickly  agree  on  the  terms  of  the  CIP,  and  the  question  of
using  pressure  against  him  ("suspension  of  U.S.  contribution")  would  only
arise  later,  should  he  fail  to  follow  through  on  his  part  of  the  agreement.

As  it  turned  out,  Durbrow's  efforts  took  a  more  complicated  form.  Even
reaching  a  nominal  agreement  on  the  Cip  took  about  6  weeks.  Then,  Durbrow
recommended  holding  up  what  is  constantly  referred  to  as  "the  green  light"  on
increased  aid  until  Diem  had  actually  signed  decrees  implementing  his  major
promises.

On  March  8  (in  response  to  a  Washington  suggestion  for  stepping  up  some
aid  prior  to  agreement  on  the  CIP),  Saigon  cabled  that:

.  .  .  despite  pressure  of  Embassy  and  MA  AG,  GVN  has  not  decreed
the  required  measures  and  will  continue  to  delay  unless  highly  pressured
to  act.

But  by  the  16th  both  the  MAAG  Chief  and  the  Ambassador  were  taking  a
gentler  line.  Durbrow's  cable  of  that  date  reports  that  agreement  on  military
reforms  had  reached  a  point  '"which  MAAG  considers  it  can  live  with  provided
GVN  follows  through  with  proper  implementation."  He  was  more  concerned
about  the  civil  reforms,  but  nevertheless  concluded  the  cable  with:

Comments:  Diem  was  most  affable,  exuded  confidence  and  for  first
time  expressed  some  gratitude  our  CIP  efforts  which  he  promised  imple-
ment as  best  he  could.  Again  before  giving  full  green  light  believe  we
should  await  outcome  detail  discussion  by  GVN-US  officials.  In  meantime
MAAG  quietly  ordering  some  equipment  for  20,000  increase.

And  a  week  later,  Washington  replied,  agreeing  that  the  ""green  light"  should
be  held  up  until  the  CIP  was  approved,  but  also  noting  that  since  success  de-
pended on  the  willing  cooperation  of  the  Vietnamese,  the  Embassy  ought  not
to  push  Diem  too  hard  in  the  negotiations.

Following  this,  the  CIP  negotiations  dragged  on  inconclusively,  and  there  is
a  ghostly  quality  to  it  all.  There  are  cables  giving  encouraging  progress  reports
which,  in  fact,  seem  limited  to  vague  promises  which,  with  hindsight,  we  know
to  have  been  quite  meaningless,  MAAG  (and  eventually  the  ICS  in  Washington)
grew  increasingly  impatient  with  Durbrow's  insistence  on  further  holding  up  the
"green  light."  They  wanted  to  get  on  with  the  war.


28 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

By  the  end,  Durbrow  was  simply  holding  out  for  Diem  to  actually  complete
the  paperwork  on  some  steps  he  had  long  ago  said  he  intended  to  take.  His  very
last  cable  (May  3)  gives  a  good  feeling  for  the  flavor  of  the  negotiations  that
had  been  going  on  between  Diem  and  Durbrow  for  the  nearly  3  months  since
the  CIP  talks  began  (and  indeed  it  gives  the  flavor  of  Durbrow's  relations  with
Diem  at  least  since  the  previous  October).

During  the  inauguration  reception  at  Palace  April  29,  Diem  took  me
aside  and  asked  if  I  had  given  green  light  for  US  implementation  of  our
part  of  counter  insurgency  plan  (CIP).  I  replied  frankly  that  I  had  not
and  noted  that  as  stated  in  my  letter  of  February  13  certain  minimum
actions  must  be  taken  by  the  GVN  first  if  CIP  is  to  produce  results.  I  listed
following  actions:  (1)  Establishment  of  a  central  intelligence  organiza-
tion; (2)  assignment  of  operational  control  for  counter  insurgency  opera-
tions within  military  chain  of  command;  and  (3)  implementation  of
reforms  announced  by  Diem  on  February  6.  Diem  replied  that  he  would
do  all  these  things,  but  that  time  was  required  to  work  out  details.  He  said
various  GVN  Cabinet  members  and  Joint  General  Staff  studying  proposals
and  have  different  ideas.  Since  he  wants  to  be  sure  that  whatever  done  is
well  thought  out,  will  be  successful  and  not  have  to  be  changed  in  future
he  letting  responsible  officials  thoroughly  consider  proposals.  Diem  stated
that  Secretary  Thuan  working  on  detailed  statute  for  central  intelligence
organization,  but  it  required  more  work  and  needs  to  be  polished  up.  I
replied  that  frankly  time  was  slipping  by  and  as  yet  there  no  action  on
these  three  points,  which  essential  before  I  can  give  "green  light"  on
equipment  for  20,000  increase  in  armed  forces.

In  connection  Diem  remarks,  Vice  President  Tho  told  me  April  28  that
he  had  not  seen  CIP,  although  he  had  heard  of  its  existence,  and  he  does
not  believe  other  Ministers  have  seen  it  either.  Question  thus  arises  as  to
whether  Diem's  statement  that  various  Cabinet  members  studying  CIP
refers  only  to  Thuan.  I  gave  Tho  fairly  detailed  fill-in  on  CIP  contents.  Tho
said  action  now  by  President,  at  least  implementation  of  reforms,  needed
in  order  capitalize  on  present  upswing  in  popular  feeling  about  situation
following  GVN  success  in  carrying  out  elections  despite  VC  efforts  to  dis-
rupt. Stating  he  did  not  know  when  if  ever  reforms  will  be  implemented,
he  commented  that  failure  take  such  action  after  so  many  promises  would
lose  all  momentum  gained  from  elections.  Tho  added  that,  aside  from
psychological  impact,  reforms  likely  take  {sic;  make)  little  change  unless
Diem  himself  changes  his  methods  of  operating.  He  noticed  that  if  "super
ministers"  without  real  authority  they  likely  become  just  additional  level
in  bureaucracy  without  making  GVN  more  effective.

On  May  2  in  course  my  formal  farewell  call  I  asked  Diem  if  decrees  yet
signed  on  intelligence  organization,  chain  of  command  and  reforms.  Diem
stated  he  working  on  these  matters  but  went  through  usual  citation  of
difficulties  including  problem  of  convincing  available  personnel  that  they
capable  and  qualified  carry  out  responsibilities.  He  stated  he  already  named
Colone^  Nguyen  Van  Yankee  to  head  intelligence  organization.  Colonel
Yankee  has  selected  building  for  his  headquarters  and  in  process  recruit-
ing staff,  while  Secretary  Thuan  working  on  statute  for  organization.  Re
chain  of  command.  I  strongly  emphasized  that  this  one  of  most  important
factors  in  CIP,  GVN  must  organize  itself  to  follow  national  plan  with  one
man  in  charge  operational  control  and  not  waste  time  chasing  will  of


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  29


wisps.  Diem  replied  that  he  not  feeling  well  (he  has  cold)  and  with  inaugu-
ration he  has  not  had  time  focus  on  this  question  but  he  will  do  it.  He
stated  that  he  realizes  only  effective  way  is  to  place  counter  insurgency
operations  under  Joint  General  Staff,  but  that  his  generals  disagreed  as  to
exactly  how  this  should  be  done.

Diem,  referring  Sihanouk's  Vietiane  press  conference  (Vientiane's  1979),
stated  he  did  not  believe  there  would  be  14-nation  conference  and  he  afraid
Laos  almost  lost  already.  Diem  argued  that  since  PL  occupy  almost  all  of
southern  Laos,  we  must  agree  increase  in  RVNAF  to  provide  additional
personnel  to  train  self  defense  corps  which  in  very  bad  shape.

Comment:  Although  Thuan  has  indicated  to  (MAAG  Chief)  General
McGarr  decree  designating  single  officer  to  conduct  counter  insurgency
operations  being  signed  imminently,  I  asked  him  morning  May  3  when
seeing  off  Harriman  and  Lemnitzer  whether  T  would  receive  before  depar-
ture "present"  he  has  long  promised  me.  He  replied  presents  often  come
when  least  expected,  which  apparently  means  Diem  not  yet  ready  sign
decree.

While  we  should  proceed  with  procurement  equipment  for  20,000  in-
crease as  recommended  my  1606,  T  do  not  believe  GVN  should  be  in-
formed of  this  green  light,  particularly  until  above  decree  signed.  Durbrow.

The  February  6  reforms  referred  to  involved  a  cabinet  re-organization  Diem
had  announced  before  the  start  of  the  CIP  negotiations.  The  intelligence  re-
organization was  to  consolidate  the  7  existing  services.  The  chain  of  command
problem  has  been  discussed  above.  Diem  finally  issued  decrees  on  all  these
points  a  few  days  after  Durbrow  went  home.  The  decrees  were  essentially
meaningless:  exactly  these  same  issues  remained  high  on  the  list  of  "necessary
reforms"  called  for  after  the  Taylor  Mission,  and  indeed  throughout  the  rest  of
Diem's  life.

D. DURBROW S  TACTICS

Did  Durbrow's  tactics  make  sense?  There  is  an  argument  to  be  made  both
ways.  Certainly  if  Durbrow's  focus  was  on  the  pro  forma  paperwork,  then  they
did  not.  Mere  formal  organizational  re-arrangements  (unifying  the  then  7  intel-
ligence services  into  1,  setting  up  at  least  a  nominal  chain  of  command  for  the
war)  often  change  very  little  even  when  they  are  seriously  intended.  To  the
extent  they  are  not  seriously  intended,  they  are  almost  certain  to  be  meaning-
less. Vice  President  Tho,  of  course,  is  cited  in  the  cable  as  making  exactly  that
point.  The  very  fact  that  Durbrow  chose  to  include  this  remark  in  the  cable
(without  questioning  it)  suggests  he  agreed.  But  if  squeezing  the  formal  decrees
out  of  Diem  really  did  not  mean  much,  then  what  was  the  point  of  exacerbat-
ing relations  with  Diem  (not  to  mention  relations  with  the  military  members  of
the  U.S.  mission)  to  get  them?  In  hindsight,  we  can  say  there  was  none,  unless
the  U.S.  really  meant"  what  it  had  said  about  making  U.S.  support  for  Diem
contingent  on  his  taking  "corrective  measures."  Then  the  function  of  those
tactics  would  not  have  been  to  squeeze  a  probably  meaningless  concession  from
Diem;  for  the  cable  quoted  alone  makes  it  pretty  clear  that  it  would  have  been
naive  to  expect  much  follow-through  from  Diem.  The  purpose  would  have  been
to  begin  the  process  of  separating  U.S.  support  for  Vietnam  from  support  for
the  Diem  regime,  and  to  lay  the  basis  for  stronger  such  signals  in  the  future
unless  Diem  underwent  some  miraculous  reformation.  That,  of  course,  is  exactly


30 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

the  tack  the  U.S.  followed  in  the  fall  of  1963,  once  the  Administration  had
really  decided  that  we  could  not  go  on  with  the  Diem  regime  as  it  then  existed.

All  this  can  be  said  with  hindsight.  It  is  not  clear  how  much  of  this  line  of
thinking  should  be  attributed  to  American  officials  in  Washington  or  Saigon
at  the  time.  There  is  no  hint  in  the  cables  we  have  that  Durbrow  was  thinking
this  way.  Rather  he  seems  to  have  felt  that  the  concessions  he  was  wringing
from  Diem  represented  real  progress,  but  that  we  would  have  to  keep  up  the
pressure  (presumably  with  threats  to  suspend  aid — as  his  guidance  considered —
even  after  the  "green  light"  was  given)  to  keep  goading  Diem  in  the  right
direction.  Meanwhile,  the  predominant  view  (pushed  most  strongly,  but  hardly
exclusively  by  the  military)  was  that  we  should,  and  could  effectively  get  on
with  the  war  with  as  much  cooperation  as  we  could  get  from  Diem  short  of
interfering  with  the  war  effort:  it  was  all  right  to  try  for  a  quid  pro  quo  on  aid,
but  not  very  hard.  The  Lansdale  view  went  even  further,  stressing  the  need  for
a  demonstration  of  positive,  essentially  unqualified  support  for  Diem  if  only  to
discourage  a  further  coup  attempt,  which  Lansdale  saw  as  the  main  short-run
danger.

In  a  significant  way,  Lansdale's  view  was  not  very  different  in  its  analysis  of
tactics  from  the  view  that  Diem  was  hopeless.  Both  Lansdale,  with  his  strong
pro-Diem  view,  and  men  like  Galbraith  with  a  strong  anti-Diem  view,  agreed
that  Diem  could  not  be  pressured  into  reforming  this  regime.  ("He  won't  change,
because  he  can't  change,"  wrote  Galbraith  in  a  cable  we  will  quote  in  more  de-
tail later.)

Where  the  Lansdale  and  Galbraith  views  differed — a  fundamental  difference,
of  course, — was  in  their  estimate  of  the  balance  of  risks  of  a  coup.  Lansdale,
and  obviously  his  view  carried  the  day,  believed  that  a  coup  was  much  more
likely  to  make  things  worse  than  make  things  better.  This  must  have  been  an
especially  hard  view  to  argue  against  in  1961,  when  Diem  did  not  look  as  hope-
less as  he  would  later,  and  when  a  strong  argument  could  be  made  that  the  U.S.
just  could  not  afford  at  that  time  to  risk  the  collapse  of  a  pro-Western  govern-
ment in  Vietnam.  It  must  have  seemed  essentially  irresistible  to  take  the  route
or  at  least  postponing,  as  seemed  quite  feasible,  a  decision  on  such  a  tough  and
risky  course  as  holding  back  on  support  for  Diem.  The  President,  after  all,
could  remember  the  charges  that  the  Truman  Administration  had  given  away
China  by  holding  back  on  aid  to  Chiang  to  try  to  pressure  him  toward  reform.
As  a  young  Congressman,  he  had  even  joined  the  chorus.

Meanwhile  Durbrow  was  about  to  come  home  (he  had  been  in  Vietnam  for
4  years);  security  problems  in  Vietnam  were,  at  best,  not  improving;  and  the
repercussions  of  Laos  were  spilling  over  and  would  make  further  moves  on  Viet-
nam an  urgent  matter.  By  the  middle  of  April,  the  Administration  was  under-
taking its  first  close  look  at  the  problem  in  Vietnam  (in  contrast  to  the  almost
automatic  approval  of  the  CIP  during  the  opening  days  of  the  new  Administra-
tion).

III. THE  SPRING  DECISIONS— I

A. THE  "PRESIDENTIAL  PROGRAM"

The  development  of  what  eventually  came  to  be  called  "The  Presidential
Program  for  Vietnam"  formally  began  with  this  memorandum  from  McNamara
toGilpatric:


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  31


20  April  1961

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  DEPUTY  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

This  will  confirm  our  discussion  of  this  morning  during  which  I  stated
that  the  President  has  asked  that  you:

a.  Appraise  the  current  status  and  future  prospects  of  the  Communist
drive  to  dominate  South  Viet-Nam.

b.  Recommend  a  series  of  actions  (military,  political  and /or  eco-
nomic, overt  and/or  covert)  which,  in  your  opinion,  will  prevent
Communist  domination  of  that  country.

The  President  would  like  to  receive  your  report  on  or  before  Thursday,
April  27.

During  the  course  of  your  study,  you  should  draw,  to  the  extent  you
believe  necessary,  upon  the  views  and  resources  of  the  State  E  partment
and  CIA.  Mr.  Chester  Bowles  was  present  when  the  President  discussed
the  matter  with  me,  and  I  have  reviewed  the  project  with  Mr.  Allen  Dulles.
Further,  the  President  stated  that  Mr.  Walt  Rostow  would  be  available  to
counsel  with  you.


Gilpatric,  although  obviously  given  a  completely  free  hand  under  the  terms
of  the  memo,  nevertheless  set  up  an  interagency  task  force  to  work  on  the  re-
port. A  draft  was  ready  April  26,  and  Gilpatric  sent  it  to  the  President  the  fol-
lowing day.  But  this  turned  out  to  be  only  the  first,  and  relatively  unimportant
phase  of  the  effort.  For  the  Laos  crisis  came  to  a  boil  just  as  the  first  Gilpatric
report  was  finished,  and  the  Task  Force  was  continued  with  the  essentially
new  mission  of  a  recommending  additional  measure  to  keep  our  position  from
falling  apart  in  the  wake  of  what  was  happening  in  Laos.  Consequently,  to  un-
derstand these  late-April,  early-May  decisions,  we  have  to  treat  separately  the
initial  Gilpatric  effort  and  the  later,  primarily  State-drafted  revision,  dated  May
6.  The  same  general  factors  were  in  the  background  of  both  efforts,  although
Laos  was  only  one  of  the  things  that  influenced  the  April  26  effort,  while  it
became  the  overwhelming  element  in  the  May  6  effort.  It  is  worth  setting  out
these  influencing  factors,  specifically:

1.  The  security  situation  in  Vietnam.

2.  The  Administration's  special  interest  in  counter-insurgency.

3.  The  apparent  futility  and  divisiveness  of  the  Durbrow  (pressure)  tactics
for  dealing  with  Diem.

4.  Eventually  most  important,  and  substantially  narrowing  the  range  of
options  realistically  open  to  the  Administration,  the  weakness  of  US
policy  in  Laos,  and  the  consequeni  strongly  felt  need  for  a  signal  of  firm
policy  in  Vietnam.

1. The  Security  Situation  in  Vietnam

The  VC  threat  in  Vietnam  looked  worse  in  April  than  it  had  in  January.  We
will  see  that  Gilpatric's  report  painted  a  bleak  picture.  Yet,  there  is  no  hint  in
the  record  that  concern  about  the  immediate  situation  in  Vietnam  was  a  major
factor  in  the  decision  to  formulate  a  new  program.


.f


32 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

VC  strength  was  estimated  at  3-15,000  in  Lansdale's  January  memorandum;
8-10,000  in  a  March  NIE;  10,000  in  an  April  briefing  paper  (apparently  by
Landsdale)  immediately  preceding — and  recommending — the  Gilpatric  Task
Force;  then  12,000  one  week  later  in  the  Gilpatric  report  proper.  VC  incidents
were  reported  high  for  April  (according  to  the  Task  Force  report,  650  per
month,  4  times  higher  than  January),  but  an  upsurge  in  activity  had  long  been
predicted  to  coincide  with  the  Vietnamese  elections.  As  would  happen  in  the
future,  the  failure  of  the  VC  to  prevent  the  elections  was  considered  a  sign  of
government  strength.

On  the  basis  of  the  Task  Force  statistics,  we  could  assume  that  the  situation
was  deteriorating  rapidly:  taken  literally,  they  indicate  an  increase  in  VC  strength
of  20  percent  in  about  a  week,  plus  the  large  increase  in  incidents.  But  neither
cables  from  the  field,  nor  the  Washington  files  show  any  sense  of  a  sharply  de-
teriorating situation.  And,  as  we  will  see,  the  initial  Task  Force  Report,  despite
its  crisis  tone,  recommended  no  increase  in  miltary  strength  for  the  Vietnamese,
only  more  generous  US  financial  aid  to  forces  already  planned  under  the  CIP.

2.  The  Administration's  Special  Interest  in  Counter-insurgency

A  more  important  impetus  to  the  Gilpatric  effort  than  any  sense  of  deteriora-
tion in  Vietnam  seems  to  have  been  the  Administration's  general  interest  in  do-
ing something  about  counter-insurgency  warfare,  combined  with  an  interest  in
finding  more  informal  and  more  eflftcient  means  of  supervising  policy  than  the
Eisenhower  Administration's  elaborate  National  Security  structure.  The  eflfort
in  Vietnam  obviously  required  some  coordination  of  separate  efforts  by  at  least
State,  Defense,  CIA,  and  ICA  (a  predecessor  of  AID).  Further,  once  a  coor-
dinated program  was  worked  out,  the  idea  appears  to  have  been  to  focus  re-
sponsibility for  seeing  to  it  that  the  program  was  carried  out  on  some  clearly
identified  individual.  This  search  for  a  better  wav  to  organize  Gilpatric  effort,
although  it  became  inconsequential  after  the  original  submission.

3.  The  Apparent  Futility  and  Divisiveness  of  the  Durbrow  (Pressure)  Tactics
for  Dealing  With  Diem

Late  April  was  a  peculiarly  appropriate  time  to  undertake  the  sort  of  sharpen-
ing up  of  policy  and  its  organization  just  described.  It  was  probably  clear  by
then  that  Durbrow's  pressure  tactics  were  not  reallv  accomplishing  much  with
Diem.  Besides,  Durbrow  had  been  in  Vietnam  for  four  years  by  April,  and  a
new  Ambassador  would  normallv  have  been  sent  in  any  event.  Fritz  Nolting  had
been  chosen  by  early  April,  and  he  was  scheduled  to  take  over  in  early  May.
Further,  Diem  had  just  been  reelected,  an  essentiallv  meaningless  formality  to
be  sure,  but  still  one  more  thing  that  helped  make  late  April  a  logical  time  for
taking  a  fresh  look  at  US  relations  with  Diem.  And  even  to  people  who  believed
that  a  continuation  of  Durbrow's  pressure  tactics  might  be  the  best  approach  to
Diem,  events  elsewhere  and  especiallv  in  Laos  must  have  raised  questions
about  whether  it  was  a  politic  time  to  be  threatening  to  withhold  aid.

4.  The  W'eakficss  of  US  Policy  in  Laos,  and  the  Need  for  a  Signal  of  Firm
Policy  in  Vietnam

The  situation  in  the  world  that  April  seemed  to  create  an  urgent  requirement
for  the  US  to  do  something  to  demonstrate  firmness,  and  especially  so  in  South-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  33

east  Asia.  The  Task  Force  was  set  up  the  day  after  the  Bay  of  Pigs  invasion
force  surrendered,  and  at  a  time  when  the  Laos  crisis  was  obviously  coming  to
head.  There  had  been  implicit  agreement  in  principle  between  the  US  and  the
Soviets  to  seek  a  cease  fire  in  Laos  and  to  organize  a  neutral  coalition  govern-
ment. But  it  was  not  clear  at  all  that  the  cease-fire  would  come  while  there  was
anything  left  worth  arguing  about  in  the  hands  of  the  pro-Western  faction.
Gilpatric's  initial  Task  Force  report  reached  the  President  the  day  of  a  crisis
meeting  in  Laos,  and  the  more  important  second  phase  of  the  effort  began  then,
in  an  atmosphere  wholly  dominated  by  Laos.

But  even  before  the  Laos  crisis  reached  its  peak,  there  was  a  sense  in  Washing-
ton and  generally  in  the  world  that  put  strong  pressures  on  the  Administration
to  look  for  ways  to  take  a  firm  stand  somewhere;  and  if  it  was  not  to  be  in  Laos,
then  Vietnam  was  next  under  the  gun.

Something  of  the  mood  of  the  time  can  be  sensed  in  these  quotes,  one  from
a  March  28  NIE  on  Southeast  Asia,  another  from  Lansdale's  notes,  and  finally
a  significant  question  from  a  Kennedy  press  conference:

From  the  NIE:

There  is  a  deep  awareness  among  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  that  de-
velopments in  the  Laotian  crisis,  and  its  outcome,  have  a  profound  impact
on  their  future.  The  governments  of  the  area  tend  to  regard  the  Laotian
crisis  as  a  symbolic  test  of  strengths  between  the  major  powers  of  the  West
and  the  Communist  bloc.

From  Lansdale's  notes  (about  April  21):

1.  Psychological — VN  believed  always  they  main  target.  Now  it  comes —
"when  our  turn  comes,  will  we  be  treated  the  same  as  Laos?"  Main  task
GVN  confidence  in  US.

And  suggesting  the  more  general  tone  of  the  time  (even  a  week  before  the
Bay  of  Pigs,  prompted  by  the  Soviet  orbiting  of  a  man  in  space)  this  question
at  Kennedy's  April  12  news  conference:

Mr.  President,  this  question  might  better  be  asked  at  a  history  class  than
at  a  news  conference,  but  here  it  is  anyway.  The  Communists  seem  to  be
putting  us  on  the  defensive  on  a  number  of  fronts — now,  again,  in  space.
Wars  aside,  do  you  think  there  is  a  danger  that  their  system  is  going  to
prove  more  durable  than  ours.

The  President  answered  with  cautious  reassurance.  Eight  days  later,  after  the
Bay  of  Pigs,  and  the  day  he  ordered  the  Task  Force  to  go  ahead,  he  told  the
Association  of  Newspaper  Editors:

....  it  is  clearer  than  ever  that  we  face  a  relentless  struggle  in  every
corner  of  the  globe  that  goes  far  beyond  the  clash  of  armies,  or  even  nu-
clear armaments.  The  armies  are  there.  But  they  serve  primarily  as  the
shield  behind  which  subversion,  infiUration,  and  a  host  of  other  tactics
steadily  advance,  picking  off  vulnerable  areas  one  by  one  in  situations
that  do  not  permit  our  own  armed  intervention.  .  .  .  We  dare  not  fail
to  see  the  insidious  nature  of  this  new  and  deeper  struggle.  We  dare  not


34 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


fail  to  grasp  the  new  concepts,  the  new  tools,  the  new  sense  of  urgency
we  will  need  to  combat  it — whether  in  Cuba  or  South  Vietnam.  (Notice
Kennedy's  explicit  assumption  about  US  armed  intervention  as  a  means  of
dealing  with  insurgencies.  Not  too  much  can  be  read  into  his  remark,  for  it
probably  was  inspired  primarily  by  criticism  of  his  refusal  to  try  to  save  the
Bay  of  Pigs  contingent.  But  the  balance  of  the  record  adds  significance  to
the  comment.)


B. THE  APRIL  26  REPORT

The  available  Gilpatric  file  consists  mostly  of  drafts  of  the  report  and  memos
from  Lansdale.  It  contains  a  memorandum  dated  April  13,  in  which  Lans-
dale  advised  Gilpatric  of  a  meeting  with  Rostow,  at  which  Rostow  showed
Lansdale  a  copy  of  a  memorandum  to  Kennedy  recommending  a  fresh  crack
at  the  Vietnam  situation.  Here  is  Rostow's  memorandum:


April  12,  1961

MEMORANDUM  TO  THE  PRESIDENT
FROM:  WWR

Now  that  the  Viet-Nam  election  is  over,  I  believe  we  must  turn  to  gearing  up
ti  e  whole  Viet-Nam  operation.  Among  the  possible  lines  of  action  that  might
be  considered  at  an  early  high  level  meeting  are  the  following:

1.  The  appointment  of  a  full  time  first-rate  back-stop  man  in  Washington.
McNamara,  as  well  as  your  staff,  believes  this  to  be  essential.

2.  The  briefing  of  our  new  Ambassador,  Fritz  Nolting,  including  sufficient
talk  with  yourself  so  that  he  fully  understands  the  priority  you  attach  to  the
Viet-Nam  problem.

3.  A  possible  visit  to  Viet-Nam  in  the  near  future  by  the  Vice  President.

4.  A  possible  visit  to  the  United  States  of  Mr.  Thuan,  acting  Defense  Min-
ister, and  one  of  the  few  men  around  Diem  with  operational  capacity  and  vigor.

5.  The  sending  to  Viet-Nam  of  a  research  and  development  and  military
hardware  team  which  would  explore  with  General  McGarr  which  of  the  vari-
ous techniques  and  gadgets  now  available  or  being  explored  might  be  relevant
and  useful  in  the  Viet-Nam  operation.

6.  The  raising  of  the  MAAG  ceiling,  which  involves  some  diplomacy,  unless
we  can  find  an  alternative  way  of  introducing  into  the  Viet-Nam  operation  a
substantial  number  of  Special  Forces  types.

7.  The  question  of  replacing  the  present  ICA  Chief  in  Viet-Nam,  who,  by
all  accounts,  has  expended  his  capital.  We  need  a  vigorous  man  who  can  work
well  with  the  military,  since  some  of  the  rural  development  problems  relate
closely  to  guerrilla  operations.

8.  Settling  the  question  of  the  extra  funds  for  Diem.

9.  The  tactics  of  persuading  Diem  to  move  more  rapidly  to  broaden  the
base  of  his  government,  as  well  as  to  decrease  its  centralization  and  improve  its
efficiency.

Against  the  background  of  decisions  we  should  urgently  take  on  these  mat-
ters, you  may  wish  to  prepare  a  letter  to  Diem  which  would  not  only  con-
gratulate him,  reafiirm  our  support,  and  specifv  new  initiatives  we  are  prepared
to  take,  but  would  make  clear  to  him  the  urgency  you  attach  to  a  more  effective


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  35

political  and  morale  setting  for  his  military  operation,  now  that  the  elections
are  successfully  behind  him.


Neither  this  memo,  nor  other  available  papers,  give  us  a  basis  for  judging  how
far  the  stress  on  the  importance  of  Vietnam  was  already  influenced  by  develop-
ments in  Laos,  and  how  much  it  reflects  a  separable  interest  in  taking  on  the
challenge  of  "wars  of  liberation."  Both  were  undoubtedly  important.  But  this
Rostow  memo  turned  out  to  be  pretty  close  to  an  agenda  for  the  initial  Task
Force  report.  It  seems  very  safe  to  assume  that  the  "full-time,  first-rate,  back-
stop man  in  Washington"  Rostow  had  in  mind  was  Lansdale.  (Gilpatric
himself  obviously  could  not  be  expected  to  spend  full-time  on  Vietnam.)  Pre-
sumably the  President's  request  for  the  Gilpatric  report  was  intended  as  either
a  method  of  easing  Lansdale  into  that  role,  or  at  least  of  trying  him  out  in  it.

Following  the  description  of  the  Rostow  memo,  Gilpatric's  file  contains  sev-
eral carbon  copies  of  a  long  paper,  unsigned  but  certainly  by  Lansdale,
which  among  other  things  recommends  that  the  President  set  up  a  Task  Force
for  Vietnam  which  would  lay  out  a  detailed  program  of  action  and  go  on  to
supervise  the  implementation  of  that  program.  The  date  on  the  paper  is  April
19,  but  a  draft  must  have  been  prepared  some  days  earlier,  probably  about  the
time  of  Lansdale's  discussion  with  Rostow  on  the  13th,  since  the  available
copies  recommended  that  the  Task  Force  submit  its  report  to  the  President
by  April  21.  The  paper  explicitly  foresaw  a  major  role  for  General  Lansdale
both  in  the  Task  Force,  and  thereafter  in  supervising  the  implementation  of
the  report.

This  Task  Force  was  apparently  intended  to  supersede  what  the  paper  refers
to  as  "one  of  the  customary  working  groups  in  Washington"  which  was  "being
called  together  next  week  by  John  Steeves,  Acting  Assistant  Secretary  of
State  for  Far  Eastern  Afi^airs."

In  view  of  all  this,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that  the  first  phase  of  the  Task
Force  effort  appears,  from  the  record,  to  have  been  very  much  a  Gilpatric-
Lansdale  show.  The  first  meeting  of  the  group  (which  included  State  and  CIA
representatives)  was  apparently  held  April  24,  four  days  after  Gilpatric  was  told
to  go  ahead.  Present  files  do  not  show  whether  there  was  another  full  meeting
of  the  group  before  the  first  version  of  the  report  (dated  April  26)  was  sent
to  the  President  on  the  27th,

Here  are  the  opening  sections,  which  introduce  the  list  of  proposed  actions
which  make  up  the  program.


A  PROGRAM  OF  ACTION  TO  PREVENT  COMMUNIST
DOMINATION  OF  SOUTH  VIETNAM
APPRAISAL  OF  THE  SITUATION

After  meeting  in  Hanoi  on  13  May  1959,  the  Central  Committee
of  the  North  Vietnamese  Communist  Party  publicly  announced  its  inten-
tion "to  smash"  the  government  of  President  Diem.  Following  this  deci-
sion, the  Viet  Cong  have  significantly  increased  their  program  of  infiltra-
tion, subversion,  sabotage  and  assassination  designed  to  achieve  this  end.

At  the  North  Vietnamese  Communist  Party  Congress  in  September
1960,  the  earlier  declaration  of  underground  war  by  the  Party's  Control


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

Committee  was  reaffirmed.  This  action  by  the  Party  Congress  took  place
only  a  month  after  Kong  Le's  coup  in  Laos.  Scarcely  two  months  later
there  was  a  military  uprising  in  Saigon.  The  turmoil  created  throughout  the
area  by  this  rapid  succession  of  events  provides  an  ideal  environment  for
the  Communist  ''master  plan"  to  take  over  all  of  Southeast  Asia.

Since  that  time,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  attached  map,  the  internal
security  situation  in  South  Vietnam  has  become  critical.  What  amounts  to
a  state  of  active  guerrilla  warfare  now  exists  throughout  the  country.  The
number  of  Viet  Cong  hard-core  Communists  has  increased  from  4400  in
early  1960  to  an  estimated  12,000  today.  The  number  of  violent  incidents
per  month  now  averages  650.  Casualties  on  both  sides  totaled  more  than
4500  during  the  first  three  months  of  this  year.  Fifty-eight  percent  of  the
country  is  under  some  degree  of  Communist  control,  ranging  from  harass-
ment and  night  raids  to  almost  complete  administrative  jurisdiction  in  the
Communist  "secure  areas."

The  Viet  Cong  over  the  past  two  years  have  succeeded  in  stepping  up  the
pace  and  intensity  of  their  attacks  to  the  point  where  South  Vietnam  is
nearing  the  decisive  phase  in  its  battle  for  survival.  If  the  situation  con-
tinues to  deteriorate,  the  Communists  will  be  able  to  press  on  to  their
strategic  goal  of  establishing  a  rival  "National  Liberation  Front"  govern-
ment in  one  of  these  "secure  areas"  thereby  plunging  the  nation  into  open
civil  war.  They  have  publicly  announced  that  thev  will  "take  over  the
country  before  the  end  of  1961."

This  situation  is  thus  critical,  but  is  not  hopeless.  The  Vietnamese  Gov-
ernment, with  American  aid,  has  increased  its  capabilities  to  fight  its  at-
tackers, and  provides  a  base  upon  which  the  necessary  additional  effort
can  be  founded  to  defeat  the  Communist  attack.  Should  the  Communist
effort  increase,  either  directly  or  as  a  result  of  a  collapse  of  Laos,  addi-
tional measures  beyond  those  proposed  herein  would  be  necessary.

In  short,  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  has  reached  the  point  where,  i
at  least  for  the  time  being,  primary  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  provid-  i
ing  a  solution  to  the  internal  security  problem.  '

The  US  Objective:  To  create  a  viable  and  increasingly  democratic  so-
ciety in  South  Vietnam  and  to  prevent  Communist  domination  of  the
country.

Concept  of  Operations:  To  initiate  on  an  accelerated  basis,  a  series
of  mutually  supporting  actions  of  a  military,  political,  economic,  psycholog-
ical and  covert  character  designed  to  achiexe  this  objective.  In  so  doing,  it
is  intended  to  use.  and  where  appropriate  extend,  expedite  or  build  upon
the  existing  US  and  Government  of  Vietnam  [GVN]  programs  already  j
underway  in  South  Vietnam.  There  is  neither  the  time  available  nor  any!
sound  justification  for  "starting  from  scratch."  Rather  the  need  is  to  focus  j
the  US  effort  in  South  Vietnam  on  the  immediate  internal  security  prob-
lem; to  infuse  it  with  a  sense  of  urgency  and  a  dedication  to  the  overall
US  objective;  to  achieve,  through  cooperative  inter-departmental  support
both  in  the  field  and  in  Washington,  the  operational  flexibility  needed  to
apply  the  available  US  assets  in  a  manner  best  calculated  to  achieve  our
objective  in  Vietnam;  and.  finallv.  to  impress  on  our  friends,  the  Vietna-
mese, and  on  our  foes,  the  Viet  Cong,  that  come  what  may,  the  US  intends
to  win  this  battle.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  37

The  program  that  followed  this  strongly  worded  introduction  was  very  modest,
not  merely  compared  to  current  US  involvement,  but  to  the  effort  the  US  under-
took following  the  Taylor  Mission  in  the  fall.  The  program  is  essentially  simply
a  moderate  acceleration  of  the  CIP  program  approved  in  January,  with  a  great
deal  of  stress  on  vigor,  enthusiasm,  and  strong  leadership  in  carrying  out  the
program.

In  particular,  the  program  proposes  no  increase  in  the  Vietnamese  army,  and
only  a  moderate  (in  hindsight,  inconsequential)  increase  in  the  size  of  our
MAAG  mission.  The  main  military  measures  were  for  the  US  to  provide  finan-
cial support  for  the  20,000-man  increase  in  the  RVNAF  and  to  provide  support
for  the  full  complement  of  counter-insurgency  auxiliary  forces  (Civil  Guard
and  Self-Defense  Corps)  planned  by  Diem.  Both  were  modest  steps.  For  under
the  CIP  we  were  already  planning  to  pay  support  costs  for  150,000  men  of  the
RVNAF  and  32,000  men  of  the  Civil  Guard.  This  Task  Force  proposal,  which
had  been  urged  for  some  weeks  by  MAAG  in  Saigon,  simply  said  that  we  would
provide  the  same  support  for  all  the  Vietnamese  forces  that  we  had  already
planned  to  provide  for  most  of  them.

For  the  rest,  the  Presidential  Program  in  its  final  form,  issued  May  19,  turned
out  (after  a  great  deal  of  stirring  around)  to  be  close  to  that  proposed  in  the
April  26  draft.

Two  comments  are  needed  on  this  material.  First,  the  program  Lansdale  and
Gilpatric  proposed  was  not  so  narrowly  military  as  the  repeated  emphasis  on
priority  for  the  internal  security  problem  might  suggest.  Rather,  the  emphasis
was  on  stabilizing  the  countryside,  in  contrast  to  pressing  Diem  on  political
and  administrative  reforms  mainly  of  interest  to  Diem's  urban  critics.  This  re-
flected both  Lansdale's  judgments  on  counter-insurgency,  which  look  good  in
hindsight,  and  his  strongly  pro-Diem  orientation,  which  looks  much  less  good.

Second,  the  reference  to  a  communist  "master  plan"  for  Southeast  Asia  (and
similar  language  is  found  in  a  number  of  other  staff  papers  through  the  balance
of  1961)  suggests  a  view  of  the  situation  which  has  been  much  criticized  re-
cently by  men  like  Galbraith  and  Kennan.  Public  comments  by  those  who  were
closely  involved  (both  those  critical  of  policy  since  1965,  such  as  Sorenson  and
Hilsman,  and  those  supporting  the  Administration,  such  as  William  Bundy)
suggest  a  more  sophisticated  view  of  the  problem.  Here  we  simply  note  that  the
formal  staff  work  available  strongly  supports  Galbraith  and  Kennan,  although
this  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  senior  members  of  the  Administration
shared  the  view  that  North  Vietnam  was  operating  (in  the  words  of  another
staff  paper)  as  the  "implementing  agent  of  Bloc  policy"  rather  than  in  fairly
conventional,  mainly  non-ideological  pursuit  of  its  own  national  interest.

C. LANSDALE'S  ROLE

In  his  April  27  memorandum  transmitting  the  Report  to  the  President,  Gil-
patric noted  that:

...  in  the  short  time  available  to  the  Task  Force  it  was  not  possible  to
develop  the  program  in  complete  detail.  However,  there  has  been  prepared
a  plan  for  mutually  supporting  actions  of  a  political,  military,  economic,
psychological,  and  covert  character  which  can  be  refined  periodically  on  the
basis  of  further  recommendations  from  the  field.

Toward  this  end,  Brigadier  General  E.G.  Lansdale,  USAF,  who  has  been


38 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

designated  Operations  Officer  for  the  Task  Force,  will  proceed  to  Vietnam
immediately  after  the  program  receives  Presidential  approval.  Following
on  the  spot  discussions  with  US  and  Vietnamese  officials,  he  will  forward
to  the  Director  of  the  Task  Force  specific  recommendations  for  action  in
support  of  the  attached  program.

This  appears  to  have  been  the  high  point  of  Lansdale's  role  in  Vietnam  policy.
Lansdal  by  this  time  had  already  sent  (with  Gilpatric's  approval)  messages
requesting  various  people  to  meet  him  in  Saigon,  May  5.  This  is  from  a  mem-
orandum he  sent  to  Richard  Bissell,  then  still  a  Deputy  Director  of  the  CIA,
requesting  the  services  of  one  of  his  colleagues  from  the  1955-1956  experience
in  Vietnam:

I  realize  Redick  is  committed  to  an  important  job  in  Laos  and  that  this
is  a  difficult  time  in  that  trouble  spot.  I  do  feel,  however,  that  we  may  yet
save  Vietnam  and  that  our  best  effort  should  be  put  into  it.

Redick,  in  my  opinion,  is  now  so  much  a  part  of  the  uninhibited  com-
munications between  President  Diem  and  myself  that  it  goes  far  beyond
the  question  of  having  an  interpreter.  His  particular  facility  for  appreciating
my  meaning  in  words  and  the  thoughts  of  Diem  in  return  is  practically  in-
dispensable to  me  in  the  role  I  am  assigned  in  seeking  President  Kennedy's
goal  for  Vietnam.

But  none  of  this  was  to  be.  Present  files  contain  a  thermofax  of  McNamara's
copy  of  the  memorandum  Gilpatric  sent  to  the  President.  In  McNamara's  hand-
writing the  words  (Lansdale)  "will  proceed  to  Vietnam  immediately"  are
changed  to  "will  proceed  to  Vietnam  when  requested  by  the  Ambassador."  As
we  will  see  below,  when  the  Task  Force  Report  was  redrafted  the  next  week,
Lansdale's  key  role  disappeard  entirely,  at  the  request  of  the  State  Department,
but  presumably  with  the  concurrence  of  the  White  House.

D. KENNEDY'S  APRIL  29  DECISIONS

Although  our  record  is  not  clear,  it  appears  that  the  cover  memorandum  was
sent  to  the  President  as  Gilpatric  had  signed  it,  and  that  McNamara's  correc-
tion reflected  a  decision  made  after  the  paper  went  to  the  President,  rather  than
a  change  in  the  language  of  the  memo.  In  any  event,  at  a  meeting  on  April  29,
President  Kennedy  approved  only  the  quite  limited  military  proposals  of  the
draft  report  it  transmitted.  Decisions  were  deferred  on  the  balance  of  the  pa-
per, which  now  included  an  annex  issued  April  28  on  much  more  substantial
additional  military  aid  believed  required  by  the  situation  in  Laos.  The  military
measures  approved  during  this  first  go-around  were:

( 1 )  Increase  the  MAAG  as  necessarv  to  insure  the  effective  imple-
mention  of  the  military  portion  of  the  program  including  the  training  of  a
20.000-man  addition  to  the  present  GVN  armed  forces  of  150,000.
Initial  appaisal  of  new  tasks  assigned  CHMAAG  indicates  that  approxi-
mately 100  additional  militarv  personnel  will  be  required  immediately  in
addition  to  the  present  complement  of  685.

(2)  Expand  MAAG  responsibilities  to  include  authority  to  provide  sup-
port and  advice  to  the  Self  Defense  Corps  with  a  strength  of  approximately
40,000.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  39

(3)  Authority  MAP  support  for  the  entire  Civil  Guard  Forces  of  68,000
MAP  support  is  now  authoritized  for  32,000;  the  remaining  36,000  are  not
now  adequately  trained  and  equipped.

(4)  Install  as  a  matter  of  priority  a  radar  surveillance  capability  which
will  enable  the  GVN  to  obtain  warning  of  Communist  over-flights  being
conducted  for  intelligence  or  clandestine  air  supply  purposes.  Initially,  this
capability  should  be  provided  from  US  mobile  radar  capability.

(5)  Provide  MAP  support  for  the  Vietnamese  Junk  Force  as  a  means  of
preventing  Viet  Cong  clandestine  supply  and  infiltration  into  South  Viet-
nam by  water.  MAP  support,  which  was  not  provided  in  the  Counterin-
surgency  Plan,  will  include  training  of  junk  crews  in  Vietnam  or  at  US
bases  by  US  Navy  Personnel.

The  only  substantial  significance  that  can  be  read  into  these  April  29  de-
cisions is  that  they  signalled  a  willingness  to  go  beyond  the  685-man  limit  on  the
size  of  the  US  military  mission  in  Saigon,  which,  //  it  were  done  openly,
would  be  the  first  formal  breech  of  the  Geneva  Agreements.  For  the  rest,  we
were  providing  somewhat  more  generous  support  to  the  Vietnamese  than  pro-
posed in  the  CIP.  But  the  overall  size  of  the  Vietnamese  forces  would  be  no
higher  than  those  already  approved.  (The  20,000-man  increase  was  already
part  of  the  CIP.)  No  one  proposed  in  this  initial  draft  that  the  Administration
even  consider  sending  American  troops  (other  than  the  100-odd  additional
advisors).  It  was  not,  by  any  interpretation,  a  crisis  response.

Indeed,  even  if  Kennedy  had  approved  the  whole  April  26  program,  it  would
have  seemed  (in  hindsight)  most  notable  for  the  "come  what  may,  we  intend
to  win"  rhetoric  in  its  introduction  and  for  the  supreme  role  granted  to  Task
Force  (and  indirectly  to  Lansdale  as  its  operations  officer)  in  control  of  Viet-
nam policy.  Lansdale's  memoranda  leave  no  real  doubt  that  he  saw
the  Report  exactly  that  way — which  presumably  was  why  he  made  no  effort
to  risk  stirring  up  trouble  by  putting  his  more  controversial  views  into  the  pa-
per. For  example,  although  Lansdale  believed  the  key  new  item  in  Vietnam
policy  was  a  need  for  emphatic  support  for  Diem,  only  the  barest  hint  of  this
view  appears  in  the  paper  (and  it  is  not  even  hinted  at  in  Lansdale's  preliminary
draft  of  the  report  distributed  at  the  April  24th  meeting  of  the  Task  Force).

That  is  when  this  opening  phase  of  the  Task  Force  effort  has  to  be  separated
from  what  followed.  As  just  noted,  it  was  remarkable  mainly  for  the  strength
of  the  commitment  implied  to  South  Vietnam,  which  the  President  never  did
unambiguously  endorse,  and  for  the  organizational  arrangement  it  proposed,
with  the  key  role  for  Lansdale  and  Gilpatric,  which  was  eliminated  from  the
later  drafts.  All  of  the  factors  behind  the  May  reappraisal  (cited  at  the  begin-
ning of  this  chapter)  undoubtedly  contributed  to  the  decision  to  set  up  the  Task
Force.  But  Rostow's  memorandum  and  the  modest  dimensions  of  the  resulting
proposals  suggest  the  main  idea  really  was  to  sharpen  up  existing  policy  and  its
administration,  rather  than  to  work  out  a  new  policy  on  the  assumption  that  the
existing  program  had  become  substantially  obsolete.  Immediately  after  April
27,  this  changes.  Although  Gilpatric  and  Lansdale  continued  to  head  up  the
Task  Force  through  the  Presidential  decisions  of  May  11,  their  personal  role
became  increasingly  unimportant.  The  significance  no  longer  was  in  putting
new  people  in  charge  of  a  new  style  for  running  the  program,  but  in  developing
a  new  program  that  would  offset  the  impact  of  Laos.


40 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


E. THE  LAOS  ANNEX

On  April  28,  an  annex  had  been  issued  to  the  basic  report  which  went  far
beyond  the  modest  military  proposals  in  the  original.  The  most  reasonable  as-
sumption is  that  the  annex  was  drawn  up  in  response  to  comments  at  the  April
27  NSC  meeting  at  which  the  Report  was  to  have  been  considered,  but  which
turned  out  to  be  devoted  to  the  by-then  acute  state  of  the  crisis  in  Laos.  On  the
grounds  that  the  neutralization  of  Laos  would  solidify  communists  de  facto
control  of  eastern  Laos  (including  the  mountain  passes  which  were  the  historic
invasion  route  to  southern  Vietnam),  the  annex  advocated  U.S.  support  for  a
two-division  increase  in  the  RVNAF.  To  rapidlv  train  these  forces,  there  was
now  a  recommendation  on  U.S.  manpower  commitments  that  dwarted  the
previous  recommendation  for  a  MA  AG  increase:  specificallv,  a  1600-man
training  team  for  each  of  the  two  new  divisions,  plus  a  400-man  special  forces
contingent  to  speed  up  counter-insurgency  training  fot  the  South  Vietnamese
forces:  a  total  of  3600  men,  not  counting  the  MAAG  increase  already  author-
ized.

It  is  interesting  that  in  the  annex  this  force  increase  (and  the  bulk  of  the  U.S.
troop  commitment)  was  specifically  justified  as  insurance  against  a  conventional
invasion  of  South  Vietnam.  Some  earlier  drafts  show  the  evolution  of  this  con-
cept. There  is  an  alternate  draft,  apparently  by  Lansdale,  which  was  not  used
but  which  recommended  a  U.S.  troop  commitment  as  reassurance  to  the  Viet-
..amese  of  U.S.  determination  to  stand  by  them.  It  did  not  recommend  any  in-
crease in  South  Vietnamese  forces.  Instead,  it  stressed  verv  heavily  the  damage
to  U.S.  prestige  and  the  credibility  of  our  guarantees  to  other  countries  in
Southeast  Asia  should  we  go  through  with  the  Laos  settlement  without  taking
some  strong  action  to  demonstrate  that  we  were  finallv  drawing  a  line  in  South-
east Asia.

Contrasting  sharply  with  Lansdale's  draft  was  the  first  draft  of  the  paper
that  was  finally  issued.  This  was  by  Gilpatric's  military  aide,  Col.  E.F.  Black.
It  concludes  that  South  Vietnamese  forces  would  have  to  be  increased  by  two
divisions,  mainly  to  deal  with  threat  of  increased  infiltration.  Black  stressed
that  the  President  would  have  to  decide  that  the  US  would  no  longer  be  bound
by  the  limitations  of  the  1954  Geneva  Agreements  (which  Defense  had  long
been  lobbying  against).  But  his  paper  recommends  no  substantial  troop  com-
mitment. The  reference  to  the  Geneva  Agreements  apparently  referred  to  a
relatively  modest  increase  in  manpower  bevond  the  685-man  ceiling,  and  to  the
introduction  of  new  types  of  equipment  not  in  N'ietnam  in  1954.

So  the  record  contains  three  versions  of  the  Annex — Black's  first  draft,
Lansdale's  alternate  draft,  and  then  Black's  revised  paper,  which  was  finally
issure  as  the  annex  to  the  Report.  The  effect  of  considering  them  all  is  an  odd
one.  The  initial  Black  paper  recommends  an  increase  in  Vietnamese  forces  to
deal  with  the  infiltration  problem,  but  no  substantial  US  troop  commitment.
The  Lansdale  alternative  recommends  a  substantial  US  troop  commitment,  but
no  increase  in  Vietnamese  forces.  The  final  paper  recommends  both  the
RVNAF  increase  and  the  US  troop  commitments,  but  changes  the  reason  for
each:  the  reason  for  the  RVNAF  increase  became  a  need  for  better  protection
against  overt  invasion,  not  an  increased  infiltration  threat.  And  the  reason  for
the  US  troop  commitment  became  a  desire  to  rapidly  train  the  new  Vietnamese
troops,  not  for  political  reassurance.

If  taken  literallv.  all  of  this  implies  an  extraordinarily  rapid  series  of  reap-
praisals and  reversals  of  judgment.  But  surelv.  the  only  realistic  interpretation


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  41

is  that  in  this  case  (because  a  series  of  rough  drafts  happens  to  be  included  in
the  available  file)  we  are  getting  a  glimpse  at  the  way  such  staff  paperwork
really  gets  drafted,  as  opposed  to  the  much  more  orderly  impression  that  is
given  if  we  saw  only  the  finished  products.  Gilpatric  (undoubtedly  in  consulta-
tion with  at  least  McNamara,  although  the  files  do  not  show  any  record  of  this)
was  presumably  interested  primarily  in  what  recommendations  to  make  to  the
President,  and  secondarily  in  providing  a  bureaucratically  suitable  rationale  for
those  recommendations.  This  rationale  may,  or  may  not,  have  coincided  with
whatever  more  private  explanation  of  the  recommendations  that  McNamara  or
Gilpatric  may  have  conveyed  to  the  President  or  people  like  McGeorge  Bundy
and  Rostow  on  the  White  House  staff.  The  lesson  in  this,  which  will  not  come
as  a  surprise  to  anyone  who  has  ever  had  contact  with  the  policy-making  proc-
ess, is  that  the  rationales  given  in  such  pieces  of  paper  (intended  for  fairly  wide
circulation  among  the  bureaucracy,  as  opposed  to  tightly  held  memoranda
limited  to  those  closest  to  the  decision-maker)  do  not  reliably  indicate  why
recommendations  were  made  the  way  they  were.

F. THE  MAY  1  REVIEW

Meanwhile,  Kennedy,  as  noted  earlier,  did  not  act  on  the  annex  at  the
April  29  meeting  when  he  approved  the  much  more  modest  military  proposals
of  the  basic  Report.  But  on  that  day,  there  was  a  cable  alerting  CINCPAC
to  be  ready  to  move  5000-men  task  forces  to  Udorn,  Thailand,  and  to  Touraine,
(Da  Nang),  South  Vietnam.  Classified  records  available  for  this  study  do  not
explain  this  alert.  But  the  public  memoirs  indirectly  refer  to  it,  and  as  would
be  expected,  the  alert  was  intended  as  a  threat  to  intervene  in  Laos  if  the  com-
munists failed  to  go  through  with  the  cease  fire  which  was  to  precede  the  Geneva
Conference.  Here  is  the  cable:


JCS

CINCPAC

CHMAAG  VIENTIANE
CHJUSMAAG  BANGKOK  THAILAND
CHMAAG  SAIGON  VIETNAM

JCS  DA  995131 From  JCS.

1.  Request  you  prepare  plans  to  move  brigade  size  forces  of  approximately
5,000  each  into  Udorn  or  vicinity  and  into  Tourane  or  vicinity.  Forces
should  include  all  arms  and  appropriate  air  elements.  Plans  should  be
based  solely  on  US  forces  at  this  time.

2.  Decision  to  make  these  deployments  not  firm.  It  is  expected  that  decision
as  to  Thailand  will  be  made  at  meeting  tentatively  scheduled  here  on  Mon-
day. Decision  regarding  Vietnam  will  be  even  later  due  to  consideration
of  Geneva  Accords.

3.  It  is  hoped  that  these  movements  can  be  given  SEATO  cover  but  such
possibility  must  be  explored  before  becoming  a  firm  element  of  your  plan-
ning. State  is  taking  action  to  explore  this  aspect.

4.  Decision  was  not  repeat  noi  reached  today  concerning  implementation
of  SEATO  Plan  5/60.


From:

TO:

INFO:


c


42 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

The  crisis  in  Laos  was  now  at  its  peak.  According  to  Schlesingers  account,
reports  reached  Washington  April  26  that  the  Pathet  Lao  were  attacking
strongly,  with  the  apparent  intention  of  grabbing  most  of  the  country  before
the  cease-fire  went  into  effect.  At  10  p.m.  that  night,  the  JCS  sent  out  a  "general
advisory"  to  major  commands  around  the  world,  and  specifically  alerted  CINC-
PAC  to  be  prepared  to  undertake  airstrikes  against  North  Vietnam,  and  possibly
southern  China.

The  next  day — the  day  the  Task  Force  Report  came  to  the  President — there
were  prolonged  crisis  meetings  in  the  White  House.  The  President  later  called
in  Congressional  leaders,  who  advised  against  putting  troops  into  Laos.  Schlesin-
ger  quotes  Rostow  as  telling  him  the  NSC  meeting  that  day  was  "the  worst
White  House  meeting  he  had  ever  attended  in  the  entire  Kennedy  administra-
tion."

The  Laos  annex  to  the  Gilpatric  Report  was  issued  on  the  28th,  in  an  atmos-
phere wholly  dominated  by  the  crisis  in  Laos.  On  the  29th,  Kennedy's  go-ahead
on  the  Task  Force's  original  military  recommendations  was  squeezed  into  a  day
overwhelmingly  devoted  to  Laos.  This  was  the  day  of  the  cable,  just  cited,  alert-
ing CINCPAC  for  troop  movements  to  Thailand  and  possibly  Vietnam.  The
"SEATO  Plan  5/60"  referred  to  in  the  closing  paragraph  of  the  cable  was  the
plan  for  moving  major  units  into  Laos.

On  May  1  (the  Monday  meeting  referred  to  in  the  cable),  Kennedy  again
deferred  any  decision  on  putting  troops  into  Laos.  According  to  available  ac-
counts, there  is  a  strong  sense  by  now  (although  no  formal  decision)  that  the
U.S.  would  not  go  into  Laos:  that  if  the  cease-fire  failed,  we  would  make  a
strong  stand,  instead,  in  Thailand  and  Vietnam.  (On  the  28th.  in  a  speech  to  a
Democratic  dinner  in  Chicago,  the  President  had  hinted  at  this:

We  are  prepared  to  meet  our  obligations,  but  we  can  only  defend  the
freedom  of  those  who  are  determined  to  be  free  themselves.  We  can  assist
them — we  will  bear  more  than  our  share  of  the  burden,  but  we  can  only
help  those  who  are  ready  to  bear  their  share  of  the  burden  themselves.

Reasonable  qualifications,  undoubtedly,  but  ones  that  seemed  to  suggest  that
intervention  in  Laos  would  be  futile.  On  Sunday  (the  30th),  another  hint  came
in  remarks  by  Senator  Fulbright  on  a  TV  interview  show:  he  opposed  inter-
vention in  Laos,  and  said  he  was  confident  the  government  was  seeking  "an-
other solution."

So  the  decision  anticipated  Monday,  May  1,  in  the  JCS  cable  to  CINCPAC
was  not  made  that  day  after  all.  But  that  day  a  new  draft  of  the  Task  Force
Report  was  issued.  It  contained  only  the  significant  change  (other  than  blending
the  April  28  annex  into  the  basic  paper).  The  original  draft  contained  a  para-
graph (under  "political  objectives")  recommending  we  "obtain  the  political
agreement  [presumably  from  the  SEATO  membership]  needed  to  permit  the
prompt  implementation  of  SEATO  contingency  plans  providing  for  military
intervention  in  South  Vietnam  should  this  become  necessary  to  prevent  the
loss  of  the  country  to  Communism."

In  the  Nvay  1  revision,  the  following  sentence  was  added  to  the  paragraph:
"The  United  States  should  be  prepared  to  intervene  unilaterally  in  fulfillment
of  its  commitment  under  Article  IV.  2.  of  Manila  Pact,  and  should  make  its
determination  to  do  so  clear  through  appropriate  public  statements,  diplomatic
discussions,  troop  deployments,  or  other  means."  (The  cited  clause  in  the  Manila
(SEATO)  Pact,  which  the  paper  did  not  quote,


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  43

If,  in  the  opinion  of  any  of  the  Parties,  the  inviolability  or  the  integrity
of  the  territory  or  the  sovereignty  or  political  independence  of  any  Party
in  the  treaty  area  or  of  any  other  State  or  territory  to  which  the  provisions
of  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  from  time  to  time  apply  is  threatened  in  any
way  other  than  by  armed  attack  or  is  affected  or  threatened  by  any  fact  or
situation  which  might  endanger  the  peace  of  the  area,  the  Parties  shall
consult  immediately  in  order  to  agree  on  the  measures  which  should  be
taken  for  the  common  defense.)

The  May  1  draft  also  cleared  up,  or  papered  over,  part  of  the  confusion
described  earlier  regarding  the  rationale  for  the  military  measures  recommended
in  the  Laos  annex:  the  increased  RVNAF  force  levels  were  attributed  now  both
to  concern  over  increased  infiltration  and  to  concern  over  overt  invasion.  But
the  US  troop  commitments  are  still  described  solely  as  for  training,  with  no
mention  of  the  original  political  rationale.

G. STATE'S  REDRAFT

Lansdale  circulated  the  May  1  draft  among  the  Task  Force,  with  a  note  that
comments  should  be  in  May  2,  with  a  final  Task  Force  review  scheduled  the
morning  of  May  3,  all  in  anticipation  of  an  NSC  meeting  on  the  paper  May  4.

George  Ball,  then  Deputy  Under  Secretary  of  State,  asked  to  postpone  the
meeting  for  a  day.  Lansdale  sent  Gilpatric  a  memorandum  opposing  the  post-
ponement. "It  seems  to  me  that  George  Ball  could  appoint  someone  to  repre-
sent him  at  the  meeting,  and  if  he  has  personal  or  further  comments  they  could
come  to  us  later  in  the  day  at  his  convenience."  But  Gilpatric  delayed  the  meet-
ing a  day,  and  State  produced  a  drastic  revision  of  the  paper.

On  the  organizational  issues,  the  State  draft  was  brutally  clearcut.  It  pro-
posed a  new  version  of  the  Gilpatric  memorandum  transmtiting  the  Report,
in  which:

L  The  paragraph  (quoted  earlier)  describing  Lansdale's  special  role  is
deleted.

2.  A  new  paragraph  is  added  to  the  end  of  the  memorandum,  in  which  Gil-
patric is  made  to  say:  "Having  completed  its  assignment  ...  I  recom-
mend that  the  present  Task  Force  be  now  dissolved."

Later  sections  of  the  paper  were  revised  accordingly,  giving  responsibility  for
coordinating  Vietnam  policy  to  a  new  Task  Force  with  George  Ball  as  chairman.
(In  the  final  version,  the  Task  Force  has  a  State  Department  director,  but  no
longer  included  Presidential  appointees  representing  their  departments.  The
whole  Task  Force  idea  had  been  downgraded  to  a  conventional  interagency
working  group.  Although  it  continued  to  function  for  several  years,  there  will
be  little  occasion  to  mention  it  again  in  this  paper.)

State's  proposal  on  organization  prevailed.  From  the  record  available,  the
only  thing  that  can  be  s^aid  definitely  is  that  State  objected,  successfully,  to
having  an  Ambassador  report  to  a  Task  Force  chaired  by  the  Deputy  Secretary
of  Defense,  and  with  a  second  defense  official  (Lansdale)  as  executive  officer.
There  may  have  been  more  to  it.  We  know  Lansdale's  experience  and  his  ap-
proach to  guerrilla  warfare  initially  won  him  a  good  deal  of  favor  at  the  White
House.  But  his  memorandum  suggest  that  his  ideas  on  a  number  of  issues  (sup-
port for  Phoumi  in  Laos,  liberation  of  North  Vietnam,  essentially  unqualified


44 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

support  for  Diem  in  South  Vietnam)  went  well  beyond  what  the  Administra-
tion judged  reasonable.  So  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  President  would  have
had  second  thoughts  on  Lansdale,  aside  from  State's  objections  on  bureau-
cratic grounds.

In  any  event,  Lansdale's  reaction  to  State's  proposal  on  organization  was  to
advise  McNamara  and  Gilpatric  that:

My  strong  recommendation  is  that  Defense  stay  completely  out  of  the
Task  Force  directorship  as  now  proposed  by  State  .  .  .  Having  a  Defense
officer,  myself  or  someone  else,  placed  in  a  position  of  only  partial  in-
fluence and  of  no  decision  permissibility  would  be  only  to  provide  State
with  a  scapegoat  to  share  the  blame  when  we  have  a  flop  .  .  .  The  US
past  performance  and  theory  of  action,  which  State  apparently  desires
to  continue,  simply  offers  no  sound  basis  for  winning,  as  desired  by  Presi-
dent Kennedy.

But  the  final  version  of  the  Task  Force  Report,  dated  May  6,  followed  very
closely  the  State  revision  submitted  May  3,  including  the  shift  in  control  of  the
Task  Force,  [see  also  Doc.  87]

H. WIDENING  THE  OPTIONS

What  is  most  striking  about  the  revised  drafts  is  that  they  excluded  a  tone
of  almost  unqualified  commitment  to  Vietnam,  yet  on  the  really  important
issues  included  qualifications  which  left  the  President  a  great  deal  of  freedom
to  decide  whatever  he  pleased  without  having  to  formally  overrule  the  Task
Force  Report.

For  example,  the  assertion  (from  the  April  draft)  that  the  US  should  impress
on  friend  and  foe  that  ''come  what  may,  we  intend  to  win"  remained  in  the
final  paper.  But  this  hortatory  language  is  from  the  introduction;  it  described
one  of  the  effects  the  program  in  the  balance  of  the  paper  was  supposed  to
achieve,  but  did  not  ask  the  President  to  do  or  say  anything  not  spelled  out  in
the  body  of  the  paper.  (We  will  see,  when  we  come  to  the  fall  decisions,  that
the  wisdom  of  an  unqualified  commitment  to  save  Vietnam  from  Communism
is  treated  afresh,  with  no  suggestion  that  any  such  decision  had  already  been
made  in  May.)

On  the  other  hand,  the  explicit  recommendation  in  the  Defense  draft  that
we  make  clear  our  "determination  ...  to  intervene  unilaterally  .  .  .  should
this  become  necessary  to  save  the  countrv  from  communism  .  .  ."  was  dropped.
Instead,  there  is  a  recommendation  for  exploring  a  "new  bilateral  arrangement"
which  might  (the  text  is  not  explicit)  extend  to  fighting  the  guerrillas,  if  that
should  become  necessarv  to  save  the  countrv.  but  also  might  only  cover  overt
North  Vietnamese  invasion.

Further,  the  need  for  these  arrangements  was  now  tied  to  the  "loss"  of  Laos.
The  May  3  draft  suggests  we  "undertake  military  security  arrangements  which
establish  beyond  doubt  our  intention  to  stand  behind  Vietnam's  resistance  to
Communism  .  .  ."  since  "it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Vietnamese  Government
can  weather  the  pressures  which  are  certain  to  be  generated  from  the  loss  of
Laos  without  prompt,  and  dramatic  support  for  its  security  from  the  U.S."

In  the  May  6  final  draft,  "establish  bevond  doubt"  was  toned  down  to
"emphasize"  and  the  flat  reference  to  the  loss  of  Laos  was  changed  to  "if
Laos  were  lost."

Similarly,  the  recommendations  on  the  two  new  South  Vietnamese  divisions,


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  45

and  the  two  1600-man  US  combat  units  to  train  them  was  described  as  a  firm
recommendation  in  the  military  section  of  the  May  3  draft  (which  State  left
untouched  from  the  Defense  version),  but  were  indirectly  referred  to  as
something  for  study  in  State's  re-drafted  political  section.  In  the  final  paper,
they  were  still  firm  recommendations  in  a  military  annex,  but  not  in  the  main
paper,  where  Defense  was  only  described  as  studying  this  and  other  uses  for
US  troops  short  of  direct  commitment  against  the  guerrillas.  US  troop  commit-
ments were  no  longer  recommended,  only  referred  to  as  something  "which
might  result  from  an  NSC  decision  following  discussions  between  Vice  President
Johnson  [whose  mission  to  Asia  had  been  announced  May  5]  and  President
Diem."

Yet  an  interesting  aspect  of  the  State  redraft  is  that,  although  its  main  im-
pact was  to  soften  the  commitments  implied  in  the  Defense  draft,  a  quick  read-
ing might  give  the  contrary  impression.  We  will  see  this  same  effect  in  the  po-
litical sections  to  be  discussed  below.  What  seems  to  happen  is  that  the  very  de-
tail of  the  State  treatment  creates  a  strong  impression,  even  though  the  actual
proposals  are  less  drastic  and  more  qualified  than  those  proposed  by  Defense.
The  contrast  is  all  the  sharper  because  the  Defense  draft  leaned  the  other
way.  For  example,  the  profoundly  significant  recommendation  that  the  US
commit  itself  to  intervene  unilaterally,  if  necessary,  to  prevent  a  Viet  Cong
victory  in  South  Vietnam,  is  tossed  into  the  Defense  version  most  casually,
with  a  reference  to  the  Manila  Treaty  that  makes  it  sound  as  if  such  a  commit-
ment, in  fact,  already  existed.

In  contrast,  here  is  the  State  language  referring  to  the  proposed  bilateral
treaty  (which  in  effect  is  a  substitute  for  the  Defense  proposed  unlimited  uni-
lateral commitment) :

The  Geneva  Accords  have  been  totally  inadequate  in  protecting  South
Vietnam  against  Communist  infiltration  and  insurgency.  Moreover,  with
increased  Communist  success  in  Laos  dramatic  US  actions  in  stiffening  up
its  physical  support  of  Vietnam  and  the  remainder  of  Southeast  Asia  may
be  needed  to  bolster  the  will  to  continue  to  resist  the  Communists.  The  inhibi-
tions imposed  on  such  action  by  certain  parts  of  the  Geneva  Accords,
which  have  been  violated  with  impunity  by  the  Communists,  should  not  pre-
vent our  action.  We  should  consider  joining  with  the  Vietnamese  in  a  clear-
cut  defensive  alliance  which  might  include  stationing  of  US  forces  on  Viet-
namese soil.  As  a  variant  of  this  arrangement  certain  SEATO  troops
might  also  be  employed.

Bilateral  military  assistance  by  the  United  Staies  pursuant  to  a  request  by
South  Vietnam  along  the  lines  of  that  undertaken  during  1958  in  response
to  the  request  by  Lebanon  for  military  assistance,  would  be  in  keeping  with
international  law  and  treaty  provisions.  The  provisions  of  the  Geneva
Accords  of  1954,  which  prohibited  the  introduction  of  additional  military
arms  and  personnel  into  Vietnam,  would  not  be  a  bar  to  the  measures  con-
templated. The  obvious,  large-scale  and  continuous  violation  of  these  pro-
visions of  the  Geneva  Accords  by  North  Vietnam  in  introducing  large
numbers  of  armed  guerrillas  into  South  Vietnam  would  justify  the  corre-
sponding non-observance  of  these  provisions  by  South  Vietnam.  Indeed,  au-
thorization for  changing  PEO  Laos  into  an  ordinary  MAAG  was  justified
on  this  legal  theory.  It  should  be  recognized  that  the  foregoing  proposals  re-
quire careful  and  detailed  consideration  and  preparation  particularly  with
regard  to  the  precise  mission  of  US  forces  used.


46 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

In  addition  to  the  previously  cited  advantages  such  an  action  might  have
at  least  two  other  important  political  and  military  advantages:

(a)  It  could  release  a  portion  of  the  ARVN  from  relatively  static  mili-
tary functions  to  pursue  the  war  against  the  insurgents  and

(b)  It  would  place  the  Sino-Soviet  Bloc  in  the  position  of  risking  direct
intervention  in  a  situation  where  US  forces  were  already  in  place,  accept-
ing the  consequence  of  such  action.  This  is  in  direct  contrast  to  the  cur-
rent situation  in  Laos.

Alternatively,  there  are  several  potential  political  and  military  disadvan-
tages to  such  an  action,  principal  among  these  being:

(a)  Some  of  the  neutrals,  notably  India,  might  well  be  opposed,  and
the  attitude  of  the  UK  and  France  is  uncertain.

(b)  This  would  provide  the  Communists  with  a  major  propaganda  op-
portunity.

(c)  The  danger  that  a  troop  contribution  would  provoke  a  DRV/
CHICOM  reaction  with  the  risk  of  involving  a  significant  commitment  of
US  force  in  the  Pacific  to  the  Asian  mainland.  The  French  tied  up  some
200,000  troops  during  the  unsuccessful  Indo-China  effort.

This  might  significantly  weaken  the  Diem  regime  in  the  long  run,  having
in  mind  the  parallel  of  Rhee  in  Korea.

This  language  is  not  solely  the  State  Department's.  In  a  Gilpatric  memo  to  be
c  ted  shortly,  we  will  see  that  the  ICS,  for  example,  had  a  hand  in  describing
the  role  for  US  troops.  Even  so,  the  overall  effect  of  the  draft,  as  already  noted,
tones  down  very  drastically  the  commitment  implied  bv  the  May  1  Defense
version :

1.  The  proposal  is  no  longer  for  a  unilateral,  unlimited  commitment
to  save  Vietnam  from  communism.  It  only  proposes  consideration  of  a  new
treaty  with  South  Vietnam  (unlike  the  Defense  draft  which  proposed  read-
ing a  unilateral  commitment  into  the  existing  Manila  Treaty);  and  its  pur-
pose is  to  "bolster  the  will"  of  the  South  Vietnamese  to  resist  the  commu-
nists, not  (as  the  Defense  draft  apparentlv  meant)  to  guarantee  that  the
US  would  join  the  war  should  the  South  Vietnamese  effort  prove  inade-
quate.

2.  It  gives  pro  and  con  arguments  for  sending  US  troops,  in  contrast
to  the  Defense  draft  which  included  a  flat  recommendation  to  send  at
least  the  3600  men  of  the  two  division  training  teams  and  the  special
forces  traininc  team.

A  reasonable  judgment,  consequentlv,  is  that  State  thought  the  Defense  draft
went  too  far  in  committing  the  US  on  Vietnam.  (And  in  view  of  the  positions
he  would  take  in  1965,  George  Ball's  role  as  senior  State  representative  on  the
Task  Force  obviously  further  encourages  that  interpretation.)  But  that  is  only
a  judgment.  It  is  also  possible  to  argue,  in  contrast,  that  perhaps  State  (or  State
plus  whatever  White  House  influence  mav  have  gone  into  the  draft)  simply
was  tidying  up  the  Defense  proposals:  for  example,  that  the  redrafters  felt  that
a  new  bilateral  treaty  would  be  a  firmer  basis  for  a  commitment  to  save  Viet-
nam than  would  reliance  on  a  reinterpretation  of  the  SEATO  Treaty.  Similar
arguments  can  be  made  on  the  other  points  noted  above.

Consequently,  on  any  question  about  the  intent  of  the  redrafters,  only  a  judg-
ment and  not  a  statement  of  fact  can  be  provided.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  47

But  on  the  question  of  the  effect  of  the  redraft,  a  stronger  statement  can  be
made:  for  whatever  the  intent  of  the  redrafters,  the  effect  certainly  was  to
weaken  the  commitments  implied  by  the  Defense  draft,  and  leave  the  President
a  great  deal  of  room  for  maneuver  without  having  to  explicitly  overrule  the
recommendations  presented  to  him.

/. THE  TROOP  ISSUE

To  return  to  a  question  of  judgement,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  how  far  this
gradual  hedging  of  proposals  for  very  strong  commitments  to  Vietnam  simply
reflected  a  desire  (very  probably  encouraged  by  the  White  House)  to  leave  the
President  freedom  of  action.  To  some  extent  it  surely  reflects  a  growing  hope
that  perhaps  the  Laos  cease-fire  would  come  off;  the  country  would  not  be  flatly
lost;  and  consequently,  that  the  May  1  Defense  draft,  and  even  the  May  3  State
draft,  reflected  a  somewhat  panicky  overestimate  of  how  far  we  needed  to  go
to  keep  Southeast  Asia  from  falling  apart.  The  two  motives  obviously  overlapped.

There  are  indications  that,  as  late  as  May  5,  the  estimate  for  saving  some-
thing out  of  Laos  remained  bleak.  On  May  4,  after  a  visit  to  the  President,  Sen-
ator Fullbright  (who  had  opposed  intervention  in  Laos  along  with  other  Con-
gressional leaders)  announced  from  the  steps  of  the  White  House  that  he
would  support  troop  commitments  to  Thailand  and  Vietnam.  An  NSC  meeting
the  following  day  (May  5)  was  devoted  to  discussing  steps  to  reassure  Vietnam
and  Thailand.  Then  in  the  afternoon,  the  President  announced  Vice  President
Johnson's  visit  to  Asia  at  a  press  conference,  which  included  this  garbled  ex-
change:

Q.  Mr.  President,  there  have  been  reports  that  you  would  be  prepared  to
send  American  forces  into  South  Vietnam  if  that  became  necessary  to
prevent  Communist  domination  of  that  country.  Could  you  tell  us  whether
that  is  correct,  and  also  anything  else  you  have  regarding  plans  for  that
country?

A.  Well,  we  have  had  a  group  working  in  the  government  and  we  have
had  a  Security  Council  meeting  about  the  problems  which  are  faced  in
Vietnam  by  the  guerrillas  and  by  the  barrage  which  the  present  govern-
ment is  being  subjected  to.  The  problem  of  troops  is  a  matter — the  matter
of  what  we  are  going  to  do  to  assist  Vietnam  to  obtain  [retain?]  its  in-
dependence is  a  matter  under  consideration.  There  are  a  good  many
[issues?]  which  I  think  can  most  usefully  wait  until  we  have  had  consulta-
tions with  the  government,  which  up  to  the  present  time — which  will  be
one  of  the  matters  which  Vice  President  Johnson  will  deal  with;  the  prob-
lem of  consultations  with  the  Government  of  Vietnam  as  to  what  further
steps  could  most  usefully  be  taken.

On  May  8,  the  reconstituted  International  Control  Commission  (established  by
the  Geneva  Agreement  of  1954)  arrived  in  Laos,  hoping  to  supervise  a  cease-
fire. The  cease-fire  had  been  agreed  to  in  principle  by  both  sides  as  early  as  May
1.  The  question  was  whether  the  Pathet  Lao  would  really  stop  advancing.  Aside
from  American  intervention,  a  cease-fire  was  the  only  hope  of  the  larger,  but
less  effective,  pro- Western  forces  led  by  Phoumi.  Certainly  hopes  were  higher
by  the  8th  than  they  were  a  week  earlier,  but  this  might  not  be  saying  much.
The  documentary  record  is  ambiguous.  The  final  draft  of  the  letter  Vice
President  Johnson  would  deliver  to  Diem  was  dated  May  8,  and  in  this  letter


48 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Kennedy  did  not  go  much  beyond  the  proposals  in  the  April  27  version  of  the
task  force  report.  There  was  no  mention  of  U.S.  troop  commitments,  nor  of  a
bilateral  treaty.  Even  on  the  question  of  a  further  increase  (beyond  170,000)
in  the  RVNAF,  Kennedy  promised  Diem  only  that  this  will  be  "considered
carefully  with  you,  if  developments  should  so  warrant."

But  the  same  day,  Gilpatric  sent  a  memo  to  the  JCS  asking  their  views  on
U.S.  troops  in  Vietnam:

...  In  preparation  for  the  possible  commitment  of  U.S.  forces  to  Viet-
nam, it  is  desired  that  you  give  further  review  and  study  of  the  military
advisability  of  such  action,  as  well  as  to  the  size  and  composition  of  such
U.S.  forces.  Your  views,  which  I  hope  could  include  some  expression  from
CINCPAC,  would  be  valuable  for  consideration  prior  to  the  NSC  meeting
this  week  (currently  scheduled  for  Friday,  May  12).

This  in  turn  was  based  on  a  statement  in  the  May  6  Task  Force  draft,  which  said
that  such  a  study  was  being  carried  out,  with  particular  consideration  being
given  to  deploying  to  South  Vietnam

.  .  .  two  U.S.  battle  groups  (with  necessary  command  and  logistics
units),  plus  an  engineer  (construction-combat)  battalion.  These  units
would  be  located  in  the  "high  plateau"  region,  remote  from  the  major  popu-
lation center  of  Saigon-Cholon,  under  the  command  of  the  Chief,  MAAG.
To  help  accelerate  the  training  of  the  G.V.N,  army,  they  would  establish
two  divisional  field  training  areas.  The  engineer  battalion  would  undertake
construction  of  roads,  air-landing  strips  and  other  facilities  essential  to  the
logistical  support  of  the  U.S.  and  Vietnamese  forces  there.

The  purpose  of  these  forces  (again,  from  the  May  6  draft)  would  be  to

.  .  .  provide  maximum  psychological  impact  in  deterrence  of  further
Communist  aggression  from  North  Vietnam,  China,  or  the  Soviet  Union,
while  rallying  the  morale  of  the  Vietnamese  and  encouraging  the  support
of  SEATO  and  neutral  nations  for  Vietnam's  defense;

— release  Vietnamese  forces  from  advanced  and  static  defense  positions  to

permit  their  fuller  commitment  to  counterinsurgencv  actions;
— provide  maximum  training  to  approved  Vietnamese  forces;  and
— provide  significant  military  resistance  to  potential  North  Vietnam  Com-
munist and  or  Chinese  Communist  action.

The  JCS  reply,  dated  May  10.  deferred  details  on  the  composition  of  U.S.
forces,  but  quite  emphaticallv  recommended  that  we  do  send  them,  "assuming
the  political  decision  is  to  hold  Southeast  Asia  outside  the  communist  sphere."
Here  is  the  JCS  memo:

In  considering  the  possible  commitment  of  U.S.  forces  to  South  Viet-
nam, the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  reviewed  the  overall  critical  situation
in  Southeast  Asia  with  particular  emphasis  upon  the  present  highly  flam-
mable situation  in  South  Vietnam.  In  this  connection  the  question,  how-
ever, of  South  Vietnam  should  not  be  considered  in  isolation  but  rather  in
conjunction  with  Thailand  and  their  overall  relationship  to  the  security  of
Southeast  Asia.  The  views  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  on  the  question  re-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  49

garding  the  development  of  U.S.  forces  into  Thailand  were  provided  to  you
BY  JCSM-311-61,  dated  9  May  1961.  The  current  potentially  dangerous
military  and  political  situation  in  Laos,  of  course,  is  the  focal  point  in  this
area.  Assuming  that  the  political  decision  is  to  hold  Southeast  Asia  outside
the  Communist  sphere,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  of  the  opinion  that
U.S.  forces  should  be  deployed  immediately  to  South  Vietnam;  such  action
should  be  taken  primarily  to  prevent  the  Vietnamese  from  being  subjected
to  the  same  situation  as  presently  exists  in  Laos,  which  would  then  re-
quired deployment  of  U.S.  forces  into  an  already  existing  combat  situation.

In  view  of  the  foregoing,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  that  the
decision  be  made  to  deploy  suitable  U.S.  forces  to  South  Vietnam.  Suffi-
cient forces  should  be  deployed  to  accomplish  the  following  purposes:

Provide  a  visible  deterrent  to  potential  North  Vietnam  and/or  Chinese
Communist  action;

Release  Vietnamese  forces  from  advanced  and  static  defense  positions
to  permit  their  fuller  commitment  to  counterinsurgency  actions;

Assist  in  training  the  Vietnamese  forces  to  the  maximum  extent  possible
consistent  with  their  mission;

Provide  a  nucleus  for  the  support  of  any  additional  U.S.  or  SEATO
military  operation  in  Southeast  Asia;  and

Indicate  the  firmness  of  our  intent  to  all  Asian  nations.

In  order  to  maintain  U.S.  flexibility  in  the  Pacific,  it  is  envisioned  that
some  or  all  of  the  forces  deployed  to  South  Vietnam  would  come  from
the  United  States.  The  movement  of  these  troops  could  be  accomplished
in  an  administrative  manner  and  thus  not  tax  the  limited  lift  capabilities
of  CINCPAC.

In  order  to  accomplish  the  foregoing  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recom-
mend that:

President  Diem  be  encouraged  to  request  that  the  United  States  fulfill
its  SEATO  obligation,  in  view  of  the  new  threat  now  posed  by  the  Laotian
situation,  by  the  immediate  deployment  of  appropriate  U.S  forces  to  South
Vietnam;

Upon  receipt  of  this  request,  suitable  forces  could  be  immediately  de-
ployed to  South  Vietnam  in  order  to  accomplish  the  above-mentioned
purpose.  Details  of  size  and  composition  of  these  forces  must  include  the
views  of  both  CINCPAC  and  CHMAAG  which  are  not  yet  available.

The  NSC  meeting  that  dealt  with  the  Task  Force  Report  was  held  the  next
day  (the  11th,  rather  than  the  12th  as  originally  anticipated).  The  President
avoided  committing  himself  on  the  troop  issue  any  further  than  he  had  already
been  committed  by  the  time  of  his  May  5  press  conference.  The  resulting  NSAM
52  [Doc.  88]  (signed  by  McGeorge  Bundy)  states  only  that:

The  President  directs  full  examination  by  the  Defense  Department  under
the  guidance  of  the  Director  of  the  continuing  Task  Force  on  Vietnam,  of
the  size  and  composition  of  forces  which  would  be  desirable  in  the  case
of  a  possible  commitment  of  U.S.  forces  to  Vietnam."  (The  Task  Force  Di-
rector at  this  point  referred  to  Sterling  Cottrell,  a  Foreign  Service  Ofiicer,
rather  than  to  Gilpatric.)

So  the  President  went  no  further,  really,  than  to  take  note  of  a  study  that  was
already  well  underway.  The  record  does  not  help  us  judge  what  significance  to


50 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

attach  to  the  qualification  that  the  study  be  done  under  the  guidance  of  the
State  Department  officer  now  heading  the  Task  Force.

On  other  issues  relating  to  our  military  commitments  the  President  again,
with  minor  alterations,  endorsed  the  proposals  of  the  May  6  draft.  On  the  ques-
tion of  a  formal  alliance  with  South  Vietnam  NSAM  52  reports  that:

The  Ambassador  is  authorized  to  begin  negotiations  looking  toward  a
new  bilateral  arrangement  with  Vietnam,  but  no  firm  commitment  will  be
made  to  such  an  arrangement  without  further  review  by  the  President.

The  President  also  "confirmed"  the  decisions  quoted  earlier  accepting  the
April  27  military  recommendations,  and  accepted  the  following  further  recom-
mendations (all  from  the  May  6  report)  "with  the  objective  of  meeting  the  in-
creased security  threat  resulting  from  the  new  situation  along  the  frontier  be-
tween Laos  and  Vietnam."

1.  Assist  the  G.V.N,  armed  forces  to  increase  their  border  patrol  and
insurgency  suppression  capabilities  by  establishing  an  effective  border  in-
telligence and  patrol  system,  by  instituting  regular  aerial  surveillance  over
the  entire  frontier  area,  and  by  applying  modern  technological  area-denial
techniques  to  control  the  roads  and  trails  along  Vietnam's  borders.  A  spe-
cial staff  element  (approximately  6  U.S.  personnel),  to  concentrate  upon
solutions  to  the  unique  problems  of  Vietnam's  borders,  will  be  activated  in
MAAG,  Vietnam,  to  assist  a  similar  special  unit  in  the  RVNAF  which  the
G.V.N,  will  be  encouraged  to  establish;  these  two  elements  working  as  an
integrated  team  will  help  the  G.V.N,  gain  the  support  of  nomadic  tribes  and
other  border  inhabitants,  as  well  as  introduce  advanced  techniques  and
equipment  to  strengthen  the  security  of  South  Vietnam's  frontiers.

2.  Assist  the  G.V.N,  to  establish  a  Combat  Development  and  Test  Cen-
ter in  South  Vietnam  to  develop,  with  the  help  of  modern  technology,  new
techniques  for  use  against  the  Viet  Cong  forces  (approximately  4  U.S.  per-
sonnel).

3.  Assist  the  G.V.N,  forces  with  health,  welfare  and  public  work  proj-
ects by  providing  U.S.  Army  civic  action  mobile  training  teams,  coordinated
with  the  similar  civilian  effort  (approximately  14  U.S.  personnel).

4.  Deploy  a  Special  Forces  Group  (approximately  400  personnel)  to
Nha  Trang  in  order  to  accelerate  G.V.N.  Special  Forces  training.  The  first
increment,  for  immediate  deployment  to  Vietnam,  should  be  a  Special
Forces  company  (52  personnel).

5.  Instruct  JCS,  CINCPAC,  and  MAAG  to  undertake  an  assessment  of
the  military  utility  of  a  further  increase  in  the  G.V.N,  forces  from  170,000
to  200,000  in  order  to  create  two  new  division  equivalents  for  deploy-
ment to  the  northeast  border  region.  The  parallel  political  and  fiscal  implica-
tions should  be  assessed.

In  general  Kennedy  did  not  seem  to  have  committed  the  U.S.,  by  these  de-
cisions, significantly  further  than  the  U.S.  had  already  been  committed  by  the
President's  public  speeches  and  remarks  at  press  conferences.  In  the  expanded
military  aid  program  approved  bv  the  President,  there  was  no  item  that  com-
mitted the  U.S.  any  further  than  we  had  gone  in  the  case  of  Laos  (that  is,  be-
yond providing  advisors,  materiel,  and  some  covert  combat  assistance).

A  debatable  exception  was  the  decision  to  send  400  special  forces  troops  to


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  51

speed  training  of  their  South  Vietnamese  counterparts.  The  idea  of  sending
some  Green  Berets  antedates  the  Task  Force  effort.  Rostow  mentioned  it  in
his  April  12  memo,  quoted  above.  It  can  be  argued  whether  it  was  really  prudent
to  view  this  decision  as  separable  from  the  "combat  troops"  issue  (which  also
were  being  considered  nominally,  at  least,  for  training,  not  necessarily  combat).
But  obviously  the  President  was  sold  on  their  going,  and  since  the  Vietnamese
Special  Forces  were  themselves  supported  by  CIA  rather  than  the  regular  mili-
tary aid  program,  it  was  possible  to  handle  these  troops  covertly.  In  any  event,
althought  there  would  eventually  be  1200  Green  Berets  in  Vietnam  (before  the
first  commitment  of  U.S.  combat  units)  they  were  apparently  never  cited  as  a
precedent  for  or  a  commitment  to  a  more  overt  role  in  the  war.

These,  then,  were  the  measures  relating  to  military  commitments  undertaken
as  a  result  of  the  April/May  review.  The  principle  objective  of  these  measures
(together  with  the  non-military  elements  of  the  program)  as  stated  in  the  Task
Force  report,  and  formally  adopted  in  the  NSAM,  was  "to  prevent  Communist
domination  of  Vietnam."  There  was  no  uncertainty  about  why  these  steps  were
taken:  quite  aside  from  the  Administration's  strong  feelings  that  we  had  to
deal  with  the  challenge  of  wars  of  national  liberation,  the  program  adopted
seems  quite  minimal  as  a  response  to  what  was — even  after  the  cease-fire  was
confirmed — a  serious  setback  in  Laos.  No  one  in  the  government,  and  no  one
of  substantial  influence  outside  it,  questioned  the  need  for  some  action  to  hold
things  together  in  Southeast  Asia.

For  the  fact  was  that  our  stake  in  Vietnam  had  increased  because  of  what
had  been  happening  in  Laos,  quite  aside  from  anything  that  we  did  or  said.  Col-
lapse in  Vietnam  would  be  worse  after  Laos  than  it  might  have  seemed  before.
And  to  do  nothing  after  Laos  would  not  really  have  made  the  U.S.  look  better
if  Vietnam  fell;  it  would  only  have  increased  the  likelihood  both  that  that  would
happen,  and  greatly  increased  the  extent  to  which  the  U.S.  (and  within  U.S.
politics,  the  Kennedy  Administration)  would  be  blamed  for  the  collapse.

The  Laotian  situation  did  not  even  provide,  then,  a  precedent  for  seeking  to
settle  the  Vietnamese  situation  through  the  same  coalition  government  route.
For  in  Laos,  the  pro-U.S.  faction  was  plainly  being  defeated  militarily  in  open
battle  despite  a  good  deal  of  U.S.  aid.  The  only  U.S.  alternative  to  accepting
the  coalition  solution  was  to  take  over  the  war  ourselves.  Further,  there  was  a
strong  neutralist  faction  in  Laos,  which  could  provide  a  premier  for  the  govern-
ment and  at  least  a  veneer  of  hope  that  the  settlement  might  be  something
more  than  a  face-saving  way  of  handing  the  country  over  to  the  communist
faction.

Neither  of  these  conditions  held  for  Vietnam,  as  de  from  all  the  other  factors
reviewed  in  the  introduction  to  this  paper  which  left  the  Administration  no
realistic  option  in  the  neutralist  direction,  even  assuming  that  there  was  any
temptation  at  that  time  to  move  in  that  direction.  To  have  simply  given  up  on
Vietnam  at  that  point,  before  any  major  effort  had  been  attempted  to  at  least
see  if  the  situation  could  be  saved  at  reasonable  cost,  seems  to  have  been,  even
with  the  hindsight  we  now  have,  essentially  out  of  the  question.

That  is  why,  in  the  context  of  the  time,  the  commitments  Kennedy  actually
made  seem  like  a  near-minimal  response  which  avoided  any  real  deepening  of
our  stake  in  Vietnam.

There  is  far  more  of  a  problem  with  the  things  that  we  decided  to  talk  about
(troops,  and  a  formal  treaty  with  Vietnam)  than  with  the  measures  Kennedy
fully  endorsed.  Certainly  putting  troops  into  Vietnam  would  increase  our
stake  in  the  outcome,  rather  than  merely  help  protect  the  stake  we  already  had.


52 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

So,  surely,  would  a  formal  treaty,  even  if  the  treaty  nominally  required  U.S.
support  only  in  the  case  of  overt  invasion.  How  much  so  would  depend  on  the
nature  of  the  troop  commitments  and  the  nature  of  the  treaty.  But,  as  we  will
see  in  the  next  chapter  (in  reviewing  Vice  President  Johnson's  visit)  Diem
turned  out  to  want  neither  troops  nor  a  treaty  for  the  time  being.  And  so  these
issues  were  deferred  until  the  fall.

Aside  from  questions  relating  to  our  commitments  to  Vietnam,  there  were
also  the  parallel  questions  relating  to  our  commitment,  if  any,  to  Diem.  As
noted  in  the  introduction,  discussions  about  Vietnam  always  had  this  dual
aspect,  and  this  part  of  the  problem  was  treated  with  increasing  explicitness  as
time  went  on  (and  as  the  Administration  got  to  know  Diem  better).  In  the  CIP,
it  was  treated  essentially  by  implication.  In  the  Gilpatric  Lansdale  draft  of
April  26,  it  was  also  handled  that  way:  no  explicit  statement  of  a  change  in  our
relations  with  Diem  was  offered,  although  by  implication  it  was  there.

Where  the  CIP  (by  implication)  saw  our  increased  aid  as  contingent  on
Diem's  performance,  the  April  26  program  left  out  any  suggestion  of  a  quid  pro
quo.  To  the  contrary,  it  simply  states  that  "those  portions  of  the  plan  which  are
agreed  to  by  the  G.V.N,  will  be  implemented  as  rapidly  as  possible."

And  where  the  CIP  saw  Diem's  government  as  our  best  hope  "at  the  pres-
ent time"  this  note  of  limited  commitment  to  Diem  is  dropped  in  the  April  26
draft.  Instead  we  have  a  bland  statement  that  we  will  "assist  the  GVN  under
President  Diem  to  develop  within  the  country  the  widest  consensus  of  public
J  ipport  for  a  government  dedicated  to  resisting  communist  domination."  [em-
phasis added]

The  May  3  State  draft  and  the  May  6  final  draft  dealt  with  this  issue  much  as
they  had  with  the  questions  of  military  commitments:  that  is,  these  did  not  so
much  conspicuously  weaken  the  proposals  of  the  Gilpatric /Lansdale  version,
as  to  qualify  and  elaborate  on  them  in  ways  that  in  effect  (again,  we  cannot
make  a  statement  on  intent)  left  the  President  a  ready  option  to  reconsider  his
position.  State  explicitly  asserted  that  we  were  changing  our  policy  on  Diem,
and  spelled  out  some  reasons  for  doing  so.

Here  are  some  extracts  from  the  May  6  final  draft;  (the  language  is  essentially
the  same  in  the  May  3  draft) .

...  we  must  continue  to  work  through  the  present  Vietnamese  govern-
ment despite  its  acknowledged  weakness.  No  other  remotely  feasible  al-
ternative exists  at  this  point  in  time  which  does  not  involve  an  unaccept-
able degree  of  risk.  .  .  .  Diem  is  not  now  fully  confident  of  United  States
support.  This  confidence  has  been  undermined  partly  by  our  vigorous  ef-
forts to  get  him  to  mend  his  ways,  and  partly  by  the  equivocal  attitude  he
is  convinced  we  took  at  the  time  of  the  November  11,  1960,  attempted
coup.  It  is  essential  that  President  Diem's  full  confidence  in  and  communi-
cation with  the  United  States  be  restored  promptly  .  .  .  Given  Diem's
personality  and  character  and  the  abrasive  nature  of  our  recent  relation-
ships, success  or  failure  in  this  regard  will  depend  very  heavily  on  Ambas-
sador Nolting's  ability  to  get  on  the  same  wavelength  with  Diem  .  .  .

The  chief  threat  to  the  viability  of  President  Diem's  administration  is,
without  a  doubt,  the  fact  of  communist  insurgency  and  the  government's
inability  to  protect  its  own  people.  Thus  military  measures  must  have  the
highest  priority.  There  is,  nevertheless,  strong  discontent  with  the  govern-
ment among  not  only  the  elite  but  among  peasants,  labor,  and  business.
Criticism  focuses  on  the  dynastic  aspects  of  the  Diem  rule,  on  its  clandes-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  53

tine  political  apparatus,  and  on  the  methods  through  which  the  President
exercises  his  leadership.  This  is  aggravated  by  Communist  attempts  to  dis-
credit the  President  and  weaken  his  government's  authority.  AH  this  is
made  the  easier  because  of  a  communications  void  existing  between  the
government  and  the  people.  For  many  months  United  States  efforts  have
been  directed  toward  persuading  Diem  to  adopt  political,  social,  and  eco-
nomic changes  designed  to  correct  this  serious  defect.  Many  of  these  changes
are  included  in  the  Counterinsurgency  Plan.  Our  success  has  been  only
partial.  There  are  those  who  consider  that  Diem  will  not  succeed  in  the
battle  to  win  men's  minds  in  Vietnam.

Thus  in  giving  priority  emphasis  to  the  need  for  internal  security,  we
must  not  relax  in  our  efforts  to  persuade  Diem  of  the  need  for  political
social  and  economic  progress.  If  his  efforts  are  inadequate  in  this  field  our
overall  objective  could  be  seriously  endangered  and  we  might  once  more
find  ourselves  in  the  position  of  shoring  a  leader  who  had  lost  the  support
of  his  people.

Although  the  paper  expresses  the  hope  that  through  "very  astute  dealings"
("a  combination  of  positive  inducements  plus  points  at  which  discreet  pressure
can  be  exercised")  Diem  could  be  successfully  worked  with,  the  net  effect  of  the
State  draft  is  hardly  enthusiastic.  The  paper  tells  the  President  that  his  Task
Force  "believes"  that  the  policy  will  work.  But  it  is  a  large  order:  for  the  aim
had  been  referred  to  as  nothing  less  than  "a  major  alteration  in  the  present
government  structure  or  in  its  objectives."

In  effect,  the  silence  on  Diem  in  the  Gilpatric/Lansdale  draft  was  replaced
by  a  detailed  statement  which,  in  the  course  of  reaffirming  the  need  to  take
prompt  steps  to  show  confidence  in  Diem,  nevertheless  leaves  the  strong  impres-
sion that  we  really  did  not  have  much  confidence  in  him  at  all.  Support  for  Diem
became  tactical:  based  explicitly  on  the  hope  that  he  might  reform,  and  im-
plicitly on  the  fact  that  trying  to  overthrow  him  would  be  terribly  risky  in  the
aftermath  of  Laos,  even  if  the  U.S.  had  someone  to  overthrow  him  with.  Fur-
ther, although  the  paper  explicitly  conceded  first  priority  to  military  needs,
there  was  a  strong  argument  that  military  efforts  alone  will  not  be  enough.

It  was  apparently  this  equivocal  attitude  toward  Diem  (aside  from  any  per-
sonal considerations)  that  led  to  Lansdale's  prediction  that  State  could  never
"win  this  battle."  Thus  in  the  main  paper  of  the  May  6  draft  the  general  polit-
ical objective  was  stated  as:

Develop  political  and  economic  conditions  which  will  create  a  solid  and
widespread  support  among  the  key  political  groups  and  the  general  popu-
lation for  a  Vietnam  which  has  the  will  to  resist  Communist  encroach-
ment and  which  in  turn  stems  from  a  stake  in  a  freer  and  more  democratic
society.

Lansdale,  in  a  pencilled  comment  to  Gilpatric,  complained:

The  elected  President  of  Vietnam  is  ignored  in  this  statement  as  the  base
to  build  upon  in  countering  the  communists.  This  will  have  the  U.S.  pitted
against  Diem  as  first  priority,  the  communists  as  second.

Nevertheless,  it  seems  that  the  May  program  went  a  very  long  way  in  Lansdale's
preferred  direction:  although  the  U.S.  was  expanding  its  contribution  to  the


54 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Vietnamese  effort  it  was  no  longer  asking  for  any  quid  pro  quo.  The  U.S.  en-
visioned "discreet  pressure"  but  certainly  not,  for  then  anv'way,  anv  hint  of
withholding  aid.  The  U.S.  flatly  asserted  that  it  saw  no  "remotely  acceptable
alternative  to  Diem,"  for  the  time  being,  any  way.  The  U.S.  thought  it  vital  that
Diem  do  better,  but  increasing  his  confidence  in  the  U.S.  had  top  priority.  The
strongest  guidance  given  the  new  Ambassador  was  to  "get  on  Diem's  wave-
length."

More  of  this  tentative  adoption  of  the  Lansdale  approach  can  be  seen  in  the
discussion  of  Vice  President  Johnson's  trip  (from  the  May  6  draft) :

The  Vice  President's  visit  will  provide  the  added  incentive  needed  to
give  the  GVN  the  motivation  and  confidence  it  needs  to  carry  on  the  strug-
gle. We  believe  that  meetings  between  the  Vice  President  and  President
Diem  will  act  as  a  catalytic  agent  to  produce  broad  agreement  on  the  need
for  accelerated  joint  Vietnamese-U.S.  actions  to  resist  Communist  en-
croachment in  SEA.  These  meetings  will  also  serve  to  get  across  to  Presi-
dent Diem  our  confidence  in  him  as  a  man  of  great  stature  and  as  one  of
the  strong  figures  in  SEA  on  whom  we  are  placing  our  reliance.  At  the
same  time,  these  conferences  should  impress  Diem  with  the  degree  of  im-
portance we  attach  to  certain  political  and  economic  reforms  in  Vietnam
which  are  an  essential  element  in  frustrating  Communist  encroachments.
Recognizing  the  difficulties  we  have  had  in  the  past  in  persuading  Diem
to  take  effective  action  on  such  reforms,  as  specific  an  understanding  as
possible  should  be  solicited  from  Diem  on  this  point.

It  was  this  sort  of  guidance  (plus,  perhaps,  a  memo  from  Lansdale  describ-
ing President  Diem  in  terms  that  bear  comparison  with  those  Jack  Valenti  would
later  use  in  connection  with  another  President)  that  accounts  for  Johnson's
famous  reference  to  Diem  as  the  Churchill  of  Asia.

In  sum,  what  emerges  from  the  final  version  of  the  report  is  a  sense  that  the
U.S.  had  decided  to  take  a  crack  at  the  Lansdale  approach  of  trying  to  win  Diem
over  with  a  strong  display  of  personal  confidence  in  him.  What  does  not  emerge
is  any  strong  sense  that  the  Administration  believed  this  new  approach  really
had  much  hope  of  working,  but  undoubtedly  this  pessimistic  reading  is  influenced
by  the  hindsight  now  available.  The  drafters  of  the  paper  very  probably  saw
themselves  as  hedging  against  the  possible  failure  of  the  policv,  rather  than  im-
plying that  it  probably  would  not  work.

If  we  go  beyond  the  paperwork,  and  ask  what  judgments  might  be  made  about
the  intent  of  the  senior  decision-makers,  and  particularly  the  President,  it
seems  that  here,  even  more  than  in  connection  with  the  military  commitments
discussed  earlier,  the  Administration  adopted  a  course  which,  whether  in  hind-
sight the  wisest  available  or  not.  probablv  seemed  to  have  no  practical  alterna-
tive.

Presumably  the  top  level  of  the  Administration  believed  there  was  at  least
some  chance  that  the  new  policv  toward  Diem  might  produce  useful  results.

But  even  to  the  extent  this  prospect  seemed  dim.  there  were  political  advan-
tages (or  at  iCast  political  risks)  avoided  in  giving  this  plan  a  trv,  and  there  must
not  have  seemed  (as  even  now  there  does  not  seem)  to  have  been  much  cost
in  doing  so.

Finally,  whatever  the  President  thought  of  the  prospects  and  political  ad-
vantages of  this  approach  to  Diem,  it  might  have  been  hard  at  that  time  to  see
anv  drasticallv  different  alternative  anvwav.  After  all,  the  heart  of  the  Laos  em-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  55

barrassment  was  that  the  U.S  was  (with  some  face-saving  cover)  dropping  an
anti-communist  leader  who  had  come  into  power  with  the  indispensable  assist-
ance of  the  U.S.  This  dropping  of  Phoumi  in  Laos  in  favor  of  support  for  the
neutralist  government  Phoumi  had  overthrown  with  U.S.  encouragement  and
assistance  remained  an  essential  part  of  whatever  outcome  developed  in  Laos.
In  the  wake  of  this  embarrassment,  the  U.S.  was  now  trying  to  reassure  other
governments  in  Southeast  Asia.  Was  it  possible  to  carry  out  this  reassurance
while  threatening  Diem,  another  anti-communist  leader  totally  dependent  on
U.S.  support,  with  withdrawal  of  our  support  (our  only  available  form  of  pres-
sure) unless  he  reformed  himself  according  to  U.S.  prescription?  Was  this  a
prudent  time  to  risk  a  coup  in  South  Vietnam,  which  was  the  widely  predicted
effect  of  any  show  of  lack  of  confidence  in  Diem?

It  is  obviously  impossible  for  us  to  strike  a  balance  among  these  reasons  (or
perhaps  some  others)  why  the  decisions  were  made  the  way  they  were.  More
interesting,  though,  is  that  it  seems  to  have  been  unnecessary  for  even  the  de-
cision-maker himself  to  strike  such  a  balance.  For  it  seems  that  whatever  his
view,  the  policy  of  trying  to  reassure  Diem  (rather  than  pressure  him,  or  dis-
sociating from  him)  seemed  like  a  sensible  tactic  for  the  moment,  and  very  pos-
sible the  only  sensible  tactic  for  that  particular  moment.

IV. FROM  MAY  TO  SEPTEMBER

At  the  end  of  September,  Admiral  Harry  Felt,  Commander-in-Chief  of  U.S.
forces  in  the  Pacific,  stopped  off  in  Saigon  on  his  way  to  a  SEATO  meeting  in
Bangkok.  Felt,  Ambassador  Nolting,  and  several  of  their  senior  aides  met  with
Diem  at  Independence  Palace,  on  the  evening  of  the  29th,  According  to  Nolt-
ing's  cable  the  following  day:

In  course  of  long  discussion  .  .  .  Diem  pointed  the  question.  He  asked
for  a  bilateral  defense  treaty  with  the  U.S.  This  rather  large  and  unex-
pected request  seemed  to  have  been  dragged  in  by  the  heels  at  the  end  of
a  far-ranging  discussion,  but  we  discovered  upon  questioning  that  it  was
seriously  intended  .  .  .

Although  the  available  record  does  not  explicitly  say  so,  this  request  pre-
sumably triggered  the  intensive  attention  to  Vietnam  planning  that  began  early
in  October  (Nolting's  cable  arrived  October  1)  and  led  to  the  decision  on  the
1 1th  to  send  the  Taylor  Mission.

The  balance  of  this  chapter  reviews  the  major  developments  between  the
Presidential  decisions  on  the  Task  Force  Report  (May  11)  and  the  arrival  of
Nolting's  cable  on  the  treaty  request  (October  1 ).

A. THE  JOHNSON  MISSION

The  available  record  tells  us  almost  nothing  about  the  Vice  President's  visit
to  Saigon  beyond  what  is  described  in  the  public  memoirs.  We  know  from
Nolting's  cables  that  Johnson  brought  up  the  possibility  of  U.S.  troops  in  Viet-
nam and  of  a  bilateral  treaty  after  Diem  (in  an  after-dinner  conversation)  began
to  talk  about  the  problems  that  communist  gains  in  Laos  would  create  for  him.
We  know  that  Diem  replied  that  he  wanted  U.S.  combat  troops  only  in  the
event  of  open  invasion  and  that  he  also  did  not  show  interest  in  a  treaty.

But  we  do  not  know  what,  if  anything,  Johnson  was  authorized  to  say  if  Diem


56 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

had  reacted  affirmatively.  And  this  could  have  ranged  anywhere  from  at-
tempting to  discourage  Diem  if  he  did  show  interest,  to  offering  some  specific
proposal  and  timetable.  No  strong  inference  can  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that
Johnson,  rather  than  Diem,  raised  the  issue.  Even  if  the  President  had  decided
against  making  troop  commitments  to  Vietnam  at  that  time,  there  would  have
been  nothing  outrageous  about  instructing  Johnson  to  refer  to  such  a  possibility
once  Diem  began  to  talk  about  his  concerns  due  to  Laos.  After  all,  the  whole
point  of  the  Johnson  mission  was  to  reassure  Diem  and  other  Asian  leaders,  that
the  U.S.  could,  despite  Laos,  be  counted  on  in  Asia.  Simply  reading  the  Ameri-
can newspapers  would  have  told  Diem  that  at  least  as  of  May  5,  the  Admin-
istration was  seriously  considering  sending  American  troops  to  Vietnam,  and
that  Johnson  was  expected  to  discuss  this  with  Diem.  A  quite  reasonable  tactical
judgment  would  have  been  that  nothing  would  have  been  more  likely  to  make
Diem  ask  for  U.S.  troops  than  for  Johnson  to  remain  eerily  silent  on  this  issue.

Consequently,  on  the  record  available,  we  can  do  no  more  than  guess  what
would  have  happened  if  Diem  reacted  affirmatively  at  the  time  of  Johnson's
visit.  The  most  reasonable  guess  is  probably  that  the  Taylor  Mission,  or  some-
thing equivalent,  would  have  been  undertaken  in  the  spring,  rather  than  in  the
fall,  and  nothing  very  much  would  have  been  different  in  the  long  run.  But
that  is  only  a  reasonable  guess.

For  the  rest,  here  are  some  extracts  from  a  report  Johnson  wrote  after  his
return.  Essentially,  Johnson  argued  for  prompt  moves  by  the  U.S.  to  show  sup-
port for  non-communist  governments  in  Southeast  Asia.  He  had  in  mind  ex-
panded conventional  military  and  economic  aid,  and  perhaps  a  new  treaty  to
replace  SEATO.  But  despite  the  shock  of  U.S.  willingness  to  accept  a  coalition
government  in  Laos,  Johnson  reported  that  U.S.  troops  were  neither  desired
nor  required.  And  although  this  might  not  always  be  the  case,  Johnson  recom-
mended that  the  U.S.  "must  remain  master  of  this  decision."

The  Impact  of  Laos

There  is  no  mistaking  the  deep — and  long  lasting — impact  of  recent
developments  in  Laos.

Country  to  country,  the  degree  differs  but  Laos  has  created  doubt  and
concern  about  intentions  of  the  United  States  throughout  Southeast  Asia.
No  amount  of  success  at  Geneva  can.  of  itself,  erase  this.  The  independent
Asians  do  not  wish  to  have  their  own  status  resolved  in  like  manner  in
Geneva.

Leaders  such  as  Diem,  Chiang,  Sarit  and  Ayub  more  or  less  accept  that
we  are  making  "the  best  of  a  bad  bargain"  at  Geneva.  Their  charity  ex-
tends no  farther.

The  Impact  of  the  Mission

Beyond  question,  vour  judgement  about  the  timing  of  our  mission  was
correct.  Each  leader — except  Nehru — publicly  congratulated  you  on  the
"timing"  of  this  mission.  Chiang  said — and  all  others  privately  concurred —
that  the  mission  had  the  effect  of  "stabilizing"  the  situation  in  the  South-
east Asian  nations.

What  happened.  I  believe,  was  this:  the  leaders  visited  want — as  long  as
they  can — to  remain  as  friends  or  allies  of  the  United  States.  The  public,  or,
more  precisely,  the  political,  reaction  to  Laos  had  drastically  weakened  the


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  57

ability  to  maintain  any  strongly  pro-US  orientation.  Neutralism  in  Thailand,
collapse  in  Vietnam,  anti-American  election  demagoguery  in  the  Philippines
were  all  developing  prior  to  our  visit.  The  show  of  strength  and  sincerity —
partly  because  you  had  sent  the  Vice  President  and  partly,  to  a  greater  extent
than  you  may  believe,  because  you  had  sent  your  sister — gave  the  friendly
leaders  something  to  "hang  their  hats  on"  for  a  while  longer.

Our  mission  arrested  the  decline  of  confidence  in  the  United  States.  It  did
not — in  my  judgment — restore  any  confidence  already  lost.  The  leaders  were
as  explicit,  as  courteous  and  courtly  as  men  could  be  in  making  it  clear  that
deeds  must  follow  words — soon.

We  didn't  buy  time — we  were  given  it.

If  these  men  I  saw  at  your  request  were  bankers,  I  would  know — without
bothering  to  ask — that  there  would  be  no  further  extensions  on  my  note.

The  Importance  of  Follow-Through

I  cannot  stress  too  strongly  the  extreme  importance  of  following  up  this
mission  with  other  measures,  other  actions,  and  other  efforts.  At  the  mo-
ment— because  of  Laos — these  nations  are  hypersensitive  to  the  possibility
of  American  hypocrisy  toward  Asia.  Considering  the  Vienna  talks  with
Khrushchev — which,  to  the  Asian  mind,  emphasize  Western  rather  than
Asian  concerns — and  considering  the  negative  line  of  various  domestic  Amer-
ican editorials  about  this  mission,  I  strongly  believe  it  is  of  first  importance
that  this  trip  bear  fruit  immediately.

Personal  Conclusions  from  the  Mission

I  took  to  Southeast  Asia  some  basic  convictions  about  the  problems  faced
there.  I  have  come  away  from  the  mission  there — and  to  India  and  Pakistan
— with  many  of  those  convictions  sharpened  and  deepened  by  what  I  saw  and
learned.  I  have  also  reached  certain  other  conclusions  which  I  believe  may
be  of  value  as  guidance  for  those  responsible  in  formulating  policies.  These
conclusions  are  as  follows:

1.  The  battle  against  Communism  must  be  joined  in  Southeast  Asia  with
strength  and  determination  to  achieve  sucess  there — or  the  United  States,
inevitably,  must  surrender  the  Pacific  and  take  up  our  defenses  on  our
own  shores.  Asian  Communism  is  compromised  and  contained  by  the
maintenance  of  free  nations  on  the  subcontinent.  Without  this  inhibitory
influence,  the  island  outposts — Philippines,  Japan,  Taiwan — have  no  se-
curity and  the  vast  Pacific  becomes  a  Red  Sea.

2.  The  struggle  is  far  from  lost  in  Southeast  Asia  and  it  is  by  no  means
inevitable  that  it  must  be  lost.  In  each  country  it  is  possible  to  build  a
sound  structure  capable  of  withstanding  and  turning  the  Communist
surge.  The  will  to  resist — while  now  the  target  of  subversive  attack — is
there.  The  key  to  what  is  done  by  Asians  in  defense  of  Southeast  Asian
freedom  is  confidence  in  the  United  States.

3.  There  is  no  alternative  to  United  States  leadership  in  Southeast  Asia.
Leadership  in  individual  countries — or  the  regional  leadership  and  co-
operation so  appealing  to  Asians — rests  on  the  knowledge  and  faith  in
United  States  power,  will  and  understanding.


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

4.  SEATO  is  not  now  and  probably  never  will  be  the  answer  because  of
British  and  French  unwillingness  to  support  decisive  action.  Asian  distrust
of  the  British  and  French  is  outspoken.  Success  at  Geneva  would  prolong
SEATO's  role.  Failure  at  Geneva  would  terminate  SEATO's  meaningful-
ness.  In  the  latter  event,  we  must  be  ready  with  a  new  approach  to  col-
lective security  in  the  area.

We  should  consider  an  alliance  of  all  the  free  nations  of  the  Pacific  and
Asia  who  are  willing  to  join  forces  in  defense  of  their  freedom.  Such  an  or-
ganization should:

a)  have  a  clear-cut  command  authority

b)  also  devote  attention  to  measures  and  programs  of  social  justice,
housing,  land  reform,  etc.

5.  Asian  leaders — at  this  time — do  not  want  American  troops  involved  in
Southeast  Asia  other  than  on  training  missions.  American  combat  troop
involvement  is  not  only  not  required,  it  is  not  desirable.  Possibly  Ameri-
cans— fail  to  appreciate  fully  the  subtletv  that  recentlv-colonial  peoples
would  not  look  with  favor  upon  governments  which  invited  or  accepted
the  return  this  soon  of  Western  troops.  To  the  extent  that  fear  of  ground
troop  involvement  dominates  our  political  responses  to  Asia  in  Congress
or  elsewhere,  it  seems  most  desirable  to  me  to  allay  those  paralyzing
fears  in  confidence,  on  the  strength  of  the  individual  statements  made  by
leaders  consulted  on  this  trip.  This  does  not  minimize  or  disregard  the
probability  that  open  attack  would  bring  calls  for  U.S.  combat  troops.
But  the  present  probability  of  open  attack  seems  scant,  and  we  might
gain  much  needed  flexibility  in  our  policies  if  the  spectre  of  combat  troop
commitment  could  be  lessened  domestically.

6.  Any  help — economic  as  well  as  military — we  give  less  developed  nations
to  secure  and  maintain  their  freedom  must  be  a  part  of  a  mutual  effort.
These  nations  cannot  be  saved  by  United  States  help  alone.  To  the  extent
the  Southeast  Asian  nations  are  prepared  to  take  the  necessary  measures
to  make  our  aid  effective,  we  can  be — and  must  be — unstinting  in  our
assistance.  It  would  be  useful  to  enunciate  more  clearly  than  we  have —
for  the  guidance  of  these  young  and  unsophisticated  nations — what  we
expect  or  require  of  them.

7.  In  large  measure,  the  greatest  danger  Southeast  Asia  offers  to  nations  like
the  United  States  is  not  the  momentary  threat  of  Communism  itself,
rather  that  danger  stems  from  hunger,  ignorance,  poverty  and  disease.
We  must — whatever  strategies  we  evolve — keep  these  enemies  the  point
of  our  attack,  and  make  imaginative  use  of  our  scientific  and  technologi-
cal capability  in  such  enterprises.

8.  Vietnam  and  Thailand  are  the  immediate — and  most  important — trouble
spots,  critical  to  the  U.S.  These  areas  require  the  attention  of  our  very
best  talents — under  the  verv  closest  Washington  direction — on  matters
economic,  military  and  political.

The  basic  decision  in  Southeast  Asia  is  here.  We  must  decide  whether  to
help  these  countries  to  the  best  of  our  ability  or  throw  in  the  towel  in  the
area  and  pull  back  our  defenses  to  San  Francisco  and  [a]  "Fortress  America"
concept.  More  important,  we  would  say  to  the  world  in  this  case  that  we


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  59

don't  live  up  to  treaties  and  don't  stand  by  our  friends.  This  is  not  my  con-
cept. I  recommend  that  we  move  forward  promptly  with  a  major  effort  to
help  these  countries  defend  themselves.  I  consider  the  key  here  is  to  get  our
best  MAAG  people  to  control,  plan,  direct  and  exact  results  from  our  mili-
tary aid  program.  In  Vietnam  and  Thailand,  we  must  move  forward  together.

a.  In  Vietnam,  Diem  is  a  complex  figure  beset  by  many  problems.  He
has  admirable  qualities,  but  he  is  remote  from  the  people,  is  surrounded  by
persons  less  admirable  and  capable  than  he.  The  country  can  be  saved — if
we  move  quickly  and  wisely.  We  must  decide  whether  to  support  Diem —
or  let  Vietnam  fall.  We  must  have  coordination  of  purpose  in  our  country
team,  diplomatic  and  military.  The  Saigon  Embassy,  USIS,  MAAG  and
related  operations  leave  much  to  be  desired.  They  should  be  brought  up  to
maximum  efficiency.  The  most  important  thing  is  imaginative,  creative,
American  management  of  our  mihtary  aid  program.  The  Vietnamese  and
our  MAAG  estimate  that  $50  million  of  U.S.  military  and  economic  assist-
ance will  be  needed  if  we  decide  to  support  Vietnam.  This  is  the  best  in-
formation available  to  us  at  the  present  time  and  if  it  is  confirmed  by  the
best  Washington  military  judgment  it  should  be  supported.  Since  you  pro-
posed and  Diem  agreed  to  a  joint  economic  mission,  it  should  be  appointed
and  proceed  forthwith.

b.  In  Thailand,  the  Thais  and  our  own  MAAG  estimate  probably  as
much  is  needed  as  in  Vietnam — about  $50  million  of  military  and  economic
assistance.  Again,  should  our  best  military  judgment  concur,  I  believe  we
should  support  such  a  program.  Sarit  is  more  strongly  and  staunchly  pro-
Western  than  many  of  his  people.  He  is  and  must  be  deeply  concerned  at
the  consequence  to  his  country  of  a  communist-controlled  Laos.  If  Sarit  is
to  stand  firm  against  neutralism,  he  must  have — soon — concrete  evidence  to
show  his  people  of  United  States  military  and  economic  support.  He  be-
lieves that  his  armed  forces  should  be  increased  to  150,000.  His  Defense
Minister  is  coming  to  Washington  to  discuss  aid  matters.


sfc  ^  4<


To  recapitulate,  these  are  the  main  impressions  I  have  brought  back  from
my  trip.

The  fundamental  decision  required  of  the  United  States — and  time  is  of
the  greatest  importance — is  whether  wc  are  to  attempt  to  meet  the  challenge
of  Communist  expansion  now  in  Southeast  Asia  by  a  major  effort  in  support
of  the  forces  of  freedom  in  the  area  or  throw  in  the  towel.  This  decision
must  be  made  in  a  full  realization  of  the  very  heavy  and  continuing  costs
involved  in  terms  of  money,  of  effort  and  of  United  States  prestige.  It  must
be  made  with  the  knowledge  that  at  some  point  we  may  be  faced  with  the
further  decision  of  whether  we  commit  major  United  States  forces  to  the
area  or  cut  our  losses  and  withdraw  should  our  other  efforts  fail.  We  must
remain  master  in  this  decision.  What  we  do  in  Southeast  Asia  should  be
part  of  a  rational  program  to  meet  the  threat  we  face  in  the  region  as  a
whole.  It  should  include  a  clear-cut  pattern  of  specific  contributions  to  be
expected  by  each  partner  according  to  his  ability  and  resources.  I  recom-
mend we  proceed  with  a  clear-cut  and  strong  program  of  action.


60 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

B. DIEM'S  JUNE  LETTER

During  his  visit  Johnson,  on  behalf  of  Kennedy,  invited  Diem  to  prepare  a
set  of  proposals  on  South  Vietnamese  military  needs  for  consideration  by  Wash-
ington. In  a  letter  May  15,  Diem  told  Kennedy  that  the  definitive  study  would
be  ready  in  a  few  weeks.  (He  appreciated  this  invitation.  Diem  told  Kennedy,
"particularly  because  we  have  not  become  accustomed  to  being  asked  for
our  own  views  on  our  needs.)"

On  June  9,  Diem  signed  the  promised  letter.  It  was  carried  to  Washington  by
a  key  Diem  aide  (Nguyen  Dinh  Thuan)  and  delivered  on  the  14th.  (Thuan
played  a  key  role  on  the  Vietnamese  side  throughout  1961.  He  was  the  man
Durbrow,  in  the  cable  quoted  in  full  earlier,  suspected  was  the  only  cabinet
member  Diem  had  told  about  the  CIP.  In  a  memo  to  Gilpatric,  Lansdale  de-
scribed him  as  Diem's  "Secretary  of  Security,  Defense,  Interior,  etc.")

In  the  letter.  Diem  proposed  an  increase  in  the  RVNAF  to  270,000  men,  or
to  double  the  150,000  strength  authorized  at  the  start  of  1961,  and  100,000
men  more  than  envisioned  under  the  CIP.  That  was  a  large  request:  for  up
until  the  end  of  April,  the  U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese  were  still  haggling  over
the  go-ahead  for  a  20,000-man  increase.  Further,  Diem  made  it  clear  that  he
saw  this  force  requirement  as  a  semi-permanent  increase  in  South  Vietnamese
strength,  which  would  continue  to  be  needed  even  should  he  eliminate  the  Viet
Cong.

Here  are  some  extracts  from  Diem's  letter:

[The]  situation  .  .  .  has  become  very  much  more  perilous  following  the
events  in  Laos,  the  more  and  more  equivocal  attitude  of  Cambodia  and  the
intensification  of  the  activities  of  aggression  of  international  communism
which  wants  to  take  the  maximum  advantage  to  accelerate  the  conquest  of
Southeast  Asia.  It  is  apparent  that  one  of  the  major  obstacles  to  the  com-
munist expansion  on  this  area  of  the  globe  is  Free  Vietnam  because  with
your  firm  support,  we  are  resolved  to  oppose  it  with  all  our  energies.
Consequently,  now  and  henceforth,  we  constitute  the  first  target  for  the
communists  to  overthrow  at  any  cost.  The  enormous  accumulation  of
Russian  war  material  in  North  Vietnam  is  aimed,  in  the  judgment  of  foreign
observers,  more  at  South  Vietnam  than  at  Laos.  We  clearlv  realize  this
dangerous  situation  but  I  want  to  reiterate  to  vou  here,  in  my  personal  name
and  in  the  name  of  the  entire  Vietnamese  people,  our  indomitable  will  to  win.

On  the  second  of  May,  mv  council  of  generals  met  to  evaluate  the  current
situation  and  to  determine  the  needs  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  to  meet
this  situation.  Their  objectiNe  evaluation  shows  that  the  military  situation
at  present  is  to  the  advantage  of  the  communists  and  that  most  of  the
Vietnamese  Armed  Forces  are  alreadv  committed  to  internal  security  and
the  protection  of  our  12  million  inhabitants.  For  many  months  the  com-
munist-inspired fratricidal  war  has  taken  nearlv  one  thousand  casualties
a  month  on  both  sides.  Documents  obtained  in  a  recent  operation,  along
route  No.  9  which  runs  from  Laos  to  Vietnam,  contain  definite  proof  that
2,860  armed  agents  have  infiltrated  among  us  in  the  course  of  the  last  four
months.*  It  is  certain  that  this  number  rises  each  day.  However,  the  Viet-

*  Diem's  number  implies  an  infiltration  rate  about  4  times  as  high  as  that  estimated
by  U.S.  intelligence  in  1961,  and  twice  as  high  as  the  hindsight  revised  1961  estimates
now  in  use.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  61

namese  people  are  showing  the  world  that  they  are  willing  to  fight  and
die  for  their  freedom,  notwithstanding  the  temptations  to  neutralism  and
its  false  promises  of  peace  being  drummed  into  their  ears  daily  by  the  com-
munists.

In  the  light  of  this  situation,  the  council  of  generals  concluded  that  addi-
tional forces  numbering  slightly  over  100,000  more  than  our  new  force  level
of  170,000  will  be  required  to  encounter  the  ominous  threat  of  communist
domination  .  .  .

After  considering  the  recommendations  of  our  generals  and  consulting  with
our  American  military  advisors,  we  now  conclude  that  to  provide  even
minimum  initial  resistance  to  the  threat,  two  new  division?  of  approxi-
mately 10,000  strength  each  are  required  to  be  activated  at  the  earliest
possible  date.  Our  lightly  held  defensive  positions  along  the  demilitarized
zone  at  our  Northern  border  is  even  today  being  outflanked  by  communist
forces  which  have  defeated  the  Royal  Laotian  Army  garrisons  in  Tchepone
and  other  cities  in  Southern  Laos.  Our  ARVN  forces  are  so  thoroughly
committed  to  internal  anti-guerrilla  operations  that  we  have  no  effective
forces  with  which  to  counter  this  threat  from  Southern  Laos.  Thus,  we
need  immediately  one  division  for  the  First  Army  Corps  and  one  for  the
Second  Army  Corps  to  provide  at  least  some  token  resistance  to  the  size-
able forces  the  communists  are  capable  of  bringing  to  bear  against  our
Laotian  frontier.  Failing  this,  we  would  have  no  recourse  but  to  withdraw
our  forces  southward  from  the  demilitarized  zone  and  sacrifice  progres-
sively greater  areas  of  our  country  to  the  communists.  These  divisions
should  be  mobilized  and  equipped,  together  with  initial  logistic  support
units,  immediately  after  completion  of  activation  of  the  presently  con-
templated increase  of  20,000  which  you  have  offered  to  support.
Following  the  activation  of  these  units,  which  should  begin  in  about  five
months,  we  must  carry  on  the  program  of  activation  of  additional  units
until  over  a  period  of  two  years  we  will  have  achieved  a  force  of  14  infantry
divisions,  an  expanded  airborne  brigade  of  approximately  division  strength
and  accompanying  (support?)  .  .  .  The  mission  of  this  total  270,000  man
force  remains  the  same,  namely,  to  overcome  the  insurgency  which  has  risen
to  the  scale  of  a  bloody,  communist-inspired  civil  war  within  our  borders
and  to  provide  initial  resistance  to  overt,  external  aggression  until  free
world  forces  under  the  SEATO  agreement  can  come  to  our  aid.  The  ques-
tion naturally  arises  as  to  how  long  we  shall  have  to  carry  the  burden  of
so  sizeable  a  military  force.  Unfortunately,  I  can  see  no  early  prospects
for  the  reduction  of  such  a  force  once  it  has  been  established;  for  even
though  we  may  be  successful  in  liquidating  the  insurgency  within  our  bor-
ders, communist  pressure  in  Southeast  Asia  and  the  external  military  threat
to  our  country  must  be  expected  to  increase,  I  fear,  before  it  diminishes.
This  means  that  we  must  be  prepared  to  maintain  a  strong  defensive  mili-
tary posture  for  at  least  the  foreseeable  future  in  order  that  we  may  not
become  one  of  the  so-called  "soft  spots"  which  traditionally  have  attracted
communist  aggression.  We  shall  therefore  continue  to  need  material  sup-
port to  maintain  this  force  whose  requirements  far  exceed  the  capacity  of
our  economy  to  support.  .  .  .

To  accomplish  this  100,000  man  expansion  of  our  military  forces,  which
is  perfectly  feasible  from  a  manpower  viewpoint,  will  require  a  great  in-
tensification of  our  training  programs  in  order  to  produce,  in  the  minimum
of  time,  those  qualified  combat  leaders  and  technical  specialists  needed


62 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

to  fill  the  new  units  and  to  provide  to  them  the  technical  and  logistic  sup-
port required  to  insure  their  complete  effectiveness.  For  this  purpose  a
considerable  expansion  of  the  United  States  Military'  Advisory  Group  is  an
essential  requirement.  Such  an  expansion,  in  the  form  of  selected  elements
of  the  American  Armed  Forces  to  establish  training  centers  for  the  Viet-
namese Armed  Forces,  would  serve  the  dual  purpose  of  providing  an  ex-
pression of  the  United  States'  determination  to  halt  the  tide  of  communist
aggression  and  of  preparing  our  forces  in  the  minimum  of  time.
While  the  Government  and  people  of  Vietnam  are  prepared  to  carr\'  the
heavy  manpower  burden  required  to  save  our  country,  we  well  know  that
we  cannot  afford  to  pay,  equip,  train  and  maintain  such  forces  as  I  have
described.  To  make  this  effort  possible,  we  would  need  to  have  assurances
that  this  needed  material  support  would  be  provided.

The  record  is  unclear  on  the  immediate  response  to  this  letter.  In  particular,
we  have  no  record  of  the  conversations  Thuan  had  in  Washington  when  he  de-
livered the  requests.  The  issue  of  the  RVNAF  increases  somehow  became  part
of  the  business  of  an  economic  mission  then  about  to  leave  for  Vietnam  (the
Staley  Mission,  discussed  in  the  following  section).  The  request  for  "selected
elements  of  the  American  Armed  Forces,"  raised  in  the  next-to-last  quoted  para-
graph, is  left  thoroughly  obscure  in  the  records  we  have — to  the  point  where
we  are  not  at  all  sure  either  what  Diem  meant  by  it  or  how  the  Administration
reacted  to  it.  But,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  section  below  on  '*U.S.  Troops,"  nothing
came  of  it.

C. THE  STALEY  MISSION

One  of  the  continuing  negotiating  items  through  most  of  1961  was  the
extent  to  which  the  South  Vietnamese  should  finance  their  own  effort.  The
U.S.  view  was  that  the  South  Vietnamese  were  not  doing  enough.  The  result
was  American  pressure  on  Diem  to  undertake  what  was  called  tax  "reform."
Diem  was  most  reluctant  to  move.  It  is  pretty  clear  that  a  large  part  of  Diem's
reluctance  to  move  flowed  from  the  same  (well-founded)  sense  of  personal
insecurity  that  made  him  avoid  establishing  a  clear  military  chain  of  command.
On  the  latter  issue,  the  risk  of  weakening  the  war  effort  obviously  struck  him
as  less  dangerous  than  the  risk  of  making  a  coup  easier  by  concentrating  mili-
tary authority  in  his  generals  instead  of  dividing  it  between  the  generals  and
the  38  province  chiefs.  Similarly,  for  a  ruler  so  unsure  of  his  hold  on  the  coun-
try, a  serious  effort  at  imposing  austeritv  looked  more  riskv  than  holding  out  for
the  Americans  to  provide  a  few  more  millions  out  of  their  vast  resources.  But
Diem,  of  course,  was  hardly  likeh  to  admit  such  reasons  to  the  Americans,  assum-
ing he  admitted  them  to  himself.  Consequentlv,  on  these  issues  (as  on  many
others)  the  record  is  a  long  storv  of  tediouslv  extracted  promises,  excuses  for
inaction,  and  American  complaints  about  Diem's  administrative  style.
On  the  economic  issue,  the  substance  of  the  argument  was  this:
The  deficit  between  what  Diem  raised  in  taxes  and  what  his  budget  reauired
was  made  up  by  the  U.S.  through  a  commercial  import  program.  The  regime
sold  the  gocds  provided  by  the  U.S.  to  South  Vietnamese  businessmen,  and
used  the  piasters  thus  acquired  mainlv  to  meet  the  local  currencv  costs  (mostly
food  and  pay)  for  the  armed  forces.  U.S.  dissatisfaction  with  the  South  Viet-
namese effort  showed  clearlv  in  the  decision  to  ask  the  South  Vietnamese  them-
selves to  provide  the  local  currencv  costs  for  the  20,000  man  force  increase


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs.  1961  63

proposed  in  the  CIP,  although  the  U.S.  had  been  paying  these  costs  (through
the  import  program)  for  the  balance  of  the  forces.  The  South  Vietnamese  in-
sisted, for  the  outset,  that  they  could  not  raise  the  piasters  required.

The  basic  question  of  whether  the  South  Vietnamese  were  bearing  a  reason-
able share  of  the  burden  devolved  into  a  number  of  technical  issues,  such  as
the  effect  of  the  program  on  inflation  in  South  Vietnam,  and  the  piaster /dollar
exchange  rate.  The  Gilpatric  Lansdale  draft  of  the  Task  Force  Report  proposed
that  Diem  be  flatly  assured  that  the  U.S.  would  make  up  any  deficit  in  the  Viet-
namese budget.  But  State  objected  from  the  start  to  giving  any  such  assurance.
Instead  a  joint  commission  of  U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese  economic  experts
was  proposed  to  work  out  a  joint  program  dealing  with  these  economic  issues.
This  was  one  of  the  proposals  Vice  President  Johnson  carried  with  him  on  his
mission.  Diem  accepted  the  proposal.  And  the  U.S.  team,  headed  by  Eugene
Staley  (president  of  the  Stanford  Research  Institute)  was  dispatched  to  South
Vietnam  in  mid-June.

By  the  time  the  Staley  Mission  left,  though.  Diem  had  written  the  letter  just
quoted  asking  for  U.S.  support  for  a  large  further  increase  in  his  forces.  Staley's
group,  with  its  Vietnamese  counterpart,  found  themselves  serving  as  the  vehicle
for  the  discussions  on  force  levels.  The  report  they  issued  is  mostly  about  mili-
tary issues,  on  which  the  economists  stated  they  simplv  reflected  instructions
passed  on  by  their  respective  governments.  Here  are  some  excerpts  on  the
military  issues  (in  addition,  the  report  of  course  contained  a  discussion,  rather
vague  as  it  turned  out,  of  the  economic  issues  which  were  nominally  its  pur-
pose, and  it  also  contained  a  good  deal  of  very  fine,  vigorous  language  on  the
need  for  "crash  programs"  of  economic  and  social  developing).

Viet  Nam  is  today  under  attack  in  a  bitter,  total  struggle  which  in-
volves its  survival  as  a  free  nation.  Its  enemy,  the  Viet  Cong,  is  ruthless,
resourceful,  and  elusive.  This  enemy  is  supplied,  reinforced,  and  centrally
directed  by  the  international  Communist  apparatus  operating  through
Hanoi.  To  defeat  it  requires  the  mobilization  of  the  entire  economic,
military  psychological,  and  social  resources  of  the  country  and  vigorous
support  from  the  United  States.

The  intensified  program  which  we  recommend  our  two  countries  adopt
as  a  basis  for  mutual  actions  over  the  next  several  years  is  designed  not
just  to  hold  the  line  but  to  achieve  a  real  breakthrough.  Our  joint  efforts
must  surpass  the  critical  threshold  of  the  enemy's  resistance,  thereby  put-
ing  an  end  to  his  destructive  attacks,  and  at  the  same  time  we  must  make
a  decisive  impact  on  the  economic,  social,  and  ideological  front.

The  turn  of  events  in  Laos  has  created  further  serious  problems  with
regard  to  the  maintenance  of  the  GVN  as  a  free  and  sovereign  non-Com-
munist nation.  In  particular,  the  uncovering  of  the  Laotian-Viet  Nam
border  to  DRV  or  DRV-supported  forces  creates  a  serious  threat  of  in-
creased covert  infiltration  of  personnel,  supplies,  and  equipment  to  the
Viet  Cong.  With  such  increased  support,  the  Viet  Cong  undoubtedly  hope
to  seize  firm  military  control  of  a  geographic  area  and  announce  the  estab-
lishment therein  of  a  "rebel"  government  for  South  Viet  Nam  which  would
then  be  recognized  by  and  receive  military  support  from  the  DRV,  Com-
munist China"^  and  Soviet  Russia.  (Example:  The  present  situation  in  Laos.)

The  joint  VN-US  group  does  not  consider  itself  competent  to  make
specific  recommendations  as  to  desired  force  levels  for  the  defense  of  Viet
Nam.  They  have,  however,  after  consultation  with  their  respective  mili-


64 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

tary  authorities,  adopted  for  economic  planning  purposes  certain  estimated
strength  figures  for  the  GVN  armed  forces  under  two  alternative  assump-
tions. Alternative  A  assumes  that  the  Communist-led  insurgency  effort
remains  at  approximately  its  present  level  of  intensity  and  the  Govern-
ment of  Laos  maintains  sufficient  independence  from  the  Communist  Bloc
to  deny  authority  for  the  transit  of  DVN  or  Communist  Chinese  troops
across  its  borders.  Alternative  B  assumes  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  able  to
significantly  increase  their  insurgency  campaign  within  Viet  Nam  and  that
the  situation  in  Laos  continues  to  deteriorate  to  the  point  where  the  Com-
munists gain  de  facto  control  of  that  country.

Alternative  A  called  for  a  build-up  of  Diem's  forces  to  200,000  (vs.  170,000
then  authorized.  Alternative  B  called  for  continuing  the  build-up  to  270,000.
On  this  basis,  Kennedy  agreed  to  provide  support  for  the  increase  to  200,000.
The  200,000-man  approval  was  supposed  to  be  contingent  on  South  Vietnamese
agreement  to  a  plan  for  using  the  forces.  The  question  of  a  further  increase  to
270,000  was  deferred,  since  it  did  not  need  to  be  faced  until  the  lower  figure
was  being  approached,  sometime  late  in  1962.

A  consequence  of  the  Staley  Mission  was  the  South  Vietnamese  troop  levels
needed  little  attention  in  the  fall  review:  the  U.S.  simply  decided  to  support
the  increase  to  200,000  even  though  the  agreed  plan  for  using  the  forces  did
not  yet  exist  (as  in  May  the  U.S.  had  agreed  to  support  the  increase  to  170,000
A^hich  also,  it  will  be  recalled,  was  supposed  to  have  been  contingent  on  such
a  plan) .

A  few  points  about  the  Staley  Mission  seem  useful  to  keep  in  mind  in  re-
viewing the  fall  process:

1.  It  is  another  reminder  of  the  prevailing  (although  not  universal)  over-
optimism  of  U.S.  appraisals  of  the  Vietnam  problem.

2.  One  of  the  follow-on  actions  to  the  report  was  supposed  to  be  a  Viet-
namese announcement  of  a  program  of  social  reform.  Producing  this  piece  of
paper  (and  in  the  end  it  was  not  much  more  than  a  piece  of  paper)  took
months.  It  was  experiences  such  as  this  that  gave  questions  about  the  viability
of  the  Diem  regime  greater  prominence  in  the  fall  review  than  they  had  re-
ceived during  April  and  May.

3.  The  U.S.  was  still  continuing  to  deal  with  Diem  most  gently.  Nothing  >
more  was  asked  of  Diem  as  a  quid  pro  quo  than  that  he  finally  work  up  a  plan  )
for  the  counterinsurgency.  The  President  explicitly  accepted  the  assumptions

of  the  Joint  Plan  worked  out  by  the  Staley  Mission  and  their  Vietnamese  coun-
terparts.

This  is  from  the  formal  record  of  decision :  |

I!


Joint  Program  of  Action
With  the  Government  of
Vietnam  (Staley  Report)

August  4,  1961

The  President  agrees  with  the  three  basic  tenets  on  which  the  recom-
mendations contained  in  the  Joint  Action  Program  are  based,  namely:
a.  Security  requirements  must,  for  the  present,  be  given  first  priority.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  65

b.  Military  operations  will  not  achieve  lasting  results  unless  economic  and
social  programs  are  continued  and  accelerated.

c.  It  is  in  our  joint  interest  to  accelerate  measures  to  achieve  a  self-
sustaining  economy  and  a  free  and  peaceful  society  in  Viet-Nam.


Similar  language  was  used  at  the  time  of  the  May  decisions.  So  it  is  not  new.
It  is  only  that,  in  the  light  of  Diem's  inactivity,  the  phrases  implying  that  non-
military  efforts  are  also  important  had  come  to  sound  a  little  hollow.

D. U.S.  COMBAT  TROOPS

From  the  time  of  the  Laos  Annex  to  the  original  Gilpatric/Lansdale  draft
of  the  Task  Force  Report  (April  28).  The  record  shows  persistent  activity  on
some  level  or  other  on  the  issue  of  sending  U.S.  combat  troops  to  Vietnam.

At  the  time  of  the  Task  Force  review,  it  will  be  recalled,  Defense  recom-
mended sending  two  1600-man  combat  units  to  Vietnam  to  set  up  two  train-
ing centers  for  the  Vietnamese  in  the  highlands.  In  later  drafts  of  the  Task
Force  report,  this  proposal  was  broadened  to  consider  sending  American
troops  for  wider  purposes,  short  of  direct  combat  against  the  Viet  Cong.  But
the  proposal  was  downgraded  to  a  subject  for  study  and  was  no  longer  a  defi-
nite recommendation.

Here  is  a  summary  of  the  items  (on  the  issue  of  U.S.  combat  troops)  in  the
record  available  to  this  study  following  Kennedy's  decisions  on  the  Task  Force
Report  (May  11).

On  May  12  Vice  President  Johnson  discussed  the  question  with  Diem,  as
described  in  an  earlier  section.  This  seems  to  have  resolved  the  issue  (nega-
tively) so  far  as  Johnson  was  concerned,  and  possibly  as  far  as  President  Ken-
nedy was  concerned.  But  if  it  did,  the  President's  view  was  not  very  emphati-
cally passed  on  to  subordinate  members  of  the  Administration.  For  a  week
later,  Lansdale  sent  a  memo  to  Gilpatrick  noting  that  Diem  did  not  want  U.S.
combat  units  as  such,  but  that  he  might  accept  these  units  if  they  had  a  mission
of  training  South  Vietnamese  forces:

Ambassador  Nolting  [saidl  that  President  Diem  would  welcome  as
many  U.S.  military  personnel  as  needed  for  training  and  advising  Viet-
namese forces  [MAAG  Chiefl  General  McGarr,  who  was  also  present
at  this  discussion  [between  Johnson  and  Diem],  reported  that  while  Presi-
dent Diem  would  not  want  U.S.  combat  forces  for  the  purpose  of  fighting
Communists  in  South  Vietnam,  he  would  accept  deployment  of  U.S.
combat  forces  as  trainers  for  the  Vietnamese  forces  at  any  time.

This  language  leaves  it  unclear  whether  McGarr  was  merely  stating  his
opinion  (which  supported  his  own  desire  to  bring  in  U.S.  combat  units),  or
reporting  what  he  understood  Diem  to  have  said.

(About  the  same  day  of  Lansdale's  memo — May  18 — the  JCS  had  re-
stated its  recommendation  of  May  10  that  combat  troops  should  be  sent
to  Vietnam;  and  McGarr,  from  Saigon,  had  recommended  sending  a
16,000  man  force,  or  if  Diem  would  not  accept  that,  a  10,000  man  force
with  the  nominal  mission  of  establishing  training  centers  for  the  Viet-


66 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

namese.  The  similar  recommendation  made  in  the  Task  Force  drafts  had
suggested  3200  men  for  the  force.)

In  any  event,  Lansdale's  memo  makes  it  quite  clear  that  he  (along  with
McGarr  and  the  JCS)  were  primarily  interested  in  getting  U.S.  combat  units
into  Vietnam,  with  the  training  mission  a  possible  device  for  getting  Diem  to
accept  them.  After  a  discussion  of  JCS  and  CINCPAC  planning  and  of  alterna-
tive locations  for  the  troops,  Lansdale  comments:

.  .  .  any  of  the  above  locations  have  good  areas  for  training  of  Viet-
namese forces,  if  this  were  to  be  a  mission  of  the  U.S.  forces.

In  the  available  papers,  no  one  at  this  time  talked  about  using  American
units  to  directly  fight  the  Viet  Cong.  Rather  it  was  mainly  in  terms  of  relieving
Vietnamese  units  to  undertake  offensive  action.  We  can  only  guess  what  people
were  really  thinking.  As  the  training-the-Vietnamese  rationale  seems  essentially
a  device  for  getting  Diem  to  accept  the  units,  the  non-combatant  role  for  U.S.
troops  may  have  been  (and  probably  was  in  the  minds  of  at  least  some  of  the
planners)  mainly  a  device  for  calming  those  members  of  the  Administration
who  were  reluctant  to  involve  American  units  in  fighting  the  Viet  Cong.  Cer-
tainly in  hindsight,  it  seems  most  unrealistic  to  suppose  that  American  combat
units  could  have  been  stationed  in  a  center  of  Viet  Cong  activity  (a  number  of
papers  postulate  the  insurgents  were  attempting  to  establish  a  "liberated  area"
in  the  high  plateau,  which  was  the  principal  local  discussed)  without  them-
selves becoming  involved  in  the  fighting.

Lansdale  concluded  his  memo  bv  reminding  Gilpatric  that  Diem  was  sending
Thuan  ("Secretary  of  Security,  Defense,  Interior,  etc.")  to  Washington  to
deliver  his  letter  on  Vietnam's  "definitive  military  needs."  Lansdale  recom-
mended that  Gilpatric  take  up  the  question  of  whether  Diem  would  accept  U.S.
troops  with  Thuan.  "With  concrete  information,  you  will  then  have  a  firm
position  for  further  decisions."

But  apparently  someone  did  not  want  to  wait  for  Thuan.  For  on  May  27,
Nolting  reported  that  he  had  brought  up  the  question  of  what  Diem  meant
in  his  conversation  with  Johnson  directly  with  Diem,  and  that  Diem  did  not  then
want  U.S.  combat  units  "for  this  or  anv  other  reason."

Nevertheless,  on  June  9,  Diem  signed  the  letter  to  Kennedy  that,  as  quoted
above,  asked  for:

.  .  .  selected  elements  of  the  American  Armed  Forces  to  establish  train-
ing centers  for  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces,  .  .  .

a  move  which  Diem  stated :

.  .  .  would  serve  the  dual  purpose  of  providing  an  expression  of  the
United  States'  determination  to  halt  the  tide  of  communist  aggression  and
of  preparing  our  forces  in  the  minimum  of  time.

This  certainly  sounded  verv  much  like  the  recommendation  of  the  Task  Force
draft,  or  McGarr's  later  expanded  version  of  that  proposal;  particularly  since
Diem  explicitlv  stated  that  he  had  McGarr's  advice  in  drafting  the  proposals.  But
where  the  American  proposals  were  for  training  whole  South  Vietnamese
divisions,  Diem  said  the  training  centers  would  be  for  combat  leaders  and  tech-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  67

nical  specialists.  Consequently,  it  seems  that  Diem  did  not  have  the  same  thing
in  mind  in  referring  to  "selected  elements  of  the  American  Armed  Forces"  as
did  McGarr  and  others  interested  in  bringing  in  American  combat  units.  It
may  be  that  Diem  agreed  to  put  in  this  request  that  sounded  like  what  McGarr
wanted  as  a  concession  to  the  Americans  in  return  for  support  of  the  large
increase  in  the  RVNAF  he  was  asking.

Presumably  this  was  clarified  during  the  discussions  Thuan  had  after  deliver-
ing the  letter.  But,  as  noted  earlier,  we  have  no  record  of  the  conversations.  In
any  event,  nothing  came  of  the  proposal.

(A  summary  of  Diem's  letter,  cabled  to  the  American  mission  in  Saigon  the
day  after  the  letter  was  received  in  Washington,  did  not  use  the  phrase  "selected
elements  of  the  American  Armed  Forces."  Instead  it  said  that  Diem  asked
for  an  increase  of  "American  personnel"  to  establish  the  training  centers.  The
crucial  issue,  of  course,  was  whether  Americans  would  be  sent  to  Vietnam  in
the  form  of  organized  combat  units,  capable  of,  if  not  explicitly  intended,  for
conducting  combat  operations.  We  do  not  know  whether  the  wording  of  the
summary  reflected  Thuan's  clarification  of  the  proposal  when  he  arrived  in
Washington,  or  a  high  level  Administration  decision  to  interpret  Diem's  letter
as  not  asking  for  combat  units,  or  merely  sloppy  drafting  of  the  cable.)

It  seems  clear  that  either  Diem  (despite  the  language  of  the  letter  he  signed)
really  did  not  want  American  units,  or  that  Kennedy  (despite  the  activity  of  his
subordinates)  did  not  want  to  send  those  units,  or  both.

Sorenson,  in  his  memoir,  says  that  in  May  Kennedy  decided  against  sending
combat  units  despite  the  recommendations  he  received  at  the  time  of  the  Task
Force  Report.  But  his  account  of  the  Task  Force  is  in  error  on  a  number  of
details,  and  so  it  is  hard  to  know  how  much  to  credit  his  recollection.

But  there  is  a  final  item  apparently  from  this  period  that  seems  to  support
Sorenson.  It  is  a  handwritten  undated  note  on  a  piece  of  scratch  paper  from
Rostow  to  McNamara.  It  looks  like  a  note  passed  at  a  meeting.  From  its  location
in  the  file,  it  was  probably  written  about  June  5,  that  is,  a  few  days  before  Thuan
arrived  with  Diem's  letter.  It  reads:


Bob:

We  must  think  of  the  kind  of  forces  and  missions  for  Thailand  now,
Vietnam  later.

We  need  a  guerrilla  deterrence  operation  in  Thailand's  northeast.
We  shall  need  forces  to  support  a  counter-guerrilla  war  in  Vietnam:

aircraft
helicopters

communications  men
special  forces
militia  teachers
etc.

WWR


Two  things  are  striking  about  this  note:  first,  it  is  a  quite  exact  description
of  the  sort  of  military  assistance  Kennedy  finally  dispatched  to  Vietnam  (i.e.,
combat  support  and  advisors  but  not  American  units  capable  of  independent
combat  against  the  guerrillas).  Second,  it  certainly  suggests  that  despite  what


68 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Lansdale,  McGarr,  and  others  were  doing,  those  close  to  the  President  were  not
at  this  time  thinking  about  sending  American  combat  units  to  Vietnam  for  any
American  forces,  for  even  the  units  Rostow  hsts  are  for  "later"  in  contrast  to
"Thailand  now").  Nevertheless  on  July  20,  McGarr  again  raised  the  question  of
combat  units  for  training  with  Diem,  and  reported  again  that  he  did  not  want
them.

In  general,  we  seem  to  be  seeing  here  a  pattern  that  first  began  to  emerge  in
the  handling  of  the  Task  Force  Report  and  which  will  be  even  more  strikingly
evident  in  the  President's  handling  of  the  Taylor  Report.

Someone  or  other  is  frequently  promoting  the  idea  of  sending  U.S.  com.bat
units.  Kennedy  never  makes  a  clear-cut  decision  but  some  way  or  other  action
is  always  deferred  on  any  move  that  would  probably  lead  to  engagements  on
the  ground  between  American  units  and  the  Viet  Cong.

We  have  no  unambiguous  basis  for  judging  just  what  had  really  happened  in
each  case.  But  we  do  see  a  similar  pattern  at  least  twice  and  possibly  three  dif-
ferent times:  in  May,  perhaps  again  in  June  (depending  on  details  of  Thuan's
talks  in  Washington  not  available  to  this  study),  and  as  we  will  report  shortly,
again  in  November.  In  each  case,  the  record  seems  to  be  moving  toward  a
decision  to  send  troops,  or  at  least  to  a  Presidential  decision  that,  in  principal,
troops  should  be  sent  if  Diem  can  be  persuaded  to  accept  them.  But  no  such
decision  is  ever  reached.  The  record  never  shows  the  President  himself  as  the
controlling  figure.  In  June,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  record  of  what
lappened,  at  least  in  the  files  available  to  this  studv.  In  May  and,  as  we  will
see,  in  November,  the  President  conveniently  receives  a  revised  draft  of  the
recommendations  which  no  longer  requires  him  to  commit  himself.

No  reliable  inference  can  be  drawn  from  this  about  how  Kennedy  would
have  behaved  in  1965  and  beyond  had  he  lived.  (One  of  those  who  had  advised
retaining  freedom  of  action  on  the  issue  of  sending  U.S.  combat  troops  was
Lyndon  Johnson.)  It  does  not  prove  that  Kennedy  behaved  soundly  in  1961.
Many  people  will  think  so;  but  others  will  argue  that  the  most  difficult  problem
of  recent  years  might  have  been  avoided  if  the  U.S.  had  made  a  hard  commit-
ment on  the  ground  in  South  Vietnam  in  1961.

E. THE  TREA  TY  REQUEST

As  to  Diem,  we  have,  of  course,  even  less  in  the  way  of  a  record  from  which
to  judge  what  he  really  thought  he  was  doing.  But  it  is  not  hard  to  understand
why  he  should  be  reluctant  to  accept  U.S.  combat  troops.  His  stated  reason
was  always  that  sending  U.S.  combat  units  would  signal  the  end  of  the  Geneva
Accords.  But  this  explanation  explains  little.  Diem  thought  the  Geneva  Accords
were  betrayal  of  Vietnam  in  1954,  and  a  farce,  freely  violated  by  the  commu-
nists, later.  Consequentlv,  he  would  be  concerned  about  their  demise  only  if
North  Vietnam  could  use  this  as  a  pretext  for  an  overt  invasion.  But  North
Vietnam  had  long  had  a  suitable  pretext  for  an  invasion  in  Diem's  refusal  to
discuss  the  elections  called  for  under  the  Geneva  Accords.  Diem's  shield  was  the
threat  of  U.S.  intervention,  not  the  Geneva  Accords,  and  it  is  mighty  hard  to  see
how  this  shield  could  he  weakened  bv  putting  American  troops  on  the  ground
in  South  Vietnam.

But  there  were  other  reasons  for  Diem  to  be  wary  of  U.S.  troops.  For  one
thing,  not  even  Diem's  severest  critics  questioned  his  commitment  to  Viet-
namese nationalism.  The  idea  of  inviting  foreign  troops  back  into  Vietnam  must
surely  have  been  distasteful  even  once  he  decided  it  was  unavoidable.  Further,


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  69

the  presence  of  American  troops  in  Vietnam  had  a  very  ambivalent  effect  on
the  risk  to  Diem  of  a  military  coup.  To  the  extent  American  troops  increased
the  sense  of  security,  they  would  lessen  the  likelihood  of  a  coup,  which  the
military  rationalized  mainly  on  the  grounds  that  they  could  not  win  the  war
under  Diem.  But  the  larger  the  American  military  presence  in  the  country,
the  more  Diem  would  have  to  worry  about  American  ability  and  temptation  to
encourage  a  coup  if  Diem  incurred  American  displeasure.

The  net  impact  of  these  conflicting  effects  would  depend  on  the  security
situation  in  Vietnam.  If  Diem  felt  strong,  he  would  probably  not  want  American
troops;  if  he  felt  weak,  he  might  see  no  choice  but  to  risk  inviting  the  Ameri-
cans in.  Even  at  the  time  of  the  Taylor  mission,  we  will  see  Diem  is  most  erratic
on  this  issue.

Against  this  background,  it  is  easy  to  understand  why  Diem,  when  the
situation  got  worse  in  September,  should  have  "pointed  the  question"  at
whether  the  U.S.  would  give  him  a  treaty,  rather  than  whether  the  U.S.  would
send  in  troops.  As  far  as  we  can  see,  he  was  mostly  concerned  about  what  the
latest  VC  attacks  were  doing  to  confidence  in  his  regime,  rather  than  any  fear
that  the  VC,  still  estimated  at  fewer  than  20,000  strong,  were  going  to  defeat
the  quarter  million  regulars  and  auxiliaries  in  his  own  forces.  What  he  probably
wanted  was  an  unambiguous  public  commitment  that  the  Americans  would  not
let  Vietnam  fall.  For  this  would  meet  his  immediate  concern  about  confidence
in  his  regime,  perhaps  even  more  effectively  than  the  dispatch  of  American
troops,  and  without  the  disadvantages  that  would  come  with  accepting  American
troops.  For  Diem,  a  clear-cut  treaty  probably  seemed  the  best  possible  combin-
ation of  maximizing  the  American  commitment  while  minimizing  American
leverage.  And  that,  of  course,  would  help  explain  why  the  Administration  was
not  terribly  attracted  to  such  a  proposal.

F. THE  SITU  A  TION  IN  SEPTEMBER

So  far  as  the  available  record  shows,  there  was  no  sense  of  imminent  crisis
in  the  official  reporting  to  Washington  as  fall  of  1961  began.  An  NIE  published
in  mid-August  concluded  that  Diem  faced  a  "prolonged  and  difficult  struggle"
against  the  insurgency,  and  noted  that  "the  French  with  their  memories  of  the
Indochina  that  was  and  the  British  with  their  experience  in  Malaya  tend  to  be
pessimistic  regarding  GVN  prospects  for  combating  the  insurgency."  But  the
NIE  also  reported  that  Diem's  army  had  been  performing  better  in  1961  than
in  1960.  Warning  of  possible  trouble  looked  months,  rather  than  weeks,  ahead.
The  danger  foreseen  was  a  coup:  "if  the  fight  againrt  the  Viet  Cong  goes  poorly
during  the  next  year  or  the  South  Vietnamese  Army  suffers  heavy  casualties,
the  chances  of  a  military  coup  would  substantially  increase."

The  judgment  of  the  NIE  on  the  effects  of  such  a  coup  was  entirely  negative:

If  there  is  a  serious  disruption  of  GVN  leadership  as  a  result  of  Diem's
death  or  as  the  result  of  a  military  coup,  any  momentum  of  GVN's  counter-
insurgency  efforts  had  achieved  will  be  halted  or  reversed,  at  least  for  a
time.  The  confusion  and  suspicion  attending  a  coup  effort  could  provide
the  communists  with  an  opportunity  to  seize  control  of  the  government.

There  is  no  mention  of  any  offsetting  hope  for  a  coup  leading  to  more
effective  prosecution  of  the  war.  The  overall  impression  left  by  the  NIE  is
that  Diem  is  not  a  very  effective  leader,  but  that  he  is  getting  along  well  enough


70 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

to  make  the  risks  of  a  coup  look  more  dangerous  than  the  risks  of  the  war  being
unwinnable  under  his  leadership.  In  particular,  a  coup  (or  Diem's  death)  were
seen  as  the  only  thing  that  could  bring  a  quick  collapse  of  the  Saigon  regime,
as  opposed  to  the  loss  over  time  of  a  "prolonged  and  difficult"  struggle.

MAAG  Chief  McGarr,  in  a  report  dated  September  1,  spoke  of  the
"enhanced  sense  of  urgency  and  offensive  spirit  now  present  within  both  the
RVNAF  and  the  Government  of  Vietnam  .  .  ."  Under  the  heading  "Outlook
for  Next  Year,"  he  reported:

With  the  increased  effectiveness  of  the  Armed  Forces  beginning  to  be
demonstrated  by  the  recent  operations  in  the  Delta  Region  and  the  mani-
fest intent  of  the  U.S.  to  continue  and  even  step  up  its  vital  support  of
the  Vietnamese  in  their  struggle  against  Communism,  there  is  a  spirit  of
renewed  confidence  beginning  to  permeate  the  people,  the  GVN,  and  the
Armed  Forces.

The  political  reporting  from  Saigon  was  less  optimistic.  Generally,  these
reports  argued  that  Diem  was  not  doing  much  to  strengthen  his  support.  But
there  was  no  disagreement  with  McGarr's  fairlv  optimistic  assessment  of  the
military  situation  and  no  sense  of  crisis.

Through  unofficial  channels,  though,  the  White  House  was  receiving  a  far
bleaker  view  of  the  situation.  Schlesinger  reports:

"The  situation  gets  worse  almost  week  by  week,"  Theodore  H.  White
wrote  us  in  August.  ".  .  .  The  guerrillas  now  control  almost  all  the
southern  delta — so  much  so  that  I  could  find  no  American  who  would
drive  me  outside  Saigon  in  his  car  even  by  day  without  military  convoy."
He  reported  a  "political  breakdown  of  formidable  proportions:  .  .  .  what
perplexes  hell  out  of  me  is  that  the  Commies,  on  their  side,  seem  to  be
able  to  find  people  willing  to  die  for  their  cause  ...  I  find  it  discouraging
to  spend  a  night  in  a  Saigon  night-club  full  of  young  fellows  of  20  and  25
dancing  and  jitterbugging  (they  are  called  1a  jeunesse  cowboy')  while
twenty  miles  away  their  Communist  contemporaries  are  terrorizing  the
countryside."  An  old  China  hand,  ^^^^ite  was  reminded  of  Chungking  in
the  Second  World  War,  complete  with  Madame  Nhu  in  the  role  of  Madame
Chiang  Kai-shek.  "If  a  defeat  in  South  Vietnam  is  to  be  considered  our
defeat,  if  we  are  responsible  for  holding  that  area,  then  we  must  have
authority  to  act.  And  that  means  intervention  in  Vietnam  politics  .  .  .
If  we  do  decide  so  to  intervene,  have  we  the  proper  personnel,  the  proper
instruments,  the  proper  clarity  of  objectives  to  intervene  successfully?"

It  did  not  take  long  to  confirm  White's  pessimism,  although  this  must  have
made  the  dilemma  of  what  to  do  about  it  seem  all  the  more  acute.  In
September,  the  number  of  VC  attacks  jumped  to  nearly  triple  the  level  (about
450  vs.  150)  that  had  prevailed  for  some  months  previously.  The  most  spec-
tacular attack,  which  seems  to  have  had  a  shattering  effect  in  Saigon,  was  the
seizure  of  Phuoc  Thanh,  a  provincial  capital  only  55  miles  from  Saigon.  The
insurgents  held  the  town  a  good  part  of  the  day,  publicly  beheaded  Diem's
province  chief,  and  departed  before  government  troops  arrived.  The  official
reporting  to  Washington  by  the  end  of  the  month  pictured  the  situation  as
stagnating,  if  not  dangerously  deteriorating,  although  there  continued  to  be  no
sense  of  the  imminent  crisis  that  Theodore  White  foresaw.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  71

Here  is  an  end-of-month  report  that  Nolting  sent  just  prior  to  the  meeting
at  which  Diem  asked  for  the  treaty:

Status  report  on  political  items  as  of  Sept.  28:

General :  Governmental  and  civil  situation  at  end  of  month  much  same  as
at  beginning.  While  neither  of  these  gave  open  signs  of  deterioration,  Diem
government  did  not  significantly  improve  its  political  position  among
people  or  substantially  further  national  unity.  On  positive  side  several  fifty-
man  district  level  reconstruction  teams  were  sent  to  each  of  4  provinces,
and  there  was  commendable  amount  country-side  travel  by  ministers.  On
other  hand,  report  was  received  of  high-level  bickering  over  powers
and  authority  of  new  central  intelligence  organization,  and  Diem  expressed
dissatisfaction  with  pace  of  field  command's  planning  of  counter-insurgency
operations,  but  he  has  still  not  delegated  sufficient  authority  to  field  com-
mand. All  in  all  we  unable  report  that  Sept.  saw  progress  toward  attain-
ment task  force  goals  of  creating  viable  and  increasingly  democratic
society.  Some  such  "shot  in  arm"  as  proposed  joint  communique  seems
desirable.

Series  large  scale  VC  attacks  in  various  areas  central  Vietnam  during
month  highlighted  increased  VC  infiltrations  through  Laos  and  under-
scored urgency  of  free  world  policy  toward  Laos  which  would  bring  this
situation  under  control.  These  VC  actions  plus  temporary  VC  seizure  of
provincial  capital  of  Phuoc  Thanh  demonstrated  that  tide  not  yet  turned
in  guerrilla  war  .  .  .

The  "shot  in  the  arm"  Nolting  referred  to  was  the  communique  on  social  re-
forms that  was  agreed  to  some  weeks  earlier  at  the  time  of  the  Staley  Mission;
it  would  finally  be  issued,  in  a  watered  down  form,  early  in  January.  The  con-
trast between  White's  and  Nolting's  reporting  is  sharp:  White  obviously  would
not  have  seen  the  issuing  of  a  communique  as  a  significant  "shot  in  the  arm,"
or  commented  on  the  VC  show  of  strength  in  such  mild  terms  as  demonstrating
"that  tide  not  yet  turned."  Consequently,  although  Diem's  request  for  a  treaty
[Doc.  911  (a  day  after  this  cable  was  sent)  surprised  Nolting,  its  effect  at  the
White  House  was  presumably  to  confirm  the  warning  that  had  already  been
received  through  White.

The  State  Department's  view  of  the  situation  seems  also  to  have  been  graver
than  that  of  the  Embassy  in  Saigon.  We  have  a  situation  summary  on  South-
east Asia  that  refers  to  Nolting's  cable  but  not  to  Diem's  treaty  request,  and
which  consequently  must  have  been  distributed  about  October  1.  On  the  polit-
ical situation  in  South  Vietnam,  the  summary  quotes  Nolting's  "no  progress"
comments.  But  the  military  situation  is  described  more  bleakly  than  Nolting
did.

SOUTH  VIET-NAM— MILITARY

1.  Although  GVN  military  capabilities  have  increased,  Viet  Cong  cap-
abilities are  increasing  at  more  rapid  rate  and  Viet  Cong  attacks  have
increased  in  size.

2.  Viet  Cong  "regular"  forces  have  increased  from  about  7,000  at  begin-
ning of  year  to  approximately  17,000.

3.  Viet  Cong  have  moved  from  stage  of  small  hands  to  large  units.
During  September  Viet  Cong  mounted  three  attacks  with  over  1,000  men


72 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

in  each.  Viet  Cong  strategy  may  be  directed  at  "liberating"  an  area  in
which  a  "government"  could  be  installed.

4.  Although  vast  majority  of  Viet  Cong  troops  are  of  local  origin,  the
infiltration  of  Viet  Cong  cadres  from  North  Viet-Nam  via  Laos,  the  de-
militarized zone,  and  by  sea  appears  to  be  increasing.  However,  there  is
little  evidence  of  major  supplies  from  outside  sources,  most  arms  apparently
being  captured  or  stolen  from  GVN  forces  or  from  the  French  during  the
Indo-China  war.

On  Laos,  the  situation  summary  showed  no  such  pessimism.  But,  overall  the
absence  of  bad  news  from  Laos  only  added  to  the  worry  about  South  Vietnam.
For  the  paper  reported:

There  probably  have  been  some  Viet  Minh  withdrawals  from  northern
Laos  but  Viet  Minh  movement  into  Southern  Laos  bordering  on  South
Vietnam  has  increased.  Thus  it  appears  enemy  may  be  accepting  stalemate
for  time  being  within  Laos  and  giving  priority  to  stepping  up  offensive  action
against  South  Vietnam.

Two  final  items  are  worth  bearing  in  mind  in  trving  to  see  the  Vietnamese
problem  as  it  might  have  appeared  to  the  White  House  in  the  fall  of  1961.
First,  this  warning  of  the  effect  of  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam,  from  the  August  15
NIE  quoted  earlier:

International  Attitudes.  In  providing  the  GVN  a  maximum  of  encour-
agement and  extensive  support  in  its  struggle  against  the  Communists,
the  US  will  inevitably  become  identified  with  the  GVN's  success  or  failure.
The  US  will  be  under  heavy  pressure  from  other  members  of  the  non-
Communist  world,  many  of  whom  view  the  Vietnam  struggle  in  differing
terms.  For  example,  the  neighboring  countries,  such  as  Thailand,  Cam-
bodia, Burma,  Indonesia,  the  Philippines,  and  Nationalist  China,  have  all
to  some  extent  viewed  developments  in  Laos  as  a  gauge  of  US  willingness
and  ability  to  help  an  anti-Communist  Asian  government  stand  against  a
Communist  "national  liberation"  campaign.  They  will  almost  certainly
look  upon  the  struggle  for  Vietnam  as  a  critical  test  of  such  US  willing-
ness and  ability.  All  of  them,  including  the  neutrals,  would  probably  suffer
demoralization  and  loss  of  confidence  in  their  prospects  for  maintaining
their  independence  if  the  Communists  were  to  gain  control  of  South  Viet-
nam. This  loss  of  confidence  might  even  extend  to  India.

Second,  a  couple  of  newspaper  quotes  mav  serve  as  a  reminder  of  the  extent  to  '
which  the  Kennedv  Administration  had  been  under  a  constant  sense  of  foreign  '
policy  crisis  throughout  its  first  vear,  with  every  evidence  of  more  to  come.  In  1
late  September,  in  a  review  piece  on  Congressional  appraisals  of  Kennedy's
first  year,  Russell  Baker  comments  that  not  even  Congress  seems  much  inter-
ested in  debate  about  Kennedy's  effectiveness  in  pushing  through  legislation:

What  makes  it  particularh  irrelevant  this  autumn  is  that  Congress  itself
has  been  far  more  concerned  ever  since  January  with  the  President's  per-
formance as  guardian  of  the  national  security  than  with  how  he  came  out
as  chief  warrior  for  a  legislative  program.

From  Laos  to  Cuba  to  Vienna  to  Berlin  to  the  Soviet  nuclear  testing


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  73

site  at  Semipalatinsk  to  New  York's  East  River,  crisis  after  crisis  has
fallen  across  the  White  House  with  a  rapidity  and  gravity  that  has  absorbed
Mr.  Kennedy's  energy  since  his  inauguration  and  reduced  the  Congressional
program  to  secondary  importance.

And  a  couple  of  days  later,  James  Reston,  describing  the  imminent  risk  of  a
nuclear  crisis  over  Berlin,  reported:

Specifically,  Khrushchev  told  one  of  Mr.  Kennedy's  political  emissaries
that  once  Krushchev  signs  a  separate  peace  treaty  with  the  Communist
East  Germans,  not  only  all  of  the  West's  rights  in  Berlin  will  cease,  but
all  traffic  to  Berlin  will  cease  until  the  West  negotiates  new  rights  of  access
with  the  East  German  regime.

Khrushchev  was  questioned  minutely  on  this  key  point.  His  reply  was
unequivocal:  Not  one  truck,  or  barge,  or  train,  or  plane  would  leave  from
West  Germany  for  West  Berlin  after  the  separate  peace  treaty  until  the
new  arrangements  with  the  East  Germans  were  negotiated.

Now,  this  is  not  precisely  the  same  as  Mr.  Gromyko's  bland  assurances.
This  is  blockade,  and  blockade  is  an  act  of  war.  Washington  has  made
clear  that  it  is  not  going  to  get  stirred  up  if  the  East  Germans  merely  re-
place the  Russians  on  the  borders  between  East  and  West  Germany  and
approve  the  flow  of  adequate  supplies.  But  Mr.  Khrushchev  did  not  support
this  procedure,  and  went  on  to  threaten  that  any  effort  to  break  his  block-
ade by  force  would  lead  to  war.

Since  Khrushchev  had  repeatedly  pledged  to  sign  the  East  German  treaty  by
the  end  of  the  year,  the  showdown  was  not  far  off.

V. THE  FALL  DECISIONS-I

A . THE  DECISION  TO  SEND  TA  YLOR

As  of  early  October,  there  were  several  proposals  for  more  active  intervention
in  Southeast  Asia  on  the  table.  One  was  the  JCS-favored  plan  to  intervene  on  the
ground  in  Laos  to  seize  and  hold  major  portions  of  the  country,  principally  to
protect  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam  and  Thailand.  A  second  plan  (referred  to
in  a  staff  paper  as  the  "Rostow  proposal")  would  have  put  a  SEATO  force  of
about  25,000  men  into  Vietnam  to  try  to  mount  a  guard  on  the  Vietnam/Laos
border  between  the  DMZ  and  Cambodia.  Finally,  there  were  various  schemes,
dating  from  the  Task  Force  review,  for  putting  a  U.S.  force  into  the  highlands,  or
at  DaNang  with  or  without  a  nominal  mission  of  training  South  Vietnamese
troops.

Except  for  the  Rostow  proposal  all  these  plans  pre-dated  the  spurt  of  Viet
Cong  activity  in  September  and  Diem's  subsequent  request  for  a  treaty.  The
record  does  not  tell  when  and  why  the  Rostow  proposal  was  drawn  up.  It  was
probably  a  direct  response  to  Diem's  request,  but  it  may  have  been  simply  a  part
of  the  on-going  Laos  contingency  planning.  In  any  event,  Rostow's  proposal  was
submitted  to  the  ICS  for  Comment  October  5.  On  the  9th,  the  JCS  responded
with  a  counter-proposal  for  a  substantial  (initially  about  20,000  men,  but
expected  to  grow)  commitment  of  U.S.  forces  in  Vietnam,  centered  on  Pleiku
in  the  highlands.


74 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

In  hindsight,  the  JCS  reasoning  in  rejecting  the  Rostow  proposal  looks
unchallengeable.  The  JCS  stated:

a.  SEATO  forces  will  be  deployed  over  a  border  of  several  hundred
miles,  and  will  be  attacked  piecemeal  or  by-passed  at  the  Viet  Cong's  own
choice.

b.  It  may  reduce  but  cannot  stop  infiltration  of  Viet  Cong  personnel  and
material.

c.  It  deploys  SEATO  forces  in  the  weakest  defense  points  should  DRV  or
CHICOM  forces  intervene.

d.  It  compounds  the  problems  of  communications  and  logistical  support.

The  Chiefs  also  argued  against  an  alternative  border  proposal  to  put  the
SEATO  force  along  the  17th  parallel.  Their  first  preference,  very  emphatically,
was  to  go  into  Laos:

As  stated  in  your  [Gilpatric's]  memorandum,  the  proposed  concept  set
forth  must  be  analyzed  in  the  total  context  of  the  defense  of  Southeast  Asia.
Any  concept  which  deals  with  the  defense  of  Southeast  Asia  that  does  not
include  all  or  a  substantial  portion  of  Laos  is,  from  a  military-  standpoint,
unsound.  To  concede  the  majoritv  of  northern  and  central  Laos  would
leave  three-quarters  of  the  border  of  Thailand  exposed  and  thus  invite  an
expansion  of  communist  military  action.  To  concede  southern  Laos  would
open  the  flanks  of  both  Thailand  and  South  Vietnam  as  well  as  expose
Cambodia.  Any  attempt  to  combat  insurgencv  in  South  Vietnam,  while
holding  areas  in  Laos  essential  to  the  defense  of  Thailand  and  South  Viet-
nam and,  at  the  same  time,  putting  troops  in  Thailand,  would  require  an
effort  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  alone  on  the  order  of  magnitude  of
at  least  three  divisions  plus  supporting  units.  This  would  require  an
additional  two  divisions  from  the  United  States.

What  is  needed  is  not  the  spreading  out  of  our  forces  throughout  South-
east Asia,  but  rather  a  concentrated  effort  in  Laos  where  a  firm  stand  can
be  taken  saving  all  or  substantially  all  of  Laos  which  would,  at  the  same
time,  protect  Thailand  and  protect  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam.

But,  if  the  Laos  plan  was  "politicallv  unacceptable  at  this  time,"  the  Chiefs
"provided"  (but  did  not  explicitlv  recommend)  "a  possible  limited  interim  course
of  action"  which  could  .  .  .

provide  a  degree  of  assistance  to  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  to
regain  control  of  its  own  territorv,  and  could  free  certain  South  Vietnamese
forces  for  ofTensive  actions  against  the  Viet  Cong.  While  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  Staff  agree  that  implementation  of  this  limited  course  of  action  would  not
provide  for  the  defense  of  Thailand  or  Laos,  nor  contribute  substantially  or
permanently  to  solution  of  the  overall  problem  of  defense  of  Southeast
Asia,  they  consider  the  Plan  preferable  to  either  of  the  two  military
possibilities  described  in  referenced  memorandum.

The  following  dav.  there  appeared  a  new  paper  called  "Concept  of  Interven-
tion in  Vietnam."*  The  paper,  according  to  a  pencilled  note  on  the  available  copy,
was  drafted  mainlv  bv  Alexis  Johnson,  who  was  then  a  Deputy  Under  Secretary
of  State.  We  know  from  a  note  William  Bundv  (then  principal  Deputy  to  Paul
Nitze,  who  was  then  Assistant  Secretarv  of  Defense,  ISA)  sent  to  McNamara


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  75

that  a  "talking  paper"  by  Johnson  was  to  be  discussed  at  a  meeting  that  included,
at  least,  Rusk  and  McNamara  on  the  afternoon  of  the  10th.  But  we  do  not  know
whether  the  draft  we  have  available  is  the  "talking  paper"  or  a  revision  put  to-
gether later  in  the  day,  after  the  meeting.

The  proposal  ("an  effort  to  arrest  and  hopefully  reverse  the  deteriorating
situation  in  Vietnam")  was  a  blend  of  Rostow's  border  force  and  the  Chiefs
"possible  limited  interim  course  of  action."  Johnson's  paper  listed  both  the  Ros-
tow  mission  of  the  force  (attempt  to  close  the  border)  and  that  of  the  Chiefs
(win  control  of  the  central  highlands):  otherwise  the  paper  followed  the  JCS
plan.  What  probably  happened,  considering  the  haste  with  which  the  paper  must
have  been  drafted,  was  that  Johnson  simply  blended  the  two  proposals  together
and  assumed  the  fine  points  could  be  worked  out  later.  For  if  the  paper  is  some-
what confusing  on  the  immediate  military  proposal,  it  is  clear  on  the  long-run
thinking  that  underlays  the  proposal.  And  this  long-run  thinking  made  the
immediate  military  mission  relatively  inconsequential,  since  as  with  the  earlier
combat-troops-for-training  proposals,  it  was  pretty  clear  that  the  main  idea  was
to  get  some  American  combat  troops  into  Vietnam,  with  the  nominal  excuse  for
doing  so  quite  secondary.

The  plan  was  described  under  the  heading  "Initial  Phase."  A  subsequent
section,  titled  "Anticipated  Later  Phases"  states:

This  initial  action  cannot  be  taken  without  accepting  as  our  real  and
ultimate  objective  the  defeat  of  the  Viet  Cong,  and  making  Vietnam  secure
in  the  hands  of  an  anti-Communist  government.  Thus  supplemental  mili-
tary action  must  be  envisaged  at  the  earliest  stage  that  is  politically  feasible.
The  ultimate  force  requirements  cannot  be  estimated  with  any  precision.
JCS  are  now  considering.  Three  divisions  would  be  a  guess  .  .  .

Earlier  the  paper,  in  a  similar  vein,  had  remarked:

While  a  satisfactory  political  settlement  in  Laos  would  considerably
reduce  Viet  Minh  infiltration  through  Laos  into  South  Vietnam,  it  would
not  entirely  eliminate  it.  While  such  a  reduction  would  materially  assist  the
GVN  in  meeting  the  Viet  Cong  threat,  there  is  no  assurance  that,  even
under  these  circumstances,  the  GVN  will  in  the  foreseeable  future  be  able
to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong.  Under  these  circumstances,  although  the  need  of
South  Vietnam  for  outside  assistance  such  as  proposed  in  this  plan  would
probably  still  be  very  strong,  it  would  be  much  more  difficult  to  find  a  politi-
cal base  upon  which  to  execute  this  plan.

This  judgment  was  probably  influenced  by  a  special  NIE  issued  October  5th,
which  stated  that  80-90%  of  the  estimated  17,000  VC  had  been  locally  recruited,
and  that  there  was  little  evidence  that  the  VC  relied  on  external  supplies.

The  relation  of  this  paper  to  Diem's  request  for  treaty  can  only  be  guessed  at.
The  paper  never  mentions  Diem,  or  any  South  Vietnamese  request  for  further
assistance.  But  the  paper  supplemented  one  published  about  a  week  or  so  earlier
(probably  prior  to  Diem's  request)  titled  "Limited  Holding  Actions  in  Southeast
Asia."  This  earlier  paper  discussed  various  steps  short  of  major  troop  deploy-
ments.

The  impression  is  that  both  papers  were  part  of  contingency  planning  (short
of  major  intervention  in  Laos)  for  saving  something  in  Southeast  Asia  should  the
Laos  negotiations  continue  to  drag  on  with  no  satisfactory  resolution.  Thus  al-


76 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

though  the  timing  of  the  Vietnam  paper  was  surely  influenced  and  probably
triggered  by  Diem's  request  for  a  treaty,  it  looks  essentially  like  a  suggestion  (but
not  a  formal  recommendation)  to  the  President  that  if  he  is  unwilling  to  inter-
vene to  try  to  save  Laos,  he  should  at  least  take  strong  and  unambiguous  action
to  make  sure  that  Vietnam  would  not  also  be  lost.  In  this  interpretation  it  is  easy
to  make  sense  of  the  emphasis  on  a  deteriorating  situation  in  Vietnam,  and  the
implied  warning  that  it  might  be  best  to  set  this  plan  in  motion  before  a  settle-
ment is  reached  in  Laos,  when  it  seemed  relatively  easy  to  provide  a  politically
plausible  basis  for  the  action.

(In  a  recent  column,  Joseph  Alsop  quoted  Averill  Harriman  as  telling  him
that  Kennedy  had  told  Harriman  to  get  whatever  settlement  he  could  on  Laos,
but  that  the  U.S.  really  intended  to  make  its  stand  in  Vietnam.)

At  the  end  of  the  Vietnam  paper  there  is  a  list  of  "Specific  Actions  to  be
Taken  Now"  which  goes  no  further  [on  Vietnam]  than  to  list:

Use  of  U.S.  naval  aircraft  and  ships  to  assist  GVN  in  interdiction  of  sea
traffic,  to  assist  self  defense  of  GVN.  This  is  to  some  extent  camouflagable.

If  necessity  arises,  use  of  U.S.  military  aircraft  for  logistic  support,  in-
cluding troop  lift  within  Laos  and  South  Vietnam.

Further,  there  is  a  long  list  of  pros  and  cons,  with  no  judgment  stated  on  the
balance.

This  (and  other  statements  to  be  cited  below)  suggests,  again,  that  the  paper
was  prepared  for  a  discussion  on  Southeast  Asia  planning  in  the  NSC,  rather
than  in  response  to  a  request  for  a  set  of  recommendations.

Three  other  points  need  to  be  mentioned:

1.  The  paper,  although  nominally  presenting  a  SEATO  plan,  explicitly  as-
sumes that  "planning  would  have  to  be  on  the  basis  of  proceeding  with  which-
ever SEATO  Allies  would  participate."

2.  The  paper  warns  (in  the  balance  of  the  paragraph  quoted  earlier)  that  the
ultimate  force  requirements  would  "much  depend"  on  the  capabilities  and  lead-
ership of  the  SEATO  forces  .  .  .  and  above  all  on  whether  the  effort  leads  to
much  more  better  fighting  by  Diem's  forces.  They  alone  can  win  in  the  end.

3.  Very  clearly  foreshadowing  the  Tavlor  mission  (and  perhaps  indicating  a
White  House  hand  in  the  drafting)  the  paper  states:

The  viability  of  this  plan  would  be  dependent  on  the  degree  to  which  it
could  and  would  also  result  in  the  GVN  accelerating  political  and  military
action  in  its  own  defense.  A  judgment  on  this  can  only  be  reached  after
thorough  exploration  on  the  spot  with  the  country  team  and  the  GVN.

Finally,  here  is  the  list  of  pros  and  cons  presented  (but  not  evaluated)  in  the
paper.

Cons

1.  The  plan  would  not  in  itself  solve  the  underlying  problem  of  ridding
SVN  of  communist  guerrillas.

2.  It  would  not  seal  off  the  borders  of  SVN  except  for  the  limited  area
of  operations.

3.  It  breaks  the  Geneva  Accords  and  puts  responsibility  on  the  U.S.  for
rationalizing  the  action  before  the  U.N.  and  the  world.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  11

4.  It  raises  questions  of  U.S.  troop  relationships  with  the  Vietnamese
peasants,  montagnards,  GVN  and  its  army.

5.  The  use  of  SEATO  forces  in  SVN  distorts  Plan  Five  [for  major  in-
tervention in  Laos]  although  these  forces  are  not  a  net  subtraction.

6.  The  risk  of  being  regarded  as  interlopers  a  la  the  French  must  be
considered.

7.  Communist  change  of  tactics  back  to  small-scale  operations  might
leave  this  force  in  a  stagnant  position.

Pros

1.  The  effect  on  GVN  morale  of  SEATO  engagement  in  their  struggle
could  be  most  heartening.

2.  It  could  prevent  the  Viet  Cong  move  to  the  next  stage  of  battaHon-
size,  formal  organization  to  challenge  the  ARVN.

3.  The  relatively  sophisticated  SEATO  arms,  air  power,  communica-
tions and  intelligence  might  spark  a  real  transformation  in  ARVN  tactics
and  action.

4.  Capitalizing  on  U.S.  intelligence  sources  now  unavailable  to  the  GVN
could  lead  to  effective  attacks  on  Viet  Cong  nerve  centers  of  command
and  communications.

5.  The  SEATO  force  commitment  could  be  used  to  get  from  Diem  a
package  of  actions  McGarr  feels  are  needed  to  step  up  the  GVN  effort
[mainly  the  familiar  items  of  clarifying  the  chain  of  command  and  estab-
lishing an  overall  plan].

6.  Introducing  SEATO  forces  would  give  us  for  the  first  time  some  bar-
gaining position  with  the  Russians  for  a  settlement  in  Vietnam.

7.  If  we  go  into  South  Vietnam  now  with  SEATO,  the  costs  would  be
much  less  than  if  we  wait  and  go  in  later,  or  lose  SVN.

The  available  record  shows  three  other  papers  prepared  prior  to  the  NSC
meeting,  October  1 1,  at  which  this  paper  was  considered:

1.  A  special  NIE  commented  on  the  plan  in  terms  that  were  a  lot  less  than
encouraging:

In  the  situation  assumed,  we  believe  that  the  DRV  would  seek  at  first  to
test  the  seriousness  and  effectiveness  of  the  SEATO  effort  by  subjecting  the
SEATO  forces  and  their  lines  of  communication  to  harassment,  ambush,
and  guerrilla  attack.  The  Communists  would  probably  estimate  that  by
using  their  Viet  Cong  apparatus  in  South  Vietnam,  and  by  committing  ex-
perienced guerrilla  forces  from  North  Vietnam  in  guerrilla  operations  in
territory  long  familiar  to  them,  and  by  exploiting  the  opportunities  offered
by  the  sizable  junk  traffic  in  coastal  waters,  they  could  severely  harass  the
SEATO  land  forces  and  penetrate  the  SEATO  blockade.  The  Communists
would  expect  worthwhile  political  and  psychological  rewards  from  suc-
cessful harassment  and  guerrilla  operations  against  SEATO  forces,  in-
cluding lowered  GVN  morale  and  increased  tensions  among  the  SEATO
members.

While  seeking  to  test  the  SEATO  forces,  the  DRV  would  probably  not
relax  its  Viet  Cong  campaign  against  the  GVN  to  any  significant  extent.
Meanwhile,  Communist  strength  in  south  Laos  would  probably  be  in-
creased by  forces  from  North  Vietnam  to  guard  against  an  effort  to  par-
tition Laos  or  an  attack  against  the  Pathet  Lao  forces.  The  Soviet  airlift


78 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

would  probably  be  increased  with  a  heavier  flow  of  military  supply  into
south  Laos,  and  the  Communists  would  probablv  intensify  their  efforts  to
establish  a  secure  route  for  motor  traffic  into  the  south.  The  establishment
of  a  coalition  government  in  Laos  under  Souvanna  Phouma  probably  would
not  significantly  reduce  Communist  infiltration  of  men  and  equipment
from  North  to  South  Vietnam  through  Laos.

If  the  Seato  action  appeared  to  be  proving  effective  in  reducing  the
present  scale  of  infiltration  the  Communist  probablv  would  increase  their
use  of  the  mountain  trail  system  through  Cambodia.  This  is  a  longer  and
more  difficult  route  but  its  use  could  keep  at  least  minimum  support  ffow-
ing  to  the  Viet  Cong.  At  the  same  time,  in  order  to  reduce  the  apparent
success  of  the  SEATO  action,  they  could  intensify  small  unit  attacks,  as-
sassinations, and  local  terrorism  in  South  Vietnam;  they  could  also  com-
mit more  DRV  irregular  personnel  for  the  harassment  of  the  SEATO
forces.  In  any  event,  the  SEATO  commitment  in  South  Vietnam  would
probably  have  to  be  continued  over  a  prolonged  period.  It  might  be  part
of  Communist  tactics  to  play  upon  possible  SEATO  weariness  over  main-
taining substantial  forces  and  accepting  losses,  in  South  Vietnam  over  a
long  period  of  time  .  .  .

The  reaction  to  the  assumed  SEATO  action  among  concerned  non-Com-
munist governments  would  vary  widely.  The  Asian  members  of  SEATO
would  find  renewed  confidence  in  the  organization  and  the  US,  if  the  plan
were  to  go  well.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  SEATO  action  were  to  become
costly,  prolonged,  or  to  involve  heavy  casualties,  the  Asian  members  would
soon  become  disenchanted  and  look  to  the  US  to  "do  something"  to  lessen
the  burden  and  to  solve  the  problem.  The  UK  and  France  would  be  likely  to
oppose  the  assumed  SEATO  action,  and  their  reluctance  to  participate
could  be  overcome  only  with  great  difficulty,  if  at  all.

In  this  instance,  and  as  we  will  see,  later,  the  Intelligence  Community's  es-
timates of  the  likely  results  of  U.S.  moves  are  conspicuously  more  pessimistic
(and  miore  realistic)  than  the  other  staff  papers  presented  to  the  President.  This
SNIE  was  based  on  an  assumption  that  the  SEATO  force  would  total  about
25,000  men.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  more  sharp  contrast  than  between  this  pa-
per, which  foresees  no  serious  impact  on  the  insurgency  from  proposed  inter-
vention, and  Supplemental  Note  2,  to  be  quoted  next.

2.  "Supplemental  Note  2"  to  the  paper,  issued  the  day  of  the  NSC  meeting,
contained,  among  other  comments,  a  JCS  estimate  of  the  size  of  the  American
force  needed  "to  clean  up  the  Viet  Cong  threat.""  It  reads:

Wider  Military  Implications.  As  the  basic  paper  indicates,  the  likelihood
of  massive  DRV  and  Chicom  intervention  cannot  be  estimated  with  pre-
cision. The  SNIE  covers  onlv  the  initial  phase  when  action  might  be  limited
to  20-25,000  men.  At  later  'stages,  when  the  JCS  estimate  that  40,000  US
forces  will  be  needed  to  clean  up  the  Viet  Cong  threat,  the  chances  of
such  massive  intervention  might  well  become  substantial,  with  the  Soviets
finding  it  a  good  opportunity  to  tie  down  major  US  forces  in  a  long  action,
perhaps  as  part  of  a  multi-prong  action  involving  Berlin  and  such  additional
areas  as  Korea  and  Iran.

Because  of  this  possibility  of  major  Bloc  intervention,  the  maximum
possible  force  needs  must  be  frankly  faced.  Assuming  present  estimates  of
about  40,000  US  forces  for  the  stated  military  objective  in  South  Vietnam,


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  79

plus  128,000  US  forces  for  meeting  North  Vietnam  and  Chicom  interven-
tion, the  drain  on  US-based  reserve  forces  could  be  on  the  order  of  3  or  4
divisions  and  other  forces  as  well.  The  impact  on  naval  capabilities  for
blockade  plans  (to  meet  Berlin)  would  also  be  major.  In  light  of  present
Berlin  contingency  plans,  and  combat  attrition,  including  scarce  items  of
equipment,  the  initiation  of  the  Vietnam  action  in  itself  should  dictate  a  step
up  in  the  present  mobilization,  possibly  of  major  proportions.

3.  Finally,  there  is  the  following  memo  from  William  Bundy  (then  acting
Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense,  ISA)  to  McNamara.  It  is  of  interest  because  it  is
the  only  piece  of  paper  available  for  this  period  that  gives  anyone's  candid
recommendations  to  his  boss,  as  opposed  to  the  more  formal  staff  papers:

Even  if  the  decision  at  tomorrow's  meeting  is  only  preliminary — to  ex-
plore with  Diem  and  the  British,  Australians,  and  New  Zealanders  would
be  my  guess — it  is  clearly  of  the  greatest  possible  importance.  Above  all,
action  must  proceed  fast.

For  what  one  man's  feel  is  worth,  mine — based  on  very  close  touch
with  Indochina  in  the  1954  war  and  civil  war  afterwards  till  Diem  took  hold
— is  that  it  is  really  now  or  never  if  we  are  to  arrest  the  gains  being  made  by
the  Viet  Cong.  Walt  Rostow  made  the  point  yesterday  that  the  Viet  Cong
are  about  to  move,  by  every  indication,  from  the  small  unit  basis  to  a  moder-
ate battalion-size  basis.  Intelligence  also  suggests  that  they  may  try  to  set  up
a  "provisional  government"  like  Xieng  Khuang  (though  less  legitimate
appearing)  in  the  very  Kontum  area  into  which  the  present  initial  plan
would  move  SEATO  forces.  If  the  Viet  Cong  movement  "blooms"  in  this
way,  it  will  almost  certainly  attract  all  the  back-the-winner  sentiment  that
understandably  prevails  in  such  cases  and  that  beat  the  French  in  early
1954  and  came  within  an  ace  of  beating  Diem  in  early  1955.

An  early  and  hard-hitting  operation  has  a  good  chance  (70%  would
be  my  guess)  of  arresting  things  and  giving  Diem  a  chance  to  do  better
and  clean  up.  Even  if  we  follow  up  hard,  on  the  lines  the  ICS  are  working
out  after  yesterday's  meeting,  however,  the  chances  are  not  much  better
that  we  will  in  fact  be  able  to  clean  up  the  situation.  It  all  depends  on
Diem's  effectiveness,  which  is  very  problematical.  The  30%  chance  is  that
we  would  wind  up  like  the  French  in  1954;  white  men  can't  win  this  kind
of  fight.

On  a  70-30  basis,  I  would  myself  favor  going  in.  But  if  we  let,  say,  a
month  go  by  before  we  move,  the  odds  will  slide  (both  short-term  shock
effect  and  long-term  chance)  down  to  60-40,  50-50  and  so  on.  Laos  under
a  Souvanna  Phouma  deal  is  more  likely  than  not  to  go  sour,  and  will  more
and  more  make  things  difficult  in  South  Viet-Nam,  which  again  under-
scores the  element  of  time.

Minutes  of  the  NSC  meeting  of  October  1 1  were  not  available  for  this  study.
But  we  have  the  following  Gilpalric  memorandum  for  the  record.  (The  JUN-
GLE JIM  squadron — 12  planes — was  an  Air  Force  unit  specially  trained  for
counterinsurgency  welfare.  Short  of  engaging  in  combat  itself,  presumably  it
would  be  used  to  train  Vietnamese  pilots) :

At  this  morning's  meeting  with  the  President  the  following  course  of  ac-
tion was  agreed  upon  with  relation  to  South  Vietnam:


80 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

1.  The  Defense  Department  is  authorized  to  send  the  Air  Force's
Jungle  Jim  Squadron  into  Vietnam  to  serve  under  the  MAAG  as  a  training
mission  and  not  for  combat  at  the  present  time.

2.  General  Maxwell  Taylor  accompanied  by  Dr.  Rostow  from  the
White  House,  General  Lansdale,  a  representative  of  JCS,  Mr.  Cottrell  from
State  and  probably  someone  from  ISA  will  leave  for  Vietnam  over  the
weekend  on  a  Presidential  mission  (to  be  announced  bv  the  President  at
this  afternoon's  press  conference  as  an  economic  survey)  to  look  into  the
feasibility  from  both  political  and  military  standpoints  of  the  following:

(a)  the  plan  for  military  intervention  discussed  at  this  morning's
meeting  on  the  basis  of  the  Vietnam  task  force  paper  entitled  "Con-
cept for  Intervention  in  Vietnam":

(b)  an  alternative  plan  for  stationing  in  Vietnam  fewer  U.S.  com-
bat forces  than  those  called  for  under  the  plan  referred  to  in  (a)
above  and  with  a  more  limited  objective  than  dealing  with  the  Viet
Cong;  in  other  words,  such  a  small  force  would  probably  go  in  at
Tourane  [DaNang]  and  possibly  another  southern  port  principally
for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a  U.S.  "presence"  in  Vietnam;

(c)  Other  alternatives  in  lieu  of  putting  any  U.S.  combat  forces  in
Vietnam,  i.e.  stepping  up  U.S.  assistance  and  training  of  Vietnam
units,  furnishing  of  more  U.S.  equipment,  particularly  helicopters
and  other  light  aircraft,  trucks  and  other  ground  transport,  etc.

3.  During  the  two  or  three  weeks  that  will  be  required  for  the  com-
pletion of  General  Taylor's  mission,  State  will  push  ahead  with  the  follow-
ing political  actions:

(a)  protest  to  the  ICC  on  the  step-up  in  North  Vietnamese  support
of  Viet  Cong  activities,

(b)  tabling  at  the  UN  a  white  paper  based  on  Mr.  William  Jordan's
report  concerning  Communist  violations  of  the  Geneva  Accords,  and

(c)  consultation  with  our  SEATO  allies,  principally  the  British
and  Australians,  regarding  SEATO  actions  in  support  of  the  deteri-
orating situation  in  Vietnam.

That  afternoon,  the  President  announced  the  Taylor  Mission,  but  he  did  not
make  the  hardly  credible  claim  that  he  was  sending  his  personal  military  advisor
to  Vietnam  to  do  an  economic  survev.  He  made  a  general  announcement,  and
was  non-committal  when  asked  whether  Tavlor  was  going  to  consider  the  need
for  combat  troops  (there  had  been  leaked  stories  in  the  newspapers  a  few  days
earlier  that  the  Administration  was  considering  such  a  move.)  Nevertheless,  the
newspaper  stories  the  next  dav  flatlv  asserted  that  the  President  had  said
Taylor  was  going  to  studv  the  need  for  U.S.  combat  troops,  which  was,  of  course,
true,  although  not  exactlv  what  the  President  had  said.

B.  THE  NEWSPAPERS  A\D  THE  CABLES

The  day  after  Kenned\"'s  announcement  of  the  Taylor  mission,  Reuters  sent
this  dispatch  from  Saigon  •


Saigon,  Vietnam.  Oct.  12  [Reuters] — South  Vietnamese  military  sources


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  81

welcomed  today  President  Kennedy's  decision  to  send  his  military  ad-
viser, General  Taylor,  here  this  week.

Sources  close  to  President  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  said  he  did  not  feel  there
was  a  need  here  yet  for  troops  of  the  United  States  or  Southeast  Asia
Treaty  Organization.

The  sources  said  the  South  Vietnamese  President  was  convinced  that
Vietnam's  Army  increased  in  size  and  better  equipped  by  increased  United
States  aid  can  defeat  the  Communists.

But  a  day  later,  the  public  position  of  the  Vietnamese  had  shifted  noticeably.
From  a  New  York  Times  dispatch  from  Saigon:

One  question  receiving  considerable  attention  here  in  the  light  of  the
Taylor  mission  is  the  desirability  of  sending  United  States  troops  to  South
Vietnam.

The  prospect  of  United  States  troop  involvement  is  understood  to  have
advanced  a  step  here  in  the  sense  that  the  South  Vietnamese  Government
is  reported  to  be  willing  to  consider  such  involvement  which  it  had  for-
merly rejected.

However,  it  is  understood  that  South  Vietnamese  deliberations  still  fall
far  short  of  the  stage  wherein  Saigon  would  be  ready  to  request  United
States  forces.

But  in  private  discussions  with  the  U.S.  ambassador.  Diem  had  turned  around
completely.  From  Nolting's  cable  [Doc.  93]:

Following  major  requests:

(1)  An  additional  squadron  of  AD-6  fighter  bombers  (in  lieu  of  pro-
grammed T-28's)  and  delivery  as  soon  as  possible.

(2)  The  sending  of  US  civilian  contract  pilots  for  helicopters  and  trans-
port plans  (C-47s),  for  "non-combat"  operations.

(3)  US  combat  unit  or  uints  to  be  introduced  into  SVN  as  "combat-
trainer  units".  Proposed  use  would  be  to  station  a  part  of  this  force  in
northern  part  of  SVN  near  17th  parallel  to  free  ARVN  forces  presently
there  for  anti-guerrilla  combat  in  high  plateau.  Thuan  also  suggested
possibility  stationing  some  US  forces  in  several  provincial  seats  in
highlands  of  central  Vietnam.

(4)  US  reaction  to  proposal  to  request  govt  Nationalist  China  to  send  one
division  of  combat  troops  for  operations  in  southwest  provinces.

* *  *

When  Thuan  raised  question  of  US  combat-trainer  units,  I  asked  specifi-
cally whether  this  was  President's  considered  request,  mentioning  his  oft-
repeated  views  re  US  combat  forces  here.  Thuan  confirmed  that  this  was
considered  request  from  President;  confirmed  that  Diem's  views  had
changed  in  light  of  worsening  situation.  Idea  was  to  have  "symbolic"  US
strength  near  17th  parallel,  which  would  serve  to  prevent  attack  there  and
free  up  GVN  forces  now  stationed  there  for  combat  operations;  Thuan
said  President  Diem  also  thought  similar  purpose  could  be  achieved  by
stationing  US  combat  units  in  several  provincial  seats  in  highlands,  thus
freeing  ARVN  guard  forces  there.  1  told  him  this  represented  major  re-
quest coming  on  heels  of  President  Diem's  request  for  bilateral  security


82 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

treaty  with  United  States.  I  asked  whether  this  request  was  in  lieu  of  the
security  treaty.  Thuan  first  said  that  it  represented  a  first  step,  which
would  be  quicker  than  a  treaty,  and  that  time  was  of  essence.  After  some
discussion  of  the  pro's  and  con's  of  a  possible  defense  treaty  (eflfect  on
SEATO,  ICC,  ratification  procedures,  etc.),  Thuan  said  he  felt  that
proposal  for  stationing  token  US  forces  in  SVN  would  satisfy  GVN  and
would  serve  the  purpose  better  than  a  mutual  defense  treaty.  (He  had  evi-
dently not  thought  through  this  nor  discussed  it  with  Diem.)

Nolting  then  indicated  he  reacted  skeptically  to  Diem's  suggestion  of  bringing
in  Chiang's  forces,  and  comments  to  Washington  that  he  thought  "this  was  a
trial  balloon  only."  He  concluded  the  cable:

The  above  questions  will  undoubtedly  be  raised  with  Gen  Taylor.  While  it
is  obvious  that  GVN  is  losing  no  opportunity  to  ask  for  additional  support
as  result  our  greater  interest  and  concern  this  area,  situation  here,  both
militarily  and  psychologically,  has  moved  in  mv  judgment  to  point  where
serious  and  prompt  consideration  should  be  given  to  these  requests.

This  cable  arrived  in  Washington  the  night  of  October  13.  The  following  day
an  unidentified  source  provided  the  New  York  Times  with  a  detailed  explana-
tion of  what  the  Taylor  Mission  was  to  do.  From  the  way  the  Times  handled
the  story  it  is  plain  that  it  came  from  a  source  authorized  to  speak  for  the  Presi-
dent, and  probably  from  the  President  himself.  The  gist  of  the  story  was  that
Taylor  was  going  to  Saigon  to  look  into  all  sorts  of  things,  one  of  which,  near
the  bottom  of  the  list,  was  the  question  of  U.S.  troops  at  some  time  in  the  in-
definite future.  Along  with  a  lot  of  more  immediate  questions  about  intelligence
and  such,  Taylor  was  expected  to  .  .  recommend  long-range  programs,
including  possible  military  actions,  but  stressing  broad  economic  and  social
measures."  Furthermore,  the  Times  was  told.

Military  leaders  at  the  Pentagon,  no  less  than  General  Taylor  himself  are
understood  to  be  reluctant  to  send  organized  U.S.  combat  units  into  South-
east  Asia.  Pentagon  plans  for  this  area  stress  the  importance  of  countering
Communist  guerrillas  with  troops  from  the  affected  countries,  perhaps
trained  and  equipped  bv  the  U.S.,  but  not  supplanted  by  U.S.  troops.

In  the  light  of  the  recommendations  quoted  throughout  this  paper,  and  partic-
ularly of  the  staff  papers  just  described  that  led  up  to  the  Taylor  Mission,  most
of  this  was  simply  untrue.  It  is  just  about  inconceivable  that  this  story  could
have  been  given  out  except  at  the  direction  of  the  President,  or  by  him  per-
sonally. It  appears,  consequentlv,  the  President  was  less  than  delighted  by  Diem's
request  for  troops.  He  mav  have  suspected,  quite  reasonably,  that  Diem's  request
was  prompted  bv  the  stories  out  of  Washington  that  Taylor  was  coming  to  dis-
cuss troops;  or  he  may  have  wished  to  put  a  quick  stop  to  expectations  (and
leaks)  that  troops  were  about  to  be  sent,  or  both.  This  does  not  mean  the  Presi-
dent had  already  decided  not  to  send  combat  units.  Presumably  he  had  not.
But  he  apparently  did  not  want  to  have  his  hands  tied.

The  Times  story  had  the  apparentlv  desired  effect.  Speculation  about  combat
troops  almost  disappeared  from  news  stories,  and  Diem  never  again  raised  the
question  of  combat  troops:  the  initiative  from  now  on  came  from  Taylor  and
Nolting,  and  their  recommendations  were  very  closely  held.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  83


C. CINCPAC  RECOMMENDS  "NOT  NOW"

On  the  way  to  Saigon,  Taylor  stopped  off  in  Hawaii  to  talk  to  Admiral  Felt  at
CINCPAC.  Felt  did  not  give  Taylor  a  flat  recommendation  on  combat  troops  at
the  time.  But  a  couple  of  days  later  he  cabled  Washington  a  list  of  pros  and
cons:

A.  Pro

(1)  Presence  of  U.S.  forces  in  SVN,  particularly  if  deployed  to  im-
portant defensive  areas  such  as  plateau  region,  would  mean  to  Communists
that  overt  aggression  against  SVN  will  involve  US  forces  from  the  outset.
This  eliminates  possibility  of  sudden  victory  by  overt  aggression  in  SVN
before  US  could  react.  This  would  settle  the  question  for  SVN,  and  SB
Asians  as  a  whole,  as  to  whether  we  would  come  to  their  help.  Further,
agreement  by  SEATO  to  principle  of  force  introduction  would  strengthen
SEATO  in  world  eyes.

(2)  Presence  of  strong  U.S.  combat  forces  will  influence  greatly  South
Vietnamese  will  to  eliminate  the  Viet  Cong.

(3)  If  we  use  U.S.  engineers  with  U.S.  military  protection  to  finish
Dakto-Ban  Net-Attapeu  Road  in  order  to  enable  US  to  operate  near  plateau
border  area,  a  military  corridor  of  sorts  will  cut  an  important  part  of  VC
pipeline  from  north.

(4)  U.S.  forces  will  make  available  larger  number  ARVN  forces  for
employment  against  VC.  RVNAF  tasks  accomplished  by  U.S.  forces  will
decrease  proportionately  certain  RVNAF  deficiencies,  particularly  in  logis-
tics, communications,  and  air  support.

(5)  U.S.  forces  in  SVN  would  tend  to  strengthen  Diem's  government
against  pro-Red  coup,  but  would  not  necessarily  preclude  non-Communist
coup  attempts.

(6)  Dividends  would  accrue  from  fact  our  troops  could  provide  variety
training  for  ARVN  forces,  broadening  base  now  provided  by  MAAG.

B.  Con

(1)  Would  stir  up  big  fuss  throughout  Asia  about  reintroduction  of
forces  of  white  colonialism  into  SE  Asia.  Little  question  that  a  propaganda
issue  will  be  made  of  this  in  all  world  forums  including  UN.

(2)  Action  could  trigger  intensification  of  Commie  aggression  against
SE  Asia.  This  may  not  be  all-out  overt  aggression,  but  could  consist,  for
example,  of  the  DRV  moving  full  blown  combat  units  through  the  moun-
tain passes  into  southern  Laos  under  excuse  that  we  initiated  invasion  of
SE  Asia  and  they  are  protecting  the  flank  of  North  Vietnam.

(3)  Politically,  presence  of  U.S.  forces  could  hasten  Commies  to  estab-
lish so  called  "representative  government"  in  South  Vietnam.

(4)  Aside  from  offering  Viet  Cong  a  political  target,  US  troops  would
constitute  provocative  military  one,  inducing  VC  to  attack/harass  it  in
manner/degree  where  issue  might  ultimately  force  American  units  active
military  campaign,  or  suffer  defensive  alternative  of  being  pot-shot  at  to
point  of  embarrassment.

(5)  Presence  of  US  troops  could  induce  Commies  to  resort  to  related
actions  such  as  introduction  of  Red  Air  Force  elements  in  North  Vietnam
and  accelerate  modernization  of  DRV  military  forces.


84 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

(6)  This  would  probably  mean  garrisoning  a  U.S.  division  in  SE  Asia
for  an  extended  period  of  time  in  same  sense  as  Army  divisions  in  Korea.
However,  circumstances  differ  from  Korea.  For  example,  nature  of  VC
warfare  such  that  US  units  cannot  remain  long  in  isolation  from  conflict
realities.  Ultimately,  they  likely  to  be  forced  into  varying  forms  of  military
engagement  with  VC  if  only  for  security  against  attacks  ranging  from
assassination/sabotage  to  tactical  harassment.  In  short,  we  should  accept
fact  that  likelihood  our  troops  becoming  combat  engaged  increases  in  pro-
portion to  duration  of  their  stay.

2.  A  summary  of  the  above  appears  to  me  to  add  up  in  favor  of  our  not
introducing  U.S.  combat  forces  until  we  have  exhausted  other  means  for
helping  Diem.

D. TAYLOR  IN  SAIGON

The  Taylor  Mission  arrived  in  Saigon  on  the  18th.  They  had  barely  arrived
when  Diem  went  before  his  National  Assembly  to  declare  that  the  increasing
gravity  of  the  Viet  Cong  threat  now  required  a  formal  proclamation  of  a  State
of  Emergency.  Diem  then  went  off  to  meet  with  the  Americans,  and  after  such
a  spectacular  opening  shot  must  have  then  astonished  his  visitors  by  indicating
that  he  did  not  want  American  combat  troops  after  all.  What  he  wanted,  he
said,  was  the  treaty,  American  support  for  larger  GVN  forces,  and  a  list  of
combat  support  items  that  nicely  paralleled  those  Rostow  listed  in  the  note  to
McNamara  quoted  earlier.  It  was  Taylor  (according  to  Nolting's  cable  516,  20
October)  who  brought  up  the  question  of  American  combat  troops.

Taylor  said  he  understood  there  had  been  recent  discussions  of  intro-
duction of  American  or  SEATO  forces  into  Viet-Nam  and  asked  why
change  had  occurred  in  earlier  GVN  attitude.  Diem  succinctly  replied
because  of  Laos  situation.  Noting  it  will  take  time  to  build  up  GVN  forces
he  pointed  to  enemy's  reinforcements  through  infiltration  and  increased
activities  in  central  Viet-Nam  and  expressed  belief  that  enemy  is  trying  to
escalate  proportionally  to  increase  in  GVN  forces  so  that  GVN  will  not
gain  advantage.  He  asked  specifically  for  tactical  aviation,  helicopter  com-
panies, coastal  patrol  forces  and  logistic  support  (ground  transport).

Diem  indicated  he  thought  there  would  be  no  particular  adverse  psycho-
logical effect  internally  from  introducing  American  forces  since  in  his
view  Vietnamese  people  regard  Communist  attack  on  Viet-Nam  as  inter-
national problem.  Rostow  inquired  whether  internal  and  external  political
aspects  such  move  could  be  helped  if  it  were  sho\\'n  clearly  to  world  that
this  is  international  problem.  Diem  gave  no  direct  comment  on  this  sug-
gestion. He  indicated  two  main  aspects  of  this  problem:  (1)  Vietnamese
people  are  worried  about  absence  formal  commitment  bv  US  to  Viet-
Nam.  They  fear  that  if  situation  deteriorates  Viet-Nam  might  be  aban-
doned by  US.  If  troops  are  introduced  without  a  formal  commitment  they
can  be  withdrawn  at  slux  time  and  thus  formal  commitment  is  even  more
important  in  psychological  sense.  (2)  Contingency  plan  should  be  prepared
re  use  American  forces  in  Viet-Nam  at  any  time  this  may  become  neces-
sary. In  this  connection  Diem  seemed  to  be  talking  about  combat  forces.
While  it  was  not  completely  clear  what  Diem  has  in  mind  at  present  time
he  seemed  to  be  saying  that  he  wants  bilateral  defense  treaty  and  prepara-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  85

tion  of  plans  for  use  American  forces  (whatever  is  appropriate)  but  under
questioning  he  did  not  repeat  his  earher  idea  relayed  to  me  by  Thuan  that
he  wanted  combat  forces.

Here,  as  earlier,  we  get  no  explicit  statement  on  Washington's  attitude  toward
a  treaty.  Further,  no  strong  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that  Taylor
took  the  initiative  in  raising  the  issue  of  troops,  since  it  might  have  been  awk-
ward not  to  mention  the  issue  at  all  after  Thuan's  presentation  to  Nolting  a
few  days  previous.

But  on  the  23rd,  we  find  this  in  a  cable  from  MAAG  Chief  McGarr:

Serious  flood  in  Mekong  delta  area  .  .  .  (worse  since  1937)  raises
possibility  that  flood  relief  could  be  justification  for  moving  in  US  military
personnel  for  humanitarian  purposes  with  subsequent  retention  if  desir-
able. Gen.  Taylor  and  Ambassador  evaluating  feasibility  and  desirability.

Taylor  met  with  Diem  and  Thuan  again  the  following  day,  the  24th.  Taylor
provided  the  Vietnamese  a  written  summary  of  items  he  described  as  "personal
ideas  to  which  I  was  seeking  their  reaction."  Item  E  was  headed  "Introduction
of  U.S.  Combat  troops."  It  proposed  "a  flood  relief  task  force,  largely  military
in  composition,  to  work  with  GVN  over  an  extended  period  of  rehabilitation  of
areas.  Such  a  force  might  contain  engineer,  medical,  signal,  and  transporta-
tion elements  as  well  as  combat  troops  for  the  protection  of  relief  operations."
Diem  now  seems  to  have  changed  his  mind  again  on  combat  troops.  Here  is  the
cable:

1.  The  essential  conclusions  which  we  have  reached  at  the  end  of  a  week
of  briefings,  consultations,  and  field  trips  follow:

A.  There  is  a  critical  political-military  situation  in  SVN  brought  on
by  western  policy  in  Laos  and  by  the  continued  build-up  of  the  VC  and
their  recent  successful  attacks.  These  circumstances  coupled  with  the
rnajor  flood  disaster  in  the  southwestern  provinces  have  combined  to  cre-
ate a  deep  and  pervasive  crisis  of  confidence  and  a  serious  loss  in  national
morale.

B.  In  the  field,  the  militarv  operations  against  the  VC  are  ineflective
because  of  the  absence  of  reliable  intelligence  on  the  enemy,  an  unclear
and  unresponsive  channel  of  command  responsibility  in  the  Armed
Forces,  and  the  tactical  immobility  of  the  VN  ground  forces.  This  im-
mobility leads  to  a  system  of  passive,  fragmented  defense  conceding
the  initiative  to  the  enemy  and  leaving  him  iree  to  pick  the  targets  of
attack.  The  harassed  population  exposed  to  these  attacks  turn  to  the
government  for  better  protection  and  the  latter  responds  by  assigning
more  static  missions  to  the  Army  units,  thus  adding  to  their  immobility.
In  the  end,  the  Army  is  allowed  neither  to  train  nor  to  fight  but  awaits
enemy  attacks  in  relative  inaction.

C.  The  situation  in  the  Saigon  is  volatile  but,  while  morale  is  down
and  complaints  against  the  government  are  rife,  there  is  not  hard  evi-
dence of  a  likely  coup  against  Diem.  He  still  has  no  visible  rival  or  re-
placement.

2.  To  cope  with  the  foregoing  situation,  we  are  considering  recom-
mending a  number  of  possible  forms  of  GVN-US  cooperation  to  reverse
the  present  downward  trend,  stimulate  an  oftensive  spirit  and  buildup


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

morale.  In  company  with  Ambassador  Nolting,  Dr.  Rostow  and  Mr.
Mendenhall,  I  discussed  some  of  these  Oct  24  with  Diem  and  Thuan.  ad-
vancing them  as  personal  ideas  to  which  I  was  seeking  their  informal
reaction.  The  following  outline,  distributed  in  French  translation  at  the
start  of  the  interview,  indicates  the  scope  of  the  discussion.

A.  Improvement  of  intelligence  on  V.C.:  the  available  intelligence
on  V.C.  insurgency  is  inadequate  both  for  tactical  requirements  and  for
basis  of  judgment  of  situation  at  governmental  levels.  A  joint  GVN-US
effort  should  be  able  to  improve  organization,  techniques  and  end
product  to  mutual  advantage  both  parties.

B.  Joint  survey  of  security  situation  at  provincial  level:  The  current
situation  can  best  be  appraised  at  provincial  level  where  the  basic  intel-
ligence is  found,  the  incidents  occur,  and  the  defenses  are  tested.  The
problems  vary  from  province  to  province  and  hence  require  local
analysis  on  the  spot.  Such  a  survey  should  result  in  better  understanding
of  such  important  matters  as  quality  of  basic  intelligence  on  V.C,  needs
of  civil  guard  and  self  defense  corps,  command  relationships  between
provincial  and  Army  officials  and  conditions  under  which  assumption
of  offensive  might  be  possible.

C.  Improvement  of  Army  mobilitv:  it  appears  that  size  of  ARVN
can  not  be  much  increased  before  end  1962;  to  make  it  more  effective
and  allowing  it  to  cope  with  increasing  number  of  V.C,  it  must  be  given
greater  mobility.  Such  mobility  can  come  from  two  sources.  (1)  moving
Army  from  static  missions  and  (2)  making  available  to  it  improved
means  of  transport,  notably  helicopters  and  light  aircraft.  Both  methods
should  be  considered.

D.  Blocking  infiltration  into  high  plateau:  increase  in  enemy  forces
in  high  plateau  requires  special  measures  for  defense  and  for  counter-
guerrilla  actions.  It  is  suggested  that  a  carefullv  tailored  "frontier  ranger
force"  be  organized  from  existing  ranger  units  and  introduced  into  the
difficult  terrain  along  the  Laos  Vietnam  frontier  for  attack  and  defense
against  the  Viet  Cong.  This  force  should  be  trained  and  equipped  for
extended  service  on  the  frontier  and  for  operations  against  the  com-
munications lines  of  the  VC  who  have  infiltrated  into  the  high  plateau
and  adjacent  areas.

E.  Introduction  of  U.S.  MilitarN'  Forces:  GVN  is  faced  with  major
civil  problem  arising  from  flood  devastation  in  western  provinces.  The
allies  should  offer  help  to  GVN  according  to  their  means.  In  the  case  of
U.S.,  two  ways  of  rendering  help  should  be  considered.  One  is  of  emer-
gency type,  such  as  offer  of  U.S.  mililar\-  helicopters  for  reconnaissance
of  conditions  of  flooded  areas  and  for  emergency  delivery  medical  sup-
plies and  like.  A  more  significant  contribution  might  be  a  flood  relief
task  force,  largelv  militar\  in  composition,  to  work  with  GVN  over  an
extended  period  for  rehabilitation  of  area.  Such  a  force  might  contain
engineer,  medical,  signal,  and  transportation  elements  as  well  as  combat
troops  for  the  protection  of  relief  operations.  Obviously,  such  a  military
source  would  also  pro\ide  U.S.  military  presence  in  Viet  Nam  and  would
constitute  militarv  reser\e  in  case  of  heightened  military  crisis.

F.  Actions  to  emphasize  national  emergencv  and  beginning  of  a  new
phase  in  the  war:  we  should  consider  jointly  all  possible  measures  to
emphasize  turning  point  has  been  reached  in  dealing  with  Communist
aggression.  Possible  actions  might  include  appeal  to  United  Nations,  an


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  87

assessment  by  GVN  of  governmental  changes  to  cope  with  crisis  and
exchange  of  letters  between  the  two  heads  of  State  expressing  their
partnership  in  a  common  cause.

3.  Dien's  reaction  on  all  points  was  favorable.  He  expressed  satisfaction
with  idea  of  introducing  U.S.  forces  in  connection  with  flood  relief  activ-
ities, observing  that  even  the  opposition  elements  in  this  crisis  had  joined
with  the  majority  in  supporting  need  for  presence  of  U.S.  forces.  In  the
course  of  the  meeting,  nothing  was  formally  proposed  or  agreed  but  the
consensus  was  that  the  points  considered  might  form  agenda  for  a  program
of  increased  GVN-US  cooperation  offering  promise  of  overcoming  many  of
the  current  difficulties  of  GVN.  There  were  no  exact  figures  discussed  with
regard  to  such  matters  as  troop  strengths,  equipment,  or  flood  relief  .  .  .

^

5.  Because  of  the  importance  of  acting  rapidly  once  we  have  made  up
our  minds,  I  will  cable  my  recommendations  to  Washington  enroute  home.

Simultaneously  with  this  cable,  Taylor  sent  a  second  "eyes  only"  for  the
President,  Chairman  of  the  JCS,  Director  of  CIA,  McNamara,  and  Rusk  and
Alexis  Johnson  at  State,  The  cable  is  a  little  confusing;  for  although  it  sets  out
to  comment  on  "U.S.  military  forces"  it  concerns  only  the  flood  Task  Force,  not
mentioning  the  various  other  types  of  military  forces  (helicopter  companies,
etc.)  which  were  envisioned.  The  same  slight  confusion  appears  in  the  "eyes
only  for  the  President"  cable  on  this  issue  to  be  quoted  shortly.  The  impression
Taylor's  choice  of  language  leaves  is  that  the  support  forces  (helicopter  com-
panies, expanded  MAAG,  etc.)  he  was  recommending  were  essentially  already
agreed  to  by  the  President  before  Taylor  left  Washington,  and  consequently  his
detailed  justification  went  only  to  the  kind  of  forces  on  which  a  decision  was
yet  to  be  made — that  is,  ground  forces  liable  to  become  involved  in  direct  en-
gagements with  the  Viet  Cong.

Here  is  the  cable  from  Saigon,  followed  by  the  two  "Eyes  only  for  the  Presi-
dent" from  the  Philippines  which  sum  up  his  "fundamental  conclusions."


FROM  SAIGON

WHITE  HOUSE  EYES  ONLY  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT
STATE  EYES  ONLY  FOR  RUSK  AND  UNDER  SECRETARY  JOHN-
SON

DEFENSE  EYES  ONLY  SECRETARY  McNAMARA
JCS  EYES  ONLY  GENERAL  LEMNITZER
FROM  GENERAL  TAYLOR


With  regard  to  the  critical  question  of  introducing  U.S.  military  forces
into  VN :

My  view  is  that  we  should  put  in  a  task  force  consisting  largely  of  logistical
troops  for  the  purpose  of  participating  in  flood  relief  and  at  the  same  time
of  providing  a  U.S.  military  presence  in  VN  capable  of  assuring  Diem  of
our  readiness  to  join  him  in  a  military  showdown  with  the  Viet  Cong  or


88 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II

Viet  Minh.  To  relate  the  introduction  of  these  troops  to  the  needs  of
flood  relief  seems  to  me  to  offer  considerable  advantages  in  VN  and
abroad.  It  gives  a  specific  humanitarian  task  as  the  prime  reason  for  the
coming  of  our  troops  and  avoids  any  suggestion  that  we  are  taking  over
responsibility  for  the  security  of  the  country.  As  the  task  is  a  specific  one,
we  can  extricate  our  troops  when  it  is  done  if  we  so  desire.  Alternatively,
we  can  phase  them  into  other  activities  if  we  wish  to  remain  longer.
The  strength  of  the  force  I  have  in  mind  on  the  order  of  6-8000  troops.
Its  initial  composition  should  be  worked  out  here  after  study  of  the  possible
requirements  and  conditions  for  its  use  and  subsequent  modifications  made
with  experience.

In  addition  to  the  logistical  component,  it  will  be  necessary  to  include  some
combat  troops  for  the  protection  of  logistical  operations  and  the  defense
of  the  area  occupied  by  U.S.  forces.  Any  troops  coming  to  VN  may  expect
to  take  casualties.

Needless  to  say,  this  kind  of  task  force  will  exercise  little  direct  influence
on  the  campaign  against  the  V.C.  It  will,  however,  give  a  much  needed  shot
in  the  arm  to  national  morale,  particularly  if  combined  with  other  actions
showing  that  a  more  effective  working  relationship  in  the  common  cause
has  been  established  between  the  GVN  and  the  U.S.


FROM  THE  PHILIPPINES

EYES  ONLY  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT  FROM  GENERAL  TAYLOR

1.  Transmitted  herewith  are  a  summarv  of  the  fundamental  conclusions
of  my  group  and  my  personal  recommendations  in  response  to  the  letter
of  the  President  to  me  dated  13  October  196 L  *  ******

2.  It  is  concluded  that:

a.  Communist  strategy  aims  to  gain  control  of  Southeast  Asia  by
methods  of  subversion  and  guerrilla  war  which  bv-pass  conventional
U.S.  and  indigenous  strength  on  the  ground.  The  interim  Communist
goal — en  route  to  total  take-over — appears  to  be  a  neutral  Southeast
Asia,  detached  from  U.S.  protection.  This  strategv  is  well  on  the  way
to  success  in  Vietnam.

b.  In  Vietnam  (and  Southeast  Asia)  there  is  a  double  crisis  in  confi-
dence: doubt  that  U.S.  is  determined  to  save  Southeast  Asia;  doubt  that
Diem's  methods  can  frustrate  and  defeat  Communist  purposes  and
methods.  The  Vietnamese  (and  Southeast  Asians)  will  undoubtedlv
draw — rightly  or  wronglv — definiti\e  conclusions  in  coming  weeks
and  months  concerning  the  probable  outcome  and  will  adjust  their
behavior  accordinglv.  What  the  U.S.  does  or  fails  to  do  will  be  decisive
to  the  end  result.

c.  Aside  from  the  morale  factor,  the  Vietnamese  Government  is
caught  in  interlocking  circles  of  bad  tactics  and  bad  administrative
arrangements  which  pin  their  forces  on  the  defensive  in  ways  which
permit  a  relativelv  small  Viet-Cong  force  (about  one-tenth  the  size  of
the  GVN  regulars)  to  create  conditions  of  frustration  and  terror  certain
to  lead  to  a  political  crisis,  if  a  positive  turning  point  is  not  soon
achieved.  The  following  recommendations  are  designed  to  achieve  that


The  Kennedy  Convnitnienrs  and  Proi^ranis,  1961  89

favorable  turn,  to  avoid  a  further  deterioration  in  the  situation  in  South
Vietnam,  and  e\entually  to  contain  and  eliminate  the  threat  to  its  inde-
pendence.

3.  It  is  recommended:
General

a.  That  upon  request  from  the  Government  of  Vietnam  (GVN)  to
come  to  its  aid  in  resisting  the  increasing  aggressions  of  the  \"iet-Cong
and  in  repairing  the  ravages  of  the  Delta  flood  which,  in  combination,
threaten  the  lives  of  its  citizens  and  the  security  of  the  country,  the  U.S.
Government  ofter  to  join  the  G\'  in  a  massive  joint  effort  as  a  part  of  a
total  mobilization  of  GVN  resources  to  cope  with  both  the  Viet-Cong
(VC)  and  the  ravages  of  the  flood.  The  U.S.  representatives  will  partici-
pate activelv  in  this  effort,  particularlv  in  the  fields  of  government  ad-
ministration, militarv  plans  and  operations,  intelligence,  and  flood  relief,
going  be\  ond  the  advisory  role  which  they  have  observed  in  the  past.

Specific

b.  That  in  support  of  the  foregoing  broad  commitment  to  a  joint
effort  with  Diem,  the  following  specific  measures  be  undertaken:

(1)  The  U.S.  Government  will  be  prepared  to  provide  individual
administrators  for  insertion  into  the  governmental  machinery  of
South  Vietnam  in  t\pes  and  numbers  to  be  worked  out  with  President
Diem.

(2)  A  joint  effort  will  be  made  to  improve  the  military-political
intelligence  svstem  beginning  at  the  provincial  level  and  extending
upward  throueh  the  government  and  armed  forces  to  the  Central
Intelligence  Organization.

C3)  The  U.S.  Government  \\\\\  engage  in  a  joint  survey  of  the
conditions  in  the  provinces  to  assess  the  social,  political,  intelligence,
and  militarv  factors  bearing  on  the  prosecution  of  the  counter-insur-
gency in  order  to  reach  a  common  estimate  of  these  factors  and  a
common  determination  of  how  to  deal  with  them.  As  this  survey  will
consume  time,  it  should  not  hold  back  the  immediate  actions  which
are  clearly  needed  regardless  of  its  outcome.

(4)  A  joint  effortVill  be  made  to  free  the  Army  for  mobile,  offen-
sive operations.  This  effort  will  be  based  upon  improving  the  training
and  equipping  of  the  Ci\il  Guard  and  the  Self-Defense  Corps,
relieving  the  Tegular  Armv  of  static  missions,  raising  the  level  of  the
mobilitv  of  Arrnv  Forces  bv  the  provision  of  considerably  more  heli-
copters and  light  aviation,  and  organizing  a  Border  Ranger  Force
for  a  lone-terrn  campaign  on  the  Laotian  border  against  the  Viet-
Cong  infiltrators.  The  U^S.  Government  will  support  this  effort  with
equipment  and  with  military  units  and  personnel  to  do  those  tasks
which  the  Armed  Forces  of  Vietnam  cannot  perform  in  time.  Such
tasks  include  air  reconnaissance  and  photography,  airlift  (beyond
the  present  capacity  of  SVN  forces),  special  intelligence,  and  air-
ground  support  techniques.


90 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

(5)  The  U.S.  Government  will  assist  the  GVN  in  effective  surveil-
lance and  control  over  the  coastal  waters  and  inland  waterways,
furnishing  such  advisors,  operating  personnel  and  small  craft  as  may
be  necessary  for  quick  and  effective  operations.

(6)  The  MAAG,  Vietnam,  will  be  reorganized  and  increased  in
size  as  may  be  necessary  by  the  implementation  of  these  recommenda-
tions.

(7)  The  U.S.  Government  will  offer  to  introduce  into  South  Viet-
nam a  military  Task  Force  to  operate  under  U.S.  control  for  the  fol-
lowing purposes:

(a)  Provide  a  U.S.  militarv  presence  capable  of  raising  national
morale  and  of  showing  to  Southeast  Asia  the  seriousness  of  the
U.S.  intent  to  resist  a  Communist  take-over.

(b)  Conduct  logistical  operations  in  support  of  military  and
flood  relief  operations.

(c)  Conduct  such  combat  operations  as  are  necessary  for  self-
defense  and  for  the  securitv  of  the  area  in  which  they  are  stationed.

(d)  Provide  an  emergenc\  reserve  to  back  up  the  Armed  Forces
of  the  GVN  in  the  case  of  a  heightened  military  crisis.

(e)  Act  as  an  advance  partv  of  such  additional  forces  as  may
be  introduced  if  CINCPAC  or  SEATO  contingency  plans  are  in-
voked.

(8)  The  U.S.  Government  will  review  its  economic  aid  program
to  take  into  account  the  needs  of  flood  relief  and  to  give  priority  to
those  projects  in  support  of  the  expanded  counterinsurgency  program.


FROM  THE  PHILIPPINES

EYES  ONLY  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT  FROM
GENERAL  TAYLOR

This  message  is  for  the  purpose  of  presenting  mv  reasons  for  recom-
mending the  introduction  of  a  U.S.  militarv  force  into  South  Vietnam
(SVN).  I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  this  is  an  essential  action
if  we  are  to  reverse  the  present  downward  trend  of  events  in  spite
of  a  full  recognition  of  the  following  disadvantages:

a.  The  strategic  reserve  of  U.S.  forces  is  presentlv  so  weak  that
we  can  ill  afford  an\  detachment  of  forces  to  a  peripheral  area  of  the
Communist  bloc  where  thev  will  be  pinned  down  for  an  uncertain  dura-
tion.

b.  Although  U.S.  prestige  is  alreadv  engaged  in  SVN,  it  will  become
more  so  bv  the  sending  of  troops.

c.  If  the  first  contingent  is  not  enough  to  accomplish  the  necessary
results,  it  will  be  difficult  to  resist  the  pressure  to  reinforce.  If  the
ultimate  result  sought  is  the  closing  of  the  frontiers  and  the  clean-up
of  the  insurgents  within  SVN.  there  is  no  limit  to  our  possible  com-
mitment (unless  we  attack  the  source  in  Hanoi).

d.  The  introduction  of  U.S.  forces  mav  increase  tensions  and  risk
escalation  into  a  major  war  in  Asia.

On  the  other  side  of  the  argument,  there  can  be  no  action  so  convincing
ot  U.S.  seriousness  of  purpose  and  hence  so  reassuring  to  the  people


The  Kennedy  Cotninitinents  and  Programs,  1961  91

and  Government  of  SVN  and  to  our  other  friends  and  allies  in  SEA  as
the  introduction  of  U.S.  forces  into  SVN.  The  views  of  indigenous  and
U.S.  officials  consulted  on  our  trip  were  unanimous  on  this  point.  I
have  just  seen  Saigon  545  to  State  and  suggest  that  it  be  read  in  con-
nection with  this  message.

The  size  of  the  U.S.  force  introduced  need  not  be  great  to  provide  the
militarv  presence  necessary  to  produce  the  desired  effect  on  national
morale  in  SVN  and  on  international  opinion.  A  bare  token,  however,
will  not  suffice;  it  must  have  a  significant  value.  The  kinds  of  tasks
which  it  might  undertake  which  would  have  a  significant  value  are  sug-
gested in  BAGU5  (previous  cable.  3.b.(7) ).  Thev  are:

(a)  Provide  a  US  militarv  presence  capable  of  raisiag  national
morale  and  of  showing  to  Southeast  Asia  the  seriousness  of  the  US
intent  to  resist  a  Communist  take-over.

(b)  Conduct  logistical  operations  in  support  of  military  and  flood
rehef  operations.

(c)  Conduct  such  combat  operations  as  are  necessarv  for  self-
defense  and  for  the  security  of  the  area  in  which  they  are  stationed.

(d)  Provide  an  emergencv  reserve  to  back  up  the  Armed  Forces  of
the  GVN  in  the  case  of  a  heightened  military  crisis.

(e)  Act  as  an  advance  partv  of  such  additional  forces  as  may  be  in-
troduced if  CINCPAC  or  SEATO  contingencv  plans  are  invoked.


It  is  noteworthy  that  this  force  is  not  proposed  to  clear  the  jungles  and
forests  of  Viet  Cong  guerrillas.  That  should  be  the  primary  task  of
the  Armed  Forces  of  Vietnam  for  which  thev  should  be  specifically  or-
ganized, trained,  and  stiffened  with  ample  U.S.  advisors  down  to  combat
battalion  levels.  However,  the  U.S.  troops  may  be  called  upon  to  engage  in
combat  to  protect  themselves,  their  working  parties,  and  the  area  in  which
they  live.  As  a  general  reserve.  the\'  might  be  thrown  into  action  (with
U.S.  agreement)  against  large,  formed  guerrilla  bands  which  have  aban-
doned the  forests  for  attacks  on  major  targets.  But  in  general,  our  forces
should  not  engage  in  small-scale  guerrilla  operations  in  the  jungle.

As  an  area"  for  the  operations  of  U.S.  troops.  SVN  is  not  an  excessively
difficult  or  unpleasant  place  to  operate.  While  the  border  areas  are  rugged
and  heavily  forested,  the  terrain  is  comparable  to  parts  of  Korea  where
U.S.  troops  learned  to  live  and  work  without  too  much  effort.  However,
these  border  areas,  for  reasons  stated  above,  are  not  the  places  to  engage
our  forces.  In  the  High  Plateau  and  in  the  coastal  plain  where  U.S.  troops
would  probably  be  stationed,  these  jungle-forest  conditions  do  not  exist  to
any  great  extent.  The  most  unpleasant  feature  in  the  coastal  areas  would  be
the  heat  and.  in  the  Delta,  the  mud  left  behind  by  the  flood.  The  High
Plateau  offers  no  particular  obstacle  to  the  stationing  of  U.S.  troops.

The  extent  to  which  the  Task  Force  would  engage  in  flood  relief  ac-
tivities in  the  Delta  will  depend  upon  further  study  of  the  problem  there.
As  reported  in  Saigon  537,  I  see  considerable  advantages  in  playing  up
this  aspect  of  the  Task  Force  mission.  I  am  presently  inclined  to  favor  a
dual  mission,  initiallv  help  to  the  flood  area  and  subsequently  use  in  any
other  area  of  SVN  where  its  resources  can  be  used  effectively  to  give  tan-
gible support  in  the  struggle  against  the  Viet  Cong.  However,  the
possibility  of  emphasizing  the  humanitarian  mission  will  wane  if  we  wait


92 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

long  in  moving  in  our  forces  or  in  linking  our  stated  purpose  with  the
emergency  conditions  created  by  the  flood.

The  risks  of  backing  into  a  major  Asian  war  by  wav  of  SVN  are  present
but  are  not  impressive.  NVN  is  extremely  \ulnerable  to  conventional
bombing,  a  weakness  which  should  be  exploited  diplomatically  in  con-
vincing Hanoi  to  lay  off  SVN.  Both  the  DRV  and  the  Chicoms  would
face  severe  logistical  difficulties  in  trying  to  maintain  strong  forces  in  the
field  in  SEA,  difficulties  which  we  share  but  by  no  means  to  the  same
degree.  There  is  no  case  for  fearing  a  mass  onslaught  of  Communist  man-
power into  SVN  and  its  neighboring  states,  particularlv  if  our  airpower  is
allowed  a  free  hand  against  logistical  targets.  Finally,  the  starvation  con-
ditions in  China  should  discourage  Communist  leaders  there  from  being
militarily  venturesome  for  some  time  to  come.

By  the  foregoing  line  of  reasoning,  I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that
the  introduction  of  a  U.S.  military  Task  Force  without  delay  offers  def-
initely more  advantage  than  it  creates  risks  and  difficulties.  In  fact,  I  do
not  believe  that  our  program  to  save  SVN  will  succeed  without  it.  If  the
concept  is  approved,  the  exact  size  and  composition  of  the  force  should
be  determined  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  in  consultation  with  the  JCS,
the  Chief  MAAG,  and  CINCPAC.  Mv  own  feeling  is  that  the  initial  size
should  not  exceed  about  8000,  of  which  a  preponderant  number  would  be
in  logistical-type  units.  After  acquiring  experience  in  operating  in  SVN,  this
initial  force  will  require  reorganization  and  adjustment  to  the  local  scene.

As  CINCPAC  will  point  out,  any  forces  committed  to  SVN  will  need  to
be  replaced  by  additional  forces  to  his  area  from  the  strategic  reserve  in
the  U.S.  Also,  any  troops  to  SVN  are  in  addition  to  those  which  may  be
required  to  execute  SEATO  Plan  5  in  Laos.  Both  facts  should  be  taken
into  account  in  current  considerations  of  the  FY  1963  budget  which  bear
upon  the  permanent  increase  which  should  be  made  in  the  U.S.  military
establishment  to  maintain  our  strategic  position  for  the  long  pull.

These  cables,  it  will  be  noticed,  are  rather  sharplv  focused  on  the  insurgency
as  a  problem  reducible  to  fairly  conventional  military  technique  and  tactics.
Together  with  the  cables  from  Saigon,  the  impression  is  given  that  the  major
needs  are  getting  the  Army  to  take  the  offensive,  building  up  a  much  better  in-
telligence setup,  and  persuading  Diem  to  loosen  up  Administrative  impediments
to  effective  use  of  his  forces.

E. The  Taylor  Report

A  report  of  the  Taylor  Mission  was  published  November  3,  in  the  form  of  a
black  loose-leaf  notebook  containing  a  letter  of  transmittal  of  more  than  routine
significance,  a  25-page  "Evaluation  and  Conclusions."  then  a  series  of  mem-
oranda by  members  of  the  mission.  Of  these,  the  most  important,  of  course,
were  the  Taylor  cables,  which,  being  '"Eves  onlv  for  the  President,"  were  deleted
from  all  but  one  or  a  \erv  few  copies  of  the  report.  There  is  no  separate  paper
from  Rostow,  and  his  views  presumablv  are  reflected  in  the  unsigned  summary
paper.

The  impression  the  "Evaluation"  paper  gives  is  more  easily  summarized  than
its  details.  For  the  impression  is  clearlv  one  of  urgencv  combined  with  optimism.
Essentially,  it  says  South  X'ietnam  is  in  serious  trouble;  major  interests  of  the


The  Kennedy  Commitments  mid  Programs,  1961  93

United  States  are  at  stake;  but  if  the  U.S.  promptly  and  energetically  takes  up
the  challenge,  a  victory  can  be  had  without  a  U.S.  take-over  of  the  war.

For  example :

Despite  the  intellectuals  who  sit  on  the  side  lines  and  complain;  despite
serious  dissidence  among  the  Montagnards,  the  sects,  and  certain  old  Viet
Minh  areas;  despite  the  apathy  and  fear  of  the  Viet-Cong  in  the  country-
side, the  atmosphere  in  South  Vietnam  is,  on  balance,  one  of  frustrated
energy  rather  than  passive  acceptance  of  inevitable  defeat.

It  cannot  be  emphasized  too  strongly,  however,  that  time  has  nearly
run  out  for  converting  these  assets  into  the  bases  for  victory.  Diem  him-
self— and  all  concerned  with  the  fate  of  the  country — are  looking
to  American  guidance  and  aid  to  achieve  a  turning  point  in  Vietnam's
affairs.  From  all  quarters  in  Southeast  Asia  the  message  on  Vietnam  is  the
same:  vigorous  American  action  is  needed  to  buy  time  for  Vietnam  to
mobilize  and  organize  its  real  assets;  but  the  time  for  such  a  turn  around
has  nearly  run  out.  And  if  Vietnam  goes,  it  will  be  exceedingly  diflficult  if
not  impossible  to  hold  Southeast  Asia.  What  will  be  lost  is  not  merely  a
crucial  piece  of  real  estate,  but  the  faith  that  the  U.S.  has  the  will  and  the
capacity  to  deal  with  the  Communist  offensive  in  that  area.

The  report,  drawing  on  the  appendices,  includes  a  wide  range  of  proposals.
[Doc.  94]  But  the  major  emphasis,  very  emphatically,  is  on  two  ideas:  First,
there  must  be  a  firm,  unambiguous  military  commitment  to  remove  doubts
about  U.S.  resolve  arising  out  of  the  Laos  negotiations;  second,  there  is  great
emphasis  on  the  idea  that  the  Diem  regime's  own  evident  weaknesses — from
"the  famous  problem  of  Diem  as  administrator"  to  the  Army's  lack  of  offensive
spirit — could  be  cured  if  enough  dedicated  Americans,  civilian  and  military,
became  involved  in  South  Vietnam  to  show  the  South  Vietnamese,  at  all  levels,
how  to  get  on  and  win  the  war.  The  much-urged  military  Task  Force,  for  ex-
ample, was  mainly  to  serve  the  first  purpose,  but  partly  also  to  serve  the  second:
"the  presence  of  American  military  forces  in  the  [flood]  area  should  also  give
us  an  opportunity  to  work  intensively  with  the  civil  guards  and  with  other  local
military  elements  and  to  explore  the  possibility  of  suffusing  them  with  an  offen-
sive spirit  and  tactics."

Here  are  a  few  extracts  which  give  the  flavor  of  the  discussion:

"It  is  evident  that  morale  in  Vietnam  will  rapidly  crumble — and  in
Southeast  Asia  only  slightly  less  quickly — if  the  sequence  of  expectations
set  in  motion  by  Vice  President  Johnson's  visit  and  climaxed  by  General
Taylor's  mission  are  not  soon  followed  by  a  hard  U.S.  commitment  to  the
ground  in  Vietnam.  [Emphasis  added]

The  elements  required  for  buying  time  and  assuming  the  offensive  in  Vietnam
are,  in  the  view  of  this  mission,  the  following:

1.  A  quick  U.S.  response  to  the  present  crisis  which  would  demon-
strate by  deeds — not  merely  words — the  American  commitment  se-
riously to  help  save  Vietnam  rather  than  to  disengage  in  the  most
convenient  manner  possible.  To  be  persuasive  this  commitment  must
include  the  sending  to  Vietnam  of  some  U.S.  military  forces.


94 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

2.  A  shift  in  the  American  relation  to  the  Vietnamese  effort  from
advice  to  Hmited  partnership.  The  present  character  and  scale  of  the
war  in  South  Vietnam  decree  that  only  the  Vietnamese  can  defeat  the
Viet  Cong;  but  at  all  levels  Americans  must,  as  friends  and  partners — not
as  arms-length  advisors — show  them  how  the  job  might  be  done — not
tell  them  or  do  it  for  them.

* *  *

"Perhaps  the  most  striking  aspect  of  this  mission's  effort  is  the  unanimity
of  view — individually  arrived  at  by  the  specialists  involved — that  what  is
now  required  is  a  shift  from  U.S.  advice  to  limited  partnership  and  work-
ing collaboration  with  the  Vietnamese.  The  present  war  cannot  be  won
by  direct  U.S.  action;  it  must  be  won  b\  the  Vietnamese.  But  there  is  a
general  conviction  among  us  that  the  Vietnamese  performance  in  every
domain  can  be  substantially  improved  if  Americans  are  prepared  to  work
side  by  side  with  the  Vietnamese  on  the  kev  problems.  Moreover,  there  is
evidence  that  Diem  is,  in  principle,  prepared  for  this  step,  and  that  most
— not  all — elements  in  his  establishment  are  eagerlv  awaiting  it.

Here  is  a  section  titled  "Reform.ing  Diem's  Administrative  Method":

The  famous  problem  of  Diem  as  an  administrator  and  politician  could
be  resolved  in  a  number  of  ways:

— By  his  removal  in  favor  of  a  militar\  dictatorship  which  would  give
dominance  to  the  militarv  chain  of  command.

— By  his  removal  in  favor  of  a  figure  of  more  dilute  power  (e.g..  Vice
President  Nguyen  Ngoc  Tho)  who  would  delegate  authority  to  act  to
both  military  and  civil  leaders.

— By  bringing  about  a  series  of  de  facto  administrative  changes  via  per-
suasion at  high  levels;  collaboration  with  Diem"s  aides  who  want  improved
administration;  and  by  a  U.S.  operating  presence  at  many  working  levels,
using  the  U.S.  presence  (e.g..  control  over  the  helicopter  squadrons)  for
forcing  the  Vietnamese  to  get  their  house  in  order  in  one  area
after  another.

We  have  opted  for  the  third  choice,  on  the  basis  of  both  merit  and
feasibility.

Our  reasons  for  these:  First,  it  would  be  dangerous  for  us  to  engineer
a  coup  under  present  tense  circumstances,  since  it  is  by  no  means  certain
that  we  could  control  its  consequences  and  potentialities  for  Communist
exploitation.  Second,  we  are  convinced  that  a  part  of  the  complaint  about
Diem's  administrati\ c  methods  conceals  a  lack  of  first-rate  executives  who
can  get  things  done.  In  the  endless  debate  between  Diem  and  his  subor-
dinates (Diem  complaining  of  limited  executive  material;  his  subordinates,
of  Diem's  bottleneck  methods)  both  have  hold  of  a  piece  of  the  truth.

The  proposed  strateg\  of  limited  partnership  is  designed  both  to  force
clear  delegation  of  authority  in  key  areas  and  to  beef  up  Vietnamese  ad-
ministration until  thcN  can  surface  and  develop  the  men  to  take  over.

This  is  a  ditficult  course  to  adopt.  We  can  anticipate  some  friction  and
reluctance  until  it  is  pro\cd  that  .Americans  can  be  helpful  partners  and
that  the  techniques  will  not  undermine  Diem's  political  position.  Shifts  in
U.S.  attitudes  and  methods  of  administration  as  well  as  Vietnamese  are
required.  But  we  are  confident  that  it  is  the  right  way  to  proceed  at  this


4


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  95

stage;  and,  as  noted  earlier,  there  is  reason  for  confidence  if  the  right  men
are  sent  to  do  the  right  jobs.

On  many  points  the  tone,  and  sometimes  the  substance,  of  the  appendices
by  the  lesser  members  of  the  Mission  (with  the  exception  of  one  by  Lansdale)
are  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  summary  paper.

William  Jorden  of  State  begins  a  discussion  of  "the  present  situation"  by  re-
porting:

One  after  another,  Vietnamese  officials,  military  men  and  ordinary  cit-
izens spoke  to  me  of  the  situation  in  their  country  as  "grave"  and  "dete-
riorating." They  are  distressed  at  the  evidence  of  growing  Viet  Cong  suc-
cesses. They  have  lost  confidence  in  President  Diem  and  in  his  leadership.
Men  who  only  one  or  two  months  ago  would  have  hesitated  to  say  any-
thing critical  of  Diem,  now  explode  in  angry  denunciation  of  the  man,  his
family,  and  his  methods.

And  after  a  page  of  details,  Jorden  sums  up  with:

Intrigue,  nepotism  and  even  corruption  might  be  accepted,  for  a  time,
if  combined  with  efficiency  and  visible  progress.  When  they  accompany
administrative  paralysis  and  steady  deterioration,  they  become  intolerable.

But  the  summary  paper,  under  the  heading  of  "The  Assets  of  South  Viet-
nam," lists:

With  all  his  weaknesses,  Diem  has  extraordinary  ability,  stubbornness,
and  guts.

Despite  their  acute  frustration,  the  men  of  the  Armed  Forces  and  the
administration  respect  Diem  to  a  degree  which  gives  their  grumbling  (and
perhaps  some  plotting)  a  somewhat  half-hearted  character;  and  they  are
willing — by  and  large — to  work  for  him,  if  he  gives  them  a  chance  to  do
their  jobs.

The  military  annex  contains  this  summary  comment  on  the  South  Vietnamese
Army:

The  performance  of  the  ARVN  is  disappointing  and  generally  is  charac-
terized by  a  lack  of  aggressiveness  and  at  most  levels  is  devoid  of  a  sense
or  urgency.  The  Army  is  short  of  able  young  trained  leaders,  both  in  the
officer  and  NCO  ranks.  The  basic  soldier,  as  a  result,  is  poorly  trained,  in-
adequately oriented,  lacking  in  desire  to  close  with  the  enemy  and  for  the
most  part  unaware  of  the  serious  inroads  communist  guerrillas  are  making
in  his  country.

But  the  main  paper,  again  in  the  summary  of  South  Vietnamese  assets,  re-
ports that  the  South  Vietnamese  regulars  are  "of  better  quality  than  the  Viet
Cong  Guerrillas."

The  point  is  not  that  the  summary  flatly  contradicts  the  appendices.  For  ex-
ample, the  statement  about  the  superior  quality  of  ARVN,  compared  to  the
Viet  Cong,  is  qualified  with  the  remark  "if  it  can  bring  the  Communists  to
engagement,"  and  can  be  explained  to  mean  only  that  the  more  heavily  armed
ARVN  could  defeat  a  VC  force  in  a  set-piece  battle.  But  the  persistence  ten-
dency of  the  summary  is  to  put  Saigon's  weaknesses  in  the  best  light,  and  avoid


96 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

anything  that  might  suggest  that  perhaps  the  U.S.  should  consider  hmiting,
rather  than  increasing,  its  commitments  to  the  Diem  regime,  or  alternatively
face  up  to  a  need  to  openly  take  over  the  war.

In  contrast,  the  appendices  contemplate  (if  they  do  not  always  recommend)
the  more  drastic  ahernatives.  The  miUtary  appendix  argues  (in  a  paraphrase  of
the  JCS  position  quoted  earlier)  that  the  U.S.  ought  to  move  into  Southeast
Asia,  preferably  Laos,  in  force.  The  appendix  by  Sterling  Cottrell  of  State  (chair-
man of  the  Vietnam  Task  Force)  suggests  an  opposite  view:

Since  it  is  an  open  question  whether  the  GVN  can  succeed  even  with
U.S.  assistance,  it  would  be  a  mistake  for  the  U.S.  to  commit  itself  irrev-
ocably to  the  defeat  of  the  communists  in  SVN.

And  Cottrell,  in  the  only  explicit  statement  in  the  available  record  on  why
the  U.S.  would  not  want  to  give  Diem  the  treaty  he  had  asked  for,  states:

The  Communist  operation  starts  from  the  lowest  social  level — the  vil-
lages. The  battle  must  be  joined  and  won  at  this  point.  If  not,  the  Com-
munists will  ultimately  control  all  but  the  relatively  few  areas  of  strong
military  concentrations.  Foreign  military  forces  cannot  themselves  win  the
battle  at  the  village  level.  Therefore,  the  primary  responsibility  for  saving
the  country  must  rest  with  the  GVN.

For  the  above  reason,  the  U.S.  should  assist  the  GVN.  This  rules  out
any  treaty  or  pact  which  either  shifts  ultimate  responsibility  to  the  U.S.,
or  engages  any  full  U.S.  commitment  to  eliminate  the  Viet  Cong  threat.

(And  a  treaty  which  did  not  apply  to  the  Viet  Cong  threat  would  hardly  be
a  very  reassuring  thing  to  Saigon;  while  one  that  did  would  face  an  uncertain
future  when  it  came  to  the  Senate  for  ratification.)

Yet,  Jorden  and  Cottrell  had  nothing  much  to  recommend  that  was  partic-
ularly different  from  what  was  recommended  in  the  summary.  The  effect  of
their  papers  is  to  throw  doubt  on  the  prospects  for  success  of  the  intervention
proposed.  But  their  recommendations  come  out  about  the  same  way,  so  that  if
their  papers  seem  more  realistic  in  hindsight  than  the  main  paper,  they  also  seem
more  confused.

Cottrell,  after  recommending  that  the  U.S.  avoid  committing  itself  irrev-
ocably to  winnins  in  South  Vietnam,  goes  on  to  recommend:

The  world  should  continue  to  be  impressed  that  this  situation  of  overt  DRV
aggression,  below  the  level  of  conventional  warfare,  must  be  stopped  in  the
best  interest  of  every  free  nation.

The  idea  that,  if  worse  comes  to  worst,  the  U.S.  could  probably  save  its  posi-
tion in  Vietnam  by  bombing  the  north,  seems  to  underlie  a  good  deal  of  the
optimism  that  pervades  the  summary  paper.  And  even  Cottrell,  in  the  last  of
his  recommendations,  states:

If  the  combined  U.S./ GVN  efforts  are  insufficient  to  reverse  the  trend,
we  should  then  move  to  the  "Rostow  Plan"  of  applying  graduated  meas-
ures on  the  DR\'  with  weapons  of  our  own  choosing.

Taylor,  in  his  personal  recommendations  to  the  President  (the  cables  from
Baguio  quoted  earlier),  spoke  of  the  "extreme  vulnerability  of  North  Vietnam
to  conventional  bombins."


The  Kennedy  Coinnutiiients  and  Programs,  1961  97

The  summary  paper,  in  its  contrast  between  the  current  war  and  the  war  the
French  lost,  states:

Finally,  the  Communists  now  not  only  have  something  to  gain — the
South — but  a  base  to  lose — the  North — if  war  should  come.

Bombing  was  not  viewed  as  the  answer  to  all  problems.  If  things  did  not  go
well,  the  report  saw  a  possible  requirement  for  a  substantial  commitment  of  U.S.
ground  troops.  In  a  section  on  South  Vietnamese  reserves,  there  is  the  comment
til  at

...  it  is  an  evident  requirement  that  the  United  States  review  quick
action  contingency  plans  to  move  into  Vietnam,  should  the  scale  of  the
Vietnam  [Viet  Cong?]  offensive  radically  increase  at  a  time  when  Viet-
namese reserves  are  inadequate  to  cope  with  it.  Such  action  might  be  de-
signed to  take  over  the  responsibility  for  the  security  of  certain  relatively
quiet  areas,  if  the  battle  remained  at  the  guerrilla  level,  or  to  fight  the
Communists  if  open  war  were  attempted.

And  the  concluding  paragraphs  of  the  summary  state  that:

One  of  the  major  issues  raised  by  this  report  is  the  need  to  develop  the
reserve  strength  in  the  U.S.  establishment  required  to  cover  action  in
Southeast  Asia  up  to  the  nuclear  threshold  in  that  area,  as  it  is  now  en-
visaged. The  call  up  of  additional  support  forces  may  be  required.

In  our  view,  nothing  is  more  calculated  to  sober  the  enemy  and  to  dis-
courage escalation  in  the  face  of  the  limited  initiatives  proposed  here  than
the  knowledge  that  the  United  States  has  prepared  itself  soundly  to  deal
with  aggression  in  Southeast  Asia  at  any  level.

But  these  warnings  were  directed  to  an  unexpectedly  strong  Viet  Cong  show-
ing during  the  period  of  buildup  of  ARVN,  and  more  still  to  deterring  the  like-
lihood of  a  Communist  resumption  of  their  offensive  in  Laos,  or  of  an  overt
invasion  of  South  Vietnam.  The  Vietnam  contingencies:  in  particular,  were  not
viewed  as  likely.  But  the  possibility  of  bombing  the  North  was  viewed  otherwise.
The  clearest  statements  are  in  General  Taylor's  letter  of  transmittal:

While  we  feel  that  the  program  recommended  represents  those
measures  which  should  be  taken  in  our  present  knowledge  of  the  situation
in  Southeast  Asia,  I  would  not  suggest  that  it  is  the  final  word.  Future  needs
beyond  this  program  will  depend  upon  the  kind  of  settlement  we  obtain
in  Laos  and  the  manner  in  which  Hanoi  decides  to  adjust  its  conduct  to
that  settlement.  If  the  Hanoi  decision  is  to  continue  the  irregular  war  de-
clared of  South  Vietnam  in  1959  with  continued  infiltration  and  covert
support  of  guerrilla  bands  in  the  territory  of  our  ally,  we  will  then  have  to
decide  whether  to  accept  as  legitimate  the  continued  guidance,  training,
and  support  of  a  guerrilla  war  across  an  international  boundary,  while  the
attacked  react  only  inside  their  borders.  Can  we  admit  the  establishment
of  the  common  law  that  the  party  attacked  and  his  friends  are  denied  the
right  to  strike  the  source  of  aggression,  after  the  fact  of  external  aggres-
sion is  clearly  established?  It  is  our  view  that  our  government  should  under-
take with  the  Vietnamese  the  measures  outlined  herein,  but  should  then
consider  and  face  the  broader  question  beyond.


98 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

We  cannot  refrain  from  expressing,  having  seen  the  situation  on  the
ground,  our  common  sense  of  outrage  at  the  burden  which  this  kind  of
aggression  imposes  on  a  new  country,  only  seven  years  old,  with  a  difficult
historical  heritage  to  overcome,  confronting  the  inevitable  problems  of
political,  social,  and  economic  transition  to  modernization.  It  is  easy  and
cheap  to  destroy  such  a  country  whereas  it  is  difficult  undisturbed  to  build
a  nation  coming  out  of  a  complex  past  without  carrying  the  burden  of  a
guerrilla  war.

We  were  similarly  struck  in  Thailand  with  the  injustice  of  subjecting
this  promising  nation  in  transition  to  the  heavy  military  burdens  it  faces
in  fulfilling  its  role  in  SEATO  security  planning  along  with  the  guerrilla
challenge  beginning  to  form  up  on  its  northeast  frontier.

It  is  my  judgment  and  that  of  my  colleagues  that  the  United  States  must
decide  how  it  will  cope  with  Krushchev's  "wars  of  liberation"  which  are
really  para-wars  of  guerrilla  aggression.  This  is  a  new  and  dangerous  Com-
munist technique  which  bypasses  our  traditional  political  and  military
responses.  While  the  final  answer  lies  beyond  the  scope  of  this  report,  it
is  clear  to  me  that  the  time  may  come  in  our  relations  to  Southeast  Asia
when  we  must  declare  our  intention  to  attack  the  source  of  guerrilla
aggression  in  North  Vietnam  and  impose  on  the  Hanoi  Government  a  price
for  participating  in  the  current  war  which  is  commensurate  with  the
damage  being  inflicted  on  its  neighbors  to  the  south.

F. SOME  CABLES  FROM  SAIGON

To  a  current  reader,  and  very  likely  to  the  officials  in  Washington  who  had
access  to  the  full  Taylor  Mission  Report  (including  Taylor's  personal  recom-
mendations), there  really  seem  to  be  three  reports,  not  one.

1.  Taylor's  own  cables  read  like,  as  of  course  they  were,  a  soldier's  crisp,
direct  analysis  of  the  military  problem  facing  the  Saigon  government.  With
regard  to  the  Diem  regime,  the  emphasis  is  on  a  need  to  build  up  intelligence
capabilities,  clear  up  administrative  drags  on  efliicient  action,  and  take  the  of-
fensive in  seeking  out  and  destroying  VC  units.

2.  The  main  paper  in  the  Report  (the  "Evaluations  and  Conclusions")  in-
corporates General  Taylor's  views  on  the  military  problems.  But,  it  is  much
broader,  giving  primary  emphasis  to  the  militarv  problem,  but  also  some  atten-
tion to  what  we  now  call  the  "other  war,"  and  even  more  to  conveying  an  es-
sentially optimistic  picture  of  the  opportunities  for  a  vigorous  American  effort
to  provide  the  South  Vietnamese  government  and  army  with  the  elan  and  style
needed  to  win.  This  paper  was  presumablv  drafted  mainlv  by  Rostow,  with  con-
tributions from  other  members  of  the  party.

It  is  consistent  with  Rostow's  emphasis  before  and  since  on  the  Viet  Cong
problem  as  a  pretty  straight-forward  case  of  external  aggression.  There  is  no
indication  of  the  doubts  expressed  in  the  Alexis  Johnson  "Concept  of  Interven-
tion in  Vietnam'"  paper  that  Diem  might  not  be  able  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong
even  if  infiltration  were  largelv  cut  off.  At  one  point,  for  example,  the  paper
tells  its  readers:

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  1959  political  decision  in  Hanoi  to  launch
the  guerrilla  and  political  campaign  of  1960-61  arose  because  of  Diem's
increasing  success  in  stabilizing  his  rule  and  moving  his  country  forward
in  the  several  preceding  vears.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs.  1961  99

On  the  verv  next  page  (perhaps  reflecting  the  vagaries  of  committee  papers)
the  paper  does  not  itself  "remember"  this  description  of  conditions  when  the
war  started.  For  it  states:

The  militar\-  frustration  of  the  past  two  months  has  .  .  .  made  acute,
throughout  his  administration,  dissatisfaction  with  Diem's  method  of  rule,
with  his  lack  of  identification  with  his  people,  and  with  his  strategy  which
has  been  endemic  for  some  vears.

But  that  seems  onh  a  momentary  lapse  from  the  general  line  cf  the  paper,
which  is  fairly  reflected  in  the  recommendation  that  we  tell  Moscow  to:

use  its  influence  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  to  call  his  dogs  off.  mind  his  business,
and  feed  his  people.

3.  Finally,  there  were  the  appendices  by  the  military  and  especially  the  State
representatives  on  the  Mission  which,  as  indicated  by  the  extracts  given  in  the
previous  section,  paint  a  much  darker  picture  than  the  reader  gets  from  the  main
paper.  Even  when,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  their  recommendations  are  not
much  different  from  the  main  paper,  the  tone  is  one  of  trying  to  make  the
best  of  a  bad  situation,  rather  than  of  seizing  an  opportunity.

Because  of  these  distinctions  between  the  different  parts  of  the  Report,  two
people  reading  the  full  Report  could  come  awa\  with  far  different  impressions
of  what  sort  of  problem  the  U.S.  was  facing  in  \'ietnam.  depending  on  which
parts  of  the  Report  seemed  to  them  to  ring  truest.  Presumably,  officials'  judg-
ments here  were  influenced  b\  their  reading  of  the  series  of  cables  that  arrived
during  and  just  after  the  Tavlor  visit,  manv  of  which  touch  on  critical  points
of  the  report.

Here  are  some  samples.

The  day  Tavlor  left,  Nolting  sent  a  cable  describing  the  immediate  mood  in
Saigon  in  prettv  desperate  terms.  All  parts  of  the  Taylor  Report,  including  the
main  paper,  did  the  same.  The  distinctions  in  describing  the  situation  were  in
how  deep-rooted  the  immediate  malaise  was  seen.  The  main  effect  of  this  cable
from  Nolting  was  presumably  to  add  weight  to  the  warning  of  the  Report  that
something  dramatic  had  to  be  done  if  the  U.S.  were  not  ready  to  risk  a  collapse
in  Saigon  within  a  few  months.  As  the  Taylor  Report  stressed  and  the  cable
implies,  the  verv  fact  of  the  Tavlor  Mission  would  have  a  very  negative  impact
if  nothing  came  out  of  it.

There  has  been  noticeable  rise  in  Saigon's  political  temperature  during
past  week.  Tavlor  visit,  thoush  reassuring  in  some  respects,  has  been  in-
terpreted bv  rnanv  persons  as  demonstrating  critical  stage  which  \'C  in-
surgency has  reached  .  .  .  Following  deterioration  of  general  security
conditions  over  past  two  months  cancellation  October  26  national  day
celebrations  to  devote  resources  to  flood  relief  and  terse,  dramatic  declara-
tion national  emergency  caught  an  unprepared  public  by  surprise  and  con-
tributed additional  unsettling  elements  to  growing  atmosphere  of
uneasiness  .  .  .


100 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

This  growing  public  disquietude  accompanied  bv  increasing  dissatisfaction
with  Diem's  methods  of  administration  on  part  senior  GVN  officials.  There
is  considerable  cabinet  level  criticism  and  growing  though  still  inchoate
determination  force  organizational  reforms  on  President.  Similar  attitude
seems  be  developing  in  ARVN  upper  levels.  Though  trend  of  thinking  these
groups  taking  parallel  courses,  there  nothing  indicate  at  this  moment  that
collaboration  between  them  taking  place.  Beginnings  of  this  would,  of
course,  be  serious  indicator  something  brewing.

At  same  time  CAS  also  has  from  Vietnamese  government  sources  reports
(C-3)  of  movement  of  certain  platoon  to  companv-size  VC  units  (total-
ling perhaps  200-500  men  toward  Saigon  to  profit  from  anv  disturbances
or  confusion  which  may  occur.  Knowledge  these  reports  within  GVN  ap-
parently tending  deter  disaffected  officials  from  developing  radical  pace
at  this  moment.

Situation  here  thus  one  of  insecurity,  uneasiness  and  emergent  instability.
A  genuine  and  important  military  victory  over  VC  would  do  more  than
anything  else  to  redress  balance  and  allay  for  moment  high-level  mutter-
ings  of  need  for  change.  On  other  hand,  further  deterioration  of  situation
over  next  few  weeks  or  months  or  new  VC  success  similar  Phuoc  Hhanh
incident  might  well  bring  situation  to  head.

From  MAAG  Chief  McGarr,  Washington  received  an  account  of  Taylor's
meeting  with  "Big  Minh,"  then  Chief  of  Staff,  later  Head  of  State  for  a  while
after  Diem  was  overthrown.  It  is  interesting  because  it  was  one  of  the  very  few
reports  from  Saigon  in  the  available  record  suggesting  that  the  Diem  regime
might  be  in  need  of  more  than  administrative  reforms.  Minh  complains  that  the
Vietnamese  army  was  "losing  the  support  of  the  people"  as  indicated  by
a  "marked  decrease  in  the  amount  of  information  given  by  the  population."  He
warned,  further,  that  "GVN  should  discontinue  favoring  certain  religions  .  .  ."
But  McGarr  stressed  the  administrative  problems,  particularly  the  need  for  an
"overall  plan."  His  reaction  explicitly  concerns  what  he  saw  as  the  "military"
aspects  of  Minh's  complaints.  But  Ambassador  Nolting's  cables  and  the  main
paper  of  the  Report  show  a  very  similar  tendencv  to  take  note  of  political  prob-
lems, but  put  almost  all  the  emphasis  on  the  need  for  better  military  tactics  and
more  efficient  administrative  arrangements.

.  .  .  Big  Minh  was  pessimistic  and  clearlv  and  frankly  outlined  his  per-
sonal feeling  that  the  militarv  was  not  being  properly  supported.  He  said
not  only  Viet  Cong  grown  alarminglv.  but  that  Vietnamese  armed  forces
were  losing  support  of  the  people.  As  example,  he  pointed  out  marked
decrease  in  amount  of  information  given  by  population.  Minh  said  GVN
should  discontinue  favoring  certain  religions,  and  correct  present  system
of  selecting  province  chiefs.  At  this  point  Minh  was  extremely  caustic  in
commenting  on  lack  of  abilitv.  militarv  and  administrative,  of  certain
province  chiefs.  Minh  was  bitter  about  province  chiefs  role  in  military
chain  of  command  saving  that  although  Gen.  McGarr  had  fought  for  and
won  on  the  single  .  .  .  command  which  had  worked  for  few  months,  old
habits  were  now  returning.  Also,  on  urging  from  Gen.  McGarr  he  had
gone  on  offensive,  but  province  chiefs  had  not  cooperated  to  extent  neces-
sarv.  He  discussed  his  inabilitv  to  get  cooperation  from  GVN  agencies  on
developing  overall  plans  for  conduct  of  counterinsurgency.  Minh  also
discussed  need  to  bring  sects  back  into  fold  as  these  are  anti-communist.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs.  1961  101

Although  above  not  new  Minh  seemed  particularlv  discouraged  .  .  .
When  analyzed,  most  of  Minh"s  comments  in  militarv  field  are  occasioned
by  lack  of  overall  coordination  and  cooperation.  This  re-emphasizes  ab-
solute necessit\'  for  overall  plan  which  would  clearlv  delineate  respon-
sibilitv  and  create  a  team  effort  .  .  .

Nolting  concerned  himself,  of  course,  with  the  civil  as  well  as  militarv  arrange-
ments, but  with  much  the  same  stress  on  organizational  and  administrative
formalities.  A  striking  example  was  when  Nolting  reported  that  Diem  was  will-
ing to  consider  fin  response  to  American  urging  of  top  level  administrative  re-
forms) creating  a  National  Executive  Council  patterned  after  the  U.S.  National
Security  Council.  Nolting  was  favorablv  impressed.  His  cable  notes  no  concern
that  under  Diem's  proposal.  Diem's  brother  Nhu  would  be  chairman  of  the
NEC.  althoueh  a  vear  earlier  fand  of  course  even  more  urgenth'  a  vear  or  so
later)  getting  Nhu.  and  his  wife,  out  of  the  picture  entireh'  had  been  seen  as
the  best  real  hope  of  saving  the  Diem  regime.

The  report  Nolting  sent  on  Ta}lor"s  final  meeting  with  Diem  also  contains
some  interesting  material.  It  leaves  the  impression  that  Diem  was  still  not  really
anxious  to  get  American  troops  deeph  in\olved  in  his  country,  despite  his
favorable  reaction  at  the  meeting  of  the  24th,  which,  in  turn,  was  a  reversal  of
his  reaction  at  the  meeting  on  the  19th.  Because  of  this,  the  impression  left  by
the  whole  record  is  that  Tavlor  came  to  the  conclusion  that  some  sort  of  ground
troop  commitment  was  needed  mainly  because  of  what  he  heard  from  Diem's
colleagues  and  his  militarv  people,  rather  than  from  Diem  himself.

According  to  Nolting's  cabled  account.  Diem,  although  raising  half  a  dozen
issues  relating  to  increased  American  military  aid.  did  not  mention  the  flood
task  force,  or  anything  else  that  might  imply  a  special  interest  in  getting  some
sort  of  ground  troops  commitment.  As  seemed  the  case  earlier,  it  was  the
Americans  who  pressed  the  idea  of  getting  American  military  people  involved
in  combat.  In  the  onlv  exchange  Nolting  reponed  touching  on  this  issue,  he
said:

1.  Diem  stressed  importance  of  reinforcement  of  aviation:  particularly
helicopters.  Tavlor  and  I  [Nolting]  used  this  opportunity  to  make  clear  to
Diem  that  we  envisaged  helicopters  piloted  by  Americans  and  constituting
American  units  under  American  commanders  which  would  cooperate  with
Vietnamese  militarv  commands.

fAt  a  meeting  with  McGarr  November  9.  Diem  again  raised  the  helicopter
question,  this  time  taking  the  initiative  in  saying  he  needed  American  pilots,  but
he  did  not  mention  the  flood  task  force,  or  anything  else  that  might  imply  a  re-
quest for  ground  troops. )

On  the  question  of  better  performance  by  Diem's  regime,  we  have  tbi^  ex-
change, which  does  not  seem  likelv  to  have  prepared  Diem  for  the  fa:  b-
stantial  quid  pro  quo  which  turned  out  to  be  part  of  the  package  proposed  by
\\'ashington :

...  3.  Tavlor  told  Diem  it  would  be  useful  if  he  and  I  could  develop
specifics  with  respect  to  political-psychological  point  in  paper  which  Taylor
presented  to  Diem  October  24.  tavlor  pointed  out  this  would  be  ven.-
useful  to  him  in  Washington  because  he  will  be  faced  with  question  that,
if  program  he  proposes  is  adopted,  what  will  be  chances  of  early  success.


102 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  I'ol.  II

In  response  Thuan's  question  asking  for  exact  meaning  of  this  point  in
Taylor's  paper,  latter  said  there  has  been  loss  of  confidence  among  both
\"ietnamese  and  American  people  about  situation  in  N'ietnam  and  we
need  to  determine  together  what  measures  .  -  "-"e  taken  to  restore  con-
fidence. Rostow  commented  that  secret  of  tu:  .  point  is  offensive  action.
Diem  stated  complete  psychological  mobilization  recui'-ed  «;o  that  everv-
thing  can  be  done  to  raise  potential  G\"N  forces  ige  enemv's

potential.  He  referred  lo  G\'N  efforts  in  past  to  co".  . '  .-:e  more  closelv
with  US  in  militarv  planning  and  said  these  effc"*-  ■  up  against  wall

of  secrecy  surrounding  US  and  SEATO  military"  p._;-.>  .  .  .

Finallv.  there  was  this  exchange,  which  does  not  appear  to  pro\ide  much
support  for  the  high  hopes  expressed  in  the  Tavlor  Repon  that  Diem  was
anxious  for  U.S.  guidance  and  "in  principle"  ready  to  grant  a  role  for  Americans

in  his  administration  and  armv.

.  .  .  -.  Taylor  referred  to  Diem"s  comments  in  c..-  talk  about
shonage  of  capable  personnel  and  suggested  US  might  assist  bv  lending
personnel.  Diem  replied  that  US  could  help  in  this  respect  in  trainine  field.
Thuan  then  brought  up  dilemma  facing  GNA'  re  instructors  at  Thui  Due
Reserve  Ofhcers"  School  .  .  .

\T. THE  FALL  DECISIONS— II

A.  COXTEXT

Tavlor's  formal  repon.  as  noted,  was  dated  November  3.  a  day  after  the
Mission  came  back  lo  \\'ashingion.  (A  good  cea"  of  it  had  been  written  during
the  stopo\er  at  Baguio.  in  the  Philippines,  when  Tavlor's  personal  cables  to  :he
President  had  also  been  written  and  sent.)  The  <  —  j^f  Taylor's  Repor:

was  followed  bv  prominent  news  stories  the  nex:  :v  :flatlv  stating  ibut

without  attribution  to  a  source)  that  the  President  "remains  strongly  opposed
to  the  dispatch  of  -\merican  combat  troops  to  Sou:h  \'ie:nam"  and  strongly
implying  that  General  Tavlor  had  not  recommended  such  a  commitment.  Ap-
parently, only  a  few  people,  aside  from  Tavlor.  Rostow  ani  Ji  'nndful  of  very
senior  onicials.  realized  that  this  was  not  exactlv  accurate — ic:  :he  summar}"
paper  of  the  Repon  had  not  been  ver\  explicit  on  just  what  was  meant  by  "a
hard  commitment  to  the  ground."  Thus  onlv  those  who  knew  about  the  "iEyes
Only"  cables  would  know  just  what  Tavlor  was  recommending.

Diem  himself  had  given  one  of  his  rare  on-the-record  interviews  to  the  \ew
York  Tin:cs  correspondent  in  Saigon  while  Tavlor  was  on  his  wav  home,  and
he  too  gave  the  impression  that  the  funher  American  aid  he  expected  would
not  include  ground  troops.

Consequentlv.  the  general  outline  of  the  American  aid  that  would  be  sent
following  the  Ta\lor  Mission  was  common  knowledge  for  over  a  week  before
any  formal  decision  was  made.  The  decisions,  when  thev  were  announced
stirred  very  little  fuss,  and  (considering  the  retrospective  imponance)  not  even
much  interest.  The  Taylor  Mission  had  received  "  -  iess  attention  in  the  press
than  several  other  crises  at  the  UN.  in  the  Congo,  on  nuclear  testing,  and  most
of  all  in  Berlin,  where  there  had  just  been  a  svmbolic  confrontation  of  Soviet
and  American  tanks.  The  Administration  was  so  concerned  about  public  reac-


The  Kennedy  Coninutnietirs  and  Proi^rafyis,  1961  103

lion  to  Soviet  aggressi\ eness  and  apparent  American  inability  to  deal  wiih  it
that  a  campaign  was  begun  (as  usual  in  matters  of  this  sort,  reported  in  the
Times  without  specific  attribution)  to  ""counter-attack  against  what  unnamed
'high  officials'  called  a  "rising  mood  of  national  frustration.*  "  The  Administra-
tion's message,  the  Tifnes  reported,  was  that  a  "mature  foreign  polic\"  rather
than  '"belligerence  of  defeatism"  w  as  what  was  needed.  What  is  interesting  about
such  a  message  is  what  the  necessit\  to  send  it  reveals  about  the  mood  of  the
times.

In  this  sort  of  context,  there  was  no  real  debate  about  whether  the  U.S.
ought  to  do  an\thing  reasonable  it  could  to  prevent  N'ietnam  from  going  the
way  of  Laos.  There  is  no  hint  of  a  suggestion  otherwise  in  the  classified  record,
and  there  was  no  real  public  debate  on  this  point.  What  was  seen  as  an  issue  was
whether  the  limits  of  reasonable  U.S.  aid  extended  to  the  point  of  sending
American  troops  to  fight  the  \'iet  Cong.  But  even  this  was  subdued.  There  had
been,  as  noted  before,  the  leaked  stories  plaxing  down  the  prospects  that  com-
bat troops  would  be  sent,  and  then,  immediateh  on  Ta\lor's  return,  the  un-
aitributcd  but  ob\iousl\  authoritati\e  stories  that  Kenned\  was  opposed  to  send-
ing troops  and  Tavlor  was  not  recommending  them.

In  a  most  important  sense,  this  situation  distorts  the  stor\-  told  in  this  ac-
count. For  this  account  inevitablv  de\otes  a  great  deal  of  space  to  the  decision
that  was  not  made — that  of  sending  ground  troops — and  verv  little  space  to  the
important  decisions  that  were  made.  There  is  simph'  nothing  much  to  sav  about
these  latter  decisions:  except  that  thev  were  apparently  taken  for  granted  at  the
time.  Even  todaw  with  all  the  hindsight  available,  it  is  \erv  hard  to  imagine
Kennedy  or  an\'  other  President  responding  to  the  situation  faced  in  1961  b\
doing  significanth  less  about  X'ietnam  than  he  did.  The  onlv  choices  seen  then,
as  indeed  even  toda\  the  onh  choices  seem  to  ha\e  been,  whether  to  do  more.
And  it  is  on  how  that  question  was  resohed.  ine\itabh.  that  any  account  of  the
period  will  be  focused.

The  .Administration  faced  (contrar\  to  the  impression  given  to  the  public
both  before  and  after  the  decisions)  two  major  issues  when  Tavlor  returned.

1,  What  conditions,  if  an\.  would  be  attached  to  new  .American  aid"?  The  Tay-
lor Report  implicith  recommended  none.  But  the  leaked  stories  in  the  press
following  Ta\lor"s  return  showed  that  some  in  the  .Administration  inclined  to
a  much  harder  line  on  Diem  than  the  summar\-  paper  of  the  report.  For  ex-
ample, a  Tifnes  dispatch  of  November  5.  from  its  Pentagon  correspondent,
reported  that  Diem  would  be  expected  to  "undertake  major  economic,  social,
and  militar\  reforniN  to  pro\  ide  a  basis  for  increased  U.S.  support."

2.  Would  the  limited  commitment  of  ground  forces  recommended  bv  Tavlor
be  undertaken'?  The  news  stories  suggested  thev  would,  although  this  would  be
apparent  onl\  to  those  who  had  seen  Ta\ior*s  "Eves  Only"  cables.  The  slorv
appearing  the  da\  after  the  report  was  submitted,  despite  the  flat  statements
against  the  use  of  combat  troops,  also  stated  that  Taylor  had  recommended  "  the
dispatch  of  more  specialists  in  anti-guerrilla  warfare  to  train  N'ietnamese  troops,
communications  and  transportation  specialists,  and  army  en^^ineers  to  help  the
Mernamese  government  eomhat  its  tiood  problems."  The  Noveniber  5  storv
was  more  explicit.  It  is  noted  that  officials  seemed  to  rule  out  the  use  of  U.S.
combat  forces,  "the  mo\e  considered  here  a  few  weeks  ago."  But  "at  the  same
time  it  appears  that  .Arm\  engineers,  perhaps  in  unusually  large  numbers,  may
be  sent  to  help  on  flood  control  work  and  other  civil  projects  and  to  fif;ht  it
necessary."  This  last  phrase  was  explicith  (and  correctly)  linked  to  the  fact  that


104 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  area  in  which  the  floods  had  taken  place  (the  Delta)  was  precisely  the  area
of  greatest  Viet  Cong  strength.

A  final  question  of  great  importance  did  not  have  to  be  resolved  during  this
review:  for  ahhough  the  Taylor  Report  had  stressed  the  idea  of  eventually
bombing  the  north,  no  immediate  decision  or  commitment  on  this  was  recom-
mended.

On  the  first  of  these  issues  (the  quid  pro  quo  for  U.S.  aid)  our  record  tells  us
that  demands  were  made  on  Diem,  as  we  will  see  when  we  come  to  the  actual
decision.  The  newspaper  stories  strongly  suggest  that  the  decision  to  ask  for  a
quid  pro  quo  was  made,  at  the  latest,  immediately  following  the  return  of  the
Taylor  Mission.  But  the  record  does  not  show  anything  about  the  reasoning
behind  this  effort  to  pressure  Diem  to  agree  to  reforms  as  a  condition  for  in-
creased U.S.  aid,  nor  of  what  the  point  of  it  was.  It  certainly  conflicted  with  the
main  drive  of  the  Taylor  Mission  Report.  The  report  not  only  suggested  no  such
thing,  but  put  a  great  deal  of  stress  on  a  cordial,  intimate  relationship  with  the
Diem  regime.  Pressure  for  reform  (especially  when  publicly  made,  as  they  es-
sentially were  in  the  leaked  stories)  was  hardly  likely  to  promote  cordiality.
Durbrow's  experience  earlier  in  the  year  had  shown  that  pressure  would  have
the  opposite  result.

Consequently,  the  President's  handling  of  this  issue  had  the  effect  of  under-
mining from  the  start  what  appeared  to  have  been  a  major  premise  of  the
strategy  recommended  to  the  President:  that  Diem  was  "in  principle"  prepared
for  what  plainly  amounted  to  a  "limited  partnership,"  with  the  U.S.  in  running
his  coimtry  and  his  Army.

The  advantages,  from  the  American  view,  of  the  President's  decision  to  place
demands  on  Diem  were  presumably  that  it  might  (contrary  to  realistic  expecta-
tions) actually  push  Diem  in  the  right  direction;  and  that  if  this  did  not  work,
it  would  somewhat  limit  the  American  commitment  to  Diem.  The  limit  would
come  by  making  clear  that  the  U.S.  saw  a  good  deal  of  the  problem  as  Diem's
own  responsibility,  and  not  just  a  simple  matter  of  external  aggression.  The
balance  of  this  judgment  would  turn  substantiallv  on  whether  whoever  was  mak-
ing the  decision  judged  that  the  "limited  partnership"  idea  was  really  much
more  realistic  than  the  trying  to  pressure  Diem,  and  on  whether  he  wanted  to
limit  the  U.S.  commitment,  rather  than  make  it  unambiguous.  Further,  the
cables  from  Saigon  had  clearly  shown  that  manv  South  Vietnamese  were  hoping
the  Americans  would  put  pressure  on  Diem,  so  that  although  such  tactics  would
prejudice  relations  with  Diem,  they  would  not  necessarily  harm  relations  with
others  of  influence  in  the  country,  in  particular  his  generals.

Finally,  although  Kennedy's  decisions  here  were  contrary  to  the  implications
of  the  summary  paper  in  the  Taylor  Report,  they  were  not  particularly  incon-
sistent with  the  appendices  bv  the  State  representatives.  For  these,  as  noted,
took  a  far  less  rosy  view  of  Diem's  prospects  than  appeared  in  the  summary.

On  the  second  issue — the  U.S.  combat  militarv  task  force — the  available
record  tells  us  only  the  positions  of  Tavlor  and  of  the  Defense  Department.  We
are  not  sure  what  the  position  of  State  was — although  Sorenson  claims  that  all
the  President's  senior  advisors  had  recommended  going  ahead  with  send-
ing some  ground  troops.

Even  Taylor's  position  is  slightU  ambiguous.  It  is  conceivable  that  he  argued
for  the  Task  Force  mainh'  because  he  thought  that  the  numbers  of  U.S.  per-
sonnel that  might  be  sent  as  advisors,  pilots,  and  other  specialists  would  not  add
up  to  a  large  enough  increment  to  have  much  of  a  psvchological  impact  on
South  Vietnamese  morale.  But  his  choice  of  language  indicates  that  a  mere


The  Kennedy  Conunitmcnls  and  Programs,  1961  105

question  of  numbers  was  not  the  real  issue.  Rather  'rayh)r's  argument  seems  to
have  been  that  specifically  ground  f  orces  (not  Jiecessarily  all  or  even  mainly  in-
fantrymen, but  ground  soldiers  who  would  be  out  in  the  countryside  where
they  could  be  shot  at  and  shoot  back)  were  what  was  needed.  Combat  engineers
to  work  in  the  VC-infested  flood  area  in  the  Delta  would  meet  that  need.  Heli-
copter pilots  and  mechanics  and  advisors,  who  might  accompany  Vietnamese
operations,  but  could  not  undertake  ground  operations  on  their  own  apparently
would  not.  There  is  only  one  easily  imagined  reason  for  seeing  this  as  a  crucial
distinction.  And  that  would  be  if  a  critical  object  of  the  stepped  up  American
program  was  to  be  exactly  what  Taylor  said  it  should  be  in  his  final  cable  from
Saigon:  .  .  assuring  Diem  of  our  readiness  to  join  him  in  a  military  show-
down with  the  Viet  C'ong  .  .

Thus  the  flood  task  force  was  essentially  different  from  the  balance  of  the
military  program.  It  did  not  fill  an  urgent  need  for  military  specialists  or  ex-
pertise not  adequately  available  within  Vietnam;  it  was  an  implicit  commitment
to  deny  the  Viet  Cong  a  victory  even  if  major  American  ground  forces  should  be
required.

Taylor  clearly  did  not  see  the  need  for  large  U.S.  ground  involvement  as  at
all  probable.  ("The  risks  of  backing  into  a  major  Asian  war  because  ,SVN  are
present  but  arc  not  impressive,"  in  large  part  because  "NVN  is  extremely  vul-
nerable to  conventional  bombing.")  At  another  point,  laylor  warns  the  Presi-
dent, "If  the  first  contingent  is  not  enough,  ...  it  will  be  diflicult  to  resist  the
pressure  to  reinforce.  If  the  ultimate  result  sought  is  the  closing  of  the  frontiers
and  the  cleanup  of  the  insurgents  within  SVN,  there  is  no  limit  to  our  possible
commitment  (unless  we  attack  the  source  in  Hanoi.)"

We  have  a  good  record  of  the  DOI3  staff  work,  which  preceded  the  President's
decision  on  this  issue,  but  only  a  bit  from  State  and  none  from  the  White  House.
Rusk,  in  a  cable  from  Japan  on  November  I,  contributed  this  note  of  caution
(which  also  bears  on  the  previous  discussion  of  demands  on  Diem  for  a  cjuid
pro  quo  for  increased  American  aid )  :

Since  General  Taylor  may  give  first  full  report  prior  my  return,  be-
lieve special  attention  should  be  given  to  critical  question  whether  Diem  is
prepared  take  necessary  measures  to  give  us  something  worth  supporting.
If  Diem  unwilling  trust  military  commanders  to  get  job  done  and  take
steps  to  consolidate  non-communist  elements  into  serious  national  effort,
difficult  to  see  how  handful  American  troops  can  have  decisive  influence.
While  attaching  greatest  possible  importance  to  security  in  SI'A.  I  would
be  reluctant  to  see  U.S.  make  major  additional  commitment  American
prestige  to  a  losing  horse.

Suggest  Department  carefully  review  all  Southeast  Asia  measures  we
expect  from  Diem  if  our  assistance  forces  us  to  assume  de  facto  direction
South  Vietnamese  affairs.

But  the  view  of  the  U.S.  Mission  in  Saigon  contained  no  such  doubts,  nor  did
most  Vietnamese,  according  to  this  cable  Nolting  sent  while  Taylor  was  enroute
home:

Our  conversations  over  past  ten  days  with  Vietnamese  in  various  walks
of  life  show  virtually  unanimous  desire  for  introduction  U.S.  forces  into
Viet-Nam.  This  based  on  unsolicited  remarks  from  cabinet  ministers,  Na-
tional  Assembly Deputies, University  professors,  students,  shop-keepers,


106 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

and  oppositionists.  Dr.  Tran  Dinh  De,  level-headed  Minister  of  Health,
told  Embassy  officer  Oct.  29  that  while  GVN  could  continue  resist  com-
munists for  while  longer  if  US  troops  not  introduced,  it  could  not  win  alone
against  commies.  National  Assembly  members,  according  to  Lai  Tu.  leader
Personalist  Community,  unanimously  in  favor  entrv  US  forces.  Diem  told
us  while  General  Taylor  was  here  that  he  had  consulted  National  Assembly
Committee  on  this  question  and  had  received  favorable  response.  Even  an
oppositionist  like  Ex-Foreign  Minister  Tran  Van  Do  has  told  us  US  forces
are  needed  and  is  apparently  so  stronglv  convinced  of  this  that  he  did  not
suggest  any  conditions  precedent  about  political  changes  bv  Diem.  Am-
Consul  Hue  reports  that  opinion  among  intellectuals  and  government  of-
ficials in  that  city  is  also  almost  unanimously  in  favor  of  introduction  of
American  combat  troops.  MAAG  believes  on  basis  private  conversations
and  general  attitude  Vietnamese  military  personnel  toward  us  that  Viet-
namese armed  forces  would  likewise  welcome  introduction  US  forces.

General  Vietnamese  desire  for  introduction  US  forces  arises  from  serious
morale  decline  among  populace  during  recent  weeks  because  of  deteriora-
tion in  security  and  horrible  death  through  torture  and  mutilation  to  which
Col  Nam  subjected.  Expanded  VC  infiltration  has  brought  fully  home  to
Vietnamese  the  fact  that  US  has  not  intervened  militarih'  in  Laos  to  come
to  rescue  of  anti-communists.  Now  that  they  see  Viet-Nam  approaching
its  own  crucial  period,  paramount  question  in  their  minds  is  whether  it
will  back  down  when  chips  are  down.  Vietnamese  thus  want  US  forces
introduced  in  order  to  demonstrate  US  determination  to  stick  it  out  with
them  against  Communists.  They  do  not  want  to  be  victims  of  political  set-
tlement with  communists.  This  is  especially  true  of  those  publicly  identified
as  anti-communist  like  Dean  Vu  Quoc  Thue  who  collaborated  with  Dr.
Eugene  Staley  on  Joint  Experts  Report.

Most  Vietnamese  whose  thoughts  on  this  subject  have  been  developed
are  not  thinking  in  terms  of  US  troops  to  fight  guerrillas  but  rather  of  a
reassuring  presence  of  US  forces  in  Viet-Nam.  These  persons  undoubtedly
feel,  however,  that  if  war  in  Viet-Nam  continues  to  move  toward  overt
conventional  aggression  as  opposed  to  its  guerrilla  character,  combat  role
for  US  troops  could  eventually  arise.

The  special  commitment  involved  in  committing  even  a  small  force  of  ground
troops  was  generally  recognized.  We  ha\e  notes  on  an  ISA  staflf  paper,  for  ex-
ample, which  ranked  the  various  types  of  increased  U.S.  military  aid  in  ascend-
ing order  of  commitment,  and  of  course,  placed  the  flood  task  force  at  the  top.
According  to  the  notes,

Any  combat  elements,  such  as  in  the  task  force,  would  come  under  at-
tack and  would  need  to  defend  themselves,  committing  U.S.  prestige
deeply.  U.S.  troops  would  then  be  fighting  in  South  Vietnam  and  could
not  withdraw  under  fire.  Thus,  the  introduction  of  U.S.  troops  in  South
Vietnam  would  be  a  decisive  act  and  must  be  sent  to  achieve  a  completely
decisive  mission.  This  mission  would  probably  require,  over  time,  increased
numbers  of  U.S.  troops:  DR\'  intervention  would  probably  increase  until
a  large  number  of  U.S.  troops  were  required,  three  or  more  divisions.

This  assessment  dilTered  from  that  in  General  Taylor's  cables  only  in  not
stressing  the  hope  that  a  U.S.  willingness  to  bomb  the  north  would  deter  North
Vietnamese  escalation  of  its  own  commitment.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  107

A  special  NIE  prepared  at  this  time  reached  essentially  the  same  conclusions.

This  SNTE,  incidentally,  is  the  only  staff  paper  found  in  the  available  record
which  treats  communist  reactions  primarily  in  terms  of  the  separate  national
interests  of  Hanoi,  Moscow,  and  Peiping,  rather  than  primarily  in  terms  of  an
overall  communist  strategy  for  which  Hanoi,  is  acting  as  an  agent.  In  particular,
the  Gilpatric  Task  Force  Report,  it  will  be  recalled,  began  with  references  to  a
communist  "master  plan'  for  taking  over  Southeast  Asia.  The  Taylor  Mission
Report,  similarly,  began  with  a  section  on  "Communist  Strategv  in  Southeast
Asia""  and  opening:

At  the  present  time,  the  Communists  are  pursuing  a  clear  and  systematic
strategy  in  Southeast  Asia.  It  is  a  strategy  of  extending  Communist  power
and  influence  in  ways  which  bypass  U.S.  nuclear  strength,  U.S.  conven-
tional naval,  air,  and  ground  forces,  and  the  conventional  strength  of
indigenous  forces  in  the  area.  Their  strategy  is  rooted  in  the  fact  that  inter-
national law  and  practice  does  not  yet  recognize  the  mounting  of  guerrilla
war  across  borders  as  aggression  justifying  counterattack  at  the  source.

The  November  5  SNIE  presumablv  indicates  the  principal  courses  of  action
that  were  under  formal  review  at  the  time;

The  courses  of  action  here  considered  were  given  to  the  intelligence
community  for  the  purposes  of  this  estimate  and  were  not  intended  to
represent  the  full  range  of  possible  courses  of  action.  The  given  courses  of
action  are:

A.  The  introduction  of  a  US  airlift  into  and  within  South  Vietnam,  in-
creased logistics  support,  and  an  increase  in  MA.AG  strength  to  provide  US
advisers  dov,  n  to  battalion  le\el;

B.  The  introduction  into  South  Vietnam  of  a  US  force  of  about  8,000-
10,000  troops,  mostly  engineers  with  some  combat  support,  in  response  to
an  appeal  from  President  Diem  for  assistance  in  flood  relief;

C.  The  introduction  into  the  area  of  a  US  combat  force  of  25,000  to
40,000  to  engage  with  South  Vietnamese  forces  in  ground,  air,  and  naval
operations  against  the  Viet  Cong;  and

D.  An  announcement  by  the  US  of  its  determination  to  hold  South  Viet-
nam and  a  warning,  either  private  or  public,  that  North  Vietnamese  sup-
port of  the  Viet  Cong  must  cease  or  the  US  would  launch  air  attacks
against  North  Vietnam.  This  action  would  be  taken  in  conjunction  with
Course  A,  B.  or  C.

These  proposed  courses  of  action  correspond  to  those  outlined  for  considera-
tion by  the  Taylor  Mission,  with  the  exception  that  the  flood  task  force  proposed
by  Taylor  has  been  substituted  for  the  former  "intermediate"'  solution  of  station-
ing a  token  U.S.  force  at  DaNang,  and  that  an  opinion  is  asked  on  the  prospects
of^threats  to  bomb  the  north,  again  reflecting  the  Taylor  Mission  Report.

The  gist  of  the  SNTE  was^'that  North  \'ietnamese  would  respond  to  an  in-
creased U.S.  commitment  with  an  offsetting  increase  in  infiltrated  support  for
the  Viet  Cons.  Thus,  the  main  difference  in  the  estimated  communist  reaction
to  Courses  A^  B,  and  C  was  that  each  would  be  stronger  than  its  predecessor.
On  the  prospects  for  bombing  the  north,  the  SNIE  implies  that  threats  to  bomb
would  not  cause  Hanoi  to  stop  its  support  for  the  Viet  Cong,  and  that  actual


108 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

attacks  on  the  North  would  bring  a  strong  response  from  Moscow  and  Peiping.
who  would  "regard  the  defense  of  North  Vietnam  against  such  an  attack  as  im-
perative."

B. FINAL  RECOMMENDATIONS

On  November  8,  McNamara  sent  the  following  memorandum  on  behalf  of
himself,  Gilpatric,  and  the  JCS:


MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

The  basic  issue  framed  by  the  Taylor  Report  is  whether  the  U.S.  shall:

a.  Commit  itself  to  the  clear  objective  of  preventing  the  fall  of  South
Vietnam  to  Communism,  and

b.  Support  this  commitment  by  necessarv  immediate  military  actions
and  preparations  for  possible  later  actions.

The  Joint  Chiefs.  Mr.  Gilpatric,  and  I  have  reached  the  following  con-
clusions:

1.  The  fall  of  South  Vietnam  to  Communism  would  lead  to  the  fairly
rapid  extension  of  Communist  control,  or  complete  accommodation  to
Communism,  in  the  rest  of  mainland  Southeast  Asia  and  in  Indonesia.  The
strategic  implications  worldwide,  particularly  in  the  Orient,  would  be  ex-
tremely serious.

2.  The  chances  are  against,  probablv  sharplv  against,  preventing  that
fall  by  any  measures  short  of  the  introduction  of  U.S.  forces  on  a  substan-
tial scale.  We  accept  General  Tavlor's  judgment  that  the  various  measures
proposed  by  him  short  of  this  are  useful  but  will  not  in  themselves  do  the
job  of  restoring  confidence  and  setting  Diem  on  the  wav  to  winning  his
fight.

3.  The  introduction  of  a  U.S.  force  of  the  magnitude  of  an  initial  8,000
men  in  a  flood  relief  context  will  be  of  great  help  to  Diem.  However,  it  will
not  convince  the  other  side  (whether  the  shots  are  called  from  Moscow,
Peiping.  or  Hanoi)  that  we  mean  business.  Moreover,  it  probably  will
not  tip  the  scales  decisi\ely.  We  would  be  almost  certain  to  get  increasingly
mired  down  in  an  inconclusive  struggle.

4.  The  other  side  can  be  convinced  we  mean  business  only  if  we  ac-
companv  the  initial  force  introduction  bv  a  clear  commitment  to  the  full
objective  stated  above,  accompanied  bv  a  warning  through  some  channel
to  Hanoi  that  continued  support  of  the  \'iet  Cong  will  lead  to  punitive  re-
taliation against  North  \'ietnam.

5.  If  we  act  in  this  wa\ .  the  ultimate  possible  extent  of  our  military  com-
mitment must  be  faced.  The  struggle  mav  be  prolonged  and  Hanoi  and
Peiping  mav  intervene  overtlv.  In  view  of  the  logistic  difficulties  faced  by
the  other  side.  I  believe  we  can  assume  that  the  maximum  U.S.  forces  re-
quired on  the  ground  in  Southeast  Asia  will  not  exceed  6  divisions,  or  about
205.000  men  (CINCPAC  Plan  32-59.  Phase  IV).  Our  military  posture  is,
or  with  the  addition  of  more  National  Guard  or  regular  Armv  divisions,
can  be  made,  adequate  to  furnish  these  forces  without  serious  interference
with  our  present  Berlin  plans.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  109

6.  To  accept  the  stated  objective  is  of  course  a  most  serious  decision.
Military  force  is  not  the  only  element  of  what  must  be  a  most  carefully  co-
ordinated set  of  actions.  Success  will  depend  on  factors  many  of  which  are
not  within  our  control — notably  the  conduct  of  Diem  himself  and  other
leaders  in  the  area.  Laos  will  remain  a  major  problem.  The  domestic
political  implications  of  accepting  the  objective  are  also  grave,  although  it
is  our  feeling  that  the  country  will  respond  better  to  a  firm  initial  position
than  to  courses  of  action  that  lead  us  in  only  gradually,  and  that  in
the  meantime  are  sure  to  involve  casualties.  The  over-all  effect  on  Mos-
cow and  Peiping  will  need  careful  weighing  and  may  well  he  mixed;  how-
ever, permitting  South  Vietnam  to  fall  can  only  strengthen  and  encourage
them  greatly.

7.  In  sum :

a.  We  do  not  believe  major  units  of  U.S.  forces  should  be  introduced
in  South  Vietnam  unless  we  are  willing  to  make  an  affirmative  decision
on  the  issue  stated  at  the  start  of  this  memorandum.

b.  We  are  inclined  to  recommend  that  we  do  commit  the  U.S.  to  the
clear  objective  of  preventing  the  fall  of  South  Vietnam  to  Communism
and  that  we  support  this  commitment  by  the  necessary  military  actions.

c.  If  such  a  commitment  is  agreed  upon,  we  support  the  recommenda-
tions of  General  Taylor  as  the  first  steps  toward  its  fulfillment.

Sgd:  Robert  S.  McNamara


A  number  of  things  are  striking  about  this  memorandum,  including  of  course
the  judgment  that  the  "maximum"  U.S.  ground  forces  required,  even  in  the  case
of  overt  intervention  bv  not  only  North  Vietnam,  but  China  as  well,  would  "not
exceed"  205,000  men.  This  estimate  of  the  requirement  to  deal  with  a  large  scale
overt  invasion  is  consistent  with  the  Chiefs  earlier  estimate  that  the  addition  of
40,000  U.S.  troops  to  the  South  Vietnamese  forces  would  be  sufficient  to  "clean
up"  the  Viet  Cong.

But  the  strongest  message  to  the  President  in  the  memorandum  (growing  out
of  points  3,  4,  and  7c)  was  surely  that  if  he  agreed  to  sending  the  military  task
force,  he  should  be  prepared  for  follow-up  recommendations  for  re-enforce-
ments and  to  threaten  Hanoi  with  bombing.  Unless  the  SNIE  was  wholly  wrong,
threats  to  bomb  Hanoi  would  not  turn  off  the  war,  and  Hanoi  would  increase
its  infiltration  in  response  to  U.S.  commitments  of  troops.  E\en  should  Hanoi
not  react  with  counter-escalation,  the  President  knew  that  the  Chiefs,  at  least,
were  already  on  record  as  desiring  a  prompt  build-up  to  40.000  ground  troops.
In  short,  the  President  was  being  told  that  the  issue  was  not  whether  to  send  an
8.000-man  task  force,  but  whether  or  not  to  embark  on  a  course  that,  without
some  extraordinary  good  luck,  would  lead  to  combat  involvement  in  Southeast
Asia  on  a  very  substantial  scale.  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  being  warned  that
anything  less  than  sending  the  task  force  was  very  likely  to  fail  to  prevent  the
fall  of  Vietnam,  since  "the  odds  are  against,  probably  sharply  against,  prevent-
ing that  fall  by  any  means  short  of  the  introduction  of  U.S.  forces  on  a  sub-
stantial scale"  (of  which  the  task  force  would  be  the  first  increment).

Although  the  Chief's  position  here  is  clear,  because  their  views  are  on  record
in  other  memoranda,  McNamara's  own  position  remains  a  little  ambiguous.  For
the  paper  does  not  flatly  recommend  going  ahead;  it  only  states  he  and  his  col-


110 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

leagues  are  "inclined"  to  recommend  going  ahead.  Three  davs  later  McNamara
joined  Rusk  in  a  quite  different  recommendation,  and  one  obviously  more  to  the
President's  liking  (and,  in  the  nature  of  such  things,  quite  possibly  drawn  up  to
the  President's  specifications).

As  with  the  May  revision  of  the  Gilpatric  Report,  this  paper  combines  an
escalation  of  the  rhetoric  with  a  toning  down  of  the  actions  the  President  is
asked  to  take.  Since  the  NSAM  formalizing  the  President's  decisions  was  taken
essentially  verbatim  from  this  paper,  the  complete  text  is  reprinted  here.  (The
NSAM  consisted  of  the  Recommendations  section  of  this  memorandum,  except
that  Point  1  of  the  recommendations  was  deleted.)

Of  particular  importance  in  this  second  memorandum  to  the  President  was
Section  4,  with  its  explicit  sorting  of  U.S.  military  aid  into  Category  A,  support
forces,  which  were  to  be  sent  promptly;  and  Category  B,  "larger  organized  units
with  actual  or  potential  direct  military  missions"  on  which  no  immediate  decision
was  recommended.  There  is  no  explicit  reference  in  the  paper  to  the  flood  relief
task  force;  it  simply  does  not  appear  in  the  list  of  recommended  actions,  pre-
sumably on  the  grounds  that  it  goes  in  Category  B.  Category  B  forces,  the  paper
notes,  "involve  a  certain  dilemma:  if  there  is  a  strong  South  Vietnamese  effort,
they  may  not  be  needed;  if  there  is  not  such  an  effort.  United  States  forces
could  not  accomplish  their  mission  in  the  midst  of  an  apathetic  or  hostile  popula-
tion."

If  McNamara's  earlier  memorandum  is  read  carefully,  the  same  sort  of  warn-
ing is  found,  although  it  sounds  much  more  perfunctory.  But  that  such  warn-
ings were  included  shows  a  striking  contrast  with  the  last  go-around  in  May.
Then,  the  original  Defense  version  of  the  Gilpatric  Task  Force  Report  contained
no  hint  of  such  a  qualification,  and  there  was  only  a  quite  vague  warning  in  the
State  revisions.  Part  of  the  reason,  undoubtedly,  was  the  6  month's  additional
experience  in  dealing  with  Diem.  A  larger  part,  though,  almost  certainly  flowed
from  the  fact  that  the  insurgency  had  by  now  shown  enough  strength  so  that
there  was  now  in  everyone's  minds  the  possibility  that  the  U.S.  might  someday
face  the  choice  of  giving  up  on  Vietnam  or  taking  over  a  major  part  of  the
war.

These  warnings  (that  even  a  major  U.S.  commitment  to  the  ground  war
would  not  assure  success)  were  obvioush  in  some  conflict  with  the  recom-
mendations both  papers  made  for  a  clear-cut  U.S.  commitment  to  save  South
Vietnam.  The  contrast  is  all  the  sharper  in  the  joint  Rusk  McNamara  memo-
randum, where  the  warning  is  so  forcefully  given.

Here  is  the  Rusk  McNamara  memorandum.


November  11,  1961

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

Subject: SoutJ]  Viet-Nam

1 .  United  States  National  Interests  in  South  Viet-Nam.

The  deteriorating  situation  in  South  Viet-Nam  requires  attention  to  the
nature  and  scope  of  United  States  national  interests  in  that  country.  The


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961 1 1  1

loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  to  Communism  would  involve  the  transfer  of  a
nation  of  20  million  people  from  the  free  world  to  the  Communist  bloc.
The  loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  would  make  pointless  any  further  discussion
about  the  importance  of  Southeast  Asia  to  the  free  world;  we  would  have
to  face  the  near  certainty  that  the  remainder  of  Southeast  Asia  and
Indonesia  would  move  to  a  complete  accommodation  with  Communism,
if  not  formal  incorporation  within  the  Communist  bloc.  The  United  States,
as  a  member  of  SEATO,  has  commitments  with  respect  to  South  Viet-Nam
under  the  Protocol  to  the  SEATO  Treatv.  Additionallv.  in  a  formal  state-
ment at  the  conclusion  session  of  the  1954  Geneva  Conference,  the  United
States  representative  stated  that  the  United  States  "would  view  any  re-
newal of  the  aggression  .  .  .  with  grave  concern  and  seriously  threatening
mternational  peace  and  security."

The  loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  to  Communism  would  not  only  destroy
SEATO  but  would  undermine  the  credibilitv  of  American  commitments
elsewhere.  Further ,  loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  would  stimulate  bitter
domestic  controversies  in  the  United  States  and  would  be  seized  upon  by
extreme  elements  to  divide  the  country  and  harass  the  Administration.

2.  The  Problem  of  Saving  South  Viet-Nam.

It  seems,  on  the  face  of  it.  absurd  to  think  that  a  nation  of  20  million
people  can  be  subverted  by  15-20  thousand  active  guerrillas  if  the  Govern-
ment and  people  of  that  country  do  not  wish  to  be  subverted.  South  Viet-Nam
is  not,  however,  a  highly  organized  society  with  an  effective  governing
apparatus  and  a  population  accustomed  to  carrying  civic  responsibility.
Public  apathv  is  encouraged  b\  the  inabilit\  of  most  citizens  to  act  directly
as  well  as  by  the  tactics  of  terror  emplo\ed  by  the  guerrillas  throughout
the  countryside.  Inept  administration  and  the  absence  of  a  strong  non-
Communist  political  coalition  have  made  it  difficult  to  bring  available
resources  to  bear  upon  the  guerrilla  problem  and  to  make  the  most  effective
use  of  available  external  aid.  Under  the  best  of  conditions  the  threat  posed
bv  the  presence  of  15-20  thousand  guerrillas,  well  disciplined  under  well-
trained  cadres,  v^  ould  be  difficult  to  meet.

3.  The  United  States'  Objective  in  South  Viet-Nam.

The  United  States  should  commit  itself  to  the  clear  objective  of  prevent-
ing the  fall  of  South  Viet-Nam  to  Communism.  The  basic  means  for  ac-
complishing this  objective  must  be  to  put  the  Government  of  South  Viet-
Nam  into  a  position  to  win  its  own  war  against  the  guerrillas.  We  must
insist  that  that  Government  itself  take  the  measures  necessary  for  that  pur-
pose in  exchange  for  large-scale  United  States  assistance  in  the  military,
economic  and  political  fields.  At  the  same  time  we  must  recognize  that  it
will  probably  not  be  possible  for  the  GVN  to  win  this  war  as  long  as  the
flow  of  men  and  supplies  from  North  Viet-Nam  continues  unchecked  and
the  guerrillas  enjoy  a  safe  sanctuary  in  neighboring  territory.

We  should  be  prepared  to  introduce  United  States  combat  forces  if  that
should  become  necessary  for  success.  Dependent  upon  the  circumstances,
it  may  also  be  necessarv  for  United  States  forces  to  strike  at  the  source  of
the  aggression  in  North  Viet-Nam.


112 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

4.  The  Use  of  United  States  Forces  in  South  Viet-Nam.

The  commitment  of  United  States  forces  to  South  Viet-Nam  involves
two  different  categories:  (A)  Units  of  modest  size  required  for  the  direct
support  of  South  Viet-Namese  military  effort,  such  as  communications,
helicopter  and  other  forms  of  airlift,  reconnaissance  aircraft,  naval
patrols,  intelligence  units,  etc.,  and  (B)  larger  organized  units  with  actual
or  potential  direct  military  missions.  Category  (A )  should  be  introduced
as  speedily  as  possible.  Category  (B)  units  pose  a  more  serious  problem
in  that  they  are  much  more  significant  from  the  point  of  view  of  domes-
tic and  international  political  factors  and  greatly  increase  the  probabilities
of  Communist  bloc  escalation.  Further,  the  employment  of  United  States
comat  forces  (in  the  absence  of  Communist  bloc  escalation)  involves  a
certain  dilemma:  if  there  is  a  strong  South-Vietnamese  effort,  they  may
not  be  needed;  if  there  is  not  such  an  effort.  United  States  forces  could  not
accomplish  their  mission  in  the  midst  of  an  apathetic  or  hostile  population.
Under  present  circumstances,  therefore,  the  question  of  injecting  United
States  and  SEATO  combat  forces  should  in  large  part  be  considered  as  a
contribution  to  the  morale  of  the  South  Viet-Namese  in  their  own  effort
to  do  the  principal  job  themselves.

5.  Probable  Extent  of  the  Commitment  of  United  States  Forces.

If  we  commit  Category  (B)  forces  to  South  Viet-Nam  the  ultimate
possible  extent  of  our  military  commitment  in  Southeast  Asia  must  be
faced.  The  struggle  may  be  prolonged,  and  Hanoi  and  Peiping  may  overtly
intervene.  It  is  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  the  loint  Chiefs  of
Staff  that,  in  the  light  of  the  logistic  difficulties  faced  by  the  other  side,
we  can  assume  that  the  maximum  United  States  forces  required  on  the
ground  in  Southeast  Asia  would  not  exceed  six  divisions,  or  about  205,000
men  (CINCPAC  Plan  32  59  PHASE  IV).  This  would  be  in  addition  to
local  forces  and  such  SEATO  forces  as  may  be  engaged.  It  is  also  the  view
of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  that  our  military
posture  is,  or,  with  the  addition  of  more  National  Guard  or  regular  Army
divisions,  can  be  made,  adequate  to  furnish  these  forces  and  support  them
in  action  without  serious  interference  with  our  present  Berlin  plans.

6.  Relation  to  Laos.

It  must  be  understood  that  the  introduction  of  American  combat  forces
into  Viet-Nam  prior  to  a  Laotian  settlement  would  run  a  considerable  risk
of  stimulating  a  Communist  breach  of  the  cease  fire  and  a  resumption  of
hostilities  in  Laos.  This  could  present  us  with  a  choice  between  the  use  of
combat  forces  in  Laos  or  an  abandonment  of  that  country  to  full  Com-
munist control.  At  the  present  time,  there  is  at  least  a  chance  that  a  settle-
ment can  be  reached  in  Laos  on  the  basis  of  a  weak  and  unsatisfactory
Souvanna  Phouma  Government.  The  prospective  agreement  on  Laos  in-
cludes a  provision  that  Laos  will  not  be  used  as  a  transit  area  or  as  a  base
for  interfering  in  the  affairs  of  other  countries  such  as  South  Viet-Nam.
After  a  Laotian  settlement,  the  introduction  of  United  States  forces  into
Viet-Nam  could  serve  to  stabilize  the  position  both  in  Viet-Nam  and  in
Laos  by  registering  our  determination  to  see  to  it  that  the  Laotian  settle-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  113

ment  was  as  far  as  the  United  States  would  be  willing  to  see  Communist
influence  in  Southeast  Asia  de\elop.

7.  The  Need  for  M iiltilateral  Action.

From  the  political  point  of  view,  both  domestic  and  international,  it
would  seem  important  to  involve  forces  from  other  nations  alonsside  of
United  States  Category  (B)  forces  in  Viet-Nam.  It  should  be  difficult  to
explain  to  our  own  people  why  no  effort  had  been  made  to  invoke  SEATO
or  why  the  United  States  undertook  to  carr\'  this  burden  unilaterallv.  Our
position  would  be  greatlv  strengthened  if  the  introduction  of  forces  could
be  taken  as  a  SEATO  action,  accompanied  h\  units  of  other  SEATO
countries,  with  a  full  SEATO  report  to  the  United  Nations  of  the  purposes
of  the  action  itself.

Apart  from  the  armed  forces,  there  would  be  political  advantage  in
enlisting  the  interest  of  other  nations,  including  neutrals,  in  the  securitv
and  well-being  of  South  Viet-Nam.  This  might  be  done  bv  seeking  such
assistance  as  Malayan  police  officials  Crecentlv  offered  Diem  b\  the  funku)
and  by  technical  assistance  personnel  in  other  fields,  either  bilateralh  or
through  international  organizations.

8.  Initial  Diplomatic  Action  by  the  L' nited  States.

If  the  recommendations,  below,  are  appro\ed.  the  United  States  should
consult  intensively  with  other  SE.-\TO  governments  to  obtain  their  full
support  of  the  course  of  action  contemplated.  .A.t  the  appropriate  stage,  a
direct  approach  should  be  made  b\  the  United  States  to  Moscow,  through
normal  or  special  channels,  pointing  out  that  we  cannot  accept  the
movement  of  cadres,  arms  and  other  supplies  into  South  Viet-Nam  in  sup-
port of  the  guerrillas.  We  should  also  discuss  the  problem  with  neutral
go\ernments  in  the  general  area  and  get  them  to  face  up  to  their  own
interests  in  the  securitv  of  South  Viet-Nam:  these  governments  will  be
concerned  about  (a)  the  introduction  of  United  States  combat  forces
and  (b)  the  withdrawal  of  United  States  support  from  Southeast  Asia;
their  concern,  therefore,  might  be  usefullv  expressed  either  to  Communist
bloc  countries  or  in  political  support  for  what  ma\  prove  necessary  in  South
\'iet-Nam  itself.

RECOMMENDATIONS

In  the  light  of  the  foregoing,  the  Secretar\  of  State  and  the  Secretary
of  Defense  recommend  that:

1.  We  now  take  the  decision  to  commit  ourselves  to  the  objective  of
preventing  the  fall  of  South  Viet-Nam  to  Communism  and  that,  in  doine
so,  we  recognize  that  the  introduction  of  United  States  and  other  SE.ATO
forces  may  be  necessan,"  to  achie\e  this  objective.  (However,  if  it  is  nec-
essary to  commit  outside  forces  to  achieve  the  foregoing  objective  our
decision  to  introduce  United  States  forces  should  not  be  contingent  upon
unanimous  SE.ATO  agreement  thereto.  )

2.  The  Department  of  Defense  be  prepared  with  plans  for  the  use  of


114 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

United  States  forces  in  South  Viet-Nam  under  one  or  more  of  the  fol-
lowing purposes:

(a)  Use  of  a  significant  number  of  United  States  forces  to  signify
United  States  determination  to  defend  South  Viet-Nam  and  to  boost
South  Viet-Nam  morale.

(b)  Use  of  substantial  United  States  forces  to  assist  in  suppressing
Viet  Cong  insurgency  short  of  engaging  in  detailed  counter-guerrilla
operations  but  including  relevant  operations  in  North  Viet-Nam.

(c)  Use  of  United  States  forces  to  deal  with  the  situation  if  there  is
organized  Communist  military  intervention.

3.  We  immediately  undertake  the  following  actions  in  support  of  the
GVN:

(a)  Provide  increased  air  lift  to  the  GVN  forces,  including  heli-
copters, light  aviation,  and  transport  aircraft,  manned  to  the  extent  nec-
essary by  United  States  uniformed  personnel  and  under  United  States
operational  control.

(b)  Provide  such  additional  equipment  and  United  States  uniformed
personnel  as  may  be  necessary  for  air  reconnaissance,  photography,
instruction  in  and  execution  of  air-ground  support  techniques,  and  for
special  intelligence.

(c)  Provide  the  GVN  with  small  craft,  including  such  United  States
uniformed  advisers  and  operating  personnel  as  may  be  necessary  for
quick  and  effective  operations  in  effecting  surveillance  and  control
over  coastal  waters  and  inland  waterways.

(d)  Provide  expedited  training  and  equipping  of  the  civil  guard  and
the  self-defense  corps  with  the  objective  of  relieving  the  regular  Army
of  static  missions  and  freeing  it  for  mobile  offensive  operations.

(e)  Provide  such  personnel  and  equipment  as  may  be  necessary  to
improve  the  military-political  intelligence  svstem  beginning  at  the  pro-
vincial level  and  extending  upward  through  the  Government  and  the
armed  forces  to  the  Central  Intelligence  Organization.

(f)  Provide  such  new  terms  of  reference,  reorganization  and  addi-
tional personnel  for  United  States  militarv  forces  as  are  required  for
increased  United  States  participation  in  the  direction  and  control  of
GVN  military  operations  and  to  carry  out  the  other  increased  responsi-
bilities which  accrue  to  MAAG  under  these  recommendations.

(g)  Provide  such  increased  economic  aid  as  may  be  required  to  per-
mit the  GVN  to  pursue  a  vigorous  flood  relief  and  rehabilitation  pro-
gram, to  supplv  material  in  support  of  the  security  effort,  and  to  give
priority  to  projects  in  support  of  this  expanded  counter-insurgency  pro-
gram. (This  could  include  increases  in  military  pay,  a  full  suppy  of  a
wide  range  of  materials  such  as  food,  medical  supplies,  transportation
equipment,  communications  equipment,  and  any  other  items  where
material  help  could  assist  the  GVN  in  winning  the  war  against  the  Viet
Cong.)

(h)  Encourage  and  support  (including  financial  support)  a  request
by  the  GVN  to  the  FAO  or  any  other  appropriate  international  organ-
ization for  multilateral  assistance  in  the  relief  and  rehabilitation  of  the
flood  area.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  115

(i)  Provide  individual  administrators  and  advisers  for  insertion  into
the  Governmental  machinery  of  South  Viet-Nam  in  tvpes  and  numbers
to  be  agreed  upon  by  the  two  Governments.

(j)  Provide  personnel  for  a  joint  survey  with  the  G\'N  of  conditions
in  each  of  the  pro\inces  to  assess  the  social,  political,  intelligence,  and
military  factors  bearing  on  the  prosecution  of  the  counter-insurgencv  pro-
gram in  order  to  reach  a  common  estimate  of  these  factors  and  a  com-
mon determination  of  how  to  deal  with  them.

4.  Ambassador  Nolting  be  instructed  to  make  an  immediate  approach
to  President  Diem  to  the  effect  that  the  Governmicnt  of  the  United  States
is  prepared  to  join  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam  in  a  sharply  increased
joint  effort  to  cope  with  the  Viet  Cong  threat  and  the  ravages  of  the  flood
as  set  forth  under  3.,  above,  if,  on  its  part,  the  Government  of  \'iet-Nam
is  prepared  to  carry  out  an  effective  and  total  mobilization  of  its  own
resources,  both  material  and  human,  for  the  same  end.  Before  setting  in
motion  the  United  States  proposals  listed  above,  the  United  States  Gov-
ernment would  appreciate  confirmation  of  their  acceptabilitv  to  the  GVN,
and  an  expression  from  the  GVN  of  the  undertakings  it  is  prepared  to  make
to  insure  the  success  of  this  joint  effort.  On  the  part  of  the  United  States,
it  would  be  expected  that  these  G\'N  undertakings  could  include,  in  ac-
cordance with  the  detailed  recommendations  of  [line  missing]

(a)  Prompt  and  appropriate  legislative  and  administrative  action  to
put  the  nation  on  a  wartime  footing  to  mobilize  its  entire  resources.
(This  would  include  a  decentralization  and  broadening  of  the  Govern-
ment so  as  to  realize  the  full  potential  of  all  non-Communist  elements  in
the  countrv  willing  to  contribute  to  the  common  struggle.)

(b)  The  establishment  of  appropriate  Governmental  wartime  agen-
cies with  adequate  authority  to  perform  their  functions  effectively.

(c)  Overhaul  of  the  militarv  establishment  and  command  structure
so  as  to  create  an  effective  military  organization  for  the  prosecution  of
the  war.

5.  Verv  shortlv  before  the  arrival  in  South  Viet-Nam  of  the  first  incre-
ments of' United  States  military  personnel  and  equipment  proposed  under
3.,  above,  that  would  exceed'  the  Geneva  Accord  ceilings,  publish  the
■■Jorden  report"  as  a  United  States  "white  paper."  transmitting  it  as  simul-
taneouslv  as  possible  to  the  Governments  of  all  countries  with  which  we
have  diplomatic  relations,  including  the  Communist  states.

6.  Simultaneous  with  the  publication  of  the  -Jorden  report,"  release  an
exchange  of  letters  between  Diem  and  the  President.

fa)  Diem's  letter  would  include  reference  to  the  DR\'  violations  of
Geneva  Accords  as  set  forth  in  the  October  24  GVN  letter  to  the  ICC
and  other  documents:  pertinent  references  to  GVN  statements  with
respect  to  its  intent  to  obsen'e  the  Geneva  Accords:  reference  to  its
need  for  flood  relief  and  rehabilitation:  reference  to  previous  United
States  aid  and  the  compliance  hitherto  by  both  countries  with  the  Geneva
Accords:  reference  to  the  USG  statement  at  the  time  the  Geneva  Ac-
cords were  signed:  the  necessity  now  of  exceeding  some  provisions  of
the  Accords  in  view  of  the  DR\'  violations  thereof;  the  lack  of  aggres-


i


116 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

sive  intent  with  respect  to  the  DRV:  GVN  intent  to  return  to  strict
compliance  with  the  Geneva  Accords  as  soon  as  the  DRV  violations
ceased;  and  request  for  additional  United  States  assistance  in  framework
foregoing  policy.  The  letter  should  also  set  forth  in  appropriate  gen-
eral terms  steps  Diem  has  taken  and  is  taking  to  reform  Governmental
structure.

(b)  The  President's  reply  would  be  responsive  to  Diem's  request  for
additional  assistance  and  acknowledge  and  agree  to  Diem's  statements
on  the  intent  promptly  to  return  to  strict  compliance  with  the  Geneva
Accords  as  soon  as  DRV  violations  have  ceased.

7.  Simultaneous  with  steps  5  and  6,  above,  make  a  private  approach  to
the  Soviet  Union  that  would  include:  our  determination  to  prevent  the  fall
of  South  Viet-Nam  to  Communism  by  whatever  means  is  necessary:  our
concern  over  dangers  to  peace  presented  by  the  aggressive  DRV  policy
with  respect  to  South  Vict-Nam;  our  intent  to  return  to  full  compliance
with  the  Geneva  Accords  as  soon  as  the  DRV  does  so;  the  distinction  we
draw  between  Laos  and  South  Viet-Nam;  and  our  expectation  that  the
Soviet  Union  will  exercise  its  influence  on  the  CHICOMS  and  the  DRV.

8.  A  special  diplomatic  approach  made  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  its
role  as  co-Chairman  of  the  Geneva  Conference  requesting  that  the  United
Kingdom  seek  the  support  of  the  Soviet  co-Chairman  for  a  cessation  of
DRV  aggression  against  South  Viet-Nam.

9.  A  special  diplomatic  approach  also  to  he  made  to  India,  both  in  its
role  as  Chairman  of  the  ICC  and  as  a  power  having  relations  with  Peiping
and  Hanoi.  This  approach  should  be  made  immediately  prior  to  public
release  of  the  "Jorden  report"  and  the  exchange  of  letters  between  Diem
and  the  President.

10.  Immediately  prior  to  the  release  of  the  "Jorden  report"  and  the
exchange  of  letters  between  Diem  and  the  President,  special  diplomatic
approaches  also  to  be  made  to  Canada,  as  well  as  Burma,  Indonesia,  Cam-
bodia, Ceylon,  the  UAR,  and  Yugoslavia.  SEATO,  NATO,  and  OAS  mem-
bers should  be  informed  through  those  organizations,  with  selected  members
also  informed  individually.  The  possibilitv  of  some  special  approach  to  Po-
land as  a  member  of  the  ICC  should  also  be  considered.


When  we  reach  this  memorandum  in  the  record,  the  decision  seems  essen-
tially sealed.  Kennedv,  by  everv  indication  in  the  press  at  the  time  and  accord-
ing to  the  recollections  of  all  the  memoirs,  was.  at  the  least,  very  reluctant  to
send  American  ground  forces  to  Vietnam,  and  quite  possibly  every  bit  as  "strongly
opposed"  as  the  leaked  news  stories  depicted  him.  He  now  had  a  joint  recom-
mendation from  his  Secretarv  of  State  and  Secretarv  of  Defense  telling  him  just
what  he  surely  wanted  to  hear:  that  a  decision  on  combat  forces  could  be
deferred.  Consequently.  Kennedy's  decision  on  this  point  can  hardly  be  con-
sidered in  doubt  beyond  November  11,  although  a  formal  NSC  meeting  on  the
question  was  not  held  until  the  15th.  On  the  question  of  demands  on  Diem,  again
there  is  no  reason  to  suspect  the  issue  was  in  doubt  any  later,  at  most,  than  the
11th.  The  only  questions  which  are  in  doubt  are  the  extent  to  which  the  Rusk/
McNamara  memorandum  simph'  happened  to  come  to  the  President  in  such
convenient  form,  or  whether  the  President  arranged  it  so;  and  if  so,  how  far


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  117

this  formal  paper  differed  from  the  real  recommendations  of  the  President's
senior  advisors.  The  record  available  gives  no  basis  for  even  guessing  about  this.
As  noted  earlier,  even  McNamara,  who  is  on  record  with  a  previous,  quite  dif-
ferent memorandum,  cannot  be  flatly  said  to  have  changed  his  mind  (or  been
overruled).  There  is  too  much  room  for  uncertainty  about  what  he  was  really
up  to  when  he  signed  the  memorandum.

In  any  event,  Kennedy  essentially  adopted  the  Rusk/McNamara  set  of  recom-
mendations, ahhough  the  record  is  not  entirely  clear  on  when  he  did  so.  There
was  an  NSC  meeting  November  5;  but  although  at  least  the  Chairman  of  the
ICS  was  there,  the  record  shows  that  even  after  this  meeting  there  was  some
uncertainty  (or  perhaps  reluctance)  in  the  ICS  about  whether  the  decision  had
been  made.  The  record  shows  that  McNamara  phoned  General  Lemnitzer  to
assure  him  that  this  was  the  case.  But  the  cables  transmitting  the  decision  to
Saigon  were  dated  November  14,  the  day  before  the  NSC  meeting.  The  formal
decision  paper  (NSAM  111)  was  not  signed  until  November  22nd.  As  noted
earlier,  the  NSAM  is  essentially  the  recommendations  section  of  the  Rusk/
McNamara  paper,  but  with  the  initial  recommendation  (committing  the  U.S.
to  save  Vietnam)  deleted.

The  NSAM  was  headed  ''First  Phase  of  Vietnam  Program,"  which,  of  course,
implied  that  a  further  decision  to  send  combat  troops  was  in  prospect.  Both  Sor-
enson  and  Hilsman  claim  this  was  really  a  ruse  by  the  President,  who  had
no  intention  of  going  ahead  with  combat  troops  but  did  not  choose  to  argue  the
point  with  his  advisors.

Schlesinger,  apparently  writing  from  diary  notes,  says  the  President  talked
to  him  about  the  combat  troops  recommendations  at  the  time,  describing  the
proposed  first  increment  as  like  an  alcoholic's  first  drink:

The  Taylor-Rostow  report  was  a  careful  and  thoughtful  document,  and
the  President  read  it  with  interest.  He  was  impressed  by  its  description  of
the  situation  as  serious  but  not  hopeless  and  attracted  by  the  idea  of  stiff-
ening the  Diem  regime  through  an  infusion  of  American  advisers.  He  did
not,  however,  like  the  proposal  of  a  direct  American  military  commit-
ment. "They  want  a  force  of  American  troops,"  he  told  me  early  in  No-
vember. 'They  say  it's  necessary  in  order  to  restore  confidence  and  maintain
morale.  But  it  will  be  just  like  Berlin.  The  troops  will  march  in:  the  bands
will  play;  the  crowds  will  cheer:  and  in  four  days  everyone  will  have  for-
gotten. Then  we  will  be  told  we  have  to  send  in  more  troops.  It's  like  taking
a  drink.  The  effect  wears  off,  and  you  have  to  take  another."  The  war  in
Vietnam,  he  added,  could  be  won  only  so  long  as  it  was  their  war.  If  it
were  ever  converted  into  a  white  man's  war,  we  would  lose  as  the  French
had  lost  a  decade  earlier.

Whether,  in  fact,  Kennedy  had  such  a  firm  position  in  mind  at  the  time
cannot  be  surmised,  though,  from  the  official  record  itself.  It  is  easy  to  believe
that  he  did,  for  as  Sorenson  points  out,  Kennedy  had  strong  views  on  the  diffi-
culties of  foreign  troops  putting  down  an  insurgency  dating  from  his  bleak,  but
correct,  appraisals  of  French  prospects  in  Vietnam  as  early  as  1951,  and  again
in  Algeria  in  the  late  1950's.  And  he  was  hardly  alone  in  such  sentiments,
as  shown  in  columns  of  the  period  by  Reston  and  Lippman,  and  in  a  private
communication  from  Galbraith  to  be  quoted  shortly.

But,  Kennedv  did  not  need  to  have  such  a  firm  position  in  mind  to  make
the  decisions  he  did.  There  was  a  case  to  be  made  for  deferring  the  combat


i


118 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

troops  decision  even  if  the  President  accepted  the  view  that  U.S.  troops  com-
mitments were  almost  certainly  needed  in  Vietnam  and  that  putting  them  in
sooner  would  be  better  than  waiting.  There  was,  in  particular,  the  arguments
in  the  Rusk/McNamara  memorandum  that  putting  combat  troops  into  Vietnam
just  then  would  upset  the  Laos  negotiations,  and  the  unstated  but  obvious  argu-
ment that  the  U.S.  perhaps  ought  to  hold  back  on  the  combat  troop  commit-
ment to  gain  leverage  on  Diem.

General  Taylor's  advice,  as  shown  in  the  record,  gave  a  different  ground  for
delaying.  Taylor  argued  that  the  ground  troop  commitment  was  essentially  for
its  psychological,  not  military,  impact.  Taylor's  judgment  was  that  it  was  "very
doubtful"  that  anything  short  of  a  prompt  commitment  of  ground  troops  would
restore  South  Vietnamese  morale.  But  such  a  commitment  would  obviously  be
a  costly  stop.  The  President  was  thoroughly  forewarned  that  such  a  move  would
lead  both  to  continual  pressure  to  send  more  troops  and  to  political  difficulties  at
home  that  would  inevitably  flow  from  the  significant  casualties  that  had  to  be
expected  to  accompany  a  ground  troop  commitment.  The  risk  of  delaying  the
ground  troop  commitment  might  easily  have  been  judged  not  worth  the  certain
costs  that  would  accompany  it.  And  of  course,  in  hindsight,  we  know  that  the
limited  program  approved  by  the  President  was  sufficient  to  put  off  any  im-
minent collapse  of  the  Diem  regime.  Consequently.  Kennedy's  decisions  do  not
tell  us  just  what  his  view  was,  and  indeed  he  did  not  need  to  have  a  firmly
settled  view  to  make  the  decision,  which  after  all,  was  only  to  put  off,  not  to
foreclose  a  decision  to  send  ground  troops.  He  had  only  to  decide  that,  on
balance,  the  risks  of  deferring  the  troop  decisions  were  no  worse  than  the  costs
of  making  it,  and  he  could  have  reached  that  judgment  by  any  number  of
routes.  The  reasons  stated  in  the  various  papers  may  or  may  not  accurately
reflect  the  President's  state  of  mind.  The  only  thing  we  can  be  sure  of  is  that
they  conveyed  his  judgment  of  the  tactically  most  suitable  rationale  to  put  in
writing.  The  most  detailed  record  we  have  of  this  rationale  and  explanation  of
is  the  following  cable  to  Nolting:

....  Review  of  Taylor  Report  has  resulted  in  following  basic  decisions:

1.  Must  essentially  be  a  GVN  task  to  contain  and  reduce  the  VC  threat
at  present  level  of  capability.  Means  organizing  to  go  on  offensive.  We  are
prepared  to  contemplate  further  assistance  after  joint  assessment  establishes
needs  and  possibilities  of  aid  more  preciselv.

2.  No  amount  of  extra  aid  can  he  substitute  for  GVN  taking  measures
to  permit  them  to  assume  offensive  and  strengthen  the  administrative  and
political  bases  of  government.

3.  Do  not  propose  to  introduce  into  GVN  and  US  combat  troops  now,
but  propose  a  phase  of  intense  public  and  diplomatic  activity  to  focus  on
infiltration  from  North.  Shall  decide  later  on  course  of  action  should  in-
filtration not  be  radically  reduced.

4.  On  flood,  decide  best  course  to  treat  as  primarily  civil  problem,  and
occasion  should  be  used  to  draw  in  as  man\'  nationals  of  other  countries
as  can  be  used  in  GVN  flood  plan.  Have  been  encouraged  this  course  on
advice  of  Desai  of  Indian  Foreign  Office  who  observed  a  good  thing  if
some  Indians  and  Burmese  involved  constructively  in  SVN  and  subject  to
VC  attack.  We  prepared  to  put  maximum  pressure  on  FAO.  Do  not  ex-
clude ad  hoc  US  militarv  aid  in  flood  area.

5.  Diplomaticalh'  position  that  the  violations  to  be  documented  in  Jor-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  119

den  report  and  strong  references  to  DRV  attack  against  SVN  in  DM's
letter  to  Kennedy,  need  not  confirm  to  the  world  and  Communists  that
Geneva  accords  are  being  disregarded  by  our  increased  aid.  Need  not  ac-
cuse ourselves  publicly,  make  Communist  job  easier.  GVN  should  be  ad-
vised to  counter  charges  by  leveling  charges  against  DRV  and  insisting
that  if  ICC  investigates  in  SVN  must  equally  investigate  in  NVN.  Appreciate
approach  will  make  ICC  task  difficult  but  will  explain  position  to  Canadians
and  Indians  to  get  their  support.

6.  A  crucial  element  in  USG  willingness  to  move  forward  is  concrete
demonstration  by  Diem  that  he  is  now  prepared  to  work  in  an  orderly
way  on  his  subordinates  and  broaden  the  political  base  of  his  regime.

7.  Package  should  be  presented  as  first  steps  in  a  partnership  in  which
US  is  prepared  to  do  more  as  joint  study  of  facts  and  GVN  performance
makes  increased  US  aid  possible  and  productive.

8.  Still  possible  Laotian  settlement  can  be  reached  pertaining  our  min-
imum objective  of  independent  Laos  on  the  basis  of  a  neutral  coalition,
(although  weak  and  unsatisfactory),  headed  by  Souvanna.  Would  include
provision  Laos  not  be  used  as  transit  area  or  base  for  interference  in  SVN.
Therefore  must  keep  in  mind  impact  of  action  in  SVN  or  prospects  for  ac-
ceptable Laos  settlement.

9.  Introduction  of  US  or  Seato  forces  into  SVN  before  Laotian  settle-
ment might  wreck  changes  for  agreement,  lead  to  break  up  of  Geneva
conference,  break  Laos  cease  fire  by  communists  with  resumption  of  hos-
tilities.

10.  Decision  to  introduce  US  combat  forces  in  GVN  would  have  to
be  taken  in  light  of  GVN  effort,  including  support  from  people,  Laotian
situation,  Berlin  crisis,  readiness  of  allies  or  sharply  increased  tension  with
Bloc,  and  enormous  responsibilities  which  would  have  to  be  borne  by  US
in  event  of  escalation  SEA  or  other  areas.

11.  Hope  measures  outlined  in  instructions  will  galvanize  and  supple-
ment GVN  effort,  making  decision  on  use  of  US  combat  forces  unnecessary
and  no  need  for  decision  in  effect  to  shift  primary  responsibility  for  de-
fense of  SVN  to  USG.

12.  We  are  fully  cognizant  of  extent  to  which  decisions  if  implemented
through  Diem's  acceptance  will  sharply  increase  the  commitment  of  our
prestige  struggle  to  save  SVN.

13.  Very  strictly  for  your  own  information,  DOD  has  been  instructed
to  prepare  plans  for  the  use  of  US  combat  forces  in  SVN  under  various
contingencies,  including  stepped  up  infiltration  as  well  as  organized  inven-
tory (sic)  [military]  intervention.  However  objective  of  our  policy  is  to
do  all  possible  to  accomplish  purpose  without  use  of  US  combat  forces.

An  accompanying  cable  also  provided  this  additional  comment  on  troops
question:

...  4.  It  is  anticipated  that  one  of  the  first  questions  President  Diem
will  raise  with  you  after  your  presentation  of  the  above  joint  proposals
will  be  that  of  introducing  U.S.  combat  troops.  You  are  authorized  to
remind  him  that  the  actions  we  already  have  in  mind  involve  a  substantial
number  of  U.S.  military  personnel  for  operational  duties  in  Viet-Nam  and
that  we  believe  that  these  forces  performing  crucial  missions  can  greatly
increase  the  capacity  of  GVN  forces  to  win  their  war  against  the  Viet


120 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Cong.  You  can  also  tell  him  that  we  believe  that  the  missions  being  under-
taken by  our  forces,  under  present  circumstances,  are  more  suitable  for
white  foreign  troops  than  garrison  duty  or  missions  involving  the  seeking
out  of  Viet  Cong  personnel  submerged  in  the  Viet-Nam  population.  You
can  assure  him  that  the  USG  at  highest  levels  will  be  in  dailv  contact
with  the  situation  in  Viet-Nam  and  will  be  in  constant  touch  with  him
about  requirements  of  the  situation.  .  .  .

C.  AFTERMATH

The  President's  decisions  were  apparently  sent  to  Nolting  on  the  14th,  in  a
cable  that  is  taken  essentially  verbatim  from  the  description  of  the  Rusk/
McNamara  memorandum  (paragraphs  3  and  4)  of  the  program  the  U.S.  was
offering  and  the  response  expected  from  Diem.  But  the  cable  added  some  new
language,  putting  still  more  emphasis  on  pressuring  Diem:

...  It  is  most  important  that  Diem  come  forth  with  changes  which  will
be  recognized  as  having  real  substance  and  meaning.  Rightly  or  wrongly,
his  regime  is  widely  criticized  abroad  and  in  the  U.S.,  and  if  we  are  to
give  our  substantial  support  we  must  be  able  to  point  to  real  administrative
political  and  social  reforms  and  a  real  effort  to  widen  its  base  that  will
give  maximum  confidence  to  the  American  people,  as  well  as  to  world
opinion  that  our  efforts  are  not  directed  towards  the  support  of  an  un-
popular or  ineffective  regime,  but  rather  towards  supporting  the  combined
efforts  of  all  the  non-Communist  people  of  the  GVN  against  a  Communist
take-over.  You  should  make  this  quite  clear,  and  indicate  that  the  U.S.  con-
tribution to  the  proposed  joint  effort  depends  heavily  upon  his  response  to
this  point.

You  should  inform  Diem  that,  in  our  minds,  the  concept  of  the  joint
undertaking  envisages  a  much  closer  relationship  than  the  present  one  of
acting  in  an  advisory  capacity  onlv.  We  would  expect  to  share  in  the
decision-making  process  in  the  political,  economic  and  military  fields  as  they
affect  the  security  situation.

Overall,  then,  what  Kennedv  ended  up  doing  was  to  offer  Diem  a  good
deal  less  than  he  was  expecting,  and  nevertheless  to  couple  this  offer  with  de-
mands on  Diem  for  which,  on  the  basis  of  the  available  record,  we  can  only
assume  he  was  totally  unprepared.  Nolting's  first  cable,  though,  reported  Diem
listened  quietly  and  "took  our  proposals  rather  better  than  I  expected."

Here  are  some  extracts:

...  As  anticipated  [bv  Washington],  his  first  question  was  re  introduc-
tion US  combat  troops.  I  replied  along  line  para  4  reftel.  .  .  .

Diem  said  that  he  presumed  I  realized  that  our  proposals  involved  the
question  of  the  responsibility  of  the  Government  of  Viet  Nam.  Viet  Nam,
he  said,  did  not  want  to  be  a  protectorate.

I  said  that  this  was  well  understood;  we  for  our  part  did  not  wish  to
make  it  one.  Diem  also  pointed  out  that  GVN  was  constantly  in  process
of  making  reforms  but  major  action  could  not  be  taken  without  thorough
consideration  and  without  having  always  in  mind  that  there  was  a  war  to
be  won.  Object  was  to  restore  order,  not  to  create  disorder.  I  said  I  recog-


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  121

nized  that  this  was  a  delicate  judgment,  in  my  opinion,  as  a  friend  of  his
country  and  of  him,  his  greater  risk  was  to  stand  pat,  or  act  too  cau-
tiously .  ,  .

On  the  whole,  I  am  not  discouraged  at  Dicm's  reaction.  In  fact,  he  took
our  proposals  rather  better  than  I  had  expected.  He  has  promised  to  call
me  as  soon  as  he  has  been  able  to  reflect  upon  our  proposals  and,  until
we  have  heard  his  considered  reaction,  I  think  it  would  be  idle  to  speculate
on  outcome  .  .  .

On  the  20th,  Nolting  met  with  Thuan,  who  among  other  things  said  the  U.S.
offer  had  set  Diem  to  wondering  "whether  U.S.  getting  ready  to  back  out  on
Vietnam  .  .  .  as  we  had  done  in  Laos."  Nolting  hoped  Thuan's  bleak  report
was  only  a  bargaining  tactic.

Thuan  said  that  Diem  had  not  yet  discussed  fully  with  him  US  proposals
presented  last  Friday;  but  had  given  him  impression  of  being  "very  sad
and  very  disappointed."  Thuan  said  Diem  had  said  he  now  hesitates  to
put  proposals  before  even  his  cabinet  ministers,  fearing  that  they  would
be  disappointed  and  lose  heart.  He  had  intended  to  discuss  US  proposals
with  both  cabinet  and  selected  members  of  assembly  who  had  been  con-
sulted re  advisability  of  US  forces  at  time  of  Taylor  Mission,  but  now
thought  contrast  between  his  earlier  question  and  our  proposals  too  strik-
ing. Thuan  conveyed  impression  that  Diem  is  brooding  over  US  proposals
and  has  made  no  move  yet  to  develop  specific  ideas  on  actions  GVN  ex-
pected to  take.  Thuan  said  President's  attitude  seemed  to  be  that  US  asking
great  concessions  of  GVN  in  realm  its  sovereignty,  in  exchange  for  little
additional  help;  that  this  is  great  disappointment  after  discussions  with
General  Taylor  involving,  in  particular,  concept  of  Delta  Task  Force;  that
Diem  seemed  to  wonder  whether  US  was  getting  ready  to  back  out  on
Viet  Nam,  as  he  suggested,  we  had  done  in  Laos.

There  followed  a  long  discussion  in  which  Thuan  described  all  the  difficulties
hat  would  be  involved  in  doing  what  the  U.S.  was  asking,  including  the  risk  of
ooking  like  a  U.S.  puppet.

There  is  nothing  in  our  record  to  indicate  any  U.S.  reconsideration  of  the
lecision  against  sending  the  military  task  force.  Thus,  if  Diem  and  Thuan's
esponse  was  a  bargaining  tactic  to  get  the  task  force,  it  failed.  On  the  other
land,  if  Diem  was  using  disappointment  over  the  failure  to  send  the  task  force
s  a  bargaining  counter  to  get  the  U.S.  to  relent  on  '"ts  demands  for  reforms,
hen  he  got  ju'st  what  he  wanted.  But  what  amounted  to  a  complete  U.S.  re-
ersal  on  these  demands  also  may  have  been  influenced  by  the  advice  Kennedy
eceived  from  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  at  this  time.  Kennedy  had  asked
ialbraith  to  stop  by  Saigon  on  his  return  to  India.  Galbraith  did  so,  and  after
hree  days  cabled  back," among  other  things,  the  advice  that  it  was  a  waste
f  effort  to  bargain  with  Diem.

On  the  20th,  the  day  of  Thuan's  meeting  with  Nolting,  Galbraith  cabled
he  President:

There  is  scarcely  the  slightest  practical  chance  that  the  administrative
and  political  reforms  now  "being  pressed  upon  Diem  will  result  in  real
change  .  .  .  there  is  no  solution^that  does  not  involve  a  change  in  govern-
ment.


122 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/V ol.  II

On  the  insurgency,  though,  Galbraith  was  optimistic,  provided  Diem  was
replaced:

While  situation  is  indubitably  bad  military  aspects  seem  to  me  out  of
perspective.  A  comparatively  well-equipped  army  with  paramilitary  forma-
tions number  a  quarter  million  men  is  facing  a  maximum  of  15-18,000
lightly  armed  men.  If  this  were  equality,  the  United  States  would  hardly
be  safe  against  the  Sioux.  I  know  the  theories  about  this  kind  of  warfare.
.  .  .  Given  even  a  moderately  effective  government  and  putting  the  rela-
tive military  power  into  perspective,  I  can't  help  thinking  the  insurgency
might  very  soon  be  settled.

The  following  day,  Galbraith,  now  in  New  Delhi,  sent  a  more  detailed  ap-
praisal, covering  essentially  the  same  ground.  Here  are  some  extracts.

.  .  .  The  Viet  Cong  insurrection  is  still  growing  in  effect.  The  outbreak
on  the  Northern  Highlands  is  matched  by  a  potentially  even  more  damag-
ing impact  on  the  economy  and  especially  on  the  movement  of  rice  to
Saigon.

In  the  absence  of  knowledge  of  the  admixture  of  terror  and  economic
and  social  evangelism  we  had  best  assume  that  it  is  employing  both.  We
must  not  forever  be  guided  by  those  who  misunderstand  the  dynamics  of
revolution  and  imagine  that  because  the  communists  do  not  appeal  to  us
they  are  abhorrent  to  everyone.

In  our  enthusiasm  to  prove  outside  intervention  before  world  opinion
we  have  unquestionably  exaggerated  the  role  of  material  assistance  espe-
cially in  the  main  area  of  insurrection  in  the  far  South.  That  leaders  and
radio  guidance  come  in  we  know.  But  the  amount  of  ammunition  and
weaponry  that  a  man  can  carry  on  his  back  for  several  hundred  kilometers
over  jungle  trails  was  not  increased  appreciablv  by  Marx.  No  major  con-
flict can  depend  on  such  logistic  support.

A  maximum  of  18,000  lightly  armed  men  are  involved  in  the  insurrec-
tion. These  are  GVN  estimates  and  the  factor  of  exaggeration  is  unques-
tionably considerable.  Ten  thousand  is  more  probable.  What  we  have  in
opposition  involves  a  heavy  theological  dispute.  Diem  it  is  said  is  a  great
but  defamed  leader.  It  is  also  said  he  has  lost  touch  with  the  masses,  is  in
political  disrepute  and  otherwise  no  good.  This  debate  can  be  bypassed  by
agreed  points.  It  is  agreed  that  administratively  Diem  is  exceedingly  bad.
He  holds  far  too  much  power  in  his  own  hands,  employs  his  army  badly,
has  no  intelligence  organization  worthy  of  the  name,  has  arbitrary  or  in-
competent subordinates  in  the  provinces  and  some  achievements  not-
withstanding, has  a  poor  economic  policy.  He  has  also  effectively  resisted  im-
provement for  a  long  while  in  face  of  heavy  deterioration.  This  is  enough.
Whether  his  political  posture  is  nepotic,  despotic,  out  of  touch  with  the
villagers  and  hence  damaging  or  whether  this  damage  is  the  figment  of
Saigon  intellectuals  does  not  bear  on  our  immediate  policy  and  may  be
by-passed  at  least  in  part.

The  SVN  Army  numbers  170,000  and  with  paramilitary  units  of  the
civil  guard  and  home  defense  forces  a  quarter  of  a  million.  Were  this  well
deployed  on  behalf  of  an  effective  government  it  should  be  obvious  that
the  Viet  Cong  would  have  no  chance  of  success  or  takeover.  Washing-
ton is  currently  having  an  intellectual  orgasm  on  the  unbeatability  of


The  Kennedy  Commit luents  and  Programs,  1961  123

guerrilla  war.  Were  guerrillas  effective  in  a  ratio  of  one  to  fifteen  or  twenty-
five,  it  is  obvious  that  no  government  would  be  safe.  The  Viet  Cong,  it
should  be  noted,  is  strongest  in  the  Southern  Delta  which  is  not  jungle  but
open  rice  paddy.

The  fundamental  difficulties  in  countering  the  insurgency,  apart  from
absence  of  intelligence,  are  two-fold.  First  is  the  poor  command,  deploy-
ment, training,  morale  and  other  weaknesses  of  the  army  and  paramilitary
forces.  And  second  while  they  can  operate — sweep — through  any  part
of  the  country  and  clear  out  any  visible  insurgents,  they  cannot  guarantee
security  afterwards.  The  Viet  Cong  comes  back  and  puts  the  arm  on  all
who  have  collaborated.  This  fact  is  very  important  in  relation  to  requests
from  American  manpower.  Our  forces  would  conduct  the  round-up  opera-
tions which  the  RVN  Army  can  already  do.  We  couldn't  conceivably
send  enough  men  to  provide  safety  for  the  villages  as  a  substitute  for  an
effectively  trained  civil  guard  and  home  defense  force  and,  perhaps,  a
politically  cooperative  community.

The  key  and  inescapable  point,  then,  is  the  ineffectuality  (abetted  de-
batably  by  the  unpopularity)  of  the  Diem  government.  This  is  the  stra-
tegic factor.  Nor  can  anyone  accept  the  statement  of  those  who  have  been
either  too  long  or  too  little  in  Asia  that  his  is  the  inevitable  posture  of  the
Asian  mandarin.  For  one  thing  it  isn't  true,  but  were  it  so  the  only  possible
conclusion  would  be  that  there  is  no  future  for  mandarins.  The  communists
don't  favor  them.

I  come  now  to  a  lesser  miscalculation,  the  alleged  weakening  emphasis
of  the  Mekong  flood.  Floods  in  this  part  of  the  world  are  an  old  trap  for
western  non-agriculturists.  They  are  judged  by  what  the  Ohio  does  to
its  towns.  Now  as  the  flood  waters  recede  it  is  already  evident  that  this
flood  conforms  to  the  Asian  pattern,  one  repeated  every  year  in  India.
The  mud  villages  will  soon  grow  again.  Some  upland  rice  was  drowned
because  the  water  rose  too  rapidly.  Nearer  the  coast  the  pressure  on  the
brackish  water  will  probably  bring  an  offsetting  improvement.  Next  year's
crop  will  be  much  better  for  the  silt.

I  come  now  to  policy,  first  the  box  we  are  in  partly  as  the  result  of  recent
moves  and  second  how  we  get  out  without  a  takeover.  We  have  just  pro-
posed to  help  Diem  in  various  ways  in  return  for  a  promise  of  adminis-
trative and  political  reforms.  Since  the  administrative  (and  possibly  po-
litical) ineft'ectuality  are  the  strategic  factors  for  success  the  ability  to  get
reforms  is  decisive.  With  them  the  new  aid  and  gadgetry  will  be  useful.
Without  them  the  helicopters,  planes  and  adviser's  won't  make  appre-
ciable difference.

In  my  completely  considered  view,  as  stated  yesterday.  Diem  will  not
reform  either  administratively  or  politically  in  any  effective  way.  That  is
because  he  cannot.  It  is  politically  naive  to  expect  it.  He  senses  that  he
cannot  let  power  go  because  he  would  be  thrown  out.  He  may  disguise  this
even  from  himself  with  the  statement  that  he  lacks  effective  subordinates
but  the  circumstance  remains  unchanged.  He  probably  senses  that  his
greatest  danger  is  from  the  army.  Hence  the  reform  that  will  bring  ef-
fective use  of  his  manpower,  though  the  most  urgent  may  be  the  most  im-
probable.

The  political  reforms  are  even  more  unlikely  but  the  issue  is  academic.
Once  the  image  of  a  politician  is  fixed,  whether  among  opposition  intel-
lectuals or  peasants,  it  is  not  changed  .  .  .  Diem's  image  would  not  be


124 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

changed  by  his  taking  in  other  non-communists,  initiating  some  social
reforms  or  otherwise  meeting  the  requirements  of  our  demarche.

However  having  started  on  this  hopeless  game  we  have  no  alternative
but  to  play  it  out  for  a  minimum  time.  Those  who  think  there  is  hope  o
reform  will  have  to  be  persuaded.


It  is  a  cliche  that  there  is  no  alternative  to  Diem's  regime.  This  is  po-
litically naive.  Where  one  man  has  dominated  the  scene  for  good  or  ill
there  never  seems  to  be.  No  one  considered  Truman  an  alternative  to
Roosevelt.  There  is  none  for  Nehru.  There  was  none  I  imagine  for  Rhee.
This  is  an  optical  illusion  arising  from  the  fact  that  the  eye  is  fixed  on  the
visible  figures.  It  is  a  better  rule  that  nothing  succeeds  like  successors.

We  should  not  be  alarmed  by  the  Army  as  an  alternative.  It  would  buy
time  and  get  a  fresh  dynamic.  It  is  not  ideal;  civilian  rule  is  ordinarily  more
durable  and  more  saleable  to  the  world.  But  a  change  and  a  new  start  is
of  the  essence  and  in  considering  opinion  we  may  note  that  Diem's  flavor
is  not  markedly  good  in  Asia.

A  time  of  crisis  in  our  policy  on  South  Vietnam  will  come  when  it  be-
comes evident  that  the  reforms  we  have  asked  have  not  come  off  and  that
our  presently  proferred  aid  is  not  accomplishing  anything.  Troops  will  be
urged  to  back  up  Diem.  It  will  be  sutficiently  clear  that  I  think  this  must
be  resisted.  Our  soldiers  would  not  deal  with  the  vital  weakness.  They  could
perpetuate  it.  They  would  enable  Diem  to  continue  to  concentrate  on  pro-
tecting his  own  position  at  the  expense  of  countering  the  insurgency.
Last  spring,  following  the  Vice  President's  promise  of  more  aid,  proposals
for  increased  and  reform  taxes  which  were  well  advanced  were  prompdy
dropped.  The  parallel  on  administrative  and  political  reform  could  be  close.

It  will  be  said  that  we  need  troops  for  a  show  of  strength  and  determina-
tion in  the  area.  Since  the  troops  will  not  deal  with  fundamental  faults —
since  there  can't  be  enough  of  them  to  give  security  to  the  countryside —
their  failure  to  provide  security  could  create  a  worse  crisis  of  confidence.
You  will  be  aware  of  my  general  reluctance  to  move  in  troops.  On  the
other  hand  I  would  note  that  it  is  those  of  us  who  have  worked  in  the
political  vineyard  and  who  have  committed  our  hearts  most  strongly  to
the  political  fortunes  of  the  New  Frontier  who  worry  most  about  its  bright
promise  being  sunk  under  the  rice  fields.  Dulles  in  1954  saw  the  dangers  in
this  area.  Dean  Acheson  knew  he  could  not  invest  men  in  Chiang.


My  overall  feeling  is  that  despite  the  error  implicit  in  this  last  move  and
the  supposition  that  Diem  can  be  reformed,  the  situation  is  not  hopeless.
It  is  only  hopeless  if  we  marry  our  course  to  that  of  a  man  who  must  spend
more  time  protecting  his  own  position  and  excluding  those  who  threaten
it  than  in  fighting  the  insurgency.  Diem's  calculation  instinctive  or  delib-
erate is  evident.  He  has  alreadv  been  deposed  once  and  not  by  the  Com-
mun'sts.  He  can  see  his  clear  and  present  danger  as  well  as  anyone.

Two  things  are  particularly  worth  noting  about  Galbraith's  advice:  the  first,
to  the  extent  it  had  an  influence  on  Kennedy,  it  counselled  him  to  avoid  send-
ing troops,  but  also  not  to  take  seriously  the  quid  pro  quo  with  Diem  because


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  125

Diem  was  not  going  to  do  anything  anyway.  Consequently,  Galbraith,  with  a
limitlessly  bleak  view  of  the  prospects  for  success  under  Diem,  really  had  no
quarrel  with  those  who  argued  against  putting  pressure  on  Diem  and  for  trying
to  win  his  confidence.  He  had  no  argument,  because  he  thought  both  ap-
proaches (pressure  and  no  pressure)  were  equally  hopeless.  And  indeed,  both
had  been  tried  during  the  year — the  pressure  approach  in  the  CIP  negotia-
tions; the  "get  on  his  wave  length"  approach  following  the  Task  Force  review
— and  both  produced  an  identical  lack  of  results.

Second,  Galbraith's  analysis  of  the  situation  really  has  a  good  deal  in  com-
mon with  that  of  the  Taylor  Mission.  Obviously,  he  thought  we  must  be  rid  of
Diem,  and  he  apparently  thought  it  was  a  mistake  to  put  this  move  off  by  mak-
ing new  aid  offers  to  Diem  rather  than  letting  word  get  around  that  we  would
be  prepared  to  offer  more  support  to  Vietnam  if  Diem  should  be  removed.
But  at  this  time,  even  people  like  Galbraith  (and  Schlesinger,  as  is  clear  from
his  memoir)  saw  no  alternative  to  continuing  to  support  Vietnam,  although  not
to  continuing  to  support  Diem  personally.  Galbraith  was,  if  anything,  more
optimistic  about  the  chances  of  putting  down  the  insurgency  (given  a  change
in  Saigon)  than  was  the  Taylor  Report.  For  his  optimism  was  not  at  all  con-
tingent on  any  hopes  of  the  efficacy  of  bombing  threats  against  the  north.  For
all  we  know,  he  may  have  been  right  in  supposing  any  "moderately  effec-
tive" Saigon  government  could  do  all  right  against  the  insurgents;  but  we  now
know  all  too  well  how  over-optimistic  was  his  fairly  confident  expectation
that  a  military  replacement  of  the  Diem  regime  would  be  at  least  moderately
effective.

To  return  to  the  negotiations  in  Saigon,  in  late  November,  we  now  had  the
following  situation :

1.  It  was  clear  that  Diem  was,  to  say  the  least,  disappointed  with  the  bargain
Kennedy  had  proposed.

2.  Kennedy  was  obviously  aware  that  he  had  offered  Diem  less  than  Diem
expected,  and  demanded  much  more  in  return.

3.  Both  supporters  of  Diem,  like  Lansdale  and  Kenneth  Young,  and  his
severest  critics,  like  Galbraith,  were  agreed  that  it  was  futile  to  try  to  force
Diem  to  reform.  Kennedy  had  already  had  his  own  experiences  with  such
efforts  earlier  in  the  year.

4.  Presumably,  although  we  have  nothing  to  show  it  in  the  available  record,
there  was  some  unrest  within  the  Administration  about  the  limited  offer  that
was  being  made,  the  demands  being  pressed,  and  the  delay  it  was  all  causing.
To  put  off  an  agreement  too  long  raised  the  dual  threat  of  an  awkward  public
squabble  and  renewed  pressure  on  the  President  to  send  the  task  force  after  all.

It  is  hard  to  think  of  any  realistic  counter-arguments  to  the  case  for  settling  the
dispute  and  get  on  with  either  trying  to  do  better  in  the  war,  or  get  rid  of  Diem.

The  next  phase  was  a  brief  flurry  of  anti-American  stories  in  the  government-
controlled  Saigon  press.  The  U.S.  was  accused,  among  other  things,  of  trying
to  use  Vietnam  as  a  "pawn  of  capitalist  imperialism."  Nolting  went  to  Diem  to
complain  about  the  damage  that  such  stories  would  do  to  U.S. -Vietnamese  re-
lations. But  Diem  disclaimed  responsibility,  and  suggested  they  were  an  under-
standable reaction  of  the  South  Vietnamese  to  what  they  had  learned  about  the
U.S.  proposals  from  U.S.  press  reports.  Nolting's  final  comment  in  his  report
on  this  meeting  was  a  suggestion  that  the  U.S.  concentrate  on  "efficiency  in


126 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

GVN  rather  than  on  more  nebulous  and  particularly  offensive  to  Diem  concept
of  political  reform."  The  impression  given  by  the  cable  is  that  Nolting  felt
on  the  defensive,  which  was  probably  the  case  since  the  package  Washington
had  proposed  must  have  been  disappointing  to  him  as  well  as  to  Diem.

It  did  not  take  long  for  Washington  to  back  away  from  any  hard  demands
on  Diem.  A  sentence  from  the  original  guidance  telegram  stated  "we  would
expect  to  share  in  the  decision-making  process  in  the  political,  economic  and
military  fields  as  they  affected  the  security  situation"  ...  as  opposed  to  the
previous  arrangement  of  "acting  in  an  advisory  capacity  only."  Alexis  Johnson
and  Rostow  drafted  a  cable  on  December  7  that  "clarified"  this  and  a  number
of  other  points  to  which  Diem  had  strongly  objected,  in  this  case  to  explain
that,

.  .  .  what  we  have  in  mind  is  that,  in  operations  directly  related  to  the
security  situation,  partnership  will  be  so  close  that  one  party  will  not  take
decisions  or  actions  affecting  the  other  without  full  and  frank  prior  con-
sultations. .  .  .

This  was  quite  a  comedown  from  the  idea  that  American  involvement  in  the
Vietnamese  government  should  be  so  intimate  that  the  government  could  be
reformed  "from  the  bottom  up"  despite  Diem.  Once  the  U.S.  backed  away  from
any  tough  interpretation  of  its  proposals,  agreement  was  fairly  easily  reached
with  Diem,  and  one  of  the  usual  fine  sounding  statements  of  agreed  principles
and  measures  was  drawn  up.

On  one  seemingly  modest  request  from  Diem,  Washington  was  curiously
firm.  Diem  repeatedly,  both  while  the  Taylor  Mission  was  in  Saigon,  and  after
its  return,  asked  for  Lansdale  to  be  sent.  (Our  record  shows  four  such  requests,
one  directly  by  Diem  to  Taylor;  a  second  from  Thuan;  and  in  a  memorandum
to  McNamara  William  Bundy  referred  to  two  further  requests  relayed  through
McGarr.)  Cottrell,  the  senior  State  representative  on  the  Taylor  Mission,
strongly  endorsed  sending  Lansdale,  and  the  main  paper  of  the  Taylor  Report
seemed  to  endorse  the  idea.  William  Bundy  was  in  favor  of  sending  Lansdale,
and  Lansdale  wanted  to  go.  But  nothing  happened.  Lansdale  never  got  to
Vietnam  until  Cabot  Lodge  brought  him  out  later  in  1965.

The  first  contingents  of  helicopters  arrived  in  Saigon  December  11  (having
been  put  to  sea  several  weeks  earlier) .  On  the  following  day  a  New  York  Times
dispatch  from  Saigon  began:

Two  United  States  Army  helicopter  companies  arrived  here  today.  The
helicopters,  to  be  flown  and  serviced  by  United  States  troops,  are  the  first
direct  military  support  by  the  United  States  for  South  Vietnam's  war
against  Communist  guerrilla  forces.

The  craft  will  be  assigned  to  the  South  Vietnamese  Army  in  the  field,
but  they  will  remain  under  United  States  Army  control  and  operation.

At  least  33  H-21C  twin-rotor  helicopters,  their  pilots  and  ground  crews,
an  estimated  total  of  400  men.  arrived  aboard  the  Military  Sea  Transporta-
tion Service  aircraft  ferrv  Core.

The  Times  story  ended  by  describing  the  force  as  "the  first  fruits"  of  the
Taylor  Mission,  with  more  to  come.  The  Times  did  not  find  the  story  important
enough  to  put  it  on  the  front  page.


The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961  Ml

A  day  later,  the  Times  published  a  story  about  the  ICC  reaction  to  the  arrival
of  the  helicopters.  It  began:

The  International  Control  Commission  for  Vietnam  was  reported  to-
day to  be  considering  whether  to  continue  functioning  here  in  the  face
of  an  increase  in  United  States  assistance  to  South  Vietnam's  struggle
against  Communist  guerrillas.

The  Commission,  made  up  of  representatives  of  India,  Canada,  and
Poland,  has  been  holding  emergency  sessions  since  the  arrival  here  yester-
day of  a  United  States  vessel  loaded  with  at  least  33  helicopters  and
operating  and  maintenance  crews.

A  few  paragraphs  later,  the  dispatch  noted  that:

With  the  arrival  yesterday  of  the  Core,  a  former  escort  carrier,  bearing
the  helicopters,  four  single-engine  training  planes  and  about  400  men,  the
United  States  military  personnel  here  now  are  believed  to  total  about  1.500.
Manv  more  are  expected.

Again,  the  Times  ran  the  story  on  an  inside  page.

Finally,  on  the  15th,  a  formal  exchange  of  letters  between  Presidents  Diem
and  Kennedy  was  published,  announcing  in  general  terms  a  stepped-up  U.S.
aid  program  for  Vietnam.


.r

128


2.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program
1961-1963


Summary  and  Analysis

A  specific  strategy  by  which  the  U.S.  and  GVN  would  attempt  to  end  the
insurgency  in  South  Vietnam  had  never  been  agreed  upon  at  the  time  that  the
U.S.  decided,  late  in  1961,  to  increase  materially  its  assistance  to  GVN  and  to
expand  its  advisory  effort  into  one  which  would  implement  a  "limited  partner-
ship." By  early  1962,  however,  there  was  apparent  consensus  among  the  princi-
pal participants  that  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  as  it  came  to  be  called,
represented  the  unifying  concept  for  a  strategy  designed  to  pacify  rural  Vietnam
(the  Viet  Cong's  chosen  battleground)  and  to  develop  support  among  the
peasants  for  the  central  government.

The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  was  much  broader  than  the  construction  of
strategic  hamlets  per  sc.  It  envisioned  sequential  phases  which,  beginning  with
clearing  the  insurgents  from  an  area  and  protecting  the  rural  populace,  pro-
gressed through  the  establishment  of  GVN  infrastructure  and  thence  to  the
provision  of  services  which  would  lead  the  peasants  to  identify  with  their  gov-
ernment. The  strategic  hamlet  program  was,  in  short,  an  attempt  to  translate
the  newly  articulated  theory  of  counter-insurgencv  into  operational  reality.
The  objective  was  political  though  the  means  to  its  realization  were  a  mixture
of  military,  social,  psychological,  economic  and  political  measures.

The  effect  of  these  sequential  steps  to  pacification  was  to  make  it  very  diffi-  i
cult  to  make  intermediate  assessments  of  progress.  One  could  not  really  be  sure
how  one  was  doing  until  one  was  done.  Physical  security  by  itself  (the  so-
called  "clear  and  hold"  initial  step)  was  a  necessary  condition  for  pacification,
not  a  sufficient  one.  The  establishment  of  governmental  functions  was  not,  byj
itself,  necessarily  conducive  to  a  successful  effort:  the  quality  of  those  functions
and  their  responsiveness  to  locally  felt  needs  was  critical.  This  inherent  difficulty
in  assessing  progress  did  not  simplv  mean  that  it  was  difficult  to  identify  prob-
lems and  to  make  improvements  as  one  went  along — which  it  was.  It  also  meant
that  it  was  quite  possible  to  conclude  that  the  program  as  a  whole  was  progress-
ing well  (or  badly)  according  to  evidence  relating  only  to  a  single  phase  or  a
part  of  a  phase.

A  related  problem  arose  from  the  uniqueness  of  this  program  in  American
experience — pacification  by  proxy.  The  theory  of  sequential  phases  could  be
variously  interpreted.  This  is  not  the  problem  of  the  three  blind  men  describing
the  elephant;  it  is  the  problem  of  men  with  different  perspectives  each  moulding
his  own  conception  of  a  proper  body  to  the  same  skeleton.  If  the  final  product
were  to  have  some  semblance  of  coherence  and  mutual  satisfaction  it  was  neces-
sary that  the  shapers  came  to  agreement  on  substance  and  operational  pro-
cedure, not  just  that  they  agree  on  the  proper  skeleton  upon  which  to  work.

The  problem  with  the  apparent  consensus  which  emerged  early  in  1962  was
that  the  principal  participants  did  view  it  with  different  perspectives  and  expec-
tations. On  the  U.S.  side,  military  advisors  had  a  set  of  preferences  which
affected  their  approach  to  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  They  wanted  to  make
RVNAF  more  mobile,  more  aiz^ressive,  and  better  organized  to  take  the  offen-  i


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  196 1 -1 963  129

sive  against  the  Viet  Cong.  They  were,  consequentlv.  extremelv  leery  of  pro-
posals which  might  lead  it  to  be  tied  down  in  strategic  defenses  ("holding"'
after  "clearing"  had  been  completed)  or  di\erted  too  much  to  militar\-  civic
action  undertakings.

The American political leadership, insofar as a generalization ma\-  be

I  attempted,  may  be  said  to  have  been  most  concerned  with  the  later  phases  of
the  program — those  in  which  GVN  services  were  provided,  local  governments
established,  and  the  economv  bolstered.  Militarv  clearine  operations  were,  to
them,  a  distasteful,  expensive,  but  necessary  precondition  to  the  really  critical

I  and  important  phases  of  the  effort.

Both  of  these  U.S.  groups  had  perspectives  different  from  those  of  the  Diem

j  administration.  In  the  U.S.  ^■ie\^  the  insurgents  were  only  one  of  Diem's
enemies:  he  himself  was  the  other.  In  this  view  the  process  of  pacification
jould  proceed  successfulh'  onl\  if  Diem  reformed  his  own  government.  It  was
precisely  to  achieve  these  goals  simultaneousU  that  the  U.S.  agreed  to  enter  a
"limited  partnership"  with  GVN  in  the  counter-insurgent  effort.  The  Strategic

,  Hamlet  Program  became  the  operational  symbol  of  this  effort.

President  Diem — unsurprisingK' — had  a  very  different  view.  His  need,  as  he
saw  it.  was  to  get  the  U.S.  committed  to  South  \'ietnam  (and  to  his  administra-
tion) without  surrendering  his  independence.  He  knew  that  his  nation  would

;  fall  without  U.S.  support:  he  feared  that  his  government  would  fall  if  he  either
appeared  to  toad\'  to  U.S.  wishes  or  allowed  any  single  group  too  much  potential
power — particularh'  coerci\e  power.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  offered  a
vehicle  bv  which  he  could  direct  the  counterinsurgent  effort  as  he  thought  it
should  be  directed  and  without  gi\ing  up  either  his  prerogati\es  to  the  U.S.  or
his  mantle  to  his  restless  generals.

I  The  program,  in  the  form  of  a  plan  for  pacification  of  the  Delta,  was  for-
mally proposed  to  Diem  in  November  1961  by  R.  G.  K.  Thompson,  head  of  the
newly  arrived  British  Advisor\  Mission.  U.S.  military  advisors  favored  at  that

I  time' an  ARVN  penetration  of  the  VC  redoubt  in  \\'ar  Zone  D  prior  to  any
operations  aimed  specifically  at  pacification.  But  U.S.  political  desires  to  start

I  some  local  operation  which  could  achieve  concrete  gains  combined  with  Diem's
preference  for  a  pacification  effort  in  an  area  of  strategic  importance  led  to  the
initial  effort  in  March  1962,  "Operation  SUNRISE."  in  Binh  Duong  Province

I  north  of  Saigon.  This  was  a  heavih'  VC-infliltrated  area  rather  than  one  of  mini-
mal penetration,  as  Thompson  had  urged.  But  planning — as  distinct  from  op-

■  erations — continued  on  the  Delta  plan  and  strategic  hamlets  were  constructed

■  in  a  varieeated.  uncoordinated  pattern  throughout  the  spring  and  early  summer.
'  The  U.S.  had  little  or  no  influence  over  these  activities:  the  primary  impetus  was

traceable  directly  to  the  President's  brother  and  political  counsellor,  Ngo  Dinh
'  Nhu.

' In  August  1962,  G\'N  produced  its  long  awaited  national  pacification  plan
'  with  four  priority  areas  and  specified  priorities  within  each  area.  At  the  same
:^  time,  however,  it  indicated  that  over  2.500  strategic  hamlets  had  already  been
completed  and  that  work  was  already  underway  on  more  than  2.500  more.
'  Although  it  was  not  until  October  1962.  that  GVN  explicitly  announced  the
"  Strategu;  Hamlet  Program  to  be  the  unifying  concept  of  its  pacification  and
j  counterinsurgent  etfort  it  was  clear  earlier  that  the  program  had  assumed  this
:entral  position.

Three  important  implications  of  this  early  progress  (or.  more  precisely,  re-
.^oned  progress)  are  also  clear  in  retrospect.  These  implications  seem  not  to

■  have  impre'ssed  themselves  acutely  upon  U.S.  observers  at  the  time.  Fir^t,  the


130 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

program  was  truly  one  of  GVN  initiative  rather  than  one  embodying  priorities
and  time  phasing  recommended  by  the  U.S.  Diem  was  running  with  his  own
ball  in  programmatic  terms,  no  matter  who  articulated  the  theory  of  the  ap-
proach. The  geographic  dispersion  of  hamlets  already  reported  to  be  completed
indicated  that  there  was.  in  fact,  a  conscious  effort  to  implement  this  phase  al-
most simultaneously  throughout  the  entire  nation  rather  than  to  build  slowly  as
Diem's  foreign  advisors  (both  U.S.  and  British)  recommended.

Finally,  the  physical  aspects  of  Diem's  program  were  similar  if  not  identical
to  earlier  population  resettlement  and  control  efforts  practiced  by  the  French
and  by  Diem.  The  long  history  of  these  efforts  was  marked  by  consistency  in  re-
sults as  well  as  in  techniques:  all  failed  dismally  because  they  ran  into  resent-
ment if  not  active  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  peasants  at  whose  control  and
safety,  then  loyalty,  they  were  aimed.  U.S.  desires  to  begin  an  effective  process
of  pacification  had  fastened  onto  security  as  a  necessary  precondition  and
slighted  the  historic  record  of  rural  resistance  to  resettlement.  President  Diem
and  his  brother,  for  their  part,  had  decided  to  emphasize  control  of  the  rural
population  as  the  precondition  to  winning  loyalty.  The  record  is  inconclusive
with  respect  to  their  weighing  the  record  of  the  past  but  it  appears  that  they,
too,  paid  it  scant  attention.  Thus  the  early  operational  efforts  indicated  a  danger
of  peasant  resistance,  on  one  hand,  and  of  divergent  approaches  between,  in
the  initial  steps,  the  U.S.  (focused  on  security  measures)  and  Diem  (concerned
more  with  control  measures).  Since  the  physical  actions  to  achieve  securit)
and  those  to  impose  control  are  in  many  respects  the  same,  there  was  generated
yet  another  area  in  which  assessments  of  progress  would  be  inconclusive  and
difficult  to  make.

U.S.  attention,  once  an  apparent  consensus  had  been  forged  concentrated  on
program  management  efforts  in  two  categories:  to  convince  GVN  to  proceed  at
a  more  measured,  coherent  pace  with  a  qualitative  improvement  in  the  physical
construction  of  strategic  hamlets;  and  to  schedule  material  assistance  (fortifica-
tion materials,  etc.)  and  training  for  local  defense  forces  to  match  the  rate  of
desired  hamlet  construction.

U.S.  assessments,  at  the  same  time,  concentrated  on  the  physical  aspects  of
the  program  and  on  VC  activity  in  areas  where  strategic  hamlets  had  been  con-
structed. Assessments  tended  to  be  favorable  from  a  security  (or  control)  view-
point and  uneven  with  respect  to  political  development.  The  general  conclu-
sion was  almost  always  one  of  cautious  optimism  when  security  (control)  was
emphasized,  one  of  hopeful  pessimism  when  political  follow-up  was  stressed.  The
impression  in  Washington  was  typically  slanted  toward  the  more  optimistic  ap-
praisals if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  hamlet  construction  and  security  ar-
rangements were  the  first  chronological  steps  in  the  long  process  to  pacification.
Was  it  not,  after  all.  '"progress"  to  have  moved  from  doing  nothing  to  doing
something  even  though  the  something  was  being  done  imperfectly?

These  U.S.  assessments  changed  onlv  marginally  throughout  the  life  of  the
program.  By  the  time,  in  1963.  that  the  hopeful  pessimist  voices  were  clearer,
it  was  also  much  clearer  that  the  Ngo  brothers  had  made  the  Strategic  Hamlet
Program  into  one  closelv  identified  with  their  regime  and  with  Diem's  rather
esotericallv  phrased  "personalist  revolution."  Fears  grew  that  Diem  was  attempt-
ing to  impose  lovalt\  from  the  top  through  control  rather  than  to  build  it  from
the  bottom  bv  deeds.  These  fears  were  not  limited  to  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Pro-
gram, however:  thev  extended  to  urban  as  well  as  rural  phases  of  South  Viet-
namese life  and  were  subsumed,  as  the  Buddhist  question  moved  to  the  fore,  by
the  general  issue  of  the  viability  of  Diem's  regime.


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  131

President  Diem  grew  increasingly  unwilling  to  meet  U.S.  demands  for  re-
form. He  believed  that  to  do  so  would  cause  his  government  to  fail.  U.S.  ob-
servers held  that  failure  to  do  so  would  cause  the  nation,  not  just  the  govern-
ment to  fall.  In  the  event  the  government  fell  and  the  nation's  counterinsurgent
program  took  a  definite  turn  for  the  worse,  but  the  nation  did  not  fall.  The
Strategic  Hamlet  Program  did.  Closely  identified  with  the  Ngo  brothers,  it  was
almost  bound  to  suffer  their  fortunes;  when  they  died  it  died,  too.  The  new
government  of  generals,  presumably  realizing  the  extent  of  peasant  displeasure
with  resettlement  and  control  measures,  did  nothing  to  save  it.

A  number  of  contributory  reasons  can  be  cited  for  the  failure  of  the  Strategic
Hamlet  Program.  Over-expansion  of  construction  and  poor  quality  of  defenses
forms  one  category.  This  reason  concentrates  only  on  the  initial  phase  of  the
program,  however.  While  valid,  it  does  little  to  explain  why  the  entire  program
collapsed  rather  than  only  some  hamlets  within  it.  Rural  antagonisms  which
identified  the  program  with  its  sponsors  in  the  central  government  are  more
suggestive  of  the  basis  for  the  complete  collapse  as  Diem  and  Nhu  departed  the
j  scene.  The  reasons  why  they  departed  are  traceable  in  part  to  the  different  ex-
I  pectations  which  combined  in  the  apparent  consensus  at  the  program's  begin-
1  ning:  to  Diem's  insistence  on  material  assistance  and  independence,  to  U.S.
willingness  to  provide  assistance  only  if  its  advice  was  heeded,  and  to  the  fail-
ure to  resolve  this  question  either  by  persuasion  or  leverage.

Having  said  this,  it  does  not  automatically  follow  that  the  program  would
have  succeeded  even  if  Diem  had  met  U.S.  demands  for  change.  To  point  to  the
!  causes  of  failure  is  one  thing;  to  assume  that  changes  of  style  would  have  led
to  success  is  quite  another.  It  may  well  be  that  the  program  was  doomed  from
the  outset  because  of  peasant  resistance  to  measures  which  changed  the  pat-
tern of  rural  life — whether  aimed  at  security  or  control.  It  might  have  been
possible,  on  the  other  hand,  for  a  well-executed  program  eventually  to  have
j  achieved  some  measure  of  success.  The  early  demise  of  the  program  does  not
permit  a  conclusive  evaluation.  The  weight  of  evidence  suggests  that  the  Stra-
tegic Hamlet  Program  was  fatally  flawed  in  its  conception  by  the  unintended
consequence  of  alienating  many  of  those  whose  loyalty  it  aimed  to  win.

This  inconclusive  finding,  in  turn,  suggests  that  the  sequential  phases  em-
bodied in  the  doctrine  of  counterinsurgency  may  slight  some  very  important
problem  areas.  The  evidence  is  not  sufficient  for  an  indictment;  still  less  is  one
able  to  validate  the  counterinsurgent  doctrine  with  reference  to  a  program
that  failed.  The  only  verdict  that  may  be  given  at  this  time  with  respect  to  the
validity  of  the  doctrine  is  that  used  by  Scots  courts — "case  not  proved."

End  of  Summary  and  Analysis


CHRONOLOGY


1953-1959 French  and  GVN  early  attempts  at  population  resettlement  into
defended  communities  to  create  secure  zones.

1959  Rural  Community  Development  Centers (Agroville)  Program

initiated  by  GVN.

Late  1960 USMAAG  Counterinsurgency  Plan  Vietnam  completed.

Early  1961 Agroville  Program  modified  by  construction  of  "Agro-Hamlets"
to  meet  peasant  objections.


132  Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II
May  1961 Vice  President  Johnson's  visit  to  RVN.

July  1961 Staley  Group  report  on  increased  economic  aid  and  increase  in
!  RVNAF  strength.

I  15  Sep  1961 USMAAG  Geographically  Phased  National  Level  Operation  Plan

'  for  Counterinsurgency.

18  Oct  1961 General  Taylor  arrives  in  RVN;  President  Diem  declares  national

emergency.

27  Oct  1961 R.  G.  K.  Thompson  submits  to  President  Diem  his  Appreciation
I  of  Vietnam,  November  1961—1962.

i  3  Nov  1961 General  Taylor  submits  his  report  and  recommendations  to  Presi-

dent Kennedy.

13  Nov  1961  R.  G.  K.  Thompson  submits  his  draft  plan  for  pacification  of  the
Delta  to  President  Diem.

15  Nov  1961  NSC  drafts  NSAM  111.  Cable  to  Ambassador  Nohing,  in-
structing him  to  meet  with  Diem,  lays  out  proposed  U.S.  as-
sistance and  expected  GVN  effort.

;  22  Nov  1961  NSAM  111.

15  Dec  1961  First  Secretary  of  Defense  Conference,  Honolulu.

2  Feb  1962  Roger  Hilsman's  A  Strategic  Concept  for  South  Vietnam.

3  Feb  1962  Diem  creates  Inter-Ministerial  Committee  on  Strategic  Hamlets.

19  Mar  1962  Diem  approves  Thompson's  "Delta  Plan"  for  execution.

22  Mar  1962  "Operation  SUNRISE"  commences  in  Binh  Duong  Province.
8  Aug  1962 GVN  National  Strategic  Hamlet  Construction  Plan.

28  Oct  1962  GVN  devotes  entire  issue  of  The  Times  of  Vietnam  to  "The  Year

of  the  Strategic  Hamlet."

8  May  1 962  Buddhist  controversy  erupts  when  GVN  troops  fire  on  demon-
strators in  Hue.

24  Aug  1963  State  to  Lodge,  Message  243,  says  that  U.S.  can  no  longer
tolerate  Nhu's  continuation  in  power.

10  Sept  1963  General  Krulak  and  Mr.  Mendenhall  give  contradictory  reports
on  progress  of  war  to  NSC.

2  Oct  1963  Secretary  McNamara  reports  to  President  Kennedy  following  his
visit  to  RVN  with  General  Taylor.

1  Nov  1963 Coup  d'etat  bv  group  of  generals  against  President  Diem.

I.  INTRODUCTION

A. SCOPE  AND  TERMINOLOGY

The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  (RVN) — articu-
lated and  carried  forward  from  late  1961  until  late  1963 — has  created  some
confusion  because  of  terminology.  One  source  of  confusion  stems  from  the


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  133

similarity  between  the  physical  aspects  of  the  program  and  earlier  fortified
communities  of  one  kind  or  another.  Another  source  of  confusion  rises  because
of  the  loose  usage  of  "hamlet"  as  compared  to  "village"  and  because  of  the
practice  of  referring  to  these  communities  as  "defended,"  "secure,"  and  "forti-
fied" as  well  as  "strategic."  But  the  greatest  source  of  confusion  lies  in  the  dis-
tinction between  a  strategic  hamlet  per  se  and  the  strategic  hamlet  program.

The  hamlet  is  the  smallest  organized  community  in  rural  South  Vietnam.
Several  hamlets  (typically  3-5)  comprise  a  village.  During  the  strategic  hamlet
program  both  hamlets  and  villages  were  fortified.  The  distinction  is  unimportant
for  the  present  analysis,  except  as  it  bears  on  the  defensibility  of  the  community
protected.  The  several  adjectives  coupled  with  hamlet  or  village  were  occasion-
illy  used  to  differentiate  communities  according  to  the  extent  of  their  defenses
3r  the  initial  presumed  loyalty  of  their  inhabitants.  More  often  no  such  dis-
inction  was  made;  the  terms  were  used  interchangeably.  Where  a  distinction
exists,  the  following  account  explains  it.

The  phrase  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  when  used  to  represent  the  program
s  much  broader  than  the  phrase  applied  to  the  hamlets  themselves.  The  pro-
gram, as  explained  below,  envisioned  a  process  of  pacification  of  which  the
-onstruction  of  strategic  hamlets  was  but  part  of  one  phase,  albeit  a  very  im-
portant part.  This  paper  examines  the  program,  not  just  the  hamlets.

9.  ANTECEDENTS

Population  relocation  into  defended  villages  was  by  no  means  a  recent  de-
velopment in  Southeast  Asia.  Parts  of  South  Vietnam  had  experience  with  the
physical  aspects  of  fortified  communities  going  bacic  many  years.  As  the  in-
:ellectual  godfather  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  has  put  it,  the  concept's
ise  as  one  of  the  measures  to  defeat  communist  insurgency  ".  .  .  has  only
Tieant  that  the  lessons  of  the  past  had  to  be  relearnt."
The  administration  of  President  Diem  had  relearned  these  lessons  much  ear-

!  ier  than  late  1961.  There  was,  in  fact,  no  need  to  relearn  them  because  they
lad  never  been  forgotten.  The  French  had  made  resettlement  and  the  develop-
nent  of  "secure  zones"  an  important  element  in  their  effort  near  the  end  of

i'  he  war  with  the  Viet  Minh.  The  government  of  newly-created  South  Vietnam,
leaded  since  1954  by  President  Diem,  had  continued  resettlement  schemes  to
iccommodate  displaced  persons,  to  control  suspected  rural  populations,  and  to
lafeguard  loyal  peasants  in  the  threatened  areas.  None  of  these  efforts  involv-

|i  ng  resettlement  had  succeeded.  Each  had  inspired  antagonism  among  the  peas-
mts  who  were  moved  from  their  ancestral  lands  and  away  from  family  burial
)lots.

,  Diem's  actions  in  late  1961  were  thus  inescapably  tied  to  earlier  actions  by
)roximity  in  time,  place,  and  the  personal  experiences  of  many  peasants.
:hief  among  the  earlier  programs  was  that  of  the  so-called  Agrovilles  or  "Rural

(  Community  Development  Centers,"  launched  in  1959.  The  Agrovilles,  group-
nents  of  300-500  families,  were  designed  to  afford  the  peasantry  the  social
benefits  of  city  life  (schools  and  services),  to  increase  their  physical  security,
md  to  control  certain  key  locations  by  denying  them  to  the  communists.  They
vere  designed  to  improve  simultaneously  the  security  and  well-being  of  their
nhabitants  and  the  government's  control  over  the  rural  population  and  rural
ireas.

The  Agroville  program  was  generally  unsuccessful.  The  peasants  had  many
complaints  about  it  ranging  from  clumsy, dishonest  administration to  the


134 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

physical  hardship  of  being  too  far  from  their  fields  and  the  psychological  wrench
of  being  separated  from  ancestral  homes  and  burial  plots.  By  1960,  President
Diem  had  slowed  the  program  in  response  to  peasant  complaints  and  the  Viet
Cong's  ability  to  exploit  this  dissatisfaction.

The  transition  from  Agrovilles  to  strategic  hamlets  in  1961  was  marked  by
the  so-called  "Agro-hamlet"  which  attempted  to  meet  some  of  the  peasants'
objections:

The  smaller  100  family  Agro-hamlet  was  located  more  closely  to  lands
tilled  by  the  occupants.  Construction  was  carried  out  at  a  slower  pace
filled  to  the  peasant's  planting  and  harvesting  schedule.  .  .  By  the  end
of  1961,  the  Agro-hamlet  had  become  the  prototype  of  a  vast  civil  defense
scheme  known  as  strategic  hamlets,  Ap  Chien  Luoc.

It  was  inevitable,  given  this  lineage,  that  the  strategic  hamlet  program  be  re-
garded by  the  peasants  as  old  wine  in  newly-labelled  bottles.  The  successes  and
failures  of  the  past  were  bound  to  condition  its  acceptance  and  by  late  1961
the  Diem  government  was  having  more  failures  than  successes.

C. THE  SITUATION  IN  LATE  1 96 1

By  late  1961,  if  not  earlier,  it  had  become  clear  in  both  Saigon  and  Washing-
ton that  the  yellow  star  of  the  Viet  Cong  was  in  the  ascendancy.  Following  the
1960  North  Vietnamese  announcement  of  the  twin  goals  of  ousting  President
Diem  and  reunifying  Vietnam  under  communist  rule,  the  Viet  Cong  began
sharply  to  increase  its  guerrilla,  subversive,  and  political  warfare.  Viet  Cong
regular  forces,  now  estimated  to  have  grown  to  25,000,  had  been  organized  into
larger  formations  and  employed  with  increasing  frequency.  The  terrorist-
guerrilla  organization  had  grown  to  an  estimated  17,000  by  November  1961.
During  the  first  half  of  1961,  terrorists  and  guerrillas  had  assassinated  over
500  local  officials  and  civilians,  kidnapped  more  than  1,000,  and  killed  almost
1,500  RVNAF  personnel.  The  VC  continued  to  hold  the  initiative  in  the  coun-
tryside, controlling  major  portions  of  the  populace  and  drawing  an  increasingly
tight  cinch  around  Saigon.  The  operative  question  was  not  whether  the  Diem
government  as  it  was  then  moving  could  defeat  the  insurgents,  but  whether  it
could  save  itself.

Much  of  this  deterioration  of  the  situation  in  RVN  was  attributable,  in  U.S.
eyes,  to  the  manner  in  which  President  Diem  had  organized  his  government.
The  struggle — whether  viewed  as  one  to  gain  loyalty  or  simply  to  assert  con-
trol— was  focused  in  and  around  the  villages  and  hamlets  in  the  countryside.
It  was  precisely  in  those  areas  that  the  bilineal  GVN  organization  (ARVN  and
civilian  province  chiefs)  most  lacked  the  capability  for  concerted  and  cohesive
action.  The  Armv  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  (ARVN)  was  developing  a  po-
tentially effective  institutional  framework  under  U.S.  tutelage,  but  that  effec-
tiveness against  the  VC,  Diem  realized,  could  potentially  be  transferred  into
effectiveness  against  himself.  The  abortive  coup  of  late  1960  had  made  Diem
even  more  reluctant  than  he  had  earlier  been  to  permit  power  (especially  co-
ercive power)  to  be  gathered  into  one  set  of  hands  other  than  his  own.  Still,
the  establishment  of  an  effective  military  chain  of  command  which  could  op-
erate where  necessarv  in  the  countryside  remained  the  prime  objective  of  U.S.
military  advisors.

A  unitary  chain  of  command  had  recently  been  ordered  into  effect  within


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  135

».RVN,  but  this  had  not  solved  the  operational  problems,  for  military  operations
'ere  inescapably  conducted  in  areas  under  the  control  of  an  independent  po-
tical  organization  with  its  own  military  forces  and  influence  on  operations  of
II  kinds — military,  paramilitary,  and  civic  action.  The  province  chiefs,  per-
)nally  selected  by  President  Diem  and  presumably  loyal  to  him,  controlled  po-
tically  the  territory  in  dispute  with  the  VC  and  within  which  ARVN  must
perate.  They  also  controlled  territorial  forces  comprising  the  Civil  Guard  (CG)
nd  Self  Defense  Corps  (SDC) .

For  President  Diem's  purposes  this  bilineal  organization  offered  an  opportu-
ity  to  counterbalance  the  power  (and  coup  potential)  of  the  generals  by  the
ower  of  the  province  chiefs.  It  was  a  device  for  survival.  But  the  natural  by-
roduct  of  this  duality,  in  terms  of  the  effectiveness  of  actions  against  the  VC,
as  poor  coordination  and  imperfect  cooperation  in  intelligence  collection  and
reduction,  in  plannin^i,  and  in  operational  execution  in  the  countryside,  where
le  battles  were  fought — both  the  "battle  for  men's  minds"  and  the  more  easily
nderstood  battles  for  control  of  the  hamlets,  villages,  districts,  and  provinces.

The  U.S.  and  GVN  were  agreed  that  in  order  to  defeat  the  insurgency  it
^as  necessary  that  the  rural  populace  identify  with  at  least  the  local  representa-
ves  of  the  central  government.  They  were  agreed,  too,  that  some  measure  of
hysical  security  must  be  provided  the  rural  population  if  this  end  were  to  be
chieved.  Both  agreed  that  the  GVN  must  be  the  principal  agent  to  carry  out
le  actions  which  would  bring  the  insurgency  to  an  end.

The  high  level  U.S.-GVN  discussions  held  during  President  Kennedy's  first
ear  in  office  focused  on  what  the  U.S.  could  provide  GVN  to  assist  the  lat-
h's counterinsurgency  efforts  and  on  what  GVN  should  do  organizationally
)  make  its  efforts  more  effective.  A  subsidiary  and  related  discussion  revolved
round  the  U.S.  advisory  organization  to  parallel  the  GVN  reorganization.  The
roblem  of  how  additional  resources  in  some  improved  organizational  frame-
ork  were  to  be  applied  operationally  was  fragmented  into  many  sub-issues
mging  from  securing  the  border  to  building  social  infrastructure.

The  story  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  as  it  came  to  be  called,  is  one  in
hich  an  operational  concept  specifying  a  sequence  of  concrete  steps  was
itroduced  by  an  articulate  advocate,  nominally  accepted  by  all  of  the  principal
:tors,  and  advanced  to  a  position  of  apparent  centrality  in  which  it  became
le  operational  blueprint  for  ending  the  insurgency.  But  it  is  also  the  story  of
1  apparent  consensus  built  on  differing,  sometimes  competing,  expectations  and
F  an  effort  which  was,  in  retrospect,  doomed  by  the  failure  to  resolve  in  one
)ntext  the  problem  it  was  designed  to  alleviate  in  another — the  problem  of
VN  stability.

. THE  FORMULATION  OF  THE  STRATEGIC  HAMLET  PROGRAM
. U.S.-GVN  CONSULTATIONS

Beginning  in  May  1961,  the  U.S.  and  GVN  conducted  a  series  of  high  level
inferences  to  fashion  responses  to  the  insurgent  challenge.  The  first  of  these
as  the  visit  to  Saigon  by  the  Vice  President,  Lyndon  B.  Johnson.  The  Vice
resident's  consultations  were  designed  to  reinforce  the  U.S.  commitment  to
VN  and  to  improve  the  image  of  President  Diem's  government.

In  a  communique  issued  jointly  in  Saigon,  it  was  agreed  that  the  RVNAF  was
)  be  increased  to  150,000  men,  that  the  U.S.  would  support  the  entire  Civil


136 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Guard  with  military  assistance  funds,  that  Vietnamese  and  U.S.  military  special-
ists would  be  used  to  support  village-level  health  and  public  works  activities,  and
that  the  two  governments  would  "discuss

[material  missing]

the  reserve  forces  if  possible  as  they  come  up  to  defend;  and  to  dramatize
the  inability  of  the  GVN  to  govern  or  to  build,  by  the  assassination  of  of-
ficials and  the  sabotage  of  public  works.

The  purpose  of  this  military  strategy,  Taylor  asserted,  was  apparently  not  to
capture  the  nation  by  force.  Rather,  in  concert  with  non-military  means,  it  was
to  produce  a  political  crisis  which  would  topple  the  government  and  bring  to
power  a  group  willing  to  contemplate  the  unification  of  Vietnam  on  Hanoi's
terms.

It  was  in  the  U.S.  interest,  Taylor  reasoned,  to  act  vigorously — with  advice
as  well  as  aid — in  order  to  buy  the  necessary  time  for  Vietnam  to  mobilize  and
to  organize  its  real  assets  so  that  the  Vietnamese  themselves  might  "turn  the
tide"  and  assume  the  offensive.  But  U.S.  aid  and  U.S.  advice  on  where  to  use  it
were  not  enough.  The  Diem  Government  itself  had  to  be  reformed  in  order  to
permit  it  to  mobilize  the  nation.  Diem  had,  in  Taylor's  assessment,  allowed  two
vicious  circles  to  develop  which  vitiated  government  effectiveness.  In  the  first
of  these  circles  poor  military  intelligence  led  to  a  defensive  stance  designed  pri-
marily to  guard  against  attacks,  which  in  turn  meant  that  most  of  the  military
forces  came  under  the  control  of  the  province  chiefs  whose  responsibility  it
was  to  protect  the  populace  and  installations.  This  control  by  province  chiefs
meant  that  reserves  could  not,  because  of  tangled  lines  of  command  and  con-
trol, be  moved  and  controlled  quickly  enough  to  be  effective.  The  effect  of
high  losses  in  unsuccessful  defensive  battles  served  further  to  dry  up  the  basic
sources  of  intelligence.

The  second  vicious  circle  stemmed  from  Diem's  instinctive  attempts  to  cen-
tralize power  in  his  own  hands  while  fragmenting  it  beneath  him.  His  excessive
mistrust  of  many  intellectuals  and  younger  Vietnamese,  individuals  badly  needed
to  give  his  administration  vitality,  served  only  to  alienate  them  and  led  them  to
stand  aside  from  constructive  participation — thereby  further  increasing  Diem's
mistrust.  This  administrative  style  fed  back,  too,  into  the  military  equation  and
through  it,  created  another  potentially  explosive  political-military  problem:

The  inability  to  mobilize  intelligence  effectively  for  operational  pur-
poses directly  flows  from  this  fact  [Diem's  administrative  practice]  as  do
the  generally  poor  relations  between  the  Province  Chiefs  and  the  military
commanders,  the  former  being  Diem's  reliable  agents,  the  latter  a  power
base  he  fears.  The  consequent  frustration  of  Diem's  military  commanders —
a  frustration  well-known  to  Diem  and  heightened  by  the  November  1960
coup — leads  him  to  actions  which  further  complicate  his  problem;  e.g.,
his  unwillingness  to  delegate  military  operations  clearly  to  his  generals.

General  Taylor's  recommended  actions  for  the  U.S.  were  designed  to  demon-
strate U.S.  commitment  in  order  to  strengthen  Diem's  stand  and,  to  broaden
U.S.  participation  in  the  hope  of  bringing  about  necessary  reforms  in  Diem's
regime.  The  President's  emissarv  rejected  the  alternatives  of  a  military  takeover


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  137

which  would  make  the  generals  dominant  in  all  fields.  He  rejected,  too,  the
alternative  of  replacing  Diem  with  a  weaker  figure  who  would  be  willing  to
delegate  authority  to  both  military  and  civil  leaders.  The  first  course  would
emphasize  the  solution  to  only  one  set  of  problems  while  slighting  others;  the
second  would  permit  action,  but  not  coordinated  action.

B.  "LIMITED  PARTNERSHIP"

In  order  to  move  in  a  coordinated  way  on  the  intermingled  military,  politi-
cal, economic,  and  social  problems  facing  South  Vietnam,  General  Taylor
recommended  that  the  U.S.  initiate  a  "limited  partnership"  which  would  stop
short  of  direct  U.S.  action  but  would  also,  through  persuasion  at  many  levels
judiciously  mixed  with  U.S.  leverage,  ".  .  .  force  the  Vietnamese  to  get  their
house  in  order  in  one  area  after  another."  Increased  material  assistance  from
the  U.S.  would  be  accompanied  with  increased  U.S.  participation  at  all  levels
of  government  in  which  the  American  advisors  must  ".  .  .  as  friends  and
partners — not  as  arms-length  advisors — show  them  how  the  job  might  be  done
— not  tell  them  or  do  it  for  them."  If  strongly  motivated,  tactful  Americans
were  assigned  primarily  outside  Saigon,  thus  avoiding  the  establishment  of  large
headquarters  not  actually  engaged  in  operational  tasks,  Taylor  thought  that  this
increased  U.S.  participation  would  not  be  "counter-productive";  e.g.,  lend  sub-
stance to  claims  of  U.S.  imperialism  and  dominance  of  the  Diem  Government.

Thus,  Taylor  consciously  opted  for  a  U.S.  course  of  action  in  which  the
major  thrust  of  effort  would  be  to  induce  Diem  to  dp  the  things  that  the  U.S.
thought  should  be  done:  to  draw  the  disaffected  into  the  national  effort  and  to
organize  and  equip  so  that  effective  action  would  be  possible.  General  Taylor
did  not  argue  explicitly  that  success  would  follow  automatically  if  Diem's  prac-
tices could  be  reformed  and  his  operational  capabilities  upgraded,  but  he  im-
plied this  outcome.  The  question  of  an  overall  strategy  to  defeat  the  insurgency
came  very  close  to  being  regarded  as  a  problem  in  the  organization  and  man-
agement of  resources.  Since  GVN  had  no  national  plan,  efforts  were  concen-
trated on  inducing  them  to  produce  one.  There  was  much  less  concern  about
the  substance  of  the  non-existent  GVN  plan.  It  was  almost  as  though  there  had
to  be  something  to  endorse  or  to  criticize  before  substantive  issues  could  be
treated  as  relevant.

C.  U.S.-PROPOSED  NATIONAL  PLANS

This  priority  of  business  is  reflected  in  the  U.S.  plans  which  were  proposed
to  GVN  for  adoption  by  the  latter.  In  late  1960  the  U.S.  Country  Team  in
Saigon  produced  an  agreed  "Counterinsurgency  Plan  for  Viet-Nam"  (CIP).  The
plan  was  an  attempt  to  specify  roles  and  relationships  within  GVN  in  the  coun-
terinsurgency effort,  to  persuade  Diem  to  abandon  his  bilineal  chain  of  com-
mand in  favor  of  a  single  command  line  with  integrated  effort  at  all  levels
within  the  government,  and  to  create  the  governmental  machinery  for  coordi-
nated national  planning.  It  was  recognized  that  these  recommendations  were
not  palatable  to  President  Diem,  but  reorganization  along  the  lines  specified  was
regarded  as  essential  to  successful  accomplishment  of  the  counterinsurgent
effort.

The  CIP  was  an  indictment  of  GVN  failure  to  organize  effectively  and  to
produce  coordinated  national  plans.  It  advanced  no  operational  concepts  for
adoption  by  GVN.  This  obvious  omission  was  corrected  in  the  "Geographically


138 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Phased  National  Level  Operation  Plan  for  Counterinsurgency"  which  MAAG
Vietnam  pubHshed  on  15  September  1961.  Not  only  did  this  plan  specify  the
areas  of  primary  interest  for  pacification  operations — as  its  title  indicates — it
also  set  forth  a  conceptual  outline  of  the  three  sequential  phases  of  actions
which  must  be  undertaken.  In  the  first,  "preparatory  phase,"  the  intelligence
effort  was  to  be  concentrated  in  the  priority  target  areas,  surveys  were  to  be
made  to  pinpoint  needed  economic  and  political  reforms,  plans  were  to  be
drawn  up,  and  military  and  political  cadres  were  to  be  trained  for  the  spe-
cific objective  area.  The  second,  or  "military  phase,"  would  be  devoted  to
clearing  the  objective  area  with  regular  forces,  then  handing  local  security  re-
sponsibility over  to  the  Civil  Guard  (CO)  and  to  establishing  GVN  presence.
In  the  final,  "security  phase,"  the  Self  Defense  Corps  (SDC)  would  assume  the
civil  action-local  security  mission,  the  populace  was  to  be  "reoriented,"  politi-
cal control  was  to  pass  to  civilian  hands,  and  economic  and  social  programs  were
to  be  initiated  to  consolidate  government  control.  Military  units  would  be
withdrawn  as  security  was  achieved  and  the  target  area  would  be  "secured"
by  the  loyalty  of  its  inhabitants — a  loyalty  attributable  to  GVN"s  successful
responses  to  the  felt  needs  of  the  inhabitants.

First  priority  in  this  plan  (1962  operations)  was  to  go  to  six  provinces  around
Saigon  and  to  the  Kontum  area.  Second  priority  (1963)  would  be  given  to  ex-
pansion southward  into  the  Delta  and  southward  in  the  Central  Highlands  from
Kontum.  Third  priority  (1964)  would  continue  the  spread  of  GVN  control  in
the  highlands  and  shift  the  emphasis  in  the  south  to  the  provinces  north  and
east  of  Saigon.  Before  any  of  these  priority  actions  were  undertaken,  however,
it  was  proposed  to  conduct  an  ARVN  sweep  in  War  Zone  D,  in  the  jungles
northeast  of  Saigon,  to  reduce  the  danger  to  the  capital  and  to  increase  ARVN's
self-confidence.

The  geographically  phased  plan  complemented  the  earlier  CIP.  Together,
these  two  U.S.  efforts  constituted  an  outline  blueprint  for  action.  It  is,  of  course,
arguable  that  this  was  the  best  conceivable  blueprint,  but  it  was  at  least  a  com-
prehensive basis  for  refinement — for  arguments  for  different  priorities  or  a
changed  "series  of  events"  in  the  process  of  pacification.

D. INITIAL  VIETNAMESE  REACTIONS

This  is  not  how  matters  proceeded,  in  the  event.  Ambassador  Durbrow,
General  McGarr,  and  others  urged  acceptance  of  the  CIP  upon  President
Diem,  but  with  only  partial  success.  Diem  stoutly  resisted  the  adoption  of  a
single,  integrated  chain  of  operational  command,  showed  no  enthusiasm  for
detailed  prior  planning,  continued  his  practice  of  centralized  decision-making
(sometimes  tantamount  to  decision  pigeonholing),  and  continued  to  play  off
the  province  chiefs  against  the  generals.  Some  aspects  of  the  CIP  were  ac-
cepted, but  the  basic  organizational  issues  remained  unresolved  and  the  strate-
gic approach  unresolved  by  default.

The  unsuccessful  U.S.  attempts  to  secure  organizational  reforms  within  the
Diem  government  had  assumed  psychological  primacy  by  the  time  of  General
Taylor's  October  1961  mission  to  Saigon.  The  American  position  was  essen-
tially that  no  operational  plan  could  succeed  unless  GVN  were  reorganized  to
permit  effective  implementation.  It  was  reorganization  that  Taylor  emphasized,
as  detailed  above.  But  General  Taylor  did  bring  up  the  need  for  some  coordi-
nated operational  plan  in  his  talks  with  President  Diem.  Diem's  response  is  de-
scribed in  a  cable  to  Washington  by  Ambassador  Nolting:


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  139

Taylor  several  times  stressed  importance  of  overall  plan — military,  po-
litical, economic,  psychological,  etc. — for  dealing  with  guerrillas.  Diem
tended  avoid  clear  response  this  suggestion  but  finally  indicated  that  he
has  a  new  strategic  plan  of  his  own.  Since  it  was  not  very  clear  in  spite  ef-
forts to  draw  him  out  what  this  plan  is,  Taylor  asked  him  to  let  us  have  a
copy  in  writing.

E. THOMPSON'S  COUNTERPROPOSALS

President  Diem  may  have  been  whistling  in  the  dark  about  a  new  plan  of  his
own.  It  is  likely,  however,  that  he  was  already  conversant  with  the  ideas  of  a
new  high  level  advisor  who  had  been  in  Saigon  for  several  weeks  and  whose  ap-
proach to  prosecuting  the  war  he  would  soon  endorse  officially  as  his  own.  The
advisor  was  RGK  Thompson,  a  British  civil  servant  who  had  come  from  the
position  of  Permanent  Secretary  of  Defense  in  Malaya.  Thompson's  British  Ad-
visory Mission  was  in  Saigon  in  response  to  Diem's  request  for  experienced
third  country  nationals  to  assist  him  in  his  counterinsurgent  operations.  There
had  been  some  initial  U.S.  objection  to  British  "advice  without  responsibility,"
but  fears  had  been  temporarily  allayed  when  it  was  agreed  that  Thompson's
charter  would  be  limited  to  civic  action  matters.

Thompson  provided  Diem  his  initial  "appreciation"  (or,  in  U.S.  terminology,
"estimate  of  the  situation")  in  October  1961.  His  assessment  was  well  re-
ceived by  the  President,  who  asked  him  to  follow  it  up  with  a  specific  plan.
Thompson's  response,  an  outline  plan  for  the  pacification  of  the  Delta  area,
was  given  to  the  President  on  1 3  November.  Thus,  Thompson  was  in  the  process
of  articulating  one  potentially  comprehensive  strategic  approach  at  the  same
time  that  the  U.S.  was  deeply  involved  in  fashioning  a  major  new  phase  in
U.S.-GVN  relations  in  which  major  new  U.S.  aid  would  be  tied  to  Diem's  ac-
ceptance of  specified  reforms  and,  inferentially,  to  his  willingness  to  pursue
some  agreed,  coordinated  strategy.  Thompson's  plan  was,  in  short,  a  potential
rival  to  the  American-advanced  plans  represented  by  the  CIP  and  the  geographi-
cally phased  MAAG  plan  of  September  1961.

In  order  to  assess  the  similarities  and  diflFerences  between  the  U.S.  plans  and
that  advanced  by  the  British  Advisory  Mission,  it  is  necessary  to  summarize
Thompson's  argument  and  proposals.  Like  Taylor  (with  whom  he  talked  and
to  whom  he  gave  a  copy  of  his  initial  "appreciation"  at  the  latter's  request),
Thompson  saw  the  VC  objective  to  be  one  of  political  denouement  by  com-
bined military  and  political  action  rather  than  a  military  takeover  of  the  en-
tire nation.  Like  McGarr  and  the  other  U.S.  military  advisors,  he  recognized
the  probability  and  danger  of  VC  attempts  to  control  the  unpopulated  areas
and  to  use  them  both  as  a  base  from  which  to  project  an  image  of  political
strength  and  as  secure  areas  from  which  (in  the  case  of  War  Zone  D.,  northeast
of  Saigon)  to  threaten  the  capital.  But  unlike  the  U.S.  military  advisors,  Thomp-
son viewed  the  primary  threat  to  be  to  the  political  stabiliy  of  the  populated
rural  areas.  Consequently,  he  regarded  McGarr's  proposed  initial  operation  in
War  Zone  D  to  be  a  step  in  the  wrong  direction.

The  main  government  target,  Thompson  argued,  should  not  be  simply  the
destruction  of  VC  forces.  Rather,  it  should  be  to  offer  an  attractive  and  con-
structive alternative  to  communist  appeals.  This  could  only  be  done  by  em-
phasizing national  reconstruction  and  development  in  the  populated  rural  areas.
To  do  so  would  require  extensive  and  stringent  security  measures,  to  be  sure,
but  these  measures  required  primarily  police  rather  than  regular  military  forces.


140 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

The  police  could  establish  a  close  rapport  with  the  populace;  the  army  could
not.  The  army  should  have  the  mission  to  keep  the  VC  off  balance  by  mobile
action  in  order  to  prevent  insurgent  attacks  on  the  limited  areas  in  which  GVN
would  concentrate  its  initial  pacification  efforts.

This  line  of  argument  was  more  fully  developed  in  Thompson's  draft  plan
for  the  pacification  of  the  Delta  area,  given  to  President  Diem  on  1 1  November.
The  objective  of  the  plan  was  to  win  loyalties  rather  than  to  kill  insurgents.
For  that  reason  Thompson  selected  a  populous  area  with  relatively  little  VC
main  force  activity.  The  thrust  of  his  proposal  was  that  "clear  and  hold"  op-
erations should  replace  "search  and  destroy"  sweeps.  ARVN  might  be  used  to
protect  the  villages  while  the  villages  were  organizing  to  protect  themselves
and  mobile  ARVN  forces  must  be  available  to  reinforce  local  defense  units,
but  the  process  should  be  abandoned  of  "sweeping"  through  an  area — and  then
leaving  it.  The  peasants  must  be  given  the  assurance  of  physical  security  so
that  economic  and  social  improvements,  the  real  object  of  the  plan,  could  pro-
ceed without  interruption.

The  means  by  which  the  villagers  would  be  protected  was  the  "strategic
hamlet,"  a  lightly  guarded  village  because  it  was — by  definition — in  a  relatively
low  risk  area.  More  heavily  defended  centers,  called  "defended  hamlets"  and
involving  more  relocation,  would  be  employed  in  areas  under  more  VC  in-
fluence, particularly  along  the  Cambodian  border.

To  control  this  effort  in  the  Delta,  Thompson  recommended  that  the  ARVN
III  Corps  Headquarters  be  reinforced  with  paramilitary  and  civil  components,
relieved  of  its  responsibility  for  the  area  around  and  north  of  Saigon,  and  func-
tion under  the  immediate  supervision  of  the  National  Security  Countil — pre-
sided over  by  President  Diem.  The  province  chiefs,  already  under  Diem's  per-
sonal direction,  would  be  responsible  on  all  emergency  matters  to  the  reinforced
III  Corps  Headquarters  (to  be  called  the  Combined  Headquarters),  but  con-
tinue as  before  with  respect  to  routine  administration.

Thompson  presented  this  Delta  plan  as  a  program  of  wide  potential:

...  It  should  lead  by  stages  to  a  reorganization  of  the  government
machinery  for  directing  and  coordinating  all  action  against  the  communists
and  to  the  production  of  an  overall  strategic  operational  plan  for  the
country  as  a  whole  defining  responsibilities,  tasks  and  priorities.  At  the
same  time  it  will  lead  to  the  establishment  of  a  static  security  framework
which  can  be  developed  eventually  into  a  National  Police  force  into  which
can  be  incorporated  a  single  security  intelligence  organization  for  the  di-
rection and  coordination  of  all  intelligence  activities  against  the  com-
munists. I  agree  with  Your  Excellency  that  it  would  be  too  disruptive  at
the  present  moment  to  try  to  achieve  these  immediately  and  that  they
should  be  developed  gradually.  Using  a  medical  analogy,  the  remedy
should  be  clinical  rather  than  surgical.


III. DEVELOPING  A  CONSENSUS  AMONG  THE  ADVISORS
A. INITIAL  REACTION  OF  U.S.  MILITARY  ADVISORS

It  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  the  shocked  reaction  to  Thompson's  proposals,
especially  in  U.S.  military  circles.  In  fact,  one  need  not  imagine  them;  General


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  141

]  McG  arr  has  recorded  a  detailed  rejoinder  to  Thompson's  proposals.  He  was,  to
; begin  with,  upset  about  the  lack  of  prior  coordination:

i

Following  Mr.  Thompson's  medical  analogy  ...  we  have  the  case  of  a
I  doctor  called  in  for  consultation  on  a  clinical  case,  actually  performing  an

amputation  without  consulting  the  resident  physician — and  without  being
required  to  assume  the  overall  responsibility  for  the  patient.

General  McGarr's  unhappiness  with  Thompson  was  not  simply  a  case  of  in-
jured feelings.  He  had  four  related  categories  of  disagreements  with  the  plan
proposed  by  the  British  Advisory  Mission.  First,  Thompson's  recommended
command  arrangements,  if  adopted,  would  demolish  the  prospect  ot  a  unitary
chain  of  command  within  ARVN,  an  objective  toward  which  McGarr  had  been
working  for  over  a  year.  Additionally,  the  Thompson  proposals  would  leave
Diem  as  the  ultimate  manager  of  an  operation  dealing  with  only  a  portion  (the
Delta)  of  RVN.  The  elimination  of  practices  such  as  this  had  been  an  explicit
objective  of  the  entire  U.S.  advisory  effort  for  a  long  time.

Second,  the  proposed  priority  in  the  Delta  clashed  with  McGarr's  priorities
which  placed  War  Zone  D  first,  the  area  around  Saigon  second,  and  the  Delta
third.  There  was  a  lack  of  unanimity  among  the  U.S.  advisors  about  the  relative
importance  of  the  War  Zone  D  operation  but  the  military  in  particular,  were
looking  for  an  important  operation  to  help  the  (hopefully)  revitalized  ARVN
demonstrate  its  offensive  spirit  and  mobile  capabilities.  This  desire  gave  rise  to
the  third  and  fourth  objections — or  fears.

The  "static  security  framework"  in  the  villages  to  which  Thompson  referred
struck  General  McGarr  as  an  unwarranted  downgrading  of  the  need  for  a  size-
able conventional  military  force  to  play  an  important  role  in  pacification.  Thomp-
son's stated  desire  to  emphasize  police  forces  in  lieu  of  regular  military  forces
was  regarded  by  the  U.S.  military  advisory  chief  as  unrealistic — a  transferral  of
Malayan  experience  to  a  locale  in  which  the  existing  tools  of  policy  were  very
different.

Related  to  this  objection  was  a  final  set  of  disagreements.  Thompson  had
wanted  to  go  slowly  and  to  let  a  new  GVN  organization  grow  from  the  effort.
The  U.S.  military  advisory  chief  also  wanted  to  go  slowly — but  not  that  slowly.
Not  only  would  the  Viet  Cong  not  wait,  it  was  simply  unsound  policy  not  to  use
the  tools  at  hand.  It  would  not  do  to  reduce  the  ARVN  and  increase  police
forces  while  the  VC  continued  their  successes.  It  was  necessary,  in  sum,  to  act
in  a  limited  area  but  to  act  quickly.  Thompson's  recommendations  did  not
look  to  quick  action,  emphasized  the  wrong  area,  '.vere  designed  to  emphasize
the  wrong  operational  agency,  and  proposed  unacceptable  command  lines.

It  is  important  to  note  that  in  spite  of  these  explicit  disagreements  there  were
broad  areas  of  apparent  agreement  between  Thompson  and  his  U.S.  counter-
parts. {Apparent,  because  the  "areas  of  agreement"  concealed  differences,  too.)
The  U.S  MAAG  was  amenable  to  the  development  of  strategic  hamlets,  General
McGarr  claimed.  Indeed,  MAAG's  long,  diffuse  doctrinal  "handbook"  for  ad-
visors in  the  field  did  devote  three  pages — without  any  particular  emphasis —
to  the  "secure  village  concept."  MAAG  did  not  stress  the  centrality  of  strategic
hamlets  per  se,  but  neither  did  Thompson.  Strategic  hamlets  were  to  Thompson
a  way  station  enroute  to  his  real  objective — winning  the  loyalty  of  the  rural
peasants.  This  was  apparently  compatible  with  the  sequential  steps  to  pacifica-
tion outlined  in  MAAG's  own  Geographically  Phased  Counterinsurgency  Plan.
If  the  competing  approaches  of  the  U.S.  and  British  advisors  had  not  been  made


142 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

compatible,  there  was,  at  least,  some  agreed  ground  from  which  to  launch
the  effort  to  make  them  compatible.

B.  REACTIONS  IN  WASHINGTON

That  such  ground  existed  was  fortunate,  for  Thompson's  evolutionary  plan
was  not  only  finding  a  warm  reception  at  the  Presidential  Palace,  it  was  also
winning  an  attentive  ear  in  Washington.  As  already  mentioned,  Thompson
talked  with  General  Taylor  during  the  latter's  October  1961  mission  to  Saigon
and  provided  Taylor  a  copy  of  the  initial  British  "appreciation."  Copies  of  the
Thompson  memorandum  on  the  Delta  were  also  forwarded  to  Taylor  at  the
latter's  request.  Then  in  January  1962,  Thompson,  again  responding  to  Taylor's
request,  sent  the  latter  a  long  letter  outlining  his  views.  In  less  than  a  month,
General  Taylor  could  present  to  President  Kennedy  a  plan  entitled  ''A  Stra-
tegic Concept  for  South  Vietnam"  by  Roger  Hilsman  which  was  an  unabashed
restatement  of  most  of  Thompson's  major  points  and  toward  which  President
Kennedy  had,  not  incidentally,  already  expressed  a  favorable  disposition.

Hilsman's  "strategic  concept"  avowedly  flowed  from  three  basic  principles:
that  the  problem  in  Vietnam  presented  by  the  VC  was  political  rather  than
military  in  its  essence;  that  an  effective  counterinsurgency  plan  must  provide
the  people  and  villages  with  protection  and  physical  security;  and  that  counter
guerrilla  forces  must  adopt  the  same  tactics  as  those  used  by  the  guerrilla  him-
self.

To  translate  these  principles  into  operational  reality,  Hilsman  called  for
"strategic  villages"  and  "defended  villages"  a  la  Thompson,  with  first  priority
to  the  most  populous  areas;  i.e.,  the  Delta  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Hue.  ARVN
would,  much  as  in  Thompson's  proposal,  secure  the  initial  effort,  when  neces-
sary, and  be  employed  to  keep  the  VC  off  balance  in  those  areas  already  under
Viet  Cong  control.  The  plan  envisaged  a  three-phase  process  by  which  GVN
control  would  progressively  be  expanded  from  the  least  heavily  VC-penetrated
provinces  with  large  populations  (phase  I),  into  the  more  heavily  penetrated
population  centers  (phase  II),  and  finally  into  the  areas  along  the  Laotian  and
Cambodian  borders  (phase  III).  Hilsman  eschewed  use  of  the  "oil  spot"  anal-
ogy but  the  process  and  rationale  he  put  forth  were  the  same.  His  plan  moved
"strategic  villages"  to  a  place  of  prominence  greater  than  that  in  Thompson's
Delta  plan  and  far  in  excess  of  the  offhanded  acceptance  which  had  thus  far
been  afforded  them  by  U.S.  military  advisors.  Strategic  hamlets  were  not  the
heart  of  the  Hilsman  plan — civic  action  was  that — but  they  were  the  symbol,
the  easily  recognizable,  easily  grasped  initial  step  by  which  GVN  could  begin,
following  Hilsman's  second  principle,  to  "provide  the  people  and  the  villages
with  protection  and  physical  security."

C.  THE  ADVISORS  REACH  AGREEMENT

Thompson's  basic  ideas  were  gaining  wide  dissemination  at  the  highest  level
within  the  U.S.  government  in  early  1962.  What  of  his  relations  with  the  U.S.
MAAG  in  Saigon?  These  had  been  significantly  improved  as  the  result  of  a
meeting  between  Thompson,  Ambassador  Nolting,  and  British  Ambassador
Hohler.  Thompson  agreed  to  revise  his  paper  so  as  to  remove  the  objection  to
his  proposed  command  arrangements.  Ambassador  Nolting  reported  that
Thompson  was  now  working  "closely  and  amicably"  with  MAAG.  This  took
care  of  one  of  McGarr's  objections.  Thompson  had  apparently  decided,  too,  to


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  143

allow  the  issue  to  drop  for  the  time  being  of  police  primacy  in  pacification
vis-a-vis  ARVN.  It  was  not,  after  all,  a  change  that  could  be  made  quickly;
President  Diem  was  convinced  that  some  start  was  needed  to  save  his  adminis-
tration. That  had  been  his  reason,  after  all,  in  reluctantly  inviting  increased
American  participation  in  the  war.

Secretary  McNamara  played  an  important  role  in  disposing  of  still  another
issue  in  dispute — that  of  where  to  begin.  In  mid-December  1961,  after  President
Kennedy  had  decided  to  adopt  essentially  all  of  General  Taylor's  November
recommendations  except  the  introduction  of  major  U.S.  forces  in  Vietnam,
Secretary  McNamara  met  in  Honolulu  with  the  U.S.  principals  in  Viet-
nam to  discuss  future  plans.  A  central  question  was  that  of  what  could  be
done  in  the  short  term  future.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  made  it  clear  that
RVN  had  "number  one  priority."  McNamara  urged  concentration  on  one
province:  "I'll  guarantee  it  (the  money  and  equipment)  provided  you  have  a
plan  based  on  one  province.  Take  one  place,  sweep  it  and  hold  it  in  a  plan."  Or,
put  another  way,  let  us  demonstrate  that  in  some  place,  in  some  way,  we  can
achieve  demonstrable  gains.

General  McGarr,  immediately  upon  his  return  to  Saigon,  wrote  to  Secretary
Thuan  and  passed  on  this  proposal :

I  would  like  to  suggest  that  you  may  wish  to  set  aside  one  specific  area,
say  a  province,  and  use  it  as  a  "test  area,"  in  establishing  this  type  "paci-
fication infrastructure."  My  thinking  is  that  all  the  various  elements  of
this  anti-VC  groundwork  be  designated  immediately  by  your  government
and  trained  as  a  team  or  teams  for  the  actual  reoccupation  and  holding
of  the  designated  communist  infiltrated  area  when  it  has  been  cleared  by
RVNAF  military  action.

Such  teams  would  embrace,  McGarr  suggested,  police,  intelligence,  financial,
psychological,  agricultural,  medical,  civic  action,  and  civil  political  functions.

IV. THE  ADVISORS  "SELL"  DIEM  (OR  VICE  VERSA)


A. WHERE  TO  BEGIN?

GVN  did  indeed  have  a  province  in  mind.  It  was  not  a  Delta  province,  how-
ever. Nor  was  it  a  province  relatively  secure  from  VC  infiltration.  Quite  to  the
contrary,  Binh  Duong  Province,  extending  north  and  northwest  of  Saigon,  had
been  heavily  infiltrated.  Its  main  communications  axis  (National  Highway  13,
extending  northward  from  Saigon  into  Cambodia)  sliced  directly  between
War  Zone  D  and  War  Zone  C.  The  province  was  crossed  by  important  routes
of  communications,  liaison,  and  supply  between  two  insurgent  redoubts.  Hardly
the  logical  place  to  begin,  one  might  say,  but  "logic"  was  being  driven  by  events
and  desires  more  than  by  abstract  reasoning.

One  desire  was  the  widely  held  wish  to  do  something  concrete  and  productive
as  a  symbol  of  U.S.  determination  and  GVN  vitality.  Another  desire  was  GVN's
wish  to  commit  the  Americans  to  support  of  Diem's  government  on  terms  which
would  be  in  fact  acceptable  to  that  government  and  would — equally  important
— appear  to  be  U.S.  support  for  GVN-initiated  actions.  If  one  were  Vietnamese


144 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

one  might  reason  that  Binh  Duong  was  an  area  of  unquestionable  strategic
importance — and  one  in  which  GVN  had  already  initiated  some  pacification
efforts.  If  the  Americans  wish  to  concentrate  in  one  province  and  if  they  are
willing  to  underwrite  the  effort  with  resources,  why  not  begin  in  an  important
strategic  area  where  work  is  already  underway?

GVN  had  initiated,  in  August  1961,  a  "Rural  Reconstruction  Campaign"  in
the  Eastern  Region  of  South  Vietnam  to  secure  the  provinces  of  Tay  Ninh,
Binh  Duong,  and  Phuoc  Tuy.  Most  of  the  effort  prior  to  December  1961  had
been  concentrated  in  the  Cu  Chi  District  of  Binh  Duong.  Xom  Hue  Hamlet  of
Tan  An  Hoi  was,  during  December,  in  the  process  of  being  fortified  as  a  stra-
tegic hamlet.  General  McGarr  was  under  the  impression  that  "considerable
progress"  had  already  been  made  in  these  three  provinces  in  the  establishment
of  the  GVN  village  level  activities  so  necessary  to  winning  popular  support.

In  mid-January  General  McGarr  met  (just  prior  to  his  departure  for  Hono-
lulu) with  President  Diem  and  Secretary  Thuan  to  discuss  pacification  plans.
As  McGarr  told  Secretary  McNamara,  Diem  stressed  that  the  MAAG-en-
dorsed  military  operation  in  War  Zone  D  might  merely  close  the  string  on  an
empty  bag.  Such  a  failure  would  be  detrimental  to  ARVN  morale.  Besides,  the
President  observed  echoing  Thompson,  "sweeps"  solved  nothing;  the  problem
was  to  hold  an  area  and  to  separate  the  VC  from  the  rest  of  the  populace.
Diem  preferred  a  concentrated  effort  in  Binh  Duong,  a  heavily  infiltrated
province,  close  to  Saigon,  of  great  strategic  importance,  and  in  which  only
10  of  46  villages  were  under  GVN  control — but  in  which  the  groundwork  for
a  sound  government  infrastructure  had  already  been  laid.

The  discussions  at  the  Secretary  of  Defense's  Conference  in  Honolulu  turned
on  whether  or  not  the  War  Zone  D  operation  offered  more  hope  for  a  concrete
gain  than  a  "single  province"  pacification  scheme.  McNamara  concluded  that
it  did  not.  General  McGarr  dissented  mildly  from  the  selection  of  Binh  Duong.
He  would  have  favored  Phuoc  Tuy  (where  U.S.  troops  were  scheduled  to  land
//  a  decision  were  ever  made  to  commit  them.)  But  Binh  Duong  was  GVN's
plan  and  the  "limited  partners"  finally  agreed  to  back  Diem's  preferred  attempt.
Thus,  the  U.S.  came  to  a  roundabout  decision  to  support  as  a  "test"  of  what
would  later  be  called  the  "strategic  hamlet  program"  an  operation  about  whose
details  they  knew  little,  in  an  area  that  all  recognized  to  be  difficult,  because
it  allegedly  represented  a  long-sought  example  of  GVN  initiative  in  planning
and  civil-military  preparation.  Much  of  the  public  image  of  the  strategic  ham-
let program  was  to  be  established  by  this  operation,  as  it  turned  out.  Its  name
was  "Operation  Sunrise."  But  it  was  not — U.S.  desires  to  the  contrary — the
only  strategic  hamlet  effort  to  be  carried  forward  during  this  period.  It  was
only  one  of  several — and  several  grew  very  quickly  into  many.

B. CONCURRENT  GVN  ACTIVITY

It  has  already  been  suggested  that  President  Diem  responded  with  some
enthusiasm  to  the  early  proposals  from  Thompson's  British  Advisory  Mission.
In  mid-Februarv  1962,  President  Diem  approved  orally  Thompson's  "Delta
Pacification  Plan"  and  said  he  would  like  to  see  it  executed  without  delay.
Earlier,  on  3  February,  he  had  created  by  presidential  decree  the  Inter-Minis-
terial Committee  for  Strategic  Hamlets  (IMCSH),  comprising  the  heads  of
various  ministries  (Defense,  Interior,  Education,  Civic  Action,  Rural  Affairs,
etc.).  The  IMCSH  was,  as  its  membership  indicates,  a  coordinating  body
designed  to  give  national  direction  and  guidance  to  the  program.  Its  importance


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  145

is  not  in  its  work — for  it  apparently  did  very  little — but  as  an  indicator  of
Diem's  early  1962  thinking  of  strategic  hamlets  as  a  national  program  and  of
the  central  role  which  his  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  would  play  in  this
program.

Nhu  was  the  real  driving  force  behind  GVN's  uneven  but  discernible  move-
ment toward  adoption  of  the  strategic  hamlet  theme  as  a  unifying  concept  in
its  pacification  efforts.  In  the  early  period  under  discussion  he  masked  his
central  role,  however.  He  was  not  announced  as  the  Chairman  of  the  IMCSH
(nobody  was),  but  the  committee  was  responsible  to  him.  He  did  not,  however,
lead  it  actively.  As  two  American  observers  remarked  at  the  time,  "Nhu  seems
to  have  consulted  the  committee  seldom  and  to  have  shared  his  policy-making
power  with  it  even  less  frequently."


C. EARLY  SIGNS  OF  GVN  EXPECTATIONS

But  although  brother  Nhu  was  behind  the  scenes  in  late  1961  and  early
1962,  an  occasional  fleeting  glimpse  of  his  thinking  and  the  direction  in  which
he  was  heading  has  still  managed  to  show  through.  A  CIA  report  from  Saigon
summarized  Nhu's  instructions  to  a  dozen  province  chiefs  from  the  Delta  in  a
meeting  held  on  14  December  1961.  Primary  emphasis  was  to  be  placed  on
the  strategic  hamlet  program,  Nhu  said,  and  this  program  was  to  be  coupled
with  a  "social  revolution"  against  "Viet-Nam's  three  enemies:  divisive  forces,
low  standard  of  living,  and  communism."  The  CIA  Task  Force — Vietnam
observed,  in  forwarding  this  report,  that  Nhu's  "social  revolution  and  strategic
hamlets  appear  to  be  fuzzy  concepts  with  little  value  in  the  fight  against  the
Communists."

No  doubt  these  concepts  seemed  fuzzy  at  the  end  of  1961.  But  within  an-
other twelve  months,  as  events  would  prove,  they  would  be  widely  recognized
as  the  twin  spearheads  of  GVN's  counterinsurgent  effort,  fuzzy  or  not.  The
strategic  hamlet  program  would  have  broad  support  within  the  U.S.  government
and  financial  resources  to  underpin  that  support.  The  "social  revolution"  to
which  Nhu  referred  in  December  1961  would  be  surfaced  as  Diem's  "personal-
ism"  drive.  The  important  thing  for  the  present  analysis  is  that  all  of  the  ex-
pectations of  the  several  participant  groups — both  U.S.  and  GVN — were
identifiable  by  very  early  1962  at  the  latest,  and  that  the  concept  of  the  stra-
tegic hamlet  program  in  the  broad  sense  had  been  fully  adumbrated.  The  skele-
ton— the  rationale — was  complete;  the  body — operational  programs — had  not
yet  taken  form.  Each  group  could,  however,  wo.k  toward  construction  of  a
slightly  different  body  (and  for  differing  reasons)  and  claim  with  some  plausi-
bility to  be  working  from  the  same  skeleton.


V. DIFFERING  PERSPECTIVES  AND  EXPECTATIONS

Three  somewhat  different  views  may  be  categorized  which  are  of  interest  to
the  present  inquiry:  those  of  the  U.S.  military  advisors,  of  the  U.S.  political
leadership,  and  of  the  Diem  government's  leaders.  Such  generalizations  are
admittedly  risky  and  easily  overdrawn;  there  were,  of  course,  differences  be-
tween the  perceptions  and  expectations  of,  say,  the  U.S.  military  advisors.  For
example,  those  farthest  from  Saigon  tended  to  be  less  patient — with  Diem  and  in
expecting  results — than  were  those  closer  to  the  area  of  operations.  Still,  dis-


146 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


cernible  differences  of  outlook  and  expectations  may  be  said  to  represent  the
prevailing  views  in  each  of  these  three  groups.

A.  U.S.  MILITARY  ADVISORS

The  U.S.  military  advisors  mistrusted  arguments  which  stressed  the  Vietna-  '<
mese  struggle  as  essentially  political  rather  than  military.  They  were  quite  will-  :
ing  to  concede  that  the  struggle  was  multi-dimensional  but  they  feared  instinc-  ;
tively  any  line  of  reasoning  which  might  appear  to  argue  that  military  considera-  |
tions  were  relatively  unimportant  in  Vietnam.  So,  too,  they  were  wary  of  |
schemes  which  might  lead  ARVN  to  perpetuate  its  defensive  tactical  stance.
Both  dangers  were  present  in  the  strategic  hamlet  program.  The  same  military
advisors  were  more  forceful  than  others  in  stressing  the  need  for  the  Diem
regime  to  rationalize  its  command  arrangements  and  to  plan  comprehensively
and  in  detail  from  the  highest  to  lowest  levels.  Their  operational  interest  con-
centrated on  making  ARVN  not  just  more  mobile  but  more  aggressive.  Their
creed,  developed  through  years  of  experience  and  training  (or  vicarious  ex-
perience) was  to  "close  with  and  destroy  the  enemy."  One  could  expect  them,
then,  to  be  more  than  willing  to  turn  over  the  job  of  static  defense  to  the  CDC
and  CG  at  the  earliest  opportunity,  to  keep  a  weather  eye  out  for  opportunities
to  engage  major  VC  formations  in  decisive  battle,  and  to  chafe  under  the  pain-
fully slow  evolutionary  process  which  was  implicit  even  in  their  own  1961  geo-
graphically phased  plan.

B.  U.S.  POLITICAL  LEADERSHIP  ^

The  U.S.  political  leadership,  and  to  varying  degrees  the  leaders  in  the  Sai-
gon Embassy  and  in  USOM,  were  more  attuned  to  the  political  problems — both
with  respect  to  GVN-U.S.  relations  and  to  the  problem  of  winning  broad  sup-
port among  the  Vietnamese  for  the  Diem  administration.  This  made  members
of  this  group  inherently  more  sympathetic  to  proposals  such  as  the  Tliompson
plan  for  the  Delta  than  they  were,  for  instance,  to  increasing  ARVN's  size  and
capabilities.  They  found  compelling  the  logic  of  analyses  such  as  Hilsman's
which  cut  to  the  political  root  rather  than  treating  only  the  military  symptoms.
One  suspects — though  documentation  would  never  be  found  to  support  it —
that  they  were  attracted  by  an  argument  which  did  suggest  some  hope  for
"demilitarizing"  the  war,  de-emphasizing  U.S.  operational  participation,  and  in-
creasing GVN's  ability  to  solve  its  own  internal  problems  using  primarily  its  own
human  resources.

C.  PRESIDENT  DIEM

Ngo  Dinh  Diem's  perspective  and  expectations  were  the  most  different  of  all.  I
U.S.  groups  differed  in  degree;  Diem's  expectations  were  different  in  kind.  He  j
wanted,  first  of  all,  to  obtain  unequivocal  U.S.  support,  not  just  to  his  nation  I
but  to  his  administration.  It  was  essential,  in  his  eyes,  that  this  support  not  com-
promise his  authority  or  Vietnamese  sovereignty.  He  did  not  want  to  give
credence  to  communist  claims  that  he  was  a  puppet  of  the  U.S.,  on  one  hand,
or  concentrate  the  coercive  instruments  of  power  in  the  hand  of  potential  an-
tagonists, on  the  other.

A  revealing  assessment  of  Diem's  frame  of  mind  is  provided  by  Ambassador
Nolting.  Diem  invited  increased  U.S.  aid  and  U.S.  participation  because  he


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  J  961-1963  147

feared  that,  especially  with  an  impending  settlement  in  Laos,  South  Vietnam
would  come  under  increasing  communist  pressures.  If  Diem's  government  could
not  win  over  these  pressures — and  Diem  feared  it  could  not — it  had  only  the
choice  of  going  down  fighting  or  of  being  overthrown  by  a  coup.  Thus,  in  re-
questing additional  U.S.  help,  Diem  had  "adopted  an  expedient  which  runs
against  his  own  convictions,  and  he  is  apparently  willing  to  accept  the  attendant
diminution  of  his  own  stature  as  an  independent  and  self-reliant  national
leader."

But  when  Ambassador  Nolting  presented  to  Diem  the  U.S.  quid  pro  quo  for
its  "limited  partnership,"  this  apparent  acceptance  of  decreased  stature  and  in-
dependence suddenly  seemed  less  apparent.  Then,  as  Nolting  reported,  President
Diem  feared  the  reaction  even  among  his  own  cabinet  aides.  Secretary  Thuan,
in  whom  Diem  did  confide,  said  that  the  President  was  brooding  over  the  fact
that  the  U.S.  was  asking  great  concessions  of  GVN  in  the  realm  of  its  sov-
ereignty in  exchange  for  little  additional  help.  Diem  argued  that  U.S.  influence
over  his  government,  once  it  was  known,  would  play  directly  into  the  com-
munists' hands.  The  first  priority  task,  he  added,  was  to  give  the  people  security,
not  to  make  the  government  more  popular.  To  try  it  the  other  way  around  was
to  place  the  cart  before  the  horse.

Diem  saw  himself  caught  in  a  dilemma  in  which  he  was  doomed  if  he  did  not
get  outside  assistance  and  doomed  if  he  got  it  only  at  the  price  of  surrendering
his  independence.  To  him  the  trick  was  to  get  the  U.S.  committed  without
surrendering  his  independence.  One  possible  solution  lay  in  getting  U.S.  material
aid  for  a  program  that  would  be  almost  wholly  GVN-implemented:  The  stra-
tegic hamlet  program  offered  a  convenient  vehicle  for  this  purpose  and  one
which  was  also  appealing  for  other  reasons.  It  put  achieving  security  before
winning  loyalty — in  an  operational  context  in  which  it  was  difficult  to  differen-
tiate between  security  for  the  rural  populace  and  control  of  that  populace,  since
many  of  the  actions  to  achieve  one  were  almost  identical  to  the  acts  to  real-
ize the  other.

D.  THE  CENTRAL  ISSUE

The  U.S.,  for  its  part,  was  asking  Diem  to  forego  independence  by  accepting
the  wisdom  of  the  American  recommendations  for  reform.  The  central  ques-
tion was  whether  he  would — or  could — do  so.  Among  those  who  responded
to  this  question  in  the  negative,  J.  Kenneth  Galbraith  was  most  trenchant:

In  my  completely  considered  view  .  .  .  Diem  will  not  reform  either
administratively  or  politically  in  any  effective  way.  That  is  because  he
cannot.  It  is  politically  naive  to  expect  it.  He  senses  that  he  cannot  let
power  go  because  he  would  be  thrown  out.

The  U.S.  decided  that  Diem  could  make  meaningful  reforms  and  that  he
would  do  so— or  at  least  it  decided  that  it  was  likely  enough  that  he  would  do
so  and  that  support  for  his  administration  constituted  the  best  available  policy
alternative.

E.  THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  SSESSMENT

The  differences  in  perspectives  and  expectations  outlined  above  are  impor-
tant in  their  own  right.  They  loom  even  larger,  however,  when  one  considers
the  difficulty  of  assessing  progress  in  the  program  about  to  be  undertaken.


148 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

These  groups  were  about  to  embark  upon  a  long,  arduous  joint  voyage.  Their
only  chart  had  never  been  to  sea.  This  was  the  newly-articulated  and  imper-
fectly understood  doctrine  of  counterinsurgency  which  stressed  the  interaction
and  interdependence  of  political,  military,  social,  and  psychological  factors.  It
posited  the  necessity  for  certain  actions  to  follow  immediately  and  successfully
behind  others  in  order  for  the  process  of  pacification  to  succeed.  Above  all —
and  this  point  cannot  be  overstressed — while  this  doctrine  recognized  the  need
for  both  the  carrot  and  the  stick  (for  coercive  control  and  appealing  programs)
it  made  gaining  broad  popular  acceptance  the  single  ultimate  criterion  of
success.  Neither  kill  ratios  nor  construction  rates  nor  the  frequency  of  incidents
was  conclusive,  yet  these  were  all  indicators  applicable  to  phases  within  the  larger
process.  The  gains  of  doing  well  in  one  phase,  however,  could  be  wiped  out  by
inactivity  or  mistakes  in  a  subsequent  phase.  It  was,  in  short,  very  difficult  to
know  how  well  one  was  doing  until  one  was  done.

VI. THE  NATIONAL  PLAN  EMERGES

A . A  WARENESS  OF  THE  UNIFYING  POTENTIAL

Before  examining  the  quality  of  execution  of  the  operational  programs  for
which  some  detailed  record  is  available  it  will  be  useful  to  outline  the  process
by  which  the  strategic  hamlet  program  became — by  late  1962 — a  comprehen-
sive national  program  embodying  the  major  effort  of  GVN  in  pacification.

"Operation  Sunrise"  in  Binh  Duong  Province  was  launched  on  22  March
1962  in  what  was  initially  called  the  "Ben  Cat  Project."  The  Delta  project,  how-
ever, languished  in  a  "planning  stage"  until  May,  when  it  first  became  known
that  Diem  was  considering  incorporating  it  into  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.
By  August  the  IMCSH  proposed  a  priority  plan  for  the  construction  of  strategic
hamlets  on  a  nation-wide  basis.  Later  the  same  month,  the  U.S.  Inter-Agency
Committee  for  Province  Rehabilitation  concurred  in  this  plan  (with  minor  res-
ervations) as  a  basis  for  planning  and  utilization  of  U.S.  assistance.  By  October,
the  Diem  government  had  made  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  the  explicit
focus  and  unifying  concept  of  its  pacification  effort.  The  government-controlled
Times  of  Viet  Nam  devoted  an  entire  issue  to  "1962:  The  Year  of  Strategic
Hamlets."  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  was  unveiled  as  the  "architect  and  prime  mover"  of
the  program  which  was  the  Vietnamese  answer  to  communist  strategy.  As  Nhu
proclaimed:  "Strategic  hamlets  seek  to  assure  the  security  of  the  people  in  order
that  the  success  of  the  political,  social,  and  military  revolution  might  be  assured
by  the  enthusiastic  movement  of  solidarity  and  self-sufficiency."  President
Diem  had  earlier  put  the  same  thought  to  an  American  visitor  in  clearer  words:

The  importance  of  the  strategic  hamlets  goes  beyond  the  concept  of
hamlet  self  defense.  They  are  a  means  to  institute  basic  democracy  in
Vietnam.  Through  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  the  government  intends
to  give  back  to  the  hamlet  the  right  of  self-government  with  its  own
charter  and  system  of  community  law.  This  will  realize  the  ideas  of  the
constitution  on  a  local  scale  which  the  people  can  understand.

By  this  time,  too,  influential  American  circles  regarded  the  Strategic  Hamlet
Program  as  the  shorthand  designation  for  a  process  which  represented  a  sensible
and  sound  GVN  effort.  Roger  Hilsman  had  said  so  in  February  to  President
Kennedy,  and  found  the  latter  highly  receptive.  He  continued  to  say  so.  As  he


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  149

advised  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Averell  Harriman  in  late  1962,  "The  gov-
ernment of  Vietnam  has  finally  developed,  and  is  now  acting  upon,  an  effective
strategic  concept."  [Doc.  119]  Even  so  lukewarm  an  enthusiast  as  the  CJCS,
General  Lyman  L.  Lemnitzer  could  report  that  ".  .  .  the  Strategic  Hamlet
Program  promises  solid  benefits,  and  may  well  be  the  vital  key  to  success  of  the
pacification  program."

The  public  record  also  shows  early  support  from  high  U.S.  officials  for  the
Strategic  Hamlet  Program  and  recognition  of  its  central  role  in  GVN's  pacifi-
cation campaign.  Speaking  in  late  April  1962,  Under  Secretary  of  State  George
W.  Ball,  commented  favorably  in  the  progressive  development  of  strategic  ham-
lets throughout  RVN  as  a  method  of  combating  insurgency  and  as  a  means  of
bringing  the  entire  nation  "under  control  of  the  government."  Secretary
McNamara  told  members  of  the  press,  upon  his  return  to  Washington  from  a
Pacific  meeting  in  July  1962,  that  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  was  the  "back-
bone of  President  Diern's  program  for  countering  subversion  directed  against
his  state."

It  is  reasonable  to  conclude  from  the  evidence  that  official  U.S.  awareness
kept  abreast  of  Diem's  progressive  adoption  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  as
the  "unifying  concept"  in  his  counterinsurgent  effort.  The  same  officials  were
constantly  bombarded  by  a  series  of  reports  from  a  variety  of  sources  describing
the  progress  of  the  hamlet  program  and  assessing  its  efficacy.

B. "OPERA  TION  SUNRISE"

The  first  operational  effort  in  which  the  U.S.  had  a  hand,  "Operation  Sun-
rise," got  under  way  in  Binh  Duong  Province  on  22  March  1962  when  work
commenced  on  Ben  Tuong,  the  first  of  five  hamlets  to  be  constructed  for  re-
located peasants  in  the  Ben  Cat  District  in  and  around  the  Lai  Khe  rubber
plantation.  Phase  I  of  the  operation — the  military  clearing  phase — was  con-
ducted by  forces  of  the  5th  ARVN  Division  reinforced  by  ranger  companies,  a
reconnaissance  company,  two  reinforced  CG  companies,  and  a  psychological
warfare  company.  The  Viet  Cong  simply  melted  into  the  jungles.

With  the  Viet  Cong  out  of  the  way — at  least  for  the  time  being — the
relocation  and  construction  of  the  new  hamlet  commenced.  The  new  program
got  off  to  a  bad  start.  The  government  was  able  to  persuade  only  seventy  families
to  volunteer  for  resettlement.  The  135  other  families  in  the  half  dozen  settle-
ments were  herded  forcibly  from  their  homes.  Little  of  the  $300,000  in  local
currency  provided  by  USOM  had  reached  the  peasants;  the  money  was  being
withheld  until  the  resettled  families  indicated  they  would  not  bolt  the  new  ham-
let. Some  of  them  came  with  most  of  their  meager  belongings.  Others  had
little  but  the  clothes  on  their  backs.  Their  old  dwellings — and  many  of  their
possessions — were  burned  behind  them.  Only  120  males  of  an  age  to  bear
arms  were  found  among  the  more  than  200  families — indicating  very  clearly
that  a  large  number  had  gone  over  to  the  VC,  whether  by  choice  or  as  a  result
of  intimidation.


C. OTHER  EARLY  PROGRAMS

Progress  in  Binh  Duong  continued  at  a  steady  pace,  beset  by  difficulties.  By
midsummer  2900  persons  had  been  regrouped  into  three  strategic  hamlets.
Elsewhere,  the  pace  quickened.  Although  the  Delta  Plan,  as  a  coordinated  effort,


150 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  11

had  not  been  implemented  by  the  summer  of  1962,  Secretary  McNamara  found
in  May  an  aggressive  effort  under  way  without  U.S.  help  near  Ca  Mao:

Here  the  commander  of  the  31st  Infantry  Regiment  had  gone  into  an
area  95%  controlled  by  the  VC,  declared  martial  law,  and  resettled  11,000
people  (some  under  duress)  in  9  strategic  hamlets,  while  fighting  the  VC
wherever  he  found  them.  Since  inception  of  the  program,  none  of  his  vil-
lages have  been  attacked,  and  the  freedom  from  VC  taxation  (extortion)  is
proving  most  appealing  to  the  people.  It  is  the  commander's  hope  (doubt-
less optimistic)  that  he  will  be  able  to  turn  the  whole  area  over  to  the
civil  guard  and  self  defense  corps  within  6  months.

These  resettlement  efforts  in  areas  which  had  been  under  VC  domination
were  not  the  extent  of  the  early  hamlet  "program,"  however.  Many  existing
hamlets  and  villages  were  "fortified"  in  one  degree  or  another  early  in  1962
following  no  discernible  pattern.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  natural  product
of  the  varied  response  to  Nhu's  injunction  to  emphasize  strategic  hamlets.  In
April,  the  GVN  Ministry  of  the  Interior  informed  the  U.S.  that  1300  such
hamlets  were  already  completed.  "Operation  Sunrise"  had  by  this  time  been
broadened  to  embrace  efforts  in  several  provinces.  Several  other  Strategic  Ham-
let Programs  were  begun:  "Operation  Hai  Yen  11"  (Sea  Swallow)  in  Phu  Yen
Province  with  a  goal  of  281  hamlets,  157  of  which  were  reported  as  completed
within  two  months:  "Operation  Dang  Tien"  (Let's  go)  in  Binh  Dinh  Province
with  a  goal  of  328  strategic  hamlets  in  its  first  year;  and  "Operation  Phuong
Hoang"  (Royal  Phoenix)  in  Quang  Nai  Province  with  a  goal  of  125  strategic
hamlets  by  the  end  of  1962.

D.  AT  LA  ST— A  NA  TIONA  L  PL  A  N

The  GVN  drew  all  of  the  partial  istic  programs  together  in  its  August  1962
national  priority  plan  mentioned  earlier.  The  nation  was  divided  into  four
priority  zones.  First  priority  was  assigned  to  the  eleven  provinces  around  Saigon.
This  included  essentially  the  area  of  the  Thompson  Delta  plan  plus  the  original
area  of  "Operation  Sunrise"  plus  Gia  Dinh  Province.  Priorities  within  each
zone  were  further  specified.  Within  the  zone  of  first  national  priority,  for
example,  the  provinces  of  Vinh  Long,  Long  An,  and  Phuoc  Try  were  assigned
the  highest  priority;  Binh  Duong — where  operations  were  already  in  progress
— was  given  priority  three.  By  the  end  of  the  summer  of  1962  GVN  claimed
that  3,225  of  the  planned  11,316  hamlets  had  already  been  completed  and
that  over  33  percent  of  the  nation's  total  population  was  already  living  in  com-
pleted hamlets.

October  1962,  when  Diem  made  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  the  avowed
focus  of  his  counterinsurgent  campaign,  marks  the  second  watershed  in  the
development  and  implementation  of  the  program.  The  first  such  watershed  had
been  the  consensus,  on  the  potential  value  of  such  a  program,  which  had  been
developed  at  the  end  of  1961  and  early  1962.  There  would  be  no  others  until  the
program  died  with  Diem.

E.  EFFECT  ON  U.S.  PERCEPTIONS

The  effect  of  the  GVN's  concentration  on  strategic  hamlets  was  to  make
U.S.  assessments  focus  on  several  sub-aspects  of  the  problem.  Attention  tended
to  be  directed  toward  how  well  hamlets  were  beine  fortified  and  whether  or  not


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961--1963  151


TABLE  1

GVN  REPORT  ON  STATUS  OF  STRATEGIC  HAMLETS
As  of  30  September  1962  *


Area

SOUTHERN:
Saigon

Eastern  Provinces
Western  Provinces

SUB-TOTAL

CENTRAL:

Central  Lowlands
High  Plateau

SUB-TOTAL

GRAND  TOTAL


Strategic
Hamlets
Planned


433
1,595
4,728

6,756


3,630
930

4,560

11,316


Strategic
Hamlets
Completed


105
291
1,236

1.632


1,490
103

1,593

3,225


Strategic
Hamlets  Under
Construction


115
501
702

1,318

682
217
899
2,217


Population  in
Completed
Hamlets


261,470
423,060
1,874,790

2,559,320


1,654,470
108,244

1,762,714

4,322,034


— Percentage  of  planned  hamlets  completed 28.49%

— Percentage  of  total  population  in  completed  hamlets  ....  33.39%


*  Adapted  from  The  Times  of  Vietnam,  28  October  1962,  p.  17.


the  implementation  phase  was  well  managed;  i.e.,  whether  peasants  were  paid
for  their  labor,  reimbursed  for  their  losses,  and  given  adequate  opportunity  to
attend  their  crops.  Conversely,  attention  was  directed  away  from  the  difficult-
to-assess  question  of  whether  the  follow-up  actions  to  hamlet  security  were  tak-
ing place — the  actions  which  would  convert  the  peasantry  from  apathy  (if  not
opposition)  to  identification  with  their  central  government.

This  focusing  on  details  which  diverted  attention  from  the  ultimate  objec-
tive took  the  form  of  reports,  primarily  statistical,  which  set  forth  the  construc-
tion rate  for  strategic  hamlets,  the  incident  rate  of  VC  activities,  and  the  geo-
graphical areas  in  which  GVN  control  was  and  was  not  in  the  ascendancy.
These  "specifics"  were  coupled  to  generalized  assessments  which  almost  invar-
iably pointed  to  shortcomings  in  GVN's  execution  of  the  program.  The  short-
comings, however,  were  treated  as  problems  in  efficient  management  and  opera-
tional organization;  the  ineluctability  of  increased  control  (or  security)  lead-
ing somehow  to  popular  identification  by  a  process  akin  to  the  economic  assump-
tion of  "flotation  to  stability  through  development"  went  unchallenged  as  a  basic
assumption.  Critics  pointed  to  needed  improvements;  the  question  of  whether
or  not  these  could  be  accomplished,  or  why,  almost  never  was  raised.

"Operation  Sunrise,"  for  example,  was  criticized  in  some  detail  by  the  US
MAAG.  Much  better  planning  and  coordination  was  needed  in  order  to
relocate  effectively:  Aerial  surveys  were  necessary  to  pinpoint  the  number  of
families  to  be  relocated;  unanticipated  expenditures  needed  to  be  provided
for;  preparation  of  sites  should  begin  before  the  peasants  were  moved;  and
GVN  resource  commitments  should  be  carefully  checked  by  U.S.  advisors  at


152 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

all  levels.  There  was  no  discussion  of  the  vulnerability  of  the  strategic  hamlets
to  VC  infiltration  (as  against  VC  attacks)  or  of  the  subsequent  steps  to  winning
support.  That  was  not,  one  may  assume,  the  military's  prime  concern.

Political  observers  who  examined  this  follow-on  aspect  were  cautiously
optimistic:

The  strategic  hamlet  program  is  the  heart  of  our  effort  and  deserves
top  priority.  While  it  has  not — and  probably  will  not — bring  democracy  to
rural  Vietnam,  it  provides  truly  local  administration  for  the  first  time.
Coupled  with  measures  to  increase  rice  production  and  farmer  income,
these  local  administrations  can  work  a  revolution  in  rural  Vietnam.

The  same  tone  was  reflected  in  Michael  Forrestal's  report  to  President  Kennedy
in  February  1963  following  his  visit  to  Vietnam  with  Roger  Hilsman  [Doc.  120].
The  visitors  found  Ambassador  Nolting  and  his  deputy,  William  C.  Trueheart,
optimistic  about  the  results  which  the  program  might  achieve  once  the  ma-
terials for  it,  then  just  beginning  to  come  in,  reached  full  volume.

The  Department  of  Defense  was  devoting  considerable  effort  to  insuring  that
these  materials  did  reach  Vietnam  in,  the  quantities  needed  and  in  timely  fash-
ion. Secretary  McNamara  had  been  stuck  with  this  problem  during  his  May  1962
visit  to  "Operation  Sunrise."  He  saw  especially  a  need  to  program  SDC,  CG,  and
Youth  Corps  training  so  that  it  would  match  the  role  of  hamlet  building  and
to  insure  the  provision  of  proper  communications  for  warning  purposes.  A
substantial  amount  of  the  MAAG-DoD  effort  subsequently  went  into  pro-
gramming. The  Agency  for  International  Development  had  agreed  to  fund  the
"Strategic  Hamlet  Kits"  (building  materials,  barbed  wire  and  stakes,  light
weapons,  ammunition,  and  communication  equipment),  but  in  August  1962
it  demurred,  stating  that  supporting  assistance  funds  in  the  MAP  were  inade-
quate for  the  purpose.  Secretary  McNamara  agreed  to  undertake  the  financing
for  1500  kits  (13  million)  but  asked  if  the  additional  3500  kits  requested  were
really  necessary  and,  if  so,  on  what  delivery  schedule.  The  target  levels  and
delivery  dates  underwent  more  or  less  continuous  revision  from  then  until  the
question  became  irrelevant  in  late  1963.  A  separate  but  related  effort  went  into
expediting  the  procurement,  delivery,  and  installation  of  radios  in  the  strategic
hamlets  so  that  each  would  have  the  capability  to  sound  the  alarm  and  request
the  employment  of  mobile  reserves  when  attacked.

F. DIFFERENCES  BEGIN  TO  EMERGE

All  of  these  "program  management"  activities  were  based  on  the  unstated
assumption  that  the  strategic  hamlet  program  would  lead  to  effective  pacifica-
tion if  only  Diem  would  make  it  work.  As  it  turned  out,  there  was  some  dis-
agreement between  what  the  U.S.  considered  needed  to  be  done  and  what  Pres-
ident Diem  knew  very  well  he  was  doing.  He  was  using  the  Strategic  Hamlet
Program  to  carry  forward  his  "personalist  philosophy."  As  brother  Nhu  visibly
took  the  reins  controlling  the  program  and  began  to  solidify  control  over  the
Youth  Corps  it  became  increasinglv  clear  that  Diem  was  emphasizing  govern-
ment control  of  the  peasantry  at  the  expense  (at  least  in  U.S.  eyes)  of  pacifica-
tion.

As  awareness  in  Washington  increased  that  strategic  hamlets  could  serve
several  purposes,  there  developed  also  a  divergent  interpretation  of  whether  or
not  the  GVN  was  "winning  the  war."  When  General  Krulak,  SACSA,  and


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963  153


Joseph  Mendenhall,  an  ex-counselor  in  Saigon  then  at  State,  visited  RVN  in
September  1963,  President  Kennedy  wryly  asked  upon  receiving  their  con-
flicting reports,  "You  two  did  visit  the  same  country,  didn't  you?"  The  answer
is  that  they  had,  but  the  general  stressed  that  the  military  war  was  going  well
while  the  diplomat  asserted  that  the  political  war  was  being  lost.  The  argument
was  not,  it  should  be  stressed,  one  between  the  generals  and  the  diplomats;
experienced  diplomats  disagreed  fundamentally  with  Mendenhall.  The  dis-
agreement was  between  those  who  pointed  to  signs  of  progress  and  those  who
held  up  examples  of  poor  planning,  corruption,  and  alienation  of  the  peasants
whose  loyalty  was  the  object  of  the  exercise.  Criticisms — frequently  ac-
companied by  counterbalancing  assertions  that  "limited  progress"  was  being
achieved — mentioned  corvee  labor,  GVN  failures  to  reimburse  the  farmers  for
losses  due  to  resettlement,  the  dishonesty  of  some  officials,  and  Diem's  stress  on
exhortations  rather  than  on  the  provision  of  desirable  social  services.

Those  who  emphasized  that  the  program  was  showing  real  progress —
usually  with  a  caveat  or  two  that  there  was  considerable  room  for  improvement
— stressed  statistical  evidence  to  portray  the  exponential  increase  in  strategic
hamlet  construction  (Table  2),  the  declining  trend  in  Viet  Cong-initiated  inci-
dents (Table  3),  the  rise  in  VC  defections  (Table  4),  and  the  slow  but  steady
increase  in  GVN  control  of  rural  areas  (Table  5) .

The  JCS  observation  with  respect  to  the  establishment  of  strategic  hamlets,
for  instance,  was  that  since  fewer  than  two  tenths  of  one  percent  (0.2% )  of
them  had  been  overrun  by  the  VC,  "The  Vietnamese  people  must  surely  be
finding  in  them  a  measure  of  the  tranquility  which  they  seek."

RGK  Thompson  later  claimed  that  the  very  absence  of  attacks  was  an  indi-
cator that  the  VC  had  succeeded  in  infiltrating  the  hamlets.  The  point  is  not
Thompson's  prescience  but  the  difficulty  of  reasoned  assessment  to  which  this
analysis  has  already  pointed.  The  U.S.  course,  in  the  face  of  these  cautiously
optimistic  and  hopefully  pessimistic  reports,  was  to  continue  its  established
program  of  material  support  coupled  with  attempts  to  influence  Diem  to  make
desired  changes.

VII. THE  PATH  TO  THE  END

A. DIEM'S  POSITION  HARDENS

The  obvious  U.S.  alternatives,  by  mid- 1963,  remained  the  same  as  they  were
in  late  1961:  (1)  to  induce  changes  within  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program
(among  other)  by  convincing  Diem  to  make  such  changes;  (2)  to  allow  Diem
to  run  things  his  own  way  and  hope  for  the  best;  and  (3)  to  find  an  alternative
to  President  Diem.  The  U.S.  continued  to  pursue  the  first  course;  Diem  insisted
increasingly  on  the  second.  Finally,  due  to  pressures  from  areas  other  than  the
Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  the  U.S.  pursued  the  third  alternative.  The  Strategic
Hamlet  Program,  in  the  event,  died  with  its  sponsors.

Far  from  becoming  more  reasonable,  in  U.S.  eyes,  President  Diem  by  mid-
1963  had  become  more  intractable.  He  insisted,  for  example,  that  the  U.S.  cease
to  have  an  operational  voice  in  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  The  multiplica-
tion of  U.S.  advisors  at  many  levels,  he  claimed,  was  the  source  of  friction  and
dissension.  The  remedy  was  to  remove  the  advisors.  The  essence  of  Diem's  posi-
tion was  that  Taylor's  "limited  partnership"  would  not  work.

Other  U.S.  missions  visited  Vietnam  to  assess  the  conduct  of  the  war.  The


154


TABLE  2


I


00-0


600D  -


i  ecoo  ^


o
S

<
o


soco


3000  -


I  I


-?


//


IMCOMfUCTC  OATA
I PntCJFI  TO  I

oc;'T;;MF!r:rt  ijoi


•  300  nrnATr.oic;  rj

tr.Tlf'AT^il)  TO  ur.  COMr*U''.T!lD


Arrnox i matcly
•ccrs  crnATr.oic — I —

M.\MUeTr-  CO:-^Pl.GTCO


O N D J  F

10  c^:


M  A


155


TABLE  3

VIET  CONG  INITIATED  INCIDENTS  BROKEN  DOWN  INTO
CATEGORIES  (ATTACKS,  TERRORISM,  SABOTAGE,  PROPAGANDA)


J  "  F* M A M "j—^r^-  y^*  SON "o  p* M A M J J A S O  "  "n  U


157


o


On


O


O

o

:^
o

i

O


O

hi

o
o


^  o


Si  E


^  ^  ^

O


O  vO

iri  O  ^
^  0\

in


(N  O
Csl  O

^

O


^  2  ^

m  O
^  CO

O

o


ON  O  v»
O

m  O  O


O  ^
O  On


O


o
o


o


on


>  S  ^


o


8^

o


ON


on


c

■t— >

a


>
o


O  Cl,

-  o


^■2
^  S.  3


^  ^  C^
Z  0^


O


60

O
C<5


O  vQ

^  o

^  O  OO
On


00  o
^  O
m  o

CO


ON


o

2

00

o

O

o

o

<N

o_

1—1

m

o

O
O
O

m


O

o  ^
o  r--

CO


C

o


.2  o
^  ^


X)
3


ITS


o


vo
On


en
O

CO


O  O  v$
ON  O

m

00


OO  O

^  o
m

(N

NO
ON


ON  O

m  O
O  in


ON
O


O  vO

o  ^
o  r--

to


o

T— (

o

>/-)

O

o

in

o

m

O

On

o\

On

O

o

in

'^'^

in

o

(N

o

CO

ntT

no"

on
a


a

o


>


o  ^
■~  <^

o  CI,


!<1

•2


O

NO  O  ^

I O  <N

o  I
o

CO


^ O  v$

o
I  o  r-

o  I


I


m  o
o  o

O  XI-

+  +

+


—I  o
(N  O

NO
NO


S  )^
o  ^

I  o  r-
^^^  +

(N
ON

+


=  -2  o


o  a,

u O  D


VO


3

X

oh

c

a

c

a

Q

c
o

o


o

E
o
c
o


o  .

o  (u

o  ^

o

C3  OD

£  §

<^  ^

u  O

3


O  .E

I-  D

3  c/?

cx  o

<U  >

c  c

(u  o

(U


°  §

O  -o


158 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


result  was  much  the  same  as  reported  by  Krulak  and  Mendenhall.  This  was
essentially  the  findings  of  the  McNamara-Taylor  mission  in  September:  the
military  campaign  is  progressing,  political  disaffection  is  growing;  U.S.  leverage
is  questionable.  [Doc.  142]

B. THE  PROGRAM  DIES  WITH  THE  NGOS

The  rest  may  be  summarized:  the  U.S.  attempted  to  insist  on  a  program  with
more  emphasis  on  broad  appeal  rather  than  control;  Diem,  finding  himself
increasingly  embroiled  in  the  Buddhist  controversy,  increased  repressive
measures;  a  coup  toppled  the  Diem  regime  on  1  November;  the  deposed  Pres-
ident and  his  brother  Nhu,  "architect  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,"  were
killed.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program — or  at  least  the  program  under  that  name
which  they  had  made  the  unifying  theme  of  their  counterinsurgent  effort —
died  with  them.  The  inhabitants  who  had  wanted  to  leave  the  hamlets  did  so  in
the  absence  of  an  effective  government.  The  VC  took  advantage  of  the  con-
fusion to  attack  and  overrun  others.  Some  offered  little  or  no  resistance.  The
ruling  junta  attempted  to  resuscitate  the  program  as  "New  Life  Hamlets''  early
in  1964,  but  the  failures  of  the  past  provided  a  poor  psychological  basis  upon
which  to  base  hopes  for  the  future.

VIII. AN  INCONCLUSIVE  SUMMARY

The  dominant  U.S.  view  has  been  that  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  failed
because  of  over-expansion  and  the  establishment  of  hamlets  in  basically  in-
secure areas.  That  there  was  overexpansion  and  the  establishment  of  many
poorly  defended  hamlets  is  not  questioned.  This  contributed,  beyond  doubt,  to
the  failure  of  the  program.  But  this  view  finesses  the  problem  of  the  process  for
which  the  strategic  hamlets  were  but  the  tangible  svmbol.  The  present  analysis
has  sought  to  emphasize  both  the  essentially  political  nature  of  the  objective
of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  and  the  political  nature  of  the  context  in  which
the  process  evolved — of  expectations,  bargaining,  and  attempts  to  exert
influence  on  other  participants  in  policy  formulation  and  implementation.  In
this  context  it  is  the  U.S.  inabilitv  to  exert  leverage  on  President  Diem  (or
Diem's  inability  to  reform)  that  emerges  as  the  principal  cause  of  failure.

Yet,  both  of  these  attempts  to  pinpoint  the  reasons  why  the  strategic  hamlet
program  did  not  succeed  fail  to  get  at  another  whole  issue:  the  validity  of  that
body  of  writings  which  one  may  call  the  theory  and  doctrine  of  counterinsur-
gency.  Neither  the  military  nor  the  political  aspects  of  this  doctrine  can  be  up-
held (or  proved  false)  by  an  examination  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.
Quite  aside  from  whether  or  not  Diem  was  able  to  broaden  the  program's
appeal  to  the  peasantry,  what  would  have  occurred  had  he  made  a  determined
and  sustained  effort  to  do  so?  Would  this  have  led  in  some  more-or-less  direct
way  to  stability  or  to  even  greater  dissatisfaction?  We  simply  do  not  know.  The
question  is  as  unanswerable  as  whether  the  appetite  grows  with  the  eating  or
is  satisfied  by  it.  The  contention  here  is  that  claims  of  mismanagement  are  not
sufiicient  to  conclude  that  better  management  would  necessarily  have  produced
the  desired  results.

In  the  military  sphere  the  unanswerable  questions  are  different.  It  is  said
that  the  military  phase  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  progressed  reasonably
well  in  many  areas;  the  failure  was  in  the  political  end  of  the  process.  But
did  the  military  actions  succeed?  Might  failures  to  develop  adequate  intelligence


The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  196 J —J 963  159

and  to  weed  out  VC  infrastructure  in  these  hamlets  not  as  easily  be  attributable
to  the  fact  that  the  inhabitants  knew  they  were  not  really  safe  from  VC  intimi-
dation and  reprisals?  Does  the  analogy  to  an  "oil  spot"  have  operational  mean-
ing when  small  bands  can  carry  out  hit  and  run  raids  or  when  many  small
bands  can  concentrate  in  one  location  and  achieve  surprise?  Where  is  the  key
to  this  vicious  circle — or  is  there  a  key?

In  conclusion,  while  the  abortive  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  of  1961-1963
may  teach  one  something,  the  available  record  does  not  permit  one  to  conclude
either  that  the  program  fell  because  of  the  failure  of  a  given  phase  or  that  other
phases  were,  in  fact,  adequate  to  the  challenge.  One  may  say  that  the  program
was  doomed  by  poor  execution  and  by  the  inability  of  the  Ngo  family  to  reform
coupled  with  the  inability  of  the  U.S.  to  induce  them  to  reform.  The  evidence
does  not  warrant  one  to  proceed  further.


160


3. Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964


Summary

A  formal  planning  and  budgetary  process  for  the  phased  withdrawal  of  U.S.
forces  from  Vietnam  was  begun  amid  the  euphoria  and  optimism  of  July  1962,
and  was  ended  in  the  pessimism  of  March  1964.  Initially,  the  specific  objectives
were:  (1)  to  draw  down  U.S.  military  personnel  then  engaged  in  advisory,
training,  and  support  efforts  from  a  FY  64  peak  of  12,000  to  a  FY  68  bottom-
ing out  of  1,500  (just  HQ,  MAAG);  and  (2)  to  reduce  MAP  from  a  FY  64
peak  of  $180  million  to  a  FY  69  base  of  $40.8  million.  South  Vietnamese  forces
were  to  be  trained  to  perform  all  the  functions  then  being  carried  out  by  U.S.
personnel.  What  the  U.S.G.  was  actually  trying  to  accomplish  during  this  pe-
riod can  be  described  in  either  or  both  of  two  ways:  (1)  a  real  desire  and  at-
tempt to  extricate  the  U.S.  from  direct  military  involvement  in  the  war  and  to
make  it  a  war  which  the  GVN  would  have  to  learn  to  win,  and  (2)  straight-
f)rward  contingency  planning  and  the  use  of  a  political-managerial  technique
to  slow  down  pressures  for  greater  U.S.  inputs.  A  blend  of  the  wish  embodied
in  the  first  explanation  and  the  hard-headedness  of  the  second  seems  plausible.

Needless  to  say,  the  phase-out  never  came  to  pass.  The  Diem  coup  with  the
resulting  political  instability  and  deterioration  of  the  military  situation  soon
were  to  lead  U.S.  decision-makers  to  set  aside  this  planning  process.  An  os-
tensible cut-back  of  1000  men  did  take  place  in  December  1963,  but  this  was
essentially  an  accounting  exercise — and  the  U.S.  force  level  prior  to  the  reduc-
tion had  already  reached  16,732  in  October  1963.  By  December  1964,  U.S.
strength  had  risen  to  23,000  and  further  deployments  were  on  the  way.

What,  then,  did  the  whole  phased-withdrawal  exercise  accomplish?  It  may
have  impeded  demands  for  more  men  an  dmoney,  but  this  is  doubtful.  If  the
optimistic  reports  on  the  situation  in  SVN  were  to  be  believed,  and  they  ap-
parently were,  little  more  would  have  been  requested.  It  may  have  frightened
the  GVN,  but  it  did  not  induce  Diem  or  his  successors  to  reform  the  political
apparatus  or  make  RVNAF  fight  harder.  It  may  have  contributed,  however,  to
public  charges  about  the  Administration's  credibility  and  over-optimism  about
the  end  of  the  conflict.  Despite  the  carefully  worded  White  House  announcement
of  the  phase-out  policy  on  October  2,  1963,  tentative  Johnson  Administration
judgments  came  to  be  regarded  bv  the  public  as  firm  predictions.  While  this
announcement  made  clear  that  the  U.S.  eftort  would  continue  "until  the  in-
surgency has  been  suppressed  or  until  the  national  security  forces  of  the  GVN
are  capable  of  suppressing  it,"  the  public  tended  to  focus  on  the  prognosis  which
followed — "Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  reported  their  judgment
that  the  major  part  of  the  U.S.  military  task  can  be  completed  by  the  end  of
1965.  .  .  In  August  1964,  Mr.  McNamara  further  explained  the  policy:  "We
have  said — as  a  matter  of  fact.  I  say  today — as  our  training  missions  are  com-
pleted, we  will  bring  back  the  training' forces."

Quite  apart  from  what  was  actually  accomplished  by  the  phase-out  policy


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  161


and  the  costs  in  terms  of  domestic  political  perceptions  of  Administration  state-
ments on  Vietnam,  there  are  some  important  lessons  to  be  learned  from  this
exercise.  What  was  the  U.S.  rationale  behind  the  policy?  Was  it  sound,  feasible,
and  consistent  with  statements  of  national  objectives?  By  what  policy  and  pro-
grammatic means  were  we  trying  to  bring  about  the  desired  results?  Were  these,
in  fact,  the  most  appropriate  and  effective  vehicles?  How  did  the  intelligence
and  reporting  system  in  Vietnam  help  or  hinder  policy  formulation?  Why  was
not  the  Diem  coup  in  its  darkening  aftermath  grasped  as  the  opportunity  to  re-
examine policy  and  unambiguously  to  decide  to  phase  out,  or  to  do  whatever
was  deemed  necessary?

The  rationale  behind  the  phased  withdrawal  policy  was  by  and  large  intern-
ally consistent  and  sensible.

— To  put  Vietnam  in  the  perspective  of  other  U.S.  world  interests.  Viet-
nam, at  this  time,  was  not  the  focal  point  of  attention  in  Washington;
Berlin  and  Cuba  were.  Part  of  this  exercise  was  to  make  clear  that  U.S.  in-
terests in  Europe  and  in  the  western  hemisphere  came  first.  Even  in  terms
of  Southeast  Asia  itself,  Laos,  not  Vietnam,  was  the  central  concern.  So,
the  phase-out  policy  made  the  kind  of  sense  that  goes  along  with  the  struc-
turing of  priorities.

— To  avoid  an  open-ended  Asian  mainland  land  war.  Even  though  vio-
lated by  U.S.  involvement  in  the  Korean  war,  this  was  a  central  tenet  of
U.S.  national  security  policy  and  domestic  politics.  The  notion  of  the  bot-
tomless Asian  pit,  the  difference  in  outlook  about  a  human  life,  were
well  understood.

— To  plan  for  the  contingency  that  events  might  force  withdrawal  upon
us.  Seen  in  this  light,  the  planning  process  was  prudential  preparation.
— To  treat  the  insurgency  as  fundamentally  a  Vietnamese  matter,  best
solved  by  the  Vietnamese  themselves.  Most  U.S.  decision-makers  had
well-developed  doubts  about  the  efficacy  of  using  "white  faced"  soldiers
to  fight  Asians.  This  view  was  invariably  coupled  publicly  and  privately
with  statements  like  this  one  made  by  Secretary  McNamara:  "I  personally
believe  that  this  is  a  war  that  the  Vietnamese  must  fight  ...  I  don't  be-
lieve we  can  take  on  that  combat  task  for  them.  I  do  believe  we  can  carry
out  training.  We  can  provide  advice  and  logistical  assistance."
— To  increase  the  pressure  on  the  GVN  to  make  the  necessary  reforms
and  to  make  RVNAF  fight  harder  by  making  the  extent  and  future  of  U.S.
support  a  little  more  tenuous.  This  was  explicitly  stated  in  State's  instructions
to  Ambassador  Lodge  on  how  to  handle  the  White  House  statement  of
October,  1963:  "Actions  are  designed  to  indicate  to  Diem  Government  our
displeasure  at  its  political  policies  and  activities  and  to  create  significant
uncertainty  in  that  government  and  in  key  Vietnamese  groups  as  to  fu-
ture intentions  of  United  States."  In  other  words,  phased  withdrawal  was
thought  of  as  a  bargaining  counter  with  the  GVN.

— To  put  the  lid  on  inevitable  bureaucratic  and  political  pressures  for  in-
creased U.S.  involvement  and  inputs  into  Vietnam.  It  was  to  be  expected
and  anticipated  that  those  intimately  involved  in  the  Vietnam  problem
would  be  wanting  more  U.S.  resources  to  handle  that  problem.  Pressures
for  greater  effort,  it  was  reasoned,  eventually  would  come  into  play  unless
counteracted.  What  Secretary  McNamara  did  was  to  force  all  theater  justi-
fications for  force  build-ups  into  tension  with  long-term  phase-down  plans.
On  21  December,  1963,  in  a  memo  to  the  President  after  the  Deim  coup,


162 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ V ol.  II

Mr.  McNamara  urged  holding  the  line:  "U.S.  resources  and  personnel  can-
not usefully  be  substantially  increased.  .  .  ."

— To  deal  with  international  and  domestic  criticism  and  pressures.  While
Vietnam  was  not  a  front  burner  item,  there  were  those  who  already  had
begun  to  question  and  offer  non-consensus  alternatives.  During  1963,  for
example,  both  General  de  Gaulle  and  Senator  Mansfield  were  strongly  urg-
ing the  neutralization  of  Vietnam.

It  is  difficult  to  sort  out  the  relative  importance  of  these  varying  rationales;
all  were  important.  Paramount,  perhaps,  were  the  desires  to  limit  U.S.  involve-
ment, and  to  put  pressure  on  the  GVN  for  greater  efforts.  And,  the  rationales
were  all  consistent  with  one  another.  But  they  did  not  appear  as  being  wholly
consistent  with  other  statements  of  our  national  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia.
For  example,  on  July  17,  1963,  President  Kennedy  said:  "We  are  not  going  to
withdravv  from  [bringing  about  a  stable  government  there,  carrying  on  a  strug-
gle to  maintain  its  national  independence].  In  my  opinion,  for  us  to  withdraw
from  that  effort  would  mean  a  collapse  not  only  of  South  Vietnam,  but  South-
east Asia."  He  added:  "We  can  think  of  Vietnam  as  a  piece  of  strategic  real  es-
tate. It's  on  the  corner  of  mainland  Asia,  across  the  East-West  trade  routes,  and
in  a  position  that  would  make  it  an  excellent  base  for  further  Communist  ag-
gression against  the  rest  of  free  Asia."  In  a  September  9,  1963  interview,  the
President  stated:  "I  believe  ['the  domino  theory*].  I  think  that  the  struggle  is
close  enough.  China  is  so  large,  looms  up  high  just  beyond  the  frontiers,  that  if
South  Vietnam  went,  it  would  not  only  give  them  an  improved  geographic
position  for  a  guerrilla  assault  on  Malaya,  but  would  also  give  the  impression
that  the  wave  of  the  future  in  Southeast  Asia  was  China  and  the  Communists."
One  could  argue  that  such  an  unequivocally  strong  statement  of  strategic  im-
portance would  not  be  consistent  with  anv  sort  of  phase-out  proposal  short  of
a  clear-cut  victory  over  the  communists.  Despite  the  caveats  about  it  being  es-
sentially a  South  Vietnamese  struggle,  President  Kennedy's  statements  were
very  strong.  And,  insofar  as  the  U.S.  was  interested  in  greater  leverage  on  the
GVN,  these  statements  tended  to  reduce  U.S.  bargaining  power  because  of  the
explicit  and  vital  nature  of  the  commitment.

The  rationales  behind  the  phased  withdrawal  policv  were  incorporated  into
a  formal  programming  and  planning  process  that  began  in  July  1962  and  ended
on  27  March  1964.  It  was  at  the  Honolulu  Conference  on  23  July  1962,  the
same  day  that  the  14-nation  neutralization  declaration  on  Laos  was  formally
signed,  that  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  guidance  from  the  President  put  the
planning  machine  in  motion.  Noting  that  "tremendous  progress"  had  been
made  in  South  Vietnam  and  that  it  might  be  difficult  to  retain  public  support
for  U.S.  operations  in  Vietnam  indefinitely,  Mr.  McNamara  directed  that  a
comprehensive  long  range  program  be  developed  for  building  up  SVN  military
capability  and  for  phasing-out  the  U.S.  role.  He  asked  that  the  planners  assume
that  it  would  require  approximately  three  vears,  that  is,  the  end  of  1965,  for  the
RVNAF  to  be  trained  to  the  point  that  it  could  cope  with  the  VC.  On  26  July,
the  JCS  formally  directed  CINCPAC  to  develop  a  Comprehensive  Plan  for
South  Vietnam  (CPSVN)  in  accordance  with  the  Secretary's  directives.  Thus
began  an  intricate,  involved  and  sometimes  arbitrary  bargaining  process,  in-
volving mainly  MACV,  the  Joint  Staff,  and  ISA.  There  were  two  main  pegs
that  persisted  throughout  this  process:  MAP  planning  for  the  support  and
build-up  of  RVNAF,  and  draw-downs  on  U.S.  advisory  and  training  personnel.

The  first  COMUSMACV  CPSVN  was  floated  on  19  January  r963.  It  en-


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  163


visioned  MAP  for  FY  1963-1964  at  a  total  of  $405  million.  The  total  for  FY
1965-1968  was  $673  million.  The  RVNAF  force  level  was  to  peak  in  FY  64  at
458,000  men.  U.S.  personnel  in  SVN  were  to  drop  from  a  high  of  12.2  thou-
sand in  FY  65  to  5.9  thousand  in  FY  66,  bottoming  out  in  FY  68  at  1.5  thou-
sand (Hq  MAAG).  No  sooner  was  this  first  CPSVN  cranked  into  the  policy
machinery  than  it  conflicted  with  similar  OSD/ISA  planning.  This  conflict  be-
tween ISA/OSD  guidance  and  COMUSMACV/Joint  Staff  planning  was  to  be
continued  throughout  the  life  of  the  CPSVN.

Secretary  McNamara  opposed  General  Harkins  version  of  the  plan  for  a  va-
riety of  reasons:  (1)  it  programmed  too  many  RVNAF  than  were  trainable
and  supportable;  (2)  it  involved  weaponry  that  was  too  sophisticated;  (3)  it
did  not  fully  take  account  of  the  fact  that  if  the  insurgency  came  into  control
in  FY  65  as  anticipated,  the  U.S.  MAP  investment  thereafter  should  be  held  at
no  more  than  $50  million  per  year;  (4)  the  U.S.  phaseout  was  too  slow,  and
the  RVNAF  training  had  to  be  speeded  up.  In  other  words,  Mr.  McNamara
wanted  both  a  more  rapid  U.S.  withdrawal  of  personnel,  and  a  faster  reduction
in  U.S.  military /economic  support.

The  Secretary's  views  prevailed.  The  embodiment  of  Mr.  McNamara's  desire
to  quicken  the  pace  of  phase-out  planning  was  embodied  first  in  a  Model  M
plan  prepared  by  the  JCS  and  later  in  what  came  to  be  called  the  Accelerated
Model  Plan  of  the  CPSVN.  The  Accelerated  Plan  provided  for  a  rapid  phase-
out  of  the  bulk  of  U.S.  military  personnel.  It  also  provided  for  building  up  GVN
forces  at  a  faster  pace,  but  at  a  more  reduced  scale.  MAP  costs  for  FY  1965-
1969  totaled  $399.4  million,  or  nearly  $300  million  lower  than  the  original
projection.

All  of  this  planning  began  to  take  on  a  kind  of  absurd  quality  as  the  situation
in  Vietnam  deteriorated  drastically  and  visibly.  Strangely,  as  a  result  of  the
public  White  House  promise  in  October  and  the  power  of  the  wheels  set  in  mo-
tion, the  U.S.  did  efi'ect  a  1000  man  withdrawal  in  December  of  1963.  All  the
planning  for  phase-out,  however,  was  either  ignored  or  caught  up  in  the  new
thinking  of  January  to  March  1964  that  preceded  NSAM  288.  The  thrust  of
this  document  was  that  greater  U.S.  support  was  needed  in  SVN.  Mr.  McNamara
identified  these  measures  as  those  that  "will  involve  a  limited  increase  in  U.S.
personnel  and  in  direct  Defense  Department  costs."  He  added:  "More  sig-
nificantly they  involve  significant  increases  in  Military  Assistance  Program
costs.  .  .  .  ,"  plus  "additional  U.S.  economic  aid  to  support  the  increased  GVN
budget."  On  27  March  1964,  CINCPAC  was  instructed  not  to  take  any  fur-
ther action  on  the  Accelerated  Plan.  Quickly,  requests  for  more  U.S.  personnel
poured  into  Washington.  The  planning  process  was  over,  but  not  forgotten.
Secretary  McNamara  stated  in  his  August  1964  testimony  on  the  Tonkin  Gulf
crisis  that  even  today  "if  our  training  missions  are  completed,  we  will  bring  back
the  training  forces."

While  the  phase-out  policy  was  overtaken  by  the  sinking  after-effects  of  the
Diem  coup,  it  is  important  to  understand  that  the  vehicles  chosen  to  effect  that
policy — MAP  planning,  RVNAF  and  U.S.  force  levels — were  the  right  ones.
They  were  programmatic  and,  therefore,  concrete  and  visible.  No  better  way
could  have  been  found  to  convince  those  in  our  own  government  and  the  lead-
ers of  the  GVN  that  we  were  serious  about  limiting  the  U.S.  commitment  and
throwing  the  burden  onto  the  South  Vietnamese  themselves.  The  public  an-
nouncement of  the  policy,  on  October  2,  1963,  after  the  McNamara-Taylor  trip
to  Vietnam  was  also  a  wise  choice.  Even  though  this  announcement  may
have  contributed  to  the  so-called  "credibility  gap,"  publication  was  a  necessity.


164 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

Without  it,  the  formal  and  classified  planning  process  would  have  seemed  to  be
nothing  more  than  a  drill.

While  the  choice  of  means  was  appropriate  for  getting  a  handle  on  the  prob-
lem, it  proceeded  from  some  basic  unrealities.  First,  only  the  most  Micaw-
beresque  predictions  could  have  led  decision-makers  in  Washington  to  believe
that  the  fight  against  the  guerrillas  would  have  clearly  turned  the  corner  by
FY  65.  Other  nations'  experience  in  internal  warfare  pointed  plainlv  in  the
other  direction.  With  more  propitious  circumstances,  e.g.  isolation  from  sanctu-
aries, the  Philippine  and  Malayan  insurgencies  each  took  the  better  part  of  a
dozen  years  to  bring  to  an  end.

Second,  there  was  an  unrealistic  contradiction  within  the  CPSVN  itself.  As
directed  by  Secretary  McNamara,  U.S.  MAP  was  to  decrease  as  RVNAF  in-
creased. In  practical  terms,  MAP  costs  should  have  been  programmed  to  in-
crease as  the  South  Vietnamese  Army  increased,  and  as  they  themselves  began
to  bear  most  of  the  burden.  The  desire  to  keep  MAP  costs  down  after  FY  65
could,  at  best,  be  perceived  as  a  budgeting  or  program  gimmick  not  a  serious
policy.

Three,  the  political  situation  in  South  Vietnam  itself  should  have  prompted
more  realistic  contingency  plans  against  failure  of  the  Vietnamese,  in  order  to
give  the  U.S.  some  options  other  than  what  appeared  as  precipitous  withdrawal.
The  intelligence  and  reporting  systems  for  Vietnam  during  this  period  must
bear  a  principal  responsibility  for  the  unfounded  optimism  of  U.S.  policy.  Ex-
cept for  some  very  tenuous  caveats,  the  picture  was  repeatedly  painted  in  terms
of  progress  and  success.

In  the  July  1962  Honolulu  Conference  the  tone  was  set.  Secretary  McNamara
asked  COMUSMACV  how  long  it  would  take  before  the  VC  could  be  expected
to  be  eliminated  as  a  significant  force.  In  reply,  COMUSMACV  estimated
about  one  year  from  the  time  RVNAF  and  other  forces  became  fully  opera-
tional and  began  to  press  the  VC  in  all  areas.  Mr.  McNamara  was  told  and  be-
lieved that  there  had  been  "tremendous  progress"  in  the  past  six  months.  This
theme  was  re-echoed  in  April  of  1963  bv  COMUSMACV  and  by  the  intelli-
gence community  through  an  NIE.  All  the  statistics  and  evaluations  pointed
to  GVN  improvement.  While  noting  general  progress,  the  NIE  stated  that  the
situation  remains  flexible.  Even  as  late  as  Julv  1963  a  rosv  picture  was  being
painted  by  DIA  and  SACSA.  The  first  suggestion  of  a  contrarv  evaluation  within
the  bureaucracy  came  from  INR.  Noting  disquieting  statistical  trends  since
July,  an  unpopular  INR  memo  stated  that  the  "pattern  showed  steady  decline
over  a  period  of  more  than  three  months  duration."  It  was  greeted  with  a  storm
of  disagreement,  and  in  the  end  was  disregarded.

The  first,  more  balanced  evaluation  came  with  the  McNamara-Taylor  trip  re-
port late  in  September  and  October,  1963.  While  it  called  the  political  situation
"deeply  serious,"  even  this  report  was  basically  optimistic  about  the  situation,
and  saw  little  danger  of  the  political  crisis  affecting  the  prosecution  of  the  war.

Not  until  after  the  Diem  coup,  the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy,  and
the  December  Vietnam  trip  of  Secretarv  McNamara  was  the  Vietnam  situation
accurately  assessed.  In  Secretarv  McNamara's  December  memo  to  the  Presi-
dent, after  his  trip,  he  wrote:  "The  situation  is  very  disturbing.  Current  trends,
unless  reversed  in  the  next  2-3  months,  will  lead  to  a  neutralization  at  best
and  more  likelv  to  a  communist-controlled  state."  One  of  the  most  serious  de-
ficiencies he  found  was  a  "grave  reporting  weakness  on  the  U.S.  side."  Mr.
McNamara's  judgment,  apparentlv,  was  not  predominant.  He  noted  in  the  con-
cluding paragraph  of  his  memo  that  he  "may  be  overly  pessimistic,  inasmuch  as


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  165


the  ambassador,  COMUSMACV,  and  General  Minh  were  not  discouraged  and
look  forward  to  significant  improvements  in  January."

By  6  March  1964  when  another  major  Secretary  of  Defense  Conference
convened  at  CINCPAC  Headquarters,  the  consensus  was  that  the  military  situa-
tion was  definitely  deteriorating.  The  issue  was  no  longer  whether  there  was  or
was  not  satisfactory  progress;  the  question  was  how  much  of  a  setback  had  there
been  and  what  was  needed  to  make  up  for  it.  Mr.  McNamara  observed  that  at-
tention should  now  be  focused  on  near  term  objectives  of  providing  for  neces-
sary greater  U.S.  support.  It  was  finally  agreed  that  the  insurgency  could  be  ex-
pected to  go  beyond  1965.

The  intelligence  and  reporting  problem  during  this  period  cannot  be  ex-
plained away.  In  behalf  of  the  evaluators  and  assessors,  it  can  be  argued  that
their  reporting  up  until  the  Diem  coup  had  some  basis  in  fact.  The  situation
may  not  have  been  too  bad  until  December  1963.  Honest  and  trained  men  in
Vietnam  looking  at  the  problems  were  reporting  what  they  believed  reality  to
be.  In  retrospect,  they  were  not  only  wrong,  but  more  importantly,  they  were
influential.  The  Washington  decision-makers  could  not  help  but  be  guided  by
these  continued  reports  of  progress.

Phased  withdrawal  was  a  good  policy  that  was  being  reasonably  well  exe-
cuted. In  the  way  of  our  Vietnam  involvement,  it  was  overtaken  by  events.  Not
borne  of  deep  conviction  in  the  necessity  for  a  U.S.  withdrawal  or  in  the  neces-
sity of  forcing  the  GVN  to  truly  carry  the  load,  it  was  bound  to  be  submerged
in  the  rush  of  events.  A  policy  more  determined  might  have  used  the  pretext
and  the  fact  of  the  Diem  coup  and  its  aftermath  as  reason  to  push  for  the  con-
tinuation of  withdrawal.  Instead,  the  instability  and  fear  of  collapse  resulting
from  the  Diem  coup  brought  the  U.S.  to  a  decision  for  greater  commitment.

End  of  Summary


CHRONOLOGY


23  Jul  62 Geneva  Accords  on  Laos

14-Nation  declaration  on  the  neutrality  of  Laos.

23  Jul  62 Sixth  Secretary  of  Defense  Conference,  Honolulu

Called  to  examine  present  and  future  developments  in  South
Vietnam — which  looked  good.  Mr.  McNamara  initiated  immediate
planning  for  the  phase-out  of  U.S.  military  involvement  by  1965
and  development  of  a  program  to  build  a  GVN  military  capability
strong  enough  to  take  over  full  defense  responsibiUties  by  1965.

26  Jul  62 JCS  Message  to  CINCPAC

CINCPAC  was  formally  instructed  to  develop  a  "Comprehensive
Plan  for  South  Vietnam"  (CPSVN)  in  line  with  instructions  given
at  Honolulu.

14  A  ug  62 C  IN  CPA  C  Message  to  MAC  V

MACV  was  directed  to  draw  up  a  CPSVN  designed  to  ensure  GVN
military  and  para-military  strength  commensurate  with  its  sovereign
responsibilities.  The  CPSVN  was  to  assume  the  insurgency  would
be  under  control  in  three  years,  that  extensive  US  support  would
be  available  during  the  three-year  period;  that  those  items  essential
to  development  of  full  RVNAF  capability  would  be  (largely)
available  through  the  military  assistance  program  (MAP).


166 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II
Oct— Nov. GVN  National  Campaign  Plan  developed

1962  In  addition  to  the  CPSVN,  MACV  prepared  an  outline  for  an

integrated,  nationwide  offensive  military  campaign  to  destroy  the
insurgency  and  restore  GVN  control  in  South  Vietnam.  The  con-
cept was  adopted  by  the  GVN  in  November.

26  Nov  62 Military  Reorganization  Decreed

Diem  ordered  realignment  of  militarv  chain  of  command,  re-
organization of  RVNAF,  establishment  of  four  CTZ's  and  a  Joint
Operations  Center  to  centralize  control  over  current  military  opera-
tions. (JOC  became  operational  on  20  December  1962.)

7  Dec  62 First  Draft  of  CPSVN  Completed

CINCPAC  disapproved  first  draft  because  of  high  costs  and  in-
adequate training  provisions.

19  Jan  63 MACV  Letter  to  CINCPAC,  3010  Ser  0021

MACV  submitted  a  revised  CPSVN.  Extended  through  FY  1968
and  concurred  in  by  the  Ambassador,  it  called  for  GVN  military
forces  to  peak  at  458,000  in  FY  1964  (RVNAF  strength  would
be  230,900  in  FY  1964);  cost  projected  over  six  years  would  total
$978  million.

22  Jan  63 OSD  ( ISA  )  Message  to  CINCPA  C

MAP-Vietnam  dollar  guide  lines  issued.  Ceilings  considerably
different  from  and  lower  than  those  in  CPSVN.

25  Jan  63 CINCPAC  Letter  to  JCS,  1010,  Ser  0079

Approved  the  CPSVN,  supported  and  justified  the  higher  MAP
costs  projected  by  it.

7  Mar  63 JCSM  190-63

JCS  recommended  SecDef  approve  the  CPSVN;  supporting  the
higher  MAP  costs,  JCS  proposed  CPSVN  be  the  basis  for  revision
of  FY  1964  MAP  and  development  of  FY  1965-69  programs.

20  Mar  63 USMACV  "Summary  of  Highlights,  9  Feb  62-7  Feb  63"

Reported  continuing,  growing  RVNAF  effectiveness,  increased
GVN  strength  economically  and  politically.  The  strategic  hamlet
program  looked  especially  good.  MACV  forecast  winning  the
military  phase  in  1963 — barring  "greatly  increased"  VC  reinforce-
ment and  resupply.

17  Apr  63 N IE  53-63

Although  "fragile,"  the  situation  in  SVN  did  not  appear  serious;
general  progress  was  reported  in  most  areas.

6  May  63 Seventh  SccDef  Honolulu  Conference

Called  to  [word  illegible]  the  CPSVN.  Largely  because  of  prevail-
ing optimism  over  Vietnam,  Mr.  McNamara  found  the  CPSVN
assistance  too  costly,  the  planned  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces  too
slow  and  RVNAF  development  misdirected.

9  May  63 Buddhist  Crisis  Begins

GVN  forces  fired  on  worshipers  celebrating  Buddha's  birthday
(several  killed,  more  wounded)  for  no  good  cause.  Long  standing
antipathy  toward  GVN  quicklv  turned  into  active  opposition.


Phased  Withdrawal  of  US.  Forces,  1962-1964  167


8  May  63 Two  SecDef  Memoranda  for  ASD/ISA

First:  Directed  joint  ISA/JCS  development  of  plans  to  replace
US  forces  with  GVN  troops  as  soon  as  possible  and  to  plan  the
withdrawal  of  1,000  US  troops  by  the  end  of  1963.
Second:  Requested  the  Office,  Director  of  Military  Assistance,  ISA,
"completely  rework"  the  MAP  program  recommended  in  the
CPSVN  and  submit  new  guidelines  by  1  September.  The  Secretary
felt  CPSVN  totals  were  too  high  (e.g.,  expenditures  proposed  for
FY's  1965-68  could  be  cut  by  $270  Million  in  his  view).

9  May  63 JCS  Message  9820  to  CINCPAC

Directed  CINCPAC  to  revise  the  CPSVN  and  program  the  with-
drawal of  1,000  men  by  the  end  of  1963.  Force  reduction  was  to
be  by  US  units  (not  individuals);  units  were  to  be  replaced  by
specially  trained  RVNAF  units.  Withdrawal  plans  were  to  be
contingent  upon  continued  progress  in  the  counterinsurgency
campaign.

11  May  63 CINCPAC  Letter  to  JCS,  3010  Ser  00447-63

CINCPAC  recommended  some  changes,  then  approved  MACV's
revision  of  the  CPSVN  and  the  MACV  plan  for  withdrawal  of
1,000  men.  As  instructed,  those  1,000  men  were  drawn  from
logistic  and  service  support  slots;  actual  operations  would  be  un-
affected by  their  absence.

17  May  63 ASD/ISA  Memorandum  for  the  Secretary

ISA's  proposed  MAP-Vietnam  program  based  on  the  Secretary's
instructions  was  rejected  as  still  too  high.

29  May  63 OSD/ISA  Message  to  CINCPAC

CINCPAC  was  directed  to  develop  three  alternative  MAP  plans
for  FYs  1965-69  based  on  these  levels:

$585  M  (CPSVN  recommendation)

$450  M  (Compromise)

$365  M  (SecDef  goal)

MAP  for  FY  1964  had  been  set  at  $180  M.

16Jun63 GVN-Buddhist  Truce  {State  Airgram  A-781  to  Embassy  Saigon,
10  June)

Reflected  temporary  and  tenuous  abatement  of  GVN-Buddhist
hostilities  which  flared  up  in  May.  The  truce  was  repudiated  almost
immediately  by  both  sides.  Buddhist  alienation  from  the  GVN
polarized;  hostilities  spread.

17  Jul  63 DIA  Intelligence  Summary

Reported  the  military  situation  was  unaffected  by  the  political
crisis;  GVN  prospects  for  continued  counterinsurgency  progress
were  "certainly  better"  than  in  1962;  VC  activity  was  reduced  but
VC  capability  essentially  unimpaired.

18  Jul  63 CINCPAC-proposed  MAP  program  submitted  to  JCS

CINCPAC  suggested  military  assistance  programs  at  the  three
levels  set  by  the  JCS  but  recommended  adoption  of  a  fourth  Plan
developed  by  CINCPAC.  "Plan  J"  totalled  $450.9  M  over  the  five-
year  period.


168 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

4  Aug  63 DIA  Intelligence  Bulletin

Rather  suddenly,  Viet  Cong  offensive  actions  were  reported  high
for  the  third  consecutive  week;  the  impHcation  was  that  the  VC
were  capitaHzing  on  the  poHtical  crisis  and  might  step  up  the
insurgency.

14  Aug  63 SACS  A  Memorandum  for  the  Secretary

Discounted  the  importance  of  increased  VC  activity:  the  compara-
tive magnitude  of  attacks  was  low;  developments  did  not  yet
seem  salient  or  lasting.

20  Aug  63  Diem  declared  martial  law;  ordered  attacks  on  Buddhist  pagodas
This  decree  plus  repressive  measures  against  the  Buddhists  shat-
tered hopes  of  reconciliation,  and  irrevocably  isolated  the  Diem
government.

20  Aug  63  JCSM629-63

CINCPAC/MACV  proposed  plan  for  1,000-man  withdrawal  in
three  to  four  increments  for  planning  purposes  only;  recommended
final  decision  on  withdrawal  be  delayed  until  October.

21  Aug  63 Director,  DIA  Memorandum  for  SecDef

Estimated  that  Diem's  acts  will  have  "serious  repercussions"
throughout  SVN:  foresaw  more  coup  and  counter-coup  activity.
But  reported  military  operations  were  so  far  unaffected  by  these
events.

27  Aug  63 JCSM  640-63

JCS  added  yet  a  fifth  "Model  M  '  Plan  to  CINCPAC's  four  alterna-
tive MAP  levels.  Providing  for  higher  force  levels  termed  necessary
by  the  JCS,  the  Model  M  total  was  close  to  $400  M.  JCS  recom'-
mended  the  Model  M  Plan  be  approved.

30  Aug  63 OSD/ISA  Memorandum  for  the  Secretary

Recommended  approval  of  JCSM  629-63.  But  noted  many  "units"
to  be  withdrawn  were  ad  hoc  creations  of  expendable  support
personnel,  cautioned  that  public  reaction  to  "phony"  withdrawal
would  be  damaging:  suggested  actual  strength  and  authorized
ceiling  levels  be  publicized  and  monitored.

3  Sep  63  SecDef  Memorandum  to  CJCS

Approved  JCSM-629-63.  Advised  JCS  against  creating  special
units  as  a  means  to  cut  back  unnecessary  personnel;  requested  the
projected  US  strength  figures  through  1963.

5  Sep  63  ASD/ISA  Memoradum  to  the  Secretary

Concurred  in  JCS  recommendation  with  minor  reservations  that
the  Model  M  Plan  for  military  assistance  to  SVN  be  approved.

6  Sep  63 SecDef  Memorandum  for  CJCS

Approved  Model  M  Plan  as  the  basis  for  FY  65-69  MAP
planning;  advised  that  US  materiel  turned  over  to  RVNAF  must
be  charged  to  and  absorbed  by  the  authorized  Model  M  Plan
ceilings.

11  Sep  63 CJCS  Memorandum  for  SecDef

Forwarded  the  military  strength  figures  (August  thru  December)


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  169


to  SecDef;  advised  that  the  1,000-man  withdrawal  would  be
counted  against  the  peak  October  strength  (16,732).  First  incre-
ment was  scheduled  for  withdrawal  in  November,  the  rest  in  De-
cember.

Presidential  Memorandum  for  the  SecDef

Directed  McNamara  and  Taylor  (CJCS)  to  personally  assess  the
critical  situation  in  SVN — both  political  and  military;  to  determine
what  GVN  action  was  required  for  change  and  what  the  US
should  do  to  produce  such  action.

ASD/ISA  (ODMA)  "MAP  Vietnam:  Manpower  and  Financial
Summary"

Approved  MAP  totals  reflected  the  Model  M  Plan:

FY  1964  :  $180.6  M
FY  1965-69: $211.6  M

Total: $392.2  M

The  GVN  force  levels  proposed  were  substantially  below  those  of
the  January  CPSVN  (from  a  peak  strength  in  FY  1964  of
442,500,  levels  were  to  fall  to  120,200  in  FY  1969).

SecDef  CJCS  Mission  to  South  Vietnam

Positive  detailed  evidence  presented  in  numerous  briefings  indi-
cated conditions  were  good  and  would  improve.  Hence,  the  Secre-
tary ordered  acceleration  of  the  planned  U.S.  force  phase-out.

McNamara-Taylor  Briefing  for  the  President,  and  later,  the  NSC
Concluded  the  military  campaign  has  made  great  progress  and
continues  to  progress,  but  warned  that  further  Diem-Nhu  repres-
sion could  change  the  "present  favorable  military  trends."

McNamara-Taylor  met  with  President  and  NSC

The  President  approved  the  military  recommendations  made  by

the  Secretary  and  Chairman:

— that  MACV  and  Diem  review  changes  necessary  to  com-
plete the  military  campaign  in  I,  II,  and  III  Corps  by  the
end  of  1964,  in  IV  Corps  by  1965:

— that  a  training  program  be  established  to  enable  RVNAF
to  take  over  military  functions  from  the  US  by  the  end  of
1965  when  the  bulk  of  US  personnel  could  be  withdrawn:

— that  DOD  informally  announce  plans  to  withdraw  1,000
men  by  the  end  of  1963.

no  further  reductions  in  US  strength  would  be  made  until  require-
ments of  the  1964  campaign  were  clear.

NSAM  263

Approved  the  military  recommendations  contained  in  the  Mc-
Namara-Taylor Report;  directed  no  formal  announcement  be
made  of  implementation  of  plans  to  withdraw  1,000  men  by  the
end  of  1963.

State  Department  INK  Memo  RFE-90

Assessed  trends  since  July  1963  as  evidence  of  an  unfavorable


170 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

shift  in  military  balance.  (This  was  one  of  the  first  indications  that
all  was  not  as  rosy  as  MACV  et  al  had  led  McNamara  and  Taylor
to  believe.)

7  Nov  63 Diem  Government  Overthrown

The  feared  poHtical  chaos,  civil  war  and  collapse  of  the  war  did
not  materialize  immediately;  US  Government  was  uncertain  as  to
what  the  new  circumstances  meant.  General  Minh  headed  the
junta  responsible  for  the  coup.

20  Nov  63 All-agency  Conference  on  Vietnam,  Honolulu

Ambassador  Lodge  assessed  prospects  as  hopeful;  recommended
US  continue  the  policy  of  eventual  militarv  withdrawal  from
SVN;  said  announced  1,000-man  withdrawal  was  having  salutary
effects.  MACV  agreed.  In  this  light,  oflficials  agreed  that  the  Ac-
celerated Plan  (speed-up  of  force  withdrawal  by  six  months
directed  by  McNamara  in  October)  should  be  maintained.  Mc-
Namara wanted  MAP  spending  held  close  to  OSD's  SI 75.5  million
ceiling  (because  of  acceleration,  a  FY  64  MAP  of  $187.7  million
looked  possible).

22  Nov  63 President  Kennedy  Assassinated

One  result:  US  Government  policies  in  general  were  maintained
for  the  sake  of  continuity,  to  allow  the  new  administration  time  to
settle  and  adjust.  This  tendency  to  reinforce  existing  policies
arbitrarily,  just  to  keep  them  going,  extended  the  phase-out,  with-
drawal and  MAP  concepts — probably  for  too  long.

23  Nov  63 SecDef  Memorandum  for  the  President

Calling  GVN  political  stability  vital  to  the  war  and  calling  atten-
tion to  GVN  financial  straits,  the  Secretarv  said  the  US  must  be
prepared  to  increase  aid  to  Saigon.  Funding  well  above  current
MAP  plans  was  envisaged.

26  Nov  63  NSAM273

President  Johnson  approved  recommendations  to  continue  current
policy  toward  Vietnam  put  forward  at  the  20  November  Honolulu
meeting:  reaffirmed  US  objectives  on  withdrawal.

3  Dec  63  [material  missing]

Region /ISA  Memorandum  for  the  ASD/ISA  [words  missing]
nam  developments,  for  a  "fresh  new  look"  at  the  problem,  second
echelon  leaders  outlined  a  broad  interdepartmental  "Review  of
the  South  Vietnam  Situation."  This  svstematic  efi"ort  did  not  cul-
minate in  high  level  national  reassessment  of  specific  policy  re-ori-
entation.

5  Dec  63 CINCPAC  Message  to  JCS

Submitted  the  Accelerated  Model  Plan  version  of  CPSVN.  From
a  total  of  15.200  in  FY  1964,  US  military  strength  in  Vietnam
would  drop  to  11.500  in  FY  1965  (vice  13,100  recommended  by
the  Model  M  Plan),  to  about  3.200  in  FY  1966  and  2,600  in  FY
1967.  GVN  force  levels  were  a  bit  lower  but  GVN  force  build-up
a  bit  faster  than  recommended  by  the  Model  M  Plan.  MAP  costs
for  FYs  1965-1969  totalled  $399.4  million  (vice  $392.2  million
under  Model  M  Plan).


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  171


n  Dec  63 CM  1079-63  for  SecDef

The  adjusted  year-end  strength  figure  was  15,394.  AUhough  1,000
men  were  technically  withdrawn,  no  actual  reduction  of  US
strength  was  achieved.  The  December  figure  was  not  1,000  less
than  the  peak  October  level.

13  Dec  63 Director,  DIA  Memorandum  for  the  Secretary

Reported  the  VC  had  improved  combat  effectiveness  and  force
posture  during  1963,  that  VC  capability  was  unimpaired.  (Quite
a  different  picture  had  been  painted  by  SACS  A  in  late  October:
"An  Overview  of  the  Vietnam  War,  1960-1963,"  personally  di-
rected to  the  Secretary,  was  a  glowing  account  of  steady  military
progress.)

30  Jan  64 Second  Coup  in  Saigon

General  Minh's  military  regime  was  replaced  by  a  junta  headed
by  General  Khanh.

10,  11,  14,  Deputy  Director,  CIA  Memoranda  for  SecDef,  SecState,  et  al
19  Feb  64  Suspicious  of  progress  reports,  CIA  sent  a  special  group  to  "look
at"  South  Vietnam.  Its  independent  evaluation  revealed  a  serious
and  steadily  deteriorating  GVN  situation.  Vietcong  gains  and,  sig-
nificantly, the  quality  and  quantity  of  VC  arms  had  increased.  The
Strategic  Hamlet  Program  was  "at  virtual  standstill."  The  insur-
gency tide  seemed  to  be  "going  against  GVN"  in  all  four  Corps.

6  Mar  64 Eighth  SecDef  Conference  on  Vietnam,  Honolulu

Participants  agreed  that  the  military  situation  was  definitely  de-
teriorating, that  insurgency  would  probably  continue  beyond  1965,
that  the  US  must  immediately  determine  what  had  to  be  done  to
make  up  for  the  setback(s).

9—16  McNamar a/ Taylor  Trip  to  Vietnam

Mar  64  Personally  confirmed  the  gravity  of  the  Vietnam  situation.

16  Mar  64 SecDef  Memorandum  for  the  President:  "Report  on  Trip  to  Viet-
nam"

Mr.  McNamara  reported  the  situation  was  "unquestionably"  worse
than  in  September.  (RVNAF  desertion  rates  were  up:  GVN  mili-
tary position  was  weak  and  the  Vietcong,  with  increased  NVN
support,  was  strong.)  Concluding  that  more  US  support  was  nec-
essary, the  Secretary  made  twelve  recommendations.  These  in-
cluded:

— More  economic  assistance,  military  training,  equipment
and  advisory  assistance,  as  needed.

— Continued  high-level  US  overflights  of  GVN  borders;  au-
thorization for  "hot  pursuit"  and  ground  operations  in
Laos.

— Prepare  to  initiate — on  72  hours'  notice — Laos  and  Cam-
bodia border  control  operations  and  retaliatory  actions
against  North  Vietnam.

— Make  plans  to  initiate — on  30  days'  notice — a  "program
of  Graduated  Overt  Military  Pressures"  against  North
Vietnam.


.f


172 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Mr.  McNamara  called  the  policy  of  reducing  existing  US  person-
nel where  South  Vietnamese  could  assume  their  functions  "still
sound"  but  said  no  major  reductions  could  be  expected  in  the  near
future.  He  felt  US  training  personnel  could  be  substantially  re-
duced before  the  end  of  1965.

17  Mar  64 N SAM  299

The  President  approved  the  twelve  recommendations  presented
by  Mr.  McNamara  and  directed  all  agencies  concerned  to  carry
them  out  promptly.

[material  missing]
forces  was  superseded  by  the  policy  of  providing  South  Vietnam
assistance  and  support  as  long  as  required  to  bring  aggression  and
terrorism  under  control  (as  per  NSAM  288).

6  May  64 CINCPAC  Message  to  MACV

Indicated  growing  US  military  commitment:  this  1500-man  aug-
mentation raised  the  total  authorized  level  to  17,000.

1-2  Jun  64 Special  Meeting  on  Southeast  Asia,  Honolulu

Called  in  part  to  examine  the  GVN  National  Campaign  Plan —
which  was  failing.  The  conferees  agreed  to  increase  RVNAF
effectiveness  by  extending  and  intensifying  the  US  advisory  effort
as  MACV  recommended.

25  Jun  64 MACV  Message  325390  to  JCS

Formal  MACV  request  for  900  additional  advisory  personnel.  His
justification  for  advisors  at  the  battalion  level  and  for  more  ad-
visors at  district  and  sector  levels  was  included.  Also,  80  USN
advisors  were  requested  to  establish  a  Junk  Force  and  other  mari-
time counterinsurgency  measures.

4  Jul  64  CINCPA  C  Message  to  JCS

CINCPAC  recommended  approval  of  the  MACV  proposal  for  in-
tensification of  US  advisory  efforts.

15  Jul  64 Saigon  EMBTEL  108

Ambassador  Taylor  reported  that  revised  VC  strength  estimates
now  put  the  enemy  force  between  28,000  and  34,000.  No  cause
for  alarm,  he  said  the  new  estimate  did  demonstrate  the  magni-
tude of  the  problem  and  the  need  to  raise  the  level  of  US  GVN
efforts.  Taylor  thought  a  US  strength  increase  to  21,000  by  the
end  of  the  year  would  be  sufficient.

16  Jul  64 MACV  Message  6180  to  CINCPAC

MACV  requested  3,200  personnel  to  support  the  expansion  (by
900)  of  US  advisory  efforts — or  4,200  more  men  over  the  next
nine  months.

17  Jul  64  EMBTEL

Ambassador  Taylor  concurred  in  MACV's  proposed  increase,
recommended  prompt  approval  and  action.

21  Jul  64 State  205  to  Saigon

Reported  Presidential  approval  (at  the  21  July  NSC  meeting)  of
the  MACV  deployment  package.


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  173


Dec  64  Further  increases

Total  US  strength  was  23,000:  further  deployments  were  on  the
way.


I.  1962

A. EARLY  1962

From  mid- 1962  to  early  1964  the  U.S.  government  went  through  a  formal
planning  process,  ostensibly  designed  to  disengage  the  U.S.  from  direct  and
large-scale  military  involvement  in  Vietnam.  In  retrospect,  this  experience  falls
into  place  as  a  more  or  less  isolated  episode  of  secondary  importance;  eventually
abortive,  it  had  little  impact  on  the  evolution  of  the  Vietnam  war.  It  does,  how-
ever, serve  as  a  vehicle  for  understanding  one  long  phase  of  the  war  and  the
U.S.  role  in  it.

The  genesis  lay  in  a  conjuncture  of  circumstances  during  the  first  half  of
1962  that  prompted  the  U.S.  to  shift  its  Vietnam  perspective  from  the  hitherto
restricted  one  of  largely  tactical  responses  to  current,  localized,  and  situational
requirements,  to  fitting  these  to  more  strategic  and  purposeful  long-range  courses
of  action.  The  expanded  perspective  was  programmatic  in  outlook,  and  ori-
ented toward  specific  goals — end  the  insurgency  and  withdraw  militarily  from
Vietnam.

At  the  outset,  the  motivation  for  the  idea  of  phased  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces
was  threefold:  in  part,  the  belief  that  developments  in  Vietnam  itself  were  go-
ing well;  in  part,  doubt  over  the  efficacy  of  using  U.S.  forces  in  an  internal  war;
and  in  part,  the  demands  of  other  crises  in  the  world  that  were  more  important
to  Washington  than  Vietnam.  In  the  course  of  materializing  into  policy  and
assuming  form  as  plans,  these  premises  were  transformed  into  conclusions,
desiderata  institutionalized  as  objectives,  and  wish  took  on  the  character  and
force  of  imperative.

For  example,  in  March  1962,  Secretary  McNamara  testified  before  Congress
that  he  was  "optimistic"  over  prospects  for  U.S.  success  in  aiding  Vietnam,  and
"encouraged  at  the  progress  the  South  Vietnamese  are  making."  He  expressed
conviction  that  the  U.S.  would  attain  its  objectives  there.  But  he  emphasized
that  the  U.S.  strategy  was  to  avoid  participating  directly  in  the  war  while  seek-
ing an  early  military  conclusion :

I  would  say  definitely  we  are  approaching  it  from  the  point  of  view
of  trying  to  clean  it  up,  and  terminating  subversion,  covert  aggression,
and  combat  operations.  .  .  .

.  .  .  We  are  wise  to  carry  on  the  operations  against  the  Communists
in  that  area  by  assisting  native  forces  rather  than  by  using  U.S.  forces
for  combat.

Not  only  does  that  release  U.S.  forces  for  use  elsewhere  in  the  world
or  for  stationing  in  the  United  States,  but  also  it  is  probably  the  most  ef-
fective way  to  combat  the  Communist  subversion  and  covert  aggression.
To  introduce  white  forces — U.S.  forces — in  large  numbers  there  today,
while  it  might  have  an  initial  favorable  military  impact  would  almost  cer-
tainly lead  to  adverse  political  and  in  the  long  run  adverse  military  opera-
tions. And  therefore,  we  think  the  program  we  are  carrying  out  is  the


174 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

most  effective  one  and  certainly  it  is  directed  toward  termination  of  op-
erations as  rapidly  as  possible.

In  late  spring  of  1962,  the  military  situation  in  South  Vietnam  showed  hope-
ful signs  of  at  last  having  turned  a  corner.  The  various  programs  under  way,
initiated  the  previous  fall  as  a  result  of  decisions  in  NSAM  No.  Ill,  appeared  to
be  bearing  out  the  basic  soundness  of  the  new  approach.  Assessments  and  evalu-
ations being  reported  from  the  fieid  indicated  a  pattern  of  progress  on  a  broad
front,  and  their  consistency  through  time  reinforced  the  impression.  By  mid-
year the  prospects  looked  bright.  Continuing  favorable  developments  now  held
forth  the  promise  of  eventual  success,  and  to  many  the  end  of  the  insurgency
seemed  in  sight.  This  optimism  was  not  without  the  recognition  that  there  were
unsolved  political  problems  and  serious  soft  spots  in  certain  areas  of  the  mili-
tary effort.  But  U.S.  leadership,  both  on  the  scene  in  Vietnam  as  well  as  in
Washington,  was  confident  and  cautiously  optimistic.  In  some  quarters,  even  a
measure  of  euphoria  obtained.

At  the  same  time,  events  outside  Vietnam,  some  of  them  ostensibly  unrelated,
were  asserting  a  direct  and  immediate  relevance  for  U.S.  policy  and  strategy
in  Vietnam.  As  competing  priorities,  they  far  overshadowed  Vietnam.  In  the
larger  scheme  of  things,  an  indefinite  military  commitment  in  Southeast  Asia
was  being  relegated  perforce  to  a  parenthetical  diversion  the  nation  could  then
ill  afford.  More  central  issues  in  Berlin,  Cuba,  and  in  Laos  were  at  stake,  perhaps
even  to  the  extent  of  survival.

Looming  foremost  was  the  Berlin  problem.  Fraught  with  grave  overtones  of
potential  nuclear  confrontation  with  the  USSR,  it  reached  crisis  proportions  in
the  spring  of  1962  over  the  air  corridor  issue,  and  after  a  temporary  lull,  flared
anew  in  early  summer.  By  the  first  of  July  it  was  again  as  tense  as  ever.  U.S.
reserves  had  been  recalled  to  active  duty,  additional  forces  were  deployed  to
Europe,  and  domestic  Civil  Defense  activities,  including  shelter  construction
programs,  were  accelerated.

The  burgeoning  Cuba  problem  too  was  taking  on  a  pressing  urgency  by  vir-
tue of  both  its  proximity  and  growing  magnitude.  The  Castro  aspects  alone  were
becoming  more  than  a  vexing  localized  embarrassment.  Given  the  volatile
Caribbean  political  climate,  Cuban  inspired  mischief  could  raise  tensions  to  the
flash  point  momentarily.  Moreover,  by  early  summer  of  1962  increasing  evi-
dence of  Soviet  machinations  to  exploit  Cuba  militarily  was  rapidly  adding  an
alarming  strategic  dimension.  Though  the  nature  and  full  significance  of  these
latter  developments  would  not  be  revealed  until  the  climactic  Cuban  Missile
Crisis  a  few  months  later,  the  U.S.  was  alreadv  apprehensive  of  serious  danger
on  its  very  doorstep.  Official  interpretive  evaluations  at  the  time  saw  an  inti-
mate causal  nexus  between  Berlin  and  Cuba.

Finally,  another  set  of  factors  altering  the  strategic  configuration  in  Southeast
Asia  and  affecting  the  U.S.  position  there  also  came  to  a  head  in  mid-summer
of  1962.  These  were  developments  regarding  Laos,  which  impinged  upon  and
helped  reshape  the  U.S.  relationship  toward  Vietnam.  In  the  fall  of  1961  and
through  the  spring  of  1962  the  U.S..  its  objectives  frustrated  in  Laos,  had
decided  to  salvage  as  much  as  possible  by  settling  for  neutralization.  After
lengthy  and  complex  diplomatic  maneuvering,  this  was  essentially  achieved  by
early  summer.  On  23  July  1962  the  14-nation  declaration  and  protocol  on  the
neutrality  of  Laos  was  signed  formally,  ending  the  15-month  Geneva  Confer-
ence on  Laos.  The  outcome  had  at  once  the  effect  of  extricating  the  U.S.  from
one  insoluble  dilemma  and  serving  as  a  stark  object  lesson  for  another.  The


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  175


Laos  settlement  now  both  allowed  the  U.S.  a  free  hand  to  concentrate  on  Viet-
nam and  provided  the  incentive  and  determination  to  bring  to  a  close  its  mili-
tary commitment  there  as  well — but  this  time  successfully.

It  was  in  this  spirit  and  context  that  the  U.S.  decided  to  pursue  actively  the
policy  objective  of  divesting  itself  of  direct  military  involvement  of  U.S.  per-
sonnel in  the  Vietnam  insurgency.  The  aim  was  to  create  militarily  favorable
conditions  so  that  further  U.S.  military  involvement  would  no  longer  be  needed.
To  this  end,  two  prerequisites  had  to  be  satisfied:  bringing  the  insurgency
effectively  under  control;  and  simultaneously,  developing  a  militarily  viable
South  Vietnam  capable  of  carrying  its  own  defense  burden  without  U.S.  mili-
tary help.  In  phase  with  the  progress  toward  both  these  goals,  there  then  could
be  proportionate  reductions  in  U.S.  forces.

B. THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE  HONOLULU  DECISIONS
OF  JULY  1962

In  July  1962,  as  the  prospect  of  the  neutralization  of  Laos  by  the  Geneva
Conference  became  imminent,  policy  attention  deliberately  turned  toward  the
remaining  Vietnam  problem.  At  the  behest  of  the  President,  the  Secretary  of
Defense  undertook  to  reexamine  the  situation  there  and  address  himself  to  its
future — with  a  view  to  assuring  that  it  be  brought  to  a  successful  conclusion
within  a  reasonable  time.  Accordingly,  he  called  a  full-dress  conference  on
Vietnam  at  CINCPAC  Headquarters  in  Hawaii.  On  23  July,  the  same  day
that  the  14-nation  neutralization  declaration  on  Laos  was  formally  signed  in
Geneva,  the  Sixth  Secretary  of  Defense  Conference  convened  in  Honolulu.

The  series  of  briefings  and  progress  reports  presented  at  the  conference
depicted  a  generally  favorable  situation.  Things  were  steadily  improving  and
promised  to  continue.  Most  programs  underway  were  moving  forward,  as  the
statistical  indicators  clearly  demonstrated.  Those  directly  related  to  prosecution
of  the  counterinsurgency  effort  showed  measurable  advances  being  made  to-
ward winning  the  war.  Programs  for  expanding  and  improving  RVNAF
capability  were  likewise  coming  along  well,  and  in  most  cases  were  ahead  of
schedule.  Confidence  and  optimism  prevailed.

Impressed,  Mr.  McNamara  acknowledged  that  the  "tremendous  progress"  in
the  past  six  months  was  gratifying.  He  noted,  however,  that  these  achievements
had  been  the  result  of  short-term  ad  hoc  actions  on  a  crash  basis.  What  was
needed  now  was  to  conceive  a  long-range  concerted  program  of  systematic
measures  for  training  and  equipping  the  RVNAF  and  for  phasing  out  major
U.S.  advisory  and  logistic  support  activities.  The  Secretary  then  asked  how  long
a  period  it  would  take  before  the  VC  could  be  expected  to  be  eliminated  as  a
significant  force.  COMUSMACV,  in  reply  to  the  direct  question,  estimated
about  one  year  from  the  time  the  RVNAF,  the  Civil  Guard,  and  the  Self-
Defense  Corps  became  fully  operational  and  began  to  press  the  VC  in  all
areas.

The  Secretary  said  that  a  conservative  view  had  to  be  taken  and  to  assume
it  would  take  three  years  instead  of  one,  that  is,  by  the  latter  part  of  1965.  He
observed  that  it  might  be  difficult  to  retain  public  support  for  U.S.  operations
in  Vietnam  indefinitely.  Political  pressures  would  build  up  as  losses  continued.
Therefore,  he  concluded,  planning  must  be  undertaken  now  and  a  program
devised  to  phase  out  U.S.  military  involvement.  He,  therefore,  directed  that  a
comprehensive  long-range  program  be  developed  for  building  up  South  Viet-
namese military  capability  for  taking  over  defense  responsibilities  and  phasing


176 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

out  the  U.S.  role,  assuming  that  it  would  require  approximately  three  years
(end  1965)  for  the  RVNAF  to  be  trained  to  the  point  that  they  could  cope
with  the  VC.  The  program  was  to  include  training  requirements,  equipment
requirements,  U.S.  advisory  requirements,  and  U.S.  units.

For  the  record,  the  formulation  of  the  decisions  made  and  the  directives  for
action  to  be  taken  resulting  from  the  Conference  was  as  follows:

a.  Prepare  plans  for  the  gradual  scaling  down  of  USMACV  during  the
next  3-year  period,  eliminating  U.S.  units  and  detachments  as  Viet-
namese were  trained  to  perform  their  functions.

b.  Prepare  programs  with  the  objective  of  giving  South  Vietnam  an  ade-
quate military  capability  without  the  need  for  special  U.S.  military
assistance,  to  include  ( 1 )  a  long-range  training  program  to  establish
an  officer  corps  able  to  manage  GVN  military  operations,  and  (2)  a
long-range  program  and  requirements  to  provide  the  necessary  materiel
to  make  possible  a  turnover  to  RVNAF  three  years  from  July  1962.

The  U.S.  Military  Assistance  Advisory  Group,  Vietnam,  had  been  augmented
in  1961  by  aviation,  communications,  and  intelligence  units,  as  well  as  by
Special  Forces  and  other  advisers.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  plainly  intended
that  plans  be  devised  for  terminating  the  mission  of  the  augmenting  units.

Three  days  later  on  26  July,  the  JCS  formally  directed  CINCPAC  to  develop
a  Comprehensive  Plan  for  South  Vietnam  (CPSVN)  in  accordance  with  the
Secretary's  decisions  of  23  July.  CINCPAC,  in  turn,  so  instructed  COMUSMACV
on  14  August,  at  the  same  time  furnishing  additional  guidance  and  terms  of
reference  elaborating  on  the  original  SecDef  decisions  at  Honolulu  and  the  JCS
directive.  The  stated  objective  of  the  CPSVN  was  given  as:

Develop  a  capability  within  military  and  para-military  forces  of  the
GVN  by  the  end  of  CY  65  that  will  help  the  GVN  to  achieve  the  strength
necessary  to  exercise  permanent  and  continued  sovereignty  over  that  part
of  Vietnam  which  lies  below  the  demarcation  line  without  the  need  for
continued  U.S.  special  military  assistance.

Development  of  the  plan  was  to  be  based  on  the  following  assumptions:

a.  The  insurgency  will  be  under  control  at  the  end  of  three  years  (end
of  CY  65).

b.  Extensive  U.S.  support  will  continue  to  be  required  during  the  three
year  period,  both  to  bring  the  insurgencv  under  control  and  to  prepare
GVN  forces  for  early  take-over  of  U.S.  activities.

c.  Previous  MAP  funding  ceilings  for  SVN  are  not  applicable.  Program
those  items  essential  to  do  this  job.

C. NATIONAL  CAMPAIGN  PLAN

Planning,  in  two  complementarv  modes,  got  underway,  immediately.  Con-
currently with  development  of  the  unilateral  U.S.  CPSVN,  USMACV  planners
prepared  a  concept  and  proposed  outline  of  a  GVN  National  Campaign  Plan
(NCP)  for  launching  an  integrated  nation-wide  campaign  of  offensive  military
operations  to  eliminate  the  insurgencv  and  restore  the  country  to  GVN  control.
A  central  purpose  was  to  reorganize  and  redispose  the  VNAF  and  streamline


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  111


the  chain  of  command,  in  order  to  improve  responsiveness,  coordination,  and
general  effectiveness  of  the  military  effort  against  the  VC.  Greater  authority
would  be  centralized  in  the  Vietnamese  Joint  General  Staff  (JGS);  Corps
Tactical  Zones  (CTZs)  would  be  increased  from  three  to  four;  and  each  CTZ
would  have  its  own  direct  air  and  naval  support.

Over  and  above  organizational  considerations,  the  NCP  provided  for  systematic
intensification  of  aggressive  operations  in  all  CTZs  to  keep  the  VC  off  balance,
while  simultaneously  conducting  clear  and  hold  operations  in  support  of  the
expanding  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  Priority  of  military  tasks  was  first  to
concentrate  on  areas  north  of  Saigon,  then  gradually  shift  toward  the  south  to
Saigon  and  the  Delta.

The  proposed  NCP  was  submitted  to  the  GVN  in  October  and  a  month  later
was  adopted  in  concept  and  outline.  On  26  November,  President  Diem  promul-
gated the  necessary  implementing  decrees  and  directives  to  effect  the  reorganiza-
tion of  the  SVN  armed  forces  and  realign  the  chain  of  command.  An  integrated
Joint  Operations  Center  (JOC)  was  also  established  and  became  operational  on
20  December,  with  representation  from  JGS  and  its  counterpart  in  USMACV
to  centralize  control  over  current  operations.  The  following  January  the  draft  of
a  detailed  implementing  plan  for  the  NCP  itself  was  completed  and  subsequently
approved.

II.  1963

A. COMPREHENSIVE  PLAN  FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM

Meanwhile,  the  first  cut  at  the  CPSVN  was  also  completed  by  the  MACV
planners.  It  was  forwarded  to  CINCPAC  on  7  December,  but  CINCPAC,  upon
reviewing  the  proposed  plan,  considered  it  infeasible  because  of  the  high  costs
involved  and  the  marginal  capacity  of  the  RVNAF  to  train  the  necessary  per-
sonnel in  the  required  skills  within  the  time  frame  specified.  As  a  result  of
CINCPAC's  reaction  to  the  initial  version,  the  CPSVN  was  revised  and  re-
submitted by  COMUSMACV  on  19  January  1963.  The  new  CPSVN  covered
the  period  FY  1963-1968.  In  transmitting  it,  COMUSMACV  recommended  that
future  Military  Assistance  Programs  (MAPs)  be  keyed  therefore  to  the  CPSVN.
He  also  indicated  that  the  CPSVN  had  been  coordinated  with  the  Ambassador,
who  concurred  in  it.

Force  levels  laid  out  in  the  CPSVN  provided  for  total  personnel  increases
reaching  a  peak  of  458,000  (regular  and  para-military)  in  FY  64,  with  RVNAF
manning  strength  raised  from  215,000  to  a  peak  of  230,000  in  the  same  FY
period  and  remaining  on  that  plateau  thereafter.  Order  of  magnitude  costs  (in
$  millions)  of  the  CPSVN  would  come  to:

FY  63 FY  64 FY  65 FY  66 FY  67 FY  68  Total
187 218 153 138 169 113  978

CINCPAC  approved  the  CPSVN  as  submitted  and  sent  it  on  to  the  ICS.  How-
ever, in  the  interim,  OSD  had  issued  dollar  guidelines  for  MAP  planning  for
Vietnam.  The  ceilings  indicated  therein  were  significantly  at  variance  with  the
costing  figures  employed  by  MACV  in  developing  the  CPSVN.  When  CINCPAC
forwarded  the  plan,  therefore,  he  went  to  considerable  lengths  to  explain  the
discrepancies  and  to  support  and  justify  the  higher  costs.  Comparison  of  the
DOD  dollar  guidelines  with  the  CPSVN,  projected  through  FY  69,  showed  a


178 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

net  difference  of  approximately  66  million  dollars,  with  the  preponderance  of
the  increase  occurring  in  FY  64,  Most  of  this  difference  was  accounted  for  by
additional  Packing-Crating-Handling-Transportation  (PCHT)  costs  associated
with  the  CPSVN  but  not  accommodated  in  the  DOD  guideline  figures.

The  body  of  the  CPSVN  laid  out  the  costs  in  relation  to  the  DOD  dollar
guidelines,  as  follows:

CPSVN— DOD  DOLLAR  GUIDELINES  COST  COMPARISON  ($  millions)


FY  64

FY  65

FY  66

FY  67

FY  68

FY  69

Total

CPSVN  -

218

153

138

169

113

110

901

DOD  Guidelines

160

165

160

150

140

122

897

Difference

+58

-12

-22

+  19

-27

-12

+4

PORT  Added

+  11

+  11

+  11

+  11

+  10

+  8

+62

Difference

+69

-1

-11

+30

-17

-4

+66

*  Excludes  PCHT.


The  rationale  offered  was  that,  in  order  to  prosecute  the  counter-insurgency  to
a  successful  conclusion,  while  at  the  same  time  building  up  GVN  capability  to
allow  early  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces,  the  major  costs  of  the  program  had  to  be
compressed  into  the  FY  63-65  time  frame,  with  a  particular  increase  in  FY  64
and  another  following  U.S.  withdrawal  in  FY  67.  But  clearly  most  of  the  greater
cost  throughout  the  period  reflected  PCHT.

The  pattern  of  force  levels  for  all  South  Vietnamese  forces  that  the  CPSVN
provided  for,  including  the  separate  non-MAP  funded  Civilian  Irregular  Defense
Group,  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  [Figure  1  missing.]

Since  the  ultimate  objective  of  the  CPSVN  was  early  withdrawal  of  U.S.
special  military  assistance,  the  plan  provided  for  phasing  out  U.S.  advisory
forces.  The  affected  major  commands  of  USMACV  that  would  largely  not  be
required  after  FY  66  were:

1.  The  U.S.  Marine  Element  which  provided  helicopter  transportation
support.  j

2.  The  2d  Air  Division  which  provided  the  USAF  portion  of  the  special
military  assistance  support  performed  in  SVN.  This  support  included
'Tarmgate"  (Fighter),  "Mule  Train"  (Transportation),  and  "Able
Mable"  (Reconnaissance).  It  also  provided  USAF  administration  and
logistical  support  for  USAF  personnel  and  equipment  engaged  in
special  military  assistance  to  SVN.

3.  U.S.  Army  Support  Group  Vietnam  (USASGV)  which  provided  the
U.S.  Army  portion  of  the  special  military  assistance  support  for  SVN
(except  that  performed  by  MAAG  and  Headquarters  MACV),  in-
cluding helicopter  and  fixed  wing  air  transportation,  signal  communica-
tions, and  special  forces.  It  also  provided  U.S.  administrative  and  logis-
tical support  for  assigned  and  attached  personnel  and  equipment  en-
gaged in  the  special  military  assistance.

4.  Fleadquarters  Support  Activity  Saigon (HSAS) which  provided  ad-
ministrative support  to  the  U.S.  Headquarters  and  other  U.S.  govern-  '
ment  sponsored  agencies  and  activities  located  in  Saigon.

5.  MAAG  Vietnam  would  have  its  strength  reduced  by  one-half  after  ,
FY  65.  Only  1,500  MAAG  personnel  were  to  remain  in  country  after
FY  68.  I


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  179


The  target  schedule  for  U.S.  force  withdrawal,  as  then  forecast,  is  contained
in  Figure  2.

FIGURE  2


CPSVN  -  Forecast  of  Phase-Out  of  U.S.  Forces

(thousands)


Organization

FY  63

FY  64

FY  65

FY  66

FY  67

FY  68

HQ  USMACV

.3

A

A

.1

.0

.0

HQ  MAAG

3.0

3.0

3.0

1.7

1.6

1.5

2D  Air  DIV

2.2

2.3

2.3

1.1

.0

.0

USASG  (V)

5.1

5.5

5.5

2.7

.0

.0

USMC  Helicopter  Unit

.5

.5

.5

.0

.0

.0

HSAS

.5

.5

.5

.3

.0

.0

TOTAL

11.6

12.2

12.2

5.9

1.6

1.5

On  7  March  1963,  the  JCS  accepted  the  MACV  CPSVN  in  toto  and  for-
warded it  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  They  recommended  approval,  and  pro-
posed that  it  be  the  basis  for  both  revising  the  FY  64  MAP  and  development
of  the  FY  65-69  MAPs.  They  requested  an  early  decision  on  the  CPSVN  be-
cause the  greatest  increase  would  occur  in  the  FY  64  MAP.  The  JCS  fully  sup-
ported the  higher  costs  of  the  CPSVN  above  the  DOD  dollar  guidelines.

In  OSD,  the  proposed  CPSVN  underwent  staffing  review  in  ISA  MA  Plans
and  elsewhere.  Draft  responses  to  the  JCS  were  prepared  and  then  withdrawn.
Secretary  McNamara  was  not  satisfied  with  either  the  high  funding  levels  or  the
adequacy  of  the  plan  regarding  exactly  how  the  RVN  forces  were  to  take  over
from  the  U.S.  to  effect  the  desired  phase-out  of  the  U.S.  military  commitment.
In  mid-April  he  decided  to  withhold  action  pending  full  review  of  the  CPSVN
at  another  Honolulu  conference  which  he  expressly  scheduled  for  that  purpose
for  6  May.  Meantime,  the  various  OSD  agencies  concerned  were  instructed  to
prepare  detailed  analyses  and  background  studies  for  him.

The  main  focus  of  interest  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  was  on  the  policy
objective  behind  the  CPSVN,  namely,  to  reduce  systematically  the  scale  of
U.S.  involvement  until  phased  out  completely.  However,  the  beginnings  of  a
counter-current  were  alreadv  evident.  New  demands  for  increases  all  around
were  to  overwhelm  the  phasing  out  objective.  Ad  hoc  requirements  for  more
U.S.  forces  were  being  generated  piecemeal,  each  in  its  own  right  sufficiently
reasonable  and  so  honored.  This  current,  counter-current  dynamic  can  be
illustrated  well  by  Mr.  McNamara's  decisions  of  late  March.  As  part  of  the
Secretary's  policy  of  demanding  strict  accounting  and  tight  control  on  author-
ized U.S.  in-country  strength  ceilings,  he  asked  for  the  latest  reading  on  pro-
jected U.S.  military  strength  to  be  reached  in  Vietnam.  He  was  reassured  by  the
Chairman,  JCS,  that  the  estimated  peak  would  not  exceed  15,640  personnel.
Yet,  on  this  very  same  day,  the  Secretarv  approved  a  substantial  force  augmen-
tation, requested  earlier,  for  FARMGATE  and  airlift  support,  involving  111
additional  aircraft  and  a  total  of  approximately  1475  additional  personnel.
Other  similar  special  requirements  and  ad  hoc  approvals  soon  were  to  follow.

Assessments  of  continuing  favorable  developments  in  the  improving  Vietnam
situation  in  the  spring  of  1963  seemed  to  warrant  more  than  ever  going  ahead
with  the  planned  phase  out.  The  general  tenor  of  appraisals  at  the  US^MACV
level  were  that  the  RVNAF  had  regained  the  initiative  from  the  VC  and  that


180 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  GVN  position  had  improved  miUtarily,  economically,  and  politically.  Evalu-
ations expressed  in  the  "Summary  of  Highlights"  covering  the  first  year  of
MACV's  existence  cited  in  detail  the  record  of  the  increasing  scale,  frequency,
and  effectiveness  of  RVNAF  operations,  while  those  of  the  VC  were  declining.
Casualty  ratios  favored  RVNAF  by  more  than  two  to  one,  and  the  balance  of
weapons  captured  vs  weapons  lost  had  also  shifted  to  the  GVN  side.  Cited  as
perhaps  the  most  significant  progress  was  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  The
future  looked  even  brighter,  e.g.,  .  .  barring  greatly  increased  resupply  and
reinforcement  of  the  Viet  Cong  by  infiltration,  the  military  phase  of  the  war
can  be  virtually  won  in  1963."

Other  evaluations,  though  more  conservative,  still  tended  to  corroborate  this
optimism.  NIE  53-63,  issued  17  April  1963,  found  no  particular  deterioration
or  serious  problems  in  the  military  situation  in  South  Vietnam;  on  the  contrary,
it  saw  some  noticeable  improvements  and  general  progress  over  the  past  year.
The  worst  that  it  could  say  was  that  the  situation  "remains  fragile."

B. SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE  HONOLULU  DECISIONS  OF  MAY  1963

At  the  6  May  Honolulu  Conference,  briefing  reports  again  confirmed  grati-
fying progress  in  the  military  situation.  Addressing  the  CPSVN,  Mr.  McNamara
questioned  the  need  for  more  Vietnamese  forces  in  FY  68  (224.4  thousand)
than  the  present  level  of  215  thousand.  His  reasoning  was  that  a  poor  nation
of  12  million  like  Vietnam  could  not  support  that  many  men  under  arms.
Qualitatively,  furthermore,  the  planned  evolution  of  VNAF  seemed  over-
ambitious  in  terms  of  sophisticated  weaponry  such  as  fighter  aircraft.  In  sum,
the  Secretary  felt  the  CPSVN  assumed  an  unrealistically  high  force  level  for
the  SVN  military  establishment  and  assigned  it  equipment  that  was  both  unduly
complicated  to  operate  and  expensive  to  procure  and  maintain.

Based  on  these  considerations,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  concluded  that,  if
the  insurgency  came  under  control  in  FY  65  as  anticipated,  the  U.S.  MAP
investment  in  SVN  thereafter  should  not  be  more  than  at  the  rate  of  about
$50  million  per  year.  In  his  view,  thus,  the  $573  million  MAP  proposed  in  the
CPSVN  for  the  period  FY  65  through  FY  68  was  at  least  $270  million  higher
than  an  acceptable  program.

With  regard  to  phasing  out  U.S.  forces,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  stated  that
the  pace  contemplated  in  the  CPSVN  was  too  slow.  He  wanted  it  revised  to
accomplish  a  more  rapid  withdrawal  by  accelerating  training  programs  in
order  to  speed  up  replacement  of  U.S.  units  by  GVN  units  as  fast  as  possible.
While  recognizing  that  the  build-up  of  RVNAF  was  inherently  a  slow  process,
he  stressed  that  in  the  instance  of  some  U.S.  units  which  had  been  in  SVN
since  1961,  it  would  be  possible  more  rapidly  to  transfer  functions  to  Viet-
namese. Specifically  toward  this  end,  he  decided  that  1,000  U.S.  military
personnel  should  be  withdrawn  from  South  Vietnam  by  the  end  of  CY  63  and
directed  that  concrete  plans  be  so  drawn  up.

On  returning  to  Washington  the  Secretary  of  Defense  instructed  the  ASD(ISA)
on  8  May  to  develop,  in  coordination  with  the  Joint  Staff,  a  plan  for  replacing
U.S.  forces  currently  deployed  in  Vietnam  with  indigenous  SVN  forces  as
rapidly  as  possible,  and  particularlv,  to  prepare  a  plan  for  withdrawing  1,000
U.S.  troops  before  the  end  of  1965.  In  another  memorandum  the  same  day  to
the  ASD(ISA)  regarding  the  MAP,  he  noted  that  "the  plan  needs  to  be  com-
pletely reworked."  He  therefore  instructed  ISA  also  to  develop  a  new,  lower


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  181


MAP  for  Vietnam  for  the  period  FY  65  through  69,  requesting  that  the  ISA
recommendations  be  submitted  by  the  first  of  September.

A  day  later,  on  9  May,  the  JCS  formally  directed  CINCPAC  to  take  the
necessary  actions  resulting  from  the  Honolulu  Conference  and  revise  the
CPSVN.  Guidance  and  terms  of  reference  were  provided  reflecting  the  Secre-
tary of  Defense  reactions  and  specifying  the  decisions  reached.  Singled  out
especially  was  the  requirement  for  U.S.  force  withdrawal.  The  JCS  directive
read:

As  a  matter  or  urgency  a  plan  for  the  withdrawal  of  about  1,000  U.S.
troops  before  the  end  of  the  year  should  be  developed  based  upon  the
assumption  that  the  progress  of  the  counterinsurgency  campaign  would
warrant  such  a  move.  Plans  should  be  based  upon  withdrawal  of  US  units
(as  opposed  to  individuals)  by  replacing  them  with  selected  and  specially
trained  RVNAF  units.

COMUSMACV  in  turn  was  tasked  to  draft  the  revised  CPSVN  and  prepare
a  plan  for  the  1000-man  reduction.  CINCPAC,  after  some  changes  and  re-
visions, concurred  in  the  proposed  plans  and  forwarded  them  to  the  JCS  on
11  May.  The  revised  outline  CPSVN  now  provided  for  the  following  SVN  force
levels  (in  thousands) :

FY  64 FY  65 FY  66  FY  67 FY  68 FY  69

Total  Military

and  Para-military 447.4 445.5 362.9  317.1 268.8  214.7

MAP  levels  provided  for  were  as  follows  (in  $  millions) :

FY  64 FY  65 FY  66 FY  67 FY  68 FY  69 Grand  Total
178.9 149.0 130.3 120.4 100.5 85.0  764.1

The  proposed  plan  for  withdrawal  of  the  first  increment  of  U.S.  forces,  in
compliance  with  instructions,  emphasized  units  rather  than  individuals,  but
the  list  of  so-called  "units"  scheduled  to  be  included  were  all  smaller  than  com-
pany size.  All  Services  were  represented.  The  criteria  employed,  also  based  on
earlier  guidance,  were  to  select  most  of  the  personnel  from  service  support  and
logistics  skills  most  easily  spared  and  whose  release  would  have  least  efl"ect  on
operations.  The  total  came  to  1,003  U.S.  military  personnel  to  be  withdrawn
from  South  Vietnam  by  the  end  of  December  1963.

C. MAP  PLANNING

ISA  meanwhile  developed  tentative  dollar  guidelines  for  MAP  planning  for
Vietnam.  The  first  cut,  based  on  the  Secretary  of  Defense's  own  suggested  total
for  the  FY  65-69  period,  was  rejected  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  as  too  high
and  returned,  with  various  desired  reductions  entered  by  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense. Reconciling  the  MAP  with  the  CPSVN  proved  to  be  a  difficult  problem.
As  CPSVN  succeeded,  it  was  logical  that  MAP  would  have  to  increase;  yet
CPSVN  tried  to  cut  back  MAP  as  well.  For  instance,  the  contemplated  phase-
out  of  U.S.  artillery-spotter  aircraft  squadrons  entailed  an  add-on  to  MAP  to
accommodate  the  squadron's  equipment  and  maintenance  after  transferral  to
the  Vietnamese.

[Material  missing]

therefore  would  have  to  be  absorbed  within  the  authorized  Model  Plan  ceilings.


182 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Nonetheless,  there  were  still  further  refinements  made.  As  finally  published,
the  approved  MAP  reflecting  the  Model  M  Plan  version  of  the  CPSVN  pro-
vided for  the  following  SVN  active  military  strength  levels  (in  thousands) :

FY  64 FY  65 FY  66  FY  67 FY  68 FY  69

ARVN  207.5 201.3 177.5  124.5 104.8  103.9

Total  (All  Services 442.5 437.0 340.2  142.1 122.2  120.2
regular  and
para-military)

Costing  levels  were  as  follows  (in  $  millions) :

FY  64 FY  65 FY  66 FY  67 FY  68 FY  69  Total
180.6  153.0  107.7  46.2  44.6  40.7  392.2

This  final  product  represented  a  radical  reduction  in  both  force  levels  and
financial  investment  after  FY  66,  consistent  with  the  Administration's  original
policy  goal  of  ending  the  war  and  the  U.S.  military  involvement  by  December
1965.


D. 1000-MAN  WITHDRAWAL  PLAN

Meanwhile,  planning  for  the  1000-man  withdrawal  directed  by  the  Secretary
of  Defense  on  6  May  was  split  off  from  the  CPSVN  proper  and  the  MAP,  and
was  being  treated  as  a  separate  entity.  On  20  August,  the  JCS,  concurring  in
the  proposed  plan  developed  by  COMUSMACV  and  CINCPAC,  forwarded  it
to  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  They  recommended  approval  at  this  time  for  plan-
ning purposes  only;  final  decision  was  to  depend  upon  circumstances  as  they
developed.  The  JCS  also  seconded  CINCPAC's  added  proposal  to  withdraw  the
1000  troops  in  three  or  four  increments,  rather  than  all  at  one  time.  The  reasons
given  were  that  this  would  be  more  practical  and  eflicient  for  the  U.S.,  would
minimize  the  impact  on  on-going  military  operational  activities  within  South
Vietnam,  and  would  afford  the  opportunity  for  '*news  prominence  and  coverage
over  an  extended  period  of  time."

ISA,  with  certain  reservations,  recommended  approval  of  the  withdrawal
plan  submitted  by  JCS.  ISA  pointed  out  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  that  the
plan  as  it  stood  would  not  draw  all  of  the  1000  troops  from  U.S.  units  that  were
to  be  relieved  by  adequately  trained  SVN  units,  as  had  been  intended.  Many  of
the  so-called  "units"  designated  therein  actually  were  not  bona  fide  existing
units  but  were  specially  formed  "service  support  units"  made  up  of  random
individuals  most  easily  spared  throughout  USMACV.  ISA  cautioned  that  the
arbitrary  creation  of  such  ad  hoc  "units"  solely  for  the  purpose  of  the  with-
drawal might  backfire  in  press  reaction.  ISA  also  recommended,  in  order  to
show  credibly  that  the  final  year-end  U.S.  in-country  strength  had  dropped  by
1000  from  peak  strength,  that  U.S.  military  strength  figures  in  Vietnam  be  made
public,  and  that  the  actual  strength  as  well  as  the  authorized  ceilings  at  any
given  time  be  carefully  monitored  to  insure  that  the  desired  reductions  were
indeed  achieved.

A  few  days  later  the  Secretary  of  Defense  approved  the  1000-man  with-
drawal plan  forwarded  in  JCSM-629-63  as  recommended.  He  agreed,  however,
with  ISA  and  advised  the  JCS  against  creating  special  units  if  their  only  purpose
was  to  be  a  holding  unit  as  a  vehicle  for  withdrawal  of  individuals.  He  also  re-
quested that  he  be  provided  with  a  projection  of  U.S.  military  strength  in  South
Vietnam,  by  month,  for  the  period  September  through  December  1963.


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  183


The  following  week  the  Chairman,  JCS,  responded  to  the  Secretary  of
Defense's  request  and  furnished  the  following  projection  of  end-of-month  U.S.
military  strengths  in  South  Vietnam:


It  was  noted  that  the  planned  1000-man  withdrawal  would  represent  a  reduc-
tion based  on  the  October  peak  strength.  The  first  increment  of  276  personnel
would  be  withdrawn  during  November  and  the  remaining  increments  in
December.  This,  as  it  turned  out,  was  destined  to  be  changed  somewhat  before
the  withdrawal  was  executed.


E. THE  BUDDHIST  CRISIS

While  the  CPSVN-MAP  and  withdrawal  planning  were  going  on,  significant
developments  altering  the  character  of  the  entire  situation  to  which  the  plan-
ning effort  was  addressed — in  fact  threatening  to  invalidate  the  very  premises
from  which  the  planning  sprung — were  occurring  within  South  Vietnam.  The
Buddhist  crisis  was  rocking  the  foundations  of  what  precarious  political  stability
the  Diem  government  enjoyed  and  there  was  growing  concern  about  its  effect
on  the  prosecution  of  the  war  against  the  VC  and  on  improvements  of  RVNAF.

A  series  of  incidents  beginning  early  in  May  revealed  the  deep  divisions  be-
tween militant  Buddhist  factions,  who  purported  to  speak  for  the  bulk  of  the
South  Vietnamese  population,  and  the  Government.  Lack  of  popular  support
for  the  Diem  regime  had  now  turned  to  open  opposition.  As  passions  flared
and  Buddhist  activism  was  met  with  increasingly  severe  countermeasures,
violence  spread  and  grew  more  serious.  A  tenuous  truce  was  reached  briefly
between  Buddhist  leaders  and  the  GVN  on  10  June  (formally  signed  on  16
June)  in  a  mutual  effort  to  reduce  tensions — but  proved  short-lived.  Almost
immediately  the  actions  of  both  sides  repudiated  the  agreements.

The  U.S.  began  to  be  apprehensive  about  the  possible  consequences  of  the
Diem  government  falling  as  the  result  of  a  coup.  By  early  July,  the  crisis  was
recognized  as  serious  at  the  highest  levels  of  the  U.S.  Government.

Through  mid-July  assessments  remained  reasonably  reassuring.  There  was
litde  evidence  of  impact  on  the  military  sector.  In  fact,  indications  pointed  to
the  military  situation  continuing  to  improve.  DIA  reported  on  17  July  that  the
general  level  of  VC-initiated  actions  during  the  first  six  months  of  1963  was
considerably  lower  than  for  the  same  period  the  year  before.  Battalion  and
company-size  attacks  were  at  about  half  the  1962  level.  It  was  noted,  however,
that  despite  reduced  activity,  VC  capability  remained  essentially  unimpaired.
Regarding  the  progress  of  South  Vietnamese  counterinsurgency  efforts,  the
DIA  evaluation  was  cautiously  optimistic:  though  there  was  still  a  long  way  to
go,  GVN  prospects  "are  certainly  better  than  they  were  one  year  ago."

Quite  abruptly,  a  disturbing  element  began  to  emerge.  Little  more  than  two
weeks  later,  the  DIA  Intelligence  Bulletin  of  4  August  reported  a  significant
increase  in  the  level  of  VC  offensive  actions.  Moreover,  the  rate  was  high  for
the  third  week  in  a  row  since  mid-July.  The  clear  implication  was  that  the  VC
at  last  were  taking  advantage  of  the  opportunity  presented  by  the  Buddhist
crisis.  It  had  been  expected — and  feared — that  they  would  seek  to  hasten  politi-
cal collapse  and  exploit  whatever  military  vulnerabilities  there  were.  The  U.S.


August


16,201
16,483
16,732
16,456
15,732


September
October


November
December


184 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

was  thus  justifiably  concerned  lest  the  recent  revived  VC  aggressiveness  be  the
opening  phase  of  a  stepped  up  insurgency.  Within  ten  days  of  this  DIA  report,
however,  a  reevaluation  of  the  significance  to  be  attached  to  the  increased  rate
of  enemy  actions  allayed  fears  somewhat.  On  14  August,  SACSA,  reporting  to
the  Secretary  of  Defense,  discounted  the  upsurge  in  VC  activity  over  the  past
month.  Its  magnitude,  comparatively,  was  below  the  average  of  the  preceding
year  and  fell  far  short  of  the  previous  high.  In  this  perspective,  SACSA  saw  no
cause  to  read  undue  implications  into  developments  that  were  as  yet  neither
particularly  salient  nor  of  long  duration.

The  political  crisis  meanwhile  took  a  turn  for  the  worse.  President  Diem,
in  an  attempt  to  regain  control,  declared  martial  law  on  20  August.  The  decree
was  accompanied  by  forcible  entry  into  pagodas  and  mass  arrests  of  Buddhist
leaders  and  laity,  and  was  immediately  followed  by  a  series  of  preemptory  re-
pressive measures.  Any  hope  of  reconciliation  was  now  shattered,  and  the  Diem
government  was  irrevocably  isolated.

The  Director,  DIA,  in  a  special  report  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  expressed
concern  that  the  declaration  of  martial  law  "will  have  serious  repercussions
throughout  the  country."  He  foresaw  further  coup  or  counter-coup  activity  in
the  making,  though  for  the  time  being  the  military  had  effectively  assumed  full
control.  So  far,  he  saw  litde  military  effect  on  the  war  effort;  relatively  few
troops  had  been  withdrawn  from  normal  missions.  At  an  August  31  review  of
the  problem  for  Vice  President  Johnson,  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  and  Secretary
McNamara  agreed  that  U.S.  planning  had  to  be  based  on  two  principles — that
the  U.S.  would  not  pull  out  of  Vietnam  until  the  war  were  won,  and  that  it
would  not  participate  in  a  coup  d'etat  against  Diem.

For  the  next  month,  as  the  precarious  political  situation  balanced  on  the
brink  of  imminent  disaster,  U.S.  anxieties  mounted.  The  Administration  was
confronted  by  a  dilemma.  It  was  helpless  to  ameliorate  conditions  as  long  as
Diem  remained  in  power — nor  did  it  want  to  approve  and  support  such  a
regime.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  it  was  equally  helpless  to  encourage  a  change  of
government — there  was  no  feasible  replacement  anywhere  on  the  South  Viet-
namese political  horizon.  The  upshot  was  an  ambivalent  policy  of  watchful
waiting  toward  the  GVN,  while  the  main  preoccupation  and  focus  of  attention
was  on  the  conduct  of  the  South  Vietnamese  military  forces  and  the  progress
of  the  counterinsurgency  programs.  These  still  remained  the  first  order  of
business.

F. MCNAMARA-TAYLOR  MISSION  TO  SOUTH  VIETNAM,
OCTOBER  1963

By  the  middle  of  September,  the  President  was  deeply  concerned  over  the
critical  political  situation,  but  more  importantly,  over  its  effect  on  the  war.  A
decision  juncture  had  been  reached.  At  issue  was  the  U.S.  military  commitment
in  South  Vietnam;  a  redirection  of  U.S.  policy  and  objectives  might  be  re-
quired. On  21  September,  the  President  directed  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  in
company  with  the  Chairman,  ICS.  to  proceed  to  South  Vietnam  for  a  personal
examination  of  the  military  aspects  of  the  situation.  The  President  gave  as  the
purpose  of  the  trip  .  .  my  desire  to  have  the  best  possible  on-the-spot  ap-
praisal of  the  military  and  para-military  eff'ort  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong."  He
stated  that  there  had  been,  at  least  until  recently,  "heartening  results,"  but  that
political  deterioration  since  May  had  raised  serious  questions  about  the  con-
tinued effectiveness  of  these  efforts  and  the  prospects  for  success.  The  Presi-


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  185


dent,  therefore,  needed  an  assessment  of  the  present  situation,  and  if  the
McNamara-Taylor  prognosis  were  not  hopeful,  they  were  to  recommend
needed  actions  by  the  SVN  and  steps  the  U.S.  should  take  to  bring  about  those
actions.  [Doc.  139]

The  Secretary  of  Defense  and  the  CJCS,  accompanied  by  a  team  of  civilian
and  military  assistants  to  help  in  the  survey,  arrived  in  South  Vietnam  on  26
September  and  returned  to  Washington  on  2  October.  During  their  visit,  de-
tailed data  were  compiled  for  them,  presentations  prepared,  extensive  briefings
given,  conferences  convened,  and  consultations  held.  Emerging  from  the  in-
vestigations and  appraisals  was  a  body  of  positive  evidence  indicating  that
conditions  were  good  and  prospects  improving.  In  fact,  in  the  cour^ic  of  these
reassurances,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  decided  to  order  a  speed  up  of  the
planned  program  for  release  of  U.S.  forces.  In  guidance  furnished  at  the  time,
he  directed  that  the  projected  schedules  for  force  reduction  provided  for  in  the
currently  approved  Model  M  Plan  version  of  the  CPSVN  be  accelerated  by
approximately  six  months.  Accordingly,  necessary  planning  revisions  were
undertaken  immediately  on  a  priority  basis.

In  contrast  to  the  generally  favorable  military  situation,  however,  there  were
grave  misgivings  about  the  political  state  of  affairs.  Earlier,  a  draft  text  of  a
proposed  letter  from  the  President  of  the  United  States  to  President  Diem  of  the
RVN  had  been  forwarded  by  cable  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  the  Ambas-
sador, with  a  request  for  their  reaction  and  comments.  President  Kennedy  him-
self thought  the  letter  too  extreme,  and  would  reluctantly  resort  to  it  only  if  the
situation  was  found  so  serious  that  such  direct  US  Presidential  pressure  was
necessary.  The  text  of  the  proposed  letter  was  characterized  by  harsh,  blunt
candor.  In  effect  it  laid  down  an  ultimatum:  unless  the  GVN  changed  the
repressive  policies,  methods,  and  actions  practiced  by  some  individual  officials
and  gained  for  itself  a  broad  base  of  popular  political  support,  the  United
States  might  have  to  consider  disassociating  itself  from  the  Diem  Government,
and  further  US  support  of  Vietnam  might  become  impossible.  The  Secretary
of  Defense  and  the  Ambassador  promptly  responded  with  a  strong  recom-
mendation against  transmitting  the  proposed  letter.  Both  agreed  that  the  situa-
tion was  indeed  very  serious,  but  that  it  was  not  likely  to  be  influenced  by  such
a  letter  to  Diem.

The  proposed  Presidential  letter  was  not  sent.  Instead,  many  of  the  points
were  conveyed  in  conversations  with  Diem,  and,  just  before  the  departure  of
the  McNamara-Taylor  Mission  from  Vietnam,  another  letter  to  President  Diem
was  composed  and  sent  in  its  place.  The  new  versio'">  was  not  only  much  softer
in  tone  and  more  circumspect  but  went  out  over  the  signature  of  General  Taylor
as  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  The  letter  was  dated  1  October  1963,  but
was  delivered  on  2  October,  with  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and
with  the  concurrence  of  the  US  Ambassador  to  Vietnam  (Lodge).

In  this  letter  the  CJCS  offered  his  personal,  professional  comments  on  the
military  situation,  in  response  to  Diem's  earlier  expressed  interest  in  receiving
them.  After  acknowledging  the  encouraging  military  progress  over  the  pre-
ceding two  years,  the  CJCS  stated,  'Tt  was  not  until  the  recent  political  dis-
turbances beginning  in  May  and  continuing  through  August  and  beyond  that
I  personally  had  any  doubt  as  to  the  ultimate  success  of  our  campaign  against
the  Viet  Cong."  He  then  added:

Now,  as  Secretary  McNamara  has  told  you,  a  serious  doubt  hangs  over
our  hopes  for  the  future.  Can  we  win  together  in  the  face  of  the  reaction


186 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

to  the  measures  taken  by  your  Government  against  the  Buddhists  and  the
students?  As  a  military  man  I  would  say  that  we  can  win  providing  there
are  no  further  political  setbacks.  The  militarv  indicators  are  still  generally
favorable  and  can  be  made  more  so  by  actions  readilv  within  the  power
of  your  Government.  If  you  will  allow  me,  I  would  mention  a  few  of  the
military  actions  which  I  believe  necessary  for  this  improvement.

The  Chairman  noted  that  though  the  military  situation  in  I,  II,  and  III  Corps
areas  was  generally  good,  some  of  the  hard-core  war  zones  of  the  Viet  Cong  re-
mained virtually  untouched.  There  were  not  enough  offensive  actions  against
the  enemy  in  the  field  and,  in  his  opinion,  the  full  potential  of  the  military  units
was  not  being  exploited,  for  ".  .  .  only  a  ruthless,  tireless  offensive  can  win  the
war."

The  principal  military  problems,  he  pointed  out,  were  now  in  the  Delta,  and
the  time  had  come  to  concentrate  efforts  there.  An  overhaul  of  the  Strategic
Hamlet  Program  was  needed.  For  it  to  succeed,  there  must  be  a  related  clear-
and-hold  campaign  by  the  combat  units  of  IV  Corps,  and  the  tactics  should  be
oriented  to  the  waterways  that  were  a  natural  characteristic  of  the  region.
Furthermore,  infantry  line  units  would  have  to  operate  at  full  strength,  without
diversion  of  combat  power  to  rear  echelon  functions.  The  CJCS  suggested  that
this  latter  problem  was  the  case  in  ARVN  generally,  which  President  Diem
might  want  to  examine  closely.

Finally  he  summed  up  what  was  intended  as  the  statement  of  the  US  position:

In  closing,  Mr.  President,  may  I  give  vou  mv  most  important  overall
impression?  Up  to  now,  the  battle  against  the  Viet  Cong  has  seemed  end-
less; no  one  has  been  willing  to  set  a  date  for  its  successful  conclusion.
After  talking  to  scores  of  officers,  Vietnamese  and  American,  I  am  con-
vinced that  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency  in  the  north  and  center  can  be
reduced  to  little  more  than  sporadic  incidents  by  the  end  of  1964.  The  Delta
will  take  longer  but  should  be  completed  by  the  end  of  1965.  But  for  these
predictions  to  be  valid,  certain  conditions  must  be  met.  Your  Government
should  be  prepared  to  energize  all  agencies,  military  and  civil,  to  a  higher
output  of  activity  than  up  to  now.  Ineffective  commanders  and  province
officials  must  be  replaced  as  soon  as  identified.  Finally,  there  should  be  a
restoration  of  domestic  tranquility  on  the  homefront  if  political  tensions
are  to  be  allayed  and  external  criticism  is  to  abate.  Conditions  are  needed
for  the  creation  of  an  atmosphere  conducive  to  an  effective  campaign
directed  at  the  objective,  vital  to  both  of  us,  of  defeating  the  Viet  Cong
and  of  restoring  peace  to  your  community.

The  results  of  the  survey  conducted  by  the  McNamara-Taylor  mission  were
consolidated  into  a  lengthv,  formal  report  to  the  President  containing  specific
findings,  general  evaluations,  and  recommendations.  The  substance  of  the  report
was  presented  in  an  hour-long,  oral  briefing  to  the  President  immediately  upon
the  return  of  the  mission  on  the  morning  of  2  October.  Attending  the  briefing
were  the  Under  Secretarv  of  State,  the  Under  Secretary  of  State  for  Political
Affairs,  the  Director  of  the  CIA,  and  the  Special  Assistant  to  the  President  for
National  Securitv  Aft'airs.  Following  the  personal  report,  the  President  called  a
special  meeting  of  the  full  National  Securitv  Council,  which  was  held  from  six
to  seven  that  same  evening.

The  McNamara-Taylor  Report  generally  was  optimistic  about  the  military


Phased  Withdrawal  of  US.  Forces,  1962-1964  187


situation  and  saw  little  direct  effect  of  the  political  crisis  on  the  prosecution  of
the  war.  Their  conclusions,  inter  alia,  were  that  despite  serious  political  tensions
and  the  increasing  unpopularity  of  the  Diem-Nhu  regime,  "The  military  cam-
paign has  made  great  progress  and  continues  to  progress."  GVN  military  officers,
though  hostile  to  the  government  and  its  repressive  policies,  continued  to  per-
form their  military  duties  in  the  larger  cause  of  fighting  the  Viet  Cong  enemy.
This  reassuring  evaluation,  however,  was  caveated  to  the  effect  that
".  .  .  further  repressive  actions  by  Diem  and  Nhu  could  change  the  present
favorable  military  trends."

Specific  findings  in  their  appraisal  of  the  military  situation  bore  out  the  gen-
eral evaluation.  In  the  body  of  the  report  they  stated:

With  allowances  for  all  uncertainties,  it  is  our  firm  conclusion  that  the
GVN  military  program  has  made  great  progress  in  the  last  year  and  a  half,
and  that  the  progress  has  continued  at  a  fairly  steady  rate  in  the  past  six
months  even  through  the  period  of  greatest  political  unrest  in  Saigon.  The
tactics  and  techniques  employed  by  the  Vietnamese  under  U.S.  monitor-
ship  are  sound  and  give  promise  of  ultimate  victory.

Especially  noteworthy,  in  their  view,  was  the  progress  clearly  being  achieved  in
the  northern  areas  (I  and  II) Corps.  Their  appraisal  of  the  progress  of
the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  was  also  largely  favorable.  In  both  connections,
they  cited  the  effectiveness  of  the  U.S.  military  advisory  and  support  effort.
Included  among  their  military  recommendations  were:

a.  General  Harkins  [COMUSMACV]  review  with  Diem  the  military
changes  necessary  to  complete  the  military  campaign  in  the  Northern
and  Central  areas  (I,  II,  III  Corps)  by  the  end  of  1964,  and  in  the
Delta  (IV  Corps)  by  the  end  of  1965.

b.  A  program  be  established  to  train  Vietnamese  so  that  essential  functions
now  performed  by  U.S.  military  personnel  can  be  carried  out  by  Viet-
namese by  the  end  of  1965.  It  should  be  possible  to  withdraw  the  bulk
of  U.S.  personnel  by  that  time.

c.  In  accordance  with  the  program  to  train  progressively  Vietnamese  to
take  over  military  functions,  the  Defense  Department  should  announce
in  the  near  future  presently  prepared  plans  to  withdraw  1000  U.S.  mil-
itary personnel  by  the  end  of  1963.  This  action  should  be  explained  in
low  key  as  an  initial  step  in  a  long-term  program  to  replace  U.S.  per-
sonnel with  trained  Vietnamese  without  impairment  of  the  war  effort.

Germane  to  the  above  recommendations,  however,  it  was  stated  elsewhere  in
the  report,  "No  further  reductions  should  be  made  until  the  requirements  of  the
1964  campaign  become  firm."

Following  the  NSC  meeting  of  2  October,  the  White  House  issued  a  formal
purlic  announcement  of  the  major  policy  aspects  of  the  McNamara-Taylor
Mission  Report.  The  White  House  statement  is  reproduced  below.


U.S.  POLICY  ON  VIET-NAM:
WHITE  HOUSE  STATEMENT,  OCTOBER  2,  1963

Secretary  [of  Defense  Robert  S.]  McNamara  and  General  [Maxwell
D.]  Taylor  reported  to  the  President  this  morning  and  to  the  National
Security  Council  this  afternoon.  Their  report  included  a  number  of  classified


188 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

findings  and  recommendations  which  will  be  the  subject  of  further  review
and  action.  Their  basic  presentation  was  endorsed  by  all  members  of  the
Security  Council  and  the  following  statement  of  United  States  policy  was
approved  by  the  President  on  the  basis  of  recommendations  received  from
them  and  from  Ambassador  [Henry  Cabot]  Lodge.

1 .  The  security  of  South  Viet-Nam  is  a  major  interest  of  the  United
States  as  other  free  nations.  We  will  adhere  to  our  policv  of  working  with
the  people  and  Government  of  South  Viet-Nam  to  deny  this  country  to
communism  and  to  suppress  the  externally  stimulated  and  supported  in-
surgency of  the  Viet  Cong  as  promptly  as  possible.  Effective  performance
in  this  undertaking  is  the  central  objective  of  our  policy  in  South  Viet-Nam.

2.  The  military  program  in  South  Viet-Nam  has  made  progress  and  is
sound  in  principle,  though  improvements  are  being  energetically  sought.

3.  Major  U.S.  assistance  in  support  of  this  military  effort  is  needed  only
until  the  insurgency  has  been  suppressed  or  until  the  national  security  forces
of  the  Government  of  South  Viet-Nam  are  capable  of  suppressing  it.

Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  reported  their  judgment  that
the  major  part  of  the  U.S.  military  task  can  be  completed  bv  the  end  of
1965,  although  there  may  be  a  continuing  requirement  for  a  limited  number
of  U.S.  training  personnel.  They  reported  that  by  the  end  of  this  year,  the
U.S.  program  for  training  Vietnamese  should  have  progressed  to  the  point
where  1,000  U.S.  military  personnel  assigned  to  South  Viet-Nam  can  be
withdrawn.

4.  The  political  situation  in  South  Viet-Nam  remains  deeply  serious.
The  United  States  had  made  clear  its  continuing  opposition  to  any  repres-
sive actions  in  South  Viet-Nam.  While  such  actions  have  not  yet  sig-
nificantly affected  the  military  effort,  they  could  do  so  in  the  future.

5.  It  remains  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  in  South  Viet-Nam  as  in
other  parts  of  the  world,  to  support  the  efforts  of  the  people  of  that  country
to  defeat  aggression  and  to  build  a  peaceful  and  free  society.


Considerable  emphasis  was  given  to  the  White  House  statement,  and  to  the
McNamara-Taylor  Mission  generally,  in  news  media.  Played  up  particularly
was  the  U.S.  force  withdrawal,  especially  the  prospective  1000-man  reduction.

Three  days  later,  on  5  October,  in  another  meeting  with  the  President,  fol-
lowed by  another  NSC  meeting,  the  McNamara-Tayior  recommendations
themselves  were  addressed.  The  President  "approved  the  military  recommenda-
tions contained  in  the  report."'  The  President  also  directed,  in  line  with  their
suggestion,  that  no  formal  announcement  be  made  of  the  implementation  of
plans  to  withdraw  1000  U.S.  military  personnel  from  South  Vietnam  by  the  end
of  1963.

The  effect  of  the  McNamara-Tavlor  mission,  thus,  was  to  revalidate  the  exist-
ing U.S.  policy  position  regarding  Vietnam.  Reaffirmed  were  the  military  ob-
jectives, courses  of  action,  and  programs  essentially  as  they  were  laid  out  by  the
Secretary  of  Defense  at  the  Honolulu  Conference  over  a  year  earlier  on  23
July  1962.  The  underlying  premises  and  soundness  of  the  rationale  seemed  more
cogent  than  ever.  In  fact,  a  new  impetus  was  thereby  given  to  pursing  the
same  goals  with  even  greater  thrust  and  purpose.  Such  an  outcome  could  have
been  forecast,  as  noted  earlier,  when  Mr.  McNamara  set  in  motion  another
CPSVN  planning  cycle  to  revise  the  Model  M  Plan  and  develop  an  accelerated
plan  to  withdraw  U.S.  forces.


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  189


Part  of  the  motivation  behind  the  stress  placed  on  U.S.  force  withdrawal,
and  particularly  the  seemingly  arbitrary  desire  to  effect  the  1000-man  reduc-
tion by  the  end  of  1963,  apparently  was  as  a  signal  to  influence  both  the  North
Vietnamese  and  the  South  Vietnamese  and  set  the  stage  for  possible  later  steps
that  would  help  bring  the  insurgency  to  an  end.  With  regard  to  the  SVN,  the
demonstration  of  determination  to  pull  out  U.S.  forces  was  intended  to  induce
the  South  Vietnamese  to  increase  the  effectiveness  of  their  military  effort.  State's
instructions  to  Ambassador  Lodge  resulting  from  NSC  action  on  the  Mc-
Namara-Taylor  mission  indicated  that:

Actions  are  designed  to  indicate  to  Diem  Government  our  displeasure
at  its  political  policies  and  activities  and  to  create  significant  uncertainty  in
that  government  and  in  key  Vietnamese  groups  as  to  future  intentions  of
United  States.  At  same  time,  actions  are  designed  to  have  at  most  slight
impact  on  military  or  counterinsurgency  effort  against  Viet  Cong,  at  least
in  short  term.  .  .  .

With  respect  to  Hanoi,  it  might  present  an  opportunity  for  a  demarche — ex-
ploiting withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces  from  South  Vietnam  by  a  specified  date  as
exchange  for  North  Vietnam's  abandoning  its  aggression  against  South  Vietnam.
But  events  were  already  conspiring  otherwise,  and  would  soon  frustrate  such
expectations  and  intentions  as  developed.  The  internal  SVN  situation  was  about
to  undergo  rapid  transformation.

By  late  October,  there  was  increasing  skepticism  in  some  quarters  about  the
military  situation  in  South  Vietnam.  Indeed,  it  was  beginning  to  be  suspected
that  reports  of  progress  by  U.S.  military  sources  actually  cloaked  a  situation  that
was  not  only  bleak,  but  deteriorating.  A  State  Department  intelligence  evaluation
of  22  October  showed  markedly  pessimistic  statistical  trends  since  July  1963,  in
most  areas  of  enemy-friendly  relative  progress  measurement,  indicating  an  un-
favorable shift  in  the  military  balance.  What  was  disquieting  was  that  the  pat-
tern showed  steady  decline  over  a  period  of  more  than  three  months'  duration.

Circulation  of  the  INR  evaluation  occasioned  controversy  and  no  little  re-
crimination. Substantive  differences  degenerated  into  a  procedural  issue.  The
outcome  was  a  personal  memorandum  from  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Sec-
retary of  Defense  on  8  November,  amounting  to  an  apology  for  the  incident.
The  Secretary  of  State  stated  in  regard  to  INR's  RFE-90  of  22  October:

....  It  is  not  the  policy  of  the  State  Department  to  issue  military  ap-
praisals without  seeking  the  views  of  the  Defense  Department.  I  have  re-
quested that  any  memoranda  given  inter-departmental  circulation  which
include  military  appraisals  be  coordinated  with  your  Department.

G. THE  NOVEMBER  COUP  AND  OVERTHROW  OF  DIEM

On  1  November,  the  political  situation  fell  apart.  The  long-anticipated  coup
occurred.  The  Diem  regime  was  overthrown,  and  both  Diem  and  Nhu  were
assassinated.  A  military  junta  of  politically  inexperienced  generals  took  over  the
government  as  their  successors.

The  significance  of  the  great  change,  for  good  or  ill,  was  not  readily  apparent.
Over  the  next  three  weeks  the  feared  political  chaos,  civil  war,  and  collapse  of
the  war  effort  following  a  coup  did  not  seem  to  be  materializing.  For  the  United


.f


190 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

States,  the  important  question  was  what  did  the  new  circumstances  mean  mil-
itarily for  existing  poHcy  and  plans  oriented  to  bringing  the  insurgency  under
control  and  to  phasing  out  US  force  commitments.

On  20  November,  at  the  President's  direction,  a  special  all-agencies  conference
on  Vietnam  was  convened  in  Honolulu  for  a  "full-scale  review"  in  depth  of  all
aspects  of  the  situation  and  to  reassess  U.S.  plans  and  policies  in  the  political,
military,  economic  and  information  fields  since  the  change  of  government.  At-
tending were  some  45  senior  U.S.  officials,  militarv  and  civilian,  including:
the  Secretary  of  State,  Secretary  of  Defense,  Special  Assistant  to  the  President
for  National  Security  Affairs,  Chairman.  JCS,  Director  of  CIA,  CINCPAC,  am-
bassador to  Vietnam,  and  COMUSMACV.  Ambassador  Lodge  assessed  the
prospects  for  Vietnam  as  hopeful.  In  his  estimation  the  new  government  was  not
without  promise.  Vietnamese  military  leadership  appeared  to  be  united  and
determined  to  step  up  the  war  effort.  The  Ambassador  advocated  continuing  to
pursue  the  goal  of  setting  dates  for  phasing  out  U.S.  activities  and  turning  them
over  to  the  Vietnamese,  and  he  volunteered  that  the  announced  withdrawal  of
1000  troops  by  the  end  of  1963  was  alreadv  having  a  salutary  effect.
COMUSMACV  agreed  with  the  Ambassador  that  the  conduct  of  the  war  against
the  VC  was  coming  along  satisfactorily.  Admitting  that  the  VC-incidents  rate
shot  up  300  to  400  percent  after  the  coup,  he  noted  that  since  6  November,  how-
ever, it  had  dropped  down  to  "normal"  and  remained  so  to  the  present.  Mil-
itary operational  statistics  now  generally  showed  a  more  or  less  favorable
balance.  In  short,  the  briefings  and  assessments  received  at  the  conference  con-
stituted "an  encouraging  outlook  for  the  principal  objective  of  joint  U.S. -Viet-
namese policy  in  South  Vietnam — the  successful  prosecution  of  the  war  against
the  Viet  Cong  communists."  Moreover,  "excellent  working  relations  between
U.S.  officials  and  the  members  of  the  new  Vietnamese  government"  had  been
established.  All  plans  for  the  U.S.  phasing  out  were  to  go  ahead  as  scheduled.

In  this  light  the  U.S.  military  plans  and  programs  for  Vietnam  were  addressed.
The  revision  of  the  Model  M  Plan  of  the  CPSVN,  ordered  by  the  Secretary  of
Defense  during  his  last  visit  to  Vietnam  in  October  was  progressing  apace  and
the  finished  Accelerated  Plan  was  expected  to  be  forwarded  shortlv.  It  would
cost  $6.4  million  more  than  the  Model  Plan,  however.  Indications  were  that  the
FY  64  MAP  would  also  cost  more  because  of  the  acceleration — to  a  total  now
of  $187.5  million.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  made  it  clear  that  he  felt  that  the
proposed  CINCPAC  MAP  could  be  cut  back  and  directed  that  the  program  be
reviewed  to  refine  it  and  cut  costs  to  stav  as  close  as  possible  to  the  OSD  ceiling
of  $175.5  million.  He  was  equallv  emphatic,  however,  that  while  he  would  not
tolerate  fat  or  ineflRciencv  in  the  program  he  was  prepared  to  provide  whatever
funds  might  be  required  under  MAP  to  support  the  GVN.  In  fact,  he  observed
that  the  GVN  was  alreadv  running  into  "tremendous  financial  deficits,"  and
opined  that  neither  AID  nor  MAP  had  budgeted  enough  to  provide  for  the
emergencies  which  were  likelv  to  arise  during  1964.

H. ASSASSINATION  OF  PRESIDENT  KENNEDY

On  22  November  1963.  President  Kennedy  was  assassinated.  The  con-
sequences were  to  set  an  institutional  freeze  on  the  direction  and  momentum
of  U.S.  X'ietnam  policv.  Universallv  operative  was  a  desire  to  avoid  change  of
any  kind  during  the  critical  interregnum  period  of  the  new  Johnson  Administra-
tion. Both  the  President  and  the  governmental  establishment  consciously  strove
for  continuity,  with  respect  to  Vietnam  no  less  than  in  other  areas.  In  Vietnam


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  191


this  continuity  meant  that  the  phase-out  concept,  the  CPSVN  withrdawal  plan,
and  the  MAP  programs  probably  survived  beyond  the  point  they  might  have
otherwise.

The  immediate  Johnson  stamp  on  the  Kennedy  policy  came  on  26  November.
At  a  NSC  meeting  convened  to  consider  the  results  of  the  20  November  Hono-
lulu Conference,  the  President  "reaffirmed  that  U.S.  objectives  with  respect  to
withdrawal  of  U.S.  military  personnel  remain  as  stated  in  the  White  House  state-
ment of  October  2,  1963."  The  only  hint  that  something  might  be  different
from  on-going  plans  came  in  a  Secretary  of  Defense  memo  for  the  President
three  days  prior  to  this  NSC  meeting.  In  that  memo,  Mr.  McNamara  said  that  the
new  South  Vietnamese  government  was  confronted  by  serious  financial  prob-
lems, and  that  the  U.S.  must  be  prepared  to  raise  planned  MAP  levels.

In  early  December,  the  President  began  to  have,  if  not  second  thoughts,  at
least  a  sense  of  uneasiness  about  Vietnam.  In  discussions  with  his  advisors,  he
set  in  motion  what  he  hoped  would  be  a  major  policy  review,  fully  staffed  in
depth,  by  Administration  principals.  The  President  wanted  "a  fresh  new  look
taken"  at  the  whole  problem.  In  preparation  for  such  a  basic  reappraisal,  an
interdepartmental  meeting  of  second-echelon  principals  accordingly  convened
on  3  December  and  laid  out  a  broad  outline  of  basic  topics  to  be  addressed  and
staff  papers  to  be  developed  by  various  departments  and  agencies.  This  attempt
at  a  systematic  and  comprehensive  reexamination,  however,  did  not  culminate
in  a  fundamental  national  reassessment.

/. ACCELERATED  MODEL  PLAN  OF  THE  CPSVN

With  no  indication  of  policy  change  in  the  offing,  U.S.  military  planning  thus
went  forward  with  hardlv  a  break  in  stride.  On  5  December  CINCPAC  sub-
mitted  the  Accelerated  Model  Plan  to  the  JCS.  It  was  the  revision  to  the  Model
M  Plan  version  of  the  CPSVN  that  the  Secretary  of  Defense  had  ordered  dur-
ing  his  early  October  visit  to  Vietnam.  The  Accelerated  Plan  provided  for  more
rapid  phase-out  of  the  bulk  of  U.S.  military  personnel  and  units  and  a  decrease
in  the  residual  strength  remaining  thereafter.  It  also  provided  for  building  up
GVN  forces  at  a  faster  pace  but  on  a  more  reduced  scale,  then  cutting  back
from  peak  sooner  and  leveling  out  somewhat  lower.  MAP  costs  for  the  FY
1965-69  period  would  be  little  higher  than  the  S392.2  million  under  the  Model
M  Plan,  coming  to  $399.4  million  in  the  Acelerated  Plan.

/. THE  lOOO'MAN  WITHDRAWAL  OF  DECEMBER  1963

During  the  month  of  December,  the  planned  1000-man  reduction  was  ex-
ecuted. It  proved  essentially  an  accounting  exercise.  Technically,  more  than  a
thousand  U.S.  personnel  did  leave,  but  many  of  these  were  part  of  the  normal
turnover  cycle,  inasmuch  as  rotation  policy  alone,  not  to  mention  medical
evacuation  or  administrative  reasons,  resulted  in  an  average  rate  of  well  over  a
thousand  returnees  per  month.  Though  the  replacement  pipeline  was  slowed
somewhat,  year-end  total  in-country  strength  nevertheless  was  close  to  16,000.
This  did  not  even  represent  a  decline  of  1000  from  the  October  peak  of  16,732.

That  the  avowed  goal  of  1000  would  not  be  reached  had  in  fact  been
anticipated  and  acknowledged  before  mid-December.  Despite  close  monitoring
of  authorized  ceilings  and  actual  strengths,  the  force  level  kept  rising.  On  11
December,  for  example,  the  estimate  of  projected  year-end  U.S.  strength  in
Vietnam  had  to  be  revised  upward  to  reflect  additional  deployments  approved


192 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

since  September.  The  adjusted  figure  now  came  to  15,894,  a  net  increase  of
162  over  the  earUer  estimate.  This  new  strength  ceiling  was  what  would  be  left
after  the  1000-man  withdrawal  then  in  progress  was  completed.

m.  1964

A. THE  VIETNAM  SITUATION  WORSENS

In  December  conflicting  estimates  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam  indicated  that
the  bright  hopes  and  predictions  of  the  past  were  increasingly  less  than  realistic.
A  McNamara  memo  to  the  President  written  following  a  trip  to  Vietnam  of  21
December,  was  laden  with  gloom.  [Doc.  156]  He  wrote:  "The  situation  is  very
disturbing.  Current  trends,  unless  reversed  in  the  next  2-3  months,  will  lead  to
neutralization  at  best  and  more  likely  to  a  communist-controlled  state."  He  went
on  to  note  that  "the  new  government  is  the  greatest  source  of  concern,"  and  that
"it  is  indecisive  and  drifting."  The  Country  Team,  he  added,  "lacks  leadership,
and  has  been  poorly  informed."  One  of  the  most  serious  deficiencies  he  found  was
a  "grave  reporting  weakness"  on  the  U.S.  side.  "Viet  Cong  progress  has  been  great
during  the  period  since  the  coup,  with  my  best  guess  being  that  the  situation  has  in
fact  been  deteriorating  in  the  countryside  since  July  to  a  far  greater  extent  than
we  realize  because  of  our  undue  dependence  on  distorted  Vietnamese  reporting."
Mr.  McNamara  clearly  concluded  that  none  of  these  conditions  could  be  re-
versed by  the  influx  of  more  American  personnel,  nor  did  he  even  mention  that
the  U.S  could  continue  to  withdraw  troops  at  all  or  as  scheduled.  His  proposal
was  to  hold  the  line:  "U.S.  resources  and  personnel,"  he  said,  "cannot  usefully
be  substantially  increased.  .  .  ."  although  he  did  announce  his  intention  to  in-
crease staffs  "to  sizes  that  will  give  us  a  reliable,  independent  U.S.  appraisal
of  the  status  of  operations."  In  his  concluding  paragraph,  however,  the
Secretary  of  Defense  admitted  that  his  own  estimate  "may  be  overly  pessimistic,"
inasmuch  as  the  Ambassador,  COMUSMACV,  and  General  Minh  were  not  dis-
couraged and  looked  forward  to  significant  improvements  in  January.  [Doc.  156]

Vestiges  of  optimism  still  persisted  in  one  degree  or  another  in  some  quarters.
The  earlier  sense  of  confidence  that  had  been  established  was  deep-rooted  and
not  easily  shaken.  A  retrospective  evaluation  of  the  Vietnam  situation  ostensibly
covering  the  period  1960  through  1963.  prepared  by  SACSA  (General  Krulak)
is  indicative.  Although  intended  as  a  broad  overview  (and  so  called),  and  though
actually  cut  off  as  of  sometime  in  October  1963,  it  was  forwarded  in
late  October  or  November  directlv  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  The  SACSA
report  presented  nothing  less  than  a  glowing  account  of  steady  progress  across
the  board  in  the  military  situation.  Significantlv,  it  contained  no  hint  that  the
rate  of  progress  possiblv  might  have  temporarilv  slowed  somewhat  in  the  second
half  of  1963,  despite  the  fact  that  it  expresslv  treated  events  as  late  as  October.
Yet  by  this  time,  other  evaluations  giving  a  quite  different  picture  were  already
asserting  themselves.  Near  the  close  of  1963  the  Director,  DIA,  reported  to  the
Secretary  of  Defense  that  year-end  review  and  reassessment  of  the  enemy  situa-
tion revealed  \'C  capabilities  had  not  been  impaired  over  the  past  year.  On  the
contrary,  the  VC  had  in  manv  regards  improved  in  combat  effectiveness  and  now
enjoyed  a  generalh-  improved  force  posture  for  insurgency.

Hopeful  bias  alone  does  not  explain  the  endurance  of  past  firmly  rooted  op-
timism— such  as  the  SACS.\  overview.  The  difference  between  those  who
stressed  the  positive  and  those  who  saw  decline  was,  in  part,  the  product  of  view-


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  193


ing  the  situation  in  greater  or  shorter  time  frames.  Those  who  appHed  a  macro-
scopic perspective,  beheved — and  not  without  certain  logic — that  current
unfavorable  reports  were,  at  worse,  a  temporary  lapse  in  the  larger  curve  of
progress  over  the  years.  Those  who  took  spot  checks  tended  to  be  more  im-
pressed by  the  immediate  situation,  and  at  this  time,  the  immediate  situation
was  critical.  The  feelings  of  this  latter  group  were  buttressed  when  on  30  Jan-
uary another  coup,  this  time  largely  bloodless,  ousted  the  ruling  Minh  govern-
ment. It  was  a  factional  power  struggle  in  which  one  military  group  replaced
another,  this  time  with  General  Khanh  emerging  as  Premier.  The  latest  develop-
ment held  forth  little  promise  of  giving  the  country  the  political  stability  so
desperately  needed  in  the  midst  of  a  war  for  survival.  The  event  would  prove
only  symptomatic  as  part  of  a  sequence  of  similar  government  upheavals  that
were  to  follow.

In  the  U.S.,  the  coincidence  of  domestic  tragedy  and  patent  instability  in
Vietnam  evoked  a  chorus  urging  a  Laos-like  resolution  of  the  Vietnam  conflict.
In  late  August,  1963,  President  de  Gaulle  had  issued  a  policy  statement  on  Viet-
nam which  was  subsequently  officially  interpreted  as  a  proposal  for  "independence
and  neutrality"  for  Vietnam — meaning  eventual  U.S.  withdrawal.  In  the  after-
math of  the  assassinations,  speculation  turned  increasingly  to  this  solution.  For
example,  Senator  Mansfield  wrote  to  President  Johnson  to  propose  a  division
of  Vietnam  between  the  GVN  and  the  Viet  Cong,  coupled  with  a  U.S.
withdrawal.  In  early  January,  1964,  Secretary  McNamara  furnished  the  Pres-
ident the  following  counters  to  Senator  Mansfield's  arguments:

1.  We  should  certainly  stress  that  the  war  is  essentially  a  Vietnamese
responsibility,  and  this  we  have  repeatedly  done,  particularly  in  our  an-
nounced policy  on  U.S.  troop  withdrawal.  At  the  same  time  we  cannot
disengage  U.S.  prestige  to  any  significant  degree.  .  .  .

2.  The  security  situation  is  serious,  but  we  can  still  win,  even  on  present
ground  rules.  .  .  .

3  Any  deal  either  to  divide  the  present  territory  of  South  Viet-
nam or  to  "neutralize"  South  Vietnam  would  inevitably  mean  a  new
government  in  Saigon  that  would  in  short  order  become  Communist-dom-
inated.

4.  The  consequences  of  a  Communist-dominated  South  Vietnam  are
extremely  serious  both  for  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  and  for  the  U.S.  posi-
tion in  the  rest  of  Asia  and  indeed  in  other  key  areas  of  the  world.  .  .  .

5.  Thus,  the  stakes  in  preserving  an  anti-Communist  South  Vietnam  are
so  high  that,  in  our  judgment,  we  must  go  on  bending  every  effort  to  win.
.  .  .  And,  I  am  confident  that  the  American  people  are  by  and  large  in
favor  of  a  policy  of  firmness  and  strength  in  such  situations.

Secretary  McNamara  in  his  testimony  before  Congress  on  the  fiscal  year  1965
budget  in  early  February,  1964,  declined  to  link  the  previously  planned  U.S.
withdrawals  with  either  "pessimism"  or  "optimism"  regarding  events  in  Vietnam,
saying  simply  that  the  withdrawals  had  all  along  been  conditioned  upon  Viet-
namese capability  to  assume  full  responsibility  from  the  U.S.  trainers,  and  that
there  would  be  a  "substantial  reduction  in  our  force  as  we  train  them."  Further:

Last  fall  ...  I  wasn't  as  optimistic  perhaps  about  the  course  of  the  war
as  I  was  about  being  able  to  bring  back  our  personnel  in  certain  numbers
by  the  end  of  last  year  and  also  in  increments  between  then  and  the  end
of  1965.

I  still  am  hopeful  of  doing  that.  We  did,  of  course,  bring  back  1,000  men


194 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

toward  the  latter  part  of  last  year.  I  am  hopeful  we  can  bring  back  ad-
ditional numbers  of  men  later  this  year  and  certainly  next  year.  I  say  this
because  I  personally  believe  that  this  is  a  war  that  the  Vietnamese  must
fight  ...  I  don't  believe  we  can  take  on  that  combat  task  for  them.  I  do
believe  we  can  carry  out  training.  We  can  provide  advice  and  logistical  as-
sistance.

But  after  all,  the  training,  by  the  very  nature  of  the  work,  comes  to  an
end  at  a  certain  point.  We  will  have  started  this  expanded  training  and
carried  it  out  for  a  period  of  4  years,  by  the  end  of  next  year.  We  started
at  the  end  of  1961.  The  end  of  next  year  will  have  been  4  vears  later  and
certainly  we  should  have  completed  the  majority  of  the  training  task  bv  that
time.  This,  in  General  Taylor's  view  and  mine,  is  what  we  should  be  able  to
do.  If  we  do,  we  should  bring  our  men  back.

I  don't  believe  we  should  leave  our  men  there  to  substitute  for
Vietnamese  men  who  are  qualified  to  carry  out  the  task,  and  this  is  really
the  heart  of  our  proposal.  I  think  it  was  a  sound  proposal  then  and  I  think
so  now.  .  .  .

Unsureness  about  the  actual  state  of  affairs  in  Washington  spread  eventually
to  the  highest  levels  of  government,  and  prompted  the  dispatching  to  South
Vietnam  in  early  February  of  a  CIA  "Special  CAS  Group""  for  an  independent
evaluation  of  the  military  situation.  A  series  of  four  reports,  dated  10,  11,  14
and  18  February  1964,  were  produced,  each  transmitted  by  the  Deputy
Director,  CIA,  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  Secretary  of  State,  and  others  as
soon  as  it  came  out.  Instead  of  finding  progress,  these  reported  a  serious  and
steadily  deteriorating  situation.  Cited  were  VC  gains  in  the  past  several  months,
and  particularly  noted  was  that  VC  arms  were  increasing  in  quantity  and  quality.
As  for  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  thev  found  it  ''at  present  at  virutal  stand-
still." The  Special  CAS  Group's  concluding  appraisal  was  pessimistic:  "Tide  of
insurgency  in  all  four  corps  areas  appears  to  be  going  against  GVN."  COMU-
SMACV  (who  had  no  prior  knowledge  of  the  Special  CAS  Group's  reports)  took
issue  with  the  Group's  findings,  contesting  less  the  date  used  than  the  conclu-
sions, especially  the  "personal""  evaluational  opinions  as  to  degree  of  deteriora-
tion. He  suggested  that  in  the  future  such  reports  be  first  coordinated  before
being  dispatched.

On  6  March  a  major  Secretarv  of  Defense  Conference  again  convened  at
CINCPAC  headquarters  for  a  broad  reassessment.  The  consensus  was  that  the
military  situation  was  definitelv  deteriorating.  No  longer  was  the  issue  whether
it  was  progressing  satisfactorily  or  not.  The  question  now  was  how  much  of  a
setback  had  there  been  and  what  was  needed  to  make  up  for  it.  An  opinion
shared  by  many  was  that  the  insurgencv  could  be  expected  to  go  beyond  1965.
This  general  reorientation  of  perspective  was  reflected  in  the  Secretary  of
Defense's  observation  that  attention  should  be  focused  on  the  near-term  ob-
jectives of  providing  the  greater  U.S.  support  that  would  be  necessary,  and  sus-
pending for  the  time  being  consideration  of  longer-range  concerns  such  as  5-
year  MAP  projections.  The  visit  to  Vietnam  on  8  March  corroborated
the  gravity  of  the  immediate  problems  at  hand.

Following  his  return  from  Vietnam,  Mr.  McNamara,  on  16  March,  sub-
mitted to  the  President  a  formal  report.  In  it  the  Secretary  of  Defense  acknowl-
edged, "The  situation  has  unquestionably  been  growing  worse,  at  least  since
September.""  RVNAF  desertion  rates  were  increasing,  and  the  GVN  military
position  generally  was  weakening  noticeably.  The  VC  position,  on  the  other


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  195


hand,  showed  signs  of  improving.  He  referred  pointedly  to  the  increase  in  North
Vietnamese  support.  The  conclusion  was  that  greater  U.S.  support  was  needed.

In  describing  what  was  required  to  improve  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam,
Mr.  McNamara  identified  measures  that  "will  involve  a  limited  increase  in  U.S.
personnel  and  in  direct  Defense  Department  costs.  More  significantly  they  in-
volve significant  increases  in  Military  Assistance  Program  costs.  .  .  .,"  plus
"additional  U.S.  economic  aid  to  support  the  increased  GVN  budget."  The  es-
timated additional  annual  MAP  costs  would  come  to  between  $30  and  $40  mil-
lion each  year,  plus  a  one-time  additional  cost  of  $20  million  for  military
equipment.  In  the  recommendation  section  of  the  report,  the  Secretary  listed
the  following  12  items:

1.  To  make  it  clear  that  we  are  prepared  to  furnish  assistance  and  support
to  South  Vietnam  for  as  long  as  it  takes  to  bring  the  insurgency  under
control.

2.  To  make  it  clear  that  we  fully  support  the  Khanh  government  and  are
opposed  to  any  further  coups.

3.  To  support  a  Program  for  National  Mobilization  (including  a  national
service  law)  to  put  South  Vietnam  on  a  war  footing.

4.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  increase  the  armed  forces  (regular  plus  para-
military) by  at  least  50,000  men.

5.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  create  a  greatly  enlarged  Civil  Administra-
tive Corps  for  work  at  province,  district  and  hamlet  levels.

6.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  improve  and  reorganize  the  para-military
forces  and  to  increase  their  compensation.

7.  To  assist  the  Vietnamese  to  create  an  offensive  guerrilla  force.

8.  To  provide  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force  25  A-IH  aircraft  in  exchange  for
the  present  T-28s.

9.  To  provide  the  Vietnamese  army  additional  M-113  armored  personnel
carriers  (withdrawing  the  M-114s  there),  additional  river  boats,  and
approximately  $5-10  million  of  other  additional  material.

10.  To  announce  publicly  the  Fertilizer  Program  and  to  expand  it  with
a  view  within  two  years  to  trebling  the  amount  of  fertilizer  made  avail-
able.

11.  To  authorize  continued  high-level  U.S.  overflights  of  South  Vietnam's
borders  and  to  authorize  "hot  pursuit"  and  South  Vietnamese  ground
operations  over  the  Laotian  line  for  the  purpose  of  border  control.
More  ambitious  operations  into  Laos  involving  units  beyond  battalion
size  should  be  authorized  only  with  the  approval  of  Souvanna  Phouma.
Operations  across  the  Cambodian  border  should  depend  on  the  state  of
relations  with  Cambodia.

12.  To  prepare  immediately  to  be  in  a  position  on  72  hours'  notice  to  ini-
tiate the  full  range  of  Laotian  and  Cambodian  "Border  Control"  actions
(beyond  those  authorized  in  paragraph  11  above)  and  the  "Retaliatory
Action"  against  North  Vietnam,  and  to  be  in  a  position  on  30  days'
notice  to  initiate  the  program  of  "Graduated  Overt  Military  Pressure"
against  North  Vietnam.

As  for  the  future  of  the  phased-withdrawal  plans,  the  Secretary  of  Defense's
report  contained  the  following:

The  U.S.  policy  of  reducing  existing  personnel  where  South  Vietnamese
are  in  a  position  to  assume  the  functions  is  still  sound.  Its  application  will


196 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


not  lead  to  any  major  reductions  in  the  near  future,  but  adherence  to  this
policy  as  such  has  a  sound  effect  in  portraying  to  the  U.S.  and  the  world
that  we  continue  to  regard  the  war  as  a  conflict  the  South  Vietnamese  must
win  and  take  ultimate  responsibility  for.  Substantial  reductions  in  the  num-
bers of  U.S.  military  training  personnel  should  be  possible  before  the  end
of  1965.  However,  the  U.S.  should  continue  to  reiterate  that  it  will  provide
all  the  assistance  and  advice  required  to  do  the  job  regardless  of  how  long
it  takes.  [Doc.  158]

By  formal  decision  at  the  NSC  session  of  17  March,  the  President  approved
the  Secretary  of  Defense  report  of  16  March  1964  and  directed  all  agencies  to
carry  out  the  12  recommendations  contained  therein.  A  White  House  statement,
reproduced  below,  was  issued  the  same  day.


March  17,  1964

IMMEDIATE  RELEASE

Office  of  the  White  House  Press  Secretary


THE  WHITE  HOUSE

Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor,  following  their  initial  oral
report  of  Friday,  today  reported  fully  to  President  Johnson  and  the  mem-
bers of  the  National  Security  Council.  The  report  covered  the  situation  in
South  Vietnam,  the  measures  being  taken  by  General  Khanh  and  his
government,  and  the  need  for  United  States  assistance  to  supplement  and
support  these  measures.  There  was  also  discussion  of  the  continuing  sup-
port and  direction  of  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency  from  North  Vietnam.

At  the  close  of  the  meeting  the  President  accepted  the  report  and  its
principal  recommendations,  which  had  the  support  of  the  National  Security
Council  and  Ambassador  Lodge.

Comparing  the  situation  to  last  October,  when  Secretary  McNamara
and  General  Taylor  last  reported  fully  on  it,  there  have  unquestionably
been  setbacks.  The  Viet  Cong  have  taken  maximum  advantage  of  two
changes  of  government,  and  of  more  long-standing  difficulties,  including
a  serious  weakness  and  over-extension  which  had  developed  in  the  basically
sound  hamlet  program.  The  supply  of  arms  and  cadres  from  the  north  has
continued;  careful  and  sophisticated  control  of  Viet  Cong  operations  has
been  apparent;  and  evidence  that  such  control  is  centered  in  Hanoi  is  clear
and  unmistakable.

To  meet  the  situation.  General  Khanh  and  his  government  are  acting
vigorously  and  effectively.  They  have  produced  a  sound  central  plan  for
the  prosecution  of  the  war.  recognizing  to  a  far  greater  degree  than  before
the  crucial  role  of  economic  and  social,  as  well  as  military,  action  to  ensure
that  areas  cleared  of  the  Viet  Cong  survive  and  prosper  in  freedom.

To  carry  out  this  plan.  General  Khanh  requires  the  full  enlistment  of
the  people  of  South  Vietnam,  partly  to  augment  the  strength  of  his  anti-
guerrilla  forces,  but  particularlv  to  provide  the  administrators,  health
workers,  teachers  and  others  who  must  follow  up  in  cleared  areas.  To  meet
this  need,  and  to  provide  a  more  equitable  and  common  basis  of  service.
General  Khanh  has  informed  us  that  he  proposes  in  the  near  future  to  put


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  197


into  effect  a  National  Mobilization  Plan  that  will  provide  conditions  and
terms  of  service  in  appropriate  jobs  for  all  able-bodied  South  Vietnamese
between  certain  ages.

In  addition,  steps  are  required  to  bring  up  to  required  levels  the  pay  and
status  of  the  paramilitary  forces  and  to  create  a  highly  trained  guerrilla
force  that  can  beat  the  Viet  Cong  on  its  own  ground.  Finally,  limited  but
significant  additional  equipment  is  proposed  for  the  air  forces,  the  river
navy,  and  the  mobile  forces.

In  short,  where  the  South  Vietnamese  Government  now  has  the  power
to  clear  any  part  of  its  territory,  General  Khanh's  new  program  is  designed
to  clear  and  to  hold,  step  by  step  and  province  by  province.

This  program  will  involve  substantial  increases  in  cost  to  the  South  Viet-
namese economy,  which  in  turn  depends  heavily  on  United  States  economic
aid.  Additional,  though  less  substantial,  military  assistance  funds  are  also
needed,  and  increased  United  States  training  activity  both  on  the  civil  and
military  side.  The  policy  should  continue  of  withdrawing  United  States
personnel  where  their  roles  can  be  assumed  by  South  Vietnamese  and  of
sending  additional  men  if  they  are  needed.  It  will  remain  the  policy  of  the
United  States  to  furnish  assistance  and  support  to  South  Vietnam  for  as
long  as  it  is  required  to  bring  Communist  aggression  and  terrorism  under
control.

Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  reported  their  overall  con-
clusion that  with  continued  vigorous  leadership  from  General  Khanh  and
his  government,  and  the  carrying  out  of  these  steps,  the  situation  can  be
significantly  improved  in  the  coming  months.


B. DEMISE  OF  THE  CPSVN

Before  the  month  of  March  was  over  the  CPSVN,  as  well  as  the  MAP  plan-
ning that  had  been  such  an  integral  part  of  it,  finally  received  the  coup  de  grace.
Sacrificed  to  the  U.S.  desire  "to  make  it  clear  that  we  fully  support"  the  GVN,
they  were  formally  terminated,  for  the  record,  on  27  March  in  the  OSD  message
reproduced  below:


FROM: OSD  WASH  DC DEF  963208 Date:  27  March  1964

(Col.  W.J.  Yates)
TO:  CINCPAC
REFS: a.  CINCPAC  Mar  64

b.  DEF  959615  DTG  Mar  64


1.  As  indicated  in  ref.  b.,  ceiling  for  Vietnam  FY  66  MAP  is  $143.0
million  against  $143.1  million  for  FY  65.  Requirements  above  these  pro-
gram levels  should  be  identified  as  separate  packages.

2.  Submission  of  five-year  programs  FY  66-70  for  Vietnam  is  suspended
until  further  notice.  Your  best  estimates  of  FY  66  requirements  are  neces-
sary inasmuch  line  detail  as  feasible  by  1  Jul  64  in  order  that  (a)  the  Mil-
itary Departments  can  reviev/  for  pricing,  lead  time,  availabilities,  and
prepare  for  procurement  action  and  (b)  requirements  can  be  processed


198 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

within  DoD,  State/AID  and  BoB  for  budget/ Congressional  Presentation
purposes.

3.  Previous  guidance  re  Model  Plan  projection  for  phasedown  of  U.S.
forces  and  GVN  forces  is  superseded.  Policy  is  as  announced  by  White
House  17  Mar  64:  Quote  The  policy  should  continue  of  withdrawing  U.S.
personnel  where  their  roles  can  be  assumed  by  South  Vietnamese  and  of
sending  additional  men  if  they  are  needed.  It  will  remain  the  policy  of  the
U.S.  to  furnish  assistance  and  support  of  South  Vietnam  for  as  long  as  is
required  to  bring  Communist  aggression  and  terrorism  under  control.
Unquote.

4.  No  further  action  required  or  being  taken  here  relative  to  accelerated
model  plan.


Thus  ended  de  jure  the  policy  of  phase  out  and  withdrawal  and  all  the  plans
and  programs  oriented  to  it.  Shordy,  they  would  be  cancelled  out  de  facto.

C. BUILD-UP  OF  THE  U.S.  FORCE  COMMITMENT

Soon  the  whole  evolutionary  direction  of  the  U.S.  military  commitment  began
to  change.  Rather  than  diminishing,  the  magnitude  rose  thereafter.  In  early
May  the  approved  U.S.  military  strength  ceiling  for  South  Vietnam  was  raised
by  more  than  1500  so  that  total  in-country  authorization  came  to  over  17,000.
Further  increases  were  in  sight.  As  the  military  situation  in  Vietnam  failed  to
show  signs  of  ameliorating,  pressures  began  to  develop  in  late  spring  for  an
even  more  significant  increase  in  U.S.  forces.

A  special  meeting  on  Southeast  Asia  was  called  at  PACOM  Headquarters  in
Honolulu  for  1-2  June  because  of  the  unsatisfactory  progress  in  execution  of  the
National  Pacification  Plan.  There,  COMUSMACV  proposed  extending  and
intensifying  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  in  order  to  improve  the  operational  ef-
fectiveness of  the  VNAF  performance  generally.  The  idea  was  discussed  and
supported  in  principle,  and  a  stafT  working  paper  outlining  the  concept  was
prepared  by  the  conferees.  Near  the  end  of  June,  COMUSMACV  submitted  to
JCS  (info  CINCPAC,  DOD,  State,  White  House)  his  formal  proposal  recom-
mending enlargement  of  the  advisory  assistance  program.  He  reiterated,  and
offered  further  justification  for,  the  need  to  augment  the  current  advisory  detach-
ments at  the  battalion  level  and  to  extend  the  advisory  effort  at  both  the  district
and  sector  levels.  His  detailed  breakout  of  primary  personnel  requirements  came
to  a  total  of  9000  more  advisors  as  the  net  in-country  increase,  but  conceded
that  additional  administrative  and  logistic  support  requirements  would  be  sub-
stantial and  would  be  submitted  separatelv.  Also,  approximately  80  additional
U.S.  Navy  advisors  would  be  requested,  in  connection  with  recommendations
made  earlier  in  the  ''Bucklew  Report"  for  a  Junk  Force  and  other  measures  to
counter  infiltration  bv  sea.  CINCPAC  indicated  concurrence  and  recommended
approval  of  the  proposal  on  4  July.

In  the  middle  of  Julv,  the  new  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Vietnam,  General  Max-
well Taylor,  sent  an  evaluation  of  the  military  situation  to  the  Secretary  of  State,
Secretary  of  Defense,  and  JCS  that  lent  strong  support  to  COMUSMACV's
proposal.  The  Ambassador  advised  that  formal  estimates  of  regular  VC  strength
in  South  Vietnam  had  been  revised  and  now  were  raised  to  between  28,000  and
34,000.  He  explained  that  this  did  not  reflect  a  sudden  dramatic  increase,  but


Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964  199


had  been  suspected  for  the  past  two  or  three  years,  though  confirmatory
evidence  had  become  available  only  in  the  last  few  months.  There  was  thus  no
occasion  for  alarm,  but  the  new  estimate  emphasized  the  growing  magnitude
of  the  problem  and  the  need  to  increase  the  level  of  U.S./GVN  efforts.  There-
fore, additional  requirements  were  being  formulated,  including  U.S.  military
personnel  requirements,  to  support  U.S.  plans  during  the  ensuing  months  to
cope  with  the  new  understanding  of  the  realities  of  the  situation.  He  forecast
an  increase  in  U.S.  military  strength  to  around  21,000  over  the  next  six-month
period  to  meet  projected  needs.

Immediately  the  size  of  the  estimated  force  requirements  connected  with
the  proposed  expansion  of  the  advisory  effort  began  to  climb.  On  16  July
COMUSMACV  submitted  the  support  requirements  associated  with  the  pro-
gram. For  the  next  year  he  would  need,  over  and  above  the  original  900  ad-
ditional advisors  requested,  more  than  3200  other  personnel,  for  a  total  gross
military  strength  increase  of  about  4200.  The  Ambassador  in  Saigon  concurred
in  COMUSMACV's  proposed  increase  in  U.S.  military  strength  by  4200  over
the  next  nine  months,  bringing  the  total  in-country  to  nearly  22,000,  and  he
urged  prompt  action.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  recommended  approval,  as  did
CINCPAC  and  JCS,  and  on  20  July,  at  the  JCS-SecDef  meeting,  overall  support
was  given  to  the  COMUSMACV  requested  deployment  package.  The  following
day,  at  the  NSC  meeting  of  21  July,  the  President  gave  it  final  approval,  though
that  action  was  not  included  in  the  NSAM  issued  the  next  day.

As  eventually  refined,  the  total  force  increment  actually  came  to  over  4900
U.S.  personnel.  In  addition,  other  requirements  not  directly  related  to  the  ad-
visory effort  itself  were  being  generated  and  met  independently.  By  the  close  of
1964  the  year-end  U.S.  in-country  strength  figure  had  climbed  to  approximately
23,000  personnel  and  further  authorized  deployments  were  under  way  or  in
preparation.

The  actual  effect  of  "phased  withdrawals"  was  minimal.  Though  1,000  spaces
among  the  personnel  authorized  MACV  were  eliminated  in  1963,  add-ons  over-
took cut-backs.  As  an  example,  U.S.  Army  strength  in  Vietnam — the  bulk  of
the  advisory  effort — was  allocated  as  follows:


PERCENTAGE  OF  U.S.  ARMY  STRENGTH  IN  VIETNAM

Total  Army Hq  &  Spt  Aviation Communica- Special  Other
Strength Units Units tion  Units Forces  Advisers

Nov  63  10,000  17  35  15  6  27

Mar  64  10,000  19  34  13  7  27

Nov  64  14,000  28  30  12  8  22


D. POSTSCRIPT  TO  WITHDRAWAL  PLANNING

The  official  termination  of  formal  planning  towards  withdrawal  by  no  means
ended  its  attraction  as  one  issue  in  the  growing  public  debate  over  Vietnam
policy.  In  August,  1964,  the  Tonkin  Gulf  crisis  brought  Congressmen  back  in
perplexity  to  Secretary  McNamara's  statements  on  withdrawals,  and  elicited  the
following  exchange:

.  .  .  [Secretary  McNamara,  you]  have  again  always  indicated  that  you
hoped  that  by  the  end  of  this  year  there  would  have  been  a  substantial
reduction  .  .  .  Where  we  had  a  planned  reduction  of  the  number  of  troops,


r


200 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoJ.  II

and  what  appeared  to  be  a  withdrawal  of  the  United  States  from  the  area,
then  this  attack  comes,  which  would  put  us  firmly  in  the  area,  or  at  least
change  our  mind.  The  whole  thing,  to  me,  is  completely,  at  least,  not  under-
standing.

SECRETARY  McNAMARA:  The  period,  December  1961,  through
the  summer  of  1963  was  a  period  of  great  progress  within  South  Vietnam,
in  countering  the  effort  of  the  Viet  Cong  to  overthrow  that  government.
However,  starting  in  May,  1963,  you  will  recall,  a  series  of  religious  riots
developed,  controversy  within  the  country  developed,  leading  eventually
upon  November  2nd  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Diem  government.  Prior  to
that  time  in  September,  1963,  General  Taylor  and  I  had  advised  and  visited
that  country.  At  that  time,  the  progress  of  the  counter  insurgency  effort
was  so  great  it  appeared  that  we  would  be  able  to  withdraw  much  of  our
training  force  by  the  end  of  1965,  and  not  1964,  and  we  would — we  so
stated  upon  our  return.  But  following  that — and  I  should  also  mention
that  in  that  same  statement,  we  made  in  September,  1963,  we  pointed  out
the  very  serious  nature  of  the  political  difficulties  that  were  building  up  in
South  Vietnam,  because  of  the  conflict  between  the  Buddhists  and  the
Catholics,  and  the  government.

In  any  event,  as  I  say,  in  November,  1963,  the  government  was  over-
thrown. There  was  another  change  of  government  January  30th,  and  this
completely  changed  the  outlook  and  the  political  instability  that  followed  the
two  coups  has  given  the  Viet  Cong  an  opportunity  to  take  advantage  of
the  political  and  military  weakness.  They  have  taken  advantage  of  it.
It  is  now  necessary  to  add  further  U.S.  military  assistance  to  counter  that
Viet  Cong  offensive.  .  .  .

We  have  never  made  the  statement  since  September,  1963,  that  we  be-
lieved we  could  bring  the  bulk  of  the  training  forces  out  by  the  end  of  1965,
because  the  actions  in  November  and  January  made  it  quite  clear  that
would  not  be  possible.

We  have  said — as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  say  today — as  our  training  missions
are  completed,  we  will  bring  back  the  training  forces.  I  think  this  is  only
good  sense,  and  good  judgment.  We  have  certain  training  missions  that  I
hope  we  can  complete  this  year,  and  others  next  year,  and  the  forces  as-
sociated with  those  missions  should  be  brought  back.

We  have  forces  there  training  the  Vietnamese  to  flv  spotter  aircraft,  for
artillery  spotting  purposes.  I  am  verv  hopeful  that  we  can  bring  the  U.S.
forces  out  as  the  Vietnamese  acquire  that  capability.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Vietnamese  quite  clearly  need  additional  as-
sistance in  training  for  counter  guerilla  operations,  because  of  the
increased  guerrilla  activities  of  the  Viet  Cong,  and  we  are  sending  additional
special  forces  to  Vietnam  for  that  purpose.

There  will  be  a  flow  in  both  directions,  but  I  am  certain  in  the  next  sev-
eral months  the  net  flow  will  be  strongly  toward  South  Vietnam.

After  Tonkin  Gulf,  the  policv  objective  of  gradual  disengagement  from  Viet-
nam was  no  longer  relevant.  The  hope,  as  well  as  the  concept  of  phase  out  and
withdrawal,  dwindled,  since  such  withdrawal  was  now  seen  as  tantamount  to
surrendering  SVN  to  Hanoi.  The  issue  for  the  future  would  no  longer  be  with-
drawals, but  what  additional  U.S.  forces  would  be  required  to  stem  the  tide —
and  how  fast  thev  would  have  to  be  thrown  into  the  breach.


201


4. The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,
May-November,  1963

Summary  and  Analysis

The  Diem  coup  was  one  of  those  critical  events  in  the  history  of  U.S.  policy
that  could  have  altered  our  commitment.  The  choices  were  there:  ^1)  continue
to  plod  along  in  a  limited  fashion  with  Diem — despite  his  and  Nhu's  growing
unpopularity;  (2)  encourage  or  tacitly  support  the  overthrow  of  Diem,  taking
the  risk  that  the  GVN  might  crumble  and/or  acommodate  to  the  VC;  and  (3)
grasp  the  opportunity — with  the  obvious  risks — of  the  political  instability  in
South  Vietnam  to  disengage.  The  first  option  was  rejected  because  of  the  belief
that  we  could  not  win  with  Diem-Nhu.  The  third  was  very  seriously  con-
sidered a  policy  alternative  because  of  the  assumption  that  an  independent,  non-
communist  SVN  was  too  important  a  strategic  interest  to  abandon — and  be-
cause the  situation  was  not  sufficiently  drastic  to  call  into  question  so  basic  an
assumption.  The  second  course  was  chosen  mainly  for  the  reasons  the  first  was
rejected — Vietnam  was  thought  too  important;  we  wanted  to  win;  and  the
rebellious  generals  seemed  to  ofi'er  that  prospect.

In  making  the  choice  to  do  nothing  to  prevent  the  coup  and  to  tacitly
support  it,  the  U.S.  inadvertently  deepened  its  involvement.  The  inadvertence  is
the  key  factor.  It  was  a  situation  without  good  alternatives.  While  Diem's  gov-
ernment offered  some  semblance  of  stability  and  authority,  its  repressive  actions
against  the  Buddhists  had  permanently  alientated  popular  support,  with  a  high
probability  of  victory  for  the  Viet  Cong.  As  efficient  as  the  military  coup  leaders
appeared,  they  were  without  a  manageable  base  of  political  support.  When  they
came  to  power  and  when  the  lid  was  taken  off  the  Diem-Nhu  reporting  system,
the  GVN  position  was  revealed  as  weak  and  deteriorating.  And,  by  virtue  of  its
interference  in  internal  Vietnamese  affairs,  the  U.S.  had  assumed  a  significant
responsibility  for  the  new  regime,  a  responsibility  which  heightened  our  com-
mitment and  deepened  our  involvement.

The  catalytic  event  that  precipitated  the  protracted  crisis  which  ended  in  the
downfall  of  the  Diem  regime  was  a  badly  handled  Buddhist  religious  protest  in
Hue  on  May  8,  1963.  In  and  of  itself  the  incident  was  hardly  something  to
shake  the  foundations  of  power  of  most  modern  rulers,  but  the  manner  in  which
Diem  responded  to  it,  and  the  subsequent  protests  which  it  generated,  was  pre-
cisely the  one  most  likely  to  aggravate  not  alleviate  the  situation.  At  stake,  of
course,  was  far  more  than  a  religious  issue.  The  Buddhist  protest  had  a  pro-
foundly political  character  from  the  beginning.  It  sprang  and  fed  upon  the  feel-
ings of  political  frustration  and  repression  Diem's  autocratic  rule  had
engendered.

The  beginning  of  the  end  for  Diem  can,  then,  be  traced  through  events  to  the
regime's  violent  suppression  of  a  Buddhist  protest  demonstration  in  Hue  on
Buddha's  birthday.  May  8,  in  which  nine  people  were  killed  and  another  four-
teen injured.  Although  Buddhists  had  theretofore  been  wholly  quiescent  politi-
cally, in  subsequent  weeks,  a  full-blown  Buddhist  '^struggle"  movement  demon-
strated a  sophisticated  command  of  public  protest  techniques  by  a  cohesive  and


202 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

disciplined  organization,  somewhat  belying  the  notion  that  the  movement  was
an  outraged,  spontaneous  response  to  religious  repression  and  discrimination.
Nonetheless,  by  June  it  was  clear  that  the  regime  was  confronted  not  with  a
dissident  religious  minority,  but  with  a  grave  crisis  of  public  confidence.  The
Buddhist  protest  had  become  a  vehicle  for  mobilizing  the  widespread  popular
resentment  of  an  arbitrary  and  often  oppressive  rule.  It  had  become  the  focal
point  of  political  opposition  to  Diem.  Under  strong  U.S.  pressure  and  in  the
face  of  an  outraged  world  opinion,  the  regime  reached  ostensible  agreement  with
the  Buddhists  on  June  16.  But  the  agreement  merely  papered  over  the  crisis,
without  any  serious  concessions  by  Diem.  This  intransigence  was  reinforced  by
Diem's  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  and  his  wife,  who  bitterly  attacked  the  Bud-
dhists throughout  the  summer.  By  mid-August  the  crisis  was  reaching  a  breaking
point.

The  Buddhists'  demonstrations  and  protest  created  a  crisis  for  American
policy  as  well.  The  U.S.  policy  of  support  for  South  Vietnam's  struggle  against
the  Hanoi-supported  Viet  Cong  insurgency  was  founded  on  unequivocal  support
of  Diem,  whom  the  U.S.  had  long  regarded  as  the  only  national  leader  capable
of  unifying  his  people  for  their  internal  war.  When  the  Buddhist  protest  re-
vealed widespread  public  disaffection,  the  U.S.  made  repeated  attempts  to  per-
suade Diem  to  redress  the  Buddhist  grievances,  to  repair  his  public  image,  and
to  win  back  public  support.  But  the  Ngos  were  unwilling  to  bend.  Diem,  in
true  mandarin  style,  was  preoccupied  with  questions  of  face  and  survival — not
popular  support.  He  did  not  understand  the  profound  changes  his  country  had
experienced  under  stress,  nor  did  he  understand  the  requirement  for  popular
support  that  the  new  sense  of  nationalism  had  created.  The  U.S.  Ambassador,
Frederick  Nolting,  had  conducted  a  low-key  diplomacy  toward  Diem,  designed
to  bring  him  to  the  American  way  of  thinking  through  reason  and  persuasion.
He  approached  the  regime  during  the  first  weeks  of  the  Buddhist  crisis  in  the
same  manner,  but  got  no  results.  When  he  left  on  vacation  at  the  end  of  May,
his  DCM,  William  Truehart,  abandoned  the  soft  sell  for  a  tough  line.  He  took
U.S.  views  to  Diem  not  as  expressions  of  opinion,  but  as  demands  for  action.
Diem,  however,  remained  as  obdurate  and  evasive  as  ever.  Not  even  the  U.S.
threat  to  dissociate  itself  from  GVN  actions  in  the  Buddhist  crisis  brought  move-
ment.

In  late  June,  with  Nolting  still  on  leave,  President  Kennedy  announced  the
appointment  of  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  as  Ambassador  to  Vietnam  to  replace
Nolting  in  September.  In  the  policy  deliberations  then  taking  place  in  Wash-
ington, consideration  was  being  given  for  the  first  time  to  what  effect  a  coup
against  Diem  would  have.  But  Nolting  returned,  first  to  Washington  and  then
to  Saigon,  to  argue  that  the  only  alternative  to  Diem  was  chaos.  The  U.S.
military  too,  convinced  that  the  war  effort  was  going  well,  felt  that  nothing
should  be  done  to  upset  the  apple  cart.  So  Nolting  was  given  another  chance
to  talk  Diem  into  conciliating  the  Buddhists.  The  Ambassador  worked  assid-
uously at  the  task  through  Julv  and  the  first  part  of  August,  but  Diem  would
agree  onlv  to  gestures  and  half-measures  that  could  not  stop  the  grave  dete-
rioration of  the  political  situation.  Nolting  left  Vietnam  permanently  in  mid-
August  with  vague  assurances  from  Diem  that  he  would  seek  to  improve  the
climate  of  relations  with  the  Buddhists.  Less  than  a  week  later,  Nolting  was
betrayed  by  Nhu's  dramatic  August  21  midnight  raids  on  Buddhist  pagodas
throughout  Vietnam.

One  of  the  important  lessons  of  the  American  involvement  in  South
Vietnam  in  support  of  Diem  was  that  a  policy  of  unreserved  commitment  to  a


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dink  Diem,  May-November,  1963  203

particular  leadership  placed  us  in  a  weak  and  manipulable  position  on  important
internal  issues.  The  view  that  there  were  "no  alternatives"  to  Diem  greatly
limited  the  extent  of  our  influence  over  the  regime  and  ruled  out  over  the  years
a  number  of  kinds  of  leverage  that  we  might  usefully  have  employed  or  threat-
ened to  employ.  Furthermore,  it  placed  the  U.S.  in  the  unfortunate  role  of  suitor
to  a  fickle  lover.  Aware  of  our  fundamental  commitment  to  him,  Diem  could
with  relative  impunity  ignore  our  wishes.  It  reversed  the  real  power  relation-
ship between  the  two  countries.  Coupled  with  Diem's  persistent  and  ruthless
elimination  of  all  potential  political  opposition,  it  left  us  with  rather  stark  alter-
natives indeed  when  a  crisis  on  which  we  could  not  allow  delay  and  equivocation
finally  occurred.  For  better  or  worse,  the  August  12  pagoda  raids  decided  the
issue  for  us.

The  raids,  themselves,  were  carefully  timed  by  Nhu  to  be  carried  out  when
the  U.S.  was  without  an  Ambassador,  and  only  after  a  decree  placing  the  coun-
try under  military  martial  law  had  been  issued.  They  were  conducted  by  combat
police  and  special  forces  units  taking  orders  directly  from  Nhu,  not  through  the
Army  chain  of  command.  The  sweeping  attacks  resulted  in  the  wounding  of
about  30  monks,  the  arrest  of  over  1,400  Buddhists  and  the  closing  of  the
pagodas  (after  thev  had  been  damaged  and  looted  in  the  raids).  In  their  bru-
tality and  their  blunt  repudiation  of  Diem's  solemn  word  to  Nolting,  they  were
a  direct,  impudent  slap  in  the  face  for  the  U.S.  Nhu  expected  that  in  crushing
the  Buddhists  he  could  confront  the  new  U.S.  Ambassador  with  a  fait  accompli
in  which  the  U.S.  would  complainingly  acquiesce,  as  we  had  in  so  many  of  the
regime's  actions  which  we  opposed.  Moreover,  he  attempted  to  fix  blame  for  the
raids  on  the  senior  Army  generals.  Getting  word  of  the  attacks  in  Honolulu,
where  he  was  conferring  with  Nolting  and  Kilsman,  Lodge  flew  directly  to
Saigon.  He  immediately  let  it  be  known  that  the  U.S.  completely  dissociated
itself  from  the  raids  and  could  not  tolerate  such  behavior.  In  Washington  the
morning  after,  while  much  confusion  reigned  about  who  was  responsible  for
the  raids,  a  statement  repudiating  them  was  promptly  released.  Only  after
several  days  did  the  U.S.  finally  establish  Nhu's  culpability  in  the  attacks  and
publicly  exonerate  the  Army.

On  August  23,  the  first  contact  with  a  U.S.  representative  was  made  by  gen-
erals who  had  begun  to  plan  a  coup  against  Diem.  The  generals  wanted  a  clear
indication  of  where  the  U.S.  stood.  State  in  its  subsequently  controversial  reply,
drafted  and  cleared  on  a  weekend  when  several  of  the  principal  Presidential
advisors  were  absent  from  Washington,  aflRrmed  that  Nhu  s  continuation  in  a
power  position  within  the  regime  was  intolerable  (words  missing)  and  did  not,
"then,  we  must  face  the  possUDility  that  Diem  himself  cannot  be  preserved."  This
message  was  to  be  communicated  to  the  generals,  and  Diem  was  to  be  warned
that  Nhu  must  go.  Lodge  agreed  with  the  approach  to  the  generals,  but  felt  it
was  futile  to  present  Diem  vvith  an  ultimatum  he  would  only  ignore  and  one  that
might  tip  oflf  the  palace  to  the  coup  plans.  Lodge  proceeded  to  inform  only  the
generals.  They  were  told  that  the  U.S.  could  no  longer  support  a  regime  which
included  Nhu,  but  that  keeping  Diem  was  entirely  up  to  them.  This  was  com-
municated to  the  generals  on  August  27.  The  President  and  some  of  his  advisors,
however,  had  beg\m  to  have  second  thoughts  abought  switching  horses  so  sud-
denly, and  with  so  little  information  on  whether  the  coup  could  succeed,  and  if
it  did,  what  kind  of  government  it  would  bring  to  power.  As  it  turned  out,  Wash-
ington's anxiety  was  for  naught,  the  plot  was  premature,  and  after  several  un-
certain days,  its  demise  was  finally  recognized  on  August  31.

Thus  by  the  end  of  August,  we  found  ourselves  without  a  leadership  to


204 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

support  and  without  a  policy  to  follow  in  our  relations  with  the  GVN.  In  this
context  a  month-long  policy  review  took  place  in  Washington  and  in  Vietnam.
It  was  fundamentally  a  search  for  alternatives.  In  both  places  the  issue  was
joined  between  those  who  saw  no  realistic  alternatives  to  Diem  and  felt  that  his
policies  were  having  only  a  marginal  effect  on  the  war  effort,  which  they  wanted
to  get  on  with  by  renewing  our  support  and  communication  with  Diem:  and
those  who  felt  that  the  war  against  the  VC  would  not  possibly  be  won  with  Diem
in  power  and  preferred  therefore  to  push  for  a  coup  of  some  kind.  The  first
view  was  primarily  supported  by  the  military  and  the  CIA  both  in  Saigon  and  in
Washington,  while  the  latter  was  held  by  the  U.S.  Mission,  the  State  Department
and  members  of  the  White  House  staff.  In  the  end,  a  third  alternative  was
selected,  namely  to  use  pressure  on  Diem  to  get  him  to  remove  Nhu  from  the
scene  and  to  end  his  repressive  policies.  Through  September,  however,  the
debate  continued  with  growing  intensity.  Tactical  considerations,  such  as  an-
other Lodge  approach  to  Diem  about  removing  the  Nhus  and  the  effect  of  Sen-
ator Church's  resolution  calling  for  an  aid  suspension,  focused  the  discussion  at
times,  but  the  issue  of  whether  to  renew  our  support  for  Diem  remained.  The
decision  hinged  on  the  assessment  of  how  seriously  the  political  deterioration
was  affecting  the  war  effort.

In  the  course  of  these  policy  debates,  several  participants  pursued  the
logical  but  painful  conclusion  that  if  the  war  could  not  be  won  with  Diem,  and  if
his  removal  would  lead  to  political  chaos  and  also  jeopardize  the  war  effort,
ihen  the  war  was  probably  unwinnable.  If  that  were  the  case,  the  argument
went,  then  the  U.S.  should  really  be  facing  a  more  basic  decision  on  either  an
orderly  disengagement  from  an  irretrievable  situation,  or  a  major  escalation  of
the  U.S.  involvement,  including  the  use  of  U.S.  combat  troops.  These  prophetic
minority  voices  were,  however,  raising  an  unpleasant  prospect  that  the  Adminis-
tration was  unprepared  to  face  at  that  time.  In  hindsight,  however,  it  is  clear
that  this  was  one  of  the  times  in  the  history  of  our  Vietnam  involvement  when
we  were  making  fundamental  choices.  The  option  to  disengage  honorably  at
that  time  now  appears  an  attractively  low-cost  one.  But  for  the  Kennedy  Ad-
ministration then,  the  costs  no  doubt  appeared  much  higher.  In  any  event,
it  proved  to  be  unwilling  to  accept  the  implications  of  predictions  for  a  bleak
future.  The  Administration  hewed  to  the  belief  that  if  the  U.S.  be  but  willing  to
exercise  its  power,  it  could  ultimately  always  have  its  way  in  world  affairs.

Nonetheless,  in  view  of  the  widely  divergent  views  of  the  principals  in
Saigon,  the  Administration  sought  independent  judgments  with  two  successive
fact-finding  missions.  The  first  of  these  whirlwind  inspections,  by  General
Victor  Krulak,  JCS  SACSA,  and  a  State  Department  Vietnam  expert,  Joseph
Mendenhall,  from  September  7-10,  resulted  in  diametrically  opposing  reports
to  the  President  on  the  conditions  and  situation  and  was,  as  a  result,  futile.  The
Krulak-Mendenhall  divergence  was  significant  because  it  typifies  the  deficient
analysis  of  both  the  U.S.  civilian  and  militarv  missions  in  Vietnam  with  respect
to  the  overall  political  situation  in  the  countrv.  The  U.S.  civilian  observers,  for
their  part,  failed  to  fully  appreciate  the  impact  Diem  had  had  in  preventing  the
emergence  of  any  other  political  forces.  The  Buddhists,  while  a  cohesive  and
effective  miioritv  protest  movement,  lacked  a  program  or  the  means  to  achieve
power.  The  labor  unions  were  entirely  urban-based  and  appealed  to  only  a  small
segment  of  the  population.  The  clandestine  political  parties  were  small,  urban,
and  usually  elitist.  The  religious  sects  had  a  narrow  appeal  and  were  based  on
ethnic  minorities.  Onlv  the  Viet  Cong  had  any  real  support  and  influence  on  a
broad  base  in  the  countryside.  The  only  real  alternative  source  of  political


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  205

power  was  the  Army  since  it  had  a  large,  disciplined  organization  spanning  the
country,  with  an  independent  communications  and  transportation  system  and  a
strong  superiority  to  any  other  group  in  coercive  power.  In  its  reports  on  the
Army,  however,  General  Harkins  and  the  U.S.  military  had  failed  to  appreciate
the  deeply  corrosive  effect  on  internal  allegiance  and  discipline  in  the  Army
that  Diem's  loyalty  based  promotion  and  assignment  policies  had  had.  They  did
not  foresee  that  in  the  wake  of  a  coup  senior  officers  would  lack  the  cohesiveness
to  hang  together  and  that  the  temptations  of  power  would  promote  a  devisive
internal  competition  among  ambitious  men  at  the  expense  of  the  war  against
the  Viet  Cong.

Two  weeks  after  the  fruitless  Krulak-Mendenhall  mission,  with  the  Washing-
ton discussions  still  stalemated,  it  was  the  turn  of  Secretary  McNamara  and
General  Taylor,  tiie  Chairman  of  the  JCS,  to  assess  the  problem.  They  left
for  Vietnam  on  September  23  with  the  Presidential  instruction  to  appraise  the
condition  of  the  war  effort  and  the  impact  on  it  of  the  Buddhist  political  tur-
moil and  to  recommend  a  course  of  action  for  the  GVN  and  the  U.S.  They
returned  to  Washington  on  October  2.  Their  report  was  a  somewhat  contra-
dictory compromise  between  the  views  of  the  civilian  and  military  staffs.  It
affirmed  that  the  war  was  being  won,  and  that  it  would  be  successfully  con-
cluded in  the  first  three  corps  areas  by  the  end  of  1964,  and  in  the  Delta  by
1965,  thereby  permitting  the  withdrawal  of  American  advisors,  although  it  noted
that  the  political  tensions  were  starting  to  have  an  adverse  effect  on  it.  But,  more
importantly,  it  recommended  a  series  of  measures  to  coerce  Diem  into  com-
pliance with  American  wishes  that  included  a  selective  suspension  of  U.S.
economic  aid,  an  end  to  aid  for  the  special  forces  units  used  in  the  August  21
raids  unless  they  were  subordinated  to  the  Joint  General  Staff,  and  the  con-
tinuation of  Lodge's  cool  official  aloofness  from  the  regime.  It  recommended  the
public  announcement  of  the  U.S.  intention  to  withdraw  1,000  troops  by  the
end  of  the  year,  but  suggested  that  the  aid  suspensions  not  be  announced  in
order  to  give  Diem  a  chance  to  respond  without  a  public  loss  of  face.  It  con-
cluded by  recommending  against  active  U.S.  encouragement  of  a  coup,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  an  aid  suspension  was  the  one  step  the  generals  had  asked
for  in  August  as  a  sign  of  U.S.  condemnation  of  Diem  and  support  for  a  change
of  government.  The  report  was  quickly  adopted  by  Kennedy  in  the  NSC  and
a  brief,  and  subsequently  much  rued,  statement  was  released  to  the  press  on
October  2,  announcing  the  planned  withdrawal  of  1,000  troops  by  year's  end.

The  McNamara-Taylor  mission,  like  the  Krulak-Mendenhall  mission  before
it  and  the  Honolulu  Conference  in  November  after  the  coup,  points  up  the
great  difficulty  encountered  by  high  level  fact-finding  missions  and  conferences
in  getting  at  the  "facts"  of  a  complex  policy  problem  like  Vietnam  in  a  short
time.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  hasty  visits  by  harried  high  level  officials  with
overloaded  itineraries  really  add  much  in  the  way  of  additional  data  or  lucid
insight.  And  because  they  become  a  focal  point  of  worldwide  press  coverage,
they  often  raise  public  expectations  or  anxieties  that  may  only  create  additional
problems  for  the  President.  There  were  many  such  high  level  conferences  over
Vietnam.

Of  the  recommendations  of  the  McNamara-Taylor  mission,  the  proposal  for
a  selective  suspension  of  economic  aid,  in  particular  the  suspension  of  the  com-
mercial import  program,  was  the  most  significant  both  in  terms  of  its  effect,
and  as  an  example  of  the  adroit  use  or  denial  of  American  assistance  to  achieve
our  foreign  policy  objectives.  In  this  instance  economic  sanctions,  in  the  form
of  selected  aid  suspensions  in  those  programs  to  which  the  regime  would  be


206 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

most  sensitive  but  that  would  have  no  immediate  adverse  effect  on  the  war
effort,  were  used  constructively  to  influence  events  rather  than  negatively  to  '
punish  those  who  had  violated  our  wishes,  our  usual  reaction  to  coups  in  Latin
America.  The  proposal  itself  had  been  under  consideration  since  the  abortive
coup  plot  of  August.  At  that  time,  Lodge  had  been  authorized  to  suspend  aid  if  (
he  thought  it  would  enhance  the  likelihood  of  the  success  of  a  coup.  Later  in
September  he  was  again  given  specific  control  over  the  delay  or  suspension  of  l
any  of  the  pending  aid  programs.  On  both  occasions,  however,  he  had  expressed  j
doubt  about  the  utility  of  such  a  step.  In  fact,  renewal  of  the  commercial  import
program  had  been  pending  since  early  in  September,  so  that  the  adoption  of  the  i
McNamara-Taylor proposal merely formalized the existing situation  into
policy.  As  might  have  been  expected  (although  the  record  leaves  ambiguous
whether  this  was  a  conscious  aim  of  the  Administration),  the  Vietnamese
generals  interpreted  the  suspension  as  a  green  light  to  proceed  with  a  coup.

While  this  policy  was  being  applied  in  October,  Lodge  shunned  all  contact
with  the  regime  that  did  not  come  at  Diem's  initiative.  He  wanted  it  clearly
understood  that  they  must  come  to  him  prepared  to  adopt  our  advice  before
he  would  recommend  to  Washington  a  change  in  U.S.  policy.  Lodge  performed
with  great  skill,  but  inevitably  frictions  developed  within  the  Mission  as  different
viewpoints  and  proposals  came  forward.  In  particular,  Lodge's  disagreements
and  disputes  with  General  Harkins  during  October  when  the  coup  plot  was  ma-
turing and  later  were  to  be  of  considerable  embarrassment  to  Washington  when
they  leaked  to  the  press.  Lodge  had  carefully  cultivated  the  press,  and  when  the
stories  of  friction  appeared,  it  was  invariably  Harkins  or  Richardson  or  someone
else  who  was  the  villian.

No  sooner  had  the  McNamara-Taylor  mission  returned  to  Washington  and
reported  its  recommendations  than  the  generals  reopened  contact  with  the
Mission  indicating  that  once  again  they  were  preparing  to  strike  against  the
regime.  Washington's  immediate  reaction  on  October  5  was  to  reiterate  the  |
decision  of  the  NSC  on  the  McNamara-Taylor  report,  i.e.,  no  U.S.  encourage-
ment of  a  coup.  Lodge  was  instructed,  however,  to  maintain  contact  with  the
generals  and  to  monitor  their  plans  as  they  emerged.  These  periodic  contacts  i
continued  and  by  October  25,  Lodge  had  come  to  believe  that  Diem  was  un-  i
likely  to  respond  to  our  pressure  and  that  we  should  therefore  not  thwart  the  I
coup  forces.  Harkins  disagreed,  believing  that  we  still  had  not  given  Diem  a  real  i
chance  to  rid  himself  of  Nhu  and  that  we  should  present  him  with  such  an
ultimatum  and  test  his  response  before  going  ahead  with  a  coup.  He,  further- .  i
more,  had  reservations  about  the  strength  of  the  coup  forces  when  compared j  t
with  those  likely  to  remain  loyal  to  the  regime.  All  this  left  Washington  anxious i  i
and  doubtful.  Lodge  was  cautioned  to  seek  fuller  information  on  the  coup  plot, ;  j
including  a  line-up  of  forces  and  the  proposed  plan  of  action.  The  U.S.  could  not  t  I
base  its  policy  on  support  for  a  coup  attempt  that  did  not  offer  a  strong  prospect  |  t
of  success.  Lodge  was  counseled  to  consider  ways  of  delaying  or  preventing  the  1  o
coup  if  he  doubted  its  prospects  for  success.  By  this  juncture,  however.  Lodge  !  ii
felt  committed  and,  furthermore,  felt  the  matter  was  no  longer  in  our  hands.  ■  1  e
The  generals  were  taking  the  action  on  their  own  initiative  and  we  could  only  ■.
prevent  it  now  by  denouncing  them  to  Diem.  While  this  debate  was  still  going  i
on,  the  generals  struck.

Shortly  after  Ambassador  Lodge  and  Admiral  Felt  had  called  on  Diem  on
November  1,  the  generals  made  their  move,  culminating  a  summer  and  fall  of i  j
complex  intrigue.  The  coup  was  led  bv  General  Minh,  the  most  respected  of  the
senior  generals,  together  with  Generals  Don,  Kim  and  Khiem.  They  convoked


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  207

a  meeting  of  all  but  a  few  senior  officers  at  JGS  headquarters  at  noon  on  the
day  of  the  coup,  announced  their  plans  and  got  the  support  of  their  compatriots.
The  coup  itself  was  executed  with  skill  and  swiftness.  They  had  devoted  special
attention  to  ensuring  that  the  major  potentially  loyal  forces  were  isolated  and
their  leaders  neutralized  at  the  outset  of  the  operation.  By  the  late  afternoon
of  November  1,  only  the  palace  guard  remained  to  defend  the  two  brothers.  At
4:30  p.m.,  Diem  called  Lodge  to  ask  where  the  U.S.  stood.  Lodge  was  noncom-
mital  and  confined  himself  to  concern  for  Diem's  physical  safety.  The  conver-
sation ended  inconclusively.  The  generals  made  repeated  calls  to  the  palace
offering  the  brothers  safe  conduct  out  of  the  country  if  they  surrendered,  but
the  two  held  out  hope  until  the  very  end.  Sometime  that  evening  they  secretly
slipped  out  of  the  palace  through  an  underground  escape  passage  and  went  to  a
hide-away  in  Cholon.  There  they  were  captured  the  following  morning  after
their  whereabouts  was  learned  when  the  palace  fell.  Shortly  the  two  brothers
were  murdered  in  the  back  of  an  armored  personnel  carrier  en  route  to  JGS
headquarters.

Having  successfully  carried  off  their  coup,  the  generals  began  to  make  ar-
rangements for  a  civilian  government.  Vice  President  Tho  was  named  to  head
a  largely  civilian  cabinet,  but  General  Minh  became  President  and  Chairman
of  the  shadow  Military  Revolutionary  Council.  After  having  delayed  an  appro-
priate period,  the  U.S.  recognized  the  new  government  on  November  8.  As  the
euphoria  of  the  first  days  of  liberation  from  the  heavy  hand  of  the  Diem  regime
wore  off,  however,  the  real  gravity  of  the  economic  situation  and  the  lack  of
expertise  in  the  new  government  became  apparent  to  both  Vietnamese  and
American  officials.  The  deterioration  of  the  military  situation  and  the  strategic
hamlet  program  also  came  more  and  more  clearly  into  perspective.

These  topics  dominated  the  discussions  at  the  Honolulu  Conference  on
November  20  when  Lodge  and  the  country  team  met  with  Rusk,  McNamara,
Taylor,  Bell,  and  Bundy.  But  the  meeting  ended  inconclusively.  After  Lodge  had
conferred  with  the  President  a  few  days  later  in  Washington,  the  White  House
tried  to  pull  together  some  conclusions  and  offer  some  guidance  for  our  con-
tinuing and  now  deeper  involvement  in  Vietnam.  The  instructions  contained  in
NSAM  273,  however,  did  not  reflect  the  truly  dire  situation  as  it  was  to  come
to  light  in  succeeding  weeks.  The  reappraisals  forced  by  the  new  information
would  swiftly  make  it  irrelevant  as  it  was  "overtaken  by  events."

For  the  military  coup  d'etat  against  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  the  U.S.  must  accept
its  full  share  of  responsibility.  Beginning  in  August  of  1963  we  variously  au-
thorized, sanctioned  and  encouraged  the  coup  efforts  of  the  Vietnamese  generals
and  offered  full  support  for  a  successor  government.  In  October  we  cut  off
aid  to  Diem  in  a  direct  rebuff,  giving  a  green  light  to  the  generals.  We  main-
tained clandestine  contact  with  them  throughout  the  planning  and  execution  of
the  coup  and  sought  to  review  their  operational  plans  and  proposed  new  govern-
ment. Thus,  as  the  nine-year  rule  of  Diem  came  to  a  bloody  end,  our  complicity
in  his  overthrow  heightened  our  responsibilities  and  our  commitment  in  an
essentially  leaderless  Vietnam.

End  of  Summary  and  Analysis

CHRONOLOGY

8  May  1963 Hue  incident

Government  troops  fire  on  a  Buddhist  protest  demonstration,
killing  nine  and  wounding  fourteen.  The  incident  triggers  a  na-


208 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

lionwide  Buddhist  protest  and  a  crisis  of  popular  confidence  for
the  Diem  regime.  GVN  maintains  the  incident  was  an  act  of  VC
terrorism .

10  May  1963  Manifesto  of  Buddhist  clergy

A  five  point  demand  by  the  Buddhist  clergy  is  transmitted  to  the
Government.  It  calls  for  freedom  to  fly  the  Buddhist  flag,  legal
equality  with  the  Catholic  Church,  an  end  of  arrests,  punishment
of  the  perpetrators  of  the  May  8  incident,  and  indemnification  of
its  victims.

18  May  1963  Nolting  meeting  with  Diem;  Embassy  Saigon  message  1038

U.S.  Ambassador  Nolting  meets  with  Diem  and  outlines  the  steps
the  U.S.  wants  Diem  to  take  to  redress  the  Buddhist  grievances
and  recapture  pubUc  confidence.  These  include  an  admission  of
responsibility  for  the  Hue  incident,  compensation  of  the  victims,
and  a  reaffirmation  of  religious  equality  and  non-discrimination.

30  May  1963  Buddhist  demonstration

350  Buddhist  monks  demonstrate  in  front  of  the  National  As-
sembly and  announce  a  48-hour  hunger  strike.

4  Jun  1963 True  hart  meeting  with  Thuan

With  Nolting  on  leave,  charge  d'affaires  Truehart  meets  with  Sec-
retary of  State  Thuan,  and  on  instruction  from  the  State  Depart-
ment, warns  that  U.S.  support  for  the  GVN  could  not  be  main-
tained if  there  were  another  bloody  suppression  of  Buddhists.

Tho  committee  appointed

Later  that  day  the  Government  announces  the  appointment  of  an
inter-ministerial  committee  headed  by  Vice  President  Tho  to  re-
solve the  religious  issue.

5  Jun  1963 Tho  committee  meets  Buddhists

The  first  meeting  between  the  Tho  committee  and  the  Buddhist
leadership  takes  place,  after  which  each  side  publicly  questions
the  other's  good  faith  in  the  negotiations.

8  Jun  1963 Madame  Nhu  attacks  Buddhists

Madame  Nhu,  wife  of  Diem's  powerful  brother,  publicly  accuses
the  Buddhists  of  being  infiltrated  with  communist  agents.

Later  on  the  same  day,  Truehart  protests  Mme  Nhu's  remarks  to
Diem  and  threatens  to  dissociate  the  U.S.  from  any  future  repres-
sive measures  against  the  Buddhists.

1 1  Jun  1 963 First  Buddhist  suicide  by  fire

At  noon  in  the  middle  of  a  downtown  intersection,  a  Buddhist
monk,  Thich  Quang  Due,  is  immersed  in  gasoline  and  sets  him-
self afire.  His  fiery  protest  suicide  is  photographed  and  is  front
page  material  in  the  world's  newspapers.  Shock  and  indignation
are  universal.  Mme  Nhu  subsequently  refers  to  it  as  a  "barbecue."

12  Jun  1963 Truehart  repeats  U.S.  dissociation  threat

Truehart  sees  Diem  again  to  protest  his  lack  of  action  on  the
Buddhist  problem  and  says  that  Quang  Due's  suicide  has  shocked
the  world.  If  Diem  does  not  act,  the  U.S.  will  be  forced  to  dis-
sociate itself  from  him.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  209


14  Jun  1963 Tho  committee  meets  again  with  Buddhists

Under  U.S.  pressure,  negotiations  between  Vice  President  Tho's
committee  and  the  Buddhist  leadership  reopen  in  apparent  ear-
nest.

16  Jun  1963 GVN-Buddhist  communique

A  joint  GVN-Buddhist  communique  is  released  as  a  product  of
the  negotiations  that  outhnes  the  elements  of  a  settlement,  but
affixes  no  responsibility  for  the  May  8  Hue  incident.

Late  June— Buddhist  protest  intensifies

July  Buddhists  protest  activities  intensify  as  leadership  passes  from

the  discredited  moderate,  older  leaders  to  younger  militants.  The
Saigon  press  corps  is  actively  cultivated.

27  June  1963  Kennedy  announces  Lodge  appointment

President  Kennedy,  visiting  in  Ireland,  announces  the  appoint-
ment of  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  as  the  new  U.S.  Ambassador  to
South  Vietnam,  effective  in  September.

3  Jul  1963 Tho  committee  absolves  regime

Vice  President  Tho's  committee  announces  that  a  preliminary  in-
vestigation of  the  May  8  incident  has  confirmed  that  the  deaths
were  the  result  of  an  act  of  VC  terrorism.

4  Jul  1963 White  House  meeting  on  Vietnamese  situation

At  a  State  Department  briefing  for  the  President  it  is  generally
agreed  that  Diem  will  not  voluntarily  remove  Nhu.  A  discussion
of  the  likely  consequences  of  a  coup  reveals  divergent  views.

5  Jul  1963 Nolting  in  Washington

Having  cut  short  his  vacation  to  return  to  Washington  for  con-
sultations, Nolting  confers  with  Under  Secretary  of  State  George
Ball  and  voices  the  fear  that  an  attempt  to  overthrow  Diem
would  result  in  a  protracted  religious  civil  war  that  would  open
the  door  to  the  Viet  Cong.  We  should  not  abandon  Diem  yet.
While  in  Washington  he  also  sees  Secretary  McNamara.

10  Jul  1963 SNIE  53-2-63

This  special  intelligence  estimate  notes  coup  rumors  in  Vietnam
and  warns  that  a  coup  would  disrupt  the  war  effort  and  perhaps
give  the  Viet  Cong  the  opportunity  for  gains  they  had  been  hop-
ing for.  It  concludes,  however,  that  if  Diem  does  nothing  to  im-
plement the  June  16  agreements,  Buddhist  unrest  will  continue
through  the  summer  and  increase  the  likelihood  of  a  coup  at-
tempt.

11  Jul  1963 Nolting' s  return  to  Saigon

Nolting  returns  to  Vietnam  with  Washington's  blessing  to  make
one  last  attempt  to  persuade  Diem  to  conciliate  the  Buddhists.  The
hope  is  to  draw  on  the  good  will  that  Nolting  has  built  up  in  his
two  years  of  service.

Nhu  squelches  coup  plotting

At  a  special  meeting  for  all  senior  generals,  Nhu  attacks  their
loyalty  to  the  regime  for  not  having  thwarted  the  numerous  coup


210 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


plots  that  had  been  reported.  The  meeting  apparently  forestalls
any  immediae  threat  to  the  family.

15  Jul  1963 Embassy  Saigon  message  85

Deeply  resentful  of  Truehart's  tough  pressure  tactics,  Nolting
meets  with  Diem  and  attempts  to  mollify  him.  He  convinces  Diem
to  make  a  nationwide  radio  address  with  concessions  to  the
Buddhists.

19  Jul  1963 Diem  speaks  on  radio

Complying  with  the  letter  but  not  the  spirit  of  Nolting's  request,
Diem  delivers  a  brief  cold  radio  address  that  makes  only  very
minor  concessions  to  the  Buddhists  and  asks  for  harmonv  and
support  of  the  Government.

McNamara  press  conference

At  a  press  conference,  Secretary  McNamara  says  the  war  is
progressing  well  and  the  Buddhist  crisis  has  not  yet  affected  it.

5  Aug  1963 Second  Buddhist  suicide

A  second  Buddhist  monk  commits  suicide  by  burning  himself  to
death  in  the  continuing  protest  against  the  Diem  regime.

14  Aug  1963  Nolting-Diem  meeting

In  their  final  meeting  before  Nolting's  departure  from  Vietnam,
Diem  promises  to  make  a  public  statement  repudiating  Mme
Nhu's  inflammatory  denunciations  of  the  Buddhists.  Nolting  left
the  next  day.

15  Aug  1963  New  York  Herald  Tribune  article  by  Marguerite  Higgins

Diem's  promised  public  statement  takes  the  form  of  an  interview
with  Marguerite  Higgins,  conservative  correspondent  of  the  New
York  Herald  Tribune.  Diem  asserts  that  conciliation  has  been  his
policy  toward  the  Buddhists  all  along  and  the  family  is  pleased
with  Lodge's  appointment.

18  Aug  1963  Generals  decide  on  martial  law

Ten  senior  Armv  generals  meet  and  decide  that  in  view  of  the
deteriorating  political  situation,  they  will  ask  Diem  for  a  declara-
tion of  martial  law  to  permit  them  to  return  monks  from  outside
Saigon  to  their  own  provinces  and  pagodas  and  thus  reduce  ten-
sions in  the  capital.

20  Aug  1963 Generals  propose  martial  law  to  Nhu  and  Diem

A  small  group  of  generals  meets  first  with  Nhu  and  then  with
Diem  to  propose  that  martial  law  be  decreed  forthwith.  Diem
approves  the  proposal  and  the  decree  takes  effect  at  midnight.

21  Aug  1963 Nhu's  forces  attack  pagodas

Under  the  cover  of  the  military  martial  law,  shortly  after  mid-
night, forces  loval  to  Nhu  and  under  his  orders  attack  pagodas
throughout  Vietnam,  arresting  monks  and  sacking  the  sacred  build-
ings. Over  30  Buddhists  are  injured  and  over  1400  arrested.  The
attack  is  a  shattering  repudiation  of  Diem's  promises  to  Nolting.
The  Embassy  is  taken  by  surprise.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  211
Lodge  confers  with  Molting  and  Hilsman

First  news  of  the  attacks  reaches  Lodge  in  Honolulu  where  he  is
conferring  with  Nolting  and  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Hilsman.
He  is  dispatched  immediately  to  Vietnam.

Washington  reaction

At  9:30  a.m.  a  stiff  statement  is  released  by  State  deploring  the
raids  as  a  direct  violation  of  Diem's  assurances  to  the  U.S.  But
first  intelligence  places  the  blame  for  them  on  the  Army,  not  Nhu.

22  Aug  1963 Lodge  arrives  in  Saigon

After  a  brief  stop  in  Tokyo,  Lodge  arrives  in  Saigon  at  9:30  p.m.
The  situation  still  remains  confused.

23  Aug  1963  CIA  Information  Report  TDCS  DB-3/656,252

General  Don,  armed  forces  commander  under  the  martial  law
decree,  has  contacted  a  CAS  officer  and  asked  whv  the  U.S.  was
broadcasting  the  erroneous  story  that  the  Army  had  conducted
the  pagoda  raids.  Nhu's  special  forces  were  responsible.  The  U.S.
should  make  its  position  known.  A  separate  contact  by  another
general  with  a  member  of  the  mission  had  brought  another  in-
quiry as  to  the  U.S.  position.  The  query  is  clear.  Would  we
support  the  Army  if  it  acted  against  Nhu  and/or  Diem?

Student  demonstrations

Large  student  protest  demonstrations  on  behalf  of  the  imprisoned
Buddhists  take  place  at  the  faculties  of  medicine  and  pharmacy
at  the  University  of  Saigon.  They  are  a  dramatic  break  with  the
tradition  of  student  apathy  to  politics  in  Vietnam.  The  regime
reacts  with  massive  arrests.

24  Aug  1963  Embassy  Saigon  message  316,  Lodge  to  Hilsman

Lodge  lays  the  blame  for  the  raids  at  Nhu's  feet  and  states  that
his  influence  is  significantly  increased.  But,  in  view  of  the  loyalty
of  Saigon  area  commanders,  a  coup  attempt  would  be  a  "shot  in
the  dark."

State  message  243,  State  to  Lodge

Subsequently  known  as  the  "Aug  24  cable,"  this  controversial
message  acknowledges  Nhu's  responsibility  for  the  raids  and  says
that  U.S.  can  no  longer  tolerate  his  continuation  in  power.  If
Diem  is  unable  or  unwilling  to  remove  him,  the  generals  are  to
be  told  that  the  U.S.  will  be  prepared  to  discontinue  economic
and  military  support,  accept  the  obvious  implication  and  will
promise  assistance  to  them  in  any  period  of  interim  breakdown  of
the  GVN.  Lodge's  permission  is  requested  for  a  VOA  broadcast
exonerating  the  Army  of  responsibility  for  the  Aug  21  raids.

25  Aug  1963  Embassy  Saigon  message

Lodge  approves  the  proposed  course  of  action  but  sees  no  reason
to  approach  Diem  first.  Diem  will  not  remove  the  Nhus  and  it
would  merely  tip  off  the  palace  to  the  impending  military  action.

CAS  Saigon  message  0292

Lodge,  Harkins,  and  Richardson  meet  and  agree  on  an  approach
to  the  generals  with  the  information  in  State's  243.


212 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

26  Aug  1963  VOA  broadcast

Early  on  this  Monday  morning,  VOA  in  South  Vietnam  broad-
casts the  press  stories  placing  blame  for  the  Aug  21  raids  on  Nhu
and  absolving  the  Army.  It  also  broadcast  press  speculation  that
the  U.S.  is  contemplating  an  aid  suspension.

Lodge  presents  credentials  to  Diem

Later  the  same  morning,  Lodge  presents  his  credentials  to  Diem,
after  an  early  morning  meeting  with  Harkins  and  Richardson,  at
which  they  agree  on  the  details  of  the  approach  to  the  generals.

NSC  meeting

The  Aug  24  cable  of  instructions  had  been  drafted,  cleared  and
sent  on  a  weekend  with  McNamara,  McCone,  Rusk  and  the  Presi-
dent all  out  of  town.  The  NSC  meeting  on  Monday  morning  re-
veals that  these  top  advisors  have  reservations  about  proceeding
hastily  with  a  coup  when  we  lack  so  much  basic  information
about  its  leadership  and  chances.  Lodge  is  asked  for  more  details.

27  Aug  1963  CAS  agents  meet  generals

CAS  agents  Conein  and  Spera  meet  with  Generals  Khiem  and
Khanh  respectively.  Khiem  tells  Conein  that  other  participants  are
Generals  Minh,  Kim,  Thieu  and  Le,  and  that  General  Don  was
aware  of  the  plot  and  approved,  but  was  too  exposed  to  partici-
pate.

Embassy  Saigon  message  364

Lodge  gives  an  optimistic  appraisal  of  the  balance  of  forces  for  a
coup  and  expresses  confidence  in  the  identified  leaders.

NSC  meeting

At  the  now  daily  NSC  meeting  in  Washington,  the  State  Depart-
ment participants  generally  favor  going  ahead  with  the  coup,
while  the  Defense  Department,  both  civilian  and  military,  pre-
fers another  try  with  Diem.

28  Aug  1963  MACV  message  1557

Harkins  goes  on  record  with  doubts  about  the  line-up  of  forces
for  the  coup  and  sees  no  reason  for  our  "rush  approval."

State  message  269,  President  to  Lodge;  and  ICS  message  3385,
Taylor  to  Harkins

Concerned  by  the  difi'ering  views  of  Lodge  and  Harkins,  as  well
as  the  division  of  opinion  in  Washington,  the  President  asks  the
Ambassador  and  MACV  for  their  separate  appraisals.

29  Aug  1963  CAS  agents  meet  Minh

At  this  meeting,  arranged  by  Minh,  he  asks  for  clear  evidence
that  the  U.S.  will  not  betray  them  to  Nhu.  He  is  unwilling  to
discuss  the  details  of  his  plan.  When  asked  what  would  constitute
a  sign  of  U.S.  support,  he  replies  that  the  U.S.  should  suspend
economic  aid  to  the  regime.

Embassy  Saigon  message  375

Lodge  replies  to  the  Presidential  query  that  the  U.S.  is  irrevocably
committed  to  the  generals.  He  recommends  showing  the  CAS


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  213

messages  to  them  to  establish  our  good  faith  and  if  that  is  in-
sufficient, he  recommends  a  suspension  of  economic  aid  as  they
requested.

MACV  message  1566

Harkins  reply  to  Taylor  suggests  that  one  last  effort  be  made  with
Diem  in  the  form  of  an  ultimatum  demanding  Nhu's  removal.
Such  a  move  he  feels  will  strengthen  the  hand  of  the  generals,
not  imperil  them.

NSC  meeting

Another  inconclusive  meeting  is  held  with  the  division  of  opinion
on  a  U.S.  course  of  action  still  strong.  The  result  is  to  leave  policy
making  in  Lodge's  hands.

State  message  272

Lodge  is  authorized  to  have  Harkins  show  the  CAS  messages  to
the  generals  in  exchange  for  a  look  at  their  detailed  plans.  He  is
further  authorized  to  suspend  U.S.  aid  at  his  discretion.

31  Aug  1963  MACV  message  1583;  Embassy  Saigon  message  391 ;  and  CAS
Saigon  message  0499

Harkins  meets  with  Khiem  who  tells  him  that  Minh  has  called  off
the  coup.  Military  was  unable  to  achieve  a  favorable  balance  of
forces  in  the  Saigon  area  and  doubts  about  whether  the  U.S.  had
leaked  their  plans  to  Nhu  were  the  deciding  factors.  A  future  at-
tempt is  not  ruled  out.

NSC  meeting;  MGen  Victor  C.  Krulak,  Memo  for  the  Record,
Vietnam  Meeting  at  the  State  Dept.

With  the  demise  of  the  coup  plot  confirmed,  the  NSC  (without
the  President)  meets  to  try  to  chart  a  new  policy  for  Vietnam.
The  discussion  reveals  the  divergence  between  the  mihtary  desire
to  get  on  with  the  war  and  repair  relations  with  Diem,  and  the
State  Department  view  that  continued  support  for  Diem  will
eventually  mean  a  loss  of  the  war  as  more  and  more  of  the  South
Vietnamese  are  alienated  from  it.  No  decisions  are  taken.

Kennedy  TV  interview

The  President,  in  a  TV  interview  with  CBS  News'  Walter  Cron-
kite,  expresses  his  disappointment  with  Diem's  handling  of  the
Buddhist  crisis  and  concern  that  a  greater  effort  is  needed  by  the
GVN  to  win  popular  support.  This  can  be  done,  he  feels,  "with
change  in  policy  and  perhaps  with  personnel  .  .  ."

Lodge  meets  with  Nhu

Avoiding  any  contact  with  Diem,  Lodge  nonetheless  meets  with
Nhu  who  announces  his  intention  to  quit  the  Government  as  a
sign  of  the  progress  of  the  campaign  against  the  VC.  Mme  Nhu
and  Archbishop  Thuc,  another  of  Diem's  brothers,  are  to  leave
the  country  on  extended  trips  shortly.

NSC  meeting

The  NSC  decides  to  instruct  Lodge  to  reopen  "tough"  negotiations
with  Diem  and  to  start  by  clarifying  to  him  the  U.S.  position.
Robert  Kennedy  speculates  that  if  the  war  can  be  won  neither


2  Sep  1963


6  Sep  1963


e


214 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

with  Diem  nor  in  the  event  of  a  disruptive  coup,  we  should  per-
haps be  considering  a  U.S.  disengagement.  Secretary  McNamara
proposes  a  fact-finding  trip  by  General  Krulak,  and  State  sug-
gests including  Joseph  Mendenhall,  a  senior  FSO  with  Vietnam
experience.  They  leave  later  the  same  day.

7  Sep  1963 Archbishop  Thuc  leaves  Vietnam

With  the  intercession  of  the  Vatican  and  the  Papal  Delegate  in
Saigon,  Archbishop  Thuc  leaves  the  country  for  Rome  on  an
extended  visit.

8  Sep  1963 AID  Director  Bell  TV  interview

In  a  televised  interview,  AID  Director  Bell  expresses  concern
that  Congress  might  cut  aid  to  South  Vietnam  if  the  Diem  Gov-
ernment does  not  change  its  repressive  policies.

9  Sep  1963 Mme  Nhu  leaves  Vietnam

Mme  Nhu  departs  from  Saigon  to  attend  the  World  Parliamen-
tarians Conference  in  Belgrade  and  then  to  take  an  extended
trip  through  Europe  and  possibly  the  U.S.

Kennedy  TV  interview

Appearing  on  the  inaugural  program  of  the  NBC  Huntley-Brink-
ley  News,  the  President  says  he  does  not  believe  an  aid  cut-off
would  be  helpful  in  achieving  American  purposes  in  Vietnam  at
present.

10  Sep  1963 NSC  meeting

Krulak  and  Mendenhall  return  from  Vietnam  after  a  whirlwind
four  day  trip  and  make  their  report  to  the  NSC.  With  them  are
John  Mecklin,  USIS  Director  in  Saigon,  and  Rufus  Phillips,
USOM's  Director  of  Rural  Programs.  Krulak's  report  stresses
that  the  war  is  being  won  and,  while  there  is  some  dissatisfaction
in  the  military  with  Diem,  no  one  would  risk  his  neck  to  remove
him.  A  continuation  of  present  policies  under  Diem  will  yield
victory.  Mendenhall  presents  a  completely  contradictory  view  of
the  situation.  A  breakdown  of  civil  administration  was  possible
and  a  religious  civil  war  could  not  be  excluded  if  Diem  was  not
replaced.  The  war  certainly  could  not  be  won  with  Diem.  Phillips
and  Mecklin  support  Mendenhall  with  variations.  Nolting  agrees
with  Krulak.  All  the  disagreement  prompts  the  President  to  ask
the  two  emissaries,  "You  two  did  visit  the  same  country,  didn't
you?"

11  Sep  1963 Embassy  Saigon  message  478

Lodge  reverses  himself  in  suggesting  a  complete  study  of  kinds
of  economic  aid  suspension  that  might  be  used  to  topple  the
recjime.

White  House  meeting

^^'hite  House  decides  to  hold  economic  aid  renewal  in  abeyance
pending  a  complete  examination  of  how  it  might  be  used  to  pres-
sure Diem.

12  Sep  1963 Senator  Church's  Resolution

With  White  House  approval,  Senator  Church  introduces  a  resolu-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  J 963  215


tion  in  the  Senate  condemning  the  South  Vietnamese  Govern-
ment for  its  repressive  handling  of  the  Buddhist  problem  and  call-
ing for  an  end  to  U.S.  aid  unless  the  repressions  are  abandoned.

14  Sep  1963 State  message  411

Lodge  is  informed  that  approval  of  the  $18.5  milHon  commercial
import  program  is  deferred  until  basic  policy  decisions  on  Viet-
nam have  been  made.

16  Sep  1963 Martial  law  ends

Martial  law  is  ended  throughout  the  country.

17  Sep  1963 NSC  meeting

Two  alternative  proposals  for  dealing  with  Diem  are  considered.
The  first  would  use  an  escalatory  set  of  pressures  to  get  him  to
do  our  bidding.  The  second  would  involve  acquiescence  in  recent
GVN  actions,  recognition  that  Diem  and  Nhu  are  inseparable,
and  an  attempt  to  salvage  as  much  as  possible  from  a  bad  situa-
tion. A  decision  is  taken  to  adopt  the  first  as  policy,  and  also  to
send  Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  on  a  fact-gathering
mission.

21  Sep  1963 White  House  press  release

The  forthcoming  McNamara-Taylor  mission  is  announced  to  the
press  by  the  White  House.

White  House  instructions  to  M cN amara—T aylor
The  White  House  instructions  for  the  mission  ask  the  two  men
to  (1)  appraise  the  status  of  the  military  effort;  (2)  assess  the
impact  on  the  war  effort  of  the  Buddhist  crisis;  (3)  recommend
a  course  of  action  for  the  GVN  to  redress  the  problem  and  for
the  US.  to  get  them  to  do  it;  and  (4)  examine  how  our  aid  can
further  no.  3.

23  Sep  1963 McNamara-Taylor  mission  departs

The  McNamara-Taylor  party  leaves  Washington  for  its  ten  day
trip  to  Vietnam.

25  Sep  1963 Opening  meeting  of  McNamara-Taylor  with  country  team

The  disagreement  between  Harkins  and  Lodge  about  the  situation
in-country  and  the  progress  of  the  war  surfaces  immediately  in
this  first  conference.  McNamara  spends  several  subsequent  days
touring  various  parts  of  Vietnam  to  appraise  the  war  first  hand
and  talk  with  U.S.  and  Vietnamese  officers.

27  Sep  1963 National  Assembly  elections

As  announced  earlier,  and  at  the  end  of  a  pro  forma  one  week
campaign,  the  GVN  holds  nation-wide  elections  for  the  National
Assembly  with  predictably  high  turnouts  and  majorities  for  Gov-
ernment candidates.

Embassy  Saigon  messages  602  and  608

Aware  that  McNamara  and  Taylor  are  tasked  to  recommend  uses
of  the  aid  program  to  pressure  Diem,  both  Lodge  and  Brent,  the
USOM  Director,  go  on  record  against  them.


I

l'  216 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

29  Sep  1963 McNamara,  Taylor  and  Lodge  see  Diem

In  their  protocol  call  on  Diem,  and  after  his  two-hour  monologue,
McNamara  is  able  to  pointedly  stress  that  the  political  unrest  and
Government  repressive  measures  against  the  Buddhists  were  un-
dermining the  U.S.  war  effort.  Diem  seems  unimpressed,  but
does  ask  Taylor  for  his  appraisal,  as  a  military  man,  of  the
progress  of  the  war.

30  Sep  1963 McNamara,  Taylor  and  Lodge  meet  Vice  President  Tho

Tho  stresses  to  the  two  visitors  the  gravity  of  the  political  deterio-
ration and  the  negative  effect  it  was  having  on  war.  He  questions
the  success  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program.  Later  that  day,  the
McNamara-Taylor  party  leaves  South  Vietnam  for  Honolulu.

2  Oct  1963 SecDef  Memo  for  the  President:  Report  of  the  McNamara-Taylor
mission

After  a  day  in  Honolulu  to  prepare  a  report,  McNamara  and
Taylor  return  to  Washington  and  present  their  findings  and  recom-
mendations to  a  morning  NSC  meeting.  Their  long  report  repre-
sents a  compromise  between  the  military  and  the  civilian  views.
It  confirms  the  progress  of  the  war,  but  warns  of  the  dangers
inherent  in  the  current  political  turmoil  and  recommends  pres-
sures against  Diem  to  bring  changes.  Militarily,  it  calls  for  greater
GVN  effort,  especially  in  the  Delta  and  in  clear  and  hold  opera-
tions, and  a  consolidation  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program.  It
proposes  the  announcement  of  the  plans  to  withdraw  1,000
American  troops  by  year's  end.  To  put  political  pressure  on  Diem
to  institute  the  reforms  we  want,  it  recommends  a  selective  aid
suspension,  an  end  of  support  for  the  special  forces  responsible
for  the  pagoda  raids,  and  a  continuation  of  Lodge's  aloofness  from
the  regime.  It  recommends  against  a  coup,  but  qualifies  this  by
suggesting  that  an  alternative  leadership  be  identified  and  culti-
vated. The  recommendations  are  promptly  approved  by  the  Presi-
dent.

White  House  press  release

A  statement  followins  the  meetins  is  released  as  recommended
by  McNamara  and  Tavlor  that  reiterates  the  U.S.  commitment
to  the  struggle  against  the  VC,  announces  the  1.000  man  troop
withdrawal,  and  dissociates  the  U.S.  from  Diem's  repressive
policies.  It  does  not,  however,  announce  the  aid  suspensions.

CAS  Saigon  message  1385

CAS  agent  Conein  "accidentallv"  meets  General  Don  at  Tan  Son
Nhut.  Don  asks  him  to  come  to  Nha  Trans  that  evening.  With
Embassy  approval  Conein  keeps  the  appointment.  Don  states
that  there  is  an  active  plot  among  the  generals  for  a  coup,  and
that  General  Minh  wants  to  see  Conein  on  Oct  5  to  discuss  de-
tails. The  kev  to  the  plan,  according  to  Don,  is  the  conversion  of
III  Corps  Commander,  General  Dinh.

5  Oct  1963 NSC  meeting

The  President  approves  detailed  recommendations  of  the  McNa-
mara-Taylor mission  for  transmission  to  Lodge.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  217
CAP  message  63560

".  .  .  President  today  approved  recommendation  that  no  initia-
tive should  now  be  taken  to  give  any  active  covert  encouragement
to  a  coup.  There  should,  however,  be  urgent  covert  effort  ...  to
identify  and  build  contacts  with  possible  alternative  leadership  as
and  when  it  appears."

CAS  Saigon  message  1445

With  Lodge's  approval,  and  probably  before  receipt  of  foregoing
message,  Conein  meets  with  General  Minh.  Minh  says  he  must
know  the  U.S.  position  on  a  coup  in  the  near  future.  The  GVN's
loss  of  popular  support  is  endangering  the  whole  war  effort.  Three
possible  plans  are  mentioned,  one  involving  assassination.  Conein
is  noncommital.

CAS  Saigon  message  34026

Lodge  recommends  that  when  Conein  is  contacted  again,  he  be
authorized  to  say  that  the  U.S.  will  not  thwart  a  coup,  that  we
are  willing  to  review  plans,  and  that  we  will  continue  support  to
a  successor  regime.

Richardson  recalled

His  identity  having  been  compromised  in  recent  press  stories
about  internal  policy  struggles  in  the  U.S.  mission,  CIA  Chief  of
Station,  John  Richardson,  is  recalled  to  Washington.

6  Oct  1963 CAP  message  63560

Washington  clarifies  its  views  on  a  coup  by  stating  that  the  U.S.
will  not  thwart  such  a  move  if  it  offers  prospects  of  a  more  effec-
tive fight  against  the  VC.  Security  and  deniability  of  all  contacts
is  paramount.

7  Oct  1963 National  Assembly  convenes

The  newly  elected  National  Assembly  convenes  to  hear  Diem's
State  of  the  Union  address.  Diem  speaks  mainly  of  Vietnam's  past
progress  under  his  rule,  playing  down  the  current  political  crisis
and  making  only  scant  reference  to  U.S.  aid.

Mme  Nhu  arrives  in  U.S.

Mme  Nhu  arrives  in  the  U.S.  from  Europe  for  a  three-week
speaking  tour.  She  immediately  launches  into  vituperative  attacks
on  the  U.S.  and  its  role  in  Vietnam.

8  Oct  1963 UN  General  Assembly  vote

The  UN  General  Assembly,  after  a  strong  debate  with  many
voices  denouncing  Diem's  anti-Buddhist  policy,  votes  to  send  a
fact-finding  team  to  Saigon  to  investigate  the  charges  of  repres-
sion.

10  Oct  1963 CAS  officer  meets  Minh

A  CAS  officer  reportedly  meets  with  Minh  and  conveys  the  U.S.
position  that  it  will  neither  encourage  nor  thwart  a  coup  attempt,
but  would  hope  to  be  informed  about  it.

17  Oct  1963 GVN  informed  of  aid  cut-off  to  special  forces

Acting  for  the  Ambassador,  General  Stillwell,  MACV  J-3,  in-


218 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II

forms  Secretary  Thuan  that  U.S.  aid  for  the  special  forces  units
responsible  for  the  Aug  21  raids  is  being  suspended  until  they  are
transferred  to  the  field  and  placed  under  JGS  command.

22  Oct  1963 Department  of  State,  INK  Research  Memo  RFE90

The  State  Department  publishes  a  controversial  research  memo-
randum which  takes  issue  with  the  Pentagon's  optimistic  reading
of  the  statistical  indicators  on  the  progress  of  the  war.  The  memo
states  that  certain  definitely  negative  and  ominous  trends  can
be  identified.

Harkins  sees  Don

General  Harkins  sees  General  Don,  and  in  a  conversation  whose
interpretation  is  subsequently  disputed,  tells  him  that  U.S.  officers
should  not  be  approached  about  a  coup  as  it  distracts  them  from
their  job,  fighting  the  VC.  Don  takes  it  as  U.S.  discouragement
of  a  coup.

23  Oct  1963 CAS  agent  meets  Don

General  Don  renews  contact  with  Conein  to  ask  for  clarification
of  U.S.  policy  after  Harkins'  statement  to  him  of  the  previous
day.  Conein  repeats  Washington  guidance,  which  relieves  Don.
Conein  asks  for  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  coup  and  its  plan;
Don  promises  to  provide  politi-

[material  missing]

24  Oct  J  963 Diem  invites  Lodge  to  Dalat

Diem  extends  an  invitation  to  Lodge  and  his  wife  to  spend  Sun-
day, Oct  27,  with  him  at  his  villa  in  Dalat.  Lodge  is  pleased,  Diem
has  come  to  him.

1st  CAS  agent  meeting  with  Don

Conein  meets  with  Don  in  the  morning  and  the  latter  reports
that  Harkins  had  corrected  his  previous  remarks  and  apologized
for  any  misunderstanding.  The  coup  is  set  to  take  place  before
Nov  2  and  he  will  meet  Conein  later  that  day  to  review  the
plans.

2nd  CAS  agent  meeting  with  Don

In  the  evening,  Don  tells  Conein  that  the  coup  committee  voted
not  to  reveal  anv  plans  because  of  concern  about  security  leaks.
He  promises  to  turn  over  to  Conein  for  Lodge's  Eyes  Only  the
operation  plan  two  days  before  the  coup  occurs.

UN  fact-finding  team  arrives  in  Saigon

The  UN  fact-finding  team  arrives  in  Saigon  and  begins  its  investi-
gation.

25  Oct  1963 CAS  Saigon  message  1964

Lodge  argues  that  the  time  has  come  to  go  ahead  with  a  coup
and  we  should  not  thwart  the  maturing  plot.  He  takes  strong
exception  to  Harkins  reservations  about  the  determination  and
ability  of  the  plotters  to  carry  oft'  the  coup.

CAP  message  63590

Bundy,  replving  for  the  White  House,  is  concerned  about  the


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  219

dangers  of  U.S.  support  for  a  coup  that  fails.  We  must  be  in  a
position  to  judge  the  prospects  for  the  coup  plan  and  discourage
any  effort  with  likelihood  of  failure.

26  Oct  1963 Vietnamese  National  Day

Diem  reviews  the  troops  in  the  National  Day  parade  before  scant
crowds  with  Lodge  and  all  other  diplomatic  personnel  in  attend-
ance. The  coup  had  originally  been  scheduled  for  this  day.

27  Oct  1963 Lodge-Diem  meeting

As  planned,  Lodge  travels  to  Dalat  with  Diem  and  engages  in  a
day-long  conversation  that  produces  little  results.  Diem  makes
his  standard  complaints  against  the  U.S.,  and  whenever  Lodge
asks  what  he  is  planning  to  do  about  specific  U.S.  requests,  he
changes  the  subject.  At  one  point,  he  does  inquire,  however,  about
resumption  of  the  commercial  import  program.  Lodge  asks  what
movement  he  will  make  on  our  requests.  Diem  changes  the  sub-
ject. Lodge's  feelings  of  frustration  confirm  his  conviction  that
we  cannot  work  with  Diem.

Buddhist  suicide

A  seventh  Buddhist  monk  commits  suicide  by  fire.

28  Oct  1963 Don  contacts  Lodge

At  the  airport  in  the  morning  prior  to  departing  for  the  dedica-
tion of  an  atomic  energy  facility  in  Dalat,  General  Don  ap-
proaches Lodge  and  asks  if  Conein  is  authorized  to  speak  for
the  U.S.  Lodge  says  yes.  Don  then  affirms  the  need  for  the  coup
to  be  completely  Vietnamese.  Lodge  agrees,  but  when  he  asks
about  timing,  Don  replies  that  the  generals  are  not  yet  ready.

CAS  agent  meets  Don

That  evening  Conein  meets  Don  again  and  the  latter  says  that
the  plans  may  be  available  for  Lodge  only  four  hours  before  the
coup.  Lodge  should  not  change  his  plans  to  go  to  Washington  on
Oct  31  as  this  would  tip  off  the  palace.  Some  details  of  the  or-
ganization of  the  coup  committee  are  discussed.

29  Oct  1963 CINCPAC  alerts  task  force

CINCPAC  alerts  a  naval  and  air  task  force  to  stand  off  Vietnam
for  possible  evacuation  of  American  dependents  and  civilians  if
required.

NSC  meeting

A  decision  is  made  at  the  NSC  meeting  to  have  Lodge  fully  in-
form Harkins  on  the  coup  plotting  and  arrangements,  since  if
Lodge  leaves,  Harkins  will  be  in  charge.  Concern  is  also  regis-
tered at  the  differing  views  of  the  two  men  toward  a  coup.

Special  forces  transferred  from  Saigon

In  the  first  preparatory  act  of  the  coup,  General  Dinh  orders
Colonel  Tung's  special  forces  out  of  Saigon  for  maneuvers.  It  is
unclear  whether  the  action  came  as  a  part  of  the  generals'  coup  or
Nhu's  psuedo  coup.


220 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

30  Oct  1963 MACV  messages  2028,  2033,  and  2034

Belatedly  apprised  of  the  continuing  contacts  with  the  generals
and  the  U.S.  role  in  the  coup  plotting,  General  Harkins  dispatches
three  angry  cables  to  Taylor  in  which  he  disagrees  with  Lodge's
interpretation  of  the  U.S.  policy.  He  understands  it  to  be  no
active  covert  encouragement.  He  opposes  personally  a  coup  and
doesn't  think  the  generals  have  the  forces  to  pull  one  off.  •

CAS  Washington  message  79109

The  White  House  is  now  genuinely  concerned  at  the  Saigon  dis-
pute and  tells  Lodge  it  believes  we  still  have  the  power  to  call
off  the  coup  if  we  choose  to.

CAS  Saigon  message  2063

Lodge  replies  to  Washington  that  he  is  powerless  to  stop  the  coup,
the  matter  is  entirely  in  Vietnamese  hands.  Harkins  does  not
concur.

CAS  Washington  message  79407

To  clear  the  air  and  redefine  U.S.  policy,  Washington  sent  an-
other cable  to  Lodge.  The  U.S.  cannot  accept  as  a  policy  position
that  it  has  no  power  to  prevent  the  coup.  If  the  coup  does  not
have  high  prospects  of  success,  Lodge  should  intercede  with  the
generals  to  have  it  delayed  or  called  off.  More  detailed  informa-
tion on  the  plans  is  urgently  requested.  Specific  instructions  to
guide  U.S.  action  during  a  coup  are  issued.  They  prescribe  strict
noninvolvement  and  somewhat  less  strict  neutrality.

31  Oct  1963 Lodge  defers  departure

Lodge,  who  had  been  scheduled  to  leave  for  Washington  for  high-
level  conferences,  defers  his  departure  because  of  the  tense  atmos-
phere and  the  apparent  immenence  of  the  coup.

1  Nov  1963 Lodge  and  Felt  meet  with  Diem

10:00  a.m.  Admiral  Felt,  who  is  visiting,  and  Lodge  call  on  Diem,  who  re-
iterates many  of  the  points  he  made  to  McNamara  a  month
earlier.  At  the  end  of  the  meeting,  Diem  takes  Lodge  aside  and
indicates  he  is  ready  to  talk  about  what  the  U.S.  wants  him  to  do.
Felt  leaves  Saigon  after  the  meeting.

Late  Coup  units  begin  to  deploy

morning The  first  coup  units  begin  to  deploy  in  and  around  Saigon.

12:00  a.m. Officers  meet  at  JGS

The  coup  committee  has  convened  a  meeting  of  all  senior  Viet-
namese officers  except  Generals  Dinh  and  Cao  at  JGS.  There  they
are  informed  of  the  coup  and  asked  to  support  it.  All  except
Colonel  Tung  do.  Their  pledges  of  support  are  taped.  Tung  is
taken  into  custodv  later  to  be  executed.  The  CNO  was  killed  en
route  by  an  escort.  A  CAS  officer  is  invited  to  the  JGS  and  main-
tains telephone  contact  with  the  Embassy  throughout  the  coup.

1:45  p.m. U.S.  notified

General  Don  calls  General  Stiilwell,  J-3  to  General  Harkins,  and
informs  him  that  the  coup  is  under  way.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  221

2:00  p.m. Key  installations  taken

About  his  time  coup  forces  are  seizing  the  key  installations  in
Saigon,  including  the  post  office,  police  headquarters,  radio  sta-
tions, airport,  naval  headquarters,  etc.  They  were  also  deploying
for  attacks  on  the  palace  and  the  palace  guard  barracks  and  to
block  any  counter-attack  from  outside  the  city.

4:00  p.m. First  skirmishes,  Diem  told  to  surrender

By  about  this  time  the  first  skirmish  was  taking  place  at  the  palace
and  guard  barracks.  Failing  to  reach  General  Dinh,  Diem  and
Nhu  realize  the  coup  is  serious.  The  generals  called  slf.ortly  after
this  and  told  the  two  brothers  to  surrender.  They  refused.

4:30  p.m. Coup  broadcast,  Diem  calls  Lodge

The  generals  go  on  radio,  announce  the  coup  and  demand  the
resignation  of  Diem  and  Nhu.  At  the  same  time,  Diem  is  calling
Lodge.  He  asks  Lodge  where  the  U.S.  stands.  Lodge  replies  that
the  U.S.  cannot  yet  have  a  view.  He  expresses  concern  for  Diem's
safety,  and  the  conversation  ends  there.

5:00  p.m. Generals  again  call  Diem  to  demand  surrender

Repeated  calls  are  now  made  to  the  palace  to  get  Diem  to  sur-
render. All  the  generals  try.  Colonel  Tung  is  put  on  the  phone
and  tells  Diem  he  is  a  captive.  Tung  is  then  taken  outside  and
executed.  Diem  and  Nhu  now  frantically  call  all  unit  commanders
but  can  find  none  loyal.  Outside  sporadic  firing  continues.

8:00  p.m. Diem  and  Nhu  flee

Sometime  in  the  early  evening,  probably  about  eight  o'clock,  the
two  brothers  escape  from  the  palace  through  one  of  the  secret
underground  passages  constructed  for  just  such  emergencies.  They
are  met  by  a  Chinese  friend  who  takes  them  to  a  previously  pre-
pared hideaway  in  Cholon.  There  they  spend  the  night  in  tele-
phone contact  with  the  palace.

9:00  p.m. Palace  bombarded

At  about  nine  o'clock,  the  attackers  launch  an  artillery  and
armored  barrage  on  the  palace  and  its  defenders  which  lasts
through  the  night.

2  Nov  1963 Assault  on  the  palace  begins

3:30  a.m. The  tank  and  infantry  assault  on  the  Gia  Long  palace  begins.

6:20  a.m. Diem  calls  generals  to  surrender

Diem  calls  General  Don  from  the  Cholon  hideout  to  surrender,
but  does  not  tell  his  location.

6:30  a.m. Palace  falls

Realizing  the  hopelessness  of  the  situation.  Diem  issues  a  cease
fire  order  to  the  palace  guard  and  the  palace  falls  to  the  insurgents.
Colonel  Thao,  the  commander  of  the  attacking  forces,  learns  of
Diem's  whereabouts  and  with  JGS  permission  goes  to  arrest  him.

6:45  a.m. Diem  and  Nhu  again  escape

Arriving  at  the  Cholon  house,  Thao  calls  JGS  and  is  overheard
by  the  brothers  who  escape  to  a  nearby  Catholic  church.


.f


222 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  11

6:50  a.m. Diem  and  Nhu  are  captured

Diem  again  calls  General  Don  and  surrenders,  this  time  uncondi-
tionally. He  and  Nhu  are  taken  prisoner  shortly  thereafter  and
are  murdered  in  the  back  of  an  armored  personnel  carrier  en
route  to  JGS.

afternoon Vice  President  Tho  confers  on  new  government

Vice  President  Tho  enters  into  intensive  conferences  and  negoti-
ations with  the  coup  committee  on  the  composition  of  a  new
interim  government  which  he  will  head.

3  Nov  1963 Lodge  meets  with  Generals  Don  and  Kim

Generals  Don  and  Kim  call  on  Lodge  at  the  Embassy  and  apolo-
gize for  the  absence  of  Minh  who  is  closeted  with  Tho  working
on  the  composition  of  the  new  government.  A  two-tiered  govern-
ment is  expected.  A  military  committee  chaired  bv  General  Minh
will  supervise  a  largely  civilian  cabinet  under  Tho's  Prime  Minis-
tership. Lodge  promises  the  immediate  restoration  of  aid  programs
and  assures  the  generals  of  forthcoming  U.S.  recognition.

4  Nov  1963 Lodge  meets  with  Genera]  Minh

On  instructions  from  Washington,  Lodge  meets  with  Minh  and
Don  and  urges  them  to  make  a  clarifying  statement  on  the  deaths
of  Diem  and  Nhu  to  allay  anxieties  about  the  new  leaders.  Minh
promises  to  do  so  and  to  announce  the  new  government  soon.

5  Nov  1963 New  government  announced

The  new  government  is  announced  with  Minh  as  President  and
Chief  of  the  Militarv  Committee.  Tho  is  Premier,  Minister  of
Economy  and  Minister  of  Finance.  Don  is  Minister  of  Defense
and  Dinh  is  Minister  of  Security.  Most  other  posts  are  filled  by
civilians,  but  there  is  a  noticeable  absence  of  well-known  oppo-
nents to  Diem.  A  later  announcement  suspends  the  1956  constitu-
tion, and  outlines  the  structure  and  functions  of  the  new  interim
government.

6  Nov  1963 Composition  of  the  Military  Revolutionary  Council  announced

Saigon  Radio  announces  the  composition  of  the  new  Military
Revolutionary  Council  with  Minh  as  Chairman  and  including  all
important  generals  except  Khanh.

7  Nov  1963 NLF  makes  post-coup  policy  statement

In  a  post-coup  policy  statement,  the  NLF  lists  eight  demands  of '
the  new  regime,  all  but  one  of  which  the  Minh-Tho  Government
was  going  to  do  anN-way.

Brent  meets  with  Tho  on  U.S.  aid

USOM  Director  Brent  meets  with  Tho  who  indicated  that  all
economic  aid  questions  would  be  handled  directly  by  his  office.  It
was  further  agreed  that  a  high-level  Vietnamese  commission  would  ,
work  with  a  similar  group  in  the  U.S.  mission  to  establish  eco-  i
nomic  and  aid  policies  and  levels.

8  Nov  1963 U.S.  recognizes  new  government

Lodge  calls  on  the  new  Foreign  Minister,  Pham  Dang  Lam,  and


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  223

presents  a  note  of  U.S.  recognition.  The  new  government  will
be  heavily  dependent  on  the  U.S.  in  all  areas.

9  Nov  1963 Embassy  Saigon  message  986

In  the  weekly  progress  report,  the  mission  notes  the  greatly  in-
creased VC  activity  in  the  week  following  the  coup.  The  return  of
coup  units  to  the  field  will  reverse  this  trend,  it  is  hoped.

12  Nov  1963  CINCPAC  message  to  JCS  120604Z  63

CINCPAC  takes  note  that  the  statistical  indicators  for  the  war
(VC  attacks,  weapons  loss  ratio,  VC  defections)  show  deteriora-
tion dating  back  to  the  summer.

17  Nov  1963  NLF  releases  stronger  set  of  demands

Its  first  set  of  demands  having  been  effectively  preempted  by  the
new  Minh  Government,  the  NLF  release  a  new  and  stronger  set
of  demands  including  that  the  U.S.  influence  be  eliminated,  the
fighting  be  halted  and  that  a  coalition  government  be  established.
For  the  first  time  the  NLF  states  that  reunification  of  Vietnam
is  an  objective.

20  Nov  1963  Honolulu  Conference

The  entire  country  team  meets  with  Rusk,  McNamara,  Taylor,
Bundy,  and  Bell  to  review  the  current  situation.  Lodge  voices
optimism  about  the  new  government,  but  notes  the  inexperience  of
the  new  leaders.  We  should  not  press  them  too  hard.  We  should
secondly  pledge  aid  to  them  in  at  least  the  amounts  we  were  giv-
ing it  to  Diem.  Brent  notes  the  economic  naivety  of  the  generals
and  indicates  the  need  for  greater  U.S.  technical  assistance  to
the  government.  Harkins'  assessment  is  guardedly  optimistic,
taking  note  of  the  higher  than  average  VC  activity  in  the  week
after  the  coup.  The  determination  of  the  new  leaders  impressed
him,  but  he  was  concerned  about  the  disruptions  that  wholesale
replacements  of  province  and  district  chiefs  might  have.

Press  release  after  Honolulu  Conference

The  press  release  gives  few  details  but  does  reiterate  the  U.S.  in-
tention to  withdraw  1 ,000  troops  by  the  end  of  the  year.

22  Nov  1963  Lodge  confers  with  the  President

Having  flown  to  Washington  the  day  after  the  conference.  Lodge
meets  with  the  President  and  presumably  continues  the  kind  of
report  given  in  Honolulu.

23  Nov  1963  NSAM  273

Drawing  together  the  results  of  the  Honolulu  Conference  and
Lodge's  meeting  with  the  President,  NSAM  273  reaffirms  the
U.S.  commitment  to  defeat  the  VC  in  South  Vietnam.  It  re-
iterates the  plan  to  withdraw  1,000  troops  by  year's  end  and  to
end  the  war  in  the  first  three  corps  areas  by  the  end  of  1964  and
in  the  Delta  by  the  end  of  1965.  U.S.  support  for  the  new  regime
is  confirmed  and  aid  in  at  least  the  amounts  given  to  Diem  is
guaranteed.  The  Delta  is  to  be  the  area  of  concentration  for  all
military,  political,  economic  and  social  efforts.  And  clandestine
operations  against  the  North  and  into  Laos  are  authorized.


224 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


I.  INTRODUCTION

In  the  spring  of  1963,  the  regime  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  seemed  to  exhibit  no
more  signs  of  advanced  decay  or  imminent  demise  than  might  have  been  dis-
cerned since  1958  or  1959.  Only  in  hindsight  can  certain  developments  be
identified  as  salient.  Of  these,  certainly  the  steadily  increasing  influence  of  the
Nhus  was  the  most  ominous.  Nhu  came  more  and  more  to  dominate  Diem  in
the  last  year  of  the  Diem  rule.  But  as  his  power  increased,  Nhu's  grip  on  reality
seems  to  have  slipped  and  he  was  reported  in  that  last  year  to  have  been  smok-
ing opium  and  to  have  been  mentally  ill.  Meanwhile,  Mme.  Nhu  was  developing
a  power  obsession  of  her  own.  The  catastrophic  effect  of  their  influence  during
the  ensuing  crisis,  however,  was  impossible  to  have  predicted.  As  one  perceptive
observer  noted,  the  Ngo  family  "had  come  to  power  with  a  well-developed
persecution  complex  and  had  subsequently  developed  a  positive  mania  for
survival."

Another  source  of  concern  should  have  been  the  regime's  self-imposed
isolation  from  the  populace.  It  had  left  the  peasants  apathetic,  a  cause  for  real
concern  in  a  struggle  with  the  zealous,  doctrinaire  Viet  Cong:  but,  more  im-
portantly, it  had  alienated  large  portions  of  the  restive  urban  population  who
felt  most  directly  the  impact  of  the  regime's  arbitrary  rule.  The  regime,  in  fact,
had  no  real  base  of  political  support  and  relied  on  the  loyalty  of  a  handful  of
key  military  commanders  to  keep  it  in  power  by  forestalling  any  overthrow.
The  loyalty  of  these  men  was  bought  with  promotions  and  favors.  Graft
and  corruption  should  also  have  drawn  concern,  even  if  governmental  dis-
honesty was  endemic  in  Asia,  and  probably  not  disproportionate  at  that  time
in  South  Vietnam.

It  was  not,  however,  the  strains  that  these  problems  had  placed  on  the  Viet-
namese political  structure  that  were  ultimately  decisive.  The  fundamental  weak-
ness of  the  Diem  regime  was  the  curious  rigidity  and  political  insensitivity  of  its
mandarin  style  in  the  face  of  a  dramatic  crisis  of  popular  confidence.

With  regard  to  the  war,  the  consensus  of  the  U.S.  military  mission  and  the
U.S.  intelligence  community  in  the  spring  of  1963  was  that  the  military  situa-
tion in  South  Vietnam  was  steadily  improving  and  the  war  was  beginning  to
be  won.  A  National  Intelligence  Estimate  in  April  1963  concluded  that  the
infusion  of  U.S.  advisors  had  begun  to  have  the  desired  effect  of  strengthening
the  ARVN  and  increasing  its  aggressiveness.  [Doc.  121]  The  Viet  Cong  re-
tained good  strength,  but  could  be  contained  by  the  ARVN  if  they  did  not
receive  a  great  increase  in  external  support.  Statistical  indices  showed  a  decline
in  Viet  Cong  attacks  from  the  previous  year,  increased  ARVN  offensive  activity,
and  improvement  in  the  weapons  loss  ratio.  Continuing  problems  were  Diem's
loyalty-based  officer  promotion  policv,  ARVN  desertions  and  AWOL's,  poor
intelligence,  and  low  grade  NCO's  and  company  grade  officers.  Nonetheless,
the  overall  outlook  was  sanguine.  Particular  reason  for  encouragement  was  the
adoption  in  February  1963  of  the  National  Campaign  Plan  urged  by  the  U.S.  The
hopeful  prospects  were  summarized  for  Secretary  McNamara  in  a  briefing  paper
for  the  Honolulu  Conference  of  May  6:

The  over-all  situation  in  Vietnam  is  improving.  In  the  military  sector
of  the  counterinsurgencv.  we  are  winning.  Evidences  of  improvement  are
clearlv  visible,  as  the  combined  impact  of  the  programs  which  involve  a
long  lead  time  begin  to  have  efltect  on  the  Viet  Cong.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  225

Even  as  seasoned  an  observer  of  insurgency  as  Sir  Robert  Thompson,  Chief  of
the  British  Advisory  Mission,  was  able  to  report  that,  "Now,  in  March  1963,
I  can  say,  and  in  this  I  am  supported  by  all  members  of  the  mission,  that  the
Government  is  beginning  to  win  the  shooting  war  against  the  Viet  Cong."

One  reason  for  the  optimism  of  these  appraisals  was  the  vigor  with  which
the  government,  under  the  direction  of  Nhu,  was  pushing  the  Strategic  Hamlet
Program.  Nhu  had  been  initially  cool  to  the  idea,  but  once  he  established  the
U.S.  willingness  to  fund  the  program,  he  focused  on  it  as  the  principal  vehicle
of  the  counterinsurgency  campaign  and  as  an  excellent  means  of  extending  the
oligarchy's  control  into  the  countryside.  In  April  the  GVN  claimed  it  had  com-
pleted 5,000  strategic  hamlets  and  had  another  2,000  under  construction.  There
was  already  official  U.S.  misgiving,  however,  about  the  quality  of  many  of  the
hamlets  and  about  overextension  of  the  country's  limited  human  resources  in
the  program's  frantic  rate  of  expansion.  Nevertheless,  field  reports  seemed  to
support  the  success  of  the  program  which  was  seen  as  the  key  to  the  struggle
against  the  Viet  Cong.

U.S.-GVN  relations  in  the  spring  of  1963  were  beginning  to  show  signs  of
accumulating  stress.  As  the  U.S.  commitment  and  involvement  deepened,  fric-
tions between  American  advisors  and  Vietnamese  counterparts  at  all  levels
increased.  Diem,  under  the  influence  of  Nhu,  complained  about  the  quantity
and  zeal  of  U.S.  advisors.  They  were  creating  a  colonial  impression  among  the
people,  he  said.  Diem  chose  to  dramatize  his  complaint  by  delaying  agreement
on  the  commitment  of  South  Vietnamese  funds  for  joint  counterinsurgency
projects.  The  issue  was  eventually  resolved,  but  the  sensitivity  to  the  growing
U.S.  presence  remained  and  as  the  long  crisis  summer  wore  on,  it  gradually
became  a  deep-seated  suspicion  of  U.S.  motives.

The  report  of  the  Mansfield  mission,  published  in  March,  further  exacerbated
relations  between  the  two  countries.  Diem  and  Nhu  were  particularly  incensed
by  its  praise  of  Cambodian  neutralism  and  criticism  of  their  regime.  Coup
rumors  began  to  circulate  again  that  spring,  and  the  prevailing  palace  state  of
mind  hearkened  back  to  suspicions  of  U.S.  complicity  in  the  abortive  1960
coup.  Mme.  Nhu's  ascorbic  public  criticism  of  the  United  States  was  a  further
source  of  friction.  By  May  1963,  these  problems  in  U.S.-GVN  relations  were
already  substantial  enough  to  preoccupy  officials  of  both  governments.  Within
a  matter  of  weeks,  however,  events  thrust  them  into  the  background  of  a  far
more  serious  crisis.

II. THE  BUDDHIST  CRISIS:  MAY  8-AUGUST  21

A.  THE  CRISIS  ERUPTS

The  incident  in  Hue  on  May  8,  1963,  that  precipitated  what  came  to  be
called  the  Buddhist  crisis,  and  that  started  the  chain  of  events  that  ultimately
led  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Diem  regime  and  the  murder  of  the  Ngo  brothers,
happened  both  inadvertently  and  unexpectedly.  No  one  then  foresaw  that  it
would  generate  a  national  opposition  movement  capable  of  rallying  virtually
all  non-communist  dissidence  in  South  Vietnam.  More  importantly,  no  one
then  appreciated  the  degree  of  alienation  of  Vietnam's  people  from  their  gov-
ernment, nor  the  extent  of  the  political  decay  within  the  regime,  a  regime  no
longer  capable  of  coping  with  popular  discontent.

The  religious  origins  of  the  incident  are  traceable  to  the  massive  flight  of


226 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Catholic  refugees  from  North  Vietnam  after  the  French  defeat  in  1954.  An
estimated  one  million  Catholics  fled  the  North  and  resettled  in  the  South.
Diem,  animated,  no  doubt,  by  religious  as  well  as  humanitarian  sympathy,  and
with  an  eye  to  recruiting  political  support  from  his  coreligionists,  accorded
these  Catholic  refugees  preferential  treatment  in  land  redistribution,  relief  and
assistance,  commercial  and  export-import  licenses,  government  employment,
and  other  GVN  largess.  Because  Diem  could  rely  on  their  loyalty,  they  came
to  fill  almost  all  important  civilian  and  military  positions.  As  an  institution,
the  Catholic  Church  enjoyed  a  special  legal  status.  The  Catholic  primate,  Ngo
Dinh  Thuc,  was  Diem's  brother  and  advisor.  But  prior  to  1962,  there  had  been
no  outright  discrimination  against  Buddhists.  However,  among  South  Vietnam's
3-4  million  practicing  Buddhists  and  the  80%  of  the  population  who  were
nominal  Buddhists,  the  regime's  favoritism,  authoritarianism,  and  discrimina-
tion created  a  smoldering  resentment.

In  April  1963,  the  government  ordered  provincial  officials  to  enforce  a  long-
standing but  generally  ignored  ban  on  the  public  display  of  religious  flags.  The
order  came  just  after  the  officially  encouraged  celebrations  in  Hue  commem-
orating the  25th  anniversary  of  the  ordination  of  Ngo  Dinh  Thuc,  the  Arch-
bishop of  Hue,  during  which  Papal  flags  had  been  prominently  flown.  The  order
also  came,  as  it  happened,  just  prior  to  Buddha's  birthday  (May  8) — a  major
Buddhist  festival.  Hue,  an  old  provincial  capital  of  Vietnam,  was  the  only  real
center  of  Buddhist  learning  and  scholarship  in  Vietnam  and  its  university  had
long  been  a  center  of  left-wing  dissidence.  Not  surprisingly,  then,  the  Buddhists
in  Hue  defiantly  flew  their  flags  in  spite  of  the  order  and,  when  the  local  admin-
istration appeared  to  have  backed  down  on  the  ban,  were  emboldened  to  hold  a
previously  scheduled  mass  meeting  on  May  8  to  commemorate  Buddha's  birth-
day. Seeing  the  demonstration  as  a  challenge  to  family  prestige  (Hue  was  also
the  capital  of  the  political  fief  of  another  Diem  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Can)  and  to
government  authority,  local  officials  tried  to  disperse  the  crowds.  When  pre-
liminary efforts  produced  no  results,  the  Catholic  deputy  province  chief  ordered
his  troops  to  fire.  In  the  ensuing  melee,  nine  persons  were  killed,  including  some
children,  and  fourteen  were  injured.  Armored  vehicles  allegedly  crushed  some
of  the  victims.  The  Diem  governm.ent  subsequently  put  out  a  story  that  a  Viet
Cong  agent  had  thrown  a  grenade  into  the  crowd  and  that  the  victims  had  been
crushed  in  a  stampede.  It  steadfastly  refused  to  admit  responsibility  even  when
neutral  observers  produced  films  showing  government  troops  firing  on  the
crowd.

Diem's  mandarin  character  would  not  permit  him  to  handle  this  crisis  with
the  kind  of  flexibility  and  finesse  it  required.  He  was  incapable  of  publicly  j
acknowledging  responsibility  for  the  tragedv  and  seeking  to  conciliate  the  angry  ••
Buddhists.  He  was  convinced  that  such  a  public  loss  of  face  would  undermine
his  authority  to  rule,  oblivious  to  the  fact  that  no  modern  ruler  can  long  ignore
massive  popular  disaffection  whatever  his  own  particular  personal  virtues  may  1 1
be.  So  the  government  clung  tenaciously  to  its  version  of  what  had  occurred.  I'

The  following  dav  in  Hue  over  10,000  people  demonstrated  in  protest  of  the
killings.  Ii  was  the  first  of  the  long  series  of  protest  activities  with  which  the
Buddhists  were  to  pressure  the  regime  in  the  next  four  months.  The  Buddhists
rapidly  organized  themselves,  and  on  Mav  10.  a  manifesto  of  the  Buddhist
clergy  was  transmitted  to  the  government  demanding  freedom  to  fly  their  flag,
legal  equality  with  the  Catholic  Church,  an  end  of  arrests  and  freedom  to  prac-
tice their  beliefs,  and  indemnification  of  the  victims  of  the  May  8th  incident
with  punishment  for  its  perpetrators.  These  five  demands  were  officially  pre-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  227

sented  to  President  Diem  on  May  15,  and  the  Buddhists  held  their  first  press
conference  after  the  meeting.  PubHcized  hunger  strikes  and  meetings  continued
throughout  May,  but  Diem  continued  to  drag  his  feet  on  placating  the  dis-
senters or  settling  issues.  On  May  30,  about  350  Buddhist  monks  demonstrated
in  front  of  the  National  Assembly  in  Saigon,  and  a  48-hour  hunger  strike  was
announced.  On  June  3,  a  demonstration  in  Hue  was  broken  up  with  tear  gas
and  several  people  were  burned,  prompting  charges  that  the  troops  had  used
mustard  gas.  On  June  4,  the  government  announced  the  appointment  of  an
interministerial  committee  headed  by  Vice  President  Tho  to  resolve  the  reli-
gious issue,  but  by  this  time  such  gestures  were  probably  too  late.  Large  portions
of  the  urban  population  had  rallied  to  the  Buddhist  protest,  recognizing  in  it  the
beginnings  of  genuine  political  opposition  to  Diem.  On  June  8,  Mme.  Nhu
exacerbated  the  problem  by  announcing  that  the  Buddhists  were  infiltrated  by
communists.

Throughout  the  early  days  of  the  crisis,  the  U.S.  press  had  closely  covered
the  events  and  brought  them  to  the  attention  of  the  world.  On  June  11,  the
press  was  tipped  off  to  be  at  a  downtown  intersection  at  noon.  Expecting  an-
other protest  demonstration,  they  were  horrified  to  witness  the  first  burning
suicide  by  a  Buddhist  monk.  Thich  Quang  Due's  fiery  death  shocked  the  world
and  electrified  South  Vietnam.

Negotiations  had  been  taking  place  between  Vice  President  Tho's  committee
and  the  Buddhists  since  June  5,  with  considerable  acrimonious  public  question-
ing of  good  faith  by  both  sides.  After  the  suicide,  the  U.S.  intensified  its  already
considerable  pressure  on  the  government  to  mollify  the  Buddhists,  and  to  bring
the  deteriorating  political  situation  under  control.  Finally,  on  June  16,  a  joint
GVN-Buddhist  communique  was  released  outlining  the  elements  of  a  settle-
ment, but  affixing  no  responsibility  for  the  May  8  incident.  Violent  suppression
by  the  GVN  of  rioting  the  next  day,  however,  abrogated  the  spirit  of  the  agree-
ment. The  Nhus,  for  their  part,  immediately  undertook  to  sabotage  the  agree-
ment by  secretly  calling  on  the  GVN-sponsored  youth  organizations  to
denounce  it.  By  late  June,  it  was  apparent  that  the  agreement  was  not  meant  as
a  genuine  gesture  of  conciliation  by  Diem,  but  was  only  an  effort  to  appease  the
U.S.  and  paper  over  a  steadily  widening  fissure  in  internal  politics.

The  evident  lack  of  faith  on  the"  part  of  the  government  in  the  June  16
agreement  discredited  the  conciliatory  policy  of  moderation  that  the  older
Buddhist  leadership  had  followed  until  that  time.  In  late  June,  leadership  of  the
Buddhist  movement  passed  to  a  younger,  more  radical  set  of  monks,  with  more
far-reaching  political  objectives.  They  made  intelligent  and  skillful  political
use  of  a  rising  tide  of  popular  support.  Carefully  planned  mass  meetings  and
demonstrations  were  accompanied  with  an  aggressive  press  campaign  of  oppo-
sition to  the  regime.  Seizing  on  the  importance  of  American  news  media,  they
cultivated  U.S.  newsmen,  tipped  them  off  to  demonstrations  and  rallies,  and
carefully  timed  their  activities  to  get  maximum  press  coverage.  Not  surprisingly,
the  Ngo  family  reacted  with  ever  more  severe  suppression  to  the  Buddhist  activ-
ists, and  with  acrimonious  criticism  and  even  threats  to  the  American  newsmen.

Early  in  July,  Vice  President  Tho's  committee  announced  that  a  preliminary
investigation  of  the  May  8  incident  had  confirmed  that  the  deaths  were  the
result  of  an  act  of  Viet  Cong  terrorism.  Outraged,  the  Buddhists  denounced
the  findings  and  intensified  their  protest  activities.  On  July  19,  under  U.S.
pressure,  Diem  made  a  brief  two-minute  radio  address,  ostensibly  an  expression
of  conciliation  to  the  Buddhists,  but  so  written  and  coldly  delivered  as  to  destroy
in  advance  any  effect  its  announced  minor  concessions  might  have  had.


228 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Within  the  regime,  Nhu  and  his  wife  were  severely  criticizing  Diem  for
caving  in  under  Buddhist  pressure.  Mme.  Nhu  publicly  ridiculed  the  Buddhist
suicide  as  a  "barbecue,"'  accused  the  Buddhist  leaders  of  being  infiltrated  with
communists,  and  construed  the  protest  movement  as  Viet  Cong  inspired.  Both
Nhu  and  his  wife  worked  publicly  and  privately  to  undermine  Diem's  feeble
efforts  at  compromise  with  the  Buddhists,  and  rumors  that  Nhu  was  considering
a  coup  against  his  brother  began  to  circulate  in  July.

A  U.S.  Special  National  Intelligence  Estimate  on  July  10  concluded  with  the
perceptive  prediction  that  if  the  Diem  regime  did  nothing  to  implement  the
June  16  agreement  and  to  appease  the  Buddhists,  the  likelihood  of  a  summer
of  demonstrations  was  great,  with  the  strong  possibility  of  a  non-communist
coup  attempt.  [Doc.  21]  By  mid- August  a  week  before  Nhu  launched  general
raids  on  Buddhist  pagodas  in  Saigon  and  elsewhere,  the  CIA  had  begun  to  note
malaise  in  the  bureaucracy  and  the  army:

Since  the  Buddhist  dispute  with  the  Diem  government  erupted  on  8
May,  there  have  been  a  series  of  reports  indicating  not  only  intensified
plotting  and  grumbling  among  Diem's  traditional  non-Communist  critics,
but  renewed  restiveness  and  growing  disaffection  in  official  civilian  and
military  circles  over  Diem's  handling  of  the  dispute.

This  estimate  went  on  to  detail  numerous  rumors  of  coup  plots  in  existence
since  at  least  late  June.  But  Nhu,  in  a  bold  move  designed  to  frighten  coup
plotters,  and  to  throw  them  off  guard,  had  called  in  the  senior  generals  on
July  11,  reprimanded  them  for  not  having  taken  action  to  squelch  revolt,  and
questioned  their  loyalty  to  the  regime.  Nhu's  move  seemed  to  have  tempo-
rarily set  back  all  plans  for  an  overthrow.  CIA  also  reported  rumors  that  Nhu
himself  was  planning  a  "false  coup"  to  draw  out  and  then  crush  the  Buddhists.

In  August,  Buddhist  militancy  reached  new  intensity;  monks  burned  them-
selves to  death  on  the  5th,  15th,  and  18th.  The  taut  political  atmosphere  in
Saigon  in  mid-August  should  have  suggested  to  U.S.  observers  that  a  showdown
was  on  the  way.  When  the  showdown  came,  however,  in  the  August  21  raids  on
the  pagodas,  the  U.S.  mission  was  apparently  caught  almost  completely  off  guard.

B. THE  U.S.  "NO  ALTERNATIVES  TO  DIEM"  POLICY

The  explanation  of  how  the  U.S.  mission  became  detached  from  the  realities
of  the  political  situation  in  Saigon  in  August  1963,  is  among  the  most  ironic  and
tragic  of  our  entire  involvement  in  Vietnam.  In  dealing  with  Diem  over  the
years,  the  U.S.  had  tried  two  radically  different  but  ultimately  equally  unsuc-
cessful approaches.  Under  Ambassador  Elbridge  Durbrow  from  the  late  '50s
until  1961,  we  had  used  tough  pressure  tactics  to  bring  Diem  to  implement
programs  and  ideas  we  felt  necessary  to  win  the  war  against  the  Viet  Cong.  But
Diem  soon  learned  that  the  U.S.  was  committed  to  him  as  the  only  Vietnamese
leader  capable  of  rallving  his  countrv  to  defeat  the  communists.  Armed  with
this  knowledge  he  could  defer  action  or  ignore  the  Ambassador  with  relative
impunity.  He  became  adept  at  playing  the  role  of  offended  lover.  Thus  by  1961,
Durbrow  was  cut  off  from  the  palace,  with  little  information  about  what  was
going  on  and  e\en  less  influence  over  events.  Under  Frederick  Nolting  as  U.S.
Ambassador,  the  U.S.  pursued  a  verv  different  tactic.  Forewarned  not  to  allow
himself  to  be  isolated,  Nolting  set  out  through  the  patient  cultivation  of  Diem's
friendship  and  trust  to  secure  a  role  for  himself  as  Diem's  close  and  confidential


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  229

advisor.  But  there  had  been  no  basic  change  in  the  American  belief  that  there
was  no  ahernative  to  Diem,  and  Diem  must  have  quickly  sensed  this,  for  he
continued  to  respond  primarily  to  family  interest,  at  best  only  listening  impa-
tiently to  Nolting's  carefully  put  complaints,  secure  in  the  knowledge  that
ultimately  the  U.S.  would  not  abandon  him  no  matter  what  he  did.  Both  tactics
failed  because  of  American  commitment.  No  amount  of  pressure  or  suasion
was  likely  to  be  effective  in  getting  Diem  to  adopt  ideas  or  policies  which  he
did  not  find  to  his  liking,  since  we  had  communicated  our  unwillingness  to  con-
sider the  ultimate  sanction — withdrawal  of  support  for  his  regime.  We  had
ensnared  ourselves  in  a  powerless,  no  alternatives  policy.

The  denouement  of  this  policy,  the  ultimate  failure  of  all  our  efforts  to
coerce,  cajole  and  coax  Diem  to  be  something  other  than  the  mandarin  that
he  was,  came  in  the  midnight  attack  on  the  pagodas  on  August  21.  And  it
created  a  fundamental  dilemma  for  U.S.  policy  with  respect  to  Diem.  On  the
one  hand,  withdrawal  of  support  for  his  regime  was  the  only  lever  likely  to
force  Diem  to  redress  the  Buddhist  grievances  and  to  make  the  political  reforms
prerequisite  for  popular  support  in  the  common  fight  against  the  Viet  Cong.
On  the  other  hand,  withdrawal  of  U.S.  support  for  Diem  would  be  signal  U.S.
approval  for  an  anti-Diem  coup,  with  all  its  potential  for  political  instability
and  erosion  of  the  war  effort.  We  found  ourselves  in  this  predicament  not  en-
tirely unexpectedly.

In  May  1963,  though  it  had  failed  to  anticipate  the  Buddhist  upheaval,  the
U.S.  mission  nevertheless  quickly  recognized  the  gravity  of  the  threat  to  Diem
and  reported  it  to  Washington.  Nolting  met  with  Diem  on  May  18  and  outlined
the  steps  he  felt  were  necessary  to  retrieve  the  situation.  These  included  a
government  acknowledgment  of  responsibility  for  the  Hue  incident,  an  offer
to  compensate  the  families  of  the  victims,  and  a  reaffirmation  of  religious  equal-
ity and  nondiscrimination.  As  an  alternative,  he  suggested  an  investigatory
commission.  Diem's  noncommittal  response  led  the  Ambassador  to  think  that
Diem  really  believed  the  Viet  Cong  had  caused  the  deaths  and  that  the
Buddhists  had  provoked  the  incident.  Diem  felt  the  U.S.  was  over-reacting  to
the  events.  Thus,  at  a  critical  time  Nolting,  in  spite  of  his  two  years  of  careful
groundwork,  was  unable  to  exercise  any  real  influence  over  Diem.  Nolting  left
on  a  well-deserved  holiday  and  home  leave  shortly  after  this  frustrating  meeting.

By  the  end  of  May,  Washington  had  become  concerned  at  Diem's  failure  to
act,  and  at  the  widening  Buddhist  protest.  The  Charge  d' Affaires,  William  True-
hart,  was  instructed  to  press  the  GVN  for  action.  Working  with  Secretary  of
State  for  Defense  Thuan,  Truehart  tried  to  move  the  government  toward  negoti-
ations with  the  Buddhists.  After  the  demonstrations  in  Hue  on  June  3,  the  State
Department  instructed  Truehart  to  tell  Diem  or  Thuan  that  the  U.S.  also  had  a
stake  in  an  amicable  settlement  with  the  Buddhists.  On  the  following  day,  True-
hart met  with  Thuan  and  told  him  that  U.S.  support  of  South  Vietnam  could
not  be  maintained  if  there  was  bloody  repressive  action  in  Hue.  This  seemed
to  get  action.  Later  that  day,  Truehart  was  informed  that  Nolting's  second
suggestion  had  been  adopted  and  a  high-level  commission  had  been  named  to
settle  the  problem.  The  commission,  headed  by  Vice  President  Tho,  met  belat-
edly with  the  Buddhists  on  June  5.

On  June  8,  Truehart  had  an  interview  with  Diem  to  protest  Mme.  Nhu's
public  criticism  of  the  Buddhists,  which  was  poisoning  the  atmosphere  for  a
settlement.  When  Diem  refused  to  disavow  her  statements,  Truehart  threatened
a  U.S.  "dissociation"  from  any  future  repressive  measures  to  suppress  demon-
strations. Truehart  left  the  meeting  with  the  impression  that  Diem  was  more


230 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

preoccupied  with  security  measures  than  with  negotiations.  Nolting's  low-key
policy  had  by  now  been  abandoned,  both  in  Washington  and  in  Saigon,  in  favor
of  a  new  tough  line.

The  situation  was  dramatically  altered  by  the  first  Buddhist  suicide  on  June
11.  Alarmed,  the  State  Department  authorized  Truehart  to  tell  Diem  that
unless  drastic  action  was  taken  to  meet  the  Buddhist  demands  promptly,  the
U.S.  would  be  forced  to  state  publicly  its  dissociation  from  the  GVN  on  the
Buddhist  issue.  Truehart  made  his  demarche  on  June  12.  Diem  replied  that  any
such  U.S.  announcement  would  have  a  disastrous  effect  on  the  GVN-Buddhist
negotiations.  The  negotiations  finally  got  under  way  in  earnest  June  14  and  the
joint  communique  was  issued  June  16.

Truehart  made  repeated  calls  on  Diem  in  late  June  and  early  July,  urging
him  in  the  strongest  language  to  take  some  action  indicating  the  government's
intention  to  abide  in  good  faith  by  the  June  16  agreement.  His  effort's  were
unavailing.  Diem  was  either  noncommittal,  or  talked  in  generalities  about  the
difficulties  of  the  problem.

On  June  27,  President  Kennedy  named  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  to  replace  Am-
bassador Nolting  effective  in  September.  After  a  brief  stop  in  Washington,
Nolting  was  hurried  back  to  Saigon  on  July  11  to  make  one  last  effort  to  get
Diem  to  conciliate  the  Buddhists.  Nolting,  evidently  resenting  the  pressure
tactics  used  by  Truehart,  met  immediately  with  Diem  and  tried  to  mollify  him.
He  succeeded  only  in  convincing  Diem  to  make  the  shallow  gesture  of  the  July
19  radio  speech.  Otherwise,  Diem  merely  persisted  in  appeals  for  public  har-
mony and  support  of  the  government,  without  any  real  attempt  to  deal  with  the
Buddhist  grievances.

Nolting  spent  his  last  month  in  Vietnam  trying  to  repair  U.S.-GVN  relations
and  to  move  Diem  to  resolve  the  Buddhist  crisis,  but  his  attempts  were  con-
tinually undercut  by  the  Nhus  both  publicly  and  privately.  They  had  grown  in-
creasingly belligerent  about  the  Buddhists  during  the  summer,  and  by  August
spoke  often  of  "crushing"  them.  Washington  asked  Nolting  to  protest  such  in-
flammatory remarks,  and  began  to  suspect  Diem's  capacity  to  conciliate  the
Buddhists  in  the  face  of  Nhu  sabotage.  Nolting  was  instructed  to  suggest  to
Diem  that  Mme.  Nhu  be  removed  from  the  scene.  Nolting  asked  Diem  for  a
public  declaration  repudiating  her  remarks  but  after  initially  agreeing.  Diem
then  demurred  and  postponed  it.  Finally,  as  a  parting  gesture  to  Nolting,  he
agreed  on  August  14  to  make  a  statement.  It  came  in  the  form  of  an  interview
with  Marguerite  Higgins  of  the  New  York  Herald  Tribune.  Diem  asserted  that
conciliation  had  been  his  policy  all  along  and  that  it  was  "irreversible."  He
further  said,  in  direct  contradiction  of  a  previous  remark  by  Mme.  Nhu,  that
the  family  was  pleased  with  Lodge's  appointment.  Washington  was  apparently
satisfied  by  this  statement,  which  Diem  viewed  merely  as  a  going-away  present
for  Nolting.  Less  than  a  week  later,  Nolting's  two  years  of  careful  work  and  an
American  policy  would  be  in  a  shambles,  betrayed  by  Nhu's  midnight  raid  on
the  pagodas.

Underlying  the  prevailing  U.S.  view  that  there  was  no  alternative  to  Diem
was  the  belief  that  the  disruptive  effect  of  a  coup  on  the  war  effort,  and  the  dis-
organization that  would  follow  such  a  coup,  could  only  benefit  the  VC,  perhaps
decisively.  Military  estimates  and  reports  emanating  from  MACV  through  the
summer  of  1963  continued  to  reflect  an  optimistic  outlook,  indicating  good  rea-
son to  continue  our  support  of  Diem  even  in  the  face  of  his  inept  handling  of
the  Buddhist  crisis.  In  retrospect,  it  can  be  seen  that  by  July  the  GVN  position
in  the  war  had  begun  to  seriously  deteriorate.  At  the  time,  however,  this  weak-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  231

ening  was  not  yet  apparent.  The  then  prevailing  view  also  held  that  the  Bud-
dhist crisis  had  not  yet  detracted  from  the  war  effort,  although  its  potential  to
do  so  was  recognized.  Secretary  McNamara  on  July  19  told  a  press  conference
that  the  war  was  progressing  well  and  that  the  Buddhist  crisis  had  thus  far  not
affected  it.  The  intelligence  community,  however,  had  already  begun  to  note
depressing  effects  of  the  crisis  on  military  and  civilian  morale.

Meanwhile,  the  U.S.  press  corps  was  reporting  a  far  different  view  of  both
the  war  and  the  Buddhist  crisis,  one  which  was,  in  retrospect,  nearer  the  reality.
In  particular,  they  were  reporting  serious  failures  in  the  Delta  in  both  miUtary
operations  and  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  Typical  of  this  reporting  was  an
August  15  story  in  the  New  York  Times  by  David  Halberstam  presenting  a  very
negative  appraisal  of  the  war  in  the  Delta.  Such  reports  were  vehemently  re-
futed within  the  Administration,  most  notably  by  General  Krulak,  the  JCS  Spe-
cial Assistant  for  Counterinsurgency.  At  the  lower  echelons  in  the  field,  how-
ever, there  were  many  U.S.  advisors  who  did  not  share  Krulak's  sanguine  view
of  the  war's  progress.

Within  the  Administration,  no  real  low-risk  alternative  to  Diem  had  ever
been  identified,  and  we  had  continued  our  support  for  his  troublesome  regime
because  Diem  was  regarded  as  the  only  Vietnamese  figure  capable  of  rallying
national  support  in  the  struggle  against  the  Viet  Cong.  The  Buddhist  crisis  shat-
tered our  illusions  about  him,  and  increased  the  domestic  U.S.  political  price
to  Kennedy  of  supporting  Diem.  But  the  only  other  option  for  us  seemed  a
coup,  with  highly  uncertain  prospects  for  post-coup  political  stability.  At  a
briefing  for  the  President  on  July  4,  the  possibilities  and  prospects  for  a  coup
were  discussed.  [Doc.  123]  It  was  the  consensus  that  the  Nhus  could  not  be
removed,  but  that  there  would  surely  be  coup  attempts  in  the  next  four  months.
Nolting's  reported  view,  with  which  then  Assistant  Secretary  of  State,  Roger
Hilsman,  did  not  entirely  agree,  was  that  a  coup  would  most  likely  produce  a
civil  war.  Hilsman  felt  that  the  likelihood  of  general  chaos  in  the  wake  of  a
coup  was  less  than  it  had  been  the  preceding  year.  (Notes  on  this  briefing,  re-
produced in  the  Appendix,  provide  the  first  documentary  evidence  of  highest
level  consideration  of  the  ramifications  of  a  coup.)

In  a  meeting  at  State  the  following  day,  July  5,  Ambassador  Nolting,  who
had  cut  short  his  vacation  to  return  to  Washington  in  the  wake  of  the  Buddhist
crisis,  told  Under  Secretary  of  State  George  Ball:

In  his  view  if  a  revolution  occurred  in  Viet-Nam  which  grew  out  of  the
Buddhist  situation,  the  country  would  be  split  between  feuding  factions
and  the  Americans  would  have  to  withdraw  and  the  country  might  be  lost
to  the  Communists.  This  led  to  the  question  of  how  much  pressure  we
could  exert  on  Diem.  Mr.  Nolting  replied  that  if  we  repudiated  him  on
this  issue  his  government  would  fall.  The  Ambassador  believed  that  Diem
would  live  up  to  the  agreement  (June  16)  unless  he  believed  that  he  was
dealing  with  a  political  attempt  to  cause  his  overthrow.  [Doc.  124]

Earlier  in  the  same  interview  he  had  said :

.  .  .  that  although  interference  by  the  Nhus  was  serious,  he  believed
that  the  GVN  would  be  able  to  come  through  this  one  slowly.  As  to  tac-
tics, the  more  Diem  was  prodded  the  slower  he  went.  While  Nhu  was  trou-
blesome he  was  chiefly  responsible  for  gains  which  had  been  made  in  the
provincial  pacification  program.  [Doc.  124]


232 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Nolting,  no  doubt,  expressed  similar  views  when  he  met  with  Secretary'  McNa-
mara  before  returning  to  Saigon.

In  spite  of  the  mountmg  political  pressure  on  the  President  in  Congress  and
in  the  press  because  of  the  Buddhist  repressions,  the  Administration  decided  to
send  Nolting  back  for  another  try  at  getting  Diem  to  settle  the  dispute  with  the
Buddhists.  Anxiety  in  Washington  mounted  as  the  summer  wore  on,  and  Nolt-
ing's  efforts  with  Diem  produced  evident  progress.  By  the  time  of  the  August
21  raids,  Washington's  patience  with  Diem  was  all  but  exhausted.


III. LODGE  vs.  DIEM:  AUGUST  20-OCTOBER  2


A. THE  PAGODA  RAIDS  AND  REPERCUSSIONS

Shortly  after  midnight  on  August  21,  six  days  after  Nolting's  frustrated  de-
parture, Nhu,  shattering  any  remaining  illusions  about  the  GVN's  conciliatory
approach  to  the  Buddhists,  and  betraying  Diem's  parting  pledge  to  Nolting,
staged  a  general  assault  on  Buddhist  pagodas.  In  Saigon,  Hue,  and  other  coastal
cities,  the  regime's  private  shock  troops — the  U.S. -trained  Special  Forces — and
the  combat  police  invaded  the  pagodas  and  arrested  hundreds  of  Buddhist
monks,  effectively  destroying  an  American  policy  and  marking  the  beginning
of  the  end  of  the  IDiem  regime.

On  August  18,  ten  senior  generals  had  met  and  decided  that  they  would  ask
Diem  for  a  declaration  of  martial  law  to  permit  them  to  return  Buddhist  monks
from  outside  Saigon  to  their  own  provinces  and  pagodas,  hopefully  reducing
tensions  in  the  capital.  Among  those  in  attendance  at  the  meeting  were  General
Ton  That  Dinh,  military  governor  of  Saigon  and  commander  of  III  Corps  sur-
rounding it,  and  General  Huynh  Van  Cao,  IV  Corps  commander,  both  of
whom  owed  their  positions  to  their  loyalty  to  the  regime.  Either  or  both  of  them
probably  reported  the  outcome  of  this  meeting  to  Diem  and  Nhu.

In  any  case,  Nhu  had  decided  to  eliminate  the  Buddhist  opposition,  and  to
confront  the  U.S.  with  a  fait  accompli  on  Lodge's  arrival;  he  assumed  the  U.S.
would  protestingly  acquiesce,  as  it  always  had  in  the  past.  On  the  afternoon  of
the  20th,  Nhu  met  with  a  small  group  of  generals,  including  Don,  Khiem,  and
Dinh  who  presented  the  m.artial  law  proposal  to  him.  Nhu,  his  own  plans  for
the  raids  now  far  advanced,  told  them  to  take  their  proposal  to  Diem.  At  a
meeting  later  that  evening,  Diem  acquiesced  in  the  generals'  plan  and  at  mid-
night the  decree  was  published  under  the  signature  of  General  Don,  Chief  of
the  Joint  General  Staff.  Meanwhile,  unbeknown  to  the  generals,  Nhu  had  already
alerted  Colonel  Tung's  Special  Forces  and  the  combat  police.  Once  the  facade
of  martial  law  was  in  place,  so  the  army  would  be  blamed  for  the  raids,  Nhu
gave  the  word  and  the  crackdown  began.  To  further  implicate  the  army,
some  of  the  combat  police  wore  paratroop  uniforms.  Pagodas  were  ransacked
in  all  the  major  South  Vietnamese  cities,  and  over  1400  Buddhists,  primarily
monks,  were  arrested.  In  the  raid  on  Xa  Loi  pagoda  in  Saigon  about  thirty
monks  were  wounded  or  injured,  and  several  were  subsequently  listed  as  miss-
ing; exact  casualties  were  never  established.  Diem  had  approved  the  martial  law
decree  without  consulting  his  cabinet,  but  it  was  never  established  whether  he
knew  of  and  approved  Nhu's  plans  for  the  pagoda  raids.  Significantly,  he  never
subsequently  sought  to  dissociate  himself  from  Nhu  or  the  raids.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  233

While  the  martial  law  decree  gave  General  Don  command  of  all  troops,  in
fact,  General  Dinh  and  Colonel  Tung  took  their  orders  directly  from  the  pal-
ace. Thus,  when  the  raids  came,  General  Don  was  at  JGS  unaware.  In  a  long
discussion  on  August  23  with  a  CAS  officer,  he  suggested  that  the  martial  law
1^  decree  was  only  phase  one  of  a  larger  Generals'  plot.  They  were  thrown  off  bal-
ance, however,  by  the  raids  and  by  General  Dinh's  rapid  assumption  of  local
control  of  martial  law  in  Saigon.

In  planning  the  raids,  Nhu  had  been  extremely  careful  not  to  have  word  leak
to  the  U.S.  mission  (although  the  Buddhists  and  the  U.S.  press  corps  had  been
tipped  off  by  their  own  informants).  On  the  morning  after  the  attack,  Richard-
son, the  CIA  chief  and  the  senior  American  civilian  in  Saigon,  emphatically  de-
nied to  Halberstam  any  foreknowledge  of  the  plan.  To  further  isolate  the  U.S.
from  an  accurate  assessment  during  the  operation,  Nhu  had  the  telephone  lines
to  the  Embassy  and  the  homes  of  all  senior  U.S.  personnel  cut  shortly  after
the  raids  got  under  way.  His  efforts  had  the  desired  effect.  It  was  several  days
before  the  U.S.  mission  in  Saigon  and  ofhcials  in  Washington  could  piece  to-
gether what  happened.  In  Washington,  Harriman  and  Michael  Forrestal,  a
member  of  McGeorge  Bundy's  staff  at  the  White  House,  drafted  a  stiff  public
statement  that  was  released  by  the  State  Department  at  9:30  the  following  morn-
ing. It  deplored  the  raids  as  "a  direct  violation  by  the  Vietnamese  Government
of  assurances  that  it  was  pursuing  a  policy  of  reconciliation  with  the  Buddhists."
But  the  first  U.S.  intelligence  reports,  based  on  information  from  Nhu,  accepted
army  responsibility  for  the  raids,  and  treated  their  coincidence  with  the  martial
law  decree  as,  in  effect,  a  military  coup.  In  an  August  21  memorandum  for
the  Secretary  of  Defense,  the  Director  of  DIA,  General  Carroll,  wrote,  "Al-
though the  military  moves  are  based  on  an  alleged  presidential  proclamation,
the  military  leaders  have,  in  effect,  assumed  full  control."

When  the  raids  occurred.  Lodge,  Nolting,  and  Roger  Hilsman,  the  Assistant
Secretary  of  State  for  the  Far  East,  had  been  conferring  in  Honolulu.  Lodge  was
immediately  instructed  to  proceed  to  Saigon.  After  a  brief  stop  in  Tokyo,  Lodge
touched  down  in  Saigon  at  9:30  p.m.  on  August  22,  in  an  atmosphere  charged
with  tension  and  official  U.S.  confusion.  Awaitimz  him  was  a  cable  from  Hils-
man  asking  for  a  clarification  of  the  situation.  Had  the  military  taken  over  and
retained  Diem  as  a  figurehead;  had  Diem  strengthened  his  own  position  by
calling  in  the  military;  or  were  the  Nhus  really  calling  the  shots?  Within  twenty-
four  hours,  Lodge  had  sent  a  preliminary  reply:  there  had  been  no  coup,  but
there  seemed  also  to  be  no  diminution  in  the  roles  of  the  Nhus,  although  the
power  roles  within  the  regime  were  unclear.

That  same  day,  the  first  military  feelers  had  been  put  out  from  the  Vietna-
mese generals  to  determine  what  the  U.S.  reaction  would  be  to  a  military  coup.
General  Don,  the  commander  of  the  armed  forces  under  the  martial  law  de-
cree, had  a  long,  rambling  conversation  with  a  CAS  officer.  He  first  outlined  the
true  role  the  army  had  played  in  the  events  of  August  20-21  and  then  inquired
why  the  U.S.  had  blamed  the  army  for  the  raids  on  the  pagodas:

General  Don  has  heard  personally  that  the  military  is  being  blamed  by
Vietnamese  public  for  the  attack  on  the  pagodas.  He  said  that  the  US
Govt  is  at  fault  for  this  misconception  because  VGA  announced  that  the
military  took  action  against  the  pagodas.  Don  queried  why  VOA  did  not
admit  that  Colonel  Tung's  Special  Forces  and  the  Police  carried  out  the
action.  Don  believes  this  would  help  the  military  at  this  point.  Don  stated
that  the  USA  should  now  make  its  position  known.


234 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

In  a  conversation  the  same  day  with  Rufus  Phillips  of  USOM,  General  Kim,
deputy  to  General  Don,  bitterly  attacked  Nhu,  charging  him  with  responsibility
for  the  raids,  and  deploring  his  dominant  role  in  the  government.  He  said  that
unless  the  popular  impression  that  the  army  was  responsible  for  the  raids  were
corrected,  the  army  would  be  handicapped  in  its  fight  against  the  VC.  He  stated
that  a  firm  U.S.  stand  for  the  removal  of  the  Nhus  would  unify  the  army  and
permit  it  to  act  against  them.  These  two  direct  and  obviously  reinforcing  re-
quests for  U.S.  support  for  military  action  aimed  at  Nhu's  ouster  marked  the
formal  beginning  of  the  U.S.  involvement  in  the  protracted  plotting  against  the
Diem  regime.  Two  senior  civilians  in  the  government,  Diem's  chef  de  cabinet,
Vo  Van  Hai,  and  Secretary  of  State,  Nguyen  Dinh  Thuan,  were  simultaneously
telling  U.S.  contacts  that  Nhu's  elimination  from  the  government  was  vital
and  that  the  U.S.  should  take  a  strong  stand  against  him.

On  August  24,  Lodge  cabled  his  appraisal  of  the  situation  to  Washington,
based  on  these  conversations.  "Nhu,"  he  reported,  ''probably  with  full  support
of  Diem,  had  a  large  hand  in  planning  of  action  against  Buddhists,  if  he  did
not  fully  master-mind  it.  His  influence  has  also  been  significantly  increased."
Nhu  had  simply  taken  advantage  of  the  concern  of  certain  generals,  possibly
not  fully  informing  the  regular  army  of  the  planned  action.  Nonetheless,  none
of  the  important  Saigon  area  troop  commanders  (Don,  Dinh,  and  Tung)  were
presently  disaffected  with  the  regime.  Furthermore,  absence  of  clear-cut  mili-
tary leadership  and  troop  strength  in  Saigon  for  a  move  against  the  Nhus  would
make  U.S.  support  of  such  an  action  a  "shot  in  the  dark."

For  the  State  Department,  the  problem  of  clarifying  the  public  record  about
the  raids  and  affixing  responsibility  for  them  had  become  acute  by  August  24.
The  press  reports  emanating  from  Saigon  had  from  the  outset  blamed  Nhu  for
the  raids,  but  VOA,  with  a  large  audience  in  Vietnam,  continued  to  report  the
official  U.S.  position  that  the  army  was  culpable.  The  accumulating  evidence
against  Nhu  and  the  likelihood  of  severe  damage  to  army  morale  if  VOA  did
not  broadcast  a  clarification  seemed  to  call  for  retractions.

The  second  issue  for  Washington  was  Nhu.  The  generals  had  asked,  in  ef-
fect, for  a  green  light  to  move  against  him,  but  Lodge  had  cautioned  against  it.
Hilsman  reports  that  as  he,  Harriman,  Forrestal,  and  Ball  deliberated  over  the
drafting  of  a  reply  on  that  Saturday  morning,  the  statement  of  Thuan  to  Phil-
lips that  "under  no  circumstance  should  the  United  States  acquiesce  in  what
the  Nhus  had  done,"  was  given  great  weight.  Admiral  Felt  telephoned  Washing-
ton from  CINCPAC  to  support  a  strong  U.S.  stand  against  the  Nhus.  The  unan-
swered question,  of  course,  was  whether  the  Nhus  could  be  removed  without
also  sacrificing  Diem,  and  if  not,  whether  the  resulting  political  instability  would
not  have  an  even  more  detrimental  effect  on  the  war  effort  than  maintaining
Diem.

The  August  24  cable  of  instructions  to  Lodge  resulting  from  these  delibera-
tions outlined  an  important,  and  subsequently  controversial,  new  policy  ap-
proach for  the  U.S.  in  South  Vietnam.  Its  opening  paragraphs  crisply  set  forth
the  new  American  view :

It  is  now  clear  that  whether  military  proposed  martial  law  or  whether
Nhu  tricked  them  into  it,  Nhu  took  advantage  of  its  imposition  to  smash
pagodas  with  police  and  Tung's  Special  Forces  loyal  to  him,  thus  placing
onus  on  militarv  in  eves  of  world  and  Vietnamese  people.  Also  clear  that
Nhu  has  maneuvered  himself  into  commanding  position.

US  Government  cannot  tolerate  situation  in  which  power  lies  in  Nhu's


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  235

hands.  Diem  must  be  given  chance  to  rid  himself  of  Nhu  and  his  coterie
and  replace  them  with  best  military  and  political  personalities  available.

If,  in  spite  of  all  your  efforts,  Diem  remains  obdurate  and  refuses,  then
we  must  face  the  possibility  that  Diem  himself  cannot  be  preserved.  [Doc.
126]

Lodge  was  instructed  to  tell  the  GVN  the  U.S.  could  not  accept  the  actions
against  the  Buddhists  and  that  prompt  dramatic  steps  to  redress  the  situation
must  be  taken.  The  key  military  leaders  were  to  be  privately  informed  that,

.  .  .  US  would  find  it  impossible  to  continue  support  GVN  militarily
and  economically  unless  above  steps  are  taken  immediately  which  we  rec-
ognize requires  removal  of  Nhus  from  the  scene.  We  wish  give  Diem
reasonable  opportunity  to  remove  Nhus,  but  if  he  remains  obdurate,  then
we  are  prepared  to  accept  the  obvious  implication  that  we  can  no  longer
support  Diem.  You  may  also  tell  appropriate  military  commanders  we  will
give  them  direct  support  in  any  interim  period  of  breakdown  central  gov-
ernment mechanism.  [Doc.  126]

Finally,  the  message  recognized  the  need  to  publicly  exonerate  the  army  from
the  raids  and  asked  Lodge  to  approve  a  VOA  broadcast  to  that  effect.  Lodge
was  requested,  as  well,  to  survey  urgently  for  alternative  leadership.

Clearance  of  the  draft  message  was  complicated  by  the  coincident  week-end
absence  from  Washington  of  most  of  the  top  level  members  of  the  Administra-
tion. The  President  was  in  Hyannis  Port;  Rusk  was  in  New  York;  and  McNamara
and  McCone  were  away  on  vacation.  Both  the  President  and  the  Secretary  of
State  were  reached,  however,  and  approved  the  draft.  Deputy  Secretary  of  De-
fense Roswell  Gilpatric  approved  for  Defense,  and  General  Taylor  for  the  ICS.
Schlesinger,  in  his  account  of  the  incident,  suggests  that  the  cable  was  hasty  and
ill-considered,  and  that  the  President  immediately  began  to  back  away  from  it.

Lodge  replied  the  following  day  endorsing  the  strong  position  but  proposing
to  forego  a  futile  approach  to  Diem  and  to  state  our  position  instead  only  to  the
generals,  thus  throwing  all  our  weight  behind  a  coup.  The  cable  stated:

Believe  that  chances  of  Diem's  meeting  our  demands  are  virtually  nil.
At  the  same  time,  by  making  them  we  give  Nhu  chance  to  forestall  or
block  action  by  military.  Risk,  we  believe,  is  not  worth  taking,  with  Nhu
in  control  combat  forces  Saigon.  Therefore,  propose  we  go  straight  to  Gen-
erals with  our  demands,  without  informing  Diem.  Would  tell  them  we  pre-
pared have  Diem  without  Nhus  but  it  is  in  effect  up  to  them  whether  to
keep  him.  [Doc.  127]

Hilsman  asserts  that  the  cable  also  reflected  Lodge's  view  that  since  our  dis-
approval of  GVN  action  was  well  known,  it  was  not  fitting  for  the  U.S.  to  go
to  Diem,  it  was  Diem  who  should  come  to  us.

In  a  separate  CAS  cable  the  same  day,  Richardson,  the  CIA  Chief  of  Station
in  Saigon,  reported  that  at  a  meeting  with  Lodge  and  Harkins  it  had  been  agreed
that  Diem  would  not  remove  Nhu  and  that  therefore,  assuming  State's  cable
of  instructions  on  24  August  [Doc.  126]  represented  Washington's  basic  pol-
icy, the  consensus  was  that  contact  should  be  immediately  made  with  generals
such  as  Minh  and  Khanh  to  assess  the  degree  of  unity  and  determination  of
senior  officers.  Minh  was  considered  the  best  possible  interim  leader,  with  Vice
President  Tho  as  the  most  attractive  candidate  for  President  among  the  civil-


236 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

ians.  The  cable  concluded  with  the  view  that  a  junta  would  probably  operate  be-
hind the  scenes  in  the  event  of  a  successful  coup,  and  that  the  U.S.  should  leave
the  specific  tactics  of  a  coup  up  to  the  generals.  There  is  a  hiatus  in  the  available
cable  traffic  at  this  point,  but  Hilsman  indicates  that  Washington  decided  on  >^
Sunday,  August  25,  to  defer  a  direct  approach  to  Diem  until  more  was  known
about  the  situation.

In  Lodge's  reply,  he  had  also  apparently  approved  the  proposed  VOA  broad-
cast to  exonerate  the  army.  Hilsman  briefed  the  press  on  the  basis  of  a  previ-
ously approved  draft  statement  on  August  25.  The  statement  expressed  strong
U.S.  disapproval  of  the  raids,  which  were  attributed  to  Nhu.  In  reporting  the
story,  the  press  speculated  that  such  a  strong  statement  probably  indicated  that
measures  such  as  aid  suspension  were  being  considered.  VOA  had  been  instructed
to  broadcast  only  the  substances  of  the  U.S.  statement  as  provided  in  the  press
guidance  and  nothing  more.  The  instructions  somehow  got  mislaid;  and  on
Monday  morning,  August  26,  just  several  hours  before  Lodge  was  to  present
his  credentials  to  Diem,  VOA  broadcast  in  full  a  UPI  story  which  flatlv  asserted
that  "the  US  may  sharply  reduce  its  aid  to  Vietnam  unless  President  Diem  gets
rid  of  secret  police  officials  responsible  for  the  attacks."  Lodge  was  understand-
ably upset,  and  sent  a  testy  cable  rhetorically  inquiring  whether  he  really  was  in
charge  of  tactics  as  he  had  been  given  to  understand.  Rusk  sent  a  personal  ca-
ble of  apology  to  Lodge,  and  VOA  promptly  broadcast  a  denial  of  U.S.  intent
to  cut  aid,  but  the  initial  damage  had  been  done.

The  Vietnamese  reaction  to  the  attack  on  the  pagodas  during  this  time  had
been  dramatic.  In  the  United  States,  Mme.  Nhu's  father  and  mother,  respec-
tively the  Vietnamese  Ambassador  to  the  U.S.  and  the  Vietnamese  observer  at
the  UN,  had  both  resigned,  making  bitter  public  statements  denouncing  the
raids.  In  South  Vietnam,  the  Foreign  Minister,  Vo  Van  Mau,  had  resigned  and
shaved  his  head  like  a  Buddhist  monk  in  protest.  On  August  23,  students  at  the
faculties  of  medicine  and  pharmacy  at  the  University  of  Saigon  turned  out  to
stage  mass  demonstrations  on  behalf  of  the  Buddhists.  The  GVN  reacted  in  the
only  way  it  seemed  to  know,  with  massive  arrests.  But  the  demonstrations  con-
tinued, and  when  the  university  was  closed,  the  protest  was  taken  up  by  high
school  and  junior  high  school  students.  These  were  dramatic  evidences  indeed
of  the  degree  of  disaffection  with  the  regime,  since  most  of  these  students  were
from  the  middle  class  families  that  formed  the  bureaucracy  and  the  army  lead-
ership. Students  in  Vietnam  had  no  substantial  record  of  political  activism  as
was  the  case  with  their  counterparts  in  other  parts  of  Asia,  like  Korea.  Fur-
thermore, some  of  the  Buddhist  leadership  had  survived  the  raids  and  gone
underground  and  were  soon  passing  out  leaflets  on  the  streets  again.  On  the  day
of  the  raids,  two  monks  had  taken  refuge  in  the  USOM  building  next  door  to
Xa  Loi  pagoda.  The  following  dav,  three  others,  including  the  militant  young
leader  Tich  Tri  Quang,  took  refuge  in  the  U.S.  Embassy,  where  they  were
warmly  received  by  Lodge  and  remained  until  the  successful  November  coup.

B.  MIS-COUP

Rumors  of  coup  plotting  had  been  a  standard  part  of  the  Saigon  scene  under
Diem  from  the  verv  beginning.  And  there  had  been  several  attempts.  In  1957,
an  assassin  fired  at  Diem  at  an  up-countrv  fair.  In  November  1960,  he  had  nar-
rowly escaped  being  overthrown  bv  a  military  coup  by  negotiating  with  the
dissident  officers  until  loval  reinforcements  could  be  moved  into  Saigon  to  re-
store his  control.  And  in  1962,  two  disgruntled  Air  Force  pilots  had  unsuccess-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  237

fully  bombed  and  strafed  the  Gia  Long  Palace.  So,  when  rumors  of  coup  plot-
ting began  to  gain  currency  again  in  the  spring  of  1963,  they  were  monitored
by  the  U.S.  intelligence  community,  but  not  given  extraordinary  prominence
or  credence.  By  mid-summer,  however,  with  the  Buddhist  crisis  in  full  bloom,
more  serious  consideration  was  given  to  the  growing  number  of  reports  identi-
fying plotters  and  schemes.  One  plot,  identified  in  late  June,  was  led  by  Dr.
Tran  Kim  Tuyen,  Diem's  Director  of  Political  and  Social  Studies  (national  in-
telligence). It  involved  elements  of  the  Civic  Action  Ministry,  the  Information
Ministry,  the  Secret  Police,  and  some  junior  army  officers.  A  separate  plot  in-
volving other  elements  of  the  army  was  reported,  and  on  July  8  General  Don
indicated  to  a  CAS  officer  that  there  was  support  among  all  but  a  couple  of
generals  for  a  coup.  Nhu's  July  1 1  meeting  with  the  generals,  however,  seemed
Ij  to  disorient  their  efforts  temporarily.  In  an  August  14  memorandum,  the  CIA
acknowledged  some  military  support  for  a  coup,  but  doubted  that  anyone  would
risk  it  unless  a  deterioration  of  the  political  situation  threatened  a  Viet  Cong
victory.  The  pagoda  attack  was  just  such  a  deterioration  and  it  precipitated  the
generals'  first  approach  to  the  U.S.  on  August  23  about  a  coup.

With  State's  instructions  of  24  August  as  guidance.  Lodge  met  with  Harkins,
Truehart,  Mecklin,  and  Richardson  on  the  morning  of  August  26  before  pre-
senting his  credentials  to  Diem.  They  decided  that  the  official  U.S.  hand  should
not  show — i.e.,  Harkins  should  not  talk  to  the  generals.  It  was  agreed  that
Lt.  Colonel  Conein  of  the  CIA  would  contact  General  Khiem,  and  Mr.  Spera
(also  of  CIA)  would  contact  General  Khanh,  II  Corps  commander  in  Pleiku,
conveying  the  following  points  to  each:

a.  Solidification  of  further  elaboration  of  action aspects  of  present
thinking  and  planning.  What  should  be  done?
I  b.  We  in  agreement  Nhus  must  go.

c.  Question  of  retaining  Diem  or  not  up  to  them.

d.  Bonzes  and  other  arrestees  must  be  released  immediately  and  five-
point  agreement  of  16  June  be  fully  carried  out.

e.  We  will  provide  direct  support  during  any  interim  period  of  break-
down of  central  government  mechanism.

/.  We  cannot  be  of  any  help  during  initial  action  of  assuming  power  of
the  state.  Entirely  their  own  action,  win  or  lose.  Don't  expect  to  be  bailed
out.

g.  If  Nhus  do  not  go  and  if  Buddhists'  situation  is  not  redressed  as  in-
dicated, we  would  find  it  impossible  continue  military  and  economic  sup-
port.

h.  It  is  hoped  bloodshed  can  be  avoided  or  reduced  to  absolute  mini-
mum.

/.  It  is  hoped  that  during  process  and  after,  developments  conducted
in  such  manner  as  to  retain  and  increase  the  necessary  relations  between
Vietnamese  and  Americans  which  will  allow  for  progress  of  country  and
successful  prosecution  of  the  war.

Conein  met  with  Khiem  on  August  27,  and  after  conveying  his  message
learned  that  Minh  was  the  leader  of  the  cabal,  which  included  also  Generals
Kim,  Khanh,  Thieu,  and  Le.  Don  was  aware  of  the  plot  and  approved,  but  was
too  exposed  to  participate.  General  Minh  was  under  surveillance,  and  had
asked  not  to  be  contacted  by  the  U.S.  Khiem  recognized  the  need  to  neutralize
General  Cao,  the  IV  Corps  commander.  General  Dinh,  the  III  Corps  and  Sai-


238 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

gon  Area  commander,  and  Colonel  Tung.  A  separate  CAS  report  indicated  that
General  Kim  had  charge  of  plans  for  the  provisional  successor  government
which  would  include  both  civilians  and  military,  with  Minh  as  President.

Meanwhile,  back  in  Washington,  by  the  time  the  NSC  met  on  Monday  morn-
ing, August  26,  misgivings  about  supporting  a  coup — the  policy  outlined  in
State's  August  24  message — had  developed.  Hilsman's  account  credits  McNa-
mara,  Taylor,  and  McCone  with  second  thoughts.  WTiatever  the  outcome  of
Monday's  meeting,  another  was  held  the  next  day,  after  which  Lodge  was  ca-
bled for  more  details  about  the  coup  plans,  and  an  assessment  of  their  chances
of  success.  Reflecting  the  reservations  in  Washington,  the  message  asked  what
effect  delaying  the  coup  would  have.

Replying  the  following  day.  Lodge  gave  a  favorable  assessment  of  coup  pros-
pects; expressed  confidence  in  the  generals  who  were  to  lead  it,  especially  Minh,
Khanh,  and  Kim;  and  argued,  "that  chances  of  success  would  be  diminished  by
delay."  A  cable  from  Harkins  to  Taylor  on  the  same  day  is  the  first  documen-
tary indication  of  Harkins'  reservations  about  supporting  the  coup  attempt.
Cryptically,  Harkins  indicated  that  he  would  offer  his  full  support  to  the  Ambas-
sador in  implementing  State's  instructions,  but  noted  that,  "Reference  b.  (CINC-
PAC  2504562  Aug  1963)  advises  me  that  reference  a.  (State  243)  embodies
CINCPAC  opinion  and  that  my  support  had  been  volunteered.''  He  would  have
preferred  one  last  attempt  to  persuade  Diem  to  dispense  with  Nhu.  Further-
more, the  line-up  of  forces  did  not  indicate  a  clear-cut  advantage  for  the  coup
plotters.  Therefore,  he  stated,  "In  my  opinion  as  things  stand  now  I  don't  be-
lieve there  is  sufficient  reason  for  a  crash  approval  on  our  part  at  this  time."
He  also  had  concluded  that  the  coup  would  not  take  place  until  we  gave  the
word.  In  a  separate  message,  Richardson,  however,  described  the  situation  as
having  "reached  the  point  of  no  return.""  [Doc.  129]  Further,  he  concluded,
"Unless  the  generals  are  neutralized  before  being  able  to  launch  their  opera-
tion, we  believe  they  will  act  and  that  they  have  eood  chance  to  win."  [Doc.
129]

In  Washington,  State  and  Defense  were  divided  on  the  issue.  Nolting,  who
was  regularly  attending  the  daily  NSC  meetings  at  the  President's  request,
sided  with  the  Pentagon  in  the  view  that  prospects  for  the  coup  were  not  good,
and  that  another  effort  should  be  made  with  Diem.  Hilsman,  Harriman,  and
Ball  were  convinced  the  U.S.  had  to  get  on  with  the  coup,  since  Diem  offered  no
prospect  of  complying  the  U.S.  wishes.  The  discussions  in  the  NSC,  reportedly,
were  increasingly  heated  and  testy.  The  di\ision  of  opinion  between  Harkins
and  Lodge  concerned  the  President  and  upon  receipt  of  their  respective  mes-
sages on  August  28,  he  cabled  each  of  them  separately  for  their  "independent
judgment"'  about  the  prospects  for  a  coup  and  their  personal  advice  on  the
course  the  U.S.  should  pursue.  The  President  was  at  pains  to  reiterate  his  great
confidence  in  both  men,  and  to  assure  them  that  differences  of  opinion  in
Washington  would  not  prevent  the  U.S.  government  from  acting  as  a  unit  un-
der his  direction.  In  a  separate  message.  State  asked  Lodge  to  indicate  the  lat-
est point  at  which  the  operation  could  be  suspended,  and  with  what  conse-
quences; since  U.S.  prestige  would  be  engaged  in  the  venture,  the  message
stated,  on:e  the  coup  were  under  way,  it  had  to  succeed.  Lodge  was  also  asked
what  actions  the  U.S.  might  take  to  promote  the  coup.

On  August  29,  Colonel  Conein  and  Mr.  Spera  met  with  Generals  Khiem  and
Minh.  Minh  bluntly  said  that  the  generals  had  to  be  cautious  until  they  had
clear  evidence  that  the  U.S.  would  not  betray  them  to  Nhu.  They  were  unwill-
ing to  discuss  their  plans,  and  when  asked  what  would  constitute  a  sign  of  U.S.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  239

support,  replied  that  the  U.S.  should  stop  economic  aid  to  the  regime.  In  a  sub-
sequent separate  contact  with  Rufus  Phillips,  General  Kim  asked  for  verifica-
tion that  the  Minh-Conein  meeting  had  Lodge's  approval.  After  checking
with  Lodge,  Phillips  assured  Kim  who  then  asked  for  a  meeting  to  discuss
planning  on  the  next  day.  Lodge  then  authorized  CAS  to  assist  in  tactical  plan-
ning.

Stressing  the  generals"  reported  lack  of  confidence  in  U.S.  support.  Lodge's
reply  to  Washington  asked  Presidential  permission  for  Harkins  to  show  CAS
messages  to  the  generals  to  prove  our  commitment.  If  that  failed,  he  reluctantly
recommended  suspension  of  economic  aid  as  they  requested.  Typical  of  the
Ambassador's  all-out  support  for  the  coup  is  the  following  summary  he  gave  of
the  U.S.  position:

We  are  launched  on  a  course  from  which  there  is  no  respectable  turn-
ing back:  The  overthrow  of  the  Diem  Government.  There  is  no  turning
back  in  part  because  US  prestige  is  already  publicly  committed  to  this  end
in  large  measure  and  will  become  more  so  as  facts  leak  out.  In  a  more
fundamental  sense,  there  is  no  turning  back  because  there  is  no  possibility,
in  my  view,  that  the  war  can  be  won  under  a  Diem  administration,  still  less
that  Diem  or  any  member  of  the  family  can  govern  the  country  in  a  way
to  gain  the  support  of  the  people  who  count,  i.e.,  the  educated  class  in  and
out  of  government  service,  civil  and  military- — not  to  mention  the  American
people.  [Doc.  132]

Harkins,  on  the  other  hand,  felt  that  there  was  still  time  to  make  one  last  ap-
proach to  Diem,  without  endangering  the  plotters,  since  their  plans  did  not
appear  fully  mature  yet.  Diem  should  be  handed  an  ultimatum  that  the  Nhus
must  go.  This,  he  felt,  would  strengthen  the  hand  of  the  generals  whose  opposi-
tion, like  ours,  was  to  the  Nhus,  not  Diem.  If  Diem  did  not  act,  there  would  then
be  time  to  back  a  move  bv  the  senerals.

These  views  were  all  reviewed  at  the  noon  meeting  of  the  NSC  on  August
29.  At  the  meeting.  McNamara  backed  Harkins'  view  in  favor  of  a  final  approach
to  Diem,  but  the  issue  was  not  decided.  Rusk  took  up  the  question  in  a  subse-
quent cable  to  Lodge,  asking  Lodge's  opinion  about  an  approach  to  Diem,  pos-
sibly by  the  generals  at  a  time  when  thev  would  be  ready  to  act,  in  which  they
would  insist  on  the  removal  of  the  Nhus,  and  threaten  withdrawal  of  U.S.  sup-
port. [Doc.  131]  A  separate  State  cable  to  Lodge  and  Harkins  authorized  the
latter  to  show  CAS  cables  to  the  generals  to  prove  our  support.  Harkins  was  in-
structed to  insist  on  knowing  the  personnel  involved  in  the  coup,  and  the
forces  available,  and  to  ask  to  review  the  detailed  plans,  without,  however,  di-
rectly involving  himself  in  the  coup  planning.  Lodge  was  authorized  to  suspend
aid  to  Diem,  "at  a  time  and  under  conditions  of  your  choice."

In  his  response  to  Rusk's  cable,  Lodge  stoutly  opposed  any  further  contact
with  Diem,  even  to  present  an  ultimatum.  Agreeing  that  removal  of  the  Nhus
was  the  prime  objective,  Lodge  argued,  "This  surely  cannot  be  done  by  working
through  Diem.  In  fact.  Diem  will  oppose  it.  He  wishes  he  had  more  Nhus,  not
less.  The  best  chance  of  doing  it  is  bv  the  generals  taking  over  the  government
lock,  stock  and  barrel.  After  this  has  been  done,  it  can  then  be  decided  whether
to  put  Diem  back  in  again  or  go  on  without  him."  [Doc.  134]  What  genuinely
concerned  Lodge  at  that  point  was  the  lack  of  action  by  the  generals,  but  he
was  reluctant  to  use  the  aid  suspension  as  a  lever.

Throughout  this  period,  another  CAS  officer  had  been  in  contact  with  a


240 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Colonel  Thao,  an  inspector  of  strategic  hamlets,  who  was  the  leader  of  an  in-
dependent junior  officer-civilian  plot.  On  August  30,  he  told  the  CAS  officer
that  he  was  in  touch  with  the  generals,  and  would  support  any  move  they
might  make,  but  that  for  the  moment  the  plans  of  his  group  had  stopped  be-
cause the  risk  of  failure  was  too  great.

With  Lodge's  anxiety  at  the  generals'  failure  to  act  increasing  daily,  Gen-
eral Harkins  met  with  General  Khiem  on  August  31.  He  was  told  that  Minh
had  called  off  the  coup  for  the  time  being  because  of  the  inability  to  achieve  a
favorable  balance  of  forces  in  the  Saigon  area,  and  because  of  continuing  anxiety
among  the  generals  about  Richardson's  close  identification  with  the  Nhus.
Both  Richardson  and  Lodge  confirmed  the  end  of  this  coup  attempt  on  the
same  day.  Apparently  unable  to  win  over  General  Dinh,  the  Saigon  III  Corps
area  commander,  Minh  had  decided  not  to  risk  an  indecisive,  protracted  blood
bath  with  only  a  slim  likelihood  of  success.  Three  factors  appear  to  have  been
important  in  Minh's  decision  to  abort  the  coup:  (1)  the  failure  to  win  over
Dinh,  leaving  the  coup  forces  at  a  tactical  disadvantage  in  the  Saigon  area;
(2)  continuing  doubts  about  the  firmness  of  the  U.S.  commitm.ent  to  Diem's
overthrow  and  the  related  concern  that  the  U.S.  had  wittingly  or  unwittingly
tipped  off  Nhu  to  the  plot;  and  (3)  uncertainty  about  the  cohesion  of  the  coup
group  and  the  firmness  of  plans.  Lodge  concluded  somewhat  bitterly,
".  .  .  there  is  neither  the  will  nor  the  organization  among  the  generals  to  accom-
plish anything."  He  did  not,  however,  rule  out  a  future  attempt.

C. TOWARD  A  NEW  POLICY

Having  at  long  last  decided  to  seek  an  alternative  to  the  Diem  regime  by
sanctioning  a  coup,  only  to  have  the  attempt  fail,  the  U.S.  found  itself  at  the
end  of  August  1963  without  a  policy  and  with  most  of  its  bridges  burned.  In
both  Saigon  and  Washington,  the  reappraisal  and  the  search  for  alternatives  be-
gan anew.  In  the  cable  acknowledging  the  demise  of  the  coup  plot  on  August
31,  Lodge  suggested  that:

Perhaps  an  arrangement  could  be  worked  out  whereby  the  following
could  be  made  to  happen:  Madame  Nhu  to  leave  the  country,  Mr.  Nhu's
functions  to  be  limited  entirelv  to  strategic  hamlets;  the  office  of  Prime
Minister  to  be  created  and  Mr.  Thuan  to  become  Prime  Minister;  Arch-
bishop Thuc  to  leave  the  country.  In  addition,  the  students  and  Buddhists
would  be  liberated;  Decree  Law  10  would  be  repealed;  the  pagodas  would
be  repaired  and  conciliatory  gestures  would  be  made.  All  of  this,  if  agreed
to,  might  be  announced  by  President  in  Washington.

These  suggestions  became  the  basis  of  discussion  of  a  "where  do  we  go  from
here"  NSC  meeting  on  the  same  day.

In  the  absence  of  the  President,  Secretary  Rusk  chaired  the  meeting  at  the
State  Department,  and  called  for  consideration  of  the  Lodge  proposals,  but  said
he  felt  it  was  unrealistic  to  start  off  bv  asserting  that  Nhu  must  go.  Secretary
McNamara  urged  that  we  "establish  quicklv  and  firmly  our  line  of  communica-
tion between  Lodge,  Harkins  and  the  GVN."*  He  pointed  out  that  "at  the  mo-
ment our  channels  of  communication  are  essentially  broken"  and  that  "they
should  be  reinstituted  at  all  costs."  These  considerations  were  soon  submerged,
however,  in  a  broader  discussion  of  the  negative  impact  of  the  regime's  actions
on  the  war  effort.  Hilsman,  supported  by  State's  Kattenburg  of  the  Vietnam


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  241

Working  Group,  argued  that  we  should  not  continue  our  support  of  a  Nhu-
dominated  regime  because  its  repressive  policies  would  eventually  have  a  dis-
astrous effect  on  the  war,  even  if  the  statistics  did  not  yet  reveal  their  nega-
tive impact.  Hilsman  and  Kattenburg  pointed  to  the  growing  disaffection  and
restiveness  of  middle  level  bureaucrats  and  military  officers  as  a  factor  which
would  steadily  erode  the  military  effort.  Unconvinced,  both  Secretary  McNamara
and  General  Taylor  asked  for  evidence  of  this  development.

Kattenburg  offered  his  estimate  that  we  would  be  thrown  out  of  the  country
in  six  months  if  the  regime  remained  in  power  and  that  the  question  the  meet-
ing should  be  considering  was  "the  decision  to  get  out  honorably."  Taylor  and
Nolting  immediately  took  exception  to  these  views  and  Secretary  Rusk  remarked
that  they  were  "largely  speculative."  He  continued,  "that  it  would  be  far  better
for  us  to  start  on  the  firm  basis  of  two  things — that  we  will  not  pull  out  of  Viet-
nam until  the  war  is  won,  and  that  we  will  not  run  a  coup."  Secretary  McNa-
mara and  Vice  President  Johnson  supported  Rusk's  views,  the  Vice  President
saying  he  had  never  really  seen  an  alternative  to  Diem.  The  meeting  ended  in-
conclusively; the  only  decision  taken  was  to  ask  for  Lodge's  advice.  [Doc.
135]

As  the  only  documented  meeting  during  this  period  of  major  policy  deliber-
ation, the  August  31  meeting  is  significant  for  the  viewpoints  it  reveals.  Ram-
bling inability  to  focus  the  problem,  indeed  to  reach  common  agreement  on
the  nature  of  the  problem,  reflects  disorientation  in  the  aftermath  of  the  ini-
tial failure.  More  importantly,  however,  the  meeting  is  the  first  recorded  oc-
casion in  which  someone  followed  to  its  logical  conclusion  the  negative  analysis
of  the  situation — i.e.,  that  the  war  could  not  he  won  with  the  Diem  regime,
yet  its  removal  would  leave  such  political  instability  as  to  foreclose  success  in
the  war:  for  the  first  time,  it  was  recognized  that  the  U.S.  should  be  consider-
ing methods  of  honorably  disengaging  itself  from  an  irretrievable  situation.
The  other  alternative,  not  fully  appreciated  until  the  year  following,  was  a
much  greater  U.S.  involvement  in  and  assumption  of  responsibility  for  the
war.  At  this  point,  however,  the  negative  analysis  of  the  impact  of  the  political
situation  on  the  war  effort  was  not  shared  by  McNamara,  Taylor,  Krulak,  nor
seemingly  by  Rusk.

But  discussions  were  overtaken  by  events.  On  the  following  Monday,  Sep-
tember 2,  the  President,  appearing  on  the  initial  broadcast  of  the  CBS  Evening
News,  was  interviewed  by  Walter  Cronkite:

Mr.  Cronkite:  "Mr.  President,  the  only  hot  war  we've  got  running  at
the  moment  is  of  course  the  one  in  Viet-Nam,  and  we  have  our  difficulties
here,  quite  obviously."

President  Kennedy:  "I  don't  think  that  unless  a  greater  effort  is  made  by
the  Government  to  win  popular  support  that  the  war  can  be  won  out
there.  In  the  final  analysis,  it  is  their  war.  They  are  the  ones  who  have  to
win  it  or  lose  it.  We  can  help  them,  we  can  give  them  equipment,  we  can
send  our  men  out  there  as  advisers,  but  they  have  to  win  it — the  people  of
Viet-Nam — against  the  Communists.  We  are  prepared  to  continue  to  assist
them,  but  I  don't  think  that  the  war  can  be  won  unless  the  people  support
the  effort,  and,  in  my  opinion,  in  the  last  two  months  the  Government  has
gotten  out  of  touch  with  the  people.

"The  repressions  against  the  Buddhists,  we  felt,  were  very  unwise.  Now
all  we  can  do  is  to  make  it  very  clear  that  we  don't  think  this  is  the  way  to
win.  It  is  my  hope  that  this  will  become  increasingly  obvious  to  the  Gov-


242 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

ernment,  that  they  will  take  steps  to  try  to  bring  back  popular  support  for
this  very  essential  struggle."

Mr.  Cronkite:  "Do  you  think  this  Government  has  time  to  regain  the
support  of  the  people?"

President  Kennedy:  "I  do.  With  changes  in  policy  and  perhaps  with
personnel,  I  think  it  can.  If  it  doesn't  make  those  changes,  I  would  think
that  the  chances  of  winning  it  would  not  be  very  good."

Confronted  by  the  necessity  of  public  comment,  the  President  had  spoken
boldly  and  forthrightly.  The  President's  call  for  changes  of  policy  and  person-
nel patently  conveyed  the  message  that  the  Buddhist  repressions  must  end,
and  the  Nhus  must  go.  Later  in  the  same  interview,  however,  the  President  had
said,  "...  I  don't  agree  with  those  who  say  we  should  withdraw.  That  would
be  a  great  mistake."  As  Hilsman  summarized  it  later,

We  had  embarked  on  a  policy  that  avoided  the  extremes  both  of  with-
drawing from  Vietnam  or  of  actually  taking  part  in  direct  action  to  change
the  Government.  The  policy  was  one  of  trying  to  discriminate  by  continu-
ing to  support  those  Vietnamese  who  were  struggling  against  the  Commu-
nists but  maintaining  the  tension  of  our  disapproval  of  Diem's  and  Nhu's
repressive  policies.

It  was,  in  effect,  the  policy  Lodge  had  proposed.

Meanwhile  in  Saigon,  Lodge  had  gone  ahead  with  his  proposals.  He  contin-
ued to  avoid  any  official  contact  with  Diem,  but  on  September  2  he  had  his
second  meeting  with  Nhu  (the  first  on  August  27  was  an  inconclusive  state-
ment of  positions  on  each  side)  in  company  with  the  Italian  Ambassador  and
the  Papal  Delegate.  Nhu,  perhaps  encouraged  by  a  collateral  intercession  of  the
French  Ambassador,  announced  he  intended  to  resign  from  the  government  for
good  and  retire  to  Dalat.  A  GVN  announcement  would  state  that  the  prog-
ress of  the  program  against  the  Viet  Cong  permitted  his  departure.  Mme.  Nhu
was  to  leave  Vietnam  for  a  trip  to  Yugoslavia,  Italy,  and  possibly  the  U.S.  The
Papal  Delegate  would  arrange  for  Archbishop  Thuc  to  leave  the  country.  Some
measures  to  ease  Buddhist  tensions  would  be  taken  and,  as  a  public  relations
gesture,  a  prime  minister  would  be  appointed.  These  were  all  proposals  which
Lodge  had  initially  advanced.  But  as  the  days  passed,  nothing  happened  and
Lodge  grew  impatient.  Contributing  to  his  concern  were  the  frequent  and  often
contradictory  rumors  that  Nhu  was  secretly  dealing  with  Hanoi  and  or  the
VC  through  the  French  and  the  Polish  Ambassadors,  both  of  whose  govern-
ments favored  a  neutralist  solution  between  North  and  South  Vietnam.

For  the  remainder  of  the  week,  the  Italian  Ambassador  and  the  Papal  Dele-
gate urged  Nhu  to  act  on  his  promises  to  Lodge.  On  Friday,  September  6,  after
they  had  stressed  the  urgencv  for  action  created  by  Senator  Church's  rumored
aid-suspension  resolution,  Nhu  went  into  a  tirade  and  said  he  would  not  consider
leaving  the  country.  He  did.  however,  say  he  would  "formally"  resign.  On  the
following  day,  the  Papal  Delegate,  who  had  condemned  Archbishop  Thuc's  ac-
tivity to  the  Vatican  and  received  the  Pope's  support,  got  Thuc  out  of  the  coun-
try. Mme.  Nhu  left  the  country  for  Europe  on  September  9.  The  arrests  of
students  by  the  regime,  however,  continued  and  stories  of  torture  and  atrocities
began  to  circulate.

In  Washington,  the  NSC  met  on  September  6  and  renewed  the  discussion  of
reopening  "tough  negotiations"  with  Diem.  Lodge,  of  course,  opposed  this  while
continuing  his  dialogue  with  Nhu.  But  others  at  the  meeting  (presumably  in-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  243

eluding  McNamara  on  the  basis  of  his  views  at  the  August  31  meeting)  urged
that  Lodge  be  instructed  to  make  another  approach  to  Diem.  Lodge  was  accord-
ingly instructed  to  clarify  for  Diem  the  U.S.  position  and  explain  the  difficult
position  his  policy  placed  us  in  with  respect  to  U.S.  and  world  opinion.

Perhaps  the  most  important  discussion  at  the  meeting  was  that  engendered
by  Robert  Kennedy  over  the  fundamental  purpose  of  the  U.S.  involvement.
According  to  Hilsman,  Robert  Kennedy  said:

As  he  understood  it  we  were  there  to  help  the  people  resisting  a  Com-
munist take-over.  The  first  question  was  whether  a  Communist  take-over
could  be  successfully  resisted  with  any  government.  If  it  could  not,  now
was  the  time  to  get  out  of  Vietnam  entirely,  rather  than  waiting.  If  the
answer  was  that  it  could,  but  not  with  a  Diem-Nhu  government  as  it  was
now  constituted,  we  owed  it  to  the  people  resisting  Communism  in  Viet-
nam to  give  Lodge  enough  sanctions  to  bring  changes  that  would  permit
successful  resistance.  But  the  basic  question  of  whether  a  Communist  take-
over could  be  successfully  resisted  with  any  government  had  not  been
answered,  and  he  was  not  sure  that  anyone  had  enough  information  to
answer  it.

Kennedy's  trenchant  analysis,  however,  did  not  generate  a  searching  reappraisal
of  U.S.  policy.  It  did  stimulate  further  efforts  to  get  more  information  on  the
situation.  McNamara  proposed  sending  General  Krulak  on  an  immediate  fact-
finding trip.  It  was  agreed  that  a  senior  Foreign  Service  Officer  with  Vietnam
experience,  Joseph  Mendenhall,  would  accompany  him,  and  that  they  would
bring  John  Mecklin,  the  USIS  director,  and  Rufus  Phillips,  the  director  of  rural
programs  for  USOM,  back  with  them  to  report.  Krulak  and  Mendenhall  left
later  that  day.  State,  for  its  part,  sent  Saigon  a  long  comprehensive  cable  of
questions  on  Vietnamese  attitudes  at  all  levels  of  society.

The  purpose  of  the  Krulak-Mendenhall  mission  was  to  assess,  in  Krulak's
words,  "the  effect  of  recent  events  upon  the  attitudes  of  the  Vietnamese  in  gen-
eral, and  upon  the  war  effort  against  the  Viet  Cong."  In  a  whirlwind  four-day
trip,  the  two  men  visited  throughout  Vietnam  and  returned  to  Washington  to
report.  Krulak  went  to  ten  different  locations  in  all  four  corps  areas  and  spoke
with  the  Ambassador,  General  Harkins  and  his  staff,  87  U.S.  advisors,  and  22
Vietnamese  officers.  Mendenhall  went  to  Saigon,  Hue,  Da  Nang,  and  several
other  provincial  cities  and  talked  primarily  to  old  Vietnamese  friends.  Not  sur-
prisingly, their  estimates  of  the  situation  were  almost  completely  opposite.

The  NSC  convened  on  the  morning  of  September  10,  immediately  after  their
return,  to  hear  their  reports.  Krulak  gave  a  very  optimistic  appraisal  of  the
progress  of  the  war  and  discounted  the  effect  of  the  political  crisis  on  the  army.
The  following,  in  his  own  words,  were  his  general  conclusions:

The  shooting  war  is  still  going  ahead  at  an  impressive  pace.  It  has  been
affected  adversely  by  the  political  crisis,  but  the  impact  is  not  great.

There  is  a  lot  of  war  left  to  fight,  particularly  in  the  Delta,  where  the
Viet  Cong  remain  strong.

Vietnamese  officers  of  all  ranks  are  well  aware  of  the  Buddhist  issue.
Most  have  viewed  it  in  detachment  and  have  not  permitted  religious  dif-
ferences significantly  to  affect  their  internal  military  relationship.

Vietnamese  military  commanders,  at  the  various  echelons,  are  obedient
and  could  be  expected  to  execute  any  order  they  view  as  lawful.


244 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

The  U.S. /Vietnamese  military  relationship  has  not  been  damaged  by
the  political  crisis,  in  any  significant  degree.

There  is  some  dissatisfaction,  among  Vietnamese  officers,  with  the
national  administration.  It  is  focused  far  more  on  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  than
on  President  Diem.  Nhu's  departure  would  be  hailed,  but  few  officers
would  extend  their  necks  to  bring  it  about.

Excluding  the  very  serious  political  and  military  factors  external  to
Vietnam,  the  Viet  Cong  war  will  be  won  if  the  current  U.S.  military  and
sociological  programs  are  pursued,  irrespective  of  the  grave  defects  in  the
ruling  regime.

Improvements  in  the  quality  of  the  Vietnamese  Government  are  not
going  to  be  brought  about  by  leverage  applied  through  the  military.  They
do  not  have  much,  and  will  probably  not  use  what  they  have.

This  sanguine  view  of  the  situation  was  forcefully  disputed  by  Mendenhall.  He
argued  that  the  disaffection  with  the  regime  had  reached  the  point  where  a
breakdown  of  civil  government  was  threatened,  and  the  possibility  of  a  religious
civil  war  could  not  be  excluded.  The  war  could  not  be  won  with  the  present
regime,  he  concluded.  The  polar  opposition  of  these  two  reports  prompted
Kennedy's  now  famous  query,  "You  two  did  visit  the  same  country,  didn't
you?"

The  critical  failure  of  both  reports  was  to  understand  the  fundamental  po-
litical role  that  the  army  was  coming  to  play  in  Vietnam.  It  was  the  only  po-
tential force  with  sufficient  power  to  constitute  an  alternative  to  Diem.  Diem
and  Nhu  fully  understood  this  fact,  and  had  coped  with  it  by  usurping  the  pre-
rogative of  senior  officer  promotion,  and  basing  those  promotions  on  loyalty
to  the  palace.  This  had  sown  deep  seeds  of  distrust  among  the  senior  military
men,  and  fragmented  their  potential  power.  Krulak  failed  to  see  that  once  the
internal  political  situation  deteriorated  to  the  point  where  massive  disaffection
with  the  regime  threatened  a  communist  victory,  the  generals  would  unite  and
plunge  into  politics  out  of  common  necessity.  But  more  importantly,  neither
Krulak  nor  Mendenhall  seemed  to  anticipate  that,  if  the  army  achieved  power,
the  divisive  effect  of  Diem's  preferential  promotion  politices  would  surface  in
an  internal  army  power  struggle.  Nor  did  they  fully  understand  the  negative
effect  on  the  war  effort  this  preoccupation  with  politics  among  the  generals
would  have.

Nolting  took  issue  with  Mendenhall's  appraisal,  noting  that  Mendenhall  had
been  pessimistic  about  prospects  in  Vietnam  for  several  years.  But  John  Mecklin,
the  USIS  director,  corroborated  Mendenhall's  view,  and  pushed  it  even  further,
saying  that  the  U.S.  should  apply  direct  pressure,  such  as  suspension  of  non-
military  aid,  to  bring  about  a  change  of  government.  In  Mecklin's  words:

This  would  unavoidablv  be  dangerous.  There  was  no  way  to  be  sure
how  events  would  develop.  It  was  possible,  for  example,  that  the  Viet-
namese forces  might  fragment  into  warring  factions,  or  that  the  new  gov-
ernment would  be  so  incompetent  and  or  unstable  that  the  effort  against
the  Viet  Cong  would  collapse.  The  US  should  therefore  resolve  now  to
introduce  American  combat  forces  if  necessary  to  present  a  Communist
triumph  midst  the  debris  of  the  Diem  regime.

Mecklin  appreciated  the  potential  for  instability  inherent  in  any  army  successor


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  J 963  245

regime  that  Krulak  and  Mendenhall  had  not  seen.  But  he,  nevertheless,  con-
cluded that  we  should  proceed  to  bring  about  a  change  of  government,  accept
the  consequences,  and  contemplate  the  introduction  of  U.S.  combat  troops  to
stave  off  a  Viet  Cong  victory.

The  meeting  went  on  to  hear  Rufus  Phillips'  dour  report  on  the  situation  in
the  Delta,  and  his  doubts  about  the  validity  of  Krulak's  optimistic  outlook  on
the  military  situation.  Phillips  argued  that  this  was  primarily  a  political  contest
for  the  allegiance  of  people,  not  a  military  war,  and  that  the  Diem  regime  was
losing  it.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  was  a  shambles  in  the  field,  especially
in  the  Delta.  The  meeting  ended  on  this  note  and  no  decisions  were  made.

One  course  of  action  being  given  increasing  consideration  in  these  meetings,
as  well  as  in  Saigon  and  on  Capitol  Hill,  was  a  suspension  of  non-military  aid
to  Diem.  After  the  erroneous  VOA  announcement  of  aid  suspension  on  August
26,  Lodge  had  been  authorized  on  August  29,  as  already  noted,  to  suspend  aid
at  his  discretion  if  it  would  facilitate  the  coup.  Lodge  had  been  reluctant  to  do
so.  The  question  had  been  raised  again  in  a  joint  State/AID  cable  to  Lodge  on
September  3  which  listed  the  items  currently  up  for  approval  or  renewal.  Lodge
was  informed  that  all  approval  for  non-military  aid  would  be  temporarily  held
up  but  that  no  suspension  was  to  be  announced,  since  such  a  policy  decision
was  still  pending.  Lodge  took  advantage  of  this  by  having  the  mission,  and
especially  USOM,  reply  to  all  GVN  inquiries  about  the  status  of  the  aid  renew-
als or  approvals  that  President  Diem  would  have  to  talk  to  Lodge  about  it.
Meanwhile,  the  U.S.  Senate  began  to  put  pressure  on  the  Administration  to
do  something  about  Diem.  Hilsman  was  badgered  by  the  Senate  Subcommittee
on  the  Far  East,  and  there  were  threats  of  further  cuts  in  the  AID  bill  if  some-
thing wasn't  done.  Senator  Church  informed  the  Administration  he  intended  to
introduce  soon  a  resolution  condemning  Diem's  represssions  against  the  Bud-
dhists and  calling  for  an  end  of  aid  to  South  Vietnam  unless  they  were  aban-
doned. He  agreed  to  delay  its  introduction  temporarily  so  as  not  to  embarrass
the  Administration.

The  idea  of  a  selective  aid  suspension  to  goad  Diem  into  action  was
actively  discussed  at  State  during  the  Krulak-Mendenhall  mission,  and  later
John  Mecklin  had  specifically  suggested  it  to  the  NSC.  On  September  8,  AID
Director  David  Bell  warned  in  a  TV  interview  that  the  Congress  might  cut  aid  to
South  Vietnam  if  the  Diem  government  did  not  change  its  policies.  On  Mon-
day, September  9,  however,  the  President,  in  a  TV  interview  for  the  new
Huntley-Brinkley  News,  said,  'T  don't  think  we  think  that  (a  reduction  of  U.S.
aid  to  South  Vietnam)  would  be  helpful  at  this  time."  On  September  11,  the
day  after  the  President  received  the  Krulak-Mcndenhall  reports.  Lodge  re-
versed his  previous  position,  and  in  a  long  cable  proposed  that  detailed  con-
sideration be  given  to  ways  in  which  non-military  aid  suspension  might  be  used
as  a  sanction  to  topple  the  government.  He  had  concluded  we  could  not  get
satisfaction  from  Diem,  and  had  to  face  up  to  the  unpleasant  task  of  forcing
events.  This  view  was  reinforced  the  next  day  in  a  long  series  of  cables  reply-
ing to  State's  September  7  request  for  a  comprehensive  evaluation  of  South
Vietnamese  attitudes.

Lodge's  proposal,  and  a  proposal  by  Hilsman  for  a  combined  set  of  public
and  private  measures  to  bring  pressure  on  Diem,  formed  the  basis  of  a  White
House  meeting  on  September  1 1 .  On  the  following  day.  Senator  Church  was
given  the  green  light  and  introduced  his  resolution.  On  September  14,  Lodge
was  informed  that  approval  of  the  $18.5  million  remainder  of  the  commercial
import  program  (the  principal  piastre  support,  anti-inflation  aid  device)  was


246 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  11

deferred  until  basic  U.S.  policy  decisions  had  been  made.  The  decision  on  aid
suspension  was  now  absorbed  into  the  broader  consideration  of  a  set  of  coordi-
nated measures  to  put  pressure  on  the  GVN.

Throughout  September,  the  division  of  opinion  within  the  U.S.  mission  in
Saigon  had  grown  sharper  and  sharper.  Harkins,  Richardson,  and  to  a  lesser
extent  Brent  (Director  of  USOM),  did  not  believe  that  the  Diem  government's
bungling  of  the  Buddhist  crisis  and  loss  of  popular  support  were  threatening  the
war  effort,  or  that  the  crisis  was  as  serious  as  Lodge,  Mecklin,  Mendenhall,
et  al.,  portrayed  it.  In  any  case,  the  situation  was  not  so  irretrievable  as  to  re-
quire a  U.S.  abandonment  of  Diem  in  a  risky  venture  at  coup-making  towards
an  unknown  alternative.  The  opposite  view  was  held  by  Lodge,  Truehart,  Meck-
lin, Phillips,  and  the  majority  of  the  junior  officers  in  the  mission.  By
mid-September,  the  debate  had  reached  a  shrill  and  acrimonious  level,  as  the
following  excerpt  from  a  Harkins'  cable  to  Taylor  indicates:

As  everyone  else  seems  to  be  talking,  writing  and  confusing  the  issue
here  in  Vietnam,  it  behooves  me  to  also  get  into  the  act:  From  most  of  the
reports  and  articles  I  read,  one  would  say  Vietnam  and  our  programs  here
are  falling  apart  at  the  seams.  Well,  I  just  thoroughly  disagree.

The  situation  was  of  such  concern  that  CIA  dispatched  a  special  officer  to  reach
an  independent  evaluation.  His  conclusion  was  that  we  had  hastily  expended
our  capability  to  overthrow  the  regime,  that  an  aid  suspension  would  not
guarantee  a  constructive  result,  and  that  to  prevent  further  political  fragmen-
tation we  should  adopt  a  "business  as  usual"  policy  to  buy  time.  Amidst  all
this  internal  U.S.  dissension,  the  GVN  announced  on  September  14  that  martial
law  would  end  on  September  16  and  that  National  Assembly  elections  would  be
held  September  27.

In  Washington,  the  NSC  convened  again  September  17  to  consider  two  al-
ternative proposals  for  dealing  with  Diem  prepared  by  Hilsman.  The  first,  which
Hilsman  and  others  at  State  favored,  was  the  "pressures  and  persuasion  track,"
and  involved  an  escalatory  ladder  of  measures  both  public  and  private,  including
selective  aid  suspension,  to  coerce  Diem  into  getting  rid  of  Nhu  and  taking  steps
to  restore  the  political  situation.  The  alternative  proposal,  the  "reconciliation
with  a  rehabilitated  GVN  track,"  involved  a  public  posture  of  acquiescence  in
recent  GVN  actions,  recognition  that  Diem  and  Nhu  were  inseparable,  and  a
decision  to  salvage  as  much  as  possible  from  a  bad  situation.  This,  of  course,
would  have  involved  a  reopening  of  the  dialogue  with  Diem,  to  which  Lodge
was  opposed.  Both  proposals  assumed  that  for  the  moment  a  coup  was  out  of
the  question.

There  are  no  available  records  of  what  transpired  in  the  meeting,  but  two
decisions  were  clearly  made.  The  first  was,  in  eflFect,  to  adopt  Hilsman's  "pres-
sures and  persuasion"  proposal.  The  guidance  cable  to  Lodge  after  the  meeting,
however,  came  from  the  White  House.  It  stated  that.

We  see  no  good  opportunity  for  action  to  remove  present  government
in  immediate  future;  therefore,  as  your  most  recent  message  suggests,
we  must,  for  the  present,  applv  such  pressures  as  are  available  to  secure
whatever  modest  improvements  on  the  scene  may  be  possible  .  .  .  Such
a  course,  moreover,  is  consistent  with  more  drastic  effort  as  and  when
means  became  available.  [Doc.  136]


I'he  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  247

Lodge  was  to  press  for  a  reduction  of  Nhu's  authority  and  his  departure  from
Saigon,  at  least  temporarily.  The  cable  included  a  long  list  of  other  measures
for  the  GVN  to  take  to  redress  the  political  situation  and  gave  Lodge  complete
control  over  the  aid  program  to  enhance  his  bargaining  position.

This  authorization  specifically  includes  aid  actions  currently  held  in
abeyance  and  you  are  authorized  to  set  those  in  train  or  hold  them  up
further  in  your  discretion.  We  leave  entirely  in  your  hands  decisions  on
the  degree  of  privacy  or  publicity  you  wish  to  give  to  this  process.
[Doc.  136]

There  is  no  evidence  on  the  degree  of  consensus  of  the  principals  in  this  decision.

Lodge  replied  to  the  new  policy  guidance  on  September  19  in  a  generally
negative  vein.  The  proposals  for  specific  actions  by  the  GVN  had  all  been
previously  suggested  to  Diem  without  any  results,  and  Lodge  was  not  optimistic
about  their  adoption  now.  He  specifically  felt  that  he  should  not  be  required  to
make  a  futile  overture  to  Diem.  The  Ambassador's  aloofness  was  beginning  to
cause  oflficial  concern  at  the  palace,  and  he  felt  he  should  press  views  on  the
Ngo  family  only  when  they  initiated  the  contact.  He  did  not  think  a  public
relations  effort  was  likely  to  have  any  effect  on  the  regime,  whose  appreciation
of  questions  of  public  support  was  virtually  nil.  Withholding  aid  was  another
delicate  matter  that  did  not  offer  great  prospects  of  success.  Lodge  was  par-
ticularly concerned  that  such  action  would  impede  the  war  effort  or  damage
the  economy,  but  have  no  real  effect  on  the  regime.  No  doubt  recalling  the
generals'  previous  request  for  an  aid  suspension  as  a  sign  of  U.S.  support,  Lodge
expressed  his  view  that  any  suspension  of  aid  should  be  timed  to  coincide  with
another  coup  attempt  and  should  be  used  to  facilitate  it.  He  was  troubled  by
the  opinion  expressed  by  both  General  Minh  and  Secretary  Thuan  privately
within  the  previous  two  days  that  the  war  was  going  very  badly  and  the  VC
were  winning.  In  general,  he  felt  that  a  patient  "let  them  come  to  me"  tactic
was  more  likely  to  have  results,  unless  a  real  coup  possibility  emerged,  which  he
felt  we  should  back.


D. THE  McNAMARA-TAYLOR  MISSION

The  second  decision  to  come  out  of  the  September  17  NSC  meeting  was  to
adopt  a  suggestion  of  Secretary  McNamara  for  another  fact-finding  mission,
this  time  by  himself  and  General  Taylor,  Chairman  of  the  JCS.  [Doc.  137]

Lodge  reacted  immediately  to  the  proposed  McNamara-Taylor  mission,
pointing  out  to  the  President  that  such  a  visit  would  require  a  call  on  Diem  that
would  be  construed  by  the  regime  as  a  return  to  business  as  usual.  Since  he  had
been  consciously  pursuing  a  policy  of  official  aloofness,  he  wondered  whether
such  a  high  level  visit  was  desirable.  Furthermore,  it  coincided  with  the  pro-
posed National  Assembly  elections  on  September  27,  and  could  not  but  be
construed  as  an  indication  of  the  lack  of  importance  we  attached  to  them.  But
the  President  was  insistent,  and  Lodge  acquiesced,  suggesting  that  the  public
announcement  state  that  Lodge  had  requested  the  visit.  [Doc.  138]  After  an
exchange  of  alternative  phraseology,  it  was  agreed  that  the  release  would  say
that  the  President  had  decided  to  send  the  mission  after  consultation  with
Lodge.  It  was  so  announced  on  September  21.


248 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

The  President's  instructions  to  McNamara  described  the  purpose  of  the
mission  in  the  following  terms:

I  am  asking  you  to  go  because  of  my  desire  to  have  the  best  possible  on-
the-spot  appraisal  of  the  military  and  paramilitary  effort  to  defeat  the  Viet
Cong.  .  .  .  The  events  in  South  Vietnam  since  May  have  now  raised
serious  questions  both  about  the  present  prospects  for  success  against  the
Viet  Cong  and  still  more  about  the  future  effectiveness  of  this  effort  un-
less there  can  be  important  political  improvement  in  the  country.  It  is
in  this  context  that  I  now  need  your  appraisal  of  the  situation.  If  the
prognosis  in  your  judgment  is  not  hopeful,  I  would  like  your  views  on  what
action  must  be  taken  by  the  South  Vietnamese  Government  and  what
stops  our  Government  should  take  to  lead  the  Vietnamese  to  that  action.

...  I  will  also  expect  you  to  examine  with  Ambassador  Lodge  ways
and  means  of  fashioning  all  forms  of  our  assistance  to  South  Vietnam  so
that  it  will  support  our  foreign  policy  objectives  more  precisely.  [Doc.
139]

The  purpose,  thus,  was  fourfold:  (1)  appraise  the  war  effort;  (2)  assess  the
impact  on  that  effort  of  recent  political  developments;  (3)  recommend  a
course  of  action  for  the  GVN  and  for  the  U.S.;  and  (4)  examine  with  Lodge
ways  of  tailoring  our  aid  to  achieve  our  foreign  policy  objectives.  In  a  statement
to  the  press  at  Andrews  Air  Force  Base  just  before  leaving  for  Vietnam  on
September  23,  Secretary  McNamara  said  that  the  purpose  of  the  trip  was,  .  .
to  determine  whether  that  military  effort  has  been  adversely  affected  by  the  un-
rest of  the  past  several  weeks."

Both  Schlesinger  and  Hilsman,  however,  contend  that  Kennedy  sent  McNa-
mara and  Taylor  to  Vietnam  to  convince  them  of  the  negative  effect  on  the
war  effort  that  the  protracted  political  crisis  was  having,  and  of  the  necessity
of  applying  sanctions  to  the  Diem  regime  to  bring  about  change.  According  to
this  argument,  the  President  felt  he  could  not  afford  a  major  policy  rift  in  the
Administration  over  applying  sanctions,  especially  the  opposition  of  the  powerful
ICS,  and  concluded  that  only  McNamara,  if  convinced,  could  bring  the  mili-
tary along.

Whatever  the  exact  purpose  of  the  trip,  the  party  left  Washington  on  Sep-
tember 23  and  returned  ten  days  later,  on  October  2,  after  an  exhausting  trip
and  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  situation.

The  divergent  views  of  the  members  of  the  U.S.  mission  about  the  relative
progress  of  the  war,  and  the  effect  on  it  of  the  political  crisis,  were  exposed  im-
mediately in  the  opening  session  that  McNamara  and  Taylor  held  in  Saigon
with  the  country  team  on  September  25.  General  Harkins  and  the  MACV  staff
generally  presented  a  favorable  picture  of  the  war.  emphasizing  the  progress
of  the  strategic  hamlet  program,  and  the  generally  improved  ARVN  position,
in  spite  of  recent  rises  in  VC  initiated  incidents  and  declines  in  ARVN  opera-
tions related  to  the  political  turmoil.  McNamara  and  Taylor  prodded  the  brief-
ers with  questions  trying  to  get  comparative  indicators  of  the  situation  over  the
previous  two  years.  McNamara  in  particular  pressed  for  details  about  the
Delta.  Lodge's  and  Mecklin's  reading  of  recent  events,  and  their  estimate  of
war  progress,  differed  sharply  from  that  of  General  Harkins.  Lodge  stressed
the  more  political  and  intangible  aspects  of  the  conflict  and  cast  doubt  on  the
"hardness"  of  the  statistical  data  from  MACV.  With  the  Mission's  division
of  opinion  exposed  and  the  issues  joined.  McNamara  left  to  tour  the  country.

His  subsequent  itinerary  took  him  throughout  the  country  interviewing


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  249

Americans  and  Vietnamese  both  at  headquarters,  and  in  the  field.  In  Saigon,
in  the  last  few  days  of  the  visit,  he  was  given  extensive  briefings  by  the  civilian
side  of  the  Mission  and,  since  he  stayed  with  Lodge,  had  ample  opportunity
for  discussions  with  the  Ambassador.

On  September  29,  McNamara,  Taylor,  Harkins,  and  Lodge  called  on  Diem,
after  having  previously  decided  against  delivery  of  a  stiff  letter  from  Kennedy.
After  a  two-hour  monologue  by  Diem,  McNamara  was  finally  able  to  stress  the
U.S.  concern  that  political  unrest  was  undermining  the  war  effort.  He  stressed
the  problem  that  repressions  were  creating  for  President  Kennedy  because  of
aroused  public  opinion.  But  he  did  not  ask  for  the  removal  of  the  Nhus,  a  mat-
ter Washington  had  left  to  his  and  Lodge's  discretion.  All  this  seems  to  have  had
little  impact  on  Diem,  however.  Diem  had  asked  Taylor  for  his  appraisal  of  the
war,  and  with  the  approval  of  McNamara,  a  long  letter  from  Taylor  was  de-
livered to  Diem  on  October  2.  The  letter  pointedly  outlined  the  major  military
problems  in  the  Delta,  warned  of  the  danger  to  the  war  effort  of  the  political
crisis,  and  listed  many  of  the  specific  steps  needed  to  improve  the  military  effort
that  subsequently  appeared  in  the  report  to  the  President.  The  letter  summed
up  with  a  terse,  tough  statement  of  the  U.S.  view:

In  closing,  Mr.  President,  may  I  give  you  my  most  important  over-all
impression?  Up  to  now,  the  battle  against  the  Viet  Cong  has  seemed  end-
less; no  one  has  been  willing  to  set  a  date  for  its  successful  conclusion.  After
talking  to  scores  of  officers,  Vietnamese  and  American,  I  am  convinced
that  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency  in  the  north  and  center  can  be  reduced  to
little  more  than  sporadic  incidents  by  the  end  of  1964.  The  Delta  will  take
longer  but  should  be  completed  by  the  end  of  1965.  But  for  these  predic-
tions to  be  valid,  certain  conditions  must  be  met.  Your  Government  should
be  prepared  to  energize  all  agencies,  military  and  civil,  to  a  higher  output
of  activity  than  up  to  now.  Ineffective  commanders  and  province  officials
must  be  replaced  as  soon  as  identified.  Finally,  there  should  be  a  restora-
tion of  domestic  tranquility  on  the  home  front  if  political  tensions  are  to
be  allayed  and  external  criticism  is  to  abate.  Conditions  are  needed  for  the
creation  of  an  atmosphere  conducive  to  an  effective  campaign  directed
at  the  objective,  vital  to  both  of  us,  of  defeating  the  Viet  Cong  and  of
restoring  peace  to  your  community.

On  September  30,  their  last  dav  in  Vietnam,  McNamara  and  Taylor,  together
with  Lodge,  met  with  Vice  President  Tho.  Tho  said  that  the  U.S.,  after  Tay-
lors report  in  1961,  had  responded  to  the  Vietnam  situation  promptly  and  ef-
ficiently, but  that  recently  we  had  failed  to  use  our  strength  and  influence  in-
telligently to  prevent  the  current  political  deterioration.  But  he  had  no  methods
to  suggest.  Later  he  sharply  questioned  the  success  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet
Program,  and  said  that  increased  Viet  Cong  strength  had  to  be  attributed  to
widespread  peasant  disaffection  with  the  government.  These  views,  from  the
man  most  often  mentioned  in  U.S.  circles  as  an  alternative  to  Diem,  coming
at  the  end  of  the  visit  as  they  did,  must  have  had  an  important  influence  on
McNamara's  conclusions.  Later  that  day  the  party  left  Vietnam  to  return
home.

During  the  briefings  for  McNamara,  Lodge  had  raised  again  his  doubts
about  the  eflRicacy  of  aid  suspension  as  a  lever  against  Diem,  but  had  also  ex-
pressed his  concern  that  the  foreign  aid  bill  would  be  penalized  in  Congress


250 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

for  Diem's  repressions.  Lodge  reiterated  in  his  cables  to  Washington  during
the  visit  his  belief  that  an  aid  suspension  could  boomerang  and  alienate  the
population  as  well  as  the  regime.  Aware,  no  doubt,  that  an  aid  suspension  was
a  potential  recommendation  of  the  mission.  Brent  went  on  record  against  it,
too.  Both  views  were  important  because  McNamara  and  Taylor  had  been
specifically  charged  by  the  President  with  examining  ways  to  make  our  aid
serve  our  foreign  policy  goals,  and  their  briefing  papers  included  a  program-by-
program  consideration  of  the  impact  of  aid  suspension  prepared  by  AID-Wash-
ington.

After  a  one-day  stop  in  Honolulu  to  prepare  their  report,  McNamara  and
Taylor  arrived  back  in  Washington  on  October  2  and  promptly  met  with  the
President  and  the  NSC.  Their  report  concluded  that  the  '"military  campaign
has  made  great  progress  and  continues  to  progress."  But  it  warned  that  the
serious  political  tensions  in  Saigon  and  the  increasing  unpopularity  of  Diem  and
Nhu  could  abet  the  then  limited  restiveness  of  some  ARVN  officers  and  erode
the  favorable  military  trends.  They  reported  no  evidence  of  a  successful  coup
in  the  making,  and  felt  that  U.S.  pressure  would  probably  only  further  harden
the  regime's  attitudes.  Nevertheless,  "unless  such  pressures  are  exerted,  they
(Diem-Nhu)  are  almost  certain  to  continue  past  patterns  of  behavior."  [Doc.
142]

The  report's  military  recommendations  were  that  General  Harkins  should
review  the  war  efi'ort  with  Diem  with  a  view  toward  its  successful  conclusion  in
T,  II,  and  III  Corps  by  the  end  of  1964  and  in  the  Delta  by  the  end  of  1965.
This  would  necessitate:  (a)  a  shift  in  military  emphasis  and  strength  to  the
Delta;  (b)  an  increase  tempo  of  military  activity  throughout  the  country;  (c)
an  emphasis  on  "clear  and  hold  operations";  (d)  a  consolidation  of  the  Strate-
gic Hamlet  Program  with  the  emphasis  on  security;  and  (e)  the  fleshing  out  of
combat  units  and  better  training  and  arms  for  the  hamlet  militia.  It  was  further
proposed  that  an  announcement  be  made  of  the  planned  withdrawal  of  1,000
U.S.  troops  by  the  end  of  1963  in  connection  with  a  program  to  train  Vietna-
mese to  replace  Americans  in  all  essential  functions  by  1965.

To  bring  political  pressure  on  the  Diem  regime  to  end  its  repressive  policies,
the  following  measures  were  recommended:  (a)  a  continued  withholding  of
funds  in  the  commodity  import  program,  but  without  formal  announcement;
(b)  suspension  of  approval  of  AID  loans  for  the  Saigon-Cholon  Waterworks
and  the  Saigon  Electric  Power  Project;  (c)  suspension  of  support  for  Colonel
Tung's  forces  unless  they  were  transferred  to  the  field  and  placed  under  JGS
authority;  (d)  maintenance  of  purely  "correct"  relations  between  the  Am-
bassador and  Diem  (General  Harkins'  contract  with  the  regime  not  to  be
suspended,  however).  In  subsequent  evaluations  of  the  success  of  these  sanc-
tions, the  report  stated:

.  .  .  the  situation  must  be  closely  watched  to  see  what  steps  Diem  is
taking  to  reduce  repressive  practices  and  to  improve  the  eflfectiveness  of
the  military  effort.  We  should  set  no  fixed  criteria,  but  recognize  that  we
would  have  to  decide  in  2-4  months,  whether  to  move  to  more  drastic
action  or  try  to  carry  on  with  Diem  even  if  he  had  not  taken  significant  steps.

Finally,  the  report  recommended  against  our  actively  encouraging  a  coup,  al-
though it  recommended  seeking  "urgently  to  identify  and  build  contacts  with
an  alternative  leadership  if  and  when  it  appears."

The  report  is  a  curiously  contradictory  document.  It  was,  no  doubt,  a  com-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  251

promise  between  General  Harkins'  view  of  the  war's  progress  as  supported  by
General  Taylor,  and  Secretary  McNamara's  growing  conviction  of  the  gravity
of  the  political  crisis  and  its  dire  potential  for  the  war  effort.  Its  recommenda-
tions for  aid  suspensions  and  the  announcement  of  U.S.  troop  withdrawals
were  obviously  designed  as  measures,  short  of  a  withdrawal  of  U.S.  support,
that  would  create  doubt  within  the  Diem  regime  about  U.S.  intentions  and
incentives  for  policy  changes.  The  fact  that  these  sanctions  would  be  seen  by
the  generals  as  a  signal  of  our  willingness  to  accept  alternative  leadership —
i.e.,  a  coup — does  not  seem  to  have  figured  in  the  recommendation,  however,
because  elsewhere  the  report  specifically  rules  out  U.S.  encouragement  of  "a
change  of  government."  This  is  an  important  lapse  in  view  of  the  generals'  clear
statement  in  August  that  they  would  regard  an  aid  suspension  as  a  coup  signal.

Nevertheless,  the  recommendations  of  the  Mission  met  with  swift  approval
at  the  NSC  on  October  2,  and  later  that  day  Secretary  McNamara  made  the
Presidentially  approved  statement  to  the  press  that  included  the  announcement
of  the  1,000  man  troop  withdrawal  by  the  end  of  the  year.  The  statement  re-
iterated the  U.S.  commitment  to  the  struggle  against  insurgency  and  aggression
in  South  Vietnam,  noted  the  progress  of  the  war,  announced  the  troop  with-
drawal, and  dissociated  the  U.S.  from  the  GVN's  repressive  policies.  It  avoided,
however,  any  reference  to  economic  aid  suspensions  or  other  sanctions  against
the  regime,  thereby  giving  Diem  a  chance  to  come  around  without  a  public  loss
of  face.

On  October  5,  the  President  approved  the  specific  military  recommenda-
tions of  the  McNamara-Taylor  report,  "but  directed  that  no  formal  announce-
ment be  made  of  the  implementation  of  plans  to  withdraw  1,000  U.S.  military
personnel  by  the  end  of  1963."  [Doc.  146]  The  details  of  how  the  new  policy
would  be  applied  were  spelled  out  in  a  long  cable  to  Lodge  following  this  meet-
ing. The  purpose  of  the  new  course  of  action  was  described  at  the  beginning  of
the  message:

Actions  are  designed  to  indicate  to  Diem  Government  our  displeasure
at  its  political  policies  and  activities  and  to  create  significant  uncertainty
in  that  government  and  in  key  Vietnamese  groups  as  to  future  intensions  of
United  States.  At  same  time,  actions  are  designed  to  have  at  most  slight
impact  on  military  or  counterinsurgency  effort  against  Viet  Cong,  at  least
in  short  term.

The  recommendations  on  negotiations  are  concerned  with  what  U.S.  is
after,  i.e.,  GVN  action  to  increase  effectiveness  of  its  military  effort;  to
ensure  popular  support  to  win  war;  and  to  eliminate  strains  on  U.S.  Gov-
ernment and  public  confidence.  The  negotiating  posture  is  designed  not  to
lay  down  specific  hard  and  fast  demands  or  to  set  a  deadline,  but  to  produce
movement  in  Vietnamese  Government  along  these  lines.  In  this  way  we
can  test  and  probe  effectiveness  of  any  actions  the  GVN  actually  takes
and,  at  the  same  time,  maintain  sufficient  flexibility  to  permit  U.S.  to  re-
sume full  support  of  Diem  regime  at  any  time  U.S.  Government  deems
it  appropriate.

The  cable  goes  on  to  acknowledge  that  the  proposed  sanctions  can  only  be
applied  for  2-4  months  before  they  begin  to  adversely  affect  the  military  effort,
and  therefore  when  that  begins  to  happen  recognizes  that,  ".  .  .  further  major
decisions  will  be  required."

The  specific  actions  to  be  taken  included:  (1)  suspension  of  the  commodity


252 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

import  program  without  public  announcement;  (2)  selective  suspension  of  PL
480,  on  an  item-by-item,  sometimes  monthly,  basis,  after  referral  to  Washington
for  review;  (3)  suspension  of  the  loans  for  the  Saigon-Cholon  Waterworks  and
the  Saigon  Electric  Power  Project;  (4)  notification  to  the  GVN  that  financial
support  of  Colonel  Tung's  forces  would  be  contingent  on  their  commitment  to
field  operations  under  JGS  control,  again  without  public  announcement.  Lodge
was  instructed  to  maintain  his  policy  of  "cool  correctness  in  order  to  make
Diem  come  to  you,"  but  to  be  prepared  to  re-establish  contact  later  if  it  did  not
work.  Specifically  he  was  to  seek  improvements  in  the  GVN  military  effort,  as
outlined  in  the  McNamara-Taylor  report;  in  the  GVN's  internal  policies  that
would  restore  popular  confidence;  and  in  the  GVN's  international  (particu-
larly American)  public  image  and  its  attitudes  and  actions  toward  the  U.S.
Once  again,  however,  the  discussion  of  this  new  program  of  pressures  did  not
allude  to  their  impact  on  the  military  nor  how  a  coup  initiative  by  the  generals,
stemming  from  such  measures,  should  be  dealt  with.

Thus,  the  Kennedy  Administration,  after  a  long  month  of  searching  delibera-
tions had  made  a  far-reaching  decision  on  American  policy  toward  South  Viet-
nam. It  had  chosen  to  take  the  difficult  and  risky  path  of  positive  pressures
against  an  ally  to  obtain  from  him  compliance  with  our  policies.  To  our  good
fortune,  that  policy  was  to  be  implemented  by  an  Ambassador  who  not  only
supported  it,  but  was  uniquely  equipped  by  background  and  temperament  to
make  it  succeed.

IV. THE  COUP  MATURES— OCTOBER  2-NOVEMBER  1

A. THE  SOUTH  VIETNAMESE  SITUATION  IN  OCTOBER

Through  the  month  of  September  the  GVN  resorted  to  police  state  tactics
ever  more  frequently.  The  regime,  now  more  than  ever  under  Nhu's  dominance,
lifted  martial  law  September  16,  but  repressions  against  the  Buddhist  clergy
continued  unabated.  Students,  down  to  the  grade  school  level,  were  arrested
and  detained  for  the  most  minor  of  protests.  Civil  servants  came  under  pressure
to  avoid  contact  with  Americans,  and  to  demonstrate  their  loyalty  to  the  ruling
family.  Regime-inspired  rumors  of  impending  mob  attacks  on  U.S.  facilities,
and  assassination  lists  of  prominent  Americans  circulated  regularly.  Then,  on
October  5,  at  noon  in  the  central  market  place,  another  Buddhist  monk  burned
himself  to  death,  the  first  self-immolation  since  the  pagoda  raids.

In  this  tense  atmosphere,  elections  for  the  National  Assembly  were  held  on
September  27  after  a  pro  forma  one-week  campaign.  Predictably,  GVN  can-
didates won  overwhelming  victories.  The  new  assemblv  convened  on  October  7
to  hear  President  Diem's  state  of  the  union  message.  Diem  spoke  mainly  of
South  Vietnam's  past  and  present  progress,  playing  down  the  internal  political
crisis,  and  made  only  scant  reference  to  U.S.  assistance.  As  might  have  been
expected,  he  threw  the  blame  for  the  Buddhist  crisis  on  the  Communists,  foreign
adventurers,  and  the  Western  press.

On  the  same  day,  Mme.  Nhu  arrived  in  the  U.S.  after  a  month  in  Europe
to  begin  a  three-week  speaking  tour.  She  immediately  launched  into  shrill
denunciations  of  the  Buddhists  and  of  U.S.  policy  that  progressively  alienated
U.S.  public  opinion.  She  was  followed  around  the  country  by  her  father,  the
former  Ambassador  to  the  United  States,  however,  who  acted  as  a  one-man


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  MaySov ember,  1963  253

truth  squad  re\ealing  the  inaccuracies  and  distortions  of  her  statements.  The
Administration's  dignified  and  temperate  reaction  further  discredited  her  at-
tacks. On  October  S.  the  UN  General  Assembly  voted  to  send  a  fact-finding
team  to  South  \'ietnam  to  in\estigate  the  changes  of  repressions  against  Bud-
dhists.

B. THE  SEW  AMERICAS  POLICY

Lodge's  immediate  reaction  to  the  new  policv  approach  was  enthusiastic,
"an  excellent  instruction  outlining  a  course  of  action  which  should  vield  con-
structive results.""  With  the  exception  of  the  aid  suspension,  his  views,  in  es-
sence, had  prevailed  with  both  McNamara  and  the  President,  the  standard
public  kudos  to  militarv  progress  notwithstanding.  His  plan  was  to  allow  the
suspension  of  the  commodity  import  program,  the  largest  and  most  important
of  the  economic  sanctions,  to  become  evident  without  making  anv  mention  of
it.  and.  bv  maintaining  his  aloofness  from  official  contact,  force  the  regime
to  come  to  him.  On  October  7.  however.  Lodge  expressed  some  doubts  about
the  real  value  of  the  political  concessions  itemized  in  State"s  instructions  if  our
real  goal  was  removal  of  Nhu.  an  objective  of  questionable  feasibility  under  the
current  circumstances.  In  view  of  Nhu's  increasing  hostility  to  the  U.S.  presence
and  influence.  Lodge  felt  a  request  from  the  regime  for  a  U.S.  withdrawal  was
a  distinct  possibility.

That  same  day.  the  regime's  reaction  to  the  aid  cut-off  hit  the  streets  with
banner  headlines  in  its  mouthpiece,  the  Times  of  \'ietnam:  "USOM  Freezes
Economic  Aid  Program."  The  article  accused  the  U.S.  of  subverting  the  war
effort,  and  asserted  that  the  cut-off  had  been  decided  in  mid-September.  Such
fantastic  pressure  for  pettv  reforms  would  jeopardize  the  entire  re\ olutionary
program  of  the  government,  it  concluded.  Lodge  made  no  comment  on  the
stor\ .

In  mid-October.  Lodge  was  requested  to  pro\ide  Washington  with  a  weekh"
evaluation  of  the  effects,  both  positive  and  negative,  of  the  new  policw  Lodge"s
October  16  reply  summarized  the  situation  as  follows:  "So  far  we  appear  to  be
getting  virtually  no  effect  from  our  actions  under  DEPTEL  534.  but  we  would
not  have  expected  effects  this  earlv.""  Other  reports  indicated  that  the  regime
was  preparing  to  take  a  number  of  belt-tightenins  measures,  including  reduc-
tions in  civil  service  salaries:  that  Chinese  businessmen  and  bankers  had  begun
to  get  jittery  about  currency  stability;  and  that  the  government  was  planning
to  draw  down  its  foreign  exchange  reser\es  to  sustain  import  levels  in  the  face
of  the  U.S.  cut-oft'  of  CIP  funds.  A  CIA  memorandum  concluded  that  the  G\  N
reaction  to  the  new  U.S.  policy,  particularly  the  violent  anti-U.S.  campaign  in
the  Times  of  Metnam  and  the  surveillance  and  harassment  of  Americans  and
their  employees,  indicated  that  Diem  and  Nhu  were  preparing  for  a  long  fight
and  were  unmoved  bv  the  new  policv.

Under  Lodge's  instructions.  General  Stillwell  (MAC\' — J-3  )  met  with  Secre-
tary Thuan  on  October  17  and  informed  him  of  the  impending  cut-off  of  funds
for  the  Special  F  orces.  both  MAP  and  CIA.  unle:>s  the  three  CIA-funded  com-
panies under  Colonel  Tung's  command  were  placed  under  JGS  control  and
transferred  to  the  field.  Thuan  said  he  would  take  the  matter  up  with  Diem  im-
mediately. Harkins  informed  Diem  directh-  of  this  action  in  a  letter  on  October
18.  General  Don  and  Colonel  Tung  were  also  personally  advised  of  the  action,
but  again  no  public  announcement  was  made.  On  October  26  it  was  learned


254 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

that  Tung  and  JGS  were  working  on  plans  to  transfer  his  Special  Forces  to  the
Central  Highlands.  By  then,  however,  coup  plans  were  well  advanced  and  the
significance  of  this  transfer  must  be  understood  therein.

Militarily,  in  October  while  the  GVN  had  taken  some  minor  steps  in  line
with  the  McNamara-Taylor  recommendations  (such  as  agreeing  to  realign
III  and  IV  Corps  boundaries  to  give  added  emphasis  to  the  Delta  war),  the
combat  situation  continued  to  worsen.  The  tempo  of  VC  attacks,  particularly
in  the  Delta,  increased;  the  weapons-loss  ratio  and  casualty  ratios  deteri-
orated; and  GVN  "missing  in  action"  increased.  In  Washington,  further  doubt
was  cast  on  the  optimism  of  previous  reports  bv  a  controversial  State  Depart-
ment research  study  of  October  22.  The  memorandum  took  issue  with  encour-
aging conclusions  about  the  progress  of  the  military  campaign  derived  from
statistical  trends,  pointing  out  important  unfavorable  trends  revealed  by  the
same  statistical  data.  In  Saigon,  MACV  continued  unsuccessfully  to  press  Diem
to  take  further  steps  to  strengthen  the  war  effort.

Meanwhile,  the  U.S.  Mission  had  been  feeling  the  impact  of  the  new  policy
in  internal  strains  of  its  own.  Hilsman  reports  that  Lodge  decided  early  in
October  that  the  recall  of  John  Richardson,  the  CIA  chief  in  Saigon,  would
be  a  useful  additional  pressure  against  Nhu  because  they  had  been  closely  iden-
tified during  Nolting's  ambassadorship,  and  because  Richardson  was  known  to
favor  a  more  conciliatory  approach  to  the  regime.  While  there  are  no  cables  in
the  available  files  to  confirm  it,  Hilsman  maintains  that  Lodge  sent  a  private
message  to  the  President  and  CIA  Director  McCone  requesting  Richardson's
transfer.  The  President  agreed,  McCone  acquiesced,  and  Richardson  was  re-
turned to  Washington  on  October  5.  Whatever  other  motives  may  have  been
involved,  Richardson  had,  in  fact,  been  the  specific  object  of  an  attack  in  the
U.S.  press  on  October  2  that  had  accused  him  of  insubordination  and  had  com-
promised his  identity.  It  is  not  surprising  under  such  circumstances  that  he
should  have  been  transferred.  Whatever  the  case,  the  press  interpreted  his  re-
call as  a  slap  at  the  regime,  as  Hilsman  suggests  Lodge  wanted.

This  was  only  an  incident  in  the  continuing  series  of  stories  by  U.S.  cor-
respondents on  divisions  within  the  mission.  Lodge's  relations  with  the  press,
however,  remained  excellent  throughout  his  tour.  He  consciously  cultivated
the  U.S.  press  corps  with  private  luncheons,  "backgrounders,"  and  occasional
leaks,  and  it  paid  ofl  for  him  personallv.  But  the  press  sharply  attacked  those
in  the  mission,  like  Richardson  and  Harkins,  with  whom  they  disagreed  about
U.S.  policy.  Washington  registered  its  concern  that  these  stories,  whatever  their
origin,  were  damaging  to  the  official  posture  of  unity  the  U.S.  Government  was
trying  to  maintain  in  the  implementation  of  a  diflficult  policy  toward  South  Viet-
nam. But  the  stories  continued,  even  after  the  coup.

In  his  weekly  evaluation  of  the  impact  of  the  new  U.S.  policy  on  October  23,
Lodge  was  not  encouraged  by  the  results  to  date.  "Diem  Nhu  give  every  ap-
pearance of  sitting  tight  and  reacting  to  U.S.  pressure  with  counter  pressure  and
implying  through  public  statements  that  they  can  go  it  alone."  Nevertheless,
there  were  several  straws  in  the  wind.  Secretarv  Thuan  had  reported  that  Diem
was  worried  and  that  he  had  instructed  Thuan  to  ask  Lodge  if  Washington  had
reached  anv  decisions  on  commercial  imports.  Lodge  also  felt  that  the  regime
was  being  more  careful  about  repressive  actions.  Furthermore,  experienced  ob-
servers felt  the  U.S.  policv  was  creating  favorable  conditions  for  a  coup,  al-
though Lodge  did  not  see  anvone  seriously  considering  it.  The  day  after  this
message  was  sent.  Lodge  and  his  wife  were  invited  bv  Diem  to  spend  the  next
Sundav  (the  dav  after  the  National  Dav  celebration)  with  him  at  his  villa  in


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  255

Dalat,  after  visiting  an  agricultural  station  and  a  strategic  hamlet.  Lodge
promptly  accepted.  Diem  had  made  the  first  move.

Washington  instructed  Lodge  to  use  the  occasion  of  the  trip  with  Diem  to
test  for  movement  by  the  GVN  on  any  of  the  U.S.  demands.  Lodge  was  to  take
advantage  of  any  subject  of  interest  that  Diem  brought  up  to  determine  both
the  willingness  of  the  government  to  make  concessions  and  the  effect  of  our
selective  sanctions.  If  Diem  did  not  provide  such  conversational  opportunities,
Lodge  was  to  assume  the  initiative.  In  particular,  he  was  to  inquire  about  changes
in  the  military  campaign  that  had  been  recommended  by  the  McNamara-Tay-
lor  mission  and  subsequently  pressed  by  General  Harkins;  he  was  to  suggest  that
Diem,  be  cooperative  to  the  UN  investigatory  team  that  had  arrived  in  the
country  on  October  24,  and  allow  them  full  access  to  information  and  people;
and  he  was  to  inquire  whether  Diem  did  not  think  it  time  to  end  the  bitter  anti-
American  campaign  of  the  Times  of  Vietnam  and  the  Nhus.

Lodge's  Sunday  with  Diem  on  October  27,  the  day  after  the  National  Day
celebration,  was  frustrating  in  almost  all  respects.  Diem  did  bring  up  several
issues  of  interest,  but  gave  no  indication  that  he  had  changed  his  position  or  his
attitude  about  the  Buddhists  or  the  U.S.  He  did  inquire  about  the  suspension  of
the  commercial  import  program  to  which  Lodge  inquired  in  reply  about  the
release  of  Buddhists  and  students  from  jail,  the  reopening  of  the  schools,  and
the  elimination  of  anti-Buddhist  discrimination.  Diem  offered  excuses  and  com-
plaints as  usual.  Taking  the  initiative.  Lodge  complained  to  Diem  of  the  public
opinion  pressure  that  his  policies  were  placing  the  President  under  in  the  U.S.
He  complained  about  the  physical  attacks  on  U.S.  newsmen  and  about  Mme
Nhu's  inflammatory  remarks  in  the  U.S.  as  examples  of  the  kind  of  thing  Diem
could  prevent  that  would  enhance  his  public  image  in  the  U.S.  and  the  world.
Lodge  describes  the  end  of  the  conversation  in  this  manner:

When  it  was  evident  that  the  conversation  was  practically  over,  I  said:
"Mr.  President,  every  single  specific  suggestion  which  I  have  made,  you
have  rejected.  Isn't  there  some  one  thing  you  may  think  of  that  is  within
your  capabilities  to  do  and  that  would  favorably  impress  U.S.  opinion?"
As  on  other  previous  occasions  when  I  asked  him  similar  questions,  he  gave
me  a  blank  look  and  changed  the  subject.

While  Lodge  saw  no  movement  on  the  basis  of  the  conversation,  he  nonethe-
less suggested  that  consideration  be  given  in  Washington  to  what  we  would
consider  adequate  response  on  Diem's  part  for  a  resumption  of  the  commercial
import  program.  The  following  day,  after  Lodge  had  related  the  disappointing
results  of  the  conversation  to  Secretary  Thuan  over  luncheon,  the  latter  ob-
served that  the  U.S.  really  wasn't  asking  much  and  that  perhaps  the  conversa-
tion with  Diem  had  been  a  beginning.  In  retrospect,  the  comment  is  ironic,  for
with  the  coup  only  five  days  away,  the  October  27  conversation  was  in  reality
a  pathetic  ending  not  a  hopeful  beginning.

At  one  level,  attention  now  turned  to  Lodge's  scheduled  trip  to  Washington
October  31.  The  exact  purpose  of  the  trip  remains  a  mystery.  On  October  30,
he  sent  a  cable  to  Washington  with  some  suggestions  of  steps  by  the  GVN  that
Washington  might  consider  adequate  for  resuming  the  commercial  import
program  under  various  conditions,  steps  which  he  hoped  to  discuss  when  he
arrived.  However,  earlier  in  October,  Lodge  had  sent  a  private  note  to  Mc-
George  Bundy,  asking  that  the  President  make  him  available  for  a  trip  to  Viet-


256 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

nam  to  discuss  with  Lodge  a  matter  which  Lodge  did  not  feel  free  to  enter  into
through  any  electronic  communication  channel.  The  following  cryptic  refer-
ence suggests  that  whatever  the  mysterious  subject  lodge  had  in  mind,  it  was  the
purpose  for  the  planned  trip  to  Washington  at  the  end  of  October:

Regarding  my  wire,  I  appreciate  your  willingness  to  send  Bundy.  Would
not  have  brought  this  up  if  I  did  not  have  a  proposal  which  I  think  con-
tains new  ideas  and  which  might  just  change  the  situation  here  for  the
better.  It  cannot  be  properly  handled  by  telegram  or  letter  and  requires  a
chance  for  me  to  have  a  dialogue  with  Rusk  and  or  Harriman  and/or
Bundy.  I  wired  Bundy  because  I  cannot  leave  here  immediately,  but  I  could
come  for  one  working  day  to  Washington  after  Vietnamese  National  Day
on  October  26  and  dedication  of  Vietnamese  Atomic  Energy  Plant  on
October  28,  returning  here  immediately  thereafter,  and  would  be  glad  to
do  it.

In  order  to  shorten  Lodge's  absence  from  Saigon  and  to  add  flexibility  to  his
departure  timing,  the  President  dispatched  a  military  aircraft  to  Saigon  and  left
it  at  his  disposal.  But  as  the  October  31  date  arrived,  it  coincided  with  the  mo-
mentary anticipation  of  a  move  by  the  generals.  Lodge,  no  doubt  preferred  to
remain  in  control  of  U.S.  actions  during  a  coup  rather  than  see  Harkins  take
over,  as  Washington's  instructions  for  his  absence  stipulated,  and  so,  he  post-
poned his  own  departure.

C. RENEWED  COUP  PLOTTING

While  Diem's  reaction  to  the  tough  new  American  policy  was  hostile,  the
senior  South  Vietnamese  generals,  predictably,  interpreted  the  new  policy  as  a
green  light  for  a  coup.  Plotting  was  reactivated  almost  immediately,  if  indeed  it
had  ever  been  completely  dormant.

On  October  2,  the  day  the  McNamara-Taylor  mission  reported  to  the  Pres-
ident, General  Don  "accidentally"  encountered  Lt  Colonel  Conein,  the  CIA
contact  man  in  the  August  plot,  at  Tan  Son  Nhut  airport  and  asked  him  to
meet  him  that  night  in  Nha  Trang.  Truehart  approved  the  contact,  instructing
Conein  to  neither  encourage  nor  discourage  a  coup  but  only  to  get  information.
At  the  meeting.  General  Don  said  that  General  Minh  wanted  to  meet  with  Con-
ein at  8:00  a.m.  on  October  5  at  JGS  headquarters  at  which  time  Minh  would
be  able  to  go  into  the  details  of  the  generals'  plan.  Don  emphatically  stated
that  there  was  a  plan,  and  that  essential  to  it  was  the  conversion  of  General
Dinh,  III  Corps  commander,  to  the  cause.

So,  with  Lodge's  approval,  Conein  met  General  Minh  on  October  5.  Getting
straight  to  the  point,  "General  Minh  stated  that  he  must  know  American  Gov-
ernment's position  with  respect  to  a  change  in  the  Government  of  Vietnam
within  the  very  near  future."  The  government's  loss  of  popular  support  was
endangering  the  whole  war  effort,  which  was  deteriorating  rapidly.  He  did  not
except  any  U.S.  support,  but  needed  assurances  the  U.S.  would  not  thwart  the
attempt.  Also  involved,  he  said,  were  Generals  Don,  Khiem  and  Kim.  Of  three
possible  and  not  mutually  exclusive  plans  mentioned  by  Minh,  two  involved
military  action  against  loval  units  in  Saigon,  and  one  was  an  assassination  plot
against  brothers  Nhu  and  Can,  but  not  Diem.  Conein  remained  noncommittal
about  both  U.S.  support  and  the  various  plans.  Minh  then  expressed  doubt
about  General  Khiem  whom  he  suspected  of  having  played  a  double  role  in


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  257

August,  but  indicated  that  the  generals  would  have  to  act  soon  to  forestall
abortive  attempts  by  lower  echelon  officers,  Minh  hoped  to  meet  with  Conein
in  the  near  future  to  go  over  the  detailed  plan  of  operations.  Conein  was  again
noncommittal  and  Minh  said  he  understood.

Lodge,  with  Harkins'  concurrence,  recommended  that  when  Minh,  about
whom  he  was  now  dubious  after  his  August  experience,  approached  Conein
again,  he  be  told:  (1)  that  the  U.S.  would  not  thwart  his  plans;  (2)  that  we
would  be  willing  to  review  his  plans,  except  those  for  assassinations;  and  (3)
"that  U.S.  aid  will  be  continued  to  Vietnam  under  government  which  gives
promise  of  gaining  support  of  people  and  winning  the  war  against  the  Com-
munists." In  pressing  Minh  for  details  of  the  planned  composition  of  a  successor
regime.  Lodge  felt  we  should  stress  the  need  for  a  ''good  proportion  of  well
qualified  civilian  leaders  in  key  positions."

A  message  emanating  from  an  NSC  meeting  was  sent  to  Lodge  on  the
same  day  and  appears  to  have  been  dispatched  before  the  arrival  of  the  CAS
report  on  the  Conein-Minh  meeting  and  Lodge's  comment.  In  it  the  President
specifically  instructed  Lodge  to  avoid  encouraging  a  coup.  The  message  stated:

.  .  .  President  today  approved  recommendation  that  no  initiative  should
now  be  taken  to  give  any  active  covert  encouragement  to  a  coup.  There
should,  however,  be  urgent  covert  effort  with  closest  security  under  broad
guidance  of  Ambassador  to  identify  and  build  contacts  with  possible  al-
ternative leadership  as  and  when  it  appears.  Essential  that  this  efi'ort  be
totally  secure  and  fully  deniable  and  separated  entirely  from  normal
political  analysis  and  reporting  and  other  activities  of  country  team.  We
repeat  that  this  effort  is  not  repeat  not  to  be  aimed  at  active  promotion  of
coup  but  only  at  surveillance  and  readiness.  In  order  to  provide  plausibil-
ity to  denial  suggest  you  and  no  one  else  in  Embassy  issue  these  instruction
orally  to  Acting  Station  Chief  and  hold  him  responsible  to  you  alone  for
making  appropriate  contacts  and  reporting  to  you  allone.  [Doc.  143]

Responding  the  next  day,  October  6,  to  the  report  of  the  Conein-Minh  meeting,
Washington  referred  to  the  preceding  day's  cable,  but,  prompted  by  Lodge's
suggestion,  added:

While  we  do  not  wish  to  stimulate  coup,  we  also  do  not  wish  to  leave
impression  that  U.S.  would  thwart  a  change  of  government  or  deny  eco-
nomic and  military  assistance  to  a  new  regime  if  it  appeared  capable  of
increasing  effectiveness  of  military  effort,  ensuring  popular  support  to
win  war  and  improving  working  relations  with  U.S.  We  would  like  to  be
informed  on  what  is  being  contemplated  but  we  should  avoid  being  drawn
into  reviewing  or  advising  on  operational  plans  or  any  other  act  which
might  tend  to  identify  U.S.  too  closely  with  change  in  government.
[Doc.  145]

Washington  was,  further,  greatly  concerned  about  the  security  and  deniability
of  any  further  contacts  and  suggested  to  Lodge  that  someone  could  be  brought
in  from  outside  Vietnam  for  follow-up  contacts  if  he  thought  it  necessary.
Lodge  apparently  did  not.

An  important  apparent  lacuna  in  the  available  message  traffic  occurs  at  this
point.  By  Shaplen's  account,  a  CAS  officer  met  with  Minh  on  October  10  and


258 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

conveyed  the  substance  of  the  U.S.  position.  Whether  or  not  the  date  is  accurate,
it  is  probable  that  some  such  contact  took  place  by  mid-October.  On  October
20  a  Colonel  Khuong  at  JGS  contacted  an  American  counterpart  and  reported
a  coup  plot  involving  Minh,  Khiem,  Kim,  and  a  fourth  unidentified  general,
plus  a  number  of  colonels.  He  was  seeking  assurances  of  U.S.  support  following
a  coup.

There  were  no  further  reported  contacts  with  the  generals  until  October  23
when  Conein  again  met  with  Don  at  the  latters  initiative.  In  a  state  of  agitation,
Don  stated  that  the  coup  had  been  scheduled  to  take  advantage  of  the  October
26  National  Holiday,  but  that  on  October  22  Harkins  had  called  on  him  to  re-
port the  Khuong  contact  and  to  discourage  a  coup.  Don  further  indicated  that
the  palace  had  learned  of  Khuong's  overtures,  implying  that  Harkins  was  re-
sponsible, and  had  taken  action  to  ensure  that  the  vital  5th  and  7th  Divisions
would  be  away  from  Saigon.  Don  demanded  to  know  what  the  U.S.  attitude
was  toward  a  coup.  Conein  reiterated  the  Washington  guidance.  Apparently
relieved,  Don  asked  Conein  to  assure  Lodge  that  Khuong  was  not  a  member  of
the  coup  committee  and  would  be  punished.  He  indicated  that  the  generals  had
avoided  contacting  Lodge  directly  at  a  party  on  October  18  because  of  the
presence  of  members  of  Harkins'  staff.  Conein  then  asked  for  proof  of  the  ex-
istence of  the  coup  group  and  its  plan.  Don  said  that  if  they  could  meet  the
following  day,  he  would  give  Conein,  EYES  ONLY  for  Lodge,  the  political
organization  plan.

In  a  subsequent  conversation  with  Harkins  on  the  matter,  Lodge  reported
that  Harkins  confirmed  his  demarche  to  Don  on  October  22,  and  after  they
had  reviewed  CAP  74228,  said  he  had  misunderstood  the  policy  and  hoped
he  had  not  upset  any  delicate  arrangements.  Harkins  added  that  he  would  in-
form Don  that  his  previous  statements  did  not  reflect  U.S.  Government  policy.

By  Harkins'  account,  he  had  not  violated  Washington's  guidance  in  his  con-
versation with  Don.  He  was  merely  trying  to  discourage  Vietnamese  officers
from  approaching  U.S.  counterparts  about  coup  plots  which  only  detracted
from  the  war  effort.  Furthermore,  Don  had  at  no  time  mentioned  coup  plan-
ning to  him.  He  concluded  by  commenting  about  the  renewed  plotting  by  the
generals  that:

Though  I  am  not  trying  to  thwart  a  change  in  government,  I  think  we
should  take  a  good  hard  look  at  the  group's  proposals  to  see  if  we  think  it
would  be  capable  of  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  the  military  effort.
There  are  so  many  coup  groups  making  noises  that  unless  elements  of  all
are  included  I'm  afraid  there  will  be  a  continuous  effort  to  upset  whoever
gains  control  for  sometime  out  and  this  to  me  will  interfere  with  the  war
effort.

This  incident  once  again  highlighted  the  differing  outlooks  of  the  Ambassador
and  MACV  and  underscored  the  lack  of  close  coordination  between  them.
Unfortunately,  it  did  not  lead  to  any  improvement  in  the  situation.  The  close
identification  of  Harkins  with  Diem  made  the  Vietnamese  generals  mistrust
him.  Lodge,  responsive  to  their  great  sensitivity  about  security,  tended  to  re-
strict information  about  the  contacts  and  coup  plans  to  himself.

In  response  to  this  contact  bv  Don.  Washington  reflected  mainly  concern
that  he  might  be  acting  as  an  agent  of  the  palace  to  lead  us  down  the  garden
path.  As  he  had  indicated,  Don  contacted  Conein  on  the  morning  of  the  24th,


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  259

but  not  with  the  promised  plans.  He  reported  that  the  previous  evening  Har-
kins  had  spoken  to  him,  correcting  his  earUer  statements  about  the  nondesira-
bility  of  a  change  of  government.  Don  further  said  he  had  a  scheduled  meet-
ing with  Lodge  that  evening  (which  Lodge  denied)  and  that  plans  were  now
far  advanced  for  a  coup  sometime  before  November  2.  He  asked  Conein  to
meet  him  later  that  afternoon  to  discuss  the  details  of  the  plan.  In  a  separate
cable  disputing  some  of  Lodges  interpretative  description  of  his  statement  to
Don,  Harkins  stated  that  he  had  repulsed  Don's  suggestion  that  they  meet
again  to  discuss  the  coup  plans.  "I  told  Don  that  I  would  not  discuss  coups  that
were  not  my  business  though  I  had  heard  rumors  of  many.  Taylor  replied
immediately,  stating,  "View  here  is  that  your  actions  in  disengaging  from  the
coup  discussion  were  correct  and  that  you  should  continue  to  avoid  any  involve-
ment."

At  Conein's  meeting  with  Don  on  the  evening  of  the  24th,  the  latter  indicated
he  had  misunderstood  General  Harkins  and  had  not  seen  Lodge.  He  said  that
the  coup  committee  had  refused  to  release  any  plans  because  of  its  anxiety  about
breaches  of  security.  He  did  promise  to  turn  over  to  Conein  for  Lodge's  review
detailed  plans  of  the  operation  and  the  proposed  successor  government  two
days  before  the  coup,  which  he  reiterated  would  take  place  before  November  2.

At  this  juncture,  the  nature  of  the  dialogue  between  Lodge  and  the  White
House  began  to  change.  On  October  25,  Lodge  sent  McGeorge  Bundy  a
long  cable  taking  exception  to  Harkins'  reservations  about  a  coup  and  arguing
for  a  policy  of  "not  thwarting."  No  successor  government  could  bungle  the  war
as  badly  as  Diem  had,  he  argued,  and,  furthermore,  for  us  to  prevent  a  change
of  government  would  be  "assuming  an  undue  responsibility  for  keeping  the
incumbents  in  office."  In  his  reply,  Bundy  expressed  the  White  House  anxiety
about  reaping  the  blame  for  an  unsuccessful  coup.

We  are  particularly  concerned  about  hazard  that  an  unsuccessful  coup,
however  carefully  we  avoid  direct  engagement,  will  be  laid  at  our  door  by
public  opinion  almost  everywhere.  Therefore,  while  sharing  your  view  that
we  should  not  be  in  position  of  thwarting  coup,  we  would  like  to  have  op-
tion of  judging  and  warning  on  any  plan  with  poor  prospects  of  success.
We  recognize  that  this  is  a  large  order,  but  President  wants  you  to  know
of  our  concern.  [Doc.  153]

The  discussion  of  these  issues  dominated  the  cable  traffic  between  Lodge  and
the  White  House  up  to  the  day  of  the  coup,  with  Washington  concerned  about
detailed  plans  and  prospects  for  success  and  Lodge  stressing  the  irrevocability
of  our  involvement.

There  were  no  further  contacts  with  the  coup  group  until  the  day  after  the
fruitless  Lodge-Diem  conversations.  That  Monday,  October  28,  Lodge  and
Diem  were  leaving  Saigon  for  Dalat  to  dedicate  the  Vietnamese  Atomic  En-
ergy Plant.  At  the  airport  before  their  departure,  General  Don  daringly  took
Lodge  aside  and  asked  if  Conein  was  authorized  to  speak  for  him.  Lodge  assured
Don  that  he  was.  Don  said  that  the  coup  must  be  thoroughly  Vietnamese  and
that  the  U.S.  must  not  interfere.  Lodge  agreed,  adding  that  the  U.S.  wanted  no
satellites  but  would  not  thwart  a  coup.  When  Lodge  asked  about  the  timing  of
the  coup,  Don  replied  that  the  generals  were  not  yet  ready.

Later  that  evening  Conein  met  Don  by  prearrangement  at  the  latter's  ini-
tiative. When  Conein  called  Don's  attention  to  Lodge's  scheduled  trip  to  Wash-
ington on  October  31,  indicating  that  it  was  important  for  him  to  review  the


260 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

coup  plans  before  his  departure,  Don  replied  that  the  plans  might  not  be  avail-
able until  four  hours  in  advance,  but  urged  that  the  Ambassador  not  change
his  plans  as  this  might  be  a  tip-off.  Don  said  that  nothing  would  happen  in  the
next  48  hours,  but  the  implication  was  that  the  coup  would  pre-empt  Lodge's
departure.  When  pressed  for  details  of  the  planning,  Don  indicated  that  within
the  committee,  Minh  had  charge  of  the  military  plans  for  the  operation,  Kim
was  doing  the  political  planning,  and  he,  Don,  was  the  liaison  with  the  Amer-
icans. They  had  surrounded  General  Dinh  with  coup  supporters  and  he  would
be  neutralized.  Generals  Tri  and  Khanh  were  both  involved  in  the  planning.
General  Khiem  was  being  circumspect  because  he  was  under  palace  suspicion.
Minor  details  of  the  plan  and  a  list  of  units  supporting  the  coup  were  also  dis-
cussed.

Simultaneous  separate  contacts  had  confirmed  that  several  important  op-
position civilians  were  in  contact  with  the  generals,  including  Phan  Huy  Quat,
Bui  Diem,  and  Tran  Trung  Dung,  and  that  they  expected  to  play  a  role  in  the
post-coup  government,  which  reportedly  would  be  headed  by  Vice  President
Tho.  In  a  cable  dispatched  that  same  day  summarizing  the  situation,  Lodge  ex-
pressed some  concern  at  the  possibility  of  a  premature  coup  by  junior  officers,
but  generally  expressed  confidence  in  the  generals  while  regretting  their  re-
luctance for  security  reasons  to  provide  details  of  their  plans.  He  concluded  in
these  words :

In  summary,  it  would  appear  that  a  coup  attempt  by  the  Generals'  group
is  imminent;  that  whether  this  coup  fails  or  succeeds,  the  USG  must  be
prepared  to  accept  the  fact  that  we  will  be  blamed,  however  unjustifiably;
and  finally,  that  no  positive  action  by  the  USG  can  prevent  a  coup  attempt
short  of  informing  Diem  and  Nhu  with  all  the  opprobrium  that  such  an
action  would  entail.  Note  too  Don's  statement  we  will  only  have  four
hours  notice.  This  rules  out  my  checking  with  you  between  time  I  learn  of
coup  and  time  that  it  starts.  It  means  US  will  not  be  able  significantly  to
influence  course  of  events.

Lodge's  view  was  clear.  We  were  committed  and  it  was  too  late  for  second
thoughts.  Moreover,  when  the  balloon  went  up  he  did  not  expect  to  have  time
to  consult  Washington.  He  expected,  and  probably  preferred,  to  guide  events
himself.

In  view  of  the  deteriorating  situation,  instructions  were  given  to  Admiral
Felt,  CINCPAC,  to  have  a  task  force  stand  off  the  Vietnamese  coast  for  the
possible  evacuation  of  American  dependents  and  civilians  if  events  required.
This  was  a  re-enactment  of  a  similar  alert  during  the  abortive  August  coup.

In  Washington,  McNamara  and  the  JCS  had  become  concerned  about  the
difl'ering  views  of  Lodge  and  Harkins  as  to  the  correct  U.S.  course  of  action.
More  importantly,  they  were  alarmed  at  the  apparent  breakdown  of  communi-
cation and  coordination  between  the  Ambassador  and  MACV.  The  cable  traffic
tended  "to  form  a  picture  of  a  relationship  which  lacks  the  depth  and  conti-
nuity required  bv  the  complex  circumstances  in  Saigon."  Harkins'  suggestions
for  improving  their  rapport  were  invited.  After  the  NSC  meeting  on  October
29,  the  White  House  was  also  concerned  and  instructed  Lodge  to  show  Harkins
the  relevant  cables  and  be  sure  he  was  fully  aware  of  the  coup  arrangements,
since  during  Lodge's  absence  in  Washington  Harkins  would  have  overall  re-
sponsibility for  the'u.S.  IDoc.  150]

These  two  cables  triggered  a  flurry  of  strong  opposing  reactions  from  Lodge


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  261

and  Harkins.  Harkins,  belatedly  apprised  of  the  recent  Conein-Don  contacts
and  of  Lodge's  evaluations  and  recommendations,  took  bitter  exception  to  the
Ambassador's  conclusions  in  three  separate  cables  on  October  30.  He  particu-
larly resented  Lodge's  independent,  gloomy  assessments  of  how  the  war  was
going,  which  were  at  direct  odds  with  his  own  views,  views  which  he  had  pro-
vided Lodge  for  inclusion  in  his  weekly  reports  to  Washington.  [Doc.  151]
As  to  U.S.  policy  toward  a  coup,  he  was  irate  at  having  been  excluded  by
Lodge  from  information  and  consultation  about  the  continuing  contacts  with
the  generals.  [Doc.  152]  The  heart  of  the  issue,  however,  was  a  disagreement
about  what  was,  in  fact,  U.S.  policy  toward  a  coup  as  defined  by  the  Washing-
ton guidance  cables.  Harkins  outlined  the  disagreement  in  a  separate  October
30  cable  to  Taylor:

There  is  a  basic  difference  apparently  between  the  Ambassador's  think-
ing and  mine  on  the  interpretation  of  the  guidance  contained  in  CAP  63560
dated  6  October  (see  Appendix)  and  the  additional  thoughts,  I  repeat,
thoughts  expressed  in  CAS  Washington  74228  dated  9  October  (Appen-
dix). I  interpret  CAP  63560  as  our  basic  guidance  and  that  CAS  74228
being  additional  thoughts  did  not  change  the  basic  guidance  in  that  no
initiative  should  now  be  taken  to  give  any  active  covert  encouragement  to
a  coup.  The  Ambassador  feels  that  74228  does  change  63560  and  that  a
change  of  government  is  desired  and  feels  as  stated  in  CAS  Saigon  1964
(Appendix)  that  the  only  way  to  bring  about  such  a  change  is  by  a  coup.

Lm  not  opposed  to  a  change  in  government,  no  indeed,  but  I'm  inclined
to  feel  that  at  this  time  the  change  should  be  in  methods  of  governing
rather  than  complete  change  of  personnel.  I  have  seen  no  batting  order
proposed  by  any  of  the  coup  groups.  I  think  we  should  take  a  hard  look
at  any  proposed  list  before  we  make  any  decisions.  In  my  contacts  here  I
have  seen  no  one  with  the  strength  of  character  of  Diem,  at  least  in  fighting
communists.  Certainly  there  are  no  Generals  qualified  to  take  over  in  my
opinion.

I  am  not  a  Diem  man  per  se.  I  certainly  see  the  faults  in  his  character.
I  am  here  to  back  14  million  SVN  people  in  their  leader  at  this  time.

*  *

I  would  suggest  we  not  try  to  change  horses  too  quickly.  That  we  con-
tinue to  take  persuasive  actions  that  will  make  the  horses  change  their
course  and  methods  of  action.  That  we  win  the  military  efi'ort  as  quickly
as  possible,  then  let  them  make  any  and  all  the  changes  they  want.

After  all,  rightly  or  wrongly,  we  have  backed  Diem  for  eight  long  hard
years.  To  me  it  seems  incongruous  now  to  get  him  down,  kick  him  around,
and  get  rid  of  him.  The  US  has  been  his  mother  superior  and  father  con-
fessor since  he's  been  in  office  and  he  has  leaned  on  us  heavily.  [Docs.
151  &  152]

The  first  Washington  message  to  Lodge  on  October  30  revealed  that  White
House  anxiety  about  the  possible  failure  of  a  coup  attempt,  already  evident
on  October  25  in  CAP  63590  (see  Appendix),  had  increased.  The  CIA's  evalua-
tion of  the  balance  of  forces  cast  doubt  on  whether  the  coup  group  could  pull
off  a  decisive  action.  With  these  concerns  in  mind,  Washington  could  not  ac-
cept Lodge's  judgment  "that  no  positive  action  by  the  USG  can  prevent  a
coup  attempt  .  .  ."  The  White  House  view  was  that:


262 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

.  .  .  our  attitude  to  coup  group  can  still  have  decisive  effects  on  its  de-
cisions. We  believe  that  what  we  sav  to  coup  group  can  produce  delav  of
coup  and  that  betrayal  of  coup  plans  to  Diem  is  not  repeat  not  our  only
way  of  stopping  coup.

In  a  long  reply  (in  which  Harkins  did  not  concur),  Lodge  was  at  pains  to  point
out  his  powerlessness  to  prevent  what  was  fundamentally  a  Vietnamese  affair,
short  of  revealing  it  to  the  palace.

We  must,  of  course,  get  best  possible  estimate  of  chance  of  coup's  suc-
cess and  this  estimate  must  color  our  thinking,  but  do  not  think  we  have
the  power  to  delav  or  discourage  a  coup.  Don  has  made  it  clear  many
times  that  this  is  a  Vietnamese  affair.  It  is  theoreticallv  possible  for  us  to
turn  over  the  information  which  has  been  given  to  us  in  confidence  to
Diem  and  this  would  undoubtedlv  stop  the  coup  and  would  make  traitors
out  of  us.  For  practical  purposes  therefore  I  would  sav  that  we  have  very
little  influence  on  what  is  essentiallv  a  Vietnamese  affair.  In  addition,  this
would  place  the  heads  of  the  Generals,  their  civilian  supporters,  and  lower
militarv  officers  on  the  spot,  therebv  sacrificing  a  significant  portion  of  the
civilian  and  militarv  leadership  needed  to  carrv  the  war  against  the  VC
to  its  successful  conclusion.  After  our  efforts  not  to  discourage  a  coup  and
this  change  of  heart,  we  would  foreclose  anv  possibility  of  change  of  the
GVN  forlhe  better.

^ ^  ^

As  regards  vour  paragraph  10  (question  of  determination  and  force  of
character  of  coup  leaders),  I  do  not  know  what  more  proof  can  be  offered
than  the  fact  these  men  are  obviouslv  prepared  to  risk  their  lives  and  that
thev  want  nothing  for  themselves.  If  I  am  anv  judge  of  human  nature,
Don's  face  expressed  sinceritv  and  determination  on  the  morning  that  I
spoke  to  him.  Heartilv  agree  that  a  miscalculation  could  jeopardize  posi-
tion in  Southeast  Asia.  We  also  run  tremendous  risks  bv  doing  nothing.
[Doc.  154]

Whether  Lodge  seriouslv  believed  this  or  merelv  used  it  as  an  argumentative
excuse  for  not  entertaining  the  possibilitv  of  intervention  to  delay  or  stop  an
un\iable  attempt  is  not  clear.  His  defense  of  the  plotters  and  his  support  for
their  goal  in  this  telegraphic  dialogue  with  Washington,  however,  clearly  show
his  emotional  bias  in  favor  of  a  coup.  Elsewhere  in  the  cable  Lodge  objected
to  the  designation  of  Harkins  as  the  Chief  of  Mission  in  the  event  of  a  coup
during  his  absence.

The  tone  and  content  of  these  parallel  messages  from  Harkins  and  Lodge
onlv  heightened  White  House  anxietv  and.  no  doubt,  raised  concern  about
the  objectivitv  of  these  two  principal  U.S.  observers  of  the  critical  Vietnamese
situation.  In  an  etTort  to  clear  the  air.  explicitlv  redefine  and  restate  the  policy
guidance,  and  clarifv  the  assignment  of  roles  and  responsibilities  within  the
Mission,  the  White  House  sent  still  another  cable  to  Saigon  later  on  October
30.  Taking  pointed  issue  with  Lodge's  view,  the  message  stated:

We  do  not  accept  as  a  basis  for  US  policv  that  we  have  no  power  to
delav  or  discourage  a  coup.  In  vour  paragraph  12  vou  sav  that  if  you  were
convinced  that  the  coup  was  going  to  fail  you  would  of  course  do  every-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  263


thing  you  could  to  persuade  coup  leaders  to  stop  or  delay  any  operation
which,  in  your  best  judgement,  does  not  clearly  give  high  prospect  of  suc-
cess. We  have  never  considered  any  betrayal  of  generals  to  Diem,  and
our  79109  explicitly  rejected  that  course.  We  recognize  the  danger  of  ap-
pearing hostile  to  generals,  but  we  believe  that  our  own  position  should  be
on  as  firm  ground  as  possible,  hence  we  cannot  limit  ourselves  to  proposi-
tion implied  in  your  message  that  only  conviction  of  certain  failure  justi-
fies intervention.  We  believe  that  your  standard  for  intervention  should
be  that  stated  above.

Therefore,  if  you  should  conclude  that  there  is  not  clearly  a  high  pros-
pect of  success,  you  should  communicate  this  doubt  to  generals  in  a  way
calculated  to  persuade  them  to  desist  at  least  until  chances  are  better.  In
such  a  communication  you  should  use  the  weight  of  US  best  advice  and
explicitly  reject  any  implication  that  we  oppose  the  eff'ort  of  the  generals
because  of  preference  for  present  regime.  We  recognize  need  to  bear  in
mind  generals'  interpretation  of  US  role  in  1960  coup  attempt  and  your
agent  should  maintain  clear  distinction  between  strong  and  honest  ad-
vice given  as  a  friend  and  any  opposition  to  their  objectives.  [Doc.  155]

Lodge  was  also  urgently  requested  to  obtain  more  detailed  information  about
the  composition  of  the  forces  the  coup  leaders  expected  to  have  at  their  dis-
posal so  that  we  could  better  assess  their  prospects.

With  regard  to  Lodge's  absence,  the  instructions  placed  Truehart  in  charge
unless  a  coup  occurred,  in  which  case  Harkins  would  be  Chief  of  Mission.  The
desirability  of  having  Lodge  on  the  scene  in  the  event  of  a  coup,  however,  was
stressed  and  he  was  encouraged  to  delay  his  departure  if  he  thought  the  coup
was  imminent.  The  following  four-point  standing  instructions  for  U.S.  posture
in  the  event  of  a  coup  were  also  given:

a.  US  authorities  will  reject  appeals  for  direct  intervention  from  ei-
ther side,  and  US-controlled  aircraft  and  other  resources  will  not  be  com-
mitted between  the  battle  lines  or  in  support  of  either  side,  without
authorization  from  Washington.

b.  In  event  of  indecisive  contest,  US  authorities  may  in  their  discre-
tion agree  to  perform  any  acts  agreeable  to  both  sides,  such  as  removal  of
key  personalities  or  relay  of  information.  In  such  actions,  however,  US
authorities  will  strenuously  avoid  appearance  of  pressure  on  either  side.
It  is  not  in  the  interest  of  USG  to  be  or  appear  to  be  either  instrument
of  existing  government  or  instrument  of  coup.

c.  In  the  event  of  imminent  or  actual  failure  of  coup,  US  authorities
may  afford  asylum  in  their  discretion  to  those  to  whom  there  is  any  ex-
press or  implied  obligation  of  this  sort.  We  believe,  however,  that  in
such  a  case  it  would  be  in  our  interest  and  probably  in  interest  of  those
seeking  asylum  that  they  seek  protection  of  other  Embassies  in  addition  to
our  own.  This  point  should  be  made  strongly  if  need  arises.

d.  But  once  a  coup  under  responsible  leadership  has  begun,  and  within
these  restrictions,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  US  government  that  it  should
succeed.

With  respect  to  instruction  d.,  however,  no  specific  actions  to  support  or  guar-
antee the  success  of  a  coup  were  authorized.  This  message  was  the  last  guidance
Lodge  received  from  Washington  before  the  coup  began.


264 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


V. THE  COUP  AND  ITS  AFTERMATH— NOVEMBER  1-23
A. THE  COUP

The  atmosphere  of  Byzantine  intrigue  in  Saigon  in  the  fall  of  1963  made  it
virtually  impossible  to  keep  track  of  all  the  plots  against  the  regime.  In  one  of
his  last  messages  to  Washington  before  the  coup,  Lodge  identified  ten  individual
dissident  groups  in  addition  to  the  generals'  group.  These  various  plots  were
highly  fluid  in  composition  and  quixotic  in  character,  quickly  appearing,  disap-
pearing and/or  merging  with  other  groups.  There  were,  however,  two  groups
that  came  into  existence  in  the  summer  and  retained  their  identity  with  some
mutation  until  near  the  end.  The  first,  chronologically,  was  variously  identified
as  the  Tuyen  or  Thao  group  after  its  successive  leaders.  It  was  conceived  some-
time in  June  by  Dr.  Tran  Kim  Tuyen,  the  Director  of  Political  Studies  (na-
tional intelligence)  under  Diem,  and  involved  elements  of  the  Ministries  of
Civic  Action  and  Information  and  certain  elements  of  the  Army.  When  Dr.
Tuyen  was  sent  out  of  the  country  in  September,  the  group  was  more  or  less
merged  with  a  separate  group  of  middle  level  officers  headed  by  Lt.  Colonel
Phamh  Goc  Thao.  Several  dates  were  established  bv  this  group  for  a  coup  during
the  summer  and  fall,  but  each  time  critical  militarv  units  were  temporarilv  trans-
ferred by  either  the  palace  or  the  JGS,  under  General  Don,  each  of  whom  was
somewhat  aware  of  the  group's  plans  and  was  interested  in  frustrating  them.
In  the  end,  it  concerted  efforts  with  the  generals  as  the  onlv  alternative  with
prospects  of  success.

The  second  group  was,  of  course,  composed  of  the  senior  generals  of  the
Vietnamese  Army.  Plotting  by  this  group  also  began  in  earnest  in  June.  Initially,
its  leader  was  identified  as  General  Khiem  and  later  General  Don,  but  the  de
facto  leader  throughout  was.  no  doubt.  General  Minh  who  commanded  by  far
the  greatest  respect  and  allegiance  within  the  officer  corps.  The  four  principal
members  of  the  group  were  Generals  Minh,  Don.  Khiem.  and  Kim,  all  of  whom
were  stationed  in  Saigon  without  troop  command,  the  latter  three  at  JGS  and
General  Minh  as  a  palace  military  advisor.  Generals  Tri  and  Khanh,  I  and  II
Corps  commanders  respectively,  were  secondarv  members  of  the  generals'  group,
but  were  also  in  touch  with  the  Thao  group.  The  abortive  attempt  by  the  gen-
erals to  launch  a  coup  in  August  has  alread\-  been  described  in  detail.  Important
lessons  seem  to  have  been  learned  by  these  men  from  that  experience,  for  when
they  again  began  to  set  their  plans  and  make  arrangements  it  was  with  great
attention  to  detail  and  with  an  explicit  division  of  labor.

Among  the  plotters,  General  Minh  had  the  overall  direction  of  the  coup
activities,  although  the  group  acted  in  committee  fashion  with  the  members  ap-
parently voting  at  several  points  on  particular  actions.  He  was  also  responsible
for  the  military  operation  of  the  coup  itself.  General  Don  was  the  liaison  with
the  Americans  and  responsible  for  wooing  General  Dinh.  General  Kim  handled
planning  for  the  post-coup  government  and  the  relations  with  the  civilian  groups
that  were  expected  to  be  called  on  to  support  the  coup.  General  Khiem  was  to
play  a  critical  role  at  the  end  of  October  as  the  liaison  man  with  the  Thao  coup
group  in  working  out  the  details  of  their  support  and  integration  into  the  actual
execution  of  the  coup.

As  already  noted,  the  fundamental  problem  of  the  plotters  was  their  lack  of
troop  command  in  the  immediate  Saigon  area.  The  Ngo  family's  longstanding
fear  of  militarv  coups,  as  pre\iouslv  discussed,  had  been  the  main  factor  in  all


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  265

military  command  assignments  and  promotion  policy.  Nowhere  was  loyalty  a
more  important  prerequisite  for  command  than  in  Saigon,  the  surrounding  III
Corps,  and  the  nearby  IV  Corps,  with  its  headquarters  only  40  miles  away  down
Highway  4.  In  addition  to  the  sizable  special  forces  units  in  Saigon  under
Colonel  Tung  and  the  various  national  police  and  paramilitary  units  that  also
took  their  orders  directly  from  the  palace,  Diem  had  appointed  the  vain,
ambitious,  and  supposedly  loyal  General  Dinh  as  Commander  of  III  Corps
(whose  5th  Division  was  stationed  at  nearby  Bien  Hoa)  and  the  Saigon  Mil-
itary District.  Furthermore,  the  IV  Corps  was  commanded  by  General  Cao,
who  had  saved  Diem  during  the  1960  coup  by  bringing  his  loyal  7th  Division
troops  up  from  My  Tho.  It  was  on  this  formidable  line-up  of  forces  that  the
family  had  staked  its  survival;  and  not  without  reason,  as  the  frustrated  coup  of
August  demonstrated.

Saigon,  however,  was  not  entirely  without  dissident  elements.  With  the  ex-
ception of  their  commanders,  the  Marine  battalion,  the  airborne  battalion,  and
the  Air  Force  were  all  sympathetic  to  a  coup.  But  the  plotters  knew  that  a  fa-
vorable balance  of  forces  could  not  be  achieved  or  maintained  without  either  the
conversion  or  neutralization  of  Generals  Dinh  and  Cao.

During  the  August  pagoda  raids,  Dinh  had  been  given  overall  command  of
the  crackdown,  although  Tung  had  taken  his  instructions  as  always  directly  from
Nhu  in  carrying  out  the  attacks.  Thereafter,  Dinh,  who  was  a  notorious  braggart,
boasted  that  he  had  saved  the  country  from  the  Buddhists,  Communists,  and
"foreign  adventurers."  Carried  away  with  himself,  he  held  a  news  conference  on
August  27  in  which  he  was  harried  and  finally  humiliated  by  antagonistic
American  journalists.  The  plotting  generals  decided  that  they  would  play  on  his
vanity  and  egoism  to  win  him  over  to  their  side.  With  his  pride  injured  at  the
hands  of  the  newsmen,  Dinh  was  easy  prey  to  Don's  suggestion  that  Nhu  had
played  him  for  a  fool,  but  that  he  really  was  a  national  hero,  and  that  the  regime
was  indebted  to  him.  Don  suggested  that  Dinh  go  to  Diem  with  a  plan  to  increase
military  participation  in  the  government,  specifically  that  he,  Dinh,  be  named
Minister  of  Interior.  Don  rightly  expected  that  Diem  would  be  outraged  at  such
a  brazen  request,  and  would  reprimand  Dinh,  further  wounding  his  pride  and
alienating  him  from  the  regime.  Diem  reacted  as  expected,  and  ordered  Dinh
to  take  a  "vacation"  in  Dalat  for  a  while.  Don  at  this  point  began  his  long  efl'ort
to  woo  Dinh  to  the  plotters  side  against  Diem.  Dinh,  however,  lacked  self-con-
fidence and  vacillated  although  he  does  not  appear  to  have  played  a  double
roll  by  revealing  the  existence  of  the  plot  to  the  palace.  While  the  elaborate
stratagems  for  seducing  Dinh  were  taking  place,  the  plotters  had  carefully  sur-
rounded him  with  supporters  of  the  coup,  including  his  deputy,  Colonel  Co,
whom  they  felt  they  could  rely  on  to  neutralize  him  if  he  showed  signs  of  rally-
ing to  the  family  once  the  balloon  was  up.  By  the  end  of  the  third  week
in  October,  the  plotters  felt  reasonably  confident  that  the  problem  of  Dinh  had
been  resolved:  he  would,  as  an  opportunist,  rally  to  the  coup  if  he  felt  it  was
going  to  succeed;  if  he  did  not,  he  would  be  eliminated.

At  the  same  time,  plans  had  been  under  way  to  neutralize  General  Cao,  the
IV  Corps  commander,  since  he  would  certainly  betray  the  plotters  to  the  palace
if  he  got  word  of  the  plans,  or  bring  his  troops  to  Diem's  aid  if  the  coup  started
while  he  was  still  in  control  of  them.  To  do  this.  Colonel  Co,  Dinh's  deputy,  was
sent  to  the  Delta  to  win  the  support  of  the  subordinate  commanders  in  IV  Corps.
In  the  ultimate  plan,  Co  would  be  sent  with  JGS  orders  to  take  command  of  the
7th  Division  in  My  Tho  on  the  day  before  the  coup  began;  he  would  order  all
boats  to  the  Saigon  side  of  the  Mekong  River;  and,  thus,  act  as  a  blocking  force


266 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

to  General  Cao  who,  stranded  in  Can  Tho  on  the  far  side  of  the  Mekong,  was
then  be  arrested  by  dissident  officers  in  his  own  command.  Co  apparently  was
successful  in  getting  the  support  of  the  great  majority  of  the  subordinate  officers,
but  one  loyal  officer  heard  of  the  plans  and  immediately  tipped  off  Nhu.

Diem  and  Nhu  called  in  Dinh  and  revealed  what  they  had  learned,  attempt-
ing to  force  his  hand.  Dinh  reacted  with  feigned  shock  and  suggested  that  Co
be  executed  immediately.  This  convinced  Nhu  that  Dinh  was  not  involved.  They
preferred  to  keep  Co  alive  to  get  more  information  from  him.  Nhu  then  re-
vealed his  own  elaborate  scheme  for  a  pseudo-coup  that  would  pre-empt  the
plotters  and  squelch  their  plans.  His  two-part  plan  was  to  start  with  the  transfer
of  Colonel  Tung's  special  forces  out  of  Saigon  on  maneuvers.  The  phony  coup
would  then  take  place  with  Diem  and  Nhu  escaping  to  their  hideaway  at  Cap
St  Jacques.  After  several  days  of  hooliganism  including  the  murder  of  several
prominent  Vietnamese  and  some  Americans,  the  loyal  5th  Division  under  Dinh
and  the  7th  under  Cao  would  counterattack  the  city  and  Diem  and  Nhu  would
return  as  triumphant  heroes,  more  secure  than  ever.  Dinh  was  the  key  to  Nhu's
plan.

Dinh's  role  becomes  confused  at  this  point.  He  apparently  was  uncertain  about
the  relative  balance  of  forces  and  decided  to  cooperate  with  both  sides  until  he
could  decide  which  he  felt  was  going  to  gain  the  upper  hand,  although  he  was
probably  still  leaning  toward  the  palace.  In  any  case,  if  he  was  trusted  by  the
Nhus,  he  certainly  was  not  by  the  generals  because  they  confided  in  him  none
of  their  detailed  plans  for  the  operation,  and  Nhu's  plan,  in  which  he  would
have  played  the  key  role,  never  came  to  fruition.  It  was  pre-empted  by  the  real
coup  the  generals  had  been  plotting.

By  the  last  week  in  October,  timing  had  become  critical.  The  Thao  group  ap-
parently had  intended  to  act  on  October  24,  but  were  dissuaded  by  Don  and
Khiem  who  argued  that  they  had  too  few  forces  to  guarantee  success.  It  was  at
this  juncture  that  Khiem  brought  the  Thao  group  into  the  plans  and  worked  out
joint  arrangements  with  them  for  the  execution  of  the  coup.  Shaplen  says  that
the  generals'  coup  was  originally  planned  for  November  4.  This  conflicts,  how-
ever, with  what  Don  had  told  Conein  on  October  24,  namely  that  it  would  occur
before  November  2.  By  Shaplen's  account,  Dinh  revealed  the  planned  date  of
the  coup  to  Nhu  who  instructed  him  to  urge  that  it  be  advanced  to  November  1.
Nhu  still  thought  somehow  he  could  carry  off  his  plan  by  abandoning  the  phony
coup,  by  letting  the  real  substitute  for  it  in  the  hope  that  it  would  be  thrown  off
balance  by  the  advanced  date,  and  by  reiving  on  Dinh's  loyal  troops  as  supple-
mented by  Cao's  to  tip  the  scale  in  the  family's  favor  once  the  chips  were  down.
In  allowing  the  generals  to  make  their  move,  the  principal  rebels  would  all  be
compromised  and  Nhu  could  then  act  to  crush  all  major  dissidence.  Whatever
the  reason,  whether  by  Nhu's  intrigue  or  by  their  own  timetable,  the  generals
set  the  coup  for  November  1.

While  they  had  left  a  worried  U.S.  officialdom  with  only  sketchy  ideas  of  the
planned  operation,  the  generals  had  themselves  devoted  great  attention  to  all
details  of  their  move.  When  the  hour  came  for  execution,  the  plan  was  imple-
mented with  hardly  a  hitch,  and  the  fate  of  the  regime  was  sealed  in  the  first
hours  of  th :  coup.

On  October  29,  the  first  preparatory  action  for  a  coup  was  taken.  General
Dinh  ordered  Colonel  Tung  to  move  his  special  forces  out  of  the  capital  for
maneuvers,  but  whether  he  was  acting  as  the  agent  of  the  generals  or  the  palace
is  still  unclear.  Simultaneously,  the  chief  of  intelligence,  who  had  been  a  member
of  the  Thao  plot  and  was  now  participating  in  the  generals'  plan,  passed  phony


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  267

intelligence  of  a  VC  build-up  outside  Saigon  to  Diem  and  Nhu  to  get  them  to
divert  loyal  units  that  could  have  been  used  to  thwart  a  coup.

The  day  of  the  coup  itself  began  improbably  with  an  official  U.S.  call
on  Diem.  Admiral  Felt,  CINCPAC,  had  been  visiting  General  Harkins  to  re-
view the  situation  and  prior  to  his  departure  at  noon,  he  and  Lodge  paid
a  courtesy  call  on  the  President.  Diem's  monologue  was  little  different  from  what
he  had  said  to  McNamara  and  Taylor  the  month  before.  As  they  were  leaving,
however,  he  called  Lodge  aside  and  they  talked  privately  for  twenty  minutes.
Diem,  in  a  tragically  unwitting  example  of  too  little  too  late,  indicated  that  he
wanted  to  talk  to  Lodge  about  what  it  was  the  U.S.  wanted  him  to  do.  The
atmosphere  of  this  meeting  must  have  been  strained  in  the  extreme  in  view  of
Lodge's  awareness  of  the  imminence  of  the  coup.  After  the  meeting.  Felt  went
straight  to  the  airport  and  held  a  press  conference,  with  a  nervous  General  Don
at  his  side,  before  departing  at  noon  unaware  of  the  drama  that  was  already
unfolding.

While  Lodge  and  Felt  had  been  at  the  palace,  coup  units  had  already  begun
to  deploy  in  and  around  Saigon.  At  the  same  time,  nearly  all  the  generals  and
top  officers  had  been  convened  for  a  noon  meeting  at  JGS  headquarters  at  Tan
Son  Nhut.  There  the  coup  committee  informed  them  that  the  coup  had  begun
and  asked  for  their  support.  Pledges  of  support  were  recorded  on  tape  by  all
those  present  who  supported  the  action.  They  were  to  be  used  later  over  the
radio  and  would  implicate  the  entire  senior  officer  corps  of  the  Army  in  the
event  the  coup  failed.  In  this  way  the  plotters  were  able  to  enlist  the  support  of
several  wavering  officers.  The  only  senior  officers  not  present  were  Generals
Dinh  and  Cao,  who  were  not  informed  of  the  meeting  to  prevent  their  revealing
the  coup  prematurely  to  the  palace  or  taking  counter  action.  Also  not  present
was  the  South  Vietnamese  Chief  of  Naval  Operations,  who  had  been  assas-
sinated by  a  trigger-happy  escort  enroute.  Several  officers  suspected  of  being
loyal  to  Diem  were  taken  into  immediate  custody  at  JGS,  including  Colonel
Tung,  and  the  commanders  of  the  Air  Force,  the  airborne  brigade,  the  Marines,
the  Civil  Guard,  and  the  police  force.  A  CAS  officer,  presumably  Lt  Colonel
Conein,  was  also  invited  to  come  to  JGS  and  was  authorized  to  maintain  tele-
phone contact  with  the  Embassy  during  the  coup.  He  provided  reliable  reporting
throughout  the  next  two  days.

At  1:45  p.m.,  Don  called  General  Stilwell,  Harkins'  J-3,  and  informed  him
that  all  the  generals  were  assembled  at  jGS  and  that  the  coup  had  begun.  At
the  same  time,  coup  forces  were  seizing  the  post  office  with  its  telecommuni-
cations facilities,  the  police  headquarters,  the  radio  stations,  the  airport,  and  the
naval  headquarters,  and  were  deploying  in  positions  to  assault  the  special
forces  headquarters  near  Tan  Son  Nhut,  the  palace,  and  the  barracks  of  the
palace  guard.  Other  units  had  been  deployed  in  blocking  positions  to  defend
against  any  loyal  counterattack  from  units  outside  Saigon.  These  actions  were
swift  and  met  with  little  resistance.  The  units  involved  included  the  Marine  and
airborne  units  under  the  leadership  of  junior  officers,  the  Air  Force  under  junior
officers,  and  units  from  the  5th  Division  under  orders  from  Dinh,  who  had
thrown  in  his  lot  when  he  became  aware  of  the  unanimity  of  the  senior  officers
and  their  apparent  likelihood  of  success.  Later  in  the  day,  armor  and  troops
from  the  7th  Division  at  My  Tho,  under  the  insurgent  leadership  of  Colonel
Co,  arrived  for  the  assault  on  the  palace.

As  is  always  the  case  in  this  kind  of  crisis,  the  quantity  of  cables  quickly  over-
whelmed the  communications  system,  and  the  incompleteness  of  the  reports
meant  that  no  clear  picture  of  what  was  happening  could  be  pieced  together


268 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

until  later.  As  in  all  such  situations,  the  Embassy  became  an  island  linked  to
outside  events  only  by  tenuous  reports  from  telephone  contacts.

In  the  early  afternoon,  Colonel  Tung,  who  had  been  arrested  on  the
morning  of  November  1,  was  forced  to  call  his  special  forces  and  tell  them  to
surrender  to  the  coup  forces.  Not  long  thereafter,  the  adjacent  special  forces
headquarters  fell  to  the  coup  units  after  a  brief  skirmish.  When  this  occurred,
the  palace  was  reduced  for  its  defense  to  the  palace  guard,  since  the  re-
mainder of  the  special  forces  were  outside  the  city  and  effectively  cut  off  from
it,  and  all  other  unit  commanders  had  come  under  the  command  of  officers  in-
volved in  the  coup.  General  Cao,  the  IV  Corps  commander,  pledged  his  sup-
port to  the  coup  in  the  late  afternoon,  although  it  is  not  clear  whether  this  was
opportunistic  or  whether  he  thought  the  coup  was  really  Phase  I  of  Nhu's
plan.  Not  trusting  him,  however,  the  generals  placed  him  under  guard.  At
4:30  p.m.,  the  generals  went  on  the  radio  to  announce  the  coup  and  demand
the  resignation  of  Diem  and  Nhu.  This  was  followed  by  a  continuing  broad-
cast of  the  pledges  of  support  of  the  senior  officers  that  had  been  recorded
that  morning.  Meanwhile,  Air  Force  transports  were  dropping  prepared  leaf-
lets announcing  the  coup,  and  calling  on  the  populace  to  support  it.

At  the  beginning.  Diem  and  Nhu  were  apparently  fooled  by  the  coup,  or  had
completely  miscalculated  the  extent  of  its  support.  At  the  first  indications  of
coup  actions,  Nhu  reportedly  assured  an  alarmed  official  that  it  was  all
}  art  of  a  palace  plan.  When  word  reached  the  palace  that  all  key  points  had
fallen,  Nhu  tried  to  contact  General  Dinh.  When  he  could  not  reach  him,  he
realized  that  he  had  been  outfoxed  and  that  the  coup  was  genuine.  By  this
time,  fighting  was  going  on  between  the  coup  forces  and  the  palace  guard  at
the  palace  and  the  nearby  guard  barracks.  When  the  generals  called  the  two
brothers  and  asked  them  to  surrender,  promising  them  safe  conduct  out  of  the
country,  Diem  replied  by  asking  them  to  come  to  the  palace  for  "consulta-
tions," an  obvious  attempt  to  repeat  the  1960  tactic  of  delaying  the  coup
long  enough  for  loyal  troops  to  reach  the  city.  The  generals,  however,  were  not
bargaining — they  were  demanding.

At  4:30  p.m..  Diem  called  Lodge  to  ask  where  he  stood  and  the  following
conversation  ensued :

Diem:  Some  units  have  made  a  rebellion  and  I  want  to  know  what  is  the
attitude  of  the  US?

Lodge:  I  do  not  feel  well  enough  informed  to  be  able  to  tell  you.  I  have
heard  the  shooting,  but  am  not  acquainted  with  all  the  facts.  Also  it
is  4:30  a.m.  in  Washington  and  the  US  Government  cannot  possibly
have  a  view.

Diem:  But  you  must  have  some  general  ideas.  After  all,  I  am  a  Chief  of
State.  I  have  tried  to  do  my  duty.  I  want  to  do  now  what  duty  and
good  sense  require.  I  believe  in  duty  above  all.

Lodge:  You  have  certainly  done  your  duty.  As  I  told  you  only  this  morn-
ing, I  admire  your  courage  and  your  great  contributions  to  your
country.  No  one  can  take  away  from  you  the  credit  for  all  you  have
done.  Now  I  am  worried  about  your  physical  safety.  I  have  a  report
that  those  in  charge  of  the  current  activity  offer  you  and  your  brother
safe  conduct  out  of  the  country  if  you  resign.  Had  you  heard  this?

Diem:  No.  (And  then  after  a  pause)  You  have  my  telephone  number.

Lodge:  Yes.  If  I  can  do  anvthing  for  your  physical  safety,  please  call  me.

Diem:  I  am  trvin^  to  re-establish  order.


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May— November,  1963  269

There  is  no  evidence  available  as  to  whether  Washington  issued  further  instruc-
tions with  respect  to  the  personal  safety  of  Diem  and  Nhu  at  this  time.  The
above  conversation  was  the  last  that  any  American  had  with  DIEM.  Lodge,
as  was  his  custom,  retired  that  night  at  about  9:30  p.m.

Shortly  after  Diem's  call  to  Lodge,  the  generals  called  the  palace  again
and  put  Colonel  Tung  on  the  phone.  Tung  told  Nhu  he  had  surrendered.  The
generals  then  demanded  the  immediate  surrender  of  the  brothers  or  they  would
put  the  palace  under  air  and  ground  attack.  Each  general  at  JGS,  in  turn,  was
put  on  the  phone  to  assure  Diem  of  safe  conduct  if  he  would  resign,  but  Nhu
apparently  dissuaded  him.  General  Minh  himself  made  a  separate  telephone
call  to  Diem  in  a  final  attempt  to  get  him  to  surrender,  but  Diem  hung  up.  The
two  brothers  now  began  frantically  calling  unit  commanders  throughout  the
country  on  their  private  communications  system  to  get  them  to  come  to  their
aid.  In  most  cases  they  could  not  get  through,  and  when  they  did  they  were
told  to  surrender  by  officers  who  now  supported  the  coup.  When  they  could  get
no  help  from  the  regular  military,  they  made  a  vain  effort  to  enlist  the  support
of  paramilitary  units  and  their  Republic  Youth  groups.  Sometime  in  the  early
evening,  probably  by  eight  o'clock,  they  recognized  the  hopelessness  of  the  situ-
ation and  escaped  from  the  palace,  unbeknown  to  its  defenders,  through  one
of  the  secret  underground  exits  connected  to  the  sewer  system.  They  were  met
by  a  Chinese  friend  who  took  them  to  his  home  in  Cholon  where  they  had  pre-
viously set  up  a  communications  channel  to  the  palace  for  just  such  an  emer-
gency. There  they  spent  their  last  night.

In  the  face  of  the  brothers'  intransigent  refusal  to  surrender  and  confident
that  they  were  now  in  control  of  the  entire  country  and  that  their  plans  had
succeeded,  the  generals  began  assembling  forces  and  preparing  for  the  siege  of
the  palace.  At  about  nine  o'clock,  they  opened  an  artillery  barrage  of  the  pal-
ace and  its  defenders.  Since  the  palace  was  being  defended  by  some  tanks,  an
infantry  assault  with  tank  support  was  required  to  capture  it.  This  began  about
3:30  a.m.  on  November  2,  and  lasted  until  about  6:30  a.m.,  when  the  palace
fell,  after  Diem  had  issued  a  cease-fire  order  to  the  palace  guard  from  his
Cholon  hideaway.

Throughout  the  night  the  brothers  had  remained  in  contact  with  both  their
loyal  supporters  at  the  palace,  and  periodically  with  the  insurgents.  The  latter
did  not  learn  that  the  brothers  had  fled  until  the  rebel  forces  under  Colonel
Thao  invaded  the  palace.  At  6:20  a.m..  Diem  called  JGS  and  spoke  personally
with  General  Don,  offering  to  surrender  in  exchange  for  a  guarantee  of  safe
conduct  to  the  airport  and  departure  from  Vietnam.  Minh  agreed  to  these
terms,  but  Diem  did  not  reveal  his  whereabouts,  still  apparently  unable  to
grasp  the  new  realities.  Colonel  Thao  learned  of  the  location  of  the  hideaway
from  a  captured  officer  of  the  palace  guard  and  received  permission  from
Minh  to  go  there  and  get  the  brothers.  When  he  arrived  at  the  house,  he
telephoned  again  to  headquarters  to  report  his  location  and  was  overheard  by
the  brothers  on  another  extension.  They  escaped  to  a  nearby  Catholic  church,
where  once  again  Diem  called  General  Don  at  6:50  a.m.  and  surrendered  un-
conditionally. He  and  Nhu  were  taken  prisoner  shortly  thereafter  by  General
Mai  Huu  Xuan,  a  long  time  enemy,  who  accordimj  to  most  accounts  ordered
or  permitted  their  murder  in  the  back  of  an  armored  personnel  carrier  cnroute
to  JGS  headquarters.

The  State  Department  reacted  to  news  of  the  coup  in  terms  of  the  recogni-
tion problem  with  respect  to  the  new  government.  Rusk  felt  that  a  delay  would
be  useful  to  the  generals  in  not  appearing  to  be  U.S.  agents  or  stooges  and


270 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

would  assist  us  in  our  public  stance  of  noncomplicity.  He  further  discouraged
any  large  delegation  of  the  generals  from  calling  on  Lodge  as  if  they  were
"reporting  in."  A  subsequent  message  stressed  the  need  to  underscore  publicly
the  fact  that  this  was  not  so  much  a  coup  as  an  expression  of  national  will,  a
fact  revealed  by  the  near  unanimous  support  of  important  military  and  civilian
leaders.  It  further  stressed  the  importance  of  Vice  President  Tho  to  a  quick  re-
turn to  constitutional  government  and  the  need,  therefore,  for  the  generals  to
include  him  in  any  interim  regime.  Lodge  replied  affirmatively  to  these  views,
indicating  his  opinion  that  we  should  encourage  other  friendly  countries  to
recognize  the  new  government  first  with  the  assurance  that  the  U.S.  would
follow  suit  shortly.  Further,  we  should  show  our  friendly  support  for  the  re-
gime and  without  fanfare  resume  payments  in  the  com.mercial  import  program.

The  news  of  the  brutal  and  seemingly  pointless  murder  of  Diem  and  Nhu,
however,  was  received  in  Washington  with  shock  and  dismay.  President  Ken-
nedy was  reportedly  personally  stunned  at  the  news,  particularly  in  view  of
the  heavy  U.S.  involvement  in  encouraging  the  coup  leaders.  Apparently,  we
had  put  full  confidence  in  the  coup  committee's  offers  of  safe  conduct  to  the
brothers  and,  reluctant  to  intercede  on  behalf  of  Diem  and  Nhu  for  fear  of
appearing  to  offer  support  to  them  or  of  reneging  on  our  pledges  of  non-inter-
ference to  the  generals,  we  had  not  appreciated  the  degree  of  hatred  of  the  Ngo
family  among  the  generals,  nor  their  fear  that  if  the  brothers  survived  the
coup  they  would  somehow,  sometime  stage  a  comeback.  In  their  first  meeting
with  Lodge  after  the  coup,  however,  the  generals  denied  that  the  assassina-
tion had  been  ordered,  and  promised  to  make  public  their  offer  of  safe  conduct
to  Diem  if  he  would  resign.

While  the  callousness  of  the  murders  of  Diem  and  Nhu,  their  previous  repres-
siveness notwithstanding,  horrified  the  world,  the  success  of  the  coup  and  the
deaths  of  the  hated  brothers  were  greeted  with  popular  jubilation  in  South  Viet-
nam. Spontaneous  street  demonstrations  by  students  in  a  holiday  mood  ended
in  the  burning  of  the  offices  of  the  Times  of  Vietnam  and  the  destruction  of
a  statue  modeled  after  Mme.  Nhu.  The  tension  released  set  off  celebrations
rivaled  only  by  the  annual  Tet  New  Year  festivities.  Americans  were  greeted
and  received  with  great  enthusiasm,  and  Lodge  was  widely  regarded  as  the  hero
of  the  whole  train  of  events.  Vietnamese  were  heard  to  remark  that  if  an
election  for  president  were  held  Lodge  would  win  by  a  landslide.

Thus,  the  nine-year  rule  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  came  to  a  sudden,  bloody,  and
permanent  end,  and  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam  plunged  into  the  unknown,  our
complicity  in  the  coup  only  heightening  our  responsibilities  and  our  commit-
ment in  this  struggling,  leaderless  land.  We  could  be  certain  only  that  whatever
new  leadership  emerged  would  be  fragile,  untried,  and  untested.

B. ESTABLISHMENT  OF  AN  INTERIM  REGIME

Even  before  the  initiation  of  the  coup,  the  coup  committee  through  Gen-
eral Kim  had  been  in  touch  with  civilian  political  oppositionists  and  to  some
extent  wi:h  members  of  Diem's  government.  Once  the  success  of  the  coup
was  certain,  negotiations  with  these  civilians  by  the  generals'  committee  began
in  earnest.  On  the  night  of  November  1  and  the  following  day,  all  ministers
of  Diem's  government  were  told  to  submit  their  resignations  and  did  so,  some
on  U.S.  advice.  No  reprisals  were  taken  against  them.  Indeed,  Vice  President
Tho  entered  into  intensive  negotiations  with  General  Minh  on  November  2  on
the  composition  of  the  interim  government.  He  apparently  understood  the


The  Overthrow  ot  S'^o  Dinh  Diem,  \la\—So\ ember.  1963  271

easemess  of  the  generals  to  ha.  e  him  head  a  new  government  to  provide  con-
tinuity, and  he  used  this  knowledge  to  bargain  with  them  about  the  composi-
tion of  the  cabinet.  He  was  not  to  be  their  pliant  tool.

^^'hile  these  conferences  were  taking  place,  the  coup  commiiLee,  or  '"Revolu-
Lor.arv  Committee"'  as  it  was  r.?-v  callmz  itself,  distributed  leanets  and  press
releases  announcing  the  dissol-:;::.  of  the  National  Assembly  and  the  aboli-
ticn  of  the  Dien-.-Nh_  government  based  on  the  constitution  of  1956,  and
pro-claiming  the  support  of  the  committee  for  such  democratic  principles  as
free  elections,  unhampered  political  opposition,  freedom  of  press,  freedom  of
relir.on,  and  an  end  to  discrimination.  They  were  at  pains  to  explain  that  the

— "-e  of  the  coup  was  to  bolster  the  fight  against  the  Communists  which  they
imselves  to  pursue  with  renewed  vigor  and  determination.

On  tne  afternoon  of  November  3,  the  second  dav  after  the  coup,  Generals
Don  and  K;.-r.  called  on  Lodge  at  the  Embassv,  explaining  that  General  MLnh
•  up  \7i  conversations  with  \"ice  President  Tho  on  the  new  govemmient.
.  -  -  - :. .  ersation  was  long  and  touched  on  many  topics.  It  began  with  mutual
expressions  of  satisfaction  at  ihe  success  of  the  coup,  and  continued  with
Lodge's  assurance  of  forthcoming  U.S.  recognition  for  their  nev.-  government.
The  generals  explained  that  they  had  decided  on  a  tv-o-tiered  government
strjcture  with  a  militan.'  committee  presided  over  bv  General  Minh  overseeing
a  regular  cabinet  that  would  be  mostlv  civilian  with  Tho  as  prime  minister.
Lodi-e  promised  to  see  to  the  immediate  restoration  of  certain  of  the  aid  pro-
'.he  speedy  resumption  of  the  others  when  the  government  was  in
p:a^e.  T.'cy  then  dealt  with  a  host  of  immediate  problems  including  the  return
of  the  Nhu  children  to  their  mother  and  the  disposition  of  the  rest  of  the
Ngo  family,  press  censorship,  the  release  of  Tri  Quane  from  the  Embassy,  cur-
few, reprisi'v  against  former  ministers,  etc.  The  eenerals  confirmed  the  psycho-
logical \:  nee  of  the  commoditv  import  suspension  to  the  success  of  their
plans.  Loage  was  elated,  both  at  the  efficiencv  and  success  of  the  coup,  and  the
seriousness  and  determination  of  the  generals  to  deal  with  the  pressing  prob-
lems and  get  on  with  the  war.

The  following  day,  on  instructions  from  Washington.  Ledge,  in  company
with  Ll  Colonel  Conein.  met  with  Generals  Minh  and  Don.  \^'ashington  had
been  anxious  for  Lodge  to  urgentiv  convey  to  the  generals  the  need  to  make
a  clarifying  statement  about  the  deaths  of  the  brothers  and  to  take  steps  to
insure  humane  treatment  of  other  members  of  the  familv.  The  generals  were
responsive  to  Lodge's  urgings  and  promised  to  see  that  action  was  taken  on  the
U.S.  requests.  Minh  said  that  the  composition  of  the  new  government  would  be
announced  shonly.  In  describing  the  meeting  later.  Lodge  offered  a  prophetic
description  of  Minh;  "Minh  seemed  tired  and  somewhat  frazzled;  obviously  a
:  ■  '.vell-intentioned  man.  Will  he  be  strong  enough  to  get  on  top  of  things?''
^— _c  closed  the  cable  bv  taking  exception  to  State's  excessive  pre-occupa-
tion  with  the  negative  public  relations  problems  of  the  coup  and  decrying  its
failure  to  note  the  brilliance  with  which  the  coup  was  planned  and  executed.

The  promised  announcement  of  the  nevv-  government  came  on  the  morning
cf  November  5.  It  was  verv-  much  as  General  Kim  had  described  it  to  Lodge
on  November  3.  Minh  was  named  President  and  Chief  of  the  Miiitarv"  Com.-
mittee:  Tho  was  listed  as  Premier.  Minister  cf  Economy,  and  Minister  of  Fi-
nance; Don  uas  named  Minister  of  Defense:  and  General  Dinh  was  named  to
the  Ministry  of  Security-  (Interior).  Onlv  one  other  general  was  included  in  the
cabinet  of  fifteen  which  was  composed  primarily  of  bureaucrats  and  civilians
with  no  previous  experience.  Political  figures,  either  opposed  to  Diem  or  not.


272 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

were  conspicuously  absent  from  the  cabinet,  a  fact  which  would  impair  the
new  government's  securing  the  roots  in  popular  support  it  would  need  in  the
long  run.  The  announcement  of  the  new  cabinet  was  followed  by  the  release
of  "Provisional  Constitutional  Act  No.  1,"  signed  by  General  Minh,  formally
suspending  the  1956  constitution  and  outlining  the  structure  and  functions  of
the  interim  government.  On  November  6,  Saigon  radio  announced  the  com-
position of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Military  Revolutionary  Council.
Minh  was  Chairman,  Don  and  Dinh  were  Deputy  Chairmen,  and  nine  other
senior  generals,  including  Kim,  Khiem,  "little"  Minh,  Chieu,  and  Thieu  were
members.  Significantly,  General  Khanh  was  not.

On  October  5,  the  new  Foreign  Minister  had  sent  a  note  to  the  Embassy
informing  the  Ambassador  officially  of  the  change  of  government,  and  express-
ing the  hope  that  relations  between  the  two  countries  would  be  continued
and  strengthened.  State  approved  Lodge's  proposed  reply  of  recognition  the
following  day,  November  6,  and,  under  the  pressure  of  other  governments  and
the  press,  announced  its  intention  to  recognize  on  November  7  in  Washington.
The  note  of  recognition  was  delivered  on  November  8,  when  Lodge  called  on
the  new  Foreign  Minister,  Pham  Dang  Lam.  Lam,  emphasizing  his  own  in-
sufficiencies for  the  job  he  had  been  given,  asked  for  Lodge's  advice  which
Lodge  was  apparently  not  reluctant  to  give  on  a  variety  of  topics.  The  primary
impression  left  was  that  the  new  government  would  be  heavily  dependent  on
U.S.  advice  and  support,  not  only  for  the  war  effort,  but  also  in  the  practical
problems  of  running  the  country.

In  the  first  three  weeks  of  November  1963,  three  problems  preoccupied
most  Americans  and  Vietnamese  in  the  new  political  and  military  situation
created  by  the  coup.  The  first  of  these  was  getting  the  new  government  started,
developing  the  relations  between  the  new  Vietnamese  officials  and  their  Amer-
ican counterparts,  and  most  importantly  shaking  down  the  power  relationships
within  the  new  regime.  The  first  two  aspects  of  this  problem  would  be  self-re-
solving and  were  largely  a  matter  of  time.  With  respect  to  the  latter,  it  was
clear  from  the  outset  that  General  Minh  was  the  dominant  figure  in  the  new
government  and  was  so  regarded  by  nearly  all  the  military  men.  Tho,  however,
had  exhibited  considerable  independence  during  the  negotiations  over  the
cabinet,  reflecting  his  confidence  that  the  generals  felt  they  needed  him.  The
open  question,  then,  was  what  degree  of  freedom  of  action  the  new  cabinet
under  Tho  would  have,  or  alternatively,  how  deeplv  the  military  council  in-
tended to  involve  itself  in  running  the  country.  This  issue  was  not  resolved  in
the  public  statements  and  communiques  of  the  new  regime  and  ambiguity  on
the  subject  was  clearly  reflected  in  the  lack  of  decisiveness  and  vigor  of  the  new
ministers  and  in  their  general  uncertainty  as  to  their  authority.  While  the  exact
reasons  for  not  including  anv  politicians  in  the  cabinet  are  not  known,  it  is  rea-
sonable to  assume  that  neither  Tho  nor  the  militarv  were  anxious  to  see  po-
tential political  rivals,  with  power  deriving  from  popular  support,  in  positions
to  challenge  the  authoritv  of  the  new  leaders.  Whatever  the  case,  it  was  the  ir-
resolution of  the  power  relationship  within  the  new  government  that  was  one
of  the  factors  contributing  to  the  next  round  of  coup-making  in  January  1964.

The  second  urgent  problem  of  these  first  weeks  in  November  was  the  ra-
pidly deteriorating  economic  situation  in  Vietnam.  The  situation  had  been  seri-
ous in  September,  and  a  large  deficit  for  the  1964  budget  had  already  been  fore-
cast. The  suspension  of  the  commercial  import  payments  and  selected  PL  480
had  aggravated  the  situation  during  September  and  October.  Furthermore,  all
negotiations  on  the 1964  budget  levels  and  U.S. support  had  been  sus-


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  273

pended  and  were  now  seriously  behind  schedule.  Aware  of  the  urgency  of  the
problem,  State,  on  November  2,  had  asked  for  Lodge's  recommendations  on
the  resumption  of  aid  and  had  urged  him  to  identify  the  people  responsible
for  economic  planning  in  the  new  government  so  that  negotiations  could  be-
gin immediately.  Concern  was  also  expressed  at  the  lack  of  expertise  in  this
area  among  the  generals  and  Lodge  was  advised  to  encourage  them  to  make
maximum  use  of  economists  in  the  previous  government  who  were  familiar
with  the  problems.  Lodge  proposed  in  response  that  the  government  be  asked
to  name  a  high  level  commission  of  economic  experts  to  work  with  a  similar
group  from  the  U.S.  Mission.  This  suggestion  had  been  agreed  to  in  principle
the  previous  day  by  Tho,  through  whose  office  all  economic  aid  matters  were
to  be  channeled.  Lodge  also  believed  that  our  aid  should  be  increased  as  an
indication  of  our  support  for  the  new  government.  But  beyond  these  prelimi-
nary discussions,  no  real  progress  was  made  on  the  economic  problems  before
the  Honolulu  Conference  on  November  20.

The  third  problem  that  worried  Americans  was  the  heightened  level  of  Viet
Cong  activity  in  the  wake  of  the  coup  and  the  military  dislocations  caused  by
it.  Related,  but  of  even  more  importance,  was  the  new  information  that  came
to  light  after  the  coup  and  in  the  atmosphere  of  free  discussion  that  it  generated
showing  that  the  military  situation  was  far  worse  than  we  had  believed.  The
overall  statistical  indicators  had  now  begun  to  show  deterioration  dating  back  to
the  summer.  The  incidence  of  VC  attacks  was  up  over  the  first  six  months  of
1963,  the  weapons  loss  ratio  had  worsened  and  the  rate  of  VC  defections  was
'way  down.  In  the  immediate  wake  of  the  coup,  VC  activity  had  jumped  dra-
matically as  MACV  had  feared  it  would  and  there  was  great  concern  to  re-
turn units  participating  in  the  coup  to  the  field  quickly  to  forestall  any  major
Communist  offensive.  Cause  for  more  fundamental  concern,  however,  were
the  first  rumors  and  indications  that  under  Diem  there  had  been  regular  and
substantial  falsification  in  the  military  reporting  system  and  in  reporting  on
the  strategic  hamlets  that  had  badly  distorted  the  real  military  situation  in  Viet-
nam to  make  it  appear  less  serious  than  it  was.  This,  it  turned  out,  was  the
main  reason  for  the  previous  discrepancies  in  MACV  and  U.S.  mission  evalu-
ations of  the  war.  In  the  first  flush  of  self-satisfaction  after  the  coup.  Lodge
had  predicted  that  the  change  of  regime  would  shorten  the  war  because  of  the
improved  morale  of  the  ARVN  troops.  But  as  time  wore  on,  the  accumulating
evidence  of  the  gravity  of  the  military  situation  displaced  these  sanguine  prog-
noses.

The  only  comforting  note  in  the  intelligence  was  the  apparent  discomfiture
of  the  National  Liberation  Front.  Throughout  the  summer  and  fall,  the  NLF
had  seemingly  been  unable  to  capitalize  on  the  Buddhist  or  student  struggle
movements.  In  fact,  its  principal  response  to  the  Diem-Buddhist  clash  had  been
increasingly  vituperative  attacks  on  the  U.S.  Not  until  November  7th  did  the
NLF  issue  a  post-Diem  policy  statement,  consisting  of  a  list  of  "eight  demands":

(1)  Destroy  all  strategic  hamlets  .  .  .  and  other  disguised  camps.

(2)  Release  all  political  detainees.  .  .  .

(3)  Promulgate  without  delay  democratic  freedom.  .  .  .

(4)  Root  out  all  vestiges  of  the  fascist  and  militarist  dictatorial  regime.

(5)  Stop  all  persecution  and  repression  and  raiding  operations.

(6)  Dissolve  all  nepotist  organizations.  .  .  .

(7)  Immediately  stop  forcible  conscription.  .  .  .

(8)  Cancel  all  kinds  of  unjustified  taxes.  :


274 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II

The  Duong  Van  Minh  government  could  claim  that  it  was  in  the  process  of
meeting  all  of  these  "demands"  except  one — halting  the  draft — so  that  the
NLF  was  effectively  pre-empted.  On  November  17,  the  NLF  Central  Com-
mittee issued  another  series  of  demands:

( 1 )  Eliminate  the  vestiges  of  the  Diem  regime.

(2)  Establish  democratic  freedom.

(3)  Eliminate  American  influence.

(4)  Make  social  and  economic  reforms.

(5)  Halt  the  fighting.

(6)  Establish  a  coalition  government.

The  demands  were  accompanied  by  a  statement  affirming  the  reunification  of

Vietnam  as  a  goal  of  the  NLF,  the  first  such  statement  in  over  two  years.

Douglas  Pike's  analysis  was  unable  to  resolve  the  reasons  for  the  inaction  of
the  NLF  throughout  the  crisis:

Had  the  NLF  leadership  wished  to  do  so,  it  could  have  used  its  impres-
sive struggle  machine  to  launch  in  the  name  of  the  Buddha  a  nation-wide
struggle  movement  that  conceivably  could  have  ended  with  its  long-pur-
sued General  Uprising  .  .  .  Knowledgeable  Vietnamese  attributed  its  re-
fusal to  act  an  unwillingness  to  involve  itself  in  an  alien  struggle  movement.
The  NLF  and  the  communists,  ran  the  argument,  avoid  activities  over
which  they  do  not  exercise  total  control.  .  .  .  The  Buddhist  leadership
made  it  clear  it  did  not  seek  NLF  help  since  it  wished  at  all  costs  to  avoid  the
Communist  stigma.  Another  popular  explanation  for  the  NLF's  "sit-
tight"  policy  during  the  Buddhist  troubles  was  that  the  NLF  was  going  to
allow  the  bourgeois  revolutionary  forces  to  succeed  in  toppling  Diem,
after  which  it  would  capture  the  Revolution  as  the  Kerensky  Govern-
ment was  captured  in  the  Russian  Revolution.  No  such  effort,  however,
was  made  by  the  NLF.  A  slanderous  but  widely  bandied  explanation
among  Vietnamese  at  the  time  was  that  the  NLF  did  not  want  Diem  re-
moved, that  he  and  his  brothers  and  sister-in-law  were  far  more  valu-
able to  the  NLF  in  office  than  out.  In  truth,  the  NLF  posture  during
this  period  remains  something  of  a  mystery.

C. THE  HONOLULU  CONFERENCE  AND  NSAM  273

Having  postponed  his  planned  October  31  visit  to  Washington  because  of  the
imminence  of  the  coup.  Lodge  apparently  suggested,  in  response  to  a  State
query,  that  it  be  rescheduled  for  November  10.  Rusk  proposed  a  further  post-
ponement to  insure  time  for  Lodge  to  establish  working  relations  with  the  new
government  and  to  take  advantage  of  his  own  planned  trip  to  Tokyo  later  in
the  month.  Accordingly,  a  meeting  with  Rusk,  Bundy,  Bell,  McNamara,  and
Taylor  in  Honolulu  was  scheduled  on  November  20  for  the  entire  country
team.  Lodge  was  invited  to  proceed  on  to  Washington  after  the  meeting  if  he
felt  he  needed  to  talk  with  the  President.

In  preparation  for  the  conference.  State  dispatched  a  long  series  of  specific
questions  to  Lodge  on  possible  methods  of  broadening  the  political  base  of  sup-
port of  the  new  government  and  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  the  war  ef-
fort. This  was  additional  to  the  comprehensive  review  of  the  situation,  includ-
ing an  evaluation  of  progress  on  the  McNamara-Taylor  recommendations,  that


The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November,  1963  275

the  military  was  expected  to  provide  and  the  in-depth  assessment  of  the  new
regime  and  its  prospects  by  the  country  team.  Lodge  repHed  even  before  arriv-
ing at  the  conference  that  the  proposed  discussions  would  require  detailed  in-
formation about  the  functioning  of  the  new  rulers  which  it  was  far  too  early
to  obtain.

In  a  broad  overview  of  the  new  political  situation  in  Vietnam  at  the  plenary
session  in  Honolulu,  Lodge  voiced  his  optimism  about  the  actions  taken  thus
far  by  the  new  government  to  consolidate  its  popular  support.  In  particular,  he
noted  the  efforts  to  eliminate  forced  labor  in  the  strategic  hamlets,  to  curtail
arbitrary  arrests,  to  deal  with  extortion  and  corruption,  to  enlist  the  support
of  the  Hoa  Hao  and  Cao  Dai  sects,  and  to  consolidate  and  strengthen  the  stra-
tegic hamlet  program.  But,  he  left  no  doubt  that  the  new  leadership  was  inex-
perienced and  fragile.  For  this  reason,  he  urged  the  conferees  not  to  press  too
much  on  the  government  too  soon,  either  in  the  way  of  military  and  economic
programs,  nor  steps  to  democratize  and  constitutionalize  the  country.  His  second
major  point  was  the  psychological  and  political,  as  well  as  economic,  need  for
U.S.  aid  to  the  new  government  in  at  least  the  amount  of  our  aid  to  Diem,
and  preferably  more.  He  recognized  the  domestic  political  problems  in  the  U.S.
with  Congress,  but  he  argued  that  anything  less  would  be  a  severe  blow  to  the
new  rulers  who  were  still  getting  their  bearings.  USOM  Director  Brent  sup-
ported these  latter  views,  but  registered  his  concern  about  the  naivete  of  the
new  leaders  in  the  face  of  an  extremely  grave  economic  situation.  In  response
to  a  direct  question  from  Rusk  as  to  whether  an  increase  in  dollars  would
shorten  the  war.  Lodge  demurred  somewhat  and  replied  that  what  was  re-
quired was  greater  motivation.  McNamara  immediately  disagreed,  saying  that
his  understanding  of  the  piaster  deficit  problem  was  that  it  was  endangering  all
the  programs,  and  that  both  AID  and  MAP  were  in  need  of  increased  funding.
Concurring  in  this  view,  AID  Administrator  Bell  agreed  to  review  the  entire
AID  program.

General  Harkins'  assessment  of  the  military  situation  took  note  of  the  up-
surge of  Viet  Cong  activity  in  the  week  following  the  coup,  but  in  general  re-
mained optimistic,  although  more  guardedly  than  in  the  past.  The  sharp  in-
crease in  VC  attacks  after  the  coup  seemed  to  have  been  haphazard,  and  not
part  of  a  well  coordinated  country-wide  response  to  the  uncertain  political
situation.  And  in  the  week  just  ended,  activity  had  returned  to  more  normal
levels.  Moreover,  he  did  not  show  concern  about  the  seeming  long  term  de-
terioration in  the  statistical  indicators.  While  he  was  favorably  impressed  with
the  determination  of  the  new  leaders  to  prosecute  the  war  and  make  needed
changes,  he  was  worried  about  the  sweeping  replacemnt  of  division  and  corps
commanders  and  province  chiefs.  The  discontinuities  and  disruptions  created
by  wholesale  replacement  of  province  chiefs  could  have  a  serious  negative  ef-
fect on  the  whole  counterinsurgency  program.  On  the  positive  side,  he  noted
the  strengthened  chain  of  command  under  General  Don  as  both  Defense  Min-
ister and  Chief  of  Staff.  McNamara  pointedly  questioned  both  Harkins  and  the
other  military  briefers  about  conditions  in  the  Delta  and  seemed  skeptical  of
the  official  optimism,  although  he  was  equally  disinclined  to  accept  undocu-
mented negative  judgments.

The  conference  ended  inconclusively  with  respect  to  the  military  problem.
It  did,  however,  underscore  U.S.  support  for  the  new  regime  and  focus  U.S.
official  concern  on  the  urgency  and  gravity  of  the  economic  problem  confront-
ing the  new  government.  An  uninformative  press  release  after  the  conference
took  note  of  U.S.  support  for  the  new  government  in  facing  the  difficult  politi-


276 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

cal  and  economic  problems  in  South  Vietnam,  and  pointedly  reiterated  the
plan  to  withdraw  1,000  U.S.  troops  by  the  end  of  the  year  with  300  to  leave  on
December  3.

Lodge  flew  to  Washington  the  following  day  and  conferred  with  President
Johnson.  Based  on  that  meeting  and  the  report  of  the  discussions  at  Honolulu,
a  National  Security  Action  Memorandum  was  drafted  to  give  guidance  and  di-
rection to  our  efforts  to  improve  the  conduct  of  the  war  under  the  new  South
Vietnamese  leadership.  It  described  the  purpose  of  the  American  involvement
in  Vietnam  as,  "to  assist  the  people  and  Government  of  that  country  to  win
their  contest  against  the  externally  directed  and  supported  Communist  con-
spiracy." It  defined  contribution  to  that  purpose  as  the  test  of  all  U.S.  actions
in  Vietnam.  It  reiterated  the  objectives  of  withdrawing  1,000  U.S.  troops  by  the
end  of  1963  and  ending  the  insurgency  in  I,  II,  and  III  Corps  by  the  end  of
1964,  and  in  the  Delta  by  the  end  of  1965.  U.S.  support  for  the  new  regime
was  confirmed  and  all  U.S.  efforts  were  directed  to  assist  it  to  consolidate  it-
self and  expand  its  popular  support.  In  view  of  the  series  of  press  stories  dur-
ing November  about  the  disagreements  between  Harkins  and  Lodge,  the  Presi-
dent requested  "full  unity  of  support  for  established  US  policy"  both  in  Saigon
and  in  Washington.  NSAM  273  directed  the  concentration  of  U.S.  and  Viet-
namese military,  political,  economic  and  social  efforts  to  improve  the  coun-
terinsurgency  campaign  in  the  Mekong  Delta.  It  further  directed  that  economic
and  military  aid  to  the  new  regime  should  be  maintained  at  the  same  levels  as
during  Diem's  rule.  And  in  conclusion,  plans  were  requested  for  clandestine
operations  by  the  GVN  against  the  North  and  also  for  operations  up  to  50  kil-
ometers into  Laos;  and,  as  a  justification  for  such  measures,  State  was  directed
to  develop  a  strong,  documented  case  "to  demonstrate  to  the  world  the  degree
to  which  the  Viet  Cong  is  controlled,  sustained  and  supplied  from  Hanoi,
through  Laos  and  other  channels."

As  a  policy  document,  NSAM  273  was  to  be  extremely  short  lived.  In  the
jargon  of  the  bureaucracy,  it  was  simplv  overtaken  by  events.  The  gravity  of
the  military  situation  in  South  Vietnam  was  only  hmted  at  in  NSAM  273  and
in  the  discussions  in  Honolulu.  Its  full  dimensions  would  rapidly  come  to  light
in  the  remaining  weeks  of  1963  and  force  high  level  reappraisals  by  year's  end.
But  probably  more  important,  the  deterioration  of  the  Vietnamese  position
in  the  countryside  and  the  rapid  collapse  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program  were
to  confront  the  fragile  new  political  structure  in  South  Vietnam  with  difficulties
it  could  not  surmount  and  to  set  off  rivalries  that  would  fulfill  all  the  dire  pre-
dictions of  political  instability  made  by  men  as  diverse  as  John  Mecklin  and
Fritz  Nolting  before  Diem's  fall.


277


5. US-GVN  Relations,  1964-1967


Summary  and  Analysis
1964-JUNE  1965

In  1964  the  U.S.  tried  to  make  GVN  strong,  effective,  and  stable,  and  it
failed.  When  the  U.S.  offered  more  aid,  GVN  accepted  it  without  improving;
they  promised  to  mobilize,  but  failed  to  speed  up  the  slow  buildup  of  their
forces.  When  the  U.S.  offered  a  firmer  commitment  to  encourage  them,  in-
cluding possible  later  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,  the  GVN  tried  to  pressure  us
to  do  it  sooner.  When  the  U.S.  endorsed  Khanh,  he  overplaved  his  hand,  pro-
voked mob  violence,  and  had  to  back  down  to  a  weaker  position  than  before.
When  Taylor  lectured  them  and  threatened  them,  the  ruling  generals  of  GVN
defied  him,  and  allied  themselves  with  the  street  rioters.  After  several  changes
of  government  in  Vietnam,  the  U.S.  could  set  no  higher  goal  than  GVN  sta-
bility. During  this  period,  the  USG  was  alreadv  starting  to  think  about  doing
the  job  ourselves  if  our  Vietnamese  ally  did  not  perform.

At  first  the  U.S.  thought  that  the  power  of  the  Vietnamese  generals  would
make  GVN  strong  and  effective.  In  fact,  the  U.S.  preference,  at  this  time,
was  for  military  leadership  in  the  GVN.  However,  the  generals  proved  to  be
less  than  perfectly  united.  Thev  found  thev  had  to  bow  to  the  power  of  student
and  Buddhist  street  mobs,  and  thev  lacked  the  will  and  the  ability  to  compel
the  civil  government  to  perform.  Yet,  the  U.S.  saw  no  alternative  but  to  back
them — to  put  up  with  Vietnamese  hypersensitivity,  their  easy  compliance  com-
bined with  non-performance,  and  their  occasional  defiance.  Moreover,  MACV
was  even  less  ready  to  pressure  the  generals  than  was  the  Embassy  and  the
Embassy  less  willing  than  Washington.  MACV  controlled  the  resources  that
mattered  most  to  the  South  Vietnamese.

Pacification  lagged,  and  the  military  picture  steadily  worsened.  Planning  of
pressures  against  the  North  became  more  urgent,  and  the  prospect  of  increas-
ing U.S.  inputs  to  all  phases  of  the  war  loomed  larger.  The  U.S.  was  more  and
more  abandoning  the  hope  that  the  Vietnamese  could  win  the  war  by  them-
selves. At  the  same  time,  the  U.S.  was  preparing  itself  internally  (NSAM  288
with  the  objective  of  an  "independent  non-communist  Vietnam")  and  ready-
ing the  American  people  (the  Tonkin  Gulf  Resolution)  for  deeper  commit-
ments.

The  period  saw  six  major  changes  of  government.  At  the  end  of  January,
1964,  Khanh  seized  power  from  the  Minh  government.  In  August,  after  his
attempt  to  formalize  military  control,  mob  violence  forced  him  to  give  way  and
to  join  a  Triumvirate.  It  presided  over  formation  of  the  civilian  High  National
Council,  which  wrote  a  Constitution  and  elected  the  civilian  President  Suu  and
Prime  Minister  Huong  to  replace  the  Triumvirate.  In  December  the  military
dissolved  the  High  National  Council,  and  in  January  1965  they  dismissed  Hu-
ong, replacing  him  by  Khanh  as  caretaker.  In  February,  they  appointed  a  new


278 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

civilian  government,  with  Suu  still  President  and  with  Quat  as  Prime  Minis-
ter. In  June,  Ky  took  over.  Besides  all  this,  coup  groups  seized  Saigon  twice  be-
fore being  faced  down  each  lime.

During  the  first  few  months  of  this  period  the  U.S.  abandoned  the  plan  for
the  phased  withdrawal  of  most  of  our  military  assistance  personnel,  and
stopped  believing  that  the  main-force  war  would  come  to  a  successful  end  by
the  close  of  1965.  With  the  start  of  planning  pressures  against  the  North,  the
U.S.  first  hoped  that  repeated  preliminary  signals  to  Hanoi  would  bring  a  re-
sponse before  bombing  began;  and  we  hoped  that  the  promise  of  U.S.  force
commitments  would  strengthen  Vietnamese  unity  and  resolve.  Both  hopes
proved  vain,  and  we  started  bombing  North  Vietnam  systematically  without
getting  anything  from  either  Hanoi  or  GVN.  Then  the  bombing  itself  failed
to  stop  Hanoi's  intervention.  Seeing  no  other  choice,  the  U.S.  poured  troops
into  the  country.

Throughout  1964,  the  U.S.  pursued  the  objective  of  a  strong,  effective  GVN
like  the  Holy  Grail.  Increasingly,  we  felt  we  had  to  reassure  our  Saigon  ally
about  the  U.S.  resolve,  and  hoped  that  a  firm  U.S.  commitment  through  ex-
tending advisors  and  through  bombing  would  improve  GVN  performance.
Recurrently,  we  looked  to  the  military  as  the  one  coherent,  anti-communist
force  in  the  country.  We  leaned  on  them  and  on  their  strong-man,  who  for
most  of  the  period  was  Khanh,  at  first  hoping  that  he  or  Minh  would  play  the
role  that  Magsaysay  did  in  the  Philippines.  We  were  interested  in  legitimacy
and  democratic  forms  only  as  a  long-run  deferrable  proposition;  although  more
and  more  we  recognized  the  need  for  broad  political  support — especially
after  the  Buddhist  crisis  in  August,  1964,  had  proved  its  importance.

As  early  as  the  Honolulu  Conference  in  June,  1964,  we  worried  about  the
possible  emergence  of  a  hostile  government  or  anarchy;  and  the  South  Viet-
namese played  effectively  on  our  fears.  We  lectured  them  repeatedly  on  the
importance  of  national  unity,  both  in  periods  of  political  calm  and  in  crises.
When  the  mobs  in  the  streets  faced  down  the  generals,  we  then  clung  to  the
position  that  no  one  should  rock  the  boat.

Yet,  well  beyond  our  control.  General  Khanh  was  a  central  figure  in  most
of  these  changes.  He  took  over  in  a  coup  in  January,  1964,  and  played  one
role  after  another,  for  over  twelve  turbulent  months.  Then  when  a  coup  at-
tempt failed  against  a  newly  installed  government  in  February,  1965,  the  gen-
erals turned  on  Khanh  and  exiled  him.  Only  the  final  coup,  in  which  Ky  took
over,  saw  Khanh  absent  from  the  scene.

Withall,  the  military  improved  their  hold  on  GVN  machinery.  The  high
turnover  of  district  and  pro\ince  officials  around  the  time  of  the  Khanh
coup  put  ARVN  officers  everywhere;  and  the  corps  commanders  gradually  con-
solidated their  power  throughout  1964.  This  tendency  reached  a  climax  and
received  a  temporarv  setback  in  the  rebellion  that  followed  the  August  con-
stitution. As  a  result  of  the  successful  Buddhist  opposition,  cabinet  changes
and  the  charter  of  the  government  in  Saigon  required  Buddhist  acquiescence.

These  problems  were  aggravated  bv  the  clear  and  growing  lack  of  legiti-
macy of  GVN.  The  generals  led  bv  Minh,  who  overthrew  Diem,  gained  an  aura
of  respectabilitv  by  this  act  because  Diem  had  so  completely  alienated  the  peo-
ple. Whatever  their  "respectabilitv"  may  have  been  worth  went  down  the
drain,  however,  when  Khanh  seized  power  and  then  later  maneuvered  Minh
out  of  the  countrv.  Khanh's  position  as  a  brash  usurper  gave  him  little  room
for  maneuver  among  Saigon's  complex  political  currents,  although  for  a  time
the  U.S.  counted  on  his  "raw  power."  With  subsequent  shifts  in  the  form  and


US-GVN  Relations  279


composition  of  government,  the  expediency  and  lack  of  legitimacy  of  GVN
grew  more  conspicuous  and  more  debilitating.

Leverage

U.S.  attempts  to  strengthen  the  GVN's  will  to  govern  and  to  pacify  the
countryside  failed.  Moreover,  the  attempts,  conceived  in  haste,  often  back-
fired. In  contrast  to  the  steady  discussion  of  alternatives  among  Washington
agencies,  the  Embassy,  and  MACV  on  the  subject  of  pressures  on  the  North,
the  idea  of  pressures  on  GVN  seldom  surfaced.  When  it  did  surface,  it  was
either  brushed  aside  or  rushed  into.  Leverage  planning  failed  to  receive  even
that  quality  and  quantity  of  attention  that  pressures  against  North  Vietnam
planning  did.

As  a  general  rule,  Washington  was  more  interested  in  putting  pressure  on
GVN  than  was  the  Embassy,  with  the  notable  exception  of  Taylor's  initiatives
in  December,  and  MACV  was  the  least  interested  of  all.  But  these  differ-
ences were  less  notable  than  was  the  almost  universal  consensus  (most  of  the
time)  that  the  Vietnamese  were  too  sensitive  for  such  pressures  to  work,  and
that  we  had  to  accept  the  GVN's  non-performance  as  the  best  available.

Starting  with  Rusk's  conversation  with  Khanh  at  the  end  of  May,  1964,  and
ending  with  Taylor's  initiative  in  early  December,  the  U.S.  tried  to  use  the
prospect  of  U.S.  force  commitment  as  an  inducement  to  the  Vietnamese  to  do
better.  However,  Taylor  said  that  if  this  inducement  were  to  fail,  the  U.S.
should  go  ahead  with  its  pressures  against  the  North  anyway.  Taking  this  posi-
tion meant  that  the  attempted  inducement  was  bluff.  There  is  every  sign,  both
in  their  non-performance  and  in  their  December-January  defiance,  that  the
GVN  sized  it  up  that  way  and  called  the  bluff.

Our  attempted  leverage  included  both  inducements  and  threats  at  one  time
and  another;  and  neither  worked  out  well.  Rusk's  May,  1964,  conversation
with  Khanh,  the  intensification  of  pressures  planning  following  the  Honolulu
Conference  in  June,  and  the  shift  of  the  Chairman,  JCS  to  the  post  of  Am-
bassador to  SVN,  all  showed  U.S.  commitment.  We  hoped  these  measures  and
talks  would  directly  contribute  to  GVN  morale  and  effectiveness.  However,
they  were  followed  by  the  July  press  leaks  and  by  direct  pressure  to  bomb  North
immediately.  The  July  public  endorsement  of  Khanh  was  intended  to  reassure
all  concerned  of  our  support,  and  so  to  strengthen  GVN.  Then,  the  Gulf  of
Tonkin  incidents  were  followed  promptly  by  Khanh's  Constitution,  which
backfired  against  him  and  against  us,  weakening  rather  than  strengthening
GVN.

Taylor's  bill  of  particulars  against  GVN  in  December  was  followed  immedi-
ately by  attacks  on  GVN  by  the  Buddhists,  and  then  shortly  by  the  military,
bringing  down  the  government.  Taylor's  stern  lecture  to  the  Young  Turks  at
this  time  met  only  with  their  defiance.  They  agreed  to  a  compromise  solution
to  the  crisis  when  Taylor  held  up  the  GVN  Defense  Budget,  and  then  reversed
themselves  after  he  released  it.  The  first  Flaming  Dart  raids,  opening  the  de-
liberate U.S.  bombing  campaign  against  the  North,  were  followed  shortly  by
another  coup  attempt.

There  was  no  disagreement  among  Washington,  the  Embassy,  and  MACV
that  U.S.  commitments  should  be  used  to  improve  GVN's  morale  and  per-
formance. In  contrast,  however,  they  often  disagreed  about  putting  pressure
on  GVN.  In  Januarv,  1964,  State  showed  far  more  interest  than  did  Lodge  in
using  the  AID  negotiations  to  press  GVN  for  more  effort;  in  the  upshot  we  gave


280 Gravel  Ediiion/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

them  an  AID  increase  with  no  strings  attached.  This  disagreement  continued
for  several  months.  McNamara  leaned  consistently  toward  giving  GVN  what-
ever it  needed;  only  later  did  he  begin  to  mention  increasing  our  influence.
But  McNamara  and  ICS  did  prod  Lodge  into  asking  GVN  why  they  were  not
progressing  well.  In  May,  1964,  Sullivan  proposed  direct  entry  of  U.S.  person-
nel into  the  Vietnamese  chain  of  command;  his  idea  was  watered  down  con-
siderably in  the  State  Department,  and  disappeared  at  the  Honolulu  Confer-
ence because  of  opposition  by  Lodge  and  Westmoreland.  Other  proposals
agreed  to  at  the  conference,  relating  to  new  actions  and  improved  programs
by  GVN,  interested  State  far  more  than  they  did  the  Embassy  and  MACV,  as
revealed  in  the  follow-up.

By  and  large  the  same  contrasts  prevailed  when  Taylor  was  the  Ambassador,
although  in  December  he  was  far  more  willing  to  press  GVN  than  Lodge
ever  was.  Even  then,  at  the  peak  of  the  crisis,  Taylor  expressly  rejected  sanc-
tions. MACV  generally  rejected  sanctions  also,  and  seemed  less  willing  to  apply
leverage  in  day-to-day  matters  than  were  U.S.  civilians  in  the  field.  MACV
studies  on  GVN  ineffectiveness  usually  proposed  more  studies  and  never  pro-
posed pressure  on  GVN.

If  U.S.  force  commitments  and  the  record  of  GVN  non-performance  reflect
the  failure  of  leverage,  what  does  the  record  tell  us  about  how  leverage  could
be  made  to  work?  Regrettably,  the  record  tells  us  nothing  about  that;  it  merely
shows  that  everything  we  tried  went  wrong.  As  noted,  attempts  at  leverage  or
pressure  on  GVN  were  seldom  thought  through  and  studied  carefully.  One
searches  in  vain  for  studies,  memoranda,  or  widespread  discussion  of  alterna-
tive techniques  for  leverage  and  of  what  our  experience  shows  about  how  they
might  work.  Pressures  against  the  North,  whose  results  have  disappointed  us,
were  a  model  of  planning,  foresight,  and  detailed  consideration,  compared  to
the  subject  of  pressures  on  GVN.  Yet  GVN's  failure  was  the  heart  of  our
policy  problem  throughout  the  period,  as  many  feel  it  still  is.

The  Embassy's  Lack  of  Political  Contact

The  shifts  of  political  loyalties,  coups,  rebellions,  and  major  changes  of  pub-
lic figures  often  caught  the  Embassy  by  surprise.  It  had  no  effective  system,
either  through  overt  or  covert  contacts,  for  finding  out  what  was  going  on.
CAS  people  talked  to  a  few  ofl[icial  contacts,  who  told  them  things  the  Viet-
namese wanted  the  U.S.  to  believe;  but  CAS  had  and  has  no  mandate  or  mis-
sion to  perform  systematic  intelligence  and  espionage  in  friendly  countries,
and  so  lacks  the  resources  to  gather  and  evaluate  the  large  amounts  of  informa-
tion required  on  political  forces,  corruption,  connections,  and  so  on.  More-
over, there  is  no  sign  that  the  Embassy  understood  events  after  the  fact,  or
saw  the  connection  between  what  we  did  and  what  the  Vietnamese  did  next.
It  appears  that  the  U.S.  had  few  people  experienced  at  maneuvering  and  ma-
nipulating among  oriental  politicians.

In  the  following  cases  the  Embassv  was  in  the  dark.  ( 1 )  We  had  no  informa-
tion on  the  degree  of  truth  of  Khanh's  charges  against  the  four  "pro-neutral-
ist" generals  plus  Minh,  and  we  knew  about  his  coup  a  day  in  advance  only
because  he  sounded  us  out  on  it.  (2)  During  the  months  of  maneuvering  be-
tween Khanh  and  Minh  after  the  coup,  we  had  no  way  to  evaluate  the  coup  ru-
mors that  always  went  around,  and  that  peaked  around  moments  of  crisis  like
the  trial  of  the  four  generals  in  Mav.  (3)  Khanh's  complaints  of  Vietnamese
war-weariness  starting  in  late  Mav,  in  retrospect  a  transparent  tactic  to  pres-
sure the  U.S.  to  bomb  North,  took  in  the  USG  completely;  we  eagerly  went


US-GVN  Relations  281


ahead  and  planned  to  bomb  "to  improve  their  unity  and  resolve."  (4)
Khanh's  defiant  leaks  on  cross-border  operations  in  July  surprised  and  per-
plexed the  Embassy;  Taylor  described  them  as  an  attempt  to  improve  his  own
people's  morale,  not  as  an  attempt  to  stampede  us.  (5)  When  Khanh  asked
for  our  public  endorsement  and  then  talked  about  "reorganization,"  we  failed
to  see  the  connection.  When  he  tried  to  reorganize  Minh  out  of  the  govern-
ment, Taylor  made  no  mo\e  to  save  Minh  until  after  street  rioting  had  broken
up  the  whole  plan.  (6)  The  September  13  coup  attempt  surprised  everybody.
(7)  The  HNC  decision  to  make  Suu  President  and  Huong  Prime  Minister  sur-
prised and  angered  us.  (8)  Taylor's  December  plan  to  strengthen  GVN  by  lec-
turing to  it  about  its  failures  provoked  a  completely  unexpected  reaction;  both
Buddhists  and  the  militan,"  turned  against  the  GVN.  Tavlor's  subsequent  stern
lecture  to  the  Young  Turks  likewise  produced  the  opposite  of  the  desired  re-
sult. (9)  The  generals"  January,  1965,  moves  to  renege  on  the  agreed  crisis
settlement  and  to  dismiss  Huong  surprised  us.  (10)  The  February  19  coup  at-
tempt surprised  everybody.  (11)  We  did  not  know  what  to  think  of  the  alleged
coup  attempt  in  May,  1965.

In  some  noteworthy  cases  we  did  better.  ( 1 )  Taylor  correctly  foresaw  that
Khanh's  August  constitution  would  cause  trouble.  (2)  Westmoreland  detected
Ky's  budding  coup  attempt  in  November  and.  with  Embassy  authority,
squelched  it.  (3)  Taylor  foresaw  (and  tacitly  accepted)  the  Ky  coup.

The  MACV  Role

The  MACV  organization  plaved  an  important,  mosth  hidden,  role  in  US  '
GVN  relations.  At  every  level  from  Saigon  to  the  districts,  the  advisory  struc-
ture was  the  most  pervasive  instrument  of  intergovernmental  contact.  ARVN
officers  were  accustomed  to  being  spoon-fed  militarv  advice:  so  when  military
dominance  of  GVN  brought  these  same  officers  to  high  positions  in  govern-
ment, the  advisor  relationship  conferred  a  latent  diplomatic  role  upon  MACV.
Advisors  were  used  as  channels  of  communications  on  political  matters  and  be-
came the  most  reliable  sources  of  information  on  impending  coups.  (On  oc-
casions such  as  the  Rhade  uprising  and  Kv's  first  attempt  at  a  coup,  senior
MAC\'  officers  openly  became  diplomatic  emissaries.)

We  have  less  record  than  we  would  like  of  COMUSMACV's  influence.  He
reported  regularly  to  his  militarv  seniors  onl\-  on  strictly  military  matters.  De-
tailed reports  of  his  routine,  dailv  dealings  with  counterparts  were  not  re-
quired of  MAC\'  as  they  were  of  the  Embassv.

From  time  to  time  COMUSMACV  revealed  his  own  independent  objec-
tives. He  sought  protection  of  the  ARVN  officer  corps  from  political  machina-
tions and  from  unfavorable  press  stories  in  order  to  preserve  their  solidarity
and  morale:  he  pressed  zealouslv  for  earlv  introduction  of  U.S.  ground  forces
and  for  their  rapid  build-up;  he  opposed  encadrement  and  combined  command
with  ARVN;  he  resisted  exclusion  of  the  militar}-  from  pacification;  he  re-
jected sanctions  against  ARVN:  he  objected  to  the  initial  constraints  on  the
use  of  American  forces  and  wanted  to  be  free  to  operate  independentlv  of
ARVN.

General  Westmoreland's  strong  position  usuallv  assured  that  his  view  pre-
vailed. Extension  of  ad\isors,  increased  MAP  resources,  and  the  introduction
of  U.S.  ground  forces  enhanced  his  relative  position.  His  freedom  from  detailed
reporting  of  dailv  contacts  was  itself  an  element  of  strength.  When  he  re-
ceived unwanted  advice  and  directives,  he  set  up  studies  (as  in  the  Civic  Ac-
tion Program)  to  stall  for  time:  when  he  lacked  authority  to  operate  freely,


282 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

he  planned  ahead  with  the  Vietnamese  (as  in  the  use  of  U.S.  forces  for  inde-
pendent offensive  operations)  and  then  presented  the  matter  to  Washington  as
a  virtual  fait  accompli.

Vietnamese  Non-Performance  and  Sensitivity

Throughout  this  period  the  GVN  failed  to  perform  in  almost  every  construc-
tive respect.  Pacification  lagged,  when  not  visibly  retreating,  even  though  the
GVN  was  always  willing  to  issue  decrees,  set  up  organizations  we  suggested,  and
so  on.  Khanh's  promise  to  mobilize  came  to  nothing.  The  VC  defeated  ARVN
in  bigger  and  bigger  battles,  until  the  military  assessment  of  the  situation  per-
mitted Westmoreland  to  call  for  over  200,000  U.S.  troops.

Moreover,  on  issues  purportedly  relating  to  sovereignty  or  "face,"  the  Viet-
namese were  and  are  quite  sensitive,  and  the  U.S.  was  consistently  afraid  to  in-
flame this  sensitivity.  Both  sides  avoided  many  delicate  topics.  A  prime  example
is  the  matter  of  the  lack  of  a  bilateral  treaty.  The  U.S.  operated,  and
still  operates,  under  a  Pentalateral  protocol  signed  bv  the  French  and  Bao  Dai
under  the  U.S.  military  assistance  program  to  France  before  1954.  It  gave  U.S.
advisers  and  officials  virtual  diplomatic  status,  which  was  reasonable  back  when
there  were  less  than  two  hundred  of  them  in  all  Indochina.  But  it  now  applies
to  all  U.S.  personnel,  and  no  one  has  wanted  to  stir  things  up.

The  sensitivity  problem  cropped  up  often.  For  a  time  early  in  1964,  the  GVN
backed  off  from  an  agreement  to  extend  U.S.  advisors  to  district  level,  and  when
the  GVN  did  approve,  they  insisted  that  the  advice  be  strictly  military  and  that
the  advisors  be  labelled  "subsector."  In  like  manner,  the  III  Marine  Expedi-
tionary Force  became  the  III  Marine  Amphibious  Force,  because  the  French
had  called  their  Indochina  force  "expeditionary."  But  the  GVN,  and  especially
the  military,  agreed  readily  to  new  U.S.  troop  commitments.

The  Vietnamese  would  often  greet  a  U.S.  representative,  in  moments  of  ten-
sion, with  false  or  exaggerated  stories  of  U.S.  dealings,  such  as  a  complaint  in
January,  1964,  about  U.S.  training  and  CIA  contacts  with  the  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa
Hao.  In  contrast,  on  cabinet  appointments  they  often  asked  the  Ambassador's
opinion,  and  he  customarily  leaned  over  backward  to  avoid  giving  specific
recommendations.  Shared  sensitivity,  closely  related  to  the  lack  of  a  treaty
governing  status  of  U.S.  forces,  prevented  any  move  toward  joint  command
and  U.S.  control  of  all  militarv  operations  in  Vietnam;  both  Westmoreland  and
the  Vietnamese  preferred  to  operate  separately.  The  Embassy  looked  the  other
way  from  repressive  police  measures  and  political  arrests  unless  these  led  to
embarrassing  press  stories.  When  the  Ambassador  would  raise  this  type  of  issue
with  the  GVN,  it  proved  alwavs  to  be  touchv.

Vietnamese  sensitivity  sometimes  led  to  open  displays  of  anti-Americanism.
These  happened  on  three  main  occasions:  (1)  when  Khanh  grumbled  about
being  a  puppet  after  the  go-North  leaks  in  July.  1964;  (2)  in  the  open  rupture
between  Khanh  and  Taylor  in  December-January;  and  (3)  in  the  January  riots
when  rioters  overran  USIS  buildings  in  Saigon  and  Hue.

Vietnamese  Compliance  More  in  Form  Than  in  Substance

The  Vietnamese  nevertheless  showed  a  readv  willingness  throughout  the
period  to  declare  new  policies,  sign  decrees,  and  engage  in  joint  studies  at  our
request.  But  as  noted  above,  that  did  not  mean  we  got  the  substance  of  what  we
wanted  on  such  matters.  The  most  important  case  of  this  kind  was  Khanh's


US-GVN  Relations  283


ready  agreement  in  March  to  "mobilize"  South  Vietnam.  He  promptly  made  a
token  announcement;  and  while  students  and  other  potential  draft-eligibles
waited  anxiously  to  learn  what  he  meant  fas  did  we,  he  delayed  several  weeks
before  any  further  announcement.  Starting  in  May,  he  began  announcing
specifics  and  signing  decrees,  and  kept  the  idea  live  for  several  months.  However,
strength  of  the  RVNAF  rose  less  in  1964  than  it  did  in  1963*,  and  the  talk  of
non-military  mobilization  came  to  nothing.

The  military  and  the  more  militant  civilians,  on  whom  the  U.S.  counted  most
heavily  and  regularly  supported,  turned  out  to  have  far  more  enthusiasm  for
going  North  and  for  other  external  adventures  than  they  did  for  getting  on  with
the  job  of  effective  government  and  pacification.  They  promised  much  on  this
latter  score,  but  could  not  or  would  not  deliver.  Knowing  that  we  had  no  one
else  to  turn  to,  they  continued  their  old  habits  and  often  openly  did  what  they
pleased  about  important  matters.  The  go-North  problem  was  particularly
troublesome  because  the  militants  rejected  the  permanent  division  of  Vietnam
at  the  17th  parallel,  upheld  in  practice  by  the  U.S.

The  following  are  interesting  instances,  among  many,  of  their  superficial
compliance.  They  agreed  readily  to  use  U.S  advisers  at  the  ministerial  level  (the
brain  trust),  although  there  is  no  sign  that  the  brain-trusters  accomplished  any-
thing. Indeed,  on  all  ten  suggestions  that  accompanied  President  Johnson's  1964
New  Year's  Message  to  Minh,  only  the  one  on  amnesty  found  them  hesitant  to
express  their  full  agreement.  They  regularly  agreed  on  budgetary  limits  to  keep
inflation  from  getting  out  of  hand,  but  never  satisfied  us  on  specifics  through
1964  or  the  first  half  of  1965.  They  repeatedly  agreed  to  relieve  ineffective,  cor-
rupt commanders  and  officials,  but  delayed  endlessly  on  doing  it  and  generally
promoted  those  whom  they  relieved.  At  Westmoreland's  request,  Khanh  created
the  Hop  Tac  plan  for  pacification  around  Saigon;  but  it  foundered,  and
eventually  the  Vietnamese  killed  it.  When  Lodge  left  Vietnam  in  June,  1964,
he  sealed  his  tour  with  a  general  agreement  with  Khanh  on  concept,  scope,
and  organization  of  the  pacification  efforts;  obtaining  such  agreements  presented
absolutely  no  problem.  In  December,  1964,  the  JGS  issued  a  directive  contain-
ing every  MACV  suggestion  on  how  RVNAF  should  help  pacification.

In  July,  1964,  Khanh  created  a  National  Security  Council  similar  to  ours,
and  it  met  regularly  with  the  top  group  of  Embassy  people  to  talk  agreeably
about  pacification  and  manpower  problems.  MACV  set  up  joint  inspection  teams
and  joint  studies  with  JGS  people  several  times  a  year.  The  only  thing  of  this
class  that  had  any  visible  follow-through  was  the  joint  planning  group  on  bomb-
ing North  and  on  other  cross-border  operations.  Two  battalions  specifically
declared  ineffective  by  MACV  suffered  no  penalty  or  improvement.

The  militants'  predilection  for  external  adventures  began  to  show  in  May,
1964,  after  the  Embassy  started  pressing  Khanh  about  his  March  agreements

*  The  end-year  figures  are  as  follows:

South  Vietnam

Infantry-type  Battalions

RVNAF  Strength  ('000)

Total  Armed  Strength  ('000)
(Included  CIDG,  police,  etc.)

Source:  OSD  SEA  Statistical  Summary,  Tables  1  and  2.


1962

J963

1964

107

123

133

397

514

571

526

612

692

284 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

with  McNamara.  Khanh  responded  within  a  few  days  by  saying  he  wanted  to
declare  war,  bomb  the  North  with  U.S.  participation,  bring  10,000  U.S.  Army
Special  Forces  troops  into  South  Vietnam,  "get  rid  of  the  pohticians,"  and  put
Saigon  strictly  on  a  war  footing.  Lodge  tried  to  cool  him  off,  but  Khanh  brought
up  a  less  extreme  version  again  with  Rusk  at  the  end  of  the  month,  saying  that
his  government  could  not  win  without  action  outside  South  Vietnam.  When
Lodge  returned  from  the  Honolulu  Conference  in  early  June,  Khanh  responded
to  discussions  of  ARVN  strength  by  trying  to  draw  Lodge  out  on  actions  against
the  North.  Then,  when  we  did  not  move  fast  enough  to  suit  him  and  Ky,  they
started  a  press  campaign  on  the  subject,  and  pressed  Taylor  more  insistently.
Finally,  in  December,  when  Taylor  told  GVN  all  the  many  ways  they  should
improve  to  justify  further  U.S.  involvement,  their  immediate  reply  included  the
comment  that  the  U.S.  program  said  nothing  about  Viet  Cong  use  of  Cambodia.

The  press  leaks  about  going  North  were  the  first  major  instance  of  their
defiantly  going  ahead  as  they  pleased  against  our  wishes.  Khanh's  August  con-
stitution was  a  less  flagrant  case,  because  Taylor's  words  of  caution  were
comparatively  diffident.  (Moreover,  in  the  following  August-September  tur-
bulence, Khanh  let  himself  become  clearly  dependent  on  the  Embassy  when  he
talked  to  the  Buddhist  leaders.)  In  the  December  crisis  the  Young  Turks  defied
Taylor  at  every  turn  following  their  dissolution  of  the  HNC;  and  after  a  tem-
porary agreement  in  January  double-crossed  Taylor,  dismissed  Huong,  and  took
control  of  the  formation  of  a  new  government.  They  guessed  correctly  that  we
saw  no  choice  but  to  go  along.

JUNE  1965— FALL  1967

By  the  summer  of  1965,  the  war  in  Vietnam  had  dramatically  changed  its
complexion  from  the  previous  two  years.  More  and  more,  with  U.S.  combat
forces  pouring  into  SVN  and  Rolling  Thunder  underway,  it  looked  like  the  U.S.
against  the  DRV.  The  war  was  no  longer  being  fought  with  U.S.  advice  and  aid
alone;  there  was  now  a  massive  U.S.  presence.  While  official  documents  still
repeated  the  credo  that  it  was,  in  the  last  analysis,  a  struggle  for  the  GVN  to  win
or  lose,  the  focus  of  U.S.  concern  shifted.  As  the  U.S.  role  increased  and  then
predominated,  the  need  for  GVN  effectiveness  in  the  now  and  short-run  re-
ceived less  attention.  The  U.S.  would  take  care  of  the  war  now — defeat  the
enemy  main  forces  and  destroy  Hanoi's  will  to  persist — then,  the  GVN  could
and  would  reform  and  resuscitate  itself.  Only  after  the  immediate  security
threat  to  the  GVN  was  blunted  and  forced  to  subside  did  we  expect  our  South
Vietnamese  ally  to  improve  its  performance  on  all  fronts.  Until  then  and  in
order  to  get  to  that  point,  the  U.S.  would  concentrate  on  what  it  could  do.

This  view — a  massive  U.S.  effort  in  the  short-run  leading  to  and  enabling  a
GVN  effort  in  the  long-run — set  the  tone  and  content  of  U.S.-GVN  relations.
In  policy  terms,  it  meant  caution  in  the  use  of  U.S.  leverage.  There  seemed  to
be  no  compelling  requirement  to  be  tough  with  Saigon;  it  would  only  prematurely
rock  the  boat.  To  press  for  efficiency  would  be  likely,  it  was  reasoned,  to  generate
instability.  Our  objective  became  simple:  if  we  could  not  expect  more  GVN  ef-
ficiency, we  could  at  least  get  a  more  stable  and  legitimate  GVN.  Nation-building
was  the  key  phrase.  This  required  a  constitution  and  free  elections.  Moreover,
if  we  could  not  have  the  reality,  we  would  start  with  appearances.  U.S.  influence
was  successfully  directed  at  developing  a  democratic  GVN  in  form.  Beginning
in  September  1966,  a  series  of  free  elections  were  held,  first  for  a  Constituent
Assembly  and  later  for  village  officials,  the  Presidency,  House  and  Senate.

U.S.-GVN  relations  from  June  of  1965  to  1968,  then,  have  to  be  understood


US-GVX  Relations  2S5


in  terms  of  the  new  parameters  of  the  war.  Before  this  date,  our  overriding  ob-
jective had  to  be  and  was  governmental  stability-,  .\fter  the  Diem  coup,  the  G\'N
underwent  six  changes  in  leadership  in  the  space  of  one  and  a  half  years.  From
June  1965  on.  there  was  relative  stabilitv.  Kv  and  Thieu.  while  challenged,
proved  strong  enough  to  keep  their  power  and  position.  In  putting  down  the
Struggle  Movement  (following  General  Thi's  dismissal  bv  Kv)  in  the  first  half
of  1966.  and  then  delivering  on  the  September.  1966  election.  G\"N  effectively
discredited  the  militant  Buddhist  leadership  and  for  the  time  being  ended  its
threat  to  political  stablilitv.  Concern  about  possible  neutralism  or  anarchv.  which
had  been  imponant  in  U.S.  thinking  in  1964  and  earlv  1965.  subsided  accordinglv.
The  uneasy  agreement  between  Thieu  and  Kv  to  run  on  the  same  ticket,  result-
ing panly  from  U.S.  pressure  for  militarv  unitv,  and  the  subsequent  transition
to  legitimacy,  gave  the  U.S.  a  sense  of  relief  and  satisfaction,  although  no  one
suggested  that  GX'X  had  vet  built  a  broad  political  base  or  had  solved  its  effec-
tiveness problems.  This  G\'N  stabilitv  made  possible  the  increased  attention  to
pacification  and  nation-building.

The  pacification  parameter  had  changed  as  well.  From  1961  to  June  of  1965.
the  U.S.  flooded  S\"N  with  the  advison.'  resources  of  men  and  monev  to  keep
the  G\'N  afloat  and  R\'NAF  fighting.  This  input  lacked  a  clear  plan.  After  June
1965.  we  made  a  concened  effort  to  organize  pacification.  \^'e  exacted  an  agree-
ment from  the  G\'N  in  the  fall  of  1966  to  shift  half  of  its  ground  forces  into
pacification — although  U.S.  forces  carried  a  share  of  this  burden  and  attempted
to  show  R\'NAF  how  to  do  it.  \\'e  tried  to  centralize  pacification  programs  by
creating  a  new  G\'N  structure  to  control  and  allocate  resources.  This  was  made
manifest  bv  the  establishment  of  a  separate  Ministr\-  for  Revolutionary-  Develop-
ment. U.S.  moves  bv  stages  to  the  unified  civil-militarv  CORDS  organization
in  Vietnam  paralleled  this  super-ministn.-  for  pacification.  And.  pacification
statistics  showed  steadv  increase  of  G\'N  control  in  the  countr\"side.  reversing
the  downward  trend  of  previous  vears — but,  U.S.  dissatisfaction  with  GN'N
performance  also  increased  nonetheless.

Beyond  and  more  imponant  than  all  this  were  the  U.S.  effons  themselves.
By  the  close  of  1965.  170.000  U.S.  combat  forces  were  in  SVX.  Bv  the  end  of
1967.  this  figure  was  almost  half  a  million.  Bv  mid- 1965.  U.S.  air  strikes  against
Xonh  Metnam  had  extended  in  geographic  coverage  up  to  20 '30'.  and  ap-
pro\ed  targets  had  widened  bevond  LOCs.  Total  sorties  rose  to  about  900  per
week.  Bv  196S.  we  were  bombing  throughout  the  North,  with  very-  few  though
important  tarsrets  still  beine  prohibited.  Total  sorties  per  week  reached  about
4.000.

It  was  in  this  context  that  U.S.-G\"N  relations  took  shape.
Leverage

Having  suffered  several  backfires  in  the  attempts  to  require  or  encourage  G\'N
effectiveness  in  1964.  the  Embassv  and  \\'ashington  generallv  preferred  to  let
well  enough  alone  in  1965  through  196".  The  U.S.  limited  itself  to  only  a  few
demands,  and  usuallv  avoided  direct  confrontations  at  the  top  levels  of  gov-
emment-to-govemment  contact.

The  U.S.  had  one  repetition  of  its  old  backfire  problem  following  the  Hono-
lulu Conference  of  Februarv  1966.  President  Johnson  embraced  Kv  publiclv  and
endorsed  his  government:  Kv  then  felt  strong  enough  to  move  against  General
Thi,  who  had  been  making  trouble  generallv  and  was  almost  openlv  waiting  for
his  chance  to  take  over  the  G\'N.  Kv  eventuallv  succeeded  in  removing  Thi
and  getting  him  out  of  the  countrw  but  at  the  cost  of  returning  to  a  degree  of


286 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

chaos  in  May  that  was  in  some  ways  worse  than  any  suffered  in  1964  under
Khanh.  At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  the  U.S.  went  so  far  as  to  use  force  and  the
threat  of  force  against  both  sides  to  keep  the  confrontation  between  GVN  and
the  Struggle  Movement  within  bounds.  There  was  no  sign  of  ill  effects  from
our  boldness  in  this  instance.

Whatever  interest  there  was  in  putting  pressure  on  the  top  levels  of  GVN
was  stronger  in  Washington  than  in  the  Embassy,  and  stronger  in  the  Embassy
than  in  MACV,  as  it  had  been  in  the  past.  But  the  past  failures  of  such  pressures
made  everyone  gunshy.  At  one  point,  Washington  felt  so  strongly  about  the  high
GVN  dollar  balances  that  it  sent  out  its  own  representative  to  negotiate  with
GVN,  and  he  freely  threatened  to  cut  down  U.S.  dollar  aid.  However,  neither
Washington  nor  the  Embassy  suggested  doing  anything  so  drastic  as  holding
up  aid  payments  and  projects  until  a  satisfactory  agreement  could  be  reached.
Confident  that  the  threats  were  empty,  GVN  dug  in  its  heels  and  gave  us  noth-
ing but  more  promises.

Although  the  U.S.  played  down  pressure  or  leverage  on  the  top  level  of  GVN,
the  idea  of  leverage  at  lower  levels  enjoyed  a  resurgence.  Interest  in  the  subject
reached  a  low  point  in  June  1965,  when  we  abandoned  the  "troika  signoff,"
which  had  given  U.S.  province  representatives  veto  control  over  the  use  of  AID
direct-support  commodities.  For  four  months  starting  October  1,  1965,  MACV
experimented  with  giving  its  sector  advisors  a  petty  cash  fund  for  urgent  projects;
however,  MACV  then  dropped  the  idea.  In  April  1966,  Lodge  urged  restora-
tion of  these  types  of  leverage,  and  the  idea  kept  coming  up  thereafter.  Two
major  studies,  one  in  Saigon  in  1966  and  one  in  Washington  in  1967,  came
down  strongly  for  regular  procedures  to  use  our  material  support  to  put  pres-
sure on  lower  echelons  of  GVN.  They  particularlv  emphasized  signoff  systems
and  the  like,  including  U.S.  distribution  of  MAP  support  within  Vietnam.  But
the  fear  that  such  methods  would  prove  counter-productive,  either  by  provok-
ing resistance  or  by  making  Vietnamese  officials  more  dependent  on  our  people
and  less  able  to  perform  on  their  own,  prevented  adoption  of  the  proposals.

In  at  least  three  instances,  AID  cut  off  its  support  to  a  province  in  order  to
pressure  the  province  chief.  In  September  1965,  AID  accused  the  province  chief
of  Binh  Tuy  of  misuse  of  AID  funds,  and  had  to  withdraw  its  personnel  from
the  province  and  cut  off  support  to  it  after  threats  on  their  lives.  The  incident
got  into  the  papers  and  embarrassed  both  GVN  and  the  Embassy;  after  several
weeks  GVN  moved  the  accused  officer  to  another  job,  and  AID  resumed  its  i
program  in  the  province.  In  June  1966,  AID  cut  off  shipments  to  Kontum  prov-
ince for  four  days  to  force  the  province  chief  to  account  for  the  end  uses  of  AID
commodities.  In  August  1967,  CORDS  cut  off  shipments  to  Bien  Hoa  province
for  eleven  weeks  for  similar  reasons.

In  contrast,  MACV  scrupulouslv  a\oided  withholding  MAP  support  from  t
military  units,  regardless  of  circumstances.  The  single  case  of  record  of  taking
away  MAP  support  involved  two  fishing  boats  owned  by  the  Vietnam  Navy
that  were  found  ineligible  for  such  support.  In  his  reaction  to  the  PROVN  Re-
port in  May  1966,  in  his  directives  to  advisers  around  the  time  of  the  Chinh-  'i
Hunnicutt  affair  in  the  fall  of  1966,  and  in  his  reaction  to  Washington  inquiries
in  Mav  1967,  COMUSMACV  consistentlv  brushed  aside  criticism  of  ARVN
and  told  both  his  superiors  and  his  subordinates  to  lay  off.  Whatever  interest  in
leverage  there  was  at  lower  levels  in  the  field  received  no  backing  from
COMUSMACV.  In  March  1966,  a  decision  to  transfer  MAP  for  Vietnam  to
service  funding  had  no  effect  on  leverage  because  MACV  continued  to  put
material  support  in  Vietnamese  hands  as  soon  as  it  entered  the  country.


US-GVN  Relations  287


Although  AID  tried  some  leverage  in  this  period,  and  although  the  Ambas-
sador, the  Mission,  and  officials  tuned  to  U.S.  domestic  pressures  urged  U.S.
leverage  for  GVN  reforms,  there  is  still  no  documented  study  of  GVN's  failures,
of  the  reasons  for  it,  and  of  the  ways  that  leverage  of  different  types  might  help
improve  GVN  permanently.  The  basic  problem  of  concern  is  GVN's  overall
failure  to  do  its  civil  and  military  jobs.  Leverage  in  the  hands  of  U.S.  personnel
might  assure  that  GVN  would  do  particular  things  we  want;  but  we  have  no  in-
formation on  what  kind  of  leverage,  if  any,  would  reform  GVN.  From  1964
onwards,  high  U.S.  officials,  including  McGeorge  Bundy  and  Secretary  Mc-
Namara,  have  said  at  one  time  and  another  that  thorough  reform  of  GVN  is
necessary;  but  no  one  has  found  or  even  seriously  proposed  a  way  to  do
it.  Encadrement  proposals,  prominent  before  June  1965,  still  received  occasional
mention;  but  these  proposed  to  make  up  for  GVN's  deficiencies  by  substituting
U.S.  control  for  GVN  control,  and  do  not  purport  to  reform  GVN  itself.  If  this
problem  has  a  solution,  we  have  yet  to  find  it.

The  Embassy's  Lack  of  Political  Contact

The  turbulent  events  of  1964  and  early  1965  had  shown  that  the  Embassy
had  no  effective  system,  either  through  overt  or  covert  contacts,  for  finding  out
what  was  going  on.  Nothing  was  done  subsequently  to  correct  this  problem.  CAS
people  talked  to  a  few  official  contacts,  who  told  them  things  the  Vietnamese
wanted  the  U.S.  to  believe;  but  the  CIA  had  and  has  no  mandate  or  mission  to
perform  systematic  intelligence  and  espionage  in  friendly  countries,  and  so  lacks
the  resources  to  gather  and  evaluate  the  large  amounts  of  information  required
on  political  forces,  corruption,  connections,  and  so  on.

General  Thi  began  sounding  out  his  U.S.  contacts  on  whether  the  U.S.  ap-
preciated his  superior  qualities  as  a  potential  leader  of  Vietnam  as  early  as
August  1965;  and  in  other  ways  we  had  plenty  of  warning  that  there  would  be
trouble.  However,  we  showed  no  feel  for  cause  and  effect.  President  Johnson's
embrace  of  Ky  at  Honolulu  in  February,  1966,  could  only  have  had  a  divisive
effect  when  Ky  commanded  so  little  solid  support  within  his  own  country.  On
the  one  hand,  civilians  and  the  military  had  fluoted  U.S.  wishes  so  often  in
the  past  that  express  U.S.  support  scarcely  counted  for  much;  but  on  the  other
hand  Ky's  weakness  and  Thi's  known  ambitions  tempted  Ky  to  get  whatever  mile-
age he  could  out  of  our  support.  In  the  subsequent  turbulence,  all  parties
again  flouted  U.S.  wishes  freely,  stopping  short  only  when  the  U.S.  used  force  and
the  credible  threat  of  force  to  oppose  them.  The  maneuverings  of  the  various
political  groups  seemed  to  surprise  the  Embassy  repeatedly.  The  same  problems
arose  in  the  GVN  cabinet  split  and  crisis  just  before  the  Manila  Conference  in
October  1966.  The  blandly  naive  language  of  the  "Blueprint  for  Vietnam"  in
late  1967,  unmodified  by  any  back  channel  elaboration,  offered  no  hope  of  any
foreseeable  improvement.

The  MACV  Role

The  MACV  organization  played  an  important,  mostly  hidden,  role  in  U.S.-
GVN  relations.  At  every  level  from  Saigon  to  the  districts,  the  advisory  structure
was  the  most  pervasive  instrument  of  intergovernmental  contact.  ARVN  of-
ficers were  accustomed  to  being  spoon-fed  military  advice;  so  when  military  dom-
inance of  GVN  brought  these  same  officers  to  high  positions  in  government,
the  advisor  relationship  conferred  a  latent  diplomatic  role  upon  MACV.  Ad-


288 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

visors  were  used  as  channels  of  communications  on  political  and  pacification
matters.  (On  occasions  such  as  the  attempts  to  get  Thi  to  meet  Ky  or  to  leave
the  country,  senior  MACV  officers  openly  became  diplomatic  emissaries.)

We  have  less  record  than  we  would  like  of  COMUSMACV's  influence.  He
reported  regularly  to  his  military  seniors  only  on  strictly  military  matters.
Detailed  reports  of  his  routine,  daily  dealings  with  counterparts  were  not  re-
quired of  MACV  as  they  were  of  the  Embassy.

From  time  to  time,  COMUSMACV  revealed  his  own  independent  objectives.
He  sought  protection  of  the  ARVN  officer  corps  from  unfavorable  press  stories
in  order  to  preserve  their  solidarity  and  morale;  he  pressed  zealously  for  the
rapid  build-up  of  U.S.  ground  forces;  he  opposed  encadrement  and  combined
command  with  ARVN;  he  rejected  sanctions  against  ARVN;  he  objected  to  the
initial  constraints  on  the  use  of  American  forces  and  wanted  to  be  free
to  operate  independently  of  ARVN.

General  Westmoreland's  strong  position  usually  assured  that  his  view  pre-
vailed. Extension  of  advisors,  increased  MAP  resources,  and  the  build-up  of  U.S.
ground  forces  enhanced  his  relative  position.  By  October  1966,  MACV  had
numerical  superiority  of  forces  over  Regular  RVNAF;  by  late  1967,  MACV
had  over  400  square  miles  of  bases.  His  freedom  from  detailed  reporting  of  daily
contacts  was  itself  an  element  of  strength.  When  he  received  unwanted  advice
and  directives,  he  set  up  studies,  and,  after  a  time,  proceeded  as  usual.  This
tendency  was  most  notable  in  the  case  of  leverage,  already  noted,  and  combined
command.  Likewise,  MACV  successfully  resisted  taking  over  the  bulk  of  Saigon
Port  operations,  despite  pressure  from  Washington,  and  delayed  for  about  a
year  the  move  to  take  division  commanders  out  of  the  pacification  chain  of  com-
mand. Another  instance  of  MACV  independence  showed  up  when  Rusk  and
Lodge  wanted  to  keep  U.S.  men  and  equipment  out  of  the  confrontation  be-
tween GVN  and  the  Struggle  Movement  in  I  Corps,  but  they  failed  to  tell
MACV  about  it.  On  April  5,  MACV  went  ahead  and  airlifted  two  battalions  of
Vietnamese  Rangers  to  Danang;  after  that  Lodge  put  a  stop  to  it.

Vietnamese  Non-Performance  and  Sensitivity

Although  population  control  statistics  began  to  improve  in  1966  and  continued
to  do  so  in  the  first  half  of  1967,  and  although  this  seemed  partly  associated  with
the  creation  of  the  Ministry  of  Revolutionary  Development  and  with  the  em-
phasis on  its  programs,  few  suggested  that  this  progress  could  be  held  if  U.S.
forces  withdrew.  The  drumbeat  of  criticism  from  field  personnel,  and  the  doc-
umented cases  of  non-performance  on  high-level  matters,  made  it  clear  that
there  was  no  real  improvement  in  GVN  performance.  Corruption  and  inaction
showed  no  signs  of  improvement;  province  chiefs  and  military  commanders
singled  out  by  U.S.  advisers  as  urgently  needing  removal  were  simply  shuffled
around,  if  moved  at  all,  and  often  promoted.  Increasing  traffic  in  the  Port  of
Saigon  led  to  acute  congestion  problems,  which  GVN  failed  to  clear  up  or
materially  improve.

Moreover,  on  issues  purportedly  relating  to  sovereignty  or  "face,"  the  Viet-
namese continued  to  be  quite  sensitive,  and  the  U.S.  was  afraid  to  inflame  this
sensitivity.  Both  sides  avoided  many  delicate  topics.  A  prime  example  is  the  lack
of  a  bilateral  treaty.  The  U.S.  presence  has  always  been  based  on  the
Pentalateral  Protocol  of  1950.  signed  by  France,  the  Bao  Dai  government,  Laos,
Cambodia  and  the  U.S..  which  gave  U.S.  advisers  and  officials  virtual  diplomatic
status — an  arrangement  reasonable  back  when  there  were  less  than  two  hundred


US-GVN  Relations  289


of  them  in  all  Indochina,  but  of  dubious  applicability  to  the  hundreds  of  thousands
now  there.  This  matter  has  cropped  up  from  time  to  time,  as  in  the  case  of
American  civilians  being  tried  for  currency  violations  in  Vietnamese  courts,
where  they  were  subject  to  extortion.  Both  governments  cooperated  in  smooth-
ing things  over  after  a  momentary  disagreement  over  jurisdiction,  and  have
avoided  stirring  things  up.

Shared  sensitivity  (and  legitimate  concern  for  an  independent  RVNAF  role),
closely  related  to  the  lack  of  a  bilateral  treaty,  prevented  any  move  toward  joint
command  and  U.S.  control  of  all  military  operations  in  Vietnam.  Both  West-
moreland and  the  Vietnamese  preferred  to  operate  either  separately  or  in  loosely
coordinated  joint  operations.  The  Embassy  looked  the  other  way  from  repres-
sive police  measures  and  political  arrests  unless  these  led  to  embarrassing  press
stories;  and  when  the  Ambassador  would  raise  this  type  of  issue  with  the  GVN,
it  proved  always  to  be  touchy.  Especially  under  Lodge,  the  Embassy  tried  to  pro-
tect GVN  from  the  press  and  to  help  it  build  a  favorable  image.

Vietnamese  sensitivity  sometimes  led  to  open  displays  of  anti-Americanism.
These  displays  reached  a  climax  in  the  Struggle  Movement  crisis  in  the  first
half  of  1966,  when  the  Buddhists  openly  accused  the  U.S.  of  helping  GVN  crush
them,  and  they  sacked  and  burned  the  U.S.  Consulate  in  Hue.  Moreover,  news-
papers reflecting  officials  views  would  occasionally  publish  stories  expressing
fear  of  a  U.S.  sellout  in  negotiations,  anger  at  U.S.  intervention  in  Vietnamese
affairs  (as  happened  during  the  Chinh-Hunnicutt  affair),  and  other  anti-
American  themes.

Vietnamese  Compliance  More  in  Form  Than  in  Substance

The  Vietnamese,  nevertheless,  showed  a  ready  willingness  to  declare  new
policies,  sign  decrees,  and  engage  in  joint  studies  at  our  request.  But  as  noted,  that
scarcely  means  that  we  got  what  we  wanted  on  such  matters.  Ky  was  always  will-
ing to  issue  decrees  purporting  to  clear  up  the  port  problem,  and  to  make  public
declarations  against  corruption.  On  economic  policy,  Ky  and  Hanh  gave  us  one
agreement  after  another  promising  to  control  inflation  and  to  run  down  their
dollar  balances.  The  relations  of  their  military  with  MACV  showed  the  same
pattern.

The  Vietnamese  military,  on  whom  the  U.S.  counted  most  heavily,  continued
as  in  earlier  periods  to  have  far  more  enthusiasm  for  external  adventures  than
they  did  for  getting  on  with  the  job  of  effective  government  and  pacification.
They  promised  much  on  this  latter  score,  but  delivered  little.  Knowing  that  we
had  no  one  else  to  turn  to,  they  continued  their  old  habits  and  often  openly  did
what  they  pleased  about  important  matters,  such  as  the  airlift  of  troops
to  Danang  in  May,  1966.

Examples  of  superficial  compliance  are  almost  too  numerous  to  mention.  The
Honolulu  Conference  of  February  1966,  produced  over  sixty  agreed  points  be-
tween the  two  governments  on  all  areas  of  mutual  interest;  getting  any  follow-up
proved  to  be  like  pulling  teeth,  and  then  the  follow-up  we  got  was  nothing  more
as  a  rule  than  more  promises.  Likewise,  at  the  Manila  Conference  much  the
same  thing  happened,  where  GVN  agreed  to  programs  for  social  revolution,
economic  progress,  and  so  on.  However,  at  our  insistence  they  did  go  ahead  with
the  constitution  and  elections,  and  they  shifted  half  of  ARVN  into  pacification.
How  much  substantive  improvement  these  moves  will  produce  still  remains  to
be  seen.

GVN  taste  for  foreign  adventure  showed  up  in  small,  irritating  ways.  In  July


290 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

1965,  Thi  planned  unauthorized  operations  in  the  DMZ,  but  we  stopped  him.
In  1967,  we  discovered  that  GVN  had  brought  in  Chinese  Nationalists  disguised
as  Nungs,  to  engage  in  operations  in  Laos;  also,  they  sent  a  group  to  put  an  air-
field on  an  island  170  miles  south  of  Hainan,  apparently  without  consulting
MACV.


Conclusion

Increasingly  throughout  1967,  GVN  legitimacy  and  performance  became  a
domestic  political  issue  in  the  U.S.  as  well  as  a  source  of  concern  for  policy-
makers. No  matter  what  issue  was  raised,  the  central  importance  of  the  GVN
remained.  If  we  wanted  to  pacify  more,  we  had  to  turn  to  the  Vietnamese  them-
selves. If  we  desired  to  push  for  a  negotiated  settlement,  we  had  to  seriously  weigh
the  possibilities  of  SVN  collapse.  In  the  last  analysis,  it  was  and  is  a  war  which
only  GVN  legitimacy  and  effectiveness  can  win.

End  of  Summary  and  Analysis


CHRONOLOGY

I  Jan  64 State  to  Saigon  1000  30  Dec  63

President's  New  Year's  message  to  Minh  contains  reassurance;
advice  also  rendered.  Brain  trust  approved.

10  Jan  64 Lodge  to  State  1287  10  Jan

Lodge  and  Minh  discuss  President's  advice  agree  they're  doing  fine
except  on  anmesty.  GVN  backs  away  from  previously  agreed  ex-
tension of  advisors  to  districts.

30  Jan  64 Saigon  to  State  1433  30  Jan

Khanh  seizes  power,  arrests  four  top  generals  of  MRC,  but  lets
Minh  continue  as  President  at  USG  urging.

13  Feb  64 Memorandum  to  Secretary  of  State

Rostow  recommends  enforcing  NVN  compliance  with  1962
Geneva  agreement.

21  Feb  64 COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  Feb  64

GVN  accepts  advisors  in  13  districts  of  the  Delta.

21  Feb  64 Saigon  to  AID  2334  21  Feb

GVN  asks  USG  for  rice  standbv  commitment,  for  the  first  time.

8  Mar  64 SD  PM  16  Mar  Sec.  Ill;  and  Memorandum  of  Conversation  at
JGS  Hqtrs.  12  Mar

Secretary  McNamara  arrives  in  Saigon  for  several  days  of  talks,
including  talks  with  GVN.  Goes  away  pessimistic,  recommends
more  AID  and  larger  RVNAF,  plus  unqualified  backing  for
Khanh.  Khanh  promises  mobilization.

17  Mar  64 NSAM  288

President  approves  Secretary  of  Defense  recommendations,  directs
their  execution.


20  Mar  64


White  House  Press  Release

White  House  announces  Khanh's  mobilization  plan.


US-GVN  Relations  291


4  Apr  64 State  to  Saigon  1 602  4  Apr

Mobilization  decree,  dissolution  of  Council  of  Notables,  promise
of  eventual  Constituent  Assembly  and  civil  government.

10  Apr  64 Saigon  to  State  1964  11  Apr

Beginning  of  AID  and  related  economic  negotiations  for  fiscal
1965.

29  A pr  64 Saigon  to  State  2089  30  A pr

Khanh  renews  request  for  brain  trust;  Lodge  euphoric.

30  A  pr  64 Saigon  to  State  2091  30  A  pr

USOM  and  GVN  badger  each  other  on  pacification  and  economic
delays.

4  May  64 Saigon  to  State  2108  4  May

Khanh  wants  to  bomb  NVN,  have  10,000  US  troops,  and  set  up
all-military  government  in  SVN.  Lodge  says  no,  no,  yes.

13  May  64 Saigon  to  State  2203  14  May

McNamara  sees  Khanh  in  Saigon;  they  reach  agreement  on  desira-
bility of  progress.

13-27  May Saigon  to  State  DTG  271200Z  May

64  Forrestal  of  White  House  staff  "negotiates"  AID  with  GVN,  gives

GVN  AID  increases.

25  May  64 Memorandum  to  President

McGeorge  Bundy  recommends  force  against  NVN  as  the  only
path  to  success.

27  May  64 State  to  Saigon  1251  18  Feb.

Sullivan  distributes  proposal  for  semi-encadrement  of  GVN  as  a
necessary  step  for  progress.

28-29  May Saigon  to  State  2332  and  2338  28  May

64  MRC  censures  four  "neutralist  plot"  generals  that  had  been  ar-

rested in  Khanh  coup.  Keeps  Minh,  as  urged  by  Lodge.

30  May  64 CINCPAC  to  State  37  2  Jim

Rusk  sees  Khanh,  leaves  nothing  to  the  imagination  on  possible
US  all-the-way  commitment,  stresses  need  for  GVN  unity.

2-3  Jim  64  Memo  for  the  Record,  Special  Meeting  on  SE  Asia.  CINCPAC
000211  DTG  8  Jim  and  Memo  for  Secretary  (State)  "Highlights
of  Honolulu  Conference"  from  W.  P.  Bundy  DTG  3  Jim
Honolulu  Conference.  Conferees  (include  Rusk,  McNamara,
Lodge,  Taylor  and  Westmoreland)  agree  on  increased  advisory
effort,  agree  to  refine  plans  for  pressures  on  NVN.

4  Jun  64 Saigon  to  State  2405  4  Jun

Lodge  hints  to  Khanh  that  USG  will  prepare  US  public  opinion
for  actions  against  NVN.

29  Jun  64 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1964,  p.  69

AID  sets  up  sector  adviser  fund,  with  troika  signoff  to  bypass
GVN-Saigon.


292 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

30  Jun  64 COMUSMACV  Oil 057 Z  Jul

US  and  GVN  agree  to  joint  planning  for  cross-border  operations
in  Laos.

8  Jul  64  Saigon  to  State  56  8  Jul

Ambassador  Taylor  presents  his  credentials  to  Khanh.

9  Jul  64  Saigon  to  State  65  9  Jul

Ambassador  Taylor  hears  the  complaints  of  civilian  cabinet  mem-
bers.

17  Jul  64 Saigon  to  State  124  1 7  Jul

USOM  starts  periodic  meetings  with  GVN's  National  Security
Council.

19  Jul  64 Saigon  to  State  185  23  Jul

Khanh  and  Ky  lobby  publicly  for  cross-border  operations  and  air
strikes  into  Laos  and  NVN.

23  Jul  64 Saigon  to  State  185  23  Jul

Khanh  presses  Taylor  for  action,  keeps  up  the  lobbying.

24  Jul  64 Saigon  to  State  203  24  Jul

Khanh  asks  Taylor  if  he  (Khanh)  should  resign;  Taylor  says  no.
Khanh  asks  for  publicly  stated  US  backing  and  gets  it.

25  Jul  64 Saigon  to  State  232  27  Jul

Khanh  promises  to  quit  lobbying,  reacts  favorably  to  proposed
joint  planning  for  air  strikes  on  NVN,  and  says  he  plans  GVN
reorganization.

2-4  Aug  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  p.  269

Gulf  of  Tonkin  incidents,  US  retaliation.

7  Aug  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  p.  270

Khanh  proclaims  state  of  emergency,  with  press  censorship.

8  Aug  64 COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  DTG  08071 5Z  Aug

Westy  and  Khanh  discuss  joint  planning,  agree  not  to  discuss  com-
bined command.

12  Aug  64 Saigon  to  State  393  12  Aug

Khanh's  ''reorganization"  is  a  new  constitution  with  military
openly  on  top,  and  with  Khanh  President.  Taylor  sceptical,  coun-
sels caution.

16  Aug  64 Saigon  to  State  415  15  Aug

Khanh  gets  MRC  approval  of  constitution  after  hurried  USOM
drafting  assistance.

18  Aug  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  270-71

Ambassador  Tavlor  firmly  recommends  plans  for  gradual  pressures
North  to  start  1  Januarv  contingent  on  improved  GVN  per-
formance, or  not  contingent  if  things  get  bad  enough.  Suggests  the
package  include  Marines  at  Danang.

21-27  Aug Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  272-74

64  Student  demonstrations  followed  by  general  rioting.


US-GVN  Relations  293


24  Aug  64 Saigon  to  State  542  24  Aug

Taylor  advises  Khanh  to  move  fast  on  new  cabinet.

25  Aug  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  274-75

One  o'clock  A.M.  Taylor  advises  Khanh  to  make  some  concessions
but  keep  constitution.  Khanh  does  and  riots  continue.  Khanh
"resigns."  Riots  continue.

27  Aug  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  275-78

MRC  revokes  constitution,  keeps  Khanh  now  as  member  of  tem-
porary triumvirate  (including  Minh  and  Khiem).  New  HNC  to  be
appointed.

29  Aug  64 State  to  Saigon  555  29  Aug

Paratroopers  with  bayonets  restore  order  in  Saigon.

6  Sep  64 Saigon  to  State  785  8  Sep

Taylor  takes  off  on  a  trip  to  Washington.  Recommends  pressures
on  NVN  to  begin  1  December.

10  Sep  64 NSAM  314  10  Sep

Says  strengthen  GVN.

13  Sep  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  287-290;  Saigon  to  State  836  13
Sep;  Saigon  to  State  878  16  Sep

Abortive  coup  attempt  temporarily  captures  Saigon.  Ky  and  Thieu
back  Khanh,  defeat  coup  forces.

20  Sep  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  p.  290;  Saigon  to  State  923  22  Sep;  936
23  Sep  937,  952,  and  954  24  Sep;  985  29  Sep;  and  1046  7  Oct.
COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  DTG  031137Z  Oct
Rhade  tribesmen  in  4  CIDG  camps  rebel  against  GVN.

24  Sep  64 Saigon  to  State  938  24  Sep

The  new  HNC  begins  deliberations  to  write  a  constitution.

30  Sep  64 NYTimes  Articles

W.  Bundy  predicts  publicly  that  bombing  NVN  would  cut  down
the  threat  to  GVN  in  a  matter  of  months.

27  Oct  64 Saigon  to  State  1292  27  Oct;  State  to  Saigon  944  29  Oct.  Shaplen
Lost  Revolution,  pp.  290-9

HNC  finishes  on  time,  surprises  by  naming  Suu  President,  not
Minh.

30  Oct  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  p.  293;  State  to  Saigon  978  1  Nov;

CINCPAC  to  JCS  DTG  020400Z  Nov;  Saigon  to  State  1382  2
Nov

Mortar  attack  on  Bien  Hoa  airbase.  State  rejects  Taylor's  recom-
mendation of  immediate  reprisal  raid  on  NVN.

11  Nov  64 Saigon  to  State  1452  and  1460  10  Nov

MRC  publishes  military  reorganization  without  MACV  review;
MACV  protests  and  MRC  withdraws  it  for  changes.

26  Nov  64 COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  DTG  0260945Z  Nov

Westmoreland  slaps  Ky  down  just  before  apparent  coup  attempt.
Taylor  is  in  Washington.


294 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

7  Dec  64 Embassy  to  State  Airgram  A-468  15  Dec

Taylor,  just  back  from  Washington  with  fresh  guidance,  presents
GVN  with  a  candid  statement  of  its  failures  and  couples  demands
for  progress  in  stated  areas  to  promises  of  US  escalation.

8-20  Dec  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  294-95

Student  and  Buddhist  demonstrations  against  Huong  government
and  growing  crisis.

20  Dec  64 Saigon  to  State  1869,  1870,  and  1874  20  Dec;  MACV  to  CINC-

PAC  rec'd  NMCC  200816Z  Dec

Khanh  and  Generals  disregard  Taylors  protests,  dissolve  HNC  and
arrest  opposition;  "Young  Turks"  (Ky,  Thieu,  Thi  and  Gang)
consolidate  their  dominance  by  creating  a  small  Armed  Forces
Council  (AFC)  as  the  top  governing  body.  Taylor  reads  them  the
riot  act.

21  Dec  64 Saigon  to  State  1881  21  Dec

Taylor  asks  Khanh  to  resign  and  leave  the  country.

23  Dec  64 Saigon  to  State  1914  23  Dec;  1929  and  1930  24  Dec

Young  Turks  attack  Taylor  publicly,  and  privately  seek  his  recall.

24  Dec  64 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  295-97

Taylor  tells  press  that  Khanh  has  outstayed  his  usefulness.

25  Dec  64 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1965,  p.  229

Vietnamese  JGS  issues  Directive  A-B  139,  at  MACV  request,  on
how  RVNAF  should  be  employed  to  improve  pacification  pro-
gram.

7  Jan  65 Saigon  to  State  2081  7  Jan  2089  8  Jan  2102  9  Jan

AFC  Generals  decide  to  give  way  by  restoring  civilian  government
under  a  new  name  (i.e.  without  HNC)  leaving  Suu-Huong  combi-
nation in.

9  Jan  65 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  297-98

With  Taylor's  reluctant  concurrence,  the  AFC  announces  the  7
January  decision.

11  Jan  65 Saigon  to  State  2112  and  2120  11  Jan

US  and  GVN  publiclv  patch  up  relations.  Young  Turks  will  enter
cabinet.

12  Jan  65 Shaplen.  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  298-99

New  demonstrations  begin,  demanding  Huong's  resignation.

14  Jan  65 Saigon  to  State  2155  14  Jan

Khanh  shows  Taylor  a  new  cabinet  list;  Taylor  tries  to  slow  him
down.

18  Jan  65 Saigon  to  State  2176  18  Jan

Khanh  gives  Taylor  completed  cabinet  list  and  schedules  installa-
tion for  the  next  dav.

19  Jan  65 COMUSMACV  to  CIXCPAC  DTG  191235Z  Jan

Khanh  tries  to  reassure  Westmoreland  on  military  repercussions  of
tying  up  some  generals  in  the  cabinet;  then  Khanh  suddenly  "post-
pones" cabinet  installation.


US-GVN  Relations  295


29-24  Jan  65  Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  298-99

Buddhist  demonstrations  build  up.  including  sacking  of  USIS  build-
ings in  Saigon  and  Hue.  Buddhist  merchants  respond  to  campaign
to  boycott  Americans.  Buddhists  demand  military  take-over.

25  Jan  65 Saigon  to  State  2276  and  2283  25  Jan

Khanh  tells  Deputv  Ambassador  Alex  Johnson  that  Huong  and
Suu  want  to  resign  and  let  the  militan."  take  over.  Johnson  says  no.

27  Jan  65  Shaplen.  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  299-302;  Saigon  to  State  2322  27
Jan:  State  to  Saigon  1542  27  Jan  and  1565  29  Jan
AFC  topples  Suu-Huong  government,  openly  puts  Khanh  back  in
charge.  JCS  approves  CO^IUS^L-\CV  request  to  use  US  jet  air-
craft in  a  strike  role  in-country  in  emergencies,  subject  to  Embassy
approval  in  each  instance.

3-4  Feb  65 Saigon  to  State  2399  4  Feb

McGeorge  Bundy  visits  Saigon,  has  tea  with  Khanh  and  the
generals.

7-12  Feb  65  Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  305-6  State  to  Saigon  1438  6  Feb;
Saigon  to  State  2426  7  Feb  2495  11  Feb

Flaming  Dart  bombings  in  North  \^ietnam.  All  US  dependents
ordered  to  leave  Vietnam.

7  Feb  65 Memorandum  to  the  President

McGeorge  Bundv  savs  the  militarv  are  the  backbone  of  the  coun-
try, that  the  Buddhists  should  be  constructive,  and  that  Vietnam
needs  a  social  revolution.

16  Feb  65 Saigon  to  State  2617  16  Feb

After  two  false  starts,  AFC  selects  Quat  to  form  a  new  cabinet.

18  Feb  65 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  306-7

Quat  cabinet  installed;  Buddhists  acquiesce.

19  Feb  65 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  307-12

New  coup  groups  seizes  Saigon,  then  bows  to  superior  AFC  force.

20  Feb  65 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  307-12

AFC  votes  Khanh  out.

24  Feb  65  Saigon  to  State  2685  20  Feb;  2693  22  Feb;  2720  23  Feb;  2731
24  Feb;  and  COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  DTG  241600Z  Feb
Khanh  goes  abroad:  Rolling  Thunder  rolls.

27  Feb  65 Saigon  to  State  2787  27  Feb

USOM  resumes  action  level  meetings  with  GVN;  both  sides  agreed
to  prepare  proposals  for  accelerating  pacification  and  to  go  forward
together  with  effective  execution.

28  Feb  65 Saigon  to  State  2800  1  Mar

State  issues  White  Paper  on  \'ietnam.

6  Mar  65 COMUSMACV  Command  History,  1965,  p.  132

MACV^  gives  budget  guidelines  to  RVN  Ministrv  of  Defense.

8  Mar  65 Saigon  to  State  2991  8  Mar

Quat  discusses  sensitive  combined-command  issue  with  Tavlor.


296 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

8-9  Mar  65 Saigon  to  State  2908  1  Mar

Two  battalions  of  Marines  land  at  Danang.

24  Mar  65 Saigon  to  State  2065  24Mar

Ambassador  Taylor  formulates  a  41 -point  program  for  stability
and  pacification.

26  Mar  65 COMUSMACV  Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situation  26  Mar

Westmoreland  issues  Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situation,
which  treads  lightly  on  combined-command  issue.

1-2  Apr  65 NSAM  328  6  Apr

Taylor  (in  Washington)  talks  to  President  and  NSC,  who  approve
Taylor's  41-point  program  and  General  Johnson's  21  recommenda-
tions.

15  Apr  65 Saigon  to  State  3419  17  Apr

Taylor  objects  to  proposed  Peers  mission.

75  Apr  65 DOD  9164  15  Apr

The  7-point  message  from  State  Defense  tells  Saigon  to  encadre
RVNAF/GVN  and  to  expect  additional  US  forces,  with  new  mis-
sions.

17  Apr  65 Saigon  to  State  3421,  3422  and  3423  17  Apr

Taylor  objects  to  7-point  message,  and  Westmoreland  objects  to
encadrement.

19-  20  Apr  65  ASD  McNaughton's  Minutes  of  Honolulu  Meeting  23  Apr

Honolulu  Conference  meets  to  resolve  disagreements  on  7-point
message.  Conferees  agree  on  force  increase  and  medcap,  scuttle
encadrement,  and  agree  on  studies  of  combined  command.

5  May  65 Saigon  to  State  3097  and  3100  26  Mar;  and  2140  31  Mar
AFC  dissolves  itself.

20-  21  May Saigon  to  State  3878  25  May

65  Abortive  coup  attempt  alleged  by  GVN,  though  not  firmly  con-

firmed by  US  observers.

May  22- Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  342-45

12  June  65 Suu-Quat  disagreement  on  cabinet  changes.

27  May  65 Joint  State/  Defense  80466  27  May

State  Defense  message  agrees  to  defer  approaching  GVN  on  com-
bined command.

12  Jun65 COMUSMACV  MAC  J-3,  19912  to  CINCPAC  DTG  120828Z
Jun

Westmoreland  presses  for  commitment  of  US  forces  to  offensive
operations,  has  already  planned  it  hand-in-hand  with  our  Viet-
namese ally.

12  Jun  65 Shaplen,  Lost  Revolution,  pp.  345—46.  Saigon  to  State  4065  4
Jun.  4119  9  Jun,  4156  11  Jun,  4190  14  Jun,  4312  21  Jun
Generals  fire  Suu  and  Quat,  create  National  Leadership  Council  of
ten  Generals  chaired  bv  Thieu,  and  make  Ky  Prime  Minister.
Taylor  reluctantlv  acquiesces  to  Ky's  appointment.


US-GVN  Relations  297


22  Jun  65 Memorandum  from  Vincent  Puritano  to  James  P.  Grant  25  Sep  65,
"Joint  Provincial  Sign-off  Authority,"  with  attachment
Troika  sign-off  abandoned.

1  Jul  65  SD  PM  1  Jul  65  Sec  8B

SecDef  Memorandum  to  the  President  recommends  more  aid  for
Vietnam.

/  Jul  65  Saigon  to  State  14,  2  Jul

Taylor  writes  a  letter  to  Ky  asking  him  to  support  constructive
USOM/GVN  consultations  on  economic  matters  and  the  port.

8  Jul  65  COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  DTG  080020Z  Jul

MACV  and  RVNAF  agree  on  coordination  and  cooperation,  and
do  not  discuss  combined  command.

20  Jul  65 SD  PM  20  Jul  para.  8B

SecDef  Memorandum  to  the  President  recommends  U.S.  veto  on
major  GVN  commanders  and  on  GVN  statements  about  going
North.

28  Jul  65 Saigon  to  State  266,  25  Jul

USOM  and  GVN  agree  on  AID  package  with  no  leverage.

15— 26  Aug Saigon  to  State  626,  26  Aug

65  Lodge  replaces  Taylor,  takes  charge  of  the  Embassy.  Ky  tells

Lodge  the  U.S.  forces  should  hold  strategic  points  so  that  RVNAF
can  concentrate  on  pacification,  and  says  that  the  Chieu  Hoi  Pro-
gram is  a  waste  of  money.

28  Aug  65 Saigon  to  State  671 ,  28  Aug

Thi  tells  Lodge  he  can  govern  better  than  Ky  can.

22  Sep  65 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1965,  p.  240

COMUSMACV  presents  proposals  for  revitalization  of  Hop  Tac
to  USOM.

1  Oct  65 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1965,  p.  240

MACV  begins  four-month  experiment  with  sector  and  subsector
advisor  funds.

3  Nov  65 SecDef  DPM

McNamara  urges  more  active  role  for  U.S.  advisors.

15  Dec  65 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1965,  p.  241

JGS  Directive  AB  140  gives  GVN  military  plan  to  support  1966
Rural  Construction  program.

24  Dec  65 State  to  Saigon  1855  31  Dec

Beginning  of  37  day  bombing  pause  and  peace  offensive.

6—8  Feb  66  State  to  Saigon  2252  4  Feb  "Vietnam:  Honolulu  Conference-
Summary  of  Goals  and  Status  of  Activity,"  30  Mar
Honolulu  Conference  to  press  GVN  for  action  on  pacification  and
on  political  and  economic  reforms.  Thieu  and  Ky  obligingly
agreed  to  U.S.  demands.  Vice-President  Humphrey  flies  with  them
back  to  Saigon.


298 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

10  Mar  66 Kahin  and  Lewis,  The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  p.  244  and  passim;  Saigon
to  State  3260  and  3265  9  Mar

Ky  persuades  military  leadership  to  approve  his  plan  to  exile  I
Corps  Commander,  General  Thi.  Thi  resigns.

12  Mar  66 Kahin  and  Lewis,  The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  p.  245;  and  Saigon  3333
14  Mar

Annamese  Buddhists  and  students  begin  demonstration  in  Danang
and  Hue.

16  Mar  66 Saigon  to  State  3381  17  Mar

Thi  permitted  to  return  to  Danang  to  quiet  demonstrations.

March  1966 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  510  CINCUSARPAC
24031 2Z  May
PROVN  Study  completed.

3  Apr  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  824

Ky  declares  Danang  to  be  in  Communist  hands.

5  Apr  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  824;  MACV  to

CINCPAC  DTG  051125Z  Apr;  Saigon  to  State  2986  5  Apr
MACV  airlifts  two  ARVN  Ranger  battalions  to  Danang.  1st
ARVN  division  commander  declares  for  the  Struggle  Movement;
U.S.  advisors  withdrawn.

6  Apr  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  824

Non-essential  U.S.  civilians  removed  from  Hue.

8  Apr  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  824

GVN  flies  two  additional  Ranger  battalions  to  Danang  after
MACV  refused  to  do  so.

9  Apr  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  824

U.S.  protest  to  Struggle  Movement  leaders  induces  them  to  pull
back  howitzers.  Two  hundred  U.S.  and  third  country  civilians
evacuated  from  Danang.

12  Apr  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  324;  Kahin  and  Lewis
The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  p.  256

GVN  withdraws  its  Ranger  battalions  from  Danang.  Relative  quiet
returns.

14  Apr  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  324;  Kahin  and  Lewis

The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  p.  256

The  Directorate  promises  elections  for  a  constituent  assembly  with
3-5  months.  Buddhists  and  others  call  off  demonstrations.

4  May  66 Kahin  and  Lewis,  The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  p.  256;  Saigon  to  State

4368  4  May  and  4605  15  May

Ky  publicly  reneges  on  promises  to  hold  August  elections,  says
perhaps  they  will  be  possible  by  October.  Lodge  absent  on  long
trip  to  Washington.  Porter  follows  State  guidance  closely.

15  May  66 State  to  Saigon  3448,  3449,  3450  and  3451  15  May

GVN  airlifts  troops  to  Danang  and  Hue  to  quell  new  disorders.
U.S.  withholds  airlift  protests  GVN  failure  to  consult,  withdraws
advisors  from  both  sides.


US-GVN  Relations  299


16  May  66 Saigon  to  State  4627  and  4635  16  May

USMC  General  Walt  threatens  to  use  U.S.  jets  to  shoot  down  any
VNAF  aircraft  used  against  dissident  ARVN  units.  The  threat
succeeds.

21  May  66 State  to  Saigon  3575  21  May

Lodge  returns,  tells  Ky  to  be  conciliatory,  use  force  with  restraint.
He  does  around  Saigon  pogodas,  but  naked  force  in  Hue  produces
self-immolations.  U.S.  evacuates  its  consulate  and  other  facilities
there.

27  May  66  Saigon  to  State  4837  21  May  4849  and  4878  23  May,  4943  and
4963  25  May,  4966  26  May,  5037  27  May,  5073  28  May,  5178

I  Jun,  and  1947  7  Jul;  Kahin  and  Lewis  ibid.

Ky  and  Thi  meet;  latter  offered  unspecified  ARVN  job.

31  May  66 Saigon  to  State  5163  and  5178  1  Jun

Ky  meets  leaders  of  the  Buddhist  Institute,  offers  civilian  partici-
pation in  an  enlarged  Directorate.  They  appear  conciliatory  and
agree  to  appointment  of  General  Lam  as  Commander  of  I  Corps.

I  Jun  66 NY  Times  Article

Student  mob  burns  U.S.  consulate  and  consular  residence  in  Hue.
Struggle  Movement  fills  the  streets  with  Buddhist  altars.

5  Jun  66 NY  Times  Article

Electoral  Law  Commission  presents  its  proposals.

18  Jun  66 NYTimes  Article

Piaster  devalued  to  official  rate  of  80.

18  Jun  66 Kahin  and  Lewis  The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  p.  257

Anniversary  of  Thieu-Ky  government  proclaimed  a  GVN  holiday;
one-day  general  strike  called  by  the  Buddhists.

19  Jun  66 Kahin  and  Lewis,  The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  pp.  258-59

Directorate  schedules  elections  for  the  Constituent  Assembly  for

I I  September.

22  Jun  66 Kahin  and  Lewis,  The  U.S.  in  Vietnam,  p.  257.

Conditions  quiet  in  I  Corps;  GVN  steadily  regaining  control.

8-9  Jun  66 NYTimes  Article

Secretary  McNamara  visits  Honolulu  for  talks  with  CINCPAC.

31  Jul  66 State  to  Saigon  1694  29  Jul  2564  3  Aug
Thi  goes  into  exile.

1 3-1 4  Aug N Y Times  A rticle

66  General  Westmoreland  reports  to  the  President  at  his  Texas  ranch.

24  Aug  66 "Roles  and  Missions"  Study  24  Aug

"Roles  and  Missions"  Study  to  the  Embassy.

II  Sep  66 NYTimes  Article

Constituent  Assembly  elections.

4  Oct  66  Saigon  to  State  7616  4  Oct,  7732  and  7752  5  Oct,  6043  7  Oct,
8681  17  Oct,  8749  18  Oct.  8833  19  Oct,  8839  20  Oct.  State  to  Sai-
gon 66781  14  Oct  and  68339  18  Oct


300 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

GVN  cabinet  crisis  brews  as  six  civilian  ministers,  the  only  South-
ern members  threaten  to  resign.

5  Oct  66 COMUSMACV  Command  History  1966,  p.  526

JGS  chairs  a  high  level  joint  conference  to  develop  a  schedule  of
action  to  implement  road  development.

6  Oct  66 State  to  Saigon  49294  16  Sep  49399  17  Sep  Saigon  to  State  6997

27  Sep  State  to  Saigon  58092  30  Sep  61330  6  Oct  58280  2  Oct
Hanh  and  Komer  reach  vague  and  general  agreement  on  GVN
budget  and  financial  matters.

10-13  Oct  66  NY  Times  Article

Secretary  McNamara,  accompanied  by  newly  appointed  Under
Secretary  of  State  Katzenback  visits  Saigon.  Saigon  Port  conges-
tion grows  worse.

14  Oct  66 SecDef  Memorandum  to  the  President

In  PM  McNamara  urges  shift  of  ARVN  to  pacification,  change  of
US  responsibility  to  MACV,  "drastic"  reform  of  GVN.

19  Oct  66  Saigon  to  State  7616  4  Oct,  7732  and  7752  5  Oct,  8681  17  Oct,
8749  18  Oct,  8833  19  Oct,  and  8839  20  Oct,  State  to  Saigon  66781
14  Oct,  68339  18  Oct

Cabinet  crisis  patched  up  at  least  until  after  Manila  Conference.

24-25  Oct NYTimes  Article  Texts  of  Communique  and  Declarations  Signed

66  at  Close  of  Manila  Conference  26  Oct

Manila  conference  of  the  seven  nations  aiding  South  Vietnam.
Basic  problem  is  still  to  get  GVN  commitment  to  action  on  non-
military  measures.

/  Nov  66 Saigon  to  State  10312  7  Nov,  11958  29  Nov

Promised  GVN  National  Reconciliation  proclamation  fails  to
appear;  instead  only  vague  reference  in  a  speech  on  other  subjects.
Ky  promised  a  NR  speech  and  proclamation  in  "early  December."

2  Nov  66 Saigon  to  State  9963  3  Nov

Komer  and  Porter  in  Saigon  reach  agreement  with  GVN  on  foreign
exchange.

2  Nov  66 Saigon  to  State  7815  6  Oct  and  8161  1  Oct

Ky  promises  a  tough  decree  on  port  management.

18  Nov  66 Saigon  to  State  11249  18  Nov  11431  21  Nov  State  to  Saigon  93314

28  Nov

General  Quang,  deposed  IV  Corps  Commander,  appointed  to
head  the  new  cabinet  portfolio  "Planning  and  Development."
Concern  continues  in  Washington  over  AID  diversions.

21  Nov  66 COMUSMACV  msg  50331  21  Nov

In  a  policy  statement,  COMUSMACV  tells  advisors  that  deficien-
cies of  non-compliance  are  to  be  resolved  within  RVNAF  chan-
nels.

29  Nov  66 MACV  Commanders  Conference  20  Nov

Washington  reminds  the  Mission  that  GVN  has  not  yet  delivered
on  its  Manila  promises  about  NR,  pacification,  and  land  reform;
suggests  Lodge  press  Ky.


US-GVN  Relations  301


2  Dec  66 Saigon  to  State  12321  2  Dec

Saigon  declines  to  suggest  formation  of  a  joint  inspectorate  general
to  follow  up  AID  diversions.

December  Saigon  to  State  14009  22  Dec,  12733  7  Dec,  12908  and  12950
1966  9  Dec,  13046  10  Dec,  14009  and  13023  22  Dec,  14112  23  Dec,

14230  26  Dec

Further  GVN-USOM  negotiations  on  the  dollar  balance  problem.

8  Dec  66 COMUSMACV  to  CINCPAC  080245Z  Dec

Ceremonial  signing  of  the  1967  Combined  Campaign  Plan  by
COMUSMACV  and  Chief,  JGS.

December Saigon  to  State  15569  13  Jan  67

1966  Saigon  Port  congestion  grows  worse  during  GVN  port  com-

mander's "great  barge"  experiment.  State  authorizes  drastic  action
which  Saigon  declines  to  use.

21  Dec  66 COMUSMACV  History  1966  pp.  471-72

Chinh-Hunnicutt  affair  terminated  with  transfer  of  the  U.S.  ad-
viser outside  the  theatre  and  issuance  of  a  memorandum  by  the
division  commander  stating  that  the  past  must  be  forgotten.

January  1967  NYTimes  Article

U  Thant  advances  proposals  for  peace.  President  promises  careful
evaluation.  Ky  forsees  negotiations  nearing.  Lodge  predicts  sen-
sational military  gains  in  1967.

2  Jan  67  Saigon  to  State  14725  2  Jan

U.S.  Mission  estimates  GVN  inflationary  budget  gap  at  14-20
billion  piasters.

7  Jan  67  NYTimes  Article

Ky  signs  law  providing  for  spring  elections  in  1000  villages  and
4000  hamlets.

13  Jan  67 Saigon  to  State  15569  13  Jan

Saigon  resists  Washington  suggestion  for  complete  MACV  take-
over of  Saigon  port.

20  Jan  67 Saigon  to  State  16037  20  Jan

GVN  issues  Cy  1967  budget  of  75  billion  piasters  without  prior
consultation  with  U.S.

23  Jan  67 State  to  Saigon  123223  21  Jan

Renewed  economic  negotiations  forseen  with  Hanh  in  Washington.

24  Jan  67 NYTimes  Article

JGS  Chief  of  Staff  Vien  appointed  to  replace  corrupt  Defense
Minister  Co,  who  is  informed  on  visit  to  Taiwan  not  to  return.

20  Feb  67 Saigon  to  State  18646  22  Feb

GVN  agrees  to  work  on  an  interim  memorandum  of  understand-
ing to  include  implementation  of  the  previous  November's  foreign
exchange  agreements.  Komer  threatens  to  reduce  CIP;  Hanh  hints
at  a  raise  in  the  piaster  rate.

24  Feb  67 NYTimes  Article  State  to  Saigon  140250  19  Feb  Saigon  to  State
18303  18  Feb

Ky  postpones  U.S.  visit  to  assure  free  and  fair  elections.


302 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


10  Mar  67 Saigon  to  State  19902  9  Mar,  20053  10  Mar,  20201  13  Mar,  State
to  Saigon  153512  11  Mar

U.S.  announces  military  jurisdiction  over  American  civilians,  thus
skirts  the  problems  of  corrupt  GVN  justice  and  status  of  forces.

1 7  Mar  67 State  to  Saigon  157064  1 7  Mar

Another  "Interim  Agreement"  reached  with  GVN  on  foreign  ex-
change.

1 9  Mar  67 NY  Times  A  rticle

Constituent  Assembly  unanimously  approves  new  constitution.
Next  day  it  is  unanimously  approved  by  the  military  junta  and  a
copy  presented  to  President  Johnson  at  Guam  meetings  between
top  level  GVN-US  leadership.

20—21  Mar NYTimes  Article  Joint  Communique  Guam  Meetings  21  Mar
67  Guam  meetings  between  top  level  GVN-US  leadership.  President

Johnson  introduces  the  new  U.S.  team  in  Saigon;  Bunker  to  be
Ambassador,  Locke  his  deputy,  Komer  the  new  pacification  czar
within  the  MACV  framework.

6  Apr  67 NYTimes  Article

General  Abrams  appointed  Deputy  to  COMUSMACV.

18  Apr  67 Saigon  to  State  23376  18  Apr

GVN  issues  a  National  Reconciliation  proclamation  that  proves
to  be  a  mirage;  it  emphasizes  solidarity  vice  reconciliation.

25  Apr  67 NYTimes  Article  Saigon  to  State  23749  23  Apr
Lodge  completes  his  stint,  leaves  Saigon.

27  Apr  67 NYTimes  Article

General  Westmoreland  confers  with  LBJ  in  Washington,  addresses
Congress  the  next  day.

7  May  67 COMUSMACV  MAC  J  341  15064  to  CINCPAC  071035Z  May

General  Westmoreland  reports  on  his  command  project  to  improve
RVNAF  performance,  offers  $7800  saving  in  cut-off  of  MAP  sup-
port to  two  VNN  fishing  boats  as  sign  of  progress.  ARVN  evalua-
tion only  partially  completed.

12  May  67 NYTimes  Article  Saigon  to  State  25554  12  May

Premier  Ky  announces  he  will  seek  the  Presidency.  Thieu-Ky
rivalry  intensifies.

20  Jun  67 Saigon  to  State  28409  20  Jun

Thieu  and  Kv  invited  to  informal  luncheon  hosted  by  Bunker  at
which  unity  of  the  Armed  Forces  is  discussed.

22  Jun  67 State  to  Saigon  213380  22  Jun

Mission  estimates  rate  of  inflation  in  SVN  to  be  45-50%  per  year.

29-30  Jun Saigon  to  State  29258  30Jun

67  The  Armed  Forces  Council  of  50-60  officers  holds  two  day  con-

tinuous session  from  which  emerges  the  Thieu-Ky  ticket.

7-8  Jul  67 NYTimes  Article  OSD{SA)  Memorandum  25  Jul,  "SecDef  VN
Trip  Briefings"

Secretarv  McNamara  makes  his  9th  visit  to  SVN.


US-GVN  Relations  303


17  Jul  67 NYTimes  Article  Saigon  to  State  1381  to  19  Jul  1475  20  Jul

CA  approves  Thieu-Ky  ticket;  rejects  the  threatening  Big  Minh
candidacy.

24-25  Jul NYTimes  Article

67  CHfford-Taylor  mission  receives  Saigon  briefings.

12  Aug  67 NYTimes  Article

Army  C/S  General  H.  K.  Johnson  reports  we  are  winning,  latest
45,000  man  troop  increase  to  be  the  last.

26  Aug  67 AmEmb  Saigon  to  SecDef,  Blueprint  for  Viet-Nam,  26  Aug
Mission  completes  "Blueprint  for  Vietnam."

3  Sep  67 NYTimes  Article

Elections  for  President  and  Senate.


I. AFTERMATH  OF  THE  DIEM  COUP


First  Half  of  1964

A. THE  INHERITANCE  FROM  1963

The  top  ruling  body  of  the  Government  of  Vietnam  at  the  end  of  1963  was
a  Military  Revolutionary  Council  of  twelve  generals,  under  the  chairmanship
of  the  affable  and  popular  but  weak  General  Duong  Van  "Big"  Minh.  The
Council  governed  through  an  all-civilian  cabinet  headed  by  Premier  Tho,  having
forbade  all  military  officers  to  engage  in  politics.  A  Council  of  Notables  served
as  a  pseudo-parliament,  with  a  purely  advisory  role;  it  included  well-known  Viet-
namese politicians,  but  could  not  claim  support  of  a  broad  popular  base  or  the
main  political  forces  in  Vietnam.  While  Premier  Tho's  previous  connection  with
the  Diem  government  was  now  a  political  liability,  there  was  a  shortage  of
national  figures  who  were  not  tarred  with  this  brush  one  way  or  another.

On  the  U.S.  side,  General  Harkins,  COMUSMACV,  who  had  long  been  known
to  be  pro-Diem,  was  clearly  on  his  way  out,  although  his  departure  was  to  be  de-
layed until  the  middle  of  1964.  Ambassador  Lodge  had  replaced  Nolting  just
before  the  Diem  coup,  and  was  held  in  that  cautious  respect  appropriate  to
the  widespread  belief  among  Vietnamese  that  he  had  engineered  it.

In  the  last  weeks  of  1963,  the  U.S.  government  reassessed  the  progress  of  the
counterinsurgency  effort  and  the  policy  options.  Plans  for  phased  withdrawal
of  1,000  U.S.  advisers  by  end- 1963  went  through  the  motions  by  concentrating
rotations  home  in  December  and  letting  strength  rebound  in  the  subsequent  two
months.  A  realistic  appraisal  by  Secretary  McNamara  showed  that  the  VC  were
continuing  to  gain  steadily,  especially  in  the  Delta.  U.S.  policy  continued  to  be
to  provide  U.S.  resources  and  personnel  to  the  extent  necessary.

The  tone  of  USG  internal  documents  and  of  its  dealings  with  GVN  was  that
of  a  benevolent  big  brother  anxious  to  see  little  brother  make  good  on  his  own —
but  with  the  benefit  of  extensive  advice.  U.S.  pressure  induced  the  GVN  to  break
up  the  palace  guard  and  to  move  coup-protection  Ranger  units  out  into  the
countryside,  though  it  turned  out  that  other  units  stayed  near  Saigon  for  this
purpose.  A  proposal  to  put  all  ammunition  stocks  in  Vietnam  under  U.S.  control
surfaced  in  November,  only  to  sink  without  a  trace.  There  was  gentle  pressure
to  persuade  the  GVN  to  allow  USOM  economics  staffs  to  share  the  offices  of


r


304 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

their  counterparts,  and  to  let  them  get  involved  extensivelv  in  GVN  budgeting.
The  USIS  and  Ambassador  Lodge  tried  to  persuade  General  Minh  to  travel
around  the  countryside  to  build  a  following  and  convince  the  people  that  the
government  cared  about  them,  but  with  little  success.  The  overall  USG  appraisal
was  that  the  GVN  was  weak  and  drifting  at  the  top  level,  failing  to  set  firm  na-
tional policies  and  to  issue  detailed  instructions,  and  that  at  lower  levels  it  was  in
complete  turmoil  because  of  the  turnover  of  personnel  following  the  coup  and
because  of  the  lack  of  firm  national  leadership.

Whether  to  push  the  GVN  harder  was  a  subject  of  disagreement  between  State
and  Ambassador  Lodge.  The  State  view  was  that  the  GVN  must  prove  its  resolu-
tion to  adopt  economic,  social  and  political  measures  to  support  the  efi"ort  against
the  VC,  and  must  move  toward  self-support.  Moreover,  State  said:

We  will  obscure  the  actual  need  for  GVN  adjustments  if  we  yield  too
easily  at  this  stage  to  GVN  pressure  for  more  commercial  import  aid.

In  contrast,  Lodge  said  it  was  essential

to  provide  some  increase  in  overall  level  of  economic  aid  ...  It  is  in
my  view  politically  unacceptable  and  psychologically  impossible  to  tell  Big
Minh  that  he  is  going  to  get  less  than  Diem.

Besides  wanting  to  go  easy  on  the  GVN  on  aid  leverage,  he  opposed  pressure
for  early  elections.  Lodge's  position  is  clear  from  the  Honolulu  Conference
(November  1963)  Report,  which  stated:

The  Ambassador  .  .  .  considers  it  essential  that  the  U.S.  not  press  the
new  government  unduly.  He  stated  that  they  are  in  a  most  delicate  state,
and  are  not  ready  for  a  system  which  replaces  governments  by  elective
process  rather  than  by  violence;  that  this  is  beyond  their  horizon  at  this
time  and  we  should  not  seek  to  recreate  in  Vietnam  our  image  of
the  democratic  ideal.

Early  in  January,  1964,  Lodge  restated  this  view  in  a  cable:

It  is  obvious  that  [the  Vietnamese  generals]  are  all  we  have  got  and  that
we  must  try  as  hard  to  make  them  into  successful  politicians  as  we  are  trying
to  make  them  into  successful  military  men.

Behind  these  differences  within  the  USG  and  between  the  USG  and  the  GVN
lay  a  certain  lack  of  confidence  in  future  behavior.  Some  in  the  U.S.  were  con-
cerned that  the  GVN  might  drift  toward  a  "neutralism"  like  that  of  Laos.  At
the  same  time,  the  GVN  feared  the  U.S.  would  negotiate  behind  its  back
or  force  it  to  accept  an  unfavorable  settlement.  These  concerns  made  it  appro-
priate for  the  President  to  issue  his  New  Year's  greeting  to  the  GVN:

As  we  enter  the  New  Year  of  1964,  I  want  to  wish  you,  your  revolu-
tionary government,  and  vour  people  full  success  in  the  long  and  arduous
war  which  vou  are  waging  so  tenaciouslv  and  bravely  against  the  Viet  Cong
forces  directed  and  supported  bv  the  Communist  regime  in  Hanoi  .  .  .
Our  aims  are,  I  know,  identical  with  yours:  to  enable  your  government  to
protect  its  people  from  the  acts  of  terror  perpetrated  by  Communist  in-


US-GVN  Relations  305


surgents  from  the  North.  As  the  forces  of  your  government  become  in-
creasingly capable  of  dealing  with  this  aggression,  American  military  per-
sonnel in  South  Viet-Nam  can  be  progressively  withdrawn.

The  United  States  Government  shares  the  view  of  your  government  that
"neutralization"  of  South  Viet-Nam  is  unacceptable.  As  long  as  the  Com-
munist regime  in  North  Viet-Nam  persists  in  its  aggressive  policy,  neu-
tralization of  South  Viet-Nam  would  only  be  another  name  for  a
Communist  take-over.  Peace  will  return  to  your  country  just  as  soon  as  the
authorities  in  Hanoi  cease  and  desist  from  their  terrorist  aggression.

In  keeping  with  the  attitude  of  concern  but  not  alarm  about  the  GVN's  con-
duct of  the  war,  SecState's  cable  transmitting  the  President's  message  directed
Lodge  to  offer  the  following  eleven  points  of  confidential  advice  on  behalf  of
the  President:

1.  It  is  vitally  important  to  act  now  to  reverse  the  trend  of  the  war  as
rapidly  as  possible.

2.  We  trust  that  personnel  changes  are  now  virtually  complete  and  that
both  military  commanders  and  province  chiefs  can  now  get  down  to  the  job
at  hand.

3.  We  hope  that  General  Minh  can  designate  a  Chief  of  the  Joint  Gen-
eral Staff  and  a  commander  of  the  III  Corps  who  will  have  no  other  respon-
sibilities and  can  devote  themselves  exclusively  to  these  mammoth  tasks.

4.  We  assume  that,  as  General  Don  promised  Secretary  McNamara,
the  GVN  will  make  available  sufficient  troops  in  the  six  key  provinces  in  the
III  Corps  to  give  its  forces  the  necessary  numerical  superiority.

5.  We  have  been  glad  to  learn  of  the  stress  which  General  Minh  places
on  small-unit  actions,  particularly  in  the  Mekong  Delta.  We  hope  that  equal
stress  will  be  placed  on  night  actions,  both  for  ambushing  Viet  Cong  and
for  relieving  villages  under  attack.  To  win  the  support  of  the  population  it
needs  to  be  emphatically  demonstrated  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  being  beaten
precisely  at  their  own  game.

6.  We  consider  it  extremely  important  that  the  necessary  civil-military
coordinating  machinery  for  clear-and-hold  operations,  followed  by  an
effective  program  to  give  the  villages  protection  and  security,  be  established
in  Saigon.

7.  It  is  likewise  extremely  important  that  program  directives  be  issued
at  an  early  stage  by  the  central  government  to  lower  echelons  for  proper
implementation  of  all  aspects  of  the  program  for  giving  villagers  protection.

8.  We  also  urge  early  revitalization  of  the  amnesty  program.

9.  We  are  encouraged  by  the  exploratory  talks  which  the  Vietnamese
Government  has  held  with  Cambodian  Government  officials  for  improving
relations  between  the  two  countries.  We  hope  that  both  Governments
can  proceed  to  actual  negotiations  for  the  settlement  of  their  bilateral
problems,

10.  We  accept  with  pleasure  General  Minh's  invitation  to  set  up  an
American  brain-trust  to  work  with  his  government  and  we  are  prepared
to  furnish  any  personnel  needed  for  this  purpose.

11.  General  Minh  can  also  be  sure  that  he  has  the  complete  support  of
the  United  States  Government  as  the  leader  of  Viet-Nam.  We  believe  he
can  magnetically  rally  the  Vietnamese  people  if  he  will  really  try  to  do  so.
He  should  be  told  leadership  is  an  essential  political  ingredient  of  victory
such  as  was  the  case  with  Magsaysay  in  the  Philippines.


306 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

In  this  overall  context  the  U.S.  had  already  moved  discreetly  toward  greater
involvement  in  Vietnamese  administration  at  lower  levels.  Late  in  1963,
the  USG  and  GVN  agreed  on  a  "Decentralization  of  Action"  package.  Using  ^
AID  de  facto  control  of  AID  commodities  to  the  province  level  (even  though  <
they  passed  to  Vietnamese  ownership  at  the  dock),  U.S.  advisers  could  assure
that  no  AID  commodities  came  out  to  the  province  without  their  consent.  They
could  and  did  extend  this  control  to  cover  releases  of  these  commodities  from
province  warehouses.  U.S.  officials  controlled  the  distribution  of  AID  commod-
ities because  they  controlled  all  Saigon  warehouses  set  aside  for  these  commod-
ities, even  though  the  warehouses,  like  the  commodities,  belonged  to  the  Viet-
namese.

Among  the  many  problems  that  were  to  keep  recurring  was  that  of  freedom
of  the  press.  Following  an  initial  honeymoon  period  after  the  coup,  trouble  broke
out  between  GVN  and  the  U.S.  press  corps.  This  reached  a  climax  with  the  tem-
porary barring  of  the  New  York  Times  from  Vietnamese  distribution  channels
when  it  ran  a  story  reporting  dissension  among  the  Vietnamese  Generals.  In
general.  Lodge  sided  with  GVN  on  this  issue,  as  shown  in  his  reported  views
at  the  November,  1963,  Honolulu  Conference:

The  U.S.  press  should  be  induced  to  leave  the  new  government  alone.
They  have  exerted  great  influence  on  events  in  Vietnam  in  the  past,  and
can  be  expected  to  do  so  again.  Extensive  press  criticism,  at  this  juncture,
could  be  disastrous.

On  January  1,  1964,  there  were  15,914  U.S.  military  personnel  in  South  Viet-
nam. Fewer  than  2,000  of  these  were  advisors  to  RVNAF,  but  the  advisor
structure  extended  down  to  ARVN  line  battalions,  and  advisors  accompanied
combat  units  on  operations.  The  MAP  budget  for  South  Vietnam  in  FY  1964
was  $175  million,  although  it  was  expected  that  an  additional  $12.5  million
would  be  required  before  the  end  of  the  year.

In  summary,  the  USG's  decisions  near  the  end  of  1963  started  modest  changes
in  our  Vietnam  programs.  Program  levels  held  even,  and  earlier  hopes  of  im-
mediate phasedown  faded.  The  USG  moved  toward  more  involvement  in  Viet-
namese day-to-day  administration,  particularly  at  the  province  level.  The  move
was  gentle,  and  stopped  far  short  of  a  takeover;  nothing  of  the  sort  was  con-
templated at  that  time.  The  USG  was  sceptical  of  GVN's  leadership  and  ad-
ministration at  all  levels,  and  continued  to  offer  extensive  and  detailed  advice,
but  had  no  drastic  policy  changes  in  mind.

B. THE  FIRST  MINH  GOVERNMENT  GOES  DOWN,  JANUARY,  1964

The  year  began  with  increasing  Vietnamese  criticism  of  the  Minh  govern-
ment. It  had  done  little  to  gain  popularity  in  the  country,  and  felt  the  sting  of
accusations  of  discrmiination  from  both  Buddhists  and  Catholics.  Buddhists
attacked  Prime  Minister  Tho.  who  was  Vice  President  under  Diem.  Catholics
accused  the  GVN  of  having  gone  too  far  to  placate  the  Buddhists  in  reaction
to  repressions  under  Diem.  There  were  also  accusations  of  secret  negotiations
with  the  French  to  neutralize  South  Vietnam.

A  spate  of  news  stories  about  U.S.  advisor  disgust  over  ARVN's  timid  at-
titude toward  combat  provoked  a  cable  from  State  to  Saigon  asking  the  Ambas-
sador to  prevent  such  stories  in  the  future.  (This  standard  phrase  meant  to  tell


US-GVN  Relations  307


the  advisors  to  stop  talking  to  the  press.)  Thus  the  Department  aligned  itself
with  Lodge's  view  of  bad  press  stories,  which  emphasized  news  silence  rather
than  corrective  action.

The  Lodge  idea  of  making  politicians  out  of  the  members  of  the  Military
Revolutionary  Council  translated  into  a  plan  for  them  to  send  out  carefully
watched  political  action  teams.  (He  also  suggested  ways  for  the  generals  to
improve  their  speech-making  style.)  For  example,  he  proposed  there  should  be
three  teams  of  eight  men  each  in  each  district  of  Long  An  Province.  He  pressed
the  MRC  to  produce  a  program  along  these  lines  with  priority  attention  to
security.  "The  workers  would  be  technically  government  employees,  but  most  of
the  work  they  will  do  would  be  what  we  would  call  political  work."  On  the  U.S.
role,  he  said,  "U.S.  personnel  should  inspect,  without  looking  as  though  they
were  doing  it,  and  see  to  it  that  a  very  high  standard  is  set."

When  discussing  general  objectives.  Lodge  and  his  team  got  on  smoothly
with  GVN.  In  a  meeting  with  all  the  top  members  of  General  Minh's  govern-
ment early  in  January  to  discuss  the  eleven  points  transmitted  with  President
Johnson's  New  Year's  greeting,  they  persuaded  Lodge  that  they  were  moving
effectively  on  all  points  except  number  8,  relating  to  amnesty.  This  one  evoked
little  enthusiasm,  but  they  said  they  had  it  under  study.  The  USOM  team  that
discussed  economic  policy  matters  with  GVN  economists  with  the  objective  of
limiting  the  GVN  budget  deficit  and  drawing  down  its  dollar  balances  found
them  willing  to  talk  frankly  and  to  examine  alternatives  freely.  GVN  was  also
willing  to  set  up  joint  working  committees  to  analyze  the  budget,  the  import
program,  and  agricultural  policy.  However,  the  U.S.  team  found  that  getting
jointly  agreed  bench  mark  data  and  a  clear  line  of  authority  for  policy  actions
"may  yet  prove  difficult."

Moreover,  a  snag  developed  on  the  previously  agreed  plan  to  extend  U.S.
advisors  to  district  level.  In  a  one  hour  meeting  January  10  between  Ambassa-
dor Lodge  and  General  Minh  and  other  top  Vietnamese  officers  and  officials,
General  Kim  stressed  the  extreme  undesirability  of  Americans  going  into  dis-
tricts and  villages.  It  would  play  into  the  hands  of  the  VC  and  make  the  Viet-
namese officials  look  like  lackeys.  There  would  be  a  colonial  flavor  to  the  whole
pacification  effort.  Minh  added  that  even  in  the  worst  and  clumsiest  days  of
the  French  they  never  went  into  the  villages  or  districts.  Others  present  went
on  to  add  that  they  thought  the  USIS  should  carry  out  its  work  strictly  hand-in-
hand  with  the  province  chief.  When  Lodge  pointed  out  that  most  of  the  USIS
teams  were  Vietnamese,  Minh  said,  "Yes,  but  they  are  considered  the  same  as
Vietnamese  who  worked  for  the  Japanese  and  the  same  as  the  Vietnamese  who
drive  for  Americans  and  break  traffic  laws."  General  Minh  went  on  to  complain
about  the  U.S.  hand  in  the  training  of  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao.  This  was  bad
because  they  then  became  American  type  soldiers,  not  Vietnamese  soldiers.
Later  in  the  discussion,  General  Minh  complained  that  the  ICA  had  made  di-
rect contacts  with  the  above  groups.  "We  simply  cannot  govern  this  country
if  this  kind  of  conduct  continues,"  he  said.

In  reply  to  the  report  of  this  meeting,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  cabled
CINCPAC  on  January  14:

SecDef  seriously  concerned  regarding  .  .  .  General  Don's  earlier  agree-
ment on  district  level  advisors  as  well  as  Minh's  assertion  that  no  advisors
are  desired  beyond  the  regimental  level.  The  Secretary  considers,  and  JCS


308 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

agree,  that  this  would  be  an  unacceptable  rearward  step.  State  is  preparing  a
response  ...  in  which  SecDef  and  ICS  will  have  a  hand.

The  State  guidance  to  Lodge  on  January  17  said:

.  .  .  We  deem  it  essential  to  retain  advisors  down  to  sector  and  bat-
talion level  as  we  now  have  them,  and  consider  establishment  of  subsector
advisors  as  highly  desirable  improvement  from  our  viewpoint.  Such  ad-
visors are  best  assurance  that  the  U.S.  material  we  supply  is  used  to  full
advantage.  Beyond  this,  we  cannot  give  adequate  justification  for  our
great  involvement  in  Vietnam  ...  if  we  are  to  be  denied  access  to  the
facts.

However,  State  indicated  a  willingness  to  limit  subsector  advisors  to  an  experi-
mental program  in  a  few  districts,  as  suggested  by  Col.  Thang,  with  a  review
of  the  question  to  follow  a  few  weeks  later.  State  suggested  that  General  Minh's
erroneous  statement  regarding  U.S.  training  of  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  de-
served prompt  refutation.  "It  is  suggested  Harkins  accompany  you  to  meetings
where  military  matters  may  come  up."

In  contrast  to  their  reticence  about  extending  U.S.  advisors  to  lower  levels,
Minh's  government  had  volunteered  the  idea  in  December  of  a  group  of  high-
level  U.S.  advisors  to  work  with  the  top  levels  of  the  GVN.  The  State  De-
partment replied  enthusiastically:

In  elaboration  of  the  brain  trust  concept  suggested  by  General  Minh
and  accepted  by  President  Johnson  (DepTel  1000),  our  view  is  that  high-
level  advisors  may  be  essential  key  to  ingredient  most  sorely  lacking  in
GVN:  Efficiency  and  urgency  of  action.  Minh's  invitation  to  establish
brain  trust  and  readiness  to  accept  U.S.  advice  and  cooperate  .  .  .  should
be  seized  upon  .  .  .  We  have  in  mind  advisors  working  directly  with  VN
officials  on  day-to-day  implementation  of  agreed  policy  lines.  They  would
of  course  be  completely  responsible  to  vou  for  policy  guidance  and  would
in  no  sense  supplant  your  policy  role  with  top  GVN  officials  nor  would
they  infringe  direct  and  comprehensive  military  advisory  role  of  COMUS-
MACV  .  .  .  We  recognize  such  advisors  must  operate  behind  the  scenes
and  that  their  persistent  prodding  must  be  done  with  great  tact.  .  .  .

The  guidance  continued  that  the  department  specifically  had  in  mind  the
assignment  of  three  experienced  full-time  advisors  (and  senior  assistants)  to
work  with  top  levels  of  GVN.  One  senior  FSO  would  work  with  Minh  and
Tho  on  broad  program  implementation,  one  ranking  AID  official  would  be
with  GVN  counterinsurgency  and  economic  officials,  one  high-ranking  mili-
tary would  work  with  the  Minister  of  Defense  and  JGS.  Both  advisors  and  as-
sistants would  have  office  space  in  a  GVN  building  close  to  the  office  they
would  advise.  Authority  was  given  to  discuss  this  with  GVN.  Lodge  was  told
to  ask  them  whom  they  would  like  for  these  positions.

Meanwhile,  political  tension  increased.  Then  on  January  28,  General  Nguyen
Khanh  told  his  U.S.  advisor  and  friend.  Col.  Jasper  Wilson,  that  a  group  of
generals,  including  Minh  and  Don,  were  plotting  with  the  French  to  stage  a
pro-neutralist  ""coup"  by  January  31.  He  asked  whether  the  U.S.  would  support
him  in  staging  a  counter-coup  which  would  assure  a  stepped-up  GVN  effort


US-GVN  Relations  309


against  the  Viet  Cong.  There  is  no  record  of  an  official  U.S.  reply  before  Khanh
resolved  to  act.  The  evening  of  January  29,  Khanh  told  Wilson  he  would  take
over  the  GVN  at  4  a.m.  the  next  morning.  Lodge  informed  State,  which  di-
rected him  to  keep  a  hands-otf  attitude  and  to  make  it  clear  that  the  USG  had
nothing  to  do  with  the  coup.  It  also  directed  Lodge  to  try  to  keep  "Big  Minh"
in  the  government,  at  least  as  a  figurehead.  The  next  morning,  right  on  sched-
ule, Khanh  took  over.

C. THE  USG  ACCEPTS  KHANH  AND  OPENS  THE  BIDDING
AGAINST  THE  NORTH,  FEBRUARY,  1964

Keeping  Minh  was  to  prove  difficult.  Khanh  wanted  to  try  four  arrested  gen-
erals for  conspiring  with  the  French  to  neutralize  SVN;  and  not  only  were
these  officers  Minh's  close  friends,  but  Khanh  said  Minh  was  a  party  to  the
plot  also.  The  affair  was  to  drag  on  into  September,  adding  to  the  political  un-
certainties and  thus  to  the  paralysis  of  government.

To  improve  government  stability,  Khanh  broadened  his  government  to  make
the  cabinet  more  representative  of  all  the  political  and  religious  groups,  and
expanded  the  MRC  to  include  17  generals  and  32  other  officers.  (By  the  end
of  March  the  MRC  had  53  members.)  Partly  at  USOM  urging,  General  Minh
travelled  around  the  country  and  reportedly  gained  popularity.  The  Council  of
Notables  continued  in  its  advisory  role.

Following  the  coup,  the  USG  reopened  the  question  of  extending  U.S.  ad-
visors into  the  districts.  On  February  7,  1964,  the  State  Department  told  Saigon:

Inasmuch  as  recently  displaced  government  evidently  took  no  defini-
tive position  on  extension  U.S.  advisory  structure  to  subsector  level  .  .  .
we  believe  [the]  Ambassador  and  General  Harkins  should  raise  this  sub-
ject at  early  date  with  General  Khanh.  It  might  be  useful  to  point  out  to
Khanh  that  in  addition  reasons  cited  in  our  1072,  proposed  extension
U.S.  advisory  structure  would  represent  expansion  U.S.  commitment  to
support  GVN  in  war  against  VC.

State  anticipated  that  Khanh  might  object  but  believed  the  possible  harm
would  be  more  than  counterbalanced  by  improved  effectiveness  of  GVN  op-
erations in  countryside:

...  if  Khanh  will  not  accept  subsector  advisors  on  scale  originally
envisaged  he  should  be  urged  to  agree  at  least  to  their  establishment  on
experimental  basis  in  few  districts  in  order  to  lay  basis  for  determining
whether  there  is  any  substantial  ill  effect  in  political  sense  from  their
presence.

Two  weeks  later  COMUSMACV  reported  Vietnamese  acceptance  of  district
advisors  in  13  districts  of  central  Delta  provinces.  MACV  J-3  had  casually  ar-
ranged it  with  General  Khiem,  apparently  without  any  new  top-level  U.S.  GVN
discussion.

Khan's  government  was  as  receptive  at  first  to  top-level  U.S.  advice  as  it
was  to  advisors  at  lower  levels,  although  the  "brain  trust"  idea  dropped  between
the  cracks.  General  Khanh  made  two  requests  for  U.S.  recommendations  of
Vietnamese  persons  to  be  members  of  his  cabinet.  Ambassador  Lodge  fur-
nished a  list  from  which  a  panel  could  be  picked,  but  refused  to  make  specific
recommendations  for  particular  positions.


310 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

However,  there  was  still  no  sign  of  effective  GVN  action,  with  or  without
U.S.  advice.  In  mid-February  JCS  recommended  a  concentrated  "counterin-
surgency  offensive"  in  Long  An  province  to  restore  GVN  control  and  to  make
that  a  model  for  other  critical  provinces.  Deputy  Ambassador  Nes,  in  Lodge's
absence,  objected  strongly;  for  he  said  such  a  proposal  was  based  on  the  false
assumptions  that:

(1)  Indigenous  Communist  insurgency  with  full  external  support  could
be  defeated  by  an  "offensive"  of  finite  duration.

(2)  GVN  had  adequate  political  cohesion,  leadership,  etc.,  to  launch  an
offensive.

(3)  The  U.S.  Mission  had  sufficient  influence  and  control  over  GVN  to
persuade  it  to  do  so.

A  February  19  report  from  COMUSMACV  tells  of  continuing  delay  on  pacifi-
cation because  the  Dien  Huang  (or  Dong  Hien)  had  to  be  revalidated  by  the
new  government.  A  new  plan  was  presented  to  General  Khanh  on  the  17th
and  was  to  be  called  Chien  Thang  ("struggle  for  victory") .

On  February  21,  1964,  Ambassador  Lodge,  Admiral  Felt,  and  General
Harkins  saw  Khanh  with  a  proposal  for  creating  a  corps  of  civil  administra-
tors to  take  over  the  villages  and  hamlets  as  soon  as  pacification  was  complete.
Khanh  replied  that  he  was  just  about  to  put  into  effect  a  program  in  the  seven
key  provinces  around  Saigon  which  would  provide  the  help  of  doctors,  teachers,
and  government  advisors  from  Saigon.

The  subject  of  funds  for  ARVN  and  para-militarv  pay  increases  came  up
because  counterpart  and  PL  480  proceeds  were  U.S.  contributions  to  the  GVN
budget.  Washington  requested  additional  facts  and  recommendations  on  how
added  U.S.  input  could  best  be  channeled  but  advised  that  an  outright  U.S.
grant  would  be  highly  undesirable.  USOM  and  MAAG  were  told  to  analyze
the  situation  and  develop  joint  U.S.  GVN  action  to  meet  the  threat  of  infla-
tion. Saigon  replied  that  their  analysis  indicated  (1)  the  budget  deficits  would
probably  be  smaller  than  originallv  expected,  and  (2)  the  economic  conse-
quences were  extremely  difficult  to  predict.  Economic  Minister  Oanh  shunned
any  immediate  "complex  study"  of  the  economic  outlook  because  he  was  com-
pletely tied  up  with  a  series  of  important  planning  exercises  for  the  govern-
ment, and  Oanh  felt  the  potential  cost  of  the  pay  raise  (700  million  piasters  in
1964)  could  be  absorbed  within  the  present  expenditure  levels.

The  Emhassv  reported  being  informed  on  Februarv  21  by  the  Minister  of
National  Economv  of  a  threatened  Saigon  rice  shortage.  He  requested  that
the  U.S.  stand  ready  to  provide  40,000  tons  under  title  II  PL  480  for  distribu-
tion to  the  Armed  Forces.  No  U.S.  commitments  were  made.  Talks  were  ex-
ploratory.

Although  the  USG  recognized  the  weaknesses  of  GVN,  as  noted  at  the  end
of  Section  1,  these  merely  aroused  concern  at  the  highest  levels,  not  alarm.
An  extreme  example  of  the  emphasis  of  this  period  is  found  in  W.W.  Rostow's  i
memorandum  to  the  Secretar\-  of  State  dated  February  13,  1964.  In  a  context  :;
emphasizing  the  importance  of  success  in  Vietnam  to  U.S.  interests  every-
where, Rostow  wrote  onlv  about  the  role  of  North  Vietnam  in  the  insurgency,
relegating  South  Vietnam's  governmental  problems  (and  those  of  Laos)  to  a
vague  clause  in  one  sentence:

South  N'ietnam  is  in  danger.  The  internal  position  in  South  Vietnam
created  bv  the  systematic  operations  conducted  from  North  Vietnam  is


US-GVN  Relations


311


precarious  .  .  .  although  difficult  tasks  would  still  be  faced  in  South  \'iet-
nam  and  Laos  if  North  \'ietnamese  compliance  with  the  1962  agreement
was  enforced,  we  see  no  possibility  of  achieving  short-run  or  long-run
stability  m  the  area  until  it  is  enforced."

In  a  cable  to  the  President.  Lodge  expressed  the  same  view.  In  addition,  he
compared  the  sanctions  used  against  Diem  with  the  sanctions  being  considered
against  the  North,  and  thus  bv  implication  treated  the  fall  of  Diem  as  the  end
of  the  problem  of  good  government  in  the  South.  Rightlv  or  wronglv,  the  USG
viewed  North  Vietnamese  support  and  direction  of  the  insurgency  as  the  over-
riding problem,  not  mereh'  in  its  public  posture  (as  represented  bv  President
Johnson's  new  vear"s  greeting  to  General  ^^inh.  quoted  on  page  3.  above,  and  bv
the  State  \\'hite  Paper,  "'Aggression  From  the  North."  issued  February  27).  but
also  in  its  internal  policv  discussions.  Rostow's  statement  savs  that  there  is  no
wav  to  achieve  short-run  or  long-run  stability  in  Southeast  Asia  without  putting
a  stop  to  this  support  and  direction,  and  gives  short  shrift  to  G\'N  reform.  To
the  extent  that  this  view  was  accepted,  it  tended  to  set  the  face  of  U.S.  policy
looking  outward  across  South  \'ietnam*s  borders,  putting  South  Metnamese
weaknesses  in  the  background,  mainly  to  be  dealt  with  after  the  1962  Agree-
ment is  enforced.

When  the  issue  came  up  of  the  GVN's  internal  military  and  political  failures,
all  agreed  that  these  were  serious,  but  there  was  seldom  any  action.  Occasional
references  (e.g..  Honolulu.  1964),  and  conversations  with  some  of  the  princi-
pals, make  it  clear  that  the  explanation  for  this  lack  of  action  was  the  fear
that  the  G\'N  was  a  house  of  cards,  which  would  collapse  if  we  pushed  too  hard.
This  fear  of  GVN  weakness  proved  to  be  a  consistent  source  of  strength  to  G\'N
in  its  negotiations  with  the  Embassy  and  with  the  USG.

D. McNAMARA'S  MARCH  TRIP  AXD  \SA^f  288

For  several  days  beginning  on  March  8.  1964.  Secretary  McNamara  con-
ferred with  GVN  leaders  and  with  U.S.  officials  in  Saigon.  The  trip  reinforced
his  pessimistic  views  of  the  previous  December.  In  his  trip  report  to  the  Presi-
dent, he  said:

C.  The  situation  has  unquestionably  been  growing  worse,  at  least  since
September:

1.  In  terms  of  government  control  of  the  countryside,  about  40^r  of
the  territory  is  under  \'iet  Cong  control  or  predominant  influence.  .  .  .

2.  Large  groups  of  the  population  are  now  showing  signs  of  apathv
and  indifference,  and  there  are  some  signs  of  frustration  within  the  U.S.
contingent:

a.  The  AR\'N  and  paramilitary  desertion  rates,  and  particularly
the  latter,  are  high  and  increasing.

b.  Draft  dodging  is  high  while  the  N'iet  Cong  are  recruiting  ener-
getically and  effectively.

c.  The  morale  of  the  hamlet  militia  and  of  the  Self  Defense  Corps,
on  which  the  security  of  the  hamlets  depends,  is  poor  and  falling.

3.  In  the  last  90  davs  the  weakening  of  the  government's  position  has
been  particularly  noticeable.  .  .  .


312 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

4.  The  political  control  structure  extending  from  Saigon  down  into
the  hamlets  dissppeared  following  the  November  coup.  Of  the  41  in-
cumbent province  chiefs  on  November  1,  35  have  been  replaced  (nine
provinces  had  three  province  chiefs  in  three  months;  one  province  had
four).  Scores  of  lesser  officials  were  replaced.  Almost  all  major  military
commands  have  changed  hands  twice  since  the  November  coup.  The
faith  of  the  peasants  has  been  shaken  by  the  disruptions  in  experienced
leadership  and  the  loss  of  physical  security.  In  many  areas,  power
vacuums  have  developed  causing  confusion  among  the  people,  and  a
rising  rate  of  rural  disorders.

D.  The  greatest  weakness  in  the  present  situation  is  the  uncertain
viability  of  the  Khanh  government  .  .  .  After  two  coups,  as  was  men-
tioned above,  there  has  been  a  sharp  drop  in  morale  and  organization,  and
Khanh  has  not  yet  been  able  to  build  these  up  satisfactorily.  There  is  a
constant  threat  of  assassination  or  of  another  coup,  which  would  drop  morale
and  organization  nearly  to  zero.  Whether  or  not  French  nationals  are
actively  encouraging  such  a  coup,  de  Gaulle's  position  and  the  continuing
pessimism  and  anti-Americanism  of  the  French  community  in  South  Viet-
nam provide  constant  fuel  to  neutralist  sentiment  and  the  coup  possibility.
If  a  coup  is  set  underway,  the  odds  of  our  detecting  and  preventing  it  in  the
tactical  sense  are  not  high.

E.  On  the  positive  side,  we  have  found  many  reasons  for  encourage-
ment in  the  performance  of  the  Khanh  government  to  date.  Although  its
top  layer  is  thin,  it  is  highly  responsive  to  U.S.  advice,  and  with  a  good
grasp  of  the  basic  elements  of  rooting  out  the  Viet  Cong.  Opposition  groups
are  fragmentary,  and  Khanh  has  brought  in  at  least  token  representation
from  many  key  groups  hitherto  left  out.  He  is  keenly  aware  of  the  danger
of  assassination  or  coup  and  is  taking  resourceful  steps  to  minimize  these
risks.  All  told,  these  evidences  of  energy,  comprehension,  and  decision  add
up  to  a  sufficiently  strong  chance  of  Khanh's  really  taking  hold  in  the  next
few  months  for  us  to  devote  all  possible  energy  and  resources  to  his  support.

A  memorandum  of  the  conversation  held  at  Joint  General  Staff  (JGS)
headquarters  between  Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Khanh,  the  Prime
Minister,  on  March  12,  shows  that  the  U.S.  pressed  for  a  national  service  act.
General  Khanh  agreeably  assured  the  Secretary  that  the  GVN  was  prepared  to
embark  on  a  program  of  national  mobilization.  The  principal  question  raised  by
the  Vietnamese  was  the  desirability  of  raising  the  Civil  Guard  to  the  same  rela-
tive status  as  ARVN  on  such  matter  as  salary,  pensions,  and  survivor  benefits
at  a  total  additional  cost  of  1  billion  piasters.  Mr.  McNamara's  reply  that  he
thought  this  highly  desirable  was  obviously  interpreted  by  the  Vietnamese  as
an  agreement  to  underwrite  much  of  the  bill.

After  considering  various  options  in  his  reports,  McNamara  recommended
the  following  basic  U.S.  posture:

1.  The  U.S.  at  all  levels  must  continue  to  make  it  emphatically  clear
that  we  are  prepared  to  furnish  assistance  and  support  for  as  long  as  it
takes  to  bring  the  insurgencv  under  control.

2.  The  U.S.  at  all  levels  should  continue  to  make  it  clear  that  we  fully
support  the  Khanh  government  and  are  totally  opposed  to  any  further
coups.  The  ambassador  should  instruct  all  elements,  including  the  military


US-GVN  Relations


313


advisors,  to  report  intelligence  information  of  possible  coups  promptly,
with  the  decision  to  be  made  by  the  ambassador  whether  to  report  such
information  to  Khanh.  .  .  .

3.  We  should  support  fully  the  Pacification  Plan  now  announced  by
Khanh  .  .  .  This  so-called  "oil  spot"  theory  is  excellent,  and  its  acceptance
is  a  major  step  forward.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  push  hard  to  get  specific
instructions  out  to  the  provinces,  so  that  there  is  real  unity  of  effort  at  all
levels.  .  .  .

Many  of  the  actions  described  in  succeeding  paragraphs  fit  right  into
the  framework  of  the  Plan  as  announced  by  Khanh.  Wherever  possible,
we  should  tie  our  urging  of  such  actions  to  Khanh's  own  formulation  of
them,  so  that  he  will  be  carrying  out  a  Vietnamese  plan  and  not  one  im-
posed by  the  U.S.

4.  To  put  the  whole  nation  on  a  war  footing  ...  a  new  National
Mobilization  Plan  (to  include  a  National  Service  Law)  should  be  urgently
developed  by  the  Country  Team  in  collaboration  with  the  Khanh  Gov-
ernment. .  .  .

5.  The  strength  of  the  Armed  Forces  (regular  plus  paramilitary)  must
be  increased  by  at  least  50,000  men.  .  .  .

6.  A  Civil  Administrative  Corps  is  urgently  required  to  work  in  the
provincial  capitals,  the  district  towns,  the  villages,  and  the  hamlets  .  .  .
The  U.S.  should  work  with  the  GVN  urgently  to  devise  the  necessary  re-
cruiting plans,  training  facilities,  financing  methods,  and  organizational
arrangements,  and  should  furnish  training  personnel  at  once,  under  the
auspices  of  the  AID  Mission.  .  .  .

7.  The  paramilitary  forces  are  now  understrength  and  lacking  in
eflfectiveness.  They  must  be  improved  and  reorganized.

d.  Additional  U.S.  personnel  should  be  assigned  to  the  training  of  all
these  paramilitary  forces.

e.  The  National  Police  require  special  consideration.  Their  strength
in  the  provinces  should  be  substantially  increased  and  consideration
should  be  given  to  including  them  as  part  of  an  overall  "Popular  Defense
Force".  .  .  .

8.  An  offensive  guerrilla  force  should  be  created  to  operate  along  the
border  and  in  areas  where  VC  control  is  dominant.  .  .  .


He  recommended  more  military  equipment  for  ARVN,  which  along  with
the  expansion  recommendations  above,  added  up  to  a  total  cost  to  the  U.S.  of
some  $50-60  million  in  the  first  year  and  $30-40  million  thereafter.  He
reasoned:

There  were  and  are  sound  reasons  for  the  limits  imposed  by  present
policy — the  South  Vietnamese  must  win  their  own  fight;  U.S.  intervention
on  a  larger  scale,  and/or  GVN  actions  against  the  North,  would  disturb
key  allies  and  other  nations;  etc.  In  any  case,  it  is  vital  that  we  continue  to
take  every  reasonable  measure  to  assure  success  in  South  Vietnam.  The
policy  choice  is  not  an  "either/or"  between  this  course  of  action  and  pos-
sible pressures  against  the  North;  the  former  is  essential  without  regard  to
our  decision  with  respect  to  the  latter.  The  latter  can,  at  best,  only  rein-
force the  former.

The  following  are  the  actions  we  believe  can  be  taken  in  order  to  im-
prove the  situation  both  in  the  immediate  future  and  over  a  longer  term


314 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

period.  To  emphasize  that  a  new  phase  has  begun,  the  measures  to  be  taken
by  the  Khanh  government  should  be  described  by  some  term  such  as
''South  Vietnam's  Program  for  National  Mobilization."

Two  courses  of  action  that  Secretary  McNamara  considered  and  rejected
were  destined  to  come  up  time  and  again.  With  respect  to  the  suggestion  that
the  U.S.  furnish  an  American  combat  unit  to  secure  Saigon,  the  Secretary
reported  "It  is  the  universal  opinion  of  our  senior  people  in  Saigon,  with  which
we  concur,  that  this  action  would  now  have  serious  adverse  psychological  con-
sequences and  should  not  be  undertaken."

On  U.S.  assumption  of  command,  he  said:

.  .  .  the  judgments  of  all  senior  people  in  Saigon,  with  which  we  concur,
is  that  the  possible  military  advantages  of  such  action  would  be  far  out-
weighted  by  its  adverse  psychological  impact.  It  would  cut  across  the  whole
basic  picture  of  the  VN  running  their  own  war  and  lay  us  wide  open  to
hostile  propaganda  both  within  SVN  and  outside.  Moreoever  the  present
responsiveness  of  the  GVN  to  our  advice — although  it  has  not  yet  reduced
military  reaction  time — makes  it  less  urgent.  At  the  same  time  MACV  is
steadily  taking  actions  to  bring  U.S.  and  GVN  operating  staff  closer  to-
gether at  all  levels,  including  joint  operating  rooms  at  key  command  levels.

The  President  met  with  the  National  Securitv  Council  on  March  17  and
approved  McNamara's  recommendations;  NSAM  288  of  that  date  directed  all
agencies  to  execute  the  parts  applying  to  them.  To  underline  one  point  further.
State  cabled  USOM  Saigon  on  March  18  to  make  sure  to  report  all  rumors
of  coups  heard  by  any  U.S.  personnel  to  the  Ambassador  at  once;  and  it  gave
the  Ambassador  full  reaction  authority.  Then  the  President  summarized  his  view
of  the  main  thrust  of  the  new  policy,  in  a  cable  to  Lodge  on  March  20:

As  we  agreed  in  our  previous  messages  to  each  other,  judgment  is
reserved  for  the  present  on  overt  military  action  in  view  of  the  consensus
from  Saigon  conversations  of  McNamara  mission  with  General  Khanh
and  you  on  judgment  that  movement  against  the  North  at  the  present
would  be  premature.  We  here  share  General  Khanh's  judgment  that  the
immediate  and  essential  task  is  to  strengthen  the  southern  base.  For  this
reason  our  planning  for  action  against  the  North  is  on  a  contingency  basis
at  present,  and  immediate  problem  in  this  area  is  to  develop  the  strongest
possible  military  and  political  base  for  possible  later  action.

Anticipating  great  things,  the  White  House  announced  Khanh's  "mobiliza-
tion plan"  on  March  17,  and  implied  USG  support  for  him:

To  meet  the  situation,  General  Khanh  and  his  government  are  acting
vigorously  and  effectively.  They  have  produced  a  sound  central  plan  .  .  .
To  carry  out  this  plan  .  .  .  General  Khanh  has  informed  us  that  he  pro-
proposes  in  the  near  future  to  put  into  effect  a  National  Mobilization
Plan.  .  .  .

The  policv  should  continue  of  withdrawing  United  States  personnel
where  their  roles  can  be  assumed  by  South  Vietnamese  and  of  sending
additional  men  if  thev  are  needed.  It  will  remain  the  policy  of  the  United
States  to  furnish  assistance  and  support  to  South  Vietnam  for  as  long  as
it  is  required.  .  .  .

Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  reported  their  overall  con-
clusion that  with  continued  vigorous  leadership  from  General  Khanh  and


US-GVN  Relations  315


his  government,  and  the  carrying  out  of  these  steps,  the  situation  can  be
significantly  improved  in  the  coming  months.

In  a  speech  in  Washington  on  March  26,  Secretary  McNamara  more  explicitly
supported  the  Khanh  government,  and  gave  the  accepted  priorities  of  U.S.
policy :

...  In  early  1963,  President  Kennedy  was  able  to  report  to  the  nation
that  "the  spearpoint  of  aggression  has  been  blunted  in  South  Vietnam."  It
was  evident  that  the  Government  had  seized  the  initiative  in  most  areas
from  the  insurgents.  But  this  progress  was  interrupted  in  1963  by  the  politi-
cal crises  arising  from  troubles  between  the  Government  and  the  Bud-
dhists, students,  and  other  non-Communist  oppositionists.  President  Diem
lost  the  confidence  and  loyalty  of  his  people;  there  were  accusations  of
maladministration  and  injustice.  There  were  two  changes  of  government
within  three  months.  The  fabric  of  government  was  torn.  The  political
control  structure  extending  from  Saigon  down  into  the  hamlets  virtually
disappeared.  Of  the  41  incumbent  province  chiefs  on  November  1  of  last
year,  35  were  replaced.  Nine  provinces  had  three  chiefs  in  three  months;
one  province  had  four.  Scores  of  lesser  officials  were  replaced.  Almost  all
major  mihtary  commands  changed  hands  twice.  The  confidence  of  the
peasants  was  inevitably  shaken  by  the  disruptions  in  leadership  and  the
loss  of  physical  security  .  .  .  Much  therefore  depends  on  the  new  govern-
ment under  General  Khanh,  for  which  we  have  high  hopes.

Today  the  government  of  General  Khanh  is  vigorously  rebuilding  the
machinery  of  administration  and  reshaping  plans  to  carry  the  war  to  the
Viet  Cong.  He  is  an  able  and  energetic  leader.  He  has  demonstrated  his
grasp  of  the  basic  elements — political,  economic  and  psychological,  as  well  as
military — required  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong.  He  is  planning  a  program  of  eco-
nomic and  social  advances  for  the  welfare  of  his  people.  He  has  brought
into  support  of  the  government  representatives  of  key  groups  previously
excluded.  He  and  his  colleagues  have  developed  plans  for  systematic  lib-
eration of  areas  now  submissive  to  Viet  Cong  duress  and  for  mobilization
of  all  available  Vietnamese  resources  in  the  defense  of  the  homeland.

At  the  same  time.  General  Khanh  has  understood  the  need  to  improve
South  Vietnam's  relations  with  its  neighbors  ...  In  short,  he  has  dem-
onstrated the  energy,  comprehension,  and  decision  required  by  the  dif-
ficult circumstances  that  he  faces.  .  .  .

The  third  option  before  the  President  [after  withdrawal  and  neutraliza-
tion, both  rejected]  was  initiation  of  military  actions  outside  South  Viet-
nam, particularly  against  North  Vietnam,  in  order  to  supplement  the
counterinsurgency  program  in  South  Vietnam.

This  course  of  action — its  implications  and  ways  of  carrying  it  out —
has  been  carefully  studied.

What  ever  ultimate  course  of  action  may  be  forced  upon  us  by  the
other  side,  it  is  clear  that  actions  under  this  option  would  be  only  a  supple-
ment to,  not  a  substitute  for,  progress  within  South  Vietnam's  own
borders.

The  fourth  course  of  action  was  to  concentrate  on  helping  the  South
Vietnamese  win  the  battle  in  their  own  country.  This,  all  agree,  is  essential
no  matter  what  else  is  done.  .  .  .

We  have  reaffirmed  U.S.  support  for  South  Vietnam's  Government  and


316 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

pledged  economic  assistance  and  military  training  and  logistical  support  for
as  long  as  it  takes  to  bring  the  insurgency  under  control.

We  will  support  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  in  carrying  out  its
Anti-Insurgency  Plan.  .  .  .

The  next  day  McNamara  formally  ended  the  hope  of  phased  withdrawal,  by
stopping  the  lower-echelon  joint  planning  activities  that  had  aimed  at  replac-
ing U.S.  elements  in  Vietnam  by  Vietnamese.  Although  the  Vietnamese  knew
that  the  "withdrawal"  of  1000  men  in  December  1963  had  been  a  pretense,  his
action  now  removed  any  remaining  doubt  about  our  intentions.  The  message  was
brief :

Model  Plan  projection  for  phasedown  of  U.S.  forces  and  GVN  forces
is  superseded.  Policy  is  as  announced  by  White  House  on  17  March  64.

E. OPENING  BIDS  ON  ADVICE,  LEVERAGE,  AND  AID,
APRIL-MAY,  1964

Armed  with  our  declaration  of  support  and  with  the  promised  further  material
assistance.  General  Khanh  signed  a  mobilization  decree  on  April  4;  at  the
time  the  decree  satisfied  the  USG  as  meeting  McNamara's  recommendation  on
the  subject.  However,  Khanh  delayed  signing  implementing  decrees  for  the
mobilization  decree  indefinitely;  and  it  has  never  become  clear  what  it  would
have  meant,  if  implemented.  In  May,  Khanh  purportedly  broadened  the  draft
to  include  older  and  younger  men,  and  announced  formation  of  a  new  "Civil
Defense  Corps";  but  neither  came  to  anything.  On  April  4,  Khanh  also  abolished
the  Council  of  Notables.  This  latter  step  he  did  on  his  own,  without  prior  dis-
cussion with  Lodge.  As  noted  in  section  1,  Lodge,  who  always  believed  in  the
need  and  importance  of  constitutional  government  in  SVN,  felt  no  urgency  for
creating  a  democratic  form  of  government,  although  many  in  State  may  have
wanted  to  object  to  Khanh's  actions.  Such  actions  without  prior  consultation
were  to  become  a  sore  point  later  on  with  both  State  and  the  Embassy.  Thus,
what  the  USG  actually  got  for  the  recognition  and  material  support  it  gave
Khanh  in  March  was  the  dissolution  of  the  Council  of  Notables.

During  April,  Lodge  and  State  continued  to  debate  how  hard  to  push  GVN
using  AID  leverage.  Lodge  agreed  with  the  general  principle  that  the  Com-
mercial Import  Program  (CIP)  should  not  be  increased  until  increased  GVN
expenditures  quickened  the  economv  and  drove  imports  up.  However,  he  noted
that  GVN  had  been  given  to  understand  that  they  could  expect  at  least  the  $95
million  CIP  in  1964  that  Diem  had  in  1963,  and  that  McNamara  had  said  in
Saigon  and  Washington  that  U.S.  assistance  to  Vietnam  would  increase  by
about  $50  million.  These  assurances  had  spurred  Oanh,  Minister  of  National
Economy,  to  ask  for  specific  increases  in  CIP.  Lodge  thought  the  time  unpro-
pitious  for  detailed  joint  planning  and  for  austerity  measures  as  conditions  for
the  last  increment  of  1964  CIP.  Oanh  received  credit  for  being  too  busy  with
pacification  planning  and  other  matters  to  discuss  such  matters.  Therefore,
Lodge  proposed  to  use  the  planning  of  the  CY  1965  program  as  the  right  place
to  apply  leverage.

State  reacted  sharplv,  questioning  whether  the  USG  should  let  GVN  off^  the
hook  on  its  March  commitments  that  easily.  Nevertheless,  State  acknowledged
that  "formal  negotiations  mav  not  be  desirable  at  this  time,"  and  settled  instead
for  "constant  dialogue  to  keep  GVN  aware  of  U.S.  adherence  to  the  new
approach  and  of  firm  desire  to  see  it  implemented."  The  desired  GVN  actions


US-GVN  Relations


317


included  drawdown  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  promotion  of  exports,  im-
port austerity,  and  an  anti-inflationary  domestic  policy.

USOM  then  talked  to  Oanh  about  the  commitments  on  the  two  sides.  USOM
felt  that  Oanh  understood  that  GVN  was  to  move  first  and  be  backed  up  by
the  USG  as  needed,  but  thought  that  some  segments  of  GVN  were  dragging
their  heels  to  avoid  living  up  to  their  commitments.  USOM  estimated  a  $15-
30  million  drawdown  of  GVN  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  1964.

In  the  last  week  of  April,  General  Khanh  asked  Lodge  for  one  American
expert  each  in  the  fields  of  Finance-Economics,  Foreign  Affairs,  and  Press
relations  to  be  assigned  to  him  personally  and  to  have  offices  in  "a  con-
venient villa  .  .  .  We  Vietnamese  want  the  Americans  to  be  responsible  with
us  and  not  merely  as  advisors."  This  request  revived  the  "brain  trust"  concept
discussed  with  the  Minh  government  around  the  first  of  the  year.  Comment-
ing, Lodge  noted  that  he  had  opposed  pushing  Americans  into  GVN  because  of
Colonialist  overtones;  they  would  cause  resentment,  and  a  lessening  of  effort
by  the  GVN,  placing  the  blame  on  the  U.S.  Therefore,  he  had  avoided  raising
the  idea  with  Khanh.  However,  that  Khanh  himself  now  proposed  it  removed
that  objection,  and  Lodge  felt  that  the  U.S.  should  respond  because  it  was  an
urgent  necessity.

Late  in  the  same  meeting.  Lodge  told  Khanh  of  a  State  Department  proposal
for  civil  administrators  on  a  crash  basis  in  partialh  pacified  areas.  His  quick
reply,  "Yes  ...  if  you  will  accept  losses."

Lodge  recommended  a  Civil  Administrative  advisor  to  join  the  three  others
mentioned  above,  but  he  advised  against  more.  He  said  there  was  no  sense
dumping  several  hundred  advisors  out  there.  In  view  of  the  "trail-blazing"
nature  of  the  move,  he  requested  a  member  of  the  White  House  staff',  possibly
F)rrestal,  to  come  out  for  a  conference.  Ordinarilv.  it  would  be  surprising  that
Lodse  would  make  such  a  bis  issue  of  Khanh's  revival  of  an  idea  that  GVN
had  already  advanced  through  Lodge  and  that  the  President  himself  had  ap-
proved. However,  his  effusive  reaction  in  this  case  merely  underlines  his  oft-
repeated  reluctance  to  push  GVN.  Lodge  presented  the  first  three  advisors  to
Khanh  on  May  6.

On  April  30,  Lodge,  Westmoreland,  and  USOM  Director  Brent  met  with
several  top  members  of  GVN  to  discuss  GVN's  failure  to  disburse  operating
funds  to  the  provinces,  sectors  and  divisions  and  to  correct  the  manpower
shortage  in  ARVN  and  the  paramilitarv  units.  Lodge  argued  that  the  McNamara
program  was  failing,  not  because  U.S.  support  lagged,  but  because  the  necessary
piaster  support  was  missing.  Moreover,  he  said,  there  was  no  shortage  of  piasters
available  to  GVN.  In  replv,  Oanh  of  the  GVN  said  they  had  inherited  a  bad
system  from  the  French,  and  that  he  was  now  trving  to  implement  new  pro-
cedures. Khanh  replied  on  the  manpower  problem  that  to  raise  the  strength
would  require  an  ultimatum  to  the  Corps  Commanders,  but  then  he  also  said
that  remedial  moves  were  underway  and  were  known  to  MACV.  Khanh  coun-
tered the  budgetary  argument  by  saving  that  he  had  still  not  received  monev
from  the  U.S.  to  support  increased  pav  for  the  paramilitary:  Lodge  replied  that
if  he  went  ahead  with  the  increased  pav,  the  U.S.  would  meet  the  bill.  Overall,
the  meeting  was  one  of  thrust  and  parrv  rather  than  of  consultation.  This
meeting  followed  prodding  from  McNamara  and  JCS  in  a  cable  sent  April  29.

On  May  4,  Khanh  told  Lodge  he  wanted  to  declare  war,  bomb  North  Viet-
nam with  U.S.  bombers,  put  the  country  on  a  war  footing,  including  "getting
rid  of  the  so-called  politicians  and  having  ...  a  government  of  technicians,"
and  bring  in  10,000  U.S.  Army  special  forces  to  "cover  the  whole  Cambodian-


318 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Laotian  frontier."  Lodge  was  non-committal  on  U.S.  forces,  but  said  that  the
war  came  first  and  that  democratic  forms  could  wait.  However,  Khanh  pub-
licly called  for  an  election  by  October  of  a  Constitutional  Assembly,  apparently
to  bolster  his  public  support;  he  had  his  share  of  rumors  and  political  infight-
ing.

On  May  13,  during  a  trip  to  Saigon  to  review  progress  on  the  March  decisions,
McNamara  met  with  Khanh  to  express  his  concern  over  GVN  inaction.
McNamara's  main  complaints  were  that  RVNAF  was  failing  to  reach  author-
ized strength  levels  and  that  budget  delays  were  holding  up  pacification.  He  felt
that  GVN  should  announce  that  failure  to  disburse  funds  is  a  crime.  He  also
expressed  concern  about  the  replacement  of  incompetent  officers,  such  as  the
Commanding  General  of  the  ARVN  Fifth  Division.  The  meeting  went  agree-
ably, and  produced  the  following  consensus:

(1)  All  present  expressed  satisfaction  at  Khanh's  having  accepted  the
importance  of  speeding  up  disbursements.

(2)  The  case  of  the  commander  of  the  Fifth  Division  "presented  some-
thing of  an  internal  problem,  but  it  would  be  arranged."  (This  was  the
second  time  around  for  the  Fifth  Division  case.  As  the  result  of  a  per-
sonal request  from  General  Harkins,  Khanh  had  agreed  on  April  25
to  change  this  same  officer  "immediately."

(3)  Khanh  hoped  to  spend  more  time  on  military  and  pacification  matters
if  only  "this  political  stomach  trouble"  that  took  so  much  of  his  time
could  be  quieted.

MACV  presented  McNamara  with  a  proposal  to  give  the  province  advisors
a  total  of  $278,000  in  petty  cash  and  "seed  money,"  to  be  used  solely  at  the  U.S.
advisors'  discretion.  This  initial  proposal  suggested  putting  the  money  under  con-
trol of  the  psychological  operations  committee.  The  idea  received  mixed  re-
actions, and  went  on  the  agenda  of  the  Honolulu  Conference  in  June.

M.  Forrestal  of  the  White  House  Staff  came  with  McNamara,  and  led  a
negotiating  team  that  met  Minister  Oanh  and  his  staff  to  discuss  budgetary  and
economic  matters.  The  U.S.  team  wanted  GVN  to  keep  its  budget  under  strict
control;  GVN  wanted  the  USG  to  increase  CIP,  and  to  give  it  an  additional  $18
million  from  fiscal  1964  funds.  On  May  27,  when  the  talks  ended,  the  USG  had
released  the  requested  $18  million,  and  committed  itself  to  a  fiscal  1965  CIP  of
$135  milHon,  $40  million  more  than  in  fiscal  1964,  plus  a  standby  arrange-
ment for  an  additional  $30  million.  GVN  protested  that  this  commitment  was
not  enough  to  prevent  inflation,  and  did  what  it  pleased  about  its  own  budget;
the  talks  ended  with  an  agreement  to  disagree.

E. THE  POLITICAL  CLIMATE  AND  PREVAILING  VIEWS
OF  THE  WAR,  MAY  1964

Khanh's  "political  stomach  trouble"  was  merely  a  fresh  case  of  a  chronic
Vietnamese  problem.  His  troubles  with  General  Minh  over  the  four  jailed  gen-
erals continued,  and  coup  rumors  abounded.  On  May  21,  Lodge  told  him  of  the
harmful  effects  of  such  rumors,  and  suggested  he  talk  tough  with  his  cabinet.
When  their  conversation  turned  to  General  Minh,  Khanh  insisted  that  Minh
could  be  proved  to  have  conspired  with  the  others  and  with  the  French  to  make
Vietnam  neutral.  Khanh  and  the  MRC  planned  to  try  the  four  generals  in
Dalat  by  the  29th  of  Mav.  State  then  directed  Lodge  to  try  to  prevent  the  trial,
and  failing  that  to  soften  its  effects  and  prevent  Minh's  deposition.  Lodge  put


US-GVN  Relations


319


this  position  to  Khanh  on  May  28,  asserting  the  special  need  for  unity  in  view
of  possible  cross-border  problems  with  Laos;  Khanh  accepted  the  point  and  agreed
to  soften  the  blow  on  the  generals.  He  flew  immediately  to  Dalat,  and  the  next
day  announced  to  Lodge  an  amicable  settlement  of  the  problem,  with  lenient
treatment  of  the  generals  and  new-found  complete  unity  among  the  members
of  the  ruling  MRC.  State  and  Lodge  were  gratified,  and  agreed  that  the  thing
to  do  was  to  press  for  unity  in  support  of  getting  on  with  the  war.  However,  it
was  soon  common  knowledge  that  the  "settlement,"  amounting  to  censure  of
the  accused  officers,  satisfied  no  one;  and  the  problem  festered  on.

In  May  the  first  sign  appeared  of  varying  emphasis  at  the  highest  levels  on
particular  necessary  steps  for  success  against  the  VC.  In  a  DPM  dated  May  25,
1964,  McGeorge  Bundy  restated  the  theme  of  the  Rostow  memorandum  to
SecState  of  February  13:

It  is  recommended  that  you  make  a  Presidential  decision  that  the  U.S.
will  use  selected  and  carefully  graduated  military  force  against  North
Vietnam  .  .  .  on  these  premises:

( 1 )  That  the  U.S.  cannot  tolerate  the  loss  of  Southeast  Asia  to  Com-
munism;

(2)  That  without  a  decision  to  resort  to  military  action  if  necessary,
the  present  prospect  is  not  hopeful,  in  South  Vietnam  or  in  Laos.

Of  course,  Bundy  knew  of  the  GVN's  weaknesses  and  on  other  occasions
asserted  the  need  to  reform  GVN;  but  here  he  focussed  exclusively  on  using
force  against  NVN.

In  contrast,  Chairman  Sullivan  of  the  newly-created  inter-agency  Vietnam
Committee  said  in  a  proposed  memorandum  for  the  President  (May,  1964,  un-
dated) :

The  Vietnamese  Government  is  not  operating  efficiently  enough  to
reverse  the  adverse  trend  in  the  war  with  the  Viet  Cong.  The  Khanh  Gov-
ernment has  good  intentions;  it  has  announced  good  general  plans  and
broad  programs;  but  these  plans  are  not  being  translated  into  effective
action  against  the  Viet  Cong  on  either  the  military  or  the  civil  side.  It  has,
therefore,  become  urgently  necessarv  to  find  a  means  to  infuse  the  effi-
ciency into  the  governmental  system  that  it  now  lacks.

To  remedy  the  GVN's  lack  of  efficiency,  SuUivr.n  proposed  that  Americans
assume  de  facto  command  of  GVN's  machinery.

American  personnel,  who  have  hitherto  served  only  as  advisors,  should
be  integrated  into  the  Vietnamese  chain  of  command,  both  military  and
civil.  They  should  become  direct  operational  components  of  the  Viet-
namese Governmental  structure.  For  cosmetic  purposes  American  per-
sonnel would  not  assume  titles  which  would  show  command  functions,  but
would  rather  be  listed  as  "assistants"  to  the  Vietnamese  principals  at  the
various  levels  of  government  .  .  .

Americans  should  be  integrated  to  all  levels  of  the  Vietnamese  Govern-
ment .  .  .  Americans  would  be  integrated  into  the  Central  Government
to  insure  that  decisions  are  taken,  orders  are  issued  and  funds,  supplies
and  personnel  are  made  available  for  their  implementation,  and  execution
actually  takes  place.  At  the  regional  level  Americans,  both  military  and


320 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

civilian,  would  also  be  introduced  .  .  .  Americans  would  likewise  be
brought  into  the  government  machinery  at  province  and  district  level  to
insure  that  the  counterinsurgency  programs  are  actually  executed  at  the
level  where  the  people  live.

Aside  from  the  command  aspect  which  Americans  would  assume,  the
principal  other  new  element  in  this  concept  would  be  the  introduction  of
American  civilians  at  the  district  level.  Their  purpose  would  be  to  insure
that  programs  are  put  into  effect  at  the  village  and  hamlet  level  to  gain  the
support  of  the  people  .  .  .

Personnel  at  the  district  level  would  confront  a  maximum  risk  and
casualties  are  virtually  certain.  Since  the  U.S.  should  take  any  feasible
measure  to  assure  their  security,  it  is  important  that  Vietnamese  units  of
the  Civil  Guard  and  Self-Defense  Corps,  which  operate  at  this  level,  be
encadred  with  an  adequate  number  of  American  military  personnel  to
insure  that  they  will  operate  effectively.

This  DPM  also  proposed  extensive  reshuffling  of  the  lines  of  authority  in  the
GVN  itself,  including  the  elimination  of  divisions  from  the  Vietnamese  military
structure  and  placing  all  authority  for  pacification,  military  and  civilian,  in  the
hands  of  the  province  chiefs  under  the  corps  commanders.

The  Vietnam  Committee  watered  down  this  proposal  immediately,  however.
On  May  27,  it  went  to  four  high-level  addressees  as  a  talking  paper,  with  the
second  sentence  of  the  above  recommendation  altered  to  say,  "They  should
become  more  than  advisors,  but  should  not  become  an  integral  part  of  the
chain  of  command."  (Emphasis  added.)  Recognizing  Vietnamese  sensitivities
and  the  GVN's  political  vulnerability,  the  revised  paper  recommended  a  gradual,
phased  approach.  But  even  the  watered-down  version  was  termed  "radical"  in
the  cable  putting  it  on  the  agenda  for  the  upcoming  Honolulu  Conference.

In  the  new  advisory  program  already  underway,  MACV  reported  a  big
improvement  by  late  May  in  the  experimental  districts  with  U.S.  advisors.
People  rather  than  messages  moved  back  and  forth.  Economic  and  social
bonds  were  reported  improved.  Further  extension  of  advisors  to  districts  was
put  on  the  agenda.  In  preliminary  communications.  General  Taylor,  Chairman
of  the  JCS,  assumed  that  their  mission  would  be  to  supervise  unit  training,
operational  performance,  and  operational  planning  of  para-military  units  in
the  districts;  but  he  also  suggested  discussion  of  other  ways  in  which  military
personnel  could  be  used  to  advantage  in  forwarding  the  pacification  program.

The  month  ended  with  a  Rusk-Khanh  meeting  that  re-emphasized  the  ac-
cepted priorities  of  U.S.  policy,  and  unquestionably  confirmed  to  the  Viet-
namese how  far  we  were  thinking  of  going.  First,  Rusk  emphasized  to  Khanh
the  effect  of  Vietnamese  quarreling  on  the  U.S.  and  on  other  potential  allies  in
the  struggle.  Second,  they  discussed  immediate  extensions  of  the  war,  such  as
attacking  the  Laotian  corridor,  and  the  various  further  extensions  that  might
follow.  Third,  Khanh  pushed  hard  on  the  idea,  which  as  noted  above  had  al-
ready been  discussed  in  Washington,  that  he  could  not  win  without  extending
the  war.  Finally,  Khanh  pledged  to  keep  all  these  matters  secret  until  the  U.S.
agreed  to  overt  statement  or  action.

The  language  of  the  cable  reporting  this  meeting  is  candid  and  revealing:

1 .  Solidarity  Within  South  Vietnam

.  .  .  Secretary  [Rusk]  stated  one  of  main  problems  President  faces  in
justifying  to  American  people  whatever  course  of  action  may  be  neces-


US-GVN  Relations  321


sary  or  indicated  as  matter  of  internal  solidarity  of  SVN.  Secretary  noted
that  if  struggle  escalates,  only  U.S.  will  have  the  forces  to  cope  with  it.

This  basic  reality  means  President  has  heavy  responsibility  of  making
vital  decisions  and  leading  American  public  opinion  to  accept  them.  Dif-
ficult to  do  this  if  SVN  appears  hopelessly  divided  and  rent  by  internal
quarrels.

.  .  .  Secretary  said  he  was  not  thinking  in  terms  of  displaying  soli-
darity so  as  to  convince  Paris  that  struggle  could  be  won,  but  rather  was
thinking  in  terms  of  sustaining  the  faith  in  the  possibilities  of  ultimate
success  of  our  Vietnamese  effort  among  those  nations  we  hoped  "would  be
in  the  foxholes  with  us"  if  escalation  became  necessary  and  if  enemy  forces
reacted  in  strength.  For  example,  UK,  Australia,  New  Zealand.  Solidarity
and  unit  of  purpose  in  SVN  was  keystone  of  whole  effort.  Was  General
Khanh  doing  all  he  could  to  bring  about  such  national  unity?

Khanh  replied  affirmatively,  saying  he  fully  aware  of  importance  of
unity.  His  recent  handling  of  the  case  of  the  arrested  Generals  showed  this.
His  clemency  showed  he  was  primarily  interested  in  protecting  unity  of
Army.  But  there  were  many  problems.  Underlying  structure  and  heritage
of  country  was  such  that  only  Army  could  lead  Nation  in  unity.  Only  Army
had  the  requisite  organization,  cadres,  discipline,  and  sense  of  purpose.  The
intellectuals  would  never  be  able  to  adopt  a  common  point  of  view  unless
it  was  imposed  by  a  dictatorship — by  a  party  as  the  Communists  did,  or  a
"family  dictatorship"  such  as  Diem's.  This  situation  was  made  worse  be-
cause of  disproportion  between  measure  of  political  and  civil  liberties
granted  in  wartime  situation  on  one  hand  and  lack  of  background  and
sense  of  responsibility  of  recipients  on  [the]  other  ...  He  was  aware
he  had  perhaps  given  more  freedom  than  really  prudent  handling  of
situation  would  have  dictated,  but  he  had  to  be  mindful  oft-proclaimed
democratic  goals  of  the  Vietnamese  revolution.  All  in  all,  this  disunity
would  not  be  fatal  because  Army  itself  was  united,  and  no  potentially  dis-
ruptive force  could  hope  to  oppose  Army  and  overthrow  GVN.  (N.B.  No
reference  to  religious  problems,  sects,  or  labor  under  this  heading.)

2.  Need  for  Action  Outside  South  Vietnam.

.  .  .  Khanh  dwelt  at  length  on  this,  laying  out  some  fairly  precise  ideas
about  the  kind  of  action  that  might  be  taken.

Basically,  he  said  that  despite  the  pacification  plan  and  some  individual
successes  he  and  his  government  were  "on  the  defensive"  against  the  Viet
Cong.  He  said  pretty  flatly  that  they  could  not  win  unless  action  was
taken  outside  South  Vietnam,  and  that  this  needed  a  firm  U.S.  decision  for
such  action.

...  He  [Khanh]  then  said  that  the  "immediate"  response  should  be  to
clean  out  the  Communists  in  Eastern  Laos,  who  were  the  same  kind  of
threat  to  him,  and  that  we  should  not  get  bogged  down  in  negotiations  but
act.

.  .  .  Secretary  then  noted  we  could  never  predict  enemy  reaction  with
certainty.  How  would  SVN  people  react  if  NVN  and  China  responded  by
attacking  SVN?  Khanh  replied  this  would  have  even  more  favorable  effect
on  SVN  national  unity  and  faith  in  victory,  and  would  mobilize  usual
patriotic  reactions  in  face  of  more  clearcut  external  threat.

3.  Timing  of  Action  Against  the  North  and  Necessary  Prior  Action
Within  South  Vietnam.

Khanh  asked  if  Secretary  and  Ambassador  believed  he  should  proclaim


322 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

state  of  war  existed  during  next  few  days  and  now  that  Generals'  case
was  settled.  Both  advised  him  to  wait  at  least  until  after  Honolulu  Con-
ference and  in  no  case  ever  to  take  action  on  such  matter  without  consult-
ing. He  agreed,  and  remarked  that  if  he  proclaimed  state  of  war,  NVN
would  know  this  was  preparatory  to  some  form  of  escalation  and  he  would
never  act  unilaterally  and  thereby  run  risk  of  tipping  America's  hand.  Al-
though the  matter  was  not  specifically  mentioned,  Khanh  appeared  to  ^
accept  as  entirely  natural  that  he  would  not  necessarily  know  in  advance  if  i
U.S.  decided  to  strike  outside  VN.

.  .  .  Some  question  as  to  how  enemy  camp  will  react.  At  various  points  in
conversation  Khanh  was  obviously  seeking  some  more  definite  statement
of  specific  American  intentions  in  immediate  future.  Secretary  told  him  he
could  say  nothing  on  this  because  he  simply  did  not  know.  The  Honolulu
meeting  would  produce  some  firm  recommendations  to  the  President  and
some  plans,  but  ultimately  only  President  could  decide.  His  decision  would
be  influenced  by  consideration  of  all  implications  of  escalation:  On  our
forces,  on  our  allies,  and  perhaps  even  on  mankind  itself  if  nuclear  war-
fare should  result.  Only  U.S.  had  the  means  to  cope  with  problems  escala-
tion would  pose,  and  only  President  could  make  the  ultimate  decisions.

Nevertheless,  Secretary  said  he  wished  to  emphasize  the  following:

A.  Since  1945  U.S.  had  taken  165,000  casualties  in  defense  of  free
world  against  Communist  encroachments,  and  most  of  these  casualties
were  in  Asia.

B.  U.S.  would  never  again  get  involved  in  a  land  war  in  Asia  limited
to  conventional  forces.  Our  population  was  190,000,000.  Mainland  China
had  at  least  700,000,000.  We  would  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  bled  white
fighting  them  with  conventional  weapons.

C.  This  meant  that  if  escalation  brought  about  major  Chinese  attack,
it  would  also  involve  use  of  nuclear  arms.  Many  free  world  leaders  would
oppose  this.  Chiang  Kai-Shek  had  told  him  fervently  he  did,  and  so  did
U  Thant.  Many  Asians  seemed  to  see  an  element  of  racial  discrimination
in  use  of  nuclear  arms;  something  we  would  do  to  Asians  but  not  to
Westerners.  Khanh  replied  he  certainly  had  no  quarrel  with  American  use
of  nuclear  arms,  noted  that  decisive  use  of  Atomic  bombs  on  Japan
had  in  ending  war  saved  not  only  American  but  also  Japanese  lives.  One
must  use  the  force  one  had;  if  Chinese  used  masses  of  Humanity,  we
would  use  superior  fire  power.

D.  Regardless  what  decisions  were  reached  at  Honolulu,  their  im-
plementation would  require  positioning  of  our  forces.  This  would  take
time.  Khanh  must  remember  we  had  other  responsibilities  in  Asia  and
must  be  able  react  anywhere  we  had  forces  or  commitments.  Not  by
chance  was  this  Conference  being  held  at  Honolulu:  the  combined  head-
quarters of  all  American  forces  in  Pacific  was  there.

...  6.  Comment

As  can  be  seen,  the  Secretarv  let  Khanh  develop  his  ideas  fairly  fully  and
do  most  of  the  talking.*  Khanh  talked  firmly  and  effectively,  and  responded
well  to  the  Secretary's  several  points.  He  showed  clearly  that  he  was  aware
of  the  gravity  of  the  decisions  (tho  he  did  seem  a  touch  cavalier  about
the  political  problems  of  hitting  eastern  Laos  at  once),  and  did  not  seem

*  Comment:  Nevertheless,  as  can  be  seen,  the  Secretary  spoke  freely.


US-GVN  Relations  323


to  want  a  firm  U.S.  answer  the  day  after  tomorrow.  But  it  seemed  clear
that  he  did  want  it  pretty  soon,  and  was  now  convinced  he  could  not  win
in  South  Vietnam  without  hitting  other  areas  including  the  North.  He  was
careful  to  point  out  that  the  pacification  campaign  was  making  gains  and
would  continue  to  do  so.  Still,  it  was  essentially  defensive.

On  the  timing,  the  Secretary  said  that  any  action  would  be  preceded  in
any  event  by  some  period  of  time  for  force  deployments.  (He  did  not
refer  to  diplomatic  steps  re  Laos,  the  UN  side,  the  U.S.  Congressional  prob-
lem, or  other  types  of  factors.)  Khanh  understood  this,  and  also  accepted
the  Secretary's  point  that  we  would  need  to  consult  very  closely  with  Khanh
himself,  try  to  bring  the  British  and  Australians  aboard  (the  Secretary
referred  only  to  these  two  possible  active  participants),  and  generally  syn-
chronize and  work  out  the  whole  plan  with  great  care.

Thus  although  the  USG  had  pressed  GVN  on  many  details  of  economic
policy,  administration,  and  pacification,  contacts  at  the  highest  level  told  GVN
that  if  the  Vietnamese  leaders  would  only  stick  together  to  prosecute  the  war,
and  if  we  compelled  the  North  Vietnamese  to  cease  and  desist,  everything  would
be  all  right.  Provided  the  GVN  didn't  embarrass  the  USG  too  much,  there  was
no  limit  to  how  far  we  would  go  to  support  them;  and  apart  from  "unity"  and  a
reasonable  show  of  effort,  there  was  no  onus  on  them  to  deliver  the  goods.
Khanh's  claim  that  he  could  not  win  without  extending  the  war,  and  that
the  Vietnamese  were  tired  of  the  long  dreary  grind  of  pacification,  met  no  U.S.
objection.

G. THE  HONOLULU  CONFERENCE  AND  ITS  FOLLOW-UP,
JUNE,  1964

The  Honolulu  Conference  met  on  short  notice  with  an  air  of  urgency;  prin-
cipals included  McNamara,  Rusk,  Lodge,  Taylor,  and  Westmoreland.  Presenta-
tions of  the  current  situation  preceded  consideration  of  additional  measures  to
be  taken.  Lodge  briefed  those  present  on  the  political  status.  He  said  the  situa-
tion could  "jog  along,"  but  he  thought  that  some  external  action  would  be  a  big
lift  to  South  Vietnamese  morale.  Lodge's  prediction  was  more  optimistic  than
later  events,  in  August,  proved  justified;  he  said  "if  we  bombed  Tchepone  or
attacked  the  [NVN  torpedo]  boats  and  the  Vietnamese  people  knew  about  it,
this  would  .  .  .  unify  their  efforts  and  reduce  [their]  quarreling."  In  reply  to  a
question  by  Rusk,  he  opposed  the  idea  of  a  more  formal  joint  USG/GVN  organ-
ization at  the  top;  IVIcNamara  hoped  that  a  more  formal  organization  would
evolve.  Lodge  felt  that  the  USG/GVN  relationship  was  harmonious,  and  that
GVN  was  responsive  to  advice.  He  liked  the  present  methods  of  dealing  with
them.  Westmoreland  called  the  military  picture  "tenuous  but  not  hopeless"  and
added  that  a  few  victories  were  badly  needed.  Both  were  more  optimistic  than
was  the  prevailing  Washington  view.

All  present  agreed  that  the  emergence  of  a  hostile  government  or  anarchy
would  be  a  major  threat  to  the  U.S.  position.  The  fear  of  this  threat  undoubt-
edly helps  explain  the  USG's  persistent  hesitancy  to  apply  leverage  to  GVN.

Westmoreland  circulated  a  working  paper  calling  for  moderate  increases  in
U.S.  personnel,  both  civilian  and  military,  for  eight  critical  provinces.  He  re-
ported that  the  GVN  had  recently  responded  to  massive  advisory  pressure  by
increasing  the  tempo  of  their  military  operations.  He  felt  they  would  similarly
respond  to  a  continuing  advisory  program  oriented  toward  pacification.  Both
Lodge  and  Westmoreland  rejected,  as  both  unwise  and  unacceptable  to  GVN,


324 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

any  major  plan  for  "inter-larding"  or  "encadrement"  which  would  move  U.S.
personnel  directly  into  decision-making  roles.  Their  opposition  ended  conference
consideration  of  the  proposals  advanced  by  the  Sullivan  memorandum.

In  a  long  draft  memorandum,  dated  June  13,  1964,  Sullivan  added  some
further  insight  into  US/GVN  relations  and  into  the  views  of  Lodge  and  West-
moreland about  national  priorities,  beyond  what  is  shown  in  the  CINCPAC
record  of  the  Conference.

In  attempting  to  accomplish  many  of  these  programs,  we  have  encoun-
tered resistance  both  from  the  Vietnamese  and  from  our  own  U.S.  Mission.
Ambassador  Lodge  .  .  .  fears  that  the  increased  introduction  of  Amer-
cans  would  give  a  colonial  coloration  to  our  presence  there  and  would
cause  the  Vietnamese  to  depend  more  and  more  on  our  execution  of  their
programs.  The  Vietnamese  .  .  .  have  some  fear  of  appearing  to  be  Amer-
ican puppets  .  .  .  Finally,  there  is  some  indication  that  they  are  reluc-
tant to  associate  themselves  too  closely  with  the  Americans  until  they  feel
more  confident  of  ultimate  American  intentions.

At  the  current  moment,  there  is  great  doubt  and  confusion  in  Vietnam
about  U.S.  determination  ...  As  a  leading  Saigon  newspaper  said  on
June  12:  "We  must  be  vigilant  and  we  must  be  ready  to  meet  any  even-
tuality so  as  to  avoid  the  possible  shameful  sacrifice  and  dishonor  to  our
country  as  in  the  past."

Given  this  sort  of  atmosphere  in  South  Vietnam,  it  is  very  difficult  to
persuade  the  Vietnamese  to  commit  themselves  to  sharp  military  confron-
tations with  the  communists  if  they  suspect  that  something  in  the  way  of  a
negotiated  deal  is  being  concocted  behind  their  backs.  Consequently,
many  of  the  actions  which  we  are  pressing  on  the  South  Vietnamese  are
flagging  because  of  this  uncertainty  .  .  .

Both  Ambassador  Lodge  and  General  Westmoreland,  at  the  Honolulu
Conference  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam
would  "jog  along"  at  the  current  stalemated  pace  unless  some  dramatic
"victory"  could  be  introduced  to  put  new  steel  and  confidence  into  the
Vietnamese  leadership.  General  Westmoreland  defined  "victory"  as  a
determination  to  take  some  new  vigorous  militarv  commitment,  such  as  air
strikes  against  Viet  Cong  installations  in  the  Laos  corridor.  Ambassador
Lodge  defined  "victory"  as  a  willingness  to  make  punitive  air  strikes  against
North  Vietnam.  The  significant  fact  about  both  .  .  .  suggestions  was  that
they  looked  toward  some  American  decision  to  undertake  a  commitment
which  the  Vietnamese  would  interpret  as  a  willingness  to  raise  the  military
ante  and  eschew  negotiations  begun  from  a  position  of  weakness.

While  it  is  almost  impossible  to  establish  measurements  of  Vietnamese
morale,  we  are  able  to  say  that  there  is  not  at  the  current  moment  a  single
galvanized  national  purpose,  expressed  in  the  government  leadership  and
energizing  all  elements  of  the  country  with  a  simple  sense  of  confidence.

The  selective  Westmoreland  plan  offered  hope  and  was  sufficiently  general
to  avoid  specific  opposition.  The  conference  agreed  that  Saigon  should  complete
the  plan  and  work  urgently  on  its  implementation.

Several  more  minor  decisions  were  made  on  unilateral  matters.  "Czar"
powers  for  information  were  put  in  the  hands  of  Zorthian.  It  was  agreed  that
the  DCM  should  be  strengthened  with  a  "trulv  executive  man,"  and  there  was  to
be  a  clearing-of-decks  on  the  military  side  in  Saigon  through  reductions  in  social
activities  and  cut-downs  in  dependents.  None  of  these  measures  was  expected


US-GVN  Relations  325


to  affect  the  dubious  prognosis  for  the  next  3-6  months.  The  best  that  could  be
hoped  for  was  a  slight  gain  by  the  end  of  the  year.

There  was  serious  discussion  of  military  plans  and  intelligence  estimates  re-
garding wider  actions  outside  South  Vietnam.  Subjects  included  the  conduct  of
military  operations  in  Laos,  a  major  build-up  of  forces,  and  planning  of  possible
air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  The  conclusion  reached  was  that  the  some-
what less  pessimistic  estimate  of  the  present  situation  afforded  the  opportunity
to  further  refine  these  plans.

The  conference  concluded  that  the  crucial  actions  for  the  immediate  future
were  ( 1 )  to  prosecute  an  urgent  information  effort  in  the  United  States  toward
dispelling  the  basic  doubts  of  the  value  of  Southeast  Asia  which  were  besetting
key  members  of  Congress  and  the  public  in  the  budding  "great  debate,"  and  (2)
to  start  diplomatic  efforts  with  the  Thais,  Australians,  New  Zealanders,  Philip-
pines, and  the  French  on  matters  within  their  cognizance  which  impinged  on
our  effort  in  South  Vietnam.

Upon  his  return  to  Washington,  the  Secretary  of  State  cabled  Saigon  a
specific  listing  of  the  Washington  understanding  of  the  ten  actions  that  were  to
be  taken  to  expand  U.S.  and  Vietnamese  activities  in  the  super-critical  prov-
inces. The  gist  of  the  actions  is  as  follows:

( 1 )  Move  in  additional  VN  troops  to  assure  numerical  superiority  over

VC.

(2)  Assign  control  of  all  troops  in  province  to  province  chief.

(3)  Develop  and  execute  detailed  hamlet  by  hamlet  ''oil  spot"  and
"clear  and  hold"  operations  plans  for  each  of  the  approximate  40  districts.

(4)  Introduce  a  system  of  population  control  (curfews,  ID  papers,  in-
telligence network).

(5)  Increase  the  province  police  force.

(6)  Expand  the  information  program.

(7)  Develop  a  special  economic  aid  program  for  each  province.

(8)  Add  additional  U.S.  personnel

320  military  province  and  district  advisors
40  USOF  province  and  district  advisors
74  battalion  advisors  (2  from  each  of  37  battalions)


434

(9)  Transfer  military  personnel  to  fill  existing  and  future  USOM
shortages.

(10)  Establish  joint  US  GVN  teams  to  monitor  the  program  al  both
national  and  provincial  level.

The  message  concluded  by  asking  Saigon  to  forward  specific  proposals  to  effect
these  decisions  and  a  time  schedule,  "earliest."  The  plan  to  give  province  ad-
visors a  petty  cash  fund  received  so  little  support  that  there  is  no  mention  of  it
in  either  CINCPAC  or  the  State  Conference  Record.

Upon  his  return  to  Saigon  on  June  4  Ambassador  Lodge  went  straight  from
the  airport  to  call  on  General  Khanh.  While  Lodge  mentions  in  his  report  that
the  subject  of  low  ARVN  strength  was  raised  as  a  matter  to  be  improved  upon,
the  main  thrust  of  his  talk  with  Khanh  was  to  hint  that  the  USG  would  in  the
immediate  future  be  preparing  U.S.  public  opinion  for  actions  against  North
Vietnam.  Khanh  was  reported  to  be  eager  to  learn  more  about  the  details.

On  June  13,  Saigon  replied  to  the  State  request  for  specific  proposals.  A
MACV  study  had  been  completed  on  point  1  and  the  RVNAF  would  be  ap-


326 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II  I

proached.  On  point  2,  it  was  noted  that  RF  and  PF  were  already  under  the
province  chiefs;  ARVN  would  be  approached  on  province  command  of  regu-
lars. A  wordy  description  of  "concept"  spoke  to  the  remainder  of  State's  ten
points.  It  provoked  a  long  series  of  specific  questions  from  Washington  about
the  8  provinces,  asking  in  sort,  "How  soon  can  action  be  initiated?"

On  June  25,  COMUSMACV  sent  his  request  to  JCS  for  an  increase  of  y
4,200  U.S.  personnel  to  implement  this  expanded  advisory  effort.  He  viewed
these  as  efforts  to  "influence  the  successful  planning  and  execution  of  the
National  Pacification  Plan."  Subsector  advisors  were  to  be  "a  general  reinforce-  ;
ment  of  the  pacification  effort  at  district  level."  Consequently,  the  MACV  terms  I
of  reference  for  subsector  advisors  were  developed  to  provide  that  teams  would  |
extend  the  capabilities  of  USOM  and  USIS.  Guidance  was  intentionally  not
specific.

The  same  day  General  Westmoreland  reported  that,  with  the  Ambassador's  |
concurrence,  he  had  called  on  General  Khanh  to  discuss  three  military  matters:
(1)  Augmentation  of  advisors  at  battalion  level  and  extension  of  larger  ad-
visory teams  to  most  districts;  (2)  The  urgent  need  to  coordinate  pacification
efforts  in  the  provinces  surrounding  Saigon;  and  (3)  The  necessity  of  moving  a
regiment  to  Long  An  (the  pacification  show-case)  as  soon  as  possible.  General
Khanh's  reply  was  very  receptive  and  agreeable  on  all  matters.

On  June  26,  Lodge  sent  his  last  message  as  Ambassador  reporting  that  he
and  General  Westmoreland  had  that  day  met  with  General  Khanh  and  had
reached  "general  agreement"  on  the  concept,  scope,  and  organization  set  forth
in  the  Saigon  reply  of  June  13  (referred  to  above) .  jj

Meanwhile  the  proposal  for  a  province  advisors'  fund  reappeared  in  a  new
form,  and  won  quick  approval.  USOM  agreed  that  AID  should  spend  $200,000
from  its  contingency  funds  for  direct  purchase  of  piasters,  to  allocate  to  sector
advisors  for  small  expenditures  (usually  less  than  $25  at  a  time).  The  funds
were  to  buy  local  materials  and  services  for  projects  using  AID  commodities;
and  their  use  was  to  be  coordinated  with  the  Vietnamese  Province  Chief.  By
subsequent  US/GVN  agreement,  all  uses  of  these  funds  and  commodities,  and
requisitions  of  the  commodities  from  Saigon  warehouses,  required  unanimous  '
approval  of  a  three-man  ("troika")  Provincial  Coordinating  Committee  con-
sisting of  the  Province  Chief,  the  U.S.  AID  Provincial  Representative  and  the  '
MACV  Sector  Advisor.  The  troika  sign-off  had  already  applied  to  the  com-
modities, as  the  means  to  the  U.S.  veto  on  their  use  mentioned  above  in  Sec-
tion A.  Except  for  a  high-level  agreement  each  vear  on  the  size  and  overall  al-
location of  these  resources,  Saigon  allowed  the  Provinces  full  freedom  of  ac-
tion  in  their  use.  The  intent  of  this  arrangement  was  to  permit  prompt  action
on  urgent  projects,  unaffected  by  the  delays  in  the  GVN  administration  that
plagued  regular  GVN  operations.  It  also  interfered  with  corrupt  misuse  of  the
AID  commodities  and  of  purchase  piasters.  ^

II. AMBASSADOR  TAYLORS  FIRST  SEVEN  MONTHS:

PLANNING  FOR  'BOMB  NORTH  '  AMID  TURBULENCE  IN  THE  I

SOUTH  I

A. AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR'S  INITIATION,  JULY,  1964  \

Ambassador  Ta\lor  arrix  ed  in  Saigon  amid  the  start  of  planning  to  extend  the
war  outside  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam.  Rusk  had  discussed  the  options  with
Khanh  on  June  1,  and  the  participants  of  the  Honolulu  Conference  had  mulled


1


US-GVN  Relations  327


them  over  further.  Although  there  was  no  formal  decision  to  recommend  new
operations  in  Laos  or  North  Vietnam,  there  was  an  atmosphere  of  expectation.
A  joint  State-Defense  message  on  June  27  authorized  joint  planning  with  the
Vietnamese  Joint  General  Staff  for  cross  border  operations  in  Laos;  on  June  30,
Westmoreland  discussed  it  with  General  Khiem,  who  agreed  to  initiate  joint
planning.

Taylor  came  with  a  letter  of  support  from  the  President  that  cleared  up  any
previous  doubt  about  the  Ambassador's  control  over  MACV:

I  want  you  to  have  this  formal  expression  not  only  of  my  confidence  but
of  my  desire  that  you  have  and  exercise  full  responsibility  for  the  effort  of
the  United  States  in  South  Vietnam  ...  I  wish  it  clearly  understood  that
this  overall  responsibility  includes  the  whole  military  effort  in  South  Viet-
nam and  authorizes  the  degree  of  command  and  control  that  you  consider
appropriate.

Either  the  letter  was  intended  to  prevent  confusion  of  authority  such  as  existed
among  Lodge,  Felt,  and  Harkins,  or  the  expectation  of  greater  militarization  of
the  war  made  it  appropriate  to  appoint  Taylor  Ambassador  and  to  give  him  un-
challenged authority.

Taylor  met  Khanh  and  presented  his  credentials  on  July  8.  Khanh  promised
him  "the  frank  cooperation  of  a  soldier."  He  said  the  U.S.  should  not  merely
advise,  but  should  participate  in  making  and  implementing  plans;  in  this  he  still
held  the  view  he  had  expressed  to  Taylor  when  he,  Khanh,  was  still  a  Corps
Commander.  (By  referring  to  Zorthian's  contacts  with  the  Minister  of  Informa-
tion, Khanh  made  it  clear  he  had  the  brain  trust  idea  in  mind.)  However,  he
noted  that  this  degree  of  involvement  should  be  kept  secret,  because  of  the
criticism  it  would  attract  if  known.  They  discussed  Minh's  trips  around  the
country,  and  agreed  these  were  useful  and  constructive.  Finally,  Taylor  stressed
the  importance  of  Vietnamese  unity  and  resolve.

The  next  day  Taylor  called  on  the  three  Vice  Premiers,  Hoan,  Do  Mau,  and
Oanh,  and  received  the  civilian  point  of  view.  Hoan  did  most  of  the  talking,
saying  that  civilian  politicians  like  himself  wanted  the  Army  to  be  supported  by
the  people,  but  that  Khanh  and  the  MRC  were  difficult  to  work  with:  The
ruling  generals  control  everything.  He  said  the  II  Corps  Commander  lived  like
a  playboy,  and  that  the  people  were  outraged;  "ever  since  wc  came  to  power
we  have  been  telling  population  wc  are  soon  going  to  have  change,  but  it  never
comes.  The  people  are  becoming  impatient."'  Moreover,  he  said,  something
must  be  done  to  raise  the  standard  of  behavior  of  the  armed  forces  toward  the
population.  Taylor  received  these  views  diplomatically.

For  a  while  there  was  a  serious  effort  to  go  through  with  close  meshing  of
USOM  and  GVN  planning.  On  July  17  USOM  met  with  Khanh,  Hoan,  Oanh
and  others  as  a  group,  which  Khanh  designated  the  National  Security  Council.
They  discussed  joint  planning  and  further  meshing  of  US /GVN  organizations,
putting  the  stamp  of  approval  on  the  arrangement  in  the  Ministry  of  Informa-
tion. On  July  23  Taylor  met  Khanh  and  discussed  a  second  meeting  of  the  NSC.
Khanh  said  the  Vietnamese  had  some  difficulty  in  adjusting  their  ministerial
organization  to  the  requirements  of  meshing  with  the  U.S.  mission  subdivi-
sions. Taylor  responded  that  reciprocal  adjustments  were  possible.  Planning
and  discussion  of  cross-border  operations  continued  actively.  Offensive  guerrilla
operations  in  Laos  were  a  major  idea;  small  operations  had  already  begun  into
North  Vietnam,  under  OPLAN  34A.  In  the  meeting  on  July  23,  Khanh  told


328 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Taylor  he  wanted  to  intensify  the  operations  under  34A  and  to  start  air  strikes
against  North  Vietnam.  He  said  again,  as  he  had  to  Rusk  on  June  1,  that  he
didn't  Uke  to  look  forward  to  the  long,  indecisive  pull  of  the  in-country  pacifica-
tion program,  and  doubted  that  the  Army  and  the  people  would  carry  on  in-
definitely.

The  events  of  July  19-23  made  it  clear  that  GVN  was  straining  at  the  leash;
it  started  public  lobbying  for  cross-border  operations.  On  July  19  Air  Marshal
Ky  spilled  the  beans  to  reporters  on  plans  for  operations  into  Laos.  Khanh
committed  a  similar  indiscretion  at  a  "Unification  Rally"  on  the  19th,  and  these
were  followed  by  GVN  press  releases  and  editorials  in  the  Saigon  press  urging  a
"march  to  the  North."  All  these  leaks  directly  violated  Khanh's  promises  to
Rusk  on  June  1.  Taylor  spoke  to  Khanh  sharply  about  them,  and  pointed  out
that  they  could  be  interpreted  as  a  campaign  to  force  the  USG's  hand.  Khanh
insisted  that  such  a  campaign  was  the  furthest  thing  from  his  mind;  and  then
confirmed  that  it  was  exactly  what  he  had  in  mind.  Following  a  long,  eloquent
repetition  of  his  remarks  of  other  occasions  on  Vietnamese  war-weariness,  he
asked:  Why  does  not  the  USG  recognize  that  the  appearance  of  North  Viet-
namese draftees  among  the  prisoners  taken  in  the  I  Corps  meant  that  the  war
had  entered  a  new  phase  and  the  USG  and  GVN  must  respond  with  new
measures?  He  said  Vietnamese  spirits  had  been  raised  by  President  Johnson's
firm  statements  earlier  in  the  year  (specifically,  Los  Angeles,  January  21),  but
that  following  them  nothing  had  happened.  The  effect  was  wearing  off,  and  the
communists  would  conclude  they  were  only  words.  Then  Khanh  took  the  offen-
sive and  complained  to  Taylor  that  U.S.  officials  were  contradicting  him  in
public  statements.  For  example,  MACV  had  denied  that  there  was  an  invasion
of  I  Corps  by  DRV  units,  as  Khanh  had  claimed  in  a  speech  at  Danang.  Zor-
thian  soothed  him  by  saying  that  MACV  merely  corrected  a  misquotation  of
one  of  MACV's  own  officials;  Taylor  said  no  U.S.  official  would  knowingly
contradict  Khanh.

Taylor  took  all  this  patiently,  as  he  did  an  intelligence  report  that  said  Khanh
was  trying  to  incite  the  USG  to  action  against  North  Vietnam.  (The  report
also  said  that  Ky  was  saying  privately  that  the  GVN  should  go  it  alone,  because
the  USG  was  stalling  on  account  of  the  U.S.  election.)  USOM  conjectured  that
Goldwater's  nomination  had  precipitated  the  "go  North"  movement.  Moreover,
within  two  hours  after  Khanh's  long  meeting  with  Taylor,  the  Ministry  of  De-
fense let  fly  another  press  release  in  the  teeth  of  USOM  disapproval,  when
Khanh  ordered  the  Ministry  to  reject  Zorthian's  suggested  changes.  The  only
explanation  ofi'ered  was  that  GVN  was  extremely  sensitive  about  appearing  to
be  a  U.S.  puppet.

In  an  analysis  of  these  events,  Taylor  argued  for  tolerance  and  patience  with
GVN,  and  showed  no  hint  of  a  desire  to  get  tough.  He  noted  that  political  snip-
ing and  maneuvering  pressed  Khanh  to  do  something  dramatic  to  bolster
his  support.  Taylor  feared  the  GVN  might  get  tired  and  want  to  negotiate  if
they  could  not  get  the  U.S.  more  involved.  He  proposed  joint  contingency  plan-
ning for  bombing  North  Vietnam  as  a  means  to  cool  GVN  off  and  to  reopen
communications  with  them.

In  a  long  conversation  on  July  24  Khanh  discussed  his  political  problems  with
Taylor  and  asked  him  point  blank  if  he  should  resign.  Taylor  flatly  said  no,  that
the  USG  still  supported  him  and  definitely  wanted  no  further  change  in  GVN.
Khanh  then  asked  for  a  declaration  of  support  and  for  pressure  on  the  generals
to  continue  to  support  him;  Taylor  agreed.  (Comment:  Much  of  Khanh's
political  problem  still  revolved  around  Minh,  who  had  long  had  good  relations


US-GVN  Relations  329


with  Taylor,  This  relationship  may  have  worried  Khanh,  and  led  him  to  ap-
proach Taylor  in  this  way.  However,  it  may  have  merely  been  a  way  to  keep
up  the  pressure  on  USG  on  the  matter  of  bombing  North.  A  couple  of  days
later  Khanh  was  again  grumbling  publicly  about  being  a  U.S.  puppet.)

In  response  to  Taylor's  discussion  of  GVN  motives  and  of  ways  to  make
them  happy,  State  authorized  him  to  tell  Khanh  the  USG  had  considered
attacks  on  North  Vietnam  that  might  begin,  for  example,  if  the  pressure  from
dissident  South  Vietnamese  factions  became  too  great.  He  must  keep  this  confi-
dential. It  said  to  tell  him  that  the  USG  position  had  not  changed,  and  that  it
never  excluded  the  possibility  of  wider  action.  When  Taylor  brought  this  matter
to  Khanh  for  discussion,  they  first  agreed  on  a  GVN  announcement  of  an  in-
crease in  U.S.  personnel  and  discussed  the  press  leaks  on  going  North.  Khanh
then  took  the  offensive,  complaining  to  Taylor  about  press  stories  suggesting
the  USG  was  negotiating  with  the  Chinese  through  the  Pakistani  Government,
behind  the  back  of  GVN.  Taylor  soothed  him  by  saying  that  the  USG  was
merely  letting  China  know  how  firm  our  policy  was.  When  Taylor  asked  Khanh
his  views  of  U.S.  policy,  Khanh  said  he  wanted  pressure  on  the  North,  meaning
a  bombing  campaign.  Taylor  replied  with  the  position  that  State  had  authorized
on  joint  planning.  Khanh  acted  pleased  and  surprised,  promised  to  think  it
over,  and  promised  to  hold  it  tightly.  He  also  said  he  wanted  to  reorganize  GVN
to  strengthen  his  own  position;  Taylor  asked  for  specifics,  and  urged  him  not  to
do  anything  drastic  that  would  stir  up  trouble.

B. THE  TONKIN  INCIDENTS  AND  THE  POLICY  PROGNOSES,
AUGUST,  1964

Within  a  week.  North  Vietnamese  PT  boats  attacked  the  U.S.  destroyer  Mad-
dox,  in  admitted  retaliation  for  an  attack  by  South  Vietnamese  boats  on  two
North  Vietnamese  islands.  Then  a  disputed  further  attack  of  North  Vietnamese
PT  boats  on  the  Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy  on  August  4  provoked  a  U.S.
retaliatory  raid  on  the  main  North  Vietnamese  PT  boat  base  and  its  support
facilities.  The  raids  lifted  GVN's  spirits,  as  expected,  and  encouraged  Khanh  to
clamp  down  internally.  On  August  7,  he  proclaimed  a  state  of  emergency,  the
idea  he  had  been  discussing  for  some  time  with  both  Lodge  and  Taylor.  He
reimposed  censorship  and  restricted  movement;  but  he  left  politicians  and
potential  coup-plotters  alone.  Also  on  August  7,  the  U.S.  Congress  in  joint
session  passed  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  Resolution.

On  August  8,  Westmoreland  discussed  overall  joint  planning  with  Khanh;
the  question  of  combined  command  came  up,  and  Westmoreland  mentioned
the  example  of  Korea.  Both  agreed  to  postpone  this  issue.

On  August  14,  State  directed  Saigon  to  avoid  actions  that  could  be  called
provocative,  like  the  DESOTO  patrols  (which  the  Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy
had  been  doing  when  attacked)  and  34A  operations.  State  noted  that  the  U.S.
retaliatory  raid's  effect  on  GVN's  morale  would  be  temporary,  and  took  a
pessimistic  view  of  the  USOM  reports:

Mission's  monthly  report  (Saigon  377)  expresses  hope  of  significant
gains  by  end  of  year.  But  also  says  Khanh's  chances  of  staying  in  power  are
only  50-50,  that  leadership  .  .  .  has  symptoms  defeatism  and  hates  prospect
of  slugging  it  out  within  country,  that  there  will  be  mounting  pressures  for
wider  action  "which,  if  resisted,  will  create  frictions  and  irritations  which
could  lead  local  politicians  to  serious  consideration  negotiated  solution  or
local  soldiers  to  military  adventure  without  U.S.  consent"  .  .  .  Our  actions


330 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

of  last  week  lifted  .  .  .  morale  temporarily,  but  also  aroused  expectations,
and  morale  could  easily  sag  back  again  if  VC  have  successes  and  we  do
nothing  further.

The  cable  went  on  to  state  that  an  essential  element  of  U.S.  policy  was  to  devise
the  best  possible  means  of  action — minimum  risks  for  maximum  results  in  terms
of  SVN  morale  and  pressure  on  DRV.  In  the  context  of  a  possible  new  Geneva
conference  on  Laos,  its  prognosis  was  that  pressure  on  the  North  would  be  the
main  vehicle  for  success:

Basically  solution  in  both  South  Vietnam  and  Laos  will  require  com-
bination military  pressure  and  some  form  of  communication  under  which
Hanoi  (and  Peiping)  eventually  accept  idea  of  getting  out.  Negotiation
without  continued  military  action  will  not  achieve  our  objectives  in  fore-
seeable future  .  .  .  After,  but  only  after,  we  have  established  clear  pat-
tern pressure  hurting  DRV  and  leaving  no  doubts  in  South  Vietnam  of
our  resolve,  we  could  even  accept  conference  broadened  to  include  Viet-
nam issue.  (Underlining  in  original.)

On  the  touchy  aspect  of  US/GVN  relations,  it  simply  said:

Joint  US/GVN  planning  already  covers  possible  actions  against  DRV
and  the  Panhandle.  It  can  be  used  in  itself  to  maintain  morale  of  GVN
leadership,  as  well  as  to  control  and  inhibit  any  unilateral  GVN  moves.

The  Taylor  reply  to  the  above  message  dilTered  only  in  emphasis.

.  .  .  Underlying  our  analysis  is  the  apparent  assumption  of  DepTel
439  (which  we  believe  is  correct)  that  the  present  in-country  pacification
plan  is  not  enough  in  itself  to  maintain  National  morale  or  to  offer  reason-
able hope  of  eventual  success.  Something  must  be  added  in  the  coming
months.

Statement  of  the  problem — A.  The  course  which  U.S.  policy  in  South
Vietnam  should  take  during  the  coming  months  can  be  expressed  in  terms
of  four  objectives.  The  first  and  most  important  objective  is  to  gain  time
for  the  Khanh  government  to  develop  a  certain  stability  and  to  give  some
firm  evidence  of  viability.  Since  any  of  the  courses  of  action  considered  in
this  cable  carry  a  considerable  measure  of  risk  to  the  U.S.,  we  should  be
slow  to  get  too  deeply  involved  in  them  until  we  have  a  better  feel  of  the
quality  of  our  ally.  In  particular,  if  we  can  avoid  it,  we  should  not  get
involved  militarily  with  North  Vietnam  and  possibly  with  Red  China  if
our  base  in  South  Vietnam  is  insecure  and  Khanh's  Army  is  tied  down
everywhere  by  the  VC  insurgency.  Hence,  it  is  to  our  interest  to  gain  suffi-
cient time  not  only  to  allow  Khanh  to  prove  that  he  can  govern,  but  also
to  free  Saigon  from  the  VC  threat  which  presently  rings  it  and  assure  that
sufficient  GVN  ground  forces  will  be  available  to  provide  a  reasonable
measure  of  defense  against  any  DRV  ground  reaction  which  may  develop
in  the  execution  of  our  program  and  thus  avoid  the  possible  requirement
for  a  major  U.S.  ground  force  commitment.

A  second  objective  in  this  period  is  the  maintenance  of  morale  in  South
Vietnam,  particularly  within  the  Khanh  government.  This  should  not  be
difficult  in  the  case  of  the  government  if  we  can  give  Khanh  assurance  of
our  readiness  to  bring  added  pressure  on  Hanoi  if  he  provides  evidence  of
ability  to  do  his  part.  Thirdlv,  while  gaining  time  for  Khanh,  we  must  be
able  to  hold  the  DRV  in  check  and  restrain  a  further  buildup  of  Viet  Cong


US-GVN  Relations  331


strength  by  way  of  infiltration  from  the  North.  Finally,  throughout  this
period,  we  should  be  developing  a  posture  of  maximum  readiness  for  a
deliberate  escalation  of  pressure  against  North  Vietnam,  using  January  1,
1965,  as  a  target  D-Day.  We  must  always  recognize,  however,  that  events
may  force  us  to  advance  D-Day  to  a  considerably  earlier  date  .  .  .

In  approaching  the  Khanh  Government,  we  should  express  our  will-
ingness to  Khanh  to  engage  in  planning  and  eventually  to  exert  intense
pressure  on  North  Vietnam,  providing  certain  conditions  are  met  in
advance.  In  the  first  place  before  we  would  agree  to  go  all  out  against  the
DRV,  he  must  stabilize  his  Government  and  make  some  progress  in  clean-
ing up  his  operational  backyard.  Specifically,  he  must  execute  the  initial
phases  of  the  Hop  Tac  Plan  successfully  to  the  extent  of  pushing  the  Viet
Cong  from  the  doors  of  Saigon.  The  overall  pacification  program,  including
Hop  Tac,  should  progress  sufficiently  to  allow  earmarking  at  least  three
division  equivalents  for  the  Defense  in  I  Corps  if  the  DRV  step  up  military
operations  in  that  area.

Finally,  we  should  reach  some  fundamental  understandings  with  Khanh
and  his  Government  concerning  war  aims.  We  must  make  clear  that  we
will  engage  in  action  against  North  Vietnam  only  for  the  purpose  of  assur-
ing the  security  and  independence  of  South  Vietnam  within  the  territory
assigned  by  the  1954  agreements;  that  we  will  not  repeat  not  join  in  a
crusade  to  unify  the  North  and  South;  that  we  will  not  repeat  not  even
seek  to  overthrow  the  Hanoi  Regime  provided  the  latter  will  cease  its  efforts
to  take  over  the  South  by  subversive  warfare.

With  these  understandings  reached,  we  would  be  ready  to  set  in  motion
the  following:

(1)  Resume  at  once  34A  (with  emphasis  on  Marine  operations)
and  Desoto  patrols.  These  could  start  without  awaiting  outcome  of  dis-
cussions with  Khanh.

(2)  Resume  U-2  overflights  over  all  NVN.

(3)  Initiate  air  and  ground  strikes  in  Laos  against  infiltration  targets
as  soon  as  joint  plans  now  being  worked  out  with  the  Khanh  Govern-
ment are  ready  .  .  .

Before  proceeding  beyond  this  point,  we  should  raise  the  level  of  pre-
cautionary military  readiness  (if  not  already  done)  by  taking  such  visible
measures  as  introducing  U.S.  hawk  units  to  Danang  and  Saigon,  landing
a  Marine  force  at  Danang  for  defense  of  the  airfield  and  beefing  up  MACV's
support  base.  By  this  time  (assumed  to  be  late  fall)  we  should  have  some
reading  on  Khanh's  performance.

Assuming  that  his  performance  has  been  satisfactory  and  that  Hanoi
has  failed  to  respond  favorably,  it  will  be  time  to  embark  on  the  final
phase  of  course  of  action  A,  a  carefully  orchestrated  bombing  attack  on
NVN,  directed  primarily  at  infiltration  and  other  military  targets  .  .  .

Pros  and  cons  of  course  of  action — A.  If  successful,  course  of  action  A
will  accomplish  the  objectives  set  forth  at  the  outset  as  essential  to  the
support  of  U.S.  policy  in  South  Vietnam.  I  will  press  the  Khanh  Govern-
ment into  doing  its  homework  in  pacification  and  will  limit  the  diversion
of  interest  to  the  out-of-country  ventures  ...  It  gives  adequate  time  for
careful  preparation  estimated  at  several  months,  while  doing  sufficient
at  once  to  maintain  internal  morale.  It  also  provides  ample  warning  to


332 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Hanoi  and  Peking  to  allow  them  to  adjust  their  conduct  before  becoming
over-committed.

On  the  other  hand,  course  of  action  A  relies  heavily  upon  the  durability
of  the  Khanh  Government.  It  assumes  that  there  is  little  danger  of  its
collapse  without  notice  or  of  its  possible  replacement  by  a  weaker  or  more
unreliable  successor  .  .  .  Also,  because  of  the  drawn-out  nature  of  the
program,  it  is  exposed  to  the  danger  of  international  political  pressure
to  enter  into  negotiations  before  NVN  is  really  hurting  from  the  pressure
directed  against  it.

Statement  of  the  Problem — B.  It  may  well  be  that  the  problem  of  U.S.
policy  in  SVN  is  more  urgent  than  that  depicted  in  the  foregoing  state-
ment. It  is  far  from  clear  at  the  present  moment  that  the  Khanh  Govern-
ment can  last  until  January  1,  1965,  although  the  application  of  course  of
action  A  should  have  the  effect  of  strengthening  the  Government  inter-
nally and  of  silencing  domestic  squabbling.  If  we  assume,  however,  that  we
do  not  have  the  time  available  which  is  implicit  in  course  of  action  A
(several  months),  we  would  have  to  restate  the  problem  in  the  following
terms.  Our  objective  avoid  the  possible  consequences  of  a  collapse  of
National  morale.  To  accomplish  these  purposes,  we  would  have  to  open
the  campaign  against  the  DRV  without  delay,  seeking  to  force  Hanoi  as
rapidly  as  possible  to  desist  from  aiding  the  VC  and  to  convince  the  DRV
that  it  must  cooperate  in  calling  off  the  VC  insurgency.

Course  of  action — B.  To  meet  this  statement  of  the  problem,  we  need
an  accelerated  course  of  action,  seeking  to  obtain  results  faster  than  under
course  of  action  A.  Such  an  accelerated  program  would  include  the  fol-
lowing actions:

Again  we  must  inform  Khanh  of  our  intentions,  this  time  expressing
a  willingness  to  begin  military  pressures  against  Hanoi  at  once  providing
that  he  will  undertake  to  perform  as  in  course  of  action  A.  However,  U.S.
action  would  not  await  evidence  of  performance.

Again  we  may  wish  to  communicate  directly  on  this  subject  with  Hanoi
or  awaiting  effect  of  our  military  actions.  The  scenario  of  the  ensuing
events  would  be  essentially  the  same  as  under  Course  A  but  the  execution
would  await  only  the  readiness  of  plans  to  expedite,  relying  almost  ex-
clusively on  U.S.  military  means.

Pros  and  cons  of  Course  of  Action  B.  This  course  of  action  asks  virtually
nothing  from  the  Khanh  Government,  primarily  because  it  is  assumed  that
little  can  be  expected  from  it.  It  avoids  the  consequence  of  the  sudden
collapse  of  the  Khanh  Government  and  gets  underway  with  minimum
delay  the  punitive  actions  against  Hanoi.  Thus,  it  lessens  the  chance  of  an
interruption  of  the  program  by  an  international  demand  for  negotiations
by  presenting  a  fait  accompli  to  international  critics.  However,  it  increases
the  likelihood  of  U.S.  involvement  in  ground  action,  since  Khanh  will
have  almost  no  available  ground  forces  which  can  be  released  from  pacifica-
tion emplovment  to  mobile  resistance  of  DRV  attacks.

Conclusion:  It  is  concluded  that  Course  of  Action  A  offers  the  greater
promised  achievement  of  U.S.  policy  objectives  in  SVN  during  the  coming
months,.  However,  we  should  always  bear  in  mind  the  fragility  of  the
Khanh  Government  and  be  prepared  to  shift  quickly  to  Course  of  Action
B  if  the  situation  requires.  In  either  case,  we  must  be  militarily  ready  for
any  response  which  may  be  initiated  by  NVN  or  by  CHICOMS.


US-GVN  Relations  333


Miscellaneous:  As  indicated  above,  we  believe  that  34A  operations
should  resume  at  once  at  maximum  tempo,  still  on  a  covert  basis;  simi-
larly, Desoto  patrols  should  begin  advance  operating  outside  12-mile
limit.  We  concur  that  a  number  of  VNAF  pilots  should  be  trained  on
B-57's  between  now  and  first  of  year.  There  should  be  no  change  now
with  regard  to  policy  on  evacuation  of  U.S.  dependents.

Recommendations:  It  is  recommended  that  USG  adopt  Course  of  Action
A  while  maintaining  readiness  to  shift  to  Course  of  Action  B.

C. THE  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  KHANH'S  CONSTITUTION

In  a  state  of  euphoria  after  the  U.S.  reprisals,  Khanh  broached  the  subject
of  a  new  constitution  with  Taylor  on  August  12;  presumably  this  was  what  he
had  in  mind  on  July  27  when  he  mentioned  reorganization  (above,  p.  328).  He
proposed  three  branches  of  government  beneath  the  MRC.  The  Assembly
would  have  90  appointed  members  and  60  elected;  Khanh  would  be  the  Presi-
dent (and  Minh  wouldn't).  Taylor  urged  Khanh  to  go  slowly,  and  to  handle  the
matter  gently.  Taylor  feared  renewed  political  instability  if  sweeping  govern-
ment changes  were  announced;  but  Khanh  said  that  the  country  could  not
progress  under  the  existing  government.  Taylor  expressed  his  scepticism,  but
objected  no  further  than  to  caution  Khanh  on  the  need  to  explain  these  changes
adequately  in  advance.

On  August  14,  after  an  NSC  joint  planning  session,  Khanh  showed  Taylor
a  rough  English  translation  of  his  proposed  new  constitution.  Taylor  expressed
reservations:

We  found  it  brusque  in  language  and  suggested  to  Khanh  that  in  present
form  it  could  raise  criticism  in  U.S.  and  world  press.  We  stressed  to  him
that  internal  problems  of  acceptance  in  Vietnam  were  his  own  affair,  and
we  could  only  offer  observations  on  the  objective  issue  of  international
reactions.

Khanh  allowed  Sullivan  and  Manful  to  work  briefly  with  his  drafting  committee,
the  same  day,  but  they  worked  in  such  haste  that  they  had  little  influence.  Tay-
lor commented :

We  conclude  that  Khanh  and  his  military  colleagues  have  decided  that
this  sort  of  change  is  indispensable.  It  is  of  course  still  not  determined  what
General  Minh's  view  will  be.  We  have  considered  possibility  of  seeking
legal  aid  from  Washington  to  review  this  charter,  but  feel  this  would  not
repeat  not  be  useful  because  this  document  departs  so  widely  from  U.S.
experience  and  because  time  is  so  short,  we  have  decided  that  our  best
efforts  would  be  devoted  to  ( 1 )  making  wording  of  document  less  brusque
and  more  palatable  both  in  VN  and  abroad,  and  (2)  assisting  in  procla-
mation and  other  sources  of  public  relations  nature  explaining  necessity
for  this  sort  of  change.  Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  this  is  the  constitutional
form  which  the  MRC  repeat  MRC  fully  intends  to  impose,  and  we  see  no
repeat  no  alternative  but  to  make  the  best  of  it.

When  Khanh  secured  MRC  approval  of  the  final  draft  on  August  16,  they  also
elected  him  President,  displacing  Minh.  Khanh  had  earlier  complained  to  Taylor
that  he  had  kept  Minh,  a  big  source  of  trouble  to  him,  only  at  Lodge's  urging,
as  indeed  he  had.  Inasmuch  as  Khanh  had  seized  power  using  charges  against


r

334 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


four  generals  and  using  unproved  allegations  against  Minh,  and  inasmuch  as
Minh  was  still  a  popular  figure,  Khanh  was  bound  to  regard  Minh  as  a  threat  to
his  personal  prospects.

For  several  days  following  the  announcement  of  the  new  constitution,  a
head  of  steam  built  up  among  students  and  Buddhists.  There  is  no  sign  that  the
Embassy  did  anything  to  anticipate  or  head  off  the  coming  trouble,  other  than
the  previously  mentioned  words  of  caution  that  Khanh  disregarded.  On  August
21,  student  demonstrations  broke  out.  Violence  built  up  in  the  streets,  organized
and  orchestrated  by  the  Buddhists  and  the  VC.

Taylor  called  on  Khanh  on  August  24  in  his  Dalat  retreat  to  tell  him  how
seriously  the  Embassy  viewed  the  demonstrations.  The  discussion  revolved
around  "public  information"  and  completion  of  arrangements  for  the  new
government.  Khanh  agreed  to  announce  the  members  of  the  new  government
by  Thursday,  the  27th,  and  to  meet  the  Buddhist  leadership  to  hear  their  com-
plaints and  to  try  to  enlist  their  help.  He  also  promised  to  meet  some  student
demands,  to  crack  down  on  the  demonstrations,  and  to  enforce  the  old
mobilization  decrees  plus  new  ones.

State  responded  to  these  events  with  a  public  announcement  of  support  for
Khanh  in  more  direct  language  than  any  previously  used:

The  United  States  government  fully  recognizes  the  need  for  national
unity  in  South  Vietnam  and  is,  therefore,  supporting  the  Khanh  govern-
ment as  the  best  means  of  building  such  unity  at  the  same  time  that  the
war  effort  is  being  prosecuted.  Obviously  anything  of  a  divisive  nature  is
neither  in  the  interest  of  the  Vietnamese  government  nor  its  people.

That  evening  Khanh  met  three  top  Buddhist  leaders  in  Saigon,  after  they
refused  to  go  to  Dalat.  Their  principal  demands,  among  eight,  were  the  imme-
diate abrogation  of  the  August  16  charter  and  the  holding  of  free  elections  by
November  1.  1965.  Khanh  made  the  mistake  of  telling  them  he  would  have  to
consult  the  Americans.

Taylor  and  others  met  Khanh  at  1:00  a.m.  August  25.  Observing  diplomatic
propriety,  Taylor  said  his  tentative  personal  views  as  an  interested  third  party
were  that  Khanh  should  not  knuckle  under  to  a  minority  group  on  such  an
important  issue  as  the  August  16  charter,  especially  under  an  ultimatum.  Khanh
agreed  and  proposed  to  issue  a  more  limited  proclamation  immediately  (which
he  did  at  5:00  a.m.)  that  would  meet  certain  concerns  of  the  Buddhists  and
students.

Khanh's  proclamation  promised  to  revise  the  constitution,  diminish  censor-
ship, rectify  local  abuses  of  government,  and  permit  orderly  demonstrations.
The  Buddhists  and  students  were  not  satisfied;  thev  formed  a  mob  outside
his  office,  to  which  he  spoke  briefly  without  further  concession.  The  mob  failed
to  disperse,  and  the  authorities  left  them  alone.  Then  without  advance  notice,
military  headquarters  (Khanh)  announced  that  afternoon  that  Khanh  had
resigned,  that  the  August  16  charter  would  be  withdrawn,  and  that  the  MRC
would  meet  the  next  day  to  choose  a  new  Chief  of  State  and  would  then  dis-
solve itself.

Taylor  had  made  it  clear  to  Minh,  Khiem,  Lam  and  Khanh  that  the  U.S.
favored  retaining  Khanh  as  head  of  the  GVN.  Both  Tri  Quang  and  Tam  Chau,
fearing  a  Dai  Viet  takeover,  supported  Khanh.  Aligned  against  Khanh  were
elements  of  the  military  angered  by  Khanh's  "down  with  military  dictatorship"
statement  made  from  a  truck  top  and  the  Dai  Viet  (including  Khiem,  Hoan
and  Minh)  angered  by  his  appeasement  of  the  Buddhists.


US-GVN  Relations  335


On  August  26  and  27,  the  MRC  met,  while  violence  erupted  in  the  streets
of  Saigon.  The  evening  of  the  27th  they  announced  that  a  triumvirate  consisting
of  Generals  Khanh,  Minh,  and  Khiem  would  rule  as  an  interim  government
while  they  tried  to  form  a  new  one.  Khanh  withdrew  to  Dalat,  and  Vice-
Premier  Oanh  became  acting  Prime  Minister.  Violence  continued,  and  coup
rumors  became  especially  active.

On  August  29,  a  State  Department  official  briefed  the  press,  interpreting
events.  He  said  Buddhists  and  students  interpreted  the  August  16  charter  as  a
return  to  Diemism  and  repression;  in  meeting  their  demands  the  MRC  had
worried  some  Catholics,  but  balanced  things  out  by  creating  the  triumvirate
with  all  views  represented.  He  said  the  charter  had  not  been  the  USG's  idea,
but  that  we  had  been  consulted  and  had  urged  delay.  The  demonstrations  did
not  contain  appreciable  anti-Americanism,  he  said,  nor  did  they  arise  from
differences  between  the  "go  North"  feelings  of  the  military  and  refugee  Catho-
lics, on  the  one  hand,  and  neutralist  sentiments  of  students  and  Buddhists,  on
the  other.  However,  the  cable  reporting  the  press  conference  to  the  Embassy
showed  concern  on  both  these  latter  points.

D. GVN  ACQUIRES  A  CIVILIAN  FLAVOR,  AND  THE  USG
REVIEWS  PRIORITIES

On  August  29th,  Vietnamese  paratroopers  armed  with  bayonets  restored
order  in  Saigon.  Khanh  rested  in  Dalat;  Taylor  called  on  him  on  the  31st  to  try
to  persuade  him  to  return  to  Saigon  quickly  to  prove  he  was  in  charge.  West-
moreland went  to  see  Khanh  the  next  day  to  urge  him  to  keep  ARVN  on  the
offensive  and  to  press  on  with  Hop  Tac  and  other  pacification;  in  exchange  for
reassurances,  Westmoreland  revised  a  previous  position  and  promised  that  U.S.
advisors  through  MACV  would  alert  Khanh  to  unusual  troop  movements.
Westmoreland  also  obtained  reassurances  from  General  Khiem.  Rusk  suggested
a  letter  from  President  Johnson  urging  Khanh  to  return  to  Saigon,  and  then
cabled  the  text  of  such  a  letter.  A  Dai  Viet  coup  attempt  was  blocked  by  the
junior  members  of  the  MRC,  who  had  now  become  powerful.  Several  Generals
went  to  Dalat  to  persuade  Khanh  to  return  as  Prime  Minister,  which  he  prom-
ised to  do  in  a  few  days.  Khanh  did  return  to  Saigon  on  September  4.  Minh
was  to  be  chairman  of  the  triumvirate,  and  would  appoint  a  new  High  National
Council  to  represent  all  elements  in  the  population.  The  Council  was  to  prepare
a  new  constitution  and  return  the  government  to  civilian  leadership  within  a
month  or  so.  Khanh  was  taking  the  line  that  he  wanted  to  get  the  Army  out  of
politics.  When  Taylor  cautioned  Khanh,  just  before  the  latter's  return  to
Saigon,  that  an  all-civilian  government  would  be  too  weak  and  would  tend
toward  neutralism,  Khanh  replied  that  the  Army  would  be  vigilant.  Taylor
again  advised  Khanh  to  lay  the  groundwork  better  before  any  more  changes  in
government  structure.  When  the  Triumvirate  announced  the  creation  of  the
NHC,  they  also  ended  the  state  of  emergency  and  press  censorship,  which  they
had  declared  on  September  6.

On  the  morning  of  September  6,  as  he  was  leaving  for  Washington,  Taylor
sent  Rusk  a  full  review  of  the  crisis  and  of  its  effects  on  the  Embassy-State
military  and  political  appraisal  of  mid-August.  He  said  that  the  USG  now
had  to  give  up  on  the  idea  of  using  a  plan  for  pressures  on  the  North  as  leverage
to  get  the  GVN  to  press  on  with  pacification,  and  should  go  ahead  with  these
pressures  in  the  hope  that  they  would  raise  Vietnamese  morale  enough  to  keep
up  their  war  effort:


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

.  .  .  While  we  must  be  disappointed  by  the  poHtical  turmoil  of  recent
days,  we  cannot  consider  it  totally  unexpected.  The  very  nature  of  the
social,  political  and  ethnic  confusion  in  this  country  makes  governmental
turbulence  of  this  type  a  factor  which  we  will  always  have  with  us.

What  has  emerged  from  these  recent  events  is  a  definition  within  fairly
broad  limits  of  the  degree  to  which  perfectability  in  government  can  be
pushed.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  recent  fracas  started  when
Khanh  sought  to  make  his  broad  and  cumbersome  government  more
tractable  and  more  effective.  His  motives  were  of  the  best  even  though
his  methods  were  clumsy.  But  now,  after  this  recent  experience  at  gov-
ernment improvement  we  must  accept  the  fact  that  an  effective  govern-
ment, much  beyond  the  capacity  of  that  which  has  existed  over  the  past
several  months,  is  unlikely  to  survive.  We  now  have  a  better  feel  for  the
quality  of  our  ally  and  for  what  we  can  expect  from  him  in  terms  of  ability
to  govern.  Only  the  emergence  of  an  exceptional  leader  could  improve
the  situation  and  no  George  Washington  is  in  sight.

Consequently,  we  can  and  must  anticipate  for  the  future  an  instrument
of  government  which  will  have  definite  limits  of  performance.  At  the  very
worst,  it  will  continue  to  seek  a  broadened  consensus  involving  and  at-
tempting to  encompass  all  or  most  of  the  minority  of  popular  front.  This
amalgam,  if  it  takes  form,  may  be  expected  in  due  course  to  become  sus-
ceptible to  an  accommodation  with  the  liberation  front,  which  might
eventually  lead  to  a  collapse  of  all  political  energy  behind  the  pacification
effort.

At  best,  the  emerging  governmental  structure  might  be  capable  of
maintaining  a  holding  operation  against  the  Viet  Cong.  This  level  of  effort
could,  with  good  luck  and  strenuous  American  efforts,  be  expanded  to
produce  certain  limited  pacification  successes,  for  example,  in  the  territory
covered  by  the  Hop  Tac  plan.  But  the  willingness  and  ability  of  such  a
government  to  exert  itself  or  to  attempt  to  execute  an  all-out  National
pacification  plan  would  be  marginal.  It  would  probably  be  incapable  of
galvanizing  the  people  to  the  heightened  level  of  unity  and  sacrifice  neces-
sary to  carry  forward  the  counter-insurgency  program  to  final  success.
Instead,  it  would  look  increasingly  to  the  United  States  to  take  the  major
responsibility  for  prying  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  North  Vietnamese  off  the
backs  of  the  South  Vietnamese  population.  The  politicians  in  Saigon  and
Hue  feel  today  that  the  political  hassle  is  their  appropriate  arena:  The
conflict  with  the  VC  belongs  to  the  Americans.

We  may,  therefore,  expect  to  find  ourselves  faced  with  a  choice  of  (A)
passively  watching  the  development  of  a  popular  front,  knowing  that  this
may  in  due  course  require  the  U.S.  to  leave  Vietnam  in  failure;  or  (B)
actively  assuming  increased  responsibility  for  the  outcome  following  a
time-schedule  consistent  with  our  estimate  of  the  limited  viability  of  any
South  Vietnamese  government.

An  examination  of  our  total  world  responsibilities  and  the  significance
of  Vietnam  in  relationship  to  them  clearly  rules  out  the  option  of  accept-
ing course  (A).  If  we  leave  Vietnam  with  our  tail  between  our  legs,  the
consequences  of  this  defeat  in  the  rest  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Latin  America
would  be  disastrous.  We  therefore  would  seem  to  have  little  choice  left
except  to  accept  course  (B) .

Our  previous  views  on  the  right  course  of  action  to  follow  in  South
Vietnam  are  set  forth  in  EMBTEL  465.  The  discussion  in  this  present  cable


US-GVN  Relations  337


amounts  to  a  recognition  that  course  of  action  A  repeat  A  of  EMBTEL
465  no  longer  corresponds  with  the  reaUties  of  the  situation.  Recent  events
have  revealed  the  weakness  of  our  ally  and  have  convinced  us  of  the
improbability  of  attaining  the  level  of  governmental  performance  desired
under  course  A  before  embarking  on  a  campaign  of  pressure  against  the
DRV.  We  are  forced  back  on  course  of  action  B  with  certain  revised
views  on  timing.

He  went  on  to  recommend  that  escalating  pressures  on  the  DRV  begin  around
December  1.

Taylor  brought  with  him  General  Westmoreland's  assessment  of  the  military
situation;  it  included  a  look  at  the  political  situation  from  a  completely  different
viewpoint  from  Taylor's :

...  1.  In  preparation  for  your  trip  to  Washington,  I  thought  it  might
be  useful  to  give  you  my  assessment  of  the  military  situation.  In  subse-
quent paragraphs  I  outline  in  some  detail  the  rather  substantial  progress
which  we  have  already  made  and,  more  importantly,  the  great  potential
for  additional  progress.  I  also  describe  military  problem  areas.  These,  as
you  know,  are  many;  but  all  are  susceptible  to  solution  assuming  that
political  stability  can  be  achieved,  and  that  armed  forces,  particularly  the
Army,  remains  intact  and  unified  in  its  purpose.  Under  the  present  cir-
cumstances, however,  the  continued  solidarity  of  the  armed  forces  is  in
doubt.  As  all  else  depends  on  holding  the  armed  forces  together,  I  address
this  matter  first.


The  Key  Military  Issue.

2.  It  seems  to  me  there  are  certain  conditions  which  must  be  met  in
order  to  preserve  the  structure  and  effectiveness  of  the  RVNAF:

A.  The  officers  of  the  RVNAF  must  be  protected  against  purge,
solely  by  reason  of  religious  or  political  affiliation.  The  Commander
in  Chief,  the  officers  of  the  Joint  General  StafT  and  commanders  down
the  line,  must  be  given  some  assurance  that  their  careers  and  reputa-
tions will  not  be  sacrificed,  for  political  expediency  to  the  ambitions
or  interests  of  political  or  religious  blocs.

B.  The  Officers'  Corps  must  be  assured  that  its  members  will  not  be
punished  or  expelled  from  the  armed  forces  if  they  faithfully  execute
the  orders  of  constituted  authority  in  connection  with  the  maintenance
of  law  and  order.  They  must  be  assured  that  their  superiors  will  not
accede  to  the  arbitrary  demands  of  pressure  groups  whose  interest  it  is
to  destroy  the  discipline  of  the  armed  forces  and  to  render  ineffective
the  forces  of  law  and  order.

3.  If  I  interpret  correctly  the  events  of  the  past  two  weeks,  neither  of
these  minimum  conditions  have  been  met.  To  the  contrary,  actions  best
calculated  to  destroy  the  morale,  the  unity,  the  pride  and  confidence  of
the  armed  forces  have  transpired  in  a  manner  which  leads  me  to  believe
that  a  relative  free  hand  has  been  given  to  those  who  aim  to  destroy  the
armed  forces.  The  demands  of  the  Buddhists  for  the  resignation  of  the
Commander  in  Chief,  the  Chief  of  StafT,  Commander  of  II  Corps,  the


338 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Prefect  of  Saigon  and  the  Director  of  National  Police,  to  name  a  few,
appear  to  be  blows  directed  at  the  heart  of  the  security  forces  which  stand
between  the  Viet  Cong  and  victory.  I  cannot  believe  that  it  is  in  the
interests  of  the  Nation  to  accede  to  these  demands.  To  the  contrary,  I  am
persuaded  that  acceptance  is  a  formula  for  political  and  military  disaster.
While  aware  that  the  insurgency  cannot  be  overcome  by  military  means
alone,  I  am  equally  aware  that  without  a  strong  military  foundation  no
program  will  ever  achieve  victory.  I  am  concerned  that  the  Government
of  Vietnam  has  already  moved  some  distance  down  the  wrong  road  in
dealing  with  its  Armed  Forces.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  Armed  Forces
will  collapse  or  whether,  finding  the  present  course  intolerable,  they  will
make  a  desperate  move  to  regain  power.  Neither  course  of  action  is  com-
patible with  the  objective  we  seek.

In  Washington,  Taylor,  Rusk,  McNamara  and  Wheeler  reached  a  consensus
that  ( 1 )  Khanh  and  GVN  were  too  exhausted  to  be  thinking  about  moves
against  the  North,  (2)  GVN  needs  reassurance,  and  (3)  Khanh  is  likely  to
stay  in  control,  but  not  to  get  much  done  on  the  pacification  program.  There
followed  NSAM  314,  whose  main  point  was  that  "first  order  of  business  at
present  is  to  take  actions  which  will  help  strengthen  the  fabric  of  the  GVN."

E. THE  HNC  GOES  TO  WORK  AMID  FURTHER  TURBULENCE

Helping  strengthen  the  fabric  of  GVN  proved  to  be  easier  said  than  done.

Another  coup  attempt  on  September  13  failed  when  Ky  and  Thi,  along  with
other  young  officers,  supported  the  existing  government.  The  USG  opposed
the  coup,  and  also  opposed  overt  violence  to  suppress  it;  in  particular,  USG
opposed  VNAF  bombing  of  Saigon,  which  was  threatened  at  one  point  when
the  coup  generals  gained  control  of  much  of  the  city.  When  Khanh  and  Ky
asked  for  U.S.  Marines,  the  USG  refused;  State  authorized  a  strong  line  in
favor  of  the  Triumvirate,  and  against  internecine  war:

(A)  It  is  imperative  that  there  not  be  internecine  war  within  VN  Armed
Forces.

(B)  The  picture  of  petty  bickering  among  VN  leaders  has  created  an
appalling  impression  abroad.

(C)  The  U.S.  has  not  provided  massive  assistance  to  SVN,  in  military
equipment,  economic  resources  and  personnel,  in  order  to  subsidize
continuing  quarrels  among  SVN  leaders  .  .  .

(G)  Emphasize  that  VN  leaders  must  not  take  the  U.S.  for  granted.

2.  In  line  with  above  you  should  make  it  emphatically  clear  whenever
useful,  that  we  do  not  believe  a  Phat  Due  government  can  effectively
govern  the  country  or  command  the  necessary  popular  support  to  carry
forward  the  effort  against  the  VC.  U.S.  support  for  the  GVN  is  based  on
the  triumvirate  and  its  efforts  to  bring  about  a  broadly  based  and  effective
government  satisfactorily  reflecting  the  interests  and  concerns  of  all
groups.

After  the  coup  failed,  the  Embassy  pressed  Khanh  to  exile  the  coup  leaders
quietly;  and  in  the  upshot  they  were  acquitted  of  the  charges  against  them.

A  fresh  problem  blew  up  on  September  20  when  Rhade  tribesmen  in  four


US-GVN  Relations  339


CIDG  camps  advised  by  U.S.  Special  Forces  revolted  against  Saigon's  authority.
It  arose  from  a  long-festering  mistrust  and  contempt  between  the  Montagnards,
encouraged  by  the  VC,  and  the  lowland  Vietnamese.  This  problem  also  vexed
US/GVN  relations,  because  the  U.S.  Special  Forces  advisors  generally  got
along  well  with  the  tribesmen,  and  some  may  have  sympathized  with  them;
and  in  particular,  it  added  to  Khanh's  suspicions  of  U.S.  intentions.  Two  or
three  Rhades  had  become  officers  in  ARVN,  and  Westmoreland  suggested
using  them  as  intermediaries  with  the  rebelling  units;  but  Khanh  turned  the
idea  down  flat.  He  also  declined  to  make  concessions  to  Montagnard  discontent.
Then  Taylor  sent  General  DePuy  as  his  intermediary  to  tell  the  Rhades  they
were  off  the  payroll  until  they  submitted  to  GVN  authority.  This  move  pro-
duced a  temporary  settlement,  but  trouble  continued  to  boil  up  for  another
two  or  three  weeks.

The  High  National  Council  began  its  deliberations  on  September  24;  Taylor
took  the  occasion  to  comment  that  Khanh  conceded  too  much  to  organized
pressure  groups.  Noting  that  GVN  effectiveness  and  morale  had  virtually  col-
lapsed, he  disliked  the  purely  civilian  makeup  of  the  Council,  and  hoped  that  it
would  take  its  time  about  writing  a  permanent  constitution.  GVN  set  a  deadline
of  October  27  for  this  exercise.  Watching  on  the  sidelines,  here  as  at  other  times,
Taylor  opposed  unsettling  change,  and  opposed  excessive  civilian  influence  be-
cause of  their  presumed  factionalism  and  lack  of  fervor  in  prosecuting  the  war.

F. THE  HNC  INSTALLS  CIVILIAN  LEADERSHIP,  OCTOBER,  1964

The  view  that  bombing  the  North  was  the  key  to  success  received  a  fresh
airing,  this  time  in  a  public  revelation  of  what  USG  was  thinking.  Assistant
Secretary  of  State  WilHam  Bundy  said  in  a  speech  delivered  in  Tokyo  on  Sep-
tember 30  that  such  bombing  would  cut  down  the  threat  to  GVN  in  a  matter
of  months.

Early  in  October,  Khanh  succeeded  in  exiling  General  Khiem,  a  member  of
the  triumvirate,  whom  he  had  suspected  of  instigating  the  September  13  coup
attempt;  Khiem  became  Ambassador  to  the  U.S.

As  the  HNC  deliberated.  State  sent  Taylor  its  guidance  on  the  USG  position
during  the  formation  of  the  new  government-to-be:

1.  We  concur  that  we  must  .  .  .  avoid  any  public  espousal  of  charter
or  people,  although  we  will  undoubtedly  be  charged  in  any  event  with
considerable  responsibility  for  the  selection  of  the  form  and  personnel
of  any  new  government  .  .  .  We  cannot  privately  disclaim  any  preference
for  individuals  or  form  of  government  because  of  our  intense  interest  in
seeing  a  new  government  having  sound  organization,  able  members,  and
broad  basis  of  popular  support.  We  also  want  to  avoid  any  private  impression
that  we  are  dumping  Khanh  and  that  as  far  as  we  are  concerned  every-
thing is  up  for  grabs  .  .  .

2.  As  seen  from  here,  evolving  political  situation  in  Saigon  contains  at
least  two  major  problems  for  U.S.  EmbTel  1054  strongly  suggests  HNC  is
leaning  toward  parliamentary  form  of  government  with  all  the  weaknesses
which  were  so  apparent  in  the  French  4th  Republic.  The  second  problem,
highlighted  in  EmbTel  983,  is  to  avoid  a  sharp  split  between  the  only  real
powers  in  the  country,  the  military,  and  the  civilian  HNC.  This  split  could
occur  over  form  of  government  or  its  personnel.  U.S.  must  try  to  bring
stable  government  of  persons  acceptable  to  both  military  and  civilian.


340 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Then  there  followed  three  suggestions  on  form  of  government  and  a  para-
graph on  people.

7.  Finally,  there  is  a  delicate  problem,  during  this  transition  period,
in  our  relations  with  General  Khanh  and  his  military  supporters.  The
present  truth  is  they  hold  such  power  as  exists  in  SVN.  Their  acceptance  is
prerequisite  to  any  successful  constitution  of  a  new  government.  Our
problem  is  that  we  must  not  abandon  one  horse  before  there  is  another
horse  which  can  run  the  course.  I  would  suggest:  That  you  have  full  and
frank  discussion  with  General  Khanh  about  how  he  sees  the  development
of  the  situation  so  that  what  we  ourselves  do  is  in  consonance  with  the
consensus  among  military  and  civilian  leadership  which  it  is  now  our  highest
purpose  to  build  .  .  .  The  important  thing  is  that  during  this  period  we
not  find  ourselves  in  a  position  where  there  is  no  one  with  whom  we  can
work.

Meanwhile,  Minh  allied  himself  with  the  High  National  Council  to  put  provi-
sions for  civilian  control  in  the  new  constitution  opposed  by  Khanh  and  the
now  powerful  junior  membership  of  the  MRC.  Taylor  tried  to  persuade  them
to  resolve  their  differences  quietly,  and  to  make  sure  a  widely  acceptable  docu-
ment was  cleared  all  around  before  publication.  Thinking  that  things  were  more
likely  to  get  v/orse  rather  than  better,  Secretary  Rusk  suggested  that  the  USG
should  prefer  Khanh  and  the  "Young  Turks"  to  Minh  and  the  HNC:

Bob  McNamara  and  I  have  following  reaction  to  political  moves  you
have  reported  during  last  week.

A  struggle  seems  to  be  developing  between  Minh  and  HNC  on  one
hand  and  Khanh  and  Young  Turk  military  on  the  other.  Between  these
two  groups  it  seems  to  us  our  best  interests  are  served  if  Khanh  comes  out
on  top  .  .  .  Problem  is  to  get  government  with  Khanh  in  a  leading  role,
ideally  as  chief  executive  unless  some  strong  civilian  shows  up  who  is  not
now  apparent.  At  least  Khanh  should  remain  as  leader  of  Army  with  co-
equal position  to  civilians  in  a  government,  whose  mandate  will  run  for
at  least  18  months  .  .  .  We  believe  it  should  be  made  clear  that  U.S.
does  not  repeat  not  support  Minh  as  powerful  chief  executive.

This  is  consensus  here  and  we  would  much  appreciate  your  comment.

Once  again  the  policy  was  to  limit  change  and  to  limit  civilian  influence.  Taylor
replied:

The  views  which  you  and  Bob  McNamara  express  .  .  .  are  very  much
the  same  conclusions  we  have  reached  and  acted  upon  here.

Minh  expected  to  be  the  new  Chief  of  State  and  to  name  the  Prime  Minister.
Taylor  talked  to  him  about  the  selection  problem,  saying  that  he  wished  to  be
consulted.  Minh  asked  Taylor's  view  of  Saigon's  Mayor  Huong  and  of  Minister
of  the  Interior  Vien.  Taylor  diplomatically  gave  his  very  high  opinion  of  Vien.
State  urged  Taylor  to  use  his  influence  freely  while  he  could  still  influence  the
shape  of  the  new  government.

The  High  National  Council  finished  on  schedule  on  October  27,  and  sur-
prised the  Embassy  by  electing  its  chairman,  Phan  Khac  Suu,  an  elderly  and
respected  politician,  to  be  the  new  chief  of  State.  Religious  group  leaders


US-GVS  Relations  341


pressured  the  HNC  into  this  decision  at  the  last  minute.  Taylor  had  hoped  and
expected  Minh  would  be  elected:  although  the  action  met  Khanh's  promise  in
Au2ust  that  the  militarv  would  get  out  of  politics.  Khanh  and  his  cabinet  re-
signed and  went  into  caretaker  status.  The  HNC  stayed  on  as  the  legislative
bodv.  Tavlor  tried  to  make  the  best  of  it.  but  protested  to  Suu  about  the  failure
of  the  HNC  to  consult  him  about  Suu"s  election:  Suu  responded  by  discussing
the  composition  of  the  new  cabinet  with  him.  naming  Huong  as  Prime  Minister.
Tavlor  also  gave  Suu  the  usual  polite  lecture  about  the  need  for  strong  govern-
ment. State  went  along  reluctantlv  with  the  new  government:  Khanh  and  the
Young  Turks  also  went  along.

G. A  QUIET  SOV EMBER.  1964

At  the  end  of  October,  the  \'C  staged  a  mortar  attack  on  the  Bien  Hoa  air
base,  destroying  several  U.S.  aircraft  and  killins  four  Americans.  Ta\lor  urged
a  reprisal  bombing  like  the  one  in  August  following  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents,
but  Washington  declined  to  approve.  Huong  told  Taylor  he  hoped  the  U.S.
would  respond,  in  a  meeting  to  consult  on  Huong's  pending  cabinet  appoint-
ments, but  the  issue  was  alread\"  decided  and  Tavlor  had  to  discourage  the  idea.

The  new  cabinet  froze  out  Minh.  no  doubt  to  improve  the  palatabilitv  of  the
new  government  to  the  dominant  eroup  in  the  MRC.  Minh  then  packed  up  and
went  abroad  on  a  good  will  tour:  Tavlor  found  the  cash  cost  to  the  U.S.  run-
ning high,  but  recommended  paving  it.  In  his  overall  assessment  of  the  balance
of  power  in  the  new  government.  Tavlor  thought  that  the  MRC  had  allowed
civilians  to  get  power  (as  promised  in  August)  because  the  MRC  feared  mob
violence,  and  thought  it  expedient  to  let  the  civilians  make  a  mess  of  it  so  that
military  rule  would  again  become  acceptable.  That  is.  he  hoped  and  expected
that  a  militarv  return  to  power  would  become  widelv  acceptable.  Tavlor  thought
the  overall  political  prospects  were  "faintlv  encouraging. Commenting  in  replv.
State  once  again  emphasized  the  accepted  links  between  U.S.  commitment  and
G\'N  morale  and  efforts:

A  key  element  in  either  the  immediate  program  or  the  long-range  course
of  action  will  be  the  nature  of  our  discussions  with  the  G\"N.  Sullivan  has
impressed  on  us  the  seriousness  of  S\'N  doubts  as  to  U.S.  intentions  .  .  .
More  basicallv.  we  believe  no  course  of  actio-^  c  succeed  unless  we  are
able  to  stiffen  G\'N  to  set  its  house  in  or^.  ..iid  take  everv  possible
measure  for  political  stabilitv  and  to  push  fonvard  the  pacification  program.

These  links  received  a  full  airing  between  Tavlor  and  State  and  between  Taylor
and  Huong.  To  State.  Tavlor  said:

W'e  ha\e  had  a  great  deal  of  di^cu^-^ion  here  as  to  the  minimum  le\el  of
government  required  tc  :ing  militar\ pressure  against  the

North.  I  would  describe  that  mmmium  government  as  one  capable  of
maintaining  law  and  order  in  the  urban  areas,  of  securing  vital  militarv
bases  from  \'C  attacks,  and  giving  its  efforts  with  those  of  USG.  As
Reference  B  indicates  we  do  not  expect  such  a  government  for  3  to  4
months  .  .  .  perhaps  not  then  if  the  current  attempts  to  chip  awav  at  the
Huong  government  continue.  .  .  .  Ho\\ever.  if  the  government  falters
and  gives  good  reason  to  believe  that  it  will  never  attain  the  desired  level
of  performance.  I  would  favor  going  against  the  North  an\Ava\".  The


342 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

purpose  of  such  an  attack  would  be  to  give  pulmotor  treatment  for  a
government  in  extremis  and  to  make  sure  that  the  DRV  does  not  get  off
unscathed  in  any  final  settlement.

In  his  conversation  with  Huong,  the  latter  requested:

That  I  obtain  a  reaffirmation  of  U.S.  policy  toward  VN.  Huong  referred
to  U.S.  action  in  Gulf  of  Tonkin  and  the  lift  in  morale  VN  had  received
at  this  display  of  determination  by  the  U.S.  to  strike  against  the  North.
Subsequently,  however,  U.S.  had  appeared  to  emphasize  almost  exclu-
sively necessity  considering  war  within  SVN  itself.  I  responded  that
reciprocal  responsibilities  were  involved.  On  the  GVN  side  it  was  essential
that  a  stable  government  be  established  capable  of  directing  affairs  of  the
Nation  and  particularly  of  directing  the  national  pacification  effort  .  .  .
Should  his  government  demonstrate  it  was  capable  of  achieving  satisfactory
degree  of  government  stability  and  effectiveness  a  wider  range  of  pos-
sibilities would  undoubtedly  be  open  for  discussion  .  .  .  Huong  indicated
his  complete  understanding  of  the  situation.

At  this  time  another  case  of  non-consultation  blew  up.  RVNAF  reorganiza-
tion plans  had  passed  back  and  forth  between  the  MRC  and  MACV  since  July.
Then,  on  November  10,  the  MRC  produced  a  plan  that  differed  materially  from
the  last  one  MACV  had  seen,  Huong  signed  it,  and  it  was  published  on  Novem-
ber 1 1  before  MACV  could  review  it.  Westmoreland  and  Taylor  both  protested
to  their  respective  contacts  in  the  strongest  terms;  the  decrees  were  withdrawn,
changed  to  MACV's  satisfaction,  and  reissued.

On  November  26,  Westmoreland  squelched  an  apparent  coup  planned  by  Ky.
He  heard  of  unusual  activity  at  VNAF  headquarters  and  asked  Ky  to  his  office.
Ky  bluntly  stated  a  case  for  a  change  of  leadership.  Westmoreland  said:

After  patiently  listening  to  the  foregoing,  I  informed  Ky  in  no  uncertain
terms  that  the  U.S.  government  would  not  support  a  change  of  command
by  other  than  orderly  and  legal  process.  (This  statement  was  cleared  in
advance  with  Ambassador  Johnson.)  Ky  was  obviously  impressed  by  my
statement  and  said  that  he  would  not  take  action  for  three  months,  but  if
the  situation  continued  to  deteriorate  he  would  be  constrained  to  act  in
national  interest.

This  episode  was  the  first  sign  of  Young  Turk  action  against  the  new  govern-
ment, and  the  first  recorded  sign  of  Ky's  own  ambitions.  The  U.S.  reaction
underlined  the  USG's  opposition  to  sudden  change  without  broad  support,  even
though  it  was  expected  that  the  military  would  return  to  power  eventually.

H. A  LECTURE  AND  A  PROGRAM  FOR  GVN

NSAM  314,  September  10,  which  had  called  for  actions  to  strengthen  GVN,
had  set  wheels  in  motion  toward  spelling  out  a  U.S.  program  within  SVN  to
complement  the  contemplated  actions  against  the  North.  Taylor  returned  to
Washington  for  consultations  at  the  end  of  November.  In  the  NSC,  he  argued
that  a  strong  message  to  GVN  about  its  problems  would  most  likely  produce
the  optimum  response.  He  said  a  threat  by  the  U.S.  to  withdraw  unless  they
improve  would  be  too  much  of  a  gamble.  There  was  no  discussion  of  inter-


US-GVN  Relations  343


mediate  leverage  or  sanctions  between  this  extreme  threat  and  none  at  all.
The  discussion  also  highlighted  the  fear  that  GVN  might  collapse  or  be  re-
placed by  neutralists  who  would  ask  the  U.S.  to  withdraw;  all  agreed  that
neutralism  could  not  be  accepted,  and  that  the  U.S.  should  minimize  this  risk
by  full  backing  of  the  existing  GVN.

Taylor  returned  to  Saigon  with  an  approved  statement  and  program  for
GVN  that  embodied  his  principal  recommendations.  Its  public  aspect  was  an
across  the  board  increase  in  the  approved  strengths  of  all  elements  of  RVNAF
and  the  paramilitary,  in  support  of  the  Hop  Tac  pacification  plan  and  its  out-
growths that  had  been  in  the  works  since  July.  Its  unannounced  aspect  included
a  rationale  showing  a  clear  shift  of  emphasis  from  the  views  at  the  highest
levels  that  had  developed  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  As  presented  to  GVN,
it  said :

It  was  the  clear  conclusion  of  the  recent  review  in  Washington  of  the
situation  in  South  Vietnam  that  the  unsatisfactory  progress  being  made  in
the  Pacification  Program  was  the  result  of  two  primary  causes  from  which
many  secondary  causes  stem.  The  primary  cause  has  been  the  govern-
mental instability  in  Saigon,  and  the  second  the  continued  reinforcement
and  direction  of  the  Viet  Cong  by  the  Government  of  North  Vietnam.
It  was  recognized  that  to  change  the  downward  trend  of  events,  it  will  be
necessary  to  deal  adequately  with  both  of  these  factors.

Kovever  it  was  the  clear  view  that  these  factors  are  not  of  equal  im-
portance. First  and  above  all,  there  must  be  a  stable,  effective  Vietnamese
Government  able  to  conduct  a  successful  campaign  against  the  Viet  Cong
even  if  the  aid  from  North  Vietnam  for  the  Viet  Cong  should  end.  It  was
the  view  that,  while  the  elimination  of  North  Vietnam  intervention  would
raise  morale  on  our  side  and  make  it  easier  for  the  Government  of  Viet-
nam to  function,  it  would  not  in  itself  bring  an  end  to  Viet  Cong  insur-
gency. It  would  rather  be  an  important  contributory  factor  to  the  creation
of  conditions  favoring  a  successful  campaign  against  the  Viet  Cong  within
South  Vietnam.

Thus,  since  action  against  North  Vietnam  would  only  be  contributory
and  not  central  to  winning  the  war  against  the  Viet  Cong,  it  would  not  be
prudent  to  incur  the  risks  which  are  inherent  in  an  expansion  of  hostilities
until  there  were  a  government  in  Saigon  capable  of  handling  the  serious
problems  inevitably  involved  in  such  an  expansion,  and  capable  of  promptly
and  fully  exploiting  the  favorable  effects  which  may  be  anticipated  if  we
are  successful  in  terminating  the  support  and  direction  of  the  Viet  Cong
by  North  Vietnam.

Then  it  went  to  the  point:

...  In  the  view  of  the  United  States,  there  is  a  certain  minimum  condi-
tion to  be  brought  about  in  South  Vietnam  before  new  measures  against
North  Vietnam  would  be  either  justified  or  practicable.  At  the  minimum,
the  Government  in  Saigon  should  be  able  to  speak  for  and  to  its  people
who  will  need  special  guidance  and  leadership  throughout  the  coming
critical  period.  The  Government  should  be  capable  of  maintaining  law
and  order  in  the  principal  centers  of  population,  assuring  their  effective
execution  by  military  and  police  forces  completely  responsive  to  its
authority.  The  Government  must  have  at  its  disposal  means  to  cope


344 Gravel  Edition/fhe  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

promptly  and  effectively  with  enemy  reactions  which  must  be  expected
to  result  from  any  change  in  the  pattern  of  our  operations.

To  bring  about  this  condition  will  require  a  demonstration  of  far
greater  national  unity  against  the  Communist  enemy  at  this  critical  time
than  exists  at  present.  It  is  a  matter  of  greatest  difficulty  for  the  United
States  Government  to  require  great  sacrifices  by  American  citizens  on
behalf  of  South  Vietnam  when  reports  from  Saigon  repeatedly  give  evi-
dence of  heedless  self-interest  and  shortsightedness  among  so  many  major
political  groups.

As  a  quid  pro  quo,  it  said:

.  .  .  While  the  Government  of  Vietnam  is  making  progress  toward
achieving  the  goals  set  forth  above,  the  United  States  Government  would
be  willing  to  strike  harder  at  infiltration  routes  in  Laos  and  at  sea.  With
respect  to  Laos,  the  United  States  Government  is  prepared,  in  conjunction
with  the  Royal  Laos  Government,  to  add  United  States  air  power  as
needed  to  restrict  the  use  of  Laotian  territory  as  a  route  of  infiltration  into
South  Vietnam.  With  respect  to  the  sea,  the  United  States  Government
would  favor  an  intensification  of  those  covert  maritime  operations  which
have  proved  their  usefulness  in  harassing  the  enemy.  The  United  States
would  regard  the  combination  of  these  operations  in  Laos  and  at  sea  as
constituting  Phase  I  of  a  measured  increase  of  military  pressures  directed
toward  reducing  infiltration  and  warning  the  Government  of  North  Viet-
nam of  the  risks  it  is  running.

...  If  the  Government  of  Vietnam  is  able  to  demonstrate  its  effective-
ness and  capability  of  achieving  the  minimum  conditions  set  forth  above,
the  United  States  Government  is  prepared  to  consider  a  program  of  direct
military  pressure  on  North  Vietnam  as  Phase  II  .  .  .

As  contemplated  by  the  United  States  Government,  Phase  II  would,
in  general  terms,  constitute  a  series  of  air  attacks  on  North  Vietnam  pro-
gressively mounting  in  scope  and  intensity  for  the  purpose  of  convincing
the  leaders  of  North  Vietnam  that  it  is  to  their  interest  to  cease  aid  to  the
Viet  Cong  and  respect  the  independence  and  security  of  South  Viet-
nam .  .  .

In  short,  the  USG  offered  to  add  some  of  its  aircraft  immediately  to  the  Viet-
namese ones  already  bombing  the  Laotian  corridor,  in  exchange  for  a  GVN
promise  of  a  shift  to  more  energy  and  effectiveness;  then  when  such  energy
and  effectiveness  actually  became  visible,  the  USG  promised,  the  USG  would
begin  bombing  North  Vietnam.

The  program  included  the  following  areas  in  which  progress  would  aid  pacifi-
cation and  would  measure  the  GVN's  effectiveness:

I.  and  2.  Increasing  RVNAF,  paramilitary,  and  police  to  and  above  ex-
isting authorized  strengths.

3.  Better  performance  by  civilian  and  military  officials.

4.  Speeding  up  budgetary  procedures  and  spending  in  the  provinces.

5.  Strengthening  the  province  chiefs.

6.  Strengthening  police  powers.

7.  More  vigor  in  Hop  Tac.

8.  After  a  delay,  "review  cases  of  political  prisoners  from  previous  re-
gimes."


US-GVN  Relations  345


To  leave  no  doubt  about  what  it  wanted,  the  program  said:

Better  performance  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war  against  the  Viet  Cong
needs  to  be  accompanied  by  actions  to  convince  the  people  of  the  inter-
est of  their  government  in  their  well-being.  Better  performance  in  itself
is  perhaps  the  most  convincing  evidence  but  can  be  supplemented  by
such  actions  as  frequent  visits  by  officials  and  ranking  military  officers  to
the  provinces  for  personal  orientation  and  "trouble  shooting."  The  availa-
ble information  media  offer  a  channel  of  communication  with  the  people
which  could  be  strengthened  and  more  efficiently  employed.  The  physical
appearance  of  the  cities,  particularly  of  Saigon,  shows  a  let-down  in  civic
pride  which,  if  corrected,  would  convey  a  message  of  governmental  ef-
fectiveness to  their  inhabitants.  Similarly,  in  the  country  an  expanded
rural  development  program  could  carry  the  government's  presence  into
every  reasonably  secure  village  and  hamlet.

If  governmental  performance  and  popular  appeal  are  significantly  im-
proved, there  will  be  little  difficulty  in  establishing  confidence  in  the  gov-
ernment. However,  this  confidence  should  be  expressed,  not  merely  im-
plied. It  is  particularly  important  that  the  military  leaders  continue  to  ex-
press public  confidence  in  the  government  and  the  firm  intention  to  uphold
it.  While  not  giving  an  impression  of  submitting  to  pressure,  the  government
might  explore  honorable  ways  of  conciliating  its  most  important  opponents
among  the  minority  groups.  The  United  States  Government  is  prepared  to
help  by  oral  statements  of  support  and  by  further  assistance  to  show  our
faith  in  the  future  of  South  Vietnam.

Taylor,  Westmoreland,  and  Johnson  met  Huong,  Deputy  Premier  Vien,  and
namese  group  politely  suggested  that  they  did  not  know  what  the  USG  meant
Khanh  on  December  7  to  present  them  with  the  new  U.S.  program.  The  Viet-
by  a  stable  effective  government  able  to  campaign  successfully  against  the  Viet
Cong,  and  able  to  speak  for  and  to  its  people.  Moreover,  they  noted  that  the
U.S.  program  said  nothing  about  Viet  Cong  use  of  Cambodia.  At  the  next
meeting,  on  December  9,  Taylor  gave  them  the  paper  "Actions  Designed  to
Strengthen  the  Government  of  Vietnam,"  covering  the  eight  areas  of  desired
progress  and  measures  of  GVN  effectiveness  listed  above.  The  Prime  Minister
replied  that  the  issue  of  political  prisoners  from  previous  regimes  was  a  very
delicate  matter;  Khanh  said  there  was  no  problem  about  military  support  of  the
existing  government.  Taylor  cabled  President  Johnson  that  the  USG  proposals:

have  been  received  with  an  understanding  reasonableness  in  the  light
of  the  current  situation  but  without  great  enthusiasm  since  they  neces-
sarily omit  some  of  the  more  dramatic  actions  which  the  Vietnamese  de-
sire.

The  only  decisions  reached  were  for  joint  study  and  consultation.  This  was  the
last  time  the  USG  tried  to  set  GVN  performance  preconditions  for  U.S.  force
use  and  deployments.  Its  effect,  if  any,  was  the  opposite  of  that  intended.

/.  THE  GOVERNMENTS  SUPPORT  VANISHES,  AND  TAYLOR  CON-
FRONTS THE  GENERALS

A  new  threat  of  crisis  boiled  up  immediately;  first,  the  leading  Buddhists  de-
clared their  opposition  to  the  government  and  went  on  a  forty-eight  hour  hun-
ger strike.  Huong  stood  fast,  but  then  the  Young  Turks  picked  a  fight  through


346 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

a  sudden  demand  that  the  HNC  dismiss  nine  generals  and  thirty  other  officers.
(These  included  some,  like  Minh  and  the  "Dalat"  generals  expelled  by  Khanh,
who  no  longer  had  jobs  but  still  held  their  rank  and  received  Army  pay.)  Tay-
lor backed  Huong  and  the  HNC  against  all  comers,  and  tried  to  get  Buddhists
and  others  to  support  them.  The  HNC  refused  to  retire  the  39  officers.  But  the
Young  Turks,  playing  for  Buddhist  support,  would  not  be  denied.  In  the  early
morning  hours  of  Sunday,  December  20,  they  arrested  twenty-two  or  more
officials  and  politicians,  including  several  members  of  the  HNC,  and  made
dozens  of  other  political  arrests.  They  also  created  an  "Armed  Forces  Council"
over  or  replacing  the  MRC,  to  consolidate  their  power.

Through  Huong  and  indirect  contacts,  Taylor  found  out  about  the  dissolu-
tion of  the  HNC  several  hours  before  Khanh  announced  it  at  a  press  confer-
ence; and  one  hour  before  the  conference  Khanh  spoke  to  Taylor  about  it.
Taylor  protested  in  the  strongest  terms,  but  without  effect;  Khanh  went  ahead
with  the  announcement.  Taylor  and  Johnson  also  met  with  the  Young  Turk
leaders,  Ky,  Thieu,  Thi,  and  Cang,  and  gave  them  a  stern  lecture,  speaking,  as
he  later  put  it,  "as  one  soldier  to  another."  As  recorded  just  afterward  by  the
U.S.  participants,  the  meeting  went  as  follows:

.  .  .  AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  Do  all  of  you  understand  English?
(Vietnamese  officers  indicated  they  did,  although  the  understanding  of
General  Thi  was  known  to  be  weak.)  I  told  you  all  clearly  at  General
Westmoreland's  dinner  we  Americans  were  tired  of  coups.  Apparently  I
wasted  my  words.  Maybe  this  is  because  something  is  wrong  with  my
French  because  you  evidently  didn't  understand.  I  made  it  clear  that  all
the  military  plans  which  I  know  you  would  like  to  carry  out  are  dependent
on  governmental  stability.  Now  you  have  made  a  real  mess.  We  cannot  carry
you  forever  if  you  do  things  like  this.  Who  speaks  for  this  group?  Do  you
have  a  spokesman?

GENERAL  KY:  I  am  not  the  spokesman  for  the  group  but  I  do  speak
English.  I  will  explain  why  the  Armed  Forces  took  this  action  last  night.

We  understand  English  very  well.  We  are  aware  of  our  responsibilities,
we  are  aware  of  the  sacrifices  of  our  people  over  twenty  years.  We  know
you  want  stability,  but  you  cannot  have  stability  until  you  have  unity  .  .  .
But  still  there  are  rumors  of  coups  and  doubts  among  groups.  We  think
these  rumors  come  from  the  HNC,  not  as  an  organization  but  from  some
of  its  members.  Both  military  and  civilian  leaders  regard  the  presence  of
these  people  in  the  HNC  as  divisive  of  the  Armed  Forces  due  to  their  in-
fluence.

Recently  the  Prime  Minister  showed  us  a  letter  he  had  received  from
the  Chairman  of  the  HNC.  This  letter  told  the  Prime  Minister  to  beware
of  the  military,  and  said  that  maybe  the  military  would  want  to  come  back
to  power.  Also  the  HNC  illegally  sought  to  block  the  retirement  of  the
generals  that  the  Armed  Forces  Council  unanimously  recommended  be
retired  in  order  to  improve  unitv  in  the  Armed  Forces.

GENERAL  THIEU:  The  HNC  cannot  be  bosses  because  of  the  Con-
stitution. Its  members  must  pro\  e  that  they  want  to  fight.

GENERAL  KY:  It  looks  as  though  'the  HNC  does  not  want  unity.  It
does  not  want  to  fifjht  the  Communists.

It  has  been  rumored  that  our  action  of  last  night  was  an  intrigue  of
Khanh  against  Minh,  who  must  be  retired.  Why  do  we  seek  to  retire  these
generals?  Because  they  had  their  chance  and  did  badly  .  .  .

Yesterday  we  met,  twenty  of  us,  from  1430  to  2030.  We  reached  agree-


US-GVN  Relations  347


ment  that  we  must  take  some  action.  We  decided  to  arrest  the  bad  mem-
bers of  the  HNC,  bad  politicians,  bad  student  leaders,  and  the  leaders  of
the  Committee  of  National  Salvation,  which  is  a  Communist  organization.
We  must  put  the  trouble-making  organizations  out  of  action  and  ask  the
Prime  Minister  and  the  Chief  of  State  to  stay  in  office.

After  we  explain  to  the  people  why  we  did  this  at  a  press  conference,
we  would  like  to  return  to  our  fighting  units.  We  have  no  political  ambi-
tions. We  seek  strong,  unified,  and  stable  Armed  Forces  to  support  the
struggle  and  a  stable  government.  Chief  of  State  Suu  agrees  with  us.  Gen-
eral Khanh  saw  Huong  who  also  agreed.

We  did  what  we  thought  was  good  for  this  country;  we  tried  to  have  a
civilian  government  clean  house.  If  we  have  achieved  it,  fine.  We  are  now
ready  to  go  back  to  our  units.

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  I  respect  the  sincerity  of  you  gentlemen.
Now  I  would  like  to  talk  to  you  about  the  consequences  of  what  you  have
done.  But  first,  would  any  of  the  other  officers  wish  to  speak?

ADMIRAL  CANG:  It  seems  that  we  are  being  treated  as  though  we
were  guilty.  What  we  did  was  good  and  we  did  it  only  for  the  good  of  the
country.

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  Now  let  me  tell  you  how  I  feel  about  it,
what  I  think  the  consequences  are:  first  of  all,  this  is  a  military  coup  that
has  destroyed  the  government-making  process  that,  to  the  admiration  of
the  whole  world,  was  set  up  last  fall  largely  through  the  statesman-like  acts
of  the  Armed  Forces.

You  cannot  go  back  to  your  units,  General  Ky.  You  military  are  now
back  in  power.  You  are  up  to  your  necks  in  politics.

Your  statement  makes  it  clear  that  you  have  constituted  yourselves
again  substantially  as  a  Military  Revolutionary  Committee.  The  dissolu-
tion of  the  HNC  was  totally  illegal.  Your  decree  recognized  the  Chief  of
State  and  the  Huong  Government  but  this  recognition  is  something  that
you  could  withdraw.  This  will  be  interpreted  as  a  return  of  the  military  to
power  .  .  .

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  Who  commands  the  Armed  Forces?  Gen-
eral Khanh?

GENERAL  KY:  Yes,  sir  .  .  .

GENERAL  THIEU:  In  spite  of  what  you  say,  it  should  be  noted  that
the  Vietnamese  Commander-in-Chief  is  in  a  special  situation.  He  there-
fore needs  advisors.  We  do  not  want  to  force  General  Khanh;  we  advise
him.  We  will  do  what  he  orders  .  .  .

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  Would  your  officers  be  willing  to  come
into  a  government  if  called  upon  to  do  so  by  Huong?  I  have  been  impressed
by  the  high  quality  of  many  Vietnamese  officers.  I  am  sure  that  many  of
the  most  able  men  in  this  country  are  in  uniform.  Last  fall  when  the  HNC
and  Huong  Government  was  being  formed,  I  suggested  to  General  Khanh
there  should  be  some  military  participation,  but  my  suggestions  were  not
accepted.  It  would  therefore  be  natural  for  some  of  them  now  to  be  called
upon  to  serve  in  the  government.  Would  you  be  willing  to  do  so?  .  .  .

GENERAL  KY:  Nonetheless,  I  would  object  to  the  idea  of  the  military
going  back  into  the  government  right  away.  People  will  say  it  is  a  military
coup.

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR  and  AMBASSADOR  JOHNSON:  (To-
gether) People  will  say  it  anyway.  .  .  .

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  You  have  destroyed  the  Charter.  The  Chief


348 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

of  State  will  still  have  to  prepare  for  elections.  Nobody  believes  that  the
Chief  of  State  has  either  the  power  or  the  ability  to  do  this  without  the
HNC  or  some  other  advisory  body.  If  I  were  the  Prime  Minister,  I  would
simply  overlook  the  destruction  of  the  HNC.  But  we  are  preserving  the
HNC  itself.  You  need  a  legislative  branch  and  you  need  this  particular
step  in  the  formation  of  a  government  with  National  Assembly  .  .  .

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  It  should  be  noted  that  Prime  Minister
Huong  has  not  accepted  the  dissolution  of  the  HNC  .  .  .

GENERAL  THIEU:  What  kind  of  concession  does  Huong  want  from
us?

Ambassador  Taylor  again  noted  the  need  for  the  HNC  function.

GENERAL  KY:  Perhaps  it  is  better  if  we  now  let  General  Khanh  and
Prime  Minister  Huong  talk.

GENERAL  THIEU:  After  all,  we  did  not  arrest  all  the  members  of
the  HNC.  Of  nine  members  we  detained  only  five.  These  people  are  not
under  arrest.  They  are  simply  under  controlled  residence  .  .  .

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  Our  problem  now,  gentlemen,  is  to  or-
ganize our  work  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  For  one  thing,  the  government
will  have  to  issue  a  communique.

GENERAL  THIEU:  We  will  still  have  a  press  conference  this  after-
noon but  only  to  say  why  we  acted  as  we  did.

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  I  have  real  troubles  on  the  U.S.  side.  I
don't  know  whether  we  will  continue  to  support  you  after  this.  Why  don't
you  tell  your  friends  before  you  act?  I  regret  the  need  for  my  blunt  talk
today  but  we  have  lots  at  stake  .  .  .

AMBASSADOR  TAYLOR:  And  was  it  really  all  that  necessary  to
carry  out  the  arrests  that  very  night?  Couldn't  this  have  been  put  off  a  day
or  two?  .  .  .

In  taking  a  friendly  leave.  Ambassador  Taylor  said:  You  people  have
broken  a  lot  of  dishes  and  now  we  have  to  see  how  we  can  straighten  out
this  mess.

Amid  the  hustle  and  bustle  of  meetings  between  MACV  officers,  Embassy  offi-
cials, and  their  Vietnamese  counterparts,  Khanh  and  the  Young  Turks,  stood
fast.

On  the  next  day,  December  21,  Taylor  suggested  to  Khanh  that  he  resign
and  leave  the  country.  This  meeting  brought  to  a  head  the  Khanh-Taylor  per-
sonal feud  which  then  became  public  and  continued  for  the  balance  of  Khanh's
tenure.  Taylor's  report  of  the  meeting  said  his  suggestion  that  Khanh  leave  the
country  came  in  response  to  Khanh's  asking  whether  he  should  leave.  But  Khanh
told  a  different  story  to  the  AFC.  who  were  still  smarting  from  the  sharp  inter-
change that  Ky,  Thieu,  Thi  and  Cang  had  had  with  Taylor.  Immediately  they
accused  Taylor  of  interfering  in  GVN  affairs.  Commenting  afterward,  he  said:

If  the  military  get  away  with  this  irresponsible  intervention  in  govern-
ment and  with  flaunting  proclaimed  U.S.  policy,  there  will  be  no  living
with  them  in  the  future.

State  supported  Taylor  in  taking  a  strong  line  to  bring  the  situation  under  con-
trol. It  approved  a  Westmoreland  proposal,  sent  by  militarv  channels  to  State,
that  Huong  get  the  credit  for  dismissing  Khanh  and  that  MACV  should  bargain


US-GVN  Relations  349


with  the  Armed  Forces  Council  to  offer  a  quid  pro  quo  for  reinstating  the  HNC.
State  spelled  out  the  quid  pro  quo  in  detail :

In  support  of  your  efforts  persuade  military  to  at  least  partially  undo
damage  [Sunday's]  actions,  we  have  also  been  considering  possible  lev-
erage we  might  apply  in  event  you  conclude  it  was  necessary.

If  dispute  continues  unresolved,  most  obvious  action  might  be  with-
holding approval  any  pending  U.S.  assistance  actions  and  letting  this  be-
come known.  You  are  in  best  position  to  evaluate  whether  these  would
impress  generals  or  conversely  hurt  Huong's  position.  In  addition,  follow-
ing steps  aimed  more  specifically  at  military  have  occurred  to  us:

1.  Suspend  operation  Barrel  Roll — not  certain  it  would  affect  generals
— might  have  wrong  impact  on  Hanoi — obviously  generals  couldn't  be
told  because  that  would  imply  commitment  to  resume  if  they  behave.

2.  Instruct  all  or  selected  Corps  or  division  advisors  make  known  our
dissatisfaction,  perhaps  suspending  for  time  being  further  contacts  with
counterparts.

3.  Stand  down  FARMGATE.

4.  Suspend  logistical  airlift  where  critical  supply  shortages  do  not  exist.

On  balance,  we  inclined  believe  none  except  possibly  1st  and  2nd  steps
would  produce  desired  results.  Obviously  any  would  hamper  over-all  war
effort,  especially  if  continued  for  very  long.

We  have  also  considered  and  rejected  possibility  of  cutting  essentials
POL  and  direct  military  supplies.  Similarly  we  do  not  favor  suspension  or
interruption  CIP,  since  it  would  primarily  affect  civilian  confidence  in
Huong  government.

Although  Khanh  talked  to  Taylor  about  travel  arrangements  for  himself  and
several  other  generals  on  the  22nd,  the  Young  Turks  had  their  backs  up  (or
were  convinced  they  could  do  what  they  pleased),  and  all  stood  fast.  Khanh
having  rallied  the  military  behind  him,  attacked  Taylor  for  his  undiplomatic
actions.  He  spoke  to  the  nation  attacking  communism  and  colonialism,  the  lat-
ter an  inference  to  the  domineering  position  of  Taylor.  In  a  message  to  the
President  on  the  22nd,  Taylor  commented:

Generals  acting  greatly  offended  by  my  disapproval  of  their  recent  ac-
tions privately  expressed  to  four  of  their  number  and  resent  our  efforts
to  strengthen  Huong  government  against  their  pressures.  One  unfortunate
effect  has  been  to  drive  them  closer  to  Khat^h  who  has  sensed  the  oppor-
tunity to  solidify  his  position.

He  feared  Khanh  would  air  the  quarrel  publicly.  Rusk  cabled  support:

I  wish  to  compliment  you  on  the  vigor  with  which  you  have  pursued
this  issue  of  unity  since  your  return  from  Washington.

But  Taylor  backed  off  from  the  sanctions  idea.  Possibly  still  hoping  that  Khanh
would  go,  he  said  there  was  no  need  for  action  but  that  the  option  should  be
kept  open.  In  particular,  he  saw  no  value  in  suspending  the  bombing  of  Laos.

Also  on  the  22nd,  while  talking  to  Taylor  of  leaving,  Khanh  met  with  the
Young  Turks  and  agreed  to  break  openly  with  Taylor  by  seeking  his  recall.
State  continued  to  back  a  tough  line  with  them,  and  rejected  Taylor's  suggestion


350 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

of  a  diversion  in  the  form  of  a  reprisal  bombing  on  North  Vietnam  for  the
Brinks  BOQ  bombing  early  in  the  week.

Hanoi  would  hardly  read  into  it  any  strong  or  continuing  signal  in  view
overall  confusion  in  Saigon  .  .  .  There  might  be  suspicion,  at  least  inter-
nationally, that  BOQ  bombing  was  not  in  fact  done  by  VC."

Taylor  urged  Huong  to  insist  on  restoration  of  the  HNC  and  declare  the  gen-
erals insubordinate  if  they  refused.  Khanh  and  the  generals  attacked  Taylor
publicly  on  December  23,  as  Taylor  had  feared,  charging  him  with  insulting
them  and  abusing  his  power.  Then  on  December  24,  Taylor  responded  in  kind,
telling  the  press  his  version  of  the  December  20  confrontation,  and  suggesting
that  Khanh  had  outstayed  his  usefulness.

Khanh  then  threatened  privately  to  declare  Taylor  persona  non  grata:  the
Embassy  replied  that  asking  Taylor  to  leave  was  equivalent  to  asking  the  U.S.
to  leave.  The  implied  threat  of  U.S.  withdrawal  was  enough  to  stop  the  Khanh
move,  if  he  was  ever  serious  about  it.  Taylor  then  suggested  that  Alex  Johnson
and  the  generals  should  form  an  ad  hoc  joint  arbitration  committee  to  resolve
the  differences  between  Khanh  and  Taylor.  The  idea  was  evidently  novel  enough
to  distract  Khanh  and  the  generals  or  to  satisfy  their  dignity;  it  disconnected
the  buttons  that  had  been  pushed  when  Khanh  and  Taylor  each  said  he  wanted
the  other  to  leave  the  country.  The  ad  hoc  committee  never  met,  but  the  pro-
posal generated  calm  discussion  between  the  Embassy  and  the  generals  for  sev-
eral days  and  allowed  them  to  cool  off  gracefully.

However,  the  basic  issue  of  the  future  of  the  HNC  and  of  civilian  govern-
ment remained  unresolved.  Huong  consulted  with  Taylor  continuously,  and
followed  some  of  his  advice,  but  stopped  short  of  taking  the  strong  public
stance  he  urged.  On  December  31,  Taylor  said  to  Washington  that  the  USG
might  have  to  accept  a  military  government  in  Saigon,  though  he  said  that
Khanh  must  not  head  it.  He  said  that  plans  for  "Phase  11"  (bombing  the  North)
should  take  into  account  various  possibilities  within  GVN.  Although  Taylor  had
earlier  favored  the  military's  return  to  power,  he  objected  to  the  means  and  to
the  timing  of  their  present  action.

/. ONGOING  PROGRAMS,  SECOND  HALF  1964

While  the  political  crises  of  Ambassador  Taylor's  first  six  months  in  Saigon
built  up  to  comic  opera  proportions,  MACV  and  the  country  team  struggled
valiantly  to  conduct  business  as  usual.

In  March,  MACV  J-1  had  completed  a  comprehensive  review  of  ARVN  per-
sonnel policies,  the  Murdav  Report,  and  forwarded  it  to  JGS  for  action.  A  tally
at  the  end  of  the  year  indicated  progress  on  only  16  of  28  specific  recommenda-
tions. One  that  received  no  response  was  the  suggestion  that  the  officer  appoint-
ment base  be  expanded.  In  May,  the  Secretarv  of  Defense  had  ordered
COMUSMACV  to  develop,  jointly  with  GVN,  procedures  for  programming
pacification  operations  with  time-phased  requirements  for  manpower  and  money.
A  joint,  combined  (MACV-USOM-GVN)  committee  was  established.  It  had
completed  a  programming  document  in  June.  After  approval  by  RVNAF  and
MACV,  joint  US-GVN  teams  visited  each  Corps  to  acquaint  selected  personnel
with  the  documents.  As  of  August  31,  fewer  than  half  the  provinces  had  sub-
mitted pacification  plans:  so  the  teams  again  visited  each  province  to  reinstruct
province  chiefs  and  sector  advisors.  All  province  reports  were  finally  received  by
October.  In  July,  the  first  Senior  Advisors  Monthly  Report  (SAME)  was  sub-


US-GVN  Relations  351


mitted.  These  put  MACV  in  a  better  position  to  advise,  and  in  October  it  sent  a
detailed  letter  of  deficiencies  to  CINCRVNAF.

A  joint  combat  effectiveness  inspection  team  started  its  work,  and  at  year's
end  the  ARVN  IG  faced  the  question  whether  the  refresher  course  at  the  Na-
tional Training  Center  was  needed  for  two  battalions  declared  ineffective
by  COMUSMACV.  In  October,  U.S.  advisors  to  RVNAF  units  submitted  the
first  semi-annual  report  of  their  personal  observations  of  the  treatment  and  use
of  MAP  equipment.  Deficiencies  were  noted  in  a  letter  to  JGS.  In  one  instance
it  was  found  that  ordnance  vans  were  being  converted  into  rolling  quarters  for
generals.  After  a  threat  to  withdraw  the  vans,  the  fault  was  corrected  and  the
vans  were  returned  to  their  authorized  use.

On  October  5,  COMUSMACV  forwarded  to  the  Embassy  the  report  of  a
month-long  study  instigated  by  the  Ambassador  on  how  to  revital;ze  the  entire
civic  action  program.  It  recommended  that  a  USOM-USIS-MACV  study  group
develop  a  joint,  integrated  mechanism  to  guide  and  coordinate  civic  action.  The
groups'  recommendations  were  to  provide  a  basis  for  discussions  with  the  Viet-
namese on  how  best  to  channel  and  revitalize  the  combined  civic  action  effort.

On  the  subject  of  command  relationships,  ICS  looked  ahead  to  the  possible
deployment  of  U.S.  ground  forces  and  anticipated  operational  control  of  RVN
forces  in  combined  operations.  However,  that  idea  would  be  dropped  later.

Following  a  Taylor-Khanh  agreement  to  launch  *"Hop  Tac"'  on  October  1,
USOM  and  the  Vietnamese  NSC  met  on  September  25  to  discuss  pacification,
after  which  Taylor  commented :

In  general,  I  consider  the  meeting  was  satisfactory  continuation  of  our
bilateral  effort  and  that  top  priority  is  at  last  being  given  to  Hop  Tac  opera-
tion. Also  that  general  result  of  meeting  focused  attention  on  priority
problems.  The  pay-off  will  be  quality  of  follow-up.

State  suggested  decentralization  of  pacification  control  to  Corps  and  Province,
to  bypass  the  central  government;  USOM  disagreed.  MACV  contacted  all  senior
RVNAF  officers  and  found  them  taking  a  responsible  attitude  toward  con-
tinuing the  war  effort;  however,  MACV  noted  that  the  coup  leaders  had  talked
the  same  way  just  before  the  September  13  coup  attempt.  Therefore  MACV  was
candidly  sceptical.

In  response,  a  COMUSMACV  memorandum  of  November  14  entitled  ''As-
sumption by  US  of  Operational  Control  of  the  Pacification  Program  in  SVN,"
states  his  position  on  the  US  role  and  is  indicative  of  his  later  views  on  com-
bined command.  He  recognized  that  anv  plan  to  encourage  GVN  in  its  efforts
should  include  measures  for  developing  US  approved  plans,  as  well  as  means  for
controlling  money  and  people  during  execution  of  plans,  and  he  envisaged  an
arrangement  whereby  GVN  agencies  would  be  provided  complete  planning  guid-
ance. He  saw  a  danger  of  exerting  influence  over  GVN  which  might  be  interpreted
as  excessive  and  which  might  boomerang  on  US  interests.  Instead,  he  suggested,
"as  a  less  drastic  alternative,  the  Hop  Tac  idea  might  be  extended  to  each  of
the  other  three  tactical  zones."

As  discussed  more  fully  in  Re-emphasis  on  Pacification  1965-67,  Hop  Tac
(working  together)  was  formally  proposed  at  a  high  level  in  the  US  government
by  Ambassador  Lodge  on  his  way  home  in  July  1964.  Ambassador  Taylor  and
General  Westmoreland  implemented  the  idea.  It  tied  together  the  pacification
plans  of  the  seven  provinces  around  Saigon  to  insure  security  and  extend  gov-
ernment control.  A  headquarters  for  US"  Hop  Tac  elements  was  established  in


352 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Saigon.  The  Vietnamese  set  up  a  parallel  organization  primarily  to  satisfy  the
US,  for  their  group  had  no  authority  or  influence.

Meanwhile,  the  US/GVN  study  and  planning  activity  continued  and  gave  the
impression  of  accomplishment.  A  US  GVN  Survey  Team  reviewed  RVNAF
structure  requirements  for  supporting  the  GVN  National  Pacification  Plan.  After
visits  to  each  corps  headquarters,  it  proposed  two  alternative  force  increases,
one  to  achieve  progress  in  priority  one  Hop  Tac  areas,  the  other  to  attain  more
overall  progress.  On  November  24,  COMUSMACV  formally  requested  ap-
proval of  the  first  alternative  from  CINCPAC  while  at  the  same  time  the  US  Em-
bassy recommended  approval  to  the  State  Department.  Meetings  of  USOM  NSC
mentioned  above  (pp.  326  and  332)  continued  till  December  5,  after  which  the
crisis  of  the  Ambassador's  return  and  its  sequel  stopped  all  pretense  of  joint
pacification  planning  for  several  weeks.

But  the  Joint  General  Staff  accepted  all  MACV  suggestions  on  how  RVNAF
should  be  employed  to  improve  the  pacification  program  and  issued  its  imple-
menting Directive  A-B  139  as  a  Christmas  present  on  December  25,  1964,  in
mid-crisis.

The  USMACV  staff  reviewed  the  RVN  Defense  Budget  for  1965  and  US  Mis-
sion approval  was  received  in  late  1964.  However,  on  order  of  the  Ambassador,
due  to  the  political  crisis,  MACV  withheld  the  budget  from  GVN  until  January
13,  1965.

K. JANUARY,  1965:  PRELUDE  TO  THE  BOMBING

The  first  week  of  January  was  filled  with  comings  and  goings  with  the  issue
of  the  HNC's  dissolution  still  unresolved.  The  Embassy  supported  Huong  pub-
licly and  privately,  but  stopped  short  of  threatening  U.S.  withdrawal  and  ad-
mitted indirectly  to  Huong  that  the  U.S.  might  be  forced  to  accept  military  gov-
ernment. Then  on  January  7,  the  generals  backed  off  slightly  and  reached  a
compromise  solution,  which  they  announced  January  9  amid  rumors  of  a  mil-
itary takeover.  The  Armed  Forces  Council  and  Khanh  agreed  to  release  the
HNC  prisoners  and  to  continue  backing  civilian  government,  referring  to  their
August  promises;  the  civilian  GVN  would  convene  a  new  civilian  group  to
legislate  and  write  a  new  constitution,  preparatory  to  Assembly  elections.  Tay-
lor saw  the  statement  before  its  release,  and  accepted  it  as  the  best  available  com-
promise. It  was  followed  by  a  statement  agreed  on  January  11  to  patch  up
US/GVN  relations,  at  which  time  Khanh  agreed  also  to  put  several  of  the
Young  Turks  in  the  cabinet.  The  crisis  seemed  to  be  over.

However,  the  end  was  not  yet  in  sight.  The  Buddhists  started  demonstrating
and  demanding  that  Huong  resign.  On  Januarv  14,  Taylor  reacted  to  Khanh's
proposals  on  the  new  cabinet  by  suggesting  that  he  was  moving  with  unseemly
haste.  Taylor  received  a  complete  cabinet  list  on  January  18,  and  Khanh  con-
ferred with  Westmoreland  on  the  effects  of  cabinet  roles  for  the  generals  on  the
19th.  Cabinet  installation  was  scheduled  for  the  19th.  However,  at  almost  the
last  minute  Khanh  asked  for  postponement  of  the  cabinet  installation,  saying
afterward  that  Huong  had  defaulted  on  promises  to  change  some  of  the  civilian
ministers.  Leading  Buddhists  went  on  another  hunger  strike,  and  a  new  crisis
built  up;  in  Hue  the  USIS  building  was  sacked  and  burned,  and  the  USIS  build-
ing in  Saigcn  was  sacked.  On  the  24th,  they  demanded  that  all  Vietnamese
businessmen,  night  clubs,  etc.,  refuse  to  sell  to  Americans,  and  a  majority  ap-
parentlv  complied.  On  the  25th,  Khanh,  having  allied  himself  with  the  Budd-
hists, told  Deputy  Ambassador  Johnson  that  Huong  and  President  Suu  wanted


US-GVN  Relations  353


to  resign  and  let  the  military  take  over,  as  demanded  by  the  Buddhists.  Johnson
replied  that  the  Buddhists  must  not  be  allowed  to  veto  the  government,  and  that
the  military  must  not  take  over.

Then  on  January  27,  the  AFC  voted  no  confidence  in  the  Suu-Huong  gov-
ernment and  directed  Khanh  to  take  charge  and  resolve  the  crisis.  Taylor's
comments  to  State  made  it  clear  that  events  were  entirely  out  of  his  control;
again  he  objected  to  the  means  and  to  the  timing  of  the  military  return  to  power.
When  he  raised  the  possibility  of  non-recognition.  State  authorized  him  to  use
his  own  judgment  but  advised  him  to  play  along  with  Khanh  for  the  time  being,
while  scouting  around  for  fresh  options.  Although  Suu  was  technically  ousted,  he
stayed  on  at  Khanh's  request;  and  Oanh  again  became  acting  Prime  Minister.

In  the  midst  of  the  crisis  Westmoreland  obtained  his  first  authority  to  use
U.S.  forces  for  combat  within  South  Vietnam.  Arguing  that  the  VC  might  go  for
a  spectacular  victory  during  the  disorders,  he  asked  for  and  received  authority
to  use  U.S.  jet  aircraft  in  a  strike  role  in  emergencies,  subject  to  Embassy  ap-
proval in  each  instance.  This  move  finessed  all  previous  ideas  of  using  potential
U.S.  force  commitments  as  leverage  to  bring  the  GVN  into  line;  but  these  ideas
had  no  doubt  been  abandoned  anyhow.

III. THE  U.S.  ENTERS  THE  WAR:  FLAMING  DART  TO  THE
STEADY  INFLUX  OF  U.S.  FORCES,  JUNE,  1965


A. 'PHASE  ir  BEGINS  AND  COUPS  CONTINUE,
FEBRUARY,  1965

While  the  Embassy  stood  by  doing  what  little  it  could  to  undercut  Khanh's
personal  position,  VC  attacks  on  the  American  advisors'  barracks  at  Pleiku,  and
on  three  other  installations,  provided  the  pretext  for  US/VNAF  bombing  at-
tacks on  infiltration  staging  areas  in  the  southernmost  province  of  North  Viet-
nam, February  7-8.  Acting  Prime  Minister  Oanh  spoke  for  GVN  during  the
coordination  of  the  attacks  and  announcements.  (The  raids  were  called  reprisals,
as  was  the  subsequent  raid  on  February  12  following  the  attacks  on  the
American  barracks  at  Quihon.)  U.S.  dependents  were  ordered  to  leave  SVN.

McGeorge  Bundy  was  in  town,  and  in  keeping  with  the  going  tactics,  stayed
at  arms  length  from  Khanh,  though  meeting  him  and  the  generals  socially.  As
an  aside  at  this  point,  Taylor  gave  one  last  blow  to  the  idea  that  cutting  off  the
flow  of  help  from  the  North  would  turn  the  tide  of  the  war  against  the  VC:  He
remarked  that  perhaps  the  smell  of  victory  within  six  months  would  now  lead
Khanh  to  take  over  again.

On  his  return  to  Washington,  McGeorge  Bundy  wrote  a  Memorandum  to  the
President,  dated  February  7,  1965.  In  evaluating  the  U.S.  team  and  policy,  he
stated,  "U.S.  mission  is  composed  of  outstanding  men  and  U.S.  policy  within
Vietnam  is  mainly  right  and  well  directed."  However,  he  proceeded  to  point  out
two  important  differences  between  his  current  assessment  and  that  of  the  mission.
Taylor  had  concluded  that:  (1)  the  Khanh  government  was  impossible  to  work
with,  and  (2)  the  Buddhists  (Khanh's  ally  in  the  recent  struggle)  must  be  con-
fronted and  faced  down,  using  force  if  necessary.  Bundy  disagreed  on  both
points,  stating  that  Khanh  was  still  the  best  hope  in  sight  in  terms  of  pursuing
the  fight  against  the  communists  and  that  the  Buddhists  should  be  accommodated
and  incorporated  rather  than  confronted.

With  respect  to  the  scheduled  reprisal  actions,  he  stated,  "For  immediate  pur-


354 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

poses,  and  especially  for  the  initiation  of  reprisal  policy,  we  believe  the  govern-
ment need  by  no  stronger  than  it  is  today  with  General  Khanh  as  the  focus  of  :'
a  raw  power,  while  a  weak  caretaker  government  goes  through  the  motions.
Such  a  government  can  execute  military  decisions  and  it  can  give  formal  political
support  to  joint  US-GVN  policy.  That  is  about  all  it  can  do/'  He  further  stated
that  reprisal  actions  themselves  should  produce  a  favorable  reaction  which  would  ('
provide  an  opportunity  for  increased  U.S.  influence  in  pressing  for  a  more  effective
government.  f

He  acknowledged  the  latent  anti-American  sentiments  in  the  country  and  their
potential  explosiveness,  as  had  been  evidenced  in  Hue  the  preceding  week.  He  ;
noted  that  these  feelings  limited  the  pressure  that  the  U.S.  could  bring  to  bear
on  ambitious  forces  like  Khanh  and  the  Buddhists.

On  February  9,  Taylor  again  firmly  recommended  that  the  program  of  con-
tinuous graduated  attacks  on  North  Vietnam  should  begin.  Nothing  but  political
turmoil  had  followed  his  early-December  attempt  to  induce  the  GVN  to  do
better  by  promising  these  attacks  as  a  quid  pro  quo.  Now  he  disregarded  this
idea,  and  spoke  only  of  the  hope  that  the  attacks  would  convince  North  Viet-  •
nam  to  abide  by  the  Geneva  Accords  of  1954  and  1962,  and  would  unify  and  I
encourage  the  South  Vietnamese.  On  February  13,  State  cabled  authority  to
begin  the  plan  of  graduated  strikes  with  Vietnamese  participation.  It  directed
Taylor  to  get  GVN  approval  and  to  get  their  agreement  to  appear  at  the  UN  if
that  should  prove  necessary;  the  condition  of  stopping  the  bombing  would  be  i
the  halting  of  aid  by  North  Vietnam  to  the  VC.

State's  guidance  to  Taylor  on  political  matters  was  that  the  U.S.  hand  should  I
not  be  too  obvious  in  the  government-shuffling  outcome  and  that  the  power  of  i
the  Buddhists  and  of  the  military  must  be  reflected  in  the  new  government
being  formed.  After  two  political  hopefuls  failed  to  round  up  enough  support,
Quat  formed  a  cabinet  starting  February  16.  The  AFC  chose  to  keep  Suu  as
Chief  of  State  and  appointed  a  National  Legislative  Council  of  twenty  members
balanced  to  represent  all  interests  including  the  military.  The  Buddhists  quietly  \
acquiesced  in  the  new  government,  installed  just  in  time  to  be  greeted  by  a  coup  g|
attempt.

On  February  19,  a  new  coup  group  (consisting  of  Thao  and  Phat  among  i
other  neo-Diem  proponents)  seized  most  of  Saigon,  Tan  Son  Nhut  airfield,  and  j|
the  radio  station.  In  this  instance,  as  in  September,  1964,  MACV  had  to  inter-  1
vene  to  stop  Ky's  threat  of  VNAF  bombing;  this  time  it  would  have  been  the  i
airfield,  with  several  thousand  Americans  in  the  area.  By  midnight  the  leading  i
members  of  the  AFC  had  rallied  forces  and  faced  down  the  coup  group;  and  the
next  day  they  voted  Khanh  out.  On  February  24,  Khanh  left  the  country;  the  $i
Embassy  and  Saigon  setded  back  in  relief.  The  bombing  phase  of  graduated  !'
pressures  on  the  North  (Rolling  Thunder)  began,  and  the  decision  to  land
Marines  at  Danang  was  in  the  works.  Taylor  now  opposed  the  introduction  of  ■ !
U.S.  combat  forces  in  SVN — except  for  base  security.  His  acquiescence  in  the  ].\
Marine  deployment  to  Danang  was  in  large  part  due  to  Westmoreland's  strong  ^
recommendation  to  do  so.  I


B.  THE  CONTINUING  CIVILIAN  INTERREGNUM  AND  FIRST  U.S.
GROUND  FORCES,  MARCH-MAY,  1965


For  several  weeks  an  unaccustomed  calm  settled  over  US/GVN  relations.
The  USG  white  paper  on  Vietnam  issued  February  28  without  prior  clearance
with  GVN  caused  no  visible  upset.  The  proposal  to  land  the  first  two  BLT's  of


US-GVN  Relations  355


Marines  received  prompt  approval  in  an  amicable  atmopshere  in  the  first  few
days  of  March,  and  the  III  MEF  became  the  III  MAF  without  fanfare.  An
abortive  Buddhist  "peace"  movement  died  away,  and  religious  groups  generally
laid  low.

Following  a  State  message  expressing  renewed  concern,  the  USOM  resumed
meetings  with  the  Vietnamese  Internal  Security  Council  (an  enlargement  of  its
old  NSC)  on  February  27  to  discuss  pacification.

It  was  agreed  that  both  sides  would  prepare  joint  proposals  for
accelerating  pacification  and  for  solving  manpower  problems  and  go  for-
ward together  in  program  for  effective  execution  of  agreed  programs.

At  a  March  13  meeting,  General  Thang  gave  a  "pessimistic  but  realistic"  account
of  Binh  Dinh  Province,  and  Quat  said  measures  would  be  taken  to  prevent  the
situation  from  spreading.  The  USG  and  GVN  reverted  to  the  pattern  of  a  year
earlier  of  urging  and  advice  politely  received.

Throughout  early  1965,  it  was  evident  that  Pacification  plans  were  failing.
Even  Hop  Tac  was  at  a  standstill.  When  a  stop  gap  allocation  of  3  mil-
lion piasters  per  province  was  made,  pending  release  of  regular  funds,  province
chiefs  were  reluctant  to  spend  the  funds.  They  wanted  specific  authority  and
direction  from  higher  authorities.

Planning  continued  unabated  between  MACV  and  GVN.  Development  of  a
revised  budget  began  on  March  6,  1965,  when  guidelines  for  budget  prepara-
tion were  furnished  the  RVN  Ministry  of  Defense.  The  proposed  revision  was
duly  received  from  RVN.

On  March  24,  Ambassador  Taylor  formulated  a  41 -point  program  for
stability  and  pacification  in  preparation  for  a  trip  to  Washington.  This  program,
without  any  hint  of  leverage  on  GVN,  in  fact  put  pacification  on  the
back  burner,  while  main  attention  focused  on  bombing  and  deployments.

In  April  1965,  General  "Little"  Minh,  Minister  of  Armed  Forces,  directed  I,
II,  and  IV  Corps  commanders  to  develop  Hop  Tac  plans  for  their  areas.  The
delay  between  the  COMUSMACV  memorandum  of  the  previous  December
that  recommended  the  extension  and  the  order  itself  is  not  explained,  but  in
May  the  Vietnamese  indicated  to  the  U.S.  Ambassador  their  dissatisfaction  with
the  Hop  Tac  program.  The  Vietnamese  wanted  to  make  Region  A  of  the  Hop
Tac  area  part  of  the  Capital  Military  Region  and  the  remaining  regions  part  of
the  III  Corps  Commander's  area  of  responsibility.  COMUSMACV  told  the
mission  council  that  the  Hop  Tac  organization  should  be  retained  for  the  fore-
seeable future  because  Hop  Tac  had  been  unique  in  providing  a  forum  for  mil-
itary and  civil  authorities  to  address  common  probl'mis.

Quiet  consultation  continued  on  the  evaluation  of  Vietnamese  counterparts
in  the  provinces,  on  Third  Country  Forces,  on  military  and  paramilitary  pay,
and  so  on.  Following  Taylor's  return  from  Washington  early  in  April,  he
presented  his  pacification  ideas  (now  having  the  stamp  of  President  Johnson's
approval),  and  discreetly  got  approval  for  the  deployment  of  the  third  of  the
Marine  BLT's.  Quat  discussed  the  military  leadership  frankly  with  Taylor  and
Westmoreland,  and  around  the  middle  of  April  started  considering  a  move  to
clip  their  wings.  On  May  5,  the  AFC  obligingly  dissolved  itself,  and  seemed  to
give  Quat  a  free  hand.

The  Honolulu  Conference  of  April  20,  which  rebuffed  the  idea  of  encadre-
ment  and  U.S.  takeover  (discussed  later),  approved  additional  deployments  and
U.S.  force  to  about  80,000  men  and  to  introduce  Korean  and  Australian  troops.


356 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

After  several  days  of  hesitation,  Quat  approved  the  increases.  Pacification,  under
the  new  name  "Rural  Construction,"  still  gave  no  cause  for  rejoicing;  and  GVN
resisted  Taylor's  proposal  to  install  some  civilians  as  province  chiefs.

Analysis  by  members  of  the  U.S.  mission  council  of  a  RVNAF  J-3  paper,
"The  Organization  and  Operations  of  the  Pacification  System,"  revealed  con-
siderable variance  between  U.S.  and  GVN  views  on:

( 1 )  The  role  of  the  corps  commander  in  pacification.

(2)  The  relationship  of  provinces  with  a  proposed  Bureau  for  Pacifica-
tion Affairs.

(3)  The  position  of  Minister  of  Interior  in  pacification.

MACV  forwarded  requirements  to  increase  the  number  of  subsector  advisory
teams  to  180,  of  which  33  in  particularly  remote  locations  would  be  filled
initially  by  Special  Forces  teams.  It  was  envisioned  that  in  case  of  escalation  by
the  VC,  these  teams  would  perform  appropriate  civil  affairs  functions,  provide
intelligence,  and  support  allied  forces  in  many  ways.  Should  the  VC  refrain  from
extensive  overt  action,  the  teams  would  push  vigorous  rural  construction.

In  the  last  half  of  May,  fresh  trouble  blew  up.  After  an  alleged  abortive  coup
attempt  on  May  20-21,  and  disorders  in  the  streets,  Quat  tried  to  reshuffle  his
cabinet,  without  first  clearing  it  with  Suu.  Suu  objected,  and  the  two  disagreed
on  who  had  the  right  to  decide;  such  a  misunderstanding  was  understandable,
in  view  of  the  lack  of  any  recognized  constitution  and  in  view  of  the  chaos  of
the  preceding  months.  The  crisis  simmered  past  the  end  of  May,  and  Taylor  cor-
T(  ctly  predicted  the  end  of  civilian  government,  with  evident  relief.

C. FIRST  MOVES  ON  COMMAND  AND  CONTROL,  MARCH
AND  APRIL,  1965

When  the  Marines  arrived  in  March,  the  control  measure  devised  for  the
employment  was  the  TAOR.  Under  the  overall  suzerainty  of  the  VN  Corps
Commander,  the  Marines  were  given  a  well  defined  geographical  area  in  which
U.S.  forces  exercised  command  authority  over  military  forces  and  for  which
the  U.S.  accepted  defensive  responsibility.

On  March  3,  Ambassador  Taylor  cabled  his  fears  that  GVN  would  "shuck
off  greater  responsibility  on  the  USG,"  and  the  same  day,  in  another  message,
he  said  he  had  no  idea  what  the  GVN  attitude  to  a  Marine  Landing  Force  might
be.

The  first  battalion  of  Marines  splashed  ashore  at  Danang  about  0900,  March
8.  The  next  day  a  second  battalion  came  in  by  air.

The  trip  of  Army  Chief  of  Staff  Johnson  to  Saigon  in  mid-March,  1965,  sig-
nalled the  beginning  of  consideration  and  planning  for  the  introduction
of  significant  numbers  of  ground  combat  forces.  General  Johnson  observed  in
closing  his  report:

In  order  for  the  USG  to  evaluate  his  (COMUSMACV's)  request
properly  when  submitted,  a  policy  determination  must  be  made  in  the  very
near  future  that  will  answer  the  question,  what  should  the  VN  be  ex-
pected to  do  for  themselves  and  how  much  more  the  U.S.  must  contribute
directly  to  the  security  of  VN.

Secretary  McNamara  answered  on  the  margin  of  his  copy  of  the  report,  "Policy
is:  Anything  that  will  strengthen  the  position  of  the  GVN  will  be  sent."


US-GVN  Relations  357


On  March  8,  Taylor  talked  with  Prime  Minister  Quat  about  his  concept  of
joint  command,  a  matter  which  had  been  raised  with  General  Johnson  on  the
occasion  of  his  visit  March  6  (EmbTel  2877).  Taylor  found  Quat's  ideas  very
hazy,  but:

his  purpose  was  very  clear.  He  hopes  by  some  joint  command  device  to
bring  his  maverick  generals  under  the  steadying  influence  of  General  West-
moreland. Taylor  told  him  he  sympathized  with  motive  but  had  never  hit
upon  a  command  relationship  which  offered  much  hope  of  accomplishing
this  end.  Although  Quat's  ideas  hard  to  disentangle,  he  seems  to  have  in
mind  a  mixed  US/ARVN  staff  element  reporting  to  General  Westmoreland
and  a  VN  C/Staff.  He  visualizes  the  staff  element  as  a  clearing  house  for  joint
studies  which  would  pass  recommendations  on  to  the  two  senior  officers.
By  implication  General  Westmoreland  would  have  the  power  of  ultimate
decision  based  upon  an  unofficial  understanding  which  Quat  hopes  generals
would  accept.  Quat  concedes  their  acceptance  far  from  certain.

Washington  was  looking  toward  combined  command  arrangements  that  would
recognize  that  the  U.S.  was  no  longer  limited  to  the  role  of  advisors  to  RVNAF.
When  asked  for  his  input  COMUSMACV  replied  that  gradual  transition  would
be  more  palatable  to  GVN  and  suggested  only  cooperation  in  the  initial  phase,
followed  by  establishment  of  a  small  combined  coordinating  staff  headed  jointly
by  himself  and  CINCRVNAF.  The  staff's  powers  would  be  limited  solely  to  co-
ordinating combined  operations.

These  comments  were  sketchy,  but  indicative,  for  in  Saigon  COMUSMACV
and  his  staff  were  putting  together  the  Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situation,
a  standard  document  in  the  military  planning  process.  Started  on  March  13,  the
day  after  General  Johnson  left  Saigon  and  issued  on  March  26,  it  more  clearly
revealed  the  MACV  concept  of  command.  While  recognizing  that  there  was  no
longer  an  effective  ARVN  chain  of  command  because  of  the  irresponsible  game
of  musical  chairs  among  the  top  leadership,  the  estimate  cautioned  that  the
Vietnamese  generals  would  accept  integrated  command  only  to  the  extent  that
the  United  States  contributed  troops;  and  it  advised  against  U.S.  commitment
to  any  rigid  arrangement  because  GVN  and  RVNAF  had  not  achieved  suf-
ficient political  and  military  maturity.  MACV  omitted  further  discussion  of  the
function  or  authority  of  such  integrated  staffs.  When  command  arrangements
were  covered  in  the  detailed  description  of  the  most  likely  course  of  action,  the
intent  was  clear.  U.S.  commanders  would  control  American  troops  except  in
certain  clearly  defined  zones  within  which  they  would  also  be  responsible  for
"controlling  and  coordinating"  operations  of  both  U.S.  and  RVN  forces.  A  col-
lateral function  envisioned  for  each  U.S.  division  command  was  that  of  Deputy
Command  Support  to  the  ARVN  Corps  Commander.

D. THE  RISE  AND  DECLINE  OF  ENCADREMENT,  APRIL,  1965

Ambassador  Taylor  returned  to  Washington  in  late  March  and  was  present
at  the  April  1-2  NSC  meeting  at  which  General  Johnson's  21  recommendations
and  Taylor's  41  points  were  approved.  Almost  as  soon  as  Taylor  returned  to
Saigon  wide  differences  of  opinion  developed  on  what  should  happen  next.

The  State/Defense  "7  point  message"  of  April  15  to  Ambassador  Taylor  and
General  Westmoreland  set  the  pot  boiling,  following  Westmoreland's  urgent
request  via  military  channels  for  more  forces.  The  message  directed:


358 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

( 1 )  Experimental  encadrement  of  U.S.  troops  into  RVNAF.

(2)  The  introduction  of  a  brigade  force  into  Bien  Hoa  Vung  Tau  for
security  and  later  counterinsurgency.

(3)  The  introduction  of  several  additional  U.S.  battalions  into  coastal
enclaves.

(4)  Expansion  of  Vietnamese  recruiting,  using  proven  U.S.  techniques.

(5)  Expansion  of  the  MEDCAP  program  using  mobile  dispensaries.

(6)  Experimentation  in  2  or  3  provinces  with  a  team  of  U.S  civil  affairs
personnel.

(7)  Supplement  of  low  RVNAF  pay  through  provision  of  a  food  ration.

Taylor  objected  to  the  new  forces,  to  encadrement,  and  to  the  whole  tone  of
the  7  point  message.  He  sent  two  principal  messages  with  these  objections,  one
setting  out  a  reasoned  comment  on  the  message  and  a  second,  personal  to  Mc-
George  Bundy,  saying  how  he  really  felt  about  it:

I  am  greatly  troubled  by  DOD  15  April  15.  First,  it  shows  no  considera-
tion for  the  fact  that,  as  a  result  of  decisions  taken  in  Washington  during
my  visit,  this  mission  is  charged  with  securing  implementation  by  the  two
month  old  Quat  government  of  a  21  point  military  program,  a  41  point
non-military  program,  a  16  point  Rowan  USIS  program  and  a  12  point
CIA  program.  Now  this  new  cable  opens  up  new  vistas  of  further  points
as  if  we  can  win  here  somehow  on  a  point  score.  We  are  going  to  stall  the
machine  of  government  if  we  do  not  declare  a  moratorium  on  new  pro-
grams for  at  least  six  months.

Next,  it  shows  a  far  greater  willingness  to  get  into  the  ground  war  than
I  had  discerned  in  Washington  during  my  recent  trip.  Although  some  ad-
ditional U.S.  forces  should  probably  be  introduced  after  we  see  how  the
Marines  do  in  counterinsurgency  operations,  my  own  attitude  is  reflected
in  EmbTel  3384,  which  I  hope  was  called  to  the  attention  of  the  President.

My  greatest  concern  arises  over  para  6  reftel  which  frankly  bewilders
me.  What  do  the  authors  of  this  cable  think  mission  has  been  doing  over
the  months  and  years?  We  have  presumably  the  best  qualified  personnel
the  Washington  agencies  (State,  AID,  DOD,  USIA  and  CIA)  can  find
working  in  the  provinces  seven  days  a  week  at  precisely  the  tasks  described
in  para  6.  It  is  proposed  to  withdraw  these  people  and  replace  them  by
Arniy  civil  affairs  types  operating  on  the  pattern  of  military  occupation?
If  this  is  the  thought,  I  would  regard  such  a  change  in  policy  which  will
gain  wide  publicity,  as  disastrous  in  its  likely  effects  upon  pacification  in
general  and  on  US  GVN  relations  in  particular.

Mac,  can't  we  be  better  protected  from  our  friends?  I  know  that  every-
one wants  to  help,  but  there's  such  a  thing  as  killing  with  kindness.  In  par-
ticular, we  want  to  stay  alive  here  because  we  think  we're  winning — and  will
continue  to  win  unless  helped  to  death.

Another  State  Defense  message  told  the  Ambassador  to  discuss  with  Quat
several  possible  uses  of  U.S.  combat  forces  be\ond  the  NSC  decisions  of  April
2.  He  replied,  "I  cannot  raise  these  matters  \\  ilh  Quat  without  further  guidance
.  .  .  I  need  a  clarification  of  our  purpose  for  the  large  scale  introduction  of
foreign  troops  unless  the  need  is  clear  and  explicit."

The  plaintive  words  did  not  sound  convincing  to  the  JCS,  for  they  told  Sec-


US-GVN  Relations  359


Def,  almost  cavalierly,  in  JCSM  281/65,  "JCS  is  confident  the  Ambassador  will
be  able  to  accomplish  such  measures  as  are  required  for  an  appropriate  accept-
ance of  these  deployments  as  approved  by  the  highest  authority,"

As  directed  in  the  7  point  message,  study  commenced  in  Saigon  on  the  mat-
ter of  combined  command.  The  message  suggested  two  approaches:  Integration
of  substantial  numbers  of  U.S.  combat  personnel  (e.g.,  50)  into  each  of  several
ARVN  battalions  (e.g.,  10);  or  combined  operations  of  three  additional  U.S.
battalions  with  three  or  more  ARVN  battalions.  General  Westmoreland  asked
his  Deputy  to  give  detailed  study  to  three  methods:

( 1 )  Assumption  of  officer  and  senior  NCO  command  positions  within  the
ARVN  battalion  by  U.S.  personnel.

(2)  Assignment  of  U.S.  personnel  as  staff  officers,  and  in  technical  and  spe-
cialists positions,  within  the  ARVN  battalion.

(3)  Employment  of  U.S.  troops  as  fire  support  elements  within  the  ARVN
battalion.

These  approaches  were  studied  in  relation  to:  Language,  security,  support,
mutual  US/GVN  acceptance,  conditions  and  capabilities  within  ARVN  units.
Problems  common  to  all  three  were  the  language  barrier,  increased  exposure
of  U.S.  personnel,  difficulty  of  U.S.  personnel  adapting  to  ARVN  living  condi-
tions, and  the  greatly  expanded  support  requirement  that  would  be  generated.
The  following  conclusions  were  reached:

Method  (1)  was  not  feasible  nor  desirable  owing  to  the  language  barrier,  as
well  as  to  probable  non-acceptance  by  GVN.

Method  (2)  would  not  materially  improve  ARVN  capabilities.

Method  (3),  therefore,  was  the  only  concept  that  would  benefit  ARVN  and
not  detract  from  GVN  morale.  A  fire  support  element  of  six  U.S.  officers  and
49  enlisted  men  was  suggested  for  each  ARVN  battalion.

Because  of  the  difficulties  of  supply  and  service  support,  medical  support,
leadership  in  ARVN  battalions,  and  anticipated  morale  problems  amongst  those
U.S.  personnel  assigned  to  ARVN  battalions,  Deputy  COMUSMACV  opposed
the  adoption  of  the  principle  of  encadrement.  He  recommended  that  COMUS-
MACV not  support  it  and  that  if  it  were  directed,  it  be  initially  applied  to  only
one  battalion.

At  the  same  time,  as  a  result  of  the  Warrenton  conference  of  mid-January,
serious  consideration  was  being  given  in  Washington  to  the  use  of  military
government  by  means  of  Army  civil  affairs  procedures.  A  straw  in  the  wind
which  indicated  what  the  Saigon  reaction  was  to  be  at  the  forthcoming  Honolulu
conference  was  the  response  by  Ambassador  Taylor  on  April  15  to  notification
that  General  Peers  was  coming  to  Saigon.  'Tf  GVN  gets  word  of  these  plans  to
impose  U.S.  military  government  framework  on  their  country  .  .  .  h  will  have
a  very  serious  impact  on  our  relations.  We  are  rocking  the  boat  at  a  time  when
we  have  it  almost  on  an  even  keel."


E.  HONOLULU  CONFERENCE,  APRIL  19-20,  1965;  ENCADREMENT
AND  COMBINED  COMMAND  FADE  OUT

At  Honolulu  General  Westmoreland  had  his  way  with  respect  to  military
encadrement.  Notes  of  the  meetings  reveal:

General  Westmoreland  states  that  individual  encadrement  of  ARVN
units  neither  required  nor  feasible.


360 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Instead  the  plan  was  to  "brigade"  U.S.  forces  with  ARVN  troops.  Considera-
tion of  the  issue  was  ended  with  the  understanding  that  General  Westmoreland
"will  submit  a  written  statement  describing  the  command  relationships  which
will  prevail  when  U.S.  forces  are  engaged  in  offensive  combat  actions,  alone  or
with  Vietnamese  or  other  forces."

The  introduction  of  U.S.  Army  Civil  Affairs  teams  into  the  provincial  gov-
ernment structure  was  also  considered  at  Honolulu.  It  was  decided  to  experi-
ment in  three  provinces  with  U.S.  teams  designed  to  provide  ample  civil  as
well  as  military  initiative  and  advice.  At  least  one  of  the  three  teams  was  to  be
headed  by  a  civilian.  Ambassador  Taylor  was  instructed  to  seek  the  concurrence
of  GVN,  "recognizing  that  a  large  number  of  questions  must  be  worked  out  sub-
sequently."

Early  in  May,  General  Westmoreland  submitted  his  detailed  command  con-
cept. It  traced  the  evolution  of  the  relationship  between  U.S.  and  ARVN  armed
forces.  Initially,  U.S.  forces  were  strictly  advisory.  In  the  period  from  1960  to
1962  the  U.S.  had  in  addition  provided  military  capabilities  such  as  helicopters
and  tactical  air  support.  The  advisory  effort  was  extended  to  ARVN  battalions,
and  advisors  accompanied  units  into  combat.  With  the  large  scale  commitment
of  U.S.  ground  forces  in  Vietnam,  a  logical  extension  of  this  evolution  was  the
suggested  command  concept  of  coordination  and  cooperation.  Operational  con-
trol of  each  nation's  forces  was  normally  to  be  exercised  by  commanders  of
that  nation,

COMUSMACV  envisioned  that  the  initial  mission  of  U.S.  forces  would  be
".ecurity  of  base  areas,  a  function  to  be  coordinated  through  senior  ARVN  com-
manders. Subsequent  deep  patrolling  and  offensive  operations  by  U.S.  forces
would  occur  within  specified  Tactical  Areas  of  Responsibility  (TAOR's)  with
ARVN  in  separate  and  clearly  defined  areas.  Eventually,  on  search  and  destroy
operations,  U.S.  forces  would  provide  combat  support  at  the  request  of  the  se-
nior RVNAF  commander.  The  U.S.  commander  would  move  to  the  RVNAF
command  post  to  agree  on  details,  but  close  and  intricate  maneuver  of  units  of
the  two  nations'  forces  was  to  be  avoided.

This  Saigon  proposal  did  not  settle  the  matter.  SecDef  urged  formation  of  a
joint  command  with  GVN  and  the  creation  of  a  "small  combined  coordinating
staff  to  be  jointly  headed  by  COMUSMACV  and  CINCRVNAF"  as  a  useful  de-
vice at  this  stage  of  development  of  the  U.S.  force  structure.

There  were  continuing  indications  from  USG  representatives  in  Saigon  of  a
sensitivity  to  South  Vietnamese  criticism  that  the  United  States  acted  as  though
we  were  fighting  all  by  ourselves.  On  May  17,  Ambassador  Taylor  felt  it  wise
to  relay  to  Washington  a  Saigon  Post  column  to  that  effect.

On  May  24,  both  the  Ambassador  and  COMUSMACV  sent  lengthy  messages
to  their  seniors  discussing  the  matter  of  combined  military  command.  Ambas-
sador Taylor  referenced  both  the  JCS  and  MACV  proposals  and  said,  "I  must
say  we  are  far  from  ready  to  propose  to  GVN  anything  like  a  plan  for  a  more
formal  combined  command  authority  ...  If  USG  intends  to  take  the  position
that  U.S.  command  of  GVN  forces  is  a  prerequisite  to  the  introduction  of  more
U.S.  combat  troops,  that  fact  would  constitute  an  additional  strong  reason  for
recommending  against  bringing  in  the  reinforcements."

COMUSMACV  also  voiced  strong  opposition  to  the  Washington  proposal  for
combined  command.  He  recalled  recent  discussion  of  the  subject  with  General
Minh  who  seemed  agreeable  at  first  but  then  moved  perceptibly  away  from
anything  suggestive  of  a  combined  headquarters.  Press  reports  of  the  views  of
General  Thieu  and  Air  Marshall  Ky.  as  well  as  the  recent  Saigon  Post  column.


US-GVN  Relations  361


were  referenced  to  substantiate  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  such  a  combined
staff  evolving.  Instead,  a  U.S.  Army  brigadier  general  staff.  'The  positioning  and
accrediting  of  Brig.  General  Collins  is  as  far  as  we  can  go."

There  appears  to  have  been  no  strong  objection  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.
In  JCSM  516-65  they  reviewed  the  course  of  events  and  recommended  augmen-
tation of  MACV  by  seven  billets  (1  Brigadier  General,  3  officers,  and  3  en-
listed) to  provide  "the  requisite  staff  assistance  on  combined  and  operational
planning  matters  associated  with  the  coordinated  operations  of  U.S.,  RVN,  and
third  country  forces  in  Vietnam."

A  joint  State/Defense  message  to  Saigon  on  May  27  deferred  any  approach
to  GVN  on  combined  command  until  it  was  politically  feasible  and  directed
that  no  planning  discussion  be  undertaken  with  RVNAF  without  Ambassador
Taylor's  approval.

There  were  two  major  battles  in  late  May  and  early  June,  Ba  Gia  and  Dong
Zoai.  Although  U.S.  troops  were  available  to  assist  in  both  instances  they  were
not  committed  and  in  both  cases  RVNAF  were  defeated.

General  Westmoreland  continued  to  press  Washington  for  greater  freedom
of  discretion  in  the  use  of  U.S.  ground  forces  with  RVNAF.  A  June  12  message
recalled  the  three  stages  envisioned  in  his  May  8  discussion  of  combined  com-
mand. So  far,  in  view  of  statements  in  Washington  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
by  the  White  House,  movement  from  stage  2  to  3  had  been  deferred,  but  it
sounded  as  though  some  measure  of  joint  planning  was  in  progress.

The  fact  is  we  have  moved  some  distance  down  the  road  toward  active
commitment  of  U.S.  combat  forces  and  have  done  so  hand-in-hand  with
our  Vietnamese  ally.  They  and  we  recognize  that  the  time  has  come  when
such  support  is  essential  to  the  survival  of  any  government  of  South  Viet-
nam and  the  integrity  of  RVNAF.

The  message  concluded  with  a  request  for  modification  of  the  letters  of  instruc-
tions on  use  of  U.S.  troops.

A  minor  note,  not  unrelated  to  combined  command,  was  raised  in  May  when
Prime  Minister  Quat  pressed  within  GVN  for  a  status  of  forces  agreement.  The
matter  arose  because  of  concern  about  Vietnamese  sovereignty  over  areas  where
U.S.  forces  were  stationed.  Relations  were  being  governed  by  the  15  year  old
Pentalateral  agreement,  clearly  inapplicable  to  the  present  situation.  U.S.  mili-
tary forces  in  Vietnam  were  enjoying  virtual  displomatic  immunity;  so  the  MACV
senior  judge  advocate  developed  arguments  to  demonstrate  that  raising  the  issue
was  not  in  the  interests  of  either  government.  They  were  passed  to  the  SVN
source  of  the  information  for  use  at  ministerial  meetings  on  the  subject.  There
is  no  indication  that  GVN  formally  discussed  status-of-forces  with  the  Embassy.

F. THE  KY  COUP,  JUNE,  1965

After  extended  negotiations  between  Quat,  Suu,  and  other  leaders  failed  to
end  the  government  crisis  that  started  in  late  May,  on  June  9  Quat  asked  the
generals  to  mediate  the  dispute.  They  did.  On  June  12  they  forced  Quat  to  re-
sign and  took  over  the  government.  After  several  days  of  jockeying  among
themselves,  the  generals  formed  a  National  Leadership  Council  of  ten  members
and  made  Ky  Prime  Minister.  Taylor  was  out  of  town  at  the  critical  time,  and
the  Embassy  found  out  about  the  main  decisions  after  they  were  taken.  How-
ever, Taylor  was  back  in  time  to  object  unsuccessfully  to  Ky's  appointment  as


362 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Prime  Minister  before  it  was  announced.  Once  things  had  settled  down  and  the
USG  felt  it  had  no  choice  but  to  accept  the  new  government,  Tavlor  cabled
State:

...  It  will  serve  our  best  interests  to  strengthen,  support  and  endorse
this  government.

IV.  THE  KY  GOVERNMENTS  EARLY  MONTHS:  THE  COUP  TO  THE
EMBRACE  AT  HONOLULU,  FEBRUARY  1966

A.  THE  KY  GOVERNMENT'S  INHERITANCE

Nguyen  Cao  Ky,  Commander  of  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force,  joined  with  other
"Young  Turks"  of  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces  to  overthrow  the  civilian  gov-
ernment of  Prime  Minister  Quat  on  June  12,  1965.  Attempts  at  civilian  gov-
ernment had  limped  along  since  October,  1964,  following  riots  in  August-Sep-
tember that  had  forced  the  generals  to  withdraw  Khanh's  military-dictatorial
constitution  and  to  promise  civilian  rule.  That  entire  period  had  been  marked
by  riots,  coups,  and  attempted  coups.  By  June,  when  Quat  and  the  civilian  Presi-
dent Suu  found  themselves  in  an  impasse,  Ambassador  Taylor  easily  acquiesced
in  the  return  to  direct  military  rule.

Pacification  kept  lagging,  and  the  dark  military  picture  forced  the  U.S.  to
decide  in  June  to  pour  U.S.  troops  into  the  country  as  fast  as  they  could  be  de-
ployed. The  pattern  of  GVN  civil  and  military  ineffectiveness  had  led  the  U.S.
Government  to  resolve  to  do  it  ourselves,  and  to  abandon  any  hope  of  forcing
or  inducing  GVN  to  do  the  job  without  us.  All  concerned  knew  that  the  Young
Turks  now  in  open  control  of  GVN  had  repeatedly  defied  Ambassador  Taylor
and  had  gotten  away  with  it.  Attempts  at  top-level  leverage  on  GVN  had  pro-
duced a  virtual  diplomatic  rupture  for  a  few  days  at  the  end  of  1964  and  the  be-
ginning of  1965,  and  the  U.S.  was  in  no  mood  to  try  it  again.

B.  THE  KY  GOVERNMENT  AND  THE  U.S.  START  THEIR  DEALINGS,
JUNE-JULY,  1965

With  Vietnam's  return  to  overt  military  government,  the  political  blocs  with
their  private  armies,  perhaps  exhausted,  bided  their  time.  Communications  im-
proved between  the  U.S.  and  GVN  to  a  state  of  cool  correctness,  gradually  re-
vealing lower-level  GVN's  intention  to  go  on  coasting  as  it  always  had  and  higher-
level  GVN's  intention  to  serve  its  own  interests.

The  day  after  the  coup,  COMUSMACV  cabled  CINCPAC  in  alarm  about
the  military  picture,  requesting  authoritv  to  send  U.S.  troops  on  offensive  mis-
sions. He  recalled  that  ARVN  had  lost  five  infantry  battalions  on  the  battle-
field in  the  last  three  weeks,  and  he  stated  that  the  only  possible  U.S.  response
was  the  aggressive  employment  of  U.S.  troops  together  with  the  Vietnamese
general  reserve  forces:

To  meet  this  challenge  successfully,  troops  must  be  maneuvered  fully,
deployed  and  redeployed  as  necessary.

To  demonstrate  how  completeh  the  initiative  changes  on  the  subject  of  com-
bined command,  Saigon  announced  to  Washington  in  mid-June  its  intention
within  the  next  few  days  to  conduct  a  backgrounder  on  command  relationships.
A  reply  from  the  Secretary  of  Defense  said.


US-GVN  Relations  363


As  basis  for  Washington  review  of  proposed  Westmoreland  back-
grounder on  command  relationships  and  MACV  organizational  structure,
please  furnish  draft  of  text  he  will  use  .  .  .

In  late  June,  General  Westmoreland  was  authorized  by  Washington  to  "com-
mit U.S.  troops  to  combat,  independent  of  or  in  conjunction  with  GVN  forces
in  any  situation  in  which  use  of  such  troops  is  requested  by  an  appropriate  GVN
commander  and  when,  in  COMUSMACV's  judgment,  their  use  is  necessary  to
strengthen  the  relative  position  of  GVN  forces."

Premier  Ky,  obviously  wishing  to  play  down  an  issue  sensitive  to  both  gov-
ernments, told  Ambassador  Taylor  he  saw  no  particular  reason  for  any  drastic
change  from  the  previous  practice  of  combat  support.  In  any  specific  situa-
tion, he  said  that  command  should  be  worked  out  in  accordance  with  "good
sense  and  sound  military  principles."  Additional  deployments  caused  no  prob-
lem, and  indeed  GVN  now  asked  for  more  US  FW  forces  than  could  be  de-
ployed or  were  approved.  But  in  response  to  a  query,  Taylor  waved  aside  any
hope  of  using  deployments  for  leverage.  Discussions  of  combined  command
avoided  joining  issue  and  left  matters  unchanged.

Although  Taylors  initial  reaction  to  Ky  was  one  of  apprehension,  he  was
soon  impressed  by  Ky's  aggressive  performance  including  his  26  point  program.
He  doubted  Ky's  ability  to  implement  the  program,  but  concluded  that  military
government  was  less  likely  to  abandon  the  war  effort  and  thus  should  be  sup-
ported.

Early  in  1965,  AID  had  decided  to  stop  buying  piasters  for  U.S.-controlled
sector  funds,  and  in  June  agreed  with  the  GVN  to  change  the  province  pro-
cedures. Effective  June  22,  1965,  the  Vietnamese  Province  Chief  would  requisi-
tion and  release  AID  commodities  on  his  own  authority,  and  all  supporting  funds
came  through  regular  GVN  channels.  The  new  procedures  included  elaborate
reporting  steps  both  when  the  U.S.  advisers  concurred  and  when  they  noncon-
curred  with  the  Province  Chiefs  actions.  In  practice,  the  change  reduced  U.S.
adviser's  leverage.

On  July  1,  Secretary  McNamara  submitted  a  memorandum  to  the  President
reviewing  all  aspects  of  Vietnam  policy.  However,  he  naturally  concentrated  on
U.S.  deployments,  and  had  little  to  say  on  GVN's  problems.  In  a  section  titled,
"Initiatives  Inside  Vietnam,"  his  only  significant  recommendations  were  that
we  should  increase  our  AID  to  GVN  and  that  Chieu  Hoi  Program  should  be
improved.  However,  in  another  memorandum  to  the  President  on  July  20,  fol-
lowing a  trip  to  Saigon,  McNamara  suggested  that  the  U.S.  Government  should
lay  down  some  terms  for  its  assistance.  GVN  was  again  pressing  for  more  U.S.
forces  than  were  available.  He  mentioned  rice  policy,  plus  a  "veto  on  major  GVN
commanders,  statements  about  invading  NVN,  and  so  on."

McNamara's  overall  evaluation  was  deeply  pessimistic,  making  clear  why  he
recommended  increased  U.S.  forces  at  that  time:

Estimate  of  the  Situation.  The  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  worse
than  a  year  ago  (when  it  was  worse  than  a  year  before  that).  After  a  few
months  of  stafemate,  the  tempo  of  the  war  has  quickened.  A  hard  VC  push
is  now  on  to  dismember  the  nation  and  to  maul  the  army.  The  VC  main
and  local  forces,  reinforced  by  militia  and  guerrillas,  have  the  initiative
and,  with  large  attacks  (some  in  regimental  strength),  are  hurting  ARVN
forces  badly.  The  main  VC  efforts  have  been  in  southern  I  Corps,  northern
and  central  II  Corps  and  north  of  Saigon.  The  central  highlands  could  well


364 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

be  lost  to  the  National  Liberation  Front  during  this  monsoon  season.
Since  June  1,  the  GVN  has  been  forced  to  abandon  six  district  capitals;
only  one  has  been  retaken.  U.S.  combat  troops  deployments  and  US  VNAF
strikes  against  the  North  have  put  to  rest  most  South  Vietnamese  fears
that  the  United  States  will  forsake  them,  and  US/VNAF  air  strikes
in-country  have  probably  shaken  VC  morale  somewhat.  Yet  the  govern-
ment is  able  to  provide  security  to  fewer  and  fewer  people  in  less  and  less
territory  as  terrorism  increases.  Cities  and  towns  are  being  isolated  as
fewer  and  fewer  roads  and  railroads  are  being  isolated  as  fewer  and  fewer
roads  and  railroads  are  usable  and  power  and  communications  lines  are
cut.

The  economy  is  deteriorating — the  war  is  disrupting  rubber  production,
rice  distribution,  Dalat  vegetable  production  and  the  coastal  fishing  in-
dustry, causing  the  loss  of  jobs  and  income,  displacement  of  people  and
frequent  breakdown  or  suspension  of  vital  means  of  transportation  and
communication;  foreign  exchange  earnings  have  fallen;  and  severe  infla-
tion is  threatened.

In  Saigon  Ambassador  Taylor  gave  the  GVN  the  first  definite  sign  of  U.S.
concern  about  the  effects  of  U.S.  deployments  on  Saigon  port  operations  and
on  the  Vietnamese  economy.  In  a  letter  to  Prime  Minister  Ky  dated  July  1,
1965,  he  said:

Your  experts  and  ours  are  in  constant  contact  on  [the  budgetary  deficit]
and  have  always  worked  effectively  together  .  .  .  [They]  will  need  your
support  in  carrying  out  the  anti-inflation  measures  which  they  may  recom-
mend from  time  to  time  .  .  .  The  rice  procurement  and  distribution
agency  which  you  have  in  mind  is  an  important  measure  of  ...  a  pro-
gram which  should  also  include  the  further  development  of  port  capacities.

USOM  also  began  talking  about  devaluing  the  piaster.  These  matters  were  to
come  to  a  head  a  year  later.  At  this  time,  however,  the  Embassy  treated  these
matters  routinely  and  applied  no  pressure  to  GVN.  GVN  oflficials  opened  the
serious  bidding  in  their  meeting  with  Secretary  McNamara  on  July  16,  saying
that  their  gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  had  suffered  the  alarming  drop
from  $175  million  to  $100  million  since  January.  1964,  and  requested  a  big  in-
crease in  AID.  Ambassador  Taylor  preferred  to  limit  our  counter-demands  to
get  quick  agreement;  he  said,

We  would  avoid  giving  the  impression  of  asking  for  new  agreements  or
imposing  conditions  for  our  increase  AID  .  .  .  We  do  not  want  to  raise
conditions  in  terms  likely  to  be  rejected  or  to  require  prolonged  debate.

On  July  28,  the  Embassy  and  GVN  settled  it.  The  agreement  touched  very
lightly  on  GVN  obligations  and  on  joint  economic  planning.  It  provided  for
"joint  discussions  to  precede  policy  decisions  .  .  .  for  control  of  inflation,"  etc.

On  July  8,  MACV  reviewed  its  relationships  with  the  military  leadership.
There  was  no  problem;  they  agreed  that  operations  involving  both  U.S.  and
ARVN  troops  would  use  the  concepts  of  coordination  and  cooperation.  They
did  not  discuss  combined  command.  However,  a  flap  developed  late  in  July
when  General  Thi  was  reported  to  be  planning  operations  in  the  DMZ.  Both
Taylor  and  Westmoreland  took  it  up  with  GVN,  who  reassured  them;  Thi  got


US-GVN  Relations  365


back  on  his  leash  before  it  was  too  late.  Such  operations  commenced  more
than  a  year  later.  A  candid  subsequent  statement  from  Saigon  shows  the  Viet-
namese desired  to  have  the  best  of  both  worlds.  Ambassador  Lodge  reported  to
Washington  the  disparaging  reactions  of  ARVN  general  officers  on  the  JGS  staff
to  the  U.S.  Marine  victory  south  of  Chu  Lai.  '"I  flag  this  small  straw  in  the
wind  as  pointing  up  the  importance  of  portraying  our  operations  here  as  com-
bined with  the  GVN  in  nature."

C. QUIET  SAILING  THROUGH  JANUARY,  1966

In  August,  Ky  wanted  to  make  a  trip  to  Taiwan,  being  interested  in  getting
Nationalist  Chinese  troops  into  Vietnam.  The  U.S.  Government  objected  both
to  the  trip  and  to  its  objective,  but  failed  to  persuade  him  to  give  up  the  trip.
Later  he  brought  in  some  Chinats  on  the  sly.  An  idea  floated  in  Washington
that  he  or  Thieu  should  visit  the  United  States  was  dropped  without  having  been
brought  up  with  the  GVN.

Lodge  arrived  around  the  middle  of  August  to  replace  Taylor.  Having  avoided
the  confrontations  with  GVN  of  the  type  that  Taylor  had,  he  came  with  a  resi-
due of  good  will.  Because  he  was  considered  responsible  for  Diem's  overthrow,
the  Buddhists  were  pleased,  and  the  militant  Catholics  dubious.  In  that  con-
nection, State  thought  it  prudent  to  direct  the  Embassy  to  assure  GVN  that  nei-
ther Lodge  nor  Lansdale,  whom  he  was  bringing  with  him,  was  going  to  try  to
make  changes  in  GVN.  On  August  26,  Ky  told  Lodge  that  he  thought  U.S.
forces  should  "hold  strategic  points"  so  that  the  Vietnamese  could  concentrate
on  pacification  operations.  That  is,  he  wanted  the  United  States  to  take  over
the  main  force  war.  He  also  said  he  thought  the  Chu  Hoi  program  was  a  waste
of  money.

In  early  August,  Ky  established  a  Ministry  of  Rural  Construction  (MRC  and
a  Central  Rural  Construction  Council  (CRCC).  These  absorbed  functions  and
personnel  from  predecessor  groups  and  other  ministries  for  the  announced  pur-
pose of  providing  centralized  direction  to  the  pacification  effort.  Nguyen  Tat
Ung  was  made  Minister  of  Rural  Construction  while  the  Council  was  chaired
by  General  Co,  Minister  of  War  and  Defense.  Timing  and  circumstances  give
no  evidence  of  a  strong  U.S.  hand  at  work.  The  U.S.  Embassy  viewed  the  new
organization  as  the  result  of  political  maneuvering,  but  also  hoped  the  change
would  promote  inter-ministerial  cooperation.  The  move  signalled  renewed  em-
phasis of  pacification  by  both  GVN  and  the  mission.  In  late  August,  Ambassa-
dor Lodge  announced  the  appointment  of  retired  General  Lansdale  as  chair-
man of  the  U.S.  Mission  liaison  group  to  the  GVN  CRCC.

There  followed  a  period  of  shuffling  and  reorganization  during  which  Ung
was  killed  in  a  plane  crash.  Two  weeks  later  Prime  Minister  Ky  announced  that
General  Thang  would  succeed  to  the  Ministry.  The  appointment  was  for  six
months  only,  and  Thang  retained  his  position  on  the  JGS.  At  the  same  time.
General  Co  was  elevated  to  Deputy  Prime  Minister  for  War  and  Reconstruc-
tion in  a  realignment  that  made  six  ministries  including  Rural  Reconstruction
subordinate  to  him.

On  August  28,  General  Thi  told  Lodge  he  thought  he  could  do  a  better  job
running  the  government  than  Ky  was  doing.  He  spoke  at  some  length  on  Ky's
political  weaknesses,  with  particular  emphasis  on  his  lack  of  support  in  I  Corps,
where  Thi  was  strong.  As  was  his  usual  practice,  Lodge  politely  brushed  aside
this  approach.  (Later  Thi  proved  harder  and  harder  to  control  until  his  dis-
missal in  March.)


366 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

In  mid-September,  Lodge  went  on  an  inspection  trip  to  Da  Nang  and  Qui
Nhon.  On  his  return  he  waxed  eloquent  about  the  benefits  of  the  U.S.  presence:

All  reports  indicated  that  the  American  troops  are  having  a  very  bene-
ficial effect  on  VN  troops,  giving  them  greater  confidence  and  courage.  I
am  always  mindful  of  the  possibility  that  the  American  presence  will  in-
duce the  VN  to  slump  back  and  "Let  George  do  it."  But  there  seems  to  be
no  sign  of  this.

I  wish  I  could  describe  the  feeling  of  hope  which  this  great  American
presence  on  the  ground  is  bringing.  There  can  no  longer  be  the  slightest
doubt  that  persistence  will  bring  success,  that  the  aggression  will  be  warded
off  and  that  for  the  first  time  since  the  end  of  WW  II,  the  cause  of  free  men
will  be  on  an  upward  spiral.

Lodge's  end-of-month  appraisal  was  that  civil  and  political  progress  lagged
behind  the  military.  He  felt  there  would  be  a  political  vacuum  that  the  VC
would  fill  if  the  U.S.  pulled  out.  Therefore,  he  was  trying  to  start  a  program  to
provide  security  and  to  generate  indigenous  political  activity  at  the  hamlet  level.
He  noted  with  pleasure  that  Ky  was  taking  the  initiative  in  bringing  his  pacifica-
tion plans  to  Lansdale,  to  get  U.S.  reactions  before  these  plans  were  too  firm  to
change.

By  September,  a  combination  of  inflation,  black-marketeering  by  U.S.  troops
and  other  related  problems  led  both  governments  to  agree  on  important  steps.
The  U.S.  introduced  military  payment  certificates,  and  the  GVN  agreed  to  ex-
change 118  piasters  to  the  dollar  for  personal  use  of  troops  and  U.S.  civilians.
Official  U.S.  purchases  of  piasters  continued  at  the  old  exchange  rate  of  35,
however.

September  brought  an  evaluation  of  the  three-month  three-province  pacifica-
tion experiment  during  which  each  was  under  the  unified  control  of  a  team
chief;  one  an  embassy  FSO,  one  a  MACV  sector  adviser,  and  one  an  AID
province  representative.  COMUSMACV  judged  that  test  only  partially  successful;
progress  achieved  was  attributed  to  the  "keen  spirit  of  cooperation"  by  all  team
members.  Because  he  believed  the  results  inconclusive  and  in  view  of  the  ex-
isting military  situation.  General  Westmoreland  concluded  that  the  team  chief
concept  should  not  be  implemented.  The  experiment  was  officially  ended.

The  U.S.  also  became  deeply  involved  in  the  rice  trade.  Vietnam  changed  over
from  a  rice  exporter  in  the  years  through  1964  to  a  heavy  importer  from  1965
onwards.  AID  provided  the  imported  rice  under  CIP.  In  September,  1964,
Ambassador  Lodge  spoke  of  measures  we  are  taking  to  control  the  price  of  rice;
inasmuch  as  AID  provided  the  imports,  USOM  had  a  say  in  the  GVN's  policies
on  price  control,  subsidization,  and  distribution  of  rice.

During  this  period  a  problem  flared  up  over  a  corrupt  Province  Chief.  Lt.
Colonel  Chi,  Province  Chief  of  Binh  Tuy,  was  accused  of  misuse  of  $250,000  of
AID  funds.  After  pressure  from  AID  had  merely  produced  threats  against  the
lives  of  AID  personnel  in  the  province,  on  September  23  AID  withdrew  them
and  suspended  AID  to  the  province.  Chi  was  a  protege  of  General  Co,  the
Minister  of  Defense  and  Deputy  Premier,  who  himself  figured  in  charges  of
corruption  a  year  later.  On  October  5,  the  story  got  into  the  papers,  and  on  the
7th  Ky  promised  publicly  to  remove  Chi.  Lodge  played  no  role  in  starting  this
episode,  and  told  the  Mission  Council  on  October  7  that  he  did  not  want  it  re-
peated. After  a  six-weeks  delay.  Kv  did  remove  Chi  on  November  25,  and  gave
him  a  job  in  the  Ministr)'  of  Defense.  AID  to  the  province  resumed.


US-GVN  Relations  367


Advisers  in  the  field  kept  on  complaining  about  the  delays  in  the  Vietnamese
system,  and  pressed  for  restoration  of  some  resources  of  their  own.  On  Octo-
ber 1,  1965,  MACV  began  giving  its  sector  and  subsector  advisers  piaster  funds
they  could  spend  on  urgent  projects.  Each  subsector  adviser  had  access  to  50,-
000  piasters  which  could  be  replenished  as  necessary.  Toward  the  end  of  1965
it  became  obvious  that  this  method  was  highly  successful.  Consideration  was
given  to  permanent  establishment  of  the  revolving  fund.

However,  after  the  trial  period  of  about  four  months  MACV^  abandoned  the
plan  because  of  strong  opposition  by  General  Thang,  Minister  of  Revolutionary
Development.  He  argued  that  under  U.S.  urging  he  had  been  developing  an  ef-
fective, flexible  organization  that  would  take  care  of  urgent  projects  of  the
type  the  sector  and  subsector  advisers  wanted  to  promote;  letting  them  bypass
his  people  would  encourage  the  latter  to  lapse  into  their  old  bad  habits  and
thwart  both  governments'  main  objectives.

USOM  also  had  second  thoughts  about  abandoning  the  sign-off  system.  Early
in  October  1965,  the  Mission  Council  approved  a  plan  to  restore  the  ''troika
sign-off"  procedure  as  it  had  existed  prior  to  June.  After  the  Mission  had  al-
ready reopened  the  issue  with  the  GVN,  the  State  Department  objected,  saying
that  the  United  States  wanted  to  make  the  Vietnamese  more  independent  and
effective.

After  a  time  the  frustrations  of  the  advisors  began  striking  a  sympathetic
chord  at  the  highest  levels.  In  a  draft  memorandum  to  the  President  dated  No-
vember 3,  1965,  Secretary  McNamara  stated  his  own  impatience  with  the  GVN
and  urged  a  more  active  role  for  our  advisers  at  province  and  district.  There  is
no  sign  of  such  high-level  interest  earlier,  except  as  expressed  by  decisions  to
extend  the  advisory  system  to  lower  levels;  as  just  noted  State  objected  to  the
restoration  of  troika  sign-off  on  October  16,  1965.

Some  uncertainty  and  disagreement  with  respect  to  pacification  developed
within  United  States  groups  in  Vietnam.  In  November,  Major  General  Lans-
dale,  Special  Assistant  to  the  Ambassador,  asked  who  on  the  U.S.  side  should
have  the  executive  role  in  dealing  with  the  Rural  Construction  Ministry?  Lans-
dale  envisaged  that  MACV  and  JUSPAO  would  be  observers  only.

COMUSMACV  disagreed  with  the  proposed  limitation.  USMACV  was  the
only  structure  advising  GVN  at  all  levels;  so  MACV  shared  responsibility  for
pacification.  Manpower  required  for  cadre  teams  would  impact  directly  and
seriously  on  MACV  efforts  to  maintain  RVNAF  strengths.  Minister  of  Rural
Construction  was  Major  General  Thang  who  also  was  Director  of  Operations,
JGS.  He  looked  to  MACV  for  advice  and  assistance  on  the  whole  spectrum  of
pacification  problems.

On  December  15  in  a  memorandum  to  Major  General  Lansdale,  the  Am-
bassador said,

I  consider  the  GVN  effort  in  this  domain  (apart  from  the  military  clear-
ing phase)  to  be  primarily  civilian  .  .  .  Consequently,  on  the  American
side  it  is  preferable  that  the  two  civilian  agencies,  USAID  and  CAS,  be  the
operating  support  agencies.

The  GVN  military  plan  in  support  of  the  1966  Rural  Construction  plan  was
given  in  the  JGS  Directive  AB  140  of  December  15,  1965,  which  had  been  de-
veloped in  coordination  with  MACV  and  the  Ministry  of  Rural  Construction.
In  November  onward,  portions  of  the  1966  GVN  defense  budget  prepared  in
accordance  with  U.S.  guidelines  were  received  by  MACV.


368 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

At  the  time  of  the  Christmas  truce,  President  Johnson  launched  a  peace  of-
fensive, including  a  suspension  of  bombing  in  North  Vietnam  that  lasted  37
days.  The  moves  were  carefully  cleared  with  GVN  and  with  its  Ambassador  in
Washington,  and  caused  no  significant  problems.  Lodge's  appraisal  was  that  the
"offensive"  achieved  all  its  aims,  at  no  significant  cost.  However,  trouble  flared
up  over  a  plan  to  release  20  NVA  prisoners  across  the  DMZ;  General  Thi  was
not  consulted,  and  said  he  would  not  permit  it  (in  his  Corps).  Things  were
smoothed  over  amicably  by  Tet.

One  troublesome  area  was  GVN's  hawkishness  over  such  issues  as  border  in-
cidents. Ky  kept  pressing  for  action  against  Cambodian  sanctuaries;  the  U.S.
stood  firm  on  the  rule  of  self-defense  in  emergencies  only,  which  could  mean
shooting  across  the  border  but  not  maneuvering  troops  across  it.  Ky  wanted  to
encourage  a  Khmer  Serai  expedition,  which  would  cause  a  flare-up  with  the
Cambodian  Government;  State  directed  Lodge  to  keep  him  on  a  tight  leash.

Coup  rumors  started  to  circulate  around  the  first  of  the  vear;  Lodge  remarked
that  iust  before  Tet  was  a  normal  season  for  that.  On  December  29  Kv  told
Lodge  of  an  alleged  assassination  plot  directed  at  Ky,  Co,  the  Buddhist  leader
Thich  Tarn  Chau,  and  Lodge.  On  January  15,  VNAF  took  to  the  air  in  nervous
reaction  to  some  supposedly  suspicious  troop  movements;  Lodge  reported  more
rumors  on  January  19,  and  took  the  opportunity  to  spell  out  his  position:

If  .  .  .  corridor  coup  .  .  .  caused  directorate  members  to  fall  out,
consequences  could  be  disastrous  ...  A  peaceful  reshuffle  within  direc-
torate is  a  continuing  possibility.  I  would  deplore  it.  We  take  all  rumors
and  reports  of  government  change  very  seriously  and  never  miss  an  oppor-
tunity to  make  clear  U.S.  support  for,  and  the  need  for,  governmental
stability.

Around  the  middle  of  January  1966,  Ky  addressed  the  Armed  Forces  Con-
vention. He  announced  the  prospective  formation,  after  Tet,  of  a  "Democracy
Building  Council"  to  serve  as  a  constituent  assembly  and  legislature.  It  would
write  a  new  constitution  by  October,  1966,  preparatory  to  elections  in  1967.  This
was  the  opening  shot  in  what  became  a  big  issue  within  a  few  weeks.

D. THE  HONOLULU  CONFERENCE  OF  FEBRUARY  6-8,  1966

By  late  January,  it  was  clear  that  Lodge's  policy  of  not  pushing  GVN  too  hard
may  have  helped  keep  things  amicable  but  permitted  pacification  to  keep  lag-
ging and  permitted  economic  problems  to  grow  serious.  With  conspicuous
haste  that  caused  GVN  some  loss  of  face,  the  U.S.  summoned  Thieu,  Ky,  and
other  GVN  officials  to  Honolulu  to  express  renewed  and  heightened  U.S.  con-
cern. The  U.S.  wanted  to  re-emphasize  pacification,  with  a  corresponding  shift
of  authority  from  the  ARVN  line  command  to  the  province  chiefs;  and  it
wanted  strong  action  to  limit  inflation,  to  clear  the  Saigon  Port,  and  to  limit  the
unfavorable  effect  of  U.S.  deplo\  ments  on  the  U.S.  balance  of  payments.

For  the  first  time  in  over  a  \ear,  the  U.S.  bargained  hard  with  GVN  on  is-
sues of  these  kinds.  The  GVN  agreed  to  the  main  U.S.  demands  on  authority
for  the  provinces  chiefs.  Moreover,  it  promised  fiscal  reform,  devaluation,  port
and  customs  reform,  and  the  use  of  GVN  dollar  balances  to  finance  additional
imports.  The  GVN  also  agreed  that  an  International  Monetary  Fund  team
should  be  invited  to  give  technical  advice  on  these  economic  programs.  Thieu


US-GVN  Relations  369


and  Ky  promised  to  go  ahead  with  a  new  constitution,  to  be  drafted  by  an  ap-
pointed Advisory  Council,  and  then  ratified  by  popular  vote  in  late  1966;  fol-
lowing that,  they  promised,  the  GVN  would  create  an  elected  government
rooted  in  the  constitution.  The  U.S.  promised  to  increase  AID  imports  to  $400
million  in  1966,  plus  $150  million  in  project  assistance.

Altogether  the  two  governments  exchanged  over  60  agreed  points  and  as-
surances, ranging  over  free  world  (third  country)  assistance,  rural  construction
(pacification),  refugees,  political  development,  Montagnards,  Chieu  Hoi,
health,  education,  agriculture,  and  economic  and  financial  programs.  This  pack-
age was  far  more  specific  than  any  previous  US  /GVN  agreement.  Their  public
statements  after  the  conference  emphasized  social  justice,  the  promise  of  elected
government,  and  the  U.S.  lack  of  interest  in  bases  or  permanent  alliance  in
South  Vietnam.

In  a  public  appearance  at  the  conference.  President  Johnson  embraced  Prime
Minister  Ky,  before  photographers.  Although  it  caused  no  loss  of  face  directly,
in  the  eyes  of  many  observers  this  act  added  to  the  impression  that  Ky  was  tied
to  our  apron  strings.  If  Lodge  sensed  this  effect,  he  said  nothing  about  it;  char-
acteristically, he  said  to  State  that  the  Honolulu  Conference  was  good  psycho-
logically for  Vietnam.

Directly  after  the  conference  USOM  remained  seriously  concerned  with  the
high  and  rising  black  market  piaster  rate  for  dollars,  which  they  and  the  Viet-
namese business  communitv  regarded  as  the  bell  weather  of  inflation.  More-
over,  besides  its  harmful  psychological  effect,  the  high  rate  tempted  U.S.  per-
sonnel into  illegal  transactions,  causing  unfavorable  publicity.  Inasmuch  as  GVN
refused  to  sell  dollars  in  the  black  market  to  push  the  rate  down.  Porter  re-
quested authorization  from  Washington  to  do  it  on  the  sly  with  CAS  money.

The  thrust  of  the  Honolulu  Conference  was  clearly  to  stimulate  nonmilitary
pacification  efforts.  Upon  his  return  to  Saigon,  Lodge  issued  a  memorandum  re-
constituting the  Mission  Liaison  Group  under  Deputy  Ambassador  Porter.
Though  charged  by  the  memorandum  with  the  management  and  control  of  all
U.S.  civilian  agency  activities  supporting  Revolutionary  Development,  Porter
saw  his  responsibility  as  primarily  a  coordinating  effort.  He  said  he  did  not  in-
tend to  get  into  individual  agency  activities.

V. A  REBELLION,  A  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY,  AND  THE
HARDSHIPS  OF  NEGOTIATING  WITH  A  "WEAK"  GOVERNMENT

A. THE  RISE  OF  THE  STRUGGLE  MOVEMENT,  MARCH,  1966

General  Thi,  Commander  of  I  Corps,  was  a  thorn  in  Ky's  side  as  a  potential
rival.  Both  private  and  public  disagreements  showed  there  was  no  love  lost  be-
tween them;  and  Thi  had  a  considerable  base  of  support  in  his  connections
with  the  Buddhist  leadership  and  in  his  identification  with  Annamese  sensitiv-
ities. These  factors  also  made  the  other  generals  of  the  Military  Directorate
(formerly  National  Leadership  Council,  etc.)  suspicious  of  Thi;  they  felt  better
able  to  cope  with  Ky.

Armed  with  President  Johnson's  public  support  of  him,  Ky  resolved  to  exile
Thi,  and  he  persuaded  his  colleagues  to  go  along  with  the  idea  in  a  meeting  on
March  10.  The  day  before  he  told  Lodge  of  his  intention,  saying  that  Thi  had
been  culpably  insubordinate;  Lodge  replied  that  he  should  be  sure  he  could
prove  the  charges,  so  as  to  put  a  good  public  face  on  the  move,  and  pave  the


370 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

way  carefully.  Later  in  the  day  Lodge  also  advised  him  to  make  sure  he  had  the
votes  in  the  Directorate,  saying  that  for  him  to  lose  on  the  issue  and  be  re-
placed as  Prime  Minister  would  be  catastrophic.  Kv  was  sure  of  himself,  al-
though he  admitted  he  could  not  prove  his  charges.  In  a  later  meeting  the  same
day,  Thieu  told  Lodge  Thi  ''had  conducted  himself  in  a  way  that  was  not
suitable,"  and  was  confident  Thi  could  be  dismissed  without  ill  effects.

On  March  10,  when  the  Directorate  voted  to  fire  him,  Thi  resigned.  Ky  told
Lodge  that  Thi  would  go  to  Da  Nang  the  11th  for  the  change-of-command
ceremony  and  then  leave  the  country  for  four  months.  The  same  day,  Thi  told
Colonel  Sam  Wilson  that  he  did  not  want  to  leave  the  country,  and  that  he  had
been  encouraged  by  the  Director  of  National  Police  to  stay;  Wilson  suggested
that  he  go  gracefully.  On  the  11th,  when  the  time  came  for  Thi  to  fly  to  Da
Nang,  he  was  detained  at  Tan  Son  Nhut;  Ky  had  got  wind  of.  or  suspected,  his
intentions.  Ky  then  urgently  requested  Lodge  to  invite  Thi  to  the  United  States
for  a  physical  examination.

The  Annamese  Buddhists,  led  by  Tri  Quang,  who  had  quietly  bided  their
time  for  about  a  year,  now  entered  the  action.  (Kv  later  told  Lodge  that  Tri
Quang  had  assented  to  Thi's  dismissal  and  had  then  double-crossed  him.)
They  began  demonstrations  in  Da  Nang  and  Hue  on  March  12,  joined  by  the
students,  and  over  the  next  several  davs  [gained  control  of  those  cities  as  the
police  stood  aside.  Again  Ky  used  Lodge's  good  offices  to  try  to  persuade  Thi
to  leave  the  country  gracefully;  but  the  16th,  Ky  and  the  Directorate  decided
to  try  to  use  Thi  to  restore  order,  and  permitted  him  to  return  to  Da  Nang.  For
a  few  days  things  quieted  down  slightly,  but  the  end  was  not  yet  in  sight.

State  oftered  Lodge  suggestions  on  how  to  get  things  calmed  down.  First,  he
might  counsel  a  firm  attitude  by  GVN,  saying  it  would  meet  with  the  Buddhists
but  not  under  threats,  and  that  it  would  not  permit  disorders.  Second,  GVN
might  steal  the  initiative  from  the  Buddhists  bv  making  a  generous  public  offer
of  elections.  Whichever  course  they  followed.  State  wanted  them  to  be  sure  it
would  work  and  would  avoid  a  head-on  collision  with  the  Buddhists.  In
reply.  Lodge  agreed  on  the  need  to  avoid  a  head-on  collision;  as  for  the  means,
he,  like  State,  simply  hoped  for  the  best:

We  should  not  settle  on  one  solution  or  another.  Rather  it  is  possible,
if  not  probable,  that,  unless  uncontrollable  mass  reaction  is  brought  about,
each  side  will  seek  to  arrange  what  can  be  looked  upon  as  widely  ac-
ceptable.

On  March  22,  Lodge  and  Ky  had  a  long  discussion  of  tactics  relating  to
elections  and  constitution-writing.  Elections  were  scheduled  to  come  up  for  the
largely  powerless  but  symbolic  provincial  councils  (which  advised  the  Province
Chiefs  on  policy  matters),  and  Kv  had  reportedly  toyed  with  calling  off  these
elections.  He  was  also  far  behind  schedule  on  the  constituent  assembly  he  had
publicly  promised  on  January  19  for  just  after  Tet.  and  as  noted  had  privately
promised  the  U.S.  Government  at  Honolulu.  Lodge  reported:

2.  ...  He  is  easer  for  advice  and  when  he  received  it,  he  said  he  agreed
with  it.  Now  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  it  will  be  carried  out.

3.  My  advice  was  based  on  careful  reflection  and  consultation  with  my
associates  and  was  to  this  effect:

4.  The  G\'N  should  not  cancel  provincial  elections  as  I  had  heard  re-


US-GVN  Relations  371


ported.  He  said  that  this  was  not  exactly  the  case;  that  there  were  two
provincial  councils,  which  didn't  want  elections.  I  said  in  that  event  these
councils  should  be  made  to  say  publicly  that  they  didn't  want  elections
so  that  the  onus  of  not  holding  these  elections  would  not  fall  on  the  Govern-
ment.  A  public  announcement  had  been  made  that  the  Government  was  in
favor  of  holding  these  provincial  elections;  the  offices  involved  have  little
actual  consequence  but  are  of  symbolic  significance;  Washington  had  been
informed  of  this  fact;  and  if  there  was  some  reason  why  in  one  or  two
provinces  they  should  not  be  held,  then  the  provinces  should  make  the
reason  plain.

5.  I  then  advised  that  he  should  take  the  lead  and  influence  opinion,  and
not  be  at  the  mercy  of  events.  I  suggested  that  a  list  of  names  for  so-
called  consultative  assembly  (which  I  suggested  would  be  better  named
"preparatory  commission")  which  aims  to  draft  a  constitution,  should  be
confirmed  by  the  Generals.  When  this  had  been  done,  I  suggested  that
then  Ky  should  make  a  very  carefully  written  and  persuasive  announce-
ment which  would  be  done  on  film  for  use  on  television  and  in  the  movie
theaters.  The  Vietnamese  are  great  movie-goers  and  it  is  a  very  important
medium  here.  I  said  that  he  should  not  read  it  on  film  with  his  head  bob-
bing up  and  down  as  he  looked  down  at  the  text,  but  should  have  it  put  on
cue  card  along  side  the  camera  and  read  it  as  he  looks  right  into  the  lens.

6.  His  statement  should  be  written  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  exclude  the
possibility  of  elections  later  on  for  a  constitutional  convention.  In  other
words,  this  should  be  deliberately  fuzzed  and  left  open  by  implication.  I
said  I  much  preferred  the  phrase  "constitutional  convention"  to  the  per-
nicious French  phrase  "constitutent  assembly."  The  constitutional  conven-
tion would  meet,  adopt  the  constitution  and  disband,  whereas  the  con-
stituent assembly  stays  around  and  makes  trouble  for  an  idefinite  period.

7.  He  agreed  with  all  this  and  seemed  to  understand  it.  He  said  that  last
night,  the  Generals  had  unanimouslv  confirmed  the  names  of  the  members
of  the  preparatory  committee.  He  would  announce  all  this  as  I  suggested.  I
wish  he  would  do  it  quickly.

8.  I  suggested  that  impulsive  unprepared  statements  were  most  dangerous
at  this  time.  Experienced  politicians  often  make  statements  which  seem
to  be  "off  the  cuff,"  but  actually  are  carefully  thought  out.  His  unprepared
statements  always  worry  me.

9.  He  agreed  with  me  that  certain  Buddhists  were  unwittingly  taking
Communist  inspired  advice,  as  were  the  students  in  Hue  who  had  attacked
me  .  .  .

10.  He  was  absolutely  sure  that  the  Buddhists  were  divided  among  them-
selves— an  analysis  which  I  share.  He  agrees  with  me  that  Tri  Quang  simply
has  not  got  the  powerful  psychological  factors  working  for  him  now  that
he  had  in  October  '63.  All  the  Communist  Propaganda  in  the  world  can-
not alter  these  facts:  That  in  '63,  the  Buddhists  were  discriminated  against,
and  now  they  are  not;  that  in  the  latter  days  of  '63  the  Buddhists  were
persecuted  whereas  now  they  are  not:  and  that  Tri  Quang  was  an  under-
dog then,  and  now  he  is  not.  Yet  Tri  Quang  is  evidently  determined.

11.  My  advice  to  him  was  not  very  drastic  and  quite  simple  to  do,  and
yet  I  believe  that  if  he  follows  it  conscientiously  and  expeditiously  without
procrastination  that  there  may  be  enough  of  a  budding  sense  of  National
interest  to  start  moving  things  along  in  the  right  direction.


372 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

12.  He  thanked  me  more  effusively  and  warmly  than  he  has  ever  done
before  and  said  he  was  so  grateful  for  my  interest  in  his  welfare,  physical
and  political.

13.  The  situation  is  not  yet  out  of  hand.  Ky  has  had  offers  from  Cath-
olics and  Southerners  for  them  to  enter  the  fray  on  his  side  and  start  throw-
ing their  weight  around,  which  he  so  far  has  been  able  to  prevent  them
from  doing.  This  is  one  of  the  things  which  I  have  been  fearing.  I  talked
in  this  vein  with  the  Papal  delegate  and  the  Archbishop  of  Saigon  yester-
day, and  they  agreed  completely.  The  leadership  of  the  Southerners  is  not,
I  fear,  as  responsible.

On  March  25,  Ky  followed  Lodge's  advice  more  or  less  closely,  and  an-
nounced the  Constitutional  Preparatory  Commission  and  said  it  would  finish  its
work  within  two  months;  elections  might  follow  by  the  end  of  1966.  However,
he  insisted  that  GVN  would  exclude  "Vietcong  or  corrupt  elements""  from  the
elected  assembly.  The  move  failed  to  restore  order.  On  March  26,  demonstra-
tors in  Hue  broke  out  anti-American  banners  written  in  English,  and  an  ugly
incident  followed  in  which  a  Marine  tore  one  down.  (After  detailed  negotia-
tions, an  apology  was  given  and  accepted.)  The  radio  stations  at  Da  Nang  and
Hue  fell  under  control  of  dissident  elements.

On  March  29,  Ky  told  Lodge  that  he  and  the  generals  wanted  to  move  on
Hue  and  Da  Nang  with  military  forces,  and  said  that  he  could  show  that  an
unpublicized  Buddhists  split  had  caused  the  uprising.  Lodge  concurred  in  Ky's
plan  to  use  forces,  but  urged  him  not  to  try  to  create  an  open  breach  among
the  Buddhists.

Although  Lodge  had  no  objection  to  using  force  against  the  Buddhist  move-
ment, both  he  and  Rusk  felt  that  U.S.  men  and  equipment  should  stay  out  of  it,
to  avoid  heightening  anti-American  feelings.  Rusk  told  Lodge  of  his  deep  con-
cern about  Vietnamese  internal  bickering  at  a  crucial  time:  he  was  particularly
disturbed  by  the  anti-American  propaganda  coming  from  the  Hue  radio,  which
was  physically  defended  by  the  U.S.  Marines  in  that  general  area.  He  went  on
to  say,

We  face  the  fact  that  we  ourselves  cannot  succeed  except  in  support  of
the  South  Vietnamese.  Unless  thev  are  able  to  mobilize  reasonable  soli-
darity,  prospects  are  grim.  I  appreciate  your  frank  and  realistic  reporting
and  am  relying  heavily  upon  your  good  judgment  to  exert  every  effort  to
get  us  over  the  present  malaise.

Lodge  replied  that  his  influence  with  the  Catholics  had  kept  them  out  of  it,
but  that  his  talks  with  Tri  Quang  had  been  unproductive.  He  estimated  that  Tri
Quang  had  used  the  anti-American  theme  to  put  pressure  on  the  GVN.
(Through  an  intermediary  the  Embassy  learned  that  General  Thi  said  that  the
United  States  was  too  committed  to  leave:  this  belief  may  have  led  Thi  and  the
Buddhists  to  feel  free  to  use  the  theme  as  a  weapon  against  GVN.)

On  March  29,  the  Catholic  leaders  in  whom  Lodge  had  placed  his  hopes
came  out  against  the  GVN  and  demanded  a  return  to  civilian  rule.

B.  KY'S  FIRST  ATTEMPT  TO  SUPPRESS  THE  STRUGGLE  MOVE-
MENT, APRIL,  1966

Events  now  happened  in  rapid  succession.  Assured  of  Lodge's  sympathy,  on
April  3  Ky  declared  that  Da  Nang  was  in  the  hands  of  Communists.  On  April


US-GVN  Relations  373


5,  despite  mild  questioning  from  State,  MACV  airlifted  two  battalions  of  Viet-
namese Rangers  to  Da  Nang  under  personal  command  of  Ky,  and  they  started
to  seize  the  city.  That  same  day  the  1st  ARVN  Division  Commander  declared
for  the  Struggle  Movement,  with  his  officers  backing  him,  and  U.S.  advisers
were  withdrawn  from  the  Division.  On  April  6,  "non-essential"  U.S.  civilians
withdrew  from  Hue.  On  April  8,  the  GVN  flew  two  more  Ranger  battalions  to
Da  Nang,  using  its  own  airlift  after  MACV  refused  to  provide  any.  On  April
9,  U.S.  representatives  protested  to  Struggle  Movement  leaders  about  Howit-
zers under  their  control  positioned  within  range  of  the  Da  Nang  airbase;  the
leaders  agreed  to  pull  them  back.  Two  hundred  U.S.  and  third  country  civilians
evacuated  Da  Nang.

Washington  played  little  role  in  all  this.  From  time  to  time  it  offered  mild
advice,  but  Lodge  had  a  free  hand.  It  was  his  decision  to  withhold  any  further
U.S.  airlift  on  April  8,  although  after  he  acted  State  agreed  by  urging  him  to
push  GVN  toward  a  political  rather  than  a  military  solution:

Accordingly  we  believe  you  should  not  repeat  not  urge  immediate  Da
Nang  operations  at  present,  but  rather  that  entire  focus  of  your  efforts  at
all  levels  should  be  to  get  political  process  started.

(It  was  at  this  time  that  Lodge  wrote  his  long  cable,  discussed  in  the  next  sec-
tion below,  saying  that  the  U.S.  does  not  have  enough  influence  in  Vietnam,
and  that  it  should  set  up  a  leverage  system  that  bypasses  Saigon  and  works  at
the  Province  level.)  Lodge  accepted  the  fact  of  Buddhist  power,  and  wanted
to  avoid  bloodshed,  but  as  always  his  sympathies  were  squarely  with  the  mili-
tary leadership:

The  political  crisis  which  has  been  gripping  VN  is  now  almost  one  month
old.  The  situation  has  deteriorated  steadily  as  the  Buddhist  opposition  has
increased  pressure  on  the  GVN.

Buddhist  demands,  when  stripped  of  hypocrisy  [and,]  .  .  .  boil  down
to  a  naked  grab  for  power.

Throughout  this  period  we  have  sought  certain  fundamental  objectives:

A.  To  preserve  the  VN  nation,  and  thus,  the  present  government.

B.  To  provide  for  an  orderly  political  evolution  from  military  to  civil

government.

C.  To  preserve  the  Armed  Forces  as  an  effective  shield  against  VC.

D.  To  guard  and  expand  all  our  political,  economic,  social  and  military
gains,  notably  those  which  llowed  from  the  Honolulu  declaration.

E.  To  maintain  the  effectiveness  of  the  Free  World  forces  in  VN.

On  April  12,  GVN  found  a  face-saving  formula  and  withdrew  its  Ranger
battalions  from  Da  Nang  to  Saigon,  and  the  streets  became  relatively  quiet.
On  the  14th,  the  Directorate  gave  way  to  the  demands  for  elected  civilian
government  by  promising  elections  for  a  Constituent  Assembly  within  three  to
five  months.  For  the  time  being  the  Buddhists  and  other  political  groups,  while
making  additional  demands,  called  off  the  demonstrations  on  condition  that  Ky
honor  his  promises.

On  April  23,  Lodge  reviewed  for  State  all  the  leverage  available  that  might


374 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

be  used  to  help  bring  the  I  Corps  area  under  government  authority,  and  re-
jected using  any  of  it.

We  have  considered  possibility  of  using  U.S.  control  over  economic  and
military  commodities  in  I  Corps  to  foster  re-establishment  of  government
authority  in  the  areas.

The  bulk  of  USAID-controlled  commodities  are  scheduled  for  use  in  rural
areas.  Comparatively  little  anti-government  activity  is  carried  on  bv  the
rural  population  .  .  .

The  Hue-DaNang  area  currently  is  relatively  well  stocked  with  basic
commodities.  There  is  an  estimated  four  month  supply  of  rice  on  hand
and  the  countryside  is  now  starting  the  harvesting  of  a  rice  crop  .  .  .
The  U.S.  currently  controls,  through  the  USAID,  the  following:  (A)
Warehouses  in  the  part  of  DaNang  containing  quantities  of  construction
material  and  PL-480  foodstuffs  .  .  .  (B)  Three  deep  draft  vessels  and  one
coastal  vessel  now  in  the  DaNang  harbor  with  CIP  cement,  rice,  fer-
tilizer, and  miscellaneous  commercial  cargo  .  .  .  (C)  Nine  chartered
coastal  vessels  .  .  .  operated  for  USAID  .  .  .

With  respect  to  military  commodities,  RVNAF  maintains  a  30-60  day
supply  of  expendable  combat  items  while  their  rice  stocks  are  maintained
at  a  30-day  level.  However,  under  rationing  these  rice  stocks  can  be  ex-
tended to  60  days.  The  RVNAF  items  which  are  in  short  supply  through-
out Vietnam,  as  well  as  in  the  Hue-DaNang  area,  include  vehicle  bat-
teries, brake  shoes,  and  POL.  We  consider  it  unwise  to  interfere  with
the  flow  of  supplies  to  RVNAF  at  this  time  since  it  would  limit  effective-
ness of  operations  against  Viet  Cong  forces  .  .  .

Indeed  any  U.S.  effort  to  withhold  resources  which  it  controls  in  this  area
may  stimulate  excesses  by  the  struggle  movement  even  though  an  attempt
is  made  to  conceal  the  U.S.  role  in  the  imposition  of  sanctions.

C. VIOLENCE  EXPLODES  IN  MA  Y,  1 966

After  promising  the  elections  by  August  15,  against  Lodge's  public  disagree-
ment, Ky  said  in  a  public  statement  on  May  4  that  "we  will  try  to  hold  elec-
tions by  October."  In  Lodge's  absence,  on  a  long  trip  to  Washington,  Porter
protested  privately  to  Ky  that  once  he  had  made  a  public  commitment  on  elec-
tion timing  he  was  risking  further  disorders  to  appear  to  shirk  it.  Nevertheless,
Ky  added  to  the  flames  by  a  further  public  statement  that  he  expected  to  re-
main in  office  for  another  year.  New  disorders  broke  out,  and  DaNang  and
Hue  again  fell  under  overt  control  of  the  Struggle  Movement.  Without  con-
sulting the  Embassy,  the  Directorate  laid  plans  for  several  days  and  then  on
May  15  airlifted  troops  to  DaNang  and  then  to  Hue.

State  first  reaction  showed  unrestrained  fury,  and  sanctioned  "rough  talk"  to
stop  the  fighting:

This  may  require  rough  talk  but  U.S.  cannot  accept  this  insane  bickering
...  do  your  best  in  next  few  hours.  Intolerable  that  Ky  should  .  .  .  move
.  .  .  against  DaNang  without  consultation  with  us.  Urgent  now  to  insist
that  fighting  stop.

State  did  not,  at  first,  sanction  the  threat  of  force;  for  example,  it  said  Gen.
Walt  should  continue  to  harbor  the  dissident  General  Dinh  in  III  MAF  Head-


US-GVN  Relations  375.


quarters,  and  that  Walt  should  tell  GVN  he  "can't  foresee  the  U.S.  Government
reaction"  if  GVN  forces  should  break  into  his  Headquarters.  Its  overall  guidance
was  to  use  persuasion,  withdrawal  of  advisers,  and  a  public  posture  of  non-in-
tervention, with  the  following  specifics:

1.  Announce  that  the  U.S.  was  not  consulted,  gave  no  help.  Ky's  use  of

T39  routine,  "not  material  assistance."

2.  Furnish  no  airlift.

3.  Withdraw  all  advisers  from  I  CTZ,  including  from  loyal  GVN  units,

except  for  any  clearly  in  position  to  fight  VC.  Keep  U.S.  forces  out,
except  maybe  to  fight  VC.

4.  Inasmuch  as  withdrawal  of  civilians  and  military  from  DaNang  in

early  April  had  a  sobering  eflfect.  State  authorized  withdrawing  them
again  (including  combat  forces).

5.  Exception  to  3:  Keep  contacts  with  Thi  and  1st  Division,  and  make

other  like  exceptions.  (Purpose  of  withdrawal  is  to  avoid  appearance
of  involvement.)

6.  Use  contacts  to  get  a  compromise  that  avoids  bloodshed.

7.  Find  out  "soonest"  the  effect  on  election  preparations.

8.  Do  not  throw  U.S.  weight  behind  GVN  effort.

However,  the  "rough  talk"  actually  used  did  reach  the  point  of  a  clear  threat
of  force.  General  Walt  heard  of  a  possible  VNAF  attack  on  dissident  ARVN
units  in  their  compounds,  and  threatened  to  use  U.S.  jets  to  shoot  down  the
VNAF  aircraft  if  they  did.  (The  pretext  was  that  U.S.  advisers  would  be  threat-
ened if  they  did,  and  did  not  apply  to  VNAF  self-defense  against  dissident
ARVN  units  closing  on  DaNang.)  If  such  an  attack  was  planned,  the  threat  suc-
ceeded.

Porter  followed  State's  guidance  closely;  he  put  it  strongly  to  Ky  and  Thieu
that  the  failure  to  consult  was  unacceptable,  withheld  airlift  from  GVN  and
withdrew  advisers  from  units  on  both  sides,  and  obtained  from  Thieu  the  as-
surance that  the  election  would  be  held  as  promised.  He  refused  to  give  public
backing  or  opposition  to  either  side,  and  tried  to  mediate.  State  sent  several
more  messages  with  guidance  along  the  same  lines,  and  directed  him  to  tell  both
sides  of  USG's  impatience  with  Vietnamese  factionalism:

The  American  people  are  becoming  fed  up  with  the  games  they  are
playing  while  the  Americans  are  being  asked  to  sustain  such  major  bur-
dens.

On  May  17,  a  U.S.  helicopter  received  small  arms  fire  from  a  dissident  ARVN
unit  when  carrying  a  GVN  officer  to  parley  with  them;  the  helicopter  returned
the  fire,  causing  several  casualties.  In  a  stormy  meeting  the  next  day  with
Corcoran,  the  U.S.  Consul  in  Hue,  Tri  Quang  accused  the  U.S.  of  joining
forces  with  GVN  in  attacking  his  people,  and  threatened  violence  against  U.S.
forces  and  facilities.  Corcoran  stood  firm,  saying  that  U.S.  forces  would  defend
themselves.  State's  guidance  the  same  day,  reaffirming  the  previous  guidance,
was  to  limit  U.S.  assistance  to  administrative  aircraft,  and  then  only  when  GVN
had  none  available,  to  reassure  Thi  and  the  leaders  of  the  Struggle  Movement
about  U.S.  support  for  free  elections,  to  bring  opposite  sides  (especially  Ky  and
Thi)  to  face  to  face  discussions,  and  to  intervene  as  needed  to  end  the  squab-
bling. On  May  20,  Tri  Quang  complained  to  another  U.S.  official  about  the


376 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

administrative  aircraft  who  pointed  out  to  him  that  the  U.S.  also  provided  such
aircraft  to  Thi  and  other  dissident  miHtary  officers.  That  same  day  a  dissident
leader  threatened  to  attack  GVN  forces  at  DaNane,  and  State  directed  that
he  be  reminded  that  the  U.S.  forces  also  in  DaNang  would  have  to  defend  them-
selves. State  also  authorized  the  threat  of  total  U.S.  withdrawal.

On  Lodge's  return  to  Vietnam  at  this  time,  he  received  detailed  guidance
from  State,  very  similar  to  that  previously  given  to  Porter,  for  his  first  meet-
ing with  Ky.  The  guidance  re-emphasized  the  demand  for  prior  consultation
by  GVN  before  it  made  any  important  move,  and  directed  him  to  urge  GVN
to  be  conciliatory  and  to  use  its  forces  with  the  utmost  restraint:

1.  We  must  have  absolute  candor  from  Ky  as  to  his  plans,  and  oppor-

tunity to  comment  before  significant  actions.

2.  Tell  him  to  leave  pagodas  alone,  except  for  surveillance  and  encircle-

ment.

3.  Keep  ARVN  out  of  Saigon  demonstrations.

4.  Elections  vs  military  role:  Sound  out,

5.  Encourage  election  progress.

6.  Keep  GVN  in  contact  with  Buddhist  leaders.

7.  Help  Ky  meet  Thi.

8.  Consider  further  the  suggestion  of  withdrawal  from  DaNang  and  Hue.

9.  Give  us  "your  judgment  as  to  whether  we  ought  to  move  forcefully

and  drastically  to  assert  our  power"  to  end  strife.
10. Suggest  broadening  the  Directorate  with  civilians.

By  this  time,  Ky  had  begun  leaning  over  backward  to  consult  Porter,  and
then  Lodge,  before  every  move.  GVN  forces  overpowered  roadblocks  and
controlled  DaNang,  but  demonstrators  were  operating  freely  from  pagodas
in  Saigon,  and  the  Struggle  Movement  had  absolute  control  of  Hue,  where  in
the  next  few  days  they  surrounded  and  blockaded  the  consulate.  In  Saigon
GVN  followed  Lodge's  advice  and  neutralized  the  pagodas  by  surrounding
them  without  violating  them;  but  in  the  I  Corps  he  was  preparing  to  occupy
Hue  forcefully  as  he  had  DaNang.  The  Buddhists  began  a  series  of  self-im-
molations. Amid  mounting  threats,  the  U.S.  evacuated  the  consulate  and  its
other  facilities  in  Hue.

Lodge  was  unreservedly  sympathetic  to  Ky,  as  in  April,  and  viewed  the
Buddhists  as  equivalent  to  card-carrying  Communists;  but  he  followed  instruc-
tions and  pressed  Ky  to  be  conciliatory.  When  Kv  would  blurt  out  fire-eating
statements  and  whittle  down  his  previous  promises  on  elections,  Lodge  would
patiently  urge  him  to  avoid  off-the-cuff  statements  and  to  limit  himself  to  pre-
pared statements  on  radio  and  TV.  Lodge  and  Westmoreland  repeatedly  pressed
Ky  and  Thi  to  get  together,  which  they  did  on  May  27;  Ky  offered  Thi  and
Dinh  unspecified  Army  jobs.  State  was  gratified,  but  cautious.

D. KY  RESTORES  GVN  CONTROL  IN  I  CORPS,  JUNE,  1966

One  of  the  main  subjects  of  Lodge's  conferences  in  Washington  was  what
the  U.S.  Government  position  should  be  on  elections  for  the  Constituent  As-
sembly. Having  finished  deliberations  and  drafting  after  Lodge  returned  to
Saigon,  State  cabled  the  principles  it  thought  should  guide  the  Mission's  opera-
tions on  election  matters:


US-GVN  Relations  377


A.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  U.S.  ACTION

The  U.S.  Mission  should  seek  to  exert  maximum  influence  toward  the
achievement  of  the  substantive  objectives  stated  in  B.  below.  At  the  same
time,  this  must  be  done  with  recognition  that  a  key  objective  is  to  avoid
anti-Americanism  becoming  a  major  issue;  we  shall  be  accused  of  inter-
ferences in  any  event,  but  it  is  vitally  important  not  to  give  potential  anti-
American  elements  (or  the  press  and  outside  observers)  any  clear  handle
to  hit  us  with.

B.  OBJECTIVES

1.  Elections  should  be  held  as  announced  by  GVN  on  April  15th,  that  is
by  September  15  of  this  year.

2.  The  issue  of  anti-Americanism  should  be  kept  out  of  the  election  cam-
paign as  far  as  possible.

3.  The  question  as  to  whether  the  constitutional  assembly  will  only  have
the  role  of  drafting  the  constitution  or  will  have  some  further  function
should  not  be  allowed  to  become  an  active  pre-election  issue  and  the  U.S.
should  take  no  position  on  this  question.

4.  The  elections  should  be  conducted  so  as  to  produce  a  constitutional
assembly  fairly  representing  the  various  regions  and  groups  within  South
Vietnam  (except  those  actively  participating  with  the  Viet  Cong),  in-
cluding the  Army,  Montagnards,  Khmer  minorities,  et.  al.

5.  The  elections  should  be  conducted  so  as  to  gain  a  maximum  improve-
ment in  the  image  of  the  GVN  in  the  United  States  and  internationally;
this  calls  for  a  wide  turnout,  scrupulously  correct  conduct  of  the  voting
and  counting  process,  as  little  political  limitation  on  voter  eligibility  as
possible  and  vigorous  efforts  to  avoid  voter  intimidation  from  any  quarter.
Ideas  to  be  explored  are  a  brief  election  period  ceasefire,  international  ob-
servation of  the  elections,  students  participating  as  poll  watchers,  etc.

6.  The  emphasis  in  the  campaign  should  be  on  the  selection  of  good  men
to  draft  the  constitution;  political  parties  are  not  expected  to  play  a  major
role  although  the  campaign  may  provide  the  occasion  for  laying  founda-
tions for  future  party  organization.

7.  Unless  new  developments  change  our  assessment,  major  efforts
should  be  devoted  not  to  stimulating  the  formation  of  a  large  nationalist
party  but  rather  to  the  adoption  of  the  concept  that  these  elections  bring
together  all  non-communist  groups  who  are  pledged,  among  other  things,
to  their  country's  independence  and  the  continuing  need  to  defend  it  with
American  help.  Specifically,  efforts  should  not  be  made  to  split  the  Budd-
hists or  isolate  the  militant  Buddhist  faction.

8.  The  election  process  should  be  a  vehicle  for  educating  and  engaging
the  population  in  the  democratic  process  and  it  should  be  used  to  launch
political  and  psychological  initiatives  with  youth  groups,  students,  labor,  etc.

9.  Restore  as  far  as  possible  the  unity  of  the  Directorate  and  promote  a
reconciliation  between  Generals  Ky  and  Thi.  However,  discourage  efforts
by  the  Directorate  to  form  a  government  party  designed  purely  to  per-
petuate the  Directorate  in  power  to  the  exclusion  of  other  significant
political  groups.

At  the  end  of  May  things  seemed  to  settle  down.  McNamara  sounded  out


378 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  Embassy  about  a  trip  in  early  June,  but  Lodge  talked  him  out  of  it  on  the
grounds  that  it  might  tempt  the  Buddhists  to  start  demonstrating  again.  Ky  met
Buddhist  Institute  leaders  on  May  31  and  offered  civilian  participation  in  an
enlarged  Directorate.  He  reported  that  the  Buddhists  accepted  this  along  with
reassurances  about  elections,  and  agreed  with  Ky's  new  appointment  of  Gen-
eral Lam  as  Commander  of  I  Corps.  Lodge  was  skeptical :

The  above  is  what  Ky  said  and  it  stood  up  to  questioning.  It  sounds  too
good  to  be  true,  and  we  will  await  next  steps.

The  next  day,  June  1,  a  mob  of  students  burned  the  consulate  and  consular
residence  in  Hue.  When  GVN  forces  prepared  to  move  on  Hue.  the  Struggle
Movement  filled  the  streets  with  Buddhist  altars,  serving  as  roadblocks  the  GVN
forces  hesitated  to  disturb,  while  dissident  ARVN  units  deployed  in  the  city.

The  directorate's  April  14  promise  of  elections  of  a  Constituent  Assembly
on  August  15  had  led  to  the  creation  of  an  Electoral  Law  Commission,  which
the  Buddhists  boycotted  as  a  result  of  the  subsequent  disagreements.  The  Com-
mission presented  its  proposals  on  June  5,  and  they  included  several  features
unacceptable  to  the  Directorate,  especially  those  related  to  the  powers  and
tenure  of  the  Assembly.  Ky  reacted  publicly  on  June  7,  saying  that  if  military-
civil  unity  proceeded  smoothly  enough  over  the  next  few  months  it  would  be
possible  to  postpone  elections.  Demonstrations  continued  in  Saigon,  while  a
combination  of  negotiations  and  force  gradually  brought  Hue  under  GVN
control.

On  June  15,  Ky  made  it  clear  that  the  Assemblv  would  not  be  permitted
to  continue  and  to  legislate  after  drafting  a  constitution,  and  that  the  Military
Directorate  would  continue  in  power  until  promulgation  of  the  new  constitu-
tion and  the  seating  of  a  subsequently  elected  Assemblv  in  1967.  (Note  that
Lodge  backed  this  attitude.)  The  Buddhist  Institute  called  a  general  strike  in
response  to  the  GVN  declaration  that  June  18,  the  anniversary  of  the  Thieu-Ky
government,  would  be  a  national  holiday.  On  June  19.  the  Directorate  scheduled
the  elections  for  the  Constituent  Assemblv  for  September  11,  1966.  The  an-
nouncement had  a  calming  effect,  and  the  disorders  came  under  control  within
a  few  days.  The  approved  electoral  law  gave  the  Directorate  ample  scope  to
exclude  unwanted  candidates,  and  prevented  the  Buddhists  from  putting  their
symbol,  the  red  lotus,  on  the  ballot.  (Again,  note  Lodge's  concurrence.)

On  July  31,  Thi  went  into  exile.

E. REVOLUTIONARY  DEVELOPMENT,  MARCH-JUNE,  1966

To  help  implement  the  increased  emphasis  given  pacification  at  Honolulu,
President  Johnson  in  late  March  appointed  Robert  Komer  as  his  Special  As-
sistant for  "peaceful  reconstruction."  The  creation  of  a  high  level  focal  point
for  pacification  planning  and  coordinating  had  the  effect  of  supplanting  the  in-
teragency Vietnam  Coordinating  Committee  (created  in  1964  and  originally
headed  by  William  Sullivan).  Though  Komers  charter  was  more  limited  than
that  of  the  VNCC,  his  direct  access  to  the  President  conferred  particular  im-
portance to  this  position.  To  his  desk  came  the  MACV  and  Mission  reports  on
the  progress  of  pacification  that  struck  the  same  gloomy  note  month  after
month.  The  Status  Report  of  March  30  on  the  Honolulu  agreements  said:

1.  Assure  that  Province  Chief  actuallv  retains  op  con  over  necessary  mili-
tary forces  to  support  program  in  his  Province.  Status:  In  Long  An  Prov-


US-GVN  Relations  379


ince  two  regiments  of  the  25th  Division  are  under  Province  control.
This  is  encouraging,  but  tactical  situation  elsewhere  makes  it  difficult.
MACV  plans  to  augment  regular  forces  by  120  companies  in  1966-67
(approximately  47  will  go  to  priority  areas.)  This  augmentation  if  suc-
cessful will  be  major  step  forward.

2.  Areas  where  the  program  is  underway  and  four  priority  areas  in  particu-
lar should  be  placed  under  superior  Province  Chiefs  who  should  not  be  re-
moved while  program  is  underway  without  serious  cause.  Status:  Since
Honolulu,  eight  Province  Chiefs  have  been  replaced.  Most  fall  within
category  mentioned  by  General  Co  at  Honolulu  when  he  said  GVN  was
about  to  make  several  changes  to  strengthen  their  ability  to  achieve  plans.
The  Mission  continues  to  emphasize  at  every  level  the  need  for  continuity,
but  in  most  cases  it  is  dangerous  for  U.S.  to  go  down  the  line  in  support
of  individual  Province  Chiefs.

The  Mission  report  on  the  status  of  "Revolutionary  Development"  for  April
said:

RD  remains  behind  schedule  with  progress  slow.  As  reported  in  March,
lack  of  effective  leadership,  military  as  well  as  governmental,  marginal
local  security,  and  late  availability  RD  cadre  teams,  continue  to  hamper
program  accomplishments.

The  corresponding  report  for  May  said:

Lack  of  effective  low-level  leadership  and  lack  of  local  security  continued
to  have  adverse  effects  on  RD  program  .  .  .  progress  primarily  reflects
consolidation  of  hamlets  and  population  already  under  a  lesser  degree  of
GVN  control  rather  than  direct  gains  from  VC  control.  There  was  no  ap-
preciable expansion  in  secured  area  or  reduction  in  VC-controlled  popu-
lation.

An  incident  in  June  highlighted  the  frustrations  of  U.S.  field  representatives,
and  showed  that  leverage  could  work,  at  least  on  procedural  matters.  In  Kon-
tum,  the  Province  Chief  flatly  refused  to  set  up  any  end-use  control  procedures
(filling  out  requisitions,  etc.)  for  USAID  commodities.  This  refusal  could  not
be  accepted,  and  AID  suspended  all  commodity  shipments  to  the  Province.
After  four  days,  the  Province  Chief  gave  in,  and  AID  resumed  shipments.

Meanwhile,  the  GVN  was  going  nothing  about  its  Honolulu  promises  in  the
areas  of  administration,  economic  reform,  and  dollar  balances.  There  were  sev-
eral U.S.  Government  reactions  to  these  failures  and  continuing  weaknesses.
There  was  a  series  of  studies  and  proposals  for  leverage,  and  there  was  rising
pressure  for  renewed  direct  negotiations  with  GVN.

An  example  of  the  studies  was  the  U.S.  Army's  "Program  for  the  Pacifica-
tion and  Long-Term  Development  of  South  Vietnam,"  (PROVN).

The  PROVN  study  was  completed  in  March  1966  by  a  Department  of  the
Army  staff  team  and  briefed  on  May  17  at  CINCPAC  Headquarters  during  a
visit  by  COMUSMACV  to  Hawaii.  His  comments  at  that  time  were  that  most
of  the  recommendations  already  had  been  acted  on.  He  emphasized  that  par-
ticular care  should  be  exercised  to  avoid  conditions  which  would  cause  RVN
officials  to  be  branded  as  U.S.  puppets.

The  study  results  were  presented  in  the  MACV  conference  room  on  May  21.


380 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

In  response  to  a  ICS  request,  COMUSMACV  commented  in  detail  on  May
27.  He  noted  that  PROVN  recommended  two  major  initiatives:  (1)  creation
of  an  organization  to  integrate  the  total  U.S.  civil-military  effort,  and  (2)  ex-
ercise of  greatly  increased  U.S.  involvement  in  GVN  activities.

COMUSMACV  agreed  with  the  first  recommendation  but  felt  it  was  al-
ready being  accomplished.  COMUSMACV  agreed  that  immediate  and  sub-
stantially increased  U.S.  involvement  in  GVN  activities,  in  the  form  of  con-
structive influence  and  manipulations  was  essential  to  achievement  of  U.S.
objectives  in  Vietnam.  He  felt  there  was  great  danger  that  the  involvement  en-
visioned would  become  excessive  and  boomerang  on  U.S.  interests;  U.S.  manip-
ulations could  become  an  American  takeover  justified  by  U.S.  compulsion  to
get  the  job  done.

COMUSMACV  saw  the  advantages  in  removing  ARVN  divisions  from  po-
sitions of  command  over  provinces,  and  attaching  some  of  their  units  to  prov-
inces, but  this  action  would  require  a  major  shift  of  Vietnamese  attitudes.  As-
signment of  ARVN  units  to  provinces  in  the  past  had  had  limited  success  be-
cause of  restrictions  on  employment  and  command  jealousies.

Accordingly  MACV  recommended  that  PROVN,  reduced  primarily  to  a
conceptual  document,  carrying  forward  the  main  thrusts  and  goals  of  the
study,  be  presented  to  the  National  Security  Council  for  use  in  developing  con-
cepts, policies,  and  actions  to  improve  effectiveness  of  the  American  effort  in
Vietnam.

Subsequently,  ICS  inquired  about  Revolutionary  Development  effectiveness,
rhey  asked  why  RD  objectives  could  not  be  more  effectively  achieved  with  the
program  under  military  execution.  COMUSMACV's  reply  repeated  the  views
of  the  Ambassador's  December  memorandum  to  Lansdale  and  said  the  pro-
gram was  primarily  civilian.

F. LODGE  FAVORS  DECENTRALIZED  LEVERAGE

Embassy  officials,  meanwhile,  continued  to  press  for  the  restoration  of  the
leverage  that  was  lost  with  the  dropping  of  the  troika  sign-off  in  June,  1965.
There  is  no  indication  that  the  issue  of  sign-off  came  up  at  Honolulu,  very  likely
because  of  disagreement  on  it  between  State  and  Saigon,  But  in  April,  Ambas-
sador Lodge  went  on  the  record  in  favor  of  the  sign-off  system,  and  against
civil  encadrement  in  the  Ministries.

Experience  and  study  have  made  it  apparent  that  the  United  States  has
not  the  influence  which  it  should  have  in  Viet  Nam  and  also  that  [we]
could  be  organized  so  as  to  be  relatively  much  more  immune  from  some  of
the  worst  effects  of  changes  of  government  in  Saigon.

I  refer  to  influence  in  the  provinces,  and  lower  units  of  government,  and
not  to  our  influence  at  the  top  of  the  Government  in  Saigon,  which  is  just
about  as  good  as  it  can  be.  The  GVN  in  Saigon  sometimes  disagrees,  often
agrees,  and  is  rarely  able  to  get  much  done  .  .  .

An  error  was  made  in  giving  up  our  right  to  withhold  funds  from  USAID
projects  until  we  have  conducted  a  successful  bargain  with  the  Vietnamese
in  which  they  agreed  to  carry  out  certain  things  which  we  wanted  .  .  .
There  are  two  ways  of  not  solving  this  problem  of  contact:  (a)  One  is
for  a  US  agency  head  with  big  administrative  responsibilities  to  pop  over
to  the  ministry  to  argue  briefly  and  intensely.  American-fashion,  with  the
Minister — a  system  which  is  almost  guaranteed  not  to  produce  results.


US-GVN  Relations  381


(b)  Nor  do  I  believe  the  problem  is  solved  by  putting  American  offices  in
the  Vietnamese  Ministries.  This  was  the  French  practice,  and  it  too  does
not  prevent  bureaucratic  paralysis  .  .  .

We  should  always  be  on  the  lookout  for  Americans  who  have  the  sym-
pathy with  and  the  knack  of  getting  along  with  these  people,  and  we  might
find  some  good  material  among  the  young  men  who  are  in  the  provinces.
Another  idea  is  to  bring  about  a  situation  where  we  are  really  economic
partners  of  the  GVN  and  not  merely  the  people  who  pay  for  the  CIP
Program  without  effective  participation  in  the  use  of  the  piaster  proceeds
of  that  program.  At  present  we  have  very  little  say  in  the  disposition  of
such  piaster  funds.  Somewhere  along  the  line  we  gave  up  this  very  im-
portant leverage.  In  fact,  we  are  now  trying  to  recover  joint  authority  over
those  funds,  but  progress  is  difficult  ...  If  we  had  this  joint  GVN/US
authority,  we  could  get  at  corruption,  provided  we  also  had  advisers  with
the  Ministries  who  were  really  "persona  grata."

In  the  first  week  of  May,  Porter  put  the  sector  fund  idea  to  Ky,  who  rebuffed
him.  Lodge  tried  to  keep  the  idea  alive,  but  without  success.

G. THE  MILITARY  ADVISORY  PROGRAM,  MARCH-JULY,  1966

COMUSMACV's  concern  over  declining  present  for  combat  strength  of
ARVN  units  resulted  in  a  study  which  showed  that  as  of  February  28,  only
62%  of  their  authorized  strength  were  mustered  for  operations.  There  were  two
principal  reasons:  (1)  Division  and  regimental  commanders  had  organized
non-TOE  units  such  as  strike/recon,  recon  and  security,  recruiting  teams,  and
(2)  Large  numbers  of  deserters,  long-term  hospital  patients,  and  KIA  had  not
been  removed  from  rolls.  MACV  instructed  JGS  to  disband  non-TOE  units  and
give  increased  attention  to  improving  administrative  procedures.  Senior  ad-
visers were  told  to  monitor  their  counterparts  and  use  their  influence  to  bring
present  for  operations  strengths  up  to  at  least  450  men  (75%  )  per  battalion.

At  the  same  time,  MACV  had  a  study  made  to  determine  the  need  for  re-
connaissance units.  When  field  advisers  were  asked,  all  replies  were  favorable;
so  JGS  was  asked  to  develop  the  organization  for  a  regimental  reconnaissance
company.

Training  was  another  problem.  One  adviser  stated,  "It  is  more  accurate  to
describe  the  training  program  as  non-existent  instead  of  unsatisfactory."  An-
other said,  "It  appears  that  the  battalion  commander  desires  the  deterioration
of  the  training  status  of  the  battalion  so  that  higher  authority  will  place  the
unit  in  a  training  center  to  be  retrained."  COMUSMACV  wrote  to  the  Chief
JGS  in  March  on  the  subject  of  training,  but  training  progress  did  not  change
appreciably  through  1966  from  the  level  recorded  during  the  first  four  months.

There  was  a  question  of  what  to  do  about  units  which  advisers  rated  ineffec-
tive. The  combat  effectiveness  of  ihe  5th  and  25th  ARVN  Divisions  was  the
subject  of  a  staff  study  completed  April  19.  Five  courses  of  action  were  con-
sidered:

(1)  Deactivate  division  headquarters  and  place  subordinate  units  under
province  chiefs.

(2)  Exchange  the  divisions  with  two  other  divisions  from  different  CTZ's.

(3)  Relieve  the  key  leaders  at  all  levels  who  were  marginal  or  unsatis-
factory.


382 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

(4)  Relieve  the  divisions  of  their  primary  responsibility  of  fighting  VC  and
leave  them  to  pacification.

(5)  By  expression  of  COMUSMACV's  concern,  encourage  intensification
of  adviser  efforts  to  solve  the  divisions'  underlying  problems.  If  there
there  were  no  improvement,  withdraw  all  advisers.  If  there  were  still
no  improvement,  withdraw  all  MAP  support.

COMUSMACV  vetoed  the  last  proposal  and  had  it  removed  from  the  study.
His  guidance  was  to  avoid  sanctions  against  GVN,  to  intensify  the  effort  to
associate  and  integrate  the  5th  and  25th  ARVN  Divisions  with  the  1st  and  25th
U.S.  Division,  and  to  consider  the  possibility  of  greater  U.S.  participation  in
pacification  in  Hau  Nghia  and  Binh  Duong  provinces.

In  April,  a  study  based  on  exhaustive  analysis  of  field  adviser  reports  and
interviews  was  presented  to  RVNAF.  It  concerned  itself  with  several  major
problem  areas:  Leadership,  discipline,  and  personnel  management.  RVNAF
reacted  positively  and  quickly  to  the  recommendations  by  establishing  a  com-
mittee to  develop  a  leadership  program.

In  response  to  COMUSMACV  guidance  in  May,  J-5  studied  courses  of
action  to  produce  more  dynamic  progress  in  the  counterinsurgency  effort  in
RVN.  It  recommended  establishing  a  Deputy  COMUSMACV  for  RVNAF
matters  as  a  way  to  influence  RVNAF  more.  General  Westmoreland  said  in
his  endorsement  that  this  step  had  already  been  taken  with  the  appointment  of
Brigadier  General  Freund  as  Deputy  Assistant  to  COMUSMACV.  At  the  same
time,  he  directed  J-5  to  review  Brigadier  General  Freund's  Terms  of  Reference
and  recommend  changes  or  extensions.  The  completed  J-5  study  was  forwarded
to  Chief  of  Staff  Army  on  July  23,  recommending  that  the  Special  Assistant  to
COMUSMACV  not  be  given  responsibility  for  any  portion  of  the  U.S.  Advisory
effort.

Low  personnel  strength  was  another  critical  factor  in  ARVN  effectiveness.
Only  one  of  22  battalions  rated  combat  ineffective  or  marginally  effective  in
July  did  not  report  a  shortage  of  personnel.  COMUSMACV  advised  Chief  JGS
to  form  an  inspection  team  at  general  officer  level  to  inspect  the  strength  situa-
tion of  ARVN  division.  The  Inspector  General,  JGS,  headed  the  team  and  was
assisted  by  COMUSMACV's  personal  representative.  The  team  began  its  in-
spection with  the  25th  Division.

H. ECONOMIC  POLICY  AND  THE  PORT  OF  SAIGON,
APRIL-JUNE,  1966

As  noted,  this  period  saw  rising  pressure  for  renewed  direct  negotiations  with
GVN.  When  the  first  phase  of  the  Struggle  Movement  ended  in  mid-April,  Wash-
ington was  thoroughly  dissatisfied  with  accumulated  delays  on  the  economic
program  agreed  at  Honolulu.  The  USG  had  gone  ahead  and  delivered  on  its  side
of  the  bargain,  but  GVN  had  done  nothing.  State  proposed  the  threat  of  sanc-
tions; without  apparently  going  that  far,  Lodge  persuaded  GVN  to  cooperate
fully  with  the  IMF  team,  then  on  its  way,  to  work  out  an  anti-inflationary  and
balance-of-payments  program.

The  IMF  team  worked  through  late  May  and  at  the  end  of  the  month  agreed
with  GVN  on  a  program  with  the  following  main  points:

( 1 )  The  exchange  rate  for  imports,  including  tariff,  would  be  increased
from  60  to  118  piasters  to  the  dollar  except  for  rice,  which  would  be
brought  in  at  80.  Purchases  of  piasters  by  U.S.  troops  and  civilians,
and  other  "invisibles,"  would  have  the  118  rate  in  both  directions.


US-GVN  Relations  383


(2)  A  new  tax  on  beverages  would  raise  about  1.5  billion  piasters  in
revenue.

(3)  The  GVN  would  sell  gold  to  jewelers  to  push  the  price  down  closer
into  line  with  black  market  dollar  exchange  rate.

(4)  The  GVN  would  raise  wages  and  salaries  of  its  employees  by  20%
immediately,  with  a  further  10%  to  follow  in  six  months  if  necessary.

The  GVN  asked  the  USG  for  assurance  on  the  following  points:

(1)  The  GVN/IMF  plan  would  substitute  for  the  fiscal  and  customs  re-
forms promised  at  Honolulu.

(2)  The  USG  would  liberalize  the  Commodity  Imports  Program  to  cover
all  importers'  requests.

(3)  The  USG  would  buy  all  its  piasters  for  official  programs  at  the  ex-
change rate  of  80  (versus  the  previous  35) .

(4)  All  appropriated  Commodity  Import  Funds  not  used  up  would  be
applied  to  economic  development  projects  in  Vietnam.

The  USG  raised  no  problem  about  points  (1)  and  (3)  of  the  GVN  requests,
but  for  obvious  reasons  could  give  only  vague  and  non-committal  assurances
on  the  amount  of  AID  that  Congress  would  authorize  and  reprogram.  How-
ever, it  made  other  concessions  to  increase  total  economic  aid.  The  two  gov-
ernments reached  prompt  agreement  on  these  points,  and  the  piaster  was  de-
valued as  proposed  on  June  18,  along  with  the  associated  fiscal  reforms.  The
GVN's  promise  to  hold  down  its  dollar  holdings  (given  at  Honolulu)  remained
"binding,"  although  the  generous  AID  package  of  the  previous  July  was  now
raising  GVN's  dollar  balances  at  a  rate  of  about  $100  million  per  year.

These  decisions  overrode  a  proposal  from  OSD  (Systems  Analysis)  to  get
tough  with  GVN  and  to  get  deeper  and  more  enforceable  reforms.  The  DASD
(Economics)  predicted  that  the  GVN  would  fail  to  carry  out  any  reforms  other
than  changing  the  exchange  rate,  and  proposed  to  force  the  GVN  to  maximize
its  legal  revenues  from  CIP  by  threatening  to  curtail  the  program.  Without  re-
form of  the  licensing,  high  market  prices  for  CIP  commodities  yielded  extor-
tionate profits  to  those  merchants  who  could  get  licenses,  with  a  presumption  of
kickbacks  to  the  licensing  agencies.  The  proposed  reform  was  to  auction  the
licenses  in  the  presence  of  US  observers.  He  also  proposed  direct  US  purchases
of  piasters,  in  a  "grey"  market.

Upon  settling  the  devaluation  package,  the  Embassy  immediately  pressed  for
drastic  changes  in  Saigon  port  management;  the  pile-up  of  civilian  cargoes
had  grown  so  much  as  to  add  to  the  already  serious  congestion.  Lodge  proposed
a  complete  MACV  takeover  of  the  port  and  warehouses  with  a  Vietnamese
general  to  be  appointed  as  figurehead  port  director.  However,  the  Mission
backed  away  from  the  idea  of  complete  takeover  for  the  time  being,  and  settled
for  MACV  handUng  of  AID  direct  assistance  commodities,  not  including  CIP.

The  agreement  reached  with  GVN  at  the  end  of  June  said:

The  United  States  Military  Agencv  appointed  by  COMUSMACV  .  .  .
shall  forthwith  assume  responsibility  and  all  necessary  authority  for  .  .  .

A.  The  receipt  and  discharge  of  all  AID-financed  commodities  consigned
to  CPA.

B.  The  obtaining  of  customs  clearances  and  all  other  clearances  ...  for
such  commodities.


384 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

C.  The  storage  and  warehousing  of  such  commodities  intransit  as  neces-
sary.

D.  The  transport  of  such  commodities  to  such  first  destinations,  including
GVN  holding  areas  and/or  CPA/ministerial  depots  as  may  be  desig-
nated by  USAID/CPA.

/. POLITICAL  AFFAIRS  IN  THE  THIRD  QUARTER,  1966

This  period  was  comparatively  quiet,  and  transactions  between  the  two
governments  were  routine.  Late  in  June,  Ky  had  brought  up  with  Lodge  the
idea  of  a  cabinet  reshuffle,  and  Lodge  had  advised  him  to  go  slow.  In  July,  Ky
agreed  to  put  it  off.  In  August  Ky  volunteered  to  do  something  about  the  most
corrupt  generals  in  the  Directorate,  especially  Co  and  Quang.  Again,  Lodge,
who  had  frankly  given  up  on  corruption  in  the  highest  places,  cautioned  him  to
go  slow,  and  Ky  decided  to  put  off  any  action  until  after  the  September  elec-
tions. Lodge's  advice,  with  State  concurrence,  concentrated  on  making  sure  Ky
had  definitive  evidence  of  the  alleged  corruption;  Lodge  was  sure  that  following
this  advice  would  delay  things  sufficiendy.  Late  in  August,  Ky  received  an  in-
vitation to  talk  to  a  press  group  in  Los  Angeles,  and  Ky  tentatively  accepted.
Both  Lodge  and  State  panicked,  especially  when  the  group  started  to  set  up  a
debate  between  Ky  and  Senator  Fulbright;  and  in  the  upshot  they  talked  Ky
out  of  going.

GVN  launched  its  transition  to  legitimate  government  on  September  11,
electing  the  long-promised  Constituent  Assembly.  Although  GVN  systematically
excluded  from  the  elections  all  persons  connected  with  the  Struggle  Move-
ment, and  although  the  Buddhists  declared  a  bovcott,  the  electorate  turned
out  in  large  numbers  and  the  results  gratified  the  Embassy.  State  had  reserva-
tions about  the  exclusion  of  Struggle  Movement  people,  but  Lodge  unreservedly
backed  this  exclusion,  on  the  ground  that  GVN  "should  not  be  discouraged
from  taking  moderate  measures  to  prevent  elections  from  being  used  as  a  ve-
hicle for  a  Communist  takeover  of  the  countrv."  As  the  election  approached,
Washington  and  the  Embassy  began  to  think  about  what  they  wanted  to  see  in
the  new  constitution.  Lodge's  view  listed  the  following  minimum  essentials  for
the  US  best  interests:

A.  A  strong,  stable  executive.

B.  Executive  control  of  the  military.

C.  Emergency  powers,  so  that  the  legislature  can't  hamstring  the  execu-
tive during  the  war  emergencv.

D.  Appropriate  provision  for  the  people's  aspirations  and  rights.

E.  Minority  group  representation.

Lodge  also  listed  lower  prioritv  requirements  for  the  new  constitution:

A.  Relative  ease  of  amendment  of  the  constitution.

B.  Removal  of  either  the  President  or  the  Legislature  should  be  very
difficult.

C.  A  limited  term  for  the  President.

D.  Appropriate  provision  for  establishment  and  improvement  of  the
judiciary.

E.  A  superior  court  for  constitutional  review  of  laws  and  decrees.


US-GVN  Relations  385

F.  Expansion  of  the  powers  of  provincial  councils  and  other  forms  of  local
government.

State  expressed  broad  agreement  with  Lodge's  views,  with  reservations  about
emergency  powers  and  about  constitutional  provisions  to  forbid  communism
and  neutralism.

J. THE  ROLES  AND  MISSIONS  STUDY

In  response  to  a  May  27  directive  from  Deputy  Ambassador  Porter,  the  Direc-
tor JUSPAO  had  named  Colonel  George  Jacobson  chairman  of  a  study  group
to  define  RD  strategy  and  the  roles  and  missions  of  the  various  elements.  The
group  submitted  its  report  on  August  24,  1966.

The  major  recommendations  of  Roles  and  Missions  Study  were:

( 1 )  The  many  elements  and  echelons  charged  with  destroying  VC
infrastructure  are  confusing.  The  National  Police  should  have  the
primary  mission  and  responsibility  for  this  goal.

(2)  Reforms  in  basic  GVN  attitudes  are  necessary.  Many  rural  residents
believe  that  the  US  condones  corrupt  practices.  This  must  be  changed.

(3)  ARVN  forces  should  be  encouraged  to  increase  participation  in
pacification  activities.

(4)  PF/RF  should  be  developed  into  a  constabulary-type  organization.

(5)  PF/RF  should  be  transferred  from  the  Ministry  of  Security  to  the
Ministry  of  Revolutionary  Development.

(6)  CIDG  should  be  stationed  only  in  remote  areas.

(7)  The  Vietnamese  Information  Service  is  not  effective  at  local  level.
It  should  assume  supporting  role  to  propaganda  activities  of  other
agencies.

(8)  A  Directorate  of  Intelligence  should  be  established  to  coordinate
all  intelligence  activities.

(9)  Reinstitution  of  the  MACV  Subsector  Advisor  Fund  is  urged.

(10)  ARVN  Divisions  (eventually  Corps  as  well)  should  be  removed  from
the  chain  of  command  in  RD  affairs.  For  instance,  there  were  no
USAID,  JUSPAO,  or  CAS  representatives  at  ARVN  division  head-
quarters.

(11)  Because  of  generally  bad  behavior  of  ARVN  Ranger  units,  they
should  be  disbanded  with  Rangers  reassigned  as  individuals  through-
out the  Army.

(12)  The  physical  and  attitudinal  consequences  of  present  air  and
artillery  employment  policies  should  be  studied.

(13)  A  logistic  system  which  provides  for  US  government  control  until
delivery  of  material  to  end  users  should  be  substituted  for  the  present
MAP  procedures.

(14)  The  Provincial  Committee  "signoff"  provision  should  be  reinstated
for  the  Revolutionary  Development  budget.

On  September  7  COMUSMACV  made  the  following  comments  with  respect
to  the  Roles  and  Missions  Study:

(1)  Action  had  been  taken  to  increase  ARVN  participation  in  RD,  but
removal  of  Division  from  the  chain  of  command  in  RD  activities  ap-
peared illogical.  If  ARVN  combat  battalions  were  dispersed  to  all  43


386 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

provinces,  the  Corps  span  of  control  would  be  ineffective  and  this  ar-
rangement would  risk  having  these  units  defeated  in  detail.  The  proposed
placement  of  battalions  under  sector  commanders  was  feasible  only
in  some  areas — to  be  considered  on  an  individual  basis.  The  1967  Com-
bined Campaign  Plan  would  clarify  the  functions  of  ARVN.  Other
things  such  as  the  buddy  system  with  US  units  were  the  realistic  ways  of
accomplishing  the  goal.

(2)  The  recommended  disbandment  of  Ranger  Battalions  would  seriously
reduce  ARVN  combat  strength.  They  should  be  retained  and  re-
organized under  new  commanders.

(3)  Recruitment  of  PF  personnel  for  RD  would  weaken  hamlet  security.

(4)  Although  the  study  recommended  giving  primary  responsibility  for
intelligence  to  the  National  Police,  the  nature  of  the  problem  dictated
that  all  US  and  GVN  military  and  quasimilitary  elements  contribute
to  this  important  goal.

(5)  The  idea  of  a  single  intelligence  director  seems  sound  theoretically,
but  it  is  not  realistic  when  DIA  and  CIA  are  not  amalgamated  in  Wash-
ington.

(6)  RD  requires  both  military  and  civil  participation.  Continued  emphasis
on  military  participation  would  be  given  but  the  major  change  in  the
MACV  organization  suggested  by  the  study  did  not  seem  necessary.

One  of  the  year's  changes  that  could  have  led  to  implementation  of  a  major
recommendation  of  the  Roles  and  Missions  Study,  but  didn't,  was  the  March
decision  in  Washington  to  transfer  the  support  of  FWMAF  and  RVNAF  from
MAP  funding  to  service  funding.  Studies  were  made  by  MACV  on  how  best
to  implement  this  change,  which  became  effective  in  September.  It  was  decided
that  only  the  logistic  advisory  function  would  be  transferred  to  USARV.  Pro-
gramming budgeting  and  executing  programs  remained  under  MACV.  Most
important,  MAP  goods  were  still  put  into  RVNAF  logistic  channels,  although
under  the  new  funding  they  could  have  been  held  in  US  channels  down  to
the  receiving  unit.

K. ECONOMIC  POLICY  AND  THE  PORT,  THIRD  QUARTER,  1966

Although  in  political  affairs  there  was  no  significant  friction  between  USG
and  GVN  in  the  Third  Quarter,  GVN's  accumulation  of  dollar  balances  and  its
inaction  on  economic  matters  caused  growing  impatience  in  USOM  and  in
Washington.

In  late  July,  1966,  Komer  and  Ambassador  Lodge  laid  the  basis  for  the  US
position,  including  a  suggestion  that  from  now  on  USOM  should  make  sure  it
has  the  means  to  monitor  and  enforce  GVN  compliance  with  its  commitments.

Komer  said:

Devaluation,  port  takeover,  CIP  expansion,  RD  reorganization  if  all
skillfully  meshed — could  vet  have  earlv  impact  on  VN  public  and  do  much
in  these  critical  weeks  to  refurbish  GVN  image  at  home  and  abroad.
So  far,  however,  GVN  has  failed  to  move  aggressively  enough  with  supplies
in  countrv  to  curb  rice  and  port  speculation;  has  been  unwilling  to  try  to
develop  wage  restraint  policv  in  private  sector,  has  dithered  on  promul-
gating and  carr\ing  out  promised  regulations  re  Warehouse  removals;
has  gone  about  moving  expanded  CIP  goods  up  country  on  business  as


US-GVN  Relations  387


usual  basis;  has  shuffled  about  on  RD  reorganization,  and  Thang's  or  Ky's
famous  report  to  the  nation.

Lodge  proposed  specific  means  to  monitor  GVN,  and  wished  to  urge  the  GVN
to  fund  Revolutionary  Development  with  counterpart  piasters,  so  that  USG
could  assure  that  the  funding  was  adequate.  Komer  agreed  with  these  proposals.
Porter  further  proposed:

We  intend  using  budget  review  process  and  counterpart  releases  on  lever-
age on  GVN  CY  67  programs  and  to  seek  GVN  acceptance  of  both  overall
ceiling  and  commitment  to  essential  revolutionary  development  programs
before  we  agree  to  support  any  part  of  the  budget.

Note  degree  our  effectiveness  dependent  on  credibility  our  leverage  by
GVN,  which  may  not  be  great.

But  Porter  opposed  a  complete  takeover  of  the  Saigon  port,  proposed  by
Komer.

VI.  A  SEVEN-NATION  CONFERENCE,  LEGITIMATE  GOVERNMENT,
AND  HIGH  HOPES  FOR  THE  FUTURE,  OCTOBER,  1966— SEPTEMBER,
1967

A. THE  MANILA  CONFERENCE,  OCTOBER  1966

In  the  first  week  of  October,  just  as  planning  was  beginning  for  a  seven-
nation  conference  at  Manila  on  Southeast  Asia,  latent  mistrust  between  South-
erners and  Northerners  in  Ky's  cabinet  broke  into  an  open  split.  A  Northerner
persuaded  Colonel  Loan,  the  Police  Director,  to  arrest  one  of  the  Southerners,
and  although  Loan  released  him  on  Ky's  order  a  few  hours  later,  six  Southerners
took  it  as  an  affront  to  all  of  them  and  threatened  to  resign  from  the  cabinet.
While  conference  planning  was  going  forward,  the  crisis  simmered  on  for  al-
most three  weeks,  up  to  the  eve  of  the  conference.  Lodge  tried  to  mediate,  but
the  six  proved  difficult  to  mollify;  he  conjectured  that  they  were  trying  to  get
all  the  mileage  they  could  out  of  the  embarrassment  the  crisis  would  cause
Thieu  and  Ky  if  it  were  not  resolved  before  the  conference.  It  was  patched  up
at  the  last  minute.

In  preparing  for  the  conference.  Lodge  was  particularly  concerned  that  Ky
or  Thieu,  if  put  in  the  limelight  through  the  opening  speech  to  the  conference,
should  avoid  embarrassing  the  USG:

One  crucial  factor  must  be  degree  to  which  you  believe  they  can  be  per-
suaded to  make  constructive  and  reasonable  speech,  avoiding  talk  of  in-
vasion of  the  North  or  any  other  subjects  that  put  us  openly  at  variance
with  each  other  .  .  .  We  hope  that  the  GVN  can  delegate  Tran  Van  Do
and  Bai  Diem  as  its  drafting  representatives  so  that  even  before  they  arrive
in  Manila  we  would  be  a  long  way  toward  common  agreement  on  the  kinds
of  language  we  need.

The  USG  was  also  concerned  that  GVN  should  announce  a  broad  and
attractive  program  that  would  put  a  good  face  on  itself  and  its  prosecution
of  the  war:

We  welcome  your  news  that  Tran  Van  Do  and  Bai  Diem  will  arrive  Ma-
nila October  21  .  .  .


388 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


Since  this  gives  us  at  least  a  solid  day,  the  22d,  to  refine  drafts,  we  are
inclined  here  not  repeat  not  to  ask  you  to  work  with  GVN  on  detailed
submissions  .  .  .  Rather  and  absolutely  vital  to  favorable  conference
result,  we  believe  you  should  be  working  with  Ky  to  get  his  concurrence
on  the  following  list  of  action  areas  in  which  we  believe  forthcoming  state-
ment by  GVN  is  not  only  wise  in  itself,  but  essential  to  US  strong  and  suc-
cessful public  statement  from  the  conference.

A.  Land  Reform

B.  Constitutional  Evolution

C.  National  Reconciliation

D.  Economic  Stabilization

E.  Improved  Local  Government

F.  Radically  Increased  Emphasis  on  RD/Pacification

G.  Postwar  Planning

H.  Corruption

I.  Port  Congestion
J.  GVN  Reserves

In  each  of  above  categories,  basic  problem  is  to  get  GVN  commitment
and  willingness  to  state  its  intentions.

Secretary  McNamara  put  down  his  views  on  priorities  in  a  Memorandum  to
the  President  on  October  14.  He  noted  that  the  US  had  not  yet  found  the  for-
mula for  training  and  inspiring  the  Vietnamese.  The  main  thrust  of  the  mem-
orandum concerned  shifting  ARVN  more  into  pacification  and  shifting  the  US
pacification  responsibility  to  MACV.  But  in  disucssing  GVN's  weaknesses,  he
commented,  "drastic  reform  is  needed."  He  let  that  one  drop  without  any
recommendation.

The  conferees  met  in  Manila  on  October  24-25,  1966,  and  after  due  delibera-
tion issued  a  long  communique  on  policies  for  Southeast  Asia  in  general  and
South  Vietnam  in  particular.  They  backed  the  defense  of  South  Vietnam
against  North  Vietnamese  aggression,  and  supported  the  major  outlines  of  US
policy.  The  GVN  emphasized  its  promises  of  social  revolution,  economic
progress,  and  political  freedom.  They  concluded  with  the  declaration  of  intent
to  withdraw  all  US  and  Free  World  forces  under  specified  conditions:

29.  In  particular,  they  declared  that  allied  forces  are  in  the  Republic  of
Vietnam  because  that  country  is  the  object  of  aggression  and  its  Govern-
ment requested  support  in  the  resistance  of  its  people  to  aggression.  They
shall  be  withdrawn,  after  close  consultation,  as  the  other  side  withdraws
its  forces  to  the  North,  ceases  infiltration,  and  the  level  of  violence  thus
subsides.  Those  forces  will  be  withdrawn  as  soon  as  possible  and  not  later
than  six  months  after  the  above  conditions  have  been  fulfilled.

B. BARGAINING  BEGINS  ON  NATIONAL  RECONCILIATION,
OCTOBER-DECEMBER,  1966

The  USG,  having  chafed  at  the  lack  of  action  on  the  Chie  Hoi  Program,
wanted  GVN  to  broaden  it  to  attract  high-level  defectors  by  offering  them  posts
comparable  to  their  existing  ones  in  the  VC  organization.  This  idea  went  down
poorly  with  the  Vietnamese.  Lodge  was  pressing  the  idea  from  the  beginning  of
October,  and  although  they  were  reluctant,  Thieu  and  Ky  finally  agreed  on
October  20  to  proclaim  the  new  program,  called  "National  Reconciliation,"


US-GVN  Relations  389


on  November  1,  a  national  holiday.  As  noted  above,  Washington  wanted  and
got  a  public  commitment  on  this  subject  at  Manila.

Then  on  November  1,  the  promised  proclamation  failed  to  appear;  instead,
there  was  a  vague  reference  to  it  in  a  speech  on  other  subjects.  When  the
Embassy  inquired,  Ky  said  the  speech  had  to  be  prepared  very  carefully,  and
that  he  had  not  had  time  before  November  1;  he  promised  he  would  have  the
speech  and  proclamation  ready  in  early  December.  Lodge  found  this  explana-
tion hard  to  swallow,  but  had  to  accept  it.  When  "early  December"  arrived,
there  was  a  dead  silence;  and  the  end  of  this  exercise  was  not  yet  in  sight.

C.  MORE  HARD  BARGAINING  ON  ECONOMIC  POLICY  AND  THE
PORT,  OCTOBER-DECEMBER,  1966

Economic  policy  negotiations  had  the  same  flavor  as  those  relating  to
National  Reconciliation.  The  USG  was  dissatisfied,  in  the  third  quarter  1966,  as
noted,  on  the  lack  of  GVN  follow-up  on  budgetary  and  foreign  exchange  prom-
ise in  June  following  the  IMF  agreement.  And  in  the  fall,  the  Saigon  Port  con-
gestion problem  grew  serious  again;  the  June  agreement  had  not  gone  far
enough.

At  the  end  of  September,  Governor  Hanh  of  the  RVN  National  Bank  came
to  Washington  to  negotiate  specifics  on  economic  policy.  During  the  negotia-
tions, Komer  cabled  Lodge:

[We  are  pressing  GVN]  hard  to  agree  to  spend  rapidly  growing  foreign
exchange  reserves  on  imports.  Otherwise,  it  will  appear  and  rightly  so,
that  GVN  is  getting  rich  at  US  taxpayers  expense.  It  is  apparent  that
GVN's  chief  reluctance  on  this  score  is  that  Thanh/Hanh  want  to  squir-
rel away  reserves  for  postwar  rehabilitation  in  case  US  goes  away  and
leaves  them.

In  the  upshot,  however,  they  reached  only  a  vague  and  general  agreement,  on
October  6,  the  most  specific  item  being  that  GVN  would  limit  its  inflationary
gap  to  10  billion  piasters  in  1967.  Dollar  balances  were  deferred  to  later  nego-
tiations.

There  was  some  efi"ort  to  resolve  disagreements  on  economic  matters  and
the  Port  just  before  the  Manila  Conference,  but  no  progress.  Komer  went  to
Saigon  after  the  Conference  and,  assisting  Porter  in  the  negotiations,  reached
the  following  agreement  with  GVN  on  November  2:

(1)  GVN  will  use  all  gold  and  foreign  exchange  available  to  it  in  excess
of  $250  million,  not  including  commercial  bank  working  balances,  to  fi-
nance invisibles  and  imports,  including  import  categories  now  financed  by
the  US.

(2)  GVN  will  place  at  least  $120  million  of  its  reserves  in  US  dollar  in-
struments of  at  least  2  year  maturity.

(3)  During  US  FY  67  USG  will  make  available  at  least  $350  million  of
grant  aid  for  imports,  not  including  PL  480  Title  1  Commodities.  Any
portion  of  the  $350  million  not  required  for  such  imports  will  be  used
during  the  US  FY  67  as  grant  assistance  for  economic  development
projects.

(4)  Within  the  balance  of  payments  accounts,  the  amounts  or  categories


390 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

to  be  financed  by  each  of  the  governments  will  be  determined  through
joint  consultation  on  a  quarterly  basis.
The  putting  of  GVN  dollar  reserves  into  US  two-year  or  longer-term  bonds
would  technically  improve  the  US  balance  of  payments,  though  the  gain  would
be  more  nominal  than  real.  The  agreement  left  plenty  of  room  for  further
problems  and  State  recognized  that  each  item  would  probably  have  to  be  pressed
again.

Following  this  agreement,  the  Embassy  prepared  to  negotiate  a  GVN  bud-
getary ceiling  and  related  matters.  The  strategy  would  be  to  seek  agreement  on  \
a  firm  budget  ceiling  for  GVN  without  committing  the  USG  on  its  spending  in
Vietnam.  But  the  Embassy  had  misgivings  about  this  approach:

...  It  deprives  US  of  the  monetary  gap  analysis  as  a  hinge  on  which
stabilization  agreements  can  be  hung  .  .  .  Note  that  Komer-Hanh  mem-
orandum signed  in  Washington  used  10  Billion  gap  figure  as  objective.

GVN  officials  are  anxious  to  resume  discussions.  Prime  Minister  now  has
on  his  desk  proposed  GVN  CY  67  budget  of  100  billion  piasters.  The  dif-
ferences between  that  figure  and  acceptable  one  is  much  greater  than  the
differences  in  US  ceiling  estimates  last  discussed  here  during  McNamara's
visit.

State  cabled  its  agreement  that  showing  GVN  the  US  plan  to  limit  its  own
piaster  spending  would  help  get  GVN  to  accept  tight  ceilings  itself.

In  December,  Embassy  negotiators  tried  to  pin  down  GVN  on  the  means  to
limit  its  accumulation  of  dollar  balances,  talking  mainly  with  Governor  Hanh.
To  evade  specific  commitment,  he  repeatedly  talked  as  though  he  could  not
determine  GVN  budget  policy  (which  he  had  negotiated  in  Washington  two
months  before)  and  that  he  could  not  as  a  good  banker  make  the  bookkeeping
transactions  that  would  be  required  to  permit  GVN  to  run  them  down  by  buy-  |
ing  imports.  The  Embassy  negotiators  then  turned  to  the  idea  of  asking  for  a
GVN  contribution  of  8  billion  piasters  to  the  Free  World  Forces'  operating
budget  in  Vietnam  as  a  cost-sharing  arrangement,  which  would  incidentally
reduce  GVN's  receipts  of  dollars  and  so  help  run  down  the  balances.  GVN's
reply  was  that  that  was  impossible.  After  a  series  of  talks  that  read  like  haggling
in  an  Arabian  marketplace.  Porter  went  to  Ky  about  it  and  got  the  following
understanding:  j

The  GVN  accepts  the  principle  of  contributing  to  free  world  forces
local  expense  and  will  make  a  contribution  of  1  Billion  piasters  for  that
purpose  at  the  end  of  March  1967.  The  matter  of  further  contribution
would  be  considered  at  that  time.  I  would  send  him  a  letter  of  understand-
ing on  that  subject.

The  story  was  much  the  same  on  GVN  support  for  AID  projects.

The  Saigon  Port  congestion  problem  led  to  discussions  starting  around  the
1st  of  October,  which  produced  nominal,  ineffective  agreements  in  the  first
week.  When  McNamara  went  to  Saigon  to  discuss  new  major  troop  deployments
with  MACV,  he  talked  to  Ky  on  October  11,  Ky  kept  talking  about  infiltration
whenever  McNamara  brought  up  the  subject  of  the  Port.  Finally,  Ky  said  he
had  solved  the  Port  problem  by  telling  the  Minister  of  Finance  "to  write  a
decree  to  get  rid  of  the  mafia  which  was  dominating  the  port."

That  did  not  solve  the  problem:  the  Embassy  kept  pressing.  On  November
2,  Ky  promised  a  tough  decree  on  port  management  and  a  deliver-or-get-fired


US-GVN  Relations  391


order  to  the  General  who  had  been  put  in  charge  of  the  Port  after  the  June
agreement.  (Accepting  merely  this  order  would  permit  further  delay  before  any
change  in  the  system,  of  course.)  Later  on  in  November,  Ky  changed  port
charges  and  accepted  some  increase  in  US  miHtary  personnel  there;  but  both
GVN  and  MACV  strongly  resisted  any  increase  in  MACV  responsibility  for
the  port.  The  GVN  also  refused  to  confiscate  goods  left  unclaimed  over  30  days
in  the  port  warehouses.  Further  talks  in  December  got  nowhere,  although  State
authorized  drastic  leverage  to  move  GVN :

To  this  end  you  might  also  tell  Ky  that  I  have  gone  so  far  as  to  propose
a  two  month  moratorium  on  shipment  of  US  financed  CIP  goods  begin-
ning 1  January  to  permit  backlog  in  transit  warehouses  and  on  barges  to
be  removed.  You  could  cite  my  view  as  being  that  if  GVN  won't  clear
port,  why  should  US  add  to  congestion  by  continuing  to  ship  goods?

I  recognize  that  actual  moratorium  would  be  draconian  measure  and
perhaps  unrealistic,  but  citing  it  .  .  .  might  help  move  Ky.

D. CORRUPTION  BECOMES  AN  ISSUE  AT  YEAR'S  END

The  issue  of  corruption  came  up  in  several  ways  in  November  and  December,
1966.  On  November  10,  Ky  told  Lodge  he  was  now  prepared  to  relieve  Gen-
eral Quang  of  his  command  of  IV  Corps,  following  up  on  intentions  he  first  told
Lodge  about  in  August.  Lodge  again  urged  caution,  saying  Ky  should  carefully
avoid  starting  "another  General  Thi  incident."  But  Lodge  was  satisfied  that
by  this  time  Ky  had  prepared  well  for  the  move.  He  had:  on  November  18,
the  Embassy  got  word  that  General  Quang  would  head  a  newly-created  Min-
istry of  Planning  and  Development;  the  Ministry  would  deal  primarily  with
postwar  planning.  The  command  changed  and  Quang  moved  up  on  November
23.  Possibly  Ky's  idea  of  how  to  deal  with  Quang  came  from  an  end-October
suggestion  from  the  Embassy  for  a  joint  postwar  study  team,  to  which  Ky
had  agreed  and  was  to  announce  jointly  with  the  White  House.  (Creating  the
Ministry  scrambled  the  plans  for  the  study  team  and  announcement,  so  the
Embassy  had  to  go  to  work  on  a  new  plan.)

A  couple  of  weeks  later,  following  allegations  of  corruption  in  news  stories,
State  cabled  the  Embassy  that  the  President  wanted  accelerated  efforts  both  to
cope  with  diversions  and  to  deflate  distorted  allegations.  State  was  also  con-
sidering sendmg  a  "blue  ribbon  panel"  from  Washington  to  assess  the  problem
of  AID  misuse.  Responding  to  the  stories  and  to  the  Washington  concern,  Ky
said  he  planned  a  national  campaign  against  corruption.  State  told  the  Embassy
on  November  25  of  suggestions  in  Washington  for  a  joint  US/GVN  inspectorate
general  to  follow  up  AID  diversions,  and  asked  for  a  reaction.  After  a  delay
due  to  active  truce  discussions  with  the  VC,  Saigon  replied  on  December  2:

There  is  already  an  interchange  of  information  on  the  working  level
between  Ky's  investigative  staff  and  our  responsible  poeple  in  USAID.  We
doubt  GVN  would  respond  positively  to  idea  of  joint  US/GVN  inspectorate
to.  work  on  AID  diversions.  This  would  touch  very  sensitive  areas.  While
we  want  to  expose  and  cut  diversions  to  maximum  extent  possible,  we
doubt  that  this  rather  public  way  is  best  suited  to  achieve  GVN  coopera-
tion.

On  December  3,  Lodge  and  Ky  had  an  "amiable  discussion"  on  corruption,
and  Ky  agreed  to  study  and  consider  all  these  suggestions.


392 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


E.  POLITICAL  MATTERS  AT  YEAR'S  END,  1966

Washington  and  the  Saigon  Mission  watched  closely  as  the  Constituent
Assembly  did  its  work.  Concern  arose  at  word  that  GVN  was  providing  a  com-
plete draft  constitution  either  formally  or  through  sympathetic  Deputies,  par-
ticularly because  it  provided  that  ultimate  political  power  would  be  vested  in  the
Armed  Forces  Council.

Washington,  consistent  in  its  championing  of  National  Reconciliation,  urged
the  Mission  to  make  the  USG's  views  known  both  to  GVN  and  to  key  CA  mem-
bers before  the  matter  because  a  major  issue.  Lodge  spoke  with  Ky  who  said
he  was  at  that  very  moment  about  to  leave  to  talk  with  Thieu  on  the  matter.
Lodge  further  encouraged  Ky  to  state  his  views  on  the  constitution  to  the  Chair-
man of  the  Drafting  Committee  and  reminded  Ky  that  the  American  con-
stitutional expert,  Professor  Flanz,  was  available  to  go  to  Ky  at  any  time  to
give  advice  in  complete  confidence.

General  Thieu  concluded  one  of  his  regular  discussions  of  the  military  situa-
tion with  General  Westmoreland  by  making  a  few  pronouncements  on  political
matters.  Westmoreland  stressed  what  was  to  become  a  persistent  American
theme,  the  importance  of  unity  in  the  GVN  leadership.  Unabashedly  Thieu
said  that  the  key  question  was  whether  the  Army  would  stay  in  power  and  what
power  they  would  retain.

F.  PACIFICATION  AND  THE  SHIFT  OF  ARVN

Komer,  in  Washington,  continued  to  prod  the  Mission  to  goad  GVN.
It  seemed  time  to  remind  them,  he  thought,  of  their  Manila  promise  to  give  top
priority  to  land  reform.  Lodge  was  asked  to  press  Ky  for  vigorous  application
of  existing  laws.

Continuing  emphasis  on  pacification  and  increased  impatience  at  the  lack  of
progress  brought  another  reorganization  of  the  US  Mission  effort.  To  unify  and
streamline  the  civilian  side,  the  Office  of  Civil  Operations  (OCO)  was  estab-
lished in  late  November  under  Deputy  Ambassador  Porter.  An  OCO  Director
in  Saigon  and  a  single  Director  of  Civil  Affairs  for  each  of  the  four  corps
became  responsible  for  the  Mission's  civil  support  of  Vietnamese  Revolution-
ary Development.  Within  GVN  General  Thang  not  only  lasted  beyond  the
originally  envisaged  six  months  but  was  elevated  to  Commissioner-General  for
Revolutionary  Development  with  supervision  over  the  Ministries  of  RD,  Public
Works,  Agriculture,  and  Administration  (Interior).  These  changes  seemed  to
enhance  the  chances  for  substantive  improvements.  Washington  wired,

Why  not  approach  Thang  and  after  telling  him  about  your  reorganization
and  new  faces  you  plan  to  put  in  region  and  then  provinces,  suggest  he
essay  a  shake-up  too.  ...  As  I  recall,  around  Tet  GVN  issues  a  new
promotion  list,  which  usually  also  entails  some  joint  shifts.  This  might  pro-
vide a  good  cover.

The  reply  offered  now  familiar  themes  as  the  reasons  for  inaction,

Specifically,  if  we  were  to  give  Thang  a  list  of  district  chiefs  and  ask  that
they  be  removed,  we  do  not  think  any  significant  change  would  result.  In
the  past  this  tactic  has  proved  cumbersome,  even  counterproductive,  and


US-GVN  Relations  393


tends  to  lead  either  to  reshuffling  of  positions  with  little  or  no  positive  end
result  or  to  the  Asian  deep  freeze  treatment.

...  At  times  we  will  have  to  make  our  views  known  on  particular  per-
sonalities if  we  find  an  intolerable  situation  in  key  leadership  positions,  as
we  have  done  in  Long  An  and  the  ARVN  25th  Div.  Basically,  however,
we  will  seek  to  avoid  too  deep  an  immersion  in  Vietnamese  personalities,
which  can  so  easily  become  a  quagmire  from  which  there  is  no  escape  and
concentrate  instead  on  encouraging  the  GVN/RVNAF  to  take  the  ini-
tiative in  a  situation  they  know  best  how  to  tackle  in  specific  tactical  terms.

Meanwhile,  efforts  went  forward  to  convert  half  of  ARVN  to  the  primary  mis-
sion of  supporting  Revolutionary  Development.  On  October  5,  the  Chief  of
the  Central  Training  Agency,  Major  General  Vy,  chaired  the  high  level  joint
conference  which  assigned  administrative  tasks  and  developed  a  schedule  of
required  actions.  Subsequently,  a  joint  MACV/JGS  team  visited  a  few  ARVN
division  headquarters  and  found  that  personnel  had  not  understood  the  July
JGS  directives  and  thus  had  not  undertaken  the  actions  directed.

At  about  the  same  time.  Revolutionary  Development  Minister  Thang  entered
one  of  his  recurring  periods  of  pouting  because  he  considered  recent  American
criticism  of  slowness  to  imply  their  evaluation  of  the  program  as  a  failure.  He
told  Ky  he  was  ready  to  resign  if  Americans  were  so  critical  that  they  wanted
to  take  it  over  and  run  it.  Lansdale  was  able  to  placate  Thang,  but  ARVN
reluctance  continued.

The  conversion  to  RD  was  fraught  with  criticism  on  both  sides,  for
the  American  press  continued  to  suggest  that  the  ARVN  shift  to  pacification
meant  Americans  would  bear  the  brunt  of  the  fighting  and  take  the  bulk  of
the  casualties.  State  considered  this  line  tendentious  and  urged  Lodge  and
MACV  to  use  "all  leverage  provided  through  MAP  and  advisor  program"  to
shift  ARVN  to  RD.

G. MILITARY  ADVISORY  MATTERS  AT  YEAR'S  END,  1966

COMUSMACV  backed  out  of  ARVN  personnel  selection  by  serving  notice
in  a  message  to  Corps  Senior  Advisors  that  only  policy  matters,  not  the  detailed
problems  of  failure  to  perform,  were  to  be  referred  to  him.

In  reviewing  the  deficiencies  discussed  in  the  Senior  Advisor's  Monthly  Re-
ports, it  is  noted  that  many  items  are  correctable  in  command  channels
at  unit,  division,  or  corps  level;  yet  it  is  not  apparent  that  su;h  action  is
being  taken  aggressively  at  local  and  intermediate  command  levels.  Defi-
ciencies involving  policy  are  referable  appropriately  to  this  headquarters;
deficiencies  involving  non-compliance  with  directives,  apathy  on  the  part
of  a  command,  etc.,  are  to  be  resolved  in  RVNAF  channels.
The  role  of  the  advisor  is  difficult  and  often  frustrating.  It  requires  military
acumen,  dedication,  selflessness,  and  perseverance.  It  is  desired  that  ad-
dressees channel  the  professional  abilities  of  the  advisory  apparatus  into
efforts  designed  to  complement  tactical  advice  with  im.provement  in  the
quality,  efficiency,  and  reliability  of  the  RVNAF  structure  as  a  whole.

Shortly  afterward  the  Chinh-Hunnicutt  affair  erupted.  As  it  unfolded  it  re-
vealed the  near  impossibility  of  eliciting  satisfactory  performance  by  means  of
the  existing  advisory  system.  CG  25th  Division  published  an  order  of  the  day
accusing  the  Senior  Advisor  of  trying  to  have  the  CG  removed,  of  attempting
to  dismiss  other  division  officers,  of  bypassing  the  chain  of  command,  and  of


394 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

destroying  the  "spirit  of  cooperation  between  Americans  and  Vietnamese."

The  MACV  command  history  describes  General  Chinh  as  extremely  weak,
afraid  to  command.  The  Senior  Advisor  was  a  dynamic,  competent  officer  as-
signed to  improve  effectiveness.  He  pursued  his  objective  in  a  firm  manner.

COMUSMACV  felt  the  incident  received  distorted  press  coverage  in  the  US
where  it  was  portrayed  as  a  challenge  to  the  entire  position  of  the  US  advisory
effort.  He  noted  that  the  Vietnamese  were  sensitive  to  real  or  imagined  infringe-
ments on  their  sovereignty.  Great  care  had  to  be  exercised  to  avoid  even  the
appearance  of  violating  their  pride;  an  officer  who  yielded  too  readily  to  US
advice  was  regarded  as  a  puppet.  He  felt  the  most  effective  way  to  work  with
the  Vietnamese  was  to  discuss  matters  with  them  and  then  allow  them  to  resolve
their  problems.  CG  25th  Division  did  have  redeeming  qualities.  He  was  con-
sidered honest;  and  for  his  stand  at  the  coup  trials  in  the  early  1960's,  when
he  had  accepted  punishment  while  many  others  were  running;  he  had  acquired
a  sizeable  following  among  ARVN  officers.  He  was,  in  addition,  a  boy-
hood friend  of  CG  III  Corps,  who  was  said  to  recognize  the  CG's  fault  but  felt
that  his  hands  were  tied.

Deputy  COMUSMACV  who  enjoyed  good  rapport  with  CG  25th  ARVN
Division,  visited  General  Chinh.  In  a  two-hour  meeting,  the  Vietnamese  spoke
freely  and  openly.  He  displayed  genuine  and  extreme  concern  and  admitted  his
error  in  issuing  the  Order  of  the  Day.  He  had  already  apologized  to  CG  III
Corps.  Deputy  COMUSMACV  received  the  impression  that  the  advisor  might
have  been  a  little  too  aggressive  with  the  Vietnamese  general,  who  was  hyper-
ensitive.  Deputy  COMUSMACV  suggested  that  a  memorandum  be  published
to  the  division  which  would  mention  that  the  Order  of  the  Day  had  leaked  to
the  press  which  had  taken  it  out  of  context  and  that  there  was  no  intention  to
disparage  the  advisory  effort.  The  memorandum  was  published  on  December  21.
It  said  the  past  must  be  forgotten  and  that  cadre  of  all  ranks  should  display  warm,
courteous,  and  friendly  attitudes  toward  their  American  counterparts.  General
Chinh  appeared  to  turn  over  a  new  leaf.  Colonel  Hunnicutt  was  reassigned  to  an
apparent  terminal  assignment  in  the  United  States.

COMUSMACV  addressed  a  letter  to  all  advisors  in  December,  1966,  to  again
emphasize  the  importance  of  rapport.  He  said,  the  key  to  success  or  failure  was
the  relationship  achieved  and  maintained  by  the  advisor  with  his  counterpart.
The  natural  tendency  of  the  US  professional  soldier  was  toward  immediate
reaction.  He  expected  the  same  in  others,  but  it  was  necessary  to  temper
counterpart  relationships  with  patience  and  restraint.

General  Westmoreland  affirmed  this  view  in  his  remarks  at  a  conference  of
his  senior  subordinate  commanders.

In  order  for  ARVN  to  be  successful,  a  re-education  process  is  necessary,
from  the  generals  on  down  .  .  .  The  attitude  of  the  soldiers  toward  the
people  frequently  is  poor.  .  .  .  We  must  do  all  we  can  toward  to  change
this  .  .  .

...  In  conduct  of  operations  in  support  of  Revolutionary  Develop-
ment, we  will  frequently  have  units  buddy  up  with  ARVN  units  ...  A
word  on  command  relations  in  these  combined  operations  is  appropriate.
We  have  had  great  success  with  our  cooperative  efforts  in  the  past.  We
should  establish  a  proper  relationship  from  a  technical  command  stand-
point. Proper  types  of  missions  are  general  support  and  direct  support.
When  conducting  operations  where  we  have  the  preponderance  of  forces
committed  .  .  .  their  association  will  be  in  direct  support  or  general  sup-


US-GVN  Relations  395


port  of  our  operations.  This  is  good  military  terminology  and  quite  proper
for  us  here.  General  Vien  agrees  in  this  terminology.

Sometimes  ARVN  was  not  receptive  to  advice.  In  November,  recognizing
the  validity  of  a  recommendation  from  the  Corps  Advisor  that  an  additional
battalion  be  activated  in  the  ARVN  23d  Battalion,  COMUSMACV  suggested
this  to  JGS.  Inactivation  of  a  marginally  effective  battalion  in  another  division
was  suggested  as  compensation.  Chief  JGS,  for  reasons  of  his  own,  declined
to  authorize  the  23d  Division  to  have  an  additional  battalion.

Still,  the  effort  moved  forward.  Training  of  RD  Mobile  Training  Teams  from
each  ARVN  Division  was  conducted  in  December.  The  actual  conversion  train-
ing of  divisions  started  in  early  1967,  and  a  similar  program  for  RF/PF  was
planned.  In  fact,  planning  was  viewed  as  the  surest  sign  of  progress.  The  1967
Combined  Campaign  Plan  was  ceremoniously  signed  by  Generals  Westmoreland
and  Vien  on  December  8.  Its  significant  innovations  were  requirements  for  sub-
ordinate commands  to  prepare  supporting  plans  and  for  quarterly  reviews  to
maintain  the  plan's  viability.

H. CONSTITUTION-WRITING  IN  JANUARY,  1967

Progress  within  the  Constituent  Assembly  and  preliminary  jockeying  over
the  new  constitution  were  persistent  concerns  during  the  first  quarter  of  1967.

At  times  the  Assembly  seemed  remarkably  independent.  It  publicly  fought
against  a  law  which  gave  the  military  junta  the  right  to  over-rule  its  decisions.
The  controversy  subsided  in  January  with  Junta  assurance  that  it  would  not  use
the  law.  There  was  considerable  discussion  within  USG  circles  as  to  how
American  influence  should  be  disposed  in  supporting  presidential  candidates.
Marshall  Ky  was  already  making  noises  about  running.  Washington  cautioned
Saigon  not  to  automatically  oppose  a  Ky  candidacy.  While  State  would  prefer
a  civilian  president,  the  most  important  matter  was  to  effect  transition  to  a  con-
stitutional government  that  was  strong  and  unified  enough  to  continue  to  pros-
ecute the  war  effort  (or  negotiate  a  peaceful  settlement),

.  .  .  and  at  the  same  time  broadly  enough  based  to  attract  increasing
local  and  national  political  strength  away  from  VC.

Ambassador  Lodge's  reply  was,  "the  continued  viability  of  SVN  depends  very
heavily  on  the  cohesiveness  of  the  military."  This  had  been  and  remained  his
evaluation  of  the  political  situation.

.  .  .  Unity  of  the  military  is  essential  to  government  stability  in  VN.  From
the  standpoint  of  stability,  this  is  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.
Movement  toward  a  broadly  based,  truly  popular  government  is  impossible
without  stability.

The  military  is  also  the  chief  nation-building  group  in  the  country.  It  has
education,  skills,  experience,  and  discipline  which  no  other  group  can  offer.

State  acquiesced  in  this  argument  but  continued  to  hope  for  a  government
broadly  enough  based  so  that  the  VC  would  find  avenues  to  conquest  of  South
Vietnam  effectively  blocked.

...  In  our  view  it  is  less  a  question  of  any  civilian  candidate  controlling


396 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  military  and  more  a  question  of  the  military  being  educated  to  accept
a  sharing  of  power  and  responsibility  with  civilians  as  a  necessary  elemen-
tary political  progress.  This  means  a  readiness  to  accept  the  outcome  of  a
free  and  open  election  in  which  the  candidate  favored  by  the  directorate
may  not  win.

/.  FOREIGN  EXCHANGE  NEGOTIATIONS  AND  THE  GVN  BUDGET,
JANUARY-MARCH,  1967

The  problem  of  GVN  dollar  balances  remained  a  thorn.  GVN  did  nothing  to
carry  out  its  November  agreements.  With  scarcely  concealed  impatience,  Am-
bassador Porter  offered  GVN  a  tough  economic  program,  in  a  meeting  in  the
first  week  of  January,  1967,  with  special  emphasis  on  the  dollar  balances.  Re-
porting on  the  meeting,  he  said:

We  underlined  many  times  the  very  high  level  of  the  US  commitment  and
said  that  we  could  not  make  this  commitment  unless  we  had  [an]  iron-clad
guaratee  that  the  GVN  would  live  up  [to]  the  foreign  exchange  agree-
ment ...  we  stated  that  this  was  the  minimum  the  US  could  accept.

Hard  bargaining  continued,  including  another  Hanh  trip  to  Washington.  Pre-
liminary to  the  Conference,  Washington  considered  several  steps  which  might
be  taken:

1.  Agreement  on  a  piaster/dollar  rate  of  118  for  official  US  purchases.

2.  US  use  of  all  counterpart  over  P-30  billion.

3.  Increase  of  Assistance  In  Kind  from  GVN.

4.  Possible  transfer  of  some  official  purchases  from  the  80  to  a  118  ex-
change rate  without  changing  the  official  rate.

5.  Transfer  of  DoD  contracts  to  the  118  rate.

6.  Tymg  all  80  rate  dollars  to  US  procurement.

7.  100%  US  use  of  PL  480  sales.

Saigon's  opinion  was  that  for  these  negotiations  there  were  two  main  routes:

( 1 )  A  switch  of  counterpart  funds  from  their  use  to  ours,  and

(2)  A  change  in  the  exchange  rate.

The  first  seemed  preferable  because  it  was  more  negotiable.  The  second  might
be  counter-productive  by  "simply  angering  Hanh  without  moving  him."  On
February  20,  GVN  merely  agreed  to  work  on  an  "interim  memorandum  of  un-
derstanding which  would  include  actions  to  implement  the  foreign  exchange
agreement  of  last  November."  When  Komer  went  to  Saigon  later  in  February
to  negotiate,  he  found  it  necessary  to  threaten  specifically  to  reduce  the  CIP
program  to  force  down  GVN's  dollar  balances,  noting  that  once  the  program
was  cut  Congress  would  be  unlikely  to  restore  the  cuts.  The  negotiations  amply
demonstrated  the  truth  of  Hanh's  remark  that  Orientals  only  act  after  much
bargaining.  As  Komer  started  to  walk  out  the  door  after  a  meeting,  Hanh  hinted
at  a  raise  in  the  official  purchase  piaster  rate  from  80  to  118,  but  made  no  other
concession.  (At  no  time  did  the  USG  threaten  explicitly  to  buy  piasters  in  the
open  market,  as  Porter  and  DASD  (Economics)  had  earlier  proposed,  a  pro-
cedure that  would  knock  down  GVN  dollar  balances  to  whatever  extent  we
wanted  while  using  fewer  dollars  to  get  the  required  piasters.)  In  an  exchange


US-GVN  Relations  397


of  letters  early  in  March,  Hanh  said  he  understood  the  US  was  willing  to  es-
tablish $50  million  development  fund  in  return  for  their  purchase  of  300  thou-
sand tons  of  rice  on  a  100%  US  use  basis  and  repayment  of  $25  million  ICA  loan.
From  Komer,  now  back  in  Washington,  came  this  reply.

There  is  in  my  view  no  doubt  whatever  that  Hanh,  and  for  that  matter  Ky,
understood  full  well  that  we  did  not  agree  to  the  $50  million  GVN  Develop-
ment Fund  as  part  of  interim  package.  Nor  do  I  regard  our  credibility  as
enhanced  if  we  now  retreat  even  more  on  this  issue.  Finally,  I  regard
the  Development  Fund  as  a  sweetener  so  clearly  wanted  by  the  GVN  that
we  need  not  give  it  away  too  cheaply.

While  in  one  sense  we  have  little  immediate  leverage  to  use  on  the  GVN
so  long  as  we  do  not  choose  to  withhold  aid  in  one  form  or  another,  in
another  sense  we  clearly  have  the  GVN  worried.  I  believe  that,  either
through  a  definitive  solution  this  June  or  more  likely  via  Salami  tactics,  we
can  keep  GVN  reserves  from  rising  too  far.

In  mid-March  Komer  reached  another  "Interim  Agreement"  with  GVN  on
foreign  exchange.  It  provided  that:

(1)  The  United  States  would  supply  at  least  an  additional  100,000  tons
of  PL  480  rice  and  a  further  300,000  tons  of  rice  under  terms  providing
for  100%  USG  use  of  proceeds.

(2)  GVN  would  make  available  up  to  $120  million  of  foreign  exchange
for  financing  commodities  previously  imported  under  the  CIP.

(3)  The  United  States  would  make  available  for  economic  development
projects  the  balance  of  FY  67  funds  unused  as  a  result  of  the  reduction
of  the  CIP  program  and  would  proceed  to  initiate  and  make  grants
for  several  interim  projects.

(4)  The  United  States  agreed  to  the  establishment  by  GVN  of  a  $50  mil-
lion development  fund  for  purchase  of  US  goods  and  services,  such
fund  to  be  considered  as  use  of  Vietnamese  foreign  exchange  resources
under  the  November  4,  1966  agreement.

(5)  GVN  would  repay  US  loans  totalling  $53  million.

Closely  related  on  the  economic  front  was  the  GVN  budget.  Estimates  of  the
CY  1967  inflationary  gap  grew  during  the  quarter  from  14  to  20  billion  piasters.
The  United  States  exercised  only  spotty  influence  on  their  budget,  specifically
on  those  items  receiving  direct  American  support;  and  general  persuasion  was
used  to  hold  down  the  overall  limit.  Governor  Hanh  tried  to  transfer  all
US  counterpart  funds  to  the  military  budget  with  the  explanation  that  only  the
US  military  could  adequately  control  the  South  Vietnamese  military,  but  the
guessing  was  that  this  might  also  be  his  way  of  freeing  GVN  civilian  agencies
from  any  American  interference.

Washington  efforts  to  get  more  information  on  the  GVN  budget  only  brought
educated  guesses  and  a  reminder  that  the  Mission  did  not  participate  in  a  review
of  the  GVN  civil  budget  as  was  the  practice  for  the  military  part.  The  CY  1967
budget  of  75  billion  piasters  was  issued  without  prior  discussion  with  AID.  It  was
unsatisfactory.  USAID  had  the  leverage  to  negotiate  because  of  counterpart
funds  and  PL  480  receipts,  but  the  major  problem  was  how  to  provide  AID  the
necessary  funding  mechanics  to  implement  programs  at  levels  sufficient  to  meet
established  requirements.


398 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


J. THE  SAIGON  PORT  AGAIN

Severe  congestion  continued  to  plague  the  Port  of  Saigon.  A  drop  in
CIP/GVN  cargo  discharged  in  December  brought  queries  from  Washington.
Saigon  rephed  that  the  drop  was  due  to  the  GVN  port  director's  abortive  great
barge  experiment  and  Hsted  a  number  of  corrective  steps  taken.  In  fact  all  were
peripheral  to  the  central  problem,  the  failure  of  commercial  importers  to  re-
move their  goods  from  crowded  warehouses.  Saigon  warned,

Any  additional  actions  .  .  .  would  require  high-level  government  to  gov-
ernment agreements  which  in  our  estimation  would  not  be  appropriate  at
this  time.

Highest  authorities  in  Washington  remained  concerned  and  pressed  for  a  com-
plete military  takeover  or  at  least  a  comprehensive  alternate  plan  which  would
demonstrably  meet  the  problem.  Saigon  held  back  with  the  view  that  progress
was  being  made,  that  Ky  was  persuaded  of  the  need  to  eliminate  port  conges-
tion and  that  he  was  doing  his  utmost  to  solve  the  problem.  A  US  takeover
was  once  again  viewed  as  neither  politically  possible  nor  desirable.  CINCPAC
chimed  in  to  support  strongly  the  Saigon  position,  and  at  the  end  of  the  quarter
Washington  was  still  peppering  Saigon  with  comment:

We  here  do  not  take  same  relaxed  view  of  barge  situation  Saigon  port  as
Saigon  .  .  .  Highest  authorities  have  been  consistently  concerned.

At  the  same  time  an  overlooked  aspect  of  the  earlier  extension  of  US  control
of  the  port  was  being  bounced  back  and  forth.  MACV  clearance  of  AID  fi-
nanced project  and  procured  commodities  was  estimated  to  have  made  AID
liable  for  one  billion  piasters  for  port  clearance  costs  previously  financed
by  GVN.  Nobody  was  quite  certain  how  to  approach  GVN  on  the  matter  or
how  the  US  should  pay  the  bill  within  existing  dollar  and  piaster  ceilings.

K. MINOR  BUT  PRICKLY  PROBLEMS,  JANUARY-MARCH,  1967

The  clearance  costs  problem  was  an  example  of  several  minor  matters  which
arose  between  the  governments,  problems  that  were  often  difficult  to  handle
because  prestige  and  sovereignty  were  involved.  GVN  National  Bank  Governor
Hanh  and  the  Embassy  tangled  over  GVN  issuance  of  instructions  to  commer-
cial banks  operating  facilities  for  US  military  forces.

The  Embassy  became  concerned  because  American  civilians,  tried  and
punished  in  GVN  courts  on  the  basis  of  American-supplied  evidence,  were  sub-
jected to  extortion.  The  ticklish  part  of  the  problem  was  how  to  investigate  the
practice  without  jeopardizing  those  in  the  midst  of  buying  their  way  out.  Soon
there  were  ill-considered  remarks  to  the  press  by  Brigadier  General  Loan  who
said  that  GVN  had  sole  jurisdiction  over  civilians.  State  instructed  Saigon  to
keep  mum  on  the  subject.  Finally,  in  March  it  was  publicly  announced  that
the  United  States  would  exercise  court  martial  jurisdiction  over  civilians  but
"only  rarely,  in  exceptional  cases."  The  US  did  not  question,  as  a  matter  of  law,
the  existence  of  a  basis  for  court  martial  jurisdiction  over  civilians  and  indicated
that  our  policy  would  be  to  handle  the  problem  of  civilians  in  other  ways.  The


US-GVN  Relations  399


statement  was  careful  to  reaffirm  US  respect  for  GVN  sovereignty,  so  as  to  avoid
the  issue  of  a  formal  status  of  forces  agreement.

Whether  GVN  could  levy  requirements  for  reports  and  payments  upon  US
contract  airlines  caused  bantam-like  stances  on  each  side.  GVN  demanded
that  contract  flights  pay  landing  charges.  Porter  replied  that  was  improper  and
offered  GVN  notification  of  flights  as  a  sop.  Ky's  retort  was  a  demand  for  copies
of  contracts  and  schedules,  restrictions  on  in-country  flights  and  limitation  of
loads  to  personnel  and  equipment  strictly  military.  We  rejected  those  terms  and
the  military  nature  of  the  problem  probably  saved  a  contract  flight  from  becom-
ing the  "example"  later  in  January  when  one  plane-load  of  Pan  American  pas-
sengers baked  in  tropical  heat  for  several  hours  while  GVN  refused  them
permission  to  disembark  at  Tan  Son  Nhut.

Premier  Ky's  implied  intention  in  February  to  accept  an  invitation  to  speak
in  the  United  States  produced  an  apprehensive  reaction  from  Washington.  Am-
bassador Lodge  cautioned,  "We  have  twice  headed  him  off  and  to  object  a  third
time  might  create  strain."  Eventually  Ky  was  able  to  publicly  postpone  his  visit
on  the  grounds  that  his  presence  was  needed  to  insure  a  free  and  fair  election.

Diversion  of  MAP  material  remained  a  closet  skeleton  to  be  rattled  period-
ically. In  February,  MACV  performed  estimative  gymnastics  to  suggest  that
no  more  than  0.3%  of  MAP  material  had  been  so  lost.  CINCPAC  quickly  sug-
gested that  valid  data  did  not  exist  and  would  be  hard  to  compile.  He  said  that
the  differences  between  manifests  and  the  material  actually  received  should  be
otherwise  identified,  and  his  thoughts  seemed  for  the  moment  to  take  care  of  a
potentially  embarrassing  need  to  explain  a  $5  million  problem  without  even
bothering  GVN.

Throughout  the  quarter  there  were  periodic  flumes  of  talks  about  negotia-
tions with  North  Vietnam.  U  Thant  was  especially  active  and  these  maneuvers
caused  an  uneasiness  in  US/GVN  relations  because  Saigon  was  never  completely
certain  what  role  it  would  have  in  such  discussions.

L. THE  OTHER  WAR

Top  levels  in  Washington  realized  that  not  much  progress  was  being  made
in  Revolutionary  Development  and  exhorted  Saigon  to  integrated,  detailed  civil/
military  planning.  COMUSMACV  waffled  once  again  on  whether  ARVN  bat-
talions supporting  RD  should  actually  be  retained  under  the  operational  control
of  the  province  chief.  US  Army  units  continued  their  work  in  the  densely  pop-
ulated Delta  provinces.  On  one  occasion  Premier  Ky  called  Colonel  Sam  Wilson
in  for  his  view  of  progress  there  as  well  as  to  ask  for  an  evaluation  of  the  ARVN
46th  Regiment.  Wilson  was  able  to  say  plainly  that  the  unit  was  poor  and  that  its
commander  was  ineffective  and,  without  a  doubt,  corrupt.  Ky  explained  that
the  commander  in  question  was  a  close  friend  of  the  division  commander  who
was  a  close  friend  of  the  corps  commander  who  was  a  close  friend  of  Ky.  That
seemed  to  explain  the  matter.

The  US  continued  to  press  national  reconciliation  upon  the  Saigon  govern-
ment. Unger  and  CAS  assets  worked  with  the  Constituent  Assembly  to  get  NR
into  the  constitution.  The  lack  of  enthusiasm  was  alleged  to  be  fear  of  unilateral
US  peace  action.  The  present  GVN  continued,  as  they  had  so  often  before,  to
agree  readily  in  conversations  with  us  to  the  principle  of  national  reconciliation;
yet  any  concrete  implementation  remained  illusive  even  through  another  top
level  meeting  with  the  President.


400 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


M. GUAM  MEETINGS,  MARCH  20  AND  21,  1967

President  Johnson  announced  that  his  purpose  in  calling  the  Conference  at
Guam  was  to  introduce  the  newly  appointed  US  team  to  the  leaders  of  GVN.
The  shift  of  personnel  represented  the  largest  shake-up  in  US  leadership  in  South
Vietnam  since  August  1965.  Ambassador  Bunker  was  designated  as  the  replace-
ment for  Lodge,  and  Locke  took  Porter's  place.  In  a  move  to  resolve  the  con-
troversy over  military  versus  civil  control  of  Revolutionary  Development,
Robert  Komer  took  charge  with  the  rank  of  Ambassador  under  the  COMU-
SMACV  organizational  structure  with  czar  powers  and  a  strong  mandate  to
produce  progress.

Most  happily,  the  Constituent  Assembly  completed  its  work  on  the  constitu-
tion just  in  time  to  permit  Premier  Ky  to  present  a  copy  to  President  Johnson  at
Guam.  As  had  been  the  case  on  the  two  previous  occasions  of  top  US/GVN
talks,  the  communique  which  resulted  from  the  2-day  meeting  lay  primary  em-
phasis on  political,  economic,  and  social  matters.  The  military  picture  was
presumed  to  be  so  encouraging  and  improving  as  to  need  no  special  attention.

N. ROUTINE  MATTERS,  APRIL-SEPTEMBER,  1967

Most  of  the  previous  problems  persisted  during  this  period.  By  June  the  rate
of  inflation  was  predicted  to  be  45-50  percent  per  year,  and  the  piaster  gap  was
to  be  17.3  billion  greater  than  projected.  Hanh,  now  GVN  Economic  Minister,
scheduled  a  September  trip  to  Washington  and  the  list  of  expected  topics  read
very  much  the  same  as  agendas  for  many  previous  such  meetings.  Hanh  could
upon  occasion  get  very  excited,  as  in  the  case  where  a  suit  by  a  Greek  shipping
line  froze  the  GVN  account  in  a  New  York  City  bank:  but  despite  repeated  ur-
ging from  Washington,  nobody  in  Saigon  could  get  up  courage  enough  to  ap-
proach GVN  on  those  retroactive  port  clearing  charges.

On  April  18,  GVN  finally  issued  a  National  Reconciliation  Proclamation
which  stated  that  "All  citizens  who  rally  to  the  national  cause  can  be  employed
by  the  government  in  accordance  with  their  ability,"  but  the  decree  proved  to
be  a  mirage.  It  used  the  Vietnamese  words  for  solidarity  rather  than  those  for
reconciliation  and  the  program  proceeded  in  consonance  with  that  distinc-
tion. Saigon  reminded  State  that  Premier  Ky  had  recently  told  the  Ambassador
that  meaningful  progress  on  national  reconciliation  could  only  come  after  a
constitutional  government  was  established.

On  the  MACV  side,  Ambassador  Komer  was  getting  organized.  In  response
to  a  Washington  query  on  land  reform  he  recalled  his  consistent  position  but
pointed  out  that  it  was  not  an  important  issue  in  Vietnam.  Far  more  important
was  the  matter  of  security  in  the  countryside.

The  US  continued  to  deliver  material  assistance  to  improve  the  morale  of
ARVN  troops.  A  $2.83  million  program  for  913  ARVN  dependent  houses  was
upgraded  to  provide  more  modern  structures  with  utilities.  USAID  helped  the
RVNAF  commissary  system  for  RVNAF  and  dependents.  Although  rice  was
eliminated  to  avoid  lowering  its  open  market  price,  GVN  sought  compensating
increases  in  the  meat  and  fish  supplied.  MACV  programmed  over  $3  million  to
the  RVNAF  Quartermaster  Corps  which  supplied  field  and  garrison  rations.

But  there  were  continuing  signs  that  ARVN  as  a  fighting  force  needed  prop-
ping up.  Sporadic  efforts  at  encadrement  appeared.  The  USMC  Combined
Action  Companies  in  I  Corps  were  well  publicized.  In  April,  the  US  25th  Divi-


US-GVN  Relations  401


sion  completed  studies,  and  transmitted  to  General  Chinh,  still  CG  ARVN  25th
Division,  the  Combined  Lighting  Concept.  It  brought  together  in  one  outpost
a  US  squad,  an  ARVN  squad,  and  a  PF  squad.

In  response  to  Washington  inquiries,  General  Westmoreland  reported  by
message  in  May,  1967,  "A  command  project  was  initiated  on  January  26,  1967,
to  review  the  performance  of  RVNAF  units  and  to  identify  those  considered
ineffective  and  non-productive.  Units  so  identified  are  being  evaluated  with  a
view  to  withdrawal  or  reduction  of  military  assistance  support  unless  improve-
ment in  these  units  is  possible.  The  evaluation  will  be  conducted  every  six  months
resulting  in  a  final  determination  each  June  and  December  .  .  .

The  methodology  for  evaluation  includes:

( 1 )  Identification  of  units  judged  ineffective  or  nonproductive.

(2)  Evaluation  of  credibility  or  feasibility  of  present  plans  to  guarantee
increased  effectiveness.

(3)  Study  of  unit  performance  trends  during  the  past  six  months.

(4)  Determination  of  the  availability  of  plans  to  train  personnel.

(5)  Evaluation  of  command  interest  at  all  levels  for  improvement.

Units  will  be  classified  as  Improvement  Probable,  Improvement  Doubtful,
and  Improvement  Unlikely.  Those  in  the  latter  two  groups  must  justify
continued  military  assistance  or  action  will  be  initiated  to  reduce  FY  68
support.

Current  Status:  All  VNAF  and  VNMC  units  are  effective  and  productive.
Support  to  VNN  reduced  by  $7800  which  reflects  discontinuance  of  support
for  two  fishing  boats  which  are  not  configured  to  support  any  role  assigned
to  VNN.  The  evaluation  of  ARVN  is  only  partially  completed.

In  July,  the  MACV  staff  briefed  Secretary  McNamara  in  Saigon  and  touched
again  on  the  subject  of  encadrement.  One  concept  considered  was  VATUSA
(Vietnamese  Augmentation  to  US  Army)  whereby  two  or  three  Vietnamese
would  be  assigned  to  each  squad  in  US  combat  battalions.  While  this  scheme
offered  the  advantages  of  improving  ARVN  skills  and  of  utilizing  additional
RVN  troops  without  further  strains  on  already  limited  ARVN  leadership,  the
only  real  gain  for  the  US  was  viewed  to  be  a  possible  reduction  in  US  strength.
The  disadvantages  pointed  out  were  the  political  climate,  the  language  barrier,
the  danger  to  US  unit  security,  the  administrative  and  disciplinary  difficulties
and  the  probable  irritation  between  VATUSA  and  regular  ARVN  unit  soldiers.
These,  it  was  judged,  dictated  against  its  adoption.

A  second  concept  considered  was  salting  ARVN  forces  with  US  leadership
in  command  positions.  The  analysis  indicated  that  for  political  and  psychological
reasons,  it  would  probably  be  best  to  put  two  US  officers  and  three  US  NCO's
in  an  instructor's  role  with  each  RF  company  rather  than  in  a  command  role.
Command  would  be  exercised  by  the  RF  company  commander  but  he  would
be  required  to  follow  the  directions  of  the  US  training  team  leaders.

The  conclusion  reached  was  to  continue  the  "salting"  experiment  with  ex-
pansion in  view  if  the  initial  results  were  good.  There  is  no  evidence  that  any-
thing became  of  the  experiment.

None  of  this  seriously  worried  top  RVNAF  leadership;  so  they  indulged  in
more  interesting  international  activities.  In  May,  talks  started  between  Lao  and
GVN  military  staffs.  The  occasion  was  planning  for  barrier  extension  westward,
but  Washington  realized  at  once  that  there  was  little  the  US  could  do  to  limit
the  contacts  to  that  subject.  In  July,  it  was  discovered  that  GVN  was  using


402 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Chinat  agents,  disguised  so  as  to  appear  to  be  South  Vietnamese  with  Nung
ancestry,  on  covert  operations.  JCS  disapproved  of  the  effort  despite  appeals
from  COMUSMACV.  The  Chinats  appeared  to  be  the  result  of  a  secret  bilat-
eral agreement  concluded  during  1966.  In  September,  MACV  reported  that
GVN  had  occupied  Pattle  Island  in  the  Crescent  Group  about  170  miles  south
of  Hainan  with  the  intention  of  constructing  an  airfield  there.  Because  these
islands  are  already  claimed  by  Communist  and  Nationalist  Chinas  and  the  Philip-
pines as  well,  MACV  advised  against  US  cooperation  in  the  adventure.

O. THE  GVN  PRESIDENTIAL  ELECTION

Pre-nomination  maneuvering  and  legitimacy  of  the  Presidential  campaign
were  the  subjects  which  occupied  American  attention  above  all  else.  The  first
task  facing  Ambassador  Bunker  as  he  arrived  on  station  in  April  was  to  over-
see the  delicate  transition  of  GVN  to  a  government  based  upon  a  popular  elec-
tion recognized  by  the  world  to  be  fair.

Premier  Ky  was  already  openly  acting  like  a  Presidential  candidate  in  April.
General  Thieu  was  informed  that  the  generals  had  endorsed  Ky  while  Thieu
was  absent  from  the  scene  recovering  from  an  appendectomy.  That  was  not
sufficient  to  scare  Thieu  from  the  race;  so  the  US  Mission  became  increasingly
worried  that  the  Thieu-Ky  competition  threatened  the  indispensable  unity
of  the  miUtary.  Dickering  remained  behind  the  scenes  until  Ky  formally  an-
nounced his  candidacy  on  May  12.  This  served  only  to  intensify  the  rivalry.  By
mid-June,  the  Thieu-Ky  confrontation  showed  no  signs  of  moving  toward  satis-
factory resolution.  Basically,  Ambassador  Bunker  believed  in  an  indirect
approach.  He  did  not  hesitate  to  approach  Ky  and  Thieu  individually  on  the
broader  issues  of  arbitrary  press  censorship,  questionable  tactics  being  pursued
by  Ky  supporters  six  weeks  before  it  was  legal  to  campaign,  or  unity  of
the  Armed  Forces.  But,  on  the  confrontation  between  the  two  candidates.
Bunker's  ploy  was  to  hold  an  informal  luncheon  to  which  the  two  principals
were  invited.  In  the  end  they  had  to  work  out  their  own  solution.  They  did.  At
the  end  of  June  the  50-60  officers  of  the  Armed  Forces  Council  met  in  a  2-day,
continuous  session  at  which  both  Thieu  and  Ky  performed  histrionics.  The  sur-
prising result  was  that  Ky  agreed  to  run  for  the  Vice-Presidency  on  Thieu's
ticket.  The  Mission  sighed  in  relief  and  agreed  that  Bunker's  approach  had
worked.  The  Ambassador  congratulated  the  candidates,  and  Thieu  obligingly
announced  that  if  elected  he  would  appoint  a  civilian  as  Premier.  Ky  agreed.
The  RVNAF  chief  of  staff  had  earlier  announced  that  there  would  be  no  of-
ficially endorsed  military  candidate;  yet  the  Constituent  Assembly  conveniently
approved  a  draft  article  which  permitted  Thieu  and  Ky  to  run  without  resigning
from  the  Armed  Forces.  By  mid-July,  the  Assembly  had  voted  acceptance  of  the
Thieu-Ky  ticket  while  disallowing  one  headed  by  Big  Minh  who  remained  in
nearby  Bangkok  as  a  potential  threat  to  the  younger  pair.  With  only  a  few
hitches,  the  campaigning  proceeded  so  as  to  satisfy  American  observers  that  it
was  acceptably  fair;  and  the  resultant  Thieu-Ky  victory  was  a  surprise  only  in  its
smaller-than-expected  pi urality .

P. BLUEPRINT  FOR  VIETNAM,  AUGUST,  1967

State  suggested  that  completion  of  the  election  process  was  a  proper  occasion
upon  which  to  consider  several  proposals,  including  increased  leverage,  for
advancing  the  total  American  effort  in  South  Vietnam.  Bunker  also  mentioned


US-GVN  Relations  403


this  when  he  transmitted  the  paper,  "Blueprint  for  Viet-Nam."  The  "Blue-
print" ranged  widely  over  all  topics  and  struck  a  consistently  optimistic  note:

Progress  in  the  war  has  been  steady  on  all  fronts.  We  can  defeat  the  enemy
by  patient,  continued,  and  concerted  effort.  The  way  to  do  this  is  for  the
GVN  and  its  allies  (a)  to  reinforce  and  accelerate  the  progress  already
made;  (b)  to  markedly  improve  the  interdiction  of  infiltration  of  North
Vietnamese  troops  and  supplies;  (c)  to  upgrade,  accelerate,  and  coordinate
the  pacification  program  in  the  countryside;  and  (d)  to  maintain  political
and  economic  stability  and  support  the  development  of  the  constitutional
process.

.  .  .  We  still  have  a  long  way  to  go.  Much  of  the  country  is  still  in  VC
hands,  the  enemy  can  still  shell  our  bases  and  commit  acts  of  terrorism  in
the  securest  areas,  VC  units  still  mount  large  scale  attacks,  most  of  the
populace  has  not  actively  commited  itself  to  the  Government,  and  a  VC
infrastructure  still  exists  throughout  the  country.  Nevertheless,  the  situa-
tion has  steadily  improved  since  the  spring  of  1965  .  .  .
Now,  that  the  initiative  is  ours  and  the  enemy  is  beginning  to  hurt,
maximum  pressure  must  be  maintained  on  him  by  (a)  intensifying  mil-
itary activity  in  the  South;  (b)  developing  new  methods  of  interdicting
infiltration;  (c)  bombing  all  targets  in  the  North  connected  with  the
enemy's  war  effort  that  do  not  result  in  unacceptable  risk  of  uncon-
trolled escalation;  (d)  accelerating  the  program  of  pacification  (including
better  security  more  effective  attacks  on  the  infractructure, » stepped  up
National  Reconciliation  and  Chieu  Hoi  programs,  a  greater  involvement
of  the  people  in  solving  their  own  problems  at  the  village  and  hamlet  level;
(e)  encouraging  reforms  in  the  government  structure  and  continued  im-
provement in  the  armed  forces;  (f)  attacking  the  problem  of  corruption;
(g)  using  influence  to  effect  a  strong,  freely  elected  government  with
political  stability;  and  (h  taking  actions  necessary  to  the  continued
growth  and  stability  of  the  economy  .  .  .

In  a  subsequent  message  Ambassador  Bunker  stated  more  specifically  that
the  United  States  should  use  its  influence  to  get  GVN  to  do  the  following:

A.  Seek  broad  based  popular  support.

(1)  Appoint  prominent  civilians  including  some  leading  opposition  can-
didates, in  new  government.  '

(2)  Use  appointments  to  insure  association  of  a  new  government  with
various  religious  and  political  groups.

(3)  Adopt  a  program  and  identify  it  with  that  of  a  former  national
hero,  "so  as  to  give  the  new  government  an  idealistic  appeal  or  philos-
ophy which  will  compete  with  that  declared  by  the  VC."  Bunker  sug-
gested Nguyen  Hue.

B.  Work  on  a  more  continuous,  although  informal  basis  with  US  Mission.
Bunker  suggests  regular  weekly  or  semi-monthly  lunches.

C.  Adopt  a  program  to  include  the  following:

(1)  Public  recognition  of  the

(a)  Necessity  for  every  Vietnamese  to  contribute  to  the  war  effort.

(b)  Need  to  change  draft  laws.

(2)  Reaffirm  on-going  programs  relating  to  RVNAF,  including


404 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


(a)  MACV  program  of  ARVN  improvement  through  merit  pro-
motions and  a  miHtary  inspectorate.

(b)  Elimination  of  corrupt,  inefficient  leaders.

(c)  Expansion  of  RF/PF  and  adoption  of  the  MACV  recommended
system  of  US  advisory  teams  operating  with  RF/PF  for  6-month
period.

(d)  Greater  integration  of  US  forces  or  joint  operations.

(e)  Reorientation  of  the  concept  of  the  Pacification  Role  of  ARVN,
RF,  and  PF  in  accordance  with  MACV  suggestions — from  static  sup-
port to  mobile,  area  security  with  night  patrolling  and  a  system  of
inspection  and  grading  to  insure  implementation.

(3)  Make  the  Province  Chief  the  "key"  man  in  pacification — giving
him  operational  control  over  all  military  and  paramilitary  forces  en-
gaged in  pacification.  He  should  appoint  district  chiefs.  He  should  report
to  Corps  commander  on  military  matters  and  to  central  government  on
civil  matters.  An  inspection,  training,  and  rates  system  should  be  es-
tablished.

(4)  Centralize  all  rural  development  efforts  in  non-RD  hamlets  under
one  coordinated  control  in  some  manner  as  is  now  done  in  the  Ministry
of  Revolutionary  Development  for  RD  hamlets.

(5  Construct  an  adequate  number  of  processing  and  detention  cen-
ters in  provinces  and  permanent  prisons  on  islands  on  priority  basis  to-
gether with  passing  of  laws  that  it  is  a  crime  to  be  a  VC  civilian  cadre.

(6)  Pay  higher  salaries  to  selected  GVN  officials,  including  the  military,
particularly  those  officials  able  to  control  corruption  or  in  a  position  to
be  tempted  by  corruption.

(7)  Reaffirm  National  Reconciliation  and  Chieu  Hoi  programs.

(8)  Grant  villages  the  power  to  enforce  land  rental  laws.

(9)  Adopt  the  whole  of  the  "operation  Take-off"  pacification  program
prepared  by  MACCORDS.

(10)  Establish  joint  council  procedures  over  expenditure  of  counter-
part piasters  by  reinstituting  sign-off  by  US  advisors  at  province  level.

(11)  Revitalize  the  veteran's  program.

(12)  Increase  receipts  from  domestic  taxes  and  tariffs,  and  revise  mone-
tary policies.


Q. THE  LEVERAGE  STUDY

On  August  31  State  transmitted  a  study  by  Hans  Heymann  and  Col.  Volney
Warner  on  the  subject  of  leverage.  It  reviewed  the  rationale  for  leverage  and
considered  a  whole  array  of  possible  techniques:

...  In  anticipating  the  US  GVN  relationship  in  the  post-election  period,
it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  US  should  find  ways  to  exercise  leverage  with
the  Vietnamese  government  which  are  more  commensurate  in  degree  with
the  importance  of  the  US  effort  to  South  Vietnam's  survival  and  which  re-
flect the  climate  of  growing  restiveness  in  the  US  ...  In  its  impatience
to  get  results  and  make  progress,  the  US  has  increasingly  resorted  to  uni-
lateral programs  and  action  with  inadequate  consultation  with  the  Viet-
namese. On  the  other  hand,  the  indiscriminate  and  careless  exercise  of  US
leverage  could  undermine  the  self-respect  of  the  Vietnamese  government
in  its  own  eyes  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  South  Vietnamese  people.
...  To  be  effective,  US  leverage  must  be  exercised  in  the  context  of  a


US-GVN  Relations  405


relationship  of  mutual  respect  and  confidence,  and  in  ways  commensurate
with  the  objective  sought.  It  must  also  be  backed  by  credible  sanctions.
.  .  .  The  various  tools  of  leverage  available  to  us  are  described  below.  It
is  not  proposed  that  all  of  these  tools  be  used  at  any  given  time  or  that  some
of  them  be  used  at  all.  However,  they  represent  a  selection  of  arrows  that
might  be  placed  in  the  US  Mission  quiver  for  use  as  the  Mission  Council
deems  appropriate.  It  will  be  particularly  important  to  construct  a  credible
and  effective  system  of  US  leverage  for  use  as  necessary  and  appropriate
in  connection  with  the  list  of  priority  program  objectives  which  we  shall
be  seeking  to  achieve  with  the  newly  elected  government  in  the  immediate
post-election  period.

Tools  of  Leverage

...  A  wide  range  of  possible  techniques  and  forms  of  influence  is  available
at  each  level  of  the  American  presence  in  Vietnam.  A  few  of  these  leverage
devices  are  now  in  use,  mostly  at  the  initiative  of  individual  Americans  on
the  spot,  but  not  as  part  of  an  organized  framework  of  influence.  Other
devices  have  been  instituted  in  the  past,  only  to  be  subsequently  abandoned
because  of  fear  of  their  misuse,  actual  misuse,  or  inadequate  understanding
of  their  value.

In  the  following  list  we  array  a  range  of  possible  instruments  of  influence
that  the  US  might  employ,  with  some  indication  of  their  applicability.

A.  Rapport  .  .  .

B.  Joint  Planning  and  Evaluation  .  .  .

C.  Joint  Inspection  and  Audit  .  .  .

D.  Joint  Secretariats  .  .  .

E.  The  JCRR  approach:  Establishing  a  joint,  autonomous,  dually-staffed,
foundation-like  organization  headed  by  a  board  of  commissioners  appointed
by  the  two  heads  of  state,  to  administer  all  forms  of  non-military  AID  .  .  .

F.  Contingency  Funds  and  Special  Resources  .  .  .

G.  Control  Over  Expenditure  of  Counterpart  Piasters  .  .  .

H.  Retention  of  Resources  in  US  Channels  .  .  .

I.  Joint  Personnel  Management — to  institute  career  incentive,  selec-
tion, and  removal  policies  .  .  .

J.  Joint  Command  .  .  .

K.  Policy-level  Monitoring  System — to  monitor  the  exercise  of  authority
of  key  officials  of  the  GVN  .  .  .

L.  Withholding  US  Support — at  levels  below  Saigon,  the  authority  of
US  senior  advisors  to  cut  oft"  or  withdraw  US  civil  and  military  support
from  Vietnamese  activities  or  operations  within  their  area  of  responsibility
would  constitute  powerful  leverage  .  .  .

At  the  Saigon  level,  a  range  of  extremely  tough  options  is  available,  en-
compassing selective  withdrawal  of  US  support  for  Vietnam  persuading
the  GVN  that  these  are  in  fact  available  requires  the  will  to  use  them  and
the  political  ability  to  follow  through  if  our  hand  is  called.  Options  would
include  halting  further  troop  deployments,  standing  down  US  unit  opera-
tions, suspending  CIP  and  MAP  assistance,  and  so  forth.

Ambassador  Komer  replied  on  September  19.  He  recalled  his  deep  interest
this  subject  and  discussed  at  length  both  present  and  potential  techniques.


406 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

His  views  seemed  considerably  mitigated  by  his  several  months  in  Saigon,  for
"rapport"  and  "persuasion  with  implied  pressure"  headed  the  list  of  what  was
presently  being  done.  He  concluded  by  saying,  "All  of  the  above  forms  of
leverage,  and  yet  others,  could  be  useful  at  the  proper  time  and  in  an
appropriate  way.  But  they  must  be  applied  with  discretion,  and  always  in  such
manner  as  to  keep  the  GVN  foremost  in  the  picture  presented  to  its  own  people
and  the  world  at  large  .  .  .  The  exercise  of  leverage  in  a  personal  manner  and
hidden  from  the  public  view  is  likely  to  be  most  effective,  while  of  the  more
operational  means  establishment  of  combined  organization  under  a  JCRR-type
concept,  to  include  joint  control  of  resources,  would  be  most  desirable.  In  sum,
we're  gradually  applying  more  leverage  in  Pacification,  but  wish  to  do  so  in  ways
that  least  risk  creating  more  trouble  than  constructive  results."

R.  POSTLOGUE

New  plans  and  new  hopes  marked  the  immediate  post-election  period.  The
story  of  US-GVN  relations  continues,  but  this  narrative  must  end.  In  conclusion
it  seems  appropriate  to  quote  from  the  MACCORDS  report  covering  Bien  Hoa
province  for  the  period  ending  December  31,  1967.

1 . Status  /or  the  RD  Plan:

The  GVN  in  Bien  Hoa  Province  has  not  met  with  any  measure  of  suc-
cess in  furthering  the  pacification  effort  during  1967.  Those  areas  that  do
represent  advances  (such  as  road  openings  or  repairs  or  construction,
breaking  up  of  main  line  VC  units,  etc.)  have  all  been  the  result  of  uni-
lateral US  actions.  It  was  perhaps  naively  thought  that  these  US  accom-
plishments would  stand  as  an  inspiring  example  to  the  GVN  and  would
prompt  them  to  not  only  continue  their  efforts  but,  further,  to  expand  and
intensify  the  fight.  However,  during  1967  in  Bien  Hoa  Province,  this  has
not  been  the  case.  The  GVN  at  all  levels  has  grown  weaker,  become  more
corrupt  and,  today,  displays  even  less  vitality  and  will  than  it  did  one  year
ago  .  .  .

Advisory  Leverage:  This  subject  has  been  an  extremely  sensitive  and  con-
troversial issue  in  both  GVN  and  US  circles.  However,  as  painful  as  it  must
be  to  address,  the  harsh  truth  is  that  given  a  showdown  situation  or  an  in-
tolerable divergence  between  GVN  and  US  methods,  the  US  advisor  will
lose.  CORDS,  Bien  Hoa  has  gone  to  extraordinary  lengths  in  reporting  on
both  corrupt  and  incompetent  officials  and  practices.  The  reason  for  these
efforts  has  been  to  illustrate  clearly  to  higher  US  authorities,  the  enormity
of  the  problems  facing  the  advisor  on  the  province /District  level.  CORDS
Bien  Hoa,  as  perhaps  all  other  echelons  of  US  advisors,  is  ultimately  power-
less to  rectify  or  even  significantly  alter  the  GVN  intentions  and  perfor-
mance. The  Vietnamese  in  the  street  is  firmly  convinced  that  the  US  totally
dominates  the  GVN  and  dictates  exactly  what  course  shall  be  followed.
However,  the  bitter  and  tragic  truth  is  that  the  US  has  been  kept  at  such  a
distance  from  GVN  circles  and  power  that  in  joint  councils  or  plans  our
views  may  be  heard,  some  portions  of  our  logic  may  be  endorsed  but  with
confrontations  or  matters  that  represent  any  truly  revolutionary  departure
from  existing  GVN  practices  etc,  we  are  light  weights  and  presently  do  not
possess  the  leverage  or  power  to  carry  the  day.

ARVN  Performance:  There  are  presently  two  ARVN  battalions  (3/43
and  2/48)  who  are  directly  assigned  to  support  RD  in  Bien  Hoa.  With  the


US-GVN  Relations  407


exception  of  the  1st  Bn,  48th  Regt  which  served  in  the  Phu  Hoi  Campaign
area  earlier  in  the  year,  ARVN  performance  has  been  less  than  satisfactory.
The  units  have  demonstrated  the  same  age-old  ills  that  have  collectively
led  to  our  present  commitment  of  US  forces  .  .  .

GVN  Officials  Interests:  The  primary  interest  of  GVN  officials  in  Bien
Hoa  Province  is  money.  The  lucrative  US  presence  with  all  the  various
service  trades  that  cater  to  the  soldier,  have  created  a  virtual  gold  mine  of
wealth  which  is  directly  or  indirectly  syphoned  off  and  pocketed  by  the
officials.  Thus,  revolutionary  development  with  all  the  ultimate  implications
of  broadening  the  governing  base  of  this  society,  is  viewed  as  some  sort  of
necessary  device  that  needs  to  be  propped  up  and  nominally  catered  to  by
the  GVN  in  order  to  keep  US  and  Free  World's  interest  and  faith  intact.
However,  any  serious  or  meaningful  gesture  in  support  of  a  program  which
ultimately  is  designed  to  displace  the  powers-to-be  (or  at  least  force  them
to  become  accountable  or  share  in  the  power)  is  not  forthcoming.  Infra-
structure is  not  attacked  even  though  the  target  is  known;  budgets  are  not
spent  although  the  funds  are  available;  GVN  officials  steadfastly  refuse
to  visit  their  districts  or  villages  or  hamlets  although  it  is  there  that  most
immediate  problems  exist.  The  list  of  limpid,  half-hearted  efforts  to  prose-
cute the  war  is  endless.

Material  Cutoffs  and  Shortages:  In  August  after  several  months  of  nego-
tiation, CORDS,  Bien  Hoa  was  forced  to  cut  off  further  shipment  of  re-
plenishment stocks  into  province.  The  reasons  for  this  action  were  many
but  could  be  reduced  to  sloppy,  shoddy  and  highly  questionable  logistical
practices  and  procedures  on  the  part  of  the  GVN.  After  eleven  weeks,  the
Provincial  GVN  finally  agreed  to  carry  out  the  reforms  and  renovations  as
suggested  by  CORDS.  However,  that  eleven-week  gap  in  the  flow  of
materials  (particularly  during  a  period  most  noted  for  its  relatively  high
degree  of  GVN  action)  had  a  significant  effect  on  curbing  construction
programs  and  causing  even  more  delays.  Then,  as  soon  as  this  issue  was
resolved,  it  was  learned  that  cement  and  roofing  weren't  in  supply  and  ra-
tioned quotas  for  the  remainder  of  the  year  further  compounded  the
damage  caused  by  earlier  material  shortages.

To  compensate,  in  part,  for  these  factors,  CORDS  has  had  to  in-
creasingly rely  on  the  resources,  skills  and  capabilities  of  resident  US
military  units.  These  units  have,  without  exception,  effectively  filled  the
gaps  and  their  efforts  have  succeeded  in  reducing  the  critical  road  situation
that  has  been  worsening  throughout  the  years.  Their  action  in  many  other
areas  has  been  highly  commendable  and  CORDS  Bien  Hoa  (as  well  as  the
GVN  itself)  owes  a  great  deal  to  these  units  and  their  commanders  who
have  unselfishly  devoted  themselves  to  furthering  pacification.  However,
for  all  their  efforts,  for  all  the  resources  either  expended  or  on  hand,  the
disturbing  truth  in  Bien  Hoa  is  that  it  still  remains  for  the  government,  with
forceful  and  meaningful  direction  from  above,  to  begin  to  assume  the
responsibility  for  prosecuting  this  war  and  the  pacification  effort.  Thus  far,
the  GVN  has  not  done  this  and  it  is  the  considered  opinion  of  CORDS
Bien  Hoa  that  unless  major  revisions  are  brought  about  in  the  factors
raised  here,  there  is  only  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  same  ordeal  with  the
accompanying  frustrations,  inaction,  corruption  and  incompetence.  A
continuation  of  this  does  not  connotate  stability  or  even  maintenance  of
the  status  quo;  it  spells  regression  and  an  ever  widening  gap  of  distrust,  dis-
taste and  disillusionment  between  the  people  and  the  GVN.


408


6. The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967


Summary  and  A  nalysis

The  United  States  decided,  shortly  after  the  Geneva  Accords  and  during  the  j
period  of  French  withdrawal  from  Indo-China,  to  give  military  assistance  and  I
advice  to  the  newly  proclaimed  Republic  of  Vietnam.  It  might  as  easily  have  ,|
decided  not  to  undertake  this  effort  to  prevent  South  Vietnam  from  falling  to  i
communism.

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  were  pessimistic.  The  creation  of  a  Vietnamese
Army,  they  said,  might  not  even  lead  to  internal  political  stability,  much  less  i
assure  the  capability  to  protect  South  Vietnam  from  external  aggression.  The
JCS  also  believed  that  the  limitations  imposed  by  the  Geneva  agreements  on  the
number  of  U.S.  military  personnel  would  make  it  impractical  to  attempt  to
train  a  new  Army — particularly  given  the  paucity  of  experienced  leaders  which
was  the  legacy  of  French  colonialism.  The  President's  military  advisors  did  not
wish  to  assume  the  responsibility  for  failure  without  the  resources  and  influence
which  would  offer  a  better  chance  for  success.

THE  AMERICAN  GAMBLE

The  available  record  does  not  indicate  any  rebuttal  of  the  ICS's  appraisal  of
the  situation.  What  it  does  indicate  is  that  the  U.S.  decided  to  gamble  with  very
limited  resources  because  the  potential  gains  seemed  well  worth  a  limited  risk.
"I  cannot  guarantee  that  Vietnam  will  remain  free,  even  with  our  aid,"  General  li
J.  Lawton  Collins  reported  to  the  National  Security  Council,  "But  I  know  that
without  our  aid  Vietnam  will  surely  be  lost  to  Communism."  I

Secretary  of  State  John  Foster  Dulles  was  instrumental  in  deciding  for  politi-
cal reasons  to  undertake  a  modest  program  of  military  advice  aimed  at  pro-
ducing political  stability.  Once  launched,  however,  the  program  of  advice  and
assistance  came  to  be  dominated  by  conventional  military  conceptions.  Insur-  ti
ing  internal  stability  is  a  "lesser  included  capability"  of  armed  force,  the  \
reasoning  went;  the  principal  purpose  of  such  a  force  is  to  protect  the  territorial  j  pi
integrity  of  the  nation.  i  Ii

It  was  such  a  conventional  force  that  the  small  USMAAG  attempted  to  pro-  i
duce  from  1955  until  about  1960.  The  Army  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  V
(ARVN)  was  made  to  "mirror  image"  the  U.S.  Army  to  the  extent  permitted  i
by  differences  in  equipment  and  locale.  The  number  of  U.S.  advisors  (approxi-  fc
mately  doubled  by  "The  Equipment  Recovery  Mission" — a  thinly  veiled  device
to  increase  the  number  of  Americans  in  Vietnam)  remained  stable  throughout
this  period.  ARVN  developed  into  a  multi-divisional  force  oriented  primarily
toward  conventional  defense.  The  later  transition  to  a  force  designed  for  t
counterinsurgent  warfare  was  thereby  made  more  difficult.

It  seemed  for  a  while  that  the  gamble  against  long  odds  had  succeeded.  The  i
Viet  Minh  were  quiescent;  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  Armed  Forces  (RVNAF)  \


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  409


were  markedly  better  armed  and  trained  than  they  were  when  the  U.S.  effort
began  (at  which  time  they  were  unarmed  and  untrained),  and  President  Ngo
Dinh  Diem  showed  a  remarkable  ability  to  put  down  factions  threatening  GVN
stability  and  to  maintain  himself  in  office.

This  period  of  apparent  stability  disappeared,  however,  in  the  events  of
1959/61  as  the  Viet  Minh  (relabelled  Viet  Cong — a  contraction  for  Viet-
namese Communist)  stepped  up  terrorism,  sabotage,  and  military  action  by
increasingly  large  units.  By  mid- 1961,  the  prospect  for  South  Vietnam's  inde-
pendence was  at  least  as  dark  as  it  had  been  six  years  earlier.

But  the  U.S.  military  advisors  in  Vietnam  had  learned — or  at  least  thought
they  had  learned — during  this  period  of  gradual  disintegration  the  true  nature
of  the  battle  in  which  they  were  engaged  by  proxy.  This  was  an  unconventional,
internal  war  of  counterinsurgency  rather  than  a  conventional  struggle  against
an  external  foe.  It  was  a  battle  for  the  "hearts  and  minds"  of  the  indigenous
(and  especially  the  rural)  population  rather  than  a  contest  to  win  and  hold  key
terrain  features.  It  was  an  intermeshed  political-economic-military  war  rather
than  one  in  which  political  and  economic  issues  were  settled  by  military  victory.

U.S.  advisors  in  Vietnam — and  U.S.  military  and  civilian  theorists  in  other
places,  as  well — formulated  during  this  period  a  rudimentary  doctrine  of  coun-
terinsurgent  warfare.  In  response  to  Premier  Khrushchev's  endorsement  of
"wars  of  national  liberation"  they  proposed  to  help  free  world  nations  save
themselves  from  communism  by  a  series  of  sequential  actions  that  dealt  with  the
symptoms  of  social  revolution  (the  insurgency)  as  well  as  its  causes  (the  frus-
tration of  expectations  for  social  justice) .

Thus,  at  almost  the  same  time  that  the  U.S.  began  its  advisory  buildup  in
South  Vietnam  in  late  1961,  military  and  civilian  practitioners  found  them-
selves in  possession  of  a  simple,  apparently  logical,  outline  sketch  of  a  method
by  which  to  counter  the  communist-captured  insurgency.  Physical  security
from  the  acts  of  the  insurgents  was  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition
for  success.  In  addition  to  security  the  Vietnamese  government  had  to  establish
the  services  which  would  link  it  in  classic  terms  of  legitimacy  to  its  subjects.
We  would  fight  fire  with  fire  and  we  would  fight  it  with  water,  too.

THE  LIMITED  PARTNERSHIP

The  decisions  made  by  the  Kennedy  Administration  from  mid-1961  onward,
culminating  in  the  expansion  of  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  following  General
Maxwell  D.  Taylor's  mission  to  Saigon  in  October,  did  not  simply  set  out  to  ex-
plain this  newly-articulated  counterinsurgency  theory  and  doctrine  to  the  GVN.
They  attempted  to  induce  the  GVN  to  reform  itself  so  that  identification  with
its  populace  would  be  possible.  Beyond  this,  they  chose  to  attempt  to  help  the
Vietnamese,  in  Taylor's  words,  "as  friends  and  partners — not  as  arms-length
advisors — [and]  show  them  how  the  job  might  be  done — not  tell  them  or  do  it
for  them."

The  "limited  partnership"  which  General  Taylor  proposed — and  which  Presi-
dent Kennedy  accepted — was  designed  to  place  U.S.  advisors  at  many  levels
within  the  RVNAF  and  GVN  structure  rather  than  merely  at  the  top.  An
earlier  proposal,  to  concentrate  on  advisors  at  the  top  with  wide  discretionary
authority  and  to  count  on  influence  as  the  product  of  the  demonstrated  com-
mitment of  a  carefully  selected  handful  of  men,  was  rejected  in  favor  of  many
advisors  at  many  levels,  each  serving  normally  only  for  a  twelve  month  period,


410 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

and  with  the  advisory  manpower  furnished  through  normal  personnel  selection
and  assignment  processes  within  the  military  services.

The  expectation  among  U.S.  policymakers — recorded  in  NSAM  111 —
was  that  the  GVN  and  U.S.  would  mutually  agree  upon  necessary  steps  to  end
the  insurgency.  The  U.S.,  for  its  part,  would  underwrite  an  increase  in  RVNAF
and  provide  advisors  throughout  the  military  structure  down  to  battalion  level
and  in  each  provincial  capital.  The  GVN  would  rationalize  its  lines  of  authority
and  begin  reform  measures  to  bring  it  closer  to  the  Vietnamese  people.  This
was,  of  course,  a  U.S.  expectation,  not  an  agreed  quid  pro  quo.  Diem  was  un-
willing to  permit  the  U.S.  to  share  in  his  formulation  of  plans.  He  was  even
afraid  to  discuss  the  U.S.  expectations  candidly  with  his  own  cabinet  ministers.
It  is  a  matter  of  record  that  he  did  not  reform  his  government.  ("He  will  not
reform  because  he  cannot,"  J.  Kenneth  Galbraith  cabled  President  Kennedy.)
What  remains  in  issue  is  whether  he  could  have  done  so.  If  he  could  not,  the
U.S.  plan  to  end  the  insurgency  was  foredoomed  from  its  inception,  for  it
depended  on  Vietnamese  initiatives  to  solve  a  Vietnamese  problem.

COMMITMENT  AND  EXPECTATION

Thus  the  U.S.  overall  plan  to  end  the  insurgency  was  on  shaky  ground  on  the
GVN  side.  Diem  needed  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.  needed  a  reformed  Diem.  As
U.S.  advisors  began  deploying  to  Vietnam  for  service  with  tactical  units  in  the
field,  the  gamble  of  the  mid-50's  was  transferred  into  a  broad  commitment.
President  Kennedy  and  his  advisors  were  determined  to  save  Vietnam  from
communism  by  helping  the  Vietnamese  to  save  themselves.  One  side  of  the
dual  U.S.  thrust  (GVN  reform)  was  already  in  trouble.  What  of  the  "friends
and  partners"  who  were  to  share  the  dangers  and  tasks  of  RVNAF  in  the  field?
What  was  expected  of  them?  What  advantages  would  accrue  from  their  pres-
ence in  Vietnam?

The  available  record  is  almost  totally  devoid  of  any  explication  (much  less
any  debate)  on  these  questions.  General  Taylor's  report  of  his  mission  to  Saigon
implies  an  unambiguous  convergence  of  interests  between  the  advisors  and  the
advised.  All  that  was  needed  was  greater  competence.  More  U.S.  advisors  at
more  places  working  on  problems  of  Vietnamese  training  and  operations  could
not  but  have  an  overall  beneficial  effect.

It  is  necessary  to  surmise  the  expectations  in  the  policymakers  minds  of  just
how  this  would  come  about.  First,  they  seem  to  have  expected  the  increased
U.S.  advisory  presence  to  lead  directly  to  increased  RVNAF  competence  in
technical  and  tactical  areas.  Basic  military  skills — how  to  move,  shoot,  and
communicate — could  be  improved  and  the  improvements  sustained  by  a  con-
tinuing U.S.  presence  at  many  operational  levels.  Second,  the  U.S.  policymakers
could  receive  reports  from  an  omnipresent  U.S.  "network"  which  would  permit
them  to  become  better  informed  about  what  was  really  taking  place  in  Viet-
nam, not  only  with  respect  to  VC  activity  but  with  reference  to  ARVN  plans,
operations,  and  problems  as  well.  Finally,  the  U.S.  expected  to  realize  increased
influence  within  RVNAF  from  the  presence  of  advisors,  (and  it  expected,  as
NSAM  1 1 1  made  clear,  to  realize  increased  influence  with  GVN  in  exchange
for  increasing  its  visible  commitment  to  South  Vietnamese  independence.)

Increased  influence  can,  of  course,  be  gained  in  many  ways.  U.S.  advisors
could,  by  example,  promote  more  aggressive  Vietnamese  leadership  and  im-
proved standards  of  conduct.  A  well-coordinated  advisor)^  network  could  exert
persuasive  pressure  throughout  RVNAF  to  adopt  certain  policies  or  practices.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  411

And  the  U.S.  providers  of  the  material  resources  could,  if  they  wished,  keep  a
tight  hand  on  the  spigot  and  control  the  flow.  They  could  exert  influence  nega-
tively. The  U.S.  was  anxious  to  avoid  this  last  mentioned  approach  to  increased
influence.  "Leverage,"  as  it  is  now  commonly  known,  was  a  subject  rarely  dis-
cussed, much  less  practiced.  The  "limited  partnership"  finessed  the  whole  issue
of  sanctions  by  assuming  (or  hoping  or  pretending,  one  cannot  know  which)
that  no  problem  existed.

PACIFICATION  AND  STRATEGIC  HAMLETS

The  process  of  countering  insurgency,  most  commonly  called  pacification,
received  a  great  amount  of  attention  and  publicity  at  the  same  time  the  U.S.
was  increasing  its  field  advisors  with  ARVN  from  a  handful  to  over  3,000.
Earlier,  in  1960,  the  USMAAG  had  pressed  upon  the  GVN  a  national  Counter-
insurgency  Plan  for  Vietnam  (CIP)  which  was  really  an  organizational  blue-
print for  reordering  the  GVN-RVNAF  lines  of  command  to  permit  effective
action.  The  nub  of  the  problem  was  that  the  political  leaders  in  rural  areas
(Province  and  District  Chiefs — almost  all  military  officers)  were  responsible
to  Saigon  directly  while  RVNAF  had  a  separate  chain  of  command.  In  1961,
the  MAAG  presented  its  complementary  Geographically  Phased  Plan  which
specified  the  relative  priority  for  clearing  out  the  VC,  holding,  then  building
GVN  at  the  "rice  roots."  The  object,  as  the  U.S.  advisors  saw  it,  was  to  have  a
workable  national  plan  upon  which  to  base  the  entire  US-GVN  effort.

The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  soon  became  the  unifying  vehicle  to  express
the  pacification  process.  The  theory  was  that  of  physical  security  first,  then
government  programs  to  develop  popular  allegiance.  The  fact  was  over-expan-
sion, counter-productive  coercion  in  some  areas,  widespread  mismanagement,
and  dishonesty.  U.S.  policymakers  were  not,  however,  aware  of  how  badly
things  were  going  until  they  became  much  worse.  Optimism  dominated  official
thinking.  No  need  was  perceived  for  new  departures.  Throughout  the  period
of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program — that  is,  until  Diem's  regime  was  toppled  in
late  1963 — the  number  of  U.S.  advisors  remained  relatively  stable  at  its  new
(1962)  plateau.

The  expectation  that  more  U.S.  advisors  would  mean  better  information  for
U.S.  policymakers  was  not  realized.  One  cannot  judge  accurately  the  reasons
why  U.S.  leaders  in  Vietnam  and  Washington  thought  the  counterinsurgent
effort  was  making  headway,  but  the  fact  that  it  was  not  is  crystal  clear  in  retro-
spect. The  expectation  that  GVN  and  U.S.  interests  were  sufficiently  parallel
to  permit  greater  U.S.  influence  solely  as  a  result  of  a  larger  U.S.  presence
foundered  on  the  personalities  and  the  felt  necessities  of  the  Ngo  brothers.
The  extent  to  which  RVNAF  technical-tactical  competence  was  increased
during  this  period  remains  a  subject  of  disagreement  but  it  was  not  increased
sufficiently  to  "turn  the  tide"  of  the  war.  That  much  is  indisputable.

ANOTHER  ROUND  OF  INCREASES

After  Diem's  fall  there  was  a  brief  period  of  optimism  based  on  the  expecta-
tion that  the  new  military  regime  in  Saigon  would  be  more  receptive  to  U.S.
advice  than  its  predecessor  had  been.  By  the  summer  of  1964,  when  the  decision
was  made  to  expand  the  advisory  effort  again,  this  optimistic  hope  had  foun-
dered on  the  fact  of  continued  VC  victories  and  instability  within  the  GVN.

NSAM  288  had,  in  March  1964,  stated  U.S.  objectives  in  Vietnam  in  the


412 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

most  unambiguous  and  sweeping  terms.  If  there  had  been  doubt  that  the
limited  risk  gamble  undertaken  by  Eisenhower  had  been  transformed  into  an
unlimited  commitment  under  Kennedy,  that  doubt  should  have  been  dispelled
internally  by  NSAM  288's  statement  of  objectives:

We  seek  an  independent  non-Communist  South  Vietnam.  We  do  not
require  that  it  serve  as  a  Western  base  or  as  a  member  of  a  Western  Alli-
ance. South  Vietnam  must  be  free,  however,  to  accept  outside  assistance
as  required  to  maintain  its  security.  This  assistance  should  be  able  to  take
the  form  not  only  of  economic  and  social  measures  but  also  police  and
military  help  to  root  out  and  control  insurgent  elements.

If  we  cannot  save  South  Vietnam,  the  NSAM  continued  in  a  classic  statement
of  the  "domino  theory,"  all  of  Southeast  Asia  will  probably  fall  and  all  of  the
Western  Pacific  and  South  Asian  nations  will  come  under  increased  pressure.

There  were  at  this  time  several  steps  which  the  U.S.  could  have  taken  to
increase  its  assistance  to  the  GVN.  Carrying  the  war  to  Hanoi  was  one;  intro-
ducing U.S.  combat  forces  was  another.  Neither  appealed  much,  however,  in
terms  of  helping  the  South  Vietnamese  to  win  tJieir  war.  Both  were  anathema
in  the  midst  of  Presidential  election  year  politics.  Bombing  was  discussed  and
plans  laid,  but  no  action  taken.  Troop  commitments  were  not  even  discussed —
at  least  in  the  written  record  of  proposals  and  decisions.  Rather,  a  number  of
palliative  measures  to  help  the  GVN  economy  and  RVNAF  were  adopted  and
the  advisory  effort  was  expanded.

The  1964  expansion  of  the  advisory  effort  consisted  of  the  beefing-up  of  the
battalion  advisory  teams  and  the  establishment  of  district  (sub-sector)  teams.
Thus,  a  new  dimension  of  American  presence  was  added  and  the  density  of
U.S.  advisors  in  operational  units  was  increased.  There  is  nothing  in  the  avail-
able record  to  suggest  either  a  challenge  to  the  old,  unstated  assumption  that
more  U.S.  advisors  would  lead  to  increased  performance  or  any  change  in  the
assumed  expectations  of  U.S.  policymakers  had  changed.  The  determination
remained  to  advise  rather  than  to  command,  to  develop  Vietnamese  leadership
rather  than  to  supplant  it,  and  to  induce  the  GVN  to  take  the  steps  necessary
to  pacify  its  own  dissident  elements.

ADVISORS  TEMPORARILY  FORGOTTEN

The  expansion  to  district  level  placed  U.S.  military  advisors  throughout  almost
the  entire  RVNAF  hierarchy  (from  JGS  to  battalion,  with  enough  men  at  the
lower  level  to  advise  companies  on  a  "when  needed"  basis)  and  the  political
hierarchy  as  well  (sector  province  and  sub-sector  district).  U.S.  advisors  were
not  present  in  large  numbers  with  the  old  Civil  Guard  and  Self-Defense  Corps —
now  relabelled  the  Regional  Forces  and  Popular  Forces  under  province  and
district  control  respectively — but  they  advised  the  military  men  in  political
positions  who  controlled  these  paramilitary  forces.

Still  the  situation  continued  to  deteriorate.  Political  instability  within  the  GVN
had  by  1965  become  a  perennial  rather  than  a  transitory  problem.  The  U.S.
had  initiated  a  continuing  series  of  military  air  war  measures  to  dissuade  North
Vietnam  from  support  of  the  war  in  the  South.  The  results  were  obviously
inadequate;  they  may  even  have  been  opposite  to  those  expected.  Then  ARVN
suffered  a  series  of  disastrous  defeats  late  in  the  spring  of  1965  which  led


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  413


knowledgeable  observers  to  fear  an  imminent  GVN  collapse.  U.S.  combat  units
— a  few  of  which  were  already  in-country  with  restrictive  missions — began  to
be  deployed  to  South  Vietnam  in  earnest.

When  the  build-up  of  U.S.  combat  forces  got  underway  the  build-up  of  U.S.
advisors  had  already  been  essentially  completed.  Being  an  advisor  in  the  field
had  been  the  most  challenging  assignment  a  U.S.  soldier  could  seek;  being  with
a  U.S.  unit  in  combat  now  became  the  aim  of  most.  The  advisory  effort  sank
into  relative  obscurity  as  the  attention  of  policymakers  (and  of  the  press  and
public)  focused  on  the  U.S.  force  deployments,  on  building  the  base  complexes
from  which  U.S.  military  might  could  project  itself  into  the  countryside,  and
in  exploring  the  new  relationships  and  new  opportunities  occasioned  by  the
commitment  of  U.S.  land  forces  to  the  Asian  mainland.

A  number  of  measures  which  would  have  changed  materially  the  U.S.  ad-
visors relationship  to  their  Vietnamese  counterparts  were  examined  briefly  in
mid-1965.  Each  was  dropped.  The  encadrement  of  U.S.  and  ARVN  units  was
favored  by  President  Johnson.  General  Westmoreland  opposed  it — apparently
because  of  language  problems  and  the  difficult  logistic  support  problem  it  would
create — and  the  issue  quickly  died,  except  for  the  experimental  Combined
Action  Platoons  (CAPs)  formed  by  the  Marines.  The  subject  of  a  combined
U.S.-RVNAF  command  was  brought  up.  Secretary  McNamara  was  more  favor-
ably disposed  toward  achieving  ''unity  of  command"  than  were  his  senior  mili-
tary advisors  and  the  U.S.  Mission  representatives  in  Saigon.  They  were  keenly
aware  of  GVN  sensitivity  to  any  measures  which  would  explicitly  finger  the
increasing  Americanization  of  the  war  effort.  So  combined  command  was
shelved,  too.  The  GVN  even  opposed  a  joint  US-JGS  staff  to  coordinate  the
war  effort.  The  staff  was  never  formed.

PA CIFICA  TION  REEMPHA SIZED

As  the  build-up  of  U.S.  combat  forces  reached  a  level  permitting  offensive
forays  against  the  VC  (and  North  Vietnamese  Army)  forces,  there  gradually
evolved  a  division  of  responsibilities  between  U.S.  and  Vietnamese  forces  in
which  the  former  were  to  concentrate  on  defeating  the  main  forces  of  the
VC/NVA  and  the  latter  were  to  give  primary  emphasis  to  the  pacification
program.  Half  of  ARVN  was  to  operate  in  support  of  pacification.

This  division  of  effort  threw  most  U.S.  advisors  into  pacification — with
ARVN  units  as  well  as  in  the  province  and  district  advisory  teams.  It  also  threw
the  U.S.  military  advisors  into  closer  contact — and  competition  and  conflict
— with  the  growing  number  of  advisors  on  civil  functions  (many  of  whom
were  U.S.  military  men  on  "loan")  representing  the  CIA,  AID,  and  USIA.
The  question  was  raised  of  the  optimal  internal  U.S.  organization  to  support
the  Vietnamese  pacification  program.

The  result  of  a  drawn-out,  occasionally  acrimonious  debate  on  this  question
was  an  intermixed  civil-military  organization  embracing  the  entire  pacification
effort,  headed  by  a  civilian  of  ambassadorial  rank  under  COMUSMACV's
direction.  Called  Civil  Operations  and  Revolutionary  Development  Support
(CORDS),  it  replaced  a  bilinear  system  in  which  military  advisors  were  con-
trolled through  a  military  chain  of  command  and  all  civilian  advisors  were
controlled  (at  least  in  theory)  through  an  Office  of  Civil  Operations  (OCO).
The  creation  of  CORDS  was  hailed  as  a  victory  for  the  "single  manager"  con-
cept even  though  some  very  substantial  U.S.  programs  were  defined  as  outside
the  pacification  program  and,  hence,  beyond  CORDS'  competence.


414 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  11


RF/PF  ADVISORS

The  creation  of  CORDS  affected  only  the  organizational  context  of  U.S.
advice  to  the  South  Vietnamese.  It  did  nothing  to  change  the  relationship  be-
tween advisor  and  advised.  U.S.  expectations  continued  in  the  v^ell-worn
furrows  in  which  they  had  travelled  from  the  beginning:  better  information,
more  U.S.  influence  over  Vietnamese  plans  and  actions,  and  improved  GVN
(including  RVNAF)  performance  were  the  hoped  for  products  of  the  advisory
effort.

This  pattern  was  repeated  in  1967  when  an  increase  of  over  2,000  military
advisors  was  proposed  by  MACV  to  assist  the  Regional  and  Popular  Forces —
whose  security  missions  were  almost  exclusively  devoted  to  support  of  the  pacifi-
cation program.  The  RF  and  PF  were,  at  that  time,  the  only  RVNAF  compo-
nents without  a  sizeable  U.S.  advisory  complement.  When  the  question  of  im-
proving their  effectiveness  was  addressed  the  old  assumption  that  more  U.S.
advisors  would  equate  to  improved  effectiveness  again  went  unchallenged.

The  question  debated  was  whether  this  new  dimension  of  the  U.S.  advisory
effort  should  be  structured  to  give  continuing  advice  to  RF  companies  and  PF
platoons  or  should  be  constituted  on  a  mobile  training  basis.  The  decision  was
to  form  mobile  teams  for  both  tactical  and  logistical  support  training.  Advisors
were  detached  from  their  parent  U.S.  combat  units  and  detailed  to  these  duties
pending  the  manpower  accounting  change  which  would  transfer  these  indi-
viduals to  MACV  advisory  control  and  replace  them  in  U.S.  units  with  newly
deployed  fillers.

AVOIDED  ISSUES

This  was  the  situation  when  the  VC.^NVA  launched  a  massive  series  of
attacks  against  urban  population  centers  and  surrounding  pacification  program
forces  during  the  1968  lunar  new  year  (Tet)  offensive.  In  the  confused  after-
math of  this  radical  change  in  VC/NVA  strategy  the  U.S.  announced  in  Wash-
ington its  intention  to  give  renewed  attention  to  modernizing  RVNAF  so  that
a  larger  share  of  the  war  effort  could  be  turned  back  to  the  Vietnamese.  This
policy  decision,  following  as  it  did  an  unprecedented  six-year  period  of  U.S.
attempts  to  wage  counterinsurgent  war  by  proxy,  constituted  an  adequate
reason  to  reexamine  the  experience  of  the  past  and  to  explore  more  fully  some
difficult  questions  which  have  been  consistently  avoided  in  the  desire  to  assist
South  Vietnam.

The  most  basic  of  these  questions  is  whether  the  U.S.  can  in  any  way  serve
as  a  makeweight  sufficient  to  change  the  continuing  unfavorable  trend  of  the
war  in  South  Vietnam?  Can  it,  that  is,  overcome  the  apparent  fact  that  the  Viet
Cong  have  "captured"  the  Vietnamese  nationalist  movement  while  the  GVN
has  become  the  refuge  of  Vietnamese  who  were  allied  with  the  French  in  the
battle  against  the  independence  of  their  nation?  Attempts  to  answer  this
question  are  complicated,  of  course,  by  the  difficult  issue  of  Viet  Cong  allegiance
to  and  control  by  Communist  China.  But  this  is  the  nature  of  the  situation.  The
issue  of  whether  the  U.S.  can  energize  the  GVN  has  been  too  long  submerged
by  repeated  assertions  that  it  must  do  so.

A  part  of  any  tentative  answer  to  this  fundamental  question  will  turn  on  the
issue  of  how  the  U.S.  might  better  promote  a  more  adequate  pace  of  GVN


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  415

reform  and  improved  RVNAF  effectiveness  to  cope  with  the  VC/NVA  threat.
(A  related  question,  of  course,  is  whether  reform  and  increased  effectiveness
can  proceed  simultaneously.)  Asking  this  question  would  open  for  examination
two  aspects  of  the  advisory  program  that  have  come  to  be  treated  by  reflexive
response:  where  are  advisors  needed  and  what  should  be  the  relationship  of  the
advisor  to  the  advised?

The  continuing  U.S.  unstated  assumption  has  been  that  more  advisors  some-
how equate  to  better  performance.  This  can  be  traced  in  the  successive  expan-
sions of  the  military  advisory  effort — first  to  the  provinces  and  down  to  battalion
level  within  ARVN,  then  to  the  districts,  and  most  recently  to  the  paramilitary
forces  within  RVNAF.  It  may  be  that  large  numbers  of  advisors  are,  in  fact,
the  best  way  to  influence  events  but  one  cannot  reach  such  a  conclusion  validly
without  first  asking  the  question.

The  relationship  of  advisor  to  advised  has  gone  through  recurrent  changes
relative  to  judging  an  advisor's  performance  according  to  the  performance  of
his  counterpart.  It  has  almost  never  deviated,  however,  from  the  belief  that  the
conscious  and  continuing  use  of  leverage  at  many  levels  would  undercut  Viet-
namese sovereignty  and  stultify  the  development  of  Vietnamese  leadership.
Given  the  results  of  this  policy  over  a  number  of  years  it  is  fair  to  ask  whether
the  stick  ought  not  to  be  more  routinely  used  in  combination  with  the  carrot.
Again,  the  answer  is  not  obvious  but  it  is  obvious  that  there  can  be  no  sound
answer  in  the  absence  of  inquiry.

Finally,  and  closely  related  to  any  examination  of  the  leverage  issue,  there  is
the  question  of  the  adequacy  of  counterinsurgent  theory  and  doctrine.  The  pro-
gression from  physical  security  through  the  establishment  of  socially  oriented
programs  (political  and  economic)  to  the  objective  of  earning  and  winning
popular  allegiance  seems  both  simple  and  logical.  It  may  also  be  simplistic,  for
its  transformation  into  operational  reality  bumps  head-on  into  some  very  diffi-
cult questions.  Is  security  a  precondition  to  loyalty,  for  instance,  or  must  some
degree  of  loyalty  be  realized  as  a  precondition  to  intelligence  information  ade-
quate to  make  security  feasible?  This  chicken-and-egg  argument  has  been  debated
for  years  without  leading  to  any  noticeable  consensus  on  guides  to  operational
action.

Seeking  answers  to  any  of  these  questions  is  a  difficult,  frustrating  business.
There  exists  no  "control"  by  which  laboratory  comparisons  of  alternative
courses  can  be  made.  There  is  almost  surely  no  hard  choice  which  will  not
carry  with  it  very  real  liabilities  along  with  its  advantages.  But  if  the  lives  and
effort  expended  in  the  U.S.  military  advisory  effort  in  South  Vietnam  in  the
1960's  are  to  be  justified,  a  substantial  portion  of  that  justification  will  consist
of  a  closer  examination  of  past  assumptions  in  order  better  to  guide  future
policy.

End  of  Summary  and  Analysis


CHRONOLOGY

21  Jul  54 Geneva  Cease-fire  Accord

Ended  fighting  between  Viet  Minh  and  French;  divided  Vietnam
at  17th  parallel;  limited  U.S.  military  personnel  in  RVN  to  cur-
rent level  (342).


416 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II

22  Sep  54 Memo,  ICS  for  SecDef,  Retention  and  Development  of  Forces  in
Indochina

U.S.  resources  could  better  be  used  to  support  countries  other
than  RVN.

11  Oct  54 Letter,  J.  F.  Dulles  {Sec  State)  to  C.  E.  Wilson  (SecDef)

Only  small  U.S.  training  forces  to  RVN  to  promote  internal  sta-
bility.

19  Oct  54 Memo,  JCS  for  SecDef,  Development  and  Training  of  Indigenous

Forces  in  Indochina

Opposed  U.S.  training  RVN  army.  Risk  not  worth  the  gamble.

22  Oct  54 Msg,  State  to  Saigon  1679

Set  in  motion  "crash  program"  to  improve  RVN  forces.

26  Oct  54 Memo,  SecDef  to  JCS

JCS  to  prepare  long-range  program  to  improve  RVN  forces.

17  Nov  54 Memo,  JCS  for  SecDef,  Indochina

Development  of  effective  forces  and  prevention  of  communist
takeover  cannot  be  prevented  without  Vietnamese  effort  that  is
probably  not  forthcoming.

20  Jan  55 Memo,  Gen.  J.  Lawton  Collins  for  SecState,  Report  on  Vietnam

for  the  National  Security  Council

Vietnam  might  be  "saved"  with  U.S.  aid;  would  be  "lost"  without
it.

21  Jan  55 Memo,  JCS  for  SecDef,  Reconsideration  of  U.S.  Military  Pro-

gram in  Southeast  Asia

Outlines  alternative  U.S.  courses  of  action  in  RVN:  present  pro-
gram, advice  with  leverage,  U.S.  forces,  or  withdrawal.

24  Oct  55- Lt  Gen  Samuel  T.  Williams,  Chief  of  MAAG  to  Vietnam.
31  Aug  60

9  Dec  55 Memo  for  SecDef,  Raising  U.S Military  Personnel  Ceiling  in

MAAG  Vietnam

MAAG  needed  twice  the  current  342  personnel  to  train  RVNAF.

16  Dec  55 Memo,  Director  CIA  from  SecState

TERM  also  to  serve  as  cover  for  intelligence  gathering.

1959  Report,  The  President's  Committee  to  Study  the  United  States

Military  Assistance  Program

Emphasized  need  for  promoting  internal  security,  coined  term
"mirror  imaging."

7  Jun  59 Msg,  State-Defense-ICA-CAS  to  Saigon  28
Forbids  advisors  to  participate  in  combat.

27  Feb  60 Msg,  Saigon  to  State  2525

Abolished  TERM  but  added  equal  number  of  spaces  to  MAAG,
Vietnam,  increasing  it  from  342  to  685.

10  Jun  60 U.S.  Army  Command  &  General  Staff  College,  Study  on  Army

Aspects  of  the  Military  Assistance  Program  in  Vietnam


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  All


Prepared  for  Gen.  Lionel  C.  McGarr,  described  Viet  Cong
strategy  but  deprecated  ARVN  participation  in  pacification.

1  Sep  60- Lt  Gen  Lionel  C.  McGarr,  Chief  of  MAAG  to  Vietnam.
5  Mar  62

4  Jan  61  Counter  Insurgency  Plan  for  South  Vietnam  (CIP),  enclosure
to  msg,  Saigon  to  State  276

Blueprint  for  RVNAF  reorganization,  containing  Gen  McGarr's
recommendations  for  integrating  ARVN  and  CG/SDC  in  a  com-
mon chain  of  command  to  promote  internal  security.

77  Ian  61 Memo,  General  Lansdale  for  SecDef,  Vietnam

Proposed  extra-bureaucratic  advisory  effort  carried  out  by  spe-
cially selected  and  qualified  personnel.

15  Mar  61- Frederick  E.  Nolting,  Ambassador  to  South  Vietnam
1  Aug  63

28  Mar  61 NIE  50-61,  Outlook  in  Mainland  Southeast  Asia
Report  that  VC  controlled  most  of  countryside.

12  Apr  61 Memo,  Walt  W.  Rostow  to  the  President

Suggested  appointment  of  Presidential  Agent  to  oversee  Vietnam
programs  in  Washington.

19  Apr  61 Memo,  Gen.  Lansdale  to  SecDef,  Vietnam

Proposed  creation  of  interdepartmental  task  force  on  Vietnam.

20  Apr  61 Memo,  SecDef  for  DepSecDef

McNamara  asked  Gilpatric  for  program  to  "prevent  communist
domination"  of  Vietnam,  in  response  to  Lansdale  proposal.

27  Apr  61  Memo,  DepSecDef  for  President,  Program  of  Action  for  Vietnam
Recommended  expanded  U.S.  effort  in  Vietnam,  MAAG  increase
of  100,  MAAG  takeover  of  CG/SDC,  U.S.  advisors  in  field  opera-
tions creation  of  Presidential  Task  Force.  Foreshadowed  later
decision.

1  May  61 Memo,  R.  L.  Gilpatric  for  Presidential  Task  Force

Recommended  augmenting  MAAG  by  2  training  commands
(1600  each)  and  deploy  400  Special  Forces  (increasing  MAAG
from  685  to  2285).  Marked  shift  to  conventional  approach.

3  May  61  Memo,  State  Department  to  members  of  Task  Force  on  Vietnam
Recommended  revision  of  Gilpatric  task  force,  proposed  inter-
departmental task  force  under  State  leadership.

//  May  61 NSAM  52

Recorded  President's  decision  to  increase  U.S.  forces  slightly  and
re-emphasized  U.S.  commitment.

75  May  61 Msg.  Saigon  to  State  1743

Recorded  Diem's  refusal  of  U.S.  combat  troops  on  bilateral  treaty.

18  May  61 Memo  BG  Lansdale  for  DepSecDef,  Vietnam

Recorded  Diem's  acceptance  of  U.S.  forces  for  training  but  not
for  fighting.


418 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

23  May  61 Memo,  Vice  President  Johnson  for  President  Kennedy

Report  from  Johnson's  trip  to  Vietnam  that  '"deeds  must  replace
words."

27  May  61 Letter  from  President  to  each  American  Ambassador  abroad.

{See  Memo,  President  for  Heads  of  Executive  Departments  and
Agencies,  29  May  1961 ,  "Responsibilities  of  Chiefs  of  American
Diplomatic  Missions,"  Federal  Register,  Vol.  26  Nr  22,  17  Nov
1961,  p.  10749  (F.R.  Doc.  61-11012).
Set  forth  coordinating  authority  for  ambassadors.

9  Jun  61 Letter,  President  Diem  to  President  Kennedy

Proposed  100,000  increase  in  RVNAF  and  corresponding  expan-
sion of  MAAG.

15  Sep  61  MAAG,  Vietnam,  Geographically  Phased  National  Level  Plan
for  Counterinsurgency

Suggested  operational  sequence  of  priority  areas  for  coordinated
counterinsurgency  effort  under  single  chain  of  command.

I  Oct  61 Msg,  Saigon  to  State  421

Diem  asked  for  bilateral  defense  treaty  with  U.S.

Oct  61  JCSM  717-61

JCS  proposal  to  send  20,000  U.S.  combat  troops  to  central  high-
lands.

5  Oct  61  DF,  Distribution  Division,  DCSPER,  DA  to  Multiple  Addressees,
Improvement  of  Personnel  Continuity  and  Effectiveness  in  Short
Tour  Overseas  Areas.

OSD  decision  to  increase  tour  of  duty  to  30  months  with  depend-
ents, 18  without,  instead  of  24  and  12.  Never  put  into  effect.

10  Oct  61 SNIE  10-3-61,  Probable  Communist  Reactions  to  Certain  SEATO

Undertakings  in  South  Vietnam

Examined  proposal  for  U.S.  troop  intervention.

11  Oct  61 Study,  Concept  of  Intervention  in  South  Vietnam,  n.d.,  discussed

at  NSC  meeting.  11  Oct  61
Proposed  sending  U.S.  combat  troops.

II  Oct  61 Memo  for  Record  Roswell  Gilpatric

Recorded  decision  to  send  Taylor  to  Vietnam  and  outlined  alter-
natives to  be  considered.

25  Oct  61 Msg.  Saigon  to  State

Diem's  assurance  that  he  favored  deployment  of  U.S.  troops.

25  Oct  61  ^l^g'  Saigon  537,  General  Taylor  to  White  House,  State,  Defense,
JCS:  Msg.  Baguio  005,  1  Nov  61,  Eyes  Only  for  the  President
from  General  Taylor

Proposed  sending  6-8000  troops  under  guise  of  "flood  relief."

1  Nov  61 State  Dept.  Bureau  of  Intelligence  and  Research,  RFE-3,  1  Nov
61.  Communist  Threat  Mounts  in  South  Vietnam
Reported  increased  VC  activitv  in  first  half  1961:  500  assassina-
tions, 1000  kidnappings,  1500' RVNAF  KIA.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  419


3  Nov  61 Report  on  General  Taylor  s  Mission  to  South  Vietnam.

Discussed  VC  strategy  and  threat  and  the  weaknesses  of  the  Diem
regime.  Proposed  shift  in  U.S.  effort  "from  advice  to  limited
partnership."

14  Nov  61 Msg,  State  to  Saigon  619

Recorded  U.S.  expectation  of  sharing  in  GVN  decision-making.

22  Nov  61 NSAM  111,  First  Phase  of  Vietnam  Program

Outlines  U.S.  actions  and  expected  improvements  in  GVN.

22  Nov  61 Msg,  Saigon  to  State  687;  Msg,  Saigon  to  State  708

25  Nov  61 Ambassador  Nolting  reported  that  Diem  refused  to  bow  to  U.S.

pressure.

Dec  61  Msg,  State  to  Saigon  693

Dropped  insistence  on  explicit  U.S.  influence  on  GVN  decisions,
but  assumed  such  influence  as  by-product  of  close  partnership.

16  Jan  62 Hq,  CINCPAC,  Record  of  Second  Secretary  of  Defense  Con-
ference

Recorded  decisions  of  Honolulu  Conference:  establish  battalion
advisory  teams,  province  advisors  CG/SDC  training.

13  Feb  62- Gen.  Paul  D.  Harkins,  COMUSMACV
1  Aug  64

23  Jul  62 Record  of  6th  Secretary  of  Defense  Conference

McNamara  plan  for  phased  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces,  based  on
optimistic  1962  expectations.

1  Aug  63- Henry  Cabot  Lodge,  Ambassador  to  South  Vietnam.
/  Jul  64

2  Oct  63 White  House  Statement

Announcement  by  President  Kennedy  of  U.S.  hopes  for  planned
phased  withdrawal  of  troops.

1  Nov  63 Diem  overthrown  by  military  coup  d'etat.

1  Nov  63— Military  Revolutionary  Council

16  Aug  64 Duong  Van  Minh,  Chief  of  State  and  Chairman,  Military  Revolu-

tionary Council.

26  Nov  63 NSAM  273

Reaffirmed  and  continued  Kennedy  administration  policies  in
Vietnam;  placed  emphasis  on  Mekong  Delta;  maintained  military
assistance  at  least  as  great  as  to  Diem;  reiterated  plans  for  troop
withdrawal;  proposed  no  new  programs  nor  increased  U.S.  assist-
ance; authorized  operations  up  to  50  km.  withm  Laos.

7  Mar  64 Briefing  Paper,  Establishment  of  Critical  District  Advisory  Teams
(C),  Briefing  Book  for  McNaughton,  Saigon  [May  1964]
MACV  extended  U.S.  advisory  effort  to  district  level  in  13  key
districts  around  Saigon.

17  Mar  64 NSAM  288,  Implementation  of  South  Vietnam  Programs

The  situation  in  Vietnam  had  deteriorated  and  was  grave;  VC  con-
trolled much  of  country;  North  Vietnamese  support  of  V.C.  had


20 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

increased;  RN'NAF  should  be  increased  by  50,000:  contingency
plans  for  operations  in  Laos  and  Cambodia  and  overt  retaliation
against  DRV  should  be  developed;  however,  no  major  increase  of
U.S.  advisor."  effort  was  called  for.

17  Apr  64  Memo.  DIA  'or  SecDef.  Status  of  the  Vietnamese  Hamlet  Survey
Aerial  photo  reconnaissance  revealed  far  fewer  fortified  hamlets
than  province  officials  claimed.

Apr  64 Memo,  DepSecDef  for  CJCS

Secretarv  insisted  that  he  personally  approve  even.-  manpower
space  for  MAC\'.

May  64  Briefing  Book, Miscellaneous Messages. Status  Reports,  and

Recommendations  for  Secretary  McS'amara.  n.d.
Reported  great  instability  in  province  governments,  decline  in
G\'N  controlled  population,  increase  in  \'C  control;  important
pro\inces  were  in  "critical  condition."

12  May  64 Draft  Memo  for  the  Record.  Lt.  Col.  S.  B.  Berry,  Jr.,  Mil.  Asst.
to  SecDef.  n.d..  U.S.  Embassy  Briefing,  Saigon.
USOM  25^  understrength,  half  this  shortage  in  rural  affairs  staff.

May McXamara  trip  to  Saigon
64  Situation  appeared  critical.

May  64 Msg.  JCS  w  COMUSMACV  6448.  Vietnamese  Civil  Guard  and

Self-Defense  Corps.

COMUSMAC\'  asked  to  studv  encadrement  of  CG  SDC  with
U.S.  teams  similar  to  White  Star  teams  in  Laos.  JCS  was  exam-
ining alternative  advisor  expansions  O.OOO,  2,000,  3,000).

May  64 Msg.  CIXCPAC  to  JCS  2304181.  Vietnamese  Civil  Guard  and
Self  Defense  Corps

MAC\'  opposed  to  "flooding"  R\'N  with  U.S.  personnel;  preferred
build-up  on  selective  basis,  challenged  "encadrement."

2/  May  64  Msg.  JCS  :o  CIXCPAC  6473.  Vietnamese  Civil  Guard  and  Self
Defense  Corps

JCS  plan  for  6  Mobile  Training  Teams  in  each  pro\ince  and
training  center.  70  advisors  to  each  critical  province,  increase  of
1000  personnel.

2"  M.:y  64 Msg.  COMUSMaCV  to  CIXCPAC  4259.  270045Z

Gen.  Harkins  disputed  the  value  of  U.S.  conducted  training  for
CG  SDC  and  of  Mobile  Training  Teams:  proposed  ad\'isors  be
used  at  district  level  for  operations:  accepted  1000  man  increase.

2-  May  64 Msg.  CIS  CP  AC  to  JCS.  270S05Z.  Vietnamese  CG  and  SDC

CINCPAC  agreed  with  COMUSMACV  and  outlined  specific  ad-
\isor}"  build-up  recommended:  956  persoimel  by  end  CY  65.

2"  May  64  }^Isg.  White  House  to  Saigon  {Pers  jr  Gen.  Paul  Harkins)
Gen.  Harkins  requested  to  return  to  U.S.

28  May  64 Msg.  Saigon  to  State  2338

USOM  desire  for  gradual,  not  rapid,  build-up;  need  for  effective
local  administration  and  security'.


The  Advisory  Build-Up.  1961-1967  421

3'''  May  64 JCSM^64-64.  Pilot  Program  for  Provision  of  Advisory  Assist-
ance to  Paramilitary  Forces  in  Seven  Provinces
One  of  two  JCS  proposals  submitted  to  McNamara  outlining  pilot
program  for  advisory  build-up:  teams  in  49  districts  over  6  month
period.  300  advisors.

30  May  64 JCSM^65-64.  U.S.  Advisory  Assistance  to  the  Vietnamese  Civil
Guard  and  Self-Defense  Corps.

Second  proposal — Broader  advisory  increase  program:  1000  per-
sonnel for  all  239  districts  over  1-1 -2  years.

30  May  64 JCSM—466—64.  Provision  of  U.S.  Advisors  to  Company  Level

Within  Vietnamese  Regular  Ground  Forces

JCS  opposed  extending  U.S.  advisors  to  companv  level,  because
of  increased  casualties.  language  problems.  AR\'N  opposition.

1  Jun  64 Honolulu  Conference

25  Jun  64 Msg.  COMUSMACV  to  JCS.  MAC  7325380.  Extension  of  U.S.
Advisory  Assistance

Elaborated  decision  of  Honolulu  conference  to  expand  advisory
effort  to  district  level,  and  to  increase  battalion-level  advisory
groups  to  make  companv  level  advisorv  teams  available.

1  Jul  64- Maxwell  Ta\lor.  Ambassador  to  South  N'ietnam.

31  Jul  65

17  July  64 Msg. COMUSMACV to CIXCPAC. MACJ-3161S0,  Support
Requirements  for  Extension  of  U.S.  Advisorv  Program.
COMUSMACN'  reached  4200  personnel  in  addition  to  926  bat-
talion and  district  advisors — "the  straw  that  broke  the  camel's
back"  of  the  overburdened  support  base.

28  Jul  64 Msg.  COMUSMACl'  to  JCS.  MACJl  7044.  Personnel  Augmenta-
tion.

COMUSMACV  requested  4200  personnel  by  1  Dec  64  and  re-
mainder of  4"72  total  increase  bv  1  Feb  65.

Jul  64  Hop  Tac

Idea  for  Hop  Tac,  special  combined  US  G\'N  effort  to  secure
critical  area  round  Saigon,  proposed  bv  Amb.  Lodge  at  Honolulu
Conference.

1  Aug  64- Gen.  WilHam  C.  Westmoreland,  commander  of  MAC\'.
30  Jun  68

2  Aug  64 Tonkin  Gulf  Incident

U.S.S.  Maddox  alleeedlv  attacked  b\-  North  \'ietnamese  torpedo
boats.

4  Aug  64 JCSM-665-64.  Additional  Support  in  RV.\  on  Accelerated  Basis

McNamara  wanted  additional  men  provided  more  quickly  than
Westmoreland's  plan.

5  Aug  64 Tonkin  Gulf  Resolution

Congress  passed  joint  resolution  supporting  "all  necessary  action"
to  protect  U.S.  forces  and  assist  \'ietnam.


422 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

7  Aug  64  Memo,  SecDef  for  CJCS,  Additional  Support  for  Republic  of
Vietnam

McNamara  directed  that  accelerated  deployment  be  completed  by
end  of  September.

11  Aug  64 Msg,  COMUSMACV  to  C  IN  CP  AC,  MAC  J 3  7738,  Additional

Support  for  RVN

Westmoreland  replied  that  he  could  not  absorb  build-up  in  time
requested  by  McNamara.

75  Aug  64  Msg,  ICS  to  CSA,  CNO,  CSAF  et  al,  ICS  7953,  Additional  Sup-
port in  RVN

McNamara  cancelled  accelerated  deployment,  services  instructed
to  deploy  personnel  in  accordance  with  Westmoreland's  initial
recommendations.

16  Aug  64- Khanh  coup.

26  Oct  64  Nguyen  Khanh,  President,  Head  of  State  and  Chief,  Revolutionary
Military  Council  (30  Jan  64  to  26  Oct  64,  27  Jan  65  to  21  Feb
65).

12  Sep  64 Hop  Tac

Hop  Tac  launched  with  a  sweep  through  Gia  Dinh  Province.
Mission  aborted  following  day  by  coup.

4  Nov  64- Phan  Klac  Suu,  Chief  of  State
11  Jun  65

Dec  64  Crisis  between  Amb.  Taylor  and  Gen.  Khanh  resulted  from

Taylor's  attempt  to  use  U.S.  decision  to  begin  bombing  DRV  as
lever  to  get  GVN  reform.  Taylor  abandoned  further  attempts  at
leverage.

Dec  64  "Troika  sign-off"  for  piasters  abolished

USOM  Director  Killen  decided  to  abandon  joint  sign-off  for
release  of  piaster  funds  for  pacification — important  leverage  tool.

23  Jan  65 McNamara  approved  RVNAF  force  increase  proposal  for  MAP
support.  Now  strength  authorizations:  275,058  Regular  Forces,
137,187  RF  and  185,000  PF.
(Alternative  1).

7  Feb  65 FLAMING  DART  reprisal  attacks  against  DRV  launched.

22  Feb  65  Gen.  Westmoreland  recommended  sending  two  Marine  Battalion
Landing  Teams  to  DaNang  for  base  security.

26  Feb  65 ROLLING  THUNDER,  sustained  bombing  of  DRV,  initiated.

26  Feb  65 Decision  to  send  Marines  to  DaNang  made  in  Washington.

6  Mar  65 Marines  went  ashore  at  DaNang.

16  Mar  65 ICS  message  0936

Gen.  H.  K.  Johnson  returned  from  trip  to  Vietnam  with  recom-
mendation for  deployment  of  U.S.  combat  forces  and  creation  of
joint  command.

20  Mar  65  Westmoreland  requested  authorization  to  implement  Alternative  2
RVNAF  strength  increase  (greater  than  alternative  1  by  15,000).


The  Advisory  Biiild-Up,  1961-1967  423

21  Mar  65 COMUSMACV  message  1566

Westmoreland  opposed  any  formal  merging  of  commands,  pre-
ferred informal  cooperation.

26  Mar  65 MACV  "Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situation"

As  a  strategy  alternative,  Westmoreland  rejected  proposal  for
accelerated  RVNAF  build-up  as  insufficient  to  prevent  VC  victory.

1-2  Apr  65 Washington  strategy  conference  with  Brig  Gen  De  Puy,  Amb.
Taylor.

6  Apr  65 NSAM  328

President  approved  dispatch  of  two  more  battalions  and  an  air
wing  and  authorized  their  employment  for  active  combat  missions.

12  Apr  65 MACV  Command  History  1965

McNamara  approved  JCS  recommendation  for  RVNAF  expan-
sion of  17,247  160  additional  U.S.  advisors  approved.

75  Apr  65 Defense  Department  message  009164,  Joint  State/Defense  Mes-
sage

Defense  Department  sought  to  have  U.S.  Army  civil  affairs  offi-
cers introduced  in  provinces  to  improve  civil  administration.  Amb.
Taylor  opposition  killed  proposal.

75  Apr  65 Department  of  State  message  2332

McGeorge  Bundy  informed  Amb.  Taylor  that  President  wanted
to  try  "encadrement  of  U.S.  troops  with  Vietnamese."

15  Apr  65 DOD  message  151233Z

DOD  requested  COMUSMACV's  opinion  about  feasibility  of
encadrement  of  U.S.  officers  in  ARVN  divisions  to  improve  ef-
fectiveness.

18  Apr  65 Honolulu  Conference,  MACV  Command  History

Based  on  study  by  Gen.  Throckmorton,  encadrement  proposals
were  rejected  because  of  language  problem,  expanded  support
requirement,  and  adverse  effects  on  South  Vietnamese  morale.

Apr  65  MACV  Command  History  1965

Westmoreland  suggested  joint  MACV-JGS  staff.  Gen.  Thieu  and
Gen.  Minh  were  opposed.

3  May  65 Hop  Tac  pacification

Corps  commanders  for  I,  II,  IV  Corps  presented  Hop  Tac  plans
for  their  zones,  each  to  extend  "oil  blot"  pacification  from  its
headquarters  city.  (By  end  of  1965  became  scheme  for  National
Priority  Areas.)

77  May  65 Viet  Cong  attached  and  overran  Song  Be,  capital  of  Phuoc  Long
Province,  and  a  U.S.  advisory  compound  in  the  city.

14  May  65 JCS  message  142228Z

McNamara  authorized  creation  of  formal  combined  command  in
Vietnam  and  coordinating  MACV-JGS  staff.


27  May  65 COMUSMACV message Combined Command; JCS  message
240603Z


424 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


Westmoreland  recommended  against  proposed  combined  com-
mand because  of  Thieu's  and  Ky's  opposition.

26  May  65 CINCPAC  msg  to  ICS  3027,  260332Z

CINCPAC  supported  COMUSMACV's  opposition  to  combined
command  because  of  fears  of  Vietnamese  hostility.

late  May  65 VC  force  ambushed  and  decimated  ARVN  51st  Regiment  and
2  battalions  near  Ba  Gia,  west  of  Quang  Ngai  City.

Jun  65  Origin  of  CAP

Several  Marines  assigned  to  work  with  local  PF  near  Phu  Bai,  I
Corps.

7  Jun  65 MACV  message  to  CINCPAC  and  JCS  19118

Moratorium  on  RVNAF  build-up  required  because  trainees
needed  as  fillers  in  existing  units  to  replace  heavy  casualties.
Westmoreland  requested  44  additional  U.S.  battalions;  reported
severe  ARVN  deterioration.

19  Jun  65-  Nguyen  Van  Thieu,  Chief  of  State  and  Chairman,  National
present  Leadership  Council,  20  Jun  65  to  9  Nov  67,  elected  President

31  Oct  67.

June  65  Viet  Cong  attacked  Special  Forces  camp  at  Dong  Xoai  with

more  than  two  regiments.

25  Jun  65 VC  Central  Highlands  offensive  began,  district  headquarters  at

Tou  Morong,  Kontum  Province,  was  overrun.

26  Jun  65 MACV  Military  Report,  19-26  June

MACV  noted  5  ARVN  regiments  and  9  battalions  combat  in-
effective.

Jul  65  18  US/FW  combat  maneuver  battalions  were  in  Vietnam.

Jul  65  MACV  Command  History,  1965

11  of  15  ARVN  training  battalions  had  to  be  disorganized  to
provide  fillers  for  line  units  due  to  heavy  casualties.

7  Jul  65 Six  district  capitals  had  been  abandoned  or  overrun.

20  Jul  65 SecDef  Memorandum  for  the  President

McNamara  urged  U.S.  to  lay  down  terms  for  continuing  as-
sistance before  introduction  of  more  forces;  suggested  exercise
leverage  through  control  of  rice  policy.

25  Jul  65 Saigon  message  266

Amb.  Taylor  did  not  want  to  appear  to  impose  conditions  for
increased  aid.

28  Jul  65 President  announced  expanded  U.S.  effort  and  increased  troop
commitment  to  Vietnam.

7  Aug  65 MACV  Command  History  1965

CG  III  MAF  designated  as  Senior  Advisor  to  ARVN  I  CTZ  Com-
mander.

Sep  65  Lodge  Ambassador

Lodge  returned  to  Vietnam  for  second  term  as  ambassador.  Term
of  office:  31  Jul  65-Apr  67.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  425

Sep  65  COMUSMACV  evaluated  3-month  experiment  with  "single  man-

ager" teams  in  3  provinces,  found  it  partially  successful  but
scrapped  the  idea.

;  Oct  65 MACV  Command  History,  1965

MACV  created  separate  contingency  fund  for  each  subsector
advisor  for  urgent  projects,  in  attempt  to  overcome  delays  in
Vietnamese  pacification  system.

16  Oct  65 State  Dept  msg  1039
18  Oct  65 Saigon  msg  1324

USOM  sought  to  restore  troika  sign-off  but  State  Dept.  opposed

this  idea.  The  attempt  was  abandoned.

21  Oct  65  Commander  of  HQ  Field  Force,  Vietnam  (FFORCEV)  desig-
nated as  II  CTZ  Senior  Advisor.  (At  insistence  of  ARVN  Corps
commanders,  who  felt  they  would  suffer  loss  of  prestige  if  ad-
vised by  less  than  Senior  U.S.  officer  in  corps.)

3  Nov  65 SecDef  Draft  Memorandum  for  the  President

McNamara  recorded  impatience  with  GVN,  recommended  giv-
ing larger  role  to  advisors  at  province  and  district  level.

5  Nov  65 MACV  Command  History

Westmoreland  recommended  increased  RVNAF  force  levels  for
FY  66  and  FY  67,  to  limit  of  available  manpower.

Nov  65  CAP  Program

Agreement  between  I  Corps  Commander  and  CG  III  MAF  per-
mitting integration  of  Marine  squads  into  PF  platoons  in  DaNang
area  to  form  Combined  Action  Platoon  (CAP):  Marine  Rifle
Squad  (14)  and  PF  Platoon  (32-38).

28  Nov  65  McNamara  trip  to  Saigon,  approves  RVNAF  force  increase
recommendation.

15  Dec  65  Lodge  memorandum  for  Gen.  Lansdale;  MACV  Command  His-
tory

Lodge  specified  that  GVN  pacification  effort  was  primarily  ci-
vilian, consequently  on  U.S.  side  the  two  civilian  agencies,  USAID
and  CAS,  should  be  generating  support  agencies.

8—11  Jan  66 Warrenton  Conference  Report

Members  of  Saigon  Mission,  Vietnam  Coordinating  Committee
and  other  senior  officials  met  at  Warrenton,  Virginia,  to  review
pacification  problem.  It  foreshadowed  a  redirection  of  advisory
effort  toward  pacification.

Jan  66  MACV  Analysis  of  RVNAF  for  CY  66

At  Mission  Council  meeting,  Amb.  Lodge  expressed  concern  that
the  number  of  U.S.  advisors  not  smother  the  Vietnamese  at  all
levels,

4  Feb  66 State  to  Saigon  2252

U.S.  requested  Honolulu  meeting  with  Thieu,  Ky  to  express  con-
cern about  pacification,  economic  problems,  GVN  lack  of  popu-
lar support.


426 Grcnel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

6—S  Feb  66 Honolulu  Conference

LBJ  concern  about  the  "other  war,"  Thieu  and  Ky  made  pledges
of  increased  pacification,  promised  elections.  -.\mb.  ^^lIliam
Poner  was  assigned  responsibility-  for  ci\"il  suppon  of  RD.

J5  Feb  66 .\fission  Council  Minutes,  Feb.  2S.  1966

Poner  described  his  understanding  of  his  duties  to  Mission  Coun-
cil: coordinating  effon  for  all  ci\il  aspects  of  revolutionan"  de-
velopment, through  the  Mission  Liaison  Group.

Feb  66  MAC\"  subsector  pacification  contingency  fund  abandoned  after

4-month  trial  period  due  to  opposition  of  G\*N  RD  Minister
Thang:  it  would  encourage  \'ietnamese  dependence  on  U.S.

Mar  66  PROVS  Study  Summary  Statement.  Mar  66

Program  for  Pacification  and  Lonir  Term  Development  of  South
\'ietnam  (PRO\"N)  completed  for  internal  armv  use.  Revealed
lack  of  coordination  among  U.S.  agencies  in  pacification.

Apr  66 Saigon  to  State  4160.  Apr  23,  1966:  4200.  Apr  26:  4435.  May  7:
5546.  June  15

Lodge  reviewed  prospects  for  introduction  of  U.S.  leverage  in
Buddhist  "Straggle  Movement":  desired  to  bring  dissidents  under
G\"N  control,  but  saw  no  wav  to  achieve  decisive  results.  Recom-
mended to  Washington  that  a  sign-off  svstem  be  reinstated  to
reduce  corruption  and  increase  U.S.  influence  at  lower  levels.

Jul  66  Siepped-up  pacification  effon:  Operation  Lam  Son,  combined  RD

"Search  and  Seal"  operations  v^ith  L'.S.  1st  Infantn'  Di^ision  and
AR\'N  5th  Division  in  Binh  Duong.  U.S.  25th  Di\ision  "adopted"
districts  in  Han  Nghia  Pro^ince.

Jul  66  "Roles  and  Missions"  Studv  Group  began  work  for  -\mb.  Porter.

Completed  in  August.  Recommendation  for  suppon  for  a  reem-
phasis  on  pacification.

Sep  66  McNamara  proposed  that  responsibilit\-  for  sole  management  of

pacification  be  assigned  to  COMUSMAC\'.  who  would  have  a
Deput\-  to  command  all  pacification  acti\ities.  .AID.  CLA..  L'SL\
opposed  such  reorganization:  Komer  and  JCS  concurred.

29  Sep  66 Kome^.  "Memorandum  for  Secretary  McSajiiara"

Komer  stressed  that  unified  management  of  pacification  was
needed.

25-25  Oct  66  f^lanila  Conference

At  Manila  Conference  Tnieu  and  Kv  formallv  accepted  com-
mitment of  AR\"N  :o  suppon  RD.  and  "National  Reconciliation"
program  to  attract  \X  back  to  government  was  announced.

Oct  66  >IcNamara  trip  to  Saigon.  Kv  agreed  to  shift  in  combat  missions

for  U.S.  and  R\"NaF  forces:  U.S.  to  conduct  large-scale  offen-
sive operations.  R\'NAF  :o  pro\ide  security-  to  RD.

7  Sox  66 MACi'  JOS  Combined  Campaign  Plan  1967  {AB  142)

Spelled  out  new  di\ision  of  labor  between  U.S.  and  R\"NaF.
JGS  agreed  to  keep  55  ARN'N  banaiions  {50^c  of  .ARN'N  com-
bat units ^  assigned  to  suppon  RD.


The  Advisory  Build-Up.  1961-1967  427

7  No\  66 Memorandum.  Amb.  Lodge  for  rhe  Secretary  of  Sia:e.  SecDef
and  Komer:  message.  Saigon  1112.^.  \ov.  17.
Lodge  defined  terms  of  reference  for  what  was  established  as  the
Office  of  Civil  Operations  ^OCO^i.

5  Dec  66 MACV  msg  52414  to  CISCPAC

\\'estmoreland  reported  to  CINCPAC  on  poor  qualitv  and  per-
formance of  AR\"N.  First  10  months  of  1966.  the  number  of
ARN'N  maneuver  battaUons  with  minimallv  acceptable  opera-
tional strength  fluctuated  from  31  to  ~S  of  total  of  121  organized
units.

17  Dec  66 I^'.  H'.  Rosiow.  Memorandum  :o  Secreiary  of  Defense  and  Act-

ing Secretary-  of  State,  draft  \SAM  attached
Pacification  listed  as  third  strategic  objective  and  five  programs
concerned  with  pacification  were  outlined,  heralding  reemphasis
on  pacification  in  196".

27  Dec  66 JCS  Memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  JCSM-~92—b6.

line-in,  line-out  revised  dra^t  SSAM  attacked.
JCS  replied  to  Rostow's  draft  after  consulting  CINXPAC;  stiffen-
ing and  making  more  specific  U.S.  commimient  to  war.  intro-
ducing term  '"revolutionan."  development."  eliminated  references
to  "national  reconciliation"'  for  ex-\'C.  and  watered  down  com-
mitment to  constitutional-electoral  efforts  underwav.

9  Jan  67 MACV  msg  00949

In  Dec  1966  a  12-ofiicer  team  from  each  ARN'N  had  undergone
training  on  RD  support  so  that  each  might  instruct  its  di\"ision  on
the  new  duties.  The  division  training  programs  began  in  Jan  67.

18  Jan  67 MACV  msg  02149  to  CISCPAC  ^rom  MACCORDS

MAC\'  described  new  Hamlet  Evaluation  Svstem  i^HES")  to  CIN-
CPAC.

20  Jan  67  ASD^ISA)  John  T.  McSaughton  Memorandum  for  the  Secre-
tary of  Defense.  Subject:  Dra^:  SSAM  on  "Strategic  Guidelines
for  1967  in  \'ietnam:"  McXaug'nton's  line-in.  line-out  revised
draft  and  the  JCS  revision  attached.

McNaughton  draft  for  Metnam  strategic  guidelines  incorporated
most  JCS  recommendations,  emphasized  security,  anti-infrastruc-
ture and  intelligence  in  support  of  R  D:  pushed  "National  Recon-
ciliation."*

24  Jan  67 MAC\'  msg  02916.  H'estmoreland  sends

Westmoreland  stated  that  the  effectiveness  of  R\"NAF  must  be
increased  and  that  its  image  must  be  improved.

28  Jan  67 Deputy  SecDef  Cyrus  Wince  letter  to  IV.  H'.  Rostow

\'ance  sent  McNaughton  version  to  Rosiow  as  Defense  Depart-
ment replv  to  his  memorandum.  No  NSAM  was  ever  promul-
gated.

Feb  67  "Pacification  Slo^vdown'  Southct-ist  Asia  Analysis  Report.  Feb.  67.

OASDiSA"*  SFA  Programs  Directorate

OASDiSA^  reported  that  pacification  effort  in  19co  had  failed.


I


428 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


18  Mar  67 MACV  msg  09101,  Westmoreland  sends

Westmoreland  cabled  CINCPAC  requesting  an  "optimum  force"
increase  of  4%  divisions  (201,250  men)  or  as  a  ''minimum  essen-
tial force,"  21/3  divisions  (100,000  men).  No  major  expansion  of
RVNAF  called  for:  6,307  more  spaces  for  ARVN,  50,000  more
RF/PF.

20—21  Mar Guam  Conference

67  President  Johnson  met  with  Thieu  and  Ky  in  Guam.  They  pre-

sented draft  constitution  and  agreed  to  a  proclamation  on  Na-
tional Reconciliation.

Johnson  decided  to  transfer  control  of  pacification  to  MACV  and
send  Robert  Komer  to  head  new  operation  in  Saigon.

25  Mar  67 Embassy  Saigon  msg  21226,  Eyes  Only  for  the  President  from
Lodge

Lodge  stressed  importance  of  RVNAF  for  MACV  success,
praised  Abrams  as  man  to  oversee  RVNAF  improvement.

Mar  67  Gen.  Creighton  Abrams  became  Westmoreland  deputy  and  as-

sumed responsibility  for  U.S.  advisory  effort  to  RVNAF.

7  Apr  67 New  South  Vietnamese  Constitution  promulgated.

24  Apr  67 R.  W.  Komer  Memorandum  for  the  President

Komer  asserted  that  decisive  contest  lay  in  pacification  in  the
South,  rejected  Westmoreland's  request  for  additional  200,000
troops,  proposed  methods  to  improve  RVNAF  and  pacification,
suggested  increased  pressure  on  GVN  for  reforms.

1  May  67 New  Ambassador,  Ellsworth  Bunker,  arrived  in  Saigon.

7  May  67 MACV  msg  15064

Reported  Jan.  decision  to  make  a  unit  by  unit  effectiveness  evalua-
tion and  to  cut  off  support  for  superfluous  or  below  standard  units.
Resulted  in  several  warnings  but  no  suspension  of  support.  Also
reported  RVNAF  desertions  were  won  for  Jan-Feb  1967  from
Jan-Feb  1966.

9  May  67 NSAM  362

Komer's  appointment  as  single  manager  for  pacification  an-
nounced internally.

12  May  67 Embassy  Saigon  Airgram  622,  Subject:  Revolutionary  Develop-

ment

Gloomy  account  of  progress  of  RD  in  first  three  months  of  1967.

13  May  67 Ambassador  Bunker  statements  to  the  press  in  Saigon,  May  13,

1967

Announcement  of  transfer  of  OCO  to  MACV,  Bunker  stressed
combined  civil-military  nature  of  pacification.

75  May  67 Embassy  Saigon  msg.  25839

First  meeting  of  Komer  with  Ky.  Ky  declined  to  place  GVN  RD
efforts  under  JGS.


The  Advisory  Bidld-Up,  1961-1967  429


28  May  67 State  Department  msg  DTG  092304Z;  MACV  Dir  10-12,  28
May  1967

MACV  issued  directive  with  instructions  on  new  RD  organiza-
tional arrangements.

May  67  JCSM-530-67,  Subject:  Increase  in  FY  1968  RVNAF  Force

Level,  28  Sep  67  {a  review  of  the  years  actions)
McNamara  imposed  a  temporary  ceiling  on  RVNAF  to  prevent
further  inflation  in  Vietnam,  and  to  arrest  some  of  the  balance
of  payments  flow  of  U.S.

14  Jun  67  Amb.  R.  W.  Komer,  Memorandum  for  General  W.  C.  Westmore-
land, Subject:  Organization  for  Attack  on  V,C.  Infrastructure
Komer  recommended  consolidation,  under  his  direction,  of  U.S.
anti-infrastructure  intelligence  effort.  Desired  unified  GVN/US,
civil/military  "management  structure  targeted  on  infrastructure."
ICEX  (Intelligence  Coordination  and  Exploitation)  structure  was
developed.

14  Jun  67 Embassy  Saigon  msg  28095,  For  the  President  from  Bunker

Bunker  described  MACV  actions  underway  to  improve  RVNAF:
improving  leadership,  better  pay,  improving  command  structure
and  equipment  of  RF/PF  training,  integrated  US/RVNAF  opera-
tions, reviews.

17  Jun  67 M ACCORDS,  Project  Takeoff,  prepared  by  the  ACofS,  CORDS,
Headquarters  MACV

Project  TAKEOFF  contained  analysis  of  reasons  for  part  failure,
appraisal  of  current  situation,  and  recommendations  for  future
emphasis  in  RD;  suggested  increased  use  of  U.S.  leverage  and
control.

4  Jul  67 ASD{SA)  Alain  Enthoven  Memo  for  the  SecDef,  Subj:  Improve-
ment in  RVNAF  Force  Effectiveness

Enthoven  claimed  that  primary  reason  for  RVNAF  ineffective-
ness was  the  quantity  and  quality  of  leadership  and  recommended
that  the  vSecretary  query  MACV  on  leadership  problems.

13  July  67 ASD{SA)  Alain  Enthoven  Memorandum  for  the  Record,  Subj:

Fallout  for  SecDef  Trip  to  South  Vietnam  (TS-SENS-EYES
ONLY  for  Dr.  Heyman);  and  OASD{SA)  General  Purpose
Forces,  W.  K.  Brehm,  Memo  for  tJie  Record,  Subj:  SEA  Deploy-
ments, Jul  14,  1 967

In  Saigon,  McNamara  gave  planning  authorization  for  U.S.  aug-
mentation up  to  525,000  spaces,  and  civilianization  of  10,000
additional  spaces  to  fulfill  Westmoreland's  lower  force  alterna-
tive.

14  Aug  67 ASD{SA)  Alain  Enthoven  Memo  for  the  Secretaries  of  the  Mili-

tary Departments,  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and
the  Assistant  Secretaries  of  Defense,  Subj:  Southeast  Asia  Deploy-
ment Program  :f^5

New  U.S.  force  level  of  525,000  promulgated  as  Deployment
Program  :^5.


430 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

30  Aug  67 DASDiSA)  Memo  for  the  SecDef

Amb.  Komer  complained  that  the  CORDS  advisory  element's
actual  strength  was  seriously  below  authorization  due  to  bureau-
cratic delays.

31  Aug  67 Dept  of  State  Msg  30023

Study  of  leverage  by  Hans  Heymann  and  Lt  Col  Volney  Warner
recommended  increased  use.

7  Sep  66  COMUSMACV  Memo  for  Ambassador  Lodge

Westmoreland  disagreed  with  Roles  and  Missions  Study  Group
recommendation  to  remove  division  from  chain  of  command  be-
low CTZ  level  and  strengthening  role  of  Province  Chief.

15  Sep  67 JCSM  505-67,  Subj:  U.S.  Forces  Deployment  Vietnam  {Refined

Troop  List)

JCS  submitted  final  detailed  troop  list  for  Program  #5.  Con-
tained 2,577  additional  advisors  and  666  Special  Forces  to  per-
form advisor-like  functions.

16  Sep  67 Review  and  Analysis  System  for  RVNAF  Progress,  MACV-J341

First  published  Review  and  Analysis  for  RVNAF  appeared:  long
catalogue  of  RVNAF  deficiencies.

A  9  Sep  67 Embassy  Saigon  msg  71 13

Komer  replied  to  recommendation  for  increased  use  of  U.S.
leverage  that  it  must  be  done  discreetly.  Proposed  comprehensive
system  of  country-wide  leverage  was  never  adopted.

28  Sep  67  JCSM-530-67,  Subject:  Increase  in  FY  68  RVNAF  Force  Level
JCS  forwarded  with  endorsement  the  MACV-CINCPAC  recom-
mendation on  FY  68  RVNAF  force  increases:  total  increase  of
63,586;  47,839  for  RF  PF  and  15,747  for  regular  forces.  MACV
requested  further  increase  of  78,204  for  FY  1969.

7  Oct  67  SecDef  Memo  for  CJCS,  Subject:  Increase  in  FY  68  RVNAF
Force  Level,  and  attached  OASD{SA)  memo  for  the  SecDef,  5
Oct  67

McNamara  approved  the  requested  FY  68  augmentations  for
RVNAF,  against  the  wishes  of  Enthoven,  who  would  have  au-
thorized only  half  as  many.

26  Oct  67  "Information  on  MATs  {Mobile  Advisory  Teams)  and  MALTs
{Mobile  Advisory  Logistics  Teams),"  8  May  1968,  working
paper  prepared  by  the  ACofS  MA,  MACV

MACV  conference  on  RF  PF,  convened  to  study  problems  of
RF  PF  expansion  and  to  plan  for  expansion  of  advisory  effort,
recommended  complete  reorientation  of  advisory  concept  for  RF/
PF,  establishment  of  Mobile  Advisory  Teams  to  be  used  on  a
rotating  basis.

15  Dec  67  Westmoreland  approved  new  RF  PF  advisory  system:  MATs  and
MALTs,  to  be  phased  in  during  1968.

31  Jan  68 Tet  Offensive

VC  NVA  initiate  massive  attacks  on  population  centers  through-
out Vietnam  during  Lunar  New  Year  (Tet)  holiday  period.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  431


I. ADVISORY  STABILITY,  1954-1960

A. THE  U.S.  GAMBLE  WITH  LIMITED  RESOURCES

1.  Origins  of  the  U.S.  Involvement  in  RVN

The  U.S.  decision  to  attempt,  generally  within  the  strictures  imposed  by  the
Geneva  Accords,  to  shore  up  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  (GVN)  and
to  prevent  the  new  nation's  fall  into  communist  hands  appears  in  retrospect
to  have  been,  in  Wellington's  phrase,  "a  close  run  thing."  The  prevalent  Ameri-
can attitude  in  1954  was  that  the  deployment  of  large  U.S.  forces  to  the  main-
land of  Asia  should  be  permitted  "never  again."  Spending  on  national  security
was  to  be  pegged  at  tolerable  levels  which  would  not  threaten  the  well-being  of
the  domestic  economy,  yet  communist  expansion  was  to  be  deterred  by  the
threat  of  massive  retaliation  combined  with  U.S.  support  for  free  nations
capable  of  managing  their  own  internal  order  and  insuring  that  any  act  of
armed  aggression  would  appear  as  just  that — the  unambiguous  precondition
for  nuclear  retaliation.

2.  Initial  Military  Reluctance

The  policy  solution  to  this  problem  in  national  security  strategy  has  been
accurately  and  exhaustively  described  in  recent  literature.  It  need  not  be  re-
peated here.  The  important  thing  to  note  is  that  the  attempt  to  achieve  stability
in  RVN  was  recognized  to  be  a  marginal  gamble  to  retain  a  small  but  poten-
tially important  piece  in  the  larger  jig  saw  puzzle  which  was  U.S.  national
security  policy.  As  such,  it  seemed  worth  the  risk  of  a  moderate  outlay  of  assist-
ance and  advice.  General  J.  Lawton  Collins  stated  the  case  succinctly  in  his
assessment  for  the  National  Security  Council:

.  .  .  There  is  at  least  an  even  chance  that  Vietnam  can  be  saved  from
Communism  if  the  present  programs  of  its  government  are  fully  imple-
mented. ...  I  cannot  guarantee  that  Vietnam  will  remain  free,  even
with  our  aid.  But  I  know  that  without  our  aid  Vietnam  will  surely  be  lost
to  Communism.

The  gamble  consisted  in  making  available  to  the  GVN  that  material  support
and  advice  which  would  enable  it  to  assure  its  own  viability.  Much  of  the  mili-
tary equipment  was  already  in  RVN,  the  residue  of  earlier  efforts  to  support
the  French  war  against  the  Viet  Minh.  The  framework  for  military  advice  was
present,  too,  in  the  form  of  MAAG  Indochina  which  had  assisted  (and  at-
tempted to  influence — generally  unsuccessfully)  the  French  struggle.

The  military  establishment  was  not  eager,  however,  to  undertake  this  effort.
The  ICS  feared  that  the  advisory  limit  imposed  by  the  Geneva  Accords  (342
military  personnel)  was  too  restrictive  to  permit  a  successful  training  program
even  if  all  administrative  tasks  were  performed  by  civilians  and  all  military  per-
sonnel freed  for  advisory  duties  in  training  the  army  of  the  new  nation.  Even
this  would  create  a  situation,  the  ICS  argued,  in  which  the  U.S.  would  have  only
very  limited  influence,  yet  assume  the  responsibility  for  failure.  The  same  re-
source allocations  would  bring  a  greater  return,  in  the  ICS  view,  if  devoted  to


432 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  support  of  military  forces  in  other  nations.  The  Joint  Chiefs  were  agreed
that  the  creation  of  a  Vietnamese  Army  might  not  even  be  adequate  to  the  task
of  estabhshing  a  stable  GVN,  let  alone  to  protecting  that  nation  from  external
aggression :

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  further  consider  that  the  chaotic  internal
political  situation  within  Vietnam  will  hamper  the  development  of  loyal
and  effective  security  forces  in  the  support  of  the  Diem  Government  and
that  it  is  probable  that  the  development  of  such  forces  will  not  result  in
political  and  military  stability  within  South  Vietnam.  Unless  the  Viet-
namese themselves  show  an  inclination  to  make  the  individual  and  collec-
tive sacrifices  required  to  resist  communism  no  amount  of  external  pres-
sure and  assistance  can  long  delay  a  complete  Communist  victory  in  South
Vietnam.

Their  conclusion,  "from  a  military  point  of  view,"  was  that  the  risk  was  not
worth  the  gamble:

.  .  .  [Tjhe  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  the  United  States  should
not  participate  in  the  training  of  Vietnamese  forces  in  Indochina.  How-
ever, if  it  is  considered  that  political  considerations  are  overriding,  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  would  agree  to  the  assignment  of  a  training  mission  to
MAAG,  Saigon,  with  safeguards  against  French  interference  with  the  US
training  effort.

3.  The  Decision  to  Gamble  with  Limited  Commitment

Political  considerations  were  indeed  overriding.  Reasonable  fears  of  failure,
claims  about  the  inadequacy  of  resources,  and  caveats  on  the  necessity  for
Vietnamese  initiatives  are  inherently  inconclusive  arguments  when  one  is  speak-
ing of  a  calculated  gamble.  Indeed,  low  value  chips  for  high  stakes  made  the
gamble  all  the  more  appealing.  Secretary  of  State  Dulles'  position  immediately
prevailed:  only  relatively  small  military  forces  were  needed;  their  principal
purpose  should  be  to  promote  internal  stability  rather  than  to  guard  against
external  aggression;  nations  acting  in  concert  (under  the  umbrella  of  U.S.
nuclear  superiority)  would  guard  against  external  aggression.  On  22  October
1954  Ambassador  Heath  and  General  O'Daniel  in  Saigon  were  instructed  to
"collaborate  in  setting  in  motion  a  crash  program  designed  to  bring  about  an
improvement  in  the  loyalty  and  effectiveness  of  the  Free  Vietnamese  forces."
Four  days  later  the  JCS  were  directed  to  prepare  a  "long  range  program  for  the
reorganization  and  training  of  the  minimum  number  of  Free  Vietnamese  forces
necessary  for  internal  security."  The  earlier  objections  of  the  JCS  were  neither
refuted  nor  ignored;  they  were  accepted  tacitly  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  policy
gamble.

4.  From  Internal  to  Conventional  Defense

The  language  of  this  decision  to  train  the  Vietnamese  National  Army  (VNA),
as  it  was  then  called,  would  indicate  that  internal  (rather  than  external)  secu-
rity would  be  the  principal  purpose  of  that  force.  That  is  not  the  way  it  devel-
oped, for  three  reasons.  First,  basic  U.S.  national  strategy  (embodied  in  NSC
162  and  NSC  5602  during  the  period  under  examination)  and  Southeast  Asia


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  433


policy  (NSC  5429  and  NSC  5612)  were  both  ambiguous  on  a  key  point:  to
what  degree  were  indigenous  military  forces  to  be  expected  to  defend  against  a
conventional,  "limited  war"  attack  by  an  aggressor?  The  continuous,  unbroken
tendency  throughout  the  1950s  was  to  desire  ever  more  capability  for  conven-
tional defense.

Second,  U.S.  military  forces  were  unprepared  by  their  own  experience  to
assist  in  the  structuring  of  forces  designed  for  other  than  conventional  warfare.
The  U.S.  advisory  experiences  that  were  current  in  terms  of  institutionalized
memory  were  those  of  aid  to  Greece  and  Korea  where  the  job  had  been  one  of
training  for  technical  and  tactical  competence  along  conventional  lines.  It  was
eminently  natural  for  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  to  follow  in  this  identifiable  path.
Indeed,  to  have  expected  the  advisory  effort  to  have  stressed  "counter  insur-
gency" early  in  this  period  would  have  been  completely  unrealistic:  the  term
had  not  been  invented  and  its  concepts  had  not  been  either  developed  or  articu-
lated. This  natural  tendency  to  develop  conventional  forces  was  not  only  in  step
with  the  dominant  trend  in  U.S.  military  strategy,  it  was  also  reinforced  by  a
third  factor,  the  generalized  assumption  that  the  ability  to  promote  internal
security  was  automatically  provided  for  in  the  creation  of  forces  capable  to
promote  external  security.

The  confluence  of  all  three  factors  led,  in  fact,  to  an  attempt  to  create  Viet-
namese forces  along  lines  which  were  later  called  "mirror  images"  of  conven-
tional U.S.  force  structures.  MAAG  Vietnam  proposed  and  led  in  the  creation
of  the  Army  of  Vietnam  (ARVN)  in  formations  comprising  divisions,  regi-
ments, battalions,  and  companies  organized  as  closely  parallel  to  U.S.  organiza-
tion as  local  differences  in  equipment  and  support  would  permit.  This  was  not,
for  the  reasons  already  indicated,  an  unreasonable  or  indefensible  development
— at  least  not  until  about  1959  or  1960 — and  by  that  time  efforts  were  under-
way to  transform  the  focus  of  ARVN  to  internal  security.  These  later  efforts
were  faced  with  the  reality  of  a  sizeable  army — conventionally  organized,
trained,  and  equipped — which  had  been  created  under  different  circumstances
and  for  different  purposes.  One  is  forced  to  wonder,  if  Vietnamese  institutions
are  as  difficult  to  remould  as  their  American  counterparts,  whether  the  later
advisory  effort  was  not  faced  from  its  inception  with  an  almost  insurmountable
task.

5. The  Early  MAAG  and  the  Equipment  Recovery  Mission

The  number  of  U.S.  advisors  to  the  fledgling  Republic  of  Vietnam  Armed
Forces  (RVNAF)  were,  as  already  indicated,  limited  by  the  Geneva  Accords.
Article  16  of  the  Accords  limited  military  personnel  in  Vietnam  to  the  number
present  at  the  time  the  Accords  were  signed.  The  magic  number  was  342.  The
U.S.  MAAG  Chief,  General  O'Daniel,  complained  that  he  needed  twice  this
number  to  train  the  new  RVNAF  and  to  oversee  the  redistribution  of  U.S.
equipment  already  in  RVN  as  a  result  of  U.S.  support  for  the  French  during  the
war  just  ended.  The  eventual  outcome,  when  it  was  learned  informally  that  the
Indian  Government  would  instruct  its  representative  on  the  ICC  to  interpose
no  objection,  was  the  creation  of  the  Temporary  Equipment  Recovery  Mission
(TERM)  with  350  military  personnel.  TERM  served  as  the  principal  manager
for  the  redistribution  of  equipment,  assisted  in  developing  RVNAF's  embryonic
logistical  support  system,  and  provided  a  convenient  cover  for  a  larger  intelli-
gence effort.

This  combined  administrative-advisory  force  remained  stable  in  size  during


434 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  period  prior  to  1961.  American  military  advisors  were  located  physically
at  only  a  very  few  locations  in  RVN.  They  were  notable  by  their  absence  in
field  units.  The  U.S.  effort  was  concentrated  in  training  centers  and  in  Saigon.
In  the  former  it  was  largely  technical;  in  the  latter  it  consisted  primarily  of
attempts  to  persuade  GVN  to  adopt  measures  recommended  by  the  U.S.  ad-
visory group.  It  was  essentially  an  attempt  to  give  advice  from  the  top.  This
does  not  mean  that  the  question  of  leverage  was  never  considered;  it  was.  Early
in  our  involvement,  in  January  1955,  the  JCS  laid  out  available  U.S.  courses  of
action  in  South  Vietnam  and  urged  that  a  decision  be  made  at  "the  highest
level"  to  indicate  which  of  these  should  be  followed:

a.  To  continue  aid  to  South  Vietnam  as  currently  being  developed  with
the  cooperation  of  the  French  and  Vietnamese.

b.  To  institute  a  unilateral  program  of  direct  guidance  to  the  Viet-
namese government  through  an  "advisor"  system.  Under  this  course  of
action,  the  amount  of  U.S.  aid  should  be  dependent  upon  Vietnamese  ad-
herence to  U.S.  direction.

c.  In  the  event  the  courses  of  action  in  a  and  b  above  are  not  sufficient
to  insure  retention  of  South  Vietnam  to  the  Free  World,  to  deploy  self
sustaining  U.S.  forces  to  South  Vietnam  either  unilaterally,  or  as  a  part  of
a  SEACDT  [Southeast  Asia  Common  Defense  Treaty — a  term  used  prior
to  SEATO]  force.

d.  To  withdraw  all  U.S.  support  from  South  Vietnam  and  concentrate
on  saving  the  remainder  of  Southeast  Asia.

No  such  decision  was  made.  Indeed,  as  explained  in  the  summary  and  analysis,
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  need  for  such  a  decision  was  even  seri-
ously considered  at  "the  highest  level."

MA  AG  Vietnam  was  by  1960  still  quite  small  in  size,  though  it  loomed  ever
larger  in  importance.  (It  was  the  only  U.S.  MAAG  commanded  by  a  Lieutenant
General;  all  of  the  other  MAAG  Chiefs  were  officers  of  lesser  rank.)  It  was
essentially  city-bound,  training  center  and  Saigon-oriented,  devoted  to  technical-
tactical  training  and  high  level  persuasion  aimed  at  influencing  RVNAF
organization.  The  personnel  limitations  imposed  upon  it  resulted  in  highly
centralized  advice.  But  through  its  efforts  and  material  support  this  MAAG
assisted  in  the  creation  of  a  sizeable  (140,000  man)  conventional  army  and  of
small  naval  and  air  forces  of  approximately  5,000  men  each.

The  U.S.  MAAG  was  also  concerned  with  the  establishment  and  training  of
paramilitary  forces,  but  it  was  not  as  directly  concerned  as  it  was  with  the
creation  of  conventional  forces  in  ARVN.  The  Civil  Guard  (CG)  and  Self
Defense  Corps  (SDC)  were  at  various  times  under  the  control  of  the  Ministry
of  the  Interior  or  directly  under  President  Diem.  In  the  field  they  were  invari-
ably under  the  direction  of  the  Province  Chiefs.  The  U.S.  civilian  advisors  who
had  been  called  in  to  give  assistance  with  police  and  internal  security  matters
tended  to  favor  making  these  paramilitary  forces  less  military  per  se  and  more
police  intelligence-minded.  MAAG  tended  to  favor  making  them  more  con-
sciously military  and  territorially  oriented  in  order  to  free  ARVN  for  mobile,
offensive  operations  rather  than  tying  its  forces  down  in  static  defense  duties.
By  1960,  when  Civil  Guard  training  was  passed  to  MAAG  control,  neither
course  of  action  had  been  followed  consistently  but  it  was  highly  probable  that
MAAG's  views  would  henceforth  prevail.  Thus,  questions  of  local  physical
security  would  almost  inescapably  be  decided  with  reference  to  the  effect  they


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  435


would  have  on  the  functions  of  ARVN,  itself  created  with  an  eye  to  external
defense.  This  may  be  said  to  be  an  awkward  structure  from  which  to  launch
an  effort  aimed  primarily  at  internal  security.  It  was,  however,  the  structure
that  existed.

B. THE  TRANSITION  PERIOD:  1959-1961

1 .  Early  Steps  Toward  Emphasis  on  Internal  Security

By  the  time  of  the  Draper  Committee  (The  President's  Committee  to  Study
the  United  States  Military  Assistance  Program)  in  1958-1959,  there  was  an
almost  imperceptible  but  growing  U.S.  awareness  of  the  requirement  to  promote
internal  stability.  The  committee's  papers,  for  instance,  sought  to  popularize
military  civic  action  programs  and  to  link  them  to  politically  acceptable  prece-
dents— such  as  the  U.S.  Army's  role  in  the  development  of  the  American  West.
The  very  term  "mirror  imaging"  was  coined  in  a  Draper  Committee  staff  study.
One  of  the  committee's  studies  questioned  even  the  easy  assumption  that  in-
ternal security  was  a  "lesser  included  capability"  of  forces  structured  to  promote
external  security:

It  is  seldom  that  a  government  considers  its  military  forces  to  have  only
a  mission  of  maintaining  internal  security.  Their  size,  organization,  equip-
ment, habitual  deployment,  and  so  on,  are  nearly  always  related  to  real  or
supposed  requirements  of  defense  against  external  attack.  They  are  usually
considered  capable  of  performing  internal  security  missions  as  part  of  this
larger  role.  However,  the  requirements  of  the  two  missions  are  different,
if  overlapping;  and  tailoring  a  military  force  to  the  task  of  countering
external  aggression — i.e.,  countering  another  regular  military  force —
entails  some  sacrifice  of  capabilities  to  counter  internal  aggression.  The
latter  requires  widespread  deployment,  rather  than  concentration.  It
requires  small,  mobile,  lightly  equipped  units  of  the  ranger  or  commando
type.  It  requires  different  weapons,  command  systems,  communications,
logistics.  .  .  .

2.  The  McGarr  Emphasis  on  Counterinsurgency

These  developments  were  only  harbingers  of  a  dawning  awareness,  however,
not  indicative  of  a  fundamental  shift  in  focus  which  had  already  occurred.  The
degree  to  which  ARVN  and  paramilitary  forces  should  be  consciously  struc-
tured to  deal  with  internal  security  rather  than  to  protect  against  external  inva-
sion was  the  subject  of  a  developing  debate  rather  than  a  settled  issue.  It  fell  to
Lieutenant  General  Lionel  C.  McGarr  to  head  the  U.S.  MAAG  during  the  con-
fusing period  of  transition  which  accompanied  this  debate.  He  did  not  come
to  Vietnam  unaware  of  the  issues;  a  long  study  prepared  for  him  by  his  staff
at  the  Army's  Command  and  General  Staff  College  (his  post  before  coming  to
Saigon)  laid  out  in  some  detail  the  Viet  Cong's  strategy  as  adapted  from  the
Viet  Minh's  struggle  with  the  French:

This  form  of  warfare  permitted  the  Viet  Minh  to  retain  the  mobility  so
essential  to  jungle  and  mountain  operations,  facilitated  the  gathering  of
detailed,  accurate,  and  timely  intelligence  information,  kept  the  level  of


436 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

violence  at  a  low  enough  level  to  preclude  the  active  intervention  of  an-
other major  power,  accomplished  the  slow  attrition  of  the  French  while
permitting  the  Viet  Minh  to  build  the  regular  forces  necessary  for  the  final
battles,  offset  the  serious  logistics  problem  by  the  very  primitiveness  of
transportation  methods,  and  surmounted  the  manpower  shortage  by  mak-
ing political  and  economic  operations  inseparable  from  military  operations.

One  could  conclude  from  this  assessment  that  RVNAF  should  be  restruc-
tured to  deal  with  this  essentially  internal  challenge  to  South  Vietnamese  sta-
bility. In  a  statement  which  may  reflect  the  difficulty  of  reversing  institutional
thought  patterns — at  the  U.S.  Army's  principal  doctrine  formulating  institution,
in  this  instance — it  was  claimed  that  pacification  operations  were  undesirable
because  they  detracted  from  training.  The  suggestion  was  that  the  CG  and  SDC
takeover  of  pacification  should  be  expedited:

The  [South  Vietnamese]  Army  is  still  required  to  engage  from  time  to
time  in  major  pacification  (internal  security)  operations,  pending  the
development  of  a  higher  state  of  operational  effectiveness  of  the  Civil
Guard  and  the  Self-Defense  Corps.  Since  units  have  considerable  personnel
turnover  and  are  filled  out  with  draftees,  who  have  had  only  basic  and
perhaps  advanced  individual  training  before  arrival  in  units,  the  orderly
pursuit  of  a  progressive  unit  training  schedule  is  essential  to  unit  effective-
ness. Each  commitment  to  an  operational  (pacification)  mission,  though
of  some  training  value,  in  general  interrupts  the  planned  training  of  par-
ticipating units  and  delays  arrival  at  a  satisfactory  state  of  operational
readiness.

3. The  Counterinsurgency  Plan  for  South  Viet-Nam

General  McGarr's  approach  was  to  give  emphasis  in  his  advice  to  recom-
mendations designed  to  integrate  the  activities  of  ARVN  and  the  CG/SDC.
He  consistently  (and  persistently)  recommended  the  establishment  of  a  single
chain  of  military  command  to  guide  all  three  forces.  He  also  pushed  for  steps
which  would  free  ARVN  from  static  security  (pacification)  missions  in  favor
of  offensive  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong.  The  vehicle  for  the  first  of  Mc-
Garr's desired  reforms  was  the  ''Counterinsurgency  Plan  for  Viet-Nam"  (CIP),
produced  in  late  1960.  The  CIP  was  a  blueprint  for  RVNAF  reorganization,
not  an  outline  of  the  strategy  to  be  pursued.  Not  until  September  1961  did
MAAG  present  GVN  with  a  set  of  operational  proposals  in  the  form  of  a
"Geographically  Phased  National  Level  Operations  Plan  for  Counterinsur-
gency."

The  CIP  marks  something  of  a  halfway  house  between  concern  with  external
defense  and  internal  security.  Both  military  tasks  were  recognized,  but  internal
security  assumed  primacy  for  the  first  time:

Military  force,  in  the  form  of  increased  communist  insurgency,  is  clearly
the  immediate  threat  to  the  stability  of  Viet-Nam  today.  South  Viet-Nam
is  unique  in  that  it  is  the  only  country  in  the  world  which  is  forced  to
defend  itself  against  a  communist  internal  subversion  action,  while  at  the
same  time  being  subject  to  the  militarily  supportable  threat  of  a  conven-
tional external  attack  from  communist  North  Viet-Nam.  The  RVNAF
force  basis  is  inadequate  to  meet  both  these  threats.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  437


The  problem  is  twofold,  although  at  present  the  counterinsurgency
phase  is  the  more  dangerous  and  immediate.  In  this  counterinsurgency
fight  RVNAF  is  on  the  defensive.  Approximately  75%  of  ARVN  is  com-
mitted to  pacification  missions,  about  half  of  these  being  committed  to
static  guard  and  security  roles.  .  .  .  The  guerrilla  problem  has  [as  a  result
of  fragmented  lines  of  authority]  become  much  more  serious  than  the  Civil
Guard  can  manage,  thereby  requiring  a  disproportionately  large  RVNAF
commitment,  which  has  further  resulted  in  a  serious  weakening  of  the
RVNAF  capability  for  defense  against  internal  or  overt  attack  in  force.

This  last  point  reflected  General  McCarr's  apparently  very  real  concern  that
ARVN  was  becoming  incapable  to  meet  internal  (as  well  as  external)  threats
posed  by  the  VC  in  conventional  troop  formations.  As  the  VC  became  stronger
and  formed  larger  regular  units — as  distinct  from  guerrilla  bands — the  differ-
ences between  conventional  and  unconventional  warfare  seemed  to  disappear.
The  problem,  as  MAAG  viewed  it,  became  one  of  guarding  against  a  spectrum
of  dangers  by  means  of  a  short  run  emphasis  on  meeting  the  internal  challenge
in  both  its  conventional  and  unconventional  (guerrilla)  form.  In  this  view
ARVN  should  become  the  conventional  offensive  and  mobile  defensive  force,
the  CG  should  be  the  static  force  in  support  of  pacification  efforts.  The  two
should  be  under  a  common  chain  of  command,  it  was  argued  in  the  CIP,  as
should  the  logistical  organization  for  their  support.  Such  a  common  chain  of
command  did  not  exist  in  1960-1961 :

The  military  chain  of  command  has  usually  been  violated  at  the  expense
of  unity  of  effort  and  command.  No  adequate  operations  control  or  over-
all planning  system  presently  exists.  .  .  .  The  President  has  exercised  arbi-
trary control  of  operations,  by-passing  command  channels  of  the  JGS
[Joint  General  Staff]  and  often  Corps  and  Division  staff.  Resources  have
been  fragmented  to  provincial  control.  The  above  practices  appear  to
have  been  designed  to  divide  responsibility  in  order  to  guard  against  the
possibility  of  a  military  coup  through  placing  too  much  power  in  the  hands
of  a  single  subordinate.

Poor  organization,  then,  was  seen  as  the  principal  roadblock  in  the  way  of
organizing  the  military  and  paramilitary  forces  of  South  Vietnam  into  an
effective  combination.  Only  through  a  single  chain  of  command  could  ARVN
be  freed  to  take  the  offensive,  the  CG  be  built  up  to  cope  with  local  guerrillas,
and  the  GVN  place  itself  in  a  position  to  start  developing  useful  intelligence —
a  field  which  was  judged  to  have  been,  thus  far,  a  notable  failure.

4. The  Supporting  Operational  Plan

The  Geographically  Phased  National  Plan  laid  out  the  priority  areas  for  this
coordinated  effort  under  a  single  chain  of  command.  A  three  phase  sequence
of  actions  (preparation,  military  action  to  clear  and  secure,  and  combined
action  to  establish  civilian  political  control  and  consolidate  intelligence  and
security  programs)  would  take  place,  sequentially,  in  each  of  these  priority
areas.  The  process  would  be  repeated  in  expanding  spheres  as  successive  areas
became  pacified.

Together  these  two  American-generated  and  proposed  plans  constituted  a
comprehensive  blueprint  for  GVN  action  to  end  the  insurgency.  Two  things


438 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

common  to  each  should  be  noted  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  inquiry.  The
first  is  the  simple  fact  that  each  was  U.S.-generated  and  proposed.  The  pro-
posals addressed  President  Diem's  persistent  fears  of  a  coup  by  asking  him  to
ignore  those  fears.  The  second  point  is  that  neither  had  anything  to  say  about
U.S.  advisors.  Each  was  an  attempt  to  give  advice,  but  neither  recommended
that  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  in  RVN  be  expanded  in  scope,  size,  or  content.

5. Stability  in  the  Number  of  U.S.  Advisors

The  number  of  military  advisors  had  remained  fairly  level  throughout  this
transition  period  (roughly,  1959  to  mid-1961).  TERM  had  finally  been  abol-
ished but  an  approximately  equal  number  of  spaces  was  added  to  MAAG  Viet-
nam, increasing  it  from  342  to  685.  The  ICC  agreed  that  this  increase  was
consistent  with  the  limitations  imposed  by  the  Geneva  Accords.  MAAG  advisors
had  been  authorized  down  to  regimental  level  but  expressly  forbidden  to  par-
ticipate directly  in  combat  operations  or  to  go  near  the  South  Vietnamese
national  boundary.  The  U.S.  had  begun  to  provide  Special  Forces  teams  to
GVN  in  an  effort  to  train  Vietnamese  ranger  companies  in  anti-guerrilla  tactics,
but  this  was  regarded  as  a  temporary  undertaking.  As  late  as  November  1961,
the  total  U.S.  military  strength  in  South  Vietnam  was  only  about  900  personnel.
Discussions  and  arguments  had  been  underway  for  some  time,  however,  with  a
view  toward  increasing  U.S.  involvement  in  South  Vietnam.  The  nature  of  this
debate,  which  took  place  largely  during  1961  and  terminated  in  the  decisions
at  the  end  of  that  year  to  establish  a  "limited  partnership"  with  GVN,  is  im-
portant to  an  account  of  the  U.S.  advisory  build-up.  It  was  in  the  shadow  of
opposing  contentions  about  how  to  make  the  U.S.  contribution  most  effective
in  helping  GVN  to  defeat  the  insurgents  that  the  advisory  build-up  was  to
begin  in  earnest  in  late  1961.  These  opposing  views,  in  turn,  were  cast  against
the  situational  developments  already  outlined:  U.S.  military  desires  to  make
RVNAF  more  effective  in  counterinsurgency  by  improving  the  military  chain
of  command,  increasing  the  mobility  and  effectiveness  of  ARVN,  and  upgrad-
ing the  CG/SDC  for  the  performance  of  pacification  tasks.

II. THE  ADVISORY  BUILD-UP,  1961-1967

A. THE  KENNEDY  PROGRAMS  {1961-1963)

1 . The  Context  of  Decisions

By  the  end  of  1961,  the  U.S.  had  decided  to  double  its  military  advisory  effort
in  South  Vietnam  by  establishing  advisory  teams  at  the  province  (sector)  level
and  within  ARVN's  battalions.  The  decision  to  take  this  step  was  one  of  a  large
number  of  decisions  designed  to  "buy  time"  in  RVN  so  that  GVN  could  mo-
bilize its  resources  and  swing  over  from  the  defensive  to  the  offensive.  All  of  the
major  participants  appear  to  have  agreed  that  the  situation  in  RVN  was  bad
and  becoming  worse,  that  additional  U.S.  actions  were  needed  if  South  Vietnam
was  to  be  saved,  and  that  the  issue  was  of  sufl[icient  importance  in  terms  of  U.S.
interest  to  justify  doing  whatever  was  necessary.  The  question  was  what  should
be  done,  not  if  anvthing  could  be  done.  Defeat  was  too  catastrophic  an  out-
come to  bear  examination.  Moreover,  decisions  about  Vietnam  in  1961  were,
until  the  very  end  of  the  year,  made  in  the  shadow  of  more  pressing  emergen-


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  439


cies — the  Berlin  crisis  and  events  in  Laos.  It  is  most  important  to  recognize
this  relative  lack  of  centrality  if  one  is  to  understand  the  apparently  incomplete
process  by  which  decisions  on  Vietnam  were  reached.  Moreover,  the  dimensions
of  the  Vietnamese  problem  were  clear  and  agreed  to  by  all.  Elusive  solutions
had  to  be  sought  in  the  interstices,  as  it  were,  of  the  policymakers'  limited  time.

It  is  difficult  to  image  any  responsible  individual  or  group,  for  instance,  tak-
ing exception  to  the  litany  of  problems  ticked  off  by  General  Taylor  in  his
report  following  his  important  October 1961 mission  to  South  Vietnam:

Lack  of  intelligence

ARVN's  defensive  posture

Poor  command  and  control

Poor  GVN  administrative  procedures

Lack  of  initiative

GVN  failure  to  communicate  with  and  mobilize  its  people,  particularly  the
intellectuals  and  the  young  people.  But  various  individuals  and  groups  would
stress  the  importance  of  different  shortcomings  and  propose  quite  different
methods  of  "persuading"  GVN  to  overcome  them.

The  prevalent  military  view,  as  already  suggested  in  the  summary  explanation
of  the  CIP  and  the  Geographically  Phased  Plan,  was  that  organizational  reform
and  national  planning  were  prerequisites  to  effective  action.  If  these  could  be
achieved,  the  military  foresaw  a  pacification  process  which  would  proceed
from  the  provision  of  physical  security  in  the  rural  areas  through  the  establish-
ment (or  reestablishment)  of  civilian  political  administration  to  a  state  of  po-
litical stability.  The  first  nut  to  crack  was  that  of  military  security.  Political
analysts,  including  those  of  the  Department  of  State,  emphasized  the  need  for
the  Diem  government  to  liberalize  itself,  to  attract  dissident  groups  at  least  into
a  loyal  active  opposition  and  away  from  indifference  and  disaffection.  In  this
view  the  heart  of  the  matter  was  essentially  political,  rather  than  military.

In  both  views,  it  should  be  noted,  advocates  agreed  that  the  GVN  must  be
persuaded  to  take  certain  necessary  steps.  Just  how  such  persuasion  was  to  be
achieved  was  a  prime  subject  for  discussion.  Who  was  to  persuade  whom  and
in  what  organizational  framework  was  another  such  subject.  But  although
these  subjects  were  bound  to  be  discussed,  neither  was  the  central  issue — by
late  1961  the  question  of  whether  or  not  to  send  U.S.  combat  forces  to  South
Vietnam  had  clearly  earned  that  title.

The  U.S.  determination  of  what  steps  to  take  was  driven  as  much  by  events
as  by  arguments.  By  late  1961  the  course  of  events  dictated  that  physical  secu-
rity would  take  primacy  over  governmental  liberalization,  not  because  the  argu-
ments for  security  were  inherently  more  persuasive  but  because  of  the  very  real
fear  that  there  would  be  no  GVN  to  save  if  the  U.S.  did  not  do  something  very
quickly.  During  the  first  half  of  1961,  terrorists  and  guerrillas  had  assassinated
over  500  local  officials  and  civilians,  kidnapped  more  than  1,000,  and  killed
almost  1,500  RVNAF  personnel.  The  VC  had  gained  the  upper  hand  in  most
of  the  countryside  and  were  drawing  an  increasingly  tight  cinch  around  Saigon.
Viet  Cong  regular  forces  were  now  estimated  to  number  25,000  and  were  be-
ing organized  into  increasingly  large  regular  formations.  The  terrorist-guerrilla
apparatus  had  grown  to  embrace  an  estimated  17,000.  The  operative  question
was  not  whether  the  Diem  government  as  it  was  then  moving  could  defeat
the  insurgents  but  whether  it  could  save  itself.

The  deteriorating  situation  was  one  reason  why  the  military  security  argument


440 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

quickly  gained  the  ascendancy.  Another  reason  was  the  military's  recognition
that,  while  security  was  an  important  precondition,  political,  economic,  and
social  reforms  were  necessary  to  the  realization  of  viability  within  South  Viet-
nam. Thus,  security  was  recognized  as  a  means  to  a  political  end.  The  process
outlined  in  MAAG's  Geographically  Phased  Plan,  described  earlier,  gave  recog-
nition to  this  fact.  This  process  would  shortly  become  known  as  the  "pacifica-
tion process,"  widely  accepted  throughout  important  places  in  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment (specifically  to  include  what  is  usually  referred  to  euphemistically  as  "the
highest  level").

2. Proposal  for  Extra-Bureaucratic  Advisors

If  the  deteriorating  situation  and  the  potential  breadth  of  the  military's  view
of  the  pacification  process  both  augured  for  at  least  the  short  run  primacy  of
security  considerations,  that  still  left  the  question  of  how  best  to  enhance  secu-
rity and  to  lay  the  groundwork  for  the  governmental  programs  which  would,
hopefully,  begin  to  operate  behind  a  geographically  expanding  security  screen.
These  questions  were  addressed,  but  in  a  rather  one-sided  way.  An  approach
to  U.S.  advice-giving  and  the  organizational  context  in  which  it  should  proceed
was  tabled  as  a  radical  proposal.  First  the  approach,  then  the  organizational
framework  were  struck  down.  The  U.S.  decided  to  take  an  opposite  advisory
approach  in  a  very  different  organizational  context  as  much  because  of  dis-
agreement with  the  debated  proposals  as  because  of  reasoned  elaboration  of  the
benefits  to  be  realized  from  the  course  which  was  eventually  followed.  In  the
process,  the  difficult  question  of  U.S.  leverage  got  shunted  off  to  the  side.  GVN
reform  was  simply  stated  as  an  expected  quid  pro  quo  for  increased  U.S.  aid.
What  the  U.S.  should  do  if  no  reforms  materialized  was  apparently  a  subject  too
unpleasant  to  be  considered.

The  radical  proposals  were  first  floated  in  January  1961  by  a  uniquely  quali-
fied professional  military  officer  serving  in  Secretary  McNamara's  office:  Briga-
dier General  Edward  Lansdale.  Although  an  Air  Force  officer,  Lansdale  had
worked  closely  in  the  Philippines  with  Ramon  Magsaysay  in  the  latter's  suc-
cessful campaign  against  the  Huk  rebellion  and  served  later  as  head  of  the  U.S.
intelligence  mission  in  South  Vietnam  in  the  mid-50's.  He  knew  President  Diem
well  and  was  trusted  by  the  GVN  leader.  He  had  gained  some  notoriety  as  the
real-life  hero  of  the  pseudo-fictional  best  seller,  "The  Ugly  American."  His  views
on  counterinsurgency  commanded  attention.

Lansdale's  proposals  lend  themselves  to  summarization,  not  to  comprehensive
description.  That  is,  he  put  forward  a  proposed  attitude  of  mind  which  should
govern  U.S.  actions,  not  a  program  in  the  usual  sense.  The  thrust  of  his  argument
pertaining  to  advisors  was  that  the  U.S.  should  select  dedicated  Americans
with  empathy  for  the  Vietnamese  and  send  them  to  advise  GVN  "with  sensitive
understanding  and  wisdom."  The  course  of  action  he  recommended  was  to  get
such  men  on  the  scene,  give  them  total  responsibility  to  match  their  total  com-
mitment, and  free  them  from  the  encumbrances  of  the  regular  bureaucratic
machinery  (be  it  military  or  civilian)  in  order  that  they  might  operate  effec-
tively according  to  the  situation :

When  there  is  an  emergencv,  the  wise  thing  to  do  is  to  pick  the  best
people  you  have,  people  who  are  experienced  in  dealing  with  this  precise
type  of  emergency,  and  send  them  to  the  spot  with  orders  to  remedy  the
situation.  When  you  get  the  people  in  position  and  free  them  to  work,  you


The  Advisory  Biiild-Up,  1961-1967  441


should  then  back  them  up  in  every  practical  way  you  can.  The  real  decisions
will  be  made  in  little  daily  actions  in  Vietnam,  not  in  Washington.  That's
why  the  best  are  needed  on  the  spot.

Our  U.S.  team  in  Vietnam  should  have  a  hard  core  of  experienced
Americans  who  know  and  really  like  Asia  and  the  Asians,  dedicated  people
who  are  willing  to  risk  their  lives  for  the  ideals  of  freedom,  and  who  will
try  to  influence  and  guide  the  Vietnamese  towards  U.S.  policy  objectives
with  the  warm  friendships  and  affection  which  our  close  alliance  deserves.
We  should  break  the  rules  of  personnel  assignment,  if  necessary,  to  get  such
U.S.  military  and  civilians  to  Vietnam.

Not  only  should  the  U.S.  depend  on  advisors  who  earn  the  trust  of  their  coun-
terparts, Lansdale  argued,  it  should  depend  on  them  to  get  the  job  done  with-
out coercion  and  threats.  Leverage  should  be  the  product  of  persuasion  and
trust,  not  the  result  of  control  over  funds  and  materiel:

.  .  .  Many  of  the  Vietnamese  in  the  countryside  who  were  right  up  against
the  Viet  Cong  terror  were  full  of  patriotic  spirit.  Those  who  seemed  to  be
in  the  hardest  circumstances,  fighting  barefoot  with  makeshift  weapons,
had  the  highest  morale.  They  still  can  lick  the  Viet  Cong  with  a  little  help.
There's  a  lesson  here  on  our  giving  aid.  Maybe  we  should  learn  that  our
funds  cannot  buy  friends  or  a  patriotic  spirit  by  mere  materialistic  giving.
Perhaps  we  should  help  those  who  help  themselves,  and  not  have  a  lot  of
strings  on  that  help.

If  the  U.S.  could  adopt  this  free-wheeling  approach  to  advice,  said  Lansdale,  it
would  do  well  to  do  it  at  the  action  level,  to  get  down  and  share  the  risks  and
discomforts  of  the  ARVN  rather  than  to  restrict  its  advice  to  paper  plans  and
confrontations  in  offices:

.  .  .  U.S.  military  men  in  Vietnam  should  be  freed  to  work  in  the  combat
areas.  Our  MAAG  has  a  far  greater  potential  than  is  now  being  utilized.
U.S.  military  men  are  hardly  in  a  postition  to  be  listened  to  when  they  are
snug  in  rear  areas  and  give  advice  to  Vietnamese  officers  who  have  at-
tended the  same  U.S.  military  schools  and  who  are  now  in  a  combat  in
which  few  Americans  are  experienced.  MAAG  personnel  from  General
McGarr  on  down  expressed  desire  to  get  more  into  real  field  work;  let's
give  them  what  they  want  as  far  as  U.S.  permission  is  concerned  and  let
them  earn  their  way  into  positions  of  greater  influence  with  the  Viet-
namese military  in  the  field.

3. Back  to  Normal  Channels

In  sum.  General  Lansdale  urged  an  extra-bureaucratic,  uninhibited  advisory
system  consciously  built  on  shared  U.S.-Vietnamese  goals  (validated  by  shared
experience)  and  based  on  mutual  trust  and  admiration.  It  was — he  would  be
the  first  to  admit — the  kind  of  unstructured,  unprogrammed,  "non-organiza-
tion" which  was  antithetical  to  that  which  the  professional  military  might  be
expected  to  propose  and  so  foreign  to  the  typical  views  of  the  State  Department,
with  its  traditional  anti-operational  bias,  that  diplomats  would  inevitably  regard
it  as  a  proposal  for  power  without  responsibility.  Thus,  one  contemporary  ac-
count suggests  that  Lansdale's  approach  was  eventually  rejected  because  of
governmental  inertia  and  bureaucratic  in-fighting:


442 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

When  Lansdale  returned  to  Washington — after  he  had  submitted  his
report  to  his  own  superiors — he  was  suddenly  summoned  one  afternoon
to  the  White  House  and,  much  to  his  surprise,  ushered  into  a  conference
room  where  the  President  was  presiding  over  a  mixed  group  of  high  Penta-
gon, State  Department,  and  National  Security  Council  officials.  To  his  fur-
ther surprise.  President  Kennedy,  after  commending  his  report,  indicated
that  Lansdale  would  be  sent  back  to  Vietnam  in  a  high  capacity.  Kennedy's
declaration  at  the  meeting  obviously  raised  the  hackles  of  many  officials
whose  agencies  had  been  criticized  by  Lansdale.  The  upshot  was  that  noth-
ing further  happened  about  Lansdale's  appointment.  It  is  now  known  that
objections  to  it  were  raised  in  the  highest  levels  of  the  Kennedy  adminis-
tration; in  fact,  there  were  threats  of  resignation.  In  the  sense  that  some
drastic  action  in  Vietnam  should  have  been  taken  at  this  time,  whether  it
involved  Lansdale  or  not,  this  was  another  vital  turning  point  in  the  long
and  tortuous  history  of  America's  Vietnamese  involvement.  There  was
still  a  chance  to  do  something  to  save  the  Diem  regime,  depending  largely
on  getting  Nhu  out  of  the  country.  Difficult  as  it  would  have  been
to  achieve  at  this  late  date,  Lansdale  might  have  been  able  to  persuade
Diem  to  do  it,  because  he  had  remained  one  of  the  few  Americans  Diem
had  ever  trusted.  More  important,  some  feasible  ideas  about  how  to  fight
a  guerrilla  war  might  have  been  set  in  motion,  and  the  miscalculation  of
what  had  always  been  essentially  a  revolutionary  situation  might  there-
upon have  been  altered.

This  account  simply  does  not  square  with  the  existence  of  several  cogent
objections  to  Lansdale's  proposals  for  "unfettered  qualitv"* — though  there  most
certainly  was  a  fair  share  of  bureaucratic  in-fighting  as  the  proposals  were
studied,  expanded,  and  reshaped.  Moreover,  it  compresses  the  time  frame
within  which  Lansdale's  two  major  theses  were  struck  down.  His  first  proposal,
for  selected  individuals  to  act  as  advisors,  implied — at  the  very  minimum —
continuity  of  personnel  selected  by  an  extra-bureaucratic  process.  Extra-
bureaucratic  selection  was  dead  by  mid- 1961;  the  issue  of  continuity  was  finally
settled  in  favor  of  year-long  tours  in  December  1962  (and  has  remained  in
effect  since  that  time).  The  issue  of  a  supra-departmental  organization  was
fought  out  in  mid-196L  It  succumbed  to  an  organizational  principle  with  very
deep  roots.

The  specific  form  which  Lansdale's  supra-departmental  organizational  pro-
posal advanced  was  that  of  a  Presidential  Agent  to  manage  the  U.S.  effort  in
RVN.  On  12  April  1961,  Walt  W.  Rostow  sent  a  memorandum  to  President
Kennedy  which  suggested,  among  other  things,  that  it  was  imperative  to  ap-
point a  "fulltime,  first-rate  back-stop  man  in  Washington"  to  oversee  the  U.S.
involvement  in  RVN.  Lansdale  was  either  aware  of  a  meaning  not  conveyed
literally  by  the  memorandum  or  interpreted  it  to  fit  his  preferences.  In  any
event,  he  used  this  springboard  to  propose,  in  a  19  April  memorandum  to  Sec-
retary McNamara  and  his  deputv,  Roswell  Gilpatric,  that  the  President
create  an  interdepartmental  task  force  on  Vietnam  to  "supervise  and  coordinate
the  activities  of  everv  U.S.  agencv  carrying  out  operations  ...  in  Vietnam
to  ensure  success  of  the  [President's]  approved  plan."  On  the  following  day
Secretary  McNamara,  presumablv  after  discussing  the  matter  with  the  President,
requested  Gilpatric  to  prepare  within  a  week  a  report  for  the  President,  setting
forth  anv  actions  necessarv  to  "prevent  communist  domination  of  that  country."

On  27  April  Secretary  Gilpatric  submitted  his  recommendations.  Much  of


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  443


the  flavor  of  the  earlier  Lansdale  pleas  for  a  select,  individualistic  advisory  effort
was  missing  from  this  product  of  an  interdepartmental  committee.  The  earlier
recommendations  for  an  expanded  U.S.  effort  were  still  there,  however.  These
included  an  RVNAF  force  increase  of  20,000  with  a  corresponding  increase  of
100  MAAG  advisors,  a  MAAG  takeover  of  the  entire  CG  and  SDC  programs,
the  employment  of  U.S.  advisors  in  field  operations,  the  continuation  of  U.S.
Mission  efforts  to  get  GVN  to  carry  out  reforms,  the  initiation  of  covert  opera-
tions with  CIA  assistance  against  lines  of  communications  in  Laos  and  North
Vietnam,  and  a  U.S.  economic  team  to  help  GVN  speed  up  national  develop-
ment. One  would  be  hard  pressed  to  identify  any  other  document  which,  over
six  months  before  the  operative  decision,  so  closely  foreshadowed  the  U.S.
actions  that  would  be  agreed  to  at  the  end  of  1961.

But  beyond  these  programmatic  recommendations  (hence,  contrary  to  Lans-
dale's  initial  proposals)  Gilpatric  recommended  the  creation  of  a  Presidential
Task  Force  to  provide  "over-all  direction,  interagency  coordination  and  sup-
port" for  this  program  of  action.  Gilpatric  was  to  be  Director  of  the  Task
Force;  Lansdale  its  operating  head  in  Vietnam.  In  order  to  appear  not  to  fly
into  the  face  of  Ambassadorial  primacy  in  Saigon  the  memo  was  forced  into
some  rather  fancy  obfuscation:

The  Ambassador  as  head  of  the  Country  Team  is  assigned  the  authority
and  the  responsibility  to  see  that  the  Program  is  carried  out  in  the  field  and
to  determine  the  timing  of  the  actions.  He  is  authorized  to  advise  the
Director  of  the  Task  Force  of  any  changes  which  he  believes  should  be
made  in  the  Program.

In  carrying  out  his  duties  in  the  field,  the  operations  officer  of  the  Task
Force  will  cooperate  with  the  Ambassador.

This  equivocation  charged  directly  against  the  mainstream  of  current  thought
as  it  related  to  the  question  of  integrating  operations  abroad.  The  "Country
Team"  concept  of  the  late  1950's,  buttressed  by  a  series  of  increasingly  com-
prehensive Executive  Orders  on  the  subject,  assigned  clear  primacy  to  the  Am-
bassador. The  State  Department  was  not  long  in  asserting  its  claim  to  leadership
in  accordance  with  this  prevailing  concept.  On  3  May  it  provided  a  recom-
mended revision  of  Gilpatric's  task  force  proposal  in  which  it  proposed  an  inter-
departmental task  force  under  State  Department  leadership  to  coordinate  the
Washington  effort  and  a  counterpart  task  force  in  Saigon  under  Sterling  J.  Cot-
trell,  then  POLAD  to  CINCPAC.  It  was  this  proposal  which  was  incorporated
into  NSAM  52  later  in  May.

In  retrospect,  the  Lansdale-Gilpatric  proposal  to  conduct  the  U.S.  partici-
pation in  the  Vietnamese  war  through  a  supra-departmental  agency — whether
by  a  Presidential  Task  Force  or  by  some  other  means — probably  never  had  much
of  a  chance.  The  Department  of  Defense  had  too  large  an  operational  role  to
agree  to  leadership  of  such  an  undertaking  by  anyone  other  than  one  of  its
own  principals.  (Thus,  Gilpatric  was  acceptable,  but  few  others  would  have
been;  Lansdale  almost  surely  was  not  acceptable  as  the  operating  chief  in  RVN.)
The  State  Department  had  at  stake  both  the  legacy  of  theoretic  interdepart-
mental primacy  and  the  oft-expressed  hope  of  giving  this  theory  more  meaning
abroad.  Indeed,  it  was  during  this  same  month  (May  1961)  that  President
Kennedy  sent  his  oft-quoted  letter  to  each  American  Ambassador,  reminding
the  recipient  of  his  coordinating  duties  even  while  reaffirming  that  these  did  not
extent  to  supervising  operational  mihtary  forces.  The  effects  in  South  Vietnam,


444 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

as  distinct  from  some  other  countries,  was  to  preserve  claims  for  independent
authority  for  each  of  the  major  governmental  departments  involved.  The  Presi-
dential letter  to  Ambassador  Frederick  E.  Nolting  in  Saigon  read  in  part:

In  regard  to  your  personal  authority  and  responsibility,  I  shall  count  on
you  to  oversee  and  coordinate  all  the  activities  of  the  United  States  Gov-
ernment in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam.

You  are  in  charge  of  the  entire  United  States  Diplomatic  Mission,  and  I
shall  expect  you  to  supervise  all  of  its  operations.  The  Mission  includes  not
only  the  personnel  of  the  Department  of  State  and  the  Foreign  Service,
but  also  the  representatives  of  all  other  United  States  agencies  which  have
programs  or  activities  in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam.  I  shall  give  you  full
support  and  backing  in  carrying  out  your  assignment.

Needless  to  say,  the  representatives  of  other  agencies  are  expected  to
communicate  directly  with  their  offices  here  in  Washington,  and  in  the
event  of  a  decision  by  you  in  which  they  do  not  concur,  they  may  ask  to
have  the  decision  reviewed  by  a  higher  authority  in  Washington.

However,  it  is  their  responsibility  to  keep  you  fully  informed  of  their
views  and  activities  and  to  abide  by  your  decisions  unless  in  some  particular
instance  you  and  they  are  notified  to  the  contrary.

If  in  your  judgment  individual  members  of  the  Mission  are  not  func-
tioning effectively,  you  should  take  whatever  action  you  feel  may  be  re-
quired, reporting  the  circumstances,  of  course,  to  the  Department  of  State.

In  case  the  departure  from  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  of  any  individual
member  of  the  Mission  is  indicated  in  your  judgment,  I  shall  expect  you  to
make  the  decision  and  see  that  it  is  carried  into  effect.  Such  instances  I
am  confident  will  be  rare.

Now  one  word  about  your  relations  to  the  military.  As  you  know,  the
United  States  Diplomatic  Mission  includes  Service  Attaches,  Military  As-
sistance Advisory  Groups  and  other  Military  components  attached  to  the
Mission.  It  does  not,  however,  include  United  States  military  forces  oper-
ating in  the  field  where  such  forces  are  under  the  command  of  a  United
States  area  military  commander.  The  line  of  authority  to  these  forces  runs
from  me,  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  to  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  in  Wash-
ington and  to  the  area  commander  in  the  field.

Although  this  means  that  the  chief  of  the  American  Diplomatic
Mission  is  not  in  the  line  of  military  command,  nevertheless,  as  Chief  of
Mission,  you  should  work  closely  with  the  appropriate  area  military  com-
mander to  assure  the  full  exchange  of  information.  If  it  is  your  opinion
that  activities  by  the  United  States  military  forces  may  adversely  affect
our  over-all  relations  with  the  people  or  governments  of  the  Republic  of
Vietnam  you  should  promptly  discuss  the  matter  with  the  military  com-
mander and,  if  necessary,  request  a  decision  bv  higher  authority.

It  is  reasonable  to  surmise  that  in  mid- 1961  events  did  not  seem  pressing
enough  to  cast  aside  a  developed — if  imperfect — concept  of  operational  inte-
gration in  favor  of  an  untried  substitute  arrangement.  In  fact,  if  one  wanted
firm  leadership  one  would  have  had  less  radical  alternatives  to  which  to  turn.
To  mention  two.  Secretarial  involvement  to  a  degree  tantamount  to  taking
charge  of  the  war  (much  as  Secretarv  McNamara  did  in  1962)  or  the  appoint-
ment of  an  Ambassador  to  RVN  with  such  military  preeminence  that  he  need
not  defer  to  other  military  judgments  (as.  General  Taylor  in  1964).

The  decision  to  supervise  the  American  effort  in  a  more  or  less  conventional


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  445


way  had  a  direct  bearing  on  the  nature  of  the  advisory  buildup  then  being  dis-
cussed. It  was  highly  unHkely  that  General  Lansdale's  radical  advisory  proposals
would  be  kindly  received  under  a  system  managed  along  conventional  lines.
Even  before  the  Presidential  Task  Force  idea  was  abandoned  Lansdale's  proposals
for  a  select,  committed  advisory  group  had  been  reshaped  by  interdepartmental
committee.  Instead  of  "old  Vietnam  hands"  in  key  spots,  the  discussion  turned
to  the  use  of  existing  organizations  and  much  larger  numbers  of  advisors:

Augment  the  MA  AG  with  two  US  training  commands  (comprised  of  ap-
proximately 1600  instructors  each)  to  enable  the  MA  AG  to  establish  in
the  "high  plateau"  region  of  South  Vietnam  two  divisional  field  training
areas  to  accelerate  the  U.S.  training  program  for  the  entire  GVN
army.  .  .  .

Deploy,  as  soon  as  possible,  a  Special  Forces  Group  (approximately
400  U.S.  military  personnel)  to  Nha  Trang  in  order  to  accelerate  GVN
Special  Forces  training.

Under  this  proposal  the  size  of  MAAG  Vietnam  would  be  increased  from  685
to  2285,  not  including  the  Special  Forces  or  training  commands  mentioned
above  or  the  100  man  increase  already  proposed  to  advise  the  20,000  men
which  were  to  be  added  to  RVNAF.

After  the  shift  to  thinking  in  terms  of  existing  military  organizations  (or,
alternatively,  of  individuals  drawn  as  it  were  by  "requisitions"  in  normal  chan-
nels) and  the  understandable — if  not  inevitable — demise  of  the  Gilpatric-
Lansdale  proposal  for  supra-departmental  direction,  U.S.  thinking  about  pos-
sible steps  in  Vietnam  remained  firmly  within  conventional  channels.  There
were  subsequent  attempts  to  reintroduce  an  alternative  advisory  scheme  and  an
organizational  framework  compatible  with  it  but  these  appear  to  have  not  been
seriously  considered.

President  Kennedy  did  not  permit  the  Gilpatric  Task  Force  recommenda-
tions to  commit  him  to  action.  Rather,  he  used  them  in  an  attempt  to  demon-
strate the  U.S.  commitment  to  Vietnam.  The  proof  of  this  contention  is  in
NSAM  52,  which  records  the  President's  decisions.  Only  about  14  personnel
were  to  be  assigned,  for  instance,  in  U.S.  Army  civic  action  mobile  training
teams  to  assist  ARVN  with  health,  welfare,  and  public  works  projects.  Although
it  was  decided  to  deploy  the  Special  Forces  group  of  400  men  to  Tourane  [Da
Nang],  this  was  in  support  of  a  CIA-directed  effort  which  could  be  kept  largely
covert.  Increased  aerial  surveillance  assistance  required  only  6  U.S.  personnel.
The  establishment  of  a  Combat  Development  and  Test  Center  in  RVN  re-
quired only  4  additional  U.S.  personnel.  The  point  is  not  how  much  was  done
but,  in  retrospect,  how  firmly  the  probable  lines  of  future  actions  had  been
drawn  as  a  result  of  what  it  had  been  agreed  not  to  do.

4. Planning  Begins  in  Earnest

The  President  did,  however,  issue  several  "hunting  licenses."  The  Defense
Department  was  directed  to  examine  fully  (under  the  guidance  of  the  State
Department's  Director  of  the  continuing  Task  Force  on  Vietnam)  "the  size
and  composition  of  forces  which  would  be  desirable  in  the  case  of  a  possible
commitment  of  U.S.  forces  to  Vietnam."  The  Ambassador  was  authorized  to
sound  out  Diem  on  a  bilateral  defense  treaty.  President  Kennedy  also  appar-
ently decided  to  feel  out  Diem's  reaction  on  the  subject  of  U.S.  combat
troops  in  Vietnam.  Vice  President  Johnson  left  almost  immediately  to  visit


446 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

South  Vietnam  and  other  Asian  nations.  He  was  empowered  to  bring  up  the
question  of  troops  as  well  as  the  treaty.

But  discussions  are  one  thing;  firm  commitments  are  quite  another.  The
range  of  alternatives  that  President  Kennedy  was  willing  to  consider  seems
clear.  What  he  was  willing  to  do  was  quite  another  matter.  Unless  he  was  most
unlike  other  politicians  and  unless  the  many  personal  accounts  of  his  stvle  are
completely  erroneous  he  was  willing  to  do  what  he  believed  he  had  to  do — and
events  in  mid- 1961  did  not  force  action  even  though  the  "drill"  that  the  Ad-
ministration went  through  was  instrumental  in  defining  the  probable  responses
when  events  did  force  action.

As  it  quickly  turned  out.  President  Diem  wanted  neither  U.S.  troops  nor  a
treaty  at  that  time.  He  told  Vice  President  Johnson  that  he  wanted  troops  only
in  the  event  of  overt  invasion  and  showed  no  interest  in  a  treaty.  Nevertheless,
the  Vice  President,  upon  his  return,  was  trenchant  in  his  observations  that  the
time  for  deeds  to  replace  words  was  fast  approaching  if  the  U.S.  was  to  make
its  declared  commitment  credible:

Our  mission  arrested  the  decline  of  confidence  in  the  United  States.  It
did  not — in  my  judgment — restore  any  confidence  already  lost.  The
leaders  were  as  explicit,  as  courteous  and  courtly  as  men  could  be  in  mak-
ing it  clear  that  deeds  must  follow  words — soon.

We  didn't  buy  time — we  were  given  it.

If  these  men  I  saw  at  your  request  were  bankers,  I  would  know — with-
out bothering  to  ask — that  there  would  be  no  further  extensions  on  my
note.

Diem  may  not  have  been  quite  so  disinterested  in  U.S.  troops  as  he  appeared
to  be.  NSAM  52  of  11  May  had  discussed,  inconclusively,  the  proposed  buildup
of  RVNAF  from  170,000  to  200,000  in  order  to  create  two  new  divisions  to
help  seal  the  Laotian  border.  When  President  Diem  responded  (on  9  June)  to
Vice  President  Johnson's  invitation  to  prepare  a  set  of  proposals  on  South
Vietnam's  military  needs,  he  recommended  a  quantum  jump  in  strength  to
270,000  and  suggested  a  substantial  increase  in  the  US  MAAG,  perhaps  even
in  the  form  of  U.S.  units:

To  accomplish  this  100,000  man  expansion  [above  the  strength  recom-
mended in  the  CIP,  which  was  20,000  above  the  existing  strength]  of  our
military  forces,  which  is  perfectly  feasible  from  a  manpower  viewpoint,
will  require  a  great  intensification  of  our  training  programs  in  order  to
produce,  in  the  minimum  of  time,  those  qualified  combat  leaders  and
technical  specialists  needed  to  fill  the  new  units  and  to  provide  to  them
the  technical  and  logistical  support  required  to  insure  their  complete  ef-
fectiveness. For  this  purpose  a  considerable  expansion  of  the  United  States
Military  Advisory  Group  is  an  essential  requirement.  Such  an  expansion,
in  the  form  of  selected  elements  of  the  American  Armed  Forces  to  estab-
lish training  centers  for  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces,  would  serve  the
dual  purpose  of  providing  an  expression  of  the  United  States'  determina-
tion to  halt  the  tide  of  communist  aggression  and  of  preparing  our  forces
in  the  minimum  of  time.

The  response  to  this  letter  is  not  part  of  the  available  record.  No  doubt  the
initial  reaction  was  one  of  surprise.  The  U.S.  was  not  accustomed  to  GVN  ini-


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  447


tiatives;  it  seldom  sought  them.  "We  have  not  become  accustomed  to  being
asked  for  our  own  views  on  our  needs,"  Diem  remarked  in  his  letter  to  Ken-
nedy. But  Diem's  proposal  did  certainly  strike  one  appealing  chord:  the  joint
benefits  of  training  coupled  to  demonstrated  commitment  through  the  de-
ployment of  existing  troop  units.  As  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam  continued
to  deteriorate  throughout  the  summer  and  early  fall  the  issue  of  U.S.  military
advice  continued  to  be  addressed  in  terms  of  U.S.  units.  These  could,  of  course,
do  even  more  than  had  been  suggested  by  President  Diem:  they  could  fight  as
units.  Diem's  generally  consistent  position,  however,  continued  to  be  that  he
would  accept  U.S.  combat  forces,  but  only  to  train  GVN  forces.  He  had  said
as  much  to  Vice  President  Johnson:

General  McGarr,  who  was  also  present  at  this  discussion  [between
Johnson  and  Diem]  reported  that  while  President  Diem  would  not  want
U.S.  combat  forces  for  the  purpose  of  fighting  Communists  in  South  Viet-
nam, he  would  accept  deployment  of  U.S.  combat  forces  as  trainers  for
the  Vietnamese  forces  at  any  time.

5.  GVN  Asks  for  Additional  U.S.  Assistance

By  October  the  situation  within  South  Vietnam  had  become  sufficiently  grim
for  President  Diem  to  reverse  his  earlier  sentiments  and  to  ask  for  a  bilateral
defense  treaty  with  the  U.S.  His  new  willingness,  coupled  with  the  deteriorating
situation,  kicked  off  a  new  series  of  proposals  within  the  U.S.  Government.
Walt  Rostow  proposed  that  the  U.S.  place  an  internationalized  force  of  about
25,000  men  into  RVN  to  perform  a  border  sealing  mission.  The  JCS  responded
with  a  counter  proposal  emphasizing  Laos  and  calling  for  the  deployment  of  a
sizeable  (initially  20,000)  U.S.  contingent  to  the  central  highlands.  In  still  an-
other proposal  a  Special  National  Intelligence  Estimate  weighed  in  with  a  hard
look  at  this  rash  of  proposals.  The  President's  reaction,  on  1 1  October,  was  to
decide  to  send  General  Taylor  on  a  mission  to  South  Vietnam  to  examine  several
alternative  courses  of  action:

(a)  The  plan  for  military  intervention  discussed  at  this  morning's  meet-
ing on  the  basis  of  the  Vietnam  task  force  paper  entitled  "Concept  for
Intervention  in  Vietnam";

(b)  An  alternative  plan  for  stationing  in  Vietnam  fewer  U.S.  combat
forces  than  those  called  for  under  the  plan  referred  to  in  (a)  above  and
with  a  more  limited  objective  than  dealing  with  the  Viet  Cong;  in  other
words,  such  a  small  force  would  probably  go  in  at  Tourane  [Da  Nang]
and  possibly  another  southern  port  principally  for  the  purpose  of  establish-
ing a  U.S.  "presence"  in  Vietnam;

(c)  Other  alternatives  in  lieu  of  putting  any  U.S.  combat  forces  in
Vietnam,  i.e.  stepping  up  U.S.  assistance  and  training  of  Vietnam  units,
furnishing  of  more  U.S.  equipment,  particularly  helicopters  and  other  light
aircraft,  trucks  and  other  ground  transport,  etc.

6.  The  Taylor  Mission  to  Saigon

This  range  of  alternatives  suggests,  even  without  "20/20  hindsight,"  that  if
something  was  going  to  be  done,  and  if  the  President  were  to  decide  not  to  send
U.S.  combat  units  to  Vietnam,  there  would  be  an  advisory  buildup  of  some  kind
almost  by  default.  This  is  close  enough  to  what  happened  to  warrant  the  risk  of


448 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

oversimplification.  It  does  not  do  justice  to  the  Taylor  Report,  of  course,  but
Taylor's  mission  and  his  reports  have  been  covered  fully  elsewhere.  For  their
impact  on  the  advisory  effort,  and  to  place  this  in  perspective,  it  is  sufficient  to
describe  only  a  few  salient  features.  First,  the  Viet  Cong  were  pursuing,  in
Taylor's  appraisal,  a  political-military  strategy  aimed  at  overthrowing  Diem  and
opening  the  way  to  unification  of  Vietnam  on  Hanoi's  terms.  Military  action  by
the  insurgents  was  aimed  at  this  objective  rather  than  at  a  complete  military
victory:

The  military  strategy  being  pursued  is,  evidently,  to  pin  down  the  ARVN
on  defensive  missions;  to  create  a  pervasive  sense  of  insecurity  and  frustra-
tion by  hit-and-run  raids  on  self-defense  corps  and  militia  [CG]  units
.  .  .  and  to  dramatize  the  inability  of  the  GVN  to  govern  or  to  build.  .  .  .

Despite  the  considerable  guerrilla  capabilities  of  the  Viet-Cong,  Commu-
nist strategy  now  appears,  on  balance,  to  aim  at  an  essentially  political
denouement  rather  than  the  total  military  capture  of  the  country,  as  in  the
case  of  Mao's  campaign  in  China.  .  .  .  The  enemy  objective  seems  to  be
to  produce  a  political  crisis  by  a  combination  of  military  and  non-military
means  out  of  which  would  come  a  South  Vietnamese  Souvanna  Phouma,
willing  to  contemplate  unification  on  terms  acceptable  to  Hanoi,  including
disengagement  from  the  U.S.

In  order  for  the  Diem  government  to  defeat  this  insurgency.  General  Taylor
reasoned,  the  Saigon  regime  must  reform  itself.  It  had  allowed  two  vicious  circles
to  develop  which  vitiated  its  effectiveness.  In  the  first,  poor  military  intelligence
resulted  in  a  defensive  military  posture  which  put  most  of  the  forces  under
provincial  control.  This,  in  turn,  meant  that  reserves  could  not  be  expeditiously
employed.  The  resultant  high  losses  in  unsuccessful  defensive  battles  further
dried  up  the  sources  of  intelligence  and  completed  the  circle.  The  second  vicious
circle  was  attributable  to  Diem's  instinctive  attempts  to  centralize  power  in  his
own  hands  while  fragmenting  it  beneath  him.  His  excessive  mistrust  of  criticism
and  fears  of  a  coup  caused  large  elements  of  society  to  stand  aside  from  the
struggle  while  the  province  chiefs  and  generals  were  forced  into  frustrating
struggles,  further  increasing  Diem's  fears  and  his  inclination  to  fractionalize
authority.  The  task,  then,  was  to  strengthen  Diem  while,  at  the  same  time,  in-
ducing him  to  reform  so  as  to  break  both  of  these  vicious  circles.

In  order  to  strengthen  Diem  with  a  U.S.  militarv  presence — very  much  along
the  lines  of  the  smaller  US  deployment  discussed  at  the  NSC  meeting  prior  to
his  trip — Taylor  recommended  the  deployment  to  South  Vietnam  of  a  task  force
of  6-8,000  troops  under  the  guise  of  flood  rehef  work.  This  task  force,  primarily
logistical,  would  necessarily  become  involved  in  some  defensive  operation  and
sustain  some  casualties,  but  its  deployment  need  not  commit  the  U.S.  to  a  land
war  on  the  Asian  mainland:

As  the  task  is  a  specific  one,  we  can  extricate  our  troops  when  it  is  done
if  we  so  desire.  Alternatively,  we  can  phase  them  into  other  activities  if  we
wish  to  remain  longer.  .  .  .

Needless  to  say,  this  kind  of  task  force  will  exercise  little  direct  influence
on  the  campaign  against  the  VC.  It  will,  however,  give  a  much  needed
shot  in  the  arm  to  national  morale,  particularly  if  combined  with  other
actions  showing  that  a  more  effective  working  relationship  in  the  common
cause  has  been  established  between  the  GVN  and  the  U.S.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  449

Taylor  had  already  received  President  Diem's  assurances  that  he  favored  the
deployment  of  U.S.  forces  for  this  purpose.

In  conjunction  with  this  U.S.  troop  deployment,  Taylor  argued  that  the  U.S.
should  initiate  increased  assistance  to  GVN  in  a  new  relationship:

A  shift  [should  occur]  in  the  American  relation  to  the  Vietnamese  elfort
from  advice  to  Hmited  partnership.  The  present  character  and  scale  of  the
war  in  South  Vietnam  decree  only  that  the  Vietnamese  can  defeat  the  Viet-
Cong;  but  at  all  levels  Americans  must,  as  friends  and  partners — not  as
arm's-length  advisors — show  them  how  the  job  might  be  done — not  tell
them  or  do  it  for  them.

General  Taylor  was  most  explicit  that  the  purpose  of  the  proposed  troop
deployments  and  the  new  "limited  partnership"  was  to  buy  time  for  the  Viet-
namese so  that  they  could  marshall  their  considerable  resources  and  assume  the
offensive  against  the  VC.  As  mentioned  above,  this  would  require  internal  re-
form in  GVN.  The  limited  partnership  would  contribute  to  both  of  these  inter-
acting objectives:

The  present  war  cannot  be  won  by  direct  US  action;  it  must  be  won  by
the  Vietnamese.  But  there  is  a  general  conviction  among  us  that  the  Viet-
namese performance  in  every  domain  can  be  substantially  improved  if
Americans  are  prepared  to  work  side  by  side  with  the  Vietnamese  on  the
key  problems.  Moreover,  there  is  evidence  that  Diem  is,  in  principle,  pre-
pared for  this  step,  and  that  most — not  all — elements  in  his  establishment
are  eagerly  awaiting  it.

7. The  Kennedy  Decisions:  NSAM  111

It  is  useful  to  approach  the  effect  of  General  Taylor's  mission  on  the  advisory
effort  from  the  simple  recollection  of  what  President  Kennedy  decided  not  to
do.  He  decided  not  to  deploy  U.S.  combat  forces  to  South  Vietnam.  This  meant
— given  the  U.S.  assessment  of  the  importance  of  RVN  and  the  felt  necessity  to
do  something — that  the  expansion  of  U.S.  assistance  was  a  foregone  conclusion.
This  was  the  general  course  of  action  that  would  be  followed  as  the  ineluc-
table result  of  having  decided  not  to  do  something  else  which  was  more  drama-
tic, involved  more  risk,  and  was  more  contentious.

Given  the  decision  not  to  send  troop  units,  then,  the  general  thrusts  of  U.S.
actions  were  determined — but  the  specifics  were  not.  Just  how  did  Taylor's
"limited  partnership,"  for  instance,  propose  to  influence  GVN's  attitudes  and
organization,  to  develop  initiative  matched  by  competence,  and  to  insure
that  the  Vietnamese  would  assume  successfully  the  responsibility  for  winning  the
struggle  which  it  was  said  only  they  could  win?  How  was  this  expanded  U.S.
effort  to  be  organized?  From  whence  would  come  the  new  junior  partners  of
the  firm?  What  would  be  their  preparation,  their  instructions,  their  duties?

The  first  of  these  two  groups  of  questions  is  more  easily  answered  than  the
second;  the  answer  to  neither  of  them  is  retrospectively  very  satisfying  in
terms  of  suggesting  that  the  U.S.  entered  into  its  expanded  effort  at  the  begin-
ning of  1962  with  its  eyes  wide  open  and  fully  aware  of  just  what  it  was  doing.
The  available  record  indicates  that  the  U.S.  hopefully  assumed  that  material
aid  and  good  intentions  would  be  adequate  to  the  task,  that  a  larger  U.S.


450 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

presence  would  spur  the  Vietnamese  to  effective  action  without  incurring  the
stigma  of  a  U.S.  "takeover,"  and  that  the  increase  in  assistance  would  be — in
and  of  itself — accepted  as  an  adequate  quid  pro  quo  for  the  desired  reforms
within  GVN.

GVN  organizational  reform  would  be  realized,  NASM  1 1 1  suggested,  by
getting  Diem  to  agree  to  clean  up  his  lines  of  authority  in  exchange  for  the  U.S.
commitment  to  the  limited  partnership.  One  section  of  the  document  is  a  list  of
approved  U.S.  actions;  another  sets  forth  the  expected  improvements  to  be
accomplished  by  GVN,  Ambassador  Nolting  was  instructed  to  use  the  substance
of  these  decisions  in  talks  to  secure  Diem's  approval.  He  found  Diem  despondent
that  the  U.S.  asked  so  much  in  return  for  so  little,  played  into  the  hands  of
those  who  claimed  undue  American  infringement  upon  Vietnamese  sovereignty,
and  placed  him  in  a  position  where  he  feared  even  to  make  known  to  his  own
cabinet  the  American  expectations.  Unless  the  U.S.  were  to  suspend  its  in-
creased aid,  and  at  the  very  time  it  was  just  gearing  up  to  provide  it,  Diem  had
made  it  clear  at  the  beginning  that  he  would  govern  South  Vietnam  in  his  way
and  that  the  U.S.  had  no  choice  but  to  support  him  wholeheartedly,  get  out,  or
find  an  acceptable  alternative  to  him.  The  U.S.,  in  turn,  had  refused  to  con-
sider the  last  two  of  these  alternatives.  It  was  stuck  with  supporting  him,  at
least  for  the  time  being.

8. Working  Out  the  Basis  for  U.S.  Advice

But  the  U.S.  approach  was  only  partially  framed  to  secure  Diem's  acceptance.
There  was  a  parallel  suggestion  that  the  existence  of  U.S.  advisors  in  the  field,
working  hand-in-hand  in  a  counterpart  relationship  with  Vietnamese,  would
reform  GVN  from  the  bottom  up.  This  line  of  policy  was  neither  spelled  out  in
detail  nor  thought  out  in  terms  of  operational  implications,  risks,  and  costs.
But  it  clearly  existed:

Through  this  working  association  at  all  levels,  the  U.S.  must  bring  about
de  facto  changes  in  Diem's  method  of  administration  and  seek  to  bring  all
elements  of  the  Vietnamese  Government  closer  to  the  Vietnamese  people —
thus  helping  break  the  vicious  political  circle.

By  concurrent  actions  in  the  fields  of  intelligence,  command  and  control,
mobility,  and  training,  the  U.S.  must  bring  about  a  situation  where  an
effective  reserve  is  mobilized  and  brought  to  bear  offensively  on  clearly
established  and  productive  offensive  targets — thus  helping  break  the  vicious
military  circle.  .  .  .

Behind  this  concept  of  a  strategy  to  turn  the  tide  and  to  assume  the  of-
fensive lies  a  general  proposition:  when  an  interacting  process  is  yielding  a
degenerative  situation,  the  wisest  course  of  action  is  to  create  a  positive
thrust  at  as  many  points  as  are  accessible.

Thus,  the  U.S.  addressed  the  critical  leverage  issue  as  the  expected  product  of
its  own  willingness  to  increase  its  participation  in  the  counterinsurgency
effort.  It  dia  so,  moreover,  without  any  conscious  examination  of  the  question
beyond  stating  its  expectations.  There  was  no  plan  to  make  the  provision  of  addi-
tional assistance  contingent  upon  GVN  actions,  only  a  statement  that  GVN
actions  were  expected.  There  was  no  willingness,  in  fact,  to  consider  the  con-
scious exercise  of  leverage;  the  situation  was  too  critical,  the  available  time
too  short,  the  issue  too  important.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  451


The  effect  of  this  avoidance  of  hard  choices — for  good  and  understandable
reasons,  but  avoidance  nonetheless — was  to  place  a  very  large  burden  on  the
benefits  to  be  realized  by  an  expansion  of  the  advisory  effort.  The  language  of
General  Taylor's  report  is  reminiscent  of  Lansdale's  earlier  proposals  for  an  un-
structured, flexible  advisory  effort  comprising  totally  committed,  carefully
selected  individuals  who  would  earn  the  respect  and  cooperation  of  the  Viet-
namese. Lansdale  had  renewed  these  proposals  at  the  time  the  Taylor  Report
was  prepared.  But  when  it  was  suggested  to  the  GVN  that  the  U.S.  would  expect
to  share  in  decisions  the  Vietnamese  reaction  led  the  U.S.  almost  immediately  to
modify  this  expectation.  The  original  communication  on  the  subject  to  Ambas-
sador Nolting  stated  that  ".  .  .  we  would  expect  to  share  in  the  decision-making
process  in  the  political,  economic  and  military  fields  as  they  affected  the  security
situation"  as  compared  to  the  earlier  arrangement  of  "acting  in  an  advisory
capacity  only."  By  early  December  insistence  on  this  point  was  quickly  dropped
in  favor  of  a  view  which  suggested  that  close  collaboration  would  produce  auto-
matic unanimity:

What  we  have  in  mind  is  that,  in  operations  directly  related  to  the
security  situation,  partnership  will  be  so  close  that  one  party  will  not  take
decisions  or  actions  affecting  the  other  without  full  and  frank  prior  con-
sultations. .  .  .

Unless  such  exchanges  invariably  resulted  in  unanimity  one  of  the  partners
would  have  to  give  way  to  the  other  or  inactivity  would  result.  What  line  to
follow  if  this  occurred  seems  not  to  have  been  examined.  This  simply  would
not  happen.

The  "close  partnership"  envisaged  by  General  Taylor — and  endorsed  by  Pres-
ident Kennedy — suggested  something  akin  to  the  "total  commitment"  which
General  Lansdale  had  earlier  urged  as  one  criterion  in  selecting  advisors  for
South  Vietnam.  This,  in  turn,  implied  at  the  very  minimum  a  period  of  long
exposure  to  the  operational  problem  (and  personalities)  with  which  these  ad-
visors would  deal.  In  the  event,  it  was  decided  to  expand  both  the  military  and
sector  (provincial  military)  advisory  efforts  without  any  such  long  term  ex-
posure. These  questions  were  settled  in  detail  when  Secretary  McNamara  met
in  mid-January  1962  at  Honolulu  with  the  principal  managers  of  the  U.S.  effort.
It  was  decided  to  establish  battalion  level  military  advisory  teams  within
ARVN,  each  to  consist  of  either  5  (infantry  battalion)  or  3  (artillery  battalion)
personnel.  Each  province  (sector)  would  receive  3  U.S.  advisors,  one  officer  and
2  enlisted  intelligence  specialists.  The  Civil  Guard  would  be  trained  in  a  series
of  6  training  centers  by  120  advisors  (20  in  each  center)  plus  12  mobile  teams
of  3  men  each.  The  SDC  would  be  trained  in  30  centers.  Secretary  McNamara
made  it  clear  that  he  wanted  these  deployments  completed  as  quickly  as  pos-
sible. He  suggested  that  if  an  ARVN  unit  was  not  prepared  to  receive  its  advisors
the  designated  individuals  be  sent  to  RVN  and  placed  temporarily  with  another
unit  to  gain  experience.  He  agreed  that  temporary  duty  assignments  to  Vietnam
were  generally  undesirable  and  asked  the  JCS  to  address  the  question  of  opti-
mum tour  length  for  advisors.

The  length  of  time  a  military  member  spent  in  Vietnam  at  that  time  varied
slightly  from  service  to  service,  according  to  whether  or  not  dependents  accom-
panied the  serviceman  and  whether  he  served  in  Saigon  or  in  some  other  part
of  the  country.  In  October  1961  it  was  allegedly  decided  at  OSD  level — without
consulting  the  services — to  make  the  tour  of  duty  30  months  with  dependents


452 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

and  18  without  dependents  rather  than  the  24  and  12  month  tours  that  were
then  typical.  The  effect  of  this  decision  would  have  been  to  increase  the  field
advisors'  tours  of  duty  from  one  year  to  one  and  a  half  years.  Each  of  the
assignment  branches  within  the  Army  opposed  this  change  as  one  which  would
be  inequitable  unless  reflected  in  changed  tour  length  for  other  '"unaccom-
panied" (by  dependent)  tours.  The  order  was  not  put  into  effect.  Thus,  there
was  some  background  against  which  to  reexamine  the  time  which  advisors
(among  others)  should  spend  in  RVN.  The  decision — again  based  on  consider-
ations of  equity  in  ''hardship"  assignments,  health,  and  resultant  morale  issues
— was  to  retain  the  one  year  tour  in  the  field.*

9. U.S.  Expectations:  The  Benefits  from  More  Advisors

To  sum  up  the  decision  to  expand  the  advisory  effort  to  battalion  and  prov-
ince level,  it  was  one  reached  without  extended  study  or  debate.  There  was
neither  opposition  to  it  nor  any  comprehensive  explication  of  what  would  be
involved  and  the  benefits  to  be  expected.  This  was  due  in  large  part  to  the  fact
that  it  was  a  decision  made  almost  offhandedly  in  the  shadow  of  a  larger  issue,
the  deployment  of  U.S.  combat  forces  to  RVN.  When  it  was  decided  not  to
send  the  combat  forces  it  was  a  foregone  conclusion  that  more  advisors  would
be  sent.  This  was  consistent  with  the  U.S.  desire  in  late  1961  to  demonstrate  its
commitment  to  South  Vietnam  and  apparently  compatible  with  the  oft-expressed
belief  that  only  the  South  Vietnamese  could  bring  their  struggle  to  a  satisfactory
conclusion.

But  the  decision  to  expand  the  advisory  effort  attempted,  at  the  same  time,
to  finesse  the  question  of  leverage.  GVN  was  informed  that  the  U.S.  expected
certain  reform  measures  to  be  adopted  in  exchange  for  increased  U.S.  assist-
ance. It  received  no  clear  signals  about  withholding  U.S.  help  if  these  actions
were  not  taken.  The  U.S.  had,  in  fact,  made  no  decisions  along  this  line;  it  had
avoided  addressing  the  issue  because  of  conflicting  desires  to  act  forcefully,  yet
to  avoid  Americanizing  the  war.  Thus,  the  U.S.  did  not  know  what  it  would  do
if  GVN  failed  to  respond  as  it  was  hoped  that  it  would.  In  this  sense  the  U.S.
advisors  became  potential  pawns  in  a  leverage  game  of  uncertain  intensity  with
no  set  rules.  This  de  facto  position  was  in  continuous  potential  conflict  with
the  expressed  hope  that  a  greater  U.S.  presence  would  lead — by  example,  per-
suasion, and  mutual  interest — to  increased  effectiveness  both  within  ARVN  and
in  the  political  administration  of  the  provinces  governed  by  U.S.-advised  ARVN
officers.

Not  only  did  the  Kennedy  Administration  decide  to  enter  in  General  Taylor's
'"limited  partnership"  without  a  careful  examination  of  the  relationships  being
established,  it  also  apparently  did  not  state  or  debate  precisely  what  benefits  were
expected  as  a  result  of  an  increased  advisory  effort.  There  was,  it  appears,  a
generalized  and  unchallenged  assumption  that  more  Americans  in  more  places
addressing  Vietnamese  training  and  operations  could  not  but  have  an  overall
beneficial  effect.  The  available  record  reflects  no  explicit  discussion  of  expected

*  It  has  remrined  basically  unchanged,  it  should  be  noted,  until  the  present.  An  un-
structured program  of  voluntary  6  month  extensions  was  inaugurated  throughout
Vietnam  in  1967,  a  voluntary  extension  program  begun  for  '"selected  officers"  in  key
positions  in  the  same  year,  and  a  small  program  initiated  in  1968  by  which  selected
Province  Advisors  would  agree  to  serve  two  years  in  Vietnam,  then  receive  almost
one  year's  training  prior  to  deployment.  No  officers  have  departed  the  U.S.  under  this
last  program  as  of  the  present  writing  (mid- 1968).


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  453


benefits.  While  oral  discussions  must  have  addressed  this  point  at  some  time,  it
seems  most  likely  that  policymakers  agreed  tacitly  on  three  overlapping  cate-
gories of  expectations — each  susceptible  to  varying  interpretations  and  degrees
of  relative  importance  and  emphasis — which  were  neither  clearly  stated  nor
critically  examined.

The  first,  and  most  obvious,  was  the  expectation  that  an  increased  U.S.  mili-
tary presence  with  tactical  units  and  at  training  centers  would  lead  to  improved
technical-tactical  competence  within  ARVN.  The  assumption  which  underlay
this  expectation  was  that  the  teaching  of  basic  military  skills  was  probably  a
sufficient  (rather  than  merely  necessary)  condition  to  enable  AR\'N  to  begin
to  operate  more  effectively — and  more  energetically  and  aggressively.  Earlier
experience  in  Greece  and  Korea  would  have  seemed  to  validate  this  expectation
within  reasonable  limits.

Second,  U.S.  policymakers  probably  expected  the  increased  military  advisory
effort  to  result  in  a  more  effective  informational  "network."  It  must  have  seemed
reasonable  to  expect  that  an  increased  but  diffuse  U.S.  presence  would  not
only  enhance  information  on  VC  actions  and  probable  plans  but  also  improve
U.S.  knowledge  of  ARVN  plans  and  performance.

Finally — and  most  difficult  to  pinpoint  in  terms  of  what  policymaker  or
policymaking  group  emphasized  which  aspects — the  U.S.  expected  to  gain  ad-
ditional influence  from  an  increased  advisory  effort.  General  Taylor  viewed  this
as  the  natural  product  of  individuals  with  parallel  interests  working  hand-in-
glove  in  the  field  (as  distinct  from  large  headquarters).  This  would  enable  them
to  escape  the  petty  differences  which  grow  up  in  the  absence  of  operational
responsibility  and  permit  the  U.S.  advisors  to  "lead  by  example"  even  though
they  would  not  be  technically  empowered  to  lead.

Other  expectations  of  increased  U.S.  influence  could  take  a  variety  of  forms.
Improved  information,  for  instance,  in  a  hierarchically  ordered  U.S.  advisory
system,  would  permit  the  U.S.  to  push  more  effectivelv  any  line  of  endeavor
which  it  wished  GVN  to  adopt.  This  potential  for  improved  "salesmanship"
was  not  unrelated  to  an  increased  potential  for  coercive  influence.  What  the
U.S.  would  give  in  material  support  it  might  also  withhold  selectively.  Influence
need  not  be  dependent  upon  example  alone.

None  of  these  expectations  were,  howe\er,  articulated  fully  or  spelled  out
in  terms  which  would  provide  operational  guidelines  for  the  new  U.S.  advisors
who  were  being  deployed  to  SVN.  The  expectations  of  benefits  were  implicit
and  generalized.  The  potential  existed  for  a  comprehensive,  coordinated  U.S.
approach  to  advising  but  the  potential  was  not  the  reality.

10. Implementing;  the  First  Build-Up

The  decision  just  examined  to  increase  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  was  pre-
ceded by  a  series  of  marginal  increases  in  the  U.S.  military  strength  in  Viet-
nam. (Actual  "in-country"  strengths  are  available  for  only  a  few  months
during  the  early  build-up  period  so  it  will  frequently  be  necessary  to  use  au-
thorization figures  and  to  realize  that  newly  authorized  spaces  were  generally
not  filled  until  some  time  had  passed  after  their  establishment.)  Presidential
decisions  in  April  and  Mav  1961,  taken  in  the  light  of  a  central  concern  with
Laos  rather  than  Vietnam,  increased  the  authorized  size  of  MAAG  Vietnam
from  685  to  785.  The  100-man  increase  was  divided  almost  equally  between
technical  advisors  and  advisors  for  ARVN's  tactical  training  centers.  In  October
1961  the  authorized  strength  was  increased  again,  to  972,  of  which  948  spaces


454 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

were  for  U.S.  Army  personnel;  603  of  these  948  spaces  were  actually  filled  by
the  end  of  November.

The  increases  in  advisory  strength  which  reflected  the  NSAM  1 1 1  decisions
were  authorized  in  December  1961  and  January  1962.  By  the  end  of  1961
MAAG's  authorized  strength  had  been  more  than  doubled,  to  2067.  This  num-
ber was  increased  again  in  January  to  more  than  3000.  Included  in  these  increases
were  the  new  dimensions  of  U.S.  advice:  battalion  advisors,  province  advisors,
and  an  additional  500  Special  Forces  advisors  (making  a  new  total  of  805  in  the
Special  Forces  program  under  CIA  control).

It  has  already  been  noted  that  Secretary  McNamara  gave  forceful  impetus  to
manning  these  newly  created  positions  in  the  shortest  possible  time.  They  were,
indeed,  filled  quickly.  By  April  1962  the  total  number  of  Army  field  advisory
personnel  in  RVN  exceeded  the  authorized  number.  By  this  time,  too,  the  author-
ized total  for  all  services  had  been  stabilized  at  about  3400.  This  total  was  reduced
in  November  to  3150,  then  remained  essentially  constant  until  a  new  round  of
increases  was  inaugurated  in  mid-1964.  Thus,  the  build-up  associated  with  the
Taylor  mission  consisted  of  a  fourfold  increase  in  U.S.  advisory  presence  (a  much
larger  increase  if  one  counts  U.S.  support  units).  After  the  build-up  was  com-
pleted, in  the  spring  of  1962,  the  number  of  advisors  remained  stable  until  many
months  after  the  fall  of  the  Diem  government.

While  the  total  number  of  advisors  remained  fairly  constant,  however,  shifts
occurred  in  the  distribution  of  advisory  personnel.  From  completion  of  the
build-up,  for  instance,  until  the  coup  which  overthrew  Diem,  the  number  of  field
advisors  at  corps  and  division  level  increased  severalfold  and  the  number  of
province  advisors  doubled  while  other  field  advisory  strengths  remained  about
the  same.  These  developments  are  shown  in  detail  in  the  tabular  summary  at  the
end  of  this  study  and  summarized  in  the  following  table:


SELECTED  FIELD  ADVISORS


Activity  Advised

April  1962

November  1963

Corps

63

380

Divisions

162

446

Regiments

150

134

Battalions

366

417

Provinces

117

235

Schools  &  Training  Centers

212

201

CG/SDC

281

215

Total

1351

2028

1 1 . The  U.S.  Vie^v:  1962-1963

Six  months  after  Diem  fell  the  U.S.  would  conclude  that  these  advisory  levels
were  inadequate,  but  during  the  Diem  area  the  predominant  official  attitude
was  one  of  sustained  optimism.  The  war  was  being  won,  it  was  maintained,  by
adherence  to  the  newly  articulated  theory  of  counterinsurgency.  The  U.S.
even  made  tentati\e  plans  to  begin  reducing  the  American  presence  in  Vietnam.


The  Advisory  Biiild-Up,  1961-1967  455


By  the  time  the  U.S.  began  seriously  to  consider  attempts  to  exercise  leverage
against  the  Ngo  family's  conduct  of  affairs  Diem's  regime  was  already  well
down  the  road  to  its  eventual  overthrow.

The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  was  the  principal  operational  vehicle  by
which  the  recently  articulated  theory  of  counterinsurgency  was  to  be  translated
into  reality.  In  general,  the  plan  was  to  begin  by  providing  to  the  rural  populace
a  degree  of  security  sufficient  to  serve  as  a  precondition  for  further  military
and  political  action.  In  the  military  field  the  peasants'  increased  security  was  to
be  the  wedge  by  which  more  effective  intelligence  gathering  could  take  place.
The  rural  population  could  not  be  expected  to  inform  on  VC  whereabouts,  it
was  reasoned,  unless  it  was  safe  from  retaliatory  acts  by  the  insurgents.  Political
action  to  promote  identification  between  the  central  government  and  the  rural
population  was  also  to  take  place  in  the  shadow  of  these  improved  physical
security  arrangements.  Security  was  viewed,  then,  as  the  precondition  to  the
military  and  political  gains  at  which  General  Taylor's  mission  had  aimed  its
recommendations.

The  evolution  and  demise  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  is  examined  in
another  volume  of  the  present  series.  It  is  pertinent  to  the  present  study,
however,  to  note  the  points  of  stress  in  this  program  as  they  pertained  to
RVNAF.  Most  of  the  new  American  advisory  effort  was  directed  to  improving
ARVN,  in  its  equipment  and  mobility  capability  and  in  its  aggressiveness.  The
central  U.S.  expectation  was  that  a  greater  capability  to  move  quickly  could  be
combined  with  improved  leadership  so  that  ARVN  could,  on  one  hand,  be
capable  of  responding  quickly  and  in  force  wherever  and  whenever  the  VC
chose  to  concentrate  for  local  superiority  and,  on  the  other,  be  made  aggres-
sive enough  to  beat  the  Viet  Cong  at  their  own  game — to  "take  the  night  away"
from  the  VC  and  to  use  guerrilla  techniques  to  hunt  down  and  defeat  the  in-
surgents in  their  own  bailiwicks.

The  realization  of  these  expectations  was  dependent  upon  several  develop-
ments, each  of  which  had  to  occur  if  ARVN  was  to  become  capable  of  turning
the  tide  in  the  insurgent  battle.  First,  the  CG  and  SDC  had  to  become  suffi-
ciently effective  to  permit  ARVN  to  be  used  as  a  mobile  reserve  for  protective
purposes  rather  than  as  part  of  the  static  protection  force.  Second,  ARVN  had
to  be  given  adequate  capability  to  move  quickly,  whether  in  reacting  or  in
seizing  the  initiative.  Finally,  both  ARVN's  leaders  and  the  political  leaders  to
whom  they  were  responsible  had  to  accept  and  put  into  operational  practice
a  spirit  of  aggressiveness  to  take  advantage  of  the  existing  static  defenses  and
the  newly-gained  mobility.

12. The  A  ctuality:  1 962-1 963

What  happened  during  1962-1963  is  that  only  the  second  of  these  develop-
ments actually  occurred  to  any  significant  degree.  The  U.S.  provided  helicopter
companies  for  rapid  tactical  transport,  small  arms  and  automatic  weapons  for
increased  firepower,  and  tactical  air  and  artillery  support  to  assure  ARVN  fire-
power superiority  over  the  insurgents.  There  were  complaints — as  there  have
been  ever  since — that  individual  weapons  were  too  heavy  for  the  Vietnamese,
that  one  helicopter  company  for  each  Corps  area  was  too  little,  and  that  sup-
porting air  and  artillery  were  an  inducement  to  rely  on  indiscriminate  firepower
as  a  substitute  for  aggressiveness.  But  the  basic  tools  were  provided.

The  other  developments  did  not  take  place.  Training  of  the  CG  and  SDC


456 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

was  speeded  up  at  Secretary  McNamara's  insistence  in  order  to  get  a  more  effec-
tive protective  force  quickly  in  being.  Even  by  cutting  the  course  of  instruction
in  half  it  required  the  remainder  of  CY  1962  to  give  a  basic  familiarization
course  to  even  the  bulk  of  the  CG  and  SDC.  GVN  was  not  eager  to  put  weapons
into  SDC  hands,  fearing  that  the  weapons  might  wind  up  in  the  possession  of
the  VC.  In  the  event,  both  forces  emerged  as  something  much  less  effective
than  had  been  expected.  The  strategic  hamlets  which  they  were  to  protect
proliferated  in  quantity  in  an  uncontrolled  manner  and  varied  widely  in  quality.
It  never  really  became  possible  for  ARVN  to  free  itself  from  static  defensive
duties.

Even  if  it  had  become  possible  for  ARVN  to  be  cut  loose  from  static  duties
it  is  questionable  that  it  could  have  risen  to  U.S.  expectations.  The  period  in
question  is  one  in  which  the  Ngo  family  felt  itself  constrained  constantly  to
play  off  the  military  against  the  provincial  officials  (who  controlled  the  CG  and
SDC)  in  order  to  forestall  attempts  at  a  coup  d'etat.  Military  leaders  seemed
inclined  to  rely  increasingly  on  firepower  as  a  substitute  for  aggressive  ma-
neuver. Rosy  reports  from  the  provinces  made  it  unappealing  to  sustain  casualties
engaging  an  enemy  who  was  said  to  have  already  been  driven  from  the  area.
The  all-too-common  result  was  that  ARVN  did  not  improve  as  the  U.S.  had
expected  it  would.  U.S.  advisors  became  frustrated  and  embittered.  Even  rare
opportunities  for  decisive  engagement  on  the  ground  were  allowed  to  pass  or
were  mishandled.  The  debacle  at  Ap  Bac,  in  ,  1962,  stands  as  a  land-
mark of  this  continued  impotence.

The  failure  of  ARVN  to  develop  as  expected  was,  however,  not  officially
recognized  until  much  later.  Even  then  the  reasons  for  this  failure  were  vari-
ously interpreted.  In  mid-1962,  after  the  initial  advisory  build-up  had  been
completed,  the  commander  of  the  recently  established  U.S.  Military  Assistance
Command,  Vietnam  (MACV),  General  Paul  D.  Harkins,  estimated  that  the
U.S.  task  was  simply  one  of  training  ARVN  leaders  on  a  one-time  basis  and
that  the  VC  could  be  eliminated  as  a  disturbing  force  within  a  year  after  this
had  been  accomplished.  (This  was  a  clear  instance  of  the  "technical-tactical
competence"  expectation.)  Secretary  McNamara— probably  wishing  also  to
form  prudent  contingency  plans  and  to  have  the  capability  to  exert  pressure
on  the  Diem  regime — directed  that  the  U.S.  plan  for  a  phased  withdrawal  of
U.S.  forces  over  a  three  year  period.  This  decision  and  the  subsequent  plans
for  its  implementation,  indicates  the  extent  to  which  optimistic  expectations
existed  at  some  high  official  U.S.  levels  even  while  (as  we  were  later  to  learn)
the  situation  in  the  countryside  continued  to  deteriorate.  This,  in  turn,  helps
to  explain  why  the  advisory  build-up  completed  in  April  1962  was  not  followed
by  any  additional  increases  in  advisors  for  more  than  two  years.

The  central  problem  in  this  regard  was  that  the  U.S.  had  neither  a  firm  grasp
on  reliable  indicators  to  determine  how  the  war  was  progressing  nor  a  willing-
ness to  accept  claims  that  it  was  not  going  well.  The  second  of  these  tendencies
was  attributable  to  the  approach  which  finally  emerged  from  the  decisions  fol-
lowing the  Taylor  mission:  The  U.S.  would  support  Diem  unstintingly  and
expect,  in  return,  meaningful  reforms  and  improvements  within  GVN.  But  it
was  caught  in  a  dilemma  when  the  expected  reforms  did  not  take  place.  To
continue  to  support  Diem  without  reforms  meant  quite  simply  that  he,  not  we,
would  determine  the  course  of  the  counterinsurgent  effort  and  that  the  steps
he  took  to  assure  his  continuance  in  power  would  continue  to  take  priority
over  all  else.  To  deny  him  support  in  any  of  a  variety  of  ways  would  erode  his
power  without  a  viable  alternative  in  sight.  The  tendency  may  not  have  been


The  Advisory  Build-Vp,  1961-1967  457


precisely  to  ''sink  or  swim  with  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,"  as  Homer  Bigart  phrased  it,
but  it  came  very  close  to  this.

The  inability  to  know  just  how  things  were  going  presented  an  even  more
difficult  problem.  The  tendency  was  to  use  forces  retrained  or  newly  equipped,
strategic  hamlets  constructed,  and  trends  in  VC  activity,  as  indicators  of  the
progress  of  the  war.  But  training  does  not  necessarily  equal  effectiveness,  the
number  of  hamlets  constructed  does  not  tell  one  of  the  loyalty  of  their  popula-
tions, and  enemy  attacks  might  be  a  misleading  guide.  Were  GVN  making  prog-
ress in  a  contested  area,  for  instance,  Viet  Cong  reactions  might  be  expected  to
increase  rather  than  to  diminish  in  frequency  and  intensity.  Conversely,  the  in-
surgents would  have  no  good  reason  to  attack  populated  areas  which  they  had
already  succeeded  in  penetrating  and  over  which  they  had  established  effective
de  facto  control.  Data  and  observations  could  be  variously  interpreted — so
variously,  in  fact,  that  President  Kennedy  was  led  to  ask  two  observers  just  re-
turned from  Vietnam  who  gave  him  divergent  reports,  "You  two  did  visit  the
same  country,  didn't  you?"

13. The  Stage  Is  Set  for  "Better  GVN  Receptivity"

While  the  U.S.  groped  for  a  better  way  to  determine  how  the  counterin-
surgent  effort  was  going  and  debated  how  (or  if)  to  exercise  leverage  against
Diem,  it  was  overtaken  by  events.  The  1963  Buddhist  crisis  in  RVN  was  met  by
increasingly  repressive  measures  by  the  GVN.  These  developments  finally  led
the  U.S.  to  reassess  its  support  for  Diem  and  to  consider  other  non-communist
alternatives  to  his  leadership.  On  1  November  1963  Diem  was  overthrown  by  a
military  coup  d'etat.  The  pacification  eftort  organized  around  the  Strategic  Ham-
let Program  died  with  him;  the  advisory  effort  was  left  untouched  in  terms  of
size  and  scope.  To  the  extent  that  Diem  and  his  family  were  the  ones  prevent-
ing ARVN  from  meeting  the  expectations  of  late  1961,  it  was  reasoned,  now
was  the  time  for  the  military  advisory  system  to  begin  to  function  more  eflcc-
tively.  To  the  extent  that  ARVN  commanders  in  the  field  had  been  unresponsive
to  U.S.  advice  because  of  indifference  and  opposition  in  the  Gia  Long  Palace,
it  was  hoped  the  difficulties  of  the  past  might  be  rectified  by  the  new  military
regime.

B.  DISTRICT  ADVISORS  AND  THE  BEEF-UP  OF  BATTALION  ADVIS-
ORY TEAMS  (1964-1965)

The  initial  U.S.  reaction  to  the  Diem  coup  was  thus  one  of  modest  optimism.
Even  given  the  U.S.  disappointment  at  the  death  of  the  Ngo  brothers  the  fact
remained  that  the  new  regime  in  the  Saigon  saddle  was  expected  to  be  more
responsive  to  U.S.  advice  than  the  previous  government  had  been.  It  was  nec-
essary that  GVN  programs  be  redirected  into  more  realistic  channels,  that  the
efficiency  of  operations  be  increased  that  additional  steps  be  taken  to  seal
the  infiltration  routes  through  Laos,  and  that  the  U.S.  reaffirm  its  commit-
ment to  GVN  in  a  credible  way.  The  key  to  success — the  pacification  proc-
ess— had  already  been  discovered;  the  task  was  one  of  skillful,  sustained  execu-
tion.

Each  of  these  points  was  addressed  by  National  Security  Action  Memoran-
dum 273,  approved  26  November  1963.  The  immediate  cause  for  NSAM  273
was  the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy  four  days  earlier;  newly-installed


458 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


President  Johnson  needed  to  reaffirm  or  modify  the  poHcy  lines  pursued  by  his
predecessor.  President  Johnson  quickly  chose  to  reaffirm  the  Kennedy  policies.
Emphasis  should  be  placed,  the  document  stated,  on  the  Mekong  Delta  area,
but  not  only  in  military  terms.  Political,  economic,  social,  educational,  and  in-  \
formational  activities  must  also  be  pushed:  "We  should  seek  to  turn  the  tide  not  ,
only  of  battle  but  of  belief.  .  .  ."  Military  operations  should  be  initiated,  under
close  political  control,  up  to  within  fifty  kilometers  inside  of  Laos.  U.S.  assistance  i
programs  should  be  maintained  at  levels  at  least  equal  to  those  under  the  Diem  '
government  so  that  the  new  GVN  would  not  be  tempted  to  regard  the  U.S.  as
seeking  to  disengage.

The  same  document  also  revalidated  the  planned  phased  withdrawal  of  U.S.
forces  announced  publicly  in  broad  terms  by  President  Kennedy  shortly  before
his  death:  |

The  objective  of  the  United  States  with  respect  to  the  withdrawal  of  ||
U.S.  military  personnel  remains  as  stated  in  the  White  House  statement  of
October  2,  1963.  |

No  new  programs  were  proposed  or  endorsed,  no  increases  in  the  level  or  na-
ture of  U.S.  assistance  suggested  or  foreseen.  The  emphasis  was  on  persuading
the  new  government  in  Saigon  to  do  well  those  things  which  the  fallen  gov-  i
ernment  was  considered  to  have  done  poorly.  I


1. Optimism  Turns  to  Frustration  >

This  attitude  of  cautious  optimism  changed  gradually  by  the  early  summer  ;
of  1964  to  one  of  deepening  gloom.  No  radical  shift  marked  this  transition;  \
it  was  one  of  a  heightened  awareness  of  instability  in  the  central  government  in  i
Saigon  (the  Khanh  coup  and  maneuvering  for  advantage  by  the  generals),  of  a
deteriorating  situation  in  the  countryside,  and  of  the  discovery  that  things  had
been  worse  to  begin  with  than  the  U.S.  had  suspected.  Not  only  did  events  in-
dicate a  Viet  Cong  ascendancy  in  the  countrvside;  the  U.S.  was  not  even  able
to  determine  with  assurance  just  how  things  stood.  The  informational  returns
were  inadequate  from  the  existing  advisory  effort,  ARVN  had  not  become  an
effective  fighting  force,  and  the  extent  of  U.S.  influence  was  questionable.

This  deterioration  of  the  counterinsurgent  eft'ort  (including  the  growing
awareness  that  earlier  reports  had  been  unrealistically  rosy)  was  one  factor
which  was  to  lead  to  an  expansion  of  the  U.S.  military  advisory  effort.  A  sec-
ond, and  complementary,  factor  was  the  increasing  conviction  in  official  circles  '
that  the  struggle  in  Vietnam  was  so  important  that  we  could  not  afford  to  lose
it.  Although  these  two  factors  in  juxtaposition  created  a  determination  to  take
whatever  steps  were  necessary  to  ensure  a  free  non-communist  South  Vietnam,
this  commitment  operated  in  the  shadow  of  an  equal  determination  to  work
through  the  GVN  rather  than  around  it  and  to  avoid  radical  policy  departures
during  the  Presidential  elections.

A  further  buildup  in  U.S.  advisors  was  not  the  major  product  of  this  deter-
mined commitment.  Rather,  there  was  in  1964  a  growing  conviction  that  only
by  consciously  expanding  the  war — bv  "going  North"  in  order  to  punish  and
dissuade  the  DRV  from  support  of  the  insurgency — could  the  deteriorating  situ-
ation be  arrested  and  reversed.  Governmental  stability  in  South  Vietnam  and
the  reduction,  if  not  the  elimination,  of  pressures  from  the  north  came  to  be


The  Advisory  Biiild-Up,  1961-1967  459


regarded  as  desiderata  which  would  turn  upon  actions  outside  RVN  rather  than
within  it.  The  decisions  to  expand  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  were  overshadowed
by  plans  to  carry  the  war  to  the  DRV.*

2. N SAM  288

NSAM  273  had,  as  described  above,  limited  cross-border  operations  to  an
area  50  kilometers  within  Laos.  NSAM  288,  published  in  March  1964,  reaffirmed
these  measures  but  went  considerably  further  in  authorizing  contingency  prep-
arations to  be  employed  in  the  event  that  border  control  operations  proved  in-
adequate:

To  prepare  immediately  to  be  in  a  position  on  72  hours'  notice  to  initiate
the  full  range  of  Laotian  and  Cambodian  "Border  Control  actions"  (beyond
those  authorized  .  .  .  above)  and  the  "Retaliatory  Actions"  against  North
Vietnam,  and  to  be  in  a  position  on  30  days'  notice  to  initiate  the  pro-
gram of  "Graduated  Overt  Military  Pressure"  against  North  Vietnam.

This  initial  official  signal  to  prepare  to  expand  the  war  was  cast  against  a
conviction  that  U.S.  objectives  in  South  Vietnam  were  critically  important:

We  seek  an  independent  non-Communist  South  Vietnam.  We  do  not
require  that  it  serve  as  a  Western  base  or  as  a  member  of  a  Western  Alli-
ance. South  Vietnam  must  be  free,  however,  to  accept  outside  assistance  as
required  to  maintain  its  security.  This  assistance  should  be  able  to  take  the
form  not  only  of  economic  and  social  measures  but  also  police  and  mili-
tary help  to  root  out  and  control  insurgent  elements.

Unless  we  can  achieve  this  objective  in  South  Vietnam,  almost  all  of
Southeast  Asia  will  probably  fall  under  Communist  dominance  (all  of  Viet-
nam, Laos,  and  Cambodia),  accommodate  to  Communism  so  as  to  remove
effective  U.S.  and  anti-Communist  influence  (Burma),  or  fall  under  the
domination  of  forces  not  now  explicitly  Communist  but  likely  then  to  be-
come so  (Indonesia  taking  over  Malaysia).  Thailand  might  hold  for  a  pe-
riod with  our  help,  but  would  be  under  grave  pressure.  Even  the  Philip-
pines would  become  shaky,  and  the  threat  to  India  to  the  west,  Australia
and  New  Zealand  to  the  south,  and  Taiwan,  Korea,  and  Japan  to  the  north
and  east  would  be  greatly  increased.

All  of  these  consequences  would  probably  have  been  true  even  if  the
U.S.  had  not  since  1954,  and  especially  since  1961,  become  so  heavily  en-
gaged in  South  Vietnam.  However,  that  fact  accentuates  the  impact  of  a
Communist  South  Vietnam  not  only  in  Asia,  but  in  the  rest  of  the  world,
where  the  South  Vietnam  conflict  is  regarded  as  a  test  case  of  U.S.  ca-
pacity to  help  a  nation  meet  a  Communist  "war  of  liberation."

Thus,  purely  in  terms  of  foreign  policy,  the  stakes  are  high.  .  .  .

The  situation  has  unquestionably  been  growing  worse,  at  least  since  Sep-
tember:

1.  In  terms  of  government  control  of  the  countryside,  about  40%  of

*  The  sensitive  files  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  for  the  period  under  discussion  consist
in  large  part  of  detailed  plans  to  bring  increasing  military  pressure  against  DRV  un-
der careful  political  control  and  under  "scenarios"  which  would  ensure  adequate  do-
mestic and  foreign  support.


460 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  territory  is  under  Viet  Cong  control  or  predominant  influence.  In
22  of  the  43  provinces,  the  Viet  Cong  control  50%  or  more  of  the  land
area,  including  80%  of  Phuoc  Tuy;  90%  of  Binh  Duong;  75%  of  Hau
Nghia;  90%  of  Long  An;  90%  of  Kien  Tuong;  90%  of  Dinh  Tuong;
90%  of  Kien  Hoa;  and  85%  of  An  Xuyen.

2.  Large  groups  of  the  population  are  now  showing  signs  of  apathy
and  indifference,  and  there  are  some  signs  of  frustration  within  the  U.S.
contingent:

a.  The  ARVN  and  paramilitary  desertion  rates  and  particularly
the  latter,  are  high  and  increasing.

b.  Draft  dodging  is  high  while  the  Viet  Cong  are  recruiting  ener-
getically and  effectively.

c.  The  morale  of  the  hamlet  militia  and  of  the  Self  Defense  Corps,
in  which  the  security  of  the  hamlets  depends,  is  poor  and  falling.

3.  In  the  last  90  days  the  weakening  of  the  government's  position  has
been  particularly  noticeable.  For  example:

a.  In  Quang  Nam  province,  in  the  I  Corps,  the  militia  in  17  hamlets
turned  in  their  weapons.

b.  In  Binh  Duong  province  (III  Corps)  the  hamlet  military  were
disarmed  because  of  suspected  disloyalty.

c.  In  Binh  Dinh  province,  in  the  II  Corps,  75  hamlets  were  se-
verely damaged  by  the  Viet  Cong  (in  contrast,  during  the  twelve
months  ending  June  30,  1963,  attacks  on  strategic  hamlets  were  few
and  none  was  overrun) .

d.  In  Quang  Ngai  province,  at  the  northern  edge  of  the  II  Corps,
there  were  413  strategic  hamlets  under  government  control  a  year
ago.  Of  that  number,  335  have  been  damaged  to  varying  degrees  or
fallen  into  disrepair,  and  only  275  remain  under  government  control.

e.  Security  throughout  the  IV  Corps  has  deteriorated  badly.  The
Viet  Cong  control  virtually  all  facets  of  peasant  life  in  the  southern-
most provinces  and  the  government  troops  there  are  reduced  to  de-
fending the  administrative  centers.  Except  in  An  Giang  province
(dominated  by  the  Hoa  Hao  religious  sect)  armed  escort  is  required
for  almost  all  movement  in  both  the  southern  and  northern  areas  of
the  IV  Corps.

4.  The  political  control  structure  extending  from  Saigon  down  into
the  hamlets  disappeared  following  the  November  coup.  Of  the  41  incum-
bent province  chiefs  on  November  1,  35  have  been  replaced  (nine  prov-
inces had  three  province  chiefs  in  three  months;  one  province  had
four).  Scores  of  lesser  officials  were  replaced.  Almost  all  major  military
commands  have  changed  hands  twice  since  the  November  coup.  The
faith  of  the  peasants  has  been  shaken  bv  the  disruption  in  experienced
leadership  and  the  loss  of  physical  security.  In  many  areas,  power  vac-
uums have  developed  causing  confusion  among  the  people  and  a  rising
rate  of  rural  disorders.

5.  North  Vietnamese  support,  always  significant,  has  been  increasing.

The  major  new  action  under  consideration  to  help  achieve  critically  impor-
tant U.S.  objectives  in  the  face  of  this  gloomy  recording  of  recent  events  was,
as  already  noted,  that  of  carrving  the  war  to  North  Vietnam.  Secretary  Mc-
Namara,  whose  memorandum  to  the  President  was  published  en  toto  as  NSAM
288,  did  not  foresee  the  need  at  that  time  for  a  further  major  buildup  of  the  ad-
visory effort  or  for  U.S.  steps  to  take  greater  control  of  the  war.  Again,  the  ap-


The  Advisory  Biiild-Up,  1961-1967  461

proach  already  selected  was  deemed  adequate.  Only  qualitative  improvement
vi^as  needed:

A.  The  military  tools  and  concepts  of  the  GVN/US  effort  are  generally
sound  and  adequate.  .  .  .  Substantially  more  can  be  done  in  the  effective
employment  of  military  forces  and  in  the  economic  and  civic  action  areas.
These  improvements  may  require  some  selective  increases  in  the  U.S.  pres-
ence, but  it  does  not  appear  likely  that  major  equipment  replacement  and  ad-
ditions in  U.S.  personnel  are  indicated  under  current  policy.

B.  The  U.S.  policy  of  reducing  existing  personnel  where  South  Viet-
namese are  in  a  position  to  assume  the  functions  is  still  sound.  Its  appli-
cation will  not  lead  to  any  major  reductions  in  the  near  future,  but  ad-
herence to  this  policy  as  such  has  a  sound  effect  in  portraying  to  the  U.S.
and  the  world  that  we  continue  to  regard  the  war  as  a  conflict  the  South
Vietnamese  must  win  and  take  ultimate  responsibility  for.  Substantial  re-
ductions in  the  numbers  of  U.S.  military  training  personnel  should  be  pos-
sible before  the  end  of  1965.  However,  the  U.S.  should  continue  to  re-
iterate that  it  will  provide  all  the  assistance  and  advice  required  to  do  the
job  regardless  of  how  long  it  takes.

Two  actions  which  were  explicitly  considered  and  rejected  indicated  that  the
U.S.  would  still  adhere  to  its  oft-stated  (and  sometimes  ignored)  position  that
the  South  Vietnamese  must  win  their  own  war  through  their  own  efforts:

Furnishing  a  U.S.  Combat  Unit  to  Secure  the  Saigon  Area.  It  is  the
universal  judgment  of  our  senior  people  in  Saigon,  with  which  we  concur,
that  this  action  would  now  have  serious  adverse  psychological  conse-
quences and  should  not  be  undertaken.

U.S.  Taking  Over  Command.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  U.S.  move
from  its  present  advisory  role  to  a  role  that  would  amount  in  practice  to
directive  command.  Again,  the  judgement  of  all  senior  people  in  Saigon,
with  which  we  concur,  is  that  the  possible  military  advantages  of  such
action  would  be  far  out-weighed  bv  its  adverse  psychological  impact.  It
would  cut  across  the  whole  basic  picture  of  the  Vietnamese  winning  their
own  war  and  lay  us  wide  open  to  hostile  propaganda  both  within  South
Vietnam  and  outside.  Moreover,  the  present  responsiveness  of  the  GVN
to  our  advice — although  it  has  not  yet  reduced  militarv  reaction  time —
makes  it  less  urgent.  At  the  same  time,  MAC^^  is  steadily  taking  actions  to
bring  U.S.  and  GVN  operating  staffs  closer  together  at  all  levels,  including
joint  operating  rooms  at  key  command  levels.

Thus,  it  was  stated  national  policy  that  the  critically  important  struggle  in
South  Vietnam  must  be  won  by  the  South  Vietnamese,  that  the  U.S.  would  do
all  within  its  power  to  help  arrest  and  reverse  a  deteriorating  situation,  and  that
plans  should  be  made  to  employ  graduated  overt  military  pressures  against  the
supporters  of  the  insurrection,  the  DRV.  This  was  the  principal  thrust  of
NSAM  288  even  though  a  sizeable  portion  of  the  document  was  devoted  to
programmatic  steps  which  GVN  and  the  U.S.  should  take  in  order  better  to
mobilize  South  Vietnam's  assets.  Specifically,  RVNAF  needed  to  be  increased
in  size  by  at  least  50,000  men,  reorganized,  and  provided  with  selected  items
of  modern  equipment.  These  programs  presaged  more  U.S.  advisors  because
there  would  be  more  RVNAF  units  to  advise,  but  there  was  no  mention  of
more  advisors  for  given  units  or  advisors  to  perform  new  functions.


462 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


3.  Increasing  Political  Instability  in  the  Provinces

The  dark  picture  painted  in  NSAM  288  in  March  had  become  even  darker
by  May  1964.  Secretary  McNamara  visited  Saigon  on  12  and  13  May  to  in-
quire into  progress  in  the  "oilspot"  national  pacification  program.  What  he
learned  could  scarcely  be  called  encouraging.  A  follow-on  conference  was
scheduled  for  1  June  in  Honolulu  and  the  planning  wheels  began  to  turn — or,
more  accurately,  the  wheels  began  to  churn — for  there  was  barely  two  weeks'
time  in  which  to  propose  and  coordinate  U.S.  actions  acceptable  to  the  GVN
which  might  reverse  the  downward  spiral  of  events,  and  "going  North"  was  not
yet  feasible  in  terms  of  domestic  U.S.  politics.

Illustrative  statistics  (the  same  which  Secretary  McNamara  saw)  give  the
tone  of  events  in  South  Vietnam.  In  an  effort  to  determine  exactly  how  many
rural  communities  even  existed — much  less  whose  control  they  were  under —
the  Department  of  Defense  had  earlier  initiated  an  aerial  photographic  survey
of  the  rural  areas  of  RVN.  Even  this  expensive  undertaking  left  great  factual
gaps.  In  Tay  Ninh  Province,  for  example,  photointerpreters  identified  39  for-
tified hamlets;  U.S.  reports  from  provincial  ofl[icials  claimed  that  there  were
106.  The  discrepancy  was  not  one  to  appeal  to  those  who  wished  to  base  policy
determinations  on  solid  facts.

Other  facts  were  more  easily  ascertainable.  Since  the  Diem  coup,  for  in-
stance, only  5  of  RVN's  42  provinces  had  not  experienced  a  change  in  Province
Chief.  Change  is,  of  course,  inescapable  in  the  aftermath  of  a  coup,  but  by  8
May  15  provinces  were  under  their  third  chief  since  1  November  1964,  7  had
their  fourth,  and  2  provinces  were  governed  by  the  fifth  oflficer  since  the  Diem
government  fell.  Instability  in  administration  was  accompanied  by  a  marked
GVN  decline  in  numbers  of  population  controlled  and  a  comparable  increase
in  VC  population  control.  These  trends  were  reflected  in  the  official  estimates
(themselves  suspect  of  being  overly  optimistic)  of  control  in  the  rural  villages:

COMPARISON,  NUMBER  OF  RURAL  VILLAGES  CONTROLLED

Sep  63  Apr  64

RVN  1682  1485

VC  709  866

Contested  139  187

Of  the  14  provinces  considered  critical  in  terms  of  location  and  population,  all
were  reported  by  their  advisors  to  be  in  ''critical""  condition.  The  prospects  in
10  of  these  were  judged  to  be  "poor."  Four  provinces  were  regarded  to  have
"fair"  prospects.  It  was  apparent  that  the  U.S.  could  not  depend  on  eventual
actions  against  DRV  to  save  the  dav  in  South  Vietnam.  By  the  time  such  ac-
tions were  politicallv  feasible  there  might  be  nothing  to  save.  It  was  time  to  take
some  further  direct  action  within  South  Vietnam  itself — and  to  take  it  quickly.
Increasing  U.S.  advisors  was  an  obvious  and  available  action.

4.  MACV's  Gradiialistic  Approach  to  Expansion

As  early  as  December  1963,  MACV  had  studied  the  desirability  of  extending
the  U.S.  advisory  effort  to  district  level  in  13  certain  key  districts,  mostly  around


The  Advisory  BiiUd-Up,  1961-1967  463


Saigon.  No  action  was  taken  at  that  time  but  the  proposal  was  revived  in  Febru-
ary and  implemented  during  late  March  1964.  Each  of  the  original  13  "key  dis-
tricts" was  assigned  one  Captain  and  one  noncommissioned  officer.  Of  the  orig-
inal 26  persons  selected  for  this  pilot  project,  21  were  newly  arrived  in  RVN.

This  gradualistic,  experimental  approach  to  expanding  the  advisory  effort
typified  the  method  preferred  both  by  the  military  and  civilian  agencies  in  Viet-
nam— although  for  somewhat  different  reasons.  MACV  was  concerned  with
the  experience  and  skill  levels  it  could  command  among  necessarily  lower  ranks
as  it  expanded  deeper  into  ARVN  and  the  political  (staffed  by  ARVN)  hier-
archy, about  increased  support  requirements,  and  about  increased  casualties.
USOM  claimed  that  its  operatives  could  work  effectively  at  the  "spigot"  end  of
the  aid  pipeline  only  where  the  local  administration  was  energetic  and  effective
and  where  some  modicum  of  security  had  already  been  provided.  USOM  had
severe  recruiting  difficulties,  too.  Secretary  McNamara  discovered  on  his  12-13
May  visit  to  Saigon  that  it  v/as  about  25  per  cent  understrength  and  that  ap-
proximately half  of  this  personnel  shortage  was  concentrated  in  the  expanding
rural  affairs  staff.

5. McNamara' s  Willingness  to  Approve  Expansion

Thus,  the  general  attitude  among  the  U.S.  agencies  in  Saigon  was  to  go
slowly,  to  avoid  the  danger,  as  it  was  frequently  expressed,  of  "strewing  Ameri-
cans all  over  the  countryside."  Secretary  McNamara  apparently  had  other
thoughts  after  his  May  visit  in  Saigon.  The  available  record  does  not  reffect  that
he  directed  an  expansion  of  the  advisory  effort — but  the  Joint  Staff  was  almost
immediately  hard  at  work  examining  which  of  several  levels  of  increase  would
be  most  desirable.  The  available  record  leaves  little  doubt  that  the  Secretary  of
Defense  wanted  it  made  clear  that  he  would  approve  any  reasonable  proposals
for  personnel,  materiel,  or  funds.  Those  sections  of  NSAM  288  which  dealt
with  recommendations  for  South  Vietnam  had  concentrated  on  programs
which  would  assist  GVN  to  mobilize  its  resources.  By  May  it  was  clear  that  the
hoped-for  actions  had  not  taken  effect.  The  obvious  conclusion — given
the  importance  which  the  U.S.  attached  to  success  in  South  Vietnam — was
that  additional  steps  must  be  taken  to  halt  the  deterioration  in  the  country-
side.


6. The  Initial  Proposals  and  Responses

The  initial  recorded  exchange  among  the  planners  occurred  when  COMUS-
MACV  was  asked  on  22  May  1964  to  "provide  an  input  to  a  JCS  study  then  in
progress  on  ".  .  .  encadrement  of  South  Vietnamese  Civil  Guard  and  Self  De-
fense Corps  with  U.S.  teams  along  lines  of  White  Star  teams  in  Laos,  with  objec-
tive of  making  these  units  as  effective  as  possible  in  Vietnamese  pacification
plan."  The  message  made  it  clear  that  the  JCS  was  examining  alternative  levels
of  increased  advisory  effort  (1,000,  2,000  and  3,000  personnel),  not  asking  //
the  advisory  effort  should  be  increased.  The  compressed  time  frame  available
for  prior  coordination  on  a  recommended  course  of  action  was  also  clear:
COMUSMACV  was  asked  to  provide  his  comments  on  the  draft  JCS  proposal
by  the  following  day  (23  May).  "Regret  circumstances  do  not  permit  more
time,"  the  message  stated.

The  reply  from  Saigon,  processed  through  CINCPAC,  adhered  to  the  estab-


464 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

lished  MACV  preference  to  undertake  new  departures  only  in  a  selective,  ex-
perimental way:

I  do  not  think  we  should  flood  RVN  with  number  of  personnel  you
mention.  Think  better  solution  is  to  do  [this]  on  selective  basis  starting
with  critical  districts  and  provinces  and  once  we  get  feel  of  problem  ex-
pand to  remainder  of  RVN  as  experience  dictates.

Then,  in  a  significant  passage,  the  reply  from  the  field  asked  in  blunt  language
just  what  the  intended  purpose  was  for  the  proposed  expansion  of  the  advisory
effort.  The  "White  Star  Teams"  used  in  Laos,  the  message  noted,  had  the  pur-
pose and  effect  of  establishing  U.S.  control  over  foreign  forces:

The  question  arises  as  to  whether  you  mean  encadrement  or  increase
of  "advisory"  effort.  Do  you  want  to  take  control  or  improve  the  perform-
ance of  CG  and  SDC  by  step-up  within  current  policy?

Although  this  direct  question  was  never  answered,  the  JCS*  initial  proposal
for  encadrement  was  quietly  dropped.  The  U.S.  might  wish  to  be  in  a  position
to  control  elements  or  all  of  RVNAF  but  it  would  not  consciously  follow  any
scheme  explicitly  aimed  at  such  control.  Instead,  the  JCS  countered  with  a  plan
for  six  Mobile  Training  Teams  in  each  province  backed  up  by  a  Training  Center
Team  and  a  small  Provincial  Training  Detachment.  This  proposal  would  put
an  additional  70  U.S.  training  advisors  in  each  selected  province  in  an  effort  to
improve  the  level  of  effectiveness  of  the  paramilitary  forces.  Its  recommendation
was  that  the  U.S.  military  advisory  effort  should  be  increased  by  1000  personnel,
enough  to  provide  this  new  dimension  of  advice  in  the  fourteen  critical  provinces
which  had  experienced  so  much  recent  instability.

This  JCS  proposal  for  Mobile  Training  Teams  for  the  RVNAF  paramilitary
forces  was  tied  to  an  explicit  statement  of  how  best  to  organize  this  effort  with-
out any  mention  of  how  much  influence  or  leverage  the  U.S.  would  or  could
exert  through  this  expanded  system.  The  problem  was  treated  as  one  in  the
development  of  technical  proficiency;  the  issue  of  the  extent  of  U.S.  control
was  largely  ignored — though  surely  not  forgotten:

Concept  of  US  Advisory  Effort

a.  General

( 1 )  An  underlying  principle  in  the  oil-spot  concept  is  accordance  of
maximum  flexibility  to  province  officials  in  solving  individual  province
problems  which  varv  widely  froin  province  to  province.  This  study  rec-
ognizes that  principle  and  outlines  a  plan  for  assignment  of  additional
US  instructor  and  training  resources  to  the  province  to  provide  the  train-
ing and  advice  needed  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  provincial
paramilitary  forces.

(2)  The  shortage  of  trained  personnel  is  acute  in  the  paramilitary
forces  because  of  the  nature  of  the  forces  themselves.  They  are  recruited
at  province  or  district  level  to  perform  military  tasks  in  those  same  re-
gions. While  the  CG  and  SDC  are  considered  full-time  troops,  many  of
the  individuals,  in  fact,  must  combine  earning  their  livelihood  with  military


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  465


duties.  Movement  of  these  people  long  distances  away  from  their  homes
to  training  centers  disrupts  their  lives,  creates  morale  problems  and  un-
doubtedly contributes  greatly  to  the  high  dessertion  rates  which  have  been
experienced.  It  appears  appropriate,  therefore,  to  bring  the  trainers  and
training  facilities  to  the  areas  where  the  paramilitary  forces  live  and  oper-
ate.

(3)  According  to  US  standards,  the  military  training  needs  of  the
Vietnamese  paramilitary  are  extremely  modest.  There  is  no  requirement
for  elaborated  technical  schools  or  complex  instructional  courses.  In-
stead, the  Vietnamese  paramilitary  require  military  schooling  at  the
most  basic  levels,  with  emphasis  on  basic  infantry  weapons  and  small
unit  tactics.  Such  instruction  would  be  provided  by  the  additional  num-
bers of  US  military  personnel.

b.  Organization  for  Advisory  Effort.  The  training  deficiencies  and  prob-
lems of  the  paramilitary  are  as  many  and  varied  as  the  number  of  prov-
inces and  districts  in  which  those  forces  operate.  Needs  in  Quang  Ngai,
for  example,  may  be  extremely  different  from  those  in  Dinh  Tuong.  With-
in the  provinces,  each  district  also  may  have  different  training  needs.  The
reasonable  method  of  approaching  this  problem,  then,  appears  to  be
establishment  of  highly  flexible  training  detachments  operating  under
supervision  at  province  level,  which  can  provide  local  mobile  training
teams,  small  training  centers,  and  temporary  encadrement  for  the  smaller
paramilitar)'  units  when  dictated  by  a  specific  situation.

7. MACV  Focuses  on  Operations  Rather  Than  Training

COMUSMACV  and  CINCPAC  were  asked  to  comment  within  two  days  on
this  study  which  had  been  ".  .  .  considered  at  the  highest  levels,  where  initial
reaction  has  been  favorable."  Their  replies,  in  which  the  theater  commander
supported  his  nominal  subordinate  in  Saigon,  contested  the  value  of  U.S. -con-
ducted training  for  RVNAF  paramilitary  forces,  proposed  that  advisors  be  used
at  the  district  level  to  assist  in  operations,  accepted  the  1,000-man  magnitude,
but  stretched  out  the  target  date  18  months — thereby  proposing  a  gradualistic
approach  without  candidly  saying  so.  General  Harkins  devoted  most  of  his  reply
to  the  question  of  training  teams:

A.  A  basic  premise  of  the  study  is  that  training  at  the  established  cen-
ters is  at  the  root  of  many  morale  and  desertion  problems.  This  premise  is
incorrect  as  regards  the  Civil  Guard  (Regional  Forces).  It  is  in  part
true  with  respect  to  SDC  (Popular  Forces);  but  the  underlying  cause
thereof — lack  of  per  diem — is  in  the  process  of  being  removed  by  the  new
allowances  that  are  about  to  be  promulgated.  This  is  not  to  say  there  are
not  formidable  morale  problems  (one  manifestation  of  which  is  desertion)
within  both  categories  of  forces.  These  need  to  be  and  are  being  tackled.
However,  basic  point  is  that  they  do  not  stem  from  the  present  system  of
training.

B.  Mobile  training  teams  have  been  organized  under  special  circum-
stances when  units  have  had  prior  combat  experience  and/or  as  an  expe-
dient measure  only.  Experience  has  proved  that  units  trained  by  such
teams  have  subsequently  required  formal  training  at  an  established  train-
ing center  where  proper  facilities  are  available.  The  Civil  Guard  and  Self
Defense  Corps  had  many  units  trained  by  mobile  training  teams  in  1962


466 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


in  order  to  provide  an  immediate  operational  force.  Almost  all  of  these
units  have  since  been  retrained  in  the  complete  unit  poi  [program  of  in-
struction] because  it  was  determined  that  the  mobile  team  training  was
inadequate.  The  mobile  training  teams  consisted  of  U.S.  personnel  and
Vietnamese  interpreters.

C.  While  the  training  requirements  of  paramilitary  forces  are  relatively
modest  by  U.S.  standards,  an  adequate  poi  must  be  backed  up  by  firing
ranges,  training  areas,  class  rooms,  training  aids  and  other  facilities.  These
requirements  are  met  by  the  regional  and  popular  forces  training  centers.
There  are  five  regional  force  unit  training  centers;  nine  regional  force/
popular  force  leader  training  centers;  and  thirty-seven  popular  force  train-
ing centers.  They  are  properly  distributed  geographically;  they  are  staffed
with  qualified  Vietnamese  instructors;  and  can  be  expanded,  with  little  dif-
ficulty to  support  programmed  force  increase.  Some  augmentation  of  the
U.S.  advisory  element  at  these  several  centers  is  desirable,  on  a  selected
basis.

D.  The  concept  of  U.S.  personnel  conducting  training  for  the  para-
military forces  on  either  a  training  center  or  MTT  basis  (and  especially  the
latter)  is  not  realistic.

(1)  The  Vietnamese  have  an  adequate  training  base  with  experienced
instructors;  the  latter  are  doing  a  satisfactory  job.  For  the  U.S.  to  as-
sume the  instructional  effort,  vice  the  Vietnamese,  would  generate  seri-
ous morale  problems  and  would  probably  be  unacceptable.

(2)  The  interpreter  support  requirements  would  be  prohibitive.

(3)  Previous  experience  (sub-paragraph  B  above)  of  using  U.S.  ad-
visors as  instructors  was  unsuccessful  due  to  the  inabilitv  to  communicate.
2.  As  indicated  above,  the  current  method  of  training  both  the  regional

and  popular  forces  is  adequate,  although  we  do  have  under  review  the
length  and  content  of  the  training.  Where  the  U.S.  can  make  its  best  con-
tribution to  the  paramilitary  forces  effectiveness  is  in  the  area  of  opera-
tions. Our  formula,  discussed  in  23  May  telecon  on  this  subject,  is  to  in-
crease greatly  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  at  the  district  level.  Therefore,
strongly  urge  that  you  support  our  position  that  approximately  1000  ad-
visors, in  the  general  proportion  of  one  oflftcer  to  three  NCO's  be  author-
ized as  district  detachments,  with  the  precise  composition  and  deployment
of  said  teams  left  to  the  determination  of  COMUSMACV.


CINCPAC  informed  the  JCS  that  he  agreed  with  COMUSMACV's  arguments
and  quoted  the  telecon  referred  to  above  to  explain  the  course  of  action  pre-
ferred by  the  military  commanders  in  the  field:

1 .  Our  comment  is  based  on  CG  SDC  reorganization  concept  of  7  May
which  includes  elimination  CG  Bn  Hq  in  provinces  and  establishment  90
man  sector  Hq  in  lieu  thereof  with  TAC  CP  capability,  and  sub-sector  Hq
16  men  at  each  239  districts.  This  is  expected  to  be  accomplished  in  two
to  three  months.

2.  Recommend  use  of  one  team  composed  of  mature  company  grade
officer  and  other  specialist  as  you  suggest  (Wpns  Demo,  Commo  Med)
per  district.

3.  Proposal  para  2  represents  end  requirement  for  239  teams,  totaling
239  officers.  717  enlisted  spec  aggregate  956  personnel,  by  end  calendar
year  65.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  467


4.  MACV  current  plans  call  for  1  officer  and  1  NCO  at  116  districts
by  June  65.  Requisitions  have  been  submitted  for  100  of  these  by  end  CY
64.  Two  man  detachments  now  assigned  to  13  districts.

5.  Assume  GVN  will  agree  to  use  US  teams  at  district  which  represent
reasonable  security  risk.  At  present  time  approx  40  of  239  districts  are  not
sufficiently  secure  to  enable  use  of  US  advisors.

8.  The  JCS  Alternative  Programs

The  JCS,  given  the  very  few  days  remaining  until  Secretary  McNamara  was
to  meet  in  Honolulu  with  COMUSMACV  and  Ambassador  Lodge  did  not  at-
tempt to  reconcile  the  time-phasing  and  eventual  size  of  the  proposed  advisory
effort  at  district  level.  Rather,  it  submitted  to  the  Secretary,  just  prior  to  his  de-
parture for  the  conference,  two  separate  memoranda:  One  laid  out  a  prospec-
tive program  for  district  advisors  throughout  RVN;  the  other  outlined  a  pilot
program  at  the  district  level.  The  purpose  of  both  outline  advisory  efforts  was  the
same — "improving  the  effectiveness  of  these  paramilitarv  units  in  the  Vietnamx-
ese  pacification  plan" — but  the  rate  of  advisor  buildup  differed.

In  the  proposed  "pilot  program,"  for  instance,  the  concept  envisaged  the
phased  establishment  of  teams  in  49  districts  of  seven  key  provinces  during  a
six-month  period.  This  would  require  approximately  300  additional  advisors.
The  broader  program  called  for  an  additional  1,000  advisory  personnel,  phased
over  a  period  of  l-lVi  years,  to  cover  all  239  districts  by  the  end  of  CY  1965.
The  more  comprehensive  program  estimated  that  63  districts  (compared  to
49  districts  in  the  "pilot  program")  would  be  manned  by  the  end  of  CY  1964.
Both  were  represented  as  suitable  bases  for  the  Secretary's  impending  discussions
in  Honolulu.  Both  were  hurriedly  drawn  up  alternative  schemes  for  expanding
the  advisory  effort  to  district  level.  Both,  moreover,  incorporated  the  arguments
of  COMUSMACV:  concentration  on  operations  rather  than  training  and  a
time-phased  buildup  with  due  attention  to  existing  security  conditions  and  in-
terpreter availability.  The  point  was  also  made  that  the  total  number  of  ad-
ditional personnel  would  necessarily  include  a  support  slice  of  approximately
35%.

One  other  question  of  expansion  was  addressed  before  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense's conference  in  Honolulu  in  June.  The  JCS  studied  the  possibility,  also
in  late  May,  of  extending  the  advisory  effort  to  regular  ARVN  units  at  the  com-
pany level.  The  JCS  agreed  with  the  COMUSMaVv  and  CINCPAC  reasoning
that  such  an  extension  would  be  undesirable  because  it  would  lead  to  greatly
increased  U.S.  casualties,  would  be  unsupportable  in  terms  of  necessary  lan-
guage training  (one  year  to  18  months  necessary  to  provide  500  "bilingual"
advisors),  and  would  meet  resistance  from  ARVN  commanders  faced  with
strange  new  relationships  and  potential  loss  of  face.

9.  MACV's  Preferred  A pproach  Accepted

The  prevailing  military  advice,  then,  when  the  Secretary  met  on  1  June  with
the  principal  U.S.  managers  of  the  Vietnamese  effort,  was  that  it  was  desirable
to  expand  the  advisory  effort  to  district  level  on  a  careful  basis  in  order  to  pro-
mote better  effectiveness  in  the  paramilitary  forces  engaged  in  pacification  ac-
tivities, but  that  U.S.  advisors  should  not  be  extended  to  company  level  in  the


468 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

regular  forces.  The  available  record  does  not  make  clear  the  exact  positions  and
arguments  put  forward  at  Honolulu.  What  is  clear  is  that  it  was  decided,  follow-
ing basically  the  revised  estimates  proposed  by  COMUSMACV.  to  expand  the
advisory  effort  to  district  level  at  some  rate  (to  be  worked  out  later  in  detail)
and  to  increase  the  size  of  battalion-level  advisory  groups  bv  two  noncommis-
sioned officers  in  infantry  battalions  and  cavalry  troops  and  bv  one  commis-
sioned and  two  noncommissioned  officers  in  artillerv  battalions.  The  acknowl-
edged effect  of  the  latter  decision  was  to  make  company-level  advisory  teams
available  on  an  ad  hoc  basis  without  assigning  them  on  a  permanent  basis.  It
is  unclear  how  this  scheme  solved  the  previous  reservations  relative  to  language
training,  higher  casualties,  and  Vietnamese  sensibilities.  A  likelv  explanation
is  that  MACV  was  after  a  new  commander.  General  Westmoreland,  who  was
more  willing  to  expand  the  advisory  effort  and  less  inclined  to  cite  the  poten-
tial disadvantages  of  a  larger  American  presence.  General  Harkins  had  alreadv
returned  to  the  United  States  to  receive  the  Distinguished  Service  Medal  in  a
ceremony  on  24  June  and,  at  the  request  of  President  Johnson,  remained  in
the  U.S.  until  he  retired.

At  any  rate,  it  was  a  new  COMUSMACV  who  cabled  on  25  June  his  pro-
posals for  the  buildup  discussed  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  in  Honolulu.  In
sum,  he  asked  for  900  additional  advisors  for  battalions  and  districts,  suggested
a  small  increase  at  province  level,  and  noted  that  "significant"  numbers  of  per-
sonnel would  be  needed  for  administrative  and  logistical  support  of  the  new
advisors.  He  also  suggested,  in  the  emphasized  portion  of  the  message  quoted
below,  that  many  of  the  district  advisorv  teams  could  complete  their  work
and  be  moved  to  new  areas  for  pacification  within  a  year:

1 .  Augmentation  of  current  US  Advisory  detachments  at  the  battalion
level  and  further  extension  of  the  advisorv  eft'ort  at  the  district  level  are
necessary  now  to  influence  the  successful  planning  and  execution  of  the
National  Pacification  Plan.  These  additions  to  the  currentlv  authorized  ad-
visory detachments  have  been  discussed  with  and  agreed  to  by  GVN.  and
will  enable  us  to  place  advisors  at  the  lowest  level,  as  needed,  in  order  to
insure  that  all  possible  actions  are  properlv  coordinated.  .  .  .  Extension
of  US  Advisory  eft'ort  to  the  districts  as  an  initial  step  toward  intensifying
the  Pacification  Program  at  the  lowest  level  is  essential.  This  will  insure
supervision  and  coordination  in  the  employment  of  paramilitary  forces
and  a  general  reinforcement  of  the  pacification  effort  at  district  level.
Initially,  teams  of  two  (2)  officers  and  three  (3)  enlisted  men  [one  (1)
of  whom  will  be  a  radio  operator]  be  placed  in  the  fortv-five  (45)  districts
of  the  eight  (8)  prioritv  provinces.  In  ten  of  these  districts,  and  in  three  (3)
districts  of  two  other  provinces,  a  limited  effort  is  now  being  made  by  dis-
trict teams  of  one  (1)  officer  and  one  (1)  enlisted  man;  these  teams  will
be  increased  to  full  strength  district  teams.  In  the  provinces  outside  of  the
eight  top  prioritv  provinces  teams  will  be  placed  in  another  sixty-eight  (68)
districts.  Starting  1  Jan  65  it  is  envisaged  that  an  additional  fifty  (50)  teams
can  be  placed,  and  that  bv  1  Jul  65  teams  from  the  original  districts  can
be  placed  into  the  remaining  districts  in  SVN.  This  extension  of  US  Advisory
efiort  to  the  district  level  must  be  conducted  on  a  phased  basis  with  actual
composition  and  emplovment  as  determined  bv  COMUSMACV.  Two  (2)
ol^cers  and  three  (3)  enlisted  men  are  considered  as  average  team  strengths
for  planning  purposes.  .  .  .


The  Advisory  Biiild-Up.  1961-1967


469


2.  RECAPITULATION  OF  REQUIREMENTS


Capts  Lts  E6

E5,  4

123  Inf  Bns  (Incl  4  Marine)

123

123

29  Arty  Bns  (Incl  1  Marine)

29

58

14  Ml  13  Troops,  Armd  CA  Sqdns

14

14

45  District  Adv  Teams  (Priority  province)

90

90

45

68  District  Adv  Teams  (Other  provinces)

136

136

68

TOTAL,  adjusted  for  13  districts  teams  now

255

363

308

in  place,  900  (242  officers;  658  enlisted).

3.  While  this  message  deals  onh'  with  the

increased

I  advisorv  effort  at

e  battalion  and  district  levels  consideration

is  also

being  given

to  in-

creases  at  sector  level,  also  discussed  at  Honolulu.  Those  recommendations
which  will  be  submitted  separatelv  will  not  approach  the  magnitude  of  the
increases  recommended  in  this  message  for  battalion  and  district
levels.  .  .  .

5.  Administrative  and  logistical  support  personnel  and  equipment  re-
quirements will  be  studied  separatelv.  From  our  earlier  studies  it  is  ap-
parent that  requirements  will  be  significant.

6.  An  increase  of  approximatelv  eighty  (80)  US  Naval  Advisors  will  also
be  recommended.  Chief  US  Naval  Advisory  Group,  in  coordination  with
CNO  VNN,  has  identified  areas  in  need  of  additional  ad\  isor\-  effort.  I  con-
cur in  the  need  and  will  support  recommendation  to  be  submitted  sep-
aratelv.


10. Unresolved  Issues:  Speed  and  Discretionaty  Authority

The  decision  to  increase  the  advisorv  effort  in  the  magnitude  and  fashion  just
cited  had  alreadv  been  made  in  effect.  It  was  necessarv,  however,  for  the  Secre-
tar}-  or  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  personallv  to  approve  every  manpower
space  for  MACV  or  MAAG  Vietnam — not  because  such  decisions  could  not  be
delegated  but  because  the  Secretarv  chose  to  reser\e  them  to  himself.  The
questions  which  remained  were,  first,  how  much  freedom  to  adjust  numbers  to
situations  fa  discretionary  authoritv  COMUSMAC\'  had  consistently  requested)
would  be  permitted  and.  second,  the  rate  at  which  the  agreed  expansion  would
take  place.  There  could  have  been  other  questions,  of  course:  should  the  district
advisory  effort  spread  in  close  seographic  relation  to  the  pacification  plan  or
follow  some  other  scheme:  should  the  advisors  be  conscious  agents  to  increase
U.S.  leverage  or  essentiallv  technical-tactical  assistants  to  their  counterparts:
how  deeply  involved  should  ad\isors  become  in  local  political  administration?
There  is  no  indication  that  these  and  other  related  questions  of  the  advisors'
role  were  brought  "up  the  tape"'  for  examination.  The  principal  issue  was  simply
how  quickly  the\-  should  be  brought  into  South  Vietnam  and  at  what  level  dis-
cretionary authoritv  w^ould  be  granted.

The  latter  question  was  settled  bv  default.  MAC\"s  proposed  Joint  Table  of
Distribution  (JTD)  of  15  Mav  1964,  replete  with  errors  and  omissions  and
antedating  the  decision  to  expand  the  advisor}  effort,  became  the  base  line  for


470 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

authorizations  to  expand.  Nobody  in  the  game  seemed  quite  able  to  keep  the
detailed  numbers  straight.  OSD  came  quickly  to  focus  on  the  total  authoriza-
tion for  U.S.  personnel  in  Vietnam  and,  as  the  papers  in  the  Secretary's  files
demonstrate,  found  itself  pencilling  new  numbers  in  eyen  final  draft  copies
which  had  undergone  several  checks  and  redrafts.  The  product  of  this  concen-
tration on  minutiae  at  high  Washington  levels  was  almost  complete  freedom  of
employment  in  the  field.  The  Washington  policymakers  asked  how  many  men
were  authorized  in  various  activities  and  how  many  were  assigned.  There  is  no
evidence  that,  once  the  decision  was  made  to  establish  district  advisory  teams,
these  same  policymakers  probed  into  priorities  of  employment  or  the  roles  of
these  advisors.

The  rate  of  the  build-up  was  a  much  more  complicated  matter,  not  because
of  the  additional  battalion  advisors  and  the  new^  district  advisors  but  because
the  numbers  represented  solely  by  the  additional  advisors  quickly  became  a  rel-
atively small  percentage  of  the  total  U.S.  build-up — all  of  which  was  justified  as
contributing  to  the  GVN  pacification  plan  and  a  sizeable  portion  of  which  was
specifically  earmarked  to  provide  administrative  and  logistical  support  to  the
newly  arriving  advisors.  By  mid-July  COMUSMACV  was  recommending  4200
personnel  in  addition  to  the  926  battalion  and  district  advisors,  at  least  two
more  helicopter  companies,  one  Caribou  company,  and  numerous  major
items  of  equipment  as  part  of  the  required  build-up.  The  increased  advisory
f^ffort  was  identified  as  the  cause  of  this  larize  increase:

The  increases  envisaged  .  .  .  will  provide  for  the  extension  and  rein-
forcement of  the  advisory  eftort  at  the  combat  unit  level  and,  concurrently,
a  major  extension  and  reinforcement  of  the  advisory  eftort  at  the  district
level  in  order  to  improve  and  accelerate  pacification  operations.  That
extension  and  augmentation  of  etTort  has  an  immediate  impact  upon  the
administrati\e  and  logistical  support  base.  In  a  sense  the  addition  of  ad-
visors in  this  quantity  becomes  the  "straw  that  broke  the  camel's  back"  to
an  already  overburdened  support  base.

11. Secretarial  Pressure  for  a  Speed-Up

The  Secretary  of  Defense  and  JCS  met  on  20  Juh  to  discuss  these  require-
ments. The  JCS  supported  COMUSMACV.  Secretary  McNamara  had  no  argu-
ment with  the  levels  of  men  and  equipment  requested;  his  question  was  why
the\'  could  not  be  provided  more  quickh  than  indicated  by  the  time-phasing  in
General  Westmoreland's  detailed  breakdown.  COMUSMACV  had  asked  for  al-
most 4200  personnel  bv  1  December  1904  and  the  balance  (comprising  only
Special  Forces  units)  of  the  4772  total  increase  bN'  I  February  1965.  Secretary
McNamara  asked  the  JCS  to  study  the  feasibility  of  accelerating  the  build-up
so  that  it  would  be  completed  b\  30  September.  The  JCS  replied  that  the  ad-
visory personnel  could  be  made  available  this  quickly  but  that  several  support
units — particularly  aviation  units — could  not  reach  South  Vietnam  by  30  Sep-
tember without  causing  extreme  difticulties  and  the  degradation  of  tests  of  the
airmobile  concept  then  in  progress.  The  Secretar\  of  Defense  directed  on  7
August  that  the  accelerated  deployment,  except  for  certain  critical  aviation
items  and  jeeps,  be  completed  bv  the  end  of  September.  He  further  directed
that  COMUSMACV  be  queried  as  to  his  ability  to  absorb  these  personnel  and
units  by  that  date.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  All


General  Westmoreland's  reply  stated  that  he  could  not  reasonably  absorb
this  build-up  in  the  time  desired  by  Secretary  McNamara.  To  do  so,  he  said,
would  generate  an  unorderly  situation  with  respect  to  support  facilities  and  an
undesirable  hump  in  personnel  rotation.  The  proposed  acceleration  would  not,
moreover,  satisfy  the  desired  standards  of  advisor  training  or  dovetail  with  the
planned  expansion  of  the  advisory  effort:

The  required  training  'schooling  of  Bn  ^District  advisors  will  be  further
sacrificed  under  the  proposed  compression.  A  two  week  in-country  orien-
tation is  being  established  to  handle  the  Sep-Oct  increments  which  will  not
receive  CONUS  schooling  prior  to  arrival.  Any  further  compression  would
create  a  requirement  for  in-country  training  which  is  beyond  our  capa-
bility.

Districts  must  be  able  to  accept  advisors  based  on  their  status  of  pacifi-
cation. The  present  scheduling  of  district  advisors  is  phased  with  the
pacification  plan  and  projected  to  coincide  with  its  progress.  .  .  .

In  summary,  the  compression  of  personnel  and  units  would  overload
our  existing  facilities  and  create  administrative  problems  beyond  our  ca-
pacity to  handle  in  an  orderly  manner.  COMUSMACV  has  discussed  with
Amb.  Taylor  who  concurs.

12. MACV's  Preference  Upheld  Again

Faced  with  this  reply  from  the  individual  responsible  for  managing  the  U.S.
contribution  to  the  advisory  and  support  effort,  Secretary  McNamara  cancelled
the  accelerated  deployment.  The  military  services  were  instructed  to  deploy  per-
sonnel and  units  to  South  Vietnam  in  accordance  with  General  Westmore-
land's initial  recommendation  forwarded  to  Washington  a  month  earlier,  in  mid-
July.

The  effect  of  this  sequence  of  decisions  stretching  from  mid-May  to  mid-
August  1964  was  to  increase  the  advisory  effort  by  over  1000  personnel:


District  Advisors:  553

Battalion  Advisors:  350

Naval  (and  Marine)  Advisory  Group:  82

Air  Force  Advisory  Group:  80

TOTAL  1065


This  expansion,  and  the  rate  at  which  it  was  to  proceed,  was  the  product  of
what  may  be  termed  "tacit  bargaining"  between  Washington  and  Saigon.
Washington  typically  assumed  the  initiative  in  proposing  increases  and  in  rec-
ommending that  they  be  accomplished  as  quickly  as  possible.  The  dominant
concern  was  the  fear  that  the  countrvside  was  being  lost  to  the  VC  and  that  the
impending  U.S.  moves  to  exert  direct  militarv  pressure  against  DRV  might
come  too  late  unless  the  pacification  program  could  be  vitalized.  U.S.  officials
in  Saigon  tended  to  prefer  to  expand  gradually  and  to  insure  that  adequate
support  facilities  were  in  place  before  additional  advisors  were  deployed  to  the
field.  The  product  of  desires  driven  by  political  awareness  of  impending  failure,
on  one  hand,  and  desires  driven  by  managerial  awareness  of  operational  con-


472 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

ditions,  on  the  other,  was  an  advisory  increase  almost  precisely  of  the  magni-
tude and  rate  preferred  by  the  managers  in  the  field.

13. Events  Overtake  Implementation  of  the  Expansion

The  really  important  points  to  be  noted,  however,  do  not  concern  the  rela-
tive influence  of  General  Westmoreland,  Secretary  McNamara,  the  ICS,  or
other  participants  in  determining  the  size  and  rate  of  this  buildup.  Rather,  the
important  points  are,  first,  that  the  carefully  studied  decisions  did  not  address
some  central  issues  and,  second,  that  events  acted  to  overtake  the  decisions
which  were  made.  The  policymakers  did  not  really  examine  how  district  and
additional  battalion  advisors  would  improve  the  execution  of  the  pacification
plan:  they  simply  assumed  that  a  greater  U.S.  presence  would  produce  bene-
ficial efi'ects.  The  basis  for  operational  advisors  for  the  paramilitary  forces  was,
quite  simply,  COMUSMACV's  reasoned  elaboration  of  the  disutilitv  of  training
advisors.  There  was  no  complementary  assessment  of  the  usefulness  of  opera-
tional advisors.  It  was  necessary  to  do  something  in  South  Vietnam  to  try  to
reverse  a  clearly  deteriorating  position.  The  provision  of  more  advisors  came
very  close  to  being  a  reflexive  response  to  this  situation.

The  overall  magnitude  of  the  advisory  increase  bears  directlv  on  the  second
major  point,  in  which  events  in  RVN  overtook  the  new  U.S.  response.  This  is
particularly  true  in  the  instance  of  the  new  dimension  in  the  advisory  effort,
the  provision  of  advisory  teams  at  the  district  (subsector)  level.  Thirteen  teams
of  one  oflicer  and  one  noncommissioned  officer  had  been  deployed  in  critical
districts,  it  will  be  recalled,  in  March  1964.  The  final  August  decisions  to  make
553  district  advisors  available  in  RVN  by  1  December  was  designed  to  provide
for  a  larger  team  (2  oflRcers,  3  EM)  for  each  of  113  of  the  total  239  districts.
The  MACV  plan,  then,  was  to  provide  U.S.  military  advisors  only  to  about
one-half  of  the  total  number  of  districts  in  RVN.

By  the  end  of  CY  1964  all  113  teams  were  actuallv  deployed.  Their  total
strength  at  that  time  was  532  as  against  the  authorized  total  strength  of  565.*
By  January  1965  the  number  of  district  advisors  assigned  exceeded  the  number
authorized.  These  teams  were  deployed,  it  will  be  recalled,  in  the  expectation
that  by  some  time  in  1965  a  substantial  number  of  them  would  have  worked
themselves  out  of  a  job  and  be  available  for  reassignment  to  new  areas.  This
expectation  was,  to  put  it  mildly,  not  validated  bv  events.

In  February  1965,  roughly  a  month  after  the  limited  expansion  to  district
advisors  had  been  completed,  the  Khanh  government  was  replaced  by  the  Quat
regime.  Over  a  vear  of  U.S.  eft'ort  to  bring  about  political  stability  within  the
GVN  seemed  to  have  been  fruitlessly  wasted.  The  U.S.  began  the  sustained
bombing  campaign  against  North  Vietnam.  ROLLING  THUNDER,  on  26
February.  Shortlv  thereafter,  two  Marine  Battalion  Landing  Teams  (BLTs)  were
landed  at  Da  Nang  for  air  base  securitv.  These  measures  presaged  a  growing
U.S.  material  commitment:  the  trend  was  heightened  by  ARVN's  performance
later  in  the  spring  of  1965.

During  Mav  and  June  ARVN  suftered  a  series  of  near  catastrophic  defeats
that  were  instrumental  in  deciding  the  Johnson  Administration  to  act  on  Gen-

*  The  discrepancy  between  the  553  additional  authorization  and  the  total  district  ad-
visor authorization  of  565  is  accounted  for  bv  the  transfer  of  some  of  the  spaces  in-
volved in  the  initial  experimental  program  at  district  level.  565  is  the  correct  total —
113  teams  of  5  men  each.


The  Advisory  Bidld-Up,  1961-1967  473


eral  Westmoreland's  recommendation  for  a  greatly  expanded  U.S.  ground  com-
bat role  in  the  war.  On  11  May,  the  Viet  Cong  attacked  and  overran  Song  Be,
the  capital  of  Phuoc  Long  Province,  and  a  U.S.  advisory  compound  in  the
city  with  more  than  a  regiment  of  troops.  Both  the  U.S.  and  Vietnamese  took
heavy  casualties.  Before  the  end  of  the  month,  a  VC  force  of  undetermined
size  ambushed  and  decimated  the  ARVN  51st  Regiment  near  the  small  outpost
of  Ba  Gia  a  few  kilometers  west  of  Quang  Ngai  City  in  I  Corps.  The  ARVN
commander  in  the  area  immediately  rushed  reinforcements  to  the  battle  scene
only  to  have  them  become  victims  of  a  second  ambush.  The  battle  dragged  on
for  several  days,  but  ended  in  a  total  defeat  for  ARVN.  Two  battalions  were
completely  decimated,  but  more  importantly,  the  ARVN  senior  commanders
on  the  scene  had  displayed  tactical  stupidity  and  cowardice.  With  a  crisis  of
confidence  in  leadership  clearly  developing  within  the  armed  forces,  the  very
real  possibility  of  a  complete  ARVN  collapse  could  not  be  excluded.  COMUS-
MACV  summarized  the  situation  in  his  7  June  cable  to  CINCPAC:

ARVN  forces  .  .  .  are  already  experiencing  difficulty  in  coping  with  this
increased  VC  capability.  Desertion  rates  are  inordinately  high.  Battle  losses
have  been  higher  than  expected;  in  fact,  four  ARVN  battalions  have  been
rendered  ineffective  by  VC  action  in  the  I  and  II  Corps  zones.  Therefore,
effective  fighting  strength  of  many  infantry  and  ranger  battalions  is  un-
acceptably  low.  As  a  result,  ARVN  troops  are  beginning  to  show  signs  of
reluctance  to  assume  the  offensive  and  in  some  cases  their  steadfastness
under  fire  is  coming  into  doubt.

If  anything,  Westmoreland's  assessment  may  have  been  too  generous.  The  next
week  the  Viet  Cong  launched  an  attack  on  the  new  Special  Forces  camp  and
adjoining  district  headquarters  at  Dong  Zoai  on  the  northwest  corner  of  War
Zone  D.  ARVN  forces  were  committed  piecemeal  to  the  engagement  and
successively  chewed  up  by  more  than  two  regiments  of  enemy  troops.  The  bat-
tle lasted  for  five  days  and  marked  some  of  the  bitterest  fighting  of  the  war  to
that  date.  The  VC  summer  offensive  continued  unabated  through  June  and  July.
On  25  June,  the  long  expected  offensive  in  the  central  highlands  began  when  a
district  headquarters  at  Tou  Morong  in  Kontum  Province  was  overrun,  report-
edly by  an  NVA  regiment  reinforced  with  local  guerrillas.  Other  remote  district
capitals  came  under  attack  in  the  following  weeks  and  by  7  July  a  total  of  six
had  been  abandoned  or  overrun.

Casualties  soared  on  both  sides;  ARVN  alone  s'lstained  1,672  in  the  second
week  of  June.  But  the  important  factor  was  the  dangerous  degradation  of  ARVN
unit  integrity.  By  the  end  of  May,  the  heaw  fighting  had  rendered  two  ARVN
regiments  and  three  battalions  combat  ineftective  by  MACV  ratings.  By  26
June,  MACV  was  forced  to  rate  5  ARVN  regiments  and  9  separate  battalions
ineffective.  Losses  were  so  high  that  in  July,  11  of  15  ARVN  training  battalions
had  to  be  temporarily  disorganized  to  provide  fillers  for  the  line  units.  It  was
this  major  degradation  of  unit  effectiveness  that  evoked  the  alarm  and  sense  of
crisis  in  Saigon  and  Washington  and  constituted  the  seemingly  incontestable
arguments  in  favor  of  substantial  American  forces.  ARVN  units  were  defeated
in  most  cases  by  their  own  tactical  ineptness,  cowardice,  and  lack  of  leadership
rather  than  by  overall  weight  of  numbers  or  inferiority  of  firepower.  The  U.S.
advisory  effort  had  sought  to  strengthen  precisely  these  military  intangibles,  in
addition  to  equipping,  training  and  generally  supporting  ARVTsI  troops.  These
skills  and  qualities  are,  of  course,  difficult  to  teach  or  impart,  but  a  successful


474 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

advisory  effort  must  at  some  point  produce  a  force  capable  of  engaging  the  en-
emy and  defeating  him  when  the  ratios  of  strength  and  firepower  are  roughly
equal.

Far  from  finding  many  of  its  advisory  teams  finishing  their  task  and  moving
on  to  new  areas  or  to  new  units,  the  U.S.  found  itself  in  mid-1965  beginning
the  commitment  of  major  ground  forces  to  South  Vietnam.  The  deployment  of
these  forces  marked  the  end  of  a  major  phase  in  "advisory  warfare."'  From
this  time  forward  the  role  of  U.S.  military  and  political-military  advisors  would
be  determined  and  practiced  in  a  radically  changed  environment.

C. U.S.  COMBAT  FORCES  AND  THE
POSSIBILITY  OF  NEW  RELATIONSHIPS  (1965)

1. The  Abortive  Limited  Expansion  of  ARVN

During  the  spring  of  1965  General  Westmoreland's  staff  prepared  a  full-blown
"Commander's  Estimate  of  the  Situation."'  The  estimate,  delivered  to  Washing-
ton at  the  beginning  of  April,  examined  three  courses  of  action  for  dealing  with
the  crisis  in  South  Vietnam.  Among  these  was  an  accelerated  RVNAF  build-up.

Even  by  accelerating  the  rate  of  ARVN  expansion,  COMUSMACV  con-
cluded, the  ratio  of  ARVN  to  VC  battalions  would  decline  by  the  end  of  1965
from  1.7:1  to  1.6:1.  General  Westmoreland  rejected  this  alternative  on  the
grounds  that  it  could  not  prevent  a  VC  victory.  It  would  take  too  long  to  ac-
complish the  build-up  and  there  was  little  assurance  that  ARVN  performance
would  match  that  of  a  constantly  improving  enemy.  (His  lack  of  confidence  in
ARVN  is  further  reflected  in  his  argument  for  U.S.  forces,  in  which  he  estimated
that  one  U.S.  Army  battalion  is  the  fighting  equivalent  of  two  ARVN  battalions
and  one  Marine  BLT  the  equivalent  of  three  ARVN  battalions.)

These  reservations  notwithstanding,  Westmoreland  had  requested  authoriza-
tion on  20  March  to  implement  the  Alternative  2  RVNAF  strength  increases
proposed  by  him  the  previous  November.  After  the  April  1-2  conference  in
Washington  and  a  review  of  the  "Commander's  Estimate,"  the  JCS  rec-
ommended approval  and  Secretary  McNamara  agreed  on  12  April  to  expand
RVNAF  by  an  additional  17.247  spaces.  An  additional  160  U.S.  advisors  were
approved  at  the  same  time.  In  late  May,  the  JCS  asked  the  Secretary  of  Defense
to  authorize  MAP  support  for  another  2,369  ARVN  spaces  to  fatten  out  division
bases  for  the  eventual  creation  of  a  tenth  ARVN  division  out  of  existing  separate
regiments.  This  request  was  approved  on  4  June.

Thus,  while  it  was  decided  not  to  continue  to  depend  exclusively  on  larger
Vietnamese  forces  with  U.S.  air  and  naval  support,  the  plan  was  to  conduct  a
modest  expansion  of  ARVN  in  conjunction  with  the  deployment  of  U.S.  forces.
In  the  event,  even  the  modest  plans  went  down  the  drain  in  the  aftermath  of
the  heavy  casualties  sustained  in  combat  during  late  May  and  early  June.  On  7
June,  General  Westmoreland  informed  CINCPAC  and  the  JCS  that  a
moratorium  on  RVNAF  build-up  was  unavoidable  because  trainees  in  the  pipe-
line would  have  to  be  used  as  fillers  for  existing  units.

The  U.S.  build-up  continued  during  the  spring  and  early  summer,  particularly
as  a  result  of  ARVN  reverses  in  combat.  By  the  end  of  July  there  were
18  US  FW  combat  maneuver  battalions  deployed  in  South  Vietnam.  In  the  same
message  in  which  he  advised  of  the  halt  in  ARVN  expansion,  General  Westmore-
land had  requested  a  significant  increase  in  the  number  of  U.S.  troops  for  Viet-
nam  (the famed "44-Battalion" request). After  more  than  a month  of


The  Advisory  Biiild-Up,  1961-1967  475


deliberation,  the  President  finally  approved  the  request  sometime  in  mid-July.
His  historic  announcement  of  the  expanded  U.S.  effort  came  on  28  July.  Under-
standably, this  momentous  expansion  of  the  U.S.  involvement  in  the  war  com-
pletely overshadowed  the  advisory  program  and  the  growth  of  RVNAF  during
the  remainder  of  1965.

2.  New  Possibilities

But  the  deployment  of  U.S.  forces  to  South  Vietnam  did,  however,  open  up
a  new  range  of  possible  relationships  which  would  not  have  been  possible  with-
out the  presence  of  substantial  U.S.  combat  forces.  Each  of  these  relation-
ships might  conceivably  promote  one  or  all  of  the  several  purposes  which  this
study  has  reasoned  to  be  behind  the  U.S.  military  advisory  effort:  the  develop-
ment of  improved  tactical  and  technical  competence  in  RVNAF,  the  genera-
tion of  better  intelligence  (both  friendly  and  enemy),  and  increased  U.S.  in-
fluence.

Two  categories  of  new  relationships  were  considered:  the  encadrement  of
U.S.  and  ARVN  units  (in  several  forms)  and  the  establishment  of  a  joint  com-
mand to  conduct  the  war.  Both  of  these  courses  were  rejected  by  COMU-
SMACV.  In  their  place  General  Westmoreland  attempted  to  create  a  Joint
US-RVNAF  staff  to  coordinate  independent  national  efforts.  The  basic  arrange-
ment enabling  tactical  independence — within  limits — was  the  creation  of
mutually  exclusive  Tactical  Areas  of  Responsibility  (TAORs)  for  each  combat
maneuver  force.

3.  Encadrement  Considered  and  Rejected

Deficiencies  in  ARVN  leadership  had  long  been  recognized  by  U.S.  military
advisors  as  one  of  the  key  impediments  to  increased  ARVN  performance.  In
April,  when  the  first  major  input  of  U.S.  combat  troops  took  place,  considera-
tion was  given  to  the  encadrement  of  U.S.  officers  in  ARVN  units  as  a  way  of
solving  this  problem.  The  proposal  was  touched  oft'  by  a  DoD  request  on  15
April  for  COMUSMACV's  opinion  about  the  feasibility  of  using  U.S.  cadres  to
improve  effectiveness  in  the  ten  ARVN  divisions.  The  same  day,  McGeorge
Bundy  sent  a  personal  NODIS  message  to  Ambassador  Taylor  stating  among
other  things,  that  "The  President  has  repeatedly  emphasized  his  personal  desire
for  a  strong  experiment  in  the  encadrement  of  U.S.  troops  with  the  Vietnamese."
General  Westmoreland  turned  the  issue  over  to  his  deputy.  General  Throck-
morton, for  a  recommendation.  Throckmorton's  study  considered  three  alter-
native encadrement  possibilities:  (1)  assumption  of  officer  and  senior  NCO
command  positions  by  U.S.  personnel  within  the  designated  ARVN  battalions;
(2)  assignment  of  U.S.  personnel  as  staff  officers,  and  in  technical  and  specialist
positions  within  the  battalions;  and  (3)  the  employment  of  U.S.  troops  as  fire
support  elements  within  ARVN-commanded  battalions.  Two  critical  difficulties
applicable  to  all  of  these  schemes  were  identified:  the  language  barrier  and  the
expanded  support  requirement  that  would  be  generated  for  U.S.  personnel.
Another  negative  factor  was  the  expected  adverse  effect  of  any  such  step  on
South  Vietnamese  morale.  These  formed  the  basis  for  General  Throckmorton's
recommendation  that  encadrement  be  rejected.  COMUSMACV  endorsed  his
deputy's  recommendation  and  the  general  encadrement  idea  was  officially
pronounced  dead  during  the  18  April  Honolulu  Conference.  Only  three  days
had  elapsed  from  the  birth  of  the  proposal  to  its  burial.


476 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


4.  Marine  Combined  Action  Platoons  (CAPs)

But  while  general  encadrement  was  effectively  killed  by  COMUSMACV  a
specific,  limited  experiment  in  encadrement  was  begun  later  in  the  year  almost
off-handedly  by  the  U.S.  Marines  near  Phu  Bai.  Since  the  Marine  units  had  been
assigned  TAORs  larger  than  they  could  secure,  innovative  commanders  sought
ways  to  maximize  local  security  resources.  In  June,  a  company  commander  of
the  3d  Battalion,  4th  Marines  near  Phu  Bai  assigned  a  few  Marines  to  the  vil-
lages in  his  tactical  area  to  work  with  the  Popular  Forces  platoons.  Marine
leadership,  training,  and  access  to  powerful  fire  support  brought  measurable
improvement  in  the  PF  units.  As  a  result  the  Commanding  General,  1st  ARVN
Division,  placed  six  PF  platoons  under  the  operational  control  of  the  Marine  bat-
talion.

By  November,  the  effort  had  achieved  such  results  that  it  was  brought  to  the
attention  of  the  CG  III  MAF.  Later  that  month  an  agreement  was  reached  be-
tween the  I  Corps  Commander  and  the  CG  III  MAF  permitting  the  integration
of  Marine  squads  into  PF  platoons  in  the  Da  Nang  area  to  improve  their  ef-
fectiveness and  stiffen  their  combat  performance.  The  basic  unit  of  the  new
venture  was  the  Combined  Action  Platoon  (CAP)  formed  by  adding  a  Marine
Rifle  Squad  of  14  men  plus  a  Navy  corpsman  to  a  PF  platoon  (32-38  authorized
strength).  The  PF  platoon  retained  its  own  organization  and  the  integrated
Marines  advised  the  entire  unit,  living  with  it,  sharing  its  food,  conducting
combined  patrols,  and  training  counterparts.  At  the  end  of  1965,  there  were
seven  such  Combined  Action  Platoons,  but  the  success  of  the  experiment  in
enhancing  PF  performance  and  extending  security  prompted  a  rapid  expansion
during  the  next  year.  The  Marines  have  continued  to  press  for  expansion  of  this
program  and  to  see  in  it  an  effective  method  by  which  to  produce  increased
performance  in  PF  units.  Critics  have  noted  that  the  Marine  advisors  quickly
become  de  facto  leaders  of  the  CAPs  and  argued  that  a  higher  level  of  current
performance  is  purchased  at  the  cost  of  stultifying  the  development  of  South
Vietnamese  leadership.  No  general  consensus  has  developed  on  the  relative
merits  of  this  combined  organization.

5.  Joint  Command  Considered  and  Rejected

The  1965  commitment  of  U.S.  forces  also  prompted  a  high  level  U.S.  debate
on  the  advisability  of  creating  some  form  of  unified  combined  command.  The
question  was  first  raised  in  Washington  in  mid-March  when  General  H.  K.  John-
son, Army  Chief  of  Staff,  returned  from  a  visit  to  Vietnam  with  the  recom-
mendation for  deployment  of  U.S.  combat  forces.  The  idea  had  the  same  con-
ceptual origins  as  the  encadrement  proposals,  nameh'  that  if  RVNAF  could  be
commanded  by  or  associated  with  U.S.  troops  it  might  be  molded  at  last  into  an
effective  fighting  force.  In  addition,  such  a  unified  allied  command  would  have
given  the  senior  commander — presumably  COMUSMACV — far  greater
freedom  to  deploy  forces  and  fight  the  war  in  the  straight-forward  pursuit  of
unambiguous  objectives,  rather  than  restricting  him  to  coordination  with  Viet-
namese counterparts  whose  motivations  at  all  times  were  a  compromise  of  po-
litical and  personal  as  well  as  military  considerations.

When  queried  on  the  matter.  General  Westmoreland  opposed  any  formal
merging  of  commands,  preferring  instead  the  maintenance  of  informal  co-
operation and  coordination  together  with  a  limited  combined  staff  under  an


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  All


American  chief  with  a  Vietnamese  deputy.  This  arrangement  would  better  as-
suage the  GVN's  sensitivities  to  questions  of  sovereignty  and  "neo-colonialism."
Full  integration  of  command,  General  Westmoreland  advised,  should  be  deferred
until  some  later  time  when  the  influx  of  U.S.  forces  might  require  it  and  GVN
sensibilities  might  be  more  disposed  to  its  acceptance.  In  May,  Secretary  Mc-
Namara  authorized  the  creation  of  a  formal  combined  authority  in  Vietnam.
But  since  both  Ky  and  Thieu  had  just  publicly  condemned  any  joint  command
idea  in  press  interviews,  both  Ambassador  Taylor  and  General  Westmoreland
recommended  against  the  proposed  action.  CINCPAC  backed  up  COMUS-
MACV's  concern  about  alienating  the  South  Vietnamese:

Refs  A  and  B  [Saigon  message  3855,  24  May;  and  COMUSMACV  mes-
sage 17292,  24  May]  again  point  out  the  formidable  disadvantages  which
obstruct  early  establishment  of  any  formal  combined  command  authority
in  South  Vietnam.  I  am  fully  in  accord  with  the  views  of  the  Ambassador
and  General  Westmoreland  in  this  regard.

The  long-range  nature  of  the  actions  directed  by  Ref  C  [JCS  msg  3159,
14  May]  is  recognized.  At  the  same  time  it  is  apparent  that  we  should
anticipate  continued  public  speculation  as  to  the  purpose  and  motive  of
any  consolidation  of  multi-national  forces  into  a  single  command  if  we
pursue  even  the  most  limited  measures.  Although  a  combined  command
might  generate  an  outward  illusion  of  unity,  many  divisive  influences  will
remain  at  work  beneath  the  surface  to  exacerbate  claims  of  American  neo-
colonialism and  self-assumed  leadership.

Conventional  operations  of  Corps-level  magnitude,  in  contrast  to
counterinsurgency  operations,  would  of  course  require  closer  coordination
and  possibly  some  form  of  international  command  mechanism.  Until  a
combined  command  is  clearly  in  our  best  interests  we  should  continue  to
stimulate  RVN  resolve  to  fight  a  counterinsurgency  war  which  is  and  must
remain  their  primary  responsibility.  Premature  experimentation  with  new
command  arrangements  would  be  counter-productive  should  it  weaken
national  unity  within  the  RVNAF  or  promote  a  feeling  of  apathy  in  the
countryside.

6. TAORs,  Senior  Advisors,  and  a  Combined  Staff

These  exchanges  effectively  ended  the  question  of  unified  command.  In  the
absence  of  unity  of  command.  General  Westmoreland  had  already  accepted  the
concept  of  the  Tactical  Area  of  Responsibility  (TAOR),  an  expedient  coordinat-
ing mechanism  originally  worked  out  between  the  local  ARVN  commanders
and  the  Marines  defending  the  DaNang  perimeter.  The  concept  was  a  practical
one  for  a  war  in  which  there  are  no  front  lines  and  in  which  military
units  operate  throughout  the  country.  Specific  geographic  areas  were  assigned
to  specific  units  who  then  had  exclusive  authority  and  responsibility  to  operate
within  them.  Militarv  units  could  not  enter  or  fire  into  another  unit's  TAOR
without  the  permission  of  its  commander.  Subsequently,  the  concept  would  raise
some  problems  as  the  requirement  for  rapid  redeployment  and  the  extensive
use  of  air  mobility  made  such  formal,  fixed  arrangements  awkward.  But  in  1965
the  TAOR  provided  a  simple  and  effective  solution  to  the  coordination  problem
raised  by  units  under  different  commands  operating  throughout  the  country.
Its  adoption  may  be  viewed  as  an  attempt  to  provide  limited,  territorial  unity  of
command  in  the  absence  of  an  overall,  national  unifying  mechanism.


478 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

General  Westmoreland  attempted  to  compensate  for  this  absence  of  unity
(which  he  had  endorsed  for  non-military  reasons)  by  the  creation  of  a  combined
coordinating  staff  at  the  national  level  and  by  making  the  senior  U.S.  military
commanders  also  the  senior  military  advisor  within  their  respective  areas  of
concern.  In  April  he  decided  to  raise  with  the  GVN  the  question  of  a  combined
MACV-JGS  staff.  (He  had  already  extended  the  tour  in  RVN  of  the  general
officer  he  had  chosen  to  head  this  staff.)  Such  a  staff  might  have  permitted  the
development  of  agreed  operational  plans  based  upon  agreed  priorities.  It  would
have  been  a  possible  intermediate  step  toward  unity  of  effort.  But  the  GVN
(represented  by  Generals  Thieu  and  "Little"  Minh)  resisted  any  suggestion  for
an  integrating  mechanism  of  this  kind.  The  proposal  was  quietly  dropped.

On  the  U.S.  side,  where  his  suggestions  had  the  force  of  orders,  General  West-
moreland took  one  step  to  integrate  the  U.S.  combat  and  advisory  functions.
The  Commanding  General,  III  Marine  Amphibious  Force,  the  senior  U.S.  of-
ficer in  the  area,  was  designated  on  7  August  as  the  Senior  Advisor  to  the  ARVN
I  CTZ  Commander.  The  former  U.S.  Senior  Advisor  became  the  Deputy  Senior
Advisor  under  CG,  III  MAF,  although  no  further  integration  of  the  advisory
structure  into  the  U.S.  chain  of  command  was  attempted.  This  pattern  was  soon
extended  to  the  other  two  Corps  areas  where  major  U.S.  units  were  operating.
The  latter  changes  were  made  at  the  insistence  of  the  ARVN  Corps  Commanders
who  felt  that  they  would  suffer  a  loss  of  prestige  if  they  were  ''advised"  by  any-
one other  than  the  senior  U.S.  officer  in  the  zone.  Thus,  on  21  October,  the
commander  of  Hq,  Field  Force,  Vietnam  (FFORCEV),  with  operational  con-
trol of  all  U.S.  units  in  IT  Corps,  was  also  named  II  Corps  Senior  Advisor.  On  1
December,  CG,  1st  Infantry  Division  was  named  III  Corps  Senior  Advisor,
following  the  pattern  already  established.  No  such  arrangement  was  made,  how-
ever, in  IV  Corps  since  the  U.S.  had  no  major  units  deployed  there.  Later,  when
U.S.  force  deployments  had  led  to  the  establishment  of  another  FFORCEV
headquarters,  each  ARVN  Corps  Commander  was  advised  bv  a  U.S.  Lieutenant
General  with  equivalent  U.S.  responsibilities  and  a  U.S.  general  officer  was  ap-
pointed Senior  Advisor  in  the  Delta  area,  which  had  no  U.S.  combat  maneuver
units.

7. Leverage:  The  Hidden  Issue

It  is  relevant  to  ask  why  COMUSMACV  (backed  up  without  exception  by
the  Ambassador  and  CINCPAC)  uniformlv  opposed  integrative  measures  de-
signed to  provide  that  which  was  and  is  almost  an  article  of  faith  in  the  military
profession — unity  of  command.  U.S.  troops  in  both  World  Wars  and  in  Korea
had  fought  under  at  least  nominal  command  unitv.  There  had  been  reservations
for  national  integrity,  to  be  sure,  but  the  principle  of  unified  command  was
both  established  and  generallv  accepted.  Wh\  then  did  the  U.S.  military  com-
mander in  Vietnam  recommend  against  its  adoption?

The  answer  to  this  question  is  not  to  be  found  bv  an  examination  of  military
factors.  The  issue,  rather,  was  a  political  one,  as  CINCPAC's  message  quoted
above  makes  clear.  The  U.S.  militarv  leaders  feared  the  exacerbations  of  US-
SVN  differences  which  thev  thought  would  accompany  an  overt  Americaniza-
tion of  the  war.  The\  wished  to  increase  U.S.  influence  in  the  conduct  of  the
war  but  onlv  as  a  result  of  persuasion  and  example.  They  tended  to  eschew  the
use  of  leverage.  A  unified  command  arrangement  would  have  provided — as-
suming that  a  U.S.  officer  would  have  been  the  overall  commander — an  open


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  479

and  obvious  means  by  which  to  exercise  leverage.  The  U.S.  leaders  in  Saigon
rejected  its  adoption  for  this  reason.

8. Withdrawing  from  Overt  Influence

The  rejection  of  a  unified  military  command  is  only  one  example  of  the  tend-
ency in  1965  to  renounce  leverage  oriented  mechanisms  at  the  very  time  that
the  U.S.  was  committing  major  land  forces  to  the  war.  It  was  as  though  the  U.S.
increased  its  determination  to  avoid  arrangements  which  smacked  of  direct,
open  leverage  at  the  same  time  that  the  inadequacy  of  earlier,  indirect  measures
was  made  obvious  by  the  deployment  to  South  Vietnam  of  U.S.  ground  combat
forces.

This  may,  in  fact,  be  what  happened.  Some  sporadic  earlier  attempts  at
leverage  had  not  borne  the  desired  fruit.  Ambassador  Taylor  had  had  a  disastrous
experience  in  trying  to  use  the  U.S.  decision  to  commence  bombing  North  Viet-
nam as  a  lever  to  get  GVN  reform  in  December  1964.  The  net  outcome  was  a
violent  reaction  by  General  Khanh,  who  very  nearly  had  Taylor  thrown  out  of
the  country  as  personna  non  grata.  In  the  end,  it  was  Khanh  who  went,  but
the  political  turmoil  that  this  produced  in  the  first  months  of  1965,  when  the
course  of  the  war  was  taking  a  dramatic  turn  against  the  GVN,  convinced  Tay-
lor that  such  attempts  should  not  be  made  again  at  the  national  level.

Concurrently,  one  of  the  most  direct  U.S.  tools  for  influencing  policy  imple-
mentation at  lower  levels,  the  joint  sign-off  for  release  of  piaster  funds  for
pacification,  was  also  being  abandoned.  The  decision  was  made  in  December
1964  by  the  USOM  Direct'or,  Mr.  Killen.  Early  in  1965,  AID  stopped  buying
piasters  for  the  U.S. -controlled  sector  funds  and,  in  June,  agreement  was  reached
with  the  GVN  for  province  chiefs  to  begin  requisitioning  and  releasing  AID
commodities  on  their  own  authority.  Thus,  the  "troika  sign-off"  came  to  an  end.
While  elaborate  arrangements  were  made  for  getting  reports  of  U.S.  advisor
concurrence  or  non-concurrence,  the  practical  effect  was  to  remove  the  advisor's
leverage  and  restrict  his  influence.  In  October,  USOM  began  to  have  second
thoughts  on  the  wisdom  of  abandoning  control  of  its  resources  in  the  field  and
proposed  a  restoration  of  the  "troika  sign-off."  The  Mission  Council  endorsed
the  plan  and  had  already  launched  discussions  with  the  GVN  when  the  State
Department  objected  to  the  idea,  insisting  that  it  would  undermine  our  efforts
to  make  the  Vietnamese  more  independent  and  effective.  There  the  matter  died.

In  a  somewhat  related  effort  to  overcome  the  delays  in  the  Vietnamese
pacification  system,  MACV  acceded  to  its  advisors'  recommendations  and,  on  1
October,  created  a  separate  contingency  fund  of  50,000  piasters  for  each  sub-
sector  (district)  advisor  to  be  used  for  urgent  projects.  Sector  advisors  were  also
given  access  to  special  funds.  The  program  was  highly  successful  and  toward  the
end  of  the  year  consideration  was  given  to  permanent  establishment  of  such
revolving  funds.  The  plan  was  abandoned,  however,  after  the  four-month  trial
period  due  to  the  strong  opposition  of  the  GVN  Minister  for  RD,  General
Thang,  who  contended  that  such  funds  were  undermining  the  legitimate  efforts
of  his  organization  to  meet  urgent  province  needs;  it  would  encourage  Viet-
namese dependence  on  the  U.S.

But  USOM  did  use  successfully  a  form  of  direct,  selective  leverage  in  the  late
summer  of  1965.  The  Province  Chief  of  Binh  Tuy  Province,  Lt  Colonel  Chi,
was  accused  of  misusing  some  $250,000  in  AID  funds.  When  USOM  pressure  on
the  GVN  for  his  removal  produced  no  results,  aid  to  the  province  was  suspended


480 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

on  23  September,  and  USOM  field  personnel  were  withdrawn.  In  spite  of  Chi's
friendship  with  the  Defense  Minister  and  Deputy  Premier,  General  Co,  Premier
Ky  removed  him  six  weeks  later.  Aid  to  the  province  then  resumed,  but  Ambas-
sador Lodge  made  it  clear  to  the  Mission  Council  that  he  disapproved  of  the
action  and  did  not  want  it  repeated  (particularly  the  press  coverage) .

As  already  indicated,  both  Ambassadors  Taylor  (after  his  near-disastrous  ex-
perience in  December  1964)  and  Lodge  preferred  not  to  force  the  GVN  or  at-
tempt to  use  high-level  pressure  to  reach  solutions  we  felt  necessary.  The  fragility
of  the  political  arrangements  in  Saigon  at  any  point  in  time  seemed  to  dictate
against  any  U.S.  action  that  might  precipitate  coups  or  disruption  from  elements
even  less  disposed  to  be  cooperative  than  the  current  group,  whoever  they  might
be.  In  this  view,  the  successive  Ambassadors  were  strongly  supported  by  the
State  Department.  Thus,  while  we  resented  the  Ky  coup  in  June,  we  did  nothing  to
exacerbate  our  delicate  relations  with  Ky.  In  July,  during  Secretary  McNamara's
visit,  the  GVN  requested  a  devaluation  of  the  piaster  and  a  hefty  increase  in  aid.
Rather  than  use  the  request  as  an  opportunity  to  press  the  GVN  for  action  on
matters  of  U.S.  concern.  Ambassador  Taylor  preferred  to  restrict  our  counter-
demands  in  the  interest  of  quick  agreement:

We  would  avoid  giving  the  impression  of  asking  for  new  agreements  or
imposing  conditions  for  our  increase  AID.  .  .  .  We  do  not  want  to  raise
conditions  in  terms  likely  to  be  rejected  or  to  require  prolonged  debate.

Consequently,  agreement  was  reached  between  the  two  governments  on  28  July,
providing  only  for  "joint  discussions  to  precede  policy  decisions  .  .  .  for  control
of  inflation,"  and  scarcely  mentioning  GVN  obligations.

9. McNamara's  Minority  Position  on  Leverage

The  only  consistent  supporter  of  increasing  and  exercising  U.S.  leverage  with
the  GVN  during  1965  was  Secretary  McNamara.  As  previously  noted,  he  was
one  of  the  principal  proponents  of  the  joint  command  idea  and  a  supporter  of
the  encadrement  proposals.  In  April,  the  Defense  Department  had  launched  an
ill-fated  effort  to  have  U.S.  Armv  civil  affairs  officers  introduced  in  the  provinces
to  assure  competent,  corruption-free  civil  administration  in  the  combat  zones.
Ambassador  Taylor's  stout  opposition  had  killed  the  proposal,  but  the  Secretary
continued  to  push  for  stronger  U.S.  action  with  the  GVN.  After  his  July  visit
to  Saigon  he  sent  a  memorandum  to  the  President  urging  the  U.S.  to  lay  down
terms  for  its  continuing  assistance  before  the  introduction  of  more  U.S.  forces.
He  suggested  that  we  exercise  leverage  through  our  control  of  rice  policy  and
gain  a  "veto  on  major  GVN  commanders,  statements  about  invading  NVN,
and  so  on."

Again  in  November,  McNamara  recorded  his  impatience  with  the  GVN  and
his  belief  that  we  should  give  a  larger  and  more  active  role  to  our  advisors  at
the  province  and  district  level.  But  the  overall  U.S.  approach  to  the  GVN  in
1965  was  dominated  by  our  felt  need  for  any  kind  of  governmental  stability
which  would  provide  a  base  from  which  to  conduct  the  war.  Proposals  for
taking  a  tough  line  were  widelv  regarded  as  rugs  that  if  pulled  out  from  under
the  GVN  would  bring  it  crashing  down,  rather  than  as  levers  that  might  bring
effective  change.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  481


10. JJ .S.  Proposals  for  GVN  Execution:  an  Example

With  leverage-oriented  arrangements  effectively  ruled  out,  U.S.  advisors  in
South  Vietnam  were  left  with  the  alternatives  of  advising  their  counterparts
only  on  how  best  to  conduct  a  decided  course  or  of  expanding  their  advice  to
embrace  what  ought  to  be  undertaken.  The  tendency  was  to  follow  the  latter
course,  to  urge  upon  GVN  plans  and  programs  American  in  concept  and  design
for  execution  by  the  South  Vietnamese.  The  Chieu  Hoi  ("Open  Arms"  for  VC
who  return  voluntarily  to  GVN  control)  program  was  one  example  of  this
tendency.  The  Hop  Tac  ("cooperation,"  in  Vietnamese)  program,  to  clear  and
hold  the  immediate  area  around  Saigon,  is  another.  Hop  Tac's  significance  with
respect  to  U.S.  advisory  activities  resides  in  the  fact  that  it  was  the  most  con-
certed attempt  to  apply  the  "oil  blot"  concept  to  rural  pacification  since  the
demise  of  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  Its  failure  can  be  attributed  in  large
measure  to  GVN  lack  of  interest  in  and  support  for  what  was  widely  regarded
as  an  "American"  program.

The  idea  of  a  special  combined  US/GVN  effort  to  secure  the  critical  area
ringing  Saigon  was  first  advanced  by  Ambassador  Lodge  in  July  1964,  at  the
Honolulu  Conference.  His  concern  with  the  problem  went  back  to  late  1963
when  the  re-appraisals  of  the  war  following  Diem's  overthrow  revealed  a  dan-
gerous deterioration  in  the  III  Corps  area.  A  special  USOM  report  on  Long  An
Province  had  particularly  troubled  the  Ambassador.  In  July  1964,  as  he  was
returning  from  his  first  tour  in  Vietnam,  he  proposed  a  special  eff'ort  in  eight
provinces  (Tay  Ninh,  Binh  Duong,  Hau  Nghia,  Long  An,  Dinh  Tuong,  Go  Cong,
Vinh  Long,  and  Quang  Ngia),  all  but  one  of  which  was  near  Saigon.
The  proposal  was  picked  up  by  Ambassador  Taylor  and  the  program  set  in  mo-
tion during  the  summer  of  1964.  The  initial  objective  was  to  stabilize  the  situa-
tion around  Saigon  and  protect  the  capital,  then  extend  the  zone  of  security  in
an  ever  widening  ring  around  the  city.  MACV  appointed  Colonel  Jasper  J.  Wil-
son to  head  the  eff'ort  and  by  September  1964  a  plan  had  been  produced  and  the
Vietnamese  reluctantly  induced  to  set  up  a  special  council  to  coordinate  the
multiple  commands  operating  in  the  area.  The  plan  created  four  roughly  con-
centric zones  around  the  capital,  each  to  be  successively  cleared  and  secured,
working  from  the  "inside  of  the  doughnut  out."  Conceptually,  three  phases
were  involved  in  each  zone:  first,  search  and  destroy  missions  to  eliminate  main
force  units;  then  a  clearing  phase  using  primarily  squad  and  platoon  size  forces
in  patrols  and  ambushes;  and  finally,  the  securing  phase  in  which  ARVN  turned
over  responsibilities  for  security  in  a  zone  to  RF/PF  and  national  police  and  in
which  heavy  emphasis  was  to  be  laid  on  positive  rural  economic  and  social
development  efforts.

Hop  Tac  was  launched  on  12  September  1964,  with  a  sweep  through  Gia
Dinh  Province  to  the  west  and  southwest  of  Saigon  by  the  ARVN  51st  Regi-
ment. The  mission  was  aborted  the  following  day,  however,  by  withdrawal  of
the  forces  to  participate  in  a  coup.  Nevertheless,  organizational  efforts  continued
and  more  ARVN  forces  were  concentrated  in  the  Hop  Tac  area.  A  special  sur-
vey of  the  area  by  USOM,  USIS,  and  MACV  in  October  revealed  that  little
real  progress  was  being  made.  In  spite  of  the  lack  of  any  visible  evidence  of
genuine  momentum,  the  Ambassador  and  MACV  continued  to  be  encouraged  by
the  modest  statistical  progress  of  Hop  Tac  at  a  time  when  nearly  every  other
activity  in  the  country  looked  blacker  and  blacker.  The  1964  MACV  Command


482 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

History  reflects  the  ofiicial  view:  "At  the  end  of  1964,  Hop  Tac  was  one  of  the
few  pacification  areas  that  showed  some  success  and  greater  promise."

Whether  in  response  to  Hop  Tac  or  not,  the  VC  substantially  increased  their
forces  in  the  Hop  Tac  area  in  the  first  six  months  of  1965.  MACV  estimated
the  growth  at  65  percent  and  also  noted  that  the  new  troops  were  frequently
equipped  with  Chinese  weapons.  This  growth  in  enemy  strength  in  turn
prompted  some  redeployment  of  RVNAF  to  strengthen  capabilities  in  the  Cap-
ital Military  Region.  In  February,  1965,  just  at  the  time  the  U.S.  was  initiating
the  sustained  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  and  beginning  the  first  Marine  combat
deployments  in  the  South,  COMUSMACV  asked  the  I  and  IV  Corps  senior
advisors  to  review  current  programs  and  to  develop  Hop  Tac-like  plans  for  their
respective  areas  as  a  basis  for  discussion  with  their  counterparts.  General  West-
moreland hoped  to  concentrate  the  available  resources  of  each  Corps  into  its
most  critical  areas  at  a  time  when  VC  activity  and  successes  were  continually
mounting  and  enemy  control  of  the  country  increasing  dangerously.  Again,  the
operative  concept  was  to  be  the  oil  blot.  By  April  General  Westmoreland  had
convinced  Minister  of  the  Armed  Forces  Minh  to  ask  each  of  the  ARVN  Corps
Commanders  (except  III  Corps,  in  whose  area  Hop  Tac  was  being  conducted)
to  draw  up  similar  plans  for  their  own  areas  of  responsibility.

The  U.S.  effort  was  clearly  aimed  at  spurring  the  practical  application  of  the
"oil  blot"  analogy.  The  effects,  however,  were  to  demonstrate  how  difficult  it
was  to  translate  simple  counterinsurgent  theory  into  practice,  how  convoluted
and  personal  were  the  ARVN  lines  of  influence,  and  how  frustrating  it  was  un-
der these  circumstances  to  exercise  influence  by  persuasion.

In  May,  the  Prime  Minister  proposed  organizational  changes  in  Hop  Tac  to
return  much  of  it  to  the  operational  control  of  the  III  Corps  commander.  These
changes  were  rejected  by  COMUSMACV,  but  he  did  agree  that  the  III  Corps
commander  might  be  named  chairman  of  the  Hop  Tac  Council.  In  June,  before
anything  could  be  done  on  this  proposal,  a  coup  with  General  Ky  at  its  head
returned  the  military  to  power.  By  the  summer  of  1965,  Hop  Tac  was  being
completely  overshadowed  by  the  build-up  of  U.S.  forces.

In  September,  Lodge  returned  to  Vietnam  for  his  second  stint  as  Ambassador.
He  immediately  asked  a  U.S.  Mission  officer  for  a  private  assessment  of  the  Hop
Tac  program.  The  report  frankly  described  Hop  Tac  as  a  failure  and  stressed  as
reasons  the  unrealistic  goals  of  the  program,  the  irrelevance  of  the  concentric
circle  concept  to  actual  areas  of  GVN  and  VC  strength,  the  fact  that  it  was  an
American  plan  never  really  given  first  priority  by  the  Vietnamese,  the  area's
political  vulnerability  to  fallout  from  Saigon  political  changes,  and  General
Ky's  lack  of  support  for  it.  The  report  recommended  letting  Hop  Tac  slowly
die.  On  September  15,  the  Mission  Council  deliberated  inconclusively  on  the  fate
of  the  program:

General  Westmoreland  said  that  w^hile  Hop  Tac  could  be  said  only  to
have  been  about  50^  successful,  it  had  undoubtedly  averted  a  VC  siege  of
Saigon.  Ambassador  Lodge  then  briefly  reviewed  the  original  reasons  for  the
emphasis  placed  on  the  area  surrounding  Saigon  and  said  that  they  were  still
valid,  primarily  because  of  the  heavy  density  of  population.  He  noted,  how-
ever, lack  of  a  clear  commitment  to  Hop  Tac  on  the  part  of  the  GVN,
possibly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Vietnamese  consider  the  program
an  American  scheme.  The  view  was  also  expressed  that  the  trouble  may
also  lie  in  US  GVN  differences  over  some  fundamental  concepts  in  Hop
Tac.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  483


By  the  end  of  1965,  the  proposal  for  Hop  Tac  programs  in  I,  II,  and  IV  Corps
had  refined  itself  into  the  scheme  for  National  Priority  Areas  that  became  the
focus  of  attention  in  1966.  Hop  Tac  itself,  in  the  Saigon  vicinity,  continued  on
into  1966  to  be  finally  phased  out  at  the  end  of  the  vear  and  replaced  by  the  III
Corps  R  D  Council  and  a  U.S.  military  eft'ort  to  protect  the  capital  known  as
Operation  FAIRFAX.

As  a  test  case  for  the  ever  popular  oil  blot  theory  of  pacification.  Hop  Tac
left  much  to  be  desired.  It  did,  however,  point  up  some  of  the  difficulties  to  be
encountered  in  any  attempt  to  implement  this  appealingly  simple — and  perhaps
simplistic — concept.  The  oil  blot  theory,  like  all  abstract  analogies,  emphasizes
the  similarity  between  phenomena  and  ignores  the  differences.  The  important
similarity  of  the  pacification  problem  to  the  oil  blot  is  the  expressed  goal  of
progressively  extending  the  secure  zone  until  it  embraces  the  entire  country.
Unlike  a  blank  piece  of  paper,  however,  the  environment  in  which  pacification
must  take  place  is  neither  neutral  nor  passive:  and  unlike  the  oil  blot,  the  pac-
ification forces  are  not  impervious.  Moreover,  implicit  in  the  theory  is  the  notion
that  the  secure  area,  like  the  oil  blot,  will  expand  in  all  directions  simultaneously,
at  roughly  the  same  speed,  and  that  expansion  is  irreversible  and  irrevocable.
Further,  the  analogy  fails  to  take  into  account  unique  problems  of  terrain  or
variances  in  government  and  insurgent  strength  in  different  areas.  One  need  not
belabor  the  point;  the  concept  is  fine  as  a  theor\,  but  not  as  a  program  design.
In  fairness,  it  must  be  said  that  the  idea  does  focus  the  need  for  concentration
of  resources  in  priority  areas.  All  this  notwithstanding.  III  Corps  was  less  than
the  optimum  place  to  test  such  a  program.  It  contains  several  longtime  Viet
Cong  strongholds  and  base  areas  and  is  extraordinarily  sensitive  to  political
changes  in  Saigon  (28  of  31  district  chiefs  were  replaced  during  the  lifetime  of
Hop  Tac) .

The  most  important  reason  for  the  failure  of  Hop  Tac,  however,  was  the
lack  of  South  Vietnamese  support  for  it.  From  its  inception  to  its  demise,  it  was
an  American  idea,  plan,  and  program.  While  the  GVN  adopted  it.  established  a
high-level  council  to  supervise  it,  and  committed  some  troops  and  other  resources
to  it,  this  was  seen  as  a  way  of  appeasing  the  Americans.  The  South  Vietnamese
never  accorded  Hop  Tac  a  high  priority  in  their  own  thinking.  Moreover,  its
low  status  was  further  emphasized  by  the  massive  U.S.  force  build-up.  As  this
U.S.  build-up  became  relatively  routinized,  however,  the  issue  of  pacification
reasserted  itself.  When  it  did  so,  the  primary  U.S.  concern  came  to  focus  on  the
issue  of  how  best  to  organize  the  military,  paramilitary,  and  civilian  advisory
efforts.  Since  even  the  civilian  advisors  in  the  field  were  military  personnel  on
loan  in  many  instances,  the  account  of  the  military  advisory  build-up  decisions
became  essentially  an  account  of  organizing  advice  for  pacification.

D. ORGANIZATION  AS  THE  KEY  TO  EFFECTIVENESS  IN
PACIFICATION  (1966-1967)

1. TJic  Basis  for  Organizational  Preoccupation

Several  factors  contributed  to  the  persistent  U.S.  preoccupation  in  1966  and
1967  with  reorganizing  the  advisory  effort  in  order  better  to  support  pacification
activities.  Firsf,  it  had  been  an  article  of  faith  for  several  years  within
U.S.  policymaking  circles  that  only  by  winning  the  "other  war"  of  pacification
could  the  U.S.  hope  to  realize  its  objectives  in  South  Vietnam.  Secondly,  the
pacification  struggle  was  still  regarded  essentially  as  a  task  to  be  performed  by


484 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  GVN — as  the  "main  force  war"  no  longer  was  after  the  introduction  of
major  U.S.  combat  forces.  Reinforcing  this  belief  was  a  third  factor,  the  widely
held  conviction  that  U.S.  forces  could  best  concentrate  on  the  main  force  war
while  RVNAF  focused  on  pacification.

Such  a  U.S.-RVNAF  division  of  effort,  it  was  reasoned,  would  permit  U.S.
forces  to  take  advantage  of  their  greater  tactical  mobility  and  fire  support  with-
out endangering  civilian  life  and  property,  employ  RVNAF  in  a  manner  cal-
culated to  minimize  the  adverse  effects  of  its  persistent  inability  to  generate  an
offensive-minded  esprit,  and  avoid  the  cultural  acclimitization  and  language  dif-
ficulties which  would  face  U.S.  forces  in  the  pacification  role.  It  seemed,  in  short,
that  RVNAF  concentration  on  pacification  and  U.S.  concentration  on  the  main
force  enemy  would  constitute  the  optimal  use  of  available  resources.

This  division  of  effort  meant  that  most  U.S.  military  advisors  would  be  directly
involved  in  pacification — at  least  periodically  if  not  continuously.  Advisors  to
regular  ARVN  units  could  expect  to  spend  a  considerable  portion  of  their  time
securing  pacification  programs.  Those  advisors  whose  counterparts  had  po-
litical and  administrative  responsibilities  (e.g.,  province  and  district  advisors)
and  paramilitary  advisors  (RF  and  PF)  could  expect  pacification  to  be  their
major  concern.

But  while  the  majority  of  U.S.  military  advisors  would  be  engaged  in
pacification  activities  they  would  not  be  the  only  U.S.  advisory  personnel  whose
responsibilities  focused  on  pacification  programs.  Advisors  from  USOM,  CAS,
and  USIS  had  overlapping  and  in  some  instances  competing  responsibilities.
Thus  it  was  logical  for  the  U.S.  to  attempt  to  devise  an  organizational  frame-
work which  would  serve  to  coordinate  adequately  the  activities  of  the  large  and
diverse  body  of  advisors  and  which  would  be  capable  to  integrate  their  over-
lapping functions.

2. Unresolved  Issues

At  the  beginning  of  1966,  three  important  issues  concerning  the  pacification
effort  were  unresolved.  Each  of  these  issues  was  tentatively  resolved  during  late
1966  or  in  1967 — in  the  sense  that  decisions  were  made  rather  than  that  these
decisions  were  final.  The  remainder  of  1967  and  earlv  1968  (until  the  Tet  of-
fensive) constituted  a  period  of  consolidation  and  refinement  based  on  limited
experimentation.  The  shock  caused  by  the  Tet  offensive  then  brought  to  the
fore  new  questions  of  RVNAF  effectiveness  and  of  U.S.-RVNAF  roles  and  mis-
sions.

The  first  of  the  unresolved  issues  in  1966  was  that  of  which  U.S.  agency  or
group  should  take  the  lead  in  coordinating  pacification  programs.  The  role  which
RVNAF  should  assume  in  support  of  pacification  was  the  second  unresolved  is-
sue. Finally,  the  extent  to  which  the  U.S.  should  be  willing  to  exert  leverage
in  order  to  influence  pacification  activities  was  also  unresolved  at  the  beginning
of  1966.

The  following  account  of  the  decisions  addressed  to  these  three  issues  may
seem  to  suggest  that  a  master  list  of  problems  was  somehow  approached  as  part
of  an  orderl} ,  comprehensive,  logical  process.  This  is  not,  of  course,  the  way  it
happened.  The  policv  process  was  confusing  and  the  policymakers  were  oc-
casionallv  confused.  Decisions  were  made  in  the  reflection  of  both  U.S.  and
South  Vietnamese  domestic  pressures  and  in  the  shadow  of  an  on-going  war.
They  were  affected  by  personalities  on  all  sides  and  involved  no  small  amount


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  485

of  bureaucratic  in-fighting.  The  account  that  follows  attempts  to  reorder  and  to
explain  this  evolution,  not  to  recreate  it.

3. Who  Shall  Lead?

The  "reemphasis  on  pacification,"  as  another  study  in  this  series  aptlv  names
it,  mav  conveniently  be  dated  from  the  Honolulu  Conference  of  February  1966,
With  the  build-up  of  U.S.  combat  forces  proceeding  rapidh'  and  with  expecta-
tions high  that  1966  would  see  the  U.S.  take  the  otTensive,  policy  attention
returned  to  address  the  "other  war"  in  which  the  object  was  to  pro\ide  rural
security  followed  by  steps  to  improve  living  le\els  and  establish  a  link  between
the  GVN  and  its  populace.  President  Johnson  made  it  clear  in  his  informal  re-
marks to  the  conferees  at  Honolulu  that  he  wanted  concrete  results  to  follow
the  splendid  phrases  of  the  U.S.-GVN  communique:

Preserve  this  communique,  because  it  is  one  we  don't  want  to  forget.  It
will  be  a  kind  of  bible  that  we  are  going  to  follow.  When  we  come  back
here  90  davs  from  now,  or  six  months  from  now.  we  are  going  to  start  out
to  put  into  effect  the  announcements  that  the  President,  the  Chief  of  State
and  the  Prime  Minister  made.  .  .  .  You  men  who  are  responsible  for  these
departments,  you  ministers  and  the  staffs  associated  with  them  in  both
governments,  bear  in  mind  we  arc  going  to  give  you  an  examination  and
the  ""finals"  will  be  on  just  what  vou  have  done.

.  .  .  How  have  vou  built  democracy  in  the  rural  areas"  '  much  of
it  ha\e  \o\.\  built,  when  and  where?  Gi\e  us  dates,  times.  numrci>.

.  .  .  Larger  outputs,  more  efficient  production  to  impro\e  credit,  handi-
craft, light  industr\'.  rural  electrification — are  those  just  phrases,  high-
sounding  words,  or  have  vou  ""coonskins  on  the  wall?"

All  parties  regarded  it  as  necessar\'  for  some  mechanism  to  coordinate  the
U.S.  ad\isor\-  acii\ities  which  would  help  the  N'ietnamesc  turn  promises  into
solid  accomplishments.  But  they  diJ>  not  agree  on  how  broad  should  be  the  unit
of  the  coordinator.  Was  he,  or  his  oilice.  to  be  primus  inter  pares  or  a  single
manager?  Did  effective  coordination  require  polic\'  primac\'  or  operational
supervision — or  both?  Above  all,  the  participants  did  not  agice  on  which  in-
dividual or  agency  should  exercise  whate\er  supra-depannicnial  authority  was
needed.

Ambassador  Lodge,  who  had  consistent! \  strcssec  the  central it\  of  the  ""other
war,"  began  b\  assigning  responsibilit\-  for  i'  1  support  for  Re\olutionary
Development  (read  ""pacification")  to  his  dcpuiN.  .  unbassador  Porter.  The  latter
described  his  concept  of  his  duties  in  traditionalist  Foreign  Ser\ice  Oflicer  terms:

Ambassador  Porter  described  brietl\  his  new  responsibilities  as  he  sees
them  in  the  pacification  rural  de\elopment  area.  He  pointed  out  that  the
basic  idea  is  to  place  total  responsihilit\  on  one  senior  indi\idual  to  pull
together  all  of  the  civil  aspects  of  re\ olutionar\  de\elopmcnt.  He  sees  this
primarily  as  a  eoorditiatiui^  effort  and  does  not  intend  to  f;et  into  the  middle
of  individual  Ui^enex  aetivities  and  responsibilities.  .-Xs  he  and  his  stalY  per-
ceive areas  which  require  attention  and  action  by  a  responsible  agency,  he
will  call  this  to  the  attentior.  !nU  agenc\  for  the  purpose  of  emphasis;
he  intends  to  suggest  rather  th criticize.


486 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Porter's  "coordination  by  suggestion"  approach  was  not  only  an  example  of
extremely  limited  effective  authority,  it  was  also  restricted  explicitly  to  the  civil
side  of  support  for  pacification.  Whether  the  coordinator-in-chief  emerged  as  a
persuader  or  a  director  it  was  clear  that  his  charge  had  to  embrace  both  military
and  civil  advisors.  (In  this  respect  "civil"  is  more  accurate  than  "civilian",  for
a  sizeable  number  of  the  civil  advisory  duties  had  devolved  upon  active  duty
military  officers  who  were  "loaned"  to  other  agencies  for  this  purpose.)

It  is  not  surprising  that  MACV  viewed  itself  as  preeminent  in  this  area.  It
was,  as  General  Westmoreland  rightly  claimed,  the  only  U.S.  organization  ad-
vising the  GVN  at  all  levels  and — in  one  way  or  another — in  all  functions.  It
was  to  MACV  that  General  Thang,  the  Minister  of  Rural  Construction  (read
"pacification")  looked  for  advice  and  assistance.  It  is  equally  unsurprising
that  Ambassador  Lodge  was  of  a  different  persuasion,  as  he  explained  clearly
in  a  memo  setting  forth  his  views  to  General  Lansdale  in  December  1965 :

I  consider  the  government  of  Vietnam's  effort  in  this  domain  (apart
from  the  military  clearing  phase)  to  be  primarilv  civilian,  economic,  social
and  political  in  nature  and  in  its  aims.  Consequently,  on  the  American  side,
it  is  preferable  that  the  two  civilian  agencies  most  directly  concerned,  i.e.,
USAID  and  CAS,  be  the  operating  support  agencies  upon  whom  you
should  rely  for  the  implementation  of  the  necessary  programs  as  they
develop.  Other  sections  of  the  Mission,  including  MACV,  JUSPAO  .  .  .
should  consider  themselves  associated  with  .  .  .  USAID  and  CAS,  but
not  as  agencies  directly  responsible  for  operations.

The  foregoing  is  intended  to  insure  that  the  number  of  persons
and  agencies  contacting  the  GVN  and  particularly  the  Ministry  of  Rural
Construction,  on  the  subject  of  pacification  and  development  is  reduced,
and  in  fact  is  limited  to  yourself  or  your  representative,  plus  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  two  operating  agencies,  USAID  and  CAS.

Operational  and  coordinative  responsibilities  remained  on  this  particu-
lar wicket  throughout  most  of  1966  while  Washington  fumed  over  the  slow
pace  of  pacification.  These  months  saw  the  development  of  sufficient  frus-
tration in  Washington  to  permit  the  growth  and  final  acceptance  of  the
proposal  that  all  U.S.  advice  for  pacification  be  placed  under  MACV.  An  ac-
count of  this  development  is  treated  more  fullv  in  another  document  in  this
series  and  will  only  be  summarized  here.

President  Johnson's  Washington  coordinator  for  pacification,  Robert  W.
Komer,  set  forth  in  August  1966  three  alternative  organizational  approaches:

Alternative  No.  I — Give  [Deputy  Ambassador]  Porter  operational  con-
trol over  all  pacification  activity.  .  .  .

Alternative  No.  2 — Retain  the  present  separate  civil  and  military  com-
mand cJiannels  but  strengtJwn  the  management  structure  of  both  MACV
and  the  U.S.  Mission.  .  .  .

Alternative  No.  3 — Assign  responsibility  for  pacification,  civil  and  mil-
itary, to  COMUSMACV.

Mr.  Komer's  categorization  was  prescient.  Ambassador  Lodge's  personal  pref-
erence and  the  fact  that  most  pacification  advisors  were  military  seemed  to  rule
out  the  first  course  of  action.  The  second  alternative  described  essentially  the
organization  followed  under  the  Office  of  Civil  Operations  (OCO)  from  Novem-


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  487


ber  1966  until  June  1967.  By  this  late  date  the  U.S.  decided  to  follow  the  third
of  Komefs  alternatives.

The  first  of  these  reorganizations,  that  which  created  OCO,  was  quite  literally
forced  upon  Ambassador  Lodge.  Particularly  in  view  of  the  fact  that  OCO  was
to  be  given  only  a  90-120  day  trial  to  produce  identifiable  results,  he  was  not
eager  to  undergo  the  turmoil  and  lost  motion  of  one  major  reorganization  only
as  a  prelude  to  yet  another  reorganization.  He  wanted  to  retain  as  much  non-
military  flavor  to  the  pacification  effort  as  possible — regarding  it  as  com-
plementary to  military  programs,  yet  separate  from  them.  Military  security
activities  were,  in  his  view,  essentially  the  negative  precondition  to  pacification
activities  which  were  the  positive  acts  leading  the  GVN  to  vitalize  itself  at  the
same  time  that  it  developed  real  ties  to  its  own  people.

4. CORDS  Replaces  OCO

Thus  OCO  entered  the  world  foredoomed  by  the  combination  of  too  short  a
prescribed  life  span  and  the  tendency  of  some  of  its  unwilling  partners  to  do
more  than  support  it  tacitly  while  the\^  maneuvered  to  get  their  blue  chips  into
another  basket.  Secretary  McNamara  had  recommended  in  October  1966  that
MACV  take  responsibility  for  pacification.  Undersecretary  of  State  Katzenbach
had  marshalled  a  strong  case  against  this  step  at  least  until  embassy  leadership
of  civil  operations  was  given  a  chance.  The  upshot  was  that  it  was  given  half  a
chance — which  may  have  been  worse  than  none  at  all.

OCO  did,  however,  accomplish  the  creation  and  selection  of  Regional  Direc-
tors and  OCO  Province  Representatives.  One  individual  was  made  responsible
for  all  civil  operations  in  each  Corps  Tactical  Zone  (CTZ)  and  in  each  province.
The  U.S.  military  chain  of  command  had  already  adapted  itself  to  parallel  the
RVNAF  organization,  but  below  Corps  level  it  was  more  complex.  Each  division
within  ARVN  was  advised  by  a  senior  advisor  (a  colonel)  who  was  given  super-
visory authority  over  the  militarv  Sector  (Province)  Advisors  within  the
Divisional  Tactical  Area  (DTA)  for  which  his  division  had  responsibility.  Thus,
while  civil  lines  of  authority  went  directly  from  corps  level  (the  region)  to  prov-
ince, the  military  advisory  chain  added  an  additional  link  at  division.  Sector  ad-
visors under  this  arrangement  found  themselves  working  under  a  military  officer
whose  advisorv  responsibilities  were  actually  military  whereas  theirs  were  only
partly  (and  sometimes  only  nominal! v)  military.

OCO  attempted  to  have  the  ARVN  divisions  removed  from  pacification
responsibilities,  but  without  success.  When  the  Office  of  Civil  Operations  and
Revolutionary  Development  Support  (CORDS)  was  established  under  MACV
in  mid- 1967  as  the  single  manager  for  all  pacification  advisors,  the  issue  could
not  be  argued  with  the  same  force.  For  by  the  time  COMUSMACV  assumed
responsibiHty  for  pacification  (through  a  ci\ilian  deputy — Ambassador  Komer),
ARVN  had  also  expanded  its  role  in  the  pacification  effort.  The  ARVN  division,
it  could  be  argued,  was  as  much  a  part  of  the  pacification  effort  as  were  the
programs  supported  by  the  U.S.  civil  agencies.

But  although  the  argument  for  removing  the  Senior  Division  Advisor  from
the  U.S.  chain  of  command  over  provincial  advisors  lost  theoretic  weight  with
the  creation  of  CORDS,  the  new  civilian  deputy  to  COMUSMACV  secured
General  Westmoreland's  approval  to  remove  the  division  advisors  from  the
pacification  chain  of  command  and  to  work  to  get  ARVN  to  take  parallel  action.
This  step  illustrates  the  extent  to  which  civil  influences  were  able  to  operate
within  this  new  section  of  MACV.  CORDS  was  of  such  size  that  it  be-


488 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

came  quasi-independent.  One  would  have  to  carry  an  issue  in  dispute  all  the  way
to  COMUSMACV  before  it  moved  outside  of  CORDS  channels.

The  comprehensiveness  of  this  reorganization  may  be  seen  in  the  following
MACV  Directive,  reproduced  in  its  entirety,  and  especially  in  the  schematic
diagram  laying  out  the  new  U.S.  command  structure  for  a  Corps  area:


MACV  Dir  10-12

HEADQUARTERS
UNITED  STATES  MILITARY  ASSISTANCE  COMMAND,

VIETNAM
APO  San  Francisco  96222

DIRECTIVE  28  May  1967

NUMBER  10-12  (MACCORDS)


ORGANIZATIONS  AND  FUNCTIONS  FOR  CIVIL  OPERATIONS
AND  REVOLUTIONARY  DEVELOPMENT  SUPPORT

1.  PURPOSE.  To  provide  for  the  integration  of  Civil  Operations  and
Revolutionary  Development  Support  activities  within  MACV.

2.  GENERAL.

a.  To  provide  for  single  manager  direction  of  all  US  civil/military
Revolutionary  Development  activities  in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  re-
sponsibility has  been  assigned  to  COMUSMACV.

b.  The  position  of  Deputy  for  Civil  Operations  and  Revolutionary
Development  Support  to  COMUSMACV  is  established  and  carries  the
personal  rank  of  Ambassador.  The  Deputy  for  Civil  Operations  and
Revolutionary  Development  Support  to  COMUSMACV  assists  COMUS-
MACV in  discharging  his  responsibilities  in  the  field  of  military
and  civilian  support  to  the  GVN's  Revolutionary  Development  Program.
Specifically,  he  is  charged  by  COMUSMACV  with  supervising  the  for-
mulation and  execution  of  all  plans,  policies  and  programs,  military  and
civilian,  which  support  the  GVN's  Revolutionary  Development  program
and  related  programs.

c.  All  activities  and  functions  of  the  former  Ofliice  of  Civil  Operations
(OCO)  and  the  MACV  Directorate  for  Revolutionary  Development
(RD)  Support  are  combined  in  the  office  of  the  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff
for  Civil  Operations  and  Revolutionary  Development  Support  (CORDS).

d.  The  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff  for  Civil  Operations  and  Revolutionary
Development  Support  is  assigned  functions  as  follows:

(1)  Advises  COMUSMACV,  MACV  staff  elements  and  all  US  civil-
ian agencies  on  all  aspects  of  U.S.  civil/ military  support  for  the  Govern-
ment of  Vietnam's  RD  Program.

(2)  In  conjunction  with  Government  of  Vietnam  authorities,
develops  joint  and  combined  plans,  policies,  concepts  and  programs  con-
cerning US  civil  military  support  for  Revolutionary  Development.

(3)  Supervises  the  execution  of  plans  and  programs  for  US  civil/-
military  support  of  Revolutionary  Development.

(4)  Provides  advice  and  assistance  to  the  Government  of  Vietnam,


The  Advisory  Bidld-Up,  1961-1967  489


including  the  Ministry  of  Revolutionary  Development,  the  Republic  of
Vietnam  Armed  Forces  Joint  General  Staff  and  other  GVN  agencies  on
US  civil/military  support  for  Revolutionary  Development  including  US
advisory  and  logistical  support.

(5)  Develops  requirements  for  military  and  civil  assets  (US  and
GVN)  to  support  Revolutionary  Development.

(6)  Serves  as  the  contact  point  with  sponsoring  agencies  for  RD
programs.  Maintains  liaison  with  sponsoring  agencies  in  representing
their  interests  in  civil  non-RD  programs  and  activities  in  the  field.  Main-
tains direct  operational  communications  with  field  elements  for  these  pro-
grams.

(7)  Is  responsible  for  program  coordination  with  the  various  Mission
civil  agencies  in  the  planning  and  implementation  of  non-RD  activities
as  they  impinge  upon  or  affect  RD-related  activities.

(8)  Provides  MACV  focal  point  for  economic  warfare  to  include
population  and  resources  control,  and  for  civic  action  by  US  forces.

(9)  Evaluates  all  civil  military  RD  activities  including  provision  of
security  for  RD  by  US/FWMA/GVN  military  forces  and  reports  on
progress,  status  and  problems  of  RD  Support.

(10)  Acts  on  all  RD  Support  policy  matters  pertaining  to  subordinate
echelons.

(11)  Directs  advisory  relationships  with  GVN  on  RD  and  RD-related
matters.

3.  Implementation

a.  Integration  and  consolidation  of  OCO  and  RD  Support  activities  will
be  accomplished  at  all  levels:  Headquarters  MACV,  region  CTZ,  province
and  district.

b.  Organization  for  CORDS  will  conform  generally  to  the  schematic
organizational  diagram  attached  at  Annex  A,  allowing  for  differences  in
the  situations  in  the  various  regions  CTZ's,  provinces  and  districts.

c.  Additionally,  in  developing  detailed  organizations  and  functions  at
each  level,  force  commanders/senior  advisors  will  be  guided  by  the  follow-
ing principles:

(1)  Region/CTZ.

(a)  The  OCO  regional  director  will  be  designated  the  Deputy  for
Civil  Operations  and"  Revolutionary  Development  Support  to  the  force
commander  /senior  advisor.  As  such,  he  will  be  charged  with  supervising
the  formulation  and  execution  of  all  military  and  civilian  plans,  poli-
cies and  programs  which  support  the  GVN's  RD  program  to  include
civic  action  performed  by  US  units.

(b)  For  all  matters  relating  to  RVNAF  military  support  for  Revolu-
tionary Development,  the  deputy  senior  advisor  will  operate  under  the
supervision  of  the  Deputy  for  CORDS.

(c)  The  Deputy  OCO  regional  director  will  be  designated  the  As-
sistant Deputy  for  Civil  Operations  and  Revolutionary  Development
Support  or  the  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  CORDS.  In  this  capacity,  he
will  head  an  integrated  civil  military  staff  which  parallels,  as  appropriate,
the  MACV  CORDS  organization.  Further,  he  will  direct  headquarters-
based  RD-related  and  non-RD  technical  programs.

(d)  Except  for  psychological  operations  and  intelligence,  those  ele-
ments of  the  staffs  of  the  force  commander /senior  advisor  and  deputy
senior  advisor  engaged  primarily  in  RD  Support  activities  will  be  inte-


490 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

grated  into  the  staff  of  the  Assistant  Deputy  for  Civil  Operations  and
Revolutionary  Development  Support  or  the  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,
CORDS.  At  a  later  date,  after  on-going  studies  are  completed,  further
guidance  may  be  issued  if  needed  for  the  integration  of  civil  and  military
intelligence  and  psychological  warfare  functions  which  represent  special
cases.

(2)  Province.

(a)  At  province,  an  integrated  provincial  advisory  team  composed
of  the  current  OCO  provincial  team  and  MACV  sector  advisory  team
will  be  organized.

(b)  The  new  provincial  team  will  continue  to  carry  out  all  functions
currently  performed  at  province.  However,  the  province  represen-
tative may  organize,  with  the  approval  of  the  Deputy  for  Revolutionary
Development  Support  at  region/CTZ,  his  personnel  and  functions  as  he
sees  fit.

(c)  A  single  team  chief,  designated  the  Senior  Provincial  Advisor,
will  be  assigned  to  each  province.  The  senior  provincial  advisor  will  be
chosen  by  the  Deputy  for  CORDS  and  the  force  commander  senior
advisor,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Deputy  CORDS  to  COMUS-
MACV,  on  the  basis  of  security  in  the  province,  civil-military  balance  in
the  RD  effort  and  qualifications  and  experience  of  the  current  OCO  senior
provincial  advisor  and  MACV  sector  advisor.  The  individual  not  selected
will  serve  as  the  other's  deputy  as  well  as  being  his  principal  advisor  for
civil  operations  or  military  support  as  the  case  may  be.

(d)  The  province  senior  advisor  will  receive  operational  direction
from  and  report  through  the  Deputy  for  CORDS  to  the  force  com-
mander ^senior  advisor.  The  military  element  of  the  provincial  team  will
receive  logistical  and  administrative  support  from  the  division  advisory
team.

(e)  Where  RVNAF  units  are  attached  to  the  province  chief  for  direct
support  of  RD,  advisors  to  these  units  will  come  under  the  operational
control  of  the  senior  province  advisor.

(f)  The  senior  province  advisor  will  serve  as  the  Vietnamese  province
chief's  principal  advisor.  However,  technical  advice,  military  or  civil,
should  continue  to  be  given  to  the  province  chief  or  his  representative
by  the  most  qualified  member  of  the  provincial  team.  In  all  cases,  the
senior  province  advisor  must  be  aware  of  the  advice  given  and  will  set
the  policies  to  which  advice  will  conform.

(3)  District.

(a)  At  district  an  integrated  district  advisory  team  composed  of  the
current  MACV  sub-sector  team  and  OCO  district  representative  will  be
organized.

(b)  The  new  district  team  will  be  responsible  for  civil /military  ad-
vice to  the  GVN  district  organization  and  for  the  implementation  of  all
US  civil  and  military  support  programs  at  district.

(c"*  A  single  team  chief,  designated  Senior  District  Advisor  will  be
assigned  to  each  district.  The  senior  district  advisor  will  be  chosen  by  the
senior  province  advisor  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Deputy  CORDS  to
the  force  commander  senior  advisor  on  the  basis  of  security  in  the  dis-
trict, civil-militarv  balance  in  the  RD  effort  and  qualifications  and  ex-
perience of  the  current  OCO  district  representative  and  MACV  sub-
sector  advisor.  The  individual  not  selected  will  serve  as  the  other's  dep-


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  491


uty  as  well  as  being  his  principal  advisor  for  civil  operations  or  military
support  as  the  case  may  be.

(d)  Where  no  OCO  district  representative  is  present,  the  MACV
sub-sector  team  will  become  the  district  Civil  Operations  and  Revolu-
tionary Development  staff  and  the  sub-sector  advisor  will  be  designated
senior  district  advisor.

(4)  The  III  CTZ  organization  for  Civil  Operations  and  Revolutionary
Development  Support  will  conform  generally  to  the  schematic  organiza-
tional diagram  attached  at  Annex  B.

(5)  For  the  time  being  there  will  be  no  change  in  the  present  IV  CTZ
organization.  Implementing  instructions  for  the  IV  CTZ  organization  for
Civil  Operations  and  Revolutionary  Development  Support  will  be  pro-
vided at  a  later  date.

(6)  Force  commanders/senior  advisors  will  revise  their  organizations
and  redraft  their  statements  of  functions  to  comply  with  the  guidance  set
out  in  this  directive.  The  revisions  will  be  forwarded  to  this  headquarters
for  approval  by  15  Jun  67.

4.  Administrative  and  Logistics  Support

a.  For  the  time  being,  there  will  be  no  change  in  administrative  and
logistics  support.  Civilian  elements  of  the  integrated  organization  will  con-
tinue to  be  supported  (funds,  personnel,  and  other  requirements)  by  their
respective  agencies,  i.e.,  Embassy,  AID,  JUSPAO,  USIA  and  OSA.

b.  It  is  intended  that  a  continuing  effort  be  undertaken  toward  logistic
and  administrative  economy  through  consolidation  and  cross-servicing  of
appropriate  support  activities.

5.  Reference.  State  Department  MSG  9  May  1967

[see  following  page]


5.  RVNAFs  Role  in  Pacification

It  has  already  been  noted  that  the  U.S.  gradually  came  to  espouse  a  division
of  effort  between  U.S.  forces  and  RVNAF  in  which  the  former  would  concen-
trate on  defeating  the  main  forces  of  the  insurgents  in  the  unpopulated  areas
while  RVNAF  concentrated  on  securing  pacification  operations  in  the  populated
areas.

General  Westmoreland  first  informed  Washington  of  his  intention  to  follow
this  general  division  of  effort  in  late  August  1966.  But  his  emphasis  was  one  of
degree,  he  made  clear,  rather  than  of  mutually  exclusive  categories:

.  .  .  Our  strategy  will  be  one  of  a  general  offensive  with  maximum
practical  support  to  area  and  population  security  in  further  support  of
Revolutionary  Development.

The  essential  tasks  of  Revolutionary  Development  and  nation  building
cannot  be  accomplished  if  enemy  main  forces  can  gain  access  to  the  pop-
ulation centers  and  destroy  our  efforts.  US,  Free  World  Forces,  with  their
mobility  and  in  coordination  with  RVNAF,  must  take  the  fight  to
the  enemy  by  attacking  his  main  forces  and  invading  his  base  areas.  Our
abiUty  to  do  this  is  improving  steadily.  Maximum  emphasis  will  be  given
to  the  use  of  long  range  patrols  and  other  means  to  find  the  enemy  and
locate  his  bases.  Forces  and  bases  thus  discovered  will  be  subjected  to  either


492


IvTACV  nil-  lG-12
2S  Mr.y  1067


Force  CoTr\7>iandeir /Senior  Advisov  i

Deputy  Force
Comtmai»de-r

Deputy  Foi'

CORDS  !

L.


Chief  of  Str.it


Force

Gcncra.1  Str.ff


Asst  Chic:  o:
for
CORDS


Deputy  Senior
j  Advisor  (Military)


Support


TD'' - -  t,

Projrrr.  rr..s


1

.  I .  .

r

Chicu

NLD

RD

Hoi

:

Rep

orts

?sy  Ops


Public


US
Units


'A  ■


Provincial
Representative


,  PaRVN  Div
A '\ "aH  Advisory

!  'i^-^


Disc:

•ict

Representative

iARVN  Rcot
_o—  '^^^  Advisory


Tr.


nSXX.


--o^^^ TaRVN  Br.
""•^"^  Advisory
1  -Xc_rj3__


o-o-c-


Coordinatlon- -Military  and  CORDS  rr.r.tters
Operational  Control  Vv-licn  v.nit  asci^ned  on
RD  c'irect  support  mission..


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  493


ground  attack  or  quick  reaction  B-52  and  tactical  air  strikes.  When  feasible
B-52  strikes  will  be  followed  by  ground  forces  to  search  the  area.  Sustained
ground  combat  operations  will  maintain  pressure  on  the  enemy.

The  growing  strength  of  US/Free  World  forces  will  provide  the  shield
that  will  permit  ARVN  to  shift  its  weight  of  effort  to  an  extent  not  here-
tofore feasible  to  direct  support  of  Revolutionary  Development.  Also,  I
visualize  that  a  significant  number  of  the  US /Free  World  maneuver  bat-
talions  will  be  committed  to  tactical  areas  of  responsibility  (TAOR)  mis-
sions. These  missions  encompass  base  security  and  at  the  same  time  support
Revolutionary  Development  by  spreading  security  radially  from  the  bases
to  protect  more  of  the  population.  Saturation  patrolling,  civic  action,  and
close  association  with  ARVN,  regional  and  popular  forces  to  bolster  their
combat  effectiveness  are  among  the  tasks  of  the  ground  force  elements.  At
the  same  time  ARVN  troops  will  be  available  if  required  to  reinforce  of-
fensive operations  and  to  serve  as  reaction  forces  for  outlying  security  posts
and  government  centers  under  attack.  Our  strategy  will  include  opening,
constructing  and  using  roads,  as  well  as  a  start  toward  opening  and  recon-
structing the  national  railroad.  The  priority  effort  of  ARVN  forces  will  be
in  direct  support  of  the  Revolutionary  Development  program;  in  many
instances,  the  province  chief  will  exercise  operational  control  over  these
units.  This  fact  notwithstanding  the  ARVN  division  structure  must  be  main-
tained and  it  is  essential  that  the  division  commander  enthusiastically
support  Revolutionary  Development.  Our  highly  capable  US  Division  Com-
manders, who  are  closely  associated  with  corresponding  ARVN  com-
manders, are  in  a  position  to  influence  them  to  do  what  is  required.

We  intend  to  employ  all  forces  to  get  the  best  results  measured,  among
other  things,  in  terms  of  population  secured;  territory  cleared  of  enemy
influence;  VC/NVA  bases  eliminated;  and  enemy  guerrillas,  local  forces,
and  main  forces  destroyed.

Barring  unforeseen  change  in  enemy  strategy,  I  visualize  that  our
strategy  for  South  Vietnam  will  remain  essentially  the  same  throughout
1967.

General  Westmoreland  had  already  reached  agreement  with  General  Vien,
Chief  of  the  Joint  General  Staff  (JGS),  to  reorient  ARVN  to  pacification  sup-
port. General  Tillson,  MACV  J-3,  had  briefed  the  Mission  Council  in  Saigon  on
the  general  plan:

In  the  1967  campaign  plan,  we  propose  to  assign  ARVN  the  primary
mission  of  providing  direct  support  to  RD  and  US  FW  Forces  the  primary
mission  of  destroying  VC/NVA  main  forces  and  base  areas.  Agreement
has  been  reached  between  General  Westmoreland  and  General  Vien  that,
in  I,  II,  and  III  Corps  areas,  ARVN  will  devote  at  least  50%  of  its  effort
directly  in  support  of  the  RD  program.  In  IV  Corps,  where  there  are  no
US  forces,  it  was  agreed  that  ARVN  might  have  to  devote  up  to  75%  of  its
effort  to  offensive  operations.  .  .  .

General  Taylor,  now  serving  as  a  personal  advisor  to  President  Johnson,  im-
mediately recognized  the  importance  of  this  communication.  A  considered  re-
sponse should  be  sent  to  COMUSMACV,  he  advised  the  President,  lest  General
Westmoreland  regard  silence  as  tacit  consent  for  his  proposed  strategy.  Taylor
was enthusiastic about the expressed intent to reemphasize  revolutionary


494 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

development  (pacification),  seeing  in  it  the  best  hope  for  bringing  the  war  to
a  speedier  conclusion.  But  he  was  uneasy  about  future  charges  that  the  U.S.  had
taken  over  the  main  war  and  was  sustaining  larger  numbers  of  casualties  than
RVNAF.  He  was  also  concerned  about  involving  any  U.S.  troops  in  pacification
— suggesting  that  U.S.  displacement  of  GVN  leadership  would,  in  the  long  run,
be  counterproductive.

Ambassador  Lodge,  on  the  other  hand,  waxed  ecstatic  over  the  involvement
of  U.S.  units  in  pacification  work.  The  crux  of  the  problem,  he  argued,  was
security.  To  promote  security  U.S.  units  should  be  used  in  a  kind  of  advisory
function.  They  would  energize  ARVN  by  example:

To  meet  this  need  we  must  make  more  U.S.  troops  available  to  help  out
in  pacification  operations  as  we  move  to  concentrate  ARVN  effort  in  this
work.  U.S.  forces  would  be  the  catalyst;  would  lead  by  example;  and  would
work  with  the  Vietnamese  on  the  'buddy'  system.  They  would  be  the  10
percent  of  the  total  force  of  men  under  arms  (90  percent  of  whom  would
be  Vietnamese)  which  would  get  the  whole  thing  moving  faster.

This  has  been  done  on  a  small  scale  already  by  elements  of  the  U.S.
Marines,  1st  and  25th  U.S.  Infantry  Divisions,  and  the  Koreans.  We  think
it  can  be  made  to  work  and  the  gains  under  such  a  program,  while  not
flashy,  would  hopefully  be  solid.  Everything  depends  on  whether  we  can
change  ARVN  habits.  Experiments  already  made  indicate  that  U.S.  cas-
ualties would  be  few.

General  Taylor's  doubts  about  the  benefits  of  involving  U.S.  troop  units  in
pacification  carried  some  weight  in  Washington.  State  was  later  to  signal  Saigon
to  go  slow  on  U.S.  participation:

We  understand  General  Westmoreland  plans  use  of  limited  number  of
US  forces  in  buddy  system  principle  to  guide  and  motivate  RD/P.  How-
ever, we  have  serious  doubts  about  anv  further  involvement  US  troops
beyond  that.  .  .  .  We  fear  this  would  tempt  Vietnamese  to  leave  this  work
more  and  more  to  us  and  we  believe  pacification,  with  its  intimate  contact
with  population,  more  appropriate  for  Vietnamese  forces,  who  must  after
all  as  arm  of  GVN  establish  constructive  relations  with  population.  Hence
we  believe  there  should  be  no  thought  of  US  taking  substantial  share  of
pacification.  The  urgent  need  is  to  begin  effectively  pressing  ARVN.

6.  The  1967  Combined  Campaign  Plan

The  upshot  of  these  exchanges,  which  illustrate  the  wide  acceptance  in  U.S.
quarters  of  the  proposed  division  of  effort  between  U.S.  forces  and  RVNAF,
was  that  the  MACV  JGS  Combined  Campaign  Plan  for  1967  (AB  142),  pub-
lished 7  November  1966,  reflected  "primary  missions"  for  US/PWMAF  and
RVNAF  and  implied  that  few  U.S.  forces  would  be  committed  directly  to  the
pacification  effort.  The  exact  number  of  such  forces  was  not  specified;  it  was  left
to  COMUSMACV's  discretion  within  the  restraints  already  suggested  by
Washington.  The  JGS  did  agree,  however,  to  keep  53  ARVN  battalions  in  sup-
port of  revolutionarv  development  during  1967.  In  addition,  230-odd  RF  com-
panies and  over  800  RF  platoons  were  to  support  the  pacification  program.

Conceptualh ,  the  regular  AR\'N  units  were  to  conduct  the  more  difficult


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  495


clearing  operations  and  then  turn  over  responsibility  for  the  "securing  phase"
to  the  RF/PF  outfits.  All  of  this  was  outlined  in  considerable  detail  in  the  Com-
bined Campaign  Plan,  with  specific  assignments  to  certain  kinds  of  units  for  each
phase  of  the  pacification  effort.  The  pertinent  sections  of  AB  142  follow:


2.  (C)  ARVN  REGULAR  FORCES:
Phase  ARVN  Regular  Forces

Clearing Tasks  in  direct  support  of  RD  activities:

1.  Conduct  operations  to  clear  VC/NVA  main  force  units
from  provincial  priority  areas  and  other  critical  areas  in  ac-
cordance with  established  provincial  RD  plans.

2.  Conduct,  in  conjunction  with  provincial  military  forces
and  civil  intelligence  and  poHce  elements,  operations  to  destroy
VC  guerrillas  and  infrastructure  in  specified  hamlet  or  village
areas  in  accordance  with  established  provincial  RD  plans.

Securing Tasks  in  direct  support  of  RD  activities:

3.  Conduct,  in  conjunction  with  provincial  military  forces
and  civil  intelligence  and  police  elements,  operations  to  destroy
VC  guerrillas  and  infrastructure  when  provincial  forces  are
inadequate  for  this  task.

4.  Provide,  in  conjunction  with  provincial  military  forces  and
National  Police,  local  area  security  and  security  for  the  popula-
tion and  GVN  cadre  elements  when  provincial  forces  are  in-
adequate for  this  task.

Developing Tasks  in  direct  support  of  RD  activities:

5.  Provide,  in  conjunction  with  provincial  military  forces
and  National  Police,  local  area  security  and  security  for  the
population  and  GVN  cadre  elements  when  provincial  forces
are  inadequate  for  this  task.

All  Phases Tasks  in  direct  support  of  RD  activities:

6.  Conduct  military  PSYOP  in  support  of  RD  activities  with
emphasis  on  operations  in  support  of  the  Chieu  Hoi  program.

7.  Conduct,  in  coordination  with  sector  commanders,  mili-
tary civic  action  to  help  win  the  support  of  the  people  for
the  government  with  emphasis  on  the  proper  behavior  and  dis-
cipline of  troops.

8.  Assist  sector  commanders  in  the  recruiting  and  training  of
RF/PF.

Related  tasks:

9.  Conduct  offensive  search  and  destroy  operations  against
VC/NVA  main  forces  to  prevent  their  incursion  into  areas
undergoing  RD.

10.  Provide  elements  for  reserve /reaction  forces  in  support
of  military  forces  in  areas  undergoing  RD.


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


3.  (C)  US/FWMAF.
Phase


US/FWMAF


Clearing Tasks  in  direct  support  of  RD  activities:

1.  Conduct  combined  and  unilateral  operations  to  clear  VC/
NVA  main  forces  from  provincial  priority  areas  and  other
critical  areas  in  accordance  with  established  provincial  RD
plans.

2.  Conduct  combined  operations  in  conjunction  with  ARVN
and/or  provincial  military  forces  and  police  elements,  opera-
tions to  destroy  VC  guerrillas  and  infrastructure  in  specified
hamlet  or  village  areas  in  accordance  with  established  provin-
cial RD  plans.

AH  Phases Tasks  in  direct  support  of  RD  activities:

3.  Conduct  other  combined  battalion  and  smaller  unit  opera-
tions with  RVNAF  to  accomplish  specific  RD  tasks  in  areas
undergoing  clearing,  securing,  and  developing  as  appropriate.

4.  Conduct,  in  coordination  with  sector  and  subsector  com-
manders, military  civic  action  to  help  win  the  support  of  the
people  for  the  government  with  emphasis  to  ensure  that  credit
is  given  to  the  GVN.

5.  Assist  sector  commanders  in  the  training  of  RF/PF.

Related  tasks:

6.  Conduct  combmed  and  unilateral  ofi"ensive  search  and
destroy  operations  against  VC  NVA  main  forces  to  prevent
their  incursion  into  areas  undergoing  RD.

4.  (C)  PROVINCIAL  FORCES:
a.  REGIONAL  FORCES  (RF).

Phase  Regional  Forces

Clearing  L  Assist,  within  capabilities,  ARVN  regular  forces  and/or

US  FWMAF  to  clear  VC  NVA  main  force  units  from  provin-
cial priority  areas  and  other  critical  areas  in  accordance  with
provincial  RD  plans.

2.  Assist,  within  capabilities,  ARVN  regular  forces  to  de-
stroy VC  guerrillas  and  infrastructure.

Securing  3.  Conduct,  in  conjunction  with  civil  intelligence  and  police

elements,  operations  to  destroy  VC  guerrillas  and  infrastruc-
ture.

4.  Provide  local  area  security  with  priority  to  major  com-
munications complexes  and  other  sensitive  areas.

5.  Provide  local  security  for  the  population  and  GVN  civil
cadre  elements  in  hamlet  and  village  areas  where  PF  are  inade-
quate for  this  task.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  497

Phase  Regional  Forces


6.  Assist  GVN  cadre  elements  to  perform  economic  and
social  development  projects.

7.  Assist  National  Police  in  population  and  resources  con-
trol and  or  to  maintain  law  and  order  and  protect  public
safety.

8.  Assist  in  the  recruiting  and  training  of  PF.

9.  Assist  GVN  civil  cadre  elements  to  organize  and  train
people's  self-defense  forces.

Developing  10.  Continue  tasks  4  and  5  until  relieved  by  National  Police
or  other  authorized  provincial  police  forces  which  may  be
established.

11.  Provide  elements  for  reserve  reaction  forces  to  counter
the  return  of  VC  NVA  main  or  irregular  forces  into  areas  un-
dergoing developing.

12.  Continue  task  6.

13.  Continue  task  7  as  necessary.

b.  POPULAR  FORCES  (PF)
Phase  Popular  Forces

Securing  1.  Provide  local  security  for  the  population  and  GVN  civil

cadre  elements  in  hamlet  and  villacre  areas.

2.  Assist  RF  to  provide  local  area  security.

3.  Assist  GVN  civil  cadre  elements  to  perform  economic
and  social  development  projects.

4.  Assist  National  Police  in  population  and  resources  con-
trol and  or  to  maintain  law  and  order  and  protect  public
safety.

5.  Assist  GVN  civil  cadre  elements  to  organize  and  train
people's  self-defense  forces.

Developing  6.  Continue  tasks  1  and  2  until  relieved  by  National  Police
or  other  authorized  provincial  police  forces  which  may  be
established.

7.  Continue  task  3.

8.  Continue  task  4  as  necessary.


c.  NATIONAL  POLICE  FORCES.
Phase  National  Police  Forces

Clearing  1.  Develop  and  maintain  informant  nets  and  other  intelli-

gence nets.

2.  Supply  intelligence  to  military  forces.

3.  Participate  with  military  forces  in  operations  to  destroy
VC  guerrillas  and  infrastructure.

4.  Assume  custody  of  and  interrogate  VC  suspects.


498 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II
Phase  National  Police  Forces

Securing  5.  Continue  tasks  1  through  4  above.

6.  Initiate  population  and  resources  control.

7.  Maintain  law  and  order  and  protect  public  safety.

8.  Assist,  within  capabilities,  military  forces  to  provide  local
area  security  and  security  for  the  population  and  GVN  cadre
elements.

Developing 9.  Maintain  population  and  resources  control.

10.  Continue  tasks  1,  2,  4  and  7  above.

11.  Prevent  the  reorganization  of  the  VC  infrastructure.

12.  Prevent  and  control  riots  and  sabotage  of  public  security.

13.  Relieve  military  forces,  when  capable,  and  provide  local
area  security  and  security  for  the  population  and  GVN  cadre
elements.

7.  Leverage  and  Sovereignty

The  decision  to  effect  a  division  of  effort  between  RVNAF  and  US  FWMAF
suggests  how  far  U.S.  policymakers  were  willing  to  go  (perhaps  "determined"
would  be  more  accurate)  to  carve  out  an  area  for  independent  GVN  conduct
of  at  least  some  major  phase  of  the  war.  It  suggests,  too,  their  relative  dissatis-
faction with  RVNAF  improvement  during  the  years  in  which  the  U.S.  ad-
visory effort  had  been  directed  toward  such  improvement.  The  question
remained  whether  U.S.  influence  could  be  brought  effectively  to  bear  through
example  and  persuasion  or  should  be  back-stopped  by  more  direct  measures —
by  the  use  of  a  range  of  negative  measures  gathered  under  the  rubric  of
"leverage."

General  Taylor's  recommendations  at  the  beginning  of  the  U.S.  advisory
build-up  in  1961,  it  will  be  remembered,  emphasized  a  "limited  partnership"  in
which  U.S.  advisors  would  actually  work  alongside  their  Vietnamese  counter-
parts instead  of  merely  "advising  them  at  arm's  length."  By  means  of  this  closer
working  relationship  in  the  field  rather  than  just  in  various  headquarters,  Tay-
lor had  suggested,  RVNAF  effectiveness  would  become  the  product  of  mutually
shared  goals  pursued  through  mutually  shared  experiences.  Conscious  adoption
of  an  alternative  course,  the  use  of  leverage,  would  have  changed  the  relation-
ship from  one  of  nominal  "partnership"  to  one  of  de  facto  U.S.  leadership —
bordering  in  some  instances  on  U.S.  command.  This,  in  turn,  would  have  been  a
very  real  infringement  of  Vietnamese  sovereignty  and  an  admission  that  the
GVN  could  not  manage  adequately  its  own  affairs.  It  would  have  undercut
Vietnamese  independence  in  both  a  legal  sense  and  in  terms  of  GVN  compe-
tence.

When  the  Diem  regime  did  not  respond  as  it  had  been  expected  (or  hoped)
it  would,  and  after  Diem's  government  was  overturned,  the  U.S.  again  refused
consciously  to  adopt  leverage  procedures  to  compel  improved  performance.
First  with  General  Minh,  then  with  General  Khanh,  the  hope  was  that  im-
proved receptivitv  (as  compared  to  the  most  recent  past  experience)  on  the
part  of  the  GVN  would  permit  the  carrot  to  work  effectively  without  the  stick.
The  period  just  ended  in  mid- 1965  when  U.S.  troops  were  committed  to  South
Vietnam  marked  another  occasion  to  examine  the  putative  advantages  and  dis-
advantages of  the  use  of  leverage.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  499


Generally  speaking,  Washington  policymakers  (less  so  in  the  State  Depart-
ment), were  prone  to  suggest  the  use  of  leverage  in  the  abstract.  The  U.S.  Mis-
sion and  MACV  tended  to  oppose  such  proposals.  Field  advisors  were,  as  a
group,  most  favorably  disposed  toward  the  use  of  leverage.  Those  whose  deal-
ings included  establishing  a  close  working  relationship  with  GVN  (to  include
RVNAF)  officials  found  that  the  threat  of  leverage  was  a  stumbling  block  to
such  a  relationship.  Some  also  found  that  the  price  of  acceptance  without
leverage  was  the  virtual  absence  of  influence.  Robert  Shaplen  summarized  this
phenomenon  in  a  pessimistic  1965  evaluation  of  the  U.S.  advisory  effort:

The  advisory  program,  while  it  had  been  a  tribute  to  the  politeness  of
both  parties,  had  failed  in  its  primary  aim  of  persuading  the  Vietnamese
officers  to  get  their  men  out  into  the  countryside  and  to  stay  there,  if  neces-
sary, day  and  night,  for  weeks  on  end  in  order  to  beat  the  Communists  at
their  own  game.  This  view  of  the  failure  of  American  efforts  at  persuasion
was  privately  expressed  to  me  by  most  of  the  advisers  I  spoke  with  during
my  trip  through  the  vital  plateau  area,  and  it  was  reinforced  by  what  ad-
visers from  other  battle  areas  told  me.  The  consensus  was  that  the  system
was  inherently  anomalous  and  unworkable  in  that  it  reflected  the  American
predilection  for  trying  to  get  a  difficult  and  probably  impossible  job  done
in  what  a  British  friend  of  mine  described  as  "your  typical  nice  American
way."

Having  rejected  proposals  for  a  combined  command  (presumably  under  U.S.
leadership)  and  for  the  encadrement  of  U.S.  troops  with  RVNAF  units,  the
U.S.  was  left — in  late  1965 — with  the  continuing  and  perplexing  issue  of
whether  or  not  to  adopt  the  use  of  leverage  in  some  comprehensive  and  planned
manner.  Earlier  decisions  had  been  to  avoid  the  issue  by  side-stepping  it.  But  the
isolated  occasions  on  which  its  use  had  been  attempted  did  little  to  substantiate
the  argument  that  cries  of  neocolonialism  were  simply  the  price  one  had  to  pay
for  short  run  effectiveness.  Indeed,  some  backfires  tended  to  have  the  opposite
effect.  Ambassador  Taylor,  for  instance,  had  had  a  disastrous  experience  in  try-
ing to  use  the  U.S.  decision  to  commence  bombing  North  Vietnam  as  a  lever  to
get  GVN  reform  in  December  1964.  The  net  outcome  was  a  violent  reaction
by  General  Khanh  who  very  nearly  had  Taylor  thrown  out  of  the  country  as
personna  non  grata.  In  the  end,  it  was  Khanh  who  went,  hut  the  political  tur-
moil that  this  produced  in  the  first  months  of  1965,  when  the  course  of  the  war
was  taking  a  dramatic  turn  against  the  GVN,  convinced  Taylor  that  such  at-
tempts should  not  be  made  ag'ain  at  the  national  level.  It  was  at  this  time  that
the  "troika  sign-off"  was  abandoned  because  of  claims  that  it  stifled  GVN
development.  Then  in  late  1965  USOM  began  to  have  second  thoughts  on  the
wisdom  of  abandoning  control  of  its  resources  in  the  field  and  proposed  a  restora-
tion of  the  troika  sign-off.  The  Mission  Council  endorsed  the  plan  and  had  al-
ready launched  discussions  with  the  GVN  when  the  State  Department  objected
to  the  idea,  insisting  that  it  would  undermine  U.S.  efforts  to  make  the  Viet-
namese more  independent  and  effective.  There  the  matter  died.

In  a  related  effort  to  overcome  delays  in  the  Vietnamese  pacification  program,
MACV  acceded  to  its  advisors'  recommendations  and,  in  October,  created  a
separate  contingency  fund  of  50,000  piasters  for  each  subsector  advisor  to  be
used  for  urgent  projects.  Sector  advisors  were  also  given  access  to  special  funds.
The  program  was  highly  successful  and  toward  the  end  of  the  year  consideration


500 Gravel  Edition  The  Peiitagon  Papers  Vol.  II

was  given  to  permanent  establishment  of  such  revolving  funds.  The  plan  was
abandoned,  however,  after  the  four-month  trial  period  due  to  the  strong  oppo-
sition of  the  GVN  Minister  for  RD,  General  Thang.  who  contended  such  funds
were  undermining  the  legitimate  efforts  of  his  organization  to  meet  urgent  prov-
ince needs.  Thev  would  encourage,  he  said,  Vietnamese  dependence  on  the  U.S.

But  USOM  did  experiment  succcssfullv  with  one  new  form  of  direct,  selective
leverage  in  the  late  summer  of  1965.  The  Province  Chief  of  Binh  Tuv  Province.
Lt  Colonel  Chi,  was  accused  of  misusing  some  $250,000  in  AID  funds.  When
USOM  pressure  on  the  GVN  for  his  removal  produced  no  results,  aid  to  the
province  was  suspended  on  September  23,  and  USOM  field  personnel  were
withdrawn.  In  spite  of  Chi's  friendship  with  the  Defense  Minister  and  Deputy
Premier  (General  Co)  Premier  Kv  removed  him  six  weeks  later.  Aid  to  the
province  then  resumed,  but  Ambassador  Lodge  made  it  clear  to  the  Mission
Council  that  he  disapproved  of  the  action  and  did  not  want  it  repeated  (particu-
larlv  the  press  coverage).

As  alreadv  indicated,  both  Ambassadors  Ta\lor  (after  his  experience  in  De-
cember 1964)  and  Lodge  preferred  not  to  force  the  G\'N  or  attempt  to  use
high-level  pressure  to  reach  solutions  we  felt  necessarv.  The  fragilitv  of  the
political  arrangements  in  Saigon  at  anv  point  in  time  seemed  to  dictate  against
any  V  S.  action  that  might  precipitate  coups  or  disruption  from  elements  even
less  disposed  to  be  cooperative  than  the  current  group,  whoever  thev  might  be.
In  this  view,  the  successive  Ambassadors  were  strongh  supported  bv  the  State
Department.  The  one  consistent  Washington  advocate  for  an  increased  use  of
leverage  was  Secretarv  McNamara.  But  the  Secretarv  of  Defense's  views  did  not
prevail  in  this  issue  as  thev  did  in  so  man\  others.  The  overall  U.S.  approach  to
advice  in  South  Vietnam  continued  to  be  dominated  bv  the  felt  U.S.  need  to
avoid  undercutting  governmental  stahilitv.  U.S.  support  was  figurativelv  re-
garded as  a  rug  which  if  pulled  out  from  under  the  GVN  would  cause  it  to  fall,
not  as  a  lever  whose  use  might  spur  increased  effectiveness.

8. The  Inconeliisive  Debate  Over  Leverai^e

This  persistent  U.S.  avoidance  of  the  planned  use  of  leverage  was,  until  about
1966,  paralleled  bv  an  equallv  persistent  avoidance  of  an\  candid  examination
of  the  whole  pandora's  box  which  was  conjured  up  bv  the  mere  mention  of  the
subject.  But  during  1966.  and  continuing  into  1967  and  bevond,  there  were  re-
peated attempts  bv  lower  echelons  within  the  policvmaking  apparatus  to  pro-
mote an  internal  examination.  Those  who  made  such  proposals  were  in  favor
of  some  kind  of  authorized,  premeditated  use  of  leverage,  of  course,  else  they
would  not  ha\  e  pushed  for  an  examination  of  this  hitherto  avoided  topic.

When  operational  groups — as  distinct  from  policvmakers  who  could  defer
when  to  implement — urged  the  adoption  of  leverage  measures  the  recommen-
dations tended  to  be  summarilv  struck  down.  In  1966.  for  instance,  an  inquirv
by  the  MACV  statf  into  the  poor  performance  records  of  the  5th  and  25th
ARVN  Divisions — both  stationed  near  Saigon — concluded  that  if  other  meas-
ures failed  to  impro\e  these  units.  COMUSMACN'  should  withdraw  U.S.  ad-
visors and  Militarv  Assistance  Program  (MAP)  support.  General  Westmoreland
deleted  from  the  studv  the  recommendation  for  the  withdrawal  of  MAP  sup-
port. He  further  directed  that  sanctions  against  .A.RVN  be  avoided.  The  U.S.
1st  and  25th  Infantrv  Di\isions  were  instructed  to  assist  the  two  ARVN  divi-
sions and  to  increase  their  own  participation  in  pacification  operations  in  Binh


The  Advisory  Build-Up.  1961-1967  501


Duong  and  Hau  Nghia  Provinces.  It  was  clear  that  the  time  was  not  ripe  for  ac-
tion; there  was  no  agreed  basis  upon  which  action  might  be  taken.

But  another  Armv  staff  effort,  the  PROX'N  Study  referred  to  earher,  set  out
to  rectif\"  this  omission.  Commissioned  in  mid- 1965  b\  Armv  Chief  of  Staff
General  Harold  K.  Johnson,  the  PRON'N  group  was  charged  with  "developing
new  sources  of  action  to  be  taken  in  South  X'ietnam  bv  the  United  States  and
its  allies,  which  will,  in  conjunction  with  current  actions,  modified  as  necessarv.
lead  in  due  time  to  successful  accomplishment  of  U.S.  aims  and  objectives."
After  eight  months  of  intensive  effort  this  select  group  of  middle  ranking  officers
produced  a  comprehensive  argument  calling  for  emphasis  on  the  pacification
eff'ort.  A  radical  decentralization  of  U.S.  and  G\'N  directive  authoritv  was  held
to  be  necessar\"  for  this  purpose.  And  to  make  sure  that  national  plans  were
turned  into  concrete  actions  at  the  operating  level.  PRO\'N  called  for  the
calculated  use  of  leverage:

The  situation  in  South  N'ietnam  has  seriouslv  deteriorated.  1966  mav
well  be  the  last  chance  to  ensure  eventual  success.  •'N'ictorv'"  can  onlv  be
achieved  through  bringing  the  indi\idual  X'ietnamese,  tvpicallv  a  rural
peasant,  to  support  willingK  the  CA'N.  The  critical  actions  are  those  that
occur  at  the  village,  district,  and  pro\incial  le\els.  This  is  where  the  war
must  be  fought:  this  is  where  that  war  and  the  object  which  lies  bevond  it
must  be  won.  The  following  are  the  most  important  specific  actions  re-
quired now:

— Concentrate  U.S.  operations  on  the  proxincial  level  to  include  the
delegation  of  command  authorit\  o\er  U.S.  operations  to  the  Senior
U.S.  Representative  at  the  pro\  incial  lc\el.

— Reaffirm  Rural  Construction  as  the  foremost  US  GVN  combined
effort  to  solidif\'  and  extend  G\"N  infiuence.

— Authorize  more  direct  U.S.  invohement  in  G\'N  aft'airs  at  those
administrati\ e  levels  adequate  to  ensure  the  accomplishment  of  critical
programs.

— Delegate  to  the  U.S.  Ambassador  unequivocal  authoritv  as  the  sole
manager  of  all  U.S.  actiN  ities.  resources,  and  personnel  in-countrv.

— Direct  the  Ambassador  to  develop  a  single  integrated  plan  for
achieving  U.S.  objectives  in  S\"N.

The  PRO\'N  Studv  proposed  that  lexeraee  be  emploxcd  at  all  levels  within
GVN  to  achieve  U.S.  objecti\es.  Noting  that  past  uses  had  been  haphazard,  it
recommended  the  emplovment  of  a  "continuum  from  subtle  interpersonal  per-
suasion to  withdrawal  of  U.S.  support"  following  U.S.-CA'N  agreement  on  spe-
cific programs.  The  South  \'ietnamese  would,  in  short,  be  aware  that  leverage
would  be  emplo\ed  if  thev  failed  to  li\e  up  to  agreed  obligations.

After  an  initial  period  during  which  no  discussion  of  the  PRO\'N  Studv  was
permitted  outside  the  Armv  staff",  the  studv  finall\-  received  wide  distribution.
Secretarv  McNamara  was  briefed  on  it.  as  were  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff'.
MACV's  comments  were  also  solicited.  The  carefullv  worded  reply  from  Saigon
stated  succincth  the  case  against  the  use  of  le\erage.

MAC\'  is  in  complete  agreement  with  PROX'N  position  that  immediate
and  substantialh  increased  United  States  direct  insolvement  in  G\'N  ac-


502 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

tivities  in  form  of  constructive  influence  and  manipulation  is  essential  to
achievement  of  U.S.  objectives  in  Vietnam.  PROVN  emphasizes  that  '"lev-
erage must  originate  in  terms  of  reference  established  by  government
agreement,"  and  "leverage,  in  all  its  implications,  must  be  understood  by
the  Vietnamese  if  it  is  to  become  an  effective  tool/"  The  direct  involve-
ment and  leverage  envisioned  by  PROVN  could  range  from  skillful  diplo-
matic pressure  to  U.S.  unilateral  execution  of  critical  programs.  MACV
considers  that  there  is  a  great  danger  that  the  extent  of  involvement  envis-
ioned could  become  too  great.  A  government  sensitive  to  its  image  as
champion  of  national  sovereignty  profoundly  affected  by  the  pressure  of
militant  minorities,  and  unsure  of  its  tenure  and  legitimacy  will  resent  too
great  involvement  by  U.S.  Excessive  U.S.  involvement  may  defeat  ob-
jectives of  U.S.  policy:  development  of  free,  independent  non-communist
nation.  PROVN  properly  recognizes  that  success  can  only  be  attained
through  support  of  Vietnamese  people,  with  support  coming  from  the  grass
roots  up.  Insensitive  U.S.  actions  can  easily  defeat  efforts  to  accomplish
this.  U.S.  manipulations  could  easily  become  an  American  takeover  justi-
fied by  U.S.  compulsion  to  "get  the  job  done.""  Such  tendencies  must  be
resisted.  It  must  be  realized  that  there  are  substantial  difl^culties  and  dan-
gers inherent  in  implementing  this  or  any  similar  program.

9. No  Decision  as  a  Decision

Events  remained  stuck  on  this  fundamental  disagreement.  The  subject  of  lev-
erage came,  during  1967,  to  be  discussed  more  fully,  but  there  was  no  real  au-
thoritative decision  to  employ  it  or  to  reject  its  use  under  all  circumstances.
Thus,  when  CORDS  completed  its  first  major  study  of  pacification  programs
(Project  TAKEOFF)  in  June  1967,  it  included  some  candid  discussion  of  the
need  for  some  kind  of  leverage.  Entitled  "U.S.  Influence — The  Necessity,  Feasi-
bility and  Desirability  of  Asserting  Greater  Leverage,"  the  analysis  proceeded
from  problem  to  alternative  courses  of  action:

A.  Necessity  of  Leverage.

1.  The  most  crucial  problem  in  achieving  the  goals  and  objectives  of
the  RD  program  is  that  the  programs  must  be  carried  out  by  the  Vietna-
mese. Present  US  influence  on  Vietnamese  performance  is  dependent
upon  our  ability  to  persuade,  cajole,  suggest,  or  plead.  Political  and  practi-
can  considerations  usuallv  have  argued  against  developing  any  systematic
use  of  the  various  levers  of  power  at  our  disposal.  The  potential  reaction
of  the  Vietnamese  mav  become  e\en  greater  now  that  they  appear  to  be
reasserting  themselves  and  when  the  question  of  sovereignty  is  an  increas-
ingly sensitive  one.

2.  However,  the  factors  of  corruption,  antique  administrative  financial
procedures  and  regulations,  and  widespread  lack  of  leadership  probably
can  be  o\ercome  in  the  short  run  onl\-  if  the  US  increases  its  influence  on
Vietnamese  performance.  The  increasing  magnitude  of  corruption  and  its
damage  to  an\'  program  make  the  need  for  developing  and  applying  a  system
of  leverage  which  forces  the  Vietnamese  to  take  U.S.  views  into  account
greater  now  than  c\er  before.  Even  the  best  conceived  and  executed  RD


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  196 1 -1 967  503

program  will  result  in  failure  in  terms  of  gaining  the  allegiance  of  the  peo-
ple so  long  as  such  extensive  corruption  prevails.

The  study  argued  that  leverage  was  feasible  either  at  the  national  level  with  the
GVN  leadership  in  the  classic  "oriental"  style  or  on  a  more  systematic  basis  to
be  applied  through  the  control  of  resources  at  all  levels  down  to  province  and
district.  The  study  concluded:

d.  Courses  of  Action.  US  influence  over  key  decisions  must  be  attained
as  quickly  as  possible.  We  recommend  the  "oriental"  approach.  However,
should  the  other  alternative  of  more  open  exercise  of  power  be  selected,  the
system  would  have  to  include  US  control  of  resources.  As  a  tactical  meas-
ure, such  control  could  be  associated  initially  with  the  introduction  of  ad-
ditional resources.  The  introduction  of  greater  US  control  and  the  pro-
cedures that  would  be  necessary  to  ensure  an  adequate  US  voice  in  the
decision-making  process  should  be  tied  to  the  "New  Team"  and  the  new
US  organization  for  RD.  For  that  reason,  too  long  a  delay  would  be  un-
fortunate.

Whether  or  not  Komer  approved  this  recommendation,  it  did  not  figure  in
the  presentations  of  pacification  given  to  Secretary  McNamara  during  his  7-8
July  visit  to  Vietnam.  The  Saigon  policymakers  were  simply  not  prepared  to
come  down  on  one  agreed  line  of  conduct  in  this  contentious  area.  This  tend-
ency was  exhibited  later  in  the  summer  of  1967  when  a  long  study  on  leverage
produced  in  Ambassador  Komer's  old  White  House  stafi"  office  by  two  staff
members.  Dr.  Hans  Heymann  and  LTC  Volncy  Warner,  was  forwarded  from
State  to  Saigon:

In  anticipating  the  US /GVN  relationship  in  the  post-election  period,
it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  US  should  find  ways  to  exercise  leverage  with
the  Vietnamese  government  which  arc  more  commensurate  in  degree  with
the  importance  of  the  US  efi"ort  to  South  Vietnam's  survival  and  which
reflect  the  climate  of  growing  restivencss  in  the  US.  ...  In  its  impatience
to  get  results  and  make  progress,  the  US  has  increasingly  resorted  to  uni-
lateral programs  and  action  with  inadequate  consultation  with  the  Viet-
namese. On  the  other  hand,  the  indiscriminate  and  careless  exercise  of  US
leverage  could  undermine  the  self-respect  of  the  Vietnamese  government
in  its  own  eyes  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  South  Vietnamese  people.

To  be  effective,  US  levera<ze  must  be  exercised  in  the  context  of  a  re-
lationship  of  mutual  respect  and  confidence,  and  in  ways  commensurate
with  the  objective  sought.  It  must  also  he  backed  by  credible  sanctions.

Might  not  the  post-election  period,  State  suggested,  he  a  proper  time  to  consider
such  a  new  emphasis  on  the  use  of  leverage.  Ambassador  Komer,  who  had  been
ardent  in  his  advocacy  of  leverage  while  working  as  a  Presidential  assistant,
replied  in  tempered  language  which  reflected  the  chastening  efTect  of  several
months  on  the  firing  line  in  Saigon.

All  of  the  above  forms  of  leverage,  and  yet  others,  could  be  useful  at
the  proper  time  and  in  an  appropriate  way.  But  they  must  be  applied  with


504 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

discretion,  and  always  in  such  manner  as  to  keep  the  GVN  foremost  in  the
picture  presented  to  its  own  people  and  the  word  at  large.  .  .  .  The  ex-
ercise of  leverage  in  a  personal  manner  and  hidden  from  the  public  view  is
likely  to  be  most  effective,  while  of  the  more  operational  means  establish-
ment of  combined  organization  under  a  JCRR-type  concept,  to  include
joint  control  of  resources,  would  be  most  desirable.  In  sum,  we're  gradu-
ally applying  more  leverage  in  Pacification,  but  wish  to  do  so  in  ways  that
least  risk  creating  more  trouble  than  constructive  results.

What  Komer  really  meant — as  his  opinions  expressed  in  a  time  frame  later
than  that  embraced  by  the  present  inquiry  would  make  clear — was  the  neces-
sity to  reserve  the  use  of  leverage  for  those  few  occasions  in  which  all  else  had
failed,  in  which  copious  records  detailing  the  failure  had  been  accumulated  over
time,  and  in  which  the  proven  offender  could  be  severed  from  responsibility
after  his  shortcomings  were  presented  behind  the  scenes  to  his  superiors.  Thus,
the  GVN  would  serve  as  executioner,  the  U.S.  as  observer-recorder.  Leverage
would  be  a  last  resort  rather  than  a  continuing  tool.  The  product  of  the  inter-
mittent debate  on  leverage  was  not  so  much  a  decision  pro  or  con  as  it  was  a
decision  to  resort  to  leverage  when  all  else  had  failed.  In  this  sense  it  dodged
the  difficult  choices.


10. Groping  Toward  Better  Information

One  of  the  programs  that  came  under  Komer's  jurisdiction  after  he  took  over
CORDS  was  the  controversial  Hamlet  Evaluation  System  (HES).  Secretary
McNamara  had  requested,  during  his  October  1966  visit  to  Vietnam,  the  de-
velopment of  some  ADP  system  for  evaluating  the  status  of  rural  security  on
an  on-going  basis — data  which  would  make  possible  comparative  judgments  of
progress  over  time.  In  November,  he  sent  Mr.  George  Allen  and  Colonel
Carter  Clark  to  Saigon  with  a  proposal.  MACV  revised  their  suggested  system
and  recommended  it  to  the  Mission  Council  which  endorsed  it  on  13  December.
MACV  described  the  new  system  to  CINCPAC  in  January  1967:

HES  provides  a  fully  automated  procedure  for  evaluating  hamlet  Re-
volutionary Development  progress  and  establishes  a  hamlet  level  data
base.  Data  input  for  HES  is  provided  by  MACV  subsector  advisors  and
district  representatives,  where  assigned,  who  evaluate  all  hamlets  not  un-
der VC  control.  They  record  their  assessments  in  terms  of  18  entries  on  a
hamlet  evaluation  worksheet  utilizing  six  factors,  each  with  three  indica-
tors. Also,  eight  problem  areas  are  evaluated.

The  system  operated  throughout  the  vear  as  something  of  a  barometer  for  the
entire  pacification  effort.  It  also  became  one  of  the  focal  points  of  criticism  of
the  excessive  reliance  on  statistical  measures  of  progress,  a  criticism  favored
by  the  press  in  particular.  Nevertheless,  it  was  the  most  systematic  attempt  to
compare  results  over  time  ever  used  in  the  assessment  of  rural  security  in  Viet-
nam. As  such  it  is  a  useful  indicator.  The  following  tables  give  summary  data  from
HES  for  1967.  The  first  table  shows  population  distribution  according  to  se-
curity and  development  factors.  The  second  table  depicts  the  distribution  of
hamlets  according  to  different  measures  of  securitv.


^  On  r-~  O
On  '— I  in


O

0\


00  '—I  00  O  '—I

t  oo


I  I


o


00


I  I


On  ^


On

Q

it:
o

o

til

O

o


05


Co


O


0^  ^

^  ^  0\  0\

cr\  00  r-~-  »/~)

^  (N  O

m  ^


00  r-;

^  On  ^  »0


00  'si-
^  ^  O


CO  ^


(T)


o^  00  o

00  (N


^  m  (N
m


OS  OS  00  y—*

O I <  O

O (N  '-^

m  00  <N  <N

fN  CO


0

CO

VO

CO

T— (

in

00

00

CO

00*

00

V  N

d

CO

i-H

UO

1— (

\o

0

r— (

00

I/-)

T— (

CO

r— (

(N

/~\

CO

1^

y—t

00

>0

»n

T— 1

p

CO

On

00

CO

On

CO

in

0

CO

C*")

0

CO

(N

00

0

<N

(N

(N

(N

1— 1

T— 1

is?

VO

q

1^

00

VO

^— 1

o\

r-J

CO

CO

00

(N

On

V  1

\^

<N

(N

CO

V  J

CN

00

<N

a\

1— (

(N

00

On

0

T— (

7—1

(N

(N

CO

1— t

T— I

/— s

CO

00

CO

v£)

T— (

0

C]

0

00

(N

d

On

in

(N

CO

00

r-

oc

in

On

in

CO

(N

a\

On

0

(N

<N

(N

CO

c
o


O O  "S  S

^  75  <^

O  §  S  S  ffi

a.  3  <  m  o  :zi

O  (U


c3
O

H


o
o

-(— >
0)


g  Q  W  O

u


B

X

a

o

Z


73

0)


c3  -«-'
O


P  S

03

>


I

a
o


-(— <
O

H


o

■»-<

a
o

Oh

o
H


00  IT)  r«~,
^  ID

^  ^  00  m


o

00


o^  o  o
<^  O  O  T^i-
00  m  ro


O

m


(N

00


o

(N

o

00

00

<5


Co


(N  (N

^  O  lo
(N  a^  — (  (N


^  m  CO

O  00

(N  r--


o


00
On


OO  ^  ir^

^  00
^ (N  ^


c

00

On

m

5


On  ON  00
On  m

^  ^  00


00  ON  O
'^t  ON

r-)  in


00

On

o

73 =5 c/3  CO

8  ^  :s  o

^  I  £  s
o  <  m  u


O

H


O  V5

^  - ^  5

15  £  £  ^
o  o


a
o
H


03

>


s

OS

X

o
H


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  507


In  February  1968  an  analysis  of  1967  pacification-R/D  results  as  revealed
in  the  HES  was  published  by  OSD  Systems  Analysis.

Hamlet  Evaluation  System  (HES)  reports  for  CY  1967  indicate  that
pacification  progressed  slowly  during  the  first  half  of  1967,  and  lost  ground
in  the  second  half.  Most  (60%)  of  the  1967  gain  results  from  accounting
type  changes  to  the  HES  system,  not  from  pacification  progress;  hamlet
additions  and  deletions,  and  revised  population  estimates  accounted  for
half  of  the  January-June  increase  and  all  of  the  June-December  increase.
In  the  area  that  really  counts — VC-D-E  hamlets  rising  to  A-B-C  ratings —
we  actually  suffered  a  net  loss  of  10,100  people  between  June  and  Decem-
ber 1967.  The  enemy's  offensive  appears  to  have  killed  the  revolutionary
development  program,  as  currently  conceived.  Recent  reports  state  that  to
a  large  extent,  the  VC  now  control  the  country-side.

Written  in  the  pessimistic  atmosphere  of  the  1968  post-Tet  period  this  view  may
over-emphasize  negative  factors.  Ambassador  Komer  wrote  a  stinging  dissent
that  appeared  in  the  next  monthly  issue  of  the  Systems  Analysis  Southeast  Asia
Analysis  Report.  Statistical  analysis  aside,  pacification  clearly  failed  to  make  the
significant  strides  that  the  President  had  hoped  for  in  1967.  It  certainly  did  not
initiate  any  Revolutionary  Development  likely  to  transform  the  quality  of  life
for  the  Vietnamese  farmer  or  to  alter  fundamentally  the  course  of  the  war.

Concurrently  with  attempts  to  improve  information  on  the  security  pro-
grams, MACV  exhibited  increased  interest  in  1967  in  improving  RVNAF  ef-
fectiveness. Early  in  the  year  it  was  decided  to  undertake  an  extensive,  unit-by-
unit  effectiveness  evaluation.  Units  judged  to  be  superfluous  or  consistently  be-
low standard  were  to  be  cut  off  from  U.S.  support.  Decisions  on  support  with-
drawal were  to  be  made  semi-annually  as  new  evaluations  were  received.  MACV
explained  to  CINCPAC  that  the  review  would  include:

...  all  VNAF,  VNN,  VNMC,  ARVN  tactical  and  logistical  units,  and
RF/PF  units  in  the  current  projected  FY  68  force  structure.  The  meth-
odology for  the  evaluation  includes:  identification  of  the  credibility  and
feasibility  of  current  plans  of  RVNAF  officials  to  guarantee  increased  ef-
fectiveness; study  of  unit  performance  trends  during  the  past  six  months;
determination  of  availability  of  necessary  plans  to  train  personnel  in  the
required  skills;  and  evaluation  of  the  degree  of  command  interest  at  all
levels  for  improvement  of  the  ineffective  or  non-productive  units.  Con-
sidering these  factors,  units  are  categorized  as  improvement  probable,
doubtful,  or  unlikely.  For  those  units  categorized  as  improvement  doubtful
or  unlikely,  justification  for  continued  military  assistance  will  be  required
or  action  will  be  initiated  to  reduce  the  FY  68  Military  Assistance  Program.

The  first  review  (completed  in  March)  cut  two  marginal  navy  vessels  from  the
list  of  U.S.  supported  units,  but  only  warned  JGS  of  the  unacceptable  effective-
ness of  two  marginal  ranger  battalions  and  an  armored  cavalry  squadron.  The
June  review,  while  producing  recommendations  from  U.S.  advisors  that  aid  be
suspended  in  several  cases,  again  resulted  only  in  warnings  and  threats.  There
was  no  suspension  of  U.S.  support.

1 1 . RVNAF  Effectiveness

Quantitative  efforts  to  rate  RVNAF  effectiveness  continued  in  the  field,  at
MACV,  and  in  Washington  throughout  the  year  with  no  clear  agreement  on


508 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II

what  set  of  statistical  indicators  best  portrayed  RVNAF  performance  and  po-
tential. During  1966  MACV  had  relied  on  a  minimum  present  for  duty  strength
as  a  means  of  evaluating  ARVN  battalion  effectiveness.  This  method  permitted
wide  fluctuations  and  was  unreliable.  The  1967  statistics  on  RVNAF  desertions
revealed  an  improving  ability  of  units  to  hold  their  men.  MACV  soon  began  to
use  this  trend  as  an  indicator  of  effectiveness.  In  May,  for  instance,  COMUS-
MACV  noted  with  satisfaction  the  marked  reduction  of  January  and  February
1967  desertions  compared  to  desertions  in  the  same  period  in  1966.  The  average
improvement  for  this  period  was  about  50  percent:

DESERTIONS/RATES  (PER  1000  ASSIGNED)

January  February

1966  9,251/16.0  14,110/24.3

1967  5,900/9.6  5,860/9.6

In  the  same  message,  MACV  noted  with  satisfaction  recent  aggressive  actions
by  the  JGS  to  correct  the  unacceptably  high  incidence  of  desertions,  including
the  singling  out  of  three  regiments  for  special  warning  on  their  excessive  deser-
tion rate.  Year-end  statistics  compiled  by  OSD  Systems  Analysis  indicate  that
the  figures  quoted  by  MACV  in  May  erred  on  the  optimistic  side  somewhat  by
undercounting  RF  desertions  in  both  months  bv  about  1,000.  Nevertheless,  the
trend  to  which  MACV  was  pointing  was  confirmed  during  the  rest  of  the  year.
After  rising  slightly  to  8,127  in  March,  RVNAF  desertion  rates  leveled  off  at
between  about  6,000-7,000  per  month  for  the  remainder  of  1967.  Thus,  1967
produced  only  80,912  desertions  compared  with  117,740  in  1966,  an  overall
reduction  of  almost  one-third.  (It  also  should  be  noted  in  passing,  that  VC/NVA
desertions  reached  a  peak  in  March  and  thereafter  fell  off  sharply.)

At  the  Pentagon,  Systems  Analysis  sought  measures  of  RVNAF  effectiveness
in  a  comparison  between  the  performances  of  Vietnamese  and  American  units
in  selected  categories:  VC  NVA  KIA  ratios,  battalion  days  of  operations,  days
of  enemy  contact,  number  of  operations,  weapons  loss  of  ratios,  etc.  Sum.mariz-
ing  the  results  of  some  of  these  statistical  studies.  Systems  Analysis  stated  in
September  1967:

Per  man,  Vietnamese  forces  were  about  half  as  effective  as  U.S.  forces
in  killing  VC/TSfVA  during  the  eleven  months  (Aug  66  through  Jun  67)
for  which  detailed  data  are  available.  Effectiveness  differs  widely  among
Vietnamese  units  of  the  same  type  and  between  units  in  differing  parts  of
the  country.  Poor  leadership  is  the  key  reason  for  inefficiency  in  most
cases.

The  MACV  staff  rebutted  manv  of  the  premises  on  which  the  statistical  com-
parisons had  been  based  and  again  revealed  the  difficulty  in  developing  mean-
ingful statistical  measures  with  respect  to  anvthing  Vietnamese.  Their  most  tell-
ing criticism  of  the  Systems  Analysis  comparison  of  U.S.  and  Vietnamese  units
was  the  following:

(a)  It  is  generallv  accepted  that  US  maneuver  battalions  have  a  combat
effectiveness  ratio  of  about  3:1  to  RVNAF  maneuver  battalions  due  to
their  greater  unit  firepower  and  depth  of  combat  support /combat  service
support  forces;  RVNAF  also  lacks  the  mobility  assets  available  to  US  units.


The  Advisory  Biuld-Up,  1961-1967  509


(b)  Approximately  one-third  of  the  RVNAF  maneuver  battalions  are
committed  to  direct  support  of  Revolutionary  Development,  a  mission
which  constrains  the  overall  potential  to  find,  fix,  and  fight  the  enemy
forces.  In  this  analysis  an  RVNAF  unit  that  is  45  percent  as  effective  as  US
units  which  have  three  times  the  RVNAF  combat  effectiveness  would  ap-
pear to  be  doing  very  well.  In  fact,  anything  over  33  percent  would  reflect
superior  performance.

But  here  again  one  can  be  misled.  One  reason  that  ARVN  was  given  the  RD
support  mission  in  the  first  place  was  its  demonstrated  inability  to  engage  ef-
fectively and  destroy  the  enemy  main  force.  RD  was  regarded  as  a  residual  and
semi-passive  role  more  suited  to  ARVN  capabilities.  And  so  the  statistical  argu-
ments raged,  partisans  marshalling  whatever  statistics  they  could  to  defend
what  in  most  cases  were  their  own  preconceived  notions.

All  of  this  is  not  to  imply  that  qualitative  estimates,  diagnoses,  prescriptions,
and  prognosis  were  lacking  in  1967.  At  the  Guam  Conference  with  the  Presi-
dent, General  Abrams'  appointment  as  the  new  Deputy  COMUSMACV  had
been  announced  along  with  the  others  already  mentioned  and  his  responsibility
for  overseeing  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  with  RVNAF  reemphasized.  Upon  re-
turn to  Saigon  prior  to  his  own  departure  Lodge  sent  a  message  to  the  President
stressing  the  importance  of  RVNAF:

MACV's  success  (which  means  the  success  of  the  United  States  and  of
all  of  us)  will  .  .  .  willy-nilly,  be  judged  not  so  much  on  the  brilliant  per-
formance of  the  U.S.  troops  as  on  its  success  in  getting  ARVN,  RF  and
PF  quickly  to  function  as  a  first-class  counter  terror,  counter-guerrilla  force.

Lodge  concluded  with  a  glowing  endorsement  of  Abrams  as  the  man  to  see  that
RVNAF  did  become  an  effective  force.  There  is  ample  evidence  that  Abrams
did  work  with  great  energy  to  do  just  that.

In  mid-June,  after  Abrams'  first  quarterly  review  of  RVNAF,  Bunker  in-
cluded a  report  on  actions  to  improve  RVNAF  in  his  weekly  report  to  the  Presi-
dent:

A)  Improving  the  leadership  and  enhancing  the  personnel  effectiveness
of  the  ARVN/RF/PF  through  such  things  as  improvement  in  the  award-
ing of  commissions  and  promotions,  selection  procedures,  training  of  of-
ficer candidates,  the  introduction  of  an  effective  personnel  management
and  accounting  system,  tightening  up  on  discipline,  improvement  in  the
treatment  of  veterans  in  order  to  clear  the  rolls  of  those  incapable  of  fur-
ther active  duty  and  an  expanded  advisory  effort  to  support  properly  the
Revolutionary  Development  program;

B)  To  improve  motivation  and  morale  through  more  equitable  pay
scales,  improvement  in  rations,  and  revitalization  of  the  dependent  hous-
ing program;

C)  Improvement  in  the  command  structure  and  equipment  of  the  Re-
gional/Popular Forces  and  a  revised  motivation  and  indoctrination  pro-
gram to  reflect  the  role  of  the  PF  soldier  in  Revolutionary  Develop-
ment;

D)  A  comprehensive  training  effort  to  improve  intelligence  and  recon-
naissance operations  and  to  improve  the  combat  effectiveness  of  battalions;


510 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

training  of  ARVN/RF/PF  for  support  of  Revolutionar)-  Development
particularly  in  providing  security  and  support  to  the  civil  population;

E)  Experimentation  with  various  forms  of  integrated  US/RVNAF  op-
erations .  .  .  [discussed  already];

F)  Institution  of  quarterly  reviews  at  which  time  progress  is  measured
against  objectives,  problems  discovered  and  decisions  taken.  First  of  these
reviews  was  held  last  month.

In  May,  General  Abrams  established  a  Program  Review  and  Analysis  Sys-
tem for  RVNAF  Progress.  This  was  essentially  an  internal  MACV  effort  to
examine  the  problems  facing  RVNAF  in  order  that  MACV  might  structure  its
advisory  assistance  to  make  the  most  headway  against  these  problems.  The
first  published  review,  covering  the  January-June  1967  period,  appeared  in  Sep-
tember. Like  many  similar  efforts  it  was  a  long  catalogue  of  RVNAF  deficiencies
by  U.S.  standards.  The  benefits  of  these  reviews  were  supposed  to  be  reaped  as
they  were  brought  to  bear  during  the  quarterly  RVNAF  self-review  called  for
in  the  Combined  Campaign  Plan.  There  is  no  available  information  as  to  how
effectively  this  has  worked  in  practice.  This  plethora  of  programs  and  activities
through  which  we  sought  either  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  RVNAF  di-
rectly or  to  promote  it  indirectly  by  improving  the  lot  and  life  of  the  soldier  re-
ceived a  full-blown  exposition  during  Secretary  McNamara's  trip  to  Saigon  in
July.  With  respect  to  improving  RVNAF  morale — in  addition  to  the  pay  scale
adjustments,  improved  rations,  and  provision  of  dependent  housing — the  U.S.
has  helped  the  South  Vietnamese  develop  a  miniature  U.S.  style  Com-
missary/PX  system.

The  leadership  problem  received  very  detailed  attention  by  MACV  during
the  course  of  1967.  Prior  to  the  Secretary's  departure  for  Vietnam,  Alain  En-
thoven,  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  for  Systems  Analysis,  sent  McNamara  a
memo  that  flatly  stated,  "There  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  the  ineffectiveness
of  many  of  the  RVNAF  units,  particularly  ARVN  combat  battalions,  but  the
primary  one  is  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  leadership."  After  itemizing  the
contributing  factors  to  this  deficiency,  he  recommended  that  the  Secretary  query
MACV  in  detail  on  leadership  problems  during  his  visit.  In  the  briefings  for
Secretary  McNamara  in  July,  fourteen  different  MACV  JGS  actions  or  programs
were  cited  as  ways  in  which  this  problem  was  being  addressed.  These  ranged
from  better  officer  career  management  to  regular  merit  promotion  procedures
and  the  publication  of  leadership  materials.  One  example  of  the  lengths  to  which
we  have  gone  in  efforts  to  remedy  the  leadership  deficit  in  RVNAF  is  the  replica-
tion in  South  Vietnam  of  the  U.S.  elite  officer  schooling  system — a  four-year  Viet-
namese Military  Academy,  enlarged  Command  and  General  Staff  College,  and,
most  recently,  a  National  Defense  College.

12. The  Latest  Expansion  of  Advisors

COMUSMACV  faced  difficult  choices  in  determining  whether  he  wished  to
emphasize  more  U.S.  advisors  for  RN-NAF — or  advisors  for  new  functions —
or  to  stress  a  build-up  of  the  number  of  U.S.  combat  forces  in-country.  RVNAF
strength  had  increased  by  152Ct  from  1960  to  1966,  going  up  by  over  100,000
in  the  18  months  preceding  the  beginning  of  1967.  The  table  below  shows  the
growth  and  distribution  of  RVNAF  o\'er  the  1965-1967  period.  The  slight
decline  in  forces  from  January  to  April  1967,  reflects  efforts  to  weed  out  ab-
sentee personnel  still  being  carried  on  padded  unit  rolls.


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  511


RVNAF  STRENGTHS


1  Jul  65

1  Jan  66

1  Jul  66

1  Jan  67  30  Apr  67

RVNAF

AKM  I

O'XA  1  1Q
Z 1  jy

0^1  9.11
ZD  /,0  /  /

Z  /D,4  15

Zo  J,ZUU

NAVY

9,037

14,559

16,380

1  '7  '3/1  Q

lD,UUU

MARINES

6,842

7,380

6,848

1  r\A  Q
/,U4y

1  1  f\r\
/,iUU

AIR  FORCE

12,081

12,778

13,895

14,647

15,600

REGIONAL  FORCES

107,652

132,221

141,447

149,844

142,018

POPULAR  FORCE

149,029

136,398

137,689

1  47  401
l'+Z,'4-^7  1

Sub  Total

518,780

571,213

592,732

622,883

606,405

PARA-MILITARY

National  Police

42,700

52,300

54,600

58,300

63,457

CIDG

21,700

28,400

30,400

34,700

31,477

Armed  Cmbt  Youth

39,000

39,600

22,800

20,000

19,930

Total

625,800

691,500

700,500

735,900

721,269

In  March,  two  days  before  the  Guam  Conference  was  to  meet,  General  West-
moreland sent  an  important  cable  to  CINCPAC  requesting  an  "optimum  force"
increase,  above  and  beyond  the  approved  Deployment  Program  4,  of  4-2/3  U.S.
divisions  (201,250  personnel  spaces),  or  a  "minimum  essential  force"  of  an
additional  2-1/3  U.S.  divisions  (84,100  spaces).  The  optimum  force  would  have
raised  total  U.S.  manpower  in  Vietnam  to  over  670,000  troops.  This  request  was
to  kick  off  (after  Guam,  where  it  was  not  specifically  addressed)  another  pro-
longed internal  administration  debate  and  review  of  forces  in  Vietnam  which
would  eventually  culminate  in  Secretary  McNamara's  July  trip  to  Saigon  and
the  subsequent  decision  to  adopt  deployment  Program  5,  raising  total  author-
ized strength  to  525,000.  COMUSMACV's  orientation  toward  RVNAF's  role  in
the  war  is  clearly  revealed  in  this  message :

Whereas  deployment  of  additional  US  forces  in  FY  68  will  obviate  the  re-
quirement for  a  major  expansion  of  the  RVNAF,  selective  increases  will
be  necessary  to  optimize  combat  effectiveness.  Regular  forces  proposed  for
FY  68  total  328,322,  an  increase  of  6,367  spaces  over  the  FY  67  authoriza-
tion. As  US,  Free  World  and  RVNAF  operations  are  expanded,  additional
areas  will  be  made  available  for  the  conduct  of  Revolutionary  Development
operations.  Based  on  experience  gained  thus  far,  an  increase  of  50,000  RF/
PF  spaces  will  be  required  to  provide  a  planning  figure  of  350,000  spaces  for
this  force.  The  increase  will  accommodate  necessary  support  of  Revolution-
ary Development  and  concomitantly,  will  be  compatible  with  requirements
incident  to  implementation  of  the  constabulary  concept.

Without  going  into  detail  on  the  debate  and  decision  on  Program  5,  from  the
advisory  standpoint  the  important  development  was  COMUSMACV's  view  of
RVNAF.  In  March,  RVNAF  had  been  regarded  almost  as  a  residual,  but  by
September,  when  the  ambitious  U.S.  force  proposals  had  been  rejected  in  favor
of  only  a  modest  increase  of  about  45,000  COMUSMACV  reasserted  the  im-
portance of  RVNAF  and  asked  for  a  major  increase  in  its  authorized  strength.


512 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Slowly,  then,  the  realization  that  there  was  a  ceiling  on  the  number  of  U.S.
forces  which  could  be  deployed  without  calling  up  reserves  turned  everyone's
attention  once  again  to  RVNAF.

The  one  significant  increase  proposed  in  the  MACV  message  cited  above  was
the  increase  of  50,000  in  RF/PF.  This  was  not  to  be  immediately  forthcoming.
In  May  1967,  Secretary  McNamara  imposed  a  temporary  ceiling  on  RVNAF  at
the  level  authorized  for  end  FY  66  to  prevent  further  inflation  in  South  Viet-
nam and  to  arrest  some  of  the  balance  of  payments  imbalance  stemming  from
U.S.  Vietnam  spending.  Subsequently,  CINCPAC  was  authorized  to  make  ad-
justments among  the  various  components  within  that  limit,  thereby  permitting
augmentation  of  RF/PF  at  the  expense  of  ARVN.

The  question  of  additional  U.S.  troops  had  refined  itself  considerably  by  the
time  the  Secretary  went  to  Saigon  in  July.  Of  the  two  force  increase  proposals
presented  by  MACV  at  that  time,  the  first  was  merely  a  restatement  of  the
old  "minimum  essential  force"  which  would  have  brought  total  U.S.  troops  to
571,071  (2-1/3  division  force  equivalents);  the  second  proposal  was  a  much
smaller  request  for  an  authorized  strength  of  535,390  (1-1/3  division  force
equivalents).  Both  of  these  proposals  contained  a  request  for  2,577  additional
advisors — primarily  to  support  the  anticipated  expansion  of  RF  TF  and  to  flesh
out  the  sector  and  sub-sector  advisory  teams  supporting  the  pacification  effort.
The  following  table  shows  the  breakdown  of  the  1967  advisory  increases,  in-
cluding the  request  presented  to  McNamara  in  July  and  subsequently  approved,
^he  large  RF/PF  advisory  element  in  this  request  included  spaces  for  824  RF
Company  Advisory  Teams  of  two  men  each  and  119  Company  Training  Teams
of  five  men  each.  Before  returning  to  Washington,  the  Secretary  gave  planning
authorization  for  a  U.S.  augmentation  not  to  exceed  525,000  spaces,  but  ful-
filling Westmoreland's  lower  alternative  by  civilianizing  an  additional  10,000
military  spaces.  A  month  later,  after  approval  by  President  Johnson,  this  new
force  level  was  promulgated  as  Program  #5.  The  final  detailed  troop  list  for  Pro-
gram #5  submitted  by  the  JCS  on  September  15  contained,  in  addition  to  the
regular  advisory  spaces  already  mentioned,  a  666-man  Special  Forces  augmen-
tation to  perform  advisor-like  functions  with  their  Vietnamese  counterparts.

Even  before  the  Program  #5  troop  list  was  completed  by  MACV  and  sub-
mitted by  the  JCS,  however,  Ambassador  Komer  was  complaining  that  the
CORDS  advisory  element  actual  strength  was  seriously  below  its  authorization
and  that  bureaucratic  delays  had  forestalled  even  the  deployment  of  the  100
priority  advisors  requested  in  July.  The  following  day,  OSD  Systems  Analysis
advised  Secretary  McNamara  that  the  shortfall  in  the  actual  strength  of  the
overall  advisory  complement  was  a  longstanding  problem.  In  March,  the  advisory
program  had  been  under-strength  600  men  while  MACV  headquarters  ex-
ceeded its  authorization  by  473.  In  response  to  Systems  Analysis  prodding  this
discrepancy  had  been  partially  rectified,  but  as  late  as  July  the  advisory  staff  was
still  short  237  while  MACV  had  an  overage  of  130.  Systems  Analysis  further
advised  the  Secretary  that  while  total  strength  authorizations  had  been  made,
MACV's  delay  in  submitting  detailed  lists  of  grades  and  specialties  of  desired
personnel  had,  in  turn,  engendered  delays  at  this  end  in  filling  the  billets.  More-
over, the  requirement  that  advisors  receive  preliminary  Stateside  background
and  language  training  further  delaved  the  actual  deployments.  Only  priority  re-
quests could  be  filled  very  rapidly,  and  these  necessarily  could  only  constitute  a
small  percentage  of  the  total.

In  order  to  study  the  problems  presented  by  the  anticipated  expansion  of
RF/PF  and  to  plan  for  the  significant  expansion  of  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  to


The  Advisory  Build-Up,  1961-1967  513

C8311  SUPPLEMENTAL  DATA  SHEET  A
SUBJECT:  MACV  Recognized  Advisory  Requirements


22

Oct  67

Auth

Required  Add-

ons

J  Url  U/

r  to D/ /ipr  0/

Jun  67

1  otal

Joint  General  Stan

r\  /-  rf

265

23

8

296

Other  National  Level

740

30  52

6

828

Naval  Advisory  Group

517

517

Air  Force  Advisory  Group

493

493

ARVN  and  RF/PF

Corps  Hq  and  Support  (4)

1,147

29

1,176

Capital  Military  District

59

7

1

67

Divisions  (10)  &  24th  Special

Zone  and  Support

266

84

11

861

Regiments  (31  Infantry)

98

12

110

Battalions  (120  Infantry)

613

-  143

120

590

Ranker  Command

(5  Gps/20  Bn)

130

-  12

118

Regional  Force  Battalions

31

21

52

1  99

  1 1

1  HQ

Armored  Cavalrv

Squadrons  (10)

107

107

Sector  Advisor  Teams

(Province)

853

56  341

92

1,342

Subsector  Advisor  Teams

(District)

969

Regional  Force  Companies

2,243

2,243

Regional  Force  Camps  (Con-

verted from  CIDG)

20  12

90

122

Totals

6,910

251  699

2,511

10,437

these  forces,  MACV  convened  a  conference

on  RF/PF  matters

on  26

October

for  all  interested  elements  of  MACV  and  USARV.  The  conference  recom-
mended a  complete  reorientation  of  the  advisory  concept  for  RF  TF.  Rather
than  assigning  teams  to  RF  companies  and  PF  platoons  on  a  permanent  basis,
the  conferees  recommended  the  establishment  of  354  seven-man  Mobile  Ad-
visory Teams  (MATs)  to  be  used  on  a  rotating  basis  under  the  direction  of  the
Province  Advisor  to  whom  they  would  be  assigned.  Further,  the  conference
recommended  the  deployment  of  an  Engineer  Advisor  to  each  province,  an
S-1  advisor  to  all  provinces  without  one,  increasing  the  Administrative  and  Di-
rect Support  Logistics  (ADSL)  companies  from  three  to  seven,  and  creating  7
seven-man  Mobile  Advisory  Logistics  Teams  (MALTs)  to  support  the  RF/PF.
Altogether,  the  conference  produced  some  fifty-odd  recommendations  from
which  a  30-point  package  was  forwarded  to  COMUSMACV.

On  15  December,  General  Westmoreland  gave  his  approval  to  the  new  system
which  was  to  be  phased  in  during  1968,  the  first  half  by  the  end  of  March  and
the  rest  by  the  end  of  that  year.  By  the  end  of  December  1967,  MACV  was


514 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

recommending  a  further  increase  of  366  advisors  for  the  FY  1969  program,
primarily  for  district  level  intelligence  slots.

Meanwhile,  on  September  28,  the  JCS  had  forwarded  with  their  endorsement
the  MACV-CINCPAC  recommendation  on  RVNAF  force  increases,  of  which
the  RF/PF  component  was  the  largest.  Requested  was  an  increase  in  FY  68
RVNAF  authorized  strength  from  622,153  to  685,739,  a  net  of  63,586.  Of  this
number,  47,839  were  RF/PF  spaces,  and  only  15,747  were  for  the  regular  forces
(of  which  ARVN's  share  was  14,966).  To  achieve  these  higher  levels,  MACV
proposed  the  reduction  of  the  draft  age  from  20  to  18  and  the  extension  of
tours  of  duty  for  active  RVNAF  personnel.  The  advisory  support  for  these  new
Vietnamese  forces  had  already  been  provided  for  by  Program  #5.  In  their  con-
cluding paragraph,  the  JCS  took  note  of  a  MACV  request,  to  be  considered
separately,  for  an  FY  1969  RVNAF  authorized  strength  of  763,953,  a  further
increase  of  78,204  over  the  newly  proposed  FY  1968  level.  Of  these  new  troops,
69,000  were  to  go  to  RF/PF  (including  some  draftees)  and  only  9,000  to  ARVN.
Secretary  McNamara  approved  these  requested  FY  1968  augmentations  for
RVNAF  against  the  recommendation  of  his  Systems  Analyst,  Alain  Enthoven,
who  would  have  authorized  only  half  of  the  request  pending  better  justification.
But  the  JCS  were  informed  that  a  judgment  on  the  proposed  FY  1969  increase
would  be  reserved  until  the  military  had  responded  to  a  series  of  questions  re-
lating to  equipment  availability,  officer  supply,  costs,  and  distribution  of  the
new  forces  between  ARVN  and  RF/PF.

Thus,  by  the  fall  of  1967,  two  factors  were  pushing  U.S.  leaders  toward  in-
creasing the  size  and  role  of  RVNAF  in  the  war — a  step  which  would  increase
the  importance  of  the  U.S.  as  advisor  rather  than  combatant:  (1)  the  approach-
ing ceiling  on  U.S.  Forces  deployable  to  Vietnam  without  mobilization  (politi-
cally unpalatable  in  an  election  year);  and  (2)  a  growing  U.S.  Congressional  and
public  clamor  for  a  larger  South  Vietnamese  contribution  to  the  war  and  assump-
tion of  burdens.

This  was  essentially  the  situation  that  existed  when,  on  31  January  1968,  the
VC/NVA  launched  a  series  of  major  attacks  on  South  Vietnamese  population
centers.  This  radical  change  in  enemy  tactics  challenged  the  efficacy  of  the  di-
vision of  effort  between  U.S.  forces  and  RVNAF,  shook  U.S.  public  support
for  the  war,  and  marked  the  beginning  of  a  new,  uncharted  phase  in  the  his-
tory of  U.S.  attempts  to  advise  the  government  and  armed  forces  of  the  Re-
public of  Vietnam.


515


7. Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967


Summary

By  the  summer  of  1967,  pacification  had  become  a  major  ingredient  of
American  strategy  in  Vietnam,  growing  steadily  in  importance  and  the  amount
of  resources  devoted  to  it.  The  U.S.  Mission  in  Vietnam  had  been  reorganized
three  times  in  15  months  and  each  reorganization  had  been  designed  primarily
to  improve  the  management  of  the  pacification  effort  and  raise  its  priority  within
our  overall  effort.

Pacification — or  as  it  is  sometimes  called  by  Americans,  Revolutionary  Devel-
opment (RD) — had  staged  a  comeback  in  priority  from  the  days  in  1964  and
1965  when  it  was  a  program  with  little  emphasis,  guidance,  or  support.  It  has
by  now  almost  equalled  in  priority  for  the  Americans  the  original  priority  given
the  Strategic  Hamlet  program  in  1962-1963,  although  the  Vietnamese  have
not  yet  convinced  many  people  that  they  attach  the  same  importance  to  it  as
we  do.

This  study  traces  the  climb  in  pacification's  importance  during  the  last  two
years,  until  it  reached  its  present  level  of  importance,  with  further  growth  likely.

This  study  concentrates  on  American  decisions,  American  discussions,  Ameri-
can papers.  It  will  be  clear  to  the  reader  that,  if  this  version  of  events  is  accurate,
the  Vietnamese  played  a  secondary  role  in  the  move  to  re-emphasize  pacifica-
tion. It  is  the  contention  of  this  paper  that  this  was  indeed  the  case,  and  that  the
Americans  were  the  prime  movers  in  the  series  of  events  which  led  to  the  re-
emphasis  of  pacification.  This  study  does  not  cover  many  important  events,
particularly  the  progress  of  the  field  effort,  the  CIA-backed  PAT/Cadre  pro-
gram, and  GVN  activity.

The  process  by  which  the  American  government  came  to  increase  its  support
for  pacification  is  disorderly  and  haphazard.  Individuals  like  Ambassador  Lodge
and  General  Walt  and  Robert  Komer,  seem  in  retrospect  to  have  played  im-
portant roles,  but  to  each  participant  in  a  story  still  unfolding,  the  sequence
may  look  different.  Therefore,  it  is  quite  possible  that  things  didn't  quite  happen
the  way  they  are  described  here,  and  someone  else,  whose  actions  are  not
adequately  described  in  the  files  available  for  this  study,  was  equally  important.

Nor  was  there  anything  resembling  a  conspiracy  involved.  Indeed,  the  pro-
ponents of  what  is  called  so  loosely  in  this  paper  "pacification"  were  often  in
such  violent  disagreement  as  to  what  pacification  meant  that  they  quarreled
publicly  among  themselves  and  overlooked  their  common  interests.  At  other
times,  people  who  disagreed  strongly  on  major  issues  found  themselves  tempo-
rary allies  with  a  common  objective.

Moreover,  there  is  the  curious  problem  of  the  distance  between  rhetoric  and
reality.  Even  during  the  dark  davs  of  1964-1965,  most  Americans  paid  lip
service,  particularly  in  official,  on  the  record  statements,  to  the  ultimate  im-
portance of  pacification.  But  their  public  affirmation  of  the  cliches  about  "win-
ning the  hearts  and  minds  of  the  people"  were  not  related  to  any  programs  or


516 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

priorities  then  in  existence  in  Vietnam,  and  they  can  mislead  the  casual  ob-
server.

The  resurgence  of  pacification  was  dramatically  punctuated  by  three  Presi-
dential conferences  on  Pacific  islands  with  the  leaders  of  the  GVN — Honolulu
in  February,  1966,  Manila  in  October,  1966  (with  five  other  Chiefs  of  State
also  present),  and  Guam  in  March,  1967.  After  each  conference  the  relative
importance  of  pacification  took  another  leap  upward  within  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment— reflecting  a  successful  effort  within  the  U.S.  Government  by  its
American  proponents — and  the  U.S.  tied  the  GVN  onto  Declarations  and
Communiques  which  committed  them  to  greater  effort.

In  addition,  each  conference  was  followed  by  a  major  re-organization  within
the  U.S.  Mission,  designed  primarily  to  improve  our  management  of  the  pacifica-
tion effort.  After  Honolulu,  Deputy  Ambassador  Porter  was  given  broad  new
authority  to  run  the  civilian  agencies.  After  Manila,  Porter  was  directed  to  re-
organize the  components  of  USIA,  CIA,  and  AID  internally  to  create  a  single
Office  of  Civil  Operations  (OCO).  And  after  Guam,  OCO — redesignated  as
CORDS — was  put  under  the  control  of  General  Westmoreland,  who  was  given  a
civilian  deputy  with  the  personal  rank  of  Ambassador  to  assist  him.

The  low  priority  of  pacification  in  1965  was  the  understandable  result  of  a
situation  in  which  battles  of  unprecedented  size  were  taking  place  in  the  high-
lands and  along  the  coast,  the  air  war  was  moving  slowly  north  towards  Hanoi,
and  the  GVN  was  in  a  continual  state  of  disarray.

But  a  series  of  events  and  distinct  themes  were  at  work  which  would  con-
verge to  give  pacification  a  higher  priority.  They  were  to  meet  at  the  Honolulu
conference  in  February,  1966.

I. THREADS  THAT  MET  AT  HONOLULU

A.  HOP  TAG

The  first  was  the  hold-over  program  from  1964-1965 — pacification's  one
priority  even  then,  the  Hop  Tac  program.  It  had  been  suggested  first  by  Lodge  on
his  way  home  from  his  first  Ambassadorship,  and  Taylor  and  Westmoreland  had
given  it  recognition  as  a  high  priority  program.  Although  Westmoreland  judged
it  repeatedly  as  a  partial  success,  it  appears  now  to  have  been  a  faultily  con-
ceived and  clumsily  executed  program.  It  was  conceptually  unsound,  lacked  the
support  of  the  Vietnamese,  created  disagreements  within  the  U.S.  Mission  which
were  never  resolved,  and  then  faded  away.  So  unsuccessful  was  it  that  during
its  life  span  the  VC  were  able  to  organize  a  regiment — 165 A — in  the  Gia  Dinh
area  surrounding  Saigon,  and  thus  forced  MACV  in  late  1966  to  commit  three
U.S.  infantry  battalions  to  Operation  FAIRFAX  to  protect  the  capital.  No  one
analyzed  Hop  Tac  before  starting  FAIRFAX.  With  the  beginning  of  FAIRFAX,
Hop  Tac  was  buried  quietly  and  the  United  States  proceeded  to  other  matters.

B.  AMBASSADOR  LODGE  AND  THE  "TRUE  BELIEVERS"

Henry  Cabot  Lodge  returned  as  Ambassador  in  August  of  1965,  and  imme-
diately began  to  talk  of  pacification  as  "the  heart  of  the  matter."  In  telegrams
and  Mission  Council  meetings,  Lodge  told  the  President,  the  GVN,  and  the
Mission  that  pacification  deserved  a  higher  priority.  Because  he  saw  himself  as
an  advocate  before  the  President  for  his  beliefs  rather  than  as  the  overall  mana-


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  517

ger  of  the  largest  overseas  civil-military  effort  in  American  history,'"  Lodge  did
not  try,  as  Ambassador  Maxwell  Taylor  had  done,  to  devise  an  integrated  and
unified  strategy  that  balanced  every  part  of  our  effort.  Instead,  he  declared,  in
his  first  month  back  in  Vietnam  (September,  1965),  that  "the  U.S.  military
was  doing  so  well  now  that  we  face  a  distinct  possibility  that  VC  main  force
units  will  be  neutralized,  and  VC  fortresses  destroyed  soon,"  and  that  therefore
we  should  be  ready  to  give  pacification  a  new  push.  While  his  involvement  was
irregular  and  inconsistent.  Lodge  did  nonetheless  play  a  key  role  in  giving  pacifi-
cation a  boost.  His  rhetoric,  even  if  vague,  encouraged  other  advocates  of
pacification  to  speak  up.  The  man  he  brought  with  him,  Edward  Lansdale,
gave  by  his  very  presence  an  implicit  boost  to  pacification.

C.  THE  III  MARINE  AMPHIBIOUS  FORCE

Meanwhile,  to  their  own  amazement,  the  Marines  were  discovering  that  the
toughest  war  for  them  was  the  war  in  the  villages  behind  them  near  the  Da
Nang  air  base,  rather  than  the  war  against  the  main  force,  which  had  retreated
to  the  hills  to  build  up.  In  the  first  12  months  of  their  deployment,  the  Marines
virtually  reversed  their  emphasis,  turning  away  from  the  enemy  to  a  grueling
and  painfully  slow  effort  to  pacify  the  villages  of  the  central  coast  in  their  three
TAORs.  It  was  a  job  that  Americans  were  not  equipped  for,  and  the  Marine
effort  raised  some  basic  questions  about  the  role  of  U.S.  troops  in  Vietnam,  but
nonetheless,  the  Marines  betran  to  trv  to  sell  the  rest  of  the  U.S.  Government  on
the  success  and  correctness  of  their  still  unproved  strategy.  The  result  was  a
major  commitment  to  the  pacification  strategy  by  a  service  of  the  U.S.  Armed
Forces,  and  influence  on  the  other  services,  particularly  the  Army.

D.  WASHINGTON  GRUMBLES  ABOUT  THE  EFFORT

When  Lodge  was  Ambassador,  there  was  widespread  concern  about  the
management  of  the  Mission.  Lodge  was  admittedly  not  a  manager.  This  con-
cern led  to  a  major  conference  at  Warrenton  in  January  of  1966,  during  which
increased  emphasis  on  pacification  and  better  organization  within  the  U.S.
Mission  were  the  main  topics.  Improving  the  Washington  organizational  struc-
ture was  raised,  but  not  addressed  candidly  in  the  final  report;  Washington
seemed  far  readier  to  tell  Saigon  how  to  reorganize  than  to  set  their  own  house
in  order.  But  Warrenton  symbolizes  the  growing  dissatisfaction  in  Washington
with  the  Mission  as  it  was.

E.  PRESIDENTIAL  EMPHASIS  ON  THE  ''OTHER  WAR"  AND
PRESS  REACTION

Finally,  there  was  the  need  of  the  President,  for  compelling  domestic  political
reasons,  to  give  greater  emphasis  to  "the  other  war."  With  the  first  full  years  of
major  troop  commitment  ending  with  victory  not  yet  in  sight,  there  was  a  grow-
ing need  to  point  out  to  the  American  public  and  to  the  world  that  the  United
States  was  doing  a  great  deal  in  the  midst  of  war  to  build  a  new  Vietnam.
While  this  emphasis  did  not  necessarily  have  to  also  become  an  emphasis  on

*  No  other  American  Ambassador  has  ever  had  responsibility  and  authority  even  close
to  that  in  Saigon;  only  military  commands  have  exceeded  it  in  size.


518 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II

pacification,  it  did,  and  thus  the  President  in  effect  gave  pacification  his  personal
support — an  act  which  was  acutely  felt  by  Americans  in  Vietnam.

F. MEANWHILE,  BACK  AT  THE  WAR  .  .  .

A  summary  of  the  MACV  Monthly  Evaluations  and  other  reports  is  con-
tained here,  showing  how  the  U.S.  command  saw  its  own  progress.  The  sum-
mary suggests  that  MACV  foresaw  heavy  fighting  all  through  1966,  and  did
not  apparently  agree  with  Ambassador  Lodge's  predictions  and  hopes  that  a
major  pacification  effort  could  be  started,  but  the  issue  was  not  analyzed  before
decisions  were  made.

II.  HONOLULU

A.  THE  CONFERENCE— FEBRUARY  1966

The  details  of  the  working  sessions  at  the  Honolulu  conference  do  not
appear,  in  retrospect,  to  be  nearly  as  important  on  the  future  emphasis  on
pacification  as  the  public  statements  that  came  out  of  Honolulu,  particularly
the  Declaration  itself.  The  discussions  and  the  Declaration  are  summarized,  in-
cluding the  President's  final  remarks  in  plenary  session.

B.  PUBLIC  IMPACT  .  .  .

The  press  reaction  to  the  conference  is  summarized.

III.  HONOLULU  TO  MANILA

A.  SAIGON:  PORTER  IN  CHARGE

The  first  reorganization  now  took  place,  and  Deputy  Ambassador  Porter  was
put  in  direct  charge  of  the  civilian  agencies.  His  responsibility  and  his  ability  to
carry  out  his  responsibility  were  not  equal  from  the  outset,  and  Porter  saw  his
role  in  different  terms  than  those  in  Washington  who  had  given  him  his  difficult
task.  A  major  problem  was  the  lack  of  full  support  that  Porter  received  from
Ambassador  Lodge,  who  had  never  been  fully  in  favor  of  the  reorganization.
Another  problem  was  the  lack  of  a  parallel  structure  in  Washington,  so  that
Porter  found  himself  caught  between  the  Washington  agencies  and  their  repre-
sentatives in  Saigon,  with  Komer  (see  below)  as  a  frequent  participant.  None-
theless, Porter  accomplished  a  great  deal  in  the  months  this  arrangement  lasted;
it  just  wasn't  as  much  as  Washington  sought.

B.  WASHINGTON:  KOMER  AS  THE  BLOWTORCH

In  Washington,  the  President  selected  a  McGeorge  Bundy  deputy,  R.  W.
Komer,  to  be  his  Special  Assistant  on  non-military  activities  in  Vietnam.  Komer
did  not  have  the  same  kind  of  authorit\'  over  the  Washington  agencies  that
Porter,  in  theor\,  had  over  the  Saigon  extensions.  Komer  pushed  pacification
hard,  and  became  the  first  senior  ofiicial.  with  apparently  ready  access  to  the
President,  who  put  forward  the  pro-pacification  position  consistently  in  high
level  meetings.  His  mandate  was  contained  in  a  loosely  worded  NSAM,  343,


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  519

dated  March  28,  1966.  During  the  summer  of  1966,  Komer  appHed  great  pres-
sure to  both  the  Mission  and  the  Washington  agencies  (thus  earning  from  Am-
bassador Lodge  the  nickname  of  "Blowtorch"),  with  a  series  of  cables  and
visits  to  Vietnam,  often  using  the  President's  name.

C.  STUDY  GROUPS  AND  STRATEGISTS:  SUMMER  1966

With  Porter  and  Komer  in  their  new  roles,  a  series  of  Task  Forces  and  Study
Groups  began  to  produce  papers  that  gave  a  better  rationale  and  strategy  to
pacification.  These  included  the  Army  study  called  PROVN,  the  Priorities  Task
Force  in  Saigon,  and  the  Roles  and  Missions  Study  Groups  in  Saigon.  At  the
same  time,  Westmoreland,  whose  year  end  wrapup  message  on  January  1,
1966,  had  not  even  mentioned  pacification,  sent  in  a  new  long  range  strategy
which  emphasized  pacification,  to  Lodge's  pleasure.  MACV  also  produced  a
new  position  on  revamping  ARVN,  and  briefed  the  Mission  Council  on  it  in
August,  1966.  The  Honolulu  emphasis  was  beginning  to  produce  tangible  results
on  the  U.S.  side.

D.  THE  SINGLE  MANAGER

Despite  the  movement  described  in  the  above  three  sections,  Washington
wanted  more,  and  was  not  satisfied  with  the  rate  of  progress.  Komer,  there-
fore, in  August  of  1966  had  produced  a  long  paper  which  offered  three  possible
changes  in  the  management  structure  of  the  Mission.  They  were:  (1)  put  all
pacification  responsibility  and  assets,  including  MACV  Advisors,  under  Porter;
(2)  reorganize  the  civilian  structure  to  create  a  single  office  of  operations,  and
strengthen  MACV  internally,  but  leave  the  civilians  and  the  military  split;  (3)
give  Westmoreland  full  pacification  responsibility.  The  Mission  rejected  all
these  ideas,  offering  in  their  stead  the  proposal  that  Washington  leave  Saigon
alone  for  a  while,  but  the  pressure  for  results  and  better  management  was  too
great,  and  the  inadequacies  of  the  Mission  too  obvious,  to  leave  it  alone.  Secre-
tary McNamara  weighed  in  at  this  point  with  a  draft  Presidential  memorandum
proposing  that  Westmoreland  be  given  responsibility  for  pacification.  Komer
and  JCS  concurred  in  it,  but  State,  USIA,  AID,  and  CIA  nonconcurred.  Mc-
Namara, Katzenbach,  and  Komer  then  went  to  Saigon  to  take  a  look  at  the
situation.  When  they  returned,  Katzenbach,  new  to  the  State  Department  and
previously  uninvolved  in  the  problem,  recommended  that  Porter  be  told  to  re-
organize the  civilians  along  the  lines  previously  discussed  (similar  to  Komer's
Alternative  Number  2).  The  President  agreed,  discussing  it  with  Lodge  and
Westmoreland  at  Honolulu,  But  he  added  a  vital  warning:  he  would  give  the
civilians  only  about  90  to  120  days  to  make  the  new  structure  work,  and  then
would  reconsider  the  proposal  to  transfer  responsibility  for  pacification  to
MACV.

E.  THE  MANILA  CONFERENCE

The  decision  had  not  yet  been  transmitted  to  Saigon,  but  it  had  been  made.
At  Manila,  with  six  other  heads  of  state  in  attendance,  the  discussion  turned  to
other  matters.  At  Manila,  in  the  final  Declaration,  the  GVN  announced  that
they  would  commit  half  the  armed  forces  to  securing  operations  in  support  of
pacification/RD.  This  had  previously  been  discussed,  but  it  was  the  public
commitment  that  really  mattered,  and  now  it  was  on  the  record.


520 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  II


IV. OCO  TO  CORDS

A.  OCO  ON  TRIAL:  INTRODUCTION

The  Office  of  Civil  Operations  was  formed,  creating  confusion  and  resent-
ment among  the  agencies,  but  also  marking  an  immediate  and  major  step  for-
ward. The  example  of  the  civilians  moving  at  this  pace  also  created  pressure
and  conflict  within  MACV,  which  was  for  the  first  time  confronted  with  a
strong  civilian  structure.  The  GVN  indicated  that  it  understood  and  approved
of  the  new  structure.

B.  OCO  ON  TRIAL:  TOO  LITTLE  TOO  LATE— OR  NOT  ENOUGH
TIME?

Although  it  was  slower  than  Washington  desired,  OCO  did  get  off  to  a  start
in  December  of  1966.  Wade  Lathram,  who  had  been  USAID  Deputy  Director,
was  chosen  to  head  up  OCO — a  choice  that  was  unfortunate,  because  Lathram,
a  skilled  and  cautious  bureaucrat,  was  not  the  kind  of  driving  and  dynamic
leader  that  OCO — in  a  brink  of  disaster  situation  from  its  inception — needed.

Even  worse,  Porter  was  almost  immediately  diverted  from  OCO  to  pay  more
rttention  to  other  matters.  While  the  planners  had  hoped  that  Porter  would
take  OCO  in  hand  and  give  Lathram  direct  guidance,  instead  he  left  Lathram
in  control  of  OCO  and  was  forced  to  turn  his  attentions  to  running  the  Mission,
during  a  long  vacation  (one  month)  by  Lodge.

The  most  dramatic  action  that  was  taken  was  the  selection  of  the  Regional
Directors,  a  move  which  even  attracted  newspaper  attention.  They  included
Henry  Koren,  formerly  Porter's  deputy;  John  Paul  Vann,  the  controversial
former  MACV  advisor;  and  Vince  Heymann  of  the  CIA.

Slowly,  the  OCO  then  turned  to  picking  its  province  representatives.  All  in
all,  OCO  accomplished  many  things  that  had  never  been  done  before;  given
time  it  could  no  doubt  have  done  much  more.  But  it  was  plagued  from  the  out-
set by  lack  of  support  from  the  agencies  and  their  representatives  in  Saigon,
and  Washington  made  higher  demands  than  could  be  met  in  Saigon.

C.  TIME  RUNS  OUT

It  is  not  clear  when  the  President  made  the  decision  to  scrap  OCO.  He
communicated  his  decision  to  his  field  commanders  at  Guam,  but  there  was  a
two-month  delay  before  the  decision  was  announced  publicly  or  discussed  with
the  GVN.

D.  THE  CORDS  REORGANIZATION

As  Bunker  took  over  the  Mission,  there  was  a  considerable  turnover  in  key
personnel.  B  inker  asked  Lansdale  and  Zorthian  to  stay  on,  but  Porter,  Habib,
Wehrle,  all  left  just  as  Locke,  Komer,  Calhoun,  Cooper,  and  General  Abrams
all  arrived.

In  the  new  atmosphere,  Komer  took  the  lead,  making  a  series  of  recom-
mendations which  maintained  the  civilian  position  within  MACV,  and  West-
moreland accepted  them.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  521

An  example  of  Komer's  influence  was  the  question  of  the  role  of  the  ARVN
divisions  in  the  RD  chain  of  command,  and  here  Westmoreland  took  Komer's
suggestion  even  though  it  meant  a  reversal  of  the  previous  MACV  position.

E. THE  MISSION  ASSESSMENT  AS  CORDS  BEGINS

The  situation  inherited  by  CORDS  was  not  very  promising.  Measurements
of  progress  had  been  irrelevant  and  misleading,  and  progress  by  nearly  all
standards  has  been  slow  or  nonexistent.  At  this  point,  the  study  of  CORDS  and
pacification  becomes  current  events.

End  of  Summary

I. THREADS  THAT  MET  AT  HONOLULU
A. HOP  TAC

While  pacification  received  a  low  emphasis  during  troubled  1964-1965,
there  was  one  important  exception:  the  Hop  Tac  program,  designed  to  put
"whatever  resources  are  required"  into  the  area  surrounding  Saigon  to  pacify
it.  The  area  was  chosen  by  Ambassador  Lodge  in  his  last  weeks  as  Ambassador
in  June,  1964,  and  Hop  Tac  deserves  study  because  both  its  failures  and
limited  achievements  had  many  of  the  characteristics  of  our  later  pacification
efforts — and  because,  like  all  pacification  efforts,  there  was  constant  disagree-
ment within  the  Mission,  the  press,  and  the  Vietnamese  as  to  how  well  the
program  was  doing.

Hop  Tac — an  intensive  pacification  effort  in  the  provinces  ringing  Saigon —
was  formally  proposed  at  a  high  level  strategy  session  in  Honolulu  in  July  of
1964  by  Lodge,  then  on  his  way  home  from  his  first  assignment  as  Ambassador.
In  a  paper  presented  to  Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara  and  incoming  Ambas-
sador Taylor  at  Honolulu  (dated  June  19,  1964),  Lodge  wrote:

A  combined  GVN-US  effort  to  intensify  pacification  efforts  in  critical
provinces  should  be  made  .  .  .  The  eight  critical  provinces  are:  Tay
Ninh,  Binh  Duong,  Hau  Nghia,  Long  An,  Dinh  Tuong,  Go  Cong,  Vinh
Long,  and  Quang  Ngai.  Top  priority  and  maximum  effort  should  be  con-
centrated initially  in  the  strategically  important  provinces  nearest  to
Saigon,  i.e..  Long  An,  Hau  Nghia,  and  Binh  Duong.  Once  real  progress  has
been  made  in  these  provinces,  the  same  effort  should  be  made  in  the  five
others.

General  Taylor  and  General  Westmoreland  began  Hop  Tac,  setting  up  a  new
and  additional  headquarters  in  Saigon  which  was  supposed  to  tie  together  the
overlapping  and  quarrelsome  commands  in  the  Saigon  area.  The  Vietnamese
set  up  a  parallel,  "counterpart"  organization,  although  critics  of  Hop  Tac  were
to  point  out  that  the  Vietnamese  Hop  Tac  headquarters  had  virtually  no  author-
ity or  influence,  and  seemed  primarily  designed  to  satisfy  the  Americans.
(Ironically,  Hop  Tac  is  the  Vietnamese  word  for  "cooperation,"  which  turned
out  to  be  just  what  Hop  Tac  lacked.)

Hop  Tac  had  a  feature  previously  missing  from  pacification  plans:  it  sought
to  tie  together  the  pacification  plans  of  a  seven-province  area  (expanded  from
Lodge's  three  provinces  to  include  the  adjacent  provinces  of  Phuoc  Tuy,  Bien
Hoa,  Phuoc  Thanh,  and  Gia  Dinh,  which  surround  Saigon  like  a  doughnut).


522 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


into  a  plan  in  which  each  province  subordinated  its  own  priorities  to  the  concept
of  building  a  ''giant  oil  spot"  around  wSaigon.  In  a  phrase  which  eventually  be-
came a  joke  in  the  Mission,  the  American  heading  the  Hop  Tac  Secretariat  at  its
inception,  C\")lonel  Jasper  Wilson,  briefed  senior  ofiicials  on  the  creation  of
"rings  of  steel"  which  would  grow  outward  from  Saigon  until  the  area  from  the
C\nnbodian  border  to  the  South  China  Sea  was  secure.  Then,  according  to  the
plan.  Hop  Tac  would  move  into  the  Delta  and  North.  Colonel  Wilson  ordered
his  stalf  to  produce  a  phased  plan  in  which  the  area  (see  map  below)  to  be  pacified
was  divided  into  four  circles  around  Saigon.  Hach  ring  was  to  be  pacified  in  four
months,  according  to  the  original  plan,  which  never  had  any  chance  of  success.
But  Wilson,  under  great  pressure  from  his  superiors,  ordered  the  plan  pro-
duced, got  his  Vietnamese  counterparts  to  translate  it,  and  issued  it.  The  kick-
o(T  date  for  Hop  Tac  was  to  be  September  12,  1964:  the  operation,  a  sweep
into  the  VC-controlled  pineapple  groves  just  west  and  southwest  of  the  city  of
Saigon — the  VC  base  nearest  to  the  city,  which  had  not  been  entered  by  the
GVN  since  the  last  outpost  had  been  abandoned  in  1960.


r;~]  Zone 'A'  L..J  Zono 'C

□  Zone  'S'  lZ] Zone  -D'


Re-Efjiphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  523

The  operation  began  on  schedule,  with  elements  of  the  51st  Regiment  mov-
ing toward  their  objective  west  of  Saigon.  During  the  second  day  of  the  opera-
tion, the  unit  ran  into  a  minefield  and  took  numerous  casualties.  Shortly  there-
after, instead  of  continuing  the  operation,  the  unit  broke  off  contact  and,  to
the  amazement  of  its  advisors,  turned  back  towards  the  city  of  Saigon.  When
next  located  it  was  in  the  middle  of  Saigon  participating  in  the  abortive  coup
d'etat  of  September  13,  1964.

From  that  point  on,  Hop  Tac  was  a  constant  source  of  dispute  within  the
U.S.  Mission.  Almost  to  a  man,  the  ci\ilian  agencies  "supporting"  Hop  Tac
felt  that  the  program  was  unnecessary,  repetitive,  and  doomed.  Thev  claimed
that  they  preferred  to  work  through  existing  channels,  although  these,  in
MACV's  view,  were  inadequate.  This  \iew  was  not  stated  openlv,  however,
since  the  Ambassador  and  General  Westmoreland  had  committed  all  U.S.
agencies  to  full  support.  On  October  6,  1964,  for  example.  General  Tavlor  sent
Washington  an  EXDIS  cable  in  which  he  discussed  and  rejected  a  suggestion
to  decentralize  the  pacification  effort,  and  instead  listed  several  actions  that
the  Mission  would  take.  First  among  these  was  a  "unanimous  recommendation"
that  the  Mission  "give  full  support  to  Hop  Tac  Plan,  assuring  it  the  necessar}'
prioritv  to  give  it  everv  chance  to  succeed  .  .  .  When  Hop  Tac  priorities  per-
mit, concentrate  on  selected  weak  areas."*  Thus  there  was  a  reluctance  to  criti-
cize the  program  directly.

Deadlines  slipped  continuallv:  phase  lines  were  readjusted;  the  official  count
of  "pacified""  hamlets  climbed  steadilv.  But  a  special  study  of  the  area  made  in
October,  1964,  by  representatives  of  USOM,  USIS,  and  MACV  concluded:
"Generallv  speaking.  Hop  Tac,  as  a  program,  does  not  appear  to  exist  as  a
unified  and  meaningful  operation.""

The  official  view  of  Hop  Tac  was  that  the  new  coordinating  machinery  was
doing  some  good.  Thus,  during  a  period  in  which  cables  on  the  general  situation
were  rather  gloom\ ,  Ambassador  Tavlor  could  tell  the  President  in  his  weekly
NODIS  that  while  "pacification  progress  throughout  the  rest  of  Vietnam  was
minimal  at  best,  largelv  because  of  the  political  climate  .  .  .  Some  forward
movement  occurred  in  the  Hop  Tac  effort  growing  out  of  U.S.  Mission  dis-
cussions with  the  Prime  Minister  on  September  25.  The  number  of  operating
checkpoints  in  the  Hop  Tac  area  increased  markedly;  command  areas  were
strengthened;  available  troop  strength  increased."'  Minor  statistical  advances,
taken  out  of  context,  were  continuallv  being  used  in  the  above  manner  to  prove
overall  progress.

The  MACV  Command  History  for  1964  reflects  the  official  view:  '"At  the
end  of  1964,  Hop  Tac  was  one  of  the  few  pacification  areas  that  showed  some
success  and  greater  promise."'  But  subsequent  events  in  the  area  do  not  bear
out  this  view.  In  Februarv^  of  1966  for  example — IS  months  after  the  birth  of
Hop  Tac — when  the  Hop  Tac  area  was  designated  as  one  of  the  four  "National
Priority  Areas,""  the  briefers  were  unable  to  show  Ambassadors  Lodge  and
Porter  anv  progress  in  the  preceding  vear.  Thev  could  not  even  produce  a  plan
for  the  coming  vear.  Originallv  Hop  Tac  was  focused  on  cleaning  out  the
nearest  VC  base  areas,  but^by  Februar\-  of  1966 — with  the  GVN  unable  to  stop
the  growing  VC  build-up,  the  emphasis  was  "placed  on  lines  of  communica-
tions, with  special  attention  to  be  given  \ital  installations  including  Bien  Hoa
and  Tan  Son  Nhut  air  bases  and  ammunition  and  gasoline  depots."  The  best
the  briefers  could  do,  in  the  final  briefing  prior  to  the  Honolulu  Conference,
was  to  say  that  thev  hoped  to  pacify  72  hamlets  in  the  entire  seven-province
area,  and' '"consolidate""  144  hamlets'  in  Gia  Dinh — which  meant  the  hamlets


524 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

ringing  Saigon,  including  many  which  were  really  part  of  the  city.  Lodge  and
Porter  were  told  that  day  'there  has  been  a  lessening  of  security  in  Hau  Nghia
and  Gia  Dinh  provinces.  RF  and  PF  units  generally  are  not  up  to  authorized
strengths.  The  new  cadre  program  should  be  helpful  in  solving  the  problem
of  continued  hamlet  security  after  pacification  .  .  .  The  1966  plan  is  not
overly  optimistic  from  a  military  standpoint."  (The  memorandum  recording
of  this  meeting,  made  by  a  member  of  General  Lansdale's  staff,  shows  as  the  only
Ambassadorial  guidance  after  this  sobering  report:  "'Maps  drawn  to  depict
progress  of  Rural  Construction  (Pacification)  should  show  as  the  goal  only  that
area  to  be  pacified  during  the  year  .  .  .  The  U.S.  Mission  manpower  commit-
tee should  look  into  the  use  of  refugees  in  the  national  labor  force.")

The  Vietnamese  were  cynical  about  Hop  Tac:  it  was  something,  speculation
ran,  that  General  Khanh  had  to  do  to  keep  the  Americans  happy,  but  it  was
clearly  an  American  show,  clearly  run  bv  the  United  States,  and  the  Viet-  am-
ese  were  reluctant  to  give  it  meaningful  support.  It  was  one  of  the  first  i  lajor
programs  with  which  the  United  States  became  publiclv  identified  (since  Diem
had  always  kept  the  United  States  in  as  much  of  a  background  role  as  possible
— and  its  shortcomings  were  in  part  derived  from  this  fact.

All  through  Ambassador  Tavlor's  tenure.  Hop  Tac  was  something  on  which
he  and  the  Mission  Council  pinned  hope.  General  Westmoreland  thought  the
program  had  been  reasonably  successful,  when  he  told  the  Mission  Council
about  Hop  Tac's  first  year:

General  Westmoreland  said  that  while  Hop  Tac  could  be  said  only  to
have  been  about  50%  successful,  it  had  undoubtedly  averted  a  VC  siege
of  Saigon.

This  same  view  was  reflected  in  McGeorge  Bundv's  comments  in  a  memoran-
dum to  the  President  months  earlier  in  Februarv,  1965,  when  he  said:

The  Hop  Tac  program  of  pacification  in  this  area  has  not  been  an  un-
qualified success,  but  it  has  not  been  a  failure,  and  it  has  certainly  pre-
vented any  strangling  seige  of  Saigon.  We  did  not  have  a  chance  to  form
an  independent  judgment  on  Hop  Tac,  but  we  did  conclude  that  whatever
its  precise  measure  of  success,  it  is  of  great  importance  that  this  operation
be  pursued  with  full  vigor.  This  is  the  current  policv  of  the  Mission.

There  were  others  who  said  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact.  Saigon  w^as  almost  under
seige  and  that  the  situation  was  deteriorating.  Westmoreland's  own  headquar-
ters, for  example,  sent  to  Washington  in  the  June  Monthly  Evaluation  from
MACV,  the  following  statement  which  seems  to  contradict  Westmoreland's
optimism:

The  sealing  off  of  Saigon  from  surrounding  areas,  no  matter  how  in-
complete the  sealing  may  be,  has  had  and  will  continue  to  have  serious
economic  as  well  as  military  effects.

Shortly  after  he  arrived  in  Metnam  for  his  second  tour.  Lodge  asked  for  a
private  assessment  of  Hop  Tac  from  an  Embassy  officer,  who  reported  to  him
in  early  September  of  1965:

1.  Hop  Tac  did  not  achieve  its  original  goals  primarilv  because  they  were
completely  unrealistic  and  did  not  take  into  account  the  difficulty  of


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  525

the  task.  These  goals  were  set  quite  arbitrarily  and  with  no  regard  for
the  available  resources  and  the  strength  of  the  enemy.

2.  The  second  reason  for  the  failures  of  Hop  Tac  lies  in  its  strategic  con-
cept. The  idea  of  concentric  circles  outward  from  Saigon  to  be  pacified
in  successive  waves  of  clearing,  securing  and  developing  may  be  sound  in
macroscopic  terms;  when  the  Hop  Tac  area  is  looked  at  carefully,  the
viability  of  this  strategy  breaks  down.  The  concentric  phase  lines  around
Saigon  do  not  adequately  take  into  account  existing  areas  of  GVN
strength  and  existing  Viet  Cong  base  areas;  rather  they  commit  the  GVN
to  a  continual  expansionary  effort  on  all  sides  of  Saigon  simultaneously,
an  effort  which  is  beyond  its  capabilities.  Above  all,  they  ignore  the  polit-
ical structure  of  the  area  around  Saigon.

3.  The  U.S.  Mission  has  two  broad  courses  of  action  available  in  regard
to  Hop  Tac.  First,  the  Mission  Council  may  feel  that  the  area  encom-
passed by  Hop  Tac  remains  the  first  pacification  priority  of  the  U.S.
and  the  GVN.  If  this  is  the  considered  judgment  of  the  Mission  Council,
then  we  must  seek  ways  of  re-emphasizing,  re-invigorating  and  re-
orienting Hop  Tac  in  order  to  achieve  a  dramatic  and  sustained  success
in  pacification.

4.  There  is  an  alternative  open  to  the  Mission  Council.  Perhaps  it  would
be  politically  unwise  to  attempt  to  commit  the  GVN  to  re-emphasis  of
Hop  Tac  at  this  time.  There  are  several  facts  which  support  this  view:

A.  The  GVN  has  never  considered  Hop  Tac  its  own  plan  and  its  own
number  one  priority.  The  staff  planning  for  the  plan  was  done  almost
entirely  by  the  United  States,  and  then  translated  into  Vietnamese.  It
is,  in  the  eyes  of  many  Vietnamese,  "the  plan  of  the  Americans."

B.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult  area  in  the  country  in  which  to  at-
tempt pacification.  Since  it  surrounds  Saigon  (but  does  not  include
it),  every  political  tremor  in  the  capital  is  felt  in  the  neighboring
area  .  .  .  the  High  Command  has  created  chains  of  command  in
the  area  which  are  clearly  designed  primarily  to  prevent  coups,  and
only  secondarily  to  pacify  the  countryside.  Another  example:  in  the
last  11  months,  24  out  of  31  district  chiefs  and  five  out  of  seven
province  chiefs  have  been  changed.

C.  Prime  Minister  Ky  will  never  feel  that  Hop  Tac  is  his  plan.  If  he  is
seeking  a  major  public  triumph,  and  intends  to  devote  his  attention
to  achieving  that  triumph,  it  is  unlikely  that  he  will  choose  Hop  Tac,
which  as  mentioned  above,  is  publicly  considered  an  American  plan.
Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  any  Vietnamese  is  publicly  connected
with  Hop  Tac,  it  is  Nguyen  Khanh.  For  this  reason,  more  than  any
other,  the  dangers  of  re-emphasizing  Hop  Tac  outweigh  the  possible
gains  .  .  .

The  situation  in  the  Hop  Tac  area  will  not  collapse  if  Hop  Tac  is  not
revitalized  now.  With  the  available  forces,  and  particularly  with  the
impending  arrival  of  the  1st  Infantry  Division  to  take  up  a  position  across
the  southern  arc  of  Zone  D,  Saigon  itself  is  not  going  to  be  threatened  any
more  than  it  presently  is.  The  threat — which  is  substantial — comes  from
the  enemy  within,  and  the  solution  does  not  lie  within  the  responsibility
of  the  Hop  Tac  Council:  it  is  a  problem  for  the  Saigon  police  and  intelli-
gence communities.  This  threat,  serious  as  it  is,  is  not  directly  affected  by


526 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  presence  of  the  Viet  Cong's  506th  battaUon  20  miles  away  in  Hau
Nghia,  nor  by  Zone  D.  The  two  problems  can  be  dealt  with  separately,
and  solution  of  the  internal  security  problems  of  Saigon  are  not  contingent
on  the  success  of  clearing  Hau  Nghia  and  Long  An.

In  an  effort  to  reconcile  these  opposing  views  about  Hop  Tac,  Lodge  told
the  September  15  Mission  Council  that  "the  original  reasons  for  the  emphasis
placed  on  the  area  surrounding  Saigon  .  .  .  were  still  valid,  primarily  because
of  the  heavy  density  of  population.  Lodge  noted,  however,  lack  of  a  clear  com-
mitment to  Hop  Tac  on  the  part  of  the  GVN,  possibly  due  to  the  fact  that  the
Vietnamese  consider  the  program  an  American  scheme.  The  view  was  also
expressed  that  the  trouble  may  also  lie  in  US/GVN  differences  over  some  funda-
mental concepts  in  Hop  Tac.  Finally,  Ambassador  Lodge  said  it  was  essential
that  all  interested  American  agencies  be  agreed  on  concepts  and  tactics  before
an  approach  to  the  GVN  could  be  made."  After  this  meeting,  no  significant
action  was  taken,  and  the  matter  lapsed.

The  importance  of  Hop  Tac  is  still  difficult  to  assess;  it  is  included  here  pri-
marily because  of  its  role  as  the  one  major  pacification  program  that  was  tried
during  the  1964-1965  period  when  pacification  was  not  receiving  its  present
top-level  emphasis.  Whether  or  not  it  averted  a  seige  of  Saigon,  as  General
Westmoreland  claimed,  is  a  semantic  question:  what  constitutes  a  seige  in  a
g;  errilla  war?  Saigon,  of  course,  never  was  under  seige  in  the  classic  sense  of  the
word,  but  it  is  hard  to  conceive  of  it  ever  being  literally  cut  off  as  Dien  Bien
Phu  or  Mafeking  were — this  would  not  be  a  logical  objective  to  the  Viet  Cong,
who  wanted  to  put  pressure  on  the  capital  but  knew  they  couldn't  seal  it  off
(nor  would  have  wanted  to,  since  they  got  supplies  from  it) .

What  is  important  is  that  the  failures  of  Hop  Tac  were  never  adequately
reported  and  analyzed  prior  to  embarking  on  other  pacification  efforts.  Thus,
at  one  point  General  Westmoreland  told  each  of  his  Senior  Corps  Advisors  to
start  a  Hop  Tac  in  his  area — a  strange  request  since  Hop  Tac  was  designed  to
pull  together  a  multiplicity  of  commands  not  duplicated  in  any  other  area.
Each  Corps  naturally  responded  by  producing  plans  which  concentrated  their
pacification  assets  around  the  Corps  headquarters — Da  Nang,  and  Can  Tho  or,
in  the  case  of  II  Corps,  Qui  Nhon.  This  in  turn  led  naturally  to  the  later  Na-
tional Priority  Area  program,  but  had  no  other  value.

With  MACV  reluctant  to  close  down  its  Hop  Tac  Secretariat,  with  the  civilian
Americans  giving  Hop  Tac  only  verbal  support,  and  with  the  Vietnamese  leaving
a  powerless  staff  at  the  headquarters.  Hop  Tac  could  well  have  survived  as  an
appendix  to  the  normal  chain  of  command,  as  so  many  outdated  structures  sur-
vive in  Vietnam  because  no  one  wants  to  admit  their  irrelevance.  But  General
Westmoreland  saw  a  way  to  dispose  of  Hop  Tac  cleanly  and  quietly  in  the  sum-
mer of  1966,  and  he  took  it.  At  the  Mission  Council  meeting  of  July  7,  1966:

General  Westmoreland  then  turned  to  the  subject  of  Hop  Tac.  He  sum-
marized the  purpose  of  the  Hop  Tac  concept,  which  was  implemented  two
years  ago,  and  said  that — while  it  has  enjoyed  only  modest  success  over
the  past  two  years — the  situation  in  the  area  surrounding  Saigon/Cholon
would  be  comparatively  worse  if  we  had  not  had  the  Hop  Tac  arrange-
ment. He  noted  that  recent  organizational  changes  have  taken  place,  which
have  resulted  in  the  Capital  Military  Region  becoming  the  Capital  Military
District  (as  part  of  the  III  Corps  Tactical  Zone)  with  Saigon  remaining  as
an  autonomous  city.  In  view  of  these  changes,  there  is  some  question  of


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  527


the  validity  of  continuing  with  the  original  concept.  More  importantly,
III  Corps  has  a  Revolutionary  Development  Council  and  a  Hop  Tac  Council
which  results  in  some  duplication  of  eflfort.  Consequently,  the  General  be-
lieves that  these  two  councils  should  be  merged,  with  the  Revolutionary
Development  Council  absorbing  the  Hop  Tac  Council.  General  Westmore-
land asked  the  Mission  Council  to  endorse  this  proposal  for  him  to
carry  out.  After  brief  discussion,  Ambassador  Lodge  indicated  his  approval.

By  this  time  Hop  Tac  had  long  lost  the  "highest  priority"  which  was  supposed
to  justify  it,  and  both  the  American  and  the  Vietnamese  had  turned  to  other
matters.

But  Hop  Tac  was  not  adequately  analyzed  before  embarking  on  other  efforts,
and  its  shortcomings  were  largely  forgotten  by  the  time  that  the  still-deterio-
rating situation  in  Gia  Dinh  led  MACV  to  commit  three  U.S.  Army  battalions
to  the  inner  area  surrounding  Saigon— the  original  first  phase  of  Hop  Tac — as
part  of  Operation  Fairfax  in  November  of  1966.  The  Mission,  with  no  institu-
tional memory,  forgot — or  never  learned — the  lessons  that  Hop  Tac  could  have
offered.

B. AMBASSADOR  LODGE  AND  THE  "TRUE  BELIEVERS"

Many  senior  American  officials  have  paid  varying  degrees  of  lip  service  to
the  pacification  effort  since  1962 — a  fact  which  makes  it  extremely  hard  to
determine  who  really  pushed  pacification  and  who  didn't.  But  about  Ambas-
sador Lodge,  there  can  be  little  question.  He  had  repeatedly  called  pacification
"the  heart  of  the  matter,"  and  his  unfailing  belief  in  the  importance  of  the  effort
can  be  clearly  shown  in  his  public  and  private  statements  and  his  cables.

His  emphasis  on  pacification  resumed  the  day  he  returned  to  Saigon  in  August
1965,  when  in  his  arrival  statement  he  said  that  the  United  States  supported  the
"true  revolution"  of  the  Vietnamese  people.  His  continual  emphasis  on  the
effort  seems  to  have  had  a  definite  impact  on  the  mood  in  Washington  and  in
the  Mission,  and  played  a  role  in  the  events  leading  up  to  the  Honolulu  Con-
ference in  February  1966 — where  pacification  was  given  (or  so  it  seemed  to
Americans  and  Vietnamese  alike  in  Vietnam)  the  President's  blessing.

It  is  true  that  Ambassador  Taylor  also  felt  that  pacification  was  important
and  that  it  would  deserve  high  emphasis;  his  push  on  Hop  Tac  clearly  demon-
strates this  fact.  But  because  Maxwell  Taylor  saw  that  it  was  his  responsibility
as  Ambassador  to  reconcile  competing  requirements  for  limited  resources,  and
develop  a  single  overall  strategy  for  the  effort,  he  never  let  pacification  consume
too  many  resources  prematurely.  Lodge,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  see  himself
as  an  administrator  or  manager  of  the  U.S.  Mission,  but  as  the  President's  per-
sonal representative  and  advisor  in  Saigon.  Thus,  he  felt  no  qualms  about  advo-
cating a  certain  course  of  action — in  this  case,  pacification.  There  is  no  record
of  Ambassador  Lodge  worrying  about  the  way  his  latest  proposals  would  affect
the  balance  of  the  whole  effort.  He  simply  did  not  see  himself  as  responsible
for  the  actions  of  the  operating  agencies  which  represented  AID,  USIA,  and
the  CIA,  let  alone  DOD,  in  Vietnam  — not  even  after  receiving  a  strong  letter
of  authority  from  President  Johnson  in  July  of  1965:

As  you  take  charge  of  the  American  effort  in  South  Vietnam,  I  want
you  to  have  this  expression  of  my  confidence,  and  a  reaffirmation  of  my
desire  that  as  Ambassador  you  exercise  full  responsibility  for  the  work  of


528 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


the  United  States  Government  in  South  Vietnam.  In  general  terms  this
authority  is  parallel  to  that  set  forth  in  my  letter  to  Ambassador  Taylor
of  July  2,  1964.t

Given  his  belief  in  the  fundamental  importance  of  the  pacification  effort,
Lodge  was  ready  to  push  it  at  any  time  he  could.  He  did  not  examine  the  pos-
sibility that  certain  times  were  more  favorable  than  others  for  an  effort  which
needed  the  full  participation  of  the  Vietnamese  in  order  to  succeed,  and,  like
many  in  the  government,  failed  to  see  that  at  certain  times  emphasis  on
pacification  would  not  only  not  work  but  would  be  harmful  to  GVN/US  rela-
tions, and  would  reduce  the  chances  for  a  successful  joint  effort  at  some  more
propitious  time.

Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that  one  of  his  last  major  documents  at  the  end  of
his  first  tour  as  Ambassador  proposed  Hop  Tac — in  the  face  of  strong  possi-
bilities that  the  situation  was  not  favorable  to  it — and  that  on  his  return  in
August  1965  he  was  advocating  more  effort  in  pacification.

Thus,  for  example,  meeting  with  his  senior  officers  one  month  after  he
arrived,  Lodge  "began  the  meeting  by  stating  that  in  his  opinion  the  United
States  military  was  doing  so  well  not  that  'we  face  a  distinct  possibility  that  VC
main  force  units  will  be  neutralized  and  that  VC  fortresses  will  be  destroyed
soon.  We  should  be  ready  to  handle  the  VC  in  small  units.  This  gives  counter-
^ubversion/terrorism  or  pacification  or  counterinsurgency — I  am  not  overly
concerned  with  what  we  call  it — a  new  urgency  for  all  of  us  here.'  "

It  is  likely  that  if  Lodge  had  clarified  his  view  of  pacification  and  repeated  it
continually  in  public  and  privately,  as  he  did  with  anything  he  believed  in,  his
view  would  eventually  have  taken  hold  in  the  United  States  Mission.  But  the
problem  of  how  pacification  should  work  was — and  is — a  very  difficult  one.  It
raises  a  number  of  extremely  difficult  questions  on  which  the  United  States
Government  has  never  reached  a  unified  position.

Sensing  that  Lodge  was  receptive  to  ideas  which  emphasized  pacification  but
that  he  had  no  set  views  on  details,  many  groups  and  individuals  besieged  him
with  a  resurgence  of  ideas  and  philosophies  on  pacification.  They  were  all  en-
couraged by  his  verbal  support  or  his  glowing  cables  to  Washington.  The  whole
atmosphere  in  the  Mission  became  more  favorable  towards  pacification  and
pacifiers;  Lansdale,  Colonel  Serong  (the  Australian  who  was  to  organize  the
Police  Field  Force  with  support  from  Lodge),  Sir  Robert  Thompson  (whose
Malayan  experiences  had  led  him  to  emphasize  the  police).  Colonel  Bohannon
(who  began  as  a  Lansdale  deputy,  but  whose  views  took  a  different  line),  the
Marines  (with  their  pacification  efforts  and  CAP's  near  Da  Nang),  the  CIA
(which  produced,  with  Lodge's  strong  support,  the  PAT's-turned  RD  cadre),
USIA  and  AID  (with  their  small  but  growing  field  programs),  the  Army  (which

*  See  for  example,  Lodge's  NODIS  to  the  President,  February  1,  1966,  in  which  he
said:  "...  I  have  learned  of  Zorthian's  wire  to  Marks,  which,  of  course,  he  has  the
right  to  send,  since  I  hold  that  Zorthian,  like  U.S.  agency  chiefs  here,  has  and  should
have  an  open  channel  to  his  agency.  It  is  a  statement  of  Zorthian's  opinion  which,  of
course,  was  sent  without  my  approval  or  direction  .  .  ."  (The  subject  was  apparently
a  suggestion  that  Lodge  address  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  in  New  York,
although  Lodge's  cable  cited  does  not  explicitly  state  what  Zorthian's  cable  said.)
t  The  letter  to  Taylor  had  said,  among  other  points:  "I  wish  it  clearly  understood  that
this  overall  responsibility  includes  the  whole  military  effort  in  South  Vietnam  and
authorizes  the  degree  of  command  and  control  that  you  consider  appropriate."


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  529

entered  the  game  late  but  elicited  from  Lodge  on  visits  to  the  U.S.  25th  In-
fantry Division  and  then  the  1st  Infantry  Division,  some  of  his  longest  and  most
glowing  accounts  of  pacification  in  action).

These  groups  and  individuals  fought  about  details,  sometimes  debating  minor
points  like  medieval  monks  but  also  disagreeing  on  rather  basic  points — such
as  whether  the  object  was  to  gain  the  population's  support  or  to  control  them
by  force.  (A  popular  Marine  saying,  which  tried  to  bridge  the  gap,  went:  "Get
the  people  by  the  balls,  and  their  hearts  and  minds  will  follow.")  But  each
group  found  something  that  appealed  to  Lodge,  and  each  in  turn  gained  en-
couragement from  him.  The  slow  change  in  mood  also  affected  Washington.

In  dealing  with  his  role  in  the  re-emphasis  of  pacification,  we  must  distin-
guish between  Lodge's  influence  on  our  overall,  or  grand,  strategy — on  which
he  was  ultimately  to  have  considerable  impact — and  his  influence  on  the  opera-
tional details  of  the  policy.  The  latter  did  not  interest  him  on  a  continuing  basis,
and  it  is  thus  easy  to  underestimate  his  influence.  There  was,  for  example,  a
tendency  in  Saigon  during  his  Ambassadorship  to  minimize  his  importance,
since  each  agency  could  ignore  him  when  he  told  them  to  do  something  and
usually  get  away  with  it.  But  this  popular  view  overlooked  Lodge's  impact  in
encouraging  all  sorts  of  people  to  emerge  from  parts  of  the  USG  with  renewed
hope  for  pacification.  It  overlooked  the  impact  of  his  cables  and  statements,
which  added  up  to  a  massive  endorsement  of  pacification.  In  his  NODIS
weeklies  to  the  President,  for  example,  pacification  receives  more  attention  than
any  other  subject.

Alone,  Lodge  could  have  done  little,  if  anything,  to  move  the  USG  around.
But  his  influence  seems  clear,  more  so  in  retrospect  than  at  the  time:  at  a  time
when  frustrations  were  growing,  he  was  emphasizing  a  different  rhetoric  and
strategy.

The  best  way  to  show  his  emphasis  is  simply  to  quote  from  the  cables  and
memoranda  of  the  period.  Each  one  shows  Lodge,  either  directly  or  indirectly,
putting  forth  his  general  beliefs — sometimes  contradictory.  They  form  an  im-
portant part  of  the  background  to  Honolulu,  where  pacification  was  to  get  its
biggest  push  to  that  date:

\. Lodge  at  the  end  of  his  first  tour  in  Vietnam,  defining  pacification  in
his  paper  proposing  Hop  Tac:

The  first  priority  after  the  military  have  cleared  an  area  is  to  bring  about
the  selection  of  an  able  man  for  that  area,  who  will  in  turn  go  about  creat-
ing a  basically  civilian  counter-terrorist  organization  on  the  "precinct"
level,  or  equivalent  thereof  ...  Its  prime  purpose  will  be,  notably  with
police  help,  to  create  security  for  the  local  government  and  free  it  from
all  intimidation  by  going  through  the  precinct  with  a  fine-toothed  comb
.  .  .  Once  the  local  government  feels  safer,  it  should  move  energetically
to  promote  public  safety  for  the  people;  the  people  should  then  rally
more  to  the  government;  and  this  should  create  an  upward  spiral  as  re-
gards security  organization  .  .  .  USOM  and  USIA  will  support  these
local  "precinct"  organizations,  will  actually  work  through  them,  and  will
seek  to  make  it  attractive  to  be  one  of  those  who  builds  such  a  counter-
terrorism  precinct  organization  .  .  .  The  military  should  take  special
precautions  in  their  operations  not  to  injure  in  any  way  the  non-combat-
ants. It  must  also  behave  itself  so  well  that  the  people  like  the  Army  .  .  ."


530 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


2.  Lodge's  Ten  Point  Program  for  Success:

In  each  city  precinct  and  each  rural  hamlet  immediately  adjacent  to  a
thoroughly  pacified  city  {i.e.,  the  smallest  unit  from  a  public  safety  stand-
point) the  following  program  should  be  undertaken  in  the  following  order:

1.  Saturate  the  minds  of  the  people  with  some  socially  conscious  and  at-
tractive ideology,  which  is  susceptible  of  being  carried  out.

2.  Organize  the  people  politically  with  a  hamlet  chief  and  committee
whose  actions  would  be  backed  by  the  police  or  the  military  using  police-
type  tactics.  This  committee  should  have  representatives  of  the  political,
military,  economic  and  social  organizations  and  should  have  an  executive
who  directs.

3.  With  the  help  of  the  police  or  military,  conduct  a  census.

4.  Issue  identification  cards.

5.  Issue  permits  for  the  movement  of  goods  and  people.

6.  When  necessary,  hold  a  curfew.

7.  Thanks  to  all  these  methods,  go  through  each  hamlet  with  a  fine-tooth
comb  to  apprehend  the  terrorists.

8.  At  the  first  quiet  moment,  bring  in  agricultural  experts,  school  teachers,
etc.

9.  The  hamlet  should  also  be  organized  for  its  own  defense  against  small
Viet  Cong  attacks.

10.  After  all  these  things  have  been  accomplished,  hold  elections  for  local
office.

COMMENT:  Lodge  began  his  second  tour  as  Ambassador  where  he  had  left
off  the  year  before.  The  above  paper,  which  he  also  transmitted  to  the  President
in  a  NODIS  message,  again  represented  no  official  U.S.  position.  After  writing
it  and  giving  it  to  everyone  in  the  Mission,  he  let  the  matter  drop,  and  thus  the
paper  did  not  assume  any  official  character.  Since  nothing  was  changed  in  the
procedures  of  the  Mission,  and  since  the  old  criteria  for  pacification  still  applied
unchanged.  Lodge  had,  in  typical  fashion,  failed  to  affect  the  operating  Mission.

3.  The  Assignment  of  Lansdale:

Handpicked  group  of  about  ten  experienced  counter-subversion/counter
terrorism  workers  under  direction  of  Edward  G.  Lansdale  will  be  going
to  Saigon  to  provide  Ambassador  Lodge  with  special  operating  staff  in
field  of  political  action  both  at  central  level  and  also  in  connection  with
rural  programs.

COMMENT:  From  the  beginning,  there  was  misunderstanding  over  Lansdale's
role  in  Lodge's  Embassy.  The  first  cable  reflects  this.  The  phrase  "counter-
subversion  counter-terrorism  workers,"  seems  to  contradict  the  latter  part  of  the
sentence,  about  "political  action."  From  the  start  Lodge  wanted  him  to  "get
pacification  going."  Thus,  less  than  a  month  later,  Lodge  told  the  President:

I  appointed  Edward  Lansdale,  with  his  complete  approval,  to  be  chairman
of  the  U.S.  Mission  Liaison  Group  to  the  newly  created  Vietnamese  gov-
ernmental body  having  to  do  with  what  we  call  "pacification,"  what  they
call  "rural  construction,"  and  what  means  to  me  socially  conscious  practi-


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  531

cal  politics,  the  by-product  of  which  is  effective  counter-subversion/
terrorism.  I  thought  it  was  important  for  all  concerned  for  him  to  have  a
definite  allocation  where  he  would  have  the  best  chance  of  bringing  his
talents  to  bear.  I  trust  that  the  hopes  of  some  journalists  that  he  is  here  in
an  adversarial  relationship  with  existing  US  agencies  will  be  nipped  in  the
bud  by  making  him  the  spokesman  for  the  whole  US  Mission  in  this
particular  regard.  (Italics  added)

Thus,  another  action  which  served  to  strengthen  the  pacification  priority,  al-
though its  primary  reason  probably  was  to  get  Lansdale  working  on  something
other  than  Saigon  politics.

4.  Lodge  on  the  Use  of  U.S.  Troops  in  Pacification:

The  presence  of  American  troops  does  provide  the  opportunity  for
thorough  pacification  of  the  areas  in  which  they  are  stationed  and  full  ad-
vantage should  be  taken  of  this  opportunity.  It  is  a  very  big  divident  from
our  investment  of  men  and  money.  For  example,  the  Third  Marine  Divi-
sion has  scored  impressive  successes  north,  south,  and  west  of  Da  Nang
...  If  our  American  troops  can  emulate  this  performance  (of  the  proto-
CAC  units)  of  60  Americans  and  150  Vietnamese,  we  ought  to  be  a  tre-
mendous amount  of  small  unit  nighttime  effective  pacification,  and  we
would  be  neglecting  an  opportunity  not  to  use  American  troops  for  this
purpose,  thereby  pacifying  the  country  and  transforming  the  ARVN,  mak-
ing it  into  a  much  more  vital  and  effective  element  of  Vietnamese  society,
able  at  some  not  too  remote  date  to  carry  on  by  themselves  within  outside
help  .  .  .  We  are  already  discussing  with  the  Vietnamese  the  possibility  of
singling  out  areas  that  look  like  good  prospects,  that  are  potentially  pretty
much  over  on  our  side,  and  then  pacifying  them  so  as  to  get  a  little  smell
of  across-the-board  success  in  the  air  ...  I  am  not  ready  to  say,  "What
areas  would  be  chosen  for  pacification,  when  should  the  plan  be  started,
what  objectives  would  be  best,"  but  hope  to  be  able  to  do  so  soon.  I  am
now  encouraging  General  Ky  to  concentrate  GVN  efforts  and  enthusiasm
on  pacification  so  that  this  can  have  sustained,  wholehearted  GVN  partici-
pation .  .  .  Development  of  popular  electoral  processes  is  part  of  all  our
current  planning  for  counter  subversion  terrorism  in  "rural  construction
(pacification)."

COMMENT:  Here,  for  the  first  time,  Lodge  addresses  a  key  point:  the  role
of  U.S.  troops  on  pacification.  The  whole  concept  of  the  use  of  U.S.  troops  was
being  worked  out  during  this  period  (see  following  section  on  Marines),  and
Lodge  now  began  to  weigh  in  with  qualified  support  for  the  Marine  approach,
based  on  an  overly  optimistic  view  of  the  situation.

5.  Lansdale' s  Weekly  Report,  October  4,  1965:

Past  week  devoted  to  getting  GVN  into  sound  start  again  on  pacifica-
tion program  .  .  .  U.S.  Mission  Liaison  Group  shaping  up  into  realistic
instrument  for  working  level  teamwork  on  pacification  by  all  U.S.  Mis-
sions .  .  .


COMMENT:  Lansdale  was  responding  to  the  direction  given  him  by  Lodge.


532 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


6.  Lodge  on  the  GVN's  Attitude  Towards  Pacification:

During  my  talk  with  General  Co,  the  deputy  Prime  Minister  in  charge  of
six  ministries,  I  was  impressed  by  the  amount  of  sustained  analytical  thought
which  he,  with  his  colleagues,  had  given  to  how  to  organize  the  govern-
ment for  the  great  new  job  of  pacification  which  confronts  them — and
which  is  clearly  their  government's  most  important  single  responsibility.

COMMENT:  Lodge  had  by  this  time  let  the  GVN  know  clearly  what  tune  he
wanted  to  hear,  and  with  their  usual  skill  the  Vietnamese — even  General  Co,
who  turned  out  to  be  worthless  on  pacification — were  playing  the  right  song
back.

7.  When  the  chance  to  win  over  the  people  was  missed  some  years  ago,
a  situation  came  into  being  in  which  it  was  indispensable  for  the  VC  large
units  to  be  defeated  before  true  community  building,  with  its  mixture  of
political  and  security  measures,  would  be  possible.  Otherwise,  the  VC
battalions,  emerging  from^  untouchable  sanctuaries,  would  destroy  what-
ever community  building  had  painstakingly  been  achieved.  Now  it  looks
as  though  the  VC  know  this  and  has  already  begun  to  act  on  the  knowl-
edge, transforming  themselves  into  small  units  and  individual  terrorists,  and
into  subversive  political  operators.

COMMENT:  Lodge's  sequence  of  events — destroy  the  main  force  enemy  first,
pacify  second — is  hard  to  argue  with,  but  his  assessment  of  VC  capabilities  and
intentions  falls  short  of  accuracy.

As  a  final  note  to  the  examination  of  Lodge's  emphasis  on  pacification,  it  is
worthwhile  asking  why  he  has  so  consistently  put  such  a  high  priority  on  the
effort — regardless  of  methodology — to  gain  control  of  the  villages.  The  answer
may  lie  in  his  strong  views  on  the  way  the  war  will  end  in  Vietnam.  Lodge
doubted  that  there  would  ever  be  meaningful  negotiations  with  the  Viet  Cong.
An  old  hand  at  negotiating  with  the  communists,  Lodge  felt  that  the  most  likely
end  to  the  war  was  for  the  enemy  to  "fadeaway"  after  a  prolonged  period  of
conflict.  In  his  view,  therefore,  control  of  the  population  became  the  best  way
to  force  the  fadeaway.  Furthermore,  in  the  event  that  there  was  some  sort  of
pro  forma  discussions  with  the  communists  at  some  future  date.  Lodge  felt  that
there  were  certain  minimum  conditions  of  a  "satisfactory  outcome"  which  must
be  met.  An  examination  of  his  definition  of  a  satisfactory  outcome  shows  the
overriding  importance  of  the  pacification  effort  in  his  mind.  The  following  is
from  a  telegram  sent  "For  the  President  and  the  Secretary  from  Lodge"  on
October  21,  1965,  which  Lodge  considered  one  of  his  most  important  cables:

What  we  consider  a  satisfactory  outcome  to  be  would,  of  course,  be  a
very  closely  kept  secret.  It  would  include  the  following,  not  necessarily
in  this  order:

1.  The  area  around  Saigon  and  south  of  Saigon  (all  of  the  Delta)
must  be  pacified.  This  area  includes  about  55  to  60%  of  the  population  of
Vietnam.  "Pacified"  is  defined  as  the  existence  of  a  state  of  mind  among  the
people  that  they  have  a  stake  in  the  government  as  shown  by  the  holding
of  local  elections.  It  also  means  a  proper  local  police  force.  In  brief,  a
pacified  area  is  economically,  socially,  and  politically  a  part  of  the  RVN.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  533

2.  The  thickly  populated  northeastern  strip  along  the  coast  which  includes
25%  of  the  population  would  be  completely  pacified.

3.  The  GVN  would  retain  its  present  control  of  all  cities  and  all  provincial
capitals.

4.  All  principal  roads  would  be  open  to  the  Vietnamese  military  day
and  night.

5.  Those  areas  not  pacified  would  not  be  safe  havens  for  the  VC
but  would  be  contested  by  energetic  offensive  forays  to  prevent  consolida-
tion of  a  communist  base.

6.  The  VC  disarms;  and  their  weapons  and  explosives  are  removed
from  their  hands.  Their  main  force  units  broken  up.

7.  North  Vietnam  stops  its  infiltration.

8.  Chieu  Hoi  rehabilitation  would  be  extended  to  individual  VC  who
are  suitable  .  .  .

9.  Hardcore  VC  to  go  to  North  Vietnam.

10.  GVN  to  approve.

COMMENT:  This  means  that  we  would  not  be  insisting  on  the  com-
plete elimination  of  the  VC  although  no  safe  haven  would  be  allocated
them.  It  would  mean  that  we  and  the  GVN  would  control  80  to  85%  of
the  population  and  that  the  VC  would  be  limited  to  the  jungle  and  moun-
tainous areas  where  they  would  go  on  as  bandits,  much  as  their  counter-
parts in  Malaya  and  Luzon — and  where  the  GVN  would  have  the  right
to  pursue  them  and  try  to  destroy  them.

Lodge's  formula  for  a  satisfactory  outcome  is  based  on  the  absolute  necessity
of  controlling  the  villages.  In  day-to-day  terms  this  meant  that,  as  Ambassador,
Lodge  had  to  push  pacification  as  hard  as  possible.  Thus,  he  was  quite  pleased
with  the  emphasis  that  came  out  of  the  Honolulu  conference  in  February  of
1966.

C. THE  III  MARINE  AMPHIBIOUS  FORCE

To  what  extent  the  growing  Marine  emphasis  on  pacification  was  a  factor
during  the  period  before  the  Honolulu  conference  is  impossible  to  determine;
the  timing  and  evidence  would  suggest  that  the  impact  of  the  Marine  strategy  was
greatest  in  the  period  after  Honolulu,  as  they  became  more  sure  of  the  right-
ness  of  their  approach,  and  as  they  garnered  more  and  more  publicity  for  it.
Nonetheless,  in  the  first  eleven  months  of  their  mission  in  I  Corps,  the  Marines
had  gotten  deeply  into  the  pacification  program.  The  Marines  thus  became  the
most  vocal  advocates  within  the  Armed  Forces  for  emphasizing  pacification
more,  and  search  and  destroy  less.

The  Marine  deployments  and  mission  are  covered  in  earlier  decision  studies
in  this  series  and  will  thus  be  treated  only  briefly  here.  The  emphasis  of  this
section  is  not  on  the  influence  the  Marines  had  on  the  Honolulu  conference,  but
on  the  way  the  Marines  gradually  moved  into  their  new  role,  and  the  difliculties
with  it.  The  material  here  applied,  therefore,  equally  to  the  pre-  and  post-
Honolulu  periods,  throughout  which  the  Marine  successes,  as  they  reported
them,  had  a  growing  impact  on  the  thinking  of  civilian  and  military  alike,  in
Saigon,  CINCPAC,  and  Washington.

The  Marines  landed  their  first  troops — two  Battalion  Landing  Teams — in  Da
Nang  in  March  of  1965.  Their  original  mission,  "to  secure  enclaves  in  the  north-


534 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

ern  region  of  Vietnam  containing  air  and  communications  installations,  was
simplicity  itself."  (From  "U.S.  Marine  Corps  Civic  Action  Efforts  in  Vietnam,
March  1965-March  1966,  a  study  done  by  the  USMC  Historical  Branch,
hereafter  referred  to  as  MC  History;  from  unpaged  draft.)

By  the  time  of  the  Honolulu  conference  the  Marines — by  now  organized
into  the  III  Marine  Amphibious  Force — had  changed  their  mission  considerably,
and  to  a  degree  then  unequalled  among  other  American  units  was  deeply  en-
gaged in  pacification  operations.

A  monthly  report  issued  by  General  Krulak,  Commanding  General,  Fleet
Marine  Force,  Pacific,  indicates  the  evolution  of  Marine  thinking  on  their  mis-
sion. Reviewing  the  first  seven  months  of  their  deployment  in  I  Corps,  the  Fleet
Marine  Force,  Pacific,  wrote  in  September,  1965:

The  Mission  assigned  III  MAF  was  initially  confined  to  airfield  security.
Subsequently,  a  limited  offensive  responsibility  was  added,  which  has  grad-
ually grown  to  an  essentially  unrestrained  authority  for  offensive  opera-
tions. Finally,  and  largely  on  its  own,  III  MAF  has  entered  the  pacification
program,  with  the  bulk  of  its  pacification  efforts  taking  place  since  June.
[Emphasis  addedj

One  month  later,  after  chronicling  their  successes,  the  report  indicated  the
major  shift  in  strategic  thinking  which  was  taking  place  at  General  Walt's  head-
quarters in  Da  Nang,  and  at  General  Krulak's  in  Hawaii:

While  accomplishing  all  this  the  Marines  were  feeling,  with  growing
impact,  a  cardinal  counterinsurgency  principle:  that  if  local  forces  do  not
move  in  promptly  behind  the  offensive  effort,  then  first  line  forces  must  be
diverted  to  provide  the  essential  hamlet  security,  police  and  stabilization.
The  alternative  is  to  risk  the  development  of  vacua,  into  which  the  VC
guerrilla  can  flow.  This  condition  grew  during  the  period.  The  Popular
Forces  and  police  were  inadequate  in  numbers  and  in  quality  to  do  their
part  of  the  job,  as  the  Marines  did  theirs.  This  operated  to  complicate  the
Marines'  problem  by  making  the  civic  action  cff'ort  more  difficult,  by  per-
mitting harassment  of  our  forces,  and  by  making  possible  a  suicide  attack
on  the  Chu  Lao  and  Marble  Mountain  areas.

The  end  of  the  period  saw  the  676  square  mile  III  MAF  area  of  influence
more  stable,  more  prosperous,  and  far  more  hopeful,  but  it  saw  also  an
urgent  need  for  efficient  regional  or  local  forces  to  take  up  their  proper
burden,  so  the  Marines  can  maintain  the  momentum  of  their
search  clear  pacification  efforts.  It  is  plain  that  the  most  efficient  way  to
bring  this  about  is  to  give  III  MAF  substantial  authority  over  the  RF  or
PF  serving  in  this  area,  in  order  that  they  may  be  properly  trained  and
properly  led.

This  summary,  written  in  the  headquarters  of  the  man  often  regarded  as  the
philosopher  of  the  Marine  Corps,  shows  the  Marines  in  the  process  of  swinging
their  emphasis  around — turning  away  from  the  offensive  against  the  enemy  wait-
ing in  the  nearbv  hills,  and  towards  the  people  and  the  VC  guerrillas  among
the  people  inside  their  TAOR.

It  was  a  crucial,  difficult  decision  for  the  men  who  made  it.  Significantly,  the
indications  are  strong  that  the  decision  was  made  almost  entirely  inside  Marine
Corps  channels,  through  a  chain  of  command  that  bypassed  COMUSMACV


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  535

and  the  civilian  leaders  of  our  government,  and  ran  from  General  Greene
through  General  Krulak  to  General  Walt.  The  files  do  not  reveal  discussions  of
the  implications,  feasibility,  cost,  and  desirability  of  the  Marine  strategy  among
highranking  officials  in  the  Embassy,  MACV  headquarters,  the  Defense  and
State  Departments.  Yet  in  retrospect  it  seems  clear  that  the  strategy  the  Marines
proposed  to  follow,  a  strategy  about  which  they  made  no  secret,  was  in  sharp
variance  with  the  strategy  of  the  other  U.S.  units  in  the  country,  with  far-
ranging  political  implications  that  could  even  affect  the  ultimate  chances  for
negotiations.

It  should  be  clear  that  the  Marine  concept  of  operations  has  a  different  im-
plicit time  requirement  than  a  more  enemy-oriented  search  and  destroy  effort.
It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  paper  to  analyze  the  different  requirements,
but  it  does  appear  that  the  Marine  strategy,  which  General  Walt  sometimes
described  as  the  "wringing  out  of  the  VC  from  the  land  like  you  wring  water
out  of  a  sponge,"  is  slow  and  methodical,  requires  vast  numbers  of  troops,  runs
the  risk  of  turning  into  an  occupation  even  while  being  called  "pacification/
civic  action,"  and  involves  Americans  deeply  in  the  politics  and  traditions  of
rural  Vietnam.  The  strategy  can  succeed,  perhaps,  but  if  it  is  to  succeed,  it
must  be  undertaken  with  full  awareness  by  the  highest  levels  of  the  USG  of  its
potential  costs  in  manpower  and  time,  and  the  exacting  nature  of  the  work.
Instead,  the  documents  suggest  that  the  Marines  determined  their  strategy  basi-
cally on  their  own,  deriving  part  of  it  from  their  own  traditions  in  the  "Banana
Republics"  and  China  (where  Generals  Walt,  Krulak,  Nickerson,  and  others  had
served  in  the  1930's),  and  partly  from  an  attempt  to  solve  problems  of  an  un-
precedented nature  which  were  cropping  up  inside  their  TAORs,  even  on  the
edge  of  the  great  air  base  at  Da  Nang.

As  it  was,  the  Marine  strategy  was  judged  successful,  at  least  by  the  Marines,
long  before  it  had  even  had  a  real  test.  It  was  applauded  by  many  observers
before  the  VC  had  begun  to  react  to  it,  and  as  such,  encouraged  imitators  while
it  was  still  unproven.

The  Marine  dilemma  was  how  to  support  the  pacification  effort  without  taking
it  over.  They  thought  they  had  succeeded  in  doing  this  by  "self-effacing  support
for  Vietnamese  rural  construction"  after  August  of  1965,  but  there  is  much
contradictory  evidence  on  this  point.  The  Marines  themselves,  according  to  the
classified  historical  study  they  recently  produced,  understood  that  their  pacifica-
tion work  had  "to  function  through  local  Vietnamese  officials.  The  tendency  to
produce  Marine  Corps  programs  or  to  work  'democratically'  through  individuals
had  to  be  strictly  controlled.  Only  Vietnamese  programs  could  be  tolerated  and
support  of  these  programs  had  to  take  place  through  Vietnamese  governing
officials  .  .  ."

But  despite  their  good  intentions  to  work  through  the  existing  GVN  structure,
the  Marines  found  in  many  cases  that  the  existing  structure  barely  existed,  except
on  paper,  and  in  other  cases  that  the  existing  structure  was  too  slow  and  too  cor-
rupt for  their  requirements.  And  gradually  the  Marines  got  more  deeply  into
the  politics  of  rural  Vietnam  than  they  had  intended,  or  presumably  desired.

Their  difficulties  were  greatest  in  the  area  of  highest  priority,  the  National
Priority  Area  (as  it  was  to  be  designated  in  October  1965)  south  of  Da  Nang.
In  a  nine-village  complex  just  south  of  the  air  base,  the  Marines  urged  upon  the
GVN  successful  completion  of  a  special  pacification  program  which  had  been
designed  by  them  in  close  conjunction  with  the  Quang  Nam  Deputy  Province
Chief.  The  nine  villages  were  divided  into  two  groups,  and  the  first  phase,
scheduled  for  completion  first  in  December  of  1965,  included  only  five  of  the


536 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

villages,  with  only  23,000  people  living  in  them.  By  February,  1966,  the  plan
had  slipped  considerably,  and  the  projected  completion  date  for  the  first
five  villages  was  pushed  back  to  April,  1966.  The  GVN  and  the  Marines  con-
sidered their  control  to  extend  to  over  16,000  of  the  23,000  people  in  the  area,
but,  according  to  an  Embassy  evaluation  of  the  area,  only  682  were  young  men
between  the  ages  of  17  and  30.  It  was  clear  that  the  Marines  were  trying  to  pacify
an  area  in  which  the  young  men  no  longer  lived,  having  either  been  drafted,
joined  the  VC,  or  gone  to  Da  Nang  to  work  for  the  Americans.  "The  basic  prob-
lem posed  by  this  lack  of  manpower  must  be  solved  before  the  area  can  be
expected  to  participate  in  its  own  defense,"  the  Embassy  report  said.  "Until  it
is  solved,  the  Marines  and  the  ARVN  will  remain  tied  to  defensive  mission  in-
volving them  with  the  population.  No  one  in  Quang  Nam  sees  any  immediate
solution  to  this  dilemma."  The  report  concluded  with  a  description  of  how  over-
involved  with  local  politics  the  Marines  were  becoming,  unintentionally,  and  said:

The  plan,  despite  the  valiant  efforts  of  the  Marines,  is  in  trouble,  caused
by  a  confused  and  fragmented  chain  of  command,  a  lack  of  skilled  cadre,
inability  to  recruit  locally  RF  and  PF — and  the  open  opposition  of  the
VNQDD.

The  VNQDD,  or  Vietnam  Quoc  Dan  Dang,  was  the  political  party  controlling
(he  provinces  of  Quang  Ngai,  Quang  Nam,  and  Quang  Tin.  The  Marines  knew
little  about  them,  although,  according  to  the  study,  all  the  village  chiefs  in  the
area  were  VNQDD  members.  The  VNQDD  were  not  supporting  the  priority
area  plan  because  they  had  not  been  consulted  in  its  formulation,  and  for  this
reason,  and  others,  the  report  predicted  the  failure  of  the  plan,  despite  the  heavy
Marine  commitment.

Like  Hop  Tac,  it  was  an  unusually  difficult  situation,  but  it  illustrates  the
problems  that  the  Marines,  and  any  other  U.S.  troops  that  got  deeply  involved  in
pacification,  confronted  in  Vietnam.

D. WASHINGTON  GRUMBLES  ABOUT  THE  EFFORT

Throughout  the  period  of  the  buildup  in  Vietnam,  there  was  a  growing
chorus  of  discontent  in  Washington  over  the  management  of  the  U.S.  effort  in
Vietnam,  most  of  it  directed  at  the  civilian  agencies — USIA,  AID,  and  the  CIA.
Unhappiness  with  the  way  the  Mission  ran  was  to  lead  to  three  major  reor-
ganizations in  the  15-month  period  from  the  Honolulu  conference  to  the
arrival  of  Ambassador  Ellsworth  Bunker.  The  first  reorganization  took  place
immediately  after  Honolulu,  and  assigned  to  the  Deputy  Ambassador,  William
J.  Porter,  specific  duties  and  responsibilities  which  had  previously  been  dis-
persed throughout  the  Mission  and  handled  on  an  ad  hoc  basis.  The  second
reorganization,  which  took  place  in  November-December  1966,  reorganized
the  internal  components  of  AID,  USIA,  and  the  CIA  so  that  the  Deputy  Ambas-
sador could  control  directly  a  single  Office  of  Civil  Operation  (OCO),  bypass-
ing the  agency  chiefs.  The  latest  reorganization,  which  was  announced  in  May
1967,  transferred  responsibility  for  OCO  from  the  Deputy  Ambassador  to
COMUSMACV,  who  in  turn  was  given  a  civilian  Deputy  with  the  rank  of  Am-
bassador (R.  W.  Komer).  This  section  outlines  events  leading  to  the  first
reorganization  in  March  1966,  a  reorganization  which  raised  the  priority  of
the  pacification  effort,  but  left  most  of  the  basic  problems  in  the  U.S.  Mission
unsolved.  The  actual  reorganization,  and  its  effects,  will  be  covered  below.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1 965-! 967  537

Efforts  to  reorganize  the  Saigon  Mission  are  a  recurring  theme  in  recent
history.  The  impetus  for  reorganization  has  consistently  come  from  Washington,
and  the  Mission  has  usually  resisted.  Its  resistance  is  not  hard  to  understand,
since  almost  every  reorganization  scheme  tended  to  diminish  the  authority  and
autonomy  of  senior  members  of  the  Mission  Council  such  as  the  JUSPAO
Director,  the  USAID  Director,  and  the  CIA  Station  Chief.

Skeptics  have  said  that  whenever  things  are  going  poorlv,  "Americans  re-
organize." But  the  opponents  of  various  reorganization  schemes  have  been
unable  to  defend  the  existing  Mission  Council  system,  which  must  definitely
be  rated  one  of  Vietnam's  casualties.  Not  since  the  beginning  of  the  "country
team"  concept  in  the  1950's  ("Mission  Council"  being  another  term  for  the
same  structure)  had  the  concept  been  tested  the  way  it  was  to  be  tested  in  Viet-
nam. The  pressure  of  events,  the  tension,  the  unprecedented  size  of  the  agencies
and  a  host  of  other  factors  made  the  system  shaky  even  under  the  strong  man-
ager Maxwell  Taylor.  Under  the  man  who  didn't  want  to  manage.  Lodge,  it  be-
gan to  crumble.  Each  agency  had  its  own  ideas  on  what  had  to  be  done,  its  own
communication  channels  with  Washington,  its  own  personnel  and  administrative
structure — and  starting  in  1964-65,  each  agency  began  to  have  its  own  field
personnel  operating  under  separate  and  parallel  chains  of  command.  This  latter
event  was  ultimately  to  prove  the  one  which  gave  reorganization  efforts  such
force,  since  it  began  to  become  clear  to  people  in  Washington  and  Saigon
alike  that  the  Americans  in  the  pro\inces  were  not  always  working  on  the  same
team,  and  that  they  were  receiving  conflicting  or  overlapping  instructions  from
a  variety  of  sources  in  Saigon  and  Washington.

Still,  while  General  Taylor  was  Ambassador,  reorganization  was  not  some-
thing to  be  pushed  seriously  by  Washington.  With  Lodge  back  in  charge,  it
was  a  different  storv.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  so  serious  were  Lodi^e's  managerial
deficiencies  that  even  during  his  first  tour,  when  the  U.S.  Mission  was  less  than
20,000  men,  and  the  entire  civilian  component  under  1,000.  there  was  talk  of
reorganization.  In  a  personal  message  to  Lodge  on  May  26,  1964,  the  President
made  the  following  prophetic  statement:

I  have  received  from  [Mike]  Forrestal  a  direct  account  of  your  belief
that  there  is  need  for  change  and  improvement  in  the  civilian  side  of  the
country  team.  We  have  reached  a  similar  conclusion  here,  and  indeed  we
believe  it  is  essential  for  you  to  have  a  top-ranking  officer  who  is  wholly
acceptable  to  you  as  chief  of  staff  for  country  team  operations.  My  own
impression  is  that  this  should  be  either  a  newly  appointed  civilian  of  wide
governmental  experience  and  high  standing,  or  General  Westmoreland.  .  .  .

This  message  became  irrelevant  when  Lodge  suddenlv  resigned  in  June  of
1964  to  assist  Governor  Scranton's  bid  for  the  Republican  nomination,  but
it  shows  that  the  President,  Lodge,  and  apparently  other  people  in  Washington
had  deep  concern  with  the  structure  of  the  Mission  at  this  early  date.

By  sending  Tavlor  and  Alexis  Johnson— then  the  State  Department's  highest-
ranking  Foreign  Service  Officer— to  Saigon  in  July  of  1964,  the  President  in
efTect  put  off  "any  Washington-initiated  reorganizations  for  the  length  of  Tay-
lor's tour,  since  no  one  in  Washington  could  tell  the  former  Chairman  of  the
JCS  how  to  run  a  mission.

Taylor  organized  the  Mission  Council — not  a  new  invention,  but  a  formali-
zation of  the  country  team  into  a  body  which  met  once  a  week,  with  agendas,
minutes,  and  records  of  decisions.  Taylor  was  particularly  concerned  that  the


538 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Mission  Council  should  have  a  "satisfactory  meshing  with  .  .  .  counter-
part activities  on  the  GVN  side."  And  while  he  was  Ambassador  the  U.S.  made
a  determined  effort  to  make  the  system  work  without  reorganization.  In  a  letter
to  Elbridge  Durbrow,  who  was  once  American  Ambassador  in  Saigon  himself,
Alexis  Johnson  described  the  system  :

Max  and  I  dropped  the  title  "Country  Team"  and  set  up  what  we  called
the  "Mission  Council"  on  a  formalized  basis.  In  addition  to  Max  and  my-
self, the  members  were  General  Westmoreland.  Barry  Zorthian  as  JUSPAO
(Joint  United  States  Public  Affairs  Office — this  covered  both  MACV  and
Embassy  info  as  well  as  psychological  operations  in  the  field  and  against
the  DRV),  the  Director  of  USOM  and  the  CAS  Station  Chief.  We  estab-
lished an  Executive  Secretarv  who  was  first  Bill  Sullivan  and  later  Jack
Herfurt,  who  was  charged  with  the  preparation  of  agenda,  the  recording
of  decisions,  and,  most  importantly,  following  up  and  monitoring  of  de-
cisions that  were  taken.  We  met  regularlv  once  a  week  (with  occasional
special  meetings  as  required),  with  paper  circulated  before  hand  insofar
as  possible.  One  of  the  responsibilities  of  the  Executive  Secretary  was  to
see  that  issues  were  worked  out  beforehand  at  staff  level  insofar  as  possible
and  the  remaining  issues  clearly  defined.  ...  It  was  normally  our  practice
to  keep  all  members  of  the  Council  fully  informed  and  to  discuss  all  ques-
tions, regardless  of  their  sensitivity.  .  .  .  After  an  informal  exchange  of
views,  we  took  up  questions  on  the  agenda,  doing  our  best  to  obtain  the
consensus  of  all  members.  When  in  rare  cases  this  was  not  achieved,  the
Ambassador  of  course  took  the  decision.  We  considered  the  full  range  of
questions,  including  such  fundamental  ones  as  when  and  under  what  cir-
cumstances we  should  bomb  the  North  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Below  the  Mission
Council  level  we  established  a  series  of  committees  in  problem  areas  in-
volving more  than  one  agency  of  the  mission,  chaired  by  the  agency  of
primary  interest.  These  committees  were  responsible  directly  to  the  Mis-
sion Council.  .  .  .  We  persuaded  the  GVN.  on  its  side,  to  set  up  a
similar  organization  that  was  first  called  the  "Pacification  Council"  and  later
the  "Rural  Construction  Council."  .  .  .  The  GVN  Council  and  the  Mission
Council  met  together  once  a  week  with  an  agenda  prepared  beforehand
by  the  two  Executive  Secretaries  .  .  .  One  of  mv  theories,  and  to  a  degree
I  think  it  was  borne  out  in  Saigon,  was  that  the  Mission  Council  and  the
Joint  Council  were  important  not  so  much  for  what  was  in  fact  decided  at
the  meetings  but  for  the  fact  that  their  existence,  and  the  necessity  of
reporting  to  them,  acted  as  a  spur  to  the  staff  people  to  get  things  done
and  to  resolve  issues  at  their  level.  Organization  structure  of  course  does
not  assure  brilliant  performance,  but  I  do  take  some  satisfaction  in  feel-
ing that,  due  to  the  organizational  structure  that  we  established,  we
established  the  habit  of  the  Mission  elements  and  the  GVN  and  the  Mission,
working  together  in  a  more  effective  way.

Whether  or  not  the  svstem  described  bv  Ambassador  Johnson  above  really
worked  the  way  he  savs  it  was  supposed  to  is  not  the  subject  of  this  study.  But
it  appears  that  within  a  few  months  after  Lodge  returned  as  Ambassador  the
people  within  the  USG  advocating  reorganization  as  at  least  a  partial  solution
to  the  problems  of  the  Mission  were  once  again  in  full  cry.

The  relationship  of  the  reorganizers  to  the  pacifiers  must  be  explained.  Those
who  advocated  restructuring  the  Mission  for  more  effective  management  were


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  539

not  necessarily  the  same  people  advocating  a  higher  emphasis  tor  pacifica-
tion. But  usually,  since  the  organization  of  the  Mission  was  so  obviously  deh-
cient,  both  groups  of  people  would  end  up  advocating  some  kind  of  change —
and  even  if  they  disagreed  on  the  nature  of  the  change,  the  most  important  fact
was  that  they  were  generally  pushing  a  similar  mood  of  dissatisfaction  with  the
Mission  upon  the  high-ranking  oHicials  with  whom  they  might  come  in  con-
tact. (It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  they  were  really  not  groups  at  all,  in  the
normal  sense  of  the  word,  but  a  shifting  collection  of  individuals  with  varying
degrees  of  loyalty  to  either  their  parent  agency  or  their  own  sense  of  history;
and  on  each  individual  issue  a  different  set  of  allies  and  antagonists  might  well
exist.)

The  efTorts  of  those  advocating  reorganization  began  to  bear  edible  fruit  in
December  1965  and  January  1966,  when  a  conference  was  held  at  Warrenlon,
Va.,  to  which  the  Mission  sent  an  impressive  collection  of  Mission  Council  mem-
bers: Deputy  Ambassador  Porter,  USAID  Mission  Director  Mann.  JUSPAO
Director  Zorthian,  Political  Counsellor  Habib,  General  Lansdale,  CIA  Station
Chief  Jorgenson,  and  Brigadier  General  Collins,  representing  Westmoreland.
From  Washington  came  the  second  and  third  echelons  of  the  bureaucracy:
Leonard  linger,  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  State;  Rutherford  Poats,  Assist-
ant Administrator  of  AID;  Major  General  Peers,  SACSA;  Alvin  Friedman,  ISA;
William  Colby  and  Peer  da  Silva,  CIA;  Chester  Cooper,  White  House;  and
Sanford  Marlowe,  USIA.  Other  participants  included:  Major  General  Hutchins,
CINCPAC;  Rufus  Phillips  of  I.ansdale's  group;  Charles  Zwick  and  Henry
Rowen  of  BOB;  George  Lodge,  the  Ambassador's  son;  Desmond  Fitzgerald,  CIA;
and  Leon  Goure,  of  RAND.

The  purpose  of  the  meeting  was  to  '"bring  together  senior  representatives  of
the  U.S.  Mission,  Saigon,  the  Vietnam  Coordinating  Committee,  Washington,
and  several  other  individuals  to  (a)  review  the  joint  GVN-US  pacification  rural
construction  program  and  seek  to  promote  its  more  effective  operation  and
(b)  address  the  problem  of  the  increasingly  serious  shortages  and  bottlenecks
in  manpower,  materials,  and  transport  in  Vietnam  and  to  designate  priorities
and  machinery  for  resources  control  and  allocation."  The  major  unstated  pur-
pose, in  addition  to  those  mentioned  above,  was  to  discuss  the  organization  of
the  U.S.  Mission  in  Vietnam.

Warrenton  was  to  turn  out  to  be  a  prelude  to  Honolulu,  and  as  such  its  rec-
comendations  never  were  to  become  an  integral  part  of  the  Mission's  plans
and  strategy.  But  the  direction  that  was  developed  at  Warrenton  is  significant,
because  it  represents  the  clear  and  unmistakable  thrust  that  existed  at  the  time
in  the  "working  levels"  of  both  Saigon  and  Washington.  Given  the  normal  time
lag  before  individual  thoughts  can~  reach  the  stage  of  agreed-upon  committee-
produced  papers,  Warrenton,  we  can  assume,  reflected  the  evolution  of  think-
ing that  had  been  going  on,  particularly  among  the  civilians,  as  the  first  year  of
U.S.  combat  troop  and  deplovment  began  to  end.  Indeed,  in  its  catch-all  ap-
proach to  pacification,  Warrenton  had  something  for  everyone.

The  final  recommendations  from  the  Warrenton  conference  were  addressed
to  Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara,  Admiral  Raborn,  Mr.  Bell,  Mr.  Marks,  and
Mr.  McGeorge  Bundy,  from  the  meeting's  co-chairmen.  Ambassador  Unger  and
Ambassador  Porter.  The  conclusions  included  the  following  points  (with  com-
ments as  required) :

1.  There  was  a  consensus  that  the  designation  of  priority  rural  con-
struction areas  for  1966  was  important  and^  that  the  modest  goals  set  for


540 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

these  areas  were  realistic.  However,  it  v/as  emphasized  that  the  contrast
between  the  massive  imput  of  U.S.  resources  and  the  modest  priority  area
goals  made  success  in  those  areas  imperative  .  ,  .

COMMENT:  The  National  Priority  Areas  did  not  meet  their  1966  goals.

2.  In  view  of  the  prime  importance  to  the  U.S.  of  success  in  the  four
National  Priority  Areas,  there  was  discussion  of  the  need  for  designating
U.S.  team  chiefs  to  head  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  in  those  areas.  It  was
agreed  that  the  U.S.  Mission  Council  would  consider  this  matter  promptly
and  report  its  conclusions  to  the  VNCC.

COMMENT:  The  designation  of  team  chiefs  for  the  priority  areas  did  not  take
place.  Here  is  another  example  of  the  Washington  effort  to  reorganize  Saigon,
with  Saigon  resisting.

3.  There  was  widespread  recognition  of  the  need  to  provide  within  the
U.S.  Mission  a  single  focus  of  operational  control  and  management  over
the  full  range  of  the  pertinent  U.S.  efforts  in  order  to  gear  all  such  U.S.
activities  and  resources  effectively  into  implementation  or  the  rural  con-
struction concept.  However,  some  concern  was  expressed  that  too  drastic
organizational  changes  within  the  U.S.  Mission  would  create  problems  with
the  counterpart  GVN  organization  and  would  not  ensure  success  of  rural
construction  programs.  No  agreement  was  reached  on  the  precise  form
for  organization  changes  but  there  was  general  consensus  that  the  focal
point  of  control  and  management  had  to  rest  just  below  the  Ambassador
and  that  there  must  be  a  senior  Mission  official  solely  concerned  with  this
subject.  Disagreement  was  registered  as  to:  (1)  whether  the  Deputy  Ambas-
sador, assisted  by  a  staff,  should  serve  this  function  or  whether  another
senior  official  (perhaps  a  second  Deputy  Ambassador)  should  be  appointed;
and  (2)  what  extent  individual  agency  personnel,  funds,  and  operations  de-
voted to  rural  construction  could  and  should  be  broken  out  of  agency  or-
ganizations and  placed  under  the  direction  of  the  single  focal  point  .  .  .

COMMENT:  Here  was  the  compromise  wording  on  the  issue  which  concerned
the  participants  at  Warrenton  a  great  deal.  Each  representative  at  Warrenton
brought  with  him  a  proposed  organization  chart  for  the  Mission  (see  below),
but  no  agreement  could  be  reached  at  that  time.  In  the  main  body  of  the
memorandum  to  the  principals  on  January  13,  1966,  Unger  and  Porter  wrote:

The  optimum  organization  for  the  U.S.  Mission  for  its  support  of  the
rural  construction/pacification  program — a  senior  official  with  a  support-
ing staff  with  full-time  responsibility  in  this  field  was  considered  necessary.
(Coordination  is  also  required  with  Ambassador  Lodge  and  Mr.  Bell  on
this  point.)  It  would  also  be  desirable  for  such  an  official  to  have  in  Wash-
ington a  high-level  point  of  liaison  to  assure  the  expeditious  discharge
here  of  urgent  Vietnam  business  in  this  field  .  .  .

When  he  reported  to  the  Mission  Liaison  Group  on  Warrenton  two  weeks
later,  on  January  27,  1966.  Porter  sharply  downplayed  the  move  for  reorganiza-
tion which  was  coming  from  Washington  and  changed  the  emphasis.  He  said:


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  541


a.  No  decision  was  reached  at  Warrenton  with  respect  to  a  U.S.  in-
country  organization  for  rural  construction,  ahhough  the  possibiUty  of  a
single  manager  was  discussed.

b.  The  U.S.  Mission  will  continue  to  support  Rural  Construction  with
the  same  organizational  structure  it  is  now  using,  placing  particular  reliance
on  the  Mission  Liaison  Group.

c.  Officials  in  Washington  were  concerned  about  teamwork  among
the  U.S.  agencies  in  Vietnam  but  not  about  ability  to  do  the  job.  Differences
of  opinion  are  expected,  and  machinery  exists  to  resolve  them.  Differences
due  to  personalities  cannot  be  tolerated.

d.  It  is  clearly  understood  in  Washington  that  military  operations  alone
are  not  enough,  and  that  effective  Rural  Construction  is  imperative.  The
highest  levels  in  the  USG  are  keenly  aware  of  the  importance  of  US/GVN
work  in  Rural  Construction  .  .  .  [Emphasis  added]

Although  not  much  more  than  a  footnote  now,  the  reorganization  schemes
that  were  presented  at  Warrenton  deserve  brief  mention.  At  Warrenton,  the
participants  were  still  fishing  for  ways  and  means,  and  their  proposals  reveal  to
a  limited  extent  the  intent  of  each  agency  when  faced,  three  months  later,
with  a  new  structure  in  both  Saigon  and  Washington — with  Porter  in  charge  in
Saigon  and  Komer  in  business  in  the  White  House.

Chester  Cooper,  working  for  McGeorge  Bundy  in  the  White  House,  pro-
posed a  second  Deputy  Ambassador  for  Pacification,  with  control  over
CIA,  USAID,  JUSPAO,  and  partial  control  (not  clarified)  over  MACV's
Rural  Construction  advisors.  Cooper  also  wanted  a  "Washington  repre-
sentative" in  Saigon  to  expedite  resource  allocation.  He  was  ambiguous
about  Lansdale's  role.  Cooper  advocated  a  unified  field  chain  of  command.
Poats  and  Mann  submitted  a  joint  Washington-Saigon  proposal  on  behalf
of  AID  (another  clear  indication  of  the  fact  that  the  real  chains  of  com-
mand ran  through  agency  channels,  rather  than  through  the  Ambassador
to  Washington).  They  advocated  a  complicated  arrangement  in  which  a
Chief  of  Staff  for  Pacification  would  head  up  special  task  forces  "drawn  from
operating  agencies  but  staying  in  their  operational  job  in  their  agencies."
AID  in  effect  wanted  no  major  change  in  the  Mission,  and  particularly
opposed  any  change  in  the  multiplicity  of  chains  of  command  in  the
provinces.  They  also  advocated  a  Theater  CTNC,  a  resources  allocation
committee  chaired  by  the  AID  Mission  Director,  and  a  MACV  advisory
structure  that  is  partially  under  the  Ambassador  and  partially  separate
(not  clarified).

Zorthian  suggested  that  the  Deputy  Ambassador  coordinate  all  pacification
activities  but  made  it  clear  that  he  would  make  no  change  in  the  chains
of  command.  Indeed,  he  emphasized  the  direct  access  of  each  Mission
Council  member  to  the  Ambassador,  the  separateness  of  each  agency's
field  program.

SACSA  proposed  a  division  of  MACV  into  a  tactical  unit  command  and  a
Pacification  command.  All  civilian  elements  supporting  pacification  would
be  under  the  Deputy  for  Pacification,  who  in  turn  would  report  to  the  Am-
bassador and  Deputy  Ambassador.  The  advisory  structure  would  have  been
split  down  the  middle  between  tactical  unit  advisors  and  province/district
advisors.


542 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

General  Collins  suggested  no  major  change  in  the  structure  of  the  Mis-
sion, but  advocated  the  information  of  "Task  Groups  to  deal  with  specific
problems  organized  on  an  ad  hoc  basis  from  personnel  provided  by  inter-
ested agencies.  The  Deputy  Ambassador  to  be  relieved  of  routine  duties
and  to  spend  substantially  all  his  time  on  rural  construction  duties  .  .  ."
The  State  Department  proposed  a  "Central  Pacification  Organization"
which  would  have  been  not  more  than  a  coordinating  committee  for  the
existing  agencies.

What  these  reorganization  proposals  seem  to  suggest,  in  light  of  the  ulti-
mate direction  that  the  Mission  took,  is  that  when  agencies  are  asked  to  produce
suggestions  which  may  reduce  or  inhibit  their  prerogatives,  they  are  unlikely
to  do  so  in  a  manner  responsive  to  the  requirements  of  their  politically-appointed
chieftains.  The  prerogatives  and  privileges  of  the  agencies  inevitably  come
first.  One  does  not  reorganize  voluntarily;  the  impetus  comes  from  without.
This  is  also  seen  in  the  different  attitude  that  the  reorganizers  had  towards
Washington  and  Saigon.  Although  the  same  problem  in  coordination  existed  (and
still  exists)  in  Washington  as  in  Saigon,  the  Washington  officials  always  were
ready  to  tell  Saigon  how  to  clean  up  its  house,  but  were  slow  to  suggest  self-
improvements.  At  Warrenton,  perhaps  prodded  by  the  Saigon  representatives,
they  did  take  note  of  the  matter,  although  they  were  reluctant  to  suggest  a  clear
solution:

Note  was  also  taken  of  the  inadequacy  of  present  U.S.  Government
machinery  to  handle  Vietnam  problems  quickly  and  decisively.  The  need
for  referral  of  too  large  a  number  of  problems  to  the  Secretarial  level  was
one  of  the  problems  mentioned.  While  the  meeting  did  not  have  time  to
come  to  any  firm  conclusions,  there  was  a  view  that  the  VNCC  because  of
its  coordinating,  rather  than  decision-cum-enforcement  powers  could  not
perform  this  task  except  in  part.  If  endowing  the  VNCC  or  its  Chairman
with  larger  powers,  and  with  a  staff  associated  with  no  one  agency,  is  not
a  feasible  solution,  it  was  considered  that  the  required  directing  position
might  have  to  be  set  up  at  a  higher  level,  perhaps  related  to  the  National
Security  Council.

In  the  Warrenton  report,  then,  all  the  events  of  the  coming  year  were  fore-
shadowed, and,  reading  between  the  lines,  one  can  now  see  what  was  coming.
Unfortunately,  and  obviously,  this  was  not  the  case  at  the  time — particularly
for  the  Mission  in  Saigon.

E. PRESIDENTIAL  EMPHASIS  ON  THE  "OTHER  WAR"  AND
PRESS  REACTION

At  the  end  of  1965,  with  the  bombing  of  the  north  in  its  tenth  month,  and  our
ground  forces  growing  steadily,  the  Administration  was  making  a  determined
effort  to  emphasize  those  American  activities  in  Vietnam  which  did  not  directly
involve  guns  and  fighting.  This  emphasis  on  what  came  to  be  called  the  "Other
War"  reached  a  high  point  during  the  conference  at  Honolulu  in  February  of
1966.  The  emphasis  on  the  other  war  did  not  necessarily  have  to  lead,  as  it  did,
to  a  re-emphasis  of  pacification:  that  was  a  by-product,  at  least  in  part,  of  the
renewed  support  for  pacification  which  had  been  coming  from  Ambassador
Lodge,  the  Marines,  the  CIA  (with  their  cadre),  and  the  advocates  of  organi-


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  543

zational  reform  (all  covered  in  previous  sections).  But  the  two  themes  merged
at  Honolulu,  and  thus,  out  of  the  conference,  came  the  first  clear  statement  of
Presidential  support  to  pacification.

The  need  of  the  Administration  to  emphasize  and  publicize  the  nonmilitary
aspects  of  the  war  needs  little  amplification.  Few  documents  show  this  emphasis
in  the  pre-Honolulu  period,  since  it  was  so  obvious.  In  an  exception,  a  joint
State-USIA  message  dated  October  4,  1965,  Washington  told  the  Saigon  Mission:

There  is  continuing  concern  at  the  highest  levels  here  regarding  need
to  emphasize  our  non-military  programs  in  Vietnam  and  give  them  maxi-
mum possible  public  exposure  both  in  U.S.  and  abroad.  [Emphasis  Added]

We  recognize  that  the  Mission  is  fully  cognizant  of  this  problem  and
already  has  underway  measures  to  broaden  public  knowledge  and  under-
standing of  non-military  activities  .  .  .  We  are  also  conscious  of  difficul-
ties involved  in  enlisting  greater  press  interest  in  these  developments  when
it  finds  military  actions  more  dramatic  and  newsworthy.  Nevertheless,  we
hope  will  continue  to  give  non-military  programs  increasing  priority  .  .  .

It  is  useful  to  recall  the  situation  which  existed  in  February  of  1966,  when
the  President  went  to  Honolulu  to  meet  with  Ky  and  Thieu.  On  January  30,  1966,
the  bombing  of  the  North  began  again,  after  a  37-day  pause.  There  were
197,000  American  servicemen  in  Vietnam  by  February  1.  The  Washington
Post — which  supported  the  Administration — editorialized  on  February  1 :

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  a  new  look  is  being  taken  at  the  military  tactics  in
the  South  so  that  greater  emphasis  can  be  put  on  the  safety  of  civilians,  the
rehabilitation  of  the  countryside,  the  furtherance  of  economic  growth.  .  .  .
Efforts  behind  the  lines  at  economic  and  social  programs  must  be  increased.

Senator  Fulbright  had  launched  his  public  hearings  on  Vietnam,  and  on
February  4  had  subjected  David  Bell  of  AID  to  a  nearly  four-hour  grilling  in  the
committee.  That  same  day,  the  conference  was  announced.

The  emphasis  at  Honolulu  was  clear  from  before  the  conference  started.  In
his  press  conference  announcing  the  meeting,  the  President  said  that  he  would
take  Secretary  Freeman  and  Secretary  Gardner,  not  previously  involved  in
Vietnam,  as  well  as  experts  from  their  staffs.  Freeman  would  go  on  to  Saigon,
the  President  added  "to  explore  and  inaugurate  certain  pacification  programs  in
the  fields  of  health,  education,  and  agriculture."  The  President  then  added:

We  are  going  to  emphasize,  in  every  way  we  can,  in  line  with  the  very
fine  pronouncements  that  the  Prime  Minister  [Ky]  has  made  concerning
his  desires  in  the  field  of  education  and  health  and  agriculture.  We  want
to  be  sure  that  we  have  our  best  planning  and  our  maximum  effort  put
into  it.  But  we  will,  of  course,  go  into  the  military  briefing  very
thoroughly  .  .  .

Even  before  the  conference  began,  there  were  early  reactions  from  the  press
to  this  emphasis.  The  New  York  Times  editorialized  on  February  6:

Programs  in  health,  education  and  agriculture  of  the  kind  President
Johnson  evidently  has  in  mind,  can  make  an  important  contribution.  To
combat  the  revolutionary  idea  the  Communists  have  set  loose  in  Vietnam,


544 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

a  better  idea  is  needed.  Vigorous  social  reform — and  particularly,  land
reform,  which  has  received  little  more  than  lip-service  so  far — could  well  (
be  made  the  price  of  increased  economic  aid,  which  is  now  to  be  doubled.

But  an  effort  to  seek  political  "victory"  in  South  Vietnam  is  likely  to  '
prove  as  fruitless  as  the  long  attempt  at  military  "victory."  A  more  limited  j
and  realistic  objective  is  essential.

I

The  conference  itself,  and  its  repercussions  both  in  Washington  and  Viet-  i
nam,  will  be  discussed  in  a  following  section,  so  there  is  little  need  to  dwell  on
the  pre-Honolulu  period.  In  Saigon,  where  the  word  of  the  conference  barely
preceded  the  departure  of  the  participants,  the  New  York  Times  bureau  chief
wrote  a  perceptive  article  which  reflected  thinking  of  many  junior  and  mid-level
officials  in  both  the  U.S.  Mission  and  the  GVN.  The  theme  it  stated  was  not
new  then,  and  still  has  a  very  familiar  ring  today:

.  .  .  There  are  now  230,000  to  250,000  pro-Communist  troops  in  South
Vietnam,  including  the  Vietcong  guerrillas  and  about  1 1  tough  regiments
of  the  North  Vietnamese  Army.  That  is  at  least  twice  as  many  enemy  troops
as  there  were  at  the  start  of  last  year,  despite  the  major  United  States  build-
up since  then.

This  does  not  mean  that  the  American  build-up  has  been  futile:  the
build-up  was  all  that  saved  South  Vietnam,  in  the  view  of  most  experts.  It
does  mean  that  no  way  has  yet  been  found  to  prevent  the  enemy  from
matching  an  American  build-up  with  a  build-up  of  his  own.

About  200,000  American  troops  are  now  in  South  Vietnam  along  with
550,000  South  Vietnamese  armed  men,  of  whom  about  half  are  well-trained
army  troops.

American  and  South  Vietnamese  military  officers  have  asked  for  more
American  troops,  requesting  a  force  of  about  400,000  men  by  the  end  of
1966.  Not  all  of  this  strength  has  been  promised  by  President  Johnson,  but
major  reinforcements  are  already  in  the  offing  .  .  .

But  while  1966  will  be  an  important  year  militarily,  one  in  which  all
generals  assume  that  there  will  be  bloodier  fighting,  it  will  also  be  a  year  of
increased  emphasis  on  the  subtle  political  and  social  aspects  of  the  struggle.

The  Honolulu  conference  will  in  fact  concentrate  largely  on  economic,
social  and  political  problems,  according  to  informed  sources.

It  is  felt  in  Saigon,  however,  that  the  Johnson  Administration  cannot,
even  with  the  best  of  intentions,  guarantee  the  allegiance  of  the  Vietnamese
to  their  Government  merely  by  pumping  more  money  and  technical  skill
into  South  Vietnam  to  give  people  the  "better  life"  of  which  officials  speak.

At  least  20  to  25  per  cent  of  the  country's  area  is  so  firmly  in  control  of
the  Vietcong  guerrillas  that  no  civic  and  political  programs  are  possible
there  at  all.  Other  large  areas  are  so  sharply  contested  that  for  the  time
being  pacification  and  rural-improvement  workers  cannot  operate.

Thus,  rural-pacification  work  in  1966  is  to  be  concentrated  in  one-third
or  fewer  of  the  rural  hamlets  that  the  Government  already  claims  to  con-
trol. The  limitation  implies  an  admission  that  after  five  years  of  war  the
allies  are  starting  from  scratch  in  this  field,  and  that  progress  must  be  slow.

With  American  enthusiasm,  the  United  States  may  wish  to  speed  the
pace  of  pacification,  but  there  will  be  serious  obstacles.  Most  of  the  sadder
but  wiser  veterans  of  previous  programs  in  Vietnam  seem  convinced  that


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  545

pressure  from  Washington  for  higher  and  more  seductive  statistical  goals
is  a  major  danger.  They  counsel  "slowly  but  surely."

As  an  example,  the  South  Vietnamese  Government  is  trying  to  turn
23,000  rural-affairs  workers,  most  of  them  originally  trained  only  in  armed
propaganda  work,  into  more  rounded  rural-construction  workers.

It  then  plans  to  recruit  and  train  19,000  more  workers,  for  a  total  of
42,000.  In  the  opinion  of  some  officials,  it  will  be  very  difficult  even  to  reach
this  goal,  and  any  great  expansion  carries  a  risk  of  substituting  numbers
for  real  training.

The  present  pacification  plan  is  considered  imaginative  and  sound  by
experts  with  long  experience  in  Vietnam,  but  it  is  considered  certain  that
the  plan  could  be  improved  at  Honolulu.

Experience  has  shown  that  the  crucial  matter  in  Vietnam  is  always
execution  rather  than  planning.  The  scarcest  resources  in  the  country  are
manpower  and  leadership.

It  is  generally  agreed  that  it  would  not  be  enough,  say,  for  the  United
States  to  offer  help  in  improving  agriculture  in  the  South  Vietnamese  coun-
tryside. The  Americans  must  also  consider,  it  is  felt,  whether  their  sug-
gested plan  is  one  that  the  South  Vietnamese  understand  and  actually —
rather  than  merely  politely — approve,  and  whether  the  badly  strained
South  Vietnamese  administration  can  execute  the  plan.

American  experts  in  Saigon  also  assert  that  the  highly  ideological  Viet-
cong  movement  cannot  be  offset  merely  by  offers  of  a  "better  life"  for  the
peasants.

The  Vietcong  have  a  loyal,  dedicated  and  highly  disciplined  underground
political  structure  that  operates  in  the  heart  of  Saigon  itself  and  in  thou-
sands of  hamlets.  So  far  the  peasants  have  shown  little  inclination  to  in-
form on  this  structure  and  to  help  the  Government  activity.

This  is  the  central  problem  of  the  South  Vietnamese  war  .  .  .

F. MEANWHILE,  BACK  AT  THE  WAR  .  .  .

The  re-emphasis  of  pacification  was,  of  course,  a  far  more  disorderly  proc-
ess than  any  written  review  can  suggest,  and  unfortunately  must  overlook
many  events  and  recommendations  which  were  not  central  to  the  re-emphasis
of  pacification.  But  it  is  useful  and  important  to  review  briefly  what  the  Mis-
sion was  reporting  to  Washington  about  the  overall  effort  during  1965,  since
Saigon's  reports  should  have  formed  an  important  part  of  the  background  for
decision.

This  selection  should  be  read  not  as  the  "objective"  story  of  what  was  happen-
ing in  Vietnam — such  an  objective  study  is  simply  not  possible  at  this  time,  even
if  we  had  access  to  enemy  thinking — but  as  a  reflection  of  the  beliefs  of  the
Americans  in  Saigon,  and  as  a  reflection  of  what  the  Mission  wanted  Washing-
ton to  believe.

This  selection  is  entirely  direct  quotations  from  MACV's  Monthly  Evaluation
Report.  Each  month  this  report  began  with  a  summary  of  the  month's  events,
and  the  following  items  represent  the  running  evaluation  for  1965:  [Emphasis
Added]

January,  1965:  Review  of  military  events  in  January  tend  to  induce  a
decidedly  more  optimistic  view  than  has  been  seen  in  recent  months.  De-


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

spite  adverse  influence  exerted  by  national  level  political  disorders  and
localized  Buddhist/student  rioting,  the  military  experienced  the  most  suc-
cessful single  month  of  the  counterinsurgency  eff"ort  .  .  .  Pacification
made  little  progress  this  month.  Although  some  gains  were  made  in  the
Hop  Tac  area,  effort  in  the  remainder  of  RVN  was  hampered  by  political
activity  and  religious  and  student  disorders  .  .  .  If  the  RVNAF  capability
can  be  underwritten  by  political  stability  and  durability,  a  significant  turn-
ing point  in  the  war  could  be  forthcoming.

February,  1965:  .  .  .  GVN  forces  continued  to  make  progress  in  III
and  IV  CTZ,  maintained  a  tenuous  balance  over  the  VC  in  I  CTZ,  and  suf-
fered general  regression  in  II  CTZ  .  .  .  The  indicators  of  RVNAF  opera-
tional effort  ...  all  showed  a  decline.  However,  losses  on  both  sides
remained  high  due  to  the  violence  of  encounters  and  VC  tenacity  .  .  .
The  long  term  effect  of  events  in  February  is  impossible  to  foretell.  It  is
obvious  that  the  complexion  of  the  war  has  changed.  The  VC  appear  to
be  making  a  concerted  effort  to  isolate  the  northern  portion  of  RVN  by
seizing  a  salient  to  the  sea  in  the  northern  part  of  II  CTZ.  Here  RVNAF
has  lost  the  initiative,  at  least  temporarily.  However,  US^GVN  strikes
against  DRV  and  increased  use  of  U.S.  jet  aircraft  in  RVN  has  had  a
salutary  effect  on  both  military  and  civilian  morale  which  may  result  in  a
greater  national  effort  and,  hopefully,  reverse  the  downward  trend.
March,  1965:  Events  in  March  were  encouraging  .  .  .  RVNAF  ground
operations  were  highlighted  by  renewed  operational  effort  .  .  .  VC  activ-
ity was  considerably  below  the  norm  of  the  preceding  six  months  and
indications  were  that  the  enemy  was  engaged  in  the  re-supply  and  re-posi-
tioning of  units  possibly  in  preparation  for  a  new  offensive,  probably  in
the  II  Corps  area  .  .  .  In  summary,  March  has  given  rise  to  some  cau-
tious optimism.  The  current  government  appears  to  be  taking  control  of
the  situation  and,  if  the  present  state  of  popular  morale  can  be  sustained
and  strengthened,  the  GVN,  with  continued  U.S.  support,  should  be  able
to  counter  future  VC  offenses  successfully.

April,  1965:  Friendly  forces  retained  the  initiative  during  April  and  a
review  of  events  reinforces  the  feeling  of  optimism  generated  last  month
.  .  .  In  summary,  current  trends  are  highly  encouraging  and  the  GVN  may
have  actually  turned  the  tide  at  long  last.  However,  there  are  some  dis-
quieting factors  which  indicate  a  need  to  avoid  overconfidence.  A  test
of  these  trends  should  be  forthcoming  in  the  next  few  months  if  the  VC
launch  their  expected  counter-offensive  and  the  period  may  well  be  one  of
the  most  important  of  the  war.

May,  1965:  The  encouraging  trends  of  the  past  few  months  did  not
carry  through  into  May  and  there  were  some  serious  setbacks.  However,
it  is  hoped  that  the  high  morale  and  improved  discipline  and  leadership
which  has  developed  during  that  period  will  sustain  future  GVN  efforts  .  .  .
June,  1965:  During  June  the  military  situation  in  the  RVN  continued
to  worsen  despite  a  few  bright  spots  occasioned  by  RVNAF  successes.  In
general,  however,  the  VC  .  .  .  retained  the  initiative  having  launched
several  well-coordinated,  savage  attacks  in  regimental  strength  .  .  .
July.  1965:  An  overall  analysis  of  the  militarv  situation  at  the  end  of
July  reveals  that  GVN  forces  continued  to  make  progress  in  IV  Corps,
maintained  a  limited  edge  in  I  Corps  with  the  increased  USMC  effort  and
suffered  a  general  regression  in  the  northern  portion  of  III  Corps  as  well
as  in  the  central  highlands  of  II  Corps.  The  VC  monsoon  offensive,  which


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  547

was  so  effective  in  June,  faltered  during  July  as  VC  casualty  figures  reached
a  new  high  .  .  .

August,  1965:  An  evaluation  of  the  overall  military  effort  in  August  re-
veals several  encouraging  facts.  The  most  pronounced  is  the  steady  in-
crease in  the  number  of  VC  casuahies  and  the  number  of  VC  "ralliers"  to
the  GVN  ...  In  summary,  the  general  increase  in  offensive  operations
by  GVN,  U.S.  and  Third  Country  forces  and  a  correlative  increase  in
enemy  casualties  have  kept  the  VC  off  balance  and  prevented  his  inter-
ference with  the  build-up  of  U.S.  forces.  The  often  spoken  of  VC  "mon-
soon offensive"  has  not  materialized,  and  it  now  appears  that  the  VC  have
relinquished  the  initiative  in  the  conduct  of  the  war.

September,  1965:  As  the  end  of  the  monsoon  season  approached,  the
military  situation  appears  considerably  brighter  than  in  May  when  the  VC
threatened  to  defeat  the  RVNAF.  Since  May  the  build-up  of  Free  World
Military  Assistance  Forces,  coupled  with  aggressive  combat  operations,
has  thwarted  VC  plans  and  has  laid  the  foundation  for  the  eventual  de-
feat of  the  VC  .  .  .

October,  1965:  ...  an  increase  in  magnitude  and  tempo  of  engage-
ments as  the  GVN/FWF  maintained  the  initiative  ...  In  summary,  the
military  situation  during  October  continued  to  favor  the  Allies  as  the  VC
experienced  heavy  casualties  from  the  overwhelming  Allied  fire  power  .  .  .
November,  1965:  The  increasing  tempo  of  the  war  was  reflected  in
casualty  totals  which  reached  new  highs  for  VC/PAVN  and  friendly  forces
.  .  .  While  keeping  the  enemy  generally  off  balance,  GVN/FWMAF
were  able  to  maintain  and,  to  some  degree,  to  increase  the  scope  and  in-
tensity of  friendly-initiated  operations.

December,  1965:  Military  activity  in  December  was  highlighted  by  an
increase  in  the  number  of  VC/PAVN  attacks  on  isolated  outposts,  ham-
lets, and  districts,  towns,  and  the  avoidance  of  contact  with  large  GVN
and  Free  World  Forces.  The  effectiveness  of  this  strategy  was  attested  by
the  highest  monthly  friendly  casualty  total  of  the  war,  by  friendly  weapons
losses  in  excess  of  weapons  captured  for  the  first  time  since  July,  and  by
30%  fewer  VC  casualties  than  in  November  .  .  .

January,  1966:  The  Free  World  peace  offensive,  coupled  with  TET  fes-
tivities and  the  accompanying  cease-fire,  resulted  in  a  period  of  restricted
military  activities  for  both  friendly  and  enemy  forces  .  .  .  Despite  this
decrease  in  activity,  GVN  and  Free  World  Forces  continued  to  force  in-
roads into  areas  long  conceded  as  VC  territory  .  .  .  [Emphasis  Added]

This  is  not  the  place  for  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  reporting  of  the  war,  or
of  the  implications  of  the  above-cited  evaluations.  But  several  points  do  seem
to  emerge:

1.  The  reports  are  far  too  optimistic  from  January  through  April,  1965,
and  a  big  switch  seems  to  come  in  June,  1965,  when  General  Westmore-
land had  already  made  his  44-battalion  request  and  warned  of  disaster
if  they  were  not  forth-coming.  May's  report  begins  to  show  the  change
in  mood,  but  its  ambiguous  evaluation  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  brief
backward  look  offered  in  September.

2.  Pacification  is  mentioned  in  the  January  evaluation,  but  fades  away  to
virtually  nothing  in  the  months  of  the  build-up.

3.  The  evaluations  do  not  suggest  that  the  main  force  threat  is  in  any  way


548 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

diminishing  by  the  end  of  1965.  Indeed,  they  accurately  predict  larger
battles  in  1966.  They  do  not  suggest,  therefore,  that  the  time  had  come
to  start  emphasizing  pacification  at  the  expense  of  exerting  more
pressure  directly  on  the  enemy.  The  evaluations  do  not  address  this
question  directly,  of  course,  but  they  do  suggest  that  if  any  greater  em-
phasis was  to  be  put  on  pacification,  it  could  be  done  only  if  there  was
not  a  corresponding  reduction  in  the  attack  effort  against  the  VC.  This,
in  turn,  would  imply  that  if  pacification  was  to  receive  greater  emphasis
at  the  beginning  of  1966,  it  would  require  either  more  Allied  troops  or
else  might  lead  to  a  lessening  of  pressure  on  the  VC.

II.  HONOLULU

A. THE  CONFERENCE— FEBRUARY  1966

The  details  of  the  closed  meetings  at  Honolulu  do  not  appear,  in  retrospect,
to  be  nearly  as  important  on  the  future  emphasis  on  pacification  as  the  mere
fact  that  the  public  statements  of  all  participants  carried  forward  the  theme  that
had  been  enunciated  in  the  Declaration.  This  may  often  be  tme  of  confer-
ences; it  certainly  appears  true  of  this  one,  which  was  convened  hastily  and
took  place  without  any  preparatory  staff  work  on  either  side  of  the  Pacific.  In
addition,  the  political  upheavals  in  the  spring  of  1966,  which  followed  the  con-
ference closely,  contributed  to  a  reduction  in  the  importance  of  the  details
of  the  conference  as  it  related  to  pacification.

Pacification  was  discussed  frequently  during  the  closed  sessions.  The  first  time
came  during  the  plenary  session,  when  Ambassador  Lodge  delivered  his  state-
ment to  the  President.

Speaking  before  a  large  audience  which  included  General  Thieu  and  Air
Vice  Marshal  Ky,  Lodge  made  a  general  statement  about  what  he  called  "the
subterranean  war,"  and  then  discussed  the  four  National  Priority  Areas  which
the  GVN  and  the  U.S.  had  established  in  October  1965:

I  would  like  to  begin  by  saying  that  the  successes  and  the  sacrifices
of  the  military,  both  the  Vietnamese  and  the  American  military,  have
created  a  fresh  opportunity  to  win  the  so-called  "subterranean  war"  .  .  .

.  .  .  We  can  beat  up  North  Vietnamese  regiments  in  the  high  plateau
for  the  next  twenty  years  and  it  will  not  end  the  war — unless  we  and  the
Vietnamese  are  able  to  build  simple  but  solid  political  institutions  under
which  a  proper  police  can  function  and  a  climate  created  in  which  eco-
nomic and  social  revolution,  in  freedom,  are  possible.

The  GVN  has  organized  itself  to  do  this  job  and  you  will  hear  a  pres-
entation by  General  Thang,  who  is  in  charge.  The  American  contribution
consists  of  training  and  equipping  of  personnel;  advice;  and  material  .  .  .

Four  prioritv  areas  have  been  chosen.  Three  are  places  of  great  im-
portance and  difficulty.  The  fourth  is  largely  pacified  and  is  the  place  where
they  want  to  get  the  economic  and  social  development  program  going.
We  think  the  areas  are  well  chosen.  The  three  tough  ones  are  close  to  the
Vietnamese  and  American  armies  which  means  that  the  military  presence
helps  pacification.  And,  as  pacification  gets  going,  it  improves  the  base
for  the  military.

In  the  four  priority  areas  are  192  hamlets,  including  238,600  people.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  549

to  be  secured  by  the  end  of  1966.  But  GVN  efforts  are  not  limited  to  these
four  priority  areas.  An  effort  is  underway  which  aims  to  raise  the  per-
centage of  the  whole  country  which  is  pacified  by  about  14%  ;  i.e.,  from  the
current  figure  of  about  52%  to  about  66%  by  the  end  of  the  year  .  .  .*

After  the  statements  of  Lodge  and  Westmoreland  (who  discussed  only  mili-
tary matters),  the  President  said:

I  hope  that  out  of  this  conference  we  will  return  with  clear  viev/s  in
our  own  minds  as  to  how  we  can  apply  more  military  pressure  and  do  it
better,  how  we  can  build  democracy  in  Vietnam  and  what  steps  must
be  taken  to  do  it  better,  how  we  can  search  for  peace  in  the  world,  honor-
able and  just  peace,  and  do  it  better.

If  we  can  do  the  first,  namely,  develop  better  methods  for  defeating
the  Viet  Cong  and  better  methods  for  developing  a  democracy,  I  have  no
doubt  but  that  the  third  will  be  much  easier  to  do  because  you  can  bargain
much  better  from  strength  than  you  can  from  weakness.

After  a  short  recess,  Secretary  Rusk  then  discussed  the  reasons  why  Hanoi
was  not  yet  ready  to  negotiate,  and  said  that  if  the  GVN  built  "the  kind
of  society  which  is  indestructible,"  then  Hanoi  would  probably  come  to  the
conference  table  more  rapidly.  "Anything  that  can  move  faster  rather  than
more  slowly  on  our  side  and  your  side,"  he  said,  "anything  that  can  cause  them
to  realize  that  an  epidemic  of  confidence  is  building  in  the  South  and  that  mo-
mentum is  gathering  could  hasten  the  time  when  Hanoi  will  decide  to  stop  this
aggression."

The  President  then  said:  "I  hope  that  every  person  here  from  the  U.S.  side
will  bear  in  mind  that  before  I  take  that  plane  back,  I  want  to  have  the  best
suggestion  obtainable  as  to  how  we  can  bring  better  military  pressure  on  Hanoi
and  from  the  pacification  side  how  we  can  bring  a  better  program  to  the  people
of  South  Vietnam,  and  finally,  third,  what  other  efforts  we  can  make  to  secure
a  just  and  honorable  peace.  Now,  I  want  to  have  my  little  briefcase  filled  with
those  three  targets — a  better  military  program,  a  better  pacification  program
that  includes  everything,  and  a  better  peace  program."

General  Thang  then  presented  the  GVN's  pacification  plans,  in  a  briefing
later  made  public.  Thang  said:

*  On  March  4,  1966,  Lodge  transmitted  the  text  and  charts  of  this  briefing  to  Secretary
McNamara  and  apparently  at  the  same  time  to  the  White  House,  at  the  request  of
Jack  Valenti.  Lodge  wrote:

"Dear  Bob:

"At  the  request  of  Jack  Valenti,  I  have  put  together  a  book  containing  the  text
and  maps  used  in  my  presentation  at  the  Honolulu  Conference.  It  is  intended  to
serve  as  a  current  indicator  of  pacification  progress  being  made  within  the  1966
National  Priority  Areas  .  .  .

"I  think  I  should  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  for  Americans,  it  is  natural  to
set  goals  and  then  work  to  achieve  them  by  a  specific  date.

"This,  however,  is  not  the  traditional  Vietnamese  way.  While  they  have  set  a
goal  of  190  hamlets  in  the  four  priority  areas,  my  guess  v/ould  be  that  by  the  end
of  1966,  they  may  have  achieved  somewhat  more  than  this,  but  not  necessarily
the  ones  which  are  listed  here.  In  fact,  if  they  ran  into  unexpectedly  heavy  opposi-
tion in  one  place  and  find  a  particularly  good  and  unexpected  opportunity  else-
where, they  probably  ought  to  change  the  plan  .  .  ."


550 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


The  objective  of  the  whole  people  of  my  country  is  a  unified  demo-
cratic and  strong  Vietnam  ...  To  reach  this  objective,  our  National
Leadership  Committee  has  promoted  three  main  policies:  first,  military
offenses;  second,  rural  pacification;  amd  third,  democracy.

.  .  .  But  it  is  necessary,  Mr.  President,  to  define  what  this  means  by
pacification.  In  my  opinion,  that  is  a  failure  of  the  past  government,  not
to  define  exactly  what  we  mean  by  pacification  .  .  .

I  think  that  it  is  necessary  to  .  .  .  define  pacification  as  an  effort  to
which  aims  at  improving  the  standard  of  living  in  this  area  in  every  respect
— political,  economic,  social.

.  .  .  the  prerequisite  is  security  ...  So  our  concept  of  pacification
is  based  on  four  main  points:

Point  No.  I:  The  rural  pacification  operation  can  only  implement
restore  the  public  security  first,  and  carrying  out  a  government  policy

through  the  real  solidarity  among  the  people,  the  armed  forces,  and  the

administration  .  .  .

Point  No.  2:  Our  government  should  be  very  clear  when  it  says  that  it
would  like  to  build  a  new  society  for  a  better  life  in  rural  areas.  That  is
meaningless  to  the  peasant  if  you  don't  develop  that  in  a  concrete
package.

[At  this  point,  Thang  launched  into  a  lengthy  explanation  of  what  he
meant  by  a  new  society.  In  a  vague  discussion,  he  described  the  social,
economic,  and  political  attributes  of  the  new  society,  all  of  which  were
general  and  idealized  statements.]
Point  No.  3:  The  clear  and  realistic  policy  of  the  government  contribut-
ing to  a  better  life  in  a  new  society  I  just  mentioned  should  be  widely
known  among  the  population  and  the  cadres  .  .  .

Point  No.  4:  Rural  pacification  operations  will  open  lasting  peace  if
the  enemy  infrastructure  is  destroyed  and  permanently  followed  up,  our
own  infrastructure  created  and  supported  by  the  people  .  .  .  All
provinces  have  promised  to  the  government  that  75  percent  of  the  fol-
lowing facts  maybe  can  be  accomplished  by  the  1st  of  January  1967:
Pacification  of  963  new  hamlets;  pacification  of  1,083  existing  hamlets;
building  of  2251  classrooms;  913  kilometers  of  roads;  128  bridges;  57
dams;  and  119  kilometers  of  canals  .  .  .  While  we  have  selected  four
areas  of  prioritv,  the  pacification  operation  has  been  pushed  forward  as
usual,  but  with  less  efforts  .  .  .

Rural  pacification  will  be  a  long-term  operation.  We  have  modest  and
practical,  rather  than  spectacular,  goals  for  1966  .  .  .

After  General  Thang's  remarks,  the  plenary  session  records  show  repeated
references  to  the  pacification  effort,  although  there  is  confusion  as  to  what  it
means.  General  Thieu  made  additional  summary  remarks  on  pacification,  then
Minister  Ton  gave  a  briefing  on  the  economic  situation,  followed  by  David  Bell
on  the  same  subject.

The  next  day,  February  8.  the  working  groups  presented  their  findings  to  the
President.  First,  Secretarv  Rusk  and  Foreign  Minister  Do  discussed  the  session
on  negotiations.  Then  General  Thang  and  Secretary  Freeman  reported  on  their
session  on  rural  construction.  The  details  of  the  working  groups  session  itself
are  covered  below,  but  in  plenary.  Thang  emphasized  the  following  points:

Our  future  should  be  developed  mainlv  in  four  priority  areas  .  .  .  Handi-
craft should  be  introduced  and  developed  in  those  areas  also  .  .  .  Rural


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  551

electrification  should  be  developed  and  the  number  ol  generators  increased
in  1967  .  .  .

Land  reform  efforts  should  be  pushed  forward  .  .  .

We  ask  that  construction  material  and  cement  be  sent  to  Vietnam  as  soon
as  possible  so  our  school  programs  can  be  developed  .  .  .
The  training  of  otiicials  at  hamlet  and  village  levels  is  vital  .  .  .

Secretary  Freeman,  who  was  about  to  make  his  first  trip  to  Vietnam,  summa-
rized for  the  Americans:

Having  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  yesterday  listening  to  the  very  elo-
quent presentations  by  the  Chairman  and  the  Prime  Minister,  as  well  as
by  Minister  Ton,  this  is  pretty  much  what  we  would  call  a  nuts  and  bolts
discussion  session.

One  thing  that  was  decided  for  United  States  purposes,  for  purposes  of
phraseology,  was  that  the  word  "pacification"  really  did  not  have  the  right
tone.  The  term  "social  construction"  might  better  be  used  .  .  .

There  was  some  discussion,  considerable,  about  the  selection  of  prov-
ince chiefs.  It  was  strongly  emphasized  that  it  was  important  that  the  men
be  of  integrity  and  ability,  and  that  they  be  selected  and  maintained  and
backed  up.

The  Prime  Minister,  Cjeneral  Thieu,  and  then  C/cneral  Thang  both  said
that  you  [Cjeneral  Thieu j  were  personally  interested  in  this,  and  that  you
were  going  to  select  them  shortly,  that  they  would  have  a  duration  of  at
least  a  year,  but  would  be  carefully  reviewed  and  would  be  changed  if  they
didn't  do  the  job,  but  wouldn't  be  changed  for  other  reasons,  which  we
thought  was  extremely  important  and  we  were  gratified  to  find  it  out.

You  also  explained  to  us,  your  associates  General  Ky  and  Cicneral
Thang,  the  change  of  command,  saying  in  the  past  they  were  confused,
and  that  they  were  now  clear,  so  that  everyone  knew  exactly  what  their
function  would  be.

Then  you  discussed  the  training  of  the  cadre  .  .  .

I  want  to  review  the  \<\\A  question  and  find  out  a  bit  more  about  why
that  .seemed  to  have  some  lag.

Finally,  we  discussed  the  possibility  of  a  joint  training  program  for  the
village  and  hamlet  chiefs  who  presumably  would  be  elected,  but  that  some
background  in  the  philosophy,  purpose  and  aims  of  government,  and  the
techniques  of  governing  and  administration,  were  felt  to  be  needed  by  those
people.

The  President  then  responded  to  the  remarks  of  'I  hang  and  Freeman  by  urg-
ing "all  of  you  connected  with  our  program  ...  to  give  very  special  attention
to  refugee  camps  and  the  schools  in  the  refugee  camps."  He  then  turned  to
Minister  Ton  and  David  Bell  \in  a  discussion  of  the  economic  situation.  'I  hen
Secretary  Gardner,  who  had  co-chaired  a  working  group  on  health  and  educa-
tion— the  distinction  between  rural  construction  and  the  health/education
programs  was  not  clarified — made  his  remarks.  He  set  out  perhaps  the  most
clearly-defined  objectives  of  the  session  (except  for  the  economic  negotia-
tions), describing  the  new  contract  with  the  AMA  for  training  personnel,  the
new  goal  lor  provincial  medical  teams,  and  the  plans  for  a  new  medical  logistics
system.  In  large  part  his  goals  were  more  specific  than  those  of  the  other  work-
ing group  because  the  USAID  Public  Health  Chief  in  Saigon,  Major  General


552 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

James  Humphries,  had  already  laid  groundwork  for  an  excellent  program  of
health  services  and  assistance,  and  Gardner  was  able  to  work  from  a  specific
plan.

Gardner  went  on  to  discuss  education,  where  his  goals  and  objectives  were
less  clear,  and  the  President  asked  several  detailed  questions,  concluding  by
asking  General  Ky  to  ask  the  Ambassador  to  request  an  educational  team  to
go  to  Saigon  after  the  agricultural  team  headed  by  Secretary  Freeman  returned.

The  Vietnamese  then  thanked  the  Americans  for  the  conference,  and  in  turn
some  of  the  senior  members  of  the  American  delegation — in  order,  Admiral
Sharp,  Leonard  Marks,  General  Wheeler,  Ambassador  Lodge,  Ambassador
Harriman — made  brief  statements  about  the  meaning  of  the  conference.  The
President  then  made  his  final  statement:

.  .  .  Preserve  this  communique,  because  it  is  one  we  don't  want  to  for-
get. It  will  be  a  kind  of  bible  that  we  are  going  to  follow.  When  we  come
back  here  90  days  from  now,  or  six  months  from  now,  we  are  going  to  start
out  and  make  reference  to  the  announcements  that  the  President,  the  Chief
of  State  and  the  Prime  Minister  made  in  paragraph  1,  and  what  the  leaders
and  advisors  reviewed  in  paragraph  2  .  .  .  You  men  who  are  responsible
for  these  departments,  you  ministers,  and  the  staffs  associated  with  them  in
both  governments,  bear  in  mind  we  are  going  to  give  you  an  examination
and  the  finals  will  be  on  just  what  you  have  done.

In  paragraph  5;  how  have  you  built  democracv  in  the  rural  areas?  How
much  of  it  have  you  built,  when  and  where?  Give  us  dates,  times,  numbers.

In  paragraph  2;  larger  outputs,  more  efficient  production  to  improve
credit,  handicraft,  light  industry,  rural  electrification — are  those  just  phrases,
high-sounding  words,  or  have  you  coonskins  on  the  wall  .  .  .

Next  is  health  and  education,  Mr.  Gardner.  We  don't  want  to  talk  about
it;  we  want  to  do  something  about  it.  "The  President  pledges  he  will  dis-
patch teams  of  experts."  Well,  we  better  do  something  besides  dispatching.
They  should  get  out  there.  We  are  going  to  train  health  personnel.  How
many?  You  don't  want  to  be  like  the  fellow  who  was  playing  poker  and
when  he  made  a  big  bet  they  called  him  and  said  "what  have  you  got?"
He  said,  "aces"  and  they  asked  "how  many"  and  he  said  "one  aces"  .  .  .

Next  is  refugees.  That  is  just  as  hot  as  a  pistol  in  my  country.  You
don't  want  me  to  raise  a  white  flag  and  surrender  so  we  have  to  do  some-
thing about  that  .  .  .

Growing  military  effectiveness:  we  have  not  gone  in  because  we  don't
want  to  overshadow  this  meeting  here  with  bombs,  with  mortars,  with
hand  grenades,  with  "Masher"  movements.  I  don't  know  who  names  your
operations,  but  "Masher."  I  get  kind  of  mashed  myself.  But  we  haven't  gone
into  the  details  of  growing  military  effectiveness  for  two  or  three  reasons.
One,  we  want  to  be  able  to  honestly  and  truthfully  say  that  this  has  not  been
a  military  build-up  conference  of  the  world  here  in  Honolulu.  We  have
been  talking  about  building  a  society  following  the  outlines  of  the  Prime
Minister's  speech  yesterday.

Second,  this  is  not  the  place,  with  100  people  sitting  around,  to  build  a
militarv  effectiveness.

Third.  I  want  to  put  it  off  as  long  as  I  can,  having  to  make  these  crucial
decisions.  I  enjov  this  agony  ...  I  don't  want  to  come  out  of  this  meeting
that  we  have  come  up  here  and  added  on  X  divisions  and  Y  battalions  or
Z  regiments  or  D  dollars,  because  one  good  story  about  how  many  bil-


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  553

lions  are  going  to  be  spent  can  bring  us  more  inflation  that  we  are  talking
about  in  Vietnam.  We  want  to  work  those  out  in  the  quietness  of  the  Cabi-
net Room  after  you  have  made  your  recommendations,  General  Whee-
ler, Admiral  Sharp,  when  you  come  to  us  .  .  .  [Emphasis  Addedl

The  President's  remarks  candidly  indicated  the  type  of  pressure  and  the  ex-
pectations that  he  had  for  the  efi"ort.

But  beyond  the  high-level  interest  so  clearly  demonstrated  publicly  for  the
first  time  at  Honolulu,  what  was  accomplished?  As  mentioned  ear'lier,  Hono-
lulu's importance  lay  in  two  things:  (1)  the  public  support  shown  for  the  "other
war";  and  (2)  the  sections  of  the  Declaration  which  committed  the  GVN  to
the  electoral  process.  If  nothing  else  was  accomplished  at  Honolulu,  that  made
the  conference  worthwhile.  Thus,  it  is  perhaps  petty  to  criticize  the  details  of  the
conference.  But  they  do  suggest  an  unfortunate  failure  to  come  to  grips  with
any  of  the  basic  issues  concerning  pacification,  and,  moreover,  a  skillful  per-
formance by  the  GVN  to  please  their  American  hosts.  Thang's  statement  to
the  President  after  the  working  session,  for  example,  with  its  emphasis  on  rural
electrification,  handicrafts,  and  the  need  for  "materials  and  cement" — none  of
which  were  major  GVN  concerns  at  that  time — can  best  be  explained,  in  ret-
rospect, by  the  Vietnamese  desire  to  emphasize  those  things  they  felt  the  Secre-
tary of  Agriculture,  the  co-chairman  of  the  American  working  group,  was  most
interested  in.

Although  the  inner  workings  of  the  conference  do  not  seem  to  have  had
much  importance  on  the  development  of  the  pacification  efl'ort,  a  record  does
remain  of  the  "rural  construction  working  group,"  and  it  deserves  a  brief
summary.  The  meeting  is  useful  to  examine  not  because  of  its  ultimate  im-
portance, which  was  marginal,  but  because  it  provides  us  with  a  record  of  a  type
of  discussion  between  Americans  and  Vietnamese  which  has  been  replayed
constantly  since  (and  before).  To  some  weary  participants,  the  very  words
used  have  seemed  to  be  unchanged  since  1962.

A  summary  cannot,  unfortunately,  recapture  the  flavor  of  confusion  which
surrounds  the  memorandum  for  the  record  (A-2254,  February  15,  1966).  The
meeting  began  with  a  discussion  of  terminology  (see  footnote  on  "revolution-
ary development")  in  which  it  was  decided  to  use  the  phrase  "social  construc-
tion" in  place  of  pacification  in  English.  Then,  according  to  the  memorandum,
everyone  lapsed  back  into  using  the  phrase  "pacification."

The  American  representatives  then  pressed  the  issue  of  the  role  of  the  prov-
ince chief,  implying  strongly  that  they  thought  the  province  chiefs  should
have  more  power  and  autonomy.  The  Vietnamese,  led  by  General  Co,  neatly
answered  this  issue,  "referring  to  the  establishment  of  Rural  Construction
Councils  and  Division  and  Corps  levels,  where  such  matters  as  the  disposition
and  use  of  military  forces  are  arbitrated  and  decided  upon."  When  Leonard
Unger,  asked  if  the  military  commanders  would  be  committed  to  providing
the  necessary  military  forces  for  the  pacification  efl'ort,  "General  Co  again
responded,  saying  that  in  the  past  senior  commanders  tended  to  pull  troops
away  from  Provincial  control  for  search  and  destroy  operations.  This  is  a
natural  desire  on  the  part  of  these  commanders  who  tend  to  feel  that  this  is  a
more  important  role  for  such  troops.  Now,  however,  their  missions  have  changed.
These  senior  commanders  are  now  directly  involved  in  the  pacification  program,
are  members  of  the  respective  Rural  Construction  Councils  ...  In  other
words,  things  have  changed  for  the  better.  Ambassador  Unger  contmued  to
pursue  his  point,  stressing  our  concern  that  vestiges  of  the  past  may  still  re-


554 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

main.  General  Thang  re-entered  the  discussion,  explaining  that  the  GVN
now  has  a  new  chain  of  command,  clear  and  clean  from  Saigon  to  the  Corps  to
the  Division  to  the  Province  to  the  District;  there  is  only  one  channel  in
the  country  and  it  is  a  military  channel  .  .  .  Still  on  the  same  subject,  Mr.
Poats  raised  the  question:  What  is  the  primary  mission  of  the  Division  Com-
mander? Is  it  pacification?  General  Thang  answered  in  the  affirmative."

The  discussion  continued  along  these  lines,  and  the  airgram  candidly  con-
cludes: "Generals  Co  and  Thang  were  being  pressed  by  rather  pointed  ques-
tions at  this  juncture  and  seemed  to  be  trying  to  indicate  that  pacification  is  a
primary  task,  although  other  military  tasks  must  continue  to  be  performed.  It
was  fairly  apparent  that  troops  charged  with  securing  the  pacification  area  are
liable  still  to  be  withdrawn  on  a  temporary  basis  to  meet  situations  which  ARVN
senior  commanders  judge  to  be  critical."

The  meeting  then  discussed  the  cadre  program;  the  renewed  emphasis  on
village  government;  the  role  of  the  province  chief  (at  this  point  General  Co
made  his  statement  that  the  GVN  would  appoint  province  chiefs  for  one  year
minimum  period,  a  decision  which  was  never  carried  out);  the  introduction  of
troops;  the  cadre  (again);  the  six  areas  where  the  effort  needed  improvement
(agriculture,  handicraft,  land  reform,  rural  electrification,  construction  ma-
terials, and  training  of  local  officials);  land  reform  (with  Minister  Tri  presenting
his  four-month-old  plan  again,  and  Poats  expressing  "concern  about  the  per-
formance to  date");  and  the  general  question  of  pacification  goals.

And  then,  after  reporting  back  to  the  President  in  the  meeting  described
earlier,  the  participants  broke  up,  returning  to  Saigon  and  Washington  to  give
"the  other  war"  a  new  emphasis;  to  reorganize  the  Mission  in  Saigon;  to  ap-
point a  new  Special  Assistant  to  the  President  in  Washington;  to  start  the  quest
for  coonskins  (the  phrase  was  in  common  use  in  Saigon  within  a  few  days);  to
await  the  public  and  press  reaction  (see  following  section);  and  to  walk  without
warning  into  a  major  political  crisis  which  almost  brought  the  government
down,  set  back  every  time-schedule  made  at  Honolulu,  forced  a  postponement
of  the  next  scheduled  conference  from  June-Julv  until  October,  and — through
an  ironic  twist  of  fate — left  the  GVN  stronger  than  before,  following  a  remark-
ably successful  election.

B. IMPACT  ON  PUBLIC  IN  U.S.,  ON  U.S.  MISSION  IN  VIETNAM,
AND  ON  VIETNAMESE

"This  week  the  word  'pacification"  was  on  everyone's  lips  at  the  Honolulu
conference  on  Vietnam."  wrote  Charles  Mohr  in  the  New  York  Times,  Feb-
ruary 13,  1966,  "and  many  important  members  of  the  Johnson  Administration
embraced  the  idea  with  all  the  enthusiasm  of  a  horse  player  with  a  new  bet-
ting system.  The  main  purpose  of  the  Honolulu  conference  was  to  dramatize
this  American  enthusiasm  for  the  1966  rural  pacification — sometimes  called
'rural  construction' — program  of  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  and  to
pledge  more  American  assistance  for  the  program."

Mohr's  article  may  ha\e  been  slightly  exaggerated,  but  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  President's  pledge  on  behalf  of  the  U.S.  Government  to  the  pacifi-
cation effort  began  a  new  period  for  the  U.S.  Government  in  Vietnam.  From
Honolulu  on  it  was  open  and  unmistakable  U.S.  policy  to  support  pacification
and  the  "other  war,"  and  those  who  saw  these  activities  as  unimportant  or
secondary  had  to  submerge  their  sentiments  under  a  cloud  of  rhetoric.  Despite


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  555

this  fact,  of  course,  man\  heated  discussions  still  lay  ahead  of  the  Mission  on
program  after  program,  and  manv  major  battles  remained  to  be  fought.  Porter
and  Komer  would  fight  them,  as  will  be  shown  later.

This  was  the  great  impact  of  Honolulu — on  pacification.  But  there  were
other  ramifications  of  the  Honolulu  conference  which  overshadowed  the  em-
phasis on  non-military  activities  in  the  months  that  followed.  Because  of  these
events — particularlv  the  political  upheavals  that  rocked  Vietnam  from  March
until  June — the  follow-up  conference  tentatively  planned  for  June  did  not  take
place,  and  the  growth  in  pacification's  importance  was  probably  set  back  about
six  months.  While  this  studv  does  not  trv  to  co\cr  the  concurrent  events  of  the
period,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  the  most  important  parts  of  the  Honolulu
Declaration  were  not  those  dealing  with  pacification  at  all,  but  rather  the  sec-
tions which  committed  the  GVN  to  "formulate  a  democratic  constitution  to  the
people  for  discussion  and  modification:  to  seek  its  ratification  by  secret  ballot;
to  create,  on  the  basis  of  elections  rooted  in  that  constitution,  an  elected  govern-
ment .  .  .""  With  these  words,  the  GVN  was  openly  committed,  under  U.S.
pressure,  to  a  process  which  they  probablv  did  not  desire  or  appreciate.  In  the
months  that  followed,  the  words  of  the  Honolulu  Declaration  were  used  against
General  Ky  by  his  Buddhist  Struggle  Movement  opponents,  to  hoist  him  on  his
Honolulu  petard;  but  then,  in  a  remarkable  about-face,  Kv  simultaneously
cracked  down  on  the  Buddhists  and  held  successful  elections  for  a  Constitu-
tional Assembly  (September  1 1,  1966).

The  following  collection  of  newspaper  items  is  selected  to  show  that  there
were  difiering  opinions  within  the  U.S.  Mission  and  among  Vietnamese,  but
that  in  general  the  message  from  Honolulu  did  get  through  to  the  NTission.  Since
almost  everv  reporter  in  Saigon  had  sources  within  some  element  of  the  Mis-
sion who  were  telling  him  their  honest  feelings  (the  Saigon  Mission,  it  was  once
said  by  Barry  Zorthian,  could  not  keep  a  secret  24  hours),  the  stories  from  Sai-
gon do  reflect  what  the  Mission  thought  in  the  davs  just  after  Honolulu.  The
editorials  and  columnists  from  Washington  indicate  to  what  degree  the  Adminis-
tration succeeded  in  convincing  the  press  corps  (which  is  not,  of  course,  the  U.S.
public)  that  the  emphasis  at  Honolulu  was  really  on  pacification.

EDITORIAL:  The  AVu-  York  Herald  Tribune,  February  8:

The  meeting  presents  the  prospect  of  our  resuming  the  war  in  more
favorable  circumstances.  The  meeting  of  the  heads  of  the  American  and
South  Vietnamese  governments  is  a  fresh  and  stronger  demonstration  of
mutual  confidence.  On  this  basis  they  can  now  proceed  to  mount  meas-
ures for  dealing  with  the  equallv  important  military  and  civilian  aspects
of  the  war.

The  two  are  intimately  related  ...  the  loyalty  and  support  of  the
peasants  in  the  interior  are  essential.  President  Johnson  is  bidding  for  them
by  offering  some  of  the  benefits  of  his  Great  Society  program  to  the  South
Vietnames^e.  It  will  not  be  easy,  in  time  of  war,  .  .  .  but  .  .  .  they  must
be  pursued  with  the  same  vigor  as  we  press  the  war  on  the  battlefield.

EDITORIAL:  The  Washington  Evening  Star,  February  7:

It  is  particularlv  significant  that  the  American  delegation  included  HEW
Secretary  Gardner  and  Orville  Freeman,  Secretary  of  Agriculture.  Their
presence  certainlv  means  that  a  greater  "pacification"  effort  will  be  made
as  the  fighting  goes  on  .  .


556 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

COLUMNIST:  Marquis  Childs,  February  9  (from  Honolulu)

This  conference  called  by  President  Johnson  is  a  large  blue  chip  put
on  the  survival  value  of  the  wiry,  exuberant  Air  Vice  Marshal  Nguyen  Cao
Ky,  and  the  generals  who  rule  with  him.  It  is  expected  that  Ky  will  not
only  survive  but  that  with  massive  economic  help  from  the  U.S.  the  na-
tional leadership  committee  will  eventually  win  the  support  of  the  peasant
in  the  countryside  .  .  .  Any  sensible  bookmaker  would  quote  long  odds
against  the  bet  paying  off.  But  after  so  many  false  starts  this  seems  to  be
the  right  direction — a  determined  drive  to  raise  the  level  of  living  in  the
countryside  and  close  the  gap  of  indifference  and  hostility  between  the
peasant  and  the  sophisticated  city  dweller  .  .  .  Over  and  over  we  have
been  told  that  only  by  winning  the  hearts  and  minds  of  the  Vietnamese
people  will  we  achieve  a  victory  that  has  meaning  beyond  the  grim  choice
of  pulverization  of  American  occupation  into  the  indefinite  future  .  .  .
This  is  the  reason  teams  of  American  specialists  in  agriculture,  health,  and
education  are  going  to  Vietnam  .  .  .

EDITORIAL:  The  New  York  Herald  Tribune,  February  9:

Perhaps  the  most  constructive  part  of  the  Honolulu  conference  was
the  emphasis  it  placed  on  this  hitherto  badly  neglected  aspect  of  the  Viet
Nam  war  [Pacification].  It  is  unfortunate  that  Chief  of  State  Thieu  di-
verted attention  from  it  by  heaping  more  fuel  on  the  controversy  over
whether  the  Viet  Cong  should  or  should  not  sit  at  a  peace  conference  ta-
ble ..  .

EDITORIAL:  The  New  York  Times,  February  9  and  13:

The  Honolulu  conference  has  followed  the  classic  pattern  of  Summit
meetings  that  are  hastily  called  without  thorough  preparation  in  advance;
it  has  left  confusion  in  its  wake,  with  more  questions  raised  than  answered
.  .  .  The  one  important  area  of  agreement  at  Honolulu,  apart  from  contin-
uation of  the  military  efforts,  was  on  an  expanded  program  of  "rural  con-
struction." The  prospective  doubling  of  American  economic  aid,  however,
will  be  futile  unless  it  is  accompanied  by  a  veritable  social  revolution,  in-
cluding vigorous  land  reform.  Premier  Ky  cast  some  doubt  in  his  emphasis
on  moving  slowly.  His  Minister  of  Rural  Pacification  envisages  action  in
only  1,900  of  South  Vietnam's  15,000  hamlets  this  year.

Vice  President  Humphrey  evidently  has  his  work  cut  out  for  him  in
his  follow-up  visit  to  Saigon.  Unless  some  way  can  be  found  to  give  more
momentum  to  this  effort,  the  new  economic  aid  program  may  go  down  the
same  drain  as  all  previous  programs  of  this  kind.

It  would  be  a  cruel  deception  for  Americans  to  get  the  idea  that  social
reforms  carried  out  bv  the  Kv  government  with  American  money  are  go-
ing to  make  any  perceptible  difference  in  the  near  future  to  the  Vietnamese
people  or  to  the  course  of  the  war.

COLUMNIST:  Ted  Lewis,  New  York  Daily  News,  February  10  (from
Washington):

Why,  all  of  a  sudden,  has  President  Johnson  begun  to  come  to  grips
with  the  "other  war"  in  South  Vietnam?  .  .  .  Johnson,  with  his  typical
oratorical  flourishes,  has  given  the  impression  that  he  launched  something
totally  new  at  Honolulu  .  .  .  The  fact  is  that  for  several  years  this  prob-
lem of  the  "'other  war"  has  been  recognized  as  vital  by  the  State  Depart-


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  557

ment,  the  Pentagon  and  even  by  the  White  House.  But  nobody  did  much
about  it,  except  in  an  offhand  way  .  .  .

Johnson  is  a  master  of  timing.  He  has  definitely  gained  a  political  ad-
vantage over  his  Viet  policy  critics  by  stressing  right  now  the  need  of  win-
ning over  the  peasants  .  .  .  [Senator  Robert]  Kennedy  complained  in  a
Senate  speech  just  ten  days  ago  that  there  were  'many  indications  that  we
have  not  yet  even  begun  to  develop  a  program  ...  It  is  absolutely  ur-
gent," the  Senator  said,  "that  we  now  act  to  institute  new  programs  of  ed-
ucation, land  reform,  public  health,  political  participation.  .  .  ."

NEWS  ANALYSIS:  Richard  Critchfield  in  The  Washington  Evening  Star.,

February  9  (from  Saigon) :

President  Johnson's  historic  decision  at  Honolulu  backing  an  American-
sponsored  brand  of  social  revolution  as  an  alternative  to  communism  in
South  Vietnam  was  warmly  hailed  today  by  veteran  political  observers.
The  Honolulu  declaration  was  viewed  as  ending  postwar  era  of  American
foreign  policy  aimed  at  stabilizing  the  status  quo  in  Asia.

The  key  phrase,  in  the  view  of  many  diplomats  here,  was  the  offer  of
full  American  "support  to  measures  of  social  revolution,  including  land
reform  based  upon  the  principle  of  building  upward  from  the  hopes  and
purposes  of  all  the  people  of  Vietnam."

.  .  .  Johnson's  decisions  to  put  political  remedies  on  a  par  with  mili-
tary action  are  also  regarded  here  as  a  major  personal  triumph  for  Am-
bassador Henry  Cabot  Lodge  and  his  top  aide.  Major  General  Edward  G.
Lansdale,  the  two  main  advocates  of  "social  revolution"  in  South  Vietnam
.  .  .  The  Honolulu  declaration  appears  to  signify  a  major  shift  away  from
the  policy  of  primarily  military  support  established  by  President  Kennedy
in  1961  and  closely  identified  with  General  Maxwell  Taylor,  Defense  Sec-
retary McNamara,  and  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  .  .  .  The  Lodge-Lansdale
formula  was  a  striking  departure  in  that  it  saw  the  eventual  solution  not
so  much  in  Hanoi's  capitulation  as  in  successful  pacification  in  South  Viet-
nam .  .  .  The  Honolulu  declaration  amounts  to  almost  a  point  by  point
acceptance  of  this  formula  and  both  its  phraseology  and  philosophy  bear
Lansdale's  unmistakable  imprint  .  .  .

EDITORIAL:  ThQ  Baltimore  Sun,  February  10:

Unless  there  was  more  substance  to  the  Honolulu  Conference  than
meets  the  eye,  it  could  be  summed  up  as  much  ado — not  much  ado  about
nothing  but  simply  much  ado  ...  It  was  all  spectacular  and  diverting  but
so  far  as  we  can  see  the  problem  of  the  war  is  where  it  was  before  the
burst  of  activity  began  ...  It  is  probably  worthwhile  to  have  a  reitera-
tion of  the  social  and  economic  measures  needed  in  South  Vietnam  ...  It
is  essential  to  underscore  the  political  nature  of  the  war,  along  with  the
continuing  military  operations.  But  these  matters  were  generally  under-
stood before  the  Honolulu  meetings.  Perhaps  events  to  come  will  make  the
purpose  of  the  meeting  clearer.

EDITORIAL:  The  New  York  Post,  February  9:

The  Hawaii  meetings  were  advertised  as  the  beginning  of  a  vast  new
movement  of  economic  and  social  reform  in  Vietnam,  President  Johnson,
we  were  told,  went  to  Honolulu  to  launch  the  new  approach  with  maximum
drama.


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Instead,  the  session  inadvertently  underscored  the  lack  of  interest  of  the
junta  in  Saigon  in  anything  but  military  conquest  of  the  Viet  Cong,  to  be
carried  out  by  stepped  up  U.S.  armed  efforts  .  .  .

NEWS  STORY:  AP,  February  10  (from  Honolulu):

Vice  President  Humphrey  left  for  Saigon  today  with  South  Vietnam's
top  leaders  to  spur  action  on  programs  attacking  hunger,  disease,  and  ig-
norance in  that  war-torn  country  .  .  .

NEWS  ANALYSIS:  Charles  Mohr,  The  New  York  Times,  February  10

(from  Saigon) :

In  the  atmosphere  of  Honolulu,  there  was  much  emphasis  on  form,
so  much  that  in  some  ways  it  may  have  obscured  substance.  The  Ameri-
cans appeared  so  delighted  with  Marshal  Ky's  "style" — with  his  showing  as
a  politically  salable  young  man  with  the  right  instincts  rather  than  as  a  young
warlord — that  there  seemed  to  be  almost  no  emphasis  on  the  important
differences  between  the  Governments  .  .  .  What  Marshal  Ky  told  Presi-
dent Johnson  was  something  he  had  often  said  before:  South  Vietnamese
society  is  still  riddled  with  social  injustices  and  political  weaknesses:  there
is  not  one  political  party  worthy  of  the  name  .  .  .  The  South  Vietnamese
leaders  believe  that  they  could  not  survive  a  "peaceful  settlement"'  that  left
the  VC  political  structure  in  place,  even  if  the  VC  guerrilla  units  were  dis-
banded. Therefore,  the  South  Vietnamese  feel  that  "rural  pacification,"  of
which  much  was  said  at  Honolulu,  is  necessarv  not  only  to  help  them
achieve  military  victory  but  also  to  prevent  a  political  reversal  of  that
victory  ...  As  the  Vietnamese  see  pacification,  its  core  is  not  merely
"helping  the  people  to  a  better  life,"  the  aspect  on  which  many  American
speakers  dwelled,  it  is  rather  the  destruction  of  the  clandestine  VC  political
structure  and  the  creation  of  an  ironlike  system  of  government  political
control  over  the  population  .  .  .

But  the  two  governments  have  never  been  closer  than  they  are  in  the
aftermath  of  Honolulu,  and  the  atmosphere  of  good  feeling  seems  genu-
ine .  .  .

NEWS  ANALYSIS:  Roscoe  Drummond.  February  14  (from  Washington):

.  .  .  The  decisions  taken  at  Honolulu  bv  President  Johnson  and  Pre-
mier Ky  go  to  the  heart  of  winning.  They  were  primarily  social,  economic,
and  political  decisions.  They  come  at  a  malleable  and  perhaps  decisive  turn  -
in  the  war  .  .  .

NEWS  ANALYSIS:  Tom  Wicker  in  The  New  York  Times.  Februarv  13

(from  Saigon) :

Vice  President  Humphrev  .  .  .  has  left  Saigon  reverberating  with  what
he  said  was  the  "single  message"  he  had  come  to  deliver.  The  message  was
that  the  war  in  Vietnam  was  a  war  to  bring  social  justice  and  economic  and
political  progress  to  the  N'ietnamese  people  .  .  .  Humphrey  said  at  a  news
conference  here:  "Social  and  economic  revolution  does  not  belong  to  the
V.C.  Non-communist  forces  are  the  ones  forwarding  the  revolution."

The  emphasis  on  social  reform  could  also  quiet  critics  who  contend
that  Washington  has  concentrated  too  much  on  the  military  problem  and
not  enough  on  civic  action  to  win  the  loyalty  of  the  Vietnamese
people  .  .  .


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  559


NEWS  ANALYSIS:  Charles  Mohr,  The  New  York  Times,  February  13

(from  Saigon) :

By  giving  enormous  emphasis  and  publicity  to  it,  an  impression  was  left
that  pacification  is  something  new.  In  a  sense,  there  was  some  truth  in
this.  The  men  running  the  program,  both  Vietnamese  and  American,  are
new.  And  the  1966  plan  itself  is  a  new  one  in  many  respects.

Pacification  is  vitally  important  to  success  in  the  guerrilla  war  in  South
Vietnam.  Without  it,  purely  military  success  becomes  empty  even  if  all  the
battles  are  '"won."

NEWS  ANALYSIS:  Joseph  Alsop,  February  14  (from  Saigon):

CART  BEFORE  HORSE  ...  All  that  reallv  mattered  at  Honolulu
was  a  Presidential  decision  to  provide  the  forces  needed  to  keep  the  pres-
sure on  the  enemy  here  in  Vietnam.  The  odds  are  heavy  that  the  President,
who  seems  to  prefer  doing  good  by  stealth,  actually  took  this  decision  be-
hind the  electorate  smokescreen  of  talk  about  other  matters.  The  question
remains  whether  the  needed  forces  will  be  provided  soon  enough.  One  must
wait  and  see.

But  at  the  risk  of  sounding  captious,  and  for  the  sake  of  honesty  and
realism,  it  must  be  noted  that  there  was  a  big  Madison  Avenue  element  in
all  the  talk  about  "pacification"  during  the  Hawaii  meeting  and  Vice  Presi-
dent Humphrey's  subsequent  visit  to  Vietnam.

This  does  not  mean  that  pacification  of  the  Vietnamese  countryside  is
an  unimportant  and  or  secondary  problem.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  even-
tually be  all-important  and  primary.  But  one  need  only  glance  at  the  list
of  priority  areas  marked  for  pacification  now,  to  see  the  adman's  touch  in
the  present  commotion.

There  are:  An  Giang  Province,  which  belongs  to  the  Hoa  Hao  sect
and  has  been  long  since  pacified  by  the  Hoa  Hao;  the  Hop  Tac  region  near
Saigon,  where  General  Harkins  experimented  unhappily  with  the  so-called
oil  spot  technique;  parts  of  Binh  Dinh  Province  along  the  north-south  high-
way; and  the  fringes  of  the  Marine  enclave  at  Da  Nang.

Each  area  differs  from  the  others.  In  the  case  of  the  nine  villages  on  the
fringes  of  the  Marines'  Da  Nang  enclave,  for  instance,  pacification  is
needed  to  insure  airfield  security  from  mortar  fire.  Most  of  these  villages
have  been  Viet  Cong  strongholds  for  over  20  years,  and  they  could  be  dan-
gerous.

.  .  .  Pacification  by  the  Marines  looks  very  fine  .  .  .  But  it  takes  far
too  many  Marines  to  do  the  job.

Nonetheless,  the  real  objections  to  making  a  big-immediate  show  of
pacification  are  quite  different.  The  Hop  Tac  experience  tells  the  story.
Here  a  great  effort  was  made  by  the  Vietnamese  authorities  with  the  strong
support  of  General  Harkins.  A  good  deal  was  initially  accomplished.  Boasts
began  to  be  heard.  Whereat  the  enemy  sailed  forth  from  the  nearest  re-
doubt area,  knocked  down  everything  that  had  been  built  up,  murdered  all
the  villagers  who  had  worked  with  the  government,  and  left  things  much
worse  than  they  had  been  before  ...  An  attempt  to  make  a  big  imme-
diate show  of  pacification  needs  to  be  warned  against,  because  of  the  Wash-
ington pressure  to  do  just  that.  A  large  element  of  the  U.S.  Mission  was
called  home  a  month  or  so  ago.  And  in  effect,  these  men  were  commanded
to  produce  a  plan  for  making  a  show  as  soon  as  possible.


560 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Fortunately,  they  had  the  courage  to  point  out  that  the  cart  was  being
put  before  the  horse  once  again.  Fortunately,  Ambassador  Lodge  is  well
aware  of  the  dangers  of  putting  the  cart  before  the  horse.  The  pressure  for
something  showy  may  continue,  but  it  is  likely  to  be  resisted.

If  so,  the  pressure  will  not  be  altogether  useless.  The  Vietnamese  and
the  Americans  here  are  getting  ready  for  pacification  on  a  big  scale  and  in
an  imaginative  way,  partly  because  of  that  pressure.

It  is  vital  to  have  everything  in  readiness  to  do  the  job  of  pacification  as
soon  as  favorable  circumstances  arise.  But  it  is  also  vital  to  bear  in  mind
that  really  favorable  circumstances  cannot  arise  until  the  enemy's  back-
bone of  regular  units  is  at  last  very  close  to  the  breaking  point,  if  not  ac-
tually beginning  to  break.

EDITORIAL:  Christian  Science  Monitor,  February  1 1 :

If  Saigon  and  Washington  fight  South  Vietnam's  economic  and  social
war  as  vigorously  as  they  fight  its  military  war,  the  Communist  thrust
against  that  country  will  fail.  Yet  this  is  the  biggest  "if"  of  the  war.  Over  and
over  lip-service  has  been  paid  to  the  inescapable  need  of  winning  over  the
peasantry.  But  time  and  again  this  has  come  to  naught.

We  are  cautiously  encouraged  by  the  latest  steps  being  taken.  The  strong
emphasis  laid  in  the  Honolulu  Declaration  on  civic  reforms  is  a  commit-
ment in  the  right  direction.  The  sending  of  Vice-President  Humphrey  to
study  South  Vietnamese  reform  programs  on  the  spot  is  an  even  stronger
earnest  of  American's  intention  not  to  let  this  program  slip  back  into  an-
other do-nothing  doldrum  .  .  .

III. HONOLULU  TO  MANILA

A. SAIGON:  PORTER  IN  CHARGE

Question.  Mr.  President,  when  you  were  in  Los  Angeles  reporting  on  the
Honolulu  Conference,  you  listed  eleven  items  which  you  said  were  discussed,
and  you  said  that  in  all  these  fields  you  set  targets,  concrete  targets.  Would
it  be  possible  to  get  a  list  of  these  concrete  targets?

Answer.  I  don't  have  any.  I  think  what  I  had  in  mind  there  was  saying
that  we  hoped  to  make  certain  progress  in  certain  fields  and  we  expect  to
have  another  conference  after  a  reasonable  length  of  time,  in  which  we
will  take  the  hits,  runs,  and  errors  and  see  what  we  have  achieved  and
everybody  would  be  answerable,  so  to  speak,  as  to  the  progress  they  have
made  and  whether  or  not  they  are  nearing  their  goals  ...  I  hope  to  be  in
Honolulu  in  the  next  few  months,  maybe  in  the  middle  of  the  year,  and
see  what  has  been  done.  I  thought  it  was  good  that  we  could  go  there  and
have  the  Government  and  the  militarv  leader,  General  Westmoreland,  and
the  Ambassador  and  the  Deputy  Ambassador,  meet  with  the  Vice  Presi-
dent, the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  and  technicians,  and  try  to  expose  to
the  world  for  three  days  what  this  country  is  trying  to  do  to  feed  the
hungry,  and  educate  the  people,  and  to  improve  the  life  span  for  people
who  just  live  to  be  35  now  ...  A  lot  of  our  folks  think  it  is  just  a  military
effort.  We  don't  think  it  should  be  that,  and  we  don't  want  it  to  be  that  .  .  .

As  the  President  returned  to  Washington  from  Honolulu,  the  Vice  President,
Secretary  Freeman,  and  McGeorge  Bundy  headed  up  a  large  list  of  high-rank-


Rc-lj)]pii(isis  oil  l^icificdtion:  / 065  -/ ^)67  561

ing  olllcials  (hat  vvcnl  on  io  Saigon.  HiinJy,  about  lo  leave  the  government,  car-
ried with  him  autliority  Iroin  tlic  President  lo  give  tlie  Deputy  Ainbassatlor  wide
authoiity  over  all  aspects  o(  the  lural  construction  pri>grani.  On  l  ehiuaiy  12,
I9(>(),  tlie  President  sent  Ambassador  Lodge  a  NODIS  telegram,  which  was
designeil  to  pave  the  way  lor  liundy's  reorgani/ation  clVort:

QUOi  r..  I  hope  that  you  share  my  own  satisfaction  with  the  Honolulu
Conlerence.  The  oppoitunity  to  talk  lace  to  lace  with  you,  (icneral  West-
moreland and  the  Vietnamese  leadeis  has  given  me  a  much  better  appre-
ciation ol  the  problems  each  ol  you  lace,  but  perhajis  even  more  impor-
tantly the  oppoi  tunities  open  to  us.  I  was  particularly  impressed  with  the
apparent  determination  ol  I  hieu,  Ky  and  the  other  Vietnamese  Ministers
lo  carry  lorwartl  a  social  policy  of  radical  am!  constiuclive  cliange.  How-
ever, I  full  well  reali/e  the  tremendous  job  that  they  and  we  have  in  |-)utting
this  into  practice.  I  intend  to  see  that  our  organi/,atit)n  back  here  lor  sup-
porting this  is  promptly  tightened  and  strengthened  and  I  know  that  you
will  want  to  do  the  same  at  your  end.  I  was  im|iressed  with  Ambassador
Porter  and  it  seems  to  me  that  he  probably  has  the  necessary  c|ualilicalions
lo  give  you  the  support  you  will  neetl  in  this  held.  While  I  know  that  he  is
already  doing  so,  I  suggest  that  ycnn  designation  ol  him  as  being  in  total
charge,  under  your  supervision,  ol  all  aspects  ol  the  rural  construction
program  would  constitute  a  clear  and  visible  sign  lo  the  Vietnamese  and
lo  our  own  jieople  that  the  Ik^nolulu  ('onlerence  really  marks  a  new  ile-
parlure  in  this  vital  field  ol  our  ellort  there.  We  will  of  course  be  glad  to
give  prompt  support  with  whatever  additional  personnel  or  administrative
rearrangement  this  might  require  within  the  Mission  or  I'lnbassy.  Please
let  me  know  yom^  own  thoughts  on  this.

I  hope  that  in  June  we  can  have  a  lull  report  slewing  real  progress  in  our
war  on  social  misery  in  Viet  Nam.  In  the  meanwhile,  I  know  that  you  will
nol  hesitate  to  let  me  know  how  we  can  be  ol  help.  UNQIJO  I  P'.

1he  President  has  instructed  that  a  copy  ol  this  message  be  given  to
McGeorge  Hundy.

The  President  also  .sent  General  Westmoreland  a  personal  telegram  that  day,
which  did  not  mention  the  mailer  of  civilian  organization.  To  Westmoreland
he  wrote:

QUOTH.  I  want  you  lo  know  (hat  I  greatly  enjoyed  the  opportunity  of
talking  directly  with  you  at  Honolulu  and  I  hope  you  share  my  own  satis-
faction on  the  outcome  of  that  conlerence.  I  was  much  encouragetl  by
your  presentation  of  the  military  situation  and  now  have  even  more  pride
and  confitlence  in  what  you  and  your  men  are  doing.  I  leel  that  we  are  on
the  right  track  and  you  can  be  sure  of  my  continued  support.
I  know  that  you  share  my  own  views  on  the  equal  importance  of  the  war
on  social  misery,  and  hope  that  what  we  diti  at  Honolulu  will  help  assure
that  we  and  the  Vietnamese  move  forward  with  equal  vigor  and  determina-
tion on  that  front.  As  I  have  told  Ambassador  Lodge  and  am  telling  Thieu
and  Ky,  I  hope  that  in  June  I  can  have  a  report  of  real  progress  in  that  field.
With  continuetl  progress  in  the  military  field,  we  should  by  that  time  be
able  lo  see  ahead  more  clearly  (he  road  to  victory  over  both  aggression  and
misery.

You  have  my  complete  confidence  and  genuine  admiration  and  absolute
support.  I  never  forget  thai  1  have  a  lot  riding  on  you.  UNQUO'l  li.


562 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

After  the  mood  at  the  Warrenton  Conference,  the  push  for  reorganization
should  have  come  as  no  surprise  to  the  higher  ranking  members  of  the  Mission.
Discussions  centering  around  the  role  of  the  Deputy  Ambassador  (and  earlier,
the  DCM)  as  a  manager  for  the  mushrooming  Civilian  Mission  had  been  going
on  for  a  long  time,  as  Lodge  and  Porter  well  knew.  With  Bundy  in  Saigon  to
ease  the  issue,  Lodge  answered  the  President  on  February  15,  1966:

I  do  indeed  want  to  ''tighten  and  strengthen  the  organization  for  sup-
port of  the  rural  construction  program  at  this  end,"  as  you  tell  me  you  plan
to  do  at  yours.  And  I  applaud  your  determination  to  treat  "rural  construc-
tion"' (for  which  there  should  be  a  better  name)  *  as  an  end  in  itself  and  on
a  par  with  the  military.

As  you  say,  Ambassador  Porter  is  already  putting  a  great  deal  of  effort
into  this  work.  I  have  never  made  a  formal  announcement  of  this  fact  be-
cause it  seemed  to  me  that  the  arrangement  was  working  pretty  well  as  it
was  and  that  public  announcement  was  unnecessary.  Also,  I  felt  the  U.S.
Government  was  getting  really  enthusiastic  work  without  thought  of  self
from  both  Porter  and  Lansdale  under  present  conditions.  I  felt  public  an-
nouncements might  make  Lansdale  feel  less  important  without  any  gain
for  Porter  who  does  not  need  or  want  a  sense  of  importance.  I  believe
that  Americans  are  pulling  together  here  as  never  before  and  that  there  is
a  spirit  here  which  is  worth  more  than  organization  charts.

But  I  can  see  the  merit  of  the  idea  that  a  public  designation  of  Porter  as
being  in  total  charge  of  the  American  aspects  of  the  rural  construction
program  would  "constitute  a  clear  and  visible  sign  to  the  Vietnamese  and
to  our  own  people  that  the  Honolulu  Conference  really  marks  a  new  de-
parture."

There  are  pitfalls  to  be  avoided.  For  example,  I  assume  that  if  Porter's
new  allocation  means  that  I  am  so  taken  up  with  U.S.  visitors  that  I  am  in

*  Lodge  had  for  some  time  been  troubled  by  the  phrase  "rural  construction" — the
literal  translation  of  the  Vietnamese  Xay  Dung  Nong  Thon — which  he  felt  suggested
bricks  and  cement,  rather  than  the  entire  program  of  "revolutionary  uplift"  which  he
advocated.  Right  after  the  Honolulu  meeting,  he  asked  each  member  of  the  Mission
Council  for  suggestions  on  how  better  to  translate  the  Vietnamese  phrase.  Out  of  the
suggestions  that  he  received  (including  Westmoreland's  recommendation  that  we  ought
to  leave  the  phrase  alone,  just  translating  the  literal  meaning  of  the  Vietnamese  as
accurately  as  possible),  Lodge  chose  the  phrase  "Revolutionary  Development."  At
about  the  same  time,  the  GVN  dropped  the  word  "rural"  from  the  name  of  the  Min-
istry of  Rural  Construction  (thus,  Xay  Dung  Nong  Tlion  was  replaced  by  Xay  Dung).
Lodge  and  Ky  then  announced  that  henceforth  the  Vietnamese  Ministry  would  be
known  in  English  as  the  Ministry  of  Revolutionary  Development,  and  the  overall  pro-
gram called  Revolutionary  Development  (RD).  To  this  day,  the  semantic  gap  remains
unbridged:  the  Vietnamese  call  it  the  Ministry  of  Construction  (Bo  Xay  Dung),  except
when  they  are  talking  in  English  to  an  American;  the  Americans  call  it  the  MORE).
The  same  applies  to  the  program:  moreover,  the  confusion  is  often  compounded  by
the  fact  that  in  most  informal  discussions  between  Americans  and  Vietnamese,  the
term  most  often  used  is  still  "pacification."  See.  for  example,  the  Working  Group
session  at  Honolulu,  February  7.  1966:  "It  is  perhaps  significant  that  this  was  the  only
time  in  the  course  of  the  meeting,  i.e.,  at  the  outset,  that  the  newly  adopted  U.S.  term
was  heard.  Throughout  the  remainder  of  the  Working  Group  discussion,  the  term
pacification  was  used  almost  exclusively.  In  this  connection,  the  Saigon  U.S.  represen-
tatives present  at  the  meeting  are  inclined  to  doubt  the  actual  appropriateness  of  the
new  term  .  .  . ) "


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  563

effect  separated  from  "rural  construction,"  then  we  would  take  a  new  look
at  the  whole  thing.  Much  of  the  most  time-consuming  job  out  here  is  not
rural  construction  but  is  the  handling  and  educating  of  U.S.  visitors.  Al-
though it  must  be  done  at  the  expense  of  the  war  effort  within  Vietnam,
it  is  vitally  important.  But  it  was  not  until  the  end  of  January  that  I  was  free
enough  of  visitors  to  start  holding  meetings  of  U.S.  "rural  construction"
workers  to  probe  and  to  prod  and  to  develop  the  "check-up"  maps  which  I
showed  you  at  Honolulu.

I  suggest,  therefore  that  I  make  the  following  announcement:  "I  have
today  designated  Deputy  Ambassador  William  Porter  to  take  full  charge,
under  my  direction,  of  all  aspects  of  work  of  the  United  States  in  support
of  the  programs  of  community  building,  presently  described  as  rural  con-
struction, agreed  at  the  Honolulu  Conference.  This  includes  overcoming
by  police  methods  the  criminal,  as  distinct  from  the  military  aspect  of  Viet
Cong  violence;  and  the  training  and  installation  of  health,  education  and
agricultural  workers  and  of  community  organizers.  Ambassador  Porter  will
have  the  support  of  a  small  staff  drawn  from  all  elements  of  the  U.S.  Mis-
sion, and  he  and  I  will  continue  to  have  the  help  of  General  Edward  Lans-
dale  as  senior  liaison  officer  and  adviser.  Ambassador  Porter  will  continue
to  serve  as  my  Deputy  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  but  he  will  be  relieved
as  far  as  possible  of  all  routine  duties  not  connected  with  the  Honolulu
program.  We  are  determined  that  this  program  for  peace  and  progress  shall
be  carried  forward  with  all  the  energy  and  skill  of  a  fully  coordinated  U.S.
Mission  effort,  always  with  full  recognition  that  the  basic  task  of  nation-
building  here  belongs  to  the  people  of  Viet  Nam  and  to  their  government."

I  know  that  you  appreciate  that  this  is  essentially  a  Vietnamese  program
and  that  what  Porter  would  be  supervising  would  be  the  American  end  of
it.  I  recognize  the  existence  of  the  view  that  we  must  in  effect  impose  de-
tailed plans  and  somehow  run  the  pacification  effort  ourselves.  But  I  do  not
share  it.  Nothing  durable  can  be  accomplished  that  way.

As  far  as  "administrative  rearrangement"  is  concerned,  I  would  like
Sam  Wilson  to  take  the  office  now  occupied  by  Porter,  with  the  rank  of
Minister,  and  to  serve  as  Mission  coordinator.  I  intend  to  put  Habib  in  the
office  now  occupied  by  Chadbourn  with  the  rank  of  Minister.  .  .  .

As  soon  as  I  receive  word  from  you  that  this  is  satisfactory,  I  intend  to
make  the  announcement  about  Porter.  The  other  appointments  can  be
announced  later.  LODGE

From  the  beginning.  Lodge,  who  felt  that  "a  public  announcement  was  un-
necessary" except  as  a  "clear  and  visible  sign  to  the  Vietnamese  and  to  our  own
people  that  the  Honolulu  conference  really  marks  a  new  departure,"  was  not
overly  enthusiastic  about  the  public  designation  of  his  deputy  as  being  "in  total
charge"  of  something.  The  documentation  is  virtually  nonexistent  on  the  ques-
tion of  whether  Lodge's  feelings  on  this  point  acted  as  a  constraint  on  Porter,
but  it  is  hard  to  escape  the  strong  impression  that  from  the  outset.  Lodge  was
going  along  with  the  new  authority  for  Porter  only  with  reluctance — and  that
Porter  had  to  keep  this  in  mind  whenever  he  considered  putting  heavy  pressure
on  an  agency.

Porter  also  had  his  reservations  about  his  role.  Whether  these  were  caused
by  a  feeling  that  the  Ambassador  was  not  going  to  support  him  in  showdowns
with  the  agencies,  or  whether  his  caution  came  from  some  more  basic  feelings,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  did  not,  in  the  period  between  Honolulu  and  Ma-


564 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

nila,  perform  in  his  new  role  as  the  President  and  his  senior  advisors  had  hoped.
And  thus  once  again,  at  Manila,  a  reorganization  was  approved — this  time  a
much  broader  and  far-reaching  one.

Porter's  intentions  were  accurately  foreshadowed  in  his  first  statement  to
the  Mission  Council  on  the  subject,  February  28,  1966.  He  sought  then  to  allay
the  fears  which  the  announcement  had  raised  in  the  minds  of  the  agency  chiefs
in  Vietnam:

Ambassador  Porter  described  briefly  his  new  responsibilities  as  he  sees
them  in  the  pacification/rural  development  area.  He  pointed  out  that  the
basic  idea  is  to  place  total  responsibility  on  one  senior  individual  to  pull
together  all  of  the  civil  aspects  of  revolutionary  development.  He  sees  this
primarily  as  a  coordinating  effort  and  does  not  intend  to  get  into  the  middle
of  individual  agency  activities  and  responsibilities.  As  he  and  his  staff  per-
ceive areas  which  require  attention  and  action  by  a  responsible  agency,  he
will  call  this  to  the  attention  of  that  agency  for  the  purpose  of  emphasis;
he  intends  to  suggest  rather  than  to  criticize  .  .  .  Ambassador  Porter  noted
that  the  non-priority  areas  are  still  getting  the  bulk  of  the  resources,  which
means  that  we  have  not  yet  really  concentrated  on  the  priority  areas  and
which  also  flags  the  necessity  to  bring  the  priority  areas  into  higher  focus.
He  will  have  a  great  interest  in  the  allocation  of  resources  such  as  man-
power; yet  he  recognizes  that  under  wartime  conditions  which  prevail  in
Vietnam  there  will  always  be  some  inequity.

It  is  important  to  emphasize  that  the  appointment  of  Porter  to  his  new  role
did  indeed  improve  the  organization  of  the  Mission,  and  that  Porter  did  accom-
plish some  of  the  things  that  Washington  had  hoped  he  would — but,  under  the
constraints  outlined  below,  he  did  not  get  enough  done  fast  enough  to  satisfy  the
growing  impatience  in  Washington  with  the  progress  of  the  effort.  This  im-
patience was  to  lead  to  the  second  reorganization  and  the  formation  of  the
Office  of  Civil  Operations  (OCO)  after  the  Manila  Conference.  Although  the
impatience  of  Washington  was  justified,  the  fact  is  that  under  the  new  and  limited
mandate  Porter  had,  he  did  begin  the  process  of  pulling  together  CIA,  USAID,
and  JUSPAO,  and  forcing  them  to  work  more  closely  together.  He  also  tried  to
focus  General  Lansdale's  liaison  efforts  with  General  Thang  more  closely  on
items  related  to  our  operational  objectives.  He  presented  a  new  and  vastly  im-
proved image  of  the  civilian  mission  to  the  press,  many  of  whom  came  to  regard
him  as  the  most  competent  high  official  in  the  Mission.  To  one  semi-official  ob-
server, Henry  Kissinger,  who  visited  Vietnam  first  in  October  of  1965,  and  then
returned  in  July,  1966,  the  situation  looked  substantially  improved:

The  organization  of  the  Embassy  has  been  vastly  improved  since  my  last
visit.  The  plethora  of  competing  agencies,  each  operating  their  own  pro-
gram on  the  basis  of  partly  conflicting  and  largely  uncoordinated  criteria,
has  been  replaced  bv  an  increasingly  effective  structure  under  the  ex-
tremely aole  leadership  of  Bill  Porter.  Porter  is  on  top  of  his  job.  It  would
be  idle  to  pretend  that  the  previous  confusion  is  wholly  overcome.  He  has
replaced  competition  by  coordination:  he  is  well  on  his  way  to  imposing
effective  direction  on  the  basis  of  carefully  considered  criteria.  At  least
the  basic  structure  for  progress  exists.  Where  eight  months  ago  I  hardly
knew  where  to  begin,  the  problem  now  is  how  to  translate  structure  into
performance — a  difficult  but  no  insuperable  task.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  565

Despite  Kissinger's  hopeful  words,  there  was  a  growing  tendency  in  Wash-
ington to  demand  more  out  of  the  mission  than  it  was  then  producing.  In  a  paper
written  in  August,  1966,  Robert  W.  Komer,  whose  role  in  the  re-emphasis
of  pacification  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  section,  wrote:

There  is  a  growing  consensus  that  the  US/GVN  pacification  effort  needs
to  be  stepped  up,  that  management  of  our  pacification  assets  is  not  yet  pro-
ducing an  acceptable  rate  of  return  for  our  heavy  support  investments,
and  that  pacification  operations  should  be  brought  more  abreast  of  our
developing  military  effort  against  the  NVA  and  VC  main  force.  The  Pres-
ident has  expressed  this  view,  and  so  has  Ambassador  Lodge  among  others.

Why  did  Porter  not  live  up  to  the  expectations  of  Washington?  While  the
documentation  is  weak  on  this  point,  the  following  reasons  can  be  deduced  from
the  available  evidence,  including  discussions  with  people  who  worked  in  both
Saigon  and  Washington:

1,  The  Ambassador  was  not  fully  backing  his  Deputy,  and  Porter  was  never
sure  of  Lodge's  support  in  Mission  Council  meetings,  in  telegrams,  in
discussions  with  the  agencies.  Many  senior  officials  of  the  USG,  includ-
ing the  President,  had  told  Porter  that  he  had  their  full  support,  and
that  they  expected  him  to  manage  the  Mission.  But  on  a  day-to-day
basis.  Porter  had  to  get  along  with  the  Ambassador,  who  was  still
(and  legitimately  so)  the  boss.  The  result  was  a  considerable  gap  be-
tween what  high  officials  in  Washington  considered  Porter's  mandate,
and  what  Porter  felt  he  would  be  able  to  do  without  antagonizing  the
the  Ambassador.*

2.  The  agencies  involved — AID,  USIA,  and  CIA — were  hostile  to  the  new
designation  from  the  outset.  Since  every  agency  paid  lip-service  to  the
new  role  of  the  Deputy  Ambassador,  it  is  difficult  to  document  this  fact.
But  it  is  virtually  self-evident:  since  every  agency  was  being  told  that
its  chief  representative  in  Saigon  now  worked  for  the  Deputy  Ambas-
sador, a  career  Foreign  Service  Officer,  there  was  unhappiness  with  the
system,  in  both  Saigon  and  Washington.  Men  like  the  Director  of
JUSPAO,  who  had  served  in  Vietnam  since  January  of  1964,  and  the
CIA  Station  Chief,  who  retained  a  completely  independent  communica-

*  This  problem  was  foreshadowed  in  a  remarkable  wuy  in  1963-1964.  After  visiting
Vietnam  in  December,  1963,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  sent  President  Johnson  a  memo-
randum in  which  he  pointed  out  that  the  Mission  "lacks  leadership  .  .  .  and  is  not
working  to  a  common  plan  .  .  .  My  impression  is  that  Lodge  simply  does  not  know
how  to  conduct  a  coordinated  administration  .  .  .  This  has  of  course  been  stressed
to  him  both  by  Dean  Rusk  and  myself  (and  also  by  John  McCone),  and  I  do  not
think  he  is  consciously  rejecting  our  advice;  he  has  just  operated  as  a  loner  all  his  life
and  cannot  readily  change  now.  Lodge's  newly-designated  deputy,  David  Nes,  was
with  us  and  seems  a  highly  competent  team  player.  I  have  stated  the  situation  frankly
to  him  and  he  has  said  he  would  do  all  he  could  to  constiUite  what  would  in  effect  be
an  executive  committee  operating  below  the  level  of  the  Ambassador."  It  is  fairly  well
established  that  Nes,  whatever  his  own  ability  and  shortcomings  was  unable  to  estab-
lish an  "executive  committee  operating  below  the  level  of  the  Ambassador,"  and  that,
as  a  matter  of  fact  his  every  attempt  to  move  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  Secretary
further  alienated  him  from  the  Ambassador.  The  presumed  lesson  in  the  incident  was
that  it  is  difficult  and  dangerous  to  tell  one  man's  deputy  that  he  has  to  assume  broad
responsibility  and  authority  if  the  top  man  does  not  want  this  to  happen.


566 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

tions  channel  to  Washington,  were  not  going  to  yield  any  portion  of  their
autonomy  without  some  quiet  grumbling  and  invisible  foot-dragging.  To
overcome  this  reluctance  was  not  as  easy  for  Porter  as  Washington  had
perhaps  hoped,  particularly  in  light  of  Lodge's  attitude.
3.  The  Washington  organization  did  not  parallel  the  Saigon  structure  it
was  supposed  to  support,  and  in  fact  actually  prevented  strong  and
continuous  support.  With  legitimate  legal  and  traditional  responsibilities
for  programs  overseas,  each  agency  in  Washington  was  understandably
reluctant  to  channel  their  guidance  through  the  Deputy  Ambassador,
whose  authority  did  not  seem  to  be  derived  from  the  normal  letter  of
authority  to  all  Chiefs  of  Mission  sent  by  President  Kennedy  in  1961.
The  agencies,  moreover,  also  had  a  special  problem  with  regard  to
Vietnam:  Congress  was  being  far  more  rigorous  in  its  review  of  the  Viet-
nam program  than  it  was  in  most  other  areas.  The  Moss  Subcommittee
on  Overseas  Governmental  Operations,  for  example,  was  sending  in-
vestigating teams  to  Saigon  regularly,  and  issuing  well-publicized  re-
ports criticizing  the  AID  program  across  a  broad  front.  The  Senatorial
group  that  reviews  CIA  programs  was  showing  considerable  concern
with  the  nature  and  size  of  the  cadre  and  counter-terror  programs.  And
beyond  that,  there  was  the  normal  budgetary  process,  in  which  each
agency  generally  handles  its  own  requests  through  an  extremely  com-
plex and  difficult  process.  Each  agency  was  bound  to  try  to  communicate
as  directly  as  possible  with  their  representatives  in  Saigon.  Thus,  while
some  major  conflicting  policies  which  had  previously  existed  were
ironed  out  through  the  new  system  (such  as  the  role  of  the  cadre),
many  smaller,  or  second-level  matters  contained  to  receive  the  tradi-
tional separate  agency  approach.

A  good  example  of  this  was  the  vital  issue  of  improving  village/hamlet  gov-
ernment. Although  consistently  identified  as  a  key  element  in  any  successful
pacification  program,  improving  the  war-torn  village  structure  seemed  to
escape  the  Mission  organizationally.  Responsibility  for  advice  and  assistance
to  the  GVN  Ministry  of  Interior  (later  the  Commissariat  for  Administration),
rested  with  the  USAID  Public  Administration  Division,  which  in  turn  was  at  the
third  level  of  the  USAID,  reporting  to  the  USAID  Director  only  through  an
Assistant  Director  for  Technical  Services.  Within  the  Public  Administration
Division  (PAD)  itself,  to  make  matters  worse,  improving  village/hamlet  gov-
ernment was  only  one  of  a  large  number  of  activities  for  which  PAD  was  re-
sponsible— and  in  the  eyes  of  many  traditionally-minded  professional  public
administrators,  it  did  not  automatically  come  first.

Other  issues  of  obvious  importance — such  as  budgeting,  strengthening  the
Ministry,  improving  the  National  Institute  of  Administration,  sending  oflficials
to  the  U.S.  for  participant  training — all  came  within  the  normal  PAD  program
as  outlined  in  the  AID  Country  Assistance  Program  (CAP)  for  FY  67,  and,
moreover,  they  required  more  resources,  more  Americans,  more  attention  at
high  levels  of  AID,  than  the  village/hamlet  government  problem.  When  Am-
bassador Porter  directed  AID,  in  May  of  1966,  to  begin  massive  efforts  to  im-
prove village  government,  his  orders  were  obeyed  to  the  extent  they  could  be
within  the  context  of  previous  AID  commitments.  The  result  was  a  further
stretching  of  the  already  taut  USAID  PAD  staff,  since  no  previous  commit-
ments or  programs  were  cut  back  to  provide  man  and/or  money  for  village
government.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  567

At  the  same  time,  other  sections  of  the  Mission  which  were  expected  to
support  the  renewed  emphasis  on  local  government  were  not  producing  as
requested.  JUSPAO,  asked  to  support  the  effort  with  psychological  operations,
agreed  in  principle  but  found  its  existing  list  of  priorities  basically  unchanged.
The  Embassy  Political  Section,  which  should  have  supported  the  effort  at  least
to  the  extent  of  urging  through  its  political  contacts  that  the  GVN  revitalize
the  village  structure,  simply  had  better  things  to  do.  The  CIA  was  also  asked  to
support  the  effort;  with  their  cadre  assets,  they  were  in  a  crucial  position  on  the
matter,  particularly  since  some  of  the  critics  of  the  cadre  had  stated  that  the
cadre  actually  undercut  village  government  instead  of  strengthening  it  (as  they
claimed).  Again,  the  CIA  gave  lip  service  to  the  idea,  without  making  any
significant  change  in  their  training  of  the  cadre  at  Vung  Tau.

In  this  situation,  Ambassador  Porter  tried  several  times  to  get  action,  each
time  received  enthusiastic,  but  generalized,  words  of  agreement  and  support
from  everyone,  and  finally  turned  his  attention  to  other  matters;  with  the  crush
of  business,  there  was  always  a  more  immediate  crisis.

B. WASHINGTON:  KOMER  AS  THE  BLOWTORCH

The  Warrenton  conference  had  discussed  not  only  the  reorganization  of  the
Mission  in  Saigon,  but — far  more  gingerly — the  need  for  a  more  centralized
management  of  the  effort  in  Washington.

After  the  Honolulu  conference  the  President  decided  to  take  action  to  change
the  Washington  structure  on  Vietnam,  but  not  in  quite  the  way  suggested  at
Warrenton.  While  many  people  at  Warrenton,  particularly  the  State  representa-
tive, had  hoped  that  the  President  would  designate  one  man,  with  an  interagency
staff,  as  the  overseer  of  an  integrated  political-military-diplomatic-economic  pol-
icy in  Vietnam,  the  President  decided  to  reduce  the  scope  of  the  job,  and  give
one  man  responsibility  for  what  was  coming  to  be  called  'The  Other  War."
Thus,  for  the  very  first  time,  there  would  be  a  high-ranking  official — a  Special
Assistant  to  the  President — whose  job  would  be  to  get  the  highest  possible  prior-
ity for  non-military  activities.  In  effect,  the  President  had  assured  a  place  at  the
decision  councils  in  Washington  for  someone  with  built-in  pro-pacification,  pro-
civil  side  bias.  This  was  Robert  W.  Komer,  whose  strenuous  efforts  in  the  next
few  months  were  to  earn  him  the  nickname  of  'The  Blowtorch"  (given  to  him
by  Ambassador  Lodge,  according  to  Komer).

How  much  authority  the  President  intended  to  give  Komer  is  not  clear.  It  is
quite  likely  that  the  issue  was  deliberately  left  vague,  so  as  to  see  what  authority
and  what  accomplishments  Komer  could  carve  out  of  an  ambiguous  NSAM
and  his  ready  access  to  the  President.

On  March  23,  1966 — six  weeks  after  Manila — Joseph  Califano,  Special  As-
sistant to  the  President,  sent  the  Secretary  of  Defense  an  EYES  ONLY  draft  of
the  NSAM  setting  up  Komcr's  authority.  In  the  covering  note,  Califano  said,
"We  would  be  particularly  interested  in  whatever  suggestions  you  would  have  to
strengthen  Komer's  authority."  In  response,  the  Defense  Department  (the  ac-
tual person  making  suggestion  unidentified  in  documents)  suggested  only  one
minor  change,  and  approved  the  NSAM.

The  other  departments  also  suggested  minor  changes  in  other  parts  of  the
NSAM,  and  on  March  28,  1966,  the  President  issued  it  as  NSAM  343.  It  said:

In  the  Declaration  of  Honolulu  I  renewed  our  pledge  of  common  com-
mitment with  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  to  defense


568 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

against  aggression,  to  the  work  of  social  revolution,  to  the  goal  of  free
self-government,  to  the  attack  on  hunger,  ignorance  and  disease,  and  to
the  unending  quest  for  peace.  Before  the  Honoululu  Conference  and  since,
I  have  stressed  repeatedly  that  the  war  on  human  misery  and  want  is  as
fundamental  to  the  successful  resolution  of  the  Vietnam  conflict,  as  our
military  operations  to  ward  off  aggression  ...  In  my  view,  it  is  essential
to  designate  a  specific  focal  point  for  the  direction,  coordination  and  su-
pervision in  Washington  of  U.S.  non-military  programs  relating  to  Vietnam.
I  have  accordingly  designated  Mr.  Robert  W.  Komer  as  Special  Assistant
to  me  for  carrying  out  this  responsibility.

I  have  charged  him  and  his  deputy.  Ambassador  William  Leonhart,  to
assure  that  adequate  plans  are  prepared  and  coordinated  covering  all  as-
pects of  such  programs,  and  that  they  are  promptly  and  effectively  carried
out.  The  responsibility  will  include  the  mobilization  of  U.S.  military  re-
sources in  support  of  such  programs.  He  will  also  assure  that  the  Rural
Construction/Pacification  program  and  the  programs  for  combat  force  em-
ployment and  military  operations  are  properly  coordinated.

His  functions  will  be  to  ensure  and  timely  support  of  the  U.S.  in
Saigon  on  matters  within  his  purview  .  .  .

In  addition  to  working  closely  with  the  addressee  Cabinet  officers  he
will  have  direct  access  to  me  at  all  times.

Those  CIA  activities  related  solely  to  intelligence  collection  are  not  af-
fected by  this  NSAM.

Mr.  Komer  was  in  business,  with  a  small  staff  and  a  mandate,  as  he  saw  it,  to
prod  people  throughout  the  government,  in  both  Washington  and  Saigon.  Com-
bined with  a  personality  that  journalists  called  "abrasive,"  his  mandate  resulted
in  more  pressure  being  put  on  the  civilians  associated  with  Vietnam  than  ever
before,  and  in  some  understandable  frictions.

Komer's  significance  in  the  re-emphasis  of  pacification  is  important,  and  must
be  dealt  with  briefly,  although  this  section  does  not  relate  his  story  in  detail.

First,  there  was  Komer's  influence  on  AID.  With  little  difficulty,  he  established
his  ability  to  guide  AID,  and  began  to  give  them  direct  instructions  on  both
economic  and  pacification  matters.  AID,  previously  with  limited  influence  in  the
Mission's  pacification  policy,  found  its  influence  diminished  still  further.

Of  more  significance  was  Komer's  emphasis  on  the  RD  Cadre  program,  run
by  the  CIA.  Together  with  Porter,  he  recommended  a  premature  expansion  of
the  program,  in  an  effort  to  get  the  program  moving  faster.  On  April  19,  1966,
after  his  first  trip  to  Vietnam,  Komer  told  the  President:

Cadre  Expansion.  While  the  RD  program  has  some  questionable  as-
pects, it  seems  the  most  promising  approach  yet  developed.  The  RD  minis-
try led  by  General  Thang  is  better  than  most,  and  the  Vung  Tau  and
Montagnard  training  centers  are  producing  5500  trained  men  for  inser-
tion in  59-man  teams  into  93  villages  every  15  weeks.

But  Porter  sees  even  this  rate  as  insufficient  to  keep  up  with  "the  grow-
ing military  capability  to  sweep  the  VC  out  of  key  areas."  He  urges  rapid
expansion  via  building  another  training  center  (which  he'd  like  to  get  Sea-
bees  to  build).  The  aim  is  roughly  to  double  cadre  output  from  19,000  to
39,000  trained  personnel  per  year.  He  thinks  this  rate  could  be  reached  by
end  CY  1966.  I  agree  with  Porter  and  will  press  this  concept  at  the  Wash-
ington end.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  569


Plans  were  approved,  and  construction  began  on  the  second  training  center.
But  by  the  end  of  1966  it  was  recognized  that  the  attempt  to  double  cadre
training  would  only  weaken  their  quality,  which  was  shaky  to  begin  with.  The
construction  of  the  second  center  was  abruptly  halted.  Komer  and  Porter  had
miscalculated  badly.

Komer  also  sought  to  influence  the  military  in  both  Saigon  and  Washington
to  give  more  attention  to  the  pacification  effort.

In  cables  to  Saigon — most  of  them  slugged  with  his  name,  and  thus  known  as
"Komergrams" — Komer  sought  to  prod  the  Mission  forward  on  a  wide  variety
of  programs.  One  of  his  most  recurring  themes  was  the  Chieu  Hoi  program and
in  time  his  urgings  did  contribute  to  a  more  successful  program,  with  a  high-
ranking  American  official  in  Ambassador  Porter's  office  working  on  nothing
else,  in  place  of  the  previous  ad  hoc  arrangement  between  JUSPAO  and  USAID.

Another  recurring  theme  was  refugees,  but  here  he  was  less  successful,  par-
ticularly since  the  U.S.  Mission  was  never  able  to  determine  whether  or  not  it
desired  to  stimulate  more  refugees  as  means  of  denying  the  VC  manpower.  His
cables  on  this  complex  issue  were  characterized  by  an  absence  of  objective,  but
at  least  he  was  addressing  frontally  questions  few  other  people  would  raise  at
all:

For  Porter  from  Komer:  We  here  deeply  concerned  by  growing  num-
ber of  refugees.  Latest  reports  indicate  that  as  of  31  August,  a  total  of
1,361,288  had  been  processed  ...  Of  course,  in  some  ways,  increased
flow  of  refugees  is  a  plus.  It  helps  deprive  VC  of  recruiting  potential  and
rice  growers,  and  is  partly  indicative  of  growing  peasant  desire  seek  se-
curity on  our  side.

Question  arises,  however,  of  whether  we  and  GVN  adequately  set  up
to  deal  with  increased  refugee  flow  of  this  magnitude.  AID  has  programmed
much  larger  refugee  program  for  FY  67,  but  is  it  enough?  .  .  .  Only  Mis-
sion would  have  answers,  so  intent  this  cable  is  merely  to  pose  question,
solicit  bids  for  increased  support  if  needed,  and  assure  you  I  would  do  all
possible  generate  such  support.

On  another  controversial  issue.  Land  Reform,  Komer  repeatedly  pressed  the
Mission  for  public  signs  of  progress,  but  by  the  time  he  went  out  to  Saigon  as
General  Westmoreland's  deputy  in  1967,  he — and  apparently  the  President —
were  still  unsatisfied.

But  perhaps  the  most  important  role  Komer  played  was  to  keep  the  general
subject  of  pacification  before  the  President,  to  encourage  Ambassador  Lodge  to
talk  pacification  up,  and  to  constitute  a  one-man,  full-time,  nonstop  lobby  for
pacification  within  the  USG.

After  his  first  trip  to  Vietnam,  for  example,  Komer  reported  to  the  President

*  For  example:  "Porter  from  Komer:  Highest  authorities  interested  in  stepping  up
defection  programs.  While  recognizing  limitations  Chieu  Hoi  program  and  inadequacies
GVN  administration,  program  has  achieved  impressive  results  and  shown  high  return
in  terms  modest  U.S.  support  costs.  Greatly  concerned  by  two  recent  administrative
decisions  taken  by  GVN  .  .  ."  Or:  "To  Porter  from  Komer:  USIA  eager  help  maxi-
mize success  both  Chieu  Hoi  and  RD  programs,  in  which  highest  authorities  vitally
interested  .  .  ."  Or:  "For  Mann  and  Casler  from  Komer:  Would  appreciate  your
following  through  on  coordinated  set  of  action  proposals  to  energize  lagging  Chieu  Hoi
program  .  .  .  We  are  concerned  about  drop-off  in  returnees  since  April  .  .  .  Bell  and
Marks  concur."


570 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

that  "while  our  splendid  military  effort  is  going  quite  well,  our  civil  programs
lag  behind  ...  To  achieve  the  necessary  results,  we  must  ourselves  give  higher
priority  to  (and  expand)  certain  key  pacification  programs,  especially  cadres  and
police — //  necessary  at  some  expense  to  the  military  effort."

Komer's  memorandum  constitutes  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  informa-
tion and  suggestions  reaching  the  President  and  his  senior  advisors  on  Vietnam,
and  the  intention  of  this  paper  is  not  to  suggest  that  they  were  in  any  sense
definitive  documents  which  show  the  direction  of  U.S.  strategy  in  Vietnam.  But
it  seems  clear  that  Komer  was  the  first  senior  official  in  Washington  to  make  a
major  effort  to  put  pacification  near  the  top  of  our  combined  civil-military  effort,
and  that  he  had  a  particularly  advantageous  spot  from  which  to  try.  He  had
authorized  back-channel  communications  with  the  Ambassador  and  Deputy
Ambassador  in  Saigon,  apparent  access  to  the  President,  and  the  umbrella  of  the
White  House.

His  memoranda  to  the  President  over  his  year  in  Washington  showed  con-
siderable change  in  thinking  on  many  issues,  but  a  consistent  support  for  more
pacification.  A  small  sample  is  revealing:

Key  aspects  of  pacification  deserve  highest  priority — and  greater  em-
phasis. Unless  we  and  the  GVN  can  secure  and  hold  the  countryside  cleared
by  military  operations,  we  either  face  an  ever  larger  and  quasi-permanent
military  commitment  or  risk  letting  the  VC  infiltrate  again  ...  I  person-
ally favor  more  attention  to  the  Delta  (IV  Corps)  region,  which  contains
eight  out  of  Vietnam's  15  million  people  and  is  its  chief  rice  bowl  .  .  .
Clearly  we  must  dovetail  the  military's  sweep  operations  and  civil  pacifica-
tion. My  impression  is  that,  since  the  military  are  moving  ahead  faster  than
the  civil  side  we  need  to  beef  up  the  latter  to  get  it  in  phase.  There's  little
point  in  the  military  clearing  areas  the  civil  side  can't  pacify.  On  the  other
hand,  security  is  the  key  to  pacification;  people  won't  cooperate  and  the
cadre  can't  function  till  an  area  is  secure  .  .  .

Somehow  the  civil  side  appears  reluctant  to  call  on  military  resources,
which  are  frequently  the  best  and  most  readily  available.  I  put  everyone
politely  on  notice  that  I  would  have  no  such  hesitations — provided  that  the
case  was  demonstrable — and  that  this  was  the  express  request  of  the  Sec-
retary of  Defense.  [Cited  Supra.]

In  August  of  1966,  Komer  produced  the  longest  of  his  papers,  and  the  one
he  considered  his  most  important.  Its  title  was  "Giving  a  New  Thrust  to  Pacifi-
cation." In  addition  to  discussing  the  substance  of  pacification,  the  paper  made
some  further  organizational  suggestions,  which  clearly  foreshadowed  the  second
reorganization  of  the  Mission  which  took  place  after  the  Manila  conference.  It
is  worth  quoting  in  some  length  (all  italics  are  part  of  the  original) :

There  is  a  growing  consensus  that  the  US  GVN  pacification  effort
needs  to  be  stepped  up,  that  management  of  our  pacification  assets  is  not
yet  producing  an  acceptable  rate  of  return  for  our  heavy  investments,  and
that  pacitication  operations  should  be  brought  more  abreast  of  our  develop-
ing military  effort  against  the  NVA  and  VC  main  force.  The  President  has
expressed  this  view,  and  so  has  Ambassador  Lodge  among  others.
I.  What  is  pacification?  In  one  sense,  "pacification"  can  be  used  to
encompass  the  whole  of  the  military,  political,  and  civil  effort  in  Vietnam.
But  the  term  needs  to  be  narrowed  down  for  operational  purposes,  and  can
be  reasonably  well  separated  out  as  a  definable  problem  area.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  571

If  we  divide  the  US/GVN  problem  into  four  main  components,  three
of  them  show  encouraging  progress.  The  campaign  against  the  major  VC/
NVA  units  is  in  high  gear,  the  constitutional  process  seems  to  be  evolving
favorably,  and  we  expect  to  contain  inflation  while  meeting  most  needs  of
the  civil  economy.  But  there  is  a  fourth  problem  area,  that  of  securing  the
countryside  and  getting  the  peasant  involved  in  the  struggle  against  the
Viet  Cong,  where  we  are  lagging  way  behind.  It  is  this  problem  area  which
I  would  term  pacification  .  .  .

At  the  risk  of  over-simplification,  I  see  management  of  the  pacification
problem  as  involving  three  main  sub-tasks:  (1)  providing  locai  security  in
the  countryside — essentially  a  military /police/cadre  task;  (2)  breaking  the
hold  of  the  VC  over  the  people;  and  (3)  positive  programs  to  win  the  active
support  of  the  rural  population.

.  .  .  Few  argue  that  we  can  assure  success  in  Vietnam  without  also  win-
ning the  "village  war."  Chasing  the  large  units  around  the  boondocks  still
leaves  intact  the  VC  infrastructure,  with  its  local  guerrilla  capability  plus
the  weapons  of  terror  and  intimidation  ...  So  winning  the  "village  war"
which  I  will  loosely  call  pacification,  seems  an  indispensable  ingredient  of
any  high-confidence  strategy  and  a  necessary  precaution  to  close  the  guer-
rilla option.

.  .  .  Yet  another  reason  for  stressing  pacification  is  that  the  U.S.  is  sup-
porting a  lot  of  assets  in  being  which  are  at  the  moment  poorly  employed.
Even  the  bulk  of  ARVN,  which  increasingly  sits  back  and  watches  the  U.S.
take  over  the  more  difficult  parts  of  the  war  against  main  enemy  units  and
bases,  might  be  more  efi'ectively  used  for  this  purpose  .  .  .  Thus,  even  if
one  contends  that  pacification  as  I  have  defined  it  is  not  vital  to  a
win  strategy,  stepping  up  this  effort  would  add  little  to  present  costs  and
might  produce  substantial  pay  offs.

Beyond  this,  the  time  is  psychologically  ripe  for  greater  emphasis  on
pacification.  South  Vietnamese  confidence  is  growing  as  the  U.S.  turns
the  tide.  New  US/FW  military  forces  are  arriving  to  reinforce  the
campaign  against  the  main  force;  their  presence  will  release  much  needed
assets  to  pacification.  The  GVN,  fresh  from  success  against  the  Buddhist
led  struggle  and  confidently  facing  an  election  process  leading  toward  a
constitution,  also  has  been  making  the  kind  of  tough  decisions — devalua-
tion, turnover  of  the  Saigon  port  to  military  management,  etc. — that  will
be  needed  in  pacification,  too.

In  sum,  the  assets  are  available,  and  the  time  is  ripe  for  an  increased
push  to  win  the  "village  war."

III.  What  is  Holding  Up  the  Pacification  Efforts?  The  long  history  of  the
Vietnam  struggle  is  replete  with  efforts  to  secure  the  countryside.  Most  of
them,  like  Diem's  strategic  hamlet  program,  proved  abortive.  .  .  .  Some
of  the  chief  difficulties  we  confront  are  suggested  below:

A.  We  had  to  go  after  the  major  VC/NVA  units  first  ...  It  was  a
matter  of  first  things  first  .  .  .

B.  The  VC/NVA  have  been  able  to  select  the  weakest  point  in  any  em-
bryonic GVN  pacification  effort  and  destroy  it  with  a  lightening  attack  .  .  .

C.  There  are  inherent  difficulties  in  the  pacification  process  itself  .  .  .

D.  Lack  of  high  quality  assets.  Pacification  has  also  had  to  take  a  back
seat  in  the  sense  that  it  generally  gets  only  the  lowest  grade  GVN  assets —
and  not  enough  of  these  .  .  .

E.  Last  but  not  least,  neither  the  U.S.  nor  the  GVN  have  as  yet  developed


572 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

an  adequate  plan,  program,  or  management  structure  for  dealing  with  paci-
fication .  .  .

1.  The  JCS  and  MACV  are  so  preoccupied,  however  justifiably,  with
operations  against  the  major  VC/NVA  units  that  they  are  not  able  to  pay
enough  attention  to  the  local  security  aspects  of  pacification  .  .  .

2.  There  is  no  unified  civil/military  direction  within  the  GVN  .  .  .

3.  A  similar  divided  responsibility  prevails  on  the  U.S.  side  .  .  .

4.  Nor  does  there  yet  appear  to  be  a  well-understood  chain  of  command
from  Porter  even  to  the  civilians  operating  in  the  field  .  .  .

5.  There  is  no  integrated  civil/military  plan  for  pacification  on  either
the  U.S.  or  GVN  side  .  .  .

IV.  How  do  we  step  up  Pacification?  ...  It  demands  a  multifaceted  civil-
military  response  .  .  .

A.  Provide  more  adequate,  continuous  security  for  the  locales  in  which
pacification  is  taking  place.  This  is  the  essential  prerequisite.  None  of  our
civil  programs  in  the  countryside  can  be  expected  to  be  eflfective  unless  the
area  is  reasonably  secure.  Nor,  unless  the  people  are  protected,  and  their
attitudes  likely  to  change  in  favor  of  the  GVN  ...  To  provide  security  re-
quires the  assignment  on  a  long  term  basis  of  enough  assets  to  defeat  these
resident  VC  companies  and  battalions,  in  addition  to  providing  24-hour
security  to  the  people  until  they  are  able  to  assist  in  providing  their  own
protection.  This  is  primarily  the  task  of  RF  and  PF,  supported  by  the  RD
cadres  and  police  .  .  .  Some  knowledgeable  experts  contend  that  even  if  we
improve  the  .  .  .  RF,  PF,  police,  and  cadre,  they  are  together  insufficiently
to  extend  local  security  much  beyond  existing  secured  areas.  They  feel  that
lacking  mobility  and  heavy  firepower,  those  forces  must  be  thickened  with  a
liberal  sprinkling  of  regular  ARVN  units  working  in  the  area  outside  the  im-
mediate area  undergoing  pacification.  I  do  not  suggest  that  ARVN  regulars
gainfully  employed  in  battle  against  the  enemy  main  forces  be  so  diverted.
/  do  urge  that  those  ARVN  forces  not  now  fully  engaged — a  substantial
fraction  of  the  total  be  used  to  contribute  directly  to  improving  local  se-
curity.

B.  We  must  devote  more  effort  to  breaking  the  hold  of  the  VC  over  the
people  .  .  .

C.  Carry  out  positive  revolutionary  development  programs  to  win  active
popular  support.  The  cliche  of  winning  support  by  offering  the  people  a
better  life  through  a  series  of  interrelated  RD  programs  has  great  relevance
in  Vietnam  .  .  .

D.  Establish  functioning  priorities  for  pacification  .  .  .

E.  Better  Area  Priorities  ...  A  greater  stress  on  pacification  logically
means  greater  stress  on  the  Delta  .  .  .

F.  Concentrate  additional  resources  on  pacification  .  .  .  Arguments  made
in  the  past  that  pacification  is  a  delicate  subject  to  be  approached  only  with
care  and  precision  have  lost  some  of  their  relevance  as  the  intensity  of  war-
fare has  increased  .  .  .  Increase:

Police  .  .  .
RD  Cadre  .  .  .

Material  Support  for  Pacification  .  .  .
The  U.S.  Agricultural  Effort  .  .  .
Chieu  Hoi  .  .  .

Village  Hamlet  Administration  .  .  .

G.  Set  more  performance  goals  .  .  .


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  573

H.  Rapidly  extend  the  security  of  key  roads  .  .  .
I.  Systematize  the  flow  of  refugees  .  .  .
J.  Get  better  control  over  rice  .  .  .
V.  How  can  Pacification  be  Managed  More  Effectively?

A.  Restructuring  the  GVN  .  .  .

— Place  the  RD  and  PF  under  the  RD  Military  .  .  .

— Establish  a  single  line  of  command  to  the  province  chiefs  .  .  .

— Remove  the  Division  from  the  pacification  chain  of  command  .  .  .

— Strengthen  the  authority  of  the  Province  Chiefs  .  .  .

— Appoint  civilian  chiefs  in  selected  provinces  and  districts  .  .  .

B.  Parallel  strengthening  of  the  structure  is  essential.  U.S.  leadership
has  often  sparked  major  pacification  steps  by  the  GVN.  The  structure  for
managing  pacification  advice  to  the  GVN,  and  direct  U.S.  mihtary/civiUan
support,  have  evolved  slowly  as  the  U.S.  contributions  have  grown.  Once
it  was  possible  to  coordinate  the  U.S.  pacification  effort  through  an  inter-
agency committee  for  strategic  hamlets.  Later  the  Mission  Council  con-
cept was  used  extensively.  In  the  wake  of  the  Honolulu  Conference,  the
President  appointed  Ambassador  Porter  to  take  charge  of  the  non-military
effort  in  Vietnam.  Several  highly  qualified  people  now  give  Porter  the
nucleus  of  a  coordination  and  operations  staff.  However  .  .  .  the  U.S.
management  structure  must  be  strengthened  considerably  more.

There  are  three  basic  alternatives,  each  building  on  the  present  structure,
which  could  provide  the  needed  result.  Two  of  them  are  based  on  the
principle  of  a  "single  manager"  over  both  civilian  and  military  assets  by  as-
signing command  responsibility  either  to  Porter  or  Westmoreland.  The  third
accepts  a  continued  division  between  the  civil  and  military  sides  for  nu-
merous practical  reasons,  but  calls  for  strengthening  the  management
structure  of  both.

Alternative  No.  1 — Give  Porter  operational  control  over  all  U.S.  pacifi-
cation activity  .  .  .

Alternative  No.  2 — Retain  the  present  separate  civil  and  military  com-
mand channels  but  strengthen  the  management  structure  of  both  MACV
and  the  U.S.  Mission.  This  option,  recognizing  the  practical  difficulties  of
putting  U.S.  civilian  and  military  personnel  under  a  single  chief,  would  be
to  settle  for  improved  coordination  at  the  Saigon  level.

To  facilitate  improved  coordination,  however,  it  would  require
strengthening  the  organization  for  pacification  within  MACV  and  the
U.S.  Mission.  MACV  disposes  of  by  far  the  greater  number  of  Americans
working  on  pacification  in  the  field.  It  has  advisory  teams  spending  most
of  their  time  on  pacification  in  200  out  of  230  districts  and  in  all  43  prov-
inces. These  teams— not  counting  advisors  at  division,  corps  and  all  tactical
units  down  to  battalion — number  about  2000  men  compared  with  about
one-eighth  this  number  from  all  other  U.S.  agencies  combined.

However,  the  senior  officer  in  MACV  dealing  with  pacification  as  his
principal  function  is  now  a  colonel  heading  the  J33  staff  division.  More-
over, with  400,000  U.S.  troops  soon  to  be  committed.  General  Westmore-
land, his  subordinate  commianders,  and  his  principal  staff  officers  must
spend  increasing  time  on  military  operations  associated  with  defeating  the
VC/NVA  main  formations.  Therefore,  management  of  the  tremendous
advisory  resources  with  MACV  inevitably  suffers  regardless  of  General
Westmoreland's  personal  effort  to  give  balanced  attention  to  both.

Hence  there  might  be  merit  in  COMUSMACV  having  a  senior  deputy


574 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II

to  manage  pacification  within  MACV  and  pacification  advice  to  the  JCS,
as  well  as  throughout  the  Vietnamese  military  chain  of  command.  Key  staff
sections,  such  as  J33,  Polwar  Directorate,  Senior  Advisor  for  RF/PF,
could  be  controlled  by  a  chief  of  staff  for  pacification  responsive  to  the
Deputy.  Advisory  teams  at  corps  and  division  would  receive  guidance  and
orders  on  pacification  from  the  Deputy.  Province  and  district  advisors
would  receive  all  orders,  except  routine  administrative  instructions,  through
the  pacification  channel.

To  parallel  the  MACV  organization  and  provide  a  single  point  of  liaison
on  the  civil  side,  Ambassador  Porter  should  have  his  own  field  operations
office  formed  by  merging  USAID  Field  Operations,  JUSPAO  Field  Services
and  CAS  Covert  Action  Branch.  Control  over  the  people  assigned  would
be  removed,  as  in  Alternative  No.  1,  from  their  parent  agency.  All  civilian
field  personnel  in  the  advisory  business  would  also  receive  their  guidance
and  orders  from  the  Deputy  Ambassador.

For  this  dual  civilian-military  system  to  operate  effectively,  the  closest
coordination  would  be  required  between  the  offices  of  the  MACV  Deputy
and  the  Deputy  Ambassador.  Since  it  is  difficult  and  dangerous  to  separate
military  and  civilian  aspects  of  pacification  at  the  province  level,  most
policy  guidance  and  instructions  to  the  provinces  hopefully  would  be  issued
jointly  and  be  received  by  the  senior  military  and  civilian  advisors  who
would  then  develop  their  plans  together.

I  would  still  favor  a  single  civil/military  team  chief  in  the  province,  even
though  he  would  have  two  bosses  in  Saigon  talking  to  him  through  different
and  parallel  chains  of  command.  Alternatively,  since  MACV  already  has  a
senior  advisor  in  each  province,  it  would  be  possible  similarly  to  assign
a  single  civilian  as  the  Vietnamese  province  chief's  point  of  contact  on  all
non-military  matters.  All  other  civilians  in  the  province  would  be  under
his  control.

Alternative  No.  3 — Assign  responsibility  for  pacification  civil  and  mil-
itary, to  COMUSMACV.  This  is  not  a  new  suggestion,  and  has  a  lot  to
recommend  it.  In  1964,  General  Westmoreland  proposed  that  he  be  made
"executive  agent"  for  pacification.  MACV  at  that  time  had  an  even  greater
preponderance  of  field  advisors  than  it  does  today,  and  was  devoting  the
bulk  of  its  attention  to  pacification.  Since  the  military  still  has  by  far  the
greatest  capacity  among  U.S.  agencies  in  Vietnam  for  management  and
the  military  advisors  outnumber  civilians  at  least  8  to  1  in  the  field,  MACV
could  readily  take  on  responsibility  for  all  pacification  matters.

Turning  over  the  entire  pacification  management  task  to  COMUSMACV
would  require  him  to  reorganize  his  staff  to  handle  simultaneously  the
very  large  military  operations  business  involving  U.S.,  Free  World  and  Viet-
namese forces  and  the  civil  military  aspects  of  pacification  at  the  same
time.  The  USAID,  JUSPAO,  and  CAS  Covert  Operations  staffs  would
come  under  COMUSMACV's  control  where  they  would  be  used  as  ad-
ditional "component  commands.""  In  this  case,  it  might  be  desirable  to  have
a  civilian  deputy  to  COMUSMACV  for  pacification.

Also  appropriate  under  this  concept  would  be  a  single  U.S.  advisory
team,  under  a  team  chief,  at  each  subordinate  echelon.  The  result  would
be  a  single  chain  of  command  to  the  field  and  coordinated  civilian/military
pacification  planning  and  operations  on  the  U.S.  side.  The  U.S.  Mission
would  speak  to  Vietnamese  corps  and  division  commanders,  province  chiefs
and  district  chiefs  with  a  single  voice.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  575

In  the  latter  part  of  this  lengthy  memorandum,  Komer  clearly  foreshadowed
both  the  formation  of  OCO  after  the  Manila  conference — his  Alternative  No.
2 — and  the  merger  of  OCO  and  MACV  into  MACCORDS  after  Guam — his
Alternative  No.  3.  But  when  he  sent  the  paper  to  Saigon  with  his  deputy  in
mid-August,  the  reaction  from  Lodge,  Porter,  and  Westmoreland  was  uniformly
negative:  they  asked  him,  in  effect,  to  leave  them  alone  since  they  were  satisfied
with  their  present  organization.

But  Komer  had  also  distributed  his  paper  around  Washington,  and  was  lobby-
ing for  another  change  in  the  structure  of  the  Mission,  although  he  remained,
in  August,  vague  as  to  which  of  the  three  alternatives  he  put  forward  he  per-
sonally favored.  When  other  senior  officials  of  government  began  to  voice  feel-
ings that  additional  organizational  changes  were  necessary  in  the  Mission  in
Saigon,  the  die  was  cast.

Another  major  attribute  of  Komer  was  his  strong  public  and  private  optimism.
He  produced  for  any  journalist  willing  to  hear  him  out  facts  and  figures  that
suggested  strongly  that  the  war  was  not  only  winnable,  but  being  won  at  an  ac-
celerating pace.

To  the  President  he  sounded  the  same  theme:

After  almost  a  year  full-time  in  Vietnam,  and  six  trips  there,  I  felt  able
to  learn  a  good  deal  more  from  my  11  days  in  country,  13-23  February.  /
return  more  optimistic  than  ever  before.  The  cumulative  change  since  my
first  visit  last  April  is  dramatic,  if  not  yet  visibly  demonstrable  in  all  re-
spects. Indeed,  I'll  reaffirm  even  more  vigorously  my  prognosis  of  last
November  (which  few  shared  then)  that  growing  momentum  would  be
achieved  in  1967  on  almost  every  front  in  Vietnam.

Komer  believed  in  the  concept  of  "sheer  mass" — that  in  time  we  would  just
overwhelm  the  Viet  Cong:

Wastefully,  expensively,  but  nonetheless  indisputably,  we  are  winning
the  war  in  the  South.  Few  of  our  programs — civil  or  military — are  very
efficient,  but  we  are  grinding  the  enemy  down  by  sheer  weight  and  mass.
And  the  cumulative  impact  of  all  we  have  set  in  motion  is  beginning  to
tell.  Pacification  still  lags  the  most,  yet  even  it  is  moving  forward.

Indeed,  my  broad  feeling,  with  due  allowance  for  over-simplification,  is
that  our  side  now  has  in  presently  programmed  levels  all  the  men,  money
and  other  resources  needed  to  achieve  success  .  .  .

In  summary,  Komer's  13  months  in  Washington  were  spent  steadily  raising
the  priority  of  the  pacification  and  other  non-military  efforts  in  Vietnam.  While
he  never  was  in  a  controlling  position  within  the  Washington  bureaucracy,  he
succeeded  in  making  those  who  were  more  aware  of  the  "other  war"  (a  term
he  used  continually  until  Ambassador  Bunker  announced  in  May  of  1967  that
he  did  not  recognize  that  there  was  such  a  thing).  While  it  can  be  no  more  than
speculation,  it  would  also  appear  that  Komer  played  an  important  role  in  insert-
ing into  high-level  discussions,  including  Presidential  discussions,  the  pacifica-
tion priority.  Thus,  when  General  Westmoreland  visited  the  President  at  the
LBJ  ranch  in  August,  1966,  Komer  put  before  the  President  a  series  of  paci-
fication-related subjects  to  be  used  during  the  discussions.  This  happened  again
at  Manila,  where  some  of  the  points  in  final  communique  were  similar  to  things
Komer  had  been  pushing  earlier,  as  outlined  in  his  August  memorandum.


576 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


C STUDY  GROUPS  AND  STRATEGISTS:  SUMMER  1966

In  the  aftermath  of  Honolulu,  task  forces  and  study  groups  were  suddenly
assembling,  producing  papers  on  priorities,  on  organization  of  the  Mission,  on
the  role  and  mission  of  various  forces.  They  were  all  manifestations  of  the  new
mood  that  had  come  over  the  Mission  and  Washington  on  pacification.  The
advocates  of  pacification — with  their  widely  differing  viewpoints — all  saw  their
chance  again  to  put  forward  their  own  concepts  to  a  newly  interested  bureauc-
racy, starting  with  Komer  and  Porter.

The  most  important  of  the  numerous  studies  were :

1.  The  Program  for  the  Pacification  and  Long-Term  Development  of  South
Vietnam  (Short  Title:  PROVN) — commissioned  by  the  Army  Chief
of  Staff  in  July  of  1965,  completed  and  submitted  in  March  1966;

2.  The  Priorities  Task  Force — formed  in  Saigon  in  April  1966  by  Deputy
Ambassador  Porter,  completed  in  July  1966;

3.  The  Inter-Agency  "Roles  and  Missions"  Study  Group — formed  by  Por-
ter in  July  1966,  completed  in  August.

While  the  recommendations  of  these  studies  were  never  accepted  in  toto,  they
all  play  key  roles  in  the  development  of  strategic  thinking  in  Washington  and
Sa'gon  during  the  latter  part  of  1966,  and  they  continue  to  be  influential  today.

PROVN- — As  early  as  the  summer  of  1965,  General  Johnson  saw  the  need
to  select  a  superior  group  of  officers,  and  set  them  to  work  on  a  long-term  study
of  the  problem  in  Vietnam.  The  study  was  intended  for  internal  Army  use,  and
was  for  a  while  after  its  completion  treated  with  such  delicacy  that  Army  officers
were  forbidden  even  to  discuss  its  existence  outside  DOD.  This  was  unfortunate,
because  in  content  it  was  far-ranging  and  thoughtful,  and  set  a  precedent  for
responsible  forward  planning  and  analysis  which  should  be  duplicated  in  other
fields.

PROVN  was  charged  with  "developing  new  sources  of  action  to  be  taken  in
South  Vietnam  by  the  United  States  and  its  allies,  which  will,  in  conjunction
with  current  actions,  modified  as  necessary,  lead  in  due  time  to  successful  ac-
complishment of  U.S.  aims  and  objectives."  With  this  broad  mandate,  PROVN
staff  spent  eight  months  questioning  returning  ofiJicers  from  Vietnam,  studying
the  history  of  the  country,  drawing  parallels  with  other  countries,  analyzing
the  structure  of  the  U.S.  Mission;  and  making  recommendations.  In  the  end,  the
PROVN  team  decided  that  there  was  "no  unified  effective  pattern"  to  the  then-
current  efforts  in  Vietnam,  and  submitted  a  broad  blueprint  for  action.  Its
thesis  was  simple:

The  situation  in  South  Vietnam  has  seriously  deteriorated.  1966  may
well  be  the  last  chance  to  ensure  eventual  success.  "Victory"  can  only  be
achieved  through  bringing  the  individual  Vietnamese,  typically  a  rural  peas-
ant, to  support  willingly  the  GVN.  The  critical  actions  are  those  that  occur
at  the  village,  district,  and  provincial  levels.  This  is  where  the  war  must  be
fought;  this  is  where  that  war  and  the  object  which  lies  beyond  it  must  be
won.  The  following  are  the  most  important  specific  actions  required  now:

Concentrate  U.S.  operations  on  the  provincial  level  to  include  the
delegation  of  command  authority  over  U.S.  operations  to  the  Senior  U.S.
Representative  at  the  provincial  level.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  577

Reaffirm  Rural  Construction  as  the  foremost  US/GVN  combined  ef-
fort to  solidify  and  extend  GVN  influence.

Authorize  more  direct  U.S.  involvement  in  GVN  affairs  at  those  ad-
ministrative levels  adequate  to  ensure  the  accomplishment  of  critical
programs.

Delegate  to  the  U.S.  Ambassador  unequivocal  authority  as  the  sole
manager  of  all  U.S.  activities,  resources,  and  personnel  in-country.

Direct  the  Ambassador  to  develop  a  single  integrated  plan  for  achiev-
ing U.S.  objectives  in  SVN.

Reaffirm  to  the  world  at  large  the  precise  terms  of  the  ultimate  U.S.
objective  as  stated  in  NSAM  288:  A  free  and  independmt  non-com-
munist South  Vietnam  .  .  .

Beyond  this  frank  and  direct  summary,  the  study  had  hundreds  of  recom-
mendations, ranging  from  the  specific  and  realizable  to  the  vague  and  hortatory.

In  summary,  the  PROVN  w^as  a  major  step  forward  in  thinking.  Although  as
mentioned  above,  its  value  was  reduced  for  a  long  time  by  the  restrictions  placed
on  its  dissemination,  the  candor  with  which  it  addressed  matters  was  probably
possible  only  because  it  originated  within  a  single  service,  and  thus  did  not  re-
quire the  concurrences  of  an  inter-agency  study.

For  example,  the  PROVN  study  addressed  directly  a  point  of  such  poten-
tial embarrassment  to  the  U.S.  Government  that  it  is  quite  likely  an  inter-agency
group  would  not  have  addressed  it  except  perhaps  in  oblique  terms:

A  PROVN  survey  .  .  .  revealed  that  no  two  agencies  of  the  U.S.  Gov-
ernment viewed  our  objectives  in  the  same  manner.  Failure  to  use  that  un-
equivocal statement  of  our  fundamental  objective — a  free  and  independent,
non-communist  South  Vietnam — set  forth  in  NSAM  288,  hinders  effective
inter-agency  coordination  and  the  integrated  application  of  U.S.  support
efforts.

As  for  the  study's  "highest  priority"  activities,  PROVN  recommended:

(1)  Combat  Operations — the  bulk  of  U.S.  and  FWMA  Forces  and
designated  RVNAF  units  should  be  directed  against  enemy  base  areas  and
against  their  lines  of  communication  in  SVN,  Laos,  and  Cambodia  as
required;  the  remainder  of  Allied  force  assets  must  ensure  adequate
momentum  to  activity  in  priority  Rural  Construction  areas.

(2)  Rural  Construction — in  general,  the  geographic  priorities  should
be,  in  order,  the  Delta,  the  Coastal  Lowlands,  and  the  Highlands;  currently
the  highest  priority  areas  are  the  densely  populated  and  rich  resource  Delta
provinces  of  An  Giang,  Vinh  Long,  Dinh  Tuong,  Go  Cong,  and  the  Hop
Tac  area  surrounding  Saigon.

(3)  Economic  Stability — current  emphasis  must  be  directed  toward
curbing  inflation  and  reducing  the  excessive  demands  for  skilled  and  semi-
skilled labor  imposed  upon  an  over-strained  economy  .  .  .

On  the  management  of  the  United  States  effort — which  PROVN  found  ex-
tremely poor — the  recommendation  was  to  create  a  single  manager  system,
with  the  Ambassador  in  charge  of  all  assets  in  Vietnam  and  the  mission  of  pro-
ducing a  single  integrated  plan.  PROVN  suggested  major  steps  in  the  direction
of  giving  the  Ambassador  a  stronger  hold  over  the  military.


578 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Of  greatest  importance — aside  from  the  reorganizational  suggestions — was
the  PROVN  conclusion  on  the  supremacy  of  Rural  Construction  activities  over
everything  else:

Rural  Construction  must  be  designated  unequivocally  as  the  major  US/
GVN  effort.  It  will  require  the  commitment  of  a  preponderance  of  RVNAF
and  GVN  paramilitary  forces,  together  with  adequate  U.S.  support  and
coordination  and  assistance.  Without  question,  village  and  hamlet  security
must  be  achieved  throughout  Vietnam  .  .  .  RC  is  the  principal  means
available  to  broaden  the  allied  base,  provide  security,  develop  political  and
military  leadership,  and  provide  necessary  social  reform  to  the  people  .  .  .

To  this  end,  PROVN  suggested  a  division  of  responsibility  among  the  forces:

The  need  to  sustain  security  pervades  every  ramification  of  RC  .  .  .  The
various  forces  capable  of  providing  this  environment  must  be  unified  .  .  .
at  the  province  level.  They  must  include  the  ARVN  as  a  major  component
— as  many  of  its  battle-tested  units  as  can  possibly  be  devoted  to  this  mis-
sion. These  integrated  national  security  forces  must  be  associated  and  inter-
mingled with  the  people  on  a  long-term  basis.  Their  capacity  to  establish
and  maintain  public  order  and  stability  must  be  physically  and  continuously
credible.  The  key  to  achieving  such  security  lies  in  the  conduct  of  effective
area  saturation  tactics,  in  and  around  populated  areas,  which  deny  VC
encroachment  opportunities.

Finally,  the  study  advocated  a  far  stronger  system  of  leverage  for  American
advisors  in  the  field — "mechanisms  for  exerting  U.S.  influence  must  be  built
into  the  U.S.  organization  and  its  methods  of  operation."

The  PROVN  study  concluded  with  a  massive  "Blueprint  for  National  Action"
which  was  never  implemented.  But  the  influence  of  the  study  was  substantial.
Within  the  Army  staff,  a  responsible  and  select  group  of  officers  had  recom-
mended top  priority  for  pacification.  Even  if  the  Army  staff  still  rejected  parts
of  the  study,  they  were  on  notice  that  a  study  had  been  produced  within  the
staff  which  suggested  a  substantial  revision  of  priorities.

The  PROVN  study  had  some  major  gaps.  Proceeding  from  the  unstated  as-
sumption that  our  commitment  in  Vietnam  had  no  implicit  time  limits,  it  pro-
posed a  strategy  which  it  admitted  would  take  years — perhaps  well  into  the
1970's — to  carry  out.  It  did  not  examine  alternative  strategies  that  might  be
derived  from  a  shorter  time  limit  on  the  war.  In  fact,  the  report  made  no  mention
of  one  of  the  most  crucial  variables  in  the  Vietnam  equation — U.S.  public  sup-
port for  the  Administration.

Further,  the  report  did  little  to  prove  that  Vietnam  was  ready  for  pacifica-
tion. This  "fact"  was  taken  for  granted,  it  seems — a  fault  common  to  most
American-produced  pacification  plans.  While  PROVN  did  suggest  geographic
priorities,  they  were  derived  not  even  in  part  from  the  area's  receptivity
to  pacification  but  exclusively  from  the  location  and  strategic  importance  of  the
area.  Thus,  the  same  sort  of  error  made  in  Hop  Tac  was  being  repeated
in  PROVN's  suggestions.

MACV  analyzed  the  report  in  May  of  1966,  calling  it  "an  excellent  over-all
approach  in  developing  organization,  concepts  and  policies  .  .  ."  In  a  lengthy
analysis  of  PROVN,  MACV  cabled:


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  579

As  seen  here,  PROVN  recommends  two  major  initiatives  essential  to
achieving  U.S.  objectives  in  South  Vietnam:  creation  of  an  organization  to
integrate  total  U.S.  civil-miHtary  effort,  and  exercise  of  greatly  increased
\  direct  U.S.  involvement  in  GVN  activities.

'  MACV  has  long  recognized  need  for  the  greatest  possible  unity  of  effort

to  gain  U.S.  objectives  in  South  Vietnam.  MACV  agrees  with  PROVN
concept  to  achieve  full  integration  of  effort  in  attaining  U.S.  objectives  in
South  Vietnam.  Evolution  of  U.S.  organization  in  Saigon  is  heading  towards
this  goal.  Deputy  Ambassador  now  has  charge  of  revolutionary  and  eco-
nomic development  programs  and  MACV  is  charged  with  military  pro-
grams. In  addition,  special  task  force  has  been  established  by  Deputy
Ambassador  to  draft  mission-wide  statement  of  strategy,  objectives,  and
priorities.  In  effect,  this  task  force  is  engaged  in  integrated  planning  which
under  PROVN  concept  would  be  performed  by  supra-agency  staff.
PROVN  proposal  for  designation  of  a  single  manager  with  supra-staff  is
a  quantum  jump  to  achieve  the  necessary  degree  of  military-civil  integra-
tion. This  final  step  cannot  be  implemented  by  evolutions  here  in  Saigon.
It  would  have  to  be  directed  and  supervised  from  highest  level  in  Washing-
ton.

MACV  is  in  complete  agreement  with  PROVN  position  that  immediate
and  substantially  increased  United  States  direct  involvement  in  GVN
activities  in  form  of  constructive  influence  and  manipulation  is  essential
to  achievement  of  U.S.  objectives  in  Vietnam.  PROVN  emphasizes  that
"leverage  must  originate  in  terms  of  reference  established  by  government
agreement,"  and  "leverage,  in  all  its  implications,  must  be  understood  by
the  Vietnamese  if  it  is  to  become  an  effective  tool."  The  direct  involvement
and  leverage  envisioned  by  PROVN  could  range  from  skillful  diplomatic
pressure  to  U.S.  unilateral  execution  of  critical  programs.  MACV  considers
that  there  is  a  great  danger  that  the  extent  of  involvement  envisioned  could
become  too  great.  A  government  sensitive  to  its  image  as  champion  of  na-
tional sovereignty  profoundly  affected  by  the  pressure  of  militant  minorities,
and  unsure  of  its  tenure  and  legitimacy  will  resent  too  great  involvement
by  U.S.  Excessive  U.S.  involvement  may  defeat  objectives  of  U.S.  policy:
development  of  free,  independent  non-communist  nation.  PROVN  properly
recognizes  that  success  can  only  be  attained  through  support  of  Vietnamese
people,  with  support  coming  from  the  grass  roots  up.  Insensitive  U.S.
actions  can  easily  defeat  efforts  to  accomplish  this.  U.S.  manipulations
could  easily  become  an  American  takeover  j-jstified  by  U.S.  compulsion
to  "get  the  job  done."  Such  tendencies  must  be  resisted.  It  must  be  real-
ized that  there  are  substantial  difficulties  and  dangers  inherent  in  imple-
menting this  or  any  similar  program.

Several  important  aspects  of  proven  concept  require  comment,  further
consideration  and  resolution  or  emphasis.  Some  of  the  more  significant  are:

Regarding  U.S.  organization,  MACV  considers  that  any  major  re-
organization such  as  envisioned  by  PROVN  must  be  phased  and  deliberate
to  avoid  confusion  and  slow-down  in  ongoing  programs  .  .  .

There  appears  to  be  an  overemphasis  on  military  control  in  PROVN
which  may  be  undesirable.  For  instance,  the  study  states  that  all  senior
U.S.  representatives  (SUSREPs)  initially  will  be  U.S.  military  officers.
This  should  not  necessarily  be  stated  policy.  The  senior  U.S.  representative,
particularly  at  province  level,  should  be  selected  on  basis  of  major  tasks


580 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

to  be  performed,  program  emphasis  in  a  particular  area  and  other  local
considerations.  PROVN  also  limits  U.S.  single  manager  involvement  in
military  activities.  If  single  manager  concept  of  a  fully  integrated  civil-
military  effort  is  to  be  successful,  military  matters,  such  as  roles  and  mis-
sions, force  requirements,  and  deployments  must  be  developed  in  full
coordination  and  be  integrated  with  civil  aspects.

PROVN  proposal  for  enlarged  U.S.  organization  for  revolutionary  devel-
opment, particularly  at  sector  and  sub-sector  levels,  will  require  both  mili-
tary and  civilian  staff  increases.  It  will  necessitate  further  civilian  recruiting
and  increased  military  input.  Present  shortage  of  qualified  civilian  personnel
who  desire  duty  in  Vietnam  must  be  considered.  It  may  fall  to  the  military,
as  it  is  now  happening  to  some  degree,  to  provide  personnel  not  only  for
added  military  positions,  but  also  for  many  of  civilian  functions  as  well.

Regardless  of  what  U.S.  might  desire,  however,  our  efforts  to  bring  about
new  Vietnamese  organizational  structure  must  be  tempered  by  continuous
evaluation  of  the  pressure  such  change  places  on  Vietnamese  leaders.  Our
goals  cannot  be  achieved  by  Vietnamese  leaders  who  are  identified  as  U.S.
puppets.  The  U.S.  will  must  be  asserted,  but  we  cannot  afford  to  overwhelm
the  structure  we  are  attempting  to  develop.

Accordingly,  MACV  recommends  that  PROVN,  reduced  primarily  to  a
conceptual  document,  carrying  forward  the  main  thrusts  and  goals  of  the
study,  be  presented  to  National  Security  Council  for  use  in  developing  con-
cepts, policies,  and  actions  to  improve  effectiveness  of  the  American  effort
in  Vietnam.

The  "Priorities  Task  Force" — This  group  was  set  up  at  Ambassador  Porter's
direction  in  April  1966,  following  Komer's  first  trip  to  Vietnam,  during  which
Komer  had  strongly  urged  that  the  Mission  try  to  establish  a  set  of  interagency
priorities.  The  actual  work  of  this  task  force,  which  had  full  interagency  repre-
sentation, was  considered  disappointing  by  almost  all  its  "consumers,"  particu-
larly Komer,  since  it  failed  to  come  up  with  a  final  list  of  priorities  from  which
the  Mission  and  Washington  could  derive  their  programs.  But  it  was  by  far  the
most  ambitious  task  force  the  Mission  had  ever  set  up,  and  it  provoked  con-
siderable thought  in  the  Mission.

Its  introductory  section  was  a  rather  gloomy  assessment  of  the  situation.  As
such,  it  was  at  variance  with  the  then  current  assessment  of  the  situation — but
in  retrospect,  it  is  of  far  greater  interest  than  the  recommendations  themselves!

After  some  15  months  of  rapidly  growing  U.S.  military  and  political
commitment  to  offset  a  major  enemy  military  effort,  the  RVN  has  been
made  secure  against  the  danger  of  military  conquest,  but  at  the  same  time
it  has  been  subjected  to  a  series  of  stresses  which  threaten  to  thwart  U.S.
policy  objectives  .  .  .

The  enemy  now  has  a  broad  span  of  capability  for  interfering  with
progress  toward  achievement  of  U.S.  objectives.  He  can  simultaneously
operate  offensively  through  employment  of  guerrilla  and  organized  forces
at  widely  separated  points  throughout  the  country,  thus  tying  down  friendly
forces,  while  concentrating  rehearsed  surprise  attacks  in  multi-battalion  or
even  multi-regimental  strength.  .  .  .  The  war  will  probably  increase  in
intensity  over  the  planning  period  (two  years)  though  decisive  military
victory  for  either  side  is  not  likely.  Guerrilla  activity  will  make  much  of  the


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  581

countryside  insecure.  More  of  the  rural  population  will  be  directly  affected,
and  the  number  of  refugees  and  civilian  casualties  on  both  sides  seem
bound  to  rise  .  .  .

Reasons  for  lack  of  success  of  the  overall  pacification  program — includ-
ing all  the  stages  from  clear  and  secure  operations  to  sustaining  local  gov-
ernment— were  varied.  First,  the  primary  hindrance  to  pacification  was
the  low  level  of  area  security  given  active  Viet  Cong  opposition.  Second,
political  instabiUty  prevented  continuing  and  coherent  GVN  direction  and
support  of  any  pacification  program.  Third,  pacification  execution  has  been
almost  wholly  Vietnamese  and  can  be  supported  only  indirectly  by  the  U.S.
This  has  made  it  less  susceptible  to  American  influence  and  more  subject
to  political  pressures  and  the  weaknesses  of  Vietnamese  administration  and
motivation.  Fourth,  no  pacification  concept  since  the  strategic  hamlet  pro-
gram has  been  sufficiently  clear  in  definition  to  provide  meaningful  and
consistent  operational  guidance  to  those  executing  the  program.  Fifth,
given  the  pressure  for  success  and  the  difficulty  of  measuring  progress  the
execution  of  pacification  failed  to  emphasize  the  political,  social  and  psy-
chological aspects  of  organizing  the  people  and  thus  eliciting  their  active
cooperation.  The  material  aspects,  being  both  visible  and  less  difficult  to
implement,  have  received  too  much  attention.  Sixth,  there  was  an  absence
of  agreed,  definitely  stated  pacification  roles  and  missions  not  only  within
the  GVN  and  the  U.S.  Mission  but  also  between  the  GVN  and  the  U.S.
Mission.  This  absence  caused  proliferation  of  various  armed  and  unarmed
elements  not  clearly  related  to  each  other.  Seventh,  a  quantitative  and
qualitative  lack  of  trained  and  motivated  manpower  to  carry  out  pacifica-
tion existed.  In  addition,  insufficient  emphasis  has  been  given  to  training
and  orientation  of  local  officials  associated  with  the  pacification  program.
Eighth,  lack  of  a  well  defined  organizational  structure  in  the  U.S.  Mission
created  some  confusion  and  conflicting  direction  of  the  pacification  ef-
fort .  .  .

During  1965,  military  plans  were  developed  to  support  revolutionary
development;  national  priority  areas  were  selected  where  special  emphasis
would  be  placed  on  revolutionary  development,  and  a  structure  was  estab-
lished by  the  GVN  extending  an  organizational  framework  for  revolu-
tionary development  from  national  to  district  levels.  Meanwhile,  the  U.S.
Mission  has  begun  action  to  centralize  direction  for  revolutionary  develop-
ment to  ensure  coordination  of  all  Mission  activities  in  support  of  revolu-
tionary development.

A  new  approach  was  also  taken  in  1965  to  bring  coherence  to  the  use
of  cadre  in  the  pacification  process.  Drawing  on  a  concept  of  armed  politi-
cal action  teams,  whose  relative  success  locally  was  at  least  partly  owing
to  direct  U.S.  sponsorship  and  control,  a  combined  cadre  team  approach
was  developed.  A  new  organization,  the  Revolutional  Development  Cadre,
was  established,  which  brought  together  and  replaced  a  number  of  dis-
parate cadre  organizations.  The  combined  cadre  team  approach  includes
armed  units  and  special  skills  of  relating  to  and  assisting  the  people.  The
combined  teams  form  the  basis  of  the  present  pacification  program.

While  these  measures  have  helped  to  alleviate  some  of  the  problem
areas  which  previously  frustrated  pacification  efforts,  some  areas  of  major
concern  remain:  First  area  security  where  Revolutionary  Development  is
being  initiated  is  not  always  adequate  because  of  manpower  problems;
second,  continued  existence  of  various  overlapping  security  forces  further


582 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


reduces  effectiveness;  third,  approved  pacification  concepts,  roles,  and
missions  agreed  to  by  the  U.S.  and  the  GVN  are  lacking;  fourth,  the  effec-
tiveness of  the  new  RD  cadre  teams  remain  to  be  tested  and  evaluated;
fifth,  extensive  training  of  local  and  other  officials  associated  with  RD  still
must  be  accomplished;  sixth,  emphasis  on  rapid  expansion  and  the  desire
for  immediate  visible  and  statistical  progress  would  operate  against  lasting
results;  and,  seventh,  organizational  development  and  functioning  on  both
the  GVN  and  U.S.  sides  are  as  yet  incomplete.

'¥  ^  ^

The  situation  described  above  suggests  that  the  course  of  events  in  Viet-
nam during  the  next  two  years  will  be  significantly  influenced  by  the  fol-
lowing principal  current  trends.

The  war  can  be  expected  to  increase  in  intensity,  but  decisive  military
victory  should  not  be  expected.  It  will  be  basically  a  war  of  attrition.  Troop
casualties  should  increase  on  both  sides,  and  civilian  casualties  and  refu-
gees as  well.  The  enemy  can,  if  he  chooses,  increase  still  further  the  rate  of
his  semi-covert  invasion  and  the  level  of  combat.

The  enemy  will  continue  to  build  up  his  forces  through  infiltration  from
NVN  and  recruitment  for  main  force  VC  units  in  SVN  to  achieve  a  favor-
able relationship  of  forces.

At  the  same  time,  he  will  continue  to  reinforce  his  capabilities  for  politi-
cal action  in  the  urban  areas,  to  exploit  anticipated  future  political  disturb-
bances,  to  increase  his  terrorist  acts  in  the  cities,  and  to  isolate  the  urban
population  from  the  countryside.

GVN  control  of  the  countryside  is  not  now  being  extended  through
pacification  to  any  significant  degree  and  pacification  in  the  rural  areas
cannot  be  expected  to  proceed  at  a  rapid  rate.  A  new  approach  to  pacifica-
tion has  been  developed,  but  it  is  too  early  to  judge  its  effectiveness.  In
addition,  important  problems  requiring  resolution  remain  .  .  .

The  Vietnamese  will  continue  to  face  grave  problems  in  creating  an
effective  system  of  government.  Under  present  conditions  we  cannot  real-
istically expect  a  strong  GVN  to  emerge  over  the  planning  period,  nor  can
we  expect  political  unity  or  a  broadening  of  the  base  of  popular  support.
The  increased  American  presence,  rising  inflation  and  an  image  of  con-
siderable corruption  are  issues  which  will  be  increasingly  exploited  by  un-
friendly and  opportunistic  elements.  U.S.  influence  on  political  events
continues  to  be  limited  while  our  responsibility  for  Vietnam's  future  is  in-
creasing.


The  Task  Force  divided  all  activities  in  Vietnam  into  categories  of  impor-
portance,  and  assigned  them  priorities  in  groups.  Unfortunately,  the  divisions
were  either  too  vague  to  be  useful,  or  else  they  designated  specific  activities,
such  as  agriculture,  to  such  a  low  position  that  Washington  found  the  selection
unacceptable.  In  its  first  rank  of  importance  the  Task  Force  placed:

1 .  Those  activities  designed  to  prepare  a  sound  pacification  program
primarilv  through  strengthening  the  human  resources  element  of
pacification,  and  through  coordinated  planning  .  .  .

2.  Those  activities  which  draw  strength  away  from  the  enemy  and  add
to  GVN's  strength  and  image  of  concern  for  all  its  citizens  .  .  .

3.  Those  psychological  activities  that  support  the  war  effort  .  .  .


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  583

4.  Those  activities  that  persuade  the  people  that  RVNAF  is  wholly  on
the  side  of  the  people  and  acting  in  their  interests  .  .  .

down  through:

16.  Those  activities  which  develop  the  leadership  and  organization  of
non-governmental  institutions,  particularly  youth  groups  .  .  .

It  was  scarcely  a  list  from  which  one  could  assemble  a  coherent  program.
Moreover,  the  above  list  of  16  "highest  priority"  tasks,  was  followed  by  a  group
of  ten  "high  priority"  tasks — including  strengthening  provincial  governments,
autonomous  municipal  governments,  better  budgetary  procedures,  better  refu-
gee programs,  minority  programs,  and  so  on.  These,  in  turn,  were  followed  by
a  nine-point  list  of  "high  priority  programs."  Into  at  least  one  of  the  35  highest,
high,  or  just  plain  priority  activities,  one  could  fit  every  program  and  project
then  being  pursued  in  Vietnam.  Furthermore,  the  proposal  seemed  to  confuse
inputs  and  outputs,  placing  in  the  same  category  "wishes"  like  "minimizing  the
adverse  impact  of  and  exploiting  the  opportunities  provided  by  the  American
presence"  (which  was  only  "high  priority")  with  "programs"  like  "creating  a
sound  base  for  agricultural  development."

The  Priorities  Task  Force  recommendations  were  used,  unlike  those  of
PROVN.  In  the  FY  67  Country  Assistance  Program  (CAP),  submitted  by  AID
to  Congress  that  fall,  the  Task  Force  Strategy  statement  was  used  as  a  foreward,
with  Ambassador  Lodge's  approval.  Moreover,  the  concept  of  priorities  out-
lined in  the  final  paper  was  applied  to  the  AID  program  in  Vietnam,  with  each
activity  being  placed  in  one  of  the  categories  of  priority.  This  did  not  result,
however,  in  the  original  objective  of  reducing  the  size  of  the  program  and  focus-
ing it:  instead,  the  AID  program  more  than  doubled  in  1967,  and  a  year  later
people  were  still  complaining  about  the  lack  of  clear-cut  priorities.  (As  a  matter
of  fact,  when  Deputy  Ambassador  Eugene  Locke  returned  to  Washington  in
September  of  1967  with  a  "Blueprint  for  Vietnam,"  he  was  told  that  it  lacked
any  sense  of  priorities,  and  was  too  much  of  a  "shopping  list.")

The  "Roles  and  Missions"  Study  Group — One  of  the  Priority  Task  Force  recom-
mendations was  that  the  Mission  should  establish  another  group  to  examine
the  question  of  the  proper  role  of  each  military  and  paramilitary  and  police
and  civilian  force  in  the  country.  This  group  was  set  up,  under  the  chairman-
ship of  Colonel  George  Jacobson  in  July  of  1966,  and  submitted  its  final  report  to
the  Mission  Council  on  August  24.  The  group  was  once  again  interagency,  and
it  produced  a  paper  of  considerable  value — indeed,  a  paper  which  could  well
have  served  as  a  basic  policy  document  for  the  Mission  and  Washington.

The  Study  Group  made  81  recommendations,  of  which  66  were  acceptable
to  all  agencies  of  the  Mission.  But  even  these  66  were  not  immediately  adopted
as  basic  doctrine.  Because  of  inertia  and  weariness,  rather  than  deliberate  sabo-
tage, the  recommendations  were  never  treated  as  basic  policy,  and  simply  were
carried  out  or  not  depending  on  the  drive  and  desire  of  the  individual  officials
associated  with  each  individual  recommendation.

The  report  began,  as  almost  all  Vietnam  studies  seem  to,  with  a  definition:

Revolutionary  Development  consists  of  those  military  and  civil  efforts
designed  to  liberate  the  population  of  South  Vietnam  from  communist
coercion;  to  restore  public  security;  to  initiate  economic  and  political  de-


584 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

velopment;  to  extend  effective  GVN  authority  throughout  SVN;  and  to
win  the  willing  support  of  the  people  to  these  ends.

From  there  it  developed  the  most  logical  and  coherent  approach  to  returning
an  area  to  GVN  control  and  then  gaining  its  support  that  had  yet  been  pro-
duced by  a  group  in  either  the  Mission  or  Washington.  The  report  was  hailed
by  Porter,  by  Komer,  and  by  various  mid-level  officials.  Jacobson  himself  was
to  be  named  Mission  Coordinator  four  months  later,  a  position  from  which  he
could  present  his  ideas  directly  to  the  Ambassadors.

While,  as  mentioned  above,  the  recommendations  were  never  issued  as  Mis-
sion policy  in  a  group,  many  of  them  found  their  way  into  the  main  stream  of
the  Mission  through  other  means.  Some  of  the  more  controversial  ones — for  ex-
ample: "that  Division  be. removed  from  the  RD  Chain  of  Comand" — remained
as  potent  ideas  to  be  discussed  within  the  government  and  with  the  Vietnamese,
and  to  be  acted  on  slowly.

Since  the  report  foreshadowed  several  major  developments  in  pacification,
and  since  it  still  has  today  an  intrinsic  value  of  its  own,  it  is  worth  quoting  some
of  its  major  points:

High  hopes  are  now  pinned  on  the  RD  cadre,  as  the  critical  element  of
success  in  RD.  Unfortunately,  there  is  a  real  danger  it  is  being  regarded
as  a  panacea  with  curative  powers  it  does  not,  of  and  by  itself,  possess.
The  introduction  of  RD  Cadre  cannot  alone  achieve  success  in  any  of  the
tasks  discussed  above.  Even  cadre  such  as  may  be  available  in  six  months
.  .  .  cannot  compensate  for  the  current  failings  and  limitations  of  other  fun-
damental elements  bearing  directly  on  the  RD  process.

.  .  .  RD  demands  for  its  success  radical  reform  within  the  GVN  includ-
ing its  Armed  Forces.  This  reform  must  start  at  the  top  .  .  .  These  radical
changes  in  the  GVN  and  RVNAF  seem  most  unlikely  to  occur  without  a
strong,  focused  and  coordinated  exertion  of  U.S.  influence  at  high
levels  .  .  .

RECOMMEND: — That  FWMAF  give  increased  emphasis  to  improving  the
performance  and  conduct  of  GVN  military  forces  through  combined  op-
erations .  .  .

— That  as  the  increase  in  FWMAF  strength  permits,  these  forces
engage  with  RVNAF  in  clearing  operations  in  support  of  RD  with  the
primary  objective  of  improving  the  associated  GVN  forces  .  .  .

— That  in  view  of  the  deployment  and  capabilities  of  FWMAF  in  Viet-
nam and  recognizing  the  necessity  for  increased  security  support  to  RD,
the  bulk  of  ARVN  Divisional  combat  battalions  be  assigned  to  Sector  com-
manders with  only  those  Divisional  battalions  not  so  assigned  to  be  under
the  control  of  Divisions  .  .  .

— That  the  Division  be  removed  from  the  RD  chain  of  command  .  .  .

— That  Ranger  units  because  of  their  frequently  intolerable  con-
duct toward  the  populace,  be  disbanded  with  mdividual  Rangers  reas-
signed* .  .  .

— That  RF  and  PF  become  Provincial  and  District  Constabulary  .  .
— That  the  Constabulary  be  placed  under  the  Ministry  of  RD  .  .  .

*  This  was  a  recommendation  which  MACV  particularly  opposed,  arguing  that  it
"would  seriously  reduce  ARVN  combat  strength."  Westmoreland  added  that  he  could
not  countenance  the  disbanding  of  units  which  had  just  received  a  Presidential  Unit
Citation.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  585

— That  National  Police  (Special  Branch)  assume  primary  responsibility
for  the  destruction  of  the  VC  "infrastructure"  .  .  .

— That  Police  Field  Force  be  integrated  into  the  Constabulary  .  .  .

— That  the  Vietnamese  Information  Service  (VIS)  terminate  its  rural
information  cadre  operations  and  assume  a  supporting  role  .  .  .  for  RD
Cadre,  technical  cadre,  and  hamlet  officials  .  .  .

And  so  on.  What  lay  behind  each  recommendation  was  an  effort  to  unify  the
various  GVN  agencies  and  ministries  working  on  pacification,  streamline  their
operations,  and,  at  the  same  time,  increase  U.S.  influence  over  those  operations.

While  many  items  the  Study  Group  recommended  have  still  not  been  carried
out,  there  has  been  growing  acceptance  of  the  bulk  of  the  recommendations.
In  its  initial  reaction  to  the  paper,  MACV's  Chief  of  Staff  wrote  to  Ambassador
Lodge  "that  many  actions  have  been  taken  or  are  being  considered  by  MACV
which  support  and  complement  the  overall  objectives  envisioned  by  the  report.
There  are,  however,  certain  recommendations  with  which  we  do  not  agree."

The  most  important  reservation  that  MACV  had,  concerned  the  allocation
of  resources  for  the  RD  effort:

We  are  confronted  with  a  determined,  well-organized  force  operating
in  regimental  and  division  strength.  As  long  as  this  situation  exists,  it  is
imperative  that  the  regular  military  forces  retain  first  priority  for  the  avail-
able manpower.  Once  the  threat  of  the  enemy's  regular  forces  has  dimin-
ished and  the  defeat  of  external  aggression  is  accomplished,  then  other
programs  should  have  the  first  priority  for  recruiting  .  .  .

In  addition,  MACV  opposed  the  removal  of  Division  from  the  RD  chain  of
command;  suggested  a  further  task  force  to  examine  the  Constabulary  issue  in
detail;  and  opposed  the  suggestion  that  Special  Branch  Police — which  meant  on
the  American  side  the  CIA — take  over  the  anti-infrastructure  effort.  (On  this
latter  point,  the  issue  was  finally  resolved  by  an  ingenious  compromise  structure
under  Westmoreland  and  Komer  called  ICEX — Intelligence  Coordination  and
Exploitation — in  July  1967.)  Finally,  Westmoreland  rejected  any  internal
changes  in  the  MACV  structure,  as  suggested  by  the  Study  Group.  These  had
included:

— the  establishment  at  MACV  Division  advisory  level  of  a  Deputy
Senior  Advisor  for  RD,  at  Corps  a  Deputy  Senior  Advisor  for  RD,  and  at
COMUSMACV  level  a  Deputy  COMUSMACV  for  the  entire  MACV  ad-
visory effort  and  for  RD  .  .  .

— changes  in  the  advisory  rating  system  to  emphasize  the  quality  of  the
advice  and  the  accuracy  of  reports,  rather  than  the  performance  of  the
organization /  Vietnamese  they  advise  .  .  .

USAID  reacted  favorably  to  the  study.  In  his  memo  to  Lodge,  the  Acting
USAID  Director  said  that  the  report  "presents  an  antidote  to  our  having  been
too  indulgent  with  the  GVN  in  the  past  to  our  peril  and  theirs."  Once  again,
however,  "as  with  MACV,  USAID  added  some  reservations — and  the  reserva-
tions all  fell  in  areas  in  which  USAID  would  have  the  action  responsibility  if
something  was  to  be  done.  USAID  feared  that  the  report  recommended  steps
that  would  give  the  Ministry  of  RD  too  much  strength,  reflecting  the  worry  of
their  Public  Safety  Division.  The  Constabulary  recommendations,  which  had


586 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

far-reaching  implications,  were  given  a  particularly  rough  going-over.  For  ex-
ample, to  protect  its  own  embryonic  structure,  the  Police  Field  Force  USAID
made  the  following  comment  on  the  recommendation  that  the  PFF  be  inte-
grated as  units  into  the  Constabulary:

USAID  concurs  with  the  reservation  that  PFF  remain  a  separate  entity
with  its  essential  police  powers

The  CIA  also  thought  the  report  was  "constructive  and  helpful,"  but  listed
a  few  "disagreements."  Once  again,  these  pertained  to  those  items  in  which  the
ICA  had  a  strong  vested  interest.  They  opposed  strenuously,  for  example,  the
suggestion  that  the  MACV  subsector  advisor — the  only  American  at  the  district
level  in  almost  every  district — "be  given  primary  responsibility  for  monitoring
the  activities  of  the  cadre."  Using  the  argument  that  everything  possible  be
done  to  retain  the  civilian  nature  of  the  cadre,  the  CIA  refused  to  let  the  MACV
subsector  advisors  do  what  they  were  already  doing  in  many  cases.

The  CIA  and  MACV  both  opposed  the  suggestion  that  a  single  Director  of
Intelligence  be  appointed  to  command  civilian  and  military  intelligence  struc-
tures. The  CIA  said  that  this  was  "unwieldly  and  unworkable"  because  "this
is  not  a  theater  of  war."

The  Political  Section  of  the  Embassy  also  thought  the  study  was  "valuable,"
but  added  that  "it  appears  to  neglect  a  number  of  political  considerations."  Be-
yond that,  they  supported  every  specific  suggestion,  while  noting  how  hard  it
would  be  to  carry  some  of  them  out.

JUSPAO  shared  the  fears  of  USAID  that  the  report  would  concentrate  more
power  in  the  hands  of  the  Ministry  of  RD  than  it  could  usefully  em-
ploy. JUSPAO  thought  that  the  Constabulary  should  be  created,  therefore,  but
placed  under  the  Ministry  of  Defense.  JUSPAO  also  found  the  removal  of  the
Division  from  the  RD  chain  of  command  "hardly  feasible  or  realistic  at  this
juncture" — begging  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  the  United  States  should  seek
this  as  a  valuable  objective.

When  the  exercise  was  over,  there  were  many  in  the  Mission  in  Saigon  who
felt  that  the  Study  Group  recommendations  should  have  formed  a  blueprint
for  action  throughout  the  Mission.  They  pointed  out  that  almost  all  the  recom-
mendations were  concurred  in  by  every  agency,  and  that  these  could  be  carried
out  immediately.  The  remaining  15  which  were  still  not  unanimously  accepted
could  then  be  discussed  and  perhaps  resolved.

In  Washington,  at  least  one  high  official,  R.  W.  Komer,  felt  the  same  way,
and  urged  the  Mission  to  use  the  recommendations  as  policy.  But  somewhere
between  August  24,  when  the  paper  was  submitted,  and  the  end  of  1966,  the
paper  was  relegated  to  the  useful  but  distinctly  secondary  role  of  another  "study
group,"  as  its  name  suggests.  While  everyone  was  complimentary  about  the
paper,  no  machinery  was  set  up  in  Ambassador  Porter's  office  to  oversee  the
implementation  of  the  recommendations.  While  the  agencies  said  that  they
agreed  with  most  of  the  recommendations,  the  all-important  decisions  as  to
how  fast  and  how  hard  to  push  forward  with  each  recommendation  was  left
to  whichever  agencv  "had  the  action"  on  it.  This  in  effect  left  some  crucial  deci-
sions — the  variables  in  our  effort — outside  the  Deputy  Ambassador's  hands.  He
had  no  machinery  for  checking  to  see  what  the  agencies  were  doing  to  carry
out  the  suggestions  they  said  they  agreed  with.  He  had  virtually  no  staff  to  ob-
serve how  the  agencies  were  actually  handling  each  problem,  although  it  was
obvious  that  success  or  failure  on  each  item  lay  to  a  large  extent  in  the  method
it  was  handled.  Indeed,  Porter  had  no  good  way  to  even  find  out  whether  the


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  587

agencies  really  did  accept  the  recommendations.  He  was  reliant  on  a  knowl-
edgeable but  small  staff  which  could  only  meddle  in  the  internal  matters  of
other  agencies  to  a  limited  degree.

It  was  these  shortcomings  in  the  new  mandate  to  Porter  that  were  becoming
evident  in  the  late  summer  of  1966,  and  pressure  began  to  build  in  Washington
for  another  reorganization.

The  pressure  and  emphasis  on  pacification  was  also  producing  visible  results
in  MACV.  On  August  8,  1966,  the  J-3  of  MACV,  Major  General  Tillson,
briefed  the  Mission  Council  on  how  MACV  intended  to  "give  maximum  sup-
port to  RD."  The  briefing  was  general,  simplistic,  and  shallow,  but  it  was  a  clear
indication  that  General  Westmoreland  and  MACV  were  beginning  to  respond  to
the  pressure  from  outside  their  command  that  they  should  give  RD  more  sup-
port. As  such,  it  marked  a  major  step  for  MACV.  Tillson  said  that  "military
operations  must  be  used  to  assure  the  security  necessary  for  RD  to  begin.  All
military  operations  are  designed  towards  this  goal  .  .

He  then  went  on  to  trace  the  degree  to  which  criticism  of  ARVN  was  justi-
fied, and  examine  the  suggestion  that  ARVN  be  re-oriented  to  support  RD —
something  which  was  to  become  part  of  the  Manila  communique  only  two
months  later:

The  ARVN  has  been  at  war  continuously  for  a  period  of  over  ten  years
.  .  .  The  fact  that  ARVN  today  even  exists  as  an  organized  fighting  force
is  a  tribute  to  its  stamina  and  morale.

Since  its  inception,  ARVN  has  been  oriented,  trained,  and  led  towards
the  task  of  offensive  operations  ...  It  is  difficult,  in  a  short  period  of
time,  to  redirect  the  motivation  and  training  of  years,  and  to  offset  the  long
indoctrination  that  offensive  action  against  the  VC  is  the  reason  for  the
existence  of  the  Army  .  .  .

In  the  1967  campaign  plan,  we  propose  to  assign  ARVN  the  primary
mission  of  providing  direct  support  to  RD  and  US/FW  Forces  the  primary
mission  of  destroying  VC/NVA  main  forces  and  base  areas.  Agreement
has  been  reached  between  General  Westmoreland  and  General  Vien  that,
in  I,  II  and  III  Corps  areas,  ARVN  will  devote  at  least  50%  of  its  effort
directly  in  support  of  the  RD  program.  In  IV  Corps,  where  there  are  no
U.S.  forces,  it  was  agreed  that  ARVN  might  have  to  devote  up  to  75%  of
its  effort  to  offensive  operations  .  .  .

[General  Vien  has  issued  a  directive  that]  flatly  states  that,  while  some
progress  has  been  made,  desired  results  are  still  lacking  on  RD.  It  em-
phasizes that  RD  efforts  must  be  on  a  par  with  efforts  to  destroy  the  enemy
.  .  .  These  directives  of  General  Vien  resulted  from  his  conversations  with
General  Westmoreland  .  .  .  [Emphasis  Added]

This  was  by  far  the  strongest  verbal  support  that  MACV  had  ever  given
pacification,  and  it  actually  contained  the  kernel  which  developed  into  the
important  passage  in  the  Manila  communique  that  committed  the  RVNAF  to
support  of  RD.

The  change  in  mood  in  Saigon  among  the  Americans  was  reflected  by  Ambas-
sador Lodge  in  his  Weekly  NODIS  to  the  President.  On  August  31,  1966,  he
began  his  cable  with:

The  biggest  recent  American  event  affecting  Vietnam  was  giving  pacifi-
cation the  highest  priority  which  it  has  ever  had — making  it,  in  effect,  the
main  purpose  of  all  our  activities  .  .  .


588 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

The  above  was  brought  about  in  several  ways — by  word  in  General
Westmoreland's  "Concept  of  Military  Operations  in  South  Vietnam"  of
August  24,  and  by  the  deeds  of  the  U.S.  1st  and  25th  Divisions  and  the
III  MAF.  There  has  also  been  the  new  MACV  proposal  to  revamp  ARVN
and  turn  it  into  a  force  better  suited  to  pacification.  Also  at  a  special  meet-
ing of  the  Mission  Council  a  stimulating  paper  was  presented  by  the
"Interagency  Roles  and  Mission  Study  Group"  which  would  take  RF  and
PF,  now  a  part  of  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces,  make  them  into  a  "con-
stabulary" and  call  it  that.  Police  Field  Force  would  also  be  included  in  the
Constabulary  under  this  concept.

A  week  earlier,  Westmoreland  had  sent  forward  to  CINCPAC  and  JCS  a
broad  strategy  statement  for  the  coming  year.  He  saw  the  time  as  "appropriate
in  light  of  the  fact  that  we  are  on  the  threshold  of  a  new  phase  in  the  conflict
resulting  from  recent  battlefield  successes  and  from  the  continuing  FWMAF
buildup."  After  reviewing  the  course  of  battle  since  the  introduction  of  U.S.
troops,  Westmoreland  projected  his  strategy  over  the  period  until  May  1,  1967,
as  "a  general  offensive  with  maximum  practical  support  to  area  and  population
security  in  further  support  of  RD."  He  then  added:

The  growing  strength  of  US/FW  Forces  will  provide  the  shield  and  will
permit  ARVN  to  shift  its  weight  of  effort  to  an  extent  not  heretofore  fea-
sible to  direct  support  of  RD.  Also,  I  visualize  that  a  significant  number  of
US/FW  maneuver  battalions  will  be  committed  to  tactical  areas  of  re-
sponsibility (TAOR)  missions.  These  missions  encompass  base  security
and  at  the  same  time  support  RD  by  spreading  security  radially  from  the
bases  to  protect  more  of  the  population  .  .  .

The  priority  effort  of  ARVN  forces  will  be  in  direct  support  of  the  RD
program;  in  many  instances  the  province  chief  will  exercise  operational
control  over  these  units  .  .  .  This  fact  notwithstanding,  the  ARVN  divi-
sion structure  must  be  maintained  .  .  .

This  long  message,  with  its  "new  look"  emphasis  on  pacification,  was  sent
apparently  not  for  CINCPAC's  routine  consideration,  as  would  be  the  normal
case  in  the  military  chain  of  command,  but  for  the  edification  of  high-ranking
civilian  leaders  in  Washington.  It  ended  with  a  comment  added  by  Ambassador
Lodge — an  unusual  procedure  in  a  military  message:

I  wish  to  stress  my  agreement  with  the  attention  paid  in  this  message
to  the  importance  of  military  support  for  RD.  After  all,  the  main  purpose
of  defeating  the  enemy  through  offensive  operations  against  the  main
forces  and  bases  must  be  to  provide  the  opportunity  through  RD  to  get  at
the  heart  of  the  matter,  which  is  the  population  of  SVN.

The  new  emphasis  on  RD /pacification  was  thus  coming  from  many  sources
in  the  late  summer  of  1966.  Porter  and  Komcr,  pushing  the  civilians  harder  than
they  had  e\er  been  pushed  before,  had  not  only  improved  their  performance,
but  also  to  create  pressures  inside  MACV  for  greater  emphasis  on  RD.  West-
moreland, responding  to  the  pressure,  and  finding  the  VC/NVA  increasingly
reluctant  to  give  battle,  was  planning  a  two-pronged  strategy  for  late  1966-
early  1967:  attack  and  destrov  enemy  base  areas,  and  use  more  forces  to  pro-
tect and  build  up  and  expand  the  GVN  population  centers.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  589


D. THE  SINGLE  MANAGER

By  the  late  summer  of  1966,  as  has  been  shown  in  detail  in  the  preceding
sections,  the  flaws  in  the  structure  of  the  U.S.  Mission  had  been  openly  criticized
in  studies  or  reports  by  the  U.S.  Army  Staff"  (in  PROVN),  by  the  Priorities  Task
Force  and  by  the  Roles  and  Missions  Study  Group  in  Saigon,  by  Robert  Komer
in  repeated  memoranda,  and  by  various  other  visitors  and  observers.  In  addition
to  the  written  record,  there  were  undoubtedly  numerous  private  comments  be-
ing made  both  in  Saigon  and  Washington,  some  of  which  were  reaching  senior
officials  of  the  government.

The  options  before  the  USG  were,  in  broad  outline,  fourfold.  The  Mission
could  either  remain  unchanged,  or  else  it  could  reorganize  along  one  of  the
three  general  lines  which  Komer  had  outlined  in  his  August  7,  1966  memo-
randum :

Alternative  One — Put  Porter  in  charge  of  all  advisory  and  pacification
activities,  including  the  military;

Alternative  Two — Unify  the  civilian  agencies  into  a  single  civilian  chain
of  command,  and  strengthen  the  military  internally — but  leave  civilian  and
military  separate;

Alternative  Three — Assign  responsibility  for  pacification  to  Westmore-
land and  MACV,  and  put  the  civilians  in  the  field  under  his  command.

The  Mission,  as  usual,  argued  for  leaving  the  structure  the  way  it  was.  Their
arguments  in  this  direction  were  unfortunate,  because  in  Washington  the  mood
was  certainly  in  favor  of  some  further  changes,  and  by  resisting  all  suggestions
uniformly,  the  Mission  was  simply  causing  friction  with  Washington  and  reduc-
ing influence  on  the  ultimate  decisions.

The  issue  was  joined  more  rapidly  than  anyone  in  Saigon  had  expected,  be-
cause in  mid-September,  1966,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  weighed  in  on  the  issue
in  a  direct  way,  producing  a  Draft  Presidential  Memorandum  which  advocated
handing  over  responsibility  for  pacification  to  COMUSMACV.

McNamara's  draft  said:

Now  that  a  Viet  Cong  victory  in  South  Vietnam  seems  to  have  been
thwarted  by  our  emergency  actions  taken  over  the  past  18  months,  renewed
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  longer-run  aspects  of  achieving  an  end  to
the  war  and  building  a  viable  nation  in  South  Vietnam.

Central  to  success,  both  in  ending  the  war  and  in  winning  the  peace,  is
the  pacification  program.  Past  progress  in  pacification  has  been  negligible.
Many  factors  have  contributed,  but  one  major  reason  for  this  lack  of  prog-
ress had  been  the  existence  of  split  responsibility  for  pacification  on  the
U.S.  side.  For  the  sake  of  efliciency — in  clarifying  our  concept,  focusing
our  energies,  and  increasing  the  output  we  can  generate  on  the  part  of
the  Vietnamese — this  split  responsibility  on  the  U.S.  side  must  be  elim-
inated.

We  have  considered  various  alternative  methods  of  consolidating  the
U.S.  pacification  effort.  The  best  solution  is  to  place  those  activities  which
are  primarily  part  of  the  pacification  program,  and  all  persons  engaged  in
such  activities,  under  COMUSMACV  ...  In  essence,  the  reorganization
would  result  in  the  establishment  of  a  Deputy  COMUSMACV  for  Pacifica-


590 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

tion  who  would  be  in  command  of  all  pacification  staffs  in  Saigon  and  of
all  pacification  activities  in  the  field.

It  is  recognized  that  there  are  many  important  aspects  of  the  pacification
problem  which  are  not  covered  in  this  recommendation,  which  should  be
reviewed  subsequent  to  the  appointment  of  the  Deputy  COMASMACV  for
Pacification  to  determine  whether  they  should  be  part  of  his  task — for  ex-
ample, the  psychological  warfare  campaign,  and  the  Chieu  Hoi  and  refugee
programs.  Equally  important,  is  the  question  of  how  to  encourage  a  similar
management  realignment  of  the  South  Vietnamese  side,  since  pacification
is  regarded  as  primarily  a  Vietnamese  task.  Also  not  covered  by  this  recom-
mendation are  important  related  national  programs  .  .  .  Finally,  there  is
the  question  of  whether  any  organizational  modification  in  Washington  is
required  by  the  recommended  change  in  Vietnam.

I  recommend  that  you  approve  the  reorganization  described  in  this
memorandum  as  a  first  essential  step  toward  giving  a  new  thrust  to  pacifi-
cation. Under  Secretary  Ball,  Administrator  Gaud,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,
Director  Helms,  Director  Marks,  and  Mr.  Komer  concur  in  this  recom-
mendation.

This  memorandum  was  apparently  never  sent  to  the  President,  but  it  was
distributed,  with  a  request  for  comments  and  concurrence,  to  Ball  (Rusk  being
out  of  the  country).  Gaud,  the  JCS,  Helms,  Marks,  and  Komer.  Only  Komer
and  the  JCS  concurred,  with  the  others  producing  alternate  suggestions.  The
entire  question  was  handled  as  an  "EYES  ONLY"  matter.

The  positions  that  were  taken  were:

State  opposed  the  recommendation.  In  informal  discussions  with  Komer,
Alexis  Johnson  cited  the  failure  of  Hop  Tac  (which  seems  irrelevant),  the
"optics"  of  militarizing  the  effort,  and  the  need  to  check  with  Lodge  as  reasons
against  actions.

AID  agreed  that  the  present  program  had  its  faults,  but  resisted  the  idea  of
a  MACV  takeover.  Instead,  they  proposed  a  complex  system  of  committees  and
deputies  for  RD,  who  would  report  to  a  Deputy  Ambassador  for  Pacification.

The  JCS  found  that  the  proposal  "provides  an  excellent  rationale  for  an
approach  to  the  problem  of  appropriately  integrating  the  civil  and  military
effort  in  the  important  field  of  pacification"  and  concurred  in  the  idea  of  a
Deputy  COMUSMACV  for  RD.

CIA  and  USIA  both  opposed  the  reorganization,  although  their  written  com-
ments are  not  in  the  files.

Komer  weighed  in  with  a  lengthy  rationale  supporting  the  idea.  Although  he
may  not  have  known  it  at  the  time,  he  was  talking  about  the  organizational
structure  he  was  going  to  fit  into  later.  After  agreeing  that  the  need  to  get  paci-
fication moving  was  great,  and  that  "the  military  are  much  better  set  up  to
manage  a  huge  pacification  effort,"  he  said  that  60-70%  of  "real  job  of  pacifi-
cation is  providing  local  security.  This  can  only  be  done  by  the  military  .  .  ."
Komer  then  raised  some  additional  points:

1 .  The  Ambassador  should  remain  in  overall  charge.

2.  MACV  should  not  assume  responsibility  for  everything,  only  the  high
payoff  war-related  activities.

3.  Logistic  support  should  remain  a  multi-agency  responsibility.

As  the  discussions  on  the  subject  continued,  Deputy  Ambassador  Porter  ar-
rived in  the  United  States  for  a  combined  business-personal  trip.  When  he  found


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  591

out  what  was  being  considered,  he  immediately  made  strong  representations  to
McNarnara,  Komer,  and  Rusk.  He  also  sent  a  personal  cable  back  to  Lodge,
alerting  him  for  the  first  time  to  what  was  afoot  in  Washington:

Principal  topic  under  discussion  here  is  DOD  proposal  to  bring  both
U.S.  military  and  U.S.  civilian  resources  needed  to  advance  RD  program
under  direction  of  Deputy  COMUSMACV.  This  plan  will  be  discussed  with
you  during  McNamara  visit.  It  would  detach  all  civilian  field  operations
from  direct  control  of  Saigon  civilian  agencies  and  would  place  them  under
Deputy  COMUSMACV  for  RD.  In  addition  to  controlling  civilian  field
resources,  latter  would  also  manage  U.S.  military  resources  with  view  to
increasing  their  effectiveness  in  furthering  RD  programs.  Deputy
COMUSMACV  would  be  responsible  to  Ambassador  or  Deputy  Ambas-
sador through  COMUSMACV.  This  at  least  is  my  understanding  of  pro-
posal which  is  being  strongly  pushed  here.

I  have  taken  position  that  this  proposal  and  certain  counter  proposals
put  forward  by  civilian  agencies  here  require  careful  field  study.  In  its
existing  form,  as  I  understand  it,  it  does  not  take  into  account  the  fact
that  militarization  of  our  approach  to  this  important  civilian  program  runs
counter  to  our  aim  of  de-militarizing  GVN  through  constitutional  electoral
process  .  .  .

I  have  been  stressing  here  that  our  military  are  already  heavily  loaded
with  responsibility  for  achieving  military  measures  required  to  further
civilian  RD  programs,  such  as  evoking  adequate  cooperation  from  RVN
...  I  have  emphasized  need  for  MACV  to  grapple  with  problem  of  VC
guerrilla  activity  during  night,  as  distinct  from  main  force  activity  during
daytime  which  we  now  know  can  be  dealt  with.  These  areas  would  appear
to  offer  great  possibilities  for  application  of  military  talent  and  I  repeat
that  in  my  view  question  of  burdening  MACV  further  with  complex  pro-
grams (cadre,  police,  etc.)  requires  careful  field  study  which  I  would  have
done  promptly,  if  you  agree,  by  group  similar  to  that  which  carried  out
"Roles  and  Missions"  study.

This  was  the  background  as  Secretary  McNamara,  Under  Secretary  Katzen-
bach,  General  Wheeler,  and  Mr.  Komer  went  to  Saigon  in  October.  The  issue
had  been  deferred,  and  when  the  visitors  returned,  they  would  make  recom-
mendations to  the  President.  Katzenbach,  making  his  first  trip  as  Under  Secre-
tary, was  requested  to  look  at  the  problem  with  a  new  eye  and  no  prior  prej-
udices.

When  they  came  back  from  Saigon,  Katzenbach  and  McNamara  both  sent  the
President  an  important  memorandum.  Katzenbach  argued  for  a  strengthening
of  Ambassador  Porter's  role,  and  a  deferral  of  the  question  of  turning  the  RD
effort  over  to  MACV.  McNamara  concurred,  but  with  a  different  emphasis.
The  memorandums  were  dated  October  14  and  15,  1966,  less  than  two  weeks
before  the  Manila  conference,  and  the  recommendations  were  accepted  by  the
President.  Katzenbach's  memorandum  was,  for  a  first  effort  after  a  short  VIP
trip,  an  unusually  interesting  one.  Excerpts:

...  I  believe  decisive,  effective  RD  depends  on  a  clear  and  precise
common  understanding  of  the  security  as  we  all  recognize  to  be  the  founda-
tion of  success  in  the  "other  war."

To  illustrate  the  divergency  of  meanings,  let  me  report  briefly  on  a  con-
versation I  had  with  a  small  group  of  reporters  in  Saigon.  It  quickly  de-


592 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

generated  into  a  debate,  not  between  the  reporters  and  me,  but  between  )

Ward  Just  of  the  Washington  Post  and  Charles  Mohr  of  the  New  York  \

Times.  {

Just  argued  heatedly  that  RD  could  not  begin  to  be  effective  unless

security  were  first  guaranteed  both  to  the  peasants  and  to  RD  workers.  I

"An  AID  man  cannot  do  his  job,"  he  said,  "while  being  shot  at  by  the  j

vc."  !

Mohr  responded  just  as  heatedly,  that  security  could  not  come  first —  |
because  security  from  guerrillas  is  meaningless  and  impossible  until  the  peas-  ;!
ant  population  is  motivated  to  support  the  GVN  and  deprive  the  guerrillas  of  ;
havens,  secrecy,  and  resources.

Obviously,  the  easy  answer  to  this  circular  chicken-egg  debate  is  to  say
that  both  are  necessary — military  protection  and  public  motivation  against
the  VC.  And  yet  even  that  answer  is  incomplete  for  it  defines  security
only  in  the  American  frame  of  reference  .  .  .

I  know  of  no  one  who  believes  we  have  begun  effectively  to  achieve
the  goal  of  gaining  the  population's  active  support,  despite  a  series  of
pacification  programs  and  despite  even  the  budding  early  efforts  of  Ambas-
sador Porter's  new  program.

The  Military  Aspect.  Secretary  McNamara,  Mr.  Komer,  Ambassadors
Johnson,  Lodge,  and  Porter,  Mr.  Gaud,  I,  and  all  others  who  have  ap-
proached the  problem  are  perfectly  agreed  that  the  military  aspect  of  RD
has  been  spindly  and  weak.

^ ^  ^

This  probably  is  the  result  of  the  entirely  understandable  preoccupation
by  MACV  in  recent  months  with  the  main  force  military  emergency.
However  justifiable  this  has  been,  a  major  effect  has  nonetheless  been
our  failure  effectively  to  press  RVNAF  to  even  start  meeting  their  crucial
RD  responsibilities.

(I  know  of  no  one  who  believes  that  these  should  be  met  principally
by  American  forces — unless  we  should  wish  the  whole  RD  effort  to  col-
lapse once  we  leave.)

The  Civil  Aspect.  Similarly,  the  work  of  civilian  agencies  has  fallen
short — largely,  but  not  only  because  of  the  failure  of  RVNAF  to  provide
a  military  screen  behind  which  to  work  .  .  .

Rather  than  engage  in  a  civil-military  debate,  I  think  we  should  devote
our  efforts  toward  trying  to  devise  an  administrative  structure  that  capital-
izes on  the  assets  each  agenc)  can  offer  to  RD.

What  should  be  the  elements  of  an  ideal  organization?

1.  It  should  have  maximum  leverage  on  RVNAF  to  engage  in  clear  and
hold  operations  in  direct  support  of  RDM  efforts.

2.  It  should  have  a  single  American  "negative,"  anti-VC  channel — that
is  a  single  commander  for  all  action  against  communist  guerrilla  forces.  This
commander  would  calibrate  and  choose  among  the  various  force  alternatives
— depending  on  whether  he  believed  the  need  to  be  military,  para-military,
or  police.

This  command  would  include  complete  responsibility  for  all  anti-VC  in-
telligence— that  is,  concerning  all  VC  suspects  either  in  the  infrastructure  or
in  guerrilla  units.

3.  It  should  have  a  single,  unified  channel  for  all  "positive"  pro-people
aspects  of  RD,  irrespective  of  the  present  lines  of  command  within  civilian


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  593

agencies,  allowing  a  single  commander  to  calibrate  and  assign  priorities  to
relevant  positive  programs  on  behalf  of  the  peasantry.

This,  too,  would  include  the  immediate  expansion  of  and  control  over
all  "pro-people"  intelligence — that  is,  detailed  district-by-district  and
province-by-province  reporting  on  the  particular  gains  most  wanted  by  the
populace  (land  reform,  for  example,  in  one  province;  or  schools  in  an-
other; or  agricultural  assistance  in  another) .

4.  Sensitivity  to  political  inputs  and  wise  political  guidance  of  the  whole
process  are  needed  to  ensure  that  military  programs  support  rather  than
negate  efforts  to  win  public  support  and  participation.  Failure  io  assure  this
— which  characterized  French  efforts  in  Indochina  and  Algeria,  in  contrast
to  civil-led,  successful,  British  efforts  in  Malaya  and  the  Filipino  campaign
against  the  Huks — means  that  the  very  process  of  gaining  security  would
be  weakened  and  prolonged,  at  increased  cost  in  Vietnamese  and  American
lives.

Thus,  overall  civilian  command  of  the  RD  program  is  needed  for  funda-
mental practical  reasons,  by  no  means  for  considerations  of  international
image  alone  (though  on  the  latter  point,  it  must  be  observed  that  as  soon
as  we  put  "the  other  war"  under  obvious  military  control,  it  stops  being
the  other  war).  In  particular,  it  is  important  not  to  block  or  reverse — by
the  way  we  organize  our  efforts — the  current  genuinely  hopeful  Vietnam-
ese trend  toward  increased  civilian  influence  and  participation  in  govern-
ment.

In  short,  it  is  not  the  precise  form  of  organization  or  the  precise  choice
of  flow  chart  that  is  important.  What  is  important  is:

1.  An  immediate  and  effective  military  screen  for  RD  efforts;  and

2.  Authoritative  and  compelling  administration  of  the  efforts  of  civilian
agencies.

I  believe  we  can  institute  effective  administration  of  the  RD  program —
which  Ambassador  Lodge  has  aptly  described  as  the  heart  of  the  matter —
achieving  all  of  these  ideals:

1.  Maintain  the  effect  and  the  appearance  of  civilian  control  by  immedi-
ately assigning  overall  supervision  of  all  RD  activities  to  Ambassador  Porter
(and  assigning  a  second  deputy  to  Ambassador  Lodge  to  absorb  the  sub-
stantial other  responsibilities  now  met  by  Ambassador  Porter).

2.  That  the  several  civilian  lines  of  command  within  agencies  be  consoli-
dated into  one.  Thus,  USAID,  JUSPAO,  OSA,  and  the  Embassy  personnel
assigned  to  RD  all  would  continue  under  the  nominal  administrative  control
of  their  respective  agencies  but  full,  unified  operational  control  would  rest
solely  with  Ambassador  Porter.

3.  That  Ambassador  Porter's  authority  be  made  clear  and  full  to  each
constituent  agency  of  the  RD  team,  including:

— relocation  of  personnel;

— the  establishment  of  priorities  irrespective  of  agency  priorities;
— and  the  apportionment  of  the  funds  allocated  by  each  agency  to
Viet-Nam,  bounded  only  by  statutory  limitations.

4.  That  MACV  immediately  give  highest-level  command  focus  and  con-
solidation to  its  RD  concerns  and  staff,  now  that  it  is  no  longer  so  completely
distracted  from  RD  by  the  compelling  requirements  of  main  force  combat.
This  would  be  organized  around  the  thesis  that  the  central  need  is  the  most
effective  persuasive  power  or  leverage  on  RVNAF.  This  thesis  is  strengthened
substantially  by:


594 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


— The  firm  intent,  expressed  to  us  in  Saigon  last  week,  of  President
Thieu  and  Prime  Minister  Ky  to  shift  ARVN  infantry  to  revolution-
ary development  v^ork  starting  in  January;

— The  enhanced  powers  they  intend  to  give  to  General  Thang,
already  an  able  chief  of  RD  for  GVN.

5.  That  the  MACV  effort  embrace  at  least  advisory  control  over  all  levels
of  force — starting  with  ARVN  but  also  including  RF,  PF,  CIDG,  and  the
para-military  operations  of  the  RD  cadre,  PFF,  and  PRV.

These  steps  would  greatly  strengthen  both  the  military  and  civil  lines  of
command.  They  would  contribute  significantly  to  the  success  of  RD.  But  not
even  these  changes  would  be  decisive  without  a  strong  link  between  them.

The  civil  side  requires  the  capacity  to  influence  military  movement  which
no  organizational  chart  can  provide.  The  MACV  side  requires  the  political
and  substantive  expertise  which  a  military  organization  does  not — and  is  not
expected  to — possess.

Thus  the  fundamental  recommendation  I  would  make  is:

6.  To  appoint,  as  principal  deputy  and  executive  officer  to  Ambassador
Porter,  a  general  of  the  highest  possible  ability  and  stature — of  two,  three  or
even  four- star  rank.  To  do  so  would  win  the  following  advantages:

a.  Compelling  indication  of  the  seriousness  with  which  the  Administra-
tion regards  RD.

b.  The  rank,  and  stature  to  insure  optimum  RD  performance  from
MACV.

c.  The  rank  and  stature  to  afford  maximum  impact  on  GVN  military
leaders  and  capacity  to  persuade  them  properly  to  prod  RVNAF  when
necessary.

d.  Demonstrated  command  administrative  capacities  with  which  to  as-
sist Ambassador  Porter,  while  bridging  the  inevitable  institutional  difficulties
that  might  well  otherwise  develop  from  one  arm  of  MACV's  taking  orders
from  a  civilian.

e.  A  solution  to  the  military  control  image  problem,  by  which  the  ad-
vantages of  close  military  support  would  be  veiled  by  civilian  control.

f.  The  capacity  and  position  to  formulate  an  effective  qualitative  plan
encompassing  both  military  and  civil  realities.  Previous  plans  have  focused
on  numbers  of  provinces,  volume  of  RD  cadre  trained,  and  so  on.  They  have
put  an  unrealistic  premium  on  quantitative,  "statistical"  success.  Meaningful
criteria,  however,  must  be  qualitative.  I  would  envision  such  a  qualitative
plan  intended  to  cover  at  least  the  next  12  months.

There  would  be  an  additional  prospective  advantage  as  well.  If  it  should
later  be  found  that  dual  lines  of  authority — even  given  this  strong  link —
are  not  successful,  then  we  could  more  readily  fall  back  to  a  unitary,  mili-
tary command  structure — with  the  new  RD  general  taking  charge.

He  would  have  the  benefit,  in  that  situation,  of  having  been  under  civil-
ian control  and  his  relationship  to  RD  would  already  be  evident,  making
the  change  to  military  control  less  abrupt  and  less  susceptible  to  criticism.

Secretary  McNamara's  memorandum — sent  the  day  before  Katzenbach's —
was  of  greater  importance,  and  stands  out  as  one  of  the  most  far-reaching  and
thoughtful  documents  in  the  files.  While  this  study  concentrates  on  pacification,
it  is  necessary  to  view  McNamara's  remarks  about  pacification  in  this  memoran-
dum within  the  context  of  the  entire  paper.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  595

He  said  that  the  military  situation  had  gone  "somewhat  better"  than  he  had
anticipated  a  year  earlier,  and  that  "we  have  by  and  large  blunted  the  com-
munist military  initiative."  But  he  found  little  cause  for  hope  that  the  overall
situation  would  turn  dramatically  in  our  favor  within  the  next  two  years.  "I  see
no  reasonable  way  to  bring  the  war  to  an  end  soon,"  he  said,  and  described  the
enemy  strategy  as  one  of  "keeping  us  busy  and  waiting  us  out  (a  strategy  of
attriting  our  national  will)."

Pacification  is  a  basic  disappointment.  We  have  good  grounds  to  be
pleased  by  the  recent  elections,  by  Ky's  16  months  in  power,  and  by  the
faint  signs  of  development  of  national  political  institutions  and  of  a  legiti-
mate civil  government.  But  none  of  this  has  translated  itself  into  political
achievements  at  Province  level  or  below.  Pacification  has,  if  anything,  gone
backward  .  .  .

Thus,  the  Secretary  found  us  "no  better,  and  if  anything  worse  off — from  the
point  of  view  of  the  important  war  (for  the  complicity  of  the  people)."

He  did  not  think  at  that  time  that  major  increases  in  U.S.  force  levels  or
bombing  programs  would  make  a  big  difference  in  the  short  run.  Rather,  he
suggested  a  series  of  actions  designed  to  emphasize  to  Hanoi  that  we  were  set-
ting definite  limits  on  the  cost  in  men  and  money  of  the  war,  while  settling
down  for  the  long  haul — "a  posture  that  makes  trying  to  'wait  us  out'  less
attractive."  His  strategy  was  "five-pronged."

First,  he  suggested  that  we  stabilize  U.S.  force  levels  in  Vietnam,  "barring  a
dramatic  change  in  the  war."  The  limit  he  proposed  was  the  470,000  total  then
under  consideration.  (CINCPAC  had  requested  570,000  by  end  1967).  This
limit  would  "put  us  in  a  position  where  negotiations  would  be  more  likely  to  be
productive,  but  if  they  were  not  we  could  pursue  the  all-important  pacification
task  with  proper  attention  and  resources  and  without  the  spectre  of  apparently
endless  escalation  of  U.S.  deployments."

Second,  he  recommended  a  barrier  near  the  DMZ  and  "across  the  trails  of
Laos."

Third,  he  suggested  that  we  "stabilize  the  Rolling  Thunder  program  against
the  North."  He  thus  recommended  against  the  increase  in  the  level  of  bombing
and  the  broader  target  systems  that  the  JCS  was  then  requesting.  Again,  his
reason  was  to  "remove  the  prospect  of  ever-escalating  bombing  as  a  factor
complicating  our  political  posture  and  distracting  from  the  main  job  of  pacifica-
tion in  South  Vietnam."

Fourth,  he  said,  we  should  "pursue  a  vigorous  pacification  program."

The  large-unit  operations  war,  which  we  know  best  how  to  fight  and
where  we  "have  had  our  successes,  is  largely  irrelevant  to  pacification  as
long  as  we  do  not  lose  it.  By  and  large,  the  people  in  rural  areas  believe
that  the  GVN  when  it  comes  will  not" stay  but  that  the  VC  will;  that  co-
operation with  the  GVN  will  be  punished  by  the  VC;  that  the  GVN  is
really  indifferent  to  the  people's  welfare;  that  the  low-level  GVN  are  tools
of  the  local  rich;  and  that  the  GVN  is  ridden  with  corruption.

Success  in  pacification  depends  on  the  interrelated  functions  of  provid-
ing physical  security,  destroying  the  VC  apparatus,  motivating  the  people
to  cooperate,  and  establishing  responsive  local  government.  An  obviously
necessary  but  not  sufficient  requirement  for  success  of  the  RD  cadre  and
police  is  vigorously  conducted  and  adequately  prolonged  clearing  opera-
tions by  military  troops  who  will  "stay"  in  the  area,  who  behave  themselves
decently  and  who  show  respect  for  the  people.


r


596 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

This  elemental  requirement  of  pacification  has  been  missing.  In  almost
no  contested  area  designated  for  pacification  in  recent  years  have  ARVN
forces  actually  "cleared  and  stayed"  to  a  point  where  cadre  teams,  if  avail-
able, could  have  stayed  overnight  in  hamlets  and  survived,  let  alone  ac-
complish their  mission  .  .  .

Now  that  the  threat  of  a  communist  main-force  military  victory  has
been  thwarted  by  our  emergency  efforts,  we  must  allocate  far  more  atten-
tion and  a  portion  of  the  regular  military  forces  (at  least  half  of  ARVN
and  perhaps  a  portion  of  the  U.S.  forces)  to  the  task  of  providing  an  active
and  permanent  security  system  behind  which  the  RD  teams  and  police  can
operate  and  behind  which  the  political  struggle  with  the  VC  infrastructure
can  take  place.

The  U.S.  cannot  do  this  pacification  security  job  for  the  Vietnamese.
All  we  can  do  is  "massage  the  heart."  For  one  reason,  it  is  known  that  we
do  not  intend  to  stay;  if  our  efforts  worked  at  all,  it  would  merely  postpone
the  eventual  confrontation  of  the  VC  and  GVN  infrastructures.  The  GVN
must  do  the  job,  and  I  am  convinced  that  drastic  reform  is  needed  if  the
GVN  is  going  to  be  able  to  do  it.

The  first  essential  reform  is  in  the  attitude  of  GVN  officials.  They  are
generally  apathetic,  and  there  is  corruption  high  and  low.  Often  appoint-
ments, promotions,  and  draft  deferments  must  be  bought;  and  kickbacks
on  salaries  are  common.  Cadre  at  the  bottom  can  be  no  better  than  the
system  above  them.

The  second  needed  reform  is  in  the  attitude  and  conduct  of  the  ARVN.
The  image  of  the  government  cannot  improve  unless  and  until  the  ARVN
improves  markedly.  They  do  not  understand  the  importance  (or  respect-
ability) of  pacification  nor  the  importance  to  pacification  of  proper,  dis-
ciplined conduct.  Promotions,  assignments  and  awards  are  often  not  made
on  merit,  but  rather  on  the  basis  of  having  a  diploma,  friends,  or  relatives,
or  because  of  bribery.  The  ARVN  is  weak  in  dedication,  direction  and
discipline.

Not  enough  ARVN  are  devoted  to  area  and  population  security,  and
when  the  ARVN  does  attempt  to  support  pacification,  their  actions  do  not
last  long  enough;  their  tactics  are  bad  despite  U.S.  prodding  (no  aggres-
sive small-unit  saturation  patrolling,  hamlet  searches,  quick-reaction  con-
tact, or  off'ensive  night  ambushes);  they  do  not  make  good  use  of  intelli-
gence; and  their  leadership  and  discipline  are  bad.

Furthermore,  it  is  my  conviction  that  a  part  of  the  problem  undoubtedly
lies  in  bad  management  on  the  American  as  well  as  the  GVN  side.  Here
split  responsibility — or  "no  responsibilitv" — has  resulted  in  too  little  hard
pressure  on  the  GVN  to  do  its  job  and  no  really  solid  or  realistic  planning
with  respect  to  the  whole  effort.  We  must  deal  with  this  management  prob-
lem now  and  deal  with  it  effectively.

One  solution  would  be  to  consolidate  all  U.S.  activities  which  are  pri-
marily part  of  the  civilian  pacification  program  and  all  persons  engaged  in
such  activities,  providing  a  clear  assignment  of  responsibility  and  a  unified
command  under  a  civilian  relieved  of  all  other  duties.  (If  this  task  is  as-
signed to  Ambassador  Porter,  another  individual  must  be  sent  immediately
to  Saigon  to  serve  as  Ambassador  Lodge's  deputy.)  Under  this  approach,
there  would  be  a  carefully  delineated  division  of  responsibility  between
the  civilian-in-charge  and  an  element  of  COMUSMACV  under  a  senior
officer,  who  would  give  the  subject  of  planning  for  and  providing  hamlet


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  597

security  the  highest  priority  in  attention  and  resources.  Success  will  depend
on  the  men  selected  for  the  jobs  on  both  sides  (thev  must  be  anions  the
highest  rank  and  most  competent  administrators  in  the  U.S.  Government),
on  complete  cooperation  among  the  U.S.  elements,  and  on  the  extent  to
which  the  South  Vietnamese  can  be  shocked  out  of  their  present  pattern  of
behavior.  The  first  work  of  this  reorganized  U.S.  pacification  organization
should  be  to  produce  within  60  days  a  realistic  and  detailed  plan  for  the
coming  vear.

From  the  political  and  public-relations  viewpoint,  this  solution  is  prefer-
able— if  it  works.  But  we  cannot  tolerate  continued  failure.  If  it  fails  after
a  fair  trial,  the  onlv  alternative  in  mv  \iew  is  to  place  the  entire  pacifica-
tion program — civilian  and  military — under  General  Westmoreland.  This
alternative  would  result  in  the  establishment  of  a  Deputy  COMUSMAC\'
for  Pacification  who  would  be  in  command  of  all  pacification  staffs  in  Saigon
and  of  all  pacification  staft's  and  activities  in  the  field:  one  person  in  each
corps,  province  and  district  would  be  responsible  for  the  U.S.  effort.

(It  should  be  noted  that  progress  in  pacification,  more  than  anything
else,  will  persuade  the  enemv  to  negotiate  or  withdraw.)

Fifth,  the  Secretary  recommended  a  renewed  effort  to  get  negotiations  started,
b\-  taking  steps  '*to  increase  our  credibilit\"  with  Hanoi,  by  considering  a  shift
in  the  pattern  of  our  bombing  program  considering  the  possibility  of  cessation  of
bombing,  by  trying  to  "split  the  \C  off  from  Hanoi,"  and  by  "developing  a  real-
istic plan  providing  a  role  for  the  \  C  in  negotiations,  postwar  life,  and  govern-
ment of  the  nation."

His  summation  was  somber.  While  repeating  his  prediction  that  the  next
two  years  would  not  see  a  satisfactory  conclusion  by  either  large-unit  action  or
negotiations,  McNamara  advocated  pursuing  both  routes  although  "we  should
recognize  that  success  from  them  is  a  mere  possibility,  not  a  probability."

The  solution  lies  in  girding,  openly,  for  a  longer  war  and  in  taking
actions  immediately  which  wilfin  12  to  18  months  give  clear  evidence  that
the  continuing  costs  and  risks  to  the  American  people  are  acceptably
limited,  that  the  formula  for  success  has  been  found,  and  that  the  end  of
the  war  is  merely  a  matter  of  time.  All  of  my  recommendations  will  con-
tribute to  this  strategy,  but  the  one  most  difficult  to  implement  is  perhaps
the  most  important^one — enlivening  the  pacification  program.  The  odds
are  less  than  even  for  this  task,  if^only  because  we  have  failed  so  con-
sistently since  1961  to  make  a  dent  in  the  problem.  But.  because  the  1967
trend  of  pacification  will.  I  believe,  be  the  main  talisman  of  ultimate  U.S.
success  or  failure  in  Vietnam,  extraordinary  imagination  and  effort  should
go  into  changing  the  stripes  of  that  problem.

The  memorandum  closed  with  a  comment  on  the  thoughts  of  Thieu  and  Ky:

They  told  me  that  thev  do  not  expect  the  enemy  to  negotiate  or  to
modify  his  program  in  less  than  two  years.  Rather,  they  expect  the  enemy
to  continue  to  ^expand  and  to  increase  his  activity.  Thev  expressed  agree-
ment with  us  that  the  kev  to  success  is  pacification  and  that  so  far  pacifi-
cation has  failed.  Thev  agree  that  we  need  clarification  of  GVN  and  U.S.
roles  and  that  the  bulk  of  the  ARVN  should  be  shifted  to  pacification.  Ky
will,  between  January  and  Julv  1967.  shift  all  ARVN  infantry  divisions  to


598 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

that  role.  And  he  is  giving  Thang,  a  good  Revolutionary  Development
director,  added  powers.  Thieu  and  Ky  see  this  as  part  of  a  two-year
(1967-1968)  schedule,  in  which  offensive  operations  against  enemy  main
force  units  are  continued,  carried  on  primarily  by  the  U.S.  and  other  Free
World  forces.  At  the  end  of  the  two-year  period,  they  believe  the  enemy
may  be  willing  to  negotiate  or  to  retreat  from  his  current  course  of  action.

McNamara's  memorandum  marked  a  strong  new  emphasis  on  pacification  by
him,  and  the  ripples  that  this  new  emphasis  set  off  were  inevitably  to  spread
throughout  the  USG,  changing  emphasis  and  official  rhetoric  up  and  down  the
line.  His  first  reactions  were  official:  comments  on  his  memorandum  from
George  Carver,  Helms'  Special  Assistant  for  Vietnamese  Affairs  at  the  CIA;  and
from  the  JCS.  Carver  agreed  with  the  evaluation  of  the  situation,  but  objected  to
some  of  the  recommended  actions,  particularly  the  "press  for  negotiations"  items
which  he  felt  would  be  "counter-productive."  Carver  made  the  provocative
statement  that  he  considered  the  prognosis  "too  gloomy."  If  the  odds  for  en-
livening the  pacification  program  are  indeed  "less  than  even,  present  U.S.  objec-
tives in  Vietnam  are  not  likely  to  be  achieved."

In  his  memorandum.  Carver  took  issue  with  McNamara  on  pacification.
Carver  felt  that  "despite  the  errors  and  administrative  weaknesses  of  present
programs,  in  the  concept  of  RD  we  have  found  the  right  formula,  a  catalyst  that
is  potentially  capable  of  inspiring  the  Vietnamese  into  effective  action  .  .  .
Serious  and  systematic  effort  in  this  field  is  really  a  post-Honolulu  Conference
development  and  it  would  be  unrealistic  to  expect  dramatic,  readily  quantifiable
progress  in  the  short  span  of  eight  months."

Carver  supported  the  new  stress  on  pacification,  adding  that  he  would  support
"wholeheartedly"  a  "real  reorganizational  change  under  which  the  civilian
director  would  have  a  joint  staff  of  sufficient  scope  to  enable  him  to  plan,  con-
trol, and  direct  the  U.S.  effort  and  have  operational  control  over  all — not  just
civilian — elements  engaged  in  RD  .  .  ."  He  opposed  a  "carefully  delineated
division  between  the  civilian  in  charge  and  an  element  of  COMUSMACV  under
a  senior  officer."

"A  civilian  pacification  structure  cannot  be  givenen  a  'fair  trial'  unless  the
civilian  director  has  the  necessary  authority,"  Carver  said.  "Also,  the  trial  will
not  be  fair  if  major  quantifiable  results  are  anticipated  in  a  matter  of  months."

Carver's  vision  of  pacification  rested  to  a  large  degree  on  the  idea  of  gaining
the  active  support  of  the  population.  He  seemed  opposed  to  the  use  of  troops  to
merely  protect  terrain  and  the  people  who  lived  on  it,  saying,  "If  an  attempt  is
made  to  impose  pacification  on  an  unengaged  populace  by  GVN  or  U.S.  military
forces,  that  attempt  will  fail."

He  concluded,  as  he  had  begun:

We  agree  with  Secretary  McNamara's  prognosis  that  there  is  little  hope
for  a  satisfactory  conclusion  of  the  war  within  the  next  two  years.  We  do
not  agree  that  '"the  odds  are  less  than  even"  for  enlivening  the  pacification
program.  If  this  were  true,  the  U.S.  would  be  foolish  to  continue  the  struggle
in  Vietnam  and  should  seek  to  disengage  as  fast  as  possible.  We  think  that
if  we  establish  adequate  management  and  control  on  the  U.S.  side  and  en-
sure that  the  Vietnamese  follow  through  on  redirecting  their  military
resources  as  promised,  there  are  at  least  fair  prospects  for  substantial
progress  in  pacification  over  the  next  two  years.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  599

The  JCS  review  of  McNamara's  memorandum  was  far  more  severe.  While
agreeing  that  "There  is  no  reason  to  expect  that  the  war  can  be  brought  soon  to
a  successful  conclusion,"  the  Chiefs  made  a  strong  case,  as  usual,  for  increased
bombing,  no  predetermined  force  ceilings,  and  stated  several  times  in  difTerent
ways  that  the  war  was  going  very  well  indeed — although  this  same  point  had
been  made  by  McNamara.  The  Chiefs  also  disagreed  strongly  with  the  move
for  negotiations  which  McNamara  had  suggested.  Any  bombing  pause,  they
said,  would  be  regarded  by  Hanoi,  by  the  GVN,  and  by  our  Allies,  as  "renewed
evidence  of  lack  of  U.S.  determination  to  press  the  war  to  a  successful  con-
clusion."

On  pacification,  the  JCS  "adhered  to  their  conclusion"  that  "to  achieve
optimum  effectiveness,  the  pacification  program  should  be  transferred  to
COMUSMACV.  However,  if  for  political  reasons  a  civilian  type  organization
should  be  considered  mandatory  by  the  President,  they  would  interpose  no
objection.

Nevertheless,  they  are  not  sanguine  that  an  effective  civilian-type  or-
ganization can  be  erected,  if  at  all,  except  at  the  expense  of  costly  delays.
As  to  the  use  of  a  substantial  fraction  of  ARVN  for  pacification  purposes,
the  JCS  concur.  However,  they  desire  to  flag  that  adoption  of  this  concept
will  undoubtedly  elicit  charges  of  a  U.S.  takeover  of  combat  operations  at
increased  cost  in  American  casualties.

The  JCS  requested  that  their  views  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Presi-
dent.

On  the  record.  Secretary  McNamara  and  Under  Secretary  Katzenbach  had
been  quite  frank  in  telling  the  American  public  that  they  had  found  pacification
lagging  during  their  October  trip  to  Vietnam.  Katzenbach  said  he  was  "con-
cerned" and,  after  emerging  from  the  meeting  with  the  President,  told  the
White  House  press  corps  that  '"We  have  to  do  a  good  deal  more  to  get  the  'other
war'  moving  and  I  think  we  can."  Even  Komer,  who  remained  more  optimistic
than  McNamara  and  Katzenbach,  was  quoted  as  "acknowledging"  that  paci-
fication was  lagging.

While  "military  progress  has  exceeded  our  expectations,"  the  Defense  Secre-
tary said,  progress  in  pacification  has  "been  very  slow  indeed."  His  trip  also
raised  fears,  for  the  first  time,  in  Saigon  that  the  military  would  take  over  the
pacification  effort.  Thus,  at  almost  the  very  moment  that  the  President  was
hearing  Katzenbach's  recommendation  that  the  civilians  be  reorganized  and
given  a  last  chance  (see  previous  action).  Ward  Just  was  writing  from  Saigon:

McNamara  left  behind  the  impression  that  his  visit  to  South  Vietnam
last  week  marked  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  civilian  supremacy  in  the
American  effort  .  .  .

Sources  here  were  saying  today  that  McNamara,  a  stickler  for  detail,  was
unimpressed  with  civilian  descriptions  of  progress,  or  lack  of  it,  in  the  paci-
fication effort.  The  American  who  bears  most  of  the  authority  for  that,
Deputy  Ambassador  William  C.  Porter,  was  in  the  U.S.  during  the
McNamara  visit.

There  has  always  been,  as  one  official  here  put  it,  a  "military  component"
to  pacification.  But  it  is  understood  now  that  that  component  will  be  in-
creased and  the  military  will  more  and  more  take  control  of  pacification—
the  task  called  nation-building.


600 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

.  .  .  The  other  hkely  outcome  of  McNamara's  four  days  in  Vietnam  is
that  the  role  of  ARVN  will  change.

Informed  sources  said  that  McNamara  heard  no  complaints  whatsoever
from  American  military  sources  regarding  the  performance  of  the  ARVN,
but  the  fact  is  that  he  did.  It  has  been  an  open  secret  in  Saigon  that  the
role  of  the  ARVN  would  change  next  year.  Their  work  would  be  in  pacifi-
cation, not  in  striking  at  main  force  units  .  .  .

There  is  now  increased  certainty  that  the  war  effort  despite  public
homage  to  the  "other  war"  and  the  "hearts  and  minds  of  the  people"'  is
more  thoroughly  military  than  ever — and  more  thoroughly  American.

In  the  end,  the  military  is  thought  to  have  carried  the  day  not  by  force
or  logic  or  force  of  wisdom,  although  their  position  here  can  be  argued
plausibly  with  both  logic  and  wisdom,  but  by  sheer  weight  of  what  one
official  called  the  juggernaut  .  .  .

"Westmoreland  says  do  this,  do  that,  and  something  happens,"  one  in-
formed observer  said.  "When  Lodge  says  do  this,  do  that,  sometimes  some-
thing happens,  and  sometimes  it  doesn't  happen."

The  men  here  who  wanted  to  see  one  ideology  beaten  by  a  better  one,
to  see  the  Vietnamese  character  (not  to  mention  the  countryside)  pre-
served and  not  submerged  by  the  war,  who  viewed  the  struggle  as  an
exercise  in  counterinsurgency,  have  now  certainly  lost  .  .  .

It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  problems  of  Vietnam  lend  themselves
to  military  solutions  and  whether  changing  conditions  in  this  war  are  better
handled  by  colonels  than  diplomats.

Just's  article  was  wrong,  of  course,  since  the  decision  to  give  MACV  respon-
sibility for  pacification  had  not  been  made.  Indeed,  within  a  few  days  this  fact
had  also  leaked  to  the  press,  and  stories  in  the  New  York  Times,  datelined
Saigon,  spoke  of  the  "abortive  effort"  by  MACV  to  take  over  the  effort.  But  the
importance  of  the  stories  was  not  in  their  accuracy  or  inaccuracy,  but  in  the
fact  that  they  indicated  the  emotions  that  had  been  raised  by  the  subject  during
and  after  the  McNamara-Katzenbach-Komer  visit.  In  truth,  no  one  in  Saigon,
not  even  Lodge  and  Westmoreland,  knew  at  this  time  what  the  final  decision
was  to  be.  But  the  subject  was  up  for  discussion,  and  the  pressure  from  Washing-
ton had  been  measurably  increased.

With  the  McNamara  and  Katzenbach  memoranda  in  hand,  the  President
apparently  indicated  tentative  agreements  to  give  the  civilians  a  short  trial  period
to  get  pacification  moving.  Then  he  left  for  his  Asian  tour,  which  was  to  climax
with  the  Seven-Nation  Conference  at  Manila.  He  left  behind  him  instructions  to
prepare  a  message  to  Lodge  and  Porter  and  Westmoreland,  instructing  them  in
his  decision.  Since  the  message  was  drafted  and  sent  on  to  the  President  in
Wellington  on  October  18.  before  Manila,  but  not  sent  on  to  Lodge  and  Porter
in  Saigon  until  November  4.  after  Manila,  there  apparently  remained  some  un-
certainty as  to  his  decision,  which  was  not  clarified  until  most  of  the  principals
were  united  briefiv  in  Manila.  But  this  is  of  marginal  importance.  The  fact  was
that  the  President  had  approved  the  idea  of  giving  the  civilians  a  final  chance.

The  Cable  Excliange:  November.  1966

Bv  October  18.  McNamara.  Katzenbach,  and  Komer  had  an  agreed-upon  tele-
gram for  the  President  to  send  Lodge.  It  was  forwarded  to  Wellington,  where
the  President  had  begun  his  Asian  tour:


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  601

State  Defense  and  Komer  recommend  vour  concurrence  in  the  general
plan  recommended  by  both  Secretary  McNamara  and  Under  Secretary
Katzenbach  regarding  reorganization  on  the  American  side  of  the  administra-
tion of  the  Revolutionary  Development  TRD)  program  in  Viet-Nam.  We
therefore  recommend  that  you  approve  our  sending  the  following  State-
Defense  message  to  Ambassador  Lodge:

BEGIN  TEXT

Personal  For  Lodge.  You  have  described  the  RD  program  as  the  heart
of  the  matter  in  S\'N.  We  agree.  Also,  \ou  ha\e  reported  and  we  agree
that  progress  in  the  RD  program  so  far  has  been  slight  and  unsatisfactory.
We  all  agree  that  progress  must  be  made  in  this  crucial  area  if  the  war  is
to  be  won  in  the  South  and  if  the  North  is  to  be  persuaded  to  negotiate.
It  is  clear  to  us  that  some  organizational  changes  are  required  on  the  Amer-
ican side  to  get  RD  moving — to  bring  harder  pressure  on  the  G\'N  to  do
its  job  and  to  get  solid  and  realistic  planning  with  respect  to  the  whole  effort.

We  had  considered  putting  the  entire  program  under  COMUSMAC\'  to
achieve  these  ends:  and  this  mav  ultimatelv  prove  to  be  the  best  solution.
But  recognizing  certain  objections  to  this  approach,  we  are  prepared  to  try
a  solution  which  leaves  the  civilian  functions  under  civilian  management.
As  we  see  it.  the  trial  organization  would  involve  the  following  changes:

1.  The  several  civilian  lines  of  command  within  U.S.  agencies  would  be
consolidated  into  one.  Thus,  line  responsibilitv  for  all  personnel  assigned  to
RD  civilian  functions  would  rest  solel\-  with  one  high-ranking  civilian.  fWe
presume  this  man  would  be  Ambassador  Porter.  If  so,  he  would  have  to  be
relieved  of  all  other  duties,  and  you  would  have  to  ha\e  another  deputy
assigned  to  absorb  the  substantial  other  responsibilities  now  met  by  Am-
bassador Porter.)  The  authoritv  of  this  civilian  would  be  made  clear  and
full  to  each  constituent  agenc\  of  the  civilian  RD  team,  including  reloca-
tion of  personnel,  the  establishment  of  priorities  irrespective  of  agency
priorities,  and  the  apportionment  of  the  funds  allocated  for  RD  by  each
agency  to  Viet-Nam  (bounded  onh  by  statutory  limitations) .

2.  To  strengthen  Porter  administratively,  it  might  be  well  to  assign  him
a  competent  Principal  Deputy  and  Executive  Officer — a  military  officer
of  two  or  three-star  rank.  If  this  officer  is  desired,  General  Westmoreland
can  supplv  him  or,  if  he  requests,  the  officer  can  be  provided  from  here.
This  officer  would  not  be  to  command  U.S.  military  forces  or  operations  or
to  perform  MACVs  functions  of  advising  and  prodding  the  ARVN,  but
would  be  to  provide  administrative  strength  on  the  civilian  side  and  to  serve
as  a  bridge  to  MACV,  ensuring  efficient  interface  between  the  civilian  and
military  structures.

3.  We  understand  General  Westmoreland  is  already  considering  a
MACV  Special  Assistant  for  Pacification  or  a  Deputy  for  Pacification.  We
presume  that  the  appointment  of  such  a  Special  Assistant  or  Deputy  could
be  timed  to  coincide  with  the  changes  on  the  civilian  side,  making  possible
the  highest-level  command  focus  and  consolidation  to  MACVs  RD  con-
cerns and  staff.

4.  Careful  definition  and  delineation  of  responsibilities  of  the  U.S.
civilian  and  U.S.  military  sides  would  be  necessary  in  the  whole  RD
establishment  in  South  Viet-Nam  to  ensure  that  nothing  falls  between  the
stools  and  that  the  two  efforts  fully  mesh.


602 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II

We  are  most  anxious,  as  we  know  you  are,  to  make  progress  in  RD.  So
this  new  organizational  arrangement  would  be  on  trial  for  90-120  days,  at  the
end  of  which  we  would  take  stock  of  progress  and  reconsider  whether  to
assign  all  responsibility  for  RD  to  COMUSMACV.

As  mentioned  above,  this  cable  was  not  repeated  to  Saigon  until  after  the
Manila  Conference.  Presumably,  in  the  intervening  period,  the  President  had
had  a  chance  to  talk  directly  to  Lodge  and  Westmoreland  about  the  matter,
since  they  were  both  at  Manila  (Porter  was  not).  In  addition,  Komer  had
gone  from  Manila  back  to  Saigon  for  a  week's  stay,  and  had  given  Porter  a  clear
warning  that  the  reorganization  was  impending.  When  he  left,  Komer  left  be-
hind two  members  of  his  staff  to  assist  Porter  with  the  planning  for  the  re-
organization, ahhough  Porter  and  Lodge,  for  some  reason  not  clear  today,
still  seemed  doubtful  that  the  reorganization  Washington  was  pressing  on
them  was  really  necessary,  and  really  desired  by  the  President.

The  cable — unchanged  from  the  text  cited  above — arrived  in  Vietnam  on
November  4,  1966.  It  was  slugged  "Literally  Eyes  Only  for  Ambassador  from
Secretary,  SecDef.  and  Komer,"  and  because  Lodge  decided  to  interpret  that
slug  line  literally,  the  entire  process  was  delayed  one  week — a  sorry  spectacle
and  wholly  unnecessary  on  all  counts.  When  Lodge  answered  the  cable  by
requesting  permission  to  discuss  it  with  his  assistants,  there  was  an  understand-
able suspicion  in  Washington  that  he  was  simply  doing  so  to  delay  action  a  little
while  longer.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  cable  had  received  the  highest  slug
normally  available  to  State  Department  messages — "Literallv  Eyes  Only" — and
Lodge  could  say  truthfully  that  he  was  just  following  instruction.

In  any  event.  Lodge  sent  his  answer  to  Washington  November  6:

I  agree  that  progress  has  been  "slight  and  unsatisfactory"  and,  undoubt-
edly some  organizational  changes  can  be  helpful.  However,  before  com-
menting on  that  I  would  like  to  set  out  some  basic  considerations.

Crux  of  the  problem  is  not  defective  organization.  It  is  security.  Civilian
reorganization  can  affect  progress  only  indirectly,  because  security  will
remain  outside  civilian  purview  .  .  .

To  meet  this  need  we  must  make  more  U.S.  troops  available  to  help
out  in  pacification  operations  as  w^e  move  to  concentrate  ARVN  effort  in
this  work.  U.S.  forces  would  be  the  catalvst:  would  lead  by  example:  and
would  work  with  the  Vietnamese  on  the  "buddv"  svstem.  Thev  would  be
the  10  percent  of  the  total  force  of  men  under  arms  (90  percent  of  whom
would  be  Vietnamese)  which  would  get  the  w^hole  thing  moving  faster.

This  has  been  done  on  a  small  scale  alreadv  by  elements  of  the  U.S.
Marines,  1st  and  25th  U.S.  Infantrv  Divisions,  and  the  Koreans.  We  think
it  can  be  made  to  work  and  the  gains  under  such  a  program,  while  not
flashy,  would  hopefullv  be  solid.  Everything  depends  on  whether  we  can
change  ARVN  habits.  Experiments  alreadv  made  indicate  that  U.S.  casual-
ties would  be  few.  While  it  would  take  time,  it  would  be  clear  to  everyone
at  home  that  time  was  working  for  us  and  it  might  create  a  "smell  of  vic-
torv."  It  would  eventuallv  get  at  Viet  Cong  recruiting — surely  an  achieve-
ment which  would  fundamentallv  affect  the  course  of  the  war.

I  wonder  whether  the  above  result  could  not  be  achieved  if  the  phrase
"offensive  operations*"  were  to  be  redefined  so  that  instead  of  defining  it
as  meaning  "seek  out  and  destroy."  which  I  understand  is  now  the  case,  it
would  be  defined  as  "split  up  the  Viet  Cong  and  keep  him  off  balance."


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  603

This  new  definition  of  the  phrase  '"offensive  operations"  would  mean
fewer  men  for  the  purely  "military"  war,  fewer  U.S.  casualties  and  more
pacification.

It  would  also  hasten  the  revamping  of  the  ARVN,  which  Ky  says  is  now
due  to  have  been  completed  by  normal  Vietnamese  bureaucratic  methods
by  July  1967  (which  seems  optimistic  to  me).  What  I  propose  in  this  tele-
gram would  in  effect  revamp  the  ARVN  by  "on-the-job-training."  It  is
the  only  way  that  I  can  think  of  drastically  to  accelerate  the  present  pace.

The  question  of  transferring  Revolutionary  Development  civilian  func-
tions to  COMUSMACV  raises  questions  and  I  understand  you  recognize
certain  objections.  I  doubt  whether  it  would  solve  any  existing  problems,
and  it  would  certainly  create  many  new  ones.  I  agree  with  your  second
paragraph  in  which  you  say  civilian  functions  should  be  left  under  civilian
management.

I  agree  that  civilian  lines  of  command  within  U.S.  agencies  dealing
with  Revolutionary  Development  should  be  consolidated  under  Ambassa-
dor Porter.  He  should  take  unto  himself  the  direct  operation  of  the  five
categories  of  manpower  now  in  the  field.  I  refer  to  USAID  public  safety,
US  AID  province  reps;  JUSPAO;  CIA  and  the  civil  functions  performed  by
the  militarv  advisers.  Thev  would  all  stay  exactly  where  they  are  as  far  as
rationing,  housing  and  administration  is  concerned.  Porter  would  have  the
operational  authority  and  responsibility.

I  am  not  clear  what  another  Deputv  Ambassador  would  do  and  advise
against  such  an  unnecessar\-  and  unwieldv  structure.  Ambassador  Porter
does  not  now  absorb  "substantial  other  responsibilities"  which  distract  his
attention  from  revolutionarv  development.  Administrative  matters  in-
volving the  U.S.  Mission  as  a  whole  are  handled  by  the  Mission  Coordina-
tor, and  political  affairs  are  handled  by  me  with  close  support  from  the
political  counselor.  Economic  affairs,  in  which  Porter  as  the  man  respon-
sible for  revolutionarv  development  is  intimatelv  and  necessarily  involved,
are  well  covered  bv  AID  and  the  Economic  Counselor.  Public  affairs  not
connected  with  field  operations  associated  with  revolutionary  development
are  well  in  hand  and  do  not  take  Ambassador  Porter's  time.

The  only  "substantial  other  responsibility"  which  Porter  carries  outside
of  RD,  is  to  take  charge  in  my  absence.  I  see  no  need,  and  would  find  it
most  inappropriate,  for  this  to  be  changed.

I  think  there  is  great  merit  in  the  idea  of  having  a  high-ranking  military
man  involved  in  pacification  work.  He  should  be  in  charge  of  all  the  military
aspects  of  pacification — working  with  ARVN  and  selecting,  expediting,  and
assigning  the  U.S.  troops  who  would  operate  as  suggested  in  para  3  above.
He  should  be  an  oflficer  with  proper  knowledge  of  and  talent  for  the  subject
and  I,  of  course,  think  of  General  Weyand.  If  the  decision  is  made  by  all
hands  to  put  the  militarv  into  pacification  as  suggested  in  para  3,  the  deci-
sion as  to  where  to  place  such  a  general  should  not  be  too  difficult.

I  agree  that  careful  definitio^n  and  delineation  of  responsibilities  of  the
U.S.  civilian  and  military  sides  is  necessary.  We  intend  that  the  two  efforts
fully  mesh.

Clearly  there  is  very  little  that  can  be  done  economically,  socially,  psycho-
logically,' and  politically  for  the  "hearts  and  minds""  of  men,  if  these  men
ha\'e  knives  sticking  into  their  collective  bellies.  The  knife  must  first  be


604 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

removed.  It  is  not  the  case — as  has  so  often  been  said — of  which  came  first,
the  hen  or  the  egg  .  .  .

* *  *

This  is  obviously  not  reflected  in  our  present  organization  under  which,
nonetheless,  much  has  been  accomplished.  When  Mac  Bundv  told  me  in
February,  after  the  Vice  President's  visit,  of  the  decision  to  relieve  Porter
of  all  of  his  duties  as  Deputy  (except  that  of  being  Charge  d'Affaires  in
case  of  my  absence)  so  that  he  could  take  charge  of  the  civilian  aspects  of
pacification,  I  did  not  at  first  welcome  the  idea.  I  must,  however,  recognize
that  under  Porter  a  real  asset  has  been  built.

To  sum  up,  therefore,  the  first  priority  is  more  U.S.  troops  to  be  allotted
to  pacification  as  set  forth  in  paragraph  3;  the  second  priority  is  better  oper-
ation and  tightening  up  of  the  present  organization;  thirdly,  are  organiza-
tional changes.

Considering  that  your  message  was  "EYES  ONLY,"  I  request  authority
to  discuss  it  and  my  comments  and  plans  with  the  heads  of  the  different
Mission  agencies  involved  here.  We  are  all  anxious  to  make  progress  in  RD,
and  the  effort  will  involve  all  of  us.  It  requires  security  and  time.  Whatever
the  trial  period  may  be,  I  suggest  we  maintain  a  constant  taking  stock  of
progress  and  of  problems.  Lodge.

Back  came  Washington's  answer  on  November  12,  giving  Lodge  permission
xo  discuss  the  matter  and  show  the  cables  to  Porter,  Westmoreland,  and  "once
plans  mature,  inform  members  Mission  Council."  W^ith  the  civilians  in  Wash-
ington already  feeling  that  their  trial  period  was  underway,  they  sought  to  get
the  Mission  moving  faster  to  reorganize.  The  cables  became  a  series  of  hints  and
threats  and  detailed  guidance.  The  difficulty  in  communication  was  quite  high.
Thus,  the  November  12  cable,  drafted  by  Ambassador  Unger  and  cleared  with
McNamara,  Helms,  Gaud,  Komer,  Marks,  Katzenbach,  and  Rusk,  and  slugged
"for  Ambassador  from  Secretary,  SecDef,  and  Komer."  laid  out  for  Lodge  and
Porter  a  detailed  description  of  how  the  new  structure  should  look — although
everyone  knew  that  the  plans  had  alreadv  been  drawn  up  and  were  sitting  on
Lodge  and  Porter's  desks  in  Saigon — and  began  with  this  warning-hint:

Following  steps  need  to  be  taken  promptly  if  we  are,  in  the  time  avail-
able, to  give  adequate  test  to  organization  which  is  intended  to  keep  RD
civilian  functions  under  civilian  management,  an  objective  to  which  we
know  you  attach  considerable  important.

The  cable  went  on  to  outline  the  organization,  and  discuss  the  question  of  the
use  of  U.S.  troops:

.  .  .  We  understand  General  Westmoreland  plans  use  of  limited  number
U.S.  forces  in  buddv  system  principle  to  guide  and  motivate  ARVN  in
RD  P.  However,  we  have  serious  doubts  about  any  further  involvement
U.S.  troops  beyond  that  in  straight  pacification  operations.  We  fear  this
would  tempt  Vietnamese  to  leave  this  work  more  and  more  to  us  and  we  be-
lieve pacification,  with  its  intimate  contact  with  population,  more  appro-
priate for  Metnamese  forces,  who  must  after  all  as  arm  of  GVN  establish
constructive  relations  with  population.  Hence  we  believe  there  should  be
no  thought  of  U.S.  taking  substantial  share  of  pacification.  The  urgent
need  is  to  begin  effectively  pressing  ARVN.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  605


In  Saigon,  the  Mission  moved  slowly.  Three  days  later,  with  still  no  answer
from  Saigon,  the  State  Department  sent  out  the  following  very  short  and  curt
cable:

Personal  for  Lodge  and  Porter  from  the  Secretary
Ref  State  83699  "

REFTEL  was  discussed  todav  at  highest  levels,  who  wished  to  emphasize
that  this  represents  final  and  considered  decision  and  who  expressed  hope
that  indicated  measures  could  be  put  into  effect  just  as  rapidly  as  possible.

This  produced,  at  last,  two  long  answers  from  Lodge  and  Porter,  which  laid  out
what  the  new  structure  was  going  to  look  like,  and  added  some  personal  com-
ments from  Lodge:

FOR  THE  SECRETARY.  SECDEF  AND  KOMER
NODIS

1.  This  is  in  replv  to  your  83699  as  amended  bv  your  85196  concerning
which  General  Westmoreland.  Porter  and  I  have  had  extensive  consultation.

2.  We  will,  of  course,  carrv  out  your  instructions  just  as  rapidly  as  pos-
sible, and  our  planning  is  already  far  advanced.

3.  It  is  verv  gratifying  that  vou  feel  as  we  do  on  the  urgent  need  to  re-
vamp the  ARVN,  on  the  importance  of  putting  all  civilians  in  the  field
under  Porter  and  of  having  single  civiUan  responsibility  in  province  and
corps — measures  which  we  have  long  advocated.  Doubt  whether  we  can
change  over  night  habits  and  organization  of  ARVN  acquired  during  the
last  ten  years.  Unless  our  success  against  main  force  daytime  activity  is
equalled  bv  success  against  guerrillas  during  the  night,  swift  improvement
cannot  be  expected  to  result  simplv  bv  reorganization  on  the  U.S.  civilian
side.  It  is  our  abilitv  to  infuse  courage  and  confidence  into  all  the  Vietnam-
ese under  arms  who  are  involved  in  pacification — both  military  and  police —
which  is  at  stake.

4.  As  regards  your  instruction  for  a  military  deputy  for  Porter,  General
Westmoreland  proposes  Major  General  Paul  Smith,  who  is  acceptable  to
Porter.  Porter  believes  General  Smith  should  be  attached  to  civilian  agency
(State  Department — Embassy  Saigon)  while  on  this  duty,  along  lines
precedents  already  established.  He  could  wear  civilian  or  military  garb
as  circumstances  require.

^ ^  ^

6.  General  Westmoreland  does  not  wish  to  have  a  separate  deputy  for
Revolutionary  Development,  but  has  nominated  Brigadier  General  William
Knowlton  as  Special  Assistant  for  Pacification.


8.  Concerning  paragraph  4  (c).  Mission  directive  will  state  clearly  that
Deputy  Ambassador  Porter  will  be  primarily  occupied  with  RD  and  that
other  Nlission  business  will  be  handled  by  appropriate  sections  of  Mission.
There  are  certain  other  aspects  to  consider,  however.  Porter  has  assumed
charge  when  I  have  been  absent.  Any  change  in  that  respect  could  only
derogate  from  his  position  in  eves  of  American  community  and  GVN.  He
believes,  and  I  concur,  that  his  assumption  of  charge  cannot  be  '"nominaF*
without  risk  of  downgrading  him  in  local  eyes.  Additionally,  it  is  essential


606 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Voh  II

that  there  be  a  point  of  decision  in  Mission,  without  ambiguity.  In  practice,
Porter  intends  to  leave  routine  functions  of  Mission  (political,  protocol,
administrative,  personnel,  consular,  visitors,  etc.)  to  sections  normally
handling  them.  He  expects,  however,  to  remain  closely  cognizant  of  politi-
cal developments  and  together  with  political  counselor  and  CAS  chief  to
consult  and  decide  course  of  action  to  take  or  recommend  to  department
as  circumstances  dictate.  I  believe  this  is  reasonable  approach  and  have
full  confidence  in  his  intention  to  concentrate  on  RD.

^ ^  ^

10.  Your  paragraph  5.  I  have  always  believed  that  Revolutionary  Devel-
opment/Pacification must  be  carried  out  by  Vietnamese  forces,  who,  as
you  say,  must  establish  constructive  relations  with  the  population.  I
have  never  advocated  U.S.  forces  taking  on  "substantial"*  share  of  this  task.
I  do  believe,  however,  that  an  American  presence  in  this  field  amounting
to  a  very  small  percentage  of  the  total  manpower  involved  could  induce
ARVN  to  take  the  proper  attitude  by  "on  the  job"  training  and  could  give
the  necessary  courage  and  confidence  to  the  Vietnamese.  Lodge

FOR  THE  SECRETARY,  SECDEF  AND  KOMER
NOBIS

1.  Herewith  I  transmit  our  recommendations  carrying  out  your  83699
and  85196.  This  is  the  best  we  can  do  in  the  immediate  future  and  we  think
it  is  a  forward  step.  But  I  believe  that  you  may  wish  to  change  it  as  we
advance  along  this  untrod  path  and  learn  more  about  circumstances  and
people.  Our  proposal  is  as  follows:

a.  The  establishment  of  an  office  of  operations,  headed  by  a  Director
of  Operations.  This  headquarters  office  of  operations  will  include  the
present  staff  of:  (1)  USAID  Field  Operations;  (2)  USAID  Public
Safety;  (3)  USAID  Refugees;  (4)  JUSP AO  Field  Services  (minus
North  Viet-Nam  branch);  (5)  CAS  Cadre  Operations  Division.  The
Office  of  Operations  will  be  organized  so  that  the  above  offices  will  not
necessarily  remain  intact  when  they  are  merged  into  a  single  office.  For
example,  I  intend  to  disband  USAID  FO's  cadre  office,  and  put  those
people  now  representing  AID  on  cadre  affairs  directly  under  the  cadre
office.  Thus  there  may  be  a  net  saving  in  manpower.

b.  All  other  divisions  of  AID  and  JUSPAO  will  remain  under  the
control  of  their  respective  directors — MacDonald  and  Zorthian — who
will  be  responsible  to  Porter,  as  they  are  now,  for  their  operations.  (I
exempt  from  this  the  special  question  of  press  relations,  on  which  Zor-
thian will  continue  to  report  to  me  directly.)  Thus,  for  example,  Mac-
Donald  will  continue  to  oversee  to  Agriculture,  Education,  Health,  Indus-
try, etc.,  Divisions,  as  well  as  continue,  along  with  the  economic  counselor
Wehrle,  to  be  responsible  for  the  anti-inflation  efforts.  The  Director
of  USAID  will  be  freed  from  responsibilities  for  the  field  operations,  but
his  job  continues  to  be  one  of  vast  importance.  I  think  it  will  now  be-
come more  manacreable.

^  4=

d.  At  province  level  we  will  select  a  single  civilian  to  be  in  charge  of
all  other  U.S.  civilians  in  the  province,  in  same  way  as  MACV  senior
advisor  is  responsible  for  the  military  involved  in  the  advisory  effort  in
the  pro\incc.  This  senior  civilian  representative  will  be  the  U.S.  counter-


Rc-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  607

part  for  civilian  affairs  to  the  VN  province  chief  and,  together  with  the
MACV  senior  advisor  (sector)  and  the  province  chief,  will  form  the
provincial  coordinating  committee.  The  practice  of  assaulting  the  prov-
ince chief  with  a  multiplicity  of  advisors,  often  giving  conflicting  advice,
should  cease  under  this  arrangement.  The  senior  civilian  representative
will  write  the  efficiency  reports  of  the  American  civilians  in  the  province,
regardless  of  their  parent  agency,  and  those  reports  will  be  reviewed
by  Porter's  office,  which  will  also  control  transfers  and  assignments.

*  *  *

f.  At  the  more  complex  region/corps  level,  we  will  consider  a  similar
system,  with  a  senior  civilian  representative  responsible  for  the  overall
U.S.  civilian  effort  in  the  corps  area.  He  will  work  with  the  MACV
senior  advisor,  and  will  in  effect  be  my  agent  (and  Bill  Porter's)  at  the
corps.  I  have  long  believed  in  the  need  for  a  sophisticated  politically-
minded  man  in  charge  of  our  effort  with  the  politically  volatile  corps
commanders,  and  this  is  a  step  in  that  direction.  Porter  and  I  will  be
looking  carefully  for  the  best  men  for  these  four  difficult  jobs  .  .  .

2.  I  do  not  want  another  deputy  Ambassador.  I  intend  to  provide  office
space  for  Porter  in  the  new  chancery  (his  present  office  will  remain  at  his
disposal  even  after  he  moves).  There  is  simply  no  job  for  another  deputy
Ambassador,  particularly  since  the  present  political  counselor  works  closely
with  me,  reporting  directly.

3.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  steps  mentioned  above  are  major  ones.
Clearly  I  cannot  predict  now  how  long  they  will  take  to  achieve,  or  how
much  disruption  they  will  cause  in  their  early  stages.  For  one  thing,  I  feel
that  a  physical  relocation  of  certain  offices  now  spread  out  across  the  city
is  vital,  and  we  are  now  studying  the  details  of  how  to  do  this.  Porter  will
probably  need  to  establish  his  offices  in  a  building  other  than  the  Chancery,
in  order  to  give  the  oflice  of  operations  a  firm  guiding  hand.  He  will,  how-
ever, keep  an  office  close  to  me,  and  he  will  be  kept  closely  informed  of
policy  developments.

*  *  *

5.  I  will  need  your  personal  support  during  the  period  which  lies  ahead.
I  am  sure  that  all  hands  here,  regardless  of  agency  affiliation,  will  support
this  effort  to  unify  the  U.S.  team.  The  same  must  be  true  of  the  agencies
that  must  continue  to  backstop  us  in  Washington.  Personnel  recruitment
will  remain  in  your  hands,  and  it  ultimately  aetermines  the  caliber  of  our
efforts.  Porter  will  send  you  separate  messages  on  the  question  of  person-
nel, so  that  new  guidance  and  requirements  can  be  put  into  effect  as  quickly
as  possible.

6.  We  look  forward  through  reorganization  to  tightening  and  simpli-
fying contacts,  advice  and  coordination  with  GVN  authorities  responsible
for  RD.


E. THE  MANILA  CONFERENCE

President  Johnson  arrived  in  Manila  on  Ocober  23,  1966,  to  attend  the
seven-nation  conference  of  troop  contributing  countries  to  the  Vietnam  war.
While  the  meeting  was  hectic  and  short,  it  did  produce  a  communique  which
contained  some  major  statements  about  policy,  strategy,  and  intentions.  The
three  most  important  points  in  the  communique  of  October  25  were :


608 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

a.  The  pledge  that  "alHed  forces  .  .  .  shall  be  withdrawn,  after  close  consulta-
tion, as  the  other  side  withdraws  its  forces  to  the  North,  ceases  infiltration,  and
the  level  of  violence  thus  subsides.  Those  forces  will  be  withdrawn  as  soon  as
possible  and  not  later  than  six  months  after  the  above  conditions  have  been  ful-
filled."

b.  The  announcement  of  a  new  program,  which  had  been  thought  up  in  Wash-
ington, for  "National  Reconciliation."  Since  the  GVN  was  not  in  genuine  agree-
ment with  the  idea,  but  under  great  pressure  from  the  Americans  to  commit
themselves  to  it,  the  communique  was  quite  vague  on  what  difference  there  was,
if  any,  between  the  new  National  Reconciliation  program  and  the  old  Chieu  Hoi
program.*

c.  The  formalization,  in  public,  of  the  move  towards  getting  ARVN  more
deeply  involved  with  the  RD  program:  'The  Vietnamese  leaders  stated  their  in-
tent to  train  and  assign  a  substantial  share  of  the  armed  forces  to  clear-and-hold
actions  in  order  to  provide  a  shield  behind  which  a  new  society  can  be  built."
This  public  confirmation  of  the  tentative  steps  that  MACV  had  been  taking  was
important.  Classified  documents  could  not  be  used  as  the  basis  for  a  far-reaching
reform  of  the  ARVN;  they  would  never  have  received  wide  enough  distribution,
nor  would  they  have  been  fully  accepted  as  doctrine  by  the  doubters  within  both
the  RVNAF  and  MACV.  But  here  was  a  piece  of  paper  signed  by  the  President
and  by  General  Thieu  which  said  in  simple  language  that  a  new  direction  and
mission  was  given  to  the  ARVN.  After  Manila,  MACV  and  the  JCS  began  in
seriousness  the  formation  of  the  mobile  training  teams  which  were  designed  to
retrain  every  RVNAF  unit  so  that  it  was  more  aware  of  the  importance  of  the
population.

The  reasoning  behind  the  move  to  commit  more  troops  to  the  relatively
static  missions  involved  in  pacification  had  been  laid  out  in  documents  and
briefings  by  people  as  varied  as  Major  General  Tillson,  in  his  August  briefings
of  the  Mission  Council  (cited  in  Section  III.C.7)  and  Robert  Komer,  in  his
memorandum  to  the  President.  But  a  key  assumption  underlying  the  new  em-
phasis on  population  control  was  the  growing  belief,  in  late  1966,  that  the  main
force  war  was  coming  to  a  gradual  end.  No  other  single  factor  played  as  great
a  role  in  the  decision  to  commit  troops  to  pacification  as  the  belief  that  they
were  going  to  be  less  and  less  needed  for  offensive  missions  against  main  force
units.  The  enemy-initiated  large  unit  action  statistics  showed  a  sharp  drop  all
through  1966,  with  a  low  point  of  less  than  two  battalion  sized  or  larger  enemy
initiated  actions  per  month  in  the  last  quarter  of  1966.  There  was  increasing
talk  of  the  "end  of  the  big  battalion  war,"  both  in  the  press  and  in  the  Mission.
Moreover,  the  first  big  U.S.  push  into  VC  base  areas  was  getting  underway,  and

*  Those  Americans  who  hoped  that  National  Reconciliation  would  become  a  major
new  appeal  to  VC  at  middle  and  higher  levels  were  to  be  in  for  a  disappointment  in
the  year  following  Manila.  The  GVN  did  not  agree  with  the  philosophy  behind  total
forgiveness  to  the  enemy,  and  continually  hedged  its  statements  and  invitations  to  ^he
VC  so  that  they  resembled  surrender  with  amnesty  rather  than  "national  reconciliation."
In  fact,  the  GVN  did  not  make  an  internal  announcement  on  the  National  Reconcilia-
tion program  until  Tet.  1967,  almost  four  months  after  the  Manila  conference,  and
three  months  after  the  GVN  had  "promised"  the  U.S.  that  it  would  make  the  announce-
ment. Then,  when  the  Vietnamese  finally  did  make  the  announcement,  they  used  the
phrase  "Doan  Ket,"  which  is  accurately  translated  as  "National  Solidarity,"  rather  than
"National  Reconciliation."  The  difference  in  meaning  is,  of  course,  significant,  just  as
the  earlier  mistranslation  of  "Xay  Dung"  into  "Revolutionary  Development"  reflected
a  divergence  of  views.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  609

it  was  possible  to  believe  that  when  operations  like  Junction  Citv  and  Cedar
Falls  were  completed,  the  VC  would  have  few  places  left  to  hide  within  the
boundaries  of  South  X'ietnam.  Thus,  some  people  were  arguing  in  late  1966
and  early  1967  that  the  number  of  troops  that  could  be  committed  to  RD  was
considerably  higher  than  the  amount  that  General  Westmoreland  was  then
contemplating:  that  the  "substantial  number"  of  the  Manila  communique  could
well  be  over  half  of  all  ARVN.  These  arguments  were  usuallv  made  orally  and
tentatively,  rather  than  in  formal  written  papers,  since  they  usuallv  raised  the
ire  of  the  militarw  When  military  opposition  to  such  a  large  RD  commitment
stiffened,  the  suggestions  of  civilians  were  often  hedged  or  partiallv  withdrawn.
But  nonetheless,  the  fact  remains  that  the  undeniable  success  against  the  main
forces  in  1966  was  the  major  justifying  factor  for  those  advocating  increased
commitment  of  regular  units — even  some  U.S.  units — to  pacification.  At  that
time,  officials  were  less  worried  about  the  possibility  of  a  major  resurgence  of
the  enemy  than  about  the  possibility  of  a  new  guerrilla  war  phase.  The  fighting
in  and  near  the  DMZ  during  Operations  Hastings  and  Prairie  (August-Decem-
ber 1966)  had  been  the  heaviest  of  the  war.  and  had  been  judged  not  only  as
a  major  defeat  for  the  enemy  but  as  a  possible  turning  point  for  the  enemy,
after  which  he  "'had  begun  to  shift  some  of  his  effort  awav  from  conventional,
or  "mobile  warfare,"  toward  the  more  productive  (from  his  standpoint)  guerrilla
tactics."  The  Marines  considered  Hastings  and  Prairie  a  foolhardy  aberration
on  the  enemv's  part,  although  thev  noted  that  the  region  of  the  DMZ  "is  re-
mote, favoring  him  with  interior  lines  and  working  to  our  disadvantage  through
extension  of  our  own  supply  lines."

The  Marines  felt  that  the  enemv  attacks  at  the  DMZ  had  been  designed  pri-
marily to  draw  down  resources  from  the  Marine  pacification  efforts  near  Da  Nang,
an  interesting  example  of  how  important  thev  thought  their  embryonic  paci-
fication eff'ort  was.  But.  the  Marines  added,  whenever  the  enemy  probed  or
patrolled,  he  was  "pursued  bv  Marine  infantrv  and  pounded  by  air.  artillery,
and  naval  gunfire.  The  effort  cost  him  an  estimated  5.000  to  6.000  NVA
troops  killed  or  disabled  and  414  weapons  lost  .  .  .  and  meant  a  severe  loss
of  prestige,  and  a  further  erosion  of  the  morale  of  his  troops."

Thus,  the  slowdown  in  large  enemv  actions,  according  to  the  Marine  estimate,
and  signs  that  the  future  would  see  an  increase  in  guerrilla  activity — "Major
main  force  and  NVA  formations  have  been  relatively  inactive  since  September,
as  far  as  large  unit  actions  are  concerned.  However,  by  the  end  of  December,
corresponding  increases  were  alreadv  beginning  to  appear  in  rates  of  guerrilla
activity."

To  what  extent  other  military  and  civilian  leaders  accepted  the  Marine  as-
sessment of  enemy  capability  and  intentions  is  not  clear  from  the  documents,
but  the  mood  of  the  time  was  not  far  removed  from  the  sentiments  cited  above.
The  end  of  the  "big  war"  was  coming,  and  pacification  was  the  next  step.  It
all  fueled  the  proponents  of  greater  pacification  efforts  by  regular  troops,  and
now,  after  Manila,  the  debate  was  already  being  conducted  on  terrain  favor-
able for  the  first  time  to  the  pro-pacification  advocates.

IV. OCO  TO  CORDS

A. OCO  ON  TRIAL:  ISTRODUCTION

With  the  cable  exchange  completed,  except  for  a  few  minor  matters.  Am-
bassador Lodge  announced  the  formation  of  the  Office  of  Civil  Operations  on


610 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

November  26,  1966 — one  month  after  the  original  go-ahead  signal  had  been
given  in  Washington,  and  three  weeks  after  the  cable  to  Lodge  telling  him  that
the  President  wanted  rapid  action.  While  delays  of  this  kind  are  common  in  gov-
ernment and  do  not  normally  affect  events,  in  this  case  the  delay  got  OCO
off  to  a  visibly  slow  start  despite  the  fact  that  the  President  had  clearly  indicated
to  Lodge  and  Porter  that  he  was  putting  OCO  on  trial  and  would  review  its
accompHshments  in  a  fairly  short  time.

The  reasons  for  the  Mission's  slow  start  revealed  again  just  how  far  apart
Washington  and  its  representatives  in  Saigon  were  in  their  philosophy  and  ap-
proach to  the  war.

Washington  officials  consistently  underestimated  the  difficulty  of  the  actions
they  wanted  the  Mission  to  do,  and  continually  expected  movement  at  speeds
literally  beyond  the  capability  of  the  Mission.  They  held  these  ambitious  expecta-
tions and  exerted  pressure  accordingly — not  primarily  because  of  the  situation
in  the  pacification  program  in  South  Vietnam  (which  was  fairly  static),  but
because  of  growing  pressure  from  the  public,  the  press,  and  Congress  for  visible
progress  in  the  war,  because  of  growing  American  domestic  dissatisfaction  with
the  course  of  the  war.  If  the  American  public  could  not  see  progress  in  Vietnam,
the  support  the  Administration  had  for  the  war  would  drop  steadily.

In  its  efforts  to  show  progress  some  members  of  the  Administration  were
continually  interpreting  statistics  and  events  in  the  most  favorable  light  possible,
and  its  critics — particularly  the  press — were  interpreting  the  same  events  in  the
most  unfavorable  light  possible.  Since  events  in  Vietnam  were  usually  open
to  at  least  two  different  interpretations,  the  gap  between  the  Administration  and
its  critics  over  the  basic  question  of  How  are  We  Doing?  grew  steadily  during
1966  and  1967.  But  beyond  the  disagreements  over  facts  and  statistics,  there
was  a  continual  effort  by  Washington  officials  to  prod  Saigon  forward  at  a  faster
pace.  Thus,  if  the  Mission  had  just  started  a  crash  program  at  the  highest  speed
ever  achieved  by  the  Mission,  Washington  officials,  particularly  Komer,  acting
(he  said)  in  the  President's  name,  would  demand  that  the  Mission  redouble  its
efforts  again.  Komer,  in  a  reflective  moment,  called  it  "creative  tension."

The  Saigon  Mission  responded  to  this  pressure  with  resistance  and  hostility
towards  its  Washington  "backstops."  When  warned,  for  example,  that  the  Pres-
ident was  giving  OCO  90  to  120  days  to  prove  itself.  Lodge  and  Porter  both  shot
back  pointed  comments  to  the  effect  that  this  was  an  inadequate  time  period,
and  at  the  end  of  it  results  would  probablv  not  yet  be  visible.  They  were  right,  of
course,  but  being  right  was  not  good  enough.  Thev  fought  the  time  deadline
with  too  great  a  vehemence  and  did  not  do  enough  to  "prove"  OCO's  worth.
The  result  was  the  decision  of  March  1967  to  put  OCO  under  MACV.

The  Mission  thought  that  because  they  were  "on  the  ground"  they  had  a
unique  understanding  of  the  problems  of  Vietnam,  and  that  because  they  were
on  the  ground  they  were  the  only  accurate  judges  of  the  rate  at  which  events
needed  to  move.  This  point  of  view  did  not  take  into  account  domestic  pressures
in  the  United  States;  or,  worse,  it  deliberatelv  disregarded  them.  Thus,  the  Mis-
sion in  Vietnam  has  generally  tended  to  formulate  strategy  as  though  the
United  States  will  be  fighting  a  slow  war  in  Indochina  for  decades,  while  the
Washington  policymakers  and  strategists  have  tended  to  behave  as  though  time
runs  out  in  November  of  1968.  The  mood  of  the  Mission  towards  Washington
is  seen  more  clearlv  in  press  leaks  than  in  cables.  Thus,  for  example,  the  Evans
and  Novak  column,  from  Saigon,  on  November  30,  1966,  as  OCO  was  being
formed  and  the  trial  period  beginning:  "A  note  of  quiet  desperation  is  creeping
into  the  top  echelons  of  the  U.S.  Mission  charged  with  winning  the  war  in  Viet-


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  611

nam.  It  grows  partly  out  of  frustration  with  what  one  top  Embassy  official  de-
scribes as  'the  hot  blow  torch  on  our  rear  ends'  that  comes  from  Washington,
and,  particularly,  from  the  White  House  in  search  of  ever-new  victory  proposals
.  .  .  Much  of  this  frustration  and  gloom  would  vanish  if  attention  in  Washing-
ton were  centered  not  on  impossible  trance  tables  for  ending  the  war  next  month
or  next  year  but  on  a  realistic  projection  of  the  modest  gain  now  being  made
at  great  and  painstaking  effort."  The  difference  in  mood  is  reinforced  by  the
climate  of  Vietnam,  which  is  sluggish  and  humid,  and  by  the  influence  of  the
Vietnamese,  who  after  many  years  of  war  are  rarely  ready  to  race  out  and  seek
instant  immortality  on  the  field  of  battle  or  in  the  Ministries.

The  one  exception  to  this  dangerous  generalization  has  often  been  the  in-
dividual American  officer,  usually  military,  serving  in  advisory  or  combat  posi-
tions. There,  with  a  12-month  tour  standard,  the  Americans  have  pushed  their
Vietnamese  counterparts  hard,  and  often  encountered  great  resistance.  Indeed,
the  Americans  in  Vietnam  often  think  they  are  already  pushing  the  Vietnamese
as  hard  as  is  desirable,  and  that  Washington  is  asking  the  impossible  when  they
send  out  instructions  to  get  more  out  of  the  Vietnamese.

These  were  some  of  the  background  factors  which  were  playing  themselves
out  in  late  1966  and  early  1967.  While  tension  between  Washington  and  Saigon
had  existed  before,  and  is  inevitable  between  headquarters  and  the  field,
the  pressure  had  by  now  reached  a  level  higher  than  ever  before.  (It  is  ironic  to
note  that  the  same  tensions  that  exist  between  Washington  and  Saigon  tend  to
exist  between  the  Americans  in  Saigon  and  the  Americans  in  the  field.
The  phrase  "Saigon  commando"  is  used  continually  to  castigate  the  uninformed
officials  in  Saigon.  There  are  too  few  people  serving  in  Saigon  with  previous
field  experience,  an  unavoidable  by-product  of  the  12-month  tour,  and  this
increases  the  gap.)

So  Washington  officials  talked  about  the  lack  of  a  sense  of  urgency  in  the  Mis-
sion in  Vietnam,  and  the  Americans  in  Saigon  talked  about  the  dream  world
that  Washington  lived  in,  and  the  Americans  in  the  provinces  talked  about  the
lack  of  understanding  of  the  Americans  in  Saigon  who  had  never  seen  the  real
war.  Washington  was  dissatisfied  with  the  progress  in  Vietnam,  and  since  it
could  not  influence  the  real  obstacle,  the  Vietnamese,  except  through  the
American  Mission,  it  deliberately  put  extra  heat  on  the  Mission.  At  least  one
high  official  involved  in  this  period  in  Washington  felt  that  it  was  a  necessary
and  deliberate  charade,  and  that  only  by  overdoing  its  representations  to  the
Mission  could  Washington  assure  that  some  fraction  of  its  desires  got  through.
More  than  one  high-ranking  official  in  Saigon  felt  that  the  only  way  to  handle
Washington  was  to  hold  out  to  them  promises  of  progress  and  generally  calm
the  home  front  down,  or  else  run  the  risk  of  inflaming  Washington  and  bringing
still  more  reorganization  down  upon  the  Mission's  head.

Rather  than  try  to  apportion  responsibility  for  this  sorry  state  of  affairs,  it
would  be  useful  to  see  the  situation  as  the  by-product  of  tensions  produced  by
the  Viet  Cong  strategy  of  survival  and  counter-punching  at  GVN  weak  spots,
and  the  GVN's  inabiUty  to  be  as  good  as  we  dream  they  should  be.  The  United
States  could  perhaps  live  with  these  problems  in  an  age  in  which  communications
were  not  instantaneous,  and  publicity  not  so  unrelenting.

Beyond  this  broad  philosophical  point,  however,  the  fact  is  that  the  Mission
in  Vietnam  was  badly  organized  to  conduct  almost  any  kind  of  large  and  com-
plex operation,  let  alone  a  war.  Thus  Washington  was  right  to  reorganize  the
Mission,  and  Saigon's  reaction  to  each  reorganization  inevitably  suggested
that  still  more  was  needed.


612 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II

Beyond  that,  the  Mission  in  Vietnam  did  not  have  the  full  confidence  of  the
Washington  bureaucracy  and  Porter  still  lacked  Lodge's  full  support.

B. OCO  ON  TRIAL:  TOO  LITTLE  TOO  LATE—
OR  NOT  ENOUGH  TIME?

With  the  formation  of  OCO  in  late  November  the  civilian  mission  began  to
move  at  a  more  rapid  pace  than  it  had  in  the  post-Honolulu  period.  Most  of
this  motion,  of  course,  was  internal  to  the  U.S.  Mission  and  could  not  produce
visible  results  against  the  VC,  an  understandable  fact  when  one  considers  the
amount  of  work  that  the  decision  involved.

First,  a  Director  of  Civil  Operations  had  to  be  chosen.  Since  Washington  de-
manded rapid  action,  it  was  decided  that  the  choice  had  to  be  someone  already
in  Vietnam  and  ready  to  work,  which  sharply  narrowed  the  list  of  possible  men.
The  final  selection  was  L.  Wade  Lathram,  who  had  been  the  deputy  director
of  USAID.  Lathram  was  to  prove  to  be  the  wrong  man  at  the  wrong  time,  a
methodical  and  slow  worker  with  strong  respect  for  the  very  interagency  system
that  he  was  supposed  to  supercede.  In  normal  bureaucracies,  Lathram  could,
and  had,  compiled  excellent  records,  but  OCO  was  demanding  extraordinary
results,  and  these  required  leadership  and  drive  which  Lathram  did  not  possess.

It  had  been  anticipated  that  Porter,  a  popular  Ambassador  and  a  knowl-
edgeable and  realistic  man,  would  supply  that  leadership  and  drive,  and  that
.^athram  would  simply  run  the  OCO  staff  below  Porter.  But  neither  Porter  nor
Lathram  saw  their  roles  that  way.  Once  OCO  was  formed,  Porter  to  an  unex-
pected degree  stayed  away  from  the  day  to  day  decisions,  leaving  them
to  Lathram.  And  Lathram  simply  did  not  have  the  position  nor  the  stature  to
stand  up  to  the  full  members  of  the  Mission  Council,  whose  assets  he  now  par-
tially controlled,  (There  was  continued  confusion  over  what  was  the  respon-
sibility of  OCO  and  what  remained  under  the  control  of  the  USAID,  CIA  and
JUSPAO  directors,  and  this  confusion  was  never  resolved — and  continues  today
under  the  CORDS  structure.)

Moreover,  Porter,  who  had  not  wanted  a  second  Deputy  Ambassador  to  come
in  to  relieve  him  of  all  non-RD  matters,  soon  found  himself  tied  down  in  the
business  of  the  Embassy.  Lodge  went  on  a  long  leave  shortly  after  the  formation
of  OCO,  taking  about  one  month's  vacation  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.
This  left  Porter  with  responsibility  for  the  full  gamut  of  Ambassadorial  activities,
and  he  unavoidably  became  less  and  less  concerned  with  the  progress  of  OCO,
even  though  it  was  in  its  first  critical  month.  He  had  been  given  an  office  in  the
new  OCO  building  (appropriated  from  AID),  but  he  rarely  used  it,  staying  in
the  Embassv  in  another  part  of  Saigon,  and  showing,  in  effect,  by  his  failure  to
use  his  OCO  office  often  that  he  could  not  devote  much  time  to  OCO.

The  failure,  therefore,  to  isolate  Porter  from  all  non-RD  matters  and  provide
Lodge  with  a  full  time  DCM  turned  out  to  be  a  serious  error.  McNamara  had
clearly  foreseen  this  in  his  15  October  memorandum  to  the  President.  In  retro-
spect, we  can  see  that  Porter  should  have  been  given  one  job  or  the  other,  and
the  vacancy  filled — as  Washington  had  suggested.  But  Washington  had  just  fin-
ished cramming  an  unpleasant  action  down  the  Mission's  throat,  and  it  was  felt
that  there  were  limits  to  how  much  the  Mission  should  be  asked  to  take,
especially  since  Lodge  and  Porter  were  so  adamant  on  the  subject.  Also,  no  one
could  foresee  how  diverting  other  matters  would  become  to  Porter,  or  how  much
he  would  delegate  to  Lathram.

The  second  major  decision  for  OCO  was  the  selection  of  the  Regional  Direc-
tors— men  who  would  be  given  full  control  over  all  American  civilians  in  their


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  613

respective  regions.  Here  Porter  presented  Lathram  with  three  nominees  (II
Corps  was  left  unfilled  until  a  few  weeks  later)  and  the  choices  appeared  to  be
quite  good  ones:  in  I  Corps,  Porter's  former  Assistant  Deputy  Ambas-
sador, Henry  Koren;  in  III  Corps,  the  former  MACV  Division  Senior  Advisor,
then  with  AID,  John  Paul  Vann;  and  in  the  Delta,  the  CIA's  former  support
chief,  Vince  Heymann.  These  were  three  respected  men,  and  they  came  from
three  different  agencies,  which  emphasized  the  interagency  nature  of  OCO.  In
picking  Vann,  Porter  had  made  a  major  decision  which  involved  possibly  an-
tagonizing both  the  CIA  and  MACV,  for  Vann  was  without  question  one  of
the  most  controversial  Americans  in  Vietnam.  He  stood  for  impatience  with  the
American  Mission,  deep  and  often  publicly-voiced  disgust  with  the  course  of  the
past  five  years,  strong  convictions  on  what  needed  to  be  done,  driving  energy
and  an  encyclopedic  knowledge  of  recent  events  in  Vietnam — and  was  a  burr
in  the  side  of  the  CIA,  with  which  he  had  frequently  tangled,  particularly  over
the  cadre  program,  and  MACV,  with  which  he  had  fought  ever  since  disagree-
ing publicly  with  General  Harkins  in  1963  (a  fight  which  led  to  his  resignation
from  the  Army  and  was  extensively  discussed  in  David  Halberstam's  book,  The
Making  of  a  Quagmire) .

The  importance  of  the  appointments  was  not  lost  on  the  Mission  or  the  press.
While  Lathram's  appointment  had  stirred  the  bureaucracy  but  not  the  press,
the  regional  directors  came  as  a  surprise  and  a  major  story.  In  a  front-page  story
in  The  Washington  Post,  Ward  Just  described  Vann  as  "one  of  the  legendary
Americans  in  Vietnam,"  and  said  that  Koren's  appointment  indicated  the  great
importance  the  Mission  attached  to  the  jobs.  Just  added  that  ''there  were  indica-
tions that,  if  OCO  did  not  succeed,  the  military  command  v^ould  lake  charge  of
pacification,  or  'Revolutionary  Development.'  "

Next  came  the  selection  of  OCO  Province  Representatives,  to  be  chosen  out
of  the  available  talent  in  each  province.  Here  the  slowness  of  the  civilians
began  to  tell,  and  it  was  not  until  January  that  the  appointments  could  be  made
for  every  province.  Trying  to  pick  men  on  the  basis  of  their  knowledge  and
ability  takes  time  and  requires  trips  to  each  province,  consultations  with  other
Mission  Council  members,  etc.,  and  the  civilians  set  out  to  do  all  this.

Meanwhile,  a  huge  job  which  no  one  in  Washington  could  fully  appreciate
was  underway — the  physical  relocation  of  ofiices  that  Lodge  had  described  as
necessary  in  his  November  16  cable.  Even  in  Washington  it  may  be  difficult  to
get  furniture  and  phones  moved,  except  for  very  high-ranking  people;  in  Saigon
a  major  relocation  was  more  difficult  to  mount  than  a  military  operation.  While
this  was  going  on,  involving  literally  over  one  thousand  people,  work  in  OCO
was  even  more  confused  and  sporadic  than  usual.

None  of  these  minor  organizational  events  would  be  of  any  importance  if
it  were  not  for  the  fact  that  they  were  eating  away  at  the  meager  time  al-
lotted to  the  civilians  to  prove  that  OCO  should  remain  independent  of  MACV.
But  they  did  consume  time,  and  this  was  to  prove  to  be  a  factor  in  evaluating
OCO.

The  documents  do  not  answer  the  question  of  whether  or  not  OCO  ever
really  had  a  chance  to  survive,  or  whether  it  was  just  allowed  to  start  up  by  peo-
ple who  had  already  decided  to  turn  RD  over  to  MACV  in  a  few  months.  Both
possibilities  fit  the  available  facts.  An  educated  guess  would  be  that  the  decision
to  give  Westmoreland  control  was  tentativelv  made  by  the  President  in  the  late
fall  of  1966,  but  that  he  decided  he  would  gain  by  allowing  the  civilians  to  re-
organize first.  If  OCO  proved  to  be  a  major  success,  he  could  always  continue
to  defer  his  decision.  If  OCO  fell  short  of  the  mark,  then  it  still  would  be  an
organization  in-being  ready  to  be  placed  into  MACV  without  further  internal


614 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

changes,  and  that  in  itself  would  be  a  major  gain.  Moreover,  if  the  changes  came
when  Lodge  and  Porter  were  gone,  there  would  be  less  difficulties.

If  OCO  moved  too  slowly  for  Washington's  satisfaction,  it  nonetheless  ac-
complished many  things  which  had  previously  been  beyond  the  Mission's  ability:

— Uniting  personnel  from  AID,  CIA,  and  JUSPAO  into  a  single  Plans  &  Eval-
uations Section,  OCO  produced  the  first  integrated  plans  for  RD  on  the  U.S.  side.
These  plans  were  ambitious  and  far-reaching,  and  required  MACV  inputs.  The
fact  that  the  civilians  were  asking  MACV  for  inputs  to  their  own  planning,
rather  than  the  reverse,  so  startled  MACV  that  MACV,  in  turn,  began  more
intensive  discussions  or  plans.  The  planning  effort  involved  several  military  of-
ficers on  loan  to  OCO,  a  fact  which  further  heightened  tension  between  OCO
and  MACV.  When  the  plans  first  formulated  were  presented  to  General  West-
moreland, he  indicated  that  he  was  not  going  to  be  bound  by  any  plans  which
reduced  his  flexibility  and  ability  to  respond  to  military  pressure  whenever  and
wherever  it  occurred;  that  is,  he  was  reluctant  to  commit  many  military  assets
to  permanent  RD  support  activities.  But  the  relentless  pressure  from  OCO,  from
Komer  in  Washington,  and  even  from  the  public  attention  focused  on  the  issue
by  Article  11  of  the  Manila  communique  C'The  Vietnamese  leaders  stated  their
intent  to  train  and  assign  a  substantial  share  of  the  armed  forces  to  clear-and-
hold  actions  in  order  to  provide  a  shield  behind  which  a  new  society  can  be
built")  all  were  working  against  General  Westmoreland,  and  towards  the  as-
signment of  ARVN  units  to  RD  missions.

— The  civilians  in  the  provinces  spoke  with  a  single  voice  for  the  first  time.  The
province  chiefs  welcomed  the  change  for  this  reason,  according  to  most  ob-
servers. Within  the  American  team  in  each  province,  there  was  now  a  built-in
obligation  to  consult  with  each  other,  instead  of  the  previous  situation  in  which
more  and  more  agencies  were  sending  down  to  the  provinces  their  own  men  who
worked  alone  on  their  own  projects.

— The  very  act  of  physical  relocation  of  the  five  major  branches  of  OCO  into  a
single  building  changed  attitudes  and  behavior  patterns  in  the  civilian  mission.
Public  Safety  and  the  Special  Branch  advisors,  for  example,  now  were
co-located,  and  began  working  together  closelv.  Previously,  they  had  both  ad-
vised the  same  people  through  completely  separate  channels  which  met  only
at  the  top;  i.e.,  when  the  chief  of  the  Public  Safety  branch  and  the  deputy  CIA
station  chief  had  something  specific  and  urgent  they  had  to  resolve.  On  the  day-
to-day  matters,  there  had  actually  been  a  deliberate  compartmentalization  before
OCO  was  formed.

These  examples  of  gains  could  be  repeated  across  a  broad  front.  They  were
first  steps  in  a  direction  which  might  ultimately  have  created  a  strong  civilian
mission,  given  time,  better  leaders,  and  more  support  from  Washington.  But
even  without  these  things,  OCO  was  a  definite  plus.

The  period  between  December  and  April  was  a  period  in  which  everyone
paid  lip  service  to  the  idea  of  supporting  OCO,  but  in  reality  it  was  sniped  at
and  attacked  almost  from  the  outset  bv  the  bureaucracies.  In  Saigon,  Zorthian,
and  Hart,  Directors  of  JUSPAO  and  CIA,  respectively,  made  it  clear  that  they
wanted  to  remain  verv  much  involved  in  any  decision  affecting  their  respective
fields  of  endeavor.  W  hile  this  was  a  reasonable  point  of  view,  it  meant  that  CIA
and  even  USIA  officers  in  the  field  often  refused  to  accept  any  guidance  from
the  OCO  representati\e,  and  cases  began  to  come  to  light  in  which  major  ac-
tions were  being  initiated  bv  the  CIA  without  any  consultation  with  OCO.  (The
CIA  reasoning  and  defense  rested  on  the  fact  that  one  of  Hart's  deputies  was
ostensibly  an  assistant  director  of  OCO.)


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  615

In  Washington,  there  was  open  skepticism  to  OCO  from  almost  all  quarters,
particularly  AID,  which  found  itself  footing  most  of  the  bill.  USIA  and  CIA
both  indicated  that  they  would  continue  to  deal  directly  with  their  field  person-
nel. In  theory,  everyone  in  Washington  was  to  participate  in  the  backstopping
of  the  interagency  OCO,  but  in  practice,  without  a  single  voice  in  charge,  this
meant  that  no  one  was  helping  OCO,  no  one  was  trying  to  sell  them  as  a  soing
concern  in  Washington.  Komer's  role  here  was  ambiguous:  he  supported  OCO
as  long  as  it  was  in  operation,  and  probably  contributed  more  to  its  achieve-
ments than  anyone  else  in  Washington,  but  at  the  same  time  he  was  already  on
the  record  as  favoring  a  military  takeover,  which  was  the  very  thing  OCO
sought  to  avoid.

Washington  had  decreed  OCO,  and  had  given  Porter  great  responsibility.  Un-
fortunately, they  had  failed  to  give  him  authority  and  stature  needed  to  make  the
agencies  work  together.

As  pointed  out  before,  this  might  well  have  been  overcome  if  time  had  not
been  so  short.  The  slow  methodical  way  of  moving  bureaucracies  may  be  more
effective  than  sweeping  changes,  anyway,  if  one  has  time.  But  in  Vietnam  no
one  was  being  given  much  time.

Shortly  after  OCO  was  formed,  Komer's  deputy.  Ambassador  William  Leon-
hart,  visited  Vietnam,  and  when  he  returned,  wrote  the  following  penetrating
assessment,  which  was  sent  to  the  President,  Secretaries  Rusk  and  McNamara,
and  Mr.  Gaud  and  Mr.  Helms:

Whether  Porter's  new  Office  of  Civil  Operations  (OCO)  is  viewed  as  a
final  organizational  solution  or  as  an  inevitable  intermediate  step  it  is
achieving  a  number  of  useful  purposes.  It  establishes,  on  the  civil  side  for
the  first  time,  unified  interagency  direction  with  a  chain  of  command  and
communication  from  Saigon  to  the  regions  and  provinces.  It  centralizes
US-GVN  field  coordination  of  civil  matters  in  one  US  official  at  each  level.
It  affords  a  civil-side  framework  which  can  work  more  effectively  with  US
military  for  politico-military  coordination  and  more  integrated  pacification
planning.

At  the  time  of  my  visit.  OCO's  impact  had  been  felt  mainly  in  Saigon.
Its  headquarters  organization  was  largely  completed.  Three  of  the  four
Regional  Directors  had  been  named,  all  were  at  work,  and  one  was  in  full
time  residence  in  his  region.  Regional  staffs  were  being  assembled  but  not
yet  in  place.  At  province  level,  teams  were  being  interviewed  for  the  selec-
tion of  Provincial  Representatives.  Porter  expects  them  to  be  designated
by  January  1.  Some  slippage  is  possible,  and  it  may  be  90  days  or  so  before
the  new  organization  is  functioning.  I  participated  in  the  initial  briefings
of  the  province  teams  I  visited,  passing  along  and  emphasizing  Bob  Komer's
admonitions  against  over-bureaucratization  of  effort  and  for  fast  and  hard
action.  These  were  well-received.  Morale  was  good.  All  the  GVN  Province
Chiefs  with  whom  I  talked  thought  the  new  structure  a  great  improvement.

C. TIME  RU\S  OUT

The  decision  to  turn  pacification  over  to  MACV,  with  an  integrated  civil-
military  chain  of  command,  was  announced  in  Saigon  on  May  11,  1967,  by
Ambassador  Ellsworth  Bunker.  In  his  announcement,  Bunker  said  that  the
decision  was  entirely  his.

But  Bunker  had  been  in  Vietnam  as  Ambassador  for  less  than  two  weeks,  and


616 Gravel  Edition  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

he  was  therefore  clearlv  acting  under  strong  guidance,  if  not  orders,  from  Wash-
ington. The  decision  to  give  MAC\'  responsibiUtv  had  actually  stemmed  from
the  clear  and  unmistakable  fact  that  the  President  now  considered  such  a  re-
organization highh  desirable.

It  is  not  clear  when  the  President  decided  this  in  his  own  mind.  The
documents  do  not  shed  an\  light  on  this  point,  and,  indeed,  they  simplv  fail  to
discuss  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  decision  in  the  earlv  months  of  1967,  when  the
subject  was  a  hot  one  in  Washington  and  Saigon.  This  all  suggests  that  what-
ever consideration  of  the  issue  was  going  on  was  confined  strictlv  to  private  ses-
sions between  principals,  and  that  the  statT  work  previously  done  on  a  highly
restricted  basis  was  no  longer  considered  necessary  by  the  principals.

It  has  been  suggested  that  the  President  had  been  strongly  in  favor  of  the  move
for  months  before  he  finally  gave  the  go-ahead  signal,  and  that  he  was  held  back
by  the  strong  opposition  from  Lodge  and  Porter,  from  Katzenbach,  from  the
agencies  in  Washington — and  bv  the  fact  that  it  would  appear  to  be  a  further
"militarization"  of  the  effort.  This  mav  well  be  the  case:  certainly  nothing  in
the  record  disproves  this  possibility.  But  since  there  is  no  way  that  this  study  can
answer  the  question,  it  must  be  left  undecided.

Whenever  the  President  made  his  decision  in  his  own  mind,  he  chose
the  Guam  meeting  as  the  place  to  discuss  with  a  group  of  concerned  officials  out-
side his  own  personal  staff".  In  a  private  meeting  on  March  20,  or  21,  1967,  with
senior  officials  from  Washington  and  Saigon,  the  President  indicated  that  he
felt  the  time  had  conie  to  turn  pacification  over  to  MACW  The  President  en-
joined those  in  the  room  at  that  meeting  not  to  discuss  the  decision  with  any-
one until  it  was  announced,  and  he  did  not  inform  the  G\'N.

At  the  end  of  the  Guam  meeting,  the  President  sent  Komer  back  to  Saigon
with  \\  estmoreland  and  Lodge,  and  Komer  spent  a  week  there,  working  out  pre-
liminary details  of  the  reorganization.  By  this  time  Komer  knew  that  he  was  to
become  Deputy  to  General  Westmoreland,  although  many  details  remained
to  be  ironed  out.

W  hen  Komer  returned  to  Washington,  with  the  preliminary  plans,  a  period
followed  during  which  no  further  action  on  the  reorganization  was  taken.  In
all.  nearly  two  months  went  bv  from  the  President's  statement  at  Guam  to  the
public  announcement,  during  which  only  a  handful  of  people  in  Washington
and  Saigon  knew  what  was  going  to  happen.  The  delays  were  caused  bv  a  com-
bination of  factors:  Bunker's  understandable  desire  to  spend  some  time  on  per-
sonal business  before  going  to  Saigon,  the  President's  desire  to  have  Bunker
make  the  final  announcement  himself  after  he  had  reached  Saigon,  the  need  to
work  out  final  details.  Since  the  President  was  the  man  who  had  pressed  every-
one else  working  on  N'ietnam  to  greater  and  greater  effort,  and  since  he  stood
to  lose  the  most  from  loss  of  time,  it  is  surprising  that  he  was  now  willing  to
see  two  months  lost,  with  a  tired  and  lame-duck  Mission  in  Vietnam,  waiting
for  the  new  team  in  a  highly  apprehensive  state,  and  confusion  at  the  higher
levels.  But  for  reasons  which  are  not  readily  apparent,  the  President  did  not
push  his  new  team,  and  it  was  not  until  Mav  13.  1967,  that  Bunker  made  his
announcement  (which  had  been  drafted  bv  Komer) :

Since  being  appointed  L\S.  Ambassador  to  N'ietnam  I  have  been  giving
a  great  deal  of  thought  to  how  to  organize  most  effectively  the  U.S.  Ad-
visory role  in  support  of  the  Nietnamese  government's  Revolutionary
Development  effort.  Like  mv  predecessor,  I  regard  RD — often  termed
pacification — as  close  to  the  heart  of  the  matter  in  V  ietnam.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  617

Support  of  Revolutionary  Development  has  seemed  to  me  and  my  senior
colleagues  to  be  neither  exclusively  a  civilian  nor  exclusively  a  military  func-
tion, but  to  be  essentially  civil-military  in  character.  It  involves  both  the
provision  of  continuous  local  security  in  the  countrvside — necessarily  a
primarilv  military  task  and  the  constructive  programs  conducted  by  the
Ministry  of  Revolutionary  Development,  largely  through  its  59-member
RD  teams.  The  government  of  Vietnam  has  recognized  the  dual  ci\il-mil-
itarv  nature  of  the  RD  process  bv  assigning  responsibilitv  for  its  execution
to  the  Corps  Region  Commanders  and  by  deciding  to  assign  the  bulk  of  the
regular  ARVN,  as  well  as  the  Regional  and  Popular  forces,  to  provide  the
indispensable  security  so  that  RD  can  proceed  in  the  countryside.  As  senior
American  official  in  Vietnam,  I  have  concluded  that  the  U.S.  Advisory  and
supporting  role  in  Revolutionary  Development  can  be  made  more  effective
by  unif\ing  its  civil  and  military  aspects  under  a  single  management  con-
cept. Unified  management,  a  single  chain  of  command,  and  a  more  closely
dovetailed  advisory  effort  will  in  m\  opinion  greatly  improve  U.S.  support
of  the  vital  RD  program.  Therefore,  I  am  giving  General  Westmoreland
the  responsibility  for  the  performance  of  our  U.S.  Mission  field  programs
in  support  of  pacification  or  Revolutionary  Development.  To  assist  him  in
performing  this  function.  I  am  assigning  Mr.  Robert  Komer  to  his  head-
quarters to  be  designated  as  a  deputy  to  COMUSMACV  with  personal  rank
of  ambassador.

I  have  two  basic  reasons  for  giving  this  responsibility  to  General  West-
moreland. In  the  first  place,  the  indispensable  first  stage  of  pacification  is
providing  continuous  local  security,  a  function  primarily  of  RVNAF,  in
which  MACV  performs  a  supporting  advisory  role.  In  the  second  place,  the
greater  part  of  the  U.S.  Advisory  and  Logistic  assets  involved  in  support
of  Revolutionary  Development  belong  to  MACV.  If  unified  management
of  U.S.  Mission  assets  in  support  of  the  Vietnamese  program  is  desirable,
COMUSMACV  is  the  logical  choice.

I  have  directed  that  a  single  chain  of  responsibility  for  advice  and  sup-
port of  the  Vietnamese  Revolutionary  Development  program  be  instituted
from  Saigon  down  to  district  level.  Just  as  Mr.  Komer  will  supervise  the
U.S.  Advisory  role  at  the  Saigon  level  as  Deputy  To  General  Westmore-
land, so  will  the  present  OCO  regional  directors  serve  as  deputies  to  U.S.
field  force  commanders.

At  the  province  level,  a  senior  advisor  will  be  designated,  either  civilian
or  military,  following  analysis  of  the  local  situntion.

While  management  will  thus  be  unified,  the  integrity  of  the  Office  of  Civil
Operations  wiU  be  preserved.  It  will  continue  to  perform  the  same  functions
as  before,  and  will  continue  to  have  direct  communication  on  technical  mat-
ters with  its  field  echelons.  The  present  Revolutionary  Development  sup-
port division  of  MACV  will  be  integrated  into  OCO,  and  its  chief  will  serve
as  deputy  to  the  Director  of  OCOT  Such  a  unified  civil  military  U.S.  ad-
visory effort  in  the  vital  field  of  Revolutionary  Development  is  un-
precedented. But  so  too  is  the  situation  which  we  confront.  RD  is  in  my
view  neither  civil  nor  military  but  a  unique  merging  of  both  to  meet  a
unique  wartime  need.  Thus  my  resolution  is  to  have  U.S.  civilian  and  mil-
itary officials  work  together  as  one  team  in  order  more  effectively  to  sup-
port our  Vietnamese  aUies.  Many  further  details  will  have  to  be  worked  out,
and  various  difficulties  will  doubtless  be  encountered,  but  I  am  confident
that  this  realignment  of  responsibilities  is  a  sound  management  step  and  I


618 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

count  on  all  U.S.  officers  and  officials  concerned  to  make  it  work  effectively
in  practice.

Bunker  outlined  to  Washington  the  line  he  proposed  to  take  during  a  question
and  answer  period  with  the  press:

Besides  the  above  announcement,  I  intend  to  stress  the  following  basic
points  in  answer  to  press  questions  or  in  backgrounding:  (a)  I  made  this
decision  not  because  I  think  that  U.S.  civilian  support  of  RD  has  been
unsatisfactory — on  the  contrary  I  am  pleased  with  progress  to  date — but
because  I  think  it  is  essential  to  bring  the  U.S.  military  more  fully  into  the
RD  advisory  effort  and  to  pool  our  civil/  military  resources  to  get  optimum
results:  (b)  indeed  I  regard  all  official  Americans  in  Vietnam  as  part  of
one  team,  not  as  part  of  competing  civilian  and  military  establishments:
(c)  as  senior  U.S.  official  in  Vietnam,  I  intend  to  keep  a  close  eye  on  all
U.S.  activities,  including  pacification — I  am  not  abdicating  any  of  my  re-
sponsibilities but  rather  am  having  the  entire  U.S.  pacification  advisory
effort  report  to  me  through  General  Westmoreland  rather  than  through
two  channels  as  in  the  past:  (d)  during  34  years  in  the  business  world  I
have  learned  that  unified  management  with  clear  lines  of  authority  is  the
way  to  get  the  most  out  of  large  scale  and  highly  diversified  programs:  (e)
since  continuous  local  security,  which  RVNAF  must  primarily  provide,  is
the  indispensable  first  stage  of  the  pacification  process,  the  MACV  chain  of
command  can  obviously  be  helpful  to  the  RVNAF:  and  (f)  I  intend  to
see  that  the  civilian  element  of  the  U.S.  effort  is  not  buried  under  the  mil-
itary— in  many  instances  soldiers  will  end  up  working  for  civilians  as  well
as  the  reverse — in  fact  Ambassador  Komer  will  be  General  Westmore-
land's principal  assistant  for  this  function  while  General  Knowlton  will  be
deputy  to  Mr.  Lathram  of  OCO.  I  intend  to  keep  fully  informed  personally
about  all  developments  in  this  field  and  to  hold  frequent  meetings  with  Gen-
eral Westmoreland  and  Ambassador  Komer  for  the  purpose  of  for-
mulating policy.

The  reaction  of  the  civilians  in  Vietnam  to  the  announcement  of  Ambassador
Bunker  was  one  of  dismay.  In  the  first  confused  days,  before  details  of  the  re-
organization could  be  worked  out  and  announced,  the  press  was  able  to  write
several  articles  which  probably  were  accurate  reflections  of  the  mood  of  most
civilians:

Civilian  reactions  today  ranged  from  the  bitter  ("We  don't  think  they
can  do  their  own  job — how  can  they  do  ours?"")  to  the  resigned  cril  be
a  good  soldier  and  go  along"")  to  the  very  optimistic  (""We've  finally  got  a
civilian  in  amonii  the  generals'").  Almost  nowhere  was  there  much  enthusi-
asm  for  what  Bunker  called  ""a  unique  experiment  in  a  unique  situation  "

Nor  was  there  jubilation  at  the  American  military  command.  West-
moreland, who  wanted  to  take  charge  of  the  pacification  program  two
years  ago,  is  now  reported  to  be  deeply  skeptical  of  the  possibility  of  pro-
ducing the  kind  of  quick  results  the  White  House  apparendy  wants.

""I  did  not  volunteer  for  the  job,'"  he  is  reported  to  have  said  privately
this  morning,  ""but  now  that  I've  got  it.  Til  do  my  best  with  it."

.  .  .  Serious  officials — both  civilian  and  military — realize  there  are  limi-


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  619

tations  on  how  far  an  officer  will  go  in  reporting  "negative"  information,
and  how  hard  a  civilian,  now  his  subordinate,  will  fight  for  realism.

.  .  .  Officials  today  sought  to  mitigate  the  effect  of  the  announcement
by  saying  that  Komer  and  his  staff,  physically  located  in  the  American
Military  Command  in  Saigon,  will  be  in  a  far  better  position  to  influence
the  course  of  Pacification  than  he  would  among  "all  the  guys  with  glasses
and  sack  suits"  in  the  Office  of  Civil  Operations.

The  Vietnamese  reaction  to  the  reorganization  was  more  difficult  to  gauge.
Ward  Just,  in  the  same  story  cited  above,  said  'There  was  surprisingly  little
comment  today  from  South  Vietnamese,  who  have  seen  so  many  efforts  at
pacification  and  so  many  efforts  to  attempt  to  organize  and  reorganize  them-
selves. One  high  American  who  professed  to  have  spoken  with  the  South  Viet-
namese command  reported  they  are  "delighted."  But  Komer's  talk  with  Gen-
eral Nguyen  Due  Thang,  the  Minister  for  Construction  (RD),  did  not  reveal
any  delight  on  Thang's  part.  Indeed,  Thang's  first  reaction  was  that  the  GVN
should  emulate  the  U.S.  and  turn  pacification  over  to  the  Ministry  of  Defense —
an  action  which  would  have  run  directly  counter  to  the  U.S.  objective  of  en-
couraging civilian  government  in  Vietnam.

There  is  no  telegraphic  record  of  the  first  series  of  talks  that  Komer  and
Bunker  had  with  Ky,  Thieu,  Vien,  and  Thang  on  the  reorganization.  Not  until
a  Komer-Ky  talk  of  May  15  does  the  cable  traffic  reflect  the  GVN  reaction  to
the  reorganization.  By  this  time,  it  should  be  noted,  the  GVN  knew  that  the
U.S.  did  not  want  the  GVN  to  follow  suit,  and  it  knew  all  our  arguments  and
could  play  them  back  to  us  with  ease:

Ky  said  that  General  Thang  had  suggested  that  the  RD  effort  be
brought  under  Defense  Ministry  to  conform  to  the  U.S.  reorganization.  Ky
and  General  Vien  had  demurred  on  grounds  that  such  a  reorganization  on
the  GVN  side  would  be  far  more  complex  than  on  U.S.  side,  would  disrupt
RD  process,  and  would  stretch  General  Vien  and  MOD  too  thin.  Besides  it
would  not  be  politically  advisable  at  the  very  time  when  there  was  a  hopeful
trend  toward  a  more  civilianized  and  representative  government.  Komer
agreed  with  Ky-Vien  reasoning  .  .  .

D. THE  CORDS  REORGANIZATION

With  Bunker's  announcement,  the  Mission  began  its  second  massive  reor-
ganization in  five  months.  This  time,  the  reorganization  was  accompanied  by
one  of  the  periodic  turnovers  in  Mission  Council  personnel  which  have  char-
acterized the  Mission:  for  some  reason,  the  tours  of  many  high-ranking  officers
seem  to  end  at  roughly  the  same  time,  and  thus,  in  1964,  1965,  and  again  in  the
spring  of  1967,  several  key  members  of  the  Mission  Council  all  left  within  a
few  weeks  of  each  other.  This  time,  in  addition  to  Ambassador  Lodge,  Porter,
Habib,  and  Wehrle  all  left  within  a  short  period  of  time,  and  only  a  high-level
decision — announced  by  Bunker  at  the  same  time  as  the  reorganization — kept
Zorthian  and  Lansdale  on  for  extensions.  Into  the  Mission  came  Bunker,  Locke,
Komer,  General  Abrams,  the  new  Deputy  COMUSMACV,  and  Charles
Cooper,  the  new  Economic  Counselor,  and  Archibald  Calhoun,  the  new  Po-
litical Counselor.

Despite  the  turnover,  the  reorganization  seemed  to  proceed  with  compara-


620 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

tive  ease.  Perhaps  the  fact  that  OCO  had  already  been  formed  was  critical  here,
since  it  meant  that  instead  of  MACV  dealing  with  three  agencies  simultaneously,
the  first  discussions  could  be  restricted  primarily  to  MACV  and  OCO.  More-
over, because  OCO  was  already  a  going  concern,  the  civilians  w^ere  better  or-
ganized than  ever  before  to  maintain  their  own  position  in  dealings  with  the
military.

But  above  all,  it  was  the  decision  by  Westmoreland  and  Bunker  to  let  Komer
take  the  lead  in  the  reorganization  which  was  important.  Komer  now  made
major  decisions  on  how  the  new  structure  would  look  which  were  usuallv  backed
up  by  Westmoreland.  The  result  looked  much  better  than  many  people  had
dared  hope.

The  details  of  the  reorganization  are  not  worth  detailed  discussion  here.  But
one  point  can  illustrate  the  wav  CORDS  could  resolve  previouslv  unresolved  is-
sues: the  question  of  the  role  of  the  ARVN  Division  in  the  chain  of  command.

As  noted  in  an  earlier  section,  study  groups  had  over  the  years  advocated  re-
moving the  ARVN  Divisions  from  the  chain  of  command  on  Pacification  RD.
But  MACV  had  large  advisory  teams  with  the  Divisions  and  these  teams  con-
trolled both  the  sector  (Province)  advisorv  teams  and  Regimental  advisory  teams
below  them.  The  structure  followed  normal  military  lines,  and  made  good  sense
to  most  of  the  officers  in  the  higher  levels  of  MACV.

The  counter-argument  was  that  Division  was  a  purely  military  instrument  and
could  not  adequately  control  the  integrated  civilian-military  effort  that  was
leaded  at  the  Province  level.  Thus  the  Roles  and  Missions  Study  Group,  for  ex-
ample, had  recommended  that  "Division  be  Removed  from  the  RD  Chain  of
Command  .  .  .  that  the  role  of  the  Province  Chief  be  upgraded  .  .  .  that
Province  Chiefs  have  operational  control  (as  a  minimum)  of  all  military  and
paramilitary  forces  assigned  to  operate  exclusively  in  their  sector."  The  Study
Group  recognized  that  "the  power  structure  being  what  it  is  in  the  GVN,  major
progress  toward  this  goal  will  not  be  short  range  or  spectacular."  But.  they
urged,  the  U.S.  should  begin  to  push  forward  on  it.

MACV  had  nonconcurred  in  this  recommendation.  General  Westmoreland,
in  a  memorandum  to  Lodge  on  September  7.  1966,  had  said  that  he  did  not
agree  with  the  idea,  and  that,  if  carried  out,  "the  Corps  span  of  control  would
be  too  large  for  effective  direction."  The  suggestion,  he  added,  was  "illogical."

This  was  still  the  position  of  ^^AC\'  when  Komer  arrived.  In  his  attempts  to
find  a  workable  civilian-militarv  chain  of  command,  he  received  two  sussestions
on  the  difficult  question  of  the  role  of  the  Division  advisory  teams.  The  first,
and  more  routine,  was  to  continue  the  existing  MACV  system — in  which,  no
matter  how  good  or  bad  the  GVN  chain  of  command  may  be,  the  U.S.  simply
duplicates  it  on  the  advisorv  side.  This  would  mean  that  all  American  civilians
and  militarv  at  the  Province  level  would  come  under  the  Division-Corps  chain
of  command.  The  MACV  staff  assumed  that  this  would  happen.

John  Paul  V^ann  and  a  few  colleagues  had  a  different  suggestion.  Vann  main-
tained that  the  evidence  suggested  that  when  the  Americans  made  their  desires
known  clearlv  to  the  Vietnamese,  without  the  vagueness  and  contradictori-
ness  which  so  often  characterized  them,  then  the  Vietnamese  usually  would  fol-
low suit  after  a  suitable  period  of  time.  Thus,  said  Vann.  if  the  Americans  re-
move the  Division  advisorv  team  from  the  U.S.  chain  of  command,  except  for
tactical  matters  and  logistical  support,  the  GVN  may  follow,  and  reduce  the
power  of  their  politicallv  potent  Divisions.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  621

The  thesis  Vann  was  putting  forward — that  the  GVN  would  follow  a  strong
U.S.  example — was  untested  and  hotly  disputed.  Secondly,  there  was  the  mat-
ter of  MACVs  stand  against  downgrading  the  role  of  the  ARVN  Divisions.  Few
people  observing  the  discussions  thought  that  the  Vann  suggestion  had  a  chance
of  success.

But  Komer,  persuaded  by  the  argument,  did  overrule  many  of  his  staff  and
make  the  recommendation  to  Westmoreland.  Westmoreland  approved  it,  and
in  June,  1967,  the  new  chains  of  command  were  announced  to  the  U.S.  Mis-
sion. After  years  of  arguing,  during  all  of  which  the  trend  had  been  towards
stronger  AR\'N  Divisions,  the  U.S.  had  suddenly  reversed  course  on  its  own,
without  waiting  for  the  Vietnamese  to  act.  The  change  was  so  complete  that  it
even  extended  to  that  last  Cand,  to  career  officers,  most  important)  question:
uho  writes  the  efficiency  report.  Under  the  new  MACV  guidance,  the  Senior
Province  Advisor  would  be  rated  not  by  the  Division  Senior  Advisor,  but  by  the
Deputy  for  CORDS  and  the  Corps  level — thus  confirming  the  new  command
arrangements.

While  it  is  still  too  early  to  tell  if  the  GVN  will  completely  follow  the  U.S.
lead,  the  early  evidence  suggests  that  the  \'ann  hypothesis  was  correct,  and
that  following  the  U.S.  action,  the  GVN  has  begun  to  reduce  the  role  of  their
Divisions  in  RD.  There  are  now  indications  that  the  G\'N  is  seriously  consider-
ing a  plan  in  which  the  Divisions  would  no  longer  have  area  responsibility  but
rather  be  reduced  to  support  of  their  forward  units,  and  operational  command
on  large  operations  of  troops.

E. THE  MI  SSI  OS  ASSESSMEST  AS  CORDS  BEG  IS  S

The  situation  that  CORDS  and  Ambassador  Komer  inherited  was  not  a  very
promising  one.  Despite  all  the  lip  service  and  all  the  ""top  priorities"  assigned
RD  b\  the  Americans  in  the  preceding  18  months,  progress  in  the  field  was
not  only  not  satisfactory,  it  was,  according  to  many  observers,  nonexistent.  The
question  of  whether  we  were  inching  forward,  standing  still,  or  moving  back-
ward always  seemed  to  the  Mission  and  Washington  to  be  of  great  importance,
and  therefore  much  effort  was  spent  trying  to  analyze  our  '"progress."

A  strong  case  can  be  made  for  the  proposition  that  we  have  spent  too  much
time  looking  for  progress  in  a  program  in  which  measurements  are  irrelevant,
inaccurate,  and  misleading.  But,  nonetheless,  the  Mission  did  try  to  measure
itself,  and  in  May  of  1967,  as  OCO  turned  into  CORDS,  produced  the  follow-
ing assessment  of  RD  for  the  first  quarter  of  1967.

In  truth,  there  has  been  little  overall  progress  in  RD  activities,  and  the
same  must  be  said  for  the  painful  process  of  building  a  meaningful  dia-
logue between  the  go\ernment  and  the  people.  A  number  of  factors  have
been  reported  from  Region  III  to  account  for  this  unhappy  situation,  but
they  might  well  apply  to  the  rest  of  the  country:

a.  The  RD  program  for  1967  involved  many  new  and  different  concepts,
command  arrangements,  administrative  and  procedural  functions  and  allo-
cation of  resources.  Onlv  recently  have  the  majority  of  provincial  officials
involved  become  aware  of  the  program.

b.  Manv  Ap  Doi  Moi  CReal  New  Life  Hamlets j,  through  guidance  from
MORD,  were  located  in  fringe  security  areas.  In  most  of  these  cases  a  great


622 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

deal  of  military  and  jungle  clearing  operations  were  necessary.  These  take
time,  and,  as  a  result,  the  deployment  of  the  RD  teams  often  were  delayed.

c.  The  hobbling  effect  of  ineffectual  officials  has  retarded  the  program.

d.  The  people  have  had  to  develop  new  working  relationships  with  the
RD  workers,*  the  ARVN,  and  the  RF/PF.  During  this  process,  there  has
been  a  "wait  and  see"  attitude.

If,  however,  the  picture  is  sombre,  it  is  not  unrelieved.  The  1967  pro-
gram may  look  at  this  point  unencouraging  statistically,  but  its  progress  is
of  a  different  and  more  important  sort.  In  critical  areas,  progress  has  been
registered.  There  has  evolved  an  implicit  understanding  by  many  in  the
GVN  that  RD  is  a  longer-term  progress  than  hitherto  believed,  requiring  a
greater  concentration  of  resources.  In  fact,  there  is  increasing  evidence
that  programming  for  1967  has  so  concentrated  scarce  resources  in  the
11 -point  Ap  Doi  Moi  that  the  GVN  presence  and  services  are  spread  very
thin  indeed  in  areas  of  lower  priority.  The  fact  that  in  general  each  RD
team  will  remain  in  each  hamlet  for  six  months  throughout  the  year,  is  a
fundamental  improvement  in  the  program.

As  a  result  of  the  finer  definition  of  the  intent  of  RD  and  more  interest
in  its  possibilities,  the  1967  program  has  become  more  vital  than  its  pred-
ecessors. This  vitality  has  produced  new  ideas,  an  increasing  flexibility,
which  marks  important  progress  in  the  program.  Moreover,  what  the
country  has  been  engaged  in  is  the  process  of  laying  a  base  for  develop-
ment; a  long  drawn  out  process  which  sees  little  initial  reward,  but  without
which  nothing  of  permanence  will  be  achieved.  In  other  words,  the  first
quarter  of  the  year  has  not  been  witness  to  a  vital  social  revolution,  but
has  instead  found  evidence  of  a  growing  understanding  of  the  nature  of  the
revolution  to  come,  and  in  so  doing  has  taken  a  further  step  in  the  painful
process  of  building  a  nation.

With  the  formation  of  CORDS,  this  history  becomes  current  events.  CORDS
is  charged  now  with  solving  what  have  previously  been  unsolvable  problems —
energizing  the  GVN  to  do  things  which  it  is  not  as  interested  in  as  we  are;  win-
ning the  hearts  and  minds  of  people  who  do  not  understand  us  or  speak  our
language;  working  under  intense  pressure  for  immediate  results  in  a  field  in
which  success — if  possible  at  all — mav  require  years.  We  have  concentrated  on
the  history  of  the  United  States  bureaucracy  in  this  study  because  that,  in  retro-
spect, seems  to  have  been  where  the  push  for  pacification  came  from — not  the
Vietnamese.  We  have  not  been  able  to  analyze  properly  the  actual  course  of  the
effort  in  the  field,  where  contradictory  assessments  of  progress  have  plagued
the  U.S.  In  the  final  section  which  follows,  we  try  to  draw  a  few  lessons  from  the
course  of  events  described  in  this  study.

When  completed,  CORDS  had  produced  a  structure  in  which,  regardless  of
civil-military  tensions  that  cannot  be  wished  away,  all  hands  were  working  to-
gether under  a  single  chain  of  command.  The  structure  was  massive,  so  massive
that  the  Vietnamese  were  in  danger  of  being  almost  forgotten — and  for  that
there  can  be  no  excuse.  But  at  least  the  Mission  was  better  run  and  better  or-
ganized than  it  had  ever  been  before,  and  this  fact  may  in  time  lead  to  a  more

*  "Workers"  was  another  one  of  the  special  words  the  U.S.  began  using  instead  of
accurate  translations  of  the  Vietnamese.  This  one  was  also  Lodge's  idea,  as  a  more
understandable  word  than  "cadre"  to  describe  the  members  of  the  59-man  teams.


Re-Emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967  623

efficient  and  successful  effort.  Without  a  unified  voice  in  dealing  with  the  Viet-
namese, we  can  never  hope  to  influence  the  GVN  to  do  the  things  we  believe
they  must  do  to  save  their  own  country.


624


Volume  11 List  of  Documents


I960

Document  96 {page  633)

Cable,  Saigon  to  State  on  threats  to  Diem  regime,  16  September  1960.

1961

Document  97 {page  635)

Memorandum  of  conference  on  19  January  1961  meeting  between  President
Eisenhower  and  President-elect  Kennedy  on  the  subject  of  Laos  (prepared  by
Clark  Clillord,  29  January  1967).

Document  98 {page  637)

Task  force  report  on  "A  Program  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam,"  8  May  1961.
Docunwnt  99 {page  642)

NSAM  52  on  steps  to  strengthen  South  Vietnam,  11  May  1961.
Document  100 {page  643)

Lansdale  memorandum  to  Taylor  on  unconventional  war,  July  1961.
Document  101 {page  649)

Cable,  Saigon  to  State  on  Diem's  request  for  bilateral  defense  treaty,  1  October
1961.

Document  102 {page  650)

JCS  memorandum  for  Taylor,  Counterinsureencv  Operations  in  South  Vietnam,
12  October  1961.

Document  103 {page  651)

Cable,  Saigon  to  State  on  GVN  request  for  U.S.  combat  troops,  13  October  1961.

Docunwnt  104 {page  652)

Extracts  from  recommendations  of  Taylor  report  on  mission  to  South  Vietnam,
3  November  1961.

1962

Docunwnt  105 {page  654)

The  Chairman  of  the  JCS  summarizes  the  current  situation  in  VN,  methods  of
VC  operations,  routes  of  infiltration  and  supply,  relative  strengths,  and  discusses
U.S.  military  units  in  place  or  enroute  to  VN.  "The  objectives  of  the  Diem  Gov-
ernment in  SVN  include  not  only  survival  against  the  communists,  but  also  im-
pro\ement  of  the  national  economy,  enhancement  of  SVN's  position  among


Documents  625


Southeast  Asian  nations,  creation  of  an  effective  armed  force,  and  preservation
of  a  pro-Western  orientation.  Policies  directed  toward  the  achievement  of  these
objectives  sutler  from  the  concentration  of  power  in  the  hands  of  the  President,
Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  and  a  small  clicjue  headed  by  his  extremely  influential  and
powerful  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu."  Chairman  JCS  Talking  Paper  for  Briefing
President  Kennedy,  9  January  1962.

Document  106 {page  659)

The  JCS  agree  that  the  basic  issue  of  Diem's  apprehension  about  a  coup  needs  to
be  resolved.  "I  don't  believe  there  is  any  finite  answer  to  the  question  you  pose
as  to  how  to  con\ince  Diem  he  must  delegate  authority  to  subordinates  he
doesn't  fully  trust."  JCS  Memorandum  for  General  Lansdale,  CM-491-62,  18
January  1962.

Document  107 {pcige  660)

The  President  establishes  a  Special  Group  (Counter  Insurgency),  the  functions
of  which  are  as  follows:  (1)  to  insure  proper  recognition  throughout  the  U.S.
Government  that  subversive  insurgency  ("wars  of  liberation")  is  a  major  form
of  politico-military  conflict  equal  in  importance  to  conventional  warfare;  (2)  to
insure  that  such  recognition  is  reflected  in  the  organization,  training,  equipment
and  doctrine  of  the  U.S.  armed  forces  and  other  U.S.  agencies;  (3)  to  continu-
allv  review  the  adequacy  of  U.S.  resources  to  deal  with  insurgency;  and  (4)  to
insure  the  development  of  adequate  programs  aimed  at  preventing  or  defeating
insurgency.  NSAM  124,  18  January  1962.

Document  108 {page  661)

State  Department  agrees  that  an  increase  in  the  Vietnamese  armed  forces  to  the
200,000  man  level  should  be  supported  provided  the  following  factors  are  con-
sidered: (1)  that  U.S.  militarv  advisors  and  the  Vietnamese  authorities  continue
to  set  valid  tactical  and  strategic  plans;  (2)  the  rate  of  increase  should  consider
the  ability  of  the  Army  to  absorb  and  train  the  additional  men  and  the  manpower
resources  of  SVN;  (3)  that  the  armed  forces  should  level  off  at  200,000  and
further  efforts  should  be  devoted  to  strengthening  the  Civil  Guard  and  Self-
Defense  Corps;  and  (4)  that  our  training  programs  for  ARVN  be  based  on  the
concept  that  the  Vietnamese  Armv  will  start  winning  when  it  has  the  confidence
of  the  Vietnamese  populace.  U.  Alexis  Johnson  letter  to  Mr.  Gilpatric,  26  Jan-
uary 1962.

Document  109 {page  662)

Secretary  McNamara  forwards  a  JCS  Memorandum  to  the  President  with  the
comment,  "I  am  not  prepared  to  endorse  the  views  of  the  Chiefs  until  we  have
had  more  experience  with  our  present  program  in  SVN."  The  JCS  Memorandum
recommends  that  if,  with  Diem's  full  cooperation  and  the  effective  employment
of  SVN  armed  forces,  the  VC  is  not  brought  under  control,  then  a  decision
should  be  made  to  deplov  suitable  U.S.  military  combat  forces  to  SVN  sufficient
to  achieve  desired  objectives.  Secretarv  of  Defense  Memorandum  for  the  Presi-
dent, 27  January  1962  (JCSM-33-62,  13  January  1962,  attached).

Document  110 {page  666)

The  President  requests  that  AID  review  carefully  its  role  in  the  support  of  local
police  forces  for  internal  security  and  counter-insurgency  purposes,  and  recom-
mend to  him  through  the  Special  Group  (Counter  Insurgency)  what  new  or
renewed  emphases  are  desirable.  NSAM  132,  19  February  1962.


626 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II
Document  11 J {page  667)

play  in  counter  insurgency  programs  as  well  as  in  the  entire  range  of  problems
involved  in  the  modernization  of  developing  countries.  The  training  objectives
The  President  approves  training  objectives  for  personnel  who  may  have  a  role  to
include  the  study  of:  the  historical  background  of  counter  insurgency,  depart-
mental tactics  and  techniques  to  counter  subversive  insurgency,  instruction  in
counter  insurgency  program  planning,  specialized  preparations  for  service  in
underdeveloped  areas.  Training  of  foreign  nationals  will  also  be  included  in  the
program.  The  President  desires  that  current  counter  insurgency  training  be  ex-
amined to  ascertain  if  it  meets  the  above  training  objectives.  NSAM  131,  13
March  1962.

Document  112 {page  669)

The  President  forwards  a  memorandum  on  the  subject  of  VN  from  Ambassador
Galbraith  and  requests  Department  of  Defense  comments.  The  Galbraith  Mem-
orandum (4  April  62)  asserts  that  the  U.S.  is  backing  a  weak  and  ineffectual
government  in  SVN  and  that  "there  is  a  consequent  danger  that  we  shall  replace
the  French  as  the  colonial  force  in  the  area  and  bleed  as  the  French  did."  Gal-
braith urges  that  U.S.  policy  keep  open  the  door  for  political  solution,  attempt
to  involve  other  countries  and  world  opinion  in  a  settlement,  and  reduce  our
commitment  to  the  present  leadership  of  GVN.  In  addition  to  recommended
specific  actions,  Galbraith  suggests  the  U.S.  should  resist  all  steps  to  commit
American  troops  to  combat  action  and  dissociate  itself  from  programs  which  are
directed  at  the  villagers,  such  as  the  resettlement  programs.  White  House  Memo-
randum for  Secretary  of  Defense,  7  April  1962  (Galbraith  Memorandum  at-
tached).

Document  113 {page  671)

The  JCS  comment  on  Ambassador  Galbraith's  Memorandum  to  President  Ken-
nedy. The  JCS  cite  the  Kennedy  letter  of  14  December  1961  to  President  Diem
as  a  public  alfirmation  of  the  intention  of  the  U.S.  Government  to  suport  Presi-
dent Diem  to  whatever  extent  necessary  to  eliminate  the  VC  threat.  In  sum,  it
is  the  JCS  opinion  that  the  present  U.S.  policy  toward  SVN  as  announced  by
the  President  "be  pursued  vigorously  to  a  successful  conclusion."  JCS  Memo-
randum for  the  Secretary  of  Defense,' JCSM  282-62,  13  April  1962.

Document  114 {page  672)

The  President  requests  contingency  planning  in  the  event  of  a  breakdown  of  the
cease-fire  in  Laos  for  action  in  two  major  areas:  (1)  the  holding  by  Thai  forces
with  U.S.  backup  of  that  portion  of  northern  Laos  west  of  the  Mekong  River;
and  (2)  the  holding  and  recapture  of  the  panhandle  of  Laos  from  Thakhek  to
the  southern  frontier  with  Thai,  Vietnamese  or  U.S.  forces.  Kennedy  indicates
that  he  contemplates  keeping  U.S.  forces  in  Thailand  during  the  period  of  the
negotiations  bv  the  three  Princes  and  the  earlv  days  of  the  government  of  national
unton.  NSAM'157,  29  May  1962.

Document  115 {page  673)

In  an  evaluation  of  the  first  three  months  of  systematic  counter-insurgency,
Hilsman  of  State's  INR  reports  some  progress  and  reason  for  modest  optimism
although  acknowledging  the  great  amount  vet  to  be  done.  State  Department  INR
Research  Memorandum  RFE-27,  18  June  1962.


Documents  627


Document  116 {page  681)

The  President  approves  assignments  of  responsibilities  in  the  development  of  U.S.
and  indigenous  police,  paramilitary,  and  military  resources  to  various  agencies  as
recommended  by  the  Special  Group  on  Counter  Insurgency.  Deficiencies  revealed
in  the  study  pursuant  to  NSAM  56  include:  country  internal  defense  plans,  im-
provement of  personnel  programs  of  agencies  concerned  with  unconventional
warfare,  orientation  of  personnel,  deployment  of  counter  insurgency  personnel,
support  of  covert  paramilitary  operations,  increased  use  of  third-country  per-
sonnel, exploitation  of  minorities,  improvement  of  indigenous  intelligence  or-
ganizations, and  research  and  development  for  counter  insurgency.  NSAM  162,
19  June  1962.

Document  117 (page  684)

Memorandum  from  CIA  to  Secretary  of  Defense  assessing  strategic  hamlet  pro-
gram, 13  July  1962.

Document  118 {page  689)

The  President  approves  a  national  counter  insurgency  doctrine  for  the  use  of
U.S.  departments  and  agencies  concerned  with  the  internal  defense  of  overseas
areas  threatened  by  subversive  insurgency.  NSAM  182,  24  August  1962.

Document  119 {page  690)

In  a  year-end  summary  of  the  Vietnamese  situation  and  prognosis,  Hilsman
(State  INR)  concludes  that  at  best  the  rate  of  deterioration  has  been  decreased.
GVN  control  of  the  countryside,  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program  notwithstanding,
has  increased  only  slightly.  State  Department  INR  Research  Memorandum  RFE-
59,  3  December  1962.

1963

Document  120 (page  717)

Memo  for  the  President  from  Michael  V.  Forrestal  evaluating  situation  in  Viet-
nam, Februarv  1963.

Document  121 (page  725)

A  National  Intelligence  Estimate  states  that  ''Communist  progress  has  been
blunted  and  that  the  situation  is  improving.  Strengthened  South  Vietnamese  ca-
pabilities and  effectiveness,  and  particularly  U.S.  involvement,  are  causing  the
Viet  Cong  increased  difficulty,  although  there  are  as  yet  no  persuasive  indications
that  the  Communists  have  been  grievously  hurt."  The  VC  will  continue  to  wage
a  war  of  attrition  and  there  is  no  threat  of  overt  attack  from  the  North.  On  the
basis  of  the  last  year's  progress  the  VC  can  be  contained  but  it  is  impossible  'lo
project  the  future  course  of  the  war  with  any  confidence.  Decisive  campaigns
have  yet  to  be  fought  and  no  quick  and  easy  end  to  the  war  is  in  sight."  NIE  53-
63,  "Prospects  in  South  Vietnam,"  17  April  1963.

Document  122 (page  726)

The  President  approves  and  directs  certain  actions  outlined  in  the  Department
of  State  Memorandum  of  17  June  1963,  relative  to  Laos  planning.  The  President
wishes  to  obtain  suggestions  for  actions  in  Laos  in  light  of  the  deteriorating  situa-
tion and  from  the  British  and  the  French  before  initiating  any  action  under  the
Memorandum.  Kennedy  asks  about  additional  U.S.  actions  to  be  taken  in  Laos
before  any  action  directed  against  NVN.  NSAM  249,  25  June  1963.


628 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II
Document  123 {page  727)

The  President  is  briefed  on  developments  in  Indonesia,  Laos  and  VN.  Specifically,
on  SVN,  discussions  cover  the  possibility  of  getting  rid  of  the  Nhus  (the  combined
judgment  was  that  it  would  not  be  possible),  pressure  on  Diem  to  take  political
actions,  possible  results  of  a  coup,  and  the  replacement  of  Ambassador  Nolting
with  Ambassador  Lodge.  Department  of  State  Memorandum  of  Conversation,
4  July  1963.

Document  124 {page  728)

Memorandum  of  conversation,  Ball,  Nolting,  Wood,  and  Springstein  on  current
situation,  5  July  1963.

Document  125 {pcige  729)

A  Special  National  Intelligence  Estimate  evaluates  the  political  crisis  in  South
Vietnam  arising  from  the  Buddhist  protest.  It  concludes  that  if  Diem  does  not
seek  to  conciliate  the  Buddhists  new  disorders  are  likely  and  there  will  be  better
than  even  chances  of  coup  or  assassination  attempts.  U.S.-GVN  relations  have
deteriorated  as  a  function  of  Diem's  distrust  of  U.S.  motives  in  the  Buddhist
affair  and  he  may  seek  to  reduce  the  U.S.  presence  in  Vietnam.  The  Communists
have  thus  far  not  exploited  the  Buddhist  crisis  and  they  would  not  necessarily
profit  from  a  non-Communist  overthrow.  A  successor  regime  with  continued
TJ.S.  support  would  have  good  chances  of  effectively  pursuing  the  war.  SNIE
53-2-63,  "The  Situation  in  South  Vietnam,"  10  July  1963.

Document  126 {page  734)

In  a  subsequently  controversial  cable.  State  informs  Lodge  that  if  Diem  is  un-
willing or  unable  to  remove  Nhu  from  the  government,  that  the  U.S.  will  have
to  prepare  for  alternatives.  Lodge  is  authorized  to  inform  the  Vietnamese  gen-
erals plotting  a  coup  that  if  Nhu  is  not  removed  we  will  be  prepared  to  discon-
tinue economic  and  military  aid,  to  accept  a  change  of  government  and  to  offer
support  in  any  period  of  interim  breakdown  of  the  central  government  mecha-
nism. State  Department  Message  to  Saigon  243,  State  to  Lodge,  24  August  1963.

Document  127 {page  735)

Lodge's  reply  to  Washington  re:  Diem,  25  August  1963.
Document  128 {page  735)

CIA  cable  on  contacts  with  Saigon  generals,  26  August  1963.
Document  129 {page  736)

CIA  cable  on  coup  prospects  in  Saigon,  28  August  1963.
Document  130 {page  736)

U.S.  policy  with  respect  to  a  coup  is  defined  in  more  detail  for  Lodge  and  Har-
kins  as  a  result  of  an  NSC  meeting  with  the  President.  'The  USG  will  support  a
coup  which  has  good  chance  of  succeeding  but  plans  no  direct  involvement  of
U.S.  armed  forces.  Harkins  should  state  (to  the  generals)  that  he  is  prepared  to
establish  liaison  with  the  coup  planners  and  to  review  plans,  but  will  not  engage
directly  in  joint  coup  planning."  Lodge  is  authorized  to  suspend  aid  if  he  thinks
it  will  enhance  the  chances  of  a  successful  coup.  State  Department  Message  272,
State  to  Lodse  and  Harkins,  29  August  1963.


Documents  629


Document  131 {page  737)

Rusk  raises  with  Lodge  the  possibility  of  a  last  approach  to  Diem  about  remov-
ing Nhu  before  going  ahead  with  the  coup.  He  notes  that  General  Harkins  favors
such  an  attempt.  Rusk  feels  that  if  accompanied  by  the  threat  of  a  real  sanction
— i.e.,  the  withdrawal  of  U.S.  support — such  an  approach  could  be  timed  to
coincide  with  the  readiness  of  the  generals  to  make  their  move  and  might,  there-
fore, ofter  some  promise  of  getting  Diem  to  act.  State  Department  Message  279,
State  to  Lodge,  29  August  1963.

Document  132 {page  738)

Lodge  cable  to  State  Department,  re:  U.S.  policy  toward  a  coup,  29  August  1963.
Document  133 {page  739)

Lodge  response  to  State  on  Diem's  closeness  to  brother,  30  August  1963.
Document  134 {page  740)

Cable,  MAAG  Chief  to  JCS  on  halt  in  coup  planning,  31  August  1963.
Document  135 {page  741 )

Vice  President  Johnson  presides  over  a  meeting  at  the  State  Department  on  the
subject  of  SVN.  The  generals'  plot  having  aborted,  Rusk  asks  what  in  the  situa-
tion "leads  us  to  think  well  of  a  coup."  Further,  Rusk  feels  that  it  is  unrealistic
now  "to  start  off  by  saying  that  Nhu  has  to  go."  McNamara  approves  Rusk's  re-
marks. Hilsman  presents  four  basic  factors  bearing  on  the  current  situation:  (1)
the  restive  mood  of  the  South  Vietnamese  population;  (2)  the  effect  on  U.S.
programs  elsewhere  in  Asia  of  the  current  GVN  policy  against  the  Buddhists;
(3)  the  personality  and  policies  of  Nhu;  and  (4)  U.S.  and  world  opinion.  Vice
President  has  great  reservations  about  a  coup  because  he  sees  no  genuine  alter-
native to  Diem.  General  Krulak  Memorandum  for  the  Record,  31  August  1963.

Document  136 {page  743)

Lodge  is  instructed  by  the  White  House  that  since  there  is  no  longer  any  prospect
of  a  coup,  pressure  must  be  applied  to  Diem  to  get  him  to  adopt  an  extensive
list  of  reforms.  In  particular  Lodge  is  authorized  to  hold  up  any  aid  program  if
he  thinks  such  action  will  give  him  useful  leverage  in  dealing  with  Diem.  CAP
Message  63516,  White  House  to  Lodge,  17  September  1963.

Document  137 {page  746)

The  President  explains  to  Lodge  his  urgent  need  for  the  McNamara-Taylor  as-
sessment of  the  situation.  The  visit  is  not  designed  to  be  a  reconciliation  with
Diem,  rather  he  expects  McNamara  wiff  speak  frankly  to  him  about  the  military
consequences  of  the  political  crisis.  State  Department  Message  431,  The  President
to  Lodge,  18  September  1963.

Document  138 {page  746)

Lodge's  reply  to  the  White  House  CAP  Message  63516  indicates  agreement  that
a  coup  is  no  longer  in  the  offing,  but  opposes  both  an  approach  to  Diem  on  re-
forms or  the  use  of  an  aid  suspension  as  a  lever.  He  regards  both  as  likely  to  be
unproductive  or  worse.  Embassy  Saigon  Message  544,  Lodge  to  State  for  Presi-
dent Only,  19  September  1963.


630 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II
Document  139 {page  748)

President  Kennedy  outlines  his  reasons  for  sending  McNamara  and  Taylor  to
VN:  "1  am  asking  you  to  go  because  of  my  desire  to  have  the  best  possible  on-
the-spot  appraisal  of  the  military  and  paramilitary  effort  to  defeat  the  VC."
While  the  results  from  programs  developed  after  Taylor's  Mission  in  1961  were
heartening,  the  serious  events  in  the  South  since  May  1963  have  prompted  the
President  to  ask  McNamara  to  make  a  fresh,  first-hand  appraisal  of  the  situation.
"In  my  judgment  the  question  of  the  progress  of  the  contest  in  SVN  is  of  the
first  importance  .  .  ."  President  Kennedy  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of  De-
fense, 21  September  1963.

Document  140 {page  749)

Pending  McNamara's  visit  and  the  subsequent  review  of  policy.  Lodge  is  given
the  following  interim  guidance:  "(1)  The  United  States  intends  to  continue  its
efforts  to  assist  the  Vietnamese  people  in  their  struggle  against  the  Viet  Cong.
(2)  Recent  events  have  put  in  question  the  possibility  of  success  in  these  efforts
unless  there  can  be  important  improvements  in  the  government  of  South  Viet-
nam. (3)  It  is  the  policy  of  the  United  States  to  bring  about  such  improve-
ment." State  Department  Message  458,  Eyes  Only  for  Lodge  from  Ball,  22  Sep-
tember 1963.

Document  141 {page  749)

Memorandum  of  conversation  (Diem,  Thuan,  Lodge,  McNamara,  Taylor,  Har-
kins,  Flott),  September  29,  1963.

Document  142 {page  751)

The  McNamara-Taylor  Mission  Report  concludes  that  the  military  campaign
has  made  great  progress,  and,  while  the  political  crisis  in  Saigon  is  serious,  "there
is  no  solid  evidence  of  the  possibility  of  a  successful  coup  .  .  ."  The  Report
recommends  against  promoting  a  coup  and,  although  it  is  not  clear  that  U.S.
pressure  will  move  Diem  to  the  moderations  and  reforms  we  desire,  nevertheless,
as  the  only  course  of  action  with  any  prospect  of  producing  results,  the  report
recommends  the  application  of  selective  economic  sanctions,  including  a  suspen-
sion of  funds  for  the  commodity  import  program.  The  Mission  further  recom-
mends a  shift  of  military  emphasis  to  the  Delta  and  a  consolidation  of  the  Strategic
Hamlet  Program.  In  addition,  it  is  recommended  that  a  training  program  be
established  for  RVNAF  such  that  the  bulk  of  U.S.  personnel  may  be  withdrawn
by  the  end  of  1965.  In  conjunction  with  this  program,  the  U.S.  should  announce
plans  to  withdraw  1,000  U.S.  military  personnel  by  the  end  of  1963.

Document  143 {page  766)

Lodge  is  advised  that  as  a  result  of  the  policy  review  just  completed,  the  "Presi-
dent today  approved  recommendation  that  no  initiative  should  now  be  taken  to
give  any  active  covert  encouragement  to  a  coup."  Efforts  to  build  and  maintain
contacts  with  "alternative  leadership"  is  authorized,  however.  CAP  Message
63560,  to  Lodae  via  CAS  channel  5  October  1963.

Document  144 {page  767)

Contact  has  been  renewed  by  the  generals  with  a  CAS  asent  who  has  been
apprised  of  the  reactivation  of  plotting.  In  the  meeting.  General  Minh  states  that
he  must  know  the  U.S.  position  on  a  coup.  He  stresses  that  a  coup  is  urgently
needed  to  prevent  the  loss  of  the  war  to  the  VC.  The  U.S.  contact  is  noncom-
mittal. CAS  Saigon  Message  1445,  Lodge  to  State,  5  October  1963.


Documents  631


Document  145 (page  769)

Washington  reaffirms  Lodge's  guidance  that  he  is  not  to  promote  a  coup.
Neither,  however,  is  he  to  thwart  one.  He  should  try  to  obtain  as  much  informa-
tion as  possible  from  the  plotters  about  their  plans  on  which  to  base  an  Ameri-
can judgement  about  their  likelihood  of  success.  CIA  Message  74228,  6  October
1963.

Document  146 [page  769)

The  President  approves  the  detailed  military  recommendations  contained  in  the
McNamara-Taylor  Report,  but  directs  that  no  announcement  of  the  implementa-
tion of  the  1,000-man  withdrawal  plan  be  made.  NSAM  263,  11  October  1963.

Document  147 {page  770)

A  Department  of  State  Research  Memorandum  contends  that  the  statistical  in-
dicators on  the  war  in  Vietnam  reveal  "that  the  military  position  of  the  Vietnam
Government  may  have  reverted  to  the  point  it  had  reached  six  months  to  a  year
ago."  The  analysis  angers  the  JCS  and  Rusk  subsequently  apologizes  to  McNa-
mara.  Department  of  State,  INR  Research  Memorandum  RPE-90,  22  October
1963.

Document  148 {page  780)

With  the  coup  plotting  now  far  advanced  and  the  U.S.  clearly  committed  to  the
generals'  attempt,  Lodge  seeks  to  calm  Washington's  anxieties  about  the  lack  of
detailed  information  on  the  generals"  plans.  He  is  at  pains  to  oppose  any  thought
of  thwarting  the  coup  because  he  thinks  the  military  will  create  a  government
with  better  potential  for  carrying  on  the  war,  and  because  it  would  constitute
undue  meddling  in  Vietnamese  affairs.  Embassy  Saigon  Message  1964,  Lodge
to  McGeorge  Bundy,  25  October  1963.

Document  149 {page  782)

While  thanking  Lodge  for  his  views,  the  White  House  indicates  that  short  of
thwarting  a  coup  we  should  retain  the  prerogative  of  reviewing  the  plans  and
discouraging  any  attempt  with  poor  prospects  of  success.  CAP  Message  63590,
McGeorge  Bundy  to  Lodge,  25  October  1963.

Document  150 {page  782)

The  White  House  instructs  Lodge  to  bring  General  Harkins  completely  up  to
date  on  the  coup  plotting,  and  asks  that  Harkins,  Lodge  and  the  CIA  Station
Chief  provide  a  combined  assessment  of  the  prospects  of  the  plotters.  Individual
comments  are  to  be  sent  if  desired.  With  these  assessments,  a  decision  can  be
made  telling  the  generals:  (a)  we  will  maintain  a  hands-off  policy,  (b)  we  will
positively  encourage  the  coup,  or  (c)  we  will  discourage  it.  More  detailed  mili-
tary plans  should  be  sought  from  Minh.  CAS  Message  79109,  McGeorge  Bundy
to  Lodge,  30  October  1963.

Document  151 {page  784)

xA.fter  complaining  about  Lodge's  failure  to  keep  him  informed  about  the  coup
planning.  General  Harkins  opposes  the  proposed  coup  against  Diem.  He  does
not  see  an  alternative  leadership  with  Diem's  strength  of  character,  especially  not
among  the  generals.  The  war  continues  to  go  well.  MACV  Message  2028,  Har-
kins to  Tavlor,  30  October  1963.


632 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


Document  152 {page  785)

General  Harkins  takes  detailed  exception  to  the  interpretations  of  a  deteriorating
war  effort  that  Lodge  has  been  transmitting  throughout  October.  He  offers  an
optimistic  appraisal  of  the  trend  of  the  war  and  sees  the  political  crisis  as  having
only  a  marginal  effect  on  troop  morale  and  military  effectiveness.  MACV  Mes-
sage 2033,  Harkins  to  Taylor,  30  October  1963.

Document  153 {page  788)

Bimdy  cable  to  Lodge  voicing  White  House  concern  on  coup,  October  30,  1963.
Document  154 {page  789)

Lodge  argues  forcefully  for  the  coup.  "It  is  theoretically  possible  for  us  to  turn
over  the  information  which  has  been  given  to  us  in  confidence  to  Diem  and  this
would  undoubtedly  stop  the  coup  and  would  make  traitors  out  of  us.  For  practi-
cal purposes,  therefore,  I  would  say  that  we  have  very  little  influence  on  what
is  essentially  a  Vietnamese  affair."  In  the  event  the  coup  fails,  he  believes  we
should  do  what  we  can  to  help  evacuate  the  generals'  dependents.  Lodge  believes
the  generals  are  all  taking  enormous  risks  for  the  sake  of  their  country  and  their
good  faith  is  not  to  be  questioned.  "Heartily  agree  that  a  miscalculation  could
jeopardize  position  in  Southeast  Asia.  We  also  run  tremendous  risks  by  doing
nothing."  General  Harkins  did  not  concur  in  the  cable.  CAS  Saigon  Message
2063,  30  October  1963.

Document  155 {page  792)

Taking  note  of  the  difference  of  opinion  on  the  advisability  of  a  coup  between
Lodge  and  Harkins,  the  White  House  specifically  informs  Lodge  that  he  is  to
discourage  the  generals  from  any  attempt  that  in  his  judgment  has  a  poor  prospect
of  success.  Lodge  is  given  full  authority  for  country  team  actions  in  the  event  of
a  coup;  if  he  has  left  for  Washington,  Harkins  will  have  charge.  In  the  event  of
a  coup,  U.S.  policy  will  be:  (a)  to  reject  appeals  for  direct  intervention  from
either  side;  (b)  if  the  contest  is  indecisive,  U.S.  authorities  may  perform  any
actions  agreed  to  by  both  sides;  (c)  in  the  event  the  coup  fails,  asylum  may  be
offered  to  anyone  to  whom  we  have  an  obligation;  but  (d)  once  the  coup  has
started,  it  is  in  our  interests  to  see  that  it  succeeds.  CAS  Washington  Message
79407,  30  October  1963.


Documents  633


[Document  96]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

U.S.  Ambassador's  "60  Analysis  of  Threats
to  Saigon  Regime

Cablegram  from  Elbridge  Diirbrow,  United  States  Ambassador  in  Saigon,  to
Secretary  of  State  Christian  A.  Herter,  Sept.  16,  1960.

As  indicated  our  495  and  538  Diem  regime  confronted  bv  two  separate  but
related  dangers.  Danger  from  demonstrations  or  coup  attempt  in  Saigon  could
occur  earlier;  likely  to  be  predominantly  non-Communistic  in  origin  but  Com-
munists can  be  expected  to  endeavor  infiltrate  and  exploit  any  such  attempt.
Even  more  serious  danger  is  gradual  Viet  Cong  extension  of  control  over  coun-
tryside which,  if  current  Communist  progress  continues,  would  mean  loss  free
Viet-nam  to  Communists.  These  two  dangers  are  related  because  Communist
successes  in  rural  areas  embolden  them  to  extend  their  activities  to  Saigon  and
because  non-Communist  temptation  to  engage  in  demonstrations  or  coup  is
partly  motivated  bv  sincere  desire  pre\  ent  Communist  take-over  in  Viet-nam.

Essentiallv  [word  illegible]  sets  of  measures  required  to  meet  these  two  dan-
gers. For  Saigon  danger  essentially  political  and  psychological  measures  required.
For  countryside  danger  security  measures  as  well  as  political,  psychological  and
economic  measures  needed.  However  both  sets  measures  should  be  carried  out
simultaneously  and  to  some  extent  individual  steps  will  be  aimed  at  both  dangers.

Security  recommendations  have  been  made  in  our  539  and  other  messages,
including  formation  internal  security  council,  centralized  intelligence,  etc.  This
message  therefore  deals  with  our  political  and  economic  recommendations.  I
realize  some  measures  I  am  recommending  are  drastic  and  would  be  most  [word
illegible]  for  an  ambassador  to  make  under  normal  circumstances.  But  condi-
tions here  are  by  no  means  normal.  Diem  government  is  in  quite  serious  danger.
Therefore,  in  my  opinion  prompt  and  even  drastic  action  is  called  for.  I  am  well
aware  that  Diem  has  in  past  demonstrated  astute  judgment  and  has  survived
other  serious  crises.  Possibly  his  judgment  will  prove  superior  to  ours  this  time,
but  I  believe  nevertheless  we  have  no  alternative  but  to  give  him  our  best  judg-
ment of  what  we  believe  is  required  to  preserve  his  government.  While  Diem
obviously  resented  my  frank  talks  earlier  this  year  and  will  probably  resent  even
more  suggestions  outlined  below,  he  has  apparently  acted  on  some  of  our  earlier
suggestions  and  might  act  on  at  least  some  of  the  following:

1.  I  would  propose  have  frank  and  friendly  talk  with  Diem  and  explain  our
serious  concern  about  present  situation  and  his  political  position.  I  would  tell
him  that,  while  matters  I  am  raising  deal  primarily  with  internal  affairs,  I  would
like  to  talk  to  him  frankly  and  try  to  be  as  helpful  as  I  can  be  giving  him  the
considered  judgment  of  myself  and  some  of  his  friends  in  Washington  on  appro-
priate measures  to  assist  him  in  present  serious  situation.  (Believe  it  best  not
indicate  talking  under  instructions.)  I  would  particularly  stress  desirability  of
actions  to  broa'den  and  increase  his  [word  illegible]  support  prior  to  1961  presi-
dential elections  required  bv  constitution  before  end  April.  I  w^ould  propose  fol-
lowing actions  to  President:

2.  Psychological  shock  effect  is  required  to  take  initiative  from  Communist
propagandists  as  well  as  non-Communist  oppositionists  and  convince  population
government  taking  effective  measures  to  deal  with  present  situation,  otherwise  we
fear  matters  could  set  out  of  hand.  To  achieve  that  effect  following  suggested:


634 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

(A)  Because  of  Vice  President  Tho's  knowledge  of  south  where  Communist
guerrilla  infiltration  is  increasing  so  rapidly  would  suggest  that  he  be  shifted
from  ministry  national  economy  to  ministry  interior.  (Diem  has  already  made
this  suggestion  but  Vice  President  most  reluctant  take  job.)

(B)  It  is  important  to  remove  any  feeling  within  armed  forces  that  favoritism
and  political  considerations  motivate  promotions  and  assignments.  Also  vital  in
order  deal  effectively  with  Viet  Cong  threat  that  channels  of  command  be  fol-
lowed both  down  and  up.  To  assist  in  bringing  about  these  changes  in  armed
forces,  I  would  suggest  appointment  of  full-time  minister  national  defense.
(Thuan  has  indicated  Diem  has  been  thinking  of  giving  Thuan  defense  job.)

(C)  Rumors  about  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Nhu  are  creating  growing  dissension  within
country  and  seriously  damage  political  position  of  Diem  government.  Whether
rumors  true  or  false,  politically  important  fact  is  that  more  and  more  people
believe  them  to  be  true.  Therefore,  becoming  increasingly  clear  that  in  interest
Diem  government  some  action  should  be  taken.  In  analogous  situation  in  other
countries  including  U.S.  important,  useful  government  personalities  have  had
to  be  sacrificed  for  political  reasons.  I  would  suggest  therefore  that  President
might  appoint  Nhu  to  ambassadorship  abroad.

(D)  Similarly  Tran  Kim  Tuyen,  Nhu's  henchman  and  head  of  secret  intelli-
gence service,  should  be  sent  abroad  in  diplomatic  capacitv  because  of  his  grow-
ing identification  in  public  mind  with  alleged  secret  police  methods  of  repression
and  control.

(E)  One  or  two  cabinet  ministers  from  opposition  should  be  appointed  to
demonstrate  Diem's  desire  to  establish  government  of  national  union  in  fight
against  VC.

3.  Make  public  announcement  of  disbandment  of  Can  Lao  party  or  at  least
its  surfacing,  with  names  and  positions  of  all  members  made  known  publicly.
Purpose  this  step  would  be  to  eliminate  atmosphere  of  fear  and  suspicion  and
reduce  public  belief  in  favoritism  and  corruption,  all  of  which  party's  semicovert
status  has  given  rise  to.

4.  Permit  National  Assembly  wider  legislative  initiative  and  area  of  genuine
debate  and  bestow  on  it  authority  to  conduct,  with  appropriate  publicity,  public
investigations  of  any  department  of  government  with  right  to  question  any  offi-
cial except  President  himself.  This  step  would  have  three-fold  purpose:  (A)  find
some  mechanism  for  dispelling  through  public  investigation  constantly  gener-
ated rumors  about  government  and  its  personalities;  (B)  provide  people  with
avenue  recourse  against  arbitrary  actions  by  some  governmental  officials,  (C)
assuage  some  of  intellectual  opposition  to  government.

5.  Require  all  government  officials  to  declare  publicly  their  property  and
financial  holdings  and  give  National  Assemblv  authoritv  to  make  public  investi-
gation of  these  declarations  in  effort  dispel  rumors  of  corruption.

6.  [Words  illegible]  of  [word  illegible]  control  over  content  of  the  Vietnam-
ese publication  [word  illegible]  magazines,  radio,  so  that  the  [words  illegible]
to  closing  the  gap  between  government  and  [words  illegible]  ideas  from  one  to
the  other.  To  insure  that  the  press  would  reflect,  as  well  as  lead,  public  opinion
without  becoming  a  means  of  upsetting  the  entire  GVN  [word  illegible],  it
should  be  htld  responsible  to  a  self-imposed  code  of  ethics  or  "canon"  of  press-
conduct.

7.  [Words  illegible]  to  propaganda  campaign  about  new  3-year  development
plan  in  effort  convince  people  that  government  genuinely  aims  at  [word  illeg-
ible] their  welfare.  (This  suggestion  [word  illegible]  of  course  upon  assessment
of  soundness  of  development  plan,  which  has  just  reached  us.)


Documents  635


8.  Adopt  following  measures  for  immediate  enhancement  of  peasant  support
of  government:  (A)  establish  mechanism  for  increasing  price  peasant  will  re-
ceive for  paddy  crop  beginning  to  come  on  market  in  December,  either  by  direct
subsidization  or  establishment  of  state  purchasing  mechanism;  (B)  institute
modest  payment  for  all  corvee  labor;  (C)  subsidize  agroville  families  along
same  lines  as  land  resettlement  families  until  former  on  feet  economically;  (D)
increase  compensation  paid  to  youth  corps.  If  Diem  asks  how  these  measures  are
to  be  financed  I  shall  suggest  through  increased  taxes  or  increased  deficit  financ-
ing, and  shall  note  that  under  certain  circumstances  reasonable  deficit  financing
becomes  a  politically  necessary  measure  for  governments.  I  should  add  that
using  revenues  for  these  fundamental  and  worthy  purposes  would  be  more
effective  than  spending  larger  and  larger  sums  on  security  forces,  which,  while
they  are  essential  and  some  additional  funds  for  existing  security  forces  may  be
required,  are  not  complete  answer  to  current  problems.

9.  Propose  suggest  to  Diem  that  appropriate  steps  outlined  above  be  an-
nounced dramatically  in  his  annual  state  of  union  message  to  National  Assem-
bly in  early  October.  Since  Diem  usually  [word  illegible]  message  in  person  this
would  have  maximum  effect,  and  I  would  recommend  that  it  be  broadcast  live
to  country.

10.  At  [words  illegible]  on  occasion  fifth  anniversary  establishment  Repub-
lic of  Vietnam  on  October  26,  it  may  become  highly  desirable  for  President  Ei-
senhower to  address  a  letter  of  continued  support  to  Diem.  Diem  has  undoubt-
edly noticed  that  Eisenhower  letter  recently  delivered  to  Sihanouk.  Not  only
for  this  reason,  but  also  because  it  mav  become  very  important  for  us  to  give
Diem  continued  reassurance  of  our  support.  Presidential  letter  which  could  be
published  here  may  prove  to  be  very  valuable.

Request  any  additional  suggestions  department  may  have  and  its  approval  for
approach  to  Diem  along  lines  paras  1  to  9.

We  believe  U.S.  should  at  this  time  support  Diem  as  best  available  Vietnamese
leader,  but  should  recognize  that  overriding  U.S.  objective  is  strongly  anti-Com-
munist Vietnamese  government  which  can  command  loyal  and  enthusiastic
support  of  widest  possible  segments  of  Vietnamese  people,  and  is  able  to  carry
on  effective  fight  against  Communist  guerrillas.  If  Diem's  position  in  country  con-
tinues deteriorate  as  result  failure  adopt  proper  political,  psychological,  eco-
nomic and  security  measures,  it  may  become  necessary  for  U.S.  government  to
begin  consideration  alternative  courses  of  action  and  leaders  in  order  achieve
our  objective.


[Document  97]

TO: THE  PRESIDENT  September  29,  1967

FROM: CLARK  CLIFFORD

Memorandum  of  Conference  on  January  19,  1961
between  President  Eisenhower  and  President-Elect  Kennedy
on  the  Subject  of  Laos

The  meeting  was  held  in  the  Cabinet  Room  with  the  following  men  present:
President  Eisenhower,  Secretary  of  State  Christian  Herter,  Secretary  of  Defense
Thomas  Gates,  Secretary  of  Treasury  Robert  Anderson,  and  General  Wilton  B.
Persons.

With  President-elect  Kennedy  were  the  new  Secretary  of  State  Dean  Rusk,


636 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  new  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  McNamara,  the  new  Secretary  of  Treasury
Douglas  Dillon,  and  Clark  M.  Clifford.

An  agenda  for  the  meeting  had  been  prepared  by  Persons  and  Clifford.  The
subjects  on  the  agenda  had  been  recommended  by  the  parties  present  at  the
conference  and  were  arranged  under  the  headings  of  ''State,"  "Defense,"  and
"Treasury."  The  first  subject  under  the  heading  of  "State"  was  Laos.

President  Eisenhower  opened  the  discussion  on  Laos  by  stating  that  the  United
States  was  determined  to  preserve  the  independence  of  Laos.  It  was  his  opinion
that  if  Laos  should  fall  to  the  Communists,  then  it  would  be  just  a  question  of
time  until  South  Vietnam,  Cambodia,  Thailand  and  Burma  would  collapse.  He
felt  that  the  Communists  had  designs  on  all  of  Southeast  Asia,  and  that  it  would
be  a  tragedy  to  permit  Laos  to  fall.

President  Eisenhower  gave  a  brief  review  of  the  various  moves  and  coups
that  had  taken  place  in  Laos  involving  the  Pathet  Lao,  Souvanna  Phouma,  Boun
Oum,  and  Kong  Le.  He  said  that  the  evidence  was  clear  that  Communist  China
and  North  Vietnam  were  determined  to  destroy  the  independence  of  Laos.  He
also  added  that  the  Russians  were  sending  in  substantial  supplies  in  support  of
the  Pathet  Lao  in  an  effort  to  overturn  the  government.

President  Eisenhower  said  it  would  be  fatal  for  us  to  permit  Communists  to  in-
sert themselves  in  the  Laotian  government.  He  recalled  that  our  experience  had
clearly  demonstrated  that  under  such  circumstances  the  Communists  always
ended  up  in  control.  He  cited  China  as  an  illustration.

At  this  point,  Secretary  of  State  Herter  intervened  to  state  that  if  the  present
government  of  Laos  were  to  apply  to  SEATO  for  aid  under  the  Pact,  Herter
was  of  the  positive  opinion  that  the  signatories  to  the  SEATO  Pact  were  bound.
President  Eisenhower  agreed  with  this  and  in  his  statement  gave  the  impres-
sion that  the  request  for  aid  had  already  come  from  the  government  of  Laos.
He  corroborated  the  binding  nature  of  the  obligation  of  the  United  States  under
the  SEATO  Pact.

President  Eisenhower  stated  that  the  British  and  the  French  did  not  want
SEATO  to  intervene  in  Laos,  and  he  indicated  that  they  would  probably  continue
to  maintain  that  attitude.  President  Eisenhower  said  that  if  it  were  not  appropri-
ate for  SEATO  to  intervene  in  Laos,  that  his  next  preference  would  be  the  In-
ternational Control  Commission.  He  was  sure,  however,  that  the  Soviet  Union
did  not  want  the  ICC  to  go  into  Laos.  President  Eisenhower  stated  that  if  this
country  had  a  choice  as  to  whether  the  task  should  be  assumed  by  SEATO  or
the  ICC,  that  he  personally  would  prefer  SEATO.

Secretary  Herter  stated  that  we  possibly  could  work  out  some  agreement  with
the  British,  if  they  could  be  persuaded  to  recognize  the  present  government  in
Laos.  The  chances  of  accomplishing  this,  however,  appeared  to  be  remote.

Secretary  Herter  stated,  with  President  Eisenhower's  approval,  that  we  should
continue  every  effort  to  make  a  political  settlement  in  Laos.  He  added,  however,
that  if  such  efforts  were  fruitless,  then  the  United  States  must  intervene  in  con-
cert with  our  allies.  If  we  were  unable  to  persuade  our  allies,  then  we  must  go  it
alone.

At  this  point.  President  Eisenhower  said  with  considerable  emotion  that  Laos
was  the  ke\  to  the  entire  area  of  Southeast  Asia.  He  said  that  if  we  permitted
Laos  to  fall,  then  we  would  have  to  write  off  all  the  area.  He  stated  that  we  must
not  permit  a  Communist  take-over.  He  reiterated  that  we  should  make  every
effort  to  persuade  member  nations  of  SEATO  or  the  ICC  to  accept  the  burden
with  us  to  defend  the  freedom  of  Laos.

As  he  concluded  these  remarks,  President  Eisenhower  stated  it  was  impera-


Documents  637


tive  that  Laos  be  defended.  He  said  that  the  United  States  should  accept  this
task  with  our  allies,  if  we  could  persuade  them,  and  alone  if  we  could  not.  He
added  that  "our  unilateral  intervention  would  be  our  last  desperate  hope"  in  the
event  we  were  unable  to  prevail  upon  the  other  signatories  to  join  us.

At  one  time  it  was  hoped  that  perhaps  some  type  of  arrangement  could  be
made  with  Kong  Le.  This  had  proved  fruitless,  however,  and  President  Eisen-
hower said  "he  was  a  lost  soul  and  wholly  irretrievable."

Commenting  upon  President  Eisenhower's  statement  that  we  would  have  to
go  to  the  support  of  Laos  alone  if  we  could  not  persuade  others  to  proceed  with
us.  President-elect  Kennedy  asked  the  question  as  to  how  long  it  would  take  to
put  an  American  division  into  Laos.  Secretary  Gates  replied  that  it  would  take
from  twelve  to  seventeen  days  but  that  some  of  that  time  could  be  saved  if
American  forces,  then  in  the  Pacific,  could  be  utilized.  Secretary  Gates  added
that  the  American  forces  were  in  excellent  shape  and  that  modernization  of  the
Army  was  making  good  progress.

President-elect  Kennedy  commented  upon  the  seriousness  of  the  situation  in
Laos  and  in  Southeast  Asia  and  asked  if  the  situation  seemed  to  be  approach-
ing a  climax.  General  Eisenhower  stated  that  the  entire  proceeding  was  ex-
tremely confused  but  that  it  was  clear  that  this  country  was  obligated  to  support
the  existing  government  in  Laos.

The  discussion  of  Laos  led  to  some  concluding  general  statements  regarding
Southeast  Asia.  It  was  agreed  that  Thailand  was  a  valuable  ally  of  the  United
States,  and  that  one  of  the  dangers  of  a  Communist  take-over  in  Laos  would  be
to  expose  Thailand's  borders.  In  this  regard,  it  was  suggested  that  the  military
training  under  French  supervision  in  Thailand  was  very  poor  and  that  it  would
be  a  good  idea  to  get  American  military  instructors  there  as  soon  as  possible  so
the  level  of  military  capability  could  be  raised.

President  Eisenhower  said  there  was  some  indication  that  Russia  was  con-
cerned over  Communist  pressures  in  Laos  and  in  Southeast  Asia  emanating  from
China  and  North  Vietnam.  It  was  felt  that  this  attitude  could  possibly  lead  to
some  difficulty  between  Russia  and  China.

This  phase  of  the  discussion  was  concluded  by  President  Eisenhower  in  com-
menting philosophically  upon  the  fact  that  the  morale  existing  in  the  demo-
cratic forces  in  Laos  appeared  to  be  disappointing.  He  wondered  aloud  why,  in
interventions  of  this  kind,  we  always  seem  to  find  that  the  morale  of  the  Com-
munist forces  was  better  than  that  of  the  democratic  forces.  His  explanation
was  that  the  Communist  philosophy  appeared  to  produce  a  sense  of  dedication
on  the  part  of  its  adherents,  while  there  was  not  the  same  sense  of  dedication
on  the  part  of  those  supporting  the  free  forces.  He  stated  that  the  entire  prob-
lem of  morale  was  a  serious  one  and  would  have  to  be  taken  into  consideration
as  we  became  more  deeply  involved.


[Document  98]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Excerpts  from  "A  Program  of  Action  for  South  Vietnam,"  8  May  1961  [Ed.
Note:  Date  questionable],  presented  to  President  Kennedy  by  an  interdepart-
mental task  force  comprising  representatives  from  the  Departments  of  State  and
Defense,  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  the  International  Cooperation  Admin-
istration, the  United  States  Information  Agency  and  the  Office  of  the  President.


638 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


...  2.  MILITARY:

a.  The  following  military  actions  were  approved  by  the  President  at  the  NSC
meeting  of  29  April  1961 :

( 1 )  Increase  the  MAAG  as  necessary  to  insure  the  effective  implementation
of  the  military  portion  of  the  program  including  the  training  of  a  20,000-man
addition  to  the  present  G.V.N,  arm.ed  forces  of  150,000.  Initial  appraisal  of  new
tasks  assigned  CHMAAG  indicate  that  approximately  100  additional  military
personnel  will  be  required  immediately  in  addition  to  the  present  complement
of  685.

(2)  Expand  MAAG  responsibilities  to  include  authority  to  provide  support
and  advice  to  the  Self-Defense  Corps  with  a  strength  of  approximately  40,000.

(3)  Authorize  MAP  support  for  the  entire  Civil  Guard  force  of  68,000.
MAP  support  is  now  authorized  for  32,000;  the  remaining  36,000  are  not  now
adequately  trained  and  equipped.

(4)  Install  as  a  matter  of  priority  a  radar  surveillance  capability  which  will
enable  the  G.V.N,  to  obtain  warning  of  Communist  overflights  being  conducted
for  intelligence  or  clandestine  air  supply  purposes.  Initially,  this  capability  should
be  provided  from  U.S.  mobile  radar  capability.

(5)  Provide  MAP  support  for  the  Vietnamese  Junk  Force  as  a  means  of  pre-
venting Viet  Cong  clandestine  supply  and  infiltration  into  South  Vietnam  by
'vater.  MAP  support,  which  was  not  provided  in  the  Counter-Insurgency  Plan,
will  include  training  of  junk  crews  in  Vietnam  or  at  U.S.  bases  by  U.S.  Navy  per-
sonnel.

b.  The  following  additional  actions  are  considered  necessary  to  assist  the
G.V.N,  in  meeting  the  increased  security  threat  resulting  from  the  new  situa-
tion  along  the  Laos-G.V.N.  frontier:

(1)  Assist  the  G.V.N,  armed  forces  to  increase  their  border  patrol  and  in-
surgency suppression  capabilities  by  establishing  an  effective  border  intelligence
and  patrol  system,  by  instituting  regular  aerial  surveillance  over  the  entire  fron-
tier area,  and  by  applying  modern  technological  area-denial  techniques  to  con-
trol the  roads  and  trails  along  Vietnam's  borders.  A  special  staff  element  (ap-
proximately 6  U.S.  personnel),  to  concentrate  upon  solutions  to  the  unique
problems  of  Vietnam's  borders,  will  be  activated  in  MAAG,  Vietnam,  to  assist  a
similar  special  unit  in  the  RVNAF  which  the  G.V.N,  will  be  encouraged  to  es-
tablish: these  two  elements  working  as  an  integrated  team  will  help  the  G.V.N,
gain  the  support  of  nomadic  tribes  and  other  border  inhabitants,  as  well  as  in-
troduce advanced  techniques  and  equipment  to  strengthen  the  security  of  South
Vietnam's  frontiers.

(2)  Assist  the  G.V.N,  to  establish  a  Combat  Development  and  Test  Center  in
South  Vietnam  to  develop,  with  the  help  of  modern  technology,  new  techniques
for  use  against  the  Viet  Cong  forces.  (Approximately  4  U.S.  personnel.)

(3)  Assist  the  G.V.N,  forces  with  health,  welfare  and  public  work  projects
by  providing  U.S.  Army  civic  action  mobile  training  teams,  coordinated  with  the
similar  civilian  effort.  (Approximately  14  U.S.  personnel.)

(4)  Deploy  a  Special  Forces  Group  (approximately  400  personnel)  to  Nha
Trang  in  order  to  accelerate  G.V.N.  Special  Forces  training.  The  first  increment,
for  immediate  deployment  in  Vietnam,  should  be  a  Special  Forces  company
(52  personnel) .

(5)  Instruct  ICS.  CINCPAC,  and  MAAG  to  undertake  an  assessment  of
the  military  utility  of  a  further  increase  in  the  G.V.N,  forces  from  170,000  to


Documents  639


200,000  in  order  to  create  two  new  division  equivalents  for  deployment  to  the
northwest  border  region.  The  parallel  political  and  fiscal  implications  should  be
assessed.  .  .  .

4.  ECONOMIC:

1.  Objective:  Undertake  economic  programs  having  both  a  short-term  im-
mediate impact  as  well  as  ones  which  contribute  to  the  longer  range  economic
viability  of  the  country.

a.  Undertake  a  series  of  economic  projects  designed  to  accompany  the  coun-
ter-insurgency effort,  by  the  following  action:

( 1 )  Grant  to  ICA  the  authority  and  funds  to  move  into  a  rural  development-
civic  action  program.  Such  a  program  would  include  short-range,  simple,  im-
pact projects  which  would  be  undertaken  by  teams  working  in  cooperation  with
local  communities.  This  might  cost  roughly  $3  to  $5  million,  mostly  in  local  cur-
rency. Directors  of  field  teams  should  be  given  authority  with  respect  to  the
expenditure  of  funds  including  use  of  dollar  instruments  to  purchase  local  cur-
rency on  the  spot.

b.  Assist  Vietnam  to  make  the  best  use  of  all  available  economic  resources,
by  the  following  action:

( 1 )  Having  in  mind  that  our  chief  objective  is  obtaining  a  full  and  enthusi-
astic support  by  the  G.V.N,  in  its  fight  against  the  Communists,  a  high  level  team
preferably  headed  by  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  John  Leddy,  with
State  and  ICA  members,  should  be  dispatched  to  Saigon  to  work  out  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  Ambassador  a  plan  whereby  combined  U.S.  and  Vietnamese  fi-
nancial resources  can  best  be  utilized.  This  group's  terms  of  reference  should
cover  the  broad  range  of  fiscal  and  economic  problems.  Authority  should  be
given  to  make  concessions  necessary  to  achieve  our  objectives  and  to  soften  the
blow  of  monetary  reform.  Ambassador  Nolting  and  perhaps  the  Vice  President
should  notify  Diem  of  the  proposed  visit  of  this  group  stressing  that  their  objec-
tive is  clearly  to  maximize  the  joint  effort  rather  than  to  force  the  Vietnamese
into  inequitable  and  unpalatable  actions.

(2)  As  a  part  of  the  foregoing  effort,  an  assessment  should  be  undertaken  of
the  fiscal  and  other  economic  implications  of  a  further  force  increase  from  170,-
000  to  200,000  (as  noted  in  the  Military  section  above).

c.  Undertake  the  development  of  a  long-range  economic  development  pro-
gram as  a  means  of  demonstrating  U.S.  confidence  in  the  economic  and  politi-
cal future  of  the  country  by  the  following  action:

(1)  Authorize  Ambassador  Nolting  to  inform  the  G.V.N,  that  the  U.S.  is
prepared  to  discuss  a  long-range  joint  five-year  development  program  which
would  involve  contributions  and  undertakings  by  both  parties.  .  .  .

5.  PSYCHOLOGICAL:

a.  Assist  the  G.V.N,  to  accelerate  its  public  information  program  to  help  de-
velop a  broad  public  understanding  of  the  actions  required  to  combat  the  Com-
munist insurgents  and  to  build  public  confidence  in  the  G.V.N. 's  determination
and  ability  to  deal  with  the  Commuinst  threat.

b.  The  U.S.  Country  Team,  in  coordination  with  the  G.V.N.  Ministry  of  De-
fense, should  compile  and  declassify  for  use  of  media  representatives  in  South
Vietnam  and  throughout  the  world,  documented  facts  concerning  Communist
infiltration  and  terrorists'  activities  and  the  measures  being  taken  by  the  G.V.N,
to  counter  such  attacks.


640 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

c.  In  coordination  with  CIA  and  the  appropriate  G.V.N.  Ministry,  USIS  will
increase  the  flow  of  information  about  unfavorable  conditions  in  North  Viet-
nam to  media  representatives.

d.  Develop  agricultural  pilot-projects  throughout  the  country,  with  a  view  to-
ward exploiting  their  beneficial  psychological  effects.  This  project  would  be  ac-
complished by  combined  teams  of  Vietnamese  Civic  Action  personnel,  Ameri-
cans in  the  Peace  Corps,  Filipinos  in  Operation  Brotherhood,  and  other  Free
World  nationals.

e.  Exploit  as  a  part  of  a  planned  psychological  campaign  and  rehabilita-
tion of  Communist  Viet  Cong  prisoners  now  held  in  South  Vietnam.  Testimony
of  rehabilitated  prisoners,  stressing  the  errors  of  Communism,  should  be  broad-
cast to  Communist-held  areas,  including  North  Vietnam,  to  induce  defections.
This  rehabilitation  program  would  be  assisted  by  a  team  of  U.S.  personnel  in-
cluding U.S.  Army  (Civil  Affairs,  Psychological  Warfare  and  Counter-intelli-
gence), USIS,  and  USOM  experts.

f.  Provide  adequate  funds  for  an  impressive  U.S.  participation  in  the  Saigon
Trade  Fair  of  1962.

6.  COVERT  ACTIONS:

a.  Expand  present  operations  in  the  field  of  intelligence,  unconventional  war-
fare, and  political-psychological  activities  to  support  the  U.S.  objective  as  stated.

b.  Initiate  the  communications  intelligence  actions,  CIA  and  ASA  personnel
increases,  and  funding  which  were  approved  by  the  President  at  the  NSC  meet-
ing of  29  April  1961.

c.  Expand  the  communications  intelligence  actions  by  inclusion  of  15  ad-
ditional Army  Security  Agency  personnel  to  train  the  Vietnamese  Army  in  tac-
tical COMINT  operations.  .  .  .

7.  FUNDING:

a.  As  spelled  out  in  the  funding  annex,  the  funding  of  the  counter-insurgency
plan  and  the  other  actions  recommended  in  this  program  might  necessitate  in-
creases in  U.S.  support  of  the  G.V.N,  budget  for  FY  61  of  as  much  as  $58  mil-
lion, making  up  to  a  total  of  $192  million  compared  to  $155  million  for  FY  60.
The  U.S.  contribution  for  the  G.V.N.  Defense  budget  in  FY  62  as  presently
estimated  would  total  $161  million  plus  any  deficiency  in  that  budget  which
the  G.V.N,  might  be  unable  to  finance.  The  exact  amount  of  U.S.  contributions
to  the  G.V.N.  Defense  budgets  for  FY  61  and  FY  62  are  subject  to  negotiation
between  the  U.S.  and  the  G.V.N.

b.  U.S.  military  assistance  to  G.V.N.,  in  order  to  provide  the  support  con-
templated by  the  proposed  program  would  total  $140  million,  or  $71  million
more  than  now  programmed  for  Vietnam  in  the  U.S.  current  MAP  budget  for
FY  62.  .  .  .

ANNEX  6
Covert  Actions

a.  Intelligence:  Expand  current  positive  and  counter-intelligence  operations
against  Communist  forces  in  South  Vietnam  and  against  North  Vietnam.  These
include  penetration  of  the  Vietnamese  Communist  mechanism,  dispatch  of
agents  to  North  Vietnam  and  strengthening  Vietnamese  internal  security  serv-


Documents  641


ices.  Authorization  should  be  given,  subject  to  existing  procedures,  for  the  use
in  North  Vietnam  operations  of  civilian  air  crews  of  American  and  other  na-
tionality, as  appropriate,  in  addition  to  Vietnamese.  Consideration  should  be
given  for  overflights  of  North  Vietnam  for  photographic  intelligence  cover-
age, using  American  or  Chinese  Nationalists  crews  and  equipment  as  necessary.

b.  Communications  Intelligence:  Expand  the  current  program  of  intercep-
tion and  direction-finding  covering  Vietnamese  Communist  communications  ac-
tivities in  South  Vietnam,  as  well  as  North  Vietnam  targets.  Obtain  further  USIB
authority  to  conduct  these  operations  on  a  fully  joint  basis,  permitting  the
sharing  of  results  of  interception,  direction  finding,  traffic  analysis  and  crypto-
graphic analysis  by  American  agencies  with  the  Vietnamese  to  the  extent  needed
to  launch  rapid  attacks  on  Vietnamese  Communist  communications  and  com-
mand installations.

This  program  should  be  supplemented  by  a  program,  duly  coordinated,  of
training  additional  Vietnamese  Army  units  in  intercept  and  direction-finding  by
the  U.S.  Army  Security  Agency.  Also,  U.S.  Army  Security  Agency  teams  could  be
sent  to  Vietnam  for  direct  operations,  coordinated  in  the  same  manner — Ap-
proved by  the  President  at  the  NSC  meeting  of  29  April  1961.

c.  Unconventional  Warfare:  Expand  present  operations  of  the  First  Obser-
vation Battalion  in  guerrilla  areas  of  South  Vietnam,  under  joint  MAAG-CIA
sponsorship  and  direction.  This  should  be  in  full  operational  collaboration  with
the  Vietnamese,  using  Vietnamese  civilians  recruited  with  CIA  aid.

In  Laos,  infiltrate  teams  under  light  civilian  cover  to  Southeast  Laos  to  locate
and  attack  Vietnamese  Communist  bases  and  lines  of  communications.  These
teams  should  be  supported  by  assault  units  of  100  to  150  Vietnamese  for  use  on
targets  beyond  capability  of  teams.  Training  of  teams  could  be  a  combined  op-
eration by  CIA  and  U.S.  Army  Special  Forces.

In  North  Vietnam,  using  the  foundation  established  by  intelligence  opera-
tions, form  networks  of  resistance,  covert  bases  and  teams  for  sabotage  and
light  harassment.  A  capability  should  be  created  by  MAAG  in  the  South  Viet-
namese Army  to  conduct  Ranger  raids  and  similar  military  actions  in  North  Viet-
nam as  might  prove  necessary  or  appropriate.  Such  actions  should  try  to  avoid
any  outbreak  of  extensive  resistance  or  insurrection  which  could  not  be  sup-
ported to  the  extent  necessary  to  stave  ofi"  repression.

Conduct  overflights  for  dropping  of  leaflets  to  harass  the  Communists  and  to
maintain  morale  of  North  Vietnamese  population,  and  increase  gray  broadcasts
to  North  Vietnam  for  the  same  purposes.

d.  Internal  South  Vietnam:  Effect  operations  to  penetrate  political  forces,
government,  armed  services  and  opposition  elements  to  measure  support  of  gov-
ernment, provide  warning  of  any  coup  plans  and  identify  individuals  with  po-
tentiality of  providing  leadership  in  event  of  disappearance  of  President  Diem.

Build  up  an  increase  in  the  population's  participation  in  and  loyalty  to  free
government  in  Vietnam,  through  improved  communication  between  the  gov-
ernment and  the  people,  and  by  strengthening  independent  or  quasi-independent
organizations  of  political,  syndical  or  professional  character.  Support  covertly
the  GVN  in  allied  and  neutral  countries,  with  special  emphasis  on  bringing  out
GVN  accomplishments,  to  counteract  tendencies  toward  a  "political  solution"
while  the  Communists  are  attacking  GVN.  Effect,  in  support,  a  psychological
program  in  Vietnam  and  elsewhere  exploiting  Communist  brutality  and  aggres-
sion in  North  Vietnam.

e.  The  expanded  program  outlined  above  was  estimated  to  require  an  ad-
ditional 40  personnel  for  the  CIA  station  and  an  increase  in  the  CIA  outlay  for


642 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


Vietnam  of  approximately  $1.5  million  for  FY  62,  partly  compensated  by  the
withdrawal  of  personnel  from  other  areas.  The  U.S.  Army  Security  Agency  ac-
tions to  supplement  communications  intelligence  will  require  78  personnel  and
approximately  $1.2  million  in  equipment.  The  personnel  and  fund  augmenta-
tions in  this  paragraph  were  approved  by  the  President  at  the  NSC  meeting  of
29  April  1961.

f.  In  order  adequately  to  train  the  Vietnamese  Army  in  tactical  COMIT  op-
erations, the  Army  Security  Agency  estimates  that  an  additional  15  personnel
are  required.  This  action  has  been  approved  by  the  U.S.  Intelligence  Board.


[Document  99]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

U.S.  Approval,  in  1961,  of  Steps  to
Strengthen  South  Vietnam

National  Security  Action  Memorandum  52,  signed  by  McGeorge  Bundy,
Presidential  adviser  on  national  security,  11  May  1961.

1.  The  U.S.  objective  and  concept  of  operations  stated  in  report  are  ap-
proved: to  prevent  Communist  domination  of  South  Vietnam;  to  create  in
that  country  a  viable  and  increasingly  democratic  society,  and  to  initiate,  on  an
accelerated  basis,  a  series  of  mutually  supporting  actions  of  a  military,  political,
economic,  psychological  and  covert  character  designed  to  achieve  this  objec-
tive.

2.  The  approval  given  for  specific  military  actions  by  the  President  at  the
National  Security  Council  meeting  on  April  29,  1961,  is  confirmed.

3.  Additional  actions  listed  at  pages  4  and  5  of  the  Task  Force  Report  are
authorized,  with  the  objective  of  meeting  the  increased  security  threat  resulting
from  the  new  situation  along  the  frontier  between  Laos  and  Vietnam.  In  par-
ticular, the  President  directs  an  assessment  of  the  military  utility  of  a  further  in-
crease in  G.V.N,  forces  from  170,000  to  200,000,  together  with  an  assessment  of
the  parallel  political  and  fiscal  implications.

4.  The  President  directs  full  examination  by  the  Defense  Department,  under
the  guidance  of  the  Director  of  the  continuing  Task  Force  on  Vietnam,  of  the
size  and  composition  of  forces  which  would  be  desirable  in  the  case  of  a  possible
commitment  of  U.S.  forces  to  Vietnam.  The  diplomatic  setting  within  which
this  action  might  be  taken  should  also  be  examined.

5.  The  U.S.  will  seek  to  increase  the  confidence  of  President  Diem  and  his
Government  in  the  United  States  by  a  series  of  actions  and  messages  relating  to
the  trip  of  Vice  President  Johnson.  The  U.S.  will  attempt  to  strengthen  Presi-
dent Diem's  popular  support  within  Vietnam  by  reappraisal  and  negotiation,
under  the  direction  of  Ambassador  Nolting.  Ambassador  Nolting  is  also  re-
quested to  recommend  any  necessary  reorganization  of  the  Country  Team  for
these  purposes.

6.  The  U.S.  will  negotiate  in  appropriate  ways  to  improve  Vietnam's  relation-
ship with  other  countries,  especially  Cambodia,  and  its  standing  in  word  opinion.

7.  The  Ambassador  is  authorized  to  begin  negotiations  looking  toward  a
new  bilateral  arrangement  with  Vietnam,  but  no  firm  commitment  will  be  made
to  such  an  arrangement  without  further  review  by  the  President.

8.  The  U.S.  will  undertake  economic  programs  in  Vietnam  with  a  view  to
both  short-term  immediate  impact  and  a  contribution  to  the  longer-range  eco-


Documents  643


nomic  viability  of  the  country,  and  the  specific  actions  proposed  on  pages  12  and
13  of  the  Task  Force  Report  are  authorized.

9.  The  U.S.  will  strengthen  its  efforts  in  the  psychological  field  as  recom-
mended on  pages  14  and  15  of  the  Task  Force  Report.

10.  The  program  for  covert  actions  outlined  on  page  15  of  the  Task  Force
Report  is  approved.

11.  These  decisions  will  be  supported  by  appropriate  budgetary  action,  but
the  President  reserves  judgment  on  the  levels  of  funding  proposed  on  pages  15
and  16  of  the  Task  Force  Report  and  in  the  funding  annex.

12.  Finally,  the  President  appro\es  the  continuation  of  a  special  Task  Force
on  Vietnam,  established  in  and  directed  b\-  the  Department  of  State  under  Ster-
ling J.  Cottrell  as  Director,  and  Chalmers  B.  Wood  as  Executive  Officer.


[Document  100]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Excerpts  from  memorandum  from  Brig.  Gen.  Edward  G.  Lansdale,  Penta-
gon expert  on  guerrilla  warfare,  to  Gen.  Maxwell  D.  Taylor,  President  Kennedy's
military  adviser,  on  "Resources  for  Unconventional  Warfare,  S.E.  Asia."  un-
dated but  apparently  from  July,  1961.  Copies  were  sent  to  Secretary  of  De-
fense Robert  S.  McNamara.  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Roswell  L.  Gilpatric,
Secretary  of  State  Dean  Rusk,  Allen  W.  Dulles,  Director  of  Central  Intelligence,
and  Gen.  C.  P.  Cabell,  Deputy  Director  of  Central  Intelligence.

This  memo  is  in  response  to  your  desire  for  early  information  on  unconven-
tional-warfare resources  in  Southeast  Asia.  The  information  was  compiled
within  Defense  and  CIA.

A.  SOUTH  VIETNAM
1.  Vietnamese

a.  First  Observation  Group

This  is  a  Special  Forces  type  of  unit,  with  the  mission  of  operating  in  denied
(enemy)  areas.  It  currently  has  some  limited  operations  in  North  Vietnam  and
some  shallow  penetrations  into  Laos.  Most  of  the  unit  has  been  committed  to
operations  against  Viet  Cong  guerillas  in  South  Vi'^tnam.

Strength,  as  of  6  July,  was  340.  The  First  Observation  Group  had  an  au-
thorized strength  of  305  and  now  is  being  increased  by  500,  for  a  total  of  805,
under  the  20,000-man  force  increase.  Personnel  are  volunteers  who  have  been
carefully  screened  by  security  organizations.  Many  are  from  North  Vietnam.
They  have  been  trained  for  guerrilla  operations,  at  the  Group's  training  center
at  Nha  Trang.  The  unit  is  MAP-supported,  as  a  TO&E  unit  of  the  RVNAF  (Re-
public of  Vietnam  Armed  Forces).  It  receives  special  equipment  and  training
from  CIA  and  U.S  control  is  by  CIA  MAAG.

The  Group  and  its  activities  are  highly  classified  by  the  Government  of  Viet-
nam. Only  a  select  few  senior  RVNMAF  officers  have  access  to  it.  Operations
require  the  approval  of  President  Diem,  on  much  the  same  approval  basis  as
certain  U.S.  special  operations.  The  unit  is  separate  from  normal  RVNAF
command  channels.

The  Group  was  organized  in  February,  1956,  with  the  initial  mission  of  pre-
paring stay-behind  organizations  in  South  Vietnam  just  below  the  17th  Parallel,


644 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

for  guerrilla  warfare  in  the  event  of  an  overt  invasion  by  North  Vietnamese
forces.  It  was  given  combat  missions  against  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  in  South  Viet-
nam last  year,  when  these  Communist  guerrillas  increased  their  activities.  The
plan  is  to  relieve  the  Group  from  these  combat  assignments,  to  ready  its  full
strength  for  denied  area  missions,  as  RVNAF  force  increases  permit  relief.  It
is  currently  being  organized  into  twenty  teams  of  15  men  each,  with  two  RS-1
radios  per  team,  for  future  operations.

b.  Other  RVNAF

MAAG-Vietnam  has  reported  the  formation  of  additional  volunteer  groups,
apart  from  the  First  Observation  Group,  for  similar  operations  to  augment  the
missions  of  the  Group.  As  of  6  July,  the  additional  volunteers  were  reported  as:

1)  .  60  Mois  (Montagnard  tribesmen)  recruited,  being  security  screened,  to
receive  Special  Forces  training.

2)  .  400  military  (RVNAF),  to  receive  Special  Forces  training.  80  will  be
formed  into  small  teams,  to  augment  operations  of  the  First  Operations  Group.
320  will  be  formed  into  two  Ranger  (Airborne)  companies.

3)  .  70  civilians,  being  organized  and  trained  for  stay-behind  operations,  pene-
tration teams,  and  communicators.

Other  special  units  of  the  RVNAF,  now  committed  to  operations  against
the  Viet  Cong  and  with  Special  Forces/Ranger  training,  are:
9,096  Rangers,  in  65  companies.

2,772  more  Rangers  being  activated,  part  of  20,000-man  increase
4,786  Paratroopers
2,300  Marines

673  men  in  Psychological  Warfare  Bn.

In  addition,  cadres  from  all  other  combat  elements  of  the  RVNAF  have  re-
ceived Special  Forces/Ranger  training.

2.  U.S.

a.  Defense

1)  .  There  are  approximately  6  officers  and  6  enlisted  men  from  the  1st  Spe-
cial Group  on  Okinawa  currently  attached  to  the  MAAG  to  assist  with  Ranger-
type  training.

2)  .  There  are  three  4-man  intelligence  training  teams  present — Combat  In-
telligence, Counter-intelligence,  Photo-Interpretation  and  Foreign  Operations
Intelligence  (clandestine  collection)  in  addition  to  eight  officers  and  two  enlisted
intelligence  advisors  on  the  MAAG  staff.

3)  .  There  are  two  Psychological  Warfare  staff  officers  on  the  MAAG  staff
and  a  4-man  Civil  Affairs  mobile  training  team  (3  officers — 1  enlisted  man)
advising  the  G-5  staff  of  the  Vietnamese  Army  in  the  psy  ops-civic  action  fields.

b.  CIA

1)  .  There  are  9  CIA  officers  working  with  the  First  Observation  Group  in
addition  to  one  MAAG  advisor.

2)  .  CIA  also  has  five  officers  working  with  the  Vietnamese  Military  Intelli-
gence Service  and  one  officer  working  with  the  covert  [one  word  illegible]  of
the  Army  Ps)chological  Warfare  Directorate.

B.  THAILAND
1.  Thai

a.  Royal  Thai  Army  Ranger  Battalion  (Airborne)

A  Special  Forces  type  unit,  its  stated  mission  is  to  organize  and  conduct


Documents  645


guerrilla  warfare  in  areas  of  Thailand  overrun  by  the  enemy  in  case  of  an  open
invasion  of  Thailand.  It  currently  has  the  mission  of  supplying  the  Palace  Guard
for  the  Prime  Minister.

Based  at  Lopburi,  the  Ranger  Battalion  has  a  MAP  authorized  strength  of
580.  It  is  organized  into  a  Headquarters  and  Headquarters  company,  a  Service
company,  and  four  Ranger  companies.  The  Battalion  has  4  command  detach-
ments and  26  operations  detachments,  trained  and  organized  along  the  lines  of
U.S.  Special  Forces  in  strength,  equipment,  and  rank  structure.

The  Ranger  Battalion  is  loosely  attached  to  the  1st  Division.  In  reality,  it  is
an  independent  unit  of  the  Royal  Thai  Army,  under  the  direct  control  of  Field
Marshal  Sarit,  the  Commander  in  Chief,  and  receives  preferential  treatment.

Each  ranger  company  has  been  assigned  a  region  of  Thailand,  in  which  it  is
to  be  prepared  to  undertake  guerrilla  warfare  in  case  of  enemy  occupation.
Field  training  is  conducted  in  these  assigned  regions,  to  acquaint  the  detach-
ments with  the  people,  facilities  and  terrain.

b.  Police  Aerial  Resupply  Unit  (PARU)

The  PARU  has  a  mission  of  undertaking  clandestine  operations  in  denied
areas.  99  PARU  personnel  have  been  introduced  covertly  to  assist  the  Meos  in
operations  in  Laos,  where  their  combat  performance  has  been  outstanding.

This  is  a  special  police  unit,  supported  by  CIA  (CIA  control  in  the  Meo
operations  has  been  reported  as  excellent),  with  a  current  strength  of  300  being
increased  to  550  as  rapidly  as  possible.  All  personnel  are  specially  selected  and
screened,  and  have  been  rated  as  of  high  quality.  Officers  are  selected  from  the
ranks.

Training  consists  of  10  weeks"  basic  training,  3  weeks'  jumping,  3  weeks'  jun-
gle operations,  4  weeks'  police  law  and  3  months  of  refresher  training  yearly.
Forty  individuals  have  been  trained  as  W/T  communicators.

All  personnel  have  adequate  personal  gear  to  be  self-sustaining  in  the  jungle.
Weapons  are  M-1  rifles,  M-3  submachine  guns  and  BAR.  In  addition,  personnel
are  trained  to  use  other  automatic  weapons,  2.34  rocket  launchers,  and  60-mm.
mortars.

There  are  presently  13  PARU  teams,  totaling  99  men,  operating  with  the
Meo  guerrillas  in  Laos.  Combat  reports  of  these  operations  have  included  ex-
ceptionally heroic  and  meritorious  actions  by  PARU  personnel.  The  PARU
teams  have  provided  timely  intelligence  and  have  worked  effectively  with  local
tribes.

c.  Thai  Border  Patrol  ( BPP)

The  mission  of  the  BPP  is  to  counter  infiltration  and  subversion  during  peace-
time, in  addition  to  normal  police  duties,  in  the  event  of  an  armed  invasion  of
Thailand,  the  BPP  will  operate  as  guerrilla  forces  in  enemy-held  areas,  in  sup-
port of  regular  Thai  armed  forces.

The  BPP  has  a  current  strength  of  4,500.  It  was  organized  in  1955  as  a  gen-
darmerie patrol  force  (name  changed  to  BPP  in  1959),  composed  of  71  active
and  23  reserve  platoons,  from  existing  police  units.  It  is  an  element  of  the  Thai
National  Police,  subordinate  to  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.

Although  technically  a  police  organization,  the  BPP  is  armed  with  infantry
weapons,  including  light  machine  guns,  rocket  launchers  and  light  mortars.  It
is  trained  in  small-unit  infantry  tactics  and  counter-guerrilla  operations.  Train-
ing is  currently  being  conducted  by  a  10-man  U.S.  Army  Special  Forces  team
from  Okinawa,  under  ICA  auspices.

This  unusual  police  unit  was  created  initially  to  cope  with  problems  posed  by
foreign  guerrilla  elements  using  Thailand  as  a  safehaven:  the  Vietminh  in  east-


646 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoJ.  II

ern  Thailand  and  the  Chinese  Communists  along  the  Malayan  border  in  the
south.  There  has  been  some  tactical  liaison  with  Burmese  Army  units.

2.  U.S.

a.  Defense

1(.  A  special  Forces  qualified  officers  is  assigned  to  advise  the  RTA  Ranger
Battalion.

2)  .  A  ten-man  Special  Forces  team  from  the  1st  Special  Forces  Group  in
Okinawa  is  currently  conducting  training  for  the  Thai  Border  Patrol  Police
under  ICA  auspices.

3)  .  There  are  5  officers  and  1  enlisted  man  attached  to  MAAG  as  ad-
visers to  J-2  and  the  Thai  Armed  Forces  Security  Center.

b.  CIA

1 )  .  2  advisers  with  PARU.

2)  .  3  officers  who  work  with  the  Border  Patrol  Police  providing  advice,
guidance  and  limited  training  in  the  collection  and  processing  of  intelligence  in
addition  to  management  of  their  communications  system.

C.  LAOS
1.  Lao

a.  Commandos

According  to  CINCPAC,  there  are  two  special  commando  companies  in  the
Lao  Armed  Forces  (FAL),  with  a  total  strength  of  256.  These  commandos
have  received  Special  Forces  training.

b.  Meo  Guerrillas

About  9,000  Meo  tribesmen  have  been  equipped  for  guerrilla  operations,
which  they  are  now  conducting  with  considerable  effectiveness  in  Communist-
dominated  territory  in  Laos.  They  have  been  organized  into  Auto-Defense
Choc  units  of  the  FAL,  of  varying  sizes.  Estimates  on  how  many  more  of  these
splendid  fighting  men  could  be  recruited  vary,  but  a  realistic  figure  would  be
around  4,000  more,  although  the  total  manpower  pool  is  larger.

Political  leadership  of  the  Meos  is  in  the  hands  of  Touby  Lyfoung,  who
now  operates  mostly  out  of  Vientiane.  The  military  leader  is  Lt-Col  Vang  Pao,
who  is  the  field  commander.  Command  control  of  Meo  operations  is  exercised
by  the  Chief  CIA  Vientiane  with  the  advice  of  Chief  MAAG  Laos.  The  same
CIA  paramilitary  and  U.S.  military  teamwork  is  in  existence  for  advisory  activ-
ities (9  CIA  operations  officers.  9  LTAG  Army  Special  Forces  personnel,  in
addition  to  the  99  Thai  PARU  under  CIA  control)  and  aerial  resupply.

As  Meo  village  are  over-run  bv  Communist  forces  and  as  men  leave  food-
raising  duties  to  serve  as  guerrillas,  a  problem  is  growing  over  the  care  and  feed-
ing of  non-combat  Meos.  CIA  has  given  some  rice  and  clothing  to  relieve  this
problem.  Consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  organized  relief,  a  mission  of  an
ICA  nature,  to  the  handling  of  Meo  refugees  and  their  rehabilitation.

c.  National  Directorate  of  Coordination

This  is  the  Intelligence  arm  of  the  RLG.  Its  operations  are  mainly  in  the  Vien-
tiane area  at  present.  It  has  an  armed  unit  consisting  of  two  battalions  and  is  un-
der the  command  of  Lt-Col  Siho,  a  FAL  officer.  In  addition  to  intelligence  opera-
tions this  force  has  a  capability  for  sabotage,  kidnapping,  commando-type  raids,
etc.


Documents  647


d.  There  is  also  a  local  veteran's  organization  and  a  grass-roots  political  or-
ganization in  Laos,  both  of  which  are  subject  to  CIA  direction  and  control  and
are  capable  of  carrying  out  propaganda,  sabotage  and  harassment  operations.
Both  are  located  (in  varying  degrees  of  strength  and  reliability)  throughout
Laos.

2.  U.S.

a.  Defense

1)  .  There  are  154  Special  Forces  personnel  (12  teams)  from  the  7th  Spe-
cial Forces  Group  at  Fort  Bragg,  N.  C,  attached  to  the  MAAG  and  providing
tactical  advice  to  FAL  commanders  and  conducting  basic  training  when  the
situation  permits.

2)  .  A  10-man  intelligence  training  team  is  assisting  the  FAL  in  establishing  a
military  intelligence  system.

3)  .  An  8-man  psychological  warfare  team  is  assisting  the  FAL  with  psy  war
operations  and  operation  of  its  radio  transmitters.

b.  CIA

1)  .  Nine  CIA  officers  are  working  in  the  field  with  the  Meo  guerrillas,  back-
stopped  by  two  additional  officers  in  Vientiane.

2)  .  Three  CIA  officers  plus  2-3  Vietnamese  are  working  with  the  National
Directorate  of  Coordination.

D.  OTHERS
1.  Asian

a.  Eastern  Construction  Company  [Filipinos]

This  is  a  private,  Filipino-run  public  service  organization,  similar  to  an  em-
ployment agency,  with  an  almost  untapped  potential  for  unconventional  war-
fare (which  was  its  original  mission).  It  now  furnishes  about  500  trained,  ex-
perienced Filipino  technicians  to  the  Governments  of  Vietnam  and  Laos,  un-
der the  auspices  of  MAAGs  (MAP)  and  USOMs  (CIA  activities).  Most  of
these  Filipinos  are  currently  augmenting  U.S.  military  logistics  programs  with
the  Vietnamese  Army  and  Lao  Army.  They  instruct  local  military  personnel  in
ordnance,  quartermaster,  etc.,  maintenance,  storage,  and  supply  procedures.
MAAG  Chiefs  in  both  Vietnam  and  Laos  have  rated  this  service  as  highly  ef-
fective. CIA  has  influence  and  some  continuing  interest  with  individuals.

The  head  of  Eastern  Construction  is  "Frisco"  Johnny  San  Juan,  former  Na-
tional Commander,  Philippines  Veterans  Legion,  and  former  close  staff  assistant
to  President  Magsaysay  of  the  Philippines  (serving  as  Presidential  Complaints
and  Action  Commissioner  directly  under  the  President).  Its  cadre  are  mostly
either  former  guerrillas  against  the  Japanese  in  WW  II  or  former  Philippine
Army  personnel.  Most  of  the  cadre  had  extensive  combat  experience  against
the  Communist  Huk  guerrillas  in  the  Philippines.  This  cadre  can  be  expanded
into  a  wide  range  of  counter-Communist  activities,  having  sufficient  stature  in
the  Philippines  to  be  able  to  draw  on  a  very  large  segment  of  its  trained,  experi-
enced, and  well-motivated  manpower  pool.

Eastern  Construction  was  started  in  1954  as  Freedom  Company  of  the  Philip-
pines, a  non-profit  organization,  with  President  Magsaysay  as  its  honorary
president.  Its  charter  stated  plainly  that  it  was  "to  serve  the  cause  of  freedom."
It  actually  was  a  mechanism  to  permit  the  deployment  of  Filipino  personnel  in


648 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

other  Asian  countries,  for  unconventional  operations,  under  cover  of  a  public
service  organization  having  a  contract  with  the  host  government.  Philippine
Armed  Forces  and  government  personnel  were  '"sheep-dipped"  and  served
abroad.  Its  personnel  helped  write  the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam,
trained  Vietnam's  Presidential  Guard  Battalion,  and  were  instrumental  in
founding  and  organizing  the  Vietnamese  Veterans  Legion.

When  U.S.  personnel  instrumental  in  the  organization  and  operational  use
of  Freedom  Company  departed  from  the  Asian  area,  direct  U.S.  support  of
the  organization  (on  a  clandestine  basis)  was  largely  terminated.  The  FiHpino
leaders  in  it  then  decided  to  carry  on  its  mission  privately,  as  a  commercial  un-
dertaking. They  changed  the  name  to  Eastern  Construction  Company.  The
organization  survived  some  months  of  very  hard  times  financially.  Its  leaders
remain  as  a  highly-motivated,  experienced,  anti-Communist  '"hard  core."

b.  Operation  Brotherhood  (Filipino)

There  is  another  private  Filipino  public-service  organization,  capable  of  con-
siderable expansion  in  socio-economic-medical  operations  to  support  counter-
guerilla  actions.  It  is  now  operating  teams  in  Laos,  under  ICA  auspices.  It  has  a
measure  of  CIA  control.

Operation  Brotherhood  (OB)  was  started  in  1954  by  the  International  Jay-
cees,  under  the  inspiration  and  guidance  of  Oscar  Arellano,  a  Filipino  architect
who  was  Vice  President  for  Asia  of  the  International  Jaycees.  The  concept
was  to  provide  medical  service  to  refugees  and  provincial  farmers  in  South
Vietnam,  as  part  of  the  1955  pacification  and  refugee  program.  Initially  Filipino
teams,  later  other  Asian  and  European  teams,  served  in  OB  in  Vietnam.  Their
work  was  closely  coordinated  with  Vietnamese  Army  operations  which  cleaned
up  Vietminh  stay-behinds  and  started  stabilizing  rural  areas.  .  .  .

c.  The  Security  Training  Center  (STC)

This  is  a  counter-subversion,  counter-guerrilla  and  psychological  warfare
school  overtly  operated  by  the  Philippine  Government  and  covertly  sponsored
by  the  U.S.  Government  through  CIA  as  the  instrument  of  the  Country  Team.
It  is  located  at  Fort  McKinley  on  the  outskirts  of  Manila.  Its  stated  mission  is:
"To  counter  the  forces  of  subversion  in  Southeast  Asia  through  more  adequate
training  of  security  personnel,  greater  cooperation,  better  understanding  and
maximum  initiative  among  the  countries  of  the  area."  .  .  .

The  training  capability  of  the  STC  includes  a  staff  of  approximately  12
instructors  in  the  subjects  of  unconventional  and  counter-guerrilla  war-
fare. .  .  .

d.  CAT.  Civil  Air  Transport  (Chinese  Nationalist)

CAT  is  a  commercial  air  line  engaged  in  scheduled  and  non-scheduled  air
operations  throughout  the  Far  East,  with  headquarters  and  large  maintenance
facilities  located  in  Taiwan.  CAT,  a  CIA  proprietary,  provides  air  logistical
support  under  commercial  cover  to  most  CIA  and  other  U.S.  Government
agencies'  requirements.  CAT  supports  covert  and  clandestine  air  operations  by
providing  trained  and  experienced  personnel,  procurement  of  supplies  and
equipment  through  overt  commercial  channels,  and  the  maintenance  of  a  fairly
large  inventory  of  transport  and  other  type  aircraft  under  both  Chinat  and  U.S.
registry.

CAT  has  demonstrated  its  capability  on  numerous  occasions  to  meet  all  types
of  contingency  or  long-term  covert  air  requirements  in  support  of  U.S.  objec-
tives. During  the  past  ten  years,  it  has  had  some  notable  achievements,  including


Documents  649


support  of  the  Chinese  Nationalist  withdrawal  from  the  mainland,  air  drop  sup-
port to  the  French  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  complete  logistical  and  tactical  air  support
for  the  Indonesian  operation,  air  lifts  of  refugees  from  North  Vietnam,  more
than  200  overflights  of  Mainland  China  and  Tibet,  and  extensive  air  support  in
Laos  during  the  current  crisis.  .  .  .

2.  U.S.

b.  CIA

1 ) .  Okinawa — Support  Base

Okinawa  Station  is  in  itself  a  paramilitary  support  asset  and,  in  critical  situa-
tions calling  for  extensi\e  support  of  UW  activity  in  the  Far  East,  could  be  de-
voted in  its  entirety  to  this  mission.  Located  at  Camp  Chinen,  it  comprises  a  self-
contained  base  under  Army  cover  with  facilities  of  all  tvpes  necessary  to  the
storage,  testing,  packaging,  procurement  and  deliverv  of  supplies — ranging
from  weapons  and  explosives  to  medical  and  clothing.  Because  of  its  being  a
controlled  area,  it  can  accommodate  admirablv  the  holding  of  black  bodies  in
singletons  or  small  groups,  as  well  as  small  groups  of  trainees.  .  .  .

4).  Saipan  Training  Station.

CIA  maintains  a  field  training  station  on  the  island  of  Saipan  located  ap-
proximately 160  miles  northeast  of  Guam  in  the  Marianas  Islands.  The  installa-
tion is  under  Navv  cover  and  is  known  as  the  Naval  Technical  Training  Unit.
The  primary  mission  of  the  Saipan  Training  Station  is  to  provide  physical  fa-
cilities and  competent  instructor  personnel  to  fulfill  a  variety  of  training  require-
ments including  intelligence  tradecraft,  communications,  counter-intelligence
and  psychological  warfare  techniques.  Training  is  performed  in  support  of  CIA
activities  conducted  throughout  the  Far  East  area.

In  addition  to  the  facilities  described  above,  CIA  maintains  a  small  ship  of
approximately  500  tons'  displacement  and  140  feet  in  length.  This  vessel  is  used
presently  to  provide  surface  transportation  between  Guam  and  Saipan.  It  has
an  American  Captain  and  First  Mate  and  a  Philippine  crew,  and  is  operated
under  the  cover  of  a  commercial  corporation  with  home  offices  in  Balti-
more, Maryland.  Both  the  ship  and  the  corporation  have  a  potentially  wider
paramilitary  application  both  in  the  Far  East  area  and  elsewhere.


[Document  101]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Cablegram  from  the  United  States  Embassy  in  Saigon  to  the  State  Depart-
ment, 1  Oct.  1961.  A  copy  of  the  message  was  sent  to  the  commander  in  chief
of  Pacific  forces.

Discussion  with  Felt  and  partv,  McGarr,  Nolting  vesterday  Diem  asked  for
bilateral  defense  treatv.  Large  and  unexplained  request.  Serious.  Put  forward
as  result  of  Diem's  fear  of  outcome  of  Laos  situation,  SVN  vulnerability  to  in-
creased infiltration,  feelings  that  SEATO  action  would  be  inhibited  by  UK  and
France  in  the  case  of  SVN  as  in  Laos.

Nolting  told  Diem  question  had  important  angle  and  effect  on  SEATO.
Major  repeated  to  Thuan  and  believe  he  understands  better  than  Diem  some
of  thorny  problems.

Fuller  report  of  conversation  with  Diem  will  follow  but  would  like  to  get
quick  preliminary  reaction  from  Washington  on  this  request.


650 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Our  reaction  is  that  the  request  should  be  seriously  and  carefully  treated
to  prevent  feeling  that  U.S.  is  not  serious  in  intention  to  support  SVN.  But  see
major  issues  including  overriding  Article  19,  Geneva  Accords,  possible  ratifica-
tion problems  as  well  as  effect  on  SEATO.

Diem's  request  arises  from  feeling  that  U.S.  policy  on  Laos  will  expose  his
flank  in  infiltration  and  lead  to  large-scale  hostilities  in  SVN.  So  seeking  a
stronger  commitment  than  he  thinks  he  has  now  through  SEATO.  Changing
U.S.  policy  on  Laos,  especially  SEATO  decision  to  use  force  if  necessary  to  pro-
tect SVN  and  Thailand,  would  relieve  pressure  for  bilateral  treaty.


[Document  102]

CM-390-61

12  October  1961

MEMORANDUM  FOR  GENERAL  TAYLOR

SUBJECT:  Counterinsurgency  Operations  in  South  Vietnam

1.  You  will  recall  that  I  recently  had  occasion  to  look  into  allegations  that
the  United  States  is  overtraining  the  Vietnamese  Army  for  a  Korea-type  war
with  little  or  nothing  being  done  to  meet  the  terrorist  problem  in  Vietnam.  My
inquiries  have  highlighted  the  following  main  points:

a.  The  success  of  the  counter-terrorist  police  organization  in  Malaya
has  had  considerable  impact.

b.  The  concept  of  using  local  police  force  to  combat  local  insurgency  is
politically  and  diplomatically  attractive.

2.  I  fully  agree  that  we  should  make  maximum  use  of  those  aspects  of  the
British  counterinsurgency  experience  in  Malaya  which  are  pertinent  to  the
situation  in  Vietnam.  You  will  recognize,  however,  that  there  are  major  differ-
ences between  the  situations  in  Malaya  and  South  Vietnam:

a.  Malayan  borders  were  far  more  controllable  in  that  Thailand  coop-
erated in  refusing  the  Communists  an  operational  safe  haven.

b.  The  racial  characteristics  of  the  Chinese  insurgents  in  Malaya  made
identification  and  segregation  a  relatively  simple  matter  as  compared  to
the  situation  in  Vietnam  where  the  Viet  Cong  cannot  be  distinguished
from  the  loyal  citizen.

c.  The  scarcity  of  food  in  Malaya  versus  the  relative  plenty  in  South
Vietnam  made  the  denial  of  food  to  the  Communist  guerrillas  a  far  more
important  and  readily  usable  weapon  in  Malaya.

d.  Most  importantly,  in  Malaya  the  British  were  in  actual  command,  with
all  of  the  obvious  advantages  this  entails,  and  used  highly  trained  Com-
monwealth troops.

e.  Finally,  it  took  the  British  nearly  12  years  to  defeat  an  insurgency
which  was  less  strong  than  the  one  in  South  Vietnam.

3.  Furthermore,  as  you  well  know,  the  success  of  the  counterinsurgency
operations  in  Malaya  is  not  unique.  Major  terrorist  activities  have  been  defeated
in  both  the  Philippines  and  Burma,  and  in  neither  place  was  the  police  organ-
ization used  as  the  framework  for  coordination  and  control.  In  the  Philippines,
for  example,  the  military  framework  used  was  highly  successful.

4.  Closely  associated  with  the  allegation  that  the  MAAG  is  "overtraining"


Documents  651


the  Vietnamese  Army  is  the  concern  frequently  expressed  over  the  length  of
time  required  to  train  military  officers  and  NCO's.  No  one  knows  better  than
you  do  that  well-trained  officers  and  NCO's  are  not  produced  in  brief  training
programs.  I  am  sure  you  will  want  to  discuss  this  in  detail  with  General  McGarr
when  you  visit  Saigon.  It  is  most  important  to  note  that  the  heaviest  casualties
in  the  Vietnam  insurgency  have  been  suffered  by  the  Civil  Guard  previously
trained  as  police.  Almost  without  exception,  the  Viet  Cong  have  attacked  the
untrained  Civil  Guard  rather  than  the  better  trained  Army  units.  This  has
resulted  in  a  heavy  loss  of  weapons  and  equipment  to  the  Viet  Cong.  Untrained
Civil  Guard  units  have,  in  fact,  been  an  important  source  of  weapons  and  sup-
plies for  the  Viet  Cong,  and  their  known  vulnerability  has  been  an  invitation
for  the  Viet  Cong  to  attack.  General  McGarr  believes  that  reversion  of  the
Civil  Guard  to  police  control  would  set  back  the  counterinsurgency  operation
in  South  Vietnam  by  at  least  a  year.

5.  With  respect  to  training  the  Vietnamese  Armv  for  the  "wrong  war,"  it
seems  clear  that  in  recent  months  the  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam  has  de-
veloped far  beyond  the  capacity  of  police  control.  All  of  the  Vietnamese  Army
successes  this  past  summer  have  met  Viet  Cong  opposition  in  organized  battalion
strength.  Even  larger  Communist  units  were  involved  in  the  recent  Viet  Cong
successes  north  of  Kontum.  This  change  in  the  situation  has  not  been  fullv  un-
derstood  by  many  U.S.  officials.

6.  In  this  regard,  there  is  some  concern  that  the  Thompson  Mission  may
try  to  sell  the  Malayan  concept  of  police  control  without  making  a  sufficiently
careful  evaluation  of  conditions  in  South  Vietnam.  Additionally,  there  are
some  indications  that  the  British,  for  political  reasons,  wish  to  increase  their
influence  in  this  area  and  are  using  the  Thompson  Mission  as  a  vehicle.  Con-
sequently, your  forthcoming  trip  to  South  Vietnam  is  most  timely.  Despite
repeated  urging,  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  has  not  yet  written  an  over-
all national  plan  for  counter-insurgency.  The  question  of  police  or  military
organization  for  combatting  Viet  Cong  insurgency  should  be  laid  to  rest  in  that
plan.  Your  evaluation  of  this  matter  could  have  an  important  effect  on  the
Governments  of  both  South  Vietnam  and  the  United  States.

L.  L.  Lemnitzer
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


[Document  103]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Cablegram  from  United  States  Embassy  i?i  Saigon  to  the  State  Department
13  Oct.  196 L  on  requests  by  Nguyen  Dinh  Thuan,  Defense  Minister  of  South
Vietnam.  Copies  of  this  message  were  sent  to  Commander  in  Chief  of  Pacific
forces  and  to  the  United  States  Embassies  in  Bangkok,  Thailand,  and  Taipei,
Taiwan.

Thuan  in  meeting  October  13  made  the  following  requests:

1.  Extra  squadron  of  AD-6  in  lieu  of  proposed  T-28"s  and  delivery  ASAP.

2.  U.S.  Civilian  contract  pilots  for  helicopters  and  C-47's  for  "non-combat"
operations.

3.  U.S.  combat  units  or  units  to  be  introduced  into  SVN  as  "combat-trainer


652 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

units."  Part  to  be  stationed  in  North  near  17th  Parallel  to  free  ARVN  forces  there
for  anti-guerrilla  aftion  in  high  plateau.  Also  perhaps  in  several  provincial
seats  in  the  highlands  of  Central  Vietnam.

4.  U.S.  reaction  to  proposal  to  request  Nationalist  China  to  send  one  division
of  combat  troops  for  operations  in  the  Southwest.

Thuan  referred  to  captured  diary  of  VM  officer  killed  in  Central  SVN,  con-
taining information  on  VM  plans  and  techniques.  Being  analyzed,  translated  and
would  pass  on.  Said  Diem  in  light  of  situation  in  Laos,  infiltration  into  SVN,  and
JFK's  interest  as  shown  by  sending  Taylor,  requested  U.S.  to  urgently  consider
requests.

On  U.S.  combat  trainer  units,  Nolting  asked  whether  Diem's  considered  re-
quest, in  view  of  repeated  views  opposed.  Thuan  so  confirmed,  Diem's  views
changed  in  light  of  worsening  situation.  Wanted  a  symbolic  U.S.  strength  near
17th  to  prevent  attacks  there,  free  own  forces  there.  Similar  purpose  station  U.S.
units  in  several  provincial  seats  in  central  highlands,  freeing  ARVN  ground
forces  there.  Nolting  said  major  requests  on  heels  of  Diem  request  for  bilateral
treaty.  Nolting  asked  if  in  lieu  of  treaty.  Thuan  said  first  step  quicker  than  treaty
and  time  was  of  the  essence.  Thuan  said  token  forces  would  satisfy  SVN  and
would  be  better  than  treaty  (had  evidently  not  thought  through  nor  discussed
with  Diem).

Discussed  ICC  angle.  Nolting  mentioned  value  SVN  previously  attached  to
ICC  presence.  Thuan  agreed,  felt  case  could  be  made  for  introduction  of  U.S.
I  nits  for  guard  duty  not  combat  unless  attacked.  Could  be  put  in  such  a  way  to
preserve  ICC  in  SVN.  Nolting  said  doubted  if  compatible  but  could  be  explored
(McGarr  and  I  call  attention  to  two  points:  in  view  of  proposed  units,  training
function  more  a  cover  than  reality;  if  send  U.S.  units  should  be  sufficient
strength,  since  VC  attack  likely) .

On  Chinat  force,  Thuan  said  Chiang  had  earlier  given  some  indication  (not
too  precise  I  gathered)  of  willingness.  Thuan  said  GVN  did  not  want  to  follow-
up  without  getting  U.S.  reaction.  Idea  to  use  about  10,000  men  in  southwest  as
far  from  17th  as  possible.  Also  intended  to  draft  eligibles  of  Chinese  origin  into
forces.  Thuan  thought  perhaps  Chinats  could  be  introduced  covertly,  but  on
analyses  gave  this  up.  Nolting  said  he  thought  Chinats  would  want  something
out  of  deal,  maybe  political  lift  from  introducing  Chinat  forces  on  Asia  main-
land (Nolting  thinks  trial  balloon  only).

Questions  will  undoubtedly  be  raised  with  Taylor.  Obvious  GVN  losing  no
opportunity  to  ask  for  more  support  as  a  result  of  our  greater  interest  and  con-
cern. But  situation  militarily  and  psychologically  has  moved  to  a  point  where
serious  and  prompt  consideration  should  be  given.

(Note:  Will  be  meeting  on  this  in  Admiral  Heinz's  office,  1330,  16  October  to
get  reply  out  today.  Applicable  CINCPAC  140333,  140346)


[Document  1041

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Excerpts  from  General  Taylor's  report,  3  Nov.  1961,  on  his  mission  to  South
Vietnam  for  President  Kennedy.

.  .  .  LIMITED  PARTNERSHIP

.  .  .  Following  are  the  specific  categories  where  the  introduction  of  U.S.
working  advisors  or  working  military  units  are  suggested  ...  an  asterisk  in-
dicating where  such  operations  are,  to  some  degree,  under  way.


Documents  653


— A  high-level  government  advisor  or  advisors.  General  Lansdale  has  been
requested  by  Diem;  and  it  may  be  wise  to  envisage  a  limited  number  of  Ameri-
cans— acceptable  to  Diem  as  well  as  to  us — in  key  ministries.  .  .  .

— A  Joint  U.S.-Vietnamese  Military  Survey,  down  to  the  provincial  level,  in
each  of  three  corps  areas,  to  make  recommendations  with  respect  to  intelli-
gence, command  and  control,  more  economical  and  effective  passive  defense,
the  build-up  of  a  reserve  for  offensive  purposes,  military-province-chief  rela-
tions, etc.  .  .  .

— Joint  planning  of  offensive  operations,  including  border  control  opera-
tions.* .  .  .

— Intimate  liaison  with  the  Vietnamese  Central  Intelligence  Organizations
(C.I.O.)  with  each  of  the  seven  intelligence  [rest  of  sentence  illegible].
— Jungle  Jim.  .  .  .

— Counter  infiltration  operations  in  Laos.*  .  .  .

— Increased  covert  offensive  operations  in  North  as  well  as  in  Laos  and  South
Vietnam.*  .  .  .

— The  introduction,  under  MAAG  operational  control,  of  three  helicopter
squadrons — one  for  each  corps  area — and  the  provision  of  more  light  aircraft,
as  the  need  may  be  established.  .  .  .

— A  radical  increase  in  U.S.  trainers  at  every  level  from  the  staff  colleges,
where  teachers  are  short — to  the  Civil  Guard  and  Self-Defense  Corps,  where  a
sharp  expansion  in  competence  may  prove  the  key  to  mobilizing  a  reserve  for
offensive  operations.  .  .  .

— The  introduction  of  engineering  and  logistical  elements  within  the  pro-
posed U.S.  military  task  force  to  work  in  the  flood  area  within  the  Vietnamese
plan,  on  both  emergency  and  longer  term  reconstruction  tasks.  .  .  .

— A  radical  increase  in  U.S.  special  force  teams  in  Vietnam:  to  work  with
the  Vietnamese  Ranger  Force  proposed  for  the  border  area  .  .  .  ;  to  assist  in
unit  training,  including  training  of  Clandestine  Action  Service.  .  .  .

— Increase  the  MAAG  support  for  the  Vietnamese  Navy.*  .  .  .

— Introduction  of  U.S.  Naval  and/or  Coast  Guard  personnel  to  assist  in  coastal
and  river  surveillance  and  control,  until  Vietnamese  naval  capabilities  can  be
improved.  .  .  .

— Reconsideration  of  the  role  of  air  power,  leading  to  more  effective  utiliza-
tion of  assets  now  available,  including  release  from  political  control  of  the  14
D-6  aircraft,  institution  of  close-support  techniques,  and  better  employment  of
available  weapons.  .  .  .

To  execute  this  program  of  limited  partnership  requires  a  change  in  the
charter,  the  spirit,  and  the  organization  of  the  MAAG  in  South  Vietnam.  It
must  be  shifted  from  an  advisory  group  to  something  nearer — but  not  quite —
an  operational  headquarters  in  a  theater  of  war.  .  .  .  The  U.S.  should  become
a  limited  partner  in  the  war,  avoiding  formalized  advice  on  the  one  hand,  try-
ing to  run  the  war,  on  the  other.  Such  a  transition  from  advice  to  partnership
has  been  made  in  recent  months,  on  a  smaller  scale,  by  the  MAAG  in  Laos.

Among  the  many  consequences  of  this  shift  would  be  the  rapid  build-up  of  an
intelligence  capability  both  to  identify  operational  targets  for  the  Vietnamese
and  to  assist  Washington  in  making  a  sensitive  and  reliable  assessment  of  the
progress  of  the  war.  The  basis  for  such  a  unit  already  exists  in  Saigon  in  the  In-
telligence Evaluation  Center.  It  must  be  quickly  expanded.  .  .  .

In  Washington,  as  well,  intelligence  and  back-up  operations  must  be  put  on  a
quasi-wartime  footing.  .  .  .


654 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


CONTINGENCIES

The  U.S.  action  proposed  in  this  report — involving  as  it  does  the  overt  lifting
of  the  MAAG  ceiling,  substantial  encadrement  and  the  introduction  of  limited
U.S.  forces — requires  that  the  United  States  also  prepare  for  contingencies  that
might  arise  from  the  enemy's  reaction.  The  initiative  proposed  here  should  not
be  undertaken  unless  we  are  prepared  to  deal  with  any  escalation  the  commu-
nists might  choose  to  impose.  Specifically  we  must  be  prepared  to  act  swiftly
under  these  three  circumstances:  an  attempt  to  seize  and  to  hold  the  Pleiku-
Kontum  area;  a  political  crisis  in  which  the  communists  might  attempt  to  use
their  forces  around  Saigon  to  capture  the  city  in  the  midst  of  local  confusion;
an  undertaking  of  overt  major  hostilities  by  North  Vietnam.

As  noted  earlier,  the  present  contingency  plans  of  CINCPAC  must  embrace
the  possibility  both  of  a  resumption  of  the  communist  offensive  in  Laos  and
these  Vietnamese  contingency  situations.  Taken  together,  the  contingencies  in
Southeast  Asia  which  we  would  presently  choose  to  meet  without  the  use  of
nuclear  weapons  appear  to  require  somewhat  more  balanced  ground,  naval,
and  air  strength  in  reserve  in  the  U.S.  than  we  now  have  available,  so  long  as
we  maintain  the  allocation  of  the  six  divisions  for  the  Berlin  crisis.

Therefore,  one  of  the  major  issues  raised  by  this  report  is  the  need  to  develop
the  reserve  strength  in  the  U.S.  establishment  required  to  cover  action  in  South-
east Asia  up  to  the  nuclear  threshold  in  that  area,  as  it  is  now  envisaged.  The
call  up  of  additional  support  forces  may  be  required.

In  our  view,  nothing  is  more  calculated  to  sober  the  enemy  and  to  discourage
escalation  in  the  face  of  the  limited  initiatives  proposed  here  than  the  knowledge
that  the  United  States  has  prepared  itself  soundly  to  deal  with  aggression  in
Southeast  Asia  at  any  level.


[Document  105]

Talking  Paper  for  the  Chairman,  ICS,  for  meeting  with  the  President  of  the
United  States  9  January  1962

Subject:  Current  US  Military  Actions  in  South  Vietnam

Background — Today  Communist  China  and  North  Vietnam  are  suffering  from
the  effects  of  failure  of  their  communes  to  produce  adequate  amounts  of  food
to  feed  their  peoples.  Recently,  large  quantities  of  wheat  were  purchased  by  Red
China  from  Canada  and  Australia  to  overcome  this  failure.  Southeast  Asia,  pri-
marily South  Vietnam  and  Thailand,  is  a  food  surplus  area  in  normal  times.
Because  of  this  and  the  standard  Marxist-Leninist  concept  of  peripheral  aggres-
sion and  pressure,  the  main  communist  threat  in  the  Western  Pacific  appears  to
be  directed  at  Southeast  Asia.  Of  principal  concern  for  the  purpose  of  this  brief-
ing is  the  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  the  US  national  objectives  there  and  the
military  actions  that  have  been  implemented  since  October  in  support  of  our  ob-
jectives.

The  Current  Situation  in  South  Vietnam

The  Viet  Cong  have  heavily  infiltrated,  organized  and  now  effectively  control
the  colored  areas  on  this  chart.


Documents  655


To  achieve  their  purposes  the  Viet  Cong  have  divided  the  country  into  two
major  geographical  areas,  Intersector  V  with  headquarters  in  the  high  plateau
region  north  and  west  of  Kontum,  and  the  Nambo  sector  in  the  south  with  head-
quarters northeast  of  Saigon.  Each  major  area  is  subdivided  into  interprovincial
commands — four  in  Intersector  V  and  three  in  Nambo,  with  a  special  zone  for
Saigon.  Each  interprovincial  area  is  further  organized  into  provinces  which  are
further  subdivided  into  districts,  villages,  and  hamlets.

Methods  of  VC  Operation

The  16,500-man  Viet  Cong  military  establishment  is  divided  into  two  opera-
tional groups — regular  and  regional-local  forces.  Regular  battalions  and  compa-
nies, numbering  about  8,500  personnel,  constitute  the  offensive  element  of  the
"Liberation  Army"  and  operate  throughout  their  respective  interprovincial
zone.

The  8,000  regional  and  local  forces,  which  correspond  functionally  to  the
Self  Defense  Forces  of  SVN,  are  essentially  security  troops  recruited  and  or-
ganized on  district  levels  for  limited  operations  and  to  provide  security  for  com-
mand headquarters,  conferences,  and  political  rallies.  Regional  units  are  also
used  to  provide  semi-trained  personnel  as  replacements  in  regular  battalions  and
as  fillers  for  newly  activated  units.  Under  regional  unit  control  guerrilla  pla-
toons made  up  of  daytime  farmers  sabotage,  terrorize,  assassinate,  kidnap,  dis-
seminate propaganda,  and  attempt  to  subvert  their  neighbors.

Availability  of  weapons  appears  to  be  a  continuing  problem  for  Viet  Cong
forces,  particularly  in  regional  units  in  which  less  than  half  of  the  men  are
armed.  The  primary  source  of  arms  for  all  VC  forces  appears  to  be  those  cap-
tured from  South  Vietnamese  security  forces.

Most  officers  and  key  NCOs,  as  well  as  political  and  propaganda  specialists,
are  former  South  Vietnamese  who  went  north  with  the  Communists  in  1955,
or  who  have  since  been  recruited  and  sent  to  North  Vietnam.  These  southern-
ers are  given  special  training  and  are  then  infiltrated  back  into  South  Vietnam
through  Laos  (or  by  junks)  to  cadre  regular  and  regional  forces.

Training  of  regional  troops  and  the  activation  of  new  regular  battalions  have
been  stepped  up  since  the  first  of  the  year.  In  recent  anti-guerrilla  operations
South  Vietnamese  troops  uncovered  several  major  Viet  Cong  training  areas,  one
of  which  had  barracks  space  for  more  than  a  battalion,  200  dummy  rifles  and
tons  of  food.

In  Commiunist-controlled  areas,  the  Viet  Cong  have  ordered  villagers  to  dig
trenches  and  prepare  combat  villages.  The  Viet  Cong  are  collecting  money  from
the  peasants  and  plantation  owners  to  finance  the  war  against  the  government,
and  have  implemented  a  rice  tax  to  build  up  supplies  for  future  operations.
Pitched  battles  are  avoided  wherever  possible,  unless  they  are  essential  to  a
given  plan,  or  the  military  advantages  are  at  least  four  to  one.  The  campaign
to  assassinate  all  who  try  to  implement  the  Government  of  Vietnam's  policies  in
the  countryside  is  being  intensified.

All  indications  point  to  the  Viet  Cong  maintaining  the  current  high  level  of
guerrilla  action  in  the  south,  and  increasing  activity  in  the  high  plateau  area  in
efforts  to  build  the  decreed  semi-permanent  bases.

Routes  of  Infiltration  and  Supply

Prisoner  of  war  interrogation  recently  conducted  by  the  South  Vietnamese
Intelligence  Service  has  shed  additional  light  on  the  means  employed  by  Com-


656 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

munist  North  Vietnam  to  assist  the  Viet  Cong  in  the  latter's  military  and  psy-
chological campaigns  against  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam.

North  Vietnam  maintains  a  training  camp  for  Special  Troops  in  the  vicinity
of  Vinh,  where  pro-Viet  Cong  South  Vietnamese  receive  an  18-month  military
course  interspersed  with  intensive  Communist  political  indoctrination.  Two
600-man  battalions  already  have  completed  training,  and  another  two  battalions
began  training  in  May  1961.  Personnel  are  assigned  to  units  within  the  battalion
according  to  their  respective  regions  of  origin  in  South  Vietnam.

Upon  completion  of  training,  Viet  Cong  volunteers  reenter  South  Vietnam
by  taking  a  circuitous  route  through  territory  in  neighboring  Laos  controlled  by
Communist  Pathet  Lao  forces.

In  addition  to  land  infiltration,  some  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  and  cadres  are  infil-
trated by  sea  using  junks  and  small  craft  to  land  at  various  points  on  the  long
South  Vietnam  coastline.  It  is  estimated  that  no  more  than  20%  of  the  total  in-
filtrees use  the  sea  route.

Relative  Strengths

The  current  strength  of  the  Viet  Cong  is  16,500  with  the  possible  infiltration  of
1,000  per  month.  The  increase  in  strength  by  infiltration  is  offset  by  the  estimated
Viet  Cong  casualties  which  average  over  1,000  a  month  according  to  South
Vietnam  official  figures.  A  recent  refinement  in  intelligence  reporting  indicates
hat  the  official  estimate  of  Viet  Cong  strength  may  be  raised  to  about  20,000  in
the  near  future.

The  current  actual  strength  of  the  South  Vietnamese  forces  are  as  follows:

Army  163,696

Navy  4,207

Air  Force  5,314

Marines  3,135

In  addition  paramilitary  forces  total  65,000  in  the  Civil  Guard  and  45,000
Self  Defense  Corps.

The  regular  Army  forces  are  organized  and  assigned  to  three  corps  areas  with
major  command  headquarters  and  units  located  as  shown  on  the  chart.

Current  US  Military  Actions

The  President  on  22  November  1961  authorized  the  Secretary  of  State  to  in-
struct the  US  Ambassador  to  Vietnam  to  inform  President  Diem  that  the  US
Government  was  prepared  to  join  the  GVN  in  a  sharply  increased  effort  to  avoid
a  further  deterioration  of  the  situation  in  SVN.  On  its  part  the  US  would  im-
mediately

a.  Provide  increased  airlift  to  the  GVN  in  the  form  of  helicopters,  light  avia-
tion and  transport  aircraft.

b.  Provide  required  equipment  and  US  personnel  for  aerial  reconnaissance,
instruction  in  and  execution  of  air-ground  support  and  special  intelligence.

c.  Augment  the  Vietnamese  Navy  operationally  with  small  craft.

d.  Provide  expedited  training  and  equipping  of  the  Civil  Guard  and  Self-
Defense  Corps.

e.  Provide  necessary  equipment  and  personnel  to  improve  the  military-po-
litical intelligence  system.

f.  Provide  such  new  terms  of  reference,  reorganization,  and  additional  per-


Documents  657


sonnel  for  US  military  forces  as  are  required  for  increased  US  railitar\-  assist-
ance.

Discussion — As  a  result  of  the  decision  to  accelerate  US  support  of  the  G\  N,
the  following  US  military  units  are  in  place  or  enroute  as  shown  on  this  chan:
(Overlay  No^  1 )

a.  Two  Army  Light  Helicopter  Companies  are  operating  in  support  of  the
R\'XAF  from  Tan  Son  Nhut  and  Qui  Nhon.  The  third  company  is  enroute  to
Da  Nang  with  an  ETA  of  15  January  and  an  operational  readiness  date  of  1
February.  This  will  provide  one  company  of  20  H-21  and  two  H-13  in  support
of  each  of  three  R\"NAF  Corps  areas.

b.  The  US  Army  has  alerted  the  18th  Fi.xed  ^^"ing  Aircraft  Companv  equipped
with  16  UlA  (  Otter)  aircraft  to  be  readv  for  deplovment  bv  15  Januarv.

c.  The  346th  USAF  Troop  Carrier  Squadron  with  16  C-123  aircraft
has  four  aircraft  at  Clark  and  four  operating  from  Tan  Son  Nhut.  The  remaining
eight  aircraft  are  in  the  Pacific  Theatre  enroute  to  Clark  with  an  ETA  of  10
January-.  This  unit  will  rotate  aircraft  into  SN'N  from  Clark  to  support  R\'NAF
operations  as  required.

d.  Four  RP-101  aircraft  and  a  small  photo  processing  element  operated  by
the  USAF  are  in  place  at  Den  Muang  Airfield,  Thailand,  fulfilling  aerial  photo
requirements  in  S\"N.

e.  The  USAF  JUNGLE  JIM  unit  at  Bien  Hoa  with  eight  T-23,  four  RB-26
and  four  SC-47  aircraft,  is  instructing  the  \'ietnamese  Air  Force  in  combat  air
suppon  tactics  and  techniques.  The  Pacific  Air  Force  is  deploying  personnel  and
equipment  to  S\'N  to  establish  a  joint  US  G\'N  Tactical  Air  Control  System
(TACS).  This  system  will  permit  positive  control  of  all  air  operations  and  rapid
response  to  requests  for  air-ground  support.

f.  The  3rd  Radio  Reconnaissance  Unit  at  Tan  Son  Nhut  is  being  augmented.
The  additional  279  personnel  will  be  on  board  by  14  January-.

g.  Six  C-123  sprav  equipped  aircraft  for  suppon  of  defoliant  operations  have
received  diplomatic  clearance  to  enter  S\'N.

h.  US  Na\y  Mine  Division  73  with  a  tender  and  five  mine  sweepers  is  operat-
ing from  Tourane  Harbor  in  conjunction  with  the  \'ietnamese  Navy  conducting
maritime  sun-  eillance  patrols  south  of  the  17th  parallel.

i.  Air  sur\eillance  flights  30  miles  seaward  from  the  S\'N  coast  f  17th  parallel)
to  50  miles  beyond  the  Paracel  Islands  are  conducted  even.-  other  day  by  Sev-
enth Fleet  patrol  aircraft.

In  addition  to  deplovment  of  organized  US  military  units  to  S\'N  and  in-
creased personnel  strength  for  the  MAAG,  acceleiated  delivery  of  MAP  equip-
ment has  alreadv  begun.  Nine  additional  L-20  light  obsen-'ation  aircraft  are  en-
route to  S\^'  for  use  by  the  Vietnamese  Air  Force.  Also.  15  T-28C  aircraft
have  been  delivered  to  ausment  the  \'ietnamese  air-ground  suppon  capability.
These  were  provided  on  an  interim,  loan  basis  until  30  T-28B  CNOMAD)  with
a  greater  ordnance  deliven."  capability"  could  complete  modification  and  be  de-
livered to  S\'N.  earlv  in  March.  Department  of  the  Army  is  also  providing  an
additional  12  H-34  helicopters  from  active  Armv  units  to  the  USAF  on  a  reim-
bursable basis  for  accelerated  MAP  delivery  to  the  RVNAF  early  in  March.

[words  missing]

Advisor}-  Group  in  Metnam  was  841.  present  strength  is  1204  and  projected
strength  as  of  30  June  1962  is  2394.  The  total  personnel  strength  of  US  units
and  elements,  other  than  the  MAAG,  was  1442  as  of  2  January-  1962  and  pro-
jected strength  as  of  30  June  1962  is  3182.  The  total  US  personnel  in  South
Metnam  is  now  2646  and  projected  strength  as  of  30  June  1962  is  5576.


658 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

The  MAAG  is  extending  its  advisory  teams  to  battalion  level  within  the
RVNAF  MA  Military  establishment  and  beginning  to  participate  more  directly
in  advising  Vietnamese  unit  commanders  in  the  planning  and  execution  of  mili-
tary operations  plans.  Since  delivery  of  MAP  equipment  has  been  accelerated
and  RVNAF  military  operations  are  increasing,  the  MAAG  training  activities
have  been  expanded.  This  training  includes  operations,  planning,  logistics,  intel-
ligence, communications  and  electronics  as  they  apply  to  each  service  within
the  RVNAF.  They  are  also  accelerating  the  training  of  the  Vietnamese  Civil
Guard  and  Self-Defense  Corps.

Shown  on  the  chart  are  the  approved  and  funded  construction  projects  in
South  Vietnam.  These  include:

a.  Improvement  of  the  Pleiku  Airfield.

b.  Improvements  at  Tan  Son  Nhut  Airfield  which  included  installations  of:

( 1 )  Pierced  steel  planking  parking  apron.

(2)  POL  hydrant  system.

(3 )  POL  pipeline  to  Nha  Be.

(4)  Ammunition  storange  facility

(5)  Concrete  parking  apron
[line  missing]

d.  Improvement  of  the  Bien  Hoa  Airfield.

— Communications  and  electronics  improvements  include  the  following:

a.  An  improved  intelligence  communications  network.  Net  control  station  to
be  located  in  Saigon  and  to  extend  down  to  battalion  and  provincial  level.

b.  An  improved  Gate  Way  Station  communications  facilities  at  Saigon.

c.  Three  mobile  navigational  aid  packages  in  the  Pacific  Theatre  are  ap-
proved for  deployment  to  SVN  as  directed  by  CINCPAC.

The  Future  Outlook

The  foremost  national  objective  today  of  the  Diem  government  in  South
Vietnam  is  survival  against  the  incursions  of  Communist  forces;  cadred,  sup-
plied, and  directed  from  North  Vietnam.  Secondary,  but  nonetheless  extremely
important  objectives  include:  (1)  improvement  of  the  national  economy  with
emphasis  on  agrarian  reform;  (2)  enhancement  of  South  Vietnam's  economic,
cultural,  and  prestige  position  among  Southeast  Asian  nations;  (3)  the  creation
of  an  armed  force  capable  of  defending  the  country  from  potential  invaders;
(4)  and  the  preservation  of  a  pro-Western  orientation.

Policies  directed  toward  the  achievement  of  these  objectives  suffer  from  the
concentration  of  power  in  the  hands  of  the  President,  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  and  a
small  clique  headed  by  his  extremely  influential  and  powerful  brother.  Ngo  Dinh
Nhu.  Continued  receipt  of  US  military,  economic  and  technical  aid,  application
of  Catholic  philosophies,  and  the  repulsion  of  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  are  addi-
tional major  policy  considerations.

Planned  courses  of  action  include:  (1)  the  building  up  of  the  armed  forces
with  US  aid  and  assistance;  (2)  defeat  of  the  Viet  Cong  forces;  and  (3)  the  im-
plementation of  a  series  of  reforms  and  measures  to  correct  imbalances  in  the
power  hier-  [words  illegible]

Certainly  some  of  the  projects  we  are  implementing  are  outright  R&D  efforts
such  as  the  defoliation  project  and  bear  all  the  earmarks  of  gimmicks  that  can-
not and  will  not  win  the  war  in  South  Vietnam.  However,  the  commitment  of
US  units  to  support  the  RVNAF  and  additional  personnel  to  train,  equip  and
advise  them  in  conjunction  with  increased  economic  and  administrative  aid,


Documents  659


should  make  it  obvious  to  the  Vietnamese  and  the  rest  of  the  world  that  the
United  States  is  committed  to  preventing  Communist  domination  of  South  Viet-
nam and  Southeast  Asia.

All  of  the  recent  actions  we  have  taken  may  still  not  be  sufficient  to  stiffen
the  will  of  the  government  and  the  people  of  SVN  sufficiently  to  resist  Commu-
nist pressure  and  win  the  war  without  the  US  committing  combat  forces.
Whether  we  will  have  to  take  this  decision  within  the  coming  year  depends  to
a  great  [conclusion  missing].

[Document  106]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
Washington  25,  D.C.

CM-491-62
JAN  18  1962

MEMORANDUM  FOR  GENERAL  LANSDALE
Subject:  Vietnamese  Command  Problem

1.  As  you  point  out  in  your  memorandum  of  27  December  1961,  it  is  quite
clear  that  Diem's  apprehension  about  a  coup  is  the  basis  for  his  reluctance  to
authorize  his  military  field  commander  to  implement  the  task  force  concept
that  was  an  important  part  of  the  over-all  plan  of  operations  against  the  Viet
Cong.  I  fully  agree  that  this  basic  issue  needs  to  be  resolved,

2.  You  are  well  aware  that  Chief  MAAG,  Vietnam,  in  accordance  with  his
assigned  mission,  has  operated  principally  as  an  adviser  and  trainer  rather  than
as  a  commander.  As  such  he  has  suggested  and  counseled,  dropping  ideas
which  the  Vietnamese  could  pick  up  and  incorporate  in  their  own  plans.  This
method  "saved  face"  for  them,  and  has  been  the  accepted  method  of  overcom-
ing simultaneously  the  inexperience  and  the  pride  of  the  Vietnamese  officers.
Now  a  strong  case  can  be  made  for  increased  direct  participation  by  US  person-
nel in  the  planning  and  supervision  of  Vietnamese  counterinsurgency  opera-
tions. Inherent  in  such  increased  direct  participation  should  be  some  assurance
of  US  support  for  Diem  personally.  Convincing  Diem  of  this  personal  support
remains  a  principal  task  of  the  senior  US  representatives  in  Vietnam.  The  in-
creased US  military  stake  in  Vietnam  should  be  of  great  assistance  in  this  task.

3.  In  my  view,  however,  some  of  the  decisions  made  during  the  16  December
SecDef  meeting  at  CINCPAC  Headquarters  offer  a  greater  hope  for  progress
in  Vietnam.  It  was  agreed  that,  while  we  should  continue  to  press  for  accept-
ance of  an  over-all  plan  or  concept  of  operations,  we  must  place  immediate  em-
phasis on  smaller,  more  specific,  and  more  readily-accomplished  operations.
Such  a  techinque  is  more  likely  to  be  acceptable  to  Diem.  At  the  same  time,
successful  small  operations  will  provide  the  impetus  for  larger  scale  offensive
operations.

4.  I  don't  believe  there  is  any  finite  answer  to  the  question  you  pose  as  to
how  we  convince  Diem  he  must  delegate  authority  to  subordinates  he  doesn't
fully  trust.  We  discussed  this  subject  at  considerable  length  at  Monday's  (15  Janu-
ary 1962)  conference  in  Honolulu.  The  Ambassador,  General  McGarr  and
other  top  level  officers  of  the  Embassy  and  MAAG  recognize  the  nature  of  the
problem  and  the  importance  of  reaching  a  satisfactory  solution  thereto.  If  it
was  not  for  the  heavy  responsibilities  you  are  now  assigned  which  would  preclude
your  going  to  Saigon,  I  believe  that  one  of  the  best  ways  to  deal  with  this  prob-


660 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

lem  would  be  to  implement  the  earlier  recommendation  to  send  one  Brigadier
General  Lansdale  out  to  Saigon  to  be  personal  adviser  and  confidant  to  Diem.

L.  L.  Lemnitzer
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

cc : Secretary  McNamara

Deputy  Secretary  Gilpatric
Admiral  Heinz


[Document  107]

January  18,  1962

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  124

TO :  The  Secretary  of  State

The  Secretary  of  Defense

The  Attorney  General

The  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

The  Administrator,  Agency  for  International  Development
The  Director,  United  States  Information  Agency
The  Military  Representative  of  the  President
Director  of  Central  Intelligence

SUBJECT: Establishment  of  the  Special  Group  (Counter-Insurgency)

To  assure  unity  of  effort  and  the  use  of  all  available  resources  with  maximum
effectiveness  in  preventing  and  resisting  subversive  insurgency  and  related  forms
of  indirect  aggression  in  friendly  countries,  a  Special  Group  (Counter-insurgency)
is  established  consisting  of  the  following  members :

Military  Representatives  of  the  President,  Chairman
The  Attorney  General

Deputy  Under  Secretary  of  State  for  Political  Affairs
Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense
Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
Director  of  Central  Intelligence

Special  Assistant  to  the  President  for  National  Security
Affairs

Administrator,  Agency  for  International  Development
Director,  United  States  Information  Agency

On  invitation:

Other  department  and  agency  representatives,  as  deemed
necessary

The  functions  of  the  Special  Group  (C.I.)  will  be  as  follows:

a.  To  insure  proper  recognition  throughout  the  U.S.  Government  that
subversive  insurgency  ("wars  of  liberation")  is  a  major  form  of  politico-mili-
tary conflict  equal  in  importance  to  conventional  warfare.


Documents  661


b.  To  insure  that  such  recognition  is  reflected  in  the  organization,  train-
ing, equipment  and  doctrine  of  the  U.S.  Armed  Forces  and  other  U.S.
agencies  abroad  and  in  the  poHtical,  economic,  intelHgence,  military  aid  and
informational  programs  conducted  abroad  by  State,  Defense,  AID,  USIA
and  CIA.  Particular  attention  will  be  paid  the  special  training  of  personnel
prior  to  assignment  to  MAAG's  and  to  Embassy  staffs  in  countries  where
counter-insurgency  problems  exist  or  may  arise.

c.  To  keep  under  review  the  adequacy  of  U.S.  resources  to  deal  with
actual  or  potential  situations  of  insurgency  or  indirect  aggression,  making
timely  recommendation  of  measures  to  apply,  increase  or  adjust  these  re-
sources to  meet  anticipated  requirements.

d.  To  insure  the  development  of  adequate  interdepartmental  programs
aimed  at  preventing  or  defeating  subversive  insurgency  and  indirect  aggres-
sion in  countries  and  regions  specifically  assigned  to  the  Special  Group
(C.  I.)  by  the  President,  and  to  resolve  any  interdepartmental  problems
which  might  impede  their  implementation.

In  performing  the  above  functions,  the  members  of  the  Special  Group  (C.I.)
will  act  on  behalf  of  their  respective  departments  and  agencies,  and  will  depend
for  staff  support  upon  their  own  staffs,  and  upon  such  country  or  regional  inter-
departmental task  forces  (normally  chaired  by  a  State  Department  Assistant
Secretary)  as  may  be  established.  The  Group  will  confine  itself  to  establishing
broad  lines  of  counter-insurgency  policy,  subject  to  my  direction  and  decision
as  appropriate,  insuring  a  coordinated  and  unified  approach  to  regional  or  coun-
try programs,  and  verifying  progress  m  implementation  thereof.  It  will  also
undertake  promptly  to  make  decisions  on  interdepartmental  issues  arising  out
of  such  programs.

The  critical  areas  initially  assigned  to  the  Special  Group  (C.  I.)  pursuant  to  para-
graph d  of  this  memorandum  are  set  forth  in  the  attached  annex.

ANNEX  TO  NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  124

Hereby  assign  to  the  cognizance  of  the  Special  Group  (Counter-Insurgency)  the
following  countries:

Laos

South  Viet-Nam
Thailand


[Document  108]

January  26,  1962

The  Honorable

Roswell  Gilpatric,

Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense.

Dear  Mr.  Gilpatric:

I  have  received  your  letter  of  December  28  to  the  Secretary  on  the  question
of  an  increase  in  the  Vietnamese  armed  forces  to  the  200,000  man  level.  The
matter  was  discussed  with  our  Task  Force  while  Ambassador  Nolting  was  here
on  consultation.


662 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

In  view  of  the  gravity  of  the  situation  in  Viet-Nam  and  of  the  importance  of
not  interrupting  the  accelerated  rate  of  our  assistance  to  Viet-Nam,  we  agree
that  an  increase  to  about  200,000  should  be  supported  provided  the  following
factors  are  given  careful  consideration:

1.  That  the  U.S.  military  advisers  and  the  Vietnamese  authorities  continue
the  joint  effort  to  build  up  a  set  of  valid  tactical  and  strategic  plans.  We  suggest
that  the  locus  of  this  effort  should  be  in  Viet-Nam  in  order  to  obtain  full  Viet-
namese cooperation  and  to  meet  the  speed  requirements  of  a  guerrilla  war  where
a  large  number  of  incidents  are  constantly  occurring.  We  would  envisage  stra-
tegic plans  made  in  Saigon  giving  priority  to  areas  to  be  cleared  and  held  and  set-
ting forth  general  methods  to  be  used.  We  believe  these  should  be  accomplished
by  numerous  small  tactical  actions  planned  and  executed  by  American  and  Viet-
namese officers  on  the  spot  to  meet  the  local  situation  at  the  moment.

2.  The  rate  of  increase  to  approximately  200,000  men  should  take  into  con-
sideration:

a.  The  ability  of  the  army  to  absorb  and  train  these  men  without  un-
duly weakening  its  fighting  ability.

b.  Viet-Nam  must  husband  its  manpower  resources  carefully.  A  mini-
mum number  of  trained  civilians  must  be  left  at  their  posts  in  order  to  at
least  partially  satisfy  the  rising  expectations  of  Viet-Nam's  citizens.

3.  That  the  armed  forces  might  best  level  off  at  about  200,000  with  future
c  Tiphasis  to  be  devoted  to  strengthening  and  enlarging  the  Civil  Guard  and
Self  Defense  Corps.  Their  job  would  be  to  hold  ground  that  had  been  recovered.

4.  That  henceforth  our  training  programs  for  ARVN  be  based  primarily  on
the  concept  that  the  Vietnamese  army  will  start  winning  on  the  day  when  it  has
obtained  the  confidence  of  the  Vietnamese  peasants.  As  a  specific  example  I
suggest  that  we  immediately  seek  Vietnamese  implementation  of  a  policy  of
promptly  giving  a  small  reward  in  rice,  salt  or  money  (commodities  in  which
the  Viet  Cong  are  in  short  supply)  to  every  person  who  gives  information  to  the
army.  Similarly,  villages  which  show  determination  to  resist  the  Viet  Cong  should
receive  the  promptest  possible  support.

I  would  be  glad  to  receive  any  comments  you  may  have  with  respect  to  the
foregoing.

Sincerely  yours,

s  U.  Alexis  Johnson
Deputy  Under  Secretary
for  Political  Affairs


[Document  109]

27  January  1962

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  asked  that  the  attached  memorandum,  stating
their  views  concerning  the  strategic  importance  may  be  required  if  the  situa-
tion continues  to  deteriorate,  be  brought  to  your  attention.  The  memorandum
requires  no  action  by  you  at  this  time.  I  am  not  prepared  to  endorse  the  experi-
ence with  our  present  program  in  South  Vietnam.

Robert  S.  McNamara

cc: Sec.  Rusk


Documents


663


THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
Washington  25,  D.C.


JCSM-33-62
13  Jan  1962


MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Subject:  The  Strategic  Importance  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Mainland

1.  The  United  States  has  clearly  stated  and  demonstrated  that  one  of  its  un-
alterable objectives  is  the  prevention  of  South  Vietnam  falling  to  communist  ag-
gression and  the  subsequent  loss  of  the  remainder  of  the  Southeast  Asian  main-
land. The  military  objective,  therefore,  must  be  to  take  expeditiously  all  actions
necessary  to  defeat  communist  aggression  in  South  Vietnam.  The  immediate
strategic  importance  of  Southeast  Asia  lies  in  the  political  value  that  can  accrue
to  the  Free  World  through  a  successful  stand  in  that  area.  Of  equal  importance
is  the  psychological  impact  that  a  firm  position  by  the  United  States  will  have  on
the  countries  of  the  world — both  free  and  communist.  On  the  negative  side,  a
United  States  political  and/or  military  withdrawal  from  the  Southeast  Asian  area
would  have  an  adverse  psychological  impact  of  even  greater  proportion,  and
one  from  which  recovery  would  be  both  difficult  and  costly.

2.  It  must  be  recognized  that  the  fall  of  South  Vietnam  to  communist  con-
trol would  mean  the  eventual  communist  domination  of  all  of  the  Southeast
Asian  mainland.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  next  major  target  would  be  Thai-
land. Cadres  are  now  being  established  in  that  country  and  "land  reform"  or
"capitalist  dictatorship"  ploys  may  prove  fertile  exploitation  fields  for  the  com-
munists. Thailand  is  bordered  by  a  "pink"  Burma  and  a  vacillating  Cambodia,
either  of  which  will  easily  fall  under  communist  pressure.  Thailand  would  al-
most certainly  then  seek  closer  accommodation  with  the  Sino-Soviet  Bloc.
SEATO  would  probably  cease  to  exist.  The  only  determined  opposition  to  a
communist  drive  would  then  be  Malaya  and  Singapore.  While  the  people  of
Malaya  have  the  will  to  fight  and  might  have  the  backing  of  the  United  King-
dom, the  country  itself  would  be  isolated  and  hard  pressed.  The  communist  ele-
ment in  Singapore  is  strong.  Short  of  direct  military  intervention  by  the  United
States,  it  is  questionable  whether  Malaya  and  Singapore  could  be  prevented
from  eventually  coming  under  communist  domination  or  control.

3.  Military  Considerations.  (The  Appendix  contains  a  more  detailed  ap-
praisal of  these  military  considerations.)

a.  Early  Eventualities — Loss  of  the  Southeast  Asian  Mainland  would
have  an  adverse  impact  on  our  military  strategy  and  would  markedly  re-
duce our  ability  in  limited  war  by  denying  us  air,  land  and  sea  bases,  by
forcing  greater  intelligence  effort  with  lesser  results,  by  complicating  mili-
tary lines  of  communication  and  by  the  introduction  of  more  formidable
enemy  forces  in  the  area.  Air  access  and  access  to  5300  miles  of  mainland
coastline  would  be  lost  to  us,  our  Allies  and  neutral  India  would  be  out-
flanked, the  last  significant  United  Kingdom  military  strength  in  Asia
would  be  eliminated  with  the  loss  of  Singapore  and  Malaya  and  US  military
influence  in  that  area,  short  of  war,  would  be  difficult  to  exert.

b.  Possible  Eventualities — Of  equal  importance  to  the  immediate  losses
are  the  eventualities  which  could  follow  the  loss  of  the  Southeast  Asian
mainland.  All  of  the  Indonesian  archipelago  could  come  under  the  domina-
tion and  control  of  the  USSR  and  would  become  a  communist  base  posing
a  threat  against  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  The  Sino-Soviet  Bloc  would
have  control  of  the  eastern  access  to  the  Indian  Ocean.  The  Philippines


664 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

and  Japan  could  be  pressured  to  assume  at  best,  a  neutralist  role,  thus
eliminating  two  of  our  major  bases  of  defense  in  the  Western  Pacific.  Our
lines  of  defense  then  would  be  pulled  north  to  Korea,  Okinawa  and  Taiwan
resulting  in  the  subsequent  overtaxing  of  our  lines  of  communications  in  a
limited  war.  India's  ability  to  remain  neutral  would  be  jeopardized  and,  as
the  Bloc  meets  success,  its  concurrent  stepped-up  activities  to  move  into
and  control  Africa  can  be  expected.

4.  Political  Considerations.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  wish  to  reaffirm  their
position  that  the  United  States  must  prevent  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam  to  ei-
ther communist  insurgency  or  aggression,  must  prevent  the  communist  control
or  domination  of  the  Southeast  Asia  mainland  and  must  extend  its  influence  in
that  area  in  such  a  manner  as  to  negate  the  possibility  of  any  future  communist
encroachment.  It  is  recognized  that  the  military  and  political  effort  of  Com-
munist China  in  South  Vietnam  and  the  political  and  psychological  thrust  by
the  USSR  into  the  Indonesian  archipelago  are  not  brushfire  tactics  nor  merely
a  campaign  for  control  of  the  mainland  area.  More  important,  it  is  part  of  a
major  campaign  to  extend  communist  control  beyond  the  periphery  of  the  Sino-
Soviet  Bloc  and  overseas  to  both  island  and  continental  areas  in  the  Free  World,
through  a  most  natural  and  comparatively  soft  outlet,  the  Southeast  Asian
Peninsula.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  planned  phase  in  the  communist  timetable  for  world
domination.  Whereas,  control  of  Cuba  has  opened  for  the  Sino-Soviet  Bloc
n.ore  ready  access  to  countries  of  South  and  Central  America,  control  of
Southeast  Asia  will  open  access  to  the  remainder  of  Asia  and  to  Africa  and
Australia.

5.  In  consideration  of  the  formidable  threat  to  the  Free  World  which  is  rep-
resented in  the  current  actions  in  South  Vietnam,  the  need  for  US  and  GVN
success  in  that  area  cannot  be  overemphasized.  In  this  connection,  reference  is
made  to  the  staff  level  document  entitled  "Summary  of  Suggested  Courses  of
Action"  prepared  for  General  Taylor  for  reference  in  his  mission  to  South  Viet-
nam. On  21  October  1961,  this  document  circulated  comments  and  recom-
mendations on  20  courses  of  action  that  could  be  taken  in  South  Vietnam  short
of  the  direct  utilization  of  US  combat  forces.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  note  that,
in  keeping  with  the  President's  decision  that  we  must  advise  and  support  South
Vietnam  but  not  at  this  time  engage  unilaterally  in  combat,  all  of  the  courses
of  action  recommended  with  few  exceptions  have  either  been  implemented  or
authorized  for  implementation.  In  this  connection,  it  is  noted  that  the  Viet-
namese Government  has  specifically  requested  further  assistance  from  the  United
States.

6.  Reference  is  also  made  to  the  agreement  made  between  the  Government
of  Vietnam  and  the  United  States  on  4  December  1961  wherein  the  Govern-
ment of  Vietnam  agreed  to  take  several  major  steps  to  increase  its  efficiency.

7.  In  response  to  President  Diem's  request  for  assistance  and  the  agreement
between  the  governments,  men,  money,  materials  and  advice  are  being  provided
to  South  Vietnam.  Unfortunately,  our  contributions  are  not  being  properly  em-
ployed by  the  South  Vietnamese  Government  and  major  portions  of  the  agree-
ment have  either  not  been  carried  out  or  are  being  delayed  by  Diem.

8.  For  a  combined  USA^ietnam  effort  to  be  successful,  there  must  be  com-
bined participation  in  the  decision  making  process.  To  date  efforts  made  on  both
the  military  and  diplomatic  level  have  failed  to  motivate  Diem  to  agree  to  act
forthrightly  on  our  advice  and  properly  utilize  the  resources  placed  at  his  dis-
posal. He  has  been  slow  to  accept  the  plans  and  proposals  of  Admiral  Felt  and
General  McGarr  and  he  has  in  many  instances  disregarded  the  advice  of  Am-


Documents  665


bassador  Nolting.  The  reason  for  Diem's  negative  reaction  to  proposals  to  save
South  Vietnam  while  he  maintains  a  positive  position  that  it  must  be  saved  may
be  found  in  CINCPAC's  appraisal  of  his  character — an  uncompromising  in-
flexibility and  his  doubts  concerning  the  judgment,  ability  and  individual  loyalty
of  his  military  leaders.  Recent  intelligence  reports  of  coup  d'etat  plotting  in-
volving senior  Vietnamese  military  officers  and  the  possibility  that  high  Viet-
namese officers  have  approached  US  officials  tend  to  confirm  Diem's  doubts
concerning  the  loyalty  of  some  of  his  military  leaders.

9.  In  this  regard,  should  a  successful  coup  overturn  Diem,  we  might  discover
that  many  of  Diem's  difficult  characteristics  are  national  rather  than  personal.
The  Vietnamese  are  tough,  tenacious,  agile,  proud,  and  extraordiiiarily  self  con-
fident. Their  recent  political  tradition  is  one  of  the  multiplicity  of  parties  and
groups  inclining  toward  conspiratorial  and  violent  methods.  The  disappearance
of  a  strong  leader  who  can  dampen  and  control  these  tendencies  could  well
mean  reversion  to  a  condition  of  political  chaos  exploitable  by  the  strongly  led
and  well  disciplined  communists.  If  Diem  goes,  we  can  be  sure  of  losing  his
strengths  but  we  cannot  be  sure  of  remedying  his  weaknesses.  Achievement  of
US  objectives  could  be  more  difficult  without  Diem  than  with  him.  Therefore,
it  must  be  made  clear  to  Diem  that  the  United  States  is  prepared  and  willing  to
bolster  his  regime  and  discourage  internal  factions  which  may  seek  to  over-
throw him.

10.  In  consideration  of  the  foregoing,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  that
there  is  an  immediate  requirement  for  making  a  strong  approach  to  Diem  on  a
Government-to-Government  level.  If  we  are  to  eff'ectively  assist  South  Vietnam,
we  must  convince  Diem  that  (a)  there  is  no  alternative  to  the  establishment  of  a
sound  basis  upon  which  both  he  and  the  United  States  Government  can  work
and  (b)  he  has  an  urgent  requirement  for  advice,  as  well  as  assistance,  in  mil-
itary, political  and  economic  matters.

11.  Accordingly,  it  is  recommended  that  you  propose  to  the  President  and  to
the  Secretary  of  State  that:

a.  Upon  his  return  to  Saigon,  Ambassador  Nolting  meet  with  President
Diem  and  advise  him  that,  since  the  United  States  considers  it  essential  and
fundamental  that  South  Vietnam  not  fall  to  communist  forces:

(1)  The  United  States  is  prepared  and  willing  to  bolster  his  regime
and  discourage  internal  factions  which  may  seek  to  overthrow  him.

(2)  Suitable  military  plans  have  been  developed  and  jointly  approved.
Diem  must  permit  his  military  commanders  to  implement  these  ap-
proved plans  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong.

(3)  There  must  be  established  an  adequate  basis  for  the  reception
and  utilization  of  US  advice  and  assistance  by  all  appropriate  echelons
of  the  GVN.

(4)  There  must  be  no  further  procrastination.

(5)  Should  it  be  found  impossible  to  establish  such  a  satisfactory  basis
for  cooperation,  the  United  States  foresees  failure  of  our  joint  efforts  to
save  Vietnam  from  communist  conquest.

12.  Vigorous  prosecution  of  the  campaign  with  present  and  planned  assets
could  reverse  the  current  trend.  If,  with  Diem's  full  [words  missing]  forces,  the
Viet  Cong  is  not  brought  under  control,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  see  no  alter-
native to  the  introduction  of  US  military  combat  forces  along  with  those  of  the
free  Asian  nations  that  can  be  persuaded  to  participate.

13.  Three  salient  factors  are  of  the  greatest  importance  if  the  eventual  intro-
duction of  US  forces  is  required.


666 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II

a.  Any  war  in  the  Southeast  Asian  Mainland  will  be  a  peninsula  and
island-type  of  campaign — a  mode  of  warfare  in  which  all  elements  of  the
Armed  Forces  of  the  United  States  have  gained  a  wealth  of  experience  and
in  which  we  have  excelled  both  in  World  War  II  and  Korea.

b.  Study  of  the  problem  clearly  indicates  that  the  communists  are  limited
in  the  forces  they  can  sustain  in  war  in  that  area  because  of  natural  logistic
and  transportation  problems.

c.  Our  present  world  military  posture  is  such  that  we  now  have  effective
forces  capable  of  implementing  existing  contingency  plans  for  Southeast
Asia  without  affecting  to  an  unacceptable  degree  our  capability  to  conduct
planned  operations  in  Europe  relating  to  Berlin  or  otherwise.

14.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  that  in  any  consideration  of  further
action  which  may  be  required  because  of  possible  unacceptable  results  obtained
despite  Diem's  full  cooperation  and  the  effective  employment  of  South  Vietnam
armed  forces,  you  again  consider  the  recommendation  provided  you  by  JCSM-
320-61,  dated  10  May  1961,  that  a  decision  be  made  to  deploy  US  forces  to
South  Vietnam  sufficient  to  accomplish  the  following:

a.  Provide  a  visible  deterrent  to  potential  North  Vietnam  and/or  Chinese
Communist  action;

b.  Release  Vietnamese  forces  from  advanced  and  static  defense  positions
to  permit  their  future  commitment  to  counterinsurgency  actions;

c.  Assist  in  training  the  Vietnamese  forces;

d.  Provide  a  nucleus  for  the  support  of  any  additional  US  or  SEATO
military  operations  in  Southeast  Asia;  and

e.  Indicate  the  firmness  of  our  intent  to  all  Asian  nations.

We  are  of  the  opinion  that  failure  to  do  so  under  such  circumstances  will  merely
extend  the  date  when  such  action  must  be  taken  and  will  make  our  ultimate  task
proportionately  more  difficult.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:

L.  L.  Lemnitzer
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


[Document  110]

THE  WHITE  HOUSE
Washington

February  19,  1962

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  132

TO:  The  Honorable  Fowler  Hamilton

The  Administrator

Agency  for  International  Development

SUBJECT: Support  of  Local  Police  Forces  for  Internal  Security
and  Counter-Insurgency  Purposes

As  you  know,  I  desire  the  appropriate  agencies  of  this  Government  to  give
utmost  attention  and  emphasis  to  programs  designed  to  counter  Communist
indirect  aggression,  which  I  regard  as  a  grave  threat  during  the  1960s.  I  have


Documents  667


already  written  the  Secretary  of  Defense  "to  move  to  a  new  level  of  increased
activity  across  the  board"  in  the  counter-insurgency  field.

Police  assistance  programs,  including  those  under  the  aegis  of  your  agency,
are  also  a  crucial  element  in  our  response  to  this  challenge.  I  understand  that
there  has  been  some  tendency  toward  de-emphasizing  them  under  the  new  aid
criteria  developed  by  your  agency.  I  recognize  that  such  programs  may  seem
marginal  in  terms  of  focusing  our  energies  on  those  key  sectors  which  will  con-
tribute most  to  sustained  economic  growth.  But  I  regard  them  as  justified  on  a
different  though  related  basis,  i.e.,  that  of  contributing  to  internal  security  and
resisting  Communist-supported  insurgency.

I  am  further  aware  that  police  programs,  as  a  relatively  minor  facet  of  the
functions  of  the  aid  agency,  may  have  tended  to  receive  little  emphasis  as  a
result.  Therefore,  I  would  like  you  to  consider  various  ways  and  means  of  giv-
ing the  police  program  greater  autonomy  within  AID,  if  this  seems  necessary
in  order  to  protect  it  from  neglect.  I  fully  recognize  that  police  programs  must
be  looked  at  on  a  case-by-case  basis  and  that  in  some  instances  they  can  indeed
be  cut  back  or  eliminated.  I  simply  wish  to  insure  that  before  doing  so  we  have
taken  fully  into  account  the  importance  of  the  counter-insurgency  objective  as
I  view  it.

In  sum,  I  should  like  AID  to  review  carefully  its  role  in  the  support  of  local
police  forces  for  internal  security  and  counter-insurgency  purposes,  and  to
recommend  to  me  through  the  Special  Group  (Counter-Insurgency)  what
new  or  renewed  emphases  are  desirable.

(signed)  John  F.  Kennedy

Information  Copy  to:

The  Secretary  of  State
The  Secretary  of  Defense
The  Attorney  General
Director  of  Central  Intelligence
Director,  Bureau  of  the  Budget
Director,  Peace  Corps
General  Maxwell  D.  Taylor


[Document  111]

THE  WHITE  HOUSE
Washington

March  13,  1962

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  131

TO:  The  Secretary  of  State

The  Secretary  of  Defense

The  Attorney  General

The  Chairman,  Join  Chiefs  of  Staff

The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence

The  Administrator,  Agency  for  International  Development
The  Director,  United  States  Information  Agency

SUBJECT: Training  Objectives  for  Counter-Insurgency

1.  The  President  has  approved  the  following  training  objectives  for  officer
grade  personnel  of  the  departments  and  agencies  indicated  above  who  may


668 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  II

have  a  role  to  plav  in  counter-insurgency  programs  as  well  as  in  the  entire  range
of  problems  involved  in  the  modernization  of  developing  countries.

a.  T}je  Historical  Background  of  Counter-Insurgency

Personnel  of  all  grades  will  be  required  to  studv  the  history  of  subversive  in-
surgencv  movements,  past  and  present,  in  order  to  familiarize  themselves  with
the  nature  of  the  problems  and  characteristics  of  Communist  tactics  and  tech-
niques as  related  to  this  particular  aspect  of  Communist  operations.  This  kind
of  background  historical  studv  will  be  offered  throughout  the  school  systems  of
the  responsible  departments  and  agencies,  beginning  at  the  junior  level  of  in-
struction and  carrying  forward  to  the  senior  level.

b.  Study  of  Departmental  Tactics  and  Techniques  to  Counter  Subversive  In-
surgency

Junior  and  middle  grade  officers  will  receive  instructions  in  the  tactics  and
techniques  of  their  particular  departments  which  have  an  application  in  com-
bating subversive  insurgencv.  This  level  of  instruction  will  be  found  in  the
schools  of  the  Armed  Services  at  the  companv  field  officer  level.  In  the  case  of
the  Central  Intelligence  Agencv.  this  kind  of  instruction  will  be  offered  at  appro-
priate training  installations.  The  State  Department  will  be  responsible  for
>rganizing  appropriate  courses  in  this  instructional  area  for  its  own  officers
and  for  representatives  of  the  Agencv  for  International  De\"elopment  and  the
United  States  Information  Agencv.  Schools  of  this  categorv  will  make  available
spaces  in  agreed  numbers  for  the  cross-training  of  other  U.S.  agencies  with  a
counter-insurgencv  responsibilitv.

c.  Instruction  in  Counter-Insurgency  Program  Platining

Middle  grade  and  senior  otiicers  will  be  offered  special  training  to  prepare
them  for  command,  staff',  countrv  team  and  departmental  positions  invohcd  in
the  planning  and  conduct  of  counter-insurgencv  programs.  At  this  level  the
students  will  be  made  aware  of  the  possible  contributions  of  all  departments,
and  of  the  need  to  combine  the  departmental  assets  into  effective  programs.
This  type  of  instruction  will  be  given  at  the  Staff  College-War  College  level  in
the  Armed  Services.  The  State  Department  will  organize  such  courses  as  mav  be
necessary  at  the  Foreign  Service  Institute  for  officials  of  State.  Agencv  for
International  Development  and  United  States  Information  Agencv.  All  schools
of  this  categorv  will  make  available  spaces  in  agreed  numbers  for  the  cross-
training  of  other  U.S.  agencies  with  a  counter-insurgencv  responsibility.

d.  Specialized  Preparations  for  Service  in  Underdeveloped  Areas

There  is  an  unfulfilled  need  to  offer  instruction  on  the  entire  range  of  prob-
lems faced  bv  the  United  States  in  dealing  with  developing  countries,  including
special  area  counter-insurgencv  problems,  to  middle  and  senior  grade  officers
(both  militarv  and  civilian)  who  are  about  to  occupv  important  posts  in  under-
developed countries.  A  school  will  accordinglv  be  developed  at  the  national
level  to  meet  this  need,  to  teach  general  (including  counier-insurgenc\ )  polic\
and  doctrine  with  respect  to  under-developed  areas,  to  offer  studies  on  prob-
lems of  the  underdeveloped  world  keved  to  areas  to  which  the  students  are


Documents  669


being  sent,  and  to  engage  in  research  projects  designed  to  improve  the  U.S.
capability  for  guiding  underdeveloped  countries  through  the  modernization
barrier  and  for  countering  subversive  insurgency.  In  addition,  this  school  would
undertake  to  assist  other  more  specialized  U.S.  Government  institutions  engaged
in  underdeveloped  area  problems  (i.e.,  those  conducted  by  the  Foreign  Service
Institute,  Agency  for  International  Development,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and
the  Services,  including  the  Military  Assistance  Institute  and  the  Central  Intel-
ligence Agency)  to  develop  curricula  on  the  nontechnical  aspects  of  their
courses  of  instruction.

e. Training  of  Foreign  Nationals

It  is  in  the  interest  of  the  United  States  to  provide  counter-insurgency  training
to  selected  foreign  nationals,  both  in  the  United  States  and  in  their  own  coun-
tries. The  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  those  countries  with  an  actual  or  poten-
tial counter-insurgency  problem.  This  training  will  be  given  in  the  following
places:

(1)  In  facilities  operated  by  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the  Central
Intelligence  Agency  which  are  available  to  foreigners.

(2)  In  special  facilities  operated  by  the  Department  of  Defense  and
the  Agency  for  International  Development  in  Panama  for  the  benefit  of
foreign  nationals.

(3)  U.S.  MA  AGs/missions  and  USOMs  in  countries  with  counter-
insurgency  programs.

2.  It  is  desired  that  the  Special  Group  (Counter-Insurgency)  explore  ways
of  organizing  a  school  of  the  type  described  in  paragraph  1  d  above  as  a  matter
of  urgency  and  develop  appropriate  recommendations.  The  Special  Group
(Counter-Insurgency)  should  also  examine  the  possibility  of  setting  up  interim
courses  at  the  Foreign  Service  Institute  and/or  at  the  National  War  College  to
fill  the  gap  during  consideration  of  a  new  school.

3.  It  is  desired  that  the  addressees  examine  the  counter-insurgency  training
which  is  currently  offered  in  their  departments  and  agencies,  and  to  report  by
June  1,  1962  upon  the  adequacy  with  which  it  meets  the  training  objectives
above.  If  any  deficiencies  are  determined  to  exist,  the  responsible  department
or  agency  will  report  its  plan  for  correcting  them.

/s/  McGeorge  Bundy


[Document  112]

THE  WHITE  HOUSE
Washington

April  7,  1962

The  Honorable

Robert  S.  McNamara

Secretary  of  Defense
Washington,  D.C.

Dear  Mr.  Secretary:

The  President  has  asked  me  to  transmit  to  you  for  your  comments  the  en-


670 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

closed  memorandum  on  the  subject  of  Viet-Nam  to  the  President  from  Ambas-
sador J.  K.  Galbraith  dated  April  4,  1962.

Sincerely

Michael  V.  Forrestal

End :  Memo  to  Pres.  from  Amb.  Galbraith

April  4,  1962

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT
Subject:  Viet-Nam

The  following  considerations  influence  our  thinking  on  Viet-Nam:

1.  We  have  a  growing  military  commitment.  This  could  expand  step  by  step
into  a  major,  long-drawn  out  indecisive  military  involvement.

2.  We  are  backing  a  weak  and,  on  the  record,  ineffectual  government  and  a
leader  who  as  a  politician  may  be  beyond  the  point  of  no  return.

3.  There  is  consequent  danger  we  shall  replace  the  French  as  the  colonial
force  in  the  area  and  bleed  as  the  French  did.

4.  The  political  effects  of  some  of  the  measures  which  pacification  requires
or  is  believed  to  require,  including  the  concentration  of  population,  relocation
of  villages,  and  the  burning  of  old  villages,  may  be  damaging  to  those  and  espe-
cially to  Westerners  associated  with  it.

5.  We  fear  that  at  some  point  in  the  involvement  there  will  be  a  major  politi-
cal outburst  about  the  new  Korea  and  the  new  war  into  which  the  Democrats
as  so  often  before  have  precipitated  us.

6.  It  seems  at  least  possible  that  the  Soviets  are  not  particularly  desirous  of
trouble  in  this  part  of  the  world  and  that  our  military  reaction  with  the  need
to  fall  back  on  Chinese  protection  may  be  causing  concern  in  Hanoi.

In  the  lieht  of  the  foreaoing  we  urae  the  followina:

1.  That  it  be  our  policy  to  keep  open  the  door  for  political  solution.  We
should  welcome  as  a  solution  any  broadly  based  non-Communist  government
that  is  free  from  external  interference.  It  should  have  the  requisites  for  internal
law  and  order.  We  should  not  require  that  it  be  militarily  identified  with  the
United  States.

2.  We  shall  find  it  useful  in  achieving  this  result  if  we  seize  any  good  oppor-
tunity to  involve  other  countries  and  world  opinion  in  settlement  and  its  guaran-
tee. This  is  a  useful  exposure  and  pressure  on  the  Communist  bloc  countries  and
a  useful  antidote  for  the  argument  that  this  is  a  private  American  military
adventure.

3.  We  should  measurably  reduce  our  commitment  to  the  particular  present
leadership  of  the  government  of  South  Viet-Nam.

To  accomplish  the  foregoing,  we  recommend  the  following  specific  steps:

1.  In  the  next  fortnight  or  so  the  ICC  will  present  a  report  which  we  are
confidentially  advised  will  accuse  North  Viet-Nam  of  subversion  and  the  Gov-
ernment of  Viet-Nam  in  conjunction  with  the  United  States  of  not  notifying
the  introduction  of  men  and  materiel  as  prescribed  by  the  Geneva  accords.  We
should  respond  bv  asking  the  co-chairmen  to  initiate  steps  to  re-establish  com-
pliance with  the  Geneva  accords.  Pending  specific  recommendations,  which
might  at  some  stage  include  a  conference  of  signatories,  we  should  demand  a
suspension  of  Viet  Cong  activitv  and  agree  to  a  standstill  on  an  introduction  of
men  and  materiel.

2.  Additionally,  Governor  Harriman  should  be  instructed  to  approach  the
Russians  to  express  our  concern  about  the  increasingly  dangerous  situation


Documents  671


that  the  Viet  Cong  is  forcing  in  Southeast  Asia.  They  should  be  told  of  our
determination  not  to  let  the  Viet  Cong  overthrow  the  present  government
while  at  the  same  time  to  look  without  relish  on  the  dangers  that  this  military
build-up  is  causing  in  the  area.  The  Soviets  should  be  asked  to  ascertain  whether
Hanoi  can  and  will  call  off  the  Viet  Cong  activity  in  return  for  phased  Ameri-
can withdrawal,  liberalization  in  the  trade  relations  between  the  two  parts  of
the  country  and  general  and  non-specific  agreement  to  talk  about  reunification
after  some  period  of  tranquillity.

3.  Alternatively,  the  Indians  should  be  asked  to  make  such  an  approach  to
Hanoi  under  the  same  terms  of  reference.

4.  It  must  be  recognized  that  our  long-run  position  cannot  involve  an  un-
conditional commitment  to  Diem.  Our  support  is  to  non-Communist  and  pro-
gressively democratic  government  not  to  individuals.  We  cannot  ourselves  re-
place Diem.  But  we  should  be  clear  in  our  mind  that  almost  any  non-Communist
change  would  probably  be  beneficial  and  this  should  be  the  guiding  rule  for  our
diplomatic  representation  in  the  area.

In  the  meantime  policy  should  continue  to  be  guided  by  the  following:

1.  We  should  resist  all  steps  which  commit  American  troops  to  combat
action  and  impress  upon  all  concerned  the  importance  of  keeping  American
forces  out  of  actual  combat  commitment.

2.  We  should  disassociate  ourselves  from  action,  however  necessary,  which
seems  to  be  directed  at  the  villagers,  such  as  the  new  concentration  program.
If  the  action  is  one  that  is  peculiarly  identified  with  Americans,  such  as  defolia-
tion, it  should  not  be  undertaken  in  the  absence  of  most  compelling  reasons.
Americans  in  their  various  roles  should  be  as  invisible  as  the  situation  permits.


[Document  113]

JSCM-282-62
13  APR  1962

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
Subject:  US  Policy  Toward  Vietnam

1.  Reference  is  made  to  a  memorandum  by  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense
(ISA)  dated  10  April  1962,  requesting  comments  on  a  memorandum  to  the
President  by  the  Honorable  J.  K.  Galbraith,  US  Ambassador  to  India,  wherein
he  proposes  changes  to  the  present  US  policy  toward  Vietnam  and  the  govern-
ment of  President  Diem.

2.  The  burden  of  Mr.  Galbraith's  proposals  appears  to  be  that  present  US
policy  toward  Vietnam  should  be  revised  in  order  to  seek  a  political  solution  to
the  problem  of  communist  penetration  in  the  area.  The  effect  of  these  proposals
is  to  put  the  United  States  in  a  position  of  initiating  negotiations  with  the  com-
munists to  seek  disengagement  from  what  is  by  now  a  well-known  commitment
to  take  a  forthright  stand  against  Communism  in  Southeast  Asia.

3.  The  President  of  the  United  States  and  the  Secretary  of  Defense  both
have  recently  and  publicly  affirmed  the  intention  of  the  US  Government  to
support  the  government  of  President  Diem  and  the  people  of  South  Vietnam
to  whatever  extent  may  be  necessary  to  eliminate  the  Viet  Cong  threat.  In  his
letter  of  14  December  1961  to  President  Diem,  President  Kennedy  said:

Your  (President  Diem's)  letter  underlines  what  our  own  information
has  convincingly  shown — that  the  campaign  of  force  and  terror  now  being
waged  against  your  people  and  your  Government  is  supported  and  directed


672 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

from  the  outside  by  the  authorities  at  Hanoi.  They  have  thus  violated  the
provisions  of  the  Geneva  Accords  designed  to  ensure  peace  in  Vietnam
and  to  which  they  bound  themselves  in  1954.

At  that  time,  the  United  States,  although  not  a  party  to  the  Accords,
declared  that  it  would  view  any  renewal  of  the  aggression  in  violation  of
the  agreements  with  grave  concern  and  as  seriously  threatening  inter-
national peace  and  security.  We  continue  to  maintain  that  view.

In  accordance  with  that  declaration,  and  in  response  to  your  request,
we  are  prepared  to  help  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  to  protect  its  people  and
to  preserve  its  independence.

4.  The  various  measures  approved  for  implementation  by  the  United  States
in  support  of  our  objectives  in  South  Vietnam  have  not  yet  been  underway
long  enough  to  demonstrate  their  full  effectiveness.  Any  reversal  of  US  policy
could  have  disastrous  effects,  not  only  upon  our  relationship  with  South  Viet-
nam, but  with  the  rest  of  our  Asian  and  other  allies  as  well.

5.  The  problems  raised  by  Mr.  Galbraith  with  regard  to  our  present  policy
have  been  considered  in  the  coordinated  development  of  that  policy.  The  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  are  aware  of  the  deficiencies  of  the  present  government  of  South
Vietnam.  However,  the  President's  policy  of  supporting  the  Diem  regime  while
applying  pressure  for  reform  appears  to  be  the  only  practicable  alternative  at
this  time.  In  this  regard,  the  views  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  as  expressed  in
JCSM-33-62  are  reaffirmed.

6.  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  that  the  present  US  policy
toward  South  Vietnam,  as  announced  by  the  President,  should  be  pursued
vigorously  to  a  successful  conclusion.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:

L.  L.  Lemnitzer
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


[Document  114]

May  29,  1962

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  157

TO:  The  Secretary  of  State

The  Secretary  of  Defense

The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence

Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

SUBJECT: Presidential  Meeting  on  Laos,  May  24,  1962

The  President  has  approved  the  following  Record  of  Actions  for  the  subject
meetings:

At  the  meeting  on  the  situation  in  Laos  held  in  the  Cabinet  Room  at  4:30  p.m.
today,  the  President  requested  contingency  planning  in  the  event  of  a  break-
down of  the  cease  fire  in  Laos  for  action  in  two  major  areas:

(a)  the  investing  and  holding  by  Thai  forces  with  U.S.  backup  of  Saya-
bouri  Province  (being  that  portion  of  northern  Laos  to  the  west  of  the
Mekong  River) ;  and


Documents  673


(b)  the  holding  and  recapture  of  the  panhandle  of  Laos  from  Thakhek
to  the  southern  frontier  with  Thai,  Vietnamese  or  U.S.  forces.

In  connection  with  the  above  contingency  plans,  the  President  desired  an
estimate  of  the  militan,"  value  of  the  Mekong  River  in  Savabouri  Province  as  a
defensive  barrier  in  relation  to  the  cost  of  taking  and  holding  it.
The  President  also  asked  that  the  above  planning  be  undertaken  unilaterally  by
the  United  States  without  discussion  at  this  time  with  the  Thais  or  the  Lao.
The  President  also  indicated  that  he  contemplated  keeping  U.S.  forces  in  Thai-
land during  the  period  of  the  3-Prince  negotiations  and  the  earlv  days  of  the
government  of  national  union,  i.e.  as  long  as  thev  serve  a  necessarv  purpose.
The  President  observed  that  a  cable  would  have  to  20  in  answer  to  Bangkok's
1844.

McGeorge  Bundy


[Document  115]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
Bureau  of  Intelligence  and  Research

Research  Memorandum
RFE-27.  June  18.  1962

TO:  FE — Governor  Harriman

FROM:  INR— Roger  Hilsman

SUBJECT: Progress  Report  on  South  \'ietnam

In  this  report,  an  expansion  of  an  earlier  informal  paper,  we  summarize  the
major  goals  and  accomplishments  of  the  present  counter-insurgency  effort
against  Communist  armed  and  sub\ersi\e  forces  in  the  Republic  of  \'ietnam
(South  Vietnam).  A  brief  assessment  of  the  general  situation  is  also  included.
It  should  be  emphasized,  however,  that  this  report  is  not  a  complete  appraisal:
It  does  not,  for  example,  discuss  Communist  strength,  capabilities,  and  achieve-
ment in  recent  months  nor  compare  these  with  those  of  the  \'ietnamese  Gov-
ernment. It  should  also  be  noted  that  this  report  does  not  follow  the  usual
format  of  a  Research  Memorandum.

I.  WHAT  ARE  WE  TRYISG  TO  DO'

A.  Devise  an  integrated  and  systematic  military-political-economic  strategic
counterinsursencv  concept  and  plan  to  eliminate  the  \'ietnamese  Communist
armed-subversive  force,  the  Viet  Cong.

B.  Orient  the  X'ietnamese  Government's  military  and  security  forces  increas-
ingly toward  counter-guerrilla  or  unconventional  warfare  tactics.

C.  Broaden  the  effective  participation  of  \'ietnamese  Government  officials  in
the  formulation  and  execution  of  government  policy.

D.  Identify  the  populace  with  the  \'ietnamese  Government's  struggle  against
the  Viet  Cong.

II.  PROGRESS:  WHERE  ARE  WE'

A.  The  importance  of  an  integrated  and  systematic  military-political-economic
strategic  counterinsurgenc\  concept  and  plan  has  been  recognized:  the  plan  is
being  implemented.


674 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


1 .  Progress

a.  Delta  Pacification  Plan

( 1 )  president  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  approved  a  systematic  counter-insurgency
plan  on  March  19,  1962,  which  contains  the  bulk  of  the  British  Advisory  Mis-
sion's (headed  by  Mr.  R.  G.  K.  Thompson)  recommendations  and  those
security  concepts  developed  by  the  US.  The  counterinsurgency  plan  is  to  be
implemented  in  10  provinces  around  Saigon  in  the  Mekong  River  delta  region
(the  so-called  "Delta  Pacification  Plan").  Col.  Hoang  Van  Lac,  a  former  province
chief  apparently  regarded  highly  by  Diem,  is  responsible  for  executing  the  plan,
operating  under  the  authority  of  Nguyen  Dinh  Thuan,  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Presidency,  and  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  Diem's  brother  and  principal  political  adviser.

(2)  "Operation  Sunrise"  in  Binh  Duong  province  just  north  of  Saigon,
favored  by  Diem  for  special  tactical  purposes,  constitutes  the  initial  effort  in  a
systematic,  province-by-province  pacification  campaign.  "Operation  Sunrise"  is
headed  by  Brig.  Gen.  Van  Thanh  Cao,  the  administrator  of  the  Southeastern
Provincial  Region.  Three  strategic  hamlets  have  been  constructed  in  Binh  Duong
province  as  a  result  of  this  operation  and,  as  of  mid-May  1962,  more  than  2,700
persons  had  been  relocated  in  these  hamlets.  (Two  additional  hamlets  are  in
ihe  planning  or  early  construction  stage.)  They  are  well  defended  and  supported
by  Civic  Action  teams  living  with  the  peasantry  and  assisting  them  in  a  variety
of  ways.  Reports  tend  to  be  optimistic  as  to  the  ultimate  success  of  these  hamlets.

b.  Other  Pacification  Programs

On  May  8,  1962,  the  second  systematic  operation  to  pacify  a  specific  area
was  started  in  Phu  Yen  province  in  central  Vietnam.  It  is  known  as  "Operation
Sea  Swallow"  and  is  similar  to  "Operation  Sunrise"  in  methods  and  objectives.

(1)  More  than  80  strategic  hamlets  are  to  be  constructed  before  the
end  of  1962;  a  large  number  are  already  in  the  process  of  final  construction.

(2)  As  of  May  18,  1962,  there  were  more  than  600  Civic  Action  per-
sonnel in  Phu  Yen  province  formed  into  more  than  70  teams;  another  11  teams
were  to  be  formed  within  two  weeks.  As  in  "Operation  Sunrise"  these  [words
missing]

c.  Strategic  Villages  and  Hamlets

(1)  The  strategic  village-hamlet  concept  has  taken  hold  within  the
Vietnamese  Government  and  is  now  priority  national  policy.

(2)  President  Diem  signed  a  decree  on  February  3,  1962,  creating  a
special  "Interministerial  Committee  for  Strategic  Hamlets"  to  coordinate  the
program  on  a  countrywide  basis.  The  committee  is  officially  chaired  by  its  Secre-
tary General,  Secretary  of  State  for  Interior  Bui  Van  Luong,  but  actually  oper-
ates under  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu.

(3)  Estimates  on  the  number  of  strategic  villages  and  hamlets  vary.  As
of  December  1961,  the  Vietnamese  Department  of  Interior  reportedly  tabulated
almost  800  such  villages  and  hamlets  although  in  February  1962  the  US  Embassy
estimated  that  possibly  there  were  only  150-200  such  settlements  scattered  in
more  than  half  of  Vietnam's  39  provinces,  principally  north  of  Saigon.  In  April


Documents  675


1962,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Interior  informed  a  US  Mission  inter-agency
group,  the  Province  Pacification  Committee,  that  there  were  1,300  strategic  ham-
lets already  in  place.

(4)  On  June  6,  1962,  about  500  officials  from  all  provinces  completed
a  special  training  course  on  strategic  villages  and  hamlets.  Training  reportedly
emphasized  the  Civic  Action  aspects  of  the  strategic  village-hamlet  program  as
well  as  the  responsibilities  of  the  ofticials  involved.

d.  Civic  Action

( 1 )  The  Vietnamese  Department  of  Civic  Action  was  reorganized  in
January  1962,  creating  (i)  a  central  Civic  Action  Service  in  Saigon  by  combining
related  and  heretofore  separate  services  within  the  Department  and  (ii)  an
integrated  Civic  Action  office  in  each  province  and  district.

(2)  As  of  January  1962  a  Civic  Action  chief  and  deputy  chief  re-
portedly had  been  assigned  to  every  province  in  Vietnam.

(3)  The  Civic  Action  teams  working  in  strategic  villages  and  hamlets,
particularly  in  support  of  "Operation  Sunrise"  and  "Operation  Sea  Swallow,"
are  excellently  oriented  and  are  doing  a  good  job.

(4)  USOM  has  established  a  committee  to  provide  on  a  priority  basis
direct  US  assistance  (and  to  coordinate  such  assistance)  to  Civic  Action  opera-
tions through  the  relevant  Vietnamese  Government  agencies.

(5)  The  Vietnamese  Department  of  Defense  is  also  organizing  its  own
Civic  Action  program.

e.  Internal  Security  and  Police  Services

(1)  The  importance  of  the  counterinsurgency  role  of  the  rural  internal
security  services  is  reflected  in  the  US  Mission's  recommendation  that  the  Civil
Guard  be  increased  to  90,000  by  FY  1962  and  the  Self  Defense  Corps  to
80,000  by  FY  1963.

(2)  As  of  the  end  of  April  1962,  89  Civil  Guard  companies  or  almost
12,000  personnel  and  276  Self  Defense  Corps  platoons  or  about  10,500  per-
sonnel had  been  trained.  The  goal  is  reportedly  to  train  a  total  of  some  49,000
Civil  Guard  and  60,000  Self  Defense  Corps  personnel  by  the  end  of  1962.

(3)  The  Vietnamese  Government,  with  the  help  of  USOM,  has  taken
steps  to  extend  the  police  system  to  rural  areas  in  view  of  the  gap  created  by  the
paramilitarization  of  the  security  services.  AID  is  seeking  to  hire  20  additional
police  advisers  for  rural  areas.  (The  present  USOM  advisory  police  complement
in  Vietnam  is  just  over  20  personnel  most  of  whom  operate  principally  in  urban
areas.)  US  aid  for  the  police  program  for  FY  1962  is  US$3.5  million  (of  which
US$2.3  million  is  for  commodities),  in  addition  to  about  US$4  million  in  unused
aid.

(4)  As  of  the  end  of  May  1962,  almost  2.8  million  of  the  estimated  7
million  persons  of  the  age  of  18  years  or  over  have  been  issued  identity  cards.
As  a  result  of  this  effort,  over  2,000  military  deserters  and  52  Viet  Cong  agents
have  been  apprehended  and  about  4,000  irregularities  in  the  previous  identity
card  program  have  been  uncovered.

f .  Village  Radio  System

(1)  As  of  the  end  of  May  1962,  more  than  530  USOM-distributed  com-
munication radios  had  been  installed  in  villages  and  other  places  in  the  provinces


676 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

of  Gia  Dinh,  An  Xuyan,  Binh  Duong,  Dinh  Thuong,  Kien  Giang,  Kien  Phong,
Tay  Ninh,  and  Phuoc  Tuy.  Since  the  rate  of  installation  is  now  about  300
radios  per  month,  USOM  expects  to  have  more  than  1,000  village  radios  in-
stalled by  the  end  of  July  1962.  Another  1,000  sets  scheduled  to  be  installed
soon  thereafter,  thus  equipping  more  than  2,000  villages  with  radio  communica-
tion facilities.

(2)  The  public  safety  role  of  village  radios  was  demonstrated  on  March
20,  1962,  when  a  joint  USOM-Vietnamese  radio  installation  team  was  attacked
by  Viet  Cong  guerrillas.  The  security  escort  engaged  the  Viet  Cong  while  the
team  proceeded  to  install  the  village  radio  and  then  notified  district  headquarters
and  nearby  villages.  Assistance  was  despatched  and  resulted  in  an  ambush  of
the  Viet  Cong  as  they  were  fleeing  toward  another  village  which  had  been
alerted.

g. Utilization  of  US  Assistance

(1)  Effective  utilization  and  integration  of  US  non-military  assistance
to  Vietnam  was  strengthened  by  AID  action  in  March  1962  establishing  first,
second,  and  third  priorities  on  the  basis  of  the  immediate  impact  of  aid  projects
on  the  counterinsurgency  effort:  first  priority  projects  are  those  with  impact
during  the  next  12  months,  including,  for  example,  Rural  Development,  Public
Safety  (especially  radio  sets),  and  Health  Services;  second  priority  projects  are
those  with  impact  during  the  next  1  to  3  years,  including,  for  example.  Agricul-
tural Credit  and  Cooperatives  and  Highway  and  Bridge  Construction;  and  third
priority  projects  are  those  with  long-term  economic  and  social  significance.

(2)  The  US  Mission  has  established  a  number  of  inter-agency  groups,
such  as  the  Province  Pacification  Committee,  for  the  purpose  of  coordinating  and
expediting  assistance  to  Vietnamese  Government  projects  in  rural  areas.

(3)  In  anticipation  of  future  needs,  the  US  Mission  is  also  taking  meas-
ures to  stockpile  commodities  (for  example,  pharmaceuticals,  pesticides,  barb
wire,  fence  posts,  fertilizer,  etc.)  which  would  be  released  on  short  notice  for
immediate  despatch  to  the  countryside.

2.  Critique

a.  Although  the  bulk  of  the  British  Advisory  Mission's  recommendations
have  been  incorporated  into  the  "Delta  Pacification  Plan,"  the  enabling  presi-
dential decree  omits  the  Mission's  proposals  on  "prompt  payment  of  compensa-
tion for  damage  to  property  or  loss  of  life,"  on  "complete  coordination  of  all
civil  and  military  action,"  on  a  'clear  chain  of  command,"  and  on  "direction
and  coordination  of  the  information  services  and  psy-war  units."

b.  US  and  British  oflficials  in  Vietnam  have  voiced  serious  concern  over
(i)  President  Diem's  delay  in  approving  the  organizational  and  implementing
machinery  for  the  "Delta"  plan  and  (ii)  a  possible  subordination  of  the  "Delta"
plan  to  the  strategic  village-hamlet  program.  It  has  been  very  recently  reported,
however,  that  President  Diem  has  approved  a  merger  of  the  "Delta"  and  the
strategic  villige-hamlet  organizational  machinery  and  has  agreed  to  give  the
10  provinces  specified  in  the  "Delta"  plan  first  priority,  subject  to  modification
as  required  by  developments  in  the  security  situation.

c.  Although  the  Vietnamese  Government  is  giving  the  strategic  village-
hamlet  program  high  priority,  there  is  reliable  evidence  that  the  program  suffers
seriously  from  inadequate  direction,  coordination,  and  material  assistance  by


Documents  677


the  central  government  and  from  misunderstanding  among  officials  at  the  pro-
vincial and  local  levels.  Province  chiefs  have  tended  to  draw  up  unrealistically
high  quotas  (generally  in  order  to  please  the  authorities  in  Saigon),  and  the
lack  of  sufficient  resources  provided  by  the  government  at  the  local  level  has  in
certain  instances  resulted  in  poorly  constructed  and  poorly  defended  settlements
and  in  financial  levies  on  the  peasant.  Moreover,  the  construction  of  these
settlements  has  not  followed  any  particular  pattern  or  plan  based  on  priorities.
In  his  reported  recent  merger  of  the  "Delta"  plan  and  the  strategic  village-
hamlet  program,  however,  President  Diem  has  indicated  that  priorities  would
be  established.

d.  Although  the  mission  of  the  Vietnamese  Department  of  Civic  Action  is
being  oriented  increasingly  toward  supporting  strategic  villages  and  hamlets,  it
appears  that  there  is  still  considerable  emphasis  on  informational  and  intelli-
gence activities.  This  has  reduced  the  effectiveness  of  Civic  Action  operations
and  has  been  somewhat  detrimental  to  the  favorable  reputation  built  up  in  the
past  by  Civic  Action  personnel.  The  Civic  Action  Department  also  suffers  from
weak  leadership  and  internal  power  rivalries.

e.  The  principal  problems  of  the  Civil  Guard  and  Self  Defense  Corps  per-
tain to  tactical  utilization  which  is  discussed  below,  under  B.  However,  there
is  also  some  question  as  to  whether  these  services  are  being  trained  and  equipped
adequately  and  as  rapidly  as  necessary.

f.  Village  radios  will  substantially  improve  the  defense  of  the  countryside
and  the  reaction  capability  of  the  Vietnamese  military  and  security  forces.  How-
ever, no  effort  has  yet  been  made  to  improve  radio  communications  at  the  ham-
let level  where  the  battle  with  the  Viet  Cong  is  actually  joined.

g.  Two  of  the  principal  weaknesses  in  the  effective  utilization  of  US  aid
are  insufficient  awareness  on  the  part  of  central  authorities  in  the  Vietnamese
Government  of  the  need  to  establish  project  priorities  and  the  general  inability
of  these  authorities  to  act  quickly  to  despatch  aid  in  support  of  projects  in  the
countryside.  The  distribution  of  US  aid  must  be  approved  in  most  cases  by  Presi-
dent Diem  personally,  frequently  resulting  in  delays  and  in  administrative
bottle-necks.  Moreover,  Diem  continues  to  exhibit  considerable  sensitivity  to
attempts  by  US  officials  to  distribute  aid  directly  to  the  countryside  without
clearance  from  the  central  government.  Recently,  for  example,  the  Vietnamese
Government  turned  down  a  USOM  proposal  aimed  at  increasing  the  impact  of
US  aid  at  the  local  level  by  establishing  a  special  fund  for  direct  financing  of
provincial  projects.

B.  The  Vietnamese  armed  and  security  forces  are  being  oriented  toward  counter-
guerrilla  or  unconventional  warfare  tactics.

1 .  Progress
a.  Air  Support

{ 1 )  Helicopter  operations  have  decreased  the  reaction  time  and  in-
creased the  mobility  of  army  and  security  units.

(2)  During  May  16-23,  1962,  Vietnamese  Air  Force  and  US  helicopter
units  flew  at  least  347  sorties:  46  were  offensive  sorties;  216  sorties  lifted  1,511
troops  and  24,000  pounds  of  cargo  of  which  12,000  pounds  were  air-dropped;
and  85  sorties  were  for  air  evacuation,  observation,  training,  and  other  missions.


678 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  II


b.  Tactical  Utilization  of  Army  and  Security  Forces

(1)  The  Vietnamese  Army  is  getting  out  and  fighting  more  than  ever
before.  During  March  20-28,  1962,  the  armed  forces  launched  more  than  23
operations  of  at  least  company  size  throughout  the  country'.  During  April  12-
May  3,  1962,  more  than  11  operations  were  launched,  each  operation  involving
more  than  a  battalion;  some  of  these  operations  continued  beyond  May  3.

(2)  Army  units  are  becoming  more  conscious  of  the  necessity  of  fol-
lowing through  during  attacks  in  order  to  prevent  the  Viet  Cong  from  disen-
gaging.

(3)  Civil  Guard  and  Self  Defense  Corps  units  apparently  are  being
employed  increasingly  with  army  units.  During  April  12-May  3,  1962,  for  ex-
ample, Civil  Guard  and  Self  Defense  Corps  units  were  combined  with  army  units
in  at  least  3  operations.  There  have  also  been  reports  of  Civil  Guard  units  re-
ceiving helicopter  support.

(4)  There  are  reports  of  effective  utilization  of  artillery  bombard-
ment. In  early  March  1962,  for  example,  a  combined  Army  ranger,  Civil  Guard,
and  Self  Defense  Corps  force  engaged  the  Viet  Cong  in  Kien  Hoa  province.
Artillery  was  introduced  only  after  the  Viet  Cong  attempted  to  withdraw,
harassing  their  escape  routes  and  inflicting  substantial  casualties.

(5)  Army  ranger  units  are  being  deployed  in  the  highlands  area,  recog-
nizing the  equal  priority  of  this  area  with  the  Mekong  River  delta  region  where
the  pacification  program  has  been  initiated.  As  of  February  1962,  there  was  a
total  of  18  ranger  companies  in  the  I  and  II  Army  Corps  Areas.

(6)  It  is  estimated  that  some  3,000-5,000  Montagnard  tribesmen  have
been  recruited  and  are  being  trained  and  armed  by  the  Vietnamese  Army  against
the  Viet  Cong  in  the  highlands  area.  In  addition,  there  are  some  irregular
Montagnard  units.

2.  Critique

a.  Despite  the  increasing  utilization  of  Civil  Guard  and  Self  Defense  Corps
units  jointly  with  army  forces,  the  former  continue  to  be  employed  excessively
on  independent  offensive  missions.  The  principal  stumbling  block  to  the  recti-
fication of  this  problem  is  the  province  chief  under  whose  authority  the  security
services  operate.

b.  Despite  the  increasing  deployment  of  ranger  units  in  the  highlands
area,  there  is  no  evidence  that  these  units  are  being  used  to  any  appreciable
degree  for  patrolling  the  Vietnamese-Lao  frontier.

c.  The  principal  deficiency  in  the  utilization  of  air  support  is  not  tactical
but  rather  is  related  to  the  availability  and  reliability  of  intelligence  on  the
Viet  Cong.

C.  The  participation  of  Vietnamese  Government  civilian  and  military  officials
in  the  formulation  and  execution  of  government  policy  has  been  broadened
somewhat.

1.  Progress

a.  Military  commanders  in  the  field  are  playing  a  greater  role  than  in  the
past  in  the  actual  formulation  and  execution  of  operational  plans.  For  example,
much  of  the  planning  of  '"Operation  Sunrise"  and  "Operation  Sea  Swallow"


Documents  679


has  been  carried  out  by  Vietnamese  Army  division  commanders  and  their  staffs.

b.  Col.  Lac  has  been  delegated  limited  but  real  authority  for  executing
the  ""Delta  Pacification  Plan"  and  for  his  recent  and  concurrent  responsibilities
in  the  strategic  village-hamlet  program.

c.  There  has  been  limited  use  of  the  National  Internal  Security  Council
established  in  December  1961.

d.  The  Director  of  the  Central  Intelligence  Organization,  Colonel  Nguyen
Van  Y,  has  been  delegated  real  though  limited  authority  both  with  regard  to
his  intelligence  responsibilities  and  his  concurrent  role  as  head  of  the  regular
police  services,  the  National  Siirete  and  the  Municipal  Police.

e.  There  is  evidence  that  the  authority  of  certain  cabinet  members  has
been  increased,  notably  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Presidency  Thuan  and  Secre-
tars'  of  State  for  Interior  Luong.

f.  The  Vietnamese  Government  has  also  taken  various  measures  to  im-
prove morale  among  rank-and-file  military  and  security  personnel.  In  January
1962,  the  family  allowance  rates  for  Army  and  Civil  Guard  privates,  privates
first  class,  and  corporals  (as  well  as  the  combat  pay  rates  for  Army  personnel  in
these  ranks)  were  increased,  and  Army  conscripts  became  eligible  to  receive
a  private's  pay  after  completing  four  months  rather  than  one  year  in  service.

2.  Critique

Ineffectiveness  in  administration  at  the  national  level,  in  carr}'ing  out  the
control  functions  of  the  government,  and  in  extending  services  to  the  country-
large  measure,  this  is  due  to  the  limited  authority  President  Diem  delegates  to
side  continues  to  represent  the  \'ietnamese  Government's  main  weakness.  In
his  subordinates.  Diem  continues  to  make  \irtually  all  major  decisions  and
even  many  minor  ones,  to  relv  largelv  on  his  inner  circle  of  official  and  unoffi-
cial advisors  rather  than  on  his  cabinet  officers  and  the  formal  channels  of
militar}'  and  civil  command  in  formulating  and  executing  policy,  and  to  inter-
fere personally  in  purelv  and  often  minor  operational  matters.  Discontent  within
the  government  bureaucracv  and  the  military  establishment  with  these  tactics
bv  Diem  and  his  lieutenants  does  not  appear  to  have  decreased  substantially
during  the  past  vear.  The  prospects  that  Diem  may  change  his  method  of  opera-
tion are  not  favorable.

D.  Popular  identification  of  the  Vietnamese  people  \vith  the  struggle  against
the  Viet  Cong  appears  to  have  increased  somewhat.

1.  Progress

a.  President  Diem"s  frequent  travels  to  the  countn-'side  may  have  im-
proved somewhat  the  popular  image  of  the  central  government.  During  July-
December  1961,  for  example.  Diem  made  18  known  trips  outside  Saigon  and
visited  19  different  provinces  (9  in  the  central  and  northern  provinces  and  10
in  the  Mekong  delta  provinces).

b.  There^  is  evidence  that  villagers  are  passing  an  increasing  amount  of
information  on  the  Viet  Cong  to  government  officials.  One  striking  example  is
the  Viet  Cone  attack  on  an  Armv^post  in  An  Hoa  in  Quang  Ngai  province  on
April  6,  1962^.  (The  Viet  Cong  used  about  300  men,  well  armed  with  recoilless
rifles  and  machine  guns.)  As^a  result  of  an  eariier  warning  by  villagers  of  a
possible  attack,  the  Army  unit  was  on  alert  and.  when  the  attack  came,  repulsed
the  Viet  Cong  with  serious  losses.


680 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

c.  It  appears  that  defections  from  the  Viet  Cong  may  be  increasing.  It
has  been  estimated  that  only  around  400  Viet  Cong  surrendered  to  government
forces  during  all  of  1961.  Since  the  first  of  1962,  however,  US  military  sources
have  been  reporting  statistics  on  Viet  Cong  surrenders  on  a  weekly  basis,  and  it
is  estimated  that  during  February  13-April  30,  more  than  207  Viet  Cong  sur-
rendered. (These  and  other  statistics  on  the  Viet  Cong  are  derived  from  various
official  Vietnamese  sources  and  must  be  treated  with  caution  since  the  Vietnam
Government  is  prone  to  exaggerate  them.)

d.  President  Diem  signed  a  decree  on  December  18,  1961,  providing  for
the  establishment  of  provincial  councils,  ultimately  to  be  elected  by  popular
ballot  but  for  the  time  being  to  be  appointed  by  the  central  government.  (Youth
representatives  on  village  councils  have  been  elected  since  early  1961.)

e.  According  to  the  chiefs  of  Kontum  and  Pleiku  provinces  some  35,000
Montagnards  have  been  resettled  from  Viet  Cong-infested  to  relatively  secure
areas  in  these  two  provinces  since  January  1962  as  a  result  of  coordinated
measures  by  Vietnamese  military  and  civilian  officials.  These  measures  have
been  aimed  at  reducing  the  Viet  Cong's  access  to  tribal  elements  for  recruits,
labor,  intelligence,  and  supplies.

2.  Critique

a.  Despite  favorable  developments,  there  has  been  no  major  break-through
m  improving  the  popular  image  of  the  government,  particularly  in  the  country-
side. In  the  short  run,  the  success  of  this  effort  will  depend  largely  on  the  degree
of  physical  security  provided  the  peasantry,  but  in  the  long  run  the  key  to  suc-
cess will  be  the  ability  of  the  government  to  walk  the  thin  line  of  meaningful
and  sustained  assistance  to  the  villagers  without  obvious  efforts  to  direct,  regi-
ment, or  control  them.

b.  There  is  growing  concern  among  Vietnamese  field  personnel  in
Kontum.  Pleiku,  and  other  provinces  that  the  Vietnamese  Government  is  not
moving  fast  enough  to  provide  adequate  assistance  to  the  Montagnard  resettle-
ment program  and,  as  a  result,  that  the  Viet  Cong  mav  succeed  in  subverting
resettlement  efforts.  According  to  one  report  almost  70,000  of  an  estimated
105,000  Montagnard  refugees  have  not  yet  been  resettled.

///.  SUMMARY  ASSESSMENT

A.  It  is  about  three  months  since  the  current  phase  of  a  major  systematic
counterinsurgency  effort  began  in  Vietnam,  and  too  short  a  time  to  expect  any
substantial  weakening  of  the  Communist  position.  Moreover,  final  victory  is
likely  to  take  some  years  and  to  be  brought  about  more  by  a  steady  erosion  of
Communist  strength  than  by  dramatic  military  successes.

B.  In  the  military-security  sector,  US  materiel,  training,  and  advice,  supple-
mented bv  tactical  support  by  US  units,  have  produced  an  improvement  in
armed  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong.  US  military  operational  reports  reflect
improved  tactics,  shortened  reaction  times,  and  more  effective  use  of  communi-
cations and  intelligence.  It  is  too  earlv  to  say  that  the  Viet  Cong  guerrilla-
terrorist  onslaught  is  being  checked,  but  it  can  be  said  that  it  is  now  meeting
more  effective  resistance  and  having  to  cope  with  increased  aggressiveness  by
the  Vietnamese  militarv  and  security  forces.  Nonetheless,  the  Viet  Cong
continue  to  increase  their  armed  strength  and  capability  and,  on  balance,  to
erode  government  authority  in  the  countryside.


Documents  681


C.  There  has  not  been  a  corresponding  improvement  in  other  sectors  of  the
total  counterinsurgency  effort.  Serious  problems  remain  in  the  civil  and  military
command  structures  and  in  the  exercise  of  command  responsibility.  Diem  con-
tinues to  prefer  personalized  rule  through  a  very  small  group  of  trusted  official
and  unofficial  advisers  and  traditional  methods  in  matters  affecting  domestic
political  opposition.  Civil  government  effectiveness  is  also  impeded  by  shortages
in  experienced  personnel,  particularly  at  lower  levels,  and  aggravated  by  confu-
sion and  suspicion  at  most  levels  of  the  bureaucracy.  More  effective  direction
and  coordination  and  realistic  implementation  are  needed,  for  example,  for
such  crucially  important  programs  as  the  "Delta"  plan,  strategic  villages  and
hamlets,  and  Civic  Action,  and  greater  authority  must  be  delegated  to  upper
echelon  civil  and  military  officials  in  order  to  make  better  use  of  Vietnamese
Government  resources.  Similarly,  while  there  are  encouraging  signs  of  popular
support  for  the  government,  there  has  been  no  major  break-through  in  identify-
ing the  people  with  the  struggle  against  the  Viet  Cong.

D.  We  conclude  that:

1.  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  certain  allegations  of  substantial  deteriora-
tion in  the  political  and  military  situations  in  Vietnam;

2.  on  the  contrary,  there  is  evidence  of  heartening  progress  in  bolstering  the
fighting  effectiveness  of  the  military  and  security  forces;

3.  however,  there  is  still  to  be  done  in  strengthening  the  overall  capacity  of
the  Vietnamese  Government  to  pursue  its  total  counter-insurgency  effort,  not
only  in  the  military-security  sector  but  particularly  in  the  political-administrative
sector;

4.  a  judgment  on  ultimate  success  in  the  campaign  against  the  Communist
"war  of  national  liberation"  in  Vietnam  is  premature;  but

5.  we  do  think  that  the  chances  are  good,  provided  there  is  continuing
progress  by  the  Vietnamese  Government  along  the  lines  of  its  present  strategy.


[Document  116]  June  19,  1962

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  162

TO:  The  Secretary  of  State

The  Secretary  of  Defense

The  Attorney  General

The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence

The  Director,  United  States  Information  Agency

SUBJECT: Development  of  U.S.  and  Indigenous  Police,
Paramilitary  and  Military  Resources

The  President  has  approved  the  following  statement  and  proposed  assignments
of  responsibilities  to  various  agencies  as  recommended  by  the  Special  Group
(Counterinsurgency) :

The  study  of  U.S.  and  indigenous  paramilitary  resources  pursuant  to  NSAM  56
reflects  gratifying  progress  in  the  development  of  an  adequate  U.S.  capability
to  support  both  the  training  and  active  operations  of  indigenous  paramilitary
forces.  Certain  deficiencies,  however,  were  clearly  revealed.  The  deficiencies,  to


682 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  II

which  all  efforts  and  shortcomings  to  date  are  related,  should  be  the  basis  upon
which  internal  defense  requirements  are  established  for  each  country  to  be
assisted.

1 .  Country  Internal  Defense  Plans

With  one  or  two  exceptions,  there  exist  no  outline  plans  to  unify  and  orchestrate
U.S.  internal  defense  programs  and  activities  in  friendly  countries  facing  a
threat  of  subversive  insurgency,  or  which  provide  strategic  guidance  for  assist-
ing such  countries  to  maintain  internal  security.  The  Department  of  State  has
prepared  a  list  identifying  the  countries  facing  a  threat  of  subversive  insurgency
and  will  direct  the  formulation  of  outline  plans  for  internal  defense  (Country
Internal  Defense  Plans)  by  the  Country  Team  in  each  such  country  which  en-
compass the  total  U.S. -supported  internal  defense  field.  These  plans  will  include
the  military,  police,  intelligence  and  psychological  measures  comprising  a
well  rounded  internal  defense  plan  and  will  he  consistent  with  the  military,
economic,  political  and  social  measures  constituting  the  overall  country  plan.
Such  plans  should  be  completed  and  in  the  hands  of  the  Department  of  State  by
September  1,  1962,  available  for  review  by  the  Special  Group  (Counterinsur-
gency).  From  that  time  on,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  NSAM  124,
the  Special  Group  will  keep  these  country  internal  defense  plans  under  periodic
review,  and  insure  prompt  resolution  of  interdepartmental  problems  arising  in
connection  with  their  implementation.

2.  Improvement  of  Personnel  Programs  of  Agencies  Concerned  with  Uncon-
ventional Warfare

A  study  will  be  made  by  the  Armed  Forces  and  appropriate  civil  agencies  con-
cerned with  unconventional  warfare  activities  of  how  to  improve  their  personnel
programs.  Particular  attention  will  be  directed  to  the  following:

(a)  Personnel  programming  for  officers  and  men,  including  establish-
ment of  career  programs  which  protect  the  special  skills  and  professional
qualifications  of  personnel  assigned  to  unconventional  warfare  duties.

(b)  Ability  to  perform  efiiciently  in  foreign  areas  in  conditions  of  stress
and  danger  for  prolonged  periods.

(c)  Morale  factors  such  as  family  housing,  tours  of  duty,  hardship  allow-
ances, hazardous  duty  pay,  special  recognition  such  as  rewards.

3.  Orientation  of  Personnel

As  part  of  the  current  effort  to  train  more  personnel  in  the  problems  confront-
ing underdeveloped  societies,  both  civil  and  military  agencies  of  the  Govern-
ment will  assign,  where  feasible  and  subject  to  the  availability  of  funds  and
personnel,  middle-grade  and  senior  officers  to  temporary  duty  for  orientation
purposes  in  selected  countries  experiencing  internal  security  problems.

4.  Deployment  of  Counterinsurgency  Personnel

In  order  to  insure  a  timely  deployment  of  qualified  counterinsurgency  specialists
to  impending  crisis  areas,  CIA  and  AID  will  take  action  to  insure  that  adequate
qualified  personnel  with paramilitary  skills are available. Periodic  reports


Documents  683


of  progress  to  achieve  this  objective  will  be  submitted  to  the  Special  Group
(Counterinsurgency)  by  CIA  and  AID.

5.  Support  of  Covert  Paramilitary  Operations

More  Special  Forces  personnel  will  be  assigned  to  support  CIA  covert  para-
military operations  where  acute  insurgency  situations  exist.  The  Department
of  Defense  has  taken  steps  to  expedite  these  assignments.  In  addition  the  De-
partment of  Defense  will  increase  its  capability  to  fund,  support,  and  conduct
wholly  or  partly  covert  paramilitary  operations  under  the  criteria  of  NSAM  57
which  distinguishes  responsibilities  of  the  Department  of  Defense  and  CIA:

Where  such  an  operation  is  to  be  wholly  covert  or  disavowable,  it  may
be  assigned  to  CIA,  provided  that  it  is  within  the  normal  capabilities  of  the
agency.  Any  large  paramilitary  operation  wholly  or  partly  covert  which
requires  significant  numbers  of  militarily  trained  personnel,  amounts  of
military  equipment  which  exceed  normal  CIA-controlled  stocks  and  or
military  experience  of  a  kind  and  level  peculiar  to  the  Armed  Services  is
properly  the  primary  responsibility  of  the  Department  of  Defense  with
the  CIA  in  a  supporting  role.

This  cooperation  will  be  intensified  and  the  President  will  be  given  periodic
reports  on  the  progress  of  these  efforts.

6.  Increased  Use  of  Third  Country  Personnel

The  Department  of  Defense,  in  collaboration  with  the  Department  of  State  and
the  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  will  undertake  a  study  to  determine  on  a  selec-
tive basis  the  feasibility  of  the  concept  of  the  increased  use  of  third-country
personnel  in  paramilitary  operations.  Particular  attention  will  be  given  to  the
following:

(a)  The  whole  range  of  this  concept  from  the  current  limited  use  of  Thai
and  Filipino  technicians  in  Laos  to  the  creation  of  simply  equipped  re-
gional forces  for  use  in  remote  jungle,  hill  and  desert  country.  Such  forces
would  be  composed  of  foreign  volunteers  supported  and  controlled  by
the  U.S.

(b)  The  feasibility  of  using  third-country  military  or  paramilitary  forces
to  operate  under  their  own  or  other  national  auspices  in  crisis  areas.

7.  Exploitation  of  Minorities

In  view  of  the  success  which  has  resulted  from  CIA/US  Army  Special  Forces
efforts  with  tribal  groups  in  Southeast  Asia,  continumg  efforts  will  be  made  to
determine  the  most  feasible  method  of  achieving  similar  results  in  other  critical
areas.  On  a  selective  basis,  CIA  and  the  Department  of  Defense  will  make
studies  of  specific  groups  where  there  is  reason  to  believe  there  exists  an  exploit-
able minority  paramilitary  capability.

8.  Improvement  of  Indigenous  Intelligence  Organizations

Recent  experience  shows  that  most  underdeveloped  countries  need  more  effi-
cient intelligence  coordination  and  dissemination  systems  to  counter  subversive


684 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


insurgency.  Therefore,  the  CIA  will  expand  its  present  training  and  support
efforts  to  achieve  needed  improvements  in  indigenous  intelligence  organizations
and  that  other  U.S.  agencies  contribute  to  this  CIA  coordinated  program.

9. Research  and  Development  for  Counterinsurgency

The  Department  of  Defense  and  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  will  carry  in
their  research  and  development  programs  a  special  section  devoted  to  the  re-
quirements of  counterinsurgency.  The  Special  Group  (Counterinsurgency)  will
follow  up  on  this  action  and  receive  reports  from  time  to  time  with  regard  to
progress  in  developing  modern  equipment  suitable  to  meet  the  requirements  of
counterinsurgency.

McGeorge  Bundy


[Document  117]

CENTRAL  INTELLIGENCE  AGENCY
Washington  25.  D.C.

OFFICE  OF  THE  DIRECTOR

13  July  1962

MEMORANDUM  FOR:  The  Secretary  of  Defense

1.  Following  up  the  conversation  that  you  had  with  Mr.  McCone  on  6  July,
he  asked  our  Chief  of  Station  in  Saigon  for  an  overall  analysis  of  the  situation
in  South  Vietnam,  with  specific  emphasis  on  the  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  the
Montagnard  situation,  and  capabilities  of  the  Armed  Forces.

2.  Attached  herewith  is  a  copy  of  report  from  our  Chief  of  Station.  Copies
have  also  been  furnished  to  Secretary  Gilpatric,  General  Lemnitzer,  General
Taylor,  Mr.  Alexis  Johnson,  and  Mr.  Sterling  Cottrell,  of  the  SEA  Task  Force.

Marshall  S.  Carter
Lieutenant  General,  USA
Acting  Director


Part  I.

1.  In  assessing  strategic  hamlet  program,  think  it  important  make  distinction
between  program  as  generalized  national  rallying  symbol  and  as  specific  tactic
counterinsurgency  campaign.  In  former  sense  strategic  hamlet  program  has
grown  in  recent  months  into  government's  major  ideological  and  institutional
tool  in  attempting  generate  popular  consensus  in  support  efforts  to  defeat  enemy.
This  clear  in  President's  double  seven  message  on  eighth  anniversary  his  acces-
sion to  power.  He  proclaimed  this  the  year  of  strategic  hamlets,  describing  their
establishment  as  constituting  "three-fold  political,  social  and  military  revolution
adapted  to  under-developed  countries.  Strategic  hamlets  bring  the  solution  to


Documents  685

our  triple  struggle  against  underdevelopment,  disunity  and  Communism."  Diem
defines  strategic  hamlet  as  "militant  democracy  in  underdeveloped  countries.
...  the  gaining  of  liberty,  of  habeas  corpus  and  social  justice  by  all  the  people,
liberating  them  from  grip  of  all  determinisms."

2.  These  concepts  not  new,  having  been  frequently  expressed  by  Ngo  Dinh
Nhu  during  past  year  in  his  efforts  articulate  strategic' hamlet  concept  and  bring
it  into  sharper  focus.  It  encouraging,  however,  that  President  saw  fit  embrace
these  ideas  and  make  them  main  theme  double  seven  message.  Hitherto  some
indication  President  not  entirely  sold  on  program.  Nhu  and  other  government
spokesmen  have  been  at  pains  make  clear  that  strategic  hamlet  program  is  in
mainstream  of  "personalist"  philosophy  which  they  consider  South  ^Vietnam's
alternative  to  Communism  on  one  hand  and  Western-tvpe  liberalism  on  other.
Whatever  merits  this  philosophy,  it  has  suffered  from  diffuseness  and  lack  dis-
cernible application  day  to  day  problems.  By  tying  it  to  strategic  hamlets  con-
cept it  possible  they  have  finally  found  much  needed  focus,  which  may  serve
to  arouse  certain  amount  of  support  among  those  intellectuals  not  irreparably
alienated  from  Diem  regime.

3.  Nhu  and  other  supporters  strategic  hamlet  program  seem  quite  aware
need  descend  from  plain  of  philosophy  in  order  make  program  attractive  to
peasants  who  are  main  target.  In  recent  conversation  held  by  the  CIA  Station
Chief  with  Nhu,  Nhu  stated  heretofore  appeal  VC  had  for  peasants  was  in  terms
private  and  immediate  interests  peasants,  with  latter  persuaded  or  deluded
into  believing  Communists  could  best  look  to  their  material  needs.  Main  purpose
strategic  hamlet  program  to  counter  this  appeal  by  proving  to  peasants  that
GVN  can  help  organize  defenses  against  VC  while  at  same  time  giving  them
tangible  benefits  which  will  convince  them  they  have  stake  in  support  of  GVN
and  defeat  of  enemy.  Extent  government  can  actuate  promise  of  "triple  revolu-
tion" in  countryside  may  in  long  run  be  most  important  result  strategic  hamlet
program,  outweighing  immediate  tactical  advantage.

4.  As  tactic  counterinsurgency  program,  should  be  emphasized  strategic
hamlets  constitute  only  one  of  number  of  different  approaches  being  developed
to  pacify  countryside,  even  though  there  general  tendency,  even  among  Viet-
namese, to  lump  all  approaches  together  under  general  term  strategic  hamlet.
Under  current  GVN  planning  strategic  hamlets  per  se  are  preventive  mechanism
aimed  at  arresting  erosion  government  control  and  presence  in  countryside.
Strategic  hamlets  are  being  constructed  in  what  Nhu  calls  "A"  areas,  i.e.,  areas
where  VC  threat  least  serious  and  where  government  can  organize  village
defenses  most  quickly  and  with  least  expenditure  overextended  conventional
military  capability.  In  these  hamlets  peasants  generally  must  look  after  own
defense.  In  "B"  areas,  where  VC  strength  greater,  although  some  strategic  ham-
lets being  built,  projected  major  emphasis  will  be  on  construction  defended  ham-
lets, as  in  case  Operation  Sunrise  in  Binh  Duong  Province.  In  "B"  areas  pro-
vision made,  in  theory  at  least,  for  outside  defense  help  from  CG/'SDC  and  in
some  cases  from  ARVN  elements.  In  ''C"  areas,  which  deep  in  territory  con-
trolled by  VC,  concept  is  to  establish  large  settlements  reminiscent  Diem's  earlier
agrovilles,  into  which  even  VC  would  be  herded  and  kept  pending  "reeduca-
tion" and  improvement  security  situation.  This  kind  of  resettlement  must  largely
await  future,  and  is  in  our  mind  most  debatable  feature  current  GVN  plans.
Fourth  type  of  hamlet  defense  setup  now  envisaged  by  Nhu  is  string  of  kibbutz-
type  posts  to  which  young,  highly  motivated  families  would  be  sent  to  live  on
permanent  basis  in  areas  adjacent  VC  strongholds.

5.  Techniques  used  strategic  hamlet  program.  Operation  Sunrise,  other  pro-


686 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

grams  increasingly  being  incorporated  into  overall  province  pacification  pro-
grams, of  which  Operation  Hai  Yen  II  in  Phu  Yen  is  prototype.  Two  more  plans,
for  Binh  Dinh  and  Quang  Ngai  Provinces  in  central  Vietnam,  currently  in  mill
and  outlook  for  several  more  next  few  months.


6.  As  of  30  June,  there  were  approximately  2000  strategic  hamlets  already
completed.  This  represents  increase  of  1300  since  January  1962,  indicating
monthly  construction  rate  of  something  over  200.  GVN  sources  claim  7000
are  scheduled  for  completion  by  end  of  year.  Qualitatively,  there  is  a  considerable
variation,  some  being  virtual  fortresses  and  others  having  only  token  size  fences
or  other  defensive  devices  which  could  be  easily  breached  by  Viet  Cong.  In  past
much  has  depended  on  degree  energy,  initiative  and  resources  of  province  chief,
as  well  as  his  understanding  of  what  Nhu  and  other  national  leaders  wanted  in
terms  strategic  hamlets.  It  is  hoped  some  standardization  effort  will  ensue  as
program  becomes  more  clearly  defined,  especially  through  strategic  hamlets
cadre  school,  second  course  of  which  began  2  July.

7.  Geographically,  strategic  hamlets  are  widely  distributed.  As  of  30  June,
about  950  had  been  constructed  in  III  Corps,  of  which  over  300  built  in  single
province  of  Vinh  Binh;  858  in  II  Corps,  with  highs  in  Darlac  and  Binh  Dinh
with  173  and  164  respectively;  and  195  in  I  Corps,  with  high  of  85  in  Quang
Nam.  Low  rate  in  I  Corps  may  in  part  reflect  Ngo  Dinh  Can's  often  reported
coolness  toward  strategic  hamlets  concept.  There  have  been  indications  recently,
however,  that  Can  has  reached  at  least  tacit  understanding  with  brother  Nhu
exchanging  greater  support  for  strategic  hamlets  for  fuller  Saigon  support  Can's
cherished  Force  Populaire  program.

8.  Generally,  present  strategic  hamlets  constructed  safer  areas  away  from
main  concentrations  Viet  Cong  strength.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that
they  not  vv'ithin  striking  distance  Viet  Cong  elements  sufficiently  strong  to  attack
isolated  hamlets  with  serious  effect.  To  date,  there  have  been  only  few  scattered
instances  Viet  Cong  attacks  on  strategic  hamlets,  but  we  expect  pace  to  step  up
considerably,  particularly  at  end  of  rainy  season.  That  strategic  hamlet  program
is  bothering  Viet  Cong  is  well  documented  in  form  virulent  propaganda  attacks
by  Radio  Hanoi  and  National  Liberation  Front  outlets,  in  addition  captured
documents  and  agent  reports,  which  indicate  problem  of  how  to  cope  with
strategic  hamlets  now  one  of  main  Viet  Cong  preoccupations.  This  spring  there
were  several  instances  of  Viet  Cong  attacks  on  larger  agrovilles  and  land  develop-
ment centers,  which  may  suggest  some  confusion  in  Viet  Cong  minds — as  well
as  western — as  to  distinction  between  strategic  hamlets  and  other  defended
installations.

9.  At  this  stage  development  strategic  hamlet  program,  one  major  weakness
is  hit-and-miss  construction  with  insufficient  integration  hamlet  defenses  into
overall  district  and  provincial  security  plans.  Hamlets  thus  vary  considerably
in  vulnerahilitv  to  Viet  Cong  attack.  Local  observers  rightly  state  that  until
country  considerablv  more  saturated  with  strategic  hamlets,  many  of  those  al-
ready in  being  will  be  exposed  to  Viet  Cong  destruction.  In  our  view,  best  way
use  strategic  hamlets  as  tactic  in  counterinsurgency  program  is,  when  possible,
to  make  their  phased  construction  integral  part  broader  pacification  programs
extending,  where  practicable,  to  province-wide  scope.  This  one  of  more  at-
tractive aspects  Hai  Yen  II  in  Phu  Yen,  where  construction  strategic  hamlets


Documents  687


carefully  phased  with  other  aspects  of  plan  such  as  availability  civic  action  teams,
emplacement  village  defenders,  and  gradual  displacement  of  Viet  Cong  back
toward  mountains.

10.  As  to  overall  popular  reaction  to  strategic  hamlet  program,  must  confess
that,  as  in  many  other  aspects  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  it  extremely  ditficult
come  up  with  firm  generalizations.  Peasant  reaction  varies  from  district  to  dis-
trict and  province  to  province  depending  on  how  question  handled  by  respective
authorities.  In  certain  cases  where  peasants  have  been  directly  harassed  or
attacked  by  Viet  Cong,  they  often  welcome  or  seek  self-defense.  In  other  in-
stances peasants  reportedly  feel  some  initial  resentment  at  changes  enforced  in
way  of  life  imposed  by  program,  as  well  as  at  exactions  of  money  and  labor.  In
some  cases,  at  least,  initial  coolness  largely  disappears  as  advantages  of  program
become  manifest.  One  of  most  encouraging  developments  is  trend  toward
election  hamlet  councils.  Another  hopeful  sign  is  the  idea  USOM  now  considering
under  which  certain  part  its  funds  for  direct  piaster  aid  to  provinces  would  be
set  aside  for  small  economic  projects  originated  by  hamlet  councils  in  consulta-
tion with  district  and  provincial-level  officials.  USOM's  concept  is  that  such
program  would  help  sustain  momentum  of  strategic  hamlet  idea  after  initial
impetus  for  construction  defenses  had  been  dissipated.

11.  In  sum,  we  believe  strategic  hamlet  program  definitely  moving  forward
both  as  organizing  principle  around  which  whole  GVN  counterinsurgency  pro-
gram has  fair  chance  of  being  sold  to  people  and  as  specific  tactic  in  preventing
spread  Viet  Cong  influence  among  people.  But  strategic  hamlets  in  themselves
not  sufficient  to  carry  day  against  still  strong  and  determined  enemy.  Until  they
supplemented  by  broader  pacification  programs  involving  wide  variety  of
counterinsurgency  measures,  they  remain  vulnerable  Viet  Cong  countermeasures.

II.  Montagnard  Situation.

12.  A  mixed  US-GVN  team  currently  making  systematic  survey  18  provinces
in  which  montagnards  live.  Until  survey  completed  and  results  made  available,
cannot  provide  full  statistical  exposition  of  problem.  In  first  four  provinces
visited  (Darlac,  Tuyen  Due,  Lam  Dong,  and  Ninh  Thuan)  some  18,000  out  of
total  montagnard  population  of  about  165,000  have  moved  away  from  their
normal  living  areas  in  past  few  months.


On  basis  these  provinces  and  some  subsequently  vis'ted,  team  has  reached  con-
clusion that  there  has  been  extensive  relocation  Montagnards  during  past  six
months  stemming  from  combination  of  factors,  including  fear  Viet  Cong,  resent-
ment enemy  confiscation  of  much  of  food  supply,  and  new  found  respect  for
power  GVN  has  manifested  bombing  attacks  and  use  helicopters.  In  some  in-
stances, however,  movement  has  been  at  invitation  GVN  in  accordance  with
long-term  plans  resettle  tribesmen.  Thus  movement  4,500  of  11,000  Mon-
tagnards in  Tuyen  Due  made  at  invitation  provincial  officials  to  areas  prepared
in  advance.  With  exception  Tuyen  Due  Province  (Dalat),  where  there  10,000
refugees,  many  of  whom  seem  in  need  immediate  provision  food  and  other
essentials,  most  provinces  visited  to  date  not  considered  have  emergency  situa-
tions in  terms  Montagnards  needs.  Becoming  increasingly  apparent,  however,
that  GVN  and  U.S.  "faced  with  long  term  problem  looking  after  uprooted


688 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Montagnards,  either  by  making  settlement  in  present  locations  palatable  to  them
or  preferably  in  creating  conditions  security  necessary  inspire  them  return  to
original  locales.  Whatever  inspiration  their  movement  toward  GVN-controlled
centers,  GVN  faced  with  opportunity  and  challenge  forge  new  and  better  rela-
tionships with  tribal  people.  Failure  do  so  could  conceivably  mean  loss  entire
plateau  and  mountain  areas  to  Communists.  As  soon  as  we  have  results  of  sur-
vey now  being  undertaken,  a  summary  of  salient  points  will  be  provided.

13.  Station  has  for  some  time  felt  GVN  and  U.S.  agencies  moving  too  slowly
in  meeting  challenge  of  Montagnard  problem,  but  hopes  that  when  current
survey  completed  situation  will  clarify  and  more  expeditious  action  will  be
possible.  USOM  now  negotiating  project  agreement  with  Lt.  Colonel  Cao,
Chief  GVN  agency  responsible  Montagnard  affairs,  providing  for  allocation
500  million  piastres  directly  to  province  chiefs  for  use  mutually  approved  proj-
ects. Rationale  this  approach  is  to  give  greater  flexibility  in  dealing  with  varying
problems  in  connection  with  Montagnards  in  different  provinces.

III. SVN  Armed  Forces  Capabilities.

14.  South  Vietnam's  armed  forces,  with  about  175,000  men,  have  demon-
strated their  willingness  stand  up  and  fight  enemy,  and  given  proper  tactical
circumstances,  have  on  occasion  inflicted  severe  defeats  on  Viet  Cong.  No  ques-
tion RVNAF's  capabilities  fight  at  least  conventional  warfare  have  increased
measurably  as  result  long  period  training  by  MAAG.  Still  not  convinced,  how-
ever, that  regular  forces  properly  geared  fight  kind  of  war  needed  defeat  Viet
Cong,  or  that  commanders,  either  by  training  or  temperament,  possess  sufficient
tactical  flexibility  and  imagination  seek  out  elusive  enemy  and  destroy  him.

15.  One  of  major  weaknesses  to  date  has  in  our  view  been  RVNAF  tendency
organize  too  large-scale  operations  which  serve  to  tip  off  enemy  giving  him  op-
portunity melt  into  countryside.  Even  when  some  element  surprise  achieved,
ARVN  sweep  forces  seem  inadequately  prepared  with  detailed  tactical  planning
to  make  thorough  job  of  it.  These  operations,  on  other  hand,  do  serve  keep  Viet
Cong  off  balance  and  tend  prevent  them  from  concentrating  forces.  In  recent
weeks,  moreover,  ARVN  sweep  forces  have  been  systematically  destroying  VC
installations  and  rice  and  ammo  stocks,  which  inevitably  will  begin  have  serious
effect  on  enemy  supply  position.  Nevertheless,  we  feel  RVNAF  capabilities
could  be  used  with  much  more  telling  effect  if  smaller-scale  operations
conducted.

16.  Where  RVNAF  have  had  greatest  success  is  in  blundering  into  sizeable
concentrations  Viet  Cong  and  in  responding  calls  for  help  from  besieged  civil
guard  and  SDC  posts.  In  this  connection  USOM-supported  village  radio  installa-
tion program  very  important,  as  well  as  availability  of  helicopters  in  reserve  to
enable  RVNAF  respond  rapidlv  to  targets  opportunity.  When  spread  of  strategic
hamlets  forces  VC  into  larger  attacking  units,  ARVN's  capability  of  locating
and  attacking  VC  is  expected  to  improve.  British  advisor  Thompson  recently
pointed  out,  however,  that  it  took  three  years  after  beginning  of  emergency  in
Malaya  before  British  and  Malayans  really  began  operate  effectively  against
Commie  terrorists  in  various  aspects  of  counterinsurgency  program.  Turning
point  comes  when  increasing  numbers  of  villagers  begin  to  volunteer  informa-
tion against  Communists.

17.  Vietnamese  Airforce  appears  slowly  be  working  its  way  out  of  political
cloud  it  came  under  as  result  palace  bombing  incident  last  February.  According


Documents  689


air attache, performance in  j pre-planned interdiction missions  and

responding  to  calls  for  close-in  air  support  improving  considerably.  One  of  main
reasons  for  this  is  increasing  effectiveness  joint  US-G\'N  Operations  Center
(JOC)  in  developing  targets  and  in  scheduling  missions.  Ambassador  has  fre-
quentU  expressed  concern  whether  targets  being  selected  with  proper  care,
fearing  adverse  political  impact  of  bombing  non-\'C  installations  and  concentra-
tions of  people.  We  share  this  concern  but  feel  onh  remedv  is  steady  refinement
criteria  for  target  selection  utilized  by  JOC.

End  of  message


[Document  118]

August  24,  1962

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  182

TO:  The  Secretary  of  State

The  Secretary  of  Defense
The  Attorney  General
The  Chairman.  Joint  Chiefs  of  Stall
The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence
The  Administrator,  Agencv  for  Internal-
Development
The  Director,  U.S.  Information  Agency
The  Military  Representative  of  the  President

SUBJECT: Counterinsurgencv  Doctrine

The  President  has  approved  the  document  entitled  "U-S.  Overseas  Internal
Defense  Policy.""  which  sets  forth  a  national  counterinsurgency  doctrine  for  the
use  of  U.S.  departments  and  asencies  concerned  with  the  internal  defense  of
overseas  areas  threatened  bv  subversive  insurgency,  and  has  directed  its
promulgation  to  serve  as  basic  policy  guidance  to  diplomatic  missions,  consular
personnel,  and  military  commands  abroad;  to  goverrmient  departments  and
agencies  at  home:  and  to  the  government  educational  system.  The  addressees
of  this  NSAM  will  take  action  to  insure  that  the  policies  set  forth  in  the  docu-
ment are  reflected  in  departmental  and  agency  operations  and  in  such  additional
instructions  and  guidance  as  ma\  be  required  to  assure  uniformity  of  effort.  They
will  also  initiate  the  formulation  of  the  internal  doctrine,  tactics,  and  techniques
appropriate  to  their  own  department  or  agency,  based  upon  "U.S.  Overseas
Defense  Pohcv.""  These  studies  when  completed  will  be  reviewed  by  the  Special
Group  (CI),  the  Department  of  State  in  consultation  with  the  other  addressees
of  this  memorandum  is  assigned  the  task  of  keeping  the  "U-S.  Overseas  Internal
Defense  Policy""  up  to  date,  making  such  modification  as  changes  in  policy  or
practical  experience  mav  require,  and  publishing  revised  editions  as  necessary.


McGeorge  Bundy


690 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


[Document  119]


DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE


Bureau  of  Intelligence  and  Research


Research  Memorandum


RFE-59,  December  3,  1962


THROUGH


TO:


FROM:


The  Secretary
S/S

INR — Roger  Hilsman


SUBJECT:


The  Situation  and  Short-Term  Prospects  in  South  Vietnam*


This  appraisal  covers  the  Communist  insurgency  and  the  internal  political
situation  in  South  Vietnam  during  the  past  year  and  focusses  particularly  on  the
direction  and  effectiveness  of  the  Vietnamese-US  counterinsurgency  effort.  It
was  prepared  as  a  contribution  to  the  forthcoming  NIE  53-62,  Prospects  in  South
Vietnam.

ABSTRACT

President  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  and  other  leading  Vietnamese  as  well  as  many
US  officials  in  South  Vietnam  apparently  believe  that  the  tide  is  now  turning
in  the  struggle  against  Vietnamese  Communist  (Viet  Cong)  insurgency
and  subversion.  This  degree  of  optimism  is  premature.  At  best,  it  appears
that  the  rate  of  deterioration  has  decelerated  with  improvement,  principally
in  the  security  sector,  reflecting  substantially  increased  US  assistance  and
GVN  implementation  of  a  broad  counterinsurgency  program.

The  GVN  has  given  priority  to  implementing  a  basic  strategic  concept
featuring  the  strategic  hamlet  and  systematic  pacification  programs.  It  has
paid  more  attention  to  political,  economic,  and  social  counterinsurgency
measures  and  their  coordination  with  purely  military  measures.  Vietnamese
military  and  security  forces — now  enlarged  and  of  higher  quality — are
significantly  more  offensive-minded  and  their  counterguerrilla  tactical
capabilities  are  greatly  improved.  Effective  GVN  control  of  the  countryside
has  been  extended  slightly.  In  some  areas  where  security  has  improved
peasant  attitudes  toward  the  government  appear  also  to  have  improved.

As  a  result,  the  Viet  Cong  has  had  to  modify  its  tactics  and  perhaps  set
back  its  timetable.  But  the  ''national  liberation  war''  has  not  abated  nor  has
the  Viet  Cong  been  weakened.  On  the  contrary,  the  Viet  Cong  has
expanded  the  size  and  enhanced  the  capability  and  organization  of  its
guerrilla  force — now  estimated  at  about  23,000  in  elite  fighting  personnel,
plus  some  100,000  irregulars  and  sympathizers.  It  still  controls  about  20
percent  of  the  villages  and  about  9  percent  of  the  rural  population,  and  has
varying  degrees  of  influence  among  an  additional  47  percent  of  the  villages.
Viet  Cong  control  and  communication  lines  to  the  peasant  have  not  been


*  This  report  is  based  on  information  available  through  November  12,  1962.


Documents  691


seriously  weakened  and  the  guerrillas  have  thus  been  able  to  maintain  oood
intelligence  and  a  high  degree  of  initiative,  mobilitv,  and  striking  poVer.
\'iet  Cong  influence  has  almost  certainlv  improved  in  urban  areas  not  onlv
through  subversion  and  terrorism  but  also  because  of  its  propaganda  appeal
to  the  increasingly  frustrated  non-Communist  anti-Diem  elements.

The  internal  political  situation  is  considerably  more  ditficult  to  assess.
Diem  has  strengthened  his  control  of  the  bureaucracv  and  the  militarv  es-
tablishment. He  has  delegated  a  little  more  authoritv  than  in  the  past,  and
has  become  increasingly  aware  of  the  importance  of  the  peasantrv  to  the
counterinsurgency  effort.  Nevertheless,  although  there  are  fewer  reports
of  discontent  with  Diem"s  leadership  within  official  circles  and  the  civilian
elite,  there  are  still  many  indications  of  continuing  serious  concern,  par-
ticularly with  Diem's  direction  of  the  counterinsurgency  effort.  There  are
also  reports  that  important  military  and  civil  officials  continue  to  participate
in  coup  plots.  Oppositionists,  critics,  and  dissenters  outside  the  government
appear  to  be  increasingly  susceptible  to  neutralist,  pro-Communist,  and
possibly  anti-US  sentiments.  They  are  apparently  placing  increased  reliance
on  clandestine  activities.

The  Met  Cong  is  obvioush'  prepared  for  a  long  struggle  and  can  be  ex-
pected to  maintain  the  present  pace  and  diversity  of  its  insurgent-subversive
effort.  During  the  next  month  or  so,  it  mav  step  up  its  military  effort  in
reaction  to  the  growing  G\'N-US  response.  Hanoi  can  also  be  expected  to
increase  its  efforts  to  legitimatize  its  "National  Front  for  the  Liberation
of  South  Metnam"  (NFLS\')  and  to  prepare  further  groundwork  for  a
"liberation  government"  in  South  \'ietnam.  On  present  e\idence.  the  Com-
munists are  not  actively  moving  toward  neutralization  of  South  \'ietnam
in  the  Laos  pattern,  although  the\  could  seek  to  do  so  later.  Elimination,
even  significant  reduction,  of  the  Communist  insurgency  will  almost  cer-
tainly require  several  vears.  In  either  case,  a  considerably  greater  effort
by  the  G\'N.  as  well  as  continuing  US  assistance,  is  crucial.  If  there  is
continuing  improvement  in  security  conditions,  Diem  should  be  able  to
alleviate  concern  and  boost  morale  within  the  bureaucrac\  and  the  military
establishment.  But  the  G\'N  will  not  be  able  to  consolidate  its  military  suc-
cesses into  permanent  political  gains  and  to  evoke  the  positive  support  of
the  peasantrN  unless  it  gives  more  emphasis  to  non-military  aspects  of  the
counterinsurgencv  program,  integrates  the  strategic  hamlet  program  with
an  expanded  svstematic  pacification  program,  and  appreciably  modifies  mil-
itary tactics  (particularly  those  relating  to  la^ge-unit  actions  and  tactical
use  of  airpower  and  artiller\  ).  Failure  to  do  so  might  increase  militant  op-
position among  the  peasants  and  their  positive  identification  with  the  \'iet
Cong.

A  coup  could  occur  at  any  time,  but  would  be  more  likely  if  the  fight
against  the  Communists  goes  badlv,  if  the  \'iet  Cong  launches  a  series  of
successful  and  dramatic  military  operations,  or  if  Vietnamese  army
casualties  increase  appreciably  over  a  protracted  period.  The  coup  most
likely  to  succeed  would  be  one  with  non-Communist  leadership  and  sup-
port, involving  middle  and  top  echelon  militarv  and  civilian  officials.  For  a
time  at  least,  the  serious  disruption  of  go\ernment  leadership  resulting
from  a  coup  would  probably  halt  and  possibly  reverse  the  momentum  of
the  government's  counterinsurgenc)  effort.  The  role  of  the  US  can  be  ex-
tremely important  in  restoring  this  momentum  and  in  averting  widespread
fighting  and  a  serious  internal  power  struggle.


692 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

I.  The  Nature  of  the  Communist  Threat  to  South  Vietnam

A.  Strategy  and  Objectives

B.  Viet  Cong  Organization  and  Capabilities

1.  General

2.  Military  Strength  and  Effectiveness

3.  Viet  Cong  Logistic  Support

a.  Local  Support

b.  External  Support

4.  Political  Capabilities

a.  The  Communist  Position  in  the  Countryside

b.  The  Urban  Sector

IL  The  Vietnam  Government's  Counterinsurgency  Effort

A.  Background:  Gradual  Response

B.  Formulation  and  Implementation  of  Basic  Strategic  Concept

1.  Strategic  Hamlet  Program

2.  Systematic  Military-Political  Pacification  Operations

C.  Military  Operations  and  Effectiveness

in.  The  Political  Situation

A.  Background:  Rapid  Deterioration

B.  The  Current  Situation

1.  Political  Attitudes  of  Diem  and  His  Family

2.  Diem  and  the  Bureaucracy

3.  Diem's  Position  in  the  Countryside

4.  Diem's  Position  in  Urban  Centers

IV.  Economic  Trends

V.  Outlook

A.  Communist  Actions

B.  GVN  Counterinsurgency  Effort

C.  The  US  Role

D.  Political  Situation

I. THE  NATURE  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  THREAT  TO  SOUTH
VIETNAM

The  Communist  threat  to  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  (South  Vietnam)  consists
of  three  interrelated  elements.  Within  South  Vietnam,  but  under  the  direction
of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  (DRV),  an  expanding  campaign  of
guerrilla  warfare  and  terrorism  and  an  intensive  political  psychological  subver-
sion effort  are  carried  out  bv  an  apparatus  commonly  known  as  the  Viet  Cong,*

*  Viet  Cong  is  the  popular  term  used  by  the  South  Vietnamese  to  refer  to  Vietnamese
Communists,  singularly  or  collectivelv.  For  all  practical  purposes,  the  Viet  Cong  ap-
paratus is  an  extension  of  the  North  Vietnamese  Communist  Party  {Dang  Lao  Dong
Viet  Nam  or  merely  Lao  Dong),  which  also  operates  in  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  other
countries  with  important  Vietnamese  minority  groups.


Documents  693


left  behind  by  the  DRV  after  it  withdrew  most  of  its  military  forces  to  the  north
in  1954  and  since  reinforced  by  local  recruitment  and  infiltration  from  the  DRV.
Externally,  the  DRV  holds  over  South  Vietnam  the  tacit  threat  of  invasion  by
the  numerically  superior  North  Vietnamese  military  forces.

In  part  because  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  (GVN)  focussed
its  defense  efforts  too  much  upon  the  implicit  external  threat  and  too  little  upon
the  internal  threat,  not  only  was  it  unable  to  counter  elTectively  the  developing
Communist  movement  but  also  its  authority  and  internal  stability  in  the  period
from  late  1959  until  early  1962  were  increasingly  weakened  by  Viet  Cong  insur-
gent and  subversive  activities.  Since  the  early  part  of  1962  however,  the  rate  of
deterioration  appears  to  have  decelerated  as  a  result  of  substantially  increased
US  assistance  to  South  Vietnam  and  expanding  GVN  implementation  of  its
broad  military-political  counterinsurgency  program.  The  apparent  improvement
is  principally  in  the  security  sector,  but  with  some  resultant  eflects  on  the  poli-
tical situation.  Many  US  advisers  in  South  Vietnam,  as  well  as  President  Ngo
Dinh  Diem  and  other  top  GVN  ofTicials,  are  more  optimistic  and  believe  that
the  deteriorating  trends  in  effect  have  been  checked  and  that  the  tide  is  now  be-
ing turned  in  favor  of  the  GVN.  Whether  this  optimism  is  justified  may  well  be
determined  by  developments  during  the  next  few  months.

A.  STRATEGY  AND  OBJECTIVES

In  South  Vietnam,  the  Communists  are  clearly  embarked  on  a  "national
liberation  war"  of  insurgency  and  subversion  from  within  rather  on  overt  ag-
gression. It  is  probably  the  Communist  view  that  this  strategy  greatly  reduces
the  risk  of  direct  US  military  intervention  and,  at  the  same  time,  provides  good
prospects  of  success  at  relatively  little  cost.  In  addition,  it  permits  the  Communist
Bloc  to  claim  continued  adherence  to  the  1954  Geneva  Agreements.  This
strategy  was  most  recently  reaffirmed  by  the  Third  National  Congress  of  the
North  Vietnamese  Communist  Party  in  Hanoi  in  September  1960  and  the
Moscow  conference  of  all  Communist  parties  held  the  following  November  and
December.

The  immediate  Communist  objectives  are  to  demoralize  the  South  Vietnamese
public  and  the  military  and  security  forces,  weaken  and  eventually  supplant
government  authority  in  the  countryside,  and  discredit  and  ultimately  precipitate
the  overthrow  of  President  Diem's  government.  Simultaneously,  the  Communists
are  attempting  to  gain  broad  popular  support  for  their  efl'ort,  including  the  crea-
tion of  a  "united  front"  with  non-Communist  elements,  and  gradually  to
strengthen  and  transform  their  guerrilla  forces  into  regular  forces  capable  of
undertaking  a  general  offensive.

The  DRV  is  the  implementing  agency  for  Communist  activity  in  South  Viet-
nam. It  exercises  close  control  over  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  and  over  the  "Na-
tional Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South  Vietnam"  (NFLSV),  the  political
instrument  of  the  Viet  Cong.  However,  while  Hanoi  is  probably  allowed  con-
siderable freedom  of  action,  Moscow  and  Peiping  probably  would  have  over-
riding influence  over  any  major  decision  critically  aflccting  the  situation  in  South
Vietnam,  as  for  example,  international  negotiations  on  South  Vietnam,  cessa-
tion of  Communist  guerrilla  operations,  and  escalation  to  conventional  warfare
or  overt  introduction  of  North  Vietnamese  army  units.  In  any  event,  important
Communist  policies  for  South  Vietnam  are  probably  coordinated  with  Moscow
and  Peiping  and  the  latter  scrutinize  developments  in  South  Vietnam  carefully
with  an  eye  to  their  own  interests.  Both  Moscow  and  Peiping  also  furnish  strong
propaganda  support  for  the  Communist  effort  in  South  Vietnam  and,  in  addition,


694 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

the  USSR  carries  on  supporting  diplomacy,  largely  in  its  capacity  as  a  Geneva
Conference  Co-chairman.  There  is  little  evidence  of  material  support  of  the
Viet  Cong  guerrillas  by  Moscow  or  Peiping.

There  are  no  apparent  major  policy  differences  between  Hanoi,  Moscow,  and
Peiping  regarding  South  Vietnam.  During  the  first  six  months  of  1962,  it  ap-
peared that  Moscow  differed  somewhat  with  Peiping's  and  Hanoi's  propaganda
for  an  international  conference  to  settle  the  South  Vietnam  situation;  this  dif-
ference presumably  continues  to  exist  although  little  has  been  said  by  the  Bloc
on  a  conference  since  mid- 1962.  There  also  may  be  underlying  intra-Bloc  dif-
ferences on  the  subject  of  neutralization  of  South  Vietnam  or  reunification.  In
any  event,  even  though  Moscow  might  prefer  neutralization,  all  would  work  to
communize  a  neutral  South  Vietnam  if  one  were  established.  Moscow  has  also
generally  exerted  a  restraining  influence  over  Communist  willingness  to  take
risks.

The  sharp  increase  of  the  US  military  presence  in  South  Vietnam  and  the
events  of  recent  months  in  Laos  apparently  have  not  weakened  Communist
resolve  to  take  over  South  Vietnam.  However,  these  events  have  clearly  caused
some  modification  of  Viet  Cong  guerrilla  tactics  and  may  have  caused  the
Communists  to  revise  their  timetable.  Nevertheless,  the  Communists  probably
continue  to  look  primarily  to  the  long  run  in  South  Vietnam  and  to  remain  con-
fident of  eventual  victory.

B. VIET  CONG  ORGANIZATION  AND  CAPABILITIES

1.  General.  Available  intelligence  indicates  that  two  parallel  structures,  mil-
itary and  political,  exist  at  all  organizational  levels  of  the  Viet  Cong  apparatus
in  South  Vietnam.  At  the  top  of  the  organization  are  two  bodies,  the  Nambo
Regional  Committee  (NRC)  and  the  Interzone  V  Regional  Committee  (IVRC),
equal  in  status  and  each  apparently  responsible  directly  to  Hanoi.  The  NRC
directs  and  is  responsible  for  all  operations  in  the  southern  provinces,  or  roughly
the  former  Cochinchina  region,  while  the  IVRC  directs  and  is  responsible  for
all  operations  in  the  central  and  northern  provinces.  These  committees  consist
of  several  staffs  responsible  for  military  and  political  activities.  The  organiza-
tion of  the  two  regional  committees  appears  to  be  duplicated  among  interme-
diate and  lower  level  committees  responsible  for  operations  at  the  interpro-
vincial  (i.e.,  area  covering  more  than  one  province),  provincial,  district,  and
village  levels.  Information  is  not  available  on  the  size  of  the  political  component
of  the  Viet  Cong  apparatus,  but  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  regular  and  irregular
guerrilla  forces  also  serve  as  penetration,  espionage,  sabotage,  propaganda,
and  terrorist  agents.

Viet  Cong  capabilities  have  increased  considerably  during  the  past  three
years.  In  1959  a  relatively  small  but  effective  military-political  apparatus  operat-
ing largely  in  the  Mekong  River  delta  provinces,  the  Viet  Cong  has  since  grown
into  a  formidable  force  operating  throughout  the  countryside  and  even  in  many
urban  centers,  including  Saigon,  the  capital.  In  addition  to  increasing  its  numer-
ical strength,  the  Viet  Cong  has  significantly  improved  its  military  and  political
organization  and  its  tactical,  weapons,  and  subversive  capabilities.

2.  Military  Strength  and  Effectiveness.  Communist  assets  for  guerrilla  ac-
tion in  South  Vietnam  are  considerable.  In  spite  of  an  apparently  increasing
casualty  rate,  Viet  Cong  hard-core  personnel  has  grown  from  an  estimated
4,000  in  April  1960  to  about  23,000  in  October  1962.  These  forces  are
distributed  principally  in  the  southern  provinces,  the  former  Cochinchina


Documents  695

region  which  includes  the  Mekong  River  delta  area  and  where  most  of  the  fight-
ing occurs.  They  are  well-trained  and  well-armed  (utilizing  such  weapons  as
Hght  machine-guns  and  mortars  and  even  57  mm.  recoilless  rifles).  The  units
into  which  these  forces  are  organized  range  up  to  battalion  and  include  the  key
personnel  infiltrated  from  North  Vietnam.  These  units  in  effect  constitute  the
elite  fighting  elements  of  the  Viet  Cong  force  and  operate  at  the  interprovincial,
provincial,  and  district  levels.  There  has  been  no  hard  evidence  that  the  Viet
Cong  has  yet  formed  regimental-size  units  or  that  they  have  an  anti-aircraft
capability,  other  than  the  small  arms  which  they  are  using  with  increasing  ef-
fectiveness against  helicopters.

In  addition  to  this  elite  fo  rce,  the  Viet  Cong  has  an  auxiliary  armed  force
roughly  estimated  at  100,000  and  distributed  throughout  the  country.  This  force
operates  essentially  at  the  village  and  hamlet  levels  and  consists  largely  of  part-
time  or  full-time  armed  cadres  and  sympathizers.  Its  functions  are  probably
varied,  but  there  is  considerable  evidence  that  it  serves  as  a  local  defense  force,
provides  logistic  support  (food  and  intelligence,  for  example),  and  constitutes
the  reserve  from  which  personnel  are  drawn  as  replacements  for  the  elite  force
or  to  help  activate  new  units.  The  auxiliaries  appear  to  be  partially  trained  and
partially  armed,  frequently  utilizing  nothing  more  than  spears,  scimitars,  and  a
variety  of  small  weapons  manufactured  in  home  workshops  or  "arms  factories."
However,  these  limited  capabilities  apparently  are  partly  offset  by  the  ability  of
the  auxiliaries,  many  of  whom  cannot  easily  be  identified  by  the  GVN,  to  pass
themselves  off  as  innocent  peasants.

By  relying  on  small-unit  actions  and  tactics  of  surprise,  constant  movement,
concentration  for  attack,  and  dispersal  upon  withdrawal,  the  Viet  Cong  guer-
rillas have  achieved  considerable  effectiveness.  They  ambush,  carry  out  com-
pany-size attacks  against  army  and  security  units,  and  have  the  capability  to
strike  in  battalion  force  against  several  targets  simultaneously.  According  to
official  GVN  statistics,  the  Viet  Cong  since  1960  has  killed  more  than  9,500
and  wounded  at  least  13,300  military  and  security  personnel.  In  addition,  the
GVN  estimates  that  at  least  8,700  local  officials  and  civilians  have  been  as-
sassinated or  kidnapped  since  I960.*

The  Viet  Cong  appears  to  be  well-informed  particularly  on  the  plans
and  movements  of  government  forces  sent  on  large  counterguerrilla  operations.
Morale  is  probably  also  good  and  desertions  or  defections  to  the  GVN  forces,
although  reportedly  increasing,  are  relatively  few.  In  recent  months,  however,
shortages  of  food  and  the  increased  aggressiveness  of  GVN  forces  are  believed
to  have  adversely  affected  the  morale  and  capability  of  some  Viet  Cong  forces
in  the  central  provinces.

3. Viet  Cong  Logistic  Support

a.  Local  Support.  The  Viet  Cong  relies  principally  on  local  resources  to  sus-
tain its  operations.  Both  the  character  of  this  support  and  the  means  by  which
it  is  acquired  vary  considerably.  It  is  obtained  voluntarily,  by  propaganda  and
promises  of  material  or  political  benefit,  by  threats  and  intimidation,  and  finally

*  The  statistics  on  Viet  Cong  and  GVN  casualties  are  incomplete  and  not  entirely  re-
liable partly  because  the  GVN  probably  understates  its  own  casualties  and  overstates
those  of  the  Viet  Cong.  Since  the  latter  part  of  1961,  casualty  estimates  have  improved
largely  because  of  the  increased  US  presence  in  South  Vietnam.  Despite  reservations  re-
garding their  accuracy,  these  figures  are  helpful  as  one  indicator  of  the  magnitude
of  the  fighting  in  South  Vietnam.


696 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

by  outright  force.  It  includes,  among  other  things,  personnel,  arms,  food,  funds,
and  intelligence.

Most  of  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  and  agents  are  recruited  locally,  with  a
large  percentage  coming  from  the  youth.  Most  of  their  weapons  are  either
captured  or  stolen  from  GVN  military  and  security  forces,  are  manufactured
in  home  workshops  or  ''arm  factories"  in  Viet  Cong  concentration  areas,  or
are  activated  from  stocks  cached  since  the  end  of  the  Indochina  war.  A  con-
siderable portion  of  Viet  Cong  funds  apparently  comes  from  fees  levied  on  buses
and  other  means  of  transportation,  from  taxes  on  the  wealthy  and  on  business
enterprises  (such  as  rubber  plantations),  and  from  ransoms  paid  for  persons
kidnapped.  The  Viet  Cong  is  entirely  dependent  upon  the  local  populace  and
the  countryside  for  food  which  is  obtained  through  purchase,  pilferage,  capture
of  stocks,  taxation  (in  the  form  of  rice),  and  even  actual  cultivation  of  crops
by  sympathizers  and  part-time  guerrillas.  Finally,  the  ability  of  Viet  Cong
guerrillas  and  agents  to  disperse,  regroup,  and  indeed  retain  their  presence  in-
tact, even  after  GVN  military  clearing  operations  have  been  completed,  is  con-
siderably enhanced  by  the  concealment  afforded  them,  voluntarily  or  otherwise,
by  the  local  population.

In  addition,  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  and  subversive  agents  rely  heavily  on
the  villagers  for  information  and  supplementation  of  intelligence  gained  from
espionage  and  from  penetration  of  GVN  military  and  civilian  services.  Intel-
ligence supplied  by  the  villagers  is  largely  of  a  tactical  nature  and  deals,  for  ex-
ample, with  the  location  and  movement  of  local  GVN  military  and  security
forces  and  the  defenses  of  individual  army  and  security  posts,  villages,  and  ham-
lets.

b.  External  Support.  The  Viet  Cong  insurgent-subversive  movement  in  South
Vietnam  is  directed,  inspired,  and  organized  by  the  DRV.  Logistical  support
from  North  Vietnam,  however,  appears  to  be  limited,  and  existing  evidence
indicates  that  there  is  no  large-scale  infiltration  of  men  and  equipment.  On  the
other  hand,  infiltration  almost  certainly  occurs  on  a  sporadic  if  not  continuing
basis  and  apparently  increases  from  time  to  time,  as  was  probably  the  case
during  May  and  June  1962.

Infiltrators  are  believed  to  consist  largely  of  well-trained  cadres  (military
personnel,  key  political  and  subversive  agents,  technicians,  and  couriers)  rather
than  units.  However,  in  recent  months  there  have  been  two  reliable  reports  con-
firming the  infiltration  of  two  Viet  Cong  groups  (200  and  400  men  respectively)
from  southern  Laos.  There  is  considerable  evidence  that  infiltrators  in  general
are  largely  South  Vietnamese  (Cochinchinese  and  Annamites),  regrouped  and
retrained  in  North  Vietnam  since  the  end  of  the  Indochina  war  and  familiar
with  the  people  and  terrain  of  South  Vietnam.  They  carry  in  their  own  weapons
and,  in  some  instances,  a  limited  amount  of  additional  small  and  even  large
weapons,  technical  equipment,  medical  supplies,  and  funds.  The  infiltrators  ap-
parently are  distributed  among  existing  Viet  Cong  units,  thus  increasing  the
number  of  hard-core  personnel  and  thereby  the  capability  of  these  units,  or  be-
come the  nuclei  of  new  units.

Since  the  latter  part  of  1960,  the  principal  infiltration  routes  have  been
through  the  corridor  of  southern  Laos  controlled  by  Laotian  and  North  Viet-
namese  Communist  forces.  However,  infiltration  continues  through  eastern  Cam-
bodia, across  the  Demilitarized  Zone  at  the  17th  parallel,  and  by  junk  landings
along  South  Vietnam's  long  coastline.  In  addition,  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  are  be-
lieved to  use  the  border  areas  of  both  southern  Laos  and  eastern  Cambodia  to  a
limited  extent  for  safe  haven  purposes  during  their  hit-and-run  attacks  or  when
pursued  by  GVN  forces.


Documents  697


4. Political  Capabilities

a.  The  Comniiinist  Position  in  the  Countryside.  There  have  long  been  major
gaps  in  our  knowledge  of  rural  conditions  in  South  Vietnam.  In  view  of  the  over-
riding importance  that  the  Viet  Cong  attaches  to  the  countryside  in  its  strategy,
these  gaps  have  now  assumed  critical  proportions.  Although  our  knowledge  of
rural  conditions  is  improving,  principally  because  of  the  substantially  increased
US  presence  in  South  Vietnam,  any  assessment  of  Communist  political  strength
outside  urban  areas  remains  questionable  and  at  best  tentative.

The  Viet  Cong  appears  to  have  had  considerable  success  in  reducing  or  sup-
planting government  authority  in  the  countryside.  By  the  latter  part  of  1961,
US  officials  estimated  that  probably  more  than  one  half  of  the  entire  rural  region
south  and  southwest  of  Saigon,  as  well  as  several  areas  just  to  the  north  and  in
the  central  and  northern  provinces,  were  under  effective  Viet  Cong  control  by
night,  with  the  government  generally  capable  of  maintaining  its  authority  only
by  day.  Many  other  areas  were  under  varying  degrees  of  Viet  Cong  influence.

According  to  a  more  recent  and  apparently  more  refined  study,  US  officials
estimated  in  mid- 1962  that  of  South  Vietnam's  some  2,500  villages,  which  con-
tain around  85  percent  of  the  total  population,  20  percent  were  effectively  con-
trolled by  the  Viet  Cong.  Although  the  Viet  Cong-controlled  villages  were
inhabited  by  an  estimated  9  percent  of  the  rural  population,  the  total  area  repre-
sented by  these  villages  encompassed  a  much  larger  proportion  of  the  country-
side. In  contrast,  the  GVN  effectively  controlled  about  47  percent  of  the  village
population,  and  33  percent  of  the  villages,  largely  located,  however,  in  the  en-
virons of  major  towns  and  provincial  capitals  and  in  the  more  heavily  populated
areas  along  main  lines  of  communication.  In  the  remaining  47  percent  of  the
villages  and  44  percent  of  the  village  population,  neither  the  GVN  nor  the  Viet
Cong  exercised  effective  control,  even  though  GVN  influence  seemed  greater
in  most  of  these  villages.

The  accelerated  GVN  counterinsurgency  effort,  principally  the  strategic  ham-
let program  and  the  increasing  aggressiveness  of  the  military  and  security  forces,
reportedly  has  enlarged  somewhat  the  number  of  villages  and  peasants  under
effective  GVN  control.  However,  this  improvement  has  presumably  occurred
principally  in  areas  formerly  contacted  by  the  GVN  and  the  Viet  Cong  since
the  rural  area  and  populace  estimated  as  under  effective  Viet  Cong  control  has
been  reduced  by  only  17  villages  with  a  population  of  150,000.

Partly  by  the  sheer  strength  of  its  presence  and  partly  because  of  the  pro-
longed absence  of  strong  government  military  and  security  forces,  the  Viet  Cong
has  been  able  to  transform  some  rural  areas — such  as  portions  of  the  Ca  Mau
peninsula,  the  swampy  Plaine  des  Janos,  and  the  highlands  in  the  north — into
major  concentration  or  base  areas  which  are  dangerously  close  to  becoming
"liberated"  areas.  Here,  the  Viet  Cong  has  virtually  a  free  hand  in  levying  and
collecting  taxes,  directing  the  cultivation  of  rice  and  other  farm  products,  and
controlling  their  distribution,  propagandizing  the  populace,  conscripting  cadres,
and  even  setting  up  overt  political  organizations  and  provisional  local  govern-
ment units.

The  political  capability  and  strength  of  the  Viet  Cong  in  the  countryside  is
inextricably  associated  with  and  strongly  dependent  upon  its  military  presence
and  power.  The  threat  or  the  use  of  force,  as  demonstrated  by  the  high  rate  of
assassinations  and  kidnappings  of  local  officials  and  even  ordinary  peasants,  is
a  continual  reminder  of  the  penalty  of  noncooperation  with  the  local  Viet  Cong.
Moreover,  by  successful  military  operations  against  the  GVN,  the  Viet  Cong  is


698 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

able  to  demonstrate  its  superiority  and  its  determination  and  ability  to  remain.
In  turn,  the  political  apathy  of  the  peasant — i.e.,  his  traditional  and  overriding
sensitivity  and  attachment  to  local,  village,  and  indeed  family  matters  and  his
minimal  awareness  of  national  or  even  regional  issues  and  developments — has
made  him  prone  to  seek  an  accommodation  with  whatever  force  seems  for  the
moment  capable  of  exercising  authority.

The  Viet  Cong  also  uses  non-violent,  positive  means  to  appeal  to  the  peasantry.
Although  their  tactics  vary  and  depend  partly  on  prevailing  local  conditions,
they  have,  for  example,  purchased  rather  than  seized  rice  and  food  stuffs  in  many
cases,  have  taxed  the  wealthy  with  effective  publicity,  and  reportedly  even  dis-
tributed land  to  landless  peasants.  Even  their  terrorist  acts  from  time  to  time
have  been  against  harsh,  disliked,  or  corrupt  officials.  These  acts  are  held  out
as  proof  of  the  Viet  Cong's  ability  to  improve  the  peasant's  economic  and  po-
litical lot.  Their  appeal  is  enhanced  by  the  peasant's  basic  distrust  of  government
officials  engendered  partly  by  their  excessive  and  harsh  implementation  of  gov-
ernment programs  and  by  the  average  Vietnamese  bureaucrat's  belief  that  he
does  not  serve  but  is  to  be  served  by  the  people.

Viet  Cong  propaganda  to  the  peasant,  therefore,  is  both  positive  and  negative.
It  extols  Viet  Cong  achievements  and  power,  credits  the  Communist  forces  un-
der Ho  Chi  Minh  with  expelling  the  French  from  Vietnam  and  keeping  the
north  free  of  "foreign  control,"  holds  out  economic  and  political  inducements,
derides  GVN  capabilities,  and  points  to  the  excessive,  oppressive,  and  corrupt
character  of  GVN  demands  and  practices,  as  for  example,  military  conscription
and  forced  labor  in  the  creation  of  strategic  hamlets.  Viet  Cong  propaganda
also  exploits  the  Vietnamese  peasant's  credulity  and  animistic  beliefs,  spreading
bizarre  stories  intended  to  limit  popular  participation  in  government  programs.

Viet  Cong  penetration  efforts  have  been  directed  largely  against  local  govern-
ment services  and  Army,  Civil  Guard,  and  Self  Defense  Corps  field  units.
While  the  extent  of  this  penetration  is  difficult  to  determine  accurately,  there
have  been  increasing  reports  in  recent  months  of  successful  Viet  Cong  penetra-
tion of  Self  Defense  Corps  units  and  strategic  hamlets.  Moreover,  the  apparent
advance  knowledge  of  some  GVN  military  operations  and  the  generally  high
rate  of  Army  desertions  is  probably  partly  due  to  Viet  Cong  penetration  of  Army
field  posts  and  training  centers.

b.  The  Urban  Sector.  Communist  activities  in  urban  areas  are  limited  largely
to  propaganda,  penetration,  and  terrorism.  The  immediate  objective  of  these
activities  is  to  encourage  dissent  and  opposition  to  President  Diem  and  the  US
presence  in  South  Vietnam  and  to  foment  neutralist  sentiments  among  intel-
lectuals, professionals,  disgruntled  politicians  and  government  officials,  and  labor
and  youth  groups.  In  this  manner,  the  Viet  Cong  hopes  to  create  a  common
ground  with  actual  and  potential  non-Communist  opposition  elements,
legitimatize  its  insurgent-subversive  effort,  and  ultimately  precipitate  Diem's
overthrow.  The  Viet  Cong  has  stepped  up  this  effort  since  1961,  particularly
with  the  creation  of  its  "National  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South  Vietnam"
(NFLSV)  which  also  seeks  to  gain  international  support  for  the  Communist
position.

As  reflected  by  Radio  Hanoi  which  also  relays  NFLSV  statements,  the  para-
mount Viet  Cong  propaganda  theme  is  the  dictatorial  family  rule  imposed  by
the  Diem  government  and  its  subservience  to  US  "foreign  imperialist  interven-
tion" which  are  combining  to  "oppress"  and  "murder"  the  South  Vietnamese
people  and  block  reunification.  This  Viet  Cong  propaganda  campaign,  coupled
with  recent  political  developments  in  Laos  (which  some  Communist  propaganda


Documents  699


has  implied  provides  an  acceptable  model  for  "settlement"  of  the  South  Viet-
namese conflict)  and  with  Diem's  persistent  reluctance  to  tolerate  any  ap-
preciable non-Communist  opposition,  has  already  contributed  to  an  increase
in  neutralist  sentiment  among  urban  circles.  Moreover,  some  oppositionists,
including  a  few  leaders  of  the  once-powerful  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  religious
sects,  are  reportedly  cooperating  with  the  Viet  Cong  to  the  point  of  being  com-
mitted to  participating  in  an  eventual  Communist-led  anti-Diem  coup  attempt.

Viet  Cong  capabilities  for  leading  a  successful  coup  are  limited,  however.  Its
own  forces,  even  if  combined  with  any  remnant  armed  bands  of  the  Cao  Dai
and  Hoa  Hao  religious  sects,  do  not  appear  strong  enough  to  overthrow  the
government  by  military  means.  Nor  is  there  any  evidence  that  the  Viet  Cong
has  any  support  in  the  middle  or  top  levels  of  the  GVN  bureaucracy  or  its  mil-
itary and  security  establishments.  Although  the  Viet  Cong  might  well  be  able  to
exploit  the  confusion  and  instability  resulting  from  Diem's  overthrow,  it  does
not  yet  have  the  ties  with  the  non-Communist  opposition  to  Diem  that  would
enable  it  to  lead  a  successful  coup.

There  is  no  reliable  evidence  of  Viet  Cong  penetration  of  the  middle  or  top
echelons  of  the  GVN  bureaucracy  and  defense  establishment.  There  is  believed
to  be  penetration  of  the  lower  echelons,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  GVN  security
and  intelligence  services  do  not  now  have  the  capability  to  prevent  such  pene-
tration. A  GVN  police  interrogation  report  in  early  1962  revealed  that  there  was
a  large  Viet  Cong  subversive  network  in  the  Saigon  post  office  and  that  an
employee  of  the  post  office  was  possibly  using  the  telegraphic  system  for
clandestine  communication  with  North  Vietnam.

The  Viet  Cong  has  also  progressively  improved  its  terrorist  capability  in  Saigon
and  other  urban  centers.  There  have  been  increasing  reports  that  the  Viet  Cong
has  enlarged  its  terrorist  corps  in  Saigon  and  that  the  principal  targets  of  these
attacks  are  to  be  Americans.  Evidence  of  this  capability  is  the  increasing  number
of  grenade  bombings  in  Saigon.  For  example,  there  were  three  bombing  inci-
dents against  Americans  in  May  1962  and  three  bombing  incidents  in  connec-
tion with  Independence  Day  celebrations  on  October  26,  1962.

II. THE  VIETNAM  GOVERNMENTS  COUNTERINSURGENCY
EFFORT

A. BACKGROUND:  GRADUAL  RESPONSE

In  contrast  to  the  rapid  acceleration  of  the  Communist  insurgent  and  sub-
versive effort,  the  GVN  response  until  this  year  was  gradual  and  relatively  un-
coordinated and  generally  did  not  reflect  the  sense  of  urgency  acknowledged
by  Vietnamese  officials  themselves.  It  was  not  until  the  early  part  of  1961  that
a  comprehensive  counterinsurgency  plan  was  drawn  up,  with  the  help  of  US
officials,  and  several  months  elapsed  before  general  implementation  began.
Moreover,  the  GVN  leadership  continued  to  view  the  situation  as  one  created
and  supported  largely  by  external  forces  with  little  popular  appeal  and  saw
their  problem  as  essentially  a  military  one  requiring  overriding  emphasis  on
purely  military  measures.

Even  these  military  measures,  however,  were  weakened  principally  by  the
GVN  leadership's  reluctance  to  abandon  static  defense  concepts  and  permit
more  offensive  actions,  for  which  it  had  sufficient  forces — a  reluctance  that
reflected  both  fear  of  overt  DRV  aggression  and  internal  political  considerations.
In  addition,  the  GVN  military  and  security  forces  themselves,  despite  their


700 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

experience  in  combatting  guerrillas  during  the  Indochina  war  and  thereafter,
were  inadequately  trained,  equipped,  and  organized  to  wage  a  sustained  and
large-scale  counterguerrilla  effort.

The  turning  period  in  the  GVN  response  occurred  in  late  1961  and  early  1962
and  resulted  largely  from  substantially  increased  US  aid,  repeated  US  reaffirma-
tions of  political  support  for  President  Diem,  and  persistent  US  recommenda-
tions, including  those  developed  by  special  US  missions  to  South  Vietnam.  Ac-
cordingly the  GVN  has  diversified  its  response  by  giving  increasing  emphasis
to  political  counterinsurgency  measures.  It  has  improved  the  coordination  of
these  measures  with  purely  military  operations,  given  priority  to  implementing
a  basic  strategic  concept  for  eliminating  the  insurgents,  significantly  increased
the  counter-guerrilla  tactical  capability  of  its  military  and  security  services,  and
departed  appreciably  from  static  defense  concepts,  thereby  greatly  aiding  the
development  of  increasingly  offensive-minded  and  aggressive  military  and
security  forces.  By  the  early  part  of  1962,  the  GVN  had  begun  to  act  upon  the
recognition  that  the  crisis  situation  in  South  Vietnam  was  an  internal  and  po-
litical problem,  requiring  largely  political  measures  to  eliminate  Communist  ap-
peal, support,  and  control  among  the  peasants.

B.  FORMULATION  AND  IMPLEMENTATION  OF  BASIC  STRATEGIC
CONCEPT

As  a  result  of  persistent  US  recommendations,  the  GVN  has  developed  a  basic
strategic  concept  for  the  implementation  of  its  diverse  counterinsurgency
measures.  The  two  principal  features  of  this  concept  are  the  strategic  hamlet
program  and  a  closely  integrated  and  coordinated  military-political  approach
directed  toward  isolating  the  Viet  Cong  and  regaining  control  of  the  countryside
on  a  systematic,  area-by-area  basis.

1.  Strategic  Hamlet  Program.  The  strategic  hamlet  program  embodies
principally  the  recommendations  of  the  British  Advisory  Mission,  headed  by
R.  G.  K.  Thompson,  a  key  figure  in  the  campaign  against  Communist  insurgency
in  Malaya.  It  also  reflects  US  innovations  and  the  experience  and  concepts
developed  by  the  GVN  in  similar  earlier  projects.  Briefly,  the  program  involves
regrouping  hamlets  into  fortified  and  more  readily  defendable  setdements  and
undertaking  in  these  settlements  political,  social,  and  economic  measures
designed  to  weed  out  Viet  Cong  agents  and  sympathizers,  reestablish  and  im-
prove local  government  administration,  improve  the  general  popular  image  of
the  GVN,  and  increase  the  peasantry's  identification  with  the  government's  fight
against  the  Viet  Cong.  The  program  is  initiated  in  relatively  secure  areas  and  is
then  expanded  into  less  secure  areas.  The  majority  of  the  hamlets  provide  most
of  their  own  resources,  although  the  US  is  supplying  some  of  the  equipment  and
necessary  construction  materials  and  it  is  expected  that  this  aid  will  increase
substantially.

The  strategic  hamlet  program  is  now  priority  national  policy.  President  Diem
has  created  a  special  interministerial  committee  to  implement  and  coordinate
the  program  on  a  countrywide  basis.  The  committee  is  headed  by  Diem's  brother,
Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  and  delegates  its  responsibilities  to  regional  committees  under
each  of  the  armv  division  commanders.  Increasing  efforts  have  been  made  to
regularize  the  procedure  for  implementing  the  program,  educate  the  respon-
sible local  officials  and  the  peasants  on  procedures  and  objectives,  speed  up  the
distribution  of  US  material  assistance,  and  train  the  necessary  specialized  per-
sonnel. The  GVN  has  reported  that,  as  of  mid-October  1962,  more  than  3,000


Documents  701


strategic  hamlets  had  been  completed  and  more  than  another  2,000  were  un-
der construction;  more  than  one-half  of  these  are  in  the  southern  provinces,
including  the  Mekong  River  delta  area.

The  completed  strategic  hamlets  vary  widely  in  the  quality  of  their  physical
defenses,  the  effectiveness  of  the  defense,  internal  security,  and  administrative
systems  and  the  degree  to  which  necessary  political,  social,  and  economic  meas-
ures have  been  implemented.  Among  the  most  effectively  organized  hamlets  are
those  in  areas  where  integrated  and  systematic  military-political  pacification
operations  have  been  undertaken,  such  as  "Operation  Sunrise"  in  Binh  Duong
province  and  "Operation  Sea  Swallow"  in  Phu  Yen  province.  In  these  and  other
hamlets,  fortifications  and  the  defense  forces  are  adequate  for  repulsing  guer-
rilla attacks,  radio  communication  has  been  provided,  hamlet  administrative
officials  have  been  elected  or  selected  by  the  inhabitants  rather  than  appointed
by  the  village  or  district  chiefs,  and  Civic  Action  teams  have  been  active  in  im-
proving the  health,  educational,  and  general  living  standards  of  the  people.  In
many  other  hamlets,  however,  fortifications  are  extremely  inadequate  or  vir-
tually non-existent,  defense  forces  are  greatly  under-strength  and  inadequately
armed,  there  are  no  radio  communications  or  Civic  Action  teams,  and  hamlet
officials  continue  to  be  appointed.  Moreover,  despite  improving  peasant  morale
in  many  hamlets,  particularly  as  the  benefits  of  security  against  Viet  Cong  in-
timidation and  taxation  become  evident,  there  are  continuing  reports  that  GVN
officials  have  exacted  too  heavily  from  local  resources  and  have  not  com-
pensated the  peasants  for  the  material  and  labor  required  to  build  the  hamlets,
that  the  peasant's  ability  to  earn  a  living  has  declined  because  of  the  time  he
is  required  to  spend  on  construction,  and  that  the  government  has  been  more
concerned  with  controlling  the  hamlet  population  than  with  providing  services
and  improving  living  conditions.

It  is  still  too  early  for  accurate  evaluation  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program.
On  balance,  the  program  appears  successful  and  probably  has  contributed  to
the  reported  slight  increase  in  the  number  of  persons  and  villages  that  have  come
under  eff"ective  government  control.  The  fact  that  the  strategic  hamlets  have
become  a  major  target  for  Viet  Cong  armed  attacks  is  in  itself  an  indicator  of
the  importance  of  the  program  to  the  GVN's  counterinsurgency  effort,  if  not
a  measure  of  its  success.  Most  of  the  deficiencies  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program
appear  to  be  the  result  of  implementation  and,  to  some  extent,  are  to  be  ex-
pected during  the  early  stages.  Many  provinces  and  district  chiefs  continue  to  be
relatively  uninformed  or  confused  as  to  procedure  and  objectives  or  are  over-
zealous  in  their  attempt  to  impress  their  superiors  and  thus  have  established  un-
realistic goals.  Moreover,  some  GVN  leaders,  including  President  Diem  and
Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  tend  to  place  exaggerated  importance  on  the  program,  view-
ing it  almost  as  a  imiversal  panacea  to  the  Communist  insurgency  rather  than
as  merely  a  measure  for  cutting  off  the  Viet  Cong  from  the  peasantry.  Accord-
ingly, the  strategic  hamlet  program  has  not  been  effectively  integrated  with  the
basic  military-political  pacification  effort  to  eliminate  the  Viet  Cong  gradually
and  systematically,  principally  because  of  the  much  more  rapid  implementation
of  the  strategic  hamlet  program.  As  a  result,  the  necessary  basis  for  the  con-
tinuing defense  of  the  strategic  hamlets  does  not  exist  in  many  of  the  areas
where  they  have  been  established.

2.  Systematic  Military-Political  Pacification  Operations.  After  consider-
able delay,  and  with  the  advice  of  the  British  Advisory  Mission  and  U.S.  officials,
the  GVN  has  developed  the  general  outlines  of  an  integrated  military-political
approach  for  pacifying  the  country  on  a  systematic,  gradual,  and  province-by-


702 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

province  basis.  The  approach  involves  large-scale  and  continuing  military  oper-
ations to  clear  and  hold  a  given  province.  As  the  province  is  cleared,  strategic
hamlets  are  established  with  Civic  Action  teams  moving  into  the  hamlets  to
direct  construction  and  help  establish  administrative,  informational,  health,
educational,  security,  and  other  services.  In  March  1962,  President  Diem  ap-
proved a  "Delta  Pacification  Plan,"  calling  for  the  pacification  of  1 1  provinces
around  Saigon  and  in  the  Mekong  River  delta  area  and  embodying  most  of  the
recommendations  of  the  British  Advisory  Mission  and  other  security  concepts
developed  by  the  US.  In  August  1962,  the  GVN  divided  the  country  into  four
priority  areas  for  purposes  of  pacification.

Implementation  of  the  integrated  pacification  approach  began  in  March  1962,
and  since  then  four  operations  have  been  initiated:  "Operation  Sunrise"  in  Binh
Duong  province  (and  portions  of  surrounding  provinces),  "Operation  Sea
Swallow"  in  Phu  Yen  province,  "Operation  Let's  Go"  in  Binh  Dinh  province,
and  "Operation  Royal  Phoenix"  in  Quang  Ngai  province.  Plans  for  another
operation  in  Vinh  Long  province,  "Operation  West  Wind,"  are  being  drawn  up.
In  addition  to  continuing  military  operations,  over  160  strategic  hamlets,  the
great  majority  in  Phu  Yen  province,  have  already  been  constructed  and  more
than  an  additional  1,000  hamlets  are  planned  for  completion  by  mid- 1963  or
shortly  thereafter.

The  results  of  the  systematic,  integrated  military-political  pacification  ap-
proach are  encouraging.  However,  its  limited  application  to  relatively  few  prov-
inces has  not  yet  appreciably  altered  the  balance  between  the  government  and
the  Viet  Cong  in  the  countryside.  Moreover,  there  is  evidence  that  the  GVN
has  some  doubt  as  to  the  feasibility  of  this  approach  as  the  principal  basis  of
its  counterinsurgency  eff'ort.  For  example,  in  addition  to  the  heavy  reliance  on
the  strategic  hamlet  program,  there  are  reports  that  President  Diem  feels  that
his  military  forces  now  have  sufficient  strength  and  capability  to  make  quick,
large-scale  military  strikes  simultaneously  in  and  behind  various  areas  of
Viet  Cong  concentration  with  the  hope  of  dispersing  and  ultimately  isolating
the  guerrilla  forces  into  small  and  easily  eliminated  pockets.

C. MILITARY  OPERATIONS  AND  EFFECTIVENESS

The  GVN  military  and  security  forces  have  significantly  stepped  up  their  of-
fensive operations  against  the  Viet  Cong  insurgents,  particularly  since  the  early
part  of  1962.  In  large  measure,  this  has  been  the  direct  result  of  US  agree-
ment to  support  a  substantial  increase  in  the  size  of  the  GVN  military  and  se-
curity establishments.  Since  the  latter  part  of  1961,  the  GVN  has  increased  its
military  forces  from  about  160.000  to  around  200,000  and  its  securitv  forces,
the  Civil  Guard  and  Self  Defense  Corps,  from  just  over  90,000  to  almost  155,000.
This  has  enabled  the  GVN  to  satisfy  its  requirements  for  defending  transporta-
tion facilities  and  what  it  considers  key  areas,  including  the  17th  parallel,  while
it  attempts  to  seek  out  and  eliminate  the  Viet  Cong.  During  the  period  October
1-25,  for  example,  the  GVN  militar\  and  security  forces  laimched  19  large  of-
fensive operations,  involving  units  with  equivalent  strengths  ranging  from  two
battalions  tc  several  regiments,  in  addition  to  small-unit  offensive  actions  and
defensive  engagements.

The  general  eftecti\eness  of  GVN  military  operations  has  also  improved  as  a
result  of  President  Diem's  apparent  increasing  awareness  that  he  must  rely  on  his
military  establishment  to  formulate  the  execute  military  strategy  and  plans.  In
close  cooperation  with  US  military  advisers,  GVN  army  division  command-


Documents  703


ers  and  their  subordinates  are  participating  increasingly  in  formulating  and
executing  offensive  missions  against  the  Viet  Cong.  However,  it  appears  that
Diem's  willingness  to  delegate  this  responsibility  is  due  partly  to  his  appointment
of  division  commanders  whom  he  believes  to  be  loyal  to  him  and  his  family.
This  reliance  essentially  on  colonels  to  direct  the  fighting  reinforces  continuing
reports  that  Diem  and  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  still  mistrust  most  of  the  generals  and
even  have  doubts  as  to  their  military  competence.  In  any  event,  Diem  and  Nhu
continue  to  play  dominant  roles  in  the  development  of  general  military  strategy
and  must  approve  plans  for  major  operations  and  frequently  will  initiate  or
modify  them.

As  a  result  of  the  substantial  increase  in  US  military  assistance  and  acceler-
ated training  programs  by  US  military  personnel  in  South  Vietnam,  who  now
number  almost  11,000,  the  GVN  military  and  security  forces  have  rapidly  de-
veloped considerable  counterguerrilla  capability.  These  forces  are  substantially
better  armed  with  weapons  and  equipment  suitable  to  counterguerrilla  war-
fare. They  are  now  ambushing  and  patrolling  more  than  ever  before,  are  en-
gaging the  Viet  Cong  increasingly  in  small  unit  actions,  and  are  following
through  their  attacks  in  order  to  keep  the  Viet  Cong  from  disengaging.  Probably
of  greater  importance,  however,  is  the  considerably  improved  tactical  mobility
of  the  GVN  forces.  These  forces  are  now  able  to  strike  more  quickly  and  in
greater  strength  than  ever  before  during  defensive,  relief,  or  offensive  opera-
tions. The  single  most  important  reason  for  this  accelerated  tactical  mobility
is  the  increasing  utilization  of  air  power,  principally  US  helicopter  support.  Al-
though better  intelligence  and  communications,  particularly  the  installation  of
radios  in  most  villages,  and  improvements  in  the  tactical  organization  of  the
GVN  military  establishment,  have  also  contributed  significantly.

The  improvement  in  GVN  tactical  intelligence  is  due  partly  to  administrative
and  organizational  reforms  but  principally  to  the  success  of  US  officials  in  im-
pressing the  South  Vietnamese  with  the  necessity  for  more  effective  interroga-
tion of  Viet  Cong  prisoners  and  to  the  apparent  increase  in  the  willingness  of
the  peasants,  at  least  in  areas  where  security  has  improved,  to  inform  on  the  Viet
Cong.  On  balance,  however,  GVN  intelligence  continues  to  be  seriously  weak-
ened by  the  shortage  of  trained  personnel,  ineffective  prisoner  interrogation
techniques,  overlapping  responsibilities  among  several  agencies  and  inter-
agency rivalries,  and  the  continuing  reluctance  of  the  peasantry  to  inform  on
the  Viet  Cong  for  fear  of  reprisal,  particularly  in  insecure  areas  or  where  the
GVN  presence  is  regarded  as  temporary.

Despite  this  improvement  in  counterguerrilla  tactics,  GVN  military  forces
continue  to  rely  more  on  large  operations  or  clearing  sweeps  than  on  small-
unit  actions,  employ  Civil  Guard  and  Self  Defense  Corps  units  excessively  in
independent  offensive  missions,  and,  during  large  operations,  deploy  combat
units,  particularly  artillery  and  airforce,  according  to  conventional  tactical
methods.  As  a  result,  the  Civil  Guard  and  Self  Defense  Corps  are  incurring
heavy  casualties  and  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  generally  have  advance  knowledge  of
major  GVN  operations,  especially  when  artillery  or  air  power  is  used  to  "soften
up"  the  enemy,  and  are  able  to  disperse  or  avoid  engagement.

The  increased  US  support  and  presence,  the  greater  role  played  by  GVN
military  officials  in  formulating  and  directing  military  operations,  and  more
successes  against  the  Viet  Cong  than  ever  before  have  apparently  improved
morale  among  members  of  the  middle  and  upper  echelons  of  the  GVN  military
establishment.  The  state  of  morale  at  the  lower  level,  however,  is  more  difficult
to  determine.  Desertions,  particularly  among  recruits  and  recalled  reservists,


704 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

appear  to  be  running  very  high  for  a  wide  variety  of  reasons,  and  some  GVN
officials  continue  to  claim  serious  difficulty  in  meeting  conscription  quotas.  Dur-
ing the  first  seven  months  of  1962,  for  example,  a  total  of  17,287  personnel
were  dropped  from  the  rosters  of  the  Army,  Navy,  Airforce,  Civil  Guard,  and
Self  Defense  Corps  as  deserters  or  as  personnel  absent  without  official  leave.
On  the  other  hand,  some  GVN  officials  have  recently  claimed  that  voluntary
candidates  have  for  the  first  time  oversubscribed  the  quota  at  the  army  officers'
training  school  at  Thu  Due.

III. THE  POLITICAL  SITUATION

A. BACKGROUND:  RAPID  DETERIORATION

During  1960  and  1961,  the  internal  political  situation  in  South  Vietnam
deteriorated  rapidly,  breaking  the  relative  stability  and  general  surface  calm
that  had  prevailed  since  President  Diem  consolidated  his  authority  in  1955-56.
Criticism  of  Diem  increased  substantially  throughout  all  sectors  of  Vietnamese
society  but  was  more  urgently  articulated  within  the  government  and  bureauc-
racy, including  the  armed  forces.  A  wide  range  of  civilian  and  military  officials,
including  Vice  President  Nguyen  Ngoc  Tho  and  other  members  of  the  cabinet,
privately  questioned  Diem's  handling  of  the  internal  security  problem  and  his
ability  to  rally  and  lead  the  people  against  the  Viet  Cong  during  what  they  re-
garded as  the  most  critical  period  since  the  end  of  the  Indochina  war.  Their
concern  with  the  Communist  threat,  however,  was  almost  inseparably  entwined
with  an  accumulation  of  grievances  principally  over  Diem's  failure  to  delegate
responsibility,  the  excessive  power  exercised  by  Diem's  family,  and  the  use  of
secret  security  services  and  semicovert  political  organizations  to  scrutinize  the
attitudes  of  the  bureaucracy.

Open  deprecation  of  Diem  also  increased  sharply  among  intellectuals,  pro-
fessionals, and  disgruntled  ex-politicians  in  urban  areas,  particularly  in  Saigon,
the  focal  point  of  non-Communist  political  opposition  to  Diem  since  1956,  and
to  a  lesser  extent  among  labor  and  business  elements.  They  repeatedly  and,  on
occasion,  vociferously  demanded  that  Diem  liberalize  and  reform  his  govern-
ment, lift  restrictions  on  civil  liberties,  eliminate  corruption  in  government,  and
permit  an  opposition  to  operate.  These  demands  were  supported,  as  in  the  past,
by  a  disparate  group  of  anti-Diem  Vietnamese  expatriates  in  Paris  who  have
long  advocated  Diem's  removal.

Unrest  also  increased  among  the  peasantrv  principally  because  of  the  govern-
ment's inability  to  assure  adequate  protection  from  the  Viet  Cong  but  partly
because  of  the  cumulative  reaction  to  the  excessively  arbitrary  and  severe  be-
havior of  local  security  and  administrative  officials.  Possibly  underlying  this
unrest  also  was  the  character  of  the  GVN's  economic  development  activ-
ities which,  however  limited,  were  oriented  more  toward  developing  an  urban
industrial  base  than  toward  improving  the  economic  lot  of  the  peasant.

Vietnamese  confidence  in  the  Diem  government  was  obviously  seriously
shaken  and  morale  within  the  bureaucracy,  particularly  the  military  establish-
ment, declined  greatly.  In  November  1960  a  small  group  of  middle  level  para-
troop  officers  staged  a  near-successful  coup  in  Saigon.  Although  the  abortive
coup  ohviouslv  made  Diem  take  serious  stock  of  the  prospects  for  political
survival,  it  also  strengthened  his  confidence  in  the  correctness  of  his  political
views  and  increased  his  suspicion  of  many  of  his  subordinates  and  the  opposi-
tionists outside  the  government.


Documents  705


During  this  period  also,  Diem's  view  of  US  policies  toward  South  Vietnam
underwent  considerable  change.  For  the  first  time  since  he  consolidated  his
position,  Diem  appeared  to  question  seriously  US  political  support  of  his  leader-
ship and  US  commitments  to  defend  South  Vietnam  from  Communist  encroach-
ment. His  apparent  concern,  although  partly  reflecting  his  disagreement  with
US  actions  in  Laos,  was  due  largely  to  earlier  persistent  US  representations  on
internal  issues  which  he  regarded  as  pressing  him  unduly  to  reform  and  liberal-
ize his  regime.  This  concern  was  further  aggravated  by  his  belief,  partly  instilled
by  members  of  his  family,  that  the  US  was  in  some  way  involved  in  the  abortive
coup.

During  the  immediate  post-coup  period,  Diem  took  a  number  of  measures  to
strengthen  his  controls  over  the  bureaucracy.  He  and  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  made  it
publicly  and  privately  clear  that  future  coup  attempts  or  even  public  criticism  of
the  government  would  be  dealt  with  severely.  The  Can  Lao,  the  government's
semicovert  political  control  organization,  and  the  secret  police  were  ordered  to
maintain  close  surveillance  over  critics  within  the  bureaucracy  and  the  military
establishment  and  over  the  oppositionists  outside  the  government,  and  of-
ficials were  apparently  instructed  that  passing  information  to  or  even  having
social  relations  with  Americans  would  lead  to  serious  consequences.  As  a  re-
sult, there  was  a  sharp  decline  in  the  heretofore  large  number  of  reports  on
coup  plotting  and  criticism  of  Diem  and  his  family.  In  the  meantime,  Diem  re-
portedly organized  a  countercoup  group  from  emong  the  most  loyal  members
of  the  Can  Lao,  the  bureaucracy,  and  the  military  and  security  services.  Osten-
sibly to  impress  the  US  with  his  willingness  to  reform  the  government,  he  later
reorganized  his  cabinet,  taking  the  opportunity  to  remove  cabinet  oflicials  he
believed  to  be  critical  of  his  leadership.

During  the  last  half  of  1961,  the  political  situation  became  somewhat  less
disturbed,  despite  the  continuing  rapid  deterioration  of  security  conditions.  The
predominant  factor  in  this  development  was  external:  strong  US  public  mani-
festations of  support  for  Diem,  including  the  visits  of  Vice  President  Johnson
and  General  Maxwell  Taylor,  and  the  substantial  increase  in  US  assistance  to
South  Vietnam.  Other  contributing  factors  were  the  slightly  greater  participation
that  Diem  now  appeared  to  permit  his  military  advisers  in  the  conduct  of  the
fighting,  the  favorable  psychological  efl'ect  on  the  middle  and  lower  military
echelons  of  a  few  large  off'ensive  operations,  and  Diem's  initiation  of  some
modest  political  reforms.  However,  there  was  no  conclusive  reversal  of  deteri-
orating trends  as  was  made  clearly  evident  when  Diem's  palace  was  bombed  by
two  GVN  airforce  pilots  in  February  1962.

B. THE  CURRENT  SITUATION

The  political  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  now  probably  more  complex  and
more  diflicult  to  analyze  than  at  any  time  since  1954.  On  the  one  hand,  the
sense  that  political  reform  is  urgently  needed  appears  to  have  subsided  signifi-
cantly, at  least  on  the  surface,  and  indeed  a  relative  calm  seems  again  to  have
descended  over  the  bureaucracy.  There  has  been  a  significant  decline  in  reports
of  serious  discontent,  and  of  criticism  by  GVN  officials  of  Diem's  leadership
and  his  family.  Reports  of  the  concern  of  officials  with  inefficiency,  corruption,
and  morale  in  the  government  have  likewise  declined  significantly  since  the
early  part  of  1962,  as  have  reports  on  coup  plotting.  Some  US  officials  believe
that  morale  within  the  bureaucracy  and  the  military  services  has  improved
appreciably,  largely  because  of  the  improved  capabilities  of  the  armed  forces  and


706 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

several  large  successful  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong;  that  some  heretofore
strong  oppositionists  are  now  seeking  to  identify  themselves  with  the  govern-
ment and  contribute  positively  to  the  war  effort;  and  that  peasant  loyalty  is  shift-
ing toward  the  government,  particularly  in  areas  where  the  government  is  mak-
ing its  presence  increasingly  felt.  Finally,  Diem  and  his  principal  lieutenants
have  very  recently  shown  considerable  confidence  and  optimism  that  the  tide
has  been  turned  against  the  Viet  Cong  and  have  even  stated  that  a  general
offensive  is  about  to  be  launched.

On  the  other  hand,  the  indicators  of  serious  internal  political  instability  re-
main, however  diminished  in  apparent  intensity,  and  are  as  varied  as  the  indi-
cators of  political  stability.  There  are  reports  from  officials  from  various  levels
of  the  administration,  including  Vice  President  Tho  and  Generals  Duong  Van
Minh  and  Le  Van  Kim,  that  Diem  continues  to  run  the  war  himself  or  through
his  inner  circle  of  confidants,  that  corruption  within  the  government  continues
unabated  (as  evident  in  the  recent  national  lottery  scandal),  that  there  is  no
political  consolidation  of  military  successes  against  the  Viet  Cong  in  the  coun-
tryside, that  indiscriminate  bombing  in  the  countryside  is  forcing  innocent  or
wavering  peasants  toward  the  Viet  Cong,  and  that  coup  plotting  persists  and
only  the  fear  of  Communist  exploitation  and  the  belief  that  the  US  would  not
tolerate  a  coup  keep  it  from  materializing.  As  recently  as  late  October  1962,  Gen.
Ton  That  Dinh,  commander  of  Army  Corps  II  and  generally  considered  one
of  the  most  loyal  although  opportunistic  of  Diem's  generals,  stated  that  he  was
highly  dissatisfied  with  the  regime,  that  Diem  and  Nhu  tolerate  corruption  in
high  places,  and  that  he  was  planning  to  precipitate  a  coup  in  early  February
1963.

1.  Political  Attitudes  of  Diem  and  His  Family.  Diem  and  his  family  remain
firmly  convinced  of  the  wisdom  of  their  political  outlook  and  of  their  method  of
governing  their  country.  They  are  basically  impatient  with  democratic  processes.
They  consider  democracy  a  useful  goal  but  its  methods  they  regard  as  waste-
ful and  as  dangerous  to  political  stability  and  public  safety  in  a  country  such  as
South  Vietnam.  They  contend  therefore  that  the  Vietnamese  people,  with  their
national  survival  at  stake,  must  submit  to  a  collective  discipline  until  they  develop
a  greater  national  consciousness  and  a  better  sense  of  civic  responsibility.  While
willing  to  rule  within  the  framework  of  constitutional  and  representative  gov-
ernment, they  are  firm  in  their  convictions  that  government  is  effective  and
dynamic  only  when  its  power  is  closely  held  and  exercised  by  a  small,  highly
dedicated,  and  uncompromising  element  at  the  very  top  through  a  machinery
founded  more  on  personal  relationships  and  loyalty  than  on  formal  or  institu-
tional chains  of  command.  Where  representative  government  and  civil  liberties
come  in  conflict  with  the  highK  centralized  authority,  the  latter  generally  pre-
vails. Finally,  Diem  and  his  family  continue  to  believe  strongly,  almost  fanati-
cally, that  their  leadership  is  crucial  if  not  indispensable  to  the  survival  of  their
country  in  the  present  crisis.

Some  slight  modifications  have  slowly  appeared  in  these  attitudes  during  the
past  year,  partly  because  Diem  and  his  family  are  increasingly  aware  that  the
Communist  threat  to  South  Vietnam  is  largely  internal,  and  partly  because
of  the  magnitude  and  complexity  of  the  US  assistance  program  and  its  increas-
ing orientation  toward  the  needs  of  the  countryside.  More  than  ever  before,
they  have  been  made  aware  that  government  must  not  only  be  served  but  must
also  serve,  that  the  peasant  and  his  active  participation  rather  than  his  passive
obedience  may  well  be  crucial  for  final  victory  over  the  Viet  Cong,  and  that  a


Documents  107


little  more  sharing  of  power  at  the  top  would  probably  improve  administrative
efficiency  rather  than  lead  to  their  ouster.

At  the  same  time,  however,  Diem  and  especially  Nhu  have  gone  to  great
lengths  to  convince  US  officials  that  this  has  always  been  their  basic  approach
to  government  and  to  elaborate  on  what  it  means  for  the  peasant.  Nhu  has
repeatedly  stated  that  the  strategic  hamlet  program,  for  example,  will  create
a  social,  economic,  and  political  revolution  in  the  countryside,  which  will  uproot
vested  economic  interests,  implant  democracy  and  efficient  and  benevolent  ad-
ministration at  the  local  level,  and  raise  the  peasant  to  a  new  social  status.
There  is  no  evidence,  however,  either  in  recent  developments  or  in  the  records
of  past  performance,  particularly  Nhu's,  that  such  are  their  real  objectives  and
expectations.

Probably  the  most  significant  change  is  in  Diem's  attitude  toward  the  US.  He
has  apparently  become  substantially  persuaded  that  US  defense  commitments  to
South  Vietnam  are  firm,  despite  his  continued  disagreement  with  the  US  on  the
Laotian  problem.  His  earlier  suspicions  that  the  US  was  looking  for  a  successor
in  South  Vietnam  and  that  the  US  was  implicated  in  the  abortive  1960  coup  have
been  considerably  relieved.  On  the  other  hand.  Diem  has  remained  firm  against
any  US  pressure  on  matters  that  he  interprets  as  vital  to  his  own  and  his  gov-
ernment's best  interests  and  is  convinced  that  in  the  final  analysis  he  can  have
absolute  confidence  only  in  himself  and  in  his  family.

2.  Diem  and  the  Bureaucracy.  Diem  probably  has  somewhat  strengthened
his  control  of  the  administration.  For  example,  he  has  reorganized  a  number  of
his  agencies,  has  removed  a  number  of  critical  and  potentially  disloyal  officials
and  by  various  means  neutralized  the  influence  of  some  others,  such  as  Vice
President  Tho  and  Gen.  Duong  Van  Minh,  and  has  improved  his  means  of
surveillance  of  the  bureaucracy  through  such  techniques  as  the  creation  in  the
military  establishment  of  a  system  of  "political  commissars"  known  as  the  Po-
litical Welfare  Division.  He  has  attempted  to  reinforce  further  his  control  of  the
military  establishment  by  the  appointment  of  personally  loyal  colonels  as  division
commanders,  some  of  whom  have  demonstrated  from  time  to  time  that  they
regard  their  responsibility  as  principally  to  Diem  rather  than  to  their  corps
commanders.

On  balance,  however,  it  appears  that  the  general  efficiency  of  the  administra-
tion has  improved  slightly,  partly  because  of  the  appointment  of  more  competent
officials  to  several  key  positions,  partly  because  of  some  increase  in  the  authority
delegated  by  Diem,  and  partly  because  of  the  enlarged  US  presence  in  South
Vietnam.  For  example.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Presidency  Nguyen  Dinh
Thuan  appears  to  be  exercising  greater  authority  than  before,  as  is  Secretary  of
State  for  Interior  Bui  Van  Luong  who,  like  the  head  of  the  new  Central  Intelli-
gence Organization,  Col.  Nguyen  Van  Y,  and  Secretary  of  State  for  Public  Health
Tran  Dinh  Do,  is  among  the  newly-appointed  and  more  competent  members  of
Diem's  entourage  in  Saigon.  At  Diem's  initiative,  the  National  Assembly  recently
passed  an  amendment  to  the  constitution  enabling  it  to  call  upon  members  of
Diem's  cabinet  to  give  testimony  on  pending  legislation.

Diem  also  has  become  increasingly  aware  of  the  need  to  revive  and  accelerate
training  programs  for  his  civil  service  and  has  been  somewhat  more  selective  in
his  appointment  of  middle  echelon  officials  and  province  chiefs.  As  a  result  of
the  increased  number  of  US  advisers,  particularly  at  this  level  of  the  govern-
ment, some  of  these  officials  have  also  shown  a  somewhat  greater  willingness  to
act  on  their  own  initiative  and  to  attempt  to  improve  their  general  effectiveness


708 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

in  such  matters  as  military  planning  and  operations,  information  and  propa-
ganda, intelligence,  and  Civic  Action.  Finally,  there  has  been  greater  consulta-
tion and  coordination  of  activities  between  GVN  and  US  officials  in  Saigon
which  in  turn  has  tended  to  reduce  delays  in  the  formulation  and  implementa-
tion of  policies.

Nevertheless,  participation  by  the  central  elements  of  the  administration  in
Saigon  in  the  formulation  and  direction  of  policies,  as  well  as  initiative  and
constructive  criticism  upward  from  its  middle  and  lower  echelons,  continue  to  be
restricted  seriously.  Diem  and  his  family  continue  to  operate  the  government
largely  on  the  basis  of  personal  relationships  rather  than  through  the  regular  or
formal  channels  of  command.  They  have  remained  steadfast  against  any  US
pressure  to  broaden  government  participation  at  the  top,  and  have  been  keenly
alert  and  highly  sensitive  to  the  possibility  that  the  role  of  US  advisers  in  the
field  or  at  the  middle  and  lower  echelons  of  the  administration  may  weaken
their  authority  outside  Saigon.

3.  Diem's  Position  in  the  Countryside.  Diem  has  never  had  widespread  popular
appeal  and  support,  even  during  his  period  of  greatest  achievement,  1955-58.
An  austere  and  disciplined  introvert,  he  is  incapable  of  demagoguery  and  has
never  made  a  great  effort — to  the  extent  that  Prince  Sihanouk  of  Cambodia
and  Ho  Chi  Minh  of  North  Vietnam,  for  example,  have  done  so — to  inspire
among  the  South  Vietnamese  people  a  national  consciousness  centered  and
moulded  around  him  personally.  While  he  has  enacted  measures  that  have
'  elped  the  peasants,  he  has  not  attempted  to  identify  himself  intimately  with
the  peasants.  Relatively  few  peasants  have  ever  seen  Diem  or  heard  him  speak,
and  there  are  probably  many  others  who  are  not  aware  that  he  is  head  of  the
government.  For  the  great  majority  of  peasants,  the  district  chief  is  probably
the  highest  government  official  with  whom  there  has  been  any  notable  degree  of
contact.

Diem  undoubtedly  has  become  increasingly  aware  of  the  serious  need  to  im-
prove the  public  image  of  himself,  his  family,  and  his  government.  He  now
travels  extensively  in  the  countryside,  and  his  manner  of  talking  with  the
peasant  has  become  more  relaxed  and  sympathetic  than  before;  during  the  last
half  of  1961,  for  example.  Diem  made  18  known  trips  outside  Saigon  and  visited
19  provinces,  9  in  the  central  and  northern  parts  of  the  country  and  10  in  the
south.  Both  Diem  and  Nhu  have  from  time  to  time  attended  the  inauguration  of
relatively  small  rural  projects.  With  US  assistance,  the  GVN  is  expanding  its  in-
formation and  Civic  Action  programs  at  the  village  level  and  has  become  more
conscious  of  the  need  to  conduct  these  activities  along  lines  understood  and
appreciated  by  the  peasant.  Finally,  there  are  reports  that  a  number  of  the
villages  and  hamlets  which  have  been  given  arms  have  resisted  the  Viet  Cong,
instead  of  surrendering  their  weapons  as  some  GVN  officials  had  expected  they
would  do.

There  seems  to  be  some  feeling  among  GVN  and  US  officials  operating  at
the  local  level  that  the  popular  appeal  of  and  support  for  Diem  and  his  govern-
ment in  the  countryside  is  improving,  particularly  in  areas  where  security  has
improved  and  the  government's  power  is  increasing.  However,  they  warn  against
any  undue  optimism,  particularly  since  they  believe  social  and  economic  ad-
vances are  still  not  keeping  pace  with  military  successes,  and  that  the  positive
identification  of  the  peasantry  with  the  government  is  still  a  long  way  off.  While
over  a  100,000  Montagnard  or  mountain  tribespeople  have  fled  Viet  Cong-
controlled  areas  and  are  being  temporarily  housed  and  fed  by  the  GVN,  their
flight  apparently  was  due  principally  to  Viet  Cong  excesses  and  the  general  in-


Documents  709


tensification  of  the  fighting  in  the  highlands  rather  than  to  any  positive  measures
taken  by  the  GVN  to  appeal  to  the  tribespeople.  The  extensive  use  of  artillery
and  aerial  bombardment  and  other  apparently  excessive  and  indiscriminate
measures  by  G\'N  military  and  security  forces  in  attempting  to  eliminate  the
\'iet  Cong  have  undoubtedly  killed  many  innocent  peasants  and  made  many
others  more  willing  than  before  to  cooperate  with  the  Viet  Cong,  particularly
in  areas  where  the  government  has  conducted  extensive  military  operations,
but  has  failed  to  follow  up  by  pro\  iding  the  means  for  permanent  security.

4.  Diem's  Position  in  Urban  Centers.  Diem's  legitimacy  as  South  Vietnam's
national  leader  may  be.  at  best,  a  vague  and  impersonal  concept  in  the  coun-
tryside. It  is  serious!)-  questioned,  however,  among  many  elements  C'f  the  urban
society,  principally  among  professionals,  intellectuals,  and  former  politicians
in  Saigon.  As  in  the  recent  past,  this  questioning  largely  continues  to  take  the
form  of  dissent  and  private  criticism  rather  than  openly  organized  opposition.
Within  this  educated  and  politically  sensitive  sector  of  the  Vietnamese  society,
there  is  a  wide  variety  of  political  sentiments,  including  varying  degrees  of
Vietnamese  nationalism,  neutralism,  communism.  pro-US  and  anti-US.  and
pro-French  and  anti-French.  The  common  themes  among  these  critics  and
active  opponents  of  Diem  continue  to  be  related  to  his  s\'stem  and  manner  of
rule.

Reports  of  open  criticism  and  opposition  to  Diem  among  the  Saigon  civilian
elite,  already  on  the  decline  by  ear]\'  1961.  have  decreased  further  during  this
year.  Little  has  been  heard,  for  example,  of  Dr.  Pham  Quang  Dan's  Republican
Party  of  Vietnam  (Dan  himself  has  been  in  prison  since  the  1960  coup  attempt),
of  GVN-created  or  G\'N-controlled  "opposition"  groups,  or  of  the  once  vocif-
erous critics  of  Diem,  such  as  the  18  intellectuals  and  ex-politicians  who  signed
a  public  protest  petition  to  Diem  in  1960.  The  probable  causes  for  this  decline
in  reports  are  varied:  GVN  repression  and  increased  fear  of  repression:  the
increased  realization  that  there  is  little  the  oppositionists  can  do  legally  to
change  conditions,  particularly  in  view  of  reaffirmed  US  support  for  Diem:  and
increased  concern  over  the  possibility  of  Communist  exploitation  of  any  coup
attempt.

This  relative  surface  silence  might  be  regarded  as  an  indicator  of  improvement
in  Diem's  position  with  the  urban  public  if  it  were  not  for  the  increasing  number
of  reports  of  clandestine  activities  b\  his  non-Communist  critics  and  opponents.
Factional  leaders  of  such  old  and  once  important  political  groups  as  the  Dai
Viets  and  the  Nationalist  Part\'  of  X'ietnam  fX'NQDD)  reportedly  are  seeking
ways  to  get  their  members  secretly  installed  in  the  government.  (There  is  evidence
of  some  collusion  between  elements  of  one  of  these  groups  and  the  two  pilots
who  bombed  Diem's  palace  in  February  1962.)  Other  opposition  elements,  in-
cluding factions  of  the  Cao  Dai  religious  sect  and  the  Hoa  Hao  Social  Demo-
cratic Party,  are  reportedh  preparing  plans  for  a  future  coup,  either  in  cooper-
ation with  other  non-Communist  groups  or  with  the  \  iet  Cong.  It  also  appears
that  expatriate  groups  in  France,  such  as  the  Democratic  Part\  of  Vietnam,  are
attempting  to  expand  their  covert  acti\  ities  in  Saigon.

While  it  appears  that  Diem  has  not  improved  his  standing  among  urban
groups,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  anti-Diem  intellectual-elite  elements  in
Saigon  ha\e  been  able  to  overcome  their  chronic  disunity  and  sectarianism  or
to  increase  their  very  small  followings.  On  the  other  hand.  Diem's  persisting
disdain  of  most  of  these  oppositionists  and  his  refusal  to  bring  into  the  govern-
ment even  some  of  their  least  reprehensible  members  have  contributed  to  a
growing  neutralist  sentiment  among  them  and,  by  forcing  man\  of  them  under


710 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  II

cover,  have  made  it  extremely  difficult  to  estimate  their  real  strength  and  dis-
ruptive potential.  In  addition  to  the  growing  appeal  of  neutralism  among  them,
their  pro-US  orientation  may  also  be  rapidly  declining.

IV. ECONOMIC  TRENDS

There  has  been  little  inflationary  pressure  in  South  Vietnam  as  yet.  Prices
have  been  stable  and  the  money  supply  has  been  nearly  constant  for  over  a  year.
For  example,  in  August  1962,  total  money  supply,  made  up  of  demand  deposits
in  the  banks  and  currency  in  circulation,  was  only  fractionally  above  what  it
had  been  in  March  1961.  Further,  prices  have  been  generally  stable  and  the  cost
of  living  in  the  cities  has  risen  only  very  slowly.

The  stability  in  money  supply  and  prices  that  has  been  such  a  marked  feature
of  the  Vietnamese  economy  has  been  the  direct  result  of  very  conservative
GVN  policies  with  respect  to  prices,  wages,  and  fiscal  management.  So  long  as
the  immediate  problem  in  South  Vietnam  was  reconstruction,  i.e.,  the  restora-
tion of  production  to  pre-World  War  II  levels,  it  was  possible  to  obtain  substan-
tial increases  in  output  at  relatively  small  cost,  and  conservative  price-wage
and  fiscal  policies  were  not  only  useful  but  also  to  some  extent  necessary.  Al-
though GVN  policies  have  been  more  conservative  in  nature  than  was  really
required  (for  example,  budget  surpluses  from  1954  to  1959  amounted  to  a
total  of  2.7  billion  piasters),  they  have  kept  the  specter  of  inflation  from  add-
ing yet  another  element  of  instability  to  the  scene.

Since  the  reconstruction  phase  ended  in  about  1959,  GVN  economic  policy
has  preserved  the  status  quo  in  the  countryside,  including  the  traditional  dis-
parity between  rural  and  urban  living  standards,  and  has  not  stimulated  eco-
nomic development.  There  are  some  indications,  in  fact,  that  there  has  recently
been  net  disinvestment  in  agriculture.  Given  the  security  situation  in  the
countryside  and  the  current  depressed  state  of  trade  there,  revised  policies
directed  toward  increasing  rural  income  and  production  would  be  an  essential
element  in  persuading  the  peasants  to  cast  their  lot  with  the  government  and
not  with  the  Viet  Cong.

Two  encouraging  developments  have  occurred  in  the  economic  field  in
South  Vietnam  in  the  last  several  months.  First,  the  Second  Five- Year  Plan  was
endorsed  by  the  National  Assembly  in  June  and  approved  by  President  Diem.
The  Plan  calls  for  the  investment  of  45  billion  piasters  over  the  period  1962-
1966  and  emphasizes  the  development  of  agriculture,  public  works,  and  indus-
try. On  June  30  the  National  Assembly  appropriated  an  initial  1.2  billion
piasters  to  finance  the  piaster  costs  of  several  projects,  none  of  them  in  the  agri-
cultural sector.

Second,  President  Diem,  in  his  state  of  the  nation  message  to  the  National
Assembly  on  October  1,  emphasized  that  agriculture  is  the  economic  base  of
South  Vietnam  and  must  have  priority  in  development.  He  also  said  that  private
investment  must  be  encouraged  and  provided  the  rationale  for  deficit  financing
by  pointing  out  that  a  developing  nation  normally  experiences  a  budgetary  def-
icit. Diem  referred  to  the  necessity  of  raising  the  living  standards  of  the  rural
population  and  said  that  the  present  guaranteed  minimum  wage  would  be  re-
examined because  of  the  rise  in  the  cost  of  living.  Although  measures  to  imple-
ment new  economic  policies  mav  not  be  presented  to  the  National  Assembly
until  its  next  regular  session  in  April  1963,  Diem's  statements  indicate  a  new
awareness  that  the  trend  of  declining  income  among  the  lowest  income  groups
must  be  reversed.  This  awareness  is  encouraging  but,  unless  the  additional  in-


Documents 71 1


come  generated  by  deficit  financing  is  largely  directed  to  the  countryside  and
to  the  lower  income  urban  groups,  the  price  rises  resulting  from  deficit  financ-
ing will  merely  widen  the  income  gap  which  already  exists  and  further  alienate
the  peasants  from  the  GVN.  Moreover,  the  additional  income  must  be  directed
to  the  rural  areas  in  such  a  way  as  to  encourage  agricultural  production.  Stable
and  attractive  prices  for  farm  products  are  the  best  and  perhaps  only  means  to
accomplish  this.

Viet  Cong  activities  in  South  Vietnam  can  be  expected  to  have  a  depressing
effect  on  agricultural  production,  although  the  major  determinants  will  continue
to  be  price,  the  weather,  and  agricultural  techniques,  including  the  use  of
fertilizer,  and  improved  seed.  These  latter  factors  however,  are  less  important
with  respect  to  rubber  production,  which  provides  South  Vietnam's  largest  single
export.  For  the  eight  months  through  August  1962,  rubber  production  on  major
plantations  declined  by  some  2,500  metric  tons  as  compared  to  1961.  A  fungus
disease  affecting  the  rubber  trees  was  partially  responsible  for  the  decline,  but  an
important  additional  cause  was  clandestine  tapping  by  the  Viet  Cong  and  general
insecurity  which  interfered  with  legitimate  tapping  on  the  estates  and  extension
of  the  planted  area.  Also,  the  government's  urgent  financial  needs  arising  from
the  emergency  have  prevented  it  since  1960  from  making  anything  more  than
token  payments  in  support  of  its  rubber  replanting  program.  Given  the  vulner-
ability of  the  estates,  there  is  little  prospect  for  an  improvement  in  the  rubber
situation  until  security  improves  generally.

It  can  also  be  expected  that  Viet  Cong  harassment  will  continue  to  interfere
with  the  transport  system,  especially  the  railroads.  The  resumption  of  night
passenger  operations  between  Saigon  and  Hue  on  September  15  was  apparently
not  based  on  any  improvement  in  security  but  on  the  hope  that  the  Viet  Cong
would  not  sabotage  trains  carrying  passengers.  The  resumption  may  have  also
been  due  to  the  fact  that  additional  revenues  are  urgently  needed  in  view  of  the
10  million  piaster  monthly  deficit  on  railway  operations.

If  President  Diem's  statements  on  October  1  are  followed  by  the  necessary
measures  to  stimulate  development  of  the  agricultural  sector  in  South  Vietnam,
which  accounts  for  the  employment  of  80%  of  the  population,  important  steps
will  have  been  taken  not  only  to  provide  the  peasantry  with  the  motivation  to
side  with  the  government  but  also  to  direct  economic  development  along  the
lines  most  promising  for  the  economic  future  of  South  Vietnam.  This  will  be
particularly  the  case  if  the  GVN's  economic  development  program  also  empha-
sizes industries  utilizing  domestically  produced  raw  materials,  particularly  agri-
cultural ones,  as  well  as  those  that  provide  import  substitutes  but  are  based
solely  on  imported  raw  materials.

In  short,  the  GVN  is  showing  a  new  awareness  of  the  necessity  of  directing
its  attention  to  programs  which  will  directly  benefit  the  rural  population.  It  has
not  as  yet  put  into  effect  any  concrete  measures  to  carry  out  its  program.  Its
actions  in  the  next  six  months  to  a  year  will  indicate  how  deep  its  new-found
conviction  is.

V.  OUTLOOK

A . COMMUNIST  A  CTIONS

There  seems  little  prospect  that  the  Viet  Cong  will  be  able  to  achieve  a  take-
over of  South  Vietnam  by  armed  force  during  the  next  year.  The  Communists
are  obviously  prepared  for  a  long  struggle.  Even  though  the  strengthened  GVN


712 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

response  and  increased  US  assistance  have  apparently  necessitated  some  modi-
fication of  plans,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  Communists  will  diminish  there  diversi-
fied campaign  of  guerrilla  warfare,  terrorism,  and  subversion.  They  can  be
expected  to  make  every  effort  to  maintain,  consolidate,  and  expand  their  control
of  the  countryside;  increase  their  overall  armed  strength,  the  number  of  organ-
ized fighting  units,  and  the  percentage  of  hard-core  personnel  in  those  units;
improve  their  weapons  capability  particularly  against  helicopters;  and  increase
their  attacks  against  strategic  hamlets.  Acts  of  terrorism,  particularly  against
Americans,  and  sabotage,  particularly  of  trains  and  important  installations,
may  well  increase  to  unprecedented  proportions  in  an  effort  to  tie  down  more
GVN  military  and  security  forces  and  thus  relieve  the  pressure  against  the  Viet
Cong.

Hanoi  can  also  be  expected  to  continue  to  infiltrate  personnel  and  material
into  South  Vietnam  and  has  the  capability  to  step  up  infiltration,  as  the  situa-
tion warrants,  with  relatively  little  danger  of  detection  and  no  great  difficulty.
The  DRV's  capability  is  further  enhanced  by  the  nature  of  the  border  terrain
and  the  limited  border-control  capabilities  of  the  South  Vietnamese,  Lao,  and
Cambodian  governments.  However,  because  of  tactical  and  strategic  military
and  political  considerations,  Hanoi  will  probably  continue  to  infiltrate  elements
primarily  from  the  pool  of  regrouped  South  Vietnamese  rather  than  from  the
Vietnamese  Communist  forces  in  Laos  most  of  whom  are  believed  to  be  North
Vietnamese  or  Tonkinese.

It  is  entirely  possible  that  the  Viet  Cong  will  step  up  its  armed  operations
during  the  next  month  or  so  with  the  advent  of  the  dry  season,  in  the  belief
that  further  military  escalation  is  necessary  in  order  to  counter  the  growing
response  and  effectiveness  of  the  GVN  forces  and  US  support.  There  are  a  num-
ber of  indicators  that  support  this  expectation:  numberous  earlier  intelligence
reports  of  Viet  Cong  regroupment  and  consolidation  of  forces;  a  slight  increase
in  the  number  of  armed  incidents  during  roughly  the  last  week  of  October;  and
two  Viet  Cong  battalion-size  attacks  in  the  Mekong  River  delta  area  in  late
October  and  early  November  1962,  the  first  since  July  1962.  Further  military
escalation  during  the  next  several  months  might  involve  the  formation  of  regi-
mental-size units,  including  the  transformation  of  some  guerrilla  units  into  con-
ventional units  with  heavier  weapons;  selected  and  simultaneous  large  attacks
against  one  or  more  targets,  including  military  installations  and  towns;  estab-
lishment of  "liberated  areas"  in  South  Vietnam;  the  creation  of  reserve  bases
in  Communist-held  areas  in  southern  Laos;  and  increased  infiltration,  particularly
if  Communist  forces  in  southern  Laos  can  provide  adequate  protection  along  in-
filtration routes.  (It  does  not  appear  likely  that  inspection  by  the  International
Control  Commission  in  Laos  will  seriously  impede  Communist  infiltration.)
However,  Hanoi  will  probably  not  resort  to  overt  military  invasion.

The  Viet  Cong  and  Hanoi  probably  will  step  up  significantly  their  political
and  propaganda  activities.  Inside  South  Vietnam,  the  Viet  Cong  will  make  in-
creased efforts  to  penetrate  the  strategic  hamlets  and  army  and  security  units,
recoup  its  psychological  losses  with  the  Montagnards,  and  in  general  subvert
the  GVN's  effort  to  win  the  support  of  the  peasants.  In  urban  areas,  the  Viet
Cong  will  rely  on  terrorism  to  demoralize  the  citizenry  and  on  increased  propa-
ganda and  subversion  to  inspire  anti-Diem  demonstrations  and  coup  plots,
encourage  neutralist  sentiment,  and,  in  general,  gain  support  for  its  "united
front"  tactics  among  non-Communist  oppositionists  and  youth  and  labor  groups.

Outside  South  Vietnam,  Hanoi  will  probably  increase  its  diplomatic  and  propa-
ganda efforts  to  gain  support  particularly  among  neutral  nations  for  the


Documents  713


"National  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South  VietnanV  (NFLSV).  It  may  have
some  success  in  establishing  "unofficial"  relations  between  the  NFLSV  and
Laotian  and  Cambodian  leaders,  in  gaining  support  for  the  NFLSV  among
Vietnamese  minorities  in  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  Thailand,  and  in  persuading
prominent  Vietnamese  expatriates  in  France  to  support  a  change  of  government
in  South  Vietnam.  In  addition  to  advocating  the  reunification  of  Vietnam,
Hanoi  and  the  NFLSV  can  be  expected  to  continue  propaganda  support  for  the
neutralization  of  South  Vietnam.  However,  the  extent  to  which  neutralization
is  emphasized  will  depend  on  the  course  of  the  war  in  South  Vietnam  and  the
degree  to  which  the  concept  is  found  to  appeal  to  the  elements  in  and  outside
South  Vietnam,  as  well  as  on  developments  in  the  Bloc  itself.

The  pattern  of  events  relating  to  the  creation  and  development  of  the
NFLSV,  as  well  as  the  pattern  of  Communist  political  tactics  and  strategy  in
similar  situations  in  other  countries  in  the  past,  indicates  that  Hanoi  and  the
Viet  Cong  are  preparing  the  groundwork  for  transformation  of  the  NFLSV
into  a  shadow  or  "liberation  government"  in  South  Vietnam.  However,  it  is
extremely  difficult  to  predict  when,  whether,  or  under  what  conditions  this
will  occur.  Hanoi  might  find  it  politically  advantageous  to  create  a  shadow  gov-
ernment under  any  one  of  the  following  circumstances:  during  a  period  of  inter-
nal political  crisis  in  South  Vietnam  following  a  successful  or  near-successful
coup  attempt;  during  a  period  when  there  has  been  a  series  of  major  and  dra-
matic Viet  Cong  military  successes;  during  a  period  of  serious  military  or  diplo-
matic reverses  for  the  US  in  the  Far  East;  or  at  a  time  when  several  neutralist
countries  had  given  assurances  of  diplomatic  recognition  of  a  new  'government"
in  South  Vietnam.  Under  any  circumstances,  however,  the  decision  would  be
considerably  influenced  by  Moscow  and  Peiping  and  their  estimate  of  the  gen-
eral international  situation.

B. GVN  COUNTERINSURGENCY  EFFORT

The  elimination  and  even  the  significant  reduction  of  the  Communist  insur-
gency in  South  Vietnam  will  almost  certainly  require  several  years.  How-
ever, in  addition  to  continuing  US  assistance,  a  considerably  greater  effort  by
the  GVN  is  crucial.  An  effective  strategic  military-political  concept  for  imple-
menting the  GVN  counterinsurgency  plan  has  been  developed  and  is  now  being
acted  upon,  and  the  armed  and  security  forces  have  been  enlarged  and  im-
proved. GVN  success  will  in  large  measure  depend  on  the  manner  and  speed
with  which  it  continues  to  implement  this  concept.  Ultimately,  however,  the
effectiveness  of  its  implementation  will  depend  on  the  willingness  of  Diem  and
his  family  to  utilize  fully  the  basic  resources  available  to  the  GVN.  The  GVN
military  leaders  are  among  the  best  in  Southeast  Asia  and  the  rank  and  file  have
the  spirit  and  willingness  to  fight;  the  civilian  bureaucratic  leadership  is  strongly
anti-Communist,  even  though  its  effectiveness  continues  to  be  impeded  by  in-
adequate delegation  of  authority;  there  are  as  yet  no  serious  trends  toward  neu-
tralism or  toward  a  political  accommodation  with  Hanoi;  and  finally,  the  Viet-
namese peasants,  however  politically  apathetic  and  discontented  with  the  gov-
ernment, are  by  no  means  ready  to  surrender  themselves  to  the  Viet  Cong,
given  greater  effort  by  the  government  to  protect  them  from  Communist  intimi-
dation and  improve  their  economic  and  political  status.

During  the  next  year,  the  GVN  probably  will  not  be  able  to  halt  completely
the  deteriorating  security  trends,  let  alone  reverse  the  tide  against  the  Viet  Cong,
unless  Saigon  significantly  accelerates  and  improves  its  response  to  the  insur-


714 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

gency.  Among  other  things,  the  government  leadership  must  give  much  greater
emphasis  to  poHtical,  social,  and  economic  measures  in  support  of  its  military
operations,  make  a  substantially  greater  effort  to  integrate  the  strategic  hamlet
program  into  a  continuing  systematic  pacification  effort,  and  appreciably  im-
prove its  counterguerrilla  tactics  and  capabilities,  including  increased  reliance
on  small-unit  actions  and  restriction  of  the  tactical  use  of  airpower  and  artillery.
Failure  to  do  this  will  seriously  weaken  the  strategic  hamlet  program,  particu-
larly since  the  Viet  Cong  can  be  expected  to  step  up  its  efforts  against  the  pro-
gram during  the  next  year.  Such  failure  will  also  greatly  restrict  the  ability  of
the  GVN  to  weaken  Viet  Cong  capabilities,  to  consolidate  its  own  military
successes  into  permanent  political  gains,  and  to  evoke,  particularly  among  the
peasants,  the  needed  greater  sense  of  stake  in  the  government's  fortunes.  Indeed,
the  continuation  of  such  tactical  measures  as  extensive  use  of  airpower  and  crop
destruction,  however  carefully  controlled,  may  well  contribute  to  the  develop-
ment of  militant  opposition  among  the  peasants  and  positive  identification
with  the  Viet  Cong.

Progress  against  the  insurgents  will  probably  remain  difficult  to  evaluate
accurately.  There  are  many  indicators  on  the  basis  of  which  progress  can  be
judged;  the  more  meaningful  would  appear  to  be  the  peasants'  willingness  to
inform  on  the  Viet  Cong  and  to  defend  themselves  against  Viet  Cong  attacks,
and  Viet  Cong  weapons  losses,  shortages  of  food  and  medicine,  and  defections.
In  this  respect,  a  national  program  by  the  GVN  to  encourage  Viet  Cong  de-
ff^ctions,  with  the  promise  of  fair  treatment  of  the  defectors  is  long  overdue  and
could  be  extremely  effective  in  improving  GVN  intelligence  and  weakening  Viet
Cong  morale.  GVN  statistics  on  casualties,  while  helpful  as  an  indicator  of  the
magnitude  of  the  fighting,  should  continue  to  be  treated  with  extreme  caution
partly  because  they  undoubtedly  include  many  casualties  among  innocent
peasants  or  wavering  supporters  of  the  Viet  Cong.

C. THE  US  ROLE

The  course  of  US-GVN  relations  will  be  an  important  element  in  the  struggle
against  the  Viet  Cong  and  in  sustaining  South  Vietnamese  morale.  The  fact  that
the  US  is  South  Vietnam's  only  source  of  significant  support  and  assistance  is
the  controlling  factor  in  GVN  relations  and  attitudes  toward  the  US.  Despite
considerable  improvement  in  relations  between  the  US  and  the  GVN  during  the
past  year  or  so,  disagreements  and  frustrations  can  be  expected  to  continue  over
a  number  of  issues,  including  the  implementation  of  the  counterinsurgency
plan  and  GVN  relations  with  Laos  and  Cambodia.

Diem  will  almost  certainly  continue  to  press  for  increased  aid  and  remain
adamant  against  any  US  pressures  upon  him  to  delegate  appreciably  more  au-
thority to  his  cabinet  and  military  advisors  or  to  expand  the  political  base  of  his
government  to  any  significant  extent.  Moreover,  while  he  has  welcomed  the
increased  US  presence  in  South  Vietnam  and  generally  approved  of  the  activi-
ties of  US  advisers  in  the  countryside,  Diem  and  his  family  will  continue  to  main-
tain a  close  watch  over  those  activities  in  the  interests  of  protecting  their  au-
thority at  the  local  level.  Diem  and  particularly  Nhu  may  also  remain  extremely
reluctant  to  accept  possible  US  proposals  directed  toward  further  integration
of  the  strategic  hamlet  and  systematic  pacification  programs  or  directed  toward
substantially  altering  the  present  balance  between  emphasis  on  purely  military
measures  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong  and  emphasis  on  political,  social,  and  eco-
nomic measures.


Documents  715


Diem  probably  still  has  some  lingering  suspicion  of  the  extent  of  US  confidence
in  and  support  of  his  leadership.  In  the  event  of  another  coup  attempt,  Diem
would  expect  quick  and  strong  manifestations  of  US  support  and  would  regard
the  absence  of  such  manifestations  as  demonstrating  lack  of  US  confidence.

There  is  considerable  evidence  that  the  substantial  increase  in  the  US  presence
in  South  Vietnam  has  improved  morale  at  all  levels  of  the  GVN  administration.
Relations  between  individual  US  advisers  and  their  GVN  counterparts  especially
at  the  local  level  have  generally  been  good  and,  despite  Viet  Cong  propaganda
efforts,  have  not  resulted  in  any  noticeable  degree  of  association  of  the  US
presence  with  the  former  French  presence.  Among  the  probable  major  consider-
ations are  the  fact  that  US  personnel,  unlike  the  French  in  the  past,  are  acting
as  advisers  rather  than  as  directors  and  implementers  of  GVN  policy,  and  the
apparent  willingness  of  US  military  personnel  to  live  and  operate  closely  with
their  GVN  counterparts,  assisting  more  by  example  rather  than  by  persuasion.
There  is,  therefore,  cause  for  optimism  over  the  effectiveness  of  the  US  presence
in  South  Vietnam,  even  though  it  will  come  under  increasing  strain  as  the
counterinsurgency  effort  develops  and  as  Communist  propaganda  is  increasingly
focussed  on  it.

D. POLITIC  A  L  SITU  A  TION

The  stability  of  the  government  during  the  next  year  will  continue  to  depend
principally  on  Diem's  handling  of  the  internal  security  situation.  If  Diem  can
demonstrate  a  continuing  improvement  in  security  conditions,  he  should  be
able  to  alleviate  concern  and  boost  morale  within  his  bureauracy  and  military
establishment.  However,  if  the  fight  against  the  Viet  Cong  goes  badly,  if  the  Viet
Cong  launches  a  series  of  successful  and  dramatic  military  operations,  or  if
South  Vietnamese  army  casualties  increase  appreciably  over  a  protracted  period,
the  chances  of  a  coup  attempt  against  Diem  could  increase  substantially.  More-
over, the  possibility  of  a  coup  attempt  at  any  time  cannot  be  excluded.  Many
officials  and  oppositionists  feel  that,  despite  the  government's  military  victories
and  improved  military  capabilities  and  initiative,  the  GVN  is  not  winning  the
war  principally  because  of  Diem's  virtual  one-man  rule  and  his  failure  to  follow
through  with  the  political  and  economic  measures  necessary  to  gain  the  support
of  the  peasants.

It  is  more  difficult  now  than  at  any  time  since  the  crisis  in  South  Vietnam
began  in  late  1959  to  estimate  reliably  the  elements  that  would  be  most  likely
to  precipitate  a  coup  attempt,  the  prospects  for  the  success  of  a  coup  attempt,
or  the  effects  of  such  an  attempt  on  internal  stability  and  on  the  counterinsur-
gency effort  itself.  During  the  past  year  or  so,  the  Viet  Cong  presumably  has
improved  its  ability  to  initiate  a  coup  and  might  attempt  to  do  so.  However,  the
Viet  Cong  probably  would  not  be  able  to  carry  out  a  successful  coup,  and  the
odds  that  it  could  gain  control  of  a  successful  coup,  although  somewhat  better
than  last  year,  appear  to  be  less  than  even.

The  coup  most  likely  to  succeed  would  be  one  with  non-Communist  leader-
ship and  support,  principally  involving  South  Vietnamese  military  elements  and
civilian  officials  and  perhaps  some  oppositionists  outside  the  government.  The
abortive  coup  attempt  in  November  1960  and  the  palace  bombing  in  February
1962  have  undoubtedly  demonstrated  to  coup  plotters  the  necessity  for  better
preparation  and  broader  participation  by  the  military.  Any  future  non-Commu-
nist coup  group  probably  would  not  be  as  deficient  in  this  respect  and  its  leaders,
unlike  the  leaders  of  the  1960  coup  attempt,  can  be  expected  to  be  better  pre-


716 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II


pared  to  execute  their  plan  quickly.  Although  the  possibility  of  a  Kong  Le-
type  coup,  i.e.,  a  coup  led  by  a  junior  and  relatively  unknown  officer,  cannot  be
completely  discounted,  it  is  more  likely  that  the  coup  leadership  would  include
some  middle  and  top  echelon  military  officials.  While  their  role  is  by  no  means
certain,  a  major  polarization  of  the  GVN  military  leadership  into  coup  and  anti-
coup  groups  does  not  appear  likely.  Most  of  them  would  probably  elect  to
remain  uncommitted  at  the  outset  of  the  coup,  as  they  apparently  did  in  Novem-
ber 1960,  and  would  then  give  their  tacit  or  active  support  to  whatever  side  ap-
peared to  have  the  best  chance  of  winning.  Under  these  circumstances,  a  mili-
tary coup  appears  to  have  a  better  than  even  chance  of  succeeding.

Diem's  removal — whether  by  a  military  coup,  assassination,  or  death  from
accidental  or  natural  causes — would  probably  considerably  strengthen  the
power  of  the  military.  The  odds  appear  about  even  between  a  government  led
by  a  military  junta  or  by  Vice  President  Tho,  with  the  army,  in  the  latter  case,
playing  a  major  if  not  the  predominant  role  behind  the  scenes.  On  the  one  hand,
the  military  might  conclude  that  a  military-led  government  would  be  better
able  to  maintain  national  unity  and  internal  political  cohesion  and,  more  im-
portantly, to  conduct  a  determined  and  effective  campaign  against  the  Viet
Cong.  On  the  other  hand,  they  might  conclude  that  Tho,  who  apparently  has
been  on  good  terms  with  some  of  the  present  top  military  leaders,  would  not
disagree  with  their  views  on  the  manner  of  conducting  the  fight  against  the
Communists  and  that  his  constitutional  succession  would  legalize  the  change  in
^pN'ernment  and  possibly  avert  a  serious  power  struggle.  (Although  Diem's  broth-
ers, Nhu  and  Can,  would  probably  also  be  removed  by  a  coup,  if  Diem  left
the  scene  for  other  reasons  his  brothers  might  attempt  to  retain  real  political
power.)  In  any  event,  a  government  led  by  the  military,  by  Tho,  or  by  any
other  civilian  approved  by  the  military  would  probably  maintain  South  Vietnam's
pro-US  orientation.

If  there  is  a  serious  disruption  of  government  leadership  as  a  result  of  a
military  coup  or  as  a  result  of  Diem's  death,  any  momentum  the  government's
counterinsurgency  efforts  had  achieved  would  probably  be  halted  and  possibly
reversed,  at  least  for  a  time.  Moreover,  the  confusion  and  suspicion  attending
the  disruption  would  provide  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  an  opportunity  to
strengthen  their  position  in  the  countrvside  and  attack  some  installations  in
large  force,  but  they  would  probably  fail  if  they  attempted  to  seize  control  of  the
government.

Under  most  of  the  foreseeable  circumstances  involving  a  coup,  the  role  of  the
US  would  be  extremely  important.  Although  this  is  by  no  means  certain,  US
military  and  intelligence  officials  might  well  have  advance  notice  of  an  impend-
ing coup  and  might  be  able  to  restrain  the  coup  plotters  from  precipitous  action.
Even  if  unable  to  restrain  such  action,  however,  US  officials  might  have  greater
success  in  averting  widespread  fighting  and  a  serious  power  struggle  which  would
lead  to  excessive  bloodshed  and  weaken  the  front  against  the  Viet  Cong.  The
US  could  also  be  helpful  in  achieving  agreement  among  the  coup  leaders  as  to
who  should  head  the  government  and  in  restoring  the  momentum  of  the  gov-
ernment's counterinsuroencv  effort.


Documents  1\1


[Document  120]

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

A  Report  on  South  Vietnam

The  war  in  South  Vietnam  is  clearly  going  better  than  it  was  a  year  ago.
The  government  claims  to  have  built  more  than  4,000  Strategic  Hamlets,  and
although  many  of  these  are  nothing  more  than  a  bamboo  fence,  a  certain  pro-
portion have  enough  weapons  to  keep  out  at  least  small  Viet  Cong  patrols  and
the  rudiments  of  the  kind  of  social  and  political  program  needed  to  enlist  the
villagers'  support.

The  program  to  arm  and  train  the  Montagnards,  which  should  go  far  toward
choking  off  the  infiltration  routes,  has  also  made  progress.  There  are  29  U.S.
Special  Forces  teams  training  Montagnards  (as  well  as  certain  minority  groups
in  the  Delta),  with  eleven  more  teams  on  the  way.  By  mid-autumn  training
camps  had  been  set  up  in  all  the  provinces  bordering  Laos,  and  a  system  of
regular  patrolling  started  that  hopefully  will  one  day  cover  the  entire  network
of  trails  in  the  mountain  regions.  Under  this  program  over  35,000  Monta-
gnards have  been  trained,  armed,  and  assisted  in  setting  up  their  village  defenses,
the  eventual  goal  being  one  hundred  thousand.

In  both  the  mountain  regions  and  the  heavily  populated  lowlands,  the  areas
through  which  one  can  travel  without  escort  have  been  enlarged.  In  contested
areas,  the  government  is  beginning  to  probe  out,  gradually  repairing  the  roads
and  bridges  cut  by  the  Viet  Cong  as  they  go.  In  some  of  the  moderately  popu-
lated areas  fringing  the  Delta  and  the  coastal  plain,  as  for  example  Binh  Duong
province,  isolated  villages  have  been  bodily  moved  to  positions  along  the  roads
where  they  can  be  more  easily  defended.

As  of  December  1,  the  Vietnamese  government  controlled  951  villages  con-
taining about  51%  of  the  rural  population^ — a  gain  of  92  villages  and  500,000
people  in  six  months.  The  Viet  Cong  control  445  villages  with  8%  of  the  rural
population — a  loss  of  9  villages  and  231,000  people  in  six  months.

The  impact  of  previously  authorized  U.S.  aid  programs  is  also  beginning  to
be  felt.  On  the  military  side,  U.S.  advisors,  helicopters,  air  support,  and  arms
have  given  the  Vietnamese  military  new  confidence  which  they  are  showing  by
increased  aggressiveness.  For  the  first  time  since  the  war  began  in  1959,  for
example,  the  government  forces  began  in  September  to  capture  more  weapons
than  they  lost.  From  January  to  August,  government  forces  captured  2,728
weapons  but  lost  3,661.  But  in  September  and  October,  they  captured  908
weapons  and  lost  only  765.

On  the  Strategic  Hamlet  and  civilian  programs,  U.S.  aid  is  just  coming  in.
Strategic  Hamlet  "kits"  are  now  arriving,  a  U.S.  military  advisor  has  been
stationed  with  each  province  chief,  and  twenty  of  the  forty-one  provinces  will
soon  have  a  U.S.  Rural  Development  advisor  as  well.  Finally,  there  is  consid-
erably more  optimism  among  Vietnamese  otlicials  than  there  was  a  year  ago,
although  it  is  probably  based  more  on  the  visible  flow  of  U.S.  aid  than  on  an
objective  analysis  of  actual  progress.

The  Viet  Cong,  in  sum,  are  being  hurt — they  have  somewhat  less  freedom  of
movement  than  they  had  a  year  ago,  they  apparently  suffer  acutely  from  lack
of  medicines,  and  in  some  very  isolated  areas  they  seem  to  be  having  trouble
getting  food.


718 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


Qualifications

Even  so,  the  negative  side  of  the  ledger  is  still  awesome.  The  Viet  Cong  con-
tinue to  be  aggressive  and  are  extremely  effective.  In  the  last  few  weeks,  for
example,  they  fought  stubbornly  and  with  telling  results  at  Ap  Bac,  near  My  Tho.
They  completely  escaped  an  elaborate  trap  in  Tay  Ninh  province.  They  fought
their  way  inside  the  perimeter  of  a  U.S.  Special  Forces  training  camp  at  Plei
Mrong,  killing  39  of  the  trainee  defenders  and  capturing  114  weapons.  And
they  completely  overran  a  strategic  hamlet  in  Phu  Yen  province  that  was  de-
fended by  a  civil  guard  company  in  addition  to  the  village  militia,  killing  24  of
the  defenders  and  capturing  35  weapons.

Probably  even  more  significant  are  the  figures  on  Viet  Cong  strength.  Intel-
ligence estimates  credit  the  Viet  Cong  with  actually  increasing  their  regular
forces  from  18,000  to  23,000  over  this  past  year  in  spite  of  having  suffered  what
the  government  claims  were  losses  of  20,000  killed  in  action  and  4,000  wounded.
Part  of  this  increase  may  result  from  nothing  more  than  better  intelligence,
but  even  so  it  is  ominous  that  in  the  face  of  greatly  increased  government  pres-
sure and  U.S.  support  the  Viet  Cong  can  still  field  23,000  regular  forces  and
100,000  militia,  supported  by  unknown  thousands  of  sympathizers.

What  these  figures  suggest  is  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  still  able  to  obtain  an
adequate  supply  of  recruits  and  the  large  quantities  of  food  and  other  supplies
*hey  need  from  the  villagers  of  South  Vietnam  itself.  Infiltration  by  sea  has  been
effectively  blocked  since  early  in  1962.  As  for  infiltration  by  land,  captured  docu-
ments, POW  interrogation,  evidence  gathered  by  patrolling,  and  other  intelli-
gence indicates  that  3,000  to  4,000  Viet  Cong  at  the  most  have  come  over  the
so-called  Ho  Chi  Minh  trails  since  January,  1962.  As  to  supplies,  there  seems  to
be  no  doubt  that  the  trails  have  so  far  been  used  only  for  specialized  equipment,
such  as  radios;  for  medicines;  and  perhaps  for  a  few  automatic  weapons,  al-
though no  weapons  have  yet  been  captured  which  could  be  proved  to  have
been  brought  in  after  1954.  Thus  the  conclusion  seems  inescapable  that  the
Viet  Cong  could  continue  the  war  effort  at  the  present  level,  or  perhaps  in-
crease it,  even  if  the  infiltration  routes  were  completely  closed.

Villagers'  A  ttitudes

The  question  that  this  conclusion  raises — and  the  basic  question  of  the  whole
war — is  again  the  attitude  of  the  villagers.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
assess  how  the  villagers  really  feel  and  the  only  straws  in  the  wind  point
in  different  directions.  The  village  defenders  in  many  of  the  strategic  hamlets
that  have  been  attacked  have  resisted  bravely.  But  in  an  unknown,  but  probably
large  number  of  strategic  hamlets,  the  villagers  have  merely  let  the  Viet  Cong
in  or  supplied  what  they  wanted  without  reporting  the  incident  to  the  author-
ities. There  is  apparently  some  resentment  against  the  Viet  Cong  about  the
"taxes"  they  collect  and  suspicion  based  on  the  stories  the  villagers  hear  about
what  is  going  on  in  the  North.  But  there  may  be  just  as  much  resentment  and
suspicion  directed  towards  the  government.  No  one  really  knows,  for  exam-
ple, how  many  of  the  20,000  "Viet  Cong"  killed  last  year  were  only  innocent,
or  at  least  persuadable  villagers,  whether  the  Strategic  Hamlet  program  is  pro-
viding enough  government  services  to  counteract  the  sacrifices  it  requires,  or
how  the  mute  mass  of  the  villagers  react  to  the  charges  against  Diem  of  dicta-
torship and  nepotism.  At  the  very  least,  the  figures  on  Viet  Cong  strength  imply


Documents  719


a  continuing  flow  of  recruits  and  supplies  from  these  same  villages  and  indicate
that  a  substantial  proportion  of  the  population  is  still  cooperating  with  the
enemy,  although  it  is  impossible  to  tell  how  much  of  this  cooperation  stems  from
fear  and  how  much  from  conviction.  Thus  on  the  vital  question  of  villagers'  atti-
tudes, the  net  impression  is  one  of  some  encouragement  at  the  progress  in  build-
ing strategic  hamlets  and  the  number  that  resist  when  attacked,  but  encourage-
ment overlaid  by  a  shadow  of  uneasiness.

Conclusion

Our  overall  judgment,  in  sum,  is  that  we  are  probably  winning,  but  certainly
more  slowly  than  we  had  hoped.  At  the  rate  it  is  now  going  the  war  will  last  longer
than  we  would  like,  cost  more  in  terms  of  both  lives  and  money  than  we  an-
ticipated, and  prolong  the  period  in  which  a  sudden  and  dramatic  event  could
upset  the  gains  already  made.

The  question  is  where  improvements  can  be  made — whether  in  our  basic
approach  to  fighting  a  guerrilla  war,  or  in  the  implementation  of  that  approach.

The  Strategic  Concept

We  feel  that  the  basis  strategic  concept  developed  last  year  is  still  valid.  As
mentioned  above,  the  Viet  Cong  have  gotten  trained  cadre  and  specialized
equipment  from  the  North,  but  the  vast  bulk  of  both  recruits  and  supplies  come
from  inside  South  Vietnam  itself.  Thus  the  strategic  objectives  of  the  war  in
South  Vietnam,  as  in  most  guerrilla  wars,  are  basically  political — not  simply  to
kill  Viet  Cong,  but  to  win  the  people.  Although  the  strategic  concept  has
never  been  spelled  out  in  any  one  document,  the  consensus  seems  to  be  that  it
consists  of  the  following  objectives:  (1)  to  create  the  incentive  for  resistance  in
the  basic  population  by  providing  for  a  flow  upward  of  information  on  villagers'
needs  and  a  flow  downward  of  government  services,  and  by  knitting  them  into
the  fabric  of  community  decision-making;  (2)  to  provide  the  basic  population
with  the  means  and  training  for  resistance;  and  (3)  to  cut  the  guerrillas'  access
to  the  villagers,  their  true  line  of  communications,  by  essentially  police-type
measures  for  controlling  the  movement  of  goods  and  people.  In  this  context,
the  military  objectives  are  also  threefold:  (1)  to  protect  installations  vital  to
the  economy  and  government;  (2)  to  provide  rapid  reinforcement  for  vil-
lages under  heavy  attacks;  and  (3)  to  keep  the  regular  guerrilla  units  oflf  bal-
ance and  prevent  them  from  concentrating  by  aggressive  but  highly  discrim-
inating and  selective  ofi'ensive  military  operations.

This  combination  of  civilian  and  military  measures  is  designed  to  reduce
the  guerrillas  to  their  die-hard  nucleus  and  isolate  them  in  areas  remote  from
the  basic  population.  Only  when  this  is  done  does  the  task  finally  become  one  of
killing  Viet  Cong,  of  simple  elimination.

As  we  say,  this  concept  seems  sound.  For,  even  though  it  is  difficult  to  assess
the  attitudes  of  the  villager,  two  assumptions  seem  reasonable.  The  first  is  that
the  villagers  will  be  prudently  cooperative  with  the  Viet  Cong  if  they  are  not
given  physical  security,  both  in  the  military  sense  of  security  from  attacks  on
their  village  and  in  the  police  sense  of  security  from  individual  acts  of  terror
and  retaliation.  The  second  is  that  if  the  villagers  are  in  fact  politically  apathetic,
as  they  seem  to  be,  they  are  likely  to  remain  so  or  even  become  pro-Communist
if  the  government  does  not  show  concern  for  their  welfare  in  the  way  it  con-
ducts the  war  and  in  the  effort  it  makes  to  provide  at  least  simple  government


720 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

services.  It  may  be  that  these  measures  will  not  be  enough  to  create  popular
support  for  the  government  and  the  incentive  to  resist,  but  it  seems  obvious
that  support  could  neither  be  created  nor  long  maintained  without  them.

Implementing  the  Concept

Thus  it  is  in  the  implementation  of  the  strategic  concept  that  there  seems  to
be  the  greatest  room  for  improvement.  Success  requires,  first,  full  understanding
of  the  strategy  at  all  levels  of  the  government  and  armed  forces,  and,  second,
the  skills  and  organization  for  effective  coordination  of  military  activities  with
civilian  activities.  Some  parts  of  the  Vietnamese  government  do  understand  the
strategy,  but  in  other  parts  the  understanding  is  imperfect  at  best.  The  same  is
true  of  the  necessary  skills  and  organization.  Specific  areas  in  particular  need  of
improvement  are  listed  in  the  paragraphs  below,  which  discuss  both  programs
and  continuing  issues  and  conclude  with  a  proposal  as  to  how  the  United  States
might  increase  its  leverage  on  the  Vietnamese  government  so  as  to  bring  the
improvements  about.

Lack  of  an  Overall  Plan

The  most  serious  lack  in  South  Vietnam  is  that  of  an  overall  plan,  keyed
to  the  strategic  concept  described  above,  through  which  priorities  can  be  set
and  the  coordination  of  military  and  civilian  activities  accomplished.  In  spite  of
U.S.  urgings  there  is  still  no  single  country-wide  plan  worthy  of  the  name  but
only  a  variety  of  regional  and  provincial  plans,  some  good  and  some  not  so
good.  There  are,  for  example,  a  number  of  special  plans — the  Delta  Plan,
Operation  Sunrise,  Operation  Sea  Swallow,  Waves  of  Love — ;  several  plans
developed  by  the  commanders  of  the  Corps  and  Divisional  areas;  and  an  un-
known number  of  plans  developed  by  each  of  the  forty-one  province  chiefs.
Regional  and  provincial  plans  are,  of  course,  necessary,  but  they  should  be  ele-
ments of  a  country-wide  plan  rather  than  a  substitute  for  it.  As  it  is,  the  im-
pression is  strong  that  many  of  these  plans  are  both  inconsistent  and  competitive.

Strategic  Hamlets

One  result  of  the  lack  of  an  overall  plan  is  the  proliferation  of  strategic  ham-
lets that  are  inadequately  equipped  and  defended,  or  that  are  built  prematurely
in  exposed  areas.

Gaps:  The  Police  Program

The  second  result  is  that  essential  aspects  of  the  strategy  are  neglected.  The
police  program  is  an  example.  An  effective  police  system  is  vital  to  guard  against
Communists  remaining  inside  strategic  hamlets,  and  to  man  the  check  points
and  patrols  that  are  essential  in  controlling  the  movements  of  goods  and  people.
The  present  police  system  is  clearly  inadequate,  and  although  the  Public  Safety
Division  of  U.S.  AID  has  put  forward  a  proposal  for  expansion,  no  action  has
yet  been  taken.

Multiple  Armies

A  third  result  is  what  appears  to  be  an  extremely  uneconomic  use  of  man-
power. There  is  in  South  Vietnam  a  confusing  multiplicity  of  separate  armies.


Documents  721


In  addition  to  the  regular  forces  (the  ARVN),  there  are  under  arms  the  Civil
Guard,  the  Self  Defense  Corps,  the  Civilian  Irregular  Defense  Groups  (CIDG),
the  Hamlet  Militia,  the  Montagnard  Commandoes,  the  Force  Populairc,  the
Republican  Youth,  the  Catholic  Youth,  several  independent  groups  under
parish  priests,  such  as  Father  Hoa's  Sea  Swallows,  and  even  one  small  army
trained,  armed,  and  commanded  by  a  private  businessman  to  protect  his  prop-
erties in  Cap  St.  Jaques.  All  these  forces  add  up  to  almost  half  a  million  men
under  arms,  a  number  which  if  so  organized  would  come  to  the  astounding
total  of  5 1  divisions.

This  multiplicity  of  separate  armies  results  not  only  in  an  uneconomic  use  of
manpower,  but  also  difficulties  in  coordination  and  confusion  as  to  function.
One  also  suspects  that  it  is  a  misallocation  of  manpower  as  well,  with  too  much
emphasis  on  military  activities  and  not  enough  on  civilian,  such  as  government
services  to  the  villages  and  police  work.  So  many  armed  men  with  different
loyalties  will  also  create  problems  in  the  transition  to  a  peace-time  economy  if
victory  is  in  fact  won,  as  well  as  the  obvious  danger  that  one  or  another  chief
will  use  the  forces  under  his  command  for  political  purposes.  South  Vietnam
does  not  need  any  more  armed  men,  but  it  does  need  to  reorganize  what  it  has.

Coordination  of  Military  and  Civilian  Activities

Still  another  result  of  the  lack  of  an  overall  plan  are  the  difficulties  in  coor-
dinating military  and  civilian  activities.  One  example  is  the  proportion  of  "clear
and  hold"  as  opposed  to  "hit  and  withdraw"  operations.  There  are  no  statistics
available,  but  a  number  of  American  military  ad\'isors  feel  that  the  proportion
of  "clear  and  hold"  operations,  in  which  troops  clear  an  area  and  then  remain
to  protect  the  civic  action  teams  and  villagers  while  they  build  strategic  ham-
lets, is  too  low  in  proportion  to  the  "hit  and  withdraw"  operations  designed  to
destroy  regular  Viet  Cong  units.  The  latter  type  of  operation  is  essential  to  keep
the  Viet  Cong  off  balance  and  to  prevent  their  concentrating  for  large-scale
attacks,  but  it  should  be  subordinate  to  the  systematic  expansion  of  secure  areas.

Amnesty  Program

A  final  result  of  the  lack  of  an  overall  plan,  or  perhaps  of  imperfect  under-
standing of  an  effective  counter-guerrilla  strategy,  is  the  Vietnamese  reluctance
to  embark  on  a  meaningful  amnesty  program.  After  much  U.S.  urging,  the
Vietnamese  have  finally  developed  a  plan,  but  it  far  from  satisfactory.  The
basic  trouble  is  revealed  by  the  Vietnamese  insistence  that  what  they  want  is
not  an  "amnesty"  policy  but  a  "surrender"  policy.

Civil  Programs

The  inadequacies  in  the  police  program,  the  tendency  to  build  strategic  ham-
lets in  exposed  places  with  inadequate  arms  and  equipment,  and  the  reluctance
to  develop  a  meaningful  amnesty  program  have  already  been  discussed.  Other
inadequacies  in  civilian  programs  are  discussed  below.

One  continuing  problem  is  the  failure  of  the  Vietnamese  government  to
organize  its  economy  on  an  emergency  basis.  A  resistance  to  deficit  spending
and  stricter  controls  has  permitted  too  large  a  part  of  the  country's  internal  and
external  resources  to  go  to  non-essential  purposes,  especially  in  the  Saigon  area.

There  should  be  more  planning  for  what  the  Vietnamese  economy  will  be


722 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

like  after  the  shooting  has  ended.  There  is  almost  none  of  this  kind  of  planning
now,  and  some  of  the  things  being  done  today  might  make  sensible  planning
in  the  future  very  difficult.  An  obvious  example  is  the  rise  of  consumption
levels,  especially  in  nonessential  imports  which  Vietnam  could  not  buy  without
U.S.  aid.  At  some  point,  and  probably  soon,  the  U.S.  should  undertake  a  long-
range  economic  study  of  the  country's  future  development.

Military  Operations  with  Political  Aspects

The  opinion  of  some  American  military  advisors  that  the  proportion  of  "clear
and  hold"  offensive  operations  is  too  low  in  relation  to  "hit  and  withdraw"
operations  designed  to  keep  the  Viet  Cong  off  balance  has  already  been  men-
tioned. Another  aspect  of  military  operations  that  may  have  political  conse-
quences is  the  tactics  used  in  the  offensive  operations  needed  to  keep  the  Viet
Cong  off  balance.  Some  American  military  advisors  feel  that  the  Vietnamese
have  a  bias  toward  elaborate,  set-piece  operations.  These  large-scale  operations
provide  insurance  against  defeat,  but  they  are  expensive,  cumbersome,  and
difficult  to  keep  secret.  From  the  political  point  of  view  they  have  the  addi-
tional disadvantages  for  the  Vietnamese  of  maximizing  the  chances  of  killing
civiUans  and  from  the  American  point  of  view  of  requiring  a  very  heavy  use  of
heUcopters.

An  alternative,  and  apparently  effective  way  of  keeping  the  regular  Viet
Cong  off  balance  is  long-range  patrolling  by  small  units,  such  as  Ranger  com-
panies. In  this  tactic,  the  patrols,  resupplied  by  air,  stay  out  in  the  field  for
extended  periods  of  time,  never  sleeping  two  nights  in  the  same  place,  ambush-
ing, and  in  general  using  guerrilla  tactics  to  fight  the  guerrilla.  The  remaining
forces  are  kept  in  reserve  for  rapid  reinforcement  and  sealing  off  an  area  when
the  patrol  encounters  resistance.  Although  American  military  advisors  in
South  Vietnam  have  worked  hard  to  overcome  Vietnamese  reluctance  to  operate
for  extended  periods  in  the  field  and  at  night,  which  would  permit  greater  use
of  this  tactic,  they  have  had  only  partial  success.  (Paradoxically,  President  Diem
spent  a  substantial  part  of  his  four  and  a  half  hour  lecture  to  us  praising  a  prov-
ince chief  who  has  used  the  long-range  patrol  tactic  to  very  good  effect  re-
cently in  Zone  D.)

Use  of  Air  Power

On  use  of  air  power,  and  the  danger  of  adverse  political  effects,  our  impres-
sion is  that  the  controls  over  air  strikes  and  the  procedures  for  checking  intelli-
gence against  all  possible  sources  are  excellent.  In  spite  of  this,  however,  it  is
difficult  to  be  sure  that  air  power  is  being  used  in  a  way  that  minimizes  the
adverse  political  effects.  U.S.  Air  Force  advisors  tell  us  that  the  demand  for  air
strikes  from  the  South  Vietnamese  has  gone  up  enormously.  There  are  now
1,000  strikes  per  month,  and  there  would  be  considerably  more  if  the  air
power  were  available.  During  November,  thirty-two  per  cent  of  these  1,000
strikes  were  so-called  "interdiction" — that  is,  attacks  on  installations  located
in  air  photos  and  identified  as  Viet  Cong  by  intelligence.  Fifty-three  per  cent  of
the  air  strikes  during  November  were  in  direct  support — that  is,  bombing  and
strafing  in  advance  of  an  attack  on  a  location  intelligence  indicated  as  being
occupied  by  Viet  Cong  or  in  response  to  a  request  by  a  ground  unit  in  contact
with  the  enemy.  Fifteen  percent  were  other  kinds  of  mission,  such  as  recon-


Documents  723


naissance.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Viet  Cong  fear  air  attacks  and  that  some
interdiction  is  necessary  and  useful.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible  to  assess
how  much  resentment  among  persuadable  villagers  is  engendered  by  the  in-
evitable accidents.  In  general,  the  final  judgment  probably  lies  in  the  answer
to  the  questions  raised  above  about  the  relative  emphasis  on  "clear  and  hold"
and  long-range  patrolling  versus  "hit  and  withdraw"  of  the  more  elaborate
type.  If  the  proportion  is  correct  between  extending  control  and  the  necessary
offensive  operations  to  keep  the  Viet  Cong  off  balance,  then  the  killing  of
civilians  is  probably  at  an  unavoidable  minimum.  If  the  proportion  of  "hit  and
withdraw"  is  too  high  in  relation  to  "clear  and  hold,"  on  the  other  hand,  then
air  power,  too,  is  probably  being  overused  in  ways  that  have  adverse  political
consequences.

Reinforcement  of  Strategic  Hamlets

One  final  point  on  the  political  aspects  of  military  operations  concerns
quicker  reinforcement  for  strategic  hamlets  under  attack.  Some  American
military  advisors  feel  that  more  attention  should  be  paid  to  ways  of  providing
quicker  reinforcement  for  the  hamlets,  including  air  support,  although  in  the
case  of  air  support  there  are  formidable  problems  of  communications  and  in
providing  airfields  close  enough  to  threatened  villages.

Foreign  Policy

In  its  complete  concentration  on  the  civil  war  and  on  the  means  and  ideology
for  winning  it,  the  government  of  South  Vietnam  has  a  naivete  in  foreign  affairs
which  is  dangerous  for  both  Vietnam  and  for  the  U.S.  There  has  been  massive
resistance  to  U.S.  suggestions  on  policies  for  cooperation  in  other  problems  in
the  area,  i.e.  Laos  and  Cambodia.  To  some  extent  this  is  unavoidable  in  view
of  Diem's  rather  simple  view  of  the  Communist  threat.  But  U.S.  interests  are
so  heavily  involved  in  the  country  that  our  voice  should  carry  more  weight.

Vietnamese  Domestic  Politics

The  Diem  government  is  frequently  criticized  for  being  a  dictatorship.  This
is  true,  but  we  doubt  that  the  lack  of  parliamentary  democracy  bothers  the
villagers  of  Vietnam  or  much  affects  their  attitudes  toward  the  war.  The  real
question  is  whether  the  concentration  of  power  in  the  hands  of  Diem  and  his
family,  especially  Brother  Nhu  and  his  wife,  and  Diem's  reluctance  to  delegate
is  alienating  the  middle  and  higher  level  officials  on  whom  the  government  must
depend  to  carry  out  its  policies.  Our  judgment  is  that  the  United  States  does  not
really  have  as  much  information  on  this  subject  as  it  should.  All  that  can  be
said  at  the  moment  is  that  it  is  the  feeling  of  Americans  in  contact  with  these
officials  that  they  are  encouraged  by  U.S.  aid  and  apparently  getting  on  with
the  job.  Both  the  American  and  British  missions,  for  example,  feel  that  Brother
Nhu's  energetic  support  for  the  Strategic  Hamlet  program  has  given  it  an  im-
portant push.  The  only  evidence  to  contradict  these  judgments  that  we  found
was  in  a  conversation  with  Buu,  the  head  of  the  Vietnamese  labor  movement
and,  paradoxically,  one  of  the  co-founders  with  Diem  and  Nhu  of  Diem's  politi-
cal party.


724 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


Diem's  Press  Relations

The  American  press  in  South  Vietnam  now  has  good  relations  with  the  Em-
bassy and  MACV  and  generally  are  grateful  for  the  help  that  they  have  re-
ceived. But  their  attitude  toward  Diem  and  the  government  of  South  Vietnam
is  the  complete  opposite,  and  with  much  justice.  Diem  wants  only  adulation
and  is  completely  insensitive  to  the  desires  of  the  foreign  press  for  factual  in-
formation. He  is  equally  insensitive  to  his  own  image,  the  political  consequences
of  the  activities  of  Madame  Nhu  and  the  other  members  of  his  family,  and  his
own  tendencies  of  arbitrariness,  failure  to  delegate,  and  general  pettiness.  After
much  effort.  Ambassador  Nolting  persuaded  Diem  to  let  the  Defense  Ministry
give  regular  military  briefings.  True  to  form,  however,  the  content  of  the  brief-
ings is  deplorable.  One  of  these  briefings,  for  example,  the  transcript  of  which
we  examined,  contained  little  more  than  a  saccharine  eulogy  of  President
Diem.

It  would  be  nice  if  we  could  say  that  Diem's  image  in  the  foreign  press  was
only  his  affair,  but  it  seriously  affects  the  U.S.  and  its  ability  to  help  South  Viet-
nam. The  American  press  representatives  are  bitter  and  will  seize  on  anything
that  goes  wrong  and  blow  it  up  as  much  as  possible.  The  My  Tho  operation,
for  example,  contained  some  mistakes,  but  it  was  not  nearly  the  botched  up
disaster  that  the  press  made  it  appear  to  be.

Action  for  the  United  States

By  way  of  summary,  then,  we  feel  that  the  United  States  should  push  the
Diem  government  harder  on  the  need  for  an  overall  plan,  on  a  reduction  in
the  number  of  different  military  organizations,  on  foreign  policy  questions  in
which  the  United  States  has  an  interest,  on  an  effective  police  program,  for  a
greater  emphasis  on  military  operations  in  extending  and  securing  government
control  as  opposed  to  large-scale  offensives  and  air  interdiction,  on  a  meaning-
ful amnesty  program,  on  planning  for  the  post-war  economy,  and  on  a  realistic
effort  to  get  a  more  favorable  press.

On  many  of  these  issues,  of  course,  the  United  States  has  already  been  press-
ing. Thus  in  one  sense  the  question  is  how  to  increase  our  leverage  in  the  face
of  Diem's  biases  and  general  resistance  to  advice.

Actually,  the  United  States  is  in  a  much  better  position  to  see  that  its  advice
is  taken  than  it  was  a  year  ago.  At  that  time  Diem  and  of!icials  at  the  national
level  were  practically  the  only  point  of  contact  the  U.S.  had  with  either  civil  or
military  programs.  Today,  however,  the  U.S.  has  military  advisors  not  only  at
the  lower  levels  of  the  Army  but  with  each  province  chief  and  steps  are  being
taken  to  put  U.S.  AID  advisors  in  at  least  20  of  the  41  provinces.  It  therefore
is  becoming  possible  to  accomplish  much  of  what  we  want  at  the  local  level
without  going  through  the  vastly  inefficient  national  bureaucracy.  An  example
is  the  work  of  the  special  forces  teams.  They  work  at  the  village  level,  and  at  a
number  of  places  have  done  wonders  not  only  in  training  and  supervising  the
erection  of  village  defenses  but  also  in  medical  aid,  school  construction,  and
even  in  agriculture  and  marketing.

In  general,  it  is  our  judgment  that  an  effort  should  be  made  to  increase  this
influence  at  the  local  level  even  more  bv  putting  additional  U.S.  AID  people
with  province  chiefs  and,  where  it  is  indicated,  even  at  selected  places  further
down  in  the  civilian  hierarchy.


Documents  725


In  addition,  having  gotten  past  the  first  year  of  increased  U.S.  support  and
demonstrated  our  sincerity,  the  time  has  probably  come  when  we  can  press
our  views  on  Diem  more  vigorously  and  occasionally  even  publicly.

One  final  recommendation  for  U.S.  action  concerns  our  dealings  with  the
press  here  in  Washington.  In  our  judgment  a  systematic  campaign  to  get  more
of  the  facts  into  the  press  and  T.V.  should  be  mounted.  Although  our  report,
for  example,  is  not  rosily  optimistic,  it  certainly  contains  the  factual  basis  (e.g.,
the  first  few  paragraphs)  for  a  much  more  hopeful  view  than  the  pessimistic
(and  factually  inaccurate)  picture  conveyed  in  the  press.

Michael  V.  Forrestal


[Document  1211

NIE.  53-63

17  April  63

PROSPECTS  IN
SOUTH  VIETNAM

THE  PROBLEM

To  assess  the  situation  and  prospects  in  South  Vietnam,  with  special  em-
phasis upon  the  military  and  political  factors  most  likely  to  affect  the  counter-
insurgency  effort.

CONCLUSIONS

A.  We  believe  that  Communist  progress  has  been  blunted  and  that  the  situa-
tion is  improving.  Strengthened  South  Vietnamese  capabilities  and  effectiveness,
and  particularly  US  involvement,  are  causing  the  Viet  Cong  increased  difficulty,
although  there  are  as  yet  no  persuasive  indications  that  the  Communists  have
been  grievously  hurt.  {Paras.  27-28)

B.  We  believe  the  Communists  will  continue  to  wage  a  war  of  attrition,  hop-
ing for  some  break  in  the  situation  which  will  lead  to  victory.  They  evidently
hope  that  a  combination  of  military  pressure  and  political  deterioration  will  in
time  create  favorable  circumstances  either  for  delivering  a  coup  de  grace  or  for
a  political  settlement  which  will  enable  them  to  continue  the  struggle  on  more
favorable  terms.  We  believe  it  unlikely,  especially  in  view  of  the  open  US
commitment,  that  the  North  Vietnamese  regime  will  either  resort  to  overt  mili-
tary attack  or  introduce  acknowledged  North  Vietnamese  military  units  into
the  south  in  an  effort  to  win  a  quick  victory.  (Paras.  29-31 )

C.  Assuming  no  great  increase  in  external  support  to  the  Viet  Cong,  changes
and  improvements  which  have  occurred  during  the  past  year  now  indicate  that
the  Viet  Cong  can  be  contained  militarily  and  that  further  progress  can  be  made
in  expanding  the  area  of  government  control  and  in  creating  greater  security
in  the  countryside.  However,  we  do  not  believe  that  it  is  possible  at  this  time  to
project  the  future  course  of  the  war  with  any  confidence.  Decisive  campaigns
have  yet  to  be  fought  and  no  quick  and  easy  end  to  the  war  is  in  sight.  Despite
South  Vietnamese  progress,  the  situation  remains  fragile.  (Para.  32)

D.  Developments  during  the  last  year  or  two  also  show  some  promise  of  re-
solving the  political  weaknesses,  particularly  that  of  insecurity  in  the  country-


726 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

side,  upon  which  the  insurgency  has  fed.  However,  the  government's  capacity
to  embark  upon  the  broader  measures  required  to  translate  miUtary  success  into
lasting  political  stability  is  questionable.  (Paras.  33-35)


[Document  122]

THE  WHITE  HOUSE
Washington
June  25,  1963

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  249

TO:  The  Secretary  of  State

The  Secretary  of  Defense

The  Director,  Central  Intelligence  Agency

The  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

SUBJECT: Laos  Planning

1.  At  a  meeting  on  June  19,  1963  the  President  considered  the  Memorandum
addressed  to  him  from  the  Department  of  State  dated  June  17,  1963  (''Memo-
randum").

2.  The  President  approved  Phase  1  of  the  plan  outlined  in  the  Memorandum
and  authorized  that  the  steps  outlined  therein  might  be  taken  at  such  time  and
in  such  manner  as  the  appropriate  officials  concerned  might  direct.

3.  The  President  directed  the  Department  of  State  to  consult  with  the  French
and  British  before  initiating  any  action  under  the  Memorandum.  He  wished  to
obtain  their  suggestions  for  action  in  Laos  in  light  of  the  deteriorating  situation
there.

4.  The  President  approved  Phase  2  of  the  Memorandum  for  planning  purposes,
but  directed  that  none  of  the  steps  outlined  in  Phase  2  be  put  into  final  execution
until  after  further  consultation  with  him.

5.  The  President  directed  that  the  steps  described  in  Phase  3  of  the  Memoran-
dum be  further  refined  and  reviewed;  and  he  asked  that  the  question  be  explored
whether  additional  U.S.  actions  should  be  taken  in  Laos  before  any  action  be
directed  against  North  Vietnam.

Carl  Kaysen

Copies  furnished : Governor  Harriman

General  McKee
Mr.  Colby
General  Clay


Documents  727


[Document  123]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
Memorandum  of  Conversation
FOR  THE  RECORD

DATE:  July  4,  1963
TIME:  11:00  to  11:50  a.m.
PLACE:  The  White  House

SUBJECT:  Situation  in  South  Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS :  The  President

Mr.  Ball
Mr.  Harriman
Mr.  McGeorge  Bundy
Mr.  Hilsman
Mr.  Forrestal

The  President  was  briefed  on  developments  in  Indonesia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam.
The  portion  on  Viet-Nam  follows:

A  joint  agreement  was  signed  on  June  16  in  which  the  Government  met  the
Buddhists'  five  demands.  The  Buddhists  and  the  Government  then  worked  to-
gether on  the  funeral  arrangements  for  the  bonze  who  burned  himself  to  death
so  that  incidents  could  be  avoided.  The  funeral  came  off  without  trouble.

Since  then  there  have  been  rumors  circulating  in  Saigon  that  the  Government
does  not  intend  to  live  up  to  the  agreement.  These  rumors  were  given  credence
by  an  article  appearing  in  the  English  language  "Times"  of  Viet-Nam,  which  is
dominated  by  the  Nhus.  The  article  contained  a  veiled  attack  on  the  US  and  on
the  Buddhists.  There  was  a  suggestion  that  the  Monk  who  burned  himself  to
death  was  drugged  and  a  provocative  challenge  to  the  Buddhists  that,  if  no  fur-
ther demonstrations  occurred  on  July  2,  this  would  amount  to  an  admission  by
the  Buddhists  that  they  were  satisfied  with  the  Government's  action.  (The  Presi-
dent injected  questions  on  the  possibility  of  drugging,  to  which  Mr.  Hilsman  re-
plied that  religious  fervor  was  an  adequate  explanation.)

At  this  point  there  was  a  discussion  of  the  possibility  of  getting  rid  of  the
Nhus  in  which  the  combined  judgment  was  that  it  would  not  be  possible.

Continuing  the  briefing,  Mr.  Hilsman  said  that  the  Buddhists  contained  an  ac-
tivist element  which  undoubtedly  favored  increasing  demands  as  well  as  charg-
ing the  Government  with  dragging  its  feet.  There  was  thus  an  element  of  truth
in  Diem's  view  that  the  Buddhists  might  push  their  demands  so  far  as  to  make  his
fall  inevitable.

During  these  events  the  US  had  put  extremely  heavy  pressure  on  Diem  to
take  political  actions.  Most  recently  we  had  urged  Diem  to  make  a  speech  which
would  include  announcements  that  he  intended  to  meet  with  Buddhist  leaders,


728 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

permit  Buddhist  chaplains  in  the  army  and  so  on.  If  Diem  did  not  make  such  a
speech  and  there  were  further  demonstrations,  the  US  would  be  compelled
publiclv  to  disassociate  itself  from  the  GVN's  Buddhist  policy.  Mr.  Hilsman  re-
ported that  Diem  had  received  this  approach  with  what  seemed  to  be  excessive
politeness  but  had  said  he  would  consider  making  such  a  speech.

Our  estimate  was  that  no  matter  what  Diem  did  there  will  be  coup  attempts
over  the  next  four  months.  Whether  or  not  any  of  these  attempts  will  be  suc-
cessful is  impossible  to  say.

Mr.  Hilsman  said  that  everyone  agreed  that  the  chances  of  chaos  in  the
wake  of  a  coup  are  considerably  less  than  they  were  a  year  ago.  An  encourag-
ing sign  relative  to  this  point  is  that  the  war  between  the  Vietnamese  forces
and  the  Viet  Cong  has  been  pursued  throughout  the  Buddhist  crisis  without
noticeable  let-up.

At  this  point  Mr.  Forrestal  reported  on  General  Krulak's  views  that,  even  if
there  were  chaos  in  Saigon,  the  military  units  in  the  field  would  continue  to  con-
front the  Communists.

Mr.  Hilsman  went  on  to  say  that  Ambassador  Nolting  believes  that  the  most
likely  result  of  a  coup  attempt  that  succeeded  in  killing  Diem  was  civil  war.
Mr.  Hilsman  disagreed  with  this  view  slightly  in  that  he  thought  civil  war  was
not  the  most  likely  result  but  that  it  was  certainly  a  possible  result.

The  timing  of  Ambassador  Nolting's  return  and  Ambassador  Lodge's  as-
sumption of  duty  was  then  discussed.  The  President's  initial  view  was  that  Am-
bassador Nolting  should  return  immediately  and  that  Ambassador  Lodge  should
assume  his  duties  as  soon  thereafter  as  possible.  The  President  volunteered  that
Ambassador  Nolting  had  done  an  outstanding  job,  that  it  was  almost  miracu-
lous the  way  he  had  succeeded  in  turning  the  war  around  from  the  disastrously
low  point  in  relations  between  Diem  and  ourselves  that  existed  when  Ambassa-
dor Nolting  took  over.  Mr.  Hilsman  pointed  out  the  personal  sacrifices  that
Ambassador  Nolting  had  been  forced  to  make  during  this  period,  and  the  Presi-
dent said  that  he  hoped  a  way  could  be  found  to  commend  Ambassador  Nolt-
ing publicly  so  as  to  make  clear  the  fine  job  he  had  done  and  that  he  hoped  an
give  his  children  a  suitable  home  in  the  years  immediately  ahead,
appropriate  position  could  be  found  for  him  in  Washington  so  that  he  could

The  President's  decision  was  to  delegate  the  authoritv  to  decide  on  the  timing
of  Ambassador  Nolting's  return  to  the  Assistant  Secretarv  for  Far  Eastern  Af-
fairs;  that  Ambassador  Lodge  should  report  to  W^ashington  no  later  than  July
15  so  that  he  could  take  the  Counterinsurgency  Course  simultaneously  with  the
normal  briefings  for  an  ambassador;  and  that  Ambassador  Lodge  should  arrive
in  Saigon  as  soon  as  possible  following  completion  of  the  CI  Course  on  August
14.  Arrangements  were  made  for  Ambassador  Nolting  to  see  the  President  at
4:00  p.m.  on  Monday,  July  8.

Prepared  by  R.  Hilsman


[Document  124]

MEMORANDUM  OF  CONVERSATION
July  5,  1963

George  Ball.  Nolting,  Chalmers  Wood,  George  Springstein

Nolting  opened  with  review  of  the  Buddhists  situation  which  he  characterizes
as  serious.  He  regretted  that  Diem  had  not  taken  it  in  hand  earlier  but  em-


Documents  729


phasized  that  Dien  given  his  u  at  the  agreement  wc _ ,  carried

out.  It  was  Nolting  s  experience  that  when  Diem  gave  his  word,  he  followed
through  although  sometimes  it  was  handler  is  own  wav.  The  ambassador
said  that  .  -erference  by  the  Nhu^  .-. serious,  he  believed  ■  he

G\'N  woi.  . ,  :o  come  through  this  one  slowlv.  As  to  tactics,  i...  :..-re

Diem  was  >:ed.  the  slower  he  went.  WliiJe  Nhu  was  troublesome,  he  was
chiefly  responsible  for  gains  which  had  been  made  in  the  provincial  pacification
program.  The  Ur.cer  Secretary  asked  what  would  happen  if  there  were  a  change
in  gove  .  The  ambassador  replied  that  he  would  give  his  view  which  was
not  ...  .  shared  by  Mr.  Wood.  In  his  view,  if  a  revolution  occurred  in

\  ie-  hich  grew  out  o!"  »he  Buddhist  situation,  the  country-  would  be  split

:ng  factions  ".e  -\mericans  would  have  to  withdraw,  and  the

CO ..nir)  migni  be  lost  to  the  Communists.  This  led  to  the  question  of  how  much
pressure  we  could  exert  on  Diem.  Mr.  Noltins  replied  that  if  we  repudiate:  '
on  this  issue,  his  government  would  fall.  The  ambassador  believed  that  L...
would  live  up  to  the  agreement  unless  he  believed  that  he  was  dealing  with  the
■.tempt  to  cause  his  ovenhrow.  As  to  the  role  of  the  Catholics  in  the
government.  Ambassador  Nolting  did  not  believe  that  Diem  gave  them  prefer-
ence. Unfonunately.  many  persons  in  the  government  felt  that  it  would  '  '
Their  careers  if  they  became  Catholic.  It  was  true  that  the  government  had
unwise  in  the  ostentatious  manner  in  which  it  supported  and  encouraged  the
r^-iicizing  of  Catholic  ceremonies,  however.  In  general.  \'ietnam  had  been  a
w  -  i"  which  there  was  a  great  degree  of  religious  tolerance.  Now  the  siiua-
-  -  ed  out  of  hand.  Ii  was  deplorable  because  we  had  been  winning.  .  .  .
^  .  ..  -lie  point  of  Ambassador  Lodee,  Mr.  Noltins  commented  that  the
e  Lodge  was  built  up  as  a  strong  man  who  was  going  to  tell  Diem  where  to
get  off,  the  harder  ::  wo-id  be  for  Lodse  to  do  his  job  in  Vietnam.  The  Under
Secretarv-  suggested  that  .Ambassador  Nolting  could  reassure  President  Diem  on
this  -


[Document  1251

SNIE  53-2-63
10  July  63

THE  SITUATION

IN  SOUTH  \  IETNAM

SCOPE  NOTE

NIE  53-63,  "  Prospecis  in  South  \'ietnam."  dated  17  April  1963  was  oarticu-
iirlv  concerned  with  the  progress  of  the  counterinsurgency  effon.  and  with  the
ary  an:  ::ical  factors  most  likelv  to  afreet  that  efion.  The  primarv'  pur-
pose of  the  present  SNIE  is  to  examine  the  implications  of  recent  developments
in  Sr::h  \'ietnam  for  the  stabilitv  of  the  countrv',  the  viability  of  the  Diem  re-
rim.e.  ^nd  :is  relationship  with  the  US.

CONCLUSIONS

A.  The  Buddhist  crisis  in  South  \'ietnam  has  highlighted  and  intensified  a
'widespread  and  longstanding  dissatisfaction  with  the  Diem  regime  and  its  style
of  government.  I: — as  is  likely — Diem  fails  to  carr."  out  truly  and  prompdy  the


730 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


commitments  he  has  made  to  the  Buddhists,  disorders  will  probably  flare  again
and  the  chances  of  a  coup  or  assassination  attempts  against  him  will  become
better  than  even.  {Paras.  4,  14)

B.  The  Diem  regime's  underlying  uneasiness  about  the  extent  of  the  US  in-
volvement in  South  Vietnam  has  been  sharpened  by  the  Buddhist  affair  and  the
firm  line  taken  by  the  US.  This  attitude  will  almost  certainly  persist  and  further
pressure  to  reduce  the  US  presence  in  the  country  is  likely.  {Paras.  10-12)

C.  Thus  far,  the  Buddhist  issue  has  not  been  effectively  exploited  by  the
Communists,  nor  does  it  appear  to  have  had  any  appreciable  effect  on  the  coun-
terinsurgency  effort.  We  do  not  think  Diem  is  likely  to  be  overthrown  by  a
Communist  coup.  Nor  do  we  think  the  Communists  would  necessarily  profit  if
he  were  overthrown  by  some  combination  of  his  non-Communist  opponents.  A
non-Communist  successor  regime  might  be  initially  less  effective  against  the
Viet  Cong,  but,  given  continued  support  from  the  US,  could  provide  reason-
ably effective  leadership  for  the  government  and  the  war  effort.  {Paras.
7,  15-17)

DISCUSSION

I.  INTRODUCTION

1.  The  two  chief  problems  which  have  faced  the  Government  of  South  Viet-
nam (GVN)  since  its  birth  in  1954  have  been:  (a)  to  forge  the  institutions  and
loyalties  necessary  to  Vietnam's  survival  as  an  independent  nation,  and  (b)  to
counter  the  menace  of  Hanoi's  subversive  and  aggressive  designs — pursued  since
1960  by  a  campaign  of  widespread  guerrilla  warfare.  In  attempting  to  cope
with  these  problems,  the  GVN  has  been  hampered  by  its  lack  of  confidence  in
and  its  inability  to  engage  the  understanding  and  support  of  a  considerable  por-
tion of  the  Vietnamese  people — including  large  segments  of  the  educated  classes
and  the  peasantry.  In  recent  weeks  these  inadequacies  and  tensions  in  the  South
Vietnamese  body  politic  have  been  further  revealed  and  intensified.

II.  THE  BUDDHIST  AFFAIR

2.  President  Diem,  his  family,  and  a  large  proportion  of  the  top  leaders  of
the  regime  are  Roman  Catholics,  in  a  population  that  is  70  to  80  percent  Bud-
dhist. The  regime  has  clearly  accorded  preferential  treatment  to  Catholics  in  its
employment  practices  and  has  favored  the  Catholic  Church.  But  there  have
been  no  legal  restrictions  on  religious  freedom  and,  until  recently,  most  Bud-
dhists appeared  passive  in  their  response  to  the  privileged  institutional  position
occupied  by  the  Catholic  Church.  There  have,  however,  been  various  adminis-
trative discriminations  against  the  Buddhists,  though  these  may  have  resulted  as
much  from  thoughtlessness  or  misplaced  zeal  on  the  part  of  minor  officials  as
from  conscious  GVN  policy.  These  have  obviously  created  an  undercurrent  of
resentment,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  extent  and  intensity  of  the  recent  outbreaks.

3.  In  April  1963,  the  GVN  ordered  its  provincial  officials  to  enforce  a  long-
standing bui  generally  ignored  edict  regulating  the  public  display  of  religious
flags.  As  it  happened,  this  order  was  issued  just  prior  to  Buddha's  birthday  (8
May),  a  major  Buddhist  festival,  and  just  after  Papal  flags  had  been  prominently
flown  during  a  series  of  ofiiciallv  encouraged  celebrations  commemorating  the
25th  anniversary  of  the  ordination  of  Ngo  dinh  Thuc,  Diem's  brother,  the  Arch-


Documents  731


bishop  of  Hue.  A  protest  demonstration  developed  in  Hue  on  8  May,  which  was
dispersed  by  fire  from  a  Civil  Guard  unit.  In  the  ensuing  melee  several  persons
were  killed,  including  some  children.  The  GVN  has  blamed  the  deaths  on  Viet
Cong  terrorists  despite  evidence  to  the  contrary,  and  its  subsequent  stiff-necked
handling  of  this  incident  and  its  aftermath  has  sparked  a  national  crisis.  The
Buddhists,  hitherto  disorganized  and  nonprotesting,  have  shown  considerable
cohesion  and  force — enough  to  elicit  a  set  of  "compromise"  agreements  from
President  Diem  on  16  June.  Moreover,  the  fact  that  the  Buddhist  leaders  have
been  able  to  challenge  the  government  openly  without  evoking  serious  govern-
ment retaliation  has  presumably  given  them  considerable  confidence.

4.  For  the  moment,  the  Buddhist  movement  remains  under  the  effective  con-
trol of  moderate  bonzes  who  have  refused  to  accept  support  from  or  countenance
cooperation  with  any  of  Diem's  political  opponents.  Communist  or  non-Com-
munist, and  appear  to  be  trying  to  insure  that  the  Buddhists  live  up  to  their
part  of  the  bargain.  This  leadership  gave  the  GVN  a  period  of  grace  (which
expired  about  the  end  of  June)  in  which  to  show  that  it  was  moving  in  good
faith  to  carry  out  its  undertakings,  failing  which  protests  would  resume.  So  far
there  have  been  no  further  demonstrations,  but  the  Buddhist  leadership  is  clearly
restive.

5.  Despite  Buddhist  restraint  in  the  political  exploitation  of  the  affair,  it  has
obvious  political  overtones.  It  has  apparently  aroused  widespread  popular  in-
dignation and  could  well  become  a  focal  point  of  general  disaffection  with  the
Diem  government.  It  provides  an  issue  on  which  most  of  Diem's  non-Commu-
nist opponents  (even  including  some  Catholics)  can  find  common  ground  of
agreement.  There  is  considerable  evidence  that  the  issue  itself  and,  even  more,
the  Diem  family's  handling  of  it  to  date  has  occasioned  restiveness  at  virtually
all  levels  of  the  GVN's  military  and  civil  establishments,  both  of  whose  lower
and  middle  echelons  are  largely  staffed  by  Buddhists.  In  some  cases,  civil  serv-
ants seem  to  have  ignored  or  tempered  GVN  instructions,  superiors  have  on
occasion  evaded  their  assigned  task  of  propounding  the  official  GVN  line  to
their  subordinates,  and  information  on  impending  government  actions  has  ob-
viously leaked  to  Buddhist  leaders.  In  any  case,  recent  developments  are  causing
many  GVN  officials  to  reexamine  their  relations  with  and  the  limits  of  their  loy-
alty to  the  Diem  regime;  there  is  accumulating  evidence  of  serious  disaffection
and  coup  plotting  in  high  military  and  civilian  circles.

6.  The  Buddhist  affair  appears  to  have  given  considerable  heart  to  the  various
non-Communist  political  opposition  splinter  groups  in  and  out  of  South  Viet-
nam. There  also  appears  to  be  a  growing  feeling  among  former  supporters  of  the
regime  that  Diem's  position  may  have  been  permanently  and  dangerously  im-
paired. Thus  far,  however,  we  have  no  evidence  that  the  diverse  opposition
groups  have  been  able  to  form  new  or  effective  alliances  with  one  another.

7.  The  Buddhist  issue  would  appear  to  be  an  obvious  windfall  for  the  Com-
munists, but  so  far  there  is  no  evidence  that  they  have  been  able  to  exploit  it  ef-
fectively. They  may  have  penetrated  the  Buddhist  clergy  to  some  extent,  but
are  not  presently  exerting  any  discernible  influence,  despite  the  suggestions  to
the  contrary  in  GVN  pronouncements.  To  date  the  Buddhist  crisis  does  not  ap-
pear to  have  had  any  appreciable  effect  on  the  continuing  counterinsurgency
effort,  though  the  morale  and  efficiency  of  the  GVN's  military  and  civil  forces
are  likely  to  be  impaired  if  the  issue  is  prolonged.

8.  The  Buddhist  crisis  has  also  hurt  the  GVN  internationally,  with  potentially
important  effects  upon  the  future  success  of  US  policy  towards  southeast  Asia.


732 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Protests  are  growing  in  other  predominantly  Buddhist  countries,  with  the  impli-
cation that  US  action  could  help  resolve  the  crisis.  Cambodia  and  Ceylon  have
made  representations  to  the  UN  and  more  may  be  forthcoming.  In  other  coun-
tries, including  the  US,  the  crisis  has  given  new  stimulus  to  criticism  of  US  policy
on  the  grounds  that  the  US  is  supporting  an  oppressive  and  unrepresentative  re-
gime.

9.  The  future  course  of  the  Buddhist  affair  will  be  largely  determined  by  the
GVN's  actions  in  the  near  term.  It  is  likely  that  the  issues  recently  raised  can  be
resolved  if  the  GVN  executes  its  portion  of  the  negotiated  bargain.  However,
politically  sophisticated  segments  of  South  Vietnamese  society,  Buddhists  in-
cluded, are  mindful  of  Diem's  past  practice  of  often  using  negotiations  as  a  stall
for  time  and  of  making  promises  in  order  to  weather  an  immediate  crisis.  The
real  danger  in  the  present  situation  is  that  Diem  may  be  tempted  to  employ
such  tactics  which  have  served  him  well  in  the  past  but  could  prove  disastrous
if  essayed  this  time.  If  demonstrations  should  be  resumed,  they  would  probably
assume  an  increasingly  political  cast,  and  less  moderate  Buddhist  leadership
would  be  likely  to  come  to  the  fore.  Public  order  would  be  threatened.  In  par-
ticular, we  cannot  be  sure  how  various  army  or  police  units  would  react  if  or-
dered to  fire  on  demonstrations  headed  by  Buddhist  bonzes.

III. THE  EFFECT  OF  RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS  ON  US-GVN
RELATIONS

10.  The  GVN  has  always  shown  some  concern  over  the  implications  of  US
involvement  in  South  Vietnamese  affairs  and  from  time  to  time  has  felt  moved
to  restrict  US  activities  and  presence  in  South  Vietnam.  This  attitude  springs
partly  from  legitimate,  if  hypersensitive,  concern  for  the  appearance  as  well  as
the  fact  of  Vietnam's  recently  acquired  sovereignty.  To  a  considerable  degree,
however,  it  springs  from  the  Diem  government's  suspicion  of  US  intentions  to-
ward it,  and  from  its  belief  that  the  extensive  US  presence  is  setting  in  motion
political  forces  which  could  eventually  threaten  Diem's  political  primacy.

11.  The  Buddhist  affairs  erupted  at  one  of  these  periods  of  GVN  sensitivity,
and  the  strain  has  been  aggravated  by  subsequent  events.  The  GVN's  initial
handling  of  the  issue  gave  the  US  ground  for  serious  embarrassment  and  con-
cern which,  in  turn,  produced  a  succession  of  forceful  US  demarches.  The  Diem
family  has  bitterly  resented  these  US  actions  and  may  well  feel  that  the  Bud-
dhist protests  were  at  least  indirectly  due  to  the  US  presence.  Under  the  circum-
stances, further  pressure  to  reduce  that  presence  is  likely.

12.  A  key  role  in  this  regard  will  be  played  by  Diem's  brother,  Ngo  dinh  Nhu.
He  has  always  been  Diem's  chief  political  lieutenant,  but  the  years  since  1954
have  witnessed  a  steady  accretion  of  Nhu's  personal  power  and  authority — an
accretion  due  partly  to  circumstance  and  primarily  to  deliberate  effort  on  Nhu's
part.  Nhu  has  political  ambitions  of  his  own  and  almost  certainly  envisages  him-
self as  his  brother's  successor.  For  a  variety  of  reasons,  Nhu  has  long  privately
viewed  the  US  with  some  hostility  and  suspicion.  American  criticism  of  the
GVN  has  especially  irritated  Nhu,  for  he  is  aware  that  he  and  his  wife  are  often
its  primary  targets.  Above  all,  Nhu  almost  certainly  doubts  whether  the  support
which  the  US  has  given  to  his  brother  would  be  transferred  to  him.

13.  In  the  negotiations  with  the  Buddhists,  Nhu  urged  his  brother  to  take  a
firm  line  and  is,  by  his  own  statement,  wholly  out  of  sympathy  with  the  con-
cessions made.  On  the  basis  of  past  performance,  we  think  it  unlikely  that  he
will  help  to  implement  the  settlement;  his  influence  on  Diem  will  be  rather  in  the


Documents  733


direction  of  delaying  and  hedging  on  commitments,  a  tendency  to  which  Diem
himself  is  already  disposed.  This  will  be  the  more  likely  since  not  only  the  Nhus
and  Diem,  but  also  his  brothers  Archbishop  Thiic  and  Ngo  dinh  Can,  the  po-
litical boss  of  the  central  provinces,  obviously  continue  to  doubt  the  legitimacy
of  Buddhist  complaints  and  to  underestimate  the  intensity  of  the  crisis.

IV. THE  OUTLOOK

14.  If  the  Diem  government  moves  efTectively  to  fulfill  its  16  June  commit-
ments, much  of  the  resentment  aroused  by  the  Buddhist  controversy  could  be
allayed.  However,  even  if  relations  between  the  GVN  and  the  Buddhists  are
smoothed  over,  the  general  discontent  with  the  Diem  regime  which  the  crisis
has  exacerbated  and  brought  to  the  fore  is  likely  to  persist.  Further,  if — as  is
probable — the  regime  is  dilatory,  inept,  and  insincere  in  handling  Buddhist
matters,  there  will  probably  be  renewed  demonstrations,  and  South  Vietnam  will
probably  remain  in  a  state  of  domestic  political  tension.  Under  these  circum-
stances, the  chances  of  a  non-Communist  assassination  or  coup  attempt  against
Diem  will  be  better  than  even.  We  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  of  an  at-
tempted Communist  coup,  but  a  Communist  attempt  will  have  appreciably  less
likelihood  of  success  so  long  as  the  majority  of  the  government's  opponents  and
critics  remain — as  they  are  now — alert  to  the  Communist  peril.

15.  The  chances  of  a  non-Communist  coup — and  of  its  success — would  be-
come greater  in  the  event  renewed  GVN/Buddhist  confrontation  should  lead  to
large-scale  demonstrations  in  Saigon.  More  or  less  prolonged  riot  and  general
disorder  would  probably  result — with  the  security  forces  confused  over  which
side  to  support.  Under  such  circumstances,  a  small  group,  particularly  one  with
prior  contingency  plans  for  such  an  eventuality,  might  prove  able  to  topple  the
government.  Conversely,  a  continued  or  resumed  truce  between  the  GVN  and
the  Buddhists  would  serve  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  such  an  overthrow.

16.  Any  attempt  to  remove  Diem  will  almost  certainly  be  directed  against
Nhu  as  well,  but  should  Nhu  survive  Diem,  we  are  virtually  certain  that  he
would  attempt  to  gain  power — in  the  first  instance  probably  by  manipulating
the  constitutional  machinery.  We  do  not  believe  that  Nhu's  bid  would  succeed,
despite  the  personal  political  base  he  has  sought  to  build  through  the  Republi-
can Youth  (of  which  he  is  the  overt,  uniformed  head),  the  strategic  hamlet  pro-
gram (whose  directing  Interministerial  Committee  he  chairs),  and  in  the  army.
He  and  his  wife  have  become  too  much  the  living  symbols  of  all  that  is  disliked
in  the  present  regime  for  Nhu's  personal  political  power  to  long  outlive  his
brother.  There  might  be  a  struggle  with  no  little  violence,  but  enough  of  the
army  would  almost  certainly  move  to  take  charge  of  the  situation,  either  rally-
ing behind  the  constitutional  successor  to  install  Vice  President  Tho  or  backing
another  non-Communist  civil  leader  or  a  military  junta.

17.  A  non-Communist  successor  regime  might  prove  no  more  efTective  than
Diem  in  fighting  the  Viet  Cong;  indeed  at  least  initially  it  might  well  prove  con-
siderably less  effective,  and  the  counterinsurgency  effort  would  probably  be  tem-
porarily disrupted.  However,  there  is  a  reasonably  large  pool  of  under-utilized
but  experienced  and  trained  manpower  not  only  within  the  military  and  civil-
ian sectors  of  the  present  government  but  also,  to  some  extent,  outside.  These
elements,  given  continued  support  from  the  US,  could  provide  reasonably  ef-
fective leadership  for  the  government  and  the  war  effort.


734 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


[Document  126]

August  24,  1963

STATE  243

STATE  TO  LODGE

It  is  now  clear  that  whether  military  proposed  martial  law  or  whether  Nhu
tricked  them  into  it,  Nhu  took  advantage  of  its  imposition  to  smash  pagodas
with  police  and  Tung's  Special  Forces  loyal  to  him,  thus  placing  onus  on  mili-
tary in  eyes  of  world  and  Vietnamese  people.  Also  clear  that  Nhu  has  maneu-
vered himself  into  commanding  position.

US  Government  cannot  tolerate  situation  in  which  power  lies  in  Nhu's  hands.
Diem  must  be  given  chance  to  rid  himself  of  Nhu  and  his  coterie  and  replace
them  with  best  mihtary  and  poHtical  personalities  available.

If,  in  spite  of  all  of  your  efforts.  Diem  remains  obdurate  and  refuses,  then  we
must  face  the  possibiHty  that  Diem  himself  cannot  be  preserved.

We  now  believe  immediate  action  must  be  taken  to  prevent  Nhu  from  con-
solidating his  position  further.  Therefore,  unless  you  in  consultation  with  Har-
kins  perceive  overriding  objections  you  are  authorized  to  proceed  along  follow-
ing lines:

(1 )  First,  we  must  press  on  appropriate  levels  of  GVN  following  line:

(a)  USG  cannot  accept  actions  against  Buddhists  taken  by  Nhu  and  his
collaborators  under  cover  martial  law.

(b)  Prompt  dramatic  actions  redress  situation  must  be  taken,  including
repeal  of  decree  10,  release  of  arrested  monks,  nuns,  etc.

(2)  We  must  at  same  time  also  tell  key  military  leaders  that  US  would  find
it  impossible  to  continue  support  GVN  militarily  and  economically  unless  above
steps  are  taken  immediately  which  we  recognize  requires  removal  of  Nhus  from
the  scene.  We  wish  give  Diem  reasonable  opportunity  to  remove  Nhus,  but  if  he
remains  obdurate,  then  we  are  prepared  to  accept  the  obvious  implication  that
we  can  no  longer  support  Diem.  You  may  also  tell  appropriate  military  com-
manders we  will  give  them  direct  support  in  any  interim  period  of  breakdown
central  government  mechanism.

(3)  We  recognize  the  necessity  of  removing  taint  on  military  for  pagoda
raids  and  placing  blame  squarely  on  Nhu.  You  are  authorized  to  have  such
statements  made  in  Saigon  as  you  consider  desirable  to  achieve  this  objective.
We  are  prepared  to  take  same  line  here  and  to  have  Voice  of  America  make
statement  along  lines  contained  in  next  numbered  telegram  whenever  you  give
the  word,  preferably  as  soon  as  possible.

Concurrently,  with  above,  Ambassador  and  country  team  should  urgently
examine  all  possible  alternative  leadership  and  make  detailed  plans  as  to  how
we  might  bring  about  Diem's  replacement  if  this  should  become  necessary.

Assume  )ou  will  consult  with  General  Harkins  re  any  precautions  necessary
protect  American  personnel  during  crisis  period.

You  will  understand  that  we  cannot  from  Washington  give  you  detailed  in-
structions as  to  how  this  operation  should  proceed,  but  you  will  also  know  we
will  back  you  to  the  hilt  on  actions  you  take  to  achieve  our  objectives.


Documents  735

Needless  to  say  we  have  held  knowledge  of  this  telegram  to  minimum  essen-
tial people  and  assume  you  will  take  similar  precautions  to  prevent  premature
leaks.


[Document  127]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Lodge's  Reply  to  Washington

Cablegram  from  Ambassador  Lodge  to  Secretary  of  State  Dean  Rusk  and  As-
sistant Secretary  of  State  Roger  Hilsman,  Aug.  25,  1963.

Believe  that  chances  of  Diem's  meeting  our  demands  are  virtually  nil.  At  same
time,  by  making  them  we  give  Nhu  chance  to  forestall  or  block  action  by  mili-
tary. Risk,  we  believe,  is  not  worth  taking,  with  Nhu  in  control  combat  forces
Saigon.

Therefore,  propose  we  go  straight  to  Generals  with  our  demands,  without
informing  Diem.  Would  tell  them  we  prepared  have  Diem  without  Nhus  but  it  is
in  effect  up  to  them  whether  to  keep  him.  Would  also  insist  generals  take  steps
to  release  Buddhist  leaders  and  carry  out  June  16  agreement.

Request  immediate  modification  instructions.  However,  do  not  propose  move
until  we  are  satisfied  with  E  and  E  plans.  Harkins  concurs.  I  present  credentials
President  Diem  tomorrow  1 1  A.M.


[Document  128]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

C.I. A.  Aide's  Cable  to  Chief  on  Contact  with  Saigon  Generals

Cablegram  from  John  Richardson,  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency's  Saigon
station  chief,  to  John  A.  McCone,  Director  of  Central  Intelligence,  Aug.  26,
1963.

During  meeting  with  Harkins,  Truehart,  Mecklin  and  COS  on  morning  26
Aug  Lodge  made  decision  that  American  official  hand  should  not  show.  Conse-
quently, Harkins  will  take  no  initiative  with  VNese  generals.  (Conein  to  convey
points  below  to  Gen.  Khiem;  Spera  to  Khanh;  if  Khiem  agrees  on  Conein  talk-
ing to  Don,  he  will) .

(A)  Solicitation  of  further  elaboration  of  action  aspects  of  present  thinking
and  planning.  What  should  be  done?

(B)  We  in  agreement  Nhus  must  go.

(C)  Question  of  retaining  Diem  or  not  up  to  them.

(D)  Bonzes  and  other  arrestees  must  be  released  immediately  and  five-point
agreement  of  16  June  fully  carried  out.

(E)  We  will  provide  direct  support  during  any  interim  period  of  breakdown
central  gov  mechanism.

(F)  We  cannot  be  of  any  help  during  initial  action  of  assuming  power  of
state.  Entirely  their  own  action,  win  or  lose.  Don't  expect  be  bailed  out.

(G)  If  Nhus  do  not  go  and  if  Buddhists  situation  is  not  redressed  as  indi-
cated, we  would  find  it  impossible  continue  military  and  economic  support.


736 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

(H)  It  hoped  bloodshed  can  be  avoided  or  reduced  to  absolute  minimum.

(I)  It  hoped  that  during  process  and  after,  developments  conducted  in  such
manner  as  to  retain  and  increase  the  necessary  relations  between  VNese  and
Americans  which  will  allow  for  progress  of  country  and  successful  prosecution
of  the  war.


[Document  129]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

C.I. A.  Station  Chief's  Cable  on  Coup  Prospects  in  Saigon
Cablegram  from  Mr.  Richardson  to  Mr.  McCone,  Aug.  28,  1963.

Situation  here  has  reached  point  of  no  return.  Saigon  is  armed  camp.  Current
indications  are  that  Ngo  family  have  dug  in  for  last  ditch  battle.  It  is  our  con-
sidered estimate  that  General  officers  cannot  retreat  now.  Conein's  meeting  with
Gen.  Khiem  (Saigon  0346)  reveals  that  overwhelming  majority  of  general  of-
ficers, excepting  Dinh  and  Cao,  are  united,  have  conducted  prior  planning,  real-
ize that  they  must  proceed  quickly,  and  understand  that  they  have  no  alternative
but  to  go  forward.  Unless  the  generals  are  neutralized  before  being  able  to  launch
their  operation,  we  believe  they  will  act  and  that  they  have  good  chance  to  win.
If  General  Dinh  primarily  and  Tung  secondly  cannot  be  neutralized  at  outset,
there  may  be  widespread  fighting  in  Saigon  and  serious  loss  of  life.

We  recognize  the  crucial  stakes  are  involved  and  have  no  doubt  that  the  gen-
erals do  also.  Situation  has  changed  drastically  since  21  August.  If  the  Ngo  fam-
ily wins  now,  they  and  Vietnam  will  stagger  on  to  final  defeat  at  the  hands  of
their  own  people  and  the  VC.  Should  a  generals'  revolt  occur  and  be  put  down,
GVN  will  sharply  reduce  American  presence  in  SVN.  Even  if  they  did  not  do
so,  it  seems  clear  that  American  public  opinion  and  Congress,  as  well  as  world
opinion,  would  force  withdrawal  or  reduction  of  American  support  for  VN
under  the  Ngo  administration.

Bloodshed  can  be  avoided  if  the  Ngo  family  would  step  down  before  the  com-
ing armed  action.  ...  It  is  obviously  preferable  that  the  generals  conduct  this
effort  without  apparent  American  assistance.  Otherwise,  for  a  long  time  in  the
future,  they  will  be  vulnerable  to  charges  of  being  American  puppets,  which  they
are  not  in  any  sense.  Nevertheless,  we  all  understand  that  the  effort  must  suc-
ceed and  that  whatever  needs  to  be  done  on  our  part  must  be  done.  If  this  at-
tempt by  the  generals  does  not  take  place  or  if  it  fails,  we  believe  it  no  exaggera-
tion to  say  that  VN  runs  serious  risk  of  being  lost  over  the  course  of  time.


[Document  130]

August  29,  1963
STATE  272

STATE  TO  LODGE  AND  HARKINS

1.  Highest  level  meeting  noon  today  reviewed  your  375  and  reaffirmed  basic
course.  Specific  decisions  follow:

2.  In  response  to  your  recommendation,  General  Harkins  is  hereby  authorized


Documents  131


to  repeat  to  such  Generals  as  you  indicate  the  messages  previously  transmitted
by  CAS  officers.  He  should  stress  that  the  USG  supports  the  movement  to  elimi-
nate the  Nhus  from  the  government,  but  that  before  arriving  at  specific  under-
standings with  the  Generals,  General  Harkins  must  know  who  are  involved,  re-
sources available  to  them  and  overall  plan  for  coup.  The  USG  will  support  a
coup  which  has  good  chance  of  succeeding  but  plans  no  direct  involvement  of
U.S.  armed  forces.  Harkins  should  state  that  he  is  prepared  to  establish  liaison
with  the  coup  planners  and  to  review  plans,  but  will  not  engage  directly  in  joint
coup  planning.

3.  Question  of  last  approach  to  Diem  remains  undecided  and  separate  personal
message  from  Secretary  to  you  develops  our  concern  and  asks  your  comment.

4.  On  movement  of  U.S.  forces,  we  do  not  expect  to  make  any  announcement
or  leak  at  present  and  believe  that  any  later  decision  to  publicize  such  move-
ments should  be  closely  connected  to  developing  events  on  your  side.  We  can-
not of  course  prevent  unauthorized  disclosures  or  speculation,  but  we  will  in  any
event  knock  down  any  reports  of  evacuation.

5.  You  are  hereby  authorized  to  announce  suspension  of  aid  through  Diem  gov-
ernment at  a  time  and  under  conditions  of  your  choice.  In  deciding  upon  the
use  of  this  authority,  you  should  consider  importance  of  timing  and  managing
announcement  so  as  to  minimize  appearance  of  collusion  with  Generals  and
also  to  minimize  danger  of  unpredictable  and  disruptive  reaction  by  existing
government.  We  also  assume  that  you  will  not  in  fact  use  this  authority  unless
you  think  it  essential,  and  we  see  it  as  possible  that  Harkins'  approach  and  in-
creasing process  of  cooperation  may  provide  assurance  Generals  desire.  Our
own  view  is  that  it  will  be  best  to  hold  this  authority  for  use  in  close  conjunc-
tion with  coup,  and  not  for  present  encouragement  of  Generals,  but  decision  is
yours.


[Document  131]

STATE  279

STATE  TO  LODGE  29  Aug  1963

Deeply  appreciate  your  375  which  was  a  most  helpful  clarification.  We  fully
understand  enormous  stakes  at  issue  and  the  heavy  responsibilities  which  you
and  Harkins  will  be  carrying  in  the  days  ahead  and  we  want  to  do  everything
possible  from  our  end  to  help.

Purpose  of  this  message  is  to  explore  further  question  of  possible  attempt  to
separate  Diem  and  the  Nhus.  In  your  telegram  you  appear  to  treat  Diem  and
the  Nhus  as  a  single  package  whereas  we  had  indicated  earlier  to  the  Generals
that  if  the  Nhus  were  removed  the  question  of  retaining  Diem  would  be  up  to
them.  My  own  personal  assessment  is  (and  this  is  not  an  instruction)  that  the
Nhus  are  by  all  odds  the  greater  part  of  the  problem  in  Vietnam,  internally,  in-
ternationally and  for  American  public  opinion.  Perhaps  it  is  inconceivable  that
the  Nhus  could  be  removed  without  taking  Diem  with  them  or  without  Diem's
abandoning  his  post.  In  any  event,  I  would  appreciate  your  comment  on  whether
any  distinction  can  or  should  be  drawn  as  between  Diem  and  Counsellor  and
Madame  Nhu.

The  only  point  on  which  you  and  General  Harkins  have  different  views  is
whether  an  attempt  should  be  made  with  Diem  to  eliminate  the  Nhus  and  pre-


738 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

sumably  take  other  steps  to  consolidate  the  country  behind  a  winning  effort
against  the  Viet  Cong.  My  own  hunch,  based  in  part  on  the  report  of  Katten-
burg's  conversations  with  Diem  is  that  such  an  approach  could  not  succeed  if  it
were  cast  purely  in  terms  of  persuasion.  Unless  such  a  talk  included  a  real  sanc-
tion such  as  a  threatened  withdrawal  of  our  support,  it  is  unlikely  that  it  would
be  taken  completely  seriously  by  a  man  who  may  feel  that  we  are  inescapably
committed  to  an  anti-Communist  Vietnam.  But  if  a  sanction  were  used  in  such
a  conversation,  there  would  be  a  high  risk  that  this  would  be  taken  by  Diem
as  a  sign  that  action  against  him  and  the  Nhus  was  imminent  and  he  might  as
a  minimum  move  against  the  Generals  or  even  take  some  quite  fantastic  action
such  as  calling  on  North  Vietnam  for  assistance  in  expelling  the  Americans.

It  occurs  to  me,  therefore,  that  if  such  an  approach  were  to  be  made  it  might
properly  await  the  time  when  others  were  ready  to  move  immediately  to  con-
stitute a  new  government.  If  this  be  so,  the  question  then  arises  as  to  whether  an
approach  to  insist  upon  the  expulsion  of  the  Nhus  should  come  from  Americans
rather  than  from  the  Generals  themselves.  This  might  be  the  means  by  which
the  Generals  could  indicate  that  they  were  prepared  to  distinguish  between  Diem
and  the  Nhus.  In  any  event,  were  the  Generals  to  take  this  action  it  would
tend  to  protect  succeeding  Vietnam  administrations  from  the  charge  of  being
wholly  American  puppets  subjected  to  whatever  anti-American  sentiment  is  in-
herent in  so  complex  a  situation.

I  would  be  glad  to  have  your  further  thoughts  on  these  points  as  well  as  your
views  on  whether  further  talks  with  Diem  are  contemplated  to  continue  your
opening  discussions  with  him.  You  will  have  received  formal  instructions  on
other  matters  through  other  messages.  Good  luck.


[Document  132]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Lodge  Cable  to  Secretary  Rusk  on  U.S.  Policy  Toward  a  Coup

Cablegram  from  Ambassador  Lodge  to  Secretary  Rusk,  Aug.  29,  1963.

We  are  launched  on  a  course  from  which  there  is  no  respectable  turning  back:
the  overthrow  of  the  Diem  government.  There  is  no  turning  back  in  part  be-
cause U.S.  prestige  is  already  publicly  committed  to  this  end  in  large  measure
and  will  become  more  so  as  the  facts  leak  out.  In  a  more  fundamental  sense,
there  is  no  turning  back  because  there  is  no  possibility,  in  my  view,  that  the  war
can  be  won  under  a  Diem  administration,  still  less  that  Diem  or  any  member  of
the  family  can  govern  the  country  in  a  way  to  gain  the  support  of  the  people
who  count,  i.e.,  the  educated  class  in  and  out  of  government  service,  civil  and
military — not  to  mention  the  American  people.  In  the  last  few  months  (and
especially  days)  they  have  in  fact  positively  alienated  these  people  to  an  incalcu-
lable degree.  So  that  I  am  personally  in  full  agreement  with  the  policy  which  I
was  instructed  to  carry  out  by  last  Sunday's  telegram.

2.  The  chance  of  bringing  off  a  Generals'  coup  depends  on  them  to  some
extent;  but  it  depends  at  least  as  much  on  us.

3.  We  should  proceed  to  make  all-out  effort  to  get  Generals  to  move  promptly.
To  do  so  we  should  have  authority  to  do  following:

(a)  That  Gen.  Harkins  repeat  to  Generals  personally  message  previously
transmitted  by  CAS  officers.  This  should  establish  their  authenticity.  Gen.  Harkins
should  have  order  on  this.


Documents  739


(b)  If  nevertheless  Generals  insist  on  public  statement  that  all  U.S.  aid  to  VN
through  Diem  regime  has  been  stopped,  we  would  agree,  on  express  understand-
ing that  Generals  will  have  started  at  same  time.  (We  would  seek  persuade  Gen-
erals that  it  would  be  better  to  hold  this  card  for  use  in  event  of  stalemate.  We
hope  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  do  this  at  all.)

(c)  VNese  Generals  doubt  that  we  have  the  will  power,  courage,  and  deter-
mination to  see  this  thing  through.  They  are  haunted  by  the  idea  that  we  will
run  out  on  them  even  though  we  have  told  them  pursuant  to  instructions,  that
the  game  had  started.

5.  We  must  press  on  for  many  reasons.  Some  of  these  are:

(a)  Explosiveness  of  the  present  situation  which  may  well  lead  to  riots  and
violence  if  issue  of  discontent  with  regime  is  not  met.  Out  of  this  could  come  a
pro-Communist  or  at  best  a  neutralist  set  of  politicians.

(b)  The  fact  that  war  cannot  be  won  with  the  present  regime.

(c)  Our  own  reputation  for  steadfastness  and  our  unwillingness  to  stultify
ourselves.

(d)  If  proposed  action  is  suspended,  I  believe  a  body  blow  will  be  dealt  to
respect  for  us  by  VNese  Generals.  Also,  all  those  who  expect  U.S.  to  straighten
out  this  situation  will  feel  let  down.  Our  help  to  the  regime  in  past  years  inescap-
ably gives  a  responsibility  which  we  cannot  avoid.

6.  I  realize  that  this  course  involves  a  very  substantial  risk  of  losing  VN.  It
also  involves  some  additional  risk  to  American  lives.  I  would  never  propose  it  if
I  felt  there  was  a  reasonable  chance  of  holding  VN  with  Diem.

[Point  7  unavailable.]

8.  .  .  .  Gen.  Harkins  thinks  that  I  should  ask  Diem  to  get  rid  of  the  Nhus  be-
fore starting  the  Generals'  action.  But  I  believe  that  such  a  step  has  no  chance
of  getting  the  desired  result  and  would  have  the  very  serious  effect  of  being  re-
garded by  the  Generals  as  a  sign  of  American  indecision  and  delay.  I  believe
this  is  a  risk  which  we  should  not  run.  The  Generals  distrust  us  too  much  already.
Another  point  is  that  Diem  would  certainly  ask  for  time  to  consider  such  a  far-
reaching  request.  This  would  give  the  ball  to  Nhu.

9.  With  the  exception  of  par.  8  above  Gen.  Harkins  concurs  in  this  telegram.


[Document  133]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Lodge's  Response  to  Rusk  on  Diem's  Closeness  to  Brother
Cablegram  from  Ambassador  Lodge  to  Secretary  Rusk,  Aug.  30,  1963.

I  agree  that  getting  the  Nhus  out  is  the  prime  objective  and  that  they  are
"the  greater  part  .  .  ."

This  surely  cannot  be  done  by  working  through  Diem.  In  fact  Diem  will  op-
pose it.  He  wishes  he  had  more  Nhus,  not  less.

The  best  chance  of  doing  it  is  by  the  Generals  taking  over  the  government
lock,  stock  and  barrel.

After  this  has  been  done,  it  can  then  be  decided  whether  to  put  Diem  back  in
again  or  go  on  without  him.  I  am  rather  inclined  to  put  him  back,  but  I  would
not  favor  putting  heavy  pressure  on  the  Generals  if  they  don't  want  him.  My
greatest  single  difficulty  in  carrying  out  the  instructions  of  last  Sunday  is  inertia.
The  days  come  and  go  and  nothing  happens.  It  is,  of  course,  natural  for  the
Generals  to  want  assurances  and  the  U.S.  Government  has  certainly  been


740 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

prompt  in  its  reactions.  But  here  it  is  Friday  and,  while  in  one  way  much  has
been  done,  there  is  not  yet  enough  to  show  for  the  hours  which  we  have  all
put  in.

If  I  call  on  Diem  to  demand  the  removal  of  the  Nhus,  he  will  surely  not  agree.
But  before  turning  me  down,  he  will  pretend  to  consider  it  and  involve  us  in
prolonged  delays.  This  will  make  the  Generals  suspicious  of  us  and  add  to  the
inertia.

Such  a  call  by  me  would  look  to  the  Nhus  like  an  ultimatum  and  would  result
in  their  taking  steps  to  thwart  any  operation  dealing  with  them.

I  agree  with  you  that  if  a  sanction  were  used,  it  could  provoke  an  even  more
fantastic  reaction.  In  fact  I  greatly  dislike  the  idea  of  cutting  off  aid  in  connec-
tion with  the  Generals'  operation  and  while  I  thank  you  for  giving  me  the  au-
thority to  make  an  announcement,  I  hope  I  will  never  have  to  use  it.

It  is  possible,  as  you  suggested  .  .  .  for  the  Generals  when,  as  and  if  their
operation  gets  rolling  to  demand  the  removal  of  the  Nhus  before  bringing  their
operation  to  fruition.  But  I  am  afraid  they  will  get  talked  out  of  their  operation
which  will  then  disintegrate,  still  leaving  the  Nhus  in  office.

If  the  Generals'  operation  does  get  rolling,  I  would  not  want  to  stop  it  until
they  were  in  full  control.  They  could  then  get  rid  of  the  Nhus  and  decide
whether  they  wanted  to  keep  Diem.

It  is  better  for  them  and  for  us  for  them  to  throw  out  the  Nhus  than  for  us
to  get  involved  in  it.

I  am  sure  that  the  best  way  to  handle  this  matter  is  by  a  truly  VNese  move-
ment even  if  it  puts  me  rather  in  the  position  of  pushing  a  piece  of  spaghetti.
I  am  contemplating  no  further  talks  with  Diem  at  this  time.


[Document  134]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

Cable  by  U.S.  General  in  Saigon  to  Taylor  on  End  of  August  Plot

Cablegram  from  Gen.  Paul  D.  Harkins,  United  States  commander  in  Saigon,  to
Gen.  Maxwell  D.  Taylor,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  Aug.  31,  1963.

(saw  Khiem:  he  stated  Big  Minh  had  stopped  planning  at  this  time,  and  was
working  on  other  methods;  others  had  called  off  planning  also,  himself  and
Khanh,  following  Minh.  He  knew  Thao  was  making  plans — but  that  few  of
military  trusted  him  because  of  his  VC  background — and  that  he  might  still  be
working  for  the  VC.  The  Generals  were  not  ready  as  they  did  not  have  enough
forces  under  their  control  compared  to  those  under  President  and  now  in  Saigon.
He  indicated  they,  the  Generals,  did  not  want  to  start  anything  they  could  not
successfully  finish.

...  At  a  meeting  yesterday,  Mr.  Nhu  said  he  now  went  along  with  every-
thing the  U.S.  wants  to  do,  and  even  had  the  backing  of  Pres.  Kennedy.  I  said
this  was  news  to  me.  Khiem  said  he  wondered  if  Nhu  was  again  trying  to  flush
out  the  generals.  He  intimated  the  generals  do  not  have  too  much  trust  in  Nhu
and  that  he's  such  a  friend  of  Mr.  Richardson  the  generals  wonder  if  Mr.  Nhu
and  Mme.  Nhu  were  on  the  CIA  payroll.  .  .  .

...  I  asked  if  someone  couldn't  confront  the  Nhus  with  the  fact  that  their
absence  from  the  scene  was  the  key  to  the  overall  solution.  He  replied  that  for
anyone  to  do  that  would  be  self-immolation — he  also  went  on  to  say  he  doubted
if  the  Nhus  and  Diem  could  be  split.


Documents  741

...  So  we  see  we  have  an  "organisation  de  confusion"  with  everyone  sus-
picious of  everyone  else  and  none  desiring  to  take  any  positive  action  as  of  right
now.  You  can't  hurry  the  East,  .  .  .


[Document  135]

OFFICE  OF  THE  SPECIAL  ASSISTANT  FOR
COUNTERINSURGENCY  AND  SPECIAL  ACTIVITIES

31  August  1963

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  RECORD

Subject:  Meeting  at  the  State  Department,  1100,  31  August  1963;  Sub-
ject: Vietnam

Present:  The  Vice  President  General  Carter

Secretary  Rusk  Mr.  Helms

Secretary  McNamara  Mr.  Colby

Mr.  Gilpatric  Ambassador  Nolting

Mr.  Bundy  Mr.  Hilsman

General  Taylor  Mr.  Kattenburg

Mr.  Murrow  General  Krulak

1.  Secretary  Rusk  stated  that,  in  his  judgment,  we  were  back  to  where  we
were  about  Wednesday  of  last  week,  and  this  causes  him  to  go  back  to  the
original  problem  and  ask  what  in  the  situation  led  us  to  think  well  of  a  coup.
Ruling  out  hatred  of  the  Nhus,  he  said,  there  would  appear  to  be  three  things:

a.  The  things  that  the  Nhus  had  done  or  supported,  which  tended  to
upset  the  GVN  internally.

b.  The  things  that  they  had  done  which  had  an  adverse  external  effect.

c.  The  great  pressures  of  U.S.  public  opinion.

2.  Mr.  Rusk  then  asked  if  we  should  not  pick  up  Ambassador  Lodge's  sug-
gestion in  his  message  of  today  (Saigon  391)  and  determine  what  steps  are  re-
quired to  re-gird  solidarity  in  South  Vietnam^ — such  as  improvement  in  condi-
tions concerning  students  and  Buddhists  and  the  possible  departure  of  Madame
Nhu.  He  said  that  we  should  determine  what  additional  measures  are  needed
to  improve  the  international  situation — such  as  problems  affecting  Cambodia —
and  to  improve  the  Vietnamese  position  wherein  U.S.  public  opinion  is  con-
cerned. He  then  said  that  he  is  reluctant  to  start  off  by  saying  now  that  Nhu
has  to  go;  that  it  is  unrealistic.

3.  Mr.  McNamara  stated  that  he  favored  the  above  proposals  of  the  Sec-
retary of  State,  with  one  additional  step — that  is  to  establish  quickly  and  firmly
our  line  of  communication  between  Lodge,  Harkins  and  the  GVN.  He  pointed
out  that  at  the  moment  our  channels  of  communication  are  essentially  broken
and  that  they  should  be  reinstituted  at  all  costs.

4.  Mr.  Rusk  added  that  we  must  do  our  best  not  to  permit  Diem  to  decapi-
tate his  military  command  in  light  of  its  obviously  adverse  effect  on  the  prose-
cution of  the  war.  At  this  point  he  asked  if  anyone  present  had  any  doubt  in
his  mind  but  that  the  coup  was  off.

5.  Mr.  Kattenburg  said  that  he  had  some  remaining  doubt;  that  we  have  not
yet  sent  the  generals  a  strong  enough  message;  that  the  BOA  statement  regard-


742 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II

ing  the  withdrawal  of  aid  was  most  important,  but  that  we  repudiated  it  too
soon.  He  stated  further  that  the  group  should  take  note  of  the  fact  that  General
Harkins  did  not  carry  out  his  instructions  with  respect  to  communication  with
the  generals.  Mr.  Rusk  interrupted  Kattenburg  to  state  that,  to  the  contrary,  he
believed  Harkins'  conduct  was  exactly  correct  in  light  of  the  initial  response
which  he  received  from  General  Kheim  (they  were  referring  to  Harkins'  report
in  MACV  1583).

6.  Mr.  Hilsman  commented  that,  in  his  view,  the  generals  are  not  now  going
to  move  unless  they  are  pressed  by  a  revolt  from  below.  In  this  connection  Am-
bassador Nolting  warned  that  in  the  uncoordinated  Vietnamese  structure  any-
thing can  happen,  and  that  while  an  organized  successful  coup  is  out,  there
might  be  small  flurries  by  irresponsible  dissidents  at  any  time.

7.  Mr.  Hilsman  undertook  to  present  four  basic  factors  which  bear  directly
on  the  problem  confronting  the  U.S.  now.  They  are,  in  his  view:

a.  The  mood  of  the  people,  particularly  the  middle  level  officers,  non-
commissioned officers  and  middle  level  bureaucrats,  who  are  most  restive.
Mr.  McNamara  interrupted  to  state  that  he  had  seen  no  evidence  of  this
and  General  Taylor  commented  that  he  had  seen  none  either,  but  would
like  to  see  such  evidence  as  Hilsman  could  produce.  Mr.  Kattenburg  com-
mented that  the  middle  level  officers  and  bureaucrats  are  uniformly  critical
of  the  government,  to  which  Mr.  McNamara  commented  that  if  this  is  in-
deed the  fact  we  should  know  about  it.

b.  The  second  basic  factor,  as  outlined  by  Hilsman,  was  what  effect  will
be  felt  on  our  programs  elsewhere  in  Asia  if  we  acquiesce  to  a  strong  Nhu-
dominated  government.  In  this  connection,  he  reported  that  there  is  a
Korean  study  now  underway  on  just  how  much  repression  the  United
States  will  tolerate  before  pulling  out  her  aid.  Mr.  McNamara  stated  that
he  had  not  seen  this  study  and  would  be  anxious  to  have  it.

c.  The  third  basic  factor  is  Mr.  Nhu,  his  personality  and  his  policy.  Hils-
man recalled  that  Nhu  has  once  already  launched  an  effort  aimed  at  with-
drawal of  our  province  advisors  and  stated  that  he  is  sure  he  is  in  conver-
sation with  the  French.  He  gave,  as  supporting  evidence,  the  content  of  an
intercepted  message,  which  Mr.  Bundy  asked  to  see.  Ambassador  Nolting
expressed  the  opinion  that  Nhu  will  not  make  a  deal  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  on
Ho's  terms.

d.  The  fourth  point  is  the  matter  of  U.S.  and  world  opinion,  Hilsman
stated  that  this  problem  was  moving  to  a  political  and  diplomatic  plane.
Part  of  the  problem,  he  said,  is  the  press,  which  concludes  incorrectly  that
we  have  the  ability  to  change  the  things  in  Vietnam  of  which  they  are
critical.  To  this  Mr.  Murrow  added  that  this  problem  of  press  condemna-
tion is  now  worldwide.

8.  Mr.  Kattenburg  stated  that  as  recently  as  last  Thursday  it  was  the  belief
of  Ambassador  Lodge  that,  if  we  undertake  to  live  with  this  repressive  regime,
with  its  bayonets  at  every  street  corner  and  its  transparent  negotiations  with
puppet  bonzes,  we  are  going  to  be  thrown  out  of  the  country  in  six  months.  He
stated  that  at  this  juncture  it  would  be  better  for  us  to  make  the  decision  to  get
out  honorably.  He  went  on  to  say  that,  having  been  acquainted  with  Diem  for
ten  years,  he  was  deeply  disappointed  in  him,  saying  that  he  will  not  separate
from  his  brother.  It  was  Kattenburg's  view  that  Diem  will  get  very  little  support
from  the  military  and,  as  time  goes  on,  he  will  get  less  and  less  support  and  the
country  will  go  steadily  down  hill.


Documents  743


9.  General  Taylor  asked  what  Kattenburg  meant  when  he  said  that  we  would
be  forced  out  of  Vietnam  within  six  months.  Kattenburg  replied  that  in  from
six  months  to  a  year,  as  the  people  see  we  are  losing  the  war,  they  will  gradually
go  to  the  other  side  and  we  will  be  obliged  to  leave.  Ambassador  Nolting  ex-
pressed general  disagreement  with  Mr.  Kattenburg.  He  said  that  the  unfavorable
activity  which  motivated  Kattenburg's  remarks  was  confined  to  the  city  and,
while  city  support  of  Diem  is  doubtless  less  now,  it  is  not  greatly  so.  He  said  that
it  is  improper  to  overlook  the  fact  that  we  have  done  a  tremendous  job  toward
winning  the  Vietnam  war,  working  with  this  same  imperfect,  annoying  govern-
ment.

10.  Mr.  Kattenburg  added  that  there  is  one  new  factor — the  population,
which  was  in  high  hopes  of  expelling  the  Nhus  after  the  VOA  announcement
regarding  cessation  of  aid;  now,  under  the  heel  of  Nhu's  military  repression,  they
would  quickly  lose  heart.

11.  Secretary  Rusk  commented  that  Kattenburg's  recital  was  largely  specu-
lative; that  it  would  be  far  better  for  us  to  start  on  the  firm  basis  of  two  things
— that  we  will  not  pull  out  of  Vietnam  until  the  war  is  won,  and  that  we  will
not  run  a  coup.  Mr,  McNamara  expressed  agreement  with  this  view.

12.  Mr.  Rusk  then  said  that  we  should  present  questions  to  Lodge  which  fall
within  these  parameters.  He  added  that  he  believes  we  have  good  proof  that
we  have  been  winning  the  war,  particularly  the  contrast  between  the  first  six
months  of  1962  and  the  first  six  months  of  1963.  He  then  asked  the  Vice  Presi-
dent if  he  had  any  contribution  to  make.

13.  The  Vice  President  stated  that  he  agreed  with  Secretary  Rusk's  conclusions
completely;  that  he  had  great  reservations  himself  with  respect  to  a  coup,  par-
ticularly so  because  he  had  never  really  seen  a  genuine  alternative  to  Diem.  He
stated  that  from  both  a  practical  and  a  political  viewpoint,  it  would  be  a  disaster
to  pull  out;  that  we  should  stop  playing  cops  and  robbers  and  get  back  to  talk-
ing straight  to  the  GVN,  and  that  we  should  once  again  go  about  winning  the
war.  He  stated  that  after  our  communications  with  them  are  genuinely  reestab-
lished, it  may  be  necessary  for  someone  to  talk  rough  to  them — perhaps  Gen-
eral Taylor.  He  said  further  that  he  had  been  greatly  impressed  with  Ambassa-
dor Nolting's  views  and  agreed  with  Mr.  McNamara's  conclusions.

14.  General  Taylor  raised  the  question  of  whether  we  should  change  the
disposition  of  the  forces  which  had  been  set  in  motion  as  a  result  of  the  crisis.
It  was  agreed  that  there  should  be  no  change  in  the  existing  disposition  for  the
time  being.

V.  H.  Krulak

Major  General,  USMC


[Document  136]

CAP  63516

WHITE  HOUSE  TO  LODGE  17  September  1963

1.  Highest  level  meeting  today  has  approved  broad  outline  of  an  action  propos-
als program  designed  to  obtain  from  GVN,  if  possible,  reforms  and  changes  in
personnel  necessary  to  maintain  support  of  Vietnamese  and  US  opinion  in  war
against  Viet  Cong.  This  cable  reports  this  program  and  our  thinking  for  your
comment  before  a  final  decision.  Your  comment  requested  soonest.


744 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  11

2.  We  see  no  good  opportunity  for  action  to  remove  present  government  in
immediate  future;  therefore,  as  your  most  recent  messages  suggest,  we  must
for  the  present  apply  such  pressures  as  are  available  to  secure  whatever  modest
improvements  on  the  scene  may  be  possible.  We  think  it  likely  that  such  im-
provements can  make  a  difference,  at  least  in  the  short  run.  Such  a  course,
moreover,  is  consistent  with  more  drastic  effort  as  and  when  means  become
available,  and  we  will  be  in  touch  on  other  channels  on  this  problem.

3.  We  share  view  in  your  523  that  best  available  reinforcement  to  your  bar-
gaining position  in  this  interim  period  is  clear  evidence  that  all  U.S.  assistance  is
granted  only  on  your  say-so.  Separate  telegram  discusses  details  of  this  pro-
gram, but  in  this  message  we  specifically  authorize  you  to  apply  any  controls
you  think  helpful  for  this  purpose.  You  are  authorized  to  delay  any  delivery  of
supplies  or  transfer  of  funds  by  any  agency  until  you  are  satisfied  that  delivery  is
in  U.S.  interest,  bearing  in  mind  that  it  is  not  our  current  policy  to  cut  off  aid,
entirely.  In  other  words,  we  share  your  view  that  it  will  be  helpful  for  GVN  to
understand  that  your  personal  approval  is  a  necessary  part  of  all  U.S.  assistance.
We  think  it  may  be  particularly  desirable  for  you  to  use  this  authority  in  limit-
ing or  rerouting  any  and  all  forms  of  assistance  and  support  which  now  go  to  or
through  Nhu  or  individuals  like  Tung  who  are  associated  with  him.  This  au-
thorization specifically  includes  aid  actions  currently  held  in  abeyance  and  you
are  authorized  to  set  those  in  train  or  hold  them  up  further  in  your  discretion.
We  leave  entirely  in  your  hands  decisions  on  the  degree  of  privacy  or  publicity
you  wish  to  give  to  this  process.

4.  Subject  to  your  comment  and  amendment  our  own  list  of  possible  helpful
action  by  government  runs  as  follows  in  approximate  order  of  importance:

A.  Clear  the  air — Diem  should  get  everyone  back  to  work  and  get  them
to  focus  on  winning  the  war.  He  should  be  broadminded  and  com-
passionate in  his  attitude  toward  those  who  have,  for  understandable
reasons,  found  it  difficult  under  recent  circumstances  fully  to  support
him.  A  real  spirit  of  reconciliation  could  work  wonders  on  the  people
he  leads;  a  punitive,  harsh  or  autocratic  attitude  could  only  lead  to
further  resistance.

B.  Buddhists  and  students — Let  them  out  and  leave  them  unmolested.  This
more  than  anything  else  would  demonstrate  the  return  of  a  better  day
and  the  refocusing  on  the  main  job  at  hand,  the  war.

C.  Press:  The  press  should  be  allowed  full  latitude  of  expression.  Diem
will  be  criticized,  but  leniency  and  cooperation  with  the  domestic  and
foreign  press  at  this  time  would  bring  praise  for  his  leadership  in  due
course.  While  tendentious  reporting  is  irritating,  suppression  of  news
leads  to  much  more  serious  trouble.

D.  Secret  and  combat  police — Confine  its  role  to  operations  against  the
VC  and  abandon  operations  against  non-Communist  opposition  groups
thereby  indicating  clearly  that  a  period  of  reconciliation  and  political
stability  has  returned.

E.  Cabinet  changes  to  inject  new  untainted  blood,  remove  targets  of  popu-
lar discontent.

F.  Elections — These  should  be  held,  should  be  free,  and  should  be  widely
observed.

G.  Assembly — Assembly  should  be  convoked  soon  after  the  elections.  The
government  should  submit  its  policies  to  it  and  should  receive  its  con-


Documents  745

fidence.  An  assembly  resolution  would  be  most  useful  for  external  im-
age purposes.

H.  Party — Can  Lao  party  should  not  be  covert  or  semi-covert  but  a  broad
association  of  supporters  engaged  in  a  common,  winning  cause.  This
could  perhaps  be  best  accomplished  by  [words  missing]  starting  afresh.
I.  Repeal  or  suitable  amendment  Decree  10.
J.  Rehabilitation  by  ARVN  of  pagodas.
K.  Establishment  of  Ministry  of  Religious  AlTairs.

L.  Liberation  of  passport  issuances  and  currency  restrictions  enabling  all
to  leave  who  wish  to.

M.  Acceptance  of  Buddhist  Inquiry  Mission  from  World  Federation  to  re-
port true  facts  of  situation  to  world.

5.  You  may  wish  to  add  or  subtract  from  the  above  list,  but  need  to  set  psy-
chological tone  and  image  is  paramount.  Diem  has  taken  positive  actions  in  past
of  greater  or  less  scope  than  those  Hsted,  but  they  have  had  little  practical  po-
litical effect  since  they  were  carried  out  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  them  hollow
or,  even  if  real,  unbelievable  (e.g.,  martial  law  already  nominally  lifted.  Assem-
bly elections  scheduled,  and  puppet  bonzes  established).

6.  Specific  "reforms"  are  apt  to  have  little  impact  without  dramatic,  symbolic
move  which  convinces  Vietnamese  that  reforms  are  real.  As  practical  matter
we  share  your  view  that  this  can  best  be  achieved  by  some  visible  reduction  in
influence  of  Nhus,  who  are  symbol  to  disaffected  of  all  that  they  dislike  in  GVN.
This  we  think  would  require  Nhus  departure  from  Saigon  and  preferably  Viet-
nam at  least  for  extended  vacation.  We  recognize  the  strong  possibility  that
these  and  other  pressures  may  not  produce  this  result,  but  we  are  convinced
that  it  is  necessary  to  try.

7.  In  Washington,  in  this  phase,  we  would  plan  to  maintain  a  posture  of  dis-
approval of  recent  GVN  actions,  but  we  would  not  expect  to  make  public  our
specific  requests  of  Diem.  Your  comment  on  public  aspects  of  this  phase  is  par-
ticularly needed.

8.  We  note  your  reluctance  to  continue  dialogue  with  Diem  until  you  have
more  to  say,  but  we  continue  to  believe  that  discussions  with  him  are  at  a  mini-
mum an  important  source  of  intelligence  and  may  conceivably  be  a  means  of
exerting  some  persuasive  effect  even  in  his  present  state  of  mind.  If  you  believe
that  full  control  of  U.S.  assistance  provides  you  with  means  of  resuming  dia-
logue, we  hope  you  will  do  so.  We  ourselves  can  see  much  virtue  in  effort  to  rea-
son even  with  an  unreasonable  man  when  he  is  on  a  collision  course.  We
repeat,  however,  that  this  is  a  matter  for  your  judgment.

9.  Meanwhile,  there  is  increasing  concern  here  with  strictly  military  aspects  of
the  problem,  both  in  terms  of  actual  progress  of  operations  and  of  need  to  make
effective  case  with  Congress  for  continued  prosecution  of  the  effort.  To  meet
these  needs.  President  has  decided  to  send  Secretary  of  Defense  and  General
Taylor  to  Vietnam,  arriving  early  next  week.  It  will  be  emphasized  here  that  it
is  a  military  mission  and  that  all  political  decisions  are  being  handled  through
you  as  President's  Senior  Representative.

10.  We  repeat  that  political  program  outlined  above  awaits  your  comment  be-
fore final  decision.  President  particularly  emphasizes  that  it  is  fully  open  to  your
criticism  and  amendment.  It  is  obviously  an  interim  plan  and  further  decisions
may  become  necessary  very  soon.


746 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


[Document  137]

STATE  431

FROM  THE  PRESIDENT  TO  LODGE


18  September  1963


I  appreciate  your  prompt  comment  and  I  quite  understand  the  problem  you
see  in  visit  of  McNamara  and  Taylor.  At  the  same  time  my  need  for  this  visit
is  very  great  indeed,  and  I  believe  we  can  work  out  an  arrangement  which  takes
care  of  your  basic  concerns.  Will  you  let  me  have  your  comment  on  the  fol-
lowing as  soon  as  possible:

1 .  We  can  make  it  clear  here,  and  McNamara  and  Taylor  can  make  it  clear
in  Saigon  to  the  GVN,  that  this  visit  is  not  designed  to  bring  comfort  to  Diem.
My  own  thought  is  that  in  any  visit  McNamara  makes  to  Diem  he  will  want  to
speak  some  home  truths  on  the  military  consequences  of  the  current  difficulties,
and  also  to  make  it  clear  that  the  United  States  Government  is  not  open  to
oriental  divisive  tactics.

2.  We  can  readily  set  up  this  visit  as  one  which  you  and  I  have  decided  on
together,  or  even  one  which  is  sent  in  response  to  your  own  concern  about
winning  the  war  in  the  current  situation.  For  example,  we  could  announce  that
the  purpose  of  the  mission  is  to  consider  with  you  the  practical  ways  and  means
of  carrying  out  my  announced  policy  that  we  will  support  activities  which  will
further  the  war  effort  in  South  Vietnam  and  avoid  supporting  activities  which
do  not.  The  whole  cast  of  the  visit  will  be  that  of  military  consultation  with  you
on  the  execution  of  the  policy  which  you  and  I  have  determined.

3.  As  our  last  message  said,  my  own  central  concern  in  sending  this  mission
is  to  make  sure  that  my  senior  military  advisors  are  equipped  with  a  solid  on-
thc-spot  understanding  of  the  situation,  as  a  basis  both  for  their  participation
in  our  councils  here,  and  for  the  Administrations  accounting  to  the  Congress
on  this  critically  important  contest  with  the  Communists.  Having  grown  up  in  an
Ambassador's  house,  I  am  well  trained  in  the  importance  of  protecting  the  effec-
tiveness of  the  man  on-the-spot,  and  I  want  to  handle  this  particular  visit  in  a
way  which  contributes  to  and  does  not  detract  from  your  own  responsibilities.
But  in  the  tough  weeks  which  I  see  ahead,  I  just  do  not  see  any  substitute  for
the  ammunition  I  will  get  from  an  on-the-spot  and  authoritative  military  ap-
praisal.

4.  I  do  not  think  I  can  delay  announcement  of  the  McNamara  mission  be-
yond Saturday,  and  I  will  be  grateful  for  a  further  prompt  comment  on  this  mes-
sage so  that  we  can  be  firmly  together  on  the  best  possible  handling  of  the  an-
nouncement and  of  the  mission  itself.


[Document  138]

SAIGON  544

(Ref  White  House  Msg  CAP  63516  atchd  at  Wash  Guidance  TAB)

FROM  LODGE  TO  STATE FOR  PRESIDENT  ONLY  19  Sep  1963

1.  Agree  that  no  good  opportunity  for  action  to  remove  present  government
in  immediate  future  is  apparent  and  that  we  should,  therefore,  do  whatever  we
can  as  an  interim  measure  pending  such  an  evantuality.


Documents  147


2.  Virtually  all  the  topics  under  paragraph  4,  letters  A  to  M,  have  been
taken  up  with  Diem  and  Nhu  at  one  time  or  another,  most  of  them  by  me  per-
sonally. They  think  that  most  of  them  would  either  involve  destroying  the  po-
litical structure  on  which  they  rest  or  loss  of  face  or  both.  We,  therefore,  could
not  realistically  hope  for  more  than  lip  service.  Frankly,  I  see  no  opportunity  at
all  for  substantive  changes.  Detailed  comments  on  items  A  to  M  are  contained
in  separate  telegram.

3.  There  are  signs  that  Diem-Nhu  are  somewhat  bothered  by  my  silence.  Ac-
cording to  one  well  placed  source,  they  are  guessing  and  off-balance  and  "des-
perately anxious"  to  know  what  U.S.  posture  is  to  be.  They  may  be  preparing
some  kind  of  a  public  relations  package,  possibly  to  be  opened  after  the  elec-
tions. I  believe  that  for  me  to  press  Diem  on  things  which  are  not  in  the  cards
and  to  repeat  what  we  have  said  several  times  already  would  be  a  little  shrill  and
would  make  us  look  weak,  particularly  in  view  of  my  talk  with  Nhu  last  night
at  a  dinner  where  I  had  a  golden  opportunity  to  make  the  main  points  of  your
CAP  63516  as  reported  in  541.

4.  Also,  I  doubt  that  a  public  relations  package  will  meet  needs  of  situation
which  seems  particularly  grave  to  me,  notably  in  the  light  of  General  Big
Minh's  opinion  expressed  very  privately  yesterday  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  stead-
ily gaining  in  strength;  have  more  of  the  population  on  their  side  than  has  the
GVN;  that  arrests  are  continuing  and  that  the  prisons  are  full;  that  more  and
more  students  are  going  over  to  the  Viet  Cong;  that  there  is  great  graft  and
corruption  in  the  Vietnamese  administration  of  our  aid;  and  that  the  "Heart  of
the  Army  is  not  in  the  war."  All  this  by  Vietnamese  No.  1  General  is  now
echoed  by  Secretary  of  Defense  Thuan  (See  my  542),  who  wants  to  leave  the
country,

5.  As  regards  your  paragraph  3  on  withholding  of  aid,  I  still  hope  that  I  may
be  informed  of  methods,  as  requested  in  my  478,  September  11,  which  will  en-
able us  to  apply  sanctions  in  a  way  which  will  really  affect  Diem  and  Nhu  with-
out precipitating  an  economic  collapse  and  without  impeding  the  war  effort.
We  are  studying  this  here  and  have  not  yet  found  a  solution.  If  a  way  to  do  this
were  to  be  found,  it  would  be  one  of  the  greatest  discoveries  since  the  enact-
ment of  the  Marshall  Plan  in  1947  because,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  U.S.  had  never
yet  been  able  to  control  any  of  the  very  unsatisfactory  governments  through
which  we  have  had  to  work  in  our  many  very  successful  attempts  to  make  these
countries  strong  enough  to  stand  alone.

6.  I  also  believe  that  whatever  sanctions  we  may  discover  should  be  directly
tied  to  a  promising  coup  d'etat  and  should  not  be  applied  without  such  a  coup
being  in  prospect.  In  this  connection,  I  believe  that  we  should  pursue  contact
with  Big  Minh  and  urge  him  along  if  he  looks  like  acting.  I  particularly  think
that  the  idea  of  supporting  a  Vietnamese  Army  independent  of  the  government
should  be  energetically  studied.

7.  I  will,  of  course,  give  instructions  that  programs  which  one  can  be  effec-
tively held  up  should  be  held  up  and  not  released  without  my  approval  provided
that  this  can  be  done  without  serious  harmful  effect  to  the  people  and  to  the
war  effort.  Technical  assistance  and  (omission)  support  to  communications  sup-
port programs  may  be  one  way.  This  would  be  a  fly-speck  in  the  present  situa-
tion and  would  have  no  immediate  effect,  but  I  hope  that  U.S.  (omission)  may
get  Vietnamese  officials  into  the  habit  of  asking  me  to  release  items  which  are
held  up  and  that,  over  a  long  period  of  time,  it  might  create  opportunities  for
us  to  get  little  things  done.

8.  But  it  is  not  even  within  the  realm  of  possibility  that  such  a  technique


748 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

could  lead  them  to  do  anything  which  causes  loss  of  face  or  weakening  of  their
political  organization.  In  fact,  to  threaten  them  with  suppression  of  aid  might
well  defeat  our  purposes  and  might  make  a  bad  situation  very  much  worse.

9.  There  should  in  any  event  be  no  publicity  whatever  about  this  procedure.
If  it  is  possible  (omission)  a  program,  I  intend  to  (omission).

10.  As  regards  your  paragraph  6  and  "dramatic  symbolic  moves,"  I  really  do
not  think  they  could  understand  this  even  if  Thao  wanted  to,  although  I  have
talked  about  it  to  Diem,  and  to  Nhu  last  night  (See  my  541).  They  have  scant
comprehension  of  what  it  is  to  appeal  to  public  opinion  as  they  have  really  no
interest  in  any  other  opinion  than  their  own.  I  have  repeatedly  brought  up  the
question  of  Nhu's  departure  and  have  stressed  that  if  he  would  just  stay  away
until  after  Christmas,  it  might  help  get  the  Appropriation  Bill  through.  This
seems  like  a  small  thing  to  us  but  to  them  it  seems  tremendous  as  they  are  quite
sure  that  the  Army  would  take  over  if  he  even  stepped  out  of  the  country.

11.  Your  paragraph  8.  I  have,  of  course,  no  objection  to  seeing  Diem  at  any
time  that  it  would  be  helpful.  But  I  would  rather  let  him  sweat  for  awhile  and
not  go  to  see  him  unless  I  have  something  really  new  to  bring  up.  I  would  much
prefer  to  wait  until  I  find  some  part  of  the  AID  program  to  hold  up  in  which
he  is  interested  and  then  have  him  ask  me  to  come  and  see  him.  For  example,
last  night's  dinner  which  I  suspect  Nhu  of  stimulating  is  infinitely  better  than
for  me  to  take  the  initiative  for  an  appointment  and  to  call  at  the  office.  Perhaps
my  silence  had  something  to  do  with  it.


[Document  139]

September  21,  1963

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

It  may  be  useful  to  put  on  paper  our  understanding  of  the  purpose  of  your  visit
to  South  Vietnam.  I  am  asking  you  to  go  because  of  my  desire  to  have  the  best
possible  on-the-spot  appraisal  of  the  military  and  paramilitary  effort  to  defeat
the  Viet  Cong.  The  program  developed  after  General  Taylor's  mission  and  car-
ried forward  under  your  close  supervision  has  brought  heartening  results,  at
least  until  recently.  The  events  in  South  Vietnam  since  May  have  now  raised
serious  questions  both  about  the  present  prospects  for  success  against  the  Viet
Cong  and  still  more  about  the  future  effectiveness  of  this  effort  unless  there  can
be  important  political  improvement  in  the  country.  It  is  in  this  context  that  I
now  need  your  appraisal  of  the  situation.  If  the  prognosis  in  your  judgment  is
not  hopeful,  I  would  like  your  views  on  what  action  must  be  taken  by  the
South  Vietnamese  Government  and  what  steps  our  Government  should  take  to
lead  the  Vietnamese  to  that  action.

Ambassador  Lodge  has  joined  heartily  in  supporting  this  mission  and  I  will  rely
on  you  both  for  the  closest  exchange  of  views.  It  is  obvious  that  the  overall
political  situation  and  the  military  and  paramilitary  effort  are  closely  intercon-
nected in  all  sorts  of  ways,  and  in  executing  your  responsibility  for  appraisal  of
the  military  and  paramilitary  problem  I  expect  that  you  will  consult  fully  with
Ambassador  Lodge  on  related  political  and  social  questions.  I  will  also  expect
you  to  examine  with  Ambassador  Lodge  ways  and  means  of  fashioning  all  forms
of  our  assistance  to  South  Vietnam  so  that  it  will  support  our  foreign  policy
objectives  more  precisely.

I  am  providing  you  separately  with  a  letter  from  me  to  President  Diem  which


Documents  749


Ambassador  Lodge  and  you  should  discuss  and  which  the  Ambassador
should  del  iver  on  the  occasion  of  a  call  on  President  Diem  if  after  discussion
and  reference  to  me  I  conclude  that  such  a  letter  is  desirable.

In  my  judgment  the  question  of  the  progress  of  the  contest  in  South  Vietnam
is  of  the  first  importance  and  in  executing  this  mission  you  should  take  as  much
time  as  is  necessary  for  a  thorough  examination  both  in  Saigon  and  in  the  field.

John  F.  Kennedy


[Document  140]

STATE  458,  22  September  1963

EYES  ONLY  FOR  AMBASSADOR  LODGE  FROM  BALL

Understand  desire  for  guidance  expressed  your  577.  Pending  further  review  of
situation  by  President  which  will  follow  your  consultation  with  McNamara
and  Taylor  we  wish  to  give  you  following  interim  guidance:

1.  The  United  States  intends  to  continue  its  efforts  to  assist  the  Vietnamese
people  in  their  struggle  against  the  Viet  Cong.

2.  Recent  events  have  put  in  question  the  possibility  of  success  in  these  efforts
unless  there  can  be  important  improvements  in  the  government  of  South  Viet-
nam.

3.  It  is  the  policy  of  the  United  States  to  bring  about  such  improvements.
Further  specific  guidance  on  your  meeting  with  Diem  being  developed  here  and
will  be  subject  further  consultation  with  you.  In  any  event  the  President  believes
object  of  this  meeting  should  be  to  increase  your  authority  and  leverage  with
Diem  government.  In  meantime  CAP  63516  still  represents  Washington's  cur-
rent thinking  on  specifics.  A  possible  Presidential  letter  to  Diem  is  in  prepara-
tion and  will  be  forwarded  for  your  comments  before  a  decision  on  delivery.


[Document  141]

Memorandum  of  Conversation  September  29,  1963

Diem,  Thuan,  Lodge,  McNamara,  Taylor  Parkins,  Flott

.  .  .  The  war  was  going  well,  thanks  in  large  measure  to  the  strategic
hamlets'  program.  Due  to  that  program  the  VC  enemy  was  having  increasing
difficulties  in  finding  food  and  recruits,  and  was  being  steadily  forced  into  in-
creasingly difficult  and  unrewarding  tactical  situations.  .  .  .  He  said  that  the
British  had  given  the  Vietnamese  government  valuable  advice  at  the  outset  of
the  program  based  on  British  experience  in  Malaya.  He  said  that  for  a  variety
of  local  reasons,  his  government  had  not  followed  the  British  advice  in  all
instances.  He  recalled  that  the  British  had  advised  him  to  consolidate  and  hold
firmly  one  area  before  extending  the  strategic  hamlet  program  to  another.
They  had  also  advised  him  to  hold  the  arterial  coastal  highway  and  consolidate
the  area  between  it  and  the  seacoast  before  trying  to  secure  areas  further  inland.
He  noted  that  the  British  had  said  that  the  strategic  hamlets'  program  should
be  limited  at  first  to  the  most  populus  and  most  productive  areas  of  the  country.
He  remarked  in  this  connection  he  had  made  important  departures  from  the


750 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

British  plan  but  always  for  good  and  valid  reasons.  Outlining  his  thoughts  on
maps  he  explained  that  if  he  had  disregarded  even  for  a  short  time  the  under-
populated and  comparatively  unproductive  highlands,  these  areas  would  have
become  a  base  for  VC  attacks  and  for  a  VC  drive  to  the  sea  to  cut  the  highway
and  split  the  Republic.  He  acknowledged  their  strategic  hamlets'  program  was
overextended  and  that  in  some  areas  the  VC  could  attack  and  overwhelm  the
poorly  garrisoned  strategic  hamlets.  He  said  that  he  realized  some  strategic  ham-
lets were  set  up  before  the  defense  personnel  were  properly  trained  or  armed,
but  that  on  balance  both  the  risks  and  the  losses  were  acceptable.  For  example,
he  said  he  could  push  ahead  rapidly  with  the  establishment  of  ten  sub-standard
strategic  hamlets.  The  VC  could  attack  these  and  overwhelm,  say,  two  of  them,
but  if  two  fell  eight  others  would  survive  and  grow  stronger.  And  the  area  within
which  the  VC  could  operate  with  impunity  would  shrink  faster  than  otherwise
would  have  been  the  case.

Another  reason  he  gave  for  making  departures  from  the  British  plan  was
that  by  so  doing  he  could  put  isolated,  strategic  hamlets  into  key  crossroads
and  junction  points  and  force  on  the  VC  considerable  detours  in  their  supply
routes.  He  said  he  had  taken  a  calculated  risk  of  opening  highways  for  the
areas  through  which  they  passed  were  absolutely  secure.  He  said  on  the  whole
he  was  satisfied  with  this  gamble  and  that  thanks  to  his  willingness  to  make
departures  from  the  plan  and  accept  risks  the  war  effort  was  further  along.
.  .  .  He  noted  the  elections  held  a  few  days  before  had  been  a  great  success.
Many  more  people  voted  than  ever  before,  thanks  in  part  to  the  fact  that  there
were  about  fifty  percent  more  ballot  boxes  than  at  the  time  of  the  last  election.
Communists  efforts  to  disrupt  the  voting  had  been  a  failure,  partly  as  a  result
of  several  security  operations  in  which  all  three  security  services  participated.
Again,  the  vast  extension  of  the  strategic  hamlets'  program  made  it  easier  and
safer  for  people  to  vote  than  in  past  years,  and  he  was  touched  at  the  interest
that  even  the  simplest  peasants  in  exercising  their  suffrage  and  participating
in  the  democratic  process.  In  spite  of  the  improve  security  situation  at  least
two  people  were  killed  by  VC  because  they  voted,  and  he  showed  this  loss
deeply  and  personally.  The  discussion  groups  in  the  strategic  hamlets  had
further  increased  people's  interest  in  government  and  voting.  (Ambassador's
comment:  This  contrasts  with  well-founded  observations.  The  truck  loads  of
soldiers  were  carted  around  in  trucks  so  that  they  could  vote  several  times  in
one  day.)  .  .  .  Diem  noted  that  while  the  total  number  of  VC  had  declined
in  the  past  year,  the  number  of  relatively  large  units,  companies  and  battalions
engaged  had  risen.  He  explained  this  was  because  of  the  success  of  the  strategic
hamlet's  program.  In  the  past  the  VC  could  get  what  they  wanted  from  the
village — food  and  recruits — with  a  mere  handful  of  men.  Now  they  were  in-
creasingly forced  to  mount  a  company  scale  attack  to  get  into  the  village.
Furthermore,  since  the  whole  rural  environment  had  become  much  more
actively  hostile  to  the  VC,  they  were  forced  to  group  in  larger  units  to  survive.
These  larger  units,  of  course,  offered  better  targets  to  the  government  forces.
The  fact  that  there  was  a  greater  use  of  large  units  by  the  VC  is  one  more  indi-
cation of  how  well  the  war  was  going  for  the  government.  It  was  one  more  indi-
cation that  the  VC  found  themselves  more  and  more  in  a  position  of  being  like
a  foreign  expeditionary  corps  rather  than  as  a  force  that  could  exist  and  move
in  the  population  like  a  fish  in  the  sea.  .  .  .

Secretary  McNamara  said  he  was  concerned  over  a  number  of  things:  that
while  the  progress  of  the  war  was  reasonably  satisfactory,  he  was  concerned
over  a  number  of  things.  There  was  the  political  unrest  in  Saigon  and  the  evident


Documents  751


inability  of  the  government  to  provide  itself  with  a  broad  political  base.  There
was  the  disturbing  probability  that  the  war  effort  would  then  be  damaged  by
the  government's  political  deficiencies  and  the  attendant  loss  of  popularity.  The
recent  wave  of  repressions  have  alarmed  public  opinion  both  in  Vietnam  and
in  the  United  States.  .  .  .  The  Secretary  warned  Diem  that  public  opinion  in
the  U.S.  seriously  questioned  the  wisdom  or  necessity  of  the  U.S.  government's
aiding  a  government  that  was  so  unpopular  at  home,  and  it  seemed  increasingly
unlikely  to  forge  the  kind  of  national  union  or  purpose  that  could  bring  the  war
to  an  early  and  victorious  conclusion.

(Comment:  Diem  offered  absolutely  no  assurances  that  he  would  take  any
steps  in  responses  to  the  representations  made  to  American  visitors.  In  fact,  he
said  nothing  to  indicate  or  acknowledge  that  he  had  received  even  friendly
advice.  His  manner  was  one  of  at  least  outward  serenity  and  of  a  man  who  had
patiently  explained  a  great  deal  and  who  hoped  he  had  thus  corrected  a  number
of  misapprehensions.)


[Document  142]

THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
WASHINGTON

2  October  1963

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

Subject: Report  of  McNamara-Taylor  Mission  to  South  Vietnam

Your  memorandum  of  21  September  1963  directed  that  General  Taylor
and  Secretary  McNamara  proceed  to  South  Vietnam  to  appraise  the  military
and  para-military  effort  to  defeat  the  Viet  Cong  and  to  consider,  in  consulta-
tion with  Ambassador  Lodge,  related  political  and  social  questions.  You  further
directed  that,  if  the  prognosis  in  our  judgment  was  not  hopeful,  we  should  pre-
sent our  views  of  what  action  must  be  taken  by  the  South  Vietnam  Government
and  what  steps  our  Government  should  take  to  lead  the  Vietnamese  to  that
action.

Accompanied  by  representatives  of  the  Stale  Department,  CIA,  and  your
Staff,  we  have  conducted  an  intensive  program  of  visits  to  key  operational  areas,
supplemented  bv  discussions  with  U.S.  officials  in  all  major  U.S.  Agencies  as
well  as  officials  of  the  GVN  and  third  countries.

We  have  also  discussed  our  findings  in  detail  with  Ambassador  Lodge,  and
with  General  Harkins  and  Admiral  Felt.

The  following  report  is  concurred  in  by  the  StafT  Members  of  the  mission  as
individuals,  subject  to  the  exceptions  noted.

I. CONCLUSIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS

A.  CONCLUSIONS

1.  The  mihtary  campaign  has  made  great  progress  and  continues  to  pro-
gress.

2.  There  are  serious  political  tensions  in  Saigon  (and  perhaps  elsewhere  in
South  Vietnam)  where  the  Diem-Nhu  government  is  becoming  increasingly
unpopular.


752 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

3.  There  is  no  solid  evidence  of  the  possibiUty  of  a  successful  coup,  although
assassination  of  Diem  or  Nhu  is  always  a  possibility.

4.  Although  some,  and  perhaps  an  increasing  number,  of  GVN  military
officers  are  becoming  hostile  to  the  government,  they  are  more  hostile  to  the
Viet  Cong  than  to  the  government  and  at  least  for  the  near  future  they  will
continue  to  perform  their  military  duties.

5.  Further  repressive  actions  by  Diem  and  Nhu  could  change  the  present
favorable  military  trends.  On  the  other  hand,  a  return  to  more  moderate  meth-
ods of  control  and  administration,  unlikely  though  it  may  be,  would  substan-
tially mitigate  the  political  crisis.

6.  It  is  not  clear  that  pressures  exerted  by  the  U.S.  will  move  Diem  and
Nhu  toward  moderation.  Indeed,  pressures  may  increase  their  obduracy.  But
unless  such  pressures  are  exerted,  they  are  almost  certain  to  continue  past  pat-
terns of  behavior.


B. RECOMMENDA  TIONS
We  recommend  that:

1.  General  Harkins  review  with  Diem  the  military  changes  necessary  to
complete  the  military  campaign  in  the  Northern  and  Central  areas  (I,  II,  and
III  Corps)  by  the  end  of  1964,  and  in  the  Delta  (IV  Corps)  by  the  end  of  1965.
This  review  would  consider  the  need  for  such  changes  as:

a.  A  further  shift  of  military  emphasis  and  strength  to  the  Delta  (IV
Corps) .

b.  An  increase  in  the  military  tempo  in  all  corps  areas,  so  that  all  com-
bat troops  are  in  the  Field  an  average  of  20  days  out  of  30  and  static
missions  are  ended.

c.  Emphasis  on  "clear  and  hold  operations"  instead  of  terrain  sweeps
which  have  little  permanent  value.

d.  The  expansion  of  personnel  in  combat  units  to  full  authorized  strength.

e.  The  training  and  arming  of  hamlet  militia  at  an  accelerated  rate,
especially  in  the  Delta.

f.  A  consolidation  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program,  especially  in  the
Delta,  and  action  to  insure  that  future  strategic  hamlets  are  not  built  until
they  can  be  protected,  and  until  civic  action  programs  can  be  introduced.

2.  A  program  be  established  to  train  Vietnamese  so  that  essential  functions
now  performed  by  U.S.  military  personnel  can  be  carried  out  by  Vietnamese  by
the  end  of  1965.  It  should  be  possible  to  withdraw  the  bulk  of  U.S.  personnel
by  that  time.

3.  In  accordance  with  the  program  to  train  progressively  Vietnamese  to  take
over  military  functions,  the  Defense  Department  should  announce  in  the  very
near  future  presently  prepared  plans  to  withdraw  1000  U.S.  military  personnel
by  the  end  of  1963.  This  action  should  be  explained  in  low  key  as  an  initial  step
in  a  long-term  program  to  replace  U.S.  personnel  with  trained  Vietnamese
without  impairment  of  the  war  effort.

4.  The  following  actions  be  taken  to  impress  upon  Diem  our  disapproval
of  his  political  program.


Documents  753


a.  Continue  to  withhold  commitment  of  funds  in  the  commodity  im-
port program,  but  avoid  a  formal  announcement.  The  potential  signifi-
cance of  the  withholding  of  commitments  for  the  1964  military  budget
should  be  brought  home  to  the  top  military  officers  in  working  level  con-
tacts between  USOM  and  MACV  and  the  Joint  General  Staff;  up  to
now  we  have  stated  $95  million  may  be  used  by  the  Vietnamese  as  a  plan-
ning level  for  the  commodity  import  program  for  1964.  Henceforth  we
could  make  clear  that  this  is  uncertain  both  because  of  lack  of  final  ap-
propriation action  by  the  Congress  and  because  of  executive  policy.

b.  Suspend  approval  of  the  pending  AID  loans  for  the  Saigon-Cholon
Waterworks  and  Saigon  Electric  Power  Project.  We  should  state  clearly
that  we  are  doing  so  as  a  matter  of  policy.

c.  Advice  Diem  that  MAP  and  CIA  support  for  designated  units,  now
under  Colonel  Tung's  control  (mostly  held  in  or  near  the  Saigon  area  for
political  reasons)  will  be  cut  off  unless  these  units  are  promptly  assigned
to  the  full  authority  of  the  Joint  General  Staff  and  transferred  to  the  field.

d.  Maintain  the  present  purely  "correct"  relations  with  the  top  GVN,
and  specifically  between  the  Ambassador  and  Diem.  Contact  betv*'een
General  Harkins  and  Diem  and  Defense  Secretary  Thuan  on  military  mat-
ters should  not,  however,  be  suspended,  as  this  remains  an  important
channel  of  advice.  USOM  and  USIA  should  also  seek  to  maintain  con-
tacts where  these  are  needed  to  push  forward  programs  in  support  of  the
effort  in  the  field,  while  taking  care  not  to  cut  across  the  basic  picture  of
U.S.  disapproval  and  uncertainty  of  U.S.  aid  intentions.  We  should  work
with  the  Diem  government  but  not  support  it.*

As  we  pursue  these  courses  of  action,  the  situation  must  be  closely  watched
to  see  what  steps  Diem  is  taking  to  reduce  repressive  practices  and  to  improve
the  effectiveness  of  the  military  effort.  We  should  set  no  fixed  criteria,  but  rec-
ognize that  we  would  have  to  decide  in  2-4  months  whether  to  move  to  more
drastic  action  or  try  to  carry  on  with  Diem  even  if  he  had  not  taken  significant
steps.

5.  At  this  time,  no  initiative  should  be  taken  to  encourage  actively  a  change
in  government.  Our  policy  should  be  to  seek  urgently  to  identify  and  build
contacts  with  an  alternative  leadership  if  and  when  it  appears.

6.  The  following  statement  be  approved  as  current  U.S.  policy  toward  South
Vietnam  and  constitute  the  substance  of  the  government  position  to  be  pre-
sented both  in  Congressional  testimony  and  in  public  statements.

a.  The  security  of  South  Vietnam  remains  vital  to  United  States  se-
curity. For  this  reason,  we  adhere  to  the  overriding  objective  of  denying
this  country  to  Communism  and  of  suppressing  the  Viet  Cong  insurgency
as  promptly  as  possible.  (By  suppressing  the  insurgency  we  mean  reducing
it  to  proportions  manageable  by  the  national  security  forces  of  the  GVN,
unassisted  by  the  presence  of  U.S.  military  forces.)  We  believe  the  U.S.
part  of  the  task  can  be  completed  by  the  end  of  1965,  the  terminal  date

*  Mr.  Colby  believes  that  the  official  "correct"  relationship  should  be  supplemented  by
selected  and  restricted  unofficial  and  personal  relationships  with  individuals  in  the
GVN,  approved  by  the  Ambassador,  where  persuasion  could  be  fruitful  without
derogation  of  the  official  U.S.  posture.


754 Gravel  Edition,  The  Pentagon  Papers  Vol.  II

which  we  are  taking  as  the  time  objective  of  our  counterinsurgency  pro-
grams.

b.  The  miUtary  program  in  Vietnam  has  made  progress  and  is  sound  in
principle.

c.  The  political  situation  in  Vietnam  remains  deeply  serious.  It  has  not
yet  significantly  affected  the  militar)'  effort,  but  could  do  so  at  some  time  in
the  future.  If  the  result  is  a  GVN  ineffective  in  the  conduct  of  the  war.
the  U.S.  will  review  its  attitude  toward  support  for  the  government.  Al-
though we  are  deeply  concerned  by  repressive  practices,  effective  per-
formance in  the  conduct  of  the  war  should  be  the  determining  factor  in
our  relations  with  the  GVN.

d.  The  U.S.  has  expressed  its  disapproval  of  certain  actions  of  the  Diem-
Nhu  regime  and  will  do  so  again  if  required.  Our  policv  is  to  seek  to  bring
about  the  abandonment  of  repression  because  of  its  etfect  on  the  popular
will  to  resist.  Our  means  consist  of  expressions  of  disapproval  and  the  with-
holding of  support  from  GVN  activities  that  are  not  clearlv  contributing
to  the  war  effort.  We  will  use  these  means  as  required  to  assure  an  effec-
tive military  program.

II. MILITARY  SITUATION  AND  TRENDS

A.  THE  STANDARDS  OF  MEASURE

The  test  of  the  military  situation  is  whether  the  GVN  is  succeeding  in
widening  its  area  of  effective  control  of  the  population  and  the  countryside.
This  is  difficult  to  measure,  and  cannot  be  stated  simplv  in  terms  of  the  number
of  stragetic  hamlets  built  or  the  number  of  roads  that  can  now  be  travelled
without  escort.  Nor  can  the  overall  situation  be  gauged  solelv  in  terms  of  the
extent  of  GVN  offensive  action,  relative  weapon  losses  and  defections.  VC
strength  figures,  or  other  measures  of  militarv  performance.  All  of  these  fac-
tors are  important  and  must  be  taken  into  account;  however,  a  great  deal  of
judgment  is  required  in  their  interpretation.

We  have  looked  at  these  factors  carefullv,  but  we  have  also  given  great  weight
to  the  evidence  of  the  men  on  the  spot — the  U.S.  militarv  advisors  and  the
USOM  field  representatives — as  to  whether  government  control  is  in  fact  ex-
tending and  becoming  more  accepted  and  solid  in  the  various  areas.  W^e  have
been  greatly  impressed  with  the  variation  of  the  situation  from  area  to  area  and
from  province  to  province;  there  is  a  different  war  in  each  area  and  province,
and  an  example  can  be  found  somewhere  to  support  any  attitude  toward  the
state  of  the  counterinsurgencv  campaign.  Our  task  has  been  to  observe  the
situation  as  broadly  as  possible  to  avoid  giving  exaggerated  importance  to  any
single  angle  of  observation.

B.  OVERALL  PROGRESS

With  allowance  for  all  uncertainties,  it  is  our  firm  conclusion  that  the  GVN
military  program  has  made  great  progress  in  the  last  year  and  a  half,  and
that  this  progress  has  continued  at  a  fairlv  steady  rate  in  the  past  six  months
even  through  the  period  of  greatest  political  unrest  in  Saigon.  The  tactics  and
techniques  employed  by  the  Vietnamese  under  U.S.  monitorship  are  sound  and
give  promise  of  ultimate  victory.

Specifically,  progress  is  most  clear  in  the  northern  areas  (I  and  II  Corps);
especially  noteworthy  work  has  been  done  in  kev  coastal  provinces  where  VC


Documents  755


strength  once  threatened  to  cut  the  country  in  half  but  has  now  been  substan-
tially reduced.  In  the  central  area  and  the  highlands  (III  Corps),  progress  has
been  steady  though  slower,  and  the  situation  remains  difficult  in  the  provinces
to  the  west  and  north  of  Saigon  itself.  [Material  Missing]

Throughout  the  northern  two-thirds  of  the  country  the  strategic  hamlet  program
has  matured  eti'ectively  and  freedom  of  rural  movement  has  grown  steadily.

The  Delta  remains  the  toughest  area  of  all,  and  now  requires  top  priority
in  both  GVN  and  U.S.  efforts.  Approximately  of  the  people  live  there;

the  area  is  rich  and  has  traditionally  resisted  central  authority;  it  is  the  center
of  Viet  Cono  strength — over  one-third  of  the  "hard  core"  are  found  there;
and  the  maritime  nature  of  the  terrain  renders  it  much  the  most  difficult  re-
gion to  pacify.

A  first  step  has  just  been  taken  by  the  move  of  a  third  division  to  the  Delta,
but  further  major  actions  are  needed.  They  include  priority  decisions  by  the
GVN  in  the  use  of  its  resources,  the  consolidation  rather  than  further  spread  of
strategic  hamlets  in  many  areas,  the  elimination  of  many  fixed  outposts,  better
hamlet  defenses  and  more  trained  hamlet  militia.  Regular  army  units  should  be
reserved  for  use  in  mobile  actions  and  for  clear  and  hold  operations  in  support
of  the  strategic  hamlet  program.  Though  there  are  unresolved  problems  in  sev-
eral key  provinces  close  to  Saigon,  as  well  as  in  the  southernmost  parts  where
the  VC  are  strongly  established,  it  is  clear  that  the  Delta  situation  has  generally
improved  over  the  past  year,  even  with  the  limited  resources  allocated  to  it.
Despite  recent  evidences  of  greater  VC  effort  and  better  weapons,  the  Delta
campaign  can  continue  to  go  forward  if  the  essential  priority  is  assigned  to
Delta  requirements.

C. MILITARY  INDICATORS

From  a  more  strictly  military  standpoint,  it  should  be  noted  that  this  overall
progress  is  being  achieved  against  a  Viet  Cong  effort  that  has  not  yet  been  seri-
ously reduced  in  the  aggregate,  and  that  is  putting  up  a  formidable  fight  nota-
bly in  the  Delta  and  key  provinces  near  Saigon.  The  military  indicators  are
mixed,  reflecting  greater  and  more  effective  GVN  effort  but  also  the  continued
toughness  of  the  fight.

September  Mo.  Ave.
June  July August (estimated)  Year  ago

No.  of  government
initiated:


Small  operations

851

781

733

906

490

Large  operations

125

163

166

141

71

Viet  Cong  Killed

1896

1918

1685

2034

2000

GVN  Killed

413

521

410

525

431

GVN  Weapons  Lost

590

780

720

802

390

VC  Weapons  Captured

390

375

430

400

450

Viet  Cong  Military

Defectors

420

310

220

519

90

Viet  Cong  Initiated

Incidents  of  all  Types

1310

1380

1375

1675

1660

Viet  Cong  Attacks

410

410

385

467

410

Estimated  Viet  Cong

Strength

HardCore

21000

21000

21000

21000

22000

Irregular

85000

82000

76000

70000

98000

756 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Recent  days  have  been  characterized  by  reports  of  greater  Viet  Cong  activ-
ity, countrywide,  coupled  with  evidence  of  improved  weaponry  in  their  hands.
Some  U.S.  advisors,  as  well  as  some  Vietnamese,  view  this  increased  activity  as
a  logical  reaction  to  the  steadily  growing  strategic  hamlet  program,  which  they
believe  is  progressively  separating  the  Viet  Cong  from  the  rural  population  and
from  their  sources  of  food  and  reinforcements.  Others  view  it  as  a  delayed
effort  to  capitalize  upon  the  political  trouble.  All  agree  that  it  reflects  a  con-
tinuing capability  for  offensive  action.

D.  THE  STRATEGIC  HAMLET  PROGRAM

In  this  generally  favorable  military  picture,  two  main  factors  have  been  the
strategic  hamlet  program  and  the  effectiveness  of  the  U.S.  advisory  and  support
effort.

We  found  unanimous  agreement  that  the  strategic  hamlet  program  is  sound  in
concept,  and  generally  effective  in  execution  although  it  has  been  overextended
in  some  areas  of  the  Delta.  The  teamwork  of  U.S.  military  men  and  civilians
is  generally  excellent,  and  on  the  GVN  side  a  number  of  the  province  chiefs
who  handled  the  program  poorly  in  its  initial  phases  have  been  replaced  by
men  who  appear  to  have  a  better  grasp  of  the  central  purpose  of  the  program —
to  bring  people  under  clear  GVN  control,  in  a  way  that  really  solidifies
their  support  of  their  government  and  opposition  to  the  VC.  The  economic
and  civic  action  element  of  the  program  (schools,  medicine,  fertilizer,  etc.)  has
been  carried  forward  on  the  U.S.  side  with  considerable  effectiveness,  but  has
necessarily  lagged  behind  the  physical  completion  of  hamlets  and  in  insecure
areas  has  made  little  progress.  Without  this  element,  coupled  with  effective
hamlet  defense  measures,  what  are  called  "strategic  hamlets"  may  be  only
nominally  under  GVN  control.  We  were  particularly  struck  by  some  evidence
that  a  hamlet's  readiness  to  defend  itself  often  bears  a  direct  relation  to  whether
the  Province  Chief,  with  U.S.  help,  has  managed  to  make  a  convincing  start  in
civic  action.

E.  THE  U.S.  MILITARY  ADVISORY  AND  SUPPORT  EFFORT

We  may  all  be  proud  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  U.S.  military  advisory  and
support  effort.  With  few  exceptions,  U.S.  advisors  report  excellent  relations  with
their  Vietnamese  counterparts,  whom  they  characterize  as  proud  and  willing
soldiers.  The  stiffening  and  exemplary  effect  of  U.S.  behavior  and  attitudes  has
had  an  impact  which  is  not  confined  to  the  war  effort,  but  which  extends  deeply
into  the  whole  Vietnamese  way  of  doing  things.

The  U.S.  advisory  effort,  however,  cannot  assure  ultimate  success.  This  is  a
Vietnamese  war  and  the  country  and  the  war  must,  in  the  end,  be  run  solely
by  the  Vietnamese.  It  will  impair  their  independence  and  the  development  of
their  initiative  if  we  leave  our  advisors  in  place  beyond  the  time  they  are  really
needed.  In  some  areas  reductions  in  the  U.S.  effort  and  transfer  of  U.S.  respon-
sibilities to  the  Vietnamese  can  now  be  carried  out  without  material  impairment
of  the  total  war  effort.  As  a  start,  we  believe  that  a  reduction  of  about  1000
U.S.  personnel  (for  which  plans  have  been  in  preparation  since  the  spring)  can
be  carried  out  before  the  end  of  1963.  No  further  reductions  should  be  made
until  the  requirements  of  the  1964  campaign  become  firm.


Documents  757


F.  CONCLUSION
f-

Acknowledging  the  progress  achieved  to  date,  there  still  remains  the  ques-
tion of  when  the  final  military  victory  can  be  attained.  If,  by  victory,  we  mean
the  reduction  of  the  insurgency  to  something  little  more  than  sporadic  banditry
in  outlying  districts,  it  is  the  view  of  the  vast  majority  of  military  commanders
consulted  that  success  may  be  achieved  in  the  I,  II  and  III  Corps  area  by  the
end  of  CY  1964.  Victory  in  the  IV  Corps  will  take  longer — at  least  well  into

1965.  These  estimates  necessarily  assume  that  the  political  situation  does  not
significantly  impede  the  ett'ort.

III. ECONOMIC  SITUATION  AND  TRENDS

The  current  economic  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is,  in  the  main,  satisfactory.
The  internal  price  level  is  reasonably  stable.  Commercial  inventories  are  high
and  national  bank  reserves  of  foreign  exchange  stand  at  approximately  $160
million  which  equals  approximately  11  to  12  months.  Imports  at  current  rate
($240  million  imports  less  $75  to  $80  million  exports).  The  efi'ective  rate  of  ex-
change of  the  piastre  to  the  dollar  is  within  the  range  of  reasonable  economic
value.

Trends  are  difficult  to  discuss  but  the  business  community  was  optimistic  be-
fore the  present  crises.  Rice  exports  for  the  current  calendar  year  are  projected
at  approximately  $80  million  against  $8.75  million  last  year.  Total  exports
are  anticipated  at  $70  million  as  against  $55  million  last  year.  Banking  circles
point  to  one  bearish  factor  in  the  export  picture.  Rubber,  which  represents
more  than  half  in  value  of  all  exports,  faces  a  situation  of  declining  world  mar-
ket prices  and  some  plantations  may  curtail  operations  in  the  next  year.

On  the  domestic  side  South  Vietnam  is  almost  self-sufficient  in  cotton  textiles
and  is  on  its  way  to  satisfying  its  own  fertilizer  and  cement  requirements  by

1966.  At  the  beginning  of  the  current  year  hanking  circles  noted  a  healthy
increase  in  local  investments  in  small  enterprises  which  reffects,  in  their
judgment  an  increase  of  confidence  in  the  future  that  is  unusual  for  recent
years.  The  prospects  for  next  year,  under  normal  circumstances,  appear  reason-
ably good.  If  the  Government  encourages  diversification  in  agriculture,  ex-
ports of  such  products  together  with  the  increasing  availability  of  rice  should
offset  the  decline  in  foreign  exchange  earnings  from  rubber.

The  projected  GVN  budget  for  CY  1964  totals  P27  billion:  tax  revenues  are
estimated  at  Pll  billion,  leaving  an  internal  budget  deficit  of  PI 6  billion.  Ex-
ternal resources  (resulting  from  U.S.  operations  but  requiring  also  use  of
foreign  exchange  reserves)  are  estimated  to  generate  an  additional  P9.5  bil-
lion, leaving  a  P6.5  billion  estimated  deficit.  This  deficit  might  be  somewhat
reduced  by  additional  tax  revenues.  To  meet  the  remaining  deficit,  borrowings
from  the  National  Bank  would  still  be  required  with  a  resulting  increase  in  the
money  supply.

The  money  supply  has  been  increasing  rather  sharply  in  the  last  nine  months,
although  the  inflationary  eff'ect  has  been  dampened  by  the  recent  arrival  of
large  shipments  under  USOM's  commodity  import  program.  This  has  been  ac-
companied by  an  increase  in  import  licensing  brought  about  principally  by
the  GVN's  adoption  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  of  an  open  general  licensing
system  for  certain  manufactured  goods  such  as  trucks,  automobiles,  fabricated


758 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

steel  and  some  industrial  raw  materials.  The  banks  estimate  that  the  open  gen-
eral licensing  system  will  result  in  a  $10  million  increase  in  GVN-financed  im-
ports in  CY  1963.

In  short,  while  the  general  economic  situation  is  good,  the  prospects  for
holding  the  line  on  inflation  and  the  balance  of  payments  do  not  appear
bright  for  CY  1964  unless  the  GVN  can  be  persuaded  to  impose  severe  re-
straints.

Effect  of  the  Political  Crisis  on  the  Economic  Situation

At  the  present  time  the  current  political  problems  have  not  had  a  significant
effect  on  the  internal  economic  situation.  French  banking  sources  report  a
slight  increase  in  the  rate  of  withdrawals  from  private  Vietnamese  bank  de-
posits over  the  last  two  months;  but  this  increase  has  only  been  on  the  order
of  1  to  2  percent.

Commercial  inventory  stocks  seem  to  be  increasing,  but  this  can  be  ex-
plained by  the  recent  increase  in  arrivals  of  foreign  goods.  In  any  case  prices
have  remained  stable  with  exception  of  a  slight  increase  in  the  cost  of  cement,
automobiles  and  certain  industrial  equipment.

The  value  of  the  piastre  has  fallen  10%  on  the  Hong  Kong  market  in  the  last
month.  Virtually  no  abnormal  flight  of  capital  has  yet  been  observed  in  banking
circles.

The  most  apparent  effect  of  the  crisis  of  the  past  several  weeks  is  a  slowdown
in  investment  decisions,  both  in  industry  and  in  the  limited  capital  market.  In-
ventors and  industrialists  are  worried  about  a  reduction  in  U.S  aid.  They  are
aware  of  the  suspension  in  the  issuances  of  procurement  authorizations  and  are
therefore  concerned  about  the  availability  of  imported  raw  materials  and  spare
parts.

Since  the  Saigon  business  community  has  lived  through  some  violent  times
before  this,  they  have  not  reacted  to  events  with  as  much  panic  as  might
have  been  expected.  If  the  U.S.  should  long  suspend  import  commitments,
however,  it  should  be  apparent  that  the  private  sector  of  the  economy  will  react
in  an  inflationary  manner.

IV. POLITICAL  SITUATION  AND  TRENDS

Although  our  observations  of  the  political  situation  were  necessarily  less  ex-
tensive than  of  the  military  picture,  they  were  ample  to  confirm  that  the  exist-
ing situation  is  one  of  high  tension.  We  reviewed  the  situation  carefully  with  the
relevant  U.S.  officials  and  were  also  impressed  by  frank  interviews  with  GVN
officials  and  with  third  country  representatives.

In  essence,  discontent  with  the  Diem  Nhu  regime,  which  had  been  wide-
spread just  below  the  surface  during  recent  years,  has  now  become  a  seething
problem.  The  Buddhist  and  student  crises  have  precipitated  these  discontents
and  given  them  specific  issues.  But  the  problem  goes  deeply  into  the  personali-
ties, objectives,  and  methods  of  operation  of  Diem  and  Nhu  over  a  long  period.

The  evidence  appears  overwhelming  that  Diem  and  Nhu  operate  in  close
collaboration,  and  that  each  needs  the  other.  They  undoubtedly  regard  them-
selves as  carrying  out  a  social  and  political  revolution  for  the  good  of  their
country,  using  all  means — including  the  strategic  hamlet  program — to  build
up  a  secure  base  of  political  strength  in  the  rural  areas.

At  the  same  time,  the  positive  and  educative  sides  of  their  actions,  aimed  pri-


Documents  759


niarily  at  the  countryside,  but  with  extensive  countrywide  educational  efforts  as
well,  have  been  increasingly  matched  by  negative  and  repressive  measures  of
control  against  the  urban  population.  The  urban  elite  or  ''Establishment" —  which
includes  intellectuals,  civilian  officials  at  all  levels,  and  a  high  proportion  of  mil-
itary officers — has  never  been  trusted  by  Diem  and  Nhu.  Always  sensitive  to
signs  of  opposition — with  some  justification  from  events  in  1954-55  and  the
attempted  coups  of  1960  and  1962 — the  regime  has  turned  increasingly  to  po-
lice methods,  particularly  secret  arrests,  that  have  almost  all  the  bad  effects  of
outright  totalitarianism  even  though  a  good  deal  of  freedom  to  criticize  still  re-
mains.

Concurrently,  the  palace  has  always  manipulated  and  controlled  the  govern-
ment structure  to  ensure  its  own  control.  The  degree  to  which  centralized  con-
trol and  intervention  have  been  carried,  and  the  often  quixotic  nature  of  its
use,  have  had  a  steadily  growing  adverse  effect  on  efficiency  and  morale.

Both  of  these  adverse  characteristics  of  the  regime,  and  the  resentment  of
them,  focus  more  and  more  on  Nhu.  Not  merely  is  he  the  hatchet  man,  but  his
statements  on  '"personalism"'  and  his  building  up  with  Madame  Nhu  of  a  wide
personal  apparatus  have  smacked  more  and  more  of  outright  totalitarianism.
A  further  disturbing  feature  of  Nhu  is  his  flirtation  with  the  idea  of  negotiating
with  North  Vietnam,  whether  or  not  he  is  serious  in  this  at  present.  This  deeply
disturbs  responsible  Vietnamese  and,  more  basically,  suggests  a  possible  basic
incompatibility  with  U.S.  objectives.

Nhu's  role  and  scope  of  action  have  increased,  and  he  may  well  have  the
designs  imputed  to  him  of  succeeding  his  brother  in  due  course.  Diem  is  still
quite  a  long  way  from  being  a  figurehead,  and  his  personal  prestige  in  the
country  has  survived  remarkably  well.  But  Diem  does  depend  heavily  on  Nhu,
their  central  ideas  are  very  close  if  not  identical,  and  it  would  be  remarkable  if
Diem  dropped  Nhu  from  a  commanding  position.

Until  the  Buddhist  and  student  crises,  it  was  probably  true  that  the  alienation
between  Diem  and  the  elite  was  more  a  matter  of  basically  divergent  views
of  the  right  social  structure  and  of  Diem  and  Nhu's  handling  of  individuals  in  the
government  than  it  was  a  matter  of  reaction  to  repressions.  However,  the  crises
have  now  brought  the  repressions  so  directly  into  the  lives  of  many  of  the  elite
that  more  orderly  methods,  which  might  previously  have  kept  the  loyalty  of  the
needed  amount  of  talent,  now  probably  cannot  do  so  without  a  convincing
degree  of  restoration  of  personal  security.  Yet  both  more  orderly  methods  and
a  restoration  of  personal  security  cut  diametrically  across  the  grain  of  Diem's  and
especially  Nhu's  view  of  what  is  necessary  to  maintain  their  power  and  move
toward  their  idea  of  social  revokition.

Thus,  the  discontent  of  the  elite — reflected  chiefly  in  the  progressive  loss  of
responsible  men — has  now  reached  the  point  where  it  is  uncertain  that  Diem
can  keep  or  enlist  talent  to  run  the  war.  The  loss  of  such  men  as  Mau  and
Tuyen,  and  the  deeply  disturbed  attitude  of  such  a  crucial  figure  as  Thuan,  are
the  strongest  evidences  of  the  seriousness  of  the  situation.

This  is  not  to  discount  groups  other  than  the  elite.  However,  the  Buddhists
and  students  cannot  in  themselves  cither  threaten  the  regime  or  do  more  than
focus  issues — although  of  course  they  seriously  damage  the  regime's  standing
in  the  U.S.  and  elsewhere,  with  uninhibited  press  reactions  that  contribute
further  to  the  persecution  complex  that  drives  Diem  and  Nhu  into  repression.
The  business  community  in  a  passive  factor  only.  Urban  labor  is  simply  trying
to  hold  its  position,  being  anti-regime  but  not  to  the  point  of  being  an  indepen-
dent source  of  trouble.  The  rural  peasantry  appear  little  affected  even  by  the


760 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II

Buddhist  issue.  If  these  groups  can  be  kept  even  in  an  acquiescent  state  the  war
could  go  forward.

As  matters  stand,  political  tension  in  the  urban  centers  is  so  high  that  it  could
boil  over  at  any  time  into  another  cycle  of  riots,  repressions,  and  resignations.
This  tension  would  disappear  in  a  very  short  time  if  Nhu  were  removed.
Whether  it  could  be  reduced  to  acceptable  proportions  by  measures  short  of
this  is  a  very  doubtful  question,  but  it  is  clear  that  such  measures  would  have  to
include  both  more  moderate  control  methods  and  a  better  government  climate
particularly  for  civilian  officials.

V. EFFECT  OF  POLITICAL  TENSION

A.  ON  MILITARY  OPERATIONS

So  far  this  has  not  significantly  affected  countryside  operations  in  any  area.
U.S.  personnel  in  the  field  testified  that  a  few  officer  or  civilian  counterparts
showed  concern  over  the  Buddhist  and  student  issues,  but  not  to  the  extent,  as
yet,  of  materially  affecting  their  doing  their  jobs.  The  rural  population  has  been
almost  untouched.  The  pace  of  GVN  operations  was  sharply  cut  for  a  short
period  at  the  end  of  August  by  transfers  of  units  and  general  uncertainty,  but  has
now  largely  renewed  its  previous  intensity.  The  Delta  particularly  has  been  so
:oncerned  with  the  war  that  it  has  been  virtually  unaffected.

Basically,  the  unifying  factors  embodied  in  the  hatred  of  the  military  for  Com-
munism remain  very  sharp.  This  hatred  is  real  and  pervasive.  It  transcends
domestic  policies  in  the  minds  of  most  officers.

However,  there  are  disturbing  elements  that  could  change  this  picture  greatly
unless  the  political  tension  can  be  reduced.  Certain  high  officers  have  been
heavily  preoccupied  with  coup  possibilities.  Those  who  have  had  relatives  directly
involved  in  the  regime's  repressions  are  deeply  disturbed  though  not  necessarily
ready  to  act  against  Diem.'^'  Resentment  of  Nhu  exists  in  top  military  circles
and  probably  to  some  extent  at  middle  levels.  The  fact  that  the  great  bulk  of
military  officers — and  Province  Chiefs — come  from  urban  areas  (simply  be-
cause of  educational  requirements  in  many  cases)  clearly  does  open  up  the  pos-
sibility of  progressive  loss  of  morale  and  effectiveness,  as  well  as  coup  partici-
pation, if  the  regime  does  not  cease  its  oppressions  against  Buddhists,  students,
and  real  or  supposed  opposition  individuals.

B.  ON  CIVILIAN  OFFICIALS

On  the  civilian  official  side,  which  is  also  relevant  to  the  war  effort,  the  re-
action to  the  regime's  actions  has  been  sharper.  The  Embassy  and  USOM  re-
port unanimously  that  their  normal  counterparts  have  become  afraid  of  as-
sociating too  closely  with  Americans,  and  that  there  is  a  general  atmosphere  of
watch-and-wait,  just  going  through  the  motions  of  the  job  but  failing  to  exert
what  limited  initiative  and  imagination  they  had  previously  been  ready  to  exert
in  face  of  the  constant  and  power-directed  interventions  of  Nhu.  The  decline  in
the  contribuiion  of  these  officials  is  less  serious  than  any  similar  decline  among

*  A  specific  example  of  this  is  the  Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps  in  Saigon.  His
brother,  along  with  many  other  relatives  of  military  officers  and  cabinet  members,  was
picked  up  in  the  student  roundups  of  early  September.  Some  were  tortured,  and — as
in  the  case  of  the  Commandant's  brother — released  only  after  intercession.  However,
the  Commandant  shows  no  inclination  to  take  action  against  the  Diem  government.


Documents  761


the  military  and  province  chiefs,  but  is  nonetheless  a  potentially  significant  and
growing  factor  if  tension  persists  because  these  officials  play  a  substantial  role  in
the  strategic  hamlet  program.

In  summary,  the  political  tension  has  not  vet  significantly  affected  progress  in
the  field,  nor  does  it  seem  likely  to  have  major  effects  in  the  near  future.  Beyond
that,  however,  the  prognosis  must  be  considered  uncertain  if  political  tension
persists  or  mounts.

VI.  OVERALL  EVALUATION

From  the  above  analysis  it  is  clear  that  the  situation  requires  a  constant  effort
by  the  U.S.  to  obtain  a  reduction  of  political  tensions  and  improved  performance
by  the  Vietnamese  Government.  We  cannot  say  with  assurance  whether  the
effort  against  the  Viet  Cong  will  ultimately  fail  in  the  absence  of  major  political
improvements.  However,  it  does  seem  clear  that  after  another  period  of  repres-
sive action  progress  may  be  reduced  and  indeed  reversed.  Although  the  present
momentum  might  conceivably  continue  to  carry  the  effort  forward  even  if  Diem
remains  in  power  and  political  tensions  continue,  any  significant  slowing  in  the
rate  of  progress  would  surely  have  a  serious  effect  on  U.S.  popular  support  for
the  U.S.  effort.

VII.  U.S.  LEVERAGES  TO  OBTAIN  DESIRED  CHANGES  IN  THE
DIExM  REGIME

A.  CONDUCT  OF  U.S.  REPRESENTATIVES

U.S.  personnel  in  Saigon  might  adopt  an  attitude  of  coolness  toward  their
Vietnamese  counterparts,  maintaining  only  those  contacts  and  communications
which  are  necessary  for  the  actual  conduct  of  operations  in  the  field.  To  some
extent  this  is  the  attitude  already  adopted  by  the  Ambassador  himself,  but  it
could  be  extended  to  the  civilian  and  military  agencies  located  in  Saigon.  The
effect  of  such  action  would  be  largely  psychological.

B.  ECONOMIC  LEVERAGE

Together,  USOM's  Commodity  Import  Program  (CIP)  and  the  PL  480
program  account  for  between  60  and  70  percent  of  imports  into  Vietnam.
The  commitment  of  funds  under  the  CIP  has  already  been  suspended.  CIP
deliveries  result  in  the  generation  of  piastres,  most  of  which  go  to  the  support  of
the  defense  budget.  It  is  estimated  that  CIP  pipelines  will  remain  relatively  large
for  some  five  or  six  months,  and  within  this  period  there  would  not  be  a  serious
material  effect.  Even  within  this  period,  however,  the  flow  of  piastres  to  support
the  defense  budget  will  gradually  begin  to  decline  and  the  GVN  will  be  forced  to
draw  down  its  foreign  exchange  reserves  or  curtail  its  military  expenditures.

Within  the  domestic  economy  the  existing  large  pipelines  would  mean  that
there  would  be  no  material  reason  for  inflation  to  begin  in  the  short  term  period.
However,  the  psychological  effect  of  growing  realization  that  the  CIP  program
has  been  suspended  might  be  substantial  in  2-4  months.  Saigon  has  a  large
number  of  speculative  traders,  and  although  there  is  considerable  police  effort
to  control  prices,  this  might  not  be  able  to  contain  a  general  trend  of  specula-
tion and  hoarding.  Once  inflation  did  develop,  it  could  have  a  serious  effect  on
the  GVN  budget  and  the  conduct  of  the  war.


762 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Apart  from  CIP,  two  major  AID  projects  are  up  for  final  approval — the  Saigon-
Cholon  Waterworks  ($9  million)  and  the  Saigon  Electric  Power  Project  ($4
million).  Suspension  of  these  projects  would  be  a  possible  means  of  demonstrat-
ing to  Congress  and  the  world  that  we  disapprove  of  GVN  policies  and  are  not
providing  additional  aid  not  directly  essential  to  the  war  effort.

C. PARAMILITARY  AND  OTHER  ASSISTANCE

(1)  USOM  assistance  to  the  Combat  Police  and  USOM  and  USIS  assistance
to  the  Director  General  of  Information  and  the  ARVN  PsyWar  Program  could
be  suspended.  These  projects  involve  a  relatively  small  amount  of  local  currency
but  their  suspension,  particularly  in  the  case  of  USIS,  might  adversely  affect
programs  which  the  U.S.  wishes  to  see  progress.

(2)  However,  there  would  be  merit  in  a  gesture  aimed  at  Colonel  Tung,  the
Special  Forces  Commander,  whose  forces  in  or  near  Saigon  played  a  con-
spicuous part  in  the  pagoda  affair  and  are  a  continuing  support  for  Diem.
Colonel  Tung  commands  a  mixed  complex  of  forces,  some  of  which  are  sup-
ported by  MAP  and  others  presently  through  CIA.  All  of  those  now  in  or
near  Saigon  were  trained  either  for  combat  missions  or  for  special  operations
into  North  Vietnam  and  Laos.  Purely  on  grounds  of  their  not  being  used  for
their  proper  missions,  the  U.S.  could  inform  Diem  that  we  would  cut  off  MAP
and  CIA  support  unless  they  were  placed  directly  under  Joint  General  Staff  and
were  committed  to  field  operations.

The  practical  effect  of  the  cut-off  would  probably  be  small.  The  equipment
cannot  be  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  the  units,  and  the  pay  provided  to  some  units
could  be  made  up  from  the  GVN  budget.  Psychologically,  however,  the  signifi-
cance of  the  gesture  might  be  greater.  At  the  least  it  would  remove  one  target  of
press  criticism  of  the  U.S.,  and  would  probably  also  be  welcomed  by  the  high
military  officers  in  Vietnam,  and  certainly  by  the  disaffected  groups  in  Saigon.

At  the  same  time,  support  should  continue,  but  through  General  Harkins  rather
than  CIA,  for  border  surveillance  and  other  similar  field  operations  that  are
contributing  to  the  war  effort.

We  have  weighed  this  cut-off  action  carefully.  It  runs  a  risk  that  Colonel  Tung
would  refuse  to  carry  out  external  operations  against  the  Lao  corridor  and
North  Vietnam.  It  might  also  limit  CIA's  access  to  the  military.  However,  U.S.
liaison  with  high  military  officers  could  probably  be  fully  maintained  through  the
U.S.  military  advisors.  On  balance,  we  conclude  that  these  possible  disadvantages
are  outweighed  by  the  gains  implicit  in  this  action.

(3)  Consideration  has  been  given  both  by  USOM  and  the  military  (princi-
pally the  JCS  in  Washington)  to  the  possibility  of  redirecting  economic  and
military  assistance  in  such  a  fashion  as  to  bypass  the  central  government  in
Saigon.  Military  studies  have  shown  the  technical  feasibility,  though  with
great  difficulty  and  cost,  of  supplying  the  war  effort  in  the  countryside  over  lines
of  communications  which  do  not  involve  Saigon,  and  it  is  assumed  that  the
same  conclusions  would  apply  to  USOM  deliveries  to  the  field  under  the  rural
strategic  hamlet  program.  However,  there  is  a  consensus  among  U.S.  agencies
in  Saigon  that  such  an  effort  is  not  practical  in  the  face  of  determined  opposi-
tion by  the  GVN  unless,  of  course,  a  situation  had  developed  where  the  central
government  was  no  longer  in  control  of  some  areas  of  the  countr\'.  Nor  is  it  at
all  clear  that  such  diversion  would  operate  to  build  up  the  position  of  the  mili-
tary or  to  cut  down  Nhu's  position.


Documents  763


D.  PROPAGANDA

Although  the  capabiHty  of  USTS  to  support  the  United  States  campaign  of
pressure  against  the  regime  would  be  small,  the  Ambassador  believes  considera-
tion must  be  given  to  the  content  and  timing  of  the  United  States  pronounce-
ments outside  the  country.  He  has  already  suggested  the  use  of  the  Voice  of
America  in  stimulating,  in  its  broadcasts  to  Vietnamese,  discussions  of  demo-
cratic political  philosophies.  This  medium  could  be  used  to  exploit  a  wide  range
of  ascending  political  pressure.  In  addition,  a  phased  program  of  United  States
official  pronouncements  could  be  developed  for  use  in  conjunction  with  the  other
leverages  as  they  are  applied.  We  must  recognize  the  possibility  that  such  actions
may  incite  Diem  to  strong  countermeasures.

E.  THE  LEVERAGE  OF  CONDITIONING  OUR  MILITARY  AID  ON
SATISFACTORY  PROGRESS

Coupled  with  all  the  above  there  is  the  implicit  leverage  embodied  in  our
constantly  making  it  plain  to  Diem  and  others  that  the  long  term  continuation
of  military  aid  is  conditioned  upon  the  Vietnamese  Government  demonstrating
a  satisfactory  level  of  progress  toward  defeat  of  the  insurgency.

F.  CONCLUSIONS

A  program  of  limited  pressures,  such  as  the  CIP  suspension,  will  not  have
large  material  effects  on  the  GVN  or  the  war  effort,  at  least  for  2-4  months.
The  psychological  effects  could  be  greater,  and  there  is  some  evidence  that
the  suspension  is  already  causing  concern  to  Diem.  However,  the  effect  of  pres-
sures that  can  be  carried  out  over  an  extended  period  without  detriment  to  the
war  effort  is  probably  limited  with  respect  to  the  possibility  of  Diem  making
necessary  changes.

We  have  not  analyzed  with  care  what  the  effect  might  be  of  a  far  more  inten-
sive level  of  pressure  such  as  cessation  of  MAP  deliveries  or  long  continued
suspension  of  the  commodity  import  program.  If  the  Diem  government  should
fail  to  make  major  improvements,  serious  consideration  would  have  to  be
given  to  this  possible  course  of  action,  but  we  believe  its  effect  on  the  war  effort
would  be  so  serious — in  psychological  if  not  in  immediate  material  terms — that
it  should  not  be  undertaken  at  the  present  time.

VIII. COUP  POSSIBILITIES

A. PROSPECTS  OF  A  SPONTANEOUS  COUP

The  prospects  of  an  early  spontaneous  replacement  of  the  Diem  Regime  are
not  high.  The  two  principal  sources  of  such  an  attempt,  the  senior  military
officers  and  the  students,  have  both  been  neutralized  by  a  combination  of  their
own  inability  and  the  regime's  effective  countermeasures  of  control.  The  student
organizations  have  been  emasculated.  The  students  themselves  have  displayed
more  emotion  than  determination  and  they  are  apparently  being  handled  with
sufficient  police  sophistication  to  avoid  an  explosion.

The  generals  appear  to  have  little  stomach  for  the  difficult  job  of  secretly
arranging  the  necessary  coalescence  of  force  to  upset  the  Regime.


764 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Diem/Nhu  are  keenly  aware  of  the  capability  of  the  generals  to  take  over  the
country,  utilizing  the  tremendous  power  now  vested  in  the  military  forces.
They,  therefore,  concentrate  their  manipulative  talent  on  the  general  officers,
by  transfers,  and  by  controls  over  key  units  and  their  locations.  They  are  aware
that  these  actions  may  reduce  efficiency,  but  they  tolerate  it  rather  than  risk  the
prospect  that  they  be  overthrown  and  their  social  revolution  frustrated.  They
have  established  a  praetorian  guard  to  guarantee  considerable  bloodshed  if  any
attack  is  made.  The  generals  have  seen  slim  hope  of  surmounting  these  difficul-
ties without  prohibitive  risk  to  themselves,  the  unity  of  the  Army  and  the  Estab-
lishment itself.

Despite  these  unfavorable  prospects  for  action  in  the  short  term,  new  factors
could  quickly  arise,  such  as  the  death  of  Diem  or  an  unpredictable  and  even
irrational  attack  launched  by  a  junior  officer  group,  which  would  call  urgently
for  U.S.  support  or  counteraction.  In  such  a  case,  the  best  alternative  would
appear  to  be  the  support  of  constitutional  continuity  in  the  person  of  the  Vice
President,  behind  whom  arrangements  could  be  developed  for  a  more  perma-
nent replacement  after  a  transitional  period.

B.  PROSPECTS  FOR  IMPROVEMENT  UNDER  AN  ALTERNATIVE
GOVERNMENT

The  prospects  that  a  replacement  regime  would  be  an  improvement  appear  to
he  about  50-50.*  Initially,  only  a  strongly  authoritarian  regime  would  be  able
to  pull  the  government  together  and  maintain  order.  In  view  of  the  pre-eminent
role  of  the  military  in  Vietnam  today,  it  is  probable  that  this  role  would  be  filled
by  a  miHtary  officer,  perhaps  taking  power  after  the  selective  process  of  a  junta
dispute.  Such  an  authoritarian  military  regime,  perhaps  after  an  initial  period
of  euphoria  at  the  departure  of  Diem/Nhu,  would  be  apt  to  entail  a  resumption
of  the  repression  at  least  of  Diem,  the  corruption  of  the  Vietnamese  Establish-
ment before  Diem,  and  an  emphasis  on  conventional  military  rather  than  social,
economic  and  political  considerations,  with  at  least  an  equivalent  degree  of
xenophobic  nationalism.

These  features  must  be  weighed,  however,  against  the  possible  results  of  grow-
ing dominance  or  succession  by  Nhu,  which  would  continue  and  even  magnify
the  present  dissension,  unhappiness  and  unrest.

C.  POSSIBLE  U.S.  ACTIONS

Obviously,  clear  and  explicit  U.S.  support  could  make  a  great  difference  to
the  chances  of  a  coup.  However,  at  the  present  time  we  lack  a  clear  picture  of
what  acceptable  individuals  might  be  brought  to  the  point  of  action,  or  what
kind  of  government  might  emerge.  We  therefore  need  an  intensive  clandestine
effort,  under  the  Ambassador's  direction,  to  establish  necessary  contacts  to
allow  U.S.  to  continuously  appraise  coup  prospects.

If  and  when  we  have  a  better  picture,  the  choice  will  still  remain  difficult
whether  we  would  prefer  to  take  our  chances  on  a  spontaneous  coup  (assuming
some  action  by  Diem  and  Nhu  would  trigger  it)  or  to  risk  U.S.  prestige  and
having  the  U.S.  hand  show  with  a  coup  group  which  appeared  likely  to  be  a

*  Mr.  Sullivan  (State)  believes  that  a  replacement  regime  which  does  not  suffer  from
the  overriding  danger  of  Nhu's  ambition  to  establish  a  totalitarian  state  (the  control
of  which  he  might  easily  lose  to  the  Communists  in  the  course  of  his  flirtations)  would
be  inevitably  better  than  the  current  regime  even  if  the  former  did  have  the  deficiencies
described.


Documents  765


better  alternative  government.  Anv  regime  that  was  identified  from  the  outset  as
a  U.S.  "'puppet""  would  have  disadvantages  both  within  South  Vietnam  and  in
significant  areas  of  the  world,  including  other  underdeveloped  nations  where
the  U.S.  has  a  major  role.

In  any  case,  whether  or  not  it  proves  to  be  wise  to  promote  a  coup  at  a  later
time,  we  must  be  ready  for  the  possibility  of  a  spontaneous  coup,  and  this  too
requires  clandestine  contacts  on  an  intensive  basis.

IX. ANALYSIS  OF  ALTERNATI\'E  POLICIES

Broadly  speaking,  we  believe  there  are  three  alternative  policies  the  U.S.
could  pursue  to  achieve  its  political  and  militarv  objectives:

1.  Return  to  avowed  support  of  the  Diem  regime  and  attempt  to  obtain
the  necessary  improvements  through  persuasion  from  a  posture  of  "reconciliation."
This  would  not  mean  any  expression  of  approval  of  the  repressive  actions  of  the
regime,  but  simply  that  we  would  go  back  in  practice  to  business  as  usual.

2.  Follow  a  policy  of  selective  pressures:  "'purelv  correct"  relationships  at  the
top  official  level,  continuing  to  withhold  further  actions  in  the  commoditv  im-
port program,  and  making  clear  our  disapproval  of  the  regime.  A  further  ele-
ment in  this  policy  is  letting  the  present  impression  stand  that  the  U.S.  would
not  be  averse  to  a  change  of  Government — although  we  would  not  take  any
immediate  actions  to  initiate  a  coup.

3.  Start  immediatelv  to  promote  a  coup  bv  high  ranking  military'  officers.
This  policy  might  involve  more  extended  suspensions  of  aid  and  sharp  denun-
ciations of  the  regime's  actions  so  timed  as  to  fit  with  coup  prospects  and
planning.

Our  analysis  of  these  alternatives  is  as  follows:
L  Reconciliation.

We  believe  that  this  course  of  action  would  be  ineffective  from  the
standpoint  of  events  in  South  Vietnam  alone,  and  would  also  greatlv  in-
crease our  difficulties  in  justifving  the  present  U.S.  support  effon  both  to
the  Congress  and  generallv  to  significant  third  nations.  \\'e  are  most  un-
likely, after  recent  events,  to  get  Diem  to  make  the  necessar}"  changes:  on
the  contrarv,  he  would  almost  certainlv  regard  our  reconciliation  as  an
evidence  that  the  U.S.  would  sit  still  for  just  about  anything  he  did.  The
result  would  probablv  be  not  onlv  a  continuation  of  the  destructive  ele-
ments in  the  Regime's  policies  but  a  return  to  larger  scale  repressions  as
and  when  Diem  and  Xhu  thought  thev  were  necessarv.  The  result  would
probablv  be  sharp  deterioration  in  the  military  situation  in  a  fairlv  short
period.

2.  Selective  Pressures.

We  have  examined  numerous  possibilities  of  applving  pressures  to  Diem
in  order  to  incline  him  to  the  direction  of  our  policies.  The  most  powerful
instrument  at  our  disposal  is  the  control  of  military  and  economic  aid  but
anv  consideration  of  its  use  reveals  the  double-edged  nature  of  its  effects.
Anv  long  term  reduction  of  aid  cannot  but  have  an  eventual  adverse  effect
on  the  militarv  campaign  since  both  the  military  and  the  economic  pro-
grams have  been  consciouslv  designed  and  justified  in  terms  of  their  con-
tribution to  the  war  effort.  Hence,  immediate  reductions  must  be  selected
carefully  and  be  left  in  effect  only  for  short  periods.


766 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

We  believe  that  the  present  level  of  pressures  is  causing,  and  will  cause,
Diem  some  concern,  while  at  the  same  time  not  significantly  impairing  the
military  effort.  We  are  not  hopeful  that  this  level  (or  indeed  any  level)  of
pressure  will  actually  induce  Diem  to  remove  Nhu  from  the  picture  com-
pletely. However,  there  is  a  better  chance  that  Diem  will  at  least  be  deterred
from  resuming  large  scale  oppressions.

At  the  same  time,  there  are  various  factors  that  set  a  time  limit  to  pur-
suing this  course  of  action  in  its  present  form.  Within  2-4  months  we  have
to  make  critical  decisions  with  the  GVN  about  its  1964  budget  and  our
economic  support  level.  In  addition,  there  is  a  significant  and  growing  pos-
sibility that  even  the  present  limited  actions  in  the  economic  field — more
for  psychological  than  for  economic  reasons — would  start  a  wave  of  specu-
lation and  inflation  that  would  be  difficult  to  control  or  bring  back  into
proper  shape.  As  to  when  we  would  reverse  our  present  course,  the  resump-
tion of  the  full  program  of  economic  and  military  aid  should  be  tied  to  the
actions  of  the  Diem  government.

As  a  foundation  for  the  development  of  our  long-term  economic  and
military  aid  programs,  we  believe  it  may  be  possible  to  develop  specific
military  objectives  to  be  achieved  on  an  agreed  schedule.  The  extent  to
which  such  objectives  are  met,  in  conjunction  with  an  evaluation  of  the
regime's  political  performance,  would  determine  the  level  of  aid  for  the
following  period.

3.  Organizing  a  coup.

For  the  reasons  stated  earlier,  we  believe  this  course  of  action  should
not  be  undertaken  at  the  present  time.

* *  *

On  balance  we  consider  that  the  most  promising  course  of  action  to  adopt  at
this  time  is  an  application  of  selective  short-term  pressures,  principally  eco-
nomic, and  the  conditioning  of  long-term  aid  on  the  satisfactory  performance
by  the  Diem  government  in  meeting  military  and  political  objectives  which  in
the  aggregate  equate  to  the  requirements  of  final  victory.  The  specific  actions
recommended  in  Section  I  of  this  report  are  consistent  with  this  policy.

Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  Secretary  of  Defense


[Document  143]

5  Oct  1963

TO:  Lodge

Via  CAS  Channel CAP  63560

In  conjunction  with  decisions  and  recommendations  in  separate  DEPTEL,
President  today  approved  recommendation  that  no  initiative  should  now  be
taken  to  give  any  active  covert  encouragement  to  a  coup.  There  should,  how-
ever, be  urgent  covert  effort  with  closest  security  under  broad  guidance  of  Am-
bassador to  identify  and  build  contacts  with  possible  alternative  leadership  as
and  when  it  appears.  Essential  that  this  effort  be  totally  secure  and  fully  deniable
and  separated  entirely  from  normal  political  analysis  and  reporting  and  other


Documents  767


activities  of  country  team.  We  repeat  that  this  etTort  is  not  repeat  not  to  be
aimed  at  active  promotion  of  coup  but  only  at  surveillance  and  readiness.  In
order  to  provide  plausibility  to  denial  suggest  you  and  no  one  else  in  Embassy
issue  these  instructions  orally  to  Acting  Station  Chief  and  hold  him  responsible
to  you  alone  for  making  appropriate  contacts  and  reporting  to  you  alone.
All  reports  to  Washington  on  this  subject  should  be  on  this  channel.


[Document  144]

TO  STATE  FROM  LODGE
CAS  1445

1.  Lt.  Col.  Conein  met  with  Gen.  Duong  Van  Minh  at  Gen.  Minh's  Headquarters
on  Le  Van  Duyet  for  one  hour  and  ten  minutes  morning  of  5  Oct  63.  This
meeting  was  at  the  initiative  of  Gen.  Minh  and  has  been  specifically  cleared  in
advance  by  Ambassador  Lodge,  No  other  persons  were  present.  The  conversa-
tion was  conducted  in  French.

2.  Gen.  Minh  stated  that  he  must  know  American  Government's  position  with
respect  to  a  change  in  the  Government  of  Vietnam  within  the  very  near  future.
Gen.  Minh  added  the  Generals  were  aware  of  the  situation  is  deteriorating
rapidly  and  that  action  to  change  the  Government  must  be  taken  or  the  war  will
be  lost  to  the  Viet  Cong  because  the  Government  no  longer  has  the  support  of
the  people.  Gen.  Minh  identified  among  the  other  Generals  participating  with
him  in  this  plan:

Maj.  Gen.  Tran  Van  Don
Brig.  Gen.  Tran  Thien  Khiem
Maj.  Gen.  Tran  Van  Kim

3.  Gen.  Minh  made  it  clear  that  he  did  not  expect  any  specific  American  sup-
port for  an  effort  on  the  part  of  himself  and  his  colleagues  to  change  the  Gov-
ernment but  he  stated  he  does  need  American  assurances  that  the  USG  will
not  rpt  not  attempt  to  thwart  this  plan.

4.  Gen.  Minh  also  stated  that  he  himself  has  no  political  ambitions  nor  do  any
of  the  other  General  Officers  except  perhaps,  he  said  laughingly,  Gen.  Ton  That
Dinh.  Gen.  Minh  insisted  that  his  only  purpose  is  to  win  the  war.  He  added
emphatically  that  to  do  this  continuation  of  American  Military  and  Eco-
nomic Aid  at  the  present  level  (He  said  one  and  one  half  million  dollars  per
day)  is  necessary.

5.  Gen.  Minh  outlined  three  possible  plans  for  the  accomplishment  of  the
change  of  Government:

a.  Assassination  of  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  and  Ngo  Dinh  Can  keeping  President
Diem  in  Office.  Gen.  Minh  said  this  was  the  easiest  plan  to  accomplish.

b.  The  encirclement  of  Saigon  by  various  military  units  particularly  the  unit
at  Ben  Cat.  (Comment:  Fifth  Division  elements  commanded  by  Gen.  Dinh),

c.  Direct  confrontation  between  military  units  involved  in  the  coup  and
loyalist  military  units  in  Saigon.  In  effect,  dividing  the  city  of  Saigon  into  sectors
and  cleaning  it  out  pocket  by  pocket.  Gen.  Minh  claims  under  the  circumstances
Diem  and  Nhu  could  count  on  the  loyalty  of  5,500  troops  within  the  city  of
Saigon,


768 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  II


6.  Conein  replied  to  Gen.  Minh  that  he  could  not  answer  specific  questions  as
to  USG  non-interference  nor  could  he  give  any  advice  with  respect  to  tactical
planning.  He  added  that  he  could  not  advise  concerning  the  best  of  the  three
plans.

[material  missing]

Nam  are  Ngo  Dinh  Kau,  Ngo  Dinh  Can  and  Ngo  Trong  Hieu.  Minh  stated
that  Hieu  was  formerly  a  Communist  and  still  has  Communist  sympathies.
When  Col.  Conein  remarked  that  he  had  considered  Col.  Tung  as  one  of  the
more  dangerous  individuals,  Gen.  Minh  stated  "if  I  get  rid  of  Nhu,  Can  and
Hieu,  Col.  Tung  will  be  on  his  knees  before  me."

8.  Gen.  Minh  also  stated  that  he  was  worried  as  to  the  role  of  Gen.  Tran  Thien
Khiem  since  Khiem  may  have  played  a  double  role  in  August.  Gen.  Minh  asked
that  copies  of  the  documents  previously  passed  to  Gen.  Khiem  (plan  of  Camp
Long  Thanh  and  munitions  inventory  at  that  camp)  be  passed  to  Gen.  Minh
personally  for  comparison  with  papers  passed  by  Khiem  to  Minh  purportedly
from  CAS.

9.  Minh  further  stated  that  one  of  the  reasons  they  are  having  to  act  quickly
was  the  fact  that  many  regimental,  battalion  and  company  commanders  are
working  on  coup  plans  of  their  own  which  could  be  abortive  and  a  "catastrophe".

10.  Minh  appeared  to  understand  Conein's  position  of  being  unable  to  comment
at  the  present  moment  but  asked  that  Conein  again  meet  with  Gen.  Minh  to
discuss  the  specific  plan  of  operations  which  Gen.  Minh  hopes  to  put  into  action.
No  specific  date  was  given  for  this  next  meeting.  Conein  was  again  non-
committal in  his  reply.  Gen.  Minh  once  again  indicated  his  understanding  and
stated  that  he  would  arrange  to  contact  Conein  in  the  near  future  and  hoped
that  Conein  would  be  able  to  meet  with  him  and  give  the  assurance  oudined
above.


SAIGON  CAS  34026,  5  October  1963

TO  STATE  FROM  LODGE  (REF:  CAS  SAIGON  1445)

EYES  ONLY  FOR  SECRETARY  RUSK  FROM  LODGE

Reference  Big  Minh-Conein  meeting  (Cas  Saigon  1445).  While  neither  Gen-
eral Harkins  nor  I  have  great  faith  in  Big  Minh,  we  need  instructions  on  his
approach.  My  recommendation,  in  which  General  Harkins  concurs,  is  that  Conein
when  next  approached  by  Minh  should:

1.  Assure  him  that  US  will  not  attempt  to  thwart  his  plans.

2.  Offer  to  review  his  plans,  other  than  assassination  plans.

3.  Assure  Minh  that  US  aid  will  be  continued  to  Vietnam  under  Government
which  gives  promise  of  gaining  support  of  people  and  winning  the  war  against
the  Communists.  Point  out  that  it  is  our  view  that  this  is  most  likely  to  be  the
case  if  Government  includes  good  proportion  of  well  qualified  civilian  leaders
in  key  positions.  (Conein  should  press  Minh  for  details  his  thinking  Re  compo-
sition future  Government).  I  suggest  the  above  be  discussed  with  Secretary
McNamara  and  General  Taylor  who  contacted  Minh  in  recent  visit.


Documents  769


[Document  145]

6  Oct  1963

FROM:  CIA
TO:  Lodge
74228

Re  CAS  1445

1.  Believe  CAP  63560  gives  general  guidance  requested  REFTHL.  We  have
following  additional  general  thoughts  which  have  been  discussed  with  President,
While  we  do  not  wish  to  stimulate  coup,  we  also  do  not  wish  to  leave  impression
that  U.S.  would  thwart  a  change  of  government  or  deny  economic  and  military
assistance  to  a  new  regime  if  it  appeared  capable  of  increasing  effectiveness  of
military  effort,  ensuring  popular  support  to  win  war  and  improving  working
relations  with  U.S.  We  would  like  to  be  informed  on  what  is  being  contemplated
but  we  should  avoid  being  drawn  into  reviewing  or  advising  on  operational  plans
or  any  other  act  which  might  tend  to  identify  U.S.  too  closely  with  change  in
government.  We  would,  however,  welcome  information  which  would  help  us
assess  character  of  any  alternate  leadership.

2.  With  reference  to  specific  problem  of  General  Minh  you  should  seriously
consider  having  contact  take  position  that  in  present  state  his  knowledge  he  is
unable  present  Minh's  case  to  responsible  policy  officials  with  any  degree  of
seriousness.  In  order  to  get  responsible  officials  even  to  consider  Minh's  problem,
contact  would  have  to  have  detailed  information  clearly  indicating  that  Minh's
plans  offer  a  high  prospect  of  success.  At  present  contact  sees  no  such  prospect
in  the  information  so  far  provided.

3.  You  should  also  consider  with  Acting  Station  Chief  whether  it  would  be
desirable  in  order  to  preserve  security  and  deniability  in  this  as  well  as  similar
approaches  to  others  whether  appropriate  arrangements  could  be  made  for
follow-up  contacts  by  individuals  brought  in  especially  from  outside  Vietnam.  As
we  indicated  in  CAP  63560  we  are  most  concerned  about  security  problem  and
we  are  confining  knowledge  these  sensitive  matters  in  Washington  to  extremely
limited  group,  high  officials  in  White  House,  State,  Defense  and  CIA  with  whom
this  message  cleared.

I

[Document  146]

October  11,  1963

NATIONAL  SECURITY  ACTION  MEMORANDUM  NO.  263
TO :  Secretary  of  State

Secretary  of  Defense
Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
SUBJECT:  South  Vietnam

At  a  meeting  on  October  5,  1963,  the  President  considered  the  recommendations
contained  in  the  report  of  Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor  on  their
i mission  to  South  Vietnam.


770 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

The  President  approved  the  military  recommendations  contained  in  Section  I
B  (1-3)  of  the  report,  but  directed  that  no  formal  announcement  be  made  of  the
implementation  of  plans  to  withdraw  1,000  U.S.  military  personnel  by  the  end
of  1963.

After  discussion  of  the  remaining  recommendations  of  the  report,  the  President
approved  an  instruction  to  Ambassador  Lodge  which  is  set  forth  in  State
Department  telegram  No.  534  to  Saigon.

McGeorge  Bundy

Copy  furnished:

Director  of  Central  Intelligence

Administrator,  Agency  for  International  Development


[Document  147]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
BUREAU  OF  INTELLIGENCE  AND  RESEARCH

Research  Memorandum
RFE-90,  October  22,  1963

TO:  The  Secretary

THROUGH:  S/S

FROM:  INR— Thomas  L.  Hughes

SUBJECT:  Statistics  on  the  War  Effort  in  South  Vietnam  Show  Unfavorable
Trends

This  report  reviews  the  more  significant  statistics  on  the  Communist  insur-
gency in  South  Vietnam  as  indicators  of  trends  in  the  military  situation  since
July  1963.

ABSTRACT

Statistics  on  the  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  although  neither
thoroughly  trustworthy  nor  entirely  satisfactory  as  criteria,  indicate  an
unfavorable  shift  in  the  military  balance.  Since  July  1963,  the  trend  in
Viet  Cong  casualties,  weapons  losses,  and  defections  has  been  downward
while  the  number  of  Viet  Cong  armed  attacks  and  other  incidents  has  been
upward.  Comparison  with  earlier  periods  suggests  that  the  military  position
of  the  government  of  Vietnam  may  have  been  set  back  to  the  point  it
occupied  six  months  to  a  year  ago.  These  trends  coincide  in  time  with  the


Documents  111


sharp  deterioration  of  the  poHtical  situation.  At  the  same  time,  even  with-
out the  Buddhist  issue  and  the  attending  government  crisis,  it  is  possible
that  the  Diem  regime  would  have  been  unable  to  maintain  the  favorable
trends  of  previous  periods  in  the  face  of  the  accelerated  Viet  Cong  effort.

Statistics  as  Indicators

Statistics,  in  general,  are  only  partial  and  not  entirely  satisfactory  indicators
of  progress  in  the  total  counterinsurgency  effort  in  South  Vietnam.*  First,  some
statistics  are  incomplete,  as  for  example,  those  relating  to  Viet  Cong  attacks
against  strategic  hamlets  and  desertions  within  the  South  Vietnamese  military
and  security  services.  Second,  all  statistics  are  acquired  largely  if  not  entirely
from  official  South  Vietnamese  sources.  As  such,  their  validity  must,  to  some
degree  at  least,  remain  questionable,  even  though  the  efforts  of  the  United  States
military  and  civilian  advisers  have  improved  the  quality  of  this  data  during
the  past  year  or

[words  missing]

Third,  there  are  several  other  imiportant  indicators  which  are  extremely  difficult,
if  not  impossible,  to  handle  statistically.  These  include:  morale  and  efficiency  within
the  bureaucracy  and  the  armed  services,  the  degree  of  locally  acquired  or  volun-
teered intelligence,  popular  attitudes  toward  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  government,
and  the  status  and  impact  of  the  government's  political,  social,  and  economic
activities  in  support  of  the  strategic  hamlet  program.  Nonetheless,  statistics  touch
on  some  significant  aspects  of  the  military  situation  and  provide  a  guide  at  least
to  trends  in  the  fighting.

Viet  Cong  Incidents

Statistics  show  that  the  Viet  Cong  have  accelerated  their  military  and  sub-
versive effort  since  July  1963.  From  January  1962  until  July  1963,  the  total
number  of  Viet  Cong  armed  attacks,  as  well  as  all  other  incidents  (sabotage,
terrorism,  and  propaganda),  dropped  consistently.  However,  since  July  of  this
year,  total  incidents  and  armed  attacks  have  increased  appreciably.  If  the  present
trend  continues  through  the  end  of  this  year,  total  incidents  will  exceed  by
more  than  \0%  the  level  for  the  period  July-December  1962.  Large  Viet  Cong
attacks  (company-size  or  larger)  have  also  increased  appreciably  since  July  of
this  year,  and,  if  the  trend  continues,  could  exceed  by  almost  30%  the  level  for
July-December  1962.

In  addition,  the  Viet  Cong  during  the  last  half  of  1963  have  shown  increased
daring,  planning,  and  coordination  in  their  attacks.  This  has  been  evidenced  by
an  attack  against  a  United  States  helicopter  base,  and  by  simultaneous  actions
against  two  or  more  strategic  hamlets  and  even  against  two  district  capitals.
Until  this  period,  towns  had  not  been  attacked  since  September  1961,  when
the  capital  of  Phuoc  Thanh  province  was  raided  by  a  large  Viet  Cong  force.

*  The  statistics  used  in  this  paper  were  compiled  by  the  Defense  Intelligence  Agency
(DIA)  and  by  the  Office  of  the  Special  Assistant  for  Counterinsurgency  and  Special
Activities  (SACS A)  in  the  Department  of  Defense  and  are  based  on  field  reports  sub-
mitted by  the  Military  Assistance  Command  Vietnam  (MACV).


772 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  II


Casualties

Although  the  Viet  Cong  have  incurred  relatively  heavy  losses  during  some  of
their  more  daring  recent  attacks,  their  overall  casualties  since  July  of  this  year
have  not  been  correspondingly  high.  If  the  accelerated  Viet  Cong  effort  and
losses  suffered  are  maintained  at  present  levels  during  the  rest  of  this  year,
casualties  will  remain  about  10%  below  the  level  in  July-December  1962,  the
peak  period  in  Viet  Cong  casualties  last  year.

In  contrast,  casualties  among  the  South  Vietnamese  military  and  security
forces  since  July  of  this  year  are  increasing  and,  at  the  present  rate,  could  exceed
by  about  20%  the  level  for  the  preceding  six-month  period.  This  would  raise  the
total  casualties  for  1963  by  some  30%  above  the  1961  and  1962  levels.  Indeed,
the  ratio  of  Viet  Cong  to  South  Vietnamese  forces  killed  and  captured  dropped
from  five-to-one  for  the  last  half  of  1962  to  three-to-one  for  the  period  July-
September  18,  1963.  This  ratio  would  be  still  less  favorable  to  the  government
if  casualties  among  such  paramilitary  groups  as  the  village  militia  and  Mon-
tagnard  scouts  were  taken  into  account.  Casualty  statistics  on  these  groups  are
not  complete  and  are  not  shown  in  this  report.  During  the  period  August-
September  18,  1963,  however,  their  casualties  exceeded  500  as  compared  with
the  combined  total  of  more  than  2,300  casualties  among  the  Army,  Civil  Guard,
and  Self  Defense  Corps  for  the  same  period.

Weapons  Losses

During  1962,  weapons  losses  among  both  the  Viet  Cong  and  government
forces  increased  progressively,  although  government  losses  were  somewhat
greater  than  those  of  the  Viet  Cong.  The  increase  continued  during  January-
April  1963,  but  losses  on  both  sides  were  about  even.  However,  during  May-
August,  Viet  Cong  weapons  losses  dropped  by  more  than  10%,  while  losses
among  government  forces  increased  by  about  15%.  If  the  trend  noted  during  the
last  three  weeks  of  September  should  continue  throughout  the  year,  the  Viet
Cong  will  lose  almost  70%  fewer  weapons  than  the  government.  Moreover,  a
large  number  of  the  Viet  Cong  weapons  lost  are  of  the  home-made  variety
while  the  great  bulk  of  government  weapons  losses  are  of  standard  or  modern-
type  pieces.

Defections  and  Desertions

Viet  Cong  military  defections  mcreased  progressively  during  1963  until  June,
dropping  from  a  high  of  414  in  May  to  a  low  of  107  for  about  the  first  three
weeks  of  September.  (These  Viet  Cong  are  usually  members  of  the  insurgent
armed  forces,  although  only  a  small  percentage  are  believed  to  be  hard-core
cadres.  They  generally  defect  to  South  Vietnamese  military  forces  who  interro-
gate and  screen  them  and  determine  their  disposition.)

In  addition  to  the  military  defectors,  some  13,700  persons  "rallied"  to  the
government  from  April  through  August  1963  under  a  national  surrender  and
amnesty  campaign.  This  campaign,  known  as  "Chieu  Hoi,"  was  officially  inau-
gurated on  April  19.  The  South  Vietnamese  government  regards  the  bulk  of
these  as  Viet  Cong.  United  States  officials,  who  do  not  screen  these  statistics,
believe  the  vast  majority  to  be  refugees  and  persons  who,  for  one  reason  or
another,  have  left  areas  controlled  or  formerly  controlled  by  the  Viet  Cong.


773


On
""-^
1

On

CO

Q

Co

C<3


^  ^  ;o

0\  o


I  o


rN  <N


On  O


"^-i  f>->  rvj


00


in


C

•  ^

O

c


c^J

E O  O


<


u

OX)


1  00

o

CM

o

T— I

O

o

o

00

r— t

+

in

00

ON

o_

oo

oo

ON

O

7

7

+

7

00

NO

ON

m

m

00^

00

no"

NO

m

no"


1/5

03


> > U >  O


^

^5  ^


On


5^


::::  ^

^On


I  .


0\


On


•-^  ^  ---^


O  oo
(N  (N  00


in

m  O
cn  \D  T-t


^  m  O

I  +  +


m  o
o  ^  O

(N

t-h"  ^


^  00

--^  r-  r-

ON  On  —I


NO  Tf

O  m
00  in


NO
ON^

NO  Tj-

<N  OO  ^

in  CO  c3
H

NO
ON


o  r-


CO


c
o

CL,

c

O

U
>


O


!/3

c


0)


C

o
U


Z
>

o  >


o


CO
a>
t-i
13
OX)

13
-t->
o
■»->

<u

J3


>n
>n


NO

<u

a

c
B

a

3


3


.a

CO


4)

o
p

NO
ON


CO

W)

bX)

^3

O

X

NO
NO


1/5

03  (L)


CO


03


NO


^  Is

CO  -C

"a  --ri
a>  X

J3  _,  CO

.2  g  £

u  ^  3
o  o

CO

CO

to  r_
■S  ^  o

>4-*  "
O O  ;3

•I— >

>%  C  CO

C  C  73
O G  3

w)^  2

J3  CO

x:  o  X!

<  D


VO


ON


774


II. CONDENSED  FIGURES  ON  MILITARY  ACTIVITY
FROM  JANUARY  7,  1962

1. Viet  Cong-Initiated  Incidents


Large-Scale

A  ttacks

Total

Total

( Com  pany-size

Terror-

Sabo-

Inci-

1962''

A  t  tacks

and  larger)

ism

tase

Prop

dents

Jan.

549

21

839

180

257

1,825

Feb.

500

20

613

137

210

1,460

Mar.

588

27

660

290

423

1,961

A  nr

497

27

1  024

220

^  \J

192

1  933

May

528

38

892

154

251

1,825

June

362

23

736

157

222

1,477

July

448

12

735

158

223

1,564

Aug.

378

10

885

146

233

1,642

Sept.

391

10

624

178

182

1,375

Oct.

419

14

583

189

166

1,357

Nov.

421

8

614

144

132

1,311

Dec.

384

9

670

107

185

1,346

Total

5,465

219

8,875

2,060

2,676

19,076

*  These  figures  closely  parallel  year-end  figures  furnished  by  COMUSMACV.


1963


Jan.

252

10

447

49

179

927

Feb.

195

14

433

69

91

788

Mar.

344

11

653

131

154

1,282

Apr.

383

12

688

105

155

1,331

May

357

13

608

93

150

1,208

June

410

12

652

107

142

1,311

July

407

9

698

80

183

1,368

Aug.

319

12

569

93

186

1,167

Sep.  18

341

13

613

115

173

1,242

Total

3,008

106

5,361

842

1,413

10,624

2.  Casualties*


Jan.  1962

ARVN— Army  of

Vietnam
CG — Civil  Guard
SDC— Self-Defense
Corps

Totals


GVN
KIA WIA  Cap/
Miss.


Total  KIA


116

221

8

76

108

43

107

146

65

299

475

116

890

Viet  Cong
WIA  Cap.


Total


1,294 212 390  1,896


COMUSMACV  has  reported  the  following  statistics  for  1962  on  Viet  Cong
casualties:  Killed— 20,919;  wounded— 4,235;  captured— 5,518;  total  30,673.


775

2. Casualties  (continued)


February  1962

KIA

GVN
WIA  Cap/
Miss.

Total

KIA

Viet  Cong
WIA  Cap.

Total

ARVN

CG

SDC

72

68
104

118

76
106

7
42
75

Totals

244

300

124

668

1,205

316

353

1,874

March  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

97

160
266

219
223
295

28
27
85

Total

523

737

140

1,400

1,456

551

523

2,530

April  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

94

108
185

164
146
222

1

66
84

Totals

387

532

151

1,070

1,596

292

415

2,303

May  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

62
131
197

140
154
215

2
24
68

Totals

390

509

94

993

1,756

352

524

2,632

July  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

84
91
150

133
186
294

13
19
45

230
296
489

1  Totals

325

613

77

1,015

1,666

413

441

2,520

July  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

86

62

236

165
149

372

13

46
153

264
257
761

Totals

384

686

212

1,282

1,544

424

542

2,510

Aug.  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

67

103
207

149
170
307

2
15
46

218
288
560

Total

377

626

63

1,066

2,271

367

669

3,307

776


2. Casualties  (continued)


Sept.  1962

GVN

W1 A

VY  l/±

Cnn/

Miss.

Trtfnl

Viet  Cong
KIA  WIA

K^ap.

I  otai

ARVN

CG

SDC

125
46
248

231
101
314

2
3
54

358
150
616

Total

419

646

59

1,124

2,218

365

446

3,029

Oct.  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

11

63
225

238
142
239

2
3
59

317
208
523

Total

365

619

64

1,048

1,967

286

373

2,626

Nov.  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

66
72
272

233
156
445

15
6
71

314
234
788

Total

410

834

92

1,336

1,982

368

561

2,911

Dec.  1962

ARVN

CG

SDC

50
50

194

232
118
268

1
7

70

283
175
532

Total

294

618

78

990

2,203

289

463

2,955

Totals,  1962

AMI

7,195

1,270

12,882

21,158

4,235

5,700  31,093

Jan.  1963

ARVN

CG

SDC

153
83
217

432
152
324

10
12
80

595
247
621

Total

453

908

102

1,463

1,754

318

379

2,451

Feb.  1963

ARVN

CG

SDC

82
87
210

224
139
293

6
10
66

312
236
569

Total

379

656

82

1,117

1,084

303

292

1,679

March  1963

ARVN

CG

SDC

75
161
174

306
259
286

4
11
51

385
431
511

Total

410

851

66

1,327

1,443

368

205

2,016

777


2. Casualties  (continued)


April  1963

KIA

GVN
WIA

Cap/
Miss.

Total

Viet  Cong
KIA  WIA

Cap.

Total

ARVN

CG

SDC

192
91
223

352
136
390

15
13
68

559
240
681

Total

506

878

96

1,480

1,660

256

388

2,304

May  1963

Total

435

889

94

1,418

1,895

295

695

2,885

lunp  JQ6^

ARVN

CG

SDC

99

89
201

256
158

358

2
6
82

357
253
641

Total

389

112

90

1,251

1,862

310

437

2,609

luhi  1Q6^

ARVN

CG

SDC

178

103
248

476
198
397

23
51
232

611
352
Sll

Total

529

1,071

306

1,906

1,918

372

387

2,677

ARVN

CG

SDC

92
68
150

313
104
218

14
14
151

419
186
519

lotal

jLk)

ODD

1  7Q

1  1  OA

1,447

206

Sept.  18,  1963

ARVN

CG

SDC

83
101
151

251
221
211

2
84
86

336
406
448

Total

335

683

172

1,190

1,249

101

329

1,679

Totals,  1963  *

3,746

7,343

1,187

12,276

14,312

2,529  3,528

20,369

*  These  figures  do  not  include  GVN  casualties  for  other  paramilitary  forces,  which  are
incomplete  but  which  in  August  and  September  1963  totalled  571.


c

ns

3. Weapon  Losses*

Viet  Cong  GVN

1961  2,753  5,982
1962

Jan.-Apr. 1,202  1,777

May-Aug. 1,526  1,884

Sept.-Dec. 1,806  1,534


Total  4,534  5,195

1963

January  683  457

February  399  253

March  367  467

April  468  797

May  564  463

June  394  580

July  374  663

August  371  554

Sept.  18  335  644


Total  3,955  4,878

4. Viet  Cong  Defections**

1962  1,956
1963

January  168

February  245

March  394

April  371

May  414

June  394

July  308

August  191

Sept.  18  107


Total  2,592


*  Many  VC  weapons  lost  are  of  the  homemade  variety.

**  This  does  not  include  "defectors"  coming  in  under  the  "Chieu  Hoi"  or  amnesty
program.


Documents  779


III. DESERTIONS  IN  THE  SOUTH  VIETNAMESE  MILITARY  AND  SE-
CURITY SERVICES  *

Percent  of  Combined


Civil  Guard

Strength  of  RVN.

and  Self

Civil  Guard,  Si

Date

Defense  Corps

Total

Defense  Corps*

J anudry

1  <J  <C  ^

Z,4oD

Q

.o

February

483

1,082

1,565

.5

March

1,168

2,110

3,278

1.0

April

1,115

1,424

2,697

.8

May

1,344

1,057

2  401

7

June

1,160

1,638

2,798

.8

July

855

1,997

2,852

.8

August

867

2,105

2  972

8

September

629

1 ,269

1,898

.5

October

767

1,505

2,272

.6

November

847

1,711

2,558

7

December

877

1,270

2,147

.6

1  oiai

1  Q  '70  1
1 O, /Zl

zy,yz4

Average  I  .7

1963

January

865

1,814

2,679

.7

February

723

1,389

2,122

.5

March

656

2,260

2,916

.7

April

853

2,018

2,871

.7

May

999

2,165

3,164

.8

June

877

1,441

2,318

.6

July

686

2,289

2,975

.7

August

830

2,501

3,331

.8

Total

6,489

15,877

22,376

Average:  .7

*  From  January  1962  through  May  1963,  the  above  statistics  include,  in  addition,  to
deserters  all  other  persons  who  have  been  absent  without  official  leave  ("awol")  for
any  length  of  time  or  for  any  reason.  The  statistics  have  not  been  adjusted  to  take
into  account  those  persons  who  returned  to  duty.  From  June  through  August  1963,
the  statistics  consist  entirely  of  deserters  and  exclude  "awols,"  but  still  have  not  been
adjusted  to  account  for  returnees.
**  Army,  Navy,  Marines,  and  Airforce.

From  January  through  December  1962,  the  combined  strength  of  these  services
increased  from  315,454  to  390,220.  From  January  through  August  1963,  the  increase
was  from  392,460  to  404,799.


Many  of  them,  however,  may  well  have  assisted  the  Viet  Cong  in  some  way
voluntarily  or  under  duress.  The  number  of  "Chieu  Hoi"  returnees  increased
progressively  from  April  19  to  June  1963,  when  a  high  of  about  3,200  was
reached.  By  August,  returnees  dropped  to  a  low  of  about  1,600.  Complete  statis-
tics are  not  yet  available  for  September.

Until  June  1963,  statistics  on  South  Vietnamese  desertions  included  all  mili-
tary and  security  personnel  who  had  been  absent  from  duty  without  official


780 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  II


leave  for  any  reason  or  for  any  length  of  time.  Moreover,  there  was  apparently
no  attempt  to  adjust  these  all-inclusive  statistics  to  account  for  persons  who  had
returned  to  duty.  Including  "awols,"  the  1962  monthly  average  of  deserters  was
J%  of  the  combined  strength  of  the  military  and  security  services.  On  this  basis,
there  was  no  change  in  the  monthly  average  during  the  first  five  months  of
1963.  Beginning  in  June,  however,  statistics  on  deserters  excluded  "awols"  al-
though they  were  still  not  adjusted  to  cover  returnees.  Even  so,  on  the  new
basis,  the  monthly  average  of  deserters  increased  from  .6%  in  June  1963  to  .8%
in  August  1963.  Complete  statistics  are  not  yet  available  for  September.

Conclusions

On  the  basis  of  available  statistical  trends,  there  appear  to  have  been  a  number
of  significant  and  unfavorable  changes  in  the  military  situation  in  South  Viet-
nam since  July  of  this  year.  Indeed,  virtually  all  of  the  indicators  noted  in  this
report  suggest  that  the  military  position  of  the  Vietnam  Government  may  have
reverted  to  the  point  it  had  reached  six  months  to  a  year  ago.  While  it  is  difficult
to  relate  precisely  cause  and  effect  for  adverse  changes  in  the  military  situation
in  South  Vietnam,  their  occurrence  at  a  time  when  the  political  situation  has
deteriorated  must  be  considered  as  more  than  coincidental.  At  the  same  time,
even  without  the  Buddhist  crisis  and  the  more  serious  political  difficulties  follow-
ing in  its  wake,  it  is  possible  that  the  Diem  government  would  have  been  un-
able to  maintain  the  favorable  trends  of  preceding  periods  in  the  face  of  the
accelerated  Viet  Cong  effort  since  July  1963.


[Document  1481

SAIGON  1964,  25  Oct.  63

FROM  LODGE  TO  McG.  BUNDY

1.  I  appreciate  the  concern  expressed  by  you  in  ref.  a  relative  to  the  Gen.
Don/Conein  relationship,  and  also  the  present  lack  of  firm  intelligence  on  the
details  of  the  general's  plot.  I  hope  that  ref.  b  will  assist  in  clearing  up  some  of
the  doubts  relative  to  general's  plans,  and  I  am  hopeful  that  the  detailed  plans
promised  for  two  days  before  the  coup  attempt  will  clear  up  any  remaining
doubts.

2.  CAS  has  been  punctilious  in  carrying  out  my  instructions.  I  have  person-
ally approved  each  meeting  between  Gen.  Don  and  Conein  who  has  carried  out
my  orders  in  each  instance  explicitly.  While  I  share  your  concern  about  the  con-
tinued involvement  of  Conein  in  this  matter,  a  suitable  substitute  for  Conein
as  the  principal  contact  is  not  presently  available.  Conein,  as  you  know,  is  a
friend  of  some  eighteen  years'  standing  with  Gen.  Don,  and  General  Don  has
expressed  extreme  reluctance  to  deal  with  anyone  else.  I  do  not  believe  the
involvement  of  another  American  in  close  contact  with  the  generals  would  be
productive.  Wq  are,  however,  considering  the  feasibility  of  a  plan  for  the  intro-
duction of  an  additional  officer  as  a  cut-out  between  Conein  and  a  designee  of
Gen.  Don  for  communication  purposes  only.  This  officer  is  completely  unwitting
of  any  details  of  past  or  present  coup  activities  and  will  remain  so.

3.  With  reference  to  Gen.  Harkins'  comment  to  Gen.  Don  which  Don  reports
to  have  referred  to  a  presidential  directive  and  the  proposal  for  a  meeting  with


Documents  781


me,  this  may  have  served  the  useful  purpose  of  allaying  the  General's  fears  as
to  our  interest.  If  this  were  a  provocation,  the  GVN  could  have  assumed  and
manufactured  any  variations  of  the  same  theme.  As  a  precautionary  measure,
however,  I  of  course  refused  to  see  Gen.  Don.  As  to  the  lack  of  information  as
to  General  Don's  real  backing,  and  the  lack  of  evidence  that  any  real  capabilities
for  action  have  been  developed,  ref.  b  provides  only  part  of  the  answer.  I  feel
sure  that  the  reluctance  of  the  generals  to  provide  the  U.S.  with  full  details  of
their  plans  at  this  time,  is  a  reflection  of  their  own  sense  of  security  and  a  lack
of  confidence  that  in  the  large  American  community  present  in  Saigon  their
plans  will  not  be  prematurely  revealed.

4.  The  best  evidence  available  to  the  Embassy,  which  I  grant  you  is  not  as
complete  as  we  would  like  it,  is  that  Gen.  Don  and  the  other  generals  involved
with  him  are  seriously  attempting  to  effect  a  change  in  the  government.  I  do
not  believe  that  this  is  a  provocation  by  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  although  we  shall  con-
tinue to  assess  the  planning  as  well  as  possible.  In  the  event  that  the  coup  aborts,
or  in  the  event  that  Nhu  has  masterminded  a  provocation,  I  believe  that  our  in-
volvement to  date  through  Conein  is  still  within  the  realm  of  plausible  denial.
CAS  is  perfectly  prepared  to  have  me  disavow  Conein  at  any  time  it  may  serve
the  national  interest.

5.  I  welcome  your  reaffirming  instructions  contained  in  CAS  Washington
74228.  It  is  vital  that  we  neither  thwart  a  coup  nor  that  we  are  even  in  a  posi-
tion where  we  do  not  know  what  is  going  on.

6.  We  should  not  thwart  a  coup  for  two  reasons.  First,  it  seems  at  least  an
even  bet  that  the  next  government  would  not  bungle  and  stumble  as  much  as  the
present  one  has.  Secondly,  it  is  extremely  unwise  in  the  long  range  for  us  to  pour
cold  water  on  attempts  at  a  coup,  particularly  when  they  are  just  in  their  begin-
ning stages.  We  should  remember  that  this  is  the  only  way  in  which  the  people
in  Vietnam  can  possibly  get  a  change  of  government.  Whenever  we  thwart
attempts  at  a  coup,  as  we  have  done  in  the  past,  we  are  incurring  very  long  last-
ing resentments,  we  are  assuming  an  undue  responsibility  for  keeping  the  in-
cumbents in  office,  and  in  general  are  setting  ourselves  in  judgment  over  the
affairs  of  Vietnam.  Merely  to  keep  in  touch  with  this  situation  and  a  policy  merely
limited  to  "not  thwarting"  are  courses  both  of  which  entail  some  risks  but  these
are  lesser  risks  than  either  thwarting  all  coups  while  they  are  stillborn  or  our
not  being  informed  of  what  is  happening.  All  the  above  is  totally  distinct  from
not  wanting  U.S.  military  advisors  to  be  distracted  by  matters  which  are  not  in
their  domain,  with  which  I  heartily  agree.  But  obviously  this  does  not  conflict
with  a  policy  of  not  thwarting.  In  judging  proposed  coups,  we  must  consider
the  effect  on  the  war  effort.  Certainly  a  succession  of  fights  for  control  of  the
Government  of  Vietnam  would  interfere  with  the  war  effort.  It  must  also  be
said  that  the  war  effort  has  been  interfered  with  already  by  the  incompetence
of  the  present  government  and  the  uproar  which  this  has  casued.

7.  Gen.  Don's  intention  to  have  no  religious  discrimination  in  a  future  gov-
ernment is  commendable  and  I  applaud  his  desire  not  to  be  "a  vassal"  of  the
U.S.  But  I  do  not  think  his  promise  of  a  democratic  election  is  realistic.  This
country  simply  is  not  ready  for  that  procedure.  I  would  add  two  other  require-
ments. First,  that  there  be  no  wholesale  purges  of  personnel  in  the  government.
Individuals  who  were  particularly  reprehensible  could  be  dealt  with  later  by  the
regular  legal  process.  Then  I  would  be  impractical,  but  I  am  thinking  of  a  gov-
ernment which  might  include  Tri  Quang  and  which  certainly  should  include
men  of  the  stature  of  Mr.  Buu,  the  labor  leader.

8.  Copy  to  Gen.  Harkins.


782 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


[Document  149]

25  Oct  63

FROM:  McGeorge  Bundy  to  Lodge
CAP  63590

Your  1964  most  helpful.

We  will  continue  to  be  grateful  for  all  additional  information  giving
increased  clarity  to  prospects  of  action  by  Don  or  others,  and  we  look  forward
to  discussing  with  you  the  whole  question  of  control  and  cutout  on  your  return,
always  assuming  that  one  of  these  D-Days  does  not  turn  out  to  be  real.  We  are
particularly  concerned  about  hazard  that  an  unsuccessful  coup,  however  care-
fully we  avoid  direct  engagement,  will  be  laid  at  our  door  by  public  opinion  al-
most everywhere.  Therefore,  while  sharing  your  view  that  we  should  not  be  in
position  of  thwarting  coup,  we  would  like  to  have  option  of  judging  and  warn-
ing on  any  plan  with  poor  prospects  of  success.  We  recognize  that  this  is  a  large
order,  but  President  wants  you  to  know  of  our  concern.


[Document  150]

30  Oct  1963

FROM:  McGEORGE  BUNDY
TO:  LODGE
CAS  79109

1.  Your  2023,  2040,  2041  and  2043  examined  with  care  at  highest  levels  here.
You  should  promptly  discuss  this  reply  and  associated  messages  with  Harkins
whose  responsibilities  toward  any  coup  are  very  heavy  especially  after  you  leave
(see  para.  7  below).  They  give  much  clearer  picture  group's  alleged  plans  and
also  indicate  chances  of  action  with  or  without  our  approval  now  so  significant
that  we  should  urgently  consider  our  attitude  and  contingency  plans.  We  note
particularly  Don's  curiosity  your  departure  and  his  insistence  Conein  be  avail-
able from  Wednesday  night  on,  which  suggests  date  might  be  as  early  as  Thurs-
day.

2.  Believe  our  attitude  to  coup  group  can  still  have  decisive  effect  on
its  decisions.  We  believe  that  what  we  say  to  coup  group  can  produce  delay  of
coup  and  that  betrayal  of  coup  plans  to  Diem  is  not  repeat  not  our  only  way  of
stopping  coup.  We  therefore  need  urgently  your  combined  assessment  with
Harkins  and  CAS  (including  their  separate  comments  if  they  desire).  We  con-
cerned that  our  line-up  of  forces  in  Saigon  (being  cabled  in  next  message)  in-
dicates approximately  equal  balance  of  forces,  with  substantial  possibility  serious
and  prolonged  fighting  or  even  defeat.  Either  of  these  could  be  serious  or  even
disastrous  for  U.S.  interests,  so  that  we  must  have  assurance  balance  of  forces
clearly  favorable.

3.  With  your  assessment  in  hand,  we  might  feel  that  we  should  convey
message  to  Don,  whether  or  not  he  gives  4  or  48  hours  notice  that  would  (A)
continue  explicit  hands-off  policy,  (B)  positively  encourage  coup,  or  (C)  dis-
courage.


Documents  783


4.  In  any  case,  believe  Conein  should  find  earliest  opportunity  express  to
Don  that  we  do  not  find  presently  revealed  plans  give  clear  prospect  of  quick
results.  This  conversation  should  call  attention  important  Saigon  units  still  ap-
parently loyal  to  Diem  and  raise  serious  issue  as  to  what  means  coup  group  has
to  deal  with  them.

5.  From  operational  standpoint,  we  also  deeply  concerned  Don  only  spokes-
man for  group  and  possibility  cannot  be  discounted  he  may  not  be  in  good  faith.
We  badly  need  some  corroborative  evidence  whether  Minh  and  others  directly
and  completely  involved.  In  view  Don's  claim  he  doesn't  handle  "military  plan-
ning" could  not  Conein  tell  Don  that  we  need  better  military  picture  and  that
Big  Minh  could  communicate  this  most  naturally  and  easily  to  Stillwell?  We
recognize  desirability  involving  MACV  to  minimum,  but  believe  Stillwell  far
more  desirable  this  purpose  than  using  Conein  both  wavs.

6.  Complexity  above  actions  raises  question  whether  you  should  adhere  to
present  Thursday  schedule.  Concur  you  and  other  U.S.  elements  should  take  no
action  that  could  indicate  U.S.  awareness  coup  possibility.  However.  DOD  is
sending  berth-equipped  militar\^  aircraft  that  will  arrive  Saigon  Thursday  and
could  take  vou  out  thereafter  as  late  as  Saturday  afternoon  in  time  to  meet  vour
presently  proposed  arrival  Washington  Sunday.  You  could  explain  this  being
done  as  convenience  and  that  your  Washington  arrival  is  same.  A  further  ad-
vantage such  aircraft  is  that  it  would  permit  your  prompt  return  from  any  point
en  route  if  necessar\".  To  reduce  time  in  transit,  you  should  use  this  plane,  but
we  recognize  delaying  your  departure  may  involve  greater  risk  that  you  per-
sonally would  appear  invohed  if  any  action  took  place.  However,  advantages
your  having  extra  two  days  in  Saigon  may  outweigh  this  and  we  leave  timing  of
flight  to  your  judgment.

7.  Whether  you  leave  Thursday  or  later,  believe  it  essential  that  prior  your
departure  there  be  fullest  consultation  Harkins  and  CAS  and  that  there  be  clear
arrangements  for  handling  (A)  normal  activity,  (B)  continued  coup  contacts,
(C)  action  in  event  a  coup  starts.  We  assume  you  will  wish  Truehart  as  charge
to  be  head  of  country  team  in  normal  situation,  but  highest  authority  desires  it
clearly  understood  that  after  vour  departure  Harkins  should  participate  in  super-
vision of  all  coup  contacts  and  that  in  event  a  coup  begins,  he  become  head  of
country-  team  and  direct  representative  of  President,  with  Truehart  in  effect
acting  as  POLAD.  On  coup  contacts  we  will  maintain  continuous  guidance  and
will  expect  equally  continuous  reporting  with  prompt  account  of  any  important
divergences  in  assessments  of  Harkins  and  Smith.

8.  If  coup  should  start,  question  of  protecting  U.S.  nationals  at  once  arises.
We  can  move  Marine  Battalion  into  Saigon  bv  air  from  Okinawa  within  24
hours — if  available.  We  are  sending  instructions  to  CINCPAC  to  arrange  or-
derly movement  of  seaborne  Marine  Battalion  to  w^aters  adjacent  to  South
Vietnam  in  position  to  close  Saigon  within  approximately  24  hours.

9.  We  are  now  examining  post-coup  contingencies  here  and  request  your
immediate  recomm.endations  on  position  to  be  adopted  after  coup  begins,
especially  with  respect  to  requests  for  assistance  of  different  sorts  from  one  side
or  the  other  also  request  you  forward  contingency  recommendations  for  action  if
coup  CA)  succeeds,  (B)  fails,  (C)  is  indecisive.

10.  We  reiterate  burden  of  proof  must  be  on  coup  group  to  show  a  sub-
stantial possibility  of  quick  success;  otherwise,  we  should  discourage  them  from
proceeding  since  a  miscalculation  could  result  in  jeopardizing  U.S.  position  in
Southeast  Asia.


784 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


[Document  151]

30  October  1963

FROM:  Harkins,  Saigon
TO:  Taylor,  Washington,  D.  C.
NR  2028

Your  JCS  4188-63  arrived  as  I  was  in  the  process  of  drafting  one  for  you  along
the  same  lines.  I  share  your  concern.  I  have  not  as  yet  seen  SAIGON  768.  I  sent
to  the  Embassy  for  a  copy  at  0830  this  morning — as  of  now  1100 — the  Em-
bassy has  not  released  it.  Also  CINCPAC  0-300040Z  infor  JCS  came  as  a  sur-
prise to  me  as  I  am  unaware  of  any  change  in  local  situation  which  indicates
necessity  for  actions  directed.  Perhaps  I'll  find  the  answer  in  SAIGON  768.  Or
perhaps  actions  directed  in  CINCPAC  300040Z  are  precautionary  in  light  of
Gen.  Don's  statement  reported  in  CAS  1925  that  a  coup  would  take  place  in  any
case  not  later  than  2  November.  It  might  be  noted  Don  also  is  supposed  to  have
said  CAS  SAIGON  1956 — that  though  the  coup  committee  would  not  release
the  details,  the  Ambassador  would  receive  the  complete  plan  for  study  two  days
prior  to  the  scheduled  times  for  the  coup.

I  have  not  been  informed  by  the  Ambassador  that  he  has  received  any  such
plan.  I  talked  to  him  yesterday  on  my  return  from  Bangkok  and  he  offered  no
additional  information.  He  has  agreed  to  keep  me  completely  informed  if  any-
thing new  turns  up.

Incidentally  he  leaves  for  Washington  tomorrow  (31st)  afternoon.  If  the  coup
is  to  happen  before  the  second  he's  hardly  going  to  get  two  days  notice.

One  thing  I  have  found  out,  Don  is  either  lying  or  playing  both  ends  against
the  middle.  What  he  told  me  is  diametrically  opposed  to  what  he  told
Col.  Conein.  He  told  Conein  the  coup  will  be  before  November  2nd.  He  told  me
he  was  not  planning  a  coup.  I  sat  with  Don  and  Big  Minh  for  2  hours  during  the
parade  last  Saturday.  No  one  mentioned  coups.  To  go  on:

Both  CAS  SAIGON  1896  and  1925  were  sent  first  and  delivered  to  me  after
dispatch.  My  1991  was  discussed  with  the  Ambassador  prior  to  dispatch.  My
1993  was  not,  basically  because  I  had  not  seen  CAS  SAIGON  1925  before  dis-
patch and  I  just  wanted  to  get  the  record  straight  from  my  side  and  where  my
name  was  involved.

The  Ambassador  and  I  are  certainly  in  touch  with  each  other  but  whether
the  communications  between  us  arc  eff"ectivc  is  something  else.  I  will  say  Cabot's
methods  of  operations  are  entirely  different  from  Amb  Noltings  as  far  as  report-
ing in  the  military  is  concerned.

Fritz  would  always  clear  messages  concerning  the  military  with  me  or  my
staff  prior  to  dispatch.  So  would  John  Richardson  if  MACV  was  concerned.  This
is  not  so  today.  Cite  CAS  1896  and  1925  for  examples.  Also  you  will  recall  I  was
not  the  recipient  of  several  messages  you  held  when  you  were  here.

CINCPAC  brought  this  matter  up  again  when  I  saw  him  in  Bangkok,  this  past
weekend.  He  is  going  to  make  a  check  when  he  returns  to  see  if  he  holds  mes-
sages I  have  not  received.  Have  just  received  SAIGON  768.  I  will  have  to  report
you  are  correct  in  believing  that  the  Ambassador  is  forwarding  military  reports
and  evaluations  without  consulting  me.  For  his  weekly  report  to  the  President,
at  his  request,  I  furnish  him  a  short  military  statement.  For  preparation  of  768  I
made  no  mention  of  the  Delta.  I  will  answer  768  separately  today.


Documents  785


There  is  a  basic  difference  apparently  between  the  Ambassadors  thinking  and
mine  on  the  interpretation  of  the  guidance  contained  in  CAP  63560  dated  6
October  and  the  additional  thoughts,  I  repeat,  thoughts  expressed  in  CAS  Wash-
ington 74228  dated  9  October.  I  interpret  CAP  63560  as  our  basic  guidance
and  that  CAS  74228  being  additional  thoughts  did  not  change  the  basic  guidance
in  that  no  initiative  should  now  be  taken  to  give  any  active  covert  encouragement
to  a  coup.  The  Ambassador  feels  that  74228  does  change  63560  and  that
a  change  of  government  is  desired  and  feels  as  stated  in  CAS  SAIGON  1964
that  the  only  way  to  bring  about  such  a  change  is  by  a  coup.

I'm  not  opposed  to  a  change  in  government,  no  indeed,  but  Fm  inclined  to
feel  that  at  this  time  the  change  should  be  in  methods  of  governing  rather  than
complete  change  of  personnel.  I  have  seen  no  batting  order  proposed  by  any
of  the  coup  groups.  I  think  we  should  take  a  hard  look  at  any  proposed  list
before  we  make  any  decisions.  In  my  contacts  here  I  have  seen  no  one  with  the
strength  of  character  of  Diem,  at  least  in  fighting  communists.  Clearly  there  are
no  Generals  qualified  to  take  over  in  my  opinion.

I  am  not  a  Diem  man  per  se.  I  certainly  see  the  faults  in  his  character.  I  am
here  to  back  140  million  SVN  people  in  their  fight  against  communism  and  it
just  happens  that  Diem  is  their  leader  at  this  time.  Most  of  the  Generals  I  have
talked  to  agree  they  can  go  along  with  Diem,  all  say  its  the  Nhu  family  they
are  opposed  to.

Perhaps  the  pressures  we  have  begun  to  apply  will  cause  Diem  and  Nhu  to
change  their  ways.  This  is  apparently  not  evident  as  yet.  I'm  sure  the  pressures
we  have  begun  to  apply  if  continued  will  affect  the  war  effort.  To  date  they  have
not.  I  am  watching  this  closely  and  will  report  when  I  think  they  have.

I  do  not  agree  with  the  Ambassadors  assessment  in  768  that  we  are  just  hold-
ing our  own.  The  GVN  is  a  way  ahead  in  the  I,  II  and  parts  of  the  III  corps
and  making  progress  in  the  Delta.  Nothing  has  happened  in  October  to  change
the  assessment  you  and  Secretary  McNamara  made  after  your  visit  here.

I  would  suggest  we  not  try  to  change  horses  too  quickly.  That  we  continue
to  take  persuasive  actions  that  will  make  the  horses  change  their  course  and
methods  of  action.  That  we  win  the  military  effort  as  quickly  as  possible,  then
let  them  make  any  and  all  the  changes  they  want.

After  all,  rightly  or  wrongly,  we  have  backed  Diem  for  eight  long  hard  years.
To  me  it  seems  incongruous  now  to  get  him  down,  kick  him  around,  and  get
rid  of  him.  The  US  has  been  his  mother  superior  and  father  confessor  since  he's
been  in  office  and  he  has  leaned  on  us  heavily.

Leaders  of  other  under-developed  countries  will  take  a  dim  view  of  our  as-
sistance if  they  too  were  led  to  believe  the  same  fate  lies  in  store  for  them.


[Document  152]

30  October  1963

FROM:  General  Harkins,  Saigon
TO:  General  Taylor,  Washington
NR:  MAC  2033

1.  Admiral  Felt  not  addee  this  message  but  will  be  provided  copy  upon  his
arrival  Saigon  tomorrow.

2.  I  now  hold  copy  of  SAIGON  768  and  this  amplifies  my  MAC  2028  which
initially  responded  to  your  JCS  4188-63.


786 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

3.  SAIGON  768  was  Ambassador  Lodge  personal  report  to  President
in  response  to  DEPTEL  576  which  is  possible  explanation  why  I  had  not  seen
768  until  one  week  after  dispatch  and  only  then  when  I  requested  a  copy  so  that
I  might  inteUigently  respond  to  your  ICS  4188-63  which  referred  to  768.

4.  Upon  receipt  of  DEPTEL  576  Ambassador  Lodge  requested  that  I  provide
him  brief  suggested  inputs  for  responses  to  questions  1  and  2  (a)  1  of  DEPTEL
576  in  that  they  were  principally  military  in  nature.  I  have  done  this  on  weekly
basis  but  have  had  no  knowledge  as  to  whether  my  suggested  brief  inputs  were
utilized  in  his  personal  report  since  as  indicated  above  these  were  not  opened
to  me.

5.  My  suggested  brief  inputs  for  para  1  which  were  provided  the  Ambassador
for  use  as  he  saw  fit  in  drafting  his  personal  evaluations  for  the  past  three  weeks
follow:

16  OCT:  On  balance  we  are  gaining  in  the  contest  with  the  VC.  There  will
continue  to  be  minor  ups  and  downs  but  the  general  trend  has  been  and  con-
tinues upward.

23  OCT:  While  significant  changes  are,  and  will  be,  difficult  to  identify  on  a
day  to  day  or  even  weekly  comparative  basis  as  regards  the  contest  with  the  Viet
Cong,  the  general  trend  continues  to  be  favorable.  The  tempo  of  RVN-initiated
operations  is  increasing  and  recently  the  tempo  of  VC-initiated  activity  has
fallen  off.

30  OCT:  No  change  from  that  previously  reported.  National  day  affairs  this
past  week  tended  to  bring  about  a  slight  reduction  in  the  tempo  of  RVN  initiated
actions,  however  VC  initiated  actions  also  waned  and  on  balance  the  trend  con-
tinues to  be  favorable.

6.  My  suggested  brief  inputs  for  paragraph  2  (a)  which  were  provided  the
Ambassador  for  use  as  he  saw  fit  in  drafting  his  personal  evaluations  for  the  past
three  weeks  follow:

16  OCT:  The  government  has  responded  at  many  points  when  we  have  cited
need  for  improvement  in  the  campaign  against  the  VC  (shift  of  boundaries;
placement  of  VNSF  activities  in  corps  areas  under  OPCON  of  corps  comdr;
reallocation  of  forces).  Additionally  Gen  Don  and  Gen  Stilwell,  my  G-3  have
spent  the  last  week  in  the  conduct  of  a  Corps  by  Corps  assessment  of  the
present  situation  with  a  view  to  further  desirable  reallocation  of  forces.  Based
on  their  recommendations  I  will  make  further  recommendations  to  Pres.
Diem  (for  inclusion  in  ANS  to  para  2  (a)  Ambassador  was  advised  that  US/
GVN  military  relations  remain  good).

23  OCT:  Response  received  from  the  government  in  reaction  to  military
areas  where  we  have  cited  needed  improvement  has  been  favorable  in  some
areas,  while  in  other  areas  no  indication  of  response  has  been  received  to  date.
In  no  case  have  they  flatly  resisted  recommended  improvements.  Favorable
indications  are  the  commitment  of  nearly  half  of  the  general  reserve  to  opera-
tions, plans  for  possible  further  redistribution  of  forces,  and  a  recognition  of  the
requirement  to  effect  consolidation  in  the  strategic  hamlet  program.

30  OCT:  No  specific  responses  have  been  received  from  the  government  this
past  week  in  reaction  to  military  areas  where  we  have  cited  need  for  improve-
ment. This  is  believed  due  in  great  part  to  their  preoccupation  with  National
day  affairs.

7.  Comparison  of  my  23  October  suggested  brief  inputs  quoted  above  with
SAIGON  768  indicates  Ambassador  Lodge  did  not  see  fit  to  utilize  my  sugges-
tions to  any  significant  degree.  It  also  apparent  that  upon  further  reflection


Documents  787


Ambassador  determined  that  more  detailed  response  was  required  than  he
initially  felt  necessary  when  he  requested  brief  inputs  on  principally  military
items.

8.  I  believe  certain  portions  SAIGON  768  require  specific  comment.  These
follow:

Para  F  of  answer  to  question  1 — View  of  Vice  Pres  Tho  that  there  are  only
15  to  20  all-around  hamlets  in  the  area  south  of  Saigon  which  are  really  good
is  ridiculous  and  indicates  need  for  him  to  get  out  of  Saigon  and  visit  country-
side so  as  to  really  know  of  progress  which  is  being  made.  In  past  two  weeks
I  have  visited  nine  Delta  provinces  (Tay  Ninh,  Binh  Duong,  Hau  Nghia,  Long
An,  Kien  Phong,  Kien  Hoa,  An  Giang,  Phong  Dinh,  Chuong  Thein),  eight  of
which  are  south  of  Saigon,  and  I  do  not  find  the  province  chiefs  or  sector  ad-
visors to  hold  the  same  views  as  Vice  Pres  Tho.

Para  H  of  answer  to  question  1 — I  am  unable  to  concur  in  statement  that
quote  one  cannot  drive  as  much  around  the  country  as  one  could  two  years
ago  end  of  quote.  I  believe  it  will  be  some  time  before,  if  we  ever  do,  experience
mass  surrenders  of  the  VC.  I  am  unable  to  concur  in  statement  that  VC  is  quote
in  fact,  reckoned  at  a  higher  figure  than  it  was  two  years  ago  end  quote.  I  have
not  observed  the  signs  that  hatred  of  the  government  has  tended  to  diminish
the  Army's  vigor,  enthusiasm  and  enterprise.  I  find  it  diflftcult  to  believe  the  few
rumors  one  hears  regarding  Generals  being  paid  off  with  money  and  flashy  cars.
Most  cars  I  see  in  use  by  Generals  are  same  they  have  been  using  for  past  two
years  and  few  if  any  qualify  as  flashy  to  my  mind.  I  do  not  concur  with
the  evaluation  of  the  14  October  report  of  the  Delta  Subcommittee  of  the  Com-
mittee on  Province  Rehabilitation  which  states  thai  the  VC  are  gaining.  More-
over I  take  exception  to  the  implication  that  the  report  represents  official  coun-
try team  agency  views  and  is  consequently  authoritative  in  the  views  it  presents.
Agency  representatives  on  this  sub-committee  served  as  individuals  in  reporting
to  the  COPROR  Committee,  incidentally  there  were  wide  divergencies  even
among  sub-committee  members.  COPROR  Committee  received  but  did  not
place  its  stamp  of  approval  or  concurrence  on  report  of  its  Sub-Committee.
COPROR  Committee  returned  the  report  to  its  Sub-Committee  for  rework.
Consequently  this  report  has  not  as  yet  been  submitted  to  country  team  nor  has
it  been  referred  to  individual  country  team  agencies  for  review  and/or  com-
ment. Any  views  quoted  from  this  Sub-Committee  report  therefore  have  no  rpt
no  validity  as  expressions  of  country  team  or  individual  agency  views.

Para  J  of  answer  to  question  1 — With  regard  to  the  quote  existing  political
control  over  troop  movements,  which  prevents  optimum  use  of  the  Army  end
quote.  I  do  not  deny  that  political  influences  enter  into  this  picture  however  I
feel  we  have  made  and  are  making  significant  strides  in  this  area  and  do  not
concur  that  time  is  not  working  for  us — so  long  as  political  controls  remain  as
at  present.

Para  J  of  answer  to  question  1 — As  indicated  in  paras  5  and  6  above  and  in
other  reports  I  have  filed  my  evaluation  is  that  from  the  military  point  of  view
the  trend  is  definitely  in  RVN  favor  consequently  I  cannot  concur  that  quote
we  at  present  are  not  doing  much  more  than  holding  our  own  end  quote.

Answer  under  (a)  to  question  2 — I  am  correctly  quoted  here  but  para  6  above
gives  full  context  of  my  suggested  input.

Answer  under  (c)  to  question  2 — As  indicated  para  6  above  Ambassador  was
advised  that  US/GVN  military  relations  remain  good.


788 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


[Document  153]

[This  duplication  of  Document  150  was  noted  late  in  the  manufacturing  process.]
Cablegram  from  McGeorge  Bundy  to  Ambassador  Lodge,  Oct.  30,  1963.

1.  Your  2023,  2040,  2041  and  2043  examined  with  care  at  highest  levels
here.  You  should  promptly  discuss  this  reply  and  associated  messages  with  Har-
kins  whose  responsibilities  toward  any  coup  are  very  heavy  especially  after  you
leave  (see  para.  7  below).  They  give  much  clearer  picture  group's  alleged  plans
and  also  indicate  chances  of  action  with  or  without  our  approval  now  so  sig-
nificant that  we  should  urgently  consider  our  attitude  and  contingency  plans.
We  note  particularly  Don's  curiosity  your  departure  and  his  insistence  Conein
be  available  from  Wednesday  night  on,  which  suggests  date  might  be  as  early
as  Thursday.

2.  Believe  our  attitude  to  coup  group  can  still  have  decisive  effect  on  its  deci-
sions. We  believe  that  what  we  say  to  coup  group  can  produce  delay  of  coup
and  that  betrayal  of  coup  plans  to  Diem  is  not  repeat  not  our  only  way  of  stop-
ping coup.  We  therefore  need  urgently  our  combined  assessment  with  Harkins
and  CAS  (including  their  separate  comments  if  they  desire).  We  concerned
that  our  line-up  of  forces  in  Saigon  (being  cabled  in  next  message)  indicates
approximately  equal  balance  of  forces,  with  substantial  possibility  serious  and
prolonged  fighting  or  even  defeat.  Either  of  these  could  be  serious  or  even  dis-
astrous for  U.S.  interests,  so  that  we  must  have  assurance  balance  of  forces
clearly  favorable.

3.  With  your  assessment  in  hand,  we  might  feel  that  we  should  convey  mes-
sage to  Don,  whether  or  not  he  gives  4  or  48  hours  notice  that  would  (A)  con-
tinue explicit  hands-off  policy,  (B)  positively  encourage  coup,  or  (C)  discourage.

4.  In  any  case,  believe  Conein  should  find  earliest  opportunity  express  to  Don
that  we  do  not  find  presently  revealed  plans  give  clear  prospect  of  quick  results.
This  conversation  should  call  attention  important  Saigon  units  still  apparently
loyal  to  Diem  and  raise  serious  issue  as  to  what  means  coup  group  has  to  deal
with  them.

5.  From  operational  standpoint,  we  also  deeply  concerned  Don  only  spokes-
man for  group  and  possibility  cannot  be  discounted  he  may  not  be  in  good  faith.
We  badly  need  some  corroborative  evidence  whether  Minh,  and  others  directly
and  completely  involved.  In  view  Don's  claim  he  doesn't  handle  "military  plan-
ning" could  not  Conein  tell  Don  that  we  need  better  military  picture  and  that
Big  Minh  could  communicate  this  most  naturally  and  easily  to  Stillwell?  We
recognize  desirability  involving  MACV  to  minimum,  but  believe  Stillwell  far
more  desirable  this  purpose  than  using  Conein  both  ways.

6.  Complexity  above  actions  raises  question  whether  you  should  adhere  to
present  Thursday  schedule.  Concur  you  and  other  U.S.  elements  should  take
no  action  that  could  indicate  U.S.  awareness  coup  possibility.  However,  DOD
is  sending  berth-equipped  military  aircraft  that  will  arrive  Saigon  Thursday  and
could  take  you  out  thereafter  as  late  as  Saturday  afternoon  in  time  to  meet  your
presently  proposed  arrival  Washington  Sunday.  You  could  explain  this  being
done  as  convenience  and  that  your  Washington  arrival  is  same.  A  further  ad-
vantage such  aircraft  is  that  it  would  permit  your  prompt  return  from  any  point
en  route  if  necessary.  To  reduce  time  in  transit,  you  should  use  this  plane,  but
we  recognize  delaying  your  departure  may  involve  greater  risk  that  you  person-


Documents  789


ally  would  appear  involved  if  any  action  took  place.  However,  advantages  your
having  extra  two  days  in  Saigon  may  outweigh  this  and  we  leave  timing  of  flight
to  your  judgment.

7.  Whether  you  leave  Thursday  or  later,  believe  it  essential  that  prior  your
departure  there  be  fullest  consultation  Harkins  and  CAS  and  that  there  be  clear
arrangements  for  handling  (A)  normal  activity,  (B)  continued  coup  contacts,
(C)  action  in  event  a  coup  starts.  We  assume  you  will  wish.  Truehart  as  charge
to  be  head  of  country  team  in  normal  situation,  but  highest  authority  desires  it
clearly  understood  that  after  your  departure  Harkins  should  participate  in  super-
vision of  all  coup  contacts  and  that  in  event  a  coup  begins,  he  become  head  of
country  team  and  direct  representative  of  President,  with  Truehart  in  effect
acting  as  POLAD.  On  coup  contacts  we  will  maintain  continuous  guidance  and
will  expect  equally  continuous  reporting  with  prompt  account  of  any  important
divergences  in  assessments  of  Harkins  and  Smith.

8.  If  coup  should  start,  question  of  protecting  U.S.  nationals  at  once  arises.
We  can  move  Marine  Battalion  into  Saigon  by  air  from  Okinawa  within  24  hours
if — [sic]  available.  We  are  sending  instructions  to  CINCPAC  to  arrange  orderly
movement  of  seaborne  Marine  Battalion  to  waters  adjacent  to  South  Vietnam
in  position  to  close  Saigon  within  approximately  24  hours.

9.  We  are  now  examing  post-coup  contingencies  here  and  request  your  im-
mediate recommendations  on  position  to  be  adopted  after  coup  begins,
especially  with  respect  to  requests  for  assistance  of  different  sorts  from  one
side  or  the  other  also  request  you  forward  contingency  recommendations  for
action  if  coup  (A)  succeeds,  (B)  fails,  (C)  is  indecisive.

10.  We  reiterate  burden  of  proof  must  be  on  coup  group  to  show  a  substantial
possibility  of  quick  success;  otherwise,  we  should  discourage  them  from  proceed-
ing since  a  miscalculation  could  result  in  jeopardizing  U.S.  position  in  Southeast
Asia.


[Document  154]

30  Oct  1963

FROM:  Lodge
TO:  State
CAS  2063

1.  We  must,  of  course,  get  best  possible  estimate  of  chance  of  coup's  success
and  this  estimate  must  color  our  thinking,  but  do  not  think  we  have  the  power
to  delay  or  discourage  a  coup.  Don  has  made  it  clear  many  times  that  this  is  a
Vietnamese  affair.  It  is  theoretically  possible  for  us  to  turn  over  the  information
which  has  been  given  to  us  in  confidence  to  Diem  and  this  would  undoubtedly
stop  the  coup  and  would  make  traitors  out  of  us.  For  practical  purposes  there-
fore I  would  say  that  we  have  very  little  influence  on  what  is  essentially  a  Viet-
namese affair.  In  addition,  this  would  place  the  heads  of  the  Generals,  their
civilian  supporters,  and  lower  military  officers  on  the  spot,  thereby  sacrificing
a  significant  portion  of  the  civilian  and  military  leadership  needed  to  carry  the
war  against  the  VC  to  its  successful  conclusion.  After  our  efforts  not  to
discourage  a  coup  and  this  change  of  heart,  we  would  foreclose  any  possibility
of  change  of  the  GVN  for  the  better.  Diem/Nhu  have  displayed  no  intentions
to  date  of  a  desire  to  change  the  traditional  methods  of  control  through  police


790 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

action  or  take  any  repeat  any  actions  which  would  undermine  the  power  posi-
tion or  solidarity  of  the  Ngo  family.  This,  despite  our  heavy  pressures  directed
DEPTEL  534.  If  our  attempt  to  thwart  this  coup  were  successful,  which  we
doubt,  it  is  our  firm  estimate  that  younger  officers,  small  groups  of  military,
would  then  engage  in  an  abortive  action  creating  chaos  ideally  suited  to  VC
objectives.

2.  While  we  will  attempt  a  combined  assessment  in  a  following  message,
time  has  not  yet  permitted  substantive  examination  of  this  matter  with  General
Harkins.  My  general  view  is  that  the  U.S.  is  trying  to  bring  this  medieval  coun-
try into  the  20th  Century  and  that  we  have  made  considerable  progress  in  mil-
itary and  economic  ways  but  to  gain  victory  we  must  also  bring  them  into  the
20th  Century  politically  and  that  can  only  be  done  by  either  a  thoroughgoing
change  in  the  behavior  of  the  present  government  or  by  another  government.
The  Viet  Cong  problem  is  partly  military  but  it  is  also  partly  psychological
and  political.

3.  With  respect  to  paragraph  3  Ref.,  I  believe  that  we  should  continue  our
present  position  of  keeping  hands  off  but  continue  to  monitor  and  press  for
more  detailed  information.  CAS  has  been  analyzing  potential  coup  forces  for
some  time  and  it  is  their  estimate  that  the  Generals  have  probably  figured  their
chances  pretty  closely  and  probably  also  expect  that  once  they  begin  to  move,
not  only  planned  units,  but  other  units  will  join  them.  We  believe  that  Vietnam's
best  Generals  are  involved  in  directing  this  effort.  If  they  can't  pull  it  off",  it  is
doubtful  other  military  leadership  could  do  so  successfully.  It  is  understandable
that  the  Generals  would  be  reticent  to  reveal  full  details  of  their  plan  for  fear
of  leaks  to  the  GVN.

4.  Re  para.  4,  Ref.,  we  expect  that  Conein  will  meet  Don  on  the  night  of  30
Oct  or  early  morning  31  Oct.  We  agree  with  Para.  4,  Ref.,  that  we  should  con-
tinue to  press  for  details  and  question  Don  as  to  his  estimate  of  the  relative
strengths  of  opposing  forces.  We  do  not  believe,  however,  that  we  should  show
any  signs  of  attempting  to  direct  this  affair  ourselves  or  of  giving  the  impression
of  second  thoughts  on  this  Vietnamese  initiation.  In  the  meantime,  we  will
respond  specifically  to  CAS  Washington  79126.  Please  note  that  CAS  Saigon
2059  corrects  CAS  Saigon  2023  and  two  regiments  of  the  7th  Division  are  in-
cluded in  the  coup  forces.

5.  Apparently  Para.  5,  Ref.,  overlooks  CAS  1445,  5  Oct  1963  which  gave
an  account  of  the  face  to  lace  meeting  of  General  "Big  Minh"  and  Conein  at
Minh's  instigation  and  through  the  specific  arrangement  of  Gen  Don.  Minh
specifically  identified  Gen  Don  as  participating  in  a  plan  to  change  the  govern-
ment. Please  note  that  Minh's  remarks  parallel  in  every  way  the  later  statements
of  Gen.  Don.  We  believe  that  the  limitation  of  contact  to  Don  and  Cein  is  an
appropriate  security  measure  consonant  with  our  urging  that  the  smallest  num-
ber of  persons  be  aware  of  these  details.

6.  We  do  not  believe  it  wise  to  ask  that  "Big  Minh"  pass  his  plans  to  Gen.
Stilwell.  The  Vietnamese  believe  that  there  are  members  of  the  U.S.  military
who  leak  to  the  Government  of  Vietnam.  I  do  not  doubt  that  this  is  an  unjust
suspicion  but  it  is  a  fact  that  this  suspicion  exists  and  there  is  no  use  in  pretend-
ing that  it  does  not.

7.  I  much  appreciate  your  furnishing  the  berth-equipped  military  aircraft
which  I  trust  is  a  jet.  I  intend  to  tell  Pan  American  that  a  jet  has  been  diverted
for  my  use  and  therefore  I  will  no  longer  need  their  services.  This  will
undoubtedly  leak  to  the  newspapers  and  the  GVN  may  study  this  move  with
some  suspicion.  I  will  answer  any  inquiries  on  this  score  to  the  effect  that  I


Documents  791


am  most  pleased  by  this  attention  and  that  this  is  obviously  done  as  a  measure
to  insure  my  comfort  and  save  my  time.  To  allay  suspicions  further,  I  will  offer
space  on  the  aircraft  to  MACV  for  emergency  leave  cases,  etc.,  and  handle  this
in  as  routine  fashion  as  possible.  I  wish  to  reserve  comment  as  to  my  actual  time
of  departure  until  I  have  some  additional  information,  hopefully  tomorrow.

8.  Your  para.  7  somewhat  perplexes  me.  It  does  not  seem  sensible  to  have
the  military  in  charge  of  a  matter  which  is  so  profoundly  political  as  a  change
of  government.  In  fact,  I  would  say  to  do  this  would  probably  be  the  end  of  any
hope  for  a  change  of  government  here.  This  is  said  impersonally  as  a  general
proposition,  since  Gen.  Harkins  is  a  splendid  General  and  an  old  friend  of  mine
to  whom  I  would  gladly  entrust  anything  I  have.  I  assume  that  »;he  Embassy
and  MACV  are  able  to  handle  normal  activities  under  A,  that  CAS  can  con-
tinue coup  contacts  under  B.  and  as  regards  C,  we  must  simply  do  the  very  best
we  can  in  the  light  of  events  after  the  coup  has  started.

9.  We  appreciate  the  steps  taken  as  outlined  in  para.  8.  However,  we  should
remember  that  the  GVN  is  not  totally  inept  in  its  foreign  soundings  and  that
these  moves  should  be  as  discreet  and  security  conscious  as  possible.  I  would,
of  course,  call  for  these  forces  only  in  case  of  extreme  necessity  since  my  hope
coincides  with  the  Generals  that  this  will  be  an  all-Vietnamese  affair.

10.  We  anticipate  that  at  the  outset  of  the  coup,  unless  it  moves  with  light-
ning swiftness,  the  GVN  will  request  me  or  Gen.  Harkins  to  use  our  influence
to  call  it  off.  I  believe  our  responsibilities  should  be  that  our  influence  certainly
could  not  be  superior  to  that  of  the  President  who  is  Commander-in-Chief  and
that  if  he  is  unable  to  call  it  off,  we  would  certainly  be  unable  to  do  so  and
would  merely  be  risking  American  lives  attempting  to  interfere  in  this  Viet-
namese problem.  The  Government  might  request  aircraft.  Helicopters,  for  the
evacuation  of  key  personalities  that  would  have  to  be  studied  closely,  but  we
would  certainly  not  commit  our  planes  and  pilots  between  the  battle  lines  of  the
opposing  forces.  We  should,  rather,  state  that  we  would  be  willing  to  act  in  this
fashion  during  a  truce  in  which  both  sides  agree  to  the  removal  of  key  person-
alities. I  believe  that  there  would  be  immediate  political  problems  in  attempting
to  take  these  personalities  to  another  neighboring  country  and  probably  we
would  be  best  served  in  depositing  them  in  Saipan  where  the  absence  of  press,
communications,  etc.,  would  allow  us  some  leeway  to  make  a  further  decision
as  to  their  ultimate  disposition.  If  senior  Vietnamese  personalities  and  their
families  requested  asylum  in  the  Embassy  or  other  American  installations,  we
would  probably  have  to  grant  it  in  light  of  our  previous  action  with  respect  to
Tri  Quang,  This  will  undoubtedly  present  later  problems  but  hopefully  the
new  government  might  ^eel  disposed  to  help  us  solve  this  problem.  Naturally,
asylum  would  be  granted  on  the  same  basis  as  the  Buddhists,  i.e.,  physical  pres-
ence at  the  Embassy  or  other  location.

11.  As  to  requests  from  the  Generals,  they  may  well  have  need  of  funds  at
the  last  moment  with  which  to  buy  off  potential  opposition.  To  the  extent  that
these  funds  can  be  passed  discreetly,  I  believe  we  should  furnish  them,  pro-
vided we  are  convinced  that  the  proposed  coup  is  sufficiently  well  organized
to  have  a  good  chance  of  success.  If  they  are  successful,  they  will  undoubtedly
ask  for  prompt  recognition  and  some  assurance  that  military  and  economic
aid  will  continue  at  normal  level.  We  should  be  prepared  to  make  these  state-
ments if  the  issue  is  clear-cut  predicating  our  position  on  the  President's  stated
desire  to  continue  the  war  against  the  VC  to  final  victory.  VOA  might  be  an
important  means  of  disseminating  this  message.  Should  the  coup  fail,  we  will
have  to  pick  up  the  pieces  as  best  we  can  at  that  time.  We  have  a  commitment


792 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

to  the  Generals  from  the  August  episode  to  attempt  to  help  in  the  evacuation
of  their  dependents.  We  should  try  to  live  up  to  this  if  conditions  will  permit.
American  complicity  will  undoubtedly  be  charged  and  there  might  be  some  acts
taken  against  specific  personalities  which  we  should  anticipate  and  make  pro-
vision against  as  best  we  can.  Should  the  coup  prove  indecisive  and  a  protracted
struggle  is  in  progress,  we  should  probably  offer  our  good  offices  to  help  resolve
the  issue  in  the  interest  of  the  war  against  the  VC.  This  might  hold  some  benefit
in  terms  of  concessions  by  GVN.  We  will  naturally  incur  some  opprobrium
from  both  sides  in  our  role  as  mediator.  However,  this  opprobrium  would  prob-
ably be  less  distasteful  than  a  deadlock  which  would  open  the  door  to  the  VC.
We  consider  such  a  deadlock  as  the  least  likely  possibility  of  the  three.

12.  As  regards  your  para.  10,  I  do  not  know  what  more  proof  can  be  of-
fered than  the  fact  these  men  are  obviously  prepared  to  risk  their  lives  and
that  they  want  nothing  for  themselves.  If  I  am  any  judge  of  human  nature,
Don's  face  expressed  of  sincerity  and  determination  on  the  morning  that  I
spoke  to  him.  Heartily  agree  that  a  miscalculation  could  jeopardize  position  in
Southeast  Asia.  We  also  run  tremendous  risks  by  doing  nothing.

If  we  were  convinced  that  the  coup  was  going  to  fail,  we  would,  of  course,
do  everything  we  could  to  stop  it.

13.  Gen.  Harkins  has  read  this  and  does  not  concur.


[Document  155]

CAS  79407,  30  Oct  '63
FROM  BUNDY  TO  LODGE

1.  Our  reading  your  thoughtful  2063  leads  us  to  believe  a  significant  dif-
ference of  shading  may  exist  on  one  crucial  point  (see  next  para.)  and  on  one
or  two  lesser  matters  easily  clarified.

2.  We  do  not  accept  as  a  basis  for  U.S.  policy  that  we  have  no  power  to  delay
or  discourage  a  coup.  In  your  paragraph  12  you  say  that  if  you  were  convinced
that  the  coup  was  going  to  fail  you  would  of  course  do  everything  you  could  to
stop  it.  We  believe  that  on  this  same  basis  you  should  take  action  to  persuade
coup  leaders  to  stop  or  delay  any  operation  which,  in  your  best  judgment,
does  not  clearly  give  high  prospect  of  success.  We  have  not  considered  any  be-
trayal of  generals  to  Diem,  and  our  79109  explicitly  reject  that  course.  We
recognize  the  danger  of  appearing  hostile  to  generals,  but  we  believe  that  our
own  position  should  be  on  as  firm  ground  as  possible,  hence  we  cannot  limit
ourselves  to  proposition  implied  in  your  message  that  only  conviction  of  certain
failure  justifies  intervention.  We  believe  that  your  standard  for  intervention
should  be  that  stated  above.

3.  Therefore,  if  you  should  conclude  that  there  is  not  clearly  a  high  prospect
of  success,  you  should  communicate  this  doubt  to  generals  in  a  way  calculated
to  persuade  them  to  desist  at  least  until  chances  are  better.  In  such  a  communica-
tion you  should  use  the  weight  of  U.S.  best  advice  and  explicitly  reject  any  im-
plication tha^  we  oppose  the  effort  of  the  generals  because  of  preference  for
present  regime.  We  recognize  need  to  bear  in  mind  generals'  interpretation
of  U.S.  role  in  1960  coup  attempt,  and  your  agent  should  maintain  clear  distinc-
tion between  strong  and  honest  advice  given  as  a  friend  and  any  opposition  to
their  objectives.

4.  We  continue  to  be  deeply  interested  in  up-to-the-minute  assessment  of


Documents  793


prospects  and  are  sending  this  before  reply  to  our  CAS  79126.  We  want  con-
tinuous exchange  latest  assessments  on  this  topic.

5.  To  clarify  our  intent,  paragraph  7  of  our  79109  is  rescinded  and  we  re-
state our  desires  as  follows:

a.  While  you  are  in  Saigon  you  will  be  Chief  of  Country  Team  in  all  cir-
cumstances and  our  only  instruction  is  that  we  are  sure  it  will  help  to  have  Har-
kins  fully  informed  at  all  stages  and  to  use  advice  from  both  him  and  Smith  in
framing  guidance  for  coup  contacts  and  assessment.  We  continue  to  be  con-
cerned that  neither  Conein  nor  any  other  reporting  source  is  getting  the  clarity
we  would  like  with  respect  to  alignment  of  forces  and  level  of  determination
among  generals.

b.  When  you  leave  Saigon  and  before  there  is  a  coup,  Truehart  will  be  Chief
of  the  Country  Team.  Our  only  modification  of  existing  procedures  is  that  in
this  circumstance  we  wish  all  instruction  to  Conein  to  be  conducted  in  immediate
consultation  with  Harkins  and  Smith  so  that  all  three  know  what  is  sold
in  Conein.  Any  disagreement  among  the  three  on  such  instruction  should  be
reported  to  Washington  and  held  for  our  resolution,  when  time  permits.

c.  If  you  have  left  and  a  coup  occurs,  we  believe  that  emergency  situation
requires,  pending  your  return,  that  direction  of  country  team  be  vested  in  most
senior  officer  with  experience  of  military  decisions,  and  the  officer  in  our  view
is  Harkins.  We  do  not  intend  that  this  switch  in  final  responsibility  should  be
publicized  in  any  way,  and  Harkins  will  of  course  be  guided  in  basic  posture  by
our  instructions,  which  follow  in  paragraph  6.  We  do  not  believe  that  this  switch
will  have  the  effect  suggested  in  your  paragraph  8.

6.  This  paragraph  contains  our  present  standing  instructions  for  U.S.  posture
in  the  event  of  a  coup.

a.  U.S.  authorities  will  reject  appeals  for  direct  intervention  from  either
side,  and  U.S.-controlled  aircraft  and  other  resources  will  not  be  committed
between  the  battle  lines  or  in  support  of  either  side,  without  authorization  from
Washington.

b.  In  event  of  indecisive  contest,  U.S.  authorities  may  in  their  discretion
agree  to  perform  any  acts  agreeable  to  both  sides,  such  as  removal  of  key  per-
sonalities or  relay  of  information.  In  such  actions,  however,  U.S.  authorities
will  strenuously  avoid  appearance  of  pressure  on  either  side.  It  is  not  in  the
interest  of  USG  to  be  or  appear  to  be  either  instrument  of  existing  government
or  instrument  of  coup.

c.  In  the  event  of  imminent  or  actual  failure  of  coup,  U.S.  authorities
may  afford  asylum  in  their  discretion  to  those  to  whom  there  is  any  express  or
implied  obligation  of  this  sort.  We  believe  however  that  in  such  a  case  it  would
be  in  our  interest  and  probably  in  interest  of  those  seeking  asylum  that  they
seek  protection  of  other  Embassies  in  addition  to  our  own.  This  point  should  be
made  strongly  if  need  arises.

d.  But  once  a  coup  under  responsible  leadership  has  begun,  and  within
these  restrictions,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  U.S.  Government  that  it  should  suc-
ceed.

7.  We  have  your  message  about  return  to  Washington  and  we  suggest  that
all  public  comment  be  kept  as  low-key  and  quiet  as  possible,  and  we  also  urge
that  if  possible  you  keep  open  the  exact  time  of  your  departure.  We  are  strongly
sensitive  to  great  disadvantage  of  having  you  out  of  Saigon  if  this  should  turn
out  to  be  a  week  of  decision,  and  if  it  can  be  avoided  we  would  prefer  not  to  see
you  pinned  to  a  fixed  hour  of  departure  now.


794 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements

KENNEDY  ADMINISTRATION


CONTENTS
Summary

Public  Statement  1 {page  798)

Kennedy  stresses  the  need  for  a  force  balance  that  can  deal  effectively  with  guer-
rilla scale  activities  being  utilized  by  Communist  aggression  (29  February  1960).

Public  Statement  2 {page  798)

Kennedy  emphasizes  the  importance  of  a  mobile  and  versatile  force  structure
which  can  intervene  swiftly  and  effectively  in  support  of  our  global  commitments
(14  June  1960).

Public  Statement  3 {page  799)

Kennedy  comments  on  the  importance  of  India,  Japan,  and  a  regional  grouping
of  the  smaller  nations  to  counter  the  threat  of  an  aggressive  China  (22  September
1960).

Public  Statement  4 {page  799)

Kennedy  comments  on  friction  between  Russia  and  China;  emphasizes  the  im-
portance of  India  as  an  indicator  of  Asia's  future  (22  October  1960) .

Public  Statement  5 {page  799)

Kennedy  stresses  the  importance  of  Laotian  security  to  that  of  Southeast  Asia
and  the  U.S.;  also  our  obligation  under  the  SEATO  agreement  (23  March  1961).

Public  Statement  6 {page  800)

Kennedy  emphasizes  threat  of  limited  war  and  the  need  to  maintain  powerful
and  mobile  forces  to  prevent  erosion  of  Free  World  (28  March  1961).

Public  Statement  7 {page  801)

Kennedy  speaks  of  global  exploitation  of  discontent  and  yearning  people  by  Com-
munist subversion;  Vietnam  cited  as  example  (20  April  1961).

Public  Statement  8 {page  802)

Kennedy  discusses  Communist  threat  to  emerging  nations  of  Africa,  Asia  and
Latin  America  with  specific  mention  of  Vietnam;  cites  U.S.  responsibilities  as
chief  defender  of  freedom  (28  April  1961).

Public  Statement  9 {page  803)

Kennedy  (in  response  to  question)  states  that  the  question  of  sending  troops  to
Vietnam  is  being  considered  (5  May  1961).


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  795
Public  Statement  10 {page  803)

Johnson-Diem  communique  expressing  U.S.  awareness  of  Communist  subversion
in  Vietnam  and  U.S.  responsibilities  and  interest  in  assisting  the  Saigon  Govern-
ment (13  May  1961).

Public  Statement  11 {page  804)

Kennedy  stresses  the  subversive  threat  facing  the  southern  half  of  the  globe  (25
May  1961).

Public  Statement  12 {page  804)

Kennedy  enumerates  border  violations  to  Southeast  Asian  nations,  denounces  the
"war  of  liberation"  justification,  and  stresses  the  consequences  of  successful  Com-
munist efforts  in  Laos  and  Vietnam  (25  September  1961).

Public  Statement  13 {pcige  805)

Kennedy  comments  on  evidence  that  guerrilla  activity  in  South  Vietnam  is
originating  outside  that  country  (11  October  1961 ) .

Public  Statement  14 {page  805)

Kennedy  acknowledges  Hanoi  direction  of  guerrilla  effort  in  violation  of  Geneva
Accords;  indicates  the  U.S.  is  prepared  to  assist  in  the  defense  of  Vietnam  in-
dependence through  increased  aid  (14  December  1961).

Public  Statement  15 {page  806)

Kennedy  acknowledges  a  step-up  in  U.S.  effort  to  resist  aggression  in  Vietnam
under  the  guise  of  a  "war  of  liberation"  ( 1 1  January  1962) .

Public  Statement  16 {page  806)

Kennedy's  response  to  a  question  on  the  hazards  of  a  coalition  government  in
Laos  provides  insight  into  his  thinking  on  military  intervention  as  the  other  alter-
native (15  January  1962).

Public  Statement  17 {page  807)

Kennedy  discusses  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam  in  general  terms;  specifics
avoided  in  interest  of  security  (7  February  1962).

Public  Statement  18 {page  807)

Kennedy  reviews  the  development  of  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam  in  response
to  question  suggesting  a  credibility  problem  (14  February  1962).

Public  Statement  19 {page  809)

Kennedy  gives  an  excellent  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  Communist  world  (23
March  1962).

Public  Statement  20 {page  810)

Kennedy  emphasizes  the  need  to  pursue  our  established  goal  of  non-Communist
Vietnam  (11  April  1962).

Public  Statement  21 {page  810)

Kennedy,  commenting  on  cease-fire  violations  in  Laos,  stresses  the  desirability  of
a  political  solution  as  contrasted  to  military  intervention  (9  May  1962).

Public  Statement  22 {page  811)

Kennedy  announces  the  movement  of  troops  to  Thailand  as  evidence  of  U.S.
concern  over  the  Laotian  cease-fire  violations  (15  May  1962).


796 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


Public  Statement  23 (page  811)

Kennedy  responds  to  questions  on  troop  deployment  to  Thailand;  cites  SEATO
obligations  as  the  legal  basis  (17  May  1962).

Public  Statement  24 (page  813)

Kennedy  describes  Communist  threat  of  infiltration  and  subversion  as  he  en-
visioned it  (6  June  1962) .

Public  Statement  25 (page  813)

Kennedy  comments  on  Mansfield's  concern  about  the  Administration's  Asian
policies;  suggests  he  does  not  think  that  Mansfield  would  advocate  withdrawing
from  Vietnam  or  Thailand  (14  June  1962) .

Public  Statement  26 (page  814)

An  official  statement  calling  attention  to  findings  of  International  Control  Com-
mission that  North  Vietnam  was  violating  the  Geneva  Accords  (16  July  1962).

Public  Statement  27 (page  815)

Kennedy  cautions  that  a  split  in  the  Communist  world  is  over  the  means  not  the
end  of  communizing  the  world  ( 14  January  1963) .

Public  Statement  28 (page  816)

Kennedy  argues  for  foreign  aid  to  help  eliminate  root  causes  of  unrest  in  develop-
ing world  (14  January  1963).

Public  Statement  29 (page  816)

Kennedy  expresses  disagreement  with  recommendation  of  Mansfield  committee
to  reduce  aid  to  Southeast  Asia;  refuses  to  withdraw  and  turn  it  over  to  the  Com-
munists (6  March  1963).

Public  Statement  30 (page  817)

Deputy  Under  Secretary  for  Political  Affairs  presents  important  analysis  of  U.S.
interests  in  Southeast  Asia;  resources  and  location  emphasized  as  is  the  impor-
tance of  Communist  revolutionary  momentum;  validity  of  SEATO  commitment
also  cited  (8  April  1963).

Public  Statement  31 (pcige  818)

Kennedy  points  out  the  interrelationship  of  Southeast  Asian  nations  in  response
to  question  on  domino  theory  (24  April  1963) .

Public  Statement  32 (page  819)

Kennedy  comments  on  reasons  for  sending  troops  to  South  Vietnam  but  not  to
Laos  (8  May  1963).

Public  Statement  33 (page  819)

Rusk  stresses  the  strategic  importance  of  South  Vietnam  and  the  history  of  oar
involvement  (13  May  1963).

Public  Statement  34 (page  821)

Hilsman  discusses  Communist  threat  to  Asia  and  the  U.S.  commitment  to  combat
its  spread;  explains  Viet  Cong  role  in  South  Vietnam  and  attempts  to  place  it  in
perspective  to  worldwide  threat  (8  July  1963).


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  797
Public  Statement  35 {page  824)

Kennedy  emphasizes  the  need  for  U.S.  presence  in  South  Vietnam  to  avoid  col-
lapse of  the  government;  vows  to  stay  (17  July  1963).

Public  Statement  36 {page  825)

Heavner,  Deputy  Director  of  Vietnam  Working  Group,  discusses  in  detail  the
evolution  of  U.S.  involvement;  he  looks  at  South  Vietnam  as  a  strategic  location,
a  moral  commitment,  a  fulfillment  of  SEATO  obligations  and  a  test  case  for  "war
of  liberation  '  (9  September  1963).

Public  Statement  37 {page  827)

Kennedy  admits  Diem's  failings  but  feels  it  essential  that  the  U.S.  remain  (25
September  1963).

Public  Statement  38 {page  827)

Kennedy  confirms  his  belief  in  "domino  theory"  and  emphasizes  need  to  remain
and  help  government  strengthen  and  reform  (9  September  1963) .

Public  Statement  39 {page  828)

Kennedy  admits  to  the  presence  of  25,000  Americans  in  South  Vietnam  with  a
primary  goal  of  winning  the  war  (12  September  1963) .

Public  Statement  40 {page  828)

Kennedy  gives  excellent  assessment  of  U.S.  role  and  responsibility  to  lead  the
defense  of  the  world's  free  nations  (25  September  1963) .

Public  Statement  41 {page  829)

Kennedy  cites  U.S.  role  as  leader  of  Free  World  (26  September  1963) .
Public  Statement  42 {page  830)

Policy  statement  reaffirming  U.S.  intent  to  fight  aggression  in  Vietnam  and  else-
where where  independence  and  freedom  are  threatened  (2  October  1963) .

Public  Statement  43 {page  830)

Kennedy  had  planned  in  his  Dallas  speech  to  emphasize  that  work  alone  cannot
defend  the  Free  World  from  Communist  advances;  military  and  economic  assist-
ance must  be  available  to  back  U.S.  promises  (22  November  1963).

KENNEDY  ADMINISTRATION

Summary

The  Administration  of  President  Kennedy  justified  the  growing  U.S.  involve-
ment in  Vietnam  utilizing  much  the  same  rationale  that  had  been  employed  by
the  Administrations  of  President  Truman  and  President  Eisenhower.  Initially,  the
situation  in  Vietnam  received  less  emphasis  than  the  crisis  in  Laos,  although  the
principles  cited  for  U.S.  concern  for  Laos — the  identification  of  U.S.  interests
with  its  independence;  SEATO  obligations — were  couched  in  terms  of  collective
security  for  Southeast  Asia.  Thereafter,  as  insurgency  in  Vietnam  itself  came  to
the  fore,  the  Administration's  public  statements  stressed  the  following:

a.  The  struggle  against  the  worldwide  communist  offensive  had  to  confront
the  danger  that  through  "subversion,  infiltration,  and  a  host  of  other  tactics  .  .  .
our  security  may  be  lost  piece  by  piece,  country  by  country,  without  the  firing
of  a  single  missile  or  the  crossing  of  a  single  border."


798 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

b.  The  "domino  principle":  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  are  interdependent
for  security,  and  the  independence  of  each  is  important  to  the  United  States.

c.  ICC  reports,  as  well  as  U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese  intelligence,  demonstrate
that  Communist  North  Vietnam  has  provided  illegally,  armed  and  unarmed  per-
sonnel, arms,  munitions,  and  other  supplies  from  North  Vietnam  to  insurgents
in  South  Vietnam  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  an  organized  attempt  to  over-
throw the  government  there.

d.  "Now  our  great  responsibility  is  to  be  the  chief  defender  of  freedom,  in
this  time  of  maximum  danger.  Only  the  U.S.  has  the  power  and  the  resources
and  the  determination."

e.  The  United  States,  although  not  a  party  to  the  Geneva  Accords,  declared
at  Geneva  in  1954  that  it  would  "view  any  renewal  of  the  aggression  in  violation
of  the  agreements  with  grave  concern  and  as  seriously  threatening  international
peace  and  security."  President  Kennedy  assured  President  Diem  that  "in  accord-
ance with  that  declaration,  and  in  response  to  your  request,  we  are  prepared  to
help  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  to  protect  its  people  and  to  preserve  its  independ-
ence."

f.  The  SEATO  Pact,  by  a  protocol,  extended  the  protection  of  the  treaty  to
Vietnam;  hence  the  treaty,  in  President  Kennedy's  words,  "stated  that  the  United
States  recognized  that  aggression  by  means  of  armed  attack  against  Vietnam
would  threaten  our  own  peace  and  security  .  .  .  the  attack  on  the  government
by  the  communist  forces,  with  assistance  from  the  north,  became  of  greater  and
greater  concern  to  the  Government  of  Vietnam  and  the  Government  of  the
United  States."

End  of  Summary

1.  Senator  John  F.  Kennedy,  Congressional  Record,  February  29,  1960,  p.  3582:

*  *  *

"But  both  before  and  after  1953  events  have  demonstrated  that  our  nuclear
retaliatory  power  is  not  enough.  It  cannot  deter  Communist  aggression  which  is
too  limited  to  justify  atomic  war.  It  cannot  protect  uncommitted  nations  against
a  Communist  takeover  using  local  or  guerrilla  forces.  It  cannot  be  used  in  so-
called  brush-fire  peripheral  wars.  In  short,  it  cannot  prevent  the  Communists
from  gradually  nibbling  at  the  fringe  of  the  free  world's  territory  and  strength,
until  our  security  has  been  steadily  eroded  in  piecemeal  fashion — each  Red
advance  being  too  small  to  justify  massive  retaliation,  with  all  its  risks.

^ ^  ^

"In  short,  we  need  forces  of  an  entirely  different  kind  to  keep  the  peace
against  limited  aggression,  and  to  fight  it,  if  deterrence  fails,  without  raising  the
conflict  to  a  disastrous  pitch.

"And  our  capability  for  conventional  war  is  insufficient  to  avoid  the  hopeless
dilemma  of  choosing  between  launching  a  nuclear  attack  and  watching  aggres-
sors make  piecemeal  conquests."

2.  Senator  John  F.  Kennedy's  statement  in  Congressional  Record,  June  14,
1960,  p.  11631:

*  *  *

"We  must  regain  the  ability  to  intervene  effectively  and  swiftly  in  any  limited


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  799

war  anywhere  in  the  world — augmenting,  modernizing  and  providing  increased
mobility  and  versatility  for  the  conventional  forces  and  weapons  of  the  Army
and  Marine  Corps.  As  long  as  those  forces  lack  the  necessary  airlift  and  sealift
capacity  and  versatility  of  firepower,  we  cannot  protect  our  commitments
around  the  globe — resist  non-nuclear  aggressions — or  be  certain  of  having
enough  time  to  decide  on  the  use  of  our  nuclear  power."

3.  Senator  John  F.  Kennedy's  statement  as  quoted  in  the  Washington  Daily
News,  September  22,  1960:

*  *  *

"The  recognition  is  not  really  the  crux  of  our  foreign  policy.  The  real  ques-
tion is  what  should  be  done  about  the  harsh  facts  that  China  is  a  powerful  and
aggressive  nation.  The  dangerous  situation  now  existing  can  be  remedied  only
by  a  strong  and  successful  India,  a  strong  and  successful  Japan,  and  some  kind
of  regional  group  over  Southeast  Asia  which  gives  these  smaller  countries  the
feeling  that,  in  spite  of  their  distaste  for  a  military  alliance,  they  will  not  be  left
to  be  picked  off  one  by  one  at  the  whim  of  the  Peiping  regime."

4.  Senator  John  F.  Kennedy  Interview  as  Reported  in  The  Washington  Post,
October  22,  1960:

ij:  4:  ^

Cronkite:  ".  .  .  What  areas  do  you  see  where  the  United  States  might  take
the  offensive  in  a  challenge  to  communism  over  the  next  4  to  8  years?"

Kennedy:  ".  .  .  the  most  vulnerable  area,  I  have  felt,  has  been  eastern
Europe.  I  have  been  critical  of  the  Administration's  failure  to  suggest  policies
which  would  make  it  possible  for  us  to  establish,  for  example,  closer  relations
with  Poland,  particularly  after  the  '55-56  period  and  the  Hungarian  revolution.
We  indicated  at  that  time  that  we  were  not  going  to  intervene  militarily.  There
was  a  period  there  when  Poland  demonstrated  a  national  independence,  and
even  the  Polish  Government  moved  some  distance  away  from  the  Soviet  Union.

.  .  Secondly,  the  relations  between  Russia  and  China.  They  are  now  en-
gaged in  a  debate  over  whether  war  is  the  means  of  communizing  the  world,
or  whether  they  should  use  subversion  and  infiltration,  economic  struggles
and  all  the  rest.  No  one  can  say  what  that  course  of  action  will  be,  but  I  think
the  next  President  of  the  United  States  should  watch  it  carefully.  If  those  two
years  should  split,  it  could  have  great  effects  throughout  the  entire  world.

"Thirdly,  I  believe  that  India  represents  a  great  area  for  affirmative  action
by  the  Free  World.  India  started  from  about  the  same  place  that  China  did.
The  Chinese  Communists  have  been  moving  ahead  the  last  10  years.  India  .  .  .
has  been  making  some  progress,  but  if  India  does  not  succeed  with  her  450
million  people,  if  she  can't  make  freedom  work,  then  people  around  the  world
are  going  to  determine,  particularly  in  the  underdeveloped  world,  that  the  only
way  they  can  develop  their  resources  is  through  the  Communist  system."

*  51;  :i«

5.  Kennedy  Presidential  News  Conference  as  Quoted  in  the  New  York  Times,
March  24,  1961.  News  Conference  of  March  23,  1961:

*  *  *

"My  fellow  Americans,  Laos  is  far  away  from  America,  but  the  world  is  small.
Its  2,000,000  people  live  in  a  country  three  times  the  size  of  Austria.  The


800 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

security  of  all  Southeast  Asia  will  be  endangered  if  Laos  loses  its  neutral  inde-
pendence. Its  own  safety  runs  with  the  safety  of  us  all,  in  real  neutrality  ob-
served by  all.

"I  want  to  make  it  clear  to  the  American  people  and  to  all  of  the  world  that
all  we  want  in  Laos  is  peace  and  not  war,  a  truly  neutral  government  and  not  a
cold  war  pawn,  a  settlement  concluded  at  the  conference  table  and  not  on  the
battlefield."

*  *  *

O.  "Mr.  President,  there  appears  to  be  some  national  unawareness  of  the  im-
portance of  a  free  Laos  to  the  security  of  the  United  States  and  to  the  individual
American.  Could  you  spell  out  your  views  on  that  a  little  further?"

A.  "Well,  quite  obviously  geographically  Laos  borders  on  Thailand,  which
is,  to  which  the  United  States  has  treaty  obligations  under  the  SEATO  agree-
ment of  1954,  it  borders  on  South  Vietnam — it  borders  on  Vietnam — to  which
the  United  States  has  very  close  ties,  and  also  which  is  a  signatory  of  the  SEATO
pact.

'The  aggression  against  Laos  itself  was  referred  to  in  the  SEATO  agreement,
so  that  given  this,  the  nature  of  the  geography,  its  location  the  commitments
which  the  United  States  and  obligations  which  the  United  States  has  assumed
towards  Laos  as  well  as  the  surrounding  countries — as  well  as  other  signatories
of  the  SEATO  pact — it's  quite  obvious  that  if  the  Communists  were  able  to
rrove  in  and  dominate  this  country,  it  would  endanger  the  security  of  all,  and
the  peace  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia.

"And  as  a  member  of  the  United  Nations  and  as  a  signatory  to  the  SEATO
pact,  and  as  a  country  which  is  concerned  with  the  strength  of  the  cause  of
freedom  around  the  world,  that  quite  obviously  affects  the  security  of  the
United  States."

6.  President  Kennedy's  Special  Message  to  Congress  on  the  Defense  Budget,
March  28,  1961,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1961,  p.  229:

*  *  *

"The  strength  and  deployment  of  our  forces  in  combination  with  those  of
our  allies  should  be  sufficiently  powerful  and  mobile  to  prevent  the  steady
erosion  of  the  Free  World  through  limited  wars;  and  it  is  this  role  that  should
constitute  the  primary  mission  of  our  overseas  forces.  Non-nuclear  wars,  and
sub-limited  or  guerrilla  warfare,  have  since  1945  constituted  the  most  active
and  constant  threat  to  Free  World  security.  Those  units  of  our  forces  which
are  stationed  overseas,  or  designed  to  fight  overseas,  can  be  most  usefully
oriented  toward  deterring  or  confining  those  conflicts  which  do  not  justify  and
must  not  lead  to  a  general  nuclear  attack.  In  the  event  of  a  major  aggression
that  could  not  be  repulsed  by  conventional  forces,  we  must  be  prepared  to  take
whatever  action  with  whatever  weapons  are  appropriate.  But  our  objective  now
is  to  increase  our  ability  to  confine  our  response  to  non-nuclear  weapons,  and
to  lessen  the  incentive  for  any  limited  aggression  by  making  clear  what  our
response  will  accomplish.  In  most  areas  of  the  world,  the  main  burden  of  local
defense  against  overt  attack,  subversion  and  guerrilla  warfare  must  rest  on  local
populations  and  forces.  But  given  the  great  likelihood  and  seriousness  of  this
threat,  we  must  be  prepared  to  make  a  substantial  contribution  in  the  form  of
strong,  highly  mobile  forces  trained  in  this  type  of  warfare,  some  of  which  must
be  deployed  in  forward  areas,  with  a  substantial  airlift  and  sealift  capacity  and
prestocked  overseas  bases.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  801

"In  this  area  of  local  wars,  we  must  inevitably  count  on  the  cooperative
efforts  of  other  peoples  and  nations  who  share  our  concern.  Indeed,  their
interests  are  more  often  directly  engaged  in  such  conflicts.  The  self-reliant  are
also  those  whom  it  is  easiest  to  help — and  for  these  reasons  we  must  continue
and  reshape  the  Military  Assistance  Program  which  I  have  discussed  earlier  in
my  special  message  on  foreign  aid.

"Strengthened  capacity  to  meet  limited  and  guerrilla  warfare — limited  mili-
tary adventures  and  threats  to  the  security  of  the  Free  World  that  are  not  large
enough  to  justify  the  label  of  'limited  war.'  We  need  a  greater  ability  to  deal  with
guerrilla  forces,  insurrections,  and  subversion.  Much  of  our  effort  to  create
guerrilla  and  anti-guerrilla  capabilities  has  in  the  past  been  aimed  at  general
war.  We  must  be  ready  now  to  deal  with  any  size  of  force,  including  small  ex-
ternally supported  bands  of  men;  and  we  must  help  train  local  forces  to  be
equally  effective."

7.  President  Kennedy's  Address  to  American  Society  of  Newspaper  Editors,
April  20,  1961,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1961,  p.  306:

^  'i»

".  .  .  we  face  a  relentless  struggle  in  every  corner  of  the  globe  that  goes
far  beyond  the  clash  of  armies  or  even  nuclear  armaments.  The  armies  are
there,  and  in  large  number.  The  nuclear  armaments  are  there.  But  they  serve
primarily  as  the  shield  behind  which  subversion,  infiltration,  and  a  host  of  other
tactics  steadily  advance,  picking  off  vulnerable  areas  one  by  one  in  situations
which  do  not  permit  our  own  armed  intervention.

"Power  is  the  hallmark  of  this  offensive — power  and  discipline  and  deceit.
The  legitimate  discontent  of  yearning  people  is  exploited.  The  legitimate  trap-
pings of  self-determination  are  employed.  But  once  in  power,  all  talk  of  dis-
content is  repressed,  all  self-determination  disappears,  and  the  promise  of  a
revolution  of  hope  is  betrayed,  as  in  Cuba,  into  a  reign  of  terror.  Those  who  on
instruction  staged  automatic  'riots'  in  the  streets  of  free  nations  over  the  efforts
of  a  small  group  of  young  Cubans  to  regain  their  freedom  should  recall  the
long  roll  call  of  refugees  who  cannot  now  go  back — to  Hungary,  to  North
Korea,  to  North  Viei-Nam,  to  East  Germany,  or  to  Poland,  or  to  any  of  the  other
lands  from  which  a  steady  stream  of  refugees  pours  forth,  in  eloquent  testi-
mony to  the  cruel  oppression  now  holding  sway  in  their  homeland.

"We  dare  not  fail  to  see  the  insidious  nature  of  this  new  and  deeper  struggle.
We  dare  not  fail  to  grasp  the  new  concepts,  the  new  tools,  the  new  sense  of
urgency  we  will  need  to  combat  it — whether  in  Cuba  or  South  Viet-Nam.  And
we  dare  not  fail  to  realize  that  this  struggle  is  taking  place  every  day,  without
fanfare,  in  thousands  of  villages  and  markets — day  and  night — and  in  class-
rooms all  over  the  globe.

"The  message  of  Cuba,  of  Laos,  of  the  rising  din  of  Communist  voices  in
Asia  and  Latin  America — these  messages  are  all  the  same.  The  complacent,
the  self-indulgent,  the  soft  societies  are  about  to  be  swept  away  with  the  debris
of  history.  Only  the  strong,  only  the  industrious,  only  the  determined,  only  the
courageous,  only  the  visionary  who  determine  the  real  nature  of  our  struggle
can  possibly  survive.

"No  greater  task  faces  this  country  or  this  administration.  No  other  chal-
lenge is  more  deserving  of  our  every  effort  and  energy.  Too  long  we  have  fixed
our  eyes  on  traditional  military  needs,  on  armies  prepared  to  cross  borders,  on
missiles  poised  for  flight.  Now  it  should  be  clear  that  this  is  no  longer  enough —


802 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

that  our  security  may  be  lost  piece  by  piece,  country  by  country,  without  the
firing  of  a  single  missile  or  the  crossing  of  a  single  border.

"We  intend  to  profit  from  this  lesson.  We  intend  to  re-examine  and  re-orient
our  forces  of  all  kinds — our  tactics  and  our  institutions  here  in  this  community.
We  intend  to  intensify  our  efforts  *for  a  struggle  in  many  ways  more  difficult  than
war,  where  disappointment  will  often  accompany  us.

"For  I  am  convinced  that  we  in  this  country  and  in  the  free  world  possess
the  necessary  resource,  and  the  skill,  and  the  added  strength  that  comes  from  a
belief  in  the  freedom  of  man.  And  I  am  equally  convinced  that  history  will
record  the  fact  that  this  bitter  struggle  reached  its  climax  in  the  late  i950's
and  the  early  1960's.  Let  me  then  make  clear  as  the  President  of  the  United
States  that  I  am  determined  upon  our  system's  survival  and  success,  regardless
of  the  cost  and  regardless  of  the  peril!"

8,  President  Kennedy's  Address, in  Chicago  to  Democratic  Party  Dinner,
April  28,  1961,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1961,  p.  340:

*  *  *

"We  live  in  a  hazardous  and  dangerous  time.  I  do  not  think  it's  possible  to
overstate  it.  We  live  in  a  world  which  has  changed  tremendously  in  our  lifetime
— history  only  will  secure  a  full  perspective  on  that  change.  But  here  is  Africa,
which  was  held  by  Western  European  powers  for  several  centuries,  now  inde-
pendent— which  holds  within  its  countries  masses  of  people,  many  of  them
illiterate,  who  live  on  average  incomes  of  50  or  60  or  75  dollars  a  year,  who
want  a  change,  who  now  are  the  masters  of  their  own  house  but  who  lack  the
means  of  building  a  viable  economy,  who  are  impressed  by  the  example  of  the
Soviet  Union  and  the  Chinese,  who — not  knowing  the  meaning  of  freedom  in
their  own  lives — wonder  whether  the  Communist  system  holds  the  secret  of
organizing  the  resources  of  the  state  in  order  to  bring  them  a  better  life.

"And  what  is  true  of  Africa  is  true  of  Asia,  and  what  is  true  of  Africa  and
Asia  is  true  in  some  degree  of  Latin  America.  The  Communists  move  among
them,  disciplined,  organized,  subject  to  an  international  discipline,  promising
under  their  system  that  all  will  be  well,  knowing  that  if  they  can  win  just  once,
then  the  iron  grip  of  the  totalitarian  state  goes  upon  the  population — those  who
resist  become  refugees,  or  are  shot — and  they  manage  to  control  the  population.

"Tonight,  in  Viet-nam,  where  the  President  was  re-elected  recently  in  the
last  2  weeks  by  a  majority  of  75  to  80  percent,  yet  a  small  army  of  guerrillas,
organized  and  sustained  by  the  Communist  Viet  Minh  in  the  north,  control
most  of  the  countryside  in  the  nighttime — in  the  last  12  months  have  assas-
sinated over  four  thousand  civil  officers,  two  thousand  state  employees  and  two
thousand  police,  believing  if  they  can  'spill  the  wine,'  that  then  they  can  win
control  of  the  population.  And  when  they  have  won,  they  do  not  intend  to  give
way.

"Now  our  great  responsibility  is  to  be  the  chief  defender  of  freedom,  in  this
time  of  maximum  danger.  Only  the  United  States  has  the  power  and  the  re-
sources and  the  determination.  We  have  committed  ourselves  to  the  defense  of
dozens  of  cointries  stretched  around  the  globe  who  look  to  us  for  independ-
ence, who  look  to  us  for  the  defense  of  their  freedom.

"We  are  prepared  to  meet  our  obligations,  but  we  can  only  defend  the
freedom  of  those  who  are  determined  to  be  free  themselves.  We  can  assist  them
— we  will  bear  more  than  our  share  of  the  burden,  but  we  can  only  help  those
who  are  ready  to  bear  their  share  of  the  burden  themselves.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  803

"The  Russians  and  the  Chinese,  containing  within  their  borders  nearly  a
billion  people,  totally  mobilized  for  the  advance  of  the  Communist  system,
operating  from  narrow,  interior  lines  of  communication,  pressuring  on  South-
east Asia  with  the  masses  of  the  Chinese  armies  potentially  ready  to  move —
of  the  Russians  who  hold  great  power  potentially  in  the  Middle  East  and  Western
Europe — the  United  States  stands  as  the  chief  defender  of  freedom.

"I  said  in  my  Inaugural  Address  that  no  group  of  people  in  any  generation
since  democracy  was  first  developed  by  the  ancient  Greeks  nearly  twenty-four
or  -five  hundred  years  ago,  have  ever  borne  a  responsibility  as  great  as  ours.
And  I  welcome  it — and  I  welcome  it  tonight.

'There  is  no  easy  answer  to  the  dilemmas  that  we  face.  Our  great  ally  is  the
fact  that  people  do  desire  to  be  free,  that  people  will  sacrifice  everything  in
their  desire  to  maintain  their  independence.  And  as  the  true  nature  of  the  Com-
munist conspiracy  becomes  better  known  around  the  globe,  when  people  come
to  realize — as  they  surely  will — that  the  Communist  advance  does  not  represent
a  means  of  liberation  but  represents  a  final  enslavement,  then  I  believe  that
they  will  rally  to  the  cause  to  which  we  have  given  our  support  and  our  commit-
ment.

"I  believe  that  we  must  build  our  country  well,  also.  Senator  Douglas  described
what  we  are  attempting  to  do.  The  burdens  are  heavy  upon  us.  We  have  to  make
this  society  an  example  to  the  world,  strong  enough  to  serve  not  only  as  an  ex-
ample but  strong  enough  to  maintain  the  commitments  that  we  have  assumed."

* *  *

9.  President  Kennedy's  Presidential  News  Conference,  May  5,  1961,  Public
Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1961,  p.  356:

i;.  if.

Q.  "There  have  been  reports  that  you  would  be  prepared  to  send  American
forces  into  South  Vietnam  if  that  became  necessary  to  prevent  Communist
domination  of  that  country.  Could  you  tell  us  whether  that  is  correct  and  also
anything  else  you  have  regarding  plans  for  that  country?"

A.  "Well,  we  have  had  a  group  working  in  the  Government  and  we've  had
a  Security  Council  meeting  about  the  problems  which  are  faced  in  Vietnam  by
guerrillas  and  by  the  barrage  which  the  present  Government  is  being  subjected
to.  The  problem  of  troops  .  .  .  the  matter  of  what  we're  going  to  do  to  assist
Vietnam  to  obtain  its  independence  is  ...  a  matter  still  under  considera-
tion.'. .  ."


10.  Joint  Communique  Issued  at  Saigon  by  the  Vice  President  of  the  United
States  and  the  President  of  Viet-Nam,  May  13,  1961,  Department  of  State
Bulletin,  June  19,  1961,  p.  956:

"The  United  States,  for  its  part,  is  conscious  of  the  determination,  energy
and  sacrifices  which  the  Vietnamese  people,  under  the  dedicated  leadership  of
President  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  have  brought  to  the  defense  of  freedom  in  their
land.

"The  United  States  is  also  conscious  of  its  responsibility  and  duty,  in  its  own
self-interest  as  well  as  in  the  interest  of  other  free  peoples,  to  assist  a  brave
country  in  the  defense  of  its  liberties  against  unprovoked  subversion  and  Com-
munist terror.  It  has  no  other  motive  than  the  defense  of  freedom."


804 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


11.  President  Kennedy's  Special  Message  to  Congress,  May  25,  1961,  Public
Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1961:

"The  great  battleground  for  the  defense  and  expansion  of  freedom  today  is
the  whole  southern  half  of  the  globe — ^Asia,  Latin  America,  Africa  and  the
Middle  East — the  lands  of  the  rising  peoples.  Their  revolution  is  the  greatest  in
human  history.  They  seek  an  end  to  injustice,  tyranny,  and  exploitation.  More
than  an  end,  they  seek  a  beginning.

"And  theirs  is  a  revolution  which  we  would  support  regardless  of  the  Cold
War,  and  regardless  of  which  political  or  economic  route  they  should  choose  to
freedom.

"For  the  adversaries  of  freedom  did  not  create  the  revolution;  nor  did  they
create  the  conditions  which  compel  it.  But  they  are  seeking  to  ride  the  crest  of
its  wave — to  capture  it  for  themselves.

"Yet  their  aggression  is  more  often  concealed  than  open.  They  have  fired
no  missiles;  and  their  troops  are  seldom  seen.  They  send  arms,  agitators,  aid,
technicians  and  propaganda  to  every  troubled  area.  But  where  fighting  is  re-
quired, it  is  usually  done  by  others — by  guerrillas  striking  at  night,  by  assassins
striking  alone — assassins  who  have  taken  the  lives  of  four  thousand  civil  officers
in  the  last  twelve  months  in  Vietnam  alone — by  subversives  and  saboteurs  and
insurrectionists,  who  in  some  cases  control  whole  areas  inside  of  independent
n.itions.

"With  these  formidable  weapons,  the  adversaries  of  freedom  plan  to  con-
solidate their  territory — to  exploit,  to  control,  and  finally  to  destroy  the  hopes
of  the  world's  newest  nations;  and  they  have  ambition  to  do  it  before  the  end
of  this  decade.  It  is  a  contest  of  will  and  purpose  as  well  as  force  and  violence —
a  battle  for  minds  and  souls  as  well  as  lives  and  territory.  And  in  that  contest,
we  cannot  stand  aside.

"We  stand,  as  we  have  always  stood  from  our  earliest  beginnings,  for  the
independence  and  equality  of  all  nations.  This  nation  was  born  of  revolution
and  raised  in  freedom.  And  we  do  not  intend  to  leave  an  open  road  for  des-
potism.

"There  is  no  single  simple  policy  which  meets  this  challenge.  Experience  has
taught  us  that  no  one  nation  has  the  power  or  the  wisdom  to  solve  all  the  prob-
lems of  the  world  or  manage  its  revolutionary  tides — that  extending  our  com-
mitments does  not  always  increase  our  security — that  any  initiative  carries  with
it  the  risk  of  a  temporary  defeat — that  nuclear  weapons  cannot  prevent  sub-
version— that  no  free  people  can  be  kept  free  without  will  and  energy  of  their
own — "

* *  *

12.  President  Kennedy's  Address  to  the  United  Nations,  September  25,  1961,
Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1961 ,  p.  624:

"Finally,  as  President  of  the  United  States,  I  consider  it  my  duty  to  report  to
this  Assembly  on  two  threats  to  the  peace  which  are  not  on  your  crowded
agenda,  but  which  causes  us,  and  most  of  you,  the  deepest  concern.

"The  first  threat  on  which  I  wish  to  report  is  widely  misunderstood:  the
smoldering  coals  of  war  in  Southeast  Asia.  South  Vietnam  is  already  under


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  805

attack — sometimes  by  a  single  assassin,  sometimes  by  a  band  of  guerrillas,
recently  by  full  battalions.  The  peaceful  borders  of  Burma,  Cambodia  and  India
have  been  repeatedly  violated.  And  the  peaceful  people  of  Laos  are  in  danger
of  losing  the  independence  they  gained  not  so  long  ago.

"No  one  can  call  these  'wars  of  liberation.'  For  these  are  free  countries  living
under  governments.  Nor  are  these  aggressions  any  less  real  because  men  are
knifed  in  their  homes  and  not  shot  in  the  fields  of  battle.

"The  very  simple  question  confronting  the  world  community  is  whether
measures  can  be  devised  to  protect  the  small  and  weak  from  such  tactics.  For
if  they  are  successful  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam,  the  gates  will  be  opened  wide.

"The  United  States  seeks  for  itself  no  base,  no  territory,  no  special  position
in  this  area  of  any  kind.  We  support  a  truly  neutral  and  independent  Laos,  its
people  free  from  outside  interference,  living  at  peace  with  themselves  and  with
their  neighbors,  assured  that  their  territory  will  not  be  used  for  attacks  on
others,  and  under  a  government  comparable  (as  Mr.  Khrushchev  and  I  agreed
at  Vienna)  to  Cambodia  and  Burma.

"But  now  the  negotiations  over  Laos  are  reaching  a  crucial  stage.  The  cease-
fire is  at  best  precarious.  The  rainy  season  is  coming  to  an  end.  Laotian  territory
is  being  used  to  infiltrate  South  Vietnam.  The  world  community  must  recognize
— all  those  who  are  involved — that  this  potent  threat  to  Laotian  peace  and
freedom  is  indivisible  from  all  other  threats  to  their  own."

13.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  October  11,  1961,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1961,  p.  660:

Troops  to  Vietnam?

Q:  "Mr.  President,  in  reference  to  your  decision  to  send  General  Taylor  to
Vietnam,  there  may  be  some  interpretation  of  that  decision  as  implying  con-
firmation of  reports  that  you  intend  to  send  American  forces  to  Vietnam  or
Thailand  or  Laos.  Can  you  give  us  your  appraisal  of  the  conditions  under  which
you  might  find  it  necessary  to  send  troops?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  ''We  are  going  to  wait  until  General  Taylor  comes  back
and  brings  an  up-to-date  description  of  the  situation,  particularly  in  Vietnam.
As  you  know,  in  the  last  two  or  three  months  there  has  been  a  large  increase  in
the  number  of  the  forces  that  have  been  involved.  There  has  been  evidence  that
some  of  these  forces  have  come  from  beyond  the  frontiers.  General  Taylor  will
give  me  and  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  an  educated  military  guess  as  to  what  the
situation  is  that  the  government  there  faces.  Then  we  can  come  to  conclusions
as  to  what  is  the  best  thing  to  do."

* * ■  *

14.  President  Kennedy  letter  to  President  Diem,  December  14,  1961,  Depart-
ment of  State  Bulletin,  January  7,  1962,  p.  13:

"Dear  Mr.  President:  I  have  received  your  recent  letter  in  which  you  de-
scribed so  cogendy  the  dangerous  condition  caused  by  North  Viet-Nam's  efforts
to  take  over  your  country.  The  situation  in  your  embattled  country  is  well
known  to  me  and  to  the  American  people.  We  have  been  deeply  disturbed  by
the  assault  on  your  country.  Our  indignation  has  mounted  as  the  deliberate
savagery  of  the  Communist  program  of  assassination,  kidnapping  and  wanton
violence  became  clear.


806 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

"Your  letter  underlines  what  our  own  information  has  convincingly  shown
— that  the  campaign  of  force  and  terror  now  being  waged  against  your  people
and  your  Government  is  supported  and  directed  from  the  outside  by  the  author-
ities at  Hanoi.  They  have  thus  violated  the  provisions  of  the  Geneva  Accords
designed  to  ensure  peace  in  Viet-Nam  and  to  which  they  bound  themselves  in
1954.

"At  that  time,  the  United  States,  although  not  a  party  to  the  Accords,  declared
that  it  'would  view  any  renewal  of  the  aggression  in  violation  of  the  agreements
with  grave  concern  and  as  seriously  threatening  international  peace  and
security.'  We  continue  to  maintain  that  view.

"In  accordance  with  that  declaration,  and  in  response  to  your  request,  we
are  prepared  to  help  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam  to  protect  its  people  and  to  pre-
serve its  independence.  We  vShall  promptly  increase  our  assistance  to  your  defense
effort  as  well  as  help  relieve  the  destruction  of  the  floods  which  you  describe.  I
have  already  given  the  orders  to  get  these  programs  underway.

"The  United  States,  like  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam,  remains  devoted  to  the
cause  of  peace  and  our  primary  purpose  is  to  help  your  people  maintain  their
independence.  If  the  Communist  authorities  in  North  Viet-Nam  will  stop  their
campaign  to  destroy  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam,  the  measures  we  are  taking  to
assist  your  defense  efforts  will  no  longer  be  necessary.  We  shall  seek  to  persuade
the  Communists  to  give  up  their  attempts  of  force  and  subversion.  In  any  case,
V  e  are  confident  that  the  Vietnamese  people  will  preserve  their  independence
and  gain  the  peace  and  prosperity  for  which  they  have  sought  so  hard  and  so
long.

"John  F.  Kennedy

"His  Excellency  Ngo  Dinh  Diem
President  and  Secretary  of  State  for

National  Defense
The  Republic  of  Viet-Nam
Saigon,  Viet-Nam"

15.  President  Kennedy's  State  of  the  Union  Message,  January  11,  1962,  Public
Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  12:

*  *  *

"A  satisfactory  settlement  in  Laos  would  also  help  to  achieve  and  safeguard
the  peace  in  Viet  Nam — where  the  foe  is  increasing  his  tactics  of  terror — where
our  own  efforts  have  been  stepped  up — and  where  the  local  government  has
initiated  new  programs  and  reforms  to  broaden  the  base  of  resistance.  The
systematic  aggression  now  bleeding  that  country  is  not  a  'war  of  liberation' —
for  Viet  Nam  is  already  free.  It  is  a  war  of  attempted  subjugation — and  it  will
be  resisted."

16.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  January  15,  1962,  Public  Papers
of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  18:

*  *  *

Q.  "In  the  past  it  would  seem  that  coalition  governments  lean  towards
Communist  control.  Are  we  then  taking  a  chance  in  supporting  a  coalition-
type  government  in  Southeast  Asia?"


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  807

A.  "We  are  taking  a  chance  in  all  of  Southeast  Asia  and  we're  taking  a  chance
in  other  areas.

"Nobody  can  make  any  predictions  sure  for  the  future  really  on  any  matter
in  which  there  are  powerful  interests  at  stake.  I  think,  however,  that  we  have
to  consider  what  our  alternatives  are  and  what  the  prospects  for  war  are  in
that  area  if  we  fail  in  our  present  efforts,  and  the  geographic  problems  which
would  have  to  be  surmounted  in  such  a  military  engagement  where  there  is  no
easy  entrance  by  sea  and  where  the  geographic  location  is  extremely — a  long
way  from  us  and  very  close  to  those  who  might  become  involved.  So  that  there
is  no  easy  sure  answer  for  Laos.

"But  it  is  my  judgment  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of  our  country  to  work
for  a  neutral  and  independent  Laos.  We  are  attempting  to  do  that  and  I  can
assure  you  that  I  recognize  the  risks  that  are  involved.  But  I  also  think  we  should
consider  the  risks  if  we  fail.  And  particularly  of  the  possibility  of  escalation  of
a  military  struggle  in  a  place  of  danger.  So  we're  going  to  attempt  to  work  out
this  matter  in  a  way  which  permits  us  to  try."

17.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  February  7,  1962,  Public  Papers
of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  121:

The  Subterranean  War

Q.  "Mr.  President,  there  seems  to  be  some  doubt,  at  least  on  the  local  level
and  in  the  region  where  this  is  going  on,  as  to  the  right  of  the  American  people
and  the  rest  of  the  world  to  know  the  extent  of  the  batde  in  South  Vietnam.
Could  you  tell  us,  sir,  what  the  situation  is  there?  How  deeply  are  we  involved
in  what  seems  to  be  a  growing  war  and  what  are  the  rights  of  the  people  to
know  what  our  forces  are  doing?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "There  is  a  war  going  on  in  South  Vietnam,  and  I  think
that  last  week  there  were  over  500  killings,  and  assassinations  and  bombings
and  the  casualties  are  high.  As  I  said  last  week,  it  is  a  subterranean  war,  a
guerrilla  war  of  increasing  ferocity.  The  United  States,  since  the  end  of  the
Geneva  Accord,  setting  up  the  South  Vietnamese  government  as  an  inde-
pendent government,  has  been  assisting  Vietnam  economically  to  maintain  its
independence,  viability  and  also  sent  training  groups  out  there,  which  have
been  expanded  in  recent  weeks,  as  the  attacks  on  the  government  and  the
people  of  South  Vietnam  have  increased.

"We  are  out  there  on  training  and  on  transportation,  and  we  are  assisting  in
every  way  we  properly  can  the  people  of  South  Vietnam,  who  with  the  greatest
courage  and  under  danger  are  attempting  to  maintain  their  freedom.

"Now,  this  is  an  area  where  there  is  a  good  deal  of  danger  and  it  is  a  matter
of  information.  We  don't  want  to  have  information  which  is  of  assistance  to
the  enemy  and  it  is  a  matter  which  I  think  will  have  to  be  worked  out  with  the
government  of  Vietnam  which  bears  the  primary  responsibility."

18.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  February  14,  1962,  Public  Papers
of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  136:

Involvement  in  Vietnam

Q.  "Mr.  President,  the  Republican  National  Committee  publication  has  said
that  you  have  been  less  than  candid  with  the  American  people  as  to  how  deeply
we  are  involved  in  Vietnam.  Could  you  throw  any  more  light  on  that?"


808 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Yes,  as  you  know,  the  United  States  for  more  than  a
decade  has  been  assisting  the  government,  the  people  of  Vietnam,  to  maintain
their  independence.  Way  back  on  Dec.  23,  1950,  we  signed  a  military  assistance
agreement  with  France  and  with  Indo-China  which  at  that  time  included  Viet-
nam, Laos  and  Cambodia.  We  also  signed  in  December  of  1951  an  agreement
direcdy  with  Vietnam.

"Now,  in  1954,  the  Geneva  agreements  were  signed,  and  while  we  did  not
sign  those  agreements,  nevertheless  Under  Secretary  Bedell  Smith  stated  that  he
would  view  any  renewal  of  aggression  in  Vietnam  in  violation  of  the  aforesaid
agreements  with  grave  concern,  and  as  seriously  threatening  international
peace  and  security.  At  the  time  that  the  SEATO  Pact  was  signed  in  1954,
Sept.  8,  Vietnam  was  not  a  signatory,  it  was  a  protocol  state,  and,  therefore,
this  pact  which  was  approved  by  the  Senate  with  only,  I  think,  two  against  it,
under  Article  4,  stated  that  the  United  States  recognized  that  aggression  by
means  of  armed  attack  against  Vietnam  would  threaten  our  own  peace  and
security.  So  since  that  time  the  United  States  has  been  assisting  the  government
of  Vietnam  to  maintain  its  independence.  It  has  had  a  military  training  mission
there  and  extensive  economic  assistance.

"As  you  know,  in  the  last  two  years  the  war  has  increased.  The  Vice  Presi-
dent visited  there  last  spring.  The  war  became  more  intense  every  month;  in
fact,  every  week.  The  attack  on  the  government  by  the  Communist  forces  with
a.  sistance  from  the  north  became  of  greater  and  greater  concern  to  the  govern-
ment of  Vietnam  and  the  Government  of  the  United  States.

"We  sent — I  sent  General  Taylor  there  to  make  a  review  of  the  situation.
The  President  of  Vietnam  asked  us  for  additional  assistance.  We  issued,  as  you
remember,  a  white  paper  which  detailed  the  support  which  the  Viet  Minh  in
the  north  were  giving  to  this  Communist  insurgent  movement  and  we  have
increased  our  assistance  there.  And  we  are  supplying  logistic  assistance,  trans-
portation assistance,  training,  and  we  have  a  number  of  Americans  who  are
taking  part  in  that  effort.

"We  have  discussed  this  matter — we  discussed  it  with  the  leadership  of  the
Republicans  and  Democrats  when  we  met  in  early  January  and  informed  them
of  what  we  were  doing  in  Vietnam.  We — Mr.  Rusk  has  discussed  it  with  the
House  and  Senate  Foreign  Affairs  Committee.  Mr.  McNamara  has  discussed  it
with  the  Armed  Services  Committee.  The  leadership  on  both  sides.  Republicans
and  Democrats — we  have  explained  to  them  our  concern  about  what  is  happen-
ing there,  and  they  have  been  responsive,  I  think,  to  evidence  their  concern.
So  that  there  is  a  long  history  of  our  efforts  to  prevent  Vietnam  from  falling
under  control  of  the  Communists.  That  is  what  we  are  now  attempting  to  do.
And  as  the  war  has  increased  in  scope,  our  assistance  has  increased  as  a  result
of  the  request  of  the  government.  So  that  I  think  we  should — as  it  is  a  matter
of  great  importance,  a  matter  of  great  sensitivity — my  view  has  always  been
that  the  headquarters  of  both  of  our  parties  should  really  attempt  to  leave
these  matters  to  be  discussed  by  responsible  leaders  on  both  sides.  In  my
opinion,  we  have  had  a  very  strong  bi-partisan  consensus  up  to  now,  and  I  am
hopeful  that  i*  will  continue  in  regard  to  the  action  that  we  are  taking."

Q.  "Mr.  President,  do  you  feel  that  you  have  told  the  American  people  as
much  as  can  be  told,  because  of  the  sensitivity  of  the  subject?  Is  that  right?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "I  think  I  have  just  indicated  what  our  role  is.  We  have
increased  our  assistance  to  the  government,  its  logistics,  and  we  have  not  sent
combat  troops  there,  although  the  training  missions  that  we  have  there  have
been  instructed  that  if  they  are  fired  upon  they  are,  of  course,  to  fire  back,  to


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  809


protect  themselves,  but  we  have  not  sent  combat  troops,  in  the  generally  under-
stood sense  of  the  word.  We  have  increased  our  training  mission,  and  we  have
increased  our  logistics  support,  and  we  are  attempting  to  prevent  a  Communist
take-over  of  Vietnam,  which  is  in  accordance  with  a  policy  which  our  Govern-
ment has  followed  for  the  last — certainly  since  1954,  and  even  before  then  as
I  have  indicated.  We  are  attempting  to  make  all  of  the  information  available
that  we  can,  consistent  with  our  security  needs  in  the  area.  So  I  feel  that  we
are  being  as  frank  as  we  can  be,  and  I  think  what  I  have  said  to  you  is  a  descrip-
tion of  our  activity  there."


19.  President  Kennedy's  Speech  at  University  of  California,  March  23,  1962,
Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  265:

"The  leaders  of  the  Communist  world  are  not  only  confronted  by  acute
internal  problems  in  each  Communist  country — the  failure  of  agriculture,  the
rising  discontent  of  the  youth  and  the  intellectuals,  the  demands  of  technical
and  managerial  groups  for  status  and  security.  They  are  confronted  in  addition
by  profound  divisions  within  the  Communist  world  itself — divisions  which
have  already  shattered  the  image  of  communism  as  a  universal  system  guaran-
teed to  abolish  all  social  and  international  conflicts,  the  most  valuable  asset
which  the  Communists  had  for  many  years.

"Wisdom  requires  the  long  view.  And  the  long  view  shows  us  that  the  revolu-
tion of  national  independence  is  a  fundamental  fact  of  our  era.  This  revolution
cannot  be  stopped.

"As  new  nations  emerge  from  the  oblivion  of  centuries,  their  first  aspiration
is  to  affirm  their  national  identity.  Their  deepest  hope  is  for  a  world  where,
within  a  framework  of  international  cooperation,  every  country  can  solve  its
own  problems  according  to  its  own  traditions  and  ideals.

"It  is  in  the  interests  of  the  pursuit  of  knowledge — and  it  is  in  our  own
national  interest — that  this  revolution  of  national  independence  succeed.  For
the  Communists  rest  everything  on  the  idea  of  a  monolithic  world — a  world
where  all  knowledge  has  a  single  pattern,  all  societies  move  toward  a  single
model,  all  problems  have  a  single  solution,  and  all  roads  lead  to  a  single  destina-
tion.

"The  pursuit  of  knowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  rests  everything  on  the  oppo-
site idea — on  the  idea  of  a  world  based  on  diversity,  self-determination  and
freedom.  And  that  is  the  kind  of  world  to  which  we  Americans,  as  a  nation,  are
committed  by  the  principles  on  which  this  republic  was  formed.

"As  men  conduct  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  they  create  a  world  which  freely
unites  national  diversity  and  international  partnership.  This  emerging  world  is
incompatible  with  the  Communist  conception  of  world  order.

"It  will  irresistibly  burst  the  bonds  of  Communist  organization  and  Com-
munist ideology.  And  diversity  and  independence,  far  from  being  opposed  to
the  American  conception  of  world  order,  represent  the  very  essence  of  our
vision  of  the  future.

"There  used  to  be  much  talk  a  few  years  ago  about  the  inevitable  triumph  of
communism.  We  hear  such  talk  much  less  now.  No  one  who  examines  the  mod-
ern world  can  doubt  that  the  great  currents  of  history  are  carrying  the  world
away  from  the  monolithic  idea  toward  the  pluralist  idea — av/ay  from  commu-
nism and  toward  national  independence  and  freedom.


810 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  II

"No  one  can  doubt  that  the  wave  of  the  future  is  not  the  conquest  of  the
world  by  a  single  dogmatic  creed,  but  the  liberation  of  the  diverse  energies  of
free  nations  and  free  men.  No  one  can  doubt  that  cooperation  in  the  pursuit  of
knowledge  must  lead  to  freedom  of  the  mind  and  of  the  soul.

"The  specter  of  thermonuclear  war  will  hang  over  mankind;  and  we  must
heed  the  advice  of  OUver  Wendell  Holmes  of  'freedom  leaning  on  her  spear'  un-
til all  nations  are  wise  enough  to  disarm  safely  and  effectively,

*  *  *

"We  must  seize  the  vision  of  a  free  and  diverse  world — and  shape  our  policies
to  speed  progress  toward  a  flexible  world  order.

"This  is  the  unifying  spirit  of  our  policies  in  the  world.  The  purpose  of  our  aid
programs  must  be  to  help  developing  countries  to  move  forward  as  rapidly  as
possible  on  the  road  to  genuine  national  independence.

"Our  military  policies  must  assist  nations  to  protect  the  processes  of  demo-
cratic reform  and  development  against  disruption  and  intervention."

*  *  *

20.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  April  II,  1962,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  322:

Viet-Nam

Q:  "Sir,  what  are  you  going  to  do  about  the  American  soldiers  getting  killed
in  Viet-Nam?"

A:  ".  .  .  We  are  attempting  to  help  Viet-Nam  maintain  its  independence
and  not  fall  under  the  domination  of  the  communists  .  .  .  But  we  cannot  de-
sist in  Viet-Nam  .  .  ."

*  *  *

21.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  May  9,  1962,  Public  Papers  of  the
Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  377:

The  Broken  Cease-fire

Q:  "Mr.  President,  last  February  at  a  news  conference  you  told  us  that  the
cease-fire  was  becoming  frayed  in  Laos  and  in  the  event  that  it  was  broken,  it
could  lead  to  a  very  serious  decision.  I  wonder,  Mr.  President,  now  that  the
cease-fire  has  been  broken,  if  efforts  should  fail  to  re-establish  it,  would  it  cause
a  re-examination  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  towards  its  policy  there?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  we  are  concerned  about  the  break  in  the  cease-
fire. As  you  know,  the  State  Department,  the  Acting  Secretary  of  State,  and  the
Assistant  Secretary  of  State,  met  today  with  Ambassador  Dobrynin,  this  after-
noon. We  have  already  indicated  to  one  of  the  co-chairmen,  the  British  govern-
ment, our  great  concern  about  it.  Our  ambassador  in  Moscow  met  with  the
foreign  secretary  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Mr.  Gromyko.

"We  do  believe,  and  have  said  from  the  beginning,  that  the  negotiations
should  move  much  more  quickly  than  they  have.  The  longer  this  rather  frayed
cease-fire  continues,  the  more  chance  we  will  have  of  the  kind  of  incidents  we
have  had  in  the  past  few  days.  That  is  why  we  were  hopeful,  after  the  meetings


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  811

at  Geneva  last  summer  and  fall,  that  the  negotiations  between  the  parties  in-
volved would  take  place  last  fall,  and  we  could  organize  a  government,  rather
than  trying  to  continue  to  hold  lines  which  in  some  cases  are  exposed,  and
which  are  subject  to  this  kind  of  pressure.  So  that  has  been  our  view.

"So  that  has  been  our  view,  and  the  longer  it  goes  on,  and  the  longer  there
is  not  an  agreement  on  a  government,  the  longer  some  groups  stand  out  from
these  kinds  of  conversations,  then  the  more  hazardous  the  situation  becomes.

"Now,  on  the  particular  incident,  it  is  a  clear  breach  of  the  cease-fire.  We
have  indicated  and  we  hope  that  the  Soviet  Union,  which  is  committed  to  a
policy  based  on  the  statement  at  Vienna,  in  regard  to  Laos,  we  are  hopeful  that
we  can  bring  about  a  restoration  of  the  cease-fire.  But  we  have  got  to  use  the
time  to  try  to  move  ahead  in  our  political  negotiations.

"I  agree  it  is  a  very  hazardous  course,  but  introducing  American  forces  is  the
other  one — let's  not  think  there  is  some  great  third  course.  That  also  is  a  haz-
ardous course  and  we  want  to  attempt  to  see  if  we  can  work  out  a  peaceful  so-
lution, which  has  been  our  object  for  many  months.  I  believe  that  these  negotia-
tions should  take  place  quickly.  This  is  not  a  satisfactory  situation  today."

^  ^j:  ^

22.  White  House  Statement  of  the  President,  May  15,  1962,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  396:

"Following  joint  consideration  by  the  governments  of  the  United  States  and
Thailand  of  the  situation  in  Southeast  Asia,  the  Royal  Thai  Government  has
invited,  and  I  have  today  ordered,  additional  elements  of  the  United  States  mili-
tary forces,  both  ground  and  air,  to  proceed  to  Thailand  and  to  remain  there
until  further  orders.  These  forces  are  to  help  ensure  the  territorial  integrity  of
this  peaceful  country.

"The  dispatch  of  United  States  forces  to  Thailand  was  considered  desirable
because  of  recent  attacks  in  Laos  by  Communist  forces,  and  the  subsequent  move-
ment of  Communist  military  units  toward  the  border  of  Thailand.

"A  threat  to  Thailand  is  of  grave  concern  to  the  United  States.  I  have,  there-
fore, ordered  certain  additional  American  military  forces  into  Thailand  in  order
that  we  may  be  in  a  position  to  fulfill  speedily  our  obligations  under  the  Manila
Pact  of  1954,  a  defense  agreement  which  was  approved  overwhelmingly  by  the
U.S.  Senate,  and  to  which  the  Secretary  of  State  and  Foreign  Minister  of
j  Thailand  referred  in  their  joint  statement  of  March  6,  1962.  We  are  in  consulta-
I tion  with  SEATO  Governments  on  the  situation.

"I  emphasize  that  this  is  a  defensive  act  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  and
wholly  consistent  with  the  United  Nations  Charter  which  specifically  recognizes
that  nations  have  an  inherent  right  to  take  collective  measures  for  self-defense.
In  the  spirit  of  that  Charter,  I  have  directed  that  the  Secretary  General  of  the
United  Nations  be  informed  of  the  actions  that  we  are  taking.

"There  is  no  change  in  our  policy  toward  Laos,  which  continues  to  be  the  re-
establishment  of  an  effective  cease-fire  and  prompt  negotiations  for  a  govern-
I ment  of  national  union."

23.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  May  17,  1962,  Public  Papers  of  the
Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  402:

No  Further  Breach  in  Laos

Q:  "Mr.  President,  could  you  bring  us  up  to  date  on  the  Laotian  situation
I since  the  dispatch  of  our  troops  in  Thailand?  Specifically,  do  you  feel  that  we


812 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


have  increased  the  chances  of  our  getting  caught  in  a  Communist  shooting  war
in  Southeast  Asia?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "We  are  continuing  to  hope  that  there  will  be  a  na-
tional government  or  national  union,  which  has  been  our  policy,  as  you  know,
for  a  year.  We  are  going  to  Thailand,  at  the  decision  of  the  Thai  government,
our  own  decision  to  provide  for  the  defense  of  Thailand.  The  latest  information
indicates  no  further  breach  of  the  cease-fire.  We  also  have  indications  that  the
three  princes  will  engage  in  conversation  shortly.  I  hope  they  will  produce  a
government.  That  is  our  object.  I  have  already  indicated  the  great  hazards  of  a
shooting  war  in  Asia.  In  Asia,  it  is  our  object  to  bring  about  a  diplomatic  solu-
tion which  will  make  the  chances  of  such  a  war  far  less  likely."

Troops  in  Thailand

Q:  "Mr.  President,  in  light  of  your  answer  to  this  question,  sir,  could  you
give  us  any  idea  how  long  the  American  troops  will  be  needed  in  Thailand?"
THE  PRESIDENT:  "I  cannot  at  this  time."

Q:  "Have  you  any  idea  under  what  conditions  they  might  return?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "I  cannot  at  this  time.  They  have  only  been  in  there
for  a  very  short  while,  and  we  can't  tell  when  they  will  come  out.  It  will  de-
pend a  good  deal  on  what  conditions  are  in  Thailand  and  the  neighboring
::ountries."

Restoring  the  Cease-fire

Q:  "Mr.  President,  could  you  tell  us,  please,  what  you  would  consider  the
restoration  of  an  eff'ective  cease-fire?  Would  this  involve  the  withdrawal  of  the
Communist  forces  to  their  position  before  the  attack  on  Nam  Tha,  or  more  or
less  a  quiescence  which  would  permit  the  talks  to  go  forward  on  the  govern-
ment?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Obviously,  we  would  prefer  as  great  a  withdrawal  to
the  line  that  was  in  efi'ect  a  week  or  so  ago  as  we  could  get.  I  would  think,  how-
ever, that  the  peace  along  the  line  which  now  may  exist,  of  course,  is  essential."

Objectives  in  Laos

Q:  "Mr.  President,  would  you  review  for  us  the  considerations  that  you  had
in  mind  last  weekend  when  you  took  this  rather  swift  action  to  move  more
American  troops  into  Thailand?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Yes.  We  are  concerned  about  the  breach  of  the  cease-
fire, the  sign  of  deterioration  in  Laos,  which  brought  Communist  forces  to  the
border  of  Thailand  up  in  the  Mekong  River  section,  up  not  too  far  from  Nam
Tha,  and  we  did  not  know  whether  this  was  an  indication  of  a  general  breach  of
the  cease-fire  which,  of  course,  would  immediately  imperil  Thailand.  So  in  our
desire  to  stabilize  the  situation,  we  got  in  touch  with  the  government,  which
was  already  in  touch  with  us,  and  worked  out  the  proposed  course  of  action."

* *  *

Legality  of  Thailand  Move

Q:  "Mr.  President,  what  was  the  legal  basis  for  our  sending  troops  to  Thai-
land? Was  it  a  bilateral  arrangement  that  we  have  with  the  Thai  government,
or  was  it  possibly  secret  arrangements?"


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  813

THE  PRESIDENT:  -No,  the  actual  le^al  basis  was  to  put  us  in  a  position
to  fulfill  our  obligations  under  the  SEATO  treaty."

Q:  "Mr.  President,  are  the  other  members  of  the  SEATO  Treaty  organization
doing  the  same?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "They  have  been  asked  to  do  so,  and  there  have  been
indications  of  a  favorable  response  from  several  of  them.  This  is  a  decision  for
them.  But  we  have  responded  and  met  our  obligations."

The  Intentions  of  Pathet  Lao

O:  "Mr.  President,  back  on  the  subject  of  Southeast  Asia,  has  there  been  any
indication  that  the  Pathet  Lao  intended  to  march  against  Thailand  or  against  the
capital  of  Laos,  and,  second,  under  what  conditions  would  the  United  States  send
its  troops  into  Laos?

THE  PRESIDENT:  "In  answer  to  your  first  question,  I  don't  know  what
their  intentions  may  be.  I  am  hopeful  their  intentions  will  be  to  maintain  a
cease-fire.  Obviously,  as  I  have  said,  the  breach  of  the  cease-fire  in  the  case  of
Nam  Tha  was  a  blow  to  the  concept  of  the  cease-fire.  That  is  what  initiated  our
action  in  the  case  of  Thailand.  On  the  second  matter,  we  have  to  wait  and  see.
I  think  it  is  very  important  that  the  princes  form  a  government  of  national
union  for  the  preservation  of  their  own  country."

24.  President  Kennedy's  Address  at  Graduation  Exercises  of  the  U.S.  Military
Academy,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  453:

"Korea  has  not  been  the  only  battle  ground  since  the  end  of  the  Second  World
War.  Men  have  fought  and  died  in  Malaya,  in  Greece,  in  the  Philippines,  in
Algeria  and  Cuba,  and  Cyprus  and  almost  continuously  on  the  Indo-Chinese
Peninsula.  No  nuclear  weapons  have  been  fired.  No  massive  nuclear  retaliation
has  been  considered  appropriate.  This  is  another  type  of  war,  new  in  its  in-
tensity, ancient  in  its  origin — war  by  guerrillas,  subversives,  insurgents,  assassins,
war  by  ambush  instead  of  by  combat;  by  infiltration,  instead  of  aggression,  seek-
ing victory  by  eroding  and  exhausting  the  enemy  instead  of  engaging  him.  It  is
a  form  of  warfare  uniquely  adapted  to  what  has  been  strangely  called  'wars  of
liberation,'  to  undermine  the  efforts  of  new  and  poor  countries  to  maintain  the
freedom  that  they  have  finally  achieved.  It  preys  on  economic  unrest  and  ethnic
conflicts.  It  requires  in  those  situations  where  we  must  counter  it,  and  these  are
the  kinds  of  challenges  that  will  be  before  us  in  the  next  decade  if  freedom  is  to
be  saved,  a  whole  new  kind  of  strategy,  a  wholly  different  kind  of  force,  and
therefore  a  new  and  wholly  different  kind  of  military  training."

25.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  June  14,  1962,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1962,  p.  492:

Mansfield's  Criticisms

Q:  "Mr.  President,  Senator  Mansfield  a  few  days  ago  suggested  a  review  of
Far  Eastern  policies  because  he  said  they  seem  to  him  either  marking  time,  or
at  least  on  a  collision  course.


814 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  II
"Do  you  think  such  a  review  is  necessary?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  we  have  been  reviewing.  As  you  know,  we  have
been  attempting  in  the  case  of  Laos  to  work  out  a  policy  which  would  prevent
either  one  of  those  situations,  whether  we  shall  be  successful  or  not,  only  time
will  tell.

"I  know  that  we  have  put  large  sums  of  money,  and  the  situation  there  is  still
hazardous,  what  is  true  there  of  course  is  true  all  around  the  world.  This  is  a
period  of  great  tension  and  change.  But  if  the  United  States  had  not  played  a
part  in  Southeast  Asia  for  many  years,  I  think  the  whole  map  of  Southeast  Asia
would  be  different.

"I  am  delighted,  as  you  know,  I  have  the  highest  regard  for  Senator  Mans-
field, and  I  think  that  we  should  constantly  review,  and  I  think  that  he  sug-
gested we  should  make  judgments  between  what  is  essential  to  our  interest  and
what  is  marginal.  We  have  been  attempting  with  great  difficulty  to  carry  out  a
policy  with  Laos  which  would  permit  a  neutral  and  independent  government
there,  and  in  Senator  Mansfield's  speech  he  used  the  examples  of  Burma  and
Cambodia.  Those  were  the  examples  that  were  also  used  at  the  Vienna  meeting
by  Chairman  Khrushchev  and  myself  in  which  we  stated  the  kind  of  govern-
ment that  we  both  said  we  hoped  would  emerge  in  Laos.  That  is  the  commit-
ment that  was  made  by  the  Soviet  Union,  and  by  the  United  States.

"Now  we  have  moved  to  a  different  plateau,  and  we  are  going  to  see  whether
the  :  commitment  can  be  maintained.  But  on  the  other  hand,  I  am  sure  and  I
know  Senator  Mansfield  would  not  think  we  should  withdraw,  because  with-
drawal in  the  case  of  Vietnam  and  in  the  case  of  Thailand  might  mean  a  collapse
of  the  entire  area."

26.  U.S.  Comments  on  Report  of  Control  Commission  for  Viet-Nam,  Depart-
ment of  State  Bulletin,  July  16,  1962,  p.  109:

Department  Statement

"The  report  just  issued  by  the  International  Control  Commission  for  Viet-
Nam  demonstrates  that  the  Communist  North  Vietnamese  are  engaged  in  a
campaign  of  aggression  and  subversion  aimed  at  the  violent  overthrow  of  the
Government  of  South  Viet-Nam.  It  indicates  clearly  that  the  hostilities  in  Viet-
Nam,  which  in  the  first  5  months  of  this  year  alone  resulted  in  the  death  of  more
than  9,000  people,  are  planned,  caused,  and  led  by  the  Communist  authorities
in  North  Viet-Nam.  These  are  the  conclusions  of  the  Commission's  Legal  Com-
mittee:

.  .  .  there  is  evidence  to  show  that  armed  and  unarmed  personnel,  arms,
munitions  and  other  supplies  have  been  sent  from  the  Zone  in  the  North
to  the  Zone  in  the  South  with  the  object  of  supporting,  organizing  and
carrying  out  hostile  activities,  including  armed  attacks,  directed  against
the  Armed  Forces  and  Administration  of  the  Zone  in  the  South  .  .  .  there
is  evidence  to  show  that  the  PAVN  [People's  Army  of  Viet-Nam]  has  al-
lowed the  Zone  in  the  North  to  be  used  for  inciting,  encouraging  and  sup-
porting hostile  activities  in  the  Zone  in  the  South,  aimed  at  the  overthrow
of  the  Administration  in  the  South.

"The  Commission  accepted  these  conclusions  of  the  Legal  Committee  that
there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  show  'beyond  reasonable  doubt'  that  the  au-


Justification the  War — Public  Statements  Sl5

thorities  in  Communist  North  \  iet-Nam  commiued  these  violations.  The  Com-
mission also  cited  the  Republic  of  \'iet-Nam  for  its  activities  in  imponing  mili-
tan.  equipment  and  personnel  above  the  limits  imposed  bv  the  1954  Geneva
Accords.  The  repon  clearly  demonstrates,  however,  that  these  actions  were
taken  by  South  \"iet-Nam  as  pan  of  its  effort  to  defend  itself  against  aesression
and  subversion  from  the  Nonh.  In  December  of  last  vear  President  Diem  re-
quested increased  militan."  assistance  from  the  United  States.  We  have  re-
sponded to  this  request.

"President  Diem  and  President  Kennedy  have  both  stated  that  thev  look  for-
ward to  the  discontinuance  of  the  present  level  of  military-  assistance  when  the
Communist  Nonh  \"ietnamese  halt  their  campaign  to  destrov  the  Republic  of
Met-Nam.  The  repon  of  the  International  Control  Commission  takes  note  of
this  position.  The  United  States  welcomes  the  Commission's  repon  and  recom-
mends it  for  world  anention.  We  hope  that  the  Commission  wiU  continue  its  ef-
forts to  restore  peace  in  \"iei-Nam."

27.  President  Kennedy's  Annual  Message  to  the  Congress  on  the  Stale  of  the
Union.  Januan,  1-.  1963.  Public  Papers  or  the  Presidents.  Kennedy.  1963.
p.  17:

«  *  je

"Third,  what  comfon  can  we  take  from  the  increasing  strains  and  tensions
within  the  Communist  bloc?  Here  hoi>e  must  be  temrered  with  camion.  For  the
SoMet-Chinese  disagreement  is  over  means,  not  ends.  A  dispute  over  how-  best
to  bur\-  the  free  world  is  no  grounds  for  Western  reioicing.

"Nevenheless.  while  a  strain  is  not  a  fracrure.  it  is  clear  that  the  forces  of
diversity-  are  at  work  inside  the  Communist  camp,  despite  all  the  iron  disciplines
of  regimentation  and  all  the  iron  dogmatisms  of  ideology.".  Marx  is  proven  wrons
once  again:  for  it  is  the  closed  Communist  societies,  not  the  free  and  open  so-
cieties w^hich  carr\"  within  themselves  the  seeds  of  internal  disintegration.

"The  disarray  of  the  Communist  empire  has  been  heightened  bv  two  other
formidable  forces.  One  is  the  historical  force  of  nationalism — and  the  yearning
of  all  men  to  be  free.  The  other  is  the  sross  inemciencv  of  their  economies.  For  a
closed  societ\"  is  not  open  to  ideas  of  progress — and  a  police  state  finds  that  it
cannot  command  the  grain  to  grow.

"New  nations  asked  :c  choose  between  two  competing  s\"stems  need  only
compare  conditions  in  East  and  ^^"est  Germany.  Eastern  and  Western  Europe.
Nonh  and  South  \"iet-Nam.  Tnev  need  onlv  comnare  ihe  disillusionment  of
Com.munist  Cuba  with  the  promise  of  the  .Alliance  for  Progress.  .And  all  the
vscrid  knows  that  no  successful  svstem.  builds  a  wall  to  keep  its  people  in  and
freedom  out — and  the  v^all  of  shame  dividing  Berlin  is  a  symbol  of  Communist
failure.

"Finallv.  what  can  we  do  to  move  from  the  present  nause  toward  enduring
reace?  Asain  I  would  counsel  caution.  I  foresee  no  spectacular  reversal  in  Com-
-T.^nist  methods  or  goals.  But  if  all  these  trends  and  developments  can  per-
suade the  Soviet  Union  to  walk  the  path  of  peace,  then  let  her  know  that  aU
free  nations  will  -oumev  with  her.  But  until  that  choice  is  made,  and  until  the
w-orld  can  develop  a  reliable  svstem  of  international  securin".  the  free  peoples
have  no  choice  but  to  keep  their  arms  nearby.

"In  short,  let  our  adversaries  choose.  If  they  choose  peaceful  competition,
thev  shall  have  it.  If  thev  come  to  realize  that  their  ambitions  cannot  succeed —


816 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

if  they  see  their  'wars  of  liberation'  and  subversion  will  ultimately  fail — if  they
recognize  that  there  is  more  security  in  accepting  inspection  than  in  permitting
new  nations  to  master  the  black  arts  of  nuclear  war — and  if  they  are  willing
to  turn  their  energies,  as  we  are,  to  the  great  unfinished  tasks  of  our  own  peo-
ples— then,  surely,  the  areas  of  agreement  can  be  very  wide  indeed:  a  clear  un-
derstanding about  Berlin,  stability  in  Southeast  Asia,  an  end  to  nuclear  testing,
new  checks  on  surprise  or  accidental  attack,  and,  ultimately,  general  and  com-
plete disarmament.

*  *  *

"My  friends:  I  close  on  a  note  of  hope.  We  are  not  lulled  by  the  momentary
calm  of  the  sea  or  the  somewhat  clearer  skies  above.  We  know  the  turbulence
that  lies  below,  and  the  storms  that  are  beyond  the  horizon  this  year.  But  now
the  winds  of  change  appear  to  be  blowing  more  strongly  than  ever,  in  the
world  of  communism  as  well  as  our  own  .  .  ."

*  *  *

28.  President  Kennedy's  Annual  Message  to  the  Congress  on  the  State  of  the
Union,  January  14,  1963,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1963,
p.  16:

*  *  *

"Second,  what  of  the  developing  and  non-aligned  nations?  They  were,  I  be-
lieve, shocked  by  the  Soviets'  sudden  and  secret  attempt  to  transform  Cuba  into
a  nuclear  striking  base — and  by  Communist  China's  arrogant  invasion  of  India.

"They  have  been  reassured  by  our  prompt  assistance  to  India,  by  our  support
through  the  United  Nations  of  the  Congo's  unification,  by  our  patient  search
for  disarmament,  and  by  the  improvement  in  our  treatment  of  citizens  and  visi-
tors, whose  skin  does  not  happen  to  be  white.  And  as  the  older  colonialism  re-
cedes, and  the  neo-colonialism  of  the  Communist  powers  stands  out  more  starkly
than  ever,  they  realize  more  clearly  that  the  issue  in  the  world  struggle  is  not
communism  versus  capitalism,  but  coercion  versus  a  free  choice.

"They  realize  that  the  longing  for  independence  is  the  same  the  world  over,
whether  it  is  the  independence  of  West  Berlin  or  Viet-Nam.  They  realize  that
such  independence  runs  athwart  all  Communist  ambitions,  but  is  in  keeping  with
our  own — and  that  our  approach  to  their  needs  is  resilient  and  resourceful,  while
the  Communists  rely  on  ancient  doctrines  and  old  dogmas.

"Nevertheless,  it  is  hard  for  any  nation  to  focus  on  an  external  or  subversive
threat  to  its  independence  when  its  energies  are  drained  in  daily  combat  with
the  forces  of  poverty  and  despair.  It  makes  little  sense  for  us  to  assail  in  speeches
and  resolutions  the  horrors  of  communism,  to  spend  $50  billion  a  year  to  pre-
vent its  military  advance — and  then  to  begrudge  spending,  largely  on  American
products,  less  than  one-tenth  of  that  amount  to  help  other  nations  strengthen
their  independence  and  cure  the  social  chaos  in  which  communism  has  always
thrived."

29.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  March  6,  1963,  Public  Papers  of  the
Presidents,  Kennedy,  1963,  p.  243:

%  %

Q:  "Mr.  President,  the  Mansfield  committee,  sent  at  your  suggestion  to  the
Far  East  and  Europe,  has  recommended  a  thorough  security  reassessment  in  the


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  817

Far  East  and  a  clamp  down,  if  not  a  reduction  in  our  aid  to  that  part  of  the
world.  Would  you  have  any  comment  on  this,  sir?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "I  don't  see  how  we  are  going  to  be  able,  unless  we  are
going  to  pull  out  of  Southeast  Asia  and  turn  it  over  to  the  Communists,  how
we  are  going  to  be  able  to  reduce  very  much  our  economic  programs  and  mili-
tary programs  in  South  Viet-Nam,  in  Cambodia,  in  Thailand.

"I  think  that  unless  you  want  to  withdraw  from  the  field  and  decide  that  it  is
in  the  national  interest  to  permit  that  area  to  collapse,  I  would  think  that  it
would  be  impossible  to  substantially  change  it  particularly,  as  we  are  in  a  very
intensive  struggle  in  those  areas.

"So  I  think  we  ought  to  judge  the  economic  burden  it  places  upon  us  as  op-
posed to  having  the  Communists  control  all  of  Southeast  Asia  with  the
inevitable  effect  that  this  would  have  on  the  security  of  India  and,  therefore,
really  begin  to  run  perhaps  all  the  way  toward  the  Middle  East.  So  I  think  that
while  we  would  all  like  to  lighten  the  burden,  I  don't  see  any  real  prospect  of
the  burden  being  lightened  for  the  U.S.  in  Southeast  Asia  in  the  next  year  if  we
are  going  to  do  the  job  and  meet  what  I  think  are  very  clear  national  needs."

30.  U.  Alexis  Johnson's  Address  Made  Before  the  Economic  Club  of  Detroit,
"The  United  States  and  Southeast  Asia"  April  8,  1963,  Department  of
State  Bulletin,  April  29,  J 963,  p.  636:

* *  *

"What  is  the  attraction  that  Southeast  Asia  has  exerted  for  centuries  on  the
great  powers  flanking  it  on  all  sides?  Why  it  is  desirable,  and  why  is  it  important?
First,  it  provides  a  lush  climate,  fertile  soil,  rich  natural  resources,  a  relatively
sparse  population  in  most  areas,  and  room  to  expand.  The  countries  of  South-
east Asia  produce  rich  exportable  surpluses  such  as  rice,  rubber,  teak,  corn,
tin,  spices,  oil,  and  many  others.  It  is  especially  attractive  to  Communist  China,
with  its  burgeoning  population  and  its  food  shortages.

"Militarily  and  strategically,  Southeast  Asia  has  great  assets.  It  stands  astride
of  east-west  trade  routes.  It  stands  in  a  critical,  strategic  relationship  not  only
to  China  and  India  but  to  Australia,  the  western  Pacific,  and  Japan.  Bearing  in
mind  the  implications  of  the  recent  Chinese  attack  on  India,  Southeast  Asia
takes  on  an  additional  significance,  since  its  domination  by  the  Communist
powers  would  outflank  the  Asian  subcontinent.

"Although  still  thinly  populated  for  the  most  part,  the  human  resources  of
this  area  are  considerable  and  growing.  Taken  together,  the  peoples  of  Southeast
Asia  represent  an  important  segment  of  the  free  world  and  a  target  of  prime
importance  to  Communist  imperialism.

"There  is  a  rhythm  to  the  tides  of  history.  Just  as  the  pressures  on  Southeast
Asia  have  in  the  past  come  alternately  from  China  in  the  north,  India  in  the
west,  and  the  maritime  powers  along  the  sea,  so  Southeast  Asia  is  again  threat-
ened by  a  resurgence  of  pressure  from  the  north.  But  today  the  danger  from  this
quarter  is  multiplied  a  hundredfold  by  the  virulence  of  the  political  doctrine
which  now  rides  on  the  backs  of  the  Chinese  people.

"As  my  colleague  Under  Secretary  Averell  Harriman  said  recently,  T  don't
know  how  you  can  distinguish  between  Chinese  communism  and  Chinese  im-
perialism. Chinese  communism  and  all  communism  is  imperialist.'

"Even  before  World  War  II,  Communist  parties  of  varying  strengths  existed
in  all  Southeast  Asian  countries,  from  Burma  to  the  Philippines.  After  the  war
the  signal  was  given  for  armed  Communist-led  uprisings,  and  these  occurred  in


818 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

Burma,  Indonesia,  Malaya,  Indochina,  and  the  PhiHppines.  Even  Thailand,  the
one  country  in  Southeast  Asia  that  had  not  known  colonial  rule,  was  threatened.
By  1952  the  revolts  were  crushed  in  all  but  Malaya  and  Indochina.  It  took  the
British  and  the  new  Malay  Federation  until  1958  to  quell  Communist  guerrilla
forces  there.  This  struggle,  incidentally,  provided  valuable  lessons  which  are
now  being  applied  in  Viet-Nam.  We  also  might  note  that,  except  for  Japan,
Malaya  is  now  the  most  prosperous  country  in  Asia.

"The  efforts  of  some  powers  following  World  War  II  to  restore  colonial  rule
along  the  pre-war  pattern  permitted  the  Communists  more  effectively  to  wave
the  banner  of  anticolonialism  and,  for  example,  through  Ho  Chi  Minh,  at  that
time  largely  to  capture  the  nationalist  movement  in  Viet-Nam.

"After  the  Geneva  Agreements  of  1954  on  Indochina  we  took  the  lead  in
the  establishment  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organization,  an  alliance  of  the
Philippines,  Thailand,  Pakistan,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  France,  Great  Britain,
and  ourselves,  with  the  objective  of  providing  security  to  Southeast  Asia  through
collective  military  action  if  the  Communists  embarked  on  outright  military  ag-
gression. The  opening  of  the  eighth  meeting  of  ministers  of  this  organization
was  attended  by  Secretary  Rusk  this  morning  in  Paris.

"Whatever  may  be  the  criticisms  of  SEATO,  the  fact  remains  that,  since  its
inception,  the  Communists  have  not  attempted  open  military  action  in  the  area.
Instead  they  have  turned  to  the  more  subtle  tactics  of  subversion  and  insurgency,
thi  prime  example  being  the  guerrilla  warfare  in  Viet-Nam  carried  on  in  the
method  made  classic  in  China  by  Mao  Tse-tung.  Whereas  the  method  employed
by  the  Communists  has  changed,  the  objective  remains  the  same — destruction
of  the  independence  of  the  Southeast  Asian  countries  one  by  one  and  return
to  the  days  when  they  bore  their  tribute  to  Peiping.  While  the  armed  struggle  is
manifest  now  only  in  Viet-Nam,  it  ceased  in  Laos  through  the  settlement
reached  just  last  year  at  Geneva,  after  14  months  of  negotiation.

Implications  of  Struggle  in  Viet-Nam

"I  have  pointed  out  that  Southeast  Asia  is  not  a  homogeneous  region  but
rather  a  geographic  expression.  By  this  same  token  of  geographic  interrelation,
the  security  of  the  area  is  not  stronger  than  that  of  its  component  countries.
All  of  us  who  were  at  Geneva  in  1954  recognized  that  Communist  domination
of  the  Red  River  Delta  of  North  Viet-Nam  would  make  it  much  more  difficult
to  defend  the  remaining  areas.  This  has  been  true.  However,  for  the  Communists
to  advance  any  further  in  the  area  would  render  the  defense  problem  very  much
more  difficult,  if  not  well-nigh  impossible.  This  is  why  the  valiant  struggle  now
being  waged  in  South  Viet-Nam  has  implications  far  beyond  the  borders  of  that
troubled  country.

"Our  massive  assistance  to  free  Viet-Nam  is  designed  to  avoid  just  such
a  catastrophe."

*  *  *

31.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  April  24,  1963,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presiaents,  Kennedy,  1963,  p.  343:

*  *  *

Falling  Dominoes

Q:  "Mr.  President,  on  Laos  again,  several  years  ago  we  heard  a  great  deal
about  the  'falling  domino'  theory  in  Southeast  Asia.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  819

"Do  you  look  upon  Laos  in  terms  of  that  country  alone,  or  is  your  concern
the  effect  that  its  loss  would  have  in  Thailand,  Vietnam,  and  so  on?
"Would  you  discuss  that?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "That  is  correct.  The  population  of  Laos  is  2  million  and
it  is  scattered.  It  is  a  very  rough  country.  It  is  important  as  a  sovereign  pov^er.
The  people  desire  to  be  independent,  and  it  is  also  important  because  it  borders
the  Mekong  River  and,  quite  obviously,  if  Laos  fell  into  Communist  hands  it
would  increase  the  danger  along  the  northern  frontiers  of  Thailand.  It  would
put  additional  pressure  on  Cambodia  and  would  put  additional  pressure  on  South
Vietnam  which  in  itself  would  put  additional  pressure  on  Malaya.

"So  I  do  accept  the  view  that  there  is  an  interrelationship  in  these  countries
and  that  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  we  are  concerned  with  maintaining
the  Geneva  Accords  as  a  method  of  maintaining  stability  in  Southeast  Asia.  It
may  be  one  of  the  reasons  why  others  do  not  share  that  interest."

*  *  *

32.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  May  8,  1963,  Public  Papers  of  the
Presidents,  Kennedy,  1963,  p.  375:

*  *  *

Q:  "Back  on  the  subject  of  Vietnam.  Could  you  explain  to  us,  sir,  why  we
have  committed  ourselves  militarily  in  Vietnam  but  have  not  committed  our-
selves militarily  in  Laos,  depending  instead  upon  this  neutralist  government?"

A:  "Because  the  situations  are  different.  That  s  why  the  remedy  has  been
different.  We  have  had  a  commitment  for  a  good  many  years  to  the  integrity  of
South  Vietnam.  We  are  anxious  to  maintain  the  neutrality  of  Laos.  It  may  not
be  possible  to  do  so  and  it  may  be  necessary  to  seek  other  remedies.  But  we
have  adopted  what  we  considered  to  be,  considering  the  geography,  the  history,
the  nature  of  the  threat  and  the  alternate  solution — we've  adopted  for  each
country  what  we  regarded  as  the  best  strategy.  And  we'll  have  to  wait  and  see
what  happens  on  them."

*  *  *

33.  Secretary  Rusk's  Address  Before  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York,  at  New
York,  April  22,  1963,  "The  Stake  in  Viet-Nam,"  Department  of  State  Bul-
letin, May  13,  1963,  p.  727:

^ ^  ^

"Viet-Nam  is  a  narrow  strip  along  the  South  China  Sea,  nearly  as  large  as
California,  with  a  population  of  some  30  million  people — about  16  million  in
the  North  and  14  million  in  the  South.

"With  Cambodia  and  Laos,  Viet-Nam  formed  what  was  formerly  known  as
French  Indochina.  During  the  Second  World  War,  the  Vichy  regime  yielded
control  of  French  Indochina  to  the  Japanese.  In  the  spring  of  1945  the  Japanese
proclaimed  the  independence  of  Viet-Nam.  And  in  August  of  that  year  they
permitted  the  Communist-oriented  Viet  Minh  to  seize  rule.

"In  the  Indian  subcontinent  and  in  Burma  and  the  Philippines,  Western  coun-
tries recognized  at  war's  end  that  national  demands  for  independence  would
have  to  be  met  promptly.  But  this  was  not  the  case  with  Indochina.  Instead,  we


820 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

ourselves  were  somewhat  at  a  loss  for  a  policy  with  regard  to  that  particular
part  of  the  world.  So  our  people  in  charge  of  war  plans  in  1944  sent  a  colonel
out  there  who  sent  a  cable  back  to  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  saying  'Request
policy  guidance  on  American  policy  toward  Indochina,  because  we  are  begin-
ning to  get  military  access  to  that  country  and  we  need  direction.'

"Well,  there  ensued  a  vast  silence  which  lasted  for  months.  We  sent  staff  of-
ficers back  to  try  to  find  the  answer.  We  sent  cables  out  there,  and  after  about
6  months  the  reply  came  and  it  said,  'When  asked  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
for  a  statement  of  American  policy  toward  Indochina,  the  President' — that  was
President  Roosevelt — 'replied,  I  don't  want  to  hear  any  more  about  Indo-
china.'

"Well,  now  the  result  of  no  significant  Allied  policy  at  that  point  was  that  the
French  did  return  and  take  over  where  they  left  off  at  the  time  of  the  Japanese
occupation,  and  they  encountered  therefore  a  militant  resistance  movement.
For  8  years,  with  material  help  from  the  United  States,  they  sought  to  pacify
the  country.  At  the  same  time  they  granted  increasing  autonomy  to  non-Com-
munist Vietnamese.  But  the  Viet  Minh,  reforms  in  Japan  and  on  Taiwan,  was
pressed  forward — 123,000  heads  of  families  became  small  landowners.  A  com-
prehensive system  of  agricultural  credit  was  set  up.  Thousands  of  Vietnamese
were  moved  into  the  highlands  to  raise  industrial  crops.  Rubber  production  rose,
and  new  plantings  of  better  varieties  promised  still  higher  production  for  the
fu  ure.  Sugar  production  doubled  in  1958.  South  Viet-Nam  was  soon  producing
enough  rice  to  resume  exports  on  a  rising  scale.  Various  small  industries  were
established.  Textile  production  rose  from  near  zero  to  near  self-sufficiency.  Elec-
tric power  nearly  doubled.  Per  capita  national  income  rose  by  20  percent.

"Thousands  of  new  schools  were  built.  Between  1956  and  1960,  enrollment
in  the  elementary  schools  rose  from  400,000  to  1,500,000.  The  expansion  of
health  facilities  included  new  hospitals  and  3,500  village  health  stations.  Rail
transportation  was  restored.  Roads  were  repaired  and  improved,  and  three
new  major  highways  were  built.

"The  Communists  were  not  completely  eliminated — especially  along  the  land
and  sea  frontiers,  where  they  could  be  supplied — but  most  of  South  Viet-Nam
became,  for  a  period,  safe  for  travel.

"Although  North  Viet-Nam  inherited  most  of  the  industry  of  Viet-Nam,  and
although  its  population  is  larger,  it  fell  rapidly  behind  South  Viet-Nam  in  food
production,  the  number  of  children  in  school,  and  in  standards  of  living.  While
per  capita  food  production  rose  20  percent  in  the  South,  it  fell  10  percent  in  the
North.

"This  was  competition  which  the  Communists  apparently  could  not  endure.
Very  likely  it  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  they  decided  in  1959  to  renew  their
assault  on  South  Viet-Nam.  And  in  1960  the  Lao  Dong  Party — that  is,  the  Com-
munist Party — ordered  the  'liberation'  of  South  Viet-Nam.

"According  to  Communist  propaganda,  the  war  in  South  Viet-Nam  is  a  civil
war,  a  local  uprising.  The  truth  is  that  it  is  an  aggression  organized,  directed,
and  partly  supplied  from  North  Viet-Nam.  It  is  conducted  by  hardened  Com-
munist political  organizers  and  guerrilla  leaders  trained  in  North  Viet-Nam,  who,
upon  their  arrival  in  the  South,  recruit  local  assistance.  This  has  been  done  in
a  variety  of  ways,  including  terror  and  assassination.  Schoolteachers,  health
workers,  malaria  eradication  teams,  local  officials  loyal  to  the  Republic — these
were  the  first  targets  of  the  assassins.  But  many  ordinary  villagers  who  refused
to  cooperate  with  the  Communist  guerrillas  likewise  have  been  ruthlessly  killed.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  821


Strategic  Importance  of  South  Viet-Nam

'This  assault  on  South  Viet-Nam  was  a  major  Communist  enterprise,  care-
fully and  elaborately  prepared,  heavily  staffed,  and  relentlessly  pursued.  It  made
headway.  In  1961  President  Diem  appealed  for  further  assistance  and  President
Kennedy  responded  promptly  and  affirmatively.

"  The  strategic  importance  of  South  Viet-Nam  is  plain.  It  controls  the  mouth
of  the  Mekong  River,  the  main  artery  of  Southeast  Asia.  The  loss  of  South  Viet-
Nam  would  put  the  remaining  states  of  Southeast  Asia  in  mortal  danger.

"But  there  are  larger  reasons  why  the  defense  of  South  Viet-Nam  is  vital  to
us  and  to  the  whole  free  world.  We  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  fate  of  14  mil-
lion people  who  have  fought  hard  against  communism — includins  nearlv  1  mil-
lion who  fled  their  former  homes  to  avoid  living  under  Communist  tvranny.
Since  we  went  to  the  aid  of  Greece  and  Turkey  16  years  ago.  it  has  been  the  at-
titude of  the  United  States  to  assist  peoples  who  resist  Communist  aggression.
We  have  seen  this  form  of  attack  fail  in  Burma.  Malava,  and  the  Philippines.
The  South  Vietnamese  are  determined  to  win  their  battle,  and  thev  deserve  our
help.

"Critics  have  complained  that  South  Viet-Nam  is  not  a  full  constitutional
democracy  and  that  our  aid  has  been  subject  to  waste  and  mismanagement.  Let
us  be  clear  that  these  criticisms  are  not  merelv  alibis  for  inaction.  For  in  passing
judgement,  let  us  recall  that  we  are  talking  about  a  nation  which  has  been  re-
sponsible for  its  own  affairs  for  less  than  a  decade,  about  a  people  who  have  had
no  peace  since  1941  and  little  experience  in  direct  participation  in  political  af-
fairs. Their  four  national  elections,  their  thousands  of  elected  hamlet  councils,
and  their  forthcoming  village  council  elections  show  steady  movement  toward
a  constitutional  system  resting  upon  popular  consent."

^  ^  ^

34.  Assistant  Secretary  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs.  Roger  IV.  Hilsman.  Address
Made  at  J 963  Conference  on  Cold  War  Education,  Tampa,  Florida.  June
14.  1963.  "The  Challenge  to  Freedom  in  Asia,"  Department  of  State  Bulle-
tin, July  8,  1963,  p.  44:

*  *  *

"As  to  the  nature  of  the  danger,  the  ideologv  of  communism  is  a  threat  to
the  United  States  today  mainly  because  it  is  joined  with  the  population,  re-
sources, and  militarv  strength  of  the  countries  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  Com-
munist China,  because  it  is  joined  w  ith  two  bases  of  power.

"But  the  fact  that  ideology  has  been  joined  to  these  two  bases  of  power  should
not  be  misinterpreted:  the  threat  is  not  just  military;  it  is  also  political.  And  of
the  two,  the  political  threat  is  probablv  the  more  pervasive.  This  is  true  because
this  nation  and  its  allies  have  made  sure  that  their  militarv  defenses  are  adequate
and  up  to  date.

"The  political  threat  is  also  serious  because  of  the  Communists'  skill
in  manipulating  all  the  elements  of  power — political,  economic,  and  psycholog-
ical as  well  as  military.  They  use  these  instruments  with  considerable  sophistica-
tion, playing  first  one  then  another  according  to  the  opportunities  open  to  them
in  any  given  situation.  Mao  Tse-tung  has  described  this  alternation  of  tactics
and  instruments  as  "talk  fight;  talk  fight,"  and  it  describes  the  technique  very
well.  This  sudden  alternation  between  talking  and  fighting  is  designed  also  to
induce  a  maximum  amount  of  confusion,  instabilitv.  and  trouble  in  the  free


822 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

world.  One  of  the  latest  examples  of  their  use  of  this  tactic  occurred  last  October
in  the  Chinese  Communist  attack  along  the  Indian  border,  followed  by  their
withdrawal  beginning  a  month  later.

"The  immediate  goal  of  the  Communists  is,  of  course,  to  capture  the
in-between  nations,  those  smaller  and  weaker  nations  which  today  are  strug-
gling against  odds  to  remain  independent.  If  the  Communists  can  capture  such
free  nations,  turning  them  against  the  United  States  and  making  them  feel  that
it  is  the  U.S.  which  poses  the  danger  or  forms  an  obstacle  to  their  goals,  then
the  Communists  could  win  without  using  military  power.  Moreover,  the  Com-
munists have  waged  an  unremitting  attack  on  the  foundations  of  our  way  of
life,  just  as  they  are  a  threat  to  freedom  elsewhere  in  the  world.  Although  they
argue  over  differences  in  emphasis  as  to  how  the  Communist  world  should  carry
out  its  attacks  on  free  men,  their  common  goal  is  plain  enough:  to  further  the
destruction  of  the  values  all  free  men  cherish.

"In  Asia  the  greatest  danger  to  independent  nations  comes  from  Communist
China,  with  its  700  million  people  forced  into  the  service  of  an  aggressive  Com-
munist Party.  We  can't  ignore  that  problem,  and  we  don't  ignore  it.  Communist
China  lies  in  direct  contact  with,  or  very  close  to,  a  whole  series  of  free  nations
ranged  in  an  arc  from  Afghanistan,  India,  Pakistan,  and  Nepal  in  South  Asia;
through  Burma,  Malaya,  Thailand,  Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Viet-Nam  in  South-
east Asia;  and  on  up  through  the  Republic  of  China,  on  its  island  base  of  Taiwan,
to  Japan  and  Korea.  Indonesia,  the  Philippines,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand  are
also  alive  to  the  threat  posed  by  the  Communist  Chinese.

"All  these  free  nations  must  deal  with  the  facts  of  Communist  China  and
its  ambitions.  No  matter  what  response  each  has  made,  be  it  nonalignment  or
alliance  with  friendly  nations,  they  all  are  aware  that  the  aim  of  the  Chinese
Communists  is  to  gain  predominant  control  in  Asia  and  eventually  to  secure  the
establishment  of  Communist  regimes  throughout  the  world.  The  reaction  of
each  nation  is  determined  by  its  own  material  circumstances  and,  sometimes
more  importantly,  by  its  own  national  psychology.

"The  United  States  is  determined  that  communism  shall  not  take  over  Asia.

"For  this  reason  we  do  not  recognize  Communist  China  and  seek  in  all  pos-
sible ways  to  limit  the  ability  of  Communist  China  to  implement  its  threat  to
obtain  hegemony  in  the  Far  East.  We  recognize  the  Republic  of  China  as  the
legal  government  of  China  and  support  its  position  in  the  United  Nations.  We
are  aware  that  the  economic  and  social  progress  on  Taiwan,  carried  out  by  free
Chinese,  stands  in  stark  contrast  to  the  failures  of  the  mainland  Communist
government.  Also  the  existence  on  Taiwan  of  a  well-trained  and  -equipped  force
of  600,000  men,  dedicated  to  the  fight  against  communism,  must  have  a  restrain-
ing effect  on  any  expansionist  ambitions  of  the  Communist  Chinese.  Further-
more the  spirit  of  the  people  of  the  Republic  of  China,  and  of  their  leader,  Pres-
ident Chiang  Kai-shek,  who  have  conducted  a  40-year  struggle  against  Com-
munist imperialism,  is  an  inspiration  to  free  peoples  everywhere.

"We  stand  ready  to  help  peoples  who  want  to  help  themselves  to  maintain
their  independence.  Sometimes  this  involves  outright  alliance,  as  with  the  Re-
public of  China,  Japan,  South  Korea,  and,  through  the  Southeast  Asia  Treaty
Organizatior.,  with  the  Philippines,  Thailand,  and  Pakistan.  If  any  of  these  na-
tions is  attacked  the  United  States  is  committed  to  help  defend  it.  Our  contribu-
tion to  security  in  the  Far  East  also  takes  other  forms,  forms  designed  to  meet
threats  of  varying  nature.

"These  threats  are  never  simple  ones:  some  are  extremely  subtle  and  sophis-
ticated. If  we  are  to  meet  these  threats  successfully,  certain  qualities  of  mind


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  823


must  be  stressed  and  certain  dangers  avoided.  Governor  Bryant,  in  a  recent
address,  referred  to  the  danger  that  the  'timid  American'  poses  for  our  democ-
racy. I  think  he  is  quite  right.  I  have  often  had  a  similar  thought,  which  I  would
like  to  emphasize  in  what  I  have  to  say  today.

''What  has  often  occurred  to  me  is  that,  if  the  United  States  is  not  only  going
to  meet  the  Communist  threat  but  carry  off  the  difficult  task  of  helping
to  create  a  new  and  stable  world  in  the  process,  then  Americans  are  going  to
need  very  steady  nerves.

"By  this  phrase  'steady  nerves,'  I  mean  not  only  not  being  timid  but  two  ad-
ditional qualities:  first,  the  capacity  for  cold,  deliberate  analysis  in  order  to  know
when  to  act  and  when  to  bide  one's  time;  second,  the  unemotional  self-discipline
and  self-control  that  enables  one  to  act  effectively  as  a  result  of  that  analysis.  I
mean  the  kind  of  self-control  that  enabled  President  Kennedy  to  use  United
States  power  with  such  coolness  and  skill  as  he  did  during  the  Cuban  crisis.  In
negotiations,  also,  extraordinary  qualities  of  mind  and  will  are  demanded,
among  which  the  element  of  cold  calm  in  dealing  with  complex  situations  is
increasingly  important.  President  Kennedy  was  speaking  of  this  in  his  inaugural
address  when  he  said:  'Let  us  never  negotiate  out  of  fear.  But  let  us  never  fear
to  negotiate.'

"The  quality  of  'steady  nerves'  is  needed  in  both  of  the  fundamental  tasks  be-
fore us.  For  there  are  two  separate  tasks.

"One  is  the  meeting  of  crises;  the  other  is  the  slower,  but  more  positive,  task
of  nation  building,  of  helping  to  build  a  system  of  stable,  strong,  and  independent
states  which  have  solved  the  problem  of  both  political  and  economic  develop-
ment."

*  *  *

"By  1960  the  situation  had  so  deteriorated  that  it  seemed  possible  the  Viet
Cong  would  be  able  to  establish  a  territorial  base  in  South  Viet-Nam,  the  next
step  in  the  Mao  formula  for  a  successful  'national  liberation  movement.'  At  this
point.  President  Kennedy  sent  General  Maxwell  Taylor  to  South  Viet-Nam  to
confer  with  the  Vietnamese  Government  and  to  observe  the  situation  for  himself.
General  Taylor  reported  that  the  Vietnamese  people  retained  the  will  to  fight
communism  and  that,  given  more  extensive  support,  had  a  chance  to  defeat  the
Viet  Cong.

"While  this  support  has  come  predominantly  from  the  United  States,  a  num-
ber of  other  countries  have  provided  significant  support,  moral  and  material.

"The  first  requirement  of  the  struggle  today  is  to  pull  the  teeth  of  the  Viet
Cong  terrorist  campaign.  This  can  best  be  done  not  so  much  by  killing  the  ter-
rorists but  by  depriving  them  of  the  opportunity  to  coerce  the  farmers  into
providing  supplies  and  recruits.  This  can  only  be  done  by  providing  practical
protection  to  the  farming  population.  The  technique  which  has  been  adopted
to  achieve  this  protection  is  the  construction  of  fortified  villages,  called  strategic
hamlets.  This  technique  was  used  successfully  in  Malaya  against  the  Communist
movement  there.  The  same  concept  had  been  applied  successfully  in  the  late
1790"s  by  the  Manchu  dynasty  of  China  against  the  White  Lotus  sect,  a  fanatical
group  whose  use  of  terror  resembled  closely  the  methods  of  the  present-day  Viet
Cong."

*  ❖  *

"The  struggle  in  Viet-Nam  gains  the  headlines  in  today's  newspapers.  But
throughout  Asia,  new  nations,  in  varying  degrees,  are  facing  the  challenge  of


824 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II


creating  progressive,  yet  stable,  societies  in  a  world  of  uncertainty.  American
policy  aims  to  provide  our  experience,  our  enthusiasm,  and,  insofar  as  our
resources  permit,  our  material  aid  to  this  great  enterprise  of  nation  building."

5f!  *  *

"Thirdly,  while  we  are  combating  Communist  imperialism  in  all  its  forms,  we
must  remember  that  it  is  not  enough  to  be  against  something  and  that  in  the
last  analysis  success  depends  upon  our  ability  to  build,  to  construct,  to  contribute
to  man's  spiritual  and  material  welfare.  We  are  cooperating  with  many  free
peoples  in  great  efiorts  at  nation  building,  while  the  Communists  try  to  tear
down,  in  order  to  impose  their  hold  and  their  system  on  the  world.

"Fourthly,  there  is  a  larger  need  for  tolerance  in  international  life.  Happily
there  is  a  growing  understanding  among  us  of  the  diverse  ways  by  which  dif-
ferent peoples  seek  to  obtain  happiness  and  security  in  a  troubled  world.  In  pass-
ing I  also  wish  to  observe  that,  remembering  our  own  unfinished  business  in  ful-
filling the  ideals  of  the  American  Constitution,  we  must  be  tolerant  of  the  short-
comings we  may  see  in  other  societies.  While  we  are  justifiably  proud  of  our
institutions  and  our  freedoms  and  stand  as  leaders  in  the  democratic  world,  our
prestige  and  influence  in  the  world  sufl'er  whenever  we  fall  short  of  our  own
ideals."

*  *  *

35.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  July  17,  1963,  Public  Papers  of  the
Presidents,  Kennedy,  1963,  p.  569:

*  *  *

Q:  "Mr.  President,  there  has  been  a  good  deal  of  public  concern  about  the
political  situation  in  South  Viet-Nam,  and  I  would  like  to  ask  you  whether  the
difficulties  between  the  Buddhist  population  there  and  the  South  Vietnamese
Government  has  been  an  impediment  to  the  effectiveness  of  American  aid  in
the  war  against  the  Viet  Cong?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Yes,  I  think  it  has.  I  think  it  is  unfortunate  that  this  dis-
pute has  arisen  at  the  very  time  when  the  military  struggle  has  been  going  better
than  it  has  been  going  in  many  months.  I  would  hope  that  some  solution  could
be  reached  for  this  dispute,  which  certainly  began  as  a  religious  dispute,  and
because  we  have  invested  a  tremendous  amount  of  effort  and  it  is  going  quite
well.

"I  do  realize  of  course,  and  we  all  have  to  realize,  that  Viet-Nam  has  been  in
war  for  20  years.  The  Japanese  came  in,  the  war  with  the  French,  the  civil  war
which  has  gone  on  for  10  years,  and  this  is  very  difficult  for  any  society  to  stand.
It  is  a  country  which  has  got  a  good  many  problems  and  it  is  divided,  and  there
is  guerrilla  activity  and  murder  and  all  of  the  rest.  Compounding  this,  however,
now  is  a  religious  dispute.  I  would  hope  this  would  be  settled,  because  we  want
to  see  a  stable  government  there,  carrying  on  a  struggle  to  maintain  its  national
independence.

"We  believe  strongly  in  that.  We  are  not  going  to  withdraw  from  that  effort.
In  my  opinion,  for  us  to  withdraw  from  that  effort  would  mean  a  collapse  not
only  of  South  Viet-Nam,  but  Southeast  Asia.  So  we  are  going  to  stay  there.  We
hope  with  the  great  effort  which  is  being  carried  by  the  Vietnamese  themselves,
and  they  have  been  in  this  field  a  lot  longer  than  we  have,  and  with  a  good  deal
more  deaths  and  casualties,  that  behind  this  military  shield  put  up  by  the  Viet-


Justification  of  the  War— Public  Statements  825

namese  people  they  can  reach  an  agreement  on  the  civil  disturbances  and  also
in  respect  for  the  rights  of  others.  That's  our  hope.  That's  our  effort.
That— we're  bringing  our  influence  to  bear.  And  the  decision  is  finally  theirs,
but  I  think  that  before  we  render  too  harsh  a  judgment  on  the  people,
we  should  realize  that  they  are  going  through  a  harder  time  than  we  have  had
to  go  through."

*  *  *

36.  Deputy  Director  of  Viet-Nam  Working  Group,  Theodore  J.C.  Heavner,
Address  Made  Before  National  Sec  &  Leg  Committee  at  the  National  Con-
vention of  Veterans  of  Foreign  Wars,  in  Seattle,  Washington,  August  25,
1963,  "The  Viet-Nam  Situation,"  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  September  9,
1963,  p.  392:

*  *  *

"In  the  light  of  long-term  trends  in  Communist  and  free  Asia  let  me  now  re-
view the  elements  of  U.S.  strategy  and  policy.  Our  policy  in  the  Far  East  can  be
summed  up  in  these  four  points:

"1.  To  stand  firmly  behind  our  commitments  to  the  defense  of  independent
nations  and  to  turn  back  any  aggressive  thrust  from  communism;

"2.  To  contribute  as  we  are  able  to  the  prosperity  and  development  of  na-
tions which  request  our  assistance  as  the  surest  way  of  helping  to  build  a
system  of  free,  viable,  and  strong  nations  in  Asia;

"3.  To  recognize  the  value  of  initiatives  by  the  Pacific  nations  themselves  to
develop  their  own  modes  of  cooperation  and  communication,  and  to
stand  ready  to  assist  when  called  upon  to  do  so;

"4.  To  work  patiently  for  the  realization  of  a  Pacific  community  of  nations
so  prosperous  and  progressive  that  its  attraction  will  prove,  in  the  long
run,  irresistible  to  those  peoples  now  kept  by  their  rulers  from  participa-
tion in  it."


The  Guerrilla  War  in  Viet-Nam

"To  understand  why  President  Kennedy  said  in  his  state  of  the  Union  mes-
sage that  'The  spearpoint  of  aggression  has  been  blunted  in  South  Viet-Nam,'
we  need  to  consider  the  situation  in  the  fall  of  1961  and  early  1962.  The  Vietna-
mese were  quite  plainly  losing  their  fight  against  the  Communist  guerrillas  then.

"The  Communist  guerrillas,  1,500  strong,  took  and  held  overnight  a  pro-
vincial capital  in  September  of  1961,  and,  to  underline  the  fact,  they  publicly  be-
headed the  Chief  of  Province  there.  The  flow  of  rice  into  Saigon,  normally  a  rice
export  center,  was  choked  off  by  the  guerrillas  to  the  point  where  the  United
States  sent  P.L.  480  rice  to  Saigon  in  early  1962.  Enemy  attacks  in  January  of
last  year  were  running  at  the  rate  of  more  than  120  per  week.  We  even  feared
that  the  Communist  Viet  Cong  might  soon  be  able  to  declare  'a  liberated  area'
somewhere  in  the  highlands.

"Faced  with  this  deteriorating  situation.  President  Diem  in  December  of  1961
sent  a  letter  to  President  Kennedy  in  which  he  oudined  the  nature  of  the  attack
on  his  government  and  asked  for  increased  American  assistance.  The  United
States  considered  this  request  very  carefully.  Vice  President  Johnson  had  visited
Viet-Nam  in  May  of  1961,  and  President  Kennedy  had  sent  General  [Maxwell


826 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  II

D.]  Taylor  to  Viet-Nam  again  in  the  fall  of  that  year.  So  we  were  very  clear
about  the  nature  of  the  threat.

"We  knew  that  the  Viet  Cong  attack  was  caused,  led,  and  directed  by  the
Communist  authorities  in  North  Viet-Nam.  This  was  a  case  of  Communist  ag-
gression, although  the  Communists  made  great  efforts  to  conceal  the  fact,  ag-
gression against  a  friendly  people  with  whom  the  United  States  had  strong  ties.
There  could  be  little  question  about  our  decision.  We  promptly  agreed  to  step
up  our  military  and  economic  assistance.

"When  we  increased  our  assistance  to  Viet-Nam  we  issued  a  study  of  the  evi-
dence of  Communist  infiltration  into  South  Viet-Nam  and  Communist  direction
of  the  war  against  the  Government  of  South  Viet-Nam.  This  was  necessary,  not
just  out  of  a  'decent  respect  for  the  opinions  of  mankind,'  but  because  of  the
great  and  continuing  Communist  effort  to  portray  the  Viet  Cong  as  an
indigenuous  and  legitimate  popular  movement  against  a  repressive  government.
I  think  it  is  worth  noting  in  this  connection  that  the  international  body
specifically  established  in  1954  at  the  Geneva  conference  to  oversee  and  keep
the  peace  in  Viet-Nam — the  International  Control  Commission,  composed  of
India,  Canada,  and  Poland — has  confirmed  the  fact  that  Communist  North  Viet-
Nam  is  engaged  in  an  attempt  to  overthrow  by  violence  the  Government  of
South  Viet-Nam.  After  sifting  the  evidence  for  almost  a  year,  the  International
Control  Commission  in  June  of  1962  issued  a  special  report  which  makes  it
clear  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  the  instruments  of  Hanoi's  deliberate  attack  on
South  Viet-Nam.

"If  we  were  losing  the  war  in  the  fall  of  1961  and  early  1962,  where  are  we
today?  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  tide  has  now  turned  and  that  the  Gov-
ernment of  Viet-Nam  is  with  our  help  slowly  overcoming  the  Communist  guer-
rillas. No  more  provincial  capitals  have  been  taken,  the  Communists  have  not
'liberated'  any  part  of  South  Viet-Nam,  and  Saigon  is  once  again  exporting
rice.  In  fact  we  anticipate  that  Saigon  will  export  300,000  tons  of  rice  this  year.

* *  *

The  'Why,'  of  Our  Involvement

"I  have  described  the  American  role  in  the  Vietnamese  war — the  'how'  of  our
involvement.  I  would  like  to  close  by  indicating  something  of  the  'why.'

"You  can  think  of  Viet-Nam  as  a  piece  of  strategic  real  estate.  It  is  on  the
corner  of  mainland  Asia,  across  the  east-west  trade  routes,  and  in  a  position
that  would  make  it  an  excellent  base  for  further  Communist  aggression  against
the  rest  of  free  Asia.

"You  can  think  of  our  involvement  in  South  Viet-Nam  in  terms  of  a  moral
commitment.  The  Vietnamese,  on  the  frontier  of  the  free  world,  are  fighting
not  just  for  themselves  but  for  all  men  who  wish  to  remain  free.  I  believe  the
300-500  casualties  they  suffer  each  week  is  a  precious  contribution  to  the
security  of  the  whole  free  world.

"You  can  think  of  the  American  role  in  South  Viet-Nam  in  terms  of  our
SEATO  [Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organization]  commitment.  You  can  regard  ii
as  a  fulfillment  of  the  implied  obligation  which  we  as  a  nation  undertook  when
we  said  at  the  Geneva  Conference  in  1954  that  we  would  regard  any  renewal
of  aggression  in  violation  of  the  Geneva  Agreements  with  grave  concern  and  as
seriously  threatening  international  peace  and  security.

"You  can  think  of  South  Viet-Nam  as  a  test  case;  there  is  good  reason  to
believe  that  this  is  the  view  of  the  Communist  bloc.  In  Viet-Nam  we  are  deter-


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  827

mining  whether  or  not  the  free  world  can  help  a  nation  defend  itself  against
the  subversion  and  guerrilla  warfare  which  make  up  the  'war  of  national  libera-
tion' tactics.  1  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  we  have  largely  stopped  the  Communist
thrust  all  around  the  world  in  conventional  and  nuclear  terms.  We  are  now
confronted  by  a  new  kind  of  threat,  and  we  have  to  a  degree  invented  a  new
kind  of  response  to  meet  it.  All  of  the  underdeveloped  nations  of  the  world  are
watching  the  event.  If  South  Viet-Nam  falls,  their  will  to  resist  this  kind  of  ag-
gression will  be  weakened  and  the  whole  fabric  of  free-world  strength  and
determination  damaged  thereby.

"Perhaps,  in  more  human  terms,  you  may  want  to  think  of  our  support  to
Viet-Nam  as  American  help  to  the  nearly  1  million  Vietnamese  refugees  who
fled  North  Viet-Nam  in  1954  and  1955  to  avoid  living  under  a  Communist
regime."

37.  President  Kennedy's  TV  Interview,  September  25,  1963,  Department  of
State  Bulletin,  September  30,  1963,  p.  499:

*  *  *

Mr.  Cronkite:  "Hasn't  every  indication  from  Saigon  been  that  President
Diem  has  no  intention  of  changing  his  pattern?"

President  Kennedy:  "If  he  does  not  change  it,  of  course,  that  is  his  decision.
He  has  been  there  10  years,  and,  as  I  say,  he  has  carried  this  burden  when  he
has  been  counted  out  on  a  number  of  occasions.

"Our  best  judgment  is  that  he  can't  be  successful  on  this  basis.  We  hope  that
he  comes  to  see  that;  but  in  the  final  analysis  it  is  the  people  and  the  Govern-
ment itself  who  have  to  win  or  lose  this  struggle.  All  we  can  do  is  help,  and  we
are  making  it  very  clear.  But  I  don't  agree  with  those  who  say  we  should  with-
draw. That  would  be  a  great  mistake.  I  know  people  don't  like  Americans  to  be
engaged  in  this  kind  of  an  effort.  Forty-seven  Americans  have  been  killed  in
combat  with  the  enemy,  but  this  is  a  very  important  struggle  even  though  it  is
far  away.

"We  took  all  this — made  this  effort  to  defend  Europe.  Now  Europe  is  quite
secure.  We  also  have  to  participate — we  may  not  like  it — in  the  defense  of
Asia."

Hs  ^

38.  President  Kennedy's  NBC  Interview,  September  9,  1963,  Department  of
State  Bulletin,  September  30,  1963,  p.  499:

*  *  *

Mr.  Huntley:  "Mr.  President,  in  respect  to  our  difficulties  in  South  Viet-Nam,
could  it  be  that  our  Government  tends  occasionally  to  get  locked  into  a  policy
or  an  attitude  and  then  finds  it  difficult  to  alter  or  shift  that  policy?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Yes,  that  is  true.  I  think  in  the  case  of  South  Viet-
Nam  we  have  been  dealing  with  a  Government  which  is  in  control,  has  been  in
control  for  10  years.  In  addition,  we  have  felt  for  the  last  2  years  that  the  strug-
gle against  the  Communists  was  going  better.  Since  June,  however — the  diffi-
culties with  the  Buddhists — we  have  been  concerned  about  a  deterioration,  par-
ticularly in  the  Saigon  area,  which  hasn't  been  felt  greatly  in  the  outlying  areas
but  may  spread.  So  we  are  faced  with  the  problem  of  wanting  to  protect  the  area
against  the  Communists.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  to  deal  with  the  Govern-
ment there.  That  produces  a  kind  of  ambivalence  in  our  efforts  which  exposes
us  to  some  criticism.  We  are  using  our  influence  to  persuade  the  Government


828 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  II

there  to  take  those  steps  which  will  win  back  support.  That  takes  some  time,  and
we  must  be  patient,  we  must  persist."

Mr.  Huntley:  "Are  we  likely  to  reduce  our  aid  to  South  Viet-Nam  now?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "I  don't  think  we  think  that  would  be  helpful  at  this
time.  If  you  reduce  your  aid,  it  is  possible  you  could  have  some  effect  upon  the
government  structure  there.  On  the  other  hand,  you  might  have  a  situation
which  could  bring  about  a  collapse.  Strongly  in  our  mind  is  what  happened  in
the  case  of  China  at  the  end  of  World  War  II,  where  China  was  lost — a  weak
government  became  increasingly  unable  to  control  events.  We  don't  want  that."

Mr.  Brinkley:  "Mr.  President,  have  you  had  any  reason  to  doubt  this  so-
called  'domino  theory,'  that  if  South  Viet-Nam  falls,  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia
will  go  behind  it?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "No,  I  believe  it.  I  believe  it.  I  think  that  the  struggle
is  close  enough.  China  is  so  large,  looms  so  high  just  beyond  the  frontiers,  that
if  South  Viet-Nam  went,  it  would  not  only  give  them  an  improved  geographic
position  for  a  guerrilla  assault  on  Malaya  but  would  also  give  the  impression
that  the  wave  of  the  future  in  Southeast  Asia  was  China  and  the  Communists.
So  I  believe  it."

*  *  *

39.  President  Kennedy's  News  Conference,  September  12,  1963,  Public  Papers
of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1963,  p.  673:

Q.  "Mr,  President,  in  view  of  the  prevailing  confusion,  is  it  possible  to  state
today  just  what  this  Government's  policy  is  toward  the  current  government  of
South  Viet-Nam?

THE  PRESIDENT:  "I  think  I  have  stated  what  my  view  is  and  we  are  for
those  things  and  those  policies  which  help  win  the  war  there.  That  is  why  some
25,000  Americans  have  traveled  10,000  miles  to  participate  in  that  struggle.
What  helps  to  win  the  war,  we  support;  what  interferes  with  the  war  effort,  we
oppose.  I  have  already  made  it  clear  that  any  action  by  either  government
which  may  handicap  the  winning  of  the  war  is  inconsistent  with  our  policy  or
our  objectives.  This  is  the  test  which  I  think  every  agency  and  oflRcial  of  the
United  States  Government  must  apply  to  all  of  our  actions,  and  we  shall  be
applying  that  test  in  various  ways  in  the  coming  months,  although  I  do  not  think
it  desirable  to  state  all  of  our  views  at  this  time.  I  think  they  will  be  made  more
clear  as  time  goes  on.

"But  we  have  a  very  simple  policy  in  that  area,  I  think.  In  some  ways  I  think
the  Vietnamese  people  and  ourselves  agree;  we  want  the  war  to  be  won,  the
Communists  to  be  contained,  and  the  Americans  to  go  home.  That  is  our  policy.
I  am  sure  it  is  the  policy  of  the  people  of  Viet-Nam.  But  we  are  not  there  to  see
a  war  lost,  and  we  will  follow  the  policy  which  I  have  indicated  today  of  ad-
vancing those  causes  and  issues  which  help  win  the  war."

*  *  *

40.  President  Kennedy's  Remarks  at  the  Yellowstone  County  Fairgrounds,
Billings,  Montana,  September  25,  1963,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,
Kennedy,  1963,  p.  724:

*  *  *

".  .  .  Countries  which  we  had  never  heard  of  before,  Viet-Nam,  Laos,  the
Congo,  and  the  others,  countries  which  were  distant  names  in  our  geographies,


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  829

have  now  become  matters  of  the  greatest  concern,  where  the  interests  of  the
United  States  are  vitally  involved,  and  where  we  have,  for  example,  in  Viet-
Nam,  over  25,000  of  your  sons  and  brothers  bearing  arms.

"So  this  is  a  difficult  and  complex  world.  I  am  sure  a  citizen  in  this  community
and  m  this  country  must  wonder  what  we  are  doing.  I  think  what  we  are  trying
to  do  is  comparatively  simple,  and  that  is,  with  our  own  power  and  might — and
the  only  country  which  has  that  power  and  might — and,  I  believe,  the  long-
range  determination  and  perseverance,  we  are  trying  to  assist  the  hundred-odd
countries  which  are  now  independent  to  maintain  their  independence.  We  do
that  not  only  because  we  wish  them  to  be  free,  but  because  it  serves  our
own  national  interest.  As  long  as  there  are  all  of  these  countries  separate,  free,
and  independent,  and  not  part  of  one  great  monolithic  bloc  which  threatens
us,  so  long  we  are  free  and  independent.

'"When  it  appeared  at  the  end  of  the  fifties  that  there  would  be  over  a  billion
people  organized  in  the  Communist  movement.  Russia  and  China  and  Eastern
Europe  working  closely  together,  that  represented  a  danger  to  us  which  could
turn  the  balance  of  power  against  us.  As  there  has  been  a  division  within  the
bloc,  as  there  has  been  a  fragmentation  behind  the  Iron  Curtain,  as  the  long-
range  interests  of  geography  and  nationalism  play  a  part  even  behind  the  Iron
Curtain,  as  it  does  on  this  side  of  the  Iron  Curtain,  we  have  made  progress,  not
toward  an  easier  existence,  but,  I  think,  toward  a  chance  for  a  more  secure  exis-
tence.

"In  1961  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union  came  face  to  face  over  Ber-
lin. The  United  States  called  up  more  than  150,000  troops.  At  the  meeting  in
Vienna,  of  1961,  Mr.  Khrushchev  informed  me  that  he  was  going  to  sign  a
peace  treaty  in  Berlin  b\  the  end  of  the  year,  and  if  the  United  States  con-
tinued to  supply  its  forces  in  Berlin  it  would  be  regarded  as  a  possible  act  of
war.  In  1962  we  came  face  to  face  with  the  same  great  challenge  in  Cuba,  in
October.  So  we  have  lived,  even  in  the  short  space  of  the  last  3  years,  on  two
occasions  when  we  were  threatened  with  a  direct  military  confrontation.  We
wish  to  lessen  that  prospect.  We  know  that  the  struggle  between  the  Com-
munist system  and  ourselves  will  go  on.  We  know  it  will  go  on  in  economics,
in  productivity,  in  ideology,  in  Latin  America  and  Africa,  in  the  Middle  East
and  Asia."


41.  President  Kennedy's  Remarks  at  the  High  School  Memorial  Stadium,
Great  Falls.  Montana,  September  26,  1963,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,
Kennedy,  1963,  p.  727:

"I  know  that  there  are  manv  of  you  who  sit  here  and  wonder  what  it  is  that
causes  the  United  States  to  go  so  far  away,  that  causes  you  to  wonder  why  so
manv  of  your  sons  should  be  stationed  so  far  away  from  our  own  territory,  who
wonder  vvhv  it  is  since  1945  that  the  United  States  has  assisted  so  many  coun-
tries. You  must  wonder  when  it  is  all  going  to  end  and  when  we  can  come
back  home.  Well,  it  isn't  going  to  end,  and  this  generation  of  Americans  has  to
make  up  its  mind  for  our  security  and  for  our  peace,  because  what  happens  in
Europe  or  Latin  America  or  Africa  or  Asia  direcdy  affects  the  security  of  the
people  who  live  in  this  city,  and  particularly  those  who  are  coming  after.

"I  make  no  apologies  for  the  effort  that  we  make  to  assist  these  other  coun-
tries to  maintain  their  freedom,  because  I  know  full  well  that  every  time  a
countrv,  regardless  of  how  far  away  it  may  be  from  our  own  borders — every


830 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  II

time  that  country  passes  behind  the  Iron  Curtain  the  security  of  the  United
States  is  thereby  endangered.  So  all  those  who  suggest  we  withdraw,  all  those
who  suggest  we  should  no  longer  ship  our  surplus  food  abroad  or  assist  other
countries,  I  could  not  disagree  with  them  more.  This  country  is  stronger  now
than  it  has  ever  been.  Our  chances  for  peace  are  stronger  than  they  have  been
in  years.  The  nuclear  test  ban  which  was  strongly  led  in  the  Senate  of  the  United
States  by  Mike  Mansfield  and  Lee  Metcalf  is,  I  believe,  a  step  toward  peace  and
a  step  toward  security,  and  gives  us  an  additional  chance  that  all  of  the  weapons
of  Montana  will  never  be  fired.  That  is  the  object  of  our  policy.

'So  we  need  your  support.  These  are  complicated  problems  which  face  a
citizenry.  Most  of  us  grew  up  in  a  relative  period  of  isolation,  and  neutrality,
and  unalignment  which  was  our  policy  from  the  time  of  George  Washington
to  the  Second  World  War,  and  suddenly,  in  an  act  almost  unknown  in  the  history
of  the  world,  we  were  shoved  onto  the  center  of  the  stage.  We  are  the  keystone
in  the  arch  of  freedom.  If  the  United  States  were  to  falter,  the  whole  world,  in
my  opinion,  would  inevitably  begin  to  move  toward  the  Communist  bloc.

'*It  is  the  United  States,  this  country,  your  country,  which  in  15  to  18  years
has  almost  singlehandedly  protected  the  freedom  of  dozens  of  countries  who,  in
turn,  by  being  free,  protect  our  freedom.  So  when  you  ask  why  are  we  in  Laos,
or  Viet-Nam,  or  the  Congo,  or  why  do  we  support  the  Alliance  for  Progress  in
Latin  America,  we  do  so  because  we  believe  that  our  freedom  is  tied  up  with
theirs,  and  if  we  can  develop  a  world  in  which  all  the  countries  are  free,  then  the
threat  to  the  security  of  the  United  States  is  lessened.  So  we  have  to  stay  at  it.
We  must  not  be  fatigued."

*  *  *

42.  U.S.  Policy  on  Viet-Nam:  White  House  Statement,  October  2,  1963,
Department  of  State  Bulletin,  October  21 ,  1963,  p.  623:

"1.  The  security  of  South  Viet-Nam  is  a  major  interest  of  the  United  States
as  other  free  nations.  We  will  adhere  to  our  policy  of  working  with  the  people
and  Government  of  South  Viet-Nam  to  deny  this  country  to  communism  and  to
suppress  the  externally  stimulated  and  supported  insurgency  of  the  Viet  Cong  as
promptly  as  possible.  Effective  performance  in  this  undertaking  is  the  central
objective  of  our  policy  in  South  Viet-Nam."

*  *  *

"5.  It  remains  the  policy  of  the  United  States  in  South  Viet-Nam  as  in  other
parts  of  the  world,  to  support  the  efi'orts  of  the  people  of  that  country  to  defeat
aggression  and  to  build  a  peaceful  and  free  society."

*  *  *

43.  President  Kennedy's  Remarks  Prepared  for  Delivery  at  the  Trade  Mart  in
Dallas,  November  22,  1963,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  Kennedy,  1963,
p.  890:

*  *  *

"I  want  to  discuss  with  you  today  the  status  of  our  strength  and  our  security
because  this  question  clearly  calls  for  the  most  responsible  qualities  of  leader-
ship and  the  most  enlightened  products  of  scholarship.  For  this  Nation's  strength
and  security  are  not  easily  or  cheaply  obtained,  nor  are  they  quickly  and  simply


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  831

explained.  There  are  many  kinds  of  strength  and  no  one  kind  will  suffice.  Over-
whelming nuclear  strength  cannot  stop  a  guerrilla  war.  Formal  pacts  of  alliance
cannot  stop  internal  subversion.  Displays  of  material  wealth  cannot  stop  the
disillusionment  of  diplomats  subjected  to  discrimination.

"Above  all,  words  alone  are  not  enough.  The  United  States  is  a  peaceful  na-
tion. And  where  our  strength  and  determination  are  clear,  our  words  need
merely  to  convey  conviction,  not  belligerence.  If  we  are  strong,  our  strength
will  speak  for  itself.  If  we  are  weak,  words  will  be  of  no  help.

"I  realize  that  this  Nation  often  tends  to  identify  turning-points  in  world  af-
fairs with  the  major  addresses  which  preceded  them.  But  it  was  not  the  Monroe
Doctrine  that  kept  all  Europe  away  from  this  hemisphere — it  was  the  strength
of  the  British  fleet  and  the  width  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  It  was  not  General
Marshall's  speech  at  Harvard  which  kept  communism  out  of  Western  Europe
— it  was  the  strength  and  stability  made  possible  by  our  military  and  economic
assistance.

"In  this  administration  also  it  has  been  necessary  at  times  to  issue  specific
warnings — warnings  that  we  could  not  stand  by  and  watch  the  Communists
conquer  Laos  by  force,  or  intervene  in  the  Congo,  or  swallow  West  Berlin,  or
maintain  offensive  missiles  on  Cuba.  But  while  our  goals  were  at  least  temporar-
ily obtained  in  these  and  other  instances,  our  successful  defense  of  freedom  was
due  not  to  the  words  we  used,  but  to  the  strength  we  stood  ready  to  use  on  be-
half of  the  principles  we  stand  ready  to  defend."

* *  *

"But  American  military  might  should  not  and  need  not  stand  alone  against
the  ambitions  of  international  communism.  Our  security  and  strength,  in  the
last  analysis,  directly  depend  on  the  security  and  strength  of  others,  and  that  is
why  our  military  and  economic  assistance  plays  such  a  key  role  in  enabling
those  who  live  on  the  periphery  of  the  Communist  world  to  maintain  their  in-
dependence of  choice.  Our  assistance  to  these  nations  can  be  painful,  risky  and
costly,  as  is  true  in  Southeast  Asia  today.  But  we  dare  not  weary  of  the  task.  For
our  assistance  makes  possible  the  stationing  of  3-5  million  allied  troops  along
the  Communist  frontier  at  one-tenth  the  cost  of  maintaining  a  comparable
number  of  American  soldiers.  A  successful  Communist  breakthrough  in  these
areas,  necessitating  direct  United  States  intervention,  would  cost  us  several  times
as  much  as  our  entire  foreign  aid  program,  and  might  cost  us  heavily  in  Ameri-
can lives  as  well."


832


Glossary


AAA Antiaircraft  Artillery
ACR Armored  Cavalry  Regiment
ABM Antiballistic  Missile
ABN  Airborne

ADP Automatic  Data  Processing
AFB Air  Force  Base
AID Agency  for  International  Develop-
ment

AIROPS Air  Operations
AM  Airmobile
AMB  Ambassador
ANG Air  National  Guard
APB Self-propelled  barracks  ship
ARL Landing  craft  repair  ship
ARVN Army  of  the  Republic  of  [South]
Vietnam

ASA U.S.  Army  Security  Agency
ASAP As  soon  as  possible
ASD Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense
BAR Browning  automatic  rifle
BDE  Brigade

BLT Battalion  Landing  Team

BN  Battalion

BOB Bureau  of  the  Budget

B-52 U.S.  heavy  bomber

B-57 U.S.  medium  bomber

CAP Combined  Action  Platoon

CAS Saigon  Office  of  the  U.S.  Central

Intelligence  Agency
CDC Combat  Development  Command
CG Civil  Guard
CHICOM Chinese  Communist
CHMAAG Chief, Military  Assistance

Advisory  Group
CI  Counterinsurgency
CIA Central  Intelligence  Agency
CIDG Civilian Irregular  Detachment
Group

CINCPAC Commander  in  Chief,  Pa-
cific

CIP Counterinsurgency  Plan

CNO  VNN Chief  of  Naval  Operations,

\'ietnamese  Navy
CJCS Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
CMD Capital  Military  District
COMUS U.S.  Commander
COMUSMACV Commander,  U.S.  Mili-
tary Assistance  Com-
mand, Vietnam


CONARC Continental  Army  Command
CONUS Continental  United  States
CORDS Civil  Operations  and  Revolu-
tionary Development  Support
[pacification]
COS Chief  of  Station,  CIA
CPR Chinese  Peoples  Republic
CPSVN Comprehensive  Plan  for  South

Vietnam
CTZ Corps  tactical  zone
CY Calendar  year
DCM Deputy  Chief  of  Mission
DCPG Defense Command  Planning
Group

DEPTEL [State]  Department  telegram
DESOTO Destroyer  patrols  off  North
Vietnam

DIA Defense  Intelligence  Agency
DMZ Demilitarized Zone  separating

North  and  South  Vietnam
DOD Department  of  Defense
DPM Draft  Presidential  Memorandum

[from  the  Secretary  of  Defense]
DRV Democratic  Republic  of  [North]

Vietnam

DULTE Cable  identifier,  from  Secretary

of  State  Dulles  to  addressee
ECM Electronic  Countermeasures
EXDIS Exclusive  (high  level)  distribu-
tion

FAL  and  FAR Royal  Armed  Forces  of
Laos

FARMGATE  Clandestine  U.S.  Air
Force  unit  in  Vietnam,
1964

FE  and  FEA Bureau  of  Far  Eastern
Affairs  in  the  State  De-
partment
FEC French  Expeditionary  Corps
FLAMING  DART Code name  of

bombing  opera-
tions, in  reprisal  for
attacks  on  U.S.
forces

FOA Foreign Operations  Administra-
tion

FWMA Free  World  Military  Assistance
FWMAF Free  World  Military  Assist-
ance Force


Glossary  833


FY Fiscal  Year

FYI For  your  information

GRC Government  of  the  Republic  of

China  (Nationalist  China)
GVN Government  of  [South]  Vietnam
G-3 U.S.  Army  General  Staff,  Branch

for  Plans  and  Operations
HES Hamlet  Evaluation  System
HNC High  National  Council
Hop  Tac Program  to  clear  and  hold

land  around  Saigon,  1964
IBP International  Balance  of  Payments
ICA International  Cooperation  Admin-
istration

ICC International  Control  Commission
IDA Institute  for  Defense  Analyses
IMCSH Inter-ministerial  Committee  for

Strategic  Hamlets
INR Bureau  of  Intelligence and  Re-
search in  the  Department  of  State
ISA Office  of  International  Security  Af-
fairs in  the  Department  of  Defense

I  Corps Northern military region  of

South  Vietnam

II  Corps Central military region  in

South  Vietnam

III  Corps Military  region  in  South  Viet-

nam surrounding  Saigon

IV  Corps Southern  military  region  in

South  Vietnam
JCS Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
JCSM Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  Memoran-
dum

JGS Vietnamese  Joint  General  Staff

JOC Joint  Operations  Center

Joint  Staff Staff organization for  the

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
JUSPAO Joint  United  States  Public  Af-
fairs Office,  Saigon
J-2 Intelligence  Branch,  U.S.  Army
KANZUS Korean, Australian,  Nevt'

Zealand,  and  U.S.
KIA Killed  in  action
LANTFLT Atlantic  Fleet
LOC Lines  of  communications  (roads,

bridges,  rail)
LST Tank  Landing  Ship
LTC Lt.  Col.

MAAG Military Assistance  Advisory
Group

MAB Marine  Amphibious  Brigade
MAC Military  Assistance  Command
MACCORDS Military  Assistance  Com-
mand,  Civil  Operations
and  Revolutionary  Devel-
opment Support
MAF Marine  Amphibious  Force
MAP Military  Assistance  Program


MAROPS Maritime  Operations
MEB Marine  Expeditionary  Brigade
MEF Marine  Expeditionary  Force
MIA Missing  in  action
MDAP Mutual  Defense  Assistance  Pro-
gram

MOD Minister  of  Defense
MORD Ministry  of  Revolutionary  De-
velopment

MRC  Military  Revolutionary  Commit-
tee

MR5 Highland  Area
NATO North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organiza-
tion

NCO Non-commissioned  officer
NFLSV National  Front  for  the  Libera-
tion of  South  Vietnam
NIE National  Intelligence  Estimate
NLF National  Liberation  Front
NODIS No distribution (beyond  ad-
dressee)

NSA  National  Security  Agency  (special-
izes in  electronic  intelligence,  i.e.
monitoring  radio  communications)

NSAM  National  Security  Action  Mem-
orandum (pronounced  nas-sam;
described  presidential  decisions
under  Kennedy  and  Johnson)

NSC National  Security  Council

NVA North  Vietnamese  Army

NVN North  Vietnam

OB Order  of  battle

OCO Office  of  Civil  Operations  [pacifi-
cation]

O&M Operations  and  Management
Opcon Operations  Control
OPLAN Operations  Plan
Ops  Operations

OSA  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  the
Army

OSD Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense
PACFLT Pacific  Fleet
PACOM Pacific  Command
PAT Political  Action  Team
PAVN People's  Army  of  [North]  Viet-
nam

PBR River  Patrol  Boat
PDJ Plaine  Des  Jarres,  Laos
PF Popular  Forces
PFF Police  Field  Force
PL Pathet  Lao

PNG Provisional  National  Government
POL Petroleum,  oil,  lubricants
POLAD Political  adviser  (usually,  State
Department  representative  as-
signed to a military  com-
mander)

PRV People's  Republic  of  Vietnam


834  Glossary


PSYOP Psychological  Operations
qte  Quote

RAS River  Assault  Squadron
RCT Regimental  Combat  Team
RD Rural  (or  Revolutionary)  Develop-
ment

RECCE  Reconnaissance

Reclama Protest  against  a  cut  in  budget

or  program
RF Regional  Forces
RLAF Royal  Laotian  Air  Force
RLG Royal  Laotian  Government
RLT Regimental  Landing  Team
ROK Republic  of  [South]  Korea
Rolling  Thunder Code  name  for  sus-
tained bombing  of
North  Vietnam

rpt  Repeat

RSSZ Rung  Sat  Special  Zone  (east  of
Saigon)

RT Rolling  Thunder  Program

RTA Royal  Thai  Army

RVN Republic  of  [South]  Vietnam

RVNAF  Republic  of  Vietnam  Air
Force  or  Armed  Forces

RVNF Republic  of  Vietnam  Forces

SA  Systems  Analysis  Office  in  the  De-
partment of  Defense

SAC Strategic  Air  Command

SACSA  Special  Assistant  [to  the  JCS]
for  Counterinsurgency  and  Spe-
cial [covert]  Activities

SAM Surface-to-air  missile

SAR Search  and  Rescue

SDC Self  Defense  Corps

SEA Southeast  Asia

SEACOOR  Southeast  Asia  Coordina-
ting Committee

SEATO  Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organi-
zation

SecDef Secretary  of  Defense

SECTO Cable  identifier,  from  Secretary

of  State  to  addressee
Sitrep Situation  Report
SMM Saigon  Military  Mission
SNIE Special  National  Intelligence  Esti-
mate
SQD  Squadron
STRAF Strategic  Army  Force


SVN South  Vietnam

TAOR Tactical  Area  of  Responsibility

TCS Tactical  Control  System

TEDUL Cable  identifier,  overseas  post

to  Secretary  of  State  Dulles
TERM Temporary  Equipment  Recovery

Mission
TF Task  force

TFS Tactical  Fighter  Squadron
TO&E Table  of  organization  and  equip-
ment (for  a  military  unit)
TOSEC Cable  identifier,  from  overseas

post  to  Secretary  of  State
TRIM Training  Relations  and  Instruc-
tion Mission
TRS Tactical  Reconnaissance  Squadron
34A 1964 operations plan  covering
covert  actions  against  North  Viet-
nam

T-28 U.S.  fighter-bomber
UE Unit  equipment  allowance
UH-1  Helicopter
UK United  Kingdom
USAF U.S.  Air  Force
USARAL U.S.  Army,  Alaska
USAREUR U.S.  Army,  Europe
USASGV U.S.  Army  Support  Group,
Vietnam

USG United  States  Government
USIA U.S.  Information  Agency
USIB U.S.  Intelligence  Board
USIS U.S.  Information  Service
USOM U.S. Operations  Mission  (for

economic  assistance)
VC Viet  Cong
VM Viet  Minh
VN  Vietnam

VNA Vietnamese  National  Army

VNAF  [South]  Vietnamese  Air  Force
or  Armed  Forces

VNQDD  Vietnam  Quocdandang  (pre-
independence,  nationalistic  po-
litical party)

VNSF  [South]  Vietnamese  Special
Forces

VOA Voice  of  America

WESTPAC Western  Pacific  Command

WIA Wounded  in  action


I


I


I-  icon  Paperback  413 — National  Affairs,  Political  Science

THE  SENATOR  GRAVEL  EDITION
THE  PENTAGON  PAPERS
Volume  II

Late  in  June  1971,  when  the  Federal  Government  had  succeeded  in  delay-
ing the  pubHcation  of  even  newspaper  synopses  and  brief  excerpts  from
the  secret  Pentagon  Papers,  Senator  Mike  Gravel  convened  a  special
meeting  of  his  Subcommittee  on  PubHc  Buildings  and  Grounds.  The  Senator
had  recently  received  4,100  pages  of  the  Papers,  and  on  the  night  of
June  29,  at  that  extraordinary  meeting,  he  entered  them  into  the  official
record  of  the  subcommittee.

That  record  is  published  here  for  the  first  time,  in  order  that  the
American  public  can  have  access  to  the  full  story  of  American  involvement
in  Vietnam  from  the  early  1940s  to  March  of  1968.

The  Pentagon  Papers  reveal  the  inner  workings  of  a  bureaucracy,  set
up  to  defend  this  country,  but  now  managing  an  international  empire  by
garrisoi.ing  American  troops  around  the  world.  The  papers  show  that  it  has
created  client  regimes,  made  secret  commitments,  toppled  governments,  and
kept  from  the  American  people  the  true  facts  and  its  real  intentions.

As  the  Senator  states  in  his  introduction,  'Mf  ever  there  was  a  time  for
change,  it  is  now.  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  I  hope  the  past,  as  revealed  in  the
Pentagon  Papers,  will  help  us  make  a  new  beginning,  toward  that  better
America  which  we  all  seek."

Mike  Gravel  was  elected  to  the  United  States  Senate  in  1968  after  serving
two  terms  in  the  Alaska  State  House  of  Representatives,  one  of  them  as
Speaker.  A  native  of  Massachusetts,  Senator  Gravel  moved  to  Alaska  after
his  graduation  from  Columbia  University.  In  the  Senate,  he  is  presently  a
member  of  the  Commitee  of  Interior  and  Insular  Affairs,  the  Public  Works
Committee,  and  the  Joint  Committee  on  Congressional  Operations.


BEACON  PRESS BOSTON  02 1 08


Volume  11  ISBN:  0-8070-0531-2


Paperback  set:  ISBN:  0-8070-0527-4


Individual  volumes  available  for  text  use  at  $5.00


$20.00  per  set


5J-


n
