PresERy'D and DerENDED. 

* 
* 
4 
Lok Ex 

By & FREE MASON NA.. 
For Perjiry's a Blaſt pon the Ming. 
ye laſt Degeneracy of human Kin u. 

The utmoſt Proſtitution of the Soul, 

_ That poi ons every Part, and. damns tl E. BE 

LES 

: « 
I" "I I" FA m —_—— 1 on 
* * * 8 " N —— 2 __ _ ” _ —_ — — 
O 3 7 5 2 1 
. 1 4 C 5 , , 
” 4 
8 4 * 4 
D $ — $ = » » * * £ 
5 " 
- 2 - 
* Y 
. 
* * 3 
: * N - 
4 — * *. - 
* . 4 
* 
8 . 
* 
* 6 * 2 * 
£ * . 
A 
P 1 * 

rinted for T. WAI 

* 
"ns. EE 

* 
4 
1 
+3 
3 
5 
* 
ws, # 
* 1 
. 
R 
* 
* 
2 

x at the Blacks Boy in Pas 

Perjnr 2 Fin ree 5 5 n Dee 

H E Antiquity of Free Maſonry, as an A 
and Science, is unqueſtion'd : And the Ho- 
nour of it, as preſerved in a Society of 
worthy Members and Maſters, and hand- 
ed down from Age to Age to this Day, as it is 
e in itſelf, is alſo as certain and unqueſ⸗ 
tion 

This Part is hiſtorical, and may be inquired into 
and made publick without any Breach of Oaths and 
Engagements, and without Injury to the Perſons or 
Memory of any of the Originals: But the Man- 
ner and Management of this Society, and by what 
Steps it has been thus wonderfully preſery'd, is a 
Secret hid in the Breaſts of the faithful Few a- 
mong whom it has been kept facred to this Day; 
nor is it yet diſcover'd, notwithſtanding the En- 
deavours of a few Traitors i in theſe unhappy Times 
to betray it. | 

A ſhort. Abridgment of its Hiſtory take as follows. 
Ham or Cham, the ſecond Son of NO AA, ha- 
ving a Genius to Architecture, is {aid to have prac- 
tiſed it in the Ante-diluvean World, before the De- 
luge, for he was 90 Years of Age "when the Flood 

came upon the Earth. 8 

Fame tells us, that after the Flood he commu- 
nicated the Knowledge of it to the Great Council 
or Feri upon the Plains of Sbinaar, where it 
was propoſed to build a Tower up to Heaven ; No- 
thing but a complete Maſter of the Science of Ma- 
"Tonry could have conceiv d ſo immenſe an Underta- 
5 | A 2 king: 

v — 

' 
| 
| 
| 
| 
i 

pr ArppLo ag Hefe, 

* 

4 ö The Perjur a 

777 
undertook the Work, and became the Maſter- 
Builder : But the Hiſtory imports, that his Work- 
men growing weary of mounting that ſtupendious 
Stair-caſe, and at laft being divided in Speech, mu- 
tined and left him, and ſo the Work was broken off; 

ut the mighty Ruins of that Fabrick fhews to this 
Day the Skill of the Mafter-Maſon ; the immenſe 
Arches, the vait Pilaſters, the. ſtrong Baſis, which 
are ſtill to be ſen, are 4 laſting TeRimony as well 
to the Greatneſs of the Work as to the Genius of the 

His Grandſon by his Son Canaan was called Si- 
don, whoſe Tribes travelling from Babel Weſt, came 
to the Sea-ſhore of Phenicia, and there (being in- 
ſtructed in the Art of Maſonry by his great An- 
ceſtor) he built the City of Hin, which re- 
mains to this Day the moſt ancient City in the 
World. 8 n . 
Another of his Grandſons was call'd Mixraim, 

* 

* 

and he travell'd into Egypt, where he (being long 
before accepted a Maſon by his great Anceſtor) 
erected a powerful Nation on the Banks of the Ni- 

choſe inimitable Fabricks call'd the Pyramids. 
Under: theſe great Maſters of Maſonry, many o- 
thers-in ſucceeding. Ages. were found, who being re- 

zus. And ſome hundred Years after that, he built | 

ceived as accepted Maſons, ſcattered themſelves a- 
broad, and ſpread the noble Science into leveral Parts 
of the World. 1 5 

Hence Cadmius a Phenician Prince, and one of the 
immediate Succeſſors of Sidon, carried the Art of 

Building from Dre (a City built by the Zidonians) 

into Boetia or Greece, and taught the Grecians the 
firſt Order of Buildings, by whoſe Skill the ſaid 
Greeks were inſtructed and daily improving, built all 

_ thoſe glorious Fabricks which Hiſtory gives us ſuch 

"I 

large Accounts of, and in particular the great Temple 

Hence 

FREE MASON, VS 
Hence Hiram, that great and famous Maſter of 

Art, being alſo a Phenician, became a Maſter Ma- 

_ for, and afted the Part of a Founder in the erefting 
Fhlomon's Temple; where he perform'd ſuch ſurpri- 
ſing Things, and ſo inimitable that he 1s faid to have 

been buried there; the Meaning of which we ſhall 

explain by and bj. e 0 

2 Prom theſe glorious Originals, the Art of Mas» 

onty 8 it ſelf in the World, being ſuppoſed to 
be in its Meridian Glory in the Time of the Roman 

Empire, and in the Reign of Trajan, in whoſe Times. 

thoſe famous Columns, Amphitheatres, Aqueducts, 

and other magnificent Buildings were rais'd, whoſe 

Ruins ate at this Nay the Wonder of the World; 

and ſhew the exquifite Skill and mighty Genius of 

the Free Maſons of thoſe Times. 

With the Fall of the Roman Empire, this glori- 

ous Art (as many others alſo did} ſuffered a fatal 

Blow; and as barbarous Nations over-ran the Em- 

pire, ſo the Art of Maſonry ſunk into Gothiciſms 

and all manner of 7rregularities, and the Buildings of 
the following Ages, became for a long Time rude 
and impolite; the Rules of Art being ſank, and as 
it were forgotten in the World. © Coty 
But under theſe Diſcouragements there were al- 
ways found A Few, Fate fo directing, who affocia- 
ting together, with the utmoſt Secreſy and Fidelity 

\ conſtantly inſtructed one another in the Rules of Art, 

and preferred their Councils from the Eyes of all 

Men; binding themſelves to one another by an in- 

violable Oath of Secreſy, and a Wörd or Token of 

Amity and Fellowſhip; by which Means they have 

preſerv'd the Knowledge of Maſonry in all its moſt 

exquiſite and accompliſh'd Parts, and handed it down 

to us even to this Day. _ 1 TEK 1 

This we call the brief Hiſtory of this Matter, 
and however, the Pryings, Searchings, Gueſſings, and 

Inquiries of buſy Men, have laboured to dive into the 
Wye Of aun ere you iy; che PRNNNe ne 

Tre; n ee 

. NON Free 8 r . 2 
pm ng eter ere ge — ; > EIS 2 

— | artoonee 

s [7 Ih Perjur'd 

the ſame has been carried on and preſerved, and have 
in ſpite of Oaths ſolemnly taken, attempted to be- 
tray and expole it; yet the Secret remains untouch'd 
and the Traytors have only poſed themſelves in 
thoſe Attempts. 
- Having thus brought down the Account of the 
Society of Free Maſons hiſtorically to the preſent 
Age; and mentioned alſo ſame Attempts to find 
out and expoſe the well depoſited Secret: It brings 
me of Courie to fix upon one or two of thoſe particu- 
lar Attempts which are juſt now broke out among us, 
and which contrary to the ExpeCation of the Trai- 
tors, have iſſued no leſs to the Honour of Free Maſon- 
y itſelf, and of the Society which has lately flouriſh'd 
in this City, than to the Infamy and Reproach of the 
ſcandalous Authors, who have been able to do no 
more than juſt to expoſe themſelves, ſhew their Con- 
tempt of all the Obligations as well of Conſcience as 
of Honour; and let the V orld ſee in ſhort that they 
have not been able to come at the Secret itſelf, and 
really know nothing of the Matter 
One of theſe has taken ſome Pains to tell us his 
Name, and has himſelf branded it with a Mark of 
Infamy, as inimitably riduculous as it is wicked; tel- 
livg us at the ſame time, that he is a received and ac- 

cepted Free Maſon, and from thence would infer 

that he knows the whole Secret, and ſo goes on to 
betray (i ; wha Wretch /) All he knows, in ſpite of 
all the Oaths. and Engagements he had entered into 
to the contrary, tho', to his great Diſappointment, all 

he knows amounts to Juſt nothing. 

The others, having been not quite ſo ſhameleſs, have 
concealed their Names, under the weak Pretences of 
having receiy'd their Informations from other Hands, 
but muſt know at the ſame time, that thoſe other 
Hands muſt then have been guilty of the ſame Per- 
ry and Prevarication, and muſt have been equally 
1 raytors to their Truſt, to their Maſters, and to 
their och he ſo that let it come which Way! it will, 
it is much e ſame, a They 

- 
Li 
* . 

"FREE MASON. : 
They have copied from one another, and all their 
Informations intimate a kind of Dialogue between 

the Perſon of a Free Maſon and ſome imaginary In- 

quirer at the Time of that Perſon being admitted in- 
to the Society; which Dialogues, and eſpecially the 

Anſwers are full of ſuch nonſenſical inconſiſtent Things, 

that they are not able to give the Reader the leaſt 
Diverſion or Information, if he had Patience to go 
thro' them. | & 5 
The following is a ſhort Entertainment of like kind 
between one of the Maſters of the Society, and a ju- 
nior Member lately admitted, and who, as appears, 
is one of the weak Bretheren mention d above. 

Maſt. Come hither young Man, pray what do you 
wear that Apron, and theſe white Gloves for ? are 
you a Free Maſon? = | 
Jun. N. B. [Here inſtead of an Anſwer he pro- 
DD — ounces (as he thinks) the SECRET 
WorD, by which he ſuppoſes he ſhould 
1 | paſs for a Member.] 
Mat. N. B. [Here the Maſter pronounces ANO- 
$77 THER WORD, which the Junior does 
not at all underſtand.] | 
Jun. What's that pray? | 
Maſt. A Token by which I underſtand that you 
are only admitted to the firſt Steps of a Free Maſon, 
but are not yet taken into the full Confidence of 
the Society. 
Jun. Ay, have they ſerv'd me fo! I can't believe 
that; I tell you I am an accepted Free Maſon ? 
Maſt. But I tell you, that you are not; but do not 
be angry; after having approy'd your ſelf honeſt, and 
pres the Society ſome Year's Experience of your 
Fidelity, as well as of your Improvement in Know- 
ledge, and the Science of a Maſon, you may at 
length attain to the full Degree of an Accepted Ma- 
ſon, but not yet I aſſure you. 3 
Jun. I tell you, I am all that already. - 

2928 

5 e — — — 2 - — —— — 
r —— - a a 7 bt qr" 2 — * 
* ep P OC Ae et 42 0 Ay I RC 2 2 ads — 9x99 2 — a * — - 
* — 4 22 * « — 
* 1 

hu os —— — OPE. 

* 

|: The No ig 

j 113 f. 1 W better, Friend; if you. were, vou 
would have underſtood what juſt now I ſaid : How- 
ever, are you willing to be farther examin'd ? 

Jun. Ay, ay; Ican anſwer all the Queſtions which 
you bs at onr Ad miſſion. | 

doubt you can't; Bras who was the ent 
Maſter at in the Warld ? 
Jun. He that built the Tower of Babel, 

Maß. Well, but who was he? 

Jun. We were not told his Name. 

Mat. T knew that well enough ; they ROK not 
truſt you with that Secret at firſt. 

Jun. Pray what was his Name? 

Maſt. No, hold there; do you think I have ſo little 
| Regard to my Oath? 

Jun. I thought when I was accepted a ret Ma- 
fon I had a Right to be told every Thing, 

Maft. No, you are miſtaken there; after one and 
Forty Years Tryal of your F idelity, Perhaps you 

may, but not before. 

i Jun. I believe I know every Thing as well as you 
o. 

Maſt. Come then, ler s put you to the Try al a: 

x who was the Head Maſter Maſon in che Build: 

of Solomon's Temple. 

"un, Hiram the great Maſter Maſon of Tyre, of 
the Tribe of Naphtali? 

Maſt. There you are wrong again; Hiram was 2 
Caſter of Braſs, or, if you pleaſe, a Founder; the 
greateſt and beſt that ever was in the Vogue, 
Jun. I fay he was a Free Maſon. 

Muff. Ye, alegorically; as a Man ol one Em- 
ployment may be a Member of a Society that is of 
another; fo a Handicraft in London may be by Pro- 
feſſion a Smith, and by his Freedom F. ompany a 
Tallow Chandler ; and ſo Hiram was a free Accept: 
ed Maſon, and no doubt he underſtood Mal; You'y per- 
feAMly well too; yet his principal Work in Hoey 

Fw, was Caſting of Ws and it was he that 3 
* 

FREE MASON. 9 

the two vaſt Brazen Pillars call d Boaz and Jachir, 

ſuch as never were ſeen before or ſince. 

Jun. Well, but Who was the Head Maſon then; 
who was the Maſter Builder of the Temple? 

Mat. Nay, that's not a Secret for you to, under- 

tand) yet; I tell you it muſt be Matter of Time. 

Ju, But I ſay 12 5 (ſay what you. will) was the 
3 Man, and he built Solomon's Porch too 
" Maſt. Yes; and don't they tell you Han LTP 
buried in the Sanctum Sanctorum? | 

Jun. Yes, and he was buried there too to be fare: 
_ Maſt: Yes, allegorically; but not really; the 
Meaning of the Figure is this: That his Art 
ſink with him, was buried in the exquiſite Work- 
manſhip which he perform'd for the Temple, and 
was never recover'd ſince, for that no ſuch Things 
were ever done after it, in or for any Building in 

the World. 
Jun. Was that the Meaning of it? 

Mast. Les; for you might eaſily know, a dead 
Body to have been buried in the Temple, would 
have polluted the Place, and the Jeus would ne- 
aer have come into it again. 

Jun. There may be ſomething in that indeed ; 
but why was not I told all that before? 

Maſt. I tell you why, . becauſe you bad not 5 
long enough enter d 10 be a fully Accepted Free 
Maſon. 

Fun. And was the Art of Maſonry buried chen 
in Solomon's Temple? 

Maſt. J don't ſay fo ; but Hiram's Att of Foun- 
dry was ſo buried to be ſure; for. all the World 
never made two ſuch maſſive Pillars of Braſs 
as BOAZ, and JACHIN, nor was there ever an wy 
ſuch heard of in the World. 

725 And what became of Maſonry in Egypt at 
the f. ame time? 

Maſt. Why that died with old Mizraim, for 
there was never any Free Maſon | in the 9 that 

r. +: conf 

Gp The Perjur'd * 

could build ſuch Pyramids, and therefore the ol 

Royal Architect is ſaid to be buried under his own 

Pyramids, that is to ſay, his Knowledge and the 
Perfection of the Science died with him. 

Jun. So we have no fully and completely finiſlird 
Artiſt in Maſonry left in the World, have we? 

Maſt. Not in thole particular Branches of Art, 
but in ſome others we have Men that have excell'd 
to a Wonder. 

Jun. Who are they ? 

Maſt. Nay, it is not your Buſineſs to examine 
me; I thought I was examining you; but you 
may go back to the Hiſtory of Maſonry abridg'd 
as above, and anſwer yourſelf. 7 

Jun. Well then, I know nothing belike of Free 

Maſonry. 

Maſt. Not TY indeed; and not enough to do 
the Free Maſons any Harm, that I can aſſure you, 
tho' you break your Oath tomorrow, and tell all 
yo know. 

Jun. I may try that des it ſeems they have 
ehiaced me, why ſhou'd not 1 be even with them ? 

| If they have deluded me, my Oath is void. 

Maſt. 1 don't ſee how you will make out that; 
but it you think ſo, you may do your worſt, there 
is no body in fear of your Reſentment. 

Jun. If they were not afraid, they would not 
make us take ſuch horrid Oaths for Secrecy , but 
I don't value their Oaths of a Farthing, not I. 

Maſt. Not value the Oaths ! Mr. Free Maſon, fay 
you ſo ! What, are you arriv'd to ſuch a Pitch 
that you value "neither God nor Devil! | 

Jun. I don't think either Gop or Devil is any 
thing concern'd in this Caſe, tis an Oath and no 
Oath to me; and I tell you, it they don't uſe me 
very handiomly, Tl] expoſe the whole Craft, 1 
know how to do it very well. MY 

Mast. All you know of it, you mean. 

Jun Yes, all I know of it. SIPs 
. : : | Maſt. 

* 
Ny 
2. 
x — 
* 
* 

Maſt. And that is jut OO at all, I tell you; 

* why you did not ſo much as know. what Trade old 
' Hiram was; or who was the Maſter Builder of 

Babel : You expoſe us! you can expoſe no body but 
your ſelf. 

Jun. Well, well, 1 will let he World ſee what 
Cheats you are, and how you have impos'd upon 
me and all the World: Ik I an't better usd, III 
make my ſelf amends upon ſome of you, I'll war- 
rant you 
Maß. What do you mean by being better usd ? 
Explain yourſelf, pray. | 

Jun. Explain my ſelf; ay, ſo 1 will; I want Mo- 
ney, and I muſt have Money, and by G- d I will 
have Money, or it ſhall be worſe for them. 

Maſt, Well, now you talk like your ſelf; wand 
Mines mußt haue Money and will. have Money / 
What's the Difference, pray, between that and 
D—mn you, Sir, Deliver, or I'll Ge. Pray, 4 

Jun. No, no; I am no 3 and yet 
J tell you, if your damn'd Society do not take care 
of me, I'll take care of them, Fil lay it all open 
by G- d. | 
Here the Dialogue broke off, as well it might ; ; 

Where is your Piſtol 2 

for what could be ſaid further to ſuch a Pretender 

to Free Maſonry, as this? He might have laid a 
Man flat without Square or Level, and cut a Perpen- 

dicular thro' his Head without Rule or Plumb-Lite, 

Upon this very Foundation the Enemies of the 
Free Maſons have proceeded, and theſe are the Men 
we have to do with in this Track: They have ta- 
ken the Oath of a Free Maſon, and 5 with an 
audacious Front broke thro' that Oath, and they 
would come off of it by objecting ag gainff the Man- 
ner of the Oath and the Obligations of it, inſiſting 
that it is not binding upon them, becauſs not admi- 
niſter'd in the ordinary Form of Law or before a 
SIE, and the like. | +: of 810%. 

B 2 "IR Part 

1 * * 
__— — — 

— 
12 
7 — _ 2 — _ 
oy "ELF. 13 4 4 e 2» — 
5 Nane * - 4 2 — . : 
e ” HI GS. NN pet ol 
4 * — at FOO PPP OR Let et be ABS 3, — — 9 cp re 
| "Bk 

22 — 9” > ers 4 — 
SO nn —— —— —— — E-” 
— 3 — 22 — 
e 

| " The ers 

Paar I. 

PH H U Sfar we have ſeen the Fools of the Society 

diſcovering themſelves; Fools we may call them 
without any Injuſtice, that could believe, a Society, 
claiming to hols been eſtabliſh'd ſo many "Ages, and 
whoſe ſecret Depoſit had been preſerv'd fo invio- 
lable under ſo many ſacred Bonds and Ties of Se- 
creſy, could be ſo weak at laſt as to diſcover the 
Arcana of Free Maſonry to every Comer that did 
bur think fit at the Expence of a Trifle to of- 
fer themſelves, and to take a Modern Oath, for 
theſe Men affirm the Oath that they have ta- 
ken to be all Modern, and, as they ſay, form'd of 

yeſterday; and fo it is indeed, compar'd' to the 

ancient Engagements of Free Maſons, which were 
founded upon Principles of Honour, and in Times 

when a ſolemn Parole was of equal, if not ſuperior 

Force with the Conſciences of Men as the warm- 
eſt Imprecations of theſe ſwearing Days: This 
has appeared in the Conſequences, ſeeing we find 
the firmly combin'd Force of the Honourable Soci- 
ety of Free Maſons remaining untouch'd, nay unat- 
tempted, notwithſtanding . the Difference of the 
Bonds: Till theſe wicked Times, when, as we ſee 
in the preſent Example, Men are not to be bound 

by the moſt awful and folemn Oaths, Promiſes and 

Aﬀeverations 3 in the World, 

Now, tho' the Senſe of this Degeneracy of Man- 
kind may have led the Society to draw up ſome 
new and additional Forms of Oaths, by which they 
might hope to ſecure the Fidelity of their Junior 
Members, yet wiſely alſo foreſeeing what might 
happen, and that Men would be found who would 
perhaps break through all thoſe Obligations, and 
ebe lighe of Faith and Honour; they took care 

: llikewiſe 

likewiſe to _ 5 no more of the Secrets 

of the Society _— — Members than they 
thought fit, "Wu — had in their firſt Station given 
ample Proofs of theie Fidelity; and yet the little 
which they knew being opened to them under the 

moſt horrid Imprecations and the moſt ſolemn Oaths, 

they could not break thro that little without brand- | 
ing themſelves. with the groſſeſt Marks of Infamy, 
as well as Folly; the firſt, in the evident Perjury; and 
the laſt, in their ignorantiy ſuppoſing they were Ma- 
ſters of the happy Secret, when indeed they knew 
little of the Matter. 

We have had the inſide of the latter fort turn'd: 
outmoſt in the former Diſcourſe with a Junior ad- 
mitted in Form as above: We ſhall now entertain 
you a little with a more flagrant piece of Treache- 
ry, and Perjury committed, avowed and openly: boaſt- 
ed of in the Teeth of Shame, and in Contempt of 
all that can be call'd Honourable among Men. 
This is fully deſcrib'd in another Dialogue between a 
True Maſon and one Mr. Samuel Prichard ; for he 
has given up his Name to the D.— under the Santti- 
on of a Counter-Oath, even in Print; ſwearing himſelf 
perjur d, which any Man would have believ'd with- 
out a ſecond Oath, and no Man the more for the 
Addition, the Dialogue is as follows. 

Q. Pray, Sir, is your Name Samuel Prichard: 2 
A. Yes, Sir. 
Se Are you the Gine Man who hes publiſſod 
| that er Book call'd the Free Maſon diſſected? 
A. Yes, I am Sir, what have you to ſay to it? 
Q. Nothing at all Sir, only I woader you did not 
give it a better Title. 
A. What Title cou'd have been more to the Pur- 
poſe, and to the Deſign of the Book? 0 
Q. O, a great many; but one in particular. 
. What is that pray; Your Wwe you have had 

5 call d? * 
| 2 Why, | 

ap 

14 The bei 'd 

Q. Why, I wou'd have had you call'd it Mr. Sas 
muel Prichard diſſected, or Mr. Samuel Prichard, 
who calls himſelf a Free Maſon, diſſected. 

A. And why ſo pray? 

Q. Becauſe fe Book would then have anſiver'd the 
Title exactly, for it has the very Inſide of a R 
laid- open in it from the very Title Page to the Word 
Finis, and the Name ſet to it at full length thus, 
(I am the Man) Samuel Prichard. 

A. You are very rude, is this all your Buſineſs 
with me? 

Q. No, no; I have ſeveral Things of Moment to 
talk with you about ; pray why do you call your ſelf 
a Free Maſon? 
A. Becauſe J am fo. 

Q. How do you make it out ? 

A. I am an Accepted Free Maſon, a Member of 
the Free Maſons, and I wear the Leather Apron and 
white: Gloves. y 

Q. How was you accomped; ak by whom? 

A. By a Conftituted Lodge of Accepted Free Maſons, 

Q. Well, but you ſhould change your Stile a little. 

A. How ſhou'd I change it, and why? 

- Q. Why, you ſhou'd lay, 72 was a Free Maſon, not 

AM. 

A. Why am] not ſo now, pray? once a Free Mas 
on, and 342 a Free Maſon. 

Q. Ay, but once a Renegade, and always a Turk, 
once a Traytor, and always a R -:; thoſe Things 
you know are Maxims in all Affairs of this kind, 
you know it well enough. 

A. Lou are very abuſive, you talk as if you had 
an Authority to rail. 

Q. I fay nothing of Mr. Prichard, but what T 
have Mr. Prichard's Authority for, under his Oath 
before a juſtice of Peace. 

A. What have I given under my Hand? 

Q. Nothing but that you are perjur'd, and have 

N ** you me ſworn to conceal; is not that 
| g Writing 

7 ig your ſelf a... . under your own Hand, and 
Have I not a good Authority to call you any thing 
or every thing that you call your ſelf? _ 

A. I fay no ſuch Thing. 

1 G. let us ſee how jeſuit-like you will work 

your ſelf out: Pray, who b apa you to the Society 
to be receiv'd a Free Maſon? 

A. I went of my own accord, it was my own De- 

ſire to be amongſt them. 

Q. Pray for what Purpoſe did you defire it? 

A. That I might ſee into the Myſtery that was 

talked ſo much of. 

Q. Then it was not to attain to any of the Per- 
fections and Improvements of a Society ſo ancient 
and honourable, but MOT to ſatisfy your own Cu- 
rioſit 

A. be Fr there might be ſomething elle in it 
too, I wanted to know what they were a doing as a 
Society, and to be let into the grand Secret, which 
the World talked ſo much of. 

Q. What did you propoſe to your ſelf? 

A. That I might get Money by it. 

Q. How cou'd you ſuppoſe you ſhould get Mo- 
ney by it, you did not deſign to diſcover it, did you? 

A. It may be I did. 

Q. A very honeſt Deſign indeed, Mr. Prichard, 
very honeſt. 

A. As honeſt on my Side as on theirs it may be. 
Q. Well, but when you were receiy d or admitted, 

you took an Oath, did not you? 
A. Yes, yes; I took all the Oaths they offer'd to me. 
Q. And would have taken forty more, I ſuppoſe, 
if they had offered them; for he that breaks an Oath 
1s perjur'd you know, and is no more you'll fay, if 
he takes a Bag full : So here was a premeditated Per- 
jury, and an Oath taken with an Intent to break it. 
A. Well, and what d'ye make of all that?: 
Q. N othing Mr. Prichard, nothing at all only for- 

; Sworn : a little, 5 s all, Mr. Prichard, pray, is that 
he, a true 

- 
Oo | - 
· 4 
= LIT 
1 * 
* 
, 

16 The Periard © 

* * * * — py — - 
4: E. * r % » 
a K | — 
2 „ : LY y 
wy * n n re wt 2 - > ” 
© SD ts — 0 4 — 2 q K 
. ** ” 9 od —_— — — 59 AB 6 

———— ot 
Eat 

— 2 2 — 

mg a eggs 
> 074 $7:2%, 

— 13 

_ 
= = ney 
8 
— . — 2 

e 

N 
— =_ 
— 

R r 
r 2 — — 

— R A 444 nee To * 
23 — 

— 
— * P 
2 - th * 
. re I tne tae ge * r. * — 
wi * 7 * TV 
ren 

» 
————— e 

. - —— 

- 

a true Copy of the Oath you took, which you haye 

printed in your Book? 

A. Yes, don't you ſee I have ſworn to it in the 
firſt Page. u 
Q. You muſt pardon me, Mr. Prichard; J can't 

believe it a jot the more for your new faſhion'd 

Oath: He that will foreſwear once, will forſwear 
twice; bur I think I know the Oath, and if you 
pleaſe i'll ſet it down again for you, that you ma 

have a Voucher; the Oath you took, if you were ad- 

mitted a Free Maſon, was this. 

The Free Maſon's Oath. 

of Almighty God aud this Right Wozſhipful Al⸗ 
bly, that J will Hail and Conceal, - and never 

| I Pereby tolemnly Uow and Swear in the Pzeſence 
em 

Reveal the Secrets oz Secreſy of Paſons oz Paſon⸗ 

ty, that ſhall be revealed unto me; unleſs to a True 
and Lawful Bother, after due Examination, oz in 
a Juſf and Wozſhipful Lodge of Bzothers and Fel- 
lows well met. ; 3 | 
I fkurthermoze Pzomiſe and Uow, that J will not 
TTirite them, Print them, Park them, Carve them, 
v2 Engrave them, oz caule them to be Written, 
Printed, Marked, Carved or Engraved on Wood oz 
'Stone, ſo as the Uiſible Character oꝛ Ampꝛeſſion of a 
Letter may appear, whereby it may be unlawtully ob- 
tain'd. e | 

All this under no leſs Penalty than to have my 
Thꝛoat cut, my Tongue taken from the Rook of my 

Mouth, my Heart pluck d from under my Left Bꝛeaſt, 

them to be buried in the Sands ok the Sea, the 

Tuength ok a Cable-rope from Shoze, where the Tide 
| ebbs and flows twice in 24 Pours, my Body to be 

burnt to Aſhes, my Aſhes to be ſcatter'd upon the Face 
of the Earth, ſo that there ſhall be no moze Remem- 
brance of me among Paſons, = 1 

| _— | So help me God. 

2. Is 

XA MAFON. 
Q. Is this a true Draft of the Oath? | 
A. Yes, yes; tis the fame I Ry and the 
Fame that 1 took. 

Q On purpoſe to break, I perceive. 
. Well, and what then? I tell you, I am not 
| guilty of Perjury for all that. 

Q. Nay, have you not ſworn that you are for- 
ſworn? 

A. Don t tell w of an and being foreſwornʒ 
| did they not anſwer my juſt Demands. then ? 
T tell you they are all Cheats and R—5, I did not 
cheat them. 

Q What Demands? Did they owe you any Thing? ? 
A. Why Money, why did they not give me.fome 
Money . 

N Did they promiſe you any when you entered, | 
or before it? 

A. It's no matter whether they did or no, T ex- 
petted it, and I wanted it, and more than chat, L 
was told 1 might get Money of them, if I was bu: 
once admitted. | 3 

Q. Who told you ſo, was he a Free We or 
done that had any Commiſſion from them to Promiſe 
in their Names? N 

A. No, no; but it was one that underſtood 
Things. | 

Q. What's that to them ? Did they make any Bar- 
gain with you? 

A. What tho' they did not, I told them 4 wants 
ed Money. 

<Q. When did you tell chem ſo, before you took 
the Oath or ſince? 

A. No, not before you may be {i ure, but often e- 

bo. nough ſince. 

And did you threaten to diſcover and break 
88 Oath if they would not give you Mo. ae? 
A. Yes, I did. 
2. And what did they lay to that, did they pe 

mike your any chen? wt I S | 

* 

18 The Perjur'd 

A. They abuſed me, like a Knot of Rs as 
they are, ſet me at Defiance, and bad me do my 

worſt. 

Q. And ſo you have done your worſt, han't you? | 
A. I have done what I told them I would do, I 

have expoſed them. 

Q. What, in your printed Book ? | 
A. Ay, in the Book called the Free Maſon Dif- 

ſected. 

Q. Pray, how then comes the World to have ſuch 
à different Opinion of that extraordinary Piece from 
what you think of it? 

A. What different Opinion have they? 

Q. Why, I can't meet with one Man that has 

read it, but what like my Title much better than 

they do yours, and think it ſhould have been call'd 
not the Free Maſon Diſſected, but Mr. Samuel Prich— 
ard Diſke&ed. _ 

A. I don't believe a Word of it. 

Q. But I can bring you good Witneſs of it, there 
is not one Page in it but what they ay, calls you both 
Knave and Fool. 

A. But how can they make it out ? 

Q. Why firſt they ſay, you own yourſelf perjur , 

nay you have ſworn to it; that calls you K. 

and ſomething worſe: And as for the F.... cer- 
_ tainly he that publiſhes his own Shame may paſs 

for a F. . in any Part of the World. 

A. I own no ſuch thing. 
Q. Well, we will talk farther of that by and Yah | 

but 1 in the mean time _ does all the Diſcovery 

| IT have made amount to? 

A. Nay, you ſay I have diſcover'd nothing. 

Q. Nothing that (as you expected) can do e | 
Free Maſons the Injury you intended. 

A. Then what is all this Noiſe for ? 

Q. Nay nothing, but to ſhew how blind a piece 
of Work you have made of it, and what a Trifle 
"= have perjur'd yourſelf for ? E 
> | A. What 

_ 
a 
- 

— 

FREE MASON 109 
A. What is it you call a Trifle? Han't I laid 
open all the Bottom of the Myſtery, that they 
have cheated the World with ſo long. | 
Qt. Truly, thou haſt laid open neither Bottom or 
Top, nor is there either Head or Tail in all the 
Book; you have only told the World that when 
People come firſt to be admitted into the Societ7 
of Free Maſons, they take an Oath of Secreſy, a 
ſolemn Oath in the Terms as above recited, and as 
it ſeems you have taken it. 

A. Yes, I have ſo. = 
Q. Ay, and have broken it too, as bare fac'd as you 
took it. 

A. So have, make your beſt of it. 

Q. And that after the Oath, they uſed a formal 
Office of Admiſſion to ſerve for a Tryal of the Fi- 
delity of the Junior Members, for that the Society 
not being able to know the Characters and Princi- 
ples of every new Member, did not think fit to com- 
mit the whole Truſt of their Secret depoſit to Novi- 
ces and *Prentices, as you ſee they are call'd, till after 
a ſufficient Probation; ſo that if they prov'd trea- 
cherous, they could diſcover no more than they knew, 
which was nothing ſignificant to the main Affair, 
and nothing by which the grand Secret could be 
expos d. = 

1 A fine Story truly; how do you make it 
our : | 

Q. The Thing makes out itſelf ; let any body 
that has had jo much Patience as to read your Li- 
bel, tell themſelves what they can learn from it of 
the Society's Affairs. K | 

A. Yes, they may learn the whole Secret. 

Q. How can that be, when 'tis plain you don't 
know it yourſelf? They car. only learn that the 
Society have been too wile to truſt you, and that you 
are too ignorant to hurt thghem. 
A. If this was true, then what do yon make all 
this Stir about Perjury for? 3 > 

3 -; ; 

4 % 
3% 

20 The Perjur'd 

Q Why you are not a jot leſs perjur'd for that: 
A Houſe-breaker is no leſs a Thief whenia Houſe 
is fo well ſecur'd that he can't get into it, than 
he would be if he had got in and rob'd It of al 
that was in it. 

A. You make very homely ann 

But they are very juſt. 

A. I tell you the Oath itſelf is void in its own 
Nature. It is an illegal Oath. 

Q. But you allow it is an Oath, and that you 
ſwore it. 

A. Well, and what c can you make now of ſuch an 
Oath as this ? 

Q. I make of it ; nay, what do you make * it? 

A. 1 make nothing at all of it, nor 1s the thing 
ſworn to worth a Farthing. | 

Q. I make ſo much of it, that I would not 
break it, tho' it were of leſs Importance than it is, 
for a thouſand Guineas. 

A. And I would break an hundred ſuch for half 
the Money. | 

Q. If you have fi uch a caſe-harden'd Conſcience 
as that, you have ſo far got the ſtart of me, Mr. 
Prichard, I can't help that. 

A. There's nothing in it, you can't call it an 
Oath. 

Q. Not an Oath ! Was it not intended to be an 
Oath by thoſe that impos'd it ? f 

A. Ay, ay; but they had no Power t. give me 
ber Oath at all, much leſs to impoſe the Form 
of it. 

Q. Very well, and will that bring you off, think 

you? Pray, had they Power to ſtand ſtill and hear 

you ſwear it? And, I hope, you remember you did 
not {wear to them, tho' you ſwore it before them, 
but to Almighty Cod, and his ſacred Name you in- 
vok'd in the "Concluſion to help, or not to help you, 
a you perform'd or did not hg watt what 222 had 
ſworn. 

A. 1 

A.T tell you, I ſwore aching; the Form of the 
Oath being legal, the Matter is illegal alſo, and of 
no Import, I do not lay the leaſt Streſs upon it. 

Q. Unhappy ſhuffling perjur'd Creature! that 
won't do, that Jefuitical Shift will not ſtand thee 
in any Read againſt the ſolid part of an Oath; hear 
the Words again: 4, that is, I Samuel Prichard, o. 
lemniy Swear in he Preſence of Almighty God, Se. 
is not that ſwearing? 

A. Not ſuch ſwearing as to make the Breach of 
the Oath Perjury. | | 

Q. Not Perjury! y 

A. No, not Perjury; and if any Man ſays I 
am perjur d, T'll bring my Action againſt him. 8 

Begin with me then, Sam, for I tell thee to 
thy Face thou art forſworn in the Sight of God 
and Man, 

R 1 dow t care for that, 10 long as it is not ſo 
in the Sight of the Law. 

Q. Thou haſt a hard-mouth'd Soul, Prichard, 
ru true. But that will carry thee but a little 
way in Defence of the Fact. Let us go back to 
the Oath: Did you repeat the Words when you 
took the Oath, or did you only hear them read, 
and, having your Hand upon the Book, fay the 
uſual Amen to them at the End, that is, So help 
me God. 
A. I need not have repeated them, but being of- 
ficiouſly forward I did repeat them aloud, being 
all the while upon my Knees z but all that's no- 
thing, I tell you | 

Q. That is to fay fill, that you don't call this 
Swearing, or call the Words, which are the Form 
of it, an Oath, when 10 read to you, and acknow- 
leqdg' d by you in the Preſence of Almighty God. 
Pray, what do you call Swearing— 
an Oath in your Account ? 

A. You may call is what you will, 1 tell you, 
Q. 

1 value it not, 

and what is 

* 

22 - "The Perjur'd 

Q. I believe you don't indeed; and you may de- 
pend upon it, no body will value any thing you 
hall ſay or ſwear for the future, you ſhall enjoy one 
Part of the Curſe attending your ſwearing Part 
(viz.) that tho your Aſbes may not be ſcatter d, as 
Jo ſay in the Oath, upon the Face of the Earth; 
yet that there ſhall be no more Remembrance of you 
among Maſons, and fo avoid Mr. Free Maſon Prichard, | 
avoid for ever. | 1 
A. Well, but you ſay I ſwore to nothing, what 
then do you make all this a- noiſe about; if I ſwore 
to nothing, I have forſworn nothing, and ſo all is 
well again. 

Q. No, Mr. Prichard, no, no; I do not ſay you 
ſwore to nothing, only I ſay you have been truſted 
with nothing, that is to ſay, nothing of Importance; 
nothing but what you may carry away, and make no 
body much the wiſer; but you are not a Jot the 
leſs dipt in the Perjury, for that: He that does all the 
Miſchief he can, is guilty of all the Miſchief he would 
do, if it was in his power; and 'tis plain by your 
Confeſſion, if you have not been guilty of all the Trea- 
chery to the Society that you deſign'd to be, it has 
not been for want of Will, but for want of Power ; 
you would have murther'd them all upon the fame 
Foot, if it had been in your Power. . 

A. But what is this to the Purpoſe ſtill, if as you a 
fay, I have diſcovered nothing. 1 

Q. Hold there, tho' what you have diſcover'd, or 
indeed, all you know, was not able to do the Free Ma- 
ſons any harm; yet you are foreſworn as much as if 
you had diſcovered ten times as much. 

A. How will you make out that? 

Q. Becauſe you did not ſwear not to diſcover 
Things detrimental] to the Company, for that might 
be to ſwear to conceal that which you did not know, 
but you ſwore not to diſcover what you knew, hg 

the Importancę of it more or leſs. 

A. You 

FREE MASON. 23 
A. Lou take a great deal of Pains to make it Per- 
jury, if you could; I tell you I don't value it, if it 
is Perjury, as long as you can't proſecute me at Law. 
Q. I have nothing to do with the braſen Side of 
your Conſcience, look you to that; I prove it to be 
Perjury, and that's enough to the preſent Caſe. 

A. Lou and I differ about the Word Purjury, per- 
haps, that's all. | | 

Q. I don't think we differ about it at all; pray 
what ſay you of a Man that folemnly promiſes with 

a profeſs'd Deſign to break his Word, and not per- 
form? one BO IE Od eye 6. oO 

A. Say, we ſay he breaks his Word. «rt 

Q. Don't we ſay he is guilty of premeditated Per- 
jury ? M7 | : 
3 We may ſay ſo, but that is not Perjury. | 

Q. Indeed, I think it is, for there is very little 
Difference (if any) between them: a ſolemn Promiſe 
before Witneſs, and mentioning the Preſence of God, 
is no leſs than calling God to witneſs; and an Oath, 
I am ſure, does no more, ſo that they are the ſame 
in the Intent and Meaning of them. 

A. That's carrying Things on to Extremes and 
| Niceties. | | 

Q. But what's all this to you? yours was a plain 
Oath, as plain and as ſtrong as Words and horrid 
Imprecations could make it. | 

A. An Oath to do what? 

Q. To conceal and keep ſecret, and neither direcł- 
ly or indirectly to divulge. 

A. Divulge what ? EEE 

Q. It is really no Matter what, whatever it was 
except it was criminal to conceal it; the divulging 
it was downright Perjury. | 
A. I don't value a hundred ſuch Oaths as that. 

Thus far the unhappy Mr. Prichard has carry d on 
his Defence, with a Stock of Braſs, perfectly agree- 
able to the Nature of the Thing call d Perjury; and 
holds it out that he is not forſworn, only becauſe 

5 he 

ww 

24. "The Perjur'd 

he did not fivear before a lawful Magiſtrate, ad that 
the Breach of his Oath cannot be proſecuted as a meer 
Perjury in the Senſe of the Law, or in a Court of 
Juſtice; let him ſhelter his Conſcience under ſuch a 
Skreen, it may indeed fave his Ears, but 1 never 
ſolve his Character. bd 

Nor will it go down with any honeft Man, that a 
ſolemn Oath, or an Oath folemnly taken between 
Man and Man, or by a Man to a Society of Men 
ſhall not be binding, becauſe the Breach of it is not 
cognifable in Form of Law. 

uſtice and Honeſty will remain unchang'd and the 
ſame, and will have the ſame Influence upon all ho- 
neft and upright Minds; tho' the Penalty were entirely 
taken off from the Breach of the Bond ; for the Ob- 
ligation is not fix'd upon the Form but tis fix d 
in the Soul, and an honeſt Man will do what is ho- 
neſt, from an inherent Principle of Juſtice, tho' there 
were no Laws to bind him, no Power to puniſn him, 
and no Shame or Reproach to attend him. 

Mr. Prichard has taken pains to guild his own Cha- 
rafter with all the flaming Luftre that the D——I 
can aſſiſt him with, and has not only avowedly broken 
the Oath of a Free Maſon, which he acknowledges 
he had taken as above, but has with a Strain above 
all that ever went before him, and m a Manner very 
particular, gone before a Magiſtrate to umſevear what 
he had ſworn to before, and take an Oath that he is 
forſworn; the aarcieft and moſt ſantaſtick Piece of 
Forehead-Morꝶ that ever I met with in the World, 
that a Man (fearing like the Wizard at New England) 
that his Word ſhould not be taken againſt himſelt, 
Has, I fay, made Oath that he has broken his Oath, 
and ſwore that he is foreſworn ; and I doubt by the 
Way is perjur'd in that Oath too, as well as in the 
other. 

What Occaſion there was for ſuch an unprecedent- 
ed Oath as this, I cannot imagine, except to eter- 

nize his Memory, which, as above, was doomed by 
the 

FREE MASON 25 
the 18 of his former Oaths eternally to 
be forgotten. Perhaps indeed he might apprehend 
that a ſingle Affirmation would not go down with 
Mankind in a Caſe ſo flagrant, and therefbre he 
ſets a Bill upon the Door, intimating that here was 
was ſome ſtrange and wonderful Novelty to be ſeen, 
ſuch as was never ſeen or heard of beiore,” viz. a 
Monſter ſwearing himſelf to be a Monſter, a Man 
ſwearing himſelf to be a D-—1. Whether indeed he 
ought to be depended upon for this laſt Oath any 
more than he might for the firſt, I ſhall not deter- 
mine. Perhaps he might act like the Wizard at 
New England, who ſwore he dealt with the Devil 
and had done ſo for ſeveral Years, yet could not 

ain Credit enough with the Jury to get himſelf 
We tho? every body. believ'd he deſerv'd it. 
And what ſhall we call this double Swearing now, 
but a Teſtimony even in favour of Free Maſonry it 
ſelf, viz. that not one Word of this Author's Work 
ought to be depended upon or even believ'd; and in- 

deed, as I have advanced already, there is ſo little 

Conſiſtency in the Relation, and ſuch confounded 
Falſhood in the Relator, that whoever would hang 
a Beaſt upon his Affidavit, ſhould never paſs with 
me for a juſt Judge or a good Juryman. : 

When a Man has once made himſelf infamous 
in the Senſe of the Law, his Evidence is no more 
accepted in a Court of Juſtice. If a Man ſhall up- - 
on Oath declare himſelf to have perjur'd a moſt 
ſolemn Oath, and -own'd that he regards neither 
God or the Devil, ſo that he can but be free from 
that one Evil call d Puniſhment ; he may paſs with 
other Men for what they pleat : but with me ſhall 
always paſs for what the Law calls by a hard Name, 
and cannot deſerve a ſoft one. 

But I am ſtill mightily e to believe one 
Thing in favour of this unhappy Author, and that 
is, that he did not really take the Maſons Oath, 
and if o, then he 1s guilty but of one Perjury; 
| but 

26 5 2 The Perjur'd 

but then to what purpoſe was his ſecond Oath! 
and he muft be brought in committing that Sin for 
the meer ſake of ſinning, which is what wiſe Men 
1ay outſins the evil; if the Devil does Mifchier, 
tis with ſome View, and Deſign of ſtill farther MiF- 
chief: But if he did not take the firft Oath, then 
he forſwore himſelf in the ſecond without any "View 
at all; and for no manner of purpoſe ; and on the 
other hand, if he did take the firſt Oath and' break 
it, his ſecond Oath might well be faid to ftatid 
for nothing, for owning himſelf forſworn already, 
who would believe any thing he ſhould lay. or 
ſwear after it? 4 
In fhort, 'tis all a piece of Nonſenſe and Covi 
Non, and we ſhall ſay no more to it, but ſee a lit- 

tle into the Deſign and Event of it all. . 
I. What his Deſi ign was in this double pre- 
varication. 

II. How far the Event has anfbrer d the Ma- 
lice of the Deſign, or whether it has 
anſwer'd it at all or noz? \ Theſe two 
Enquiries have atforded us another ſhort 

Entertainment upon the Subject by way 
of Dialogue, and which may ſerve to 
diſmiſs this worthy Subject and its Au- 
thor allo from the Stage and Scene of 

Action, and indeed from all Converſation 

among Free Maſons in the World. 99 

| 81 Hildurte 18 as follows. eb; 

> 4 

Q. Pray. Me. Free Maſon PrrGHAkD; let me 

'F ask you another ſhort Queſtion or two upon the 
1 Subject of our laſt Conference, and (if that be poſ- 
bu 7 anſwer me /incerely. - es at” 4 
1 A. I won't promiſe you that. or Ni gan 

| „ indeed, I doubt you | can't; and if you 

N it would be of no great Weight; but I ſhall 
judge 

FREE MASON 27 
judge a little by the Manner of your Anſwers, whe- 
oh they are ſincere or no. | 

A. Well, what is it you would ask me! - 

2. Why, in the ſirſt place, what did you propoſe 
to yourſelf in your late extraordinary Pamphlet cal- 
led Maſonry Diſſected? 

Et Propoſe to my ſelf, what do you mean by 
at 1 | 

Q. The Oucttion is plam; no Afton is 
done by any rational Creature, but it is done for 
ſome End, ſomething is propoſed, as an End in the 
Work: Now i in that Part, either you propoſed ſome 
thing to your ſelf, or you propoſed nothing. 

A. I told you before I propoſed to get 3 

Q. Money; of whom, pray ? 

A. Why, of the Free Maſons. 

$i: + What, after you had /piz your Venom at them; 
alter you had done all the Miſchief you could? you 
nas Py not expett they would give you any thing then, 
elpecially ſeeing, as iz ſeems, they would give you 
none before. | 

A. But I did expect it for all that. 

Q. What, Did you think they would give you 
Money for railing, when they would give you none 
to hold your Tongue? 

A. Well, it were better for them that they had. 

Q. Had what! ? given you Money, aiter you had 
Ak your worſt : J am indeed of Opinion now, that 

your Anſwer is ſincere, it is ſo filly. 
A. But perhaps I had another End in it, that 
may have been anſwer'd effectually, and chat I 
ihan't let you into the Secret of. 

Q. I believe 1 can tell it you, if you won't tell 
it me, and I believe ſo, becauſe there is no room 
for any thing elſe, and that is REVENGE. 

A. Well, if that is the Caſe, han't I good Cauſe? 
Han't 1 Provocation enough ? 

I. No Indeed, L ſee no Provocation ar all: Pray, 
e e we it wherein 

28 

Ra "Dig eee 
—̃ — 22 

P 

* eee n 
* * „ 
e 
n 4 * 

: . — * * 
* 

N ; G <A ” 
— * Apr ni, ern ren, . 

— ——— Ws, 

28 The Perjur d 
wherein have the Free Maſons affronted you, that 
it ſhould raiſe your Spleen ſo much? 

A. Why, they would give me no Men Y_ not 
that ſufficient Provocation ? 

Q. I am perſwaded they gave you as much as 
they promis'd you. 
A. Why they gave me nothing at all. 

Q. Did they give Money to any body elſe ? 

A. I dont inquire into that. 
a .Q But why ſhould you expe it, if no body elſe 

1 

A. It's no matter for that, J will be reveng'd of 
them, they had better have done = 

Q. That's not worth notice: But this brings me 
to ask you another Qneſtion, and that is, are not 
all the Ends you propos'd to your ſelf diſappointed ; 
or to put it another Way, has any one : of your 
ExpeTations been anſwer d? : 
A. Perhaps they have. * 

Q. I doubt not; 1 believe you eannot Pretend 
to it. 

A. Yes, yes, T have got Money by my Bock. 

Q. Poor Scribbler! What little you have got by 
the Copy of your Book is hardly worth being call'd 
getting, and you have bought that Gold (if there was 
any) much too dear. 

A. Well, you have nothing to do with that; I 
have not done with them yet. 

Q. Well, now you are ſincere again, for that's A 
free and full Confeſſion. 
A. Confeſſion of what? 

Q. Why, that you have been diſappointed i in what 
you have done already. 

A. How difappointed ? 

Q. Why, that it has not anſwer'd your End or 
Defign. ' 

A. You don' t know what my End or Def ign 
was. 

2 917 18 not you tell me juſt now, chat it 

was 

: 5.4 2. : : | 
: {3 85 af 3 2 

FREE MASON. 129 

was Revenge, becauſe you could get no | Money of 
them: 
A. Well, it may be it was chat, among other 
Things S 

'Q. And are you not diſappointed now, as effec- 
tually as you were before ? I tell you, you have 
taken wrong Meaſures in both: I think you ſhould 
go to School, to learn the A B Cof a R—— you 
have enough of the Rage, but no Method. 

A. By your Way of OS, I ſuppoſe you are 
able to teach me, 

Lou are witty upon me, it ſeems, for my Ad- 
vice: No, I ſhan't pretend to teach you, but I may 
direct you to them that can. 
A. Who may that be, pray? | 

Q. Wis I think, you may learn of ſome of thoſe 
leſſer R s at Bristol When you wanted Mo- 
ney of the Free Maſons, I wonder you did not threa- - 
ten to burn their Houſes, if they did not ſend it you. 

A. What, do you take me for an Incendiary then? 

Q. Tes; indeed, Ido; for there are other People 
call'd Ineendiaries, belides thoſe that burn Houſes, 
and I think the Crimes bear a ſtrong Analogy. 

A. How can you make that our? 

Q. Why Revenge, tis apparent, is the grand Ap- 
paratus of both; Want of Money is the Spring 
which moves them both; and if you attack by 
Slander, and they by Fire, Gop and the Gallows 
has only prevented it, or elſe the Method had been 
the ſame in both. 

A. What d'ye mean by that? 

Q. Mean! my Meaning is direct, not equivocal 
like yours: Providence has been the Safety of the 
Innocent, and the Gallows has been the Terror of 
the Guilty. - 

A. You are raving fare, pray what eve 1 done 
£2 to you? 
| Q. Nay nothing, Mr. Riker, nothing at all, 

6 55 to ow dh elle; pony 28 _ Tow, wen d 5 
| well 42 

k 
% 
$” ks, * 
r * 4 
FRY 
* ES 

* 3 x 
| - 5 £ : Io TR. * * 
3 2 

30 J) Perjur 4 
us what you would have done, had it not bee Fax 

the Gallows. - Toa: 
EL 5 Why the Gallows; pray? r _ 79 

Q. Becouſe you are ſomething of a Coward, it 

ſeems, and afraid of being hang'd; your Brethren 
of Briftol had more Courage by half than you. 

A, I never intended to bar any Ds 8 Hauſee 

Q. I don't think you did. fa 

A. Why do you talk thus: this ? ze 

Q. Be I tell you, I can never believe chat 
he who, to extort Money unjuſtly and where none 
is due, w1'l attack innocent Men, endeavour to blaſt 
them with Slander and Calumny, and in mere Re- 
venge perjure himſelf to faſten the Dirt of his Re- 
proaches upon them, would ever ſtick at robbing, 
ay or burning their Houſes to bring it to pals, if 
it was not for mere Cowardiſe and Fear of the Gal- 
lows; and now I think I have explained my ſelf. 

A. Explain'd your ſelf in what? 

Q. Why, in ſtating the Affinity between the Bri- 

fol Men and you, and ſaying you were Brethren ? 

A. Very well; and is there no Difference be- 

tween us then ? 

Q. Yes, yes; there's a great deal of Difference 
between you too. 

A. It's well you'll allow me that. 

Q. Nay, nay, don't boaſt of it; there's none in 
the Crime, tho' there's ſome in the Manner. 
A. None inthe Crime | monſtrous ! Why TI han't 
burnt Houſes, nor ſent Letters to threaten any of 
the Free Maſons, have 122 

Q. Perhaps not; I tell you, Fear of the Gal- 

lows has prevented that, but no Thanks to your 

Intention, which, like theirs, was Revenge; a Crime 
in its very Nature, and fruitful of all the other 
Crimes we talk of, as the Boldneſs and Spirit of 
the Criminal guides i it, ſo that (as I ſaid) there 1$ 
no Difference in the Principle at fall. ! 

A. Well, where is the; Difference chen? For AJ 

own we "Es 9 Why 

9 a k * 
> as Sails MES a 

<Q Why th Dilfarench 3s plain.” The 
tine all che Miſchief they chreaten d, and you have 
been able to do no Miſchief at all. They have 
ſhewmn their Villany in Fire, and you only in Balle. 
They have hurt the Man they ointed at, you _ 
Have only grinn'd and ſhe wd Oe” Te "Ru: 8 5 we 

* 
2 : 

* 7 
EF * 4 

able to hurt no body. 29 5 
A. Well then, you ſay T have 3 0 e 3 
50 No, none at all, Me.Prichard, none at all; that 

is to ay; not to a Free) Mafia, en «9 

A. What then do ydu exclaim againſt? what do 

you make ſuchia Noiſe ff? 

Q. Lott W ieked Deſign as not been the” Los, 

"aa you: havedone hurt co | 
A. But whitis my Delfign to you 2 ALS GL IO te 
Q. Yes, yes, as I id before, if 4 Nin attempt 

to robb my Houſe, but® can! get in; or c fire my - 

Hoale, hs can't faſten his Cevtbultibles, he does me 

wrong, tho? he does me no Hart, he injutes me and 

aſſaults ihe, the” he can“ ' do che Miſchief he wop!d #4: 

dd 3 7 108 tit rr 

you pretend, 1 N let Four know you- are not in- 
vulnerable. w_ Wo 

Q. I believe we are; bs to any Tlang you can 
do, and Lam ſore we are, as to all you have done 
yet; ſo as the Tree-Moſon' told” you urs _ may 
do your worſf. 4 

1 „ ” ; Ho 
7 183 _— Fes 7 TH 
© - * * — n a” 
* 

'HU S. the Pets Mike," . Mr. Prichard Par- 
ted; and indeed he had fo little to ſay, that it 
was not worth while to talk any more with him. 
\ They had indeed ſome other Diſputes about the an- 
\ Client Nags | in {pe faſt l of the wor b 

„et 

9 ny 

S 

A. Well, well, if T have! been: di ppeigted, as 0 

ut this % 

% 

4 

© 
- 

». 
» 

8. 

* 
— 
* 

32. 

4 - 
eb * CLE AE + 
2 * 
9 — 
* - 

2 4 VS 
: 4 
= * 2 a 
+ N 3 % ys * F. 

le, Which was worſe in matter of Hiſtor 
, that. it was to no purpoſe to go, bark. To © 

j The Ne. Maſon aged. bim * many free Ma- 
ſons were employ'd in the building of Solomon's Tem- 
* but he nee 8 of it: Hen: he a8 d 

r 

er, re no, Slat at all br Upon cha he 7 51 
him one 0 gr. Halter Raleigb's Hiſtory of the 
World, that there were Soo Maſons and 30000 
Carpenters and Joyners employed in that Work, and 
and -35000/Maſter Maſons or Directors to overſee and 
direct the Work and asked him if he thought the 
Antiquity of Free Maſonry was not alpen, de- 
1 by the learned: Author. 

To all this the ignorant Creature had nothing to 
"+ but to complain that he was not informed of all 
theſe Things when he Was admitted, to which it 
was anſwered, That; if he had continued an Honeſt 
Fee theſe. "Things, and all tlie other A.. 
rana of the Society, which has been communi- 
cated and committed to him, but that he loſt all 
that by turning R — too ſoon; and upon this he 
went ſwearing away and vowing farther Revenge, but 

The z Terje 4 a 
— Fellow was ſo ignorant, ſo N and 0 as 

mes with bim, -or to: fay e of -what | 

75 

55 a 
* 

| 

1 

e unable to do the F res Maſons che leat hurt. 4 

N. 

A — E 1 * 41 
— ” —— 4 o 

. 
- 
„ ; * * 7 
4 , HE; 
— 8 * x , 
„ x % BY — * . 
* » > : : i — mov 
« » k, 

> 

> * 
* A 2 
* ” 
: J F 47 * 
1 

. + 

A6 5 | BRI = "AN] 

4% 5 = jj NX 7 13 * 1 3 
3 : * ; LS. — i ; 2 

# 4 
N | 4 3 22-251 

Ty x 3 4 +. X- TI , 2 1 ? 4 
„ 5 ®. — 5 | 

VTV. > 16 OS 4 AIG 1 dd G1] + 00 Aw. gg t Av »"J_AAXx . fg vo
