ae

pet y f i i i esha
He 5 oer st z 3

:
ei | i

AMS orn rings ts aromas sebee as pont nee Featndny crstnheiginraeae A empcanee 1 ‘ 3 es ¢ y F 1 Teta 5 "1 ake desies
ncialeceemessemanaiaeeen ere Eni

Te PUT etna aN ene RS AT prone et ners eae RR

Presented by
Wm. Horlick, Jr.

9553 |

“ay

‘irst_ published in Madrid some fifty years ago, this narrative
f the travels of a Castilian knight in Europe and the Near Yo
last has been unduly neglected. Tafur was a person of out-
tanding qualities. His experiences at the various courts he
isited would alone make his record noteworthy. But there

; much more. Tafur was deeply interested in traffic and —
ommerce, and his descriptions of some of the great trading
entres of the day are most valuable. Tafur tells us nothing

ut the plain truth, while his shrewdness and dry humour give

> his book a welcome and unusual quality of freshness,

ert
Ray A

+ erage

PERO TAFUR

TRAVELS AND
ADVENTURES
1435-1439

BROADWAY TRAVELLERS

NO i NO ae NO ea NO as Cad

f THE BROADWAY TRAVELLERS
ee EDITED BY SIR E. DENISON ROSS
-) AND EILEEN POWER
TRAVELS AND ADVENTURES
OF PERO TAFUR, 1435-1439
AKBAR AND THE FESUITS
IN TARTARY AND TIBET
oy 5
4

THE TRAVELS OF HUC AND GABET
DON FUAN OF PERSIA
SELECTIONS FROM THE

TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

THE ENGLISH AMERICAN
BY THOMAS GAGE, 1631

LITERARY REMAINS OF
THOMAS AND ANTONY, SHERLEY

THE VOYAGES AND
TRAVELS OF MANDELSLO

THE TRAVELS OF

CLAVIFO AND SCHILTBERGER

THE NEW-FOUND WORLDE OR
ANTARTICKE, BY ANDRE THEVET, 1568

Published by

HARPER & BROTHERS

—
-.
“ib en

: NRE

» &

a 7d ie
si ame ,
/ gets

co A

SECTION FROM A CATALAN MAP OF 1375

(front,

se ipa pe st pest pO a ara pre ge aD32

THE BROADWAY TRAVELLERS

EDITED BY SIR E. DENISON ROSS
AND EILEEN POWER

PERO TAFUR

TRAVELS AND
ADVENTURES

143571439

Translated and Edited with an
Introduction by Malcolm Letts

PUBLISHERS
HARPER & BROTHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON

fe ES NE NEE NENA NG eH aE RSH

Ae pean pene Oy¥ peng 02% ge ng 0% grag OX gp ne 0 gp ng % go ng OY 96.28 OF Be Aa ARO IE IN

First published in 1926

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
BILLING AND SONS, LTD,, GUILDFORD AND ESHER

NOTE AS TO DATES

CrrTAIN dates can be ascertained from Tafur’s narra-
tive, and it may be useful to give them now (Tafur
mentions no dates).

Leaving out the vexed question of the year of the
attack on Gibraltar, as to which see ch. i, note 1, Tafur
must have sailed from Spain towards the end of 1439.

1435, December (after 25th).—Tafur was at Genoa
during the rising against Milan (ch. ii, note 6).

1436, May 17 (Ascension Day).—He sailed from
Venice for the Holy Land (ch. v).

1437, October 29.—He was at Rhodes when the
Grand Master, Antonio de Fluvian, died (ch. xii, note 4).

1437, November 24.—He was at Constantinople
when the Emperor sailed for Europe (ch. xiv, note 2).

1438, May 22 (Ascension Day).—He returned to
WV Gnice..,

1439, January 16.—Having completed his European
travels, Tafur was back in Ferrara on the day when
the Pope and the Emperor departed for Florence
(ch, xxviii, note 1).

PREFACE

In offering this translation of the travels of Pero Tafur
to English readers, I desire to express my sincere
thanks to Miss A. de Alberti, an acknowledged
authority on early Spanish, for much valuable advice -
and assistance, to Miss A. J. Mayes for drawing the
map, and to my wife, who has helped me in many ways.
The Introduction reproduces with additional matter
a leading article written by me for The Times Literary
Supplement last year. I am indebted to the editor
for permission to reprint it.

I have not followed the Spanish editor in the matter
of notes, but have written my own, and for convenience
I have divided the narrative into chapters. Neverthe-
less, my predecessor’s work, particularly his Catdlogo
Biograéfico, running into more than 200 pages, must
not be overlooked by historians and students. This
Catalogo is a veritable “‘ Who’s Who”’ of the period,
and I cannot close my labours without expressing my
unqualified admiration for a most scholarly piece of
work which is too little known.

No complete translation of Tafur has hitherto
appeared in any language, but a German version of
some portions dealing with Germany was published
by Dr. Konrad Habler in 1887 (Zeitschrift fiir allge-
meine Geschichte, vol. iv).

The frontispiece is reproduced by kind permission
from a copy of the original map in the possession of

the Royal Geographical Society.
MALCOLM LETTS.

Lonpon,
Easter, 1926.

Vii

CONTENTS

Note as to Dates. p : ; Vv
PREFACE : . : : vii
INTRODUCTION : I
PROLOGUE . ‘ : : oy 19

CHAPTER ONE

Departure from San Lucar—T he Count of Niebla—T he attack on
Gibraltar—Gibraltar—Return to San Lucar—Cadiz—T he
Barbary Coast — Ceuta — Malaga — Cartagena — The
Balearic Isles—Gulf y Lyons—A great Sorm—The Riviera

—Genoa 21-26

CHAPTER TWO

Genoa—Litigation with certain merchants—San Lorenzo—
Genoese possessions abroad—The inhabitants—A rising—
Sesri Levante — Portovenere — Spezia — Lerici — Pietra-
santa — Leghorn —The vessel taken by the Count of
Modica—Niccolo  Piccinino—Pisa—F lorence—P iftoia—
Bologna—Pope Eugenius—Ferrara—Bills of Exchange—
Venice é : : - é 27-33

CHAPTER THREE

Rome—Pope Gregory and the Faithful—The walls—The Tiber
—Casile of St. Angelo—The Vatican—Old St. Peter’s—
St. Fohn Lateran—Right of Sanduary—S anda Sandorum—
Statue of Marcus <Aurelius—The Colosseum—Imperial
buildings on the Palatine—S. Maria Nuova—S. Croce in
Gerusalemme—S. SilveSiro in Capite—S. Maria Rotonda—

ix

CONTENTS

Trajan’s column—Triumphal arches—8. Maria in Ara Coeli
—8. Maria Maggiore—S8. Prassede—S. Pietro in Vincoli—
S. Anastasio alle Tre Fontane—The miserable condition of
the city—The inhabitants—Wild beasts within the walls 34-43

CHAPTER FOUR

Rome to Viterbo — Perugia — Assisi — Gubbio — Meeting with
Count of Urbino — Rimini — Ravenna — Venice —
Arrangements for the voyage. : : 44-47

CHAPTER FIVE

Departure from V enice—P arenzo—Zara—Ragusa—Corfu—Gulf
of Patras—Isthmus of Corinth—A monastery of Greek
monks—Modone—Island of Cythera—Crete—Rhodes—
The Knights Hospitallers—Arrival at Faffa ‘ 48-53

CHAPTER SIX

Landing at Faffa—Ferusalem—The Holy Sepulchre—The holy
places—Bethlehem—Return to Ferusalem—Fericho—The
Fordan—The pilgrims bathe and one is drowned—Visit to
the Dead Sea—Mount Quarantana—A French squire falls
off the mountain—Trouble with an oficial—Fudgment and
execution—Bethany—Mount Tabor—Tafur penetrates into
the Mosque of Omar—Second visit to the Holy Sepulchre—
Three pilgrims dubbed knights . : : 54-62

CHAPTER SEVEN

Departure for  Cyprus—Rama—JF affa—Beyrout—Colchis—
Cyprus—Nicosia—Mosen Suarez and the late King’s
captivity—Tafur is appointed ambassador to the Sultan of

Egypt , 5 : : ‘ 63-67
x

CONTENTS

CHAPTER EIGHT
PAGES

Departure from Cyprus—Damietta—Weasels and carrier-pigeons
—A narrow escape—T he Nile—Crocodiles—H ippopotami—
Fourney up the Nile to Babylonia (Cairo) —The Mamelukes—
Reception by the Sultan of Egypt—La Matarea—The
Pyramids—Elephants—A girafe—A game of Polo 68-80

CHAPTER NINE

The journey to Mount Sinai—Trade in mummy—The Monastery—
Tafur proposes to visit India—Arrival of a caravan—Nitolo
de’ Conti—He relates the Story of his life—The Red Sea 81-86

-CHAPTER TEN

The return journey from Mount Sinai—WNicolo de’ Conti continues
his relation—Prester Fohn ° . ; 87-95

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Arrival in Cairo—The Story of Pedro de la Randa—<Adminisira-
tion of Fustice—Life in the Streets of Cairo ; g6-I101

CHAPTER TWELVE

Departure from Cairo—Alexandria—The voyage to Cyprus—
Nicosia—A rising—The King’s person—Departure for
Rhodes—A narrow escape from the Turks—A great storm—
Arrival at Rhodes—Death of the Grand Master—Eledion
of his successor 5 ‘ é : 102-109

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Voyage to ConStantinople—Shipwrech—Tafur is almo$ drowned—
A fight between Catalans and Genoese—Two embassies
arrive for the Emperor of the Eas—Chios—Troy—The
Dardanelles—Pera . : : ‘ 110-116
xi

CONTENTS

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
PAGES

ConSantinople—The Emperor Fohn Palaeologus—Tafur’s family
tree—The Story of the Fourth Crusade—Tafur’s reception at
Court—Departure of the Emperor for Europe : TI7-125

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Adrianople—Description of the Grand Turk—Tihe Black Sea—
Arrival at Trebizond . : : - 126-130

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Trebizond—The Usurper—Kaffa—The slave-market—Tafur
purchases three slaves—The Don—The trade in caviare—
The Grand Khan—The Tartars : - 131-137

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Return to ConStantinople—St. Sophia—The Relics—Statue of
Constantine (Fustinian\—A Holy Pidure—The Hippodrome
—The Serpent Column—A Statue called the Fusi—The
Palace—The Library—The miserable condition of the
city—Summary justice—A feint by the Turks—They are
bought off . : , : : 138-148

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Brusa—Pera—Departure from ConSiantinople—Tafur rescues
some Christian slaves and is wounded—Mytilene—S alonica—
A great storm — Ragusa — Ancona— Spalato— A sea
monster : . . : : 149-155

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Parenzo—Return to Venice—The fresh pilerims—Tafur’s goods
are seized and released by order of the Doge—The ceremony
of the Marriage of the Sea—St. Mark’s treasure—The
Emperor Barbarossa and the Pope : : 156-162

x11

CONTENTS

CHAPTER TWENTY
PAGES

Description of Venice—The Gondolas—St. Mark’s—The Cam-
panile—The government—Provisions and trade—Wealth
of the common people—Sanitary arrangements—Rigorous
administration of justice—The Arsenal—A hospital for
Soundlings—Scrupulous regard for money matters—The
possessions abroad “ . ; = 163-172

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 4

Departure from Venice—An engagement between the Venetians
and the Milanese—Ferrara—Pope Eugenius and the Em-
peror of the EaSt—A meeting of the Counci-—The Marquis
Niccolo — Parma — Piacenza — Milan — Duke Filippo
Maria Visconti—T he government ; ee 173-181

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO #

The route for Germany—Crossing the Alps—The St. Gothard
Pass—Basle—The Baths—Schaffhausen—Weashing for
gold — Strassburg — Precautions again? fire— Mainz —

The Rhine—Coblenz— Arrival at Cologne . 182-189

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

Cologne—The Inns—Archbishop Dietrich von Mérs—The
Cathedral—aA miracle in the Chapel of the Three Kings—
The Fair—Fourney down the Rhine—The Duke of Cleves—
Nymegen — Bois -le- duc — Lila — Malines — Brussels—
Duke Philip the Good—A hospitable Abbess : 190-197

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

Bruges—Arras—Ghent—Antwerp . : : 198-204
xii

CONTENTS

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

Louvain — Bois-le-duc — Nymegen — Frankfurt — Cologne —
Mainz—The travellers are kidnapped and released—Tafur
loses his sword—Basle—A tourney at Schaffhausen—Con-
Sance—Ulm—Nordlingen—K aspar Schlickh—Nuremberg—
Prague—The Margrave of Meissen ‘ : 205-212

PAGES

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

Breslaun—The Emperor Albert II—Life at court—The King of
Poland—Breslau in winter. ; ; 213-218

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

Departure from Breslau—Fourney to Vienna—Tafur is attacked
by the way—Vienna—The Empress Elizabeth—Buda—
NeuStadt— Duke Frederick of AuStria—The Carnic Alps—
Friuli—Treviso—Padua : p : 219-224
cd

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

Ferrara—The Pope leaves for Florence—Venice—A great
engineering feat—Vicenza—V erona—F lorence—The Pope
and the Emperor—Pisa—Bologna—V enice : 225-230

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

The homeward journey—Ravenna—Brindisi—The Straits of
Messina—The Sirens—Lipari Islands—Palermo—Syra-

cuse—Mount Etna—Tunis—Sardinia . : 231-234
Nores . 235-252
INDEX . 253-261

XIV

ine

ITT.

VIII.

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

. Section from a Catalan Map of 1375 showing :

. Cyprus
. Jerusalem
. Dead Sea

. Damascus
. Cairo

7. Red Sea

I
2

3 é

4. Mount Sinai. ; ; . Frontispiece
5

6

FACING PAGE

The Holy Sepulchre. From a Book of Hours (before 1480).

British Museum, Egerton M8. 1070, f. 5

An Elephant. From the Pilgrim Book of Gabriel Muffel
of Nuremberg (1465). British Museum, Egerton MS.
1g00, f. 1106 : : : °

. St. Catherine’s Monastery on Mount Sinai. By Gabriel

Muffel, f.1236 .

. 4 Storm at Sea. From the Warwick Pageant, 1383-

1439. British Museum, Cottonian MS., Fulius
E IV. (The Earl of Warwick binds himself, his
lady and son to the mast)

. Venice. By Gabriel Muffel, f. 46 (See Nos. 3 and ‘
VII.

The Emperor Fohn VIII Palaeologus. From Benozzo
Gozzoli’s fresco in the chapel of the Riccardi Palace,
Florence : : .

A Tournament. From a Flemish Calendar of the fifteenth
or early sixteenth century. British Museum, Add. MS.

24098, f. 236
Sketch Map to illustrate the travels

XV

56

78

82

152

168

176

194
234

The Travels and Adventures
of Pero Tafur

INTRODUCTION

Tarur’s travels were first printed in Madrid in 1874,
and were edited by D. Marcos Jiménez de la Espada.
The full title is: Audancas é Viajes de Pero Tafur por
diversas partes del mundo avidos (1435-1439), and the
work appeared as vol. 8 of the Coleccion de Libros
Espanoles raros 6 curiosos. ‘The editor used the only
known manuscript from the library of the Colegio
mayor de S. Bartolomé de Cuenca in Salamanca,
now in the Biblioteca Patrimonial (sala 2%. J. pl. 4).
This appears to be an early 18th century copy of an
earlier manuscript. It is written on 914 folios, and
preserves the spelling, the irregular pun¢tuation, as
well as the turns of speech current in the middle of
the 15th century. It also shows the condition of the
earlier manuscript, indicating by dots the blanks due
to omissions of words or lines, or to damage due to
careless handling or age. It may be inferred that this
earlier manuscript was written in two columns, that
about a third of a page was missing at the top of p. 1,
which contained on one side the title of the book and
half the prologue, and on the other the rest of the
prologue, that a few lines of the text at the beginning
were illegible and that the last page of the manuscript
was missing, since the narrative breaks off abruptly.
Calculating the missing portion by the space given in
Clavijo’s Embassy to the Court of Timour, 1403-1406,
to the return journey from Sicily to Spain, Tafur’s
account of his voyage from Sardinia to the coast of
Spain would not fill more than a page. No further
B

TRAVELS OF “PE ROV@ aw

manuscript has since been discovered, but much
interesting information concerning Tafur himself has
come to light since the original introduction was written.

In an article published in 1902 in the Boletin de la
Real Academia de la Historia (vol. xli, pt. iv) D. Rafael
Ramirez de Arellano has collected facts and documents
which clear up a number of obscurities. He shows
that Tafur was born in Cordova, not in Seville as he
told the Sultan’s chief interpreter at Cairo (see p. 72),
and that he was the son of Juan Diaz Tafur, a native
of Cordova. Heseems to have been born about 1410,
so that he would be 25 years old, more or less, when
he set out on his travels. Returning to Spain in 1439,
Tafur settled down, and some time before 1452 he
married Dofia Juana de Horozco, but the exact date
of the marriage is not known. There was issue of
the marriage, a son, who appears to have predeceased
his father, and three daughters. Dofia Juana’s will,
executed in 1490, is printed in the article above referred
to, and from that document it seems clear that Tafur
died about 1484. He must have spent some time
revising his narrative, and there are several indications
in the document itself that he was busy with it between
1463 and 1457, but he also took a prominent part
in local affairs and in the political disturbances of the
period. He and his son both held office as aldermen
in 1479. The earlier registers of the corporation of
Cordova are not in existence, but Tafur’s name appears
regularly in the records for that year. He seems to
have taken his duties very seriously and did not miss
asinglesession. His name does not appear after 1479,
but the registers are very incomplete. His signature
from a document in the city archives is reproduced
at the end of the article already mentioned, a fine
specimen of charaéter and flourish.

So much for the traveller. Before dealing with his
experiences in Europeand the Near East, and tracing his

2

[NER ODUCT LON

itinerary, it may be well to note the period in which he
was travelling, for he belongs for all practical purposes
to the Middle Ages. When he was abroad the art
of printing was still unknown. ‘The New World was
undiscovered, and scarcely a hint of the new learning
was to be observed even in Italy. It was an age of
disorder and darkness, of warfare and private feuds, of
poverty of mind and expression which it is not now
easy torealize. Itis doubtful if any thought of change
was in men’s minds, although the world was changing:
steadily before their eyes. The Eastern Empire was
rocking to its fall. ‘Tafur had barely reached Con-
stantinople when the Emperor and the Patriarch set
sail upon their last desperate effort to reconcile the
Churches, and obtain men and assistance in the struggle
against the Turk. The history of their undertaking
can be read in Gibbon, their portraits are preserved
in Benozzo Gozzoli’s frescoes in the Riccardi Palace,
and some account of their life and state in Ferrara can
be read in Tafur’s later pages; but the Patriarch found
a grave in Europe, and the Emperor returned to his
decaying empire with empty hands to meet the angry
denunciations of his people. In Europe the Church,
which was just recovering from the Great Schism,
was torn in sunder by the dissensions of the Council
at Basle. The Pope was an exile. Italy was harassed
and at cross-purposes, a prey to petty jealousies and
selfish scheming. As for the Empire, it was in the
greatest state of confusion. ‘The Emperor Sigismund
had died without heirs before T'afur returned to Europe,
and Albert of Hapsburg, his son-in-law, had succeeded
to his dominions. Albert was a man of ability and
character, and he made a great impression on Tafur,
who was his guest at Breslau, but a year later he, too,
was dead, and everything was once more in disorder,
Tafur was prevented, by the plague which was raging,
from visiting France; had he done so he would have

3

TRAVELS AGE PERO TAT UK

found the country in a state of demoralization, and
sadly devastated by the wars of the fourteenth and
early fifteenth centuries. Joan of Arc had been dead
seven years; the English, having been deprived of the
Burgundian alliance, had lost Paris and were shortly
to be driven out of Rouen. In Tafur’s own country
affairs were such that they might well have kept him
at home fighting with the King, his master, The
prosperity and magnificence of the Court of Burgundy
must have stood out in striking contrast to the misery
and unrest elsewhere. Philip the Good was rising to
the apex of his power, and had already laid the founda-
tions of what was later to become the mightiest and
wealthiest monarchy known to the West in the fifteenth
century. Of the splendour of Philip’s Court, and of
the wealth and prosperity of Bruges, Antwerp and
Ghent, there is ample evidence in Tafur’s pages.
Here, indeed, was a land of promise; but elsewhere
the impression left on the reader is one of disorder,
violence, suffering and unrest.

Tafur left Spain in the latter part of 1435 with at
least two squires. His first undertaking was to join
his kinsman, Don Enrique de Guzman, Count of
Niebla, in an attack on the Moorish stronghold of
Gibraltar. The attempt, which was unsuccessful, cost
Don Enrique his life, and the traveller was obliged to
return with the discomfited troops to San Lucar.
Tafur then embarked in a ship—one of a convoy of
three—which was bound for Genoa, and after visiting
Ceuta he sailed for Malaga which was then in the
hands of the Moors. In the Gulf of Lyons a violent
storm arose which carried two of the ships far out to
sea, but Tafur’s vessel managed to keep to its course,
and on Christmas Day 1435 he reached Nice. When
the traveller arrived at Genoa he was thoroughly worn
out. He seems to have had some kind of mystical
experience during the storm, or it may have been the

4.

DN DT RODUCTION

result of sheer terror, but he certainly reached land
in a very devout and chastened frame of mind. He
became involved almost at once in litigation with
certain merchants who refused to honour his bills
of exchange, but he had powerful friends, and the
defaulters were brought to book.

Tafur describes Genoa in considerable detail with
not a few historical touches. He was there during the
rising against the Duke of Milan which took place at
the end of December 1435, but he was able to pass out
in safety. The condottiere Niccolo Piccinino sent
him into Portovenere where he took ship for Leghorn,
passing on by way of Pisa to Florence and Bologna.
Here he found the exiled Pope Eugenius IV, who
blessed him and gave him leave to proceed to the Holy
Land. We next find our traveller at Venice, but as
no pilgrim ships were available until Ascension, Tafur
filled up the interval of waiting by visiting other parts
of Italy.

During Lent he was in Rome, an experience which
must have been something of a penance in itself, for
Rome in 1436 cannot have been a very pleasant place.
The buildings and houses had fallen into decay: the
streets, reduced in some cases to marshes or filled with
rubbish, were hardly passable. A show of greatness
was attempted by means of empty ceremonies and
celebrations, but some idea of the actual condition of
the city may be gathered from the fact that when Tafur
was there wild beasts were breeding in the caves and
waste spaces. The traveller picked his way through
the narrow streets and busied himself with the churches
and relics; he has left us, within limits, an interesting
description of Old St. Peter’s, but as for the antiquities,
irreparable damage had been done, he tells us, by foreign
kings who had sacked the city, and by Pope Gregory
the Great who, seeing that the pilgrims coming to Rome
for the good of their souls had their pious thoughts

5

-

TRAVELS “OF (BPRO ela Ur

disturbed by the sight of so much magnificence, took
upon himself to throw down what time and the hand
of man had spared—a story which impressed Tafur
to such an extent that he repeats it three times.

Tafur now passed on to Viterbo, Perugia and
Assisi. At Gubbio he resorted to an extraordinary
subterfuge (the need for which I am ata loss to under-
Stand) in order to obtain an audience with Count
Guid’ Antonio da Montefeltro,a pious man, who treated
him with great kindness, and on Ascension Day 1436
he sailed for the East.

Life at Jerusalem at this time must have been an
extremely profitable business for the infidel, as most
Christians found to their cost. Like other pilgrims,
Tafur paid the fees due from one of his rank, and gazed
with the eye of faith upon the innumerable holy places,
the Sepulchre itself, the spot called Compas, which
Our Lord signified as the centre of the earth, the houses
of the Virgin Mary, of Pilate and Caiaphas, the palace
of David, the place where the Apostles composed the
Creed, and Christ the Lord’s Prayer, the tree on which
Judas hanged himself, and the place of Peter’s denial:
(the very stone on which the cock stood to crow was
shown, although Tafur does not mention it). He
visited Bethlehem, and inspected the well into which
the star of the Magi fell; from Jericho he reached the
Jordan, where he bathed, and where a German gentle-
man of the party unfortunately got drowned, and on
the shores of the Dead Sea he sampled the pleasant-
looking but bitter Dead Sea fruit. When the travellers
were ascending the mountain Quarantana, where Our
Lord was tempted of the devil, a second mishap befell
them, for a squire of France, going to the assistance
of a lady, lost his foothold and, falling from a great
height, was dashed in pieces on the rock below. Fur-
ther trouble awaited them at the church on the site
where Lazarus was raised from the dead, for here a

6

INTRODUCTION

quarrel arose with the officer in charge, who demanded
tribute. This was refused, whereupon the officer
and his men attacked the party and wounded some of
them. The pilgrims and their guard retaliated and,
capturing their assailants, carried them to a place not
far off, where they found the Governor of Jerusalem,
who chopped off the upstart officer’s head without
moreado. ‘These events cannot be said to have damped
the ardour of the pilgrims, or even to have affected
their spirits. A dead squire, a decapitated soldier, -
or a drowned German gentleman were matters for
comment possibly, but not for concern. Tafur relates
the circumstances with complete detachment, and
then placidly resumes his sightseeing. Job’s dunghill,
a considerable attraction in earlier days, seems by this
time to have disappeared, for the pilgrims did not
continue their journey to the Land of Uz, but returned
at once to Jerusalem.

Not content with his previous adventures, Tafur
now disguised himself as a Moor and penetrated into
the Mosque of Omar, an extremely foolish proceeding
which might well have cost him his life, for any Jew
or Gentile found therein would certainly have been
killed at sight. He was also anxious to visit the
monastery of St. Catherine on Mount Sinai, a very
perilous undertaking, but a caravan had just departed
and he was advised to return to Cyprus and obtain a
safe-conduct to Cairo, from which place he could make
the journey.

Cyprus at this time was almost at the end of its
greatness. Famagusta was in the possession of Genoa,
and the island was under the rule of the weak and
vicious Janus III, whose father had been for fifteen
months a prisoner in Egypt, and whose main business
in life seemed to be the raising of the heavy tribute
payable to the Sultan which was his inheritance. Any-
one travelling from Cyprus to Cairo might be pre-

TRAVELS © FSP Pie euoe ae

sumed to be carrying treasure for the Sultan, and was
therefore not likely to be molested, and Tafur had no
difficulty in obtaining a commission from the King,
armed with which he set out for Cairo. At Damietta
he found the place overrun with weasels, and pre-
serving contact with the court at Cairo by means of
carrier pigeons. Here he had an experience which
nearly cost him his life, for certain Moors accused him
of being a spy, and it was probably the recolle€tion of
this escape which made him anxious on one or two
occasions afterwards to conceal his identity. He gives
us a remarkably accurate description of the habits of
the crocodile, which he calls cocatriz, and from hearsay
a less satisfactory account of the hippopotamus.

At Cairo he made friends at once with the Sultan’s
chief interpreter, a renegade Jew of Seville, and it
seems clear that in order to secure this highly-placed
official’s good-will, Tafur claimed to be his fellow
citizen, although there is little doubt that he was born
in Cordova. In any event, he obtained a very valuable
friend who received him in his house and showered
kindnesses upon him. ‘Tafur had audience with the
Sultan and carried through successfully the business
with which he was entrusted. ‘Then, after seeing the
sights of Cairo and visiting the Pyramids, he set off
for Mount Sinai. It was a terrible experience: the
travellers were gievously affli€ted by sand and heat,
and the journey occupied fifteen days. While there
Tafur conceived the idea of journeying on to India.
He discussed the project with the Prior, who told him
that a caravan from the East was due in a few days and
advised him to await its arrival before making any plans.
When it came it brought with it a very famous traveller,
Nicolo de’ Conti, whose fame in after years was second
only tothat of Marco Polo. Here again Tafur thought
it necessary to descend to subterfuge, for when they
met he told de’ Conti that he was an Italian. De’

8

INTRODUCTION

Conti quite obviously did not believe him, whereupon
Tafur, perceiving him to bea grave and discreet person,
allowed the truth to be known. De’ Conti persuaded
Tafur to desist from his proposal and entertained him
with the story of his adventures. Not being on oath,
as he was later when he was beguiling the Papal Secre-
tary, Poggio, he added a number of highly coloured
details which Tafur swallowed with the greatest
relish. ‘Tafur returned with the caravan to Cairo,
the trials of the journey being entirely forgotten in the
delight of listening to de’ Conti’s narrative, and from
Cairo Tafur visited Alexandria. He then returned
to Cyprus to give an account of his stewardship. He
was extremely well received, and had the climate been
better, it is probable that he would have taken service
there, and we should have lost the rest of a very valuable
narrative of travel.

Tafur now sailed for Rhodes and very nearly lost
his life. His ship was attacked by Moors, who sank
the cargo boat which was following and drowned the
crew. Tafur’s vessel slipped away in the darkness,
but it was a near thing. At Rhodes he found the
Grand Master dying and was able to witness the election
of his successor. The ceremony is described in
detail and should be of great value to any future his-
torian of the Order. Another adventure awaited the
traveller in the island of Chios, for here he suffered
shipwreck and was left for some time in the water,
clinging to a piece of wreckage, and it was only with
great difficulty that he could be rescued. He then
visited the site of Troy, and finally reached Constanti-
nople some time in November 1437.

‘Tafur believed himself to have been descended from
the Emperors of the East; and immediately on arrival
he sought audience with the Emperor, John VIII
Palaeologus, and endeavoured to unravel the mysteries
of the family tree; but the Emperor, who was reigning

9

TRAVELS 2O.F (2 ERiOw Aen

in something like subjection to the Turks, had other
things to think of. He was just setting out for Europe
on an attempt to unite the Churches and to obtain
supplies, and he endeavoured to persuade Tafur to
accompany him. But this was not at all what the
traveller had in mind, and he set out at once for the
Turkish headquarters, to see the Grand Turk, Amu-
rath II, himself. He was well received, and took careful
note of the Potentate’s State and person. He describes
him as serious in aspect, about forty-five years of age,
of a goodly stature and handsome—a description which
contrasts oddly with that of another traveller, who
calls him a little, short, thick man, with the physiog-
nomy of a Tartar! We next find the traveller at
Trebizond as the guest of John IV Comnenus, who
had only recently murdered his father and buried
him with great pomp. He had further taken an
infidel to wife, and was altogether not the kind of
person to appeal to an orthodox Spaniard; so Tafur
left him to his fate and sailed for Kaffa, the chief base
of Genoese trade in the Black Sea, and the greatest
Catholic colony in partibus infidelium. It was a busy,
bustling place, larger than Seville, and full of strange
sights. Here were merchants bartering with strangers
from the Far East, for silks and spices, gold and jewels,
furs, skins, and queer, unfamiliar beasts from the
unknown; for Kaffa was on the great commercial route
from the Bosphorus to the Don and the Volga, and
was thus in direct communication with China and
Central Asia. In the slave market Tafur purchased
a man and two girls, whom he carried back with him
to Spain. He visited the headquarters of the Grand
Khan and seems to have entertained the idea of
penetrating farther into Tartary; but wiser counsels
prevailed, and he returned to Constantinople and
civilization.

The picture of Constantinople preserved in Tafur’s

IO

INTRODUCTION

pages is a very sad one. The streets were dirty and
neglected. The Imperial Palace was half ruined, and
the people were vicious, badly clothed and poverty-
stricken. Continuously threatened by the Turks,
neglected by the West, its majesty decayed and its
life eaten up with corruption, the city’s greatness was
nothing but a memory. ‘Tafur visited and described
the churches and holy places, but without much
enthusiasm. Even the serpent column failed to move
him. Possibly he did not know its history. Had he
done so he might well have paused before a monument
which, alone amidst disruption and decay, seemed still
to hold some fading memories of the glory that was
passed, and which was so soon to witness another
act in the age-long Struggle between East and West.
Even while Tafur was there the Turks made a feint of
attacking, and had to be bought off with presents,
but the time for presents was almost over. ‘Twenty
years later this city of the Caesars and the Church,
most gallantly but hopelessly defended, passed into
the hands of the infidel.

Tafur now sailed for Venice and turned his attention
to Europe. During the voyage he persuaded the
ship’s captain to land a boat in the Dardanelles to
rescue some Christian slaves, and in the fighting which
ensued he was wounded. Nor was his wound healed
until he reached Basle. Once more he was nearly
wrecked, and there is a very human touch in his remark
that had he reached the mainland instead of an island,
nothing would have induced him to put to sea again.
He landed safely in Venice on Ascension Day 1438,
just two years after he had set out. Here he encoun-
tered other Spanish pilgrims who were sailing for the
Holy Land, and after a dispute with the Customs
authorities, who had confiscated his goods and slaves,
he settled down to explore the city.

Most of us would give a good deal to have seen

II

TRAVELS -OF PER Ovi ek

Venice in the fifteenth century, and Tafur’s enthusiasm
is very catching. He witnessed the “ Marriage of
the Sea,” informed himself on matters of government
and history, and was delighted with the gondolas.
The city, he tells us, was as clean and pleasant as a
large room. It was well paved and bricked, so that
in winter there was no mud, and in summer no dust.
The sanitary arrangements were primitive in the
extreme, but spices and sweet-smelling scents could be
purchased everywhere, and the people carried them
constantly in their hands to counteract the evil odours.
Tafur visited the arsenal, and saw ten galleys completely
fitted out while they were being towed past the windows
of the storehouses. Every article was handed out of
its special window and stowed away, and by the time
the boats had reached the end of the dock they had on
board their full complement of men and Stores, and
were equipped from end to end and ready for the sea.
It is not claiming too much to say that Tafur’s descrip-
tion of Venice is one of the most important that has
come down to us.

Tafur now left his goods at Venice and set off in
earnest upon his European travels.

At Ferrara he encountered the Pope and the Emperor
of the East (the latter was suffering from a bad attack
of gout). He attended a sitting of the Council,
shaved off his beard, dined at the Emperor’s table
and relates in distressing detail the tragic domestic
upheaval which deprived the reigning Marquis at once
of his wife and heir. At Milan he contrived to have
speech with Filippo Maria Visconti, who as a rule
denied himself to every stranger. Then, crossing by
the St. Gothard Pass, he reached Basle, where the
remnant of the Council was still sitting. At the Baths
he was healed of his wound and watched the ladies
disporting themselves in the water, as Poggio had done
before him. He then passed down the Rhine, which

12

INTRODUCTION

he describes as the most beautiful stretch of river in
the world, to Cologne. Here he was received by the
Archbishop, Dietrich von Mérs, who showed him the
sights, the castles, monasteries, and churches, and
introduced him to the great people of the city. The
cathedral, still unfinished, must have looked much as
it does in Memlinc’s shrine of St. Ursula, but every-
one was talking of a wonderful miracle which had
happened a few days previously in the chapel of the
Three Kings. A large stone had fallen, whilst it was
being lifted, dire€tly over the spot where the bodies
were lying, whereupon the whole chapel took one step
to the right, and the stone fell upon the ground, leaving
the sacred bodies uninjured. From Cologne the
traveller passed on to the Low Countries, visiting
Malines and Brussels, where he was most graciously
received by Duke Philip the Good. The small boy
running to and fro was Charles the Bold, whose ex-
travagant schemes of conquest and whose tragic death
were later to break up his dominions, and throw his
people into the arms of Austria and Spain. Tafur gives
an interesting picture of the magnificence of the Court
of Burgundy. He was received by the Bastard of
St. Pol, one of the foremost soldiers of his day, and such
grandeur and pomp Tafur had never seen before. The
town was filled with great folk. Every day there were
pageants, tourneys and feats of skill. ‘The Duchess
was beautiful and gracious beyond compare, and as
for the Duke, he was a most noble prince, of great virtue,
very handsome of face and figure, and, moreover, as
gallant of manner as might be. Bruges, Ghent and
Antwerp all greatly impressed the traveller. Indeed,
his descriptions of Bruges, still almost at the height
of its prosperity, and of its harbour at Sluys, are by far
the most detailed and valuable which have so far been
discovered.

A curious adventure now befell the traveller. He

13

TRAV BLS 76 Peek RO Gad ere

was journeying along the Rhine, in company with a
number of prelates who were returning to the Council
at Basle, when in the neighbourhood of Mainz they
were seized by a nobleman, who had his own views of
the proceedings of the Council, and all were carried
off to an adjoining castle. Here they suffered the closest
confinement for fourteen days, although the hospitality
shown them was lavish. Indeed, we gather that Tafur
had to sit up night after night, drinking and carous-
ing with his captors, until his digestion was seriously
impaired. At last the prisoners were set at liberty,
but now came the crowning scandal. ‘Tafur had
been disarmed by a knight specially imported for the
occasion, and the base fellow had mislaid his sword.
The outraged nobleman blazed and thundered, invoked
the heavens, and poured forth his wrath upon his
captor and all his household. Finally, as he was
shaking off the dust from his feet preparatory, it would
seem, to returning to Spain to fetch an army and lay
waste the lands of the miscreant Duke, a retainer rode
up with the trusty sword, and all was well once more.
Tafur now made his way in the direction of Prague
to pay his respects to Albert I, the King of the Romans.
He was not there, but was found eventually at Breslau,
on the very outskirts of civilization, where the travellers
arrived at Christmas, 1438. ‘Tafur was received
with great respect. Albert paid him every attention,
finding partners for him at the Court ball and holding
the candle to him on several occasions, and eventually
investing him with the Order of the Dragon. It was
not without difficulty that Tafur could obtain licence
to depart; but at last he was suffered to do so, and,
carrying with him a silver bowl as a present, he set out
for Vienna in company with a party of knights. The
journey was a very trying one, and the cold was so
intense that Tafur’s teeth almost fell out of his mouth.
At a short distance from Vienna Tafur left the main

14

INTRODUCTION

party and proceeded alone with his servants. They were
attacked almost at once by two noblemen, with intent
to rob if not to murder, and it was only due to their
excellent horses that the travellers contrived to escape.
Later that day, while Tafur was supping at his inn,
who should ride up but the selfsame marauding noble-
men. ‘Tafur at once demanded an explanation, which
was readily given. ‘They were loth to have caused him
any inconvenience, they said, but they were poor noble-
men, and how could they exist if not by violence and
robbery ? ‘Tafur pointed out that he, too, was a noble-
man and poor, and was, moreover, a stranger in the
midst of them. ‘The gentlemen of the road thereupon
humbled themselves and craved pardon, suggesting,
very naively, that they should depart and rob someone
else in order to pay the expenses of Tafur’s entertain-
ment at the inn! It says much for our traveller’s good
nature, and his views of the sacred obligations of knight-
hood, that attackers and attacked were soon seated at
the same table eating their meal together at the charge
of the latter.

At Vienna Tafur paid his respects to Albert’s con-
sort, Elizabeth, the daughter of the Emperor Sigis-
mund. She instructed certain of her gentlemen to
entertain him, and once more invested him with the
Order of the Dragon, stating that the Order was at
her disposal alone, as the daughter of the Emperor,
and that her husband had no authority to bestow it,
a nice point of domestic precedence which was no doubt
hotly debated between the spouses. A lady of Eliza-
beth’s force of character, who, a year later, widowed
and desolate, could steal the sacred crown of Hungary
and cause it to be set on the head of her newly born
son, was not likely to give up readily any dignity which
attached to her in right of her house.

Travelling now by way of Buda and Neustadt, where

he encountered the future Emperor and father of

vr)

TRAVELS VOR MP ER OFM Ayers

Maximilian, Frederick III, Tafur crossed the Carnic
Alps and came once more to Ferrara. The Pope and
the Emperor of the East were just about to depart
for Florence, and we have a striking description of the
Papal progress, or rather flight, for Piccinino’s troops
were patrolling the roads. Tafur then travelled to
Venice in time to witness one of the most marvellous
engineering feats of any age, namely the transporting
of 25 barks and 6 galleys across the Tyrolese Alps
to the Lago di Garda. He paid a flying visit to
Florence, and finally took ship for his own country,
where he arrived in March or April 1439.

What are the main features which stand out from
this really extraordinary narrative? Chiefly, I think,
the commercial instinéts of the traveller, his business-
like methods, and his vivid and intimate descriptions
of the great trading centres of Europe and the Near
East. Tafur, for all his claims to Imperial descent
and his views on the obligations of his rank, was more
interested in trade than in anything else. As for the
cities he visited, they were well walled and ditched,
as large as Valladolid, or Seville, or Cordova. The
comparisons hardly ever vary, but place him in a
commercial centre such as Kaffa, Pera, Venice, Bruges,
Ghent or Antwerp, and his interest is awakened at
once. That he was well supplied with this world’s
goods is clear, but one suspects that his ancestors
made their money by trading. Ata time when many
of the nobility could scarcely sign their names, Tafur
had been trained to write with fluency and effect.
He had correspondents all over the world upon whom
he could draw bills at sight. He remarks again and
again upon the benefits of the system, and applauds
especially the honesty of the Venetians, who would
pay a fellow-trader’s debts rather than allow him to
default. Prof. Pirenne in the index to his Histoire
de Belgique by a strange slip refers to Tafur as a

16

INTRODUCTION

Spanish merchant. Possibly he was not so far from
the truth. One feels that our hidalgo could have
written an excellent treatise on bills of exchange.

Tafur was not lacking in personal courage. Much
fighting had familiarized him with death. He risked
his life in the Mosque of Omar; he effected a very
gallant rescue of Christian slaves in the Dardanelles;
he could speak his mind with almost foolhardy direét-
ness to the usurping Emperor of Trebizond, and he
told the Sultan’s chief interpreter at Cairo in no uncer-
tain terms what he thought of his master’s ideas of
justice. Added to this Tafur always makes light of
his own misfortunes and never grumbles. His outlook
is quite simple and human. There is something
- rather moving in his avowal, after the terrors of a Storm
at sea, that until then he had not known God. He
saved the life of a boatswain who should have been
hanged at the yard-arm, and his condué at Sluys,
where a poor woman offered him her two daughters
for a little bread, stamps him as a very courteous and
gallant gentleman. Like other travellers he tells us
much that is valueless, and at times omits the very
things we desire most to know, but his style, though
stilted, has warmth and colour, and we could ill spare
his pictures of life long since passed away.

Of the people he met he was undoubtedly most
impressed by the Turks, the Venetians, and the
Flemings. France he did not visit. England, except
for two or three stray references, might never have

existed.

17 c

Br

PROLOGUE

Here begins the prologue addressed to the most
noble and virtuous Sefior Don Fernando de Guzman,
Chief Commander of the Order of Calatrava, composed
by Pero Tafur upon the treatise which he wrote of
his travels and voyages in different parts of the world.

The state of knighthood, O most virtuous Sefior, had
ever a beginning, but is, indeed, more lasting than any
other virtuous office, for the exercise thereof is more
appropriate to the noble, and virtue itself is the chief
and surest foundation of nobility. A man may be
called noble so long as he follows the customs of his
predecessors, who not departing from deeds of virtue,
gave promise of the continuance of prowess, thus
deserving to become the leaders and rulers of men. .

From the practice of travelling into foreign lands a
man may reasonably hope to attain proficiency in that
which prowess demands. ‘Thus hidalgos may grow
Stout-hearted where, being unknown, they are beset
by hardship and peril, striving to show themselves
worthy of their ancestors, and by their own deeds to
make their virtues known to strangers. Moreover,
if by good fortune they escape the perils of the way
and return to their native land once more, they may
from their experience of different forms of government,
_ and the contrasting qualities of various nations, acquire
knowledge of what is most conducive to the public
weal and the establishment thereof, which should be
the chief endeavour of him who would avoid the name
of enemy to what is noble. ‘Therefore, for these and
other reasons, and especially in view of the truce
between our lord the King Don Juan and the Moors,

19

TRAVELS (OPPs (PERO cetera.

our natural enemies, I having both time and oppor-
tunity to visit various parts of the world, set forth upon
my journey for the attainment of these ends. . .

I would fain refine that which is gross, and being
of your house and lineage, and likewise knowing that
such compendiums and writings are agreeable to you,
and serve to refresh you after the troubles and anxieties
inflicted on your gentle spirit by these restless times;
therefore, my most noble Sefior, be pleased to read my
work and hear the hardships I have suffered in various
parts of the world. Accept with love this humble
present, in which, knowing, as I do, your true nobility,
you will, I trust, find some diversion; the more so since
he who sends it has sought and will ever seek with
lasting devotion to do you pleasure.

TAFUR’S SIGNATURE FROM A DOCUMENT PRESERVED
IN THE ARCHIVES AT CORDOVA.

20

GS 53

CHAPTER I

Departure from San Lucar—The Count of Niebla—The attack on
Gibraltar —Gibraltar—Return to San Lucar—Cadiz.—The
Barbary Coast —Ceuta.—Malaga—Cartagena—The Balearic
Isles.— Gulf of Lyons—A great Storm —The Riviera.—Genoa.

E set sail and left the harbour of San Lucar

de Barrameda. I travelled in a ship of Galicia,

as I had already made preparations for my
departure and had no horses and other things necessary
foraland journey. That day and the night following
we sailed on, and doubling Cape Trafalgar we entered
the Straits, and at daylight we reached the promontory
of Carnero at the entrance to Gibraltar. We anchored
close to the town and saw there a great number of ships
and a galley of the King, all of which had come with
the Count of Niebla.1 We found that the Count was
encamped about half a league from Gibraltar with
1200 horsemen and 5000 foot soldiers, and his son was
there with him. I disembarked and went to see the
Count, and he was delighted to meet me, and mar-
velled how I had been able to come, in view of my
recent illness. He took counsel with his knights
and told them the reason for his being there, which
before had been kept secret. The undertaking was
to be as follows. He had been told that in Gibraltar
there were not ten Moors who were fighting men,
whereas to defend so great a fortress not even a thousand
would be sufficient, and that it could be taken by
assault. He proposed to muster his horsemen at the
entrance which is on land, while he with his men-at-
arms launched an attack close to the dockyard, on the
side of the mountain where King Alfonso entered.
His son Don Juan was to march against the tower of

2I

PRA ELS On URER O11 sr Ue

Tuerto, which is on the mountain. This was to be
from the sea. Meanwhile the Biscayans with their
ships and the galley were to attack the Casal de Gino- .
veses which is at the very summit of the mountain.

So he ordered everything, and the next day after
Mass each one went to his station. We then set out
and drew near to the town, and at low water we all
disembarked and moved towards the wall, but that day
we did not carry up our artillery, because this was only
a test to see how many men were there to defend the
place. Nevertheless, as soon as we came up to the
wall, fifteen or twenty of our men were killed at once.
And we were so occupied that we did not observe how
the tide was rising, and we were soon up to our knees
in water. As we could do nothing, not having brought
our artillery, the Count gave orders to sound the retreat
tothesea. ‘The men retired to the boats, but the Count
remained behind collecting the others. As he was
making for the last boat, with ten or twelve knights
who had remained on shore with him, it became clear
to the enemy that only a small party was left, and that
the others had withdrawn without any orders having
been given to cover the retreat with cross-bows and
artillery, and that all were taking to the water, and that
the last boat was leaving. ‘The Moors thereupon
dashed out with horsemen to the number of twenty,
with as many foot-soldiers, and as they came up at a
gallop, the boat, which was small and heavily laden,
capsized, and the Count and all those with him were
drowned. Meanwhile the other engagements were
proceeding, and the rest of the men had as much work
as they could do, except the horsemen on the shore
who had no one to fight with. So very sadly, with
the loss of so noble a leader both on sea and land, we
returned to Castile to San Lucar from which place we
had set out.

Gibraltar is a very strong fortress and famous all

22

GiBRAL TAR—CADITZ

the world over. It Stands at the mouth of the Straits
where the Atlantic Ocean joins the Mediterranean
Sea, and it is a very fruitful place. The town com-
mands the entrance to the mainland which is very
narrow, and it is about a league from there to the top
of the rock. It is very well walled, with orchards,
vines and excellent water, and it lies very low on the
edge of the sea. Behind it Stands the rock which is
so high that it seems to reach to the clouds. It rises
straight up, and although it looks formidable from the
west, it is seen to greater advantage from the east.
The harbour, which is very secure, is made by an arm
of the sea which runs inland as far as Algeciras, three
leagues distant, and the whole way is good anchorage.
Leaving there, we sailed through the Straits in view
of Cape Tarifa and past Cadiz and other places on the
coast, and entered the harbour of Barrameda at San
Lucar, where they received us with less lightness of
heart than at our departure. I then collected the things
I had prepared and put myself aboard a carack owned
by Geronimo de Voltajo, who had come from Genoa
with two other ships belonging to Esteban Doria and
Geronimo Doria, and they had troops to defend them
for fear of the Catalans, and most of the Genoese who
were in Seville sailed in them, for they carried great
riches.

We left the harbour of Cadiz and came to the coast
of Barbary, to a town called Arzila, where we had to
discharge and take fresh cargo. This town is close
to the Cape of Espartel. It belongs to the King of
Fez and had then as governor a Moorish knight, called
Calabengala. It is a very fruitful place, but abounds
more in animals and fowls than in anything else. We
remained there three days. ‘Then we set sail and
entered the Straits of Gibraltar, and at the hour of
Vespers we espied two large ships which we took to be
the Catalans, and we turned back and anchored off

an}

TRAVECS (ORE bio TAFUR
Tangier, but they passed by on their way to Cadiz.

The next day we departed and came to Ceuta, where
we learned from a Biscayan vessel that those two
caracks belonged to the Genoese fleet, and that they
came from Genoa to accompany the three of us. We
anchored at Ceuta and disembarked, and hailed a sloop
and sent letters to Cadiz saying that the caracks should
await us there, or that at least they would find us at
Malaga, where we had to discharge and take fresh
cargoes. That day we remained at Ceuta, and I went
about inspecting the city and its surroundings which
appeared to me to be very excellent. It showed itself
to have been a great place and, without doubt, if the
King of Castile? owned it and caused it to be em-
bellished, it would, in view of its situation, be one of
the most notable places in the world. ‘The soil is
generally fruitful, although it is rugged and the country
mountainous, but there is a good harbour and much
land, and fruit and water are abundant. What is left
of the city is sufficiently strong. There is on one side
on the mountain a rocky place surrounded by a wall,
called E/ Alminan, which would be very remarkable
if it were what it ought to be. In these mountains
of Ceuta there are more lions than in any other part
of the world, and porcupines, apes, panthers, bears and
pigs without number. They say that it is doubtful
if there is any place so high and mountainous on the
African side. ‘This is said to arise from its nearness
to the West on the side of the Straits [sic].

We departed from Ceuta, and leaving Africa on the
right hand, and having Europe on the left, we sailed
through the Straits and entered the open sea, and
continued along the coast until we anchored on the
shore of Malaga, a city belonging to the King of
Granada. There the merchants landed and discharged
their cargoes and took others. We remained there
nine days, and while we were there those caracks

24.

MALAGA—CARTAGENA

arrived which had passed us, and put their men on
board our ships and took in merchandise, and returned
to Cadiz for more to take to Flanders. During those
nine days we had nothing to do but to admire the city
of Malaga which impressed me favourably, both as
regards its situation, though it has no port, and its soil,
though there is a scarcity of bread; but what there is
is good. And there is no shortage of orchards and
fruit. The city is flat, for the most part walled, with
a castle on either hand and a walled passage running
from one to the other which they call Gibralfar. It is
full of trade, and if it belonged to us it would be better.
But all kinds of merchandise would have to go in from
our country, which would never be suffered in any
place held by the Moors. ‘The sea flows up to the
walls, in such wise that a fleet of galleys could throw
out landing stages on to flat land. For the part towards
the sea is very low-lying, although it is well defended
on its landward side. ‘There are many people there,
but rather of the merchant class than skilled in war.
After nine days at Malaga the Genoese collected
their goods and armed the ships and set them in order,
for they had to coast from headland to headland along
the country of the King of Aragon. Sailing onwards,
we followed the coast of Granada, past Salobrefia,
Almufiecar, and Almeria, until we reached Cartagena
which is in our country. We entered the harbour,
and remained there one day, awaiting news of the
Catalans. It is one of the finest harbours, in my
judgment, in the world,,and the town is excellent.
We departed and sailed along the coast of Aragon, by
Elche and Alicante, until we came near to Valencia, and
there we had advices to leave the coast and take to the
open sea. ‘The next day, leaving the coast, we came
close to the island of Ivica, belonging to the King of
Aragon. So continuing our route, leaving Catalufia
and Barcelona on the left hand, we passed the islands

25

TRAVELS OF? PERO (TAERURE

of Majorca and Minorca, which belong to the King
of Aragon, and entered the Gulf of Lyons, which is so
called as one goes out from it, but at the going in it 1s
called the Gulf of Narbonne.

One day at Vespers such a violent storm arose that
we ran before it all that night, and the next day we
were far away. The two large caracks were driven
under bare poles towards Sardinia, and it was two
months before we had news of them, but our ship,
which still had its main-sail, although but little of it
remained, kept close to the island of Titan, as they
call it, off the coast of Provence. This day and the
following night we were in constant peril and had much
labour, but we ran on and the next day we came to
Nice. It was Christmas Eve,? and we anchored there
and repaired our sails. We then departed and came
to Savona, a pleasant city, belonging to Genoa, and
remained there for Christmas Day. ‘The following
day we set sail, and keeping close inland we passed along
the sea-shore, forty miles from Genoa, which is the
most beautiful sight in the world. To one who does
not know it, the whole coast from Savona to Genoa
looks like one continuous city, so well inhabited is it,

and so thickly studded with houses.

26

CHAP EER

Genoa.—Litigation with certain merchants —San Lorenzo.—Genoese
possessions abroad—The inhabitants —A rising —Sestri Levante.
— Portovenere.—Spexia.—Lerici.— Pietrasanta.—Leghorn.—T he
vessel taken by the Count of Modica.—Niccold Piccinino—Pisa.—
Florence.—Pistoia.—Bologna.—Pope Eugenius.—Ferrara.—B ills
of Exchange —Venice.

WE entered the harbour of Genoa close by the Mole,
and were very cheerfully received both by men and
women, but they were very sad at the fate of the
caracks, as no one knew what had become of them.
We disembarked, but before entering the city we went
half a league from there to the church of Nuestra Dona
que Corona,’ according to the vow which we had made
during the storm. I then took a lodging for the fifteen
days that I had to remain in Genoa, and, indeed, I
had need of repose, for I was overcome with fatigue,
and unhappy, and sea-sick, and quite out of conceit
with myself, and this was the first time that I began to
know God. For some days I was engaged in litigation
with certain merchants who would not honour some
bills of exchange which I had. But the Doge? and
many of the lords of the place showed me much honour
and favour, and made the merchants pay me what was
mine, with double the costs which they had put me to.

This city is very ancient. ‘They say that it was
founded by Janus Prince of Troy’, after the destruction
of that city, and, indeed, it seems to have been the work
of a defeated man, for it is placed upon a very high
mountain above the sea, and all the houses are like
towers of four or five storeys or more, while the streets
are very narrow and difficult of access. ‘The soil is
very unproductive, but the people are industrious,
and they import provisions from all parts of the world,

=]

TRAVELS 9O BBE iO ee are

so that the city is as well supplied as if the land were
fruitful. There is an excellent harbour, as well as a
mole with a tower and lighthouse, which burns all
night, and on the other side of the harbour there 1s
another very high tower, also with a light, so that the
entry to the harbour may be known to everyone. All
this has been made at great cost. The monasteries
are very notable, as are also the churches. ‘The great
church is called San Lorenzo, and it is very remarkable,
particularly the porch. They keep in it the Holy
Grail‘, which is made of a single emerald and is indeed
a marvellous relic. This city with all its patrimony
is ruled by the people, and by their industry and wisdom
they have acquired many cities and towns and castles
on the mainland, and many islands in the sea. They
own Chios and Mytilene, and in the island of Cyprus
they own the city called Famagusta, which they took
when they captured the King of Cyprus and carried
him to Genoa, both him and his wife.° ‘The father
of this present King was born there in the Pharos
tower, and was called Janus, as he was born in Genoa.
They also own Pera, a city which adjoins Constantinople,
and a city called Kaffa at the end of the Black Sea, as
large or greater than Seville, and in the Sea of Azov
they have fortresses, and others in Turkey.

The nation is very powerful at sea, its caracks in
particular are the best in the world, and had it not been
for the great dissensions which the people have had
amongst themselves, their dominion would have
extended throughout the world. ‘The inhabitants are
very industrious and without vice, nor are they addicted
to sensual pleasures, for which the nature of the country
is unfavourable. They are very wealthy and orderly.
In matters of dress they see to it that if anyone is more
richly clad than is necessary, he or she is taxed. They
are of a very beautiful complexion, but not handsome
of face, although both men and women are well grown,

28

GENOA

and they value the women by size: the tallest has the
smallest dowry. Widows do not take a second hus-
band, and if they do they suffer in their reputation.
In the troubles which the people have had, the Duke
of Milan entered the city as ruler with one of the
factions, and while I was there the people rose against
the Duke® and killed one of his captains who was
stationed there, who was called Pacino de Alciato, and
they destroyed his castle which was near the city.
There they showed me the dreadful prison, in which
were kept those knights who had been taken by the
Kings of Aragon and Navarre. In the sea at Genoa
there are few fish, and those very small. Without
doubt, if the men of other nations were such travellers
throughout the world as are the Genoese, and were so
long separated from their homes, the chastity of their
wives would be much endangered. But here they
value their morals so highly that a woman is hardly
ever taken in adultery. If such a thing occurs the
penalty is always death.

I departed from Genoa and travelled along the coast,
which is thickly inhabited, to Sestri Levante, and from
there I came to Portovenere. On that day the people
had risen against the Duke of Milan and the King of
Aragon, the Duke having given the place to the King.
It is an excellent port, with an island in front of it
which affords it great protection. The town is very
Strongly fortified with two castles, the first at one end
and the second at the other. From there we sailed to
Spezia, a large town belonging to Genoa, and thence
to Lerici, a great fortress of the King of Aragon. We
next came to Pietrasanta, and at the hour of Vespers
we arrived outside Leghorn, the port of Pisa. The
Count of Modica had arrived there from Naples with
fourteen galleys, and he took our ship and sent to the
galleys all those Genoese who had come init. To me,
on the other hand, he showed much honour, and desired

29

TRAVELS? ORI9 Ri Oa Ar wie

me to depart at once, but certain Catalan knights
informed him that I should be in great peril from the
armed men in those parts, who were in the pay of the
Count Francesco,? a man much in favour with the
Genoese who was now captain of the Florentines.
The Count heard from me how that the town of Porto-
venere had risen against the King of Aragon, and that
Nicolao Pichilino® was there with his men, and I
returned with him to Lerici. We found the castle
in safe keeping, but the town was in revolt, and the
rebels plundered it and attacked Spezia and Porto-
venere by land and sea, but they could not take them,
although they laid waste the countryside. The Count
of Modica and Nicolao Pichilino then sent me into
Portovenere, and gave me four Genoese prisoners to
ensure my good treatment. When I arrived at Porto-
venere, where I was known, I found a vessel and sailed
in it for Leghorn, and entering the river of Pisa I
arrived at the city. It is possible at high tide for
galleys to reach the walls. Pisa was at one time very
powerful and rich, and had many possessions, not only
on the land, but among the islands, but now the Pisans
are subjugated to the Florentines, whose masters they
were,

Leaving Pisa I came to Florence, ten leagues from
that place, travelling through a very fruitful country
and by large villages which had, however, been much
depopulated in the Pisan wars. Florence is a city both
great and rich, and exceedingly beautiful within and
without. It is situated in a plain with extensive
suburbs on either side. A river runs through the
centre which reaches to Pisa. But I will not write
much of this city, as I shall speak of it later.®

From Florence I crossed the Alps to Pistoia, passing
through many villages, and came to Bologna, where
I found Pope Eugenius,”° and here I was received with
great honour by the Castilians who were there, by the

30

BOLOGNA

prelates as well as by the knights who bore me company
when I craved licence from the Pope to go to Jerusalem.
This he gave me readily with his blessing. He gave
me also a Bull of plenary absolution at the hour of
death. I remained there fifteen days, resting myself
and watching the festivities with which both noblemen
and citizens diverted themselves. It was the middle
of winter, when the people are accustomed to amuse
themselves and celebrate their weddings. The city
accounts itself part of Lombardy. It is very large,
well populated, and supplied with all the necessities
of life, for which reason it is called Bologna the Fat.
The houses and streets are most remarkable; the inns
are excellent and the churches and monasteries very
fine indeed. Among the latter is the monastery of
St. Dominic the Preacher, where the body of the Saint
is buried. This blessed one was a native of Castile
of the lineage of Guzman on his father’s side and of
those of Aga on his mother’s side, and the Master
Don Luis de Guzman, being of the same lineage, sent
to his majordomo, Pedro de Guzman, who was am-
bassador to the Pope and attached to the embassy of
King Juan, desiring him to visit the place where St.
Dominic was buried and to expend a certain sum of
money there, which he gave him for the purpose, and
he did so. I saw the chapel and grave, now very
richly adorned, but formerly much neglected, and round
about are sculptured and painted the arms of Guzman,
which that good knight, Don Luis de Guzman, Master
of Calatrava, had ordered to be set up. A small river
runs through the city which improves it very much, and
there are a hundred sluices with mills; some grind
wheat, others spices, some scour arms, others make
paper, saw wood, and spin silk, and in this manner
they make use of the water. On one side of the city
is a castle, the wall of which is made of sods of earth,
which is very strong against shots from bombards.
31

TRAV ELS #7 OB bts Ome bane ae

Here is also one of the most famous universities in the
world, where all sciences are studied, and students
of all nationalities and great men are continually
working there. The city belongs to the Church.

While at Bologna I sold my horses, and placed myself
and my goods and people on board a boat, and travelled
to Ferrara, all the way by that river of which I have
spoken. It is very narrow so that only one boat can
travel at a time, and if two boats meet one of them has
to be hauled ashore. ‘The river freezes each night, and
the villagers have boats, the keels of which are shod
with iron, and at night they go up and down the river,
breaking the ice with poles which are pointed with
iron, and thus they make a waterway for travellers.
The children go about singing, “ good sport,” which 1S
to say: “ May there be a good frost.” By this river
we reached the Po, one of the greatest rivers in the
world, and one of the four arms which descend from
the German Alps, and travelling along the Po we came
to the city of Ferrara." I there presented myself to
the Marquis, lord of the city, and remained three days.
I then left by the river and came to Francolino, and
continuing still by the river, I arrived at the place where
it enters the sea which is one day’s journey.

I reached Venice’ at Vespers, leaving on the right
hand and on the left many churches and monasteries
and inns, all placed in the sea in the same way as
Venice itself, and as soon as I had landed I went to see
the church of St. Mark, which is on the water’s edge,
and worshipped there, after which we went to an inn
called the Sturgeon, a very notable hostelry, where
we lodged the day and night following. The next
day, after Mass, I enquired for the exchange of Messer
Sylvestro Morosini, on whom I held bills. I found
him speedily, and he accepted the bills and paid me
the money. This is a matter in which nothing on
earth will make them delay, for though all merchants

32

VENICE

in every part of the world make use of bills of exchange
they are more eager than any for fair dealing. I spent
the day with him and with Carlo Morosini, a merchant
who had been in Seville and had for a long time rented
mines there. I had been great friends with him in
the house of Master Don Luis, and therefore he received
me very kindly and made me free of his house, where
I resided all the time I was in Venice.

While there I enquired concerning my journey to
Jerusalem, and learnt that it was not possible to set out
for three months, as the pilgrim boats were not accus-
tomed to leave until Ascension Day, which is in May.
I desired to spend the intervening time in visiting the
Christian world, including the courts of the Emperor
and the King of France, but the merchants, my friends,
with whom I took counsel, advised me to leave this
until after my return from Jerusalem, and that in the
meantime I should travel in Italy, which was well worth
while, and as Lent was approaching I could spend it in
Rome. I could then go on to Naples and see the King
of Aragon, all which I could accomplish, and still have
twenty days and more before my boat sailed. This
seemed to me to be excellent counsel, and I followed
it. I, therefore, set out to visit Italy, and saw many
cities and towns, villages and fortresses until Lent,
when I came to Rome. But Pope Eugenius was at
Bologna, as I have said, having been driven out of Rome
by a faction which had taken arms against him, intend-
ing to murder or capture him, and he escaped by boat
by the Tiber and went to Pisa, and thence to Florence
and Bologna.

Ri y

CHAPTER AITE

Rome.—Pope Gregory and the Faithful—The walls—The Tiber.—
Castle of St. Angelo—The Vatican —Old St. Peter’s—St. Fohn
Lateran —Right of SanGuary—Sanda SanGorum—Statue of
Marcus Aurelius—The Colosseum.—Imperial buildings on the
Palatine —S. Maria. Nuova—S. Croce in Gerusalemme—
8. Silvestro in Capite—S. Maria Rotonda—Trajan’s column.—
Triumphal arches —8. Maria in Ara Coeli.—8. Maria Maggiore.—
8S. Prassede—S8. Pietro in Vincoli—8S. AnaStasio alle Tre Fon-
tane—The miserable condition of the city—The inhabitants.—
Wild beass within the walls.

I stayep at Rome? during the whole of Lent, visiting
the sanctuaries and ancient buildings, which appeared
to me to be very wonderfully made, but not only am
I unable to describe them, but I doubt whether I could
appreciate them as they deserved. ‘Therefore I may
be pardoned, such is the grandeur and magnificence
of Rome, if I fall short in my account, for I am not
equal to so great an undertaking in view of the extent
to which these ancient buildings have been destroyed
and changed, and are decayed. Nevertheless, to all
who behold them it is clear that they were once very
magnificent, in spite of the tumults which they witnessed
after the beginning of the downfall of Rome, in the
discords between the princes who were her citizens,
the destruction wrought by powerful kings who fought
against her, and the hand of time which consumes
everything. Moreover, Pope St. Gregory, seeing how
the faithful flocked to Rome for the salvation of their
souls, but that they were so astounded at the magnifi-
cence of the ancient buildings that they spent much
time in admiring them, and neglected the sacred object
of their visit, the Pope, I say, sent orders to destroy all
or the majority of the antiquities which had survived

34

ROME

from ancient times. ‘The circuit of the city is very
great, the walls being twenty-four miles round, that is
eight of our leagues. They are so built, and of such
height, that they appear to be fresh from the hand of
the master-builder, and where they are broken down,
there the tyrants entered the city from time to time, for
the work is such that they defy wilful destruction.
Small wonder, then, that they have survived, having
been left as the ancients built them.

Through the middle of the city runs a river, which
the Romans brought there with great labour and set
in their midst, and this is the Tiber. ‘They made a
new bed for the river, so it is said, of lead, and channels
at one and the other end of the city for its entrances and
exits, both for watering horses and for other services
convenient to the people, and anyone entering it at
any other spot would be drowned. On either side of
this river there are many mills which make the city all
one [sic].

On one shore of the Tiber is a castle standing on a
mound, which has been piled up so high that it has
become a mountain, and it is fortified with a very high
wall and many brave towers. It is called the Castle
of St. Angelo. It stands above the bridge over the
Tiber on the way to St. Peter’s, where is the seat and
place of the Apostles. They say that there was once a
great plague in Rome which lasted for a long time,
and it was revealed to Pope Gregory that he should
go in procession to a church at, one end of the city,
called S. Agata in Suburra, where was an idol which
was worshipped by the heathen, and even in secret by
Christians, for some parts of the heathen rites had
survived. As the Pope arrived in procession at the
church and came to the idol, a noise like thunder burst
from it and it fell in pieces. ‘The Pope, beholding this
marvel, made his procession, and as he was returning
very devoutly to St. Peter’s by the bridge below that

35

TRAV BES 70 Fea Ri ater ters

castle, an angel appeared in the sight of all with a drawn
sword in his hand, all bloody, which sword he cleansed
on his mantle and placed in its sheath. This was
held to be a sign that God was appeased, and did not
desire that more should die. In this manner was
idolatry put down, and the castle from that day onwards
was named the Castle of St. Angelo. It is so called
to this day, and the figure of an angel is set up on it.
It was in view of this miracle, and of other mighty and
wonderful things which took place in Rome, that Pope
Gregory, as I have related, destroyed many of the
ancient buildings because they drew the attention of
the pilgrims from the holy places, but he did not
destroy all, and those who go there to-day, if they
desire to see beautiful things, still seek them out before
anything else.

The Pope has his dwelling adjoining the church of
St. Peter on the slopes of the Aventine Hill. This
is the place where formerly they used to secure the
liberty of Rome (and in like manner they have now
to secure the Faith, of which the Pope is constituted
defender, against any heretics who desire to overthrow
it), and here the Emperors remain several days before
they are crowned, as if encamped against the Church’s
enemies. Afterwards they receive the crown of gold,
with many ceremonies of which I cannot give an
account. The Pope’s dwelling is a mediocre place
and when I was there it was ill-kept.

The church of St. Peter? is a notable church, the
entrance is very magnificent, and one ascends to it by
very high steps. The roof is richly worked in mosaic.
Inside, the church is large, but very poor and in bad
condition and dirty, and in many places in ruins. On
the right hand is a pillar as high as a small tower, and
in it is the holy Veronica. When it is to be exhibited
an opening is made in the roof of the church and a
wooden chest or cradle is let down, in which are two

36

ROME

clerics, and when they have descended, the chest or
cradle is drawn up, and they, with the greatest rever-
ence, take out the Veronica and show it to the people,
who make concourse there upon the appointed day.
It happens often that the worshippers are in danger
of their lives, so many are they and so great is the press.

A little further on there are two large columns
encased in wood, where they put those who are pos-
sessed by spirits, and from these pillars it was that
Our Lord preached to the people in Jerusalem. In
front of them is the rope with which Judas hanged
himself; which is as thick as a man’s arm or thicker.
In the high altar are the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul,
and there is here a very great indulgence on a certain
day, plenary both for sin and punishment. Here is
also the chair in which St. Peter sat, and the Pope seats
himself in it when he is elected. It is well, indeed,
that strangers look on it with devotion, for it is neither
rich nor kept with reverence.

There are many other san¢tuaries in this church.
On the other side of it is a high tower? made of one
piece of stone, like a three-cornered diamond raised
upon three brazen feet; and many, taking it for a holy
thing, creep between the ground and the base of that
tower. This was a work undertaken in honour of
Julius Caesar and assigned for his burial, and on the
top of it are three large gilt apples in which is the
dust of the Emperor Julius Caesar, and certainly it is
a noble edifice and marvellously ordered and very
strange. It is called Caesar’s needle, and in the middle
and at the base, and even at the top, are a few ancient
letters carved in the Stone which now cannot well be
read, but in faét they record that the body of Julius
Caesar was buried there. And around this are many
other edifices now much ruined.

The city of Rome is very sparsely populated con-
sidering its size. It is the opinion of many that now

37

TRAVELS: OFS PR ROf 1b Ui

that it is thrown down and depopulated, there issues
from the ruins of the great buildings, and from the
cellars and cisterns and houses, and from the deep
vaults, now uninhabited, such poisonous air that it
affects human bodies, and therefore it is said that Rome
is unhealthy. But when it was well populated it was
the contrary. Even now it seems that in the places
where it is most closely inhabited the people find better
health, as in Campo dei Fiori, which is a large district,
and Campidoglio, another large distri€t, and in the
Ghetto, which is like a great village. But all the rest
of the city is but thinly-scattered houses.

The first church established among Latin peoples
was the church of St. John Lateran, from which the
Holy Fathers draw their title and of which they are
bishops. Both in it and around it there are very
singular things to be seen. ‘This church, so it is said,
was the house in which Rome kept her treasure, and
there is the Tarpeian Gate, which Caesar opened when
he took out the treasure, and which until that hour had
always been closed. When the Emperor Constantine
was converted to the Catholic Faith and gave the
patrimony of the Empire to the Church, and endowed
it, he begged Pope Sylvester to issue a Bull in respect
of that gate for the souls of those who should pass it,
in like manner as previously the gate had been a place
of san¢tuary for those who took shelter there. For if
one came as a fugitive and reached the Tarpeian Gate,
whatsoever crime he had committed, he could not be
taken thence, and this out of reverence for the treasure
which lay therein. The Pope at first ordained that all
who entered should be absolved from sin and punish-
ment, but because many boldly committed sin with
intent to be absolved by passing through the gate, the
Pope ordered it to be closed, and to be opened once
only every hundred years. Later, the period was
reduced to fifty years, and now it is as the Pope is

38

ROME

pleased to ordain. In this church are the heads of
St. Peter and St. Paul, a very great relic and a great
indulgence for sin and punishment when they are
exhibited, in the same manner as the Veronica in the
church of St. Peter.

Beside this church is a chapel apart, which they call
Sancta Sanctorum. In it is a picture of Our Lord,
showing Him from the girdle upwards, painted on a
Stone.” They say that Our Lady begged St. Luke,
who was a famous painter, to paint this piCture after
the death of her Son, and he consented and painted it.
It is, indeed, an object of the greatest devotion, and a
very suitable remembrance of Him who had, and still
has, power to do all things. It shows well the figure
of Our Lord, His age and colour and all that He was, and
there is a mole on the left cheek as an emblem of His
humanity. It is the most revered object, and the
greatest relic in Rome. Four men armed with iron
maces guard it continually hour by hour, and on one
day in the year, the feast of the Virgin, in the middle of
August, they take out the relic, and protected by
men-at-arms, and amidst much rejoicing, they carry
it in procession and take it to the church of S. Maria
Maggiore, where it rests that day and night, and the
following day they return it to its place. ‘There is
plenary indulgence for all who are there at that time.
No women are allowed to enter the chapel, for the
reason, as they say, that a woman once uttered such
things that she burst asunder. At the door of this
chapel are two bells, said to be’the first which were
ever made in the world.

The election of the Pope takes place in the church
of St. John Lateran, and here the various ceremonies
are observed and he receives the triple crown. There
are also many relics of St. Helena, mother of the
Emperor Constantine, which were sent by him when

he was in the Holy Land. The church 1s large, but
39

TRAVELS “ORM Pi RO”. lie

not rich nor well built, nor clean, nor richly adorned.
Outside in a large square are many buildings and ancient
memorials. Here is the Statue of that Mucius® who
caused the siege of Rome to be raised, and thinking
to kill the king killed his favourite, for which he con-
demned himself, and suffered his right arm to be burnt.
He is seated on a great horse of gilded brass, and both
the figure and the horse are clearly the work of a master.
Round about the square are many and diverse things,
figures in stone, and marbles and stones with ancient
inscriptions cut upon them.

Close by is the Colosseum which was, so they say,
unmatched in the whole world for size and magnifi-
cence, and although most of it is in ruins the greatness
and the marvel of its building may well be seen. It
would take long to tell how the Romans kept this
Colosseum, and with what reverence, and of the statue
they had there’, which was so great that its feet stood
on the ground and its head reached to the highest point
of the roof. The right arm was raised and held a
large apple in the hand, which is now on the door of
St. John Lateran. This, they say, was meant to
signify that the whole world was in his hand, and from
it is said to have been derived the custom of carrying
an apple before the Emperors. They say, further, that
this statue was once surrounded by figures of all the
kings and princes in the world, each having a chain
round the neck fastened to the feet of that great statue,
and when it was known that any king or prince was
rising against Rome, they threw down his image and
issued decrees commanding war to be made upon him.
However this may be, the Colosseum shows that it was
once a very magnificent and sumptuous building.

Near at hand are the palaces of Octavian Augustus,®
which, they say, he built and fortified because he was
told by one of the Sibyls that when the Virgin should
bring forth a child his Statue would fall, and this was

40

ROME

upon the advent and birth of Our Lord, and his palace
fell, and it is said that even now every year, on the day
of the birth of Our Lord, some portion falls. Here
there is a large mound like a hill, and it well appears
that this mound was made by the fall of some very large
edifice, and one can see many marbles, large Stones,
and other things which show well what it must have
been. ‘There is also a notable monastery of the Order
of St. Bernard, which is called S. Maria Nuova.
There is in Rome a church, which they call S. Croce
in Gerusalemme, where is preserved the title which
was set up above Our Lord’s Cross, which reads
IHS NAZARENuS. All this church, with the floor and
the walls and everything else, was made from earth of
Jerusalem brought as ballast in ships, when St. Helena
sent the holy relics to Rome, and here there is plenary
indulgence for sin and punishment. ‘There is also
another church called S. Maria Rotonda,® which was
formerly the place where the Roman people held their
council. It is supported on great columns and is
covered with lead, and one day in the year there is
plenary indulgence. Another church belongs to cer-
tain nuns, where is the head of St. John the Baptist,”°
and there is also plenary indulgence on his feast-day.
Close by is a great column made of a single Stone, which
was erected in memory of the Emperor Trajan, who
came from Castile and was a native of Pedraza. He
gave Rome its laws, which are used to this day by. the
Romans and by ourselves, as well in warfare as in the
direction of public affairs. There are also three or
four or more triumphal arches, which the Romans
set up in honour of victorious men, among them one
which was made for Julius Caesar, a very notable work.”
Another church is called S. Maria in Ara Coelli,
beneath which is a large vaulted chamber, in which,
at times, the Romans held their council, and where
Julius Caesar was murdered by the hands of Cassius

41

TRAVELS OF PERO AAP,

and Brutus. Close by is the church of S. Maria
Maggiore, where, on a certain day in the year, there 1s
plenary indulgence, and at the door, in a great square,
there is a column of porphyry, the worth of which cannot
be estimated, and there are also many relics in this
church. Adjoining is the church of S. Prassede, in
which is the half of the column at which Christ was
scourged, and there is also the body of the Blessed
St. Jerome, on whose day there is plenary indulgence.
The church where St. Peter was incarcerated is called
S. Pietro in Vincoli, where is also plenary indulgence.
Beyond the walls is the church where St. Peter and
St. Paul were beheaded”, in which are certain springs
of very healing water, and here also there is plenary
indulgence. Close by is the monastery of St. Paul,
a very notable fraternity of the Order of Preachers,
also with indulgence.

There are in this city many other things and sanctu-
aries, plenary indulgences, and wonderful buildings,
which it would take long to describe. And since those —
who came with intent to visit the sacred places spent
their time in admiring the ancient buildings and ruins,
Pope Gregory ordered them, or the greater part of
them, to be destroyed, so that the pilgrims should turn
their minds from such matters to the holy places. He
could not, however, completely destroy them, and it is
apparent what these things, or some of them, must
once have been. Here were the sepulchres of Romulus
and Remus, the first builders of Rome, as well as many
statues of men and women, placed there as a perpetual
memorial of their deeds. Rome, which used to be the
head of the world and is now the tail, has lost nothing
in her ceremonies of what she was when she held the
whole world in subjection, but such is now the miser-
able condition of the city that it is a shame to utter it.
They say that in order not to forfeit their place as head
of the world, which once they held, the citizens on a

42

ROME

certain day in the year make formal protest to the
Pope, proclaiming that they are still ready to subdue
the world as of old, that they have not lost their rights,
but that the Pope has despoiled them of their own.
This formal protest is made on Shrove Tuesday.
Would to God that they were able to rule themselves,
and were not, as the Italians say of them, a worthless
people, given over to every vice and abused by all.

ound no one in Rome who could give me any
account of those ancient things concerning which I
enquired, but they could, without doubt, have informed
me fully as to the taverns and places of ill-fame. It is
said that the people never dine in their houses even by a
miracle, and, indeed, their dress and bearing, both 1n-
doors and out, show clearly what they are. I say this
of the majority, for doubtless in such a multitude there
must be some who are virtuous. It is said, further,
that Rome, though depopulated, has more inhabitants
than any Christian city in the world, but there are parts
within the walls which look like thick woods, and
wild beasts, hares, foxes, wolves, deer and even, so it
is said, porcupines breed in the caves.

There are two statues’ in Rome, and it is related of
them that once there was a dispute between the plebeians
and the nobles, the former demanding to know why,
since they were all sons of one father, namely Adam,
and consequently having Eve for mother, the nobles
should take precedence of them. And the plebeians
said in a sculptured inscription: Cum pater Adam
nobis sit, mater Eva, cur igitur non sumus nobilitate pares ?
The nobles thereupon made answer: Degenerant omnes
Viclis, fiuntque minores, exaltat virtus, nobilitantque mores.
Therefore, it is said, the nobles have greater jurisdic-
tion, and, moreover, that this was the reason why the
law was made that no plebeian nor woman could hold the
office of consul, which law was broken later when Gaius
Marius, according to Sallust, was proposed in the Senate.

43

CHAP EER TE

Rome to Viterbo.—Perugia—Assisi —Gubbio.—Meeting with ae
of Urbino.—Rimini—Ravenna.—Venice—Arrangements for the

voyage.

I pepartep from Rome and came to Viterbo, a very
pleasant city, where there are warm water baths, which
are said to be sovereign against all infirmities, and they
say that on the request of his private physician, the
Pope sent orders to destroy them, and it is not known
now what manner of diseases they cured, but it is be-
lieved that some little time since they were found to
cure dropsy. The holy body of St. Rose is here.
We left Viterbo and passed certain cities called Narn1,
Terni and Spoleto, and arrived finally at Perugia, a
famous city, where was born Bracchio,' that great
captain, and Sforza, father of the present Duke of
Milan. All this country is so thickly inhabited that
cities, towns and castles seem all joined together. I
left Perugia for Assisi, where St. Francis and St.
Clare were born, and where their bodies now lie. It
is a notable city. In it are eight or ten monasteries,
both for men and women, of the Order of the blessed
St. Francis, the principal monastery being in the chief
square. I went to lodge in it, having found there a
servant of our Cardinal of Castile who was a great
friend of mine, and I remained three days resting myself.
They say that the body of St. Francis is buried there in
a place which they show, but the truth is that no one
knows the exact spot, not even those in the monastery,
except the Pope, one cardinal, and a brother of the
monastery, to whom the Pope confides the secret.
The monastery is very notable and very richly adorned:

Departing thence I set out for Gubbio which belongs

44.

GUBBIO—RIMINI

to the Count of Urbino of the House of Malatesta,”
but by the way I came upon armed troops placed there
by Count Francesco, who at that time was making war
on the Pope and had occupied many places, and I was
advised to send my horses from Assisi with a man well
known there who was going to see the Count, and that
I should be wise to go on foot, which I accordingly did,
and after walking for two days and a half I reached
Gubbio, a great city belonging to the Count. I found
then that the Count was going forth on foot in pro-
cession to greet the Cardinal of Colonna, his wife’s
brother, and nephew of Pope Martin, and I saw him
coming, surrounded by clerics and singing with them,
and thus they met the Cardinal and received him most
honourably. I presented myself to the Count and
made my reverence, and begged him, for the love of
God, to assist me, as I was a poor man who had come
from Rome and was going to Jerusalem; but my men
remained behind, as I had told them not to come
with me. The Count took me aside, but first he
asked me whence I came. I said: “From Spain.”
He then enquired if I was of gentle birth, and I said,
“Yes ”: whether I was a knight, and I said, “ Yes.”
He then desired to be informed how I had come and
of what I had need. I informed him of my coming,
and that I had arrived on foot, further, that I had need
of nothing as I had sufficient for my journey, but that
I had come in this guise in order to see him and have
speech with him ‘Thereupon he embraced me closely
and said: “ Even against your will you shall be assisted
here to the best of my ability,’ but I replied that I
could under no circumstances accept anything so long
as I had what was needful, for so I had resolved before
departing from my country. He made me, however,
remain there two days to rest and enjoy myself, after
which he called a squire and ordered him to accompany
me through his dominions as far as Rimini, which is

45

TRAVELS OP. PERO mea Ur

a port and a possession of his, and that he was to bear
all my expenses. Further, that at Rimini he was to
provide me with a ship and with all necessaries for my
journey to Venice. At parting the Count took me by
the hand and led me to his room and told me to take
whatever I had need of, and he gave me of his own
shirts and woollen garments and towels, of each three
pairs, and was much distressed because I did not want
to accept anything else, and he said farewell to me very
humanly as if we had been equals. He charged me
much to remember him in my prayers and to come and
visit him on my return. But this good Count is now
dead, and they say that he died very piously and has
been canonized as a saint.

In Gubbio there are many relics, among them the
finger of the right hand of John the Baptist, with which
he pointed when he said: ecce agnus Dei. I departed
with that squire and came to Urbino, which belongs
to the Count, and remained there a day, after which,
in two days, we arrived at Rimini, a great city, also the
Count’s, and I stayed there two days. ‘The squire
prepared a boat for me and victualled it, and paid all
charges as far as Venice, and as I parted from him he
said: “ Sir knight, the Count, my Master, ordered me
to give you a hundred ducats: see, here they are.” I
bade him thank the Count greatly for his kindness and
liberality, but said that I had sufficient for my needs,
and that on my homeward journey, if I was in diffi-
culties, I should certainly crave assistance from him, and
that I should shortly return. I begged him, further, to
kiss the Count’s hands for me, and thus we parted.

I now embarked on board my ship, and we set sail
and arrived the following day at Ravenna, a very
ancient place and large, although not well populated.
There we found a good wind, and at Vespers we
reached Venice, where I was well received by m
friends the merchants, and found the money I had left

46

VENICE

there at my departure in good hands. I took up my
quarters in the house of my friend Carlo Morosini, and
spent thirty days or more there until Ascension Day,
which falls in May, the month when the ships, especially
the pilgrims’ galleys, have leave to depart. During
the intervening time I made my contract with the
galley-master, as the custom is, for my passage and
provisions, with a supply of preserves for morning,
afternoon and evening, the cost for the outward and
return journey being thirty-five ducats for each person.
But since I proposed to stay at Jerusalem, I paid for
myself and my two squires the sum of sixty ducats, that
is twenty ducats for each of us. I passed my time at
Venice very pleasantly and restfully, at small expense,
_ and each day I went about seeing many remarkable
and delightful things. Every hour there came news
from all countries of the world, for the sea-borne
traffic is very great, and ships are continually arriving
from all parts, and if one desires to have news of any
place it is only necessary to enquire of the ships.

47

CHAPTERS

Departure from Venice —Parenzo.—Zara.—Ragusa.—Corfu.—Gulf
of Patras —Isthmus of Corinth—A monastery of Greek monks.—
Modone.—Island of Cythera —Crete-—Rhodes—The Knights
Hospitallers—Arrival at Faffa.

On Ascension Day, after receiving the blessing, we
departed and set sail at noon, and took the left side of
the gulf towards Esclavonia [Dalmatia], the greater
part of which is Venetian, and all along the coast there
are many safe harbours and islands and ports for taking
in provisions. ‘The next day we came to a town called
Parenzo, and from there we sailed for Zara, a town of
the Venetians. Thence we reached Ragusa which is
under the dominion of the Emperor. All this time
we kept passing islands belonging to Esclavonia, some
populated and some uninhabited. The country is
very mountainous and bare; and the inhabitants are
the tallest I have ever seen, but what a barbarous people
they are! In these parts are bred the best falcons in
the world, except the Norwegian, and it is said that
silver is to be found in many places.

We continued our voyage along the Gulf, passing
Valona, a large city, which had recently fallen into the
hands of the Turks, and then, leaving Esclavonia, we
sailed by Albania, which is part of the same coast,
and left Italy and the Cape of Spartivento on the right
hand. The Gulf of Venice runs for 800 miles between
Italy and Esclavonia, and at the end of it is the island
of Corfu, which the Venetians call their door, although
Venice is in fact 800 miles away. On the right hand is
that part of Italy called Apulia and the Tierra di Lavoro,
and, on the left, Esclavonia, formerly called Dalmatia,
and a great part of Albania. The island of Corfu is

48

CORFU—MODONE

inhabited by Greeks. Not long ago King Ladislaus
of Naples’ took it and held it with the intention of
capturing Jerusalem, of which he called himself king,
and it is said that in his necessity he sold the island to
the Venetians who now possess it. We remained there
two days, waiting for a favourable wind, and on the
third day we departed, sailing for Modone, which is
in Greece. This day we passed the Gulf of Patras
on the left hand, and much enjoyed the sight of it.
Here the city of Corinth is situated, a very ancient
_ place with magnificent buildings, now much depopu-
lated. This gulf strikes inland, and with the other
eulf which enters from the other side it forms the
peninsula of Morea, which in ancient times was called
Achaia. It is governed by the Emperor of Con-
Stantinople, and is the patrimony of the eldest son
whom they call Despot of Morea. These two gulfs eat
so far into the land that they say there is not a space
of two miles between them. An Emperor of Con-
Stantinople once wished to make the peninsula into
an island, but he changed his mind on the advice of
his counsellors. Nevertheless, he enclosed it with a
very Strong wall which can be seen to this day.

On the fourth day we came in sight of the city of
Modone. Six miles before we reached it we passed
a small island, on which is a notable monastery of
Greek brothers of St. Basil, whom the Latins call
monks, and since the wind had dropped, and I desired
to see the monastery, I asked the master to put me
ashore, and I carried some fish with me, since by their
rules the monks are never allowed to eat meat. They
received us very joyfully and showed us their house,
and soon afterwards we departed. The inhabitants
of the island told us that the monks live a very holy
life there. The monastery is called Stanphane.®
That day we arrived at Modone’, which lies between
that island and the island of Sapienza, and there we

49 F

TRAVELS) OF PRO alors

cast anchor and landed in order to provision the ship,
and to enable the master and the passengers to transact
certain business there, for they were Venetians and
the place belongs to Venice. There are 2000 inhabi-
tants, and the sea encloses it on both sides. It is well
walled and sufficiently strong, but flat. I saw there
numerous gardens supplied with all kinds of fruit,
and the soil is very productive, like that of Andalucia.
Lodging is good, the language is Greek, but the place
is governed from Venice. Six miles away is Corone,
which lies in the other gulf of which I spoke. It isa
large town and a powerful fortress. Here also Greek
is spoken, and it is likewise under the seigniory of
Venice. The Venetians have these possessions in
Morea because they are vital for their trade. The
people are very wealthy, for these places are the ports
of discharge for Greece and the Black Sea for all classes
of merchandise. We remained theresix days. Then
we sailed towards Candia, which was anciently called
Creta, where once King Agamemnon reigned, who led
the Greeks against the Trojans. We left the Archi-
pelago on the left, which is full of islands both popu-
lated and uninhabited, and among them I saw the
island of Cythera, which the Greeks call Cetril. Here
it was that Paris seized Helen and carried her off to
Troy. Isawalso a mighty rock which is very smooth,
but which rises to a great height. In the midst of it
is a cave, two hundred fathoms high and more than
that in depth.*

From Modone to the island of Crete the distance
is 350 miles, which we compassed in two days and
two nights, after which we arrived at the harbour of
Candia, and because the Latins of Crete know only
the city of Candia they call the whole kingdom by that
name. ‘The island® is very fertile and well supplied
with excellent towns and fortresses. The language
is Greek, and the government is from Venice, Each

$o

CANDIA—RHODES

year a Duke is sent as governor, and since, not long ago,
the islanders rose against the Venetians, who had to
send and recapture the place, an ordinance was issued
that in a certain part of the island nothing should be
sown, nor should the cattle be allowed to multiply.
This was done to decrease the prosperity of the people,
since everything is so abundant there. The city of
Candia is very large, with many great buildings. They
say that three miles away is that Labyrinth, made by
Daedalus, with many other antiquities. The city is
well built, with beautiful gardens and much water.
The harbour is remarkable, with an excellent mole made
artificially. There are also many wind-mills. At a
certain period of the year such multitudes of falcons
pass over the island that they can hardly find anyone
to buy them. We remained there three days, and
then sailed for Rhodes, leaving the Archipelago and
numerous islands on the left hand. ‘The distance
from Candia to Rhodes is 300 miles. On the third
day we reached the island, and found there certain
galleys and ships belonging to the King of Aragon,
but we armed ourselves and displayed our pennons
for Jerusalem, and when they saw these they left us
at once and sailed away.

The city of Rhodes is flat, but fortified with a moat
and wall, and on one side is a place apart where the
Knights Hospitallers of Jerusalem® have their residence,
which is called the Collachium, and in it is the Hospital
from which they take their name. _It is one of the most
magnificent houses of piety which I have ever seen, and,
indeed, in the matter of building and embellishments
and supplies it could not be improved. The Knights
receive anyone who is sick, and a patient dying there
is absolved from sin and punishment, and even for
those who visit the Hospital there are certain indul-
gences. This Hospital 1s situated just as one enters
the Collachium on the left hand, and it was built by

SI

TRAVELS OF PPR Ot ror

Don Anton de Fluvian, Grand Master of the Knights,
who was a Catalan by birth. From there we went to
see the city, passing many streets and houses of the
Knights, among them certain hostels where foreigners
eat and have their places of meeting, each nation
apart from the others, and a Knight has charge of
each one of these hostels, and provides for the necessi-
ties of the inmates according to their religion. At
the end of the Knights’ quarter, on the left hand, 1s
the church of St. John, to which they constantly
resort to say their office, and where they hold their
council. In this church there are many relics, includ-
ing, so they say, the basin in which Our Lord washed
His hands, and a large share of the money for which
He was sold, some of the thorns, a nail of the Cross,
and many others, and when they elect the Grand
Master, the Knights swear on these relics that, truly
and without favour, they will elect the one most worthy
to hold that office. In front of this church is the
house of the Grand Master, an ordinary dwelling and
not rich. There the Master is attended by twelve
Knights, called companions, who take counsel with
him and eat always at his board.

Every day throughout the year the Knights have to
give food to twelve poor people and serve them with
their own hands, except when they are occupied with
the sick or are absent. ‘There is another hostel which
is for the reception of pilgrims for Jerusalem, and
here they lodge every one according to his station,
and everything is provided except food. ‘There is
also a church where certain chaplains are charged with
the duty of saying Mass for the pilgrims, and all this
is done to keep them from the common inns. The
Knights visit them there, and anyone who desires to
take a guest with him may do so with leave of the
Marshal. The island of Rhodes is reasonably well
supplied with bread and wine, and with gardens.

§2

Pen Rey VntiertA k's fA BEA

Most of the gardens are for the service of the Master’s
table, and he portions them out among the twelve
companions who are with him. ‘There is also a fortress
in the island called Judigo. Much might be related of
this noble company of Knights, but I leave them now
to speak of other things.

We departed from Rhodes and sailed past Castel-
rosso, an island off the coast of Armenia, a very strong
fortress belonging to the Knights, and taking the
route to Cyprus, we coasted by Turkey where the great
Turkish lords have their habitations, the Caraman,
the lord of Candelor, the lord of Satalia, and other
powerful rulers. ‘There they showed us a city which
is said to have been destroyed for the crime of sodomy.
We sailed then for three days along the Gulf of Satalia
and reached the island of Cyprus, passing over against
a city called Paphos, now uninhabited by reason of
bad air and water, and since it is not the custom for
the pilgrims for Jerusalem to disembark in the island on
the outward journey, I am unable in this place to relate
more concerning it, but later I will speak of it. So
continuing our voyage to Jaffa, which is the port of
Jerusalem, from point to point a distance of 350
miles, we sailed for three days and nights, and on the
fourth day we came to the coast of the Holy Land, but
since the whole of that country is very flat the entrance
to Jaffa cannot be seen.

53

CHAPTER VI

The landing at Faffa—Ferusalem—The Holy Sepulchre—The holy
places. — Bethlehem.— Return to Ferusalem.— fFericho.— The
Fordan.—The pilgrims bathe and one is drowned.—Visit to Dead
Sea.—Mount Quarantana.—A French squire falls off the mountain.
—Trouble with an oficial —Fudgment and execution —Bethany.—
Mount Tabor —Tafur penetrates into the Mosque of Omar.—Second
visit to the Holy Sepulchre—Three pilgrims dubbed knights.

Wuen the pilgrim ship arrives at Jaffa the fact is
known almost at once to the Prior of Mount Sion, who
sends two or three friars to the Governor of Jerusalem
who return with the Sultan’s safe-conduct.' They
take the pilgrims ashore and deliver their names in
writing to the Governor, and they themselves retain
another list, and in this manner all fear of imposture is
avoided. As one disembarks, there are Moors ready
with asses which the pilgrims ride all the time that
they are in the Holy Land. ‘Two ducats is the price
fixed for the hire, and this cannot be increased or
diminished. ‘The Governor and the friars travel with
the pilgrims to Rama, a great place, five leagues from
Jaffa, where there is a hostel founded for pilgrims by
Duke Godfrey of Bouillon when he took the Holy
Sepulchre. It is well provided with many apartments,
some for men and some for women, and we remained
there one day. The next morning we travelled two
miles to the monastery of St. George, where his body
is said to lie, and where he is believed to have slain
the dragon, but others say that he slew it at Beyrout
which is the port of Damascus. That day we slept at
a place five leagues from there, close to a castle called
Emmaus, and the following day we left early and
travelled another five leagues to the city of Jerusalem,
of which we obtained a good prospect some four

54

JERUSALEM

leagues off. We could see a number of buildings,
as well as Mount Sion, and the castles of King David,
and the Holy Sepulchre which is a very lofty
church.

As we entered Jerusalem the Christians, both Greeks
and other nations, came out to receive us and carried
us to a great square in front of the Holy Sepulchre
where we prayed, but they did not let us goin. They
then took us to a hostel, likewise founded by Duke
Godfrey of Bouillon, where we found an abundance of
food cooked in various ways, which the Greeks make
ready and sell to the Christians. Not long after, the
Prior of Mount Sion came with his friars, bringing
with them ten or twelve knights who are accustomed
to live in the monastery, and we were very comfortably
lodged. The Prior left two friars who were to accom-
pany us from that day onwards and show us the sights
in Jerusalem and the vicinity. This monastery of
Mount Sion is situated on one side of the city on the
highest point, and in it are many places where Our
Lord worked great miracles. There is also a lofty
tower in the vault of which, when the disciples were
gathered together, Our Lord appeared to them in
tongues of fire—this was the Feast of Pentecost. From
here one can see the sea of Sodom and Gomorrah,
which they call the Dead Sea, where once were five
cities. Beneath this tower is also a chapel where Our
Lord appeared to St. Thomas the Apostle and told
him to put his hand into His side, and many other
things also happened in this place. At the entrance,
in the centre of a Street, is the house of the Virgin
Mary, and close to it, behind the monastery, is the
place where Our Lord partook of the Last Supper
with His disciples. This day we rested there, and the
next day we heard Mass in the Holy Sepulchre, which
is only open once a year, and there they took count of
us according to the list which they made at Jaffa.

55

TRAVELS (OF SP ERO gyre rae ae

Each pilgrim paid seven ducats and a half, and with
the two paid for the beasts, and certain payments
made in small coin in the holy places—eleven of these
coins being worth a ducat—each pilgrim paid twelve
and a half ducats as tolls.

As we were preparing to enter the Holy Sepulchre,
there came out to meet us in procession all those
Christians who had been locked up there since the year
before,” that is to say the Catholics (three Franciscan
friars), the Greeks, the Jacobite Christians, the Ar-
menians, those of Cinturia, India and the Copts, in all
seven different kinds of Christians, and we joined the
procession and went into the Holy Sepulchre. This
is a great church, exceeding lofty, with an immense
opening through which the light enters. Within is
another smaller chapel, in which is the Holy Sepulchre
itself, and this is so small that there is no room in it,
except for the priest who says Mass and the server.
After worshipping there we went with the procession
to Mount Calvary, where Our Lord was crucified, which
is twelve or fifteen paces from that place. This is
a great rock upon which stands a chapel, most richly
ornamented with mosaic work. The hole in which
the Cross was placed is still to be seen, as well as the
holes where the crosses of the two thieves stood, After
praying there, we descended to the place where Christ
was anointed, and thence to the room where He was
detained before the crucifixion, Afterwards we saw
the place where St. Helena found the Cross, as well as
the spot which Our Lord indicated as the centre of
the world. Adjoining is the dwelling of the friars,
where the relics are kept, and where Our Lord appeared
to St. Mary Magdaleneasa gardener. At the entrance
is a great hall hung with pennons and flags of many
kings and Christian princes, and here the knights set
up their arms. All these things and many more are to
be seen on the way in from this cemetery, and all the holy

56

PLATE II

THE HOLY SEPULCHRE

From a Book of Hours

)

before 1480

(

[face p, 56

JERUSALEM

relics are there, and each one of the aforesaid Christians
has a separate chapel.

We left the procession and heard Mass, and then
had dinner, which the Greeks had prepared for us very
well for our money. ‘That day the Moors and Christians
had licence to display goods for us to buy, and we rested
a day and night, hearing divine offices, each one in
the manner of his country. Here is the tomb of
Godfrey de Bouillon, with an inscription engraved on
a stone as follows.* [It is missing.] Close to this is
the tomb of Baldwin, his brother, made in the same
manner, with this inscription. [It is missing.] The
following day, when we had heard Mass, they opened
the doors and let us out after counting us, and sent us
to our hostel. That day we saw the Campo Santo
and the Valley of Jehoshaphat, where is the sepulchre
of the Virgin Mary, which is an underground vault
reached by fifteen or twenty steps. The Franciscans
are the guardians. Here we paid certain moneys.
From there we went to the place where Our Lord was
taken in the garden, and afterwards to the Mount of
Olives, where Christ ascended to Heaven. ‘There isa
notable church here, with a stone with the imprint of
His foot upon it. We saw also the place where the
disciples, being gathered together, composed the
Creed, and from there we continued to the spot where
Christ uttered the Pater Noster. Close by is the
elder-tree where Judas hanged himself. Then, as we
returned to Jerusalem, we passed the place where the
wood of the Cross was kept for a long time, and not
far off is the site of the stoning of St. Stephen. We
entered the city close by the Golden Gate, which
adjoins the Temple of Solomon, and passed the pool
where the Angel troubled the waters, and the sick were
healed. Then we saw the Houses of Pilate and
Caiaphas where Christ was judged. Here they still
sentence people to death. We saw also the street

on

TRAVELS OF “PH ROeer Aa

called Amargura, where Our Lord carried the Cross
on His shoulders, which is a covered way. Here the
rain water is colleéted and stored in cisterns from which
the people drink, for the city is badly supplied with
water. ‘This day we slept at our hostel.
The next day we departed early from Jerusalem with
the Governor and the friars, and set out for Bethlehem,
five leagues from there, where on the way they showed
us a chapel which marks the spot where the Star
appeared to the Three Kings, and a league further on we
came to the house of the prophet Elijah. At noon we
arrived at Bethlehem, a small town with some fifty
inhabitants. There the Moors vied with us in showing
reverence, and we entered the monastery which is very
notable and wealthy, with fine buildings. Six friars
live here continually, and they came out in procession
to receive us, and took us at once to a chapel under-
ground where Our Lord was born, and close to it is the
crib, and at the going out is the place where Christ
was circumcised. ‘Then we saw the vaults where the
Innocents are buried, and in these vaults is the place
where St. Jerome translated the Bible, and here we
rested that day and paid fees. The following day,
after Mass, we departed for the place where St. John
the Baptist was born, a distance of five leagues. Here
lived St. Zachariah, and here he wrote the psalm
Benedidus Dominus Deus Israel. In this place there
are many holy things. We remained at Bethlehem all
that day, and the next day we returned to Jerusalem,
which is three leagues distant, where we arrived very
early. We spent the day visiting certain sanétuaries
in Jerusalem: the house of St. Anna, the house where
St. Peter denied Our Lord (here is also the stone with
which the sepulchre was closed); the houses of St.
James, the Greater and the Less, and the grave of
Absalom which is situated outside the city. It is
related that within the last few days, as some Moors

58

»

JERICHO

were seeking treasure there, a cry was heard and they
were brought out dead. We saw also a fountain which
they say Our Lady, the Virgin, caused to spring forth,
as well as the place where Our Lord fell when carrying
the Cross, the castles of King David, the place where
ek washed the disciples’ feet, and many other holy
places.

We rested for a day, and then set forth early from
Jerusalem with the Governor and the friars, and dined
two leagues from there at the castle and place called
Madalon, which was the inheritance of Mary Mag-
dalene. There is a notable church here, as well as
the place where Our Lord raised Lazarus from the
dead, and other holy sites. Here we paidfees. In the
evening we departed and came toa place which belonged
to Martha, the sister of Mary Magdalene, and slept
that night at a house in a mountain where Our Lord
healed the sick which were brought to Him. The next
morning we came to Jericho, which is fifteen leagues
from Jerusalem. ‘There is here a great valley, and a
vast plain through which the river Jordan flows to the
place where Our Lord baptized St. John the Baptist,
and was baptized of him. A stone cross in the water
marks the spot. Here we all bathed, and a German
gentleman belonging to our party perished by drowning.
This is a place of the greatest sanctity.

The pilgrims had to return that night to sleep at
Jericho and to go the next day to Quarantana, where
Our Lord fasted. But I arranged with a Moor to take
me to the desert of Arabia, three leagues farther on,
where St. John preached, and where the first hermit,
St. Anthony, as well as other Holy Fathers, retired to
live, and from there I returned by the Dead Sea, where
were Sodom and Gomorrah and three other cities,
five cities in all, which were overthrown for the sin of
sodomy. ‘The water is so foul that it cannot be de-
scribed, and they say that no fish can breed there and

59

TRAVELS OF -PiiROV a Areas

that no birds frequent the place. The Moor who
travelled with me told me a great marvel: that the
river Jordan enters the lake and emerges at the other
side without mixing with the fetid waters, and that in
the midst of the lake one can drink of the sweet water
of the river. All about this valley there are certain
tall and very Straight trees, much burdened with a
fruit like citrons, and if one touches them with the
fingers, however lightly, they break and a smoke comes
out, and the evil smell remains on the hand all that
day.*

The following day I returned and dined at Jericho,
which is a village with about a hundred inhabitants,
and there I gathered some of those roses which are
beneficial to women in labour, and saw many holy
places associated with Our Lord. At the head of that
river is the province called Bethany-trans-Jordan.
That night I slept at the mountain where Our Lord
fasted where I again joined the pilgrims. This is a
very high mountain range in the centre of which are
some small chapels, and there is a road for the ascent,
made by St. Helena to do honour to the place. But
as we were ascending, a squire of France, going to the
assistance of a lady, fell headlong from the mountain
and was dashed in pieces on the rocks below, for the
place is very perilous to climb. We then descended,
and by another and easier route we reached the very
summit where Our Lord was tempted of the devil.
We then returned and came to a fountain where the
people from Jericho had brought food to sell tous. We
remained there that night, and the next morning we
took up the corpse of that squire and carried it to the
before-mentioned house on the mountain, and there we
buried it, after which we remained there that day.

The next morning we returned to the castle of
Madalon, but the Governor remained behind as he was
going hunting. He commended us, however, to one

60

Mel URNY TO JERUSALEM

of his knights, who accompanied us to the church where
Lazarus was raised from the dead. ‘The officer there
demanded tribute, but the Moor who was with us
refused to pay, saying that it was not customary, and the
quarrel grew so heated that the officer and his men
took up arms against the knight who had charge of us
and wounded him. But we went to his assistance
and attacked and wounded many of the Moors, and
finally we captured the officer and his fellows and
carried them before the Governor, who meanwhile
had drawn near. The Governor at once held his
enquiry and pronounced sentence of death on the
officer, whose head was cut off without more ado,
while the other prisoners were ordered to be flogged.
We remained there until evening, and then returned
to sleep at Jerusalem. ‘The next day we departed with
the same knight and came to Bethany, where they
showed us many holy places, including Mount Tabor,
where Our Lord was transfigured, and it is said that
here also is the Vale of Hebron, where are the graves
of Adam and Eve. We returned that night to Jerusa-
lem, passing several holy places, among them the
garden where Our Lord prayed and was taken, and we
reached the city early.

That night I bargained with a renegade, a native
of Portugal, and offered him two ducats if he would
get me into the Temple of Solomon,’ and he con-
sented. Atoneo’clock in the night I entered, dressed
in his clothes, and saw the Temple which is a single
nave, the whole ornamented with gold mosaic work.
The floor and walls are of the most beautiful white
Stones, and the place is hung with so many lamps that
they all seemed to be joined together. The roof above
is quite flat and is covered with lead. They say, in truth,
that when Solomon built it, it was the most magnificent
building in the whole world. Afterwards it was
destroyed and rebuilt, but to-day, without doubt, it

61

TRAY Eis 90 F PER Oe tears.

is Sill unmatched. If I had been recognized there as
a Christian I should have been killed immediately.
Not long ago this Temple was a consecrated church,
but a favourite of the Sultan prevailed on him to take
it and turn it into a mosque. The renegade who
had escorted me now returned with me to Mount
Sion where the friars mourned for me as one already
dead, since I had not come at the appointed time, and
they rejoiced greatly to see me again, as did also the
gentlemen of my company.

We had ordained to go the next day to hear Mass
and to remain a day and night in the Holy Sepulchre.
Accordingly, we arrived at daybreak, and they opened
the doors with the same ceremonies as before. ‘That
day we confessed and received the Sacrament, and I
dubbed three gentlemen Knights of the Holy Sepulchre,
two Germans and a Frenchman,° and we placed our
arms in the accustomed place and took some of the
relics which the guardian gave us, and the next day at
dawn we heard Mass and departed. We spent the
whole of this day and the next in visiting holy places
and in preparation for our departure. I had been
enquiring as to the possibility of visiting St. Catherine’s
monastery on Mount Sinai, which is close to the Red
Sea, but learnt that the escort with the camels had
already departed with an ambassador from Turkey
to the Sultan at Babylonia, so that my journey could
not be undertaken. I was willing to remain there
until next year, if needs be, but the guardian advised
me to go to Cyprus to see the Cardinal, brother of the
old King, stating that he would give me a safe-conduét
for Babylonia and that I could reach Mount Sinai from
there, and I decided to do this.

62

CHAP PERMVit

Departure for Cyprus.—Rama.— Ff affa—Beyrout.—Colchis.—Cyprus.
—Nicosia—Mosen Suarez and the late King’s captivity —Tafur
is appointed ambassador to the Sultan of Egypt.

THE next day we departed with the Governor and
the friars and slept at Rama. The following day we
reached the port of Jaffa, where we found the galleys
awaiting us, and we went on board, and the Moors
and friars returned to Jerusalem while we set sail for
Beyrout. This day the Governor Nagardin came to
me and related what befell the King of Denmark, and
so we arrived at the port of Damascus. We passed
along the coast by Tyre, Ascalon and Acre, where is
a castle to which the Knights of St. John withdrew
when they lost Jerusalem. Close by is Nazareth,
where Our Lady was saluted, which is in Galilee, and
so we arrived at Beyrout. Here the patrons of the
galleys took in merchandise, and I desired to see
Damascus, but they could not stay for me. From
here I saw Mount Lebanon, where all the trees are
cedars, but they looked like laurels. Here, in Beyrout,
they say that St. George slew the dragon, and now they
find these creatures in the fields under the stones, like
scorpions, and they grow no larger and have no poison.
This, they say, is due to the prayers of the blessed
St. George. I gathered much information concerning
Damascus, but since I did not see the place I pass it
over and leave it to those that have been there. We
departed from Beyrout by the coast of Syria as far as
Armenia, where of old Antioch is said to have stood,
and they showed it tous. ‘Then, proceeding along the
coast, we saw the castle of Colchis where Medea lived,
and the island of the Golden Fleece. This castle

63

TRAVELS! (OF @2 GR Oni yas

belongs to the Kings of Cyprus, wherefore they call
themselves Kings of Armenia. In this part of
Armenia there is a high mountain range called the
Black Mountain, and here, they say, Noah’s ark rested
after the Flood.

Over against this castle is the island of Cyprus, and
in that part which faces Armenia is the ancient city
of Famagusta, which the Genoese captured when they
took the King of Cyprus and carried him to Genoa
with his wife,! and there the Queen gave birth to a son
whom they called Janus, who was the father of the’
present king. The place is depopulated on account
of bad air and water. ‘They say that there is a lake
here called Gostanca which is the cause of the ill-
health. Nevertheless, the Kingdom of Cyprus is for
the most part unhealthy. We arrived at daybreak
and anchored to take in cargo, and I bade farewell to
the ship’s master and to my friends, and had my goods
putonshore. I caused enquiries to be made for beasts
for me and my people and goods, and I departed forth-
with and took the road for Nicosia, which is ten leagues
away. ‘This is the chief city of the Kingdom and the
most healthy, and here the Kings are accustomed to
hold their court, and the lords of the Kingdom have
their dwellings there. Since it was already late I had
to stay at an inn, two leagues from the city. As I was
going along I was seized with such terrible pains in
my head that I thought I was about to die. The pain
descended to my legs and attacked the stomach, the
belly, hips, thighs and the knees down to the feet,
and it lasted all that night and the following day
until Vespers. I could not but think that if each
separate pain was to endure for three hours I should
certainly die.

That night I departed and came to the city of Nicosia
where the King then was, and I lodged ataninn. The
next morning, as I was hearing Mass in the church of

64

Cari Uks

St. George, a squire approached me from the Lady
Ines,” sister of the late King Janus, she having sent
him to summon me to her presence. And after Mass I
went with the squire to the palace of that lady and made
my reverence, and she received me very graciously,
desiring to know who I was and whence I came and
whither I was going. After much speech with me she
gave directions that I should take up my lodging in her
house, and ordered all things necessary to be prepared
for me and mine. This lady was very noble, but
unmarried, having in youth resolved to remain a virgin,
and she was continually in the King’s council, and by
her influence controlled most of the affairs in the
Kingdom, and she was about fifty years of age. After
I had rested she conducted me the next day to the
King, her nephew,° and to the Cardinal, her brother.
I then made my reverence to both, and they received
me very graciously, and I related to them the reason
for my journey, stating that in the first place I had come
there to visit the King and his court, and secondly to
obtain a safe-conduct for my journey to Babylonia
and Mount Sinai. I showed them my letters from
King Juan, recommending me to the Cardinal of
Cyprus who at that time was in Italy, but now I found
him here, and he promised to help me in what ways
he could. ‘There was present at this interview Mosen
Suarez, admiral of Cyprus, and he approached me with
great friendliness, saying that he was a Castilian, as I
was, and he craved leave of the King and the Cardinal
and the Lady Ines to take me as his guest, and the
Lady Ines made objection, but finally she consented,
and I went with him to his house.

This knight was born in Segovia, of the family of
Cernadilla, and being young and on his travels, he came
to Cyprus on the very day on which the late King was
fighting with the Sultan’s forces, and he carried him-
self so valiantly in battle that he saved the King’s life,

65 F

TRAV EUS Oi ep as RO mee Os

but he was taken prisoner with him and carried to
Babylonia# There is a custom among the Moors
that none may ride on horseback who is not a renegade
Christian, and that day, as they entered Babylonia, the
King being a captive, they brought two horses, one for
the King and one for Mosen Suarez,° and when they
were come into the presence of the Sultan he gave
orders, having heard the truth of the affair, that Mosen
Suarez should be honoured equally with the King.
After some days, when they were speaking of the
King’s ransom, the Sultan told Mosen Suarez that if
' he wished to further the release of the King, he would
set him free on his word that he would go and return
with the ransom, or at least come back himself. Mosen
Suarez promised accordingly, and the Sultan ordered
that everything should be prepared for him, and when
asked in what guise he would go, he replied that he
would travel as a Syrian. Thereupon the Sultan fitted
him out and gave him licence, and he departed and came
to Cyprus, and after taking counsel with the Cardinal
and the Lady Ines, and their advisers, it was ordained
to send certain knights to the kings and princes of
Christendom to seek their aid in ransoming the King
(I saw there the knight who was sent to Castile, who
was called Jacobo Guiri), and the lot fell upon this
same Mosen Suarez to go to Rome to the Pope. In
due time each returned from his mission, bringing back
what he could, and the necessary guarantees having
been obtained, Mosen Suarez, with the others of the
Council, took a sum of gold, which was 300,000
ducats, and set out with it to the King.

As soon as they were come to Babylonia the Sultan
heard of it, and sent orders to go out and receive them,
and he showed Mosen Suarez as much honour as if he
had been his own son. The release of the King was
secured in this wise: the Sultan took the gold, and in
‘addition the King of Cyprus obliged himself to send

66

NICOSTA

each year 8000 ducats, and so the matter was con-
cluded. The Sultan gave orders to prepare the
necessary things and the ships to carry the King to
his country. Moreover, the King showed much favour
to Mosen Suarez and also to the Sultan’s chief inter-
preter, a native of Castile who was a Jew of Seville
and a renegade, for services rendered to him in his
prison, and each year the present King sends him 200
ducats. When the King returned to his Kingdom
and conferred with his lords, he took Mosen Suarez
by the hand and made him sit down at his side, and
said that if he had no legitimate son he would bequeath
the Kingdom to him, The King also sent for one of
his bastard daughters who was there, and married
Mosen Suarez to her, and made him his admiral and
his heir.

After I had passed four or five days in the house of
the admiral Mosen Suarez, the Cardinal sent for me
and told me that I was to go to hear Mass with the
King, and that he would give me occasion for my journey
to Babylonia, and that I was to dine with him. After
Mass the King went apart to a corner of the church
with the Cardinal and his aunt and with his councillors,
and presently the Cardinal came and told me from the
King that he knew of my desire to go to Babylonia and
Mount Sinai, and that as the King had to send an
ambassador to the Sultan about his affairs he had asked
me to accept the office, and that by doing this I should
be serving the King well. I knew that the Cardinal
placed the affair in that light in order to honour me, and
I replied that I was content to serve the King in this
manner, since I knew him to be a Christian, and of the
nation of France. ‘Thereupon, the King sent for me
to dine with him and the Cardinal, and he gave me
directions for my journey.

67

CHAPTER AV IE

Departure from Cyprus-—Damietta—Weasels and carrier-pigeons.—
A narrow escape-——The Nile-—Crocodiles.—Hippopotamt.—
Fourney up the Nile to Babylonia (Cairo)—The Mamelukes.—
Reception by the Sultan of Egypt—La Matarea—T he Pyramids.—
Elephants.—A Giraffe—A game of Polo.

I pepartep for Paphos, where the King had ordered
me to be received in a village on a mountain, for the
plague was in Paphos, and this village had escaped,
and I lodged in the house of Diego Thenorio, a Castilian
squire, with whom I had much pleasure. At the end
of three days a ship with eighteen rowers arrived at
Paphos, which was to carry me and the King’s inter-
preter who was with me, the ship being as well victualled
as if for the King’s household, and with it came the
particulars of the business I had to transact with the
Sultan. ‘The second day we set sail, and after being
eleven days at sea, with favourable winds, we arrived at
last at the port of Damietta, where the river Nile,
which comes down from the terrestrial paradise, flows
into the Mediterranean Sea, and there we entered the
river and reached Damietta, a league and a half from
the sea. It is as big as Salamanca and is abundantly
supplied with bread and grapes, and all manner of
fruits and sugar. ‘The city is very flat and unwalled
and without a castle. It is excessively hot, but the
dwellings are very cool. There are so many weasels,
both in the streets and houses, that they are more
numerous than are mice with us, even in places where
they abound. I saw there for the first time carrier
pigeons’ which take letters in their tail-feathers. They
carry them from the place where they are bred to other
places, and when the letters are detached they are set
free and return to their homes. By this means the
68

DAMIE'E TA

inhabitants have speedy news of all who come and go
by sea or land, and thus escape surprise, since they live
without defences, and have neither walls nor fortresses.

As soon as I arrived I was taken to the Governor,
and I told him that I had come to the Sultan and
asked him for a small boat to carry me farther, since
the ship which had been sent with me could not be
navigated in the river, and he gave directions for me
to be received in his house while the necessary arrange-
ments were being made. While I was there certain
Moors came, saying that I was a Catalan, and that
they had seen me at meat with the Lord of Candelor, and
that they could prove it, and they brought two Turkish
gentlemen who, they said, had been present and could
testify to the truth of what was alleged. And they
came and saw me, but said at once that the Moors
lied. Whereupon I enquired: “If the Turks had
said otherwise, what would have been my fate?”
They replied that I should have been executed at once,
since whatever a Turk said was accepted as true. In
this district more dates are produced than in any other
part of the world. ‘The Nile passes through the city,
that is, one of two arms of the river which separate
about a day’s journey from Babylonia.2 In the month
of September, when I was there, the water rises and
floods the whole country, and when the water is at its
height great numbers of fish enter the river from the
sea and are found even among the houses. The heat
is very great, and consequently the houses are built
for the most part with openings towards the river, so
_that water can be collected easily, and at times the fish
come in through the openings and are washed up on
to the ground and caught.

In this river there are great beasts which breed there
called cocatriz,* and when they are in the water neither
man nor beast can escape them. ‘They say that they
are afraid of buffaloes, and for this cause, since there

69

TRAVEUS (Oba raeO7e la he

are no bridges in those parts, nor can any be made
because of the great stretches of sand, the poor people,
who would otherwise have to hire boats, mount these
buffaloes and cross the river upon them without any
danger. These creatures are accustomed to come out
of the water five or six paces, and when it is sunny
they become very sleepy, and those that set out to kill
them take a lance with an arrow at the end, fitted with
barbs, which grip when they enter and fasten themselves
in the flesh. At the other end a cord is tied, some 100
or 150 fathoms long, and when they approach the
beast they strike below the ribs, which is the only
vulnerable spot, and the iron enters, whereupon they
pull the cord tight. As soon as the beast feels that it
is hurt it makes for the water, and they play out the
cord until it becomes tired. Then they pull it ashore
and carry it about through the towns and villages,
begging alms, as they do in Castile when they kill a
wolf. ‘These creatures are shaped likea lizard. Their
top and bottom teeth fit into each other so closely that
when they seize anything they cannot easily let go.
On land they flee from everything, because they are
not at home there. I saw many of these creatures in
that river. ‘They say also that in the same river there
are other beasts, although I did not see them, which
are neither more nor less than horses, except that their
jaws are as broad as their foreheads, and they come out
of the water to graze, and the men make pits in the
ground and cover them, like the wolf pits in Castile,
and so they kill them, although they do no harm either
in or out of the water. The water of the Nile is the
best in the world and seems, in truth, to be water of
paradise. During the whole period of my visit I
drank nothing but this water, although I could have
had excellent wine. In this place there are quails
like those of Castile, which they sell, ten for a
maravedi, and they kill them with dogs, beating them

7O

TOE IGG ENE
up with sticks with two or three bells fastened to
the end.

I remained at Damietta eight days, by which time
the Governor had a ship prepared to take me to Baby-
lonia. These ships are as long as a great galley, and
are furnished with rooms from one end to the other
where one can lodge. ‘They have flat keels, since they
have to ride in shallow water. They carry much cargo
and are rigged with a sail as high as a carack’s, but it
is a narrow and lateen sail like that of a galley. It
happens at times, when the river is rising, they cannot
move a yard forward, although they work with sails
and oars, unless they can get clear of the current, or
land men to tow them with long ropes. They carry
three drums, one in the poop, one in the prow and one
amidships to frighten away the cocatriz. ‘They do not
dare to take water from the river by hand, but they
bind a vessel to a long pole and take water in that
manner.

I now departed from Damietta, continuing my
journey up the river. On either side the shore is
sprinkled with villages down to the water’s edge.
I arrived at the place where the two arms of the river
separate, the one I followed, and the other goes to
Alexandria. There are men at Babylonia* who shave
the head, the beard, the eyebrows and the eyelids,
and they appear to live like mad people, saying that they
do this out of holiness, and that for the service of God
they eschew the world and its pomps, and for this
reason also they shave themselves. Some go about
wearing horns, others bedaubed with honey and
feathered, and others carrying poles with lanterns and
lights hanging from them; others have bows and arrows
drawn ready to shoot, and thus in diverse manners they
go about, saying that they are persecutors of the
Christians. [he Moors show them great reverence.
One day I met a number of them and asked where they

FI

TRAVELS ™ Oe? ERO alate ees.

were going, and they said that they were about to enter
the fire with the Christian dogs to see who would burn
the faster. In Alexandria there is abundance of flax
from which they make excellent linen.

So, continuing our journey, we came in seven days to
Babylonia and disembarked at the port, where there 1s
a corn-market frequented by Christians, and we
unloaded all our goods from the ship and lodged there
that night. The next day in the morning we hired
asses, very well equipped with saddles and bridles, and
very fast, with a man to guide us to the house of the
Sultan’s chief interpreter, and it took us from dawn to
midday to reach his house. When we had arrived
I gave him the letters and saluted him from the King
of Cyprus, and paid him also the 200 ducats sent by
the King in accordance with the provisions of his
father’s will, which direCted that sum to be paid to him
for life, in return for services rendered to the King in
prison. He received me very graciously and lodged
me in his house. I remained there two days before
I could see the Sultan, and during that time the inter-
preter spoke much with me, and asked me about my-
self, and heard from me how that I was a Castilian,
born in Seville, whereat he was very pleased, for he too
had been born there, but had been carried as a child
to Jerusalem with his father, who was a Jew, and on
his father’s death he became a Moor. At first they
called him Haym, but nowSaym. He wanted to know
who I was and whence I had come, and I hid nothing
of my deeds in order to avail myself of his services and
counsel.

I was as well received in the house of this interpreter
as if I had been his son, and he allowed me to mix with
his wives and children, telling me that it was the
greatest honour be could show me, and, indeed, it
seemed that I was of his country, since his children were
so fond of me. This gentleman would be about go

72

BABYLONIA (CAIRO)

years old, but, notwithstanding his age, he was Still able
to beget children, and while I was there one of his
Wives gave birth to a son. He has four Christian
Wives, such as are purchased in the Black Sea, for they
hold it a great dishonour to marry a Moor by birth.
During those three days, before I could see the Sultan,
he showed me many things, so that it would take long
to write of them. ‘The third day he took the letters
which I brought for the Sultan, and he carried them
himself, and showed them and took counsel about the
replies. That night he brought them back to me
closed and told me, as I was his fellow countryman,
that the Sultan had already seen the letters, since it was
held to be a disgrace not to reply immediately, and
therefore it was the custom to read them first, but that
I should be well advised to propose my business without
letting it be understood that I knew what had been
told me. ;

The next morning he sent to make ready the beasts
for me and mine, and at sunrise we set out for the
Sultan’s palace. Before we arrived we were able to
eat and drink by the way, for men go about carrying
portable stoves with ready cooked food, others sell
fruit, others water, and many things besides. We
arrived at the principal mosque, which is a very re-
markable thing to see, but there are better in Christian
lands. We then came to a great square where there
were men on horseback, and armed tents, and we
learnt that outside the city there were more horsemen,
for this was the day on which the Sultan is saluted.
I cannot describe the number of men-at-arms, on horse
and on foot, and keep silence, since I do not wish to
relate what is hard to credit, although, indeed, in these
parts anything may be said and believed. We arrived
at the door of the Sultan’s residence and left our beasts,
and climbed the steps to the entrance. This dwelling
is about the same size as Villareal. ‘The streets are

BS

TRAVEUS (OFO PER On eia ba

full of men going to and fro from place to place, and
they told me that these were the Mamelukes, whom we
call renegade barbarians,° and the Sultan buys them
for cash in the Black Sea, and in all places where the
Christians sell them. When they arrive here they
become Moors, and they teach them the law, and
instruct them in horsemanship and to shoot with the
bow. ‘Then they are examined by the chief Doétor,
and are given wages and rations and sent to the city.
No man can become Sultan, nor admiral, nor have any
honour or office except he be one of those renegades,
nor can any Moor by birth ride on horseback under
penalty of death. It is the Mamelukes who have all
the honours of knighthood. ‘Their sons have some-
what less honour, and the grandchildren still less again,
and after that they are accounted Moors by birth.
This is in order to augment the number of Moham-
medans: therefore are they called the increasers of the
law of Mohammed. ‘The women do not enjoy this
prerogative, but a Moor would rather take a Christian
woman without dowry, than a Moorish woman, however
richly dowered she may be, especially if she is a Moor
by birth.

Continuing through the streets we reached a great
door which was locked, and they opened it, and we
entered and came to a great court full of horsemen,
drawn up in order against the walls, and opening
another door they took us to a square where horsemen
were likewise marshalled. They then opened another
door, and we came to a further square, where men were
also stationed, but here there were negroes with clubs
in their hands. The chief interpreter made me wait
here with my attendants until he should return. In
a short space of time he came back and escorted me
through a door to a great square, in which were numbers
of horsemen in the same order as before. In the
centre of the square was a large and sumptuous tent

74

Bb. OON TAS (CATRO)

with its trappings, where the Sultan was to dine, and
where he was to receive the salute, and close at hand
a pavilion had been set up, and a high platform with
a seat where the Sultan was to alight. ‘The chief
interpreter told me to wait in the centre of that square
and that the Sultan would come out and pass by with
him, but that I was not to make any reverence, for such
is their custom in their disdain for Christians. While
I was there they opened a great door and the Sultan
came out on horseback. His son preceded him on
foot with about 200 horsemen, and he passed close
by me and sat himself on the above-mentioned seat.
A few days previously the Sultan had set free from
prison a son of his treasurer, who had succeeded his
father, and who was very wealthy, having much gold
and pearls and precious stones, and other things of
great value, and to honour that feast, and to return to
the Sultan’s favour, he had sent him a black horse
shod with gold, the bridle and saddle being also gar-
nished with gold. In the saddle-bow was a ruby
which was said to weigh an Egyptian pound and a
half, which looked as large as a good-sized orange.
In the back saddle-bow were three rubies as large as
fowls’ eggs, and a scimitar worth much gold. The
hangings were of white damask, ornamented with a
border of valuable pearls.

The chief interpreter now came to me, and told
me that I must make a show of kissing the ground
before approaching the Sultan, and he took the letters
which I carried, and touched my head and mouth with
them for greeting, and gave them to the Sultan. Since
they were written in a foreign language he read them
out in the Turkish language, for no one at the court
speaks anything else. ‘They say that this was ordained
when the Turk adopted the law of Mohammed some
time ago, and that it is done out of honour. The
Sultan enquired of me concerning the King of Cyprus,

ie

TRAVELS, OF PER OFA VrUk

and the Cardinal, his uncle, and Mosen Suarez, and
also concerning others of the Kingdom, and when I
had replied he assured me that he was pleased to grant
the requests of the King, which were as follows: the
King had sent me to beg that the Sultan would not
send the Mamelukes each year, as he was wont to do,
to colleé& the tribute, since they caused the King great
expense, but that the King would send the tribute
in four months, and further that the Sultan would
accept the tribute in camlets, at the price they were
worth in Babylonia. Also that he would allow the
King to sell his salt, which was a source of great
revenue throughout Syria, without paying duty, and
all this was granted. The Sultan also gave directions
that I was to be well lodged and that I was to have
whatever was necessary, and this was done. ‘That day
the Sultan gave me a robe which he was accustomed
to give, as an emblem of vassalage, to the King of
Cyprus, which was of olive green and red, worked with
gold and lined with ermine. Then the Sultan de-
scended from his seat and came to the tent, whereupon
the salute was given, and he dined. I then took leave
of him for that day.

While I was there a hundred men, or thereabouts,
entered, bringing a Moor with them, and they threw
him on the ground, and stripped him, and gave him
200 strokes on the belly and shoulders with rods.
They told me, further, that all criminal justice was
administered in the presence of the Sultan. When
we returned to that place we found none of those whom
we had seen before, except the negroes, and from there
we came to the great square, and mounted our beasts,
but there were no gentlemen there nor in the tents,
only poor men with sieves, sifting the sand. I en-
quired what it signified, and was told that they were
vagrant people, who were seeking whatever might
have fallen to the ground from so great a multitude of

76

BABYLONIA (CAIRO)

men. That day we were occupied until sunset in
returning to our lodging. The following day we
rested, and I arranged to send the Sultan’s dispatch
to the King of Cyprus in that vessel of his which
was at Damietta, and that it should return for me in
two months, during which time I intended to go to
St. Catherine’s monastery on Mount Sinai.

After sending the Sultan’s dispatch to the King ot
Cyprus I remained in Babylonia about a month, mar-
velling at many things which were passing strange
to those of our nation. Indeed, I had great good
fortune in having such a guide as the chief interpreter,
for he took much pleasure in doing whatever I desired.
One day we rode out at dawn to La Matarea, where
the balsam is obtained. It is about a league from the
city and we did not arrive until mid-day, although we
had very swift beasts. Our lodging might be said to
be in the centre of the city, so that from this one can
well see how extensive the city is. La Matarea is a
great orchard enclosed by a wall, and in it is the garden
where the balsam grows.® It is about 60 or 70 square
feet in extent, and here it grows, and it resembles a
two year old vine, and they collect it in the month of
October. The Sultan comes with great ceremony
to collect the oil, and they say that there is so little that
it does not reach half an azumbre of our measure.
But they take the branches and boil them in the oil
and deliver them to the world as balsam. Having
finished gathering the roots, they commence at once to
cultivate the ground, and they take specially prepared
cuttings and drive them in, and they water them with
that water which Our Lady, the Virgin, called forth
in that place when she was fleeing with her Son into
Egypt. Itisa place of great devotion for us Christians.
When they have watered the plants with that water,
the next day they find they have taken root. Many
times they have tried to water them with Nile or other

Jas

TRAVELS OF (BER OF sian

water, but the roots dry up at once. As one goes out
from this garden there is a very great fig-tree, which
produces figs of Faron, which are red, and inside the
trunk is a little building like a small chapel. The tree,
they say, opened of itself, and there Our Lady and her
Son hid when they were in danger of capture. As we
were returning to Babylonia along the river Nile, we
saw many gardens and fine houses of the nobles, and
we took all that day to return, and did not reach our
lodgings until midnight.

The next day we went to see the Granaries of Joseph,’
which are three leagues from the mouth of the river,
in the desert. Although they say that there are many
more further inland, there are only three here, two great
ones, and one lesser one. ‘They are diamond shaped,
with the apex raised, and they must be much higher
than the Great Tower at Seville. As one enters
through the door there is a wall joined to another,
making a circular stairway which reaches to the top,
with many windows. And the beasts, when they are
laden, climb up and are unloaded through those win-
dows, and so they fill the granariestothetop. Certainly
I never thought that there was such a great building in
the world to-day, nor have I seen the like before or since.

This day we returned to Babylonia, and the following
day we went to see the place where they keep the
elephants, and we saw seven. ‘They are black in colour
and larger than camels. The front and back legs are
so firm that they seem to be of marble. The foot is
round with a very strong hoof. ‘The legs are said to
be jointed, but they have no marrow. ‘The eyes are
red, and very small like a farthing. The tail is short
like a bear’s. The ears resemble a shield, and the head
is like one of those great jars which hold six arrobas.®
The tusks are four spans in length. The mouth is
very small, and from the lip there hangs in front a
trunk of about six palms’ length. The beasts can

78

FLAIE iil

AN ELEPHANT
From the Pilgrim Book of Gabriel Muffel of Nuremberg (1465)

[face p. 78

ae
ii

BABYLONIA (CAIRO)

extend and contraét it at will, and with it they grasp
whatever they want to eat, and carry it to the mouth,
or take up water when they need it. These beasts
seem to be very knowing. They play tricks, and at
times they will fill their trunks with water and squirt
it over anyone they choose. They play also with a
lance, throwing it up and catching it, with many other
sports. When they are in heat they take them at dawn
and put them in the river to cool them, otherwise they
could not control them. ‘They have a very hard skin,
and if they are wounded they put them where the
moon shines on them, and the next day they are healed.
The drivers carry an iron spike fastened to a pole, and
they prick them behind the ears, and turn them where
they will, for the skin is very tender there, and even a
fly alighting in that place will give them pain. They
feed them with grain and barley, as they do horses with
us. It is said that in India they place castles upon
them, which hold sixteen men, and when they wish
to fight they cover the tusks with steel. These animals
are said to be very long-lived. This day we returned
to our lodging, having seen many strange sights.
The following day we went to see an animal called a
giraffe. It is as large as a stag. Its front legs are
two fathoms long and its back legs no more than a
cubit. In general appearance it is like a stag. It is
dappled, the stripes being white and yellow. The
neck is as long as a good sized tower is high. It is
very tame. If they give it bread to eat with the hand
it lowers its head and makes a great arc with its neck.
They say that these creatures live to a great age, and
that this one has been there more than 200 years.
That day we went to see the city of Babylonia. It
is divided into three sections. ‘The first they call
Greater Babylonia, the second Cairo, and the third
Mistra. By the side of the city of Babylonia, in the

river which passes that quarter, there are three columns

79

TRAVELS (10 HP ROM Ai an

in the water with certain lines and ancient letters upon
them, and in the month of September, when the river
rises, guards are placed there, and they watch every
hour when the water increases,® and they report the
matter to certain criers on the land, who go through the
city every hour, crying out how much the water has
risen, and when the water is fully risen the people know
to what extent they can sow, and whether the year will
be fruitful or lean. They say that the setting up of
these columns was the first work undertaken in Baby-
lonia. In the ancient part of this city there are many
notable houses and gardens, even on the terraces, and
great trees and vast numbers of caves and cisterns for
Storing the Nile water. ‘This day we returned to our
lodging, and | arranged with the interpreter to go the
following day to see the Sultan, and crave licence to
depart for Mount Sinai. We accordingly went in
the morning to the great palace, but found that the
Sultan had gone hunting, and we followed him and
overtook him about a league from the city. He was
exceedingly well attended, having, as it appeared to
me, more than five or six thousand horsemen, and
many falcons and leopards. ‘That day the Sultan
dined in the field, and afterwards they played a game
which is customary there, in this manner:’° they place
a ball in the centre of the field, and some thousand
horsemen, more or less, take up their position on one
side, and they draw lines on either side in front of
them, and each one has a mallet in the hand, the handle
of which is fixed into a staff, and they all attack the
ball at the same time, with intent, on the one side, to
drive it across the line, while the others seek to do the
same on their part, and those who succeed in driving the
ball across the line are the victors. That day one of the
players tried to hinder the Sultan’s son, and he took out his
sword and tried to kill his opponent, and there was a great
commotion until the Sultan came up and parted them.
80

CHAPTER Ix

The journey to Mount Sinai—Trade in mummy —The Monastery. —
Tafur proposes to visit India.—Arrival of a caravan.—Nicolo de’
Conti.—He relates the Story of his life —The Red Sea.

Tuat day I begged leave of the Sultan to go to
Mount Sinai, and he consented, and ordered that one
of his interpreters should go with me, and he provided
three camels for me and mine, and would accept no
payment. I then took my leave and departed in two
days. In those two days, indeed, there was little
leisure, since there were so many strange and remark-
able things to see, and as the weather was very hot they
brought me each morning a vase of water to drink,
which was specially treated, and in it were certain
seeds like hemp, and of a truth it was a very healthy
drink. It is their custom to drink it fasting in the
summer before dinner. The Sultan’s interpreter
prepared everything that was necessary, and recom-
mended me to the interpreter who was to go with me,
and wrote himself to the Patriarch of Alexandria who
lived in Cairo (who seleéts the Superior of the mon-
astery of St. Catherine at Mount Sinai), to recommend
me to him. We departed from Cairo, and crossed the
lifeless desert of Egypt with much labour and in great
peril. The heat was such that I was amazed that
any man could withstand it. ‘These deserts, they say,
provide the mummies, which are the bodies of those
who die there. For with the great dryness which is
in those parts, the bodies do not decay, but the radical
moisture is consumed, leaving the bodies entire and
dried, so that they can be ground up. There is no
road in the desert, for the wind effaces it and shifts the
sands from one place to another and makes great hills,
81 G

TRAVELS -OFP 3 PE ROG Tar Une

and people die there, as I have related. They navigate
here with the compass as at sea. ‘There is no habita-
tion between Babylonia and Mount Sinai, and the
camels carry everything, as well for the travellers as
for themselves.

The journey to Mount Sinai endured for fifteen days.
This mountain is very lofty and stands quite alone,
about half a league from the Red Sea. On the summit
of this mountain there was formerly a monastery,
where the body of St. Catherine was kept, and they say
that one year, when there was great scarcity of bread,
the monks, on that account, and also in view of
the great labour in climbing those heights, went to
Babylonia, leaving the monastery and the holy body
unattended. ‘Thereupon the blessed St. Catherine
appeared to them and told them to return, and that
they would find provisions and a convenient place to
live in, and that where they should find a great heap
of wheat, there they should build their monastery
and house her body. ‘The monks thereupon returned,
and found at the foot of the mountain a great heap of
wheat, and there, thanking God and the Virgin St.
Catherine for the blessings they had received, they
erected their monastery which is still a most notable
place. The monks ascended the mountain and
brought down the body with great honour, and placed
it in the monastery at the foot, where they now live,
not, indeed, neglecting what is on the mountain itself,
for there are many holy places there, it being the place
where God gave the tables of the law to Moses, and
where He appeared to him in the burning bush. Here
also is the place where He bade Moses strike the rock
with his rod, and the water gushed forth, which to
this day runs down to the foot.

The lower monastery is a fine building. There are
in it about fifty or sixty persons, both monks and
servants, and the church is well fashioned in the Greek

82

PLATE IV

et i ey
ieee oe lhe egy)
wo Prt acts wo Zcllert BW Aptuc®k vue pen.
we ps fuk grote Petraes yen
‘ fic aus Smt 311 klein hocRzeitten yer Sct

eee yt Git Exeeryuen oe 2
Bek flaue wee obf Gare

ST. CATHERINE’S MONASTERY ON MOUNT SINAI
By Gabriel Muffel (1465)

[face p. 82

MOUNT SINAI

manner. The body of St. Catherine is beneath the
chief altar. I did not see the body, because they are
not accustomed to show it, and, indeed, the place is not
convenient for seeing it, but it appeared to me, from its
size, that the body must be greater by a span than the
tallest women who could be found in the world to-day.
There are in a house certain bodies of men enbalmed.
Some say they are the bodies of knights who visited
that holy place and died there. Others say that some
knights of Greece were carried there after death, and
it is a place of great devotion. The monastery derives
a large income from all Greece, and a great lord of
Candia left to it, when he died, an income of 4000
ducats, but since the place is very remote, and the
provisioning of it costs much money, part of the
revenue is expended in maintaining an establishment at
Babylonia, and the Patriarch of Alexandria lives there.
He provides for everything, and the revenues are paid
to him. He also eleéts the Patriarch who is sent to
Greater India to Prester John, and while I was in
Babylonia, the former Patriarch being dead, he chose
his successor and dispatched him thither.

After spending three days at the monastery, I
bethought myself whether it would be possible to go
to Greater India, and I spoke privately with the Prior
about the matter. He told me that a caravan, which
was the means of communication with those parts, was
due to arrive within two or three days, and that we
could then obtain information as to the possibility of
making the journey, but that he was altogether opposed
to it. In four or five days the caravan duly arrived,
bringing so many camels with it that I cannot give an
account of them, as I do not wish to appear to speak
extravagantly. This caravan carries all the spices,
pearls, precious stones and gold, perfumes, and linen,
and parrots, and cats from India, with many other
things, which they distribute throughout the world.

83

TRAVELS OF PERGA aU

One half goes to Babylonia, and from there to Alex-
andria, and the rest to Damascus, and thence to the
port of Beyrout.

I went to the shore of the Red Sea, which is half a
league from Mount Sinai, to see the arrival of the
caravan, and I found that a Venetian had come with it,
called Nicolo de’ Conti,? a gentleman of good birth
who brought with him his wife and two sons and a
daughter, all of whom had been born in India. It
appeared that he and they had become Moors, having
been forced to renounce their Faith in Mecca, which
is the Moors’ holy place. As soon as he saw me he
came up and enquired who I was, and what I did there,
and what was my profession. I told him that I came
from Italy, having been brought up at the court of the
King of Cyprus, and that I was travelling upon his
affairs to the Sultan who had given me licence to come
there, and that I intended to pass on to India. He
told me at once that I ought not to attempt it, and that,
however much I desired it, it could not be accom-
plished. As I seemed to be fixed in my determination,
he besought and conjured me to tell him truly who
I was, and said that he could do me a great service,
which was that he would tell me what I ought to do,
and that I could trust him implicitly, since he was a
Christian as I was. He also promised to relate the
events of his life, and how he had come there. I,
observing that he was a person both grave and discreet
and of good address, told him that I was a noble of
Spain, and had come to the Holy Sepulchre, and from
there to Babylonia, with intent to see Mount Sinai
and to go on to India.

On hearing this Nicolo de’ Conti showed great
pleasure and said as follows: “ You must know that
“at the time when Timur-Beg was ruling I found
“myself in Alexandria with certain moneys of my
“father, and from there I had to go to Babylonia, and

84

THE RED SEA

“through bad management and youthful inexperience,
“for I was only eighteen years of age, I lost what
“I had, and as I was desperate and ashamed to return
“home, I went to the place where Timur-Beg was,
“and remained a year at his court. From there I
“sought the means to go into Greater India and
“learnt that all was secure, for at that time the rule of
“Timur-Beg extended from India to the Red Sea.
“When I arrived in India I was taken to see Prester
“ John,*® who received me very graciously and showed
“me many favours, and married me to the woman I
“now have with me, and she bore me these children.
“IT lived in India for forty years, with a great longing
“to return to my country. I gained much wealth,
“and after Timur-Beg had died, and the country
“was divided up, I arranged to journey to the Red
“Sea, and to go to Mecca, and to the place to which
“T am now come, and for this purpose I obtained a
“ safe-conduct from the Sultan. I spent two years in
“ procuring this, but at last he sent 1t to me. When
“J arrived with my wife and children at Mecca, they
“ordered us to abjure the Faith or to be killed. I
“myself was ready to receive martyrdom, but I knew
“that my wife and children would rather renounce the
“ Faith than die, and I therefore decided to accept the
“alternative, hoping that God would save us in due
“time. But the Sultan must have been a participator
“in all this, in order to have a share in that which they
“robbed me of. Now this is my life and the story of
“ my past, and in what concerns you I pray you, in the
“name of God, and for the love which you bear Him,
“and since you are a Christian and of my country,
“that you will not embark on such madness, for the
“ way is very long and troublesome and perilous; the
“ country is inhabited by strange races without king or
“laws or rulers; how can you expect to pass without
“4 safe-conduct, and whom shall he fear who is minded

85

TRAVELS SOR CPE ROr irae

“to kill your Further, the air is strange, and food
“and drink are different from those in your country.
“ You will meet with bestial people, unable to govern
“ themselves, and although there are monstrous things
“to be seen they are not enough to give you satisfaction.
“You will see heaps of gold and pearls and precious
“ Sones, but what shall they profit you since the people
“are beasts who wear them ?”

These and other things were told me by Nicolo
de’ Conti, and finally I concluded that if I did not fly
thither it was impossible to make the journey. I saw
clearly that it was his great affection and the kindness
of his nature which moved him to counsel me thus,
and as it well appeared that he told me the truth, |
tired of my project, and we returned to the monastery
and remained there three days, and the company
prepared for the road, some, as I have’ said, to go to
Babylonia, and the rest to Damascus. During those
three days I did nothing but visit various places and
the Red Sea, and the place where the Children of
Israel entered the sea when Pharaoh was following after
them, and the sea became dry land and the waters
were divided. From there we saw an island called
Shushonah, whence, they say, the Jews came who are
called in Castile Abens-susenes.

86

CHAPTER X

The return journey from Mount Sinai—Nicolo de’ Conti continues his
relation.—Prester Fohn.

We departed from Mount Sinai, and I took my
leave from the Prior and the monks, and they gave me
the device of St. Catherine, which is a wheel with teeth
of gold, and out of my own poverty I gave them money.
I left my arms, and set out on my road with those of
the caravan and with Nicolo de’ Conti. During the
journey I did little else except hear of his doings in
India, and he gave me many things written with his
own hand. I asked him concerning Prester John*
and his authority, and he told me that he was a great
lord, and that he had twenty-five kings in his service,
although they were not great rulers, and also that many
people who live without law, but follow heathen rites,
are in subjection to him.

» » They say that there is in India a very high mountain,”
the ascent of which is exceedingly difficult, so much
so that in ancient times those below knew nothing about
those above, and those above had no knowledge of
those below, and a road was made, and a chain was
stretched from the top to the bottom, to which those
who ascended or descended could cling. On the top
of the mountain is a great plain where they sow and
reap corn, and keep cattle and grain, and where there
are many orchards full of fruit, and much water; all
things, in short, necessary to the life of man. On
one side is a very notable monastery, to which it is the
custom for those of fit rank to be Prester to send twelve
ancient men, nobles by descent, and virtuous, to elect
a new Prester John when the office is vacant, and they
do it in this manner. ‘The chief sons and daughters

87

TRAVEUS” Off Pin eee

are sent there to serve, and they marry one with another
and raise up children, and they provide there all that is
necessary for their existence, and give them horses
and arms, and bows and arrows, and they teach them
warlike arts, and the art of governing men. The
eleétors who are there take counsel daily, and observe
that one which appears to them most fit to succeed to
the government when Prester John vacates it, and are
already agreed as to the person to be chosen. When
the ruler is at last dead, his knights, as the custom 1s,
carry him to that mountain on a bier, covered in mourn-
ing, and the electors, beholding them from the heights
where they are, take the one who has been chosen, and
give him to the knights in exchange for the dead ruler.
They then take up the body and bury it in the moun-
tain, with the honours due to it, while the others go
with their lord and, amidst great feasts and rejoicings,
make their submission to him. Thither come certain
races, bringing presents. Some bring pearls and others
stones of great worth, or gold rods, each one according
to the land where he lives, or where he was born.
Nicolo de’ Conti told me also that in that mountain of
Ceylon very fine cinnamon is grown. He said, further,
that there is a fruit there like a great round pumpkin,
and inside it are three separate fruits, each having its
own taste.

He told me also of a sea coast where the crabs, on
reaching land, and being exposed to the air, turn to
stone. He spoke, too, of a country belonging to the
heathen where there is a famous place of pilgrimage.
Here a woman brought forth two sons at one birth,
and immediately they were born they covered their
eyes with their hands, and said that they did not intend
to live in such a wicked world, and they betook them-
selves to a mountain, and there they lived and died.
Where the one died there appeared a great lake of
water, and where the other died a great lake of mud,

88

RETURN FROM MOUNT SINAI

and the people throw themselves in and die, saying that
they are going to glory. Others there are who, in order
to leave behind them a reputation for strength, and that
their sons may be known to be the sons of good men,
make an apparatus like shears, and putting their heads
between the blades they force them to shut with their
feet, and so cut off their heads. Nicolo de’ Conti told
me also that he had seen people eating human flesh,
the strangest thing he had ever seen. ‘This, be it
understood, is a heathen praétice, but he had seen
Christians eating the raw flesh of animals, after which
it is necessary to eat of a very odoriferous herb within
fifteen to twenty days, but if they delay longer they
become lepers.

I learnt also that Prester John, desiring to know
whence the Nile had its beginnings, prepared boats
and sent men and provided much food, and ordered
them to bring back news of its source, and they set out
and saw so many strange countries and peoples and
unfamiliar animals that it was a great marvel, but as
they had eaten all their victuals they had to return
without having found what they sought, and Prester
John was much cast down. He then took counsel as
to whether it was possible to send men who would not
perish for lack of food, and he ordered them to take
young children, and, depriving them of milk, he reared
them on raw fish (which is no great marvel, for it is
reported by those that go to Guinea that, in those parts,
the heathens eat nothing but raw fish). After these
children were grown up he prepared boats and nets,
and ordered that they were in no wise to return without
certain information concerning that which they sought.
They departed and journeyed up the river, through
divers countries, but they communicated with no one
for fear of being prevented, and they came to a great
lake like the sea, and they followed the shore, and went
all round it to find out whence the water came which

89

TRAVELS “OF PERO) -faihud

made that lake. They came at last to an opening where
the water entered, and they proceeded until they came
to a great mountain range which was very lofty and
precipitous, and which seemed to be hewn out of the
rock, and the top of it could not be seen. In it was a
great opening through which the water poured, and.
close to that mountain range, and joined to it, was
another as high as the former, and it could well be seen
that the water came from it. The travellers decided
to send up one of their party to report, but he that
ascended, so they say, having beheld what was within,
refused to come down or even to answer questions.
Another of the party was then sent up, but it was with
him as with the first. When the others saw this, and
that there was no possibility of obtaining more informa-
tion, they left those two on the mountain, being unable
to recover them, and returned by the way they had
come. ‘They related to their Master all that had be-
fallen them, telling him that nothing further could
be discovered, since it was clear that God did not
desire that mortals should know more, and that He had
therefore locked up the secret in that wise.

Nicolo de’ Conti also told me that he saw a heathen
people who are not accustomed to take a dowry with
their wives when they marry, but if the man dies first
the woman has to burn herself, in the same way as the
heathen burn dead bodies. But if the woman dies
first the man does not have to burn himself, for they
say that woman was made for the service of man, but
not man for the woman; and if the principal should
perish, the accessory is not worthy even of mention.
This is what they do: when the man dies they put the
corpse in the place where it is to be burnt. "The woman
then attires herself as finely as she can, saying that it
is for nuptials better than the first, and that she is to
accompany her husband for eternity in the place where
he is. The people make merry and sing, both she and

go

RETURN FROM MOUNT SINAI

her kinsmen, and they enquire whether anyone desires
to send a message to those on the other side, since she
is about to depart thither in company with her husband.
Then they take off her clothes, and dress her in a sad
robe, like a shroud, and sing dirges and sad songs the
while. She then bids farewell to all and lies down beside
her husband, placing her head on his right arm, and
they say many things in conclusion, chiefly that the wife
ought only to live so long as she is honoured and
defended by that arm, and they set fire to them, and
thus, cheerfully and willingly, she goes to her death.
In another place, where they have the same custom,
there is this difference, that when the marriage is
celebrated they ask the woman whether she wishes to
be burnt or not. If she consents, she has to submit
to the practice mentioned above, but if she declines, she
has to provide a dowry. On the death of her husband
the same ceremony is gone through, but when it comes
to the burning, they put in her head-dress in place of
the woman, and she forfeits her dowry to the husband’s
heirs. ‘Those that refuse to be burnt are looked upon
as bad wives and not legitimate. It is said that there
are very few such, and one of them, who did not elect
to be burnt, left the country for shame and came to
live in Babylonia, and Nicolo de’ Conti saw her there.

- Nicolo de’ Conti told me that, although he had been
plundered, he still had many things with him and much
riches, such as pearls and precious stones. But he
dwelt most upon the quantity of health-giving medi-
cines which he had, so many, indeed, that their value
was not to be estimated. He showed me a ruby of
great worth, and also a round hat of grass, as delicate
as the finest silk which could be found. He enquired
of me where, if God brought him safely to Christian
lands, his goods would have the best market. I
told him that the Emperor was at war with the King of
Poland, and it was but a short time since he had come

gi

TRAV.EES**O8) PE AROPs eee

into his Kingdom, and that he had little wealth, that
there was less wealth in France on account of her long-
Standing wars, and that in Italy, as he knew better
than I, they only bought to sell again. Further, that
it appeared to me he would find the best market in
Spain, chiefly on account of the great wealth of our
King, but also because in all our wars we are always
victorious, and have never been beaten. ‘The people,
I said, were very rich and valued such things more
than anyone else. He, therefore, resolved to come
to Spain.

I enquired whether he had ever seen monsters in
human shape, such as some have reported, that is men
with one leg and one eye, or but a cubit in height, or
as tall as a lance. He replied that he had never met
with such, but that he had seen beasts with very strange
shapes. In a heathen land he had seen an elephant
of a great size and as white as snow, which is a very
strange thing, since they are almost all black, and they
kept it fastened to a column with chains of gold, and
adored it as a god. He had seen also an ass which
they brought to Prester John, not much larger than a
hound, and of as many colours as it is possible to
enumerate; also many unicorns and other animals,
which it would take long to describe. He told me as
well that he had seen them set up those castles upon the
elephants, which they use when they go to fight.
Prester John and his people are said to be as good
Catholics and Christians as could be found anywhere,
but they know nothing of our Romish Church, nor are
governed by it. This lord is said to be held in such
reverence that if the greatest of his subjects does
anything worthy of death, he sends a servant with a
letter ordering him to submit to execution by that
servant, and in obedience to that letter, straightway he
lowers his head and suffers death. Nicolo de’ Conti
told me also that he saw a noble lord who brought a

92

me eURN FROM MOUNT SINAI

great present of gold to Prester John, and had so much
glory in what he brought and said so much to him,
bragging that no one had ever done him such service
before, that Prester John immediately ordered him to
be put to death, saying that it was the best service he
could do him, which was no small one for that lord.

I learnt also that the people in those parts are very
skilled in the Black Arts, and that when navigating in
the Red Sea, de’ Conti saw them consult with demons,
and he told me that he could descry a vague black
shape moving up and down the mainmast. ‘The sailors
then conjured it to keep still and demanded: “ What
of our voyage ?” and the shape made answer: “ You
will have six days of dead calm when the sea will be
like oil, but be prepared, for you will have as many
days of very heavy storms.” He described their ships
as like great houses, and not fashioned at all like ours.
They have ten or twelve sails, and great cisterns of
water within, for there the winds are not very strong,
and when at sea they have no dread of islands or rocks.
These ships carry all the cargoes which the caravans
receive from them at Mecca [Jedda], which is the
port where they unload. De’ Contitold me that Mecca
is a great place, larger than Seville. It is in subjection
to no ruler, except to the chief of their law, whom they
regard as their Pope, and they look on the Sultan as
Emperor. ‘There is a very rich mosque there where
they keep the body of Mohammed, and certain Indians
from Ethiopia who come there. ... He said also
that they could dam the water of the Nile, which runs
from India to Ethiopia, and through all the land of
Egypt to the Mediterranean Sea, and which divides
itself into two arms, the one entering the sea close to
Alexandria and the other by Damietta. If that water
ceased to flow, the whole country would be depopulated.

I learnt from Nicolo de’ Conti that Prester John
kept him continuously at his court, enquiring of him

93

TRAVELS* OF PHRROD Tig

as to the Christian world, and concerning the princes
and their estates, and the wars they were waging, and
while he was there he saw Prester John on two occasions
dispatch ambassadors to Christian princes, but he did
not hear whether any news of them had been received.
He saw, however, the preparations made by Prester
John to come with his hosts to Jerusalem, which is
much farther than the journey to Europe. He saw
the church where lies the body of St. Thomas, who
converted the Indians. He mentioned also the drift
which comes down, when the Nile rises, from the
terrestrial paradise, which they call perfume of aloes,
and in the time of St. Thomas, when he went about
preaching and the people would not be converted, there
came down the Nile a great tree which was washed
ashore in that place. The people went to their ruler
and besought him to come and see the greatest marvel
in the world, namely, an aloe tree, greater than had ever
been seen, and he came at once, and when he saw it he
ordered them to carry it away with oxen, but they
could not move it. He then direfted that it should
be cut up, but the tools would not enter the wood.
St. Thomas the Apostle, being there, told them that if
they would be baptized and believe in God, who did
these marvels, he alone with his hand would lift the
tree and carry it to the desired place, and the ruler and
his people replied that if he would do that they would
believe. St. Thomas then crossed himself and laid
hold of the tree, and carried it to the place which
they showed him. When the people saw that miracle,
all were baptized and became Christians. The Apostle
then took that wood and had it sawed up, and made a
chapel which he roofed with it, and there his body now
lies. The Indians have to-day such devotion for the
Apostle, that they take earth from the place where he
is buried, and make pellets, which they carry always
in their breasts, saying that in the moment of death,

94

RETURN FROM MOUNT SINAI

if they cannot communicate, it suffices to eat one of
these. Nicolo de’ Conti gave me five or six of them,
which I believe I have to this day. The people of
Greater India are a little darker in colour than we anes
but in Ethiopia they are much darker, and so on until
you come to the black negroes, who are at the Equator,
which they call the Torrid Zone.

75

CHAP TE Rew

Arrival in Cairo —The Story of Pedro de la Randa—AdminiSsiration
of justice.—Life in the Streets of Cairo.

Our journey occupied fifteen days, in view of the
great trouble we had in making it, but with the pleasure
of hearing such good things from Nicolo de’ Conti I
did not notice the labour. We reached Babylonia, and
appointed to meet each day in the church of St. Martha,
where is interred the holy body of a Castilian called Pedro
de la Randa, of whom mention is made later. This
was because I had to go and take my residence with
the Sultan’s chief interpreter, and Nicolo de’ Conti
had to seek lodgings among the Moors. When I
arrived at the house of my host, he received me with
as much joy as if his own son had come back to him.
The next day Nicolo de’ Conti went to see the Sultan,
and made complaint of the way in which the people
had disregarded his safe-conduct, and of the manner
in which they had forced him to become a Moor, and
had robbed him. ‘The Sultan heard this with much
chagrin, and, to compensate de’ Conti, he showed him
many favours and made him his chief interpreter,
equal with the other, and gave him a house and pos-
sessions in Babylonia. ‘The following day he came to
that church where we had appointed to meet, and told
me all that had happened between the Sultan and him,
and what they had done for him, and that as he now
held office under the Sultan, he could go through his
country and visit the sea ports, so that he hoped, with
the help of God, to reach Christian lands in safety with
his company. He asked me to carry certain letters to
Venice, since I was going there, and he wished to know
when I intended to depart, and I told him that I was
96

CAIRO

wearied with so much travelling and that I should
Stop there twenty or thirty days, which I did. During
this time I did little else but see the sights of Babylonia
with de’ Conti and with the chief interpreter, my
Castilian host.

One day my host told me what befell the late Sultan,
his master, with a Castilian called Pedro de la Randa,}
and it was thus. Pedro de la Randa was a corsair and
much looked up to in these waters, but one day he was
defeated and captured by a Moorish ship, and after
having so taken him they ran across a Catalan corsair,
who defeated the Moors and took the ship, and with
it Pedro de la Randa. The corsair recognized him,
and knowing him for a very famous man, he proposed
that he should refit Pedro de la Randa and give him a
ship and money, on condition that he should be with
him always and join the convoy, and that he should
pledge his word. Pedro de la Randa replied that the
project pleased him well, but he stipulated that they
should fight only with Moors and never with Christians,
for so he had sworn. ‘The Catalan made an agreement
with him, and they came to Rhodes, and there they
made ready everything necessary for their venture.
They sailed away and waged war on the Moors, taking
many of their ships, and making them afraid to attack
the Christians. Such was their fame that the Moors
were thoroughly frightened, for it seemed as if two of
the greatest Christian princes were at sea.

The war continued, and one day, following their
custom, which was that if there was nothing to capture
on sea one of them should land while the other guarded
the ships, the Catalan disembarked at Damietta to
make an attack, but so many Moors came up against
him that he was very hard pressed. Pedro dela Randa,
seeing this from his ship, came at once to shore to
succour him, but the Moors attacked them in such
numbers that they took them both and carried them to

oF H

TRAVELS Ody et DAO aenaoe

the Sultan. When the Sultan knew that they had
brought that famous corsair who had wrought such
havoc among the Moors, he rejoiced greatly, and asked —
Pedro de la Randa if he was the man who had so greatly
injured his people, and he admitted it. He then asked
him why he had done this. Pedro de la Randa replied
that it was because they were enemies of the Faith:
would the Sultan think it fitter for him to spare the
Moors and plunder Christians? Then the Sultan
decreed that to requite what he had done, and as an
example of the justice of God, Pedro de la Randa should
renounce the Faith, acknowledge his misdeeds and
become a Moor, and that the Sultan would then pardon
him and show him favour. But Pedro de la Randa
made answer that all the good which the Sultan might
do him could not compensate him for the loss of his
soul, and the Sultan ordered their heads to be sawn off
forthwith, whereupon the Catalan said he would
becomea Moor. ‘Then Pedro de la Randa approached
the Sultan privately and said: “ My Lord, I will become
a Moor if you will revenge me by killing my com-
panion,” and the Sultan was pleased to agree. Pedro
de la Randa went apart with the Catalan and said:
“Friend, we cannot now save our lives, for even though
we should renounce the Faith, the Sultan has decided
to kill us, and since this is so let us receive martyrdom
from God in palliation of our sins.” The Catalan replied
that it was well spoken, and he was content, and was
immediately put to death. The Sultan then said to
Pedro de la Randa: “I have now fulfilled my part of
the bargain, do you fulfil yours.” But he replied:
“ Sultan, I did this only to save my companion’s soul,
since his spirit was so weak that for fear he would have
become a Moor: now do with me whatever you think
well.” ‘The Sultan made answer: “ Serve me faithfully;
do what I command and go with me to the wars, and

I will give you your life.” Pedro de la Randa replied:
98

CALRO

“ On condition that you do not fight against the Chris-
tians.” And the Sultan agreed, saying: “I promise
that I will never put you to fight with Christians, but
will make you ruler of all the Christians in my service,
and I will show you many favours if you serve me
faithfully”; and so he bound himself. The Sultan
ordered a house to be prepared, and sent men to serve
and gave him maintenance. He summoned also one
of his admirals and placed Pedro de la Randa in his
charge. ‘They say, further, that as the Sultan was de-
parting to return to the city he called this admiral
back, and said: “See to it that the Christian has wine
for himself and his household, as much as he needs,
so that he may not pine for his own country.” This
was related to me by the interpreter with whom I was,
both to magnify the Sultan, his master, and to please
me by speaking well of a Castilian, as he also was.

When this Sultan died, another succeeded him, and
he sent at once for that gentleman who had charge of
Pedro de la Randa, and ordered that he should be
taken, with intent to slay him. But the gentleman
fled with him and they hid themselves. The Sultan
sought them out and took them both, and ordered Pedro
de la Randa to renounce the Faith and become a Moor.
But he would not consent, whereupon his head was
sawn off, and the Christians took up the body and
buried it in a church which is in Babylonia, called
St. Martha’s church, and it worked many miracles
there.

That day justice was administered, and it was as
follows. ‘They brought out three men to be killed,
and I asked what they had done. The interpreter
told me that the night previously a money-changer
had been robbed, and since these men were his neigh-
bours, and did not observe the robbers, and had not
taken such care of their neighbour’s goods as of their
own, therefore they had been condemned to die.

99

TRAVELS “OF PERO” Iie

I said: “ It appears to me that you are punishing those
who are without blame and innocent of offence: it is
a bestial sentence.” But the interpreter replied:
“ There are very many of us, and God increases our
numbers daily. If we did not visit offences both on
the criminal himself and on the spectators, we could
not live. We do not merely administer justice, but
find it necessary to execute it in a cruel and relentless
manner.”

The best and richest and most magnificent thing
to see in Babylonia is the market. Great quantities
of goods are sold there which come from Greater India,
especially pearls, precious stones, spices, perfumes,
and sweet smelling things, silks, and linen goods. It
is not possible to enumerate all the articles which are
brought from India and distributed throughout the
world, and here is the chief market for all those things
which I have described. ‘There are certain men who
come and go through the streets of Cairo carrying a
kind of mirror fastened to the breast. These are the
barbers who shave the heads and the necks of the
Moors, and they pass through the streets, crying as
they go. There are negroes also of about ten or
twelve years of age who go about calling: “ Who will
be shaved ?” These are those who serve the women
in that which they are wont to cleanse secretly at the
baths. For every requirement there are traders in
the streets enquiring if anyone has need of them. Even
the cooks go up and down, carrying braziers, and
fire, and dishes of stew for sale; others have plates of
fruit, and innumerable men go to and fro selling water
which they carry on camels and asses, or on their backs,
since there are many people, and no water is to be had
except from the river. The summer fruits are very
mellow, and as the heat is then very great, so God
has provided what is necessary. When the heat is
overpowering there comes at times a very sharp breeze

100

CAIRO

which affects the eyes, and many people go about as
if drunk, and find those fruits a great preventative.
But otherwise the country is very healthy. The air,
water, and meats are all good. ‘The camels in those .
parts are very large and fine, but not swift. The
asses, on the other hand, are the mos gentle beasts
of good appearance, and swift-footed. and they are well
accoutred with bridles and saddles.

IOI

CHAP LERO Xa

Departure from Cairo.—Alexandria.—The voyage to Cyprus.—Nicosia.
—A Rising —The King’s person—Departure for Rhodes.—A
narrow escape from the Turks —A great storm.—Arrival at
Rhodes.—Death of the Grand Master —Eledion of his successor.

I reMarneD at Babylonia thirty days and then departed,
taking leave of the Sultan and of Nicolo de’ Conti,
who gave me letters for Venice, and also of my host,
the chief interpreter, and his wife and children, who
had treated me as if I had been one of them. They
gave me presents which I took with me, namely, two
Indian cats, two parrots, perfumes and other things,
including a turquoise which I still have. They gave
me also victuals for my journey. I left Babylonia
and travelled by the Lower Nile, and when I arrived
at the place where the two arms parted, I left the right
arm, which goes to Damietta, where I had already been,
and came by the other to a place close to Alexandria,
which they call Rosetta, and from there I reached the
city of Alexandria. It is a very notable city and I
remained there three days, wondering at the holy houses
where St. Catherine was born and martyred. Here
there is also a covered vault where, they say, is the
wheel on which they put her. This city is a great
sea port, and a great place of loading and unloading
for the Christians, and when I had seen it thoroughly
I went by land to Damietta, but I did not find there
the ship which the King of Cyprus had given me.
I had to wait there eight days until it arrived, for it
had been sailing along the coast as far as Jerusalem.

I was received with much honour by the Governor
of Damietta, to whom I carried letters from the Sultan’s
chief interpreter, and I sent to enquire if he had a |

102

NICOSIA

crocodile skin to send to the King of Cyprus who had
asked for it. He offered me one which had recently
been killed, but it smelt very rank, so that for my part
I would rather have carried away the Governor’s pretty
daughter who was there, than the skin of that crocodile.
I now set sail and in seven days I reached Paphos,
where I had embarked, a most unhealthy place. The
very day on which I arrived a bishop and two of his
squires had died, and I gave God thanks that as soon
as I set foot on land I was able to ride off on the beasts
belonging to the dead bishop and his squires. I
departed for the court of the King of Cyprus, at Nicosia,
and the interpreter whom the King had given me went
before to announce me to the King and the Cardinal.
They sent to direct me to remain that night at an inn,
as on the morning of the following day they desired to
receive me with honours, and this they did. The next
morning, going on my way, I met many gentlemen of
the court of the King, who had come out to receive me,
and they accompanied me into the King’s presence,"
and when I arrived I found the King and the Cardinal
and many great men with them, and I was very well
received, and treated with as much friendliness as if I
had been born there, and they gave thanks to God that
I had returned in safety after so long a voyage. They
thanked me much on behalf of the King for what I
had done in his service, and offered me whatever I
desired. So I took my leave of the King, and the
admiral who was there took me to his dwelling as
before, where I was very well lodged.

The next day, in the morning, there was a great
uproar among the people, and everyone flew to arms,
including the Cardinal and the Lady Ines, his sister,
and many of the great men of the Kingdom, against
the King, intending to kill or take captive a favourite
of his, named Jacobo Guiri, who held the office of
judge. The King fled to a fortress at one end of the

103

TRAVELS{(OF SPE ROss ls

city, which they call the Citadel, but they surrounded
it and demanded that he should banish the favourite
from the court, and forbid him to return for a year.
The King swore it, and it was accomplished forthwith,
and the people went to their homes. On the following
day the King sent for me, and in the presence of the
Cardinal and certain nobles, asked me to take of him
what I pleased for the cost of my journey. I replied
that I was much beholden to him, but that I had
sufficient for my return, and I requested him to order
that they should give me a safe-conduét and a ship
to carry me to Rhodes, and I laboured to depart and
he to detain me. He desired me to Stay at least
eight days, and since I saw that it would please him I
had to consent. During those days, while I refreshed
myself, a ship was prepared to carry me, and I took
leave of the King (and of a truth he gave me licence
with bad grace), and he gave me his device, which I
still have, and ten pieces of camlet, and fine linen, as
well as a leopard, and such profusions of victuals
for my journey to Rhodes that they sufficed for a year.
While I was there two ambassadors came to the King,
the one from the Duke of Savoy and the other from a
Duke of Germany, each one to offer him his daughter
in marriage. I did not hear the conclusion arrived at
with either of them, but it was said that another marriage
was projected, and was being anxiously pressed, by the
Master of Rhodes on behalf of a daughter of the Count
of Urguel of Aragona, sister of the wife of the Infante
Don Pedro, Regent of Portugal. It appeared to me
that the project which the King’s council most favoured
was the marriage with the daughter of the Duke of
Savoy, and I believe that this was the one that suc-
ceeded,”

The King is a youth of sixteen or seventeen years
of age, of great stature. His legs are so fat that
they are almost the same size at the garter as at the

104

CERINA

thigh. He is a gracious man and, considering his age,
of excellent understanding. He is very gay and apt
with his body, especially in horsemanship. Without
doubt, if his country were not so unhealthy, I should
have been glad to place myself at his service for a time,
but it is almost impossible for a stranger to live in such
a wretched country, and on that account, and because
I had to return to Castile for the Moorish war, I was
obliged to continue my journey as speedily as I might.

I departed from the city of Nicosia, and came to
Cerina where a ship was waiting to carry me to Rhodes.
Cerina is an ancient city founded by Achilles, and from
him it takesits name. It is small, but strong and well
walled, and has a good harbour, although not large.
This is closed with a chain and is well guarded. It was
to this place that the King escaped with the Cardinal,
his uncle, and the Lady Ines, and many others of the
Kingdom when King Janus was captured.’ It is the
healthiest place of any in Cyprus since it is exposed to
the west wind. There I found a trading ship which
the King had ordered to be prepared for me, which
was to carry me to Rhodes, and another with it carrying
merchandise. We left the harbour and came to the
extremity of Cape Pifani at about noon. We then
sailed out to sea by the Gulf of Satalia, on the way to
Turkey, but before two o’clock we saw a Turkish galley
coming towards us with intent to take and destroy us,
in revenge for a ship of theirs which the Catalans had
taken outside the harbour of Cyprus. We strove
with sail and oars, and they likewise, so that there was
no flagging of the litany while our hands grew weary
with rowing. I had with me a boatswain of a Catalan
galley who had killed a nephew of the captain. He
had been sentenced to be hanged from the yard-arm,
but the rope had broken with his weight, and I
besought the captain to give him to me, since God had
done so much for him, and he consented, and this

105

TRAVELS OF (PER OD aa

was the means of our escape, for he was a skilled
navigator. He lightened the boat so that it could
make better headway, but the other ship with the
merchandise would not jettison the cargo, and when
it was late and the sun was setting the Turks overtook
it, and sank it, and drowned every man of the crew.
In the confusion which ensued we had time to increase
our distance a little, and when it began to grow dark
we put on as much sail as we could, and all took to the
oars, and labouring as best we could, when night fell,
we reefed the sail and turned to the right hand, rowing
quietly so that there should be no sound from the oars,
and the galley passed close to us without seeing us.
The boatswain said that we must alter our course, as
the galley would hug the land and wait for us, believing
that, as our ship was small, they had us in their hands.
We therefore made for the open sea, and saw the galley
approach the land, and at midnight the south wind
rose, and every wave swept us fore and aft. How
much rather would I have fallen into the hands of the
Turks than be drowned at sea! They wanted me to
throw one of my men overboard, but we defended
ourselves stoutly. Driving before the storm, we ran
towards Castelrosso and reached there at three o’clock,
and found that the galley had left scarcely two hours
earlier. We landed there in a good harbour, and
climbed to the fortress and rested, as became us after
having escaped so great a peril. This castle belongs
to the Knights of Rhodes, and is part of the province
of Armenia, although anisland. It is very rocky and
no beast can climb it. Below, at the entrance to the
harbour, are certain salt mines which are a source of
great revenue to the Knights of Rhodes. :
We departed from the island of Castelrosso and took
the course to Rhodes, in constant fear of that galley.
We had also foul weather, but in two days we arrived
and entered the harbour, and I went to lodge with
106

RILO DES

Brother Nufio de Cabrera, an excellent knight, born in
Castile, and a Knight of the Order, and among all
those there he was the wealthiest and most renowned,
and he received me most cheerfully and affectionately.
He treated me very benevolently, and had it not been
for the company he bore me, I think I should have
died after the hardships I had suffered. Even in my
own house I could not have been more piously nor
better served. On the second day after my arrival
I went to see the Grand Master,* and gave him certain
letters from the King of Cyprus, which he had en-
trusted to me concerning his affairs, and Brother Nufio
de Cabrera accompanied me with other Castilian
knights, and knights of different nations, particularly
the French, who are much attached to our people.
When I arrived I found the Master grievously ill with
pains in his liver, but he soon dispatched the answers
to the King of Cyprus, and I took my leave and re-
turned to my lodging. That night he died of his
sickness. While he was in the extremity of death
there came, according to custom, the Commanders,
the confessors, and certain knights of the Council,
and asked him upon his oath, and from his conscience,
that he should name the one whom he wished to
succeed him as Grand Master of the Order, and that
he should write it and seal it with his seal, so that it
should remain a secret. ‘They then took his writing
and put it in safe keeping so that none should know of
it, except the confessor. Ifthe Master dies it is their
custom to open the sealed paper, and at the time of
the election of his successor the vote of the dead Master
counts, it is said, for two.

This Master was buried on the day of his death at
the hour of Mass, and his funeral offices were fitting
to his person. The heads of the Order bore him on
their shoulders on his bier, covered with a black pall,
with a great train before and behind, which those that

107

TRAVELS “OF (RE RO ease

could not reach the bier held in their hands. He was
dressed in his habit, with his sword, and with his spurs
on his feet and a rosary in his hand; and thus they
buried him. They then ordered all the gates to be
closed, and me they placed in a room which they
locked from without, and gave me food to eat, but my
people they sent into the city, and so, clad in their
habits, with their swords girt on, as is their custom, they
entered the church to elect the new Master, which 1s
done, they say, in this wise.

From each nation of those who belong to the Order
they take three persons, a knight, a chaplain and a
lay or serving brother. These are selected by all
present, and first they make everyone confess and
communicate and swear on the holy relics, which they
have there, that each will well and truly make his
choice. ‘Those that are chosen also swear that they
will in their turn select well and truly, and these persons
choose thirteen. These thirteen, upon a like oath,
elect seven, and each one of these seven, having also
been sworn, and without speaking to his fellows, records
his vote in a closed writing, placing it on a table before
that confessor who, as I have said, holds the vote of
the deceased Master. This is done in the presence
of all the knights, and the confessor, having the votes
of the seven and of the Master, reads them there, the
Master’s vote, as I have said, counting for two, and he
that has the most votes becomes the Master. ‘They
remained there all that day and the night following
until dawn, and all believed, and even said, that a Grand
Commander who was there would be the Master, and
that there was no need to have an ele¢tion, so certain
was he to be chosen. An hour before dawn there was
a great clamour heard, as well in the church as through-
out the city, with ringing of bells and blowing of
trumpets, and they fetched me from my room, where I
had been locked up, and carried me to the church, and,

108

RHODES

all being in procession, they made me carry the pennon
of the Order to the great Altar, and he who had the
votes cried out: “Give thanks to God, your Master
is the Prior of Auvergne.”° And many, although it
was still night, could be seen to turn yellow with envy.

This having been accomplished, they all came out,
and it was now day. We then went to the hospital,
and they opened the doors, and we went outside into
the city with all the people, and placed the pennon
upon the tower of the harbour. The new Master
was an ancient knight who had well served his Order,
and a man of much virtue. The following day they
took counsel and ordered that he should be fetched,
and they armed four galleys and departed at once for
Auvergne, where he was Prior. It would, indeed, be
Strange if there were any mischance in such an election,
for they leave no scope for partiality nor friendship nor
enmity. The Order is very noble and large, and great
men are always forthcoming for its defence. This
in truth is necessary, seeing that they have for neigh-
bours, on the one hand, the Grand ‘Turk, and on the
other, the Sultan of Egypt; and in the valour of its
defenders lies the safety of the Order.

109

CHAPTER XIll

Voyage to ConStantinople—Shipwreck—Tafur is almo% drowned.—
A fight between Catalans and Genoese—Two embassies arrive for
the Emperor of the East-—Chios—Troy—The Dardanelles.—
Pera.

Ture was a ship from Ancona at Rhodes, and I
contracted with the captain to carry me to Constanti-
nople, and we sailed and came to the island of Samos,
which is in the Archipelago, leaving on the right hand
the castle of S. Pedro, which is on the mainland of
Turkey, and on the left, the island of Cos, which
belongs to the Order of Rhodes. We continued our
course towards Chios, where we came upon a ship of
that place, and they told us that the ships and galleys,
which had come from the Council to take the Emperor
of Greece to Europe, were anchored in the harbour of
Chios, and we set sail and passed, leaving the island on
the left, but the wind did not favour us, and when it
failed we had to anchor beside the island and remain
there that night. The next morning we saw approach-
ing us two great galleys, and two lighter ones, and they
came alongside and ordered us to return to Chios,
otherwise they would fight us, and we had to do this,
as we could not resist them. ‘This was so that we
should not know what they were about, for the Genoese
had taken those galleys and armed them, intending to
go to the harbour of Alexandria, and to capture two
Catalan galleys, the Ex-Casa-Sages, and the En Sirviente,
which were there. We were forced to return with the
galleys and to anchor in the harbour, and we remained
there all day. At midnight a great storm arose,
and as we were insecurely grappled, our anchor broke
away and caught a carack, which had been burnt
IIO

CYlOs

and sunk in ancient times during the war between
the Venetians and the Genoese, the bows of which
remained above the water, and our ship struck it,
and it stove us in and we sank, and it was then
day. ‘The sailors, in great peril from the sea which
was very high, reached shore with difficulty, but as for
me, when the ship sank, I was left in the water clinging
to a piece of wreckage. Certain gentlemen who were
there, Messer Nicolao de Meton, captain general, and
some bishops and French gentlemen, gave orders to
rescue me, but none dared venture. Then some
Biscayans took a skiff from a galley, and came out to
me and carried me to shore, but I was almost exhausted
by the water and the cold, for it was Christmas. I
found there the Bishop of Viseo in Portugal’, and he
took me with him and attended to my needs. There
the French gentlemen heard from me of the death of
the Grand Master of Rhodes, and certain Knights of
the Order arrived, and with them the Commander of
Pulaque, and when the storm abated he was carried
to Rhodes in a galley, and was made Marshal of Rhodes.
He was that one who brought the Bull? to Castile, and
then he had lost one eye, but not when I now saw him,
and he was a very good knight and a man of great
renown.

We remained there in Chios until the galleys went
out against the Catalans, and it was on this wise. When
they arrived at the harbour of Alexandria they found
the Catalans there, and when the Catalans saw them
they ran one of the galleys aground, and the larger
galley, which was very powerful, took up the men, and
they fought all that day and night, and the Moors
looked on. At dawn a land wind arose, and the Cata-
lans sailed out to sea, but the Genoese did not dare
to follow, since on the open sea, with a fair wind, they
would have had the worst of it, and leaving the other
ships well guarded, the Catalans sailed for Rhodes, and

III

TRAVELS? OF PER Og ema

the Genoese returned to Chios, where we remained.
Having dragged our ship ashore, we refitted it, but
the bulk of the merchandise was lost, and I also lost
many things which I had brought from the East.
The ambassadors took their ships and left the harbour
and came to the Council, and disembarked at Nice in
Provence. ‘This embassy was the one which had come
to the Emperor of Greece, to obtain his agreement
with the Council. It was a very rich and magnificent
embassy, composed of well-selected men. But when
the Venetians heard of it, and saw the great prejudice
which was being stirred up against Pope Eugenius, who
was a native of that city, they sent out another embassy
to the Emperor, and the two met at Constantinople,
and there was a great dispute as to who should bring
the Emperor, and they armed themselves to fight.
Thereupon the Emperor let it be known that he would
go with neither embassy, but that he intended to go
with his own ships, and he asked them to depart and
not to hinder his passage, and they hadtoagree. ‘Those
of the Council came to Chios, as I have related, and
the Venetians made as if to enter the Black Sea. Never-
theless, an agreement was come to between them and
the Emperor, and when the others had departed they
returned, and took the Emperor within a few days, and
carried him to Italy to the port of Venice.°

I remained in this island of Chios for twenty days
and had nothing to do. I then departed for Turkey,
which is only a short distance away, to a place called
Foja-Vecchia, which, they say, is one of the ports of
Turkey, where there is a Genoese settlement, and I
found there a friend of mine whom I had known in
Seville, and I asked him, since he had some influence
with the Turks, to send one of his people with me to
Troy, and to hire horses for me, which he did. I
travelled by land for two days to that place which they
say was Troy, but found no one who could give me any

I1l2

bE NE DOS

information concerning it, and we came to Ilium, as
they call it. This place is situated on the sea opposite
the harbour of Tenedos. The whole of this country is
strewn with villages, and the Turks regard the ancient
buildings as relics and do not destroy anything, but
they build their houses adjoining. ‘That which made
me understand that this was, indeed, ancient Troy, was
the sight of such great ruined buildings, and so many
marbles and stones, and that shore, and the harbour
of Tenedos over against it, and a great hill which seemed
to have been made by the fall of some huge building.
But I could learn nothing further, and returned to
Chios. Here I found my ship refitted, and in two days
we set sail. ‘The island of Chios yields much gum,
and has been populated by the Genoese, who took it
from the Greeks, and the rulers call themselves Mayon-
eses,* and since they cannot defend the place, they pay
tribute to the Genoese who raise their standard there.
The Genoese have need of that island for their voyages
to the Levant and the Dardanelles.

We departed and put out to sea, and a great tempest
arose which damaged the ship, but the sailors, being
very skilled in that art, repaired the damage as best
they could, and, leaving on the left hand the island of
Mytilene, which also belongs to the Genoese, we
doubled the Cape of S. Maria and came to the island
of Tenedos, where we anchored and disembarked.
While the ship was being refitted we set out to see the
island, which is some eight or ten miles about. ‘There
are many conies, and it is covered with vineyards, but
they are all spoilt. The harbour of Tenedos looks so
new that it might have been built to-day by a master-
hand. ‘The mole is made of great stones and columns,
and here the ships have their moorings and excellent
anchorage. There are other places where ships can
anchor, but this is the best, since it is opposite the en-
trance to the Straits of Romania [Dardanelles]. Above

113 I

TRAVELS ORS PER Omer igi

the harbour is a great hill surmounted by a very strong
castle. This castle was the cause of much fighting
between the Venetians and Genoese until the Pope
sentenced it to be destroyed, that it might belong to
neither. But, without doubt, this was very ill-advised,
since the harbour is one of the best in the world. No
ship can enter the Straits without first anchoring there
to find the entrance, which is very narrow, and the
Turks, knowing how many ships touch there, arm them-
selves and lie in wait and kill many Christians. From
there one sees many buildings of Troy, and certain’
Greeks who live there can even give some account of
the place.

The next day we departed, and sailing on we entered
the Straits, which are very narrow. On the Turkish
side the water is very shallow. These Straits are called
the Dardanelles, and here was the door and harbour
of Troy.. On the side towards Greece the water is
very deep. Here stands the tower of Vituperio where
Achilles was found with Patroclus, or so they say that
wish it so. In this place the Straits are so narrow that
on a clear day one can see a Standard raised on the other
side. So, passing through these Straits, and leaving
certain villages on the Turkish side and on the Greek
side, we reached the city of Gallipoli, a notable place,
and a good harbour with an excellent castle. This
was the first place taken by the Turks when they
passed over into Greece, and they left the wall and
castle standing, which they did not do elsewhere, so
that if they chanced to be defeated they could be
succoured from there.

We departed from Gallipoli and came to the Sea of
Marmora, which is an inland circular sea of about
eight leagues across, and they call it Marmora, because
from it came all the marble for Constantinople, as well
for the walls as for the city, and it belongs to the Greeks.
From there we came to a town called Eregli, and to

I14

PERA

another called Silumbria, which two places the Turks
allowed the Emperor to retain in times past out of cour-
tesy and for his support. Departing from there, the
next day at dawn, we saw a very high mountain, more
than a hundred miles off, and they told us that it was
St. Sophia, which is in Constantinople, and we came
to a place about two miles from the city where we
remained that night The next morning I sent the
boat to the city of Pera, to give news of my coming to
the captain of a ship, called Juan Caro, a native of
Seville, who was my good friend and whom I knew
to be there. He came out with his friends in their
boats to greet me. I desired to go at once to make my
reverence to the Emperor, but they importuned me
so much, saying that I should disgrace them if I did
not go first to Pera where they had their houses, that I
had to comply. I and my companions entered the
boats of the Castilians, and our ship came with us,
and we entered the harbour of Constantinople, and we
then left it and went on and anchored at the quay of
Pera,°® which is one of the finest in the world. Any
ship, however great, can lie in clear, deep water with
its bowsprit on land, so that better anchorage could not
be had. I landed in company with the Castilians, and
with other friends of theirs of divers nations, and we
went to the church to pray. There I found the podesta
who governs the place, and he received me very kindly,
asking for news of the West, and protesting that what-
ever I had need of should be supplied at once, and so
we parted. I took lodgings with the Castilian captain
where I had, indeed, an excellent reception, and
when I arrived I found a great present of wine and
fowl, which the podeStd had sent me. The following
day the Castilians who were in Constantinople and
Pera came to see me, and I recognized some whom I
had seen in Castile, among them Alfon de Mata,
squire to Don Juan, our Master, whom God protect.

TES

TRAV ELS> (GO RA0P BRIG peters ts

He begged me to present him to the Emperor of
Trebizond, because he had come with the ambassadors
of the Council, and was now ruined, and I did speak.
to the Emperor,® although he was himself equally
ruined, having been exiled from his country with the
Empress of Constantinople, his sister, and he received
him into his service, and gave me the same day a bow
and arrows which I still have.

116

CHAPTER XIV

Constantinople —T he Emperor F ohn Palacologus—T afur’s family tree. —
The story of the Fourth Crusade —Tafur’s reception at Court.—
Departure of the Emperor for Europe.

AFTER two days, during which time I rested myself,
I went to make my reverence to the Emperor of Con-
stantinople, and all the Castilians accompanied me.
I arrayed myself as best I could, putting on the Order
of the Escama,’ which is the device of King Juan,
and I sent for one of the Emperor’s interpreters, called
Juan of Seville, a Castilian by birth, and they say that
the Emperor chose him to be interpreter because he
sang him Castilian romances to the lute. He came
with me to the Palace, and went in to advise the Em-
peror that I was there to make my reverence, and they
made me wait an hour while the Emperor sent for
certain knights and prepared himself. I then entered
the Palace, and came to a hall where I found him seated
on a tribune, with a lion’s skin spread under his feet.”
I made my reverence there, and told the Emperor that
I had come to see his person and estate, and to take
knowledge of his lands and lordships, but principally
to learn the truth concerning my lineage, which I had
been told had sprung from that place, and from his
Imperial blood, and I commenced to tell him the
manner in which this was said to have come about.
He replied at once that I was very welcome, and that
he was greatly pleased to see me, and as to that which
I spoke of he would order the ancient records to be
searched, so that the truth of everything might be
ascertained. He asked me for news of the Christian
lands and princes, especially concerning the King of
Spain, my Master, and of his estate and his war with
117

TRAVELS “OR PER Oypignit

the Moors, and I replied to everything to the best of
my knowledge, and so took leave of him and went to
my lodging. The next day he sent for me to ask me
to go hunting, and he sent horses for me and mine,
and I went with him, and with the Empress, his consort,
who was there, and that day he told me that he was now
acquainted with the matters about which I enquired,
and that on his return he would order me to be exactly
informed concerning them, andI thanked him. When
we returned, about Vesper time, after we had dis-
mounted, he sent to summon before him those whom
he had instructed to make search concerning my
enquiries, and it was on this wise.

They say that formerly (I do not remember the actual
time) an Emperor of Constantinople sent through-
out his lands to order that the nobles should pay taxes
and render service and make contributions, in the same
way as the villeins. The nobles, in view of so great
an abuse of their charters, spoke with his eldest son
and heir, and persuaded him to take their part and to
reason with the Emperor, his father, that he should
refrain from leaving so bad a name behind him, for his
proposals were against order and justice, and could
only force the nobles to take up arms against him, which
could not be avoided if he persisted in his evil purposes.
The prince accepted the charge of the nobles, and
promised to do all in his power, and he spoke to the
Emperor, his father, and begged him, of his grace, not
to do this against the nobles of his country, since it
was due to them that he was ruler, and that they
sustained and honoured him; further, that if he opposed
them he would involve his country in great peril and
labour, and that he would find that he could not enforce
his will on them. When the Emperor heard this he
was very incensed against the prince, his son, and
banished him from his court, and he betook himself,
as they say, to the city of Adrianople, which is to-day

118

CONSTANTINOPLE

the headquarters and court of the Grand Turk. When
he arrived there the noise of it went throughout the
Empire, and presently there was a general rising of
the nobles and their adherents, and they gathered to-
gether and took the prince, and came with a great host
to Constantinople where the Emperor was, a journey
of about five days. The Emperor, when he knew of
this, went out and encamped with all his commons,
and they were thus arrayed one against the other. ‘The
prince sent once again to beseech his father that he
should refrain from causing such great injury and
ruin, since otherwise he would have to fight with him.
But the Emperor was much more incensed than before,
saying that matters must now proceed, and that he
would make the prince and all those with him pay with
their lives. When the prince saw this, and that a
contest was imminent, he made an agreement with
his father that the Emperor should withdraw to Con-
stantinople, and that he should return to Adrianople,
and that they should then come to terms. The prince
did all this in order to avoid fighting with his father.
And it fell out so, and each returned to his place.
Now when the prince saw that the question could
not be settled without fighting, he approached one of
the princes, his brother, and recommended the people
to him, and he commended him to the people, and
said that God would never suffer him to fight with
his father, nor even to live in a country where such
a thing was possible, and he departed and came to
Spain, and arrived in Castile at the time when Don
Alfonso was reigning, who conquered Toledo, and
whom some call Alfonso of the Pierced Hand. Here
the prince was known as Count Don Pedro, and was
father of Don EStevan Yllan. ‘The Greek nobles, when
they found themselves bereft of such a captain, for he
was a valiant knight, as he had proved himself by many
feats of arms, both before and after he came to Spain,

119

TRAVELS: (OF OR WOg sii ie

took the younger brother, although he was but a youth,
and kissed his hand, and called him Emperor of
Greece, and set out with him from Adrianople with
all their men-at-arms. ‘They came up against Con-
Santinople, with intent to place this youth on the
Imperial throne, and the Emperor, when he was
advised of it, did as before and marched out of the city
against him, and there was no course but to fight.
The Emperor was vanquished and captured, and great
numbers of his people were slain and taken, and the
nobles entered the city as great victors and placed the
young prince, their captain, whom they had brought
with them, on the Emperor’s throne. They set a
Strong guard about the person of his father, and after
a few days’ illness he died, and the prince remained
in peaceful possession of the Empire. He repealed
the laws which his father had made, and made others
more favourable to the nobles than before, and for this
cause they say that there is not so much liberty for
nobles in any part of the world as in Greece. Nor are
the villeins anywhere so much in subjection, since they
are in fact slaves to the nobility. But, to-day, for the
sins of Christians, both nobles and villeins are afflicted
with a grievous servitude, since their lords are the
Turks, the enemies of the Faith. .

The other prince, when he came to Castile, was very
well recetved and much honoured by the King, and
they say that the King was preparing to make war on
the Moors, and he married the prince to one of his
own legitimate sisters, and left him to govern the
Kingdom while he went to the war. He is said to
have been a very noble knight, vigorous, frank, and
very discreet. ‘They called him Don Peryllan, and he
it was, they say, who entered Toledo and set up the
King there. Moreover, when the city revolted he
recovered it for him, fighting against the rebels and
overcoming them. For this cause, and as recompense

120

CONSTANTINOPLE

for this deed, they say that all those privileges were
granted to him, which the citizens of Toledo enjoy to
this day. He is buried in the chapel of the ancient
kings in Toledo, and high up in the roof he is painted
on horseback with his standard and arms, the which
are the same as those now borne by the most virtuous
and bounteous Don Fernant Alvarez de ‘Toledo,
Count of Alva, for he is descended in the direét line
from that prince of Greece who came to Castile. I
also carry those arms, for I come also of that line, and
that Don Pero Ruyz Tafur, who was prominent in the
taking of Cordova, was a grandson of Count Don
Estevan Yllan, the son or grandson of Don Peryllan,
the prince of whom 1am speaking. It would be fitting,
but for prolonging this writing, to relate from the
history of Castile, how many of them from father to
son are descended from that line until now. And if I
carry bars on my escutcheon, it 1s because by marriages
the descent has become confused, but the true arms
are checky.

When I was acquainted with all this, I enquired of
the Emperor why he did not carry those arms which
it was formerly the custom for the Emperors to wear,
that is the arms of my family, and he told me that some
hundred or hundred and fifty years ago, or more, the
Venetians prepared a great fleet,® saying that it was for
the assistance of the Emperor against the Turks, and
they came with the fleet to Constantinople, and were
very well received by the Emperor and all the Greeks,
and they lodged everywhere in the city. But it appears
that they had already plotted what they put in practice,
for they rose with the citizens against the Emperor,
and fought with him, and since he was wholly un-
prepared for such treason, they succeeded in driving
him out of the city, and many were slain. He fled
to Morea, which was called formerly Achaia, a princi-
pality of the heirs of the Empire, and the Venetians

I2I

TRAVELS OF PERO TAFUR

occupied the city and remained there for fully seventy
years, and they carried away many holy relics, which
are now in Venice, the bodies of St. Helena and
St. Marina, and many other relics. They despoiled
a number of magnificent buildings, and carried off two
great columns which they set up, with their Patron
Saint upon them, on the sea-shore. They are as high
as towers and so well preserved that it is difficult to
believe they could ever have been moved.* Above
the door of St. Mark’s are four very great horses of
brass, thickly gilt with fine gold. There are also
jaspers and marbles and other things, all of which they
carried off from Constantinople during the time of
their dominion. ‘They were even on the point of
transferring the government from Venice to Con-
stantinople, but desisted on the advice of an elder, who
said that they ought never to leave the city from which
they had conquered all the others. While the Vene-
tians held Constantinople the Emperor died,° as well
as his son, and there remained only a grandson, who
married a daughter of the King of Hungary and
became a worthy knight. He agreed with the people
of Constantinople and the surrounding country that
on a given day they should all rise, and he would be
ready with as great a force as he could muster, and
would succour the city, and when it was taken all
should be his, and it was so.

On the appointed day the people rose against the
Venetians, and shut them up in one part of the city so
that they could not reach the ships, and they sent for
that prince, who entered the city, and killed and cap-
tured all the Venetians, and sat himself on the Imperial
throne, and the people kissed his hand and acknow-
ledged him as their ruler, They took much spoil
from the Venetians and much money by way of ransom,
and he held dominion in peace. Now they say that
this Emperor, who thus recovered the Empire and held

122

CONSTANTINOPLE

it, could never be prevailed upon to relinquish the arms
which he formerly bore, which were and are two
links joined, and to assume the Imperial arms, which
belong to the throne. But he replied always that he
had won the Empire bearing those arms, and nothing
would induce him to part with them, and so it is to this
day. Nevertheless, the old arms, which are checky,
can still be seen on the towers and buildings and the
churches of the city, and when the people put up their
own buildings they still place the old arms upon them.
I insisted, as best I could, that the Emperors should
still wear those arms since they are the real arms of the
Empire. Further, that it is the office which gives the
authority, and not the person who restored it, especially
since the people recovered the city and made him their
lord. ‘To this the Emperor replied that the matter
was still being debated between himself and the people.
I, having been informed of all this, told the Emperor
what had happened in Spain, and he told me what had
happened there. ‘This was all I could learn of the
affair of the arms, and of the manner in which it came
about.

From that time onwards the Emperor treated me
with great affection and as a kinsman, and he desired
greatly that I should remain in his country and marry
there and settle down, and I had some thoughts of
doing so in view of what I have related, for the city is
badly populated and there is need of good soldiers,
which is no wonder since the Greeks have such power-
ful nations to contend with. I found in the city many
Castilians and persons of other Latin nations in the
Emperor’s service, and while I was there they showed
me great honour and esteem. That day a knight of
the household who was there invited me to dinner on
the following day, and I accepted. After Mass I went
to his house, where he was awaiting me, and I dined
with him, and he showed me his wife and children,

123

TRAVEUS 7 OF PBR Om adieu

treating me in a very friendly manner. After dinner
he sent everyone away and went to his room and put
on his collar of the Order of Escama, the device of our
King and Master, and he came to me and said in the
Castilian tongue: “ Sir knight, you are right welcome.
See here is my house with all that is in it at your dis-
posal, as if for my own brother, because I have received
great honour and many benefits from your King, and
from the knights of your country much hospitality,
and if I have not spoken to you until now in your own
tongue in public, it is because we hold it for a disgrace
at any time to give up our own language and speak a
Strange one. Nevertheless, for the great love which
I have for your nation, and for you, from henceforth
when we are alone | will bear myself in all things as a
Castilian, like yourself.” From that hour I received
much honour from this knight, and he brought one of
his sisters to me, a very beautiful woman, saying that
while I was there I should serve her as a friend, and
he commended me to her. Indeed, I believe he
desired me to marry her. From this lady I received
many things, especially two pavilions which I took
to Castile. The one I gave to the King, and the other
I still have.

This day the Emperor sent for me to go hunting,
and we killed many hares, and partridges, and fran-
colins, and pheasants, which are very plentiful there,
and when we returned to the Palace I took my leave
and went to my lodging, where he had ordered that
I should be provided with whatever I had need of.
Without doubt, it was the Emperor’s wish to show me
much honour and favour, and from that day onwards,
when he or the Empress, his consort, desired to hunt,
he sent horses for me, and I went with them, and they
said that they had great pleasure in my company. After
fifteen days of my visit had passed, the Emperor had
to depart in the Venetian galleys to meet the Pope, and

124

CONS DANTINOPLUE

he begged me repeatedly to accompany him, which
I should have done had I not been forced to excuse
myself on the plea that I was obliged first to see Greece,
Turkey, and also Tartary. When the Emperor saw
that he could not persuade me, he commended me to
the Empress, his wife, and to Dragas,® his brother,
who was heir to the Imperial throne—that one whom
the Turks have since killed—and he departed in great
splendour. There went with him two of his brothers,
and 800 men, all noblemen of high rank. On the day
of his going” there was a great celebration, and every-
one went in procession with the members of the
Religious Orders to the place of embarkation, and a
great company went one day’s journey out to sea with
the fleet, and I went also. I then took my leave and
returned to Constantinople, but the Emperor gave me
licence very unwillingly, saying that if | had had my
people with me he would not have let me go. So I
left him, he commanding me to visit him before
returning to my country, which I promised and later
performed.

125

CHAPTER ZAY.

Adrianople—Description of the Grand Turk.—The Black Sea.—
Arrival at Trebizond.

Havine returned to Constantinople, I asked leave
of the Despot Dragas, who now represented the Em-
peror, to go to Adrianople, the greatest city in Greece
except Constantinople, where the Turks had their
armies. The Despot sent for certain Genoese mer-
chants who were there, and directed that they should
arrange for me to see the Grand Turk, his state and
person, and return without danger. It happened that
a brother of one of those merchants had arrived, who was
very acceptable to the Despot and was much trusted by
him, and this merchant agreed, in order to serve the
Despot, to carry me with him and show me everything.
We departed in three days, taking the road to Greece,
and passing certain small places which need not be
described here, until we arrived at Adrianople, a nine
days’ journey. Here I lodged with the Genoese who
had his house in the city. ‘The Grand Turk" sent for
me to enquire when and how the Emperor had de-
parted, and in what state, and in whose ships, and
accordingly, while telling him these things, I saw his
person and household and people. He must be about
45 years of age, of good stature, and handsome of
feature. He seemed from his bearing to be a discreet
person, grave in his looks, and he was so handsomely
attended that I never saw the like, for he had with him
all his forces, which amount to 600,000 horsemen,
and, lest it should appear that I am exaggerating, I
refer to those who gave me the information. In good
faith, I am afraid to repeat all that was told me. There
is not a pedestrian in the whole country, but all go on
horseback, on very small and lank horses.
126

ADRIANOPLE

The Grand Turk and his people are always in the
field in tents, both in winter and summer, and although
the city is close at hand, he never enters it unless it is
to go with his women to the bath, which thing, with
the help of the Genoese, I was enabled tosee. He went
thither with drums and music and buffoons singing,
and a great crowd of women, who, they said, were his
body-women, to the number of 300 and more. Thus,
with great noise and shouting they entered the city
and remained there until midnight, when the Grand
Turk returned to his tents. The next day he went
hunting, and the Genoese arranged for me to go as
well. There were many people on horseback with
falcons, goshawks, and leopards, and all the hunting
accoutrements. The Turks have the custom to carry
in the saddle an iron staff, and a tambourine with
their bows and quivers. ‘This is the whole of their
fighting outfit, and since the country is cold and often
frozen, and the horses fall easily, the men wear boots
of Damascine leather up to the knees, which are very
hard, and to which the spurs are fixed. These they
wear always, and if the horse falls they can free their
legs without receiving any injury, and the boot remains
in the stirrup. There are many pheasants and
francolins, and every kind of bird which is in Spain.
The men are clad in the manner of the country, with
long cloaks and mantles of the same material, which
are open in front. These are made of fine woollen
cloth, and of silk and brocades from Italy. But what
surprised me more than anything else was the display
of furs: martins, sable, and less valuable skins, ermine,
with the teeth, and fox, which latter they value very
highly, as well for its quality as also for its softness,
and because it is very warm and suitable for such a
cold country. Many wear linen on their heads, others
hats made like those worn at rustic merry-makings
in Burgos. Their saddles are like asses’ saddles, but

127

TRAVEUS) O RUPE ROs teen.

very rich and covered with fine cloths, and their stirrups
are rather short than long.
That day we returned to the city, and my companion
took me about the camp, looking at the quarters of the
knights and the other people. There, as in their own
houses, they keep all that is necessary for their comfort,
their women, and everything besides. The tents are
excellent, with good personal accommodation, but
nevertheless the people endure much hardship, and
long usage has so accustomed them to it that they do
not show any aversion. ‘The horses are always kept in
the open without any shelter, and I believe that, although
they are lank and small by nature, the way in which
they are neglected makes them work still less, and, in-
deed, it seems at times as if they could scarcely carry
their masters. Although the number of their horses
is difficult of credit, yet considering how many beasts
there are in Castile, hacks in Galicia and in the moun-
tains, he mules, she mules and asses, | think our country
could show as many. I would as lief ride to war or
to tourney on one of our asses as on any of their horses.
The Turks have a vast dominion, but the country
is very Sterile and sparsely populated and mountainous.
Greece, which they occupy, is a flat and fruitful land,
although now it is depopulated by war, for the Greeks
bear the whole burden of the Struggle, and the Turks
are ruthless and treat them with great cruelty. Indeed,
it is difficult to believe how so great an army can be
provisioned. The Turks are a noble people, much
given to truth, They live in their country like nobles,
as well in their expenditure as in their actions and food
and sports, in which latter there is much gambling.
They are very merry and benevolent, and of good
conversation, so much so that in those parts, when one
speaks of virtue, it is sufficient to say that anyone is
like a Turk. Having seen the person, household and
estate of the Grand Turk, I told my companion that it
128

PEP eLACK SHA

would be well to return to Constantinople, but we
were forced to remain for two days more on account of
some business which he had to complete with certain
merchants of the Grand Turk’s household. On one
of those days the Grand Turk went out to hunt, and
I went with him to see the assembly, which was the
greatest I had ever beheld, in point of numbers and
horses, and general display. The men were very well
and richly clad, according to their fashion, but such
pnes I never saw in my life, neither so many nor so
rich.

The following day we departed and returned to
Constantinople by that road by which we had come,
and the Despot Dragas showed much pleasure at
seeing me, and thanked the Genoese heartily for the
care he had taken of me. I remained in the city eight
days, resting myself, and while there I begged the
Despot that he would be graciously pleased to speak
with the captain of a ship there, saying that I desired
to pass over the Black Sea to go to Kaffa, which is a
city of the Genoese, close to the Sea of Azov. The

_ Despot sent at once for the captain, and asked him to
carry me with him and show me honour, and he
promised it. And captain Juan Caro, the Castilian,
my friend, spoke also with one of the Genoese,
and, to oblige him further, he carried in his ship
certain merchandise to Chios and Rhodes. ‘This same
Castilian gave me also victuals for the voyage. We
then prepared ourselves and set sail, and came by the
Bosphorus, which stretches from Constantinople to the
mouth of the Black Sea, a distance of eighteen miles.
Entering the Black Sea we bore to the right hand
towards Turkey, passing many places, until we reached
a castle called Sinope, which belongs to the Genoese
in Turkey. There we anchored and remained two
days, discharging merchandise, and loading other
goods. In these parts the Turks cut the wood from

129 K

TRAVELS. O Re Pee RO melee ov

which they make very strong cross-bows, and they
bury them on the sea-shore for fear of the heavy punish-
ment which would be inflifted if they were caught
selling them to the Christians, and when they see ships
passing they dig them up and sell them.

We departed from Sinope and coasted along the
shore of the Black Sea as far as Trebizond, which was
called Samothrace of old. The Emperor there is a
Christian and a Greek, and they say that the father of
the present Emperor, in order to disinherit his elder
brother, approached the Grand Turk, asking him to
support him, and he killed his father, and he had two
sons and the younger son killed his father, whereb
the words of the Evangelist were fulfilled: For with
the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured
to you again. ‘The elder brother was he whom I had
seen in Constantinople, living in exile with his sister,
the Greek Empress, and they say that his relations
with her are dishonest.

130

CHAPTER XVI

Trebizond.— The Usurper.— Kaffa.— The slave-market.—Tafur
purchases three slaves—The Don—The trade in caviare.—
The Grand Khan.—The Tartars.

TREBIZOND has about 4000 inhabitants. It is well
walled, and they say that the ground is fruitful and that
it produces a large revenue. We landed and went to
see the Emperor,* who enquired of me concerning the
Emperor of Constantinople, in what manner he had
departed for Italy, and what people he had taken
with him, and he enquired also as to the Empress, his
sister, and his brother, whom he had exiled. All
this he did, because he desired to know from me whether
it was true that his brother was betrothed to a daughter
of the Lord of Mytilene, and that this lord and the
Genoese and the Emperor had given him a great fleet
to make war on ‘Trebizond, and I assured him that this
was so, whereupon he was much cast down and replied
that he had sufficient to resist them all,and many more.
He asked me much in order that he might know who
I was and whither I was going, and he urged me to
remain there, and promised, in order to satisfy me, that
he would send me in one of his ships to see what I
wished to see. I replied that I thanked him for de-
siring my company, but that I could not consent,
since I had to accomplish my journey and be back in
my own country within a certain time, as the King, my
Master, was going to war with the Moors. Further,
that if matters were otherwise I could not remain with
him, for he was married to a daughter of a Turk, and
that some harm would surely come to him from that.
He replied that God would show him grace, because
he had married her with intent to make her a Christian,

it

TRAVELS “OF PEK © lear

but I said: “ My Lord, they say, rather, that they gave
her to you so that she could turn you into a Moor,
by reason of your expectations from her and the little
that you have.” He ordered me to be provided with
what food I had need of and asked me to return there.

I then departed, and sailed for Kaffa,” which is part
of the Empire of Tartary, but the city 1s held by the
Genoese who have licence to inhabit there, only the
Tartars did not think that they would settle there in
such numbers. We anchored in the harbour and came
to the inn where the captain had his lodging, and stayed
there. The next day I went to see the monastery
of St. Francis, which is a very pleasant house, and heard
Mass, and later I went to see the podeSta who received
me very well. Heasked me of what things I had need,
and told me that he would gladly supply my wants, for he
felt great love and duty towards our nation, since when he
was in Seville he was excellently treated.I thanked him
heartily, and before nightfall | went about the city admir-
ing many things which were strange to me.

The city is very large, as large as Seville, or larger,
with twice as many inhabitants, Christians and
Catholics as well as Greeks, and all the nations of the
world. ‘They say that the Emperor of Tartary would
have taken and destroyed it many times, except that
the lords and common people of the surrounding
countries would not consent to it, for they use the
place for their evil doings and thefts, and their great
wickedness, such as fathers selling their children, and
brother selling brother. These things, and worse, are
done there by all the nations of Persia, and when they
leave the city they turn their faces to it, and drawing
a bow they shoot an arrow against the wall, saying that
they go thus absolved from the sins they have com-
mitted. They say, further, that the selling of children
is no sin, for they are a fruit given by God for them to
use for profit, and that God will show the children more

132

KAFFA

favour in the places whither they go than with their
parents. In this city they sell more slaves, both male
and female, than anywhere else in the world, and the
Sultan of Egypt has his agents here, and they buy
the slaves and send them to Cairo, and they are called
Mamelukes. ‘The Christians have a Bull from the
Pope, authorizing them to buy and keep as slaves the
Christians of other nations, to prevent their falling into
the hands of the Moors and renouncing the Faith.
These are Russians, Mingrelians, Caucasians, Circa-
sians, Bulgarians, Armenians and divers other people
of the Christian world. I bought there two female
slaves and a male, whom I still have in Cordova with
their children. The selling takes place as follows.
The sellers make the slaves strip to the skin, males as
well as females, and they put on them a cloak of felt,
and the price is named. Afterwards they throw off
their coverings, and make them walk up and down to
show whether they have any bodily defect. ‘The seller
has to oblige himself, that if a slave dies of the pestilence
within sixty days, he will return the price paid. When
slaves of different_nationalities are sold, if there is a
Tartar man or woman among them, the price is a third
more, since it may be taken as a certainty that no
Tartar ever betrayed a master.

The city of Kaffa is indifferently walled and sur-
rounded by a very small ditch, but it is well provided
with cross-bows, bombards, cannon, muskets and
culverins, and all manner of defensive artillery. They
turn these even upon unarmed people although they
have little wish to do them injury, since they derive
great profit from them. A few days earlier those of
the city marched out with troops and artillery trains to
take the city of Corcate, which is the chief city of Tar-
tary, but the Tartars were advised of it, and over-
came the Genoese, and took their artillery and their
colours, and killed and captured so many that the

133

TRAVELS: (OF (PER Om) eames

Tartars thought that day to take Kaffa itself. They
approached the walls and tried to scale them, but
many were killed, and the Genoese there realized
that their people were Stronger by sea than by land.
Kaffa is bounded on the side towards Persia and
India by land, and on the others by the Sea of Tana,
the Sea of Ryxabaque and the Sea of Bacu.? They
bring there much merchandise, spices, gold, pearls,
and precious stones, and above all, from the countries
round, come the furs of the whole world and at the
cheapest rates. Certainly if it were not for the Genoese
who are there, it would not appear that the people
have any lot with us, since there are so many different
nationalities, so many ways of dressing and eating, and
such diversity in the usage of women. In the tavern
where we lodged they brought us young virgins for a
measure of wine, of which there is great scarcity, as also
of all kinds of fruit and bread. ‘These can all be had
in the town, but there they are sold by the merchants
at a high price, and for this reason thefts are common.
The Tartars are a warlike people and they work much,
both they and their horses, and they require little to
sustain them. They say that when they are moving
about, or at war, they carry their meat between the
horse’s side and the seat of the saddle,* and they do not
cook it any more than it is cooked by that process.
They make war on the neighbouring Christians, and
take them and sell them in Kaffa, especially since the
death of the lord of Vitoldo, who ruled over Lithuania
and Russia, and was brother of the King of Poland,
and he died without heirs. When the King of Poland
succeeded to his lands, since they were far removed
from Poland, the people did not desire him for ruler,
and the country was divided up and thus lost. If
the Tartars come under our rule as slaves, it is only
because they are stolen or sold, as I have related, by
their parents. So great is the multitude of men, and

134

KAFFA

of so many different nationalities, that it is a marvel
that Kaffa is free from plague.

_ While I was there I went to see the Don,° a great
river, and they say that this is the other stream which
flows from the terrestrial paradise, and the Sea of
Tana, the Sea of Ryxabaque and the Sea of Bacu are all
fed by that water which comes from the Tanais, and
runs through all Persia and Greater India, and, as with
the Nile, the water carries much merchandise which
enters the Black Sea close to Kaffa. On this coast
are two castles, one belonging to the Genoese and the
other to the Venetians, where they store much mer-
chandise. In this river there are many fish which they
load on ships, especially great quantities of Sturgeon,
which we call here so//os, a very good fish, both fresh
and salted, and they can be met with in Castile and
even in Flanders, whither they are carried. By this
route the ambassadors of King Enrique travelled when
they went to the court of Timur-Beg.® I was told
by Don Alfonso Fernandez de Mesa that from there
to the farthest point they reached was as far as from
Kaffa to Castile, but that they went straight there and
back and saw many strange things by the way, and at
the court of Timur-Beg, as they assert. The river
Don is a Strange sight, as are also the people who dwell
on its banks. They kill there certain fish which they
call merona. ‘These, they say, are very large, and they
put the eggs into casks and carry them all over the
world, especially to Greece and Turkey, and they call
them caviare. The eggs look at first like black soap,
and they take them when they are soft and they press
them with a knife, as we do soap in our country, and

ut them into braziers, which makes them hard, and
they look like the eggs of fish. This caviare is very
salt. [he women and the majority of the men wear
the delicate silk of those parts, very elaborately worked,
like the Moriscas here. ‘The men wear felt cloaks, as fine

135

TRAVEUS OF SRG Ome ene.

as Cloth, which are pressed into shape and have no seams.
Their arms are scimitars, bows and arrows, and clubs.

I did what I could to make plans to go to Tartary,
but I was advised against it, since it would be unsafe
to venture among people who are constantly moving
and live without restraint, owing obedience to no ruler.
I went, however, to see the city of Corcate, and from
there I wished to see the great bazaar of the Grand
Khan (that is lordo basar: lordo, a host, and basar, a
square) which they call his court. And I informed
myself as to it, and it ison this wise. ‘There is a place
like a great city where they have their market, as they
call it, and there the Grand Cadir is stationed who is
charged with governing the people. On the other side,
on the left hand, is another place for the same purpose,
and another Grand Cadir rules there. The houses are
portable, some of linen, some of rods, and it happens
at times that, because the soil is exhausted, they change
their ground and settle in another district, and when
they go they place all their goods in carts, and then set
them down in the same order, as if they could not
bring themselves to alter it. They eat no bread, which
is not to be had, only a mixture of rice and camels’ milk,
and horse-flesh. ‘They know nothing of wine, for they
are of the Mohammedan religion. The Grand Khan
is ruler over much country, but cities and towns are
unknown. The people live always in the open country.
Those who cannot find Christians with whom to fight,
make war among themselves, and they steal when they
can without fear of justice, for they do not regard it as
wrong. They are commonly small in stature and
broad-shouldered. ‘Their foreheads are wide and their
eyes are small. It is said that the most deformed are
of the noblest birth. It is said also that when they
meet the Turks they always have the better of them,
and that the Turks, as a consequence, beat the Greeks,
and the Greeks the Tartars.

136

KAFFA

But the Greeks are now altogether undone, for at
this time Constantinople was the only fortified place
they had left, and some still called them lord, but now
all the Christian nations distributed throughout the
world are serfs to the Moors, as the mudejares are with
us, and are completely ruined and subject and scattered.
The Turks have, indeed, avenged the taking of Troy.
Even before I arrived, and before Constantinople had
been taken, the Greeks were as subject as they now
are, and if the Turks did not lay hands upon the city,
it was for fear of the Christian peoples of the West,
lest they should take up arms. But it well appears from
the great neglect of Christian princes and people, now
that Constantinople is lost, how vain was that fear, for
if God had allowed it, and the Turks had dared more,
they could have succeeded in all that they attempted,
seeing that Christendom has made no effort to avenge
the wrong. It is plain, indeed, that cities are better
defended by the miraculous power of God than by the
industry and strength of men.

I desired greatly to remain in that country, but the
people were bestial, and the food did not agree with
me. The country is almost as inaccessible as Greater
India, where it is impossible to go, and there is little
to see in other parts of the country, except those
Christians I spoke of as miserable and ruined by the
ill neighbourhood of the Tartars, and their want of a
ruler to govern them; and so they will continue to
suffer until God takes pity onthem. ‘The city of Kaffa
is so cold in winter that the ships freeze in the harbour.
Such is the bestiality and deformity of the people that
I was glad to give up the desire I had to see more, and
to return to Greece. I therefore colletted my goods

and departed from Kaffa.

137

CHAPTER: XVII

Return to ConStantinople.—St. Sophia——The Relics —Statue of Con-
Stantine (FuStinian)—A Holy Pidure—The Hippodrome —The
Serpent Column.—A Statue called The Fust.—The Palace —The
Library. —The miserable condition of the city—Summary Fustice.
—A feint by the Turks —They are bought of.

WE sailed in the same ship, and continuing our course
we returned to Trebizond, where, as I have said, the
Emperor did his best to detain me, but he could not
succeed, and we departed and came to Constantinople.
But orders having been issued that no ships coming
from the Black Sea were to enter the harbour, either
at Constantinople or Pera, because it was feared that
they would bring the plague with them, they built
a shelter two leagues from Constantinople where the
ships could discharge their cargo, and where they had
to remain for sixty days unless they were prepared to
put to sea again. Certainly the foreign nations bring
much sickness with them, and I myself saw in that
lodging men dead of plague. I sent one of my men to
ask permission of the Despot Dragas to enter the city,
notifying him that I and my people had left the ship,
and that I had not lodged with the others, but had
remained two days in the fields. He ordered a boat,
which was very well fitted out, to be sent for me, and
certain of my friends came out to receive me. I sent
my people to the place where they were to lodge, and
went to make my reverence to the Despot, who received
me very graciously, as did also the Empress and her
ladies. The Empress enquired of me how I had
fared in the Black Sea, especially if I had seen her
brother, the Emperor of Trebizond, and her other
brother was there at that time. I told them what had
138

CONSTANTINOPLE

happened when I saw the Emperor, and they thanked
me much, and the Empress said: “ You could not have
done more if you had been of our nation,” and I replied:
“ Lady, I did that which was due from a good Chris-
tian.” I then took my leave and returned to my lodging,
very well attended by the nobles of the city.

On the day following I went to the Despot, and asked
him if he would be pleased to dire€& that I should be
shown the church of St. Sophia and its relics, and he
replied that he would do it with pleasure, and that he
himself desired to go there to hear Mass, as did also
the Empress and her brother, the real Emperor of
Trebizond. We then went to the church to Mass,
and afterwards they caused the church to be shown to
me. It is very large and they say that in the days of
the prosperity of Constantinople there were in it six
thousand clergy. Inside, the circuit is for the most
part badly kept, but the church itself is in such fine
state that it seems to-day to have only just been finished.
It is made in the Greek manner with many lofty chapels,
roofed with lead, and inside there is a profusion of
mosaic work to a spear’s length from the ground.
This mosaic work is so fine that not even a brush could
attempt to better it. Below are very delicate stones,
intermixed with marble, porphyry, and jasper, very
richly worked ‘The floor is made of great stones,
most delicately cut, which are very magnificent. In
the centre of these chapels is the principal one which
is very large; the height is such that it is difficult to
believe that cement can hold it together. In this
chapel there is similar mosaic work, with a figure of
God the Father in the centre. From below it looks
the size of an ordinary man, but they say that the foot
is as long as a spear, and from eye to eye the distance
is many spans in length. Here is the great altar, and
here one can see all the grace and richness appertaining
to geometry. Beneath this chapel there is a great

139

TRAVELS" OF PERO yur.

cigtern' which, they say, could contain a ship of 3000
botas in full sail, the breadth, height and depth of water
being all sufficient. I know not if such a statement
can be supported, but I never saw a larger in my life
and do not believe that one exists.

The Despot and the others directed the clergy to
bring out the holy relics. The Despot keeps one key,
and the Patriarch of Constantinople, who was there,
the other. The third is kept by the Prior of the
church. The clergy, in their vestments, brought out
the relics in procession, which were: Firstly the lance
which pierced Our Lord’s side, a marvellous relic;
the coat without a seam, which must at one time have
been violet, but which had now grown grey with age;
one of the nails; and some thorns from Our Lord’s
crown, with many others, such as the wood of the Cross,
and the pillar at which Our Lord was scourged. ‘There
were also several things of Our Blessed Lady the
Virgin, and the gridiron on which St. Lawrence was
roasted, and many other relics which St. Helena took
when she was at Jerusalem and carried here, which are
much reverenced and closely guarded. God grant
that in the overthrow of the Greeks they have not fallen
into the hands of the enemies of the Faith, for they will
have been ill-treated and handled with little reverence.
As we came out we saw at the door of the church a
great column of stone, higher than the great chapel
itself, and on the top is a great horse of gilded brass,
upon which is a knight with one arm raised, pointing
with the finger towards Turkey, and in the other he
holds an orb, as a sign that all the world is in his hand?.
One day it was blown down in a great storm, and the
orb fell from the hand, and they say that it is as large
as a 15 gallon jar, but from below it looks like an
orange, so that one can judge how high the Statue is.
They say that to secure that orb, and to fasten the horse
with chains, to prevent its being blown down in the high

140

CONS UN LINO? EE

winds, cost 8000 ducats. This knight, they say, is
Constantine, and that he prognosticated that from that
quarter which he indicated with his finger would come
the destruction of Greece, and so it was. That day we
were occupied until midday admiring the church and
its circuit. Outside this church are great squares with
houses where they are accustomed to sell wine and bread
and fish, and more shell-fish than anything else, since
the Greeks are in the habit of eating them. In certain
times of fasting during the year they do not only con-
fine themselves to fish, but to fish without blood, that
is, shell-fish. Here they have great tables of stone
where they eat, both rulers and common people,
together.

The Despot and the Empress and her brother then
returned to the Palace, and I went to my lodging.
The next day I went to the church of St. Mary,® where
the body of Constantine is buried. In this church is
a picture of Our Lady the Virgin, made by St. Luke,
and on the other side is Our Lord crucified. It is
painted on stone, and with the frame and stand it
weighs, they say, several hundredweight. So heavy
is it as a whole that six men cannot lift it. Every
Tuesday some twenty men come there, clad in long red
linen draperies which cover the head like a stalking-
dress. ‘These men come of a special lineage, and by
them alone can that office be filled. There is a great
procession, and the men who are so clad go one by one
to the picture, and he whom it is pleased with takes it
up as easily as if it weighed only an ounce. ‘The bearer
then places it on his shoulder, and they go singing out
of the church to a great square, where he who carries
the picture walks with it from one end to the other,
and fifty times round the square. By fixing one’s eyes
upon the picture, it appears to be raised high above the
ground and completely transfigured. When it is set
down again, another. comes and takes it up and puts it

141

TRAV EUS*/0.F Pin RAO air eer

likewise on his shoulder, and then another, and in that
manner some four or five of them pass the day. ‘There
is a market in the square on that day, and a great crowd
assembles, and the clergy take cotton-wool and touch
the piCture and distribute it among the people who are
there, and then, still in procession, they take it back
to its place. While I was at Constantinople I did not
miss a single day when this picture was exhibited,
since it is certainly a great marvel.

There was a church‘ at Constantinople, not so large
as St. Sophia, but, as they say, much richer, which
St. Helena built, desiring greatly to show her power.
At the entrance were certain arches which were very
dark, and they say that people were found there fre-
quently committing the offence of sodomy, and one
day a thunder-bolt fell from Heaven and set fire to
the church, and not one of those who was surprised in
that sin was spared. The church they called Vala-
yerna, and it is to-day so burnt that it cannot be repaired.
There is also a monastery, called Pentecatro,® which
belongs to the monks of the Order of St. Basil (there
is no other Order in those parts), and this also is very
richly adorned with gold mosaics. In it are the vessels
which were filled with wine at the marriage of Archi-
teclinos, and many other relics, and it is the burial
place of the Emperors. On one side of the city,
towards the sea and over against Turkey,.is a monastery
for women, on a wall, called St. Demetrius, and one can
see Turkey across the narrowest part of the Straits.
Opposite to it on the Turkish side there is a tower where
a chain was stretched from one side to the other, and
when it was made fast the ships could not pass. This
was done partly for display, and partly in order not to
lose the tolls which were colle¢ted there, and this they
call the Arm of St. George. At one part the Straits
are so narrow that one can see a man passing on the
opposite shore. Moreover, the sea is very shallow

142

COND DAN TINOPEE

on the Turkish side, and so deep on the Greek side
that a ship of any size, and however large, can lie against
the walls of Constantinople, so that it looks as if one
could jump from the walls on to the ship.

There is in Constantinople a great place made by
hand, with porticoes and gateways, and arches below,
where the people used in ancient times to watch the
games when they celebrated their holidays,® and in
the centre are two snakes entwined, made of gilded
brass, and they say that wine poured from the mouth
of one and milk from the other. But no one can
remember this, and it seems to me that too much credit
must not be attached to the story. There is a statue
of a man in the centre of this square, also of gilded
brass, and they say that when merchants could not
agree as to price they consented to go to this statue,
which they called the Just,” and what it signified as
correct by shutting the hand, that was the true price
of the goods, and both parties accepted it. There was
once a nobleman who had a horse which was valued at
300 ducats, and a gentleman of those parts desired to
buy it, and they could not agree on the price. They
arranged, therefore, to go to the statue to determine
the question, and they went there, and the purchaser
took out some ducats and laid one in the hand of the
Statue, which thereupon shut its hand, giving to under-
Stand that the horse was not worth more, and the
purchaser had the horse and the seller the ducat, but
the seller was so incensed that he took out his scimitar
and cut off the statue’s hand, and after that it never
judged again. When the buyer reached home the
horse fell dead, and the hide and shoes fetched just a
ducat. But I would place more faith in anything
found in the Evangelists.

On the other side of this square is a bath® with doors
on either side opposite each other, and any woman
accused of adultery was ordered by the judges to be

143

TRAVELS “OF -PE ROT Aru

brought there, and they made her go in by one door
and come out at the other, and if she was innocent she
passed through without shame, but if otherwise her
skirts and chemise raised themselves on high without —
her perceiving it, so that from the middle downwards
everything could be seen. ‘This also it may be no sin
to doubt. In the centre of this square there is an
obelisk® made of a single stone, in the same manner
as that at Rome, where are the ashes of Julius Caesar,
but in fact it is not like that one, nor is it fine nor
ancient. They say that it was made for the body of
Constantine. There are also many buildings about
this square, and inside it, and they call it the Hippo-
drome.

The city of Constantinople is made like a triangle,
two parts in the sea and one on land. It is very
strongly walled in a way that isa marvel tosee. They
say that the Turks came there and put the city in great
straits, and he that had charge of the mines was amazed,
and said to the Grand Turk: “ Lord, this city is not to
be taken by mining, for the walls are of steel and will
never fall.” (This was said because the walls are very
high and are made of great marble blocks bound
together.) But as the Grand Turk was continuing
his attempt, they told him that they had seen a man
on horseback riding on the wall. He then asked a
Greek who had been captured what this marvel was
which they saw each night, namely, a knight riding
round the ramparts on a horse, fully armed. He
replied: “Lord, the Greeks say as follows: when
“Constantine built his church, many men were em-
“ ployed on the work, and one day, as all were going
“to dinner, the chief master-builder ordered a child
“to stay and guard the tools. The child did so, and
“a very beautiful man on horseback appeared and said
“to him: ‘Why do you not go to eat with the others ?’
“and the child replied: ‘ Lord, they ordered me to

144

CONSTANTINOPLE

“ “remain here to guard the tools.’ But the horseman
“replied: ‘Go and eat,’ and the child replied that he
“dare not. Whereupon the horseman said: ‘Go
““ without fear. I promise you that I will guard the
church and the city until you return.’ And the
“child went, but afterwards, being afraid of punish-
“ment, he did not return, so that the horseman remained
“in fulfilment of his promise, and they say that it was
“an angel.” But it might be said now that the child
had returned, and the angel had ceased his guard, for
the city is now captured and occupied. But for that
time the Turk departed.

The Emperor’s Palace must have been very magnifi-
cent,’° but now it is in such state that both it and the
city show well the evils which the people have suffered
and stillendure. Atthe entrance to the Palace, beneath
certain chambers, is an open loggia- of marble with
Stone benches round it, and stones, like tables, raised
on pillars in front of them, placed end to end. Here
are many books and ancient writings and histories,
and on one side are gaming boards so that the Emperor’s
house may always be well supplied. Inside, the house
is badly kept, except certain parts where the Emperor,
the Empress, and attendants can live, although cramped
for space. The Emperor’s state is as splendid as ever,
for nothing is omitted from the ancient ceremonies,
but, properly regarded, he is like a Bishop without a
See. When he rides abroad all the Imperial rites are
Strictly observed. The Empress rides astride, with
two stirrups, and when she desires to mount, two lords
hold up a rich cloth, raising their hands aloft and
turning their backs upon her, so that when she throws
her leg across the saddle no part of her person
can be seen. ‘The Greeks are great hunters with
falcons, goshawks, and dogs. The country is well
Stocked with game both for hawking and hunting,

and there are quantities of pheasants, francolins,
145 c

oo ¢

TRAVELS (OF; SPE RO Te aArltin

partridges, and hares. The land is flat and good for
riding. Re:

The city is sparsely populated. It is divided into
distri@ts, that by the sea-shore having the largest
population. The inhabitants are not well clad, but sad
and poor, showing the hardship of their-lot which 1s,
however, not so bad as they deserve, for they are a
vicious people, steeped in sin. It is their custom when
anyone dies not to open the door of the house for the
whole of that year except in case of necessity. They go
continually about the city howling as if in lamentation,
and thus they long ago foreshadowed the evil which
has befallen them. On one side of the city is the
dockyard. It is close to the sea, and must have been
very magnificent; even now it is sufficient to house the
ships. In the quarter over against Pera is a mole
made by hand, where the ships are fastened. Here
the salt water comes in and meets a river which enters
the sea at that place. The distance from there to
Pera is twice as far as a man could cast a Stone. When
the ships come to Pera to traffic with the Genoese,
they first salute Constantinople and pay tribute, and
criminal justice is administered from Constantinople
for Pera and the whole country. These harbours
of entry, the one and the other, are always full of ships,
on account of the great cargoes which they discharge
and load.

One day the Castilian captain who was there sent
for me, because one of his men had been killed at sea
by a Greek, with intent to steal his ship, and I went to
him, and we took the criminal and the corpse to the
Emperor that justice might be done. Although the
Greeks did not wish it, yet out of his great regard for
me, and because I said that our people might otherwise
take vengeance upon those who were innocent, the
Emperor sent at once for the executioner, and in front
of the Palace he ordered the criminal’s hands to be cut

146

CONSTANTINOPLE

off, and his eyes to be put out. I enquired why they
did not put him to death, and they replied that the
Emperor could not order his soul to be destroyed.
They told me also that when Charlemagne took Jerusa-
lem, on the way by which his people had to return,
many of them travelled through Greece and were
killed by the Greeks, and that the others, when they
heard of this, took the road through Tartary and
Russia, where the inhabitants were Christians, and
from there they passed into Hungary and Germany.
It is said that the reason why the Russians of those
parts are so beautiful, is that many Frenchmen settled
there and married. The Emperor Charlemagne then
came up against Constantinople, and made great war
on the Emperor of Greece, but in the end they had to
make peace, and the Emperor, as penance for the
killing of those men, promised to fast during the whole
of Lent, which they say is observed differently than
with us (since the Greeks cannot reconcile it with their
consciences to eat fish with blood, but only shell-fish),
and, further, that no one, however great his crime,
should be put to death, but that the punishment was
to be loss of hands and eyes. In Greece, therefore,
there are many maimed and blinded men. This is
the manner in which the Despot gave us justice, and
we were content with what he did.

During my stay in the city the Grand Turk marched
forth to a place on the Black Sea, and his road took him
close to Constantinople. The Despot and those of
Pera, thinking that the Turks were going to occupy
the country, prepared and armed themselves. The
Grand Turk passed close by the wall, and there was some
skirmishing that day, and he passed with a great
company of people. I had the good fortune to see
him in the field, and I observed the manner in which
he went to war, and his arms, horses and accoutrements.
I am of opinion that if the Turks were to meet the

147

TRAVELS SOB Ost) ate

armies of the West they could not overcome them,
not because they are lacking in strength, but because
they want many of the essentials of war. On this
day a great present was carried from Constantinople
and taken to the place where the Turks were stationed.
I thought that they would sit down and besiege the
city, but they continued their march to the Black Sea
against a people which had rebelled. It was, indeed,
what I desired, for we had but few men, and it would
have been difficult to make much resistance. It was,
therefore, a gratifying thing to see so great a host
depart without peril or labour. Would to God that the
people of our country were closer at hand, for there
are here neither ships nor fortresses, nor is there any

protection except by fighting.

148

CHAPTERS XVIII

Brusa.—Pera— Departure from Constantinople—Tafur rescues some
Christian slaves and is wounded.—Mytilene—Salonica.—A great
Storm. —Ragusa.— Ancona.—Spalato.—A sea monster.

Tue next day I asked a friend of mine, a Genoese, who
had a house in a city of Turkey which they call Brusa,!
at the extremity of the Gulf of Nicomedia, to take me
with him, and he did so. We went by sea, and I
saw the city, which is unwalled, but greater and better
than anyin Turkey. ‘There are some 4000 inhabitants,
and but for the gulf it would be of little value, for by
it the merchants have communication with the city.
They bring there many things by land from Persia.
It is situated very close to Greece, and since the Turks
have owned it they have much improved the place,
for it is a stepping-stone for the Turks from Greece
to their own country. ‘They have placed great stores
there, for they use the city as a half-way port. I believe
that in the whole of Turkey to-day there is no other
place so large, nor so well peopled, nor so rich. From
there I returned to Constantinople and Pera, whence
I had set out.

The city of Pera? has about 2000 inhabitants. It
is very well walled and has a good ditch and rampart.
The churches and monasteries are excellent, and there
is a fine exchange, well built and enclosed. The
buildings are notable and lofty, as in Genoa. The
common people are Greeks, but they are governed by
the Genoese who hold all the offices. It is a place of
much trafic in goods brought from the Black Sea,
as well as from the West, and from Syria and Egypt,
and the merchants are all wealthy. Pera was formerly

called Galata.
149

TRAVELS “OR (PER O7 AU as

After my return from the Black Sea I remained two
months in Constantinople and Pera, and I then departed
in a ship of Ancona, carrying with me my slaves and
the other things I had purchased in Kaffa. We set
sail, taking the route by which we had come, leaving
Constantinople behind us, and passing Eregli, Silum-
bria, Marmora, and Gallipoli. As we sailed through
the Straits, close by the Dardanelles, which was the
port of Troy, we saw certain men making signs to us
tocometoshore. ‘The captain said that he knew them
to be Christian captives who wanted to escape in our
ship, and that we should take no notice of them. But
I begged him to launch a boat and go to their assistance,
urging that if we left them to their fate it would be no
wonder if God sent us bad luck, and in due course he
put off a skiff, and I and four others rowed ashore.
As we drew near some Turks came up, and seeing that
we had come to take the prisoners, they commenced
to fight with us. The captain of the ship, being a
ready fellow, sent off a boat with twenty men with
cross-bows and fire-arms, and it came to shore, and we
beat off the Turks and sailed away safely with our
Christians. I was wounded in the foot by an arrow,
but it was well done, for we lost nothing and served
God.

This day we sailed out of the Straits of Romania
and anchored in the harbour of Tenedos, opposite
Troy. The next day we sailed from there and, doub-
ling the Cape of S. Maria, we came to the island of
Mytilene which belongs to the Genoese, where I
found the Emperor of ‘Trebizond, who had fled from
his brother, having, as I have said, married a daughter
of the ruler in order to obtain his help, and he was
collecting ships to set out for Trebizond against his
brother. They enquired of me concerning the State
of things at Trebizond, as it had appeared to me, and
I told them the truth, namely, that having the Grand

150

MYTILENE
Turk against them they could do nothing which would

advantage themselves or injure their enemies. In
this island there is much alum, and we loaded our ship
with it. We then sailed away and turned towards
Greece, taking the route for Salonica. In the sea is a
very lofty island, which they call Monte Santo, which
the Grand Turk, father of the present one, essayed to
capture, but the plague fell on his host, and he was
constrained to order all the damage he had done to be
repaired, and to make provision for those that live there.
The place is ordered on this wise. ‘There is a monas-
tery at the foot of the mountain, another half way up,
and a third at the top, and they receive there no one
unless he is a noble by birth or has borne arms, or is
old and infirm, or maimed. These come to this place
and are received and entertained in the first monastery.
The monks observe closely how they live, and if they
live well, they send them up by ele¢tion to the monastery
in the centre. Here the same rule applies, and when
it appears that they are worthy, the monks send them
up again to the third and last monastery. They say
that those who inhabit there have a great reputation
for holiness, and the place is a great resort for pilgrims,
and receives much in alms. But those who visit the
place are only shown the first monastery. The monks
are all Greeks, of the habit and Order of St. Basil.
They not only eschew meat, but all fish having blood.

We departed thence, leaving the Gulf of Salonica
on the right hand. At the end of the gulf is the city,
which not long since was lost by the Venetians, and it
happened in this manner. The Turk came to attack
it with men by land, and also with his ships from the
sea, and the Venetians made ready a great fleet, but it
is said that they took counsel and were advised to give
up Salonica, for two reasons, the one, because they
could not resist the might of the Turks by land, and
the other because of the cost of defending the place.

Ist

TRAVELS” OF “PE RQy eae.

Further, that they had little profit from it, since the port
was not well suited for trading, so that the Venetians
and the other Italians set greater store on profit than
on honour. ‘They set out with their fleet to engage ~
the Turks, but the Turks destroyed it, and not a man
escaped. Thus was the city of Salonica lost. We
came next to the island of Negroponto, which is in the
Archipelago, and is governed by the Venetians. They
say that in ancient times there was a bridge from there
to the main land. ‘The island is inhabited by Greeks,
and it contains many orchards and much fruit. From
there we sailed through the Archipelago, passing
many islands, inhabited and uninhabited, on the one
hand and on the other, and on the day of the Feast
of Pentecost we rested in an island called Andros.

On the second day of the festival we set sail, and
ran with a very fresh wind through the Archipelago,
but at midnight a great storm arose in the sea so that
we all but despaired of our lives, and there was much
vowing of pilgrimages East and West. At one time
our ship was full of birds which perched upon our
shoulders. These were flying from the storm, and
sought the ship to escape drowning. They were
mostly hoopoes. ‘This, they say, happens seldom,
and only during great storms. We arrived at Vespers,
with sails torn to shreds, at the island of Crete, and
the wind carried us in shore to that part of the island
called Canea, and we drove thus before the wind
until we came close to the land where we anchored.
Here we remained a day and night and the following
day until afternoon. A hermit, who had seen us the
day before, driving with bare poles, watched the ship
put in, and observing that no one came ashore, and that
no movement was to be seen in the ship, entered his boat
and came out to us, and found us sleeping. He had
been amazed at the fierceness of the Storm during the
night, and feared that his hermitage would be carried

152

From the Warwick Page

A STORM AT SEA.

ant, 1383-1439. (The Earl of Warwick binds himself,

his

lady and son to the mast)

[face p. 152

MODONE—ANCONA

away by the wind, and seeing us come in at dawn he
prayed to God for us. ‘The captain remained in the
ship repairing the sails, and I and my people went
ashore with the hermit to see his house, and we carried
victuals which I had in the ship, in particular that kind
of fish which the Greek monks eat, and we remained
there three days with him, spending the time very
pleasantly, and he sent refreshment to the captain from
what he had there. As for me, I had experienced such
terrors that had I been on the mainland I would never
have put to sea again.

But on the fourth day we sailed away once more,
and came to Modone, and remained two days outside,
since the place is very unhealthy. We then departed,
sailing along the coast of Morea to the Gulf of Patras,
past the island of Corfu, which I have already described.*
We now entered the Gulf of Venice, leaving Italy on
the left hand, and on the right the coast of Albania.
We saw many towns on the sea-coast and strong castles,
and there is a city called Valona, which the Turks had
taken and then ruled. All the sea here is dotted with
islands, some inhabited and some uninhabited. We
came to the coast of Esclavonia, to a city called Ragusa
which is a province of the Emperor of Germany, and
this country of Esclavonia they call Dalmatia. There
are very fine hawks in these parts, for the country is
high and mountainous, and taller people I have never
seen anywhere. In Dalmatia and Albania they say
that there are many mines where silver is found. The
city of Ragusa is very strong. It is situated above the
sea and is very rich in merchandise. It looks towards
Italy, and on the other side one can see Ancona and its
territories. We remained there one day and departed for
Ancona, as our ship belonged there and had to discharge
certain cargo and go on to Venice. ‘That night we
encountered a great storm, and the next day at Vespers
we reached Ancona and anchored and went on shore.

iS

TRAVELS OF PERO Tyr

We remained at Ancona four days. The city, with
all the March of Ancona, as they call it, is of the
patrimony of the Church. It is well walled and strong,
and the houses are all turreted and lofty, in the manner
of Genoa. ‘They say that he who built Genoa also
built Ancona, and it well appears from its buildings
that it is a very ancient place. They drive a great
trade there and fit out many ships, which go about the
seas carrying merchandise, and the people on land live
more upon trade than on anything else. The country
is fruitful in corn and wine and fruit, and in everything
needful for life. At that time it was rumoured that
Count Francesco, who then had conquered a great part
of the March, desired also to take Ancona, and the
people were preparing for the defence. Afterwards
I learnt that he had made the attempt, but could not
enter the city.

We set sail after four days and drew near to Dal-
matia. The coast is much affected by sailors on account
of the excellent shelter and anchorage, the like of which
is not to be found on the Italian side. So, coasting
along Dalmatia, and passing many islands, some in-
habited and some uninhabited, like the Archipelago,
although in size and population they are not so notable,
we came to a town called Spalato, which is also in
Dalmatia. St. Jerome and St. Christopher were born
in this town, and there is an arm of the sea which passes
by a hamlet, where they say St. Christopher carried the
poor people across who could not pay for a boat, and
even to-day there is some remembrance of the houses
of both those saints. _ In the gulf, which strikes inland
here, it happened on several occasions that women who
were washing their linen disappeared without anyone
knowing the reason. One day, when the women were
in the water as usual, a monster, half fish from the middle
downwards, and having human shape above, with wings
like a bat, attacked one of the women and seized her

154

SAAT O

and carried her down under the water. ‘The other
women, and also some men who were there, hearing
her cries, ran to the place where the monster was
Struggling with her, but not even when they attacked
it would it let her go. ‘They wounded the beast and
dragged it ashore alive, and it was three hours or more
before it died. ‘There was then little doubt that the
women who had disappeared before had been seized
by this monster. ‘They cut it open and salted it, and
sent it to the Seigniory of Venice so that it might be
dispatched to Pope Eugenius, and a picture was made
and carried all over Castile and throughout the world.
I did not see the beast, but they told me of it, and it was
only a short time since it happened. ‘This place is a
Bishopric, and at the court of the Pope I saw the Bishop,
who was a native of France.

Lj)

CHAPTER XIX

Parenzo.—Return to Venice —The fresh pilgrims.—Tafur’s goods are
seized and released by order of the Doge-—The ceremony of the
Marriage of the Sea. —St. Mark’s treasure —The Emperor Bar-
barossa and the Pope.

We departed from Spalato and came to a town called
Parenzo, which is at the point of Dalmatia opposite
Venice, and it is ruled by the Seigniory. The ships
desiring to reach Venice anchor there first, to await the
opportunity to enter by the narrows between the two
castles, and in all that coast there is good shelter, and
excellent anchorage. ‘The next day we sailed into the
harbour of Venice, and found many ships outside
waiting to sail, and among them the galley for the
Holy Sepulchre which we recognized by its banners.
We asked why everything was in such readiness, and
they told us that it was Ascension Day, and that after
Mass and the Blessing each one was to go to his ship
to prepare for the voyage. It was on that day, at that
hour, two years previously that I had set out for
Jerusalem." I enquired if there were any Castilians
among the pilgrims, and they told me that Gutierre
Quixada and Pero Barva de Campos were going to
Jerusalem, and that they were in the city watching the
celebrations which were going forward. We entered
and disembarked before St. Mark’s and went at once
to the church to hear Mass, where we found a great
concourse of people, since it was on Ascension Day
that the Venetians gained a great victory over the
Emperor Barbarossa, as I shall hereafter relate. ‘There
I found Gutierre Quixada and Pero Barva and Luys
Vanegas and Juan de Angulo, brother to Fernando
de Angulo, and many other Castilians with whom I
had much pleasure, and they no less with me, and

156

VENICE

since they were going to Jerusalem, they were able to
inform themselves as to how best to undertake the
journey, and I told them what they had to do and how
much the journey would cost. But it seemed to me
that they had fallen out amongst themselves and were
going in separate ships. I laboured to reconcile them,
but could not do it, and so they departed, some to the
oared galley, and others to the galley set aside for poo
people. We dined together that day, and after the
festival, and having obtained plenary indulgence against
sin and punishment, and after the Blessing, I went with
them to the sea and saw them embark betimes.

I then returned with tl.e other Castilians to the city,
and found that the goods I had brought in the ship,
including the slaves and the other things, had been taken
from me under the pretext that no one could bring
goods from the Black Sea unless he was a native of
Venice, and that I had not notified them to the customs’
authorities. That day, being a great festival, the people
assembled in the Piazza of St. Mark, all arrayed in
their best, and some seven or eight knights entered,
wearing the device of the Emperor Sigismund, which
I also wear, and I went at once to them and complained
of what had been done. Thereupon they accompanied
me to the Doge, who represents the ruler of the country,
and the Castilians who were there went also, and I
spoke to the Doge, who was in council, and made my
complaint. The members of the council asked me to
retire for a space while they deliberated, and soon they
called me and said: “Sir knight; it is true that we
“have a law that none can bring with him anything
“to this city from the Black Sea or the Levant, unless
“he is a native of Venice, and if he does so his goods
“are forfeit, and therefore your goods are forfeit by
“ this law, but, as you say, this law is intended to apply,
“and should apply, to merchants, and your habit
“debars you from trading; further that what you

T$7

TRAVELS (OF WP Ori 2 rau as

“ carry is for your own service, so that the law does not
“touch you. Your goods are therefore quit, and if
“the law says otherwise the Seigniory will graciously
“abrogate it. Also, because of the noble nation to
“which you belong, we will do you a greater favour.
“ We will not only restore what is yours, but will give
“you licence to transport your goods whither you
“desire, a privilege which is not commonly given to
“any, since nothing which enters Venice can be taken
6 out.”

I then took my leave of the Doge, who made me many
kind offers, and those gentlemen who had accompanied
me went with me and procured the deliverance of all
my goods, and did not leave me until I reached my
lodging. Also that day they sent me wine and comfits
and game, and every day when they met me they gave
me a hearty welcome, as if they had been my close
kinsmen.

On Ascension Day they have great celebrations and
exhibit all their treasures, including the treasure of
St. Mark, and jewels in the streets at the doors of
the houses. ‘The money-changers display their gold
and silver, and all the men and women are arrayed very
richly, with jewels of great worth. On this day the
Doge goes forth in great magnificence, with Papal and
Imperial ceremonial, the right to which he obtained,
they say, on this day, and there are grand processions,
and having heard Mass, he goes with all the clergy to
the sea, and they all embark, the Doge and the lords
in a ship called Bucentoro, which is a third larger than
a galley and twice as broad, and the rowers are below
out of sight. It is all hung with rich cloth of gold,
and the deck is carpeted with fine tapestry. If
strangers or honourable men are present they take them
also, carrying crosses and pennons, very richly worked
in drawn gold. So full is the sea with ships that the
water can hardly be seen. ‘They sail out to sea and

158

VENICE

betake themselves to the entrance to the harbour, where
are the two castles, and there, making certain orations,
the priest pronounces a blessing and throws in Holy
Water, and the Doge draws a ring from his finger and
casts it into the sea. This, they say, is an ancient
ceremony for wedding the sea to the land to placate
its fury, since their city is founded in the sea, and from
the sea they draw all that they have.

When this was finished it was an hour before all the
ships could separate, and after the Blessing they spread
their sails and took their courses, which is a wonderful
thing to see. The Doge then returned, with all his
gentlemen, to a sandy beach between the castles, where
is a notable monastery of friars, and there disembarking,
they all feasted with the Doge at his expense and made
merry, and in the evening they returned to the city. This
day I went to see the treasure of St. Mark, and certain
people of the city went with me so that all should be
shown me, although everything was on view. ‘There
I beheld much riches, especially pearls, and precious
Stones, quantities of rubies, diamonds, and balas rubies,
among them three stones in three candlesticks, but set
loosely so that one can take them in the hand to look
atthem. ‘There are bishops’ mitres loaded with pearls
and precious stones and silver, and palliums, also
covered with jewels and pearls, and great quantities of
gold and silver, and they say also that there is a rare
piece of carbuncle. In truth, a greater display of
riches I never saw. ‘There is a retable, which they call
La Pala, entirely covered with pearls and precious
Stones, but I cannot write at length of it as it would take
up too much space.

The Venetians say that the Emperor Barbarossa
waged such war on the Pope that he gained all the
patrimony of the Church, and caused the Pope to flee
and take shelter in Venice, where he remained a long
time in a monastery without being discovered.” Then

ro

TRAVELS OF PERRO faa

one came to know of it who saw him, and he told the
Doge, and he with the council went to seek the Pope in
that monastery, but could not find him, and they made
all the friars come out, down to the cook, and then they
found him, for he was the cook. ‘They took him and
carried him away with them, and dressed him with
the ceremony which belonged to him, and lodged him
in the palace of the Seigniory, and there he was treated
and reverenced as the Pope. They wrote also to Rome,
and to all Italy, saying that the Pope was there, and they
notified the Emperor and begged him to restore the
patrimony of the Church so that the Pope might return
worthily to Rome. The Emperor, incensed against
the Pope and against the Venetians, armed a great
fleet and came to Venice, as far as the two castles, and
the Venetians had a great fleet there, and they went
out against him, and fought with him, and overcame
him, so that he had to flee, and they took his son
prisoner. ‘The son, being there in prison, asked the
Pope to let him go on his word, and that he would
endeavour to bring the Emperor, his father, to obedi-
ence, and that if he did not succeed he would return
to prison. The Pope, with the consent of the Seigniory,
gave him licence, and dispatched him in a galley to
the city of Ancona where his father was, and there he
spoke with him, and begged him to return to his
obedience to the Pope and submit to him, and restore
what was his, but he could not persuade him, and he
returned to prison. But within a few days the Emperor
sent to desire that his son might have licence to come
again and have speech with him, as he desired to respond
to the proposals which he had made concerning the
Pope. The son craved licence from the Pope and the
Seigniory, as before, and accepted the conditions, and
set off once more, and came to his father. Then the
Emperor consented with him of his own free will, and
even acknowledged to have done evil in the past, and
160

VENICE

desired to submit to the Pope, and to restore what was
his and beg for pardon, and to place himself in his
hands. With this accord the son returned to Venice,
and there was much pleasure over the Emperor’s good
reply, and they armed a great fleet, and the greatest
in the city went init. They filled it with gear and all
things necessary to carry so great a lord, and came to
the city of Ancona where the Emperor received them
very honourably. He entered the ship and came to
Venice, where he was treated very magnificently, and
they took him to the church of St. Mark. They say,
further, that they placed him at the door lying on the
ground so that the Pope should pass over him, and so
it was, for the Pope, coming out of his palace and
entering the church, stepped over him saying the
verse: Super aspidem et basiliscum ambulabis etc. ‘The
Emperor replied: “ That was not said to you but to
St. Peter,” and the Pope made answer: “ To St. Peter
and to me, and to me and to St. Peter.” Then he raised
him up and gave him his peace, and the Emperor
asked pardon and confessed that he had sinned, where-
upon the Pope pardoned him, and presently the
Emperor restored all the patrimony of the Church which
he had taken.

The Emperor remained in Venice ten days amidst
great rejoicings, and the Doge accompanied the Pope
and the Emperor to Ancona in his fleet, with the
greatest lords of the country, at his charges. At
Ancona the Emperor had made great preparations to
receive them, that city with its Marches being one of
the richest of the Church’s patrimonies. They re-
mained there a further ten days feasting, after which
the Pope and the Emperor went to Rome, and the Doge
returned with his people to Venice. It is related that
the Pope and the Emperor told the Doge that he might
ask what favour he would of them, since he had per-
formed so excellent a work, and they would grant it,

161 M

TRAV ELS 1@ Vag iO eee

and he requested of both of them the right to use their
ceremonials. ‘They granted the request, and the Doge
to this day uses the Papal and Imperial ceremonials.
He then took leave of the Pope and the Emperor and
came to Venice, and in a great hall, the greatest and
richest which they have in their palace on the sea, they
have set up the history of this affair, which is painted
very richly. ‘This is the reason why the Venetians
have these celebrations on Ascension Day, for on that
day they won their victory, and the Pope then granted
them plenary indulgence for sin and punishment,
and the ships do not depart until they have gained it.

162

CEA D LR OX.

Description of Venice —T he Gondolas. —St. Mark’s.—T he Campanile. —
The government—Provisions and trade —Wealth of the common
people.— Sanitary arrangements. — Rigorous adminisration of
justice—The Arsenal—A hospital for foundlings—Scrupulous
regard for money matters —T he possessions abroad.

Tue city of Venice is very populous, and there is much
country round about it. The houses are built very
close together. They say that there are 70,000 in-
habitants, but the strangers and serving people, mostly
slaves, are very numerous. ‘The city has no walls,
nor any fortress, except those two castles which enclose
the harbour, since its defence lies in the sea, They
draw a chain across from one side to the other so that
they may be secure, and if the whole world came up
against the city, the Venetians could sink a ship between
the two castles in the canal and be safe. ‘The city is
built on the sea, and there are artificial canals along
which the boats can pass, and in some parts there are
Streets where the people can go on foot. Elsewhere,
in places where the canals are too narrow for ships,
there are bridges, and as in Castile everyone has a
beast to ride, so here they all have boats and pages to
row and attend to them. And as we pride ourselves
on a fine horse and a pretty well-dressed page, so they
set great store by their boats, which are kept very
properly. They are well hung and fitted with cabins
and seats, so that one or two or more may travel in them.
The exits from the city to the main-land are made
artificially, and only small boats can go there, since the
water is not sufficient for large craft, and the canals are
shallow and sandy. Thus neither great ships nor
beasts can enter or leave the city, which is sea-bound,
and for this reason they say that Venice is the finest
163

TRAVELS) (OPe Pit RO ga wu cues

fortress in the world. The boats go to the main-land
for all necessaries, and also for drinking water. They
take certain large boats and fill them with sand, and in
the bottom is a hole with a plug. When the boat
enters a river of fresh water, they open the plug and fill
the boats to their full capacity and replace the plug,
and so they carry the water for their needs. ‘There
are cisterns in all the houses in the city, and many
common cisterns, built of brick above the sea, made in
such a manner that the water in them, as I found with
similar cisterns at Jerusalem, neither grows stale nor
Stinks, as in other places. But it would take long to
describe all their methods.

There are many churches and monasteries in the
city which are very rich and sumptuously built, among
them the principal and greatest is the church of St.
Mark, which is the chief and head of all. It is built
with domes in the Greek manner, covered with lead
on the outside, with gilded cupolas. Inside, it is very
finely decorated with rich golden mosaics. The floor
also is decorated with similar mosaics, except that they
are large and coloured. At the great door, high up
over one of the arches, are four great horses of brass,
thickly gilt. ‘These the Venetians carried away and
placed here in triumph when they took Constantinople.t
In front of this door is a great square, greater than the
Medina del Campo, paved with bricks, and surrounded
by many-storied houses with porticoes. They hold
a market here every Thursday, which is greater than
that of the Torre del Campo, a hamlet of Jaen. On
one side of this square is a very high tower,” as high
as that in Seville, with a cross of fine gold on the top,
a very beautiful thing to see. It can be seen in the sun
at a distance of 80 miles away. In it are the bells
which they ring, one for Mass, one for Vespers, one to
summon the Council, which they call the Council
Bell, and one when they arm the fleet, and each one is

164.

VENICE

recognized by all. On another side of this square,
facing the sea, are two very large and lofty columns.’
On the one is St. George with the Dragon and on the
other St. Mark, the patron Saint and the device of the
city. ‘These also were carried away from Constanti-
nople. They say that no one could set them up,
but a Castilian climbed up and raised and secured them,
whereupon the Venetians ordered that he should have
whatever he desired. He did not ask anything for
himself, but round about the columns are certain
steps, and he requested that if any criminal, whatever
his offence, took refuge there, justice should not be
executed upon him. And now rogues play there at
dice and commit other knaveries, praising the man who
secured them such immunity.

Between these columns and the church of St. Mark
is the Palace of the Seigniory, and in one part of it the
Doge is lodged with his family, and the rest is open for
anyone to see, as well as that great hall where, as I
have related, the affair of the Pope and the Emperor
is painted. Here they hold the Council. There
are other halls, also very rich, where they administer
justice and have their prison, and beneath the arches,
- over against the great square, are certain marble stones.
Three are coloured, and there they hang the nobles,
and the others are for hanging the common people. In
these porticoes strangers leave their arms, and there
are also some skins of the beasts called crocodiles*
which the Sultan of Egypt sent as things most mon-
Strous to the Seigniory. This palace is indeed very
noble.

The Venetians have a law that none but a noble by
birth can be Doge, or hold any office of government,
and this they always observe, unless for some special
reason they abrogate it. Every Sunday after dinner
they ring the Council Bell in that tower I have spoken
of, and all the nobles assemble and report what has

165

TRAVELS OF@PER Omg a ee

occurred during the week, both in matters of govern-
ment and in the administration of civil and criminal
justice, excepting only the matters deliberated upon by
the Secret Council, chiefly matters of war, which
Council is composed of the Doge and the deputies.
The assembly looks like a royal court, and at the doors
of the palace are as many boats and well-dressed pages
as there are beasts with us. ‘Thus the nobles come out
of the palace and go to their houses. The government
provides as follows. Wine and bread, corn and oil,
and other things necessary for food cannot be bought
by any citizen, only by strangers and poor people.
These are sold to them at a price which would appear
to leave no profit for those who bring them from the
ends of the earth, but the Seigniory pays for them so
that there may be plenty, and that strangers and poor
people shall not want. Indeed, such is the govern-
ment that I never saw a country so plentifully supplied,
nor so cheaply, with the necessities of life. It appears
that the fruit which comes from Spain is to be had at
Venice as fresh and as cheap as in our country. Like-
wise 1s to be had whatever comes from Syria and, if
one desires it, from India, since the Venetians navigate
all over the world. With their merchandise they bring
also other things for the sustenance of the people.
The citizens are very rich and deal in such vast
quantities that even with small profits they gain much,
and what they sell is to be had at a fair price. The
houses are very notable, being exceedingly lofty, with
many storeys and chimneys, and furnished with rich
porticoes and windows towards the streets. ‘They are
richly adorned with gold and blue and marble. The
great people close at hand, and even at a distance, pride
themselves on becoming citizens of Venice in order to
have her favour,such as the King of Cyprus, the Marquis
of Ferrara, the Marquis of Mantua, the Marquis of
Monferrat, who with other great lords and knights
166

VENICE

have magnificent houses in the city. I saw there the
Cardinal of Cyprus, brother of the King, who was living
in the house of his brother. He was about to depart
for Cyprus, the galley which was to take him being
moored to the door of his house, and there I met him
and went with him through the city. Many other
ships, great and small, lay there also, fastened to the
doors of their owners’ houses.

There are many notable monasteries at Venice, which
are very sumptuous and magnificent, there being more
than eighty for men and women, and above fifty
churches. There are likewise many relics and holy
bodies: the body of St. Helena, that of St. Marina,
and a leg of St. Christopher from the knee downwards,
as well as many bones of the Innocents, with an infinite
number more which the Venetians brought from Con-
stantinople when they took it. ‘The common people
are unusually wealthy, as I saw during the Carnival,
at a masquerade in the Doge’s Palace. ‘Two galleys
came by sea, and they were supposed to bring, the one
the Emperor, who came with thirty knights dressed in
brocade, and the other the Grand Master of Rhodes
who was clad in black velvet. ‘The ladies who re-
ceived them were attired in brocades, and wore rich
jewels, and, of a truth, I saw some who wore three
different dresses at that festivity, and even that was not
accounted extraordinary. All these people were of
the middle classes of the city, and not of the better
classes nor the richest. Yet the festival could not have
been better.

The city is as clean for walking in as a gracious
chamber, so well paved and bricked is it. No beast
on four legs can enter it, and in winter there is no water
in the Streets. There is, therefore, no mud, and in
summer no dust. ‘The sea rises and falls there, al-
though not so much as in the West, and cleans out the
filth from the secret places, otherwise it would not be

167

TRA VIETS “OR oP RO aera,

possible to live for the stench. They say that at times
the air is infected, but they have fires both winter and
summer, and burn many perfumes, and the people
carry with them scents and spices, which are ground in
the streets and give forth a most pleasant smell.

Until recently the rulers had no licence to own
possessions on the mainland, but some time since the
Seigniory, having increased its power by land and sea,
and having gained many provinces, gave leave to settle
on the mainland so that if necessary the people could
go there to refresh themselves, and also that when
sickness broke out they could have some place to escape
to. ‘The Doge is never suffered to leave the city for
any cause whatever, except to go to the monastery of
St. George, which is a stone’s throw by sea from his
palace, and when the city is unhealthy he departs
thither. It happened once that a Doge went there to
escape a pestilence in the city,° and everyone departed
for the mainland, so that none remained except the poor
people. A kinsman approached the Doge and said
to him: “ Lord, you have now such an opportunity
“as never man had. You have in your possession the
“ treasure of Venice, the chief people have all departed,
“and none remain except strangers and the poor. Do
“ what you will, take the treasure, place the crown on
“your head, and call yourself King of Venice, and you
“will wear the crown for always.” ‘he Doge reproached
him greatly for what he had said, and the matter re-
mained secret. But some time later, when certain
people spoke ill of the Doge, the kinsman repeated the
counsel he had given and said: “It serves him right
since he would not be King of Venice.” Thereupon
the kinsman was taken and brought before the Council
that they might know the truth, and he was closely
examined as to what he had said, and he confessed all.
Then the lords of the Council went to the Doge and
enquired if it were true, and he replied that it had

168

PLATE VI

pase 4
Pant wendy ¢

VENICE
By Gabriel Muffel of Nuremberg (1465)

[face p. 168

VENICE

happened as his kinsman had related. The lords of
the Council conferred together, and finally they called
the Doge and thanked him much for his loyalty to his
country, but in that he had kept silence in a matter
which might have threatened great danger to the
State, they requested him to await their pleasure.
They then ordered that great benefits should be show-
ered upon his wife and children, but directed that he
should lose his head, since none might dare to keep
silence in any matter affecting the public safety. They
have in the great hall, which I have mentioned, all the
arms of the Doges from the first down to the present,
and also those of the Doge whom they killed among
the others, these being draped in black velvet.

The Venetians pride themselves on inflicting punish-
ments which remain for a perpetual memorial. ‘There
was a citizen in treaty against the city and they ordered
him to be killed, and turned his house into a slaughter-
house, and have a statue of him hanging in chains.
Another also, for some crime, they killed and left his
house without a door in it which could be shut, and
those who lived there had to do so as best they could.
While I was there they had for Captain the Count of
Carmefiola,° and they said that he was engaged in some
evil against the city. They made him come there
under safe conduét, and he was taken, and they tore out
his tongue by the roots, and tortured him in other ways
until he died, and they buried him in a dung heap and
placed over him a stone with these words cut upon it:
“Here lies the traitor, the Count of Carmefiola.”
These and other similar things are done in this city.

There is an arsenal at Venice which is the finest in
the world, as well for artillery as for things necessary
for navigation. ‘The sea flows into it, and the ships
enter the water there after they pass the castles. They
told me that, including the war galleys and merchant
vessels, and others which were in the water and on the

169

TRAVELS (OFrePR Oba Gas

Stocks, there were altogether eighty galleys, besides
other ships. One day, coming from hearing Mass in
St. Mark’s, I saw about twenty men enter the square,
some carrying benches and others tables and others
chairs, and others large bags of money; thereupon a
trumpet was blown, and the great bell, which they
call the Council Bell, was rung, and in an hour the
square was full of men who recetved pay and went into
the arsenal. Andas one enters the gate there 1s a great
street on either hand with the sea in the middle, and on
one side are windows opening out of the houses of the
arsenal, and the same on the other side, and out came
a galley towed by a boat, and from the windows they
handed out to them, from one the cordage, from another
the bread, from another the arms, and from another
the balistas and mortars, and so from all sides every-
thing which was required, and when the galley had
reached the end of the street all the men required were
on board, together with the complement of oars, and
she was equipped from end to end. In this manner
there came out ten galleys, fully armed, between the
hours of three and nine. I know not how to describe
what I saw there, whether in the manner of its con-
struction or in the management of the workpeople, and
I do not think there is anything finer in the world. If
the Venetians desired to show their strength, the
enemies of the Faith in those parts would not, in my
opinion, have a single ship at sea, still less on the coast,
nor would they dare to match themselves against such
a powerful enemy.

In times past there were few weeks, or even days,
when the fishermen did not take out dead babies from
their nets, and this, they say, came from the fact that
the merchants were so long separated from their wives.
These, urged by their fleshly lusts, gave way to them
and became pregnant, and with intent to save their
reputations threw the offspring out of window into

170

VENICE

the sea as soon as they were delivered, the place being
aptly disposed therefor. The rulers, in view of such
enormous crimes, took counsel together and founded
a great and rich hospital,” very finely built, and placed
in it a hundred wet-nurses to suckle the babes, and now
those who would hide their shame take their children
there to be reared. The Venetians also obtained a
Bull from the Pope that whosoever visited those
children in hospital should gain certain pardons. ‘Thus
men and women can go there to visit their children, as
if to gain pardons. Without doubt it was a very pious
work, and it is held in great reverence.

In this city there is always a heavy penalty for any-
one who carries arms under whatsoever pretext, and
much less are arms suffered to be worn in the Council.
The elders among the people are much honoured and
reverenced, and when they have to elect a Doge they
choose the man, without any partiality, who is best
fitted for the dignity, provided that he is a noble by
birth, and once he is elected they never deprive him of
office, unless for some crime. ‘They give him 8000
ducats for his maintenance which, be it understood,
is for his family. All the other expenses of his estate
are borne separately by the Seigniory, and he cannot
exceed what 1s provided, nor can he condemn or release
anyone without their consent.

The Venetians set great store by honest dealing, as
I found by experience, and if any man is minded to
break faith in money matters they would rather pay his
bills of exchange for him than suffer him to default.
I do not wonder that people who go about the world
should observe this rule, since otherwise they could
not travel with security. They have a custom to send
each year a citizen of gentle birth to their cities on the
mainland and in the gulf, and in the high seas and in
distant parts every two years. It happened once that
they sent the podeSfd to the island of Crete, which we

171

TRAV ELS OP “Ps RO Gear ear.

call Candia, and after a year they dispatched an in-
vestigator according to their custom, and he made
strict enquiry and beheaded the podesta before leaving.
Thus the provinces and the city are well controlled,
and if a man be in any territory of theirs, although at
the ends of the earth, yet it seems as if he were in Venice
itself. ‘The government is very mighty, and this is
why the city is so prosperous. Its wealth is extraor-
dinary. ‘The citizens bring thither the products of
the Levant in as great a profusion and abundance as
they do those from the West, so that the whole world

seems to be in their possession.

172

CHAPTER XXI

Departure from Venice-—An engagement between the Venetians and the
Milanese —Ferrara—Pope Eugenius and the Emperor of the
Eas.—A meeting of the Council—The Marquis Niccolo—
Parma—Piacenza.—Milan—Duke Filippo Maria Visconti—
The government.

Wuen I departed from Venice to go to the other
Christian countries I left there the goods I had brought
from the Levant, including the slaves, and my money,
and all that I had purchased, in the charge of Messer
Domenego Vent’, a merchant of Venice, my very good
friend, and took only the money which I thought
sufficient for my needs. I took also bills of exchange
on certain merchants in Bruges in Flanders, and
departed in a boat, and slept the night of my departure
at a place called Chioggia, which is founded in the sea
like Venice, and is subject to it. ‘There were certain
burnt ships there, which had been lost in the battle
when the Genoese came to that place to make war on
the Venetians. The next morning we departed, and
after four or five miles we entered the river Po, which is
one of the greatest rivers in the world, and the arm by
which I entered is one of three. ‘The river is so large
that many times, when the Venetians are at war with
the Duke of Milan,’ they both of them arm great
fleets in it. ‘The ships are the most wonderful I have
ever seen. They are barques of great size and are
flat-bottomed, so that they can float in shallow water.
On the deck is a great castle of wood with a lofty tower,
and in it they place ammunition for their artillery, such
as bombards, culverins and the like. The rowers
are below so that they cannot be attacked. These
ships do not carry sails nor are they built for sailing,

173

TRAVEUS>(O.F" PERO sapiens

since they would easily capsize. With these ships
they fight mightily, and while I was there the Venetians
set out with forty galleons against the Duke of Milan,
intending to capture a city, and the Lombards came out
to resist them, and they say that there was a great
battle. ‘The Lombards use a small kind of boat,
called galapago,” completely covered with metal like a
vault, and they use them to set fire to the others, and it
is not possible to injure them. The Venetians, how-
ever, sent a man who dived under the water and swam
to the enemy’s ships, and bored holes in them with a
drill, so that the Lombards lost three ships before they
knew what was happening, while the Venetians lost
four by fire. The battle continued for so long that the
Venetians were beaten and lost sixteen galleons, and
recovering what men they could, they retreated down
the river and returned to the city. On this wise there
is frequent warfare between the Venetians and the
Lombards.

I continued my way along the river Po to a place
called Francolino, which is on the mainland and belongs
to the Marquis of Ferrara. Thence I came to Ferrara,
where the Pope and the Emperor of Constantinople
then were, with a great concourse of people who had
assembled to witness the union of the Church with the
Greeks.? The second day, well accompanied by the
Castilians, I went to see Pope Eugenius, who received
me very graciously. He desired to know the particu-
lars of my journey to Jerusalem, and about the Sultan
of Egypt, and the Grand Turk, also concerning the
Emperor himself, what power he had, and I gave heed
and then satisfied him to the best of my knowledge,
and so I departed. ‘That day in the evening I went to
wait upon the Emperor of Greece, and gave him letters
from his consort and from his brother the Despot.
He received me gladly, saying that I was his kinsman
and a native of his country. He drew me to him and

174

FERRARA

made me sit there beside him, asking me for news of
his country and telling me that I must visit him each day
I was there, and that it would give him much pleasure
if I were to reside with him. ‘Thus we were very
familiar together. The Emperor was living in a palace
belonging to the Marquis of Ferrara, on the waters of
the Poatello, which they call Paradise, a very pleasant
residence.

That day I took my leave and rested myself, and on
the petition of the Castilians who were there I cut off
my beard, which I wore very long, and clad after the
manner of my country, I went again to see the Emperor.
When he saw me he said that I had done wrong to cut
off my beard, which is the greatest honour and dignity
belonging toman. But I replied: “ Lord, we hold the
“contrary, and except in the case of some serious
“injury we do not wear beards”; and we spoke upon the
matter for some time. ‘Then we returned to the affairs
of Greece, and he enquired of me minutely concerning
matters there, about his wife and brother, the condition
of the country, and what the Grand Turk was doing,
and as to my movements since I was there, and I told
him everything I knew. That day the Emperor was
to go to see the Pope, and I went with him. The Em-
peror had the gout and could not walk, and he was
Pied -inea  chair- by certain “men. The Pope
received him very honourably, in a great hall which
had been made ready. ‘There were present with him
a number of cardinals, archbishops and bishops, the
Marquis of Ferrara and other lords of the country,
and they were all in their seats. On the right hand
was the chair of the Emperor of Germany with those
of the kings and princes of Christendom, and on the
left that of the Emperor of Greece, and of certain
prelates. In the centre was the Pope’s chair which
was raised above the others. ‘That day they remained
three or four hours in council, conferring, it was said,

175

TRAVELS VOFOPER Om GAT ea

upon certain differences of faith between the Greeks
and the Latins. Afterwards we departed, and the Pope
entered into his chamber, while the Emperor returned
to his palace accompanied by the members of his
train. For he had brought from Greece a great com-
pany of people, all of whom went about in long robes
and with great beards, showing themselves to be grave
and serious persons. It was, indeed, a goodly company,
but one had the impression that more were in attend-
ance than was actually the case, although they say that
at least a thousand persons were there. ; |
The Emperor entered his palace, and all departed
from him, but I remained and went in with him, and
he made me dine at his table and showed me many
kindnesses. Eight days later was the Feast of Corpus ©
Christi, which the Pope and the Emperor, notwith-
standing their magnificent attendance, celebrated in
such manner that in a village of ten inhabitants it could
not have been performed with more humility, only
in view of the presence of so many Strangers, the
customary usages were altered. While I was there I
saw two messengers who arrived on business with the
Pope, one from the Duke of Burgundy, craving licence
to hear Mass after noon, and the other from the Duke
of Germany, craving leave to hear Mass before mid-
night.
The city of Ferrara is one of the pleasantest I have
ever seen. It is of the same extent as Valladolid, but
with very good houses and fine streets. It is well
walled, with bastion and ditch, and there is a castle
on one side above the river Po. It is very pleasant
within, but more so without. The soil is rich, and
round about are many fruit gardens. The city pays
tribute to the Pope, and they say that he received at
one time 100,000 or 150,000 ducats, but it grew less
by degrees to 10,000 or 6,000, and now it is reduced
to 3000, and I will presently relate the reason for this.
176

921 “4 200f} adUaIOPY “s"["q IPIVITY ay3 JO JadvyD ay ur Odsaiy s1[OzzZoL) Ozzousg Wor

«

SNOOTORVIVd WIA NHOf YOUAdWA AHL

FERRARA

The Marquis of Ferrara is a native of France, and
also, they say, of the lineage of Galalon,* and certain
ceremonies are observed with him with the bread as
with the others of the same descent, such as placing
the loaf on the table upside down and then turning it
over. ‘They say that he came to the King of France
to ask him to give him arms and release him from this
custom, and the King provided the arms, but said that
he could not grant the other request. This Marquis
is a great lord and has for his inheritance many fine
cities, towns and castles, with a revenue, it is said, of
300,000 ducats. He is very merry and handsome of
person and very amorous. They say he has con-
tinuously ten or twelve concubines in certain of his
palaces in the city. He must bea man of eighty years
of age, small of stature and very fat. They say also
that, being married to a daughter of a Duke of Ger-
many,” his wife became enamoured of a son of his by
another wife, and their love took such shape that the
son forgot what he owed to his father, and the wife
-her duty to her husband, and they indulged their
carnal appetites. The Marquis, learning of this from
a servant, surprised them in the act of sin, and sent
them to the judges of the country that they might
deliberate what judgment should be executed upon
them. Many lords of the country and elsewhere
remonstrated with him, and even the Pope begged
him to act mercifully, but to all he replied that he
would neither order them to be killed nor spared, but
that the judges must decide the matter. The judges
gave sentence that they must both die, and the Marquis
being present, they were immediately taken to the place
of justice and there executed. It would take too long
to describe all that happened. Then the Marquis
had a galley prepared, and entered into it and sailed for
Jerusalem. On his return he married a daughter of
another Duke of Germany, a very beautiful girl of

Gt, N

TRAVELS (OF SP i Ogee Aree

fifteen, he being eighty, so that nothing can be looked
for but another mischief greater than the first.

The Marquis has sons by this last wife who are
infants. He has also a bastard, a youth of thirty, and
a man of much virtue and a gallant knight in war.
Seeing that Italy is never at peace, and that he must
leave his dominions to those infant sons, who did not
know how to govern and would certainly come to grief,
the Marquis decided to leave all he possessed to the
bastard. He, therefore, made him legitimate and
constituted him his heir to everything, and made his
people kiss his hand and take him as their ruler. The
Pope also was consulted and gave his permission.
The Marquis then ordered that there should be given
to the eldest legitimate son, under oath, as his inherit-
ance for ever, one half of the revenue, but not the
government. I saw there one day a great festival in
the palace to which came many nobles, both men and
women, and there was a joust, and after it was finished
all the ladies ran on foot in the lists. They had to run
as far as a man could throw a stone. At the other
end were three pieces of cloth, one of brocade, one of
crimson velvet, and the third of cloth of scarlet. The
first gained the brocade, the second the velvet, and the
third the cloth of scarlet. But if the Garandilla de
Alcudia® had been there she would have run the course
three times over and won all the prizes.

The Marquis is a merry man, and it well appears
that he is of French birth. I remained in this city
twenty days, resting myself and preparing for my
journey to Germany, and buying beasts for me and my
people. When all was ready I went to take leave of
the Emperor of Greece, and he begged me to visit
him again before I returned to Spain, since I had to
go back to Venice to fetch my goods, and I promised
to doso. I departed from Ferrara and passed through
the March to a city called Parma, which is on the

178

PIACENZA

river Po and belongs to the Duke of Milan. There,
passing the river, I found Nicolao Picherino,’ the Duke’s
captain-general, with 20,000 horsemen, the finest
body of men I have ever seen. They say that he was
going to take Bologna, which belongs to the Pope.
I remained three days at Parma to see them pass, and
it was a most remarkable thing to see a body of men so
finely armed and mounted, and so well found in every-
thing necessary for war, and, what was best of all, with
such a discreet and able captain at their head. In this
city are the finest cherries I have ever seen.

From there I went to Piacenza, a city belonging to
the same Duke, which is likewise a great city of 7000
or 8000 inhabitants. From there, the next day, I
went to Milan, an immense city, and one of the greatest
in Christendom. Indeed, in the opinion of many,
it is the greatest. The city is indifferently walled,
but there is a great moat with an excellent rampart,
and within, the city is very well built and the streets
are very fine. It is a grander sight and more interest-
ing to see the city on a work-day than on a holiday.
The streets and the houses of the armourers are most
remarkable, as well as those of the spear-makers, the
saddlers and the tailors who make the uniforms and ma-
terials for war. They know how many rulers and leaders
of armies there are in Italy, and their devices, and they
and the other craftsmen are so well provided that they
can supply them with everything they need, though it
be for the greatest lord in Italy. All the craftsmen
are marvellously skilful and do their work with great
regularity. There isin the city a palace where the Duke
lives, which is a very notable residence and very large.
Outside, itis defended by a great wall with a very strong
bastion and a deep and capacious moat, through which
the river runs, and from this they take much fish.
The palace stands on level ground on one side of the
city; indeed, in the whole of Lombardy there are no

179

TRAVELS; OF UPPER Oe eas

houses built on rocks, but they are in no way less
strong for being built in the plain, so well are they
moated on all sides.

In this city there are many notable churches and
monasteries, especially the chief church on which they
are still at work, which they call the Duomo, a most
sumptuous building. Here they say the Ambrosian
Mass, which is the reverse of ours, and I am told also
that they observe Lent differently. There is a very
rich monastery of the Order of Preachers, in which
St. Peter the Martyr is buried, who is believed to have
met his death in this city. The Duke of Milan is a
person who does not let himself be seen.* This, they
say, is for fear of poison, but one day he was in a park
there, and I saw him and had speech with him. He
seemed to me to be a discreet person, grave and honest,
of great stature, with a very long nose, and with his
head shaved and uncovered. He was not well attended,
and they say that he does not value any but men-at-arms,
These he keeps in the field, and, indeed, he does well
to value such men. This Duke has neither son nor
daughter, only a bastard daughter married to the
Count Francesco, who now is Duke of Milan.®

The city is without a rival in Christendom, in point
of size, abundance, and in the number of its inhabitants,
both nobles and artisans. ‘They say that the Duke’s
revenue from the city itself, not counting the Church
revenues, is 1000 ducats a day. No one can enter the
city unless first, on entering the Duke’s dominions,
he obtains a certificate which establishes that he comes
from a healthy country, uncontaminated by plague.
This regulation is most rigidly enforced, and they say
that it is now sixty years since there has been an out-
break of plague in any part of the country. I enquired
concerning many things relating to the government of
the city which is very well ordered. Much more is
this the case in the Duke’s household. They say that

180

MILAN

those of his council can take money from no one but
from him, and that when a council is necessary its
deliberation is secured in this manner. A writing is
sent to each councillor containing the particulars of
the matter to be decided, and each one writes his
opinion at the foot of the paper without consulting with
his fellows. Indeed, anyone who does otherwise
would suffer heavy penalties. Thus, reading - the
opinion of each councillor, the Duke adopts that which
seems to him to be the wisest, and during his govern-
ment his decisions have been much praised.

181

CHAPTERS Cail

The route for Germany.—Crossing the Alps —The St. Gothard Pass.—
Basle—The Baths —Schaffhausen—Washing for gold—strass-
burg.—Precautions again fire —Mainz.—The Rhine. —Coblenz.
—Arrival at Cologne.

I pEPARTED from Milan and set out for Germany, and
as I came to no city worthy of mention I have nothing
to relate, but I found many places burned and de-
stroyed, which had been laid waste by the great Italian
commander, Facino Cane.1 The third day after
leaving Milan I arrived at a German town which 1s
called Lucerca,? but before I could enter it was neces-
sary to load all the animals and baggage upon boats,
and to cross a great lake which receives its waters from
the Alps. The lake is very deep and quite four leagues
across, and in it are multitudes of fish which are said
to be very good to eat. This town must have about
1g00 burghers. It is well walled and adorned with
beautiful houses in the German manner, with stoves
in them, and excellent inns, very abundantly pro-
visioned.

The next day I departed and arrived at the foot of
the St. Gothard pass, high up in the Alps, and the
following day after the necessary preparations had been
made we commenced the ascent. It was the end of
August when the snow melts by reason of the great
heat, and the crossing is therefore very perilous. The
people in those parts have oxen which are accustomed
to the way. One of these beasts goes in front drawing
a long rope, and attached to the rope is a trailer which
resembles a Castilian threshing machine? On this
the passenger sits, holding his horse behind him by
the reins, and the crossing is thus safely accomplished,

182

BASLE

for if anything untoward occurs, only the ox is ini-
perilled. In passing along narrow ways, where the
snow which covers the mountains on either side
threatens to fall, the people discharge fire-arms so that
the report may bring down any snow which is ready
to be dislodged. For it happens at times that the snow
becomes loosened and buries travellers. At this
season the streams and rivers are much swollen by
thaws. These mountains are thickly populated, and
everywhere one comes upon inns and small hamlets.
This day we climbed to the hermitage of St. Gothard,
which lies almost in the sky, and even so there are other
heights above, the summits of which, so the monks
maintain, have never been seen, since they are per-
petually shrouded in mist. From here one looks
towards Italy, and anyone with sufficiently good sight
can see the whole country, so high are the mountains
and so flat and low is Italy in comparison. We now
paid off our beasts and took the road to Basle through
the mountains. Here there are numbers of martens
and other creatures, as well as animals like goats, from
which the people make chamois leather.

So continuing by those ways, and descending from
the mountains and ridges, and travelling for a day along
the plain, we reached the noble city of Basle.* The
Council was then sitting, and a great company of
people of all nationalities had assembled in the city.
There were many notable personages from Spain,
although the Alférez? had by that time departed.
Nevertheless, the Cardinal of San Pedro, and the
Bishop of Cuenca, the Bishop of Burgos, and others
still remained. This town is situated upon the banks
of the river which comes from the Alps and the Lake
of Schaffhausen. ‘The stream is of furious swiftness,
and it happens frequently that the water sweeps down
with it great blocks of ice, frozen as hard as stones,
which destroy the buildings and bridges and everything

183

TRAVELS? OF (2 ERO eee

else in their way. "The boatmen are in constant peril
of striking some obstacle and of being dashed in
pieces, although they are very skilful and wary. Ae
boats travelling down the river never return, for they .
could not make headway against the current. Indeed,
such is the pace with which they sweep downstream
that it turns one giddy to behold them. In this river
are many delicate and wholesome fish, including very
large salmon.

The city of Basle is abundantly supplied with
everything which Germany produces, and excellent
wines and other beverages may be had there. It is
well walled and delightfully built; the houses are of
several storeys with high chimneys, and very pleasantly
adorned with glass windows looking on to the street.
Many of the buildings have towers on which are
crosses and weather-cocks. ‘The city is very pleasant
to behold from within, and still more so from without.
The streets are paved with stones, and are well supplied
with drinking troughs. The churches and monas-
teries are indeed notable. The principal church is
exceedingly well built, and there the Council holds its
sessions. [he inhabitants, both men and women,
are very comely and rich. ‘The city is self-governing,
although it belongs to the Empire, and they say that
the citizens owe no tribute to the Emperor except to
entertain him at dinner when he is there, and to provide
him with a pair of breeches, but he can summon them
towar. The city has large and well-populated suburbs.
Such multitudes of beggars had flocked to Basle from
all parts of Germany, having been attracted thither by
the Council, that they alone would fill a large city.

I heard that the Cardinal of San Pedro was in the
Alps at the warm baths, which they call the Holy Baths,
and about a mile distant is a notable monastery called
Maria Stella,® where the Cardinal had resided for six
months, since he did not desire to enter Basle for fear

184

BASLE

of offending Pope Eugenius, but he transacted the
business of the King, our Master, from that place.
I went to see the Cardinal, who received me very
graciously, and since I was still suffering from the
wound which I received in Troy,’ and which with
travel seemed always to be getting worse, the Cardinal
made me remain there in the care of a surgeon, and in
twenty days I was cured. This surgeon is held in
great esteem as well by the clergy as by laymen, and
without doubt he deserves it, for he is a notable
person of sovereign virtue and outstanding honesty.
The monks regard him with special affection, for
besides the good which he does them, he has made
heating rooms for them and other contrivances for the
service of the establishment, which is situated high
up in the mountains in the coldest place in all
Germany.

I went to see the bathing establishments where |
found a great concourse of people, both sick persons
and pilgrims who had come there under vows from
afar. ‘They think nothing of men and women bathing
together quite naked, and it is the custom to play games
and take their meals in the water. I met a lady there
who was on pilgrimage for her brother, who had been
taken prisoner in Turkey, and I frequently threw
silver coins into the bath, and her maids dived for them
and picked them up in their mouths. One can well
imagine what it was they held in the air when they
put down their heads. The people in general have
excellent voices. Even the common people sing part
songs with great skill, like trained artists.

As soon as I was cured of my wound I craved licence
of the Cardinal, and returned to Basle in company
with the lady I had encountered at the Baths, whom
I did not leave until we reached the city of Cologne,
where she had her estates. The first day, after leaving
the Baths, we travelled by boat to a town where the

185

TRAVELS OF SPER Og eane

river falls from a place as high as two towers. The
boatmen land their passengers and fasten the boat with
long ropes so that it sweeps over the falls. Then,
when it is in the water below, they secure it again, and
the passengers having re-embarked, the boat shoots
downstream with the force of the water, which runs
very swiftly from the mountains. We thus arrived at
Basle, and remained there six days, after which we
departed.

We came next toa town where I saw, by the shore,
a number of people washing gold from the sand of the
river, and it was done in this wise. Close to the water
was a table on a bench, with one of the supports by the
water’s edge, and the other raised on high. Upon
this they placed pieces of wood, like steps, about the
breadth of an arm. ‘Then they shovelled the sand
from the bank of the stream and cast it to the top of
the table, and let it run down, so that a kind of white
mud remained clinging to the steps. When sufficient
had been collected they placed it in a trough which was
close by, and filled it. The gold, being heavy, sank
to the bottom, and as they lifted the mud with their
hands one could see the gold shining below. But
fortune does not favour them every day. From this
gold they make the coins which are known as Rhenish
guldens. On either bank of the river are cities, towns,
and castles all close together, and many notable churches
and monasteries, and there are so many leper-houses
of St. Lazarus that it is a marvel to see them. It is
said that these are necessary by reason of the fa¢t that
the people eat much fish, and drink very little wine and
oil. ‘They relate that not long ago the son of a Duke
of Germany came with his wife, the daughter of another
Duke, to sleep for a night at one of the leper-houses,
and that the lepers tried to rape her, so that the husband
was forced to kill her, and they killed the husband;
and when it became known the parents set out and

186

Si RASSBURG

burnt the house with those that were in it. But it
would take much space to narrate all that happened.

The following day we arrived at the city of Strass-
burg, which is called in Latin Argentina, as if to say
the town of silver, and, indeed, such is it that it must
be one of the most delightful cities in the Christian
world. The river flows by it and enters the streets.
The city is strongly walled, with a deep ditch. It is
very well built, with fine streets which are level and
well-paved. There are many chimneys and stoves
in the houses: the inns are excellent, and the churches
and monasteries very noteworthy, especially the great
church, a wonderful piece, with a stately tower in which
is the clock, the finest I have ever seen. On the tower,
above the clock, three men keep watch in turn all
night, and each time the clock strikes they blow a horn
like a shepherd’s horn, but it makes more noise than
a trumpet. They say that these men are placed there
as a protection against fire, of which the people are
much afraid. In each parish there are captains, and
on an alarm of fire each man knows to which standard
he belongs, and everything proceeds in an orderly
manner. Some bring sacks of straw, others pails of
water, hatchets, iron-hooks and long pikes, so that help
is immediately at hand. One night I went to see the
companies turn out, and certainly it is a remarkable
thing to see the order which is preserved. This city
is indeed notable.

We now departed for Mainz, and on the left as one
goes is a seat of chalk and stone, very lofty, where they
elect the Emperor.* He is forced to come here and
to wait thirty days to see if anyone opposes him, and
it has happened on occasions that a rival did appear,
who sat himself in that seat and supplanted the other.
This is a ceremony imposed upon candidates so that
all may see that the choice is publicly made. We
came then to the city of Mainz, which is very large and

187

TRAVELS OF (PE RO Mizar ei

closely populated, and well-provisioned and wealthy.
It is one of the great Arch-bishoprics of Germany.
Its churches and monasteries are very fine, and the
inhabitants are exceedingly comely. We remained
there two days and departed for Cologne. In truth,
the Rhine is so lovely that the world cannot show the
like. On one hand and on the other are such stately
towns, and so many castles, and so much beauty that a
man can hardly dare to describe what he sees. Towns
and castles are all crowded closely together and the
towers are adorned with lofty crosses and gilded
weather-vanes.

So by this river we arrived at a city called Coblenz,
a notable place. Opposite the city, on the other side
of the river, lie the towers and castle of the lord of
Hanesberque,’ a knight who set out once on pilgrimage
to Santiago and was captured and taken to Burgos.
Nor was he released until such time as certain merchants
of Burgos, who were detained in Germany, were allowed
to return to Castile. Thus it happened and he was
set at liberty. But as he was returning home, he fell
into the hands of Count Ferdinand of Villandrando,
who held him to ransom, so that his pilgrimage was in
truth an unlucky one. I was advised to pass speedily
so as to avoid any injury on the part of that lord, which
I accordingly did. During all this time I had in my
company the lady whom, as I have related, I encountered
in the Baths. I now took my departure and slept in
the great and noble city of Cologne, where that lady
had her dwelling, and she invited me to her house and
showed me much honour all the time I was there,
which was eight days. The following day that lord of
Hanesberque sent one of his sons to me with certain
squires to ask me to go to his lands, where I should
find pleasure and rest. Further, that I should not
believe what was told me concerning his intentions,
for he desired to make peace with the Castilians, who

188

COLOGNE

had done no more than their duty, and that it was far
from his desire that those who came there should suffer
on his account. ‘They also said that the Emperor had
sent word to his palace, commanding him to entertain
any knights who came there. I thanked him much
for his good will, but said that I had to repair with all
speed to the Duke of Burgundy, and then to return to
the Council, but that another time I would visit him,
and so I took my leave.

189

CHAP T BRie x ent

Cologne —The Inns —Archbishop Dietrich von Mors —The Cathedral.
—A miracle in the Chapel of the Three Kings —The Fair—
Fourney down the Rhine —The Duke of Cleves.—Nymegen.—
Bois-le-duc—Lila.—Malines —Brussels.—Duke Philip the Good.
—A hospitable Abbess.

I REMAINED in this city of Cologne in great content-
ment, and replaced my beasts, since those I had brought
with me were fatigued. This is the richest and the
most beautiful city in all Germany. On one side is
the Rhine, and on the other are great fields and meadows,
such as are commonly found in Germany. The city
is well walled, with a good and deep ditch. The
streets are pleasant, and there are numbers of artisans
engaged in trades of all kinds. ‘The houses are beauti-
ful within the city, but there are many more on the
outskirts. The inns are excellent, worthy to enter-
tain a king if needs be. It is customary for a number
of gentlemen to bind themselves together to found an
inn, each one putting down a sum of money, and
receiving a share of the profits in proportion to his
contribution. ‘They then choose as host a man of
parts and of noble birth, for they say that a good host
befits good guests. It happens not infrequently that
a gentleman, desiring through age to retire from the
world, comes to an innkeeper and bargains with him
for the rest of his life. He has a room, a bed, two large
and two small meals, and money for Mass, and having
paid his due, he lives without care for the rest of his
days. ‘There are other matters of note in conneétion
with the inns here, which would take too long to relate,
for, as I understand, there is much traffic in them and
careful management, and the entertainment is excellent.
190

COLOGNE
In this city a great lord is Archbishop,’ great by

reason of his office and by birth, for he is the son of a
Duke, but he seems, in my judgment, to be more apt
for a secular than an ecclesiastical calling. He was
most hospitable and gracious to me, and I was as
familiar with him as if I had been born there. He rode
about the city with me and showed me the churches
and monasteries, and the palaces of the lords and of the
ladies, whom, as it seems to me, he did not wholly
disdain. The great church is very remarkable, and a
most sumptuous edifice, upon which they are Still
constantly at work. In the centre of the largest
chapel is a smaller shrine enclosed with iron railings,
where lie the Three Kings, and they say that a few days
previously a great miracle happened there, and it was
in this wise. ‘The chapel was completed except for a
great stone with which to roof it, and as they were
lifting this ready to place it in position, it leapt from
the ropes just above the place where the bodies of the
Kings werelying. ‘The shrine thereupon moved itself
as much as one pace to the side, and the stone fell
beside it. The three bodies are preserved so that all
can see them from head to feet. ‘They are quite intact,
and are without doubt very holy relics, wherefore they
are richly adorned and looked upon with the greatest
devotion. ‘There is in this city a nunnery where lies
the virgin St. Ursula, with the eleven thousand virgins
who died with her, and it was here that she received
her martyrdom. It is a great nunnery, and a famous
place of pilgrimage. While I was in the city the fair
was being held, and much merchandise had been
brought there, in particular a number of English
horses, trotters and hackneys, which pleased me greatly.
The Germans are a very diligent people and, as I have
said, they are specially skilled in handicrafts.

Leaving Cologne I travelled down the Rhine until
I came to a town belonging to the Duke of Cleves,”

IgI

TRAVELS © © BP RO eas

father of the Princess of Navarre who is married to a
sister of the Duke of Burgundy, a mighty lord of lands
and dues, but the best of them he took from his neigh-
bours, as they say, by personal prowess. The Duke
received me very graciously and entertained me well,
and had his device shown to me, and I learned the
conditions attached to it, but they seemed to me to be
too onerous, and because the Pope had absolved me
from the vow attached to that one I already bore, I
could not consent to wear it.

I departed from that lord, and lower down the Rhine,
on the right hand, I came to a town called Nymegen,
that is to say, New May. It was founded by Julius
Caesar, and there is a stone there with the whole story
inscribed on it. This town belongs to the Duke of
Guelders*, who is a great lord and even richer than the
one I had just left. He is married to a daughter of
the Duke of Burgundy. This town is in every way the
most beautiful that I have seen. It is very strong,
being built on the rocks behind a strong wall and moat.
I was there three days and saw the Duke, who was a
league out of the town in a palace which he has in the
country for riding and hunting. He received me very
kindly, and I saw there the Duchess and their sons
and daughters, and they desired me to dine with them,
and in the evening I took my leave and returned to the
town. The next day I departed and arrived at a large
town called Bois-le-duc, which is in Brabant and belongs
to the Duke of Burgundy. It is a very remarkable
place, although not well populated. The river runs
into the town in many places, and they breed as many
swans as there are geese in Castile. They say that
the Duke of Burgundy orders them to be distributed
among the people, who bring up the birds and have
to render an account of them, and on feast days they
are eaten and esteemed to be a great luxury. I
purchased a horse here for sixteen ducats which

192

MALINES

would, without doubt, have fetched a hundred at
home.

I now departed for Lila,* which is likewise in Brabant
and belongs also to the Duke of Burgundy. It is a
very pleasant town. ‘The people here are accustomed
to travel in carts, but I could not suffer it, for I would
far rather be at sea. I continued to ride, while my
people followed in the carts. The greater part of this
district is dotted at intervals with wind-mills, and
instead of wood they burn sods of earth like bricks.
They cut them in the summer, each one from his land,
and dry them in the sun and keep them until winter.
These sods make a pleasant fire and are said to be very
healthy. There is very little wine, and the people
drink beer, as the water is bad.

I departed from Lila and came to Malines, which
the Castilians call Mellinas, and although it is small,
I have never seen, before or since, such a charming
place. The Duke delights greatly to come here to
rest, as one retiring to a garden. He has no palace
in the town, but he lies at an inn, which is so excellent
that it is fit to entertain, not him alone, but the greatest
prince on earth. I remained in the town two days,
and had great pleasure there by reason of its charm
and beauty. I then left for Brussels, which is also in
Brabant, and there I found the Duke of Burgundy and
the Duchess, his consort,? to whom I made my
reverence. ‘They received me very graciously, the
Duke on account of his French descent and the love
which he bears to the Castilians, and the Duchess by
reason of her Spanish origin and her relationship with
our Master, King Juan, whose cousin she is. The
Duke ordered me to be lodged and provided with
everything that was needful for me and mine, and I
was soon comfortably bestowed.

The next day I repaired to the palace of the Duke
whom I found at Mass. Afterwards I enquired for

193 oO

TRAVELS -OFVPE ROT Ares
the Bastard of St. Pol® and I joined myself to him, and

greeted him from Gutierre Quixada, who was under
obligation to fight a duel with him, and whom I had
seen embarking for Jerusalem. He sent word to say
that he would shortly return to accomplish his under-
taking, and he commended himself to the Bastard.
The Duke drew near and heard this and said that it
was a fine thing that Mosen Gutierre had done, to go to
Jerusalem with intent to return to kill or dishonour
his comrade, and that such a journey would be better
undertaken after the duel. All this was said by way
of jest. From that day onwards the Bastard paid me
great attention as if I had been his closest kinsman.
He is a gracious knight and a man of honour, and by
his personal valour he has advanced himself more than
many others of greater estate, who are far less respected
by the Duke and Duchess and all the ladies. He 1s as
gentle as he is brave, and in token of his virtue and
integrity the Duke has bestowed on him the Order of
the Golden Fleece. Until then neither minor nor
bastard had ever received the Order, but seeing that
this knight was so valiant and gracious, the Duke and
the electors of the Order had to bestow it. They say
that the one which he wears is that which was forfeited
by the lord of Tremouille, who ran away in battle.
The Bastard is graceful in person and body, of good
stature, a man both discreet and adroit. He is fifty-
five years old, thin and somewhat sallow, and has a
wound on the face which he received in battle, when he
was taken prisoner. Afterwards he was ransomed
for a large sum which was paid by the Regent, mother
of the Duke of Burgundy, who they say loves him very
dearly.

This knight showed me the Duke’s palace as well as
the city and everything in it, but nothing could surpass
in majesty the persons of the Duke and Duchess and
the state in which they live, which is the most splendid

194.

PLATE VIII

A TOURNAMENT

From a Flemish Calendar of the 15th or early 16th century

[face p. 194

“=P. Ts

WH

«*

CY

BRUSSELS

I have ever seen. At that time the following great
persons were housed in the palace, to wit, the Duke of
St. Pol, a mighty lord, with his wife and retainers, the
Count of Estampes, likewise a great lord, with his
followers, and the Princess of Navarre, a niece of the
Duke, who keeps a separate establishment, also John
of Cleves her brother, and two gentlemen, by name
de Charni and de Crequi, with their wives, as well as
many knights of the Duke’s household. They say
that there are two hundred maids of honour continually
in attendance on the Duchess, all of whom sleep and
eat in the palace, as do also the knights who have no
separate establishments, and the Duke pays all the
expenses as if for his own person. In this he appears
to me to be the opposite of the Duke of Milan; the one
keeps all the men he can in the field and none with
him, and the other keeps all with him and none in the
field, but the Duke of Burgundy can safely retain his
knights at court, for he enjoys good peace. The
multitude of people and their refinement and splendour
can scarcely be described. ‘There is a constant suc-
cession of tourneys and everything that makes for
pleasure.

The Duke is a very noble person, of great virtue, and
very gracious in his bearing, and comely. He is tall,
though slight, and as gallant as may be. He is about
fifty-five years of age. The Duchess is extremely well
spoken of. She is much loved by her subjects, and
still more by her consort. They have but one son.’
I saw at the court two blind men from Castile who
played the guitar, and later I met them again here in
Castile. While I was there the Duke sent for me
many times, and enquired as to the places I had visited,
and by repeated questions desired to be exactly informed
concerning all that I had seen and done. He showed
great pleasure at what I told him, giving me to under-
stand the longing which he had to make the conquest

195

TRAVELS (OF UP RIRIO (li ta

of Jerusalem; at least so it appeared to me from his
enquiries. He asked me whether I desired to con-
tinue my journey, or if it pleased me to remain at his
court. I replied that having visited his country and
Paris, I must speedily return te Castile, for I knew
that the King, my Master, wished to wage war in person
against the Moors, and he took it in good part, and
ordered the Bastard of St. Pol to bear me company
and, when I desired to depart, to escort me through
his dominions; further, that if it was necessary he would
give me letters of recommendation, which pleased me
greatly. Afterwards we went to see the city, which is
large and rich, with beautiful houses, and in the centre
of a square is the Hotel de Ville, where the Council
meets, which has no equal. We went also outside the
city to see certain estates belonging to the Duke,
whither he retires for his pleasure, among which was
one with a very fine house and a great enclosed park,
about a league in circumference, where are many deer
and other wild creatures,

I departed from Brussels in company with a knight,
the captain of Sluys, to whom the Bastard had recom-
mended me, and we arrived that day for dinner at
a town where there was not a drop of wine to be had,
and | proposed that we should go on to Bruges where
we should certainly find some, but the knight informed
me that a lady, a kinswoman of his, was abbess of a
convent close by, and that he would send to enquire
if she had any wine, and this he accordingly did. ‘The
abbess sent a message that she had wine in plenty,
but that she would not produce it unless he came to
dine with her, and brought with him the Spanish
knight who was his companion. We therefore pre-
sented ourselves, and were very pleasantly received and
exceedingly well entertained. After dinner the abbess
told me that she had been on pilgrimage to Santiago,
and had received such honourable treatment from the

196

BRUGES

Castilians that she scarcely knew how to repay it.
She thereupon begged me to remain some days there
to refresh myself after the fatigue of my journey, and
told me that she would treat me as her own son, but
I thanked her and took my leave. We then set out
for Bruges, where we arrived at Vespers and lodged
at the Angel, and the captain of Sluys, who was with
me, departed to his place, having invited me to visit

him there and take my pleasure with him, which I
promised to do.

197

CHAPTER XXIV

Bruges. —Arras.—Ghent.— Antwerp.

Tuis city of Bruges’ is a large and very wealthy city,
and one of the greatest markets of the world. It is
said that two cities compete with each other for com-
mercial supremacy, Bruges in Flanders in the West,
and Venice in the East. It seems to me, however, and
many agree with my opinion, that there is much more
commercial activity in Bruges than in Venice. The
reason is as follows. In the whole of the West there
is no other great mercantile centre except Bruges,
although England does some trade, and thither repair
all the nations of the world, and they say that at times
the number of ships sailing from the harbour of Bruges
exceeds seven. hundred a day. In Venice, on the
contrary, be it never so rich, the only persons engaged
in trade are the inhabitants. The city of Bruges is in
the territory of the Count of Flanders, and is the chief
city. It is well peopled, with fine houses and Streets,
which are all inhabited by work people, very beautiful
churches and monasteries, and excellent inns. It is
very strictly governed, both in respect of justice as in
other matters. Goods are brought there from England,
Germany, Brabant, Holland, Zeeland, Burgundy,
Picardy, and the greater part of France, and it appears
to be the port for all these countries, and the market
to which they bring their goods in order to sell them to
others, as if they had plenty at home.

The inhabitants are extraordinarily industrious,
possibly on account of the barrenness of the soil, since
very little corn is grown, and no wine, nor is there
water fit for drinking, nor any fruit. On this account
the products of the whole world are brought here, so

198

BRUGES

that they have everything in abundance, in exchange
for the work of their hands. From this place is sent
forth the merchandise of the world, woollen cloths
and Arras cloths, all kinds of carpets, and many other
things necessary to mankind, of which there is here a
great abundance. There is a large building above a
great tract of water which comes from the sea at Sluys,
which ts called /¢ Hala.* Here all goods are unloaded
in the following manner. In these parts of the West
the sea rises and falls greatly, and between Bruges and
Sluys, a distance of two and a half leagues, there is a
great canal, as great and as deep as a river, and at
different places sluice-gates, as of water mills, are set
up, which when opened admit the water, and on being
closed the water cannot escape. When the tide rises
the ships are laden and travel with their cargoes from
Sluys on the tide. When the water has reached its
highest point they lock it up, and those ships which
have been unloaded and filled with fresh cargoes return
with the same water which carried them up-stream,
travelling down again with the falling tide. Thus
the people by their industry make use of the water,
carrying great quantities of goods to and fro, the
transport of which, if they had to use beasts, would be
exceedingly costly and troublesome.

This city of Bruges has a very large revenue, and the
inhabitants are very wealthy. Recently they rebelled
against the Duke,® at a time when he was in the city,
so that he had to flee with his wife and attendants.
He then armed himself, and made war against it and
took it by force, and took great vengeance upon it,
both in the matter of lives and property. I myself
saw many high gallows around Bruges, and from there
to Sluys, and around Sluys, upon which were fixed
the heads of dead men. ‘The people of this part of
the country are exceedingly fastidious in their apparel,
very extravagant in their food, and much given to all

199

TRAVELS “OF PRERO WAT Uae
kinds of luxury. They say that in that Ha/a, the

women who were so minded had licence that any who
so pleased might go and remain there at night, and the
men who resorted there might bring any woman they
chose and lie with her, on condition that no one should
endeavour to see her, nor to know who she was, and
that any who should do so should be deserving of
death. The bathing of men and women together they
take to be as honest as church-going with us. Without
doubt, the goddess of luxury has great power there,
but it is not a place for poor men, who would be badly
received. But anyone who has money, and wishes to
spend it, will find in this town alone everything which
the whole world produces. I saw there oranges and
lemons from Castile, which seemed only just to have
been gathered from the trees, fruits and wine from
Greece, as abundant as in that country. I saw also
confections and spices from Alexandria, and all the
Levant, just as if one were there; furs from the Black
Sea, as if they had been produced in the district. Here
was all Italy with its brocades, silks and armour, and
everything which is made there; and, indeed, there is
no part of the world whose produé¢ts are not found here
at their best. ‘There was a great famine in the year of
my visit

I departed to see Sluys,* which is the seaport of
Bruges, and lodged with the captain. As I was in
the church hearing Mass, a woman approached me and
said that she had something to communicate to me in
private which would be to my advantage. She took
me to her home close by, and she there showed me two
young girls and offered me the one who should please
me most. Astounded, I enquired of her how she could
bring herself to behave thus, whereupon she told me
that she was almost dead with hunger, having had
nothing to eat for many days except a few small fish,
and that the two girls were like to die of starvation and

200

BRUGES

that they were virgins. I extra¢ted from the woman
and the girls a solemn oath that they would never again
attempt such traffic with anyone. The new year, I
said, would bring an improvement in their fortunes,
and that which I was about to give them would suffice
to provide for all three. I then gave the woman six
Venetian ducats, and departed. The famine was the
worst which had ever been known, and it was followed
by a dreadful plague which devastated many places.

I remained there with the captain for two days and
saw the place. It numbers more than fifteen hundred
burghers, and is strongly fortified with a wall and moat
and so crowded with foreigners and their wares that the
houses are insufficient to shelter them. I met there
many Castilians, and people of other nations known to
me. The harbour of this town is said to be very
difficult to enter, on account of the sand banks, but,
once inside, the ships are very secure and with the tide
they can reach the town walls. At low tide many of
them lie aground, but on such soft deep sands that they
are as well placed as on the water. ‘The harbour looks
as if half the world had armed itself to attack the town,
so great a fleet of ships of all kinds is always at anchor
here: caracks, sloops from Germany, galleys from
Italy, barques, whalers, and many other kinds of
vessels according to the different countries, and even
if the people are enemies among themselves they do not
show their enmity either in the harbour or on land, but
everyone goes his way and does his business. Anyone
acting otherwise is severely punished. One can see
there all the nations of the world eating at a common
table without disputing. I remained two days at
Sluys with the captain, and then returned to Bruges.

I now travelled through Picardy to a city called
Arras, which belongs to the Duke of Burgundy. It
is a pleasant place, and very rich, especially by reason
of its woven cloths and all kinds of tapestries, and

201

TRAVELS OF “PERO @1AT Us

although they are also made in other places, yet it well
appears that those which are made in Arras have the
preference. The negotiations for the peace between
the King of France and the Duke of Burgundy took
place here. I remained three days in the city and
intended to pass on to Normandy to see Rouen, and
thence to go to Paris, but the plague was so severe that
I was forced to change my route, and to return to
Bruges in Flanders. I had certain money with
bankers there, and went to obtain it from them, but
I found that the merchants had all gone to Antwerp
to the fair. I remained, therefore, one day only in
Bruges and then departed, and in two days I arrived
at Ghent which is likewise in the County of Flanders.
Ghent is one of the greatest cities in the Christian
world; it is very strongly fortified in every way although
situated in a plain, for it is well walled, with a high
rampart and moats, in such a way that none can attack
it except at a great distance. It is also well furnished
with arms and all kinds of artillery. They say that by
law each inhabitant must have his own armour and a
lance, and that 60,000 footmen can be put into the
field, but whether this be so or not, it is said that there
are sufficient provisions in the city for six years, and
every year they are renewed. Since I was there the
people have had a quarrel with the Duke, their ruler?
and he came against them and blockaded the city, which
held out for a long time, but at last he took it and exe-
cuted great vengeance. It is said that the citizens had
to come unclad in their shirts to ask pardon, and they
submitted to many things to show their subjection,
and so he departed. But the undertaking cost the
Duke much labour, and he lost his goods and one of
his sons. Messer Jaques de la Ben who warred in
Castile died there also of a wound from a piece of
ordnance. The city is very large and populous and
very wealthy by reason of its trade, for the water reaches
202

GHENT—ANTWERP

to the walls and many ships enter there. A great deal
more might be said concerning this city, but I do not
wish to enlarge upon it and grow tedious with much
writing.

I departed from Ghent and came to the city of
Antwerp, which is in Brabant and belongs to the Duke
of Burgundy. It is large, and has about 6000 burghers.
There is also an excellent wall with a rampart and a
moat. The houses and streets are very fine and it
has a good harbour. The ships enter by a river so
that the galleys can be fastened to the city walls. The
fair® which is held here is the largest in the whole
world, and anyone desiring to see all Christendom, or
the greater part of it, assembled in one place can do so
here. The Duke of Burgundy comes always to the
fair, which is the reason why so much splendour is to
be seen at his court. For here come many and divers
people, the Germans, who are near neighbours, like-
wise the English. The French attend also in great
numbers, for they take much away and bring much.
Hungarians and Prussians enrich the fair with their
horses. ‘The Italians are here also. I saw there ships
as well as galleys from Venice, Florence and Genoa.
As for the Spaniards they are as numerous, or more
numerous, at Antwerp than anywhere else. I met
merchants from Burgos who were settled in Bruges,
and in the city I found also Juan de Morillo, a servant
of our King.

As a market Antwerp is quite unmatched. Here
are riches and the best entertainment, and the order
which is preserved in matters of traffic is remarkable.
Pi@tures of all kinds are sold in the monastery of
St. Francis; in the church of St. John they sell the
cloths of Arras; in a Dominican monastery all kinds
of goldsmith’s work, and thus the various articles are
distributed among the monasteries and churches, and
the rest is sold in the streets. Outside the city at one

203

TRAV EDS20 RP ER Oar a on

of the gates is a great street with large Stables and other
buildings on either side of it. Here they sell hackneys,
trotters and other horses, a most remarkable sight, and,
indeed, there is nothing which one could desire which
is not found here in abundance. I do not know how
to describe so great a fair as this. I have seen other
fairs, at Geneva in Savoy, at Frankfurt in Germany,
and at Medina in Castile, but all these together are not
to be compared with Antwerp.

204

CHAPTER XXV

Louvain. — Bois-le-duc.— Nymegen.— Frankfurt.— Cologne.— Mainz.
—The travellers are kidnapped and released —Tafur loses his
sword.—Basle.—A tourney at Schaffhausen.—ConStance —Ulm.—
Nordlingen.— Kaspar Schlick.— Nuremberg. — Prague.— The
Margrave of Meissen.

I peparteD from Antwerp and came to the city of
Louvain, which is in Brabant. It is a very great place,
but much de-populated. Here is a very notable
university for the study of all sciences, but they say
that theology is taught more than the others, I saw
there two bastard sons of the Duke of Burgundy who
were Studying philosophy. One of them afterwards
became a valiant man of arms, and fell, as I have related,
at the blockade of Ghent. I left Louvain and came to
Bois-le-duc, where I had already been, and from there
I travelled to Nymegen, which, as I have said, belongs
to the Duchy of Guelders; from there I passed on to
the Duchy of Cleves and came to Frankfurt. It was
the time of the fair which is very noteworthy, as I have
said, but not equal to that at Antwerp. The city is
very well provisioned, and has 4000 burghers, and the
fair brings it much wealth. Frankfurt is situated in
the middle of Germany and is chiefly notable, as it
seemed to me, for its beasts. I remained there three
days, and departed and returned to Cologne. I visited
the Archbishop, as I had promised, and he received me
most graciously.

At Cologne I fell in with an embassy which was
returning to Basle from the Duke of Burgundy, a
goodly company dispatched by the Council to the Duke,
to endeavour to persuade him to take sides with the
Council, and to throw off his allegiance to the Pope,

205

TRAVELS -OF. PER OP eiU aim

whom he had hitherto supported. There were three
prelates in the embassy, one was the Bishop of Viseo, in
Portugal, the second was a German, the third was
Ludovico, the greatest scholar of his age and proto-
notary of the Pope. It happened that through my
acquaintance with the Bishop of Viseo, whom I had
encountered in the island of Chios' in Greece, whither
he had gone to receive the Emperor of Constantinople,
I was obliged to return in his company as far as Basle.
When we came to Mainz the ambassadors sent at once
to Duke Stephen of Bavaria’ for a safe-conduét, since the
Duke was tutor to his nephew Duke Ludwig who was
lord of all that country. This was because the Duke
was a supporter of Pope Eugenius. Nevertheless, in
due course he sent his safe-conduct and we departed
from Mainz, but about three leagues from there we
were set upon by some 200 horsemen, who took captive
the ambassadors, and me with them, and they carried
us to a castle in a mountain, called Livantane [ Lauben-
heim], and this with great discourtesy. But, as for
me, seeing I was a knight, no one approached me, but
they sent for a knight who took my sword and spurs
from me. For a whole fortnight they kept us in
captivity, but at least there was no likelihood of death
from want. On the contrary, at night and break of
day, indeed at all hours of the day, we were forced to
eat and drink with our guards, as is the custom there,
which was quite strange to us and became us very ill.
I sent at once to Duke Stephen to tell him who I was,
and the manner of my coming, and demanded to be
released. He complied by sending one of his kinsmen
to deliver me from prison, and when I was at liberty
I desired to see and have speech with my companions,
but this was denied me, since they kept each one of us
apart.

As soon as I was free of the castle I rode with my
people to Duke Stephen, who was in a town a league

206

MAINZ

from there, and spoke with him, demanding the release
of my companions. I told him that if he did not set
them free at once he would lose not only his own
goods, but also the estates of his nephew which were in
his charge. While I was there news came that his
nephew’s people had risen against the Duke, saying
that he had dishonoured his nephew and violated his
safe-condu@t. Whereupon the Duke asked me to
return to the ambassadors to try to make peace with
them, saying that he was anxious to set them:free, but
that they must agree not to make complaint to the
Council or: to the Emperor. He sent also to the
messengers, who came to him, to inform them that he
had liberated the ambassadors and had shown them
much honour. I then departed with one of his kins-
men and returned to the place where the ambassadors
were imprisoned, and had speech with them, and they
were very pleased at what I had done and readily
consented to the conditions, and they were set at
liberty and had restitution of all that was taken from
them, so that nothing was lost. But, to my amaze-
ment, my sword, which had been taken from me when
I was captured, could not be found. They offered me
one belonging to the Duke, but I scorned to take it,
swearing that I would never wear any but my own,
and that the Duke’s country should pay dearly for the
injury done to me in the face of his safe-condud.

With this we departed, the ambassadors and I,
through the lands of that Duke Ludwig, where they
showed us much honour and would not suffer us to
pay for anything. But just as we were about to leave
his dominions, a squire from the Duke rode up and
begged me to make an end of my wrath, since what
had happened had been dire¢ted not against me, but
against the ambassadors, and they brought me my
sword, and told me that it had cost the Duke more
labour to recover it than to capture a city. So we

207

TRAVELS (OR) GP Ei Oe Ags

departed from the country of those lords, both uncle
and nephew, and returned to Strassburg and continued
our journey, taking with us from each city an armed
escort for our protection, in view of the contending
factions and the disputes between the Pope and the
Council. We thus returned to Basle, where we found
again the ambassadors from the King, our Master,
whom I had seen before.

Departing in due course from Basle, I came to a
town called Schaffhausen which lies on the Upper
Rhine. It is small, but pleasant and very clean. A
grand tourney was being celebrated there, which the
nobles had arranged in this manner. Certain knights
gathered together and made a list of all the noblemen
in the district, and they caused a painter to paint the
coats of arms of each one, which a herald carried from
house to house, presenting the shield and giving notice
that on a certain day every nobleman should present
himself in that place, fully equipped with arms and
horses, to take part in a tournament. They gave
notice also to all the great ladies in those parts. Then
the nobles and ladies assembled at their own cost, and
when all were gathered together the elders went apart
with certain matrons and took counsel, and enquired
whether any nobleman had done ought amiss, whether
any had forced or dishonoured matron or maid, or had
seized the goods of a minor who had no protector, or
had debased himself for greed of money by marrying
a woman of low birth, or had otherwise degraded his
rank, Thus the misdeeds of each were brought to
light, and when any culprit was found they provided
as follows. Certain knights were summoned, and when
such an one appeared in the lists, they were ordered to
fall upon him and beat him with rods and drive him
thence. ‘This was done, and afterwards the older
knights and ladies drew near to the culprit and told him
why he had been beaten. Then they escorted him

208

CONSTANCE

back and allowed him to take his place with the other
noblemen in the tourney, as if he had purged his offence
and done his penance. But if he refused to attend he
was sentenced to a double punishment, and if, after a
third summons, he still remained obdurate, he was no
longer regarded as a noble since he had refused to
joust with his peers. In these parts all can joust and
join in any knightly sports, but only nobles of known
escutcheon can take part in the tourney. This is a
good and worthy custom, since thereby everyone knows
who can lay claim to chivalry and high lineage, and those
who have been guilty of base deeds may be brought
toshame. I was bidden to join with the other nobles
and witnessed the rejoicings.

I remained at Schaffhausen two days, and departed
and came to Constance, where an earlier Council had
been held* concerning the healing of the differences
in the Church, and Fernand Perez de Ayala, and the
Alcalde de los Don¢eles were the Castilian ambassadors.
Here I met the Cardinal of San Pedro who was then
dwelling there. I remained with him eight days,
taking much pleasure and admiring the city, which is
indeed a fine place tosee. There are delightful houses,
Streets, churches and monasteries, and excellent inns
and lodging houses. It must always have been a
noble city, but it is much finer since the Council was
heldthere. A lake of sweet water flows up to the walls,
which comes from the Alps. This lake is five or six
leagues in length and of equal breadth. It is very deep,

-and many great caracks could float in it. It contains
an abundance of fish, which are said to be very good
to eat. In the lake are a number of islands, where are
hermitages andaconvent. Vast supplies of provisions
come in by that lake, to which the city owes much of
its prosperity. The suburbs are very extensive. I
saw there the most beautiful woman it has ever been
my lot to see. So great was her beauty that I doubted

209 P

TRAVELS “Ob (PER Oma a ae

if she could be really human. If she was as good as
she was beautiful, they should make much of her in
Paradise. It was here in the cathedral church that the
Council held its sittings, and it happened that King
Fernando of Aragon died at that time, and there were
grand obsequies in this church as befits a King, and the
whole church is painted with the arms of Aragon.

I now took leave of the Cardinal, and departed to see
the Emperor who was in Bohemia, and travelling
through Upper Germany I came to Ulm, which we
call Olmos, where they make the fustians which are
named after it. The city is pleasantly situated and
charmingly built. It is an Imperial city, which
signifies that justice and revenue and all things belong
to the Emperor. Half a league from there runs the
Danube, which flows into the Black Sea. I departed
from this city and came to Nordlingen, which town
was then at strife with a lord in the vicinity, and they
gave me an escort through the dangerous country,
I then arrived at the city of Nuremberg, where I en-
countered many people, ambassadors from the Pope,
and the Cardinal of Santa Cruz, and many other prel-
ates, among them the present Cardinal of San Sisto,
who was then called Brother Juan de Torquemada.*
On the side of the Council were the Cardinal of Arles
and many other prelates, including Magister Juan de
Segovia, professor of theology, and for the Emperor
there were Kaspar Schlick,° vice-chancellor, and many
lords and learned men. I was obliged to remain there
until the Diet was finished and they were ready to
depart, in order to travel farther with Kaspar Schlick,
who was on his way to the Emperor in Bohemia, for
otherwise I could not have travelled without grave peril
of death. The Castilians who were there recommended
me to him, and he was pleased to take me in his train.
There had come with him the son of a Count whom
I knew in Castile, in the Moorish wars on the frontier

210

NUREMBERG

of Jaen, and who was knighted in Cambil. He had
fled to Spain from his father who wished to make a
bishop of him, as he had an elder brother, but on his
return to Germany he found his father and brother
both dead, and he inherited the estates with a rental
of 20,000 ducats. His name was Patendorf. From
this knight I received many kindnesses, as well by the
way as in the Emperor’s household.®

This city of Nuremberg is one of the greatest and
richest in Germany. It is a very ancient city and has
about the same population as Toledo, which city it
resembles in size and situation. There are many
workpeople in the place, especially metal workers.
They make the coats of mail which are called after the
_ city. There is a church where the Emperor Charle-
magne placed the relics which he brought from the
Holy Land when he took Jerusalem, and I went with
the Cardinals to see them. They showed me many
relics, among them a lance of steel of the length of an
ell, and they told us that it was the very lance which
pierced Our Lord’s side, but I said that I had seen the
real one in Constantinople, and I believe that if the
great people had not been with me, I should have been
in peril from the Germans for what I said. ‘This city
is very wealthy, and although situated inland it is
full of merchandise. When the ambassadors had
finished their labours, each returned to his home, and
I went with the Germans to the confines of Bohemia,
to a town called Eger, in which the Emperor Sigismund
had bestowed on Kaspar Schlick all the chief offices,
and here he had his wife. We remained in the town
six days, during which time he celebrated the marriage
of one of his brothers, and many great people were
there from Germany and Bohemia, and there were
joustings and tourneys and great celebrations.

We departed from Nuremberg, and travelling
through Bohemia we came to the city of Prague, but

211

T RAV E1759 © Feo Bee era

we could not meet with the Emperor, who had de-
parted for Silesia on the confines of Poland, where he
was waging war with the Polish King. Prague 1s a
very ancient and notable city and very rich, although
it has declined since the Bohemians became heretics.
It also appears to me that the heresy has in no way been
exterminated, for there are mountains and lofty strong-
holds belonging to the Taborites, and a castle which
they call Tabor. The people persist still in their
errors, and the greater part of the kingdom sides with
them, especially the women, for there is community
of wives, but I believe it is to satisfy their lusts, as I
also heard. Prague is divided into two parts, the one
they call Old Prague, and the other New Prague,’
and between the two runs a great river, crossed by a
bridge which leads from one to the other. There is
here a famous university for the study of all the sciences,
particularly theology. We remained for two days, and
departing from the city we travelled through Bohemia
to its farthermost limits. Between Germany and
Bohemia there rises, like a wall, a high and thickly-
wooded range of mountains, over which one can
neither ride nor walk, except by specified routes.
Leaving Bohemia we entered Germany and came to
a town belonging to the Margrave of Meissen, Duke
of Saxony,® who is now married to the sister of the
Emperor Frederick. It was then about a fortnight
since he had fought a battle with the Bohemian heretics
and had defeated them, and had taken much spoil
and 1000 prisoners, including 100 nobles. This
lord received me well and showed me much courtesy,
and Kaspar Schlick remained there with him three
days. We then departed, travelling through Germany,
and saw many places and churches in ruins, which had
been destroyed by the King of Poland while the Emperor
was at war with the Bohemians, so that he had to cease
hostilities there and march straightway against the Poles.
PIS TOD

CHAP EE Rae vil
Breslau.—The Emperor Albert II —Life at court—The King of Poland.

—Breslau in winter.

Turee days before Christmas we arrived at Breslau,
in Silesia, on the very outskirts of Germany. There
we found the Emperor Albert,’ accompanied by many
dukes, counts, and other great men, and prelates, as
well from Germany as from Hungary and Bohemia.
A knight of the Prussian Order was there also with
many soldiers sent by the Grand Master. The
Emperor had in addition a great army with him, for
he was in the field, and had need of them, being at
war with a numerous and valiant foe. But, as I learnt,
the fighting did not hinder the festivities, nor the
jousts, tourneys and nuptials which the Emperor had
planned for his people, nor did the festivities hinder
the fighting, but due provision was made for each.
The Emperor had only recently been crowned, and a
great concourse of people was in attendance, am~
bassadors from kings and princes, and from the Italian
republics. The Bishop of Burgos was there by order
of our King and Master, Don Juan, to whom the
Emperor showed the greatest respect. And, indeed,
he deserved it, for apart from the Sovereign whom he
represented, he was a noble and discreet man, and
learned, and kept great and worthy state. Repre-
sentatives were also there from the Duke of Burgundy,
the Duke of Milan, from Venice, Florence, and Genoa,
from Pope Eugenius, and from the King of Aragon.
Many brought presents, especially the Venetians and
Florentines, those from Venice being specially note-
worthy. The Emperor received themall very graciously,
but those from Venice he would not accept, saying
QT

TRAVELS OF PERO TAFUR

that it was not fitting for him to take presents from a
people upon whom he intended to make war. He said
further, in the presence of all, that he had madea solemn
vow not to accept the Imperial crown, nor even to enjoy
its revenues, until that which the Venetians had filched
was restored to the Empire.” Then having re-taken
the Holy Sepulchre, he would be crowned there. All
who heard this vow were very glad, except the Vene-
tians who straightway departed.

This day I made my reverence to the Emperor,
being well attended by Castilians and Germans, also
by two noblemen whom I had met at Jerusalem, and
by that knight of Patendorf with whom I had travelled.
The Emperor received me very graciously, and did me
much honour. He had celebrated that day a marriage
between a widowed countess and a knight of the court,
and the Emperor jousted with the Margrave of Branden-
burg, and the Emperor was unhorsed in one of the
encounters, but he got up very merrily, and laying aside
his helmet, he placed on his head a hat adorned with a
very costly brooch. He then approached the bride,
and presented hat and brooch to her, and taking her
by the hand he led her to the palace, accompanied by
many noblemen and great lords. It was Vespers when
the company went to table. The ladies sat apart, but
the bridegroom sat with the gentlemen. At the
Emperor’s table he, and the knight of Prussia, and I
sat alone, and the banquet lasted until an hour after
midnight, and then followed the dancing which went
on until dawn.

The Emperor was a man of light-hearted disposition,
very graceful in person and face, although of unusual
Stature. He was somewhat dark in colour, so that the
Germans said in jest that he was of Castilian blood.
He took me by the hand and bade me look upon the
ladies, and choose the one it would please me best to
dance with, and on two or three occasions he even

214

BRESLAU

carried a light before me. Thus we passed that night,
and I saw there many noblemen with the device of the
Escama which I received from the King my Master.
These gentlemen accompanied me to my inn when |
took leave of the Emperor. The next day after Mass
the Emperor summoned all the ambassadors, and
sitting on his raised throne, he called to him the Bishop
of Burgos, and asked him to make reply for him to the
ambassadors, and this he did in order to honour the
Bishop. After this I drew near to him, and he gave me
his device, as well as the Order of the Dragon, which is
in Hungary what the Order of the Eagle is in Austria,
and the Order of the Tusino in Bohemia.

Each day the Emperor provided feasts, but, as I
have remarked, he did not neglect the war for which
he was always prepared. ‘The chief cause of this war
was the Empress,* widow of Sigismund, and mother-
in-law of the present Emperor Albert, who, as they say,
was a very loose woman, and when her son-in-law took
steps against her, she left his country and fled to the
King of Poland, taking with her much treasure which
she gave to the King. She bestowed upon him all
rights over her German lands, and then she married
him. But this was the greatest absurdity, for she was
more than sixty-five years of age and he not yet twelve.
On the strength of this quarrel the Poles entered
Germany, but the Bishop of Burgos who was there, a
discreet man, dealt with the matter in such wise that
the parties were appeased and peace was made, which
was a very difficult business in view of the damage
which had been done. On account of this I had an
opportunity of seeing the King of Poland.* I found
him in a village, a day’s journey away, with a great
company of lords who were very wonderfully clad and
armed according to the custom of their country, and
very well mounted. ‘They say that the King is a great
lord, both in lands and revenue. He was of the age

21.5

TRAVELS (OR PH ROPeE AT ER
before mentioned, of a pleasant face, and very valiant.
I wished also to see the city of Cracow, which is the
chief city of his Kingdom, but it was not possible. Nor
was I able to witness a tiger (bear ?) hunt, which is the
most remarkable thing to be seen in these parts. The
beagts are very wild and fierce, and very fleet-footed,
and it is a great sport which cannot be undertaken
without many men and dogs, and the flesh is good
to eat.

I took leave of the King of Poland and returned to
the Emperor at Breslau. Speaking one day about my
experiences, he asked me how I had fared in Germany,
and I had to tell him that Duke Stephen had imprisoned
me in the Rhineland, whereat he was much incensed,
and said that the Castilians did not deserve such treat-
ment, since he knew well how many favours the Germans
had received from the King of Spain and his people.
He told me, further, that before he was married he
had proposed to visit Spain. The next day, as I was
at dinner with the Bishop of Burgos, the Emperor’s
Hungarian herald entered, whom I had already en-
countered with the admiral Don Fadrique, and who
was known as Tusol. He brought a silver-gilt cup
in which were some 300 florins, which the Emperor
sent, saying that I must pardon him that he could not
show me greater liberality, but that the time and place
were not favourable. I returned answer that I thanked
him greatly for what he sent me, but that I must
return the money, as I had sufficient for my needs, and
it would be a burden to me to take it. I said also that
if I had been without money, I would not only have
accepted it, but, indeed, I should have asked for it,
knowing well his great generosity, and with this the
herald left me. The Bishop of Burgos was greatly
pleased with my answer, and related the affair after-
wards to King Juan in my presence.

It is seldom that a day passes at this court without

216

BRESLAU

a contest, the parties having sharpened lances and
steel helmets and shields, but they are all so used to
the practice and so skilful that there is no more danger
than in a contest with jousting lances. The city of
Breslau is very large, greater than Seville, and very
populous. It belongs to the Bishop of Silesia, who is
the greatest prelate in those parts. Besides his great
revenues, the number of men he can place in the field
of battle is most remarkable. ‘The country is as cold
in comparison with Lower Germany, as Germany is in
comparison with Castile. The chimneys and stoves
do not give sufficient warmth; but there is another
kind of stove for heating which they use. They make
a fire beneath an upstairs room, and in the floor are
covered holes, and they place seats above, also with
holes in them. The people then sit down on those
seats and unstop the holes, and the heat rises between
the legs to each one.

So cold is the city that the Emperor and his courtiers
go about the streets seated in wooden vehicles like
threshing machines. These are drawn by horses shod
with iron in the manner of the country, and so they are
dragged through the streets. Others go in carriages
drawn by eight or ten horses. These carriages are
entirely closed with awnings, and they fix braziers to
them. ‘Thus they go from their houses to the palace
or wherever they wish. No one with any money rides
on horseback for fear of falling, for the streets are like
glass owing to the continual frosts, and many go on
toot. Everyone attends church at midnight, even the
children, and the people are very devoted to the Mass.
They fortify themselves by taking great quantities of
food and drink, a custom which to us seems stranger
than anything else. I believe that more money is
expended here upon furs and spices than in half the
world besides. ‘The people are very wealthy, having
much silver, and as they do not keep many servants

217

TRAVELS “OF (oP eR Ord Ars

and have large revenues and great wealth, they live
very well. The Emperor Albert was a man of sovereign
virtue, a good Christian and devout, as well in the
hearing of divine offices, as in the acts of piety which
he did. He was honest in his bearing and very con-
tinent, an open and vigorous knight. It was due to
him alone, when he was Duke, that the Bohemians
did not penetrate into Germany, for the Emperor
Sigismund made little resistance, being a Bohemian
by birth, for which reason he did not march against
them.

218

CHAPTER XXVII

Departure from Breslau.—Fourney to Vienna.—Tafur is attacked by
the way.—Vienna.—The Empress Elizabeth —Buda.—Neuftadt.
—Duke Frederick of AuStria—The Carnic Alps—Friuli—
Treviso.— Padua.

I now asked the Emperor if it would please him to
give me licence to depart, as I desired to return to
Castile since the King, my Master, was taking part
in person in the Moorish war, and those who were there
requested him to commit me to the care of two of his
knights, who were travelling with an escort of 200
horsemen to Vienna. We accordingly departed from
Breslau and came with much labour and danger to the
Bohemian frontier. We now entered the Margravate
of Moravia which belonged to the Emperor Albert,
the Emperor Sigismund, his father-in-law, having
bestowed it upon him at the time of his marriage, and
we found many places wasted and burnt, which the
Bohemians had destroyed. Thus we passed twelve
days until we arrived at Vienna, suffering much from
ice and frost, and in our route we passed over two
rivers which we crossed with our carts on the ice.
It was so cold that my teeth almost fell out of my
mouth. Without doubt, it is a terrible business to
travel through such country in winter. Of the two
knights, my companions, one lived in a place belonging
to the present Emperor, and the other resided in
Vienna, having a house in commission from the
Emperor Albert some two leagues outside the city,
where he lived with his wife, and when we were two
leagues from the city they departed, each one to his
place. ‘That one who lived in Vienna asked me to
spend some five or six days with him in his house, saying
219

TRAVELS: OF] PERO yaar.

that he would fetch me from the city. He then showed
me the way to Vienna and told me where to lodge, and
we parted.

I had not gone half a league from there when I was |
attacked in the way by some unmounted noblemen
with intent to rob, but they did not succeed in their
plan, as I and my people had good horses. So we
escaped and arrived at Vienna, and put up at the inn
which had been recommended, but no sooner had I
sat down to eat than those very noblemen appeared who
had attacked me, and I recognized one of them im-
mediately. I asked them how they could behave
thus, and they told me that they were poor noblemen,
and had to rob for a living. I replied that I also was
noble and poor, and moreover a stranger in their midst,
and that my needs were equally great. Then they
craved pardon and offered to go and seek for money
so that they could give me entertainment. But I
thanked them and made them sit down with me, and
gave them money with which they were greatly pleased,
and they accompanied me on most of the days that I
was in the city.

Vienna! is situated on the river Danube and is very
large, about the same size as Cordova. The houses,
both inside and outside, are very beautiful. The
streets are pleasant, as are also the churches and inns.
The great church is most notable, particularly the
tower which was copied from that at Strassburg. The
organs are so large that when they are played the
church seems as if it would fall. In this city there are
many workpeople of all kinds, and a university for the
Study of sciences. ‘The Emperor has a very notable
palace. ‘The Empress” was there, and I visited her, as
the Emperor had commanded me to do. She is the
daughter of the Emperor Sigismund, a most beautiful
lady, and tall. She has a little son, who is now King of
Hungary, and two daughters of between eleven and

220

VIENNA

fifteen years ofage. I gave her the news of the Emperor,
her husband, and told her that peace was concluded
between him and the King of Poland, and that the
Emperor was preparing to return, at which she was
much pleased. She sent for certain of her gentlemen
and ordered them to treat me well, and to show me the
city and bear me company, which they did. I then
took my leave, and although the Emperor had invested
me with the Order of the Dragon, she gave me the
one she was wearing, since it was, she said, her father’s
Order, and only she had authority to bestow it.

_ I remained with these gentlemen and was four days
in the city, entertaining myself with them until the
knight, who was my travelling companion, sent two
squires to me, and I departed and left the palace and
betook myself to the place where he awaited me. His
house is called Lacsensdorf, and he received me there.
But before leaving Vienna I went to see Jorge Voniroc,
who had made a vow of arms with Don Fernando de
Guivara, and this knight accompanied me those two
leagues to the house, where my host made him dine
with us before he departed, and that day we had great
entertainment. The knight then returned to Vienna
and I remained with my host four days, refreshing
myself pleasantly after my exertions. I was received
there as a familiar, and by the lady of the house as if
she had been my own mother. I saw the whole
estate, which is among the largest and most splendid
Ihaveseen. It is very strong, with rampart and moat,
although situated in a plain, and on one side is a great
park about a league in extent, where there are wild
pigs, deer and other game. A river runs through it
and the thickets rise on either side. In this palace the
Emperor keeps armourers, and swords and bows and
arrows, suits of mail, and many other things wonderful
to behold. ‘The knight and his lady gave me presents,
she linen, and he a sword, spurs and gilded stirrups, and

221

TRAVELS, OF (PERO AT i.

so I took my leave of them. I asked that knight to
send one of his squires with me to Buda, a city of
Hungary, three days’ journey from there. I departed
with this squire, and travelling along the Danube, we ©
entered Hungary, which is very extensive and well
populated, with great strongholds on the German
frontier.
We arrived at Buda, a city as great as Valladolid,
and the Danube flows by it. It is the greatest city in
Hungary and has many workpeople, but it is not so
cleanly as the German cities. The inhabitants are some-
what gross, which comes, they say, from their plenty.
The Emperor Sigismund improved the city greatly
and ereéted a noble palace there, in which he built a
great audience chamber, made like that at Padua, but
to me it did not appear to be so magnificent. I de-
parted from there and came to the confines of Hungary,
and entered Germany, and came to a city called Neu-
stadt, which signifies New Town, and there I found the
present Emperor Frederick, then Duke of Austria,®
a first cousin of the Emperor Albert, but not so noble
a man. He was in the midst of the celebrations
attending the marriage of his daughter with that
Margrave of Meissen before mentioned, who had
defeated the Bohemians. I remained with the Duke,
who now is Emperor, a whole week, and there I met
again my second travelling companion, who showed
me great courtesy, as did also the Duke, with whom
I dined daily. A great multitude of people had
assembled from Germany for the wedding, not only
from among his own household, for he is a great lord,
but also his kinsmen and friends. ‘The bride was a
gentle lady, and there was much entertainment, but the
bridegroom was absent in his country by reason of the
war, and they took the bride to him. This Duke, now
Emperor, is exceedingly wealthy, but they say that he
knows well how to keep what he has. He had returned
222

NEUSTADT—PADUA

from Jerusalem a few days before I set out, and he took
great pleasure in conversing with me of lands beyond
the sea, and I enjoyed myself there with him. I then
took leave of the Duke and dismissed the squire who
had escorted me to Hungary, and sent him to his
master, a day’s journey from that place.

I departed from Neustadt, going by lands and
cities, towns, and castles of that Duke, who has great
possessions, until I arrived at the Alps, which I crossed
with great labour and peril on account of the severe
frosts, but the passes are all so well populated, and
provisions are so plentiful that it is a marvel to behold.
All this country has been taken by the Venetians from
the Empire,* and in those passes and narrow ways they
have built towers and gates with which they close
them; all which is to further their tyranny. I de-
scended towards Italy, and came to a country which
they call Friuli, which belongs by right to the Patriarch
of Aquileia, where he had many and great possessions,
but the Venetians have taken everything. I saw the
Patriarch at the court of the Emperor, where he made
complaint about the matter. They say, without doubt,
that if the Emperor had not died, the Venetians would
have compassed his death with poison, having been
apprised of the oath which he swore, that they should
be dispossessed of what they had taken by violence.
I went now to Treviso, another city which the Venetians
had seized. It is a great city and wealthy, situated
near the sea about a day’s journey from Venice.

I desired to go on at once to Venice, but hearing
that the Pope proposed to leave Ferrara for Florence,
I hurried on in order to arrive first, and came to Padua.
This city is about as big as Seville and very rich and a
great trading centre. It is close to the sea, about half
a day’s journey from Venice. ‘This also the Vene-
tians took from the lord of Carrara, which was his
patrimony, and he, too, was with the Emperor com-

Pg

TRAVELS OF (PEROT Aes

plaining of the Venetians. I learnt that the Pope would
not leave for five or six days, and I remained at Padua
three days, and, indeed, there is much to see there.
It possesses a very remarkable university, among the
best in the Christian world, also a magnificent and very
wealthy monastery where lie the bodies of St. Anthony
of Padua and St. Luke the Evangelist, which is a
notable place of pilgrimage and devotion. In the
centre of the city there is a great hall? which is twice as
big as any I have seen. ‘The roof is covered with lead
and the interior with Milanese metal work; the ceiling
is blue, finely painted at intervals with golden Stars.
In the centre there are bars of iron like beams, adorned
with great gilt apples, and it is all painted with the
history of the world from the Creation to the Advent.
They say that the painting cost more than 40,000
ducats. Round the hall are seats of wood, and there
they administer justice, and outside there are porticoes.
The hall has four doors, on each of which are sculptured
marbles. ‘Two of them commemorate men of science
of that city, namely Titus Livius, the historian, and
Magister Pedro d’ Abano,® a great necromancer, who
was burnt there by the Friars Minor for doing strange
and wonderful things, such as drawing straightway to
the harbour of Venice the ships of Constantinople,
and other matters falling within the province of*witch-
craft. Beneath this hall they have erefted shops for
those that make clothes and shoes. From these it is
possible to see how great the hall is, for although the
city is very extensive, all these tradespeople are housed
there. The city has some very ancient buildings.
They say it was built by Antenor after the destru€tion
of Troy, and, indeed, its buildings are of great anti-
quity. On the day of my arrival justice was executed
upon a native of Padua, who had murdered a knight
of Catalonia, named Mosen Villafranca, who was his
cuest.

224

CHAPTER XXVIII

Ferrara —The Pope leaves for Florence—Venice.—A great engineering
Seat.—V icenza.—Verona.—F lorence —The Pope and the Emperor.
—Pisa—Bologna.—Venice.

I cerr Padua and travelled along the canals, and since
that country is very close to Venice, they collect the
water into lakes, some of fresh and some of salt water,
but these lakes have a very evil smell, and they call
them the marshes, and when in speaking the Italians
wish to refer to anything as noxious or stinking, they
liken it to those marshes. On drawing near to Ferrara,
they told me that the Pope was wishful to depart, and
it was so, and on arrival I found the Pope preparing
to set out for Florence. As soon as I arrived I waited
on the Emperor of the Greeks, who rejoiced greatly
to see me again, and I saw also the Pope’s progress
which was in this wise.* All the archbishops, bishops,
and other prelates and clergy, went on foot in procession
with the crosses. Then followed the cardinals on
horseback, staffs in hand, in order of precedence, and
after them came twelve horses with crimson trappings,
one bearing the umbrella, one the chair and another
the cushion, and so on until the end. The last horse
was covered with brocade, and on a rich silver saddle
was a casket containing the Blessed Sacrament. ‘This
horse had a silver bell, and two prelates led it by the
reins. ‘Then came the Pope himself, upon a horse with
crimson trappings. He was vested as for Mass,
wearing a bishop’s mitre and giving his blessing on
one side and the other, while men cast coins into the
Street, so that those who picked them up might gain
pardons. ‘This was done to prevent the crowds from
pressing upon the Pope, whose horse was led by the
Marquis of Ferrara and the Count of Urbino.
225 Q

TRAVEUS OF UPPER Oa aC.

It was rumoured that the Duke of Milan was lying
in wait to capture the Pope, so that the Marquis
escorted him that day to a hermitage a mile from there
with a great company of armed men, making it seem
that the Pope was travelling with troops to one of his
cities, where he had arranged great festivities. But
in faét he rode with him in a different dire¢tion, and in
two days brought him safely to Florence. They say
that for this service, and others that the Marquis did,
the Pope reduced the tribute payable by the Mar-
quisate to 3,000 ducats, and confirmed all its privileges,
as appears in the Bull which the Marquis had engraved
in stone and set up in the great church at Ferrara.

I remained two days in Ferrara and desired to depart,
and I could not do otherwise than go to Florence, for
all the banks were closed and the bankers had gone
away. ‘The Emperor desired to take me with him, but
I departed, and leaving my horses at Ferrara to bait,
I went to Venice to see after my goods and rest, while
my horses refreshed themselves at Ferrara. The
Emperor left the next day, and I remained at Venice,
and was as well placed as if I had been in my own house,
and I was very grateful to my friend, the merchant,
whom | had entrusted with my property, for, indeed,
I could not have left it in better hands. He was
preparing to depart for Seville, and I asked him if he
would ship my goods for me, except the money which
I retained, and he did me this good office as willingly
as the first. I remained there with him at Venice until
he departed. At this time, while the Pope was holding
his court at Brescia, news came that the Duke of Milan
had closely invested that city by boats from the lake,
in such manner that no provisions could be got in,
whereupon the Venetians equipped a galley, and by a
cunning contrivance carried it overland and across a
mountain, as high as any in Castile, and then brought
it down and launched it in the lake,? and I think that

226

VICENZA—FLORENCE

100,000 people came to see the feat, and not without
reason, for I never saw anything so skilful, however
difficult it may be to believe it. When the galley was
launched it soon destroyed all the other boats, and no
others dared to come, and it succoured the city, and
the siege was raised, although the Milanese prided
themselves they had already taken it. I went to see
the Duke of Milan’s men who were there, with Nicolao
Picherino’, their chief captain, and a very fine army
1t was.

I now departed and came to Vicenza, a pleasant
city of the Venetians; thence I reached Verona, like-
wise a Venetian city. It is large and rich though
thinly populated, and very ancient. They report
that it was built by Roman exiles, who named it Veroma,
which is to say: “ Lo! another Rome,” and indeed many
Roman remains may be seen there to prove the re-
semblance. I then returned to Venice and remained
there two days, after which I left for Florence, where
I found the Pope and the Emperor, and I collected
my money. I remained there eight days marvelling
at the city, which is one of the most wonderful in
Christendom, wonderful alike in size, as in wealth and
government. It is ruled by individuals who are
elected each month by lot, and the lot may fall on shoe-
maker or nobleman alike, but nevertheless the govern-
ment could not be bettered. Florence is full of
delightful houses, excellent streets and inns, and it
is very cleanly and well ordered, with magnificent
churches and monasteries. Its hospitals are un-
equalled in the world. ‘There is one for men and one
for women, so clean and well ordered and provisioned
that if it happens that a king or prince falls sick, he
Straightway leaves his house and goes there in order
to be nursed. Moreover, there are pardons for those
who live in them, and plenary indulgence for those who
die there. Who can measure the good work which is

227

TRAVELS 2-OF PWR Om lead

done in these hospitals? Each sick person is lodged
according to his station, but the treatment is the same
for all. In what will so wise a people not do well?
Indeed, Florence has ever produced great and valiant
men in science, and it is so to this day.

The great church of this city is very notable. There
are also wonderful buildings, particularly the tower at
the door of the church, which is adorned almost to the
top with marble statues. There is a great square in
front, and in the centre is a very great church worked
with mosaics within, and covered with lead without.
They call it the church of St. John the Baptist. In it
is a great baptismal font, as well as an altar where they
say Mass, and high up are suspended the banners of
all the cities which belong to Florence and are governed
by her; for by good government she has gained much
territory, and even the city of Pisa, to which Florence
was once subject, but now her lords hold it in their
hands.

This city of Pisa, they say, owned at one time the
islands of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica, with vast
provinces on the mainland. But once a ship passed
which carried a cardinal and certain prelates, am-
bassadors from the Pope to the King of France, without
giving the accustomed salute. Thereupon the Pisans
flew to arms, and captured and burnt the ship, and the
Pope, when he heard of it, was so incensed that he
ordered war to be declared and proclaimed a crusade
against them, and did them great damage. But on
the entreaty of certain kings and princes, the Pope made
an end of his wrath, on condition that the culprits
should be absolved if they set out and captured the
Holy City. Then the Pisans prepared a great fleet
and passed over the seas, and took Jerusalem with its
dependencies, and remained there some time, but finally
they found it was too costly to retain the city and they
sold it, from which a& all their evils are believed to

228

Pa Say

have come. It is to be doubted if there is now a single
natural-born Pisan in the city. They had also to pull
down their buildings, and, further, as a mark of dis-
honour, to wear their helmets reversed. Thus they
are disdained by all men and are subjugated to those
who were their servants.

It is said that when they captured Jerusalem, the
Venetians and Genoese were also there, and after the
city was taken they divided the treasure which they
found into three parts. In one they placed the Holy
Grail, which is made of a single emerald, in the second
they placed two columns, in which each one can foresee
the evils which are to befall him and whatever he
desires, and in the third they placed the treasure.
They then threw lots, and the Holy Grail fell to Genoa,
where it now is, as I myself have seen,” the columns,
with the city of Jerusalem, came to the Pisans, which
columns they brought to Pisa, and Venice took the
treasure which is the foundation of all its wealth, but
the columns which were brought to Pisa lost their
virtue when Jerusalem was sold.

There is a very notable church and a cloister, the
soil of which is from the holy field at Jerusalem, which
was purchased with the thirty pieces of silver. It is
called here in Pisa the Campo Santo. ‘They say that
bodies interred here do not endure more than thirty
days, as the earth consumes them. Without doubt,
Pisa was formerly a great place. Its harbour is a
river which reaches to the city, and the galleys enter
and go out there. But Leghorn, which is close at
hand, is the principal harbour for galleys and ships.

I departed from Florence, and came to a town which
they call Firenzuola. It is in the mountains of Pistoia,
and it was there that Hannibal won the battle of Cannae.
Close to Firenzuola, surrounded by a river, is a field,
all burnt,° and if they throw wood in, it is consumed
at once, but no fire appears nor anything that burns,

229

TRAVELS (OR2 PER Oma Aras

which is a great marvel. I climbed those mountains,
which are very rugged although well populated, and
came to the great and famous city of Bologna. From
there I travelled to Ferrara, and took my horses which —
I had left there at bait, and they had grown very fat,
and I sold them and returned to Venice. Here I
Stayed a month waiting for a ship, and finally I found
one which was bound for Sicily, and I collected all that
I had and went on board.

230

CHAPTER XXIX

The homeward journey.—Ravenna.—Brindisi —The Straits of Messina.
—The Sirens —Lipari Islands —Palermo.—Syracuse —Mount
Etna —Tunis —S ardinia.

Departinc from Venice we coasted along Italy to a
city called Ravenna, a very ancient place, and from
there we came to Rimini which belongs to the Count
of Urbino da Malatesta. We then went to Pesaro
and Fano, two fine cities, and arrived at last at Ancona,
which is of the patrimony of the Church. We sailed
thence for the port of Brindisi, which is as fine, or
finer, than any I have seen. It is in the territory of
Apulia, which they call Tierra di Lavoro. The next
day we departed, and after doubling the Cape of
Spartivento, and sailing to the right, as we had a favour-
able wind, we came that evening to the island of
Sicily, and we lay out at sea until the following day.
We then came with good weather through the Straits,
leaving Calabria, which is in the Kingdom of Naples,
on the right, and Sicily on the left, and after much
labour, by reason of the strong currents thereabouts,
we anchored at the city of Messina. These Straits,
according to the poets, were the home of the Sirens.
They say that Naples and the island of Sicily were at
one time joined together and formed one country,
and that an earthquake broke off this island. Here
the sea is deeper than anywhere else.

They say, also, that there is a species of fish in these
parts, formed like a woman from the waist upwards,
and below like fish, and these creatures live in the
depths where the first movements of the wind can be
noticed, and when they feel the motion, if it is very
Strong, they know that a great Storm is brewing, and

295

TRAVELS OF (PERO ak

they show themselves on the face of the waters, singing
asong. ‘They say that to hear it is certain death. It
is a sad song, lamenting the fate of those to whom they
appear. Death comes to all who hear it, because they
sing only when the storm rages mightily and none can
escape, except bya miracle. The port of Messina has
very deep water, so that a great ship can ride at anchor
with its bowsprit on land. It is closed by a spit of
land which looks like an artificial mole. At one end
is a monastery of Greek monks,' and at the other end
is the dockyard. ‘The city has many large buildings
and is very ancient, and the poets, orators and his-
torians of old wrote much concerning it, especially
in the First Punic War. It is sufficiently well walled
and there are beautiful gardens within and without,
and it is well watered. Although it is now somewhat
sparsely inhabited, one can see that it was once a great
city. Over against it, towards Calabria, there is a
place called Reggio, and the Straits are so wide that on
a clear day it is only just possible to see a man riding on
horseback on the beach on the other side.

I left Messina and came to Patti, a small town in
the same island, and there in front is the island of
Vulcano, which, they say, is one of the three mouths of
Hell, because it throws up smoke continually, with
noise of thunder, and large quantities of scoria, which
latter are so light that they float on the water. Close
by is another opening which they call Stromboli, as
furious as the other. Adjoining is an island which
they call Lipari. It is a small place, and by reason of
the smoke from Stromboli, those that live there suffer
much from their eyes. It is the chief seat of a bishop-
ric. I saw there, as I was trying to land, the biggest
fish I have ever beheld. It was as large as a very great
tower. We rode there that day as our ship could make
no headway on account of the great calm. A large
Moorish galley with two small ones was cruising about

299

PALERMO-—SYRACUSE

and drew near us, but did not venture to attack us;
So we passed that day until Vespers, when a fresh
wind sprang up and filled the sails, and we sailed all
that night, and the next day at dawn we drew near
to Monte Pelegrino, which is above the harbour of
Palermo. We anchored in the harbour and came on
shore, as the captain had business there, and we re-
mained for six days.

Palermo is as large as Seville, and since the King of
Aragon made war on Naples, the city has been much
enlarged, and there are now more inhabitants. It is
the chief place of traffic in the island. It is the seat
of an archbishopric. The cathedral is about two miles
distant from the town, and in it they crown and bury
the kings of those parts. It is a magnificent church,
most richly adorned, and it has the finest mosaics of
any I have seen in Latin countries. It is called Mon-
reale.* The city of Palermo is very wealthy on account
of its trade. It is well provided with all things, and in
addition to being in a great country, it is one of the
largest cities there. It is remarkable for its sugar
canes. Monte Pellegrino is a very high mountain,
with much water and large pastures. ‘They say that
if any beast is likely to die, as soon as they take it to
that mountain, in eight days itis well. This city sends
large supplies to the King of Aragon at Naples, pro-
visions as well as horses, and they build ships for him
called tafareas, which carry sixty horses or more.

I departed from :Palermo and went to Trapani,
which is at the end of the island, a very good harbour.
There is a tower there which they call Columbaria, and
close by it they fish for coral.® It is a pleasant place
and well built. Above it is a high mountain which
they call Monte Trapani, where lies the body of
Anchises, father of Aeneas. We departed and sailed
round the island towards the east, and came to Girgenti.
Thence we sailed to Syracuse, a pleasant city, belonging

233

TRAVELS OF PERO iat

to the Queen of Aragon, sister of King Juan, our
Master. We next came to Catania which is on the
slopes of Mount Etna, the third mouth of Hell. Here
we took in cargo, and three days later we sailed for
Sardinia, but as we drew out to sea an east wind from
Greece arose and carried us towards Tunis. After
sailing a day and a night, the next day at three o’clock
we came to Cape Blanco, the port of Tunis. I desired
much to go on shore to see the town, but the captain
would not suffer it, as he intended leaving at once.
The harbour of Tunis is very shallow so that ships
cannot enter it, and they unload their cargoes into light
boats. We remained there one day, and then sailed
for two days and nights, and came to the island of
Sardinia, which belongs to the King of Aragon, and
entered the port of Cagliari, which is a fine place.
We discharged our merchandise and remained there
two days. ‘This island is very unhealthy, having bad
air and bad water. ... (Here the narrative breaks

off.)

<The ea

Ny

+e

#
by
» <t
.
’
=
“4
-Z.

“i
‘a
é

a
ap
>
yan

‘
Pte
=f
+
=
3 <
ioe
4 .
Se

\

5
S

c
9 SOX Nymwegen
NN EES *\Cleves
hente "Antwerp

* * ines
Brugsels. . Louvain

“Arras i a eae
te x\Poblens
Poors, ®\ Maing Frankf
i
‘ 5 :
a?
i) ~/ Strasburg Nox
f Ulm >
i Zi ee
f FFh,
Basle- Siren
PUCERNES ee

oo a “
S*Gothard lig ms
Gotherd Sona wil? i

——— \}}. sen Lucar

adiz

MAP

o~ iMustratin

1455 14.39.

tienna

Suda Pesth

Adrianople . 2
Constantinople ¢

> Wer < tylene

Soe é it) es
, iy; =

Beyrout

Jaffa
| e Jericho
eee hie em? | a

[face p, 234

oS EY PY oem det

sur at Say

oh at
MA

NOTES

CHAPTER I

* Don Enrique, Count of Niebla, a famous soldier of his time. His
abortive attack on Gibraltar must have taken place at the end of 1435,
as T'afur’s arrival at Genoa can be dated quite definitely (see ch. ii,
note 6). Several Spanish chroniclers give the date of Niebla’s death
as 1436, but that the attack on Gibraltar took place before the rising
in Genoa is clear from Tafur’s narrative. The news of the revolt
at Genoa reached King Juan early in January 1436 (Cromica de Don
Fuan Il, ch. i). The news of the Count of Niebla’s death reached
him later (Crézica, ch. iii). I cannot explain the discrepancy, but it is
unlikely that Tafur can be wrong as to these happenings, since he took
part in the one and was an eye-witness of the other.

2 ‘The King, about whom we hear so much in Tafur’s narrative, was
Juan II of Castille (1406-1454). His daughter, Isabella the Catholic,
married Ferdinand of Aragon.

* Christmas Eve, 1435.

CHAPTER II

1 ‘This church cannot be identified.

2 "The Doge was either Tommaso Fregoso or Isnardo Guarchi.

8 The legend concerning the founding of Genoa is carved on the
nave arches of San Lorenzo, where it has remained since 1307. See
Carden, Gezoa, London, 1908, p. I.

* 'The Sacro Catino is still preserved. It was taken as part of the
spoils of Caesarea in 1101. It is in fact made of glass. It was sent to
Paris and reclaimed in 1815, but being carelessly packed it broke on the
way. ‘The fragments have been united by a setting of gold filigree.

® In 1373, as a result of the murder of some Genoese merchants,
a fleet was sent to Cyprus and the King (Peter II) was brought back as
a prisoner with hisuncle. The island was heavily fined and Famagusta
was made over to Genoa to secure the King’s ranson. ‘The son born
at Genoa was the child of the uncle. He became Janus I] and died in
1432. His son Janus III was the King when Tafur visited Cyprus.
See below, pp. 64 f. and pp. 103 f. Also Stubbs, Lectures on Medieval
and Modern History, pp. 225-228.

6 The commercial aétivity of Genoa during the Middle Ages was

235

TRAVELS "OF {PERO ae

much hindered by internal dissensions. The city was forced to accept
foreign dominion, successively German, Neapolitan and Milanese.
The troubles which Tafur witnessed arose out of the defeat and capture
of Alfonso of Aragon by the Genoese at a sea-fight off Ponza in August
1435. Alfonso had claimed the Kingdom of Naples on the death of
Joanna II, and Genoa had been dragged into the quarrel. Having
captured the King of Aragon, the Genoese were furious to find that
the prisoner was to be taken to Milan, where the Duke received him as
a friend and ally. The rising took place at the end of Dec. 1435.
The governor, Oppizino d’Alzate, was slain, and the Milanese were
driven out. Carden, Gevoa, pp. 39-41. :

7 Francesco Sforza (1401-1466) was in the midst of one of his
bewildering wars. Having fought for Milan against Venice, he was
now fighting for the Pope, Venice and Florence against Milan.

8 Niccolo Piccinino (1386-1444), one of the most notorious of
the Italian condottieri.

® On Florence, see below, p. 227.

10 Asa result of his disputes with the Council of Basle, and threatened
by the Visconti and by a republican rising, Pope Eugenius IV fled from
Rome to Florence in June 1434. He lived for more than 8 years as
an exile. Gregorovius, Rome in the Middle Ages (Eng. translation),
VII peas:

114 On Ferrara and the Marquis see below, pp. 176 ff.

12 Venice is described in detail below, pp. 156 ff.

18 “Lo Storione” was one of the popular inns on the Rialto.
The sign appears in a pi€ture by Carpaccio “‘ II Patriarca di Grado.”
See E. Zaniboni, 4/berghi Italiani (sec. xiii-xviii), Naples, 1921, p. 65.

CHAPTER III

1 On Rome in 1436 see Gregorovius, Rome in the Middle Ages
(Eng. translation), VII, i, p. 89. With Tafur’s remarks on the wild
beasts compare Gregorovius, VI, ii, p. 618, where it is stated that in
1411 five large wolves were killed in the Vatican Gardens.

2 On Constantine’s Basilica see Marucchi, Basiliques et Eglises de
Rome, 2nd.ed. 1909, pp. 110 ff. with plans and drawings. The founda-
tions of the existing church were laid in 1506.

* The obelisk was placed where it now stands by Sixtus V in 1586.
A careless reading of the inscription may have led to its being taken
for a memorial to Caesar. Higden tells us that it was a saying among
pilgrims that anyone creeping under the obelisk was cleansed from sin.
F. M. Nichols, Te Marvels of Rome, London, 1899, pp. 71-73 and
notes. ;

* I cannot explain this unless it is a confused reference to the Porta
Santa which is only opened in Jubilee years.

236

. ~

NOTES

° The picture is still in the chapel. The reason given for the
exclusion of women is certainly startling. Usually the prohibition
is connected with the death of John the Baptist.

® ‘This must refer to the famous equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius
which then stood in front of the Lateran church. See E. Rodocanachi,
The Roman Capitol (Eng. translation), pp. 131 ff.

? On the various legends conneéted with this colossus see F. M.
Nichols, Te Marvels of Rome, 1889, pp. 62, 102 ; also G. McN. Rush-
forth in Fournal of Roman Studies, 1919, p. 14.

® On the legend of Augustus and the prophecy of the birth of Christ
see F. M. Nichols, op. cit., pp. 35, 90.

® The Pantheon.

10 S. Silvestro in Capite.

11 "The Arch of Severus probably gained the name here given to it
from a careless reading of the inscription. Nichols, op. cit., p. 11.

‘2 ‘The place called Ad Aquas Silvas, now the Tre Fontane. ‘The
existing church of S. Paolo alle Tre Fontane dates from 1560. ‘Tafur
refers to the church of S. Anastasio alle Tre Fontane given in 1190
to St. Bernard who founded there a convent of Cistercian monks.

18 A reference to the Statues of Marforio and his friend and gossip
Pasquino who carried on the famous dialogues, merciless to the govern-
ment and the times. ‘These dialogues were placarded at early morning
on their respective pedestals.

CHAPTER IV

1 Braccio da Montane (1368-1424), a notorious condottiere, the
companion and opponent of Sforza.

2 ‘The Count was Guid’ Antonio da Montefeltro, son of Antonio,
Count of Urbino and Montefeltro, whom he succeeded in 1404.
His piety was remarkable, and it is possible that on his death in 1442
Steps were taken, as Tafur suggests, to canonize him, but nothing came
of it. See Dennistoun, Memoirs of the Dukes of Urbino, 1851, I,
pp- 38/7. It is difficult to understand the reason for the subterfuge
adopted by ‘Tafur here.

3 On Venice see below, pp. 156 #7. ‘The pilgrim traffic was very
carefully controlled at this time. A number of contracts between
pilgrims and galley-masters have been preserved. On the whole
subject see M. M. Newett, Canon Pietro Casola’s Pilgrimage to Ferusa-
lem (1494), Manchester, 1907, Introd. and R. Rohricht, Deutsche
Pilgerreisen nach dem heiligen Lande, Innsbruck, 1900. Full details
concerning the preparations, the setting out and the whole pilgrimage
from beginning to end are contained in The Book of the Wanderings of
Brother Felix Fabri (1480-1483), translated by Aubrey Stewart, 1892,
2 vols. (Pilgrims’ Text Society). ‘There is an interesting description

sah

TRAVELS ‘OF IP BRO jn Aol s

ofa galley and of the life on board, at Vol. I, pp. 125 #7. Fabri’s account
is pleasantly summarized by P. S. Allen, in Te Age of Erasmus, Oxford

1914, pp. 238 ff.
CHAPTER V

1 Ladislaus, King of Naples (1386-1414), a soldier of great courage
and ability. It was Zara which he sold to the Venetians for 100,000
florins in 1409. Corfu, with the rest of the Ionian Islands, was ac-
quired by Venice in 1205 as part of their share of the spoils of the
Greek Empire, but Venetian control was not definitely established
until 1368.

2 Fabri (I, p. 184) also describes the island and monastery.

3 There is a long description of Modone in M. M. Newett, Canon
Pietro Casola’s Pilgrimage (1494), Manchester, 1907, pp. 191 ff.
In 1204 the Morea fell to Venice on the division of the Byzantine
Empire. Modone and Corone were the chief strongholds. In 1500
they were taken by the Turks.

* Probably the isolated rock of Monemvasia from which our ancestors
obtained their malmsey wine. See W. Miller, Essays on the Latin
Orient, Cambridge, pp. 231 ff.

° Crete also passed to Venice in 1204, but the new dominion was
not readily accepted and there were many revolts. ‘Tafur must be
referring to the rising of 1362; as to which see W. Miller, Essays on the
Latin Orient, Cambridge, 1921, pp. 183 7. Whenthe Venetians were
again masters the whole plateau of Lasithi, one of the most fertile
distriéts in Crete, was converted into a desert, and nothing was suffered
to be sown there for nearly a century.

® The Knights Hospitallers, or Knights of St. John, conquered
Rhodes in 1309 and were given the estates of the Knights Templars
in 1312. ‘They were driven out in 1522. ‘Tafur returns to Rhodes
later and describes the election of the Grand Master (p. 108). The
Collachium, a term said to be derived from the Latin co//igere, was the
part of the town in which the principal buildings of the Order were
collected and where the Knights had to reside. See De Balabre,
Rhodes of the Knights, Oxford, 1908, p. 96 (plan at p. 22).

CHAPTER VI

* The pilgrim ships had to lie at Jaffa often for days awaiting the
arrival of the Governor of Jerusalem and the Prior of Mount Sion.
The Prior’s business was to see that the pilgrims were accompanied to
Jerusalem and to make what arrangements he could for their comfort.
The Turkish officials took down the names of the pilgrims and of their
parents, and full particulars as to their position, and then issued passes,
after which the pilgrims were thrust into a row of caves on the sea-

238

NOES

shore, known as St. Peter’s Caves, where the filth was indescribable.
Rohricht, Deutsche Pilgerreisen, p. 17. Here they remained while
the question of tribute was arranged. Possibly Tafur, by reason of
his rank, escaped these horrors. ‘The pilgrims were then allowed to
depart, and set off on asses for Jerusalem. ‘There is a picture of a com-
pany setting out in E. S. Bates, Touring iz 1600, London, 1911, p. 210.
‘Tafur’s account can be supplemented from the relations of Fabri,
Casola (already referred to), Bertrandon de la Brocquiére (1432-3) in
Thos. Wright, Early Travels in Palestine (Bohn’s Library), and many
others. Much useful information is given by P. S. Allen in The dge
of Erasmus, Oxford, 1914, pp. 244 ff. Breydenbach’s Itizerarium
(1483) was the first account to be printed with views of the places
visited. ‘These very important woodcuts are reproduced in Hugh
Wm. Davies, Bernard von Breydenbach and his Fourney to the Holy
Land, London, 1gtt.

? The Church of the Holy Sepulchre was only opened twice a year,
from Good Friday to Easter Monday, and from the Vigil of the In-
vention of the Cross until Vespers following. Fabri, I, p. 429. The
guardians remained locked in until the arrival of the next season’s
pilgrims. Jdid.p.428. They were fed upon food handed in through
holes in the door. Fabri has left us a moving description of a night
spent in the Holy Sepulchre, rendered hideous by the yells of Eastern
Christians, the bargaining of traders, and the visitation of innumerable
fleas. did. pp. 429-30. For a description of the church and the
holy sites within its walls, see 4 Brief Description of the Holy Sepulchre,
by G. Jeffery, Cambridge, 1919.

* The inscriptions are not given by Tafur, but the original editor
has printed them from other sources. Both tombs were destroyed
in the fire at the beginning of the rgth century.

4 ‘There is a description of the Dead Sea fruit in Curzon’s Visits to
Monasteries in the Levant, ed. by D. G. Hogarth, Oxford, 1916, p. 228.

5'The Mosque of Omar marks the site of the Temple of Solomon.
Mandeville says he saw the inside, and William of Tyre has described
it, but Christians were rigorously excluded. ‘Tafur’s account is there-
fore all the more valuable.

® On this ceremony see Rohricht, Deutsche Pilgerreisen, p. 21, and
authorities quoted at p. 70; also Favine, Tzeatre of Honour, 1623,
p- 383.

CHAPTER VII

1 See above, p. 28, and ch. ii, note 5.

2 Ines or Agnes Lusignan, sister of Janus IT of Cyprus.

° Janus III, son of Janus II, was born in 1415 and succeeded his
father in 1432. He was a weak and vicious man, and when he died in
1458 the royal house was practically extinét. His only legitimate

239

TRAVEES (OF (PEROT Aree

child was a daughter, Charlotte, who succeeded him, but it was now
merely a question between the Venetians and Genoese, which should
take the island. Venice entered into full possession in 1489 and held
the island for 82 years against the Turks. The Cardinal was Hugo |
de Lusignan, the brother of Janus II.

* Monstrelet (ch.xxxix) calls this Knight Sir Galeran Savary, and
says he threw himself over the King’s body, crying out in the Syrian
language : “It is the King.” Janus II plundered the shores of Egypt
and aroused the vengeance of the Mameluke Sultan who attacked the
island in July 1426 and captured the King. His captivity lasted
15 months. Ransomed at enormous cost he returned, broken and
dispirited, and in 14.32 he died.

° Monstrelet (ch. xxxix) gives a very different version. He says the
captives were bound two and two like beasts, and that the King, like-
wise bound, followed on a mule.

CHAPTER VIII

1 On the use of carrier pigeons here, see Pilgrimage of Symon Semeonts,
by Mario Esposito in Geographical Fournal, Nov. 1917, p. 349 (1322-
23); Schiltberger, Boxdage and Travels, Hakluyt Society, p. 53 ; and
RGhricht, Deutsche Pilgerreisen, p. 24.

2 The medieval name for Old Cairo.

* I have preserved Tafur’s expression, which is much more attractive
than “ crocodiles.” The beast next described is, of course, the hippo-
potamus.

* Doubtless some kind of Dervish.

5'The Mamelukes were the enfranchised slaves who constituted the
court and officered the army, and from whose ranks the Sultans were
drawn. ‘The Sultan who received Tafur was Barsbai, proclaimed
1422 with the title Malik al-Ashraf. Schiltberger (c. 1420) also
notes that no person could be Sultan unless he had been sold. Travels
and Bondage, Hakluyt Society, p. 51.

* Mandeville (ch. vii) has much to say about this balm and the
craft by which the Saracens counterfeited it for sale to the Christians.
An azumore is about half a gallon, English measure.

7 On this denomination of the Pyramids see M. Esposito. The
Pilgrimage of Symon Semeonis in Geographical Fournal, 1918, Feby.
p. 87.

8 Six arrobas=24 gallons. Semeonis also saw the elephants and a
giraffe at Cairo. Geographical Fournal, Feby. 1918, p. 86.

° Curzon witnessed exactly the same procedure 400 years later.
Visits to Monasteries in the Levant, Oxford, 1916, p. 78. -

*° "This seems to be a game of polo, the most ancient of all games of
stick and ball.

240

NOTES

CHAPTER IX

+ ‘The journey to Mount Sinai was a very terrible experience and
it was said that no pilgrim ever made the journey twice. See for the
adventures of later travellers, E. S. Bates, Touring in 1600, London,
IQII, pp. 223 f#.; Rohricht, Deutsche Pilgerreisen, p. 23. There is
an excellent account of the monastery as it is to-day, and of the
famous library, where Tischendorf is still referred to as “‘ the thief,”
in Mount Sinai, a Modern Pilgrimage, by A. Mary R. Dobson,
London, 1925. The traffic in mummy survived until the 18th
century.

2 Tafur is hopelessly out here as regards distance, but his meeting
with Nicolo de’ Conti is extremely interesting. ‘This amazing traveller
was a Venetian of noble family who when a young man resided in
Damascus as a merchant. It is not known in what year he started on
his travels to the East, but he passed through Persia, sailed along the
coast of Malabar, visited some parts of the interior of Hindustan and
also the islands of Ceylon, Sumatra, and Java. He afterwards went
to the south of China and on his return he passed along the coast of
Ethiopia, sailed up the Red Sea and reached Cairo, where he lost his
wife and children. He returned to Venice in 1444 after many years’
absence. He besought the Pope to absolve him from his apostasy, and
as a penance the Pope ordered him to relate his adventures to Poggio
Bracciolini, the Papal secretary. Poggio wrote them down in Latin,
but they were not printed until 1723. An English translation was
issued by the Hakluyt Society in 1857 (India in the 15th Century),
A reference to this volume establishes at once that de’ Conti told
Tafur much that he did not relate to Poggio. On de’ Conti see the
Introdu@tion to the Hakluyt volume.

$ Prester John was a fabulous Christian monarch of Asia. ‘The first
mention of him occurs in a chronicle of Otto, Bishop of Freisingen
(1145). In 1165 a letter was circulated throughout Europe purporting
to be addressed by Prester John to the Emperor Manuel. Later
Prester John disappears from Asia and is met with in Abyssinia. By
this time, as is clear from de’ Conti’s narrative (see pp. 87 /.), the title
Prester or Presbyter was held by the ruler for the time being. See
F. Zarncke, Der Priester Fohannes, 1876-79. ‘There are many
references to Prester John in Yule’s Cathay and the Way Thither
(Hakluyt Society) and in his edition of Marco Polo.

CHAPTER X
1 See ch. ix, note 3.
2 On Adam’s Peak in Ceylon where Adam’s grave was supposed to
be situated, and which was so lofty that it could only be ascended by
241 R

TRAVELS OF SPERO TARO;

means of chains, see C. R. Beazley, The Dawn of Modern Geography,
III, pp. 137, 269, 303.

ae 4h EE rep a suicide of this nature at the court of the
pagan King of Mul-Java. In modern times an instrument of this kind -
was preserved at a village of Bengal near Nadiya. It was called
Karavat, and was a crescent-shaped knife with chains attached to it
forming Stirrups, so adjusted that the fanatic, placing the edge to the
back of his neck and his feet in the stirrups, by giving the latter a
violent jerk, cut off his head. See Yule, Marco Polo, 3rd ed., Il,
p. 349, where other instances are given.

CHAPTER XI

1 J cannot trace any reference to this corsair nor to the church in
which he is interred.

CHAPTER XII

1 For Tafur’s earlier experiences at Cyprus see above pp. 64 ff.

? King Janus III was twice married: (1) to daughter of the Marquis
of Monferrato and (2) to Helena Paleologus, daughter of the Despot
Theodore of Peloponnese, by whom he had one daughter, Charlotte,
who succeeded him.

3 See above p. 28, and ch. ii, note 5.

* This was Antonio Fluvian of Aragon, elected 1421, died 29 Ot.
1437. His death fixes the date of Tafur’s return to Rhodes. For
‘Tafur’s previous visit see pp. 51 ff. See also de Balabre, Rhodes of the
Knights, Oxford, 1908, p. 19.

5 Jean de Lastic, died 17 August 1454. It is perhaps unnecessary
to emphasize the importance of this detailed description of his eleCtion.

CHAPTER XIII

* Luis de Amaral y Costa. King Juan of Portugal sent him to the
Council of Basle. He was now in the East on a mission to the Emperor.
He was one of the ambassadors taken prisoner with Tafur in the neigh-
bourhood of Mainz. See below p. 206.

? This was the Bull from the Grand Master issued in 1445, claiming
money and help against the preparations being made by the Sultan of
Egypt to attack the island.

* See below p. 124.

* Genoa ruled the island of Chios from 1346 to 1566. It was
controlled by what we should call a Chartered Company known as the
Maona, the members being called Maonesi. See W. Miller, Essays on
the Latin Orient, 1921, pp. 298 ff.

242,

INOS ES

° After the recovery of Constantinople in 1261 the Genoese were
established at Pera where they enforced their own laws and had their
own magistrates. From here they controlled their Black Sea trade,
the principal establishment there being at Kaffa which Tafur visited
later. See pp. 132 ff. and Heyd, Commerce du Levant, 1, pp. 436f;
Il, pp. 287 ff. ‘There is a description of Pera in Clavijo, Embassy to
Samarcand, (1403-6). Hakluyt Society, pp. 47-48. ‘The colony dis-
appeared with the Empire. See below p. 149.

° ‘This was the real Emperor who had been exiled by his brother.
Tafur met the usurper at Trebizond later. See p. 131.

CHAPTER XIV

* ‘The date of the institution of this Order is uncertain, but it seems
to have been founded by King Juan II of Castille in 1420, to attraét
nobles and vassals to his Standard. ‘The members vowed to defend the
Kingdom against the Moors, to obey the Master and to die if needs be
for the Faith.

? ‘The Emperor John VIII Palaeologus, threatened by the Turks,
was anxious to turn the dissensions aroused by the Council of Basle to
his advantage. Which party was prepared to send troops and money
for the defence of Constantinople? Eventually the Pope’s legate
outbid the others and the Emperor departed for Europe on 24 Nov.
1437. ‘Tafur witnessed his departure and met him again at Ferrara.
See p. 175. ‘The main result of the visit to Europe was the union of
the Church, but the Eastern clergy refused to accept it and the Emperor
on his return was greeted with ribaldry and insults. He died in 1448.
Constantinople fell to the Turks 5 years later. Cambridge Medieval
History, IV, pp. 621 ff. ‘Tafur’s account of his family history is
not easy to follow, but the Spanish editor discusses it at length at
pp: 480 ff.

3 In 1204 a powerful fleet of Latin Christians, French, German and
Venetians, setting out on the Fourth Crusade, turned aside from their
holy purpose and besieged and took Constantinople. ‘The Greeks
recaptured Constantinople in 1261, but the Empire never recovered
from the catastrophe. See Cambridge Medieval HiSory, IV, pp. 415 ff.

* The columns and the horses are described later. See below
pp. 164 f.

5 On the capture of Constantinople the Greeks found a new
centre in Nicea round which to rally. Michael Palaeologus, who
had married a princess of the Imperial family, recovered Constanti-
nople on 15 August 1261, and placed the Imperial crown on his head
in the church of St. Sophia. Cambridge Medieval History, IV,

pp. 427 ff.
243

TRAVELS’ OF “PERO MEAT

® Afterwards Constantine XI Palaeologus. He died fighting after
the capture of Constantinople.
7 ‘This was the 24 November 1437.

CHAPTER XV

1 Murad (Amurath) II (1421-1451). Bertrandon de la Broc-
quiere, who saw him in 1433, describes him as “a little, short, thick
man with the physiognomy of a Tartar.” Wright, Early Travels in
PaleStine, p. 346.

CHAPTER XVI

1 Trebizond was then the capital of an independent Empire which
had been set up after the Latin conquest of Constantinople in 1204.
The Emperor John IV Comnenus had recently murdered his father.
The father, Alexios IV, is generally believed to have been alive as late
as 1446, but Tafur’s record shows that he was dead in 1437 or early
in 1438. Finlay’s Greece (Vol. IV, p. 399) needs correction. ‘Tafur’s
evidence is accepted by Mr. Wm. Miller. See Eng. Hist. Review, 1923,
p- 409. ‘Trebizond was annexed by the Ottoman Sultan Moham-
med II in 1461. For a description (1404) see Clavijo, Embassy to
Samarcand, Hakluyt Society, p. 62.

? Kaffa was more than the headquarters of Genoese trade in the
East. It was with Galata the colonial capital of the Latin Orient.
The Genoese may have been established there before 1204, but the
colony probably resulted from the Greek restoration of 1261. Schilt-
berger (c. 1420) describes Kaffa as surrounded by a double wall and
containing 6000 houses within the narrower and 40,000 within the
wider of these defences. It was the seat of a great mission diocese and
in it were six kinds of religious faith. Schiltberger, Bondage and Travels,
Hakluyt Society, pp. 49-50; Beazley, Dawn of Modern Geography,
III, pp. 371, 4773 II, p. 453-

3 ‘Tana and Ryxabaque were names for the Sea of Azov. ‘The
Sea of Bacu is the Caspian Sea.

* Compare Schiltberger p. 48: “they take a piece of flesh, cut it
into slices, place it under the saddle and ride on it, and eat it when they
are hungry : but they salt it first and think that it will not spoil, because
it becomes dry from the warmth of the horse and becomes tender under
the saddle from riding.”

5 'The Don was the great starting point of one of the trade routes
for China. See C. R. Beazley, Dawn of Modern Geography, Il,
pp. 455 Jf.

6 ‘The narrative of this embassy (1403-1406) by Ruy Gonsalez de
Clavijo has been preserved. See translation by Sir Clements Mark-
ham, Hakluyt Society, 1859.

24.4

NOTES

CHAPTER XVII

* On these cisterns see W. R. Lethaby and H. Swainson, Sanda
Sophia, 1894, pp. 19, 196. Clavijo says that ten galleys could float
there (p. 38). A 4o¢a is a liquid measure containing 516 litres. I
cannot explain its use here.

° This was in fact a statue of Justinian which was destroyed by
lightning in 1492. An excellent drawing exists in the Serai Library,
reproduced in J. Ebersolt, Confantinople Byzantine et les Voyageurs
du Levant, Paris, 1919, p. 30. Pierre Gilles, naturalist and author,
who was sent to the Levant by Francis I of France in 1544, found
portions of the statue in the melting house where ordnance was cast.
‘The proportions were colossal: the leg exceeded the height of a man,
the nose was g inches long.

3 Clavijo (1403) saw this picture in the church of S. Maria de la
Dessetria. He says that it was so heavy that it took three or four men
to carry it with leathern cords. Embassy to Samarcand (Hakluyt
Society), p.44. The picture was destroyed when the Turks entered
the city, the Janissaries having cut it into pieces for charms. W.H. Hut-
ton, Cowsfantinople (Med. ‘Towns Series), pp. 263, 266. The picture
seems to have been kept from time to time in different churches.

* This church seems to have been that of the Blachernae. It was
seen in ruins by Gilles (1544). Ebersolt, Cowantinople Byzantine
et les Voyageurs du Levant, Paris, 1919, p. 81.

® The church of the Pantokrator, a triple church founded by John
Comnenus and his wife Irene who died in 1124. ‘The central church
was the mausoleum of the Comneni.

8 The Hippodrome and the Serpent column. ‘The column, removed
from Delphi by Constantine, bore at its first making the golden tripod
which the Greeks consecrated to Apollo after the victory over Xerxes
at Platea. ‘The names of the cities inscribed on the coils may Still
be traced. ‘The three heads have long since disappeared. One is in
the museum. For the history of the column and the inscriptions see
Frazer, Pausanias’s Description of Greece, V, pp. 299 f-

7 Jt is not known to what statue ‘Tafur is referring, nor is the story
found in the records of other travellers.

8 A legend possibly conneéted with the Baths of Zeuxippus, which
were close to the Palace and the Hippodrome.

® The obelisk was brought from Heliopolis by Theodosius and has
remained ever since in the place where he ere¢ted it.

10 Of the buildings which formed the Imperial Palace only the ruins
remain. ‘The reference to the library is interesting, for there has been
much discussion as to its whereabouts.

11 ‘There had been a siege by the Turks in 1422 which lasted from
June to August, but it was abandoned. ‘The Emperor then made peace,

245

TRAVELS “OF “BER Osi os

but on condition that he paid a heavy tribute and surrendered several
places on the Black Sea. Cambridge Medieval History, IV, pp. 689,
690.

CHAPTER XVIII

1 Brusa occupies the lower slopes of the Mysian Olympus. ‘The
city was founded, it was said, at the suggestion of Hannibal. It was
taken by the Turks in 1327 after a siege of ten years and continued to
be their capital until Murad I removed to Adrianople.

2 On Pera see above p. 115.

3 Salonica, after many vicissitudes, was finally captured from the
Venetians in 1430, and 7000 of its inhabitants were sold into slavery.
Cambridge Medieval History, 1V, p. 690; W. Miller, Essays on the
Latin Orient, 1921, pp. 279 f-

* See above p. 48.

CHAPTER XIX

1 'The date of Tafur’s return to Venice was 22 May 1438.

2 A more restrained account of this episode and of the events which
followed can be read in Hazlitt, Venetian Republic, 1st ed. I. p. 420.
‘The Pope was Alexander III. ‘Tradition relates that he came to Venice
in disguise in 1177 and went to the monastery of the Carita, where he
was received as a simple priest or, according to another version, as a
scullion. A Frenchman named Comodo is said to have recognized him.
The story has no historical basis. See G. Tassini, Curiosita Veneziane,
4th ed. Venice, 1887, p. 148. ‘The sea-fight took place on May 26
1177. ‘The rout of the Germans was complete. ‘Three slabs of red
marble in the porch of St. Mark’s point out the spot where Frederick
knelt and the Pope with tears of joy raised him and gave him the kiss
of peace. ‘The legend related by ‘Tafur, telling how the Pope set his
foot on the neck of the prostrate Emperor, is of later date. The picture
is in the Sala del Maggior Consiglio in the Doge’s palace.

CHAPTER XX

+ ‘These famous bronze horses probably adorned the triumphal
arch of Nero and afterwards that of Trajan. Constantine sent them to
Constantinople whence the Doge Dandolo brought them to Venice
in 1204.

? The Campanile was begun in 888 and rebuilt in 1148 and 1329.
It collapsed on July 14 1902, and has been rebuilt.

° The two granite columns were erected here in 1180. One bears
the Lion of St. Mark, and the other, not St. George, but St. Theodore
on a crocodile, the patron of the ancient republic before the body of
St. Mark was brought from Egypt in 827. The columns lay on the

24.6

NOTES

ground for several years until a Lombard engineer, Nicolo, who seems
from some cause, possibly his addiction to play, to have been called
Barattiero, raised and secured them. Biarattiero, seeing that gaming
had been interdicted in Venice, bargained for the grant of a monopoly
in his favour to keep the space between the columns for gaming tables.
Hazlitt, Venetian Republic, 1. p. 433. ‘The concession was made, but as
a corrective the Council ordered that public executions should take
place there. ‘Tafur iscuriously out in his reference to a right of
sanctuary.

* Tafur’s name for crocodiles is cocatriz. See above p. 69.

° The reference is to the traitorous conspiracy of Marino Faliero,
elected Doge in 1354 at the age of 76. ‘Tafur is too generous to his
memory. He was executed on 17 April 1355. Hazlitt, Venetian
Repudlic, rst ed. III. pp. 145 ff.

§ Francesco Bussone, born at Carmagnola, a small village in the
distri€t of Turin in 1390. He was convicted of traitorous dealings
with the Visconti and executed on 5 May 1432.

7 'The Pieta established in 1346 to receive foundlings. See G. ’'Tas-
sin, Curiosita Veneziane, 4th ed. Venice, 1887, p. 559.

CHAPTER XXI

1 The war between Venice and Milan dragged on with intervals
for many years, only ceasing with the death of Filippo Maria Visconti
in 1447. On the whole he was the loser, for Genoa revolted and
Venice extended her frontiers westwards.

2 A galapago is a tortoise—rather a good name for these early
monitors.

* Pope Eugenius decreed the Council of Basle dissolved and sum-
moned another at Ferrara in January 1438. A year later it was trans-
ferred to Florence. ‘The union of the Greek and Roman Churches was
accepted by the Emperor, but the Greek people refused to adopt it.

4 Niccolo III, twelfth Marquis of Ferrara (1383-1441). He was
then 55. ‘Tafur can be wayward in the matter of ages. See pp. 73
and 215. ‘The mention of Galalon is not easy to follow, but Diego de
Valera, Cronica de Espata abreviada, Pt. IV, cap. 9, refers to the subject.
He writes : “ The chronicles of Spain and France say that this [the defeat
at Roncesvalles] was caused by a French count called Galalon, some of
whose descendants are still living in France. And whenever any one
of these dines with others the bread is placed on the table before him
upside down.” Galalon (Ganelon) was the traitor in the Song of
Roland.

> The contemporary evidence concerning this tragedy appears to
have been destroyed, and it is not easy to distinguish truth from fiction.
Niccolo’s first wife died in 1397. In 1418 he married Parisina

247

TRAVELS: OF PERO yal Aya

Malatesta. Her stepson Ugo became her lover, and on the night of 20
May 1425 the guilty pair were arrested and thrust into gaol. ‘The next
day they were executed. The Marquis had many bastards after Parisina’s
death. His third marriage was with Ricciarda da Saluzzio in 1431,
with the stipulation that even if he had sons by her, Leonello, a bastard
born in 1407, should succeed, and Martin V legitimized him. Gardner,
Dukes and Poets of Ferrara, 1904, pp. 37 f-

6 I cannot explain this reference, but she must have been a very
fleet-footed lady.

7 Niccolo Piccinino. Tafur had met him before. See above ch. 1i,
note 8, and p. 30.

8 Filippo Maria Visconti was a son of Gian Galeazzo. He suc-
ceeded on the death of his brother in 1412. He was the last of the
Visconti tyrants and ruled for 35 years. He was extremely ugly and
so sensitive that he scarcely showed himself abroad. He lived in
secret chambers and when he went out he refused all salutations in the
Streets.

® Filippo Maria had no male heir. His bastard daughter Bianca
married Francesco Sforza in 1441. Francesco succeeded to the ducal
throne, after a brief republican interval, in 1450.

CHAPTER XXII

1 ‘The famous condottiere who married the widow of Filippo Maria
Visconti.

2 Tf this is Lucerne Tafur has got his itinerary badly mixed.

3 Adam of Usk crossed this pass in 1402, being “drawn in an
ox-wagon half dead with cold and with mine eyes blindfolded, lest
I should see the dangers of the pass.” Chronicle ed. by Sir E. M.
Thompson, 2nd ed., p. 242.

4 ‘There is a description of Basle at this time by Aeneas Sylvius,
afterwards Pius II, translated in Creighton, Hisfory of the Papacy,
new ed. II, p. 199. ‘The Council assembled in 1431 and dragged on
until 1449.

° D. Juan de Silva, first Count of Cifuentes, Alférez major to King
Juan I. The Alférez major was the officer who had charge of the
standard of a city on the occasion of a royal visit.

° Probably Maria Stein, formerly a Benedidtine Abbey with a
famous pilgrimage church.

7 See above p. 150.

8 ‘The old K6nigsstuhl erected in 1376 at Rhense near Coblenz has
been replaced by a modern restoration. ‘The last Imperial eleGtion
took place there in 1400.

* Icannot identify. It may be Johannisberg, but that is many miles
from Coblenz.

248

NOTES

CHAPTER XXIII

* Dietrich II von Mors, eleéted in 1414, died 1464, one of the most
powerful of the princes of the Church. Notwithstanding 'Tafur’s
hint he took vigorous steps to reform the morals of the clergy.

? Adolf II, first Duke of Cleves 1371-1448. His second wife was
Marie, sister of Philip the Good.

* Arnold of Egmont, invested 1423 with the Dukedom of Guelders
and Zutphen. He died in 1473.

* This cannot be Lille. ‘Tafur must be referring to some small
place close to Bois-le-duc, and has confused the name.

> Philip the Good, who ruled from 1419 to 1467. He married
Isabella of Portugal in 1430, the daughter of Juan I of Portugal and
Philippa of Lancaster.

§ John of Luxemburg, bastard son of Waleram III of Luxemburg,
born 1390, legitimized 1436 and died 1466, one of the foremost soldiers
of his day. He was twice captured in battle. The Order of the
Golden Fleece was bestowed on him in 1433, but not in the manner
related by Tafur. He seems to be confusing Jean de la Trimouille
with the Sire de Montaigu, who was guilty of cowardice and was
expelled from the Order in 1431.

7 Afterwards Charles the Bold, born in 1433, died before Nancy
in 1477. He married in 1468 Margaret of York, sister of Edward IV.

CHAPTER XXIV

1 'The translation of Tafur’s account of Bruges and Sluys has already
appeared in my Bruges and its Pas, Bruges and London, 2nd ed.,
1926. Bruges was still the leading mart of Western Europe, but it was
just past the greatest days of its prosperity.

2 'The Waterhalle, so called from the fac that it was built astride
the Reye. It occupied the whole of the E. side of the Grand’ Place,
but was pulled down in 1787. It can be seen to advantage in the
reproduction from Marc Gheeraerts’ great panorama of 1562 repro-
duced in my book.

3 The reference is to the revolt of 1437. On Whit-Monday in
that year the Duke was cut off at the Bouverie Gate and barely escaped
with his life. A year later Bruges had to submit and a dreadful
vengeance was taken.

4 Sluys, the ancient sea-port of Bruges, is now an inland town,
having been left high and dry by the silting up of the estuary of the
Zwin.

5 Ghent revolted in 1452. Thanks to the strength of its defences
it was able to withStand a blockade of more than a year. But the

249

TRAVELS OFRGPERO aa

defeat at Gavere on 23 July 1453 reduced the rebels to submission.
On 30 July, 2000 of the burghers knelt in their shirts to Duke Philip
and begged for mercy, and the town accepted the most humiliating
terms.

6 In 1415 the Emperor Sigismund gave Antwerp the right to hold
two annual fairs. From that date the town began to prosper as never
before, but it was not until the beginning of the 16th century that
Antwerp became the great centre of the trade of the North. Bruges
was still a formidable rival. See J. Wegg, Antwerp 1477-1559,
London, 1916, and Pirenne, Histoire de Belgique, 11, p. 4.40.

CHAPTER XXV

1 See above p. III.

2 This must have been Duke Stephen of Bavaria—Ingoldstadt,
the son of Duke Frederick of Bavaria—Landshut.

> The Council of Constance which burnt John Hus was summoned
in 1414. See J. H. Wylie, The Council of Constance to the Death of
Fokn Hus, London 1g00 (Ford Ledtures for 1900).

* Not the great inquisitor, but an earlier ecclesiastic who died in
1468. He was one of the ambassadors sent by the Pope to the Council
at Basle.

5 Kaspar Schlick came of a good citizen family in Franconia and in
1416 entered Sigismund’s chancery as secretary. He became the
trusted adviser and friend of the Emperor, who conferred riches and
distinctions upon him. He continued to be chancellor under Albert II
and Frederick III.

§ From this point for several pages Tafur’s account can be supple-
mented from the Wanderbuch of Johannes Butzbach (1478-1526).
A German translation by D. J. Becker of the Latin MS. at Laach was
issued in 1869 at Regensburg. It has been reissued in the Jnse/ Bicherei,
No. 26 (1912). See my article in English Historical Review, January
IQI7.

7 Compare Butzbach, Wanderbuch, chapters vi and vii, and Exg/ish
Historical Review, January 1917, p. 29.

a Frederick II, the ally of the Emperor Sigismund in the Husite
ars.

CHAPTER XXVI

* Albert of Austria, son-in-law of the Emperor Sigismund, succeeded
as King of the Romans in 1437. He died while campaigning against
the Turks in 1439.

* In 1420 the Venetians had conquered the whole of Friuli and had
extended their territory N.W. to the Carnic Alps.

250

NOTES

* The less said about Barbara of Cilli the better. There was, of
course, no marriage with the King of Poland, who was only a boy, but
when Sigismund was in his last illness the Empress conspired against
him with the view of marrying the King of Poland after the Emperor’s
death and acquiring the crowns of Bohemia, Poland and Hungary.
‘The Empress was then 45. ‘The plot was discovered and the Empress
was imprisoned. Albert restored her to liberty, but she died in 1457.
See J. Aschbach, Geschichte Kaiser Sigismunds, Hamburg, 1845, IV,
PP- 3915 395-

* Wladislaus III (1434-1444) was only nine years old when he
became King and only twenty when he died on the battlefield of Varna,
fighting against the Turks.

CHAPTER XXVII

1 'There is a delightful view of Vienna in 1489 from the “ Baben-
berger Stammbaum ”’ in the Klosterneuburg, reproduced in J. Schwerd-
feger, Vienna Gloriosa, Vienna, 1923, p. 26.

2 ‘The Empress Elizabeth was a lady of much courage and determina-
tion. Herson was not born untilafter her husband’s death, whereupon
she caused the sacred crown of Hungary to be stolen and set upon the
infant’s head. ‘The diary of her attendant, Helene Kottanner, who
purloined the crown, is preserved in the K. K. Bibliothek at Vienna
(No. 2920). It was printed by S. Endlicher in 1846 and is the subject
of one of Gustav Freytag’s well-known Bilder aus der deutschen Ver-
gangenheit (vom Mittelalter zur Neuzeit, ch. x). It is an exciting
episode, and there is a very human touch in the description of the baby
as having “little pleasure in his coronation and crying with a loud
voice.”

* Frederick III (1440-1493), the weakest of all the successors of
Otto the Great. For his character see Stubbs, Led@ures on Medieval
and Modern History, p. 387. His son Maximilian married Mary of
Burgundy.

4 See above p. 214.

5 Tl Salone in the Palazzo del Municipio, built by Pietro Cozzo
between 1172 and 1219. ‘The walls are adorned by 300 frescoes
painted after 1420 by Giov. Miretto and others.

6 Pietro d’Abano (1250-1316), Italian philosopher and physician.
He died a natural death, but was twice tried by the Inquisition on
charges of practising magic. He died before the second trial was
concluded and was burnt in effigy.

251

TRAVELS OF, PERO ra Ais

CHAPTER XXVIII

1 In January 1439 the Pope transferred the Council to Florence.
He set out on January 16th, so that the date of Tafur’s arrival at Ferrara
can be definitely fixed. See Creighton, Hisory of the Papacy, new ed.
Il, pp. 340 f. How Tafur saw all he describes and reached Ferrara
2 days after his arrival at Breslau isa mystery. ‘The journey to Vienna
took 12 days (p. 219).

2 This unique engineering feat is described in Hazlitt, Venetian
Republic, isted. IV, pp.141.f. A flotilla of 25 barks and 6 galleys was
carried across the Tyrolese Alps on carriages drawn by men and oxen into
the Lago di San Andrea, and thence across Monte Baldo into the Lago di
Garda. The distance covered was 200 miles and the cost was estimated
at 15,000 ducats or more. It was mid-winter and the ground was
covered in deep snow. ‘The whole flotilla was afloat in Feby. 1439.
Tafur evidently witnessed the transporting of one of the last of the boats.

3 On Piccinino see above p. 30.

4 It is not easy to follow Tafur here. The Pisans joined in the
First Crusade and proved their valour at the capture of Jerusalem, from
which they derived much commercial advantage. ‘The reference is
probably to one of the troubles which fell upon the luckless city in the
13th century. In 1405 Pisa was sold to Florence.

5 See above p. 28.

8 ‘Tafur refers to the singular phenomenon about 14 miles from
Pietramala, at the foot of the Monte di Fo, known as “ I Fuochi.’’
It consists of emanations of inflammable gas, which on being ignited
present something of a volcanic appearance. ‘The flames are about
a foot from the ground and are seen to best advantage at night.

CHAPTER XXIX

1 A Basilian monastery founded by Roger I, transferred to the
mainland when Charles V rebuilt the fort of San Salvatore.

* The mosaics are still the glory of the church and place it among the
finest of medieval churches.

° Trapani is still the chief seat of the Sicilian coral trade.

250

INDEX

Asano, Pedro d’, 224

Adam’s Peak, Ceylon, 87 f.

Adrianople, 126 ff.

Albert IJ, Emperor, 3, 14,
213 ff.3 receives Tafur, 214;
is unhorsed at a tourney, 214;
his character and appearance,
2143 war with the Poles,
215; quarrel with Venice,
2135 223

Alexander III, Pope, 160 ff.

Alexandria, 102

Alexios IV of Trebizond, 130

Alicante, 25

Almeria, 25

Almufiecar, 25

Alps, crossing of, 182

Alva, Don Fernand Alvarez,
Count of, 121

Amurath II, the Grand Turk,
ro, 126 7.

Ancona, 153 /., 231

Andros, 152

Angel, the, inn at Bruges, 197

Angolo, Fernando de, 156;
Juan de, 156

Antioch, 63

Antwerp, 203 ff. ; the Fair, 203 ;
the horse market, 204

Aquileia, Patriarch of, 223

Arles, Cardinal of, 210

Arms of Eastern Empire, 121,
123

Arms, Tafur’s, 121

Arras, 201 f.

Arzila, 23

Asses at Cairo, 72, 101%

Assisi, 4.4

Austria, Duke Frederick of. See
Frederick III
Ayala, Don Fernand Perez de, 209

Babylonia. See Cairo

Baldwin of Jerusalem, 57

Balsam gardens (La Matarea), 77

Barcelona, 25

Basle, 12, 183 #7, 208; baths
near, 184

Bathing establishments near Basle,
184; at Bruges, 200

Bavaria, Duke Stephen of, takes
‘Tafur prisoner, 206, 216

Bear hunt, 216

Bethany, 61

Bethlehem, 58

Beyrout, 54, 63

Bills of Exchange, use of, 16,
Soha tT ied 295202

Black Sea, 10, 129 f.

Bohemia, 211 ff.

Bohemian heretics, 212

Bois-le-duc, 192, 205;
at, 192

Bologna, 30 ff., 230

Bosphorus, 129

Bouillon, Godfrey of, 54, 553
tomb of, 57

Braccio, condottiere, 44

Brandenburg, Margrave of, 214

Bread, usage in connection with,
177

Brescia, Venetians raise siege of,
226 /f.

Breslau, 3, 14, 213 ff.3 extreme
cold at, 217; life in streets of,

217

swans

253

INDEX

Bruges, 13; the Angel inn, 197 ;
the town, 198 ff; its com-
mercial importance, 198; the
Waterhalle, 199; its wealth,
199; a rising against the Duke,
199; his vengeance, 1993
luxury of the people, 200;
mixed bathing, 200; Bills of
Exchange on merchants there.
173,202

Brusa, 149

Brussels, 193 ff.

Bucentoro at Venice, 158

Buda, 222

Burgos, Bishop of, 183, 213, 215,
216

Burgundy, Duke of. See Philip
the Good

Burgundy, Duchess of, 193, 195

Bussone, Francesco, conspires
against Venice, 169

Cabrera, Brother Nufio de, 107

Cadiz, 23

Cagliari, 234

Cairo, 8, 723 life in streets of,
72, 100 #f.; departure for
Mount Sinai, 81; return to,
96

Camels, 83, 101

Campos, Pero Barva de, 156

Cane Facino, 182

Caravan from India arrives at
Red Sea, 83

Carnic Alps, 223

Caro, Juan, a Castilian captain,
II5, 129, 146

Carrier-pigeons at Damietta, 68

Cartagena, 25

Carts, travel in, 193

Castelrosso, 53, 106

Catalans, 23, 97, 105, 110

Cataluna, 25

Catania, 234

Cerina, 105

Ceuta, 24

Charlemagne, legend concerning
his capture of Jerusalem, 147,
211

Charles the Bold, 13, 195

Chioggia, 173

Chios, 110, 1133 fight outside,
110 fF

Cilli, Barbara of, Empress, 215

Clavijo, embassy to ‘Timur - Beg,

13

Ge Duke of, 191; town of,
IgI

Coblenz, 188

Colchis, 63

Cologne, 188, I90 ff, 205;
inns at, 1903; the Cathedral,
191; the bodies of the Three
Kings, 191; monastery of
St.. Ursula, ) F913) then fase
IgI

Columns, the two, at Venice, 122,
165

Constance, 209; Tafur sees a
beautiful woman there, 209

Constantine XI Paleologus.
Dragas

Constantinople, 9, 11, 117 ff

See

138 #3; plague: at, 1385
occupied by the Venetians,
121 ff.3 >kecovered, = 123%

St. Sophia, 139 ff.; the relics,
140; St. Mary’s Church, 141 ;
picture of Virgin Mary by
St. Luke, 1413 church of
St. Helena (Blachernae), 142 ;
church of Pantokrator, 142 ;
excellent anchorage, 1433
Hippodrome, 143; statue
called the Just, 143; Baths of
Zeuxippus, 143; legend con-
nected with walls, 144; Im-
perial Palace, 145; the library,

1453; harbours, -146; the
people vicious, 146; justice,
146; ‘Turkish attack on,
147

254

INDEX

Conti, Nicolo de’, Tafur meets
him at the Red Sea, 8, 84;
he recounts the story of his
life, 84 7., 87 ff.

ag a city of the Tartars, 133,
13

Cordova, Tafur born at, 2

Corfu, the door of Venice, 48 ff,

153

Corinth, Gulf of, 49

Corone, 50

Cos, 110

Council of Basle, 3, 183; of
Constance, 209 ; at Ferrara, 175

Crete, 50 ff, 152, 1713; the
government of, 51 ; its falcons,

51

Crocodiles, description of, 69 ff. ;
Tafur inspects a skin, 103;
at Venice, 165

Cuenca, Bishop of, 183

Cyprus, 7, 28, 533 first visit to,
64; second visit to, 103 ff;
a rising at, 103; King of,
Ser )janus 11], Peter II;
Cardinal of, 65, 167

Cythera, 50

Dalmatia, 48, 153; its safe har-
bours, 48, 154; its barbarous
people, 48 ; its falcons, 48

Damietta, 8, 68 #3 carrier-
pigeons at, 68, 102; weasels
at, 68

Danube, 210

Dardanelles, 114, 150

David, castles of, 55

Dead Sea, 6, 59 #7. ; its fruit, 60

Dervishes, 71

Desert of Egypt, 81

Don, 135

Donceles, Alcalde de los, 209

Dragas, afterwards Constantine XI
Palaeologus, 125, 126, 129,
138, 174

Dragon, Order of, 215, 221

Eagle, Order of, 215

Eger, 211

Egypt, Sultan of, takes Janus II
of Cyprus prisoner, 66 ff;
his palace at Cairo, 733 re-
ceives Tafur, 75; hunts with
leopards, 80

Elche, 25

Elephants at Cairo, 78, 92;
a white elephant, 92

Elizabeth, consort of Albert II,
15, 220; invests Tafur with
Order of the Dragon, 221

England, horses from, 191 ; does
some trade, 198

English merchants at Antwerp,
203

Emmaus, Castle of, 54

Emperor of the East. See John
VIII Palaeologus; an earlier
emperor and his son, 118 ff.

Empress of the East, 118, 1383
rides astride, 145

Eregli, 114, 150

Escama, Order of, 117, 124, 215

Espartel, Cape of, 23

Etna, Mount, 234

Eugenius IV, Pope, 5, 333 at
Bologna, 30; at Ferrara, 174;
leaves Ferrara, 225; at Florence,
227

Falcons, 48, 51, 80

Faliero, Martino, Doge of Venice,
168 ff.

Famagusta, 7, 64

Fano, 231

Ferrara, Council at, 12, 1753
Tafur at, 32, 2303 second visit
to, 174 ff. ; description of, 176 ;
Pope departs from, 225

Ferrara, Niccolo III of, 177 7;
his unfortunate marriage, 177

Fire precautions at Strassburg, 187

Firenzuola, 229

Fish, a monstrous, 232

veel’

INDEX

Florence, 30, 227 f.; hospitals
at, 2273; government, 227;
churches, 228

Fluvian, Antonio, Grand Master
of Rhodes, 52; his death, 107

Foja Vecchia, 112

Foundlings, hospitalat Venice, 170

Francolino, 32, 174

Frankfurt, 205 ; the Fair, 205

Frederick III, Emperor, 16, 222

Friuli, 223

Furs, 127; at Kaffa, 134

Galalon, the traitor, Marquis of
Ferrara a descendant of, 177
Galley, pilgrim, at Venice, 47,

156, 157

Gallipoli, 114, 150

Genoa, 5, 27 #f.; inhabitants of,
28; women of, 29; rising
against Duke of Milan, 29

Ghent, 202 f.; rising against the
Duke of Burgundy, 202; a
bastard son of the Duke killed
before, 202

Gibraltar, attack on, 4, 21 ff;
described, 23

Giraffe at Cairo, 79

Girgenti, 233

Gold, washing for, on Rhine, 186

Gothard, pass of St., 182 /f2

Gozzoli, Benozzo, his portrait
of the Emperor John Palaeo-
logus, 3

Granada, coast of, 25

Granaries of Joseph. See Pyra-
mids.

Greeks, miserable condition of,
128, 137, 146; their fasts, 141 ;
their lamentations, 146; great
hunters, 145

Gubbio, 6, 45

Guelders, Duke of, 192

Guiri, Jacob, a favourite of the
King of Cyprus, 66, 103

Guivara, Don Fernando de, 221

Guzman, Don Enrique. See
Niebla, Count of.

Guzman, Don Fernando de,
prologue addressed to, 19

Guzman, Don Luis de, 31, 33

Guzman, Don Pedro de, 31°

Hippopotamus, 70

Holy Grail, preserved at Genoa,
Dee, Zp

Holy Sepulchre, first visit to, 56 ;
second visit to, 62; Tafur
dubs three knights at, 62

Horses of St. Mark’s, 122, 164

Horses, Turkish, very lank, 126,
128

India, Tafur proposes to visit, 83 ;
Nicolo de’ Conti dissuades him,
86; described by de’ Conti, 90.7.

Ines, the Lady, aunt of Janus III
of Cyprus, 65, 66, 103, 105

Interpreter to the Sultan of Egypt
befriends Tafur, 72 7.

Ivica, 25

affa, reception of pilgrims at, 54,
P pug 5
6

3

Janus II of Cyprus, born at
Genoa, 28, 64; his imprison-
ment at Cairo and release, 65 ff.

Janus III of Cyprus, 7 ; employs
Tafur as ambassador, 67; a
rising against, 103 ; Tafur takes
leave of, 1043 description of
his person, 104 ff.; his pro-
jected marriage, 104

Jehoshaphat, valley of, 57

Jericho, 59, 60

Jerusalem, reception at, 55;
water-supply, 58; the Holy
Places, 6, 55 #., 58 ff, 61

John IV Comnenus, usurping
Emperor of Trebizond, ro, 130,
131, 138; Tafur speaks his
mind to, 132

256

INDEX

John VIII Palaeologus, Emperor,
embassy sent from Europe for, ©
IO, ITO, 1123 receives Tafur,
117 f.; treats him with great |
kindness, 123; goes hunting, |
124; leaves for Europe, 125; |
his state as splendid as ever,
145; a bishop without a see,
145; Tafur is received by him |
at Ferrara, 174 ff.; has the
gout, 1743 attends a meeting
of the Council, 174 ; leaves for
Florence, 225; at Florence,
227

Jordan, a pilgrim drowned while
bathing, 59

Joust. See Tourney

Juan II of Castille, 4, 19, 24, 65,
G2, EtS;, 117, 193;'296, 213;
216, 219

Juan of Seville, interpreter at
Constantinople, 117

Just, statue called the, 143

Justice, administration of, at Cairo, |
76, 99; at Constantinople,
146 f.; at Venice, 169; at
Padua, 224; at Jerusalem, 61

Justinian, statue of, at Constanti-
nople, 140

Kaffa, 10, 132 ff.; slave market, |
133; attack on, 133; market,
134

Knights Hospitallers of Jerusa-
lem, 51 ff.

Kénigsstuhl at Rhense, 187

Lacsendorf, near Vienna, 221

Ladislaus, King of Naples, 49

Lastric, Jean de, Grand Master
at Rhodes, ele@tion of, 108 ff.

Laubenheim, Tafur a prisoner at, |
206 |

Lazarus, site where raised from |
the dead, 61; a dispute with
the officer in charge, 61

|
257

Lebanon, Mount, 63
Leghorn, 29, 30, 229

_ Leopards used for hunting, 80

Leper houses on Rhine, 186
Lerici, 29, 30
| Lila, 193

_ Lipari Islands, 232
| Louvain, 205; the university,

205
Lucerne, 182

Madalon, 59, 60

Mainz, 187; Tafur is captured
near, 206

Malaga, 24 f.

Malines, 193

Mamelukes, 75 ; bought at Kaffa,
133

Maonesi at Chios, 113

Maria Stein, near Basle, 184

Marmora, Sea of, 114, 150

Marshes near Padua, 225

| Mata, Alfon de, 115

Matarea, la, 77

Mecca, 93

Medea, 63

Meissen, Margrave of, 212, 222

Messina, 232; Straits of, 231

Michael Palaeologus recovers Con-
stantinople, 122

Milan, 179 f.; the workpeople,
1793; war with Venice, 173,
226; government, 180 f.

Milan, Filippo Maria Visconti,
Duke of, 12, 29; Tafur meets
him, 180; his men always in

the field, 195

| Modica, Count of, 29

Modone, 49 f., 153
Monemvasia, rock of, 50
Monster at Spalato, 154

Monte Pelegrino, 233

Monte Santo, island of, 151
Morosini, Carlo, 33

Morosini, Silvestro, 32

Mors, Dietrich von, 13, 191, 205

BS)

INDEX

Mosque of Omar. See Solo-
mon’s Temple
Mummy, trade in, 81

Mytilene, 113, 150

Narni, 44

Nazareth, 63

Negroponto, island of, 152

Neustadt, 222

Nice, 26

Nicosia, 64, 103

Niebla, Count of, 4, 21; death of,
22

Nile, rise of, 69, 80; excellent
drinking water, 70 ; Nile boats,

» 713 Prester John sends to find
source, 89 ff.

Nordlingen, 210

Nuremberg, 211 ; the relics there,
211; the manufacture of
armour, 211

Nymegen, 192, 205

Padua, 223 f7.

Palermo, 233

Paphos, town in Cyprus, 68, 103

Parenzo, 48, 156

Parma, 178 f.

Patendorf, a knight of, 210 f, 214

Patras, Gulf of, 49, 153

Patti, 232

Pera, 115, 149

Perugia, 44

Pesaro, 231

Peter II, King of Cyprus, taken
to Genoa, 28, 64

Philip the Good, Duke of Bur-
gundy, 4, 13, 193 /7.; Bruges
rises against, 199

Piacenza, 179

Piccinino, Niccolo, 5, 30, 179

Pietrasanta, 29

Pisa, 29, 30, 228 f.

Pisans at Jerusalem, 229

Pistoia, 30

Plague, See Quarantine

Pos327 i735

Poland, King of, 215; war with
Emperor Albert, 215

Poles, the cogtume of the nobles,
215 ; their hunting, 216

Polo, played at court of Sultan
of Egypt, 80

Portovenere, 29, 30

Prague, 212

Prester John, 83, 87; his election,
87 ff; sends to find source of
Nile, 89 ff.

Pyramids, 78

Quails, hunted at Damietta, 70

Quarantana, Mount, 6, 59; a
French squire falls from the
mountain and is killed, 60

Quarantine at Constantinople,
138; at Milan, 180

Quixada, Gutierre, 156, 194

Ragusa, 48, 153

Rama, 54, 63

Randa, Pedro de la, a corsair,
97 f-

Ravenna, 46, 123

Red Sea, 84, 86

Reggio, 232

Rhense, Kénigsstuhl at, 187

Rhine, swiftness of, 183 ; salmon,
1843 beauty of, 12, 188;
washing for gold, 186; leper
houses, 186

Rhodes, 9; first visit to, 51 ff. ;
the Knights’ quarters. 51;
church of St. John, 523 pro-
vision for strangers, 52; second
visit to, 107 g.; description
of election of Grand Master,
108 ff.

Rimini, 46, 231

Rome, 5, 34 /:3 circuitghn
walls of, 35; population, 37;
bad air, 38; miserable condi-
tion of the city, 42 ff; wild

258

INDEX

beasts there, 43; Tiber, 35;
castle of St. Angelo, 35 7f.;
S. Agata in Suburra, 35;
Vatican, 36; St. Peter’s, 36;
the Veronica, 36; the two
columns at which Christ was
scourged, 373; Judas’s rope,
373; chair of St. Peter, 37;
Julius Caesar’s column, 37;
Ghetto, 38; St. John Lateran,
38 #f.; Tarpeian Gate, 38;
right of sanctuary, 38; Porta
Santa (?), 38; heads of SS.
Peter and Paul, 39; Sanda
Sanctorum, 39; statue of Mar-
cus Aurelius (Mucius), 40;
Colosseum, 40; Palace of
O@avian Augustus, 40; the
legend of the Sibyl, 40;
S. Maria Nuova, 41; S. Croce
in Gerusalemme, 41 ; S. Maria
Rotonda (Pantheon), 41; S.
Silvestro in Capite, 41; Trajan’s
column, 41; arch of Severus,
41; S. Maria in Ara Coeli, 41 ;
S. Maria Maggiore, 42; S.
Prassede, 42; S. Pietro in
Vincoli, 42; S. Anastasio alle
tre Fontane, 42; statue of
Marforio, 43
Rosetta, 102

St. Anna, 58

St. Anthony, 59

St. Catherine, monastery on
Mount Sinai, 82 f., 873 her
houses at Alexandria, 102

St. Christopher, 154, 167

St. Dominic, 31

St. Francis, 44

St. George, 54, 63

St. George (Arm of the Sea),
142

St. Gregory, destroys the ancient
monuments at Rome, 34, 36,
42; mentioned, 35

St. Helena, 39, 56, 60, 122, 1673
church of, at Constantinople,
142

St. James, the Greater and the
Less, 58

St. Jerome, 58, 154

St. John the Baptist, 41, 58, 59

St. Lawrence, 140

St. Luke, pi€ture by, at Rome,
39 ; at Constantinople, 141

St. Marina, 122, 167

St. Mary Magdalene, 56

St. Peter, 37, 39, 58, 180

St. Pol, Bastard .of, 13, 194 fs
196

St. Rose, 44

St. Thomas and the Indians, 55,

94

St. Ursula, 191

Salobrefia, 25

Salonica, 151; taken by the
SEEKS, Kez

Samos, IIo

San Lorenzo, church of, at Genoa,
28

San Lucar, 21, 22, 23

San Pedro, Cardinal of, 183, 184,
209

San Sisto, Cardinal of, 210

Santa Cruz, Cardinal of, 210

Sardinia, 234

Satalia, Gulf of, 53, 105

Schaffhausen, Lake of, 183; falls
of, 186; a grand tourney at,
208 f.

Schlick, Kaspar, 210, 211, 212

Segovia, Juan de, 210

Sestri Levante, 29

Sforza, Francesco, 30, 44, 453
attacks Ancona, 1543; marries
daughter of Duke of Milan,
180

Shell-fish much eaten by Greeks,
TAY, D475 151,153

Sicily, 231

Silumbria, 115, 150

259

INDEX

Sinai, Mount, 7, 8; journey to,
80 ff.; the monastery, 82 ff. ;
departure from, 87

Sinope, 129

Sion, Mount, monastery on, 55; |
Prior of, receives pilgrims, 54, |

ye)

Sirens, 231

Slaves, Tafur buys three, at Kaffa, |

1333 rescues Christian slaves
in the Dardanelles, 150; at
Venice, 163

Sluys, 13, 17, 197, 199, 200 f.5

famine at, 200; a poor woman
and her daughters, 201

Solomon’s ‘Temple, ‘Tafur pene- |

trates into, 7, 61

Spalato, 154

Spezia, 29

Spoleto, 44

Stanphane, monastery outside
Modone, 49

Storm at sea, 26, 106, 110, 152,
153

Strassburg, 187, 208

Stromboli, 232

Sturgeon, the, inn at Venice, 32

Sturgeon caught in the Don, 135

Suarez, Mosen, admiral of Cyprus,
65, 763 saves the King’s life,
66; arranges his ransom, 67 ;
takes ‘Tafur as his guest, 65,
103

Suicide, strange method of, 89

Swans at Bois-le-duc, 192

Syracuse, 233

‘Taborites, 212

Tafur, Juan Diaz, 2

Tafur, Pero, his parentage, 2;
marriage, 2; his after life, 2;
sails from San Lucar, 21 ; joins
in attack on Gibraltar, 21 f.;
at Genoa during rising against
Duke of Milan, 29; overcome
by hardships, 27, 111, 153;

seized with illness at Cyprus,
64; accused of being a traitor,
69; in storms, 26, 106, IIo,
152, 1533 shipwrecked, 111;
chased by Turks at sea, 106;
his family tree, 1173 nearly
married at Constantinople, 124;
speaks his mind to Sultan’s
interpreter at Cairo, 100; to
the usurping Emperor of
Trebizond, 132; is wounded,
150 ; his goods seized at Venice,
1573 cuts off his beard, 175 ;
cured of his wound, 185;
amuses himself at the baths,
185; saves a boatswain from
hanging, 105 ; his gallant con-
duct at Sluys, 200; taken
prisoner on the Rhine, 206;
loses and regains his sword,
206 ; attempt to rob him, 220

Tafur, Pero Ruyz, 121

‘Tartars make good slaves, 1333
a warlike but bestial people,
134, 136 #3 their clothes,
1353; their arms; 136; their
horses and food, 137

Tenedos, 113, 150

Terni, 44

Three Kings,
Cologne, 191

Tierra di Lavoro; 48, 231

Toledo, 120 /f.

Torquemada, Brother Juan de,
210

‘Tourney or joust at Ferrara, 178 ;
at Schaffhausen, 208 ; at Bres-
lau, 214

Trafalgar, Cape, 21

‘Trapani, 233

Trebizond, 130 ff7.; 1383 see
John IV Comnenus, Alexios
IV; exiled Emperor of, 116,
130, 150

Treviso, 223

Troy, site of, 112 ff.

chapel of, at

260

INDEX

Tunis, 234

‘Turk, the Grand, Amurath II,
126 ff.; his state and person,
127 #.; goes hunting, 127,
12

Turks, dress of, 127 ; horses, 126,
128; a noble people, 128;
the name synonymous with
virtue, 69, 128; attack Con-
Stantinople, 144, 147; the
army, 147; ‘Tafur nearly
captured by, 105 ff.

Tusino, Order of, 215

Ulm, 210

Unicorns, 92

Urbino, Count of (Guid’ Antonio
da Malatesta), his kindness to
Tafur, 6, 45

Valencia, 25

Valona, 48, 153

Venetians and Fourth Crusade,
121 ; masters of Constantinople,
121 ff.; transport galleys to
Lake of Garda, 226; and
Emperor Barbarossa, 159 ff. ;
and Emperor Albert II, 213;
encroachments on Imperial
territory, 214, 223; their
honesty, 171 ; their justice, 171

Venice, 12; first visit to, 32 77. ;
use of Bills of Exchange, 32 ;
second visit to, 46 ff.; com-
mercial adtivity, 47, 166; the
pilgrim galleys, 47 ; posessions
abroad, 50 ; third visit to, 156 ;
celebrations on Ascension Day,
156; Tafur’s goods confis-
cated, 157; Piazza of St. Mark,
1§7; church of St. Mark,
1643 treasure of St. Mark,

158 f.; Emperor Barbarossa,
159 #-; Bucentoro, 158 ; pop-
ulation, 163; the gondolas,
163; drinking water, 1643
the four horses, 122, 1643
Campanile, 164; the bells,
164 f.; the two columns, 165 ;
the Doge’s palace, 165 ; croco-
diles at, 165; government of,
165 f.; citizens of, 47, 1663
monasteries, 167; carnival, 1675
condition of city, 167 ; sanitary
arrangements, 167 f. ; the Doge
Martino Faliero, 168 ; justice,
169; arsenal, 169 ff.; found-
ling hospital, 170 f.; carrying
arms in, I713; government
abroad, 171 ; war with Milan,
173, 2263; fourth visit, 226;
fifth visit, 230

Vent’ Domenego, 173

Verona, 227

Vicenza, 227

Vienna, 14, 15, 220 ff.

Villafranca, Mosen, 224

Villandrando, Ferdinand, Count
of, 188

Virgin Mary, picture of, at Con-
Stantinople, 141 ff

Visconti, Filippo Maria. See
Milan, Duke of

Viseo, Bishop of, 111, 206

Viterbo, 44

Voniroc, Jorge, 221

Vulcano, Island of, 232

Weasels at Damietta, 68
Witchcraft in the Red Sea, 93 3
performed by Pedro d’ Abano,

224
Zara, 48

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
BILLING AND SONS, LTD., GUILDFORD AND ESHER
