The Children of the Sun
W. J. Perry, 1923
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Perry's 1923 hyperdiffusionist manifesto — Egypt as the source of world civilization; the ancient-technology canon's diffusionist pole. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/childrenofsun00perr). This 1923 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

t 
a, 
wi 


| cu 

ae ce ee 
Wet Fain Mh ub i aa NG ae i Pe 
Ee An NIE MAH La Ath bh 
Ce HL Ee ua Hist 
CU a uO 


an sy fu bm ai 
i Silly. CE a cit 
3 ‘ i p vail ali 
Ball Be toa Ree 
HE a as a 


NTA 
ae ee CREE an ea TT 


ri AEE HEE 
ae a a Paik 
Ahh 


ip fiat aint 


ha ae Ha 
a iH ihe ae a 
He a 


ane ae a ‘ ee ii 


HH ai 
RRs RE Wey Tian 
rag a aa 


ve a i 


ue Hh iii 
a ae i 


He ae i a 
an at 


pig eak a Re 
es 


—o 


wa ewe a iN | 
mt a i 4 a i 


i 
tf HM TEER iT i Hi} | i i Pip A i . Atif Aran i 
HAAPIKNMBA HB | a ee : ee a 
4 a 


i 
uate 
sb ite BSI AM BILAL a i Rie a Aes at ti ipl eee 
ah a ara wit c i a iW oo i" fr ih i} hehe fia rf od 

ii ‘8 i eh b nd i HEY Hh ott FEB pH BLSUEEA TI 
in tae et i | ee 
Mi i va ‘Tuba a a 


e AHttEl He Hig { a 
tH TE a 
aa a i a oa 
wun au Ny ea i ih 
naa ii Ha i ei HH | 
i iH i it ie 


EB Hite He 
; Hat ih HW 
ny 4 Ad 
ate a BEANE IAD ni ure a NL i a it 


iEieisseee: 


it ay Hi itt Hi 
i fy 


Ite Sy 
Sas = 
Sele 


aaete wep EFT Hi Hea 
Ab i i Muh q a i ann i nent i a Hh HUB E My i Ha Hie at veh ii MIE i 
Lobe eeierann ali a CC EGE | i a 
EEE Haba inosine Ce l Hi 
ne Kak ie ; My Hin nee HHP LIbenC BEE IBID i ( i ie u i i Haat hie. 
ar it i ath i od ae i ; i | it i : a a it a SPE 
a oy Hata a i i) HEAR RR HE i ae ena ad ie Hi m a nn aa 
Leet it aaa Hay par nin i cra HN H He 38 i ath Ra an ELL 
eR ah ii sn inpuIR AN ae an cae | Shh RL inna a He Ue iil 
Mik i He AEA ny ry f Tai nn wr Ae i pH ape ie ie Hil i heh iti ie Ha qa 
bere . Bas ib cath vee Ata aE ; a a 


eT t a fh i n aa i Ht Wt ih a Ap 
ae i 


{ 
HQ Bs RM fee Hib tbe Hei} reall bil t uy Ronen Hineeata a a 
Has i ae ati F ail HUE dl Me 
Bt nh iit tok ini il 


neh a Hit ae Let a a 
Hi a en 


ae te al ' ee aa 

HII i Hi i ESTA hy 

bib: Me 1 Ae i a at i on} et cn al 
mee) ie ih nee 


HES 


ec PSS SRPEL VEN YA CHUAN LATE 
aa 


u 
i i i i Hi a ae 


iN 
aan A Le 
; ch it iu a cae a HH 
ABs vin q non 
i 1 Ha Ha 
Hi 


th Hah ; Be q m3) 
cae es bi Ad a } ist AT a 
hi Aan i i a Ha : ite if ‘ ih Ht a 
i i ie a "i I) 
Flt ia ty oe Wik ane HH a Biting su ee 
Mi Ce aa ea A aH AEA a 
He ia Sait ‘fi ARH 


el ie 
a 


Bit a Hea 


ca Lee IE 
H ‘ i i ii a | i 
nV: re ie i 4 Ht ie Hee hp 
COC EE EE BBO A q Hi ce i iN Ean 
la ve i | Hi ab ai Wiis Hi a ce 4 
H pt, Hi Mit Wa i HH HEH i ea 


es 
Hu 1h bil LAE 
it 


i if a mu 


ae iN fu i He ea 
Huth are Hi et fi i HA Heh ti 
Wi 


Hits 0 


i a Tl 


yas 
idee 
an eatin ier 
tha i i} 
ee 
A it 


923 # 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


¢ 


— Sten | ‘J > € a 
a dd ee PT, 
ithe - Lay 
5 eae) wee 
ion 
w Vas 
; fi 
4 . 
; oan 
ath PS 


m 
ic 


ah 


} | spat 
: eS 
4 ms! is ¥ 


| in ee with funding 
Princeton Theol 


y the Internet Archi 


joe 


logical Seminary Lib 


af ae 


hy in Tiak. 
M, ORS Oe RZ 


See eae ee ve oan vn ie 


ee ee 


, 
; 
1: ‘ v et 
} * d { 
Bert ee -f 
“>: i=] Pm GS A Pe get 
. 7; : we. ; 7 » 3 
ieee: 
ee ; n, Ae 
as 
/ ies 


a ae 
ot a 


> 
ost 


Zn 


ee 9 


 % Ese PREY ae 


tra 
Nah} 
Pehe ¥ 


aie A RDON: 


SHILIIVOO'T LNVINOdN] DNIMOHS ‘NOISY AHL AO dV IVAANAY 


2 


pueresz// 
oN O 


mesuew @ rors 
aye] Pajerey 
BoA: zx) & hy _ 
ae eo £ oz. 
Fowes vid “ nee 
. re ; ‘ » Moo, 
Q 
eipuy © 
y o = cea 
.0 Aus und$en 
nemeyy i ‘ Fy Sex0y © 


vee a7vumns 


THE CHILDREN OF 
THE SUN 


A STUDY IN THE EARLY 
HISTORY OF CIVILIZATION 


ff BY 
YY 
\ @ J. PERRY, M.A. 
READER IN COMPARATIVE RELIGION IN THE UNIVERSITY 


OF MANCHESTER 


WITH SIXTEEN MAPS 


METHUEN & CO. LTD. 
36 ESSEX STREET W.C. 
LONDON 


» 


{ hala a stat 
A A Gia ares 
ok Si UN vs kh 
RLU San a aN Tsu eyal 
ey ig pea by re} i ia iy itn \ a ei Ni : ) mye } a d “hy 
4 , * % ‘ : r 


sa Be oie ; ne RAN ei sitesntbnay yh ah ARRAN 


‘ Z h & } 4 Mets Ay 
hy 5 i ‘ i Mh “A@uetras Vhahlesaida Hay 
is zi 7 i Ky i a) PLA , 
¥ t 
A wh 
wit ve ‘, 
“A 
"a eR 
4 : } } 
5 ‘i i 
' Ma 
‘ ‘ i 1 4 i ; 
‘ 1 i i ; . 
‘ i bh 
Us Ba } ‘ ni 
ty ‘ | 
i 1} 
‘ { ‘ f ( | i 
at, : Pa hea, 
i i | 
i / ) Ri eat jee 
“¢f \ 4 fe auan 4 
Hee pi 
\ 
L 
aie \ 
\ ‘a 
} 1 
. a 
t i f 
e i i ‘ \ 
' 
td pag Yrs ( 
hy) Ast 4 , 
at 4 Ae pi 
5 1 Ue | 
bys) ’ ; 1 ; 
‘ - } 
| iF 
Taw 
4 
if ' y 
i 4 f 
de j 7 f / 
“ - ‘ 
i (| 


wi Wis mah dpa 


¢ 
| 


ase ; 
r ae) i ! 
i oe i 
ite ; 
fore. i ae eel Ny 
ACC be j ted 
Kant yn! i ae 
v VA y j 
Tw) 7 } 
i t 
ae ] 
ri P ig 
Wee he Re 
Fe A Af Mis 
fists “¢ ; 
. } i J 4 
f ‘ ae \ ay f { i 
1A a HELA ACS) ak nee / id ; 
Par te f : } Ph See I BA ah 1 y's) i Whi tea uh 
ie . ; ef r i ADP iia | 
# Ps d ' Aa ; : | Cart 1 t 
d 4 i) 
eae oe { We 
; ay ¥ f ne At hyd a id Gy wii pee PA , 
| . . : iy y 


To 
GRAFTON ELLIOT SMITH 
In Memory oF Many Happy Hours 


7 , i * 
A fa } ‘ i 


> 
= 


fi SDR a. WAC a 
‘i ey Cine RUN Mier Fe #2. | 
x a Okt Saint Lit ad ao ¥ ure ake 


i 
“ : 
\ ' i> 
’ y r 
* 
ce 
- 
4 ‘ 
it - ‘ 
, Bee i 
= : 
*™ 
\ ! , 
NM 
‘ 
{ 
Be } 
i 
74 ® 4 r; ‘ 
' : Yi t 
’ yy 
ys 
; 
iM ’ 
% rr 
* ¥ 
. FAL } 
; ‘ 
- 
i 
»' ¢ 
- 
‘ é 
t ' f 
yy 
* { } 
. ; . Pa %, 
:¥ : 
a ; 
ie 
~ 
re 
y ‘ ‘ iat ] 
i n “ye F ‘ 
7 ~4 
7 airy { 
TO Ab hy 7 , 
' i ' 
rm ' t “y v P 
‘ ' f art ny 
: a pg ‘yy vee 
am | a 1 } 
t i sd « 
ioe, , 


yp PoC oe he ew netng he | ik sail 


4 iP 4 i 
| m : y , 
2 : >i 3 ‘* ‘ , i Pe ‘as We i i 
P ' ae , F tas 
iyd adie anit if en F 
ye 4 a 2 f ! ‘ ; ‘ Mi ‘ae 
‘ 4, 45: 1s, ae i Fe J ie vi; 
‘ eerie 4 : { ¢. I Ay oh 
‘a J j * ; 
> : 7 af ne ‘ey fas » ; ) neue! 
~ 4 ce ag’ | j ‘ a y =! 2 r 
‘ ‘ . i 4 r a 
Py 1 ry a + | j < 7 a 
W Ts \ ’ / , ; Ci 
j U +f] in 2 M ie My ! “ph 7 


PREFACE 


yi N this, my second volume of researches into the early history 

of civilization, I have chosen a wider area, and a more 

extended investigation than in ‘‘ The Megalithic Culture of 
Indonesia.”” As the inquiry proceeds, and general principles 
become clearer, it is easier to manipulate large masses of facts. 
This gives reason to hope that before long it will be possible to 
handle world-wide masses of facts with fair ease, and to set out 
the history of civilization in a limited number of general proposi- 
tions capable of ready verification. 

I have adopted, in this work, the device of sketch-maps to help 
the reader to appreciate the geographical distributions of culture. 
In “ The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia” distribution tables 
were used, but they are not so very satisfactory ‘at this stage of 
the science. Perhaps as time goes on it will be possible to use 
them with greater success. For the present, it seems to me that 
maps help the reader to a greater extent, enabling him to realize 
the manner of spread of culture over wide regions. Through the 
generosity of my publishers, I am able to include sixteen sketch 
maps, fourteen of which are in two colours, which show the reader 
at a glance the relationships between the different sorts of dis- 
tributions that they depict. In the first map I have indicated 
the whole of the region under examination, and have marked 
some of the places that are important in the discussion. 

I have to thank several kind helpers. Professor Unwin, of 
this University, suggested to me the scheme of the book, and 
I owe much to his kindly interest and criticism. Professor 
Canney, and Mr. J. Wilfrid Jackson of the Manchester Museum, 
have helped me in various ways. Miss Winifred M. Crompton, 
Assistant Keeper of Egyptian Antiquities in the Manchester 
Museum, has afforded me constant and untiring help, especially 
in the chapter on Egypt. She undertook for me the laborious 
task of searching the mastaba inscriptions for details of marriages, 
and has thereby supplied me with much valuable information. 

Vil 


Vili THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


I owe her a still greater debt for her able and unsparing criticisms 
with regard to style and exposition. My wife has helped me 
greatly in the laborious task of proof-reading. Heer Kruyt has 
supplied me with much information, and has allowed me to see 
some of his unpublished manuscripts. Mr. H. M. McKechnie, 
Secretary of the Manchester University Press, has given me 
much good advice. I owe much, also, to my colleague, Professor 
T. E. Peet. 

My indebtedness to Professor Elliot Smith does not need 
emphasis. To him I owe the realization of the importance of 
Egypt in the history of civilization ; and it is a matter of grati- 
fication to all those who agree with his views to see that opinion 
is slowly, but surely, coming round to his point of view, so that 
the ultimate justification of his courageous and outspoken 
attitude is assured. If this book contributes in any way to that 
end, I shall feel myself well rewarded. 

I cannot allow this opportunity to pass without. adding my 
small contribution to what has already been said of the late 
Dr. Rivers. To him I owe everything as an anthropologist ; 
and for ten years I had the benefit of his unceasing advice and 
sympathy, as well as, what is equally important, of his unsparing 
and unerring criticism. ‘Those who have come under the kindly 
lash of his tongue will well realize what I mean. He was to have 
seen this book in manuscript, and I was anxious to hear the 
verdict ; but he went from us just a month before it was to have 
been sent to him to read, so I shall never know what that verdict 
would have been. A great and good man has gone from the 
world, and his friends and pupils will never cease to mourn his 
untimely departure. I, for one, would sacrifice much to have 
him back. 


MANCHESTER, 
February 22, 1923. 


CONTENTS 


(The numbers refer to pages) 


CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 


The problem, 1; method of study, 2; the Archaic Cwilization, 2-3; 
Egyptian origin of archaic civilization, 3; importance of human mind in 
history of civilization, 3-4; early thought, 4; early warfare, 4. 


CHAPTER II 


FOOD-GATHERERS AND FOOD-PRODUCERS 


Food-gathering peoples, 5; food-gatherers and food-producers in North 
America, 6-7; in Oceania, 7; in Borneo, 7-9. 


CHAPTER III 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, NORTH AMERICA 


Origin of maize cultivation, 10-12; mound builders, 12-15; Pueblo 
culture, 15-16; Mexican civilization, 17; Maya civilization, 17-18; cultural 
history of North America, 18-19; archaic civilization of North America, 
19-20. 


CHAPTER IV 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 


Remains in Polynesia, 21-4; pre-Maori people of New Zealand, 24-6 ; 
remains in Melanesia, 27-9; in Micronesia, 29-32; pottery-making in 
Oceania, 32; Australia and Oceania, 32-3; Oceania food-plants, 33-7. 


CHAPTER V 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDONESIA 


Results of inquiry into early history, 38-40; remains in Java and Sumatra, 
41; in South Celebes, 41; Hindu influence in Indonesia, 42; Tinguian 
tradition, 43; remains in Cambodia, 44-5; cultural history of Indonesia, 
45, 


CHAPTER VI 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDIA 


Prehistoric age in India, 46; remains near Bellary, 47-8; remains in 
South India, 49-50; in Chota Nagpur, 52-3; in Assam, 53-4; in North 
India, 54; summary of inquiry into culture-sequence, 55. 


1x 


x THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


CHAPTER VII 
THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 


Gold and civilization, 56-8; turquoise mining in the Pueblo area, 58-60 ; 
old mines in Pueblo area, 60-1; railways, minerals and ruins in the Pueblo 
area, 61-3; choice of settlement by Pueblo Indians, 63-4; ancient mining 
in California, 65-6; railways and ruins in Mexico, 66; obsidian and jade 
in Mexico, 67; early Maya settlements, 67-8 ; mounds and pearlsin the Mound 
area, 68-70 ; stone graves in Mound area, 69-70 ; Mexican influence in Mound 
area, 70-1; gold mining in Mound area, 71-2; copper mining in Mound 
area, 72-3; cause of distribution of mounds, 74; mica and other mines in 
Mound area, 75-6; remains and pearls in Oceania, 76-9; gold and obsidian 
in New Zealand, 79; pearls, gold and remains in Melanesia, 80-2; ancient 
exploitation of wealth of Indonesia, 82-3; ancient gold mines in the Malay 
Peninsula, 84-6; pearls in the Mergui Archipelago, 86; dolmen-building 
and early mining in South India, 87-8; iron in India, 88; railways, mines 
and remains in South India, 88-90; native gold-getting in India, 90-2; 
cause of distribution of settlements of archaic civilization, 92-3. 


CHAPTER VIII 
POLISHED STONE IMPLEMENTS 


Polished stone implements in ancient mines, 94-5; Austronesian lan- 
guages, 95-7; polished stone implements in Indonesia, 97-8 ; in New Guinea 
and Australia, 98-9; in Oceania, 99; obsidian implements in Oceania, 99- 
100; polished stone implements in North America, 100-1; cultural 
comparisons based on study of polished stone implements, 101. 


CHAPTER Ix 
THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 


Cultural unity of North America, 102; of Polynesia, 102-3; study of 
tradition, 103-4; Polynesians in India, 104-6; spread of Polynesians, 
106-7; continuity in Oceanic culture, 107-8; absence of migration tradi- 
tions in Melanesia, 108; Malay and Hindu settlements in Indonesia, 109 ; 
cultural history of Borneo, 109-10; Bugi settlements, 110-11; migrations 
in Timor region, 111; Dravidian influence on Batta, 111; population of 
India, 112; Munda history, 112-13; Oppert’s views on Indian history, 
114-15 ; degradation of culture in India, 115-17; spread of Rajputs, 118-19 ; 
caste system, 119-20; history of Assam, 120-1; secondary movements of 
culture, 121-2; culture-heroes in Indonesia, 123; in Melanesia, 124; in 
Australia, 125-7; cultural history of region, 127; meaning of degradation 
of culture, 128. 


CHAPTER X 
THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 
Early kingship in Egypt and Sumer, 129-31; in India, 132; Asuras and 
Dravidians in India, 133-4; Children of the Sun in Indonesia, 135; in 
Oceania, 136; divine kings in Oceania, 136-7; Polynesian myths, 137-8 ; 
divine kings in Polynesia, 138; Children of the Sun in Oceania, 139; early 
history of Samoa, 139-40; Children of the Sun in North America, 141; 
culture-heroes and Children of the Sun in Indonesia, 142; culture-heroes 
in North America, 142-4; Children of the Sun as culture-heroes, 144-5. 


CHAPTER XI 
THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 


Transition from sun-god to war-god in Egypt and Babylonia, 146; in 
India, 146-7; gods in Borneo, 147-8; sun-gods and war-gods in Oceania, 


CONTENTS x1 


148-50; in North America, 150-3; early communities peaceful, 153-6 ; 
culture-heroes and warfare, 156; spread of warfare in Oceania, 156-9; 
in America, 159-61; meaning of fortifications, 161-2; psychological problem 
of warfare, 162; history of warfare in the region, 162-3. 


CHAPTER XII 


RULERS AND COMMONERS: (1) THE DOCTRINE OF 
THEOGAMY 


Children of the Sun as incarnate gods, 164; fatherhood of the sun-god, 
165; traditions of theogamy, 165-8; the birth of culture-heroes, 169; 
origin of war gods, 169-70. 


CHAPTER XIII 
RULERS AND COMMONERS: (2) THE SKY WORLD 


Children of the Sun and the sky-world in Egypt, 171; Sumerian beliefs 
about death, 172; beliefs about the sky-wor!d in India, 172-3 ; in Indonesia, 
173-4; in Oceania, 174; in North America, 175-6; culture-heroes and the 
sky-world, 176-8; Children of the Sun as priests of the sun-cult in Egypt, 
179-80 ; Sumerian cults, 180-1; nature of Vedic religion of India, 181-2 ; 
Dravidian religion, 182; religious development of India, 183-4; commoners 
and cults of gods in Indonesia, 185-6; Toradja gods, 187-8; culture-heroes 
receive no cults, 188-9; cults of gods in Polynesia, 190-1; American reli- 
gious systems mainly utilitarian in nature, 192-5; effects of disappearance 
of ruling groups on religious systems, 196 ; mummification of rulers, 197-200. 


CHAPTER XIV 
SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 


Beliefs about creation and man’s spiritual nature in Egypt and Sumer, 
201-4; in India, 204-6; in Indonesia, 207-8; in Oceania, 208-11; in 
America, 211-13; the carving of stone images and ideas of creation, 213-14. 


CHAPTER XV 
THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 


Prehistoric art in Europe, 215-16; the Great Mother in Egypt and Sumer, 
216-22; human sacrifice in Egypt and Sumer, 222; the Great Mother in 
India, 223-5; human sacrifice in India, 226; human sacrifice to snakes, 
227; the Great Mother in Indonesia, 227-8; the Rice-Mother, 228; human 
sacrifice in Indonesia, 228-30; head-hunting and human sacrifice, 229-30 ; 
human sacrifice and cannibalism in Melanesia, 231; in Polynesia, 232-4; 
cannibalism in Australia, 234; the Great Mother in Mexico, 234; the 
Corn Mother, 235; cannibalism in Mexico, 235; human sacrifice in North 
America, 235-6; the Great Mother in the United States, 236-7; human 
sacrifice and warfare, 238-9. 


CHAPTER XVI 
MOTHER-RIGHT 


Mother-right in Egypt and Sumer, 241-2; transition to father-right in 
Arabia, 242-3; mother-right and father-right in India, 243-6; mother-right 
in Indonesia, 246; in Micronesia, 246; in Melanesia, 246-7; mother-right 
and father-right in Polynesia, 247-8; in Australia, 249; in North Americe, 
249-52; culture-heroes and mother-right, 253. 


xil THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


CHAPTER XVII 


THE UNDERWORLD 


Relationship between ideas of origin and of the destination of the soul 
after death, 234-5; land of the dead in Egypt and Sumer, 256; the under- 
world in India, 257-9; Toradja ideas of life after death, 259; the under- 
world and the archaic civilization, 259-60; effects of migration on the 
belief in an underground land of the dead, 260-1; Bugi origin stories, 261 ; 
underworld in Oceania, 261-4; ruler of the underworld in Oceania, 264; 
the underworld in North America, 264-8; history of the Great Mother, 
269-70. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
THE DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA 


Dual institutions in Egypt, 272-3; the Dual Organization of society, 273 ; 
dual organization in Dravidian India, 274 e.s. : foundation of Pegu in Burma, 
276; dual organization of Dravidian tribes, 277-8; dual organization in 
Assam, 278-9; Oppert’s views on ancient Indian society, 279-80; right- 
and left-hand castes in India, 280; cross-cousin marriages in India, 281 ; 
the dual organization in India, 282; interpretation of right- and left-hand 
caste system, 283-4; Polynesian dual settlements in India, 283-4. 


CHAPTER XIX 
THE DUAL ORGANIZATION: INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 


The dual organization of the Bugi states, 285-7; of Sumba, 288; of 
Timor, 289; of the Moluccas, 289-90; of Micronesia, 290-2; of Melanesia, 
292-6; ofjFiji, 296-8; of Tonga, 298; of Samoa, 298-304; of eastern Polynesia, 
305-9 ; political basis of the dual organization, 307; dual organization 
among ancestors of the Maori, 309-11; in Hawaii, 311; dual organization 
in Easter Island, 311-12; in Australia, 312-13. 


CHAPTER XX 
THE DUAL ORGANIZATION: AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 


Dual organization in Mexico and Central America, 314; in the United 
States, 315-23; distribution of the dual organization, 323 ; dual communities, 
324; hostility between divisions, 324; the ball game, 325; distinctions 
between moieties of dual grouping, 325; similar names of dual settlements, 
326; theory of origin of dual groupings, 326; effects of hostility between 
moieties, 326; ruling groups and the dual organization, 327-8; Children of 
the Sun and the dual organization, 328-9; relationship between culture- 
heroes and dual communities, 329-31. 


CHAPTER XXI 
THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 


Reason for reconstitution of dual organization by Huron and other peoples, 
332; Egyptian nomes, 333; Egyptian government by council, 333-4; 
definition of Totemism, 335; totemism in India, 335-6; government by 
council in India, 337 e.s. ; stone circles used for council meetings in India, 
337-9 ; totemism in Indonesia, 340; relationship with animals in Indonesia, 
340-1 ; councils in south Celebes and Seran, 341-2; totemism in Micronesia, 
342-3; in New Guinea, 343; councils in New Guinea, 343; totemism and 
councils in Torres Straits, 344; totemism in Melanesia, 344-5; in Australia, 
345-6 ; councils in Australia, 346; totemism in Polynesia, 346-7; councils 
in Samoa, 347-9; councils derived from the archaic civilization, 349-50; 
totemism in North America, 350-1; councils in North America, 351-5; 
councils derived from the archaic civilization, 355; the nature and origin 
of the council system, 355-7. 


CONTENTS xiil 


CHAPTER XXII 
THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 


Origins of totemic clans, 358-9; reincarnation in clans, 360-2; rein- 
carnation and the archaic civilization, 362-3; the nature of the totemic 
clan, 364; relationship between men and animals, 364-5; initiation and 
coronation ceremonies compared, 365-6; ritual death and rebirth, 366. 


CHAPTER XXIII 
HXOGAMY 


Exogamy first confined to dual groupings, 368-70; the beginnings of clan 
exogamy, 370-2; culture-sequences in exogamy, 372; marriages in ruling 
groups, 373-5; culture-heroes and exogamy, 375; marriages in early Samoa, 
375-7 ; marriages among the Children of the Sun, 377; origin of the typical 
exogamy of the dual organization, 378; mythological reflections of altera- 
tions in social organization, 378-81. 


CHAPTER XXIV 
GIVERS OF LIFE 


Definition of ‘‘ Givers of Life,’’ 383; polished stone implements as givers 
of life, and as links with the archaic civilization, 384-5; quartz as giver of 
life, 385-6; charms in British New Guinea derived from the archaic civili- 
zation, 386-7 ; gold as giver of life, 388; pearls as givers of life, 389 ; Malays 
and gold, 389-90; regalia as givers of life, 390-1; ceremonies connected 
with mining, 391-2; stones as givers of life, 392-5; quartz as giver of life 
in Australia, 395-6; magical practices of Australia and Melanesia compared, 
397; stones in Polynesian religion and magic, 398-9; quartz in North 
America, 400-2; pearls as givers of life in North America, 404; magical 
powers of people of archaic civilization, 403-5. 


CHAPTER XXV 
THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 


Cultural elements of the archaic civilization, 406 ; distribution of the archaic 
civilization, 407-8 ; theory of geographical control, 408-11; unity of archaic 
civilization, and diversity of successors, 412-13 ; importance of the human 
mind in the production of civilization, 413-14; search for gold, pearls, etc., 
as cause of distribution of archaic civilization, 415-16; continuity in culture, 
416-17; origin of civilization of North America, 418; origin of Maya. civi- 
lization, 418-25; origins of civilizations of Oceania, Indonesia and India, 
426-7. 


CHAPTER XXVI 
EGYPT 


Discovery of irrigation in Egypt, 428-9; unification of Egypt under the 
First Dynasty, 429-31; duality in Egyptian institutions caused by this 
unification, 431-2; origin of mummification, and of the making of portrait 
statues, 432-4; animation of the portrait statue, 434 ; creative ideas attached 
to portrait statues, 434-5; early Egyptian burials, 435-6; development of 
tomb construction in Egypt, 436; origin of the mastaba, dolmen and stone 
circle, 436; origin of the pyramid, 437-8; origin of stone-working, 438-9 ; 
distinction between pyramids and mastabas, 439; the sun-cult, 439; the 
Children of the Sun, 439; Heliopolitan influence in the early dynasties, 
439-40 ; Heliopolitan origin of the Sothic calendar, 440-1; origin of the 
sun-cult at Heliopolis, 441-2; the formulation of the doctrine of theogamy, 
442-5; Khnum as creator god, 444-5; origin of ruling groups, 445-7; 


ae THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


effects of accession of Heliopolitans to the throne, 447 ; sky-world and under- 
world, 447-8; division of the ruling power caused by Heliopolitan accession, 
449-53 ; intermarriages between the royal family and viziers’ families, 453-5 ; 
growing independence of the nobles in Pyramid Age, 456; origin of the use 
of gold, 456-7; origin of the use of polished stone implements, 457-8 ; and 
of obsidan, 458; Egyptian expeditions for givers of life, 458-60; conditions 
in Egypt in Sixth Dynasty resemble those of the archaic civilization, 460 ; 
movement out from Egypt of archaic civilization, 461; the Phoenicians, 
461; break-up of the archaic civilization, 461; gradual decay of Egyptian 
state, 463-5; final break-up of the archaic civilization, 465-6. 


CHAPTER XXVII 
CONCLUSION 


Evolutionary school of thought, 467; Rivers describes this school, 468 ; 
degradation of culture, 469-70; the theory of continuity in culture, 470-2 ; 
manner of spread of culture, 473-4; manner of development of elements of 
culture, 474-6 ; concrete experience as basis of early thought, 476-9 ; selective 
attitude of native populations towards ideas elaborated in Egypt, 479-80; 
attitude towards study of native magic, 480-1; connection between myth- 
ology and history, 481-5; history of thought in the region, 485-6. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
CONCLUSION 


Study of behaviour of man in society, 487-8; the gregarious instinct fails 
to explain the structure of early society, 489; the class-system as the basis 
of the class-state, 489-90; food-gatherers peaceful, 480; education of man- 
kind in violence, 490-1 ; human sacrifice and early warfare, 491; hostility 
in the dual organization, and early warfare, 491 ; man’s education in cruelty, 
492; development of warfare, 492-3; war and the subjection of women, 
493; war and the treatment of children, 493; development of ideas of 
incest, 494-5; importance of ruling groups in early society, 496; ruling 
groups and the break-up of the archaic civilization, 496; effects of ruling 
groups on inventiveness of man, 497; the effects of the removal of the 
influence of ruling groups, 497-9; early history of European civilization, 
499-500; the Children of the Sun in Europe, 500; the culture of the Phe- 
nicians and Carthaginians similar to that of the archaic civilization, 501-2 ; 
importance of the Pheenicians as carriers of Egyptian culture. 


List oF AUTHORITIES . R A ; ; “ id « 5038 


INDEX . § f 4 ‘ : A : 4 “ Mare st 


LIST OF MAPS 


FACING 
PAGE 
GENERAL MAP OF THE REGION, SHOWING IMPORTANT 
LOCALITIES . ‘ : ; : Frontispiece 
THE UNITED STATES, SHOWING CULTURAL AREAS , 6 
THe MounpDs oF THE UNITED STATES (AFTER CYRUS 
THOMAS) : : ; , ; ! : ; 12 
EASTERN POLYNESIA . ‘ ‘ : : ; : 22 


WESTERN POLYNESIA, NEW ZEALAND AND SOUTHERN 
MELANESIA . ‘ t : ‘ ;: : 7 24, 


MICRONESIA, NEw GUINEA, AND NORTHERN MELANESIA 26 


British NEw GUINEA (AFTER CHINNERY) . ‘ baie. 
INDONESIA ; : : ‘ A ; : shiny oe 
SoutH INDIA : ‘ : : ; : ; . 46 
PUEBLO AREA (SOUTHERN SECTION) . : : - | 68 
PUEBLO AREA (NORTHERN SECTION) . : 714 OS 
MEXICO : . : : : : a} apts - 66 
MAYA SETTLEMENTS ABOUT A.D. 460 (AFTER MORLEY) . 68 
CHotTa NAGPUR . " . ; j ‘ . - 90 
INDIA AND BuRMA : : : ‘ee : ‘ - 96 
CELEBES AND NEIGHBOURHOOD . : ‘ : . 286 


XV 


‘ale MS 
sik 


Hake Oey ale vie HOH) Ph (' 


i emt i, PY pat Nae 


ay rr in i 
r: i, oi a Vs \ f twat 
ae Da Wed 


2 Havent 
Shaul i 


tA) 
Wit 


Dy nb wile SE rr 


19 


Paine Dae 


eee 


THE 
CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 


HE vast region stretching from Egypt by way of India, 
Indonesia and Oceania, to America, is important in the 


study of the early history of culture. It contains remains 
of civilizations rooted in the depths of time, whose ruins stand 
in the fever-haunted jungles of India, Cambodia, Java, Guate- 
mala, on the islands of Micronesia, and elsewhere as silent wit- 
nesses to the frailty of human endeavour, arousing in the traveller 
wonder at the skill of their builders, and pity that such fair 
creations were doomed to ruin and decay. It contains, on the 
other hand, many communities of lowly culture, even so primitive 
in some instances as not to have learned to procure their food 
from agriculture or domesticated animals, who often live in 
countries that possess ruins of ancient civilizations, and show no 
signs of attempting to emulate the efforts of their predecessors. 

What is the secret of the riddle of this vast mosaic, of this 
juxtaposition of peoples at the opposite ends of the cultural scale ? 
What have been the determining factors producing a certain 
form of culture in one place and at a definite time, in one place 
rather than another, and at one time rather than another ? 

In seeking to grapple with this problem, we have to retain 
in mind the past existence of the great civilizations of Egypt, 
Sumer, India, Mexico, and Guatemala, extending thousands of 
miles across the earth’s surface: we have to remember that 
while the civilization of Egypt can be reckoned back at least 
five thousand years, that of the Maya, the first to appear in the 
northern half of the American continent, originated somewhere 
about the beginning of our era. The bridging of these great 
gaps in time and space will necessitate the adoption of some 
very simple and general method of study, one that is purely 
objective and as independent as possible of the personality of 
its wielder. Some parts of the region, such as the area of the 
Plains of North America,! show no traces of the former existence 


1 Sketch Map No. 2. 
1 1 


2 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


of a highly developed civilization. On the other hand, it is 
usually found that behind existing communities there must have 
been others, whether related to them or not, whose culture was 
different. The existence of the study of archeology is itself 
witness of that fact. In many places comparisons can be instituted 
between two or more phases of culture. We may select one 
element belonging to the earlier phase, and inquire as to its 
presence or absence in the later phase. Whatever the answer 
may be, something of value has been learned. Ifsuch comparisons 
can be carried out on a sufficiently large scale, some rough know- 
ledge will be gained as to the manner in which culture has been 
modified all through the region in the course of ages. If it be 
found that, wherever the inquiry be made, the answer is invariably 
the same in respect of any cultural element, then the first step 
will have been made to the foundation of a stable theory of the 
history of civilization in the region. ‘This method possesses the 
merit of being as “ fool-proof’’ as a method well can be: it is, 
moreover, capable of easy control, for the production of contrary 
instances will soon serve to jeopardize generalizations founded 
on surveys of culture sequences. I shall adopt this method of 
Culture-Sequences, and shall apply it to all manner of elements 
of culture, with the aim of reconstructing, so far as is possible, 
the past history of the region as a whole. In doing so, I shall 
take no account, for the present, of absolute chronology, but 
shall be content with the relative chronology of the sequences 
in any place. For instance, it will not matter that a culture- 
sequence in respect of irrigation, in which it is invariably found 
that the practice is dropped in the second phase of culture, 
may range over thousands of years in time when passing from 
Egypt to America. The essential fact is that irrigation tends 
to. disappear in the later stage of culture. 

The first application of the method of culture- -sequences will 
be to the comparison of the remains of old stages of culture 
and those of existing peoples. Since this inquiry is largely 
concerned with vanished peoples, the elements studied by the 
method will have to be chosen from those available. The use 
of stone for purposes of construction, stone images, irrigation 
and so on, are objective facts that cannot be denied, and for this 
reason have been chosen out for study in the first instance. 
Since these elements have persisted in some regions and have 
disappeared in others, the knowledge gained forms a foundation 
on which to build a general theory. 

When the region is surveyed for the elements just mentioned, 
it is possible to formulate a working hypothesis; namely, that 
the earliest peoples in all parts, who had advanced beyond the 
food-gathering stage, were so similar in culture that they can 
be grouped together as constituting the Archaic Civilization. 
Not only does the survey reveal the essential similarity of the 
earliest stage of food-producing culture throughout the region, 


INTRODUCTION 3 


it also shows that an important process was at work, that loss 
of culture was a constant feature of the history of the outlying 
parts of the region, the earliest communities in North America, 
Oceania and elsewhere being more advanced in the arts and 
crafts than those that followed. 

Once in possession of the hypothesis of an archaic civilization, 
uniform in nature throughout the region as compared with its 
successors, several problems emerge, and the subsequent chapters 
are devoted to their examination. It is necessary to determine 
the relationships between the communities of the archaic civiliza- 
tion and those that followed, to account for the distribution of 
the communities of the archaic civilization, and to inquire into 
the origin of the archaic civilization itself. In order to solve 
these problems a thoroughgoing investigation is made to deter- 
mine the political, social and religious organizations of the archaic 
civilization, and as the inquiry proceeds it becomes increasingly 
clear that the preliminary hypothesis fits the facts. The evidence 
shows, also, that the later communities of the region have acquired 
their culture from that of the archaic civilization, and that the 
variations that they display are due to the manner of derivation. 

What of the archaic civilization itself? Given that the later 
civilizations originated from it, where and how did it come into 
being? The solution of this problem is, I contend, to be 
sought in Egypt: for, as I have tried to. show, the assemblage 
of the elements of that culture could be watched there and 
nowhere else. It is in the Sixth Dynasty, the culminating point 
of the Pyramid Age, that this process seems to have been complete. 
The reason for its spread was, I maintain, the search for various 
substances, principally those prized for their assumed life-giving 
properties; for the settlements of the archaic civilization are 
situated near sources of the very materials that the Egyptians 
themselves took so much trouble to seek in neighbouring countries. 
Further consequences of this search are discussed in Chapter 
XXIV, where it is argued that the native tribes all through the 
region use, for their magical practice, substances that attracted 
the men of the archaic civilization from place to place. 

It is obvious that the inquiry just outlined must go to the 
roots of civilization. The reader will find that several funda- 
mental problems are discussed. For instance, in dealing with 
the problem of the distribution of the various forms of culture, 
and particularly with the settlements of the archaic civilization 
itself, I urge that the important factor is the human mind with 
its desires and aims. Men in the past have imposed their will 
on their surroundings, and have not been forced by them into 
any line of action. Given certain desires, men will do their 
utmost to satisfy them, and it is to this dynamic attitude that is 
attributed the development and spread of the archaic civilization. 
This will hardly tally with the commonly accepted doctrines 
of the modern school of geographers, who appear, explicitly or 


4 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


implicitly, to ascribe such importance ,to “Geographical Control” 
as a causative factor in the development of various forms of 
human culture, instead of looking at these phenomena as the 
outcome of processes at work in society itself. The views 
advanced here, if correct, serve to establish a continuity in human 
society from the very earliest stages, so that, from the days of 
paleolithic man settlement has been made in certain localities 
because men chose to live there, and not because they were forced 
so to do by the climate or some other geographical cause. 

The investigation has led to the examination into the way by 
which early men built up civilization. It is found that early 
thought was originally based on experience, without, apparently, 
any element of speculation or symbolism. Early men thought 
directly of the world around them and expressed their thought 
in concrete ideas. I have tried to show briefly how this process 
worked—how, as the result of one discovery after another, the 
attention of men was directed to new phenomena, and thus an 
organized body of thought was fashioned. 

A further development is that concerned with the influence 
of social institutions on the behaviour of men. I have ventured 
a little along this path, especially with regard to the important 
topic of warfare, which, as I hope to have shown, began in a 
highly organized condition of society, and thus is not a funda- 
mental mode of behaviour common to mankind. Ifthe arguments 
advanced here be correct, it follows that warfare is the outcome 
of social institutions that can be modified, and thus the problem 
of its abolition is ultimately soluble. 

The investigation of this book is, strictly speaking, a continua-. 
tion of that carried on in The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia, 
but its scope is much wider. I have, as is obvious would be the 
case, made great use of the work of Rivers and Elliot Smith, the 
first in regard to Oceania, the second in regard to Egypt. In 
such a great movement of thought as that opened up by these 
two pioneers, it is imperative that each worker, while constantly 
bearing in mind the studies of his colleagues, and using them 
for his own guidance, should mark out for himself a lme of study 
to pursue, so as to avoid the risk of being overwhelmed with 
detail. Consequently I have followed my own line of thought, 
and have tried to produce a picture of some aspects of the rise 
and spread of early civilization as they appear to me. Thus 
the reader will find that many topics dealt with by Rivers and 
Klliot Smith have been ignored, while others that they have not 
treated are discussed in detail. At the same time I must freely 
acknowledge my great indebtedness to Elliot Smith, particularly 
as regards Egypt, for his pioneer work in that country has opened 
up the way for those who choose to follow, and I hope to have 
made clear the magnitude of his contribution to the study of the 
beginnings of civilization. 


CHAPTER ITI 
FOOD-GATHERERS AND FOOD-PRODUCERS 


HE greatest stride forward ever taken by man was when 
he devised the craft of agriculture. Previously to that he 
had been in the food-gathering stage of culture, dependent 
on nature for his sustenance, and unable to control its production. 
The ability to regulate the food supply brought the power to 
increase the population indefinitely, and this has entirely changed 
the face of the earth. How did early men, after thousands of 
years of the food-gathering life, acquire the practice of agriculture 
and the domestication of animals? Did these practices arise 
independently in different countries, or were they spread abroad 
throughout the world from one centre? The answer to this 
question is of momentous importance, for on it depends the whole 
theory of civilization. 

The region now to be studied contains peoples in all stages 
of culture, among them communities of food-gatherers, who still 
remain hidden in the depths of the jungles and on the outskirts 
of civilization: such are the Veddas of Ceylon, and other pre- 
Dravidian jungle tribes of South India; the Kubu of Sumatra ; 
the Punan of Borneo, the Semang and Sakai of the Malay 
Peninsula; the Indians of California, the Ute and Paiute of 
Utah, the Dene of the Mackenzie basin of Canada; the Aus- 
tralians, and others, who, when what they have learned from 
other peoples is subtracted, are practically devoid of the arts and 
crafts. 

In trying to account for the presence of agriculture in the 
region under survey, it is just as important to know why some 
people do not possess that craft as why others do: the one question 
is the complement of the other. If, therefore, it is possible to 
study, in any part of the region, food-gathering peoples and 
food-producing peoples in close proximity, some useful information 
may be forthcoming with regard to the manner in which native 
tribes have taken the first step upward to civilization. 

Unfortunately this can only be done in three places: the 
United States of North America; the region between New Guinea 
and Australia; and in Borneo; but the results obtained agree 
with one another. 

Sketch Map Number 2 shows that North America can be 

5 


6 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


divided into several cultural areas. The Pueblo area is occupied 
by Indians who live in settled communities, building houses of 
adobe or stone, cultivating the soil by means of irrigation, and 
altogether presenting a relatively high stage of civilization.1_ The 
region between the Mississippi, the Great Lakes and the Atlantic 
Ocean can, for various reasons, be regarded as a whole. The 
third region comprises the great plains westward from the Missis- 
sippi to the feet of the Rockies. The region running up the west 
coast, although of great importance, will be ignored, as well as 
that of the Eskimo. The culture of the peoples living there 
shows signs of affinity with that of the peoples of the north-east 
coast of Siberia, and doubtless the two groups are culturally 
related. The Californian Indians will be considered, as will be 
those of Canada, outside British Columbia. 'Towards the south 
the region to be considered reaches to Honduras, and includes 
Mexico and Yucatan.? 

In later chapters attention will be paid to other features of 
this distribution of culture. For the present it is only necessary 
to think of the boundary that can be constructed between food- 
gathering and food-producing peoples in the United States an 
Canada. | 

Before comparing food-gatherers and food-producers in North 
America one serious difficulty must be removed. In the area of 
the plains there live a large number of tribes, of various linguistic 
stocks, such as the Sioux, the Pawnee, the Arapaho, Cheyenne, 
and others, who rank above the food-gathering stage of culture 
of the Indians of California and other western states. These 
tribes can be eliminated from the present discussion, for it is 
known that they migrated into the plains after the introduction 
of the horse by the Spaniards. The result of their migration 
was to cause profound alterations in their mode of life, which 
will be discussed later. If the conditions be considered at about 
the time of the arrival of Columbus, the United States would be 
tenanted by two groups of peoples. Within the boundaries 
marked out on the map would be agriculturists, and without 
the boundary would be food-gatherers, as still live in California 
and other states. 

The distinction between the cultures of the food-gatherers 
outside the boundary and the food-producers within is abrupt. 
For a line drawn to mark the limits of agriculture would coincide 
with that already drawn, and this line would also denote the 
limits of pottery-making, house-building, and other cultural 
elements unknown to the food-gatherers.* It is curious to think 
that, when the boundary between the Pueblo Indians and the 
Californian Indians is crossed, we have gone from a region where 


1 They derive their name from the Spanish word for “‘ Village.’’ 

* Cf. Clark Wissler (i), (iv) for fuller details with regard to Culture Areas. 
Sketch Map No. 2 is based on those given by him. 3 Wissler ii. 1 e.s. 

* Wissler i. 474, 487, 490: Spinden ii. 269: Powell ii. 41. 


‘SVEUY IVYNLIND ONIMOHS ‘SHLVIS AALINGQ AHL 


uoipsiunbig jong & 


A2MOTJ 
i 


i APj50UD Os OPPeD 
2019 s9ddy PSPAAUD a 


ww 4 


f mMedeng y, 


ae 
4 eere0 


240.1245 


2IUMPUS 


ame cody 


ZAPMP}2AC 


h ; +f : ’ ise aN j a sy ey 


ee 
i Bey a, 


ay 


. ug 
' ‘ 
7" 
' 
| 
j 
a J . 
‘ « 
awe 
te? 
4 
j 
Sen 
r - iT 
\ 
‘ 
+ 
i 
‘ 
( 4 
Z 
\ 
p me, A] 
i 
. Ane 
4 
} 
"4 7 2 
‘ 
\ 
* 
' 
ae | 
i 
rt oy 
: \ F 
a + . 
te ‘eet 
‘ 
7. 
: 
F 
> 
> 
* 
= ‘ 
‘ 
‘ 
J ¥ 
» ' * 
a 
‘ - 
( e 
‘ 
P = 


FOOD-GATHERERS AND FOOD-PRODUCERS t 


stone and brick houses are built, irrigation is practised, elaborate 
pottery is made, and metals are worked to some extent, into 
one where the people are devoid of these arts and crafts, being 
among the lowest in culture of the United States. 

How is it that this abrupt boundary exists between the two 
sorts of culture? Is it the result of natural conditions, of local 
features of climate and so forth? If so, what is the essential 
difference between Arizona and California, that the one should 
have produced so high a form of civilization, while the other is 
devoid of it in practically every particular, in so far as the native 
tribes are concerned? In this particular instance the differ- 
ences, if any, in local circumstances, do not seem to offer the 
remotest chance of solving the problem. 

In the second instance of the proximity of food-gatherers to 
food-producers, the boundary runs between Australia and New 
Guinea by way of the Torres Straits, and cuts off Australia from 
the rest of the world. On one side of this line is British New 
Guinea, with a relatively high form of civilization, with tribes 
that sometimes practise irrigation for their taro plantations ; 
while on the other is Australia with no native agriculture at all. 
It seems hard to understand what natural differences between 
Queensland and British New Guinea could have brought about 
this remarkable cultural difference. In New Caledonia again 
much irrigation is carried on, and the level of culture is relatively 
high. Certain cultural resemblances exist between Australia 
and Melanesia, as will be seen, but in the fundamental craft of 
agriculture a profound gulf divides the two regions. Why should 
this great continent be ringed by islands with relatively high 
civilizations, and yet have little itself, especially on the material 
side? This problem, like that of North America, does not seem 
capable of solution in terms of environment. 

Further to the west is a cultural boundary between hunters 
and food-producers that is not apparently more or less fixed 
as in the case of North America, and Torres Straits, but is con- 
tinually advancing. We owe to Messrs. Hose and McDougall 
an illuminating account of the spread of culture across the island 
of Borneo, and the consequent conversion of nomadic hunters 
into. settled agricultural tribes of varying degrees of civilization. 
It will be necessary to consider once more in a subsequent chapter 
the cultural history of this island, but for the present it will 
be enough to confine attention to the less civilized tribes of the 
interior. One group of these tribes, the Kayan and their kindred 
Bahau, have spread across the island from the south and south- 
western parts, and, after reaching the central highlands, are 
now travelling down the rivers into Sarawak. This migration 
is partly caused by their method of farming rice, which consists 
in burning tracts of jungle and then planting the seed in the 
ground so fertilized. This method is wasteful, and after a few 
years it is necessary to move on. This the Kayan are able to 


8 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


do on account of their superior strength and organization.! It 
is to these migrating Kayan that is ascribed the culture of the 
non-Kayan tribes of the interior of Sarawak. In the same 
regions as the Kayan live other fairly well-civilized groups of 
tribes, called Kenyah and Klemantan, the Kenyah being the 
more highly civilized. The authors state that the culture of 
these peoples differs from that of the Kayan “ chiefly in lacking 
some of its more advanced features, in having less sharply defined 
outlines, in its greater variability from one community to another, 
and in the less strict observance of custom. Thus the Kayans 
in general live in larger communities, each of their villages 
generally consisting of several long houses; whereas a single 
long house generally constitutes the whole of a Kenyah or Kle- 
mantan village. The Kayans excel in iron-working, in padi- 
culture, in boat-making and in house-building. Their customs 
and beliefs are more elaborate, more definite, more uniform, and 
more strictly observed. Their social grades are more clearly 
marked. They hang together more strongly, with a stronger 
tribal sentiment, and, while the distinction between them and 
other tribes is everywhere clearly marked and recognized by 
themselves and others, the Klemantans and Kenyahs everywhere 
shade off into one another and into Punans ’’—that is, into 
nomadic hunters.? I will venture to quote more of these remarks, 
for they throw an illuminating light upon the early history of 
civilization. The authors are convinced that the Kenyah and 
Klemantan have assimilated their culture from the Kayan; 
that they in fact are food-gatherers who have adopted part of 
the civilization of the strangers. The Kenyah seem to have 
assimilated more than the rest: they grow enough rice to last 
the year round, while the Klemantan do not. In fact “‘ it seems 
that most of the present Kenyahs first began to plant padi not 
more than two, or at most three, centuries ago. Some of the 
Kenyahs also preserve the tradition of a time when they con- 
structed their houses mainly of bamboo; this was probably 
their practice for some few generations after they began to acquire 
the Kayan culture. At the present day those Punans (nomadic 
hunters), who have only recently taken to the settled mode of 
life, generally make large use of the bamboo in building their 
small and relatively fragile houses.’’? Moreover, the process of 
conversion of Punans into settled communities that assimilate 
more or less freely the Kayan culture is still proceeding. ‘“* We 
are acquainted,” say the authors, ‘ with settled communities 
which still admit their Punan origin; and these exhibit very 
various grades of assimilation of the Kayan culture. Some, 
which still build very poor houses and boats, cultivate padi very 


1 Hose and McDougall, II. 232. It is possible that the iron-working 
activities of the Kayan have led them on to fresh sources of that metal in 
the beds of the rivers (see p. 122). 

2 Id. II. 243-4. 3 Id. II. 243-5. 


FOOD-GATHERERS AND FOOD-PRODUCERS 9 


imperfectly, and generally exhibit the Kayan culture in a very 
imperfect state.” 4 

This is certainly one of the most valuable known facts concerning 
the development of culture. It shows that a people with a 
fairly high type of civilization, who build large houses, displaying 
thereby much skill in carpentry, who work iron, who have large 
boats, and display a high degree of social solidarity, can come 
into a region peopled only by food-gatherers, and, by contact 
of varying degrees, produce a whole series of cultures varying 
from their own level down to that of the food-gatherers. It is 
unfortunate that the possibilities of observing such experiments 
are so limited, for thereby much light can be thrown on the 
development of civilization. Such an example as this at once 
drives a breach into the defences of those who hold that peoples 
have, in all parts of the world, under certain climatic and racial 
influences, come to raise themselves in cultural level. The case 
of Borneo shows, on the contrary, that cultural uplift can be 
shown to result from contact between peoples of varying cultural 
level, whereby the people of lower degree borrow some of the 
arts and crafts of the others, and it offers a satisfactory expla- 
nation of the abrupt differences in North America and Torres 
Straits. This makes the development of civilization quite a 
different matter. It is now a case of movement of culture, and 
not of spontaneous generation. 

As the argument proceeds it will be seen that growth is the 
chief feature of the development of early civilization. Signs 
exist, not of a general and independent uplift of culture in all 
parts of the.region, but rather of the acquisition by communities 
of elements of culture from other communities that possessed these 
elements. 

The food-gatherers will play but little part in the general 
discussion of this book, but their existence on the boundaries 
must not be forgotten. It will often be necessary to use them 
as a sort of “control’”’ for the argument, in order to elucidate 
the points involved. But with the realization that their hunting- 
grounds have, in more than one place, been encroached on by 
peoples with the fundamental arts and crafts of civilization, the 
food-gatherers pass out of the scene to take their place in the 
background. 


1 Td. II. 244. 


CHAPTER III 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, NORTH AMERICA 


the food-producing peoples of the United States; and that 

this boundary also marks the limits of pottery-making, house- 
building and so forth; allowing, always, for the fact that the 
time chosen is in a period prior to the introduction of the horse 
by the Spaniards. The next question is: How did these people 
come by their agriculture, pottery-making and the rest of their 
arts and crafts? I shall now try to answer that question. 

In studying the problem of North American agriculture, one 
important generalization can be made at once; namely, that 
it was founded on maize-growing. All the more advanced tribes, 
excepting, of course, the Plains Indians, grew maize, and there 
is no reason to believe in a prior stage of agriculture when this 
cereal was not yet cultivated.1 That is to say, the whole of 
the culture of the United States can be regarded as a unit based 
on maize-growing. The mode of cultivation and the methods 
of preparation of the grain for food displayed remarkable skill ; 
and the same varieties of corn, the same methods of planting, 
fertilizing, and cooking prevailed everywhere. 

The Indians handed on their methods to the Europeans who 
followed them. In the words of Mr. Wissler: ‘‘ Our farmers 
formerly planted, and often yet plant, maize in hills; this was 
the universal Indian mode, four to five grains being dropped at 
one place at regular intervals of about three feet, quite like a 
cornfield of to-day. In cultivation, the Indian hoed the earth 
up around the growing stalk, which is still the principle of the 
mechanical cultivator. For husking, our farmers use a husking 
pin, which, while now of iron, was not so very long ago of bone 
and wood, precisely like those still in use among our surviving 
eastern Indians. Ears of corn to be dried or preserved for seed 
often have their pendant husks braided together ; this is typically 
Indian. The corn crib was used by the Indians and elevated on 
posts to keep the contents dry and to protect it from rodents. 
The type of crib which is larger at the top than at the bottom 
was also used by the southern Indians. 

“The Indian planted beans and squashes among the corn. 


1 Wissler i. 17. 
10 


I N the last chapter it was said that a definite boundary includes 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, NORTH AMERICA 11 


This has always been a favourite custom of our farmers. He 
also understood the art of testing his seed and of preparatory 
germination in warm water. Where fish were available they 
were used for fertilization, the rule being one fish to a hill. 

“The methods of cooking corn are not only still about the 
same among us, but we also retain many of the Indian names 
for such dishes, as hominy and succotash. The famous roasting 
ear in all its forms was known to the Indians. Then we must 
not forget the favourite mush, which is still stirred with a wooden 
ladle strikingly like those of the Algonkin tribes. Some years 
ago our country people still made ‘lye hominy’ with wood 
ashes, just as*described by some early observers of the Indian.”’ ! 
The Indians of the States who practised agriculture were there- 
fore not ignorant savages, roaming the woods with tomahawks 
ready to trap unwary settlers. People who had the idea of 
germinating maize in warm water, who knew of many methods 
of preparing it as food which the Europeans were content to 
imitate, must have elaborated a high form of civilization them- 
selves, or have derived it from some people of advanced culture. 

Fortunately it is not necessary to speculate on this problem 
of the origin of the maize-culture of the Indians, with all that it 
involves. For authorities are agreed on this point. Wissler 
tells us that, culturally speaking, there is no gap between the 
eastern area of the States and Mexico: ‘“‘ Although its contact 
with the great agricultural area of Mexico and the South is 
slightly broken in Texas, we have no reason to doubt a historical 
connexion between the two areas, and consequently we may 
consider them as parts of the same whole.” That being so, a 
further step forward is easy. For maize belongs to the South, 
to Mexico and Guatemala, and not to the United States ; there- 
fore its cultivation must have spread northwards. In the words 
of Mr. Spinden, “the concept and the complex of agriculture 
undoubtedly migrated from Mexico.” 2? This statement is sup- 
ported by other students, among them Mr. Gilmore, who, on the 
basis of his study of the food-plants of Indian tribes, says: “ The 
several cultivated crops grown by the tribes of Nebraska are 
all of south-western origin, probably all indigenous to Mexico. 

After diligent inquiry, the only cultivated crop plants 
of which I am able to get evidence are corn, beans, squashes and 
pumpkins, tobacco, and sunflowers. These are all of native 
origin in the south-west, having come from Mexico by way of 
Texas. But a large number of plants growing wild, either in- 
digenous or introduced by human agency, designedly or un- 
designedly, were utilized for many purposes. No _ evidence 
appears that any attempt was ever made looking to the domesti- 
cation of any of these plants. The reason for this is that the 
necessary incentive was lacking, in that the natural product of 


1 Wissler iv. 656 e.s. Cf. also Waugh. 2 Spinden ii. 269. 


12 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


each useful native plant was always available. In their semi- 
annual hunting trips to the outlying parts of their domains, the 
Indians could gather the products belonging to each phytogeo- 
graphic province. The crop plants which they cultivated, how- 
ever, were exotics, and hence supplemented their natural resources, 
thereby forming a distinct adjunct to the supply of provisions 
for their needs.” } 

The notion that agriculture, in the shape of maize-growing, 
came north from Mexico, is not new ; for Schoolcraft, many years 
ago, enunciated the same thesis as Messrs. Spinden, Wissler 
and Gilmore.?, He couples pottery-making with agriculture as 
derived from the South. In this he is, once again, in agreement 
with modern authorities. Spinden, for instance, says that “ the 
boundaries of pottery distribution closely parallel the boundaries 
of agriculture distribution, extending in some regions slightly 
beyond them,’’? as the result, it must be noted, of the movement 
into the Plains. The fundamental crafts of agriculture and 
pottery-making being derived from Mexico and the South, the 
culture of the Indian tribes can be regarded as derived thence, 
directly or indirectly, and thus the abrupt boundary between 
the food-gatherers and the food-producers receives its explanation. 

Schoolcraft clearly realized the fundamental importance of 
the great civilizations of America as foci of cultural influences. 
For he says: ‘‘ Notwithstanding the great diversity we have 
found, there are, on every hand, the unmistakable signs of 
unity. The higher cultures of Mexico and Peru are, after all, 
merely the great centres where the fundamental elements of the 
New World culture were full-blown. Thus, we found that agri- 
culture, metal work, ceramics, architecture, and sculpture all 
centred there. In addition, there were a number of specific instances 
of miscellaneous traits that radiated from these centres. Con- 
fronted as we are by the undeniable evidence for the local diffusion 
of culture traits in all parts of both continents, it would be difficult 
to conceive of the existence of these virile centres in entire isola- 
tion.” * With the aid of the working hypothesis, that the culture 
of the food-producers of the United States was ultimately founded 
on Mexico, it is possible to study with profit the various culture- 
sequences that can be observed in the northern half of America. 

It is not generally remembered by writers on the customs and 
beliefs of Indian tribes of North America that the Cherokee, 
Iroquois and others are living in a region full of remains of a 
past civilization which obviously differed from theirs; so much, 
indeed, that violent discussions have taken place as to the identity 
of the earlier folk and their relationship to the post-Columbian 
Indians. Sketch Map No. 3 is intended to convey to the reader 
some idea of the extent of the mounds and other remains of this 


1 Gilmore 136, 137. 2 Schoolcraft I. 61-2. 
8 Spinden ii. 269. * Schoolcraft I. 202. 


THE MouNDS OF THE UNITED STATES (AFTER CyRuS THOMAS)' 


¢ ub 


, “ ain pee Bi ea Ot ee ee ee ~ nee 
w ry 


wh ~ 
: ~ 
pi aeagg in 
Ts eee 
yt . 4 ts: va 
F d \ ga et 
‘ > « t 
s t 
ie i 
Hor 
4 Oy fi? 
, " = 
t ee - 
é * 
he a ; f 
‘ 
‘ v . 
Z ‘Th A ¥ 
& hy FA 
p ’ 
’ 
MW a 
5 Fa 
> ae, 
wer ae 7 @F \ 
4 { 
" 
x ' 
- 
7 
$ 
t f : 


£ 
I , we 
y i "~ a 
f- { 
ae 
' { 
ud ? f 2 
f va 
‘ é 
i 
fal ie W 
i, RO Fee ge 
4 a sam th rg egg Fir within (gt sanded te det aletnEDAd 4 mmm * 
y 7 r ] a Mes teh ‘ 
: - c mer at Fe: ‘4 
P . 1 a Rae nd | | Os at 4 
' ; ty Me Ava ctahs AE ARS 
ihe ee f ae "ie % 
> 
ane , 
> ' ; { prt ; ae ‘ 
~ sd 
A h F 
sr ’ sy } hl Mm 
. 4 i *, . 
‘ 7 ae spiel ‘ s 
a : ’ Py 


4 = | I oe J " " 
ia J he ers oh WO Py a. £1 


> 


‘ * 
1 ‘ | . J al . — ’ , 
ren se ROS PE Te AN ORR ae st 51 » wea pt Mhes* Teli 
+ y 


’ a an ¢ x x 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, NORTH AMERICA 13 


past stage of civilization. The mounds are numbered by hundreds, 
mainly grouped in the basins of the Mississippi, Ohio, Tennessee, 
Cumberland, and other rivers, on both sides of Lake Michigan, 
in West Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Florida. 
Large tracts of country are free from them. West of the Missis- 
sippi they exist in small numbers in Texas, between the Arkansas 
and Red Rivers, along the Arkansas, Kansas and Missouri Rivers, 
and in certain other places. 

Much discussion has taken place with regard to these mounds, 
the result of which has been to establish two conclusions with 
fair certainty: That the mound-builders were in some way 
connected with the Indian tribes ; and that the practice of building 
mounds came from Mexico. The argument that the culture of the 
mound-builders is similar to that of the Indians rests on a broad 
basis ; it is said that they had similar burial customs ; everyday 
implements of the Indians, such as scrapers, hoes, celts, axes, 
hammers, chisels, gouges, drills, awls, net-sinkers, and so on are 
similar down to specific forms and finish, leaving absolutely no 
possible line of demarcation between them and the similar 
articles attributed to the mound-builders ; maize was the chief 
food of both; and there are marked resemblances in the use of 
shells and tobacco-pipes ; evidence also exists of the construction 
of mounds by post-Columbian Indians. The fact that the 
sedentary Indians of post-Columbian times should have occupied 
practically the same area as the mound-builders is further im- 
portant evidence connecting the two groups.* 

At the same time the theory of Mexican origin of the culture 
of the mound-builders has everything to be said for it. School- 
craft was strongly of the opinion that the custom of mound- 
building spread from Mexico. He says that, as it spread, ‘it 
evinced a decadence which is the probable result of inter-mixture 
and encounters with barbarous tribes. Its temples and teocalli ¢ 
dwindle away in almost the exact ratio of the distance which they 
had proceeded from their central seat. Yet there was a strong 
clinging to original ideas and forms. On reaching Florida and 
the Mississippi valley their teocalli assumed the shape of large, 
truncated mounds, still noted as the sites of their sacerdotal and 
magisterial residence—for these functions were here, as there, 
firmly united ; while the adoration of the sun, as the symbol of 
Divine Intelligence, was found to be spread among all the tribes 
of North America, to the borders of Lake Superior, and even 
through New England. Viewed in the present area of the United 
States, to which the disturbing influence of the twelfth century 
manifestly reached, there were originally, and still remain, great 


1 For a general account of the mounds and their contents, see C. Thomas 
i. and iil. 

2 C. Thomas ii. 680, 683, 684, 687, 688. 

8 T shall, in future chapters, refer to this region (see Sketch Map No. 2) as 
the Mound Area. * Truncated pyramids = “‘ god’s houses.”’ 


14 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


resemblance of customs and arts, and of traits mentally and 
physically.”’ 1 Clark Wissler states that the use of pyramidal 
mounds for burial and ceremonial purposes extends from Mexico 
to the Great Lakes, which is yet another sign of the unity of 
culture throughout this region.? 

Although the culture of the mound-builders shows manifest 
signs of continuity with that of the Indians, yet it is superior in 
the arts and crafts. For instance, some of the mounds contain 
dolmen-like burial chambers made of large slabs.2 Some mounds 
in Georgia, Kentucky and Tennessee contain, moreover, carved 
stone images. None of the Indian tribes use stone for any purpose 
except implements, and they certainly do not make carved stone 
images. 'The mound-builders also made pottery heads and death 
masks, both of which are unknown among the Indians.* In the 
making of mounds they are also to be sharply distinguished from 
the great majority of the Indians. In culture the mound-builders 
thus stand midway between the civilizations of the South and the 
Indian tribes. They possess some of the arts and crafts that the 
Indians lack, while their own accomplishments do not rival those 
of the Mexicans. For instance, the sculptor’s art was at home 
in the south, so that ‘‘no stone-carving worthy of the name 
occurs north of the Rio Grande.” ® The civilization of the Mexicans 
and other peoples of the South can be compared with those of the 
mound-builders and the Indians in yet another way. It is said 
that “In Mexico... gold and silver were skilfully worked 
by casting, soldering, hammering and inlaying,”’® and that “‘ The 
North American Indian does not, during prehistoric times, appear 
to have worked or used gold or silver for either ornament or 
utility.””? While it is not quite exact to say that none of the 
Indian tribes used metals, it certainly is true that a great gulf 
exists between them and the Mexicans in this respect, and that 
the mound-builders are intermediate between them. 

Mexican agriculture was founded on irrigation, which is un- 
known in the mound area. Indian tribes invariably grew their 
crops on small mounds. But the mound-builders seem, partly, 
to have had a more intensive system of cultivation. “ It is pretty 
well established that since the time of the mound-builders and 
prior to the advent of the Indians, a race known as the ‘ villagers ’ 
occupied certain districts in this country and made the ‘ garden 
beds’ found in northern Indiana, Lower Missouri, and in the 
valleys of the Grande River and St. Joseph’s, Michigan. The 
beds exist in the richest soil in that part of the country. Some 
of the lines of the plots are rectangular and parallel, others are 
semicircular and variously curved, forming avenues, differently 
grouped and disposed. ‘They cover from ten to one hundred 
acres, and sometimes embrace even three hundred acres. The 

1 Schoolcraft V. 30. * Wissler iv. 103. 8 Yarrow 115. 


4 T, Wilson i. 468 e.s., 475 e.s. 
5 Wissler ii. 134. 8 Wissler ii. 126. 7 T. Wilson i. 508. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, NORTH AMERICA 15 


beds are laid out with great order and symmetry, and have certain 
peculiar features that belong to no recognized system of horti- 
culture. These beds are entirely different from the system of 
field culture as practised by the Indians, and no similar remains 
are connected with the enclosures of Ohio.” 4 

When the three groups of peoples are compared, Indians, 
mound-builders and Mexicans, it is evident that their cultures 
are graded in progression. On the basis of maize-growing it is 
possible to claim a fundamental unity. The culture of the south 
came first, and gave rise to that of the mound-builders, which 
in its turn produced that of the Indians. In every case the arts 
and crafts, instead of developing as the result of this transmission, 
degenerate ; often they disappear. 

The various groups of Pueblo Indians, although differing in 
speech, are similar in culture, and are all related to each other, 
as is evident from a study of their origin stories. These peoples 
have not always lived in this region in the same stage of culture, 
but are described as remnants of a dwindling race or as powerful 
sedentary tribes reduced to distress and decadence. The dwellings 
of their ancestors are scattered, as may be seen from Sketch Maps 
Nos. 10 and 11, over an area wider than that occupied by the 
present tribes (see Sketch Map No. 2). These ruins are found 
in Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona and the north of 
Mexico. They are situated more especially on the banks of the 
Colorado and its tributaries, the Rio Grande and its tributaries, 
and the Sierra Madre of Mexico. They are of three main types: 
cave-dwellings ; cliff-dwellings made by enlarging and altering 
natural caves or rock shelters, or by cutting caves in the cliffs on 
the banks of the rivers ; and ruins in the valleys, plains or rocky 
plateaux.? Many of these are on an enormous scale, witnessing 
to the extent of the past civilization of the Pueblo Indians. 

This region is full of existing and disused irrigation systems, 
the early ones being the more elaborate. The Moqui Indians 
formerly made reservoirs lined with masonry. ‘‘ The face of 
the cliff had been ingeniously converted into terraces. These were 
faced with neat masonry, and contained gardens, each surrounded 
with a raised edge so as to retain water upon the surface. Pipes 
for the reservoirs permitted them at any time to be irrigated. . 

A long flight of stone steps, with sharp turns that could easily be 
defended, was built into the face of the precipice, and led from 
the upper reservoir to the foot of the town.”® Again it is said, 
* the walls of the terraces and reservoirs were of partially dressed 
stone, well and strongly built, and the irrigating pipes conveniently 
arranged.”’* Fewkes says in one place, ‘Students of south- 
western archeology are familiar with rows of stones marking off the 
surface of the land in rectangles of great regularity. Some of these 
lines of stones extend for several hundred feet.’’ Similar sites are 


1 Maclean 131. 2 Beuchat 187.6 °® Bancroft IV. 668. +4 Ibid., 670. 


16 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


found in the San Simon valley. ‘‘ They may be regarded as the 
walls of terraced gardens, so placed as to divide different patches 
of cultivated soil, and to prevent this soil from being washed 
down to the plain below.” Very extensive irrigated terraced 
gardens are to be seen not far from San Jose. “ It would seem 
from their distribution that not only irrigation ditches watered 
the Valley of Pueblo Viejo, but also that the water was in some 
way carried up the hill-sides, so that land now barren was in 
ancient times cultivated by the people of this region.”1 The 
earlier stage of Pueblo culture was therefore, it seems, more 
elaborate than that of the present-day tribes, such as the Zuni, 
Hopi, Sia, and others.2. But many of these tribes still practise 
irrigation and live in houses of mud brick, thus surpassing the 
Indians of the Mound region. But they have, in some instances, 
fallen still lower in the scale of culture. In his commentary on 
the creation legend of the Zunis, an important group of Pueblo 
Indians, Mr. Cushing explains how the present tribe originated. 
It is compounded of two groups, one of which, akin to the Pueblo 
peoples of Utah and Colorado, settled in the region and practised 
irrigation. Of the early people Mr. Cushing says: ‘“‘ There is 
abundant reason for supposing that the ‘ elder nations “—those 
peoples whom they ‘ overtook,’ the ‘ People of the Dew,’ the 
‘Black People,’ and the ‘Corn People’ of the towns builded 
round—were direct and comparatively unchanged descendants 
of the famous cliff dwellers of the Mancos, San Juan, and other 
canyons of Utah and northern New Mexico.’’* These settled 
irrigating people were dominated by an incoming group from the 
west, that made themselves into the ruling class. The later 
comers were much less advanced in the peaceful arts: they did 
not cultivate the soil, or, at least, they did not cultivate it to any 
considerable extent, before they met the first of these peoples ; 
for, to use their own words, they were “ ever seeking seeds of the 
grasses like birds on the mesas ”’ (mountains).4 The introduction 
of the horse had the effect of detaching some of the Pueblo Indians, 
and caused them to take to the nomadic life ; this was so with the 
Navaho, Apache, and others, who formerly lived sedentary lives 
and made stone houses. Pueblo culture has thus gone steadily 
downhill. 

Many reasons can be adduced for believing that the civilization 
of the Pueblo region was derived from the direction of Mexico ; 
for in material culture and in ritual and belief many ties connect 
the two. But apart from this, the fact that the Pueblo Indians 
grow maize is sufficient evidence of the southern origin of their 
civilization. 

Mexico and the south is thus the home of culture of the tribes 


1 Fewkes vii, 176-8. 


* See Duff 304 e.s., for continuity between early and late in the Pueblo 
area. 


5 Cushing ii. 69. 4 Id., 68, 69. 5 Beuchat 2265. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, NORTH AMERICA 17 


of the United States. When the Spaniards arrived at Mexico 
City they found the Aztecs in power. But these people were the 
descendants of conquerors who had come a short while before 
from the north. They were not the founders of Mexican civili- 
zation : that was the work of a far earlier people. Behind the 
Aztecs in Mexico were the Toltecs, whose existence has been so 
often asserted and denied. The Toltec civilization, although the 
earliest known in Mexico, is not so old as that of the Maya, farther 
south ; its beginnings coincide with the time when the Maya had 
colonized Yucatan, in the second period of their development, 
for ample evidence exists of cultural relationships between the 
two groups. The great Toltec cities were Tula, Teotihuacan 
and Cholula, the first two of which were founded, it is said, in the 
seventh or eighth century a.p., at about the end of the Maya 
epoch of greatest brilliancy : and probably these cities were in 
their greatest splendour several centuries later. They appear to 
have declined in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and other 
cities rose in their stead; for instance, Tezcuco, Tlascala, and 
Tenochtitlan.2 This civilization was not a local product of 
Mexico. As Mr. Spinden says: ‘“‘ Similarities in material arts, 
socia} organization and religious institutions bind the various 
peoples of southern and central Mexico in a firm ethnographic 
union with the Maya.” 3 Since the Maya civilization came first, 
to it are to be ascribed the beginnings of the later civilizations of 
the area ; and therefore, ultimately, of the rest of North America.* 
Of that there seems no reasonable doubt. For instance, it is 
certain that the calendar was invented by the Maya, who brought 
it to its highest degree of perfection. In Mexico it is supposed 
to have been introduced by Quetzalcoatl (the great culture-hero 
of the Nahua-speaking peoples). Five of the animals representing 
day-signs in the Aztec calendar do not occur in the highlands of 
Mexico, but are indigenous to the Maya country, which is good 
evidence of origin in that place.® 

The Maya country extended between 87° and 94° West Longi- 
tude, and 14° and 22° North Latitude. It comprised the states 
of Tabasco and Chiapas in southern Mexico ; Guatemala north of 
the Motagua river ; part of Honduras, including the head-waters 
of the Copan river, the lower course of the Ulea and probably the 
whole valley of the Comayagua; and the peninsula of Yucatan 
and British Honduras.* The earliest cities probably were Tikal, 
Copan, Quirigua, Naranjo, Yaxachilan, Piedras Negras and 
Palenque, which contained great stone pyramids and irrigation 
systems. This civilization reached its zenith in the first period 
of development, just after the beginning of our era; the level of 
culture was the highest ever reached by a native American civili- 
zation. It is said that although inferior to the Peruvians in the 


7 Aaa i. 219. 2 Spinden i. 220. Sketch Map No. 12. 
- 1. 219. 4 Spinden i. 1. 
® Spinden i. 220. 8 Spindeni. 1. Sketch Map No. 13. 


2 


18 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


textile arts, to the Chiriqui people in metal-work, and to the 
Aztee in military organization, they far excelled any other 
civilization of America in their material culture. In none of the 
later Maya settlements was there any improvement in the tech- 
nique of arts and crafts, but rather a deterioration. Mr. Spinden 
says, ‘“* Maya art is on a much higher scale than any art in America 
except possibly the textile art of Peru.’’* But this level is not 
maintained. For, speaking of the stele found in the early 
Maya cities, he says: ‘* Instead of an increase of accuracy in the 
representation of the natural proportions of the human form, 
there is a marked falling off.’’? He goes on to say: “ The 
mechanics of architecture seem hardly to have suffered a set- 
back. Only esthetic art in its most spiritual» and imaginative 
phases was blotted out by some potent social change.’’* What 
that social change was will be discussed in a later chapter. 

In the course of time the civilization of Mexico gradually 
deterioriated in material culture, and the final blow was given 
by the Spaniards ; so that, at the present day, the Lancadones 
live in the valley of the Usumacinta, the first home of the Maya 
race, In a region strewn with ancient cities. ‘‘ Scattered thinly 
in family groups, these people have indeed reverted to the wild. 
Although their religion is now of the primitive guardian animal 
type, the ritual still preserves features that point upward to the 
past, as also does the making of pottery or cloth.”® Direct 
descendants of the Maya still live in Yucatan with a culture so 
low that, were it not known that they were of Maya stock, it 
could be claimed that they represented an early stage in the 
development of civilization.® 

The result of the study of the historical sequences of cultures 
in the northern half of America can be summed up in a few words. 
First appeared the Maya civilization of Guatemala and its neigh- 
bourhood, possessed of all the arts and crafts of the later civili- 
zations, and equalling, if not excelling them all in practically 
every respect. This Maya civilization gave rise to others in 
Yucatan and Mexico, of a lower level in culture. These, in their 
turn, sent out shoots. The United States was influenced, and 
communities appeared there depending for their sustenance on 
maize, brought from the south. In time these new civilizations, 
in their turn, degenerated in the arts and crafts, and the final 
upshot was to produce communities of a low level of culture, not 
only in the United States, but also in the home of the Maya 
civilization. The tale is one of uninterrupted culture degradation, 
a surprising result : and, so far as I am aware, there is not a single 
fact to contradict this generalization. 

How did the Maya obtain their civilization ? I do not intend 
at this stage to say anything to bias the reader one way or the 


1 Spindeni. 14. Cf. also Joyce ii. 
2 Spinden 1. 14. 3 Id., 158. « Jd., 198. 
° Spinden i. 12. 6 Gann. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, NORTH AMERICA 19 


other, but will simply quote the words of two competent author- 
ities in American archeology. According to Mr. Morley, the 
origin of the Maya civilization is “‘ lost in the remote past, not 
even the shadowy half-lights of tradition illumining its beginnings. 
The very earliest inscriptions literally burst upon us fully formed, 
the flower of long-continued astronomical observations expressed 
in a graphic system of exceeding intricacy. It seems probable, 
indeed, judging from the complexity of the earliest texts, which 
are in stone, that the hieroglyphic writing must have been developed 
on some perishable medium such as wood or fibre-paper or parch- 
ment, the destruction of which by natural processes would satis- 
factorily explain the entire absence of its earlier stages.’ 1 Again, 
Mr. Spinden: ‘‘It would be accepted as self-evident that the 
Maya calendar could not have sprung suddenly into being, based 
as it is upon exact astronomical facts and intricate mathe- 
matical calculations. There was no earlier civilization in the 
American field sufficient to furnish even the fundamental concepts 
of the calendar. No one can tell how long a period of observing, 
recording or correcting was necessary before the Maya year count 
was made nearly as accurate as our own, and far superior to the 
best that the classical culture of Greece and Rome could offer. 
Furthermore, other features of Maya culture must have passed 
through a long period of selection and evolution before the 
beginning of the period of recorded history. The simple picto- 
graphs of the American Indians, the only prototype that research 
has offered, could not in a moment have developed into a compli- 
cated hieroglyphic system. Government and religion must have 
had time slowly to master its control over the mass of the people 
before the great pyramids, some of which probably antedated 
even the most archaic monuments, could have been attempted.” 2 

I leave the reader to ponder over these words, and to solve for 
himself the problem with which he is thus faced: How did a 
great civilization suddenly arise in one place, spread thence, and 
ever after steadily go downhill. Of more immediate concern is 
the utilization of the results already achieved, so that they may 
be applied to other parts of the region. 

It is possible, on the basis of certain cultural elements, to draw 
a line of distinction between the civilization of Mexico and the 
South, and that, say, of the post-Columbian Indians. It is 
necessary not to take too many elements to begin with, for that 
would only complicate the argument. But if it is noted that the 
civilization of the Maya, and the South generally, differed from 
that of the Indian tribes of the United States in that it possessed — 

(1) The use of stone for purposes of construction ; 

(2) Irrigation ; 

(8) Sculpture, especially the carving of stone images; 

(4) Metal-working, especially for the precious metals ; 


1 Morley i. 141. * Spinden i. 171. 


20 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


it will be agreed that the two groups are well differentiated. I 
do not mean that this division is water-tight, but that it enables 
us to draw a broad line of division. As the survey works west- 
wards it will be found that a similar distinction between early and 
late is widespread. This makes it convenient to give the earlier, 
more advanced stage a name, and I shall therefore call it the 
Archaic Civilization, and shall consider it provisionally as character- 
ized by the four cultural elements above enumerated. I shall 
make no attempt to distinguish between different sorts of stone- 
work, or metal-working, but shall accept the crafts themselves 
as the important facts. The justification for this attitude must 
come later. 


CHAPTER IV 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 


‘Te vast region of Oceania contains two distinct peoples. 
In Melanesia, which comprises the western part, the 
Solomons, the New Hebrides and Fiji, the population is 
dark-skinned and negroid in type. In Polynesia, which com- 
prises the rest of the Pacific with the exception of Micronesia, 
the population consists of light-skinned people somewhat akin 
to the inhabitants of countries west of the Pacific. The population 
of Polynesia is relatively uniform, though the effects of an infusion 
of Melanesian blood can be detected in certain places. Because 
of this diversity of race it is customary to divide Oceania into 
two broad divisions, Polynesia and Melanesia. 

Scattered through Polynesia are stone monuments and stone 
statues, of varying shape and size, which in many cases are not 
used by the present population for any purpose. Some of these 
remains, such as those of Easter Island, have, for various reasons, 
attracted much attention. One principal cause of the interest 
aroused by them is that, in the words of Rivers, the manufacture 
of these monuments ‘“‘ seems quite beyond the present powers 
and implements of the people, and in most cases the inhabitants 
do not know when or by whom these objects were made.”’ ? 

Easter Island has a fascination of its own. Its remote isolation 
in the Eastern Pacific strikes the imagination when one thinks 
of the people who erected the massive stone terraces and carved 
the gigantic stone statues that it contains. The monuments of 
this island, according to one authority, consist of *‘ stone houses, 
massively built, and placed in rows or streets: platforms from 
200 to 300 ft. in length, and 15 ft. to 20 ft. high on the outer 
or seaward side, constructed of hewn stones dovetailed together ; 
stone statues 3 ft. to 30 ft. high, representing the upper portion 
of a human figure, sometimes standing on the platform and 
sometimes on the ground; and sculptured rocks, the subject 
being generally the human face. On the heads of the larger 
figures crowns made from a red volcanic stone were fitted.’? In 
the quarries whence the stone was obtained some figures were 
found. ‘‘ One of these figures measured 20 ft. from the nape 
of the neck to the top of the head, which was flattened for the 


1 Rutland iii. 44. 2 Rivers vi. II. 437. 
21 


22 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


reception of a crown. From the appearance of the eye-sockets, 
it has been conjectured that black obsidian eyeballs were origin- 
ally inserted. Another peculiarity of the figures is the dispro- 
portionate size of the ears.’’! The platforms on which these 
statues were placed were pyramidal in shape. The builders of 
these monuments were evidently skilled agriculturists, for 
remains of irrigation systems have been found on the island.® 

Hawali possesses stone ruins. For instance: “ In the remark- 
able temple of Umi on the desert plain of Hawaii, 7,000 ft. 
above the sea, the huge pyramids of stone remain to this day 
as monuments of the devotion and industry of chiefs, priests 
and the men of the districts of the island.” * Stone tombs were 
formerly made for the kings; one is mentioned as built some 
time before 1700 a.p. The Hawaiians practise irrigation for 
taro-growing.° 

Stone idols and stone walls testify to the presence in the past 
of a population on uninhabited Necker Island, 450 miles west- 
north-west from Honolulu. Stone remains also exist in Fanning’s 
Island, near Christmas Island. The Marquesas possess stone 
remains in the form of statues and buildings.’ About these 
Rivers has collected some interesting information. ‘‘ Several 
statues with points of resemblance to the remains of Easter Island 
have been found in the Marquesas. In Nuku-hiva Porter saw 
a statue of stone, about the height of a man, but ‘ larger pro- 
portioned in every way,’ round which the dead were exposed 
in canoes. This figure differed from those of Easter Island in 
being in the squatting position, but a greater similarity is present 
in a statue found by Christian in the island of Riva-oa. This 
was about 8 ft. high, and in the position of the arms and general 
character of the features definitely resembled the statues of 
Easter Island. ... The ma’ae or sacred places had two or 
more platforms, but there is no evidence of a pyramidal form.” 8 
Platforms are also mentioned 100 yds. long, many of the blocks 
of stone of which they were made being as much as 8 ft. long, 
shaped and closely fitted. The platforms were surrounded by 
upright stones, and on top had pyramidal altars.® The people 
of these islands formerly practised irrigation. “‘ In all the valleys 
one can see a Series of terraces, platforms of various sizes, according 
to the slope of the ground. These terraces have stone supporting 
walls and irrigation canals for the water supply.” 1° Irrigation 
works are found also in the Paumotus. | 


1 Rutland iii. 38-9. 2 Rivers xiv. 83. 3 Ratzel I. 254. 

4 Brigham 97-8. 

5 Written communication from Mr. A. M. Hocart. 

6 Ellis I. 124: J.P.S. 3, 1894, 153. 

? Christian i. 194. 8 Rivers xiv. 295-6. ® Rivers x. 440. 

10 Tautain ii. 543. Handy mentions ma’ae in these’islands ‘‘ sometimes 
consisting of several terraces running up a hill-side’’ (228). In a letter to 
Rivers he denies the existence of irrigation terraces in the Marquesas. Perhaps 
he has mistaken the function of those described by him. 


@ Remains of Archaic Civilisation 
EB Dual Organisation 
eo Pearls 


Washingtont. 
@ Fanning [. 
-Christmas [. 


. Jarvis [. 


- Starbuck [. 


@e 
Victoria I. Ali ar as” 


Ce, -Malden I. 
pia enrhyn [. “ 
- Humphrey I. line ret caret est 


6.9 °@;% 6 


eRaiatda 


Cook ly. . 


ubuai 


Rarotonga . i- ar aia Se . 
8 


EASTERN POLYNESIA 


a 
, 
‘ . +h 
J a 
2 
. - a 
' 
~ \ : 
j ‘ 
\ mS rere 
t vy 
< 
. 
= ti 
; , 
’ a 
2 f 
ao Ne @ sin 5 — etry 
su 454. ] or | Fy here 
Leen fe 4 
cee, 6 f 
ce et 


ot 


eee et ened “Fy 
S 


Boseuers wns a ean Jie Nie, tial 
+ cdisingt taal ART aie 
. 


€: % +a 8 “ 
esos ee aad 4, 5 ete es 
Pre a) * P . . i 


Awan 


e 


Pda reek : Pi er Rr eA ge 
” , / oe ae 4 > Ata amy a 


p oe : '. ee Pee 
é i ( ue Ls out 
- La { % $)r6 
re 
; ¢ a 
Pd 
Pop ate 
fier sie i ae 
SH LS CP aS ar” ; ' ; 
way a . Afra! ‘ 
, it . Oe a | aah : ; 8 a“ OG +e 9 
7 : i a ok a 
*y lines meee ida 9 
, 4 ‘ t i an 
Ss imeitag rays Aca m 1, arta ‘ 
L Fiulé 
rye ge 
; at 
H @ i 


Shp lade al os ‘e ot ¥ 1 gre. 


—') my i @ * an Ri 
; a ai 
’ . | aay vir a ale 


¥ 
> 


} v . * aoe . 
; ee ct nee’ 
+ ~# = 
7 i ‘ q 
* ‘ : ~y 
& & wa ' = hha ia 
LAS ; 
’ it : C { p . y - 
4 : , 4 t eo 40 Rid y . hi 

. ae om 8 
je ‘7 
i ee at os ' 


, 4 | wae ‘ ; ‘ 
} h vee a Las Pad , vee 


Speen ee Pia PAE had mation eth cota tomy TI Ny Maat et APNE REM ABR SR, NR Rw er 
» f i 
EA ior WATT AS 
& 
{ ‘ isy* . ~ in 
' 
; ' Lm | 
‘ ; ae | 
. - ¥ . ? 
¢ 4 . r oe 
s & ays / 
»~ &, ; die : 7 
a ~ 
| 
‘ 
: . 
bd re ’ t 
. ‘ 
ohn 4 
. * » i 
. 
a4 + be ' ef Sed 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 23 


Stone temple foundations are reported from Pitcairn Island. 
Stone statues have been found at Raivaivai of the Austral Islands, 
‘“‘and yet in the other islands of this group there is now no trace 
of megalithism; the existence of great stone statues and 
maraes in this islet is stilla puzzle.” ? Mangaia of the Cook 
Islands does not seem to possess any stone remains, but Gill 
mentions a stone “‘idol”’ that the natives broke on conversion 
to Christianity. ° 

The Society Islands possess many megalithic monuments, and 
in this respect seem to be the most important of the eastern 
Pacific. Tahiti possesses a great number of ruins of pyramidal 
structures that played an important part in the religious rites 
of the people. Raiatea also possesses some important marae, 
among them being that of Opoa, of which more will be heard 
in later chapters. Captain Cook described one of these monu- 
ments, called a marae. “It is a long square stonework built 
pyramidically ; its base is 267 ft. by 67 ft. ; at the top it is 250 ft. 
by 8 ft. It is built in the same manner as we do steps leading 
up to a sundial or fountain erected in the middle of a square, 
where there is a flight of steps on each side. In this building 
there are eleven of such steps; each step is about 4 ft. in height, 
and the breadth 4 ft. 7 in., but they decreased both in height 
and breadth from the bottom to the top. On the middle of the 
top stood the image of a bird carved in wood; near it lay the 
broken one of a fish carved in stone. There was no hollow or 
cavity in the inside, the whole being filled up with stones. The 
outside was faced partly with hewn stones and partly with others, 
and these were placed in sucha manner as to look very agreeable 
to the eye. Some of the hewn stones were 4 ft. 7 in. by 2 ft. 4 in., 
and 15 in. thick, and had been squared and polished with some 
sort of an edge tool. On the east side was enclosed with a stone 
wall a piece of ground, in form of a square, 860 ft. by 354 ft. ; 
in this were growing several cypress-trees and plantains. Round 
about this marae were several smaller ones all going to decay, 
and on the beach between them and the sea lay scattered up 
and down a great quantity of human bones. Not far from the 
great marae were two or three pretty large altars, where lay the 
skull-bones of some hogs and dogs.”’ ® 

There is a megalithic stone circle on Penrhyn Island.6 Samoa 
has its monuments, among them the Fale-o-le-Fe’e, which forms 
‘another link in the chain of mysteries of the past, regarding 
which we seek in vain for some help to unravel.’”?’? The earlier 
generations of Samoa are said to have had idols, but they are 
not used by the later population of the group.® 

Tonga has its megalithic remains. Near Kolonga in East 


1 Ellis I. 124. 2 J.P.8. 27, 1898. 8 Gill ii. 15. 
4 Baessler 256. 5 Rutland iii. 38-9. 8 Westropp 56. 
? Stair i. 42; v. 42,45; J.P.S. i. 62, 8 Stair i. 33. 

i 


24 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Tongatabu is an immense trilithon, comparable with those of 
Stonehenge, the purpose of which is not known. It must there- 
fore have been erected in an age of which only traditions persist. 
It is said that the stones were brought from elsewhere, but 
this may not be so. At the same time the transportation of 
large stones is well known in Tongan folklore. In this group 
is an artificial hill about which nothing is known, a noteworthy 
fact in an island where the memory of sacred spots dies hard. 
This mound, built of lumps of coral, is 15 ft. high with a causeway 
leading to the flat summit.? 

Fiji has its megalithic monuments. In the island of Rotumah 
are ‘‘stone tombs, composed of masses so large that it was 
difficult to conceive the means by which the natives had been 
able to move and arrange them.’’ Many of them were of dolmen 
form.2. The Fijians also had enclosures called nanga in which 
were pyramidal stone structures. According to information 
supplied me by Mr. A. M. Hocart, “irrigated terraces in Fiji 
are almost, if not quite, confined to the islands as opposed to 
Viti Levu. It must be noted that in Viti Levu they can plant 
taro in dry land on the slopes owing to the damp and possibly 
the soil. They cannot in the islands, except Vanua Lava... . 
Terraces do not occur in Tonga unless it may be in Kao and Tofua, 
for the simple reason that the islands are flat and have no streams. 
I have seen none in Rotuma: they plant in dry land.” 

Stone causeways and walls: show that the Chatham Islands 
were formerly inhabited by stone-using people.4 New Zealand 
presents some fascinating problems. In the first place it must 
be remembered that the Maoris on their arrival found in the 
island people called Maruiwi (Moriori), probably so named after 
one of their chiefs. The first Maori settlers came twenty-eight 
or thirty generations ago. Their predecessors are said to have 
been ‘‘ tall and slim-built, dark-skinned, hairy, having big or 
protuberant bones, flat-faced and flat-nosed, with upturned 
nostrils. Their eyes were curiously restless, and they had a 
habit of glancing sideways without turning the head. Their 
hair in some cases stood upright, in others it was bushy.”’ Accord- 
ing to Elsdon Best these people are similar in physical type to 
those of Malekula in the New Hebrides.®° The Maori probably 
derived much of their culture from these Maruiwi.6 The Maruiwi 
are said to have made hill forts, and many terraces in this country 
cannot be ascribed to the Maoris. ‘‘ The terraced hills, the fosses 
and ramparts (presenting scarps in some cases of 20 ft.), the 
double and treble systems of circumvallation, the ingeniously 
contrived earthwork defences for weak places and entrance 
passages—all these are of interest, and well worthy of study. 
Where or how did they originate ? We know that the Maoris 
who settled in New Zealand came from the eastern Pacific area ; 


1 B. Thomson ii. 81. 2 Brabrook 5—6: Allen. 3 Rivers ix. : Joske. 
_ 4 Weule 309. > Best xiii, 435, 437. 6 Cf. Rutland 229, 230. 


a Gilbert l= 


Phoenisc IF 
Ellice IF 


Malaita 


eo ristoval ® Santa . ‘Bowditch IF 
*e ' eo”. Cruz 
ae e: aes 


Savaijo® 
e gs Santa Maria | tino gto F Miia: 
New 


eeiciousento is e nit 
Maleku as Hebrides Fue Gane 
Deees % 
ye @ 
© Fase. @. he re 


* *. Tongatabu 


Banks IS. 


® Remains of Archaic Civilisation 
§ Dual Oganisation 
@ 


Gold Kermadec 15 


®@ @ Pearls 
@ wosid lan 
| 
| 


@ Obsidian 


ZEALAND, 


S Chatham i$ 


WESTERN POLYNESIA, NEW ZEALAND AND SOUTHERN MELANESIA 


t, ; ‘ ya i f 
4 , > z ' ; s 


sendin. com 


i. pri he 2 ae ee ss Ake nae 
‘ me * ply « » Rae BIR ae ee Trek 
ea a rea ‘ 7% | * a ; 


; y ay ‘i 
nM ae ae ) ae 
| Fal "4 ‘ ity ; en 4 7 | 4 ; is as wi en 4 ia std J eck oy, 
’ 51 ¢ , ware. ye cy" =f, be) ) 
; 4 PFO f gis, es Ve ND ate et 
eee co ye a he, ee ae amma Bara 
i eh wy if "% i . 4 “ all ab sis a q 
+4 x ¥ A +7 a4 ee ~~ LY 7 — 
Fe kn: will hel: pre mane 
. } 44 + eb : iw ee ete Se ae ie ia ye. AS 


. ; a ; | } Nae iat ap te , of Ror ya i Ss il. Sa 


- i 7 ac } ») Ms 5 ie Fa Conia * ai a v) eo 


} a * 

: . ¥y" 
bay vib, eee, Orb VN al eh ar irae oe Ce ae) 
wy me ‘ | eel 
wi s a dnp bony es - LoS 

iy tan teats Sit Sg Oe vs 
Oo diem at pied ug ERS ee cee 
Fee cae Gone. einai fe 


b; . nee. ie : edie. 
P itn dl A Coe LDS ae 
ah: 831 ee. SVR ES eet hae 4 
i \ , a y ; mi, ‘ a / Poeun” ; ) me 


t & 7 ys 2. r 
y vit 4 bh _ Py oe et ~ ‘. 
; ars ee ‘ a 
ri it i. ~ | 
' A, t oo o TALES Se 
a iy en ee ¥ 4 er 
fe a : Be t,* 
a} \ - ; ah 
' 2 » ; : 
\ A } 
¢ ~ Pe ; * ’ ‘ J > ; 
‘ i j bee y 4 o. : 
; ; t . ; } hia ” 
, 4 : ; ; ; e 
¥ = : eee 
Seana Nae a einen oO ee | PO ie 
LT A 
; ! »'* " 4 
‘ 3 se aa, ; 
qi? fii ae hs ee ¢ i ig 
* “a } 7 
. a 5 P 1, ha 
7 ! Poet d Th J 
» Ao eet tai 
Xi 
ir 
{ . Ait bA ‘ 
" ® 
: } 
a ™{ ' ay id 
ste 
# i. os 
, ix My i a 
; 
\ a pn 4 ‘ 
. - y tft 24 f 
4 : 
j ‘ 
4 - s 
\ ; 
1 
‘ 4 
% A A. Pome 
ry , ‘ 
4 7 Le 
, 
i by er 
ea wir ; ? ; 
, t 
i. z+ ‘ ! 


{iy A, 


ve, 7 1 ms 1) ee A, sdisthey =3 a oie 


md te eat 


oy) . V eoweats A aia weacare: a iyyia ecdenie Prcae 
| > ive a £6fs", al * away Houats. tal 4' 


- ei i he “oe ‘ 


; ao is ‘ 4 yoy A 7 ee To sith see x vi 


‘ fe ; ; ° 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 25 


we know that no such remains of fortified places are found in 
that area. A few stone-walled refuges exist on the lone isle of 
Rapa. The Tongan fortified places were based on those of Fiji, 
but the Polynesian was not a fort-builder. Apparently the only 
place outside the North Island of New Zealand where hill-forts, 
the defensive works of which were fosses, ramparts, stockades, 
and fighting-stages, were numerous is the island of Viti Levu. . . . 
The origin of the pa maori is a field for inquiry.”” Apparently 
the Maori learned cannibalism and forms of human sacrifice from 
the people whom they found in the island. They adopted some 
of their weapons. Wooden coffins of unknown origin have been 
found in the island. s 

The Maori learned their mode of carving from their predecessors. 
‘*It seems beyond a doubt that the Maori did not bring this 
knowledge with them from the Pacific Islands. ... Many 
splendid specimens of ancient carving have been dug up out 
of swamps, where they have lain presumably for hundreds of 
years ; but in these, we see no sign of the beginner’s hand, they 
are of the same type as those of the present day, but better 
finished, and of a pattern to be found only in New Zealand.” 
** From the ancient inhabitants the Maori obtained a knowledge 
of the greenstone, and how to work it, besides other useful arts 
tn which they were further advanced than their conquerors.”’ 2 

It has already been said that traces have been found in New 
Zealand of a pre-Maori population. In the first place the recent 
discovery of megalithic monuments must be mentioned.* Then 
in the region of Pelorus Sound are traces of a former agricultural 
population living in regions where, at the time of arrival of Captain 
Cook, existed only virgin forest. Since 1855 the clearing of the 
ground about this sound has “ brought to light traces of human 
occupation wholly unexpected. Scattered over the steep hill-sides 
and on the small flats, pits, terraces, shell heaps, and other relics 
have been discovered in numbers that testify ... to a large 
population.”’ The pits and terraces are closely associated. The 
pits are rectangular in shape, and are made in the terraces. 
They are carefully lined with stone, the terraces being always 
much longer and about 8 ft. wider than the pit, allowing between 
it and the bank at the rear a foot or so of level ground. The 
bank or wall, generally about 3 ft. high, was always levelled 
at the top so as to form a narrow horizontal ledge, behind which 
the hill rose naturally. There is a series near Kenepuru so 
that “‘ the profile of the spur has the appearance of a gigantic 
staircase.’’ These were the work of a vanished people. “* Every 
part of the ground furnishes the same unmistakable evidence 
that the forest has taken possession of land once occupied by 
man.” ‘The natives say that the pits were houses, but it is thought 


t Best xiii. 439, 440, 445-7. 2 Gudgeon i. 210, 
3 Rutland 229, 231; Campbell 70. 


26 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


that they may have been sweat-baths, which is not improbable.* 
Some of these pit dwellings were cut out of the rock ; more than 
700 cu. ft. of rock had been removed in one case, and this was 
used in raising walls and levelling the outer margins of the pit. 
‘“‘ Throughout, the walls of the chamber are perfectly perpendicu- 
lar, the angles squarely cut, and the floor even, especially the 
raised portion or dais.” 2 ‘‘They made implements of twelve 
different sorts of stone, some of them, such as greenstone, obsidian, 
pumice, and diorite, being imported for the purpose.” * But 
these people had disappeared long before the arrival of Captain 
Cook. Their ancient taro gardens have been found near Endea- 
vour Islet, covered with gravel brought up from the seashore. 
‘‘ Between the revival of agriculture when the overgrown Maori 
gardens were cleared and the days of the pit-dwellers, there was 
an interval of centuries, during which the Sound could only have 
been inhabited by people subsisting on the natural products of 
the district.’’ 4 : 

Yet other signs point to the presence in the past of strangers 
in New Zealand. In certain places (Weka Pass, near Waikari 
Flat ; Takiroa, near the Waitiki; the Opini; the levels Tengawai 
and Pareora) strange inscriptions occur on the rocks. Haast 
says of them: “I have no doubt that these rock-paintings when 
closely examined by archeologists and linguists will throw some 
light upon the questions at issue, and at least prove that at one 
time there has been some immigration to New Zealand, from the 
north-west and from countries which then possessed a far higher 
civilization than the Maori ever reached.”*® Not only have 
inscriptions been found, but apparently other discoveries are 
reported. According to Crawfurd, writing in 1867: “In 1837 
there was found among the Maories of the North Island a bronze 
bell, bearing an inscription. ... I am satisfied that the relic 
is a Hindu sacrificial bell such as the Brahmins are wont to use 
in the performance of the ritual of their religion—that it was 
cast in Java, and found its way to distant New Zealand, along 
with portions of the Malayan languages in the course of time.” ® 
Apparently, according to Haast, other objects, of silver and glass, 
were found about the same time, but the finders were afraid to 
bring them to the public notice for fear of ridicule.’ 

Traces are present of ancient occupation on the Great Barrier 
Island near Auckland in the North Island, where in many places 
are old terraces with stone retaining walls, and enclosures with 
stone walls, as well as large heaps of stones that had been collected 
prior to the cultivation of the soil in places now covered with 
forests. No signs of Maori occupation could be found.® 

Clearly the Maori were not the first-comers to New Zealand. 


1 Rutland i. 221 e.s. 2 Rutland v. 78. 
3 Rutland i. 225; ii. 111; iv. 4 Rutland i. 231. 
5 Haast ii. 50. 8 Crawtfurd II. e.s. 


7 Haast ii. 61. 8 Westman 83. 


VISANVIA, NUAHLIUYON ANV ‘VANINS MAN ‘VISTNOUOIP 


7TNuy) FIUPSE@” 
-@ TRAC} SU & 
a ees) hg case 9 gO 


eneiew @ oy 41 PIPOOM 0 
; Bee oo 
sI 22ma $1 S Se 
sone “U OULOTO S © 
e . 1] 
r 
pury2s] m2 eae 
os) Qenwpy Bw 
YUINZ22O of 
g] J42qN1D 
nesnyo® 
ie ; ® 
adeuog?: 2 & . ‘ C) sina op 
ie QOS ia 
: = dexo 6 
Peel cy ele? 144 0 eS ' 
s] NPYUSAPW: 6S 


S]LDaAY 


PIOD 
uworosiunbig jong 


UOLPDSIPAL) WUDYILY JO SUIDUAY 


: ¥ ea \ r ¥ ite i.) , 
Baa Sg ht dy. 
if ee one i ules ui f 
ed < i * ot cele 
f ay - ait ee wrk 54 
MY ie a At wes nM 2° < 
¥ , 0 an > 4 
i vs (ied i late f , 
Py, See lee cel 
hike ae! hi : ‘ £ ‘ ve +o 
} a au: 
At ET RT 4 RO 
y yt Nigg x ‘i : 
i : = 
f eile & resides HeN © Be 
Vey b 
i ws fd 
i” a ¢ Sh ee y a wer 
vA, ; , ave! paPAEL 5 f i 
+ “it _ 
we ie err pe a 
mt whey Me lle 
ES Ni 
-- 8) er 
ie ‘ a he wey A A! / 
| bi vag ML ye 
= ' ‘ ae weve ae * 4 
t 
ays : 5 . ala | 
7 \ ree 
, , | A ¥ 
t ‘ ; y yt 4 x if Shoe al rn 
® .4 : 
3) NG), \ oy MAES 
ee) | ca 5 
aes ' » Le ny 
7 Ai wh t a i \ 
eX 5 ‘ ‘ 
PA alad | . 
t { 
es in oe 0) { mM 
. ' : 
& Ki P i 
ae ee ep ad eer ae 
i ? ¥ r fe a 
a ne Ql P| i , s ' Aye 
P i te 
y i - 
e J wl 
oN i ; e's hy c's * ik ge 
oe PM DO iy 't a 
a) ¥ if } ~~ 
a mT, + ; zp Ws, 
5 ‘+ i , + oe 
“I nw ; mee: { tig 
. ie ; a 8 " y ® Mae Whe) Yi 
4 \ F ¥ * 
; P P Ty 
% 
ae ‘ ay} f ut > *y be 
& : 
MI t ser 5 ial 4 a, ul 44 
et ‘ i ¢ i® 
ia A ae 
mr j " ‘ WF » 1y) 
fi i yen: F 
i » (oe wo R 
| by ore sat % 
i. at - a) } > 
7 My ¥ 4 vv 
’ hey ‘ wy 
y in 
i we NOY ju ‘ P 
4 : el 
% 4) % : iY 
na z 
* yay ” ia 
\ 4 i ; 
i] 
{1 Fy ' vy) vo" ‘ 
\ i | any ED 4 
Wh me vy , 
z i , ms ne “ty hy ; 4 
ee 4 Avani irae fas ea ‘ ’ 
aay ' Dd W 
fi | ! sf % 
a H fe pi } D: 4 y 
A ‘" 5 
at ; i p » I yj, | ; 
A i 
ie | a | 
| r™ on are a a - 
i ; \ \ fe 1 
i 4 -. : at ta , * } 
[ + rs We Py 
YY F bo’ : 
d ‘ ‘ f fs 4 
L . : toe 1D 45 ie ey my : 
‘ one ¥ \ Pi h Ih i i 
; y td Yale \ f ow f em 
, ; cs Haart ' ih “Rr 
vi - 4 \ ce ‘ ae ™ 
is ' a : v's j roy ey) Wb a oly = aie * 4 
i et lees 4 yt as we 
"ies ea ar ee ee 1 
i : | ‘ tp Pritt , 
5 'y ‘ , a ; ih e ‘yj r, , 
" ag x, a} te: aR) + , 
Al » wall i ok ® Par n : ( 
4 , »' I =i at 
v 
7 t a | f fetes oe " 
a | ) 
' 7 at 
ye i : ' Vi ne ae 
"" ‘ Che ck A Ae my rag ¥ 
- / i “f x ad'y) h 
saa ae ; Wey lane 
-- ‘ 
De ce = ’ 
* ry 
rw) ves it 
rt - hs ‘ ‘ 
esr | 7 
Sew le H ; i i 
’ ; ra aes, 
A : ¥ i hy 
Pet » | 
a ‘ ’ ‘ ‘ ' ,? A - * ha 
ms a TN : JUNIE =. 4 : 
4 bibs i P , ‘ 
71 n yt ‘ , “ive, agre ‘ I is We aoe ey wy 


i ° Hs rh 4 RAB 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 27 


They were anticipated by people who made great terraces on 
the hill-sides, who did not hesitate to cut dwellings out of the 
rock, who taught them the use of several kinds of weapons. 
These mysterious strangers presumably left cannibalism behind 
them as a legacy, and certain forms of human sacrifice. They 
used several kinds of stone for their implements, and were most 
skilful in stone-carving, their work being better finished than 
that of later centuries. Here, then, is another mystery, one 
more vanished people of relatively high civilization, who are 
succeeded by their inferiors in the arts and crafts. Apparently 
these old people possessed a civilization somewhat analogous to 
that of the megalith builders of Polynesia, in that they erected 
megalithic monuments, used stone for purposes of construction, 
and made terraces, but whether for agriculture or not, is not 
certain. As to their relationship to the Maruiwi whom the Maori 
found in the island, it is not possible to make any definite statement. 

Melanesia is of great interest, for stone monuments are there 
still in use. Terraced irrigation is practised in New Caledonia. 
Glaumont speaks of huge works for taro cultivation, consisting 
of terraces with stone and clay walls: ‘‘ The valley of Tene was 
at the bottom of a basin, and the mountains which surrounded 
it were the sides ; the spectator at the centre enjoying the same 
coup dil as if he were in the middle of a Roman circus.” ! 
Macmillan Brown has noted the existence of megalithic monu- 
ments in this island: ‘“ There are ramparts of stone that might 
have been fortifications. There are a few dolmens or trilithons. 
And there is an extraordinary development of carving on rocks 
and on blocks of stone.’ 2. Archambault comments upon these 
early remains: “These monuments must not be attributed to 
the kanaka population which actually occupies the island. 
Besides the fact that the Papuan races, to which belong our 
Caledonian natives, have never, it seems to me, shown any 
inclination to carve symbols on the rocks, the little attention 
which they attract suffices to show that they count for nothing 
in their existence. These monuments are meaningless to them, 
for the most intelligent of them do not know of the greater part 
of these inscriptions at all, and are incapable of giving any meaning 
to the mysterious figures inscribed on the rocks. One tradition 
only ascribes them to a former chief. It has already been noted 
that rock inscriptions occur in New Zealand. 

“North of New Caledonia, in the New Hebrides, is a certain 
amount of stone-work, some of it in present use. In some 
islands, Santo, Malo and Malekula, an important feature of the 
ritual of the secret societies is the erection of a dolmen-like stone 
structure consisting of a table-stone resting on stone supports, 
on which a new member stands when he is killing a pig.” * An 


1 Glaumont ii. 2 Macmillan Brown ii. 
® Archambault 266. The best houses in New Caledonia are pyramidal 
in shape ( Ella i. 6 5). 


28 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


important use of stone is found in the island of Santa Maria in 
the Banks Islands, where are stone buildings, a miniature trilithon, 
and stone images connected with club-houses. Recently it has 
been found that the island is covered with stone walls to such 
an extent that they must be “several hundred kilometres in 
length’; they are as big as a man, partly built of great blocks 
of basalt, and must have cost an immense amount of labour to 
construct. In many of the basalt blocks are hollows, “‘ sometimes 
as large as a wash-basin, evidently artifacts which can only 
have been made by a gigantic amount of labour, or perhaps 
more probably by a very prolonged use of some kind.” In 
this island are also earthen mounds as high as a man’s shoulder. 
Worked stone has been found in Mota and Loh of the Torres 
Islands. In Malo, south of Santo, are walls and platforms of 
stone, sometimes very finely worked, closely resembling those of 
Santa Maria. In Aurora certain stone rings are said to have 
marked the graves of chiefs, together with monoliths as high as 
a man. Rivers states that “‘ there can be no doubt that the | 
greater part of the stonework of this part of Melanesia is very 
ancient. This is certainly so in the case of the stone-walls and 
earth-mounds of Santa Maria which are ascribed to the labours 
of a people called Mala-vui or Mala-tuniun, who are said to have 
had no houses, to have slept in the bush like animals, and to 
have had little or no sense.’? They are said to have built the 
walls, heaped up the mounds and made the hollows in the stones 
at the bidding of the few ‘normal human beings”? who then 
existed. The phrase ‘‘ normal human beings ”’ is certainly inter- 
esting and remarkable.! 

Farther north, in the Solomons, the recent writings of the 
Rev. C. E. Fox have made it clear that stone is used for various 
purposes. In the Arosi district of San Cristoval each shore 
village has a stone structure called ariari, a platform carefully 
and well built of large even stones, its sides even and its top 
broad and flat, usually 12 to 15 ft. broad and 4 to 5 ft. high, 
Sometimes the ariari is circular. These people also make large 
pyramidal or square stone mounds, on the flat tops of which the 
dead are buried. They construct dolmens on top of these mounds. 
In Guadaleanar and Malaita of the Solomons stone structures 
are also used for ceremonial and other purposes.? 

New Guinea is one of the last places in the world where remains 
of an early civilization of a fairly advanced type would be expected ; 
for in the minds of most it stands for savagery, primeval and 
untouched. Yet little doubt exists that it has had a far different 
history from that which would be expected. In 1907 Messrs. 
Seligman and Joyce wrote as follows: ‘‘ Within the past few 
years discoveries have been made in British New Guinea of 
pottery fragments and implements of obsidian and stone, which 


1 Rivers ix. II. 427-8, 2 Fox 99 100, 176, 177. 


| 


(AUANNIHD AALAV) VANIND MAN HSILIUG 


SOPs 

o8e)}2diyoay 
eprisinoqy 

oO O Be 


‘g 
nevis C2 , tes 


1PSSOY 


$1 AAPTPoog: - 


Dyan erties 
3] Purraqgosy a3 
SIMD 
Many 
eS 
S)LDIq @ ® _ 
P1279 BB 
uonovbiisy 3 & 
SJuawmajduy auars paysijog 4 t @ & ef} 
eve 


UOYDSIPALD DIDYIAp ay) JO Sulpuiay @ @ 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 29 


differ entirely in type from the pottery and implements used 
at the present time by the inhabitants of the localities in which 
the finds were made.” 1 Recently Mr. Chinnery has published 
a paper enumerating all the known discoveries of antiquities in 
British New Guinea and the neighbouring parts of German New 
Guinea. His catalogue is as follows: ‘‘ The objects are ‘ sacred ’ 
stones, standing stones, stone circles; shells with incised orna- 
mentation consisting of concentric circles, spiral scrolls, and 
human face representations ; fragments of ornamented pottery ; 
stone carvings of birds (with snake-like head), human and animal 
figures ; pestles and mortars of granite, lava, and other stone, 
in various shapes, some of them carved; perforated quartz 
implements in various forms, some of which have been converted 
into stoneheaded clubs, and implements of obsidian and other 
stone not used by existing races.” ? 

In New Britain use is made of stone images, but no mention 
is made of any other use of stone. 

According to Miss Semple, “‘the islands of Melanesia show 
generally fenced fields, terrace farming on mountain-sides, irriga- 
tion canals, fertilized soils, well-trimmed shade trees, and beautiful 
flower gardens.” Irrigated terraces are reported in New Britain, 
New Guinea, the Solomons and the New Hebrides.4 In New 
Guinea irrigation is confined to the Massim district, but drainage 
canals are made in the Fly River district and perhaps farther 
west. The irrigation in the Massim district is for taro, and 
elaborate works made long ago are still kept up. Near Wamira, 
Bartle Bay, is an aqueduct about 60 ft. long over a gully 30 ft. 
deep, “‘a very fine piece of work.’’® Terraced cultivation is 
found in the d’Entrecasteaux Archipelago and in Aurora.® Mr. 
Hocart tells me that “‘ terraced irrigation (for taro always) occurs 
on a large scale in Nduke (on the maps Kulambangara), near 
New Georgia. The terraces are banked up with stones. Dr. 
Rivers tells me that terraced irrigation is found in the northern 
part of Santo in the New Hebrides. The distribution of irrigation 
thus corresponds with that of stone-work. Both are the remains 
of an almost forgotten stage of civilization, which only persists 
in a few places. 

The part of Oceania with the most evident signs of a vanished 
civilization is Micronesia, and especially the Caroline group. 
Here, in certain spots, are works which would excite the imagina- 
tion and pride of any civilized man if they were the product of 
his own countrymen. But when they are regarded as the relics 
of people living in such an out-of-the-way part of the world as 
the Carolines, they must cause amazement. Mr. Christian’s 
descriptions will serve to give an idea of the magnitude of the 


1 Seligman and Joyce 325. 

* Chinnery 279. Sketch Map No. 7 shows the distribution of these remains. 
3 Rivers ix. Il. 516. 4 Semple 455, 456; Ratzel I. 255. 

5 Perry iv. 16. § Ratzel I. 256. 


30 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


ruins.! ‘‘ All over the Mariannes, in the seats of the native 
population, before their discovery by the white men, there exist 
certain pyramids and truncated cones, on the top of which are 
placed semi-estufas, i.e. half-spherical bodies. These cones or 
pyramids on the island of Guahan do not exceed 8 ft. in height, 
the diameter of the curious pieces on the tops being about 2 ft. 
... Amongst the natives these go by the name of Houses of 
the Ancients. 'They face each other in parallel lines like a regular 
street. According to tradition the old inhabitants used to inter 
their dead in these houses or cairns.”’ 2. Irrigation for rice-growing 
is practised in the Mariannes.? 

With regard to Yap in the Carolines: ‘‘ The island is full of 
relics of a vanished civilization—embankments and terraces, sites 
of ancient cultivation, and solid roads neatly paved with regular 
stone blocks, ancient stone platforms and graves, and enormous 
council lodges of quaint design, with high gables and lofty carved 
pillars. The ruins of ancient fish-weirs fill the lagoon between 
the reef and the shore making navigation a most difficult matter, 
and calling forth many most unkind remarks from trading 
skippers.’’ 4 

The most important remains are those of the harbour of Meta- 
lanim, the eastern part of Ponape. Here is Nan-Matal, a regular 
Venice built out into the sea, covering an area of several square 
miles. One of the ruins, the Nan-Tauach (the Place of Lofty 
Walls), is thus described: ‘‘ The water-front is faced with a terrace 
built of massive basalt blocks about 7 ft. wide, standing out 
more than 6 ft. above the shallow waterway. Above us we see 
a striking example of immensely solid cyclopean stone-work 
frowning down upon the waterway, a mighty wall formed of 
basaltic prisms laid alternately lengthwise and crosswise after 
the fashion of a check and log fence, or, as masons would style it, 
Headers and Stretchers.” ® 

The left side of the great gateway yawning overhead is 
about 25 ft. in height and the right some 30 ft., overshadowed 
and all but hidden from view by the dense leafage of a huge ikoi 
tree, which we had not the heart to demolish for its extreme 
beauty—a wonder of emerald-green heart-shaped leaves, thickly 
studded with tassels of scarlet trumpet-shaped flowers, bright 
as the bloom of coral or flame tree. 

** Here in olden times the outer wall must have been uniformly 
of considerable height, but has now in several places fallen into 
lamentable ruin, whether from earthquake, typhoon, or the wear 
and tear of long, long ages. Somewhat similar in character 
would be the semi-Indian ruins of Java, and the cyclopean 


* Those of Yap, Ponape, Nauru and Kusaie of Micronesia are described 
and figured in the various reports of the Hamburg Expedition. See A. 
Kramer ii., Miller (Wismar). 

2 Christian iv. 53. 3 Safford 720. 

-« Christian iv. 19. Peed es 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 31 


structures of Ake and Chichen-Itza in Yucatan. A series of 
rude steps brings us into a spacious courtyard, strewn with 
fragments of fallen pillars, encircling a second terraced enclosure 
with a projecting frieze or cornice of somewhat Japanese type. 
The measurement of the outer enclosure, as we afterwards roughly 
ascertained, was some 185 ft. by 115 ft., the average thickness 
of the outer wall 15 ft., height varying from 20 to nearly 40 ft. 
The space within can only be entered by the great gateway in 
the middle of the western face, and by a small ruinous portal in 
the north-west corner. The inner terraced enclosure forms a 
second conforming parallelogram of some 85 ft. by 75 ft. ; average 
thickness of wall, 8 ft.; height of walls, 15 to 18 ft. In the 
centre of a rudely paved court lies the great central vault or 
treasure-chamber, identified with the name of an ancient monarch 
known as Chau-te-reu, or Chau-te-Leur, probably a dynastic title 
like that of Pharaoh or Ptolemy in ancient Egypt.” ! As an old 
chronicler says, the origin of these ruins “is involved in the 
greatest obscurity. The oldest inhabitants can tell nothing about 
them, and has no tradition as to their history. Doubtless there 
existed here a fortified town inhabited by a folk of superior civiliza- 
tion.”’ 

The Carolines show other signs of an advanced civilization. 
Dr. Macmillan Brown has noted the existence in Oleai, or Uleai, 
of ascript. This, and that of Easter Island, are the only known 
examples in the Pacific. The stone money of Yap, chiefly stone 
wheels sometimes weighing several tons, has been brought 300 
miles across the sea from the Pelews.2, Dr. Brown mentions 
also the enormous buildings which are still erected in the Pelews 
and in Yap as men’s clubs as indicative of a former high state 
of civilization.* Traces of ancient cultivation also exist in Yap, 
in the shape of causeways, roads, terraces, and embankments. 4 

Lele of Kusaie in the Carolines also possesses great stone ruins, 
of which Christian says: “‘In careful and minute adjustment 
they are inferior to the structures of Java, but doubtless the 
work of a kindred race of builders labouring under less favourable 
conditions. Looking at their solid outlines, seamed and furrowed 
with the rains and sun of untold generations, one cannot help 
marvelling at the ingenuity and skill of these primitive engineers 
in moving, lifting and poising such huge and unwieldy masses 
of rock into their present position, where these mighty structures 
shadowed by great forest trees, stand defying time’s changing 
seasons and the fury of tropic elements.” ® 

This survey establishes the fact that in the past the population 
of Oceania erected stone buildings, carved stone images, and 
practised irrigation or terraced cultivation, or both. This mega- 
lith-building population is not reported in every group of Oceania : 
I have not found mention of stone remains in Caroline Island, 

1 Christian iv. 79-80, 81, 115. 2 Furness 53. 
3 Brown i. 43. 4 Christian ii. 124. 5 Christian iv. 


82 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the Gambier Islands, Bass Islands, Oparo, Tokelau Islands, the 
Phoenix, Marshall, Gilbert and Ellice groups and Kermadec 
Islands, and others.1. The building of stone pyramids seems to 
have been confined to Easter Island, the Society Islands (especially 
Tahiti and Raiatea), the Marquesas, Fiji, San Cristoval, the 
Carolines and the Mariannes. Tonga and Samoa possess mega- 
lithic monuments of typical form, and it would seem that dolmens 
have been discovered in Fiji and New Zealand. In Melanesia 
dolmens are still used on certain islands. In other places, Hawaii, 
Fanning Island, Necker Island, Paumotos, Pitcairn Island, Austral 
Islands and elsewhere, the remains do not seem to be so extensive. 
In the account certain places stand out as of great importance 
from the extent of their remains; Easter Island, the Marquesas, 
Society Islands, and above all, the Carolines. It will be necessary 
to explain why these places have been chosen for occupation on 
so large a scale. 

On the whole the civilization of Oceania, judging from the 
crafts of stone-working and irrigation, has suffered a considerable 
decline, so that the present-day communities live alongside remains 
beyond their capacity to construct. 

Pottery-making is a useful index of alteration in cultural 
level in the Pacific. In America it occurs along with agriculture, 
and is one of the last crafts to be lost. The distribution of pottery- 
making in the Solomons appears to be the same as that of agricul- 
ture. ‘‘ The inhabitants of the island of Bougainville Straits 
display far more interest in the cultivation of the soil than do 
those of San Cristoval and its adjacent islands.’’ There are 
‘“‘ extensive cultivated tracts with consequent abundance of food 
in the one region, and meagre patches of cultivation with the 
resulting dearth of food in the other.’? Pottery is made in 
Bougainville.? It is also made in the Admiralty Islands, Santo 
of the New Hebrides, New Caledonia, and Fiji.* It is not made 
in Epi or Leper’s Isle (Omba) of the New Hebrides, but fragments 
are found there, as in the parts of British New Guinea where 
remains are found of a vanished population. The former popula- 
tion of Easter Island made pottery.4— Thus the craft evidently 
belonged to the early people, and has persisted in certain spots 
that show strong traces of the former civilization. 

Australia has been left on one side. In this book a question 
will have to be faced, the importance of which for the erection 
of a stable theory of human society can hardly be exaggerated. 
An immense structure of theory has been raised on the assumption 
that the culture of Australian tribes is primitive in the real sense 
of the term, that it was elaborated by men in the first stage of 
development of civilization. It is evident, from the summary 


1 See Sketch Maps Nos. 4, 5, 6. 2 Guppy i. 62, 81, 86. 

3 Joyce i. 125-6. It is not made in New Britain (B. Danks 617). 

4 Joyce i. 147; Rutland iii. 6; Suas iii. 202. See also Suas ii. 247, on 
‘culture-degradation. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 33 


discussion of the remains of the archaic civilization of Oceania, 
that Australia is ringed with remains of this old civilization, 
and that these remains approach as close as Torres Straits, 
through which also passes the boundary of food-producers and 
food-gatherers. Can we then assume that Australia was never 
visited by bearers of this civilization? It is claimed that stone 
circles existed in Australia.t If this be so, then the structure 
on which these theories rest collapses. It seems certain that no 
irrigating, stone-working, metal-working, pottery-making people 
have inhabited Australia for any length of time, but that does 
not mean that they have not influenced the culture of the natives. 
The study of the archaic civilization is still too incomplete to 
permit of a closer analysis being made; and the matter must be 
left over until it is possible to apply more delicate tests. At 
the same time the reported presence of stone circles is significant 
and important. 

It can readily be shown that the cultural elements used in 
Chapter III to distinguish the archaic civilization in North America 
from its successors—irrigation, stone-working, the making of 
stone images, pottery-making and metal-working—have, with the 
exception of metal-working, similar distributions in Oceania, and 
can therefore be grouped together as constituting the elements 
of its archaic civilization. Metal-working plays no part in Poly- 
nesia, for the simple reason that no metals occur there. On 
the basis of these cultural elements it is possible to compare the 
archaic civilizations of North America and Oceania, and to claim 
that, for some reason or other, the earliest civilizations of both 
regions were compounded of the ingredients just mentioned. 

Oceania and North America present another point of resem- 
blance. It was possible to claim that the civilization of North 
America was a unit based on Mexico, whence came the cultiva- 
tion of maize, the fundamental food-plant. It is probable that 
the problem of the Pacific can be solved in a similar manner. 
In the Pacific the distribution of man presents problems similar 
to those of animal and plant life. In the words of Mr. Guppy, 
‘* Man and his distribution in the islands of the Pacific reproduces 
in a minor degree all the difficulties presented there by plants, 
birds and other forms of animal life. Like the plant he entered 
the ocean from the west; and as with the plants, so with the 
aborigines, there was an era of general dispersion over this ocean, 
followed by an age in which Polynesian man, ceasing to migrate, 
tended to settle down in the several groups, there undergoing 
differentiation in various respects, as in physical characters, in 
language and in manners. Just as we can now recognize the 
type of a plant, of a bird, or of an insect, that belongs to a parti- 
cular group of islands, so we can distinguish between the Hawaiian, 
the Tahitian, and the Maori, whether in physical characters, in 
his speech, or in his customs. Fiji possesses in the Papuan 


1 Chinnery. 
3 


34 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


element of its population the earliest type of man in the Pacific, 
just as it also possessed in the Coniferae the most ancient types 
of trees in this region. Divesting his mind of all previous con- 
ceptions, the ethnologist might profitably study de novo the 
dispersion of man in the Pacific from the standpoint of plant 
dispersal. . . .’’4 ‘‘ Man in the Pacific is almost as enigmatical as 
the plant. As a denizen of this region he is by no means a recent 
introduction; and though his food-plants are mainly Asiatic, 
they belong to distinct ages in the history of man’s occupation 
of these islands. 

‘I venture to think that a great deal lies behind the Indo- 
Malayan mask of the Polynesian, and that there is a story con- 
cerned with his origin that had yet to be told. We have by 
no means solved the riddle when by following the evidence we 
assign him a home in Asia. It is only then that the real difficulties 
begin. It required many centuries of European civilization for 
the discovery of America; but the voyage of Columbus sinks 
into insignificance when we reflect on what had been dared and 
accomplished by uncivilized man when he first landed on the 
shores of Hawaii and Tahiti.” 2 

Polynesian food-plants fall into two indefinite groups: the 
ordinary food-plants commonly used, such as the yam, taro, 
banana, etc.; jand certain plants growing wild that} are {only 
used when the others fail. Among these are the wild yams, 
mountain bananas, J'acca pinnatifica, and Pandanus odoratissi- 
mus.? With regard to the latter, the older, group Guppy says: 
‘“*Some of them are now occasionally cultivated; but most of 
them only occur in the wild condition, either as weeds or as 
larger plants growing spontaneously in uncultivated localities. 
Even the knowledge of them as food-plants has sometimes been 
altogether lost, the present inhabitants of the Fijis, for example, 
knowing nothing of Labla vulgaris and Sagus vitiensis, as sources 
of food.” ? With regard to the distribution of the early food- 
plants, we learn that the oldest of them are apparently confined 
to Fiji. ‘‘ Here we seem to possess indications of the development 
of new species since that group was first occupied by man. Others, 
like Pachyrrhizus trilobus and Cycas circinalis, that are restricted 
to the groups of the western Pacific, may come next in relative 
antiquity.” 

The wild bananas of the Pacific that are found in New Caledonia, 
Fiji, Samoa, Rarotonga, and Tahiti grow wild in the interior and 
are occasionally cultivated. ‘‘ Birds have no doubt often assisted 
in the dispersal of the wild seeded plants; but it is likely that 
’ man is responsible for the occurrence of the mountain forms in 
the Pacific, and probably their fruits when cooked formed one 
of the principal articles of diet of the earliest immigrants.” 4 

It is thus possible that the food-plants of the Pacific indicate 


1 Guppy iii. II. 411. 2 Guppy iii. II. 412. 
3 Id., 412-3. 4 Guppy iii. TI. 413-4. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 35 


two distinct movements of population into that region. Whether 
they were all imported by man cannot be decided at present, 
but there is no doubt in the case of the later group of plants— 
the breadfruit, banana, yam, taro, ape, Malay apple, winter 
cherry and others. The taro presents a difficulty. Its home is 
probably in India or Indonesia ; but it readily escapes cultivation 
and often runs wild.!_ The breadfruit is an important food-plant 
in Polynesia. ‘‘In popular works the breadfruit has been so 
intimately identified with the Polynesian people that we are apt 
to regard it not only as an indigenous production, but as one 
confined to the islands. Its original habitat was, however, the 
Malay Archipelago, Java, Amboina, and the neighbouring islands, ? 
where it was brought into cultivation at so remote a period that 
the cultivated varieties, of which there are so many, ceased to 
bear seed, and are propagated by suckers. As eastwards of the 
Fiji only the cultivated or seedless varieties are found, it was 
evidently introduced into and spread through Polynesia by man. 
For the dissemination of the breadfruit some skill in the 

art of agriculture was clearly necessary. Were, then, all other 
evidence wanting, the presence of these seedless varieties would 
be sufficient to prove the regular colonization of the islands.” 3 
The banana and plantain (Musa sapientum, Musa paradisiaca) 
afford evidence of the colonization of the islands of the Pacific. 
Roxburgh says that both plants are varieties of one species found 
wild in the hilly districts of East Bengal. The Kew Bulletin 
quotes from Tuckey’s “‘Congo’’ (App. 471) that: ‘‘ There is no 
circumstance in the structure of any of the states of the banana 
or plantain cultivated in India or the islands of equinoctial Asia 
to prevent their being all considered as merely varieties of one 
and the same species, namely Musa sapientum: that their reduc- 
tion to a single species is even confirmed by the multitude of 
varieties that exist ; by nearly the whole of these varieties being 
destitute of seeds; and by the existence of a plant indigenous 
to the continent of India producing perfect seeds; from which, 
therefore, all of them may be supposed to have sprung.’ + De 
Candolle also states that the cultivation of the banana spread 
to the Pacific.” According to Rutland, ‘‘ The banana, like the 
breadfruit, having become barren by long cultivation, can only 
be multiplied by offsets and suckers; its wide dissemination 
through Polynesia is therefore another proof of the colonization 
of these islands.”” The Peruvians had two cultivated varieties 
of the banana, which plant was unknown in the West Indies. 
Rutland suggests that the Polynesians introduced the banana to 
America: ‘To transplant the banana from Polynesia to the 
shores of America across more than 2,000 miles of ocean would 


1 Rutland ii. 5. 2 de Candolle 299. 

* Rutland iii. Cf. Hocart v. for a discussion of the bearing of tradition 
on the question of the transportation of food-plants. 

* Botanic Gardens 24. 5 de Candolle 304. 


36 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


overtax the skill and knowledge of any ordinary European gar- 
dener; but for a people who have dispersed this species and the 
breadfruit through the countless islands that form their home it 
would be a simple undertaking.’’;* 

In the case of the coco-nut, botanical and historical facts are 
in apparent contradiction. For, while innumerable varieties are 
grown in the East Indian Archipelago, a single wild species exists 
on the islands off the west coast of America. It is unknown in 
the West Indies. The botanical evidence seems to be in favour 
of the New World as its original habitat, all the other species 
of the genus cocos being confined to America.? 

But, putting that on one side, the coco-nut tree is of vast 
importance in the study of the colonization of the Pacific. For 
many Polynesian islands would have been uninhabitable were it 
not for its presence. It would seem that the coco-nut must be 
planted in order to grow. ‘“‘ Pickering, who visited a great many 
of the small uninhabited Polynesian islands, states that he did 
not meet with a single instance of the spontaneous extension of 
the species,’’ in spite of the fact that coco-nuts are designed to 
float and to resist the influence of salt water. The Singalese 
have a saying that ‘“‘the coco-nut palm will not grow out of the 
sound of the sea or of human voices.’’ Moresby informs us that, 
although the coco-nut is extremely plentiful along the whole of 
the south coast of New Guinea, and on some of the islands of 
Torres Straits, it does not occur anywhere along the coast of 
north-east tropical Australia. This cannot be due to anything 
either in the soil or the climate, for trees planted by Europeans 
at Caldwell were doing well when Moresby made his observation ; 
we must, therefore, conclude that the spontaneous extension of 
the coco-nut is not so common as is generally supposed, and that 
its wide dispersion throughout the whole of the equatorial islands 
is mainly artificial. This view is further strengthened by the 
fact that the extension of the species in these seas coincides with 
the extension of the art of agriculture.$ 

Other food-plants, such as the Malay apple, tell the same tale. 
The Malay apple belongs to the East Indian Archipelago, and 
not to the mainland, and it was cultivated in Polynesia before 
the arrival of Europeans.4 

In North America the cultural history of an immense region 
depended on one limited area. If the origin of the Maya civiliza- 
tion could be explained, then the rest of the development of 
North American civilization would be understood without much 
difficulty. The cultural history of North America was that of 
steady degeneration in the material arts and crafts. In the 


1 Rutland i. 10. 


‘ Rutland ili. 10-12: Guppy iii. II. 413: de Candolle, however, says 
(p. 435), “‘ I incline to the idea of an origin in the Indian Archipelago.’’ 

® Rutland iii. 12-14. 

* Rutland iii. 15: de Candolle 241. 


~e 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, OCEANIA 37 


Pacific the tale is similar, except that the difference in culture 
between the first and last phases is not so patent. Many parts 
of this vast area contain signs of a people skilled in agriculture, 
who installed irrigation systems, bringing in certain varicties of 
cultivated plants such as the breadfruit, the banana, the coco-nut, 
and others ; who erected megalithic monuments here and there, 
carved stone images and made pottery. The present-day civiliza- 
tion of the Pacific displays none of these capabilities. Since 
Kuropeans came to know them in the sixteenth century, the 
Polynesians have not made any megalithic monuments on a 
great scale, they have not spread the craft of irrigation, and they 
have not introduced new food-plants to any appreciable extent. 
From the botanical evidence it seems that the founders of Poly- 
nesian civilization came into the Pacific by way of Indonesia 
(the East Indian Archipelago), for the breadfruit, the banana 
and perhaps the taro, must have come thence. The problem of 
the Pacific is therefore to be solved either in Indonesia or in some 
region farther west. The groundwork of the civilization came 
thence, just as maize-growing in North America came from the 
south. Botanical and archzological evidence agree in postulating 
an early period when a stream of civilization moved out into the 
Pacific, carrying with it the fundamentals of a relatively advanced 
civilization. Then came a period during which the communica- 
tion was cut, and the Pacific lay isolated from the west until 
the coming of Europeans. Evidence for this is seen in the fact 
that the later variety of the breadfruit, the jackfruit (Autocarpus 
mtegrifolia), which is found on the south-east mainland of Asia 
and in the East Indian Archipelago, did not find its way into 
the Pacific.1 

The evidence thus converges on one conclusion. The early 
civilization of Oceania, as of North America, begins with the 
appearance of people with the fundamental arts and crafts of 
civilized life. Then comes the gradual degeneration of this 
civilization and the obscuring of the old landmarks. In the 
Pacific, as in North America, the origin of civilization is to be 
found in one locality, no evidence existing of an independent 
cultural uplift of any community. The food-plants of the Pacific 
came by way of Indonesia, and consequently it is there that the 
origins of the civilization of the Pacific must be sought. 


* Rutland iii. 10, 28, 46. 


CHAPTER V 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDONESIA 


HE evidence derived from the study of food-plants in 
Oceania suggests that the first colonists of the Pacific came 
from India by way of the East Indian Archipelago, or Indo- 

nesia, as it may be called. But when search is made there for signs 
of the beginnings of civilization, the results are more difficult to 
interpret than those presented by Oceania. For many centuries 
Indonesia has been overrun by strangers bent on domination or 
exploitation, whose activities have so obscured the past that it 
is only by devious methods that any idea can be formed as to the 
course of history. Nevertheless, it is possible to estimate with 
some certainty what sort of culture first existed in this region. 
In studying, in my book,? the distribution of megalithic monu- 
ments and of the sun-cult in Indonesia, I soon found that the 
complexity of the task would be still further increased if account 
were taken of those places where signs of Indian and other foreign 
influence could be detected. I therefore decided to eliminate, for 
the purposes of that book, South Celebes (Bugi, Macassar), Java, 
Bali and the surrounding islands, the Sulu group, the whole of 
Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula and other places that revealed 
obtrusive evidence of later Indian culture. But that did not 
eliminate the difficulty. For Horst, in his work on Hinduism 
in Indonesia, had claimed that Hindu influence could be detected 
in places like the Moluccas, and in Geelvink Bay of New Guinea.? 
It is true that his views had been controverted by Wilken and 
others, but their objections did not seem to dispose of his claims. 
This was a perplexing discovery, for it threatened to make the 
interpretation of Indonesian cultural history extremely difficult. 
However, a choice was made of those parts of the region which 
seemed to be free from alien influence. 

The result of inquiry into the cultural history of the peoples 
chosen for the purpose was to show that, wherever they were 
raised above the food-gathering stage, they invariably claimed, 
or showed in their culture, that they owed their progress to out- 
side influence, or else that they were migrants from a place where 
such influence was obvious. The evidence of this alien culture 


1 Perry vii. 2 Horst. 
38 


VISHNOAN] 


UOQDSIPIALD IIDYIUy Jo SuTmUlay 
STUIULIIAU] JUS PIYS770q 
uognstuvbig Jong 

Uy 

jneyacuny Si ox? 7209 
° Jeddaz 
SPUuowUnUy 
SJLD%) @® 


o4nrf-@ 


Oourszuy | 


® e 3° 
eo 
si yneie lg 
WINSNINDd 
| AWTIWW 


OWNWANI 


i. ¥ ~ 
atin wii. 
Loy Sy igeg, 
." ae t 
4 L “a f 
- 
re a - Fe Gh: 


= 


+> 


4. 

= 
~+ het> yd 
ap SS 


«, 
= 
a 


= 
= 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDONESIA 39 


could be defined as the work of a stone-using, irrigating, metal- 
working people, who established irrigation systems wherever they 
settled, left behind them stone remains, and often were working 
gold as well as the basex metals. 

The highly civilized strangers were concentrated more especially 
in the region east of Java as far as Timor; in Celebes; in the 
Moluccas ; and in the Philippines and Formosa. In the islands 
of Sumba, Roti, Savu, Timor, and elsewhere in this region, they 
have left behind them many traces of their presence. Sumba is 
remarkable for the number and nature of its dolmens; and it is 
to be hoped that a more detailed description of them than we 
possess at present will some day be forthcoming.? The whole 
of the region of the Sunda Islands needs a survey ; for practically 
nothing is known of some of the lands such as Flores, and existing 
accounts date back many decades. The region west of Timor 
is of great importance in the general study of the history of 
civilization, for many of the people are of Polynesian type, so 
that it must have been colonized by Polynesians on their way to 
the Pacific. In the islands east of Timor traditions tell of the 
coming from the west of the founders of villages, bringing with 
them sacred stones around which the village cults are centred. 
The unity of the culture of these islands can hardly be questioned 
and all signs point to the west as the place of origin. 

In Celebes the two regions of Central Celebes and Minahassa 
were selected for study. Much of the island is still unknown, 
and other parts have long been under Hindu and Mohammedan 
influence.* In ‘‘ The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia ’”’ evidence was 
produced to show that the megalithic remains of Central Celebes 
were the work of strangers, who also taught the people where they 
settled to grow their food by means of irrigation. Since this 
book was written, Heer A. C. Kruyt, well-known to ethnologists 
as a worker in the field in Indonesia, has found further traces of 
these strangers, and is now engaged in writing an account of his 
new discoveries. He accepts the conclusions that I had arrived 
at: and in a preliminary account of his discoveries he states : 
**On the way by which these strangers moved through Central 
Celebes, they have left unmistakable traces of their presence, 
partly in the form of stone images, dolmens, monoliths and phallic 
emblems, and partly in the shape of a number of pottery urns 
buried in the ground in which they put the ashes of their cremated 
dead.” ® The civilization of Minahassa is likewise ascribed by 
native tradition to strangers ; people who sometimes placed their 
dead in rock-cut tombs, sometimes in large monoliths hollowed 


1 Perry vii. 170 e.s. See Sketch Map No. 8. 

2 Cf. Kruyt vi., viil., ix., for additional evidence on this topic. 

® ten Kate for photographs of Savu women of pure Polynesian type. 

4 Nevertheless, as will be seen later, the States of South Celebes retain 
many survivals of the past. 

5 Kruyt, A. C., and J., 5. 


4.0 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


out at the top, who made stone images, and in many respects 
showed signs of a high form of civilization. 

In the Moluccas there is evidence of the coming of a stone-using 
population into certain islands. These people left behind them 
stone images, and other traces of a civilization similar to that of 
the archaic civilization of Oceania. In Luzon of the Philippines, 
the culture of the Bontoc, Igorot and Ifugao tribes is ascribed 
to wonderful strangers, who came from the sky and taught them 
all they know, including the use of stone, the working of metals, 
and terraced irrigation. The island of Nias also has a high form 
of civilization, including the use of stone, irrigation and metal- 
working. The evidence discussed in ‘“‘The Megalithic Culture of 
Indonesia’’ supports the conclusion that these people owe their 
civilization to a cultural influence similar to that responsible for 
progress elsewhere in the region. 

This is a mere summary of the evidence for the former existence 
of a highly civilized people in the more backward parts of the 
archipelago. For further information the reader is referred to 
“The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia,’’ where the matter is 
studied in detail. 

It is now necessary to consider those places revealing traces 
of Indian and other definitely alien influences, such as South 
Celebes, Java and Sumatra. What evidence do they afford of 
the presence of the archaic civilization ? To answer this question 
it would be necessary to know what were the relationships between 
the civilization of the Hindus of Java and the archaic civilization 
of other places. It is certain that the two have certain elements 
in common, such as irrigation, the working of metals and stone- 
carving. But in one respect it is possible to distinguish between 
the Hindu civilization of Java and that responsible for cultural 
progress in Oceania; the Hindus of Java never made megalithic 
monuments of the dolmen or stone circle type. In India also, as 
will be seen in the next chapter, the erection of dolmens and stone 
circles antedated the so-called Hindu civilization by an unknown 
period of time. If, therefore, dolmens or stone circles exist in 
regions that were later dominated by the Hindus, it is probable 
that the first civilization of such places was similar to that which 
produced the advance in culture of other parts of the archipelago, 
and that the Hindu civilization was a later arrival. 

It has long been known that dolmens exist in Sumba, an island 
east of Java, and that in other islands near by, such as Roti, 
Savu and Timor, monuments of large stones have been found, 
together with other signs of the former existence of a highly 
developed civilization. Oflate years dolmens have been discovered 
in Java, as well as images of Polynesian type : ? so in this island, 
which, from the first centuries of our era, was the headquarters 
of Hinduisim in Indonesia, relics of the civilization of megalith- 


_ 7 Towe this information to Heer Kruyt. 2 Juynboll 63 e.s. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDONESIA 41 


builders have been found. In various parts of Sumatra remains 
testify to the influence of people far higher in civilization than the 
present inhabitants. Some of these remains are undoubtedly 
Hindu, but in the Passumah lands, inland from Benkulen, Mr. 
H. O. Forbes saw some sculptured stones of unknown origin. 
‘*Some of the most interesting objects in the Passumah Lands 
are the sculptured figures found in so many parts of it.’’ It has 
been thought that these images were of Hindu origin, but Mr. 
Forbes states that this is not so. They are carved in the form 
of human figures in a posture between sitting and kneeling. 
‘* Hach figure has a groove down its back and they had apparently 
stood on a flat pedestal, with their backs towards one centre, 
with their faces more or less accurately towards the cardinal 
points of the compass. The features of all four are of the same 
type of countenance ; but the race now living in this region did 
not form that model, and it is equally beyond question that the 
Hindu features are not represented. . . . If these stones are not 
the work of the Hindus, they must have been carved by either 
the people in .the district or by foreign sculptors. If by Pas- 
sumahers, did they depict their own features or those of another 
race? But who these foreign inhabitants of the Passumah were, 
whence these foreign artificers came and for what these sculptures 
were used, is shrouded in deep mystery. It is quite certain also 
that the present inhabitants could not conceive, much less execute, 
such work of art. ...” ‘The only conclusion is that a superior 
race, possessing considerable knowledge and refined taste, and 
with technical skill not possessed by the natives of any part of 
the island at present, occupied this region ; but who they were 
and when they dwelt here is absolutely shrouded in oblivion,” + 
Unfortunately I have not been able to collect any more evidence 
of the presence of past civilizations in Sumatra; but the words 
of Mr. Forbes make it clear that stone-working strangers were 
wandering about the island at some unknown time in the past. 

Another region of which little is known is that of Southern 
Celebes. Although highly civilized, not much has been written 
of the country that is accessible to me. Seemingly, however, 
the people of the archaic civilization must have been there ; for, 
in their work on Celebes, the Cousins Sarasin report a stone circle, 
or, rather, a circle of stone, surrounding two rocks on the sacred 
Baenteng Peak.* So far as I am aware, no megalithic remains 
have been detected in the Malay Peninsula, except those described 
by Mr. Ivor Evans in Negri Sembilan. Unfortunately it is not 
easy to come to a decision about them; for what are possibly 
ancient remains are now part of a Mohammedan tomb.® 

Sketch Map No. 8 shows that the building of megalithic monu- 
ments, the practice of irrigation, the making of stone statues and 


1 Forbes 201-4. 2 Sarasin, Reisen in Celebes, II. 327. 
3]. Evans ii. 155. 


42 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the working of metals are, in Indonesia, closely associated, which 
suggests that its earliest civilization was akin to the archaic 
civilization of Oceania. In Indonesia this archaic civilization 
has been overlain in places by Hindu and other cultures, which, 
although similar in some respects, differ in others, chiefly in the 
absence of megalithic monuments, such as dolmens, stone circles 
and rock-cut tombs. 

The overlap of the Hindu civilization is obvious in Java, 
Sumatra, and South Celebes. But it is even to be observed 
in the region just west of Timor. For in the island of Savu as 
well as in other localities, traditions tell of the coming of Javanese, 
that is Hindu princesses. Hindu influence can even be detected 
in the foundation of the civilization of some of the tribes of Borneo. 
In this island the people of the interior have been raised from the 
food-gathering stage by the influence of one group, the Kayan 
and their kinsmen, who have travelled across the island from south 
tonorth. It will be necessary later to inquire as to the provenance 
of the Kayan; for the present it is to be noted that they were 
preceded in the centre of the island by people who left behind 
them, on the banks of some of the rivers, carved stone remains of 
Hindu workmanship.? 

It is evident that the overlapping of the Hindu and the archaic 
civilization in Indonesia has caused complications that will need 
unravelling, but they may be ignored when supporting the thesis 
that the study of culture-sequences in any area shows that the first 
food-producing communities were usually more highly civilized than 
those that immediately followed. This is certainly the case in 
those places studied in “The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia.’’ It 
is also obviously so in Sumatra. In Java the Hindu civilization 
was immensely superior to that of the natives occupying the same 
regions after their departure. Wallace describes ruins at Modjo- 
pahit, the ancient capital of east Java. The ruins he saw con- 
sisted of two lofty brick masses, apparently the sides of a gateway. 
‘“‘ The extreme perfection and beauty of the brickwork astonished 
me. ‘The bricks are exceedingly fine and hard, with sharp angles 
and true surfaces. ‘They are laid with great exactness, without 
visible mortar or cement, yet somehow fastened together so that 
the joints are hardly perceptible, and sometimes the two surfaces 
coalesce in a most incomprehensible manner. Such admirable 
brickwork I have never seen before or since. . . . Traces of 
buildings exist for many miles in every direction, and almost 
every road and path shows a foundation of brickwork beneath 
it—the paved roads of the old city.”” He mentions another ruin 
that he saw. “The size of this structure is about 80 ft. 
square by 20 ft. high, and as the traveller comes suddenly 
upon it on a small elevation by the road-side, overshadowed by 


+ The meaning of this map will become clearer after the discussions of 
‘the next two chapters. 2 Rouaffer ii.: Perry vii. 61. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDONESIA 43 


gigantic trees, overrun with plants and creepers, and closely 
backed by the gloomy forest, he is struck by the solemnity and 
picturesque beauty of the scene and is led to ponder on the strange 
law of progress, which looks so like retrogression, and which in 
so many distant parts of the world has exterminated or driven 
out a highly artistic and constructive race, to make room for one 
which, as far as we can judge, is very far its inferior.” ... 
** Sculptured figures abound; and the ruins of forts, palaces, 
baths, aqueducts, and temples can be everywhere traced. .. . 
One is overwhelmed by the contemplation of these innumerable 
sculptures, worked with delicacy and artistic feeling in a hard, 
intractable, trachytic rock, and all found in one tropical island. 
What could have been the state of society, what the amount of 
population, what the means of subsistence which rendered such 
gigantic works possible, will, perhaps, ever remain a mystery ; 
and it is a wonderful example of the power of religious ideas in 
social life, that in the very country where, 500 years ago, 
these grand works were being yearly executed, the inhabitants 
now only build rude houses of bamboo and thatch, and look upon 
these relics of their forefathers with ignorant amazement, as the 
undoubted production of giants or demons.” } 

Peoples such as the Tinguian of the Philippines have traditions 
reaching back to times when they were in contact with a higher 
civilization. The folk-tales relate to a people that lived in the 
sky, but connected with their own ancestors, whose material 
culture, although similar in many respects to that of the present- 
day tribe, was more elaborate. ‘‘ The use of gold and jewels 
seems to have been common in the old times; the latter are 
seldom seen in the district to-day, but the use of bits of gold in 
the various ceremonies is still common, while earrings of gold or 
copper are among the most prized possessions of the women.” 
Evidently these people of the old times are regarded as human 
beings by the present-day Tinguian: ‘‘ They appear rather as 
generalized heroes whose life and deeds represent that of an 
earlier period, magnified and extolled by succeeding generations.” ? 
Apparently these old times are connected in some way with out- 
side influences that brought in glass, porcelain and agate beads ? 
as well as old Chinese jars, which are not of native make.* The 
traditions of the people seem to go back to times before they 
possessed terraced irrigation for rice, and when domesticated 
animals were unknown. Mr. Cole states that the tales of the 
early period are located at Kadalayapan and Kaodanan, which 
are stated at one time to be in the sky, and at another at Abra, 
just north of the tattooed Igorot. It is important to note that 
in the tales of the early period centred round these villages ‘‘ the 
terraced fields and the rice culture accompanying them, which 


1 Wallace 77-81. 2 Cole 21, 26. 
® Cf. Rouaffer for information about the cultural significance of beads. 
* Cole 31. 


Ads THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


to-day occupy a predominant place in the economic life of the 
people, are nowhere mentioned. On the other hand, the Lang- 
paddan, or mountain rice, assumes a place of great importance. 
References to the cultivation of the land all seem to indicate that 
the “hoe culture,’? which is still practised to a limited extent, 
took the place of agriculture.”’,1 This is an important statement, 
for it seems to contradict the evidence already adduced. 

A country that really belongs to the Indonesian culture-cycle is 
Cambodia. It reveals the remains of a civilization, founded by 
immigrants from India, which excites the wonder of every one 
who sees its majestic ruins. Its authors, called the Khmer, were 
overwhelmed by advancing bodies of people from Yun-nan, 
members of the great Tai-Shan group, which has given so many 
ruling families to this part of Asia. There are many remains of 
this mighty civilization in Cambodia : for example the temple of 
Angkor Wat. This immense building is constructed of sandstone 
brought from quarries distant some twenty-five miles. Some 
of the blocks are of great size, weighing more than eight tons, 
and, though no cement was used, they are fitted together with 
so nice an accuracy that a line traced on a piece of paper laid over 
the junction between two stones is as straight as though it had 
been ruled. What the mechanical contrivances could have been 
by means of which these huge blocks of stone were cut, trans- 
ported to the site selected for the temple, and hoisted into their 
destined places in the temple, is a riddle to which it would by no 
means be easy to supply an answer. The amount of human 
labour at the disposal of the architects must have been enormous, 
and the civilization which inspired such designs and could carry 
them into successful execution must have attained to a very high 
standard. - 

‘** Even more astonishing than the titanic character of the ruins 
is the wealth of beautiful detail which they display. Almost every 
individual stone is curiously carved. Statues of immense pro- 
portions, figures of Buddha, of giants and kings, of lions, dragons, 
and fabulous monsters abound. ‘The bas-reliefs show processions 
of warriors mounted on birds, on horses, tigers, elephants, and 
on legendary animals, combats between the king of the apes and 
the king of the angels, boats filled with long-bearded rowers some 
of them dressed in the Chinese fashion, cock-fights, women at play 
with their little ones, soldiers armed with bows, with javelins, 
sabres, and halberds, and innumerable other scenes. The men 
who wrought these carvings must have been possessed with a 
veritable passion for artistic presentiment, by a love of art for its 
own sake such as would seem to argue a degree of intellectual 
refinement which has no counterpart among the peoples of the 
Hindo-Chinese peninsula in our own day.’?? Angkor Thom, 
great Angkor, the capital of this forgotten empire, was on a 


1 Cole 7, 20, 31. * Clifford 147, 148. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDONESIA 45 


similar scale to the great temple. ‘“‘ Judged by the gigantic 
remains which they have bequeathed to us—the expression at 
once of a tremendous energy and of a passionate love of art— 
the Khmers must have been a wonderful people, and such a people 
cannot fail to have a marvellous and inspiring history. What 
that story was we know not, and perhaps shall never know.” 
The civilization is gone: ‘‘ The mountains are inhabited for the 
most part by aboriginal tribes of a very low standard of civilization 
who from time immemorial have been pillaged and enslaved by 
their more advanced neighbours.”’ * 

The cultural history of Indonesia has, therefore, been of the 
same nature as that of other parts of the region: the first food- 
producing people were more highly civilized than the tribes of 
the present day. When the old civilizations passed away nothing 
replaced them ; only where their influence extended has cultural 
progress taken place ; in the rest of the region there is stagnation. 

Indonesia presents a novel problem in that the early influence 
was due to at least two distinct cultural movements. These 
cultures, in their broad outlines, both come under the heading of 
the Archaic Civilization, and, as such, stand in direct contrast 
with the cultures of the other peoples of the archipelago. It is 
possible, therefore, to state with confidence that the first develop- 
ment of culture in Indonesia was the work of people who irrigated, 
used stone for making monuments, and worked metals, and that 
only in the places visited by such people have the natives advanced 
in culture. These early civilizers can be divided into two groups 
on the basis of the types of structures that they executed—the 
earlier group erected megalithic monuments such as dolmens and 
stone circles; the second group constructed temples of well- 
known Indian types. 

In another way these two waves can be distinguished. For 
the earlier group, corresponding to the colonizers of the Pacific, 
seems to have introduced the practice of irrigation for taro culti- 
vation.? Rice-growing, the staple form of culture by irrigation, 
probably came in with the Hindus about the beginning of our era ; 
and the growing of taro has been mostly superseded, this plant 
being only used in times of scarcity, 

The conclusion, therefore, seems to emerge, that the early 
civilization, based on taro-growing, spread out into the Pacific, 
but that the civilization based on rice-growing did not penetrate 
so far. This is in agreement with the conclusion arrived at with 
regard to the history of the Pacific, namely, that after a period 
when communication with the west was free, there came a time 
when intercourse was severed. Apparently the spread of Hindu 
civilization took place after this severance. 


1 Id., 150, 162, 165. 2 Clifford 162, 164. 
® Rivers xiia, 514. Kruyt vi. 535 for Sumba. In Central Celebes taro 
was formerly the chief food-plant (communicated by Heer Kruyt). 


CHAPTER VI 
CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDIA 


become more complicated. The unity of the civilization 
of North America was evident on the basis of maize- 
growing ; that of Oceania was also easy to understand on the basis 
of the food-plants that the Polynesians brought with them. In 
Indonesia it was hard to discover any such simple formula in 
explanation of the foundations of civilization. For it was clear 
that at least two important waves of migration had swept over 
the region at different times, both of which had played a part 
in civilizing the native food-gathering tribes. Such difficulties 
increase in India. This country, as is well known, has been 
subjected from time immemorial to diverse cultural influences. 
When historical records begin, about 800 B.c., active trade had 
existed between India and the West for several centuries.1 The 
effects of such constant intercourse must have been profound. 
Civilization in India, once implanted, was not allowed to remain 
isolated, as in North America : fresh stimuli repeatedly led to new 
developments. This makes it impracticable at this stage in the 
argument to study the history of Indian culture on the same lines 
as that of North America, for the establishment of culture- 
Sequences would involve an examination of the contemporaneous 
civilizations of the west. Consequently I shall confine myself to 
the attempt to show that its first food-produciig civilization was 
fundamentally similar to the archaic civilizations of Indonesia, 
Oceania and North America; that it was based on irrigation, 
stone-working, pottery-making, and metal-working. At the same 
time attention will be called to the fact that, in several parts of 
India, peoples of low culture live in regions full of remains of 
vanished civilizations. | 
It is now known that India had a well-developed paleolithic 
age," which was followed by a phase with cultural characteristics 
analogous to those of the Neolithic Age of Europe. This pre- 
historic civilization was characterized by the practice of agri- 
culture by means of terraced irrigation. Unfortunately I have 
not been able to find sufficiently’ precise data for the construction 
of a map to indicate the distribution of irrigation in India, 


A S the survey has proceeded, the problems to be solved have 


1 Rawlinson. See also Schoff. 2 Foote ii. 7 es. 
46 


nd,” 
’ 


ers 


‘ 
\ 
ey 


~— 


a oe 


y . : BA ea 
2 Trichinopoly 


Megalithic Monuments 
ArchaicCivilisetonSsettleme nts 

Polished Stone Implements 

Gold 

Tron 

Copper 

Diamonds 

SB Dharwar Schist( gold-bearing) formation 
ses~ Rauways 


>e am Os 


SouTH INDIA 


>) 
“4 } 
1. 
f 
p 
3 ; 
j A 
‘ 
¢ 
a 
\ 
rae 
¢? 7 
ei , 
J # 
2 
ak 
x Lan 
4 " 
; é 
4 
fa 
xy 
* 
° 
wo 
i & 
¢ 
i 
y 
4 
Pa 
+ 
ve 
° 1 
- e 
+ 


“es 


t 
Fe ¢ 
a "a 
eu 8 
i! 
i y a 4 inh ' TO edd hu 
t hse.) = > wee 
; ‘ i.” 4 ’ 
ha , i 
he P or) x 
F ae ev m4 ~ i= 
tot i ln cleat ied cee The de rting ( iemeesindih pestis aiken 
; ‘e , , 14 y ' 
a Att { frie 
. - a ee 
4 
£ i J] , ee 
* - a 
; : bc & ¥ 
i : , a 
F ial } ‘ict é wT 
By a 
. “ ef a , »* 
- ¥ cat se @ 
i j A 
’ 
UJ 4 , + ' q 7 
f < y . 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDIA Ay 


hence I cannot say anything with regard to its general cultural 
associations. It is certain, nevertheless, that these early people 
were irrigators, who left behind them ‘“ Terraces revetted 
with rough stone walls; near which were great accumulations 
of pottery, bones of bovine animals, tanks made by dam- 
ming streams, and shallow troughs hollowed out in the rocks, 
which were apparently used for crushing corn.’’! One of the 
chief centres of these people was at Bellary,? where many settle- 
ments have been discovered. It was the richest district studied 
by the late Bruce Foote, to whom is due so much of the knowledge 
of Indian prehistory. Sketch Map No. 9, which is based on those 
of Bruce Foote and Munn, shows that the settlements of these 
early people were mainly concentrated in the basis of the Kistna 
River, and especially in the Bellary district. They were on the 
tops of hills, together with terraces and workshops for the stone 
implements then in use.? On Kupgal Hill, in the Bellary 
district, 43 miles north-east of the North Hill at Bellary, is the 
most important neolithic site in the country, which contained a 
large implement factory. ‘‘ The summit of the peak consists of 
great masses of rock forming a kind of keep in which are several 
good rock-shelters. The actual summit is inaccessible without 
a ladder some 20 to 380 ft. high, and with the upper part of the 
hill forms a very defensible citadel. The citadel includes three 
linchets, the lowest of which is kept up by a rough stone revet- 
ment. In the rock shelters there are several polished places on 
the rock floor formed probably by grinding grain with flat mealing 
stones. Alongside the small stream flowing down the sloping 
valley between two small tanks and about half-way down between 
the two tanks, I observed no less than seven large granite blocks 
which had evidently been used for domestic purposes but were 
partly broken. On the second big linchet lay an oval trough 
polished by use and into which a hole had been worked at a later 
time, such as one sees nowadays in stone rice-mortars.” ... 
Although the lower parts of the Kupgal are not murally scarped, 
they are so steep on all sides except the north-east that they 
could have been very easily defended against any assailants 
_ from below. The inhabited parts of the old. settlement would 
seem to have been the citadel and its linchets and the little shallow 
_ valley which slopes down eastward from the very rocky summit. 
The soil of this little valley mostly consists of made-ground held 
_ up in several places by low retaining walls carried across as if to 

form tiny tanks by pointing back the little rill which during the 
rains flowed down from the top. The little walls are built of 
smallish stones without any mortar. Below them are little 
sloping surfaces, some covered with grasses, others bare or rough 
from the trampling of cattle when wet. Near to the point at 
which the great dyke cuts across the axis of the little valley, the 


1 Thurston ii. 139. 2 Foote 77 e.s. 3 Foote ii. 28. 


9% 


48 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


ground falls suddenly at a steep angle and becomes quite rugged 
and unfit for habitation, and all traces of such come to an end.” + 
This settlement seems to have been left undisturbed from the 
day it was abandoned. ‘“‘ From the great number of implements 
I procured during my first visit to this part of the hill, I came to 
the conclusion that this old celt factory had never before been 
visited by anyone taking any interest in the neolithic artifacts 
and that the place remained in much the same condition as it had 
been left in by the old people who abandoned the manufacture 
of stone implements very probably in consequence of the advanc- 
ing state of the iron industry.” # 

This description of the site at Kupgal is reminiscent of those 
in New Zealand, where the ancients built terraces, and also had 
the habit of living on hills. The Kupgal people were irrigators 
who made terraces, for the remarks of Bruce Foote make it clear 
that only the makers of the polished stone implements could 
have been responsible for this installation of terraced irrigation. 
These old neolithic folk were metallurgists, according to Bruce 
Foote. He says that the North or “ Face” Hill at Bellary had 
on it ‘‘ considerable traces of an old settlement of the neolithic 
people, together with indications of the commencement of an iron 
smelting industry in the shape of iron slag and of fragments of 
hematite of both rich and poor quality. This hematite must 
have been brought there by human agency, for there are no signs 
of any geological formation on the hill from which the ore could 
have been washed down, and the nearest natural source from 
which it could have been obtained lies in the great hematite 
quartzite beds of the copper mountain located eight miles to the 
south-westward. The assumption of the existence of an iron- 
making industry in this neolithic settlement is supported by the 
occurrence in it of a small pottery tuyére suitable in shape for the 
protection against direct flame-action of the nozzle of a small 
bellows.” 4 

Bruce Foote’s account of the Bellary “‘ Face ”’ Hill settlement 
shows that the “Iron Age” of India followed hard on the “ Neoli- 
thic Age,”’ if any distinction at all can be made between them, for 
remains of the two phases of culture occur in the same sites. “ In 
spite of the great ease with which iron objects of all kinds are 
utterly destroyed and lost by oxidation when exposed to damp, 
yet from the very durable character of the pottery the iron age 
people produced and the vast quantity of it they left, it is evident 
that in a very large number of cases they must have occupied 
the old neolithic sites ; and the celts and other stone implements 
are now mixed up with the highly polished and brightly coloured 
sherds of the later-aged earthenware. Except in very few cases 
the dull-coloured and rough-surfaced truly neolithic sherds occur 
but very sparingly.” ® 


1 Foote ii. 83, 87. 2 Foote ii. 84, 85. 3 Cf. p. 25. 
* Foote ii. 81, 90. 5 Foote ii. 24. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDIA 49 


The close connexion between the so-called neolithic and iron 
ages of prehistoric India is shown in quotations such as the follow- 
ing: ‘‘ About twelve miles south-east of Anantapur town, close 
to the village of Mushturu, on the high road to Cuddapah, in an 
old site at the southern end of the granite hill there occurring, is 
a neolithic settlement to which an iron-age settlement apparently 
succeeded, traces of the latter being numerous in the shape of 
black iron slag scattered about the surface on which remain also 
large quantities of trap fragments, probably the rubbish of a 
celt factory. ... Much comminuted pottery accompanied the 
neolithic remains, chiefly of the red and black and salmon-coloured 
varieties and of excellent quantity.” 1 Another region where the 
neolithic and iron phases of civilization are closely associated is 
that of the Sheravoy Hills in the Salem district. ‘‘ The Sheravoys 
proved themselves even richer in traces of the iron age than of 
the neolithic age, but all the remains found were derived from 
graves, ‘ kistvaens,’ which are very numerous on the western 
and northern sides of the plateau.”’ ? 

The following quotation gives some idea of the cultural stage 
of these early people: ‘‘ Of very great interest are two earthen- 
ware figures of women found on Scotforth estate by my son-in-law, 
Mr. Herbert W. Leeming, when digging a trench for the foundation 
of a wall. The special interest attaching to these figures is due 
to the unique style of head-dress they show—namely, having their 
hair dressed in short ringlets all round the head, and wearing high 
combs on the top. . . . The finding of these little female figures 
with such an elaborate style of hairdressing throws light upon 
the use of a neck-rest unearthed in an old iron-age site on the 
north bank of the Cauvery River opposite the town of Tiruma 
Kodlu Narsipur in Mysore and just below the Sangram, or junction 
with the Kabani, or Kapilla River. The use of a neck-rest was 
essential if the women desired to preserve their curls intact when 
sleeping, which they doubtless did, a practice in which they are 
followed by some of the present-day Brahmin ladies on certain 
special occasions.”’ § 

It is usual to distinguish between the “ neolithic ’’ and “‘ iron ” 
phases of this early civilization. The matter hangs on the pottery, 
but apparently no real means exists of distinguishing the various 
types. In the words of Bruce Foote, the early civilization can 
be divided into four stages: ‘‘ Four such ages seem recognizable : 
the neolithic, the overlap of the stone and iron ages, the iron age 
proper, and the protohistoric age. This assignment to determined 
position of antique pottery is of necessity only a tentative pro- 
ceeding, for there is under present circumstances no absolute 
certainty for judging the age of the pottery by mere collocation 
with neolithic implements which does not in many cases prove the 
actual neolithic origin of the vessels or sherds remaining. The 
facies of the typical neolithic pottery will, I believe, turn out to 


1 Td., 102. 2Id., 57 e.s., 61. 3 Foote ii. 62-3. 
4 


50 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


be dull-coloured and rough-surfaced with but little decoration, 
whereas the true iron-age vessel is distinguished by showing rich 
colours and highly polished surfaces with, in some cases, elaborate 
and artistic mouldings. There had been a development in the 
potter’s art which then attained a stage of very real beauty. This 
was probably before the great Aryan invasion, under which the 
potter’s craft came to be despised and neglected, as it is nowaday 
to a very great extent, as evidenced by the great plainness and 
often absolute ugliness of the present-day pottery.” ! 

Mr. Bruce Foote himself is of the opinion that no real gap 
separated the two phases. ‘‘In the third stage of prehistoric 
civilization the art of smelting and working iron was introduced, 
and gave it the name of the Early Iron Age. This was the greatest 
advance made in arts and crafts since man’s first appearance on 
the earth. The much greater ease and rapidity with which 
weapons and tools of greatly improved quality could be produced 
by the working of iron, caused the manufacture of stone imple- 
ments of the larger and more expensive kind to be given up in 
very great measure. From this evidence afforded by several old 
sites in the Deccan and Mysore, it is a very reasonable inference 
that the iron workers were the direct successors and probably 
lineal descendants of the neolithic people. ... In fact, the 
ages overlapped.” ? 

In view of the intimate relationship between these two phases 
of culture, I shall group them together as the Archaic Civiliza- 
tion of India. This civilization was characterized by irrigation, 
pottery-making, metal-working, and also, as will now be shown, 
by the use of stone for construction. 

The people of the archaic civilization in India constructed 
megalithic monuments—dolmens and stone circles being especially 
numerous, ranging from the valley of the Nerbudda to Cape 
Comorin.* They are found in the Palni Hills in the Madura district, 
in the Sheravoy Hills of the Salem district, in Coimbatore, Malabar, 
Coorg, Hyderabad, and elsewhere, as is evident from Sketch Map 
No. 9.4 These megaliths are often large, the following being a 
description, by Mr. Walhouse, of one in a cemetery at Peramdoory, 
between Salem and Coimbatore: ‘‘ In the centre of the cemetery 
was placed, as if it were the chief, the highest of all the tombs. 
A vast obelisk-like stone, 13 ft. by 64, towering above all the 
others, stood at its head; great shapeless masses formed the 
circle; the heap of stones within had disappeared, and the 
chamber beneath was laid bare, on one side to the bottom. . . . 
The chamber, 10 ft. deep, as many wide, and somewhat more 
in length, was formed of four enormous slabs, placed two at the 
ends and one at each side; and was divided length-wise by a 


* Foote ii. 34. The degradation of pottery is a good instance of the usual 
culture-sequence. . 

2 Foote ii. 3. 5 Lane-Fox. 

* Walhouse 17: Cole 299, 302, 303. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDIA 51 


partition-slab, somewhat less in depth, into two main compart- 
ments, which were again longitudinally subdivided by still lower 
slabs, thus dividing the whole chamber into four compartments 
at the bottom, which was paved with great slabs. A colossal 
capstone had been laid over the chamber.’’!_ No detailed study 
of these remains has yet been produced. The writer who as yet 
has given most information is Colonel Meadows Taylor, who 
describes the megaliths of Southern India, and says that they 
lie south of a line running from Bellary to Nagpur.2. In some 
parts of the country, as near Bellary and Nirmal, they abound, 
some of them of great size, “‘ being composed of blocks of stone, 
very difficult, nay, impossible, to remove them without mechanical 
assistance, both as to the size of the stones which compose the 
outer rings of the tumuli, and also the large slabs which form the 
inner cell or tomb, wherein the body or bones are placed. The 
diameter of some of these larger tumuli is from 30 to 40 ft. ; others 
again are much smaller, and on these a much less amount of 
labour has been bestowed. The depth of some of the large ones 
is very considerable. You first dig through a mound of from 8 
to 5 ft. deep, outcropping and bounded by these immense circle 
stones, which brings you to the level of the ground about. When 
you dig down again some 8 or 10 ft. you reach the regular tomb, 
which is composed of eight immense slabs of gneiss or granite, 
forming an enclosure of 8 or 9 ft. long, and 4 or 5 broad, giving a 
total depth from the top of the mound to the bottom of from 16 
to 20 ft.’ 

The great concentration of dolmens round Bellary, the place 
most densely occupied in the archaic civilization, is significant, 
2,127 dolmens having been reported in this district, which gives 
an idea of the extent of the settlement. It can be seen from the 
sketch map that the distribution of megalithic monuments agrees 
with those of neolithic and iron-age sites. For this reason, and 
because of the identity of the remains found in these tombs with 
those of the archaic civilization of India, it is legitimate to con- 
sider these graves as those of the early people. 

Megalithic monuments are still erected by certain tribes of 
India and Burma, the Kurumba, Gond, Bhil, Munda, Oraon, 
Khasi, and Southern China being prominent among them; but 
in no case of the size characteristic of the prehistoric phase of 
civilization. The culture-sequence of early and late in megalithic 
monuments thus shows that the earliest known examples are 
the largest. The loss of culture in the case of tribes that build 
megaliths is also well shown in the fact that the present-day 
peoples do not make statues of women as did their predecessors. 
The present-day makers of megaliths in some cases practise 
irrigation—for instance, the Munda and Khasi; but the culture 


~ 1 Walhouse 189. 2 M. Taylor i. 
3M. Taylor i. 180. * Munn 1, 


52 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 
of the people of the archaic civilization has only survived in 
diminished measure. 

Although it is not intended to establish any culture-sequences 
for the whole of India, yet it is useful to realize that, in many 
parts of, the country, they give the same results as elsewhere. 

The present-day tribes of Southern India do not usually display 
any tendency to construct stone monuments. On the summits 
of the Nilgiri Hills, near which live the Todas, are cairns, circles 
and barrows containing pottery, adorned with figures of animals, 
such as the buffalo, horse, sheep, camel, elephant, leopard (7), 
pig (?), low-country bullock with hump, none of which animals 
are mentioned in the Toda legends.! The relationship between 
the makers of these monuments and the Todas themselves is 
speculative. Riverssays: ‘‘ If wecould accept the view that the 
cairns, barrows, and cromlechs of the Nilgiri Hills were the work 
of the ancestors of the Todas, we should have at once further 
evidence that the Todas have degenerated from a higher culture. 
We should have an example of a people who once used, if they 
did not make, pottery, showing artistic aptitudes which they have 
now entirely lost. The Toda now procures his pottery from 
another race, and, so long as this is of the kind prescribed by 
custom, he is wholly indifferent to its artistic aspect. I doubt if 
there exists anywhere in the world a people so devoid of xesthetic 
arts, and if the Nilgiri monuments are the work of their ancestors, 
the movement backwards in this department of life must have been 
very great.”’? Thus, a people of a low level of material culture 
live in a district filled with remains of a fairly high civilization. 
This is another example of a common feature of the whole of the 
region covered by megalithic monuments. 

An interesting case is that of Chota Nagpur, where live the 
Mundas, who are closely connected with megalithic monuments, 
of which vast cemeteries are reported in some places.*? The 
Mundas claim to have migrated into Chota Nagpur, and say that 
people called the Asuras, who were there before them, are re- 
sponsible for certain remains. It is said that ‘* Evidence in 
the shape of remains of smelting places and slags of iron, ornaments, 
implements and vessels made of copper, foundations of extraor- 
dinarily large but comparatively thin bricks, remains of pottery 
and burial urns, is gradually accumulating, and would seem to 
bear out the Munda tradition of the previous occupation of a 
large portion, if not the whole, of the Ranchi district by an ancient 
people who used copper and subsequently iron, and who had 
evolved a comparatively much higher culture than the Mundas 
who claim to have ousted them.” In Ranchi, Roy has found 
‘here and there villages containing remains of very ancient brick 
buildings, stone temples and sculptures, cinerary urns and huge 
slabs and columns of sculptured stones, large tanks mostly silted 


1 Rivers i. 712. 2 Rivers i. 715. 
3 Dalton. See Sketch Map No. 14. * Roy iv. 434. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDIA 53 


up, which are all locally attributed to an ancient people called 
the ‘ Asuras.’ ... Indeed an inspection of the architectural 
and other remains attributed to them convinces one that these 
pre-Munda inhabitants of what is now the Munda country had 
attained a degree of civilization which must necessarily remain a 
standing wonder to the ruder Mundas of our days.” Some of 
these remains consisted of graves, stone slabs on the ground with 
funerary urns beneath them. Again Roy comments upon this 
strange old civilization: “‘ These reputed Asura sites appear to 
have almost invariably been elevated tracts conveniently situated 
on the banks of a river or stream commanding a wide view of the 
country around so as to be eminently suitable for defence against 
an invading force. Foundations of brick buildings, large tanks, 
cinerary urns, copper ornaments and stone beads, copper celts 
and traces of smelting works for iron, are the principal features 
of these Asura sites on the Chota Nagpur plateau. Ruins of stone 
temples, carved stone pedestals and stone sculptures of deities 
and bulls, and certain stone implements, etc., found in some of the 
reputed Asura sites, are also to-day attributed to the Asuras of old. 
With respect to the stone bulls and other stone sculptures, how- 
ever, such high antiquity may perhaps be doubted.” 2. This con- 
stitutes, therefore, another case in which the earliest civilization 
that can be detected in a region is more advanced in the arts and 
crafts than its successors. 

This can be seen in yet another region. For in Upper Assam, 
in the Dibrughar district, are ‘‘ ruins of magnificent buildings and 
raised roadways found all over the country.”* ... “Mr. T. T. 
Cooper also writing in 1873 of Eastern Assam again testifies to the 
energy and civilization formerly characteristic of this people and 
forming a striking contrast to the lethargic existence of the 
present-day scanty population. He says: ‘The contemplation 
of these ruins surrounded by almost impenetrable jungle which 
has overgrown the once fertile and well-cultivated fields of a people 
that has almost passed away, is calculated to strike one with an 
intense desire to learn more of the history of those terrible events 
which robbed a fertile land of a vast and industrious population, 
converting it into a wilderness of swamps and forests.’ The 
region of the Nambhor Forest between Lumding Junction and 
Golaghat and bordered by the Mikir and Naga Hills covers 
ground once occupied by the Kachari clans who were then in a 
high state of civilization. The railway engineers are constantly 
coming across ‘causeways, canals and sites of buildings,’ 
especially near Rangapahar and Dimapur.’* This country is 
how occupied by the remnants of the Kachari, and by other 
peoples of a low stage of civilization. 

Kven in the country occupied by the Abor and Mishmi tribes, 
Tuins testify to a former high stage of civilization ; for instance, 

~ 1 Roy vi. 229, 235, 245. 2 Roy vi. 253. 
3 Shakespear ii. 3. 4 Id., 3. 


54. THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


on the hills along the banks of the Dikrang River, a tributary of 
the Brahmaputra, are forts made of huge blocks of stones. 
‘“ And when and wherefrom did the wild Abors and Mishmis 
come who now hold these hills.” 1 

A similar fate has overtaken the ancient civilization of Northern 
India, which extended along the feet of the Himalayas from the 
headwater of the Ganges to Nepal and still farther east. Such 
examples could be multiplied in India, but, in view of the chequered 
cultural history of the country, they would not serve to support 
any generalization such as can be founded on the evidence in 
Oceania and North America. These instances illustrate the fre- 
quent loss of the material side of culture, and show that regions 
now inhabited by peoples low in the cultural scale were once the 
scenes of thriving civilizations. The complications in India are 
due to the fact that each cultural wave has left a backwash behind 
it, so that every generalization must be founded on the historical 
study of each group of tribes. We still await that study. In 
the case of the tribes who still erect megalithic monuments, a loss 
of culture can be detected, in that they do not manipulate such 
large stones as their predecessors. It is also possible to show that 
they have lost certain elements of the original culture. 

The generalization to be obtained from the study of Indian 
prehistory, as at present known, is that the earliest food-producing 
civilization was that of people who practised irrigation, worked 
metals, made pottery, and constructed megalithic monuments. 
With the exception of the pottery images of the Sheravoy Hills 
in the Salem district, they do not seem to have made human 
statues, and no carved stone statues are reported. 


The survey has now covered North America, Oceania, Indonesia 
and India, including Burma. The final result has been to show 
that the earliest known civilization of food-producers, in any part 
of the region, is that of people who practised irrigation, built 
megalithic monuments, worked metals, made pottery and carved 
stone images.2. On the basis of these cultural elements it is 
possible to claim uniformity of the archaic civilization throughout 
the region, for all these cultural elements tend to disappear in 
the later civilizations. This generalization takes no account 
whatever of the relationships between the archaic civilization and 
its successors ; nor does it concern itself with the varieties of stone 
or of pottery that are made. In this last I shall probably meet 
with opposition from archeologists, who usually base so much 
of their reasoning on differences of technique in certain arts and 
crafts. It may be objected, on that score, that I am postulating 
uniformity where it does not exist; that, for instance, in India 
megaliths of the archaic civilization are mainly dolmens and 
stone circles; in Indonesia there are dolmens, rock-cut tombs, 


1 Shakespear ii. 83. See Sketch Map No. 15. 
2 The exceptions to this generalization have been noted. 


CULTURE-SEQUENCE, INDIA 55 


stone circles and pyramids ; in Oceania there are dolmens, stone 
circles and pyramids ; and in America there are pyramids and 
dolmens. These monuments, it may be asserted, should be 
considered separately. Similarly with regard to pottery and 
metal-working. Such objections as these entirely miss my 
point, which is that the craft itself, whether the use of stone, of 
pottery-making or of metal-working, can be studied from the 
point of view of presence or absence, and that the archaic civili- 
zation is distinguished from those that followed by the possession 
of these and other crafts, not on account of any varieties of form 
in the productions of those crafts. The main point is, Why do 
some people work stone while others do not? That question 
being answered, we may then inquire into the various forms of 
stonework. Similarly, the distribution and cultural affinities 
of the pottery industry being determined, we may proceed to 
consider variations on the theme, those of shape and decoration. 
If pottery-making owes its introduction in a large area to a 
cultural influence, the variations in style are not so important as 
the industry itself. In like manner the important fact about 
irrigation and terraced cultivation is not the particular food plant 
grown, but the procedure itself. As has been seen, irrigation is 
concerned, in America with maize, in the Pacific with taro, in 
Indonesia and India with rice ; yet the inception of the practice is 
apparently connected with the archaic civilization. If that be 
so, the kind of food grown by irrigation in the different countries 
is merely the variation on the theme. The people of the archaic 
civilization, in Oceania at least, were skilful enough to transport 
shoots of food-plants across thousands of miles of ocean and 
bring them to maturity in their new homes, a noteworthy feat. 
Therefore, it must constantly be remembered that men in posses- 
sion of a highly skilled craft such as that of irrigation, are capable 
of bringing, in different countries, the proper food-plants under 
cultivation. 


CHAPTER VII 
THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 


(i) NORTH AMERICA 


P ; NHE discussion of the relations between food-producers and 
food-gatherers suggested that throughout the region the 
food-producers were constantly advancing into the lands 

of the food-gatherers and dispossessing them of their hunting- 
grounds. Given this gradual outward movement of civilization, 
how is it to be explained ? What impelled the food-producers 
to occupy new lands, and what selective agency caused them to 
choose certain spots for settlement, and to neglect others ? 

Fortunately it is possible to study, in two places on the boundary 
between food-producers and food-gatherers, the phenomenon of 
the advance of civilization into new regions. It is well known 
that the great colonization of California and Australia by Euro- 
peans only began in the latter half of the last century, prior to 
which both countries were but sparsely inhabited by stock- 
breeders. Although the analogy between the archaic civilization 
and that of western Europe in the nineteenth century is not 
exact, yet it is close enough to serve as a rough guide. 

It is perhaps not properly realized by all what an important 
part has been played in the near past by discoveries of gold. 
California came into prominence only when it was discovered 
to be a rich gold region. The Spaniards, ignorant of its gold, 
tried to colonize it, but with no success.1 Prior to 1848, when 
gold was discovered, the country was given over to Spanish priests, 
mission Indians, and a few American settlers, traders and trappers. 
But once the presence of gold was known, multitudes flocked 
there, and the population increased in the year 1850 by one 
hundred thousand. The gold boom, of course, in time died down, 
and the country was then forced to develop its agricultural 
resources. 2 

The same story can be told of Australia. The native population 
is in the hunting stage, although signs exist of the presence there 
in the past of people of superior civilization. ‘‘ Before 1850, men 


1 Coman I. 9, 13-15, 20; ITI. 80. 
2 Coman I. 142, 145 e.s., 155, 187, 189, 207, 228, 239; II. 287, 294, 296, 
297, 302. 


56 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 57 


went thither for the sake of breeding sheep upon its wide mono- 
tonous plains; and, had no other attraction been discovered, 
the island-continent of the South would have remained until 
now a slow-moving cityless country of pastoral settlers—possibly 
(from lack of the brisk sea-trade now established) still shearing 
their flocks and boiling down their sheep and cattle, as the only 
means of utilizing their surplus produce, in exchange for the 
more or less indispensable commodities of other countries. But 
the discovery of Gold at once changed the scene. Settlers and 
ships came thick and fast; new lines of Commerce tracked the 
deep; already the European race is making a new home at 
the Antipodes; and a brilliant future has opened upon that 
Southern continent, of whose greatness we only see the beginning.’’! 
So wrote an author in 1882. He goes on to say that ‘‘ The bulk 
of this vast Emigration came from Europe, the Heart of modern 
civilization, most fully possessed of the means and appliances 
for Migration.” 2 

As a remarkable example of the way in which the discovery 
of gold will attract people from their homeland, it is noteworthy 
that the Chinese are to be found in numbers, when the immigration 
laws permit, on every gold-field in the world, whether in Australia, 
the Malay Peninsula, Borneo or California: in non-auriferous 
parts of the world they are not so prominent.? 

If a geographer of five thousand years hence should discover 
ruins on the upper reaches of the Yukon, he would probably 
wonder what could have induced men to live in such an inhospit- 
able spot. He may speculate about changes of climate, or he 
may try to give some other reason, but the remarkable nature 
of the place will probably force him to conclude that some definite 
cause led men to live there. If he turns to the study of the customs 
of the people of that remote age, he will find that they desired 
gold above all things, not because it had any surpassing intrinsic 
merit in itself, but because it was a medium of exchange, and 
could enable a man to minister to his selfish desires, and obtain 
a fuller measure of “‘ life’? than his fellows. He wouid then turn 
back to the Yukon valley, and conclude that the presence there 
of gold in the past constituted a sufficient cause for the presence 
of civilized peoples. And, although he did not see splendid stone 
buildings and all the appurtenances of civilization in such a spot, 
he would nevertheless be prepared to conclude that the gold- 
miners came from more civilized regions, but that, being there 
to exploit the gold, and not intending to remain longer than 
they could help, they made shift with what sufficed for the needs 
of the moment. So, even if there be no direct signs of a high 
form of civilization connected with ancient mining works in any 
given place, that in itself is no evidence that the miners were of 


1 Petterson I. 56. * Id., 1. 57,,457. 
3 Cf. Sketch Map No. 8 for Borneo (Posewitz 345 e.s.). 


58 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


low culture. They would not have the time, nor the available 
labour, nor the incentive to construct great works. 

It is a commonplace that the presence of minerals of various 
forms has largely determined the distribution of population in 
more developed countries. In England the greatest concentra- 
tions are on the coal and iron fields, with the exception of London, 
and the same is the case elsewhere. In the United States there 
is an interesting example of the way in which new regions can be 
occupied with dense populations in a short time. The part of 
Pennsylvania containing the main supply of oil was barren, rocky 
soil, practically uninhabited, until the discovery of oil in the 
middle years of the last century. Immediately after the discovery 
it was transformed into a thriving region, full of large towns, all 
drawing their prosperity and wealth from the stores of oil in the 
earth. The discovery of the use of this oil as an illuminant thus 
brought a new centre of civilization into being. 

I now propose to put forward evidence that the same motive 
must have led to the foundation of civilizations in the places 
that have already come under review. To begin with America 
and work westwards. 

In North America it is necessary to account for the first Maya 
cities in Guatemala, Honduras and Southern Mexico, for the 
Pueblo settlements, and for the distribution of the mounds in 
the Eastern States. I shall begin with the Pueblo region. The 
culture of the Pueblo Indians is so closely related to that of 
Mexico as to suggest that one of them must have been derived 
from the other.! Since the Pueblo folk cultivate maize, which 
originated south of the Rio Grande, it seems certain that they 
derived their civilization from Mexico. Another good reason 
exists for this belief. Turquoise was a favourite precious stone 
among the Mexicans, the Maya and the Pueblo Indians. “ In 
all three provinces the turquoise found both a religious and an 
ornamental use, and there are striking analogies between its 
application among widely separated tribes.” 2. Since no turquoise 
is known in Mexico itself, or in the country to the south, the 
Mexicans must either have gone themselves to the Pueblo region 
to get it, or they must have got it by trade. Turquoise occurs 
in a natural state in New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado and California, * 
the principal sources being near Cerillos in Cochise County, New 
Mexico, twenty-five miles south of Santa Fé; Little Burro 
Mountains and Little Hachita Mountains, Grant County, New 


1 “We find peoples in New Mexico and Arizona still practising rites which 
can at least be compared with those of the Nahuas. ... Undoubtedly 
there is a vein of similarity running through the ritual and symbolism of all 
tribes of the American race; indeed, we might likewise say, between those 
of all primitive people in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America ’’ (Fewkes i. 42, 
43). 2 Poque 437. 

3 Kunz i. 54, 56, 60, 63: Mineral Resources II. 1911, p. 1065; 1909, 
pp. 779, 781, 788; 1908, pp. 846, 847, 849: Blake 227 e.s. 


1~-s ue é ‘a . 
1 ‘ Pid acd { 
. QSTYIOD Mwy ap Se SADMI]IDY ++ 
f 7 5 
Tae 4 ros / e ‘te, ” +AlxS = § 
- re ae StS = Sh UOSINL - ” adda) Vv 
eS ' \ » Jaane ® 
ry ‘ 
< a Me \ SouTu P7OD BB 
x ‘\ \ = < surmy 8 S0193%d « 
cae V. Ne se @ os 
10". ¥ ok 2 Mf ne 
/ N @rv 6 eo PAL) Sse 
. r Noe? PUrsy Pp) 
wie? Ky azans on he ON te a ee 
e\*s ~ 8 @ ~. = 
vA \c g Sage ee ‘s wees s 
° e/ 1 ‘ “378 . ‘ La efe 
ave Se _7J By *==----, wedonuTcW ec lee 
° = a & a 4 
e / 1 >~—e _S 6 e|* 
is <8 e0V ® e ve ee : & 
gs x Xe r \ e/ ‘ 
i e) © e Ge “6 ry ® 
Lo AUNE PLO eh a 
° e@ ee « ey POuUgd~ ~~ 
® fod e mS 
~= 
e * “ e e “\ « \ 
* ike @o , t\e \ 
C) ° e y \ 
) e 8 ‘a 
e\” @ s - . «* v 
“ 6@ Py * g e\s e ‘ 
& 
6 
“ a @e ©\%e@ g & we \ 
ee bd fre ! 
e e ® 6 W 
Ss ee e w ® ; 
e e e e ‘ee ae» 
s e e / &@ m= 4 
oa: +. & s o—6 e> ae vas 
- \ oqo2s2 
® e e Noe _ 
e GE P1OLOD Ale e®e\ V a. 
Aas es. ® gl @! 
e6 £ Na eee 
sd . 2 >. 7) x ae a 
- ==. e 
? e 
= « a = . wy 


(NOILOAS NUYFHINOS) vauy OTAANg 


A} 


3 
T 
if: 4 ‘ B 
‘ - > 7 ? al 
ae ik ‘ 
' 5 an tes a igh 0 
f 4 ’ ie 
arn ie oe et ft 
ATH gti be 7’, 
é ae y ” j 
A , f - 
- b> ? 
é ° é 
i ia § ’ » 
, 7 ¥ « ’ 
’ a 
Se : 
f , a we } F , 
y hat s os oe 7) 
: > oe 
P ; 1 
= ' ¥ 
‘ - 4 Ps ; 
+ 
. A 
¥ 
‘ ns b ‘ j i 
y 4 Py ave 
' Mi, 
3 i , 
1 ‘ * * a 
E. Leh ‘ Paes a 
2 Pe 
- } , ° . ?* 4 
‘ _ \ 
f ¥*, - a ' 
ws - a 
, , 4 K ,. e 
h 5 ra “ v Fee y 


a a 


, ° » 
* si Pigs ‘ 5 ; i 44 ' ee D 
¢ ¥ — 2 f " 
i 5 » Cy : ee 
, 8 . p ¥ ‘ 
4 : / 
¢ “ rv 
Cr aa = - 
by Aw , we 
b J ' 
a) ‘ 
‘ “0 


t i * 
‘ s TSN . i . ° 
E : ‘ tg ol 
* f ‘ sh As 
7 a ; £) 
to , a a! ; / 
é my. & f -. - 
; . ' 
$ ‘ 4 ' rs 
} i.% ‘ ss 4 
é b < 7 & 
4 : y's ee ¥ i a e+ 
-_ hee bese Bos ‘ baa ] e 
\ a teal G 5 f : y 
- ry ’ 
"i bs _— 2‘, r ys ; 
; i) Soma } ? i 4 
> j : 5 We 
‘4 , orf 7 
« ‘ > 6 
eat " £e 
rf { \ 4 
% beak By 
! . ? - * ‘ 7 
“= Poy . ty P +. 
® Je ne a Ta 
* * a ad J * 
rg . ” a 
e a. 
pate LRT ah A Bah ee 
ms ee 7 ; : a ae : " 
f ; ie Ws) i ge eh Gate § 
‘ ¢ A. } , st 5 
* om ‘ = ’ 
, ‘ a ‘ a 
aa Nias x ye eS 
: q ey a ete f P 
ie _ he 
: - ; ow ba Oe ey ier 
4 A, 1 > 5 dig? te 
7’ é f 4 “J a 
ne J ns v. ih \ . i 
nn 1 é " ? 


, at it (ake? dae Seca 


“ 
% 
* 
‘ 
er Pe eda 
> 
‘ 
¢ 
> 
> es e 
= 
ae 
ad 


: \ : 4 a a ; , 
Ra > = . 
t aah” Set tik ox] eee peat ; 7” ‘Ve ae. ay —T Li 
i 7 ? é ‘ By 
r ve 
ie Se Hk , Wahi. 
’ ¥E >” 


‘ see . 1 “ : a 
il ' a , Die eae od oh 
ol j ne, ‘ ; $o., is pig ORS | aie » 1 
¥ us ‘ wl i : 
v s 
a¢@ ‘ 
er al 
« ’ ~*~ 
7 
Wd , ‘ 
7% ° l ‘ 
wu td Se 
rn Nel ‘ j 
* ' 
ar - , - +s 
res? - : 4 
“ ell | at th ' a'% ° 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 59 


Mexico; Las Cruces, Dona Ana County, New Mexico; Mineral 
Park, Arizona; Aztec Mountains, Arizona; La Jara, Comejos 
County, Colorado; Holy Cross Mountains, Colorado; Taylor’s 
Ranch, Fresno County, California; and Cottonwood, San Ber- 
nardino County, California. 

‘* At a number of these deposits were remains of ancient work- 
ings, pits, shafts, tunnels, and stopes, with dumps of waste rock, 
made by Indians or other early inhabitants of the south-west.”’ } 
The places with old workings are—Los Cerillos ; Little Burro and 
Little Hachita Mountains; Las Cruces; Aztec Mountains; San 
Bernardino County, California. ? 

Presumptive evidence that the ancient Mexicans worked the 
turquoise mines of the Pueblo region is given by the following 
quotation: ‘* That the ancient Mexicans held the turquoise in 
high esteem is well known, and that the Los Cerillos mines were 
extensively worked prior to the discovery of America, is proved 
by fragments of Aztec pottery—vases; drinking, eating, and cooking 
utensils ; stone hammers, wedges, nails, and idols—discovered 
in the debris found everywhere.’’ 3 The following quotation gives 
an idea of the extent of the operations: ‘‘ On reaching the locality 
I was struck with astonishment at the extent of the excavation. 
It is an immense pit with precipitous sides of angular rock, pro- 
jecting in crags, which sustain a growth of pines and shrubs in 
the fissures. On one side the rocks tower into a precipice and 
overhang so as to form a cave; at another place the side is low 
and formed of the broken rocks which were removed. From the 
top of the cliff, the excavation appears to be 200 ft. in depth 
and 800 or more in width. The bottom is funnel-shaped and 
formed by the sloping banks of the debris or fragments of the 
sides. On this debris, at the bottom of the pit, pine trees over 
a hundred years old are now growing, and the bank of refuse 
rock is similarly covered with trees. This great excavation is 
made in the solid rock, and tens of thousands of tons of rock 
have been broken out. ‘This is not the only opening; there are 
several pits in the vicinity, more limited in extent, some of them 
being apparently much more recent... . 

... °° The evident antiquity of this excavation, and its extent, 
renders it peculiarly interesting. Little or nothing appears to 
be known of it in that region, and I am not aware that it has 
ever been visited except by the Indians and New Mexicans. It 
seems hardly possible that such an amount of rock could have 
been removed by men without the aid of powder and machinery. 
The evidences were, however, conclusive that it was the work 
of the aborigines long before the conquest and settlement of 
the country by the Spaniards.”’ 4 

Recently several caves in this mountain have been unearthed, 

2 Mineral Resources II. 1911, 1065. 


2 Id., 1909, 779, 788; 1908, 849. See Sketch Map Nos. 10 and 11. 
8 Kunz i. 60. 4 Blake 227, 229, 


60 ‘THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


extending from the level of the long-abandoned mine. ‘“* The 
Wonder Caves are about 25 ft. from the surface and run 100 ft. 
from the apex of the mountain, being about 30 by 25 ft. in width, 
and from 6 to 8 ft. in height above the debris. This group 
resembles in shape the five fingers of the hand. Here were found 
numerous veins of turquoise from } in. to 2 in. in thickness, and 
strips of gold-bearing quartz cover the walls of the central cave. 

It is presumed that further explorations would bring to 
light openings through these walls, showing that the entire 
mountain was honeycombed by the ancients, and the pillars left 
by them to support the roof.’? + Quartz veins were worked for 
gold in the same district: ‘‘In the mountains known as Los 
Cerillos, about eight miles from New Placer, there is a deserted 
mine, known among the old Mexicans as La Mina del Oro, the 
true character of which could not be well determined. It cer- 
tainly is very ancient, and there is no record or tradition concerning 
it, except that the work was done before the Insurrection, which 
took place in 1680. The principal shaft is over 200 ft. deep and 
is cut vertically, with great precision, through solid rock. The 
sides are very smooth, and it is evidently the work of experienced 
miners. A stone, allowed to drop vertically, does not reach the 
bottom for several seconds, and then gives a dull sound as if 
striking earth, showing that there is no water in the mine even 
at that depth. There are two other shafts, and they all com- 
municate by galleries in miners’ style.” ? 

The hills of Los Cerillos, San Miguel, Jemez and elsewhere, 
contain many old mines worked either by the Spaniards or the 
Indians.? Old mines exist at Abiquin on the Chama River. ‘‘ The 
work exhibits considerable skill in the use of tools, and a familiarity 
with the business of mining. The roof is carefully braced where 
weak, and old galleries are closed by well-laid walls of masonry. 
From the style in which the excavation is done, and from the 
perfect preservation of the woodwork, I attribute this and other 
similar mines in this region to the earlier Spanish explorers.” 4 
In the neighbourhood is a considerable ancient settlement. 
** Descending by a steep and tortuous path, we left our mules 
at the bottom and climbed a detached mesilla which stands at 
the junction of the two branches of the valley (of the Chama), 
and on which is situated an ancient and ruined pueblo, once a 
stone-built town of considerable size. Even its name is now lost, 
and of the inhabitants whose busy hands constructed its walls, 
and whose feet in successive generations wore so deeply the 
threshold of its entrance, no tradition now remains. The mesa 
on which it stands is some 500 ft. in height, is composed of a 
cellular trachyte, and the top is only to be reached by a narrow 
and difficult path. The houses are now in ruins, but were once 
numerous, and all built of dressed stone. Within the town we 


1 Kunz i. 55-6. 2 Lock 179. 
3 J. S. Newberry 40, 67: J.S. Lindgrenii. 17. | 4 Newberry 67. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 61 


noticed a dozen or more estuffas excavated from the solid rock. 
They are circular in form, 18-20 ft. in diameter by 10 or 12 in 
depth. They all exhibited evidence of once having been covered 
with wooden superstructures. In most of them, four excavations 
on opposite sides would seem to have been used as the sockets 
for the insertion of wooden posts, and in one is a niche cut in 
the side, with a chimney leading from it; probably the place 
where the sacred fire was kept perpetually burning. The style 
of architecture in which this town was built, as well as the estuffas, 
show that its inhabitants belonged to the race of Pueblo Indians ; 
a race now nearly extinct, but once occupying every habitable 
part of New Mexico.” } 

In Arizona remains of old operations have been discovered : 
‘‘ Various evidence of crude, prehistoric mining have been found 
at various times and places in what is now called Arizona. How- 
ever, it is not certain whether this work was done for gold, silver 
or copper. Discoveries made along the Salt River by Lieutenant 
Cushing, of ancient oven furnaces in which considerable copper 
was found, would seem to indicate that the ores treated were 
copper carbonates.” ? 

Beyond doubt, further investigation will reveal the existence 
of many more ancient mining sites, as is evident from the following 
_ quotation from Lindgren and Gratton: ‘‘ The Great Plains and 
the Plateau Provinces of eastern and north-western New Mexico 
do not contain metalliferous deposits, except local iron and copper 
ores distributed in sedimentary rocks. On the other hand, the 
metallic ores are present in every mountain range in the Territory. 
They occur in the continuation of the Rocky Mountain system 
in northern New Mexico, in the Zuni uplift, in the Sandia, Magda- 
- lena, San Pedro, Manzano, San Andreas, Oscura, Organ, Mimbres, 
and almost all of the small desert ranges of south-western New 
Mexico. They also occur in the broken-down edge of the Plateau 
Province about Silver City and in several of the large rhyolite 
fields in the south-western part, extending from the Mogollon 
Mountains into Socorro County.’ ® 

The matter can be approached from another angle, and treated 
as a problem in human geography. It is unnecessary to emphasize 
the fact that the opening-up of New Mexico, Arizona and the 
neighbouring states was due to the discovery, in the latter part 
of last century, of the vast stores of mineral wealth that they 
contain. In consequence of this it was not long before railways 
began to spread their tentacles over the mining districts. Railways 
are the modern trade-routes, and show unmistakably what are 
the industrial districts of any new country. A study of the 
maps published by Hill in his Bulletin on “‘ The Mining Districts 
of the Western United States’? shows how the existence of 
‘Mining settlements has decided the direction of railway lines. 


1 Id., 69-70. 2 Crane 27, 29, 94. 
8 Lindgren i. 80. * Id., ii, 17 ©8. 


62 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


States with but little mineral wealth, that are given over to 
cattle-breeding, are sparsely served by railways; those with 
many mining settlements soon possess a network of railway lines. 

Sketch Map Numbers 10 and 11 are built up from the maps 
of Hill, and those provided in several volumes of the Reports 
and Bulletins of the Bureau of Ethnology.t They are called 
sketch maps, because it is impossible, at the present moment, 
to obtain exact details as to distributions. They show the mining 
centres as given by Hill, the railways, and the sites of past and 
present ruins of pueblos. These ruins are of different ages and 
of various kinds, but for the present purpose they are grouped 
together. 

It is evident that modern mining centres have been served 
by branch lines. This is the case with the mines of the Verde 
Valley, Arizona; the centres round Globe and Maimi in Gila 
County, Arizona; Morenci and Metcalf in Greenlee County, 
Arizona ; and Silver City, Santa Rita and Hanover, Grant County, 
New Mexico. The important mining district round Santa Fe 
on the Rio Grande is well served by railways, as also is the mining 
district of Colfax County, New Mexico, which includes Elizabeth- 
town. Another railway branch serves Elvado on the Chama, Rio 
Arriba County. <A railway branch also extends to Farmington 
on the San Juan River, San Juan County, New Mexico. In 
Utah a noteworthy relationship exists between railways and 
mining regions, as may be seen by reference to Hill’s monograph. 

In practically all these cases the railways are running into 
regions full of remains of native villages or ruins of some sort. 
This is particularly noteworthy in the case of the line running 
from Prescott, through Phoenix, to El Paso on the Rio Grande. 
With the exception of the upper reaches of the Salt River, it 
might almost be thought that the distribution of ruins was really 
that of settlements served by the railway. It stands beyond 
doubt that identity of aim must have caused such an agreement 
of distribution. The branch lines in the various mining regions 
cannot be claimed as natural routes from one place to another : 
they are obviously made for the transportation of raw material 
from the terminus, and the choice of route is based on industrial 
requirements. It can hardly, therefore, be claimed that the ancient 
settlements in these places were determined by climatic and other 
geographical circumstances. The founders of these settlements 
were presumably actuated by the same motives as Europeans, 
namely, the presence of raw materials of various sorts. The 
Same reasoning applies to the thickly populated region round 
Santa Fé. The agreement between the ruins and railway lines 
1s too close to be due to chance; it argues for identity of purpose 
in the minds of their authors, the desire for raw materials. The 
old mining activities in this region bear out the contention. 


. Fewkes V., Vill., xill., xiv.: Harrington: Hewett: Hough: E. H. 
Morris: Mindeleff i., ii., iii. 


(NOILOAS NUYFHLUON) VaUY OTAaNg 


1 ’ e en ae a 2 TAL Ben . °° 
/ I e a e os a . 
t iy 8S . aN iv. ° eo,” = 
t e « = e 6 eeu 
e;°* VA « \ od 
ee | ied ‘ A 
e ee \_ of . s pa 
yt oa! =< 20) 7: TSS ae “7 N 
ff eee S- A. “(-"@ @6 wen"? dmmey + E = 
@ “a efi 6 “ id ® e 
1 e S @y1 e e® s 
E .@ 6225 A, e © ee 
- * : « e 
secre eee oe 
1@%6@ 
ish s Vv e 
Soe . . &8 6 - ee 
‘lee ® ° = . a 
. les = y, 
Vv e e 
eh. I (e%, ® ar 
SOV] t : e e 
Ce iG 
¥ oy , bad ® 
Bees [fs 3 opemaz ° 
aie a) >. sie a07 Fume 4 . ° 
B a a ae ee oe | Seed AER oe 
rm Ret) * \ sont Pe de + a A 
\ a | ant e «8 @ 
\ t ‘ / ®6 * 
\ 2 V7 See I 
, we ete 
70 a om 6e 
SADAAIIY -~-\ oFuemd, fe 808 he BE 
/ i ~2% e 2 
soe, 4 “ ~ 1 Wa 4.01 Po, *e Z . shed 
‘ ns oe & 
uaddon ee s | 5- * e fis 
/ 2 
LOA @ eh pe es “ 
7? J me 1 : . 
POCO mM \ e" J se . 
sunt 9 s0q27%q @ 2pre19" ees a 


64 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


engaged in mining, it would not be expected that their migration 
would be determined by the presence of such things as gold and 
copper, for which they have little use. But it is going too far 
to claim that such migrating tribes did not exercise a deliberate 
choice of settlement. They may have had just as decided notions 
as to what was a suitable place for settlement as the old turquoise 
and gold miners, but their preference may have lain in different 
directions. 

It is not wise to call in the action of impersonal natural forces 
as the causative agents in distributions of human settlement 
before it is quite certain that the people themselves had no direct 
choice in the matter. This is particularly so in the case under 
consideration. For it is well known that the region between 
the headwaters of the Little Colorado and the headwaters of the 
Gila River contains many salt lakes and marshes, which were 
visited by Indian tribes from vast distances. One of the things 
that struck Coronado when he arrived among the Zuni Indians, 
was their possession of quantities of excellent white salt.1 The 
getting of salt was a religious ceremony among the Indians. It 
was given to them by the Salt Old Woman,? which, as will be 
evident later on, is direct evidence of the influence of the people 
of the archaic civilization. Cushing states emphatically that the 
settlement of the Zuni and other Pueblo Indians near the salt 
lakes of south central New Mexico, was due to their desire for 
salt: ‘“‘ The Tanoans so far prized their comparatively inferior 
source of salt supply in the salinas of the Manzano as to have 
been induced to settle there and surround them with a veritable 
cordon of their pueblos.”? ? Among the Zuni at the present time 
the south is the *‘ direction of the salt-containing water or lake.” 4 
Thus it is possible to claim that the desire for salt determined the 
distribution of these peoples. 

Other cases will have to be decided. The Tusayan district, 
inhabited by the Hopi Indians, does not seem to afford any 
material substance that would attract settlers. Again, the great 
distribution of ruins in the San Juan drainage may be due to 
the existence of gold gravels, for gold exists in the watershed of 
the rivers on which many of these settlements were made. These 
cases must, however, be left on one side. It must be remembered, 
nevertheless, that the need for various sorts of stone for the 
manufacture of domestic implements and utensils of various kinds 
of basic rocks, probably influenced native settlement to some 
extent. For instance, the Pueblo peoples used obsidian for 
knives. ‘‘ Obsidian was worked somewhat extensively in the 
mountains of northern New Mexico, in Nevada, and Arizona, 
and the Pacific States are exceedingly rich in this material, and, 
although no important quarries have been located, there can be 

1 Winship 389, ‘‘ The best and whitest I have seen in all my life.” 


2 J. P. Harrington 535-7. 
% Cushing li. 353 e.s. & Jd., 355. 5 Holmes iv. 114. 


— 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 65 


but little question that such exist.”” 1 The problem will have to 
be attacked in detail before it can be said to have been solved 


in a Satisfactory manner. The run of the evidence, however, is 


in the direction of supporting the theory that the first food- 
producing occupants of the country must have come from a place 
where mining was actively prosecuted. 

Although difficulties meet the attempt to account for all the 
settlements in the Pueblo region, yet if it be conceded that 
modern railways, even branch lines, run into regions full of ruins 
of pueblos, it is difficult to contest the truth of the general principle 
just enunciated. It may well happen that further extensions of 
railways in this region will make the correspondence still closer. 

The explanation put forward fits the facts without any difficulty. 
How else can we explain why men built great. dwellings crazily 
perched on the precipitous sides of deep cafions, that had to 
be approached by long ladders reaching hundreds of feet up the 
sides, in an arid and inhospitable country, when the whole of 
the United States was open to them? Their actions betray the 
existence of a strong incentive, and the desire for gold, turquoise 
and other substances supplies it. 

California possesses traces of ancient mining. Turquoise was 
worked in San Bernardino County. Professor Whitney, in a work 
on ‘“‘ The Auriferous Gravels of the Sierra Nevada,’’ to which I 
have not had access, discusses remains found in gold-bearing 
gravels of this region. I quote from an article by Dr. Southall 
which quotes Professor Whitney. ‘‘ He gives a list of the objects 
which have been found in the gravel, comprising (1) a mortar 
found in pay gravel under volcanic matter, at the depth of 150 ft. 
(at San Andreas); (2) A stone hatchet, triangular in shape, size 
4 in. round, 6 in. long, with a hole through it for a handle, found 
75 ft. from the surface in gravel, and under basalt, 300 ft. from 
the mouth of the tunnel, locality Table Mountain, Tuolumne 


County; (8) a large number of mortars, pestles, stone dishes, 


with bones of elephant and mastodon at ‘ Murphy’s,’ Tuolumne 
Co.; (4) bones of a human skeleton found in clay at a depth of 
88 ft., by Dr. H. H. Boyce, at Placerville; (5) numerous stone 
relics, mortars, groved disks, etc., at various depths.” ? The 
men who made these relics were not at the cultural level of the 
present-day Californian Indians: they were far above it. They 
made out of granite mortars and dishes of perfect form, weighing 
from 20 to 40 pounds, and 12 in. in diameter. They also used 


a vessel made of lava “‘ hard as iron,”’ circular in form with three 


legs and a spout ; and polished stone axes perforated with a hole. 
“ And the interesting thing about these remains is that, as Bancroft 
Says, they seem in almost every instance to have been found 
by miners in their search for gold.” 3 The explanation given by 
Dr. Southall in his paper seems to me to be the only possible 
one. He points out that these remains “‘ always seem to be 

1 Id., 214, 2 Southall 195-6. 9 -Id., 197. 

5 


66 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


found in the auriferous gravels,’ and he goes on to say that: 
‘** A thousand years, perhaps, before Cortez landed in Mexico, the 
Toltec civilization flourished in Central America, in Anahuac, 
and on the Pacific Coast, and centuries before the palaces of 
Montezuma glittered with the precious metals, the precursors 
of the Aztecs had mined into the auriferous gravels of the Sierra 
Nevada and the Sacramento Valley. The relics . .. were evi- 
dently left where they have been found by the gold-hunters.” + 

It is possible, on the basis of this discussion, to turn to Mexico 
and the Maya country. If, as seems certain, the Pueblo region 
was colonized from Mexico, what were the Maya and Mexicans 
doing in their own country, and how did they choose their original 
sites for settlement ? In order to answer this question I shall 
have to use indirect evidence. Sketch Map No. 12 shows the 
relationship between the important groups of ruins of Mexico, 
as given by Lumholtz, Joyce and Bancroft, and the railway lines. 
It is significant that, judging the region from New Mexico to 
South Mexico as a whole, the railways are plentiful in the basin 
of the Gila River, in New Mexico and Arizona, and then sparse 
for a great distance, when they begin to proliferate; and that 
ruins should be plentiful in both cases where the railway lines 
begin to throw out several branches. As in the Pueblo region, 
branch lines run into places with ruins; as that to Oaxaca, 
that to Mexcala less definitely ; and that to Pazcuaro; while 
the proliferation of branches near Mexico city agrees well with 
that of ruins. Even the apparent exceptions can be explained. 
The name of Placeres del Oro tells its own tale, in view of the 
fact that, as Sahagun states, the Mexicans washed river gravels 
for gold. The ruins in Vera Cruz are in a State which is notable 
for the presence of pearl-bearing freshwater mussels on a greater 
scale than elsewhere in Mexico.? The Mexicans used much pearl- 
shell and many pearls; only recently Mrs. Zelia Nuttall has 
discovered, on top of a pyramid in Mexico, a great depth of 
pearl-shell, in the midst of which were burials. So it is possible 
that the pearls of Vera Cruz attracted the people of old, but 
that they have not been so successful in attracting modern men 
as to cause them to build railways. 

There may be other explanations for the Mexican railways 
than that adduced. But railways are made to make money, 
which is not done in Mexico by passenger traffic. The branches 
to Oaxaca and elsewhere were certainly made on account of the 
mineral traffic, and similar motives presumably caused the men 
of the archaic civilization to settle in the same districts. 


1 Southall 197. Holmes (iv. 116) notes ‘‘ the occurrence of articles of 
stone—mortars, pestles, and other objects of kindred culture grade, as well 
as fossil human remains—in the gold-bearing gravels of the mountain valleys.” 

Remains have also been found in the Santa Barbara district—bowl- 
shaped mortars, long, graceful sandstone pestles, steatite tobacco pipes, 
serpentine cups and bowls, made from materials of local origin (¢d., 115). 

2 Sahagun 776. § Simpson. 


OOIXaW 


dedoqurimsy 


ce) 


SkDM)10Yf om—e- 
SUIT 7UD)L0AUl] e 


010 12P $2.129014 


¢ 
\ O18T974eL ‘ 
“s ‘ Donel Se-- / 
e- Se “Sooxkay ® es pe -“@ areyodezs 
° 3 aeseniny031@ \@emy *- (@ 


g® Ce ae 


a 


, 
d t; 
7 We Ve 
it : 
a | ye i 
ri 
5] 
Pea oe ' 
ie d 
“ f : 
2 
. 
a BS 
eA 
Misi Ai 
a 
= \ 
x. 
=~ 
M ~ 
Wd hate 
° 4 
Bye) 
‘ 
- 
‘ > 
’ %, 
> 
- 5 
la % 
a 
i 
f Ve 
‘ : 
§ * : ”" 
Z ¢ 
¥ . 
‘ : , 
7 , 
% 
& " 


Pea 


i . 

é, r 

5 ‘ 1 7 
\ + \ 

: : © - 

{ ti X 
’ 

A ig 

if te. 
: 
/ ”, ts 


. ¥ - | 
te J rif 
| ~ 
4 \ a 
ss 
% ; 
. 4 
« 
4 . 
y, 462 
ed ee es 
‘ danrgpee 
, a. J 
ie me 
4 y ad 
tPF ye 
= + e os 
s = Or ae 
‘ 9 = 
' ? ‘a di ® A 
‘ Sas 
: & 
‘ ‘ , 


ry 


tit Mare 


« wd = 
mag 

- 

hl 

f 


’ 
os 


a 4 
) a 
hs 
, 
: 
‘ * 
. 
. ‘ 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 67 


The question of the more homely raw materials must not be 
forgotten when considering the problem of the early colonization 
of a country. In the case of Mexico, obsidian, so widely used 
for the manufacture of knives, may have determined certain 
settlements, as is shown by Mrs. Zelia Nuttall. ‘‘ Hardly an 
occupied site in all Mexico and Central America can be found 
that does not furnish examples of obsidian implements or frag- 
ments. The flake-knife is the simplest and most universal of 
the flaked forms, and occurs in great numbers in and about the 
valley of Mexico. The immense refuse deposits of the ancient 
city of Tenochtitlan, now the city of Mexico, are in places liter- 
ally black with the broken knives, and San Juan Teotihuanan 
furnishes an apparently inexhaustible supply of these and other 
forms of implements.’ Since the stone is found in the San Juan 
River, the settlement was probably due to its presence ; | indeed, 
it is probable that the existence of obsidian determined many of 
the old settlements in this part of America. Mrs. Zelia Nuttall 
has a suggestive article concerning the stone called Chalchihuitl 
by the Mexicans, a kind of jade. This formed one of the forms 
of tribute paid by the coast tribes to the Mexicans, the others 
being gold and turquoise. Mrs. Nuttall gives a long list of such 
places. ‘* The actual existence of towns in regions which anciently 
paid tribute of chalchihuitl beads to Montezuma, and of districts 
whose names incorporate the word chalchihuitl, undoubtedly 
constitute a most valuable indication which deserves serious 
consideration by those interested in the possibility of finding 
jadeite in place.’ It is noteworthy too, that, as Mrs. Nuttall 
mentions, in Chiapas, the region where the Maya civilization had 
its origin, there is a place called ‘‘ The land of chalchihuitl.” ? 
_ The argument from railways cannot be applied to the Maya 
country, for none have yet been made there. Sketch Map No. 13 
shows the distribution of the early Maya cities. Some are in 
the basin of the Usumacinta River; Copan and Quirigua are 
in the basin of the Motagua River; and the rest are in Honduras 
and Yucatan, which last country was the scene of later Maya 
history, when they had been driven from their earlier home. 
The settlements of Copan and Quirigua may possibly be explained 
because the Motagua River is said to be the most important 
gold river in that part of America.* The earliest settlements 
in the Usumacinta River basin are close to the banks of rivers, 
which suggests design. The Usumacinta is by far the most 
noteworthy pearl-bearing river in Mexico and Central America, 
for it contains several varieties of the pearl-bearing freshwater 
mussel.* It is said, further, by Simpson, that pearl-bearing 
mussels exist in Honduras, but the information is not precise. 
The Maya used pearls, both at Copan and in the Honduras and 
Yucatan settlements, but none have been found in the Guate- 


1 Holmes i. 406. 2 Nuttall i, 228, 238. 
* Maclaren 608. 4 Simpson, 


68 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


malan sites.1 It may be, therefore, that pearls played some 
part in the settlement of Honduras. 

Attention has already been called to the enormous number of 
mounds that exist in the Mound area of the United States, 
particularly in the basins of the Mississippi, Ohio, Tennessee and 
Cumberland rivers, in South Michigan, South Minnesota, Florida 
and Western New York. The mounds are sparse along the 
Atlantic seaboard districts, and they soon disappear once the 
Mississippi is crossed in the westward direction. They do not 
persist far north of the Great Lakes. It is probable that they 
exist in some numbers in Texas, which archeologically is but 
little explored.2 If that be so, a continuous distribution exists 
from Mexico to the eastern States. 

Sketch Map No. 8 does not show all the mounds, but it is 
sufficiently detailed to make the reader realize the great extent 
of the mound-building civilization. If a careful examination be 
made of the original map, it will be found that no mound is situated 
far from a river-bank. It can be seen, from the sketch map 
reproduced here, that this is true in the general sense: it is also 
true in detail. What cause can have led men, all over this wide 
area, practically universally to settle in close proximity to water ? 
I suggest that the cause was the search for pearls and pearl-shell. 

It needs a detailed examination of the monograph of Simpson 8 
to realize the number of varieties of pearl-bearing freshwater 
mussels that exist in the Mound area. The details are so numerous 
that it is impossible to plot them on a map. Nevertheless, certain 
general principles can be derived from the mass of details. The 
great bulk of the mussels are found in the basins of the Mississippi, 
Ohio, Tennessee, Cumberland, Tombigbee, Chattahoochee, Flint, 
Savannah, and Altamaha Rivers; also in the St. Lawrence and 
Atlantic drainages, and in South Michigan and North Florida. 
The distribution of pearl-mussels therefore agrees closely with 
that. of mounds. 

When the Mississippi is crossed, the number, both of pearls 
and of mounds, rapidly lessens ; so that, although mounds are 
fairly plentiful in Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa and Minnesota, 
especially within reach of the Mississippi, they soon vanish in 
Indian Territory, Kansas, Nebraska and the Dakotas. While 
the pearl-bearing mussels disappear in like manner, they are 
fairly plentiful in Arkansas, along the Little Red, White, and 
Current Rivers, but, beyond a few references to Kansas, they 
practically are not noted in the more westerly States of the Plains. 

The distribution of mounds and of pearl-bearing freshwater 
mussels supports the contention that the mound-builders appre- 
ciated pearls and pearl-shell, and were largely determined in their 
movements by the presence of these things. 

Mr. Jackson has shown that, in various parts of the Mound 
region, many pearls have been found with burials of the mound- 


1 Jackson 117~18. 2 Pearce 227-8, 3 Simpson, 


@ Ma iya Settlements 


Un AuTi Aon 1 
te 
ON © 

2 

ER , 
Pale 

alenque @ wa Tikal, J 
ras | Nardnjg—£ 
CHIAPAS ape a O'/ tie 
ay 
E} Pabellon{ nw | 
) a, 


Tze t of) 


SL Ak = ALL A. 


HONDURAS 


MAYA SETTLEMENTS ABOUT A.D. 460 (AFTER MORLEY) 


rm 


7 ™ 

, 

‘ 

+ 
* 
~ 
\ 
‘ 


eT as 


ee ee ey 


a bills Sha-vhatine Ic 


De ¥ 


on 0 


t at Poe 4 
re Ee RD | A 
mi ar ay akin pear ts 


an ; , 
ep ’ a + ew an - 


; wa a SVOR A ti kus a “aie 


LA =] 
eo _ 7? 
a ‘ {isa 
x ” 
® 
ee 4. 
; 
of 
ve s 
‘ 4 a | 
‘ 
; ‘ ! farts xf 
4. “a 
. 
"4 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 69 


builders.! The valuable paper by Willoughby, on the Indians of 
Virginia, shows what great value they placed on pearls and other 
things. He describes the process of mummification of the kings. 
‘* They were first disembowelled, then the skin was laid back 
and the flesh cut from the bones. Strachey says that this was 
dried over the fire into ashes and preserved in little pots. Hariot 
tells us it was dried in the sun and preserved in mats which were 
placed at the feet. The skeleton, still fastened together by 
ligaments, was enclosed again in its skin and stuffed with white 
sand or with ‘ pearls, copper, beads and such trash sewed in a 
skynne.’ Upon it were placed bracelets, copper ornaments and 
strings of pearls and beads. Thus prepared, the remains were 
wrapped in a white dressed skin and lastly rolled in mats and 
laid ‘ orderly one by one as they dye in their turnes.’ The riches 
accumulated during life, such as beads, pearls and copper, together 
with his tobacco pipe, and any object especially valued during 
life, were placed in baskets and deposited at the feet.’? More 
than once mention is made, in this account, of the great value 
placed on pearls as well as copper, by these people.? 

Jackson quotes from Streeter with regard to the Florida Indians. 
“As in Cleopatra’s time in Egypt, so in Florida, the graves of - 
the kings were decorated with pearls. Soto’s soldiers found in 
one of their temples great wooden coffins, in which the dead lay 
embalmed, and beside them were small baskets full of pearls. 
The temple of Tolomecco, however, was the richest in pearls ; 
its high walls and roof were of mother-of-pearl, while strings of 
pearl and plumes of feathers hung round the walls; over the 
coffins of their kings hung their shields, crowned with pearls, 
and in the centre of the temple stood vases full of costly pearls.” 

‘The use of pearls, therefore, by the mound-builders, and by 
the tribes of Columbian times, stands beyond doubt; and its 
ceremonial nature shows, likewise, that the people attached great 
importance to them.? So, if the peoples responsible for the 
mounds came to the United States for pearls and other valuables, 
it follows that their most important settlements would be in the 
areas richest in what they most desired. I shall now adduce 
evidence to show that the most important Mound region was 
that characterized by the richest profusion of substances appre- 
ciated by the people of Mexico and elsewhere in pre-Columbian 
times. Cyrus Thomas quotes the words of Dr. Joseph Jones : 
** After a somewhat lengthy review of the various kinds of burial 
practised by the aborigines of America, he arrives at the following 
conclusions: ‘We have carefully examined all the modes of 
burial practised by the American aborigines, in extenso, and it 
is evident that the ancient race of Tennessee is distinguished 


1 Jackson 167 e.s. 2 Willoughby 62, 71, 72. 

8 Jackson 167 e.s. See Chapter XXV for an explanation of this fact, 
which is of so great importance for the understanding of the archaic civili- 
zation. 


70 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


from all others by their peculiar method of interment in rude 
stone coffins. Whilst the custom of burying the dead in the 
sitting posture was almost universal with the various tribes and 
nations of North and South America, the ancient inhabitants of 
Tennessee and Kentucky buried most commonly in long stone 
graves,”, with the body resting at length, as among civilized 
nations of the present day in Europe and America.’” Cyrus 
Thomas goes on to comment: “ Since the publication of Dr. F. 
Jones’ paper much additional information in regard to these 
graves has been obtained, and the area in which they occur has 
been greatly extended, but the result has been, as will be seen 
in the sequel, rather to confirm than to disprove the opinion here 
expressed. Graves of the same character have been observed in 
northern Georgia, in the lower portions of eastern Tennessee, in 
the valley of the Delaware River, at various points in Ohio and 
in southern Illinois. Yet, strange as it may seem, all these places 
were at one time or another occupied by the same people who 
formerly dwelt in the Cumberland Valley, or by closely allied 
tribes.” Later he states that the Cumberland Valley and middle 
Tennessee constituted “ the chief home of the people who buried 
in stone graves of the peculiar form mentioned,’”’ with whom he 
connects the Shawnee and Delaware tribes. He sums up a long 
discussion of this matter in the following terms: ‘* Taking all 
these corroborating facts together, there are reasonable grounds 
for concluding that graves of the type now under consideration, 
although found in widely separated localities, are attributable to 
the Shawnee Indians and their congeners, the Delawares and 
Ilinois, and that those south of the Ohio are due entirely to the 
first-named tribe.”’* Thus he claims that the mound-builders 
are definitely linked to the Indians of post-Columbian times, and 
any careful reader of his arguments is, it seems to me, bound to 
agree with him. 

Another important fact emerges from the study of mounds 
containing stone graves. In a group of mounds at Cartersville, 
Georgia, called the Etowah Mounds, certain remarkable figured 
copper plates and engraved shells have been found. “It is 
apparent to every one who will inspect the figures that in all 
the leading characters the designs are suggestive of Mexican or 
Central American origin. In fact, there can be no doubt that 
they were derived in some way from these more civilized countries 
either directly or, as is more probable, indirectly.”? It is perhaps 
doubtful, as Cyrus Thomas points out, whether the copper plates 
may not perhaps be of European origin. But he notes, at the 
same time, that copper plates have only been found in mounds 
with stone graves. 


1 The crouched position in burial extends throughout the region, from 
Egypt of pre-Dynastic times, to the eastern States. 

2 Cf. C. Thomas i. 353. 

3 C, Thomas ii. 691 e.s. * 104,701. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 71 


Cyrus Thomas comments on the use of shell for ornament, 
and says that the ornamented shells are found “in all parts of 
Tennessee, except the extreme western portion, in western North 
Carolina, in northern Georgia, the extreme northern part of 
Alabama, south-eastern Missouri, southern Illinois, and in Virginia, 
especially the extreme south-western part; but western North 
Carolina, eastern and middle Tennessee, especially the Cumberland 
Valley, are the places where they have been found in the greatest 
numbers.” + He continues thus: ‘“ The chief difficulty which 
arises in connexion with these shells is the fact that a few of 
them bear undoubted Mexican designs which pertain to pre- 
Columbian times ... for example, those found in the ‘Big 
Toco ’mound. ... The Mexican origin of the designs is admitted 
by every one who sees them, yet the proof that this mound was 
built and used by the Cherokees is so strong as scarcely to admit 
of a doubt. How these two facts are to be reconciled is a problem 
not easily solved.” 2 

Other strong reasons can be given for the presence of people 
with undoubted Mexican culture in this region. It is well known 
that the Appalachians contain much gold, especially in the States 
of Tennessee, West Virginia, North and South Carolina, and 
Georgia, and in the days of Columbus they were inhabited by the 
Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, and Shawnee, tribes which are all 
claimed to have strong culture links with the mound-builders.$ 
It is certain that gold-mines were worked here in the past. But 
the problem is obscured by two facts. First of all, it is well 
known that the Spaniards worked gold-mines in this region. 
Also it is probable. that the first seekers got their gold from the 
gravels of the river-beds, and thus all traces of their work may 
well have disappeared. At the time of the Spaniards it seems 
certain that the natives of this region knew of the gold, and the 
early writers describe the manner in which it was got by them 
from the river gravels.4. The Indian tribes were living in country 
watered by rivers full of gold. The Cherokee call the Chatta- 
hoochee River by that name because in its bed there are many 
rubies. It and the Chestatee River, as well as many others 
running through their territory, are well stocked with gold in 
the gravels.° 

The following quotation from Lock’s “‘ Gold” makes it clear that 
the native tribes had certain knowledge of the wealth of their 
homeland : “‘ Old chroniclers give an account of a province called 
Cofachiqui, which was visited by the Spaniard de Soto’s gold- 
hunting expedition in 1538-40, and which was embraced in what 
afterwards became the States of Florida, Georgia, Alabama and 
Mississippi, and, according to Logan, had its centre on the western 
limits of South Carolina. Its capital and chief town stood upon 

1 C. Thomas ii. 702. 2 C. Thomas ii. 703. 


3 C. Thomas ii. 718 e.s. 4 Becker 253 e.s. 
® Crane 26. The Chattahoochee is also an important pearl river (Simpson). 


72 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the tongue of land between the Broad River of Georgia and the 
Savannah, just opposite the modern district of Abbeville. The 
Spaniards entered this capital after a two-months’ march, and 
there found hatchets formed from an alloy of gold and copper. 
At this their cupidity was greatly excited, and they concluded 
that they had found a country abounding in the long-coveted 
precious deposits of gold. And so indeed they had: less than 
six miles south-east of the town, on the opposite or Carolina side 
of the river, lay one of the most extraordinary gold deposits in 
the world. The Cherokees were well acquainted with the Dorn 
mine. This is shown by the numerous relics of their handiwork 
scattered around it, and there can be little doubt that the massive 
nuggets of its outcropping gold supplied them abundantly with the 
finer metal of the alloy that so attracted the Spaniards, It is no 
less known that the gold and copper, found in the possession of 
the Indians, in the form of solid masses or curious trinkets, by 
the first white men who visited the country, were obtained from 
these sources.”” He goes on to say: ‘* These chronicles and 
traditions go to confirm what Lawson says, that the Indians, 
from time immemorial, were acquainted with valuable mines of 
gold and silver in Upper Carolina.” + 

These emphatic words of Lock show that the Indians of the 
goldfield were engaged in working the stores of metal that existed 
there, and that their capital was, as he says, situated near “‘ one 
of the most extraordinary gold deposits in the world.” Now 
since the Indians, who had such close cultural associations with 
the mound-builders, knew of the gold in their midst and worked 
it, it seems beyond doubt, for this reason alone, that the mound- 
builders also exploited the mines. 

The mound-builders worked other sources of wealth. There 
are traces of mining over a wide area from Lake Superior to 
Mexico. ‘‘ The skill which is shown, and the knowledge of the 
situation of veins, as well as the patience and perseverance 
necessary to do so much work, all prove that it was the performance 
of a people more civilized than our aborigines.” Near Lake 
Superior are numerous traces of copper workings. “ It is along 
the edges or outcrops of these veins that the ancients dug copper 
in great quantities, leaving, as external evidences of their industry, 
large trenches, now partly filled with rubbish, but well defined, 
with a breadth of 10 to 15 ft., and a variable depth of 5 to 20 ft. 
In one place, the inclined roof, or upper wall work, is supported 
by a natural pillar which is left standing, being wrought around, 
but no marks of tools are visible. In another case, east of the 
recent works, is a case where they have wrought along the vein 
a few feet without taking away the top or the outside vein stone. 
The rubbish has been cleared away in one spot to the depth of 
20 feet, to the bottom of the trench. ... The agent found 
in one pit at about 18 ft. in depth, measuring along the inclined 

1 Lock 122-3. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 73 


face or flow of the vein, a mass of native copper supported on a 
cobweb of timber, principally the black oak of these mountains, 
but which the ancient miners had not been able to raise out of 
the pit. 

‘The sticks on which it rested were not rotten, but very soft 
and brittle, having been covered for centuries by standing water, 
of which the pit was full at all times. They were from 5 to 6 in. 
in diameter, and had the marks of a narrow axe or hatchet about 
1? in. in width. 

“They had raised it 2 or 3 ft. by means of wedges, and then 
abandoned it on account of its great weight, which was 11,658 
pounds, or near 6 tons.”’ 

They used stone hammers and mauls; they also used fire in 
their work. ‘‘ With these apparently inadequate means they 
have cut away a very tough compact rock, that almost defies 
the skill of modern miners, and the strength of powder, for many 
miles in a continuous line, and in many places two, three and four 
adjacent lines.” 4 

It is well known that copper mines exist in Tennessee. ‘‘ The 
many relics of mining operations in the shape of tools and workings 
on copper, lead and zinc veins in the State would seem to indicate 
that the Spaniards had once been engaged in mining operations, 
not for these base metals but with the expectation of finding gold 
and silver.”’? The Spaniards very likely went to places already 
worked by the natives. So the copper found in the Etowah 
Mounds may well have been mined by the mound-builders. In 
maintaining that the mound-builders were attracted to the Appala- 
chians not only by the pearls, but also by the stores of mineral 
wealth that existed there, I am making a claim that is hard to 
substantiate in one particular. For, so far as I am aware, no 
gold has been found in the mounds. But the Cherokee and other 
native races evidently knew of the presence of gold in their 
streams, and gave information which attracted the Spaniards. 
Since a continuity exists between the natives and the mound- 
builders, it is permissible to look upon this as presumptive evidence 
of the appreciation of gold on the part of the mound-builders. 
The task of accounting for its absence, presents no insuperable 
difficulty. For it is safe to argue that anyone who would search 
the remains of any goldfield would find no gold there, except 
that which the gold-seekers had overlooked. Goldfields are 
usually worked in order to remove the metal, not to use it on the 
spot. The Mexican connexions of the Etowah Mounds suggest 
strongly that the Mexicans were the instigators of the industry, 
and they naturally would remove all the gold. The presence of 
such highly civilized strangers could not fail to raise the natives 
in cultural level. This would account for the appearance of 
carved articles apparently beyond the powers of the Indians. 
The facts, when assembled, suggest, therefore, that the mounds 

1 Schoolcraft I. 96: cf. also Orr. 2 Crane 104. 


74 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


of the Appalachian goldfield present cultural features that connect 
them more closely with Mexico than any other mounds of the 
States. Further, these mounds are themselves connected with 
the most advanced Indian peoples, the Delawares, Cherokee and 
Shawnee. This region, as will be shown later by additional 
evidence; was one of the hiving-off places, whence swarms of 
Indians went out to seek fresh homes, who, as they went, dropped 
still more of the old culture that they had derived from the early 
gold-seekers of the Appalachians. 

A reason can therefore be assigned for the distribution of the 
mounds that accounts for it in a way that no other explanation 
has accomplished. It suggests that the search for gold, pearls 
and copper led the mound-builders to the localities where they 
found these things, and that they ignored other places probably 
equally well suited for habitation. In fact, their motives were 
similar to those of modern men. If a study be made of the 
behaviour of the Spaniards after their conquest of America, it 
will be found that their movements were obviously controlled 
by the reports of supplies of gold. ‘‘ If we go back in imagination 
three centuries, and picture to ourselves the most striking char- 
acteristic which the aspect of Europe then presented, we shall 
behold a universal excitement caused by the discovery of a new 
continent, which had been brought to light by a Genoese navigator, 
whose genius and persistent daring had been stimulated by a 
lucky miscalculation of the geographical position of China. In 
this new world, to which Columbus had traced the path—not 
merely for Castille and Leon, as is alleged in the inscription 
placed on the tomb by the tardy gratitude of posterity, but for 
the whole civilized world—mines of gold, and afterwards of silver 
(especially the latter), of unheard-of richness, presented themselves 
to the cupidity of the conquerors. The most enterprising spirits 
of the Iberian peninsula hastened across the ocean to possess 
themselves of treasures, the splendour of which had been exag- 
gerated in their excited imaginations; and they were followed 
by a multitude of daring adventurers from all parts of Europe, 
who precipitated themselves on the coast of America, all in 
quest of mines of gold and silver.’? 1 Small wonder that they 
arrived in the Pueblo region and in the Appalachians in their 
quest for gold, there to find in both places a highly developed 
civilization. If the motive was the search for gold in the one 
case, it is hard to see what other motive can be adduced in the 
other. The Spaniards found out the places where gold and pearls 


1 Chevalier 1-2. I owe the following quotation from a work entitled 
‘“ Recherches philosophiques sur les Americains’’ (Berlin, MDCCLXXVIT) 
to Dr. Elliot Smith. Discussing how the Jesuits came to choose a particular 
region of California for their mission, the writer makes this comment: 
‘“‘ Voici les véritables causes de leur prédilection pour cette partie des Indes 
occidentales. La péche des Perles, qui est, comme I’on fait, sur les parages 
de cette Péninsule et des Isles voisines, plus fertile et plus riche que sur ceux 
de Panama, d’Ormus, de Bassara et du Malabar ensemble ”’ (p. 134). 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 75 


existed ; so did the mound-builders ; it is therefore legitimate 
to claim that the early settlements in the North American gold- 
fields were made by men deliberately seeking for wealth. 

Reliance must not be placed solely on the presence of gold 
and pearls, and copper, to account for the whole distribution of 
the mounds. These people used other materials, flint, chert, 
mica and so on, the need of which would determine in some 
measure the distribution of their settlements. For instance: 
** Mica was in very general use among the Indian tribes east of 
the Great Plains and was mined by them at many points in the 
Appalachian highlands from Georgia to the St. Lawrence River. 
From these mines it passed by trade or otherwise to remote parts 
of the country and is found more especially in burial mounds, 
stone graves and ordinary burials in the Gulf States and through- 
out the Mississippi Valley. Mica is also found in workable forms 
in Dakota and south-western Arkansas, but is not known to have 
been mined by the aborigines in these sections.” + 

Many mounds contained burials associated with mica. ‘‘ At- 
water describes the discovery of a burial at Circleville, Ohio, of 
a sheet of mica 36 in. in length by 18 in. in width and 1 in. in 
thickness. Other similar finds were made by Atwater in the 
same region. With a skeleton in the Grave Creek Mound near 
Wheeling, W. Va., 150 disks of sheet mica measuring 14 to 2 in. 
in diameter and having one or two perforations were found. 
These were probably suspended as tinkling pendants on some 
part of the costume.” # 

The mica-mines covered a wide area. “ No definite idea of 
the number of ancient diggings can be formed, but that they 
were numerous and widely distributed over the south Appalachian 
region cannot be questioned, western North Carolina claiming 
the largest number.’”? ? When it is remembered that the natives 
were, at the time of Columbus, actively engaged in mining for 
flint, chert, steatite, mica, catlinite, hamatite, copper, silver and 
gold, fire-clay, pigment materials, salt and so forth,* it is evident 
that much work will have to be done before it is possible to state 
that climatic or other geographical conditions have influenced 
the peoples in their choice of settlement. The great workshops 
of Flint Ridge, Licking and Muskingum Counties, Ohio, give an 
idea of the industry of the peoples. ‘* The extent of the ancient 
operations is almost beyond belief and can be realized only imper- 
fectly by those who have not visited the locality. To say that 
hundreds of acres of the undulating surface of the plateau have 
been dug over and countless trenches and pits opened to the 
depth of from 5 to 25 ft., often so closely placed as to coalesce 
within the various groups, does not leave an adequate impression 
upon the mind,.® ... The great marvel is that the aborigines 

1 Holmes iv. 241. 2 Holmes iv. 241. 


3 Holmes iv. 244. 4 Id., iv. 158: T. Wilson ii. 961 e.s. 
5 Holmes iv. 173. 


76 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


even accomplished the work of which such abundant traces 
remain, and only those who have ventured to remove a small 
mass of the flint from its place can realize the appalling difficulty 
of the work, even to men with tools of steel, unaided by powerful 
explosives.”’ 1 

These quotations show that the native tribes of the United 
States were organized on a complicated industrial basis, and that 
their industrial needs, beyond any doubt, played an important 
part in the determination of their distribution. I am convinced 
that a careful survey of the whole country will reveal correlations 
between settlements and sources of raw materials as exact as 
those already discovered in the case of the early settlements of 
England and Wales.? 


(ii) OCEANIA 


It has already been pointed out that megalithic monuments 
and irrigation systems are not found in every island of the Pacific. 
The original colonizers of Oceania brought with them their food- 
plants and made habitable the islands where they lived. They 
therefore must have had some reason for settling in one place 
rather than another; but, from the standpoint of natural condi- 
tions, it is hard to see what influenced them. What is the cause 
of the great activity round Tahiti, with the building of numerous 
pyramids, when the fertile soil of New Zealand lay ready for 
occupation, and was known in early days to the Polynesians ? 
Why were the Paumotu more highly favoured than the Gilberts 
or the Ellice Islands? Why was Penrhyn Island chosen as a 
site for megaliths rather than the others in the vicinity ? What 
is the difference between New Caledonia and New Zealand that 
their cultural history should be so different ? 

Sketch Maps Nos. 4, 5 and 6 show that the distribution of 
pearl-shell agrees well with that of the archaic civilization. The 
Islanders have always been famous for their love of pearls and 
of pearl-shell. According to Jackson, ‘“‘In the Pacific Islands 
pearls and pearl-shell seem to have been appreciated for centuries. 
Among the native ornaments noted by Captain Cook at Tahiti 
were feathers, shells and pearls ; but the latter were worn,” so he 
says, ‘‘ chiefly by the women. In the Marquesas Islands, plates 
of mother-of-pearl decorated the principal head-dress of the natives, 
while ornaments consisting chiefly of pearl-shell were seen in 
Toobouai; Friendly Islands; Mangea Islands ; New Caledonia ; 
New Zealand, etc. The pearl-shell was also found to be employed. 
in the construction of fish-hooks in many of the islands visited 
by early navigators.”’ The shell from which the pearl fish-hooks 


1 Idi, iv. 176. 

2 Cf. Perry xii.: ‘‘ I have now examined mines and quarries of the abori- 
gines in twelve distinct materials, and each new example has added to my 
former high estimate of the enterprise and perseverance of the native peoples 
when engaged in the pursuit of their mineral industries ’’ (Holmes ii. 507). 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 77 


are made (Avicula cumingii) is rare in the Ellice Islands. It is 
universally used in the Pacific, and the principal source of supply 
is the lagoon of Nukulailai.1 On the map are marked the places 
where the pearls are, or have been, fished. The list of places 
where pearl-fisheries are reported agrees with those of megalithic 
remains, irrigation and other signs of the presence in the past 
of the archaic civilization : Hawaii (Oahu), Marquesas, Paumotus, 
Tubuai (Austral Islands), Cook Islands, Society Islands (especially 
Tahiti and the neighbouring islands), Raiatea, Penrhyn Island, 
Samoa, Tonga (especially Tongatabu), Fiji, New Zealand,? New 
Caledonia, New Hebrides (Espiritu Santo and Vanikolo being 
especially mentioned), Santa Cruz, Ticopia, Solomons, British 
New Guinea, New Britain, Torres Straits, Carolines, Pelew, 
Mariannes, Marshalls, the Lord Mulgrave and Gilbert Islands.? 
The maps show the nature of the agreement between the two 
distributions. 

- Some features of this distribution need notice. In the first 
place, I suggest that, since the two distributions agree so closely, 
the first colonizers of the Pacific were led by their desire for pearls, 
and settled where they found banks of the shells that yielded 
them what they sought. The presence of the early folk is indi- 
cated by that of megalithic monuments, stone images and irrigation 
systems. These are absent in those places where no pearls are 
reported. Since these latter groups are now inhabited, the 
inference is that the first colonizers of the Pacific avoided them 
because they contained no pearls, and not because climatic 
reasons prevented settlement. 

If the people of the archaic civilization in the Pacific were pearl- 
fishers, their most important settlements would be in places where 
pearls were most abundant. Writers on the pearl-fishing industry 
are unanimous on two points. First, that pearl-fishing is the 
chief industry of the Pacific; and secondly, that the Society 
Islands constitute the most important centre. In the words of 
Kunz and Stevenson: ‘ Gathering pearl-shells and pearls is the 
principal industry of the semi-amphibious natives of the hundreds 
of palm-crowned and foam-girdled islands of the southern Pacific, 
commonly known as the South Sea Islands. Among these the 
most prominent for pearl-fishing are the Tuamotu Islands or 
Low Archipelago, the Society Islands, the Marquesas, the Fiji 
Islands, Penrhyn or Tongrareva, and New Caledonia.” * The 
most important centre of pearl-fishing is that of the Society 
Islands and the Paumotus. In the words of the same authors : 
“ Tahiti, the largest of the eleven Society Islands, is the centre 
of the pearling industry of French Oceania. It is situated in 
about lat. 17° S. and long. 150° W., and has an area of approxi- 
mately 410 square miles and a population of 11,000, nearly one- 
1 Jackson 109-10. 


2 v. Hessling 75 e.s.: Huguenin 43: Taylor 634-6. 
3 Kunz and Stevenson 189 e.s. 4 Kunz and Stevenson 189. 


78 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


half of whom live in Papeiti, the principal town. This is one of 
the most agreeable of the ‘Summer Isles of Eden,’ Nature 
furnishing food in abundance, and climate and social customs 
requiring little in the way of dress and habitation. Notwith- 
standing its importance as the head-quarters of the pearling 
industry; few pearl-oysters are caught at Tahiti, most of them 
coming from the Archipelagoes of Tuamotu, Gambier and occa- 
sionally Tubai.’’ 4 

Tahiti, therefore, is, for the eastern Pacific, the centre to which 
pearls are brought. It is therefore significant that so many stone 
pyramids are to be found in the Society Islands, especially in 
the neighbourhood of Tahiti. In this respect this group far 
excels the rest of Oceania, and in the past it is evident that 
Tahiti must have played a part of great importance in the history 
of the eastern Pacific. That the region richest in megalithic 
remains should be also richest in pearls is presumptive evidence 
that the people who first settled in Polynesia were pearl-fishers. 
Certain other facts support this. Penrhyn Island is mentioned 
as a place with notable megaliths ; it is also an important pearl- 
fishing centre. Again, the island of Tongatabu of the Tonga 
group is famous for the great trilithon ; it is also specially men- 
tioned as a pearl-fishing centre. In Hawaii, the island of Oahu, 
where now is Honolulu, contains pearls; this island has played 
an important part in the history of the group (see p. 311). 

The Samoa group needs mention. When the migrations of 
the Polynesians are mentioned, it will be found that Samoa was 
a great hiving-off centre, whence the Society Islands, the Mar- 
quesas, Rarotonga and other groups were colonized, an expedition 
even setting out thence at an early date for New Zealand. Samoa 
is mentioned by Von Hessling as a pearl-fishing centre,? but it 
certainly is not important in that way to-day. The pearl-beds, 
therefore, must soon have been exhausted. It is thus important 
to note that the megalithic remains of this group cannot in any 
way compare with those of Tahiti. The different degrees of 
richness in the pearl-fisheries of the two groups serve to explain 
the difference. In the one case there was every incentive to 
settle, and this incentive was lacking in the other. It must be ~ 
noted, too, that the signs of the archaic civilization are practically 
confined to the small island of Tau in Manu’a, at the extreme end 
of the group. 

Directly the boundary between areas with pearls and those 
without them is crossed, the distinction in culture is noticeable, 
for in the latter case megaliths are practically {entirely lacking. 
In one or two instances further evidence may serve to fill in the 
gaps in the evidence; as, for example, at Fanning’s Island, and 
the Chatham Islands. 

The unimportance of the pearls of New Zealand suggests the 
reason why the first expedition from Samoa did not lead to 


1 Id., 189-90. 2 Von Hessling. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 79 


settlements of the same nature as those of Tahiti. Nevertheless, 
people were undoubtedly living in the island before the arrival 
of the Maoris, and it may be that the pearl-bearing oysters induced 
them to make a settlement, although the relative unimportance 
of the pearling industry seems to have prevented a development 
such as that in Tahiti. In one case it is possible to suggest another 
motive. 

One important region for old remains is the Pelorus Sound. 
The Pelorus River itself is a gold river, the gravels of which have 
been worked for gold. Also gold is reported in Mahakipaca Bay, 
where a statuette of red material like pottery was found.! Stone 
implements have actually been found in gold claims. At Bruce 
Bay in a claim in the forest belt near the shore “‘ on argillaceous 
gravel, a party of miners, consisting of S. Fiddean, J. Sawyer 
and T. Harrison, found a stone chisel and a sharpening-stone 
lying close to each other; the former was broken, having been 
accidentally struck by the pick when the miners were loosening the 
wash-dirt. The stone chisel is made of a dark greenish chert, 
and is partly polished ; the sharpening-stone is made of a coarse 
greyish sandstone, which I found in situ about ten miles south 
of this locality, near the mouth of the river Piringa.’”’? Haast 
goes on to say that ‘‘ The beds through which the miners had 
been working were quite undisturbed, and some very large trees 
had been growing just above that portion of their claim, near the 
centre of which these stone implements had been found.’’ Similar 
finds had been made in Wellington Province in the drainage of 
swamps and construction of roads, often several feet below the 
surface. Others occasionally are found in Canterbury Plains, 
but all these implements are more or less polished, and resemble 
in many respects those of the present native population. ‘I 
wish to point out, however,” says J. Haast, ‘‘ that although these 
tools are much more perfect than those found in the Moa-ovens, I 
am not able to say which are of the greater antiquity.” ? It is 
therefore possible that the early comers in New Zealand, being 
of a higher civilization than those who followed, had some definite 
errand. Nothing can be argued definitely from the presence of 
one stone celt in a gold gravel. But the finding of an implement 
in such a position does at last raise the possibility that the gold- 
fields of New Zealand were discovered, if not worked to any great 
extent, a long time ago. 

Another attraction can be suggested. The terraces and other 
pre-Maori remains of the Great Barrier Island show that some 
reason must have existed for settling in this particular spot, 
although the whole of New Zealand was open. The presence 
there of much obsidian suggests the cause.* It has already been 
claimed that domestic industries have had an influence upon the 
distribution of population in North America, as well as the more 


1 Rutland i. 226, 230. 2 Haast i. 118. 
3 Id., 118-19. 4 Westman. 


80 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


obtrusive occupations of pearl-fishing and gold-mining. So, in 
the Pacific and elsewhere, the demand for a homely material 
’ such as obsidian may have played an important part in determin- 
ing the distribution of population, although some more powerful 
motive must be assigned for the first colonization of the region. 
It is not suggested that the search for obsidian led men into the 
Pacific. But, once there, they would seek obsidian for their 
knives, because they were accustomed to work it. It must be 
confessed, however, that the question of New Zealand cannot 
be decided on the present evidence. Nevertheless, the com- 
parative lack of pearls in the sea around the island and in the 
rivers, together with the small degree of influence of the archaic 
civilization, support the general contention of this chapter, 
namely, that the search for pearls and gold led the people of the 
archaic civilization to colonize the Pacific. 

The region of Melanesia from New Caledonia to New Britain 
is a noteworthy centre of pearl-fisheries, as is shown by Sketch 
Maps Nos. 5 and 6. But, besides pearls, other substances could 
have attracted the men of the archaic civilization. In New 
Caledonia gold exists in several localities both in river gravels 
and in the rock.2. Moreover, this island contains jade and sandal- 
wood, both of them much desired by the civilized peoples of 
eastern Asia. Signs of the presence of metals exist in the 
Solomons ; tin has been found in San Cristoval and Bougainville.* 
But doubtless the pearls of this region would prove the greatest 
attraction to people from more highly civilized countries. 

The most important centres of the archaic civilization in 
Polynesia were those characterized by rich pearl-fisheries. Evi- 
dence of the same nature exists in the New Hebrides. For those 
islands mentioned by Rivers as being noteworthy for their mega- 
lithic remains—Santo, Malo, Malekula, Aurora, Santa Maria—are 
situated in the midst of a pearl-fishing region that is especially 
mentioned by Von Hessling. 

It seems certain that the earliest food-producing civilization 
in British New Guinea was that of gold-workers. Mr. Chinnery 
has shown that all the remains of antiquity of British 
and German New Guinea, which belong to a time far beyond 
the recollection of the present populations, including stone 
pestles and mortars, stone-carving, pottery fragments, shell 
ornaments, implements of ophicalcite, obsidian, quartz, stone 
circles, and incised stones, have a distribution that indicates 
“a wide movement that had had a most profound and far- 
reaching influence on the early developments of New Guinea 
peoples.” 4... ‘‘What led the immigrants into the formidable 
regions of the interior in so many places? Nothing short of 
extreme pressure or the highest inducement could account for the 


1 Cf., for instance, J.P.S., 1902, for jade axes in Niue, which must have 
come from some other island. 


2 Maclaren 302-3. 8 Guppy ii. 11, 20. * Chinnery 271. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 81 


presence of people in the very interior of this, one of the most 
inhospitable countries in the world. The existing races are there 
simply because they cannot help themselves, while the white 
race is attracted there by gold. We can reasonably assume from 
the evidence that the immigrants penetrated the interior at 
various points entirely of their own free will. Had they been 
searching for land they would surely have remained in the fertile 
coastal region. What, then, did they seek.”’ He goes on to say 
“that the objects have been discovered either in gold-bearing 
areas or in neighbouring coastal regions,’’ and also that pearls 
certainly occur on the coast of New Guinea in every locality 
which has yielded traces of the immigrants.1 Also “‘ some of the 
goldfields into which these objects have found their way lie among 
the mountains of the interior in the midst of almost impenetrable 
jungles, rough broken mountains, precipitous gorges, and danger- 
ous rivers. These regions are inhabited by fierce mountain tribes 
of short peoples, all of which until recent years were at war with 
one another as well as with their taller neighbours of the low- 
lands. Yet it is in such inhospitable regions that some of our 
objects have been discovered, many of them below the surface. 
The existing races are not able to account for them, so we are 
forced to conclude that they were part of a culture which has 
failed to survive.” ... ‘‘ What induced the immigrants to 
penetrate the interior is, I think, strongly suggested by the pestles 
and the mortars and their discovery in goldfields (and on pearl- 
beds). Many of them are eminently adapted for the purpose of 
crushing stone, and I feel strongly inclined to support the view 
expressed by the practical miners of the Yodda goldfield. The 
peculiar distribution of objects and the cultures I have associated 
with them, and also the general characteristics of the peoples 
of the interior, could have resulted from a series of prospecting 
expeditions into the interior by the immigrants and woolly-haired 
peoples of the lowlands; a similar process of culture-distribution 
and fusion is in fact in operation to-day, as a result of the move- 
ments into the'interior of white miners and their coastal labourers 
in search for gold.’ ? 

Mr. Chinnery has thus provided facts that are of extreme 
importance for the thesis that I am sustaining. He makes it 
clear that the first food-producers in British New Guinea were 
gold-miners and pearl-fishers, who have left behind them traces 
of their presence in places where these things existed. His 
analysis of the culture of the peoples living in these regions shows 
what sort of cultural influence these old miners had. He is of the 
opinion that when these gold-seekers arrived they found only the 
nomadic hunters of negrito stock, and that they raised them in 


1 Td., 280, 284. 
2 Id., 280, 287. B. Thomson mentions gold on Sudest and St. Aignan 
in the Louisiades (i. 525, 530, 540). 
3 Sketch Map No. 7. 
6 


82 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


cultural level so that they now practise irrigation. So, in yet 
another place, evidence has come to light to show the onward 
march of civilization in early times in exactly similar circum- 
stances to those in which it is now once again moving up into the 
interior, namely, the search for gold. For long years the Japanese 
have worked the pearl-fisheries of Torres Straits, thus showing 
that the eastern nations of thousands of years ago could have been 
quite capable of coming there on a similar errand. In the region 
of the Carolines much pearl-fishery must have gone on in the past, 
and the Pelews and Yap are still important in that respect. 

The history of the Pacific therefore seems to have been one of 
colonization by a highly civilized people who used stone and 
practised irrigation, desired pearls and pearl-shell above all things 
that the islands produced, and made their permanent settlement 
in places where the supplies of pearls and pearl-shell were most 
abundant. The Eastern Pacific, judging from the study of food- 
plants, must have been uninhabited by man until the pearl- 
fishers came in their boats, seeking here and there, testing every 
lagoon until they found what they desired. It is thus not remark- 
able that the Polynesians tell how their great hero, Maui, fished 
up the islands one after another with his pearl-fish hook. In all 
parts of the Pacific this tale is told ; and, if the real reason of their 
search was the pearl, if they actually made the islands inhabitable, 
its wide distribution is explained—it has an historical basis. 


(iii) INDONESIA 


In “ The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia ” I argued that the 
search for valuable substances led the people of the archaic 
civilization to the Kast Indian Archipelago.? The discussion in 
that book was confined to certain places. Now that the basis is 
widened, it is necessary to make a broad survey of the Archipelago, 
and to determine what was the most striking object that could 
have attracted the men of the archaic civilization. 

The study of ancient Chinese records throws much light on the 
early civilization of the regions surrounding that country. The 
Dutch scholar, Groenenveldt, published in 1877 extracts from 
Chinese sources which throw a flood of light on the commercial 
relationships of the East Indian Archipelago just after the 
beginning of our era, and show that the natural products of that 
region were then being actively exploited. Indian merchants 
must have visited the archipelago long before that time, and the 


1 An illustration that can be added to those discussed in Chapter II. This 
conclusion is in entire harmony with my own as to the cultural conditions 
of the outlying parts of the region before the coming of the archaic civilization. 

2 On the authority of ten Kate, I noted that Sumba, so famous for its 
megaliths, was an ‘‘ Island of Gold.’”’ I understand from Heer Kruyt that 
the island probably never contained any gold. The question of the settle- 
ment of Sumba must therefore remain open. The island has always been 
famous for its sandalwood, so beloved of the peoples of India. I have no 
record of any pearl-fisheries round its shores. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 88 


lure would be the gold, tin, pearls, sandalwood, spices and other 
treasures for which it was renowned. Since two great peoples were 
exploiting this region, it is reasonable to conclude that others 
were on the same errand before them, for active trade has existed 
in the Indian Ocean from the beginning of the fourth millennium 
B.c. Sketch Map No. 8 shows that pearls form by far the most 
obtrusive possible cause of the settlements of the people of the 
archaic civilization. The settlement of Java certainly seems to 
have been due to their presence. The island contains little, if any, 
gold,1 but its shores are rich in pearls, and, near Batavia, purple 
shells exist. It is therefore quite in keeping with what has been 
learned of America and the Pacific, to find that the settlements 
of the archaic civilization in Indonesia agree so closely with the 
pearl-beds. 

Other factors have helped to determine the choice of settlement. 
In Central Celebes a considerable amount of gold is washed from 
the gravels of the rivers, and Heer Kruyt tells me that the distri- 
bution of the remains of the archaic civilization agrees with that 
of the gold. In Timor ancient copper mines have recently been 
discovered in places with ruins.? In Sumatra the earliest settle- 
ments, those of the people responsible for the stone images of the 
south-west, may have been the result of the search for gold ; for 
there are some ancient mines in the Redjang-Lebong goldfield, the 
only one “certainly known to merit the application of modern 
methods.” 4 It is noteworthy that a Phoenician script is in use in 
the Redjang district. 

Not only were people from India and westward exploiting the 
wealth of Indonesia at an early date, but the Chinese also took a 
hand in the game.® ‘“‘ In the south-west of Borneo there are traces 
of very extensive washings of alluvial gravels for gold and 
diamonds. These operations were being conducted by Chinese 
when Europeans first came to the country ; and the extent of the 
old workings implies that they had been continued through many 
centuries.”’® The Chinese also had a colony in North Borneo. 
It has already been seen that the Kayan have raised the nomadic 
food-gatherers of the centre of Borneo to a higher cultural level. 
But, as is known, they were preceded in the centre of the island 
by Hindus, who left behind them carved stone bulls. These 
people were evidently on the same errand as the Chinese, for the 
images lie on the banks of rivers in whose gravels there is gold. 
The Malay Peninsula contains numerous remains of antiquity, 


1 See discussions in the Natuurkundig Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch 
Indie on the reported presence of gold-bearing sand between Tijilatjap and 
Noessa-Kambangan (1855, p. 188; 1859, 380): also in dessa Melihan of 
Kota-Kedirie (1861, 489, 515). But, in any case, the country contains but 
little gold. 

* He promises, in his forthcoming work, to publish distribution maps. 

® Kruyt ix. 784. van Es suggests that the old copper mine at Tanini 
was the work of Europeans, 

4 Maclaren 298. 5 Cole 21. ® Hose and McDougall I. 17. 


84 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 
not in the form of temples, but of ancient mines, the technique of 
which testifies to a high civilization.1 Many stone implements 
have been discovered in this region, for example in Perak ; none 
of them, so far as I am aware, are paleolithic; they are all of 
polished stone. We are told that “‘ the multiplicity of the types 
of stone implements found in Perak shows that the users of them 
must have been comparatively in a high state of civilization ” ; 
further, that “the people, whoever they were, who employed 
them, were settlers from some other locality who on arrival had 
reached the second stage of the stone age.”’* A stone implement 
was found by a native 3 ft. deep in the alluvial soil of a tin- 
washing.? In Pahang there are remains of unknown strangers. 
One writer states that he found some stone implements in this 
State. ‘‘The rudest implement was found by myself at the 
bottom of an alluvial gold-mine in the Tui Valleyin Pahang, and ~ 
it had not been disturbed in its position when I found it. It lay 
in a deposit of gravel or crystalline limestone rock, and over it 
had been a deposit of gravel and clay 43 ft. thick . . . the imple- 
ment must be of very great antiquity.” In this same region of 
the Tui Valley have been found some stone rings, whose use and 
makers are entirely unknown. ‘* Neither Malays nor Chinese in 
Pahang have any reasonable theory of the origin or possible use 
of these things, and it seems very improbable that the rings could 
have been made by either of these peoples.”»* There are other 
signs of an alien people in this State. As Sir Hugh Clifford says, 
*“* The recent discovery in the Malayan State of Pahang—the home 
_ of apes and ivory and peafowl—of immense gold-mines of very 
ancient date and of a workmanship that has no counterpart in 
South-eastern Asia, supplies an ample reason for the designation 
of ‘golden’ so long applied to the Chersonese. Here, hidden 
away under the shade of the primeval forest, are excavations 
which must have yielded in their time tons of the precious metal 
. . . Of the race that worked them, of the slaves who toiled and 
suffered and died therein, we to-day possess no clue, for this, the 
story of the earliest exploration of a portion of South-eastern 
Asia, is lost to us for ever.’’5 

Colonel Gerini, in his studies on Ptolemaic geography, has a 
fascinating note on the gold-mines of the Malay Peninsula that 
I cannot resist quoting in full. ‘‘ Gold,” he says, ‘is found in 
considerable quantities, either disseminated in quartz reefs or 
in alluvial deposits, especially about Gunong Ledang or Mount 
Ophir, to the east of Malacca, where it was worked till 1817 
by Malays; on the upper waters of the Muar River and its 
tributary the Gemencheh (Chendras and other mines N.N.E. of 
Malacca town); in Upper Perak at Ayer Tawar, Busong, and 
Belum of Balom mines, of which last McCarthy says (‘ Surveying 
and Exploring in Siam,’ p. 16), ‘We saw traces of ancient gold- 

1 Sketch Map No. 8. 2 Wray 44. 3 Hale. 
4 Man, 1904, 34. ° H. Clifford 13. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 85 


mines, gigantic workings, abandoned no man knows how long ago.’ 
On the east coast of the Malay Peninsula we need not mention its 
frequent occurrence in Pahang (on Lui, Lipis, and Jelei Rivers) ; 
in Kelantan (Galas and Pergau Rivers); and in Legeh or Rangeh 
(upper waters of the Tanjung Mas and Telubin, and Tomoh dis- 
trict). But it is of paramount importance for ethnological 
science to call attention to the fact that most of the gold-mines 
now being developed in Pahang through European enterprise 
were originally opened at apparently a very remote age by men 
of an unknown race, whose workings, of which evident and in- 
numerable traces still remain, have rightly been styled ‘ wonder- 
ful’ by the Europeans who first visited them (see Denny’s 
*Descer. Dict. of Brit. Malaya,’ pp. 265-6), The chief of these 
formerly exploited mines are Raub, Punjum, Selensing, Tui, and 
Kechau, the Selensing being one of the most marvellous, It is 
situated in a small valley surrounded by low hills, which in some 
forgotten period must have been the scene of very extensive 
mining operations. The surfaces of these hills are honey-combed 
with perpendicular shafts, circular in shape, which in some 
instances penetrate to the water-level below the surface of the 
valley, a depth of considerably over 100 ft. (Denny, op. cit. p. 
266, speaks of pits over 160 ft. deep extending for miles.) Many 
of these pits are placed so close together that a wall of rock not 
more than 2 ft. thick separates them one from another. The 
antiquity of these workings is attested by the apparently virgin 
forest which clothes the hills in which they are situated, large 
slow-growing trees being in some instances found with their 
roots centred in the sides of the shafts. ... No clue has yet 
been obtained which might serve to indicate the race to which 
these miners belonged, The mode of mining employed by them 
differs radically from that in use among the Chinese, and the 
_ Malays possess no tradition on the subject. ..., Whatever the 
race may have been, it is evident that it must have attained to 
a considerable degree of mechanical skill, and presumably to a 
fairly high degree of civilization ; and yet, from an examination 
of the excavations, one is led to believe that the race which mined 
them must have been of a somewhat more diminutive stature 
than either the modern Malay or Siamese. From the appearance 
of many of these workings, it would seem that probably the work 
of mining was suspended suddenly and never resumed, possibly on 
account of war, an epidemic, or some other public calamity 
(H. C. Belfield’s ‘Handbook of the Federated Malay States,’ 
London, 1902, pp. 127-8). As for myself (Gerini), I can add that 
traces of similar old workings have been noticed, not only in 
connexion with gold, but also tin mines in various parts of the 
Peninsula ; neolithic implements, such as celts, axe-heads, etc., 
being found in the ancient timbered drives or tunnels. This has 
been the case, for instance, in Perak, Since a.p. 1516 Barbosa 
speaks of a gold-mine lying abandoned in Pahang (Ramusio, 


86 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


vol. i., fol. 818 verso). What, therefore, was the race that opened 
these mines? Evidently the same that built those wonderful 
monuments in Kamboja—the race of Fu-nan, now still represented 
in the Malay Peninsula by the Sakai and allied tribes. However, 
this race, as in Kamboja, no doubt did only the manual labour. 
But the intelligent mind that planned, directed and superintended 
must have been, as there, Hindu, or shall we have to assume that, 
in the case of the most ancient of these mines, where neolithic 
implements occur associated with the workings, the directive 
mind was Phoenician? This is by no means improbable. . . 
(for) . . . Phoenician influence once undoubtedly (as we have seen) 
extended as far as Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula... .”1 It 
is difficult to write about such happenings as these without 
spreading exclamation marks all over the page. To find immense 
workings, dating from the unknown past, in places which till 
recently have been the happy hunting-grounds of nomadic hunters 
of the type of the Semang and Sakai, is to experience a shock, 
and it is to be hoped that the effects of this mental shock will be 
permanent. Apart from these nomadic peoples, aboriginal in 
nature, there are only in this region tribes of Malay origin, who 
cannot have been there for many centuries, certainly not by 
thousands of years as long as the old workings. So, once again, 
the first civilized peoples to arrive in an outlying region were 
evidently gold-miners, who found themselves in a place tenanted 
only by nomadic hunters and food-gatherers.2. These people 
were, as far as their mining activities are concerned, fully our 
equals, when their difficulties are realized. With regard to the 
rest of their material culture, it is hard to speak, for they evidently 
made no permanent settlements, but, like the Phoenicians in the 
districts of Sumatra, have left haphazard traces of their presence, 
These people evidently were not colonists ; they were exploiters, 
simply bent on getting all the gold and tin that they could, and 
then departing. They were different from the Hindus who 
followed them and inspired civilizations in Cambodia, Java and 
elsewhere. They were the pioneers, who spied out the land, and 
it was left for later comers to carry on the work if they could. 

Turning now to the coast of this district, it is noteworthy that 
the Mergui Archipelago is important on account of its pearls, 
which are fished for by the Selung, a people who will play a 
part in the next chapter, for they speak a language of a family 
that has branches from India to Australia. 


(iv) INDIA 
An important contribution to the present discussion has been 
made by Major Munn, Inspector of Mines to the Nizam of Hydera- 
1 Gerini ii. 477. ray 
2 Yet another instance of the sort discussed in Chapter IT, 


8 H. W. Smyth 522. He also gives an account of the tin-mining industry. 
Pearl shell is also found in the Andamans. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 87 


bad, who in 1918 presented a paper to the Manchester Literary 
and Philosophical Society that will serve to lay the foundations 
of the study of the prehistoric archeology of Southern India. 
He claims, in that paper, that the dolmen-builders of the Deccan 
were mining for gold, copper, iron, and diamonds. He says that 
the two districts where the dolmens are thickest, Bellary and 
Dharwar, “ are riddled with old workings for gold, copper and 
iron.” Inthe Bellary district 2,127 dolmens have been reported. 1 
He asserts that ‘‘ The area covered by the Dharwar Schists,? 
not only in Hyderabad State, but from Shorapur in the north, 
to the Wainad in the extreme south of India, is everywhere 
pitted with the remains of ancient gold-mining, and, as far as I 
personally have seen in Hyderabad, around or in the vicinity of 
these workings, dolmens and circle cairns are to be found, and 
in Dharwar and Bellary even greater quantities are reported,” 3 
In Hyderabad the memory of these ancient mines is entirely lost, 
even in the folk-lore. ‘‘ It was, in fact, not until 1888 that these 
old gold-mines were rediscovered, and the early efforts of the 
explorer were watched with intense ridicule by the local Brahmin 
—who never had had clear proof of the Sahib’s madness. The 
difficulty which attended this prospecting was accentuated by 
the fact that all the workings had been completely filled up, and 
practically obliterated by the so-called black cotton soil, an 
alluvial resulting from the decomposition of the Deccan Trap. 
So that the surface indications were most deluding, and consisted 
of typical auriferous blue quartz, and the remains of old metal- 
lurgical appliances on the adjacent hard trappoid rock. Every- 
where cup-like hollows, undoubtedly nothing but small mortars 
found in the rock where the gold quartz was pounded with stone 
pestles, and occasionally small crucibles have been found which, 
on crushing, gave an assay for gold. Whether the miners possessed 
the knowledge of amalgamation is a moot point. 

** In the Hutti gold mines, discovered by Mr. F. W. Grey, we 
have the most extraordinary evidence of the skill of these ancient 
workers. There was little surface evidence at Hutti—a slight 
series of depressions—and here and there a few splinters of quartz 
which gave an assay—and the usual marks of crushing on the 
hard trappoid rocks near the Hutti nullah. Cross-cutting exposed 
a long series of workings which were not bottomed by means of a 
small exploratory shaft. The Company was formed and deeper 
mining on a larger scale was undertaken, but the first attempt 
failed to bottom the old workings. Finally it was proved that 
the ancients had excavated all payable quartz to an unparalleled 
depth of 640ft. . . . Sufficient evidence was found to state that 
the quartz reef was extracted by fire-setting—and after it was 
loosened was gouged out by iron-shod wooden levers. A great 
amount of timber had been employed ; one piece might have been 
a windlass and marks on the ‘ hanging-wall’ suggested the ore 

2 Munn 1. 2 See Sketch Map No. 9. 3 Munn 5. 


88 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


was raised by means of ropes. It was probably water that finally 
stopped the old workers from going deeper, for at 640 ft. a large 
quantity of broken ‘chatties’ were found, which suggested 
heavy bailing. No such instance of perseverance and skill has so 
far as I.know ever been discovered in the other ancient mining 
centres at Kolar, Wainad, Dharwar and Anantagiri. The develop- 
ment of the mine must have taken a considerable period and 
employed a great number of people, not only in the actual mining, 
but in the crushing of the resulting ore.’ + 

As regards copper: ‘‘ The copper-mining in Hyderabad State 
in and around Chintrala is certainly very early, and, as I have 
already mentioned, so intimately associated with dolmen remains 
that, even in 1908, I had connected the two things together and 
never found them apart.” # 

Major Munn makes some important remarks about the iron 
workings of the Deccan. Unless anyone has visited Hyderabad 
State, or in fact Southern India, he cannot get even a slight idea 
of the abundance, the extent, or the pureness of its iron ores, No 
section of the geological sequence exists in which iron does not 
occur, In the Archzan, magnetite most frequently occurs in 
almost unparalleled magnitude, whole hills and ranges being 
formed of the purest varieties ; specular iron and red hematite 
are also found. The schistose area contains interbedded layers 
of magnetite and hematite schists. The Purana Group contain 
veins of limonite and bedded magnetite. Nearly every group 
of rocks in the Gondwana system, save the bottom glacial beds, 
contain one or more of the ores of iron, in greater or less quantities. 
The disintegration of the Deccan Trap supplies rich pockets of 
magnetic iron sand that glisten in the beds of every stream that 
traverses that area. Lastly the laterite is noted for its richness 
in this metal. ‘‘ Each and all of these ores have been used for 
smelting iron by the natives, In this area iron has been known 
from earliest times, and the unintentional manufacture of steel 
practised.’’ § 

Major Munn contends that the use of iron was discovered in 
India by the builders of the megaliths. These people worked 
iron, so his contention is doubtless sound. From the days of the 
archaic civilization the working of iron has doubtless surpassed 
in importance that of the other metals. The working of gold died 
out at a very early date in the Deccan, the old mines heing aban- 
doned ; but the working of iron has persisted until this day among 
the natives, 

The examination of the Pueblo Region of North America showed 
that modern people have constructed their railways through 
regions full of ruins, even in the case of branch lines. In India 
the railways of Hyderabad and the country to the south seem to 
have been built to serve regions full of valuable raw materials, 
such as gold, iron and copper. ‘This is made clear by Sketch Map 


2 Munn 6-7, a Elbe Us 3 Munn 9. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 89 


No. 9. Doubtless economic motives induced Europeans to 
construct railways in some places rather than in others. For 
instance, they would have made railways in Travancore to a 
greater extent if they had been needed for transportation of raw 
material. But that region is singularly deficient in minerals of 
all sorts, as is evident from a perusal of the work of La Touche. 
In more than one instance branch lines run up into districts that 
possess signs of occupation in the days of the archaic civilization. 
Sketch Map No. 9 shows the railway system, the deposits of iron, 
gold, copper, and so forth, and the distribution of settlements 
of the archaic civilization. If the reader will follow the course 
of the railways, he will notice the extent of the correspondence, 
which extends even to the cases of branches to Ootacamund, 
southwards from Bellary, to Kudligi, and from Bangalore to 
Mysore,! These correspondences entirely support the contention 
of Major Munn, that the builders of megaliths, and thus the 
people of the archaic civilization generally, settled in places where 
they found raw materials for their industries. In the beginning 
it probably was the presence of pearls on the coast and gold in 
the interior that attracted them. Once the use of iron was 
discovered, the course of events took another turn, and the 
native population took it up with avidity. The people of the 
archaic civilization made implements of polished stone, especially 
of trap rocks, diabase, diorite, and so forth. This industry has 
evidently been responsible for one series of their settlements, 
that of Kathiawar, which are situated near a series of trap rocks 
that they particularly prized. These sites presumably were 
those of implement factories.2. This relationship can hardly be 
doubted, Bruce Foote was aware of it, for he says: ‘‘ The 
extreme rarity of trap dykes in the south of the peninsula may 
have been a vera causa of the rarity of neolithic remains in the 
regions south of the Cauvery, while it is certain that in the 
northern parts of the Deccan Plateau, where neolithic remains 
most abound, dykes of basaltic, dioritic, and diabasic traps are 
very plentifully distributed. This has reference to their war (sic) 
implements, as their axes are, as a rule, almost without a single 
exception, made of the trappoid rocks and especially of the finer 
grained varieties of these.” A complete survey, therefore, of 


1 This map is based on those of Bruce Foote and Munn. Thedistributions 
of gold, copper, iron and diamonds are derived from La Touche. The Dharwar 
Schist (gold-mining) area has been copied from Maclaren and Munn. Evi- 
dence with regard to remains has been derived from Cole 299 ©.s.; Fer- 
gusson 467, 472, 476; Lane Fox 60; ‘‘ Imperial Gazetteer of India,’’ XVII. 
58, XVIII. 187; Reai. 48, 49, 53, 57, 61, 63, 68, 70; Meadows Taylor i. 
160 e.s.; Walhouse 17 e.s. ; Westropp 550.s. It will be noted that for many 
years practically no work of this sort has been done in India. It is to be 
hoped that the active archzological societies now springing up in various 
parts of. India, in Hyderabad, Chota Nagpur, Madras, Calcutta, will soon 
collect the necessary data. 

2 Foote ii. 146 e.s., 151-52. See Sketch Map No. 15. 

8 Foote ii. 36. 


90 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


India will have to take account of the sources of the materials 
of which the polished stone implements were made. 

Bruce Foote gives evidence of the working of copper mines by 
the people of the archaic civilization. He speaks of pottery from 
an old copper mine on the left bank of the Kistna River near the 
centre of the south to north reach of the river south of Muktiala 
in the Kistna district. The vessel was of polished earthenware, 
dark red in colour ; with it were bowls and dishes of iron-age type.+ 
This is proof that the builders of megaliths were working copper 
mines. 

Sketch Map No. 14 suggests that communities interested in 
the getting of gold and the working of iron will be determined in 
their choice of situation by the presence of these. For the people 
of the archaic civilization have left their remains in regions where 
gold, copper and iron abound. The distribution of megalithic 
monuments in this region, whether the work of the people of the 
archaic civilization, or of existing peoples, also supports the same 
thesis. For the great centres of dolmens are on the banks of the 
Subanrika River, ‘‘ the streak of gold,” as its name states. ? 

In Assam, again, settlements of civilized peoples have been 
determined by the presence of desired substances, for the ruins 
of vanished civilizations mentioned by Colonel Shakespear are 
close to railways and in districts producing gold and iron.*? This 
betrays the existence, in the minds of the former people, of needs 
similar to those of modern civilized men. 

The late Mr. Vincent Ball, in an article on the distribution of 
gold in India, says: ‘‘ Gold-washing, as practised in India, affords 
an example, I believe, of human degradation. The colonies of 
washers who are found plying their trade in most of the areas 
where, geologically speaking, the occurrence of gold is possible, 
must be regarded as the remnants of a people possessing special 
knowledge: * for although the former may have some acquaint- 
ance with the appearance of the rocks in the neighbourhood of 
which gold occurs, so far as I could ascertain from a close exami- 
nation of the operations of two gold-washers who were in my 


1 B. Foote ii. 129. 

2 “‘ Imperial Gazetteer of India,’? XXIII. 114. The material for the Map 
is derived from La Touche, Maclaren, Lock and Ball (ii. 241-2; v. 170 e.s.), 
for gold, copper and iron. For remains, information has been collected from 
Anderson (347): Ball (i. 128; i. 143; iv. 177; vi. 208; vii. 268; viii. 
123; ix.): C. Brown (i. 127; ii.): Dalton (112-15, 119): Olden: Roy (v. 
229, 231; vi.; vii. 485): J.B.O.R.S. IT. 386. 

3 Shakespear ii. 3, 9. See Sketch Map No. 15. 

4 He adds a significant footnote, which is well worth quotation. ‘‘I have 
often been struck with the traditional knowledge of such subjects as Materia 
medica possessed by individuals of semi-savage tribes who never seem to 
discover a new idea for themselves, nor to modify in the slightest degree, 
when uninfluenced by superior races, their methods of performing any one 
single act in their domestic economy.”’ This is an excellent support for one 
of the main theses that I am sustaining, namely, the entire dependence of 
present-day communities on the archaic civilization for their culture. 


: PN \BHAGALEUR 
\ ‘\e 


\ es 
' Ne 7! ja ‘ ree 
AF -1 —“* ee i 
£ ie mee\4 j Ee 
ae a ne 
7 Pace e ® B ‘ 
ile pa: 7 y 
1. as 
Ves. mbal 
eye eur. CKEONTHAR. 
@! ‘, 
° 7 
DHENKANAL as 
e (8 ? 


ers-- Railways 
@® fron 
A Copper 
B Gold 
! Polished Stone /mplements 
Megalithic Monument area 
" Monuments 


Y 
®@ac 


CHOTA NAGPUR 


iy od 
ay’ % 
\ + ‘4 

Ot 
*) 
we 

; 


eb a en uceeesd rac we be co ee LR > die sir eee A sy MAR deenonttlle=s'« sr oe PE . 


~ 


F 
, ‘ 
‘ 
ar 
es 
ot 
. 

id 


rts bet CU ORR MOS 


al 
Tae 
% ’ 
Ss, ¥ ‘ 1 fe 
- 4 : 
’* 
P ie § , 
+ pe é re 
. wa! ! PF a? 
% eh a i] 
; ” ~ 
. a 


£ 
. Po 9 
sare 
ng 2% > 
ud ; 
. . y 
uy, ig Pe awit _ elie Sof 
oti cra Ve ae Der . F 


VW a - Sy if 7 & eet anc ; ae" "" 
aC a aN wage 

: oie 4, £ ij 4 
4 Fein eee, an TORE het ty 


+ om ‘ The 
v oe a ye “ 
“ ply E 
SHA PAGO b RS 
. o > * : < : 
ih “i ; ae 
. han ‘ j 
? Fee my ¥ 
1 ‘ ‘ ye 
“iP Ae ot t 4 * 
”y < +) tt k 
; - 
sn ow * nid F ; 
‘ a! aaa 
- ‘ =o W oes en + 
+ i» 4 m * ; 7 
"i is ' ‘ “vy ag ay 6 
2 
‘ 
A , ‘ 
’ f Y. 
* bE ind 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 


service for about three months, such acquaintance, if possessed, 
is rarely availed of. Indeed, I doubt if they ever look upon the 
rocks as being really the source from whence the gold has been 
derived. They know of its occurrence in the sands and alluvial 
soils, but whence it ultimately came from they do not trouble 
to consider. 

‘ But it cannot always have been so, for their earliest progenitors 
must have ascertained the existence of the gold by the application 
of experimental research in localities where, from theoretical 
considerations, they believed it to exist. 

“It is scarcely possible that the non-gold-producing areas in 
which the Deccan ‘Trap or basalt and the rocks of the Vindhyan 
formation prevail, and which aggregate a total area of about 
one-fourth of the peninsula, were ever systematically prospected, 
and for this reason, if for no other, that the washers, if they were 
comparable to those of the present day, could not have devoted 
months and years to the exploration of, for them, barren tracts, 
simply from the fact that they could not subsist under such 
circumstances. 

*“ By what means, soever, they were led to select and settle 
in these gold-producing tracts, it is certain that within such limits 
a process of segregation has been going on towards the richest 
points. 

“In a part of Western Bengal I found that generations of 
washers had demarcated limits within which washing was remu- 
nerative, and these limits corresponded in a striking degree to 
the well-defined boundaries between two formations—the meta- 
morphic and the sub-metamorphic. In the area occupied by 
the former, gold was not absent ; but its abundance, as contrasted 
with that in the latter, I ascertained, by two independent methods 
of calculation . . . was in the proportion of 1 to 3. Hence, as 
the washers only managed to eke out a bare subsistence in the 
sub-metamorphic area, they confined their operations to it.’ 4 

These remarks of Mr. Vincent Ball show that the practice of 
gold-washing inevitably tends to restrict the gold-washers to certain 
geological formations. Sketch Map No. 15 shows the present-day 
distribution of the Gonds, themselves assiduous gold-washers, 
and suggests that their movements have been influenced in the 
way stated by Mr. Ball. The presence of certain desires in the 
mind of men results in a distinct geographical distribution which 
corresponds with certain geological formations.2. The distribution 
is the expression of the desire; it has not given rise to it. For, 
as Mr. Ball insists, the practice of gold-washing must have come 
down from days when men deliberately sought the gold in situ, 
and consequently tended to segregate in places with stores of 
gold, 


1 V. Ball x. 259-60. 
* An exact confirmation of the thesis of my paper on the distribution of 
megaliths in England and Wales. 


92 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


These remarks gain in significance when it is remembered that 
the Gonds still erect miniature dolmens, and thus show strong 
signs of continuity with the people of the archaic civilization. 
If the Gonds, as gold-washers, have segregated themselves on 
sources of gold, and perhaps iron, why should not the people 
of the archaic civilization also have done so? The case of the 
Gonds also shows that gold-washing is carried on by people whose 
culture shows signs of direct influence of that of the archaic 
civilization. This is also the case with the Kurumbas, who, 
with the Moplas, are the chief native gold-workers of the Madras 
Presidency. Their gold-washing activities are supposed to date 
from 500 B.c. ‘“ During the inquiry carried out in 1831, Nicolson 
had discovered the remains of numerous old gold workings, made 
by a mining people known as Karumbara, along the outcrop of 
quartz reefs in the S.E, Wynaad.” + The Kurumbas still erect 
dolmens, and to them are attributed those of southern India. 
The Khasi of Assam, also, who are noted iron-workers, erect 
many megalithic monuments.? But this relationship does not 
hold throughout, for I know of nothing to connect the Moplas 
with the archaic civilization, nor the Jalgars, the gold-washers 
of Bombay.? 

The evidence in India bears out the contentions of Major Munn 
and myself, that the people of the archaic civilization were 
engaged in exploiting the wealth of India, and that their settle- 
ments were distributed so as to be near the sources of supplies 
of gold and other precious substances, and of humbler materials 
for everyday requirements. Certain native tribes, whose culture 
shows strong traces of the influence of the archaic civilization, 
have carried on the getting of gold, and have tended to segregate 
themselves on gold-bearing geological formations. 

It is not necessary to insist on the fact that the great civiliza- 
tions of Egypt and Elam, the earliest known in the region under ~ 
discussion, were engaged in exploiting various sources of wealth. 
The Egyptians were, at an early date, seeking copper and tur- 
quoise in Sinai,* gold in Nubia, and sending out expeditions to 
the land of Punt for all manner of products.® The significance 
of this fact will be pointed out in the chapter on Egypt. 

On the basis of this survey I suggest that the process of settle- 
ment of the communities of the archaic civilization was purposive, 
that these people had desires that they sought to satisfy, even 
when it caused them much inconvenience. Such a conclusion, 
I am aware, runs counter to the doctrines of the modern school 
of geographers, which lay such stress on climatic and other 
geographical conditions. My theory amounts to asserting that 
what is in the minds of men counts more than anything else, 
and that if the desire be but strong enough it will be satisfied, 
if that be humanly possible. This is in accordance, as I insisted 


1 La Touche II. 208. 2 La Touche II. 236. 3 Ball x. 266. 
* Peet 21 e.s. 5 Dunn 207 e.s. 


THE SEARCH FOR GOLD AND PEARLS 63 


in the beginning of the chapter, with what we know of ourselves 
and our fellows. Therefore, if anyone wishes to advance theories 
of ‘‘ Climatic Control’? and so forth, he will have to construct 
a better explanation of the distributions of the settlements than 
that which is now in possession of the reader. 

Right to the boundary of the archaic civilization, and occa- 
sionally beyond it, traces exist of former mining activities. 
Beyond the boundaries are great stores of precious substances. 
Why did not the ancients exploit these stores that lay so close 
to hand? ‘To answer this question it is necessary to discover 
also why they did not finish their work in places such as Calli- 
fornia, Sumatra, Borneo, New Guinea, the Malay Peninsula, 
Hyderabad, and Chota Nagpur. The ancient miners abandoned 
works which were left for many centuries, until the coming 
of the European. Evidently something happened that stopped 
the mining factivities of the ancients, and prevented them 
from extending their operations. The story of this great catas- 
trophe will be told in part in this book, but as yet the full extent 
of the tragedy is not known. When the world is surveyed at 
the present time, in the places where, in former days, much 
activity must have existed, there are now only peoples of a low 
_ stage of culture entirely ignorant of the wealth that lies at their 
feet, or, if not ignorant, at least indifferent. As the story develops, 
it will be seen that the ancients did penetrate Australia, but 
apparently had to leave the country in a hurry before they had 
had time to exploit its wealth. Something happened, perhaps an 
incursion of war-like people into British New Guinea, or some 
convulsion farther west, and they disappeared, so that all we 
know of them is derived from the Australians themselves. The 
traditions of the Australians tell of these strangers, and of their 
influence upon the natives whom they found wandering about 
the country in a state of extreme cultural degradation. When 
the archaic civilization broke up, as it will be seen later it did, 
not only were irrigation, stone-working and image-carving given 
up, but metal-working and mining were abandoned, and the 
land often given over to people who cared for none of these 
things. Whence came these barbarians? That story will have 
to be told. But it will be well to try to get another view of the 
archaic civilization before plunging into the description of its 
relationship to those that followed. 


CHAPTER VIII 
POLISHED STONE IMPLEMENTS 
Sic: discussion of the last chapter has introduced a complica- 


tion. Traces of ancient gold-mines have been found in 

places devoid of obvious remains of the archaic civilization, 
such as stonework, carved stone images, irrigation systems. In 
the Malay Peninsula are ancient gold-mines whose workers have 
long since disappeared ; in the Redjang district of Sumatra some 
unknown people have been at work on the goldfields, and these 
people may be responsible for the stone images that are found 
in the south-west districts; in California miners have been at 
work in places devoid of ruins. 

If the people of the archaic civilization were decided in their 
movements by the search for gold, pearls, etc., then we must 
try to account for such old workings as these. They may have 
been the work of some European people of the Middle Ages, say 
the Portuguese or the Dutch; on the other hand, they may have 
been the work of the first civilized people that came that way, 
and thus date back thousands of years to the days of the archaic 
civilization. If they are the work of people of the archaic civili- 
zation, then the possibility will have to be borne in mind, that 
these people may have influenced native communities among 
whom they have left none of the cultural elements chosen out 
as indicative of their presence. If the study of some less obtrusive 
cultural element than those already chosen can show that the 
old gold-miners of the Malay Peninsula, and elsewhere, can be 
included among the people of the archaic civilization, then it 
may be possible to link up other peoples, such as the Austra- 
lians, with those already considered; the study of gold-mines 
may show that the cultural elements chosen for discussion are 
not enough to afford more than a limited view of the activities 
of the people of the archaic civilization: it may be necessary to 
use some cultural elements of wider sweep than those already 
considered. 

Fortunately, such an element is to hand. To determine it, 
the account of the old gold and tin workings of the Malay Penin- 
sula is of crucial importance. For, in these mines, as well as in 
the tin washings, polished stone implements have been dis- 

94 


POLISHED STONE IMPLEMENTS 95 


covered: 1 the same discovery has been made in British New 
Guinea and in North America. 

In India hardly any doubt can be expressed regarding polished 
stone implements: they are invariably related to the archaic 
civilization, and their manufacture has long been abandoned. 
Their geographical distribution in India, Assam and Burma, 
as is shown by Sketch Map No. 15, is such as to associate them 
with bygone mining activities.2. In Assam they are found in 
the districts that produce gold, iron and other desired substances. 
In Burma their distribution also suggests that their makers 
were intent on the search for gold and tin. In the Irrawaddy 
basin they seem to be in direct relationship with gold-washing ; 
for in this stream gold is said to be rare below Prome; so are 
polished stone implements. Such implements are also found in 
the tin-producing regions of Burma.? 

In Indonesia, as is shown by Sketch Map No. 8, the distribution 
of polished stone implements agrees so closely with that of pearls 
and gold, that little doubt can exist as to the intentions of their 
makers. It has already been seen that the gold and pearl localities 
were visited by the people of the archaic civilization. Since the 
makers of polished stone implements have visited the same locali- 
ties, and have long since vanished, they presumably must be 
equated to the people of the archaic civilization. 

Farther east an interesting contrast exists between New Guinea 
and Australia. The polished stone implements of New Guinea 
are the work of the vanished gold-miners and pearl-fishers ; and 
the existing natives know nothing of the use of such implements. 
The Australians make them to-day; so, although far below the 
natives of British New Guinea in culture, they display an apparent 
close connexion with the civilization of the old gold-miners. 

This discussion brings us face to face with one of the most 
important problems of modern ethnology. The work of linguists 
during the past twenty years or so has revealed a family of 
languages spoken by peoples ranging from the Himalayas, through 
Further India and Indonesia, right out into the Pacific, and includ- 
ing Australia. This Austronesian group of languages, as it is 
called, is spoken by people of the Panjab, the Santal Parganas, 
Chota Nagpur, Orissa, Chattigarh, and north-east Madras in 
India, the languages of these peoples being termed Munda; it 
is spoken in Assam in the Khasi and Jaintia Hills; in Burma 
by the Palaung, Wa and Mon or Tailing ; in the Mergui Archipel- 
ago by the Selung, and in the Nicobars; in Indo-China it is 
spoken along the Mekhong River, and in Cambodia the national 


1 See p. 84: Pahang (Man, 1904, 34). 

* Based on Sketch Maps Nos. 9 and 14. Additional information is derived 
from Ball iii. : Theobald (ii. 155, 169, 170,171; i.): and from P.A.S.B. (1865, 
122; 1869, 181; 1870, 220-21, 267-68 ; 1871, 83; 1872, 41, 46-7, 136; 1875, 
102,158). Information with regard to gold and tin is derived from La Touche, 
_ Lock and Maclaren. 


96 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 

language, Khmer, belongs to it; the Semang and Sakai of the 
Malay Peninsula belong to this linguistic group ; and, finally, 
there are the Malayo-Polynesian languages and some of those of 
Australia.+ 

The cultures of people with Austronesian languages often 
possess palpable traces of contact with the archaic civilization : 
the Khasi of Assam still make megalithic monuments ;? they 
erect standing stones in memory of their men, and dolmens for 
the women: the Mundas of Chota Nagpur are associated with 
megalithic monuments.® On the other hand, it must be remem- 
bered that not all the peoples of India who erect megaliths speak 
languages of this family. The Kurumbas of North Arcot in Madras, 
who still make dolmens for their dead, speak a Dravidian language.* 
The Polynesians, however, formerly erected megaliths, and their 
language is of this family. But many peoples speaking these 
languages show in their culture little or no obvious traces of 
contact with the archaic civilization; such are the Sakai and 
Semang of the Malay Peninsula, the Nicobarese and others. 

Much discussion has taken place as to how peoples with diverse 
cultural associations, and of different physical types, came to 
possess languages of a common family. The close association 
of the Mundas, Khasi and other with the archaic civilization 
suggests the cause of the linguistic unity; but from the point 
of view of megaliths, irrigation, pottery-making and the carving 
of stone images, this hypothesis breaks down in the case of the 
peoples of the Malay Peninsula and the Australians, who have 
none of these things. It is at this point that polished stone 
implements come to the rescue. 

Sketch Map No. 15 shows that polished stone implements 
exist in places where Austronesian languages are spoken.> If 
the makers of these implements were gold-miners, pearl-divers 
and so on, who made settlements in certain places, these settle-_ 
ments being permanent or temporary, according to the circum- | 
stances; if, further, they spoke Austronesian languages, or @ 
language that gave rise to this group, then an explanation is — 
forthcoming of the spread of this group of languages. This view 
has already been expressed: “‘ Archzologists are of the opinion | 
that the various stone implements which are found from Chota 
Nagpur on the west to the Malayan Peninsula on the east are 
often so similar in kind that they appear to be the work of one 
and the same race. Attention has also been drawn to analogous 
customs found all over the area, and to other coincidences. ... 
Philological reasons can also be adduced to support the supposition 
of a common substratum in the population of parts of Nearer 
India, Farther India, and elsewhere.” 6 The explanation of the 


1 Of. P. W. Schmidt: Grierson: Kern iii.: India Census i. 250 e.8. : Roy 
i., iv. e.8., 18 0.8. 2 Gurdon. 8 Roy i. ¢ Thurston ii. 141 e.s. 


® Distribution of Austronesian Languages is derived from the Census 
Report i. 6 Grierson il. l. 


Bay. of Austronesian languages 
-——~ Bay. of Dravidian languages 
B Megalithic monuments 
Settlements of Archaic Civilisation 
Polished stone umplements 
Old Gold mines 
Old copper mines 
Old diamond mines 
/Jron mines 
Tin workings 
Pearls 


INDIA AND BURMA 


ee 
ee DP a Se, ee 
ted re ee 
iP See > 


: i. was 
» aie 


Jo 
ner ahs A 
~ 
7 
‘ 
Re 
Me 
Lev 


o, 
* 
oT 
** 
a 
4 
fy. ' 
Ey 
hae 
oy 
R 
v 
f 
i 
f 
on 
> 
AN 
p 
ht 
» & 


; 7 - 4 = ca > ; . " > 
_ <i 7 . * f aw 
+] 2", < So Fe ‘ ‘ aa as St at ee 
_ 7 ’ - x 5 r 
oan : . + -= : ~ ee : > > ; > = bie b = 
os I s G P i a a ‘ i 7 
a= ; a aS el ee ce ph pm epee Dit ne ’ shah re Se ee a ee ed _ 4 ‘ 
= oS = 5) - 2 a ; ~ * e > - , ’ “ 
? ¥ or . 
» % $ ~ = 
< - : a 
‘1 a é . , 
\ i : ‘ 7 “3 Z 3 s > rn 
4 — ’ wd « a 
fj 2 Fe ~ oe 4 - z 
ce , ~ 
‘ “J cs 
Z * 7 
Sy j 
| 
i ~ 1 
= rt 
za) e * 
i < 
1 = - 
7 > «. 2 ra ors 
ae" \ v7 * 


POLISHED STONE IMPLEMENTS 97 


phenomena would be that the original makers of the celts spoke 
the language, and that, wherever they went, they imposed it 
on the natives. Who the celt-makers were in any particular 
instance does not matter at present. The essential point is that 
the establishment of the Austronesian languages and their associa- 
tion with polished stone implements enables the student to form 
a mental picture of the original civilization of the vast region 
stretching from India to the farthest confines of the Pacific. 
Whether this civilization was carried by one race, or whether 
it was handed on from one people to another, need not concern 
us. 
In India, Farther India, the Malay Peninsula and Indonesia, 
the making of polished stone implements is, generally speaking, 
a thing of the past. It is necessary to account for the disappear- 
ance of this craft after the break-up of the archaic civilization. 
If the contentions of Major Munn be sound, the people of the 
archaic civilization discovered the working of iron in India, and 
transmitted this craft to the natives; which suggests that the 
natives have kept on that element of the culture of the archaic 
civilization, and ignored the manufacture of the stone implements, 
which is but natural, since iron-working would be far easier. 
Similarly, in Indonesia, peoples such as the Kayan of Borneo 
and the Toradja of Celebes have continued to work iron, but do 
not make stone implements. 

Although the continuity between past and present is broken 
in the case of the manufacture of the implements, some valuable 
evidence is to be gathered from their present occurrence. In 
Borneo the natives possess polished stone implements which 
they hang up in the galleries of their long houses. These axes 
were not made by them, and are regarded with superstitious 
awe.+ Mr. Ivor Evans found polished stone implements in the 
Tempassuk district of British North Borneo, all of which were 
got from the Bajaw or Illanun.? In this part of Borneo stone 
circles are found. 

Recent work by Heer Kruyt has thrown more light on this 
subject; for he has found, in Celebes and Sumba, that the 
rulers preserve as their greatest treasures polished stone imple- 
ments, or implements of bronze and copper of similar type that 
are no longer made, which have been handed down through the 
generations of their ancestors. From Timor eastward a value 
is placed on old stone implements that the ancestors of the 
inhabitants brought with them from their homes in the west. 
In the Kolaka region of Celebes the chiefs, like those of Sumba, 
have implements that were given to their ancestors. Thus, 
although the manufacture of polished stone implements is no 
more in Indonesia, the implements themselves play an important 
part in the life of the present peoples. 


1 Hose and McDougall IT. 11 e.s. 2 I. Evans i. 
3 Cf. Chapter XXIV. 


98 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


The distribution of polished stone implements in Java and the 
islands to the east helps to clear up a difficulty encountered in 
the chapter on culture-sequences, that of the priority of the 
Hindu or the archaic civilization in Indonesia. Many polished 
stone implements have been found in Java, especially in the 
central and western parts.t Since the whole island was formerly 
ruled by Hindus, who did not use the implements, it follows that 
the makers must have preceded them. Polished stone implements 
are found also in the islands east of Java as far as Timor, that 
is to say, in the area which contains so many remains of the 
archaic civilization in the form of megaliths, irrigation systems 
and metal-working. This region is full of pearl-fisheries. Thus 
in a region of Indonesia where Hindu influence was very strong, 
evidence exists of the priority of the makers of polished stone 
implements. 

The distinction between the people of New Guinea and those 
of Australia has already been noted. The implement-makers 
of New Guinea, the gold-hunters of the mountains, are gone, 
and the existing natives neither make nor use such implements. 
Over the boundary between food-producers and food-gatherers, 
that runs through Torres Straits, is a region where the implement- 
making industry is in full swing among people who do not practise 
agriculture, but some of whom speak Austronesian languages. 
Other evidence points to a connexion between the old gold-miners 
of New Guinea and the natives of Australia; for grinding-stones 
are found in Australia. ‘‘In Northern Australia and Riverina, 
where stones are indeed a luxury, hundreds of square miles being 
devoid of stone, some fine specimens of grinding-stones have been 
found, often one or more feet in length, usually of a close and 
hard-grained sandstone, and hollowed out by ages of use on one 
or both sides. These were undoubtedly carried hundreds of 
miles, and were possessions of considerable value. The pounding- 
stones, pestle-shaped, perfectly rounded or with one flat surface, 
are usually of hard, smooth stone, such as quartz, diorite, dense 
basalt, or imestone. Some of these artifacts were found beneath 
the surface—near Geelong, in the drift of an ancient water-course 
on the Barraboo Hills, flints and water-worn gabbro axes were 
found. In the gravel of an old river-drift near Barnon River 
there were discovered a gabbro axe, weathered basalt wedges, 
and a grinding-stone, the latter from an excavation made several 
feet near Barren River. Also a few years ago, a flint axe of old 
workmanship was obtained many feet from the surface during 
the construction of a well near Lake Counewarre.”* What is 
the explanation of these facts? If the presence of an Austro- 
nesian language, in a country outside India at least, is a sign of 
the influence of the archaic civilization, then it follows that the 
people of the archaic civilization must have visited Australia. 
Australia has much gold, and the implement-makers would surely 

1 Roulin 1285 e.s.: Brouwer 68 e.s.: Juynboll 45 e.s. 2 Daley 502. 


POLISHED STONE IMPLEMENTS 99 


have wandered about in search of it, while their mines of British 
New Guinea were being worked. The working of polished stone 
implements has died out in so many places that the possession 
of the craft must argue for a close association with the people 
of the archaic civilization; or, at least, for a connexion with 
them not interrupted by subsequent incursions of peoples with 
different cultures. It is well known that the subsequent history 
of New Guinea has been troublous; that of Australia must have 
proceeded uninterruptedly since the natives first made these 
implements. So, if the Australians began to make implements 
under the influence of the men of the archaic civilization, their 
culture may possibly show signs of that influence which would 
be absent among the peoples of India, Burma and Indonesia, 
except those speaking Austronesian languages. 

The making of polished stone implements has been, at one 
time, widespread in the Pacific, invariably in those places possess- 
ing direct traces of the archaic civilization. They are often dug 
up in islands where they are no longer made : some mentioned by 
Guppy in San Cristoval of the Solomons are said by him to be 
of paleolithic type, and of origin unknown to the natives. 
This is probably wrong, and they are more likely to be of neolithic 
type, that is to say, made by people with a culture similar to 
that possessed by the makers of the polished stone celts. In 
many places the manufacture of stone implements, especially of 
jade, obsidian and so forth, was carried on in historic times, as, 
for example, in New Zealand, New Caledonia, and so on. It 
is possible, even probable, that the people of the archaic civiliza- 
tion who visited New Zealand, and also the Chatham Islands, 
were attracted thither, among other things, by the presence of 
obsidian. A great trade formerly existed in the Pacific, in this 
stone being brought to islands, where it did not exist, by expedi- 
tions that went to places such as New Caledonia to get supplies.? 
It is easy to show that the use of obsidian by the Polynesians 
was not born of the presence of that stone, but was due rather 
to the fact that it was a custom derived from their ancestors. 
This is evident in the case of British New Guinea, where splendid 
implements of obsidian have been found that are not the handi- 
work of the present-day peoples, but are the relics of some people 
of the past, evidently those of the archaic civilization.? The 
obsidian is ready at hand for use, according to Professor Seligman, 
who says that: “‘ Small fragments are found mixed with the 
shingle on which are built the coastal villages of Bartle Bay, an 
indentation in the large hollow of the coast which faces the 
d’Entrecasteaux group and constitutes Goodenough Bay. These 
fragments were until recently used for scarification for medical 
purposes, and the blocks from which they were struck were 


1 Guppy 77 e.s. He mentions implements in various islands. 
2 Brigham: Skinner 309 e.s. 
8 Chinnery : Seligman and Joyce 326 e.s. 


100 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


stated to have been brought from Goodenough Island for this 
purpose ; but it was said that no larger fragments were in exist- 
ence, that implements were never made of obsidian, and that no 
one had ever heard or thought of applying it to any use of this 
kind. .At Wagawaga, in Milne Bay, fragments of obsidian, 
formerly used for bleeding and scarification, though less abundant, 
were not uncommon, and here they were said to have been 
obtained from a place called Hiliwau, described as near East 
Cape, where, according to a somewhat doubtful statement, 
obsidian boulders were found in the jungle. ... But, again, it 
was denied that implements of obsidian had ever been made 
either at Wagawaga or elsewhere, and the same was said at 
Tubetube in the Engineer group, where the fragments of obsidian 
used for medical scarification were formerly imported from Duau, 
the largest island of the d’Entrecasteaux group. . . . Practically, 
then, fragments of obsidian have been found wherever search 
has been made in the south-eastern portion of British New Guinea 
and its archipelagoes, but nowhere, as far as our present knowledge 
extends, is there any legend or trace of a belief that it was ever 
worked to form such implements as are shown (in the accompany- 
ing plates). 1 That is to say, people living in places where 
obsidian exists in a natural state, and where obsidian implements 
of unknown origin are found, are ignorant of the working of 
obsidian for implements. This goes to show that the Australians 
must have been in contact with people who made obsidian knives ; 
for they make in glass imitations of obsidian knives so exact that 
some attention is necessary to distinguish them from the originals. 

If the argument be based upon the use of polished stone imple- 
ments and obsidian knives, it would appear that the ancestors 
of the present-day Polynesians will have to be equated, culturally, 
to the ancient gold-miners of British New Guinea, and to the 
hypothetical people who taught the ancestors of the Australian 
tribes to make these objects. It is not meant by this that these 
various groups of people in possession of the archaic civilization 
were necessarily of the same race, but that they possessed cultures 
which, so far as the elements in question are concerned, were 
similar. 

In North America the use of polished stone implements runs the 
whole gamut of culture, with the exception of the food-gatherers 
and some of the Indians who went out into the Plains in post- 
Columbian times to hunt buffalo. They occur in the earliest 
known settlements: at Copan, one of the first, if not the first, 
of Maya cities, a number of small polished stone implements 
have been found, made of basalt, diorite and flint, slightly wedge- 
shaped, flattened with a cutting-edge at one end and blunt nose 
at the other, in addition to rudely chipped implements which 
would have done for preliminary dressing of stone.” The work 
of Moorhead on Prehistoric Implements shows how widespread 


1 Seligman and Joyce 327. 2 Morley ii. 5, n. 2. 


POLISHED STONE IMPLEMENTS 101 


was the manufacture of implements and of polished stone obsidian 
in North America among the food-producing, pottery-making 
peoples. These are so similar in form to those of the rest of 
the world that no distinction can be made between them. 

Attention has already been called to the fact that the peoples 
of Mexico and the surrounding lands, and those of the northern 
part of the continent, possess more than one cultural element 
in common, the fundamental element being that of maize-growing ; 
and use has been made of the common possession of these cultural 
elements to formulate a theory of development of civilization in 
that continent. The use of polished stone implements and of 
obsidian knives serves to bind together still closer the civilizations 
of the United States and those of Mexico and the Maya country. 
We may further say that it links together the whole region from 
America westward. 

These results make it possible to predict what cultural resem- 
blances should be expected between the various parts of the 
region, Egypt, India, Indonesia, New Guinea, Australia, Oceania, 
and North America. Egypt remained for thousands of years in 
possession of the fundamental elements of the archaic civilization, 
and in Nubia polished stone implements were made for many 
centuries. In India the earliest food-producers, who irrigated, 
constructed megaliths and worked metals, also made polished 
stone implements, and thus will necessarily be nearer in culture 
to Egypt than their successors, who did not possess all these 
elements of culture. The Austronesian-speaking peoples who 
built megaliths would also be expected to approximate closest 
in culture, of the existing peoples of India, to Egypt. Farther 
east, in Indonesia, the conditions suggest a less close approximation 
to the archaic civilization. It would be expected that the existing 
peoples of New Guinea would be, in some respects, culturally 
more remote from the archaic civilization than the natives of 
Australia. ‘The early Polynesians would be nearer in culture to 
the Australians and to the Egyptians than to their descendants 
in New Zealand, Hawaii and elsewhere. The peoples of North 
America, from their long-continued manufacture of polished 
stone implements, should also betray closer cultural resemblances 
to ancient Egypt and the Australians than to the later Poly- 
nesians, the present peoples of New Guinea and Indonesia and 
the later comers to India. That is to say, broadly speaking, the 
cultures of Egypt, of the megalith-building stage in India, of the 
Australians, of the megalith-building stage of the Polynesians, 
of the gold-workers of New Guinea, and of the peoples of North 
America should be similar; and should differ from the later 
comers in all parts of the region. 


1 See p. 457 for a fuller discussion of this matter. 


| CHAPTER IX 
THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 


IVEN that the first food-producing communities of the 
(Cy outlying parts of the region, that is, from India east- 

wards, were those of the archaic civilization, what is to 
be said of the existing communities, whose culture often differs 
markedly from theirs? This question is of fundamental import- 
ance for the general theory of development of culture, and it must 
be faced squarely before further progress can be made. 

I shall try to show in this chapter that the cultures of the later 
food-producing communities were derived, directly or indirectly, 
from the archaic civilization; and that no evidence whatever 
exists for believing in an independent development of culture in 
any of the countries from India to America. 

In the case of North America the conclusion of Chapter IV is 
identical with the thesis of this chapter. The evidence all favours 
the view that the cultures of the less developed peoples have been 
derived from those higher in the cultural scale. The fundamental 
craft of agriculture, founded on maize-growing, forms the founda- 
tion of this position, which apparently nothing can shake. I 
shall assume, until reason is forthcoming to adopt another attitude, 
that the civilization of the Maya country, Mexico and the United 
States is a unit; and that complete continuity exists, each com- 
munity having derived its culture from some other, the original 
source and fount being the Maya civilization of Guatemala and 
its neighbourhood. 

With regard to the Polynesians: ‘“‘ The homogeneity of this 
race is a remarkable feature, scattered as it is over an extent of 
the earth’s surface that in actual area equals—if it does not 
exceed—that occupied by any other race of like homogeneity. 
From Nukuroro and Leuanina Islands in the far north-west to 
Kaster Island (Rapa-nui) in the distant south-east ; from Hawaii 
in the extreme north-west to New Zealand (Aotearoa) in the 
south-west, we find one people speaking dialects of one language, 
having practically the same customs and beliefs, and béaring so 
great an affinity in physique, colour and general appearance that 
it is difficult to distinguish the inhabitants of one part from those 
of any other.” + Or, in the words of Elsdon Best : ‘‘ How came 


1 Rutland iii. 14: P. Smith vi. 9, 12. 
102 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 103 


the Hawaiian to speak of his old-time voyages to Tahiti, and 
relate the deeds of the ancestors of the New Zealand Maori; the 
Samoan to relate his exploration of the Paumotus ; the Tongarevan 
to maintain his descent from immigrants from New Zealand ? 
Why do Moriori and Hawaiian claim the same gods ; the Tahitian 
describe voyages made to Aotearoa of the Maori; and the Maori 
of these isles recount his ocean wanderings from Tahiti, Samoa 
and Rarotonga ? 

‘“‘' The answer to these queries is that all these widely separated 
peoples are descendants of common ancestors, of the Polynesian 
Vikings, of the Maori voyagers, the bold seamen who broke through 
the hanging sky in times long past away, who fretted the heaving 
breast of Hine-moana with the wake of their swift canoes, who 
ranged over every quarter of the vast Pacific, and marked off the 
sea roads for all time.” } 

The decisive proof of the unity of the Polynesian peoples is 
provided by their genealogies, carefully preserved, a knowledge 
of which is an essential part of the education of the upper classes. 
Anyone who had any pretensions to chieftainship whatever was 
supposed to know his family table for at least twenty generations. 
A comparative study of tables from New Zealand, Rarotonga, 
Tahiti, Hawaii shows that these peoples had many common 
ancestors, and it has been possible on this basis to construct a 
chronology of the Polynesian movements.? The neglect of, or 
perhaps, one ought to say, contempt for, native tradition, is a 
marked feature of modern ethnological study. Perhaps one day 
some one will study the causes of this attitude towards what many 
of the less advanced peoples consider to be their most precious 
knowledge. A tendency exists, in some quarters, to look upon 
the savage, as he is called, as a silly child, who has made up out 
of his head all sorts of fancies, among them tales about his origin. 
This attitude is found among ethnologists, and, consequently, 
among those who read their writings. Perhaps I may be allowed 
to quote an example, in which the Greeks, of all people, are put 
into the same class as children. ‘*‘ Most peoples have wondered, 
like children, how the world was made. When a little child 
finds something new and strange, he asks such questions as these : 
‘What is it?’ ‘What is it made of?’ ‘Who made it?’ and 
‘What is it from?’ Like children, the Greeks of old wished to 
know what the earth was, what it was made of, and who made it. 
Before they became wise and learned they made up a simple story 
about it.” And soon. So long as this patronizing attitude is 
maintained towards those who live in other places, and in different 
circumstances, there is not much hope for any real advance in 
the study of early civilization. 

The members of the Polynesian Society have now spent many 
years in collecting and studying traditions and myths, and this 
is what one of the foremost of these students says : “* I would like to 


1 Best xii. 448. © )\4 PySmithi vit 25, 28, 


104 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


say, in my humble opinion the European ethnologist is frequently 
too apt to discredit tradition. It is an axiom that all tradition 
is based on fact—whilst the details only be wrong, the main stem 
is generally right. In this, local colouring is one of the chief 
things ‘to guard against, and here the European ethnologist is 
generally at fault for want of local knowledge—at any rate when 
he deals with Polynesian traditions. No one who has for many 
years been in the habit of collecting traditions from the natives 
themselves, in their own language, and as given by word of mouth, 
or written by themselves, can doubt the general authenticity of 
the matters communicated. But it is necessary to go to the right 
source to obtain reliable information, and even then the collector 
must understand what he is about or he will fail. 

‘““The men who really know the traditions of their race look 
upon them as treasures which are not to be communicated to 
everybody. They will not impart their knowledge except to those 
whom they know and respect, and then very frequently only under 
the condition that no use is to be made of them until the reciter 
has passed away.” These traditions were holy things and any 
deviation from the truth brought down the wrath of the gods. 
‘It is obvious from this, that traditions acquire a value they 
would otherwise not possess. The fear of the consequences 
arising out of false teaching acted as an ever present check upon 
the imagination.” + 

Anyone who has seriously studied traditions in conjunction 
with other social facts will bear out these remarks. Frequently 
they serve to throw a flood of light on dark places, and, if not 
forced to support any a priori view, but allowed to tell their own 
tale in their own time, they reveal the most unexpected results. 
In this inquiry much reliance will be laid on traditions, in con- 
junction always with other cultural elements. They will not be 
looked upon as products of imagination, or necessarily as attempts 
to explain ritual, but as something ranking as fact, to be studied 
as such. 

It is commonly agreed by authorities that the Polynesian race 
came from the west, probably from India. This conclusion can 
be supported on many grounds. In the first place, people of 
Polynesian type still live in India and Indonesia. Mr. Hornell’s 
monograph on Indian boat designs contains a photograph of a 
man of the Parava caste of Tuticorin, the fishermen of Southern 
India, which shows a pure Polynesian type. The Mentawi 
Islands, Halmahera, and other islands of the archipelago have 
inhabitants of Polynesian type. 

The * Log-books ” of the ancestors of the Rarotongans, Maoris, 
Tahitians, Paumotuans and so on, give some sort of account of 
the journeys of these wonderful travellers.2 The earliest land 
mentioned is believed to have been India, which was left about 


1 P. Smith vi. 20-1. Cf. also Pargiter i., iii. : Tod. 
2 P. Smith vi. 108 e.s. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 105 


the year B.c. 450. A king who is said to have built a temple 
72 ft. high, enclosed with a stone wall, and called Korotuantinim 
or “‘ place of many enclosures.’’! It was built as a meeting- 
place for gods and men; and here the spirits of the ancients after 
death forgathered with the gods. It was a ngai tapukaka, “a 
sacred glorious place,” of great space within, and filled with many 
beautiful and wonderful things. Here were originated the different 
kinds of takuruas, feasts and games, by Tu-te-rangi-marama (the 
ruling king), to dignify the land. From Atia came the “‘ trumpets, 
the drums, of two kinds, and the numerous ovas or dances. Here 
also originated the kariori or houses of amusement, singing and 
dancing, besides many other things and customs. Here was first 
originated the takuruatapu, or sacred feasts to the gods Rongo, 
Tane, Ruanuku, Tu, Tangaroa, and Tongaiti, and here also were 
the meeting-places of the great chiefs of that period—of Tu-te- 
rangi-marama, of Te Nga-taito-ariki, of Atea, of Kau-kura, of To 
Pupu, of Rua-te-atonga, and others, and of the great priests of 
old when they assembled to elect the kings, to meet in council to 
devise wise measures for men, slaves and children. These were 
the orders of men that lived in that land, and these were the people 
who spread over all this great ocean.’’ The movement from India 
was caused by great wars,” and nothing is known until about the 
year B.c. 65, when mention is first made of an actual migration.’ 

In his monograph on Indian boats, Mr. Hornell makes some 
interesting statements about the Paravas, the ‘‘ Polynesian ”’ fisher- 
men of South India. Hethinks that they migrated to India from 
Sumatra or thereabouts: ‘“‘The Sumatran Polynesians would 
naturally land first in Ceylon, whence they appear to have passed 
to the south-eastern coast of India, and eventually up the west 
coast. As they spread they doubtless planted fishing colonies at 
favourable points, establishing there their peculiar boat designs. 
Such centres may well have included Galle, Colombo and Korkai, 
where the embouchure of large rivers makes fishing remunerative. 
Palk Bay and the Gulf of Manaar, with their wealth of food fishes 
and treasures of pearls and conch shells, would early attract the 
attention of the maritime new-comers, and it is not surprising that 
there we find the Polynesian boat forms in great variety, and, in 
common with peculiar Polynesian fishing devices, in continued 
high esteem by the local fishermen and divers.’?+ Hornell quotes 
an important statement with regard to the Paravas by two Dutch 
officials who wrote in 1669: ‘‘ Under the protection of those Rajas 
there lived a people who had come to these parts from other 
countries—they are called Parruas—they lived a sea-faring life, 
gaining their bread by fishing, and by diving for pearls. . . . The 
pearl fishery was the principal resource and expedient from which 
the Parruas obtained a livelihood.” These Paravas claimed con- 


eld., 123. 2 P. Smith vi. 124-5. 3 Id., 150. 
* Hornell 230. On the other hand, Elliot Smith derives the Polynesian 
type from the region of the Persian Gulf, 


106 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


nexion with the great Lunar race of Ayodhya or Oudh, before 
the war of the Mahabharata. } 

The Polynesians moved out from India, and reached Oceania 
by way of Indonesia. Little is known of them during this period, 
but continual wars forced them ever onward, and nothing more 
is heard of them until they arrive in the Pacific.? 

The information gained about the Polynesians now forms a 
harmonious whole. Their original settlements in the Pacific, as 
shown by the megalithic remains, are in the region of pearl-shell 
and of pearls. Their traditions, and other evidence, point to 
India, or some land in the west, as their original home. In 
Indonesia and India there still live people of Polynesian type in 
localities which contain remains of the archaic civilization, and_ 
also pearls. In India, and perhaps also in Indonesia, these people 
are pearl divers, who, in India, claim relationship with one of'the 
great ruling families of India of the days before the arrival of the 
Aryans. So it is possible that the Polynesians have spread from 
Ceylon to the farthest bounds of the Pacific, going from pearl-bed 
to pearl-bed, seeking ever the same objects, and leaving in all 
places traces of their presence. : 

How they got to Southern India, it is not easy to say; but 
Professor Elliot Smith tells me that in physical type the Poly- 
nesians are a mixture of the Mediterranean and Armenoid stocks, 
and that the mixture probably took place in the Persian Gulf, one 
of the most important pearl-fishing centres of the world. In that 
case, a definite physical type is associated with a large movement 
of the archaic civilization, and is found on every pearl-bed from 
the Persian Gulf to the uttermost ends of the Pacific. Since, in 
Oceania, the Polynesians were associated with megalithic monu- 
ments, it follows that, in India, they probably were also so 
associated ; and that they were responsible for the polished stone 
implements that are scattered throughout the region. In the 
course of time they have, in some parts of the region, given up 
these two cultural elements. 

It is necessary to have some idea of the track of the Polynesians 
during their wanderings in Oceania, in order to appreciate the 
culture-sequences that can be established from their history. 
The Polynesians are first heard of in Samoa and Fiji, which is 
half Polynesian and half Melanesian, about a.p. 450. Mention 
is also made of Tonga; but little is known of its early history. 
The people of this date are said to have been responsible for the 
mysterious Le Fale-o-le-Fe’e of Upolu in Samoa, of which mention 
has been made, as well as the ruins of stone foundations of houses, 
roads, enclosures of the group.4 About the year a.p. 650, great 
voyages of discovery began from this region out into the eastern 
Pacific. 'Tu-te-rangi-atea, brother of Hui-te-rangiora, first reached 
Tahiti, and built a great house in the island of Raiatea, probably 


1 Hornell 232-3. 2 P. Smith vi. 135. 
3 P. Smith vi. 151, 156-7. 4°Td.; 161,163: 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 107 


the great marae of Opoa which was “‘ celebrated all over Eastern 
Polynesia as the sacred meeting-place of all the tribes of those 
parts.’’ Many islands were discovered by these men from the 
west, and a list of them is preserved in the genealogies.1. Hawaii 
was settled in a.p. 650, so far as can be told. Probably Easter 
Island was colonized about then ; and the Marquesas in a.p. 675.? 
The date of the first colonization of New Zealand is uncertain ; it 
may have been visited during the first great movement out from 
Fiji and elsewhere about A.D. 650 in the time of Hui-te-rangiora. 
Mention is made of the visit to New Zealand of a Polynesian 
voyager, Maku, about Aa.p. 850; but Maori nobility trace their 
descent to men who came from Rarotonga about a.p. 1350. 

Polynesian history thus falls into three distinct periods. The 
first Polynesians settled in Fiji, Samoa and Tonga in the fifth 
century Aa.p. After a time some of them went farther east, 
and founded colonies in the eastern Pacific, Tahiti, Hawaii, 
Marquesas, Rarotonga‘andso on. Finally amovement about 1350 
landed the great body of the Maoris in New Zealand. It will be 
necessary later on to examine this process in more detail, but these 
outlines will suffice to show the general trend of the migrations. 
By this means it will be possible to establish time- and culture- 
sequences of great value.‘ 

Evidence of continuity between the people of the archaic 
civilization in the Pacific and the present-day population is not 
hard to find. It is claimed by the peoples of some islands that 
their ancestors made megalithic monuments: this claim is put 
forward by the people of Easter Island with regard to the huge 
stone statues and other megalithic remains that it contains.® In 
Tahiti the pyramids were doubtless made by the ancestors of the 
present inhabitants; for example, the Mahai-atea, a stepped 
pyramid of stone, was built in the seventeenth century by the Te 
Teva clan, who are said to have moved the blocks of stone from 
the quarries by handing them from one to another, as is done 
with buckets of water in case of fire in the country. The same 
is said of the old Kaha la heiau marae of Hawaii.® 

As already said, people from Samoa colonized Raiatea of the 
Society Islands, where is the great marae of Opoa, the home of 
the later rulers of Tahiti and their god Oro.’ Thence were taken 
foundation stones for new maraes in other places. Raiatea was 
apparently connected with Hawaii, for in Hawaii it is said that 
** Hawaii ”’ was the old name for Opoa.® Thus a close connexion 


1 Id., 166 e.s. 2 P. Smith vi. 173-4. 8 Id., 290. 

4 The reader is referred to Mr. Percy Smith’s ‘‘ Hawaiki” for a lucid 
account of the history of the Polynesians. Also to the volumes of the ‘‘ Jour- 
nal of the Polynesian Society,’’ and to the ‘‘ Transactions of the New Zealand 
Institute.’’ He will there see how definite and exact is the foundation of 
fact upon which these conclusions are based. 

§ Churchill 4. 

6 P. Smith vi. ? P. Smith vii. 8 Ellis 111, 114. 


108 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


seems to have existed between the early ruling classes of Tahiti 
and Hawaii, and those of the archaic civilization. 

More light has now been thrown on the early history of the 
Pacific. When Tahiti was colonized, intercourse was general, 
and chiefs came for thousands of miles to take part in celebrations 
and rejoicings; the maraes were in full use. But when the 
archaic civilization broke up, a veil fell over this great island 
world, and, until the coming of Europeans, only faint traces of 
its history can be discerned. 

In yet other parts of the Pacific there appears to be a relation- 
ship between the Polynesians and stone monuments. The Penryhn 
Islanders, for instance, are known to have made some of the 
remains on their island. Others are strange to them.! 

The doctrine that the present-day Polynesians have lost much 
of their former culture is put forcibly by an eminent Polynesian 
scholar, Mr. Tregear, who says: ‘‘ Who shall say that, being 
barbarians, they have always been barbarians? It would, 
indeed, be impossible to prove, and my own belief is opposed 
to such a notion. To what does this view of the subject lead 
us? To the position that if we rely too much upon modern 
conditions, customs or modern ignorance among savages to explain 
the birth of myth among primitive men we may be led entirely 
astray, since our modern savages may not be primitive at all, 
if by primitive we understand ‘original,’ * untouched,’ ‘ near 
the fountain head of innocence.’ They may be, and probably 
are, the degenerate descendants and broken remnants of mighty 
peoples, and their simplicity is not the result of innocence, but 
of ignorance and decay.” ? 

Elsewhere in the Pacific a direct connexion can be established 
between the existing communities and the use of stone. This 
is so in the Carolines (see p. 398). In Melanesia megalithic monu- 
ments are still used; for instance, in San Cristoval and elsewhere 
in the Solomons, and Ambrym and elsewhere in the New Hebrides 
(see pp. 27-8). 

A comparison between the Polynesians and the Melanesians 
reveals an extraordinary difference. The Melanesians have no 
traditions of migration into their region ; they claim to have been 
created on the spot.? They also now use megalithic monuments 
of types not now made in Polynesia. Given the uniformity of 
the archaic civilization throughout the Pacific, it follows that 
the historical experiences of the Polynesians and the Melanesians 
must have been profoundly different. The one group has con- 
stantly lost its culture while moving about from place to place ; 
while the other, which has not migrated, has retained more 
connexion with the past. I do not mean to claim that there 
has been no loss of culture in Melanesia: far from it; the stone 
remains of Santa Maria and elsewhere are sufficient evidence on 
that point. But nevertheless San Cristoval, the New Hebrides, 

1 P. Smith i. 91-2. 2 Tregear vi. 59. * Codrington 20. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 109 


and. New Caledonia seem,to stand nearer in‘culture to the archaic 
civilization than any part of Polynesia at the present day. That 
being so, a closer cultural relationship would be expected between 
Melanesians, Australians and the ancestors of the Polynesians, 
than between Melanesians and Polynesians. 

In Indonesia it is often possible to show, with much probability, 
that peoples of the lower culture have once been in intimate 
contact with peoples of relatively high civilization. The nature 
of that contact varies from case to case. Often it is claimed 
that the tribe, or rather, its ruling caste, is descended from some 
ruling house in a civilized country. For example, it is well known 
that the Malays have spread all over Indonesia, forming various 
settlements. They originated in the Menangkabau district of 
Sumatra, and their earliest migrations date from about a.p. 1160. 
when they settled in Singapore. They spread after becoming 
Mohammedans, and they have settlements in South Sumatra 
(Menangkabau, Palembang, Lampongs), in all the insular groups 
between Sumatra and Borneo, in the Malay Peninsula as far 
north as the Isthmus of Kra: round the coast of Borneo; in 
Tidore, Ternate and Halmahera; in the Banda, Sula, and Sulu 
groups; in Batavia and Singapore. Their settlements have 
resulted from conquest, as in the case of Ternate! and Central 
Celebes:? the Tagalos of the Philippines were descended from 
Malay chiefs who went with their followers in canoes, and estab- 
lished themselves in that group. Before the spread of the Malays, 
the Hindus had formed settlements in all parts of the Archipelago, 
the first of which, those in Java, date from about the beginning 
of our era. Hindus from Java probably founded kingdoms in 
the Palembang, Menangkabau and Djambi * districts of Sumatra. 

Borneo formerly had many settlements of Hindus from 
Modjopahit in Java. The most important of these old colonies 
in the west was Sukadana, and this in its turn gave rise to many 
others, such as Matan, Landak, Tajan, Sanggouw, Sukadana, 
Sintang ; the Hindu-Javanese founded Bandjermasin in the south ; 
the ruling house of Pasir claims Hindu descent; Kuti was also 
founded by colonists from Java, and especially from Modjopahit. 
When Modjopahit fell these kingdoms became independent. 

The Hindu-Javanese were followed by the Malays from Menang- 
kabau, the date of whose arrival cannot be settled. Later on 
Buginese from South Celebes, themselves Mohammedans, founded 
settlements.® This does not exhaust the list. For, as has already 
been said, the Chinese have formed important settlements in this 
island for the working of gold and diamonds. 

The peoples of the interior of Borneo, the Dyaks as they are 
called, have, consequently, for many centuries been surrounded 
by communities of higher civilization, which cannot fail to have 
influenced them in their culture. In the districts under the rule 


1 Wallace 239. * Kruyt and Adriani I. 299. 8 Wilken 352-3. 
* Id., 362-3. 5 Id., 370-1. 


110 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


of these strangers, the natives were put under the sway of members 
ofthe ruling house ;! so possibly many Dyak tribes have derived 
their ruling classes directly from the Hindus, the Malays, or from 
a similar source. Messrs. Hose and McDougall show that the 
natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo have been pro- 
foundly’ influenced in culture by more civilized peoples. For 
example, the Idaans claim to be descended from Chinese who 
came to seize the great jewel of the Kina Balu dragon.? The 
court of Bruni in the north was profoundly influenced’ by the 
Hindu-Javanese. ‘‘ Hindu-Javanese influence also was not 
confined to the court of Bruni, for in many parts of the southern 
half of Borneo traces of it survive in the custom of burning the 
dead, in low relief carvings of bulls on stone, and in various gold 
ornaments of Hindu character”; moreover, “‘the people of 
Sarawak have only lately ceased to speak of ‘the days of the 
Hindus.’ ”’ 4 

What is the bearing of this on the civilization of the peoples 
of Borneo? It has already been seen that the Kayan and their 
kinsmen have caused an uplift in the interior of the island that 
has given rise to the culture of the Kenyah, Klementan and 
others. The approximate date of arrival of the Kayan is given 
by Hose and McDougall, who state that, according to a tradition 
of the Kapuas Malays, this tribe arrived in the island about the 
beginning of the fourteenth century. The ancestors of the 
Kayan are said to have been a gang of criminals, with mutilations 
in the ear-lobes and elsewhere for incest, who were in the service 
of the king of Modjopahit in Java. They landed near Sikudana 
and spread into the country between the Kapuas and Banjer- 
massin.© The Kayan thus arrived in Central Borneo after king- 
doms had been established on the coast for many centuries. They 
are also said to have been in contact with higher civilizations. 
Therefore the cultures of Borneo natives can but be regarded as 
degenerate remnants of more advanced civilizations. 

In Central Celebes the To Bada originated in three villages 
containing stone remains.® Although the past history of South 
Celebes and the neighbouring islands is still obscure, yet it seems 
certain that the States of this region possess ruling families 
belonging to the Bugi or Macassar group. Such interrelation- 
ships are evident in the case of the Sadan Toradja, the State of 
Luwu, the Mandar States of the west coast of the southern 
Peninsula, and various other Bugi States. The Bugi and Macassar 
peoples are supposed to have a common origin, and this certainly 
seems true of their ruling families (see pp. 284e.s.). The Bugi ruling 
group claim to have started from Watoe in Wadjo, and thence 
to have spread all over South Celebes, and the neighbouring 
islands. The Buginese have founded colonies in Borneo: in the 

1 Wilken 373. 2 Hose and McDougall I. 11, 17. 


3 Id., I. 17-18. § Tdi, Lite. 
5 Hose and McDougall I. 15 n. 8 Perry vii. 47. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 111 


Riouw-Lingga group ; in Endeh of Flores and the islands east of 
Flores, which constitute the principality of Bima.! <A pro- 
liferation of States extending over a wide area thus owes its 
origin to a common focus, and these States betray no sign of 
independent origin. As the general argument proceeds it will 
be seen that this continuity shows itself in many ways. Although 
Hinduism and Islam have played their parts in Celebes, yet the 
old political and social organization has survived in sufficient 
detail to reveal the relationship between these communities and 
those of the archaic civilization. 

Minor examples of the foundation of daughter settlements are 
those of the To Rongkong, and the Kolaka people of South- 
eastern Celebes. The To Rongkong have emigrated from the 
Sadan region, where are ample traces of the archaic civilization ; * 
while the Kolaka folk owe their culture to beings who show strong 
signs of relationship with the ruling family of Luwu and other 
Bugi States.2 In Sumba, again, it is known that certain States 
have derived their ruling families from others, which in their 
turn probably came from Bima, and, therefore, ultimately from 
Celebes.4 Each additional fact that is brought to light thus 
serves to establish continuity between one State and some other 
that preceded it, and usually with a higher civilization. 

Evidence already adduced shows that the ancestors of the 
peoples of the islands running east from Timor came from the 
neighbourhood of Timor, a place where people of Polynesian type 
aretobefound. Thisisthe more significant when it is remembered 
that, as already pointed out,° the peoples of these islands attach 
great importance to polished stone implements brought with 
them by their ancestors from the west. Megalithic remains are 
plentiful in the islands to the west of Timor, and, as may be seen 
from Sketch Map No. 6, stone implements have been found in 
these islands. So, it is possible that the whole of the culture 
of the region, which steadily degenerates eastward from Timor, 
is derived from the archaic civilization. The culture of the 
Moluccas also shows strong signs of the influence of the archaic 
civilization, a fact which has been emphasized in ‘‘ The Megalithic 
Culture of Indonesia,’”’ where it was also claimed that the culture 
of those Philippine tribes of whom anything is known, shows signs 
of a similar mode of origin. 

The Batta of Sumatra, who show signs of Hindu influence, are 
divided into exogamous groups called margas, one of which, 
called the Marga Simbiring, has subdivisions that, according to 
the Dutch philologist, Kern, are of Dravidian origin.® In physical 
_ type some of the Batta are thought to resemble the Dravidians 
of India,’ and it is said that the Indians have had much influence 
upon their religion. Throughout Sumatra the dominant influ- 


1 Indonesia, ‘‘ Encyclopedia,” I. 324. 2 Kruyt v. 367. 
® Kruyt viii. 691 e.s. 4 Kruyt m.s.s. 5 Perry vii. 57-8. See p. 97. 
§ Kern ii. 359 e.s. 7 Brenner 191. 8 Hagen 500. 


112 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


ences have been Hindu and Mohammedan, so that it is impossible 
to detect any signs of the independent development of culture in 
any one place. Not only must account be taken of these two 
known influences, but the Phcenician script, the stone images and 
the stone implements of the south-west must be constantly borne 
in mind when speaking of the culture of the native peoples of the 
island of Sumatra. 

To sum up: It is not possible, in any part of Indonesia, to 
point to a group of communities, or even a single community, 
as an instance of the independent development of culture. 

The population of India can be divided roughly into four, or 
perhaps rather, five groups. In the first place, some food-gathering 
tribes still remain, such as the Veddhas of Ceylon and certain 
jungle tribes of Southern India. Secondly, there are peoples 
speaking Austronesian languages, who have already been dis- 
cussed in part. Their distribution is seen in Sketch Map No. 13. 
They, with their ancient languages, are closely linked, in later 
times in India, with the third group of peoples, commonly called 
the Dravidians, who speak cognate languages. Fourth come the 
Aryan-speaking peoples, the product of an incursion from the 
north. The fifth group is that of the Mongoloid peoples of Assam, 
Upper Burma and the Himalayas, who will not enter much into 
the argument. 

In those pages of this book which concern India, much space 
will be devoted to the comparison of the culture of the Aryans 
with that of the peoples whom they found in the country on their 
arrival. This will be a task of great difficulty, for the proper 
study of the cultural history of India has yet to come. 

It can be shown that many food-producing peoples of India 
have been derived from others possessing a higher degree of 
culture. For instance, the Kunet of the Kulu district of the 
Panjab, between the Beas and Kons Rivers, live in a region with 
many remains of a vanished civilization, which are ascribed to 
their ancestors, who, again, are identified with the Mundas of 
Chota Nagpur.t| The Mundas themselves claim that they came 
from Azimgarh, a district in which now live scattered tribes of 
Cheros, Seoris, Kols, Kharwars, who all speak Austronesian 
languages.? A Behar tradition states that in the Satya Yogu, 
the Golden Age of India, the country was ruled by the Savaras, 
Munda-speaking people, whose dominion extended to Azimgarh, 
which district contains many ruins of a former highly civilized 
population. The local traditions of Azimgarh refer to the 
Rajbhars and Suiris as the most ancient occupants of the soil. 
Cunningham identifies these Suiris with the Savara, and thus 
with the Munda-speaking tribes. ‘“‘ Thus the tradition of the 
Mundas themselves finds unexpected support from the traditions 
preserved by the Hindus of the Azimgarh district, and we may 
therefore safely accept the Mundari tradition of their former 


1 Roy i. 24, 50-1, quoting Cunningham xiv. 127-8. 2 Id., 24. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 118 


residence at Azimgarh as correct.” If so, they were connected 
with the highest civilization of pre-Aryan times in India. The 
Mundas seem to have left Azimgarh when the Aryans became 
dominant in that part of India.1_ They wandered about over a 
great part of northern India for many years before finally settling 
in Chota Nagpur. ‘‘ They must have spent a rude dreary exist- 
ence in these fastnesses for a considerable time. And in that 
wide space of time, they probably unlearnt some of the peaceful 
arts of civilization that they had acquired in their pre-Aryan days 
of peace and prosperity. In their constant struggle with the 
adverse forces of the physical and animal world, it is no wonder 
that they should have slipt down the few rungs of the ladder of 
civilization that they had climbed up in happier days.’?* Proof 
of their former existence in certain places is afforded by their 
remains. The Mundas erect stone monuments over their graves, 
and have the custom of sitting during council meetings on stones 
ranged in a circle.2 The extracts given by Roy from the archeo- 
logical reports of Cunningham, suggest that some of these old 
Munda remains are dolmens.* One such site is described. Mr. 
Carleylle found, at a place ten miles south-west of Fatehpur Sikri, 
near’ the south bank of the Banganga River, numerous small 
standing stones which looked as if they had formed stone circles 
and also “‘ certain solitary erect slabs of stone of which the width 
across horizontally was generally equal to and sometimes a little 
greater than their vertical height above ground, and which latter 
stones might possibly originally have formed the sidestones of 
cromlechs.”’ ® 

The Mundas are equated to the Cherus, who have left brickwork 
ruins in several places, among them being some pyramidal mounds 
thirty-three miles north of Chapras, and also eighteen miles north- 
west of Mozufferpur. Numerous remains in Behar, one of the places 
said to have been visited by them on their wanderings, mounds, 
brickwork, stone images, are ascribed to Munda-speaking peoples. 
Thus a megalith-building people who speak a language of the 
great Austronesian family have a culture rooted far back in the 
past, and formerly in advance of what they now possess. Driven 
from their early home by a race of conquerors, the Mundas 
wandered about and lost much of their original civilization, 
maintaining, nevertheless, their continuity with the past, and 
preserving the custom of erecting stone graves.® 

The Oraon of Chota Nagpur are similar to the Mundas in 
occupations and manners, but differ in language, in which they 
are allied to the Canarese of South India, and this harmonizes 
with their claim that Rawan, the demon king of Ceylon, was once 
their ruler. They are identified with certain peoples who opposed 
the advance of the Aryans in India, such as the Karushas and the 
cannibal Rakshahas. A mythical Oraon king, Karakh, is said to 

1 Td., 52 e.s., 61-2, 64-5. 2 Roy 1. 73. 3 Id., 122. 4 Id., 82-3. 

5 Roy i. 83-4. 6 [d., 96 e.s., 103 e.8. 

8 


114 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


have ruled over the region between the Son and Karamansa 
Rivers. 

The work of Gustav Oppert, on ‘“ The Original Inhabitants 
of India,’? abounds with examples of the relationship between 
present-day Dravidian peoples and the great ruling houses of the 
past. He says: “ In pursuing the ramifications of the Bharatan, 
or Gaudo-Dravidian, population throughout the peninsula, I hope 
I have been able to point out the connexion existing between 
several tribes, apparently widely different from each other. I 
have tried thus to identify the so-called Pariahs of, Southern 
India with the old Dravidian mountaineers and to establish their 
relationship to the Bhars, Brahuia, Mhars, Mahars, Paharias, 
Paravari, Paradas and other tribes; all these tribes forming, as 
it were, the first layer of the ancient Dravidian deposit. In a 
similar manner I have identified the Candalas with the first 
section of the Gaudian race which was reduced to abject slavery 
by the Aryan invaders, and shown their connexion with the 
ancient Kandalas and the present Gonds. In addition to this, I 
trust I have proved that such apparently different tribes as the 
Mallas, Pallas, Pallavas, Ballas, Bhillas and others are one and 
all offshoots of the Dravidian branch, and that the Kolis, Kos, 
Khonds, Kodagas, Koravas, Kurumbas and others belong to 
the Gaudian division, both branches forming in reality only 
portions of one and the same people, whom I prefer to call, as I 
have said, Bharatas.”?? The thesis of Oppert is thus that of this 
chapter, namely, that a great number of peoples, seemingly 
independent, are really, culturally speaking, derivatives of one 
original stock, produced by a continuous process of development, 
and not independently evolving their culture.? He brings forward 
masses of facts to show that many of the Dravidian peoples are 
but the shattered remnants of once powerful kingdoms, but the 
evidence is so abundant that it is hard to know what to select. 
For example, he discusses the Bhars, and says: ‘‘ The Bhars 
must have once ruled over a great area of country stretching from 
Oudh in the west to Behar in the east and Chota Nagpur, Bundel- 
kund and Sagar in the south. . .. Traces of the former supre- 
macy of the Bhars are found scattered all over the country. Most 
of the stone erections, fortifications, as well as the embankments 
and the subterranean caves in Gorakhpur, Azimgarh, Janpur, 
Benares, Mirzapur and Allahabad are ascribed to them. Such 
forts generally go now by the name of Bhar-dih. The grand 
ruins known as those of Pampapura in the neighbourhood of the 
modern Mirzapur probably owed their origin to the Bhars. Mr. 
C. A. Elliot states that ‘almost every town whose name does 
not end in pur, or abad, or mow or is not distinctly derivable 
from a proper name, is claimed by tradition, in the east of Oudh, 

1 Grignard 4-8; Roy iii. 3 e.s. 2 Oppert, p. vii. 

’ “The Koragas are now treated like Pariahs, though according to tradi- 
tion they also were once a governing race.’’—Oppert (171). 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 115 


as a Bhar town. The district of Bharaich . .. is their oldest 
abode, and the name of the town Bharaich is said to be derived 
from them.’ ‘Traces of the Bhars abound, according to Mr. 
Duthoit, late Superintendent of the Maharaja of Benares, ‘ on 
all sides in the form of old tanks and village forts. One cannot 
go for three miles in the districts without coming upon some of 
the latter.’ Not very long ago the Bhars were the lords of the 
soil in the districts of Benares and Oudh, and according to the 
still prevailing tradition in Azimgarh, the Rajbhars occupied the 
country in the time of Rama. The structures left by the Bhars 
prove that they were equally proficient in the arts of peace and 
of war. ‘The remains ascribed to them are especially numerous 
in the Benares district.’””1_ Nowadays they have fallen from their 
high estate: ‘‘ A considerable number of Bhars fill the post of 
village policemen, while others are ploughmen, but the vast 
majority of this race are now in a miserable condition. ... In 
spite of the abilities they exhibit when suitably employed and in 
spite of the reputation of their ancestors, which has survived to 
this day, the descendants of the ancient rulers of the land have 
now lost nearly everything and are reduced to the most abject 
conditions.’’? 

The low estate of former great races of India has struck more than 
one writer. For example, an author, in the “ Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society,’”> comments thus on the fallen conditions of the 
Bhars : ‘‘ I know not why we should be so ready always to ascribe 
all the ancient civilization of India to successive troops of the 
Hindu immigrants. The more I investigate the matter, the 
stronger do my convictions become, that the Hindu tribes have 
learnt much from the aboriginal races; but that, in the course 
of ages, these races have been so completely subdued, and have 
been so ground down by oppression, and treated with such 
extreme rigour and scorn, that, in the present condition of abject 
debasement in which we find them, we have no adequate means 
for judging of their original genius and power.’ He goes on to 
say that: ‘‘It would be interesting to learn the history of the 
degradation of a race of people, of enterprise and skill, of origin- 
ality and singular personal ability, which, it is evident, once 
characterized them in no ordinary degree. Their supplanters, 
whether Rajpoots, Brahmans or Mahommedans, though more 
civilized and refined, are not to be compared with the nobler 
aborigines whom they have ruined, in regard to the great works 
of public utility which have been executed in the land.” ® 

Even the Pariahs, or Paraiyan, as they should properly be 
called, of whom the very name has come to stand for what is 
most abject in human nature, claim that they once had a glorious 
place in the country. ‘‘ However despised a position the Pariah 
and the Holiya occupy in the places where they live, they have 
preserved and still cherish, as the Mhar and Bhar do, the memory 


1 Oppert 40-1. 2 Id., 47. 3 Sherring 385, 395. 


116 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


of former greatness and regard themselves as the original owners 
of the soil. Political revolutions, about which we now know 
nothing, have most probably been the cause of their subversion 
by other kindred Dravidian tribes.”?+ The Pariahs are closely 
connected with the Paravas, the pearl-fishers of Polynesian type 
of the south, who also claim high rank in the past. The Pariahs 
are unable to bring forward serious evidence in support of their 
contention ; but the existence among them of a complicated caste 
system, with a division into right- and left-hand castes, points 
to some ancient social order that has long been superseded. The 
Pariah possess certain privileges which they could not possibly 
have gained for themselves from orthodox Hinduism. ‘“ These 
seem to be survivals of a past, in which the Paraiyans held a 
much higher position than they do now ; or at any rate show that 
they are as ancient in the land as any other Dravidians (Mudaliars, 
Pillais) whom the Paraiyan calls Tamils, a name which he does 
not apply to himself.” The Paraiyans are supposed to be more 
intimate with local gods than the high-caste people, and to have 
better knowledge of the village boundaries. ? 

The Kurumbar people, who nowadays erect megalithic monu- 
ments, are also supposed to have had a great past. ‘“ They were 
masters in the south, which is still full of traditions of them, and 
in the Carnatic formed a federal community of twenty-four castle- 
states, all of which have been traced, and reached no mean stage 
of civilization. In the sixth or seventh century they were scat- 
tered and destroyed by the Chola kings of Tanjore after a long 
and widespread domination; probably continuing to exist in 
larger or smaller communities, ever wasting and driven farther 
and farther into the hills and wildernesses by their conquerors. 
It is to this perished people that the megalithic monuments may 
be with most probability ascribed ; they are still associated with 
them in popular tradition ; the circles and kistvaens being often 
commonly called ‘Kurumbar rings’ and ‘ Kurumbar Forts,’ 
especially round Conjeveram, once a principal centre of their 
power. ... Sometimes they retain their ancient name, as the 
Kurumbars of the Nilgiri slopes, a dwarfish hairy race, dwelling 
in the densest, most feverish jungles, and feared even by the other 
mountain tribes as the most dangerous of enchanters. Elsewhere 
they are known by many titles—Kaders,'or wood-men; Maleiarasar, 
or hill-kings ; Koragas, or bushmen ; Holyars, or men of the river ; 
Irular, or people of darkness ; all names indicative of contempt 
tinged with fear. In still larger remnants they probably survive 
in the wide unknown jungle regions of the northern circars as 
Gonds, Kols and many others. ) 

“That these dwindled miserable tribes are the representatives 
of the race that once covered the plains with megalithic monu- 
ments is proved, as far as proof is ever likely to be obtained, by 
the curious fact of their maintaining at the present day the same 


1 Oppert 50-1: cf. Shortt 193. 2 Clayton 60-1. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 117 


practice in miniature show. The Malei Arryans of the Travancore 
mountains, who still number from 15,000 to 20,000, on a death 
amongst them, make an imitation kistvaen of small slabs of stone 
and place a flat stone over with ceremonies and offerings ; the 
spirit of the deceased is supposed to dwell in the pebble. The 
Kurumbars and Irulars of the Nilgiri Hills do the same, and I 
have seen small covered slab structures there filled with long 
smooth pebbles, the meaning of which I was long in ascertaining, 
the people being reticent on the subject. The Gond tribes of 
the Godavery and Orissa make miniature cromlechs ‘like 
three-legged stools,’ which they place over the bones and ashes of 
the deceased. The Kols are reported by Major Macpherson 
to place the ashes in a chatty, bury it in the ground, and lay a 
large flat stone over it. Here we find wild secluded tribes 
keeping up the semblance of constructing kistvaens and stone 
monuments on mountain-fastnesses overlooking the plains where 
such structures abound; and the inference is strong that they 
must be the weakened descendants of the people who, when 
numerous and powerful, dominated the plains and built the 
structures.” } 

The mass of evidence put forward by Oppert and others makes 
it clear that it cannot be taken for granted that any Dravidian 
people of the lower culture has elaborated its culture independently 
of others. He shows how many strands bind tribes together, 
linking one with another, and all seemingly derived from a few 
original stocks, which have lost their culture in the course of 
ages. A writer just quoted evidently has the same belief as 
Oppert : ““ My own belief is, that many of the aboriginal tribes 
of India were originally blended together. All investigation into 
the races of India goes to prove that at various epochs separate 
tribes have spread over the land, one pushing forward another, 
the weaker and less civilized retreating to the jungle and hilly 
fastnesses ; and the stronger, in their turn, giving place to fresh 
and more vigorous clans. It may be impossible to prove, 
therefore, what is nevertheless highly probable, that m very 
ancient times most of these tribes were exceedingly few in number ; 
for it is a singular circumstance, opposed, indeed, when regarded 
superficially, to the assumption I am making, that the races of 
India, whether Aryan or non-Aryan, for a long succession of ages, 
have largely maintained their distinctive individuality, notwith- 
standing the fluctuations in their respective histories.’ ? 

The Bhil are Dravidians that have apparently fallen from a 
former high estate. ‘‘ The Bhils are, and deem themselves, a 
distinct people. There are so many different tribes among them, 
that it has been conjectured by some, that the general name of 
Bhil only denotes a confederacy of mixed and degraded races of 
Hindus, associated by political events and local circumstances : 
but, though there can be no doubt that their strength has been 


1 Walhouse 27-8. 2 Sherring 399, 


118 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


increased, and their consequence raised, by recruits sprung from 
the prohibited intercourse of the primitive Hindu castes, there 
is every reason to believe that the original race of Bhils may claim 
a high antiquity, and that they were once masters of many of the 
fertile plains of India, instead of being confined, as they now are, 
to the rugged mountains and almost impenetrable jungles.” + 
Many other examples could be quoted of Dravidian tribes, now 
of lowly culture, who can point to a glorious past. In some cases 
it is not possible from the historical evidence to claim that a 
people has been derived from one of higher culture. But, on 
the other hand, it does not seem that any of the Dravidian com- 
munities have developed an independent civilization. This, of 
course, is purely negative evidence. But the facts here adduced, 
which only constitute a tithe of those available, as may be seen 
from a perusal of the work of Oppert, make it possible to claim 
with some confidence that, with regard to the Dravidian group, 
independent origin of culture is not proved, and that degeneration 
of culture has demonstrably played a large part in the production 
of communities of all degrees of culture. The positive evidence 
is on the one side of degeneration, and on that I shall rely, taking 
it as a working hypothesis that Dravidian civilization can be 
regarded as a unity. 

With regard to the Aryans, Sir Alfred Lyall, in his “ Asiatic 
Studies,”’ shows what an influence has been exerted by the Rajput 
elans on the neighbouring aboriginal tribes. He says that, in 
the country round Rajputana, dwell peoples called Bhil,? who 
form the lowest stratum of the population.? Above them in the 
social scale come half-blood tribes claiming paternal descent, 
more or less regular and direct, from Aryan clans, with a social 
organization based, although indistinctly, on that of the Rajputs. 
These predatory clans, of very mixed and obscure origin by 
descent, rank in the order by which they gradually approximate 
more and more to the customs and ritual of the pure clans ; “so 
that we might make out roughly, in Central India, a graduated 
social scale, starting from the simple aboriginal horde at the 
bottom, and culminating with the pure Aryan clan at the top; 
nor would it be difficult to show that all these clans are really 
connected, and have something of a common origin.” The 
intermediate groups “usually assert themselves to be fallen 
patrician, but they are probably derived from both sources.” 
Lyall mentions also the Meenas, robbers and caterans, who claim 
Brahmin and Rajput descent. He mentions also the Grassias, 
a tribe of South-West Rajputana, ranking above the Bhil. “The 
Grassia is probably of mixed Rajput blood, possibly in some cases 
he may be a pure Rajput stock detached and isolated in the 
backwoods. ... There is also a widely spread tribe of pro- 


1 Malcolm 68. 
2 We have already seen that the Bhils are a degraded remnant of a former 
powerful race 8 Lyall I. 176. 4 Id., 176-8. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 119 


fessional thieves which is evidently by origin nothing more than 
an association for the purpose of habitual robbery ; but even there 
these people pretend to a remote descent from Rajput and shape 
their internal society upon the pattern of the clan.” 1 The pro- 
cess at work is one in which “a wild tribe seems to grow out 
of a collection of recruits from the scattered communities, who 
either from necessity, or a love of adventure, join together under 
some notable leader.” And “so far as the actual course of 
things can be watched, in early and wild times a tribe or clan 
regularly throws off another tribe or clan after its own kind, as 
swarms come out of a wild bees’ nest.’ 3 

It is found that all the Rajput clans themselves claim descent 
from a common ancestor. As Sir Alfred Lyall says: ‘‘ The pure 
Rajput clans are those great kindred groups which have kept 
immaculate the rules and conditions of exogamic connubium, 
throughout the genealogy of their tribal tree in all its branches, 
every family showing its pedigree leading back to some branch, 
however insignificant, which sprang out of the original stem and 
root of the tribe. This is the real aristocracy of India, with 
which every Hindu dynasty and family of influence or new wealth 
(except Brahmans) tries to find, beg or borrow a connexion 
from the petty non-Aryan chief of the Central Indian woodlands 
to the greatest Maratha ruler, the kings of Nepal, and the half- 
Chinese princes in the far north-eastern portions of India and 
Burma.” 4 

One great feature of modern India is the caste system. The 
vast mass of the population are ranged in groups, formed mainly 
upon some professional or occupational basis, the members of 
which are forced, theoretically, to marry within that group. One 
definition that has been given of caste is the following. It is “a 
close corporation, in theory, at any rate, rigorously hereditary ; 
equipped with a certain traditional and independent organization, 
including a chief and council ; meeting on occasion in assemblies 
of more or less plenary authority, and joining in the celebration 
of certain festivals; bound together by a common occupation, 
observing certain common usages which relate more particularly 
to marriage, to food, and to questions of ceremonial pollution ; 
and ruling its members by the exercise of a jurisdiction the extent 
of which varies, but which succeeds, by the sanction of certain 
penalties and above all the power of final or revocable exclusion 
from the group, in making the authority of the community 
effectively felt.” > Itis claimed, in some quarters, that this system 
of caste grew up as the result of the coming of the Aryans into 
India. In the course of time it has drawn the greater part of the 


1 Td., 183. 2 Id., 194. $ Id.y4. 198, 

4 Id., I. 257. ‘‘ The Dogras of the Kangre Bhils and the Khas of Nepal 
are believed to be the offspring of alliances between conquering Rajputs 
and women of more or less Mongoloid descent ’’—(Risley 555). 

5 Ris ley 518. 


120 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


population into its sphere of influence, so that people of all 
physical types and races are in the system. Sir Herbert Risley 
gives an explanation of the origin of the caste system that accords 
well with that of the manner in which the Rajputs have formed 
other communities outside themselves. He claims that the 
Aryans came into India with but few women. Some of the 
adventurous spirits among them set out with followers and 
managed to seize some of the Dravidian kingdoms, and took the 
Dravidian women for their wives. Cut off from their relatives by 
distance, and by their new alliances, these men and their families 
would form a new caste lower in rank than that from which they 
came, but would be the ruling caste in the communities formed 
by them. ‘As their number grew their cadets again sallied 
forth in the same way and became the founders of the Rajput and 
pseudo-Rajput houses all over India. In each case complete 
amalgamation with the inferior race was averted by the fact that 
they only took women and did not give them. They behaved, 
in fact, towards the Dravidians whom they conquered in exactly the 
same way as the founders of Virginia behaved to the African 
slaves, whom they imported, and the founders of the Indian 
Empire towards the women of the country which they conquered.” 1 
This means that one original community gives rise to others 
successively lower in cultural status, the ultimate basis of the 
process being the superposition of one group on another, usually 
of alien language and customs. In this way it is claimed that the 
great complexity of Indian society has been produced. 

In the Puranas several tribes are mentioned as being descended 
from Kshatriya migrants. The process was apparently well 
known to the writers of those books. Not only is this process 
mentioned in the sacred books, but it has gone on in historic 
times. In Assam, for example, successive waves of conquerors 
have disputed for sovereignty. As a result: ‘‘ The dynasty 
would ordinarily be overthrown ; the downfallen survivors of the 
old aristocracy would become merged in some Hindu caste, such 
as the Kalika.”’$ Often the country would, as a result, be split 
up into:a number of petty states. ‘From time to time a local 
chief of unusual enterprise and ambition, or possibly some 
Kshatriya adventurer, would reduce these petty states and make 
himself master of the whole country.”’* In this way the ruling 
families of these small states would be depressed to a lower rank, 
or would be forced to migrate and seek their fortunes elsewhere, 
that is, to found another small state with themselves as rulers. 
Thus many old ruling houses have vanished : ‘‘ The disappearance 
of former ruling races is one of the most curious phenomena in 
Indian history. There is no vestige now of the old Bodo rulers of 
Sylhet. The Khers, who ruled in the north-west of Assam before 
the Koches, have also for the most part been absorbed in other 
castes. In Upper India there is now no visible trace of the Greeks, 


1 Risley 556. 2 Wilson, H. H., 375, 481-3. 3 Gait 9. ee £1 8 : © 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 121 


Huns, Bhars, and other once dominant races or tribes.””?4 The 
Kachari, now a tribe whose beliefs and practices are quoted as 
examples of primitive modes of thought, claim that their kings once 
ruled over most of Assam, with their capital at Dimapur, where 
are remains of a relatively high state of civilization.2, The Kachari 
are allied to the Mech, and were formerly part of the Bodo king- 
dom; so that ‘‘it seems not improbable that at one time the 
major part of Assam and North-East Bengal formed a great Bodo 
kingdom, and that some, at least, of the Mlecchha kings mentioned 
in the old copper-plate inscriptions belonged to the Kachari race 
or some closely allied tribe.” The old Kachari kingdom of 
Dimapur displayed a higher form of civilization, that is, using 
the term in the sense of the control over stonework and so on, 
than the Ahoms, a people of Tai-Shan, that is Mongoloid, stock, 
who displaced them. Their capital Dimapur was built of brick, 
but much use was made of sandstone for carved pillars, some 
as much as 12 ft. long and 5 ft. in circumference, which had been 
brought at least 10 miles from the quarries.? 

Convulsions in the valley of Manipur, and elsewhere in Assam, 
have probably brought into being several tribes of the hills. The 
Naga, Kuki, Manipuri, Lushai and Gurkha are alike in physique. 
It is interesting to note that some of the clans of these groups, the 
Anal and Thado of the Kuki, and the Manipuris, claim to be 
descended from three men whose father was the son of Pakhangba, 
the mythical ancestor of the royal family of Manipur.‘ The Naga, 
Kuki and Manipuri also claim a common ancestry.° 

Examination into the cultural history of Indian peoples 
therefore gives the same result as in other parts of the region 
—a lack of positive evidence of independent development of 
culture. 

A further important point must be noted with regard to the 
relationship between the archaic civilization and its successors. 
Not only are the early communities situated near sources of 
valuable materials, but existing tribes, such as the Munda, Gond, 
Kurumba, Khasi, and so on who, as was seen in Chapters VI, 
VII and VIII, had retained the practices of irrigation or the 
erection of megalithic monuments, have not wandered far from 
such areas. When movements have gone out from such centres, 
cultural elements have been dropped. Nevertheless it is possible 
that such secondary migrations, as they may be termed, are 
directed by desires similar to those of the people of the archaic 
civilization. For example, the To Rongkong, a people of Central 
Celebes, who came from the Sadan region,® where are many traces 
of the archaic civilization, have made their principal settlement 
in a place with much iron ore.’ 


? id., 9. 2 Eliot 1156. 3 Gait 243. 

4 Shakespear i. 150. 5 Hodson. 

§ Ci. Perry vii. Heer Kruyt will shortly publish a monograph on this 
important district. 7 Kruyt v. 373, 


122 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Messrs. Hose and McDougall have some interesting comments 
on the iron-working of the Kayan of Borneo. ‘‘ In any account of 
the arts and crafts of the Kayans, the working of iron claims the 
first place by reason of its high importance to them and of the 
skill and knowledge displayed by them in the difficult operations 
by which they produce their fine swords. The origin of their 
knowledge of iron and of the processes of smelting and forging 
remains hidden in mystery ; but there can be little doubt that 
the Kayans were familiar with these processes before they entered 
Borneo, and it is probable that the Kayans were the first iron- 
workers in Borneo, and that from them the other tribes have 
learnt the craft with varying measures of success. However 
this may be, the Kayans remain the most skilful ironworkers 
of the country, rivalled only in the production of serviceable 
sword-blades by the Kenyahs. 

‘““ At the present day the Kayans, like all the other peoples, 
obtain their iron in the form of bars of iron and steel imported 
from Europe and distributed by the Chinese and Malay traders. 
But thirty years ago nearly all the iron worked by the tribes of 
the interior was from ore found in the river-beds, and possibly 
from masses of meteoric iron; and even at the present day the 
native ore is still smelted in the far interior, and swords made 
from it by the Kenyahs are still valued above all others.”.1 This 
quotation shows that in iron-working the principle of continuity 
holds. The other tribes of the interior have derived their iron- 
working from the Kayan, and do not equal them in skill. No 
signs exist of the independent origin of the craft in the country, 
and it is surmised that the Kayan must have brought it with 
them. That is to say, the possession, by the Kayan, of the craft 
of iron-working, is evidence of their former contact with a more 
advanced form of civilization. It is possible that the movements 
of the Kayan have been directed by the supplies of iron. Iron- 
working being their chief industry, it is likely that they would 
make their new villages where they found supplies of ore. The 
Kayan are said to move on to find new patches of jungle to burn 
down for their rice cultivation. The choice in that respect is 
fairly open, and it is likely that the presence of iron-ore would 
determine the exact spot. Along these lines, it may ultimately 
be possible to account for the great majority of the settlements 
of the later periods. 

Thus inquiry into the derivation of the later communities of the 
region as a whole leads, in all cases where enough historical 
evidence is to hand, to the communities of the archaic civilization. 
The later communities are living on the cultural capital that they 
have derived from that original source. The modes of derivation 
of culture are various. Sometimes members of one community 
go out and form a fresh community, which is thus simply an off- 


2 Hose and McDougall I. 193—4. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 123 


spring of the first. _In another case members of a ruling family 
go out from home to seek a kingdom, and either impose them- 
selves upon a group of people, or wrest a kingdom from some other 
ruling family, and take their place. In Polynesia much of the 
dispersal has been of such types. The Polynesians have grown 
by the natural increase of population, fresh communities budding 
off from the old stock. In the later stages, when the islands had 
become populated, we hear of conquest and the superposition of 
one class on another. In Indonesia, and in India also, both 
processes have been at work. 

The consequences will vary according to the mode of trans- 
mission of culture. Where budding-off has taken place, continuity 
in culture is more likely than in the case of conquest of a foreign 
people. Examples of both these processes will be forthcoming 
in the course of the argument, and they will be discussed in their 
proper places. 

A third method whereby culture can be transmitted from one 
place to another will now have to be considered. It has already 
been noted that the people of Melanesia do not claim to be of 
immigrant origin; they were, they say, created on the spot, 
whatever that may mean. At the same time their culture 
possesses unmistakable traces of the influence of the archaic 
civilization in the form of irrigation, dolmens and so on. How 
did this happen, since no part of the population claims to be of 
immigrant origin? It is not hard to suggest an explanation. 
The existence, in certain islands, of graves of former chiefs, in 
places where none now rule, suggests that a former ruling class 
brought with them these cultural elements. It is, however, 
unnecessary to resort to speculation, for the various native 
populations have something to say about it. Tradition is so 
highly prized that it will be well to heed its voice. 

In “‘ The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia ”’ it was shown that 
certain peoples possess traditions that the archaic civilization 
was introduced to them by strangers. The best examples are 
the Bontoc, Igorot and Ifugao in the Philippines, and the Toradja 
in Central Celebes. Both groups claim that, at some time in the 
past, a being from the sky came and civilized them. An examina- 
tion of their traditions and culture suggested that these culture- 
heroes were representatives of the archaic civilization, and that 
their arrival in these places was the result of the search for gold. 
In other parts of Indonesia, these strangers founded ruling houses, 
but in these two cases they did not. The reasons are definite. 
Among the Bontoc the hero married one of the women and had 
children by her ; but they were all killed, and the people lost their 
rulers. In the case of the Toradja it is said that the descendants 
of the hero and the woman whom he married went to other parts 
and there became chiefs. Culture-heroes may then be looked 
upon as peoples of higher civilization that settle among others in 
a low stage of civilization, influence them, and depart without 


124 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


forming a social class.1_ In the case of the Bontoc and the Toradja 
the native traditions seem reliable, for the strangers have left 
behind them material evidence of their presence. In other 
places tales are told of wonderful men who came to a people and 
taught them their civilization. Of the Kai tribe in German New 
Guinea, not far from the Huon Gulf, it is said: ‘‘ The Nemu 
were demi-gods who inhabited the world before the present race, 
stronger and more powerful than men; they made men what 
they are, and put a black skin on some, and a white on others. 
They discovered edible fruits, first planted fields, built houses. 
At first a whole bunch of bananas ripened at once, the Nemu 
altered this and made them ripen gradually. Also they stopped 
houses moving about from place to place as they formerly did. 

** At first it was always day ; the Nemu told the sun to go down 
and give them time for rest and sleep. 

‘* In short, Nemu settled mode of life for man; natives always 
answer, ‘ The Nemu did so, and so do we.’ 

‘*‘ The Nemu were turned into animals or into blocks of stone 
at death, and great floods destroyed them all.”? This region 
contains remains of old gold-workings : so the claim of the natives 
that certain beings originated their civilization is apparently 
trustworthy. The traditions credit the strangers with the intro- 
duction of edible fruits and of a settled life, acts already ascribed 
to the people of the archaic civilization. 

The Roro-speaking tribes of British New Guinea believe in a 
culture-hero, less definite in nature than the Nemu of the Kai, 
called Oa Rove Marai. In the course of the development of the 
argument it will be seen that he is in all probability associated 
with the archaic civilization. 

The culture-heroes of Torres Straits, between New Guinea and 
Australia, introduced new methods of agriculture, new ceremonies 
and appropriate dances. ‘Sida, the great culture-hero for 
vegetable food, came from New Guinea, where he returned after 
visiting the Western and Eastern Islands of Torres Straits. 
Everywhere he is regarded as a benefactor; he instructed the 
people in language, he stocked reefs with the valuable cone shell, 
and notably he introduced plants useful to man. He was a very 
amatory person, and valuable economic plants sprang up as the 
result of his amours, an example of the close association in the 
native mind of the sexual act with agricultural fertility. The 
superior fertility of Mer is also accounted for by the introduction 
of garden plants from Badu and Moa by two heroes, and at the 
same time this accounts for the impoverishment of these two 
Western Islands. The death dances were introduced into the 
Western Islands by two beings from New Guinea, one of whom 
brought over some funeral dances to Ewaier, the smallest of the. 

1 The reader will find a detailed discussion of these topics in ‘‘ The Mega- 


lithic Culture of Indonesia,’’ Chapters VIII e.s. 
2 Chinnery 282-3. 8 Seligman i. 304 e.s. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 125 


three Murray Islands. Two heroes of Mer are reputed to have 
been the first to build the large weirs for catching fish which they 
also introduced in the central islands.’’ + More will be said about 
the heroes of the Torres Straits in later chapters, but it is clear 
that they are associated in tradition with those cultural elements 
that were ascribed to the archaic civilization, particularly food- 
plants. 

Faint traces exist in Australia, in the shape of reported stone 
circles, taro growing wild, stone pestles and mortars and neolithic 
implements, of the former presence of civilized peoples with a 
culture similar to that of the archaic civilization. It has long 
been held that the civilization of the Australians is indigenous in 
origin, although in the past few years a revolt has sprung up 
against that point of view. Many reasons exist for concluding 
that the Australians have derived much of their civilization from 
outside, but it must not be forgotten that the Australians have 
something to say on the matter. 

In South-East Australia certain groups of tribes have traditions 
of beings more or less human in form, to whom they owe their 
civilization. These beings were the predecessors and prototypes 
of the blacks, who believe in their former, and even their present, 
existence. Their wanderings over Central Australia, the origin 
of the present native race, and of the sacred ceremonies, are 
embodied in the legends and preserved by oral tradition. The 
Mura-muras, as they are called by some tribes, found the ancestors 
of the Australians as half-formed beings and made them into 
human shapes. In a legend belonging to the Urabunna, the 
Kuyani, and the southern tribes as far as Spencer Gulf, it is said 
that two Mura-mura youths, coming from the north, travelled 
through the land, introducing the stone knife for circumcision. 
‘After thus showing themselves in many places as life-givers, 
they turned back northwards, and at Lake Eyre one went to the 
west, and the other to the east and then to the north, taking 
everywhere the Tula and introducing its use. Thus they still 
wander, showing themselves at times as living and as life-givers.” 8 
These Mura-muras are now said to inhabit trees, and to be visible 
to the medicine-men.* Howitt comments upon these and other 
similar tales as follows: ‘‘ They recognize a primitive time before 
man existed, and when the earth was inhabited by beings, the 
prototypes of, but more powerful in magic than, the native tribes. 
Those beings, if they did not create man, at least perfected him 
from some unformed and scarcely human creatures.” ® 
In addition to the Mura-mura youths, some Australian natives 
believe in what are termed “ All-Fathers,”’ beings who have caused 
an immense amount of discussion. The natives have accounts 
of these great beings: “* The Narrinyeri call the Supreme Being 
by the names Nurrundere and Martummere. He is said to have 


1 Haddon i. 183-4. 2 Howitt 475. 3 Id., 475-7. 
* Id., 482. ° Id., 487. 


126 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


made all things on the earth, and to have given to men the weapons 
of war and hunting, and to have instituted all the rites and cere- 
monies which are practised by the aborigines, whether connected 
with life or death. ... Nurrundere went to Wyirrawarre, 
taking his children with him” (Wyirrawarre being the sky). 
Again: *‘ The Wiimbaio spoke of Nurelli with the greatest rever- 
ence. He was said to have made the whole country with the 
rivers, trees and animals. He gave to the blacks their laws, and 
finally ascended to the sky, where they pointed him out as one 
of the constellations. He is said to have had two wives, to have 
carried two spears, and his place of ascension is pointed out at 
Lake Victoria.”” Bunjil of the Kulin was a being of the same sort. 
He taught them the arts of life, and finally went up to the sky- 
land with all his sons. 'The Kurnai believe in a being, called 
Mungan-ngaua, who is the equivalent of Bunjil. He lived long 
ago on the earth, taught the Kurnai of that time how to make 
implements, nets, canoes, weapons, ‘‘in fact, everything they 
knew.’ He also gave them the name they have from their 
ancestors. His son Tundun, the ancestor of the Kurnai, finally 
went to the sky.} 

All these beings are practically identical: ‘‘ It seems quite 
clear that Nurrundere, Nurelli, Bunjil, Mungan-ngaua, Daramu- 
lum and Baiame all represent the same being under different 
names. ‘To this may be reasonably added Koin of the Lake 
Macquarie tribes, Maamba, Birral and Kohin of those on the 
Herbert River, thus extending the range of this belief certainly 
over the whole of Victoria and of New South Wales, up to the 
eastern boundaries of the tribes of the Darling River. If the 
Queensland coast tribes are included, then the western bounds 
might be indicated by a line drawn from the mouth of the Murray 
River to Caldwell, including the Great Dividing Range, with some 
of the fall inland in New South Wales. This would define the 
part of Australia in which a belief exists in an anthropomorphic 
supernatural being, who lives in the sky, and who is supposed to 
have some kind of influence on the morals of the natives. No 
such belief seems to obtain in the remainder of Australia, although 
there are indications of a belief in anthropomorphic beings 
inhabiting the sky-land. That part of Australia which I have 
indicated as the habitat of tribes having that belief is also the 
area where there has been the advance from group marriage to 
individual marriage, from descent in the female line to that in the 
male line; where the primitive organization under the class 
system has been more or less replaced by an organization based 
on locality; in fact, where those advances have been made to 
which I have more than once drawn attention in this work.” 2 

It is necessary to adopt some attitude towards those beliefs. 
It is often assumed ® that the belief in them has developed in the 
minds of the natives themselves, and that they do not represent 


+ Howitt 488-493. * Id., 499-500. 3 Id., 506 es. 


THE SUCCESSION OF CULTURES 127 


any real tradition of an alien race. It seems to me that such a 
point of view can only be adopted by those who deliberately 
ignore the actual circumstances of Australian civilization. In 
British New Guinea, right through the New Hebrides, in New 
Caledonia, are ample traces of the former presence of people far 
above the existing population in civilization, who probably came 
into the region as miners and pearl-fishers. Australian beliefs in 
culture-heroes are not common property, but are only told to 
men who have undergone a process of initiation.t Their careful 
preservation must have some traditional value. These traditions 
relate that the Australians owe their culture and social organization 
to strangers belonging to the sky-world, their indebtedness even 
extending to household objects such as nets. Why disbelieve 
them ? It is useless to say that the natives invented their material 
culture, their stone implements, their pestles and mortars and 
their complicated social organization, and then decided to group 
themselves in certain ways so that peoples with one form of social 
organization held one form of belief, while people with another 
held a different form of belief. There is no sign whatever of such 
an arrangement. The Australians do not claim to be culture 
carriers: in this way they differ from the Polynesians, who say 
that their ancestors came into Polynesia with various elements of 
culture. Tales told of such beings form part of the most precious 
knowledge that the community possesses, and for this reason 
they must be studied seriously. If, as is claimed, these beings are 
the traditional representatives of the archaic civilization, then the 
study of fresh groups of facts about them should reveal new 
relationships between them and the archaic civilization; they 
cannot be put on one side as beings created by the native mind 
to explain customs already in existence. I shall consequently 
accept the tradition that culture was introduced, until it is dis- 
proved by irrefutable evidence. 

This marks the end of the first part of the book. The setting for 
the next phase of the discussion has been formed, and attention 
must now be paid to the constitution of the archaic civilization 
itself, and to the means whereby it transformed itself when giving 
rise to its successors. The story, as already told, is somewhat as 
follows. Into a large region tenanted by food-gatherers has come 
a civilization characterized by certain cultural elements, irrigation, 
the use of stone for construction, pottery-making, the use of 
metals, the carving of stone images and the manufacture of 
polished stone implements. The introducers were men seeking 
for various things, who settled where they found them, and in- 
troduced their distinctive culture to varying degrees. In the 
course of time the communities thus established gave rise to 
daughter settlements, which usually lacked some of the original 
elements of culture. These derived communities in time gave 
rise to others in a yet lower stage of civilization. And so on. 


1 Id., 526. 


128 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


The final result of this process, continued for centuries, is seen in 
a number of communities, differing in culture, but all derived 
from those of the original archaic civilization. 

This point of view is obviously opposed to that of students who 
are apt to use the present culture of a community as a means of 
gauging its place in the scheme of development of civilization. 
They tend to ignore tradition, which is a trustworthy witness of 
the past. 

Any close student of ethnology knows that the theoretical side 
of the study has made but little progress, and this is due, in great 
measure, to the contempt shown by so many students for native 
tradition. The claim on the part of a community of low culture 
to have been descended from a royal family is marked down as 
nonsense, whereas it may be, and probably is, true. The idea of 
universal steady, continual upward cultural progress must be 
given up, once and for all, as contrary to patent facts ; and it must 
be recognized that civilization is an artificial product which can 
only thrive in certain soils, and is apt to wither or die in fresh 
surroundings. Far from low culture meaning primitiveness in 
time, it would seem invariably, putting on one side the food- 
gatherers, to mean degeneration. On the basis of the facts 
recorded in the past chapters, I shall consider the culture of all 
communities in the region, with the exception of obvious intru- 
sions, such as the Aryans, as derivatives of the archaic civiliza- 
tion, even when their culture is as low as that of Australia, for I 
believe that, prior to the coming of the archaic civilization, India, 
Indonesia, Oceania and America were peopled by tribes with as 
much native culture as is exhibited by the Punan of Borneo, the 
Déné of the Mackenzie basin in Canada, the Paiute of Utah and 
others, that is to say, entirely by food-gatherers. 


CHAPTER X 
THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


PROPOSE now to examine several aspects of the archaic 
I civilization and its successors. Political, economic, social 

and religious institutions will be compared, and culture- 
sequences will be observed, in order to see how the archaic civiliza- 
tion transformed itself in giving rise to its successors. The survey 
will begin with Egypt and work eastward to America. This is the 
direction followed by known cultural movements, for instance, 
that of the Polynesians, and it is in accordance with the known 
facts of chronology. 

This chapter and the two following will be concerned with ruling 
classes, and their réle in the development of civilization. For 
the first time Egypt becomes prominent in the discussion, but it 
will be so henceforth till the end. The examination will begin with 
an account of a remarkable group of people called The Children 
of the Sun, who are closely connected with the archaic civilization. 

The study of the records of ancient Egypt and Sumer has shown 
that the earliest rulers were identified with the gods. In Egypt 
Osiris, the prototype of the kings, was a great national god. 
“In the sculptures, as well as in the hieroglyphs, it is always in 
the guise of a king that Osiris appears, and this aspect, too, is 
inseparable from his myth and his cult. .’ It is often said 
that Osiris was a vegetation god, the personification of fertility, 
but this aspect is secondary. In the words of Dr. Alan Gardiner : 
“A few early passages from the Pyramid Texts and elsewhere 
have been quoted in support of the interpretation of Osiris as the 
source of all vegetable life ; but apart from the feasts the evidence, 
so far as the Old Kingdom i is concerned, must be admitted to be 
very scanty and indecisive, and is completely outweighed by the 
evidence testifying to his kingly character.” 1 The identity 
between the dead king and Osiris is borne out in the Pyramid 
Texts of the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties: ‘‘ As he (Osiris) lives, 
this king Unis lives; as he dies not, this king Unis dies not; as 
he perishes not, this king Unis perishes not. . (Oh, Osiris) 
thy body is the body of this king Unis, thy flesh is the flesh of 
this king Unis, thy bones are the bones of this king Unis.” ? After 


1 Gardiner iii. For a discussion of the connexion between early kings 
and fertility, see Elliot Smith xx. 29 e.s. 2 Breasted iv. 143 e.s. 
9 129 


130 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


death the king was identified with Osiris, but during life he was 
identified with Horus, the son of Osiris : thus a complete identity 
existed between the early kings of Egypt and the gods.! 

Sumer is a parallel case: ‘‘ Among the Sumerians their rulers 
from the most remote antiquity were regarded always as closely 
related to deity. . . . They were tangible manifestations of the 
beautiful Tammuz child, the beloved of the great mother goddess. 
A... liturgy sung in wailings for Tammuz has a passage in 
which five deified kings of the dynasty of Isin are identified with 
the dying god.” 2. The kings of Sumer were supposed to be the 
descendants of those who had escaped the Flood that destroyed 
mankind, and were thought to be sent by the gods to the earth 
to restore peace and prosperity, the first of these kings being 
Dungi, the son of the great goddess Ninsun.? Tammuz was the 
god of vegetation, and the identification of the king with him 
‘“ was based upon an ancient belief that some mysterious con- 
nexion existed between the king and nature.” * The king was 
supposed to control life on earth, rain, sunshine and harvests, 
and in certain festivals held in honour of Tammuz, the king . 
played the part of the god. 

In Egypt and Sumer a transformation took place in which the 
king, instead of being identified with a god of vegetation and 
fertility, was looked upon as a manifestation of the sun-god. In 
Egypt this took place about 2750 B.c. at the beginning of the 
Fifth Dynasty, when a dynasty connected with Heliopolis gained 
possession of the throne of Egypt.° Re, the sun-god, was the 
great god of the Heliopolitans. As under the previous régime, the 
king was identified not with Re, but with his son, also, like the 
son of Osiris, called Horus.* This identification was accomplished 
at the coronation, when the ka, the double of the hawk, which 
bird was intimately associated with Horus, descended from the 
sky and incarnated itself in the king. When the king died, the 
hawk-double returned to Horus, to be incarnated in the next 
occupant of the throne.’ To show his divine nature, the king was 
given several names.® He had a divine birth. The sun-god told 
the king that he alone had created him; ‘ Life was an emission 
of fertilizing light and the creating word ”’ ; thence the epithets of 
“‘ master of the rays ”’ and of “‘ creator by the voice ” or “‘ utterer 
of words ”’ which are given to all those who have the power of 
demiurges. Above all, Re, the sun, was the creator par excellence, 
and the agents of his power were his eye, the sun, Eye of Horus, 
and his voice, ‘‘ the voice of heaven, the thunder.” When the 
god made or procreated a king, he gave him the gift of life, strength 
and duration, in the form of a magnetic fluid, so that in his veins 
ran the “liquid of Re, the gold of the gods and goddesses, the 


1 Gardiner iii. 124, 2 Langdon iv. 31. ye Onai W> Dy sicko 
gfe (+ Pome Sy Waka’) + 5 Breasted v. 121 es. 
® Moret i. 8, 13. 7 Id., iii. 196. 8 Idsri. 17 Oe 


® Id., i. 39 @5. 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 131 


luminous fluid from the sun, source of all life, strength and per- 
sistence.” !_ This fluid the king transmitted to the crown prince, 
who was associated with him. The accession to the throne of the 
crown prince was supposed to be due to divine intervention.? 
After the accession of the solar dynasty it was believed that the 
king was the actual son of Re, the sun-god, and this period marks 
the first appearance of the Children of the Sun. 

. The Egyptians of the Fifth Dynasty thus had thorough-going 
ideas of the divine nature of their kings, and it is doubtful whether 
the identity between royalty and divinity was carried so far in any 
other state. Being a god the king had, theoretically, power over 
the lives of his subjects and the soil of the kingdom. “ With his 
cortege of animals tamed by his charms, with his ureeus round his 
head, his nape protected by the hawk or vulture, he goes escorted 
by a lion. The Egyptians dare not look at their king. The king 
could bring on rain, make sunshine; he was master of magic, 
the pupil of Thoth the great magician ; he was master of thunder, 
the urzus spitting the fire and his voice being the thunder, he 
brandishes his sceptre like a thunderbolt. As king of the harvest 
he turns over the earth and presides over the sowing. Sickle in 
hand he cuts the grain.”’ 3 From him therefore could be expected 
the same benefits as from the gods themselves. 

In Sumer, although the first gods and the first kings were, as in 
Egypt, connected with vegetation and water and fertility, later 
on the chief gods are solar gods, and the kings are also Children of 
the Sun. Tammuz himself was identified with the sun-god,* 
Shamash, but probably this aspect is late. The gods of Babylon, 
such as Marduk and his equivalents, were solar in nature, and the 
early kings were looked upon as their incarnations. 

Egypt and Sumer, therefore, had an early phase of society in 
which the kings were identified with gods associated with water, 
vegetation and fertility. This phase was followed by another 
with kings identified with the sun-god, who has to some extent 
usurped the place of the vegetation god, the dead king. The 
kings are now the divine Children of the Sun, and, in Babylon, are 
remembered in the guise of Gilgamesh, the hero of the great epic.? 
But the custom of deification of kings did not persist in Babylon 
and Assyria as in Egypt. The pre-Semitic kings of Sumer were 
deified ; so was the Semitic dynasty of Hammurabi, under which 
the sun-god Shamash became so prominent. ‘‘ This custom, 
inherited from the Sumerians, seems to have been gradually 
discontinued in Babylon after the Semites became the predominant 
race, probably because they regarded their kings, as did also the 
Assyrians, as containing the spirit of the gods, and therefore their 
(more or less divine) representatives on earth.” * Thus the 
deification of kings belongs to the early phase of development, 

1 Moret i. 48. 2 Id., i. 78-9. 3 Id., ili. 210-19. 


* Langdon i. 31. 5 Pinches i. 90. 
6 Pinches i. 90: Barton 168-9. 


132 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


and the culture sequence in Babylonia is one in which kings 
become less divine. 

No trace can be detected, in India, of a stage corresponding to 
that of Osiris and Tammuz in Egypt and Sumer, for the earliest 
known_ kings are of solar descent. It was formerly thought that 
the Aryans found in India peoples lower in culture than them- 
selves. The Vedas, and the other early compositions, recount 
struggles with people called Asuras (Nagas, Danavas, Dasyus, and 
so on). The school of Max Miiller interpreted these struggles as 
descriptions of the contest between the rising sun and the rain- 
clouds ; but it is now recognized that the Asuras were actual men 
higher in culture than the Aryans. They were probably the 
rulers of the Dravidian kingdoms which existed in India before 
the arrival of the Aryans. 

The chief deity of the Aryans of India was Indra, the war-god. 
He slew the serpent Ahi: ‘ With his vast destroying thunderbolt, 
Indra struck the darkling mutilated Vritra ; as the trunks of trees 
felled by the axe, so lies Ahi prostrate on the earth.” 2 Again: 
‘‘ Indra, hero, keep up the strength wherewith thou hast crushed 
Vritra, the spider-like son of Danu, and let open the light to the 
Arya. The Dasyu has been set aside on the left hand.” 3 The 
Danavas and Dasyu mentioned here are Asuras, enemies of the 
Aryans. Who was this Ahi or Vritra ? Probably he was, accord- 
ing to Oldham, a king. For the Bundadish of the Persians 
mentions Azidahaka, who overthrew Yima the first mortal.4 
The name Azidahaka was borne by a dynasty which ended with 
Bevarasp, who was overthrown by Feridun and condemned to be 
bound to Mt. Demavand, and has been equated to Astyges, who 
was overthrown by Cyrus.® ‘ It seems,” says Oldham, ‘‘ that the 
kings of Media and other neighbouring countries, down to the 
time of Astyges, were serpent-worshippers, and were known by the 
dynastic title of Azi-dahaka. They doubtless all belonged to the 
same race, if not to the same tribe, as that Azidahaka who ‘ sawed 
Yima in twain.’’’® So possibly the Ahi or Vritra who was over- 
thrown by Indra was a king. This suggestion is supported in the 
Mahabharata, where it says that Vritra was “the prince of the 
Daityas (another name for the Asuras) who occupied the whole 
earth and the heavens.” * Mention is made in the Vishnu Purana 
of a certain Ahi Naga, who was one of the royal family of Ajudha.® 

It must be remembered that the Asuras were ruling families : 
and not the common people. In civilization they were far in 
advance of the Aryans ‘It would seem, indeed, as if the Asuras 
had reached a higher degree of civilization than their Aryan rivals. 
Some of their castles were . . . places of considerable importance. 
And, in addition to this, wealth and luxury, the use of magic, 
superior architectural skill, and ability to restore the dead to life, 


1 Bhandarkar 76 e.s. 2 Oldham 32. 3 Id., 35. 
4 Id., 37: Carnoy 312 e.s. 6 Id., 3lé © 1dips4h 
7 Id., 46. 8 H. H. Wilson 386. 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 133 


were ascribed to the Asuras by Brahmanical writers.”” The 
Aryans got from them the knowledge of astronomy. The 
Asuras are credited with the foundation of many important cities 
in India, among them Taxila, Champa, Multan (Hiranyapura), 
Kosambi and others. Their chief centre was the traditional Patala, 
situated somewhere in the valley of the Indus, whence many 
colonizing movements set out. ‘‘ Hiranyapura, the city of the 
great Asura Hiranyakasipu, and the scene of the man-lion avatar. 
(of Vishnu) was, according to tradition, the present Multan. The 
great temple of the Sun, at this city, was celebrated throughout 
India from the earliest period to the time of the Moslem invasion.” 4 

The Asura colonies of South India appear to have been Dravidian 
kingdoms. One of them, the result of a defeat at the hands of the 
Aryans, was in a land ruled over by a Naga raja, that is an Asura, 
which was called the ‘‘ Land of Gems,”’ and was situated under 
the sea. The people there had ships and fished for pearls.2 This 
suggests affinities between the Asuras, Dravidians, and the people 
of the archaic civilization. 

Certain evidence implies relationships between the ruling houses 
of North and South India, for Ravana, a ruler of Ceylon, an Asura, 
whose grandfather lived in Patala,* was chief of the serpents or 
Nagas. Ancient legends relate that the Hindus on their arrival 
in South India fought with chiefs of Naga, that is Asura, descent, 
who had the serpent banner and the title of Supreme Lord of 
Bhogavati, thus claiming descent from the Naga rajas of Patala.* 
Evidently the Asuras had founded colonies in South India. 
_“ Some of these colonies were in the very positions occupied by 
the Dravidian kingdoms; and there can be little doubt that 
Asura colonists were the founders of these kingdoms.’ Linguisti- 
cally many peoples of Northern India in pre-Aryan times were 
allied to the Dravidians of South India. That the Northern Indian 
Dravidians were the kindred of those of South India is made 
probable by the fact that ‘“‘Neither the subjugation of the 
Dravidians by the Aryans, nor the expulsion from Northern India 
of the southern Dravidians by the Aryans, is recognized by any 
Sanskrit authority or any Dravidian tradition.’’> Another bond 
of union between the Asuras and the Dravidians, lies in their 
common possession of the cult of the cobra, the Naga, with which 
the ruling families were often connected. It is usual to find 
images of Naga deities or kings protected by a hood of Nagas, just 
as the urzus protects the head of the Pharaoh. 

In Northern India, in the valley of the Chenab, are tribes 
claiming Naga descent, called Takkha, who have serpent gods. 
** The forms of worship and the architecture of the temples have 
probably undergone little change since the days of the Mahabhar- 
ata.’”’ The cobra, or Naga, is sacred to them. Their temples are 
dedicated to old rulers, such as Sesh Nag, Tahkt Nag, Prithu Nag, 


1 Oldham 53-4. 2 Id., 56-7. 3 Id., 61-2. 
4 Id., 61, 62, 63. 5 Id., 148 es. 


184 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


who are therein worshipped in human form with multiple cobra- 
heads to protect them. The sun is carved on the roof of the temple, 
and ritual use is made of tridents, incense-burning, lamps, and 
iron scourges like those.portrayed in the hands of Osiris in Egypt.+ 
The temple services include sacrifices of sheep and goats, votive 
offerings, incense-burning, cireumambulation of the temple, music 
and dancing. Attached to each temple is an inspired prophet 
called the Chela,? who. is the mouthpiece of the god, and not a 
magician or sorcerer. Self-torture is customary during the cere- 
monies for fine weather, and human sacrifice was formerly 
practised. Attached to the temple is a sacred grove. 

The main features of Dravidian ritual are said to correspond to 
those of the Naga tribes of the Panjab. ‘* Some of the deities, too, 
are the same. Then, the sacred groves, the temple being vested 
in the village communities, free from Brahmanic control, the non- 
Brahmanic priests, the inspired prophets, the religious dances, 
the circumambulation of the temples, the use of flagellation, and 
of the ceremonial attending on the erection of the Dhwaja or 
standard of the deity, are all common to the ancient, but no longer 
orthodox, Hinduism of Northern India, and to the unorthodox 
Dravidian religion of the south.’ Dancing-girls constitute yet 
another link between the two groups of peoples. 

Other evidence of connexion between the Nagas, or Asuras, 
and the Dravidians, is given by the fact that a grove is found in 
the south-west corner of each Nair house in South India. One 
such grove near Travancore is the property of a family whose 
ancestors are said to have been spared when the Khandava forest 
of the Panjab was burned by Krishna and Arjuna.® Each male 
member of the family was called Vasuki, the name of the king of 
Patala, the great city of the Nagas in the Panjab. The men are 
priests of the temple, and the women of the family carry images 
of serpents in processions. 

For various reasons, therefore, the Asuras can be equated to the 
Dravidians.* Oldham thus sums up his discussion of the matter : 
‘* Taking into consideration all the evidence which has been put 
forward, the only possible conclusion seems to be that the Dravid- 
ians, of the south of India, were of the same stock as the Asuras or 
Nagas of the north.” ” 

Some time has been spent over this matter because of its im- 
portance. In this and later chapters comparison will be made 
between the beliefs and practices of the Aryan-speaking peoples of 
India, and those with whom they came into conflict, the peoples 
recorded by them as Asuras, Nagas, Danavas, Daityas, and so 
forth. I shall assume, as a working hypothesis, that these peoples 
can be equated to the Dravidian peoples of historical times. The 


1 Oldham 86-7. 2 Id., 94. 3 Id., 99-100. 
4 Id., 154-5. 5 “¢ Mahabharata’? Adi Parva, Khandava cexxix. 
6 Cf. Hewitt, 1888, 331. 7 Oldham 165, 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 135 


value of this hypothesis will be tested in later chapters, where it 
will be found able to bear any weight laid upon it. 

The rulers of the Asuras included Children of the Sun, divine 
beings, incarnations of the sun-god himself, and thus far different 
from the kings of the Aryans, who contented themselves with 
claiming divine descent. Like the kings of Egypt, Dravidian 
rulers claimed the power of controlling the elements. They were 
even accepted as divine by the Brahmins, the most sacred beings 
of the Aryans; an indication of their prestige.? 

Those parts of Indonesia where distinct traces of the archaic 
civilization can be detected are associated with the Children of 
the Sun. The chiefs of the gold-producing region of Sonabait, 
who once ruled Timor, are the descendants of the sun-gods. In 
Central Celebes, the Toradja claim that they owe their civilization 
to Lasaeo, the Sun-Lord, who came to live among them. He 
married one of their women, and had children. His sons went to 
places, such as Napu and Luwu, that possessed gold, and there 
founded lines of chiefs. This agrees with the Luwu version in 
which the rulers are descended from Puang Matowa, the chief deity, 
who came from the sky and married a Luwu woman. This, again, 
agrees with the general mode of origin of Bugi ruling houses, among 
which is that of Luwu, which is from a being of the sky world who 
marries a princess of the underground world, and their descendants 
form ruling houses in the various Bugi States. Conformably with 
his mode of origin the Toradja look upon the raja of Luwu as an 
incarnate deity. He is the personification of the old traditions ; 
he is supposed to have white blood ; and no one may look at him 
without serious consequences.?® 

The traditions of the Bontoc of Luzon possess traces of the 
Children of the Sun. Lumawig, who came and civilized them, 
married a Bontoc woman, but their children were all killed. If 
they had lived it is probable that they would have been Children 
of the Sun, for Lumawig corresponds exactly to Lasaeo of the 
Toradja. The Bontoc tell a story about the Children of the Sun, 
which shows that they have had experience of these beings.* 

The bringers of the use of stone and other features of the archaic 
civilization to Minahassa in North-East Celebes, claimed solar 
descent. Their ancestress was Lumimu’ut, who married her son 
To’ar, the Sun: thus they were Children of the Sun.°® 

The solar race of India formerly ruled over certain islands in 
Indonesia, and in Bali the sun-cult is still an important feature of 
the religion. The Children of the Sun who ruled over Java were 
not, as has been seen (see p. 98), of the same wave of migration 
as those responsible for the archaic civilization of the region, but 
represent a later movement, led by members of the same ruling 


1 Oldham 71. 2 Id., 72-3. 

3 Perry vii. 75: Kruyt and Adriani I. 151. 

4 Id., vii. 66, 72, 96, 115, 135: Jenks ii. 

5 [d., vii. 78, 79, 91. 6 Friederich: Liefrinck. 


136 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


family. Thus both the great civilizing movements into Indonesia 
were led by the Children of the Sun. 

Farther to the east the Children of the Sun ruled in the past in 
Ponape of the Carolines, where are so many traces of the archaic 
civilization. These kings were called Chau-le-leur, chau meaning 
both king and sun. They lived at Matalanim, formerly called 
chau-nalan, which means ‘‘ the Sun.’ 1 Their successors on the 
island do not claim such an exalted origin. The Children of the 
Sun still rule in San Cristoval, where are so many evidences of the 
archaic civilization, such as pyramids, dolmens, and so forth. 
They are also present in New Caledonia: when a chief dies it is 
said “The Sun has set.’ ? Thus in those parts of Melanesia 
and Micronesia where the signs of the archaic civilization are most 
prominent, the Children of the Sun form the ruling class. They 
have disappeared elsewhere, if they ever existed. 

It is now necessary to find if the Children of the Sun were 
present among the ancestors of the Polynesians. Ample evidence 
exists to show that the early chiefs in Polynesia were equated to 
gods. Fijian chiefs were supposed to control the weather and the 
crops. ‘“‘ The people of Western Vanua Levu (Fiji) believe that 
they have less food now than formerly because the government 
head of the province is not their proper chief; when the last one 
who was their proper chief died ‘ the food was buried with him.’ 

Both chiefs and gods have certain things tabooed for their 
special use; both have the miraculous power of mana, the belief 
in which has been claimed by some as an elementary form of 
magico-religious superstition ; chiefs and gods have cloaks of red 
and yellow feathers ; chiefs and idols have crests on their heads. 
Chiefs in Fiji are formally installed, the ceremony suggesting a 
rebirth, the probable meaning being that the chief thereby be- 
comes a god.” 3 The great chief of Mbau was the Roko Tui mbau ; 
he was sacred, and “ at his death no cry of lamentation might be 
uttered, but a solemn blast was sounded on the conch-shell, as at 
the passing of a god.’? * These sacred chiefs seem to have ruled 
widespread in Polynesia: in Fiji they were called Tui, and this 
title was also found in Samoa, Tonga, Rotuma, and Tokelau. In 
some places this title once existed, but has been lost.° A Tahitian 
king was, by virtue of the coronation ceremony, made into an 
incarnate god.® He was declared to be the actual son of Oro, the 
great god of the people, who had been born at Opoa in Raiatea, 
the centre of so much Polynesian religion. ‘‘ It was not only 
declared that Oro was the father of the king, as was implied by the 
address of the priest when arraying him with the sacred girdle, 
and the station occupied by his throne, when placed in the temple 
by the side of the deities, but it pervaded the terms used in 
reference to his whole establishment. His houses were called the 


1 Christian iil. 188; iv. 80: Rivers x. 441. 2 Glaumont i. 129. 
$ Hocart iii. 637, 640. * B. Thompson ii. 61. 
5 Hocart vi. 44. 6 Ellis III. 108 e.s. 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 137 


aorai, the clouds of heaven ; anuanua, the rainbow, was the name 
of the canoe in which he voyaged ; his voice was called thunder ; 
the glare of the torches in his dwelling was denominated lightning ; 
and when the people saw them in the evening, as they passed near 
his abode, instead of saying the torches were burning in the palace, 
they would observe that lightning was flashing in the clouds of 
heaven. When he passed from one district to another on the 
shoulders of his bearers, instead of speaking of his travelling from 
one place to another, they always used the word mahuta, which 
signifies to fly ; and hence they described his journey by saying, 
that the king was flying from one district of the island to another.” } 

Enough has been said to establish the divine nature of some of 
the Polynesian chiefs. The Polynesians came from some place in 
the west, and have wandered about the Pacific from certain 
centres. In the course of these travels they have lost much of 
their original culture, and have in many cases ceased to make the 
stone monuments for which their ancestors were so famous. As 
they now possess divine chiefs it is natural to wish to know if they 
formerly were ruled over by the Children of the Sun. Since the 
archaic civilization all over the region shows signs of similarity, 
it is possible that, if the Children of the Sun ruled in one place, 
they may have ruled in another, and that, in Polynesia, later 
events may have effectively masked their former presence. 

In order to determine the earliest form of ruling class possessed 
by the Polynesians, use will have to be made of tradition and myth. 
I have already defined my attitude towards tradition (see p. 104). 
But in the case of myths it is not so easy to establish any one 
position. It seems best to conclude that myths contain both fact 
and fiction, and that it is our business to disentangle them. For 
that reason I shall try to confine myself to those myths that come 
nearest in historical sequence to actual history. That is to say, 
when faced with a long story of the creation of the earth and of 
man, and of the peopling of certain lands, I shall consider, for the 
present, only those statements that refer to the more immediate 
ancestors of man, and shall leave on one side, as far as possible, 
the preceding epochs. It is obvious that migrating people will 
take with them beliefs that will be out of place in their new home, 
and will also have certain traditions concerning their arrival in 
their new home. The two sets of belief will be preserved, and 
perhaps mixed, and the process thus set up will eventually produce 
complications. For that reason, bearing in mind the movements 
of the Polynesians, the study of the mythology of the eastern 
Pacific may be more difficult than that of Samoa, for the Eastern 
Polynesians have had greater historical experience of migration. 
It may also happen that, in the homeland, the result of wars and 
invasions has been to break up much of the old civilization, and 
obscure the past to a great extent. The most hopeful process is 


1 Hllis III. iii. 113-14: Hawaiian sacred chiefs claim descent from gods, 
and rank accordingly. Beckwith 308. 


138 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


that of linking up communities in a time-sequence, and then trying 
to detect culture-sequences. In that way the story of the original 
peopling of the last place occupied may, perhaps, give some idea 
as to the time and circumstances in which the migration left the 
former home. The former home may possess a tradition of 
colonization, and thus carry the story one step farther back : 
and so on as far back as possible. Thus, for example, the present- 
day Maori claim to have come from Tahiti or Rarotonga, and say 
that their ancestors were certain famous men who lived in other 
parts of the Pacific. I shall therefore try to trace back the ruling 
families of the Polynesians to their original homes, proceeding 
from one stopping-place to another, and relying on the general 
trustworthiness of their traditions as to the course of their migra- 
tions. In this way it will be possible to test the value of native 
tradition, as well as to obtain knowledge as to their original 
cultural conditions. 

One of the pivots of Eastern Polynesian civilization was the 
great marae of Opoa in the island of Raiatea near Tahiti, which, 
in early days, was a meeting-place for the peoples scattered in the 
surrounding groups. In later days this marae was sacred to Oro, 
the war-god of this part of the Pacific. But apparently this was 
not always so. Indirectly, from Hawaii, knowledge can be got 
of the circumstances of early days. Hawaii is connected with 
Tahiti, for traditions make the Hawaiians originate thence. 
Hawaiian traditions contain accounts of the conditions in Tahiti 
before the old civilization broke up. They tell of gods (akua) ; 
and of demi-gods (kupua), who are descended from the gods, 
possess supernatural powers, can change their shapes, bring the 
dead to life, fly from one place to another like the Tahitian kings, 
and at death return sometimes to their ancestors in the sky. 
Although the sun-cult is now absent from these islands, as well as 
the Children of the Sun, a great Hawaiian princess, in the tale of 
Laieikawi, marries a divine chief called “ Eyeball of the Sun,” 
who lives in a place called *‘ The Shining Heavens ” on the borders 
of Tahiti, the ancestral home of the Hawaiians.! The sun-god can, 
according to the Hawaiian story, come to earth: ‘“‘ The divine 
approach marked by thunder and lightning, shaken by earth- 
quakes and storm, indicates the kupua bodies in which the Sun 
travels in his descent to earth.”’ 2. Apparently the “‘ Eyeball of the 
Sun ’’ was a kupua, for his approach is Iferalded in the same way. 
He was divine and human at the same time, for he says: ‘* When 
the dry thunder peals again, then ceases, I have left the taboo 
house at the borders of Tahiti. I am at Kealchilani, my divine 
body is laid aside, only the nature of a taboo chief remains, and 
I am become a human being like you.” > These facts suggest that 
the Children of the Sun once lived on the borders of Tahiti in 


1 Beckwith 295, 300, 302, 303, 308, any 336, 568, 570. 
2 Id., 629. 3 Id., 568. 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 139 


“The Shining Heavens,” but that they have since disappeared, 
and have remained on in tradition as the kupua beings, who are 
so closely connected with the sky. This agrees with Fornander’s 
statement that Hiro, the first king of Raiatea, was great-grandson 
of the Sun.! 

In New Zealand some of the former Maori chiefs may have been 
Children of the Sun. For the human race originated from Tane, 
a being from the sky-world, and Kurawaka, ‘ the earth-formed 
Maid,” who was formed by Tike the god who fashioned the first 
men.” According to Mr. Elsdon Best, Tane was probably the 
Sun: “ Tane was the great generator, and the Maori fully grasped 
the power of the sun in causing growth.’’? The Maori also once 
possessed rites connected with the sun-cult.4 

In Hawaii and New Zealand, both colonized from Eastern 
Polynesia, the sun-cult and the Children of the Sun persist only 
in tradition, and their former existence can only be inferred. In 
the Eastern Pacific, Tahiti, Rarotonga, Mangaia and elsewhere, 
are traces of the past existence of the sun-cult, and also of extensive 
displacements of older gods by newer ones. In Raiatea, where is 
the great marae, it is said that Ra, the sun-god, married Tu-papa, 
or Tu-metua, who is identical with the youngest daughter of the 
great mother of the gods of Mangaia, and lives with her in the 
underworld. Thus traces of the sun-god persist in the place whence 
radiated cultural influences all over the Eastern Polynesia.> In 
Mangaia, a new god, Rongo, has displaced an older deity, Tan- 
garoa.® The dispossessed god was connected with the sky and, 
according to folk-tales, with the Sun, while Rongo is an under- 
world god.’ Tangaroa retired to Rarotonga, where the earliest 
ruling family was founded by a certain Kariki, who was connected 
with the famous marae of Raiatea, where is “* the stone seat of 
Aria ” (=Kariki).8 The family marae of Kariki is called Rangi- 
Maruka, or ‘* Manu’a (=Marika) in the skies.” Thus this family 
of Rarotonga was connected both with the marae at Opoa in 
Raiatea, and with the sky. It is also connected with a place called 
Manu’a, and not with Savai’i, the place where Rongo lives. 
Manu’a is in Samoa, and to it all Samoan traditions point as the 
starting-place of their history. Tahiti was probably colonized 
from Samoa. So, the nature of the first rulers of Mangaia and 
Rarotonga, as well as of the Tahiti group, will probably be dis- 
closed in Samoa. 

The history of Samoa has been warlike for at least seven 
centuries, and thus its beginnings are obscure. The clue given by 
the family of Kariki, the first king of Rarotonga, leads back to a 
part of Samoa called Manu’a, which consists of the islands of Tau, 


1 Fornander 44, n. 2: Stair iv. 104. 2 Best v. 151; xi. 139. 
3 Best xi. 138. 4 P. Smith vii. 24. 
5 Gill i. 6. 6 Pratt ii. 761. 


? In the chapters on the Underworld and the Dual Organization this dis- 
placement will be further discussed. 
8 Gill ii. 634. °Id., i, 425: 


140 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Ofu and Olosaga, of which the first only is of any importance, so 
that, when I speak of Manu’a, I shall mean Tau, and vice versa. 
According to universal Polynesian belief, the islands were lifted 
up from the bottom of the sea; and, in Samoa, Manu’a, that is 
Tau, was the first island to appear. We thus have, in native 
opinion, only to do with Tau, or Manu’a, when thinking of the 
origin of the ruling family of Rarotonga: Manu’a is “ The first 
resting-place of the Polynesian race . . . it is the sacred hearth- 
stone of the race.” 1 _ 

The origin myths of Samoa tell of the descent of the first ruling 
families and of the creation of men. In both cases the sun-gods 
are the originators.2 The ruling family of which Kariki was a 
member was descended from beings called Sa Tagaloa, who lived 
in the lowest region of the sky, and these beings were Children 
of the Sun.?. From them were derived the insignia of royalty, 
the titles and the magical virtue that belong to sacred chiefs 
descended from the beings of the sky-world.*? The Children of the 
Sun once lived in Tau, at a place called Lefaga, where was built 
the first fale-ula, or temple, the name of which means “ Shining 
House,”’ and represents the ninth heaven,* it thus corresponding to 
the “‘ Shining House ” of the “‘ Eyeball of the Sun ”’ that was on 
the borders of Tahiti, a place first colonized by men from the 
west—Fiji, Samoa or Tonga. 

The first settlement of human beings was at Fitiuta in Tau of 
Manu’a. Here was born Tagaloaui, a son of the sun, whose 
mother was Ui.> Ui came to Fitiuta from another country, Atafu, 
where they offered human sacrifice to the Sun.* Thus the ancestor 
of the ruling house of Fitiuta is descended from the Sun by a 
woman from a place where the Sun lived. Moreover, the people 
of Tutuila and Upolu, other islands of Samoa, were created by 
Tangaloa in a place called Malae-La, the “‘ Village of the Sun,”’ 
where he gave the command that the people of Samoa should 
always respect Manu’a.’ 

The claim to be descended from gods is not preposterous, for in 
Egypt the kings were divine, certainly when they became Children 
of the Sun. The ancestors of the ruling family of Samoa came 
from some place where lived the Children of the Sun. That again 
is not preposterous, for such people are definitely recorded in the 
Carolines, San Cristoval and New Caledonia, in direct connexion 
with the archaic civilization, and on the track of Polynesian 
migration. Samoan traditions evidently thus go back into the 
archaic civilization. So, from Egypt to the ends of the Pacific, 
the archaic civilization was apparently ruled over by the Children 
of the Sun, incarnate gods. These rulers have usually disappeared, 

1 Powell and Pratt 213. 2 Pratt iii. 293: F. Kramer I. 8, 22, 24. 

3 F. Kramer I. 382. 4 Id... 385, n.. 4: 

® Id., 370, 419. Some Samoan chiefs claim to belong to the Sa Tagaloa 
family. (Powell and Pratt 216.) 


$ Prattii. 122 es: She brought two stone images with her. (Pratt 121: 
Powell and Pratt 20.) 7 Id., ti. 274-5. 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 141 


lingering only in certain secluded spots. The present-day rulers 
do not make such high claims, but usually content themselves 
with divine descent. 

The case is no different in America. The earliest known kings 
claimed solar descent. Nothing is known directly of the rulers of 
the Maya while they were still in Guatemala, but they arrived in 

Yucatan ruled over by kings who probably claimed solar descent. 

In Mayapan, for example, the kings acted as the high priests of 
the national cult, and claimed descent from Kukulcan their 
culture-hero.! This Kukulcan was identical with a certain Zamna, 
who came from the west to Yucatan, and brought many arts and 
crafts with him. Zamna was a son of the Sun.? Thus the Maya 
kings were probably Children of the Sun. The history of royal 
families is confused in Mexico, owing to the many convulsions that 
have shaken the country. The beings credited with the foundation 
of the Maya and Mexican civilization are constantly referred to as 
gods, but there does not seem to be any evidence that the later 
kings were similarly regarded. At the same time, it is possible 
that the early rulers of Mexico were divine beings, Children of the 
Sun. For a certain tribe in Louisiana, called the Natchez, had 
ruling over them, at the time of the arrival of the Spaniards, the 
Children of the Sun. These men were descended from immigrants 
from a country in the direction of Mexico. It is said that, many 
years ago, there arrived a man and his wife, who came down from 
the sun. He came to bring to the people the rules of good govern- 
ment. He gave them certain laws, among them being the follow- 
ing: That no one must kill anyone except in self-defence ; no 
one must’ know any woman but his own ; people must not lie, get 
drunk or be avaricious, but must be ready to share with all.? 
This stranger further said that temples must be built in which 
there should be kept the eternal fire. He also brought down fire 
from the sun in the presence of all. The kings of the Natchez, 
called Suns, were intimately associated with their agriculture, and 
took a chief part in the agricultural ceremony, being the high 
priests of the sun-cult. They could bring on rain by fasting. 
This tradition, of the origin of a ruling family of Louisiana from 
the south-west, strongly suggests that the Mexicans were formerly 
ruled over by the Children of the Sun.* 

Wherever it is possible to examine the ruling classes of the 
archaic civilization, it is found that they were what are termed 
gods, that they had the attributes of gods, and that they usually 
called themselves the Children of the Sun. This is the case in 
Egypt, Sumeria, India, Indonesia, Micronesia, Melanesia, Poly- 
nesia, and America—that is, from one end of the region to the 
other. 

It is important to find that, in the earliest known phase of 
civilization, rulers had this exalted position, for thereby certain 


1 Spence 155. 2 Bancroft III. 462-3, 465, 
8 du Pratz 330-1. 4 Bancroft II. 146. 


142 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


problems can be solved, one of the most pressing being that of 
culture-heroes. A people often ascribes its culture to divine 
beings who visited them and then went away again. It is fre- 
quently said that this being was deified by the people, that they 
exalted him to the rank of deity on account of his great superiority 
in cultttre over themselves. It is now obvious.that this need not 
be the case at all, but that he may himself have claimed divine 
nature. It has already been stated that the characteristics of 
culture-heroes often constitute strong evidence of their connexion 
with the archaic civilization. The fact that the rulers of the 
archaic civilization were so often Children of the Sun can likewise 
be brought to help to identify these beings. For, in Indonesia, 
in one place certainly, and probably in others, the culture-heroes 
were Children of the Sun, and were associated with the cultural 
elements of the archaic civilization. Lasaeo, the culture-hero of 
the Toradja of Central Celebes, was a Sun-Lord. Lumawig, the 
culture-hero of the Bontoc of Luzon, was probably also a son of 
the Sun, for he belonged to the sky-world. It is also said that the 
Children of the Sun taught the Bontoc head-hunting. So it is 
possible to bring the culture heroes of the peoples of Indonesia 
into line with the former rulers of the archaic civilization, and to 
claim that the native traditions are not the product of jmagina- 
tion, but records of historical events. Apparently the only 
difference between the Children of the Sun as culture-heroes, and 
the Children of the Sun as the founders of ruling houses, lies in the 
fact that the former did not leave descendants to rule over the 
people among whom they stayed. So the claim that a people 
owes its culture to a divine being from the sky can be looked upon 
as meaning that they were visited in the past by men of the 
archaic civilization who made no permanent settlement. 

The American peoples have many traditions of culture-heroes. 
In the words of Brinton: ‘ The native tribes of this continent 
had many myths, and among them there was one which was so 
prominent and recurred with such strangely similar features in 
localities widely asunder, that it has for years attracted my 
attention, and I have been led to present it as it occurs among 
nations far apart, both geographically and in point of culture. 
The myth is that of the national hero, their mythical civilizer and 
teacher of the tribe, who, at the same time, was often identified 
with the supreme deity and the creator of the world. It is the 
fundamental myth of a very large number of American tribes, 
and on its recognition and interpretation depends the correct 
understanding of most of their mythology and religious life. 

“The outlines of the legend are to the effect that in some 
exceedingly remote time this divinity took an active part in 
creating the world and in fitting it to be the abode of men, and 
may himself have formed or called forth the race. At any rate, 
his interest in its advancement was such that he personally 

appeared among the ancestors of the nation, and taught them the 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 143 


useful arts, gave them the maize and other food-plants, initiated 
them into the mysteries of their religious rites, framed the laws 
which governed their social relations, and thus, having started 
them on the road to self-development, he left them, not suffering 
death, but disappearing in some way from their view. Hence it 
was nigh universally expected that at some time he would return. 

** The circumstances attending the birth of these hero-gods have 
great similarity. As a rule, each is a twin or one of four brothers 
born at one birth ; very generally at the cost of their mother’s life, 
who is a virgin, or at least had never been impregnated by mortal 
man. The hero is apt to come into conflict with his brother, or 
one of his brothers, and the long and desperate struggle resulting, 
which often involved the universe in repeated destructions, con- 
stitutes one of the leading topics of the myth-makers.”’ } 

These twins were the Children of the Sun, which is shown in 
many alegend. The Zuni, one of the tribes of the Pueblo Indians, 
say that they were formed first in the Womb of the Earth.? The 
great sun-god impregnated a foam cap with his rays, and produced 
twins, the Children of the Sun, to whom he gave knowledge and 
domination over men.? These twins went into the bowels of the 
earth, and, after many adventures, brought the Zuni out into this 
world, where, in conjunction with the priests, they ordained their 
social organization and institutions. Likewise the Hopi were 
led out of the underworld by the Twin Children of the Sun.® The 
Huron tale may be taken as another example. They were an 
agricultural tribe, with a highly developed culture similar to that 
of the southern peoples. In their cosmogony they say: “ In the 
beginning there was nothing but an endless sea under the pristine 
sky-world. From among the semi-divine people dwelling in the 
sky an ill-fated woman fell into the lower water regions. Water- 
fowl rescued her; and the human-like quadrupeds built an island 
for her on the Big Turtle’s back out of some mud secured from the 
bottom of the sea. While the island was being enlarged into a 
continent, the Small Turtle was sent into the sky to create 
luminaries. She made the sun, the moon and the stars out of 
lightning and assigned them their course along the various paths 
in the solid arched vault of the sky. The sun and the moon had 
to travel westward across the sky once a day ; but the world being 
flat and the heavy edges of the sky vault resting on the water 
around it, these luminaries could not return to their starting-point 
in the east. The Turtle, therefore, bored a passage under the 
earth, thus allowing them to proceed across the underworld at 
night, and, in the daytime, through the sky. Once a quarrel 
broke out between the divine but human-like sun and moon, the 


1 Brinton 27-8. 2 Cushing ii. 379. 

3 Id., 381-2. 4 Id., 382 e.s. 

5 Fewkes iv. 266. ‘‘ Every new variant of the story of the birth of the 
little god reiterates the statement that he and his twin brothers were sons of 
the Sun ”’ (id., i. 49). 


144 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


results of which are still felt to this day in their phase and varia- 
tions. On the island the woman gave birth to mysteriously 
begotten boy-twins, or—according to another tradition—to a 
daughter who died at the birth of her own twin children. Of the 
twins one was good, the other bad. Their mission was to prepare 
the island for the coming of man. All the good things came into 
this world through the good twin, and all evil through his wicked 
brother. The rival creators finally fought a duel to decide who 
would remain supreme on the island. The bad twin was slain 
by his more powerful brother, who restored the island and called 
the Indian man forth. As the good one could not entirely blot 
out the traces of his brother’s work, evil has survived to this day, 
to the greatest detriment of mankind. Death, so far unheard of, 
for the first time appeared at the downfall of the evil twin or, 
according to other versions, when the mother of the twins died. 
Both the deceased woman and her evil son have since remained in 
charge of the souls of the dead, in the underground or western 
world; and the Milky Way is the road along which the souls 
slowly proceed into their distant and peaceful abode. As to the 
good twin, it is believed that after he had taught man various arts 
and precepts, he established his new home far away in the east, 
where the sun rises. There he is still, subject to all the necessities 
of life, regulating the seasons from afar, overseeing the harvest 
and protecting his people.” 1 The good twin gave them their life 
in the beginning. ¥ 

The Indians of North America are probably the cultural descen- 
dants of the Maya. It is therefore in keeping with such a view 
that they should ascribe the beginnings of their civilization to the 
hap of the Sun, since those beings evidently ruled over the 

aya. 

North American peoples agree with those of Indonesia in claim- 
ing that their civilization was brought by the Children of the Sun, 
but they differ in stating that these culture-bringers were brothers, 
sometimes twins. The extraordinary nature and mode of origin 
of these twins will have to be explained. It is possible to suggest 
an explanation of the statement that their mother belonged to the 
sky-world, and bare her children on earth, or brought them to the 
_ earth. For the son of the Sun in Manu’a of Samoa had as mother 
Ui, who came from a place ruled over by the Sun (see p. 140); the 
Children of the Sun came to Manu’a from the sky (see p. 140) ; 
also the Great Eyeball of the Sun in Hawaiian tradition lived in 
The Shining Heavens on the borders of Tahiti (see p. 188). So 
the claim that a woman came from the sky may simply mean that 
she came from a place ruled over by the Children of the Sun. In 
that case the Children of the Sun can be put down as members of 
the ruling family of the archaic civilization, but their twin nature 
will have to be reserved for later discussion (see p. 328). 

This leads to the question of the culture-heroes of Australia. 


1 Barbeau ii. 7-8. Cf. also Dixon. 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 145 


They are divided into two groups. One consists of pairs of youths 
who wandered about the country civilizing tribes, and then departed 
to some other part of the earth. The other culture-heroes, the 
All-Fathers, as they are called, live now in the sky. It may be 
that the two youths correspond to the twin Children of the Sun of 
America. But what of the All-Fathers? They are connected 
with the sky, and thus presumably can be equated to the people 
of the archaic civilization. But why should they so differ from 
the other culture-heroes? This difficulty cannot be considered 
until other data have been adduced. It will be found that other 
remarkable cultural distinctions exist between the groups of tribes 
that hold these distinct beliefs (see p. 249). 

This discussion ends with the suggestion that the Children of 
the Sun were men who posed as incarnate gods, apparently with 
mothers more or less human. The accounts of times when gods 
walked the earth, that many people possess, may contain a 
historical foundation in the claims of these heroes. Such beings 
are of the past, and their memory persists to tantalize us with its 
vagueness. 


10 


CHAPTER XI 
THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 


HE Children of the Sun were closely connected with the 
archaic civilization. Their disappearance from the scene, 
which has so often happened, was accompanied by 
certain cultural transformations which will have to be dis- 
cussed. In this chapter it will be shown that the sun-cult was a 
constant feature of the archaic civilization, and that it disappeared, 
the sun-god being replaced usually by a war-god. It will also be 
shown that this change in deities was accompanied by a change 
in the habits of such communities, by the adoption of a more 
warlike behaviour. 

Once established the sun-cult was always prominent in Egyptian 
religion. But later on, under the rule of Thebes, the sun-god 
became more definitely warlike than in the earlier stage. 

In Babylonia and Assyria a definite transition to a war-god 
can be observed. Tammuz, the god of the Sumerians, was first 
connected with vegetation and fertility, and kings were indentified 
with him. Very soon, however, in Sumerian history, he is associ- 
ated with the sun-god Shamash, who is an important Babylonian 
god.! Although the religion of the Babylonians shows many 
signs of continuity with that of Sumeria, the religion of Assyria, 
a Babylonian colony, reveals traces of profound political changes. 
Ashur, the great god of the Assyrians, was a war-god.? He 
evidently was the product of a process of development such as 
produced Ramman or Rimmon, the Assyrian god of thunder, 
lightning, wind and storm, who was originally identified with 
Shamash, the Babylonian sun-god.* The culture-sequences in 
the case of the Sumerians, Babylonians and Assyrians show that 
the chief gods are first vegetation and fertility deities, then sun- 
gods, and then war-gods. 

In India the transformation is from sun-god to war-god, for 
there are no signs of the Tammuz-Osiris stage. The culture- 
sequences that can be observed are those between the Aryans 
and Asuras, and between the early and late stages of the Aryans 
themselves.4 The sun was a great god of the Asuras, and has 


1 Langdon i. 31. 2 Barton 221: Jastrow. 3 Td., 224 e.s. 

* By ‘‘ Aryans ’’ is meant ‘‘ peoples speaking Aryan languages.”’ Similarly 
with “‘ Dravidians’”’ and ‘‘ Austronesians.”’ 

146 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 147 


continued so in those parts of India under Dravidian influence. 
Peoples such as the Mundas of Chota Nagpur, who speak an 
Austronesian language, the Gonds, Khonds and other Dravidian 
tribes, have the sun-god as their chief deity. The sun is an 
important god among many of the Hindu sects of Southern India, 
the region where Dravidian influence is so powerful. The Aryan- 
speaking peoples, on the other hand, had Indra, a war-god, as 
their chief deity. So, in the culture-sequence between Aryans 
and Dravidians, the sun-god is followed by a war-god. But it is 
possible to go farther, and to establish a culture-sequence among 
the Aryans themselves. It is known that Indra had, some time 
before the compilation of the Rig Veda, supplanted a group of 
sun-gods, headed by Varuna, who were the children of Aditi, the 
great mother of gods and men.2 These sun-gods are common to 
the Aryans of India and those of Persia before the Zoroastrian 
reform, and among them is Mithra. So, among the Aryans 
themselves, a war-god had come to the front. Varuna himself 
lost his solar character, and became a creator god and god of 
waters. In Vedic India, as in Assyria, the sun-gods are trans- 
forming themselves, and also being supplanted by war-gods. 

A culture-sequence can be established in Indonesia. For in 
Borneo, the Kayan, who have immigrated later than the Hindus, 
have no sun-god, and no ruling class of Children of the Sun. Their 
supreme god is Laki Tenganan, who is not endowed with special 
functions,? but is looked upon as a fatherly being who watches 
over their interests. He is identical with the supreme being of 
the Kenyah and Klemantan, tribes whom the Kayan have 
civilized. He is apparently not the creator, but the Kayan are 
not clear on this point; at any rate he does not figure in the 
creation myth. The most important of their ordinary gods is 
Toh Bulu, the war-god.° The Kayan—this obviously means 
the chiefs—claim descent from gods, especially Oding Lahang, 
who acts as intermediary between men and Laki Tenganan.° 
Oding Lahang, they say, was a chief who lived long ago. 
It is interesting to note his ancestry. ‘In the beginning there 
was a barren rock. On this the rains fell and gave rise to moss, 
and the worms, aided by the dung-beetles, made soil by their 
castings. Then a sword handle (haup malat) came down from 
the sun and became a large tree.?’ From the moon came down 
a creeper, which, hanging from the tree, became mated with it 
through the action of the wind. From this union were born 
Kaluban Gai and Kalubi Angai, lacking the legs and lower half 
of their trunks, so that their entrails hung loose and exposed. 
Leaves falling from the tree became the various species of birds 


1 Barnett 22. 2 Id., 18: Barth 18. 
5 Hose and McDougall II. 5. 4 Id., II. 6-7. 
§ Id., IJ. 5. Toh Bulu means “‘feather-spirit ’’ or ‘‘ spirit of feathers ” 


(II. 18). 
6 Td., IL. 10. wud IL 197; 


148 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 

and winged insects, and from the fallen fruits sprang the four- 
footed beasts. Resin, oozing from the trunk of the tree, gave 
rise to the domestic pig and fowl, two species which are distin- 
guished by their understanding of matters that remain hidden 
from all-others, even from human beings. The first incomplete 
human beings produced Pengok Ngai and Katira Murei; the 
latter bore a son, Batang Uta Tatai, who married Ajai Avai and 
begot Sijau Laho, Oding Lahang, Pabalan, Pliban, and Tokong, 
who became the progenitors of the various existing peoples. Oding 
Lahang is claimed by the Kayans as their ancestor, and also by 
some of the Klemantan tribes.” 4 

This story raisés an important point in mythology. The 
history of the Kayan tends to connect them with the Hindus of 
Java.? Their chiefs claim descent from the sky, and, indirectly, 
from the sun. Their most prominent deity is a war-god. But 
what is the function of Laki Tenganan, their supreme being ? 
What does he mean in their history ? He is identical with the 
supreme being of the Kenyah and Klemantan tribes, whom the 
Kayan probably have civilized. This god means something in 
the past history of the Kayan, and possibly he was connected 
originally with the sun, from which the ancestors of Kayan chiefs 
seem originally to claim descent. If Oding Lahang, their great 
ancestor, were one of the Children of the Sun—he certainly is in 
the line of descent—and if he usurped the place of Laki Tenganan, 
then it is possible that the creation story presents history through 
a refracting medium that has distorted the original nature of Laki 
Tenganan. 

The process may have been similar to that of India, where 
Varuna, originally a sun-god, has been pushed into the back- 
ground by a war-god, and has lost his solar character. Were it 
not that other information exists about Varuna, it would not be 
possible to know that he was originally a sun-god.. The case may 
be the same with Laki Tenganan. Another important tribe of 
Borneo, the Iban or Sea Dyak, have war-gods as their chief 
deities. Borneo tribes thus show signs of contact, in the past 
with the Hindu caste of the Children of the Sun; their chiefs 
seem originally to have claimed descent from the sun ; their chief 
deity possibly changed from a sun-god into a vague supreme 
being with no cult; and war-gods have come into prominence. 

The culture-sequence of sun-god and war-god can be established 
in the Pacific. The Carolines, or at least Ponape, formerly had 
the Children of the Sun as rulers. Then came invasions, and in 
Ponape the chief god is Tokata or Taukatau, which name is that 
of the king of Kusaie-Tokasa—whence came invaders who broke 
up the former civilization.4 Another account, that of Christian, 
says that the Children of the Sun were wiped out by warlike 


1 Hose ite rape ag II. 138. Ua os 20) Be Yi 
a Edis 4 Hahl 1. 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 149 


peoples from the south, led by Icho-Kalakai, who became their 
war-god.! 

_ With the exception of San Cristoval, New Britain, New Ireland, 
the Bismarck Archipelago and New Caledonia, the sun-cult is a 
thing of the past in Melanesia. It is said formerly to have existed 
in the southern part of the New Hebrides, representations of the 
sun having been found on rocks in Anaiteum.?. In New Zealand, 
along with traces of the Children of the Sun, go certain indications 
of the former existence of a sun-cult among the ancestors of the 
Maori, who mention a sacred mountain in their homeland, which 
is the abode of the Bird of the Sun, so well-known in connexion 
with the sun-cult from Egypt to America.? 

Although Melanesia and Polynesia possess traces of a former 
sun-cult, yet most of the important Polynesian gods are war-gods, 
who often have demonstrably displaced solar gods.4 The original 
rulers of Tau, that part of Manu’a where originated the first ruling 
families of Samoa, were Children of the Sun. Tagaloa Ui, the son 
of the Sun and of Ui, a woman who came from a country that 
possessed a sun-cult, had a son Taeotagaloa, whose sister was the 
wife of the Tuafiti, that is, the ruler of Fiji. Taeotagaloa married 
two girls. Each bare a son on the same day, and the ruling 
power of the two parts of the island was divided between them. 
When the sons had been instituted by Taeotagaloa in their offices, 
he said to his brother Le Fanonga, ‘‘ You stop here in the east and 
be the war-god of Fitiuta, but I will go and be the war-god of 
Le-fale-tolu.”’® Taeotagaloa was a son of the Sun: he changed 
himself deliberately into a war-god. Henceforth the sun-god 
disappeared from the active cult, and persists only in tradition 
and myth. Taeotagaloa was the last god of the sky-world who 
had intercourse with the Samoans: one authority claims that 
he was the first man, and his son the first human king. It is 
significant that, at the moment when human dynasties are in- 
augurated, the beings who previously had been Children of the 
Sun become war-gods. It would be worth much to know exactly 
what happened at this moment ; some important historical event 
must have occurred to cause this profound change. For Taeota- 
galoa evidently was a real being, in that he is the traditional 
representative of the Children of the Sun, who came to Tau of 
Manu’a in Samoa to live. These Children of the Sun went back 
to the sky, that is, back home, and left the ruling power in the 
hands of the Ali’a family, members of which spread to Tahiti, 
Rarotonga and elsewhere.’ 


1 Christian iv. 84. 2 Rivers x.; Xii. 3 Best x. 
“ Fornander mentions a former sun-cult in Tupai of the Society Group 
(44,n. 2). 5 Pratt ii. 25. 


§ Pratt iii. 294-5. Le Fanonga and his brothers went to Upolu and became 
presiding deities (Stair ii. 49). 

’ From the time of disappearance of the Tagaloa family, Samoan chiefs 
are called Tui, a title similar to that found in Fijiand Tonga. These Tui chiefs 
are really war chiefs, for they take no part in the administration of the state, 


150 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Oro, the god of the marae of Opoa in Raiatea, was the chief god 
of Tahiti and the Leeward Islands, and the kings of Tahiti in their 
coronation ceremony became his sons. The Tahitians claimed 
that Oro originated at Opoa, whence his worship spread to the 
neighbouring islands, and throughout the Paumotu group. He 
was the great god of war in Eastern Polynesia,! and is equated 
to Rongo, the great god of Mangaia in the Hervey Group.? Rongo 
was the twin brother of Tangaroa in Mangaia.* Tangaroa was 
the elder and was connected with the sky. He is identical with 
Tangaloa of Samoa, and thus is really a sun-god. Rongo, on the 
other hand, is connected with the underworld, where lives the 
great mother of gods and men. On account of the favouritism 
shown for Rongo by his mother, Tangaroa went to Rarotonga 
and settled there, leaving Rongo in possession in Ma ngaia. So 
the sky-god has retired, leaving the war-god in possession. 

The first king of Mangaia, where Rongo dispossessed Tangaroa, 
was Rangi, who is said to have come from Savai’i, a name of one 
of the islands of the Samoan group. Since Savai’i occurs so often 
in Polynesian tradition, and in connexion with widely separated 
places, it is well not to rely on this. But Savai’i in Samoa is so 
closely connected with the underworld that Rongo, the god of 
war, whose son Rangi was the first king of Mangaia, might well, 
together with his son Rangi, be connected with it. The picture 
is completed by finding that, in Rarotonga, the island to which 
went Tangaroa, when disgusted with the favouritism shown to 
Rongo, the ruling family was founded by Kariki from Manu’a 
in Samoa, who was descended from the sky-gods. Thus the place 
with sky-gods is ruled over by people claiming descent from a sky- 
god, in fact, from the sun ; while a place with a war-god, who rules in 
the underworld, has a king who comes from a place closely con- 
nected with the underworld, which, in the case of the Samoan 
Savai’i, was ruled by families claiming descent from Manu’a, 
where the sun-god had changed into a war-god. 

Behind all this mythology, therefore, a political revolution is 
being accomplished. The Children of the Sun have vanished, 
and their place is taken by other rulers; and the sun-gods give 
way to war-gods.* Thus it is natural to find that, as in New 
Zealand, all male children are dedicated to the war-god.°® 

The earliest great god of North America was the sun-god, who, 
in certain parts, reigned supreme to the end. But in Mexico 
he became partly superseded, but not so much as in Polynesia. 
Just before the arrival of Europeans, the Aztecs came from the 
north and seized power in Mexico. They differed in culture from 
the sedentary agriculturists whom they conquered, and this 

1 Gill i. 14. R6Fd.; ii. 636. 8 Td., iv. 10-11. 

4 In Mangaia a king, Tiaio, became a war-god. The Mautara, a priestly 
tribe, gave up their ancient divinity, Tane, in favour of this new god. The 
greatness of Tiaio marks the political supremacy of that warlike clan, which 


is of recent origin (Gill i. 30). 
5 Best vi. 456; xi. 128, 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 151 


difference is shown in their pantheon. They had a war-god, the 
protector and leader of the tribe, who had come with them on 
their wanderings, named Huitzilopochtli. According to one 
account, Huitzilopochtli was a deified man. It is said that when 
pushing their way to Mexico, the Aztecs had a leader named 
Huitziton, who, one night, was translated to the sky and presented 
to the god Tezauhteotl, the frightful god, who had the form of a 
horrible dragon. The god welcomed him, and thanked him for 
governing his people; and, saying that it was high time he was 
deified, told him to go to earth and tell the people of his impending 
departure, and to say that his skull and bones would be left with 
them for protection and consultation. This new deity was called 
Huitzilopochtli, for the Aztec thought that he was seated on the 
left hand of Tezcatlipoca. They took his relics with them to 
Mexico, whither he is said to have guided them. He directed 
the manner of sacrifice that he wished ; for, some priests who had 
offended him having been found one morning with their breasts 
cut open and their hearts pulled out, this was adopted as the 
common mode of sacrifice. Thus in yet another culture-sequence 
does a war-god supersede a sun-god. : 

The Zuni Indians of the Pueblo region afford a remarkable 
instance of the transition from a sun-god to a war-god. They are 
formed of the amalgamation of two peoples: a branch that 
probably is descended from the old cliff dwellers, the people of 
the archaic civilization; and a branch from the west or south- 
west, less advanced in culture, who did not cultivate the soil to 
any extent before their arrival in Zuni-land, who became the 
dominant branch of the tribe. 1 

The Zuni have a long creation myth, which, according to 
Cushing, is that of the later and less civilized part of the nation. 
It is to the effect that the All-Father Father created himself as 
the Sun, ‘‘ whom we hold to be our father.’”? With his appearance 
came the water and the sea. With his substance of flesh out- 
drawn from the surface of his person, the sun-father formed the 
seed-stuff of twain worlds, impregnating therewith the great 
waters, and lo! in the heat of his light those waters of the sea 
grew green and scums rose upon them, waxing wide and weighty 
until, behold, they became Awitelin Teita, the “‘ Four-fold con- 
taining Mother Earth,’”? and Apoyan Tachu, the “ All-covering 
Father Sky.” These produced all life in the four-fold womb of 
the Earth. The earth-mother pushed apart from the sun-father, 
and man took formin thelowest cave-womb. Then a being called 
*‘ the all-sacred master ”’ appeared in the waters and arose to ask 
the All-Father for deliverance. The sun-father impregnated a 
foam-cap with his rays and incubated it, so that it finally gave 
birth to twins, the Beloved Preceder and the Beloved Follower, 
to whom the sun-father gave knowledge and leadership over 
men.? 

1 Cushing ii. 342-3, 2 Id., 379, 381-2, 


152 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


With their magic knives the twins cleft asunder the Mountain 
of Generation, and went beneath into the underworld, to their 
subjects.1. When they got on the earth they at once set out 
to find the ‘“‘ middle,” the navel of the earth, where they should 
make their permanent settlement. It was in those days that war 
began. ‘‘ At times they met people who had gone before, thus 
learning much of ways of war, for in the fierceness that had 
entered their hearts with fear, they deemed it not well, neither 
liked they to look upon strangers peacefully.” 2 Finally they met 
the dew-people, who claimed to be their elder brothers, and the 
two groups joined company.® After several stays in different 
places “‘ they sought more often than ever to war with all strangers 
(whereby they became still more changed in spirit.) ”’ 

The twin Children of the Sun, well aware of the temper of the 
people, changed also in spirit. They founded the Society of the 
Knife, ‘‘ the stout warriors of the Twain.”’ 

‘Of blood we have tasted the hunger, 
Henceforth by the power of war, 
And the hazard of omens and dance, 
Shall we open the ways for our people 
And guide them in search of the middle. 
And our names shall be known as the Twain 
Who hold the high places of Earth. 


Come forth: ye weren of the nits. 
Our chosen, the priests of the bow. 


Ye shall changed be forever, 
The foot-rests of eagles 
And signs of our order.’’ 4 


The twins were “‘ strong now with the full strength of evil... 
Twain children of terror and magic were they.” * Finally their 
wanderings ended, and they met the black people of the high 
buildings, their elder brethren, and amalgamated with them.® 

This story, to my mind, is one of the most remarkable ever 
recorded. It is a piece of social psychology beyond price, showing, 
as it does, the change of behaviour in a people as the result of 
warfare, and the consequent change in their gods. It is remark- 
able that the Zuni priests should so accurately have analyzed the 
causes of this change of temper, and have recorded them so faith- 
fully. It has already been claimed that a continuity exists 
between the archaic civilization and those that followed. In 
this case the signs of such a continuity are clear. A people begins 
with the Children of the Sun as their culture-heroes, the twain 
beloved, and ends with them in the guise of war-gods. 

In the Mound area the sun-cult existed universally, and, as has 
been seen, the Children of the Sun were ruling over some tribes in 
post-Columbian times. But those tribes who got horses from the 

1 Cushing, 382-3. 2 Td., ii. 390. ’ Id., 397-8. 

4 Id., 417-19, ° Id., ii, 422-3, 8 Id., 426. 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 153 


Spaniards, and went across the Mississippi after the buffalo, 
suffered many transformations in their material culture. Their 
religious and social organization also was much altered. The 
process varied with the tribes, so, in comparing the Plains Indians 
with those of the Mound area, it will be well to begin with the 
most extreme example. The great Siouan family of the Plains 
was split into several divisions. One of them, the Omaha, which 
possesses traditions of movement across the Mississippi from the 
eastern States, has lost much of its old culture. The tribe has 
two divisions, each of which plays an important part in the 
communal life. One half possesses the rites that appertain to 
the relationship between the individual and the cosmic powers, 
while the other has those that are more utilitarian, and those that 
pertain to war. In the course of the wanderings of the tribe, 
most of the first set of rites have disappeared, while the practical 
ones are retained. They now have no sacred chiefs, and the only 
approach to a god is the thunder being, so closely connected with 
war, who is in the sky, and is sometimes addressed as Grandfather. 
Certain ceremonies are performed for each individual, such as the 
Introduction of the Child to the Cosmos ; Turning the Child ; and 
the Consecration of the Boy to the Thunder, that is, to the war- 
god, who was invoked by the warriors.1 No trace exists of the 
sun-cult among the Omaha, and no Children of the Sun rule over 
them.? 

Evidence that the Siouan family once had the sun-cult is 
afforded by the fact that the chief deity of the Mandan, “ The 
Lord of Life,”’ is said to live in the sun.® It is important to note 
that the Mandan approximate closest in culture to the people of 
the eastern States, for they have retained maize cultivation to a 
‘considerable degree, and have not neglected it like the Omaha 
and others. Certain other cultural features also show them to 
be nearer to the archaic civilization than the Omaha, who have 
lost so much while wandering across the Mississippi. ‘The old sun- 
cult has also not entirely died out among the Hidatsa, Tciwere, 
Winnebago and other Siouan tribes. 

In North America, therefore, historical events have caused 
certain tribes to lose the sun-cult that their ancestors possessed. 
Thus the culture-sequence of the Indian tribes is similar to that 
of the rest of the region, namely, from sun-god to war-god. 


This survey shows that the peoples who followed the archaic 
civilization, or were derived from it, in any spot, differ consider- 
ably from those of the archaic civilization, not only in material 
culture, in the absence of stone-working, irrigation and so forth, 
but in other ways; for they have often replaced sun-gods by war- 
gods; and also lack a ruling class of Children of the Sun. 

The widespread existence of remains of the archaic civilization 


1 Fletcher and La Flésche 195, 199, 200, 382. 
2 J. O. Dorsey ii. 430 e.s, 3 Id., 506, 507. 


154 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


in places occupied by communities not capable of their con- 
struction shows that there must be a profound difference between 
the two cultural phases. There is every reason to believe that 
the later comers were intellectually equal to the peoples of the 
archaic civilization ; they simply lacked the necessary organization. 
Why was that ? 

The answer to this question apparently lies partly in the fact 
that the later comers were more warlike than the peoples of the 
archaic civilization. In the days of the archaic civilization wars 
were not frequent, and time and energy were available for great 
works. But the later communities became educated in war, and 
gave up constructive work in favour of domination. 

It is an error, as profound as it is universal, to think that men 
in the food-gathering stage were given to fighting. All the 
available facts go to show that the food-gathering stage of history 
must have been one of perfect peace. The study of the artifacts 
of the Paleolithic age fails to reveal any definite signs of human 
warfare. A critical analysis of the industry of this age in its 
various phases shows that the minds of the people were intent 
on their food supply and on art, which, itself, was probably 
connected with the food supply ; and that the various inventions 
made in their flint industry were improvements in implements 
for preparing food, and in modelling tools and other means of 
exercising their artistic capacities, which were considerable. Such 
matters are, however, outside the scope of this book, for the great 
bulk of these remains are in Europe. Some are in India and 
Tasmania, and none of them indicate warlike activities. 

The best evidence of the peaceful tendencies of early man is 
provided by existing food-gathering communities in various parts 
of the region. In another place I have collected the descriptions 
of the early food-gathering communities in all parts of the world, 
and the unanimous testimony of the authorities leaves no room 
to doubt that these peoples are peaceful, and entirely lacking in 
any cruel mode of behaviour.! 

The coming of the archaic civilization into the outlying regions 
of the earth therefore meant the beginning of war. But only in 
the later phases did war become serious. The people of the 
archaic civilization were comparatively peaceful, as the following 
accounts show. 

Professor Breasted describes the Egyptians as “usually un- — 
warlike . . . naturally peaceful.’’ 2 They became warlike as a 
consequence of the invasion, about 1688 B.c., of the Hyksos, who 
dominated the country for some time, but were ultimately driven 
out. ‘It was under the Hyksos that the conservatism of — 
millennia was broken up in the Nile Valley. The Egyptians 
learned aggressive war for the first time, and introduced a well- 
organized military system, including the chariotry, which the © 
importation of the horse by the Hyksos now enabled them to do. 


1 Perry vi. 2 Breasted iii, 193, 319, 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 155 


Egypt was transformed into a military empire. In the struggle 
with the Hyksos and with each other, the old feudal families 
perished, or were absorbed among the partisans of the dominant 
Theban family, from which the imperial line sprang. The great 
Pharaohs of the Highteenth Dynasty thus became Emperors, 
conquering and ruling from Northern Syria and the upper 
Euphrates, to the fourth cataract of the Nile on the south.’ In 
the earliest phases of Egyptian history, the king had no regular 
army : each nome had its militia, commanded by civilians. There 
was no caste of officers. In case of serious war the militias were 
grouped together as well as possible and put under a leader chosen 
from the officials. ‘“‘ As the local governors commanded the 
militia of the nomes, they held the sources of the Pharaohs’ dubious 
military strength in their own hands.” } 

In Babylonia the sequence in deities is that of Tammuz-Sham- 
ash-Ashur. No signs exist of warfare in connexion with Tammuz ; 
his attributes are the reverse of pugnacious or cruel. In con- 
nexion with the sky-gods signs exist of war. But the Assyrians 
were extremely warlike, as is shown by the following statement : 
“The Assyrian was even more than most of the empires of 
antiquity a well-organized fighting machine, and, as all the state- 
ments about Ashur occur in inscriptions written after the era of 
conquest began, they necessarily represent Ashur as a god of 
war.’ 2 They thus differed entirely from the Sumerians and 
Egyptians. The story of Egypt, Babylonia and Assyria is 
thus one of education in warfare, and in Mesopotamia, along 
with this change in behaviour, went a change in the ruling families, 
and in the gods connected with those families. 

In India, as elsewhere, the old civilization succumbed to the 
onslaughts of conquerors who added but little to the cultural 
heritage of the country. India owes most of its civilization to 
people who were more peaceful than their conquerors. The 
Dravidian peoples were not warlike in the same way as the Aryans : 
they were agricultural, and lacked that element of mobility so 
characteristic of the great warrior peoples of history. Beyond 
doubt the break-up of civilization in India was due to the incursions 
of warlike peoples. Otherwise there appears to be no reason why 
this civilization should not have persisted indefinitely. 

In Cambodia the downfall of the great Khmer civilization, of 
Dravidian origin, was due to the irruption of the Tai-Shan peoples 
from Yunnan, with a much inferior civilization but a more war- 
like behaviour.® 

Although the States of Southern Celebes have always possessed 
a military organization, the heads of which were princes of the 
royal blood, yet the warfare seems to have been of a half-hearted 
sort. These States had no real armies, which seems to suggest 
that only officers existed. ‘It is evident from this that the war- 


1 Breasted iii. 19, 82. 2 Barton 221, 3 Haddon ii. 30-2. 


156 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


fare must have been of a very different type from that of Europe.” 4 
The military organization is thus directly similar to that of ancient 
Egypt, being of the nature of a militia, and not a professional 
army; such as exist in later civilizations in Indonesia and elsewhere. 

The, great civilization in the Carolines owes its downfall to 
warlike invasions. It is said, in one set of traditions, that Yap 
was invaded by warriors, so that the people fled to Ponape. Then 
came a great fleet from Koto (? Kusaie) under a certain Ijokalakal, 
which captured Ponape; after this the old customs began to die 
out. Another tradition shows how the break-up of a community 
can be due to internal causes. Formerly, it is said, a single king 
ruled over Ponape. He lived at Metalanim at a place called 
Pankatara. This king sent his nobles to rule the provinces, and 
in time they became independent, his power was undermined, and 
probably wars between the different governors became frequent.? 

If culture-heroes, who visit food-gatherers and civilize them, 
are representatives of the archaic civilization, and if the food- 
gatherers were peaceful before their arrival, it follows that peoples 
with culture-hero traditions would probably state that they got 
their warlike habits from these strangers. This is expressly so 
claimed in British New Guinea. Oa Rove Marai, the culture-hero 
of the Mekeo people, having quarrelled with the people of some 
other village, sent for the Mekeo people, gave them spears and 
black palmwood clubs, and sent battle, theft and adultery among 
them, and sorcerers to kill people. Thus death came among 
them.? 

Similar traditions exist in Australia. For example, the great 
being of the Kurnai, Mungan-ngaua, is said to have given the 
people their weapons: “ They are told that long ago he lived 
on the earth, and taught the Kurnai of that time to make imple- 
ments, nets, canoes, weapons—in fact, everything that they 
know.” # 

Evidence exists with regard to the former peaceful nature of 
Oceania. With regard to the general question, I venture to quote 
the words of Mr. A. N. Hocart. He says: ‘* My belief is that a 
highly civilized people with a theory of kingship akin to the 
Egyptians and of a peaceable nature occupied the South Sea 
Islands (with the possible exception of (?) peaceful aborigines in 
the interior of the larger islands).° They were gradually pushed 
back towards the East by various peoples with whom warfare 
was a religious function ; and who consequently were constantly 
fighting and killing. I should not like to say that the original 
civilized inhabitants never did fight, but they certainly did not 
make fighting a regular practice.”’ He refers to the fact that the 
Tongans have traditions of the times when wars were not, and 


1 Bakkers iv. 80. 2 Hahl i. 3 Seligman i. 308. * Howitt 493. 

5 Cf. F. Kramer I. 394, who says that doubtless in the earliest times peace 
reigned over Fiji, Samoa and Tonga and Western Polynesia in general. The 
quotation from Mr. Hoeart is from a letter. 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 157 


goes on to say, ‘‘ wars, or at least frequent wars, were certainly 
imported into Tonga from Fiji. In Fiji one can almost see the 
war-gods moving East.” 

The Tongan tradition is recorded by Mariner. ‘* At the time 
when Captain Cook was at these islands, the habits of war were 
little known to the natives; the only quarrels in which they had 
at that time been engaged were among the inhabitants of the Fiji 
Islands. . . . The bows and arrows which before that period had 
been in use among the people of Tonga were of a weaker kind, and 
fitted rather for sport than war—for the purpose of shooting rats, 
birds, etc. From the fierce and warlike people of (Fiji)... 
however, they speedily learned to construct bows and arrows of a 
much more martial and formidable nature; and soon became 
acquainted with a better form of the spear, and a superior method 
of holding and throwing that weapon. They also imitated them 
by degrees in the practice of painting their faces, and the use of a 
peculiar head-dress in time of war, giving them a fierce appearance, 
calculated to strike terror into the minds of their enemies. These 
martial improvements were in their progress at the time of Captain 
Cook’s arrival, but not in general practice, for having few or no 
civil dissensions among themselves, the knowledge of these things 
was confined principally to certain young chiefs and their ad- 
herents, who had been to the Fiji Islands.” 4 

The Fijians themselves seem originally to have been peaceful. 
“The ancient legends describe a peaceful immigration of a few 
half-shipwrecked and forlorn people. ... And so far from 
being an entrance at that early period of a victorious host, it is 
not till long after that any serious war is even hinted at; not, 
indeed, till several tribes had broken away from the original 
stock and become independent.” The author quoted is confident 
that war on a considerable scale is comparatively recent in Fiji, 
and that the introduction of fire-arms has had much to do with 
its? 

Manu’a, the earliest settlement of Samoa, was a land of peace, 
and was neutral in intertribal wars.? 

In Eastern Polynesia former times seem to have been peaceful, 
and chiefs and their followers from all directions assembled at 
Raiatea in Tahiti for certain ceremonies. This delightful con- 
dition of affairs broke up because of quarrels among the priests 
in charge of the ceremonies, and wars, murders and strife ensued.* 
This is substantiated by the traditions of the people of Hawaii, 
which state that the Children of the Sun formerly lived in Tahiti 
and Hawaii. In those days life was more peaceful, and a race 
of heroes, probably such as the Eyeball of the Sun, the children 
of the gods, ruled by subtlety and skill, and went to other islands 
for courtship and barter. Then came a time when these chiefs, 
having to protect their property against their fellow-chiefs, gave 
up these long voyages: ‘“‘ Thus constantly in jeopardy from each 


1 Mariner 67. 2 Deane 229. 3 Ella iii. 155. # P. Smith v. 


158 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


other, sharpening, too, their observation of what lay directly 
about them and of the rational way to get on in life, they accepted 
the limits of a man’s power and prayed to the gods, who were their 
great ancestors, for gifts beyond their reach.” } 

In later times warfare was not universal in Polynesia. For 
example, the people of Bowditch Island, who.seem to have pre- 
served much of the archaic civilization, were quiet and rarely 
fought.2. Similarly the people of Funafiti in the Gilberts and 
those of Tikopia are described as peaceful. On the other hand, 
in Penrhyn Island, where are ruins of the archaic civilization far 
beyond the capacity of the present population, fighting is incessant. 
The ancestors of the people came from Rarotonga, like those of 
the Maori. 

Peace reigned in Mangaia in the days of Rangi, the son of 
Rongo, the war-god. The art of war is said to have been taught 
the people by denizens of the underworld,* that is, by followers 
of Rongo. It is also said that the Mangaians owe the develop- 
ment of their warfare to Tongans, who brought ironwood with 
them—so useful for weapons.® So the Tongans handed on what 
they had learned from Fiji. 

The Maori found, in New Zealand, peoples with a civilization 
that seems to have been, in some respects, superior to theirs in 
material culture. These people were peaceful. The cultural 
decadence of the Maori themselves is ascribed to their fighting 
habits. ‘* In the centuries immediately after the first immigration 
all evidence points to the existence of large States, which occasion- 
ally were subject to one common head. There seems also to have 
been a religious centre. This was the period of the national 
prosperity of the Maoris, when their workmanship also attained 
its highest perfection. Tasman alone saw in 1642 large and 
splendid double canoes in use among them ; such canoes the Maori 
of the eighteenth century were no longer able to build. The 
decadence was universal. The ancient kingdoms broke up into 
small communities of bold incendiaries and robbers, who recog- 
nized no political centre, but were engaged in fierce feud one against 
another. ... The national character, always inclined to pride 
and tyranny, ended by becoming more and more bloodthirsty, 
revengeful and cruel.” ’ The Moriori of the Chatham Islands, 
the descendants of those driven out of New Zealand by the Maori, 
were peaceful. Their laws forbade killing, and they said that all 
fighting had been prohibited in the days of their ancestor Nunuku. 
They formerly used stone axes as weapons, but latterly had only 
a pole, 8 to 10 ft. long, for fighting.® 

The evidence from the Pacific thus entirely bears out the 
contention of Mr. Hocart. Where culture-sequences can be 


1 Beckwith 303. This account recalls the history of Ponape in the Carolines. 
2 Turner 268. %* P. Smith i. 96. 4 Gill i. 130 

5 Id., 288. 6° Gudgeon 209. 7 Weule 333. 

8 Shand 76 e.s. 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 159 


established, it is found that the earlier phase was the more 
peaceful. The break-up of Polynesian society can now readily 
be understood. When communities give up their peaceful habits 
and take to fighting on a large scale, attention is diverted from one 
occupation to another. In the Pacific, the rise of warfare coincides 
with the degeneration of culture intheartsand crafts. It is thus 
legitimate to look upon warfare not, as many do, as a sign of 
strength, but of decay, from the standpoint of material culture. 

The same story is told in America. The earliest known civili- 
zation, that of the Maya, shows signs of being comparatively 
peaceful.1 The early reliefs of the Maya depict, as the principal 
subject, a human figure, the divine ruler or priest, splendidly clad 
with the emblems of civil and religious authority. At Palenque, 
and elsewhere, religious ceremonies, sacrifices, self-torture, are 
depicted. Curiously enough, the more northerly Maya cities, 
which are of later date, contain traces of war. ‘‘ At some of the 
northern cities the principal figures stand on the backs of couched 
human beings who have been identified as captives, and at Piedras 
Negras captives, bound with ropes and stripped of all clothing 
and ornaments, appear huddled together before a ruler seated upon 
a throne with attendants standing on either side; or, again, an 
elaborately dressed ruler with spear in hand and an attendant 
standing behind him faces kneeling captives or warriors, also 
armed with spears. These two monuments... have been 
interpreted, and probably correctly, as records of specific con- 
quests, the captives representing the alien rulers, cities or tribes 
with their corresponding nemaglyphs on their shoulders or thighs. 
But at best these are only sporadic cases, and an overwhelming 
majority of the Old Empire sculptures portray religious cere- 
monies, deities, rulers and priests.’’? While the Maya in the 
centre were living in a profound peace, those on the outskirts 
evidently fought with the surrounding tribes, which, on the 
hypothesis based on the study of the distribution of civilization 
of various stages, have been derived from them. That is to say, 
if it be granted that the Maya first settled peacefully among 
unwarlike food-gatherers, they brought with them something in 
their social and political organization that proved their ruin ; 
that is to say, they ultimately produced warfare. This hardening 
process is at work in the later Maya settlements of Yucatan, 
where a certain ruling family, descended from the sacred priest- 
kings of the early period, the Cocomes, evidently went the way 
of other ruling families. They ruled at Mayapan in Yucatan ; 
and at the time when certain convulsions were taking place, ‘‘it 
would appear that they had begun to exercise a closer control 
over their vassals. To support the harsher methods which they 
introduced they commenced to employ the services of mercenaries, 
* Mexicans,’ recruited in Tabasco and Xilxicalance, and by their 


1 Joyce ii. 364-5. * Morley i. 443-4. 


160 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 

aid levied tribute upon the other members of the league to an 
extent which the latter were not prepared to suffer.’?1 Thus a 
family, claiming descent from Kukulcan, a Son of the Sun, began 
to take on the aspect of a typical warrior aristocracy. The ruling 
class of Chichen-Itza, another Maya settlement in Yucatan, also 
constituted a warrior caste.? 

So, in the case of the Maya, the story is one of education in 
warfare. The earliest cities show no trace of fighting: then, 
on the outskirts, the later cities were engaged in war. The ruling 
class of the later cities probably were Children of the Sun. When 
the Maya left Guatemala and went to Yucatan, their rulers 
tended to become definitely warlike and to behave cruelly. Pre- 
sumably, like the ancient Egyptians, they were educated in war. 
The growing aggression of the rulers of Mayapan seems itself to 
have caused much turmoil in Yucatan. Thus the phenomenon 
of the increasing warfare will probably find its explanation in that 
of the change of behaviour of the ruling classes. 

The warlike activities of Mexico in the time of the Aztecs are 
well known. According to Bandelier, speaking of the Aztecs: 
‘““ War, at first defensive, afterwards offensive, became the life of 
the tribe.”’*> The later civilizations certainly far surpassed, in this 
respect, the early civilization of the Maya. So, not only did the 
Maya become more warlike, but their successors, who surpassed 
them, went through the same process of education. 

The hypothesis adopted with regard to North America was that 
the civilization of that region can be regarded as a unity, derived 
ultimately from Mexico and the south. The cultivation of maize, 
pottery making, the working of metals, the use of pearls and 
manufacture of polished stone implements, and the tales of 
culture-heroes, have been adduced as evidence of this unity. If 
it be true that the practice of warfare has been derived from the 
archaic civilization, that the people who brought in maize-cultiva- 
tion to the food-gatherers also turned them into fighters, it 
will not be surprising to find further evidence of unity of culture. 
This evidence is forthcoming. 

In North America in post-Columbian times the military organi- 
zations of the various tribes were similar. According to the 
Huguenot narratives, the tribes of North Florida and the adjacent 
region had a military system and marching order almost as exact 
as that of a modern civilized nation, the various grades of rank 
being distinguished by specific titles. The Indians who went 
into the Plains after the buffalo had military organizations so 
similar as to suggest a common origin. Thus once again signs 
of unity run through the civilization of North America. 

The post-Columbian Indians seem to have been more warlike 
than their predecessors for : ‘‘ From what we know of the Indian 
character, there is every reason to believe that the non-sanguinary 


1 Joyce ii. 205. 2 Spence 155. 5 Bandelier 98. 
* Hand-Book: Art. Military Organization. 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 161 


sun-worshipping tribes were conquered and rudely driven off ’”’ 4 
by the ancestors of the post-Columbian Indians. In their place 
are warlike tribes such as the Iroquois, with war-gods as their 
chief deities.?. This agrees with the Huron and Wyandot tradition 
that the sky-world, the place associated with the people of the 
archaic civilization, was peaceful. Several of the Plains tribes 
werevery warlike, especially the Pawnee, for whom war was business 
and pleasure. By it they amassed wealth, and gained credit and 
renown. They conquered all the surrounding tribes, and claimed 
to hold the country from the Missouri to the Rockies, and from 
the Nebraska southwards to the Arkansas or the Canadian River.4 
They had given up the sun-god ; which is shown by the fact that 
they came out of the south-west, where the sun-cult was universal ; 
and also by the fact that the Skidi, a branch of the tribe, still 
retain some sort of sun-cult, although, even in this case, the sun 
is unimportant.® 

The study of culture-sequences has led to the generalization 
that, in all parts of the region, the earlier civilization seems to be 
the more peaceful. The archaic civilization has spread out into 
countries inhabited by peaceful food-gatherers, and the earliest 
settlements were probably also peaceful, which accords with their 
apparent industrial nature. Men engaged in mining for gold 
would be more interested in that than in fighting. Moreover, 
such settlements would be sparse ; India, for example, with the 
exception of Bellary, and one or two other places, does not seem 
to have possessed any great concentration of population in those 
early days, so that a pretext for warfare would hardly exist. 

One fact points to warfare in this period—the building of forti- 
fications. What, it may be asked, would be the aim of such 
fortifications if no warlike peoples were feared? This difficulty 
tends to ignore the probable nature of these settlements. They 
were, according to the hypothesis, those of peoples with a fairly 
high degree of civilization, of whose provenance it will be necessary 
later to inquire. If it be assumed that they came from some 
country where war had already begun, where the building of 
fortresses was a habit, then, to account for the fortifications, it is 
only necessary to invoke the innate tendency for settlers to 
reproduce the culture of their homeland. Perhaps an instance 
from outside the region will help. The great ruins of Zimbabwe, 
south of the Zambesi, built by men working the goldfields, are 
fortresses. Yet, beyond doubt, they were built without reason. 
The warlike Bantu had not yet swarmed down from the north: 
the only possible inhabitants of the country were the peaceful 
Bushmen and Hottentots. This makes these great fortresses 
simply ridiculous. So, in places such as India, the habit of living 
on hill-tops may have been brought by the people of the archaic 


1 Schoolcraft v. 203. 2 Tylor IT. 308. 

8 Barbeau i. 289. See Chapter 13 for sky-world. 

* Grinnell 303, 306. 5 Id., 224: Wissler ili. 335, 337. 
I] 


162 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


civilization from their homes, and thus would have no reference 
to the conditions of the countries where they lived. It is further 
necessary to add that the more warlike peoples of the earth have 
not usually been given to the making of fortifications, and this 
makes the peaceful nature of the people of the archaic civilization 
more probable. At the same time these people must have had 
some warfare, and the habit of fighting must have developed. It 
must be remembered that the archaic civilization was based on 
agriculture, which implies a steady increase of population. A 
new world was created wherever these people settled; food- 
gathering gave place to food-producing, and new peoples came 
into being. In this way the chances of war must have increased 
in several ways. 


The surveys of this chapter have shown that the loss of the 
sun-cult and of the Children of the Sun, and the appearance in 
their place of warrior chiefs and war-gods, has been accompanied 
by an actual change in the behaviour of peoples. This is the 
first example yet adduced of the relationship between various 
elements of civilization: a change in the ruling class is accom- 
panied by a change in the deities of the community, and also by 
a change in the behaviour of the community. Evidently one 
change caused the others. This raises one of the ultimate prob- 
lems of social psychology, that of the interrelationship of institu- 
tion and behaviour in society. As the general argument proceeds, 
it will repeatedly be seen how close is this interrelationship. Once 
it is realized, it is obvious that the ultimate problem of all is that 
of explaining, in psychological terms, the process that is now 
being described in historical terms. Such a problem must be 
left on one side until the historical process is itself clear enough 
to make it possible to attempt its solution. 

The aboriginal inhabitants of the region were peaceful food- 
gatherers with no social organization, wandering about in family 
groups. Then there came into existence at various points, India, 
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Carolines, Polynesia, Mexico and else- 
where, an advanced civilization based on irrigation, located near 
sources of wealth of various sorts, and characterized by stone- 
working and other arts and crafts. Some of these early settle- 
ments were obviously only there for the purpose of mining, and 
no attempt was made to colonize the country. But, in others, 
great cities sprang up, that must have numbered their populations 
by tens of thousands. These early civilizations were ruled over 
by divine kings, usually claiming descent from the sun. This 
archaic civilization gave rise to others, less advanced in the arts 
and crafts, but more warlike, with war-gods, which ultimately 
destroyed it. The rulers of these later communities were not 
divine beings. 

The next task is that of determining what other circumstances 
attended this remarkable transformation. The archaic civiliza- 


THE COMING OF THE WARRIORS 163 


tion contained some element destined to destroy it, in spite of 
its achievements in all parts of the world : it was rotten somewhere. 
This archaic civilization has exercised a tremendous influence 
upon all that followed: even that of Western Europe is deeply 
rooted init. Maybe that some of the problems that face us at the 
present day will find their solution in the determination of the 
reasons that brought to ruins this civilization that was so rich in 
material culture. 


CHAPTER XII 
RULERS AND COMMONERS : 
(i) THE DOCTRINE OF THEOGAMY 


ROM one end of the region to the other the Children of the 
HK Sun were looked upon as gods, that is, as beings far removed 

from the rest of mankind. They had great powers : they 
could control the weather, they could fly through the air, they 
could visit the world in the sky, and do all manner of things 
impossible to mortal men. In looking back to the days when the 
Children of the Sun ruled in Polynesia and elsewhere, a time is 
being considered when “‘ gods ”’ walked the earth, divine beings 
incarnate as men, the like of which have not since been seen. 
The importance of this fact in the history of civilization, and 
especially in the study of mythology and tradition, cannot be 
exaggerated. For, when it is known that the rulers of the 
archaic civilization were really regarded as gods, tales that speak 
of olden times, when gods lived on earth, assume an historical 
significance. Such tales show that various communities, who 
now have no incarnate gods living with them, must in the past 
have known of such beings, for imagination can be put on one 
side as a factor in the production of tradition and myth until 
details otherwise inexplicable are encountered. 

The supreme importance of this theme makes it imperative to 
try to find what was the essential difference between the Children 
of the Sun and the rest of mankind. In what did their divinity 
really consist ? If it can be discovered what was the actual 
relationship between the Children of the Sun and the sun-god, 
then it may be possible to understand in some way how the war- 
gods came into existence. 

Before starting on this quest, one important point must be 
noted. It has been stated that the Children of the Sun were 
rulers over the communities of the archaic civilization. That 
does not mean that they were the sole rulers. The analogy of 
our own country shows that more than one category of rulers 
can govern a country. At the head of the constitution is the 
royal family: then comes a nobility, with an extensive variety 
of rank. Likewise, in the archaic civilization, which, as will be 

164 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 165 


evident in the course of time, was complicated in nature, the 
ruling group did not consist merely of the Children of the Sun. 
Other grades of nobility and of royal rank existed, and the parts 
that they played will be discussed in some detail in succeeding 
chapters. For the present, however, attention will be paid to 
the Children of the Sun, so as to define their position as closely as — 
- possible. 

In the chapter on Egypt, which comes at the end of the dis- 
cussion of the archaic civilization as a whole, it will be shown of 
what importance was the coming into being of a ruling group 
calling themselves the Children of the Sun. It is well known 
that this happened at the beginning of the Fifth Dynasty. Prior 
to that the sun-cult was not the state cult of Egypt, and the 
kings were more closely associated with Osiris, with whom they 
were identified after death, and Horus, with whom they were 
identified during life. 

What distinguished the Children of the Sun from their pre- 
decessors in Egypt, and from the rest of the community, was 
their claim to be the actual sons of Re, the sun-god. It was said 
that Re took the place of the king and became the father of his 
heir. 

Unfortunately the Children of the Sun have died out in most 
parts of the region, or have not sufficiently been studied, so that 
it is hard to find instances of the belief in theogamy as an every- 
day occurrence. Nevertheless, I have found two other examples 
(not including that of the Incas of Peru, who also were Children 
of the Sun) in which it is believed that the sun-god can become 
the father of mortals. In both cases the people claim solar 
descent. The Abarihu ruling class of San Cristoval in the 
Solomons, who call themselves Children of the Sun, and are so 
closely connected with the archaic civilization in their use of 
pyramids, dolmens, portrait statues and so forth, believe that 
women can mate with the sun.2. The Yuchi of the Savannah 
River in the United States call themselves Children of the Sun. 
Dark-skinned members of the tribe form a kind of empty aris- 
tocracy, and it is believed that they are the actual children of the 
sun himself and one of their maidens.? 

Although only in Egypt, San Cristoval and among the Yuchi 
have I been able to collect instances of the belief in theogamy 
as a factor in everyday life, it has been preserved throughout the 
region in tradition and folk-lore. In the epic literature of India 
the Children of the Sun usually were born through a process of 
theogamy. A noteworthy example is that of Kunti, or Pritha, a 
maiden of royal birth, who, by the Sun, became the mother of 
Karna (Vasusena), the brother of Arjuna, the son of Indra. He 
was born encased in natural armour and with face brightened by 

1 Cf. Moret i. 39 for a vivid account of the ideas connected with the doctrine 


of theogamy in Egypt. Also Breasted ii. II. 187 e.s. 
2 Information from Dr. Rivers. 3 Speck ii. 106. 


166 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


ear-rings, the first of all wielders of weapons,* endowed by the 
beauty of a celestial child.2, Again it is said of him: “ That 
far-famed destroyer of hostile hosts, the large-eyed Karna, was 
born of Pritha in her maidenhood. He was a portion of the hot- 
beamed Sun. ... Born of the Sun himself... he was capable 
of slaying a lion.”»? Madri, the wife of Pandu, the ancestor of 
the Pandavas, the famous race of kings that fought the Kurus in 
the epic of the Mahabharata, had two sons by the Acvins, the 
twin gods of the Vedas.4 - This form of maiden birth by the action 
of the Sun is a commonplace in the stories of heroes in ancient 
India.®°> Indonesian folk-lore tends to connect theogamous 
origins of ruling families with the archaic civilization. The 
Batta of Sumatra show signs of connexion with the Dravidian 
civilization of India, which itself is so closely connected with the 
archaic civilization. Their first great king was Singa Mangaradja, 
the son of a Batta princess and their great god, Batara Guru. 
The royal girl one day ate a fruit of the Anacardicum, in which 
Batara Guru had temporarily incarnated himself. Seven years 
later she bare a son, Singa Mangaradja, who was the ancestor of a 
line of chiefs ruling over Bakara, on the west shore of Lake Toba. 
He could make the sun shine or the rain fall at pleasure, and the 
welfare of the community depended on him. His descendants 
were not born in like manner.6 Among the Tontemboan of 
Minahassa the ancestress of the race was Lumimu’ut, who is said 
to have arrived in a ship, and is thus looked upon as human. In 
one story she came out of a rock, under the action of the sun’s 
rays, and then gave birth to To’ar, the Sun, who became her 
husband, and presumably was the ancestor of the upper class of 
the Tontemboan. Or else it is said that To’ar came out of a hump 
of foam, that gave birth to him under the action of the Sun’s rays. 
Thus, in the beginning, a theogamy takes place, in that To’ar is 
produced by the Sun. He then marries Lumimu’ut, but it does 
not seem, so far as I can tell, that the Sun has any more children.’ 
Folk-lore and tradition in the Pacific show that the idea of solar 
theogamy must formerly have been a living thing. Mr. Hocart 
claims that the earlier kings of Fiji were divine beings. He also 
says that, according to a folk-tale, the daughter: of one of these 
kings was confined, when of a marriageable age, in a room, so 
that the Sun could not impregnate her with his rays. This 
points to belief in the doctrine of theogamy among the early 
Fijians, just as it exists to-day in San Cristoval, not as a vague 
tradition, but as something that could happen any day. A 
similar tale is told in Fiji of the Tongan royal family. The 
daughter of a Tongan chief was called the Mother of the Sun- 

1 This remark is significant in view of the conclusion that the Children 
of the Sun introduced warfare. 

2 <¢ Mahabharata,’’ Adi Parva, Sambhava cxi. 

8 Id., Cxxxviii. 4 Td., cxxiv. 5 H. H. Wilson 147, 149. 


6 Pleyte 4.0s., 46: J. G. Fraser i. I. 398. 
7 Schwarz Tales Nos. 109-19. 8 Hocart vi. 48. 


- RULERS AND COMMONERS 167 


child. Her father hid her on account of her great beauty, but 
without avail ; the Sun looked upon her, and saw her, and loved 
her ; and in the course of time a child was born to her, whose name 
she called the Sun-child. 

In Samoa the Children of the Sun disappeared, and the later 
ruling families were more especially connected with the under- 
world. The doctrine of theogamy is found in tradition associated 
with the original family of Children of the Sun at Manu’a; for it 
is said that the rays of the sun fell on a woman of Leipata, who 
bare Aloalolela, Sun-beam, who married the daughter of the king 
of Fiji.2 Yet the progeny of the Tagaloa family, the original 
Children of the Sun who came from the sky to Samoa, and of a 
woman, Ui, who came from a place with the sun-cult, were not 
Children of the Sun. Tagaloa, it will be remembered, changed 
himself into a war-god. One of this family became ancestor of 
Pili, whose sons were the first rulers of Upolu. The doctrine 
of theogamy disappeared in Samoa, together with the Children of 
the Sun. 

The birth of Oro, the war-god of Tahiti, was as follows: ‘‘ The 
shadow of a breadfruit leaf, shaken by the power of the arm of 
Taaroa, passed over Hina, and she afterwards became the mother 
of Oro.’”’* Taaroa is similar to Tagaloa of Samoa, and therefore 
originally was a sun-god. Other evidence, already quoted (see 
pp. 188-9), suggests that the Children of the Sun originally ruled 
over Tahiti; this supports the identification of Taaroa as a sun-god. 
Direct evidence of the doctrine of theogamy is not apparent in 
Hawaii, so far as I know. It is said that formerly some of the 
chiefs claimed descent from the great god Kane, evidently a sun- 
god, in which case their birth must have been by a process of 
theogamy. These chiefs went to the sky to visit their relatives, 
just like the Sa-Tagaloa family in Manu’a. Hawaiian tradition 
also mentions the days when sky beings came to earth and married 
their women. These gods “shaped the customs of mankind,” 
and thus seem to correspond to the Children of the Sun; but all 
this is past, and all that remains is the knowledge that chiefs 
used to claim divine descent.® 

The break between early and late times in Oceania is seen 
clearly in New Zealand. The doctrine of theogamy is not held 
by the Maori; but tradition recounts cases of that nature, such 
as the union between the wife of Tamatea, an historical;personage, 
and a supernatural being, the offspring of which was Uenuku- 
titi.® ‘i 

Although the Children of the Sun have long since disappeared 
in Mexico, it is possible, from collateral evidence, to conclude 
that they must have come of theogamous unions. In the United 
States, the Natchez of Louisiana were ruled over by Children of 

1 Fison 33. 2 Pratt i. 451: Turner 200. 


$F. Kramer I. 254-7. 4 Ellis I. 123, 231, 326. 
° Beckwith 302-8. § Best xi. 157. 


168 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the Sun, whose ancestors are supposed to have come from the 
direction of Mexico. Nothing is known of the doctrine of theogamy 
among them; but the Yuchi of the same region, also Children of 
the Sun, believe in the fatherhood of the sun. Thus the Mexicans 
and Maya had it. Other evidence points the same way. For 
the great gods of the Aztecs and other late comers to Mexico, 
Huitzilopochtli, Camaxtli, Mixcoatl, were said to have gods as 
fathers and earthly women as mothers. In the case of Huitzilo- 
pochtli, it is said that one day a devout woman saw, in the temple 
at Tulla, floating down from the sky, a ball of feathers which she 
put in her bosom. She found herself pregnant after this. Her 
many children, seeing her in that state, agreed to kill her. But 
the child yet unborn cried out, “‘ Fear not, O my mother, for this 
danger will I turn to our great honour and glory.”? He was born 
with shield and spear ; on his left leg and his head he had green 
plumes, and his face, arms and thigh were barred with lines of 
blue. He fell on the other children and killed them. He was 
the protector of the Mexicans and led them on their journey to 
Mexico. He possessed a shield on which were five balls of feathers 
in the form of a cross, and a golden flag with four arrows in the 
upper part. This shield and flag are said to have been sent down 
to him from heaven to enable him to perform the glorious deeds 
of their national history.} 

Among tribes of North America with no Children of the Sun 
living among them, tales of theogamies are concerned with 
eulture-heroes. The Pueblo Indians claim that the Twin Children 
of the Sun are the children of an earthly woman, or of a foam 
cap, or of the ancestress of the race, embraced by the Sun.? Some 
of the Plains Indians have preserved such tales. The Kiowa, for 
example, say that formerly a girl climbed up to the sky in pursuit 
of a porcupine. To her amazement the tree got taller as she 
climbed, so that she finally got to the sky, where she found that 
the porcupine had turned into the Sun. They married and had a 
son. Her husband warned her against going near a certain plant, 
of which the top had been bitten off by a buffalo. With the usual 
feminine curiosity, she found one that had been cropped by a 
buffalo and pulled it up. It left a hole through which she could 
see the world that she had forgotten. She took a rope, and let 
herself and her son down by means of it ; and her husband, seeing 
what she did, threw a stone after her and killed her. The child 
was uninjured, and got to the bottom, where he was taken care 
of by the Spider Woman. One day in a game he threw up a 
wheel, which came down and cut him into two, so that there were 
twin brothers. After many adventures, in the course of which 
these twins rid the world of many dangerous monsters, one of 
them walked into a lake and disappeared for ever, while the other 
transformed himself into a ‘“‘ medicine” which is the great 
palladium of the tribe, and is kept in a small pouch fringed with 


1 Bancroft III. 288-9. 2 Stevenson ii. 24. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 169 


scalps, and used on certain ceremonial occasions.! The Kiowa 
have no ruling class of Children of the Sun, and the tale is told of 
a being who has been transformed into their national palladium. 

The Osage branch of the Sioux of the plains have two divisions : 
one connected with peace, and the other with war. The warriors 
claim that they once lived in the sky, and that they were the 
children of the sun and moon.? But among the Omaha, who 
were formerly connected with them, even this attenuated belief 
has disappeared, and no connexion with the sky-world is claimed. 
The Omaha simply have the Thunder Being, about whose origin 
apparently nothing is known. 

Kvidence has been accumulating from more than one quarter 

to identify the culture-heroes of various parts of the region. 
In some instances they are actually the Children of the Sun, born 
of theogamies. In others, while they are not said to have been 
sons of the Sun, their form of birth suggests that they may 
originally have had that title. For instance, the great hero of 
Kiriwina in the Trobriands, east of British New Guinea, was born 
of a virgin fertilized by a drop of water.* In Melanesia there are 
tales of culture-heroes, such as Qat of the Banks Islands, and 
Tagaro of the New Hebrides. The story of the birth of Qat is 
similar to that of To’ar in Minahassa. He was born of a woman, 
who was a stone that burst asunder, and no mention is made of 
his father. Tagaro, the great hero of Whitsuntide Island, is said 
to have had a child by an earthly woman. Also it is believed, in 
Leper’s Island, that Tagaro can give women children.* A 
similar belief in theogamy seems to persist in the Ponape belief 
that a pregnant woman must not allow the sun to shine on her 
lest she have a difficult labour.® In all these cases the original 
setting of the tale has been largely destroyed, and the belief 
survives only in fragments. . 
' The occurrences of the doctrine of theogamy serve to throw 
light on the relationship between the communities of the archaic 
civilization and those of its successors, particularly in respect of 
the connexion between sun-gods and. war-gods. 

The stories of theogamy centre round two groups of beings : 
the Children of the Sun and war-gods. The Children of the Sun 
are the actual progeny of the sun-god himself, and thus are semi- 
divine: the war-gods, themselves born of like unions, are thus 
of the same nature, that is to say, semi-divine, and not of the 
rank of the original sun-god himself. Therefore a son of the Sun 
could become a war-god, for this change would neither exalt nor 
abase him in rank. 

Who were these war-gods? The Children of the Sun were 
actual men who once lived in Oceania and elsewhere. Therefore 
when it is said that the first war-god in Samoa, Taeotagaloa, was 
a descendant of the Tagaloa family, of the Children of the Sun, 


1 J. Mooney vi. 239. 2 Fletcher and La Flésche 63. 
3 Malinowski 412. 4 Codrington 154, 169, 230. 5 Hahl 10. 


170 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


it seems that we must accept the story as historical and grant 
him a human form. Similarly, it is said that Oro in Tahiti had a 
son who became a great king.! Oro lived at Opoa, which suggests 
that he was a man. Moreover, no mention is made of theogamy 
in the case of his son. Huitzilopochtli of the Aztecs is said to 
have been a great warrior. Similarly, on the hypothesis that the 
Children of the Sun of American tradition were actual men, the 
twin war-gods of the Zuni must have a human shape. Therefore 
it is reasonable to believe that the war-gods throughout the region 
were actually members of the ruling group of the archaic civiliza- 
tion, who founded dynasties for themselves, and, apparently, 
failed to preserve in their family the belief in the constant inter- 
vention of the sun-god. In this way the title of Son of the Sun 
disappeared. The relationship between the archaic civilization 
and its successors must, if this scheme be stable, be founded on 
some peculiarity of the original ruling group. While possessing 
Children of the Sun, who perpetuate themselves to the accom- 
paniment of the belief in constant divine intervention, there must 
be present some other element that makes it possible for the war- 
gods to emerge and to found families who are born in a normal 
manner. This problem will be discussed at length in Chapters 
XX and XXIII, where it will be seen that the ruling group of the 
archaic civilization really consisted of two independent groups, 
of which the Children of the Sun formed one, while the war-gods 
formed another. 

The scheme just outlined serves to establish a threefold grading 
of divine nature... First comes the sun-god, supreme over all 
others, who can intervene on earth and produce children of mortal 
mothers. These men are semi-divine, incarnate gods as it were, 
but not partaking of the nature of their father. Some of these 
god-born men can found dynasties, and become war-gods. Their 
descendants are not so divine as they, for no mention is made of 
the belief in theogamy as a mode of birth among them. Thus, 
although claiming descent from war-gods, who are really only 
semi-divine, they are a step farther removed from the divinity 
of the sun-god himself. It must not be forgotten that this scheme 
rests on the basis of the restriction of the belief in theogamy as a 
common occurrence to the Children of the Sun. If it can be 
shown that war-gods are in the habit of producing children by 
similar means, then the scheme will have to be abandoned. But 
this will not affect the main argument of the book. 


1 Ellis, loc. cit. 


CHAPTER XIII 
RULERS AND COMMONERS: 
(ii) THE SKY-WORLD 


HE Children of the Sun differed in yet another way from 

the rest of the community. They were closely connected 

with the sky-world, and when they disappeared direct 
communication with this world ceased. 

In Egypt the sky-world is closely connected with the Children 
of the Sun, and it is first mentioned in the Pyramid Texts, in which 
the king, instead of being identified after death and ruling over the 
Osirian land of the dead, went to the sky, there to live in the 
company of Re. ‘‘ The kings of the early Pyramid Age in the 
thirtieth century B.c. evidently looked confidently forward to 
indefinite life hereafter maintained in that way.” 1 The Pyramid 
Texts ‘‘deal almost entirely with a blessed life in a distant 
realm.’ ? 

““ Men fall, 
Their name is not, 
Seize thou king Teti by the arm, 
Take thou king Teti to the sky, 
That he die not on earth among men.” 


This sky-world was at first reserved solely for the king; the 
extension of the privilege to his family and to the nobles was 
accomplished on the basis of the fiction of identity with the king, 
which was produced by ritual means. It is not necessary at this 
point to inquire into the origin of this doctrine. But it is evident 
that, once formulated and accepted, it split the community into 
two groups: that comprising the king and his family, who built 
pyramids, and those of his nobles who ultimately got to the sky ; 
and the rest of the community, who went to the old land of the 
dead. Speaking generally, the nobles of Egypt continued to be 
buried in mastaba tombs, the form of tomb made by the royal 
family before the invention of the pyramid, and these tombs 
contain no traces of solar ideas. It must therefore be borne in 


1 Breasted iv. 81: ‘‘ The prospect of a glorious hereafter in the splendour 
of the sun-god’s presence is the great theme of the Pyramid Texts ”’ (id. iv. 
103). 

2 Id., iv. 99. 3 Id., iv. 102. 4 Murray v.: Petrie ii, 22. 
171 


172 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


mind that connexion with the sky-world does not necessarily, 
in other parts of the region, apply to the whole of the ruling 
class, for, as in Egypt, certain sections may be connected with 
other places of after life. 

In Sumer the idea of a land of the dead in the sky does not seem 
to have been prominent: ‘‘ The idea of a celestial paradise in the 
far-away skies where only immortals lived, or mortals who had 
partaken of the bread of life, does not appear to have had a firm 
hold in popular religion.””» 1 These words of Mr. Langdon show 
that the belief in Sumeria was confined to certain favoured beings. 
The older land of the dead in Sumer was the underworld, and only 
later, when the sun-cult began to exert an influence, and the Children 
of the Sun appear, does the tendency appear to transfer deities 
such as Tammuz to the sky.2. The underworld was, throughout 
Babylonian history, the chief place to which went the dead : 
never had they such elaborate doctrines as those expounded in 
the Pyramid Texts of Egypt. 

In Ancient India the ruling families were partly connected with 
the sky-world. In the Rig Veda both the Daevas and the Asuras 
belonged to the sky,* where they lived in Swarga, the heaven of 
Indra. This is natural, in that the Asuras claimed solar descent. 
Both they and the Daevas were children of Kasyapa, the Sun.* 
The Mahabharata mentions Asuras living in the sky. For 
example, the Paulomas and Kalakanjas live in Hiranyapura, the 
golden city, floating in the air. At the same time some of the 
Asura group were closely connected with the underworld. The great 
city of the Nagas was Patala, which is usually represented as an 
underworld. Here live not only the Nagas, but also the birds, 
the Garudas, another branch of the family of the Asuras. Again, 
Hiranyakasipu was the king of the universe and god of the dead, 
who lived at Hiranyapura, which, although represented as floating 
in the air, at the same time is in Patala, that is, the underworld. 
This underworld is represented as far more beautiful than the 
heaven of Indra; it is “‘ infinite in extent, filled with hundreds of 
palaces and elegant mansions with turrets and domes and gate- 
ways, abounding with wonderful places for various games and 
entertainments.’’ In this underworld the houses are made of 
silver and gold decorated with lapis-lazuli, corals and gems, one 
of which is identical with crystal, and with the sun. These houses 
are high and close to one another.’ 

The connexion that the Asuras have both ‘with the sky and with 
the underworld needs careful attention, for it is not only important, 
but it is apt to cause great difficulty. Why should the ruling 
groups of the Dravidians, or Asuras, be connected with the sky 
and with the underworld ? What is the cause of this duality ? 


1 Langdon i. 37. Rid dit Od 

8 «*Mahabharata,’? Adi Parva liii.: Oldham 31. 4 Oldham 30. 
5 H. H. Wilson 148, n. 12. ® Oldham 81. 
? “Mahabharata,” Udyoga Parva xcix. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 173 


When dealing with mythology and with traditions, the historical 
aspect of facts must never be forgotten. In the epics of India 
it is clearly understood, in the beginning, that the contest between 
the Daevas and Asuras was fought out in the sky, and that these 
two groups of beings became incarnated in mortal women in 
order to take part in the great struggle between the Kauravas and 
Panchalas that is the main theme of the Mahabharata. 

So when. these beings became incarnated on earth, they would 
bring their associations with them. If, therefore, it should 
happen that any branch of the Asuras, say the Nagas, were con- 
nected with the underworld, it would follow that they would be 
considered as having lived in the underworld part of the sky-world. 
For the sky-world is not necessarily thought of as something quite 
different from the earth: it can be the place on earth where the 
Children of the Sun had previously lived. It is enough to mention 
the * Eyeball of the Sun ” of Hawaiian tradition, who lived in the 
*‘ Shining Heavens ” on the borders of Tahiti, to see that the idea 
of the sky-world in tradition need not mean anything more than 
the former home of the Children of the Sun (see p. 138). What 
really is important is the fact of the duality in the ruling groups. 
The Nagas are practically always represented as living in the 
underworld, at Patala and elsewhere, not in darkness and gloom, 
but in a kingdom full of life, wealth and pleasure. It can, there- 
fore, be taken that the Nagas of India represent that part of the 
ruling group of the non-Aryan peoples who were connected with 
the underworld. The Nagas were looked upon in the epic litera- 
ture as half-brothers of the Garudas, or birds, and they both are 
represented as living in the sky or in the underworld. They are 
both sons of the Sun, but with different mothers. 

It was shown in “ The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia ”’ that, 
in cases where the people of the archaic civilization had founded 
ruling classes, the members of which claimed descent from the sky- 
world, the members of those classes went at death to the sky- 
world. The commoners never made such a claim. The spread 
of Islam over the region has obscured the original beliefs of ruling 
groups such as the Bugi and Macassar. But their traditions 
invariably assert that their male ancestor came from the sky.} 
Similarly, the founders of the civilization of the Kolaka of South- 
Kast Celebes are said to have been men from the sky-world.? . 

The available evidence suggests that all the ruling groups of 
Indonesia are derived, with the exception of Mohammedan and 
other invaders, from the ruling groups of the archaic civilization. 
In some instances, as has been seen, these rulers called themselves 
Children of the Sun, and, presumably, this title was formerly held 
much more widely than at present. But a closer study of the 
ruling groups of Indonesian peoples, as well as of those of Poly- 
nesia and elsewhere, has made it clear, as was pointed out some 
time ago by Mr. Hocart, that the ruling groups themselves are 


1 Kruyt iii. 467: Morris 549: Erkelens 81. 2 Kruyt, viii. 692. 


174 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


composite: In India, for instance, the Nagas, ancestors of ruling 
families of the Dravidians, were connected not only with the sky 
but also with the underworld, and this duality of association forms 
a bewildering element in the study of Indian literature of the epic 
period. Similarly, in places such as South Celebes, it is found that 
the Bugi ruling groups had as ancestors a god from the sky-world 
and a goddess from the underworld. The ruling family thus had 
its origin, according to the myth, in a union between members of 
two entirely different groups. For the present, therefore, it is 
not only advisable, but necessary, to claim simply that an associa- 
tion with the sky-world is only found in connexion with members 
of ruling groups ; and that commoners, except perhaps in the case 
of warriors, never have any connexion with that place. On the 
other hand, some members of the ruling group can be connected 
with the underworld. 

In Polynesia the sky-world is a thing of the past; it belongs 
to the days of the Children of the Sun. In Samoa the traditions 
of the colonization of Manu’a depict the Tagaloa family coming 
from the skies on to the earth, and the ancestress Ui, of the ruling 
family, coming from a place with a sun-god who received human 
sacrifices. But when the Children of the Sun disappeared, the 
connexion with the sky-world was evidently broken off for good, 
and henceforth the gods and the dead lived in the underworld. 
In other parts of Polynesia a similar sequence is to be observed. 
In Hawaii the great chiefs of the past were closely connected with 
the sky.! According to Ellis the rulers of Hawaii, who some- 
times went to the sky, did not stay there, but were reincarnated in 
a rejuvenated form on the earth.2, The commoners go to the 
gloomy underworld. In Tahiti, with which Hawaii was formerly 
connected, the classes separate at death.? The king of Tahiti was 
the son of Oro, who was born at Opoa in Raiatea. The rulers and 
nobility, and the members of the great Areioi society, an institu- 
tion founded by two brothers of Oro, went after death to an earthly 
paradise on top of a mountain in Raiatea,* while the commoners 
went underground. It is possible that formerly the land of the 
dead for kings in that group was the sky ; for the dwelling of the 
‘*Hyeball of the Sun,’’ so famous in Hawaiian tradition, was ** The 
Shining Heavens ” on the borders of Tahiti. 

The evidence regarding the existence of a belief, in New Zealand, 
in a Sky-world for the dead is somewhat doubtful. Some writers 
state that the great chiefs and priests of the Maori formerly went 
to the sky. This is disputed by Elsdon Best, an authority whose 
word is to be trusted ; he claims that the dead always went to the 
underworld, in the island of Hawaiki, the mythical home of the 
race of the Polynesians.® At the same time he does not seem to 
be quite consistent. In 1914 he says: ‘‘ The broad way of Tane 
is the path or way by which the spirits of the dead pass on their 


1 Beckwith 302, 308, 309. 2 Ellis IV. 411: Beckwith 299, n, 2. 
3 Id., IV. 428. 4 Id., 1. 397. 5 Best v. 230 es.: iv. 24. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 175 


way back to the fatherland of the race, the place where man 
originated, whence they pass down to the underworld, or ascend 
to the heavens, according to whether they sympathize most with 
the Earth Mother or the Sky Father Parent.’’?1 This would 
harmonize with the statement that, in some tribes, the great 
priests called tohungas, who are said to have died out, went, 
together with the great chiefs, to the sky.2. It is, I think, best to 
conclude that the sky-world is, for the Maoris, a thing of the past ; 
that the class connected with it has disappeared, leaving only 
people connected with the underworld. This agrees with the 
fact that theogamy and the sun-cult only persist in tradition and 
folk-lore among these people. <A careful comparison of the 
various Maori tribes in this matter would evidently produce 
interesting results; for the two groups of authorities may be 
basing their evidence upon facts derived from different sources. 

In Melanesia the underworld is practically universal, especially 
in these places with no ruling class. The only beings in such 
places connected with the sky are the culture-heroes, who have 
already been claimed as representatives of the archaic civilization. 

The ruling class in Mexico believed themselves to go to the sky 
after death, while commoners went underground.’ The Yuchi 
of the Savannah River, who call themselves Children of the Sun, 
all go after death to the sky, whence came their ancestors.4 The 
Natchez of Louisiana were ruled over by Suns, whose ancestors 
came from the sky.® I have no evidence with regard to 
their beliefs as to the destination of the ghosts after death; but 
from the principle that ghosts usually go back to the place of 
origin of their ancestors,® it would be expected that these Suns 
believe themselves, like the Children of the Sun elsewhere, to go 
after death to the sky. The Pueblo Indians, who have no ruling 
class of Children of the Sun, universally believe that they go after 
death to the underworld.? The analogy of the Yuchi, just quoted, 
suggests that the Zuni, who call themselves Children of the Sun, 
would go to the sky after death. But the Zuni have no belief in 
theogamy, and they have no people produced by such unions, as 
among the Yuchi. 

The beliefs of the Indian tribes of the Plains are complicated, 
as would be expected, for their culture has suffered many modifi- 
cations as the result of |their movement from the Hastern Area. 
Among the Sioux, the Dakota have no land of the dead in the sky, 
but they believe that certain stars are men transported to the 
sky. Another indication of a former land of the dead in the sky 
lies in the belief that the ghost of the dead, on the way to the land 


1 Id., xi. 136. 

* Goldie 25. ‘‘ The only item pointing to anything like a system of star 
worship is in connexion with agriculture.’’ Best vill. 448. 

$ Bancroft III. 533-4. 4 Speck 11. 97. 

5 du Pratz 330. 6 Perry ii 

* Stevenson ii.: Cushing ii. 343: Fewkes iv. 258: Ch Chap. 17. 


176 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


of the dead, is pushed over a cliff or from a cloud, if it is not 
tattooed.!_ This suggests a former land of the dead in the sky. 
The Omaha believe that their ghosts go to the land of the dead by 
the Milky Way.? The Mandan claim that the stars are ghosts, 
and believe that when a child is born a star comes to earth and 
appears in human form: at death it returns to the sky.* The 
associated Hidatsa, on the other hand, have an underground land 
of the dead.* Such are the beliefs of some of the Indian tribes of 
North America with regard to the destiny of the ghost after death. 
Their indefiniteness is an index of separation from their original 
context. 

This survey shows that the Children of the Sun are invariably 
connected with the sky-world, and claim to go there after death. 
In the course of time the Children of the Sun have disappeared, 
and other rulers are usually found in their place. In Polynesia, 
for instance, these later rulers are connected with the underworld, 
or with an earthly paradise. This suggests, once again, that the 
ruling class of the archaic civilization was complex, for the 
evidence derived from the examination of the doctrine of theogamy 
leads to the conclusion that the later dynasties were derived from 
these early ruling groups. In India, it will be remembered, the 
Asuras, were connected both with the sky and with the under- 
world, and yet were said to be of solar race, which shows that they 
were not homogeneous like the Children of the Sun of Heliopolis, 
but resemble the ruling classes of Polynesia, which, originally, 
partly at least, connected with the sky, are now wholly connected 
with the underworld, or with an earthly paradise. 

If it be true that the archaic civilization has given rise to com- 
munities with war-gods connected with the underworld, it follows, 
as has already been pointed out, that the rulers of the archaic 
civilization must have formed a complex group. The nature of 
this group will have to be discussed, and this discussion will take 
place when the dual organization of society is under review. For 
the present it can be stated that the sky-world is apparently 
associated solely with the Children of the Sun, that commoners 
never enter it, and that when the Children of the Sun disappear, 
communication with the sky-world is broken off, or is sporadic. 

The association between the Children of the Sun and the sky- 
world serves to bring the culture-heroes into greater contact with 
the archaic civilization. The two culture-heroes of Indonesia 
that have played so prominent a part in previous discussions, 
Lasaeo of the Toradja of Central Celebes, and Lumawig of the 
Bontoc of Luzon in the Philippines, are both connected with the 
sky. Both came to their respective peoples, married women, 
had children, and then went back to the sky, leaving their wives 
and children behind them. Similarly with the culture-heroes of 
Australia. The two youths who civilized many of the peoples are 


1 J. G. Dorsey ii. 484-5 ; i. 145. 2 Fletcher and La Fiésche 588. 
3 J. O. Dorsey ii. 508. 01d, tie DIS. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 177 


thought to be still wandering about the earth, but the All-Fathers, 
who are associated with other tribes, are believed now to live in the 
sky.1 For example, Nurelli of the Wiimbaio made the whole 
country, rivers, trees, animals: he gave laws to the natives, and 
finally ascended to the sky. In the tribe of South-West Victoria 
the chief being is a gigantic man who lives in the sky. He is of a 
kindly disposition and harms no one, is seldom mentioned but 
always with respect.? All the beings believed in by the tribes | 
conform to the same type: they once dwelt on earth, gave the 
people their civilization, and then went up to the sky to dwell. 

Melanesian culture-heroes belong to the sky-world. Tagaro, 
the culture-hero of Araga, or Whitsuntide Island, came down from 
heaven, made men and other things, and finally went back to 
the sky. He was the father of a boy by an earthly woman. 
Mother and son went up to the sky to see Tagaro, and persuaded 
him to return to earth with them. They climbed down. Tagaro 
came last and on the way cut the line above the woman and child, 
and thus severed connexion between the earth and sky-world.# 
Several Tagaro beings exist in Melanesian folk-lore, all of which 
belong to the sky-world (as the Tagaloa of the Samoans, and of the 
rest of Polynesia). They are all vui, spirits to whom are ascribed 
the remains of stone structures that exist in various places, so 
that they evidently belong to the archaic civilization. These 
culture-heroes did not stay. Qat, one of them, who came to 
Vanua Lava, left in a canoe, and his return is confidently expected.°® 
Atabulu is a village of Pentecost with many remains of the archaic 
civilization, in the shape of sepuichral stones. In this place are 
ancient house sites raised perhaps a yard above the ground: 
near by, at Anwalu, are stones over the graves of former chiefs. 
In the village place of Atabulu lies a stone of winged shape called 
Vingaga. This Vingaga, ‘“‘ The Flyer with webbed wings,”’ who 
came from the sky to the village, was a supernatural being, a 
vui, who, after a time, returned to the sky-world.® 

American culture-heroes are connected with the sky-world. 
Their mother comes thence, or else their father is said explicitly 
to have been the Sun himself. In the case of the Pueblo Indians, 
these heroes stand in strong contrast with the rest of the com- 
munity. The Zuni Indians, for instance, claim to be connected 
solely with the underworld : there they were made and there they 
go after death. At the same time Zuni culture came from the 
twins born of the foam-cap by the action of the rays of the great 
Sun-Father ; to them were given knowledge, and the leadership 
and dominion of all men. In the beginning the twins and the 
priest fathers gathered in council for the naming and selection of 
‘“‘ man-groups and creature-kinds,” and thus organized the social 
organization of the whole tribe.?. The Sia Indians, of the Pueblo 


1 Howitt 477. 2 Td., 480. 3 Td., 500. 
4 Codrington 169. 5 Id., 166. 6 Td., 46. 
7 Cushing ii, 386. 
12 


178 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


region, say that the Twin Children of the Sun organized, on the 
earth, the cult societies of the people. Among the Hopi Indians 
the story is told of Twin Children, who brought them out of the 
underworld, and civilized them.2 In the Eastern States is found 
the claim to have been civilized by beings associated with the sky- 
world. The founders of the Natchez ruling house came both 
from the direction of Mexico and from the sky. The Yuchi claim 
that their culture-hero was either a supernatural being or else a 
child of the Sun. The story runs that formerly, when nothing 
existed but an expanse of water and air, certain sky-beings with 
animal names, made the earth by fishing it up from the waters. 
A woman of the sky-world became with child, and when the boy 
was born she took him to the Rainbow, the gathering-place of the 
sky-beings, to be initiated. After a time the mother and child 
were driven away, and seem to have fallen to the earth. The son 
was called the Sun, and he became the ancestor of the Yuchi. 
He taught them all their ceremonial, and gave them the knowledge 
of certain remedies. The Creeks attribute their civilization to 
a being called ‘“‘ The Master of Breath,’’ who is associated with 
the sky-world.* The creation tale of the Huron, already quoted, 
shows how the culture-hero came from the sky. It is not neces- 
sary to give more examples of the sky-origin of American heroes : 
that has already been done by Brinton, and summarized in the 
quotation already made from his work. 

The survey just completed shows that the sky-world often is 
a thing of the past. Hither the Children of the Sun have once 
ruled and disappeared, or else culture-heroes have come from the 
sky and returned there, breaking off connexion with the earth. 
Only where the Children of the Sun, or their direct descendants, 
still rule, does direct communication with the sky-world still 
exist. In all places, the passing of the beings connected with the 
sky-world means the severance of direct intercourse with that 
land. When, therefore, mention is made of sky-gods among a 
people who have no class of the community connected with the 
sky, it will have to be borne in mind that these sky-gods may be, 
and probably are, survivals from the time when “ sky-born ” 
beings lived on the earth. When mention is made, for example, 
among the Maori, of Tangaloa, who is in the sky, the explanation 
cannot be that he is a deity who is the product of native specula- 
tion: on the contrary, Tangaloas actually walked the earth at 
Manu’a, the homeland of the Eastern Polynesians. What has 
happened is that the Children of Tangaloa have gone, but that 
Tangaloa has survived in tradition. 

The relation between the Children of the Sun and the sky- 
world makes it possible to link still closer the rulers of the archaic 
civilization and culture-heroes among various peoples. They 
belong to a world with which no one else has any connexion. 


1 Stevenson 43-75. 2 Fewkes iv. 266. 
3 Speck ii. 105. 4 Speck ii; 163. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 179 


The rest of the community belong to the underworld, or to some 
land of the dead over the sea. 

It is possible to approach the problem of the sky-world from 
another standpoint. It can be shown that the Children of the 
Sun acted as high priests of the sun-cult wherever they went. 
This is only a special example of a general theorem, that cults 
of gods are only carried on by their descendants. I have already 
established this thesis in “* The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia ” 
for the communities therein studied: 1 but it is necessary to 
return once again to this matter. 

In Egypt, from the time of the Fifth Dynasty onwards, the 
king was the high priest of the sun-cult, and had to perform daily 
ceremonies in connexion with the sun-god.? The cult which he 
had to render towards the god was that which a dutiful son ren- 
ders to his father. The king in relation to the gods, and the 
eldest son in relation to his father, were on exactly the same plane: 
the king was himself a god, and the god whose cult he carried on 
was his father. Therefore the cult of the gods of Egypt was an 
ancestor-cult in the royal family. In the tomb the ancestors of 
each man received the funerary cults of their sons ; in the temples 
the gods received the divine cult at the hands of their sons, the 
kings. In the cult of the god, the son, that is, the king, was 
assisted by his wife, usually his sister, and his mother, the wife 
of the dead king. The temple itself was planned in the same 
manner as a palace: round it was a sacred wood, and a lake was 
in the grounds, just as are seen in the pictures of private houses 
of the upper classes. Nothing distinguished the dwelling of the 
god from that of his descendants. The gods of Egypt lived in 
their temples in the manner of mortals: they had luxurious rooms 
fitted up for the use of the occupant.* 

The first appropriations of lands in Egypt were apparently 
those destined for the upkeep of the temples and their staffs. 
The military chiefs only appeared later, about the time of the 
Twelfth Dynasty, or perhaps even later. The cause of the expedi- 
tions to Asia and to the regions of the Upper Nile, was simply the 
need of materials for the building and decorating of temples, and 
for use in the temple ritual: in fact, it is not saying too much, 
according to Moret, to claim that the upkeep of the table of the 
gods, the filling of the sacred vases, and the procuring of the 
necessary clothing and ornaments for the state cult, was one of the 
chief preoccupations of the king and the royal administration.° 
The king had to provide all the supplies for the temples, and for 
the tombs whose occupants had been granted the favour of the 
royal funerary ceremonies. It is thus obvious that the greater 
part of the organization of Ancient Egypt was focussed on the 
temples and the royal palaces. The king stood at the centre of a 
vast complex organization concerned mainly with the cult of the 


1 Perry vii. Chap. 18. * Blackman ii. 16 es. 
5 Moret i. 117. 4 Id., 118, 126, 130. 5 Id., 186, 


180 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


royal dead, and the whole economic and social life of the com- 
munity revolved round this centre. This makes it possible to 
understand the significance to the Egyptians of their king. In 
the words of Moret: “* The Egyptians worshipped in Pharaoh not 
the strongest, best born, richest man, but the son of the gods and 
their priest, who acted as intermediary between men and gods. 
On this priest descended the cult of the gods and of the dead. 
This cult having preserved the religious rites of his ancestors, it 
was necessary that the king in order to be able to celebrate them 
should be of the same race as the gods and the Osirian dead, 
whence the theory of the divine birth of the Pharaoh. The king 
had, moreover, each day to receive a new supply of the fluid of 
life.”” 1 One consequence of this interdependence of state cult 
and ruling family was that when one dynasty, or one branch of 
the ruling family, overthrew another, the result was a new state 
god. For example, when, as seems to have been the case, the 
Heliopolitan ruling family got power, the solar cult became the 
state religion of Egypt, this cult being that of the god from whom 
the king of Heliopolis was descended. Similarly, when the ruling 
houses of Memphis or Thebes got the throne, the state gods were 
changed. So when, in consequence of invasions of victorious 
strangers, the king of Egypt no longer was the son of the gods, 
their cults, left in the hands of ordinary mortals, were neglected. 
According to the Papyrus Salliari, says Moret, the Hyksos king 
Apopi abandoned the cult of Re for that of Sutekh, of which cult 
the Theban Seqenenre, as descendant of the indigenous royal 
family, took charge.? 

It is not surprising that, so intimate being the ties between the 
ruling family and the state cult, the commoners seemingly played 
no part in the formation of the Egyptian religious system, cer- 
tainly not of the solar cult. The necessity for the maintenance 
of this vast system made it imperative to found large priestly 
corporations, usually hereditary, and, in the higher orders, of 
noble or royal birth. This priestly class has produced the great 
developments of religious thought in Egypt, the commoners 
apparently taking no part in this matter. As is said, “‘ No one 
was of necessity excluded from the mysteries of the Egyptian 
religion : these were as accessible to the people as to the nobility, 
however true it may be that the former troubled themselves but 
little on the subject, and left it to the priests to take thought for 
the offermgs. The people would naturally have more faith in 
the power of amulets and magic than had the cultured classes, 
yet fundamentally the religious belief of all classes was the same.” # 
Since the cult of the state deities was primarily an ancestor-cult 
of the royal family, it is not surprising to meet with this indifference 
on the part of the ordinary people. 

Little is known of the manner in which the religious system of 
the Sumerians was carried out. At the time of the first dynasty 


1 Moret i. 281. 2 Id., i. 280, n. 4. ° Wiedemann 206. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 181 


of Babylon the priesthood seems to have contained members of 
the royal family.!. The Sumerian kings were evidently identified 
with Tammuz, the god of vegetation, the son of the great mother 
goddess, and represented him in certain ceremonies.2. As in 
Egypt, the ordinary people seem to have taken no part in the 
production of religious system. In the words of Robertson 
Smith: “ The official system of Babylon and Assyrian religion, 
as it is known to us from priestly text and public inscriptions, 
bears clear marks of being something more than popular traditional 
faith ; it has been artificially moulded by priest-craft and state- 
craft in much the same way as the official religion of Egypt—that 
is to say, it is in great measure an artificial combination, for 
imperial purposes, of elements drawn from a number of local 
worships. In all probability the actual religion of the masses was 
always much simpler than the official system.”’ 3 

Indian religion seems to have been primarily an affair of the 
ruling groups. The compositions of the Aryan immigrants into 
India were long regarded as typical of the first strivings of the 
human mind towards the comprehension of the mysteries of the 
universe ; they were supposed to represent the infancy of human 
speculation. But of late years the advance of knowledge of the 
conditions under which the civilization of the Aryans of India was 
developed, and the more critical study of the writings themselves, 
has convinced most students that these writings, far from being 
the spontaneous products of naive speculation, are, on the contrary, 
highly artificial, and the product, not of the beginnings of religious 
thought, but rather of its later and modified forms. This point of 
view has forcibly been expressed by Barth. ‘“ My views on the 
Veda are not precisely the same as those which are most generally 
accepted. For in it I recognize a literature that is pre-eminently 
sacerdotal, and in no sense a popular one; and from this con- 
clusion I do not, as is ordinarily done, except even the hymns, 
the most ancient of the documents. Neither in the language nor 
in the thought of the Rig-Veda have I been able to discover that 
quality of primitive natural simplicity which so many are fain to 
see init. The poetry it contains appears to me, on the contrary, 
to be of singularly refined character and artificially elaborated, 
full of allusions and reticences, of pretensions to mysticism and 
theosophic insight ; and the manner of its expression is such as 
reminds one more frequently of the phraseology in use among 
certain small groups of initiates than the poetic language of a 
large community. And these features I am constrained to remark 
as characteristic of the whole collection; not that they assert 
themselves with equal emphasis in all the hymns—the most 
abstruse imaginings being not without their moments of sim- 
plicity of conception; but there are very few of these hymns 
which do not show some trace of them, and it is always difficult 
to find in the book and ‘to extract clearly defined portions of 


1 King ii, 116. 2 Langdon i. 26. 3 R. Smith ii. 14. 


182 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


erfectly natural and simple conception. ... The hymns, as I 
heer already remarked, do not appear to me to show the least 
trace of popular derivation. I rather imagine that they emanate 
from a narrow circle of priests, and that they reflect a somewhat 
singular view of things. ... Jam therefore far from believing 
that the Veda has taught us everything on the ancient social and 
religious condition of even Aryan India, or that everything there 
can be accounted for by reference to it. Outside of it I see room 
not only for superstitious beliefs, but for real popular religions, 
more or less distinct from that which we find in it.... We 
shall perhaps find that . . . the past did not differ so much from 
the present as might at first appear, that India has always had, 
alongside of its Veda, something equivalent to its great Civaite 
and Vishnuite religions, which we see in the ascendant at a later 
date, and that these anyhow existed contemporaneously with it for 
a very much longer period than has till now been generally sup- 
posed.” + Later on, when the ascendancy of the Brahmins was 
complete, the relationship between the priesthood and the cult 
of the gods became even more intimate. The Brahmins claimed 
to be divine, and the worshipper had to have allhis religious rites 
performed for him by a Brahmin priest. The Brahmins were 
responsible in India for the institution of caste, with its multi- 
tudinous restrictions of all kinds. The official culture of Brah- 
minism, says Barth, was aristocratic, and is competent only for 
chiefs and men of wealth. Even the domestic ritual which it 
involved was costly, and far beyond the means of the poor man. 
The Brahmins formed “ the intellectual and religious aristocracy 
of the nation,’ and they were at the head of all new religious 
movements in Hinduism in subsequent ages.? 

With regard to the Dravidians, it is not possible to estimate 
accurately the part played by the ruling classes in the religious 
systems. It would seem, however, that cults of gods were 
associated with hereditary priesthoods of royal birth. For 
example, it is probable that certain cults were introduced to the 
Aryans by the priestly family of Bhrigu, who seems to have been 
an Asura, that is a Dravidian. It is known, further, that the 
Brahmins derived the fundamental doctrines of the Upanishads 
from Kshatriyas, that is Children of the Sun.? The priests of 
the Nagas, another people of the Dravidian, or non-Aryan civiliza- 
tion, probably belonged to the Kshatriya, or royal caste of 
Children of the Sun. This is so nowadays among the peoples of 
the Chenab Valley in the Himalayas. Oldham says: “ In this 
we have a survival of ancient customs existing in the far-off days 
when the Kshatriya chief offered his own sacrifices.””* These 
temples are in honour of the old deified chiefs of the Nagas, and 
the cults carried on in them constitute another example of the 
temple ritual being simply an ancestor-cult of the ruling family. 


1 Barth xiiti.-xv. Cf. also Moulton. 2 Id., 154-5, 158, 
3 Deussen 18-20: Oldham 70. * Oldham 93. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 183 


It is beyond doubt that the main developments of religion in 
India were in the hands of the two upper castes, the Brahmins 
and the Kshatriyas or rulers. Not only did the Brahmins pro- 
duce Brahminism, and the multiplication of the Hindu sects ; 
but to the Kshatriyas India owes many dogmas, especially that 
of reincarnation. Buddhism and Jainism are intimately connected 
with the ruling families of the serpent-worshipping Naga races 
of the Dravidian times.t The gradual development of a sacred 
language, only understood by a few priests, still farther shows 
that the religious thought of India was in the hands of people 
who claimed special relationships with the gods. It may be 
claimed that this great priestly development of Indian religion 
was accompanied by another development of popular religion, 
and many customs are pointed to in support of this contention. 
This argument certainly may have some weight. But it is not 
stably founded. For, as has been seen, the present-day Indian 
peoples have a long history behind them, and many of them 
clearly are derived from highly civilized peoples of the past. If 
it is proposed to select communities possessing the popular 
religions that stand outside of the great priestly development, 
where shall they be found? Apparently nowhere in India out- 
side of the food-gatherers like the Veddas and other jungle tribes 
of South India. A Dravidian tribe, such as the Oraon of Chota 
Nagpur, possesses a religious system compounded of elements 
brought with them from their original home, and others that they 
have derived from the Kols.?. Their religion is purely utilitarian : 
‘** They look upon God as being too good to punish them, and 
therefore they do not think that they are answerable to him in 
any way for their conduct. ... All their anxiety is about this 
world, and all their religious practices tend only to worldly things, 
namely, to get good crops and be free from sickness.’?? The 
Kols, again, are connected with the ancient ruling races of India. 
In this case, as in others, inquiry invariably leads to the com- 
munities of the archaic civilization. 

Ignoring these considerations for a moment, and conceding 
the feasibility of separating peoples into categories according to 
the nature of the deities whom they are said to worship, can any 
signs be detected of an independent development among the 
peoples of lower culture in India of a cult of gods? In the 
Census Report for 1901, Sir Herbert Risley discusses the less 
advanced peoples of India whom he calls Animistic. He says: 
** We may .. . sum up the leading feature of Animism in India. 
It conceives of man as passing through life surrounded by a 
ghostly company of powers, elements, tendencies mostly im- 
personal in their character, shapeless phantasms of which no 
image can be made and no definite idea can be formed.’ 4 He 

1 Cf. de Visser, where it is shown that the belief in dragons and Nagas was 


carried about the East by Buddhists. 
2 Dehon 124, 3. id. 125. 4 India, Census of, 1901, i. 356. 


184 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


then goes on to compare this Animism with the popular Hinduism 
of the present day, that form of religion which came into being 
after the revival of Brahminism and the downfall of Buddhism 
in India. It is a medley of all kinds of religious systems—Vedice, 
Dravidian, Brahmanic, Christian, Mohammedan, and so on—but 
the main thread of development is, as has been seen, held by the 
Brahmins, who have been responsible for the production of the 
new sects. Risley defined Hinduism as Animism more or less 
transformed by philosophy, or as magic tempered by meta- 
physics. ‘“‘ The fact is,” he says, “‘ that within the enormous 
range of beliefs and practices which are included in the term 
Hinduism, there are comprised two entirely different sets of ideas, 
or, one may say, two widely different conceptions of the world 
and of life. At one end, at the lower end of the series is Animism, 
an essentially materialistic theory of things which seeks by means 
of magic to ward off or to forestall physical disasters, which looks 
no farther than the world of sense, and seeks to make that as 
tolerable as the conditions will permit. At the other end Pan- 
theism combined with a system of transcendental metaphysics.” } 
He then goes on to say that “‘ The Animistic usages of which we 
find such abundant traces in Hinduism appear indeed to have 
passed into the religion from two different sources. Some are 
derived from the Vedic Aryans themselves, others from the 
Dravidian races who have been absorbed into Hinduism. As to 
the first, Bergaigne has shown in his treatise on Vedic religion 
that the Vedic sacrifice which is still performed by the more 
orthodox Hindus in various parts of India is nothing more nor 
less than an imitation of certain celestial phemonena.? It is, in 
other words, merely sympathetic magic directed in the first 
instance to securing the material benefits of sunshine and rain in 
their appointed seasons. The Vedas themselves, therefore, are 
one source of the manifold Animistic practices which may now be 
traced through popular Hinduism. They have contributed not 
only the imitative type of sacrifice but also the belief, no less 
magical in its character, that by the force of penance and ascetic 
abnegation man may shake the distant seat of the gods and compel 
them to submit themselves to his will. It would be fruitless to 
attempt to distinguish the two systems of magical usage—the 
Vedic and the Animistic. They are of mixed parentage like the 
people who observe them, partly Indo-European and _ partly 
Dravidian.” ? In other words, it is possible that the whole of 
the Animism of the peoples of India represents what the native 
mind has selected from more highly developed religious systems, 
and that it has nothing primitive about it. The quotation at 
least compels an open mind on the subject. Because the archaic 
civilization stands behind that of the present peoples of India, 
it is imperative to seek in it first of all the source of the present- 


1 India, Census of, 1910, 357, * Bergaigne. 3 Risley 358. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 185 


day Animism. No valid reason exists to deny this conclusion, 
and much to accept it. 

In Indonesia the available evidence goes to show that cults 
of gods are carried on by those who claim descent from them, 
that is, by the immigrants who came in with the archaic civiliza- 
tion and imposed themselves as rulers. They claimed to be con- 
nected with the sky-world, and carried on cults connected with 
their divine ancestors: the ordinary people take no active part 
in these cults, and obviously could have had nothing to do with 
their development. Not only are they excluded from the state 
cult, but they do not seem to take any interest in it at all. For, 
as has been pointed out, the indigenous population cares but little 
for the gods in the sky, the ancestors of the sky-born rulers. This 
evidence is so important that I may perhaps be allowed to quote 
it in full. | 

Heer Kruyt says: ‘“‘ Where the belief in and the worship of 
gods is an integral part of the life of primitive man, he has no more 
than a suspicion of his gods, and that suspicion has but little 
influence upon his daily life.” Again he says that a Toradja man 
is “‘ quite conscious of the relationship between man and the ghosts 
of his ancestors. But when anyone asks him about his gods and 
spirits, then perhaps he may have something to tell which he has 
learned by chance, but generally he refers the questioner to the 
priests.”’ In Nias, where the religion is well developed, ‘‘ the Nias 
people do not worship their gods, they only expect good from 
them.”’ Heer Westenberg says of the Karo Batta of Sumatra 
that ‘‘ the tales about the gods are preserved by the priests, for the 
ordinary people know practically nothing about them ; they only 
know what they have picked up here and there.’’ 1 

It is fortunate that these field workers have noticed this in- 
difference of commoners towards the gods of the community. I 
am confident that this proposition is of universal application, 
and that inquiry will bear out the statements of these students. 
It is possible to support this conclusion from another direction. 
** Among all the peoples of Borneo a number of myths are handed 
on from generation to generation by word of mouth. These are 
related again and again by those who make themselves reputations 
as story-tellers, especially the old men and women; and the 
people are never tired of hearing them repeated, as they sit in 
groups about their hearths between supper and bed-time, and 
especially when camping in the jungle. 

‘‘ The myths vary considerably in the mouths of different story- 
tellers, especially of those that live in wide-separated districts ; 
for the myths commonly have a certain amount of local colouring. 
Few or none of the myths are common to all the people, but those 
of any one people are generally known in more or less authentic 
form to their neighbours. 

** Although many of the myths deal with such subjects as the 


1 Perry vii. 166-7. 


186 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


creation of the world, of man, of animals and plants, the discovery 
of fire and agriculture, subjects of which the mythology has been 
incorporated in the religious teachings of the Classical and 
Christian worlds, the mythology of these people has little relation 
to their religion. The gods figure but little in the myths, and the 
myths are related with little or no religious feeling, no sense of 
awe, and very little sense of obligation to hand them on unchanged. 
They are related in much the same spirit and on the same occasions 
as the animal stories, of which also the people are fond, and they 
may be said to be sustained by the purely esthetic or literary 
motive rather than the religious or scientific motives.” } 

This quotation shows where lie the real interests of the Borneo 
peoples. They are concerned with homely matters, and not with 
the vague figures of the gods, the ancestors of their ruling classes. 
Knowledge of the gods belongs to the priests, whose business and 
interest it is to preserve it. The ordinary man is more interested 
in his own affairs, and in the ghosts of his own folk. The fact 
that the tales are allowed to be varied shows the absence of any 
religious feeling. For the usual rule in the case of sacred myths 
is that the slightest deviation from the exact wording niles be 
visited with the direst penalties. 

‘The corollary to the theorem that cults of sky-gods are in the 
hands of those who claim relationship with them, is that where 
no such class exists such cults will be absent. It is possible to 
put this matter to the test. Certain peoples have been visited 
by culture-heroes, beings who came from the sky, married some 
of their women, and then departed without founding a ruling class. 
Such people include the Toradja of Central Celebes, the Bontoc 
of Luzon, the Australians, and certain peoples of New Guinea, 
Melanesia and North America. 

The Posso-Todjo group of the Toradja of Central Celebes, who 
have no chiefly class, say that a culture-hero, Lasaeo, the Sun- 
Lord, once visited them and civilized them, and that his sons 
went away elsewhere to found chiefly houses. These peoples 
have no hereditary priesthood, and men, except in rare instances, 
do not act as priests. That is reserved for women. Priestesses 
are not concerned with cults of gods: their functions are practical, 
for they are needed in ceremonies connected with illness, agricul- 
ture, funerals, and house-building. It may be thought that these 
functions of priestesses are of native origin, but the Toradja deny 
this, and claim that the sky people began the craft by instructing 
some woman whom they took to the sky for the purpose. In 
‘* The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia ”’ it has been shown that these 
functions of the initiated priesthood persist because the culture- 
heroes and other people of the archaic civilization who introduced 
the use of stone, irrigation and so on, also brought with them ideas 
with regard to the nature of the life of man which made it im- 
perative for the priesthood to continue if men were to remain in 


1 Hose and McDougall II. 136-7. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 187 


health, to get their food-supply, to build houses satisfactorily, and 
to find their way to the land of the dead. 

The Toradja have a few deities, although, as Kruyt says, 
they take no real interest in them. If these deities are derived 
from the archaic civilization, and are not the product of native 
thought, their survival must be explained; and it can be shown 
that they bear a direct relationship to each Toradja man and 
woman, as well as to the people of the archaic civilization. 
In the first instance the Toradja have two chief deities, iLai 
above and iNdara below. ‘* These are known as otiose deities, 
who reign above and beneath as rulers, and do not trouble them- 
selves with men.’ These two deities made the first Toradja man 
out of stone images, and then retired to the background, being 
but rarely called upon.! Another god, Pue di Songi, ‘‘ the lord 
in the room,’ figures in the Toradja mythology, presumably 
because he plays an important part when the priestesses are 
engaged in the cure of illness. The theory of illness is that the 
‘life’ of the patient has been taken from him by some agency, 
such as a sky-being. When she wishes to cure anyone, the 
priestess goes into a trance, and her “‘life,’’ accompanied by her 
familiar sky-spirit, goes to the sky, to Pue di Songi, to claim the 
life of the patient. Pue di Songi decides whether it shall be 
restored or not. Thus the persistence of a god is accompanied 
by some useful function on his part. 

Kruyt goes on to say: “* We shall find the names of other gods 
in various prayers that are included in this volume. It is super- 
fluous to mention here that ordinary people know no more of 
themthan the name. In general, the knowledge of these gods and 
of many spirits is the property of the priestesses. The people 
know them not ; the people know only of one god and that is Pue 
mPalaburu.”’ His name means ‘the kneader” and this refers 
to his function of ‘‘man-maker,’ Although creation was 
performed by other gods, it was Pue mPalaburu who ordered it 
to be done. In prayers he is named as the god who separated the 
fingers of the hand, the lips and so on. In his function of man- 
maker he is supposed to live in a house, the floor-laths of which 
consist of human fingers, the roof-beams of ribs and so on, and 
he uses these to make men. His betel-pouch consists of a human 
scalp.2. This important god performs a function of vital interest 
to every Toradja, the making of human beings. The Toradja 
have none of the usual type of deities that are to be found in 
Egypt and elsewhere, no war-gods or sun-gods, or any of the 
personifications of nature. The two gods who really do play a 
part in their theology are intimately associated with them in 
connexion with the cure of illness, and with the process of birth. 

The Toradja tell of the time when close intercourse existed 
between the sky and the earth. In those days the sky lay near 
to the earth, and the separation took place on account of the 


1 Kruyt and Adriani I. 268. 2 Id., 269, 


188 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


nausea caused in the gods by the Toradja pigs. Now that inter- 
course is broken off, except for the priestesses, the Toradja know 
practically nothing of the sky-world. This tradition of separation 
agrees with that of Lasaeo, in that it can be interpreted as meaning 
that sky-descended people once lived among the Toradja. Now 
that they have gone the priestesses alone can communicate with 
the sky. 

The Toradja in their religion pay no attention to deities that 
perform no useful function ; iLai and iNdara, having created men 
have retired, so to speak, and are not the objects of any cult. Pue 
mPalaburu, the actual maker of each human being, is of import- 
ance, and is the object of a cult. In this way he, and similar 
gods, constitute an exception to the rule that cults of gods are 
really ancestor-cults. Precisely the same attitude is taken by the 
Australians with regard to their culture-heroes. They have 
retained no sky-gods at all, and simply remember their culture- 
heroes as beings, superior to them in magic and knowledge, from 
whom they derived their civilization. It is said that the 
Australian All-Fathers were deities in the making. But no 
reason exists to believe this to be so. For their culture-heroes, 
whether the two youths or the All-Father, seem to be traditional. 
The youths certainly are not the object of any form of cult. As 
for the All-Father, it is only necessary to quote the words of Howitt. 
** In this being, although supernatural, there is no trace of a divine 
nature. All that can be said of him is that he is imagined as the 
ideal of those qualities which are, according to their standard, 
virtues worthy of being imitated. Such would be a man who is 
skilful in the use of weapons of offence and defence, all-powerful 
in magic, but generous and liberal to his people, who does no injury 
or violence to anyone, yet treats with severity any breaches of 
custom or morality.” 2? Howitt fails to see any form of religious 
feeling associated with this being. He discusses the matter and 
says in conclusion : ‘‘ But all this does not bring us to the worship 
of the ancestor, who is supposed to have developed into the All- 
Father.” He goes on to say, “‘ Although it cannot be alleged that 
the aborigines have consciously any form of religion, it may be 
said that their beliefs are such that, under favourable conditions, 
they might have developed into an actual religion, based on the 
worship of Mungan-ngaua or Baiame.” ° 

The culture-heroes of Melanesia are in the same case as those 
of Australia ; although sky-beings, they do not receive any active 
cult. Throughout Melanesia ancestor-cults are prominent, and 
little of a cult of deities can be observed. This goes with the 
absence throughout the greater part of the region of a ruling class. 
As among the Toradja and in Australia, certain beings, who are 
remembered as creators, receive no cult: in San Cristoval there 
are beings called Figona or Hilona. ‘‘ The name figona is also 
known at Florida, and is applied to beings whose power exercises 


* Kruyt and Adriani III. Cf. Adriani. ® Howitt 506-7.  % Jd., 507. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 189 
itself in storms, rain, drought, calms, and in the growth of food ; 
but these the natives decline to admit to be simple spirits, thinking 
they must once have been men; and doubtless some so called 
were men not long ago. One being only is asserted there to be 
superhuman, never alive with a mere human life, and therefore 
not now a ghost ; one that now receives no worship, but is the 
subject of stories only, without any religious consideration. This 
is Kosvasi, a female. How she came into existence no one knows ; 
she made things of all kinds; she became herself the mother of a 
woman from whom the people of the island descended. She was 
the author of death by resuming her cast-off skin ; she was the 
originator of the varying dialects of the islands round ; for having 
started on a voyage she was seized with ague, and shook so much 
that her utterance was confused.” ... These spirits, such as 
they are, have no position in the religion of the Solomon Islands ; 
the ghosts, the disembodied spirits of the dead, are objects of 
worship ; the tindalo of Florida, tidadho of Ysabel, tindaolo of 
Guddaleanar, lio’a of Saa, “’ataro of San Cristoval.’? 1 So, in 
the Solomons, as in Indonesia, supernatural beings, whatever 
their powers, do not receive cults unless they have relatives on 
earth, or else are useful to the community ; even then they do not 
get much attention. 

In the Banks Islands a form of cult is attached to certain spirits, 
called Vui, to whom belong culture-heroes such as Qat and Tagaro. 
This cult is not attached directly to the spirit, but to certain 
objects, usually stones, identified with the spirit. ‘‘ Such stones 
have some of them been sacred to some spirit from ancient times, 
and the knowledge of the way to approach the spirit who is 
connected with them has been handed down to the man who now 
possesses it. ... Some of these objects of sacrificial worship 
are well known, but can only be approached by the person to 
whom the right of access to them has been handed down ; there 
must be between the worshipper who desires advantage and the 
medium spirit who bestows it not only the medium of the stone, 
or whatever material object the spirit is connected with, but also 
the man who through the stone has got a personal acquaintance 
with the spirit. .. . Inthe Northern New Hebrides, spirits are 
approached very commonly at stones, and offerings are made to 
them upon the stones, to secure their favour or to reconcile them 
if offended. Such sacrifices are made for sunshine, rain and 
abundant crops.” 2 So, sacrifices made to spirits are for material 
benefits, and not by way of worship of the particular spirit. It is 
important, too, that the cult is associated with stones, and with 
beings that have already shown strong signs of association with 
the archaic civilization, with its divine rulers possessed of magical 
power beyond other men. It would therefore appear, from the 
statements of Codrington, that the religious systems of the 
Melanesians are centred round ghosts of ancestors. Spirits, 

1 Codrington 124. 2 Id., 140-3. 


190 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


whatever their powers, are neglected, unless some link connects 
them with the earth in the form of stones that are supposed to 
be their seat. 

The Polynesians stand in strong contrast to the Melanesians. 
Ellis, in his ‘‘ Polynesian Researches,”’ gives an account of the 
priesthood of the Polynesians of Tahiti. ‘The priests of the 
national temples were a distinct class ; the office of the priesthood 
was hereditary in all its departments. In the family, according to 
the patriarchal usage, the father was the priest ; in the village or 
district, the family of the priest was sacred and his office was held 
by one who was also a chief. The king was sometimes the priest 
of the nation, and the highest sacerdotal dignity was often 
possessed by some member of the reigning family. The intimate 
connexion between their false religion and political despotism, is, 
however, most distinctly shown in the fact of the king’s personify- 
ing the god, and receiving the offerings brought to the temple, 
and the prayers of the supplicants, which have been frequently 
presented to Tamatoa, the present king of Raiatea. The only 
motives by which they were influenced in their religious homage, 
or service, were, with very few exceptions, superstitious fear, 
revenge towards their enemies, a desire to avert the dreadful 
consequences of the anger of the gods, and to secure their 
sanction and aid in the commission of the grossest crimes.” 4 

The Polynesians lived in the midst of religious ceremonies. 
Ellis mentions a large number of such ceremonies. ‘‘ An ubu 
or prayer was offered before they ate their food, when they tilled 
their ground, planted their gardens, built their houses, launched 
their canoes, cast their nets and commenced or concluded a 
journey. The first fish taken periodically on their shores, together 
with a number of kinds regarded as sacred, were conveyed to the 
altar. The firstfruits of their orchards and gardens were also 
taumaha or offered, with a portion of their live-stock, which 
consisted of pigs, dogs and fowls, as it was supposed death would 
be inflicted on the owner or the occupant of the island, from whom 
the gods should not receive such acknowledgment.” 2 Other 
ceremonies were connected with the purification of the land after _ 
the incursion of an enemy, the building of temples, the illness of 
their rulers, and various other events; thus forming a strong 
contrast with the customs of peoples with no ruling class descended 
from the beings of the sky. 

Apparently the real old hereditary priesthood of the Poly- 
nesians was formed in their ancestral home, and the necessary 
knowledge was handed on from generation to generation. ‘‘ They 


1 Ellis I. 342. In Bowditch Island the king was called Tui Tokelau, the 
same name as the chief god, whose high-priest he was. ‘This king was chosen 
from among three families (Turner 268). 

2 Ellis I. 350. 

' ® Members of priestly families introduced sacerdotal systems, as in Hawaii 
(Beckwith 298). 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 191 


were the astrologers, magicians, poets, historians, often warriors, 
and, not least important, the navigators, where the great know- 
ledge of the stars they possessed enabled them to guide their 
vessels from end to end of the Pacific, and even to the Antarctic 
regions.” 1 These old priests were credited with all manner of 
extraordinary powers, including such feats of illusion as the 
‘* Mango Trick.”’? Now that as for example, in New Zealand, 
these old priests have died out, much of this knowledge has gone 
with them ; so it is not surprising to find that the culture of the 
Polynesian shows signs of decadence. Elsewhere in Polynesia, 
as is natural, considering the uniform nature of their culture, the 
office of priests is hereditary. In Samoa the father of the family 
carries on the ancestor-cult. With regard to the gods of the 
villages, it is said that “ The priests in some cases were the chiefs 
of the place ; but in general some one in a particular family claimed 
the privilege, and proposed to declare the will of the god. His 
office was hereditary. He fixed the days for the annual feasts in 
honour of the deity, received the offerings and thanked the 
people for them. He decided also whether or no the people 
might go to war.”® It is significant that in Samoa the chief 
classes of priests are the Prophets or Sorcerers, Family Priests, 
Priests of the War-gods, and Keepers of the War-gods,* and _ that 
the priests of the war-gods evidently constituted the most 
important group. No sun-cult is now reported on the island ; 
so with the disappearance of the Children of the Sun has gone 
that of any priests who may have had charge of the sun-cult 

The evidence from Melanesia, when compared with that from 
Polynesia, shows that, while the form of cult attached to the 
personal gods of the Polynesians is not exactly the same as that 
associated with the vui spirits of Melanesia, the two are prob- 
ably connected. Cults of gods in Polynesia, such as Oro in 
Tahiti, Rongo in Mangaia and the various war-gods elsewhere, 
are carried on by men who claim to be their descendants. When 
these ruling families die out, with them go the actual cults of 
these gods. But some indirect cults are connected with the Vui 
spirits of Melanesia, who, for various reasons, have been equated 
to the Children of the Sun of the archaic civilization. ‘They have 
left no descendants, but are remembered as culture-heroes ; there- 
fore no direct cult of them is maintained. At the same time they 
are connected with certain stones, where are carried on ceremonies 
directed towards utilitarian ends. Since the archaic civilization 
is directly concerned with stones, it is reasonable to claim that 
this fact has caused the peoples of Melanesia to attach importance 
to certain stones (see p. 393). The cult carried on in this way is 
purely for utilitarian ends, and does not constitute a cult of the 
spirits themselves. They are remembered as Vui, and not as 
ancestors of various groups. 


1 P. Smith v. 255-6. 2 Id., v. 267: Huguenin 141 es. 
’ Turner 20. 4 Stair vi. 70. 5 Id., 220. 


192 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


The cults of the initiated priesthoods of Indonesia belong to 
this category. The archaic civilization is credited with their 
institution, and they are concerned with utilitarian ends, leech- 
craft, agriculture and so on; and, although connexion with the 
sky has been interrupted, the priestesses can get there when 
necessary. ! 

It must therefore be borne in mind that, although the actual 
cults of gods of the sky-world are carried on by their descendants, 
yet ceremonies connected with these beings can be performed in 
other ways, but in every case the means of intercourse must be 
some material object or some social institution directly associated 
with the people of the sky-world, that is with the archaic civiliza- 
tion. The inference is that, while the natives are not concerned 
with the family cults of the rulers of the archaic civilization, yet 
they have learned from them the necessity, imaginary of course, 
of performing certain ceremonies for the maintenance of health, 
food supply, and so on, and have taken good care to preserve the 
means of performing these ceremonies. 

In North America the evidence points to exactly the same 
conclusion. Cults of gods were in the hands of ruling classes. 
In the Maya settlement of Mayapan, the rulers were priest-kings, 
claiming descent from the divine founders of the city.?, Probably 
Mexico formerly had priest-kings; for the kings in later times 
acted on certain occasions as high-priests of the state-cult ; but 
in the days of the Aztecs this office had become hereditary in 
families of very high birth. The head priests were called 
Quetzalcoatl, and probably the most revered priest in Mexico was 
the priest of Quetzalcoatl, the great culture-hero of the Mexicans, 
who dwelt at Cholula, and was regarded as the direct descendant 
of Quetzalcoatl. He lived a life of great austerity. In the origin 
myth of the Kiche of Guatemala, it is said that their ancestors 
were led by priests and the early royal family acted as priests.° 

In reviewing the religious systems of the rest of North America 
it becomes evident that the forms of their various cults are 
determined by processes similar to those which acted in the case 
of the regions already discussed. In Mexico and among the Maya, 
the highest ranks of the priesthood were recruited from the royal 
family ; and the peoples had a great and elaborate pantheon, 
consisting of divers deities. But in regions such as those of 
the Pueblo Indians, the religious system is utilitarian. The 
Zuni are looked upon as the most religious people among the 
Pueblo Indians, on account of the number of their ceremonies. 
Their religion is thus summed up by Mrs. Stevenson: ‘“ They 
look to their gods for nourishment and for all things pertaining 
to their welfare in this world, and while the woof of their religion 
is coloured with poetic conceptions, when the fabric is separated 

1 Perry vii. Chap 18. 2 Bancroft III. 472. 


3 Bancroft Il. 200 es. 4 Joyce ul. 91-2. 
® Brasseur de Bourbourg lxxxvi. 311. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 193 


thread by thread we find that the web is composed of a few simple 
practical concepts. Their highest conception of happiness is 
physical nourishment and enjoyment, and the worship of their 
pantheon of gods is designed to attain this end.’’! Similarly the 
religion of the Hopi, another important Pueblo Indian tribe, is 
concerned with the getting of food and of other material blessings. ? 
Some other of the Pueblo Indians have less complex. ceremonials, 
The Pima, a ‘“‘ powerful sedentary tribe, reduced to distress and 


decadence,* . . . are far less given than their Pueblo neigh- 
bours to the outward show of religion, . . . they appear to have 
no other than occasional ‘ rain-dance,’ the naviteo, and other 
ceremonies for the cure of disease. ... So far as could be 


ascertained in a comparatively brief sojourn among them, their 
religion comprised a belief in the supernatural or magic power 
of animals, and especially in the omnipotence of the sun.” 4 These 
people have a class of hereditary priests who are concerned with 
the cure of disease : they also have magicians who bring on rain, 
and have power over the weather, crops and so forth. They have 
no hereditary class with cults of deities; for the doctors and 
magicians are the rulers of the tribe. So, in this case, as in others, 
the effect of a drop in the level of culture has been to cause the 
gods and their cults to disappear, and to leave only those elements 
of the former religious system that pertain to the practical benefit 
of the community. 

In the Pueblo area, the ritual is mainly concerned with food. 
It would be thought that this might be due to the natural desire 
of the people to protect their food supply, and to appeal to their 
gods to get it for them. This suggestion, which is so often made, 
assumes the existence among the bulk of the people of a lively 
sense of their gods, which cannot be conceded, for it assumes that 
the knowledge of the gods is really a common possession of the 
peoples, and not simply part of the priestcraft, as it is in so many 
places. It must be remembered constantly that the civilization 
of the Pueblo area is founded upon the cultivation of maize, which 
cereal comes from Mexico. Moreover, Mexican and Mayan ritual 
centred round agriculture, that is, on maize-growing. This ritual, 
as Fewkes has asserted, is similar to that of the Pueblo Indians,° 
who, consequently, must have got it, together with their maize, 
from the Mexicans or Maya. Their traditions assert that their 
ceremonial was taught them: the Hopi, for example, say that 
the sun-cult was introduced from the south by one of their clans. 
With this sun-cult go certain ceremonies, among them that of 


the “calling back of the sun.” “The object of this winter 
solstice ceremony is not only to draw back the sun, the arrival 
of whom is dramatized ... but likewise to impart new life to 
all nature, to fertilize the earth, that the germ-god may vitalize 
. 1 Stevenson ii. 15. 2 Fewkes xv. 493. 
3 F. Russell 25, 250. 4 Id., 250. 


5 Fewkes xv. 499-500. 
13 


194 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


not only the crops, the seeds of which are piled below the altar, 
but also all game, domestic animals, human beings, material 
resources of all kinds.’? 1 Other Hopi stories recount the arrival 
of clans with certain rites, and the whole of their traditions 
support. the view of an alien origin for their ceremonial, agricul- 
tural and otherwise. In this they are typical of the Pueblo 
tribes as a whole. 

Among the tribes of the Mound area, and those that migrated 
thence into the Plains, the relationship is clear between the ruling 
class and cults of gods. The Chief Sun, the ruler of the Natchez 
of Louisiana, acted as high-priest in certain agricultural ceremonies : 
he brought on rain and acted as an incarnate deity. The Yuchi 
of the Savannah River, who claim to be Children of the Sun, have 
a number of ceremonies taught them by their culture-hero, 
probably a Son of the Sun. The Cherokee say that the know- 
ledge of cults died out with their hereditary priesthood.* Conse- 
quently the following is a description of the Cherokee’s attitude 
towards religion. ‘“ All his prayers were for temporal and tangible 
blessings—for health, for long life, for success in the chase, in 
fishing, in war and in love, for good crops, for protection and for 
revenge. He had no Great Spirit, no happy hunting-ground, 
no heaven, no hell, and consequently death had for him no terrors, 
and he awaited the inevitable end with no anxiety as to the future. 
He was careful not to violate the rights of his tribesmen or to do 
injury to his feelings.” ® 

The relationship between hereditary groups and definite rites 
is evident in the case of the Omaha, the Siouan tribe of the Plains. 
Their relatives of the east had an absolute monarch. A high- 
priest was the only person who could make sacrifices to a Supreme 
Being, who, however, paid little attention to them.® The Omaha 
tribe is divided into two groups of five gentes. When the tribe 
is camping out, one group occupies the northern half of the 
camping-circle, while the other five gentes occupy the southern 
half of the circle. These gentes were the possessors of certain cere- 
monies that only they could perform ; they constituted, as it were, 
hereditary priesthoods. The five gentes of the northern half of 
the circle were the custodians of the rites that pertained to the 
creation of the stars, and the manifestation of the cosmic forces 
that pertain to life.? Nearly all these rites have become obsolete, 
except those of the last-named class : these constituted the ritual 
by which the child was introduced to the Cosmos, the ceremony 
through which the child was inducted into its place and duty in 
the tribe, and the ritual required when the two sacred tribal pipes 
were filled for use on solemn tribal occasions. Miss Fletcher, who 
with Francis la Flésche, himself an Omaha, has studied this tribe 
so thoroughly, says: ‘‘ In view of what has been discerned of the 

1 Voth iv. 142, 2 du Pratz 329, 339-40, 8 Spech ii. 149. 


* J. Mooney vii. 392-3. Id., i. 318. 
* Id., Vv. 22, 31. 6.8. ? Fletcher and La Flésche 194-6. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 195 


practical character of the Omaha, it is interesting to note that 
only those rites directly concerned with the maintenance of the 
tribal organization and government were kept alive and vital, 
while those other rites, kindred but not so closely connected with 
the tribal organization, were suffered to fall into neglect.’? 1 The 
rites that have survived are, in addition to those already mentioned, 
those pertaining to the Sacred Tent of War, and the first thunder 
of the spring, and those connected with the food supply, which 
‘were connected with the two Sacred Tents. One of these tents 
contained the sacred white buffalo hide, the keeper of which 
conducted the rites connected with the planting of maize and the 
hunting of the buffalo. In the other sacred tent was kept the 
sacred pole, the keepers of which were associated with the main- 
tenance of the authority of the chiefs in the tribe. In short, 
protection from without and the obtaining of food and clothing 
were the objects of these rites that have survived. The Omaha, it 
is said, had no gods, or goddesses,” and no tribal priesthood, also 
many rites pertaining to the sky have been lost. Whatis the cause 
of this loss? It is significant that they formerly had a class of 
hereditary chiefs, for nowadays they only have elective chiefs.? 
Possibly, therefore, the loss of the ruling class involved that of 
rites pertaining to the gods, as well as of the gods themselves. 
This would account for the vague and obscure nature of the 
Omaha ideas. The Sioux in their ancestral home had rulers, and 
high-priests and deities ; so evidently the culture of the Omaha is 
but a wreck of its former self, and only comparison with the 
religious systems of the other Siouan tribes will make possible 
its reconstruction. The Omaha are in two groups, of which that 
concerned with the rites pertaining to the sky is itself connected 
with the sky. According to the tribal myths, human beings were 
the result of the union between the sky-people and the earth- 
people. Since the sky-people were concerned with the rites 
pertaining to the sky, it seems probable that the tribe once had 
cults of gods along with their hereditary chiefs. The Dakota 
branch of the Sioux have cults associated with the sun-god 
which are carried out by the ‘‘ high-priest.”’° 

The evidence in North America, as in Oceania, shows that cults 
of gods are the affair of their descendants; when the people 
connected with the sky disappear, so do the gods and their cults. 
This appears clearly in the case of the Omaha, where the loss of 
rites is ascribed by the people themselves to the dying out of those 
family groups in which they were hereditary possessions. But 
when the groups with their ancestor-cult have gone something is 
usually left that harks back to the archaic civilization, some rites 
are retained that deal with practical ends. This is evident in the 
Pueblo region, where the people ascribe all their civilization to the 
‘Twin Children of the Sun, who led them out of the underworld. 


1 Id., 195. 2 Id., 601. 8 Id., 202. 
4iTds, 186. 5 J. O. Dorsey ii. 449. 


196 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


These beings have not founded a ruling class claiming descent 
from them : so a direct cult of the sun, as is found in Egypt, does 
not exist. The cults of these peoples are centred mainly round 
their agriculture, which is the chief preoccupation of their lives. 
Certain fraternities among them deal with healing, but the most 
important deal with the food supply. In this they are acting 
similarly to the peoples of Indonesia and Melanesia. It is 
probable, therefore, that the archaic civilization was, in all parts 
of the region, in possession of a theory of agriculture and of 
disease that required ceremonies to procure good health and an 
abundant food supply. Since these people probably brought 
agriculture with them to all parts of the region, it would be 
expected that they would teach their subjects, not only the 
practical methods of cultivation, but also the theoretical con- 
siderations underlying the process of getting food, which necessi- 
tated the institution of a priesthood. This would make the 
performance of ceremonial a matter of practical necessity ; 
and the natives, even when the people of the archaic civilization 
had departed, would tend for that reason to maintain such 
ceremonial. It stands to reason that this ceremonial was based 
upon false analogy, and was obviously absurd ; but the prestige 
of the people of the archaic civilization, and the claim of their 
rulers to divinity, would serve to endow their statements with a 
glamour that would not fail to impress itself upon the natives, 
and once such ideas had become part of the social heritage they 
would not readily be lost. 

On the other hand, the loss of cults of sky deities shows that the 
Children of the Sun and the commoners were possessed of entirely 
different social traditions. Both were living in the same com- 
munities, but their antecedents were utterly dissimilar. The 
original Children of the Sun carried about with them beliefs 
concerned with the sky-world, they maintained a cult connected 
with their relatives in the sky, and this cult disappeared with 
them. After they had gone the connexion with the sky was 
only maintained for practical ends. Moreover, these sky-born 
folk differed from the rest of the community, in that they went 
after death to the sky, while the others went underground or 
elsewhere. It therefore would seem that communities ruled over 
by the Children of the Sun consisted of two entirely distinct 
parts that had no real connexion with one another, either during 
life or after death. ‘The explanation of this deeply rooted distinction 
will, it is evident, go far to solve the problem of the origin of the 
archaic civilization. It must be borne in mind, at the same time, 
that the Children of the Sun, although they bulk large in the 
story of the archaic civilization, do not necessarily constitute the 
whole of the ruling class. It has been found, in India, that some 
of the Asura ruling families were closely connected with the 
underworld, the place so often frequented by the commoners in 

various places from Egypt to America. Moreover, in Polynesia, 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 197 


the later ruling class was closely connected with the underworld, 
and it has been claimed that this ruling class has been derived 
from the archaic civilization. So it must be realized that the 
archaic civilization may have possessed a complex ruling group, 
formed of two or more distinct elements, of which the Children of 
the Sun constituted only one. It is with this group of Children 
of the Sun that the sky-world is associated. 

The ruling group of the archaic civilization can at the same 
time be distinguished as a whole from the commoners. Throughout 
the region it is associated with the custom of mummification, 
which is practically never practised in the case of commoners. 

Elliot Smith, in his ‘‘ Migrations of Early Culture,” has shown that 
mummification is practised throughout the region. And, although 
he does not stress the point, it is evident, from his exposition 
of facts, that this custom is reserved for members of the ruling 
class. For the commoners interment is the usual fate.1 Anyone 
who wishes to study the matter in detail is referred to Elliot 
Smith’s monograph. I shall content myself here with filling up 
one or two small gaps in the evidence, and with stressing the 
relationship of the custom to rulers. It is unnecessary to insist 
on the practice of mummification by the ancient Egyptians. On 
the other hand, it was sporadic in Babylonia, which is another 
token of the cultural difference between the two civilizations. It 
has already been said that Dravidian India shows traces, more 
or less definite, of Babylonian influence, but the nature and 
extent of this influence cannot as yet be estimated. At the same 
time certain peoples of Dravidian India show strong traces of 
relationship with the archaic civilization, in that they still erect 
dolmens. The problem of the origins of Indian civilization is 
therefore complex. 

Although cremation is now so widespread, it is noteworthy 
that Indian tradition speaks of mummification. Dr. Crooke 
mentions “ the belief in the possibility of securing the body from 
decay in the Deccan tales of Chandan Raja and Sodewa Bai.” 2 
In the Vishnu Purana it is said that the body of Nimi, the son of 
Ikshwaku, the son of Vaivaswata, the Son of the Sun, and there- 
fore of the solar line, was preserved from decay ‘“‘ by being 
embalmed with fragrant oils and resins, and it remained as entire 
as if it were immortal.’ ? Thus the practice was certainly known 
among the Children of the Sun. Dr. Crooke says that in the 
Mahabharata * the body of King Pandu, the father of the Pan- 
dava princess, was smeared with sandalwood paste. The Brahmins 
also knew of it: for Wilson, in his translation of the Vishnu 
Purana, comments upon the case of Nimi, by saying that a 


* And the body is usually in a crouched position. When the burial customs 
of the region are discussed in detail, it will be seen how strong a confirmation 
is forthcoming for the support of the main thesis of this book. The practice 
of crouched burial will Rey an stot pl part in such an inquiry. 

2 Crooke 272. . Wilson 388. 4 Crooke 272. 


198 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


certain Brahmin mummified his mother’s body. ‘For this 
purpose he first washes it with the five excretions of a cow, and 
the five pure fluids, or milk, curds, ghee, honey and sugar. He 
then embalms it with (I leave out the native terms) Agallochum, 
camphor; ‘musk, saffron, sandal and a resin called Kakkola; and 
envelops it separately with flowered muslin, silk, coarse cotton, 
cloth dyed with madder, and Nepal blanketing. He then covers 
it with pure clay, and puts the whole in a coffin of copper. These 
practices are not only unknown, but would be thought impure in 
the present day.” + Aryans also seem to have disembowelled the 
dead and filled the cavity with clarified butter, but it is not said 
whether this holds of the rulers only or not.2 Not only is mummi- 
fication mentioned in India in the Epics, but it was practised 
lately in certain places. The Todas of the Nilgiris now cremate 
their dead, but their burial practices were formerly different. 
An old manuscript, written in 1603, says that they “‘ burn the 
dead body, but it must be wrapped in a veil of pure silk, which 


they call a toda-pata, worth five or six fanams; and if this is 


lacking they must wait for it, though it be for a year. In the 
meantime, in order to preserve the body they open it at the loins, 
take out the entrails, and cut off the occiput ; then they place it 
in an arbour and dry it in the smoke.” 

A certain amount of mummification is still practised in Assam 
and Upper Burma. The Khasi, who speak an Austronesian 
language, and erect megalithic monuments, preserve the bodies 
of their chiefs in honey and after a time cremate them,* which 
suggests that the practice of cremation has been superposed on 
that of mummification. It is probable that this has been very 
generally the case in India. 

The Naga tribes perform some process of desiccation. It is 
not said whether this applies to any section of the community. 
The Mao are mentioned as placing their dead in a bamboo coffin 
shaped like a house, and just large enough to admit the body. 
This coffin is put up in the outer compartment of the house and 
the body is smoked, the process lasting for from ten days to two 
months, after which the coffin is taken and placed on a platform 
outside the village. The Tamlu Naga also smoke the bodies of 
their dead, and then place them in wooden coffins in the forks of 
big trees. They exhibit signs of a class distinction : for “ in the 
case of men of distinction the body is thoroughly cured, the head 
is wrenched off and placed in an earthen pot. This pot is then 
neatly thatched with Tokapat and deposited at the feet of the 
tree in which the coffin containing the body is placed.” ® 

Mummification is practised also by the Chin tribe of Upper 
Burma, the Siyin and Sokte branches being mentioned.’ 

The topic of the disposal of the dead in Indonesia is one that 

1 H. H. Wilson 387, n. 2. 2 Elliot Smith xi. 68 e.s. 


3 Rivers i. 727. 4 Gurdon. ° Assam Census Report (1891), 246. 
6 Td., 246. * Carey and Tuck I. 196-7. 


RULERS AND COMMONERS 199 


requires special treatment, and I do not intend here to discuss the 
modifications of mummification that can there be detected. It 
must be mentioned that mummification of rulers occurs in close 
connexion with the archaic civilization. In Timor the Children 
of the Sun were mummified. They were placed, after death, in 
open coffins in the branches of trees, “and only when the flesh 
is decayed and the remains are reduced to a mummified condition 
are they buried facing the Sun, the chief’s ‘ Father.’’’! Heer 
Kruyt has lately told me that mummification of chiefs is practised 
by the Toradja of the Sadan district of Central Celebes, a region 
closely connected with the archaic civilization. 

The Igorot of the Philippines, who ascribe their culture to 
beings from the sky, practise mummification.2, The custom is 
also reported, in the Philippines, among the Bicol, Visaya, Tin- 
guinan and Gaddanes.? Farther south the practice occurs in 
Dutch New Guinea at Mairassi and in Geelvink Bay,* a region 
that shows strong signs of the influence of the archaic civilization, 
but my information does not state whether the practice is confined 
to the chiefly class, if one exist in such places. 

Working eastwards along the New Guinea coast brings us out 
into the Pacific, where the relationship between the preservation 
of the dead and the chiefly class has been fully established by 
Rivers. He surveys both Melanesia and Polynesia, and comes 
to the conclusion that “the balance of evidence is... in 
favour of the ascription of the practice of preservation to chiefs.’ ° 
Mummification is also practised in Torres Straits, as well as in 
certain parts of British New Guinea which, according to Mr. 
Chinnery, show strong signs of the influence of the archaic civili- 
zation. Chinnery speaks of the mountain tribes, whom, he 
maintains, have been strongly influenced by the gold-seekers, and 
says that many of these mountain tribes have also elaborate 
practices in connexion with the dead, of which he gives several 
examples. Elliot Smith has discussed at length the mummies 
of the Torres Straits and Northern Australia, and has given as 
his considered opinion that they show signs of Egyptian technique 
of the XXIst Dynasty. That this practice of mummification 
was introduced to Torres Straits Islanders by the culture-heroes 
of the archaic civilization is made probable by the following 
remarks of Dr. Haddon. ‘A hero-cult, with masked performers 
and elaborate dances, spread from the mainland of New Guinea 
to the adjacent islands : part of the movement seems to have been 
associated with a funeral ritual that emphasized a life after death. 

Most of the funeral ceremonies and many sacred songs 
admittedly came from the west.” This evidence tends to ascribe 


1 Cabaton 356. 2 Sawyer, Inhabitants of the Philippines, 259. 

8 Kern i. 232: Sawyer 259, 279: Blumentritt i. (?), 204; ii. 54. 

4 §. Miller I. 105, 106: Bastian II. 35: Nova Guinea III. 274: Gouds- 
waard 73: TNAG, 1902, 168. 5 Rivers ix. II. 277, 281-2, 291. 

® Elliot Smith xii. 21. * Id... X1. 28, 


200 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


mummification to the people of the archaic civilization. Evidence 
of the same nature is forthcoming from Samoa, where, in Upolu, 
embalming, formerly practised, is said to be due to people who 
came from the sky, and told people to bury them in a standing 
position with their heads uncovered. * 

The Australian tribes of Queensland practise preservation of 
the dead. It is said that: ‘‘ Desiccation is a form of disposal 
of the dead practised only in the case of very distinguished men. 
After being disembowelled and dried by fire the corpse is tied 
up and carried about for months.” 2 So, if mummification be a 
practice connected with the archaic civilization, its existence in 
Australia is further evidence of the influence of this civilization 
in that continent. 

The distribution of mummification in the region from Egypt 
to America suggests its connexion with the archaic civilization, 
and the evidence brought forward by Elhot Smith in his mono- 
graph is enough to convince most. But the new evidence in 
Indonesia, that serves to fill up certain gaps, makes his case still 
stronger, for it removes the possibility of objections founded on 
these former gaps. 

In America mummification was evidently connected with the 
archaic civilization, and with ruling families. For, in Mexico, 
and among the Indians of the Mound area, only rulers and nobles 
were mummified. The old cliff-dwellers of the Pueblo region 
practised mummification, but I do not know whether they 
reserved it for any social class. 

Throughout the region mummification has tended to die out. 
The Plains Indians, for example, who once must have lived in a 
region where the chiefs were mummified have moved out thence, 
and have lost the custom. Similarly with the Pueblo Indians. 
In Oceania, again, mummification tends to be a thing of the past. 
Only recently has its former practice in New Zealand been proved. 
It is obsolete in India. 


1 Turner 235, 2 W. Roth 393. $ Elliot Smith xi. 114415. 


CHAPTER XIV 
SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 


ethnologists show that, in speaking of the “ religious 

system ” of any community, it is necessary to be clear 
what that term means. A given tribe is said to possess a pan- 
theon of gods. What is meant is that these gods are known to 
the priesthood, or certain members of it ; but the laity is usually 
ignorant about such matters, often not even knowing the names 
of the gods. When the Children of the Sun have disappeared 
from any community, they have generally left the native popula- 
tion in possession of certain ideas about the nature of the soul, 
the causation of disease and so forth; but the solar pantheon 
has usually vanished. Rites connected with gods that are pre- 
served by such peoples as the Toradja of Celebes or the Melanesians, 
and practised by members of a profession, tend to centre round 
material objects. Even among the priesthood initiated by the 
people of the archaic civilization, a selective process has been at 
work, weeding out deities and cults, so that the priestcraft becomes 
directed towards practical ends. 

This generalization has an apparent exception. For sometimes 
deities are retained who are not obviously connected with any 
practical ends—such as Varuna in India, Laki Tengagan of the 
Kayan of Borneo, Bunjil of the Wurunjerri in Australia, Tangaloa 
of the Maori. Such beings do not as a rule receive any cult, and 
could on that account be ignored. But they still persist for 
some good reason. It is because the life of man is supposed by 
these peoples to be derived from the sky, and to return there after 
death. In spite of the fact that the sun-cult disappears in all 
parts of the region, sky-gods are sometimes remembered on 
account of their possession of the life of man. This makes them 
an object of interest to all men, and for this reason they have not 
wholly been forgotten. 

The association between the sky and life is well seen in Egypt. 
Whatever the beliefs associated with the life of man, prior to the 
elaboration of the theology connected with the sky-world, it is 
certain that the Heliopolitan priests made it clear that henceforth 
life was essentially the possession of the sky-gods. Re, the sun- 
god of Heliopolis, was looked upon as the actual father of the 

201 


() eimotogsts in the last chapter from certain Dutch 


202 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


king.!.| The Pyramid Texts of the Fifth and succeeding dynasties 
were written by men whose ideas of the future life differed from 
those previously held. Instead of the otherworld, whether 
underground or not, they conceived the sky as the home of the 
dead king, The dominant note of these writings was that ‘‘ life was 
in the sky. ... The prospect of a glorious hereafter in the 
splendour of the god’s presence is the great theme of the Pyramid 
Texts.’? 2 According to Heliopolitan theory, life was an emis- 
sion of vitalizing light and of the creating word; thence the 
terms of ‘‘ master of the rays,’? and “ creator by the voice,” or 
‘““utterer of words ’’ which are given to all those deities that 
play the part of demiurge. Above all, Re, the sun-god, was the 
creator par excellence, and the agents of his creative power were 
his eye, the sun, ‘‘ Eye of Horus,” and his voice, “ the voice of 
heaven, the lightning.’’ ? Re was said by the priests of Heliopolis 
to have created from his body Shu and Tefnut, from whom were 
born the great gods of the Egyptians, Osiris, Herkhent-an-ma, 
Set, Isis, Nephthys.4. Thus not only was life in the sky, but the 
sky-gods were held to be creators. The Pyramid Texts are full 
of such ideas: in them “ the chief and dominant note throughout 
is insistent, even passionate, protest against death. They may 
be said to be the record of humanity’s earliest supreme revolt 
against the great darkness and silence from which none returns.” 
The dead king is not now supposed to rule over the dead in the 
Osirian otherworld: on the contrary he goes to the sky, and 
lives among the gods: “ King Teti is this eye of Re, that passes 
the night, is conceived and born every day. . . . His mother the 
sky bears him living every day.’’® As each dead king was 
identified with Osiris, it follows, naturally, that Osiris was ulti- 
mately raised to the sky-world, there to be the judge and ruler 
of the dead, and to be confused inextricably with Re and the 
dead king. 

When the dead king died, his ba, or soul, which was his breath, 
went to the sky, in the form of a bird, there to join the ka, or 
afterbirth, that had gone there when he was born. His earthly 
body was thus bereft of the soul, which had to be restored. This 
could only be done by certain magical processes. Horus was 
supposed to have helped the dead Osiris to live again by giving 
him his eye that had been wrenched out in a fight with his enemy 
Set. Consequently all offerings to Osiris are called ‘‘ Eye of 
Horus,” and the dead body is thus made once again into a ‘‘ soul,”’ 
ba. Thus the king is given back his breath, his life, he now 
‘“ existed as a person, possessing all the powers that would enable 
him to subsist and survive in the life hereafter.” ® 

The bodies of Egyptian kings were mummified, and an impor- 
tant accompaniment of the practice of mummification was that of 


1 Moret i. 39. 2 Breasted iv. 102-3. 3 Moret i. 41. 
4 Wiedemann 33, 5 Breasted iv. 123, 136, S| Tdi, ‘iv. Gls 


SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 203 


making a portrait. statue of the deceased, which was ‘‘ animated ” 
by magical process. Libations of Nile water were made with 
the aim of restoring to the statue the bodily fluids of the deceased. 
Then imecense was burned to restore the odours of the living. 
Finally was performed the most important ceremony of all, that 
of the ritual ‘‘ opening of the mouth,” in which a priest touched 
with a copper chisel the mouth, eyes, ears and nose of the statue, 
which was then supposed to be alive in the fullest sense of the 
term. Elliot Smith points out that the Egyptian tried to make 
the portrait statue as life-like as possible, and paid special atten- 
tion to the eye. The making of portrait statues seems only: to 
have been attempted because of the failure of the first attempts 
to preserve the body in the full likeness of the living person. All 
through the ages the Egyptians persistently strived to preserve 
the dead in the real likeness of their living selves; and in the 
Kighteenth Dynasty they seem to have considered that they had 
succeeded. 

The three cultural elements of sun-cult, mummification and 
the making of stone portrait statues, became closely connected 
in Egypt with the Children of the Sun. The Egyptians also 
believed that men were created from images. It was first held 
that Khnum, the potter, made men on his potter’s wheel. And 
in the later accounts of the birth of the Pharaoh it is said that 
Khnum makes the young king on his wheel at the commands of 
Re. Khnum made the egg from which Re emerged on the 
surface of the primeval ocean. Ptah, the great god of Memphis, 
was also closely connected with the idea of creation. His name 
probably comes from the root pth, ‘“‘ to open,” especially as used 
in the ritual of the “ opening of the mouth ”’ of the stone statue. 
Like Khnum, he uses the potter’s wheel; and in his work of 
creation he is helped by the Khnumu, the modellers, who are said 
to be his children. Later on they became the children of Re. 
They were dwarfs with big heads, crooked legs and long mous- 
taches ; and earthenware images of them are found in Egyptian 
tombs, for they were supposed to help in the reconstituting of the 
bodies of the dead.1 The evidence thus points to Ptah as a later 
god, connected with the making of portrait statues, to whom have 
been transferred the attributes of Khnum. Both of these gods 
helped in the process of theogamy, acting on the orders of Re 
(see p. 443). Thus the two creative crafts, pottery-making and 
the carving of portrait statues, have come to be associated, in 
Egyptian thought, with the ideas of the creation of men and gods. 

The contrast between Egyptian and Sumerian ideas of the life 
to come serves to emphasize the fact that life, in the fullest sense, 
was connected with the sky. This is shown by the following 
quotation from Langdon: “According to the doctrine of 
Kridu, man, in the beginning, was doomed to die; he could wish 
for nothing better than long life. Sumerian and Babylonian 

1 Wiedemann, 133 e.s. 


204 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


traditions state that the gods created man as mortal. According 
to the Assyrian version of the creation story, the gods created 
man ‘to enrich the fields of the Anunnaki,’ that is to say, to 
people the underworld: and in an ancient version of the epic of 
Gilgamesh, Sabitu, the woman who guarded the banks of the river 
of death, addresses Gilgamesh as follows: ‘When the gods made 
men they made him mortal, and life, they kept that in their 
possession.’”’? +. Tammuz in the underworld is asleep, and has to 
be revived with the ‘‘ water of life” that it possesses. The 
Sumerian underworld thus contrasts strongly with the sky- 
world of the Egyptians, where all is life. Also, in the early 
Sumerian texts, no mention is made of breath as a means of 
animation.2?. This is a later feature of Sumerian, and probably 
also of Egyptian, thought, and it is bound up with the practice of 
animating portrait statues. 

Before setting out on the survey of the rest of the region it will 
be well to sum up the various ideas possessed in Egypt concerning 
creation, the production of children, the nature of the soul, the 
destiny of a man’s life, and the animation of portrait statues. 
The creation of men and the production of children seem to be 
the work of the same deities, the potter- and sculptor-gods. It is 
significant that the act of creation should be ascribed to the gods 
who personify the creative crafts; for, later on, it will be found 
that iron-working plays a part in the story, this being another 
creative craft. These creator-gods appear to be ancient, but how 
ancient it is not possible to tell. In the Heliopolitan theology 
they become associated with Re in the act of theogamy, although 
Re himself is gifted with powers of creation by various means, and 
can produce children. In the Heliopolitan theology life is in the 
sky, and at first is the exclusive property of the king. The ritual 
of animation of portrait statues shows that the life of a man was 
closely connected with his breath, and only when the breath of 
life had been restored was the statue supposed to live in the real 
sense of the term. ‘Thus several strands ran through the fabric 
of thought that the Egyptians had woven on the theme of life 
and death, which strands will be found to run through the whole 
of the archaic civilization from one end of the region to the other. 
As would be expected, the ideas will be clearer in some places than 
in others, according as contact with the archaic civilization has 
been more or less continuous. 

In India ideas on the subject of the creation of man and his 
spiritual nature are complicated. The Rig-Veda and subsequent 
writings contain various accounts of the creation and origin of 
gods andman. The Rig-Veda itself has few references to creation. 
In the tenth book it says that the four castes were produced from 
the sacrificial body of Purusha.* The Aryans of India claimed 
descent from Aditi, the mother goddess; also from Prajapati, 
and from Manu.* The act by which Prajapati produced men is 


1 Langdon v. 91-2. 2 Id., v. 63. 3 Muir I. 9. * Id., IV. 59. 


SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 205 « 


described as follows: ‘‘ Prajapati alone was formerly this 
universe. He desired, ‘May I be propagated and multiplied.’ 
He practised austere fervour. He suppressed his voice. After 
a year he spoke twelve times. This nivid consists of twelve 
words. This nivid he uttered. After it all beings were created.” 1 
This recalls the creative word of Re, and the notion of Brahma 
creating sons from his own mind is certainly the most prominent 
of all the creative ideas possessed by the post-Vedic writers of 
India. The Vedas also possess ideas of creation similar to those 
connected with Khnum and Ptah in Egypt.? ‘‘ Let us celebrate 
with exultation the births of the gods, in chanted hymns (every 
one of us), who may behold them in (this later age). Brahman- 
aspati shaped all these (beings) like a blacksmith. In the earliest 
age of the gods, the existent sprang from the non-existent. 
Thereafter the different regions sprang from Uttanapad. The 
earth sprang from Uttanapad ; from the earth sprang the regions. 
Daksha sprang from Aditi, and Aditi came forth from Daksha. 
For Aditi was produced, she who is the daughter, O Daksha. 
After her the gods came into being, blessed sharers in immortality. 
When, O gods, ye moved, strongly agitated, on that water, there 
a violent dust issued forth from you, as from dancers.” ? This 
extract shows the confusion of thought in the Vedic age concerning 
the creation of men and gods. Brahma is the creator. Like Re 
he came up out of the primeval ocean, or issued from an egg 
floating on it. Daksha was his mind-born son, and the father, 
in later times, of Aditi, Diti, Danu, Vinata and other ancestresses 
of men and gods. The confusion is well exemplified in the fact 
that Daksha and Aditi in turn produce one another. Another 
important feature of this account lies in the idea that the creator 
was a blacksmith. The blacksmith, like the potter and the 
sculptor, brings new things into being, and thus can well serve as 
the symbol of the creator. The idea is also present, in Indian 
thought, of the creation of each human being. 'Twashtri is the 
god who develops the germ in the womb and is the shaper of all 
forms, human and animal. ‘‘ Twashtri has generated a strong 
man, a lover of the gods. . . .. Twashtri has created the whole 
world.” 4+ The intimate relationship between the creation of 
men, the world and the production of each being is well shown 
in this extract. 

In the Rig-Veda all life is held to come from the sky. Man’s 
soul is his breath, which at death returns to the sun: when the 
sun wishes he draws out the life of a man so that he dies.° 

The Aryans came to India to find a flourishing Dravidian 
civilization. The study of Vedic gods has shown that they 
probably represent a stage of development in which the war-god 
has pushed the sun-gods into the background. In the Dravidian 
religions, on the other hand, the sun-gods are predominant. 


1 Td., I. 181. 2X. 72. 8 Muir IV. 12. 
mold... Vis 225. 5 Hopkins 205, 221, 232. 


206 THE CHILDREN OF “THE SUN 


Since, in Egypt, the ideas of the breath as life, and the doctrine 
of the sky-world, belong to the solar theology, it is natural to 
look for similar ideas among the Dravidians rather than among 
the Aryans. The Aryans made no stone images, but such are 
common among the Dravidians. The Tantras, which, although 
of late date, contain much of the early Dravidian religion, gave 
elaborate directions for the animation of statues of gods.1 It is 
also possible that Twashtri, the god connected with birth, was 
originally a Dravidian deity. 

In the culture-sequence, therefore, the making of images is 
present in the civilization nearest to the archaic civilization, and 
is not found in the later civilization. It is not possible, so far as 
Iam aware, to claim that the writers of the Rig-Veda once made 
images. Probably they did. But it is noteworthy that people, 
who have relegated their solar deities to the background, emerge 
into history with ideas of the life of men as his breath, and of this 
breath as closely connected with the sky ; with a deity, Brahma, 
who shows strong signs of similarity with Re, the great sun-god 
of Egypt ; and with notions of the creation of men and gods from 
this deity, and also by way of the craft of the blacksmith, that 
agree well with the Egyptian ideas on the same subject. The 
ideas of the Rig-Veda can well be explained as scattered fragments 
from an archaic civilization similar in essentials to that of Egypt. 

Indian thought in the post-Vedie period elaborated a theory 
of the soul similar to that which in Egypt is so bound up with the 
making of portrait statues. The writers of the Upanishads and 
the Brahmanas are more concerned with this theme that so 
interests mankind, than with the doings of the gods, who are 
allowed to be forgotten. This process culminates in Buddhism, 
in which the gods finally disappear, as being of no real interest to 
man, whose attention is now paid to personal considerations, to 
the ordering of life so that the highest good may accrue. This 
culture-sequence is obviously one in which the gods and their 
cults are gradually forgotten, and attention is increasingly paid 
to those elements of the religious system that directly affect man. 

On the other hand, the Dravidian religion is permeated with 
gods and goddesses, in whose cults images play an important part. 
The later forms of Indian religion included under the heading of 
Hinduism, which represent the coming back to power of Dravidian 
ideas, make use of images, and the ideas expressed in many of 
these sects hark back to the beginnings of Indian civilization. 

When India with its complications is left on one side, and search 
is made farther east, a relationship can be detected between image- 
making, life-giving, and the production of children by sky-gods. 
In such places no great intellectual movement, such as that con- 
nected in India with Brahminism and Hinduism, has caused 
complications that tax the wit of man to unravel. These people 
have had a much simpler history, and their ideas of beginnings 


1 Avalon 115-16. 


SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 207 


are clearer. The Toradja of Central Celebes have a god, said to 
be universally known, Pue mPalaburu, who like Khnum, Ptah, 
and Twashtri, makes each child, in this case in a smithy.1. They 
say that formerly the earth was uninhabited, so the god of the sky, 
and the goddess of the underworld, decided to create men. They 
caused Pue mPalaburu, called ‘‘ the kneader,” ‘‘ the smith,” or 
“the man-maker,’’ ? to make two images, man and woman, of 
stone, or perhaps, as some say, of wood. When he had done 
this, the god went to the sky to fetch the “‘ breath of life”? that 
was up there, the “eternal breath ’’; but, while he was away, 
the goddess let the wind blow on the images, and they were 
animated as mortals. Pue mPalaburu enters into the life of 
every Toradja in a practical manner, for he is the actual maker 
of them all. He is also the maker of the stone images from which 
their ancestors were derived. This intimate association with 
each man and woman is probably the reason why the Toradja 
have preserved him in their memory; while the original deities, 
the god of the sky and the goddess of the underworld, have gone 
into obscurity, and persist only in priests’ tales. Corresponding 
to the idea that Pue mPalaburu, who is probably a sun-god, makes 
each of them, is that of the derivation of life from the sky. The 
Toradja have dual ideas with regard to the spiritual nature of 
man. They claim that he possesses a “‘ life ’? which can separate 
itself from the body and assume various shapes. It is important 
in the life of the individual, for its absence from the body, if 
temporary, causes illness, if permanent, death. It is, in fact, life 
itself. The Toradja are themselves usually doubtful of the nature 
of this “‘ life,” but their creation myth shows that it is the breath, 
and this explanation is given by some of the people themselves. 
In illness the “life ’’ has been extracted from the body. This 
may be done by various agencies, but only when the sky-gods have 
taken it, and keep it, does the person die. Therefore the home of 
this breath is in the sky, the place to which the creator gods went 
to get the “eternal breath ’’ to animate the images. At death 
the breath apparently goes to the sky. The ghost, which comes 
into existence for the first time at death, goes to the underworld, 
a place ruled over by the goddess who took part in creation. 

The Toradja make no stone images; but the people of the 
archaic civilization have left some in their lands.4 Since the 
Egyptians and the Hindus animate their images, it is reasonable 
to suppose that the image-makers of Central Celebes performed 
similar ceremonies, and that the creation story of the Toradja is 
connected with this assumed power of animating stone statues. 
In any case, the power of animating stone images is ascribed by 


1 Tron-working is an important craft among the Toradja. (Kruyti.) 

2 Kruyt and Adriani I. 269-70. 3 Id., 1. 245-6. 

*Heer Kruyt tells me that the people of the archaic civilization have 
im behind them stone images in parts of Central Celebes where gold is 
ound. 


208 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Toradja tradition to beings who have been equated to the peoples 
of the archaic civilization. 

The creation story and the accounts of the spiritual nature of 
man of the Toradja contain one important discrepancy. In the 
creation, story the images are animated by the wind, not by the 
‘“‘ eternal breath.”’ In the accounts given by Kruyt of the spiritual 
nature of man, it is evident that the ‘‘ eternal breath ’’ must be 
the life. It is possible to account for this discrepancy by recalling 
to memory the fact that, when Lasaeo went back to the sky, 
intercourse with the sky-world was cut off, and access could 
thenceforth only be had by means of a sky-spirit that helped the 
priestess. ‘The Posso Todjo group of the Toradja possess no sky- 
descended class, no one who claims to go at death to enjoy eternal 
life with the sky-gods: all go to the underworld. Therefore, 
from the point of view of the “‘ life ’’ that is derived from the sky, 
these people are mortal. Although they may live indefinitely 
in the underworld, they have become divided from their sky- 
derived life. Thus it may be that the incident in which the 
images become mortal is a reflection of the fact that the sky-born 
folk departed, leaving no one behind to keep up the close inter- 
course with the sky that must have obtained in their days. + 

The Toradja beliefs concerning the spiritual nature of man are 
dual, in that, while the “life,” which is derived from the sky, 
goes to the sky, the ghost goes underground. This duality will 
have to be explained, for it is hardly natural that men should so 
imagine their destiny without some good cause. The belief held 
in Nias, an island to the west of Sumatra, shows that it is not 
inevitable that man should so divide at death. The south part 
of this island has a class of sky-descended chiefs, the members of 
which believe themselves to go at death to the sky. When a 
commoner dies his breath, his “ life,” goes to the sky, into the 
possession of the sun-god Lature, who had given it to him while 
he was yet unborn. His ghost goes underground. Thus, to the sky- 
born, life in the sky is certain after death, and presumably, as in 
the case of the Egyptian kings, eternal life as of the same order as 
on earth: while the commoner loses his “ life’ and persists in 
the underworld as a ghost. 2 

Melanesian culture-heroes, such as Qat and Tagaro, are creators 
of men:? and so are the All-Fathers of the Australians, of whom 
Bunjil, for example, is said by the Wurunjerri to have made men 
of clay, and to have imparted life to them.4 

The ancestors of the Polynesians made stone images which are 
scattered throughout the Pacific. In Nukahiva of the Marquesas 
these stone images are ealled tiki, in Hawaii tii, and in Easter 
Island tii.° In Tahiti the ghosts of chiefs were called tii, and were 
associated with stone images, in some of which their skulls were 

1 I owe the realization of this point to my pupil, Mr. C. Humphreys. 


2 Kruyt iii. 448, 474, 481, 482. 3 Codrington 26, 28, 154, 171. 
4 Howitt 484. 5 Blyth 533: Tregear iii. 390. 


SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 209 


kept, and received the same cult as the ghosts themselves.1_ The 
tii spirits formerly lived at Opoa in Raiatea, which has been so 
important in the history of Eastern Polynesia.?. The name Tii or 
Tiki occurs in all Polynesian genealogies.? 

Thus in certain parts of Polynesia a connexion exists between 
rulers and stone images, that serves to determine still more clearly 
the relationship of the later people to those of the archaic civiliza- 
tion. But it is possible to go farther. Polynesian mythology 
speaks of a being called Tii in Tahiti, Hawaii and Samoa, and Tiki 
in New Zealand and the Marquesas. In New Zealand he is asso- 
ciated with small greenstone images of grotesque shapes, called 
heitiki, which are worn as charms. ‘Tiki in New Zealand is looked 
upon either as the first man or as the creator of men: * thus the 
Tahoe tribe call themselves the children of Tiki. His important 
function was that of taking part in the procreation of children, 
for a new-born babe was, according to Taylor, called he potiki, a 
gift of Tiki from the po or underworld.® So far as I can tell, the 
Maori have no recorded idea of Tiki actually forming the child as 
Pue mPalaburu in Celebes or Khnum in Egypt. Perhaps this 
part of the belief is lost. 

It is claimed by some that the heitiki images represent the 
foetus. For example, Elsdon Best, a competent authority,’ says : 
** Now, regarding the singular pendant worn by Maori women, 
and termed a heitiki, often fashioned from nephrite, and which, 
although of human form, has the head sideways and the legs 
doubled up, it is known to every old native that this pendant is, 
properly, worn by women only, and herein lies the story of its 
origin. It is highly probable that this curious figure represents 
a human foetus or embryo, as indeed some old natives state, and 
that the wearing of it by women is a survival of, or allied to, 
certain acts connected with phallic symbolism of long past 
centuries. The figures were ever most highly prized by the Maori 
folk.” The first heitiki was given by her father to Hine-te- 
iwaiwa, the goddess of childbirth. But Mr. Skinner differs. 
He says: ‘“ There may, as Mr. Best suggests, be some connexion 
between women and the ornament. It is certainly much more 
often worn at the present time by women than by men. But in 
Cook’s time it would seem to have been observed on men only, 
for Banks says, ‘The men often carry the distorted figure of a 
man made of green tale.’ It should be remembered that Cook’s 
plates show a portion of the men wearing the tiki, as do other 
early writers.’’ ® He goes on to say that both he and Karl van 
den Steinen have come independently to the conclusion—* That 
the disproportionate size of the head, the slant at which it is set, 
and the curved legs depend not on a realistic representation of 


1 Ellis I. 335. ord Give La whee 3 Tregear iii. 390. 

4 Goldie 7: Tregear ii. 389, 391: Blyth 533, 546-7: Best iii. 17. 
So ld., iii, 19. 6 Blyth 533. 7 Best xi. 130. 
roid. Lol. ® Skinner 310. 


14 


210 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the human embryo, but on the proportions of the greenstone 
adze,”? which is worn as an ornament. He goes on to say that 
the figure resembles the human figures of the rock carvings and 
paintings of New Zealand and elsewhere, which, as has been seen, 
are possibly associated with the archaic civilization. + 

The difference between Messrs. Best and Skinner is one upon 
which it is difficult to pronounce judgment. Perhaps they both 
will be able to collect more facts on this important point. The 
claim of Elsdon Best, that the heitiki are connected with birth, 
is in consonance with the data collected in this chapter; and the 
argument of Mr. Skinner, that the heitiki takes its shape from 
that of the adze charm, hardly seems to be evidence against this 
claim. 

Among the Maori Tiki is concerned in the production of children : 
throughout the Pacific his name is connected with stone images 
and with ruling families: the cycle of ideas is thus similar to that 
of Egypt, India and Indonesia. Moreover, the Maori connect 
“life? with the sky. Hina, the mother of men and goddess of 
the underworld, was the daughter and wife of Tane, a sky-being, 
and probably a Child of the Sun, if not the sun-god.2. When 
Hina went down to the underworld to rule over the ghosts of the 
dead, she was pursued by Tane, who tried to stop her. But she 
said, “‘ Return thou to the upper world, that you may draw up 
our descendants to light and life: while I remain here below to 
drag them down to darkness and death.” ? Again, Rangi, the 
great father, said to Tane: ‘‘ The whare a aitua yawns below, 
the abode of life is above.’? * The Maori priests were all aware of 
the existence of life in the sky. ‘* Our ancestors desired that man 
should die as the moon dies: that is, die and return again to 
this world. But Hine-nui-te-to said, ‘ Not so let man die and 
be returned to Mother Earth, that he may be mourned and wept 
for.’’’® Ultimately life, the breath of life, and the power of 
conception came from Io of the Hidden Face, the great mysterious 
supreme being of the Maori, who is only mentioned in connexion 
with childbirth. He it was who gave the first breath of life to 
Hine.® Each Maori receives his life from the sky,’ so presumably 
it returns there at death. During parturition, in the case of a 
child of noble birth, the priest thanks the gods (of the sky-world) 
for their gift. The position of Maori belief is evidently similar 
to that of the Toradja of Central Celebes: although each man 
gets his life from the sky, his ghost goes to the underworld. 

Maori thought seems ultimately, in some instances, to have 
made both the life of man and his ghost go to the underworld ; 
for it is said that Hina, the Great Mother, has the “‘ life-breath ”’ 
in the underworld. Her son, Maui, a great hero in Polynesia, 
and probably a Son of the Sun, went down to get it from her, 


1 Skinner 311. 2 Best v. 151. 3 Id., 162. 
4 Goldie 7. 5 Best v. * id., xi. 130.38 
? Tregear iv. 391. § Best xi. 137. 


SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 211 


but failed, and died in the attempt.! The fact that, in Maori 
mythology, the life of men, which came originally from the sky, 
is now, according to some accounts, in the underworld, is entirely 
in consonance with what is conjectured of Maori history. In the 
background is the vague sky-world, with which closer communi- 
cation must once have existed. The men of the sky-world have 
gone, and with them their peculiar beliefs, and the present folk 
have but faint notions of the real nature of the past. This is 
characteristic of the whole of Polynesia. 

Here and there the idea of life in the sky still persists in tradition 
in definite association with the rulers. In Hawaiian legend great 
chiefs went to the sky, conducted thither by two sky-spirits, and 
were there rejuvenated and brought back to earth.? It is signifi- 
cant that one of the conductors is called “‘ Eyeball of the Sun.” 
This fact supports the conclusion that such peoples as the Maori 
once had a similar class of beings who could get renewed life from 
the sky. 

In Mexico it was said that gods made images and animated 
them, and thus produced the first human beings. The Natchez 
of Louisiana, a people ruled over by a group of Children of the 
Sun, whose ancestors presumably came from Mexico, believed 
that the sun-god made an image of clay into which he breathed, 
so that it became a human being.* In the same region, the 
Yuchi, who call themselves Children of the Sun, name the sun 
** The One who is Breath,” or ‘‘ Makes Indians,” thus accrediting 
him with creative functions.° The Cherokee, despite the general 
break-up of their culture, have retained traces of a former belief 
in asky-world. For they say that the seventh upper world is the 
final abode of the immortals ‘“‘ where his soul thereafter stands 
Prect.ii:* 

The Zuni of the Pueblo area regard the Sun as their creator : 
the Earth is called the mother of all, but the Sun is the father— 
** All peoples are the children of the Sun.’’ The supreme being 
of the Zuni is A’wonawilo’na, the supreme life-giving, bi-sexual 
power called He-She, “‘ the symbol and initiation of life, and life 
itself, pervading all space.’’ Directly associated with this supreme 
power is the Sun, the great god above all gods except the supreme 
being, and, through the supreme being, the giver of life.’ Accord- 
ing to Cushing the supreme being made himself in the form of the 
Sun, ‘‘ whom we hold to be our father.”? The Sun-father created 
the earth, and the actual production of life on the earth was due 
to Mother-earth and Father-sky, from whose union human beings 
were produced in the womb of the earth.® 


1 Best v. 153-4. This is like the Hawaiian legend, in which the Sun god 
becomes the first ghost (Beckwith 337), shunned by all and doomed to live 
in darkness (Grey 7). By him and Maui came death. 

2 Ellis LV. 145. 

3 Bancroft III. 57: Brasseur de Bourbourg exxiii. 23 e.s. 

4 du Pratz 330. 5 Speck i. 102. 8 J. Mooney viii. 3. 

? Stevenson ii. 20, 22. § Cushing ii. 379. 


212 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 

The Zuni have no class claiming to go to the sky at death, 
although the people say that they are the Children of the Sun. 
In other places ‘“ breath ”’ or “life” is usually associated with 
the sky.. But among the Zuni, as among the Maori, this life- 
giving breath is connected with the underworld. They say that 
man possesses a “‘ breath body ”’ which goes to the underworld 
after death, and not to the sky. Similarly the Hopi ideas of 
creation centre mainly round the underworld, where, according 
to one account, the Great Mother created their ancestors ; 1 or, 
according to another account, the Sun performed this function in 
the underworld—“ and to this house of the Sun return the spirits 
of the dead.” 2 

The Pima Indians, on the other hand, hold that “ Elder 
Brother” made human beings in the form of images. These 
image people multiplied and began to destroy one another, so he 
said: ‘* I shall unite earth and sky ; the earth shall be as a female 
and the sky as a male, and from their union shall be born one who 
will be a helper to me. Let the Sun be joined with the moon, 
also even as man is wedded to woman, and their offspring shall 
be as a helper to me.”?? “ Earth Doctor ” also had the power of 
making men out of images.* This tribe has lost the sun-cult, 
and only retains the idea that the male person has the power of 
making and animating images. The Sia Indians, on the other 
hand, were created by Spider Woman in the underworld.°® 

No tribe of the Pueblo Indians has a class of sky-descended 
people. At the same time they have legends of the Children of 
the Sun born of a virgin mother. The rdle of creator is not always 
filled by the Sun, but sometimes by the Great Mother herself. 
Thus the sun-god is the creator among the Zuni, and among the 
Pima “ Elder Brother” is the creator who makes images and 
animates them: while among the Hopi and the Sia the creator is 
the Great Mother herself. Throughout the Pueblo Region breath 
plays an important part as a creative force, and the breath bodies 
of people leave them at death to go to the underworld. This 
confusion of ideas is to be expected among the Pueblo Indians, 
for it has more than once been evident how chequered has been 
their past history. The Hopi, for example, are but the product 
of the fusion of several independent clans coming from all direc- 
tions, and are not the outcome of a direct process of growth, as 
are the Yuchi or the Huron or many other tribes. 

The process of degradation of creation ideas can be seen still 
farther developed among the Indians of the Plains. The Omaha 
have no idea whatever of creation, nor have their cognates the 
Osage, Ponco and others. Some of the Osage claim that the 
sun is their father and the moon their mother,® but that is about 
the extent of their beliefs. The Dakota have no myth of the 
creation of men images by the sun, but they pay the sun great 


1 Vothi. le.s. 2 Fewkes vii. 86. 3 F. Russell 208. 
€ Id., 216. 5 Stevenson i. 27. 6 Fletcher and La Flésche 63. 


SKY-GODS AS LIFE-GIVERS 213 


respect, for it is the favourite residence of the ‘‘ Master of Life.”’ 1 
The Tciwere and Winnebago have no such belief in the creation 
of man by the sun-god.?. The Saponi branch of the Sioux believe 
in a creator.* The Mandan of the upper Missouri believe in the 
** Lord of Life,’ a being with a tail, living in the sun, who created 
men and women.’ The Hidatsa believe in a ‘‘ Man who never 
dies,” or the “ Lord of Life,” who made all things.6 It is im- 
portant to note that these two tribes have kept on their agriculture 
to a much greater extent than the other Plains Indians, and 
consequently approach nearer in culture to the tribes of the 
south. The Cheyenne believe that they were created by the 
Great Medicine. The Algonquian wild-rice gatherers known as 
the Menomini believe in the creative power of sky-beings, for 
Mesha Manido, their “ Great Spirit,’’ made spirits in the form of 
animals and birds. He also made a bear into an Indian.? The 
Fox Indians also believe that their supreme being could create 
men and animals,’ in the form of images into which he breathed 
life. The Pawnee state that their supreme being, Tirawa, who 
lives in the sky, sent down the power to put life into all beings.® 

The most general result of this discussion is to show that life 
is usually connected with the sky, even in places where no com- 
munication with the sky-world now exists. Not only do sky- 
beings possess “life,” they create men; they are also often 
expressly said to be associated with the life of each person. This 
life is brought from the sky at birth, and returns there at death, 
the ghost going underground or elsewhere. The connexion be- 
tween life and the sky-gods is almost universal; the only excep- 
tions are places where the Children of the Sun have failed to 
establish a ruling family. This suggests that the ideas were part 
of the archaic civilization, and have been handed on in more or 
less distorted form to its successors. 

The definite association between the making of stone images 
and the ideas of creation and production of children goes far to 
support this conclusion. For the idea of creation from stone 
images seems to be connected geographically with the making of 
stone images. It is met with in Central Celebes, where the people 
of the archaic civilization have left stone images behind them ; 
it is absent in Australia, where no stone images are reported ; 
it is connected with stone images in Polynesia, as is seen by the 
associations of Tiki; in Mexico the making of stone images has 
an accompanying creation myth ; the Natchez of Louisiana, who, to 
the best of my knowledge, had no stone images, made their creator 
use clay ; and the Plains Indians, who have |no images at all, for 
the most part have no such creation myth. The idea of creation 
from stone images, and of the animation of stone images, is 
natural from the point of view of the people of the archaic civiliza- 

1 J. O. Dorsey ii. 449. 2 Id., 424 es. 3 Mooney ix. 
4 J. O. Dorsey il. 506. 5 Id., 513. 8 Id., iii. 34-5. 
? Hoffman ii, 243. 8 Owen 36. 9 Fletcher i. 732-3, 


214 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


tion. In Egyptian ritual the animation of portrait statues was 
regarded as a definite act of creation. Images could also be 
animated by the Dravidian peoples of India. So when people 
among whom the Children of the Sun settled have tales of the 
creation-of men by sky-beings, it is legitimate to equate such acts 
to the ritual animation of portrait statues by the people of the 
archaic civilization. The study of culture-sequences therefore 
shows that people, who presumably have been influenced by the 
archaic civilization, derive their origins from creative acts so 
similar to the ritual practices of the people of the archaic civiliza- 
tion, as to make it possible to claim with confidence that such 
creative acts have a foundation in fact, and not in childish fancy. 
This power of animation of statues probably constitutes one 
important reason why sky-gods have not entirely been forgotten 
when their actual descendants disappeared: they enter into the 
lives of all men in that they give them their life, and thus self- 
interest would prompt mortals to remember them. 

The acceptance of this interpretation of the evidence involves 
an assumption that at first sight would appear to be unwarrant- 
able, but which is permissible on the basis of results already 
arrived at: that the sky-beings of the Toradja and others can be 
equated to the rulers, say, of ancient Egypt—that they are beings 
of the same order. It has already been shown that the first kings 
of whom anything is known in the region were looked upon as 
incarnate gods, and that subsequent ages produced nothing like 
them. On the contrary, as was shown in Chapter XII, the later 
ruling groups were decidedly less divine than the Children of the 
Sun. So, when mention is made, in tradition, of ages when gods 
walked the earth, it is within the bounds of probability that these 
gods were actual men, and that the sky-gods of mythology are 
their reflections in the sky. The making of stone images by gods 
may well mean their making by men, and the geographical dis- 
tribution of stone images supports this contention. It is well to 
remember that this discussion rests on the basis of the distribution 
of certain material objects whose existence cannot be gainsaid, 
such as stone images. It cannot, therefore, be claimed that the 
ideas put forth above are due to fancy, when material evidence 
is to hand to substantiate them. The creation of children by a 
potter, or some other craft-god, recalls the doctrine of theogamy, 
in which the sun-god becomes the husband of a mortal woman, 
and raises the question of the connexion between the two sets of 
ideas. In both cases it certainly is true that men are made by 
gods, but the creative act is different in nature. In a theogamous 
union, the god is the actual father of the child, who is one of the 
Children of the Sun. In the other case the god is not the father 
of each child, he simply makes embryos. Thus the two cases are 
different, and no apparent connexion exists between them. 


CHAPTER XV 
THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 


HE preceding chapters have shown that relationships 
can be established between the social, political and 
economic organizations, and the religious system of a 

people. For example, cults of gods are in the hands of hereditary 
priests claiming descent from them, and connected with the sky- 
world. Another relationship is that existing between the be- 
haviour of a community and its gods : sun-gods have been replaced 
by war-gods, and the communities have lost their Children of the 
Sun and become more warlike. These results only touch the 
fringe of the matter. In this, and following chapters, an attempt 
will be made to sketch another fundamental relationship between 
religious systems and the rest of the life of a community. It will 
be argued that the agriculture of the people of the archaic civiliza- 
tion was accompanied by human sacrifice, and that, associated 
with this practice of offering victims, was the Great Mother 
goddess, the earliest deity known to man. In the next three 
chapters further discussions will be devoted to the Great Mother, 
and in the chapter on the Dual Organization the whole of the 
argument dealing with the sky-world, the Children of the Sun, 
and the Great Mother will be combined in an examination of the 
social and political organization of the archaic civilization, in 
which it will be urged that the most complete parallelism exists 
between religious and other institutions. 

In the earlier paleolithic age of Europe no traces have, as yet, 
been discovered of magical or religious ideas. The later, or Upper 
Paleolithic Age, of Western Europe, Egypt and elsewhere reveals 
a culture of a much more developed nature. These people used 
colouring materials both for their paintings and for self-adorn- 
ment, and it is probable that they tattooed themselves. They 
used shells and perforated animals’ teeth for ornaments, and put 
them with their dead in their graves. They made necklaces of 
amber, jet, crystals, fossils, and minerals. They usually interred 
their dead in a crouched position. Their art can be divided into 
two phases: in the earlier they sculptured in the round, and 
rarely executed those carvings on ivory, bone or wood objects 
which are so abundant in the second phase.! These carvings have 


1 Déchelette I, 203 2.s,, 207 e.s., 213, 214, 301, 471. 
215 


216 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


a great interest, for those of the early phase represent women, 
usually with extraordinary physical characteristics. 

Why should these people make feminine statuettes of such 
grotesque form? ‘They were not alone in this. For, in the 
civilization that followed, that termed “ Neolithic” in Europe, 
characterized in its later stages by the building of megalithic 
monuments, and the use of stone implements of the types already 
discussed, constant use is made of similar figures, male figures 
being practically non-existent. The late M. Déchelette said that, 
along with the building of megaliths, ‘‘ there penetrated into Gaul 
the image of a primitive deity . . . a female idol.’? He claims 
that the images, wherever found, are so similar that they conform 
to one type, and he says that they act as the guardians of the 
tomb. This form of idol was found also in the Aegean in these 
times, and certainly was the deity of the neolithic age.1 This 
agrees with the contention of Elliot Smith, who claims that the 
images of the Upper Paleolithic Age are those of the first deity, 
the Mother Goddess. He postulates the gradual development 
in prehistoric times of “‘ the conception of a creator, the giver 
of life, health, and good luck. This Great Mother, at first. with 
only vaguely defined traits, was probably the first deity that the 
wit of man devised to console him with her watchful care over 
his welfare in this life, and to give him assurance as to his fate in 
the future.” 2. There seems to be little doubt that, so far as 
Kurope itself is concerned, the Great Mother was the first deity. 
For, in the region whence the culture of the neolithic age is sup- 
posed to have penetrated into Europe, the Aegean, the cults of 
mother goddesses held sway for thousands of years. This makes 
it reasonable to surmise in Egypt the cult that was predominant 
in the far past was that of the Great Mother. Owing to the early 
development of the kingship in Egypt it is not possible to speak 
with any documentary knowledge of this matter; we must rely 
on inference and on indirect evidence. Fortunately, Sumerian 
records contain much information on this point. 

The Great Mother is the earliest Sumerian deity. ‘ Through- 
out their history, from the most ancient period to the very end 
of their existence as a race, the unmarried goddess is a dominating 
figure, the persistent and unchanging influence in the vast and 
complex pantheon.”’* The Mother Goddess does not stand alone 
inSumer. This civilization was probably founded upon irrigation, 
for evidence is lacking of a pre-irrigating population, and, as in 
Egypt, documentation only exists from periods after the intro- 
duction of irrigation. This is an important point ; for, although 
the Great Mother apparently stands alone in the Ancient Kast and 
Western Europe, in the earliest texts she is provided later with a 
son, who, in the case of the Sumerians, is her lover, Tammuz. 
Langdon says that ‘‘ the worship of the Mother Goddess and her 
son evidently forms the earliest element in human religion,” and 


1 Déchelette, 217, 428-9, 584,594, Elliot Smith xx, 151. *® Langdoni. 4-5. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 217 


this worship was vitally connected with irrigation.1. The Great 
Mother and her son-lover were inseparably connected in the minds 
of the early Sumerian priests ; for the feminine titles of the ancient 
Mother Goddess were applied to the youthful god of vegetation.? 
Great confusion also existed between Tammuz and the Mother 
Goddess in the Liturgies. Whence came Tammuz? According 
to Mr. Langdon, he was a real king of Erech in prehistoric times, 
and identified with the god Abu.* This suggests that the Tammuz 
idea was associated with the first kings of Sumer, who actually 
looked upon themselves as born of the virgin Great Mother ; 
Lilazag, king of Isin, was “ first-born son of the holy goddess, the 
woman, mother Bau.’ These early kings were also associated 
with irrigation.® 
Tammuz is compared with Osiris of Egypt, for they have 
identical functions: both are regarded as real kings; both are 
connected with vegetation, water and fertility. But one difference 
distinguishes them : Tammuz is the child of the Great Mother, 
who is unmarried; on the other hand, Osiris married his sister 
Isis, who is a form of the Great Mother. It must be remembered, 
however, that the king of Egypt was identified, not with Osiris, 
but Horus his son, and that with Horus is associated Hathor, 
‘the house of Horus.’’ Osiris is a dead king, and the Osiris type 
of king of Egypt seems to correspond to the later development in 
Sumer. Beginning with Dungi, of Ur, the king married the 
Mother Goddess, and no longer looked upon himself as her son. 
This transition, whereby the king married the Mother Goddess, 
is well known in Sumerian literature. It resulted from Tammuz 
becoming the local tutelary deity ; as, for example, at Larak, the 
gods of which were Tammuz and the Mother Goddess, his spouse. 
In the same way Enki gained his wife Dangalnunna, who was a 
development of Nintud, a virgin mother goddess.® 
Each city of Sumer had its own cults. It is commonly 

assumed that these cults sprang up locally, probably spontane- 
ously. But the views of Langdon put the matter in quite another 
light: “It is probable that the gods of the numerous cities of 
Babylonia and Assyria, whatever may have been their special 
attributes acquired in later times, are, at the beginning, each and 
all, shadows of the young god. They and their consorts are 
derived from this one great and primitive cult, and set aside for 
the performance of the more human and joyous side of this cult. 
I am not sure but that this formula applies to every other local 
bel and belit in the history of religion.”’? He adds that the great 
gods of the cities, such as Ningirsu of Lagash, Nergal of Kutha, 
Marduk of Babylon, are but solar manifestations of Tammuz.® 
In similar manner he postulates continuity in the Mother God- 
desses of Sumer, Babylonia and Assyr, which can all be 

1 Langdon i. 6. 10.) Who, rie 2 Ae bts: Say 

* Id i. .208,' n.: 1. 5 Id., ii. 176, 191. 

6 Id., 176, 190. 7 Id., i. 28, ® Id., 30, 


218 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


equated to one another. According to Mr. Langdon, the earliest 
form of the Great Mother Goddess in Sumer was connected with 
the vine, for she was called Lady Vine-Stalk. As Gestin-anna, 
‘heavenly mother goddess of the vine,’ she was identified with 
Nina, queen of waters ; and the two of them were goddesses of 
canals, irrigation, sheep, cattle, sacred song, incantation, and 
they were also identified with Isharru, the scorpion-goddess. 
The vine-goddess is also the Western Mother Goddess and the 
Grain Goddess. Ninanna is identified with Innini, both being 
the mother-earth. Innini, “‘ heavenly lady,’ was first a snake 
goddess ; she is ruler of the sky and of the underworld, and she is 
identified with Antu, the goddess of war. Thus could be re- 
counted a bewildering list of goddesses, all derived ultimately 
from the original Great Mother. As Mr. Langdon says: “A 
considerable portion of the pantheon was derived by erecting a 
new name into a separate deity.” * or instance, Ishtar, a great 
Mother Goddess of the early unmarried type, was superseded in 
many of her functions by the personifications of these functions.° 
Similarly Innini, ‘‘ having cast off many concrete qualities which 
were personified into female consorts of local gods, she retains for 
herself the commanding position of a detached deity mother of 
humanity, defender of her people.” 4 

The Great Mother was, in later times certainly, the incarnation 
of the principle of fertility, and, as such, she collected round 
herself all sorts of qualities associated with the welfare of mankind. 
In the course of her history she became associated with a multitude 
of qualities and objects, plants and animals, the enumeration of 
which would take some time, and would involve much discussion. 
Some of these associations will be discussed in this book, but the 
complete examination into the history of the Great Mother has 
yet to be undertaken. At the beginning of her documentary 
history she is intimately bound up with her son, so intimately 
that it is said that ““ we cannot always be sure whether we have 
to do with a goddess or her son.’’® Later in her history she turns 
into a married goddess, the wife of the dominant god, or even 
becomes his daughter; but, even to late times, she retains her 
position as the mother of mankind. This is shown in the case of 
Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria : 

‘* A little one art thou, O Ashurbanipal, whom I confided to 
the goddess, queen of Nineveh. 

‘*Weak wast thou, Ashurbanipal, when I satiated thee on the 
lap of the queen of Nineveh. 

‘* Of the four teats which were put to thy mouth, two thou didst 
suck, and with two thou didst cover thy face.’ ® 

Subsequent to the early period, when the king was identified 
with the son of the Great Mother, came another, in which the 
goddess took a less important place in the pantheon. She even 

1 Langdon i. 7, 45 e.s., 49, 87, 92, 95; ii. 132. 2 Id., i. 50. 

3 Id., 59. coef RR oat bE $oJd., 120. ° Id., 56. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 219 


came to be changed into a god, a fact that has been emphasized 
by Barton. He says that the old mother goddess of South 
Arabia, the home of so many Mother Goddesses, became changed, 
why, we know not, intoa god. He says: ‘“‘ We are safe . . . in 
assuming that the ba’al (= Lord) Athtar is later than the umm 
Athtar and was developed out of her.’? This god was localized 
in various places and developed certain variant qualities like local 
Virgin Marys. “It frequently happens in such cases that some 
favourite epithet of the deity is used so constantly to designate 
him that it finally displaces his original name : thus Tammuz (or 
whatever the primitive name was) became Adon, as did Yahwe in 
Israel. . .. It is possible to show how several divine names 
in Arabia originated in this way. At ’Amram the epithet 
Ilmaqqahu, ‘the divine protector,’ very nearly displaced the 
older name of Athtar. In thirty inscriptions Ilmaqqahu has 
displaced the name Athtar except in two instances, and in the 
former of these the meaning of the inscription equated Ilmaqqahu 
with Athtar. Ilmaqqahu is, moreover, throughout this group of 
inscriptions, a protector of children and a giver of fertility— 
functions not only performed by Athtar elsewhere . . . but also 
performed by Athtar in this very town.’’ At times this personi- 
fication of an epithet went so far that Athtar and IImaqqahu were 
put side by side as separate deities. ‘“ From this phenomenon 
it is safe to infer that if other South Arabian, or indeed Semitic, 
gods appear, whose names are epithets, and whose characteristics 
and functions are clearly those of Athtar, that they are offshoots 
from him and may have arisen in a similar manner.’’?! Barton 
is of the opinion that both Tammuz and Shamash were originally 
Mother Goddesses : for Shams was a sun-goddess in Arabia and 
Shamash a god elsewhere.? 

I do not propose to push this argument too far. It does, 
however, appear certain, from the arguments of Barton, that 
many of the old Semitic gods of Arabia and Babylon were origin- 
ally goddesses. He shows also that the goddesses themselves, 
as well as the gods derived from them, showed much power of 
expansion and of splitting off into other forms, as the result of the 
personification of epithets of the original deity. 

The bearing of this discussion upon the problem of the origins 
of Babylon is important. That country was conquered by 
Semites. In the early stages of Sumerian history the mother 
goddess was prominent. Then came people with gods who, 
according to Barton, had developed out of goddesses. By the 
time the Babylonian hegemony was established the original 
unmarried mother goddesses had become the married type, and 
thus lost much of their prestige. 

The next chapter will show why this transformation took place 
in the sex of deities ; it was but part of a radical transformation 
in all departments of social life which occurred throughout the 


1 Barton 12. SL Gve~ hae 


220 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


whole region, and was not confined to Sumer and Babylonia. 

Before discussing any further problems of early Sumerian and 
Semitic deities, it will be well to turn to Egypt to see what is the 
relationship between goddesses and gods. 

The great mother goddess in Egypt was directly concerned 
with the nursing and upbringing of the young members of the 
royal family, and was supposed to suckle the royal children. 
As an example, the inscriptions relating to the birth of Queen 
Hatshepsut of the Eighteenth Dynasty contain a scene repre- 
senting the nursing of the infant. ‘‘ On a couch at the left sits 
Queen Ahmose, supported by a goddess, and before her the child 
and its ka are nursed by two cow-headed Hathors. Below the 
couch are two Hathor cows suckling the child and its ka. On the 
right are the ka’s twelve in number, which have already been 
suckled and are being passed on to the Nile-god and an obscure 
divinity deity named Heku, who present them to three enthroned 
divinities.”? 1 Not only was the royal child suckled by goddesses, 
but the queen herself says ‘‘ Iam thy mother Hathor (or Isis, or 
Anoukit). I give thee the panegyrics of accession together with 
my good milk, so that they may enter thy limbs with life and 
strength.” 2 

The gods of Egypt being equated to their kings, it is natural 
to find that they too were born of goddesses. When the dead 
king reaches the sky, in the Pyramid Age, he is supposed to have 
a mystic relationship with the mother goddess. ‘“ King Teti 
is the Eye of Re, that passes the night, is conceived and born every 
day. . .. His mother the sky bears him living every day like 
Re.” The king is also said,'in the Pyramid Texts, to be the 
“son of Re, born of the sky-goddess,”’ and suckled by the sky- 
goddesses. * 

The great goddesses of Egypt were, according to the priestesses 
of Hathor, in her great temple at Denderah, but “‘ forms and 
attributes of Hathor worshipped under different names, so that 

. all prayers to them were in reality addressed to Hathor.”’ > 
The claim that all the goddesses were but forms of Hathor can be 
substantiated by an examination of the equations that take place, 
as in Sumer. For example, Hathor is equated to Mut, both of 
them being the Eye of Re, and represented by the vulture.® 


Mut, or Hathor, again, is identical with Sekhet the Lioness, Tefnut, 


and Bast, all of whom are solar goddesses. At Phil, Isis- 
Hathor personified all the goddesses in one: “‘ Kindly is she as 
Bast, terrible is she as Sekhet.’?? Neith, the goddess of Sais, is 
associated there with Osiris and Horus, and thus is identified with 
Isis, and therefore with Hathor ; she is the goddess of war and 
the mother of the gods. Mut, the celestial mother, is identified 
with Hathor, and gave water to the souls of the dead out of a 


1 Breasted ii. II. 210. 2 Moret i. 64. 8’ Breasted iv. 123. 
4'Id:,’ 130. 5 Wiedemann 143. 6 Td., 123. 
7 Td., 188. 8 Td., 140. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 221 
sycamore tree.!_ Many other examples could be quoted to show 
that all the mother goddesses of Egypt can be derived from one 
original form. For the purpose of simplicity it is possible to 
take Hathor as the type, for she was associated so closely with 
Horus, the prototype of Egyptian kings. Her name means 
‘“* House of Horus.” Horus, according to Elliot Smith, adopted 
many of the attributes of Hathor, so that it is not easy to dis- 
tinguish his original qualities.? 

It is possible to adduce evidence to show that the mother 
goddess was originally a prominent deity in Egypt. The difficulty 
in the way of this task lies in the fact that the texts from which 
so much knowledge of Egyptian origins is derived, the Pyramid 
Texts, are relatively late, and are devoted to ideas mainly centred 
round a male god, the sun-god Re, of Heliopolis. But one line 
of evidence points to the mother goddess as a very important 
deity. The earliest form of royal tomb in Egypt was the mastaba. 
This was a development of the pre-dynastic grave, originally 
scooped out of the sand, that, in time, became an underground 
house, with sets of rooms for the use of the deceased, and with a 
superstructure of bricks with sloping sides. This ultimately gave 
rise to the pyramid, which, in its initial form, was made of brick 
like the mastaba, the use of stone not appearing till the Third 
Dynasty. The ruling family had, at first, the monopoly of the 
Pyramids, and the texts found in these structures were purely 
solar in their theology. But the nobles continued to make 
mastaba tombs, and the deity usually found on the walls of these 
mastabas is Hathor.? Although so prominent in the mastabas, 
Hathor does not appear in the Pyramids, except as a secondary 
manifestation of the sun-god. The process of thought therefore, 
in ancient Egypt, had gone through the same phases as that in 
Sumer; the original mother goddess had been pushed into the 
background. In the Fourth Dynasty the wives of local magnates 
regularly acted as priestesses of Hathor. It is therefore possible, 
if not probable, that the later developments of Egyptian religion 
have masked an earlier stage when Hathor was predominant. 

This discussion suggests that the religious systems of Egypt, 
Arabia and Babylonia have passed through the same _ phases. 
The great mother seems to be all alone in the days before the 
discovery of irrigation. Later she is accompanied by a son, who 
is also her lover. This son is personified on the earth by the 
kings of these States; and the king, the god and the mother 
goddess are primarily associated with irrigation, fertility, 
vegetation and similar things. The next phase of development 
is that in which the male element begins to assert itself, and the 
mother goddess is gradually pushed into the background, and 
relegated to the position of wife of the chief god, who was formerly 
her son. This process of substitution has been accompanied by 
a progressive expansion in which epithets of the deities become 

1 Id., 64, 143. 2 Elliot Smith xx. 79. 3 Petrie ii. 22. 


222 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


separate deities. With the foundation of new cities the god and 
goddess are transplanted into new soil, and at once begin their 
own course of development. This process of expansion is, of 
course, paralleled by that of the actual dynasties that claim 
relationship to the gods, and, as far back as it is possible to go, 
evidence exists of the strict relationship of kings to gods. 
Since new deities are continually being given off in historical 
times, it is probable that this process must be projected into the 
past, so that all the dynasties of Egypt and Babylonia may have 
sprung from one original group. 

Having thus defined the general trend of development in the 
Ancient East, it is now possible to pass on to the problem of this 
chapter, the practice of human sacrifice. It seems probable that 
in ancient Egypt, as in Sumer, the king was himself originally 
killed as a sacrifice for the vegetation. Osiris, according to some 
accounts, met his death in the Nile flood-water.1. This agrees 
with what is known of Sumer, where the Tammuz rites are but 
the memory of the times when the king was actually drowned : 
‘** Not the divine son perished in the waves, but a human being 
who was slain represented at first this tragedy of birth and death.”’ 2 
This ritual was connected with agriculture above everything else ; 
it was part of a ceremony to ensure the proper supply of food, and 
the king evidently, in Egypt and Sumer, was the victim. This 
phase, in which the king was killed, did not last ; few traces of it 
exist in Egypt. The Egyptians, however, had the remarkable story 
of the Destruction of Mankind, in which Hathor, as Sekhet the 
Lioness, destroys human beings in order to procure for Re, the 
sun-god, blood that would serve as an elixir of life. This story is, 
to my mind at least, extremely obscure ; and at present it seems 
hardly possible to guess at its meaning. It is evident that, in the 
story, the king is not killed, but one of his subjects is sacrificed 
instead. A late tradition existed in Egypt to the effect that 
formerly a virgin was sacrificed in order that the irrigation might 
be prosperous. 

It is noteworthy that the change in the mode of human sacrifice 
may be connected with the solar theology of Heliopolis, for the 
tale of Destruction of Mankind, which contains the first sign of the 
substitution sacrifice, is connected with Re.* In this connexion 
the mother goddess is cruel and destructive. This is in harmony 
with the Sumerian evidence ; for only, in that country, when the 
sky-world came into question, did the mother goddess develop 
martial and bloodthirsty qualities: ‘“‘ As soon as the queen of 
heaven becomes associated with the light that streams from the 
heavenly bodies, the sun, moon, stars, she develops warlike 
qualities.”’® Indeed there was ‘“‘ a close connexion between the 
astral and martial types ”’ :° the warlike Ishtar was represented 

1 Murray ii, 128-134; iii. 2 Langdon i. 26. 

§ J. G. Frazer i. II. 38. * Wiedemann 59 e.s.: Budge 1. 

5 Langdon i. 98. 6 Id, 105. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 2238 


by the star Sirius and the lion, “‘ and she becomes, in fact, especially 
in Assyria, the principal genius of battle.” } 

The evidence therefore suggests that human sacrifice was 
especially associated with the great mother goddess, and with 
the sun-god, and that the earlier phase was that in which the king 
himself was the victim. The form of human sacrifice which is 
most widespread over the earth is that in which a captive, or 
some other victim, is offered in connexion with the state-cult, 
and not the king himself; and it is this form of human sacrifice 
that seems first in the Ancient East to have been connected with 
the sun-cult. 

The mother goddess is important in India. Both the Vedic 
and the Dravidian religious systems recognize male and female 
deities ; but with this difference, that in the Vedas the goddesses 
are negligible, while throughout Dravidian religion, and in the 
Hindu period, they are of great importance.2. The worship of 
mother goddesses has always flourished where Dravidian civiliza- 
tion held its ground,® and this prominence exists as far back as 
literary sources go. The Hindu sects that resulted from the post- 
Buddhist revival of Brahminism are permeated with the worship 
of mother goddesses : almost every village in South India has its 
shrine for the goddess, the guardian spirit of the village, situated 
outside the village in a sacred grove. Many of those goddesses 
bear names that show them obviously to be of the nature of the 
derivative mother goddess of Egypt and Sumer, such as “ the 
mother who wears the circular crescent,” ‘‘ the pearl-like mother,”’ 
“the golden mother,” ‘‘ the beautiful queen mother.” 4 Modern 
Hinduism includes a series of cults associated with certain aspects 
of the mother goddesses. Each god has associated with him a 
goddess called his Shakti, or creative force. ‘‘ The cultus of the 
Caktis, as it is formulated in certain Upanishads, in several 
Puranas, and especially in the Tantras, must not be confounded 
with the customary homage rendered by all sects to the wives of 
the gods. It forms a religion by itself, that of the Caktas, which 
again is subdivided into several branches, having their special 
system of doctrine and forms of initiation, and in the heart of 
which there arose a quite distinctive mythology. At the summit 
and source of all beings is Mahadevi, in whose character the idea 
of the Maya and that of the Prakriti are blended. Below her in 
rank are arrayed her emanations, the Caktis of Vishnu, of 
Brahma, of Skandha, etc., ete. (an order which is naturally altered 
in favour of Lakshmi or of Rahha in the small number of writings 
belonging to the Tantras which Vishnuism has produced), and a 
whole complex hierarchy, highly complex, and as variable as 
complex, of female powers, such as the Mahamatria, ‘ the Great 
Mother,’ personifications of the productive and nourishing powers 
of nature; the Yoginis, the sorceresses, whose interference is 
always violent and capricious; the Nayikas, the Dakinis, the 


1 Td., 59. 2 Hewitt (1890) 400. 3 Barnett 5. 4 Sastri 223-4. 


224 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Cakinis, and many other classes besides, without consistently 
defined powers, but almost all malignant, and whose favour is 
secured only at the expense of the most revolting observances. 
All this in combination with the male divinities goes to form the 
most duitegrous group of divinities which man has ever con- 
ceived.” 

The non-Vedic literature of India shows that the fundamental 
unity of the mother goddesses was well recognized in that country. 
For instance, in the Vishnu Purana, the various forms which 
Vishnu assumes when he comes to the earth are accompanied by 
changes in his consort Lakshmi: ‘her first birth was as the 
daughter of Bhrigu by Khyati : it was at a subsequent period that 
she was produced from the sea, at the churning of the ocean by 
the demons and the gods, to obtain ambrosia. For in like manner 
as the lord of the world, the god of gods, Janarddana (Vishnu), 
descends among mankind (in various shapes), so does his coad- 
jutrix Sri (Lakshmi). Thus when Hari was born as a dwarf, the 
son of Aditi, Lakshmi appeared from a lotus ; when he was born 
as Rama, of the race of Bhrigu, she was Dharani; when he was 
Raghava, she was Sita; and when he was Krishna, she became 
Rukmini. In the other descents of Vishnu, she is his associate.’ 2 
In the Tantras the great mother is recognized as having all sorts 
of forms. In one Tantra Siva speaks thus to his consort: * Thou 
art the only Prakriti of the Supreme Soul Brahman, and hast 
sprung from the whole universe—O Shiva—its Mother. O 
gracious One, whatever there is in this world, of things which have 
and are without motion, from Mahat to an atom, owes its origin 
to, and is dependent on, Thee. Thou art the Original of all the 
manifestations; Thou art the birthplace of even Us; Thou 
knowest the whole world, yet none know Thee. 

“Thou art Kali, Tarini, Durga, Shodashi, Bhuvaneshvari, 
Dhumavati. Thou art Bagala, Bhairvai, and Chhinnamastaka, 
Thou art Anna-purna, Vagdevi, Kamalalaya. Thou art the 
image or Embodiment of all the Shaktis and of all the Devas. 
Thou are both Subtle and Gross, Manifested and Veiled, Formless 
yet with form. Who can understand Thee ?’ 3 

The Dravidians put their mother goddesses in the forefront of 
their religious systems, and even in village shrines the goddesses 
are all-important. This makes it evident that these mother 
goddesses play a part in the life of these people that is lacking 
among the Aryans. In the Vedas the solar deities, the Adityas, 
are the sons of Aditi, a goddess of indefinite attributes, of whom 
little is said. The Adityas and their mother Aditi recall the 
Egyptians and Sumerian gods with their mother goddesses. Their 
supersession by Indra suggests that the Aryans have passed 
from a stage similar to that of the Dravidians, a conclusion that 
has already been drawn from other evidence. During the process 
the practice of human sacrifice was also abandoned. 

1 Barth 202. * H. H. Wilson 80. 3 Avalon 46-7. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 225 


The Vedic and Dravidian religions are sharply contrasted : ‘‘ Both 
the Vedic and the Dravidian religions acknowledged deities of 
both sexes; but in the former the masculine members of the 
pantheon chiefly engrossed the worshipper’s regard, while in the 
latter the position is reversed. Vedic religion, though it has its 
darker side—occasional human sacrifice, frequent cruel slaughter 
of animals, outbursts of filthy obscenity, and a mass of vulgar 
superstitions and crude magic rites enwrapping almost every 
function of life—was nevertheless in its official aspect a fairly 
bright and respectable system ; Dravidian religion was dark and 
repulsive, obscene and bloody. The worship of the mother 
goddess with human sacrifice, of the emblems of generation with 
wholesale prostitution, has always flourished where Dravidian 
religion held its ground.’ + 

This contrast reveals two characteristics of Dravidian religion ; 
the connexion of the mother goddess with fertility and with 
human sacrifice.2 It is strange that the great mother of all things, 
the source of all life, should also be destructive, yet such is the 
case. The wife of Shiva is Uma, ‘ the gracious,” who, as a mother 
goddess, has many forms, Devi, ‘the goddess”; Parvati, ‘ the 
daughter of the mountains ” ; Durga, ‘‘ the inaccessible ”’ ; Gauri, 
“the bright one”; Sati, ‘“‘ the devoted wife’; Bhairavi, ‘‘ the 
terror-inspiring ’’; Kali, ‘‘ the black one’’; Karala, ‘‘ the horrible 
one.’ *? She is thus beneficent and terrible. Her cults are dual ; 
they are divided into black and white, benevolent and cruel ; 
‘‘and they constitute in this way two series of manifestations 
of the infinite energy, as it were two series of supreme goddesses, 
one series presiding more specially over the creative energies of 
life, the other representing rather those of destruction. To both 
a twofold cultus is addressed: the confessed public cultus ... 
or ‘cultus of the right hand,’ which, except in one particular, 
namely insistence upon animal sacrifice in honour of Durga, Kali 
and other terrible forms of the great goddess, observes essentially 
the general usages of Hinduism; and the ‘cultus of the left 
hand,’ the observances of which have always been kept more or 
less secret. Incantations, imprecations, magic and common 
sorcery play a prominent part in this last, and many of these 
strange ceremonies have no other object than the acquisition of 
the different siddhis or supernatural powers. These are practices 
of very ancient date in India, since they are deeply rooted in the 
Veda, and a special system of philosophy, the Yoga, is devoted 
to the explanation of them ; but nowhere have they found a soil 
so congenial as in Civaism and the cultus of the Caktis. Neither 
is there room to doubt that the blood of human victims not 
unfrequently flowed on the altars of these gloomy goddesses, before 
the horrible images of Durga, Kali, Candika and Camunda.”’ 4 


1 Barnett 5. 2 According to Hewitt (1890, 933), man was the first 
sacrificial animal in India. 3 Barth 165. 
* Barth 203. Durga was fond of wine and blood (Mazumdar 357). 
15 


226 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


The human sacrifices held in connexion with the mother 
goddesses of India are usually agricultural.t_ The Mundas and 
Oraons of ancient times practised human sacrifice, and even to 
this day still do so in secret.2 This seems to be a degenerate form 
of the original practice, for the ceremony is on account of some 
evil spirit that has to be appeased. The Mundas have a 
varied history behind them, and this form of sacrifice may well 
be a survival of the earlier mode. The Gonds practised human 
sacrifice, especially to Kali Danteshwari, the tutelary deity of 
the rajas of Bastar. The human sacrifice of the Oraon is con- 
nected with the goddess Anna Kauri, or Mahadhani.* ‘‘ She 
can give good crops and make a man rich.” Sir E. B. Tylor well 
expresses the nature of the human sacrifice of the Khonds, one 
of the Dravidian tribes. He says: ‘‘ Of all the religions of the 
world, perhaps that of the Khonds of Osissa gives the earth- 
goddess her most remarkable place and function. Boora Pennu 
or Bella Pennu, the light-god or sun-god, created Tari Pennu the 
earth-goddess for his consort, and from them are born the other 
great gods. But strife arose between the mighty parents, and it 
became the wife’s work to thwart the good creation of her husband, 
and to cause all physical and moral ill. Thus to the sun-worship- 
ping sect she stands abhorred on the bad eminence of the Evil deity. 
But her own sect, the earth-worshipping sect, seem to hold ideas 
of her nature which are more primitive and genuine. The 
functions which they ascribe to her, and the rites with which they 
propitiate her, display her as the earth-mother, raised by an 
intensely agricultural race at an extreme height of divinity. It 
was she who with drops of her blood made the soft muddy ground 
harden into firm earth ; thus men learnt to offer human victims 
and the whole earth became firm; the pastures and ploughed 
fields came into use, and there were cattle and sheep and poultry 
for man’s service ; hunting began and there were iron and plough- 
shares and harrows and axes, and the juice of the palm tree ; and 
love arose between the sons and daughters of the people, making 
new households, and society with its relations of father and 
mother, and wife and child, and the bonds between ruler and 
subject. It was the Khond earth-goddess who was propitiated 
with those hideous sacrifices, the suppression of which is matter of 
recent Indian history.”»> The Gonds, Khonds, Mundas, Oraons, 
who are especially prominent in India as practising human sacrifice, 
are tribes whose culture shows clear signs of contact with the 
archaic civilization. Thus it is probable that, in India, human 
sacrifice goes back to the archaic civilization. The Tantrik cults 
originated in Assam, and several tribes practise human sacrifice, 
among them the Tipperas, Kacharis and Jaintais.® It is import- 
ant to note that some tribes of Assam, such as the Nagas, practise 

1 Hewitt (1890) 374. * Roy ii. 32-6: Dehon 141. 


3 R. V. Russell 112. 4 Dehon 141. 
° Tylor II. 270-1. Cf. Macpherson. ® Gait 15, 40: Elliot 1167. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 227 


head-hunting. Since these people live in places formerly occupied 
by a higher civilization, and since their culture shows signs of 
being derived from that of the archaic civilization, it follows that 
their head-hunting practices are probably derived from human 
sacrifice, the heads being used for similar purposes. 

Human sacrifices used to be made to the cobra, the Naga 
snake, so closely connected with the great Dravidian ruling group 
of the Nagas. This indicates a line of inquiry which cannot be 
followed up here on account of considerations of time and space. 
But it may be mentioned that the mother goddesses of Egypt and 
Sumer were especially connected with snakes. The tutelary 
goddess of Buto in Lower Egypt was Buto, who was connected 
with the deadly urzus, the asp, which adorned the diadem of 
the king, and served as his protector. The tutelary goddess of 
the other half of Egypt, Nekhbet, was the vulture-goddess, 
who also helped to protect the king. In Sumer the serpent 
aspect of the mother goddess was extremely important.! One 
of the original names of the mother goddess must have been 
*“mother-great serpent.’? Not only was the mother goddess 
intimately associated with the serpent, but so also was her son. 
As is said by Langdon, it is sometimes impossible to know whether 
mention is made of the mother goddess or her son when serpents 
are spoken of in the texts.? 

Human sacrifice was not practised by the Aryans of Vedic 
times, but traces of it exist. One instance is that of Purusha, 
from whose sacrificial body the four castes were made.? Thus, 
in the culture-sequence of Aryan and Dravidian, human sacrifice 
belongs to the first period but not to the second. In India the 
cults of mother goddess, the practice of human sacrifice and the 
craft of agriculture have disappeared among the writers of the 
Rig-Veda. They obviously were pastoral, for the whole ritual 
centres round cattle, and agriculture is barely mentioned. The 
disappearance of these cultural elements, so intimately bound 
together among the Dravidian tribes, raises the important problem 
of causation. Which was given up first—the earth-goddess, the 
human sacrifice or the agriculture ? ‘This question will arise again 
in the next chapter, where it will be seen that the disappearance 
of the mother goddess was part of the tremendous social trans- 
formation which took place on the break-up of the archaic civili- 
zation. 

The archaic civilization of Indonesia being mainly extinct, traces 


‘would hardly be expected of a relationship between the great 


mother goddess, agriculture and human sacrifice, even if they 
ever existed. The region has received at least two great civilizing 
influences coming from India, the archaic civilization and the 
Hindu movement, and both of these phases included the three 
cultural elements. This complicates the matter. 
Indonesia possesses but few instances of a mother goddess 
1 Langdon i. 115 e.s. 2 Id., 120. 3 Muir I. 9. 


228 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


holding a place similar to that of Sumer or India. But mother 
goddesses are reported among the Tontemboan of Minahassa, 
and in the Sadan district of Central Celebes, two places strongly 
influenced by the archaic civilization as is shown by the custom of 
making rock-cut tombs.4- Lumimu’ut is the great deity of the 
Tontemboan of Minahassa, the mother and -wife of To’ar, the 
Sun, who came over the sea in a ship bringing food-plants with 
her.2. The people of the Sadan region of Central Celebes tell 
of a Goddess of the Sea, to whom they owe most of their culture. 

It has been seen that the people of the archaic civilization took 
with them into Polynesia the food-plants with which they made 
habitable several of the islands. In their home in India they 
probably knew of rice, but they did not take it into the Pacific. 
Ido not know whether they brought rice into Indonesia ; but cer- 
tain evidence, especially that collected by Heer Kruyt, leads to 
the conclusion that they were concerned in Indonesia with taro 
cultivation. Rice, therefore, would have been brought by the 
Hindus. In an important monograph on the “ Rice-Mother,”’ 
Kruyt has collected information from all over the archipelago 
with respect to rice-cultivation. The idea is widespread through- 
out the archipelago that rice has a soul of similar nature to that 
possessed by man, and ceremonies have to be performed in order 
that the crop may be abundant. The peoples who grow rice 
usually term certain heads of the newly cut rice by the name of 
the ‘‘ rice-mother ”’ ; sometimes they are called the “ rice-uncle ” 
or “chief.” 3 In this “ rice-mother ” is supposed to be concen- 
trated the soul of the rice ; her function is that of the maintenance 
of its health.*. The origin of these ideas and practices associated 
with the rice-mother must apparently be sought in India; for, 
in Sumatra, Java, Bali and South Celebes, places strongly 
permeated with Hindu influences, the ‘‘ soul ” of the rice is called 
after names derived from that of the great Indian goddess, Sri, 
another form of Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, from whose body 
the rice is supposed to have come. 

Both sets of mother goddesses of Indonesia are therefore con- 
nected with agriculture. In this region human sacrifice is also 
connected with the past. It is, or was, found among the Batta 
of Sumatra, at Kupang in Timor, in West Sumba, and among 
the Toradja of Central Celebes and certain Borneo tribes. The 
Batta, in addition, were cannibals, and their culture shows signs 
of Dravidian affinities, which makes it interesting to note that in 
the Mahabharata mention is made of the Rakshanas, a cannibal 
people, who were included in the Dravidian group.* The human 


2 Perry vii. 10, 13. 2 Schwarz 407-8. 

8 Kruyt ii. 384. Wat Gece ans tbe 

6 Id., 410-11. Miss Blackman has recently shown that the ancient Egypt- 
ians had identical ideas and practices. See Journ. Manchester Egypt. and 
Orien. ‘Soc., No. X., 1922. 

6 « Mahabharata,’ Adi Parva, Vakabadha clxii. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 229 


sacrifice of west Sumba is closely allied to that of India, for it is 
connected with the snake race. In this part of the island the 
python is sometimes held to be a great ancestor, and human 
sacrifices are made to it. Offerings are made to such snakes in 
order that the springs shall be full for the irrigation and that the 
agriculture shall prosper. Since, in these instances, agriculture 
is practically universally carried on by means of irrigation, the 
evidence suggests a close connexion between the snakes and the 
archaic civilization. In a story told in west Sumba a man was 
given some irrigated fields by a snake, on the understanding that 
he offered human sacrifices to it every year.! The snakes 
involved in such stories are not looked upon simply as animals, 
but as men who can assume a snake form ; so they correspond to 
the Nagas of India. 

In Central Celebes traditions tell of human sacrifices on sacred 
stones.2. The Olo Ngadju of South-east Borneo formerly practised 
human sacrifice in connexion with their warfare. Before going 
on an expedition they broke eggs on certain sacred stones, called 
pangantoho, that were put in position to the accompaniment 
of a human sacrifice. On their return the blood and heads of 
slain enemies were brought to the stone, and the heads were 
placed in a hut near by.® 

Formerly the practice was much more widespread in Indonesia. 
In Borneo, where it is almost unknown, ‘‘ there is a number of 
rites of which it is admitted by the people that the slaughter of 
human beings was formerly a central feature ; of these, the most 
important and the most widely spread are the funeral rites ofa 
great chief, the rites at the building of a new house, and those on 
returning from a successful war expedition. In all these fowls or 
pigs are substituted now as a rule, but we know of mstances in 
which in recent years human beings were the victims.” + 

The associations of these sacrifices suggest the influence of the 
archaic civilization; for it has already been stated that the 
chiefly class of the Borneo tribes claims kinship with the sky- 
world ; and the rites for which human sacrifices are needed are 
exactly those for which the members of the initiated priesthood 
are necessary, those rites having been derived from the sky- 
world.® As for war, it has already been claimed that the people 
of the archaic civilization introduced the practice. 

The modification of human sacrifice in Borneo brings into 
prominence the question of the meaning and origin of the custom 
of head-hunting, so widespread in Indonesia. The evidence 
indicates that this custom is derived from that of human sacrifice. 
For instance, Borneo tribes that formerly practised human 
sacrifice now seek heads at certain periods. A Sebop legend 
shows that this practice is connected with agriculture. The 
Sebop claim descent from Tokong, a brother of the supposed 


1 Kruyt m.s.s. 2 Kruyt and Adriani I. 60. 3 Kruyt iii. 219, 
* Hose and McDougall II. 104. ® Perry vii. 145 e.s. 


230 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


ancestor of the Kayan, Kenyah and other chiefly groups, which 
suggests connexion with the archaic civilization. Tokong intro- 
duced head-hunting to the Sebop on the advice of a frog, which 
assured him that head-hunting would bring them prosperity of 
every kind. They took its advice. ‘As the party returned home 
and passed through their fields the padi (rice) grew very rapidly. 
As they entered the fields the padi was only up to their knees, but 
before they had passed through it was full-grown with full ears. 
The words of the frog thus came true, and Tokong and his 
descendants and people continued to follow the new practice, 
and from them it was learned by others.” ! Thus the people of 
Borneo directly ascribe the custom to a foreign source. 

Kayan beliefs provide striking evidence with regard to the 
relationship between head-hunting and people of another civiliza- 
tion. They hang up heads taken in war in the verandas of their 
houses. These heads are supposed to be the abodes, not of the 
ghosts of their owners in life, but of certain spirits called toh, who 
show every sign of being the traditional representatives of the 
forerunners of the Kayan in Central Borneo, the people who left 
behind them carved stone bulls on the banks of certain rivers. 
Further, the Kayan war-god is Toh Bulu.2 The toh are not 
wholly malevolent. It is held that in some way their presence 
in the house brings prosperity to it, especially in the form of good 
crops ; and so essential to the welfare of the house are the heads 
held to be that, if a house has lost its heads through fire, and has 
no occasion for war, the people will beg a head, or even a fragment 
of one, from some friendly house, and will instal it in their own 
with the usual ceremonies.? The head-hunting of the Kayan 
is apparently associated with rice-growing, and thus with the 
Hindu or the archaic civilization. In this case the great mother, 
if she ever existed, has left no traces, except perhaps in the 
connexion supposed to exist between the fertility of women and 
of rice. Among the Toradja tribes of Central Celebes head- 
hunting is intimately connected with agriculture, the possession 
of a head being essential for the procuring of a proper crop of 
rice. The Bontoc of Luzon in the Philippines say that the 
Children of the Sun took the first head, and thus ascribe the 
custom of head-hunting to their influence. 

The evidence from Indonesia, while not conclusive, agrees in 
associating human sacrifice and mother goddesses with the 
archaic civilization, and also with the Dravidian civilization of 
India. Human sacrifice has been modified in the region into 
head-hunting, and a direct association with agriculture is not 
always apparent. The mother goddesses also have associations 
with agriculture. But, so far as can be told, no such direct 
connexion between the mother goddess, agriculture and human 
sacrifice can be detected in Indonesia as in India and elsewhere. 
This is what would be expected from what is known of the 

1 Hose and McDougall II. 139. 2 Id., 18. 3 Id., 23: 


is eg A es le ee Re ee Se eae 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 231 


history of culture in Indonesia. The archaic civilization has been 
so broken up by subsequent incursions that it only survives in 
fragments, that have to be pieced together with reference to 
other groups of data in order that their former nature may be 
recognizable. 

Human sacrifice occurs in New Guinea, in the form of cannibal- 
ism, where it is apparently closely connected with the influence 
of the archaic civilization ; for it is found in Bartle Bay, Southern 
Massim and Wagawaga. In the rest of the region studied by 
Prof. Seligman, the custom is not recorded. Some of the stone 
circles of British New Guinea are used as squatting-places, a 
custom similar to that of the Khasi and elsewhere; but others 
were used for cannibal feasts, each clan using its own circle. 
Bartle Bay is further remarkable in that a ceremony is performed 
there in connexion with the mango.? 

Throughout Melanesia cannibalism and human sacrifice still 
persisted during late years. In San Cristoval Mr. Fox couples 
human sacrifice for agriculture with the earliest stratum of food- 
producing culture of Melanesia. Dr. Codrington mentions 
human sacrifice as occasionally practised in the Solomons, often 
for the dedication of a new canoe, or a chief’s dwelling-house. He 
states that cannibalism has extended itself in the Solomons during 
the past century,? as in the case of Ulawa. ‘“ The natives of 
San Cristoval not only eat the bodies of those who are slain in 
battle, but sell the flesh. To kill for the purpose of eating human 
flesh, though not unknown, is rare, and is a thing which marks 
the man who has done it.’’ Cannibalism is absent from the 
Banks Islands and Santa Cruz, but present in the northern New 
Hebrides. Dr. Codrington was told by eye-witnesses that it was 
practised in Pentecost: ‘‘ In Leper’s Island they still eat men 
(1891).”> He reports head-hunting in the Solomons.* Of this 
practice Rivers says: ‘‘ The primary motive which seems to have 
underlain the practice of head-hunting in Melanesia was that they 
might act as an offering on such occasions as the building of a 
new house or the launching of a new canoe. ... It is probable 
that the offering of the head of an enemy on these occasions has 
arisen directly out of the practice of human sacrifice, the head 
being used as the representative of the human victim.” He 
goes on to state that the practice of head-hunting certainly belongs 
to a late stage of Melanesian history.° This agrees with the 
evidence in India and Indonesia, where head-hunting is evidently 
a modification of human sacrifice. 

Further south in Melanesia cannibalism and human sacrifice 
flourish in New Caledonia, a place ruled over by the Children of 
the Sun, with mummification, terraced irrigation and other signs 
of close relationship to the archaic civilization.® 

1 Seligman i. 556 e.s. 2 Id., 589, 650. 


3°C. Hy Fox 158, 134, 297, 343. * Codrington 344-5. 
5 Rivers ix. II. 259. 6 Lambert 178. 


232 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Human sacrifice and cannibalism are mainly things of the past 
in Polynesia, although in later times these customs have been 
introduced once again from the west to Fiji and elsewhere. In 
the story of the peopling of Samoa it is said that the ancestress 
of the ruling family of Manu’a, Ui, came from a land where 
human sacrifices were offered to the sun. Ui managed to procure 
the use of substitutes for human beings, and then departed.+ 
Cannibalism is said to have been practised by the first settlers 
at Manu’a in Samoa.?. It was unknown in later times in the 
group, and human sacrifice had largely been abandoned. In 
places settled by the Samoans, such as the Gilberts, human 
sacrifice is unknown. Human sacrifices in Polynesia were mainly 
associated with the great gods of Fiji, Tonga, the Hervey Group, 
the Marquesas,? the Paumotos and Hawaii. Cannibalism was 
also practised: ‘‘ Their mythology led them to suppose that 
the spiritual part of their sacrifices is eaten by the spirit of the 
idol before whom it is presented. . .. In some of the islands, 
‘man-eater ’ was an epithet of the principal deities; and it was 
probably in connexion with this that the king, who often person- 
ated the god, appeared to eat the human eye.” 4 | 

Cannibalism and human sacrifice occur in New Zealand.? 
Elsdon Best comments thus upon these practices: “ Though 
cannibalism was practised in some isles, yet it was no universal 
Polynesian custom. In the Society Group, whence the Maori of 
New Zealand came, it was rare, and it horrified several Tahitians 
who sailed in Cook’s vessels in the Pacific. How is it that our 
Maori has become such a pronounced cannibal in these islands ? 
No such condition of general cannibalism—of its becoming such a 
common practice—is known among Polynesians of the south- 
eastern area. In order to find the eastern limit of this custom 
as a common habit we must turn to Fiji, in the Melanesian area. 
It is fairly clear that the Maori did not bring this shocking custom 
in any excessive form with him to New Zealand. Did he borrow 
if from the Maruiwi? Tradition shows that the aborigines were 
of a lower plane of culture than that on which the Maori stood 
(but cf. p. 27). The Maori immigrants took large numbers of 
Maruiwi women, first as gifts, afterwards by force ; such a whole- 


sale system of inter-marriage must have had some effect on the 


culture and customs of the intruding people. . .. Was canni- 
balism as a common custom acquired by the Maori? The dreadful 
Maori custom—or, at least, occasional habit—of kai pirau was 
also a Fijian custom—the exhuming and eating of buried human 
bodies.” ® 

Since Elsdon Best derives the Maruiwi from the New Hebrides, 
it is probable that they were cannibals and handed on the practice 
to the Maori. In the case of human sacrifice Elsdon Best says : 
‘We are aware that the practice of human sacrifice was followed 

1 Pratt ii. 121-2. 2 Tautain i. 3 Ff. Kramer I. 10. 

4 Ellis I. 357-8. 5 Haszard. § Best vi. 429. 


\ 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 233 


in Eastern Polynesia, and probably the Maori brought it with him 
to New Zealand. There is, however, some evidence to show that 
in former times two singular examples of this custom obtained 
here that we cannot trace to the former home of the Maori ; these 
were the burial of human beings at the bases of the main forts of 
the stockade of a pa, or fortified village, and also at the bases of 
posts supporting a house. There are several allusions to the 
latter custom in Maori tradition; and, curiously enough, there 
is proof that in many cases some other object—such as a bird, a 
lizard, or a stone—was so buried, the human sacrifice being 
omitted. It would be interesting to know whether or not the 
depositing of a stone, etc., was the more modern custom, such 
objects serving as substitutes for a human sacrifice ? Or were both 
forms of the ceremony practised during the same period ? There 
is a certain amount of evidence to show that such sacrifices at the 
completion of a new fort or superior house, and perhaps also of a 
new canoe (as in the Solomons) of the larger type, were practised 
at one time, but that in later times they became much less frequent, 
if indeed, they did not entirely cease in some districts. ... The 
allusions in tradition to the burial of a human being at the base 
of a house-post are but few, and there is no record, so far as the 
writer is aware, of such an occurrence in late generations. ... 
In regard to the burial of human beings at the bases of stockade- 
posts, we know of no tradition concerning this custom, and no 
old natives questioned on the subject knew anything about it. 
We have, however, some very direct evidence in the fact that the 
remains of such sacrifices have been found in one locality.’? + This 
evidence from New Zealand suggests that the tendency is for 
animal sacrifice to be substituted for human sacrifice. The Maori 
claim to have come from India, where the cult of the Great Mother 
and the practice of human sacrifice for agriculture were prevalent. 
On their travels they lost some of these practices, but in New 


_ Zealand they once more seem to have come into contact with the 


archaic civilization, and to have adopted cannibalism and the 
wider forms of human sacrifice which later they again abandoned, 

Definite traces exist throughout Polynesia of the Great Mother, 
usually called Hina or Ina, or Sina... Among the Maori she is the 
cause of illness and death,? and she tries to obtain the blood of 
Maui, her son and brother, for magical purposes. 

In Polynesia, therefore, human sacrifice tends to die out, 
especially in its more intensive form of cannibalism. As for the 
relationship between the cult of mother goddesses, human sacrifice 
and agriculture, the evidence at my disposal is not enough to 
warrant any conclusion. It is possible to make some generaliza- 
tions on the matter: that human sacrifice and cannibalism have 
tended to die out ; that agriculture was formerly at a much higher 
level ; and that goddesses were formerly much more important. 


1 Best. vi. 440; iv.: P. Smith v. 268. 2 Tregear v. 20 es, 
3 Goldie 5-6: Best vi. 464. 4 Best v. 153-4. 


234 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


These statements are generally true. But as to the real relation- 
ship between the cult of mother goddesses, human sacrifice and 
agriculture in early days it is not possible for me to speak with 
confidence. Human sacrifice is connected with agriculture in 
San Cristoval and thus this relationship may originally have been 
universal. If continuity in Polynesian culture be admitted, then 
it certainly would have held in the past. 

The Australians practise some ceremonial cannibalism in 
connexion with fighting and funerals.1. If cannibalism be asso- 
ciated with the archaic civilization, this will constitute yet another 
sign of the influence of this civilization in Australia. Since no 
other of the food-gathering tribes of the region practise human 
sacrifice or cannibalism, it is probable that the Australians learned 
the habits from some food-producers, and no good reason exists 
for refusing to credit one more cultural element to the account of 
the people of the archaic civilization. 

In North America the cult of the great mother goddess, human 
sacrifice, cannibalism and agriculture are elements of the archaic 
civilization that tend to die out, especially among those tribes 
that have moved out into the plains. That is to say, the highest 
form of civilization of North America is characterized by customs 
of the most horrible cruelty, while those far below them in material 
culture stand above them in this respect. 

In Mexico the mother goddess was important, and, as in Egypt, 
Sumer and India, adopted many forms: she was especially 
associated with the sedentary agriculturists of Mexico, and not 
with the pastoral peoples such as the Aztec who came in later and 
conquered the country.2, Prominent among the goddesses was 
Centeotl, the goddess of maize and the earth, the Great Mother, 
identified with the other important goddesses such as ** the mother 
of the gods,” “‘ the snake-woman,”’ ‘‘ our grandmother,” ‘‘ the 
universal mother,” “‘the Earth.’”? She was the patroness of 
medicine, doctors and the sweat-bath. As in Egypt and Sumer, 
the mother goddess was closely associated with intoxicating 
drinks. ‘“‘ They feign that Mayaguil was a woman with four 
hundred breasts, and that the gods, on account of her fruitfulness, 
changed her into the Maguey, which is the vine of that country, 
from which they make wine.” 3 

Human sacrifice was prominent in the ritual of the mother 
goddesses. 'Teteoinnan, or Toci, the Mexican mother of the gods, 
was the goddess of ripe maize, healing herbs, the patroness of 
doctors, bath attendants and diviners. In a sacrifice in her 
honour the human victim was flayed. In other sacrifices to the 
great mother the victim was decapitated.4 Certain gods, espe- 
cially the sun-gods, had human sacrifices in their honour. 


1 Howitt 750 e.s. 2 Joyce ii. 36. 

3 Bancroft ITI. 349 e.s., 351, n. 4. 

4 Joyco ii. 38. The victim, in Mexican human sacrifice, represented the 
god (Toy 175). 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 235 


' The peoples of North America possessed a conception similar 
to that found in Indonesia, namely that of the corn mother, 
round which centred their sacrifices. In Mexico the religious 
festivals were arranged in an annual cycle connected with the 
growing of maize. The feast of the first-fruits of the maize 
consisted of the decapitation of the goddess of the young maize, 
Xilonen, represented by a maiden. This feast inaugurated the 
harvest and the eating of the new maize. When the shoots begin 
to appear above the ground they go to seek the god of maize, 
that is, a young plant which is carried to the house and treated 
asagod. In the evening this is taken to the temple of Chicome- 
coatl, the goddess of food, where the young girls go each with a 
bundle of seven head of maize from the last harvest. The name 
of this bundle also stood for that of the goddess of maize; it was 
the maize mother. After the sacrifice of the goddess of young 
maize, Xilonen, came another, that of Toci, the goddess of 
harvested maize. 

The ritual associated with the maize mother and the accom- 
panying human sacrifice has been dealt with in full by Sir James 
Frazer. The study of this ritual, important as it is, cannot be 
undertaken here, for my aim is to establish relationships between 
certain cultural elements and the archaic civilization. An account 
of the human sacrifice of the Mexicans is found in “ Prescott’s 
Conquest of Mexico.’’ This author describes their cannibalistic 
practices. “‘ The most loathsome part of the story, the manner 
in which the body of the sacrificed captive was disposed of, 
remains to be told. It was delivered to the warrior who had 
taken him in battle, and by him, after being dressed, was served 
up in‘an entertainment to his friends. This was not the coarse 
repast of famished cannibals, but a banquet teeming with delicious 
beverages and delicate viands, prepared with art, and attended 
by both sexes, who, as we shall see after, conducted themselves 
with all the decorum of civilized life. Surely never were refine- 
ment and the extreme of barbarism brought so closely in contact 
with each other.” ? 

Cannibalism in North America was confined as a practice to 
Mexico and some tribes of the Mexican Gulf: % its occurrence to 
the north was sporadic. The distribution of human sacrifice in 
the United States is significant. It is reported among the Natchez 
of Louisiana, the Skidi Pawnee, the Iroquois, and the Pueblo 
Indians. The Natchez were ruled over by Children of the Sun 
whose ancestors had come from the south-west. Their traditions 
state that certain members of their ruling family went away 
because they disapproved of this custom of human sacrifice.* 
So once again does human sacrifice disappear in places remote 
from the archaic civilization. The Skidi Pawnee differ from the 
rest of the Pawnee tribe in possessing a “ centre of specialization 


1 Loisy 237. 2 Prescott I. Chap. 3, p. 53. 
3 Handbook, Art. Cannibalism. 4du Pratz 314. 


236 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


of rituals relating to the gods above.” + Sacred ears of corn, 
‘“‘ reminding one of those seen upon some Pueblo altars,” are very — 
prominent in their ritual, and the Corn Mother is of fundamental 
importance. Each spring the Skidi offered a human sacrifice 
to their supreme being, and not to Mother Corn. “ This sacrifice 
seemed acceptable to Tirawa, and when the Skidi made it they 
always seemed to have good fortune in war, and good crops, and 
they were always well.” ? The Pawnee have moved out from 
the Pueblo region, have suffered much dislocation of culture, and 
become definitely warlike: so it is not surprising that the god 
has usurped the function fulfilled in Mexico by the Great Mother. 
The human sacrifice of the Skidi assures good luck in war as 
well as good crops. Although the mother goddess has been pushed 
into the background, women play an important part in the ritual, 
for they prepare for the corn dance and afterwards are treated as 
chiefs.4. The Skidi human sacrifice is similar to that of the 
Mexicans: ‘“‘ The scaffold upon which the human captive was 
tied is quite like the one shown in ‘Le Manuscrit. du Cacique,’ 
Plate X, Fig. 8 (Henry de Saussure, Geneva, 1892). There we 
have the shooting of an arrow into the victim, the catching and 
offering of his blood, and particularly the idea that the captive 
must be induced to do everything willingly. These very striking 
parallels to the Aztec sacrificial ceremony leave us little doubt as 
to their interpretation.” ° 
Human sacrifice among the Iroquois is allied to much agricul- 
tural skill: ‘“‘ One of the outstanding features of Iroquois material 
culture was their aptitude for agriculture. This was at first 
concerned largely with the cultivation of corn, beans and squashes. 
The importance attached to these may be noted from the fact 
that they were called the Three Sisters.” ®° The Iroquois were 
also in other respects more similar in culture to the southern 
tribes than the rest of the northern tribes of the States and Canada. 
The Pueblo Indians came out of the underworld where they 
were ruled over by the Great Mother. According to the Zuni, 
Earth is the mother to whom all are indebted for food.? The Zuni 
symbol of life is an ear of corn clothed in beautiful plumage, which 
embraces “all life-mysterious, life-securing properties, including 
mystery medicine.’ § This symbol is closely connected with the 
Corn Maidens.? The Zuni creation story says that “‘ corn shall 
be the giver of milk to the youthful and of flesh to the aged, as 
our women folk are the givers of life to our youth and the sustainers 
of life in our age; for of the mother-milk of the Beloved Maidens 
is it filled, and of their flesh the substance.” 1° These people are 
said to have practised human sacrifice. A study of their traditions 
makes it evident that they are far from their original condition, 
and the story of their movements makes it obvious that their 
1 Wissler iii. 335. * Id., 337. 3 I[d., 367. * Id., 378. 


5 Id., 338. § Waugh 3. ? Stevenson ii. 20. 8 Id., 24. 
® Id., 53-7. 10 Cushing ii. 397. 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 2387 


original culture must have undergone modifications on account 
of their experiences. 

In other Pueblo tribes these cultural elements are less closely 
associated. The Pima evidently have forgotten about the Great 
Mother, forthe chief actors in their creation story are males. But 
in one important incident in this story the aid of a woman is 
necessary. The ancestors of the Pima tried to make an irrigation 
system, but failed because the soil was poor and the rock too 
hard ; so the sister of Elder Brother, the being who brought them 
out of the underworld, White-eater-old-woman, made irrigation 
canals for them.! The Sia claim that the Spider was alone in the 
lower world, and made both the mother of the Sia and all Indians 
and the mother of the rest of men. She divided the people into 
clans and gave them corn. The mother of all Indians, Utset, 
whom the Spider created, chose the first priest and directed that 
the priesthood should always belong to the Corn clan. She also 
instructed the first priest how to make the Sacred Ear of Corn, 
the supreme “idol” of the Sia. The people were brought out 
of the underworld by the Twin Children of the Sun, and Utset 
stayed in the lower regions.? 

Apparently, in the Pueblo area, as among the Skidi Pawnee, 
the original mother goddess has split up into the Earth Mother, 
the being who lives in the underworld, and into the Corn Mother, 
usually represented by an ear of maize. In Indonesia the grain 
goddess only appears in those places near in culture to the archaic 
civilization: in other places the Rice Mother took her place. 
Similarly in North America the form of the great mother as a 
erain goddess is only really prominent in Mexico: farther north 
she is replaced by the Maize Mother, usually in the form of an ear 
of corn. This process of degeneration has gone still farther among 
the Omaha, who practise but little agriculture : they simply have 
a tale that maize was discovered by a woman, just as the Pima 
say that the sister of Elder Brother had to be called in to dig the 
irrigation canals. 

Human sacrifice is apparently unknown in the United States, 
excepting the tribes already mentioned (the north-west coast 
always being left on one side). This custom in Mexico is bound 
up with agriculture and the cult of the great mother. In the 
north, where the cultural influence of Mexico becomes weaker, 
the practice dies out, the Great. Mother, as associated with agricul- 
ture, tends to disappear, and her place is taken by an ear of corn 
called the Maize Mother. Since the Plains Indians have mostly 
dropped agriculture, it is not surprising that they have no maize 
mother, except where agriculture has survived, as among the 
Mandan and Hidatsa of the Upper Missouri. So, both the food- 
gatherers of North America and those peoples who have tended 
to abandon agriculture, lack in their culture human sacrifice, 


1 F. Russell 215. 2 Stevenson i. 16, 39, 40. — 


238 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


ceremonial cannibalism, and the Great Mother as associated with 
agriculture. 


This survey is not intended to exhaust either the study of 
human sacrifice, or of the Great Mother goddess. The aim is to 
show that, in the archaic civilization, the mother goddess was 
associated with agriculture, in connexion with which human 
sacrifices were offered to procure blood for the fertilization of the 
fields. Human sacrifice was performed for other ends, for instance 
to provide servants for rulers in the next life, and these wider 
associations of human sacrifice have tended to survive the agricul- 
tural, and in certain instances signs of the substitution of other 
victims for man have been apparent. Head-hunting is a mitiga- 
tion of human sacrifice, for it does not involve the cold-blooded 
slaughter of the victim. 

It is significant that human sacrifice tends to die out among 
peoples of lower culture. This fact opens up a field of research in 
social psychology, and tends to give a new idea of the meaning of 
civilization and its relationship to human behaviour. In North 
America and Mexico the contrast is striking between the highly 
civilized Mexicans and the Indians of the plains, greatly their 
inferiors in culture, but lacking their hideous customs. These 
Indian tribes have rejected human sacrifice and cannibalism as 
foreign to their ideas and desires. The practice of human sacrifice 
is certainly a great blot on the archaic civilization. Due as it was 
to mistaken ideas, it was fraught with fearful consequences to 
mankind, and the people of the archaic civilization have left 
behind them a legacy that has caused untold misery and suffering 
to mankind. 

Human sacrifice has an important bearing on the development 
of the archaic civilization into those that succeeded it. For it 
would seem that the warfare of this early period was centred 
mainly round human sacrifice, it being waged primarily for the 
purpose of getting victims to offer to the deities. It is well known 
that the Aztecs tried not to kill the Spaniards, but to capture 
them, and the Spaniards were forced to witness the slaughter of 
some of their comrades on the pyramid of the sun-god. In 
Indonesia it is not an exaggeration to say that warfare is confined 
to head-hunting raids and the consequent reprisals, and it is hard 
to see that any fighting would happen if such a custom did not 
exist. Warfare and personal combat, being unknown among the 
food-gatherers, must have originated for some definite cause, 
and cannot be the outcome of some innate tendency to fight. 
The widespread existence of human sacrifice throughout the region, 
and its direct association with the head-hunting of Indonesia and 
elsewhere, suggests that the earliest form of warfare was bound 
up with the killing of victims for human sacrifice. This custom 
could have provided men with the education in cruelty necessary 
to cause them to injure their fellows. The possible sequence of 


THE GREAT MOTHER AND HUMAN SACRIFICE 239 


events is as follows. In the first instance the earliest kings were 
peaceful : Osiris and Tammuz certainly bear this character. These 
kings, it is said, were themselves sacrificed for the good of the 
community, probably by drowning. So long as this persisted, it 
is hard to see what warlike developments could take place. But 
a great transformation took place with the coming of solar ideas. 
Both in Egypt and Sumer the mother goddess, when connected 
with the sun-god, is destructive and martial. In Egypt she gets 
the human blood necessary to rejuvenate the king. That is to 
say, instead of the king being killed, human victims are now got, 
and thus the situation is entirely altered. The king, no longer 
doomed to die, has the power of life and death over his subjects. 
The education of ruling groups in warlike behaviour begins from 
that time. 

This conclusion will doubtless appear surprising to some readers. 
They must remember, however, that the available evidence is 
dead against the ascription of regular pugnacious behaviour to 
early man, and that the causes of this behaviour must be sought 
in food-producing communities. It seems certain, to me at least, 
that the whole study of social psychology will have to be ordered 
on different lines in the future if any progress is to be made. The 
facile habit of inventing pictures of early times will have to be 
abandoned in favour of the method of relying solely on facts, 
however unpalatable they may be. It will have to be realized 
that civilized men, in their actions, afford but little evidence of 
those of their forerunners, that in the course of development of 
civilization entire transformations may have taken place in human 
behaviour. These contentions are immensely fortified by the 
work of the modern school of neurologists in this country, such as 
Head, Rivers, Stopford and others, together with that of Elliot 
Smith on the evolution of the cerebral cortex. I hope at some 
time in the near future to show how many and powerful are the 
reasons for believing in the immense influence of social institutions 
on human behaviour. 


CHAPTER XVI 
MOTHER-RIGHT 


social, political and economic life of a community suggests 

that the great mother goddess as mother of gods and men 
may have some social significance. It seems as if, in the Ancient 
East, a time was when only the Great Mother existed. Then she 
was accompanied by her son, who became her husband, and finally 
pushed her into the background. On the hypothesis of the 
parallelism between the religious and other aspects of the life of 
a community, this gradual supersession of the mother goddess has 
some historical significance. Just as the sun-god disappeared 
with the Children of the Sun, so may the mother goddess have 
been relegated to the background on account of some transforma- 
tion, political or social, in the life of the community. In this 
chapter, therefore, further inquiry will be made as to the part 
played by the Great Mother in the life of the communities of the 
archaic civilization and of those that followed. 


[T= existence of parallels between the religious and the 


One of the best-known features of ancient society is that of 


mother-right. Much has been written about this stage of social 
development, and many theories have been advanced to account 
for its meaning, and the part it has played in the development of 
human society. In our own civilization the rule is that we take 
our names, inherit our property, and succeed to the rank of our 
fathers, and not of our mothers. If Mr. Smith marries Miss Jones, 
the children are called Smith ; the eldest son of the Duke of Norfolk 
succeeds to the title, and inherits the property : the mother has 
no part in these things, except in so far as she is able to will her 


property, if she has any, to her son, if she please. But, leaving on 1 


one side the inheritance of property, descent, meaning by that 


the membership of a social group, and succession to rank, go © 


through the father. We live in what is called a patrilineal form 
of society ! But it is found that in certain communities descent 
is in the social group of the mother. For example, in the case of 


the marriage of Mr. Smith and Miss Jones, the children would be © 
called Jones, and the succession to rank and inheritance of the — 


property of the family would go through the daughters and not 
through the sons. In all parts of the region there are com- 


240 


i eS a a es 


MOTHER-RIGHT 241 


munities which possess these matrilineal customs. What is the 
cultural significance of this form of social organization ? 

Before starting it will be necessary to know what to seek. The 
three matters concerned are descent in a social group, succession 
to rank, and inheritance of property. For the purposes of this 
chapter inheritance can be left on one side, and the survey confined 
to descent and succession. In treating of descent two distinct 
matters will have to be observed. Many peoples with matrilineal 
descent have tales of a race ancestress, who often clearly belongs 
to the category of mother goddesses: that is to say, it is possible 
that descent from a great mother and descent through women 
ultimately mean the same thing. The survey must therefore 
take account, not merely of the actual social mechanism of 
matrilineal descent, but also of the claim to descent from a race 
ancestress. 

Further, treating of succession to rank, it will be found that, 
although succession is through women, the actual rulers are usually 
men. In such cases a man’s son does not succeed to the throne, 
but his brothers, and failing them, the eldest son of his sister. 
So it will not be necessary to explain how it came about that 
women were ousted from the rule by men; but simply to explain 
why succession to the throne was transferred from a man’s brother 
and nephew to his son. 

The survey will therefore be concerned with :— 

(1) Descent from a race ancestress, a great mother. 

(2) Descent in the female line. 

(8) Succession of kings in the female line. 

This survey will show that these three cultural elements existed 
together in the archaic civilization, and that they were followed 
in all parts of the area by patrilineal institutions ; further, that the 
distribution of these matrilineal institutions is similar to that of 
the great mother goddess connected with fertility, agriculture, 
war and human sacrifice. 

The beginning of the exposition of the material is difficult. For, 
in the earliest times in Egypt, the situation seems to be one in 
which matrilineal institutions are giving way to patrilineal 
institutions. Under matrilineal institutions the daughter of the 
king is the lawful heir to the throne, so that anyone who wishes 
to rule will have to marry her and reign as her surrogate. From 
the earliest-known times in Egypt, the king was sometimes the 
brother of the queen: Osiris married Isis his sister. Why did he 
do that? Miss Murray has some remarks upon this matter that 
seem to be essentially just. She says that ‘‘ where in ancient 
history we find consanguineous marriages in the closest possible 
degrees of relationship, we are not always dealing with records of 
licentiousness and vice, as the historians ancient and modern 
would have us believe, but with a system of matrilineal descent 

1 At the same time, it must be realized that women often do rule under 
mother-right. 

16 


242 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


and female inheritance preserved in a royal family. ... Iam 
convinced that wherever marriages are found to be closely con- 
sanguineous, there one must look for inheritance (i.e. succession) 
in the female line.’? 1 She analyses several dynastic tables of the 
Kgyptian kings to support her contentions. In another place 
Miss Murray quotes evidence to show that the queen was the 
theoretical occupant of the throne. This is derived from an 
article by Erman, in which he shows that the name of Isis means 
‘the throne-woman,’’ while Osiris means “the occupier of the 
throne.”’ ? 

In Sumer the relationship between Tammuz and his mother 
is commented on as follows by Langdon: “ That the son should 
be also the lover of the goddess is explained by Frazer, on the 
assumption that in ancient society the imperial power descended 
through the female line. In that case the heir to a throne is the 
daughter ofa king. To retain a throne a son of a king must marry 
his sister, or failing a sister, his own mother. In the Sumerian 
myths we have both circumstances represented.” ? In early 
Sumer the king actually ruled as the son of the great mother, 
and only later was he emancipated so as to rule in his own right. 

A strong feminine element is characteristic of the early con- 
stitution of the kingship in Egypt and Sumer, a feature of society 
very unlike that of later times. Corresponding to the union in 
mythology of the mother goddess and the king, is a form of 
marriage in which the king is the brother or son of the queen, who 
appears to be the lawful heir to the throne. So, in these cases, 
if the interpretation here adduced be correct, female descent 
and descent from the mother goddess are synonymous. The 
king, although he must have been the son of a mortal woman, 
claimed sonship of the great mother. Therefore the descent 
through the mother has some relationship to descent from the 
great mother, though that relationship may not be clearly ex- 
pressed. 

In Arabia a remarkable transformation occurred when Arabs 
began to move out from Yemen on account, either of some political 
upheaval, or of the bursting of the great dam of Mahreb. It has 
been shown by Barton that the goddesses of the Arabians of 
Yemen were changed into gods, so that, for example, Semitic 
invaders of Babylon arrived there with Shamash, the male form 
of Shams.* It appears also that the tribes that migrated from 
Yemen changed, within a few generations, their descent from the 
matrilineal to the patrilineal mode.> This was accompanied by 
an abandonment of the irrigation for which the people of Yemen 
were famous, and the adoption of the pastoral mode of life. Thus 
in Arabia irrigating, cattle-breeding people with the great mother 


‘1 Murray iv. 308-9 ;_ iii. 
* Id., ii. : Cf. ZAS 1909, p. 92. Miss Murray gives an interesting account 
of the importance of women in Egyptian religion (i. 220 e.s.). 
3 Langdon i. 25. * Barton 124 e.s. ® Robertson Smith i. 


4 


MOTHER-RIGHT 243 
cult, and matrilineal institutions, swarmed out of their homeland 
and appeared subsequently as pastoral, patrilineal peoples who 
had changed their goddesses into gods ; certainly one of the most 
dramatic social, economic and religious transformations that the 
world had witnessed. 

The culture-sequence, therefore, seems to be from mother- 
right to father-right, with mother-right as a feature of the archaic 
civilization. When irrigation is dropped the goddesses become 
gods, and the social transition takes place. Which is cause and 
which is effect ? 

In India the contrast between matrilineal and _ patrilineal 
institutions is patent. The people of the Vedas paid little atten- 
tion to their goddesses : on the contrary, Dravidian religion was 
much occupied with them. It is possible to show, from the 
Puranas and the Mahabharata, that probably the Aryan and 
Dravidian ruling families were originally descended from the 
same stock. For the chief god of the Vedic period was Indra, a 
war-god, who had pushed the Adityas, sun-gods, into the back- 
ground. The chief Aditya was Varuna, who has been identified 
by Darmsteter with Ahura-Mazda, the great god of the Iranians. 
Ahura, as Darmsteter has shown, is the same word as Asura, and 
Varuna was called the great Asura.! So the Aryans possessed a 
great god that bears the name of the Asuras, their enemies. 
Varuna became supplanted by Indra in accordance with the 
adoption of warlike habits on the part of the Aryans. But the 
matter does not end here; for the Adityas, of whom Varuna was 
one, were named after Aditi, a goddess, which fact suggests 
matrilineal institutions. Can it be that the older Aryan ruling 
family had matrilineal institutions? There is every reason to 
believe so. For, in the Puranic tables, Aditi is directly related to 
the great beings of the Dravidian ruling families. The Puranas 
were written under Brahminic influence, so Brahma plays an 
important part in the creation of man. But if attention be paid 
to the posterity of Brahma, it will be found that the relationship 
between the Aryans and the Dravidians was clear, and that the 
Dravidians were certainly matrilineal in their institutions. 
Daksha, a ‘“‘ mind-born son” of Brahma, one of the Rishis as 
they are called, had a number of daughters, Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Arish’ta, Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhava, Ida, Khasa, 
Kadru, Muni.? Aditi is the mother of the gods of the Aryans, 
and Diti is the ancestress of the Daityas who fought the Aryans, 
Danu of the Danavas who also resisted them, and Vinata of the 
Twin Children of the Sun. Thus Aryan and Dravidian gods are 
supposed to be descended from sisters, and are named after their 
ancestresses, and not after ancestors. This is shown in the case 
of Hiranyakasipu, son of Diti and Kasyapa, the sun. MHiran- 
yakasipu, the son of Diti, had formerly brought the three worlds 
under his sway. He had usurped the authority of Indra, and 

1 Darmsteter 45, 47, 62-3, 67, 68. 2 H. H. Wilson 122. 


244, THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


exercised the functions of the sun, of air, of the lord of waters, 
of fire, and of the moon. He was the god of riches, and judge of 
the dead; and he appropriated to himself, without reserve, all 
that was offered in sacrifice to the gods.1 The descendants of 
Hiranyakasipu were not called after him or any other male 
ancestor, but after Diti.2 His brother Hiranyaksha had many 
sons, but none of them were called after him. It is said, on the 
contrary, that they were all Daityas of great powers, that is, 
they were named after their grandmother, a matronymic form 
of naming. Then Kasyapa, the sun, married Danu, and the 
descendants in the words of the Vishnu Purana “were the 
renowned Danavas,” or sons of Danu.* Thus certain of the 
Children of the Sun called themselves after their ancestresses, 
and not after their ancestors, however famous they may have been. 
On the contrary, among the Aryans, the patrilineal mode of 
reckoning descent is patently in vogue. The descent of Manu, 
himself one of the Children of the Sun, is patrilineal: Manu 
Vaivaswata was a Child of the Sun ; one of his sons was Karusha :* 
“From Karusha descended the mighty warriors termed Karushas 
(the sovereigns of the north).’’ > The whole of the descent of Manu 
is of this type, and the feminine element never enters. Yet both 
those lines are equally Children of the Sun, and, as has been seen, 
related to one another, in that Aditi, the mother of the sun-gods 
of the Aryans, was the sister of Diti, the race ancestress of the 
Dravidians who opposed the Aryans. Evidently the rise to 
prominence of Indra had pushed the solar deities into the back- 
ground, and during the process the mode of descent had changed. 

A further contrast between the Dravidians and the Aryans 
must be noted. The Dravidians were keen irrigators: the 
Aryans, on the contrary, were cattle-breeders, the whole of their 
ritual is bound up with this craft, their agriculture being carried 
on by the Vaisya caste. This is in strong contrast with the 
communities of the archaic civilization, in which the royal family 
were intimately concerned with the irrigation of the country. 
As in the case of the Arabs, matrilineal and patrilineal peoples 
exhibit striking differences, not only in their religious institutions, 
but also in their economic and social life. And in India, as among 
the Semites, the transition from matrilineal to patrilineal institu- 
tions has taken place among related peoples. 

The institutions of the Dravidians were thoroughly matrilineal, 
and were accompanied by a claim to descent from a race ances- 
tress. Women played an important part in the court of Magadha, 
an important Dravidian city ; they were more trusted than men, 
formed the personal bodyguard of the king, went hunting with 
him, and served as soldiers. Magadha was the great mother 
goddess of the city.® 

Existing Dravidian tribes of North India display strong matri- 


1H. H. aaron 126. 2 Id., 147. 3 Id., 147. 
* Td., 348 5 Id., 361. § Hewitt. 


MOTHER-RIGHT 245 


lineal tendencies. The Bahikas or Takhas of the Panjab, the 
Newar, who appear to be kinsfolk of the Nairs of the Malabar 
Coast, and the Arattas, all have mother-right.4_ Mother-right is 
important in the Dravidian country in the south. In the words 
of Mr. Richards, ‘‘ there is abundant evidence that inheritance 
through females was at one time general throughout South India. 
It would seem that a matrilineal system of inheritance was a 
general feature of the sub-culture of the south, on which the 
Brahmanic super-culture was imposed.” ? The succession in the 
royal families of Travancore, Cochin, Calicut and Colastri on the 
Malabar Coast is matrilineal, the heirs to the throne being younger 
brothers or sisters’ sons. These ruling groups seem certainly 
to be of Dravidian origin,® and to belong to the Nair caste. 

The Khasi of Assam, who erect megalithic monuments, have 
preserved matrilineal institutions. Sir Alfred Lyall, in his intro- 
duction to Major Gurdon’s work on the Khasis, says that ‘ their 
social organization presents one of the most perfect examples still 
surviving of matriarchal institutions, carried out with a logic and 
thoroughness which, to those accustomed to regard the status 
and authority of the father as the foundation of society, are 
exceedingly remarkable. Not only is the mother the head and 
source, and only bond of union, of the family; in the most 
primitive part of the hills, the Synteng country, she is the only 
owner of real property, and through her alone is inheritance 
transmitted. The father has no kinship with his children, who 
belong to their mother’s clan; what he earns goes in his own 
matriarchal stock, and at his death his bones are deposited in the 
cromlech of his mother’s kin. In Jowal he neither lives nor eats 
in his wife’s house, but visits it only after dark. In the veneration 
of ancestors which is the foundation of the tribal piety, the primal 
ancestress (Ka Iawbei) and her brother are the only persons 
regarded. The flat memorial stones set up to perpetuate the 
memory of the dead are called after the woman who represents 
the clan (Maw Kynthei), and the standing stones ranged behind 
them are dedicated to the male kinsmen on the mother’s side. 
In harmony with this scheme of ancestor worship, the other 
spirits to whom propitiation is offered are mainly female, though 
here and there male personages also figure. The powers of sick- 
ness and death are all female, and these are most frequently 
worshipped. The two protectors of the house are goddesses, 
though with them is also revered the first father of the clan, U 
Thawlang. Priestesses assist at all sacrifices, and the male 
officiants are only their deputies ; in one important State, Khyrim, 
the High Priestess and the actual head of the State is a woman, 
who combines in her person sacerdotal and regal functions.” 4 
Of course Khasi rulers are usually men, not women. The king 


1 Oldham 158: ‘‘Mahabharata,’’ Karna Parva xlv. 
2 Richards i. 3 Mateer 119, 387. * Gurdon, pp. xxili. ¢.s. 


246 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


inherits the right to rule from his mother, but he is not her deputy. 1 
It is significant to find that a tribe that has such strong cultural 
affinities with the archaic civilization of India, should have such 
definitely matriarchal institutions. 

The disappearance of. much of the archaic civilization in 
Indonesia, as is shown by the distribution of implements of 
polished stone, copper and bronze, makes it probable that many 
cultural elements of the archaic civilization and of the Dravidian 
peoples of India will be absent from that region. It is thus not 
surprising to find that mother-right is only recorded among the 
Malays of Menangkabau, in the Sangir, Talaut and Siaw Islands 
north of Minahassa,? in Timor and in Sumba. The genealogies 
of the Minahassa people reveal an important culture-sequence ; 
for some quoted by Prof. Hickson trace descent from Lumimu’ut, 
the race-ancestress : the descent from the first few generations is 
through women, and then it changes and is recorded henceforth 
through men. Matrilineal institutions have lately been discovered 
by Heer Kruyt in other parts of Indonesia, and this gives rise to 
the hope that more will yet be forthcoming from this area. He 
states that in the Kodi district of West Sumba, so closely con- 
nected with the archaic civilization, descent is matrilineal, and 
the husband goes to live with his wife’s family. In Timor the 
people of Annas still preserve matrilineal institutions.? 

The political convulsions which have devastated Micronesia 
have destroyed much of the old civilization, but in the Pelews 
and elsewhere there persists what may be a survival of the old 
social organization. The people of the Pelews are divided into 
matrilineal exogamous clans, each of which claims descent from 
a woman, or perhaps, it might be said, a goddess. Women are 
ealled ‘‘ Mothers of the Land ”’ and ‘‘ Mothers of the Clan,”’ and 
enjoy complete equality with the men in every respect. Indeed 
Kubary states that they are in every way superior to the men. 
The women cultivate the taro fields.4 In Ponape of the Carolines, 
which possesses immense stone ruins of the archaic civilization, 
the people are divided into clans with matrilineal descent and 
inheritance. In Guam of the Mariannes, the succession to the 
chieftainship is matrilineal, the brother or nephew of the ruler 
succeeding him.® Descent is matrilineal in the Marshalls. Thus 
in Micronesia the religious, social, and economic elements in the 
life of the community are closely related. Moreover, the god- 
desses have priority over the gods, and the race or clan ancestress 
approximates to the Great Mother. 

In British New Guinea matrilineal institutions exist in a 
developed form in Bartle Bay only, in which spot are the stone 
circles, irrigation systems with aqueducts, cannibalism, the 
mango ceremony, and other elements of the archaic civilization.? 

1 Gurdon 66-71. 2 Hickson 197. 8 Kruyt ix. 799. 


4 J. G. Fraser ii. II. 204 e.s. 5 Christian iv. 74: Hahl 39. 
6 Safford 716. ? Seligman i. 16, 81, 199, 447. 


MOTHER-RIGHT 24:7 


The institutions of Torres Straits are patrilineal : yet the culture- 
heroes of the Eastern Islands, Bomai and Malu, are related so as 
to suggest that they belonged to matrilineal communities. ! 

The earliest food-producers of Melanesia were matrilineal, and 
the later comers were patrilineal in their institutions. The 
association between descent from women and mother-right is 
~ wellshown in Aurora, Maewo of the New Hebrides, where a story 
is told of the first woman. She was a cowry shell that turned 
into a woman, and called the men to her and divided them into 
her husbands and brothers, fathers and maternal uncles, as in the 
dual organization, which will shortly be studied.? 

At the end of a discussion, Rivers says that the evidence leads 
to the conclusion “‘ that matrilineal descent is a feature of Melan- 
esian society which now possesses far less social significance than 
in the past. In some places it is perhaps only the last relic of a 
condition of mother-right which once governed the whole social 
life of the people ; which regulated marriage, directed the trans- 
mission of property, and, where chieftainship existed at all, 
determined its mode of succession, while many other aspects of 
social life were altogether governed by the ideas of relationship 
between arising out of this condition.” ? He goes on to say that 
this old form of social organization has, under the influence of 
immigrants, given rise to a condition of father-right: “It is 
beyond all doubt that the direction of change in Melanesia has 
been from the matrilineal to the patrilineal mode.” * Much of 
the second volume of his work on the History of Melanesian 
Society is devoted to establishing the truth of this statement. 
The Fiji Islands possess signs of the transition from mother-right 
to father-right, and it is important to note that the matriarchal 
communities have no tradition of immigration, while the patri- 
lineal peoples have vivid traditions of their wanderings: this 
itself is evidence of the antiquity of mother-right in Fiji. Accord- 
ing to Hocart, “The evidence collected showed clearly that 
chieftainship was originally matrilineal : it is now common for a 
man to succeed his father, but let there come a bad year and the 
people will remember that this is not the right thing.” ® 

The social organization of Tonga is now patrilineal. This 
island has sent a colony to Tikopia at some time in the past, and 
the culture of Tikopia seems to represent the early stage of Tongan 
civilization: “both Tikopia and Tonga .. . possess the insti- 
tution of father-right in a definite form.” But certain cultural 
indications suggest a transition from mother-right to father- 
right : for maternal relatives play an important part in the lives 
of children ; so that, in the words of Rivers, we have to suppose 
that “‘the people of both Tonga and Tikopia once followed 
matrilineal descent.” 7 

1 Torres Straits Report VI. 282. Seep. 253. 


2 Codrington 26. 3 Rivers ix. II. 102. 4 14.4101 
5 Deane 3. 6 Hocart iv. 7 Mariner 95: Rivers ix. IT, 240-1. 


248 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


As regards succession to the throne in Polynesia, Rivers is of 
the opinion that it “seems to have passed in the female line,”’ 
although chieftainship is now strongly patrilineal.1_ In Mangaia, 
of the Cook’s Islands, kinship was, in the time of the Rev. W. Gill, 
in a condition of transition from the matrilineal to the patrilineal 
mode, as far as descent in the clan was concerned.2 The former 
existence of matrilineal institutions in this island is shown by 
the fact that ‘‘ the three tribes of the Ngariki, literally the royal 
house, the kingly tribe, represented as being the three original 
tribes of Mangaia, deduced their descent from a common mother, 
Tavake, and her three illegitimate sons, Rangi, Mokioro, Aka- 
tauria; while all the tribes throughout the Hervey group trace 
back their origin each to one of a series of gods, who were the 
offspring of Vatea and Papa, and ultimately of a woman of flesh 
and blood, Varu-mate-takere, or ‘The very beginning.’”? In 
Hawaiian legends the hero claims the help of the gods by proving 
his relationship to them on the mother’s side. This suggests the 
existence of matrilineal institutions in the days before the break- 
up of the old Polynesian society.* 

Throughout Polynesia mention is made of an ancestress called 
Sina, Hina, or a similar name. She is usually the wife of some 
god, either of the sky or of the underworld, who does not occur 
alone, as in the case of the Sumerian mother goddess. This is 
significant, in view of the fact that, in Polynesia, the transition 
has taken place from mother-right to father-right, the effect of 
which would be to cause gods to assume greater prominence than 
goddesses. 

An account by Elsdon Best of the cult of Io, the supreme being 
of the Maori, shows that the people traced their descent to a 
woman: “All life originally emanated from Io. Man is not a 
descendant of Io, but from Io was obtained the spirit, the soul, 
the breath of life, that were implanted in Hine-ahu-one, the 
earth-formed maid, from whom man is truly descended.” He 
suggests also that the high respect in which the maternal line of 
descent is held is a probable sign of the past existence of the 
matriarchate.° In the Chatham Islands Hine-tehu-wai-wanga, 
who is the same lady as Hine of the Maori, was the “‘ goddess or 
deified ancestress.’’ She was associated with the making of stone 
implements, and thus was connected with the archaic civilization, 
if it be true that these early people were responsible for these 
implements. ® 

In the Pacific, therefore, mother-right has given place to father- 
right, and gods are in the ascendant, with a great mother in the 


1 Rivers ix. IT. 322. 2 Gill i. 36. 8 Id., 3, 5, 6, 10. 

* Beckwith 628. It is significant that Palinli, spoken of in Hawaiian 
legend as the first home of the race, and as ‘‘ the hidden land of Pane,” ‘‘ the 
great land of the gods,’’ should also be called ‘‘ the land of good women ”’ 
(ib., 305, n. 2, 334). 

5 Td., iii. 24, 6 P, Smith iii. 82, 


MOTHER-RIGHT 249 


background. The old form of society was evidently similar to 
that of the Carolines or of the Khasi of Assam. 

In Australia the associations of matrilineal institutions are 
remarkable. The peoples with mother-right claim that they 
owed their culture to two youths who came among them and then 
departed. The patrilineal tribes, on the other hand, claim that 
their culture hero was an “ All-Father,” who went to the sky. 
Twin culture-heroes are closely connected with the archaic 
civilization, which is evident in North America, where so many 
tribes claim to have received their culture from these beings. On 
the other hand, single culture-heroes are found in Indonesia, also 
from the sky, but in communities that have no matrilineal in- 
stitutions. It will shortly be seen that the tribes of North America 
with dual culture-heroes are matrilineal, or have lately passed 
from that stage, so the evidence suggests that dual culture-heroes 
go with mother-right, and single culture-heroes with father-right, 
as happens in Australia. 

The transition from matrilineal to patrilineal institutions is an 
interesting feature of the history of North America. An important 
part was played in Mexico and among the Maya by the Great 
Mother in all her manifestations. Although the later history of 
the nations of these regions has obscured the beginnings, yet it 
would seem that the queen of the country was an important 
personage, and had to be of royal blood. This is also character- 
istic of the Natchez of Louisiana, ruled over by the Children of 
the Sun, where only men descended from a royal princess could 
reign.2 So far as I am aware, there is no further evidence of 
matrilineal institutions in Mexico and the Maya country. 

The Pueblo Indians are partly matrilineal, and partly patrilineal. 
All the surrounding tribes, with the exception of the Navaho, and 
Apache, who claim relationship with them, as well as the Yokut 
of California, are patrilineal, in their institutions.? 

The case of the Seri Indians must be noted as an apparent 
contradiction to the generalization that matrilineal institutions 
belong to the archaic civilization. The Seri live on the Tiburon 
Islands and the opposite coast of the Gulf of California. Their 
material culture is extremely primitive. They live chiefly on 
turtles, fish, molluscs, land game, cactus fruits, mesquite beans, 
and a few other vegetables. ‘‘ They neither plant nor cultivate, 
and are without domestic animals, save dogs, which are largely of 
coyote blood.’”’ They have no houses, but make flimsy shelters 
of boughs.4 They are loosely organized in matrilineal clans, and 
there are indications that the clan organization was formerly much 
more developed before the tribe was reduced by warfare. They 
make very crude pottery.® The dead are clothed in their finest 


1 Brasseur de Bourbourg cxix. 205-7. 2 du Pratz 347. 

3 Rivers xii. : Cushing ii. 368: Stevensoni. 19: F. Russell 197: Matthews 
iv. 33. 

* McGee 9. 5 Id., 185. 


250 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


garments, folded and wrapped in the smallest compass like 
Peruvian mummies, and placed in a grave and covered with 
turtle-shells. The grave is then filled with stones or thorny 
branches to keep off the wild animals, and some possessions are 
placed with the dead. Their only implement is “the original 
natural cobble used for crushing bones and severing tendons, for 
grinding seeds and rubbing face paint, for bruising woody tissue 
to aid in breaking okatilla poles for house frames or mesquite 
roots for harpoons (both afterwards finished by firing), and on 
occasion for weapons; and this many-functioned tool is initially 
but a wave-worn pebble, is artificially shaped only by the wear 
of use, and is incontinently discarded when sharp edges are pro- 
duced by use or fortuitous fracture.” 4 

These people appear to be of the stage of culture of the food- 
gatherers, but they make pottery, which has been assigned to the 
archaic civilization and its derivatives. It is thus necessary to 
be cautious in claiming that the matrilineal institutions of the 
Seri are of native origin. This caution must be increased on 
learning that “ Seriland is surrounded with prehistoric works, 
telling of a numerous population who successfully controlled the 
scant waters for irrigation, built villages and temples and for- 
tresses, cultivated crops, kept domestic animals, and manufactured 
superior fictile and textile wares ; but (save possibly in one spot) 
these records of aboriginal culture cease at the borders of Seriland. 
In their stead a few slightly worn pebbles and bits of pottery are 
found here and there, deeply embedded in the soil and weathered 
as by the suns of ages. There are also a few cairns of cobbles 
marking the burial places, and at least one cobble mound of 
striking dimensions but of unknown meaning; and there are a 
few shell mounds, one so broad and high as to form a cape in the 
slowly transgressing shoreline (Punta Antigualla), and in which 
the protolithic implements and other relics are alike from the 
house-dotted surface to the tide-level 90 ft. below.” 2 This 
makes it impossible to claim that the Seri are primitive, or their 
culture indigenous ; rather must they be viewed as an example 
of cultural influence on the part of the archaic civilization, with 
which further investigation will probably show other traces of 
contact. 

The Zuni Indians have matrilineal descent in the clan, but the 
infant is said to be the “‘ child ” of its father’s clan, a sign of a 
transition to patrilineal modes. The creation myth contains 
evidence of the former presence of matrilineal institutions. It 
is said of the first Sun Priest that ‘‘ He and his sisters became also 
the seed of all priests who pertain to the midmost clan-line of 
the priest-fathers of the people themselves, ‘ masters of the houses 
of houses.’ ”’ Again, “‘ asthe Earth-mother herself had increased 
and kept within herself all things, cherishing them apart from 


1 McGee 12, 154. a Id 12, 3 Stevenson ii. 291: Cushing ii. 367. 


MOTHER-RIGHT 251 


their father even after they came forth, so were our mothers and 
sisters the keepers of the kin-names and of the sacred seed thereof, 
nor may the children of each be cherished by any others of kin.” 
Also in the creation poem: 


‘* As a woman with children 
Is loved for her power 
Of keeping unbroken 
The life-line of kinsfolk.’’ 


When the group of the Zuni who tell the creation myth, the later 
comers, arrived at the country of the Black-Corn people, the 
sedentary irrigating Zuni with whom they amalgamated, they 
were opposed by the “elder nations”? who were led by the 
** Ancient Woman’’ who carried her heart in her rattle, and was 
deathless of wounds in the body.” + The evidence thus goes to 
show that the Zuni formerly had well-developed matrilineal 
institutions. 

The Tewa of Arizona have matrilineal institutions, while those 
of New Mexico are patrilineal.2. The Sia Indians of the Pueblo 
region are apparently in a process of transition from one mode of 
descent to another, for their clans are exogamous for either parent.? 
This accords with their degenerate culture. The Sia compare 
usefully with the Pima, who are patrilineal and have suffered still 
greater transformations in culture, for the Great Mother still 
survives among them as the sister of Elder Brother, their culture- 
hero who brought them out of the underworld,* while the Pima 
have lost all memory of such a being. 

The Navaho, in spite of their abandonment of the sedentary 
life and of agriculture, have matrilineal institutions. The child 
belongs to the group of its mother, whence it takes its name ; but 
the group of both father and the mother are forbidden for the 
purpose of marriage, which shows that the system is beginning 
to turn to the patrilineal side.® Correspondingly, in the creation 
myths, although the twin gods, the culture-heroes, are born of a 
mother, the people themselves seem to have been created in the 
form of images. At the same time, other memories of their origin 
seem to have been retained, in that the clans are said to have been 
named according to the words uttered by the women when they 
drank of the magic fountains. The memory of a race ancestress 
is thus apparently preserved by those people who retain mother- 
right, while among those who are undergoing the transformation 
to father-right, this memory is becoming faint. 

The Pawnee, who came into prominence in the discussion of 
human sacrifice, have matrilineal institutions.® All the tribes 
of the south-eastern States, the Creek, Choctaw, Chickasaw, 


1 Cushing ii. 386, 387, 411, 426. 2 Freire-Marreco 269, 270. 
3 Stevenson i. 19. 
4 F. Russell 197, 215. 5 Matthews iv. 33. 


6 Grinnell 203: Wissler iii. 335: cf. Fletcher ii. 


252 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Seminole, Yuchi, Timuquanan, Biloxi are matrilineal. The Yuchi 
claim that they are descended ultimately from a woman of the 
sky-world.1. The Iroquois, whose culture shows such strong 
affinities with that of the south, have a matriarchate that is 
famous in ethnology.2, The Huron are also matrilineal, and, like 
the Yuchi, claim to be descended from a woman from the sky. 
The Delaware and Mohican among the Algonquians are matri- 
lineal, but the Abnaki, Ojibway and Potawattomty are patrilineal. 
The Ojibway and the Menomini tribes were formerly matrilineal, 
but have changed to the patrilineal mode. Of the Siouan tribes 
of the plains, the Omaha, Ponca, Osage, Iowa, Kansas, Dakota, 
Assinibion, Tciwere, Winnebago, are patrilineal; while the 
Mandan, Hidatsa, Crow, Missouri, and Ote are matrilineal. The 
Winnebago have traces of former matrilineal institutions. The 
Sioux of the eastern States, the Nayhassan, were matrilineal, 
being divided into four clans claiming descent from women.® 
After migration into the plains some of the Siouan tribes had 
patrilineal institutions, and others matrilineal. These facts 
suggest that some Siouan tribes have changed from mother-right 
to father-right since setting out from their homeland in the 
eastern States. This is the view of Sir James Frazer: “* Taken 
together with the case of the Mandans, another Siouan or Dacotan 
tribe who retain maternal descent, the custom of the Otoes and 
Missouris raises a presumption that all the Siouan or Dacotan 
tribes had formerly mother-kin instead of father-kin, and that the 
change from the one line to the other, wherever it has taken place, 
has been comparatively recent.” ° 


The survey reveals the past existence of mother-right through- 
out the region. Where contact with the archaic civilization is 
closest matrilineal institutions are retained, and where the old 
order has gone father-right has appeared. In Arabia, India and 
North America this social transformation has been accompanied 
by the abandonment of agriculture, and the adoption of the 
pastoral or purely hunting mode of life. The close connexion 
between the mother goddess and agriculture, revealed in the past 
chapter, suggests that the dropping of this craft may have caused 
loss of prestige by the mother goddess and the transition to father- 
right. But the transition was accompanied by other cultural 
changes, such as the adoption of warfare, the disappearance of 
the Children of the Sun, and so forth, and it is not advisable to 
attempt here an explanation of its cause. 

The survey has shown that the descent through women and 
the claim to descent from a race ancestress or a Great Mother are 
closely connected. If the history of any matrilineal people be 
considered, it would seem that the descent of the people is reckoned 

1 Speck ii. 105. 2 Morgan: Rivers xv. 


3 Rivers xv. 4 J. G. Frazer ii. 122. 
5 J. Mooney ii. 33. 6 J. G. Frazer ii. II. 123. 


MOTHER-RIGHT 253 


through a long line of ancestresses. The first of these is some- 
times a goddess, and then is evidently the ancestress of the ruling 
family. This is natural, for only the ruling families preserve 
genealogies. This race ancestress cannot in some cases be dis- 
tinguished from a mother goddess, so it is possible to think of 
communities of the archaic civilization budding off from the 
parent stock, and carrying with them the tradition of descent 
from women, who in the first instance were of the royal family. 
It is not yet possible to understand the real relationship between 
the great ancestress and the bulk of the people: that matter 
must be reserved for discussion at the end of the next chapter, 
where it will be seen that she does play an important part in the 
lives of all members of the community, rulers and commoners 
alike. , 

A noteworthy feature of mother-right is the close association 
between the twin culture heroes and their mother. Dual culture 
heroes generally seem to live in an atmosphere of mother-right. 
For instance, the two culture heroes of the eastern islands of 
Torres Straits, Bomai and Malu, stand in the relationship of 
mother’s brother and sister’s son, relationships which are im- 
portant under mother-right, the mother’s brother being the 
counterpart of the father under father-right. 


CHAPTER XVII 
THE UNDERWORLD 


an important matter was left on one side. It was found, 

in Nias, and among the Toradja of Central Celebes, that 
the spiritual nature of a commoner was bisected, as it were, at 
death : his life—his breath—went to the sky, back to the god who 
gave it, while his ghost, something that only came into existence: 
at death, went to the underworld. The ruling class in Nias, on the 
other hand, went entirely to the sky. So, at death, the com- 
munity divides into two parts, each going its appointed way. 
Why should not sky-chiefs rule over their subjects in the life to. 
come? Why should they go elsewhere? It is easy to under- 
stand that the breath of the commoner goes back to the sky to 
the sky-gods. Why should his ghost go underground ? 

Before proceeding to study this distinction of classes it will be 
well to lay down a general principle. Many peoples hold ideas 
with regard to the origin of men and their destiny after death. 
Some years ago I published a preliminary account of a survey 
of the peoples of Indonesia with a view to establishing the thesis 
that a relationship existed between these two sets of beliefs and 
the form of burial that accompanied them.! The result of the 
investigation of as complete a collection of the evidence as 
possible suggested that the land of the dead is the place where 
the people believe themselves to have originated ; and further, 
that the mode of disposal of the dead is intended to help the dead 
back to their home. A few examples will illustrate the principle. 
Various ideas are held as to the origin of the race. When the 
ancestors came from over the sea, the dead are usually placed in 
canoes which shall serve to take them back home. It is probable 
in some cases that the dead were formerly taken back in canoes 
to the old home whence their ancestors came. Often the dead are 
buried to face towards the land of origin, which is also the land 
of the dead. In Savu, an island to the west of Timor, the dead 
are interred. in a sitting position facing the west, the direction 
whence the inhabitants are said to have come.? Some people 
deelare that their ancestors came from a certain mountain : in the 
Belu district of Timor, it is said that the ancestress of the 

1 Perry ii. 2 fd., uu. 140-1. 
254 


De G the discussion of the creation of man by sky-gods 


THE UNDERWORLD 255 


race came out of a mountain, and the dead are supposed to go 
back there, and are interred, presumably to reach the under- 
world. The Dusun of British North Borneo believe that 
their ancestor, when he saw them comfortably settled, went 
to Mt. Kinibalu to live, and it is there that their ghosts are 
supposed to go at death.t In one case, that of the Karen of 
Burma, not only is it believed that the dead return to the moun- 
tain of their origin, but care is taken to ensure this. An annual 
festival is held, during which the bones of all the clan or family 
who have died during the year are collected and taken to the 
common burial-place, situated on some remote and inaccessible 
mountain called the Hill of Bones.? 

A singular belief is that of origin from trees. This is found in 
Borneo among other places. The Bahau of Kutei on the east 
coast hold that ‘“‘men came from trees and to trees they shall 
return. ... When a Bahau woman bears a child before the 
appointed time, it is placed in a tree; it is, as it were, returned 
to the place which it has lately left.” 3 

Interment is the means of returning the dead to the place of 
origin, the underworld. A tribe in upper Burma, called Bunjogee 
or Pankho, who inter their dead, claim that their ancestors came 
out of the underworld by means of a cave, and say that “ The 
cave whence man first appeared is in the Lhoosai country close 
to Vanhuilen : it can be seen to this day, but no one can enter. 
If one listens outside the deep notes of the gong and the sounds 
of men’s voices can still be heard. About their future home they 
are most explicit. After death they believe that the deceased 
go into the large hill whence man first emerged ; this they say is 
the land of the dead.* Certain tribes believe that their ancestors 
came out of stones, among them being some Naga tribes of Assam. 
They inter their dead and place a stone on the grave, or else put 
the body in a cave in the side of a mountain, the mouth of which 
is filled with stones. 

These examples illustrate the general correspondence between 
beliefs and practices connected with death and origins. In this 
chapter this correspondence will be studied with regard to the 
elements of the society of the archaic civilization that were not 
connected with the sky. It has already been found that the 
Children of the Sun had close ties with the sky, and went there 
at death to join their ancestors. It was found, moreover, that 
the rest of the community went elsewhere, usually underground. 
The peoples of the archaic civilization tend to claim descent from 
a race ancestress, one of the forms of the Great Mother. If it be 
true universally that the dead return whence they came, it should 
follow that the Great Mother, the ancestress of the race, should 
be found in the land of the dead to which go the ghosts of those 
elements of the community that do not claim descent from sky- 
beings. 

1 Id., 144. 2 Id., 145. 3 Id., 146. * Id., 150. 


256 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


The study of the disposal of the dead is one of great complexity, 
owing to the large number of forms that have developed from a 
few original methods. For that reason it is not possible to 
generalize so freely about burial customs as about some other 
cultural elements. But, in certain parts of the region, particu- 
larly Egypt and Polynesia, there are indications of the probable 
condition of things in the archaic civilization. The pre-dynastic 
people of Egypt and those of early Sumer were interred in the 
sand, often without any covering, in a contracted position. 
According to the evidence from Indonesia, this practice should 
be accompanied by a belief in an underground land of the dead. 
This belief was present in Sumer in the earliest known times : 
the dead went underground and there were sunk in deep sleep. 
This underworld at first seems to have had no ruler ; but later on 
it had a queen, Erishkagal, one of the forms of the Great Mother, 4 
who ruled alone: “ truly queen of all decrees am I; a god with 
me rivals not.’’? Later on she was given a spouse, Nergal, god of 
fire and of war, one of the forms of the sun-god. In the story of 
Tammuz and Ishtar, Tammuz goes to the underworld, lies there 
in a deep sleep, and has to be rescued by Ishtar from the queen 
of the underworld. Tammuz does not seem to rule over the 
underworld. Yet in Egypt, Osiris, who holds a similar position 
in Egypt to Tammuz in Sumer, was lord of the dead: “‘ It was a 
subterranean kingdom of the dead over which Osiris reigned, and 
it was as champion of the dead that he gained his great position 
in Egyptian theology.” * Osiris was associated with water, and 
was supposed to encircle the underworld like a snake. He is 
also said in the Pyramid Texts to be “‘ with outstretched arms, 
sleeping upon his side upon the sand, lord of the soil.”” The cult 
of Osiris moved from the Delta to Abydos, where it was preceded 
by that of Khenti-Amenti, the First of the Westerners. This 
title originates from the land of the dead situated in the west, 
or below the horizon, where it merged into the underworld, out 
of which the Nile flowed. Thence Osiris was called Lord of Dewat. 
Osiris became associated with Anubis of Siut, who was sometimes 
called “‘ First or Lord of the Westerners,” the title of the old god 
of the dead at Abydos.‘ 

In Egypt and Sumer, therefore, the land of the dead, usually 
underground, is presided over by the Great Mother and by a god 
identified with the king. In Egypt a contrast exists between the 
kings of the solar period and Osiris. The solar kings went after 
death to the sky and lived in the company of Re ; but the rest of 
the people went to the land of the dead ruled over by Osiris, the 
first king who became mortal. It is true that later on Osiris was 
raised to the sky ; but in the beginning the Osirian cycle of deities 
were clearly distinguished from the solar cycle.° Therefore the 

1 Langdon ii. 131, 132. ae A bk 


5 Breasted iv. 37. It is not certain that this land was originally sub- 
terranean, although it was so in later times. ¢ Jd., 100, 144. 5 Ids, 143. 


THE UNDERWORLD 257 


bisection of the community at death characteristic of communities 
ruled over by the Children of the Sun is not a necessary feature of 
society : for the earliest kings continued in the other world to rule 
over their subjects, and, in the days in Egypt when the solar kings 
ruled on earth, the old kings still ruled in the underworld over the 
dead. The sky element of the population thus shows every sign 
of superposition, and of being a more or less artificial element of 
society. 

In India the Aryans and the Asuras held different ideas regard- 
ing the underworld. The Aryan nobility looked upon a land of 
the dead in the sky as their home after death, and practised 
cremation in order to get there. But some of the Dravidians 
were associated with an underworld. Hiranyakasipu, the son of 
Diti, the king of the universe, was the judge of the dead. Mention 
is made of “the crystal palace, where the Asura with pleasure 
quaffed the inebriating cup.’’! This underworld of the early 
Dravidian peoples was not a dreary place as in Babylonia. For, 
according to the Vishnu Purana, the regions below the earth 
number seven, Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, Mahatala, 
Sutala, and Patala. Their soil is severally white, black, purple, 
yellow, sandy, stony, and of gold. They are embellished with 
magnificent palaces, in which dwell numerous Danavas, Daityas, 
Yakshas, and great snake-gods. The Muni Narada, after his 
return from those regions to the skies, declared amongst the 
celestials that Patala was much more delightful than Indra’s 
heaven. ‘* What,’’ exclaimed the sage, ‘‘can be compared to 
Patala, where the Nagas are decorated with brilliant and beautiful 
and pleasure-shedding jewels ? Who will not delight in Patala, 
where the lovely daughters of the Daityas and Danavas wander 
about, fascinating even the most austere ; where the rays of the 
sun diffuse light, and no heat, by day ; and where the moon shines 
by night for illumination, not for cold ; where the sons of Danu, 
happy in the enjoyment of delicious viands and strong wines, 
know not how the time passes? There are beautiful groves and 
streams and lakes where the lotus blows; and the skies are 
resonant with the Koil’s song. Splendid ornaments, fragrant 
perfumes, rich unguents, the blended music of the lute and pipe 
and tabor; these and many other enjoyments are the common 
portion of the Danavas, Daityas, and snake-gods, who inhabit 
the regions of Patala.’’ 2 

Below Patala was Naraka, or hell, presided over by Yama, 
which had several divisions for those guilty of various crimes. 
Yama in the Vedas presided over the underworld, and he still 
occupies that position in later Indian religion. Yama was a child 
of the sun, “‘ son of Vivasvat, the assembler of men, who departed 
to the mighty streams, and spied out the road for many.”’? Again, 
** Reverence ye with an oblation Yama, the son of Vivasvat, the 
assembler of men, who was the first of men that died, and the 


1 H. H. Wilson 126. 2 Id., 204. 3 Muir V. 292: Rig Veda X. 14. 
17 


258 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


first that departed to this (celestial world).”?1 Like Osiris he 
married his sister Yima, or rather, had intercourse with her. 

The Atharva Veda contains traces of a conflict between the 
land of the dead of Yama and that of the sky. In Hymn 30 it 
says: “‘ Let breath come, let mind come, let sight come, then 
strength ; let his body assemble ; let that stand firm on its two 
feet. With breath, O Agni, with sight unite him ; associate him 
with body, with strength ; thou understandest immortality : let 
him not now go; let him not now become one housing in the 
earth.”” In Muir it has for this last phrase: “ Let him not 
depart, or become a dweller on a house of clay.” From this it 
has been suggested that the Aryans of India first of all practised 
interment, and that cremation, associated with Agni, the god of 
fire, and the sky-world, was a later development, when Yama was 
removed to the sky, like Osiris in EKgypt.? 

The Atharva Veda contains ideas reminiscent of the Pyramid 
Texts of Egypt. “‘ When thou, O Brihaspati, didst release us from 
Yama’s otherworld existence, from Malediction, the Acvins bore 
back death from us, O Agni, physicians of the gods, mightily. Walk 
ye (two) together ; leave not the body ; let thy breath and expira- 
tion be here alike; live thou increasing a hundred autumns ; 
(be) Agni thy best overruling shepherd. Thy lifetime that is 
set over at a distance—(thy) expiration, breath, let them come 
again—Aogni hath taken that from the lap of perdition ; that I 
cause to enter again in thy self. Let not breath leave this man ; 
let not expiration, leaving him low, go away ; I commit him to the 
seven sages ; let them carry him happily unto old age. Enter ye 
in, O breath and expiration, as (two) draft-oxen a stall; let this 
treasure of old age increase here unharmed. We impel hither thy 
breath ; I impel away thy yaksma ; let Agni here, desirable one, 
assign us life-time from all sides. Up out of darkness have we, 
ascending the lightest firmament, gone to the sun, among the gods, 
highest light.’’*? Again (in 8, I) we read, ‘‘ Do not regard the de- 
parted, who lead (one) to the distance ; ascend out of darkness, 
come to light ; we take hold on thy hands. Let not the dark and 
brindled one, sent forth (seize) thee, that are Yama’s dogs, road- 
defenders ; come thou hitherward ; do not hesitate; stand not 
there with mind averted. Do not follow that road; that is a 
frightful one—the one thou hast not gone before, that I speak 
of ; to that darkness, O man, do not go forth; (there is) fear in 
the distance, safety for thee hitherward. . .. Up hath heaven, 
up hath earth, up hath Prajapati, caught them ; up out of death 
have the herbs, with Soma for their king, made thee pass.” 4 

Numerous other passages could be quoted to show that, in 
the minds of the early Aryans of India, life was in the sky, and 
death and darkness in the underworld of Yama. This Yama was 
the first mortal, the first king of men, who found his way to the 


1 Atharva Veda XVIII. 3, 13. 2 Td., V. 30. 
8 Id., VII. 53. * VIIL 1. 


THE UNDERWORLD © 259 


land of the dead, which was not the land of the dead of later times. 
Men, therefore, tended to go back to the land where they should 
be ruled over by their first king, and had to be saved from that 
fate by the gods of the sky-world. In the Aryan version, the 
mother goddess has been driven into the background, but she 
seems to survive in the person of Nirriti, the goddess of destruction, 
whose sons are Fear, Terror and Death.!_ Yama is akin to Osiris, 
the Egyptian ruler of the dead in the underworld, in that he 
seems to have married, or had connexion with, his sister. Pre- 
sumably the Aryans of India passed through a stage in which the 
land of the dead was underground and ruled over by the first king ; 
or else they adopted ideas of that type from some other civilization. 
It is significant that the earlier people of India, the Dravidians, 
claimed a relationship with an underworld, not a dark and gloomy 
place, but superior to Indra’s paradise, a place full of wealth, 
light, and happiness. 

It is now possible to understand the Indonesian instance in 
which the ghost of a man goes.underground, while his life goes to 
the sky. In the case of the Posso-Todjo Toradja, among whom 
the Sun-Lord came to stay, the life of a man goes to the sky and 
his ghost goes to the underworld, ruled over by I nDari, the goddess 
who took part in the creation of men out of stone images. These 
people have no chiefly class, because the children of Lasaeo went 
to the district of the mountain Toradja, so none go to the sky, 
the place whence came Lasaeo ; all go underground.? The moun- 
tain Toradja, on the other hand, place their land of the dead 
on the earth in the direction whence they believe themselves to 
have come. The act of migration has therefore caused a change 
in belief with regard to the land of the dead, and thus compli- 
cations are introduced into the problem of determining the 
relationship between the mode of disposal and the home of the 
dead. 

If the reasoning from the Toradja be correct, it should be found, 
on a general survey of Indonesia, that only in certain places do 
the commoners go to an underground land of the dead. This 
should happen where a distinct division of classes takes place at 
death, such as in Nias and south-west Timor, or where culture- 
heroes came from the sky, as among the Posso-Todjo Toradja ; 
provided no other circumstance, such as subsequent migration, 
has tended to complicate the belief. 

It isimpossible here to give details for the whole of Indonesia— 
the data are too numerous. I hope at some future time to publish 
the material. A preliminary analysis, set out in tabular form, 
shows that the belief in an underground land of the dead is closely 
associated with the archaic civilization. In addition to the Posso- 
Todjo group of the Toradja, the belief is found among the Batta 
of Simelungun in Sumatra, the Kayan of the Kapuas region and 
of Sarawak, the Baju of Banjermassin, the people of the Sangir 

1 “Mahabharata,” Adi Parva, 2 Kruyt and Adriani I. 268. 


260 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Islands, certain tribes of Mindanao in the Philippines, and the 
Galela people of Halmahera ; in the Geélvink Bay region of Dutch 
New Guinea, in South-West Timor, and in South Nias. The 
cases of Nias and Timor have already been discussed, and it has 
been found that the ghosts of rulers, in the case of Timor those 
of the Children of the Sun, go to the sky, while those of commoners 
go underground. It is significant that in those places of Indo- 
nesia, Central Celebes and South-West Timor, where mention is 
most definite of the Children of the Sun, and in Nias, where the 
sun-god is important, the underground land of the dead should 
be the place of destination for the ghosts of the commoners, whilst, 
when the archaic civilization begins to break down, it tends to 
disappear. ‘This is well shown in the case of the tribes of the 
interior of Borneo. The Kayan have the belief, while those 
tribes presumably influenced by them lack it. 

It is interesting to note what happens when the archaic civili- 
zation begins to dissolve. This process can be watched in the 
region west and east of Timor, ranging from Sumba to Luang- 
Sermata, where the only example, so far as I am aware, of an 
underground land of the dead, is in that place formerly ruled 
over by the Children of the Sun. In the other cases this belief 
is not recorded, in my knowledge. Yet from Sumba to the Luang- 
Sermata group, interment is the invariable mode of disposal, 
except, again, in the case of the Children of the Sun, who are 
mummified. In these islands, therefore, the land of the dead 
should be underground. Sumba contains many dolmens, Roti 
and Savu have megalithic monuments, and thus have been 
profoundly influenced by the archaic civilization. In the islands 
east of Timor, which have, according to tradition, been peopled 
from Timor, the use of stone gradually dwindles away to practi- 
cally nothing. When inquiry is made with regard to the land 
of the dead in these places, it is found that it is in the direction of 
migration : it is never underground, so far as I am aware. In 
one case it is possible to watch the apparent transition from an 
underground land of the dead to one in the direction of migration. 
In the Fialarang district of Belu in Timor, the people believe that 
they are descended from an ancestress who came out of Mt. 
Lekaan. Their ghosts go to Mt. Lekaan after death, but as to 
whether they go underground or not is not clear.t Evidently 
they went underground at first ; but migration has caused them 
to remember only their place of origin, and to forget the fact that 
their ghosts went underground. This is natural, if it be remem- 
bered that ghosts return to the ancestral home. 

Throughout this region, in Sumba, Roti, Belu, Keisar, Leti- 
Moa-Lakor, Babar, Timorlaut, the people believe in an under- 
ground world. These peoples are immigrants, so this under- 
world is probably the ancestral home of the dead that has become 
detached from its setting, and lingers on in popular memory as | 


1 Gryzen 46. 


THE UNDERWORLD 261 


an underworld. The Naga tribes of Assam exemplify the case. 
They usually practise interment,! and most of them claim to have 
come from elsewhere. The Mao and Kabui Naga believe that the 
dead go underground in certain cases, and both these tribes are 
closely associated with the archaic civilization. The Mao Naga 
say that the “ good ’”’ go to the sky and the “‘bad”’ go to the 
underworld,” and thus have a duality of belief somewhat akin to 
that of Nias and of the Posso-Todjo Toradja. 

This discussion therefore leads to the expectation that the 
underground land of the dead will only be found among those 
people whose culture shows most signs of the influence of the 
archaic civilization ; and that, as the break-up sets in, it will tend 
to be displaced by some other home of the dead. 

The connexion between the archaic civilization and the under- 
world is shown in yet another way. The creation myth of the 
Posso-Todjo Toradja of Central Celebes recounts that the first 
images were made by a god of the sky and a goddess of the 
underworld, so evidently both places were equally connected with 
the archaic civilization. In the origin stories of the Bugi and 
Macassar people, farther south, it is also said that the ancestors 
of the ruling houses were derived from both worlds, for la male 
being from the sky married a princess of the underworld. The 
story told in Luwu states that the male being from the sky was 
Batara Guru. He married several princesses from the underworld, 
among them being We Opoe Sangang, by whom he had twin 
children—a boy Sawerigading, and a girl We Tanrijabeng.* This 
Sawerigading was the great hero of the Bugi folk; and he went 
all over Celebes and the neighbouring islands waging war and 
contracting matrimonial alliances. He married We Tjoedai, a 
princess of the underworld, and finally retired to the underworld 
to live. His sister, on the other hand, married Ramang ri langi, 
** the clouds of the sky,” and finally went with him to the sky 
and dispossessed the rulers of that place.* Sawerigading thus 
acts as other early kings, and goes to rule over the underworld, 
although his ancestry is derived on one side from the sky-world. 
(See p. 373). 

In Oceania the evidence bears out the conclusions already 
reached. In Guam of the Mariannes, with matrilineal! institu- 
tions, the ghosts of the dead go underground.® In Melanesia 
various beliefs are held with regard to the land of thedead. “ Dr. 
Codrington has put on record the striking difference between 
Northern and Southern Melanesia in regard to the beliefs concern- 
ing the abode of the soul after death. In the Banks and Torres 
Islands, and in the New Hebrides, it is the almost universal 
belief that the dead live underground, the way to the home 
beneath the earth being in some cases through the volcanic vents 


1 The exceptions being the Ao and Tamlu Naga. 
2 Hodson 161. 3 B. Morris 550. @ Td., 551. 5 Safford. 


262 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


which occur in these islands. In the Solomons, on the other 
hand, the prevailing belief is that the dead find their way after 
death to islands, either in other parts of the Solomons, or more 
remotely situated. Here and there in the Solomons, however, 
as in Savo, we find, either alone or in conjunction with the more 
widely diffused belief, the idea that the dead go into volcanic 
craters or caverns, while in at least one place in Southern Melanesia, 
in Anaiteum, it is believed that the dead reach their future home 
by sea.”’ ! 

"The underground land of the dead is associated in Southern 
Melanesia with a woman, who is, according to some ideas, the 
mother of Qat, the great culture-hero: in one story she is Iro 
Puget, the wife of Mate, Death. In a Mota tale it is said that the 
dead are met by her at the entrance to the underworld.? Codring- 
ton gives an account of the way in which Iro Puget came to live in 
Panoi, the land of the dead: ‘In one (island) the cause of the 
introduction of Death was the inconvenience of the permanence 
of property in the same hands while men changed their skins and 
lived for ever. Qat therefore sent for Mate, who dwelt in Panoi, 
or by the side of a volcanic vent in Santa Maria, and assured him 
that he would only have to go to Vanua Lava and not be hurt. 
Death therefore came forth; they laid him on a board, killed a 
pig, and covered him over; then they proceeded to divide his 
property and eat the funeral feast. On the fifth day, when the 
conch was blown to drive away the ghost, Qat opened the covering 
over Mate and found him gone; nothing but bones remained. 
In the meanwhile Tangaro the Fool had been set to watch the 
way to Panoi, where the paths to the lower and upper worlds 
divided, lest Mate should go below; the fool sat in front of the 
way to the world above, and let Mate go down to Panoi; all men 
have since followed Death along that path. Another story makes 
the same fool—under his name of Tagilingelinge—the cause of 
death, because when Iro Puget set him to guard the way to 
Panoi in prospect of her own death, he pointed out that way to 
her descending ghost instead of the way back to the world, and 
so she, and all men after her, died and never came back to life.’’ 8 
This quotation suggests that, in the region of the dual organization 
of Melanesia,’ the choice existed between two different destinies 
after death : one land of the dead was associated with the upper 
world and with life, and the other with the underworld and with 
death; and the people with their interment and contracted 
position of burial came to ‘go underground. The idea of the first 
mortal being the ruler of the dead is implicit in the story of Mate, 
and the Great Mother apparently is also there in the form of Iro 
Puget. In the case of Leper’s Isle, the land of the dead is under- 
ground, and is ruled over by Nggalevu, a vui,® and consequently 
connected with the archaic civilization. 


1 Rivers ix. IT. 261-2. See Macdonald 728, for Efate 2 Codrington 265. 
3 Id., 266-7. * See pp. 294 e.s. ® Id., 285. 


THE UNDERWORLD 263 


The beliefs in Melanesia would be expected on the basis of the 
evidence gained in Indonesia. The people of Southern Melanesia 
have no traditions of migration, and their land of the dead is 
underground ; which is exactly what would happen if the ruling 
class of former times had disappeared, leaving the commoners 
with their ideas of the underworld. In Southern Melanesia the 
vui, so similar to the sacred chiefs of Fiji, the culture-heroes who 
have been associated with the archaic civilization, the carved 
stone images, and the numerous other signs of the archaic civiliza- 
tion, go to show that life was far different in the past. The dis- 
appearance of the ruling class associated with the sky has caused 
the community to be associated completely with the underworld. 
The other parts of Melanesia, where migrations have taken place, 
lack such ideas. For instance, the people of Santa Cruz, who have 
migrated, have no underground land of the dead. 

In Polynesia the sky-world is mainly a thing of the past, and 
all classes of the community as a rule go to the underworld, which 
is often reached over the sea, this journey by sea being presum- 
ably consequent upon migration. The evidence from Polynesia 
suggests that the bisection of the community into rulers and 
commoners, one group connected with the sky, and the other 
with the underworld, is not comprehensive. On the contrary, 
one element of the ruling group from the beginning has evidently 
been connected with the underworld. In Samoa, the children of 
the sun were associated with a family connected with the under- 
world, with whom they intermarried.! This family, the Salefe’e, 
ruled the underworld, and La Fe’e its head, played an important 
part in the early history of Samoa. On the disappearance of the 
Children of the Sun, the only land of the dead was underground, 
where dwelt Nafanua, the goddess of war; and the great gods of 
Samoa were henceforth underworld gods. After the disappearance 
of the Children of the Sun the ruling chiefs were called Tui in 
Fiji, Tonga, Samoa, and elsewhere in Western Polynesia. These 
chiefs are connected with the underworld, the land of the dead 
of the whole community. 

The race ancestress of Mangaia, Vari-ma-te-takere, lives in 
Avaiki, the underworld. She made Vatea, who rules over the 
underworld. Vatea married Papa and they had twin sons, 
Tangaroa and Rongo.? Rongo, as is known, ultimately super- 
seded Tangaroa, and became the god of Mangaia, raising it 
up from the underworld. 'Tangaroa and Rongo are children of 
the same mother ; one is connected with the sky, and the other 
with the underworld. Thus, as the result of the departure of 
Tangaroa, there results an underground land of the dead ruled 
over by the first king and the mother goddess. In Tahiti the 
land of the dead for all the community, except members of the 
Areoi society, is underground.? In Hawaii the bulk of the people, 


1 This matter will be discussed at length in Chapter XXIII. 
2 Gilli. 10. 3 Hillis I. 396, 


264 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


chiefs included, go underground, the land of the dead being ruled 
over by Wakea, the counterpart of Vatea of Mangaia, for the upper 
part, and Milu for the lower part. In the Marquesas Tiki and 
Hina Mataone, said to have been the ancestors of part of the 
population, are king and queen of the underworld, to which go 
the bulk of the people.2. The land of the dead for the Maori is in 
the underworld, reached over the sea, the land whence the people 
originally came :* this underworld is presided over by Hina-nui- 
te-po, the ancestress of the race, and by Whiro. No connexion 
is now held with the sky-world ; only certain traditional heroes, 
such as Tawhaki, Kariki, Rongomaui and Hauki-waho are 
supposed ever to have visited this place.* 

The Polynesian evidence shows that the ruling class was formerly 
composed of two divisions, connected with the sky and with the 
underworld, and that the disappearance of the Children of the 
Sun leaves the underworld people in possession. The bisection 
of the community in the archaic civilization in Polynesia is thus 
not complete, for part of the ruling element goes underground, 
as in Egypt. It seems certain that this “‘ underground ”’ ruling 
element was intimately connected with the sky element, for the 
two groups intermarried, as in Celebes and Samoa. Usually a 
sky man marries an underground woman; but instances of the 
opposite form of marriage are sometimes recorded. 

The rulers of the underworld are the Great Mother and her 
son, sometimes together, sometimes singly. The evidence so far 
adduced is hardly enough to make for certainty ; but it is possible 
to suggest explanations of the variations. ‘The culture-heroes of 
the Posso-Todjo Toradja left no children to form a ruling class. 
The only deity mentioned in their underworld is I nDari, who 
took part in the creation of man from stone images. In Southern 
Melanesia, again, a ruling class, whose past existence seems 
certain, is absent, and the underworld is ruled over by a race 
ancestress, in one case accompanied by a vui, presumably one of 
the former ruling class. On the contrary, among the Egyptians, 
Sumerians, the Dravidians, and the Polynesians, the underworld 
is ruled over by a god in addition to a goddess, the goddess some- 
times being relegated to the background, as in Egypt, India and 
Samoa. In all these cases the community has a ruling class. 
Thus the constitution of the underworld appears to reflect that 
of the earth. For, when no ruling class exists, no god presides 
over the underworld ; but kings on the earth have their counter- 
parts in the life to come. The Great Mother forms the constant 
element, presumably as the ancestress of gods, rulers and com- 
moners. 

It is now necessary to see what light can be gained by the 
study of American peoples. 

In Mexico the land of the dead for commoners was the under- 


1 Beckwith 299, n. 2. 2 Christian i. 190. 
5 Best xi. 137; v. 155, 229. 4 Id.,i. 184. 


THE UNDERWORLD 265 


world, Mictlan, where the dead were sunk in deep sleep, as in 
Sumer. It was ruled over by one of the forms of the great mother 
goddess, and also by Mictlantecutlh, the first man and the first 
mortal, like Osiris and Yama, who was connected with the moon, 
as were the rulers of the dead in other places. He was the king 
of Xibalba, the underworld city destroyed by the culture-heroes 
of the Kiche of Guatemala.} 

In the Pueblo region the dead go to the underworld, where lives 
the Great Mother. The Hopi underworld, the place whence their 
ancestors emerged, is peopled by sentient beings who perform 
ceremonies similar to those of the people on the earth. The ruler 
of this underworld is the goddess of germs, who is said to resemble 
Mictlantecutli of the Mexican underworld.? According to the 
Hopi a man has a “ breath body,”? which after death becomes a 
Katcina, a spirit that plays an important part in the ritual of 
Pueblo peoples. The Sun is the father of the Katcinas, and the 
*‘ breath body ” follows him westward on its way to the opening 
of the underworld.? The Katcinas are also said to have been the 
offspring of the earth-goddess.* 

The “‘ breath body ”’ of the Hopi, therefore, instead of, as among 
the Toradja, going to the sky, goes underground. At the same 
time the Katcina, the ultimate form of the breath body, is the 
offspring of the sun and the earth mother, and follows the sun to 
the West before entering the underworld. Thus the breath body 
and Katcina show signs of relationship to the sky, as in other 
places, but ultimately both are related to the underworld. It is 
said, further, that the Katcinas, like men, came out of the under- 
world ;° so, in returning there, they are acting like the spiritual 
part of men in other places. The problem is thus that of ex- 
plaining why the Katcinas did not come from the sky, being the 
offspring of the sun. That problem, however, is part of the 
wider problem of accounting for the entire absence among the 
Pueblo peoples of any sky-world, which will shortly be considered. 

According to a Zuni priest, “It seems—so the words of the 
grand-fathers say—that in the underworld were many strange 
things and beings, even villages of men, long ago. But the people 
of those villages were unborn-made, more like the ghosts of the 
dead than ourselves, yet more like ourselves than are the ghosts of 
the dead, for as the dead are more finished of being than we are, 
they were less so, as smoke, being hazy, is less fine than mist, 
which is filmy ; or as green corn, though raw, is soft like cooked 
corn which is done (like the dead), and as both are softer than ripe 
corn which, though raw, is hardened by age.”’® Dead Zuni go to 
the underground Dance Village, and there join the council of the 
gods. As their ancestors came out of the earth, their mother, 
so they return there. Members of the Bow Priesthood, founded 

1 Bancroft ITI. 396, 534. 2 Fewkes iv. 259. 


3 Fewkes xv. 513, 524. 4 Td., iv. 266. 
5 Ibid., vii. 86. 6 Cushing iii. 400. 


266 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


by the Twins when they had become war-gods, go to become 
lightning-makers, and thus differ from the rest of the community. ! 
Among the Sia Indians, who were created by the Great Mother, 
the dead are believed to go to the underground whence men 
emerged. When the Sia came out of the underworld they were 
accompanied to the earth by Utset, their great mother, who then 
left them to return to her world beneath, where she awaits them 
after their death.? 

The Pueblo Indians are wholly connected with the underworld. 
Their creation myths tell of wanderings, and it might be expected 
that the land of the dead would be thought to be in the direction 
whence they came; but these people have not forgotten their 
real origin, and the ghost finds its way back into the underworld 
through the hole whence its ancestors emerged. The corre- 
spondence between place of origin and home of dead is thus 
complete. 

The Pueblo Indians, though telling of the Children of the Sun 
in their creation stories, have no beliefs at all in a sky-world, nor 
have they any ruling class connected with the sky. The nearest 
to such a class that they possess is the Bow Priesthood of the 
Zuni, instituted by the twins, whose members become lightning- 
makers after death. The absence of a sky-descended class 
accounts for the lack of a sky-world, and for the concentration 
of the beliefs of the people on the underworld. The absence of a 
ruling class is also reflected in the fact that the Great Mother is 
apparently the only ruler of the underworld. But although the 
lack of beliefs in a sky-world may be accounted for by stating that 
none of the Pueblo Indians came thence, yet one serious difficulty 
still remains. How is it that, among the Toradja, the “ life ” 
goes to the sky, while, among the Pueblo tribes, it goes under- 
ground ? It is possible to suggest an explanation. The Toradja 
were created from stone images animated by breath, and made 
by the god of the sky-world and the goddess of the underworld. 
Stone images are also found in the lands of the mountain Toradja, 
which helps to supply an historical background for the story. But 
the creation of the Pueblo peoples takes place in the underworld, 
only the Twin Children of the Sun being produced by the inter- 
vention of sky-beings. In the case of the Toradja, the dual 
nature of creation is reflected in the dual destiny of the breath 
and ghost. But in the Pueblo instances the creation takes place 
in the underworld, and it is not connected with the animation of 
images. It therefore seems as if the absence of the idea of 
animation of stone images, so closely associated with the sky- 
world, accounts for the difference between the Pueblo and 
Toradja. 

The creation story of the Pima tribe tells of Elder Brother 
creating from clay human beings, whom he destroyed for fighting 


1 Stevenson ii, 20-1. 2 Td., i. 26 e.s., 39 €.8., 68. 


THE UNDERWORLD 267 


among themselves, and mention is also made of the creation of 
men by Earth Doctor. The Pima are patrilineal, and they have 
a tradition of a former line of chiefs. This tradition of a ruling 
class, together with the creation story from images, suggests that 
possibly all the Pueblo tribes were formerly in like condition, and 
that the disappearance of the ruling class caused the ideas of 
creation to be centred round the Great Mother. 

The Navaho, who are derived from the same source as the 
Pueblo peoples, began in the underworld, and ghost and breath 
go there after death to be ruled over by the Woman Chieftainess, 
the goddess of witches.1. The solitary presence of the mother 
goddess in the underworld is in keeping with the democratic 
nature of the Navaho. But one feature of their origin story 
merits careful attention. On their way out on to the earth the 
Navaho had to pass through several successive worlds. When 
they got to the fourth world, the earth and sky joined together 
for a moment, and out of the union came Coyote and Badger : 
** We think that Coyote and Badger are children of the sky,” a 
statement which suggests the former existence among them of a 
sky-descended ruling class. This is supported by the Navaho 
statement that the first man was the chief of all the people in the 
fourth world, except the Pueblo people.? This first man led them 
out of this underworld. It therefore seems as if the Navaho once 
had a ruling class which they have lost. This may be so, for their 
tribal organization is evidently in a state of disintegration. When 
this ruling family disappeared, the people went to their ancestress 
in the lowest world. 

In the Mound area the underworld is not so prominent as in 
the Pueblo region. The Yuchi, who call themselves Children of 
the Sun, and claim descent from a woman from the sky, believe 
that both ghost and life return to the sky; no mention is made 
of an origin from the underworld, and that place, so far as I know, 
does not exist in their beliefs. They thus form a direct antithesis 
to the Pueblo peoples. Their beliefs form, nevertheless, a per- 
fectly consistent whole, for the place of origin and the land of the 
dead are identical. Unfortunately but little is known of the 
beliefs for the rest of the eastern States.’ 

The Huron, who claim descent from a woman, who came from 
the sky, and gave birth to twins who were their culture-heroes, 
believe that ghosts go to the underworld, there to be ruled over 
by this race-mother and one of her sons. This case differs from 
that of the Yuchi, in that the Huron do not claim to be Children 
of the Sun, but simply look upon the twins as their culture- 
heroes. That one of the twins should be their ruler in the under- 
world suggests that they were once ruled over by a class of sky- 
descended people which has disappeared. This suggestion is 


1 W. Matthews iii. 164. 2 Ibid., 71. 
3 The Choctaw were created, in the underworld, out of clay, by the good 
spirit above, Aba, near the headwaters of the Pearl River (Bushnell 527, 530). 


268 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


borne out by the fact that the Huron themselves speak of the 
council-meeting when they constituted their tribes, and selected 
their clans and phratries; which seems to show that they had 
become disorganized for some reason or other, and had to recon- 
stitute the tribe as well as possible. The Huron retain traces of a 
contact with the sky-world, for ghosts go to the land of the dead, 
which is underground in the west, by way of the Milky Way. 
The good twin, who animated them and gave them their culture, 
lives in the eastern sky.? 

The Plains Indians nearest in culture to the archaic civiliza- 
tion have the most coherent ideas about creation and the destiny 
of the ghost. For example, the Mandan tribe of the Sioux, who 
have retained agriculture and other cultural elements that the 
Plains Indians have tended to lose, believe in a “ Lord of Life ”’ 
in the sun, and in an ‘“‘ Old Woman who never dies,” the Mother 
of the Sun, who lives in the south. The race originated from the 
underground, where the old woman lives, and ghosts go there at 
death.* Corresponding to the belief that the sun-god is the Lord 
of Life, is the belief, already quoted, that when a child is born a 
star descends on earth and appears in human form. When a 
man dies, it goes back to the sky and reappears as a star. The 
Hidatsa, who resemble the Mandan in their nearness to the archaic 
civilization, have ideas which are not so definite. They believe 
that their ancestors were created by the “ First in Existence.” 
They also believe in a grandmother, who is connected with their 
agriculture, as is the ‘““Old Woman who never dies”? among the 
Mandan. At death the dead go underground, but it is not said 
whether they go to the grandmother. It is also said that a man 
has four souls, but not much is reported about them. Apparently, 
among the Mandan, the organization of beliefs is becoming dis- 
located, so that they have no logical interrelationship. 

This process has advanced much farther among other tribes of 
the Plains. The Omaha, who have lost so much of their culture, 
inter their dead in a sitting position under a mound. They believe 
that they have only one soul, and that the ghost goes at death to 
the land of the dead by means of the Milky Way.’ The Dakota 
do not have a land of the dead in the sky, but some of the stars 
are believed to be men transported to the sky.* Although they 
are said not to have a land of the dead in the sky, yet it is said 
than an old woman sits on the road leading to the land of the 
dead and examines the ghosts as they pass for tattoo marks. 
Those without them are pushed from a cloud or a cliff and 
fall into this world,’ which suggests the former existence among 
ee of ideas connected with the sky-world as a home of the 

ead. 


1 Barbeau ii. 8. 2 J. O. Dorsey ii. 507. 
8 Id., 512: Matthews v. 739. 4 Td., 508. 
5 Id., 583-92. 6 Id., 493. 


* J. O. Dorsey i. 145. 


THE UNDERWORLD 269 


This ends a long discussion centred round the Great Mother. 
She was apparently the first deity that man knew, and in the 
course of time she came to acquire many characteristics that 
finally in all parts of the world developed into independent god- 
desses. Some of her characteristics were those of a goddess of 
fertility, of agriculture and of grains, and throughout the archaic 
civilization she was closely associated with human sacrifice. This 
ereat mother was in time supplanted in many of her functions 
by a god, who, at first, was her son. He became associated with 
- human sacrifice, and so did his earthly representatives, the divine 
kings of the archaic civilization. But when he changed into a war- 
god, human sacrifice tended to die out, and was reserved mainly 
for funerals of chiefs. 

The next stage in the argument was to show that the archaic 
civilization was matrilineal in its institutions, and that mother- 
right was intimately bound up with the idea of a race-ancestress, 
who was seemingly identical with the Great Mother. Correspond- 
ing to the idea of a great mother of the race is the idea that the dead 
return to her. In this chapter it has been found that, while the 
sky-descended part of the community goes to the sky after death, 
the rest of the community goes underground, or else to a land of 
the dead situated in some other place on the earth, according as 
to whether a migration has taken place or not. These beliefs are 
clearly shown in the case of the Pueblo Indians, where the ideas 
of creation and death are centred round the underworld and the 
great mother. These conceptions regarding the Great Mother are 
accompanied, in the archaic civilization, by the notion of the 
** life *”’ of each person belonging to the sky-world, which causes a 
duality in the ideas concerning the spiritual nature of men, one 
part being connected with the sky, and the other with the under- 
world. In the case of the “‘ life,’ it would seem that the Great 
Mother has little or nothing to do with the matter; the breath 
usually goes to a god in the sky, not to a goddess. The ghost 
goes back to the mother of all, and the life goes back to its giver. 

In Egypt of the Fifth Dynasty and onwards the kings went 
to the sky, while the rest of the community went to the under- 
world. All over the region, sky-descended rulers go to the sky 
after death, while commoners and other members of the ruling 
group usually go to the underworld. The association with the 
underworld exists among people who apparently once had sacred 
rulers. In no case does a sky-descended portion of the community 
go underground at death ; and in no case do people that originated 
in the underworld go to the sky. The evidence suggests that the 
beliefs connected with the Great Mother and the underworld are 
earlier than those associated with the sky. This is so in Sumer. 
In Egypt, where it is not so definite, it is best to assume that the 
solar ideas developed out of those associated with gods such as 
Osiris and the Great Mother. Otherwise it is hard to see how a 
god such as Re, who could produce life of himself, should be born 


270 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


anew each day of the mother goddess; also why the mother 
goddess should help Khnum by giving to the embryo the life 
that it needed. Although it is possible that, in Egypt and 
Sumer, the underworld preceded the sky-world, and the rulers 
of the underworld those of the sky-world, no signs are present in 
other parts of the region of such a sequence. The evidence from 
Polynesia suggests strongly that, in the archaic civilization, both 
groups of rulers existed together in the same communities, 
and that these connected with the underworld survived the 
Children of the Sun. This makes it possible that, in India and 
Mexico, a process of stripping had taken place in the past, the 
Children of the Sun having disappeared and left the underworld 
rulers. 

The bisection of the community that takes place at death is 
important. It happens in communities where the ruling class 
consists of the Children of the Sun, or of peoples descended from 
sky-beings. In such communities the sky-born go back to the 
sky, and the others, rulers and commoners alike, go elsewhere, 
usually underground. The sky-world is bound up with the 
sky-born class, and disappears with it. The underworld was 
probably an earlier land of the dead than the sky for the peoples 
of the Ancient East; and since the commoners never go to the 
sky, it follows that the condition of things when both rulers and 
commoners go underground together is the more natural. The 
bisection of a community, such as takes place where the Children 
of the Sun rule, is artificial. The two groups live together on 
earth, but after death the rulers go elsewhere, and some one else 
rules over their dead subjects. This suggests that these rulers 
of the dead were originally ruling groups on earth who were 
supplanted by the sky-born group, and that when the sky-born 
people disappeared the others entered again into their own. 

It is possible to go one step farther. In some cases the mother 
goddess is alone in the underworld. In such instances, as among 
the Toradja and the Peublo peoples, no ruling class exists on earth. 
Are these conditions therefore representative of the stage before 
the arrival of rulers? It certainly is plausible to argue that the 
Great Mother, having survived the shocks of fortune, was therefore 
the first deity, and that she represents the condition of affairs 
before the rise of kings. 


. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
THE DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA 


examination has shown with increasing clearness that the 

religious, economic, political and social sides of the life of 
a community are closely interrelated. This interrelation becomes 
closer the farther it is possible to penetrate into the maze of facts ; 
and it is difficult to surmise where it would ultimately break down. 
In this chapter, and those that follow, an attempt will be made to 
penetrate farther into the jungle, and to elucidate more definitely 
the nature of the archaic civilization that looms so largely behind 
the civilization of later times. The problem began to shape itself 
when the study of the Children of the Sun was undertaken. It 
was seen that the archaic civilization possessed a ruling class of 
Children of the Sun, divine beings connected with the sky-world, 
and born of theogamies. It was noted, too, that these Children 
of the Sun were often represented as twins, hostile to one another ; 
and that sometimes one twin was connected with the sky and the 
other with the underworld, even when the mother came from the 
sky. The Children of the Sun disappeared, and in their place 
ruled chiefs associated with the underworld, and often of a warlike 
nature. Also the sun-god gave place to a war-god born of a 
theogamy, who thus had some relationship to the archaic civiliza- 
tion. The chiefs of this later stage of civilization are not born of 
theogamies. Nevertheless, it was evident that the two branches 
of the ruling class, the Children of the Sun, who belonged to the 
sky, and the war chiefs, who belonged to the underworld, were in 
some way related, for they intermarried. Thus the ruling class 
of the archaic civilization was dual in nature, one part belonging 
to the sky and the other to the underworld. A parallel, therefore, 
exists between the ruling class and the Twin Children of the Sun. 
A further duality has been observed in that men in the archaic 
civilization who do not belong to the sky-born class usually go 
at death to the underworld, while their life goes to the sky. 

It is obvious that such dualism of culture will have to be 
explained, for the facts are remarkable and unexpected. Why 
should the thought of the archaic civilization be permeated, 
through and through, with the ideas of duality, such as have been 
revealed in the past chapters? It is difficult, if not impossible, 

271 


ke study of various people’ of the great region under 


272 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


to frame any a priori reason for the division of the ruling class, 
such as is patent in Polynesia and elsewhere. Before any explana- 
tion of these facts is sought, it is necessary to inquire whether any 
other dualisms are noticeable in the archaic civilization, so as to 
determine still further the relationships between the various 
aspects of its life. 

The constitution of Egypt in dynastic times was thoroughly 
dual. The country was originally divided into two distinct parts, 
Upper Egypt in the south, and Lower Egypt in the north, that 
is, the Delta of the Nile. At the beginning of the First Dynasty 
the country was united under one throne, and ever since it 
remained united; but it was never forgotten that the king was 
the ruler of a dual country.1. He was always called the king of 
Upper and Lower Egypt; his crown was double, his coronation 
ceremony was double; even his palace was double. In an 
inscription on the Palermo Stone, which has revealed such impor- 
tant evidence for the early chronology of Egypt, it is said “ Ex- 
alted is the White-Crown-of-Snefru-upon-the-Southern-Gate.”’ 
“* Exalted-is-the-Red-Crown-of-Snefru-upon-the-Northern - Gate.” 
Prof. Breasted comments: ‘‘ These are the names of the two 
gates or parts of the palace of Snefru: one for the south and one 
for the north. We have thus the double name of a double 
palace which, like the organs of government, was double, to 
correspond with the old kingdoms of south and north. ... The 


state temples also were double; each had a double facade, and. 


the hypostyle was divided into north and south by the central 
aisle.”’? Kings are usually called ‘“‘ The King of Upper and 
Lower Egypt. ... Favourite of the Two Goddesses.’ Then 
again there are inscriptions on the Palermo Stone of the type: 


KING NEFERIRKERE. 


Horus . . . King of Upper and Lower Egypt ; Favourite of the Two 
Goddesses (Upper and Lower Egypt respectively). 
Year I. 
Second month, seventh day. 
Birth of the Gods 
Union of the Two Lands 
Circuit of the Wall,? 


which reveal the persistence of the idea of duality of the kingship. 
As king of Upper and Lower Egypt the king personated Set, the 
god of Upper Egypt, and Horus, the god of Lower Egypt.* He 
sometimes had a double name. For example, Khasekhmoui of 
the Third Dynasty was called Horus-Set, as is shown by numerous 


1 Blackman ii. 244, n. 2. It is thought by some scholars that the country 
had formerly been united under one king, because in the late pre-Dynastic 
times the kings of Upper and Lower Egypt bore the same name of Horus. 
But this is doubtful. Even were it true, it would not affect the present 
argument. 


2 Breasted ii. I. 66. a 7d.,°70. * Blackman ii. 244, 


ee en ee ee 


Se 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA 278 


cylinders found at Abydos and Hieraconpolis.! He is called 
** Khasekhmoui, the Wielder of the Two Sceptres,”’ “‘ Khasekhmoui 
in whom are united the two Divinities.” 2 Archaic inscriptions, 
dating from the times prior to the Fifth Dynasty, refer to “‘ daily 
purifications of the king of south and north, Double Lord 
Noutirni.” > The king even sometimes had two tombs, one in 
either land.4 His treasury was double. Apparently the office 
of high-priest was sometimes dual: for the high-priesthoods of 
Memphis and Heliopolis, the incumbents of which were called 
‘* Great Chief of Artificers,’”’ and ‘‘ Great of Seeing,’’ respectively, 
were usually two in number, and were, of course, held by men of 
high rank.® 

A marked feature of the mythology of Egypt was the enmity 
between Set and Horus, which, apparently, had not always 
existed, for in some passages of the Pyramid Texts Set helped 
Horus in the offices for the dead. Certain events in the dim past, 
presumably connected with the dispossession of Set, caused a 
hostility to grow up between them, and this hostility continued 
throughout the whole of Egyptian history. A hostility also 
existed between the communities of Upper and Lower LEgypt.® 
The two parts of the realm were distinguished from one another 
by different colours ; white being the colour of Upper Egypt and 
red the colour of Lower Egypt.’ 

Another remarkable feature of the constitution of Egypt in the 
Fifth and succeeding Dynasties must be mentioned. In the days 
before the accession to power of the Children of the Sun, the heir 
to the throne acted as vizier, and carried on, for his father, the 
administration of the State. When the Heliopolitans came into 
power, at the beginning of the Fifth Dynasty, the king was high- 
priest of the sun-cult, but his son did not act as vizier. ‘This 
office was now held by a family presumably belonging to Memphis.® 
The ruling power was thus split into two parts, sacred and secular, 
and this distinetion held through the Pyramid Age. More will 
be said on this matter in the chapter on Egypt. The constitution 
of Egypt was thus a Dual Organization of Society in the widest 
sense of the term, the social, political, economic and religious 
organizations all manifesting a like condition.? 

Egypt is the only country of the region where conditions 
remained approximately unchanged until the end. So, if other 
communities possessed the dual organization, it will probably 
have fallen into ruin as the result of the coming of the more war- 
like communities. The existence of the dual organization through- 


1 Weill 97. 2 Td., 98. 

3 Td., 150. Cf. also 152, 155. 4 Meyer iii. I. 2, § 247. ° 
5 Breasted v. 64. 8 See p. 430. 

? See p. 272. 


8 Breasted v. 126. In the Sixth Dynasty the family of the vizier belonged 
to Abydos (see Chapter X XVI). 

® In Chapter XXVI certain aspects of the dual organization of Egypt 
are studied in detail. 


18 


274 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


out the region in the archaic civilization has first of all to be 
established, and this will have to be done by means of fragments. 
In this and the next two chapters will be collected all the scraps 
of information on this topic that I have been able to find ; and in 
Chapter XX the material will be examined, and ample reason will 
be forthcoming for believing that the archaic civilization was 
based on a dual organization similar to that of ancient Egypt. 

The study of early forms of human society is peculiarly difficult 
in India. The great spread of Brahmanism during the past 
centuries has obscured many features of the old civilization and 
produced great cultural transformations. ‘The general adoption 
of the caste-system, for example, under Brahmanic auspices, has 
caused the obliteration of many old landmarks; whole com- 
munities of the Dravidian area have been thereby absorbed, so 
that their social organizations has often been transformed. Con- 
sequently the task of finding traces of the dual organization of 
society in India will not be easy. This is to be expected, for other 
discussions have shown that it is further east, in Australia, Poly- 
nesia and America, that the clearest traces of the archaic civiliza- 
tion exist, and not in India and Indonesia. So, if in India the 
inquiry only serves to bring to light evidence that may possibly 
be interpreted as vestigial remains of a former dual organization 
of society, judgment must be deferred until the whole survey is 
completed. For it will then be evident that these scattered facts 
are really the remains of a former coherently organized system 
of society. 

If the dual organization belonged to the archaic civilization, 
it must be sought in India among the Dravidian and Munda 
groups, and not in the more northerly peoples of the Panjab and 
elsewhere, who have become thoroughly Hinduized. The sacred 
writings contain possible traces of a dual grouping among the matri- 
lineal ruling groups that are included under the term Dravidian. 
In the Mahabharata it says: ‘‘ There were, in former days, 
celebrated throughout the three worlds, two brothers named 
Sunda and Upusunda living together and incapable of being slain 
by anybody unless each slew the other. They ruled the same 
kingdom, lived in the same house, slept on the same bed, sat on 
the same seat, and ate off the same dish. ... Both of them 
were mighty Asuras endowed with great energy and terrible 
powers. The brothers were both fierce and possessed wicked 
hearts. . . . Of exactly the same dispositions and habits, they 
seemed to be one individual divided into two parts.” + They 
could go everywhere at will. They went to the sky to the region 
of the celestials, and, after conquering various divine beings, they 
set out to conquer the earth. Sunda and Upusunda were descen- 
dants of Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti, the great mother of the 
Daityas and sister of Aditi. They thus belonged to the ruling 
group of the Asuras, the enemies of the Aryans. Other twins 

1 «*Mahabharata,’’ Rajyalabha Parva cex. i. 


ee 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA 275 


occur in this family of daughters of Daksha. In the first place 
Hiranyakasipu has a brother Hiranyaksha, who seems to be his 
twin.! In another case, Vinata, a sister of Diti, has by Kasyapa, 
the sun, twins called Garuda and Arjuna. Kasyapa said to 
Vinata concerning them :—‘‘Two heroic sons shall be born to 
thee, who shall be lords of the three worlds. ... These two 
shall be lords of all winged creatures. These heroic rangers of 
the skies will be respected of all worlds, and capable of assuming 
any form at will.’’ 2 Garuda, the ruler of the birds, was the son 
of Vinata, whose sister Karma, was the mother of the Nagas or 
serpents, the father of both sons being the sun. Although of the 
same parentage, and although allied to one another, a hostility 
existed between Garuda and the Nagas. Garuda was associated 
with the sky and the Nagas with the underworld, where they lived 
in splendid palaces. This brings to light further evidence that 
the rulers of the Dravidians were divided into two groups, one 
connected with the sky and the other with the underworld, both 
related but yet hostile. This corresponds to the division of 
Egyptian society into sections connected with the sky and the 
underworld, combined with the hostility between the two gods 
Horus and Set, connected respectively with birds and snakes and 
water animals. 

In the Jataka Tales, the stories of the Buddha’s former 
births, mention is made of pairs of brothers similar to Sunda and 
Upusunda. The Ghata-Jataka mentions Kamsa and Upakamsa, 
sons of Mahakamsa, who reigned in Uttarapatha in the Kamsa 
district, in the city of Asitanjana. When Mahakamsa died, 
Kamsa became king, with Upakamsa for his viceroy. Mention 
is made also of a king Mahasagara, who ruled at the same time in 
Upper Madhura. He had two sons, Sagara and Upasagara, of 
whom Sagara succeeded to the throne, with Upasagara as his 
viceroy. The Mahabharata contains many examples of pairs 
of brothers. For instance, in the list of the sons of Dhritarashtra, 
the king of the elder brother of Pandu, occur Dussaha and 
Duschala, Vinda and Anuvinda, Durmarshana and Durmukha, 
Dushkarna and Karna, Chitra and Upachitra, Durmada and 
Dushpradharsha, Urnanabha and Padmanabha, Nanda and 
Upanandaka, Senapati and Sushena, Kundodara and Hahodara, 
Chitravahu and Chitravarman, Dridhahasta and Suhasta, Vatavega 
and Suvarchasa.® These pairs are mentioned together in a long list 
of brothers. In view of the cases of Sunda and Upasunda, Kamsa 
and Upakamsa, Sagara and Upasagara, the definite association 
between two brothers of like name, which constitute the great 
majority of the linked pairs in the list, suggests some peculiarity 


1 “Mahabharata,” Adi Parva Ixv. : Wilkins ii. 124, 130. 
2 Id., Adi Parva XXXI., XVI. 

8 Jd., Adi Parva XXII., lxv., lxvi. 

4 Jataka IV. 50, No. 454. 

> «‘ Mahabharata,’ Adi Parva, Sambhava Parva Ixvii. 


276 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


in the political constitution of the past in India in which two 
‘* brothers,’’ whether of the same mother or not it is not possible 
at present to tell, share the rule. The possibility of different 
mothers must be borne in mind, for the instance of Garuda and 
the Nagas is one in which two sisters have children by the same 
father, and these ‘‘ brothers” are associated in that they are 
mentioned together and are said to be hostile. Before long 
further instances of a similar nature will be forthcoming, and it 
will be seen that such instances of linked brothers as have been 
adduced are not the product of imagination. In the case of the 
Garuda-Naga relationship, it will be remembered that, in Poly- 
nesia, it was found that the ruling groups were really dual in 
nature in the earliest settlements. They consisted of the Children 
of the Sun connected with the sky, and another group connected 
with the underworld, where usually lived the great mother of 
the community. These two groups intermarried, the sky-men 
marrying underworld women. When the Children of the Sun 
disappeared in Polynesia, only the underworld people were left. 
The evidence from India suggests that both groups were originally 
Children of the Sun, and that the Naga branch was associated 
with the underworld. It would therefore seem that the ruling 
group consisted of two branches, one connected with birds, and 
the other with snakes, or their equivalents, such as dragons, 
crocodiles and so forth. 

It has already been seen that the ancestors of several ruling 
houses of Dravidian tribes were Nagas. The evidence just 
adduced suggests that the Nagas and Garudas formed part of a 
dual organization of society, an hostility existing between them, 
as between the different parts of Egypt. Moreover, it can be 
shown that the women of the Naga race gave birth to twins, the 
sun usually being their father. The foundation of the kingdom 
of Pegu in Burma is due to immigrants from Dravidian India who 
were of Naga race.! Tha-htun was the first colony, forty-four 
miles north-west of Martaban, in a country called Suvarnabhumi 
—“ golden land,’ and old gold-workings have been found 120 
miles from Tha-htun on the Paunglaung or Sit-taung River, 
where gold still exists: “‘ The name Tha-htun is derived from 
vernacular words having the same signification.” 2 Evidently 
the gold attracted the colonists, who are said to have come from 
Thubinga, in the country of Karanaka or Karanatta. The story 
goes that a king Titha, who ruled over Thubinna or Thubinga in 
Karanaka, had two sons, Titha Kumma and Dzaya Kumma, 
who became hermits and settled near Tha-htun. One day they 
found on the shore two dragon’s eggs, from which emerged two 
boys. One of these boys died when ten years old, and was reborn 
in Mittila to be a disciple of Buddha; the other boy grew up, 
built Tha-htun with the help of Thakya (Sakra, the chief of the 
second heavenly region, and corresponding to Indra), and reigned 

1 Phayre 32. 2 Id., 24-6. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA 277 


there as Thiha Radza. A certain Adinna Radza, one of his 
descendants, ruled over Tha-htun, having dispossessed two _half- 
brothers, Thamala and Wimala, born of a different mother, a 
woman of Naga race, who laid two eggs, out of which they came. 
The dispossessed twins went away with one hundred and seventy 
families, and founded Pegu in A.D. 573, the elder brother, Thamala, 
being chosen king.1 

_ This tradition shows that women of the Naga race were supposed 
to give birth to twins, bearing similar names, as in the case of 
Sunda and Upusunda. It is important to note that, in this tale, 
the two brothers set out with their followers, and thus evidently 
the whole structure of the old society was transplanted to the 
new home. 

The Gonds claim that their ruling class was descended from a 
Naga king of Ceylon, and they certainly originated in South 
India. They have two aristocratic subdivisions, Raj-Gonds and 
Khatolas, but it is not possible to say anything as to the signifi- 
cance of these divisions.2. The Gonds of Bastar have two divisions, 
Maria and Muria, and in one part of Bastar the Maria group is 
divided into two exogamous groups. Therefore the Gonds 
appear to have the dual organization in some of its elements. It 
is said also that there is a “‘ probability that the Gonds and Khonds 
were originally one tribe in the south of India, and that they 
obtained separate names and languages since they left their ori- 
ginal home for thenorth.” ® Possibly these two tribes originated, 
so far at least as their ruling classes are concerned, from people 
of the Naga group, and then split up into distinct divisions. The 
Khonds are divided into Kutia Khond, hill Khond, and plains 
Khond, but whether this division has any significance and is 
anything but territorial, I am unable to say.4 

Similar evidence, suggestive of the break-up of a former dual 
grouping of society, is found in the case of the Mundas, who are 
ruled over by a Naga race of chiefs, whence Nagpur gets its name. 
The Mundas and the Khangars are descended from two brothers, 
but are now separate tribes.° This may correspond to the Gond- 
Khond split. The Bhars, who formerly ruled in Bihar, were 
divided into Rajbhars, a superior caste, and Bhars. Similarly 
the Bhil were divided into White Bhil and Black Bhil.® 

All this is not of much value in itself, but, in conjunction with 
the examples previously adduced, it suggests that the Dravidian 
peoples formerly possessed a dual organization that is now in 
ruins. Farther south the Nairs of Malabar afford more precise 
evidence. They live in the heart of the Dravidian country, and 


1 Phayre 25-32. 2 Russell IIT. 63. 3 Id., 44, 

4 Id., III. 465. -5 Roy i. 400-1. 

6 Sherring 367. The Korwa and Korku show signs of a former dual 
organization (Russell 554-574). The Yeravas, an important tribe of Coorg, 
are divided into two divisions, Panjiris and Paniyas (‘‘ Imperial Gazetteer,” 
XI. : Coorg 28). 


278 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


possibly belong to the Naga race. They are organized in clans 
of two groups, localized in North and South Malabar respectively. * 
The clans of North Malabar are the superior, and the highest clan 
of South Malabar is supposed to correspond to the North Malabar 
clans. ‘‘ The Nayars of North Malabar are held to be superior 
all along the line, clan for clan, to those of South Malabar, which 
is divided from the north by the River Korapuzha, seven miles 
north of Calicut; so that a woman of North Malabar would not 
unite herself to a man of her own clan name of South Malabar.” 
Some clans are divided into two groups; the Vattakad clan of 
South Malabar, for example, is composed of the Veluttatu or 
White division, which is the superior; and the Karuttatu or 
Black division. In another place this clan has two divisions with 
different names; in North Malabar the Akattu Charna clan is 
in two divisions. In addition, each lord in North Malabar 
formerly had two groups of adherents, Purattu Charna, outside 
adherents or fighters, and Akattu Charna, inside adherents or 
clerks and so forth, the first group being the superior. The dual 
organization of the Nair was evidently of a thorough-going nature. 
The country itself had two broad territorial divisions, as in Egypt. 
Each local group was dual, with definite marriage regulations, one 
group being the superior. 

Signs of a dual grouping of society exist elsewhere in South 
India. Among the Todas, for example, ‘“‘ the fundamental 
feature of the social organization is the division of the community 
into two perfectly distinct groups, the Tartharol and the Teivaliol.’’# 
Each of these groups is composed of clans, local exogamous 
groups. Normally each clan is in two groups called Kudr, which 
are of ceremonial importance, but the real significance of this form 
of grouping is now lost. So the dual grouping runs through the 
whole of their society, and is similar to that of the Nair and other 
peoples. It is important to note that the Todas ascribe their dual 
organization to Teikirzi, their great mother goddess,* 

Traces are recorded among other South Indian peoples, such 
as the Urali, Sholaga and Irula,° of what may originally have been 
a dual organization of society, but the evidence, so far as I know, 
is scanty. 

Some tribes of Assam show traces of it. According to Lt.-Col. 
Shakespear, the Ao and Sema Nagas are divided into two large 
clans, Chungli and Mongsin for the Ao, Yepatomi and Zijhumoni 
for the Sema. According to another authority the Sema Naga 
have a culture that is evidently in an advanced stage of degra- 
dation. They have father-right and signs of a former totemic 
system. They probably were once organized on the dual system, 
for some villages have two divisions with distinct chiefs, and in one 
case mention is made of “ an ancient and abiding feud ”’ between 

1 Mateer 388: Fawcett ii. 187-8. 
2 Faweett ii. 188, 189, 203, 218, 3 Rivers 34. 
* Rivers 186. > MGMB IV. 1901. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA 279 


them.! The dual grouping of clans may possibly be connected 
with two brothers with similar names—Chesha and Chishi ; ? 
but the old social organizations has been so broken up that its 
original nature can only be surmised. 

The Mao Naga, who show special associations with the archaic 
civilization in that they are connected with a stone circle and 
other megalithic monuments, are divided into two groups: in 
the Mao village of Liyai (Yemi) live four clans divided into two 
exogamous groups ; the Mao village of Maram has two hereditary 
priests Khullakpa, instead of the customary one, which corre- 
sponds to the two exogamous groups. Other Naga tribes have a 
dual grouping. The Marring are divided into Saibu, the older 
group, consisting of seven clans; and Marring or younger, also 
consisting of seven clans. Likewise the Kabui Naga are divided 
into Songboo and Poeran.* The Chirus have a similar organiza- 
tion. The Tangkhul Naga possess two divisions, Luhupas in 
the north and Tangkhuls in the south.> It might be thought that 
the north and south groupings were accidental and due to local 
circumstances, but the evidence forthcoming from all parts of 
the region will show that such an explanation is untenable. The 
Angami, Ao and Konyak Naga also have dual groupings.® 

The Naga are not the only Assamese peoples with traces of the 
dual organization. The Ahom, of Tai-Shan origin, say that their 
kingdom was founded by Khunlung, Prince-elder, and Khunlai, 
Prince-younger, who came from the sky.’ The Minyong branch 
of the Abor of Upper Assam are divided into two groups, claiming 
descent from two brothers who were Children of the Sun: the 
Dobang branch also have the dual organization.® 

It is noteworthy that the Khasi, who speak an Austronesian 
tongue, possess no apparent signs of the dual organization. It 
is possible that they have lost it, or else the traces that remain 
have not yet been recorded. 

The evidence suggests a former dual organization of society 
throughout the non-Aryan population of India. The claim that 
the peoples of India were grouped in two divisions was made by 
Oppert in his work on “ The Original Inhabitants of India.’’ 
He asserts that the Gaudo-Dravidians, as he prefers to call them, 
were formerly divided into two hostile groups, and that the great 
war of the Mahabharata was the outcome of this hereditary 
division into hostile camps. His theory is that some of the 
Dravidian tribes became intimately associated with the Aryans: 
“I contend that the Bharatas mentioned in the Rigveda, princi- 
pally as the followers of Visvamitra, were warriors of non-Aryan 
origin, who, disconnecting themselves early from their aboriginal 
kindred and gaining access into the Aryan pale, became by their 


1 Hutton i. 121, 125. 2 Id., i. 126. 3 Hodson 73 e.s., 83. 
4 Jd., 75. ON Td.) SA? 

6 Hutton ii. 110, 111, 113, 372, 385. 

? Gait 71, 8 Dunbar 9, 84, 85, 


280 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


superior prowess and influence the representative tribe of the 
Aryan race, as their relatives beyond the pale were the repre- 
sentatives of the aboriginal inhabitants. They were divided into 
two great branches, the Kurus and Pancala-Pandavas, round 
which were grouped the other clans. In a similar manner two 
great tribes, the Gaudians and Dravidians, formed the chief 
component parts of the non-Aryanized Bharatas, who, split up 
in numberless subdivisions, were spread over the whole length 
and breadth of India, and even beyond it, if we include the Uttara- 
kurus and Bahlikas with their immediate kindred who lived in 
the Himalayan mountain range.” + 

Another suggestive piece of general evidence is supplied in the 
case of the division of the population in South India into right- 
hand and left-hand castes. The agricultural castes are on the one 
side, while the mechanical and commercial interests of the country 
are on the other.? ‘‘ This movement seems to have been originally 
confined to Southern India, its centre being at Kancipuram,* 
the seat of so many religious and political dissensions, where 
there are to this day special halls for both parties, called Valankai- 
mantapams and Itankai-mantapams. ... At the time of the 
Bhagavat Ramanujacarya this division into right-hand and left- 
hand castes was already an acknowledged institution, as different 
hours were assigned to right- and left-hand people for entering the 
Gelvapillai temple at Melkota, which place is also called Patita- 
pavanaksetra, i.e. the field where even outcastes can be purified.’’ 4 
This mode of grouping of castes is described in Mysore. ‘“‘ The 
agricultural, artizan, and trading communities form a species of 
guilds called phana (apparently a very ancient institution), and 
these are divided into two factions, termed Balagai (right hand) 
and Yedagai (left hand). The former contains eighteen phana, 
headed by the Bana jiga and Wokkaligo, with the Holeya at the 
bottom ; while the latter contains nine phana, with the Panchala 
and Nagarta (traders) at the head, and the Madiga at the bottom. 
Brahmins, Kshattriyas, and most of the Sudras are considered 
to be neutral. Each party insists on the exclusive right to certain 
privileges on all public festivals and ceremonies, which are 
jealously guarded. A breach on either side leads to faction fights, 
which formerly were of a furious and sometimes sanguinary 
character.” ® ' 

The right- and left-hand caste system suggests the grouping of 
the followers of North Malabar chiefs. The correspondence is 
exact, for in both cases the distinction lies between the agricultural, 
land-owning and military elements on the one hand, and the 
industrial and commercial elements on the other. Thus the 
right- and left-hand castes may simply be the relics of former 
kingdoms, whose ruling classes have disappeared. 

1 Oppert 621-2. 2 Id., 57 e.8., Gl es. 


3 The old Pallava capital (Rea 1). 4 Oppert 61-2. 
° “Imperial Gazetteer,” XVIII. : Mysore 199, 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA 281 


More light is thrown on the early organization of South Indian 
Society by Rivers in his paper on Cross-cousin Marriages. Cross- 
cousin marriages are those in which the children of brother and 
sister are allowed to marry, but not those of two brothers or two 
sisters. This form of marriage probably is derived from the dual 
organization of society as defined in its sociological aspect. Rivers 
defines the dual organization as follows: ‘‘ In the dual organiza- 
tion the whole population consists of two exogamous groups which 
I call moieties, a man of one moiety having to marry a woman of 
the other. Further, in every case where this form of social 
organization is known to exist, descent is in the female line, so 
that a man belongs to the moiety of his mother.”?! A remarkable 
result accrues from this form of social organization. Given that 
the community is so divided with the rule of exogamy, the children 
of two brothers or two sisters will belong to the same moiety, and 
therefore will not be able to marry. But the children of a brother 
and sister will be of opposite moieties, and thus will be eligible for 
marriage. This is what is called the, ‘‘ Cross-cousin ’’ marriage. 
It seems to be found only in cases where the dual organization 
exists or has existed in the past ; but on this point there cannot be 
entire certainty.2. Rivers, however, has found that ‘‘ The kinship 
system of Southern India . . . provided abundant confirmation 
of the general prevalence of the cousin-marriage, and leaves no 
doubt that this form of marriage must at one time have been 
universal in that part of India.’’ He goes on to say, “‘ I have been 
able to find but little similar evidence for Central or Northern 
India,” from which he concludes that the cousin-marriage is a 
Dravidian institution.? Further, in. the dual organization it. is 
obvious that the father of a child under the matrilineal form of 
descent is of the opposite moiety, and that his mother’s brother 
will be of his own moiety. Thus it is found in such cases that the 
mother’s brother is nearer to the child than his father. Rivers 
says: ‘‘A careful examination of the evidence would seem to 
show that the relation between uncle and nephew at marriage 
is especially a feature of Dravidian society.”’ In this way he 
links up the Dravidian society of India with that of Australia. 
“It is a familiar view that the Dravidian population of India is 
related to that of Australia, and recent research is tending to link 
together not only those two peoples but also the ruder tribes of 
the interposed region of Malaysia, such as the Sakais. The 
evidence that I have brought forward in this paper adds another 
similarity to those which are already known to exist between 
these different peoples.” 4 

The existence of an underlying cultural basis for the peoples of 


1 Rivers ix. I. 17. 2 Rivers ii. 319-20. 

8 Rivers iii. 621: Saldanha (3-4) records the cross-cousin marriage in 
Bijapur, Dharwar and Kanara ; and marriage between a girl and her maternal 
uncle’s son in Konkan, Deccan and Gujarat: in Kanara marriage is practised 
between a man and his sister’s daughter. 4 Id., 618-20, 


282 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


India, Burma, the Malay Peninsula, Indonesia, and Australia 
has already been discussed, and it has been claimed that the 
people of the archaic civilization supplied it. The statements of 
Rivers add further support for this conclusion, and tend to show 
that the earliest communities of this vast region based their social 
organization on the dual system. That this probably was so, 
will become clearer as the general argument proceeds. 

The definition of the Dual Organization as given by Rivers 
differs from that adopted in this book. The definition of Rivers 
is perfectly satisfactory when dealing with the dual organization 
of Melanesia; but, as will be seen in the course of the discussion, 
it is somewhat limited. While convinced of the justice of the 
point of view of Rivers, I regard the duality of which he treats as 
the social aspect of a much wider organization which runs through 
the social, political and economic organizations of a people. In 
the political sphere there is the duality of the kingship, and also 
the division of the administrative power between two families, 
allied, yet distinct. In the economic sphere, the country is dual. 
The population in many places is divided into two distinct parts, 
living in different divisions of the territory, and maintaining that 
hostility characteristic of the two lands of Egypt. The sphere 
of mythology comprises the dualism of the Twin Children of the 
Sun, with their distinctive characters and hostility. As fresh 
facts are brought to light, this dualism will be seen to run through 
every department of life, and not merely to be a marriage regula- 
tion. I shall therefore use the term in that wider sense, without 
in any way wishing to violate its original meaning. 

If the evidence for the former existence of the dual organization 
in India be summed up, it is possible to reconstruct an organiza- 
tion similar to that of Egypt. The kingship, as shown by the 
extracts from the Mahabharata and the Puranas, was dual in 
its early stages : the country was in two parts, one of which was 
superior to the other, each local group of the larger unit was 
divided into moieties, and the followers of any ruler were in two 
groups. The idea of twin kings is also present in literature, these 
kings being hostile to one another. It is true that these details 
are not typical of any one community, but the cultural similar- 
ities already found to exist between the various tribes of the 
Dravidian group make it possible to claim that they probably 
describe roughly the original state of Dravidian society. 

The case can be put still more clearly. As has been stated, 
many of the ruling families of Dravidian India were connected 
with the cult of the Naga: they were the Naga people, and, in 
dealing with Dravidian India, it is impossible to ignore the impor- 
tance of this great race. Naga families have ruled in many parts 
of the country, notably Chota Nagpur, South India, Assam, and 
Burma, and from them several peoples claim descent, among them 
the Nagas of Assam, the rulers of Pegu in Burma, the Gonds, 
Khonds, the rulers of Nagpur and several ruling houses in South 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—EGYPT AND INDIA — 283 


India such as the Nayars or Nairs. When therefore it is remem- 
bered that a group of peoples with traces of a dual organization 
in their culture, all claim an ultimate relationship with a single 
group of rulers, it is probable that their dual characteristics are 
but the remains of the original form of society. From beginning 
to end the Nagas are connected with the dual grouping; the 
Naga dragon women give birth to twins, hostile to one another ; 
peoples claiming descent from them are divided into two parts ; 
one superior to the other ; and the whole society shows a thorough- 
going duality. It is therefore possible to claim that one element 
at least of the ruling family of ancient India possessed the dual 
organization, and that this mode of grouping has in places sur- 
vived the great spread of Brahminic influence. 

The analysis of ancient India society can go still farther, and 
deal with the quarrel between the Aryans and Asuras, the origins 
of the Vishnu and Shiva sects, the relationship between Indra and 
Agni, Kshatriyas and Brahmins, and other apparently dual 
elements of culture. But the time is not ripe for that task. The 
cultural skeletons of India will best be reconstituted when the 
living organisms of other peoples have been studied in detail. 

The study of the dual organization of the Polynesian race can 
begin with India, and thence to America on practically every 
pearl-bed will be found traces of this form of society. The pearl- 
fishing Parava caste of Southern India comprises people of Poly- 
nesian types, who are probably remnants in India of that great 
race (see p. 105). They are allied to the Pariahs, the Pulayars 
and the Pallas, and form part of the great right- and left-hand 
caste grouping that has already been mentioned. Before launch- 
ing out into the Pacific the case of the Pariahs deserves notice. 
They have two great divisions, east and west ; the eastern Pariahs 
claim that they were the slaves of Suyodhana and his brother 
Kuruvas, while the western division were the slaves of the Panda- 
vas in the war of the Mahabharata. The defeat of the Kuruvas 
caused the western division to be the superior.1_ Their traditions 
thus couple them with the great ruling houses of the past. 

This claim has an important bearing on the problem of con- 
tinuity. For in Chapter VIII it was seen that several peoples, 
low in the cultural stage, claimed to be the remains of former 
highly civilized communities. It is evident from the Pariah 
traditions that this claim is capable of rational interpretation. 
It may sometimes merely imply that they were the lower orders 
of dual communities. It is possible to interpret the whole of the 
right- and left-hand caste system in this way, and thus to avoid 
the difficulty of accounting for the apparent great drop in culture. 
For it can be assumed that the Pariahs and other tribes, who 
belong to the right- and left-hand caste system, were never more 
than labourers, craftsmen, and so forth, who have maintained 
through the ages about the same level of culture. Thus, although 

1 Mateer 38-9. Cf. 35 for other signs of duality. 


284 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the Paravas are people of Polynesian type, it does not follow that 
they ever possessed the culture of the archaic civilization in its 
highest degree. They are pearl-divers, and presumably always 
have followed that occupation. Of stone-work, irrigation and 
metal-working they may never have known much. 

The Paravas are mentioned in old chronicles in connexion with 
dual settlements: “ Vidanarayanam Cheddi and the Parava 
men who fished for pearls by paying tribute to Alliyarasani, 
daughter of Pandya, king of Madura, who went on a voyage, 
experienced bad weather in the sea, and were driven to the shores 
of Lanka, where they founded Karainerkai and Kutiraimalai. 
Vidanarayanam Cheddi had the treasures of his ship stored there 
by the Paravas, established pearl fisheries at Kadalihilapam and 
Kallachihilapam, and introduced the trees which change iron 
into gold.’?} The similarity in the names of the two pearl 
fisheries suggests a dual grouping of society. 


1 Thurston i. 123, 


CHAPTER XIX 


THE DUAL ORGANIZATION: INDONESIA 
AND OCEANIA 


REVIOUS chapters have revealed but few traces of the 
Pp archaic civilization among the existing tribes of Indonesia. 
The making of polished stone implements, the building of 
megalithic monuments, are mostly things of the past. Such 
cultural elements as mother-right, human sacrifice and the sun- 
cult only survive in fragments, so also traces of the dual organiza- 
tion are not plentiful. 

The Sakai of Sumatra are said to be divided into two groups 
distinct from one another for purposes of marriage.1 They 
speak an Austronesian language, and thus presumably have been 
influenced by the archaic civilization. 

Although the introduction of Hinduism and Islam into South 
Celebes has obscured the old form of religion, yet the social and 
political organization retains enough of its former shape to show 
that it was once dual innature. This is the case with the Bugi and 
Macassar states.2. The best instance known to me is that of Gowa, 
the chief Macassar state. Gowa and Tallo formed, in bygone days, 
a dual state, ‘‘ one folk under two rulers,’”’ ? which is said to have 
resulted from an alliance. In this dual realm the ruler of Tallo 
acted as vizier for him of Gowa,® a form of government utterly 
unlike those of the Hindu or Mohammedan states of Indonesia, 
as is evident from the following quotation from Prof. van den 
Berg: “In the Malay states the heir to the throne is usually, 
after attaining his majority, the vizier (Rijksbestuurder), and 
bears the title attached to the office. . . . In the Macassar and 
Bugi states the functions of heir to the throne and vizier are 
usually distinct, the first plays but little part in the government, 
but sometimes acts as substitute for the ruler.”” The state of 
Macassar, that is, of Gowa and Tallo, therefore possessed a 


1 Moszkowski 708. Cf. p. 281, where Rivers states that the Sakai of the 
Malay Peninsula practise the cross-cousin marriage. 

2 I speak without knowledge of the Adatsrechtsbundel, which, like so 
much Dutch literature, is inaccessible to me at present. See Sketch Map 
No. 8 for this region. 

3 Eerdmans 66. * Erkelens 82. 

5 Kerdmans 41: Tidemans 353: Indonesia I. 324. § Berg 35-6. 


285 


286 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


remarkable constitution, utterly unfamiliar to us, and strangely 
like that of Egypt in the later Pyramid Age, a form of constitution 
that did not persist in Indonesia, for it is not found among the 
Malay States or those founded by the Hindus. 

The duality in the constitution was apparent in the case of the 
principal offices. Below the vizier were two officials, Toemailalang 
matowa, the elder Toemailalang, and Toemailalang malolo, the 
younger Toemailalang,! who were in a position of intimate 
relationship to the ruler, and acted as intermediaries between him 
and his council, of which more will be said inChapter XXI. The 
state also possessed two heads of the army, who were princes of 
the blood.2 It also had two harbour-masters, Sabanna-matowa 
and Sabanna-malolo, who looked after shipping, who also were 
royal princes. Corresponding to the dual institutions of Gowa 
and Tallo is the story that the first mortal king of Gowa had two 
sons, Batara Gowa and Karaeng lowe ri Tallo, who became the 
rulers of Gowa and Tallo, and founded the ruling houses of these 
realms.* Another form of duality exists in connexion with these 
rulers, in that they were descended from marriages between 
denizens of the sky and the underworld, a matter that will receive 
attention in Chapter XXIII. 

The constitutions of all Bugi states are so similar that the old 
form of government can be reconstructed from different sources.°® 
Formerly Bugi states had an important official, corresponding 
to the vizier (Pabitjaraboetta) of Gowa (Macassar), called Man- 
darang in Boni, and Makadangana-tanae in Luwu.*® This post 
no longer exists. In Boni the founder of the ruling house came 
from the sky and married a woman from the sky. His son reigned 
after him, but, since he married no wife of royal blood, it became 
necessary for his sister’s son to succeed him. But he had two 
sons by a woman of low rank, and these sons acted as Makadan- 
gang and Tomarilalang for his nephew when he became king ; 
that is, they filled the two most important offices in the state.’ 
This tale shows that the title of Makadangang formerly existed. 
The chief official in Bugi states is now the Tomarilalang, the 
office usually being single, if it is not extinct.® The office of 
harbour-master in Bugi states is now single,®) andjsometimes is 
extinct. The office of war chief usually has only one incumbent.” 
The universal tendency, therefore, is for the old dual offices to 
become merged into one, or else to disappear, which is natural 
under Mohammedan and other alien influence. 

An intensive study of the old political and social constitution 
of the Bugi and Macassar states would doubtless reveal many 
traces of a former dual organization. In Boni, for instance, it is 


1 Eerdmans 46, 67. 2 Id., 46. 

3 Id., 46. 4 Erkelens 81. 

5 Bakkers i. 251. 6 Herdmans 65. 

? Bakkers iv. 174. 8 Id., 69, 70: Matthes 146. 
9 


Bakkers iv. 97. 10 Matthes 147. 


S amaNnaToEN 


CELEBES AND NEIGHBOURHOOD 


’ 
r 
es 
. 
, 
} 
k 
' 
- 
‘ 
rs 
‘ 
; 
+ 
> 
) 
c , 
| 
og is 
i“ 
- 
a 
Vy 
7 + 
el 


pant 
‘2! 
. 
"hash 
L } 
\ =) 
rey 
, 
; ye 
iy 2 
“ 
« 
‘ 
; : 
y er 
Or ae 
Law 
« . 
yd 
| 
~ 
va 
. = 
D 
’ 
ek ae 
> 
as 
+ 
- ( 
z : Wide 
Vl Ons, . 
+ i 
o 
4 < 
‘ ar 
* ¥ 
i 3 ee r 
1 ‘ , 
, ty 7 ‘3 
Py . id 
i yg 2 ' 
é 
Pa * wt 
A it .* ‘ (et. 3 * 
4 . . . 
, y 
f F . : 
~ Sle ppt te gabemgaphe lyin «5m hin and een set a mtn nd el apn ip amma pt at 
‘ 
‘ A 
| ce b a ante 
‘ere era kL ite vat vi 
: 
Ny “ ‘Wolk :7 
Fs | ~+ ¥ ‘ 
‘ 
¥ 4 - 
— v4 7 
hi - 
. } 4 
bee 2 ‘ Me tine 
‘ » ' 
* . 
. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 287 


said that the first ruler had a flag, a universal custom in those 
states. When he had organized the constitution he caused two 
red flags to be made, called ‘“‘ the red flag on the right-hand side,” 
and “‘ the red flag on the left-hand side,’’ which suggests a dual 
grouping of his followers. In those days the office of vizier 
(Makadangang) existed; but signs are lacking, so far as I know, 
of a former dual grouping of states in Boni, which would corre- 
spond to that of Gowa and Tallo, although this story of the two 
flags and of the office of vizier suggests that formerly Boni, and 
subsequently other Bugi states, were organized like that of 
Macassar. The constitution of the Mandar states of the west 
coast of South Celebes indicates a dual organization of society. 
Their rulers are of Bugi stock. The lesser chiefs of Madjene, one 
of these states, who form the council, are divided into two distinct 
groups, each with a head, and over the whole state rules a single 
chief. 2 

Kolaka, a state in Southern Celebes, founded by two brothers 
from the sky-world, who are, according to Kruyt, identical with 
Sawerigading, the great hero of the Bugi peoples, is divided into 
two parts ; the elder brother settled in Kandari, and the younger 
at Mekonga, on the Gulf of Boni.* The distinction of “ elder ”’ 
and “younger” as applied to rulers and founders of states is 
familiar wherever dual institutions exist. The To Seko in 
Central Celebes are divided into two groups, the To Seko and the 
To Seko Pada, the latter being the younger. Each division of 
the tribe consists of two villages ; those of the To Seko claim once 
to have lived together, and the To Seko Pada say that they 
migrated from the To Seko. The process suggests the successive 
fissions of one original community.4 Farther south, the rulers 
of Bonerate came from Boeton, and, originally, it is presumed, 
were of Bugi or Macassar stock, for they claim the great Saweri- 
gading as ancestor. The first settlements were made by two 
women, Opoe Rongga and Opoe Djongga, who founded Lagoendi 
and Bonerate.° The Bugi rulers say that they originated at 
Wadyjo in South Celebes. I much regret not being able to see the 
work of Matthes on this district ; for he says that each state of the 
Wadjo confederacy has two chiefs, one for peace and the other 
for war.® 

Further investigation will probably reveal links between the 
ruling groups of the great region comprising Celebes, the islands 
west and east of Timor, and the Moluccas. It seems certain that 
the Sultanate of Bima, which comprises parts of Flores and the 
neighbouring islands, was formerly in close association with 
South Celebes ; and it is further possible that it was responsible 
for an invasion of Sumba, which gave that island some of its 
present ruling groups. Be that as it may, the states of the east 


1 Bakkers iv. 176. ® Mandhar 661, 690. 
3 Kruyt viii. 692. 4 Id., vi. 398. 
° Kriebel 208. 6 Berg 68. 


288 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


and central parts of Sumba are sometimes founded on a dual 
basis. ‘‘In the states of Central and East Sumba there are 
generally two power-holding groups, one of which is the possessor 
of the relics of the ancestor, the Marapoe, while the other chiefly 
house controls the administration. Wielenga gives an example of 
this in the royal house of Malolo. There the radja of Watoe 
Pelitoce (a division of the Walolo district) is the ‘lesser’ or 
‘younger,’ and the radja of Palai Malamba (another division) 
is the ‘greater’ or ‘elder.’ The sacred chief, the guardian 
of the relics, is the superior, or ‘ elder’ chief of the state.’ This 
suggests that formerly, in Celebes, the chieftainship was divided 
between the sacred and civil functions, the sacred chief being the 
superior, and his vizier belonging to the other ruling group. This 
arrangement persists in Wadjo, as has been seen. No more 
information is given with regard to the constitution of the state 
in Central and Eastern Sumba, much as it is needed ; but some is 
forthcoming from West Sumba. This part of the island is more 
closely connected with the archaic civilization than the others, 
for it possesses more megalithic monuments, more irrigation and 
soon. ‘“‘Itis a peculiarity of the districts of the west, that they 
are all divided into two parts, of which one is looked upon as the 
elder, and the other as the younger. So we have in Louli: Louli 
data and Louli wawa, which is nothing more than ‘ Louli above ’ 
and ‘Louli beneath.’ The district of Lamboja consists of 
Lamboja and Patijala; Wajewa of Baliomba or Lewata and 
Bali loko; the first-named part must be the older, and conse- 
quently it is said to own the land. In Loura they speak of Mar- 
adana the plain and Latana the mountains. Kodi has the 
divisions of Kodi bokoel and Kodi bengedo. This division of 
the community is, so far as is known, only territorial and has no 
social significance.”? + The last comment of Kruyt shows that 
the old form of society has almost disappeared, which is under- 
standable when it is realized that at least one invasion must have 
swept over the country in the past, that which gave rise to the 
ruling houses of the centre and eastern parts. Evidently the old 
order has passed and left behind it simply a small amount of 
wreckage. Doubtless further investigation will reveal more facts. 

The accounts, now being published so rapidly by Heer Kruyt, 
of the various places in Indonesia lately visited by him, are bring- 
ing to light many new facts. Not only has he found the dual 
organization in Sumba, but in Timor his published account shows 
that the signs of the dual organization are still more plentiful. 
This is only to be expected ; for in the past there ruled Children 
of the Sun, who were mummified after death, and otherwise 
differed culturally from their subjects. At the present day two 
districts on the south coast show signs of being dual: they are 
called Amanoeban and Amanatoen, names strikingly similar. 
The people are of the same origin and speak the same language, 

1 Kruyt vii. 538. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 289 


and it is said that they must have come from Mollo, a neighbouring 
district. The ruling houses are nearly related and were founded 
by strangers. The accounts of their origin differ somewhat ; 
one says that two brothers came from a place called Banam, and 
brought with them some soil which they placed under a stone. 
The younger became chief, and ruled Amanoeban under the name 
of Noebatonis, while the elder is said to have been an ordinary 
noble, and to have ruled the “ sister-district ’’ of Amanatoen. 
This suggests that Amanoeban was the superior district, and that 
its chief took precedence over the chief of Amanatoen.! The 
other account states that a stranger landed on the coast of 
Amanatoen and married the two daughters of the ruler, who only 
had the rank of noble. A second stranger, who was found sitting 
between two stones under a lontar-palm, married the daughter 
of the first arrival, and ruled over Amanoeban. The two families 
are closely related, so that members of each attend funerals of 
the other.2 Not only are the ruling houses of these two districts 
nearly connected, but in Amanoeban the ruling power is evidently 
divided between two related families. A sister of a former ruler 
of this district, who went to dwell at a place called Pene, had 
descendants called “‘ Lords (descended) from the sister.” The 
descendants of the ruler who lived at Niki-niki were called ‘‘ Lords 
(descended) from the man, or brother.’’ The ruler of Niki-niki 
must have as his chief wife a woman from the ruling family of 
Pene. 

The extinct kingdom of Sonabait, in Timor, ruled over by 
Children of the Sun, seems to have been divided into “ greater ”’ 
and ‘“‘ smaller” parts. The founder of the ruling house was the 
brother of the founder of the ruling house of Belu, according to 
one account. Also it is said that the rulers of the two chief 
districts of Sonabait were two brothers.* Several accounts have 
been given of the dual organization of the Moluccas, but none of 
them supply many details. It has long been known that, in 
Halmahera, Seran, the Kei and Aru groups, and probably else- 
where in this region, society is divided into two parts. These 
divisions, which are hostile to one another, have names, such as 
Ursiwa and Urlima ; Ulisiwa and Ulilima ; Patasiwa and Patalima ; 
in Halmahera the distinction is between Galela and Tobelo peoples. 
These groups are under the suzerainty of the Sultans of Ternate 
and Tidore. 

The Ursiwa-Ulisiwa-Patasiwa group is connected with the 
seaward part of the islands, and the other group with the inland 
part. Their founders brought with them the use of stone to the 
islands ; in one instance they have actually transported across 
the sea a large stone that is used for ceremonial purposes ; in 
Seran these groups are connected with the sun-cult, and one is 
higher in rank than the other, forming a kind of aristocracy ; the 

1 Kruyt ix. 792, 793, 796. 2 Id., 796-7. 
3 Id., 777, 779, 780, 790. 
19 


290 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


members of this group, who possess a sun-cult, go to the sky after 
death, while the others go elsewhere.? 

Traces of a dual grouping exist among the Tobelo and Galela 
people of Halmahera. They are supposed originally to have 
formed one group ;? for in the account of their arrival on the island 
of Halmahera, it is said that they were under one chief.* Hostility 
broke out between the Galela and Tobelo people on account of 
two gongs that the Tobelo people brought with them, so they 
thus possess another constant feature of the dual organization. 
The Galela people are divided into two groups.4 The Tobelo are 
divided into four clans, the two most important being the Lina 
and the Gura, between which hostility has existed from time 
immemorial. The two other clans are but of small importance. 
The Tobelo and the Tobaru are also hereditary enemies,® but I 
have no further evidence concerning them. 

The evidence from Halmahera therefore suggests that the dual 
organization of society, characterized by the Patasiwaand Pata- 
lima, is widespread and fundamental. It is unfortunate that no 
detailed study has been made of this duality of society in Indonesia, 
or elsewhere for that matter; for it is immensely important for 
the proper understanding of the early history of the Polynesians. 
The district of the Moluccas contains peoples of Polynesian type, 
and stone circles are reported in Halmahera. It is therefore 
probable that the Moluccas, in addition to South Celebes, and the 
islands near by, were inhabited by the Polynesians on their way 
to the Pacific ; so the study of these regions will help to elucidate 
the history of that race. The regions of South Celebes and the 
Moluccas are notable for their pearl-fisheries, and thus are emin- 
ently suitable as stepping-stones for the ancestors of the Poly- 
nesians. In addition, the gold and copper regions of Timor are 
characterized by the dual organization.. The only place that 
causes difficulty is Sumba, which does not seem to possess materials 
to attract strangers, and judgment must be deferred about that 
island. It will be found, however, as the survey works across the 
Pacific, that the places characterized by the dual organization 
are usually those noteworthy for their stores of pearls. 

The close relationship between the culture of Micronesia and 
the archaic civilization raises the expectation that, if the dual 
organization formed part of the old order, it would there have 
left its mark. Although the Children of the Sun have disappeared 
and but little has been recorded about this most important region, 
yet enough is known to make it certain that the dual organization 
was once paramount. In tradition Ponape exhibits signs of 
duality, for two brothers, Olo-sipa and Olo-sopa, are mentioned 
as the builders of the great ruins of Nanmatal.’? The ruling 
power of Ponape is shared by two families. The king is a sacred 

Perry vii. 46, 114, 115, 143. * Hueting 225. 3 Id., 224. 

4 Id., 225. 5 Td., 220-1. 

© Id., 231. * Rivers x. 441. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 291 


priest-king, who alone knows certain secrets associated with sacred 
stones, upon which he sits during ceremonies. On the other 
hand, the nobility is associated with the civil function ; its head, 
although he can never be king, holds much power in his hands, 
while the king has practically none. The family of the king and 
the nobility form two intermarrying groups.? 

The villages of Yap are divided into two parts, north and south, 
and’ sometimes these parts have separate names.? The villages 
éach have a village chief, who does not go out to fight, but is 
concerned with the civil administration, and a war chief, who has 
complete charge of the fighters. Moreover, the people are divided 
into two groups, hostile to each other, between which fighting 
takes place. Sometimes a village consists of members of one 
eroup only, but in other cases both are present in the same place.* 
Other signs exist of a dual organization. ‘“‘ In Yap are two great 
wizards, the head of all the magicians (Uleg-uleg, or Machmach) 
in the island, both well on in years, who support’ their dignity 
under very strict conditions indeed. With them truly it is a 
case of Sagesse if not noblesse oblige. They are only allowed 
to eat fruits from plants or trees specially grown for them. 
They may not smoke tobacco, but, subject to the condition above- 
mentioned, may enjoy a quid of betel-nut, the chewed-up remains 
being reverently collected after them, borne away, and burnt in a 
special manner, for fear of any ill-disposed person getting posses- 
sion of the rubbish and doing mischief by uttering a curse over it, 
a superstition like that of the Nahak in the Melanesian area. When 
one of them goes abroad the other stops at home, for were the 
two to meet one another on the road the natives hold that some 
dreadful calamity would surely follow. There are plenty of 
lesser degree Machmach men, who go about always with divers 
errands in hand, such as recovering missing property, divination, 
and the like, but all grave and important questions come up 
before the Mighty Two.” ® 

Much more is known of the social and political organization 
of the Pelews. The work of Kubary has already revealed the 
importance of the matriarchate in that group. This author has 
also described other aspects of the sociology in much detail. He 
says that the foundation of Pelew society is the matrilineal clan. 
It was possible for a-clan to bifurcate, for it is said that the descend- 
ants of two sisters might constitute themselves two distinct groups 
and thereafter look upon one another with hostility.° Villages 
comprise groups of clans, and form independent political units.’ 
The constituent clans of the village differ in rank and are 
grouped round the two principal clans. To this political grouping 
corresponds a territorial grouping; for the land is divided into 
two halves, just as happens in the case of the clans themselves. 

1 Hahl 5 e.s, 2 Miller 169. 3 Id., 242-3. 
4 Id., 234. 5 Christian iv. 289-90. 8 Kubary 46. 
* Id., 33 e.s8. 


292 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Formerly it was customary for two clans to unite in a relationship 
of reciprocal helpfulness, but this custom has died out.1 Hach 
village possesses other dual features. Two landing-places are 
provided, one for each half of the village, and between them is 
astonedam. The people strive to maintain the equality as far as 
possible between the two sides of the village, in clan-houses, and 
so forth. This division of villages is even observed in small 
places, where there is only one landing-place and often no dam. 
Hostility exists between the two sides, which on certain ceremonial 
occasions comport themselves as two strange houses.?. The head 
chief of the village, who comes of the first clan, lives on one side 
of the village, and his successor on the other.? The society of the 
Pelews thus has a basis of thorough-going duality. 

In British New Guinea the dual organization exists in places 
possessing traces of the archaic civilization. ‘‘ In some parts of 
the Massim district, e.g. Milne Bay and Bartle Bay, there is a 
dual or multiple grouping of the clans. Where this occurs, not 
only should no one marry into his or her own clan, but no one 
might take a mate from his or her own clan-group. ... But 
with the extinction of warfare and cannibal feasts within the 
last few years the dual grouping has so fallen into decay as to be 
largely ignored.’’* Bartle Bay possesses stone circles, matrilineal 
institutions, and other signs of the influence of the archaic civili- 
zation. In Gelaria of Bartle Bay the community is divided into 
two exogamous parts, Garuboi and Elewa, the Elewa division 
being subdivided into Giriwoa and Elewa. The people ascribe 
this division into clans to the great garuboi snake that lived on 
one of the twin peaks, Viara and Gaova, of a mountain near by.® 
In Wagawaga a like grouping of clans exists, Garuboi and Modewa : 
in this case the Modewa group has subdivided into Modewa and 
Hurana. | 

It is unfortunate that the study of the dual organization was 
not pushed farther by Prof. Seligman, but he had not time to 
finish the investigation. In his work on “The Melanesians of 
British New Guinea,”’ he gives an excellent account of the history 
of certain groups of peoples, which affords the clearest idea, 
outside Egypt, Samoa, the Pelews, and, perhaps, South Celebes, 
of the real meaning of the dual organization. The tribes of the 
Central District, the Motu, Koita, Sinaugolo, and so forth have 
their clans divided into right and left halves. Of these peoples 
presumably the Sinaugolo were the most important, the Koita, 
for example, having derived certain cultural elements from 
them.’ Little is said of the Sinaugolo, but enough to excite 
curiosity. Their clans are divided into two exogamous divisions 
which occupy either side of the village street, these divisions being 
right and left hand. Each division has two big corner posts 
; 1 Kubary 69-70. 2 Id., 86-8, 99: A. Kramer ii. 4. 


8 Kubary 86-8. * Seligman i. 10. 5 Id., 438. 
§ Id., 435. ? Id.,i. 17 @8. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 298 


and the big carved horizontal beam on one side of the council- 
house. The Elema Papuan tribes of the Papuan Gulf have 
club-houses divided into right- and left-hand sides. Men eat and 
sleep on their side of the house, and exogamy is practised between 
the sides. The chief of the right is especially the chief of the 
men’s house, and takes precedence over the chief of the left.1 

The Koita, who seem to have derived some of their institutions 
from the Sinaugolo, have a tale of origin from two brothers, 
Kirimaikulu and Kirimaikape, and a female dog.2 As a whole 
the tribe seems to be divided into two hostile sections, for Prof. 
Seligman has tabulated a list of villages that live in a state of 
chronic hostility. He says: “It is obvious that a line joining 
the island Lolorua to Pyramid Hill divided the Koita settlements 
into eastern and western moieties, which correspond geographi- 
cally as closely as possible with the distribution of the sections at 
enmity. Although nothing was said by my informants to show 
that they recognized such a local grouping, the enmity between 
eastern and western sections was so constant that I have found 
it convenient to regard the Koita as consisting of eastern and 
western moieties.”’ The Koita are divided into clans, each with 
its club-house, over which was a hereditary clan chief. One 
particular chief of each section of the Koita was looked upon as 
the head of that section, and this office was usually hereditary in 
one clan. The clan chief owns the right-hand front post of the 
elub-house, while a sub-chief owns the left-hand post.2 The 
Roro-speaking group does not seem to be divided into two 
divisions : nevertheless, one section of them, the Kevori tribe, 
has two groups of settlements, coastal and inland, but nothing 
is said about the significance of this grouping. Roro villages 
consist of two parallel rows of houses,* and appear to be in two 
divisions, right and left hand, each with its own side in the club- 
house. Each side is ruled over by a chief, the chief of the right 
and chief of the left, so called from their positions in the club- 
house on ceremonial occasions. The chief of the right was the 
more important. He had the power to stop fights, and thus was 
a peace chief.° Sometimes the chief of the left was a war chief. 

In the tribes just mentioned, therefore, a division runs through 
the community. The tribe consists of two groups, and each village 
or clan is divided into two distinct parts, one of which is superior 
to the other. The chief of the superior part is concerned with 
peace, and the chief of the other part with war. The institutions 
of these peoples are in a condition of degradation, for many of 
the club-houses have fallen into disuse. 

Prof. Seligman studied one group of tribes, the Mekeo group, 
with such thoroughness that it is possible, from their history, 
provisionally to reconstruct that of the others. The Mekeo group 


1 Td., 28, n. 1. 2 Id., 43. 3 Id., 42, 52, 54, 56. 
* Id., 198, 199. 5 Id., 216-17. 


294 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


consists of two tribes, Biofa and Vee, “‘ who speak a common 
language and who, in spite of chronic warfare, have long inter- 
married and have even formed colonies in each other’s villages.”’ 4 
They thus form one community, with two divisions. The original 
settlements of these tribes respectively were Ioiovina and Ioio- 
faopo, names strangely alike, as are the names of other dual 
settlements. These original settlements were divided into two 
exogamous groups. Each clan group is also divided, if large 
enough, into two divisions, each with a chief, the more important 
performing the functions of sacred chief, and the other that of 
war-chief.?_ From top to bottom, therefore, the social and political 
constitution of this group is dual. 

In Torres Straits dual institutions exist in both island groups : 
they are more important in the western group, but were dis- 
appearing on the arrival of the Cambridge Expedition in 1898. 
The island communities are divided into two sections, and in one 
case at least these moieties are hostile.? Some of the culture- 
heroes of the western group were dual ; for instance, garden plants 
and death dances were introduced by two men. Even single 
culture-heroes have dual characteristics, as is shown in the case 
of Kwoiam, the culture-hero of Mabuiag, who made two crescentic 
ornaments of turtle-shell that blazed with light when he wore 
them at night-time. These became the insignia of the two groups 
of the island. Associated with his cult were two heaps of shells, 
called ‘‘ navels of the augud,’’ which word means the totem of a 
clan, which lay in the place where the moieties were supposed to 
have originated.* 

In the eastern islands the dual grouping is apparently only of 
a ceremonial nature.® In Murray Island tales are told of Bomai 
and Malu, Bomai being the mother’s brother of Malu, and thus 
bearing to him a relationship which is important in the dual 
organization with matrilineal descent. These men brought 
the dual grouping from Tuger on the mainland of New Guinea. 
The people of Mer, with the exception of some later immigrants, 
are grouped into two divisions, which have ceremonial significance, 
and are connected with the cult of Bomai and Malu, but it is 
doubtful whether these groups have any social significance.’ 

The advanced cultural degradation of Torres Straits peoples 
makes it difficult to understand the past form of society ; neverthe- 
less, the islands presumably in the past possessed dual institutions, 
Dr. Haddon and Dr. Rivers think that the culture-heroes arrived 
after the dual grouping had been set up.’ Be that as it may, 
they certainly are connected now with the dual organization. 

In Melanesia the dual organization is associated with the com- 
munities that stand in closest relationship to the archaic civili- 


1 Seligman i. 311. 2 Id., 336 6.8. 
3 Torres Straits Report V. 172 e.s. 4 Id., V. 183-4. 
5 Id., VI. 169 es. 6 Id., VI. 282. 


? Id., VI. 169, 172, 173, 178, 281. 8 Id., VI. 172, 179. 


% 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND. OCEANIA 295 


zation. Codrington states that, in this region, “‘ nothing seems 
more fundamental than the division of the people into two or 
more classes, which are exogamous, and in which descent is 
counted through the mother.’’! In the Banks Islands, and the 
Northern New Hebrides, he says, the community consists of two 
divisions, in the Solomons of more than two. Rivers tells of the 
former existence of the dual organization from the Solomons to 
the Northern New Hebrides and thence to Fiji.2 He _ believes, 
with Codrington, that the dual organization “‘ is the earliest of the 
forms of social structure found in Melanesia,” and that probably 
it was once universal in Melanesia.* I do not propose to go into 
its exact distribution, but to say that all the available evidence 
goes to show that it was the earliest form of social organization 
in Melanesia. The later immigrations have been organized other- 
wise ; for Codrington states with regard to the dual organization : 
‘ There is, however, one very remarkable exception to this general 
rule in the Solomon Islands ; it is not to be found in Ulawa, Ugi, 
and parts of San Cristoval, Malaita, and Guadalcanar, a district 
in which the languages also form a group by themselves, and in 
which a difference in the decorative art of the people, and in the 
appearance of the people themselves, thoroughly Melanesian as 
they are, can hardly escape notice. In this region, the boundaries 
of which are at present unknown, there is no division of the people 
into kindreds as elsewhere, and descent follows the father. This 
is so strange that to myself it seemed for a time incredible, and 
nothing but the repeated declarations of a native who is well 
acquainted with the division which prevails in other groups of 
islands was sufficient to fix it with me as an ascertained fact.” # 
The work of Rivers has shown that the people with this social 
structure, that caused such astonishment to Dr. Codrington, 
were later comers. 

‘The dual organization throughout Melanesia displays certain 
notable similarities. In the Gazelle Peninsula the moieties are 
named after To Kambinana and To Kovuvuru.® To Kambinana 
is said to be clever and full of guile, while To Kovuvuru is said 
to be stupid and ignorant. Corresponding personages are spoken 
of in New Ireland and Duke of York Island. The moieties in 
the Gazelle Peninsula are said to be descended from two women, 
one light and the other dark, and to be associated with the dark 
and the light coco-nut.?. In the Solomons the Rev. C. Fox has 
lately described the social organization of San Cristoval, and 
has made discoveries that promise to throw much light upon the 
history of Melanesia. He states that the earliest form of social 
organization, after that of the legendary food-gatherers, was the 


1 Codrington 21. 2 Rivers II. 73. 3 Id., II. 16, 83. 

* Codrington 22. 5 Rivers ix. IT. 501. 

§ Rivers ix. II. 503-4. To Kambinana made everything good and useful, 
including plants and animals, and was the founder of every art and trade 
(S. Danks 452), ? Rivers ix. II. 560. 


296 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


dual grouping. In Bauro, for example, the social organization 
is that of moieties. “The real division of society in Bauro is 
into Atawa and Amwea. ... In the bush villages... 
especially in the centre of the island, I have so far never found 
any clan except Atawa and Amwea, which are always present, 
while on the coast the other clans are frequently called divisions 
of these two. ... In all cases Atawa and Amwea are present, 
and in the central main mass of the island in the interior, usually, 
at least, only these two are present. . . . I would say emphatically 
that the social atmosphere of Nauro is that of a dual community. 
Atawa and Amwea are the only divisions of importance in native 
estimation; they are the real basis of society.” These two 
moieties are hostile and formerly had regular fights. The Atawa 
are looked upon as being the superior, and are “‘ bitter,’’ gentle, 
cleverer, talkative and fair in appearance: the Amwea are silent, 
morose, fierce fighters, and dark in complexion. Villages were 
once divided between them, as now on Santa Anna, where the 
moieties live on either side of the centre path. Mr. Fox states 
that no clans have such a body of tradition of hostility, and of 
opposition in character and physical appearance, or in status in 
society as the moieties. ‘‘ Their distribution all over the island, 
and their identification with different clans at different places, 
seem to point them out as the original and older people.” Tra- 
dition connects them with the light and dark coco-nut.} 

In the Banks Islands the moieties bear different characters. 
On Mota they are called Tatalai and Takwong: the Tatalai are 
well versed in social lore and are peaceful; the Takwong are 
ignorant, unimportant and quarrelsome.? The dual grouping 
exists in Tanna of the New Hebrides: the community has two 
great divisions, largely geographical ; the Numrikuenimin live in 
the south and east; while the Kauyameramin live in the north 
and west. The latter group use red paint for their faces, but the 
others do not.2 When these two divisions go to war there is 
cannibalism, but not otherwise.* Apparently the real hostility 
in the island is between these two groups. 

The work of Mr. Hocart is gradually revealing the former 
condition of society in Fiji. He shows that the older stratum of 
the population had the dual organization in most of its typical 
forms. For instance, the Fijians formerly had the dual chief- 
tainship : ‘‘ Our reasons for believing this are that the dual chief- 
tainship exists in Tonga and Rotuma; it is common among the 
coastal High Fijians, in the Rewa delta it is the rule; but as we 
ascend that river it disappears suddenly and completely. It 
cannot have been introduced by the hill tribes, since they have not 
got it; they can only have caused its disappearance among the 
coastal tribes that have not gotitnow. For instance, in legendary 
times we hear of a Tui Lakemba; in historical times the chief of 


1 Fox 122, 123, 124, 125, 160. 2 Rivers ix. I. 22. 
5 Gray 648, * Id., 649. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 297 


Lakemba bears the title of Sau. The suggestion is that originally 
there were both a Tui and a Sau; the Tui went over to Tonga, 
as we know, and only the Sau remained. The dual tradition, 
however, is still strong, and I have heard it laid down in Lakemba 
that every Fijian chief has his second.” } 

** Society was certainly organized on the dual plan with two 
exogamous moieties and matrilineal descent. One division was 
nobler than the other, so that a lady of rank always married an 
inferior.”” Mr. Hocart goes on to say that the dual organization 
is found in that part of Vanua Levu least affected by subsequent 
influences. It is somewhat disguised and not easy to identify 
in Eastern Fiji and on the east coast of Na Viti Levu. ‘I allude 
to the common division of villages into ‘ nobles ’ on the one hand 
and ‘the land,’ or ‘the teeth of the land,’ on the other.’’ ? 
This dual grouping of the village was associated with the game 
of reed-throwing, the players being divided into camps according 
to their social division. Hocart’s information is valuable, for 
it links the ruling class with social organization. He couples 
on the dual kingship, the division of the ruling power into that 
of sacred chief and war chief, with that of the division of the 
village into nobles and commoners. 

The traditions of the origin of the Fijian Nanga agree with the 
evidence of Mr. Hocart. The Nanga are stone enclosures sur- 
rounded by a stone wall, and containing four stone pyramids. 
The story of their origin relates that two men came from across 
the sea to Viti Levu. ‘“* When they landed they conferred together 
and said : ‘ Let us go tothe chief of Vitongi and ask him to divide 
his men between us that we may teach them the Nanga for which 
purpose we have come to Fiji.’ So they went and preferred their 
request, and the Chief said: ‘ Good, divide my men amongst you.’ 
He also gave them each a piece of flat ground on which to build 
the Nanga, and the name of the place where the first one was 
built was called ‘Tumba Levu.’ Now it was the descendants 
of men to whom Veisina and Rukuruku taught the Nanga, that 
practised it; and their descendants, even unto this day, are 
divided into the Kai Veisina and the Kai Rukuruku.”* Thus not 
only is the dual organization part of the former condition of things 
in Fiji, but the pyramidal stone structures of the island are also 
associated with a dual grouping of the people for ceremonial 
purposes. The account of the Nanga suggests that the presence 
of the dual grouping is due to deliberate intent. For the man 
who brought over the Nanga rites asks that the people should 
be divided into two groups. 

1 The Vunivalu (Root of War) always belonged to Tui Kamba (“‘ Lords 
of Kamba Sept ’’), and the Roko Tui Mbau to the Vusaratu (‘‘ Chief Sept ’’) 
(B. Thomson iii. 61). 2 Hocart vi. 47. 

° Hocart ii. ‘‘ In the game of tingga (reed-throwing) the vosa dhauravou 
will make one side and the vosa turanga the other side” (Hocart iii.). His 


article shows that the dual organization is breaking down, and is now hardly 
recognizable. * Joske 257-9. 


- 


298 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


It is possible to go still farther with the aid of Hocart’s work ; 
for he claims that the vui spirits of Melanesia correspond to the 
vu or ancestors of the sacred chiefs of Fiji. In Fiji the dual 
chieftainship is connected with the dual grouping in the villages. 
No chiefs are reputed in Southern Melanesia, but it would seem 
that the culture-heroes of that region correspond to the vu chiefs 
of Fiji. In the Banks Islands and the New Hebrides the culture- 
heroes seem to be dual in nature. In Vanua Lava, for example, 
Qat was the culture-hero ; he was a vui, and therefore, according 
to Hocart, corresponded to the sacred chiefs of the archaic civili- 
zation. He had eleven brothers, all named Tangaro, among 
them being Tangaro the wise man, and Tangaro the fool.t In 
Aurora Tagaro was the hero: his companion was Suqematua, 
‘* who in all things was contrary to him,” and does all he can 
to thwart him. In Whitsuntide Island Suge is the companion 
of Tagaro, and accompanies him and thwarts him: Tagaro was 
always right and Suge always wrong. Elsewhere in Melanesia 
stories are told of similar hostile personages in places with the 
dual organization.* 

In Tonga the ruling function was shared by the sacred chief 
and war chief, the sacred chief being higher. There were two 
sacred chiefs, one superior to the other. The highest chief of all 
in the time of Mariner was the Tuitonga; next to him, and a’ 
colleague of his in the sacred office, was the Veachi. Then came 
the secular chief, the How. The Tuitonga always belonged to a 
certain family, and was descended from the chief god who visited 
the island.* ‘‘'Tuitonga and Veachi may easily be conceived 
sources of nobility, on account of their supposed divine originals, 
and the How because he holds the reins of government, and is 
invested with power. The family of Finow, who is the present 
How, say that they descended neither from Tuitonga nor Veachi, 
but are altogether a distinct race. ... The present Finow’s 
father was the first of the family that came to the throne, which 
he did by usurpation and expulsion of the reigning family.” The 
previous Hows had been the relatives of the Tuitonga.* 

The Samoan group has always been closely associated with 
Fiji and Tonga. It is here that it is possible to see farthest into 
the past, for the work of Kramer, Stair, Fraser, Powell, Pratt, 
and others has brought together a mass of facts that show how 
the first settlements of Polynesia took place. The traditions of 
the eastern Pacific place the homeland of the race in Samoa, and 
especially in Manu’a, at the eastern end of that group. Moreover, 
the culture associated with Manu’a is much closer to that of the 
archaic civilization than that of the rest of Samoa, or even of the 


1 Codrington 156 e.s. In the chapter on Exogamy further evidence will 
be forthcoming of the connexion of these culture-heroes with the Dual Organi- 
zation. 

2 Id., 168-170. See also Suas i. 33. 

3 Mariner 75-6. 4 Td., 83, 84. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—-INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 299 


rest of the eastern Pacific, with the exception perhaps of early 
Tahiti. It is therefore in Manu’a that search should be made 
for facts about the archaic civilization of the eastern Pacific. 

The story of the peopling of Manu’a begins with the Tagaloa 
family, Children of the Sun. A Tagaloa fished the island of Tau, 
in Manu’a, out of the water, and intercourse then began between 
the sky and the earth. The first settlement in Tau was at Fitiuta. 
Later on another was made at Tau, on the other side of the island. } 
In Fitiuta lived the Sa-Tagaloa, the Children of the Sun, and there 
was brought the first beautiful house from the sky which later 
became the temple of the reigning chief,? where lived the gods on 
earth, the Tagaloa family. Since by “ gods” is meant “ beings 
related to a ruling family,” this story means that the first settle- 
ments of Samoa were made by men claiming connexion with the 
sky-world, which is in agreement with the fact that the first 
kings of Samoa were sacred and looked upon as gods.? It is said 
that in the sky-world were many malae, council-places, in pos- 
session of the various branches of the Tagaloa family, the most 
important being the malae o toto’a, ‘‘ the malae of peace’’; the 
malae o vevesi, ‘‘ the warlike,” and so forth.* 

The first settlement in Samoa, Fitiuta in Tau of Manu’a, was 
divided into two, Aga’euta, Aga’e landward, and Aga’etai, Aga’e 
seaward. In one tale it is said that Aga’euta and Aga’etai were 
husband and wife, who lived at Saua in Fitiuta. The Tagaloa 
family came down from the sky to them and brought the dignity 
of the Galea’i for their son Aga’e, who was the first chief of all 
Manu’a. Aga’e was one of the Children of the Sun,’ so his parents 
must have been of solar birth. Thus the first ruler in Samoa was 
one of the Children of the Sun, of a race that has long since dis- 
appeared. 

The peopling of Manu’a can be looked at from another angle, 
from that of the ancestress of the royal family. A woman named 
Ui, the daughter of the Tuiatafu, that is, the Tui chief, of a place 
called Atafu, came to Manu’a, swimming across the sea. In 
Atafu was a sun-god who demanded human sacrifices. Ul 
persuaded him to accept substitutes, and then left the country, 
accompanied, in some accounts, by her brother. She landed in 
Fitiuta, and bore to the Sun, Tagaloa-la, a son named Tagaloaui.® 
Tagaloaui married Sinasa’umani, the daughter of La Fe’e, iater 
the ruler of the underworld, and their son was Taeotagaloa,’ 
with whom real men are supposed to begin. Thus the first rulers 
of Samoa were born of a woman of royal birth, who came from a 
place where the sun-cult was practised, where, if the equation of 
gods and rulers be true, the Children of the Sun reigned. This 
account, therefore, agrees with that of Aga’euta and Aga’etai, 


2 Kramer I. 362, n.-1, 370, 382. 2 Tas, 
3 Pratt i. 657. 4 F Kramer 393. 
5 Td., 382, n. 1, 382, 384. 6 Td., 241, 419. 


TeIdss Ge 8 Id., 382, 385 n. 7, 393, 


300 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


husband and wife, the parents of Aga’e, a Child of the Sun. 
According to another version, Tagaloala married Sina, the daughter 
of the Tuifiti, the ruler of Fiji, and their son was Taeotagaloa, 
while their daughter, Muiuv’uleapai, married the Tuifiti.! 

The two first settlements in Tau, Fitiuta and Tau, are con- 
nected with the ruling family, for it is said that Taeotagaloa, the 
son of Tagaloaui and Sina, married two girls, Laulaulefolasa, the 
daughter of Le Folasa, who lived at Le Faga in Fitiuta and Sina, 
the daughter of Taotoaiseaualuma, in Aualuma in Tau. The sons 
of Taeotagaloa by these two wives were Atiilagi and Fa’aeanuu,? 
of whom the one born at Tau was destined to become the temporal 
ruler of Manu’a, while the one born at Fitiuta became the sacred 
chief. 

The transference of the temporal power to Tau is explained in 
the following story. Taeotagaloa, the first human king, had three 
brothers, Lefanonga, Lele, and Leasiasiolagi, and two sisters, 
Muiu’uleapai and Moatafao.? These sons were gods, and could 
go to the sky to attend the council meetings of the Tagaloa 
family : ‘‘ They had all the same power to ascend from earth to 
heaven, to pass over seas, and to go to the most distant regions.” 4 
But when Tagaloaui went with his sons uproar always resulted. 
Taeotagaloa was peaceful, but his brother, Le Fanonga, was 
quarrelsome. ‘‘ This was utterly unlike the propriety required 
in the realms ; for, at all times, perfect peace and order were there, 
and silence during the holding of councils. Annoyed by these 
disturbances Tagaloa—the creator and Tagaloa-le-fuli proposed 
that dignity and authority, and the palace, and sovereign rule, 
should be given to Tagaloaui to take to earth with him, so that 
he might appoint one of his sons king of earth, with all the royal 
rights ; thus there would be no occasion to have the peace and 
quiet of the heavenly regions any longer broken.” So Tagaloaui 
went to Le Fanonga and said to him: ‘‘ You are a disobedient 
boy ; you stop here. Taeotagaloa shall be king ; to him shall be 
given the royal sway over all lands under heaven ; the proclama- 
tion of the ao shall go forth in his name.’’® Thus Taeotagaloa 
became the first Tui, and Le Fanonga took a subordinate place. 
Apparently they both lived in Fitiuta. For, when the sons of 
Taeotagaloa had grown up, Taeotagaloa says to his brother Le 
Fanonga®: “ You stop here in the east and be the war-god of 
Fiti-uta, but I will go and be the war-god of Le-faletolu.’’? . . . 
Ta’e-o-tangaloa then went to his sons and gave them formally 
their appointments. To Fa’a-ea-nu’u he said, ‘‘ Let the imperial 
dignity abide with thee ; let them stand up and make their council- 
speeches in thy palace, King of Manu’a and all Samoa.’’ To his 
brother he said, ‘“‘ Be thou named Ati-i-lagi; let the royal dignity 


1 F. Kramer 392. 2 Id., I. 370: Pratt iii, 294, 
3 ¥. Kramer I. 393: Pratt ii. 123. # Fraser iil. 67. 
5 Td., iii. 67-8. 6 Cf. F. Kramer I. 389. 


7 Pratt iii. 294-5. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 301 


be associated with the inferior human gods through thee; sit 
thou in thy palace and speak to the heavens.”’! 

This account of the change of a god associated with the sky, 
claiming descent from the Sun, into a war-god has already been 
noted. This change of nature on the part of the god formed part 
and parcel of a revolution on the island, whereby the power was 
transferred from Fitiuta to Tau, Fitiuta henceforth enjoying but 
little prestige.? 

The son of Aga’etai and Aga’euta was Aga’e, who had the 
Galea’i title, which was brought down from the sky by the Tagaloa 
family. This title was replaced by that of the Tui. It is curious 
to note that the Tuimanu’a was really only concerned with war, 
and that the peace functions were carried on by the council of 
heads of clans, the faleula, of which more will be said in the chapter 
on Totemic clans. It may thus be that the Galea’i title was that 
of the original Children of the Sun, who, by some social revolution, 
changed their capital to the war side of the island, and themselves 
became war-gods instead of Children of the Sun. As further 
evidence of this, the chiefly offices of each part of the island may 
be considered. Each ruler of a district had two such councillors : 
these ‘‘ brother chiefs,”’ as they are called, had formerly as titles, 
in Fitiuta, Soatoa and Galea’i; in Tau, Soatoa and Lefiti, the 
Galea’i title being replaced in Tau by that of Lefiti.2 These two 
chiefs alone can prevent war, and on this account they are called 
‘‘ Freshwater.’ 4 I have not been able to find out anything more 
about these two brother-chiefs.. The fact that the Galea’i title 
has gone, and been replaced by another, is suggestive, as is also 
the fact that these two chiefs can act as preventers of war. The 
members of the early ruling family were themselves looked upon, 
in later times at least, as dual in nature. Chiefs were addressed 
as ‘‘ you two.”’® ‘“ Fue, the son of Tangaloa, that came down 
from heaven, had two names, Fue-tangata and Fue-sa ; he peopled 
the two flat lands.” ® 

The earliest settlement of Samoa was dual. The island of Tau 
was divided into two parts, and the chief settlement of each part 
was dual, with a seaward and a landward part. The ruling 
family broke up into two parts, one sacred and the other temporal, 
and in the councils the chief had two chiefs as intermediaries 


1 Id., 295. 

2 Another account of the splitting-up of the royal power is given by Pratt. 
Le Faga, who lived at Le Faga in Fitiuta, had a son Folasa, who married 
Sina. Their son, Le Lologa, had several wives. Le Folasa said that the 
son born first should have the royal title. ‘Two were born on the same day. 
‘‘O Ali’t’a-tama, ‘the younger’ Ali’a; and ’Ali’a-matua, ‘the elder’ 
Ali’a.”” The younger had the insignia of royalty. They occupied opposite 
ends of the house. ‘‘ Be thou named Ali’a-matua, the presence of Moa ; 
and be thou named ’Ali’a-tama, the Circle-of-chiefs-of-Moa’’ (Pratt i. 
134-5), 

3 ¥. Kramer I. 367, 368. 4 Lass Ad be 

5 Powell and Pratt 118. § Pratt ii. 274. 


/ 


802 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


between him and the councillors, one of these “‘ brother chiefs ” 
formerly holding the ancient Galea’i title. So far as can be seen 
these arrangements were deliberate. The Tagaloa family gave 
certain titles to the people on earth ; and the Tagaloa on the earth 
divided up the island and assigned their parts to the actors. 

Another sort of duality is evident. The Tagaloa men marry 
women connected with the underworld, which suggests that the 
ruling power was held by two distinct families; one connected 
with the sky, the Children of the Sun, the Tagaloa family ; and 
the other connected with the underworld, and _ associated 
especially with La Fe’e, the ruler of that region. This latter 
branch of the ruling class evidently also had dual characteristics : 
La Fe’e, the ruler of the underworld, and his brother Sa’umani 
are said to have separated, La Fe’e going inland and Sa’umani 
going to the coast. Moreover, the ancestress of the Tuimanu’a 
of Manu’a, Ui, that is, ‘‘ darkness,” arrived with two stone 
idols.2. Her brother Luama’a was called ‘‘ two stones,” ? and 
at Fitiuta their place of landing is marked by two stones 
called Luama’a.4 Also the son of Fe’e named Faia,®* married a 
woman named Sina, and their son Luanu’a was. called ‘‘ two 
lands.’ ® Further evidence of duality in the ruling family is 
supplied by the family at Le Fanga in Fitiuta, to which belonged 
the wife of Taeotagaloa. According to one account Pega and 
Pega, man and woman, with the same name, had three children, 
Pilimoelagi, Pilimoevai and Sina. The first son lived in the sky ; 
the second lived in the water near the home of Sina, and in the 
form of a fish became the father of Pili, the ancestor of the rulers 
of Upolu.’ 

In the creation story Savai’i was created after Manu’a. The 
first settlement in that island was Samata, which was colonized 
by ‘people from Manu’a.§ 

* Together with the group of small lands; 

‘* With the home of Alamisi (the two Samatas Catan 
inland and Samata by the sea. 

“The seat of Tangaloa and his footstool. 

“ But great Manu’a first grew up 

“The resting-place of Tangaloa. 

** After that, all the other groups of islands.” 9 

Samata, like Fitiuta, was a dual settlement. It’s parts, 
Samata iutau (Samata inland), and Samata itai (Samata to sea), 
were named after two boys, Mata-i-uta (Eyes Inland) and Mata-i-tai 
(Eyes to Sea), whose occupations were appointed by their father 
respectively inland and on the coast.!° The ruling power of 
Samata was derived from Manu’a. The Tuisamata is looked upon 


2 cH hye and Pratt 70. 4. 1d.,°126. 

Id., 127. 4 F. Kramer 370. 

5 Powell and Pratt 203. ® Powell and Pratt 201-2, 
7 F. Kramer TI. 439. 8 Id., 75 


® Powell and Pratt 208. 10 Fraser iii. 113-14, 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 803 


as the brother of the Fua-au in Pagopago of Tutuila,! being 
descendants of sons of Tele and Malae, two immigrants from 
Manu’a. They had held the office of preparing food for the 
Tuimanu’a, but were banished and went to Lefutu in Tutuila, a 
dual settlement, where the first Tuisamata married the daughter 
of the Mata (Matalula); hence the name Samata.? 

In this way have arisen new settlements from Manu’a. It 
is to be noted that the dual grouping of the village is connected 
with two brothers, but that one man only is held accountable for 
the foundation of the office of the Tuisamata. This man. was a 
brother of the founder elsewhere of a chiefly house. Thus the 
dual grouping of ruling families has broken down. 

Another example of the same process is provided by Leapai 
and Fa’a-toafe, descendants of Fai-malia and Fai-tama’a, who 
came from Manu’a. Fa’a-toafe became ruler of Sangoni in 
Savai’i, and Le-apai chief of Sangona in Upolu—so that settle- 
ments with similar names were founded, by brothers, on different 
islands. 

The founders of the Tuisamata and Fua-au houses were not 
Children of the Sun, but merely the sons of officials in the service 
of the Tuimanu’a. Their new homes were in villages split up as 
before, but with the ruling power in the hands of one family 
only, with no apparent division of sacred and war chief. It has 
already been said that the Tuimanu’a was really only a war- 
chief, and that the council ruled in peace time: also that, in Tau 
of Manu’a, the brother chiefs could exercise a veto on the warlike 
proclivities of the Tuimanu’a, the ruling chief. In Manu’a the 
Galea’i title, the first title to be given to the descendants of the 
Tagaloa family, disappeared, and it is only said that one of the 
brother chiefs was a Galea’i. This, coupled with the fact that 
Taeotagaloa became a war-god, and got the Tuimanu’a title from 
the sky, suggests, as has already been pointed out, that the 
original sky-born chiefs disappeared at an early date in Samoa, 
and left simply the war-chiefs, that is, the part of the ruling class 
connected with the underworld. If, as appears probable, the 
ruling families of other islands were founded by nobles from 
Manu’a who served the Tuimanu’a, then it is to be expected that 
the original sacred sky-born chiefs would not appear, but that 
simply the warrior chief family would be represented. This is 
what appears to have happened. On the other hand, the dual 
grouping of the village is maintained, with a corresponding tale 
of foundation by two brothers. 

The earliest ruling family of Upolu in Samoa came from Manu’a. 
The political organization of this island has been much broken 
up by conquest, but enough is known to make the early conditions 

1 Tutuila is dual. ‘‘ Tutu and Ila, that is a pair. Tele and Upolu were 
placed to people the land of Upolu-tele; but Tutu and Ila, they two were 


to people the land now called Tutuila ’’ (Pratt ii. 274). 
2 F. Kramer I. 76. 3 Fraser iii, 116-17. 


304 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


fairly certain. Apparently in the beginning only two districts 
existed on the island, Aana and Tua.! In the story of the 
political. foundation of the island Aana and Tua appear as twin 
sons of Pili from Manu’a.? Aana is divided into Itu alofi and Itu 
tuafanua.? Also, signs exist of a former duality ; for a story is 
told of a former chief of Aana, who, on the point of death, divided 
his sceptre between his two sons, Fasito’otai taking the seaward 
part, and Fasito’outa taking the part nearer the centre.* Corre- 
sponding to this story is the fact that the chiefs of these two places 
play a most important part in the council of Aana, and that the 
two places correspond to one another.®> The capital of A’ana is 
Leulumoenga, but this settlement is not absolutely paramount. 
‘*‘In all the principal divisions of the islands there were some 
settlements, in addition to the leading district, which possessed 
greater influence than others. In A’ana, the division with which 
I was most familiar, there were two important settlements that 
had to be consulted in addition to Leulumoenga, viz. Fasito’otai 
and Fasito’outa. These had the privilege of following the opening 
speech, and their decision was often final, the other places adopting 
pretty much the tenor of their addresses ; but this was not always 
the case. So great was the influence of these places, that it 
required the presence of the representatives of one or the other 
of them to render valid the proceedings of that assembly, so that 
in case both absented themselves from the meeting, the fono 
dispersed without entering upon business.’ ® 

I do not like to push speculation too far ; but it would seem, in 
this case, as if the capital Leulumoenga had been imposed upon 
a former dual grouping of the community, so that the chiefs of 
the old dual settlements, who are connected in tradition with a 
former chief who so divided his kingdom, still play a paramount 
part in the councils of the district. 

In the later history of Samoa the dual grouping of society 
has disappeared, and one searches in vain through the detailed 
pages of Kramer, with their descriptions of each settlement and 
village, for any signs of it. Only rarely has the dual organization 
persisted, and even in such cases decay has long since set in. In 
Manu’a, the Tagaloa family ruled in the early times, when there 
was connexion with the sky. But in the other islands, Savai’i, 
Upolu and elsewhere, search is vain for the Children of the Sun, 
their sky-world and their other characteristics. 'They have gone, 
and in their place rule gods of war connected with the underwofld, 
beings such as Le Fanoga, Fe’e, Pili, and others, who came over 
from Manu’a to Savai’i and Upolu, and became war-gods and 
maintained a connexion with the underworld, not with the sky, 


and thus represent the family with which the men of the Tagaloa 
family married. 


1 Ella i, 629. 2 Pratt ii. 257: F. Kramer I. 9, 27. 
3 F. Kramer I. 148. * Pratt iii, 301. 


° F. Krémer I. 153-4, 5 Stair vi. 88-9. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 805 


The early disappearance of the dual organization in Samoa 
does not raise any great hopes of the discovery of its counterpart 
elsewhere in Polynesia. But signs persist of its former existence 
in Tahiti, where traces are to be seen of the sun-cult. In the 
Tahitian legend of Honoura, mention is made, in the domain of 
Aua-to-i-tahiti, a former king of Tahiti, of districts called Teraitopi 
and Teraitopa,! names suggesting that districts went in pairs. 
Honoura himself says in one place in the poem ‘“‘ Here are my 
names: Maui-tua and Maui-aro ”’ ; 2? that is, ‘‘ Maui-behind ’’ and 
‘* Maui-in-front,’’? which suggests that the rulers of that day were 
dual. It is said that the progenitors of men were Tii Maaraauta 
~ and Tii Maaratai, ‘‘ Tii extending towards the land” and ‘“ Ti 
extending towards the sea,” who lived at Opoa and produced the . 
human race.4 This is reminiscent of the dual organization in 
Samoa and elsewhere.® Twin war-gods are also mentioned : ‘‘ The 
two pupils for whom the life of the stone battle-axe was created. . . 
Before the face of the armies of Rai and Roo.”’ ® Thus a duality 
exists in the districts under the rule of former kings, in the beings 
who first lived at Opoa in Raiatea, and in the war-gods of Tahiti. 

More evidence of duality is forthcoming from Mr. Percy Smith. 
He mentions that formerly the people of the eastern Pacific met 
at Raiatea for ceremonies, prominent among which were those 
connected with the Whare-kariori, the great Areoi Society of 
Polynesia, which, according to Polynesian tradition, was brought 
from India (see p. 105). The founders were Urutetefa and Orote- 
tefa, the brothers of Oro, the great war-god of Tahiti and else- 
where in eastern Polynesia, whose similar names suggest the dual 
organization. In the concluding part of the ritual of the cere- 
monies, temporary pyramidal structures are erected for the 
brothers, who are represented by two stones from the marae of 
Oro at Opoa in Raiatea, into which the gods were supposed to 
enter after the priest had uttered a prayer.’ Other evidence 
pointing to the dual nature of the Areoi societies is furnished by 
Mr. Percy Smith. ‘“‘ Tradition seems to infer that these gatherings 
broke up after a time, owing to the hostility of two factions, the 
Ao-tea, or eastern people, and the Ao-uri, or western people, 
resulting in murders, war and all kinds of evil. . . . The meaning 
of these two distinctive terms, ‘ Ao-tea’ and ‘ Ao-uri’ is the light 
and the dark world, derived from the sun-rise and sun-set.”’ ® 

The coming to power of the descendants of Oro has evidently 
destroyed in Tahiti many traces of the dual organization, just as 
in Samoa only the earliest settlements are dual. Enough remains, 


1 Honoura 265, 279: P. Smith vi. 236-8. 

2 Id., 267. 3 Gill vi. 126. 4 Ellis I. 111. 

5 As is natural where the old order has changed, other tales are told. One 
says that Tii was a man made by the gods, who married a woman named 
“ie or Hina. Their ghosts, called Tii, are connected with stone images (Ellis 

» ATL) 
§ Ellis I. 201. 7 Id., I. 231-4. 8 P. Smith v. 258. 
20 


306 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


however, to show that it must have been a prominent feature of 
the life of the past. It is, however, in Mangaia and elsewhere that 
the best evidence can be found of the past existence of the dual 
organization. 

Mangaia was brought up out of the sea by Rangi, the grandson 
of Rongo, the great war-god, who lives below in Aviki, the place 
of origin of the race and the land of the dead. Rongo is identifical 
with Oro, the great warrior-god of Tahiti. He and his twin 
brother Tangaroa were sons of Vatea and Papa. Vatea was the 
son of Vari-ma-te-takere, the great mother of gods and man, who 
lives in Aviki, the land of the dead. Tangaroa, like the Tagaloa 
of the Samoan group, was connected with the sky, + and doubtless 
was originally one of the Children of the Sun. 


‘‘The fair-haired children of Tangaroa, 
Doubtless sprang from dazzling light”! 


Tangaroa and Rongo separated. ‘‘ Now, Tangaroa was altogether 
the cleverest son of Vatea ; he instructed his brother Rongo in the 
arts of agriculture. Their father wished to make Tangaroa the 
lord of all they possessed ; but the mother Papa objected, because 
as parents they dared not taste the food or touch the property of 
Tangaroa, the eldest by right. The mother had her own way. 
Hence, when a human sacrifice was offered to Rongo, the refuse, 
i.e. the body, when thoroughly decayed, was thrown to his 
mother, who dwelt with Rongo in the shades, in order to please 
hers 

‘‘ Government, arrangement of feasts, the drum of peace, i.e. 
all the fountains of honour and power, were secured to Rongo, 
through the selfish craft of Papa.” Tangaroa left Mangaia 
disgusted with the continual preference shown to his brother. 
‘“‘ He made a long journey, and touched at many islands, scattering 
everywhere the blessings of food piled up for the purpose in his 
canoe. Finally, he settled down on his beloved islands, Rarotonga 
and Aitutaki, leaving Auau, or as it was afterwards designated, 
Mangaia, in the quiet possession of Rongo—The Resownder.” ” 

This sounds like an imaginary tale. But the remarkable 
feature has yet to come. Rongo in Mangaia represented the 
underworld ; so when Tangaroa left, the people were without 
any communication with the sky-world. Rangi, Mokoiro and 
Akatauira, the three sons of Rongo, were the first kings on Man- 
gaia after it had been pulled up out of the ocean, for their father 
had remained below.2 To make good the lack of a sky-god, 
Rangi had recourse to a remarkable expedient. “* Rangi, Mokoiro 
and Akatauira were probably veritable persons, chiefs of the first 
settlers on Mangaia.* Their wives were respectively named Tepo- 
tatango (Bottom of Hades), Angarua and Ruange. 

Then came Papaunuku, son of Tane-papakai, or Tane-giver-of- 

1 Gilli. 4, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18. 2 Id., i. 11, 13, 14. % Id., 16. 
4 This agrees with the conclusions of Chapter XII. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 307 


food. When Tane died he was worshipped by his son, who was 
sent for by Rangi as a priest. But Rangi was not pleased with 
Tane, as he spoke only as a man, without frenzy, through his son 
Papaunuku. His grandfather Rongo lived only in the shades ; 
Rangi wished for a god who would live with him in the upper 
world. He therefore sent to Rarotonga to ask Tangiia, a renowned 
warrior-king of that island, to send him over one of his sons ‘ who 
had grown up under the sacred shade of the Tamanu leaves’ to 
be his god. Rangi’s wish was gratified, and Motoro was fixed 
upon by his father for the purpose.” 4 Accordingly, Motoro com- 
bined with Rongo as chief deities of the island. ‘‘ The three 
original tribes, and the kings, invariably worshipped Rongo and 
Motoro; but many are said to have disapproved of this new 
worship, correctly regarding Rongo as the great original heathen 
divinity of Mangaia. Until 1824 both were conjointly worshipped 
as the supreme deities of this island, Rongo taking the first 
place.” 2. Motoro was connected with the interior of the island, 
and he was the god of the living ; while Rongo had his marae on 
the seashore, and was the god of the dead.? 

This is evidently an account of a deliberate arrangement made 
by a king of Mangaia. It was necessary to have two deities, one 
for the dead and the other for the living ; so when Tangaroa went 
away, he had to be replaced, and this was done by arrangement 
with the rulers of Rarotonga. Corresponding to this arrangement 
of deities, the principal king lived inland in the sacred district 
of Keia, and kept away the evil spirits from the east ; while the 
second king lived on the seashore, and kept away the evil spirits 
from the west. Sometimes the shore-king was an illegitimate 
son of the sacred king.® 

The departure of Tangaroa means that some political change 
had taken place, the nature of which can only be inferred. An 
account given of a change of deity, accompanied by that of the 
ruler in Mangaia, helps to the understanding of this point. A 
certain warrior chief, named Tiaio, routed some invaders, and 
thus gained mighty fame. For some act of impiety he was killed 
by a priest of Tane-the-man-eater, and his spirit entered first an 
eel, and then a shark. ‘‘ The Mautara, or priestly tribe, gave up 
their ancient divinity, Tane, in favour of this new god. The 
greatness of Tiaio marks the political supremacy of that warlike 
clan, which is of recent origin.” ® Since Tane was superseded by 
the son of a warrior king from Rarotonga, and also, in another 
account, by the ghost of a warrior king or chief of Mangaia, it 
seems possible that the supersession of Tangaro was, in like 
manner, due to some conflict in the ruling power which led to 
. the exile of the Tangaroa family. In Samoa the sacred chief 
undoubtedly has more than once been exiled by the council ; in 
Timor, also, the Children of the Sun were exterminated; the 


1 Gilli. 19. 2 Id., 27. 9) Ths 8 8, 
4 Id., iii, 635; i. 293. 5 Id., iii. 636. § Id., i. 29-30. 


308 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


account of Percy Smith of the break-up of society in the eastern 
Pacific likewise shows that the disappearance of the Tangaroa 
family, the Children of the Sun, may have been due to political 
dissensions and warfare, in which the Children of the Sun would 
stand but little chance. Evidently the departure of Tangaroa 
from Mangaia was not pleasing to Rangi, who was left behind. 
Something had to be done, so help was sent for from Rarotonga, 
where Tangaroa had gone. But the god who came was not the 
son of Tangaroa, but of Tangaia, and dwelt, not in the sky, but 
on earth. Thus the link with the sky-world was partly broken 
with the departure of the Tangaroa family, and the best that 
could be done was to secure the services of a god who could rule 
over the living on earth. As in Samoa, the ruling power was 
not entirely vested in the hands of the occupant of the throne. 
‘*“ Upon gaining a decisive victory the leading warrior was pro- 
claimed ‘Temporal lord. of Mangaia.’ The kingly authority 
was hereditary and distinct from that of the warrior chief; the 
former representing the spiritual, the other the temporal power. 
... It sometimes happened that the temporal chief was at 
enmity with the king of his day. In this case the king would 
refuse to complete the ceremonies for his formal investiture ; life 
would remain unsafe ; the soil could not be cultivated, and famine 
soon followed. This state of misery might endure for years, until 
the obnoxious chief had in his turn been dispatched, and a more 
agreeable successor fixed upon.’ ! Such conflicts would soon 
break up the original dual grouping. 

The choice of a successful chief to be the temporal king of 
Mangaia, while the descendant of Rongo, the great war-god, 
became the spiritual chief, shows that the original dual grouping 
has altered in nature ; for the sacred chief is now the son of the 
war-god, not of the Sun, and he, in his turn, has someone else to 
take over the charge of temporal affairs. The system thus is 
again in a state of degeneration, but it still retains some semblance 
of its original condition. 

Rarotongan history begins in Tahiti and Samoa. Five hundred 
years ago two chiefs ruled in Tahiti, Tutapu and Tangiia, 
Tutapu being the elder.2. They possessed opposite ends of 
Tahiti-iti.? Tutapu had killed Pou-te-anua-nua and Pou-rakaraka- 
ia, the sons of Tangiia, who were chiefs in Tahiti.4 Tangiia fled 
by way of Huahine, the Leeward Islands, and Aitu, to Raro- 
tonga, followed by Tutapu. At Rarotonga the Tangiia party 
amalgamated with Kariki and his followers, and together they 
beat and ate Tutapu.> The Karika family of Rarotonga say that 
they came from Manu’a in Samoa; ‘‘ the family marae of the 
Kakea tribe is therefore named Rangi-Manuka or ‘ Manu’a in 


1 Gill i. 293. 2 Id., 23. 3 P. Smith vi. 238, 
* Id., ii. 26. The presence of rulers with such similar names is additional 


evidence for the former presence in Tahiti of the dual organization. 
® Gill ii. 24. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA. 309 


the skies.’ 1... The Karika family is identical with the Ali’ 
family of Manu’a, and therefore with the earliest settlers, the 
descendants of the Tagaloa family, the Children of the Sun. Thus 
both the Karika family and the Tangiia family of Rarotonga had 
come from places with the dual organization, and consequently 
set up once more this form of society. Tangiia said to Kariki: 
** Let us select from the people some to be Ariki (chiefs), some to 
be Taungas (priests), some to be Mataipos and Komonos (minor 
chiefs).””. They did so. Tangiia set up his adopted son Te-ariki- 
upoko-tini to be ariki of the Ngati-Tangiia, and Kariki chose 
another to be chief over Te-au-o-tonga.2, They chose the priests 
and eighty each of the sorts of minor chiefs. They then said, ‘‘ To- 
morrow we will divide the lands’; and they did so, ‘‘ completing 
the circuit of the land ” : Kariki went inland while Tangiia went 
seaward.® 

Rarotongan history goes still farther back. It was first settled, 
probably about 875 a.p., by two brothers, Apopo-te-akatinatina 
and Apopo-te-ivi-roa, who came from a place called Atu-Apai. 
This may be the Haapai group, but Mr. Percy Smith thinks that 
they really came from Samoa.4 Other signs exist of a dualism 
in Rarotongan society. Mention is made of two priests named 
Paoa-uri and Paoa-tea, who went from Rarotonga to Raiatea 
with a sacred drum for the marae of Oro at Opoa.? 

The account of Mangaia and Rarotonga is interesting because 
it shows that the Polynesians of early days took care to set up a 
form of dual organization of society wherever they went, even 
though this dualism did not always contain all the original ele- 
ments. It is interesting to note that the establishment of the 
dual grouping in Rarotonga and Mangaia is not the work of men 
with similar names, but that the families are quite distinct. On 
the other hand, in both cases, the chiefs who set up the dual 
grouping come from places where the early ruling groups have, 
in tradition, similar names. This important feature of the dual 
organization will have to be explained. 

New Zealand was peopled from eastern Polynesia. Traditions 
point to the migrations of the ancestors of the Maoris as being due 
to wars. As an example, Elsdon Best quotes the quarrel between 
two chiefs of eastern Polynesia, one of whom, Manaia, decided 
to go away, and he sailed to New Zealand with his family.® 
Probably the great break-up of society in Eastern Polynesia had 
much to do with the migrations of the Maoris ; for they claim to 
belong to one of the divisions of the former eastern Polynesian 
society—the Aio-tea or eastern people, the people of the light. 
This corresponds to a tradition which seems to divide the ancestors 
of the race into two groups. That led by Tane, the ancestor of 
the race, apparently a sun-god, is said to have been of a kindly 

1 Gill i. 25. 2 P. Smith ii, 27. 
3 Id., 26-7. 4 P. Smith vi. 203, 204, 211, 231. 
5 Id,, vi. 287. ® Best xii. 450-1. 


310 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


peaceful disposition, and to have come out of the underworld into 
this world. Then came another group, led by Whiro: ‘‘ Whiro 
especially appeared in a very peevish condition, irritated at Tane 
for leading them out of the Earth Mother to be assailed by cold. 
From this time on, Whiro and Tane were enemies, and, in after 
times, when Whiro had been defeated by Tane, the former retired 
to the underworld, that is he returned within the Earth Mother, 
with whom his sympathies lay.’! It is difficult to reconcile this 
account with the claim that the Maori do not go at all to the sky 
after death. Evidently the society of the Maori must formerly 
have been different in nature, and they must have had sky-born 
rulers. 

A similar difficulty exists in Maori mythology. Hina, the great 
ancestress of the Maori, and ruler of the underworld, seems to be 
connected with twin deities : for, in one of her forms, she married 
Irawaru, who was killed by Maui, her brother or son. She went 
to find Irawaru, and when she arrived at the Sacred Isle, obviously 
an island connected with a previous home of the race, she married 
two brothers, Ihuatamai and Ihuawareware,? with names so 
similar as to suggest the dual organization. The Sun has two 
wives, Hine-raumati, or Summer Maid; and Hine-takurua, or 
Winter Maid, with each of whom he dwells in turn.? Maui, the 
great god of the Polynesians, who is so often concerned with the 
raising of islands from the bottom of the sea, is, in New Zealand, 
the brother and son of Hina, the mother goddess, the jancestress 
of the race, who rules in the underworld. Maui is a twin, being 
born together with an egg;4 and he also seems to be a dual 
personage, Maui-mua and Maui the Great,® which is in keeping 
with his dual nature in Tahiti. 

Taylor has an interesting statement which suggests the former 
presence among the ancestors of the Maori of the dual organiza- 
tion. He speaks of a whare-kura. ‘* The whare-kura is spoken 
of as having been a very large edifice, in which all the tribes were 
accustomed to meet together for worship, and the rehearsal of 
their sacred pedigrees, as well as the heroic deeds of their ances- 
tors, for holding their solemn councils, and administrating justice. 
The word literally means a red house from the colour it was 
painted, and is said to have been in existence at a place called 
Reporoa, before they left Hawaiki; its extreme antiquity is seen 
from the circumstance of all those who are recorded as having met 
there, being regarded as ancient gods ; the temple had a porch or 
veranda, such as they still make to their houses, this was 
placed at the gable end, by which they entered, and at the other 
extremity was a small building in which the high priest resided. 
The Whare-kura and the Tuahuas were enclosed by a fence, 
beyond it were the abodes of seventy other priests who had their 

1 Best xi. 137-8. 2 Tregear i. 488. 


* Best'xiv. 5. He gives other interesting examples of duality (pp. 7, 9). 
4 Tregear ii. 30, 54. 5 Td., i. 495-6. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 311 


houses ranged around. These were called the Tauira, and their 
abodes were also enclosed by a fence, being considered a sacred 
court, each building bearing the name of one of the heavens ; 
the posts which supported the building were carved to represent 
their chief ancestors. 

“The different tribes which met there were ranged in two 
grand divisions, one Kahui or party being on one side of the 
building, and the other on the other ; one company possessed a 
staff, called To Toko-toko o Turoa, whose owner was Rangit- 
awaki, the other side also had a staff, named Tongi-tongi, which 
belonged to Mai-i-rangi, perhaps these individuals were the chiefs 
who marshalled their respective companies.”?! The break-up 
of this former stage of society is said to have been due to the 
quarrels of the two priestess sisters, Rito-wara and Rito-maopo. 
** At first this temple was a grand place of union for all the tribes, 
but afterwards it became the source of discord. The tribes which 
assembled in it quarrelled.” 2 Thus they developed warlike modes 
of behaviour, as so often occurred among the communities of the 
archaic civilization. 

Ancient Hawaiian society probably was organized on a dual 
basis. Fornander speaks of two classes of chiefs, Iku-pau and 
Iku-nuu. The Iku-pau were direct descendants of ‘‘ Kane ”’ the 
god, or Kumuhenua the first man, and they had the spiritual 
and temporal power. The Iku-nuu had temporal power. Kane 
being a sun-god, the Iku-pau would therefore be Children of the 
Sun, and thus ancient Hawaiian society falls into line with that 
of the archaic civilization in general. Oahu was the sacred 
place ; thither went the women of the royal family to give birth 
to children.t This place is the site of a pearl-fishery. There 
also two girls were born, Laieilauai and Laieloheloche, to the 
accompaniment of claps of thunder, the prerogative of sacred 
beings.» Thus in New Zealand and Hawaii, the last homes of 
the Polynesians, as later on in Fiji, Samoa and elsewhere, the 
dual organization has disappeared. On the other hand, wher- 
ever approach can be made to the original home of the Polynesians, 
and also to the days before the general break-up of Polynesian 
society, traces of the dual organization can be detected. Appar- 
ently, for many centuries, society was founded upon this basis, 
and, about 1200 a.p. or so, the hostility of the two factions became 
acute and disintegration set in. 

Easter Island society is divided into two parts, the western 
part, which includes the clan of Raa, the Sun, claiming to be the 
superior.? Hostility exists between the two groups. The story 
of the peopling of the island suggests a dual society, for the 
ancestors are said to have come from two adjacent islands, Marae 
Renga and Marae Tohio. Mention is made of their arrival at 

1 Taylor 174-5. 2 Id., 176-8. 8 Fornander 41-4. 


4 Owen 53. 5 Beckwith 334. 
6 Newell 604 e.s, * Routledge i. 221. 


312 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Easter Island in groups of ‘“ Long-ears” and ‘‘ Short-ears.’’} 
The facts are not enough to enable us to understand the real 
history of the people. | 

It is unnecessary to insist at length on the widespread distribu- 
tion of the dual organization, and its modifications, the four- and 
eight-class systems, in Australia. This topic has been dealt with 
by numberless writers, and forms one of the commonplaces of 
ethnological literature. As Howitt says, ‘‘ It may be laid down 
as a general rule that all Australian tribes are divided into two 
moieties, which intermarry, but each of which is forbidden to 
marry within itself. . . . The division of the tribe into two classes 
is the foundation from which the whole social organization of the 
native tribes of Australia has been developed.” 2 He states in 
another place that throughout wide areas of Australia a strong 
similarity exists between the names of the classes, and, further, 
that the whole system shows signs of growth from small origins.® 
This is significant, and well worth remembering when speculating 
on the origins of native tribes. The Rev. John Mathew has also 
remarked upon the similarity of names. He shows, too, that they 
are connected with different colours, just as were Upper and 
Lower Egypt. He thinks that the colour differences betray the 
mode of origin of the dual organization, namely, the fusion of 
two different races, one Papuasian, very dark, with curly hair ; 
and the other stronger, more advanced, lighter in colour, akin to 
the Dravidians and Veddahs of India.‘ 

A curious custom exists in Australia—that of the ball game: 
** A game of ball-playing was a favourite pastime of the Victorian 
tribes, of which the Wotjobaluk, Wurunjerri, and the Kurnai 
will serve as examples. The ball used by the former was made 
of strips of opossum pelt rolled tightly round a piece folded up 
and covered with another bit sewn tightly with sinews. The ball 
used by the Kurnai was the scrotum of an ‘ old-man’ kangaroo, 
stuffed tightly with grass. This was called Turtajiraua. 

“The Wurunjerri called their ball, which was like that of the 
Wotjobaluk, Manguri. In playing this game the two sides were 
the two classes, two totems, or two localities. For instance, in 
a case which I remember in the Mukjarawaini tribe, the Garchukas 
(white cockatoos) and the Batyangal (pelicans) played against 
each other. But this was in fact the class Krokitch against 
Gamutch. The Kurnai played locality against locality or clan 
against clan, their totems being merely survivals. 

‘* Kach side had a leader, and the object was to keep the ball 
from the other side as long as possible, by throwing it from one 
to the other. Such a game might last for hours.” ® 

Hewitt remarks that the ball game is a useful index as to the 
class of a particular totem group. He says that “in games 
- 1 Routledge 223, 280-1. 2 Howitt 88-9. * Id., 137:¢.8. 


* Mathew 166, It will be seen, in the next chapter, that this view is 
untenable, 5 Howitt 770, 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—INDONESIA AND OCEANIA 313 


played with a ball, the two segments of one class will play together 
against those of the other; or when the whole tribe is gathered 
together on some ceremonial occasion, the two pairs of sub-classes 
will camp on opposite sides of a creek. In ceremonial or expia- 
tory encounters, one pair of fellow sub-classes will always side 
together against the other two.”! The ball game is mentioned 
here because it will turn up again in other places as part of the 
dual organization. This remarkable custom will help much to 
understand the cultural nature of the dual organization, and to 
counteract the tendency to imagine that it sprang up indepen- 
dently in various parts of the region. 

Coupled with the dual grouping of Australian tribes must go 
the myths of two culture-heroes who are found connected with 
the matrilineal tribes, that is, those nearest in culture to the 
archaic civilization. 

The evidence adduced for Indonesia and Oceania is enough to 
establish the connexion between the dual organization and the 
society of the archaic civilization. Unfortunately it has not been 
possible in any one place to discover the original form of the dual 
organization : that appears to be reserved practically for Egypt. 
In all parts of Oceania and Indonesia the dual grouping has long 
since begun to break up, so that mere remnants are left behind to 
indicate what was the original condition. The complicated nature 
of the group of customs and beliefs centring round the dual 
organization will need extended examination, so it will be well to 
see what evidence can be gained from America before launching 
out into any discussion. | 


1 Id., 14-15. 


CHAPTER XX 


THE DUAL ORGANIZATION: AMERICA AND 
CONCLUSION 


HE general break-up of society in Oceania has obscured 
the old form of social organization so thoroughly that itis 
only possible to piece it together with much labour. It is 
therefore not to be hoped that the study of the civilization of 
Mexico will afford many returns. The data are but few, and 
reliance has to be placed on inference for the understanding of 
the past. But in the outlying districts, such as the Mound area, 
the story is much plainer, and the dual organization will be found 
to exist in its typical form. 

The wide prevalence of stories of twin culture-heroes in America 
gives reason to hope that the dual organization will exist on earth 
to provide such a reflection in mythology. It has been found 
that the Twin Children of the Sun correspond to the dual grouping 
of society : it is thus to be expected that, where such stories are 
told in North America, the dual organization will be present in 
some of its elements. 

The greatest figure of American mythology is Quetzalcoatl, 
the Divine Twin, whose brother is Tezcatlipoca. Hostility exists 
between them, for Tezcatlipoca drove out Quetzalcoatl from their 
former home at Tulan. They play a ball game in a court running 
north and south.! The sacred book of the Kiche of Guatemala 
abounds in twin heroes. Two of them, Hunbatz and Hun- 
chouen, play the ball game in a court, just as Quetzalcoatl and his 
brother Tezcatlipoca.?, Twin Kiche heroes, Hun-hun-ahpu and 
Vucub-hun-ahpu, go to Xibalba, the underworld capital ruled over 
by their enemies, Hun-came and Vucub-came, who are dual kings.® 
This evidence suggests that the old civilizations of Guatemala 
were on the dual basis, and that the rulers of the Kiche and of 
Xibalba formed a dual group, of which Xibalba was connected 
with the underworld. Further evidence is supplied by Landa, 
who says that the Maya armies were always commanded by two 
generals : two human faces on a mound temple probably represent 
these two Maya generals.* In later Mexican ritual signs appear 

1 Seler 19: Hagar ii. 89. * Brasseur de Bourbourg 71 e.s. 

3 Hartman 148. 4 Hagar i. 27. 

314 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 315 


of a duality. During an annual feast a paste statue of Huitzilo- 
pochtli, the great war-god of the Aztecs, was eaten. This was 
the act of a fraternity, the leaders of which, who wore the insignia 
of gods, were two in number, corresponding to Tezcatlipoca and 
Huitzilopochtli,! Tezcatlipoca was looked upon as being the twin 
of Huitzilopochtli, as well as of Quetzalocoatl. 

I have not been able to collect more evidence of the former 
existence of the dual organization in Mexico and the Maya 
country ; but ample traces of it exist in the United States. 

The archeological evidence suggests that the region of the 
Appalachian gold-field is that which has been most strongly 
influenced by the Mexican civilization ; for in its mounds have 
been found obvious Mexican designs, as well as stone graves with 
extended interments. This is the homeland of the Siouan and 
Iroquois groups; it is thus a focus of cultural intensity in the 
Mound area. 

In the Mound area the dual organization appears formerly to 
have been universal, it being mentioned among the Creek, Chick- 
asaw and Natchez. The Yuchi have a dual grouping of societies, 
which corresponds to the dual organization of the other tribes. 
The tribes farther north, such as the Iroquois and the Algonkins, 
have the dual organization, as have also some of the Plains Indians. 
But some tribes of the Plains, who are derivations from other 
regions, for example the Pawnee and Kiowa, show no sign of it. 
The Cheyenne show traces of what may formerly have been a 
dual organization, but it is not possible to be certain on the 
matter. ? 

Mr. Barbeau makes some general remarks upon the dual 
organization of North American tribes: ‘‘ The occurrence of 
the phratries and moieties, although sporadic, is fairly common 
in the North American Indian tribes, and among people whom 
the Indian tribes are likely to have come into direct or indirect 
contact with, such as the Yuchi, the Siouan Indian tribes, the 
Muskhogean tribes, and the Pueblo and Mexican Indians.” ? He 
goes on to say that ‘“‘ the phratries and moieties are distinctly at 
home in the south-east, centre, south-west and Mexico, where- 
from the Indian ones must have been derived. It is, moreover, 
remarkable that wherever the phratric system is wanting as a 
whole the clans show no tendency towards growing into phra- 
tries.” * Clark Wissler makes the following interesting state- 
ment: ‘‘ There appears a tendency for certain tribes to divide 
into two halves, usually described as summer and winter groups, 
whose chiefs lead alternately according to the season. ‘This is 
quite conspicuous in the Mississippi Valley, whence it extends into 
Mexico, and has its counterparts in Peru.” ® 


1 Loisy 405. 2 Dorsey iii. 49. 

2 Batten: iii. 397. * Id., 399. 

°C. Wissler v. 202... Another instance of a widespread unity in American 
civilization. 


316 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Mr. Barbeau claims that the phratric division has been a deliber- 
ate matter of politics. ‘‘ The lack of uniformity in the arrange- 
ment of clans in the phratries reveals arbitrary purpose rather 
than unconscious growth or transmission.”! The remarks of 
Mr. Barbeau entirely agree with the conclusions derived from the 
study of the dual organization in the Pacific. It was found, in 
Mangaia and Rarotonga, that deliberate efforts were made to set 
up the dual organization ; and that, in the case of Mangaia, help 
was actually appealed for from Rarotonga, where lived people 
who could take on that part of the constitution which dealt with 
the living. The distribution of the dual organization in North 
America is what would be expected if it belonged to the archaic 
civilization, for it is present among those tribes nearest in culture 
to the archaic civilization. Among tribes who show signs of 
considerable cultural degeneration it is lacking and, as Mr. 
Barbeau says, such tribes show no signs of adopting it. 

One constant feature of the dual organization in North America 
is the ball game, which is universal among the tribes from Maine 
to California, and Mexico to Hudson’s Bay.? The moieties of the 
tribes play on different sides in these games. This agrees with 
the story of the twins in Mexico and among the Maya playing 
the ball game in a court running north and south. Not only are 
the twins hostile, but also a hostile feeling exists between the two 
sides of the community.* The trib ‘s are usually divided into two 
parts, chiefs and warriors, connected with peace and war; so, in 
general, the dual grouping has the same characteristics as else- 
where. 

The Creek Indians lived in ‘‘ towns,” each with its badge, and 
belonging to one or other of the two “ fires.”” Those belonging 
to the same fire were friends; while those who belonged to 
different fires were opponents. One fire was that of the “ peace ” 
side, while the other was that of the “ war” side. Their colours 
were respectively red and white. Of all the Creek towns, four had 
precedence, two among the red towns and two among the white 
towns, while one of the red or peace towns was the head of the 
whole tribe. I do not know whether this selection of two towns 
has any reference to a duality of ruling power; this will have to 
be a matter for further inquiry. But the following quotation 
from Mr. Swanton is significant. Speaking of these four principal 
towns of the Creek confederation, he says: ‘‘ As a matter of fact 
these were the leading towns among the Upper and Lower Creeks 
respectively.” * In addition to a dual grouping of towns, the 
Creeks had a dual grouping of clans into ‘‘ Whites,” and “ People 
of a different Speech.” Speaking of this dual clan grouping, Mr. 
Swanton says that it is natural to ask if the white clans belong to 
the white towns, and the other clans to the other towns. ‘“ This 
is probably a fact, but it is not so consistently shown as would be 


1 Barbeau iii. 398, 400. 2 J, Mooney iii. 105. 
® Speck ii. 77, 4 Swanton ii. 594. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 317 


expected.’ The clan grouping is evidently fundamental, for the 
two clan groups play on different sides in the practice ball games. 

Mr. Swanton comments on the dual organization of the Creeks. 
‘‘ Creek society,”’ he says, “‘ has resulted from a combination of a 
number of tribes speaking Muskogee with others employing 
different languages, mainly those of the same stock. The dual 
division of towns seems not to be due in this case to a union of 
distinct tribes, because the non-Muskhogean tribes are found on 
both sides, and there is a strong tradition that Kowi’ta and 
Kasi’ta,?, now in opposite fires, separated from one original 
Muskogee tribe. An attempt to correlate the dual division of 
clans with the dual division of towns is not altogether satisfactory. 
Still the white clans are certainly associated by some Creeks with 
the white towns and the Tciloga’lgi (‘ people of a different speech ’) 
with the red towns.” ? Since the Creek people are a confederation, 
it can hardly be claimed that the dual organization is a matter of 
chance; it must have been due to some deliberate organization 
on the part of men who knew what they wanted. In the Pacific 
it has already been seen that men from communities where the dual 
organization certainly existed, took care, if possible, on landing 
in a new place, to set up the constitution to which they were 
accustomed at home. This is but natural, as is evident from the 
consideration of our own political life. 

The Chickasaw, the most westerly of the Muskhogeans, possess 
a dual organization: they have matrilineal clans, each with its 
own officials, its place in the tribal encampment, and its rank 
among the other clans. The clans are in two groups, each with 
its own religious ceremonial, named “‘ Their hickory chopping ” 
and ‘‘ Worn-out places.” The first, the superior, who are the 
warriors, live in substantial lodges, while the others usually live 
under the trees in the woods. The groups occupied opposite 
sides of the council-fire of the tribe.4 The dual grouping of 
warriors and inferiors suggests that the “chiefs ’’ have gone, 
leaving only the warlike part of the tribe, as in Polynesia, and that 
the people have set up a dual grouping of a modified form.° 

The Yuchi of the Savannah River have a dual grouping of 
societies, and each male child belongs to one or other of them. 
The superior society is that of the chiefs ; that of the warriors is 
inferior. These societies were originated by the culture-hero. 
In one place he is spoken of as the Son of the Sun; but some 
ambiguity exists about this.6 Commenting upon these divisions, 
Speck says : ‘‘ In a general way there appears to be some points 
of resemblances between these divisions and the ceremonial and 

1 Td., 597. 

2 This is a significant fact in view of the similarity of names. It is strangely 
reminiscent of the dual organization of Oceania. 

3 Swanton ii. 598. 4 Speck i. 51, 54. 

6 According to Speck (ii. 75, n. 1), the Chickasaw had the grouping of 


‘* chiefs’ and ‘‘ warriors,’’ with the chiefs as the superior division. 
§ Gatschet 280-1. 


318 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


military societies of the plains... . Toa certain extent, bearing 
in mind the feeling of superiority on the part of the Chiefs, and 
their position in the towns, the two Yuchi groups remind one of 
the social castes of the Natchez, if we rightly interpret the nature 
of the latter from historical records.” + It will be remembered 
that the ruling class of the Natchez came to the country from a 
place which was probably Mexico. The Great Sun was the ruler 
and high-priest of the nation. ‘The head of the army was, in the 
time of du Pratz, his brother, called Stung Serpent. So this 
community had religious and military sides, with the religious 
element predominant. 

The Shawnee had five divisions which occupied the two sides 
of the council-house. ‘They claimed that they could tell to 
which division anyone belonged by his general appearance.” ? 
In a manuscript of 1666 the Iroquois are said to be divided into 
two bands, one of four families and the other of five families.? 
Corresponding to this they have stories of twins, one light and 
the other dark.* The Seneca likewise had a story of twins, one 
light and the other dark, born of a woman from the sky-world.® 

The Huron or Wyandot have the dual grouping of clans. Their 
account of its origin is as follows: ‘‘ This is what happened. 
The Wyandot, the Potawatomi, and the Delaware, speaking three 
different languages, met together and had a council, wherein they 
settled their marriage customs. They laid down the law about 
how they were to get married. First (the Wyandots) were divided 
into seven (nine in fact) groups (or clans). Then they studied 
the nature and habits of the game which they used. The first 
animal that was found was the Deer. Now, no fault could be 
found with this fellow, for he had a perfectly good nature. That 
is why they made him their first choice and gave him a clan. 
Their next choice was the Bear, to whom they also gave a clan. 
The next was the Porcupine, and here was his clan. Another was 
the Beaver, and there was his clan. They had thu made one side 
of the (council) Fire. 

**'Then they began to form the other side of the fire. It con- 
sisted of the Big Turtle, the Prairie Turtle, the Small (striped) 
Turtle, and, coming the last, the Hawk. 

‘** Another was the Wolf. And the people (belonging to the 
two sides of the fires) were his cousins. 

‘** Now then (the four clans on one side of the fire formed ‘ one 
house,’ while the four opposite clans made up another. As to 
the wolf, he remained all by himself. The four clans in each house 
were brothers to each other). Were all (mutual) ‘ cousins ’ (those 
who belonged to opposite houses, so that whoever stood on one 
side of the fire called ‘ cousin’ anybody standing on the other 
side). 

‘1 Speck ii. 78. 2 J. Spencer 320. 3 Barbeau iii. 394. 


* Parker iii. 495. Cf. L. H. Morgan 97, 129: Parker i. 474-6. 
® Parker ui. 610. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 319 


** It was then agreed that this was the law which the Wyandots 
were to observe. And it had to be proclaimed in such a way that, 
on all possible occasions, the opposite groups may be known as 
cousins. 

‘“‘This is the very first thing done (when they were assembled 
in council, framing the rules by which henceforth they were to be 
governed). It was so arranged that those who belonged to the 
same clan should not be allowed to intermarry. That is why a 
woman, having a clan, may not get married within it, but only in 
that of her cousins. This was the established marriage rule which 
the whole household of the Wyandots was bound to observe. 

‘‘ Moreover, the same custom was accepted by the Potawatomies, 
the Delawares, and all the people with different languages who, 
in time, became friends or allies of the Wyandots, and at the head 
of all these nations stands the Wyandot for ever. That is why 
the customs of the Wyandot are also the law for them all.” 1 The 
Delaware of Caney River had three phratries, each with a chief 
and his assistant, and a war chief and his assistant. There was 
also a head chief, to whom the phratry chiefs acted as advisers.? 

The account of the Wyandot is that of the deliberate setting- 
up of the political constitution of a tribe on a basis of the dual 
grouping. The probable reason for this is that the Huron had 
lost their ruling group : for, in the tale of the origin of their tribe, 
the Good Twin goes back to the sky, while the Bad Twin goes to 
the underworld, there to rule over the dead in the company of his 
mother, the ancestress of the tribe. The dual organization had 
thus broken up, and it was necessary, as in other places, to set 
matters right. 

In the case of the Sauk-Fox Indians, the relationship between 
the twin culture-heroes and the dual grouping of the tribe is plain. 
Once upon a time the Manitos lived on the earth. The Great 
Manito had four sons, two of whom were called Elder and Younger, 
who were grandsons of the Sun. The Great Manito called all the 
chiefs together and divided the people into two groups, elder and 
younger. The younger brother was killed, and became the lord 
of the land of the dead, ‘‘ the land beyond the place where Sun 
goes down.” The Elder Brother says to him, “I will create a 
people after the race of our mother, and they shall follow you, and 
live with you there for ever.’’ Accordingly, after a flood, he 
created a new race of men out of red clay, and said to them that 
he was going away, but would come back: ‘‘ Then I shall take 
you with me to the west, to the place where rules . . . my younger 
brother, your uncle. There we shall meet our kindred that have 
gone before us, and we shall dwell with them for ever.” * 

In this case the dual division of society is linked up with the 
Twin Children of the Sun; each section of the community belongs 
to one of the twins, and both sections are to be joined together in 
the next world. 

1 Barbeau ii. 82-9. 2M. R. Harrington 211. 3 Jones 225-38. 


320 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Among the Menomini Indians, who also have the dual grouping, 
the gods are divided into two sets, which have their own localiza- 
tion. The sky-gods and the underworld-gods are said to meet. 
_ “We are two sides—the good gods in heaven, and the gods under 

the earth. How shall we be partitioned off from each other ? 
What sides shall we choose ?”’ The underneath-gods spoke first : 
‘We shall take our own side on the north.’’ The good gods 
said: ‘‘ We will choose the side where the sun goes south.” So 
they made a lodge and chose their places.+ 

The Winnebago had a dual grouping of the tribe. The Upper 
or heavenly group had bird ancestors ; while the lower or earthly 
group had land animals for ancestors. No significance attached 
to the twofold division of the tribe.? 

These somewhat disjointed accounts show that the Indian 
tribes correlated their social organization and their mythology. 
The twins are associated, one with the sky, and the other with 
the underworld, the twin of the underworld being the ruler of the 
dead in company with his mother. Correspondingly, one division 
of the tribe was connected with the sky, and the other with the 
underworld. The political nature of the dual organization is well 
shown in the case of the Omaha branch of the Sioux of the Plains.$ 
They camped in circular fashion, each clan in its appointed place. 
The circle was divided into two halves, north and south, and each 
division of the tribe had its appointed half. On the northern 
side were the clans associated with the sky and peace, and on the 
southern those associated with the temporal affairs of the tribe 
and war. According to the Omaha, the sky was masculine and 
the earth feminine, the union of these two being considered 
necessary for the perpetuation of all living forms. This order or 
method for the continuation of life was supposed to have been 
arranged by Wakonda, and thus it was symbolized in religious 
rites and social usages and organization.’ These divisions were 
based on mystic ideas as to how creation came about and how life 
must be continued on the earth. The myths relate that human 
beings were born of a union between the sky-people and the 
earth-people ; and, in accordance with this belief, the union of 
the sky-people and the earth-people was conceived to be necessary 
to the existence of the tribe. There was a teaching preserved 
among the old men that the division of the tribe was for marital 
purposes, a teaching which bears out the mythic symbolism of 
these two divisions. Corresponding to this dual organization, 
the tribe possesses two principal chiefs, two tribal pipes and so 
forth, just as the Egyptians had their dual regalia.® 

The dual organization is in a state of decay among the Plains 
Indians. The Osage, Dakota, Yankton, Teton, Ponca, Quapaw, 
Iowa, Omaha, Kansas and Missouri had it, but it is evidently 
- } Michelson 77-8. 2 Radin 211 e.s. 


3 Fletcher iii. 259 e.s. 4 Fletcher and La Flésche 134. 
8 Jd., 435. 6 Id., 62: J. O. Dorsey ii. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 321 


lacking among the outlying tribes, such as the Blackfeet, Crow, 
Cheyenne, Pawnee and Kiowa. This may be seen by comparing 
Sketch Maps Nos. 2 and 3. It can therefore be stated that 
the dual organization is confined to the region of the mounds. 
Several remarks made with regard to the Siouan group of tribes 
suggest that more could be learned with regard to their dual 
organization. Kor instance: “ Among the Eastern Dakota the 
phratry was never a permanent organization ; but was resorted to 
on special occasions and for various purposes, such as war or the 
buffalo hunt.” + But the Teton division into Upper and Lower, 
like the Creek and Egyptians ; and certain facts pointing to the 
splitting of tribes into two distinct parts, hostile to one another 
and with different functions, suggest that these tribes once had a 
thorough-going dual organization of society, that is now in 
process of disappearance.’ 

To turn now to the Pueblo region. The creation myth of the 
Zuni recounts the origin of the dominant part of the tribe that 
afterwards joined the sedentary agriculturists to form the 
present tribe. Although the Zuni community thereby is dual in 
a way, yet the dominant portion, the new-comers, already 
possessed the dual organization of society. They were brought 
out of the underworld by the Twin Children of the Sun. Among 
the ancestors of the Zuni was Yanauluha, who brought water 
from the inner ocean of the underworld, the seeds of life-production 
and growing things, and things containing the “‘ of-doing powers.” 
He had a plumed staff, decorated with feathers, shells and other 
potent contents of the underworld. With this staff. Yanauluha 
struck a hard place and then blew on the staff. Four round seeds 
of moving beings appeared among the plumes, two blue like the 
sky or turquoise, and two dun-red like the earth-mother. Achi, 
the elder of the Twin Children of the Sun, said that two of these 
seeds should become birds of brilliant plumage which would fly 
to the region of summer and plenty, while the other would be pie- 
bald and would fly to the region of winter and scarcity. Yanau- 
luha and others followed the macaw into the south, while yet 
others followed the raven to the north: thus arose the dual 
organization of the Zuni people. The twins and the priest-fathers 
consulted together as to the proper constitution of this dual 
grouping.’ So evidently the Twin Children of the Sun played an 
‘important part in the constitution of the Zuni tribe, and to them 
must be ascribed the dual organization. 

The Children of the Sun among the Zuni changed into the twin 
war-gods, and preserved their dual characteristics. For their 
shrines are divided into two sets: those to the north for the elder 
war-god, and those to the south for the younger. The following 
quotation shows how much information is still to be gathered 
with regard to dual institutions. “‘ Cushing refers to six new 

1 J. O. Dorsey iii. 221: Riggs 195. 

* Riggs 156 e.s.: J. O. Dorsey iii. 213 e.s. 3 Cushing u. 384-6. 

21 


322 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


shrines of the war-gods, three to the north belonging to matsailema, 
he being associated with the left hand (facing the east, the north 
is on the left), and three shrines to the south belonging to ahaiiuta, 
he being associated with the right hand. In addition there are 
two peace shrines, one on towa yallane belonging to matsailema, 
and one on the * Mountain of Lovers ’ (?) belonging to ahaiiuta.”’ + 

The Hopi Indians of the Pueblo group, formed by the amalga- 
mation of clans coming from all directions, have not constituted 
themselves into moieties, such as are possessed by other tribes. 
The Pima Indians of the Pueblo group, whose culture has 
degenerated much from its former condition, are divided into 
two groups of clans, one called the Vulture or Red people, and the 
other the Coyote or White people. These groups are also named 
Red Ants and White Ants. The red people are said to have 
been first in possession of the land ; while the white people, who 
were brought out from the underworld by the culture-hero, the 
Elder Brother, conquered them.? The Sia, another degenerate 
Pueblo tribe, have no dual grouping. Other tribes associated 
with the Pueblo Indians who have adopted the nomadic mode of 
life, such as the Navaho, have no dual grouping. 

Little mention has been made in this book of the food-gathering 
Indians of California. Situated, as they are, in a country possess- 
ing traces of ancient mining activity, and living near to the Pueblo 
region, it is improbable that they would have escaped the influence 
of their neighbours. Some of these tribes have a dual organiza- 
tion : the moieties are connected with land and water ; sometimes 
they perform reciprocal ceremonial functions ; they oppose one 
another in games ; sometimes a dual chieftainship exists ; and the 
moieties are usually exogamous.? This case is reminiscent of 
that of the Australian tribes, who, although they do not seem to 
have acquired much material culture from the archaic civilization, 
have been profoundly influenced in their social organization. The 
Sakai of Sumatra are also similar in this respect. These three 
examples show that different elements of culture move with 
varying ease into new territories. 

In the Pueblo region, which has witnessed so much migration 
and so much disturbance during the centuries, the signs of the 
dual grouping of society are not plentiful, but when they occur 
it is in conjunction with the Children of the Sun. At the same 
time these people have no class descended from the Children of 
the Sun living among them. Consequently, all their interests 
are centred on the underworld, where live the great mother, the 
ghosts of the dead and the “‘ breath bodies ” that, in other places, 
go to the sky after death. This suggests that the first settlers of the 
Pueblo region were led by Children of the Sun, that is, by members 
of the ruling group of Mexico, and came there to work the turquoise, 
_ gold and other deposits. For some reason the rulers disappeared, 


1 Parsons, AA, 1918, 391. 2 F. Russell 197. 3 Gifford 291 e.s. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 823 


and left only their subjects, who, like the right- and left-hand 
castes of Southern India, maintained their original form of social 
organization. But this dual grouping, as is shown in the case 
of the Hopi, disappeared when the original communities were 
broken up. 


It now remains to try to understand the significance of the dual 
organization of society. The evidence shows that, in later times, 
it has almost, if not entirely, disappeared. In India it survives 
in fragments ; in Indonesia it has almost disappeared ; it is not 
found in those parts of Melanesia tenanted by the last-comers, 
the betel people of Rivers ; it is not in New Zealand, and in various 
groups of the Pacific, such as Hawaii, the Gilberts and the Ellice 
group, that have been colonized last of all; in North America 
it is lacking among the Indians of the Western Plains, such as the 
Arapaho and Cheyenne. That is to say, the youngest peoples, 
so to speak, lack it entirely, or possess it only in fragments. The 
places where it has been possible to gain the clearest impression 
of this form of society are Egypt, Southern India, South Celebes, 
Sumba, Timor, the Moluccas, New Guinea, Australia, Southern 
Melanesia, the earliest settlements of Samoa, and in the Mound 
area of the United States, just in those places where clear signs 
of the archaic civilization have been detected, as may be seen 
from Sketch Maps Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. It is thus possible to 
watch, as it were, the spread of this form of civilization from 
pearl-bed to pearl-bed, and goldfield to goldfield; for traces of 
the dual grouping exist in the region of the pearl-beds of Ceylon 
and South Celebes, in the gold and copper regions of Timor, in 
the region of the pearl-fisheries of the Moluccas, in the pearl- 
fisheries of Micronesia, British New Guinea and Melanesia, and 
in those parts of Polynesia specially noted for their pearls, Fiji 
and neighbourhood, and Tahiti and the surrounding groups.? 
The only place where the relationship does not hold so closely is 
that of Samoa, where the pearl-fisheries are not so important. 
Nevertheless pearls are reported, and there may formerly have 
been more. In any case the dual grouping did not last long in 
Samoa; it did not survive the first settlements in Manu’a and 
_Savaii. Thus right across the pearl-fishing region, from Egypt 

to America, is a chain of dual settlements. Off the track of pearls 
and gold they are rare. They thus provide a geographical test 
for determining the route of the Polynesians on their journey out 
into the Pacific, and search should reveal further dual settlements 
left behind by these people.? It would also be of great interest 
if, farther west, say in the region of the Persian Gulf and the Red 
Sea, other dual settlements such as those recorded in Ceylon should 
be found ; for, in that case, every pearl-field from Egypt to America 


1 Sketch Map No. 8. 2 Sketch Maps Nos. 4-6. 
’ The papers now being published by Heer Kruyt constitute an example. 


324 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


would have been occupied by people making dual settlements. * 

The evidence collected regarding the dual organization is not 
of uniform weight. In some instances it is mythological or 
traditional, in others it concerns the structure of the village, in 
others the whole society from the ruling family to the clan is dual. 

The most widespread form of dual grouping is undoubtedly 
that of the dual village, whether occupied by one clan, or by a 
group of clans. This form of dual grouping is found among the 
Naga tribes of Assam, the Parava caste of South India (tradi- 
tional) ; in Sumba of the East Indian Archipelago ; in Yap, the 
Pelews and Ponape of Micronesia, where it even extends to two 
landing-places for canoes ; in British New Guinea ; in Fiji and in 
the early settlements of Samoa. A corresponding grouping 
is that of the tribe, which is especially characteristic of Australia 
and North America, but is found also in Assam and elsewhere. 
The tribe consists of a group of clans occupying a given territory 
and speaking a common language. The tribes in the places 
mentioned are divided into two groups like the villages, and really 
correspond, except that they are not necessarily sedentary in 
habit. In some cases the clan itself can divide into two parts, 
as among the Nair of Malabar, the Todas ; in Micronesia and in 
British New Guinea; and among the Creek Indians of North 
America. The wide distribution of villages or tribes with the 
dual grouping does not necessarily mean that this form of grouping 
is fundamental, and that the dual nature of the kingship is 
secondary, for it can quite well be that the dual organization of 
the Australians and of the villages of British New Guinea repre- 
sents what is left after the break-up of a centralized authority, 
as is evidently the case with the right- and left-hand castes of 
South India. 

A further dual grouping is that of the whole territory of a tribe 
into two parts. In some cases this is accompanied by a ruling class, 
but this need not be so. Such a localized grouping is found in 
Egypt, in Assam among the Nagas, on the Malabar Coast; in 
Timor as well as in Macassar of Indonesia; in British New 
Guinea; in the New Hebrides (Tanna being noteworthy); in 
Samoa, in early Tahiti, according to the legend of Honoura ; and 
among the Creeks of North America. 

The two sides have feelings of hostility to one another. This 
hostility can be experienced between the two sides of a clan 
group, as in the Pelews ; between two sides of a village, as in the 
Pelews and British New Guinea ; between two parts of an island, 
as in Southern Melanesia; or between two sides of a tribe, as in 
North America and British New Guinea. This hostility often 
extends to continual warfare, as in British New Guinea among 
the Mekeo tribes. Associated with it is the ball game or its 

1 It is significant that the Phoenicians, who probably came from the Bahrein 


Islands in the Persian Gulf, possessed so many cultural elements of the 
archaic civilization, and show signs of dual institutions. See p. 501. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 3825 


variants. In Australia, Fiji, and throughout North America, 
it is customary for the moieties to take opposite sides in a game 
played with a ball, or with some object such as reeds. The wide 
distribution of this custom makes it certain that further search 
will reveal its existence in other places. 

Another persistent feature of the dual divisions is the superiority 
of one group. This is the case in India among the Bhar, Bhil, 
Nairs and Pariahs; in Micronesia in the Pelews and Ponape; 
throughout the dual region of Melanesia, in Fiji villages; and 
throughout North America. In certain cases the divisions are 
connected with distinctive colours; the colour of Upper Egypt 
was white, while that of Lower Egypt was red ; in India the Bhil 
divisions are white and black ; some Nair clans are divided into 
white and black divisions; in Melanesia the dual divisions are 
connected with light and dark colours ; the dual divisions of Tanna 
of the New Hebrides are connected with different colours; and 
so are the two groups in Australia; in Samoa, the primordial 
ancestors of the people, Po and Ao, are connected with two pearl- 
shells, one bright and the other dark ; in America the Creeks are 
divided into red and white divisions ; the Pima groups are also red 
and white. A wide association with colours is thus characteristic 
of the moieties of the dual organization, and the superior side of the 
community is invariably connected with the lighter colour. The 
dual grouping also possesses a ceremonial significance. In India at 
Kancipuram the right- and left-hand castes have separate halls ; 
the Kaldebekel, the clubs of the Pelews, are grouped in two 
divisions corresponding to the two sides of the villages ; in British 
New Guinea the club-houses are sometimes in pairs for each 
village, or else each side of the village or of the clan has its own 
side of the club-house ; in the Nanga society of Fiji the members 
are divided into two parts; the Areoi society of Eastern Poly- 
nesia was dual in nature; the Yuchi of North America have a 
dual grouping for ceremonial purposes ; so have the Omaha, the 
whole tribe being divided into two parts, one connected with the 
sky and the other with the earth, each side possessing the proper 
ceremonies ; and the Californian moieties have reciprocal cere- 
monial obligations. Sometimes the dual divisions are distin- 
guished as elder and younger. The clans of the Pelews split up 
into elder and younger branches; the clans of the Mekeo of 
British New Guinea likewise split into elder and younger. Another 
grouping is that of right- and left-hand sides. This is especially 
_ prominent in India, the castes of South India being divided in 
that manner. This division of right- and left-hand castes was 
connected with the duality of ceremonial buildings, as in British 
New Guinea, where the divisions are right and left hand, and 
occupy the corresponding parts of the club-houses and of the 


1 W. Miller notes the ceremonial nature of the ball game in Yap. It is 
evidently a survival (222). 


326 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


village itself, which often consists of a street with the houses on 
either side. 

Dual settlements also have similar names: this is so in the 
legend of the Parava caste in India; in Sumba the village names ~ 
mean a seaward and an inland part; in the Moluccas the dual 
societies have similar names, and the groups are connected with 
the sea and the land respectively ; in British New Guinea the 
Mekeo tribes originated in two settlements with names extremely 
alike ; the clans of the people of British New Guinea that split up 
have very similar names for their divisions ; the early settlements 
of Samoa in Manu’a are of a similar nature to those of Sumba and 
elsewhere, consisting of a seaward and a landward part with similar 
names; in Tahiti the territorial divisions are similar in name: 
one of the clans of the Creek split up into two divisions with 
similar names. 

It has been suggested that the dual organization owes its 
origin to the amalgamation of two distinct peoples. But the 
bizarre nature of its characteristics make it imperative to reject 
this solution. How could it come about that people in North 
America, Fiji and Australia play games, the different sides of the 
community playing on either side; why should the moieties be 
distinguished by colours? Certain characteristics, such as the 
feeling of hostility and the superiority of one side over the other, 
could be explained in this way, and possibly in some cases the 
colour distinction; but what is the explanation of the sea and 
land side of the villages, the elder and younger distinction, and 
the great similarity of names? In certain countries, in Egypt 
for instance, and in North America, amalgamation seems to be 
out of the question. The fact that, in Rarotonga and Mangaia, 
and among the Huron and Omaha of North America, steps were 
taken to set up the dual organization that had broken down, 
shows that it was part of the political organization, and that 
it was considered essential for the well-being of the community. 
In this way alone can the multiplicity of characteristics be 
explained, and not by some fortuitous process at work all over 
the world. 

The hostility between the moieties is a remarkable feature of the 
dual organization. It is not necessary to inquire at the moment 
into its origin. Its effects on the archaic civilization are evident. 
For in more than one instance, in eastern Polynesia and among 
the ancestors of the Maori, it is directly said that this hostility 
finally broke up the old order and gave rise to migrations of peoples. 
Such an instability is bound finally to lead to such consequences 
in certain circumstances. The case of the Mekeo tribes of British 
New Guinea, added to those just mentioned, suggests that this 
hereditary hostility, together with the custom of human sacrifice, 
serves to account for much of the warfare of the region. 

This analysis has as yet taken no account of political groupings. 

1 Cf. B. Spencer 6, who rejects the idea of admixture. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 327 


The important part played by ruling groups in the story already 
told makes it certain that they must figure prominently in the 
dual organization. In some places the dual grouping of clans, 
the dual divisions of villages, and the dual divisions of the larger 
community, evidently depend upon a duality in the ruling group. 
The Nair chiefs had adherents divided into two groups, which 
correspond to the right- and left-hand castes of southern India ; 
but it is not said whether this duality corresponds to any duality 
of the rulers. This may indeed formerly have been the case ; 
for the right- and left-hand grouping of villages in British New 
Guinea is accompanied by a duality of chiefs, each side of the 
village, among the Koita, Roro, and other tribes, having its own 
hereditary chief. The work of Kruyt and others has revealed the 
existence of dual States and ruling families in Sumba and in 
Timor, while some of the Macassar and Bugi States of Southern 
Celebes have dual ruling groups. The co-existence of dual ruling 
families and dual divisions of a village or tribe is recorded in the 
Pelews and Ponape in Micronesia, where the clans are grouped 
round two principal families, who supply the head chiefs of the 
village ; Fijian villages are divided into ‘; nobles ” and “ teeth of 
the land ”; the story of the setting-up of the dual organization 
in Rarotonga suggests also that a duality of ruling families was a 
necessary part of society; Kariki took one side of the island, 
Tangiia took the other side; and each had associated with him 
eighty subordinate chiefs as well as priests; the ruling family 
of the Natchez of Louisiana was dual, and this duality is compared 
with that of the Creek and other tribes of the Gulf region. The 
lack of more facts illustrating the relationship between ruling 
groups and the dual organization is due partly to insufficient 
data. It is evident, however, that further information should 
not be sought where ruling classes are lacking, in Australia, 
Southern Melanesia and elsewhere; in such places discussion 
can only be concerned with mythology. 

A further duality characterizes the ruling element of society. 
Chiefs are divided into sacred or peace chiefs, on one side of the 
community, and war chiefs, on the other side. This form of 
duality is found in Egypt in the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties, when 
to all appearances, the ruling power was divided between the 
royal family of Heliopolis, and other families, associated with 
Memphis in the Fifth Dynasty, and Abydos in the Sixth Dynasty, 
these latter families supplying viziers. Evidence is lacking, so 
far as I am aware, of a similar condition in India, except that the 
grouping of adherents of the Nair chiefs suggests a duality of the 
ruling power. Sacred and war chiefs are widespread from one 
end of the Pacific to the other. In Ponape, Yap, and probably 
the Pelews, the two ruling families around which the villages 
are grouped supply the hereditary peace and war chiefs. Evidence 
is also forthcoming from British New Guinea, where the sacred 
chief is the superior ; he occupies the right-hand side of the village 


328 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


house, and is connected with the right-hand side of the village 
street. In Tonga and Manu’a of Samoa the ruling chiefs were 
divided into peace and war chiefs, the sacred chief being the 
superior : this evidently was also the case in Mangaia before the 
departure of Tangaroa. In North America the grouping of tribes 
into peace and war sides is common ; one side of the tribe supplies 
the peace or sacred chief, and the other supplies the war chief. 

If the dual organization formed part of the archaic civilization, 
the Children of the Sun should play some part in it ; and in the 
distinction of sacred and war chiefs it would be expected that 
they would supply the sacred chiefs. This certainly seems to 
have been the case in the Manu’a settlements of Samoa, and 
among the Natchez, as well as in Egypt. Direct information on 
this point must necessarily be scanty on account of the early 
disappearance of the Children of the Sun in most parts of the 
region. Nevertheless, it is possible to approach the matter other- 
wise, and to observe that, in addition to Samoa, the early organi- 
zation of Mangaia, Rarotonga and that of the ancestors of the 
Maori certainly consisted of two parts, one connected with the 
sky and the other with the underworld. This form of dual 
grouping persists still among the Omaha of North America, in 
spite of the fact that they have lost their class of hereditary 
chiefs. Other Indian tribes of North America display a like 
duality of sky and underworld. It is thus legitimate to claim 
that, in the archaic civilization, the dual grouping of the com- 
munity was centred round a ruling group that, being dual in 
itself, was connected with the sky and the underworld. 

It is now time to turn to the culture-heroes, founders of villages, 
ancestors of ruling groups that have figured throughout the dis- 
cussion. It can be shown that these beings have characteristics 
similar to those possessed by the two sides of the dual grouping ; 
they have similar names, they are hostile, they are connected with 
different colours, they are elder and younger, superior and inferior. 
They have similar names in some instances. 'They occur as Sunda 
and Upusunda and the numerous pairs of brothers with linked 
names in Indian Epic; as the founders of Tha-htun and Pegu in 
Burma, Titha Kumma and Dzaya Kumma, Thamala and 
Wimala; as Khunlun and Khunlai, prince-elder and prince- 
younger, who came from the sky to found the Ahom kingdom of 
Assam ; the great ruins of Nanmatal in Ponape of the Carolines 
are connected with Olo-sipa and Olo-sopa, who in all probability 
are Children of the Sun. The Koita of British New Guinea claim 
descent from two brothers, Kirimaikulu and Kirimaikapa ; in 
Manu’a of Samoa, “‘ Fue, the son of Tangaloa, that came down 
from heaven, had two names, Fue-tan-gata and Fue-sa; he 
peopled the two flat lands ” ; one account of the early rulers of 
Tau in Manu’a makes the rulers of the two sides of the island 
Ali-’i-a-tama, and Ali’i-a-matua, the younger Ali’a and the elder 
Alia ; in the story of the foundation of Samata in Savai’i the two 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 829) 


boys are named Mata-i-uta and Mata-i-tai, ‘“‘ Eyes to inland ” and 
‘* Hyes to sea ”’ ; in Tahiti, Honoura calls himself ‘‘ Maui behind ” 
and “‘ Maui in front,” a dual name for a single person ; the ancestors 
of the race were Tii Maaraauta and Tii Maaratai ; in America dual 
names of twins occur; the Kitche twins were Hun-came and 
Vucub-came, Hunbatz and Hunchouen. Throughout the region, 
therefore, culture-heroes and other traditional beings have dual 
names. They are also hostile and different in disposition ; the 
story of Sunda and Upusunda centres round their ultimate quarrel 
over a girl ; in Melanesia To Kumbinana and To Kovuvuru of the 
Gazelle Peninsula have different qualities, being clever and full 
of guile on the one hand, stupid and ignorant on the other ; one 
is light and the other dark. In the Banks Islands and the New 
Hebrides, the two culture-heroes have similar qualities. In 
North America the culture-heroes are hostile and possess different 
qualities : they play in the ball game; one is light and the other 
dark among the Iroquois; the Huron twins are distinct, one 
being good and the other bad. The twins are connected, by the 
Zuni, with the right and left hands. 

Culture-heroes and other traditional beings differ in their 
characteristics from place to place, but correspond in their 
associations to the ruling groups of the particular community with 
which they are connected. Where the community as a whole is 
connected with the underworld, no apparent distinction exists 
between the culture-heroes. This is so among the Koita people 
of British New Guinea, who claim descent from two brothers, 
Kirimaikulu and Kirimaikape, and a female dog. The culture 
of these people is of secondary derivation from the archaic civili- 
zation, and the dual grouping has no reference to sky and under- 
world. This is also in the foundation of Samata in Savai’i of 
Samoa. The settlement was dual, and so were its founders. They 
did not belong to the original ruling family of Manu’a, the Children 
of the Sun of the Tagaloa family, but were nobles ; consequently, 
in Savai’i, the underworld is the sole place with which men are 
concerned. The duality of the founders of the settlement, and 
their exclusive connexion with the underworld, is a reflection 
of the form of duality of the original settlement. This is again 
shown in the case of the dual settlement of Fasito’otai and Fasito’- 
outa, in Aana, which are connected with the sons of a former king 
of Aana, No mention is made of their connexion with the sky- 
world and the underworld, and their ancestry is not solar. In 
Aana the home of the dead is underground and the gods are war- 
gods. The founders of those settlements which have a ruling 
class associated with the underworld evidently do not show a 
variety such as characterizes the ruling groups that include the 
Children of the Sun. This contrast is well shown in the early 
traditions of Manu’a in Samoa. In Manu’a it is evident that the 
ruling power was dual in the beginning, and this is reflected some- 
what in the character of the first rulers, Taeotagaloa and Le 


330 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Fanonga. They divided the rule of Fitituta between them. 
Taeotagaloa originally was the sacred ruler and Le Fanonga the | 
war chief, and it would be expected that Taeotagaloa would be 
connected with the sky-world and Le Fanonga with the under- 
world. This isso, for Le Fanonga was a war-god of Upolu, having 
come there from Manu’a. Thus connected with the fact that the 
Children of the Sun were in Manu’a, the tworulers of their settle- 
ment were connected respectively with the sky and the under- 
world. Then came the remarkable change in which Taeotagaloa 
changed himself into a war-god, and went to the other side of the 
island. This means, if the conclusions arrived at be correct, that 
a political change had taken place, and that the Children of the 
Sun had disappeared,! so that henceforth the whole of the 
mythology of the island was centred round the underworld. This 
is seen in the settlements of Upolu and Savai’i, already mentioned, 
in which the founders are both apparently connected with the 
underworld. In Manu’a the duality of founders of settlements 
accompanies that of the ruling family. This consisted of two 
branches, the Children of the Sun, represented by the Tagaloa 
family, and a group connected with the underworld, represented 
by La Fe’e and others. The duality of the settlements is thus 
faithfully reflected in their founders. When the Children of the 
Sun disappear, so does the duality of sky and underworld ; the 
other side of the ruling group sets up a like organization, but 
associated solely with the underworld. 

What is the real meaning of the twin nature ascribed to culture- 
heroes? It is patent that the real founders of dual settlements 
were not twins, and that they did not have names such as “ Eyes 
to sea’? and “‘ Eyes to land.’’ The twins are not real. They 
correspond in characteristics to such dual settlements, and thus 
must be their mythological reflections. This is not the end of 
the matter ; for the dual settlements are themselves presumably 
but the reflections of the ruling group. It follows, therefore, that 
the culture-heroes reflect the nature of the ruling class of the 
community. 

This conclusion is in harmony with those already reached 
concerning the relationship between mythology and _ history, 
between gods and men. It has repeatedly been evident that the 
social, political, economic and religious sides of the life of a com- 
munity are inextricably interlinked. This latest conclusion only 
carried one step farther the realization of the mutual inter- 
dependence of the various aspects of society. In the present 
instance it is evident that the dual settlements have an objective 
existence; the twins must therefore be their mythological 
reflections, for they have similar characteristics to those of the 
settlements. 

The corelusion, that the founders of settlements derive their 
characteristics ultimately from the ruling group that founded the 

1 Perhaps exterminated as in Timor. 


DUAL ORGANIZATION—AMERICA AND CONCLUSION 331 


settlement, makes it possible to suggest, from the character- 
istics of the founders, the form of the original ruling group. It 
has been seen that settlements derived from the secondary move- 
ments show no signs of a distinction of sky-world and underworld ; 
this characterizes only the communities of the archaic civilization, 
as Egypt, Manu’a, Mangaia and elsewhere. The certain existence 
of this distinction in such places makes it possible to claim that, 
wherever the founders of settlements are connected with the sky 
and the underworld, this duality was derived from the original 
ruling group itself, and from no other source. 

An examination of those eases where such a distinction exists 
between the founders of communities show that they are usually 
Children of the Sun by a process of theogamy. Sometimes it 
is only said that they were born of women from the sky-world. 
In either case they are connected with the ruling class of the 
archaic civilization. In India the sun-gods, especially Kasyapa, 
are the fathers of twins, or of brothers with the characteristics 
of the dual organization. The Garudas and Nagas in India are 
the children of sisters, their father being Kasyapa the Sun; the 
sons of women from the sky in North America are connected with 
the sky and the underworld. In both these countries, therefore, 
reason exists for believing that the ruling groups originally con- 
sisted of two parts connected respectively with the sky and the 
underworld. In this scheme can be incorporated the Kiche- 
Xibalba group of ruling families, connected respectively with the 
sky and the underworld, hostile, and reputed to be twins. Doubt- 
less the twin names of founders of settlements are derived from the 
settlements themselves. This feature of the Children of the Sun 
and other founders of settlements can thus be put on one side as 
secondary. When that is done these traditional beings still possess 
characteristics that need explanation. In certain places, such as 
Manu’a in Samoa, Mangaia, Rarotonga and elsewhere, the founders 
of ruling houses have entirely different names and are connected 
with the sky and the underworld respectively. Taeotagaloa and Le 
Fanonga in Manu’a; Karikiand Tangiia; perhaps Rongo and Taga- 
loa in Mangaia ; Garuda and the Nagasin India. This corresponds 
evidently to the duality of the ruling group which consists of two 
families. One important fact remains, however, even when the 
twin characteristics have been cleared out of the way. The two 
beings are brothers, usually half-brothers, and usually the father 
is a being of the sky-world. Taeotagaloa and Le Fanonga were 
both the sons of Tagaloaui, and they could go to the sky to attend 
council meetings. That is to say, in the case of Le Fanonga, 
a being of the underworld belonged to the sky-world, or rather 
was descended from a father of the sky-world. How comes this 
unity of father and duality of association ? This question will 
have to be answered in Chapter XXIII. 


CHAPTER XXI 
THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 


archaic civilization struck one practical note. Although 
in many instances the dual grouping has been allowed to 
fall into decay, yet, in the cases of Tahiti, Mangaia, Rarotonga, 
as well as among North American tribes, it was deliberately 
reconstructed after its disruption. This points to its utility in 
the lives of the people. A study of one example where the dual 
organization was set up again, shows that the dual grouping in 
itself was not necessarily the cultural element that was most 
prized ; the real aim was to reconstruct the tribal council that 
could carry on the affairs of the community. In the Huron story 
already recounted, the people were divided into clans, each 
connected with an animal. ‘These clans were, moreover, grouped 
into two sets, that were said to sit on opposite sides of the fire. 
The meaning of that phrase lies in the fact that the heads of the 
clans sat in the tribal council, and that, during the meetings, the 
two sides of the dual grouping sat on opposite sides of a fire. 
Since these people took the trouble to reconstitute the tribal 
council, it evidently must have formed an important part of the 
life of the tribe. In the case of the Huron, or Wyandot, it has 
been suggested that the reconstruction of the tribe took place 
after this disappearance of the ruling group. If that be so, the 
people evidently laid more store by the council of elders of clans, 
than they did by the rulers of the tribe. Similarly, the Omaha, 
having lost their hereditary chiefs, retained their council, and 
preserved certain symbols of unity of the tribe, such as the 
pipes. Since such peoples are supposed to have derived their 
social and political organization from the archaic civilization, it 
follows that the clan grouping and the council must also have 
belonged to the archaic civilization. It would also be expected 
that, reasoning from the cases of the Huron and Omaha, the 
council of the archaic civilization would show more power of 
persistence than the kingship, and that the disappearance of the 
ruling class would not involve that of the council. 
Another feature of the clan system of the Huron and Omaha 
must be remembered—the association of each clan with an 
332 


Ts discussion of the dual organization of society in the 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 333 


animal.! Is this a constant feature of the archaic civilization, 
or do the local circumstances in North America account for it ? 
From general reasoning it would be expected that it belonged 
to the archaic civilization, and inquiry will show this to be the 
case. It may, therefore, be asked: Do the communities of the 
archaic civilization consist of related groups claiming descent 
from a common ancestor, the heads of each group forming a 
council to adjust the affairs of the community ? And are these 
groups invariably connected with some emblem ? 

Egypt was divided into a number of provinces, called by the 
Greeks “‘nomes.’’ They existed in pre-Dynastic times, and were 
probably twenty in number, ten in each part of Egypt.2 As 
to their constitution, Maspero says that: “The country was 
divided among communities, whose members were supposed to 
be descended from the same seed (pait) and to belong to the same 
family (paitu) ; the chiefs of them were called ropaitu, the guar- 
dians, or pastors of the family, and in later times their name 
became a title applicable to the nobility in general.” * The nomes 
were designated by signs of sorts, animals, plants or material 
objects. Thus the hawk gave its name to the “ Followers of the 
Hawk.” The dog, ibis, scorpion, lion, ram, owl, elephant, bull, 
palm, bee, viper, reed, sycamore, bow, arrows, harpoon, axe, 
boomerang, mountains, and the sun also appear as ensigns.4 The 
relationship between the animal of the nome and the people of 
the nome, especially the ruling group, was close ; it was supposed 
to be the actual incarnation of the deity of the nome; it guarded 
the community during peace ; in war it marched at the head of the 
army. Periodically a woman slept in the temple of the nome- 
god, and was supposed to have connexion with the animal.* This 
relationship played an important part in later times in connexion 
with the kingship, the foundation of the sovereignty being the 
result of struggles between the ruling families of the nomes. But 
that side of the development of the relationship between men and 
animals cannot be discussed here; the inquiry must be kept 
strictly to the connexion between the territorial divisions and the 
animals, and to the part played by these territorial divisions and 
the later history of the country. 

An inquiry into the political functions of the nomes of Kgypt 
enters into obscure places. Breasted gives, as usual, a lucid 
account of what is known. He shows that in the early dynastic 
times, known as the Old Kingdom, and comprising the first six 


1 The association is sometimes with plants or material objects. This 
point will be dealt with in the next chapter. 

2 Breasted iv. 30, 31. 

8 Maspero ii. 70-1. It must be remarked that his statements with regard 
to kinship are disputed. 

# Moret iii. 188-9. 

5 Id., 193. What of the.plants and material objects that are associated 
with some nomes? It would be interesting to know their relationship to 
the people of the nomes. ; 


334 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


dynasties, the whole of the administration of the country was 
bound up with the ruling family. ‘“‘ The entire complex of palace 
and adjoining offices was known as the ‘Great House,’ which 
was thus the centre of administration as well as the dwelling of 
the royal household. Here was focussed the entire system of 
government, which ramified throughout the country. 

‘“* For purposes of local government, Upper Egypt was divided 
into some twenty administrative districts, and later we find as 
many more in the Delta. These ‘nomes’ were presumably the 
early principalities, from which the local princes who ruled them 
in prehistoric days had long disappeared. At the head of such 
a district or nome there was in the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties 
an official appointed by the Crown, and known as * First under the 
King.’ Besides his administrative function as ‘local governor ’ 
of the nome, he also served in a judicial capacity, and therefore 
bore also the title of ‘judge.’ In Upper Egypt these ‘ local 
governors ’ were also sometimes styled ‘ Magnates of the Southern 
Ten,’ as if there were a group among them enjoying higher rank 
and forming a college or council of ten. While we are not so well 
informed regarding the government of the North, the system 
there was evidently very similar, although there were perhaps 
fewer ‘local governors.’ Within the nome he administered the 
‘local governor’ had under his control a miniature State, an 
administrative unit with all the organs of government : a treasury, 
a court of justice, a land-office, a service for the conservation of 
the dykes and canals, a body of militia, a magazine for their 
equipment ; and in these offices a host of scribes and recorders, 
with an ever-growing mass of archives and local records.” !_ These 
local governors in their judicial capacity were said to be “* attached 
to Nekhen ” (Hieraconpolis), “an ancient title descended from 
the days when Nekhen was the royal residence of the Southern 
Kingdom.”’? In the New Kingdom the Vizier’s ‘“‘ Hall’ was 
also called the “*‘ Great Council,” the vizier being in charge of the 
administration of the State. In the Fifth Dynasty, when the 
Children of the Sun appear on the scene, the ruling power was 
dislocated, and the rulers of the nomes took the opportunity of 
making their office hereditary, instead of elective, as hitherto. 
In those days, therefore, Egypt probably was governed as 
follows: At the head of the State was a king, the sacred ruler. 
Then came the vizier, who, from the Fifth Dynasty onwards, 
belonged to a different family. He presided over a Council 
composed of the hereditary rulers of the territorial divisions, 
each of which was distinguished by some ensign. Each nome was 
ruled by its Governor.® 

In India the inquiry falls under two heads: firstly, the relation- 
ship between clans and animals ; secondly, the mode of government 

1 Breasted v. 79-80. 2 Td., 81. 


* Cf. Newberry i. 23, for a description of the Vizier’s Hall, where he was 
assisted by the Elders of the Southern Tens. See also Strabo xvii. I. 37. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 335 


of the clans and of the people as a whole. Egypt provides little 
evidence to show whether the people of each nome believed them- 
selves to be related to the animal or plant, or thought that their 
ancestor was associated with the material object from which it 
took its name. But in India, and the countries to the east, a 
definite relationship binds together clans and ensigns, which is 
well known under the heading of Totemism. This relationship 
may be defined provisionally, with Rivers, as: ‘(1) The 
connexion of a species of animal or plant, or of an inanimate 
object or class of inanimate objects, with a definite social 
group of the community, and typically with an exogamous group 
or clan; (2) a belief in a relationship between the members 
of the social group and the animal, plant or object, a belief in 
descent from the animal, plant or object being a frequent form 
which this relationship takes : (3) respect shown to the animal, 
plant or object, the typical way of showing the respect being that 
the animal or plant may not be eaten, while an inanimate object 
may not be used at all or only with certain restrictions.” + 

The subject of totemism is very large, and, as may be seen from 
the definition, complicated ; for not only is descent from the totem 
claimed, but also the system is coupled with various restrictions. 
For the present attention will be paid chiefly to the totemic clan 
in itself; its relations to other clans, in the form of marriage 
regulations, will be discussed in a later chapter. 

Fortunately it is not necessary to go into the distribution of 
totemism in detail; that task has been performed by Sir James 
Frazer. He shows that totemic institutions are possessed by 
the Dravidian- and Austronesian-speaking peoples, and to a 
certain extent by the tribes of Assam, but are lacking among the 
Aryan-speaking peoples.2. The Aryans are therefore distinguished 
in yet another way from the other peoples of India. It is possible, 
however, to go farther. The Aryans of India formerly had sun- 
gods, which have been pushed into the background by Indra, a 
war-god. These sun-gods were the children of Aditi, the mother 
goddess; so, bearing in mind the relationship between ruling 
groups and deities, it is possible that the Aryans formerly had 
totemic institutions, and that they are related, by their ruling 
groups, to Dravidian and other royal families. 

The Epics and Puranas give accounts of the beginnings of the 
earth and of human society, that agree in fundamentals, even if 
they differ in detail. The creation of the universe is ascribed 
to Brahma, who produced certain male beings, called mind-born 
sons, who were the ancestors of mankind ; he is also said to have 
produced all animals and plants.?. One ‘of his mind-born sons, 
named Daksha, became the father of sons through his wife Asikini, 
whom he had wedded when he decided to begin sexual intercourse. 
The story of these sons is suggestive. They numbered five thousand, 


1 Rivers ix. IT. 75. 2 J. G. Frazer ii. ITV. 329 e.s, 
3 H. H. Wilson 37 e.s. Code Sen ie 


336 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


and Daksha determined that the universe should be peopled by 
them. But, owing to the intervention of Narada, another mind- 
born son of Brahma, they decided first of all to explore the universe : 
‘* Having heard the word of Narada, the sons of Daksha dispersed 
themselves through the regions, and to the present day have not 
returned ; as rivers that lose themselves in the ocean come back 
no more.”’ Daksha then propagated some more sons, with like 
result: + then he created sixty daughters of the daughter of 
Virana (Asika), his wife, and gave some of them in marriage to 
Kasyapa, one of the forms of the sun-god. These daughters were 
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arishta, Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, 
Krodhavasa, Ida, Khasa, Kadru, Muni;? so Aditi, the great 
mother of the gods of the Aryans, is grouped with Danu, Diti and 
others, who are the race-mothers of the Dravidians. The posterity 
of all these sisters are, moreover, the Children of the Sun. These 
gods bore their mother’s name ; and just as the Adityas were the 
children of Aditi, so also were the Danavas and the Daityas the 
children of Danu and Diti. But it is possible to go still farther ; 
for “‘ Tamra” (a wife of Kasyapa) had six illustrious daughters, 
Suki, Syeni, Bhasi, Sugrivi, Suchi and Gridhrika. Suki gave 
birth to parrots, owls and crows; Syeni to hawks; Bhasi to 
kites ; Gridhrika to vultures; Suchi to water-fowl; Sugrivi to 
horses, camels and asses. Such were the progeny of Tamra: 
Vinata bore to Kasyapa two celebrated sons, Garuda and Arjuna ; 
the former, also called Suparna, was the king of the feathered 
tribes, and the remorseless enemy of the serpent race : the Children 
of Surasa were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents, 
traversing the sky. 

‘The progeny of Kadru were a thousand powerful many-headed 
serpents, of immeasurable might, subject to Garuda; the chief 
amongst whom were Sesha, Vasuki, Takshaka, Sankha, Sweta, 
Mahapadma, Kambala, Aswatara, Elapatra, Naga, Karkota, 
Dhananjaya, and many other fierce and venomous serpents. 

“The family of Krodhavasa were all sharp-toothed monsters, 
whether on the earth, amongst the birds, or in the waters, that 
were devourers of flesh. 

** Surabhi was the mother of cows and buffaloes; Ira of trees 
and creeping plants and shrubs and every kind of grass; Khasa, 
of the Rakshasas and Yakshas; Muni of the Apsarasas; and 
Arishta of the illustrious Gandharbas. 

‘These were the children of Kasyapa, whether movable or 
stationary, whose descendants multiplied infinitely through 
successive generations.’’? Thus the enemies of the Aryans were 
divided into families of animals, and, as Sir James Frazer has 
shown, this is characteristic of the Dravidian- and Munda-speaking 
peoples of India. The Aryans, being related in this manner to 
the Asura, Naga and other peoples, who evidently were totemie, 
would therefore seem to have passed through the totemic stage, 

1 H, H. Wilson 117. 2 Id., 122. *Id., 150-1. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 337 


and to have abandoned it when they changed to patrilineal 
institutions. 

The political organization of this early society is little known. 
Rhys Davids gives an account of the life in the days of Buddha 
which probably holds true generally for the Dravidian com- 
munities. Buddha was a member of the Sakhya clan, one of a 
number scattered throughout the valley of the Ganges, and 
probably belonging to the Naga race.1 The administration of 
the clans was as follows: “The administrative and judicial 
business of the clan was carried out in public assembly, at which 
young and old were alike present, in their common Mote Hall 
(santhagan) at Kapilavastu. A chief was chosen to preside over 
the sessions, and over the State when the sessions were not sitting, 
this chief being called the raja.’’?. In other towns were also Mote 
Halls. The affairs of the villages were carried out in the open 
assemblies of the householders, ‘‘ held in the groves which, then 
as now, formed so distinctive a feature of each village in the long 
and level alluvial plain.” * Thus people, closely connected with 
the Naga race that presumably was grouped in totemic clans, had 
councils for the transaction of public business. These clans were 
not ruled over by a class, but formed autonomous units. The 
council plan was typical, not merely of the life of the State, but 
also of that of the village: in the case of the capital, the council 
met in the Mote Hall, and in the case of the village, it met in the 
grove; this provides an explanation for the grove that charac- 
terizes Dravidian villages. 

It is possible, however, to bring this matter closer into touch 
with the archaic civilization. The Khasi of Assam are divided 
into totemic clans. Each State is ruled over by a chief, who 
usually holds in his hands both the spiritual and the temporal 
powers; but he does not rule despotically, for he has to consult 
his durbar or executive council, on which sit the chief men of the 
State.4 This durbar is supposed to be of divine origin, which 
probably means that it was founded by people of the archaic 
civilization. When in session, the members of the durbar sit on 
stones arranged in a circle;® that is to say, the State council is 
related to the custom of erecting stone circles, which has been 
claimed as a feature of the archaic civilization. 

Among the Naga tribes of Assam the institution of the council 
is not so well defined. Naga tribes are divided into clans, now 
patrilineal, that formerly were matrilineal, and possibly totemic. 
The Sema Naga chief conducts the village business in the following 
way: ‘He has to direct the village in war, nominally at any 
rate, and to decide either by himself or in consultation with the 
elders (Chochomi), all questions of the relations between his own 
and neighbouring villages. The extent to which he would consult 


1 Oldham 172, 180, Eons Indian Arch. Rep. 1898: de Mason 3: Rhys 
Davids 3. 2 Rhys Davids 19. $ Id., 20. 
* Gurdon 67. 5 Id., 92. 
22 


338 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


his elders would depend almost entirely on the personal character 
of the chief himself.” 1 This system of village councils is thus 
much less definite than that existing among the Khasi, and, as 
will be seen, among other peoples more directly associated with 
the archaic civilization. The culture-sequence thus tends to 
connect the council system with the archaic civilization. It is 
curious that the Asi clan of the Sema Naga, as well as the Kacha 
Naga, erect, in memory of rich men, shallow circles of stones set 
in the ground so as to slope away from the centre of the circle. 
Stone circles, usually dilapidated, are found in Marring Naga 
villages,? and thus may formerly have played a part in the social 
life. It must not be forgotten, also, that a large stone circle, of 
unknown origin, exists at Uilong in Manipur. It is thus possible 
that the Khasi custom of sitting during council meetings on stone 
seats ranged in a circle may formerly have been possessed by the 
Naga, together with the dual organization, but that it has been 
given up as a result of the break-up of the old order. 

The Mundas of Chota Nagpur, who make great use of stone, and 
irrigate their lands, also have councils, the members of which sit 
on stones arranged in a circle. The Mundas are grouped in clans, 
similar to the Sakhyas, Lichavis and other clans of the time of 
Buddha, and their political organization is exactly similar. When 
they arrived in Chota Nagpur, they consisted of a small number 
of totemic groups, and were united to the Santhals, Bhumijes 
and other peoples. In the course of time the clans increased 
greatly, and members went out to found new settlements, but 
these new clans still retained their political organization, that of 
the council, even when living in distinct settlements. The 
council meetings are held in the village place. ‘‘ Here public 
meetings are held, the Panchayat hold their sittings, offenders 
against social rules as well as suspected witches and sorcerers are 
brought to justice, and the young folk of the village assemble 
in moonlit nights and on festive occasions to dance and sing. 
A number of large stone slabs placed underneath the tree serve 
as seats for actors and spectators.” + This is not definite evidence 
of the use of stones for seats on assemblies, but it certainly is 
suggestive, in connexion with the evidence concerning Khasi 
councils. 

The Todas, who are divided into clans, but without any trace, 
so Rivers states, of their ever having been totemic, have councils 
to regulate their affairs. ‘‘ The most important feature of Toda 
government is the naim, or noim, a council having a definite 
constitution. The naim proper has to do with the affairs of the 
Todas in general, and, in addition, more informal councils, con- 
sisting of the chief members of a clan, may be held to settle matters 
arising within the clan. It seems, however, that the supreme 
naim may sometimes be called upon to settle the internal affairs 


1 Hutton i. 150. 2 Hodson 188. = Roy i. 413. 4 Td., i. 387. 


. THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 339 


of a clan.” 1 The members of this council number five, and they 
are drawn from certain clans. As for their meeting-place: 
**On the slopes below the hill called Mirson, near Paikara, there 
are the remains of ruined walls marking a place where the naim 
used to meet. This place is called Idrgudipem, and seems to have 
been at one time the chief meeting-place.”’ At present the naim 
may meet anywhere, and its members sit in a semicircular row.? 

The hills that surround the Todas are sometimes crowned with 
stone circles, probably not the work of Todas themselves, but 
associated with their gods or ancestors. Toda gods live like 
themselves. ‘‘ In the legends he lives much the same kind of life 
as the mortal Toda, having his dairies and his buffaloes. The 
sacred dairies and the sacred buffaloes of the Todas are still 
regarded as being in some measure the property of the gods, and 
the dairymen are looked upon as their priests. The gods hold 
councils and consult one another just as do the Todas, and they 
are believed to be swayed by the same motives and to think in the 
same way as the Todas themselves. 

** At the present time most of the gods are believed to inhabit 
the summits of the hills, but they are not seen by mortals. Before 
the Todas were created, the gods lived on the Nilgiri Hills alone, 
and then it was believed that there followed a period during 
which gods and men inhabited the hills together. The gods ruled 
the men, ordained how they should live and originated the various 
customs of the people. The Todas can now give no definite 
account of their beliefs about the transition from this state of 
things to that which now exists. 

** Kach clan of the Todas has a deity especially connected with 
it. This deity is called the nodrochi of the clan, and is believed 
to have been the ruler of the clan when gods and men lived 
together.”’ 3 

The Todas thus ascribe their social institutions to the gods, 
who formerly lived in the Nilgiri Hills. These gods, according 
to the interpretation put on them in former chapters, would be 
rulers of the archaic civilization: so the Todas, according to 
their accounts, owe their political and social organization to these 
people. The Todas say that the gods hold council meetings on 
some special hill-top, each god coming from the hill where he lives. 
** There is one important feature which is said to be common to 
all the hills inhabited by deities. They all have on their summits 
the stone circles which the Todas call pun. My informants were 
very definite about this and fully understood that these stone 
circles corresponded to the cairns and barrows opened by Breeks 
and others.’’* Since the Todas’ gods live on hills with stone 
circles, and hold their councils on such hills, it is reasonable to 
suppose that these stone circles were their council-places, as 
among the Khasi. The Todas’ culture is an evident degradation 


1 Rivers i. 540, 550. 2 Td., i. 550-1. 
3 Id., i. 185. * Id., 444. 


340 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


product of something more advanced, and the facts suggest that 
the former society would possess divine rulers, a dual organization, 
clans, perhaps totemic, and a system of council meetings held in 
stone cireles. Of this the Todas have retained what appertained 
to the council, evidently the feature they most prized. As Rivers 
says, they are ‘“‘ the slaves of their traditions and of the laws and 
regulations which have been handed down to them by their 
ancestors.”?! They have in recent times abandoned a stone 
building for the council meetings, and now meet anywhere; so 
it is possible that they formerly used stone circles. 

Totemism in Indonesia is confined to but few peoples, the most 
important being the Batta of Sumatra, whose culture has already 
been noticed as showing strong signs of Dravidian influence. 
Elsewhere on the west coast of Sumatra, as in Mandailing, among 
the Gajos, and perhaps in other parts of that island, persist traces 
of totemism.2. There are traces of totemism in Seran, Ambon, 
Buru, in the Babar Islands, and elsewhere in the group east of 
Timor, but little is known of the institution in these places. No- 
where in Indonesia, so far as I am aware, is there any totemism 
with matrilineal descent, apparently its original form. 

It is possible to ascribe to the people of the archaic civilization 
a belief in relationship with animals that is not found among the 
indigenous peoples of Indonesia whom they civilized. I have 
already summed up the evidence on this point as follows: 
‘«« Several facts go to show that the whole group of notions con- 
cerning the relationship between men and animals were introduced 
by the stone-using immigrants (the people of the archaic civiliza- 
tion). For they appear to be more closely connected with animals 
than the indigenous peoples. The chiefs of Kupang in Timor are 
said to be descended from crocodiles ; and the carved crocodiles 
on the backs of the stone seats of chiefs in Nias suggest a close 
relationship between these creatures and the chiefs. Food 
restrictions among the Naga and Khasi in Assam fall more especi- 
ally upon chiefs, priests, those who have erected’ memorials, 
and warriors, all of them persons who are more closely associated 
with the influence of the stone-using immigrants than the rest 
of the people. 

‘“‘'The available evidence thus points to the stone-using immi- 
grants as the introducers of certain notions concerning the 
relations between men and some animals. These notions are 
based, it seems, upon the assumption that men and these animals 
differ from other organic beings in possessing a ‘ soul-substance ” 
(equal to the ‘ life ? spoken of in Chapter XIV), which is derived 
from the sky-world. In such circumstances it is to be expected 
that the attitude of the immigrants towards animals which are 
connected to them by such close ties of kinship will differ pro- 
foundly from that of the indigenous peoples, who, so far as can 
be told, before their coming possessed no ideas concerning the 


1 Rivers i. 446. 2 J. G. Frazer ii. II. 192 2.8. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 341 


nature of soul-substance and the relations between men and 
animals. Strong evidence of the existence of such a difference 
of attitude has already been discovered. For in the punishment 
tales which were discussed in Chapter XVI it was found that the 
sky-people were enraged when certain animals were laughed at. 
The animals mentioned in the tales were cats, dogs, frogs, apes, 
fowls and pigs. This list is very like the other two already 
compiled, and it would probably be more like if a greater number 
of tales had been collected by workers in the field. The anger of 
the sky-people is thus aroused when animals, which, according 
to the evidence, are related to them by the closest ties of kinship, 
are laughed at by people who have no suspicion of the existence 
of such a relationship.’? 1 The evidence in Indonesia thus points 
definitely to the people of the archaic civilization as the intro- 
ducers of ideas concerning the relationship between man and 
certain animals. 

It has already been stated that the political organization of the 
States in South Celebes was allied to that of the archaic civilization, 
in that it showed strong traces of the dual organization. As 
might be expected, successive incursions of Hindus and Arabs 
have obscured much of the past social organization, so that, so 
far as I know, no indisputable signs exist of a former grouping in 
totemic clans. Nevertheless, government in the South Celebes 
States differs profoundly from that of the Hindus and Moham- 
medans elsewhere in Indonesia. Their councils are organized 
on a definite basis, and play an important part in the government 
of thecountry. These States are in divisions, each ruled over by a 
noble, who sits on the council of the State. The constituent 
States thus resemble the totemic clans, in that their heads sit on 
the council of the whole community. The resemblance is even 
closer: for the members of the councils each had an ensign; 
which corresponds to the usage in Egypt, where the nomes were 
so distinguished.? 

The Patasiwa of Seran, one of the moieties of the dual organiza- 
tion of that island, have three.divisions, which are related to 
those of the Kakian society. Hach division of the Kakian society 
is presided over by a council called Saniri, the head of which, 
called the Kapala saniri, is aided by an assistant. Each council 
also has two officials called respectively, saer ue, “the bottom of 
the flagstaff,” and saer hahue, “‘ the top of the flagstaff,’? who 
formerly were war chiefs.2 The members of the Kakian society 
sit, in their club-houses, on stone seats, and therefore in this 
respect come into line with the councils of the Khasi, Mundas and 
others. ‘Thus, in Indonesia, the communities nearest the archaic 
civilization in culture are ruled over by means of councils, this 
form of government being less prominent in the rest of the region. 
The evidence, therefore, so far as it goes, tends to associate, in 

1 Perry vii. 159-60. 2 Berg 43. 
3 Wilken 348-9. 


342 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Indonesia, the totemic clan grouping, with its system of councils, 
with the archaic civilization. 

Ponape of the Carolines, noted for immense remains of the 
archaic civilization, possesses pure totemism in so far as it connotes 
descent from animals or plants. Families believe in their descent’ 
from totems, called ‘‘ mother,’’ which are holy in the clan and 
must not be hurt.!. The account of Christian in his work on the 
Carolines suggests that what he terms “ tribes ”’ are really clans, 
which consist of a chiefly family, and presumably freemen, 
commoners and slaves. Christian mentions several of these 
tribes as possessing “‘ totems,’’ which evidently are really looked 
upon as the ancestors of the rulers of the tribe. The tribe or clan 
formed a unit: ‘“‘ The chiefs mingle amongst their tribesmen with 
great familiarity and affability, which, no doubt, forms a fresh 
bond of sympathy and union. They all hold together loyally ; 
offend one, and all are eager to take up his quarrel. If the chief 
be a kindly hospitable man, his people will follow his example. 
If he be a rogue and a churl, his people will act as rogues and 
churls. And this I have observed is a characteristic of Caroline 
Islanders in general. They seem to have little independence of 
judgment, and love to follow the lead of their chiefs in all things 
crooked or straight, right or wrong.’ 2? These nobles, together with 
the priests—Chaumaro, high-priests, and Laiap, lesser priests— 
formed, with the king, the great council of the kingdom of Ponape, 
which, while in session, sat on a stone platform in the Council 
Lodge.? I am unable to tell whether each “tribe,” or clan, had 
a eeudcll house. Probably this was so, for each clan in Yap has 
one. 

The Pelew Islanders possess pure totemism, or something 
practically indistinguishable from it. The group forms part of 
Micronesia, which has abundant traces of the archaic civilization. 
The people ‘‘are divided into a large number of exogamous 
families or clans (blay) with descent in the maternal line. In an 
ordinary village there will be members of a score of such clans 
living together. Each clan has its sacred animal, bird, or fish, 
in which perhaps, though this is not certain, the souls of dead 
members of the clan may formerly have been supposed to lodge. 
Among these sacred creatures or clan totems, as we may call them, 
are sea-eels, crabs, fish and parrots. Further, each district or 
village has its god, and all these district or village gods have their 
sacred animals, which are generally fish. Among the sacred 
animals of the village gods are the shark, the rayfish, the Platyurus 
fasciatus, the Dysporus, the Birgus latre, a species of crab, the 
puffin, and a species of night-heron (Nycticorax manilensis). 
According to Mr. J. Kubary, our principal authority on the Pelew 
Islands, the sacred animals of the village gods have certainly been 
developed out of the sacred animals of the families or clans, The 


1 Hahl 10. 2 Christian iv. 326. 
8 Id., iv."325-6. 4 Id., 290. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 343 


inference, if it is sound, points to totemism as the origin of all 
these cases of sacred animals associated with families.” ... 

The evidence certainly points to the existence of pure totemism 
in the Pelews at some time in the past. Probably incursions of 
warlike peoples from New Guinea have caused much disturbance 
in the social organization, so that the original totemism has become 
masked. On the assumption that village gods are ancestors of 
ruling classes, it certainly looks as if these ancestors were connected 
with totemic institutions. The whole problem is, however, 
obscure, and hardly capable of any useful discussion. The forth- 
coming account by Dr. Kramer will doubtless help much to 
elucidate this matter. 

In the region of British New Guinea the distribution of totemism 
is such as to suggest its connexion with the archaic civilization, 
for it is found in Bartle Bay, Wagawaga and elsewhere in Southern 
Massim, as well as in the Northern Massim district. The Koita, 
the Roro-speaking tribes and the Mekeo have a clan organization, 
with badges, that without much doubt represents a degenerate 
form of totemism. Throughout this region, whether in the 
matrilineal totemic communities, or in those with patrilineal 
institutions and the non-totemic organization, the chief feature 
of political life is the clan organization. In each village each clan 
as a rule has its own club-house, where matters are discussed, 
exactly as among the Munda and other peoples of India. It is 
important to note that, while the custom of sitting on stones 
arranged in a circle exists in Bartle Bay, Wagawaga and else- 
where in the totemic area, it is not found farther west among the 
Mekeo and the other groups, who use their club-houses for council 
meetings. The great difficulty with British New Guinea is that 
contact with the archaic civilization has apparently largely been 
broken. This makes it possible that, in Bartle Bay, the use of 
stones for squatting-places may be the survival of something more 
important. ‘“ The information that the stone circles and rows of 
stone were ‘ old-time fashion,’ and were only used as squatting- and 
debating-places by the men, is doubtless correct for some of them, 
and there does not seem to be any doubt that some of the Bartle 
Bay circles are debating-places for the men, and correspond to the 
non-cannibal gahana of Bartle Bay.”’?. This suggests that the stone 
circles formerly had a regular ceremonial use for council meetings. 

In British New Guinea the unit of social organization is the 
clan, and not the village. It may happen, as it sometimes does, 
that a single clan occupies a single village ; but often several clans 
are found in the same village. In that case each clan has its own 
council house ; and has right- and left-hand divisions to correspond 
to the opposite sides of the council house. Throughout the region 
each clan, whether totemic or not, is connected with some badge, 
which is carved on the principal posts of the club-house. Thus 
it seems that the essential feature of the totemic organization, in 

1 J. G. Frazer ii. 184. 2 Seligman i. 465, 


344 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the minds of these people, as among the Mundas, Todas and others, 
is not the totemic relationship, but the clan organization in the 
political sense, the council that directs the affairs of the group and 
preserves. intact the customs, for this feature has survived the 
strictly totemic organization with matrilineal institutions. 

In Torres Straits, “‘ while totemism exists among the Western 
Islanders, it is entirely absent as a cult from the Miriam. We 
have no information concerning the other Eastern Islanders, but 
probably they agreed in this respect with the Miriam. ...: We 
may certainly regard the totemism of the Western Islanders as of 
unknown origin.’’ The dual organization of the Western Islanders 
is not found among the eastern group: at the same time a 
degraded form of totemism appears there, as is shown by the 
existence of dances connected with animals, derived from the 
Western Islands, and originally from the mainland of New 
Guinea.” It is noteworthy that the culture-heroes of the Eastern 
Islands, as well as those of the western group, appeared in the 
forms of animals.? Since the culture-heroes of the Eastern 
Islands came from the western group, it would seem that, in 
the course of the transference of culture from one region to another, 
elements were lost. The villages of the islands of the western 
group manage their affairs by means of councils of old men.4 
Formerly chiefs existed: ‘‘ It may be that primarily they were 
the head-men of a totem clan, but as the clan had a definite 
geographical distribution, so the head-men would naturally be 
regarded as chiefs of districts, and a territorial rather than a 
totemic chieftainship would be recognized. It is possible that the 
territorial idea is more ancient and therefore more fundamental 
than the totemic.””® No evidence is to hand concerning the 
account of the government of the Eastern Islands. 

In Melanesia totemism can be ascribed to the influence of the 
archaic civilization. In the first place, it is completely absent 
from the peoples who have, according to the scheme of Rivers, 
come last into the region; and in the matrilineal part of the 
Solomons, that is, the region supposed to be most nearly connected 
with the archaic civilization, totemism is prominent. Rivers 
says: “ The matrilineal part of the Solomon Islands, comprising 
the islands of Florida, Guadalcanar Ysabel and Savo, is another 
region where we find definite exogamous clans associated with 
objects which are regarded as sacred. When these objects are 
animals they may not be eaten, and there is a belief in descent 
from these animals or from human beings more or less closely 
identified with them.” He continues: ‘The general resem- 
blance with the typical institution in this matrilineal region of 
the Solomons is so close that there can be little doubt we have to 
do with totemism, but in a state of modification.” Further, ‘‘ In 

1 Torres Straits Report VI. 254. 2 Id., 255, 282. 


8 Id., 282. @ Id., V. 263. 
| 5 Id., V. 265,8266. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 345 


one region of the Solomons, that comprising Ruviana, Eddystone 
and Vella Lavella, totemism is certainly absent, and there is little 
which can be regarded even as its survival. At the eastern end 
of the Solomons, and especially in San Cristoval, however, 
totemism exists in certain districts, though it would seem as if 
the institution were absent in some parts.” ! 

He sums up in these words: ‘The result of this survey of 
Melanesia has been to show the existence of genuine totemism in 
the Santa Cruz groups, in the Buin and Shortlands region of the 
Solomons, and probably in Sandwich Island in the New Hebrides, 
the latter place differing from the others in the plant-nature of its 
totems. Further, the institution is present, though in a modified 
form, in the matrilineal district of the Solomons, and in a still less 
typical form in Fiji. The regions from which it seems to be most 
clearly absent are the New Hebrides (except Sandwich Island), 
the Banks and Torres Islands, and certain regions of the Solomons, 
or, at any rate, certain parts of these regions. It seems probable 
that its absence in these parts of the Solomons is only due to a 
greater progress of the changes which have given the institution 
the aberrant character it possesses in the matrilineal region of this 
group.” 2 Rivers is definite in claiming that totemism is not 
part of the culture of the latest, most warlike, incursion into the 
Pacific. ‘‘ About one people I suppose to have come into 
Melanesia it is possible to speak with some confidence. It is just 
in those parts of the Solomon Islands where the influence of the 
betel-people seems to have been especially potent that we have 
no evidence whatever for the presence of totemism. No trace of 
this institution has been found in Malaita, Ulawa and Eddystone 
Island. ... This distribution makes it extremely unlikely that 
the betel-people were totemic or that they held beliefs which were 
the starting-point of totemism.”’ 3 

Rivers also seems inclined in his evidence to believe that 
totemism did not belong to the dual organization, which has been 
ascribed to the archaic civilization.4 In this survey I hope to 
show that, speaking generally, the association between the two 
institutions is very close. At any rate, in Southern Melanesia 
the unit of grouping is the clan, whether totemic or local, and the 
old men rule the community as what is called a gerontocracy. 
Unfortunately little is recorded of the matter in this region, but 
what is known tends to bring the social and political organization 
into line with those of peoples already discussed. 

Australia is a classic home of debates on totemism, which occurs 
there in a pure form. The institution in that continent is so 
closely bound up with the life of the tribe that it has long been 
thought that it was an indigenous product. But, of late years, 
the work of Rivers, Schmidt, Graebner, and others, has thrown 
doubt on this. In the present volume, more than one indication 


1 Rivers ix. IJ. 76-7. a cs Sate baa HY gt B 
3 Id., II. 372-3. ame: Aree 8 es ¥ 


346 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


has been found to support the idea that the people of the archaic 
civilization have given to the Australians most of their culture, 
including the totemic grouping. Australian tribes usually have 
the dual, organization, but the ultimate basis of the tribe is the 
clan, both matrilineal and patrilineal. Usually the oldest man 
of the totem is its head: ‘‘ But it does not follow that the head 
of a totem or of a local division has necessarily much, or even any, 
influence outside his totem or division.’? 1 The tribe is governed 
by a council. As Howitt says: ‘I have constantly observed in 
those tribes with which I have had personal acquaintance, that 
the old men met at some place apart from the camp and discussed 
matters of importance, such as arrangements to be made for 
hunting game, for festive or ceremonial meetings, or indeed any 
important matter. Having made up their minds, one of them 
would announce the matter at another meeting, at which all the 
men would be present, sitting or standing round, the younger men 
remaining at the outside. At such a meeting, the younger the 
man the less he would have to say; indeed, I never knew a young 
man who had been only lately admitted to the rights of manhood 
presume to say anything or to take part in the discussion. All 
that they have to do as part of the assembly is to listen to what 
the leaders have to say. 

‘“‘ In the Dieri tribe such meetings as these are composed of the 
heads of totems or local divisions, fighting-men, medicine-men, 
and, generally speaking, of old men of standing and importance.”’ 
The real constitution of the council in this, as in other tribes, is 
that of men who have been fully initiated.2 From India to 
Australia, therefore, the clan organization functions in the political 
constitution of the tribe, and usually exists independently of a 
ruling class. Evidently rulers in the archaic civilization were not 
absolute, and had to reckon with their councils. 

Although in but few communities, as yet, has it been possible 
to observe closely the mode of government of the archaic civiliza- 
tion, in Polynesia we can gain some idea of former political and 
social conditions. The Polynesians show signs of an early condition 
of totemism, most traces of which, according to Rivers, are found 
in Samoa and Tonga. He says: ‘‘ There are a few indications 
that the place of animals in Polynesian religion was greater than 
is generally supposed. When Captain Cook saw the great marae 
in the western part of the island of Tahiti, there were figures of a 
bird and fish on the platform of the pyramid which formed one 
side of the marae. On this platform were placed the images of 
the gods, and the presence of figures of animals in this situation 
suggests that they must have occupied a prominent place in the 
religious cult. The available accounts of Polynesian religion are 
of a most superficial kind, and the record of these animal figures 
is more important than any amount of negative evidence.” 4 


1, Howitt 297. 2 Id., 320-1. 
® Rivers ix. II. 357-8, @ JTd., ix. II. 372. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 347 


Sir James Frazer comments thus upon the totemism of Poly- 
nesia: ‘‘In the wide area occupied by the Polynesian race 
totemism and exogamy appear to exist, or at all events to be 
reported, together, only in the Pelew Islands, which are situated 
to the extreme west and are inhabited by the Micronesian branch 
of the Polynesian family. It is true that in some of the other 
islands, particularly in Samoa, there exists or existed a system of 
animal-worship and plant-worship associated with families or 
clans which bears a close resemblance to totemism, and has 
probably been developed out of it. But in these islands the system 
lacks one of the characteristics of ordinary totemism, in that the 
families or clans are not reported to be exogamous.”}... 

The existence of a modified form of totemism in Polynesia 
accords well with the other signs of the alteration of the archaic 
civilization in that region, the disappearance of the sun-gods, the 
change from matrilineal to patrilineal institutions, the dropping 
of the use of stone, and other signs of the coming of a new order. 
Therefore, if totemism, especially in the form of a claim of descent 
from animals, once existed there, it presumably would have 
changed its form in the course of the great cultural transformation. 

It has more than once been evident that traces of the old order 
could be detected in Samoa. The political and social réles played 
by the various sections of the Samoan people can also be under- 
stood with fair certainty. It is not possible, however, to state 
the exact conditions in the beginning, for wars have obliterated 
landmarks. For instance, as Sir James Frazer states, it is not 
known whether the clans associated with animals were exogamous, 
and, so far as I know, the association between the clans and the 
various divisions of the community are not recorded. The former 
political organization of Samoa is thus described by Stair: ‘* Until 
a comparatively recent period, the government of Samoa appears 
to have approached more nearly to that of Tahiti and the Sandwich 
Islands, which is monarchical, than would be supposed from its 
present condition. Perhaps it may best be described as a com- 
bination of the monarchical and patriarchal forms. Although 
for a long series of years, perhaps for ages, the whole group was 
nominally governed by one head, in whom the supreme authority 
was vested, the different districts were governed to a considerable 
extent by their own local authorities or chiefs, who in many 
respects were independent of each other. Heads of families also 
possessed great power over their relatives and dependants, which 
they used as they pleased, and were irresponsible to any other 
authority.” 2 Stair describes the relationships between the settle- 
ments and the districts. The local affairs of the settlement 
were under their immediate control, and were discussed and 
decided upon in a public assembly composed of the leading men 
of each village or district. More weighty matters, such as declar- 
ing war or making peace, the appointment and installation of 

1 J. G. Frazer ii. II. 150. 2 Stair vi. 76. 


348 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


chiefs, or indeed any matter of general importance to the whole 
district, were deliberated upon in a general fono, or parliament of 
the whole district, composed of representatives of all the leading 
settlements and villages of the district. Each district had its 
leading settlement called its Laumua. — It was the province of the 
Laumua to convene the fono, or general assembly, of its respective 
district, to announce the object for which it had been summoned, 
to preside over its deliberations, to arrange disputed or knotty 
points, as well as to sum up the proceedings and dismiss the 
assembly ; in fact, to sustain the office of chairman. These 
meetings were usually conducted with much formality and 
decorum, the general fono of the district being always held in the 
open air, in the great marae of the leading settlement, or Laumua. 
In sitting in the marae each group of representatives had its 
proper place. 

In the district fono the members were the tulafale, the landed 
aristocracy, as it were; and sometimes the faleupolu or smaller 
landholders. The tulafale were a very powerful class, the real 
power in the settlements being usually vested in them.? They 
could depose the chiefs of the settlement. Thus, for example, in 
Aana, a district of Upolu, the tulafale could depose the Tuiaana, 
for in their gift was the ao, the authority by which he ruled. The 
power belonged to nine families of councillors in the chief settlement 
of Leulumoega, who could appoint or depose the ruler. Some 
of the tulafate group were more important than others; they 
were the tulafale ali’i, the council chiefs, who were often con- 
nected by marriage with the ruler of the district. These chiefs 
were said to be the heads of clans. Also, in the same district, the 
dual settlements of Fasito’otai and Fasito’outa, which are so 
important in the councils, each possessed seven such families, 
Fasito’otai also having a House of Chiefs, seven chiefs that had to 
do with war.4 The heads of local groups, the landed nobility, 
thus had great power, being able to control the whole affairs of 
the community by virtue of their power to depose or appoint the 
ruling chief. 

In Aana of Upolu, from which the examples have hitherto been 
drawn, the chief of the district, when sitting in council, has on 
either side of him a pair of chiefs called tofa’i and tu’itu’i, who 
are his supporters (Stutzen). In Samoa certain royal titles 
can be held by the kings: it is not necessary to go into their 
history ; but it should be stated that they probably did not exist 
in the beginning, but have arisen owing to various historical 
events. These titles are Tuiaana, Tuiatua, Gatoaitele and 
Tamasoali’i,® and if, by any means, a king can obtain them all, 
he is king of all Samoa. But it is an empty kingship, for he has 
but little to do with the internal administration of the country, 

1 Stair vi. 84—5. 2. TId., 76. 
3 Stair iii. 597, 616: EF. Kramer I. 10, 482: Ella ii. 596 e.s. 
4 ¥. Kramer I. 153. 5 Id., 18. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 349 


that being, as is obvious, in the hands of the tulafale. For each 
of these titles the ruler has a pair of chiefs sitting on either side 
of him as supporters. These officials are hereditary, like all the 
others of importance. 

The political circumstances of Samoa make it evident that the 
kingship is by far the least permanent institution ; the ruler has 
no land, and his ruleis determined by the good-will of his council. 
Instances are known of the deposition of obnoxious rulers. Such 
an act can happen without in any way inconveniencing the life 
of the community ; for each district would depend, as before, on 
its council for the management of its affairs, and each settlement | 
in the district would manage its own business. For instance, in 
Aana, the great fono would legislate for Aana, and in the settle- 
ment of Fasito’otai, the seven councillors and the seven members 
of the house of chiefs, who presumably are the heads of clans, 
would act for the settlement : each head of a family would in the 
same way rule his descendants and dependants. The political 
organization is thus compact and stable and capable of standing 
many shocks. The least stable element is the kingship. 

It is now possible to understand what may have been the history 
of all the peoples that have been considered. Their ruling classes 
have disappeared, and the state has disintegrated, each part 
going its own way. This would account for the Mundas, Korkus 
and other peoples: they may have been clan groups under some 
ruling family of the archaic civilization, which, when the ruling 
group was eliminated, became autonomous units. | 

The Khasi of Assam say that their council is of divine origin 5 
that is to say, they refer it back to the archaic civilization ; the 
Todas again say that the gods hold council meetings; in like 
manner the Samoan traditions claim that they got their councils 
from the sky, from the Children of the Sun, and thus from the 
archaic civilization. A tale states that the father of the first 
human member of the Tagaloa family, Tagaloaui, used to go to 
the sky to attend council meetings; and it is said that this 
Tagaloaui got from the sky-world the title of the ruler, the chief’s 
house, and the institution of the council.!. The right to institute 
the council seems to have been vested, in early times, in the women. 
The story of the foundation of the districts of Upolu and Savai’i of 
Samoa recounts that the founders of the ruling houses came from 
Manu’a. ‘They were Le-apai and Fa’a-toafe, the descendants of 
Fai-malie and Fai-tama. Le-apai married Amete, the daughter 
of the Tui-samata. Fa’a-toafe said to him, ‘“‘ If your wife is a 
favourite with her father, get her to intercede with him for me to 
give me fono—the authority to hold councils—to take to Upolu.” 
He thus got the power through his wife, and established councils 
throughout the island.?- The other daughter of the Tui-samata, 
Sina, married and had six sons. ‘‘ When these sons grew up, 
Sina called a council to establish good order and industry among 


1 F, Kramer I. 409. 2 J. Frazer ii. 115 es. 


350 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


them.”?! She had the right to establish the council. Therefore 
the right to hold councils was evidently handed on from one 
settlement to another, the ultimate source being the sky-world, 
‘that is, the archaic civilization. The widespread custom of 
sitting on stone seats constitutes another link between the council 
and the political organization of the archaic civilization. 

North America is a part of the region where the institution of 
totemism would be expected, if it formed part of the archaic 
civilization. In the words of Sir James Frazer: “‘ The institution 
of totemism was first observed and described by Europeans among 
the Indian tribes of North America, and it is known to have 
prevailed widely, though by no means universally, among them. 
Within the great area now covered by the United States and 
Canada the system was most highly developed by the tribes to 
the east of the Mississippi, who lived in settled villages and culti- 
vated the soil ; it was practised by some, but not all, of the hunting 
tribes, who roamed the great western prairies, and it was wholly 
unknown to the Californian Indians, the rudest representatives 
of the Redskin race, who had made little progress in the arts of 
life, and in particular were wholly ignorant of agriculture. Again, 
totemism flourishes among the Pueblo Indians of the south-west, 
who live in massively-built and fortified towns of brick or hewn 
stone and diligently till the soil, raising abundant crops of cereals 
and fruits, and whose ancestors even constructed canals on a large 
scale to irrigate and fertilize the thirsty lands under the torrid 
skies of Arizona and New Mexico. It is certainly remarkable 
that over this immense region, extending across America from 
the Atlantic to the Pacific, the institution of, totemism should 
be found to exist and flourish among the tribes which have made 
some progress in culture, while it is wholly absent from others 
which have lagged behind at a lower level of savagery. As it 
appears unlikely that these rude savages should have lost all 
traces of totemism if they had once practised it, while the system 
survives among their more cultured brethren, we seem driven to 
conclude that among the Indians of North America totemism 
marks a degree of social and intellectual progress to which the 
more backward members of the Redskin family have not yet 
attained.”’ ? 

These remarks of Sir James Frazer show that totemism is an 
institution of those tribes that are nearest to the archaic civiliza- 
tion. He distinctly states that the food-gatherers have it not, 
and he also says that some of the Plains Indians show no signs of 
it. In this connexion he quotes from Mooney with regard to 
tribes of the western Plains whose social organization shows no 
signs of the dual organization, and who consequently belong to 
those whose culture has become highly modified. ‘‘ There seems 
to be no possible trace of a clan or gentile system among the 
Arapaho, and the same remark holds good of the Cheyenne, Kiowa 


1 J. Frazer ii. 115. 2 J. G. Frazer ii. III. 1-3. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 351 


and Comanche. It was once assumed that all Indian tribes had 
the clan system, but later research shows that it is lacking over 
wide areas in the western territory. It is very doubtful if it exists 
at all among the prairie tribes generally. Mr. Ben Clark, who 
has known and studied the Cheyenne for half a lifetime, states 
positively that they have no clans, as the term is usually under- 
stood. ‘his agrees with the result of personal investigation and 
the testimony of George Bent, a Cheyenne half-breed, and the 
best living authority on all that relates to his tribe. With the 
eastern tribes, however, and those who have removed from the east 
or the timbered country, as the Caddo, the gentile system is so 
much a part of their daily life that it is one of the first things to 
attract the attention of the observer.” 4 

It is not possible to state, from direct evidence, whether the 
Maya and other civilizations of Mexico and the south had totemic 
institutions or not; but their gods were connected, generally 
speaking, with animals similar to those from which the totemic 
clans of the Indians claim descent. Herr Stempell says that the 
Maya have chosen for their calendar and for use in their inscrip- 
tions only a small selection of the fauna of the country.? It is 
significant that these animals should be sacred among the Maya, 
and that they should occur as totems among the peoples of the 
United States.? Other facts suggest that the ancient civilizations 
of Mexico and the Maya country possessed totemic institutions. 

The culture-hero of the Nahua and the Maya was called 
‘“‘ Feathered-Serpent,” his name being Quetzalcoatl, Kukulcan, 
Gucumatz, according to the people whom he visited. Ruling 
families were themselves associated with animals, from which 
they claimed descent. This is clearly brought out in the Popol 
Vuh of the Kiche, for the early kings were represented as animals.* 

In North America totemism with matrilineal descent exists 
among the tribes of the eastern States and the Pueblo region. 
The Plains Indians have it in a modified form, but usually with 
patrilineal descent ; and those who have wandered farthest lack 
the institution altogether: the earliest ruling families of Mexico 
were probably associated with animals: totemism is unknown 
among the food-gatherers. Therefore totemism must evidently 
be ascribed to the archaic civilization. 

An examination of the culture of the American Indians of the 
United States shows that the council was the leading feature of 
tribal government, the organization in totemic clans being closely 
associated with the political organization of the tribe. This has 
been known for many years, for Lewis H. Morgan in his work on 
““ Ancient Society,” has said what is necessary on this point. 


1J. G. Frazer ii. III. 1, n. 1. 2 Stempell 705. 

3 This statement may be verified by comparing the list given by Stempell 
with those recorded in Frazer’s volume on America. With these should also 
be compared the lists given by Moret iii. 

4 Brasseur de Bourbourg cxviil. 


352 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


“The plan of government of the American aborigines com- 
menced with the gens and ended with the confederacy, the latter 
being the highest point to which their governmental institutions 
attained. It gave for the organic series: first the gens (called 
clan in this book), a body of consanguinei having a common gentile 
name: second, the phratry, an assemblage of related gentes 
united in a higher association for certain common objects ; third, 
the tribe, an assemblage of gentes, usually organized in phratries, 
all the members of which spoke the same dialect ; and fourth, a 
confederacy of tribes, the members of which respectively spoke 
dialects of the selfsame language.” 1 Originally in North 
America the clan, or gens, as Morgan calls it, was matrilineal,? 
a fact which still further serves to bind the institution to the 
archaic civilization. 

Morgan states that the clan or gens is individualized by the 
following rights, privileges, and obligations : 

. The right of electing its sachem and chiefs. 

. The right of deposing its sachem and chiefs. 

. The obligation not to marry in the gens. 

. Mutual rights of inheritance of the property of deceased 
members. 

. Reciprocal obligation of help, defence and redress of 
injuries. 

6. The right of bestowing names upon its members. 

7. The right of adopting strangers into the gens. 

8. Common religious rites (query). 

9 

0 


Be Oo DD 


Or 


. A common burial-place. 

. A council of the gens.? 

The gens or clan is thus a self-contained unit carrying on its life 
independently of the rest of the tribe. 

Each gens had a hereditary head chief called the sachem, who 
was concerned with peace. Certain men were also chosen out of 
the gens for bravery and skill in war, for eloquence, or for other 
outstanding qualities. They ranked below the sachem in auth- 
ority, for he was the official head of the clan or gens.4 

In the tribes of North America the dual grouping played no 
part in government: the moiety had no council. The next 
higher council from that of the simple clan was the council of the 
tribe as a whole, which usually consisted of clan chiefs. The 
sachem, the clan chief, had to be invested in office by the tribal 
council.® ‘It devolved upon the council to guard and protect 
the common interests of the tribe. Upon the intelligence and 
courage of the people, and upon the wisdom and foresight of the 
council, the prosperity and the existence of the tribe depended. 
Questions and exigencies were arising through their incessant 
warfare with other tribes, which required all the exercise of these 
qualities to meet and manage. It was unavoidable, therefore, 


+ Morgan 66. 2 Id., 67. 3 id Tk 
4 Id., 73-4. 5 Td., 114. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 353 


that the popular element should be commanding in its influence. 
As a general rule the council was open to any private individual 
who desired to address it on a public question. Even the women 
were allowed to express their wishes and opinions through an 
orator of their own selection. But the decision was made by the 
council. Unanimity was a fundamental law of its action among 
the Iroquois; but whether this usage was general I am unable 
to state.”»1 The confederacy of tribes was carried out by the 
Iroquois, in which the Mohawks, Oneidas, Onondagas, Cayugas 
and Senecas joined together, for mutual help and protection, on 
a basis of equality. 

It is not necessary to discuss in detail the system of rule by 
councils in North America, for it is evident, from the statements 
of Morgan, that it was of fundamental importance. This makes 
it obvious why the Huron, the Omaha and other tribes took the 
trouble to maintain their organization of clans and phratries. 

Since it is possible to group together the more advanced tribes 
of North America by virtue of their common possession of a 
council as the mode of government, it is to be presumed that the 
peoples of Mexico were governed by councils. When the Spaniards 
arrived they found the country ruled by a confederacy consisting 
of Aztecs, Tezcucans and Tlacopans. These tribes formed part 
of seven kindred tribes that had migrated to Mexico from the 
North, and imposed their rule on the country.2. The confederacy 
of the three tribes was ruled by a council: ‘‘ The government 
was administered by a council of chiefs, with the co-operation 
of a general commander of the military bands. It was a govern- 
ment of two powers; the civil being represented by the council 
and the military by a principal war-chief. Since the institutions 
of the confederate tribes were essentially democratic, the govern- 
ment may be called a military democracy, if a designation more 
special than confederacy is required.’? 2 So much for the general 
government of the tribe. ‘‘ Each tribe was independent in what- 
ever related to local self-government ; but the three were exter- 
nally one people in whatever related to aggression or defence. 
While each tribe had its own council of chiefs, and its own head 
war-chiefs, the war-chief of the Aztecs was the commander-in- 
chief of the confederate war bands. This may be inferred from 
the fact that the Tezcucans and Tlacopans had a voice either in 
the election or in the confirmation of the Aztecs’ war-chief. The 
acquisition of the chief command by the Aztecs tends to show 
that their influence predominated in establishing the terms upon 
which the tribe confederated.”’ 4 

Morgan was fully persuaded of the existence of phratries and 
clans among the Aztecs and other peoples of Mexico. “There is 
a large amount of indirect and fragmentary evidence in the 
Spanish writers pointing both to the gens and the phratry.® ... 

1 Morgan 117. 2 Id., 188. 3 Id., 188. 
© Idi p' 192. Id. i197: 
23 


354 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


The Pueblo of Mexico was divided geographically into four 
quarters, each of which was occupied by a lineage, a body of 
people more nearly related by consanguinity among themselves 
than they were to the inhabitants of the other quarters. Pre- 
sumptively, each lineage was a phratry. Each quarter was again 
subdivided, and each local subdivision was occupied by a com- 
munity of persons bound together by some common tie. Pre- 
sumptively, this community of persons was a gens. Turning to 
the kindred tribe of the Tlascalans, the same facts nearly re- 
appear. Their pueblo was divided into four quarters, each 
occupied by a lineage. Each had its own standard and blazon.! 
As one people they were under the government of a council of 
chiefs, which the Spaniards honoured with the name of the 
Tlascalan senate. Cholula, in like manner, was divided into six 
quarters, called wards by Herrera, which leads to the same 
inference. The Aztecs in their social subdivisions having arranged 
among themselves the parts of the pueblo they were severally to 
occupy, these geographical districts would result from their 
mode of government.?. . . Assuming that the lowest subdivision 
was a gens, and that each quarter was occupied by a phratry, 
composed of related gentes, the primary distribution of the Aztecs 
in their pueblo is perfectly intelligible. Without this assumption 
it is incapable of a satisfactory explanation. When a people, 
organized in gentes, phratries and tribes settled in a town or city, 
they located by gentes and by tribes, as a necessary consequence 
of their social organization. The Grecian and Roman tribes 
settled in their cities in this manner. For example, the three 
Roman tribes were organized in gentes and curiae, the curia 
being the analogue of the phratry ; and they settled at Rome by 
gentes, by curies and by tribes. ‘The Ramnes occupied the Palatine 
Hill, the Tities were mostly on the Quirinal, and the Luceres 
mostly on the Esquiline. If the Aztecs were in gentes and 
phratries, having but one tribe, they would of necessity be found 
in aS many quarters as they had phratries, with each gens of 
the same phratry in the main locality by itself. As husband 
and wife were of different gentes, and the children were of the 
gens of the father or mother as descent was in the male or the 
female line, the preponderating number in each locality would 
be of the same gens.’ 3 

The inheritance of property is also used by Morgan to establish 
the existence of clans among the Aztecs. He also insists that 
the possession of a Council of Chiefs involves the same form of 
social organization: ‘‘ The existence of such a council among the 
Aztecs might have been predicted from the necessary constitution 
of Indian society. Theoretically, it would have been composed 
of that class of chiefs, distinguished as sachems, who represented 
bodies of kindred, through an office perpetually maintained. 


? Which recalls the Egyptian nomes and the states of South Celebes. 
2 Morgan 198. 3 Id., 199. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 355 


Here, again, as elsewhere, a necessity is seen for gentes, whose 
principal chiefs would represent the people in their ultimate 
social subdivisions as among the northern tribes. Aztec gentes 
are fairly necessary to explain the existence of Aztec chiefs. Of 
the presence of an Aztec council there is no doubt whatever ; 
but of the number of its members and of its functions we are left 
in almost total ignorance.’’ 4 

In North America the culture-heroes are invariably represented 
as originating the councils of the various tribes. The peoples of 
the sky hold councils. The Sauk-Fox, for instance, tell of the 
time when the gods, the manitos, lived on earth, and the Great 
Manito called a council, at which the people were divided into 
“elder”? and ‘‘ younger ”’ divisions.2, The Yuchi say that the 
people of the sky-world lived just like those on earth, so it is to be 
presumed that they had councils. Four of the Yuchi clans were 
looked upon as superior to the rest, and from them were chosen 
the four chiefs of the tribe. The Yuchi held their ceremonies in 
the Square Ground, which was said to be similar in every respect 
to the Rainbow of the sky-world. The officials of this place were 
called Rainbow or Square-ground Chief, and Rainbow or Square- 
ground Warrior. According to tradition the ceremonies per- 
formed there originated in the sky-world and were taught the 
people by the Sun.? The Cherokee state that the ‘ Animals,” 
the mythical predecessors of the tribe, had chiefs, town houses, 
councils, and ball games, just like men. These animals once lived 
on earth on terms of perfect equality with men, and for some 
unexplained reason they left this world and went to the sky. 
Trees and plants could formerly talk and had their places in the 
councils, the leader of which was the frog.4 


The survey just completed shows that the clan system plays 
an integral part in the society of those communities nearest to 
the archaic civilization. So far as the evidence goes, each com- 
munity consists of a number of totemic clans claiming relationship 
in some way or another with an animal, plant or material object. 
The totemic clan plays an important part in the political life of the 
community, for it has its own council for the regulation of its 
domestic affairs, and each clan council sends its representatives 
to the council of the tribe. This part of the life of the community 
therefore goes on independently of the ruling group. If, for any 
cause, the community should be split up, the clan groups are 
quite capable of independent function. These communities there- 
fore possess an elastic and useful form of social organization 
capable of indefinite extension, so it is not surprising to find that 
the system of clan groups, each with its council, has survived the 
totemic relationship. 

Other evidence shows that the system of clan councils belonged 


1 Td., 203. 2 Michelson 225-6. 
3 Speck ii. 111-12. 4 Mooney vii. 280, 231, 261. 


356 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


to the archaic civilization. The council is derived from the sky 
or from the gods, or it is instituted by the Ancestral Animals : 
also during council meetings use is made of stone seats. The 
evidence with regard to the use of stone for seats during councils 
falls into line with what was collected in “‘The Megalithic Culture 
of Indonesia.”’ It makes especially suggestive the account of the 
meeting on Mt. Tonderukan, when the ancestors of the Ton- 
temboan met to divide up the land; for the chiefs are said to 
have sat “‘ round about” on stones. 

The derivation of the council from the archaic civilization 
brings up the problem of the constitution of the tribal council. 
It is evident that the clan council can, and usually does, consist 
of the elders of the clan, often with a hereditary chief as president. 
A clan council can act without any hereditary chief, and does 
so in Melanesia and Australia. The constitution of the tribal 
council is a different matter. In South Celebes and Samoa the 
state council was composed of hereditary chiefs, rulers of certain 
territorial districts, who formed the nobility. In Samoa the king 
himself, in the particular instance quoted, the Tuiaana, was not 
a landholder; he was at the mercy of his council, who could 
depose him if they wished. Therefore, from the point of view of 
the district of Aana, the nobles were the real rulers. The great 
council was not democratic : it was aristocratic, in the full sense 
of the term, as much as the House of Lords of our own country. 
This form of organization accords well with that presumably 
existing in ancient Egypt, where the governors of the nomes in 
the Fifth Dynasty became hereditary. Such local magnates 
appear once again in Ponape, although but little is known of them. 
In Virginia the land was formerly divided into petty provinces, 
each with its local governor subject to a higher authority.’ In 
like manner when Tangiia and Kariki set up the organization of 
Rarotonga, they chose eighty minor chiefs for each moiety of the 
island. No mention is made of the function of these chiefs in 
Rarotonga, but, since Kariki came from Samoa, it seems beyond 
doubt that they were chosen for the purpose of holding council 
meetings in the proper manner. The constitution of the archaic 
civilization therefore appears to include landholding chiefs forming 
a nobility, after the same manner as that of our country, and 
constituting a national council such as our House of Lords. 

If the council of the tribe or district of the archaic civilization 
consisted of members of the nobility, each of whom was associated 
with an animal, which was an ancestor, or was simply used as an 
ensign, a ready explanation is forthcoming for the claim made by 
several of the North American tribes, the Cherokee for instance, 
that they got their institutions from the ancestral animals who 
lived in the sky. The localization of the ancestral animals in the 
sky suggests that they were people of the archaic civilization, and 
their membership of a council serves to equate them to the 


1 Willoughby 57. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 357 


hereditary chiefs of the clans of earthly tribes. Thus it would 
seem that the hereditary chiefs of the clans were the descendants 
of the ancestral animals, that is to say, of the ruling class of 
the archaic civilization. The conclusion, therefore, is that the 
totemic clan, as a part of the political constitution of the tribe as 
a whole, really. centres round one family, that family which claims 
direct descent from the animal ancestor that gave rise to the clan. 


CHAPTER XXII 
THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 


HE totemic clan system can be viewed from at least two 
standpoints. As has been found in the last chapter, the 
typical grouping is related to the institution of the tribal 
council, on which sit representatives of each clan. In some cases 
the clan representatives on the tribal council are hereditary chiefs. 
The clan itself has a council, formed of its elders, and is thus 
an autonomous unit. It has another characteristic, now to be 
studied. A relationship exists between its members and some 
animal, plant or inanimate object, called the Totem of the clan. 
The definition of Rivers makes descent from the totem an essential 
feature of the totemic clan system. Since a belief of this sort 
is manifestly impossible in the case of inanimate objects, this 
discrepancy in the definition of Rivers will have to be taken into 
account when coming to a conclusion as to the real nature of the 
totemic clan system. It can, however, be left on one side for 
the moment, while the actual mode of descent in the clan is 
studied. 

It will be well to begin with a specific case. That of the Yuchi 
of the Mound area of North America will do for the purpose. 
The stories of the mode of origin of the tribe differ. Two are 
given by Speck ; in both cases it is said that a sky-woman became 
pregnant in some mysterious way, and gave birth, either to a son, 
or to twin sons. In the story in which she gave birth to one 
boy, the Sun-boy, it is said that she took him to the Rainbow, 
the gathering-place of the sky-beings, and there had him scarified 
according to custom. After a time the mother and her offspring 
were driven away, and came to the earth. The Sun-boy became 
the ancestor of the Yuchi, who consequently call themselves 
Children of the Sun. He taught his descendants ceremonies, for 
protection from evil influence, and in honour of the supernatural 
beings in the sky.1_ Another version claims that the Sun is an 
old woman, and that the ceremonies were taught by a super- 
natural being called Gohantone.? 

A further complication in belief arises from the statement 

that the members of each clan believe themselves to be the 


1 Speck ii. 107, 112, 2 Id., ii. 145, 
358 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 359 


relatives, or, in some vague way, the descendants, of pre-existing 
animals, whose name and identity they now possess. These 
totemic animals are held in great reverence, are appealed to 
privately in certain exigencies, and are publicly worshipped in 
dances and celebrations. Each boy is initiated, and thenceforth 
is supposed to have acquired the protection of his ancestral 
totemic animal. The clans were named by the Sun-boy or by 
Gohantone.+ 

Speck’s account is obviously confused, for some of its elements 
are mutually contradictory. It is, nevertheless, clear that the 
Yuchi derive themselves from the archaic civilization: in one 
version, their ancestress came from the sky-world, from a place 
where lived the Children of the Sun, for she gave birth either 
to twins or to the Sun-boy in a manner that suggests theogamy ; 
while, in another version, the Yuchi are descended from animals 
who lived in the sky-world. 

Nothing is said, so far as I am aware, about the origin of the 
clans. For information on this topic it is necessary to turn to 
other peoples, for instance, the Huron or Wyandot, who are 
matrilineal in organization, and are divided into totemic clans. 
They claim origin from a woman of the sky-world, who rules 
over the dead in the underworld with one of her twin sons. Her 
other twin son is the creator, who now lives in the sky. A tale 
already quoted in detail recounts that the phratries and clans 
were decided upon by a council-meeting of men of several tribes, 
who met to reconstitute communities that probably had been 
broken up by warfare. 

The Huron say that the Hawk and Snake clans each originated 
from one of their women and a being who could assume human 
or animal forms at will.2 This recalls the semi-human, semi- 
animal beings of the sky-world, from whom the Yuchi sometimes 
claim descent ; and suggests that the mode of origin of the clans 
of both peoples may have been identical. 

A careful examination of the Huron story reveals an apparent 
contradiction. The clans are now matrilineal, which means that 
every man or woman derives his or her totem from his or her 
mother: the father has nothing to do with the matter; and 
it is presumably a matter of indifference to what clan he belongs ; 
except that, as will be seen in the next chapter, regulations as 
to marriages exist in such communities. Although the father 
is of such insignificance, nevertheless the clan, in the beginning, 
is named after the male ancestor. This means that the first 
male of the Snake clan, for instance, was a snake, who was the 
father, by a Huron woman, whose clan is not specified, if she 
had any, of snake children. That is pure patrilineal descent ; 
but it did not persist; for, of the children of this union, only 
the daughter carried on the clan. The son married a woman of 
another clan, and his children were bears, or something else ; 

1 Td., ui. 70-2. 2 Barbeau iii. 90. 


360 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


they were not snakes. The children of his sister were snakes, 
and so on indefinitely. Thus the clan apparently began with a 
patrilineal mode, and then changed to the matrilineal mode of 
descent, which is incredible on the hypothesis that mother-right 
was the rule in the archaic civilization. In order to solve this 
riddle, or to approach its solution, we must go deeper into the 
constitution of the totemic clan, especially under matrilineal 
descent. This will lead into obscure places, where but few facts 
at present light the path. 

The Yuchi, already mentioned in this connexion, believe that 
they are the reincarnations of their maternal ancestors, and each 
child is named after a maternal grandparent’s brother or sister. 
The child is not named for four days, for it is thought that the 
soul takes that time to go to the land of the dead, and, presum- 
ably, that it needs the same time to return to earth. This pro- 
cess of rebirth is controlled in the sky by the Old Woman.! The 
Huron also had a belief in reincarnation, and used to bury little 
children by the side of paths in order that their souls might enter 
women to be reborn.” The Huron also possessed a set of names 
for each clan, all derived from characteristics of the totemic 
animal. These names were chosen by the council women of the 
clan, which is significant, in view of the fact that the process of 
rebirth among the Yuchi is controlled by the Old Woman in the 
Sky. 

patter light is to be obtained from the Hidatsa, a tribe of 
the Upper Missouri, whose culture has not suffered, as a conse- 
quence of migration, so much loss as that of the Omaha. The 
Hidatsa believe in an underground land of the dead. They had 
also a belief in reincarnation, a curious account of which is quoted 
by Sir James Frazer, in his work on “'Totemism and Exogamy,”’ 
from the description of Long’s Expedition to the Rocky Mountains 
in 1819. “ At the distance of the journey of one day and a half 
from Knife-creek, which divided the larger and the smaller towns 
of the Minnetarees from each other, are situated two conical hills, 
separated by about the distance of a mile. One of these hills 
was supposed to impart a prolific virtue to such squaws as resorted 
to it for the purpose of crying and lamenting, for the circumstance 
of their having no male issue. A person one day walking near 
the mount, fancied he observed upon the top of it two very small 
children. Thinking they had strayed from the village, he ran 
towards them to induce them to return home; but they immedi- 
ately fled from him, nor could his utmost speed overtake them, 
and in a short time they eluded his sight. Returning to the 
village, the relation of his story excited must interest, and an 
Indian set out next day, mounted on a fleet horse, to take the 
little strangers. On the approach of this individual to the mount, 
he also saw the children, who ran away as before, and although 
he endeavoured to overtake them by lashing the horse into his 

1 Speck ii. 94, 108. 2 J. G. Frazer i. I. 91. % Jd, ii. III. 34, 35. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 361 


utmost swiftness, the children left him far behind. But these 
children are no longer to be seen, and the hill once of singular 
efficacy in rendering the human species prolific, has lost this remark- 
able property.” In an account by Washington Matthews, the 
infants were said to emerge from a very narrow cavern that ran 
into the earth.! 

The evidence gathered in North America suggests that the 
idea originally underlying the totemic clan was that of the suc- 
cessive reincarnation of a limited number of spirit individuals. 
The clan itself, according to the Huron story, originated in the 
union of a Hawk man and a girl; so it is to the conditions attend- 
ing this union that attention must be paid, for it gave rise to 
the spirit individuals. What, however, had the male ancestor 
to do with the process ? 

North America, so far as I know, gives no answer to this ques- 
tion; and if so, none can be expected in Polynesia; it is in 
Australia that search must be made for the original ideas as to 
the origins of totemic clans. The search must be confined, also, 
to the matrilineal tribes, which correspond more strictly to the 
archaic civilization. 

Inquiry in Australia produces the following results. The 
Urabunna, a tribe of Central Australia, state that, in the old 
days, the Alcheringa times as they are called, the ancestors of 
the different totemic groups lived as a number of half-human, 
half-animal or plant people. No one can suggest how they arose.? 
These ancestors left behind them spirit individuals, called mai- 
aurli, which have continually undergone reincarnation. These 
spirit individuals are supposed to inhabit certain spots, sometimes 
only one kind at a spot, sometimes two or three kinds.2. Each 
living individual is the reincarnation of a mai-aurli, or spirit 
that emanated from the body of an Alcheringa ancestor. ‘* Every 
individual goes back after death in spirit form to the spot at 
which it was left in the Alcheringa by the ancestor of the totem. 
If, for example, it were originally a pigeon spirit, then it will go 
back into the rocks at the spot where the pigeon ancestor performed 
ceremonies in the Alcheringa and left spirits behind. In the 
course of ages any single individual can run the whole gamut 
of the totems, but always returning at death to its original 
home.” 

Among these people “ the child must belong to the same moiety 
and totem as its mother, but they have the curious belief that 
in each successive reincarnation the child changes its sex, moiety 
and totem.” ® 

One feature of interest of the Australian belief is that it does 
not involve any idea of a race ancestress. The existence of the 
clan depends entirely upon the continuous reincarnation of spirit 
individuals produced by the culture-heroes, those mysterious 


1 J. G. Frazer ii. III. 150-1. 2 Spencer and Gillen 145-7. 
3 Id., 148-9. 


362 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


beings to whom so much is ascribed. The culture-heroes were 
said to be life-givers, which ascription is evidently well founded, 
for they have provided a self-working mechanism for the perpetua- 
tion of communities with totemic clans. 

Before discussing this matter further, mention must be made 
of the ideas concerning reincarnation held by the people of the 
Trobriand Islands off the coast of British New Guinea. A ghost 
in these islands is believed to go to the underworld. In course 
of time it grows old, the teeth fall out, and the skin gets wrinkled. 
It then goes to the sea and bathes ; the skin is thrown off and it 
becomes young again, an embryo indeed. A ghost woman then 
takes it and places it in an earthly woman, who in due course 
gives birth to a child, who is the reincarnation of the previous 
individual. Sometimes spirit children are supposed to float in 
the scum on the shore, or to be in stones. An important feature 
of this system of reincarnation lies in the fact that the spirit 
child is brought to a woman of its own clan by a ghostly woman 
of the same clan.t_ Thus the clan reproduces itself by a continuous 
process. 

All this bears out the suggestion founded on the American 
evidence, that the totemic clan is a group of individuals constantly 
undergoing reincarnation. The evidence from Australia shows 
that these spirit individuals are supposed to have been derived 
from culture-heroes, i.e. from the archaic civilization. They 
are limited in number, and once the clan is started, it reproduces 
itself unceasingly. It does not seem that the semi-human, semi- 
animal ancestor of the clan plays any part, or that a notion of 
a totem is essential for the constitution of the clan. Rather 
would it seem that the totemic clan is an artificial construction, 
and not an organic institution with interdependent parts. The 
perpetuation of the clan evidently depends solely on the idea of 
the reincarnation, through the women, of the spirit individuals. 

If this be compared with the manner of birth of peoples like 
the Toradja of Central Celebes (see p. 207), it will be noticed that 
the sky-beings had the necessary power, for they made embryos 
and placed them in position to be born. The mode of inception 
of totemic clans thus harmonizes entirely with the notions of the 
people of the archaic civilization, and lends still further support 
to the conclusion that they started the totemic clan system in 
all parts of the region. 

India supplies further evidence that the idea of reincarnation 
belonged to the archaic civilization. For it is a commonplace 
of Epic and Puranic literature, as well as of the Jataka texts 
of the Buddhists, that sky-beings could enter women to be reborn. 
In the Mahabharata it is said that the Daevas and the Asuras 
both became incarnated on earth in order that they might continue 
their struggles. Instances of this kind could be multiplied beyond 
number in Indian literature. In the Vishnu Purana, that store- 

. 1 Malinowski 403 e.s. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 363 


house of facts with regard to ancient society, it says: ‘‘ There 
were twelve celebrated deities in a former Manwantra (world- 
epoch), called Tushitas, who, upon the approach of the present 
period, or in the reign of the last Manu, Chakshusha, assembled, 
and said to one another, ‘Come, let us quickly enter into the 
womb of Aditi, that we may be born in the next Manwantra, 
for thereby we shall again enjoy the rank of gods’: and accord- 
ingly they were born as the sons of Kasyapa, the son of Marichi, 
by Aditi, the daughter of Dahska.’?! This is exactly the idea of 
reincarnation which is found in association with totemic clans, 
the entry of spirit individuals into a woman in order to be reborn. 
Note, too, that these gods said that they must enter Aditi, their 
mother. Perhaps this is the reason for matrilineal descent in 
the real totemic clan; for what happens is the perpetual rebirth 
of a man from his mother, who is reborn in her daughter. In the 
Indian Epics the idea of reincarnation through the mother is 
definite. ‘‘ The husband, dividing his body in twain, is born of 
his wife in the form of his son.”’ Again, “‘ After the dissolution 
of his body, man, according to his acts re-entereth the womb of 
his mother and stayeth there in an indistinct form, and soon after 
assuming a distinct and visible shape reappeareth in the world 
and walketh on its surface.”’ ‘*'The mother is but the sheath of 
flesh in which the father begets the son. Indeed, the father 
himself is the son.’’? 

It is possible to establish, in India, a culture-sequence in the 
ideas concerning reincarnation. No mention is made of the 
doctrine in the Vedas. It was brought forcibly to the notice of 
the Brahmins by Kshatriya kings, that is, by the Children of 
the Sun. It is said that a Brahmin was responsible in the first 
case for its inception, but, nevertheless, the Brahmins had to be 
instructed by the Children of the Sun in this doctrine, which 
shows such strong signs of belonging to the culture of the people 
of the archaic civilization. It is probable, nevertheless, that the 
Aryans of India once held the notion of reincarnation. For the 
quotation just made from the Puranas shows that the Adityas, 
the sun-gods, the sons of Aditi, the great mother, entered her in 
order to be reborn. The Adityas were pushed into the back- 
ground on the rise of Indra, and probably during this change the 
old ideas concerning reincarnation became weakened. Thus the 
Aryans yet once more seem to have gone through the phase of 
the archaic civilization. Earlier gods, named after their mother, 
and reincarnating themselves through her, are pushed into the 
background by a war-god, who is connected with patrilineal 
institutions. Yet, at the same time, it must be mentioned that 
Indra himself has children by earthly women ; so that the Aryans 
had not entirely broken loose from the old ideas. They preserved 
the idea in their mythology when they had lost it in actual life. 


1H. H. Wilson 122. 2 *¢ Mahabharata,’’ Adi Parva xxiv., xc., xcv. 
Deussen 17, 18, 396 e.s. 


364 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


The evidence derived from India thus bears out the contention 


based on the study of beliefs in America, Australia and elsewhere ;- 


namely, that the totemic clan depends for its perpetuation on 
the successive reincarnations of spirit individuals, and that it has 
no essential connexion with animals, plants or material objects. 
The belief is based, evidently, on the notion that the sky-beings 
could make embryos. The essential independence of the two 
groups of ideas accounts for several difficulties in the proper 
understanding of the totemic clan system. In the first place, it 
shows that the fact that totemic clans may be chosen, as in the 


case of the Huron, that they may have originated from a woman 


who gave birth to animals, or that they were the result of the 
marriage of an earthly woman and a semishuman, semi-animal 
male being, is not of any great importance from the point of view 
of the origin of the clan system: these are but accounts of the 
inception of the clan system in particular cases. The clan depends 
upon the sky-beings for its inception, and its perpetuation is 
ensured by the process of reincarnation through the women. 

The clan could persist even though it were not named after 
an animal, plant or material object. It is therefore possible that 
the doctrine of reincarnation has intermingled with ideas concern- 
ing the relationship between certain families and totems of different 
sorts, and that the belief in descent from the animal, or even in 
identity with the animal, has not been the basic element of the 
system. 

The notion of actual descent from the totem is understandable 
when the first ancestor of a clan was a Bear, Lion, and so forth ; 
it is hard to see how man conceived of birth from trees; and 
the notion of birth from material objects can hardly be primitive. 
Men may identify themselves with animals, or even with plants, 
but when it is claimed that they identify their life and personality 
with material objects, it is time to cry a halt, and to seek in some 
other direction for the real relationship between a clan and its 
totem. 

Signs of ideas of a relationship between men and animals are 
found as early as the Upper Paleolithic Age in Europe, when the 
teeth and claws of animals were worn as necklaces. The idea at 
the back of this practice was evidently that of protection. For, 
at the present day, the custom is world-wide, and the teeth or 
claws are certainly worn as protectors. It has been seen in the 
case of the Yuchi that the totem animal is a protector. And 
when the totemic clan system broke down in North America 
the idea of the animal as protector survived, so that some students 
look upon this aspect of the system as fundamental. So it 
probably is, but not perhaps in their sense. It is fundamental 
in that, in North America, it has shown itself most capable of 
surviving the forces of disintegration, and of persisting when the 
transition has taken place to patrilineal descent. It is therefore 
possible to claim, with some plausibility, that the aspect of the 


—— —- 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 365 


totemic clan system concerned with the relationships between 
men and the totem, is based originally on the notion of the animal 
as the protector of the member of the clan. All other ideas of 
the relationship between a man and his totem may be purely 
secondary derivatives of the system itself. The only way to 
discover the truth in such a case is to institute an historical 
inquiry into the belief. It is evident that such an inquiry will 
have to concern itself with the vast mass of facts concerned with 
the initiation ceremonies by which a youth is made a full member 
of the clan. He has to undergo certain ordeals and is subjected 
to certain rites, such as scarification, tattooing, and circumcision. 
He also has to undergo a process of ritual death and rebirth, 
the significance of which is obscure. 

The ritual of the totemic clan initiation ceremony has persisted, 
after the break-up of the clan system, in the form of secret socie- 
ties, the members of which are connected with animals, not by 
birth, but by other ties. ‘They are initiated into the society, and 
then only do they attain to full communion with the animal or 
other object round which centres the ritual of the society. Before, 
therefore, pronouncing judgment upon the meaning of the relation- 
ship between the clan and the totem, it would be necessary to 
subject the ritual of totemic clan initiation ceremonies and secret 
societies to a close analysis. 

In one case it is possible to see that the relationship between 
the man and an animal is not that of descent. It has already 
been stated that the king of Egypt was closely identified with 
the hawk, the bird of Horus. When the king was crowned, the 
double of the hawk came from the sky, and incarnated itself in 
him; on his death it returned to the sky, and became identified 
once more with Horus. This king was thus half human and half 
hawk, and the relationship between his two aspects was not that 
of descent. The king of Egypt belonged to the Hawk Clan, it 
may be said, for he was closely identified with the hawk. But, 
after the Fifth Dynasty, at any rate, his actual father was stated 
to be the sun-god Re, who, according to the later accounts at 
least, performed this feat by causing a manufactured embryo to 
be placed in the queen. The life-story of the king of Egypt was 
thus complicated. He was born of a theogamy in a certain family 
connected with the hawk; he really was a spirit individual 
manufactured by Khnum, and placed in his mother for the purpose 
of birth ; his real identification with the hawk did not take place 
until his coronation, when the hawk-double descended on him. 
It might thus be said that the king of Egypt was the reincarnation 
of Horus, and that he belonged to the Hawk Clan, his full member- 
ship of that clan beginning at his coronation. 

This series of facts can be paralleled elsewhere in the region. 
Hocart states that the ceremony of coronation of important 
Fijian chiefs resembles a process of rebirth. Moreover, it is an 
universal feature of the initiation ceremonies of totemic clans 


366 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


and of secret societies that the initiate does not really belong to 
the clan or society until he has gone through a process of ritual 
death and rebirth. 

The point common to these three groups of ceremonies is that 
the king, or the member of the clan, or of the society, is not fully 
identified with the totem, or the animal of the society, until he 
has gone through some process of initiation. He is not, just by 
the fact of birth in the clan, made a full member of that clan. 
That has to be accomplished by a ceremony. It is therefore 
imperative to understand the real meaning of the ceremony of 
ritual death and rebirth common to the coronation ceremony of 
the Fijian chief, the totemic clans and the secret societies, and 
to know what relationship this had to the coronation of the 
Keyptian kings. 

The difficulties in the way of this comparison are obvious. 
The coronation ceremony of the Egyptian kings was, so far as is 
known, performed in his case alone: it was not performed for 
all Egyptians, even for all members of the nobility. Again, 
nothing is known of the ideas of the Egyptians about reincarna- 
tion, and it is doubtful whether they had such ideas.4 Although 
it is possible to compare the nome system of Egypt with the 
totemic clan system of other parts of the region, this comparison 
is not exact. Whereas it is well known that each male member 
of a community throughout the archaic civilization was probably 
initiated into his clan, the initiation in Egypt was, so far as I 
know, confined to the king. This constitutes a difficulty in 
studying the relationship between the members of a totemic clan 
and the totem. 

To take another point of view. The ritual of initiation is so 
closely connected with that of death that it may be necessary 
to consider the death ceremonies of Egypt and elsewhere in 
conjunction with those of secret societies and totemic clans. A 
suggestive comparison has already been made between the ritual 
of the Midewiwin secret society of the Ojibwa of North America 
and the Egyptian Book of the Dead, and perhaps the prosecution 
of this line of thought would lead to important consequences.? 

Evidently the study of the totemic clan system has to be 
approached from at least three different directions. The clans 
are grouped together, in the first instance, so that they contribute 
members to the council of the tribe or state: each clan consists 
of a number of individuals perpetually undergoing reincarnation : 
finally each clan is connected with some animal, plant or material 
object, with which the male members are identified by means of 
an initiation ceremony. ‘These three elements of the system are 
apparently independent. The clans can carry on their business 


1 Certain modern Egyptian customs suggest that the ancient Egyptians 
had such ideas. 

2 Emerson. Cf.C.S. Wake for another instance of similar beliefs in Egypt 
and North America. 


THE TOTEMIC CLAN SYSTEM 367 


by means of their own councils: reincarnation can take place 
in other circumstances than those of the totemic clan: and the 
relationship with animals can persist after the original clan system 
has broken up. The system, therefore, has been brought into 
existence through the amalgamation of at least three distinct 
cultural elements, none of which have any real inter-relationship, 
and all of which can exist in complete independence of the others ; 
and it is only in the archaic civilization that these cultural elements 
appear to be in their proper setting. 


CHAPTER XXIII 
EXOGAMY 


NE important feature of social organization has hitherto 
() been ignored—the rule of exogamy, under which marriage 
is prohibited in a given social group. This custom has 
long interested students, and many attempts have been made to 
discern its origin in some rudimentary stage of society, but an 
examination of the practice in various phases of society shows 
that its origin is to be sought in a highly developed, rather than 
a lowly, civilization. 

I have postponed the study of exogamy until the totemic clan 
system had been examined, because this custom is, in certain 
circumstances, associated with totemism, so that a man may 
not marry a woman of his own clan. This rule of clan exogamy 
has been taken by some students as typical of the totemic clan 
system; but one writer at least, Sir James Frazer, has realized 
that, although totemic clans are often exogamous, the rule 
originally held only between the moieties of the dual organization. 
Therefore a knowledge of the relationship between clans and 
moieties is essential for an appreciation of the meaning of 
exogamy. 

L. H. Morgan describes the social organization of the Iroquois. 
The Seneca branch of the confederacy was divided into eight 
clans, grouped in two moieties: Bear, Wolf, Beaver, Turtle, on 
one side; and Deer, Snipe, Heron, Hawk, on the other side. 
‘* Each phratry (i.e. moiety) is a brotherhood (De-a-non-da-a-yoh) 
as this term also imports. The gentes in the same phratry are 
brother gentes to each other, and cousin gentes to those of the 
other phratry. They are equal in grade, character and privileges. 
It is a common practice of the Senecas to call the gentes of their 
own phratry, brother gentes, and those of the other phratry, 
cousin gentes, when they mention them in their relation to the 
phratries. Originally marriage was not allowed between the 
members of the same phratry ; but the members of either could 
marry into any gens of the other. This prohibition tends to show 
that the gentes of each phratry were subdivisions of an original 
gens, and therefore the prohibition against marrying into a person’s 
own gens had followed to its subdivisions. This restriction, how- 


368 


EXOGAMY 369 


ever, was long since removed, except with respect to the gens of 
the individual. 

‘*A tradition of the Senecas affirms that the Bear and the 
Deer were the original gentes, of which the others were the sub- 
divisions.”’ 1 

In its original form, therefore, the exogamy of the Seneca was 
between the moieties. Each moiety consisted of a number of 
clans, but they were not exogamous in themselves, and, for the 
purposes of marriage, need not have existed. 

The practice of exogamy has two aspects. When marriages 
are only allowed between the two sides of a community, it can be 
said that, for some reason, the members of one side are prevented 
from marrying women of their own side, and, consequently, must 
seek their wives on the other side; or else it can be said that men 
of one side are forced to seek their wives from the other side. 
There is either a repulsion in either side, or else an attraction 
between the sides. For instance, some think that the desire to 
prevent incest led men to institute exogamy: such students 
explain the custom by the existence of a repulsion in the moiety. 
Other explanations have been forthcoming, most of them based 
on similar reasoning. So far as I am aware, the existence 
of a political reason for such a form of marriage has escaped 
notice. 

Morgan shows that the mechanism of exogamy broke down 
among the Seneca, so that the prohibition became restricted to 
the individual clans. The principle was maintained, but the area 
of choice has widened, so that a mate can be chosen from every 
other clan. The custom of exogamy, fixed in the tribes as a 
cultural legacy from the culture-hero, and thus buttressed by the 
sanctions of tradition, survived, as a regulator of marriage, the 
breakdown of the dual grouping. 

Sir James Frazer, in his work on “ 'Totemism and Exogamy,”’ has 
already reached a similar conclusion. He thinks that exogamy 
first held between the moieties, and that clan exogamy came 
later. At the same time his scheme differs from that outlined 
here, in that he wishes to find the origin of the practice in some 
communities like those of the Australians, as the result of the 
desire to prevent incest.2. Sir James Frazer adds further import- 
ant support for the scheme, as is to be seen in the following 
quotation :— 

‘We have seen that wherever the system of relationship of a 
totemic people has been ascertained that system is classificatory, 
not descriptive in its nature. To that rule there appears to be 
no exception. But, further, we have found that the classificatory 
system of relationship follows naturally and necessarily as a 
corollary from the system of group marriage created by the 
distribution of a community into two exogamous classes. Hence 
we may infer with some degree of probability that, wherever the 

1 L. H. Morgan 90-1. 2 J. G. Frazer 1. IV. 132-4. 
24 


370 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


classificatory system now exists, a two-class system of exogamy 
existed before. Ifthatis so, then exogamy would seem everywhere 
to have originated as in Australia by a deliberate bisection of the 
community into two exogamous moieties classed for the purpose 
of preventing the marriage of near kin, especially the marriage 
of brothers with sisters and of mothers with sons.” 4 

This shows that it is possible to reconstruct the past form of 
society from the relationship systems of existing peoples.2 The 
classificatory system of relationship depends upon the dual 
organization, for it is its natural result ; the classificatory system 
is found among totemic people the world over, whether they 
now have the dual organization or not; therefore, in the past, 
all peoples with totemic clans must have been organized on the 
dual basis, that is, into two exogamous moieties, each of which 
was divided into totemic clans; and, although the dual organiza- 
tion has broken down, the classificatory system of relationship 
has persisted to witness its former existence. Sir James Frazer 
thus provides the scheme in process of construction with a power- 
ful support; he makes it plain that, in all parts of the region, 
the dual organization was formerly predominant, a contention 
already sustained in this book. I have argued that the totemic 
clan system itself belongs to the archaic civilization. Sir James 
Frazer, in associating the classificatory system of relationship 
with totemic clans, is adducing yet another reason for the accept- 
ance of this conclusion. 

A quotation given by Swanton with regard to the Creeks of 
the Mound area suggests that clan exogamy was deliberately 
instituted: ‘* An old and very intelligent Kealedji Indian posi- 
tively declared that anciently clans were not exogamous, but 
that at one time a council was held at which it was determined 
that they should be made so.” 3 The clan system is followed, in 
North America, by a third stage. Tribes such as the Arapaho, 
Cheyenne, Kiowa, and Comanche of the Plains have no phratries, 
no clans and no totemic divisions. In their case the system is 
in ruins. 

If others besides Morgan had made adequate records, it would 
be possible to witness in all parts the development of new forms 
of society out of the original dual organization of the archaic 
civilization, to see the dual organization breaking down and the. 
peoples rearranging themselves on the basis of clan exogamy, 
itself finally destined to disappear. The case is clear among the 
Iroquois ; but in that of the Mekeo peoples of British New Guinea 
it is even clearer. For the diligence of Professor Seligman has 


1 J. G. Frazer ii. IV. 135-6. 

2 This is another confirmation of the soundness of Rivers’ contention, 
that social structure persists longest. This is but natural, when it is 
rememberea that the dual organization of the archaic civilization, due 
entirely to the ruling groups, survived their disappearance. 

~§ Swanton ii. 596. # Kroeber 9. 


EXOGAMY 371 


_ put on record the history of the Mekeo tribes from their origin, 
and this history is well worth following in detail. 

The Mekeo group of tribes consists of the Biofa and Vee, who, 
since they have a common language, and have always intermarried, 
in spite of chronic warfare between them, possess characteristics 
of the two sides of a dual organization. The original settlements 
of these tribes were, Ioiovina for the Biofa, and Ioiofaopo for 
the Vee, names that again suggest the dual organization. Each 
village was divided into two exogamous groups called pangua, 
connected respectively with the breadfruit tree, and a sort of 
palm. These two villages in turn gave rise to daughter settle- 
ments, the cause of migration being incessant strife between the 
divisions. Every pangua group consisted of a number of clans, 
each claiming descent from a common ancestor, and members of 
these clans went off to found new villages of their own. 

The birth of new pangua is easy to understand. Certain clan 
groups that belong to the same pangua, or exogamous group, 
come to feel themselves more closely linked together than the 
other clans of the same large group, and set up a constitution 
of their own, and thus form another pangua, independent, yet 
remembering its relationship to the original larger group. When 
a new pangua comes into existence, and is of sufficient strength, 
it divides into two groups of clans calling themselves “‘ first born ”’ 
and “later born,” thus corresponding to the widespread dual 
grouping of “elder” and “younger.” It might be expected © 
that these divisions would practise exogamy. But this is not 
so. The memory of the original system has persisted through 
all the fissions, so that a ‘“‘ first-born ” group of one pangua is 
associated with the “later-born”’ group of some other pangua 
that traces its descent to the other side of the original villages. 
This relationship is called ufuapie, and it involves certain reciprocal 
services. The word ufuapie means “ club-house of the other side 
of the village,”’ and this is thought to refer to the original village, 
in which, as usual in dual settlements, the two divisions live on 
either side of the street.? 

Professor Seligman comments thus on the marriage relations 
between ufuapie groups :— 

“The effect, if any, on the regulation of marriage exercised 
by the ufuapie must now be considered. In discussing this 
matter with natives of Mekeo the impression left on my mind 
was that it was considered better to marry within the ufuapie 
group, though this was not necessary. Dr. Strong independently - 
arrived at the same conclusion, and Father Guis in his account 
published in 1898 also takes this view, indeed he goes so far as 
to say that ‘the young men of a village may only marry the 
girls of their allied village ... (ufuapie, auai at Mekeo)... 
by these words is understood .. . a village that in every con- 
tingency and under all circumstances acts with another (en tout 

1 Seligman i. 366. 2 Id., 1. 349 nl. 


372 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


et pour tout est de moieté avec une autre). For example, the 
people of Beipaa (Veifa) feed pigs and bring up dogs, but these 
pigs and dogs are not for them, they are for the village of Amoamo, 
their ufuapie, and in return the pigs and dogs of Amoamo come 
to Beipaa. ... The same condition holds in the matter of 
marriage; the girls of a village, according to the accepted rule, 
should not marry any others than the men of the ufuapie.’ ” 4 
Professor Seligman says further that marriages in the ufuapie 
are now exceptional. All that can be said, therefore, is that the 
ufuapie groups are in some ways related, and that a tradition 
has been handed down of regular intermarriage between them, 
which is a continuation of that which existed in the original 
villages. The original dual grouping with intermarriage can 
thus still be discerned, in that such marriages are still considered 
desirable, though really not much practised. The only rule now 
observed is that members of clans must not marry. This case 
has thus every appearance of one in which clan exogamy has 
resulted directly from the original intermarriage of the two sides 
of the dual organization. 

Another instance is that of Santa Cruz in Southern Melanesia, 
where the people are grouped in exogamous totemic clans. The 
dual organization is lacking, but, since the people have the 
classificatory system of relationship, it probably once existed.” 
The exogamous totemic clan system is followed in Melanesia by 
the rule of prohibition of marriage between relatives, which is 
found among the ‘“‘ betel-people ”’ of Rivers, the latest immigrants, 
who live principally in the Western Solomons. 

The study of culture-sequences in North America and Melanesia 
reveals three stages of development of marriage rules: (1) mar- 
riage forbidden between members of the same moiety; (2) 
marriage forbidden between members of the same clan; (8) 
marriage forbidden between blood relatives. The bearing of 
this on the marriage rules of the Aryans of India is instructive. 
They are divided into exogamous groups, which are not totemic. 
When these people first emerge on the scene of history their 
* eulture shows signs of the former prominence of sun-gods, of 
mother-right, of human sacrifice, and perhaps totemic clans. 
Their division into exogamous groups suggests that they had 
proceeded one step towards the third stage in the regulation of 
marriage, but that, for some unknown reason, they gave up the 
idea of relationship with animals, so typical of the totemic clan 
system, and the original relationship with animals has survived 
in their mythology. 

On the assumption that exogamy was primarily connected 
with the dual groupings, and was independent of the clan system, 
it is possible to enter on the discussion of an important question. 
For, if the dual groupings take their characteristics from the 
ruling group of the archaic civilization, it should follow that the 

! Seligman 364. 2 Rivers ix. II. 72, 75. 


EXOGAMY 373 


ruling groups themselves practised exogamy: that is to say, in 
the original settlements ruled over by the Children of the Sun, 
intermarriages should take place systematically between the sky 
people and the underworld people. 

The practice of intermarriage between the ruling families of 
two sides of a dual settlement is universal in Ponape and the 
Pelews of Micronesia; in Ponape two intermarrying families 
supply the sacred chief and the war-chief of each district ; ' 
in the Pelews, again, the clans of the two sides of each village 
are grouped round two principal families, who intermarry. This 
is also presumably true of the two leading families in the dual 
villages of Fiji. A probable case of the same sort is reported 
by Kruyt in Timor, in the district of Amanoeban, which with 
Amanatoen forms a dual grouping. It is said that, formerly, 
the sister of the ruler of Amanoeban, who lived at Niki-niki, 
went away and settled at a place called Pene. At the present 
time the rule is that the chief of Amanoeban, who now lives at 
Niki-niki, must marry a»woman of the ruling family of Pene.? 
Cross-cousin marriage is the favourite union in this part of Timor,? 
and this is evidence of the past existence of the dual organization, 
and of the practice of intermarriage between the two groups. 
Further instances have been recorded in Sumba by Wielenga. 
In Malolo of Eastern Sumba, the government is in the hands of 
two families, one of which supplies the sacred chief, and the 
other the civil chief. The civil chief must marry, for his principal 
wife, a woman of the family of the sacred chief. It is not said 
whether the sacred thief in his turn takes a wife from the side 
of the civil chief; but, in some instances, the members of the 
sacred chief’s family must obtain their principal wives from the 
rulers of Toboendoeng, who constitute the oldest ruling group of 
Sumba. This restriction in marriage does not apply universally 
in Sumba, but only in the case of Malolo, Toboengoen, Rende and 
Kanatang. 

The ruling houses of the Bugi and Macassar states of South 
Celebes probably once were exogamous. According to Bugi 
traditions the rulers of the sky-world and of the underworld were 
brothers, the ruler of the sky-world being the elder. The elder 
brother said that no one existed on earth to carry on their cult, 
and that he intended to send down his eldest son, Batara Guru, 
to the earth, for this purpose, demanding also that the ruler of 
the underworld should send up his daughter to be the wife of 
Batara Guru. The sky-god told Batara Guru that he would no 
longer be a god, but that when he wanted anything he was to 
ask for it.* 

This story shows plainly the relationship between the gods, 
both of the sky and of the underworld, and ruling houses. Men 
worshipped only their ancestors. The sky-god, having no descen- 


1 Hahl 5 e.s. 2 Kruyt ix. 790. 
3 Id., 790. 4 Id., iii. 467-8, 


374 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


dants on earth, received no worship until he sent down his son to 
establish his cult and perpetuate it through his descendants. 
Batara Guru came to earth, made it habitable, and planted 
vegetables. His father made him a house to the accompaniment 
of thunder and lightning. Njilitamo came up from the under- 
world and became his wife, and they were the ancestors of the 
ruling houses of the Bugi. 

Another account, from Luwu, throws more light on the early 
history of the Bugi. For, in this case, the ruler of the underworld 
is the brother of the wife of the ruler of the sky, and the wife 
of the ruler of the underworld is the sister of the ruler of the sky- 
world. Thus pairs of brothers and sisters have married, a perfect 
example of intermarriage between the two sides of the ruling 
group. A son of the sky people married a daughter of the under- 
world people, and thus practised a cross-cousin marriage. The 
children of this marriage were Sawerigading, the great Bugi hero, 
and his twin sister We Tanrijabong. Sawerigading married a 
princess of the underworld, and ultimately retired there with her. 
His sister married a being of the sky-world, and they went to 
the sky. After several intermarriages between the two worlds, 
the Luwu chiefs were ultimately descended from a sky prince 
and a princess of the underworld. 

The conditions in these stories show that the sky people 
and the underworld people systematically intermarried. In the 
Luwu tale the two beings who came to earth to found the royal 
family were cross-cousins, that is, children of brother and sister. 
It is therefore striking that the royal family of Boni seem formerly 
to have practised this kind of marriage.” In later times it dis- 
appeared, so far as I can tell from the study of the available 
facts. The cross-cousin marriage being almost certainly the 
result of the dual organization with exogamy, its practice among 
the rulers of Boni suggests that this group formerly was divided 
into two parts, the members of which intermarried ; one part 
of this ruling group would, on the basis of the origin stories, have 
belonged to the sky-world, and the other to the underworld, but 
those days are evidently long since past. 

The history of the Mandar confederacy likewise suggests a 
former condition of exogamy between the ruling groups of the 
Bugi; for it is said that, after the spread of the ruling house of 
this confederacy, their homeland, Toboelawang, remained the 
leading mountain settlements, and the chief of Boni was the 
ruler of the lower settlement, because the sister of the Toboela- 
wang ruler had married him. 

These examples, derived from places where the Children of the 
Sun existed in the past, suggest that the practice of intermarriage 


1 B. Morris 550. 
_® Bakkers iv. 154 e.s. It would be interesting if a complete set of tables 
for the various Boni states, Palakka, Soppeng and the others coud be 
procured. 


KXOGAMY 375 


formerly held between the two branches of the ruling groups of 
the archaic civilization. 

- Twin or brother culture-heroes are closely connected with the 
ruling families of the dual organization, so should also be con- 
nected with exogamy. This is inferred from their association with 
the beginnings of social life in North America, Australia and 
elsewhere. In one case it is expressly said that they instituted 
exogamy between the two divisions. In Opa (Omba), or Leper’s 
Island, of the New Hebrides, the culture-heroes are Takaro and 
Mueragbuto. Takaro created the people, and organized them 
in two exogamous divisions, which were connected with the right 
and left hand, because they sucked at the right- and left-hand 
breasts of their mother. 

The evidence, so far as it goes, points to intermarriage between 
the two branches of the ruling family of the archaic civilization. 
Since the examples have not been taken from places where the 
Children of the Sun can be observed, it is necessary to pursue 
the inquiry. The only places where it is possible to do so are 
Egypt and Manu’a in Samoa, for only here have we enough 
data concerning marriages. Egypt will be left over till Chapter 
XXVI, for the evidence is complicated, and attention will be 
solely occupied with Manu’a. 

The island of Tau in Manu’a of Samoa, which was first settled, 
was divided into two parts, Fitiuta and Tau. Fitiuta, the first 
settlement, differs from all other places in the Samoan group, 
and indeed from most other places in Polynesia, for its first 
inhabitants were the Children of the Sun, the Sa-Tagaloa.2. The 
two parts of Fitiuta are connected, in one account, with Aga’euta 
and Aga’etai, man and wife, who had a son Aga’e, presumably 
one of the Sa-Tagaloa ;* for it is said that the Tagaloa family 
brought from the sky, that is, from their home, the Galea’i title, 
which they gave to Aga’e.*— This was, so far as can be told, the 
first royal title in Samoa, and, as has been seen, it was later on 
connected with peace, and not with war, as was the Tui title. 

Now comes an important story, the meaning of which must 
depend entirely upon the interpretation placed upon the facts 
recounted as to the foundation of Fitiuta. It is said that Taga- 
loaalagi, the sun-god, was the father, by a girl of Fitiuta, of 
Aga’e, and, by a Tau girl, of Tau:° thus the ruling families of 
both sides of the island, and therefore of the dual organization, 
were the children, by different mothers, of a sky-being. Descent 
evidently was matrilineal in those days, for the two children 
belonged to the settlements of their mothers. The two settle- 
ments had different characteristics: Tau was always associated 
with the temporal power, as the seat of the Tuimanu’a; while 
Fitiuta was always the home of the sacred chief. Tau was never 
connected with the sky-world, whence it may be presumed that 


1 Suas i. 47. 2 fF. Kramer I. 370, 3 Id., 371, 378, 
4 Id., 382, 5 Id., 3790. 


376 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the Tau girl was connected with the underworld, which in Samoa 
in later times was the universal abode of the dead and of deities. 

On the other hand, the girl of Fitiuta evidently belonged to 
the sky-born part of the ruling family. This can be surmised 
from the story of Galea’i, or Aga’e, and of the loss of the Galea’i 
title, which came from the sky. Aga’e, the Galea’i, married, not 
a girl of Fitiuta, or of the Tagaloa family, but a daughter of the 
Tuiosana;1 and their child, Taeotagaloa, was the first Tui- 
manu’a, the first Tui chief of Samoa. Since the wife of the 
Galea’i belonged to a Tui family, the title evidently descended 
through her to her son, which is natural under matrilineal institu- 
tions. It is said that the Tui title was at this time brought down 
from the sky, and given to Taeotagaloa ; it did not exist before 
in Samoa. The title belonging to Aga’e was, of course, the sacred 
title of Galea’i. The question is, why was not this title given to 
his son? The answer comes from the comparison between the 
marriages of Tagaloaui, the father of Aga’e, with that of Aga’e 
himself. Tagaloaui married two women, one of Fitiuta, and the 
other of Tau; Aga’e was the child of the first marriage, and Tau 
of the second. Aga’e evidently succeeded to the Galea’i title 
because his mother belonged to Fitiuta. He could only hand it 
on to his son by marrying a Fitiuta woman, which he failed to do. 

This explains why the Galea’i title was superseded by the Tui 
title, which became the most important in Manu’a, for it was in 
closest connexion with the people of the sky-world. Therefore 
the lapsing of the Galea’i title in Samoa gives exactly the conditions 
found among the Bugi and Macassar of Celebes, that is, a ruling 
family descended from a man of the sky-world and a woman of 
the underworld. The account from Manu’a is more important, 
however, for it reveals the conditions of the days of the Children 
of the Sun. 

The other accounts of the ancestry of Taeotagaloa, the first 
Tuimanu’a, show that he is always the son of a woman of the 
Tui family, or of a woman belonging to the underworld. In one 
instance the Sun married Ui, the daughter of the Tuiatafu, a 
ruler in Atafu, where the sun-cult was practised. Their son was 
Tagaloaui, who married a daughter of La Fe’e, the ruler of the 
underworld.? Their son was Taeotagaloa the first Tuimanu’a. 
Thus the ancestry of Taeotagaloa, on his mother’s side, connected 
him directly with the Tui chieftainship and the underworld group. 
Another account makes Taeotagaloa, the first Tuimanu’a, the 
son of Tagaloa-la, the sun-god, and a daughter of the Tui-fiti.* 

This collection of stories provides consistent facts. Evidently 
the various titles were hereditary, and a man had to marry the 
heiress in order that his son might succeed to them. The coming 
into prominence of the Tui title coincides with the marriage of 

1 F. Kramer 383. He therefore married into the other group of the dual 


organization. 
2 Id., I. 393, 45. ® Id., 393. 


EXOGAMY 377 


a member of the sky family with a woman of the underworld 
family, a daughter of a Tui chief. This title is said to have 
been derived from the sky-world. It is thus evident that the 
ruling class of the archaic civilization had two chief titles, the 
Galea’i and the Tui, one belonging to the sky family and the other 
to the underworld family. It was necessary for a Galea’i chief, 
a sacred chief, to marry a woman of the sky-world if the title 
was to persist. Once such a union was lacking the title lapsed, 
and the less lofty title took its place. According to tradition 
Taeotagaloa, the first Tui chief, went from Fitiuta to become the 
Tuimanu’a at Tau, while Le Fanonga, his brother, was left at 
Fitiuta to be the war chief. Taeotagaloa is also said to have 
married two girls, one from Fitiuta and the other from Tau, and 
the two sons that resulted, who were born on the same day, were 
respectively sacred chief and war chief of the island.1_ Thus the 
distinction of sacred chief and war chief has survived the dis- 
appearance of the 'Tagaloa family and the original sacred. title 
of Galea’i; that is to say, Fitiuta supplies the sacred chief, and 
Tau the war chief; but the original ruling family has disappeared. 

If these stories have any semblance of reality, it would seem 
that, in the times when the Children of the Sun existed in Tau, 
the ruler was in the habit of marrying women from both sides of 
the community. The woman from Fitiuta was of royal blood, 
and, assuming matrilineal descent, the sacred title of Galea’i 
went with her. On the other hand, the Tui title, that of war 
chief, went with the girl of Tau. Thus the Children of the 
Sun practised two sorts of marriage, with their own stock and 
with the war chief’s side of the ruling group. 

The marriage of the Children of the Sun with their own stock 
is a well-known feature of that family. For in several places they 
married their sisters or some other blood relative, and the eldest 
son of such unions succeeded to the throne. This wasso in Egypt, 
where the king seems to have married his sister, mother or daughter, 
so as to obtain the throne and the inheritance that went with 
her. In Indonesia the evidence collected in “ The Megalithic 
Culture of Indonesia’”’ shows that ruling classes that claimed 
descent from the sky-world invariably asserted that their first 
ancestors practised incestuous unions. In Hawaii and elsewhere 
the early ruling class of Children of the Sun seems to have prac- 
tised such unions. Since the Children of the Sun. practised 
polygyny, it could easily happen that the ruler also married the 
eldest daughter of the war chief. 

The conclusion to which this discussion points is that the Child- 
ren of the Sun married relatives, and women of the other side 
of the ruling group, that side associated with the underworld. 
The side of the district inhabited first of all by the Sun family 
was that side which continually provided the sacred chief, and 
the other side, that of the underworld group, supplied the war 

1 Pratt ii. 135. 


378 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


chief, the descent being through the mother. Thus the dual 
associations of the twins is explained, as well as their brotherhood. 
They were not twins, but half-brothers; their twin nature was 
due to the dual settlement, as has been suggested. This would 
explain why du Pratz found among the Natchez of Louisiana, 
ruled over by the Children of the Sun, that the brother of the 
Great Sun, Stung Serpent, was the head of the army.! It is 
known that the Natchez ruler had to be the son of a woman of 
royal blood, which agrees with what was inferred in India. Pre- 
sumably Stung Serpent, who, on the analogy of the rest of the 
Indian tribes, belonged to the other side of the dual grouping 
from the Great Sun, was the son of a woman from the other side 
of the ruling group. 

In the original settlement of Tau of Manu’a, one side of the 
island provided sacred chiefs and the other provided war chiefs. 
The dignity of the war chief, the Tui, was founded later, and 
was less than that of the sacred chief. In the course of time the 
family of the Children of the Sun disappeared, apparently, in 
Manu’a, when the Galea’i failed to marry a woman of Fitiuta. 
Thereafter the Tui chief was the chief ruler. None the less the 
distinction of sacred and war chief was still a feature of the 
political organization of the island. For Taeotagaloa, the first 
Tuimanu’a, the first war chief of Samoa, married women from 
Fitiuta and Tau, the opposite sides of the island, whose sons, 
born on the same day, were respectively sacred and war chiefs. 
Thus the organization set up by the original Children of the 
Sun was continued by their successors, so that marriages took 
place between both sides of the island. 

The deliberate institution of the dual organization has already 
been described in the case of Rarotonga and among certain North 
American tribes. It appears, consequently, that the dual 
organization persisted when the originators had vanished, but in 
a modified form, for the brother-sister marriage, which was 
typical of the sky-people, if not peculiar to them, disappeared, 
and the underworld folk seemingly did not practise it in Polynesia. 
So, when the Children of the Sun vanished, the community would 
be left with a dual grouping of the ruling class, the two sides 
providing the sacred and war chiefs. The custom of intermarriage 
already existed, and presumably it took the form of exogamy 
as is found in Ponape and the Pelews. 

The analysis of the traditions of the Samoans and others leads 
to a discussion of an important point in mythology. How is it 
that certain peoples claim that the race began with the union 
of sky and earth, with a man of the sky-world and a woman of 
the underworld ? Such stories as these apply to the ruling group, 
for the commoners, in Samoa, were said to have been created by 
the sky-folk, the Tagaloa family. 

In examining Samoan stories of origin it must be remembered 

1 du Pratz 43. 


EXOGAMY 379 


that these people had no direct knowledge of the days of the 
Children of the Sun, so that they would know nothing of the 
incestuous unions that were practised, and stories of theogamy 
would not refer to an event that might happen any day. Samoan 
tradition really only goes back to the times when the Tui chief- 
tainship was already in existence; for, from the earliest times, 
marriages take place with that family, either in Samoa or in 
Fiji. The marriages are usually between a man of the sky-world 
and a woman of the Tui family, connected with the underworld ; 
and, since descent is evidently matrilineal, the son is a Tui chief. 

The interpretation of this story has already been put forward : 
it is concluded to be the result of the break-up of the original 
organization, of the disappearance of the Children of the Sun, 
and to show that the early ruling groups of Manu’a in Samoa 
consisted of two intermarrying families. Since the later chiefs 
were all connected with the underworld, the interpretation fits 
the facts. But it is necessary to go further in order to reach 
greater certainty. If the two sides of the dual grouping inter- 
married, we should hear of marriages between men of the under- 
world and women of the sky-world whose children would be 
Children of the Sun, or at least would belong to the sky-world, 
the land of their mothers. It is significant that the Samoans 
interpret the manner of birth of the Sun in this way. They 
say that the Sun was the son of a masculine being called Po, 
darkness, and a feminine being Ao, light.1_ Thus the two stories 
give a complete exogamous system, in which the people of the 
sky and those of the underworld intermarry, and the children 
follow their mothers in descent. This is, of course, surmise, based 
on the amalgamation of Samoan tales, and must be treated as 
such. It is nevertheless remarkable that Samoan tradition should 
yield results so harmonious. 

The history of Samoa thus resembles that of the Bugi and 
Macassar people of South Celebes, whose ruling families, in the 
three stories of origin that were quoted, were invariably descended 
from marriages between beings of the sky-world and those of the 
underworld. The existence of the cross-cousin marriage in the 
royal family of Boni, coupled with its popularity in Timor, 
suggests that this traditional form of union between two distinct 
families actually was in practice; and that, when the old order 
broke up, only the form of marriage and the tradition persisted. 
As in Samoa, the conditions usually suggest that the mode of 
descent was matrilineal, so that the setting is the society of the 
archaic civilization. ) 

The instance of South Celebes may be taken as a second phase 
in the break-up of the dual organization after the disappearance 
of the Children of the Sun with their incestuous unions. The 
Maori of New Zealand provide a possible third stage. They have 
come from Rarotonga, where the dual organization was deliber- 

1 F. Kramer 393, 413: Pratt ii. 242-3: Stair ii. 48. 


380 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


ately set up, and they retain less trace of the dual organization 
than the peoples of South Celebes. The Maori claim descent from 
Taaki or Tawhaki of Rarotonga, the brother of Karii or of Kariki. 
They claim also to have been formerly part of the dual organiza- 
tion. Since Kariki is associated, in Rarotonga, with the dual 
organization, it is probable that his brother, Taaki, is also so 
connected. Kariki came from Manu’a in Samoa, and belonged 
to the sky-family, the Ali’a, the descendants of the Tagaloa folk 
of the sky. According to the Maori he was the ancestor of the 
Rarotongans.! Since the Maori came from a place with the dual 
organization, and are predominantly connected with the under- 
world,? their ancestors should, with matrilineal descent, be a 
woman of the underworld and a male being of the sky. This is 
so, for the ancestors of gods and men are Rangi and Papa, Heaven 
and Earth, male and female.* The facts are therefore in agree- 
ment. This agrees with the Samoan belief that the “‘ Sun ”’ was 
descended from a woman of the sky and a man of the underworld. 
The two cases correspond to one another on the assumption that 
exogamy took place between the two sides of the ruling family. 

Other instances of the origin of the dual grouping from the 
union of sky-people and underworld-people, or rather, people 
presumably originally connected with the underworld, exist in 
North America. The Omaha claim that the sky is male and 
the earth female, so that the union of these two is necessary for 
the perpetuation of all living forms. These ideas are not fanciful, 
but are connected with the dual divisions of the tribe.* The 
Osage tribe of the Sioux were likewise formed of the union of 
people belonging to the sky-world and the underworld.® The 
case of the Omaha shows that a tribe in which the old rules of 
society are disappearing, in which matrilineal descent has given 
place to patrilineal descent, retains, in its mythology, traces of 
the former organization ; which further supports the conclusion 
derived from the Maori and the peoples of South Celebes. The 
disappearance of the teaching of the old men, who state that 
the dual division formerly had to do with exogamy, would serve to 
produce an exactly similar condition of affairs. 

The story, that the earth and the sky are the first ancestors 
of a race, founded on the past existence of the dual organization, 
constitutes another example of the close connexion between all 
aspects of the life of a community. It may be claimed, on the 


1 P. Smith vi. 191. 

2 It must not be forgotten that an ambiguity exists in respect of this matter 
(see p. 174). 

3 R. Taylor 116 es.: Best xiv. 3. 

4 Fletcher and La Flésche 135. ‘‘ Amid the wreckage of the ancient tribal 
rs loner at the present time, the practice of exogamy is still observed ’’ 

5). 

° Id., 68-4. The Zuni state that human beings resulted from the union 
of Father Sky and Mother Earth (Cushing ii. 379)... Among the Hopi the Sun 
and Earth ‘‘are the parents of all clans ’’ (Fewkes vii. 85). 


EXOGAMY 381 


other hand, that it is ‘“‘ natural ’’ to ascribe a sexual antithesis 
to the sky and the earth, and that the sky is naturally male. 
This would be plausible if such a form of origin myth were uni- 
versal ; but it breaks down because such an origin is not always 
claimed. Moreover, the sky is sometimes female, as in Samoa, 
which destroys the “‘ naturalness ’’ of the sexual antithesis. At 
the same time it need not be thought that no speculative element 
enters at all into this antithesis of light and darkness, sky and 
underworld ; for it may lie at the root in the formulation of 
the solar theology. But what has gone before suggests that it 
is necessary, in cases such as that of the Maori, to look first to 
the history of the people for an interpretation of their origin 
myths, before inquiring whether such stories are the result of 
pure speculation.’ 

The topic treated in this chapter is one upon which an immense 
amount of ingenuity has been expended.® It has been approached 
from many points of view, according to the attitudes of different 
students. In the present case, the subject was approached by 
way of the dual organization. HExogamy was a constant feature 
of that form of society, and, as such, demanded explanation. 
The search for the explanation revealed the ruling groups of the 
archaic civilization as consisting of two intermarrying families, 
or clans, and the exogamy of the rest of the community as derived 
thence. The culture-sequences established in North America, 
Oceania and elsewhere, show that the institution of exogamy has 
a like history in each part of the region: in the beginning it is 
connected solely with the dual organization itself, the rule being 
that marriages must take place between the two groups into 
which the community is divided. The totemic clan grouping 
does not come into play until the break-up of the dual organiza- 
tion, when the rule is that marriages must be outside the clan. 
In the final stage, when the clan grouping is disintegrating, marriage 
is forbidden within certain degrees of kinship. The first form of 
exogamy, that of the dual organization, bears every trace of 
artificiality ; certain groups of relatives are possible mates, while 
others are forbidden; the children of brother and sister, cross- 
cousins, may marry, while those of two brothers or of two sisters 
may not marry. Such a rule is not founded on any prohibition 
of incest; it is obviously a secondary derivative from a rule 
devised for some other purpose. The rule of exogamy in the 
dual organization simply divided the whole community into two 
groups, possible mates and forbidden mates, and this grouping 
has nothing whatever to do with proximity or relationship or 
propinquity of habitation. It is entirely artificial, and this 
artificiality is evident when the dual organization disintegrates. 


1 TI shall not discuss this matter. Cf. Sethe vi. 

2 See pp. 481 e.s. for a consideration of the possibility of speculation on 
the part of people such as the Maori. 

5 Westermarch II. 162 e.s. 


382 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


For then the restriction holds with regard to relatives on one 
side, according to whether descent is matrilineal or patrilineal, 
and no real account is taken of proximity. It is only when the 
clan restriction disappears that marriage is directly forbidden to 
relatives. 

It is stated definitely, in the case of Gowa of South Celebes, that 
the interrelationship between the rulers of Tallo and of Gowa 
was a source of strength to the State, and led to its great influence 
in that part of the archipelago.! Since the form of the exogamous 
principle changed in the course of time, it is easy to believe that, 
in its inception, it was due to a compact between the two sides 
of the ruling group, whereby intermarriage took place. When 
the question of the origin of the archaic civilization is mooted, it 
will be found that this is the explanation suggested by the facts. 


1 Eerdmans 66. 


CHAPTER XXIV 
GIVERS OF LIFE 


his recognition of the réle of man’s search for “‘ life-giving ”’ 
substances in the development of civilization. In a 
striking passage in ‘“‘ The Evolution of the Dragon” he says :— 

‘In delving into the remotely distant history of our species 
we cannot fail to be impressed with the persistence with which, 
throughout the whole of his career, man (of the species sapiens) 
has been seeking (in response to the prompting of the most 
fundamental of all instincts, that of the preservation of life) for an 
elixir of life, to give added ‘ vitality ’ to the dead (whose existence 
was not consciously regarded as ended), to prolong the days of 
active life to the living, to restore youth, and to protect his own 
life from all assaults, not merely of time, but also of circumstance. 
In other words, the elixir he sought was something that would 
bring ‘ good luck’ in all the events of his life and its continuation. 
Most of the amulets, even of modern times, the lucky trinkets, 
the averters of the ‘ Evil Eye,’ the practices and devices for 
securing good luck in love and sport, in curing bodily ills or mental 
distress, in attaining material prosperity, or a continuation of 
existence after death, are survivals of this ancient and persistent 
striving after those objects which our earliest forefathers called 
collectively ‘givers of life.’ ’’? 

That is, I am convinced, one of the most important generaliza- 
tions ever made in the study of human society, and, as evidence 
is daily being acquired, it becomes increasingly more certain that 
Elliot Smith has here put his finger upon one of the prime causes 
of the development of our civilization, namely, the ‘‘ desire for 
life’ in its broadest sense. 

Space makes it inadvisable to enter upon a discussion of the 
origins of the use of “ Givers of Life,” and the inquiring reader 
is referred to the work of Elliot Smith for more details. This 
chapter will be devoted simply to showing that the archaic civiliza- 
tion was much more potent in the practices connected with givers 
of life than those that followed it ; moreover, that the later civiliza- 


1 Elliot Smith xx. 145: See also xviiil.: Cf. Weston 75, n, 2. 
383 


() i of Elliot Smith’s greatest services to knowledge has been 


384 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


tions derived magical practice from the archaic civilization. In 
order to support this thesis, it will be shown that the peoples of 
the later civilizations use for their magical operations certain 
objects left behind them by the people of the archaic civilization, 
and that traditions point to the people of the archaic civilization 
as a potent source of magic. 

One example of this use of ancient objects is well known. The 
work of Andrée, Blinkenberg and others shows that polished stone 
implements are considered, in those countries where they are no 
longer used, to be ‘‘ thunderstones,”’ ‘‘ thunderteeth,” ‘ god’s 
axes”? and so forth, and to have magical powers. ‘The belief can 
hardly be of spontaneous growth, for it is not attached to paleo- 
lithic implements. The choice of a particular group of implements 
by peoples in widely separated regions points to a uniform cause ; 
it suggests that in these places the makers of the implements were 
accredited with great magical powers. 

In India the peoples have a widespread belief in the magical 
properties of polished stone implements, which, as has been seen, 
are not now made or used by them. The Naga tribes of Assam 
look upon polished stone implements as thunderbolts ; the Sema 
‘Naga say that the fall of these implements from the sky is marked 
by forked lightning.+ 

In the East Indian Archipelago polished stone implements are 
not made, and are universally looked upon as “ thunderbolts ”’ 
or “ thunderteeth.” This belief exists wherever the implements 
are discovered.2, Among the Kenyah tribe of Borneo they are 
called the teeth of the war- and thunder-god Balingo ;? a Madang 
chief, Tama Kajan Odoh, who claims descent from Balingo, 
the same war-god, possesses many such “ teeth ” as heirlooms.* 
Kruyt mentions that the chiefs of West Sumba, the part of the 
island with megaliths, irrigation, dual grouping of villages and 
other signs of the archaic civilization, possess polished stone 
implements and similar implements of bronze,® which are looked 
upon as very sacred and as belonging to their ancestors, He 
mentions also that these objects are found in Central Celebes on 
hill-sides, in cracks of rocks and elsewhere. The Kolaka district 
of South-East Celebes is ruled over by chiefs descended from sky- 
beings called Sangia. The original Sangia were two brothers, 
who divided the land between them. This suggests the dual 
organization. One of these Sangia, Konawe, is said to have 
given stone hammers to the four head chiefs of his district, as 
tokens that these chiefs were his direct descendants.® This 
information with regard to the association between chiefs of 

1 Hutton i. 196, 252, ii. 2 Perry vii. 133-4. 

3 Hose and McDougall II. 124. OUT de, To 11s ee 

® Kruyt viii. 545. 

6° Kruyt vi. 696-7. Some Californian tribes likewise possess obsidian 


blades as heirlooms; thoy are sacred and objects of wealth, but not like 
objects in a sacred ‘‘ bundle ”’ (Rust, 688 e.s.). 


GIVERS OF LIFE 385 


Borneo, Sumba and Celebes, and polished stone implements is 
important. The possession of these sacred objects is a token of 
descent from beings of the sky-world, or of the ancestry of chiefs ; 
the Borneo chiefs of the Madang claimed descent from Balingo, 
and possessed a large number of his teeth ; in Sumba the imple- 
ments were sacred tokens of ancestors ; in Celebes they were given 
to chiefs by beings from the sky-world. The information thus 
agrees in associating these implements with the people of the 
archaic civilization, and, what is more important, in connecting 
the ancestors of chiefs with the rulers of the archaic civilization, 
and thus in providing another link between early and late in 
Indonesia, a region where such links are all too rare. This further 
accession of information makes it possible to understand still 
more clearly the past history of the islands east of Timor. For, 
in these islands, especially in Wetar, the chief treasures, which, 
as in Sumba, are kept in the village temples, are small stones in 
which the ghosts of ancestors are supposed sometimes to live. In 
the case of Wetar it seems especially clear that these small stones 
are polished stone implements.! If so, the people of the region 
from Sumba to Timorlaut are evidently preserving implements 
of the archaic civilization as precious links with the past. The 
fact that these implements are foreign to the peoples, that they 
do not know their use, makes any evidence gained from them of 
peculiar importance : they serve as an unconscious witness to the 
connexion of these peoples with the archaic civilization, and help 
to show that in several parts of the region the continuity between 
past and present has never really been broken. 

The magical practices of peoples of the lower culture in 
Indonesia, Melanesia and elsewhere, tend to centre round a few 
substances. This is evident from an enumeration of the magical 
paraphernalia of various peoples. The Punan of Borneo, food- 
gatherers who have been influenced by their more highly civilized 
neighbours, make use of charms: ‘“‘ The Punan has great faith in 
charms, especially for bringing good luck in hunting. He usually 
carries, tied to his quiver, a bundle of small objects which have 
forcibly attracted his attention for any reason, e.g. a large quartz 
erystal, a strangely shaped tusk or tooth or pebble, etc., and the 
bundle of charms is dipped in the blood of the animals that fall 
to his blow-pipe.”* The use of blood and animal’s teeth can be 
left on one side for the present, and attention fixed on the use of 
quartz. The Punan are not alone in regarding this substance 
as a “‘ giver of life,” for the Kayan and other tribes use it. Kenyah 
houses usually possess a bundle of charms: ‘‘ This bundle, which 
is the property of the whole household or village, generally con- 
tains hair taken from the heads that hang in the gallery; a 
erocodile’s tooth ; the blades of a few knives that have been used 
in special ceremonies ; a few crystals or pebbles of strange shape , 

-pig’s teeth of unusual shape (of both wild and domestic pig) ; 
1 Perry vii. 45, 57. 2 Hose and McDougall II. 190. 
25 


386 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


feathers of fowls (these seem to be substitutes for Bali Flaki’s 
feathers, which they would hardly dare to touch); stone axe- 
heads, called the teeth of Balingo ; and isang, i.e. palm leaves that 
have been put to ceremonial use.” + 

It may be asserted that quartz is used for magical purposes on 
account of its colour; that it has attracted attention and come 
to acquire magical power. Such a possibility must be borne in 
mind, but there is much evidence against it. 

The magical practices of the peoples of British New Guinea 
make it more reasonable to ascribe the use of quartz (the matrix 
of gold) to the influence of the archaic civilization than to the 
attraction that its properties may have had for primitive man. In 
British New Guinea it is possible to connect the archaic civiliza- 
tion with the magical practices of the present-day peoples. The 
evidence collected by Mr. Chinnery shows that the distribution 
of stone pestles and mortars, stone circles, and other cultural 
elements foreign to the present population, coincides so closely 
with that of gold and pearls, as to leave no room to doubt as to 
what those responsible for the remains were seeking. The natives 
are ignorant of the nature of the remains, but they use them in 
their magic: Mr. Chinnery mentions that they had a circular 
stone mortar ; they had.no idea of its use, but would not part with 
it “lest harm should come to them.’’ In another case a sorcerer 
had a small stone mortar, which gave potency to his magic, and 
he was killed because so many people died. Small stone pestles 
are looked upon as charms. A small stone image was used by the 
natives of one village to place in the ground in order to get good 
crops. Neuhass describes and figures some stone human figures 
with remarkable heads collected in Bukaua, that were used by 
the natives as charms.” That is to say, the present-day popula- 
tion look upon the implements and ceremonial objects from the 
archaic civilization as “ givers of life.” 

Other evidence reveals the profound influence of this vanished 
population upon native thought and practice. The peoples of 
British and German New Guinea look upon the previous peoples 
as their superiors in power, and this is enough to account for the 
regard that they have for their remains. This influence goes very 
deep into their magical practice, and is betrayed by their choice 
of varieties of stone for charms. The gold-miners made their 
implements of mica-schist, sandstone, volcanic rock, diabase, 
diorite, granite, quartz, hornblende, clay-stone, ophicalcite, 
obsidian and jade. Professor Seligman describes the agricultural 
charms of the Koita people of British New Guinea: ‘“ Yam 
stones are rounded, oval or oblong, and almost always water- 

1 Hose and McDougall II. 124. 

2 Chinnery 272, 273, 279. Similarly the natives of California regard 
mortars found in gold-bearing gravels as magical. ‘‘ They were acquainted 
_ with these mortars, but knew nothing about the makers of them, and held 


them in such superstitious dread that on no account could they be induced to 
touch one”’ (Skertchly 332-5). 


GIVERS OF LIFE 387 


worn; they usually consist of a volcanic or highly metamor- 
phic rock, or a basic tuff. More rarely yam charms consist 
of pieces of trachytic lava, waterworn fragments of vein quartz, 
or even the large irregular hollow ‘blisters’ which probably 
arise in the giant clam (Tridacna gigas). When these blisters 
are removed they are used as charms, they are sometimes reddened, 
and water is left in them for a few minutes before being sprinkled 
on the yams. 

‘““ Among the yam charms sent by Mr. Ballantine to the British 
Museum are waterworn pebbles of the following minerals: 
Serpentine, a diorite or hornblende schist, ophitic diabase, augite, 
andesite, iron pyrites and a not obviously waterworn piece of 
chert.”” Among banana charms are fossil coral, crystalline calcite, 
limestone, beekite, metamorphic rock, Cassis shell, resin, titani- 
ferous iron ore. The fishing charms seem to have been mainly of 
quartz: one consisted of an irregularly fractured piece of quartz 
connected by a short piece of string with a string knot to which 
are attached five small netted string bags containing various 
charms, a piece of resin and an irregularly fractured piece of jasper- 
like rock. The five netted bags contain respectively a highly 
polished pebble, a clam (Tridacna) pearl, two clam pearls, frag- 
ments of resin, a fragment of quartz.! 

The similarity between the list of stones and other objects used 
for charms, and that of stones used by the gold-workers in their 
craft, is striking enough to suggest that the natives attach magical 
power to these varieties of stone because of their associations. 
The occurrence of pearls and resin certainly strengthens this 
suggestion, for it can hardly be doubted that the people of the 
archaic civilization included pearl-diving among their activities ; 
and the use of resin was extremely important in such countries 
as Hgypt.? 

Quartz evidently is the most prized of all: ‘‘ Certain charm 
stones—as far as my knowledge goes these are always of quartz— 
are so highly charged with magical power that it is not considered 
safe for them to be touched with the hand, even by the man who 
is about to bring their power into play. One charm of this sort 
which I saw was kept in a small bamboo cylinder, out of which it 
was lifted by means of a bone fork, the pointed end of which was 
thrust through the loosely netted covering which surrounded the 
stone.” * The stone pestle and mortars left behind in the gold- 
diggings. suggest quartz-grinding. It is therefore significant that 
the kind of rock that the old gold-seekers sought above all others 
should have been the most potent in magic for the natives. 

The study of the magical practice of British New Guinea 
suggests that the peoples of Borneo owe their use of quartz to the 


1 Seligman i. 176-8. 

2 Mr. A. R. Brown notes the importance of resin in the lives of the Andam- 
anese. Cf. ‘‘ The Andaman Islanders.’? Cambridge, 1922, 

3 Seligman i. 174. 


388 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


people who left behind them the carved stone bulls in the centre 
of the island, as well as those who made the polished stone imple- 
ments. I have already urged that the search for gold, pearls 
and other substances led the people of the archaic civilization to 
Indonesia, and this search for gold-bearing quartz may have so 
impressed the natives that they adopted the use of quartz as a 
principal giver in life.} 

The case now being argued will gain in strength if it can be 
shown that the people of the archaic civilization themselves 
regarded gold, pearls and quartz as magical. This was certainly 
so in Egypt. Gold was identified with Hathor, the great mother 
goddess, the Lady of Nubia, whence came the metal. The room 
in the temple where the king was born was called the ‘‘ House of 
Gold.’”? The god Ptah is said to have made the first statues of 
the kings and gods, and to have covered them with gold. He 
was called ‘‘ Lord of the Gold Smithy,” and the place where he 
was supposed to perform the act of creating the new king was 
called the “‘ Gold Smithy in the Temple of Dendereh.”? Quartz 
was a favourite material for making amulets among the Egyptians, 
and pearls were “ givers of life.” 

In Sumeria, Ea and Inlil were called Lords of Gold. In India 
the Asuras were credited by the Aryans with magical powers : 
they could bring the dead to life and perform many wonderful 
feats. They were said to have vast stores of treasures, among 
them gold and jewels and pearls. The following extracts show 
how the Indians regarded gold and pearls :— 


GoLD AS AN AMULET FOR Lone LIFE 


. The gold which is born from fire, the immortal, they bestowed 
it upon the mortal. He who knows this deserves it ; of old 
age he dies who wears it. 

. The gold (endowed by) the Sun with beautiful colour, which 
the men of yore, rich in descendants, did desire, may it 
gleaming envelop thee in lustre. Long-lived becomes he 
who wears it. 

3. (May it envelop) thee unto (long) life, unto lustre, unto force, 
and unto strength, that thou shalt by the brilliancy of the 
god, gold, shine forth among people. 

. (The gold) which king Varuna knows, which god Brihaspati 
knows, which Indra, the slayer of Vrita, knows, may that 
become for thee a source of life, may that become for thee 
a source of lustre.* 


— 


i) 


i 


Gold is constantly compared with the gods, and claimed as a 
giver of life : ‘“‘ Gold, doubtless, is Agni’s seed ”’ ; ‘‘ Gold, doubtless, 


1 The Fijians have magic crystals (Kunz ii. 304-5). 

* Lippmann 267. See Chapter X for other instances of the divine nature 
of gold in Egypt. 3 Id., 521. 

* Bloomfield XIX. 26. 


GIVERS OF LIFE 389 


is a form of the gods ”’ ; “‘ Gold, indeed, is fire, light, and immor- 
tality.” } 
_ Again the pearl is looked upon as a giver of life. 


THE PEARL AND ITS SHELL AS AN AMULET BESTOWING 
Lona LIFE AND PROSPERITY 


1. Born of the wind, the atmosphere, the lightning, and the light, 
may this pearl shell, born of gold, protect us from straits. 

2. With the shell which was born in the sea, at the head of the 
bright substances, we slay the Rakshasas and conquer the 
Atvins (devouring demons). 

3. With the shell (we conquer) disease and poverty; with the 
shell, too, the Sadanvas. The shell is our universal 
remedy ; the pearl shell protects us from straits. 

4. Born in the heaven, born in the sea, brought on from the river 
(Sindhu), this shell, born of gold, is our life-prolonging 
amulet. 

5. The amulet, born from the sea, a sun, born from Vritra (the 
cloud), shall on all sides protect us from the missiles of the 
gods and the Asuras. 

6. Thou art one of the golden substances, thou art born from 
Soma (the moon). Thou are sightly on the chariot, thou 
art brilliant on the quiver. (May it prolong our lives.) 

7. The bone of the gods turned into pear! ; .that, animated, dwells 
in the waters. That do I fasten upon thee unto life, lustre, 
strength and longevity, unto a life lasting a hundred autumns. 
May the (amulet) of pearl protect thee.2 


Mr. Donald A. Mackenzie, in his latest work, has shown that 
the ancient Mexicans held ideas with regard to the life-giving 
powers of certain substances, exactly similar to those of the 
Kgyptians and peoples of India. He mentions gold, silver, pearls, 
precious stones, jade and so forth. ‘“‘ Withal, they were used in 
precisely the same way and connected with similar beliefs and 
practices.” 3 

Not only did the communities nearest in culture to the archaic 
civilization possess ideas regarding the supposed life-giving 
powers of gold, pearls and so forth ; but, it can be shown, in one 
case at least, that such ideas have been handed down directly 
from the archaic civilization. Mr. Skeat, in his work on ‘‘ Malay 
Magic,’ has some remarkable information with regard to the 
mining charms of the people of the Malay Peninsula. The Malays 
possess some of the cultural elements of the archaic civilization, 
such as mother-right; they have spread from the Menangkabau 
Plateau of Sumatra, and, as the following quotation from 
Marsden shows, their movements have been controlled by the 
presence of gold. He says: “ Beside those articles of trade 

1 Satapatha-Brahmana V. 187, 203, 215, 236, 239, 303, 304. 


2 Bloomfield xlii. 
3D. A. Mackenzie ii. Chapter I. 4 Skeat 23-9. 


390 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


afforded by the vegetable kingdom, Sumatra produces many 
others, the chief of which is gold. This valuable metal is found 
mostly in the central parts of the island, none (or with few 
exceptions) being observed to the southward of Limun, a branch 
of Jambi River, nor to the northward of Nalabu, from which port 
Achin is principally supplied. Menangkabau has always been 
esteemed the richest seat of it ; and this consideration probably 
induced the Dutch to establish their head factory at Padang, in 
the immediate neighbourhood of that kingdom. Colonies of 
Malays from thence have settled in almost all the districts where 
gold is procured, and appear to be the only persons who dig for 
it in mines, or collect it in streams; the proper inhabitants or 
villagers confining their attention to the raising of provisions, 
with which they supply those who search for the metal. Such 
at least appears to be the case in Limun, Batang Asei, and 
Pakalang jambu, where a considerable gold-trade is carried on.” } 
Their movements, therefore, are like those of the Gonds, who also 
have spread over gold-bearing formations. 

One important circumstance makes it probable that the Malays 
have derived their ideas concerning the life-giving powers of tin, 
gold and so forth from the archaic civilization. The Malay 
rulers owe much of their great sanctity to their regalia. They 
are divine beings : “‘ The theory of the king as the Divine Man is 
held perhaps as strongly in the Malay region as in any other part 
of the world, a fact which is strikingly emphasized by the alleged 
right of Malay monarchs ‘to slay at pleasure, without being guilty 
of a crime.’t Not only is the king’s person considered sacred, 
but the sanctity of his body is believed to communicate itself to 
his regalia, and to slay those who break the royal taboos. Thus 
it is firmly believed that anyone who seriously offends the royal 
person, who touches (even for a moment) or who imitates (even 
with the king’s permission) the chief objects of the regalia, or 
who wrongfully makes use of any of the insignia or privileges of 
royalty, will be kena daulat, i.e. struck dead, by a quasi-electric 
discharge of that: Divine Power which the Malays suppose to 
reside in the king’s person, and which is called * Daulat’ or 
‘Royal Sanctity.’ ”’ 2 

Professor van den Berg has made it clear that the great sanctity 
attaching to regalia belongs to the early stratum of kingship in 
Indonesia, to the rulers who are nearest in culture to the archaic 
civilization. For he says: ‘‘ Although the institution of Regalia 
exists in the Javanese and Malay States, it nowhere has such a 
significance as in South Celebes. The superstitious reverence 
for regalia, which elsewhere is sporadic, is there a regular 
practice.” He says further that this custom is non-Moham- 
medan, and that a ruler must have possession of the regalia 


1 Marsden 165. 
* Skeat 23-4. Egyptian kings were possessed of much magical power. 
8 Berg 74. 


GIVERS OF LIFE 391 


before he can reign; which recalls the case of a Mekeo 
chief, who, when deposed, handed the royal lime-gourd to his suc- 
cessor. Not only must each ruler come into possession of the 
regalia, but, more important still, “ native tradition connects the 
origin of the earliest States with the finding, discovery, or acquisi- 
tion in some other manner, of an ornament, for instance a stone, a 
piece of wood, a fruit, a weapon and so forth, all of a particular 
shape or of a particular colour, in a word of a strange object, that 
according to tradition appears to have superhuman powers.”’ ? 

This quotation recalls the fact that rulers of States in Sumba 
and South Celebes possess polished stone implements that have 
magic power. A detailed study of regalia would reveal much 
important information, and would help to the understanding of 
many problems connected with givers of life. It would seem, 
from what has been said, that the institution comes down directly 
from the archaic civilization.? 

Another fact makes it probable that the Malay kings of the 
Malay Peninsula derive their sanctity from the archaic civilization, 
directly or indirectly, and that is the magical use of iron. The 
Sacred Lump of Iron forms part of the regalia of several rulers, 
and it is regarded with “‘ the most extraordinary reverence, not 
unmingled with superstitious terror.’’ Iron does not occur in 
the Malay Peninsula, so that its use must have come from elsewhere. 
The people of the archaic civilization worked iron in India, and 
presumably in places such as Central Celebes, where, as Kruyt 
has shown, iron is much used in magic.* Once again, therefore, a 
substance is used for magic that has been associated with the 
archaic civilization. 

To turn to the mining practices of the peoples of the Malay 
Peninsula. These have been described chiefly by Mr. A. Hale, 
whose paper is quoted in extenso by Mr. Skeat. Tin and gold 
are the chief minerals sought in this region, and both are worked 
to the accompaniment of much ceremony, carried on by a mining 
wizard, generally a Malay, sometimes a Sakai (that is, a man 
speaking an Austronesian language). Mr. Hale says: ‘‘ The 
Malay pawang, or medicine-man, is probably the inheritor of 
various remnants and traditions of the religion which preceded 
Muhammadanism, and in the olden time this class of persons 
derived a very fair revenue from the exercise of their profession, 
in propitiating and scaring those spirits who have to do with 
mines and miners.”* Again he says: ‘“‘ The Malay miner has 
peculiar ideas about tin and its properties ; in the first instance, 
he believes that it is under the protection and command of certain 
spirits whom he considers it necessary to propitiate; next he 
considers that the tin itself is alive and has many of the pro- 


1 Berg 72. * Id., 77. 

3 Cf. Samoa, where the insignia and magical power of the earliest rulers 
came from the sky-world (Chapter X, p. 140). * Kruyt i. 150 e.s., 

® Skeat 250. § Id., 253, 


392 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


perties of living matter, that of its own volition it can move from 
place to place, that it can reproduce itself, and that it has special 
likes—or perhaps aflinities—for certain people and things, and 
vice versa. Hence it is advisable to treat tin ore with a certain 
amount of respect, to consult its convenience, and what is, perhaps, 
more curious, to conduct the business of mining in such a way that 
the tin-ore may. as it were, be obtained without its own know- 
ledge.’ 1 Mr. Skeat gives a quotation from the ideas associated 
with gold, from Denys’ “ Descriptive Dictionary ” (which is not 
accessible to me) :— 

‘* Gold is believed to be under the care and in the gift of a dewa, 
or god, and its search is therefore unhallowed, for the miners 
must conciliate the dewa by prayers and offerings, and carefully 
abstain from pronouncing the name of God or performing any 
act of worship. Any acknowledgment of the sovereignty of 
Allah offends the dewa, who immediately ‘ hides the gold,’ or 
renders it invisible.” * 

It may be asserted that it is ‘ natural ” for people working tin 
or gold to “‘ imagine ” that the mineral is protected by a spiritual 
being. It must, however, be remembered that the working of 
tin or gold is not itself “‘ natural ” in any sense of the term, and 
that native populations have left such metals undisturbed for 
untold centuries. When, therefore, the present-day seekers after 
tin and gold in the Malay Peninsula accompany their craft with 
magical practices, it is possible to claim that, on the basis of the 
other signs of continuity with the archaic civilization, these ideas 
and practices have been derived from the same source. 

The facts adduced form a coherent system. Evidently the 
people of the archaic civilization looked upon gold, pearls and 
other things as Givers of Life, and sought them wherever they 
could. That being the case, it is likely that such ideas would be 
handed on to their successors. It would thus be expected that, 
wherever signs exist of old gold-workings of the people of the 
archaic civilization, the natives would look upon quartz as a giver 
of life. 

We turn now to study the magic of Australia, Melanesia and 
Torres Straits. The magic of Torres Straits Islanders shows 
traces of the influence of the past. Stones, often in the form of 
carved human images, play an important part in magical ¢cere- 
monies, especially those for the production of rain and yams.* It 
has already been stated that the communities of the western 
group of Torres Straits have exercised strong cultural influences 
upon those of the eastern group. This is manifest in the magic 
of the easterners ; for “‘ so many of the natural and worked sacred 
stones in the Murray Islands, are of foreign origin, and there can 
be no doubt that the majority of these must have come from the 

1 Skeat 259-60. 


_ * Id., 271-2. Cf. Perry vii. 173-4, for ceremonies in Timor connected 
with gold. 8 Torres Straits Report VJ. 193 e.s, 


GIVERS OF LIFE 393 


Western Islands.”! In the Western Islands magic is largely centred 
round stones. ‘Certain stones from their shape, or from other 
causes, were regarded as potent and were employed for magical 
purposes.” It is also said that: “Stones rudely carved and 
painted were formerly frequent, but unfortunately very little 
information is to hand about them.”’2 So the magic of Torres 
Straits rests upon the past, and is centred round objects associated 
with the archaic civilization. The Torres Straits Islanders also 
use the shells of the giant clam, which yield pearls, as well as 
others, in their magic.? 

Melanesia is a classical home of magic, but the different parts 
of the region vary in the proportion of magic to religion. The 
nature of this magic is well known to students, and the Melanesian 
word for magical power has become a commonplace in ethnological 
literature. In the words of Codrington, who first described the 
belief in detail :— 

““The Melanesian mind is entirely possessed by the belief in 
a supernatural power or influence, called almost universally mana. 
This is what works to effect everything which is beyond the 
ordinary power of men, outside the common process of nature ; 
it is present in the atmosphere of life, attaches itself to persons 
and to things, and is manifested by results which can only be 
ascribed to its operation. ... But this power, though itself 
impersonal, is always connected with some person. If a stone is 
found to have a supernatural power, it is because a spirit has 
associated itself with it... .’’4 Beyond doubt stones play the 
most conspicuous part in the magical beliefs and practices of the 
Banks Islands and New Hebrides. It is to be noted that, in the 
region where magic is so prominent, the cults are centred round 
spirits, called vui, which are not the ancestral spirit of the present 
inhabitants. These vui spirits have already been mentioned, and 
brought into relationship with the ruling class of the archaic 
civilization of Southern Melanesia. The vui were supposed to 
be possessed of mana in a great degree.® They are also closely 
associated with stones, and, in the Banks Islands and the New 
Hebrides, sacrifices are made to them. “The spirits who are 
approached with these offerings are almost always connected 
with stones on which the offerings are made. Such stones have 
some of them been sacred to some spirit from ancient times, 
and the knowledge of the way to approach the spirit who is 
connected with them has been handed down to the man who now 
possesses it.”” A man can himself get a stone of unusual shape, and, 
by trial, find whether or not it containsa spirit. Again, it is said 
of these vui: ‘‘ In the Banks Islands and in the Northern New 
Hebrides the purely spiritual beings who are incorporeal are 
innumerable, and unnamed. These are they whose representative 

1 Id., VI. 243. 2 Torres Straits Reports V. 363. 


8 Id., V. 347; VI. 211, 303. 
4 Codrington 119. $ Id., 123. 6 Id., 140. 


394 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


form is generally a stone, who haunt the places that are sacred 
because of their presence, and who connect themselves with 
certain snakes, owls, sharks and other creatures,’’ and thus in 
this respect bring themselves into line with the archaic people. 
In this région stones and sacred places are intimately associated : 
‘“‘ Sacred places have almost always stones in them; it is im- 
possible to treat separately sacred places and sacred stones.’’? 

The custom exists in Southern Melanesia of choosing stones 
for their shapes and using them for magical purposes. ‘“ In the 
Banks Islands a man would happen upon a boulder of yolcanic 
or coral rock, and would be struck with a belief that a spirit was 
connected with it. The stone was then rongo, and the place 
wherein it lay was rongo ; the man constituted himself the master 
of the sanctuary ; it was his marana within which none but him- 
self, or those brought in by him, could come.’’? 

To these remarks from Codrington may be added some of Mr. 
Hocart’s, whose competence in such matters is unquestionable. 
He comments as follows upon the uses of the word mana in the 
Pacific: ‘‘So far from being preeanimistic, the word is out and 
out spiritualistic ; it is almost, if not entirely, confined to the 
action of ghosts and spirits, who, whatever their origin, now go 
under the same name as the ghosts; tomate in Mandegusu, 
kalou in Fiji, ’atua in Uvea, aituin Samoa. It would seem that 
the word is simply a technical term belonging to a spiritualistic 
doctrine which it is now the task of Ethnology to reconstruct, and 
that it has been carried all over the Pacific as part of that doctrine 
by a people whom we have to identify.” 4 

What is the meaning of the attitude of Melanesians to the 
givers of life that possess the mysterious power of Mana? The 
current interpretation of the facts starts from the well-known 
occurrence of a man choosing a stone because of its peculiar shape, 
say like a yam, and then applying that stone for some useful 
purpose. Throughout Melanesia stones have come to be looked 
upon as the seats of spirits or as possessed of mana because of 
their shape. Does the admission of that fact lead to the origin 
of the custom of choosing these stones? Not a bit. It is quite 
true that the man chose the stone because of its shape. But do 
we choose a fantail pigeon because of its shape? Does the fact 
that this pigeon has certain “ points ”’ strike us with an idea of its 
superiority over other pigeons ; or have we in our minds certain 
ideas that incline us to choose one pigeon rather than another ? 
That is the real question at issue. It is the difficulty that is 
inherent in‘all questions of this same type. It may be perfectly 
true that a man chooses a stone because of its shape, but that act 
need have nothing whatever to do with the origin of the custom, 
or with the development of Melanesian magic. As a study in 


1 Codrington 151. See also 140, 148. LF by js Be re Us Rod hy 
* Hocart i. Cf. Best vi. 489. 


GIVERS OF LIFE 395 


pure psychology the act of choosing the stone is obscure, and 
any interpretation is simply of the form of a guess. At least two 
distinct and contrary causes can force a man to choose some 
particular stone. In the first place, he may, in some unknown 
manner, spontaneously originate the idea that the stone is like a 
yam, and therefore can help in growing yams. On the other hand, 
he may have come under the influence of a social institution in 
which certain stones are looked upon as the source of magic 
power, as givers of life, and this may cause him to choose a stone 
for himself. The only possible manner of solution is by the 
application of the historical method. 

An inquiry into the history of Melanesia ultimately will reach 
the times when men made the stone buildings that are scattered 
here and there throughout the region. According to the folk- 
tales the beings associated with these remains are called vui, and 
are potent as “‘ givers of life”’: they are full of mana. Moreover, 
they made stone images. The study of New Guinea and the 
Torres Straits shows that carved stone images are important 
** givers of life,’ and are used for all sorts of purposes similar to 
those to which the Melanesians of the Banks Islands and the 
Northern New Hebrides put stones. Also, these stone images 
are associated with a previous people powerful in magic, from 
whom they derive their potency. The present-day natives of 
British New Guinea not only make use of the stone images that 
the ancients left behind them, but they also use stone pebbles of 
the kinds of stone of which the ancients made implements for use 
in gold-mining and agriculture. Thus, before it can be claimed 
that the mana of Southern Melanesia is a product of the present- 
day population, it is necessary to discount all these facts, and to 
prove that a residuum remains that is incapable of explanation 
on the hypothesis of inheritance from the archaic civilization. 
This task would not be easy. On the other hand, if the builders 
of the stone remains were people who thought themselves able to 
control the weather, and to animate and transmit magical powers 
to stone images, then the practices of the present-day peoples 
receive an explanation in accordance with the facts. 

The Australian tribes have no religious cults, but much magic 
associated with certain material objects. Of these Howitt says: 
‘* In all the tribes I refer to (these cover the whole of the south- 
east part of the continent) there is a belief that the medicine-men 
(the magicians of the tribes) can project substances in an invisible 
manner into their victims. One of the principal projectives is 
said to be quartz, especially in the crystallized form. Such 
quartz crystals are always, in many parts of Australia, carried as 
part of the stock-in-trade of the medicine-man, and are usually 
earefully concealed from sight, especially of women, but are 
exhibited to the novices at the initiation ceremonies.” 1 What could 
have persuaded a group of tribes, scattered over a vast continent, 

4 Howitt 357-8. 


396 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


that the chief cause of disease was the presence in the body of quartz, 
or that certain men could project these crystals into other men? 
To assume that they came to these beliefs independently is risky, 
for the beliefs are so outrageously at variance with fact. It seems 
impossible on such lines to suggest any explanation of how the 
Australians could have elaborated such a belief, especially if it be 
supposed to have happened independently over the whole conti- 
nent. 

Among the Dieri tribe the medicine-men are supposed to have 
communication with supernatural beings called Kutchi, as well as 
with their culture-heroes, the Mura-muras. These medicine-men 
are believed to have the power to fly up to the sky-land, whence 
eame the culture-heroes. ‘It is said that they drink the water 
of the sky-land, from which they obtain the power to take the 
life of those they doom.”’ ‘‘The medicine-men were everywhere 
credited with the ability to fly through the air—perhaps * being 
conveyed ’ would be a better term—either to distant places, or 
to visit the ‘ sky-land,’ where dwelt, according to a widespread 
belief, their allies the ghosts and supernatural beings, such as 
Daramulun, from whom, in some tribes, their magical powers 
were supposed to be derived.” ! 

Howitt sums up his lengthy discussion of the medicine-men of 
the Australians in the following terms: ‘* The general belief as to 
the powers of the medicine-man are much the same in all the tribes 
herein spoken of. He is everywhere believed to have received his 
dreaded power from some supernatural source, or being, such as 
Baiame, Daramulun, or Bunjil, or the ancestral ghosts. 

“*'In all cases he is credited with being able to see men in their 
incorporeal state, either temporarily as a wraith, or permanently 
“separated from their body as a ghost, which is invisible to other 
eyes. He can ascend to ghost-land beyond the sky, or can 
transport himself, or be transported by the ghosts, from one spot 
of earth to another, at will, much after the manner of the Bud- 
dhist Arhat. The powers thus conferred upon him he can use to 
injure or to destroy men, or to preserve them from the secret 
attacks of other medicine-men. He can, it is also thought, 
assume animal forms and control the elements. 

‘* In these beliefs there is a striking resemblance to those which 
have been recorded concerning wizards, sorcerers and witches in 
other parts of the earth, as well as to the beliefs of savages the 
world over, nor can it be said that they have together died out 
in the most civilized countries. 

** Some of the practices described are found all over the Austra- 
lian continent, locally, if not generally. For instance, the use of 
human fat, and the belief in the magical properties of the quartz 
crystal. But as to the latter, the use of the crystal globe is still 
with us also, and may have been handed down from the distant 
times when our ancestors were savages,” ? 

1 Howitt 358, 359, 388. 2 Id., 410. 


GIVERS OF LIFE 397 


It is striking that the magic of the Australians should centre 
round two forms of givers of life in which the people of the archaic 
civilization were evidently interested ; for human sacrifice and 
cannibalism, according to the evidence, belong to the archaic 
civilization, and the aim of both these practices was to get life 
from the human body itself. The traditions of these peoples 
also point to the archaic civilization as the source of their magic, 
for their practitioners come and go from the sky-world, the land 
of their culture-heroes, whence they obtain their powers. Every 
reason thus exists to ascribe Australian magic wholly to the 
influence of the archaic civilization. 

It is significant that the Australians do not use stone for their 
magic. ‘This cannot be due to the absence of stones of the required 
shape for the purpose. If peculiarly shaped stones inspired the 
people of the Torres Straits and Melanesia, why did they not 
inspire those of Australia? From the point of view of those who 
would claim that the shape of the stone was in itself the causative 
agent for the Melanesian, the same shape should inevitably inspire 
the Australian. Since it does not, it is evident that this mode of 
reasoning is false. In Torres Straits, New Guinea and Melanesia, 
‘stone images of unknown origin are found, and certain stones are 
regarded as givers of life. The coincidence of these distribu- 
tions suggests that the magic is centred round the remains of the 
archaic civilization, and will vary according to the character of 
these remains. Moreover, another difference exists between the 
magical practices of Australia and New Guinea. In New Guinea, 
the kinds of stone used for implements by the old gold-seekers are 
now regarded as givers of life: Australian natives make stone 
implements, but do not regard them as magical, for quartz is their 
giver of life. This suggests that artifacts can only be regarded as 
magical when contact has been broken between the peoples of the 
archaic civilization and their successors. 

Possibly the use of magical objects is not always common 
among communities in which there are beings who are themselves 
givers of life, that is, incarnate deities. In Egypt, magic and 
religion were inseparable. It may be that in other communities 
the magical procedure is centred mainly round people associated 
with the sky-world. In this connexion the remarks of Rivers 
about the distribution of magic in Oceania are interesting. He 
compares the Banks Islands and Tikopia. He says: ‘“‘ While the 
practices of the Banks Islands would by almost universal consent 
be regarded as magical, there can be none who will doubt the 
essentially religious character of the rites of Tikopia. In this 
island benefits are obtained for the individual and the community, 
calamities are averted and injuries inflicted, by means of direct 
appeal to atua, beings who are believed to possess the power of 
conferring or withholding that for which appeal is made.” ! In 
the Banks Islands magical practice really depends upon objects 
1 Rivers ix. II. 404. 


398 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


associated with the vui spirits, who are connected, it would seem, 
with the archaic civilization, and are not related in any way to 
the present-day population. In Tikopia, on the other hand, the 
rites practised for exactly the same purposes are centred round 
atua. Who are these atua ? We turn again to Rivers for informa- 
tion. Hesays: ‘‘ All the sacred beings are called atua and many 
of them are clearly the ghosts of ancestors. Others are the 
animals connected with the different divisions or reverenced by 
the people as a whole. ... Whatever other atua there may 
have been, there is little doubt that so far as ceremonial is con- 
cerned those derived from ancestors are the most important.” ! 

The Tikopians came from Tonga, a place with sacred chiefs, 
and therefore connected more or less intimately with the archaic 
civilization. So, in a community that has a continuous con- 
nexion with the archaic civilization, the “ givers of life” are 
pre-eminently ancestral ghosts. On the other hand, in com- 
munities where connexion has been definitely cut off from the 
archaic civilization, such as the Banks Islands, the givers of life 
are objects left behind by the archaic civilization. Rivers states 
also that ‘‘ though magic exists in the Solomons, it is less important 
and far less malignant there than in the Banks and Torres Islands.” 
This may be due to the fact that the Solomons contain many 
peoples with chieftainship. 

Evidence from Ponape of the Carolines explains the relationship, 
in magical practice, between the archaic civilization and the later 
peoples. The founders of Ponape are supposed to have come 
from Yap on stones that swam on the water, and to have made 
Ponape where these stones stranded. It is said in Ponape that 
certain spirits came from the sky and changed into stones ; and 
the gods cannot be approached except through these stones, 
which are only found in certain places ; if they are lacking in any 
place, so is the cult of gods. These stones are not only used in 
connexion with offerings made to gods, but also possess magical 
power and healing properties.? When, for example, men wish to 
go fishing, they drop a holy stone into the sea.4 

This information from Ponape is important in connexion with 
what has been learned in Melanesia, for it shows that the use of 
stones as givers of life can be connected both with the religion 
and with the magic of a community. Through the stones the 
gods are approached, and by means of them magical effects 
are produced. The stones themselves are petrified sky-beings. 
Ponape is closely connected with the archaic civilization, and the 
priesthood show signs of being derived from that part of the 
population which has remained from that civilization after the 
conquest ; for the priests belong to the commoners, and not to the 
royal family, which is immigrant in origin. The priesthood is also 


1 Rivers ix. I. 315. 2 Id., ix. II. 407. 
3 Hahl, 2. 4 Id., 3. 


GIVERS OF LIFE 399 


matrilineal in succession.! In every respect, therefore, the stones 
of Ponape seem to be connected with the archaic civilization. 
It is claimed that the people of Ponape came originally from 
Yap, where are remains of archaic civilization, on stones that 
swam on the water. This custom of transportation of stones can 
be paralleled in Polynesia. I have already mentioned that Mr. 
Percy Smith gives, in one of his writings, a fascinating peep into 
the past history of the Pacific. Speaking of the Polynesians he 
says, “‘ There was a time in the history of the race when the old 
beliefs and history were taught at great gatherings, when chiefs 
and priests collected from the far-distant isles of the Pacific to a 
central spot, and there the history was recited, and a vast number 
of ceremonies performed the faint recollection alone of which 


remains. ... Here were found the whare-kariori or houses 
of amusement, in which, no doubt, originated the Areoi societies 
of Tahiti. ... This gathering place in Eastern Polynesia was 


at Raiatea, of the Society Group. Here came lordly chiefs within 
their gaily decked canoes, with flying streamers and drums 
beating, accompanied by large retinues of chiefs, warriors, priests, 
and servitors. Tradition says that from far Uea, or Wallis 
Island, in the western Pacific, to Rapa-nui, or Easter Island, 
in the Far East, the people gathered to these meetings. They 
took place at Opoa in Raiatea, the most sacred marae, or temple, 
in all Polynesia, and from whence stones were taken to other 
islands with which to found other maraes, to serve as visible 
connecting links with this most holy of places.’’ Opoa, in Raiatea, 
was the Polynesian Mecca.? In those far-off days evidently close 
communication was maintained between the various parts of 
Polynesia, and the stones served as connecting links between the 
settlements. This goes far to show the unity of the Polynesian 
race, and to explain the importance of stones in Oceania.® 
The practice of transportation of stones serves still further to 
throw light on the continuity existing between the settlements 
of the archaic civilization and those that followed. The quota- 
tions just made show that the Polynesian settlements were 
connected, perhaps universally, by the possession of sacred 
stones derived from some pre-existing settlement.* The identical 
practice exists in Indonesia, as is evident from the facts collected in 


1 Hahl 3. 

2 P. Smith v. 257-8; vii. 23. 

8 Cf. also the great talisman-mauri of the Maori, a tree supposed to have 
grown from a branch brought from Hawaiki. This ensured the wealth and 
prosperity of the country. ‘‘ When the Kumara, or sweet potato, was first 
obtained by the old-time people of Whakatame they were advised by the 
islanders from whom they obtained it to slay one Taukata and sprinkle or 
besmear his blood on the door-frame of the storehouse in which the Kumara 
was placed. This rite was for the purpose of preventing the mauri or life- 
principle of the tribe from returning to Hawaiki.” (Goldie 7-8.) 

* Pieces of stone are said to have been taken from ‘‘ Avaiki ”’ to Rarotonga, 
and from ‘‘ Hawaiki’’ to New Zealand (Browne 3, 10). 


400 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


“The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia.”’ + In all parts of the region 
where stone is used, those who found new villages take with them 
stones from the former site, in order, evidently, to preserve 
continuity with the ancestral home. Not only is stone used, but 
earth is also carried in many cases from one place to another. 
It is thus possible to regard the whole of the settlements of the 
archaic civilization in Indonesia and Polynesia as_ probably 
linked together by the custom of transportation of stones, or 
even of earth, from one place to another.* 

The distribution of the archaic civilization in North America 
probably results from the desire for certain materials, such as 
gold, pearls, turquoise, jade and so forth.* If the people of the 
archaic civilization attached magical powers to these substances, 
and placed them in the forefront in that respect, if, further, the 
post-Columbian tribes are the descendants of these people, then 
the results obtained elsewhere would suggest that the later tribes 
would place great stress on quartz, pearls, pearl-shell, turquoise, 
and so on, as givers of life. This does not mean that these sub- 
stances would be used exclusively: far from it. But, as in 
Australia, Borneo and New Guinea, quartz should play an im- 
portant part in the magic of the tribes. 

This can be easily shown tobeso. The Huichol of Mexico, living 
in a country with a long history of people of the archaic civiliza- 
tion, attach high importance to rock crystals. ‘“‘ Small rock 
crystals, supposed to be produced by the shamans, are thought 
to be dead or even living—a kind of astral bodies of the Theoso- 
phists. Such a rock crystal is called Tevali (plural tevali’s) or 
grandfather—the same name is given to the majority of the 
gods. But it may, however, represent any person or relative, in 
accordance with the directions of the shaman.” * The same 
author says in another place, that the shaman can catch a certain 
sort of god, in votive bowls, in the form of [small crystals. ‘‘ Rock 
crystals are said to be mysterious people, dead or alive, who at the 
shaman’s bidding come flying through the air as tiny white birds, 
which afterwards crystallize. They are called grandfather, and 
are thought to bring special luck in hunting deer.... The 
conditions necessary for living people becoming rock-crystals is 
that they must be true husbands and wives, therefore such rock 
crystals are rare.” 5 

The Zuni Indians connect quartz crystal with the Sun, and say 
that he has a shield of that stone. The Hopi in their ceremonies 
represent the sun on altars by a piece of quartz crystal. The 
sacred objects of the Navaho include rock crystal, and in 

1 Perry vii. 46-8. ' 

* The Maori carried with them, on their wanderings, small pieces of stone 
which ensured communication with their deities. In their new homes these 
were set in larger stones, and both were put in the great wooden or stone 
pillar in the sacred place (Tregear TZNI 30, 1899, 63-4). 


° Cf. D. A. Mackenzie ii. Chaps. I., II. : Brasseur de Bourbourg cliii. 
* Lumholtz i. 63. § Id., ii. Il. 187-8. 


GIVERS OF LIFE 401 


their creation legend they speak much of the Youth and Maiden 
of the Rock Crystal; alsothe First Man and Woman made the sun 
out of a clear stone and the moon out of a kind of crystal.} 

The Cherokee of the Eastern States regard a crystal as the 
great talisman of the tribe. They believe in great beings shaped 
like snakes, corresponding to the dragons of other peoples. The 
Uktena is a great snake with horns on its head and a bright 
blazing crest like a diamond on its forehead and scales glittering 
like sparks of fire. The blazing diamond is the Ulunsuti, ‘‘ trans- 
parent,’’? and he who can win it may become the greatest wonder- 
worker of the tribe. Only one man ever succeeded in getting it, 
and this crystal is now in the possession of the eastern Cherokee. 
It is a large transparent crystal nearly the shape of a cartridge 
bullet, with a blood-red streak running through its centre from 
top to bottom. Its owner keeps it secretly wrapped up in a 
deerskin in a cave in the mountains. Every seven days he rubs 
it over with the blood of small game, and twice a year with the 
blood of deer or some large animals. ‘* Should he forget to feed 
it at the proper time it would come out from its cave at night in 
the shape of fire and fly through the air to slake its thirst with the 
life blood of the conjurer or some one of his people. He may 
save himself from this danger by telling it, when he puts it away, 
that he will not need it again for a long time. It will then go 
quietly to sleep and feel no hunger until it is again brought out 
to be consulted. Then it must be fed again with blood before 
it is used.””» When the owner dies the stone must be buried with 
him ; if not, it will come out of its cave night after night for seven 
years like a blazing star to look for him, when, if not able to find 
him, it will return to the cave and sleep for ever. The owner of 
the crystal can bring to his aid certain spiritual beings called 
Little People.? 

There are many crystals in the old Cherokee country, the 
Southern Alleghanies,® which is a famous gold-mining region. So, 
as among the Mexican and Pueblo Indians, supernatural powers 
are ascribed to the stone associated with gold. The crystal played 
an important part in connexion with the mounds that the 
Cherokee formerly made. They had a clan of hereditary priests, 
who were exterminated because they became so haughty and 
overbearing. These priests aresaid to havemade mounds. They 
placed a circle of stones on the ground, lit a fire in the centre, and 
near it put the body of some prominent chief or priest who had 
lately died. Some say that they put seven bodies of chief men 
from the seven clans ; together with the Ulunsuti stone, that is, 
the great crystal ; a scale or horn of the Uktena, on whose head is 
the crystal ; a feather from the right wing of an eagle ; and beads, 
red, white, black, blue, purple, yellow, and grey-blue. The 
mound was then built up with earth, and a chimney was left in 

1 Matthews ii. 452; iv. 243, 79-82. * Mooney vii. 296 e.s., 459-60. 
3 Id., vii. 460. 
26 


402 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the middle to help the fire.!. The use of crystals thus goes right 
back into the past history of the Cherokee, being associated with 
their former class of hereditary priests, with the building of 
mounds and therefore, presumably, with the mound-builders 
themselves. . 

The importance paid to crystals by the Cherokee and the 
association of the crystal with a water-monsteris of great interest 
in view of some facts regarding the Omaha, who have migrated 
into the plains, presumably from some region near to the ancestral 
home of the Cherokee. They have lost most of their rites per- 
taining to religion, but have retained some practices that are of 
interest. They have a secret society called the Pebble Society, 
membership being open to those who have had a vision of water, 
or its representative, the water monster, a huge creature that 
lashed the water with its tail. The opening ritual of the society 
deals with creation and the cosmic forces ; it speaks of a primal 
rock called the Aged One; and the steam from the water in the 
sweat lodge of the society represents the mighty water whence 
issued life and the power to wash away all impurities. The 
members of the society acquire magical powers.? 

The Dakota branch of the Sioux also have magic stones, the 
more important of which are white, ‘‘ resembling ice or glass.”’ 4 
‘‘'The Dakotas regard certain small stones or pebbles as mysterious, 
and it is said that in former days a man had one as his helper or 
servant. There are two kinds of these mysterious stones (i.e. 
pebbles, not rock). One white, resembling ice or glass (i.e. 
probably translucent) . . . the other resembles ordinary stones. 
It is said that one of them entered a lodge and struck a man, and 
people spoke of the stones sending in rattles through the smoke 
hole of a lodge.”’* Both the Omaha and the Dakota have thus 
retained ideas regarding crystals which possibly have originally 
been derived, like those of the Cherokee, from the archaic civili- 
zation. 

The Omaha have another sacred giver of life that plays a part in 
the ceremonial of their secret societies—the Sacred Shell. ‘‘ No 
one knows what it stood for, but every one held it in superstitious 
dread ; in all the tribe there was not a person exempt from fear 
of this shell. The superstition that clung about it indicated that 
its rites related to the cosmic forces and to fundamental beliefs 
relative to life and death.’”? Among the Osage branch of the 
Omaha the shell was associated with the introduction of life on 
the earth. 

This shell is a specimen of Unio Alatus, the pearl-bearing 
mussel, a species known to occur only in the Ohio, Missouri and 
Northern Mississippi, and in the Great Lakes.® 


1’ Mooney vii. 395-6. 2 Fletcher and La Flésche 565 e.s. 

3 J. O. Dorsey i. 153. “ Id., ii. 447. 

* Fletcher and La Flésche 454-7. Cf. Hoffman i. for similar beliefs con- 
cerning cowries. 


GIVERS OF LIFE 403 


The mound-builders were busily engaged in exploiting the 
pearl-beds of the United States, for many thousands of pearls 
have been found with their burials. In Mexico pearls were looked 
upon as givers of life of the first order. It is thus significant that 
the most sacred object of the Omaha should be a shell of the pearl- 
bearing mussel. The fact that the Omaha cannot account for 
the origin of this shell makes it necessary to seek elsewhere for 
the explanation, and the assumption that the early mound- 
builders held such ideas with regard to pearls as were held in 
Mexico solves the problem. That the mound-builders looked 
upon pearls in this manner is made probable by the fact that they 
placed so many of them in their graves, for that is a sign that they 
were givers of life. Thus the magical objects of the Omaha are 
explained in the region east of the Mississippi. 

The importance attached to quartz the whole way from India 
to America, by tribes who do not work gold, can be explained on 
the hypothesis that the people of the archaic civilization sought 
for gold, and looked upon it as a giver of life, and that the peoples 
who followed have continued to use quartz in their magical 
practice. It is the rule to find that quartz is the most important 
giver of life, which harmonizes with the claim that the search for 
gold was the main cause of the distribution of the archaic civiliza- 
tion. Although pearl oysters and mussels have added to the 
equipment of the magician, usually in the form of pearl-shells, 
gold certainly has occupied more attention than any other sub- 
stance, and it is not remarkable that the obsession of the people 
of the archaic civilization has made so deep an impression on the 
natives of so many places. 

This survey shows that the people of the archaic civilization 
have had a profound effect upon the magical practice of the later 
peoples, which has shown itself in manifold ways. Moreover, 
they were looked upon by their successors as powerful in magic ; 
for, in the whole region, magical powers are invariably ascribed 
to gods and culture-heroes, as has already been seen in the case 
of the Australians. In a recent work Mr. F. C. Cole has analysed 
the folk-tales of the Tinguian of Luzon in the Philippines, and 
has shown that they were formerly in contact with a much higher 
civilization, with people credited with great powers over nature, 
who, it is said, could transport themselves at will to a distant 
spot in an instant of time; could create men ; could make crops 
grow in an instant; could control the weather; and could kill 
people and bring them to life by means of magical practices. 
Mr. Cole contrasts these early folk with the later Tinguian : 
‘** Magic was practised extensively in ‘ the first time,’ but it is by 
no means unknown to the people of the present day. They 
cannot now bring a dead person to life, or create human beings 
out of bits of betel-nut ; but they can and do cause sickness and 
death to their foes by performing certain rites or directing actions 

1 Cole 17-18. 


404 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


against garments or other objects recently in their possession.” + 
The Polynesians formerly also had wonderful magicians. The 
Maori have a tradition of a former priest Kiki, whose shadow 
withered plants and shrubs. Two celebrated wizards of Maori 
tradition had a magical head, and slew hundreds by the power 
of its enchantment.? These ancient priests could bring the dead 
to life, perform the “‘ mango trick,” and do other wonderful feats.® 
The powers that in certain places are accredited to the people 
of the archaic civilization, such as bringing the dead to life, 
changing shape, transporting themselves to distant spots, causing 
plants to grow with great speed, are not entirely mythical, but 
have, in certain cases, a substantial historical basis. No one who 
has read the descriptions of the powers of the members of the 
fraternities of the North American Indians, can doubt that these 
well-authenticated accounts of marvellous feats performed by these 
men have some basis in fact. I do not for a moment pretend 
that these men did what they are supposed to have done; that 
they cured men hopelessly wounded, or caused maize plants to 
come to fruition in a few minutes ; what I do claim is that they 
had the power of deluding people into believing that they had 
done so, and, in so far as they possessed this power, they must be 
looked upon as remarkable men. It is highly significant that in 
Kgypt, India, Polynesia, and North America similar powers are 
claimed by magicians. I do not know whether any systematic 
examination has been made of these magical fraternities ; but it 
seems certain that the traditions of their magical powers have an 
historical basis that readily accounts for the tremendous influence 
that these men of old have exerted on their successors. The 
great amount of magic practised in the communities of the archaic 
civilization readily accounts for the practice among the native 
populations with which they have come in contact. 

Although the discussion of the use of givers of life throughout 
the region has not been exhaustive, yet it seems, to me at least, 
to lead to the formulation of the following working hypothesis : 5 
The magic of any people without a ruling class centres round those 
objects that have acquired magical power from their association 
with the people of the archaic civilization ; so that, in a place 
such as Australia, where the people of the archaic civilization, 
who presumably were seeking for gold, suddenly retired, and left 
no stone images behind them, the people have centred their 
magic round two features of the culture of the strangers—their 
cannibalism and human sacrifice, and their appreciation of 
quartz. In Torres Straits, on the other hand, where there is no 
quartz, but where these strangers, presumably engaged in pearl- 


1 Cole 24-5. 2 Goldie ii. 31. See p. 191. 

$B... Smith, v.32, 4 Grinnell 374 e.s. 

° The discussion of Chapter X XVII, which deals with the general problem 
of the manner in which the archaic civilization was built up on the psycho- 
logical side, has an important bearing on this matter. 


_ 


GIVERS OF LIFE 405 


fishing, made stone images, the pearl-bearing giant clam and 
stone images play a prominent part in magic. Similarly, in Melan- 
esia aS a whole, the greater part of the magic is centred round 
stones, because the people of the archaic civilization made, and 
presumably animated, stone images, as in San Cristoval at the 
present day. North American tribes have a similar regard for 
crystals and the shells of pearl-bearing mussels, as well as for the 
pearls themselves. In the Pueblo region likewise, turquoise is 
much valued as a giver of life, which agrees with the suggestion 
of an earlier chapter, that the search for turquoise was the cause 
of the first settlement of this inhospitable region. 

Although this by no means completes the catalogue of givers 
of life, yet it is enough to lend support to the suggestion that the 
magical ceremonies of any tribe whatever will be centred round 
certain ‘‘ givers of life,” which derive their power from their 
historical associations ; and that, if it be possible to trace the 
matter far enough, the inquiry in every case would lead back to 
the archaic civilization ; so that any given community regards 
an object as a “ giver of life’? simply because it was associated 
with the wonderful people of old.? 

This generalization can be put forward the more freely because 
it is readily capable of refutation by facts. If it can be shown 
that any people, in any part of the world, regards, as a giver of 
life, an object that has no possible association with the people of 
the archaic civilization, then it will be necessary to modify the 
hypothesis, and to conclude that magical practices can spon- 
taneously originate. 


1 Cf. Rivers xiii. for an extended examination of magic in Oceania, together 
with a discussion of problems of transmission. 


CHAPTER XXV 
THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 


concerned with the elaboration of the theory that the first 
food-producing civilization in the region was characterised 
by the following cultural elements :— 
1. Agriculture by means of irrigation. 
2. The use of stone, typically for pyramids, dolmens, stone 
circles, and rock-cut tombs. 
The carving of stone images. 
. Pottery-making. 
Metal-working and pearl-fishing. 
. The use of polished stone implements. 
. A ruling class in two divisions :— 

(a) The Children of the Sun, connected with the sky- 
world, born of theogamies, who practise incestuous 
unions. 

(b) A class associated with the underworld, who survive 
as war-chiefs. 

8. The sun-cult. 
9. The practice of mummification. 

10. The great mother goddess. 

11. Human sacrifice, connected with agriculture and the cult 

of the mother goddess. 

12. Mother-right. 

18. Totemic clans. 

14. The dual organization. 

15. Exogamy. 

This archaic civilization gave rise to others, which differed 
from it in lacking some of these elements. Now that this process 
has been discussed, I propose to turn to the question of the 
origin of the archaic civilization itself. 

The maps show that the cultural elements just given in the 
list are not scattered haphazard throughout the region, although 
their distribution may seem, at first sight, sporadic. I have 
already claimed that the evidence connects the settlements of 
the archais civilization with sources of gold, pearls, copper, iron, 
turquoise, obsidian, and so forth, the inference being that the 
desire for these things led the people of the archaic civilization 

406 


"Te discussion of the past twenty-three chapters has been 


ID TB oo 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 407 


hither and thither, so that they settled where they found supplies. 
Since this conclusion runs counter to much modern thought, it 
is desirable to recount briefly the reasons why it alone fits the 
facts; and to examine in detail some objections that may be 
urged to the contrary. 

The cultural elements of the archaic civilization which did not 
survive, are grouped in places noted as important sources of 
certain raw materials. In India megalithic monuments, irrigation, 
polished stone implements, metal-working and other signs of the 
archaic civilization are grouped closely round the gold, copper, 
iron, and diamond districts of that country. Human sacrifice, 
the cult of mother goddesses, totemic clans, the sun-cult, are all 
characteristic of the civilization that is so closely linked with 
these cultural elements. Signs of the dual organization are also 
more notable in those parts of the country where other elements 
of the archaic civilization are plentiful.1 In Indonesia the sources 
of gold and pearls are associated closely with polished stone 
implements, megalithic monuments and stone-work in general, 
human sacrifice, matrilineal institutions and the dual grouping. 
These cultural elements are, as a rule, either all present in any 
given place or all absent; they are not distributed haphazard. 

The distribution of cultural elements of the archaic civilization 
is marked in Oceania. Micronesia possesses practically all of 
them in a marked manner, which is but fitting for a region con- 
taining such vast ruins as those on Ponape and other islands. 
In British New Guinea, in the Solomons, in the New Hebrides, 
and other parts of Southern Melanesia, the old order has much 
disintegrated ; nevertheless, the distribution of known remains 
of the archaic civilization, and of cultural elements such as the 
dual organization, mother-right, and so forth agrees well with 
that of pearls and gold. 

In Polynesia the cultural elements of the archaic civilization 
are not invariably present. From the beginning of the inquiry 
it became evident that the places that mattered were the groups 
of Fiji, Samoa and Tonga in the west, and Tahiti in the east. 
Outlying groups, such as Hawaii, the Gilberts, the Ellice group, 
the Phoenix group, among others, have played practically no 
part in the history of Polynesia, but have been colonized by 
secondary movements from Samoa and other places. During the 
process of colonization the old order broke up, and the wanderers 
went to places not noteworthy for stores of pearls or minerals. 
New Zealand offers an apparent exception to this rule, for the 
Maori went there as a secondary movement from Rarotonga. 
But the Maori were not attracted by the gold: perhaps they went 
there for the jade. The existence of a former population shows 
that people in the past may have gone there for the gold, but 
the evidence is not of much weight. 

In North America the peoples who have emerged latest, the 

1 Sketch Maps Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,7, 8, 14, 15 will illustrate this argument, 


408 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


tribes of the western Plains, such as the Arapaho, Cheyenne, 
Pawnee, and others, show the least signs of the culture of the 
archaic civilization. The cultural elements associated with the 
archaic civilization are grouped in the regions possessing gold, 
pearls, turquoise, and other such things. 

The sum total of the survey of the region is to show that the 
cultural elements of the archaic civilization have, on the whole, 
similar distributions; if one of these elements be reported in 
any place, most, if not all, of the others are also recorded. Since 
the distribution of the archaic civilization is not uniform, it is 
evident that some cause or causes must have determined why 
some localities were favoured, while others have been rejected, 
or have been occupied in later times. 

The suggestion has already been made that the cause of the 
distribution was the search for valuables. Putting that sugges- 
tion on one side for the moment, and treating the problem as a 
general one, it is possible to frame more than one hypothesis to 
account for the distribution, and to assert that, either the people 
of the archaic civilization deliberately chose certain spots, or 
else that the conditions in such places favoured the growth of 
civilization, and caused the various arts and crafts to be developed. 
A third possibility is a combination of the two; namely, that the 
people of the archaic civilization were determined in their choice 
of settlement by the natural conditions of certain localities, and 
settled there with their cultural baggage. 'These three hypotheses 
really reduce to two: either the people of the archaic civilization 
settled in certain places because they so wished, or else they were 
forced by natural conditions, climatic or otherwise, to settle in 
some places and avoid others. 

This question involves important principles in human geography, 
so it will be threshed outin detail. It necessitates the elaboration 
of a theory of colonidation on the basis of the facts already 
accumulated. | | 

The problem is to decide what are the underlying modes of 
thought of the people of the archaic civilization. Why did they 
choose the Carolines rather than the Gilberts? Why did they 
choose Tahiti rather than Hawaii? Why were Tikal and Copan 
chosen for the first Maya sites, rather than any other sites in 
America, or even in Guatemala ? 

An argument that carries much weight at the present moment 
is that of climatic influence. It is held that the natural conditions 
of any place will determine, in some measure, what will be the 
culture of the people of that place. As a good instance, the 
case of the early Maya settlements may be mentioned. In his 
work on Climate and Civilization, Professor Huntingdon maintains 
that when Copan and the other early cities of America were built, 
the climate was much more bracing than at present, and the 
rainfall less. He holds that it is possible to correlate climatic 
cycles with the rise and fall of the successive Maya civilizations. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 409 


According to him, man is, as it were, a plastic material in the 
hands of forces that decide where and when he shall build up his 
civilizations, like a nest of ants under observation of a scientist 
who is conducting experiments. Such students as Professor 
Huntingdon, when asked to explain why the Plains of North 
America were left alone by food-producers when the ravines of 
the Pueblo region were thickly populated, would probably main- 
tain that the climate had much altered since those days, and that 
probably when the Pueblo settlements were first made the country 
was more habitable than at present. 

Such arguments as these sound plausible when viewed from a 
general standpoint. But when inquiry is made with regard to 
particulars, it is not so easy to understand how the process works. 
For instance, it is well known that the Maya made first of all a 
few cities, half a dozen at the most, Copan, Tikal, and so forth. 
No signs exist of any previous development of culture in that 
region, on which fact further emphasis will be laid at the end 
of this chapter. Does Professor Huntingdon seriously argue that 
climatic conditions can cause people, in the food-gathering stage, 
to invent, without any previous experience, the arts and crafts 
that were possessed by the builders of Copan and a few other 
cities ? It is quite possible to understand that climatic influences 
may be at work when a civilization is seen to develop from one 
stage to another, as, for instance, in Egypt. But when it is 
argued that the climatic conditions of Copan led certain people 
living there to build a wonderful city without any previous 
experience that can be detected, then it is time to call a halt. 
However bracing the climate may have been, the concentration 
of effort on a few sites, and the result of the first experiments at 
building up a civilization, cannot be so explained. 

The cultural conditions of North America forbid any specula- 
tions as to the cause of the growth of civilization anywhere outside 
Mexico and the Maya country: for, as has been seen, the agri- 
culture of the whole region depends upon maize-growing, which 
must have come from Mexico. The only claim that can be put 
forward, therefore, with regard to North America, is that the 
conditions determined where the culture connected with maize- 
growing should be planted. The climate had no causative effect 
whatever in places other than Mexico; for all the other civiliza- 
tions are clearly derivative. Moreover, it must not be forgotten. 
that no signs have as:yet.been detected of any cultural develop- 
ment in North America and Mexico subsequent to the time of 
the early cities of the Maya. On the contrary, since that time 
culture has gone downhill. Huntingdon’s hypothesis therefore 
has to bear a terrific weight, for its implications are that, at one 
place and time, the climatic conditions were such, in North 
America, as to cause the generation of a civilization, and that 
subsequently no such conditions ever recurred. That is incredible. 
If climate causes men to create civilizations, surely, in North 


410 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


America, a great variety of cultures should have been elaborated, 
a culture of the woodlands, another of the plains, all sorts of 
cultures of different kinds. When inquiry is made it is found 
that this-elimatic diversity has done nothing at all; which there- 
fore warrants complete scepticism with regard to the hypothesis 
that the cities of Copan and elsewhere owe anything whatever to 
climatic influences. ; 

In order to drive this matter home, attention is called:to the 
problem of the Pacific. In this case climatic circumstances have 
had nothing whatever to do with the production of civilization ; 
for the ancestors of the Polynesians brought their foodplants 
with them, and thus made the region fit for habitation. The 
climate of this region cannot have altered during the past two 
thousand years or so that the Polynesians have been there, or 
not enough to matter. It is therefore difficult, on any ground, 
to see in what way climatic conditions can be brought forward 
to account for the culture of the Polynesians. On the contrary, 
all the facts show that it was brought from the west. The 
existence of remains in British New Guinea, in the midst of 
inhospitable country far less habitable than the regions of the 
coasts, is further evidence against any climatic or environmental 
hypothesis. | 

The general hypothesis of climatic and natural conditions fails 
also to account in any way for the abrupt discontinuities displayed 
in the distribution of the archaic civilization. Why should these 
people have concentrated on a few spots in India, round Bellary 
and a few other places, and have ignored the rest of the country ? 
Why, going north from Hyderabad, has this civilization left no 
traces until Chota Nagpur is reached; and, then, again, why 
should certain parts only of that region be chosen? This hypo- 
thesis likewise fails to account for abrupt discontinuities in 
Polynesia, where the climatic conditions are practically uniform, 
and no excuse is afforded for arguing about soils, temperature and 
so forth. 

The agriculture of the archaic civilization was based on irriga- 
tion. It might be claimed, on the climatic hypothesis, that 
irrigation was installed because of its utility in any place. This 
argument really is twofold, and either aspect is used according 
to circumstances. When it is pointed out that irrigation has 
not been installed in countries where it obviously was necessary, 
such as Australia, California, and elsewhere, it would be answered 
that perhaps the people were not yet advanced enough in culture, 
they had not yet come to cultivate the soil, and thus could not’ 
be expected to think of irrigation. When, on the other hand, 
irrigation is present, it is claimed that the natural conditions 
necessitated it, and thus the people came to practise it. It is 
significant that the Pueblo Indians were expert irrigators, instal- 
ling terraces on the walls of the canyons where they had their 
dwellings; while, in California, the Indians had no agriculture 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 411 


at all. In this case irrigation evidently forms part of a culture. 
For, if it be argued that the Pueblo people originated irrigation, 
then it is obvious that they must previously have reached a 
certain stage of culture. Otherwise, if they developed their own 
agriculture, how came they to practise irrigation, while their 
Californian neighbours, who needed it as much as they, never 
thought of it? Since the Pueblo Indians grow maize, they evi- 
dently got their agriculture, and presumably their irrigation, from 
Mexico, so that natural conditions, in this case, had nothing to 
do with the origin of irrigation. 

This argument applies likewise to the early Maya settlements. 
Given that they evolved their civilization on the spot, how did 
they come to invent irrigation? They surely could not have 
needed it as much as the Indians of California, Utah and else- 
where; the rainfall must certainly have been more, whatever 
climatic cycles can be postulated, especially in the past two 
thousand years, which is the period of development of American 
civilization. Any theory of the indigenous origin of American 
irrigation must account for the contrast between the Indians of 
California and those of Pueblo regions and elsewhere, and in such 
a case the climatic hypothesis fails. 

In British New Guinea the installation of irrigation systems by 
some unknown people in the past at places such as Bartle Bay 
does not suggest climatic influence. The irrigation of Polynesia 
was obviously brought there by the ancestors of the Polynesians 
from their home in India. 

The most hardened exponent of the climatic hypothesis would 
probably not venture to assert that at any time the climate of 
Borneo differed greatly from that of Java, Lombok, Bali, and 
other islands of that region; or that the climate of Java differed 
from that of the islands east of Timor. Yet irrigation in that 
part of Indonesia is confined to Java, Bali, Lombok, Sumba, Roti, 
and Timor. The island of Sumba is divided into two parts, east 
and west; irrigation is practised in the west part, and is accom- 
panied by many cultural elements of the archaic civilization, 
while the east end of the island is devoid of these elements and 
of irrigation. 

Java is remarkable in that it possesses a great rainfall, which 
suggests that only one explanation can be given of the presence 
of a form of cultivation involving the storage of great supplies of 
water, namely, that it is due to a cultural influence. But for 
the existence of irrigation in Java the great rainfall of Borneo 
could be used to account for the absence there of irrigation. 
In Assam, again, the rainfall is immense, and much irrigation is 
practised, but abrupt discontinuities are observable. Some Naga 
tribes, for instance, practise irrigation, while their kinsmen and 
neighbours have dry cultivation. 

These remarks show that great difficulties meet the exponents of 
the doctrine that irrigation owes its existence to climatic influences, 


412 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


It is possible to give the argument another turn, and to consider 
the custom of erecting stone monuments. Since it is hard to 
see how climatic influences could have caused men to invent 
irrigation independently in several places, 1t may be urged that 
perhaps the distribution of the settlements of the archaic civiliza- 
tion can be explained by supposing that people, possessing the 
craft of irrigation, were led to settle because they found stone 
for their constructions. A glance at the distribution of megalithic 
monuments in India shows that this hypothesis will not stand 
criticism. 

Even if the hypothesis of climatic influence could explain the 
growth of civilization in certain places, it would utterly fail to 
account for the unity of the archaic civilization. This unity 
cannot be doubted; for, in contrast with those civilizations that 
followed, the archaic civilization stands unique. Right across the 
region, from one end to the other, extends a chain of settlements 
possessing cultures so alike that the idea of unity must force 
itself on the most sceptical mind. Given that the climate of 
different regions, for various reasons, caused men to adopt irriga-’ 
tion, the same conditions, which obviously differed greatly in 
various places, could not explain why the same communities 
possessed mother-right, practised human sacrifice and sometimes 
cannibalism, produced a class of Children of the Sun, looked on 
gold and pearls as givers of life, and possessed in common several 
other cultural elements. This is unthinkable, unless appeal be 
made to the doctrine of the similarity of the working of the 
human mind, in the form in which it is usually stated, namely 
that men, once started on the upward path, tend to develop their 
civilizations on parallel lines, and thus to invent similar cultural 
elements in the most diverse places. If reliance be made on that 
hypothesis, it is hard to account for the great diversity among 
the civilizations that followed the archaic civilization. What 
caused men to diverge from the path that they trod in step for 
so long ? How again, is the fact of degradation to be explained ? 
A hypothesis such as this has therefore to bear a great weight. 
It must, nevertheless, be treated with respect ; but before consider- 
ing it attention must be paid to the relationships between + Sh 
archaic civilization and its successors. 

Several lines of argument converge upon the conclusion that 
food-producing peoples all over the region owe their origin to 
the communities of the archaic civilization. The first considera- 
tion of this matter showed that, from the point of view of geo- 
graphical distribution, this conclusion was satisfactory: for the 
boundary line between the food-producers and the food-gatherers 
was also the boundary between the archaic civilization and the 
food-gatherers ; and in many places it was evident that the food- 
producers of the lower culture were living in regions previously 
tenanted by the people of the archaic civilization, and probably 
were derived, directly or indirectly, from them. Subsequent 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 4138 


discussions have supported this conclusion: the culture-heroes 
who have civilized so many tribes have been identified with the 
ruling class; the origin myths of later peoples derive them from 
it ; magical practices are largely concerned with objects connected 
with the old wanderers: in short, the later peoples are living on 
culture derived from the past. 

The discussion has not dealt with every tribe or community 
in the region. Enough, however, have been considered to show 
that the form of culture possessed by any one community can be 
accounted for when its manner of derivation from the archaic 
civilization is known. That is to say, uniformity has produced 
diversity, owing to the various historical circumstances accom- 
panying the transformation of the original civilization. Theories, 
such as those of the influence of natural circumstances, or of the 
similarity of the working of the human mind, can be set on one 
side, and the whole problem may be treated as historical. 

Attention must be paid to another important feature of the 
relations between the archaic civilization and its successors. If 
natural conditions exerted any influence, it should be noticeable 
in the culture of the derived civilizations. But, far from improving 
on the past, they have, in all parts of the region, lost much that 
they formerly had. The study of culture-sequences has shown, 
in case after case, that two entirely different forms of culture 
can succeed one another in the same place: a people building 
megaliths, seeking gold, and practising irrigation can be succeeded 
by another that never uses stone, has rough and ready methods 
of cultivation, and attaches no importance to gold; the dual 
organization can be followed by local exogamy or by totemic 
clans, mother-right gives place to father-right ; while natural 
conditions remain the same, and are seemingly powerless to exert 
any influence whatever on the course of development. 

When the great diversity of culture that has been reviewed is 
recalled, the conviction gains in strength that the process under 
review has its own peculiar nature. Of late years students of 
human society have tended to treat man as a plastic material 
in the hands of an unknown potter. Sir James Frazer comments 
upon this attitude of mind when dealing with Professor Wester- 
marck’s theory of exogamy, and his remarks are so pertinent that 
they are well worth quoting: ‘It may be observed that Dr. 
Westermarck’s theory of the origin of exogamy appears.to suffer 
from a weakness which has of late years vitiated other speculations 
as to the growth of human institutions. It attempts to explain 
that growth too exclusively from physical and biological causes 
without taking into account the factors of intelligence, delibera- 
tion and will. It is too much under the influence of Darwin, 
or rather it has extended Darwin’s methods to subjects which 
only partially admit of such treatment. Because, in treating 
of the physical evolution of man’s body and his place in the animal 
creation, Darwin rightly reckoned only with physical and biological 


414 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


causes, it has seemed to some inquirers into the history of man’s 
social evolution that they will best follow his principles and 
proceed most scientifically if they also reckon with nothing else ! 
They forget the part that human thought and will have played 
in moulding human destiny. They would write the history of 
man without taking into account the things that make him a 
man and discriminate him from the lower animals. To do this, 
to adopt a common comparison, is to write the play of Hamlet 
without the Prince of Denmark. It is to attempt the solution of 
a complex problem while ignoring the principal factor which ought 
to come into the calculations. It is, as I have already said, not 
science but a bastard imitation of it. For true science reckons 
with all the elements of the problem which it sets itself to solve, 
and it remembers that these elements may differ widely with the 
particular nature of the problem under investigation. It does 
not insist on reducing the heterogeneous at all costs to the homo- 
geneous, the multiformity of fact to the uniformity of theory. 
It is cautious of transferring from one study the principles and 
methods which are appropriate to another. “In particular the 
science which deals with human society will not, if it is truly 
scientific, omit to reckon with the qualities which distinguish 
man from the beasts.” 4 

The consideration of the phenomena of degradation that bulk 
so largely in the cultural history of the region shows that the 
hypothesis of the uniformity of the working of the human mind, 
as propounded by certain students, will not work. In America 
it is necessary to account for the rise of the Maya civilization, 
and the subsequent steady cultural degradation throughout that 
continent ; and this is impossible on a hypothesis of spontaneous 
development of culture in all places, for such a hypothesis fails 
to take account of the movements of culture that obviously have 
taken place.? , 

Human society is a human product. It is thus best to look first 
of all to causes that are peculiarly human when dealing with 
problems presented by human society, and not to expect unthink- 
ing natural forces to have played a determining part in the 
production of the vast organism with which we have been con- 
cerned. If the continuity between the communities of the 
archaic civilization and those that followed be as definite as I 
claim, then it is evident that the process at work must be regarded 
as mental. That is to say, the mind of man must have been of 
predominating importance, both in the production of the archaic 
civilization and also in the determination of its distribution. The 
archaic civilization being a human product, its distribution must 
be expressed in terms of that civilization itself, and not in terms 
of barometric pressure or rainfall. If any explanation on such 

1 J. G. Frazer ii. 98. 


* It will be apparent later that, rightly formulated, it supports the general 
thesis of this book. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 415 


lines be not practicable, it will then be time to turn elsewhere for 
help. 

The introduction to Chapter VII showed that the gold of Cali- 
fornia, Australia and elsewhere was untouched until the arrival 
of men who valued it, and were prepared to undergo any hardship 
in order to possess it. It stands beyond doubt that the reason for 
the colonization of new countries is especially to be found in 
the presence there of desired substances.!' No one in his senses 
would claim that climatic conditions had anything whatever to 
do with the foundation of Dawson City in Alaska, or with the 
building of the ruins on the Yukon River that belonged to some 
unknown gold-washing or pearl-fishing folk of the past; or that 
the gold-diggers who went out to Australia were forced there by 
anything but a mad desire for wealth. That being so, what 
justification has anyone for denying that the only possible reason 
that could have led men to the inhospitable mountains of New 
Guinea was the presence there of alluvial gold? It is the only 
rational explanation of the facts, and no amount of argument 
can account otherwise for the sudden appearance of people with 
a distinctive civilization in such a region: in late years it is this 
very motive that has led civilized men once again to brave the 
terrors of New Guinea. That the Polynesians of old were seeking 
pearls stands beyond doubt; for, ever since Europeans have 
known of them, they have been engaged in pearl-fishing, and 
there is no reason for believing that they have ever done 
otherwise. Given that the appearance of the archaic civilization 
in British New Guinea and Polynesia is due to the search for gold 
and pearls, we can interpret similarly the facts in Indonesia and 
India, where sites of the archaic civilization bear so obvious a 
relationship to sources of various kinds of wealth. In America, 
again, the desire for gold, copper, turquoise, and pearls can well 
explain the peculiar distribution of early civilization. Such a 
hypothesis as this accounts, as none other will, for sites such as 
Copan, and for the localization of Pueblo villages in the canyons 
of the Colorado River basin, and elsewhere in the south-west. 
It is possible in this way to see what led the culture-heroes 
to Australia; they evidently were wandering about seeking gold. 
Perhaps their sudden departure, which is recounted in Australian 
folk-lore, was consequent upon the evacuation of the New Guinea 
gold-fields. It is certain that connexions between the Pacific and 
the West were cut at some past time: that was evident from 
the study of food-plants. Such interruptions were probably 
due to the break-up of archaic civilization, consequent on the 
intensification of warfare. The coming of warlike peoples to 
British New Guinea will readily explain the sudden abandonment 
of the gold-fields and the departure of the culture-heroes from 
Australia. This is probably why they missed the pearl-beds of 
Broome, on the west coast of Australia. 

1 Such instances as those of the Pilgrim Fathers and others are sporadic. 


416 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Another argument is that derived from the study of Givers 
of Life. The great store set by later peoples on gold, or quartz, 
or iron, pearls and so forth, gives an inkling of the intensity of 
the powers accredited to such objects by the early folk. This 
desire for givers of life is enough to account for a world-wide 
search for such objects. For, as I have shown elsewhere, it has 
certainly led, in historical times, to many expeditions in search 
of earthly paradises, where givers of life were supposed to exist. 
With so powerful a motive, it is readily understood why the people 
of the archaic civilization scattered themselves far and wide on 
the face of the earth. 

Another line of approach to the same conclusion is through the 
study of the movements of peoples who migrated from settlements 
of the archaic civilization. Tribes like the Gonds of the Central 
Provinces, the Kayan of Borneo, and the Toradja of Central 
Celebes, apparently settled where they found iron for their 
industry. In the case of the Gonds, however, the prime cause of 
their movements has been the search for gold. 

In the case of the Toradja, the migration was into entirely 
new country, so that the choice of position for settlement was 
practically free. The wanderers chose sites where iron existed, 
and have installed in some cases irrigation works, which goes to 
show that the determining factor was the presence of iron; for 
even the most convinced supporter of climatic and other influences 
would hardly venture to show that one river valley was any better 
than another in this part of Celebes. This secondary movement 
in search of iron fits in readily with that of the archaic civilization 
in search of such things as gold and pearls: it is the result of the 
selection, by people such as the Toradja, of certain cultural ele- 
ments, and of the concentration of their attention on those 
elements. 

Finally, it is improbable that climatic and other natural condi- 
tions have co-operated to produce similar civilizations in places 
which in practically every case are sources of various desired 
objects: such a coincidence does not fall within the limits of 
probability. The distribution of communities of the archaic 
civilization can only be due to the deliberate choice of settlement 
by people possessing an uniform culture. 

Given that continuity exists between the archaic civilization 
and those that followed, the inference is that the process at work 
is continuous. The communities of the archaic civilization in 
more than one instance have produced others, some of them 
destined to grow to great size. Sometimes the growth of a group 
of tribes from one original settlement can be watched, and, 
doubtless, if knowledge were available, such instances could be 
multiplied : the Polynesians have made a far-flung line of settle- 
ments, all related to one another: in Australia it would seem that 
many tribes are derived from one original tribe: several people 
of India, such as the Naga tribes of Assam, show an underlying 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 417 


unity. To this unity of settlements can be added the unity of 
culture such as is especially evident in North America. No signs 
exist of anything approaching independent origin. The better 
the facts are known, the more apparent is the continuity between 
one settlement and another, between one tribe and another. 

When the Polynesians are considered as a whole, it is evident 
that their cultural similarities are due to filiation, to a definite 
interrelationship existing between the most widely-scattered 
communities: in Assam the cultural similarities of the Nagas 
are put down to similar cultural history ; and so on throughout 
the region. When this knowledge is applied to the communities 
of the archaic civilization, the inference can only be that all these 
communities, with their similar cultures, owe their existence to 
derivation from one original source. This is evident when the 
possible mode of formation of settlements is considered. Settle- 
ments ruled over by the Children of the Sun must have been 
founded by members of that family: it is unthinkable that 
commoners from one place could go to another and reproduce 
the culture of their homeland: the whole of the evidence vetoes 
that view. It is known, in the case of the Polynesians, that the 
expeditions were led by men of noble blood, which makes it 
impossible for commoners to have usurped their place; it has 
been found, also, that when the Children of the Sun die out, they 
are replaced by the other side of the ruling class, the chiefs con- 
nected with the underworld ; moreover, when the ruling class has 
disappeared, it is not replaced by another. Any given com- 
munity lives on what it has got from the archaic civilization ; it 
does not add to the original capital, but tends rather to squander 
t .The invariable result of the disappearance of the Children 
of the Sun has been for the sky-world to lose its place in the 
religious system of the community. In that case, how can it be 
asserted that men not belonging to that family have arrogated 
to themselves divine honours? The prestige of the Children of 
the Sun makes that impossible. The only conclusion that can 
be accepted is that any settlement of Children of the Sun must 
have been derived from some settlement of that family, and this 
conclusion is universally borne out by native tradition from one 
end of the region to the other; which says that men came from 
the sky, from a place where there was a sun-cult. This may be 
interpreted as invention to explain the fact. But the results of 
the study of tradition throughout this book will not support such 
an assumption for a moment. 

Given that the archaic civilization is a unity, and that the 
successive settlements have been derived from preceding settle- 
ments, it is natural to ask where was the original settlement. 
The laws of probability make it incredible that the archaic civili- 
zation, as it is known in various parts of the region, could have 
originated more than once... The entire failure of any subsequent 
people to develop independently any cultural elements of the 

27 


418 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


archaic civilization is sufficient warrant for that supposition. A 
study of the direction of movement should therefore point at 
once to that of the original home; and it can hardly be doubted 
that this home was in the Ancient East. 

This can readily be shown by the consideration of such a cultural 
element as the use of a script. The possession of a script by any 
people is a sign of a high stage of civilization. The earliest script 
in Egypt and Sumer was certainly prior to 3000 B.c.: in India a 
script apparently arrived about 700 B.c.: the Polynesians are 
said to have left India about 450 s.c., and to have arrived in the 
Pacific about the beginning of our era, which suffices roughly to 
fix the date of the script of the Carolines; a Phoenician script 
is known in south-west Sumatra, the date is uncertain, but 
probably is not earlier than 1500 B.c.: the foundation of the 
Maya civilization is put at about the beginning of our era, with a 
possible margin of 200 years either way. This rough measure 
suggests that writing moved in an easterly direction, for it appeared 
in various countries at dates progressively later in proportion to 
the remoteness from the Ancient East. No one maintains that 
civilization existed in the northerly part of America before 200 
B.c. Since all the arts and crafts of the Maya people, including 
writing, had been possessed by other peoples for thousands of 
years before that time, it seems reasonable to suppose that the 
movement of culture has been towards America. 

In any attempt to understand the origin of the civilization of 
North America it must constantly be remembered that it contains 
a group of communities whose cultures are fundamentally similar. 
With the exception of the horse-riders, who can be put on one 
side, for reasons previously stated, as playing no part in the 
argument, the food-producers are divided by a great cultural gap 
from the food-gatherers, who represent the early population of 
the continent. The culture of the food-producers, as is constantly 
said by American ethnologists, is fundamentally a unity. All 
the facts point to the Maya as the earliest civilized people in North 
America, and to them is owed the civilization of the other peoples. 
The question is: whence came the Maya civilization ? 

It will be well to inquire, first of all, of the American archzo- 
logists who have had this matter in hand. I quote from a recent 
authority, Mr. S. C. Morley, whose bulky monograph on “ The 
Inscriptions at Copan ”’ has lately been published by the Carnegie 
Institute of Washington. He devotes some pages to the question 
of the origin of the Maya civilization. According to him: “The 
Maya themselves have been variously derived from the ancient 
Egyptians; from the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel; from the 
Javanese ; and even from the visionary folk of fabled Atlantis.” 4 
And he goes on to say that “* unfortunately these highly improbable 
hypotheses have not entirely disappeared before the advance of 
the science since the Egyptian connexion has been revived 

1 Morley ii. 28. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 419 


recently by (Elliot) Smith on the basis of erroneous identifications 
and purely superficial similarities.” + He continues: ‘Such 
extravagant hypotheses would scarcely merit even passing notice 
were it not for the fact that their very superficiality renders them 
peculiarly attractive to the general public. It is, therefore, 
perhaps not superfluous to repeat that the Maya civilization was 
a native American product, developed in its entirety in the New 
World, and probably not far from the region where its extensive 
remains are now to be found.” * Mr. Morley is very emphatic 
in his assertions, and his language suggests that presumptuous 
folk, such as Elliot Smith, will be thoroughly castigated when it 
comes to a discussion of the evidence. His colleague, Mr. Spinden, 
writing in 1913, is even more emphatic. He says: ‘‘ The writer 
does not care to dignify by refutation the numerous empty theories 
of ethnic connexions between Central America and the Old 
World.’?? These and other American authorities are very im- 
patient of any comparison. between America and Asiatic civiliza- 
tion. This for example: ‘‘ Except in the matter of stairways 
and methods of construction the pyramids of Assyria were not 
dissimilar from those of Mexico and Central America. Super- 
ficial resemblances might also’ be noted in the assemblages of 
rooms in the palace structures and in the marked use of inclosed 
courts.”’ 4 

I do not propose to enter on an argument with American 
archeologists, I shall simply inquire where and how they imagine 
the Maya civilization to have originated. In spite of wholesale 
condemnation of their opponents, they are unable to produce a 
single fact in favour of its indigenous origin. Listen to the 
authorities just quoted. » First Mr. Spinden, who begins by 
scolding those who seek an outside origin: “* No reasonable excuse 
can now be found for writers who, on the strength of this or that 
authority, cheerfully leap the bounds of space, time and reason 
to derive the religious and artistic conceptions of the Mayas from 
Egypt, India or China. The evidence these writers present is 
always insufficient, and usually wrong. Where real similarities 
exist they probably can be explained by pure chance or by psychic 
unity.° 

‘In determining origins, however, account may well be taken 
of the single outlying group of the Maya-speaking peoples, the 
Huasteca, who inhabit the low coast region north of Vera Cruz, 
and in whose territory many remains of cities as yet undescribed 
are known to occur. It is possible but not likely that a careful 
study of this disconnected group will indicate a northern origin 
for Maya arts. An origin to the south of the stated limits (of the 
Maya civilization) is hardly conceivable, owing to the great and 


1 Td., 402. 2 Id., 28, n. 4. 

3 Spinden i, 231-2. © 1d... 1. go2- 

5 In a later chapter (see p. 485) it will be seen to what conclusion this hypo- 
thesis of ‘‘ psychic unity ”’ really leads. 


420 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


sudden falling off in handicrafts and ideas once the southern 
frontier has been crossed. Such similarities as do exist may 
easily be accredited to the Nahua colonies, which, in the last 
centuries before the coming of Europeans, were planted even 
farther south than Lake Nicaragua. No matter, however, to 
what other region fuller investigation may refer the humble 
beginnings of Maya art, the indisputable fact remains that in all 
essential and characteristic features it was developed upon its 
own ground.”’ 1 

In view of these assertions some evidence would be expected 
to show that the elaborate civilization of the Maya was a local 
product. A careful examination of the arguments brought for- 
ward by Mr. Morley, the latest writer on the subject, who is fully 
aware of what has been written, makes it clear, to any fair-minded 
reader, that the claim is groundless ; and that no evidence what- 
ever exists to point to the origin of the Maya civilization in America. 
It seems to spring full-blown from the ground, to use the candid 
words of Mr. Joyce. This is the sort of explanation that we are 
tendered: ‘‘ At some remote epoch sufficiently prior to (their 
earliest date) for them to have developed such a complex calendar, 
chronology, and hieroglyphic writing as they possessed at that 
early date (about 100 B.c.), the Maya may have lived somewhere 
north of their habitat during the Old Empire ; and since a Maya- 
speaking people still inhabit such a region between Tuzan and 
the Panuco River, this may possibly have been the place. 

‘“‘ Before developing their calendar, chronology, hieroglyphic 
writing, and distinctive civilization, by which they were character- 
ized in later times, the great mass of the stock moved south, 
leaving behind, perhaps, the more backward elements, who later 
developed a far lower and different culture but who continued to 
speak the mother Maya tongue, and who later became the Huastecs 
of historic times.? 

‘*“Somewhere between the above region and San Andreas 
Tuxtla, if our hypothesis be correct, the Maya civilization had its 
origin, and their calendar and chronology had been perfected to 
such a point that by (their earliest date) they were able to carve 
upon a very hard stone . . . the earliest date yet found in their 
hieroglyphic writings. 

‘* How long prior to this date it took them to make and record 
the necessary astronomical observations on the sun and moon, 
upon which their calendar is based, and having at last sufficient 
data at hand, how long it took them to perfect their remarkable 
chronological system, is of course impossible to say. The first 
process, however, would appear, a priori, to have been much the 
longer of the two, since, once certain astronomical facts, such as 
the apparent revolutions of the sun and moon around the earth, 
had been determined, the invention of the whole elaborate 
calendar and chronology, including the arithmetical and notational 

1 Spinden i. 2. 2 This argument is rejected by his colleague, Spinden. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 421 


systems, might have been the work of a single individual. Such 
highly complex and arbitrary inventions, while based upon data 
slowly and laboriously acquired over long periods of time, are apt 
to flower quickly once a certain stage is reached }—a sudden 
liquidation of long-accumulated intellectual investments; and 
so the actual construction of the Maya calendar and chronology 
may have come swiftly, once the astronomical data upon which 
they were based had been accumulated in sufficient quantities 
to establish therefrom certain dependable astronomical laws. 
And possibly this invention may have taken place not long prior 
to... the date on the Tuxtla Statuette, since no certain earlier 
contemporaneous date has yet been found in the Maya writing.” 2 
This quotation will show the reader what form of argument is 
used by the utterers of the strong opinions with regard to those 
who would claim foreign origin for the Maya civilization. These 
students have not a single fact to explain the origin of any of the 
features of Maya civilization. The bankruptcy of facts is com- 
plete, and in order to buttress their position the invention of all 
sorts of arts and crafts is taken for granted as something not 
needing explanation, which is as good an example as could be 
desired of the time-honoured practice of ‘‘ begging the question.” ° 

Something is known about the history of civilization in North 
America in pre-Columbian times. Can any reason be adduced 
to support the belief that a people of that continent elaborated 
any civilization at all? What did the study of culture-sequence 
reveal? It showed that, wherever it was possible to establish a 
sequence, the earlier civilization was the more developed. This 
was true in comparing the Plains Indians with those east of the 
Mississippi; the Indians east of the Mississippi with the Mound 
Builders; the Mound Builders with the Mexicans (if this be 
allowed as a legitimate culture-sequence); the early Pueblo 
Indians with their descendants; the later branch of the Zuni 
with the Elder Brethren; the tribes of Mexico with the ancient 
Mexicans ; the later Maya with the early Maya. The evidence 
was always unhesitating. Therefore, if a certain tribe speaks a 
Maya tongue, and is culturally lower than the early Maya, then 
it can only be assumed, on the basis of what really is known in 
North America, and not what is postulated, that this tribe must 
have been later in time than the Maya. Going backward in time, 
in America, is like the ascent of a series of cultural steps, at the 
summit of which stands unchallenged the earliest civilization of 
all, that of the Maya.* How, therefore, can such claims be made 


1 Asif this sort of process could be watched at work in all parts of the earth. 

2 Morley ii. 408. 

8 IT may perhaps mention that this attitude is not adopted by all American- 
ists. See, for instance, Holmes iii. 35-6, for an appreciation of the cultural 
similarities between America, Cambodia, Java, and elsewhere. Also Z. 
Nuttall ii. 185 e.s. and other writings. 

4 Long. Man, 1918, 70. ‘‘ Ifthe theory put forward in this paper as to the 
origin of the zero point of Maya chronology is sound, it will show a remarkable 


422 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


as those that are put forward with so much confidence and vigour 
by Spinden and Morley and some of their colleagues? Is it 
credible that, in the space of a few decades or centuries, the 
Maya invented their civilization and brought it to its highest 
development, and that subsequently the whole history of the 
continent has been one of uninterrupted cultural degradation ? 

One loophole may be suggested to those who support this claim. 
It has been stated that the coming of warlike peoples ruined the 
archaic civilization. This may be held responsible, as it certainly 
could, for the degeneration of culture among the other peoples of 
North America. It may be claimed that the Maya elaborated 
their civilization in peace, and that the subsequent degeneration 
was the result of the introduction of warfare. The evidence put 
forward shows that warfare must have been responsible for much 
of the cultural degeneration in this continent. But it does. not 
explain everything. For large areas are inhabited by people who 
have never at any time elaborated any sort of civilization. The 
theory that warfare has destroyed civilization is plausible when 
applied to civilization already in existence. But the existence 
of that civilization has to be accounted for, so, before applying 
the solution of war, it is essential to explain how it is that civiliza- 
tion appeared first in certain spots, particularly in southern 
Mexico and the surrounding countries. What in that region made 
it so different from the whole of the rest of the continent, that 
men there began to elaborate arts and crafts, even though sub- 
sequently they have shown no tendency to follow the same 
example ? The colonization of the United States areas can be 
explained by a spread from Mexico of maize-growing people, and 
this explanation is the only one that accounts for the facts. These 
people went in search of substances that they needed, pearls, 
copper, gold, turquoise, and so forth. In Guatemala and Southern 
Mexico they were likewise in an area full of precious substances, 
Why therefore refuse to believe that the founders of the Maya 
civilization came in search of such things and settled where they 
found them? The mere presence of the gold and other substances 
cannot account for the civilization, for they also exist in California, 
the natives of which have never displayed the slightest interest 
in them. 

The fact is that the Maya civilization springs from nowhere, 
so far as America is concerned. Giving due weight to all the data, 
is it credible that this miracle was accomplished by the Maya 
people entirely independently of any outside influence ? . What is 
the real situation? After the archaic civilization had been in 
parallel to the Hindu Kali Yuga era of 3102 B.c., which has been shown also 
not to be a historical date, but one arrived at by calculating back till a date 
was reached which would be the commencement of a cycle harmonizing lesser 
cycles (Dr. J. F. Fleet, in Journal Roy. Asiatic Soc., April 1911). It is curious 
that another parallel can be found between the Hindu method of reckoning by 


‘expired ’ instead of current time periods and the Maya reckoning by elapsed 
time.’’ 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 423 


existence for nearly three thousand years, a civilization, in all 
essentials its exact copy, suddenly springs up in a part of America 
where existed supplies of precious substances. The direction of 
culture-movement across the region as a whole is from west to 
east; so that, logically speaking, the wave of culture should, in 
time, have impinged on the American coast. In support of that 
contention it is urged that it is possible to establish some distribu- 
tions that run continuously throughout the region from one end 
to the other. The distribution of polished stone implements is 
continuous ; so are those of mummification, pyramid-building, 
the dual organization, the sun-cult, relationship with animals, 
theogamy and so on. The continuity is only broken in any part 
of the region as the result of the decay of the archaic civilization, 
and even in such eases traces of the old order still persist. Thus was 
spread over the whole region a civilization which did not repeat 
itself in subsequent times: the new civilizations always deviate 
from it, thus showing that there is no inherent necessity about 
this civilization, that men do not inevitably make polished stone 
implements of trap rocks, work obsidian, build pyramids, elaborate 
a dual organization of society, and so on. The facts, on the 
contrary, all go to show that the archaic civilization was a thing 
in itself, put together once and for all, and only preserved in special 
circumstances. Is it to be believed, therefore, that, in circum- 
stances that would suggest the spread of the archaic civilization 
to America, the Maya people independently elaborated a civiliza- 
tion that, as it were, finished off the process and completed the 
extension of the archaic civilization? To believe that involves 
the denial of the traditions of American peoples, who all claim 
that they got their civilization from culture-heroes, and have 
elaborated ideas about these culture-heroes identical with those 
held in other parts of the region. 

It has been shown that, in America as elsewhere, the use of 
stone, the carving of stone images, the practice of irrigation and 
the working of precious metals constitute definite cultural elements 
that are found only in certain circumstances. The presence of 
precious metals has nothing whatever to do with their use, for in 
several parts of North America are great deposits of gold, that 
were not worked until the middle or end of last century. The 
peoples of North America were, on the whole, indifferent to the 
use of stone for building and for images : they sometimes dropped 
the making of pottery. Anyone who would choose to insist that 
the Maya invented all these cultural elements will, in the face of 
these facts, have to produce definite evidence to show how and 
where they were invented. It must be remembered that no 
evidence has yet turned up of the origin in America of any one 
cultural element that has figured in the discussion. The only 
place where, as yet, signs of beginnings can be detected, is the 
Ancient East. To accept the use of stone, irrigation, the working 
of metals, as axiomatic, is to run counter ta the known facts. 


424 © THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


These cultural elements belong to the archaic civilization in all 
parts of the region, and disappear with that civilization. On 
them may be based in the first instance, the challenge to those 
who claim the American origin of the Maya civilization. 

Certain objections can be raised against the theory that the 
civilization of America was of exotic origin. One, upon which 
emphasis is laid, is that of food-plants. If the strangers came in, 
why did they not bring some food-plant with them, such for 
example as rice? Fortunately what is known of the results of a 
long movement of culture disposes of the difficulty. The ancestors 
of the Polynesians came from a country where rice was grown, 
and they seem to have known of it. Why did they not take it 
out into the Pacific? The answer is given by their own tradi- 
tions: they found the breadfruit in Indonesia and took that 
instead. So a migrating people can drop one plant and take up 
another. This is what apparently happened in America. As 
has been seen, the first colonizers of the Pacific were clever agricul- 
turists, and would have a good knowledge of plants. Evidently 
they found the maize plant in America, and adopted it, and 
grafted on to its cultivation a group of ceremonies and ideas that 
are common to the agriculture of the archaic civilization from one 
end of the region to the other. The maize mother is exactly 
analogous to the rice mother of Indonesia. The calendrical 
system of the Maya was centred round agriculture, as were 
those of the Egyptians and others ; their great festivals were also 
mainly agricultural: they had human sacrifice in connexion with 
their agriculture, which was closely associated with mother 
goddesses. The only thing that differs is the plant itself, and itis 
only natural that it should. What value, therefore, has an objection 
that selects one element of a complex and ignores the others ? 

The language difficulty is also brought forward. How is it 
that the strangers, if they came from Asia, did not bring with 
them a language or a script that shows signs of affinity with those 
of their homeland? As in the case of food-plants, this difficulty 
is specious. It is not confined to America; for in Micronesia 
and Easter Island scripts exist that cannot be deciphered. No 
one claims that the Easter Islanders elaborated their civilization. 
So, before the difficulty of America be brought up, those of the 
Pacific should be considered. When it is realized that exactly 
the same process has been at work, in the Pacific as in America, 
the objection based on language vanishes, for it is not proper to 
America. ; 

It is possible that the strangers were expert agriculturlists 
who soon discovered maize and started to grow it: that they 
learned the language of the natives, and that they elaborated a 
hieroglyphic system to express this new language. 

Another group of cultural elements will have to be explained 
on the basis of the hypothesis of the indigenous origin of American 
civilization. Apart from stone-working, irrigation and the work- 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 425 


ing of precious metals, many less material elements demand 
elucidation. First and foremost is the class system. 

It is admitted by American archeologists that the Maya people 
elaborated their civilization in a short space of time. In addition 
to inventing various arts and crafts, they evolved a ruling class 
headed by Children of the Sun, who belonged to a sky-world, and 
including other rulers connected with the underworld. At death 
the Children of the Sun went to the sky, and the rest of the com- 
munity went underground, to be ruled over by the mother goddess 
and a king, representative, it has been concluded, of the other 
branch of the ruling class. How is this extraordinary condition 
of affairs to be explained on the hypothesis of the American origin 
of the Maya civilization ? 

Again, how did the Maya come to elaborate the dual organiza- 
tion with all its ramifications, producing thereby a form of society 
with an uncanny resemblance to that of the archaic civilization 
of the rest of the region ? Not in one, but in a number of ways, 
does the dual organization of North America reproduce that of 
the Pacific and India. Then can be added the organization into 
totemic clans, the institution of exogamy, all of which run con- 
tinuously through the archaic civilization from one end of the 
region to the other. 

The practice of building pyramids presents another serious 
difficulty. Archseologists are fond of stating that the dolmen 
was the favourite form of stone building for “‘ primitive ’? man, 
When the Maya began to work stone they built vast stone 
pyramids. The civilization of Egypt had been in existence for 
many centuries before this step was taken; and the Egyptians 
began their pyramids with one made of brick. It seems incredible 
that the Maya in a few short decades jumped cultural gaps that 
needed centuries in the Ancient East, and that they left out some 
of the steps. The pyramid of Egypt was a development either 
of the mastaba or else of the top stone of the obelisk. It is nota 
simple natural obvious structure, as is evident from its history 
in Egypt (see p. 437). 

Innumerable such difficulties could be put, which are simply 
insoluble on the hypothesis of the indigenous origin of the Maya 
civilization. 

What is the real position as regards North America ? It seems 
to be this. The Maya civilization stands at the summit of 
American culture, and it precedes all others in that area; it 
displays, in itself, or in its derivatives, exact parallels to other 
branches of the archaic civilization, with which it is continuous 
in distribution, and of which it can be treated as an integral part ; 
it resembles the civilization of the Ancient East more than that’ 
of any other part of the region, excepting perhaps India ; and its 
origins in America cannot be traced. It is reasonable to suggest, 
therefore, that the origins of this civilization must be sought 
elsewhere than in America. 


426 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


In Oceania the current of civilization has flowed in the past 
from west to east, and little opposition can be maintained to the 
view that the culture of this region came from India by way of 
Indonesia. The study of food-plants is enough to settle that 
point: the Polynesians made their islands habitable by bringing 
with them the breadfruit, the banana and other fruit-bearing 
trees, and these trees in the great majority of cases came from 
India. It is therefore in India that must be sought the origin of 
the civilization of Polynesia, and presumably of the rest of 
Oceania. 

There is nothing to show that the peoples of Indonesia elabor- 
ated their civilizations. They themselves claim to have been 
civilized by strangers, often from the sky-world. And the 
evidence indicates that the people of the archaic civilization came 
to the region and settled where they found substances not pre- 
viously valued by the native populations, except when under the 
influence of people of higher civilization. The whole history of 
Indonesia is that of civilization by strangers. 7 

Then comes the problem of the origin of the civilizations of 
India. Evidently, in the present state of the study of the history 
of that country, any direct attack on this problem would be 
futile. Any attempt to penetrate far into the past is bound, 
sooner or later, to come up against a wall of fog, through which 
it is as yet impossible to penetrate.t_ Nevertheless, it is possible 
to urge good reasons for believing that the people of the archaic 
civilization in India were strangers: they evidently knew where 
to settle, for they chose places yielding gold, copper, and so forth ; 
and they were masters of the mining craft, able to work quartz 
reefs to a depth of 600 ft. They practised irrigation. No evidence 
whatever exists in India to show that either of these crafts 
originated there; they seem to have been introduced, together 
with pottery-making. This is negative evidence, but it is signi- 
ficant. 

Then another and more serious argument can be adduced 
against the theory of the independent origin, in India, of the 
archaic civilization. This argument goes right to the foundations 
of the problem of the origin of civilization. In a paper already 
quoted, in connexion with the search for gold and other desired 
substances, I have claimed that the paleolithic people of Western 
Kurope, like their successors, chose to live in the localities where 
they found raw materials for their industries. This paper was 
confined to the discussion of the problem in England and Wales, 
where it was shown that the river drift implements mentioned by 
Sir John Evans had been found in places situated in close prox- 
imity to the chalk formations, and particularly in those providing 
ample supplies of flint, of which paleolithic implements were 
chiefly made. So far as I can see, the drama of the paleolithic 
age was played out on the geological formations producing flint 
_ + Pargiter has, in his latest work, made a good start along these lines. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE ARCHAIC CIVILIZATION 427 


and other allied substances of which paleolithic man made his 
implements, as well as in the limestone regions, where later on he 
lived in caverns; so that the fundamental problem of the origin 
of civilization is that of discovering what caused man to settle 
on other formations. That problem will be considered once 
again in the next chapter; for the present attention will be con- 
‘fined to India. 

Numbers of paleolithic implements, chiefly quartzite, are found 
in India. As to the distribution of these remains, Bruce Foote 
is well aware of the relationship with geological formations, for 
he says: “ There are far more traces of the paleolithic race around 
the great quartzite yielding groups of hills forming the Cuddapah 
series of the Indian geologists and the great quartzite shingle 
conglomerates of the Upper Gondwana system in the Chingleput 
(Madras), North Arcot and Nellore districts, than in other regions. 
In diminishing quantities traces of paleolithic man are found to 
the northward of the Kistna valley, where quartzite becomes a 
much less common rock. So also to the southward of the Palar 
valley, where quartzite becomes a rare material ; to the westward 
on the Deccan plateau, where the same stone chippers finding no 
quartzite in the Bellary district had recourse to the banded jasper 
hematite rocks (of the Dharwar system); and farther north in 
the valley of the Kistna, where recourse was had in one instance 
to hard siliceous limestone.”’?} The men of the paleolithic age 
thus left their remains on quite different geological formations 
from_those of the archaic civilization. That is to say, the later 
folk had entirely different ideas from their forerunners, and no 
traces can be detected of the transition from one stage of culture 
to the other. It is more reasonable to seek for such traces on a 
geological formation which possesses a raw material common to 
the food-gathering and food-producing stages of culture, such as 
the flint-bearing formations which supplied the peoples of Egypt 
and Western Europe with raw material for their industries. 


1 Foote 36. 


CHAPTER XXVI 
EGYPT 


Having discussed the possible origin of the archaic civiliza- 

tion in North America, Oceania and India, we have found 
no good reason for believing that it developed in any of those areas. 
There remain but Sumer and Egypt, and it is in Egypt that, as 
I shall try to show, the archaic civilization came into being. 

The nature of the problem must clearly be understood. By 
asserting that the archaic civilization originated in Egypt, I do 
not. mean that every element was necessarily invented by the 
Egyptians: I mean that it took shape in Egypt and was propa- 
gated thence. To establish my contention, therefore, it will be 
necessary to show how and why these cultural elements originated, 
and to explain what caused Egyptian culture to begin its journey 
across the earth. 

In the last chapter a list was made of the principal elements of 
the archaic civilization (see p. 406). The surveys of the various 
chapters have shown that these elements were present in Egypt : 
it now remains to show how the Egyptians came to possess them. 
Egypt is peculiarly fitted to be the home of the archaic civilization, 
or of any food-producing culture, for it has been inhabited con- 
tinuously since the early days of the Paleolithic Age.t The 
reason for this occupation lies in the presence of large quantities 
of excellent flint for the manufacture of implements, in which 
craft the Egyptians were unequalled. In consequence of the 
elaboration of fresh needs, the Egyptians moved out from this 
district, and began to live on other geological formations. But 
when still in their homeland they made the first step towards the 
production of civilization as we know it: they discovered the 
craft of irrigation. Irrigation is certainly one of the most impor- 
tant cultural elements of the archaic civilization, for on it the 
settlements depended for food. The recent work of Prof, Cherrv 
has made it beyond reasonable doubt that this craft—and with 
it agriculture—must have originated in Egypt.2 He shows that 
the Nile has a perfect irrigation cycle, the like of which is not 
found in any other river valley of the world. The inundation 
takes place at the end of the hot, dry summer, so that the water, 

1 de Morgan i. 2 Cherry. 
428 


[is chapter constitutes the climax of the argument. 


EGYPT 429 


by flooding the land on either bank, causes any plant seeds that 
may be lying there to germinate, and provides the mud in which 
they can thrive. When the flood recedes the plant has the cool 
winter months in which to grow, and the crop, in the case of 
cereals, can be harvested at the end of the winter. Thus, before 
man cultivated food, ripe grains of barley and millet would lie 
on the ground throughout the hot Egyptian summer without 
sprouting or mildewing, and would be ready for the flood at the 
end of the summer. The Nile was the first cultivator of the 
cereals by irrigation. Men lived in Egypt for many thousands 
of years before they learned the lesson that they were yearly being 
taught. They were seed-gatherers, beyond doubt, who lived on 
the barley and millet that the Nile grew for them. Eventually, 
however, they probably began to scoop out small channels to 
help the water to cover more ground, and thus came to practise 
artificial irrigation. In Mesopotamia, on the other hand, the 
flood-cycle does not serve to grow crops without artificial control. 
For the flood comes at the beginning of the summer, which means 
that any sprouting plants would be at the mercy of the hot sun, 
and would inevitably die. Consequently, as Prof. Cherry observes, 
those who inaugurated the irrigation system of Mesopotamia 
must have proceeded with deliberate intent. He discusses also 
the problems connected with barley, so favourite a food with the 
pre-dynastic Egyptians, and argues that the valley of the Nile 
must have been the place where it evolved. 

The Egyptians of these early days possessed other elements 
of the archaic civilization, the origin of which is not yet decided ; 
spinning and weaving; pottery-making; and the cult of the 
Mother Goddess common to the peoples of the upper paleolithic 
age, and revealed in Egypt by the presence of small feminine 
images of grotesque shape. The Egyptians had also discovered 
the use of copper for tools, probably as the result of their employ- 
ment of malachite as a pigment. Various Givers of Life were 
also in use. The country had territorial divisions, called by the 
Greeks “ nomes,” each having as ensign an animal, plant or 
material object. These nomes were in two groups, constituting 
respectively Upper and Lower Egypt. In the earliest days no 
signs existed of stone for construction, of the sun-cult as the state 
cult, of the Children of the Sun, of pyramids, dolmens and so 
forth, or of several other cultural elements of the archaic civilization. 

The most important date for our purpose is that of the unifica- 
tion of Egypt under the First Dynasty, which took place about 
8300 B.c., according to some, or earlier, according to others. 
Before the dynastic period there were kings; and, in late pre- 
dynastic times, and at the beginning of the dynastic period, these 
kings seem to have had similar titles ; whivh serves, it is claimed, 
to establish a continuity between the two groups. The evidence 
for this is late, but, according to Sethe, it goes to show that the 
‘** Followers of Horus?’ or “‘ Worshippers of Horus” (Horus- 


430 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


diener), who are said to have existed in Egypt in the days before 
the country was united under Menes, the first king of the First 
Dynasty, were actual men. They corresponded, he thinks, to 
the king of Upper Egypt at Hieraconpolis, and the king of Lower 
Egypt at Buto.! Sethe says that the kings of the first historical 
dynasties seem to have considered themselves to be the successors 
of the Upper Egyptian “ Followers of Horus ” of Hieraconpolis, 
and that they were especially worshippers of this god.? The 
kings of the Sixth Dynasty still retained traditions of the days 
of the “‘ Followers of Horus ”’ of Hieraconpolis and Buto, to whom 
reached back the annals. In the royal annals of the first two 
dynasties mention is made of a feast called ‘* Worship of Horus,” 
which was held every two years.? It is thus possible that the 
foundation of united Egypt was the work of one of the **‘ Followers 
of Horus.” 

The connexion between the nomes and animals has already 
been mentioned. The royal families of late pre-dynastic times 
were also connected with animals: rulers are represented with 
jackal standards and as jackal-headed:* the ruling family of 
Hieraconpolis was connected with the hawk, the bird of Horus, 
and this connexion was clearly shown in the coronation ceremony 
of the king of united Egypt. 

Whether or not Egypt was united in the pre-dynastic period 
under one king, to fall again into two kingdoms, it is certain that 
the First Dynasty united two distinct kingdoms. The first king of 
the First Dynasty was Menes, a native of Thinis near Abydos in 
Upper Egypt, who is said to have built Memphis at the boundary 
of Upper and Lower Egypt so as to preserve order.° He was 
thus ruler of a double kingdom, each part including a number 
of territorial groups, closely connected, certainly so far as their 
rulers were concerned, with certain animals, plants and material 
objects. Thus Egypt at the beginning of the First Dynasty already 
had begun to take on the aspect of the typical community of the 
archaic civilization. | 

Other cultural elements became attached to the dual grouping. 
The conquest of Lower Egypt by a king of Upper Egypt produced 
hostility between the peoples of Upper and Lower Egypt. The 
king of Upper Egypt had continually to enforce law and order 
in the Delta: and Sethe claims that the Memphite feast in the 
month of Choiak had a relationship to the forcible union of the 
two kingdoms. ‘‘ The anniversary of the coronation of the 
Kgyptian kings, which was also that of the coronation of Horus, 
was the day on which Menes seated himself on the throne of 
Egypt.” On this day was the feast held. On the previous day 
a preliminary ceremony was performed which Sethe claims to be 
a sign of triumph. A pillar, called the “‘ dad ”’ pillar, was erected. 

1 Sethe iii. 20. 2 Id., 16. 


2 Breasted iv. 46; ii. I. §§ 91-167. 
4 Sethe iv. 20. 5 Breasted iv. 91. 


EGYPT | 431 


“The ceremony of the erection of the dad pillar, which took place 
on the day before this important festival day for the king, must 
have had a particular meaning for the king besides its religious 
and mythological importance, because of the singular mock-fight 
that was fought with plant-stalks. When we read over the heads 
of the two struggling priests the words, ‘ I take Horus so-and-so,’ 
it seems as if a new king is concerned, about whom the adversaries 
struggle. More important still are the two groups of combatants, 
who are distinguished from the others by their clothing ’’ (they 
evidently are people of Lower Egypt). ‘‘ We seem to have to 
do with a fight between citizens, which took place among those 
of Buto, the capital of the king of Lower Egypt. When could 
this struggle have been fought in Buto, that it should have such 
importance for the Egyptians as a whole? Probably on the 
occasion of the union of the two lands, for Buto was then still of 
importance. If at that time any part of the population of Buto 
had declared itself for the Upper Egyptian king, then that would 
have been doubly welcome, because by this means the union 
would not have appeared quite so involuntary as it actually was 
from the standpoint of the Lower Egyptians. The phrase, ‘I 
take Horus so-and-so,’ which was uttered during the strife 
between the priests, gains thereby particular importance.” 4 

This ceremony serves to throw light on the hostility between 
the two sides of the dual organization, especially as characterized 
in the ball-game.? 

Horus and Set in Egyptian mythology are usually represented 
as hostile, though in some of the Pyramid Texts they are friendly. 
These two beings are connected with Upper and Lower Egypt 
respectively, and evidently the hostility between them has some 
historical significance. One reason for this hostility has already 
been suggested, namely, the dispossession of Set by Horus. It is 
said also that Set was lord of Ombos in Upper Egypt, and Horus 
was lord of Buto in Lower Egypt.’ 

The duality of the organization of dynastic Egypt has already 
been described: it pervaded most departments of the State. 
The king himself might have a dual personality :* he had a dual 


1 Sethe iii. 6, 137. 

2 It is remarkable that a ceremony similar to that of the erection of the 
dad-pillar takes place on the occasion of the Sun Dance of the Plains Indians 
of North America, a feature strangely reminiscent of the rites of Attis and 
other mystery heroes. The Sun Dance is performed in the spring. On the 
day before the real ceremony certain warriors go to the forest and get a pine 
tree, which they bring home in triumph and erect in the lodge made for the 
purpose. While bringing it home a mock fight takes place. It is entirely 
impossible to explain the fight in America, but it certainly is more in place in 
Egypt. 
® Sethe v.5. Ido not propose to enter here on a discussion of the problem 
of the hostility of Horus and Set in connexion with the hostility between the 
twins in other parts of the region. 

4 Breasted iv. 42. Perabsen of the Third Dynasty had the signs of Horus 
and Set (Weill). 


432 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


palace; his coronation ceremony was dual; his titles bore 
witness to the fact that he was the ruler of a dual kingdom ; his 
high officials were often two in number for each office, as in the 
case of the High Priests of Heliopolis and Memphis; his crown 
was dual’; in short, in every way it was made evident that the 
unification of Egypt under one crown had left an indelible 
impression on the whole organization of the State. 

The duality of the early state was the direct result of the 
unification of Upper and Lower Egypt under one throne. Thus 
the process of development of the typical community of the 
archaic civilization has advanced another step. 

In early dynastic times other cultural elements came into being ; 
the practice of mummification, together with its correlative, the 
making and animation of stone statues. The pre-dynastic 
Egyptians buried their dead in the hot dry sand, in consequence 
of which the bodies were preserved in the likeness of the living. 
** The burying of valuable objects with the corpse led to frequent 
rifling of the graves (by the deceased’s contemporaries), and this 
repeated desecration must have familiarized the people with the 
knowledge that in Egypt the bodies of the dead were often pre- 
served in a marvellously incorrupted state by the action of the 
forces of nature. The hot dry sand in which the early pre-dynastic 
graves were scooped out, often produced such rapid desiccation 
that the whole corpse was preserved indefinitely without change.” } 
But the customs of the later Egyptians tended to prevent this 
process of desiccation from taking place: ‘‘ Even in the earliest 
known pre-dynastic period the Proto-Egyptians were in the habit 
of loosely wrapping their dead in linen—for the art of the weaver 
goes back to that remote time in Egypt—and then protecting the 
wrapped corpse from contact with the soil by an additional 
wrapping of goat-skin or matting.’ This practice was developed 
and varied as the wealth of the Egyptians increased, until, finally, 
after the discovery of the use of copper, the dead were, in the case 
of the rich, placed in stone coffins. This had a noteworthy con- 
sequence: ‘* For in the course of time the early Egyptians came 
to’ learn, no doubt again from the discoveries of their tomb- 
robbers, that the fate of the corpse, after remaining for some time 
in a roomy rock-cut tomb or stone coffin, was vastly different 
from that which befell the body when simply buried in the hot, 
dry, desiccating sand.2,_ They evidently set themselves to counter- 
act these natural forces, and to preserve the dead in the likeness 
of the living.’’® “ From the outset the Egyptian embalmer was 
clearly inspired by two ideals: (a) to preserve the actual tissues 
of the body with a minimum disturbance of its superficial appear- 
ance; and (b) to preserve a likeness of the deceased as he was in 
life.’ 4 The earliest known attempt at mummification dates 
from the First Dynasty. In the Second Dynasty attempts the 


1 Elliot Smith ix. 9e.s.; xii. 32 es. 2 Id., xii. 33-5. 
Sida az, AObs ‘Jd., xxi TG 


EGYPT 433 


corpse was swathed in a large series of bandages which were 
moulded into shape to represent the form of the body. In the 
earliest instances, endeavours were made to mould the features 
so as to preserve the likeness of the deceased ; so that the mummy 
was evidently intended to be a portrait as well as the actual bodily 
remains of the dead. ‘A discovery made by Mr. J. E. Quibell 
in the course of his excavations at Sakkara suggests that, as an 
outcome of these practices, a new procedure may have been 
devised in the Pyramid Age, the making of a death-mask. For 
he discovered what may be the mask taken directly from the face 
of the Pharaoh Teta.” ! At the same time the practice originated 
of making a life-size portrait statue of the deceased which was 
left in the tomb along with the mummy. 

*““ All these varied experiments were inspired by the same 
desire, to preserve the likeness of the deceased. But when the 
sculptors attained their object, and created those marvellous 
life-like portraits, which must ever remain marvels of technical 
skill and artistic feeling, the old ideas that surged through the 
minds of the pre-dynastic Egyptians as they contemplated the 
desiccated remains of the dead, were strongly reinforced. The 
earlier people’s thoughts were turned more specifically than here- 
tofore to the contemplation of the nature of life and death, by 
seeing the bodies of their dead preserved whole and incorruptible ; 
and, if their actions can be regarded as an expression of their 
ideas, they began to wonder what was lacking in these physically 
complete bodies to prevent them from feeling and acting like 
living beings. Such must have been the results of their puzzled 
contemplation of the great problems of life and death. Otherwise 
the impulse to make more certain the preservation of the body of 
the deceased by means of a sculptured statue remains inexplic- 
able. But when the corpse had been rendered incorruptible and 
the deceased’s portrait had been fashioned with realistic perfection 
the old ideas would recur with renewed strength. The belief 
then took more definite shape that if the missing elements of 
vitality could be restored to the statue, it might become animated 
and the dead man would live again in his vitalized statue. This 
prompted a more intense and searching investigation of the 
problems concerning the nature of the elements of vitality of 
which the corpse was deprived at the time of death. Out of these 
inquiries in course of time a highly complex system of philosophy 
developed.”’ * 

The practices of mummification and of the making of portrait 
statues thus in all probability developed simultancously, in 
response to the desire to preserve both the body and also a like- 
ness of the deceased, and as the outcome of certain climatic 
and economic causes. 

Mummification and the making of portrait statues evidently 
played an important part in the development of ideas regarding 
1 Elliot Smith xx. 17. 2 Id., xx. 19. 

238 


434 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the soul. When the portrait statue had been made, it was a 
lifeless object until it had been animated. In order to animate 
it, certain ritual procedures were followed, such as the use of 
libations and the burning of incense, and the ceremony of the 
‘‘Opening of the Mouth.” + | 

Dr. A. M. Blackman has discovered the significance of libations 
and incense in Egyptian funerary ritual. His quotations from 
the Pyramid Texts show that the Egyptians considered that the 
deceased had lost his bodily fluids and odours, and that they must 
be restored to him. For example, ‘* These thy libations, Osiris; 
these thy libations, O Unas, which have come forth before thy 
son, which have come forth before Horus. I have come, I have 
brought to thee the Horus-eye that thy heart may be cool pos- 
sessing it. ... I offer thee the moisture that has issued from 
thee, that thy heart may not be still possessing it.” And again, 
‘““The offering of libations. Thy water belongs to thee, thy 
flood belongs to thee, the fluid that issued from the god, the 
exudation that issued from Osiris.”? Dr. Blackman quotes from 
a later ritual text, the Ritual of Amon, which states that ‘*‘ The 
grains of incense are the exudations of a divinity, the fluid which 
issued from his flesh, the god’s sweat descending to the ground.” 
Incense was used for purification, and also to communicate with 
the gods by means of the smoke that rises to the sky. Incense 
and libations were both intended to restore the bodily fluids to 
the deceased: ‘‘ The general meaning of these passages is quite 
clear. The corpse of the deceased is dry and shrivelled. To 
revivify it, the vital fluids that have exuded from it must be 
restored, for not until then will life return and the heart beat 
again. This, so the texts show us, was believed to be accom- 
plished by offering libations to the accompaniment of incanta- 
tions,”’ 2 

The animation of the portrait statue was not complete until 
the chief ceremony of all had been accomplished, that of “‘ The 
Opening of the Mouth.’? This was performed by touching with 
a metal chisel the mouth, ears, eyes, and nose of the statue, after 
which it was supposed to live. 

The act of making a portrait statue was regarded by the 
Egyptians as essentially creative. I quote an extract from 
Elliot Smith recording a note given him by Dr. Alan Gardiner: 
“That statues in Egypt were meant to be efficient animate sub- 
stitutes for the person or creatures they portrayed has not been 
sufficiently emphasized hitherto. Over every statue or image 
were performed the rites of ‘Opening of the Mouth ’—magical 
passes made with a kind of metal chisel in front of the mouth. 
Besides the up-re, ‘ mouth-opening,’ other words testify to the 
prevalence of the same idea; the word for ‘ to fashion a statue ’ 
(ms) is to all appearance identical with ms, ‘to give birth,’ and 
the term for the sculptor was sankh, ‘he who causes to live.’”’ 4 
_ 1 Elliot Smith 20. ? Blackmani. 69-70. # Elliot Smith xii. 42. 4 Jd., 42. 


EGYPT 435 


The importance attached by the Egyptians to the portrait 
statues, and the ideas that they possessed with regard to the 
process of animation of these statues can, as Elliot Smith has 
already insisted, well explain the origin of the world-wide idea 
of the creation of men from images. 

The practice of mummification was closely connected with 
Anubis, the jackal god of Upper Egypt. Osiris, the prototype 
of early Egyptian kings, was closely associated with the ritual, 
for all ceremonies of mummification centred round him. The 
dead king was identified with Osiris, and his son, the reigning 
king, was identified with Horus, the son of Osiris, who performed 
the ceremony of mummification of his father. The making of 
portrait statues was connected with Ptah, the god of Memphis, 
his high priest being called the Chief Artificer.1 At Memphis 
Ptah was regarded as the creator of the earth: he was also the 
*““ Lord of Life,’ who performed the ceremony of ‘ Opening the 
Mouth ”’ for images of the gods.” 

It is now possible to approach the study of the origin of the use 
of stone and of the different stone monuments. Elliot Smith 
has given a clear account of the development of the Egyptian 
tomb. He says :— 

‘‘ In the Pre-dynastic Age in Egypt the corpse was buried lying 
flexed upon the left side, with the head south ; it was protected 
from contact with the soil by linen, mats or skins, or in the larger 
tombs by a palisade of sticks or a wooden frame in the grave. 
The small graves were shallow pits of an oval or nearly round 
form; the larger graves were deeper rectangular pits, roofed with 
branches of trees. 

‘* At the end of the pre-dynastic period the practice was intro- 
duced of lining the grave with brickwork to prevent the sand 
falling in and also to support a roof of branches, logs with layers 
of bricks upon them, or, later, corbel vaults, which were certainly 
invented about this time in Egypt.”’ 

Elliot Smith goes on to say: ‘‘ When the Proto-Egyptian had 
learned efficiently to line the grave, either with wood or brick- 
work (with or without a definite coffin made of wood, pottery, or, 
later, of stone), the skins and matting previously employed to 
protect the corpse from direct contact with the soil were no longer 
considered necessary, though the loose linen wrapping was still 
retained. Quite early in the dynastic period the wooden coffin, 
the pottery coffin and the stone sarcophagus were invented to 
overcome the special difficulties that appealed to the Proto- 
Egyptians.” 

In the course of time the graves of the richer classes became 
more elaborate. Whole suites of rooms were made underground, 
and the grave became so deep that a flight of steps had to be 
made down into it. Also the pile of earth or stones on the top 
of the grave was enclosed by a wall of mud-brick, thus forming 

! 1H. Meyer iii. I. 2, § 247. 2 Erman 942, 947. 


4.36 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the mud-brick mastaba. On the side that faced the Nile a court- 
yard was made by means of a low wall which was floored with 
beaten mud. In this period the shape of the grave altered, and 
from being round, circular or elliptical, became definitely rectan- 
gular. Thus was evolved in Egypt the mastaba, which is des- 
cribed by Elliot Smith in the following terms!: it is “a type of 
tomb consisting of (a) a multi-chambered subterranean grave, 
to which a stairway gave access ; ‘(b) a brickwork superstructure 
in the shape of four walls enclosing a mass of earth or rubble ; 
and (c) an enclosure for offerings in front of (i.e. facing the river) 
the brick mastaba.”’ 4 

Then came a remarkable development. “As the material 
prosperity of Egypt rapidly increased and the arts and crafts 
began to feel the powerful impetus of the invention of metal tools, 
the process of aggrandisement of the tomb, which we have now 
followed through the first two dynasties, received a further 
tremendous stimulus. Bigger, deeper and grander tombs were 
being made. Before the end of the Second Dynasty the gradual 
deepening of the burial chamber involved the necessity of cutting 
into the solid rock, and when the workmen realized that it was 
possible to overcome this difficulty, a process which the invention 
of the copper chisel had now greatly facilitated, a great innovation 
was made in the tomb-constructor’s technique.” Thus came the 
practice of making rock-cut tombs, which, as Elliot Smith states, 
were on the same plan as the former underground grave. Stone 
was used to some extent in grave construction in the First and 
Second Dynasties, but not regularly till the Third Dynasty. 
‘“‘ At this time (early part of the Third Dynasty), although the 
subterranean burial chamber was often carved out of the solid 
rock, the superstructure was still constructed of mud-brick. 
But eventually the mud-brick mastaba was replaced by a 
stone building. At first the mud-brick model was more or 
less slavishly followed in the stonework, but the stairway rapidly 
atrophied and gave place to a simple shaft; and the many- 
chambered subterranean house soon dwindled into a small burial 
chamber.’ 2 

It is from the mastaba that Elliot Smith derives the dolmen 
and the stone circle. He says, ‘‘ If my arguments are valid we 
must regard the dolmen, not as the whole of the Egyptian mastaba- 
tomb but as its core, so to speak, greatly overgrown and stripped 
of all its unessential parts. The parts which are constantly 
represented in every dolmen represent the serdab (the chapel) 
and the burial chamber, often merged into one. The ‘ holed- 
stone’ found in dolmens so widely separated as India, the 
Caucasus and various parts of Western Europe is a striking witness 
to the reality of the serdab-conception in the dolmen; and the 
great masses of stone that go to the making of the dolmen represent 


1 Elliot Smith ix. 9, 12, 13, 14, 19. OGL, Tk. ane 


EGYPT 437 


not the visible parts of the mastaba, but the greatly overgrown 
lining slabs of the serdab.” ! 

The Third Dynasty opens with Zoser, one of the most remark- 
able kings of Egypt. His accession to the throne marks the rise 
of Memphis, which was his capital.2 In his reign appears the first 
pyramid. ‘‘ Until his reign the royal tombs were built of sun- 
dried bricks, only containing in one instance a granite floor, and 
in another a chamber of limestone.”’ Zoser built a brick mastaba 
in which the passage into the burial chamber was closed by five 
portcullis stones. ‘In all probability Zoser himself never used 
this tomb, built so near those of his ancestors ; but assisted by 
Imhotep (one of his advisers) undertook the construction of a 
mausoleum on a more ambitious plan than any of his ancestors 
had ever attempted. In the desert behind Memphis he laid out 
a tomb, very much like that at Bet Khallaf, but the mastaba was 
now built of stone; it was nearly 88 ft. high, some 227 ft. wide, 
and an uncertain amount longer from north to south. As his 
reign continued he enlarged it upon the ground, and increased 
its height also, building five rectangular additions superimposed 
upon its top, each smaller than its predecessor. The result was 
a terraced structure, 195 ft. high, in six stages, the whole roughly 
resembling a pyramid. It is often called the ‘ terraced pyramid,’ 
and does indeed constitute the transitional form between the flat- 
topped rectangular superstructure or mastaba first built by Zoser 
at Bet Khallaf and the pyramid of his successors, which immedi- 
ately followed. It is the first large structure of stone known in 
history.’’ 3 

The great Pyramid Age has now set in. The last king of the 
Third Dynasty, Snefru, made a pyramid at Medum, between 
Memphis and the Fayum. It began with a limestone mastaba 
with the tomb beneath it. The builder ‘ enlarged it seven times 
to a terraced structure,’’ and filled in the steps from top to bottom 
so as to produce the smooth slope of the later pyramids. From 
the time of Snefru onward the power of the state waxed, and this 
development went on until the beginning of the Fifth Dynasty, 
when signs of decay set in. The Fourth Dynasty, during which 
pyramid-building reached its zenith, was founded by Khufu, or 
Khnum-Khufu, a noble from the neighbourhood of Beni-Hasan.* 
‘“It has now become the chief project of the state to 
furnish a vast, impenetrable and indestructible resting-place for 
the body of the king, who concentrated upon this enterprise the 
greatest resources of wealth, skill and labour at his command. 
How strong and effective must have been the organization of 
Khufu’s government we appreciate in some measure when we 
learn that his pyramid contains some two million three hundred 


1 Td,, 42-3. His contentions are fully, borne out by Professor Seligman, 
who mentions (ii.) several localities in Egypt and the Sudan possessing 
dolmens. 

2 Breasted vy. 111 es. 3 Id., 113-14, 4 Id., v, 116, 


438 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


thousand blocks, each weighing on the average two and a half 
tons. The mere organization of labour involved in the quarrying, 
transportation and proper assembly of this vast mass of material 
is a task,which in itself must have severely taxed the public 
offices.” 1 It is significant that this tremendous work was accom- 
plished in a kingdom where the whole of the power was in the 
hands of a singleman. “ It will be evident that all the resources 
of the nation were completely at his disposal and under his control ; 
his eldest son, as was customary in the Fourth Dynasty, was 
vizier and chief judge; while the two ‘treasurers of the God ’ 
who were in charge of the work in the quarries were undoubtedly 
also sons of the king, as we have seen. The most powerful 
offices were kept within the circle of the royal house, and thus a 
great state was swayed at the monarch’s slightest wish, and for 
many years held to its chief task, the creation of his tomb.”’? 

At this point the king stood at the summit of human power, a 
condition of affairs the like of which the world has not since seen. 
It is a striking commentary on mankind that all this man could 
do with his power was to concentrate on the building of a tomb 
that should help him to immortality. The colossal folly of the 
building of pyramids is typical of man’s desire for his own pre- 
servation, and also of the ruthlessness with which he will encom- 
pass that desire if only he possess the power. 

Thus from the simple pre-dynastic grave there developed, 
along with the growing wealth of Egypt and the increasing power 
of the kingship, the pyramid, a monument of stone that is a 
witness of the futility of selfish human aspiration. The pyramid 
of stone was therefore the result of a long period of development ; 
the first example was in all probability a variation of the mastaba 
tomb, due to Zoser, who, by setting one mastaba on another, 
produced the embryonic pyramid. Further, the use of stone for 
building was not begun in Egypt until a comparatively late date, 
the Third Dynasty marking the real beginning of this practice. 
It is obvious, therefore, that the mere presence of stone in any 
place does not constitute any reason why it should be used for 
construction. On the contrary, the practice probably resulted 
from the making of tombs in the rock, which may have suggested 
the idea of cutting slabs of stone for other purposes. ‘The sequence 
of ideas provides a logical transition from brick to stone by way 
of the rock-cut tomb. 

The assembling of the archaic civilization has thus advanced : 
the use of stone, the building of pyramids, and possibly the building 
of dolmens and stone circles, have been added to the complex. 
Evidently the causes giving rise to the pyramid were entirely 
different from those that produced the dual kingship, the dual 
grouping of the people, and the hostilities between Set and Horus 
and Upper and Lower Egypt. The development of the stone 
pyramid and the stone mastaba depended upon the invention of 

1 Breasted v. 117, 2Id., v. 119. 
/ 


EGYPT 439 


the copper chisel, and the use of stone for construction probably 
arose as the result of the systematic cutting out of stone in the 
process of making rock-cut tombs. 

What were the real causes that led to the transformation from 
mastaba tombs to pyramids? According to Elliot Smith: 
“The pyramid itself may be regarded as a divergent development 
of the First Dynasty grave, in which the sloping passage on the 
northern aspect is retained (the great development of the temple 
on the river side prevented the retention of the stairway or incline 
of the Proto-Dynastic grave in the alternative—i.e. eastern side— 
as well as the many chambers in the subterranean grave). The 
pyramid itself is a monstrously overgrown but elaborately built 
cairn.”’ 1 

The pyramid differed in another respect from the mastaba ; 
in that the set of dwelling-rooms for the dead, that were included 
in the mastaba, were, in the case of the pyramid, removed to a 
temple outside the tomb itself. The pyramid thus was a funerary 
monument surrounding a small chamber containing the coffin. 

The point to be explained is how and why it came about that 
the kings of Egypt gave up the habit of building mastabas, and 
made pyramids instead, while the rest of the ruling class went on 
using mastaba tombs. Such divergences cannot simply be 
ascribed to chance. A new idea has a history that serves to 
account for its genesis. It may be true, as is asserted, that the 
act of placing one mastaba on another led to the idea of the 
pyramid, but it is not wise to rely on such methods of surmise ; 
for the pyramid is more than a modification of the mastaba ; it 
signifies the coming of new ideas into Egyptian religious thought. 
The texts in the mastaba tombs are concerned with the old gods 
of Egypt, such as Anubis, Osiris, Hathor, and Ptah. The texts 
found in the pyramids of the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties, on the 
other hand, are full of solar theology. What is the origin of the 
solar theology that seems to emerge with the building of pyramids ? 
The answer to this question reveals one of the most important 
events in the history of the world. The sun-cult became the 
state cult at the beginning of the Fifth Dynasty.? In this same 
dynasty the kings for the first time called themselves the Children 
of the Sun; and this marks the entrance of the actors who were 
destined to play so important a part in the drama of the archaic 
civilization. At this moment the archaic civilization assumes its 
typical shape, and henceforth, in Egypt, the Children of the Sun 
dominate the situation. 

Before the sun-cult became the state cult, it was established in 
Heliopolis, where, as I hope to show, it originated. But, although 
the sun-cult did not become prominent until the Fifth Dynasty, 
there are signs of the influence of the solar theology before the 
construction of pyramids. Some of the kings of the Second, 
Third and Fourth Dynasties called themselves by names com- 

+ Elliot Smith ix. 30-1. 2 Breasted ii, 


440 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


pounded of Re: Reneb was a king of the Second Dynasty ; the 
third and fifth kings of the Third Dynasty were Nebkere and 
Neferkere ; and in the Fourth Dynasty the second, third and 
fourth kings were Dedefre, Khafre and Menkure.! ‘The inclusion 
of Re in the royal name points unmistakably to. the influence of 
Heliopolis, the home of the sun-cult, which influence was destined 
ultimately to cause the transference of the ruling power from 
Memphis, the capital of the first four dynasties, to Heliopolis, the 
home of the Children of the Sun, who appeared at the beginning 
of the Fifth Dynasty. The early ruling families had been 
associated, by virtue of their relationship to Osiris, with the 
moon, and no signs exist of any connexion with the sun apart 
from the use of Re in the early dynasties. The problem, therefore, 
is to account for the elaboration of a sun-cult at Heliopolis. 
Men do not naturally elaborate sun-cults; rather do they 
ignore them, as was seen throughout the region. 

One reason for the unique position of Heliopolis is to be found, 
I am convinced, in the fact that it is the home of the Sothic or 
solar calendar. ‘“‘The most important cultural achievement 
which dates from the old Lower Egyptian kingdom, which at the 
same time confirms our previous results and fixes them chrono- 
logically, is the calendar. That the Egyptians originally reckoned 
time in months varying from twenty-nine to thirty days cannot 
be doubted, the influence of which has been preserved in the 
celebration of lunar festivals and in the word for month, ebot, 
for a sub-division of the year. For an agricultural people the 
succession of the seasons was a matter of importance. In the 
case of the Egyptians it was of supreme importance that the 
date of the Nile rising should be known, for the whole of their 
agricultural operations depended upon this event. Apparently 
the difficulties and confusions attending the use of the lunar 
calendar led some one in Egypt to invent a calendar based on the 
date of the rising of Sirius. Thus came the great stride forward, 
that of abandoning the consideration of the moon altogether 
with regard to the calendar, and of proceeding to a pure solar 
year, or perhaps one ought to say more correctly, to an agricultural 
year of uniform length.’’? 


1 Appended is a list of the chief kings of the Third to Sixth Dynasties for 
the convenience of the reader :— 


Third. Fourth. Fifth. Sixth. 
Zoser I Khufu Userkaf Teti 
Zoser II Dedefre Sahure Userkere 

(Teti I) Khafre Neferirkere Pepi I 
Nebkere Menkure Shepseskere Mernere I 
Sezes Shepseskaf Khaneferre or Isi Pepi II 
Neferkere Nuserre Mernere II 
Hu Menkuhor 
Cha-ba Dedkere-Isesi 
Ka-hor Unis 
Sneferu 


-2 K. Meyer iii. 98-9. 


EGYPT : 441 


This great step forward was taken at Heliopolis; and in time 
the use of the new form of calendar was adopted throughout 
Egypt. “* Of course we must not assume that the new calendar 
was accepted immediately throughout the whole country, but it 
will have been first of all introduced in one principality and thence, 
partly owing to political events and partly owing to its eminent 
advantages, it will have spread throughout the whole of Egypt. 
But there is one fact of particular importance which also adds 
considerably to our historical knowledge, and that is the date of 
the rising of (Sirius) on the 19th of July, which shows that the 
home of the calendar is to be sought in Lower Egypt in the 
territory of Heliopolis and Memphis. The monuments of the 
most ancient period which exist in such abundance in Upper 
Egypt fail us completely as regards these territories, up to the 
present, at least, in spite of the great importance of Heliopolis 
and of the Delta. By the calendar, however, Lower Egypt set 
up a monument which, as even we can see, makes it, even in early 
times, equal, even superior, to the centres of culture of Upper 
Egypt at Hieraconpolis and Abydos.”’ 4 

The height of the Nile is determined by Nilometers. Such 
monuments are mentioned in the First Dynasty. The oldest 
Nilometer was at Rodah, the old capital of the Heliopolitan nome ; 
and thence were derived the other Nilometers of Egypt.2. Thus 
for yet another reason it is probable that the calendar was invented 
at Heliopolis. 

If the priests of Heliopolis were the inventors of the calendar 
based on Sirius, if also they were the inventors of the Nilometer, 
they would evidently stand high in Egypt. The invention of a 
calendar of such a kind is a tremendous achievement, and the 
Heliopolitans were entitled to their share of.influence in Egyptian 
affairs, since they gave to mankind one of its greatest possessions. 

The power of the solar ideas that manifested itself in the early 
dynasties by the inclusion of Re in royal names, may rest on a 
still broader basis. As was pointed out at the end of Chapter 
XV, the custom of offering a subject in place of the king himself 
appears to be connected with Re, the sun-god, for it is in the tale 
of the Destruction of Mankind that this incident first appears. 
If the Heliopolitans had thought out a way for the king to escape 
his fate, their power would be immensely strengthened, and I 
suggest that they were responsible for this great mental feat. 

What were the consequences of the introduction of the new 
form of calendar? The priests of Heliopolis must constantly 
have been engaged in making astronomical observations in con- 
nexion with it; corrections have to be made, and predictions 
verified. The practical identity of the Sothic and the Solar year 
must have been observed by the Heliopolitans at an early date ; 
and it is possible that this led these men to make observations 
with regard to the sun. This would explain the presence of 

1 KE. Meyer i. 41. 2 Borchardt i. 41. 


442 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


obelisks at Heliopolis, the city of the sun-cult. The obelisk, 
casting as it does a sharp shadow, is an ideal instrument for 
observing the altitude of the sun, and this in all probability was 
the end for which it was designed.! This preoccupation with the 
observations of the sun’s movements I take to be one of the prime 
causes of the elaboration of the sun-cult by the priests of Heliopolis. 
Probably another important factor in the situation was the 
existence of a definite moon-cult in connexion with the royal 
family ; for Hathor, Osiris and Isis were definitely connected 
with the moon. Indeed the most common feature of mother 
goddesses was their connexion with the moon. I shall have more 
to say later on that point : at the present it is enough to note that 
the existence of ideas connected with the moon may have led the 
Heliopolitan priests towards the elaboration of a sun-cult. The 
moon, the central element of the former calendar, was closely 
connected with deities ; it is significant, therefore, that the sun 
should become the centre of a new theological system. It is fair 
to argue that the preoccupation with the calendar gave the 
direction to the new ideas, while the existence of a lunar theology 
helped to give them their expression. 

The sun-god born of Heliopolitan speculation was closely 
connected with the irrigating activities of Egypt. Re himself 
was born of the primeval ocean, Nun, or from an egg made by 
Ptah or Khnum, that came out of the primeval ocean. Moreover, 
the birthday of Re was the day of the Nile flood, the New Year’s 
Day of the Egyptian calendar.? Re therefore is a product of 
composition, for he is expressed in terms of ideas and practices 
already in existence in Egypt. Khnum and Ptah were old gods ; 
the primeval ocean was evidently the Nile flood; and the fact 
that the birthday of Re was the New Year’s Day suggests that 
he was invented after the inauguration of the new calendar. 

It can easily be explained why, although the influence of the 
Heliopolitans was at work behind the scene in royal circles, the 
solar cult was not the state cult before the Fifth Dynasty. The 
evidence gathered from other parts of the region shows that the 
chief criterion of the existence of the sun-cult in any community 
is the existence of the Children of the Sun. In Egypt, in the days 
before the Fifth Dynasty, the sun-god was evidently an abstrac- 
tion, a being with no real connexion with the earth. If, as seems 
certain, cults of deities are ancestor cults, it follows that such a 
deity could not receive a cult until he became the ancestor of kings. 

This was the situation with which the Heliopolitan priests were 
faced. Their power was growing; their ideas had been accepted 
by the kings ; but the relationship between the king and Re, the 
sun-god, would have to be made definite before any real advance 
was possible. Re was no natural father of a king, as was Osiris, 


1 Breasted claims that the pyramid was an imitation of the top stone of the 
obelisk, which seems probable. 


2 EK, Meyer iii. I. 2 § 197; ii. 14, 


ail O_o, CFL 


EGYPT 443 


so he had to be made into a father. Obviously the ordinary 
method was impossible ; but the priests of Heliopolis were equal 
to the occasion, for they elaborated a fiction that places them on 
a pinnacle among mankind : they made Re into the actual father 
of the king. 

The story runs that Khufu, the first king of the Fourth Dynasty, 
‘‘ was enjoying an idle hour with his sons, while they narrated 
wonders wrought by the great wise men of old. When thereupon 
Prince Harzozef told the king that there still lived a magician able 
to do marvels of the same kind, the Pharaoh sent the prince to 
fetch the wiseman. The latter, after he had offered some examples 
of his remarkable powers, reluctantly told the king, in response to 
questions, that the three children soon to be born of the wife of a 
certain priest of Re were begotten of Re himself, and that they 
should all become kings of Egypt. . . . In this folk-tale we have 
what is now the state fiction; every Pharaoh is the bodily son 
of the sun-god, a belief which was thereafter maintained through- 
out the history of Egypt.’ 1 The title first appears in the case of 
the eighth king of the Fifth Dynasty, which is the first known 
mention of the Children of the Sun,’ 

The claim to physical fatherhood on the part of the sun-god 
will bear examination, for it serves to show how the idea was 
probably built up by the Heliopolitan priests. 

The first complete text dealing with the act of birth of a new 
sovereign is that concerning Hatshepset, the sister or aunt, and 
probably wife, of Thutmose III of the Highteenth Dynasty.® 
Her father was, according to the inscriptions, Amon-Re, the god 
of Thebes. 

In the Texts it is said that the god himself takes on the form 
of the king and visits the queen in her apartments. He has an 
interview with Thoth, and announces his intention of becoming 
the father of Hatshepset. The first part of the text implies that 
he is the father of the queen by the ordinary sexual act. Then, 
it is said, Amon-Re calls in the aid of Khnum. The text runs: 


INSTRUCTIONS OF AMON 


Utterance of Amon, presider over Karnak : ‘ Go, to make her, 
together with her ka, from these limbs which are in me; go, to 
fashion her better than all gods ; (shape for me) this my daughter, 
whom I have begotten. I have given to her all life and satisfac- 
tion, all stability, all joy of heart from me, all offerings, and all 
bread, like Re, for ever.” 


Reply oF Kunum 
“‘] will form this (thy) daughter (Makare) (Hatshepset), life, 
prosperity and health; offerings . . . love for all good things. 
Her form shall be more exalted than the gods, in her great dignity 
of king of Upper and Lower Egypt. 
1 Breasted v. 123. #? Cf. Petrie i. I. 69 08. *% Breasted ii. II. 87 es. 


444, THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


V. Kunum Fasnions THE CHILD 
Scene 


Khnum is seated before a potter’s wheel, upon which he is 
fashioning two male children, the first being Hatshepset, and the 
second her ka. The frog-headed goddess Heket, kneeling, on the 
right, extends the symbol of life to the two children. 


INSCRIPTION 


Khnum repeats the instructions he has received from Amon, 
putting them down in the first person. 

Utterance of Khnum, the potter, lord of Hirur: “I have 
come to thee (fem.), to fashion thee better than all gods. I have 
given to thee (fem.) all life and satisfaction, all stability, all joy 
of heart with me; I have given to thee (fem.) all health, all 
lands ; I have given to thee (fem.) all offerings, all food; I have 
given to thee (fem.) to appear upon the throne of Horus like Re, 
for ever ; I have given to thee (fem.) to be before the Kas of all 
the living, while thou (fem.) shinest as king of Upper and Lower ~ 
Egypt, of South and North, according as thy (fem.) father who 
loves thee (fem.) has commanded.”’ 


The interest of this account lies, of course, in the part played 
by Khnum. He was the potter god, and obviously in the 
Kighteenth Dynasty was credited with powers of creating human 
beings on his potter’s wheel. It would be important to discover 
when Khnum was first credited with these powers. Inthe Westcar 
Papyrus it is said that Khnum gives health to a child already 
born, and no mention is made of the manufacture of the embryo. 
Apparently, in such a case, the god Re is the actual father of the 
child by his own powers. If so, the conception of Khnum as a 
creator must have been introduced into the story at a later date. 

It would be interesting to determine how Khnum came to be 
the fashioner of the child in its mother. The idea seems to be 
old; for it can hardly be thought that, once the notion had arisen 
of Re as a creator by virtue of his own power, an idea which 
deputes the power to another could have originated. It is easier 
to think that the Heliopolitans adopted wholesale a view already 
existing, or else that these men gave a peculiar twist to current 
thought and induced the belief that Khnum could actually make 
a child. 

Khnum belongs to an early and obscure period of human 
thought on the subject of creation. He corresponds to Enki of 
Eridu., Both were ram-headed, and both controlled the waters 
of irrigation; both were creators; Enki made out of potter’s 
earth the chief gods of the Sumerian guilds of carpenters, jewellers 

1 I owe this information to Prof. Peet. 


* The bearing of this question on the problem of the origin of totemism is 
obvious, 


‘ EGYPT MAS 


and so forth; he also created towns and ruled over the first race 
of men.! It is important to note that the first men created by 
Enki were animated by means of blood mixed with clay. The 
blood was that of members of the earlier race that he had destroyed 
by the flood. If the evidence with regard to Enki be taken as 
witness to the manner of early thought, it seems that the idea of 
creation by the potter’s wheel is not the first. It may thus be 
that the notion of creation in this later way was the result of the 
thought of the Heliopolitans. It is natural for them to use the 
idea of Khnum as a creator for the son of Re, since Khnum made 
the egg out of which Re himself emerged. 

Probably the notion that Khnum made the child was an early 
Egyptian belief that became incorporated in the doctrine of 
theogamy as put forward by the MHeliopolitan priesthood. 
Whether the Heliopolitans originated this thought, or whether 
they used, in later accounts, ideas that were current in Egypt, 
seems uncertain. Whatever be the upshot, the claim to the 
divine birth of the king was a stroke of genius. It evidently was 
the means whereby the Heliopolitan priests managed to gain 
power. They had solved the great problem that lay before them. 
They had established a connexion between the king and the sun- 
god, which was absolutely essential if the sun-cult was to become 
the state religion of Egypt. Once direct filiation was established 
the rest was easy. . 

A fraternity that elaborated the calendar of Egypt was capable 
of this piece of reasoning, and scored thereby one of the greatest 
triumphs of history ; these Heliopolitans provided ruling families 
with a trump card that served them for thousands of years. , The 
doctrine of theogamy is the lynch-pin of the group of ideas 
centring round the early kingship; by means of it kings reached 
a far greater height than they previously had attained, and all 
over the world the Children of the Sun have been accepted as 
divine kings, far removed from ordinary mortals, by virtue of 
their tremendous claim to divine parentage. 

The story of the rise of the power of the Heliopolitan priesthood 
suggests. an explanation of the origin of ruling classes. Elliot 
Smith was the first to call attention to the close connexion 
between the earliest kings and irrigation: “‘ One of the earliest 
pictures of an Egyptian king represents him using the hoe to 
inaugurate the making of an irrigation-canal. This was the 
typical act of benevolence on the part of a wise ruler. It is not 
unlikely that the earliest organization of a community, under a 
definite leader, may have been due to the need for some system- 
atized control of irrigation. In any case the earliest rulers of 
Egypt and Sumer were essentially the controllers and regulators 
of the water supply and as such the givers of fertility and pros- 
perity.” Again: ‘It is no mere coincidence that the ‘god’ 
should have been a dead king, Osiris, nor that he controlled the 

1 Langdon v. 29, 58, 60. 


446 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


waters of irrigation and was especially interested in agriculture.” * 
All the evidence goes to support the contention of Elliot Smith, 
that the earliest kings and gods were intimately associated with 
irrigation. 

_ What was the manner of association between the ruling family 
of Egypt and the irrigation system? According to Cherry the 
Egyptians began their irrigation by digging small channels to 
help the water to reach fresh places. In course of time this 
system became more complicated, and thus needed organization ; 
but it is hard to see how any ruling family could have developed 
on such lines. The evidence with regard to village and clan 
councils shows that the existence of a ruling group is not at all 
necessary for the proper maintenance of an irrigation system. 
The Bontoc of Luzon in the Philippines, the Mundas of Chota 
Nagpur, and many other irrigating peoples of the present day, 
maintain vast and complicated systems of terraced irrigation 
solely by means of village councils, which decide the allotment of 
water to each field. Indeed, the necessity for the maintenance 
of irrigation systems may have led to the foundation of village 
councils ; but it is certainly hard, if not impossible, to conceive 
how the continuously developing process of elaboration of irri- 
gation systems in Egypt could have led one group to have raised 
itself above the others, and to have maintained that position 
without challenge for so many centuries. The explanation surely 
cannot lie in that direction. 

The rise to power of the Heliopolitan kings suggests the means 
whereby the first kings of Egypt gained their position. The 
first step taken by the Heliopolitan priests towards their ultimate 
goal was the elaboration of the Sothic Calendar, and with that 
source of power they were ultimately able to dominate Egypt. 
When the ruling power that they dispossessed is considered, it 
is evident that this ruling group may have owed its position to a 
similar process, namely the invention of the lunar calendar. The 
early kings, and the great mother goddess Hathor, were closely 
connected with the moon. If it be assumed that some genius 
began to calculate, by means of the phases of the moon, the date 
of the next flood time, then the rise to power of a ruling group is 
explained. This man would be in possession of knowledge of 
inestimable value for the community as a whole, which would 
place him on a pedestal. The benefits that he and his descendants 
would confer on the community would be of the same order as 
those that gave Heliopolis its power ; namely, the means of pre- 
dicting the seed time. 

How the connexion between the ruling group and the great 
mother goddess and the moon came into existence does not enter 
into this question. It may be that the great mother had become 
connected with the moon, for reasons stated by Elliot Smith ; 
or it may be that the institution of the lunar calendar gave the 

1 Elliot Smith xx. 29-30. Cf. Boylan 23, n. 4. 


EGYPT 447 


ideas that led to the elaboration of the lunar theology. But what 
seems to have given the ruling family its original power was 
the elaboration of the lunar calendar, and the retention by that 
group of the necessary knowledge that enabled them to predict 
the date of the flood. Along such lines as these the origin and 
persistence of ruling groups is easy to understand.} 

The Heliopolitans, by their accession to power in the Fifth 
Dynasty, brought about a bisection in the ruling power that must 
be explained. The older ruling group was, in the beginning, 
connected with the moon, while the Heliopolitans were connected 
with the sun. All the evidence, moreover, points to the latter 
as the inventors of the idea of a world in the sky. Re himself, 
when old, was lifted up on the back of the Great Cow in the form 
of the Mother Goddess, Nut, and there he made the sky-world 
for the gods. A remarkable passage in the Pyramid Texts suggests 
that the Heliopolitans themselves in the Sixth Dynasty were well 
aware that the sky-world was entirely of their invention, for ‘they 
speak of “* one of the great bodies of gods formerly born at Helio- 
polis, who were subject to no king, who were ruled by no prince 

. when neither the sky nor the earth yet existed.”’?. Although 
this text states that the earth did not exist, and thus tends to 
diminish the value of the statement about the sky; yet it does 
seem that the Heliopolitans recognized a time when the sky-world 
itself did not exist, when the gods lived only at Heliopolis. This 
is entirely in harmony with the native traditions recorded in ‘‘ The 
Megalithic Culture of Indonesia,”’ to the effect that in a bygone 
time the sky-world had not yet come into existence. The 
elaboration of the cult associated with the sky at Heliopolis can 
constitute a fixed point in human history from which to date all 
ideas concerning the sky-world. All through the region it is 
evident that ideas concerning the sky have not persisted ; they 
have tended to disappear together with the Children of the Sun. 
It is entirely fitting that these ideas should have been elaborated 
in the place where the Children of the Sun originated. 

An examination of the literature and the monuments suggests 
that the land of the dead was formerly not in the sky. “It is 
not improbable that the history of the early sequence of these 


1 This important topic requires investigation throughout the region. 
It would seem that the knowledge of the determination of the time for plant- 
ing has been preserved by the ruling groups. For instance, Kruyt, in his 
MSS. on Sumba states that throughout the island one man looks after the 
regulation of agriculture. In Central and East Sumba this is always the 
ratce, or priest. In the west part of the island the office seems to be some- 
times held by men other than the ratce. ‘‘ When I asked what showed that 
the time was come for the beginning of operations, the answer usually was : 
We watch for the first rains.’’ It is only the ratce who has the knowledge 
of the movements of the stars, and he keeps it to himself. This knowledge 
certainly constitutes a source of strength to this class. A wide survey of the 
practices connected with the determination of the date for the beginning of 
agriculture is necessary in order to establish the truth of my contention. 

2 Moret i. 7, n. I. 3 Perry vii. 167 e.s. 


448 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


beliefs was thus: we should begin with a primitive belief in a 
subterranean kingdom of the dead which claimed all men. As 
an exclusive privilege of kings at first, and then of the great and 
noble, the glorious celestial hereafter . . . finally emerged as a 
solar kingdom of the dead.’’ + Again, according to Moret, in the 
Memphis period (Third Dynasty onwards) it was certainly believed 
that the soul lived in the tomb or did not go outside its precincts.? 
Breasted says: “ The early belief that the dead live in or at the 
tomb, which must therefore be equipped to furnish his necessities 
in the hereafter, was one from which the Egyptian never escaped 
entirely, not even at the present day. . . . The common people 
doubtless still thought of their dead either as dwelling in the tomb 
or at best as inhabiting the gloomy realm of the west, the sub- 
terranean kingdom ruled over by the old mortuary gods eventually 
led by Osiris. But for the great of the earth, the king and 
his nobles at least, a happier destiny had now dawned. They 
might dwell at will with the sun-god in his glorious celestial 
kingdom. In the royal tomb we henceforth discern the emer- 
gence of this solar hereafter.’ 

The Pyramid Texts show clearly the bisection of the community 
produced by the elaboration of the solar theology and the accession 
to power of the Childrén of the Sun. They contain no mention 
of the old land of the dead. The king goes to the sky: “ He has 
freed King Teti from Kherti, he has not given him over to Osiris.” 
Horus ‘“ puts not this Pepi over the dead, he puts him among the 
gods, he being divine.” * In these texts Osiris and his cycle of 
deities are even said to be hostile, ceremonies being performed 
to keep them from the pyramid tomb of the king. 

Even when pyramid-building was in full swing, the nobles 
continued to be buried in mastaba tombs, which contain no trace 
whatever of a solar cult. This means that the old ideas connected 
with Osiris still persisted among the nobles, although the royal 
family had introduced the solar theology. The land of the dead 
associated with the older ruling groups was either underground 
or else on the horizon : in later times it certainly was underground. 
Thus the ruling group possessed two entirely different theologies, 
and had distinct homes after death. The king went to the sky, 
where he was separated from his subjects: the nobles went to 
the land of the dead, where they would find all their subjects, to 
the old world ruled over by Osiris, who had ruled over the dead 
from time immemorial. Thus was produced, in Egypt, by the 
coming to power of the Heliopolitan family, the bisection of the 
community that was noted from one end of the region to the 
other. 

To turn now to another problem connected with the 
assembling of the archaic civilization.® Although the evidence 

1 Breasted iv. 141. 2 Moret iv. 85. 


® Breasted iv. 51, 69. 4 Id., iv. 99, 1438. 
° The data on which the following discussion of the Viziers of the Pyramid 


EGYPT 449 


regarding the political events of the days following the rise to 
power of the Children of the Sun is scanty, yet enough is known 
to show that it caused a dislocation of the state machinery, and 
led finally to internal convulsions from which Egypt never really 
recovered. As the result of the accession to power of the Helio- 
politans, the ruling function, formerly in the hands of the family 
of the king, was divided: the Heliopolitan family supplied the 
sacred king, who theoretically was the head of the State, and the 
administrative power was in the hands of other families. In 
order to understand the formation of the archaic civilization it 
is necessary to determine as closely as: possible the conditions 
under which this change took place. 

In the Fourth Dynasty the ruling power was fixed at Memphis. 
The king was supreme, and was assisted in the government by 
his heir, who acted as vizier, and controlled for his father the 
administration of the State. ‘The century and a half during 
which the Fourth Dynasty maintained its power was a period of 
unprecedented splendour in the history of the Nile valley people, 
and, as we have seen, the monuments of that time were on a scale 
of grandeur which was never later eclipsed.””1 The royal family 
held all power in their hands. They even controlled Heliopolis ; 
for some of the high priests of Heliopolis in this dynasty are known 
by name: Merib, sonof Khufu ;? Kanefer, son of Sneferu ; ? and 
Rehotep, who was the son of a king. These men were very 
closely connected with the royal power, for they bore the title 
of ‘‘ king’s son of his body.’”” They married women called ‘ royal 
acquaintances,’’ who were thus probably of the royal family, and 
their children were also “‘royal acquaintances.’’ The viziers 
were also in this dynasty ‘‘ king’s sons,”’ married ‘‘ royal acquaint- 
ances,’ and had children called “royal acquaintances.” The 
vizier and the high priest of Heliopolis were members of the royal 
family : Kanefer held both offices. One high priest. of Memphis 
of this dynasty is known, Renefer, of the reign of Sneferu or 
Khufu.® His name suggests Heliopolitan influence. 

It seems impossible at present to understand the nature of the 
events that established the sun-cult as the state religion of Egypt. 
The royal family of the Fourth Dynasty evidently had complete 
control over the State, and supplied the high priest of Heliopolis. 
The actual transition may have come about because of an intrigue 
among the priests attached to Heliopolis, the result of which was 
the overthrow of the royal high priest. The story of theogamy 


Age is based have been supplied by Miss W. M. Crompton, Keeper of Egyptian 
Antiquities of the Manchester Museum, to whom I express my obligations. 
The bulk of the facts have been derived from original sources, so are probably 
free from serious error. Although Miss Crompton has provided the material, 
the conclusions are mine, and I accept full responsibility for them. See also 
Weil and Murray v. 

1 Breasted v. 121. 2 Lepsius JI. 18-22. 

3 Hieroglyphic Texts I. Pl. 4. 4 Petrie v.: 37. 

5 Petrie v.: Mariette i. 125. 


29 


450 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


may have supplied the means whereby the conspirators incited 
the others to action. This, however, is a dark place in Egyptian 
history, and it seems too much to hope that it will ever be illumin- 
ated. 

It is fairly obvious that some of the princes and high officials of 
the dispossessed dynasty reconciled themselves to the change. 
Thus Ptahshepses, brought up with the children of King Menkure, 
and married to the oldest daughter of King Shepseskaf, last king 
of the Fourth Dynasty, received, or apparently continued to hold, 
during the new regime, the High Priesthood of Memphis, and 
lived to add to his titles that of priest of the solar temple of 
Neuserre, seventh king of the Fifth Dynasty. This man, husband 
of the eldest daughter of a king, might have claimed the throne. 
Again Sekhemkere, son of a Fourth Dynasty king, and a vizier, 
is recorded in his tomb to have been ‘‘ worthy before” Kings 
KXhafre and succeeding kings up to Sahure, second king of the 
Fifth Dynasty.1 Whether or no Prince Sekhemkere acted as 
vizier after the deposition of the royal house to which he belonged, 
it is certain that with the succeeding viziers comes a complete 
change in the situation. They are no longer king’s sons, and 


they usually bear names compounded with Ptah, as is shown by 
the List :—- 


VIZIERS OF THE FIFTH DYNASTY 


Vizier. Chief Titles. Wife’s Titles. Reign. 
Sekhemkere? . . King’seldestson Royal acquaintance Khafre to 
Sahure 
Ptahhetep yi." 4. Not royal... Nob nown. 4 Ju ? ny 
Ptahhetepdesher } RG Oe ELE aie sy ~f ms “Tao ? 
Ptahhetep 
Ptahhetepdesher®. — oA oy “dys ? 
Ptahwesh®. . . Notroyal, Ha. se a . . Neferirkere 
Pahniwka’ mS Hl B | io” sn. 8 NO tithes’ 60°. 07. o Nereripkera, or 
later 
Ptahshepses® . , oe » 9 + King’s daughter . Neuserre 
Minnefer® ... ., oo Not known ‘e 
Ptahhetep?® . . Notroyal . . yi mi . «. Dedkere-Isesi 
Ikhethetep 11. . Notroyal, Ha. :; a as ME a yy 


Senezemib Inti1*. LErpa,Ha . . Royal acquaintance Py a 


1 Mariette C. 1; H. 14. 

2 Lepsius II. 41-2. 

3 Id., 11. 101-4. Weil places this and the next three viziers after Minnefer, 
in order to bring together all those of the same name, but Davies (i. II. 21) 
assigns some to the earlier date. 

4 Mariette i. C. 6, 7: Murray vi. I. Pl. 6 (Double Tomb). 


5 Mariette i. 434. 6 Sethe vii. I. 40-5: Mariette i. D. 38. 
* Lepsius IT. 45-8. Two of his sons have names compounded with Ptah. 
8 Borchardt ii. 31, 127-8, 144-5. 9 Id., 74. 


10 Mariette i. D. 62: Murray vi. I. 8-18. 
11 Mariette i. D. 64: Davies i. 21. 
12 Lepsius II. 76-8: Mariette i. I. 2. 


EGYPT 451 


Vizier. Chief Titles. Wife's Titles. Reign. 
Senezemib Mehi! Erpa,Ha . . King’s Daughter . Unas 
Tepemankh ?”*!) 9. Ha’) 72) s No titles’ 2. 4" Unas, ‘or later 
Henku*® . . . Erpa,Ha . . Royal acquaintance ? 
RehemIsi* . . Ar SHY s " A ? 


Probably the viziers with Ptah names belonged to a Memphite 
family, for Ptah was god of Memphis. Ptahshepses was son-in- 
law to King Neuserre, but the wives of the others are not mentioned. 
Such names continue until the time of the eighth king of the 
dynasty, Dedkere-Isesi, the first king known to have borne the 
title of ‘‘ Son of the Sun,”’® but the exception of Ptahshepses, who 
married a king’s daughter, prevents the formulation of any 
generalization as to the absence of evidence of marriage relation- 
ships with the royal family. Two viziers late in the dynasty, 
both named Senezemib, father and son, married—in one case, a 
‘‘ royal acquaintance,’ and, in the other, a “ king’s daughter.” 
This suggests a closer connexion between the vizier of the royal 
family than in the case of most of the early viziers of the period. 

During this dynasty the high priests of Heliopolis seem to have 
been unimportant, for they are unknown. That is natural, for 
the king himself theoretically filled the office. Throughout the 
dynasty one of the high priests of Memphis, a position held 
concurrently by two men, generally bore the name of Ptahshepses : 
the first was the husband of the eldest daughter of Shepseskaf, 
the last king of the Fourth Dynasty, and probably held the office 
in that reign. The high priest of Memphis during the reigns of 
Unas, the last king of the Fifth Dynasty and Teti of the Sixth 
Dynasty, married a “royal acquaintance.”® Thus the high 
priests of Memphis, although apparently Memphite, since they 
bear the name of Ptah, are closely connected by marriage with 
the royal family. 

The events of this dynasty are obscure. The sun-cult has 
become the state religion, but not until the reign of Dedkere- 
Isesi is the king known on good evidence to have called himself 
Son of the Sun.’ Before this king’s reign the viziers were pre- 
sumably Memphites, as, apparently, also were the high priests of 
Memphis throughout the dynasty. Thus it seems that the ruling 
power was divided between families of Heliopolis and of Memphis : 


1 Lepsius II. 73-75: Mariette I. 2. 

2 Mariette i. H. 11 (D. 10a). 3 Davies ii. IT. Pll. 22-26. 

4 Daviesii. Pll. xvii-xxi. This and the following may belong to the time 
of King Isi, predecessor of Neuserre, or they may be placed at the end of the 
Sixth Dynasty. 

5 In this reign the two titles of ‘‘ Governor of the South ”’ and ‘‘ Governor 
of the King’s Palace’ first appear (Sethe ii. 48). Do they correspond to 
the Bruderhauptling of Samoa, or the Tomailaring of South Celebes ? (see pp. 
286, 301). 

SaFedcate iC. 1,9; H.14; E. 1,2: Murray vi. L. P. 1, 26, 28, 31. 

7 Burchardt and Pieper 12-14. The evidence for the earlier use of the 
title depends only on two scarabs. 


452 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


the Heliopolitan family provided the sacred king; and certain 
families of Memphis acted as viziers and as high priests of Memphis. 

It is important to note that the viziers of the early part of the 
Fifth Dynasty often lack the hereditary title of erpa, and their 
wives are seldom mentioned. Sekhemkere, the first vizier, a 
king’s “ eldest ’’ son, who married a “ royal acquaintance,” is an 
apparent exception, but he carried on from the Fourth Dynasty. 
The first known high priest of Memphis likewise married a princess, 
but the others apparently had no high titles. 

The case of the early viziers of the Fifth Dynasty is therefore 
remarkable. Presumably the Heliopolitan family, on gaining 
power, chose a family of Memphis to act in that capacity. They 
probably had to compromise with the former administration, and 
were forced to agree to a division of power. It is hard to under- 
stand the apparent lack of titles among the early viziers of this 
dynasty. But, whatever were the arrangements, it is clear that 
they did not persist ; for the seventh king, Neuserre, had a vizier 
who married into the royal family. 

The situation changed at the end of the Fifth Dynasty. The 
kings began to call themselves Son of the Sun. Their viziers 
were of noble blood, having the erpa and ha titles, and this form 
of designation persisted throughout the Sixth Dynasty.! The 
following table shows the viziers of the Sixth Dynasty :— 


VIZIERS OF THE SIXTH DYNASTY 


Vizier. Chief Titles. Wife’s Titles. Reign. 
Neferseshemseshet ? King’sson . Notknown. . . Last king of V, 
or early VI 
Neferseshemre 3. . Erpa,Ha. . Notitles . . .  Teti, or later 
Gemnikai# . . . » 99. + » King’s daughter ©. 4) S 
BaP OO. OC ie. Wore Netiatown) JCC OE? 
Zau ® Cee ALIL Wth dirpaitals Ve — Pepi II 
MER ciesitie es ouE MiGs » »» « «+ King’s daughter +¥.\' (Pepilt 
Teti Meri® . . . King’sson . Royal acquaintance Pepi II, or later 
TAR APIA 1 LN — Not known . ob sePeg ale 
Pepynekht 1°... Erpa, Ha... 3 5 [OLB 2 3 
TEMA IE VP MRLY MRL: oh EE z o SRA fa" if 
Thenty i431 (tii 6 od FF: Qe ETA, > 18 of) U0 Possibly much 
earlier 


1 Sethe says that, from the time of Senezemib, the viziership was no longer 
hereditary, but was given at choice. I find it hard to understand the reason 
for this statement: the two Senezemib were father and son; as were Meri 
and Teti Meri; and Idi was probably brother to Zau. 

2 Mariette i. E. 11. 3 Capart ii. II. Pl. VIII es. 

4 Bissing Pl. X. 5 Mariette i. E. 16. Sethe vii. 94. 

§ Mariette ii. 523: Sethe vii. I. 117. 

? de Morgan ii. 523 e.s. 

8 de Morgan ii. 562, 569-70 ; Teti Meri was the son of Meri; his maternal 
grandfather was a king. ; 

® Mariette ii. 526: Cairo 1575. 10 Mariette ii, 531: Cairo 1573. 

11 Mariette ii. 540: Cairo 1576: Lepsius Text 176. 

12 Mariette i. C. 18. 


EGYPT 453 


Not only are noble titles commoner in the Sixth Dynasty, but 
two of the viziers, Neferseshemseshet and Teti Meri, held the 
exalted title of King’s Son. The viziers of this dynasty, therefore, 
appear to be more closely connected with the royal family than 
most of those of the Fifth Dynasty. When, therefore, the Fourth, 
Fifth and Sixth Dynasties are compared, a remarkable series of 
changes become evident. In the Fourth Dynasty the viziers are 
all king’s sons, and one of them seems to carry over into the 
Fifth Dynasty. Then no apparent royal connexion can be wit- 
nessed until the reign of Dedkere-Isesi, a time when the king calls 
himself ‘‘ Son of the Sun,”’ and two new offices, those of ‘‘ Governor 
of the South”? and “ Governor of the King’s Palace” are first 
mentioned. Henceforth the royal family and the viziers appear 
to be closer associated. But it seems certain that, whatever else 
happened, the old system of the Fourth and preceding dynasties 
was abandoned, so that the crown prince never acts as vizier. Thus 
was produced, by some means not yet fully understood, the 
bisection of the ruling group into two distinct portions, each with 
separate functions, and this condition persisted in Egypt. We 
have found that the two sides of the ruling group throughout the 
archaic civilization appear to have intermarried regularly, which 
custom has evidently been imposed on the rest of the community, 
so that exogamy forms a definite part of the dual organization of 
society. If, as is urged, the dual ruling group originated in Egypt, 
the practice of intermarriage should also have begun in that 
country.! 

With the exception of Sekhemkere at the beginning, who carried 
on from the Fourth Dynasty, and Ptahshepses, the early viziers 
of the Fifth Dynasty married women whose titles are unknown. 
Those viziers had no exalted titles. This is suggestive when it 
is noted that, when the hereditary erpa title comes again into 
common use, under Dedkere-Isesi, the Son of the Sun, the viziers’ 
wives at once are mentioned as of high rank. This may be 
fortuitous. As it stands, the evidence suggests that the earlier 
viziers did not marry princesses. Whether that be so or not, it 
is evident that the viziers and the royal family were more closely 
connected from the time of Dedkere-Isesi onwards. Two daughters 
of Teti, named Heruatetkhet and Seshseshet, married Meri and 
Gemnikai; while a third daughter, also named Seshet, married 
Neferseshem Ptah, the brother of the vizier Neferseshemre. The 
son of Meri and Heruatetkhet, named Teti Meri, who was a vizier, 
married Nebt, a “ Royal Acquaintance.” Thus the viziers were 
closely connected by marriage with the royal family in the early 
part of the Sixth Dynasty, in that they married princesses. On 
the other hand, one king of this dynasty, and possibly two, 
married into a family of viziers. For Pepi I, or Meryre as he is 
also called, married two sisters of Zau, and was by them the 


1 Cf. Elliot Smith’s article in Anthropology and Archeology in the 
supplementary volumes of the *‘ Encyclopedia Britannica” (11th Edition). 


454 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


father of Mernere I and Pepi II (Neferkere). Zau was vizier for 
his nephew Pepi II, and one Ibi, probably his son,! was “ Governor 
of the South,” thus filling an important office, that came into 
existence with Dedkere-Isesi, the eighth king of the Fifth Dynasty. 

It is possible that in another case the king married into the 
family of a vizier, but the evidence is not certain. The father of 
Zau, the vizier of Pepi II, and brother of the wives of Pepi I, was 
named Khui. The wife of King Teti was Khuit,? the feminine 
form of Khui. This suggests that Khui and Khuit were related. 
Ifthat be so, the family of Zau and the royal family intermarried. 
The wife of Khui was royal. The conditions thus suggest 
that the relationships between the royal family and the family 
of the vizier were precisely similar to those obtaining in such 
places as Ponape, and the Pelews, in which the ruling group is 
divided into two intermarrying families. 

We can go still farther in the matter; for Zau belonged to 
Abydos in Upper Egypt, while the king lived at the other end of 
the country, at Memphis, on the border of Upper and Lower 
Kgypt. Theson of Zau was also the Governor of the South, and 
thus held an office in Upper Egypt. It is consequently claimed 
that the marriage of Pepi I into a family of Abydos ‘‘ not im- 
probably had a political end in view”’ and that “it may have 
been both custom and policy that the king as king of Upper 
Kgypt should marry an heiress of the south, and vice versa.”’ # 

The family of Zau is well known. An examination of the 
marriages contracted by its members suggests that this family 
constantly married royal princesses. Zau’s two sisters, who 
married Pepi I, were called Pepy-ankhnes or Meryre-ankhnes, 
names evidently derived from those of their husband.* It seems 
to have been usual in those times for daughters to take the names 
of their mothers, and sons the names of their fathers ; often the 
names of grandparents were taken. So when Zau-shmaa, the 
grandson of Zau, married a woman named Pepy-ankhnes,? it 
sounds as if he were marrying a daughter or granddaughter of 
the wife of Pepi I. This surmise is strengthened by the fact that 
Zau-shmaa and Pepy-ankhnes had a daughter named Pepy- 
ankhnes.® 

The family tree of Zau provides yet another possible instance 
of a marriage between the royal family and that of the vizier 
and other important officials. Aba or Ibi, the son or grandson 
of Zau, married a woman named Rehem Hemi.’ Through this 
marriage he became lord of the Twelfth Nome. He was also 
‘real Governor of the South.” Possibly the parents of, Rehem 
Hemi were Rehem-Isi and Rehem. Rehem-Isi evidently had 
taken the name of his wife, and had come into her property. 


1 Davies ii. I. 30. 2 Gauthier 150. 
8 Davies ii. I. 30. 4 Gauthier 161-2. 5 Davies ii. II. Pl. VI. 
§ Davies ii. II. pl. IX. 7 Davies ii. I. pl. XII. 


EGYPT 455 


Rehem-Isi was vizier. Thus two viziers’ families, those of Zau 
and of Rehem-Isi, seem to intermarry with the royal family. The 
available evidence suggests that a close relationship of inter- 
marriage existed between the royal family and the families of 
viziers and ‘‘ Governors of the South’’: and, if it be permissible 
to generalize on such a scanty basis of fact, these two families 
formed at that time an intermarrying group similar to those 
found in Micronesia. The remarks of Davies suggest that the 
actual stage of affairs was that in which, as a rule, the king married 
a woman of the vizier’s family, and also a royal princess, but the 
evidence in favour of this is scanty. 

From the time of the Fifth Dynasty onwards, therefore, the 
ruling power in Egypt was bisected ; the royal family carried on 
the state cult of the sun-god and the king was closely connected 
with the sky, where he went at death; the civil administration 
was carried on by another family. In the Fifth Dynasty this 
family lived at Memphis, and does not seem to have had any close 
relationship with the royal family. But in the early Sixth 
Dynasty the family of the vizier lived at Abydos, and members 
of that family act as Governors of the South ; while the king lived 
at Memphis on the border of Upper and Lower Egypt. The 
conditions thus approximate closer to those of the dual organiza- 
tion of the Pacific and other parts of the region. In the late 
Fifth and early Sixth Dynasties the royal family seems constantly 
to have intermarried with that of the vizier, thus producing a 
close co-operation and alliance. In this the conditions approach 
still closer to. those of the archaic civilization in Micronesia. But 
it has been found, in Samoa, that the king probably married 
women of both sides of the dual grouping. The prevalence of 
incestuous unions in Egypt suggests that this may have been the 
case in that country : the king would marry his sister, mother or 
perhaps daughter, and thus gain possession of the throne; he, 
or one of his sons, would also marry a member of the other family : 
the heads of the vizier’s family would marry royal princesses. 
In that way the royal family and the vizier’s family would approxi- 
mate to the ruling families of the archaic civilization in all parts 
of the region. 

Although the evidence on this point is not yet entirely satis- 
factory, yet it is possible to see, on a broad survey of the whole 
situation, that the varieties of the practice of intermarriage 
between two branches of the ruling group probably had a common 
origin in one place. For it is probable that, in Egypt, as in the 
rest of the region, the vizier was not necessarily always a member 
of a family that intermarried with the royal family. Indeed, it 
is found, for instance in Indonesia, in the case of certain com- 
munities ruled over by Mohammedan chiefs, that the vizier is the 
heir to the throne, and that only the ruling groups most closely 
connected with the archaic civilization have the vizier chosen 
from a distinct family, which is closely connected at the same 


456 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


time with the royal family.1 In later times, in Polynesia and 
elsewhere, the office of vizier disappeared. In Egypt, also,: the 
vizier was definitely chosen, in subsequent dynasties, and was 
not necessarily a member of a family that intermarried with 
royalty. ‘It is significant that, in Egypt, and elsewhere, only in 
certain circumstances do the royal family and the family of the 
vizier or war-chief form an intermarrying group. This close 
correspondence in circumstances argues strongly for a relation- 
ship between these various intermarrying groups, and goes to 
support the contention that the alliance made in Egypt, probably 
for purely political ends, survived in the rest of the region for a 
time, and then disappeared, as in Egypt itself. 

Another important process was at work in Egypt as the conse- 
quence of the emergence of the Heliopolitan ruling group. The 
rulers of the nomes, formerly appointed by the king, took the 
opportunity of making themselves independent, and introduced 
hereditary succession to their office. The power of the throne 
was thus undermined, and it is easy to understand that the king 
was forced to make alliance with his powerful nobles in order to 
rule the country. This process of consolidation of power in the 
hands of the nobles of the nomes produced the condition of affairs 
found in Samoa, where the independent nobles form a council that 
has great power in the state. 

An important question now arises. Is there evidence of a 
movement from Egypt similar to that which led the people of the 
archaic civilization across the world ? Although the presence of 
flint caused the early inhabitants of Egypt to live in the valley of 
the Nile, there is ample evidence that some sort of intercourse 
was maintained, even in those early times, with other regions. 
The presence, in the Grimaldi caves of Mentone in the south of 
France, of Indian Ocean cowrie shells is proof of wide connexions. 
Egypt has a peculiarity that makes it unique in the region : it is 
the only country with no valuable natural products. In being an 
exception to the rule laid down in Chapter VII, it is peculiarly 
fitted to be the home of the archaic civilization, and the centre 
whence it spread. The process of cultural spread was doubtless 
due to several causes. But since gold has played so important a 
part in the spread of the archaic civilization, since, moreover, it 
was probably the first metal used by the Egyptians, it will be 
well to understand how it came to acquire its value. The origin 
of the Egyptian appreciation of this metal has been traced by 
Elliot Smith to superstitions connected with the cowrie shell, 
which the ancient Kgyptians were getting from the Red Sea. He 
says: “‘ The evidence which has been collected by Mr. J. Wilfrid 
Jackson seems to suggest that the shell-cults originated in the 
neighbourhood of the Red Sea. 

“With the introduction of the practice of wearing shells on 
girdles and necklaces and as hair ornaments the time arrived 

1 Berg 35-6. 


EGYPT 457 


when people living some distance from the sea experienced 
difficulty in obtaining these amulets in quantities sufficient to 
meet their demands. Hence they resorted to the manufacture 
of imitations of these shells in clay and stone. But at an early 
period in their history the inhabitants of the deserts between the 
Nile and the Red Sea (Hathor’s special province) discovered that 
they could make more durable and attractive models of cowries 
and other shells by using the plastic yellow metal which was 
lying about in these deserts unused and unappreciated. This 
practice first gave to the metal gold an arbitrary value which it 
did not possess before. For the peculiar life-giving attributes of 
the shells modelled in the yellow metal came to be transferred to 
the gold itself. No doubt the lightness and especially the beauty 
of such gold models appealed to the early Egyptians, and were in 
large measure responsible for the hold gold acquired over man- 
kind. But this was an outcome of the empirical knowledge gained 
from a practice that originally was inspired purely by cultural 
and not esthetic motives. The earliest Egyptian hieroglyphic 
sign for gold was a picture of a necklace of such amulets ; and 
this emblem became the determinative of the Great Mother 
Hathor, not only because she was originally the personification 
of the life-giving shells, but also because she was the guardian 
deity both of the Eastern ways where the gold was found and 
of the Red Sea coasts where the cowries were obtained.” } 

It is probable that Elliot Smith is not correct in all his state- 
ments, but this does not matter in the present instance: what is 
important is his clear and logical explanation of the possible 
manner in which gold came to acquire an arbitrary value, and 
subsequently, as he shows, was used as currency. The desire 
for gold and for cowries must have led men away from Egypt 
down to the Red Sea, that is to say, on to other geological forma- 
tions. The enormous extent of Nubian gold-mining activity in 
ancient times certainly supports this theory. 

The development of gold-mining in Nubia in pre-dynastic times 
may explain a remarkable fact connected with polished stone 
implements. Although widespread throughout the region, and 
certainly belonging to the archaic civilization, they are very rare 
in Egypt. But there is another remarkable fact with regard to 
them, as is shown by the following statement by Professor 
Seligman: ‘I have been unable,”’ he says, ‘to find any record 
of their discovery in a tomb group or undisturbed burial in Egypt ; 
so that considering the number of prehistoric burials that have 
been examined, it can be said that they were scarcely if at all 
known in pre-dynastic Egypt. On the other hand, they are common 
in Nubia, where a number have been found in pre-dynastic and 
early dynastic tombs.” ? 

Egypt was, from very early times, in close connexion with 
Nubia, so that, if the Nubians had invented the use of polished 

1 Elliot Smith xx. 221-2, 2 Seligman ii. 


458 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


stone implements, it is hard to understand, especially on the basis 
of the fashionable theories of ‘‘ trade’ and “ barter,’? how the 
Kgyptians lacked them so completely, especially when it is per- 
fectly well known that, in our own country for instance, such 
implements are found far from localities possessing basic rocks. 
But if the case of the bronze and copper chisels of Celebes be borne 
in mind, if it be remembered that the use of polished stone imple- 
ments can survive that of metal implements, it is easy to see that 
people such as the Egyptians, going out into a fresh country, 
could have imitated their copper chisels in stone; or else that, 
finding no flint in Nubia, they began to use the local stone, but 
did not import them to Egypt, because they preferred their flint 
and copper implements. Some such explanation as this will 
account without difficulty for the facts in Egypt and Nubia. It 
does more than that: it explains, for instance, why the mound- 
builders made beautiful ‘“‘ Solutrean ”’ blades of flint identical 
with those of the Egyptians, as well as polished stone implements 
like those of the rest of the region. Moreover, the pre-dynastic 
Egyptians knew well how to work diorite and other basic rocks, 
and therefore were quite capable of manufacturing polished 
stone implements. The hypothesis that the outward spread of 
civilization was that of the Egyptians, a people well versed in 
the manufacture of ‘‘ Solutrean ’’ blades, who were attracted to 
geological formations containing basic rocks because they found 
there gold and other minerals, thus provides a_ satisfactory 
explanation of the peculiarities of the use of polished stone imple- 
ments.! 

In like manner it is possible to explain the use of obsidian, so 
common in the Admiralty Islands, New Guinea, Mexico, and 
North America, as a result of the search in the islands of the 
/Egean for emery and corundum, which the Egyptians used for 
working hard stones. 2 

The growing complexity of Egyptian civilization led to expedi- 
tions to surrounding lands for desired substances. At the be- 
ginning of the Fifth Dynasty the Egyptians were undertaking 
considerable foreign enterprises. ‘‘ Sahure, who followed Userkaf 
(the founder of the Fifth Dynasty), continued the development 
of Egypt as the earliest known naval power in history. He 
dispatched. a fleet against the Phcenician coast, and a relief just 
discovered in his pyramid temple at Abusir shows four of the 
ships with Phoenician captives among the Egyptian sailors. This 
is the earliest surviving representation of sea-going ships, and the 
oldest known picture of Semitic Syrians. Another fleet was sent 
by Sahure to still remoter waters, on a voyage to Punt, as the 
Egyptians called the Somali coast: at the south end of the Red 
Sea, and along the south side of the Gulf of Aden. From this 

1 T need not stress here the bearing of these facts on the problem of the, 


origin of the so-called ‘‘ Neolithic ’’ civilization of Europe. 
2 Melos 216 e.s, 


EGYPT 459 


- region, which like the whole east he termed the ‘ God’s Land,’ 
he obtained the fragrant gums and resins so much desired for the 
incense and ointments indispensable in the life of the oriental. 
Voyages to this country may have been made as early as the First 
Dynasty, for at that time the Pharaohs already used myrrh in 
considerable quantities, although this may have been obtained 
in trade with the intermediate tribes who brought it overland 
down the Blue Nile, the Atbara and the Upper Nile. In, the 
Fourth Dynasty a son of Khufu had possessed a Puntite slave, 
but Sahure was the first Pharaoh whose records show direct com- 
munication with the country of Punt for that purpose. His 
expedition brought back 80,000 measures of myrrh, probably 
6,000 weight of electrum (gold-silver alloy), besides 2,600 staves of 
some costly wood, presumably ebony.’ 1 King Isesi of the Fifth 
Dynasty, the first king known to have used the title of the Son 
of the Sun, sent an expedition to Punt. In the Sixth Dynasty 
expeditions were being sent to that land.2. The best account of the 
expeditions to Punt is that of the inscriptions of Queen Hatshepsut 
_of the Eighteenth Dynasty, on the,walls of her temple at Deir-el- 
Bahri.* These inscriptions give details of the venture, and of the 
traffic with the natives, and enumerate the treasures that were 
acquired. ‘ The loading of the ships very heavily with marvels of 
the country of Punt; all goodly fragrant woods of God’s Land, 
heaps of myrrh-resin, with fresh myrrh trees, with ebony and 
pure ivory, with green gold of Emu, with cinnamon wood, khesyt 
wood with ihmut-incense, sonter-incense, eye-cosmetic, with apes, 
monkeys, dogs, and with skins of the southern panther, with 
natives and their children. Never was brought the like of this 
for any king who has been since the beginning.” 4 

This list shows that the Egyptians went far to obtain products 
also attractive to the people of the archaic civilization throughout 
the region. In the peninsula of Sinai they worked copper and 
turquoise, the latter of which was so closely connected with Hathor, 
the Lady of Turquoise. Aname for Punt, ‘‘ God’s Land,” shows 
the real nature of the search ; the expeditions to that land reveal 
the innermost desires of the Egyptian rulers—the need for “* Givers 
of Life,’’ for magical substances. In thus setting out to procure 
the materials for mummification, and for other ritual purposes, 
the Egyptians set a process at work that still persists, a process 
that has formed the theme for the literature of the ages, the search 
for the Isles of the Blest, the earthly Paradise, where eternal 
youth, perfect health, and all the desirable things of life are to be 
found.® Their intense desire for life-giving substances has been 
transmitted to native populations in all parts of the earth, who 
use objects left behind by the old seekers for Givers of Life in their 


1 Breasted v. 127. BT 1d. day OOLS Ody COL 

3 Td., II. 246-8. 4 Td., ii. 265. 

5 Like the turquoise mother of the Pueblo Indians. 
6 Meyer and Nutt: Yetts: Perry xi. 


460 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


magical practice, and thus carry on a process the origin of which 
is unknown to them, but the mainsprings of which they themselves 
possess, the desire for “‘ Life ’’ in all its manifestations. 

The period of the Sixth Dynasty was one in which a great out- 
ward movement from Egypt was probable.. Breasted remarks 
that ‘‘ The foreign policy of Pepi was more vigorous than that 
of any Pharaoh of earlier times. He sent expeditions out to Nubia 
and Palestine. When he died his son Mernere retained a great 
measure of power. He employed the services of the great family 
of nobles who lived at Elephantine, Harkhuf and his relatives, 
to maintain order in Nubia and the Sudan, whence Egypt derived 
gold, ostrich feathers, ebony logs, panther skins, andivory.”’? “It 
was upon Harkhuf and his relatives, a family of daring and 
adventurous nobles, that the Pharaoh now depended as leaders of 
the arduous and dangerous expeditions which should intimidate 
the barbarians on his frontiers and maintain his prestige and his 
trade connexions in the distant regions of the south. These men 
are the earliest known explorers of inner Africa and the southern 
Red Sea. The responsibility for the development of Egyptian 
commerce with the land of Punt and the region of the southern 
Red Sea also fell upon the lords of Elephantine. Evidently they 
had charge of the whole south from the Red Sea to the Nile.” ? 

It has been concluded that Ibi, a ‘‘ Governor of the South ” 
in the reign of Pepi II, was probably the son of the vizier, Zau, of 
the same king.* Zau’s sisters married Pepi I, and Zau’s son 
married a “‘ Royal Acquaintance ” named Rahem. This close 
relationship between the two groups makes it significant that in 
the reign of Mernere, the son of Pepi I, a noble named Harkuf, 
who was pushing out into the Sudan and the lands on the south 
of the Red Sea, was also a “‘ Governor of the South,” and pre- 
sumably connected by marriage with the royal family. 

To sum up: At the beginning of the Sixth Dynasty in Egypt, 
about 2625 B.c.* and onwards, the social, political, economic, and 
religious features of Egyptian society resembled those of the 
archaic civilization in other parts of the region. The kingdom 
was based on the dual organization, the ruling power was in the 
hands of two families that intermarried, one family being at 
Memphis, and the other in the south ; the state religion was the 
sun-cult, and the king called himself the Son of the Sun ; he was 
mummified after death and buried in a pyramid ; he went to the 
sky as a special privilege, while the rest of the community went 
underground ; the Egyptians were expert metal-workers ; they 
practised irrigation ; they used, in Nubia and the Sudan, polished 
stone implements : the cause of their outward expansion was the 
search for gold and other substances such as incense, fragrant 
woods and other Givers of Life, which led them to southern 
Arabia. Presumably members of the ruling families set up 


1 Breasted v. 136. 2° Td., °v.-136; 138. 
* Davies ii. I. 30. 4 Breasted v. 131. 


EGYPT 461 


independent kingdoms outside Egypt, say in southern Arabia, 
Somaliland or Abyssinia, which kingdoms were the forerunners 
of others still farther afield. 

The movement from Arabia to India is natural when it is 
remembered that trade had been going on round south Arabia 
since the First Dynasty, about 3300 B.c. This trade was flourish- 
ing in the time of the Romans. . Men who went down in ships to the 
land of Punt would be certain to try their fortunes farther afield ; 
for they were driven on by one of the strongest desires that have 
possessed men. Moreover, the fact that the boats of India and 
the East are often exact reproductions of Egyptian boats of the 
Sixth and succeeding dynasties, is further strong evidence, as 
Elliot Smith has insisted, of the preponderating influence of 
Egypt on early navigation in all parts of the world. 

The hypothesis of an early movement out from Egypt, which 
resulted in the translation of the civilization of the Sixth Dynasty 
to the uttermost parts of the earth, will gain enormously in 
strength if it can be shown that a community with the culture 
of the archaic civilization has actually been in close contact with 
Egypt. I do not propose to discuss this matter at any length 
here, as I dealt with it briefly at the end of the last chapter, where 
it is mentioned that the Phoenicians probably supply a close link 
between Egypt and the external world, and that their culture 
possesses the fundamental traits of the archaic civilization, 
including ‘the dual organization. In every respect they satisfy 
the necessary conditions postulated as determining the spread 
of the archaic civilization ; their close interrelationship with Egypt 
is well known ; so for these reasons it is possible to claim that an 
outward movement from Egypt is an established fact, and that 
what happened in the case of the Phoenicians certainly must have 
happened before their time. Moreover, the reputed homeland 
of the Pheenicians, in the Persian Gulf, is a fitting place for their 
origin, since it is the site of extensive pearl-fisheries. Thus these 
people supply an important link in the chain ; their origin in the 
Persian Gulf serves to establish the dual organization on a chain 
of pearl-beds extending from the Red Sea, by way of the Persian 
Gulf, right across the Pacific, in continuous succession to the 
valley of the Ohio. 

The archaic civilization in all parts of the region tended to 
break up shortly after its appearance in any place. This also 
happened in Egypt at the end of the Sixth Dynasty. During the 
Fourth Dynasty (2900-2750 3B.c.)the power of the kings was at 
its summit. ‘‘ The century and a half during which the Fourth 
Dynasty maintained its power was a period of unprecedented 
splendour in the history of the Nile valley people, and as we have 
seen, the monuments of the time were on a scale of grandeur which 
was never later eclipsed.” But with the coming of the Heliopoli- 
tan Fifth Dynasty the office of grand vizier remained in the 

1 Elliot Smith xvii.: Hornell. 2 Breasted v. 121. 


462 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


families of the old regime, the kings now had to reckon with the 
power of their nobles. The rulers of the nomes, formerly local 
governors, now began to rule on their own behalf, and hereditary 
succession became prevalent.! Evidence of the increasing power 
of the official class is shown by the fact that, in this dynasty, 
under King Isesi, mention is made, for the first time, on a relief 
recounting the triumphs of the king over his enemies, of the name 
of the official who carried out the campaign. Another sign of the 
weakening power of the kings of the Fifth Dynasty is shown in 
their pyramids. ‘‘ Their limestone pyramids ranged along the 
desert margin south of Gizeh, at Abusir and Sakkara, are small— 
less than half as high as the great pyramid, and the core of such 
poor construction, being largely loose blocks, or even rubble and 
sand, that they are now in complete ruin, each pyramid being a 
low mound with little semblance of the pyramid form. The cen- 
tralized power of the earlier Pharaohs was thus visibly weakening, 
and it was indeed in every way desirable that there should be a 
reaction against the totally abnormal absorption by the Pharaoh’s 
tomb of such an enormous proportion of the national wealth.” 2 

The growing power of the local nobles, the rulers of the nomes, 
finally produced the downfall of this dynasty. ‘We have the 
first example traceable in history of the dissolution of a centralized 
state by a process of aggrandisement on the part of local officials 
of the crown, like that which resolved the Carlovingian empire 
into duchies, land-graviates or petty principalities.” ® 

It is significant that the kings of Egypt, no longer complete 
masters at home, began to look to the neighbouring countries 
round Egypt for the exercise of their power. So long as Egypt 
was ruled over by absolute monarchs, the king concerned him- 
self mainly with state functions, which is natural when he is the 
high priest of the state cult. When the monarch is faced with a 
powerful nobility in a condition of semi-independence, this new 
relationship in the state often expresses itself in the foreign policy 
of the king. In the Sixth Dynasty Pepi I, who managed to hold 
his nobility more or less in hand, maintained an attitude towards 
the realm different from that of his predecessors. ‘‘PepilI... 
strove to single out men of force and ability with whom he might 
organize a strong government, closely attached to his fortunes 
and to those of his house. He also launched a strong foreign 
policy and brought the Nubian tribes under his power, so 
that they could be made to fight for him in his struggles against 
his nobles.” 4+ But the end was not far off. The successors of 
Pepi I were not able to maintain his position and power, and the 
dynasty was doomed. ‘‘ When it had ruled something over 
180 years the power of the landed barons became a centrifugal 
foree which the Pharaohs could no longer withstand and 
the dissolution of the state resulted. The nomes gained their 


1 Breasted v. 128. 2 o1d., 1206 
8 'Id., 131. $ Id., 134-6. 


EGYPT 463 


independence, the Old Kingdom fell to pieces, and for a time was 
thus resolved into the petty principalities of prehistoric times. 
Nearly a thousand years of unparalleled development since the 
rise of a united state, thus ended, in the twenty-fifth century B.C., 
in political conditions like those which had prevailed in the begin- 
ning.” + Thus fell the Old Kingdom, the culminating point of 
early Egyptian civilization. 

The subsequent history of Egypt is that of the education in 
warfare of a peaceful people. In the Eleventh Dynasty the king 
had to reckon with the power of small states or petty principalities, 
the heads of which owed him their loyalty, but were not his 
officials or his servants. Some of these local nobles were “‘ Great 
Lords” or nomarchs ; others were only “ counts ”’ of a smaller 
domain with its fortified town.? Under such conditions the 
Pharaoh could not but surround himself with the necessary 
power to enforce his will when obliged todoso. A class of military 
‘“‘attendants”’ or literally “followers of his majesty ”’ arose, 
professional soldiers, the first known in ancient Egypt. But 
Kgyptian warfare was still but a petty business : “‘ As in the Old 
Kingdom, war continues to be little more than a series of loosely 
organized predatory expenditions, the records of which clearly 
display the still unwarlike character of the Egyptians.”’ 3 

The Middle Kingdom continued for nearly 400 years (2160- 
1788 B.c.). During the reign of the founder of the Twelfth 
Dynasty, Amenemhet I, the country enjoyed great prosperity, 
for he had reduced his nobles to order. But here again, curiously 
enough, the king seems to have looked outside Egypt for his 
reward. He no longer had complete control of the resources of 
the state ; the most he could expect to do was to keep the nobility 
quiet. ‘“‘It is doubtless true that the circumstances in which 
these kings of the feudal period found themselves forced them 
to seek new sources of wealth outside the country.” The 
nobles were taking their share of the wealth, and the kings had 
to use their armies to help them to exploit other peoples. At 
the same time the country itself was raised to a pitch of un- 
exampled prosperity.4 ‘“‘ The pyramids of the Twelfth Dynasty 
kings are eloquent testimony to the fact that the construction of 
the royal tomb was no longer the chief office of the state. More 
wholesome views of the function of the kingship have now gained 
the ascendancy and the resources of the state nation are no longer 
absorbed in the pyramid as in the Old Kingdom. In the Eleventh 
Dynasty the Theban kings had already returned to the original 
material of the royal tomb and built their unpretentious pyramids 
of brick. Amenemhet I followed their example in the erection of 
his pyramid at Lisht; the core was of brick masonry and the 
monument was then protected by casing masonry of limestone.” ® 
The custom was continued by all the kings of the dynasty with 

1 Id., 143. 2 Id., 157-8. 8 Id., 167-8. 
4 Id., 191. Id., 198. 


464 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


one exception. This was the end of pyramid building. “‘ Hence- 
forward, with the exception of a few small pyramids at Thebes, 
we shall meet no more of these remarkable monuments, which, 
stretching in a desultory line along the margin of the western 
desert -for 65 miles, are the most impressive surviving wit- 
nesses to the grandeur of the civilization which preceded the 
Empire.” + In the Middle Kingdom all the arts and crafts were 
flourishing, but perhaps not at quite so high a level as in earlier 
times. Nevertheless, ‘“‘ Little ever produced by the later gold- 
smith of Europe can surpass either in beauty or in workmanship ” 
the ‘“‘regal ornaments worn by the daughters of the house of 
Amenemhet nearly 2000 years before Christ.”?? The theological 
developments of the Twelfth Dynasty also bear witness to 
the weakening of the royal prestige. In the Pyramid Age, the 
time of the greatest power of the kingship in early Egypt, the 
royal scribes managed to persuade themselves that the king 
went to the sky, and that Osiris was an enemy, yet the Solar 
theologians were forced ultimately to bow to popular superstition, 
and to raise Osiris to the sky, there to become inextricably confused 
with Re as the ruler of that realm. Further, in the Twelfth 
Dynasty, the ideas concerning Osiris had become very powerful. 
The Heliopolitan priests apparently were forced constantly to 
modify their doctrines, to add yet one element after another to 
their compilation ; and in the end they were defeated by sheer 
weight of popular prejudice. 

Then came the Thirteenth Dynasty, in which the succession 
to the throne was soon interrupted by usurpers. ‘“‘ Rapid dis- 
solution followed, as the provincial lords rose against each other 
and strove for the throne. Pretender after pretender struggled 
for supremacy ; now and again one more able than his rivals 
would gain a brief advantage and wear his ephemeral honours, 
only to be quickly supplanted by another. Private individuals 
contended with the rest and occasionally won the coveted goal, 
only to be overthrown by a successful rival. Foreign adventurers 
took advantage of the opportunity, and one of the pretenders who 
achieved a success may have been a Nubian.” * During these 
struggles, the Hyksos, a line of foreign shepherd kings, dominated 
the country for a long period, finally turning it into a warlike 
state by educating its people in warfare, and teaching them the 
advantage of an army. The Hyksos were expelled and the 
Kmpire was founded about 1580 B.c. by Ahmose I of Thebes, 
whose military experience thoroughly fitted him for the task of 
reorganizing the nation after the disorganization caused by the 
downfall of the Middle Kingdom and the incursion of the Hyksos.* 

“The task of building up a State, which now confronted 
Ahmose I, differed materially from the reorganization accom- 
plished at the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty by Amenemhet I. 


1 Breasted 200. 2 Id., 203. 
3 Td., 211-12. “ Id., 225-6. 


KGYPT 465 


The latter dealt with social and political factors no longer new in 
his time, and manipulated to his own ends the old political units 
without destroying their identity, whereas Ahmose had now to 
begin with the erection of a fabric of government out of elements 
so completely divorced from the old forms as to have lost their 
identity, being now in a state of total flux. The course of events, 
which culminated in the expulsion of the Hyksos, determined for 
Ahmose the form which the new state was to assume. He was 
now at the head of a strong army, effectively organized and welded 
together by long campaigns and sieges protracted through years, 
during which he had been both general in the field and head of the 
state. The character of the government followed involuntarily 
out of these conditions. Egypt became a military state. It was 
quite natural that it should remain so, in spite of the usually 
unwarlike character of the Egyptian. The long war with the 
Hyksos had now educated him as a soldier, the large army of 
Ahmose had spent years in Asia and had even been for a longer or 
shorter period among the rich cities of Syria. Having thoroughly 
learned war and having perceived the enormous wealth to be 
gained by it in Asia, the whole land was roused and stirred with a 
lust of conquest, which was not quenched for several centuries. 
The wealth, the rewards and the promotion open to the profes- 
sional soldier were a constant incentive to a military career, and 
the middle classes, otherwise so unwarlike, now entered the ranks 
with ardour.” + Naturally the king was once again in possession 
of supreme power, and had been educated in war and conquest. 
No one could oppose him with his army at his back. The landed 
nobility had disappeared, and local districts were administered 
by petty officials of the crown; the nation had come back by a 
different route to the condition of the Old Kingdom. Thus 
opened the period of the New Empire, which witnessed a revival 
of Egyptian culture. This period began with the Eighteenth 
Dynasty, and ended about 1150 B.c., with the close of the Nine- 
teenth Dynasty. Finally, internal struggles of various kings 
brought this new state tottering to its fall.2 Thebes developed 
into an independent sacerdotal principality, and caused the 
destruction of the Empire and the end of the unity of the king- 
dom.* The king once more had to deal with the rismg power of 
the nobles, and, as always, they beat him in the end, and brought 
the fabric of the state crashing to the ground. 

From Egypt to America, therefore, the end of the complex of 
belief and practice, social, economic, political, and religious, built 
up in Egypt during the first six dynasties, was ruin and decay. 
According to local circumstances, the length of time before the 
catastrophe varied, but in no case did this unstable conglomeration 
last for many centuries. It is evident that the day when the 
Heliopolitan priests first sat on the throne of Egypt marked the 
beginning of the end. From that day onwards the power of the 

1 Breasted iv. 233. 2 Id., 505 e.s. * Tail 622) 
30 


4.66 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


king grew weaker, and that of his nobles increased, so that finally 
they were able to control the destinies of the state. This great 
wave of civilization that swept over the earth carried with it the 
seeds of decay, which soon grew up and strangled the parent 
growth ; in all parts of the region the Children of the Sun, who 
imposed themselves in the beginning in an artificial manner, 
disappeared for ever, and their place was taken by the repre- 
sentatives of the old society in Egypt, the nobles who were con- 
nected with the old underworld, the first land of the dead that 
man ever knew. The destruction of the archaic civilization 
revealed fresh potentialities in man; mother-right gave place to 
father-right, military aristocracies came into being, war-gods 
emerged, and the world began to take on a shape that we all 
recognize. The exposition of the story of the coming of the 
modern world is a task for the future ; it is enough to have recog- 
nized the former order of society and its manner of origin. 


CHAPTER XXVII 
CONCLUSION 
Te last chapter ended a long inquiry into the historical 


problem of the origin and development of the civilizations 

of the region from Egypt to North America. The conclusion 
reached was that the food-producing peoples owed their culture to 
the direct or indirect influence of the archaic civilization, which 
took its shape in Egypt. It now remains to consider what bearing 
this conclusion has on the general problem of the origin and 
development of civilization. 

The only sound method of study, in the case of human society, 
is to ascertain what has happened before considering why it 
happened. It is also necessary to be sure that the basis of facts 
is wide enough to make it possible to determine cause and effect ; 
otherwise the end will be disaster. The scope of this book satisfies 
this last requirement, since North America, Oceania, Indonesia, 
India, and Egypt have come under survey, with their immense 
variety of cultures, ranging from food-gatherers to Egyptians of 
the Pyramid Age. 

Current speculation as to the origin and development of culture, 
from the food-gathering stage upwards, has been much influenced 
by the views of what may be termed the Evolutionary School of 
thought, which sprang up in the latter half of the last century, 
mainly under the influence of Darwin and Herbert Spencer. 
Reasoning from the obvious facts of the evolution of various 
forms of life on this planet, it was assumed that, since the most 
elementary forms of life appeared first, since also the elementary 
forms of human society preceded those more advanced in type, 
what is termed “‘ savagery ”’ represents an early stage of develop- 
ment of civilization, so that human society has, in all parts of the 
world, gradually developed from the food-gathering stage to that 
of high civilization, the process on the whole being one of advance. 
Such reasoning is implicit or explicit in most works on the develop- 
ment of any aspect of human society. It is assumed without 
question that people such as the Iroquois of North America, or 
the Australians, can be taken as representing, in their culture, 
something primitive in human thought and doings. Sir James 
Frazer attempts to derive the origin of Totemism and Exogamy 
from peoples such as the natives of Australia, and but little 

467 


468 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


opposition is maintained to his general position, although he is 
much criticized in detail. 

The general attitude and methods of this school of thought have 
been well summarized by Rivers in his small pamphlet on ‘“‘ History 
and Ethnology,’’ which should be universally read by those inter- 
ested in these studies. He speaks of the time, ten years or more 
ago, when the historical method of study began under the influence 
of himself and Elliot Smith. ‘‘ At this more remote period 
anthropology—I use the term anthropology advisedly—was 
wholly under the domination of a crude evolutionary standpoint. 
The aim of the anthropologist was to work out a scheme of human 
progress according to which language, social organization, religion, 
and material art had developed through the action of certain 
principles or laws. It was assumed that the manifold peoples of 
the earth represented stages in this process of evolution, and it 
was supposed that by the comparative study of the culture of 
these different peoples it would be possible to formulate the laws 
by which the process of evolution had been directed and governed. 
It was assumed that the time-order of different elements of culture 
had been everywhere the same; that if matrilineal institutions 
preceded patrilineal in Europe and Asia, this must also have been 
the case in Oceania and America; that if cremation is later than 
inhumation in India, it has also been later everywhere else. This 
assumption was fortified by attempts to show that there were 
reasons, usually psychological in nature, according to which there 
was something in the universal constitution of the human mind, 
or in some condition of the environment, or inherent in the 
constitution of human society, which made it necessary that 
patrilineal institutions should have grown out of matrilineal, 
and that mhumation should be earlier than cremation. Moreover, 
it was assumed as an essential part of the general framework of 
the science that, after the original dispersal of mankind, or 
possibly owing to the independent evolution of different main 
varieties of Man, large portions of the earth had been cut off from 
intercourse with others, so that the process of evolution had taken 
place in them independently. When similarities, even in minute 
points of detail, were found in these regions, supposed to have 
been wholly isolated from one another, it was held that they were 
due to the uniformity in the constitution of the human mind, 
which, working on similar lines, had brought forth similar products, 
whether in social organization, religion, or material culture.” + 

This position is now being hotly contested, as is evident to any 
reader of this book. As Rivers says in the pamphlet just quoted, 
when speaking of the rise of the historical school, and of its 
attitude towards the older ‘ Evolutionary ” school of thought : 
‘The adherents of the recent movement to which I have referred 
regard the whole of this construction with its main supports of 
mental uniformity and orderly sequence as built upon the sand. 

1 Rivers xvii. 4. 


CONCLUSION 469 


It is claimed that there has been no such isolation of one part of 
the earth from another as has been assumed by the advocates of 
independent evolution, but that means of navigation have been 
capable, for longer periods than has been supposed, of carrying 
Man to any part of the earth. The widespread similarities of, 
culture are, it is held, due in the main, if not wholly, to the spread 
of customs and institutions from some centre in which local 
conditions favoured their development.” 1 This group challenges 
the other to show that it is right in using evidence indiscriminately 
from all over the earth without regard to time or place, and demands 
stricter canons of evidence. It asserts that it can be shown that 
certain less advanced communities are derived from those more 
advanced, and wants to know where such a process stops. 
The quarrel, therefore, between the two schools centres round 
culture degradation. Tylor recognized the importance of this 
process.2, He remarks that : ‘‘ It would be a valuable contribution 
to the study of civilization to have the action of decline and fall 
investigated on a wider and more exact basis of evidence than 
has yet been attempted. The cases here stated are probably but 
part of a long series which might be brought forward to prove 
degeneration in culture to have been, by no means the primary 
cause of the existence of barbarism and savagery in the world, 
but a secondary action largely and deeply affecting the general 
development of civilization. It may perhaps give no unfair idea 
to compare degeneration of culture, both in its kind of operation 
and in its immense extent, to denudation in the geological history 
of the earth.” * Tylor thus realized the importance of degradation 
of culture. He was also aware of the importance of the historical 
method: “‘ It is always unsafe to detach a custom from its hold 
on past events, treating it as an isolated fact to be simply dis- 
posed of by some plausible explanation.” * It is fair to claim that 
neither of these canons has been generally respected ; degrada- 
tion has been largely ignored ; and facts have been collected whole- 
sale from all parts of the earth, and put together to support some 
thesis or other, without any attention being paid to their history. 
While it is certain that civilization has developed, it is equally 
certain that no community can be taken as a type of an elementary 
or primitive stage of culture, except when it has been demon- 
strated beyond doubt that its history lends support to such an 
assumption. Thus, for instance, there is little reason to 
doubt that the Dene of the Mackenzie River basin in Canada, 
the Punan of Borneo, the Veddas of Ceylon are really primitive, 
although they have acquired some elements of culture from 
their more highly civilized neighbours. But, in the case of food- 
producing peoples as a whole, it can safely be said that not one is 
evidence for the early stage of mankind, except in so far as it can 
be shown that such customs as they possess could not have been 


1 Rivers xvii. 4—5. 2 Tylor I. 27, 32, 
8 Tylor I. 48. 4 Tylor I. 20, 


470 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


derived from some pre-existing community. ‘Thus the arguments 
for the primitiveness of Australian totemism are really baseless ; 
they are founded on the assumption that culture belonging to 
people of a low stage of civilization must of necessity be of lowly 
origin, forgetting that Australian natives sometimes use matches 
and other products of European civilization, and so, in bygone 

ages, may have acquired elements of the culture of Sojourners in 
a higher state of civilization. 

The fount and source of the opposition is “‘ The History of Melan- 
esian Society,’’ in which Rivers made the first attempt to range 
cultures in an historical sequence, and to determine their inter- 
relationships. It is true that Graebner and other German 
students had previously worked out certain culture distributions, 
and formulated sequences ;! but their methods were entirely 
different from those of Rivers, whose work may be regarded as a 
new development of thought. 

Once it is evident that the historical aspect is of importance, 
the position held by the followers of Tylor becomes precarious. 
The prosecution of the line of thought opened up by Rivers leads 
to a position in direct conflict with that generally adopted. It 
reveals the important fact that, in the region under consideration, 
especially in North America, Oceania and Indonesia, the earliest 
form of civilization was more advanced than those that followed ; 
also that the later communities had, with the exception of the 
food-gatherers, acquired their culture, directly or indirectly, 
from this original civilization, which was, broadly speaking, 
uniform throughout the region. In so far as the communities of 
these outlying parts of the region are concerned, leaving Egypt 
and India on one side for the present, this is the basis on which 
the old point of view is held to be unsound. 

This theory of continuity is open to attack from more than 
one side. One possible objection, that based on the doctrine of 
the influence of climatic and other geographical circumstances 
on the development of civilization, has already been met. The 
consideration of the distribution of certain cultural elements did 
not seem to afford any support to the notion that men had, in the 
outlying parts of the region, been plastic material in the hands 
of unintelligent forces, but rather that they had been wilful, 
desiring beings, with aims of their own that they sought to satisfy, 
and for the satisfaction of which they were willing to undergo 
considerable hardship. 

Criticism can also be directed towards the numerous gaps in 
the evidence, which will certainly be considered by some readers 
to constitute a formidable difficulty in the way of my enterprise. 
It is therefore imperative that the method of inquiry should 
enable anyone, who does not agree with the conclusions, readily 
to control the evidence on which the argument is founded. ‘The 


1 Graebner. 


CONCLUSION AT71 


method adopted, that of culture-sequence, seems to provide a 
simple test to effect this control. It is only necessary, in any 
instance, to produce one well-founded contrary example, in order 
to shake the whole structure. The theory of the growth and 
spread of culture has not been built up on any suppositions 
regarding the manner in which man acts in society ; it has been 
erected, so far as personal proclivities will permit, on the basis 
of the facts adduced. It is patent to anyone that the whole 
ground has not been covered ; it is unnecessary to state that India 
has not been studied in complete detail ; such facts are undeniable ; 
but it is unreasonable to urge that as damning the general con- 
clusions of the book. All that is claimed is that the study of 
culture-sequences has invariably given the same results throughout 
the region ; that, for instance, mother-right precedes father-right ; 
sun-gods precede war-gods, and so on. The process may be 
likened to that of throwing a fine web of argument from one 
point to another, and then adding to those in position fresh strands 
derived from new inquiries, so as finally to produce a fabric 
capable of sustaining some weight, the amount borne depending 
on the number of strands. The method of production of these 
threads, usually that of culture-sequence, is simple, its results are 
easily controlled, and, on that account, it is reasonable, I claim, 
to rely on the final conclusions. 

It is possible, in the study of culture-sequences, to take one 
element of culture, say the sun-cult, and to show that the sun-god 
is followed in all parts of the region by a war-god ; or to show that 
mother-right gave way to father-right. Ifthe survey be made on 
a wide scale, it then can be said that the region has had two civil- 
izations, the earlier characterized by the sun-cult and mother- 
right, the later by a cult of war-gods and father-right, although, in 
certain instances, elements of the first civilization survived into 
the second civilization. It might consequently be argued that 
mankind has naturally and independently in all parts of the world 
gone through the stage of the sun-cult before developing the 
notion of war-gods ; that the process was natural and inevitable ; 
or that the transition from mother-right to father-right was a 
natural sequence. But when inquiry shows that the sun-cult is 
also accompanied by a ruling class claiming descent from the sun- 
god, and that when this class disappears the sun-gods disappear also, 
the theory of spontaneous origin meets with difficulties. For, not 
only has it to be shown how men came to elaborate a sun-cult, and 
then to give it up; it is also necessary to explain the origin of a 
ruling class that looked upon the sun-god as a father. It must be 
remembered that the doctrine of probability cannot be forgotten 
in such cases as this. If the chance of any cultural element 
existing in any community be one in two, then the chance of ten 
elements existing in that community will be one in one thousand 
and twenty-four ; that is, provided the elements are independent. 
Although the uniform presence in the archaic civilization of one 


472 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


cultural element may therefore not be important, it is vastly 
different when ten such elements are present. 

On this basis it is possible to deal with the problem of gaps. 
If it be found, in any place, that subsequent events have obliter- 
ated most traces of the past, and have left some characteristic 
features of the archaic civilization, then filiation can be claimed 
for that reason alone. As an instance, in the Jataka Tales in 
India, mention is made of two princes with similar names. When 
Kamsa or Sagara came to the throne, his brother, Upukamsa or 
Upusagara, became viceroy. This can be interpreted as evidence 
of a former dual grouping of the ruling class, one side of which 
supplied the king, and the other the viceroy or vizier, and, con- 
sequently, of the dual organization of society. 

It must be remembered, however, that this form of assertion 
can only be made on the basis of the invariability of the culture- 
sequence. Once any serious exceptions to. the rule are established, 
the possibility of such confident predictions immediately vanishes. 

The problem of gaps may be treated in another way. In only 
one country in the region was it possible to watch the archaic 
civilization coming into existence. It is evident, from the dis- 
cussions in the chapter on Egypt, that the compilation of the 
archaic civilization was the result of events which, it might be 
said, were fortuitous: the process of mummification had nothing 
to do with the sun-cult; the doctrine that Khnum could make 
children was not directly connected with either of these things ; 
the dual division of the ruling power, and the form in which inter- 
marriages took place between the family of the king and that of 
the vizier, were due to purely historical causes; and so on for 
the rest of the story of Egypt of the Pyramid Age. In face of the 
process of accumulation of the various cultural elements of the 
archaic civilization, a process vastly intricate in its workings, and 
often directly the result of certain natural features of the country, 
such as the annual flood of the Nile, and of the ambitions of 
certain groups of the community, is it seriously argued that 
processes entirely different, that may have taken place in other 
parts of the earth, could have given rise to results that are so 
similar? In the whole region out of Egypt the rule was that of 
degradation of culture ; in Egypt alone can growth be witnessed. 
Therefore Egypt must have been the originating place of the 
archaic civilization. Anyone, who denies this will be faced with 
a question in probability that surely would daunt the most deter- 
mined exponent of the doctrine of independent origin. He would 
have to explain how, in other countries, where the conditions were 
vastly different, men came to elaborate a heterogeneous collection 
of beliefs and practices entirely similar to those collected by the 
Egyptians ; he would have to interpret all the stories of culture- 
heroes on an entirely different basis ; he would have to deny the 
historical value of tradition ; he would have to face the question 
as to why this civilization, spontaneously originated in all parts 


CONCLUSION A73 


of the world, and entirely alike in its content, gave rise, in 
all parts of the region, to diversity, and, ultimately, to the 
wholesale loss of culture. 

This manifold task would, I feel certain, prove insuperable. 
In fact, it is only by constantly ignoring tradition that it has been 
possible to work along the lines followed for so many years. Once 
native tradition is taken seriously, and an attempt is made to 
understand what it really means, the mind is forced, I feel assured, 
to travel along the lines followed here and in “The Megalithic 
Culture of Indonesia’’; and the ultimate production of a rational 
scheme is but the outcome of reliance on native tradition allied 
to an historical method of treatment of the evidence. 

Given that the process by which the civilization of the food- 
producers has appeared in all parts of the region has been con- 
tinuous, it evidently has two different aspects. The introduction 
of agriculture to various places has caused an increase in the 
population, and fresh communities have budded off, carrying 
with them some measure of culture from the parent settlement. 
On the other hand, the civilization itself, the collection of arts, 
crafts and beliefs, is the result of the addition of one cultural 
element to another. 

The spread of the archaic civilization is not hard to understand. 
The bearers of this civilization have moved, say from India to 
Indonesia; perhaps from Arabia, or even Egypt itself, to India, 
Indonesia, and farther east. As in the case of the Kayan and the 
Punan, they have civilized the native populations. They have 
carried with them their culture, and the natives have provided 
the bulk of the population. Certain interesting problems arise 
concerning the identity of the carriers of the culture in any case. 
The native population can have played but little part in the 
process of culture-transmission ; they simply provided the back- 
ground for the immigrants. The circumstances attending the 
presence of the Children of the Sun, with their consanguineous 
marriages, suggest that some continuity may have existed in the 
ruling families of the archaic civilization; but, in the case of 
commoners, there is no reason for this belief. The essential 
condition for the transplantation of the civilization is simply the 
movement of men of all grades of society from a place where it 
was in full bloom. The Children of the Sun of any community 
must have been derived from those of some other community, 
which means that the ruling groups of all the chief settlements of 
the archaic civilization must have been interrelated, and their 
distribution throughout the region must be the result of a con- 
tinuous process. This argument probably holds with the other 
branch of the ruling group, the underworld people; but this is 
not so certain. In any case the institution of the secular branch 


1 The widespread custom of adoption in royal families will produce racial 
mixture. 


7 4 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


of the ruling group has certainly been handed on from one com- 
munity to another. 

It is possible that the principle of continuity may serve to 
account for the disappearance of boat-building and stone-working 
in Polynesia and elsewhere in the region. These crafts were in 
the hands of families, usually of noble birth. If the family died 
out, so would the craft.. When it is remembered that the archaic 
civilization was a complicated organization with various grades 
of society, with hereditary occupations, it is not extraordinary 
that this civilization failed to stand the shocks to which it was 
subjected by the struggle set up in the ruling group from one end 
of the region to the other. 

In the last chapter an account was given of the manner in 
which the ancient Egyptians built up their civilization, adding 
one cultural element after another to those already in their 
possession. I now propose to discuss this process from a general 
point of view, so as to determine, in some measure, how the mind 
of man works in society ; and at the end of this chapter a theory 
will be propounded to account for the phenomena that have already 
been described. 

The contrast between Egypt and the rest of the region is 
striking. In New Guinea, Indonesia, Polynesia, and North 
America crafts such as stone-working, pottery-making, dis- 
appeared, and were never re-introduced, except as the result of 
the arrival of fresh groups of men possessing those crafts. In 
like manner pyramids degenerate into earthen mounds; earthen 
mounds never grow into pyramids. Once the thread of con- 
tinuity in any craft is dropped, it is not picked up again; the 
craft can only be re-introduced by some one who knows it. In 
Egypt, on the other hand, new ideas were constantly being added 
to the common store. 

The most important step taken by man was when the Egyptians 
first scooped out small channels in the sand to allow the Nile to 
flow over fresh patches of land; for they were forced to think of 
problems connected with the sizes and shapes of fields, and to 
study hydraulics. The annual incidence of the flood led to 
observations of the moon’s movements, and the institution of a 
lunar calendar, and in this lies, perhaps, the secret of the origin 
of ruling groups. The man who discovered that it was possible, 
by calculating the months, to predict the annual rise of the Nile, 
possessed valuable knowledge, and it is reasonable to believe that 
he and his family were allowed to live at the expense of the com- 
munity in return for the services that they rendered. In this 
way was set in motion a process of terrific import for mankind, 
the full significance of which is only now beginning to be realized. 
This group produced an entirely new situation in human society ; 
the first vested interest was produced, and those who benefited 
by it were not slow to take advantage of it. In like manner the 
invention of the new calendar also caused men to attain to 


CONCLUSION 475 


positions of power. Thus the annual flood of the Nile has had 
effects on human society that are felt to this day with the keenest 
intensity. 

When attention is paid to the method by which the Egyptians 
elaborated their thought, it is found, in the case of the Helio- 
politan theology, for instance, that they were using elements of 
thought already in existence. It has been pointed out that the 
god Re was composite, and was hardly original in his nature. 
Ideas of creation were based, after the invention of pottery-making 
and stone-carving, on those crafts. 

It is possible to show that cultural elements, apparently simple 
in nature, are really the products of a long process of development. 
In the early chapters of this book, for instance, all forms of stone- 
work were grouped together without consideration of type. That 
is to say, the craft itself was the fundamental reality, and varia- 
tions in the product were ignored. In Egypt the use of stone was 
applied to the mastaba and the pyramid, and followed the use 
of brick. Therefore it was a new cultural element added to 
others already existing. The pyramid, again, owed its origin to 
several causes, among them being the elaboration of the Helio- 
politan solar theology, itself the result of a complicated process. 
The conditions accompanying the introduction of the use of stone 
in Egypt for purposes of construction therefore support the 
attitude adopted, when all sorts of stonework were taken to- 
gether without consideration of variety. This attitude has 
already been justified in the case of Indonesian stone-work, where 
it was found that the use of stone, for any purposes of construction 
whatever, occurred in circumstances that suggested the influence 
of the archaic civilization.! When, therefore, it is claimed that 
the existence of variant forms of stone-work in the Pacific means 
variant cultural influences, it is evident that the premise is wrong. 
There may be trilithons and dolmens and pyramids of stone ; 
but these monuments do not necessarily mean variant cultural 
influences. They are all stone monuments, and for that reason 
it can be claimed that they represent one cultural influence. The 
use of stone dies out in the region, except under the influence of 
the archaic civilization. When, therefore, stone is used, it can 
be claimed that this practice is due to the influence of the archaic 
civilization. That being admitted, the next problem would be 
that of inquiring into shape and ornamentation. 

I claim, therefore, that it is wrong to assert that the existence 
of different forms of stone-work means that men have indepen- 
dently invented the use of stone, and applied it in different ways. 
This is a fundamental question that faces every student of the 
growth of civilization. What happens in the case of the stone 
pyramid is that this monument did not originate as a stone 
pyramid, but that it is the result of the grouping of various ideas 
which can ultimately be analysed into their fundamental elements. 

1 Perry vii. 48-9. 


476 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


So when stone pyramids are found in Mexico and elsewhere in 
America, there can hardly be any doubt that they owe their origin, 
ultimately, to Egypt. For the monument is the expression of 
several cultural elements that tend to disappear. That two 
widely separated communities invented a complicated monument 
in entirely different circumstances is incredible. Similarly with 
pottery-making and metal-working. The fundamental question 
is that of the presence or absence of the craft, not of the form of 
production. 

It is easy to see that civilization may ultimately have been 
built up out of a few original elements, which, by their combina- 
tions, and the subsequent addition of fresh elements, have pro- 
duced a richly variegated fabric. In this way it 1s possible to 
regard human culture as a whole, every element being dependent 
on others for its existence, and organically related to the body of 
ideas in possession of the people. It is thus easy to understand 
how readily arts and crafts disappear when transplanted into new 
surroundings. 

Having tentatively suggested that the existence of cultural 
elements is not the result of spontaneous development’ in the 
minds of different peoples, but rather is due to a long process of 
accretion of one idea to another, it is possible to go farther. What, 
it may be asked, is the way in which the original ideas came into 
man’s possession ? The Egyptians were surrounded by manifold 
phenomena, capable of being worked up into a system of ideas 
and made part of their organized system of thought. They did 
not, however, choose out elements at random. For some reason 
or other, they speculated about the moon before the sun, and in 
many other ways their thought shows signs of a selective attitude 
of mind. I suggest that throughout this process of elaboration of 
thought ran a single principle, that the Egyptians derived their 
ideas in the first instance directly from facts of concrete experience, 
and that these ideas had, in their inception, no element of specula- 
tion or of symbolism. Although he is not consciously arguing 
this theory, Elliot Smith, in his “ Evolution of the Dragon” and 
other writings on the origins of Egyptian culture, adduces numer- 
ous instances that entirely support it. Time after time he shows 
that ideas, at first sight of a highly speculative nature, are derived 
from the most homely of human experiences, and are literal state- 
ments of fact. He shows, for instance, that the idea of the double 
of man was derived directly from the phenomenon of the placenta ; 
so that the fravashi of the Persians, the guardian spirit, apparently 
the product of human speculation about the relationships between 
man and the unknown, is a very material thing, prosaic in its first 
shape.t| Again, he remarks that the magic wand, known from 
one end of the world to the other, is supposed to have been, in 
Egypt, nothing more than a conventionalized uterus:? “* The 
Great Mother wields a magic wand which the ancient Egyptian 


1 Elliot Smith xx. IX. e.s. 2 Id., 45. 


CONCLUSION | ATT 


scribes called the ‘Great Magician.’ It was endowed with the 
twofold powers of life-giving and opening, which from the 
beginning were intimately associated the one with the other from 
the analogy of the act of birth, which was both an opening and 
a giving of life. Hence the ‘magic wand’ was a key or ‘ opener 
of the ways,’ wherewith, at the ceremonies of resurrection, the 
mouth was opened for speech and the taking of food, as well as 
for the passage of the breath of life, the eyes were opened for sight, 
and the ears for hearing. Both the physical act of opening (the 
‘key’ aspect) as well as the vital aspect of life-giving (which we 
may call the ‘uterine’ aspect) were implied in this symbolism. 
Mr. Griffith suggests that the form of the magic wand may have 
been derived from that of a conventionalized picture of the 
uterus, in its aspect as a giver of life.” 1) 

In other important departments of thought, Elliot Smith shows 
how Egyptian ideas were originally direct, literal statements 
of fact. Speaking of the origin of the idea of gods, he says 
that—‘ It is essential to realize that the creation of the first 
deities was not primarily an expression of religious belief, but 
rather an application of science to national affairs. It was the 
logical interpretation of the dominant scientific theory of the 
time for the practical benefit of the living; or in other words, 
the means devised for securing the advice and active help of 
wise rulers after their death. It was essentially a matter of prac- 
tical politics and applied science. It became ‘religion’ only 
when the advancement of knowledge superseded these primitive 
scientific theories and left them as soothing traditions for the 
thoughts and aspirations of mankind to cherish. For by the 
time the adequacy of these theories of knowledge began to be 
questioned they had made an insistent appeal, and had come to 
be regarded as an essential prop to lend support to man’s con- 
viction of the reality of a life beyond the grave. A web of moral 
precept and the allurement of hope had been so woven around 
them that no force was able to strip away this body of consolatory 
beliefs ; and they have persisted for all time, although the reason- 
ing by which they were originally built up has been demolished 
and forgotten several millennia ago.” 2 He goes on to explain 
how ‘“‘ some scientific theorist, interpreting the body of empirical 
knowledge acquired by cultivating cereals, propounded the view 
that water was the great life-giving element,” * and how that in- 
consequence of the elaboration of this theory, the ideas of deity 
were made more complex, and the ritual was enriched by the 
invention of libations and other procedures. ‘“*The symbolism 
so created has had a most profound influence upon the thoughts 
and aspirations of the human race. For Osiris was the prototype 
of all the gods ; his ritual was the basis of all religious ceremonial ; 
his priests who conducted the animating ceremonies were the 
pioneers of a long series of ministers who for more than fifty 

1 Id., 190. 2 Id., 30-1. 3 Id., 31. 


f 


478 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


centuries, in spite of the endless variety of details of their ritual 
and the character of their temples, have continued to perform 
ceremonies that have undergone remarkably little essential change. 
Though the chief functions of the priest as the animator of the 
god and the restorer of his consciousness have now fallen 
into the background in most religions, the ritual acts (the incense 
and libations, the offerings of food and blood, and the rest) still 
persist in many countries ; the priest still appeals by prayer and 
supplication for those benefits which the Proto-Egyptian aimed 
at securing when he created Osiris as a god to give advice and 
help.” 1. Elhot Smith then proceeds to comment on the terms 
‘““god ” and ‘‘ religion ’’: ‘‘I have already said that in using the 
terms ‘ god’ and ‘ religion ’ with reference to the earliest form of 
Osiris and the beliefs that grew up with reference to him, a potent 
element of confusion is introduced. 

‘‘ During the last fifty centuries the meanings of those two 
words have become so complexly enriched with the glamour of a 
mystic symbolism that the Proto-Egyptian’s conception of Osiris 
and the Osirian beliefs must have been vastly different from those 
implied in the words ‘god’ and ‘religion’ at the present time. 
Osiris was regarded as an actual king who had died and been 
reanimated. In other words, he was a man who could bestow 
upon his former subjects the benefits of his advice and help, but 
could also display such human weaknesses as malice, envy and 
all uncharitableness. Much modern discussion completely misses 
the mark by the failure to recognize that these so-called ‘ gods” 
were really men, equally capable of acts of beneficence and of 
outbursts of hatred, and as one or the other aspect became 
accentuated the same deity could become a Vedic deva or an 
Avestan daeva, a deus ora devil, a god of kindness or a demon 
of wickedness. 

‘*‘'The acts which the earliest ‘ gods’ were supposed to per- 
form were not at first regarded as supernatural. They were 
merely the boons which the mortal ruler was supposed to be able 
to confer, by controlling the waters of irrigation and rendering 
the land fertile. It was only when his powers became apotheo- 
sized with a halo of accumulated glory (and the growth of 
knowledge revealed the insecurity of the scientific basis upon 
which his fame was built up) that a priesthood, reluctant to 
abandon any of the attributes which had captured the popular 
imagination, made it an obligation of belief to accept these super- 
natural powers of the gods for which the student of natural 
phenomena refused any longer to be a sponsor. This was the 
parting of the ways between science and religion; and thence- 
forth the attributes of the ‘ gods ’ became definitely and admittedly 
superhuman.”’ ? 

These quotations show how strongly Elliot Smith’s work 

supports the thesis now being argued, that thought was in the 
1 Elliot Smith 32. 2 Id., 32-3. 


CONCLUSION 479 


beginning empirical, that ideas were concrete, based on actual 
human experience, consisting of literal expressions of fact, without 
the slightest admixture of speculation or symbolism. His state- 
ments would require qualification on minor points, but his main 
contention is clear, and, to my mind, entirely correct. 

Support can be gained from other quarters for this position. 
Mr. Donald Mackenzie has just published, in the ‘‘ Journal of 
the Folk-Lore Society,’’ a paper on Colour Symbolism that exactly 
bears out the statements of Elliot Smith with regard to early 
Egyptian thought, and supports the thesis that symbolism is 
founded, in the beginning, on concrete ideas, and not on any 
innate tendency of the human mind.! He has also accumulated 
a large mass of material, which shows how the idea of milk, so 
common in Egypt, has been carried round the world, and given 
rise to an immense accumulation of symbolic thought, by its 
application to trees, shells, and so forth. 

Another scholar, Dr. Alan Gardiner, in his article on ‘‘ Egyptian 
Philosophy ” in the ‘Hastings’ Encyclopedia of Religion and 
Kthics,”’ states that the whole basis of Egyptian thought was 
concrete. ‘* Most scholars would agree with the verdict that the 
Egyptians show no real love of truth, no desire to probe into the 
inner nature of things. Their minds were otherwise oriented : 
a highly gifted people, exhibiting talent in almost every direction, 
their bent was towards material prosperity and artistic enjoy- 
ment ; contemplation and thought for their own sake—necessities 
to peoples of Greece and India—were alien to the temperament 
of the Egyptians.’’ Breasted also says: “The Egyptian... 
always thought in concrete terms and in graphic forms.” ? 

These quotations and remarks serve to open up the general 
question of the growth and development of civilization from the 
mental side. I have claimed that the archaic civilization was put 
together, and that it spread, by a continuous process; that, in 
fact, the growth of communities and of cultural elements pro- 
ceeded by definite steps, each of which was the consequence of 
those that preceded it. I have, further, claimed that most of 
the elements of the archaic civilization were built up in Egypt. 
In the domain of ideas, so far as can be told at present, the 
Egyptians went from one idea to another as the organized body 
of thought in their possession led them. (This refers, of course, 
to the Egyptians who possessed these ideas, usually the priests.) 
Given that this is true, and that Egyptian thought was built up 
ultimately from concrete facts of everyday experience, and that 
it has, in its inception, no element whatever of speculation, it is 
obvious that communities which derived their culture from Egypt 
would adopt a different attitude towards the ideas originated 
in Egypt from that of the Egyptians themselves. The peoples 
influenced by the archaic civilization rejected large parts of the 
culture, and, in fact, chose those elements that harmonized with 

1 Mackenzie i. 136 e.s. 2 Breasted iv. 246. 


480 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


their own experience. They selected, for instance, the ceremonies 
connected with agriculture, leechcraft, burials, house-building, 
because they understood, from the people of the archaic civiliza- 
tion, that without these ceremonies things would go wrong. The 
sun was to them a matter of indifference, simply because, it may 
be argued, nothing had ever occurred in their experience to cause 
them to elaborate ideas with regard to it. The sun had risen and 
set daily for untold years, and was accepted as a matter of course, 
as was the rest of nature. Only when men arrived with an 
organized system of ideas built up round the sun was any attention 
at all paid to it. And, what is more, it would seem that after the 
disappearance of the Children of the Sun, the sky-world only 
remained in men’s thoughts because of the life that it was sup- 
posed to contain. Otherwise, it would evidently have disappeared 
from thought all through the region, as it has in the case of the 
Pueblo Indians, where the life, in the form of the “‘ breath-body,” 
goes to the underground land of the dead. 

The study of Givers of Life, so far as it went, showed that the 
ideas concerning magic held by the peoples that followed the 
archaic civilization were largely based on empirical facts. They 
chose for their magical objects things closely identified with the 
strangers of old, and seem to have shown little signs of inventive- 
ness. It is probable that, as further inquiry goes nearer to the 
root of things, it will be found that, prior to the coming of this 
civilization, the native peoples were devoid of any magical or 
religious practices or ideas. 

It may be contested that this statement is going too far, that 
we do not know what may or may not have happened. That is 
true, but such an argument cuts both ways. It is not possible 
for those who postulate a spontaneous development of thought 
in various parts of the world, to rely on negative evidence to 
support their arguments. The only practical basis on which to 
found conclusions is that of actual ascertained fact. The study 
of Givers of Life shows that it is possible to point to the magical 
practice of a large number of peoples, and to say, with confidence, 
that these people are using, in their magic, objects associated with 
the archaic civilization. The people of the archaic civilization 
were well aware of the magical craft: therefore, as a working 
hypothesis, it may be claimed that the whole of the magic of the 
peoples outside Egypt was ultimately derived from ideas elaborated 
in Egypt, or derived by the Egyptians from a pre-existing source. 
If this working hypothesis be rejected, it will be necessary to 
point to a body of magical ideas and magical practice that could 
not possibly have been derived from the archaic civilization, and 
that task will be difficult, if not impossible. 

Another task will have to be faced by the objector to this 
hypothesis. Elliot Smith has shown with considerable certainty 
that the beginnings of the ideas underlying magical and religious 
practice were bound up with shells, which were used by the people 


CONCLUSION 481 


of Upper Paleolithic times for necklaces and in burial ceremonies. 
He has pointed out the relationship between the shape of the 
opening of the cowrie shell and the portal by which we all enter 
this world ; he and Mr. Jackson have shown the immense ramifi- 
cations of this primordial idea. One class of objects after another 
has been incorporated in the body of ideas concerning Givers of 
Life; so that, ultimately, vast categories are included in the 
scheme, all originally deriving their potency in thought from the 
homely cowrie shell. Similarly it may be argued with regard 
to the use of blood-red substances as Givers of Life. On this 
basis of reasoning, therefore, the objector to the theory that all 
ideas have been transported from Egypt to the uttermost parts 
of the earth, will have to show not only that local ideas are of 
local growth, but also how these ideas arose from facts of concrete 
experience, what was the train of thought that led men to argue 
that such and such an object had potency for good or evil, to help 
or hinder man in his various activities. It is easy to harmonize 
the facts with the doctrine of the similarity of the working of the 
human mind, if it be accepted that the ideas of any community 
are ultimately based on their experience, and are not due to an 
innate tendency to speculation. 

One of the most prominent results of the inquiries conducted 
in the preceding pages has been, I hope, the realization of the 
intimate relationship between all aspects of the life of a community. 
This interrelationship extends to mythology, for, in more than one 
instance, it has been found possible to explain the stories of 
beginnings in terms of the actual experience of the ancestors of 
that community. 

This seems to be true for all the communities that have come 
under review. The fundamental unity of the Polynesian myth- 
ology, or that of the peoples of North America, can, in both cases, 
be put down to unity of experience. The ideas that the Poly- 
nesians and Indians of North America express with regard to the 
world and their relationship to it, are, in both cases, confined to 
a relatively narrow circle of thought, so that .certain themes 
recur with regularity. In the case of the Polynesians it is well 
known, from irrefutable evidence, that of the genealogical tables, 
that the various groups are but shoots from one original stem ; 
in the case of the North American Indians the common possession 
of maize-growing and other elements of culture points to a uniform 
experience in the past. The unity of mythology, so far as it exists, 
corresponds therefore to actual unity of former experience on the 
part of these peoples. 

In other cases, such, for instance, as that of the Toradja of 
Central Celebes, ideas of creation are expressed in terms of contact 
with the people of the archaic civilization, who left images lying 
about in various places. Again, peoples such as the Omaha of 
the United States, the Maori of New Zealand, and the Bugi and 
Macassar peoples of South Celebes, have tales of origin which 

31 


482 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


suggest the dual organization as formerly existing in the com- 
munities from which they were derived. The stories of fishing 
up of islands in the Pacific by Maui, the Polynesian hero, are 
probably descriptions, compounded of various elements, of the 
actual colonization of the islands, of the pearl-fishing, and so on. 
Many other instances could be adduced to suggest that the origin 
tales of the communities of the archaic civilization and its suc- 
cessors have a definite historical basis. That being so, a similarity 
exists between the cases of the peoples just quoted, and that of 
Kgypt. In all instances the tales of origin are compounded of 
ideas based on experience, but the experience is of a different 
kind. 

This is seen by comparing the stories of origin of the Egyptians 
and Sumerians with those already recounted. The Sumerian 
tales of Paradise and the Flood, collected and edited by Mr. 
Langdon, contain ideas that can be expressed in empirical terms. 
The stock of ideas is small: the mother goddess creates men out 
of blood and bone; the first settled community is a place where 
irrigation is practised; Tag-tug, the Sumerian Noah, works in 
a garden; and the thought is so elementary that the notion of 
immortality is absent, the greatest boons attainable for man 
being good health and long life; Tammuz, like Osiris, was an 
actual king. Ideas associated with the animation of images were 
absent in the earliest texts; the sky-world was not yet. The 
only abstract ideas are those centring round the notion of deity ; 
and these, as Elliot Smith has claimed, are ultimately to be 
explained in terms of human experience. 

What, therefore, is to be said of the creation stories of the 
peoples, say, of the Eastern States of North America, in which 
the sky-world existed before the earth, a world tenanted by semi- 
human, semi-animal ancestors, who fished up the earth from the 
bottom of the waters ? These peoples account for their origin 
as the result of the coming to earth of a woman of the sky-world, 
who became pregnant in a mysterious manner and gave birth 
to twins. Their origin stories wind through a series of incidents, 
most of which are, in themselves, wholly unintelligible without 
an historical investigation into the relationship between each 
community and the archaic civilization. 

What attitude is to be maintained towards these stories, now 
that it is suggested that human thought is not free to wander 
where it pleases through the realms of fancy? Using a story 
such as that just sketched out as typical for the great bulk of 
origin tales, is it claimed that, while the first known civilizations, 
those of Sumer and Egypt, had origin stories based directly on 
experience of a homely kind, other peoples, who have shown no 
signs of elaborating arts and crafts such as stone-working and 
pottery-making, had a faculty of inventing, independently, such 
manifold and symbolic ideas as those contained in the story of 
the origin of people from the sky-world ? 


CONCLUSION 483 


The story of the peoples of the Eastern States is unintelligible 
if taken by itself. These peoples could have had no such experi- 
ence themselves of the ocean as to warrant the idea that at first 
only water existed. Even were they coast dwellers, why should 
they elaborate such an idea? But when it is remembered that 
the idea of emergence from the primordial ocean of land or of the 
sun-god is found from America to Egypt, it becomes evident that 
the best explanation is that of assuming that the primordial 
ocean, which, in Egypt, can well be equated to the Nile flood, has 
formed part of the creation story of these peoples because it has 
been carried over the earth. The idea is anchored down in 
concrete fact in one place: in the other it is purely speculative. 
Again, the notion of the sky-world has, in Egypt, a definite history, 
which can, in part, be traced. Yet the story of origin of the 
peoples of the Eastern States claims that the sky-world existed 
before the earth. Since the Egyptians and Sumerians were 
concerned, in their early forms of thought, solely with this earth, 
it is hard to believe that men, who interpret their origins in terms 
of the sky-world, could independently make this great step for- 
ward, that took the Egyptians so much time to perform, and 
indeed was only accomplished by one group of men in that country. 
Similarly in the case of the semi-human, semi-animal denizens of 
the sky-world. How are they to be interpreted in terms of native 
thought ? Why should they be in the sky-world ? It is evident 
that the history of this idea leads closer to reality the farther it is 
followed ; the semi-animal folk correspond to the clan chiefs with 
their animal associations ; and their super-human nature corre- 
sponds to that of the rulers of the archaic civilization. Their rdéle 
of culture originators is fitting. 

It is not necessary to labour this point. The discussions that 
have preceded make it plain that the culture of the peoples of 
the Eastern States can be interpreted in terms of the archaic 
civilization, and that the origin tales of the tribes rest on an 
historical basis. The point insisted on is that the origin tales 
suggest, in themselves, that they must have had a long history, 
since they are so divorced from reality. In this they contrast 
definitely with the origin tales of Egypt and Sumer, where, in 
the early stages, even the idea of creation from images apparently 
was non-existent. This reasoning applies well to cases such as 
those of the Australian All-Fathers, beings who live in the sky, 
and are credited with the power of creation from images. This 
mythology possesses at least three ideas that were comparatively 
late in Egyptian and Sumerian thought—residence in the sky, 
creation from images, and animation by means of breath. Is it 
seriously claimed that the Australians independently evolved 
these ideas, even if, for the moment, abstraction be made of the 
rest of their culture, which shows such strong traces of the 

1 It is unnecessary to remind the reader of the ridiculous ideas of the 
Freudians on this topic. 


484 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


influence of the archaic civilization ? What facts of their experi- 
ence could have led them to think of creation from images, or 
of animation by breath, or of creation itself? Is it not easier to 
think of Biaame, Bunjil, and the rest, as legacies from the archaic 
civilization, bereft of many characteristics, and deprived of cults 
because of the disappearance of their descendants ? 

Throughout the region mention is made of gods. The first 
gods in Egypt and Sumer were certainly men; and, throughout 
the region, the earliest rulers, the Children of the Sun, were closely 
connected with the gods of the sky-world. When, therefore, any 
community without a god-descended class possesses ideas con- 
cerning gods, is it to be believed that they have made a jump 
that enables them to overleap the steps up which toiled the best 
thinkers of the highest civilizations of antiquity ? Is it credible 
that they displayed such powers of abstract thought ? Is it not 
easier to believe that such peoples have derived their ideas of gods 
from the archaic civilization, and that they are dealing with 
notions the origins of which they do not understand ? 

The study in Chapter XIII of the ideas with regard to gods and 
the knowledge of them exhibited by the different social classes, 
supports the contention that such ideas are divorced from their 
original context of fact. For, as has been said, the commoners 
in various communities know nothing whatever of their gods, and 
therefore could not have imagined them. The idea of a god is 
something alien to their experience, their history has not brought 
them to think on such lines, and thus, when the idea is presented 
to them, they tend to reject it. 

The implications are obvious. It can be shown that the stories 
of origins, in Sumer and Egypt, are founded ultimately on concrete 
human experience, and that they have grown up by an orderly 
process of accretion of one idea to another, so that ultimately 
organized systems of thought have emerged. It is found, also, 
that communities outside the Ancient East invariably express 
their origins in terms of systems of ideas similar to those ultimately 
elaborated in the Ancient East, systems of ideas which, moreover, 
are often, in such cases, divorced from any facts of actual ex- 
perience, and are not evidently parts of an organized system of 
thought. In these circumstances it is possible to claim, with 
confidence, that all these communities must have derived their 
systems of thought from other communities. That is to say, the 
mythologies of the peoples of India and the region to the east, 
represent the traditional accounts of the beginnings of those 
communities ; and these accounts, because of the use of ideas 
detached from their original context, and therefore symbolical, 
show clearly that the members of these communities have no 
notion whatever of the real origin of civilization, but are using 
ideas at second-hand. 

If this conclusion be contested, it is necessary to show how and 
why the Egyptian and Sumerians have systems of thought based 


CONCLUSION 485 


so near to actual fact, while those of peoples such as the North 
American tribes, have fantastic stories of origins that obviously 
are false in many respects. It will be necessary to explain why 
the Egyptians founded their ideas on experience, while the Maori 
of New Zealand held symbolical notions about the sexual distinc- 
tions of the sky and earth, notions which cannot possibly have 
been founded directly on experience, but can only have come into 
existence at the end of a long train of thought. 

As in other instances, it is found that the later developments 
in Egypt were parallel to those of the communities supposed to 
have derived their culture from Egypt. Early Egyptian thought 
evidently was empirical and concrete, but Dr. Alan Gardiner 
states that “ The religious literature of Egypt shows a stronger 
leaning to speculation than the secular works, due to a confusion 
of contradictory myths and attributions which must have been 
intolerable to the more learned priests. Cosmogony has the same 
purpose as philosophy—an explanation of the universe; and in 
Egypt it might, under more favourable circumstances, have 
resulted in true philosophy.’’ That is to say, various groups of 
priests, each with their own body of doctrine founded on their 
varied intellectual histories, had come to amalgamate their ideas, 
which in the process necessarily became separated from their 
context in fact, and thus gave rise to speculation, or reasoning 
on ideas the origins of which are unknown. 

It can therefore be claimed that the doctrine of the similarity 
of the working of the human mind provides an explanation of the 
facts. For, as the Egyptians founded their systems of theology, 
mythology and philosophy on experience, so also did the com- 
munities supposed to have derived their culture from Egypt. 
But, in their case, the basis of experience was far different: they 
had been civilized by men who had inherited a culture based on 
long experience, they had come into possession of ideas the real 
meaning of which was unknown to them; and they were forced 
to reason on the basis of these ideas, and thus produced mytho- 
logical systems, stories of beginnings so far as they knew of them. 
It has been seen, in more than one instance, that these ideas were 
capable of rational explanation when the relationship between 
the community in question and the archaic civilization had been 
explained ; that, in fact, an increase in historical knowledge led 
often to the complete rationalization of the story. 

The conclusion of the matter is this : The growth of civilization 
is attained through the development of an organized system of 
thought, founded in the beginning on direct experience, and con- 
sisting of empirical ideas concerning matters that interested early 
man. Once this process has begun, the original themes begin to 
influence one another, and to bring into existence fresh ideas, 
and thus ultimately to produce speculative and abstract thought. 
Applying this conclusion to communities derived from the archaic 
civilization, it will be seen that they had an entirely different 


486 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


experience from Egypt and Sumer, in that they inherited a cultural 
equipment already elaborated, and acquired ideas of the concrete 
origin of which they were ignorant. Their initial capital, partly 
composed of the results of the experience of pre-existing com- 
munities, was modified in transmission to conform to the experi- 
ence of the communities themselves ; and thus it happens that 
the derived communities expressed their origins in terms of ideas 
that had been produced in the original communities as the result 
of a long experience. The thought of the derived communities 
therefore tends to be more speculative, being detached from the 
experience from which it was originally derived, and, in India for 
instance, has elaborated a world for itself, as is seen in the specula- 
tions of the Brahmanas and Upanishads. None the less, it seems 
that all elements of thought, of whatever community, can ulti- 
mately be expressed in terms of the empirical experience of that, 
or some other community, so that human thought is anchored in 
human experience. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
CONCLUSION— Continued 
Lise thought is needed in order to realize that the be- 


haviour of man is largely moulded by the social institutions 

that he has elaborated in the course of the development of 
civilization. He has come to live with his fellows in communities, 
all of which have distinct personalities, so to speak, due to their 
varied histories. The behaviour of the members of these com- 
munities can, as has been seen in the case of warfare, differ 
profoundly, according to the mode of origin of the community, 
and the circumstances in which it finds itself. A review of the 
region seems to reveal communities in a constant state of flux, 
each apparently living its own life more or less independently of 
the others. The idea of independence, plausible as it may seem, 
is, aS has been found, profoundly false; for the various com- 
munities are really all linked together by innumerable ties; and 
all, from the point of view of culture, derive their capital from 
one original source. These communities, therefore, are but the 
expression of a process at work; and one of the fundamental 
tasks of the historian, taking that term in its widest sense, is to 
express that process in its simplest terms, so that the whole range 
of civilization from beginning to end may be grasped without any 
serious difficulty. 

It is commonly thought that the only hope for the student of 
society is the acquisition of knowledge ; more facts, and still more 
facts, is a common catch-phrase. But what is really needed is 
more insight into what facts have been gained. The mere 
accumulation of knowledge in itself is of little use: what really 
is needed is some means of using that knowledge. The student 
should constantly try to group his facts into still wider generaliza- 
tions, he should learn what is more and what is less essential, what 
is primary and what is derived ; for he will only be able to acquire 
the necessary economy of thought by confining himself to what 
is really essential in the growth and development of human 
society. 

The question of what is primary and what is secondary in human 
institutions is of the utmost importance for all students of society. 
An example will probably explain my meaning. It is possible for 
anyone to have a detailed knowledge of human warfare in all ages, 


487 


488 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


and yet to be totally ignorant of the real meaning of that institu- 
tion in human society. He may know all about the conquests of 
Genghis Khan and his descendants, he may be able to tell of the 
triumphs, of Alexander the Great, or of Napoleon, he may have a 
detailed knowledge of the war of 1914. But what will that 
knowledge really avail him ? Nothing, unless he tries to under- 
stand what is the essential meaning of that form of social activity. 
Is war a primary social institution ? That is to say, is it, like the 
family, something rooted deep down in human history, resting 
perhaps upon inherited mental traits, and certain to persist what- 
ever forms civilization may assume, and in itself a potent factor 
in the development of civilization? Or is it but the expression 
of something else? That is to say, does civilization possess a 
social institution that expresses itself by a warlike mode of 
behaviour? If so, then it is possible to eliminate warfare 
from our minds, and to think simply of the institution which 
gives rise to it. For, if that institution be eliminated or modi- 
fied, then the mode of expression, the warfare, will disappear. 
Further, the institution of which warfare is an expression may 
itself possibly be derived from some other institution, and so on, 
The law of growth holds with social institutions, as with ideas 
and elements of culture, and this fact must constantly be held in 
mind. 

In this chapter I shall indicate briefly some of the more general 
instances of the relationships between social institutions and 
human behaviour that have come under notice, and shall discuss 
shortly some of the larger consequences of the appearance of 
ruling groups. : 

In food-gathering communities the family groups live in 
juxtaposition, with no signs of the superposition of one group on 
another. If what has gone before be correct, it follows that 
civilization, meaning the possession of the fundamental craft of 
agriculture, has, from its beginnings, been characterized by the 
phenomenon of superposition of certain family groups on others. 
In the earliest times in Egypt a power-holding hereditary group 
seems to have existed, and such groups have persisted throughout 
the region, only disappearing in cases like those of the Omaha of 
the Plains of North America, but even then leaving strong traces 
behind them. 

It is possible to think of the great group of communities through- 
out the region as consisting of people using givers of life, or 
possessing some other fundamental element of culture, but such 
a formula does not express the existence of different communities 
with definite personalities, with traditions, religious systems, and 
all sorts of variations that make them into separate entities. The 
needed formula is one that will make it possible to think of the 
communities of the whole region as the expressions of a process. 
In the case of the food-gatherers the communities were family 
groups; they were simply the expression of the fundamental 


CONCLUSION 489 


instinctive tendencies of men, the sexual, maternal instincts, and 
the sentiments that grow up in the family circle. But the food- 
producing communities are more than that; they are the ex- 
pression of something beyond the instinctive tendencies of men. 
They result from the combination of cultural elements that have 
been elaborated by men in the course of the development of 
society. 

It is commonly asserted that men possess a gregarious instinct, 
that causes them to accumulate in communities; and that the 
possession of this instinct has helped in the process of development 
of civilization. If that be the case, it is remarkable that all the 
food-gathering peoples show no traces of this process at all, for 
they live in family groups.t And, moreover, as has been seen, the 
process of development of civilization is of an entirely different 
order from that of the mere expression of some uniform instinctive 
tendency of man. No traces exist, throughout the region, of 
the working of an instinctive tendency to live in groups, except 
in the case of groups of relatives. The clan system itself, on 
which the archaic civilization is built up, is simply a variation, 
produced by agriculture, of the same habit. Once agriculture is 
introduced, it is possible for family groups to live in closer contact, 
but that is not evidence of their innate desire to do so. 

Reasoning on the lines of the instinctive tendency of men to 
live in communities leads nowhere; least of all does it explain 
the means whereby one group of families is able to dominate 
others, and often to cause various clan groups, that is, various 
enlarged families, to live in juxtaposition. That is the funda- 
mental problem of the political organization of society: and, in 
view of its importance, the cultural element of which it is the 
expression itself attains to importance. 

What cultural element expresses itself throughout the region 
in the form of society in which family groups, clans or otherwise, 
are amalgamated into a state? The class system supplies the 
answer. In the analysis of the dual organization of society, the 
form of society of the archaic civilization, it was found that the 
distinctive features of both sides of the dual grouping were derived 
ultimately from the ruling group itself—the hostility, the contrast 
of light and dark colours, superior and inferior, elder and younger, 
sacred chief and war chief, were all derived from peculiar features 
of the dual ruling group of the archaic civilization. The com- 
munities of the archaic civilization were presumably formed, in 
all eases, from others, as daughter settlements, which, by a con- 
tinuous process, transplanted the constitution of society into a 
new place. That is to say, the ruling group of one community 
transferred itself partly to another place, and thus the process 
continued. Without the ruling group, the archaic civilization, 
as it is known, would have been extinguished, as it was, for 
instance, in the Malay Peninsula. The whole of the ideas con- 

1 Perry xili. 515 e.s.: Speck iv. 


490 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


cerning the sky-world, cults of deities, the doctrine of theogamy, 
and other cultural elements, were definitely linked on to this other 
cultural element. As has been seen in Egypt, the power-holding 
group formed a focus of attraction for other cultural elements. 
The existence of a ruling group induced the rulers to invent all 
sorts of cultural elements to keep it in existence. The motive 
was selfish, but it provided the necessary stimulus. Although 
the life of the community must have gone on more or less un- 
disturbed throughout the region, yet the formation of states, 
with their varying personalities, is ultimately to be ascribed to 
the institution of the class-system. How many communities in 
the region have no ideas connected with the sky-world? Very 
few. Very few, therefore, have escaped the influence of the 
Children of the Sun. Every community, with the possible excep- 
tion of the food-gatherers, has some sort of a religious system, 
some ideas concerned with deities—that is, every community is, 
in some way or other, the expression of the class-system as it 
sprang up in Egypt. 

It is legitimate to claim, therefore, that the process of expansion 
of the archaic civilization all over the region was really that of 
the growth of the power-holding group from one place to another, 
each community that consisted of groupings other than those of 
families pure and simple, being but the expression of the existence 
of aruling group. It is thus not necessary to think of a series of 
communities from one end of the region to the other: it is only 
necessary to think of the continuous development of a process. 
The break-up of the archaic civilization, and the production of 
new communities, can likewise be expressed in terms of the same 
process. The fundamental element of these societies, the ruling 
group, modified itself, and gave rise to fresh groups, which pro- 
duced new communities that were the expression of the modifica- 
tion of the ruling group. 

The study of ruling groups leads to the question of warfare and 
other modes of human behaviour. Food-gathering communities, 
in their primordial state, are entirely peaceful, not only, it seems, 
towards the members of other family groups, or towards the 
members of different tribes, but in all relations inside the group 
itself. That is to say, violence and cruelty are apparently rare. 
How far this is strictly accurate further investigation only will 
show ; but the published accounts of the behaviour of peoples of 
the food-gathering stage, and also of certain of those of the food- 
producing stage, go to show that cruelty and violent behaviour 
are not universal characteristics of men. This is not the place 
to enter upon a detailed investigation of the problem of violence ; 
but a few suggestions may be allowed on the basis of the dis- 
cussions carried out in previous chapters. 

The people of the region underwent a process of education in 


1 Even in more highly developed communities this is often mainly true. 
» See, for instance, Huguenin (p. 40). 


CONCLUSION 491 


violent behaviour: this was seen in Egypt, Babylonia and else- 
where. Fighting forces developed from militias to professional 
‘armies. Throughout the region the first form of warfare was 
connected with human sacrifice ; and, so far as the evidence goes 
at present, it can be said that warfare in the first instance was but 
the expression of the pre-existing cultural element of human 
sacrifice, which itself was founded upon certain ideas concerning 
the necessity of human blood for agriculture, for the rejuvenation 
of the king and so on, and thus was, in itself, a complicated 
element of culture. Ignoring other elements that complicate the 
problem, the consideration of human sacrifice shows that this 
form of cruelty depends for its existence on a developed cultural 
environment. Throughout the region it was intimately associated 
with the cult of the great mother and the sun, and with agriculture. 
It has other associations, but these need not be considered at 
present. It was found that, when human sacrifice was introduced 
to places such as Indonesia, where the archaic civilization was not 
deeply rooted, it soon became transformed into the more humane 
practice of head-hunting, and also into animal sacrifice. The 
form of cruelty exhibited in human sacrifice was only possible in 
the case of people who possessed the civilization of which it was an 
integral part. 

This is well seen in the contrast between Mexico and the region 
to the north. The Mexicans, under the Aztecs, practised human 
sacrifice on an immense scale, as well as ceremonial cannibalism. 
Both these practices die out in the United States as the cultural 
stage of the Mexicans recedes, presumably because the general 
breakdown of the archaic civilization caused men to lose that 
particular form of induced behaviour. Human sacrifice, there- 
fore, provided the communities that practised it with an education 
in cruelty that, in Mexico for instance, led them to great excesses. 
Other peoples, who had not inherited the culture of the archaic 
civilization, were less educated in this form of behaviour, and did 
not exhibit it in so definite a manner. 

In another way it can be seen that the communities of the 
archaic civilization were educated in violent and cruel modes of 
behaviour. The dual organization, from one end of the region 
to the other, was characterized by the exhibition of an hostility 
between the two sides of the community, in spite of the fact that 
they intermarried, and were united in ceremonial performances. 
This hostility was a disruptive force that ultimately smashed the 
archaic civilization, and gave rise to fresh communities of a war- 
like nature. In several places, such as New Guinea, the whole of 
the warfare apparently consists of struggles between communities 
on either side of the dual organization. As in the case of human 
sacrifice, the amount of violence displayed depends upon the 

1 It is interesting to note that the Kiowa of the Plains do not permit the 


self-mutilation that is so prominent a feature of the Sun Dance among other 
tribes (Scott 345). 


492 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


degree to which the culture of the archaic civilization has been 
received. In Australia the fighting is not serious: in Polynesia 
it was deadly. In proportion as the various native peoples were 
influenced by the archaic civilization so did they begin to fight.+ 
The great development of fighting that took place at the break- 
up of the archaic civilization, in which new communities with war- 
gods and warlike organizations came into existence, was the result 
of events that took place in the ruling groups of the archaic 
civilization themselves. Thus the modern form of warfare, that 
of fighting for domination, is the direct result of a process of 
education in violence that men experienced during the develop- 
ment of civilization. 

Since human sacrifice, and the hostility between the two sides 
of the dual organization, are so intimately connected with the 
ruling groups, it can safely be said, as a working hypothesis, that 
warfare, in the beginning, was a secondary result of the existence 
of ruling groups, which, for various reasons, gradually educated 
themselves and their followers in violent and cruel modes of 
behaviour. It is interesting to note that the communities which 
developed the more violent forms of warfare to a great extent gave 
up human sacrifice. That is but another instance of the phe- 
nomenon that a cultural element can only survive in the proper 
environment, particularly in that in which it originated, and that 
it tends to disappear when its environment is altered. 

The education in cruel modes of behaviour that can be wit- 
nessed in action throughout the region is an excellent instance of 
the interaction between social institutions and human behaviour. 
Given that the behaviour of the food-gatherers constitutes the 
normal type, it follows that any deviation has been caused by 
some human institution. A constant interaction is proceeding 
between institutions and human beings, institutions are con- 
stantly being modified, and in their turn are constantly influencing 
human behaviour. 

The cruel behaviour of men in the time of the archaic civilization 
was centred mainly round two institutions : one connected with 
ritual human sacrifice, the foundation of which was the supposed 
necessity for human blood as an elixir of life ; the other, ordinary 
fighting as we know it, in which two groups of men are pitted 
against each other. The cruelty involved in human sacrifice is 
understandable. The necessity for blood caused men to perform 
acts which were, in all probability, abhorrent to them. The 
performance of these acts would, nevertheless, provide an educa- 
tion in cruelty. The decadence of human sacrifice among warlike 
peoples shows that this form of cruelty is on a different plane 
from that involved in ordinary combat. The great development 
in warfare consequent on the break-up of the archaic civilization 

1 Heer Kruyt tells me that, in Central Celebes, the warlike behaviour of 


peoples diminishes in proportion to the remoteness of their culture from that 
of the archaic civilization. 


~ CONCLUSION 498 


was accompanied by some profound political changes. Judging 
from the culture-sequences in Indonesia, the later rulers were 
not so restricted in their actions as their predecessors ; the councils 
had fallen more or less into decay, and chiefs were able to do much 
as they pleased. In the archaic civilization the war-chief was 
subordinate to the sacred chief, and thus had less power. His 
actions were circumscribed, and as he was only in authority when 
fighting began, he evidently could not wield such powers as a 
warlike king. That is to say, when the sacred king disappeared, 
and the warrior aristocracy took his place, the aims of the ruling 
class were entirely different, and they gave themselves up to 
fighting on a large scale. It seems certain that this education in 
violent modes of behaviour has had repercussions on all phases of 
social life, which will need detailed study in all stages of civiliza- 
tion. It can be shown, beyond doubt, that the increasingly 
militaristic and violent spirit that has been acquired by man has 
resulted in the subjection of women. The sexes in the food- 
gathering communities are on a stage of perfect equality, the 
normal condition of things.t Such was also the case in early Egypt, 
Sumer and Babylonia; in communities such as the Khasi, the 
Bugi and Macassar States of Southern Celebes ; in Micronesia ; 
and among the Iroquois of North America. But when warfare 
became a prominent occupation, woman’s manifest incapacity 
for violent modes of behaviour, and the increasing attention paid 
to fighting by ruling classes, tended, among other things, to put 
her in a position of inferiority, and man became predominant. 
Polygyny is also an expression of this transformation. 

The process has not stopped here. For, as can be shown 
beyond doubt, the treatment of children in food-gathering com- 
munities is vastly better than in our own communities. Savage 
children are, as a rule, treated with all kindness, and are petted 
and spoiled.2 It is only in communities that have adopted 
violent modes of behaviour that cruel methods of education of 
children are thought to be necessary. This topic can only be 
brought to notice in this place. It is evident that it is of the 
utmost importance for mankind, and one that needs the most 
intensive study in the future, if it is to be possible to order society 
on right lines. It is permissible, perhaps, to stray beyond bounds, 
and to note that, in our own days, a profound change is coming 
over the face of society. The great democratic movement that 
is taking place is accompanied by the continual adoption of less 
violent modes of behaviour. It is only necessary to compare, in 
our country, the penal laws of the eighteenth and the twentieth 
centuries to understand how men are modifying their views. If 
the results gained in this book be true, it should follow that this 
transformation of behaviour, this reluctance to use violence that 
is becoming so apparent, is accompanied by social and political 


1 Cf. Perry vi. 
2 See for instance A. R. Brown (p. 51) in the case of the Andamanese. 


494 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


changes, and that all have to be studied as a whole, and not piece- 
meal. I mention this as an instance of the way in which the 
study of early forms of society can throw light on modern 
problems. 

Another instance of the education of mankind in certain ideas 
and modes of behaviour may be mentioned. In the course of 
the discussion on exogamy, it was claimed that this social rule 
went through certain stages, in which the restriction of marriage 
to people not related by ties of blood became more and more 
evident. In the dual organization, the rule of exogamy could 
only, by the greatest stretching of terms, be claimed as a restriction 
of incest ; for it marked certain groups of relatives as possible 
mates, and ruled out other relatives, equally nearly related, as 
impossible. Moreover, it led finally to the idea that the most 
desired marriage of all was that between actual first cousins, the 
children of a brother and sister. This notion is widespread, being 
found, in India, among the Dravidian peoples, in Timor, among 
the royal family of Boni in Celebes, and elsewhere. The rule of 
exogamy, in these circumstances, has no pretence whatever to be 
a rule of prohibition of incest. Everything points to it as a 
positive injunction to marry into another group, not a prohibition 
against marriage in a certain group. As the dual organization 
broke down the rule became that the members of all other clans 
were possible mates. Finally marriage was only forbidden to 
blood relatives. This line of development suggests that the idea 
of incest was taught men by means of the marriage rules of the 
dual organization, and that, previously, no rule existed. It may 
have been that, as is claimed by Westermarck and others, men 
prefer to choose their mates among strangers, owing to the great 
attraction that novelty has in sexual matters ; but no evidence 
exists, so far as I am aware, to show that this preference was 
elevated into a rule, especially if it be claimed that the rule was 
to avoid incest. Preference for strangers, and avoidance of 
incest, are poles apart, and no amount of argument can bring 
them together. The matter is not yet quite clear, for the forms 
of marriage of the Children of the Sun complicate the question ; 
but it would seem that, in the archaic civilization, the rule usually 
was that the royal family practised incestuous unions, and the 
commoners were bound by the rule of marriage into the other side 
of the community. In Indonesia and elsewhere, tales tell of the 
prohibition of incest by beings who are said to have practised 
incest themselves. The punishments meted out by the sky 
peoples, the traditional representatives of the people of the archaic 
civilization, show that the injunction was something strange to 
the natives. What the real injunction was can only be surmised : 
probably it was that marriage had to be exogamous. ‘The natives 
found that the very people who enjoined this form of marriage, 
practised incest, and may have come to interpret the positive 
command as a prohibition against incestuous practices ; so that, 


CONCLUSION 495 


when the dual organization broke down, the practice was remem- 
bered in terms, both of the incest of the Children of the Sun, and 
of the exogamy of the dual grouping, and this duality of thought 
was realized in the incest prohibition. Those communities that 
had gone through the previous stages then came to interpret the 
rule as meaning that no marriages must be practised between 
people who were related on either side of the family. 

Incest was a common feature of Egyptian life. The attitude 
of the Egyptians towards incest, as stated by Sethe, well 
exemplifies the process just outlined. He says that “ the notion 
of incest, in the strong sense in which the Hebrews, Greeks and 
Romans understood it, and also as Christendom understands it, 
seems to have been foreign to the Egyptians, at least in ancient 
times, even if already at that time the people may have avoided 
marriages between parents and children because of natural feelings 
and on natural grounds.’ ! The Greeks, Hebrews and Romans 
have demonstrably gone through a process of development similar 
to that experienced by the communities of the archaic civilization, 
and they have all gained possession of the feeling of incest. It 
is thus probable that the scheme just outlined for the people of 
the region under consideration is correct in its essential features. 
The earliest feeling may have been that of the greater desirability 
of marriages with strangers, partly because of their greater sexual 
attractiveness, partly, perhaps, for other reasons. The innova- 
tion of the arrangement of intermarriage between the two sides 
of the ruling group in Egypt brought to men’s minds for the first 
time the conception of a marriage regulation. This regulation, 
in time, owing to the working of more than one cause, tended to 
become restrictive, and to take on the ultimate form of incest 
prohibition.? 

These few instances are brought forward as examples of the 
sort of problem that emerges from the study of culture-sequences. 
The vicissitudes through which the archaic civilization has gone 
may be described in terms both of history and of psychology. 
The historical description must, of course, come first, and, in this 
book, the great bulk of the attention of the reader is occupied 
with such problems. But it is impossible to ignore the psycholo- 
gical aspects of the process, and the examples just considered 
serve to indicate the problems that confront the student of 
society. 

It is not possible here to do more than indicate what appear 
to be the main lines of development of society as the result of the 
interaction of men and the social institutions that they have 
brought into being. The formulation of the historical scheme 
of development is but the prelude to the more fundamental 
problem of assigning causes to the various phenomena. It will 


1 Sethe v. 60. 
2 I owe to Professor Elliot Smith the realization of the real meaning of 


incest. 


496 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


be necessary to study the behaviour of human societies in detail 
before this branch of inquiry is firmly established. Nevertheless, 
it is permissible to sketch, in broad outlines, what appear, at the 
present, to be some of the principal forms of interaction between 
men aiid social institutions. So far as this line of inquiry has 
proceeded, it seems probable that the institution of the class 
system has been fraught with great consequences to civilization. 
The great development of religious systems has taken place within 
ruling groups; the political systems of states owe their origin to 
the interactions of ruling groups, and, finally, the important 
institution of warfare seems to be entirely centred round ruling 
groups. Thus they have played a part of supreme importance 
in the growth and spread of civilization. 

The demonstration of the truth, or the falsity, of the thesis, 
that human warfare is the outcome of the existence of the class- 
system, whereby the members of the ruling group, on account 
of their subjection to the influences of certain social institutions, 
develop a cruel mode of behaviour, will have to be attained on 
the basis of an extensive exposition of the facts. 

The problem of the warlike behaviour of mankind is inextric- 
ably bound up with another important problem, that of the 
conditions in which advances in culture are made. It has already 
been stated that the development of new cultural elements seems 
to be dependent on the existence of the proper cultural environ- 
ment. When a civilization is transplanted to a new region, and 
thereby undergoes transformations more or less fundamental, 
the equilibrium between the various cultural elements is upset, 
ideas become detached from their contexts, and the civilization 
tends to break down. What is the principal cause of this break- 
up ? Or, in other words, what is the social element that is most 
destructive of culture? If that question can be answered, then 
it is possible that the first step may have been taken towards 
the foundation of a study of the necessary conditions for the 
advance of culture. 

Beyond any reasonable doubt, the principal cause of the break- 
up of the archaic civilization was the existence of hostility 
between the two sides of the dual organization. It is remarkable 
that this hostility was carried from one end of the region to 
another ; and that, in places where the old ruling group persisted, 
this ruling group ultimately destroyed itself, more or less com- 
pletely, owing to this cause. The hostility owed its origin, as 
has been seen, to the actions of ruling groups, to the struggles of 
the rulers of Upper and Lower Egypt for supremacy, which 
makes it, therefore, a secondary result of the existence of ruling 
groups. When these ruling groups began to struggle for supre- 
macy, the arts and crafts declined with great rapidity, and many 
cultural elements disappeared, including, sometimes, that of 
writing. That is to say, the existence of a ruling group possessed 
_ of the necessary warlike behaviour, is a very destructive element 


CONCLUSION 497 


of society. Evidently its influence does not merely confine itself 
to producing a warlike mode of behaviour in the community ; it 
also prevents the invention of fresh elements of culture. 

In Egypt it seems certain that practically all the arts and crafts 
were invented before the end of the Third Dynasty. Weaving, 
metal-working, pottery-making, house-building, and so forth 
were invented long before historical times. Although the con- 
ditions in which these inventions were made were not known, 
it would seem probable, judging from the pre-dynastic Egyptian 
graves, that the ruling group, even if one existed, had but little 
power, compared with what it had in the Third Dynasty, when 
it was possible for the king to build enormous pyramids. It may 
therefore be urged that the growing power of the rulers, and their 
absorption in the problem of getting enough supplies for their 
temples, prevented the Egyptian people from turning their 
minds to the invention of fresh arts and crafts, and caused all 
attention to be centred round the supposed welfare of one small 
group of the community in this life and in the world to come. 
The struggles within this group culminated, as has been seen, in 
the ruin of the country for centuries: at the end of the Sixth 
Dynasty Egypt was given over to anarchy, directly as the result 
of the struggles between the various branches of the ruling group. 
What happened in Egypt happened in other parts of the region ; 
the archaic civilization was transplanted with a ruling group that 
held so much power that further advance in civilization was 
practically impossible. Evidently the archaic civilization was, 
in itself, an unfavourable medium for the production of new 
elements of civilization. 

What happens when, in a favourable environment, the archaic 
civilization is broken up to some extent, but not completely ? 
What happens, for instance, with the elimination of certain 
elements connected with the ruling groups ? 

From time to time in the history of the world a genius has 
arisen, who has seen through the mist, and has perceived that 
man, in order to attain to greater perfection and happiness, must 
throw away many of the institutions with which he has surrounded 
himself. One of the most important of these great teachers was 
Buddha. He preached that men should rely, in their life, not 
on hypotheses but on facts, on reason not on authority, and thus 
he struck, at one blow, at the very foundations of the civilization 
of his time. The aim of Buddhism is, it is said, ‘“‘ to produce in 
every man a thorough internal transformation by self-culture and 
self-conquest.”* Buddha entirely rejected the caste system. 
‘* Between ashes and gold there is a marked difference, but between 
a Brahmin and a Chandala there is nothing of the kind. A 
Brahmin is not produced like fire by the friction of dry wood ; 
he does not descend from the sky nor from the wind, nor does he 
arise piercing the earth. The Brahmin is brought forth from the 

1 Narasau 32. 
32 


498 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


womb of woman in exactly the same way as the Chandala.” 
Buddhism, in fact, preached equality of mankind, and also the 
equality of woman and men.! The Buddhist doctrines, therefore, 
were entirely subversive of those that must have been held 
previously in India. Freed, therefore, from many of the ideas 
that had grown up in the archaic civilization in the course of ages, 
and foreed,once again, to base reasoning and conduct on experience, 
what was the form of behaviour manifested by the Buddhist 
monks, and what part did Buddhism play in the development of 
civilization ? The Buddhist monks were great civilizers. ‘“‘ It 
was often the monks who encouraged the people in the cultivation 
of the arts of peace and life. Often they themselves led the 
people in the transformation of waste ijands into rice-fields.” 2 
That Buddhism was a great civilizing agency is made clear from 
the following quotation, which could be supported by many 
others. “A tangible way in which a religion manifests its actual 
influence upon civilization is art. The great glory of Buddhism 
is that it has always ministered to the satisfaction of esthetic 
aspirations. Wherever Buddhism has prevailed, artistic pagodas, 
vast viharas, beautiful stupas have come into existence. The 
finest buildings in Japan are the Buddhist temples. The beauty 
and charm of the frescoes of Ajanta caves serve as monumental 
proofs of the wonderful inspiration which the religion of the 
Tathagata imparted to art. Brahminism has no art of its own 
in India, and the plastic arts of later Vaishnavism and Saivaism 
are the bastard children of the sculpture of the bhikshus. . 
The best era of Indian medicine was contemporary with the 
ascendancy of Buddhism . . . the true schools of Indian medicine 
arose in the public hospitals established by Asoka and other 
Buddhist kings in every city. ... All sciences and arts were 
studied in the chief centres of Buddhist civilization, such as the 
great Buddhist university of Nalanda. According to the great 
orientalist, Theodore Benfrey, the very bloom of the intellectual 
life of India, whether it found expression in Buddhist or Brah- 
minical works, proceeded substantially from the Dharma, and 
was contemporaneous with the period in which Buddhism 
flourished.’ ® 

It is possible to argue that new cultural influences were coming 
into India at the time when Buddhism was promulgated, that 
new ideas were at work like a ferment in men’s minds, causing 
them to strike out in new directions. The rise of Buddhism may, 
therefore, be put down to a “cultural influence.” But until 
such a term is strictly defined, it is meaningless, and simply tends 
to confuse thought. It is becoming the fashion to speak of “ cul- 
tural influences,” and to use this phrase as a ‘‘ catch-phrase,”’ 
which can be applied to any problem. But, in India, the question 
is to understand how and why, at one period, and one period only, 


1 Narasau 71, 88, 93. 2 Id., 114, 115. 
3 Narasau 34-7. 


CONCLUSION 499 


that of the rise and spread of Buddhism, the intellectual life of 
India was immensely stimulated, so that, later on, with the rise 
of Brahminical influence and the spread of the caste-system, all 
signs of creative activity disappeared. In India of the time of 
Buddhism, activity was shown in all aspects of life. The stimulus 
did not merely act in one direction but in all. It seems as though 
some repressing factor has been removed which allowed the 
intellectual faculties full play. This is true, it seems to me, of 
all times in the history of the world when great advances have 
been made. A country is not active in one direction, it is active 
in all. 

It is plausible to argue that the teaching of Buddha himself, 
whatever be its antecedents, formed the first impulse towards 
the new development of thought, to claim that he removed some 
of the mental factors that repressed original thought, and allowed 
the minds of men once more to have free play. Before his time 
thought was conventionalized and stereotyped, owing to certain 
social causes : he freed it, allowed the mind to return to concrete 
ideas, and the consequences were great. It is significant that 
his doctrines were essentially democratic ; he preached equality 
of men and women, he denied the basis of the caste system, that 
is to say, he denied the basis on which rested the class system. 
This he did successfully for a time, and at the same time men’s 
minds were free to advance in all directions. 


Every one is familiar with the presence, in this country, and 
elsewhere in western Europe, of megalithic monuments and 
other cultural elements that suggest the presence of the archaic 
civilization. It is necessary, however, to remember that the 
problems presented by Europe will differ somewhat from those 
for the region just examined. For, as is known, the Ancient 
East was radiating influences towards western Europe at very 
early dates, and probably long before the time of the Fifth Dynasty 
of Egypt. <A perusal of the works of Sir Arthur Evans, Siret, 
Déchelette and others, shows that Egypt was probably in 
relationship with Europe as early as the First Dynasty, if not 
before, either directly or by way of Crete. It is therefore not 
necessary to expect that the first civilized people to visit western 
Kurope should display all the cultural elements of the archaic 
civilization, for several of them demonstrably originated at a later 
date. At the same time they should display some of them ; and, 
if the general principles arrived at be correct, the successive 
waves of influence that swept over Europe should approximate 
more and more closely to that of the archaic civilization. 

In one respect the conditions controlling the spread of civiliza- 
tion from the Ancient East to western Europe should be identical 
with those controlling the distribution of the archaic civilization 
in the Pacific and elsewhere in the region—the earliest settlements 
should be situated near sources of raw materials. This, I take 


500 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


it, is a fundamental general principle of human geography that 
cannot be upset. Man, from the earliest times of which there is 
knowledge, has lived near his supplies of raw materials, and has 
got his food locally. He has never, so far as can be told, occupied 
a new country because he was pressed for food. This supposition 
is baseless, and the sooner it is abandoned the better for science. 
I have already shown, as has been insisted on more than once in 
this book, that the earliest food-producing people in England 
and Wales settled near the sources of flint, gold, tin, and so forth, 
and thus exhibited desires identical in nature with those of the 
archaic civilization elsewhere. Throughout the whole range of 
the Paleolithic Age certain favoured spots of France, and northern 
Spain, and of the Rhine and Danube valleys, have been inhabited 
by successive waves of peoples, presumably because of the supplies 
of flint or the limestone caverns that existed there.! Similarly, 
in this country, round Brandon and Dunstable, successive 
cultures, from the paleolithic onwards, have chosen these flint- 
bearing localities for settlement.2 And as the needs of civilized 
men increased, so did their choice of locality become more varied. 
The fundamental principle holds from the beginning to the end 
of human history, so that, at the present day, the distribution 
of coal in this country mainly determines that of population. 

Since the Egyptians and others were setting out to seek raw 
materials before the archaic civilization had been fully developed, 
it follows that the earliest food-producing settlements in Europe 
should display a simpler culture than those, say, of India. This 
is so, for the so-called ‘‘ Neolithic ’’ stage of culture in. Europe 
lacks many of the fundamental elements of the archaic civilization. 
Nevertheless, the aims of these men were to seek out raw materials. 
It is only on the arrival of the use of stone for construction that 
signs appear of the archaic civilization. As to the exact date of 
megalithic monuments in Europe it is not easy to lay down any 
general rule ; but it would seem that it is best to think that they 
were the work of men who knew of metals, of gold, copper and tin, 
for their distribution strongly suggests mining activities. But it 
is certain that there suddenly appeared in Europe several new 
cultural elements that strongly suggest the archaic civilization ; 
bronze daggers, solar symbols, a new form of grave and a great 
use of gold for personal ornament. The solar symbols suggest 
at once the Children of the Sun ; and the daggers suggest warfare, 
of which, it must be noted, no signs whatever exist previously, 
in connexion with the “neolithic ” phase of civilization. The 
facts suggest that ruling groups were gradually spreading across 
Kurope, beginning in Egypt and moving out by way of Crete and 
Mycenzan Greece.? I shall discuss this matter in my forth- 
coming work on the ‘‘Growth of Civilization.” 


1 Cf. the various maps in Osborn. 
2 See Sketch Map No. 6 in Perry xii., which is based on J. Evans. 
5 Cf. A, J. Evans i. for evidence with regard to the spread from Egypt of 


CONCLUSION 501 


Although it is not possible to say much with regard to the 
social and political conditions of Europe in the days of the coming 
of the Children of the Sun, who have survived in Greek, Celtic 
and other mythologies, yet it seems certain that the archaic 
civilization has, at one period, been transplanted bodily into the 
basin of the Mediterranean. For a people, known as the Pheenic- 
ians, who, according to their traditions, originated in the Persian 
Gulf, on the Behrein Islands the seat of famous pearl-fisheries, 
came over and settled on the Syrian coast, and forthwith proceeded 
to spread all over the basin of the Mediterranean, and probably 
into the Atlantic. The ruling class of these people were Children 
of the Sun, who practised mummification and human sacrifice. 
The Phoenicians were skilful metal-workers, great sailors and 
traders, who ransacked the countries for treasures, as may be seen 
from the Twenty-Seventh Chapter of Ezekiel. They were expert 
stone-workers, and built the Temple for Solomon. They were 
skilful irrigators.1 What is more, their culture exhibits strong 
traces of the dual organization. Tyre and Sidon seem to have 
formed a dual grouping of cities, with constant rivalry and hostility 
between them, but the evidence is somewhat obscure on this point. 
Each city had two harbours, north and south.? It is not said 
whether these were associated with different functions, but that 
of Carthage was also dual, and was divided into the military and 
commercial harbours.2 These harbours were artificial, and were 
formed by breakwaters, just like those of Ponape. The stone- 
work was megalithic. ‘‘ The construction of the central pier is 
remarkable. It is formed of massive blocks of sandstone, 16 ft. 
long by 7 ft. wide and deep, which are placed transversely, 
so that the lengths form the thickness of the pier, and their 
ends the wall on either side. On both sides of the wall are 
quays of cement.” * Tyre was a double city, with seaward and 
landward parts, as probably was also Carthage. The seaward 
part was built on an island just near the coast, just as in the 
Carolines. This was built first, and then another city was built 
on the land opposite, the two constituting a dual group, like those 
of the archaic civilization from one end of the region to the other.® 
Little is known of political organization, but what is known goes 
to link the Phoenicians still closer to the communities of the 
archaic civilization in Polynesia and elsewhere. For the families 
of the king and the high priest of Melcarth at Tyre apparently 
formed an intermarrying group. The government was largely 
carried on by an aristocratic council, as throughout the archaic 
civilization. Carthage and its colonies were governed by two 


the sun-cult, and therefore, according to the principles worked out here, of 
the Children of the Sun, to Crete in the Mycenzan period. 

1 See Rawlinson, Movers, Kenrick, for an account of the Pheenician civiliza- 
tion: R. B. Smith, Meltzer, Church, and Bétticher for the Carthaginians. 

2 Rawlinson, 65, 68, 69, 70. 

8 «Enecy. Brit.’’, Art. Carthage, vol. V. 427. 

* Rawlinson 75. 5 Rawlinson 69. 8 R. B. Smith 15, 


502 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Suffetes, kings elected from certain clans, who had _ priestly 
functions. The nobility of Carthage is said to have formed two 
hostile factions, another prominent trait of the archaic civiliza- 
tion. Moreover, civil strife is said to have led to the break-up of 
the old Phcenician society. Enough has been said to show that 
a stable foundation probably exists for the theories so lucidly 
discussed by Dr. Rendel Harris regarding Twin Cults in Europe. ? 
When it is remembered that the Phcenicians, the Spartans and 
the Romans had, in their social and political organization, so 
much that characterizes the dual organization in India, the 
Pacific, North America, and, of course, Egypt, it is evident 
that these beliefs in all probability have, as elsewhere, a direct 
historical basis, the reconstruction of which will, lam convinced, 
throw considerable light on the manner of growth and development 
of the civilization of Kurope. When it is remembered, too, that 
the Phoenicians admittedly depended largely on Egypt for their 
culture, it is evident that they constitute a typical example of 
the hypothetical communities, originated in the Indian Ocean, as 
the result of Egyptian enterprise, which, by continuous seg- 
mentation, produced a long chain of daughter settlements, 
all situated near the sources of raw materials, and all destined 
to break up as the result of internal instability and external 
ageression. 


1 Rendel Harris. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 


‘“* L’Anthropologie,”’ Paris. — 

“The American Anthropologist,’ Washington, New 
York, Lancaster. 

** Report of the Australian Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science.”’ 

‘** Ancient Egypt.” 

** KGnigliche-Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften 
zu Berlin,’ Abhandlungen. 

** Annual Reports of the Bureau of American Eth- 
nology,” Washington. 

** Archeological Survey of India.”’ 

‘** Bulletin of the Bureau of Ethnology,’’ Washington. 

‘* Bijdragen tot de taal-land-en volkenkund van Neder- 
landsch-Indie,” ’=s Gravenhage. 

‘‘ Hastings’ Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.” 

** Folk-Lore,’’ London. 

** Internationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie,’”’ Leiden. 

** International Congress of Americanists.”’ 

**The Journal of American Folk-Lore,’? Boston and 
New York. 

** Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,” Calcutta. 

‘** Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society,” 
Patna. 

‘* Journal of the Ethnological Society of London.” 

** Journal of the Polynesian Society.” 

** Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute.” 

** Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,’’ London. 

‘** Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales.”’ 

‘* Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,’’ Calcutta. 

** Bulletin of the Madras Government Museum,” 
Madras. 

‘* Memoirs of the Geological Survey of India.” 

‘* Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,” 
Calcutta. 

‘** Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archzology,”’ 
London. 

‘* Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy.” 

‘** Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London.” 

‘** Tijdschrift van het (koninklijk) Nederlandsch 
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap,’’ Amsterdam, Leiden. 

‘* Transactions of the New Zealand Institute.” 

‘** Transactions of the Royal Anthropological Institute,” 
London. 

‘* Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society,” London, 

503 


504 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


TTLV .. .. ‘* Tijdschrift voor indische taat, land-en volkenkunde,” 
Batavia and ’s Gravenhage. ~ 

USGS . . “United States Geological Survey.” 

VBG ... ‘* Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap 

; van kunsten en wetenschappen,’” Batavia. 

VKAW. . “ Verhandelingen van het (koninklijk) Akademie der 
wetenschappen,”? Amsterdam. 

VMKAW . “ Verslagen en mededeelingen van het ... (konink- 
lijk) Akademie der wetenschappen,’? Amsterdam. 

ZAS . .. “‘ Zeitschrift fiir Aegyptische Sprache,” Leipzig. 

ZEKE . . “ Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie,” Berlin. 


ADRIANI, N.: ‘*‘ Indonesische Priestertaal,’’ VMKAW, Ser. 5, IV, 
1920. 

ALLEN, W.: ‘‘ Rotuma and the Rotumans,’’ AAAS, 6, 1895. 

ANDERSON, C. W.: ‘‘ Notes on Prehistoric Stone Implements found 
in the Singhbhum District,’’ JBORS, 3, 1917. 

ANDREE, R.: ‘‘ Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche,” Neu 
Folge, Leipzig, 1889. 

ARCHAMBAULT: ‘‘ Les mégaliths neo-caledoniens,’”’ A, 12, 1901. 

‘‘ Assam Census Report,” 1891. 

‘*‘ Atharva Veda’’?: see Whitney, Bloomfield. 

AvaALon, A.: ‘* Tantra of the Great Liberation,’’ London, 1918. 

AYMONIER, E.: ‘‘ Le Camboge,’’ Paris, 1900. . 


BAESSLER, A.: ‘‘ Marae und Atu auf den Gesellschafts-Inseln,” 

IAH, X, 1897. 

BAKKERS, J. A.: 

(i) ** Tanette en Barroe (Celebes),”” TTLV, XII, 1862. 

(ii) ‘‘ De eilanden Bonerate en Kalao,”’ ibid. 

(ili) *‘ De afdeeling Sandjai (Celebes),” <¢bid. 

(iv) ‘* Het leenvorstendom Boni,’ id. XV, 1866. 

BALL, ‘V.: 

(i) ‘On Stone Implements found in Bengal,’’ PASB, 1865. 

(ii) ‘*‘ Geology of the Rajmahal Hills,’ MGSI, XIII, 1867. 

(iii) ** Note on Stone Implements found in Bengal,’’ PASB, 1867, 

(iv) ‘* Note on some Stone Implements found in the District of 
Singhbhum,’’ PASB, 1868. 

(v) *“* On the Ancient Copper Mines of Singhbhum,”’ PASB, 1869. 

(vi) ‘‘ Remarks on Stone Implements in Singhbhum,’’ PASB, 
1870. 

(vii) ‘‘ On some Stone Implements of the Burmese Type, found 
in Pargana Dalbhum, District of Snghbhum, Chota Nagpur 
Division,’”’? PASB, 1875. 

(viii) “‘ On Stone Implements found in the Tributary States of 
Orissa,’”’>’ PASB, 1876. 

(ix) ‘“* On the Forms and Geographical Distribution of Ancient 
Stone Implements in India,’? PRIA, Second Ser. I, 1879. 

(x) ‘** On the Mode of Occurrence and Distribution of Gold in 
India,” Jourl. Roy. Geol. Soc. of Ireland, V, 1880. 

Bancroft, H. H.: ‘*‘ Native Races of the Pacific States of North 

America,”” New York, 1883. 

Banve ier, A. F.: ‘‘ On the Art of War and Mode of Warfare of the 

Ancient Mexicans,” 10th Ann, Rep. Peabody Museum, 1877. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 505 


BARBEAU, C. M.: 
(i) ‘‘ Supernatural Beings of the Huron and Wyandot,” AA, 
New Ser. XVI, 1914. 
(ii) ‘‘ Huron and Wyandot Mythology,” Geological Survey, 
Ottawa. Memoir 80, Ottawa, 1915. 

(iii) ** Iroquoian Clans and Phratries,’? AA, New Ser. XIX, 1917. 
BARNETT, L. D.: ‘ Antiquities of India,’’ London, 1913. 
Bartu, A.: ‘* The Religions of India,’ London, 1882. 

Barton, G. A.: ‘‘ A Sketch of Semitic Origins,’ New York, 1902. 
Bastian, A.: ‘* Indonesien,’’ Berlin, 1884-94. 
Brecker, G. K.: ‘* Reconnaissance of the Gold Fields of the Southern 

Appalachians,” 16th AR, USGS, 1894-5. 

Becxwiru, M. W.: ‘* The Hawaiian Romance of Laieikawai,”’ 33rd 

ARBE, 1911-12. 

Bere, L. W. C. vAN DEN: ‘“‘ De Mohammedansche Vorsten op Neder- 

landsch-Indie,’”?’ BTLV, 6th Ser. IX, 1901. 

BERGAIGNE, A.: ‘“ La religion védique d’aprés les hymnes du Rig- 

Veda,”’ 1878-83. 

BEstT, E.: 

(i) “Spiritual Concepts of the Maori,’ JPS, IX, 1900. 

(ii) ‘“‘ The Whanga-nui-a-Tara,’ JPS, X, 1901. 

(iii) ‘“‘ Maori Marriage Customs,” TNZI, 36, 1908. 

(iv) “‘ Notes on Ancient Polynesian Migrants or Voyagers to 

New Zealand,’ TNZI, 37, 1904. 

(v) ‘‘ Maori Eschatology,’ TNZI, 38, 1905. 

(vi) “‘ Maori Religion,’ AAAS, XII, 1909. 

(vii) ‘“‘ Prehistoric Civilization in the Philippines,” JPS, 1. 

(viii) ‘‘ Maori Forest Lore,’ TNZI, 42, 1909. 

(ix) ** The Cult of Io,’? Man., 1913, 57. 

(x) “The Peopling of New Zealand,’’ Man., 1914, 37. 

(xi) ‘“‘ Ceremonial Performances Pertaining to Birth, as Per- 

formed by the Maori of New Zealand in Past Times,” 
JRAI, 44, 1914. 

(xii) ‘‘ Maori Voyagers and their Vessels,’ TNZI, 48, 1915. 

(xiii) ‘‘ Maori and Maruiwi,”’ ibid. 

(xiv) ‘‘ The Maori Genius for Personification ; with Illustrations 

of Maori Mentality,’ TNZI, 53, 1921. 
BerucuatT, H.: ‘‘ Manuel d’Archéologie Américaine,” Paris, 1912. 
BHANDARKAR, R. G.: ‘The Aryans in the Land of the Assurs 
(Skr-Asura),”” JRAS (Bombay), 25, 1917-18. 
Bissinc, F..W. von: ‘‘ Die Mastaba des Gemnikai,”’ Berlin, 1911. 
BLACKMAN, A. M.: 
(i) ** The Significance of Incense and Libations in Funerary and 
Temple Ritual,’ ZAS, 50, 1912. 

(ii) ‘‘ The Pharaoh’s Placenta and the Moon God Khons,” 

JEA, 3, 1916. 

(iii) ‘* The House of the Morning,’ JEA, 5, 1918. 

BLAGDEN, H. O.: 

(i) JRAS, 1902. 

(ii) ‘‘Siam and the Malay Peninsula,” JRAS, 1906. 

BLAKE, W. P.: ‘* The Chalchihuitl of the Ancient Mexicans,’? Am. 

Jour. Sc., 2nd Ser. XXV, 1858. 

BLANDFORD, W. T.: 
(i) “* On the Geology of the Taptee and Nerbadda Valleys and 
some Adjoining Districts,” MGSI, VI, 1869, 


506 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


(ii) ‘‘ On the Traps and Intertrappean Beds of Western and 
Central India,” ibid. 
BLINKENBERG, C.: ‘*‘ The Thunderweapon in Religion and Folk-lore,”’ 
Easton, 1916. 
BLOOMFIELD, M.: ‘‘ Hymns of the Atharva Veda,”’ Sacred Books of 
the East, Vol. 42, ‘Oxford, 1897. — 
BLUMENTRITT, F.: 
(i) ‘‘ Der Ahnencultus und die religiosen Anschauungen der 
Malaier des Philippinen-Archipels.” 
(ii) ‘“‘ Gaddanes, etc., des Valle de Cagayan,’’ Mitt. Anth. Ges. 
Wien., 14, 1884. 
Buiytu, W. H.: ‘‘ The Whence of the Maori,” TNZI, XIX, 1886. 
BorcHARDT, L.: 
(i) ‘‘ Nilmesser und Nilstandmarken,’ AKAW, 1906. 
(ii) ‘‘ Das Grabdenkmal des K6nigs Neuserre,”’ Leipzig, 1907. 
Boranic GARDENS, RoyAt: ‘‘ Bulletin of Miscellaneous Information,” 
Add. Ser. VI, Selected Papers from the Kew Bulletin. II, 
‘** Species and Principal Varieties of Musa,’’ London, 1906. 
BOTTLICHER, W.: ‘‘ Geschichte der Carthager,” Berlin, 1827. 
Boyan, P.: ‘* Thoth the Hermes of Egypt,’’ Oxford, 1922. 
BRABROOK: ‘‘On the Tombs in the Island of Rotumah,” JRAI, VI, 
1877. 
BRASSEUR DE BoursourG: ‘“ Popol Vuh,” Paris, 1861. 
BREASTED, J. H.: 


(i) ‘‘ The Philosophy of a Memphite Priest,’ ZAS, 39, 1904. 
(iiy “‘ Ancient Records of Egypt,’ London, 1907. 
(iii) ‘‘ A History of the Ancient Egyptians,” London, 1908. 
(iv) ‘‘ Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt,” 
London, 1912. 
(v) “‘A History of Egypt,’? London, 1919. 
BRENNER, J. Frur. v.: ‘* Besuch bei Kannibalen Sumatras,”’ 
Wirzburg, 1894. 
BricHamM, W. T.: ‘‘ Stone Implements and Stone Work of the 
Ancient Hawaiians,” Honolulu, 1902. 
Brinton, D. G.: ‘* American Hero Myths,’ Philadelphia, 1882. 
Brouwer, J. J. v. L.: ‘‘Steenen beitels in ’t museum van ’t 
Bataviaasch Genootschap,” TTLV, XVIII, 1872. 
Brown, A. R.: “The Andaman Islanders,’ Cambridge, 1922. 
Brown, J. C.: 
(i) ‘‘ Note on Two Copper Axes,” JBORS, I, 1915. 
(ii) ‘* Note ona Copper Celt found in the Palamau District,”’ ibid. 
Brown, MACMILLAN : 
(i) ‘‘ A New Pacific Ocean Script,’ Man., 1914, 43. 
(ii) ‘‘ Notes on a Visit to New Caledonia,” Man., 1916, 66. 
Browne, A. H.: ‘“ An Account of some Early Ancestors of Raro- 
tonga,” JPS, 6, 1897. 
Bruescu, H.: “ Mythologica,” ZAS, 24, 1886. 
Bunce, E. A. W.: ‘‘ Legends of the Gods,” London, 1912. 
BurcuArDT and Pieper: ‘‘ Handbuch der Koénigsnamen,” Leipzig, 
1912. 
Burma: ‘Note on the Occurrence of Celts in British Burma,”’ 
PASB, 1865. 


BUSHNELL, D. J., jun.: ‘‘ Myths of the Louisiana Choctaw,” AA, 
: New Ser. 12, 1910, 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 507 


CABATON, A.: ‘“* Java, Sumatra and the other Islands of the Dutch 
East Indies,’’ London, 1911. 
Carro: ‘ Exhibits in the Museum at Cairo.” 
CAMPBELL, R. EK. M.: ‘* Traces of Ancient Human Occupation in 
Pelorus Sound,’ JPS, 5, 1896. 
CANDOLLE, A. DE: ‘“ Origin of Cultivated Plants,’ London, 1884. 
CAPART, J.: 
(i) ** Primitive Art in Egypt,’ London, 1905. 
(ii) ‘‘ Une rue des Tombeaux,” 4to Brussels, 1907. 

Carey, B. S., and Tuck, H. N.: ‘*“‘ The Chin Hills,’’ Rangoon, 1896. 
Carnoy, A. J.: “* Iranian Views of Origins in Connection with Similar 
Babylonian Beliefs,’ Jourl. Amer. Oriental Soc. 36, 1916. 

Cuerry, T.: ‘* The Discovery of Agriculture,’’ AAAS, 1921. 

CHEVALIER, M.: ‘‘ Remarks on the Production of the Precious 
Metals, and on the Depreciation of Gold,” translated by D. F. 
Campbell, London, 1853. 

CHINNERY, EK. W. P.: ‘‘ Stone-work and Goldfields in British New 
Guinea,” JRAI, 49, 1919. 

CHRISTIAN, F. W.: 
(i) “* Notes on the Marquessans,” JPS, IV, 1895. 
(ii) ** On the Distribution and Origin of some Plant- and Tree- 

names in Polynesia,’ JPS, VI, 1897. 

(iii) ‘‘ Notes from the Caroline Islands,” ibid. 
(iv) ‘‘ The Caroline Islands,’? London. 

Cuurcu, A. J.: ‘* Carthage,’’ London, 1886. 

CuurcHILL, W.: ‘°* Easter Island,’ Washington, 1912. 

CuAyTon, A. C.: ‘* The Paraiyan,’” MGMB, V, 2, 1906. 

CuirFoRD, H.: ‘* Further India,’? London, 1905. 

CopRINGTON, R. H.: ‘‘ The Melanesians,’? Oxford, 1891. 

Coe, F,. C.: ‘* Traditions of the Tinguian,”’ Field Columbian Museum, 
14, No. 1, Anth. Sect., Chicago, 1915. 

CoLE, R. A.: ‘ On the Discovery of Cromlechs in Southern India,”’ 
TES, 7, 1869. 

ComMAN, K.: ‘*‘ Economic Beginnings of the Far West : How we won 
the Jand beyond the Mississippi,” New York, 1912. 

CowELL, E. B. C.: ‘* The Jataka or Stories of the Buddha’s Former 
Births,” Cambridge, 1895-1907. 

CRANE, W. R.: ‘* Gold and Silver,’? New York, 1908. 

CRAWFURD: ‘On an Ancient Hindu Sacrificial Bell with Inscription 
found in the Northern Island of the New Zealand Group,” 
TES, 5, 1867. 

CROOKE, W.: ‘“ Primitive Rites of Disposal of the Dead with Special 
Reference to India,” JRAI, 1900. 

CUNNINGHAM, A.: ‘“‘ Archeological Survey of India,” Vol. XIV. 

CusHING, F. H.: 
(i) *“ Zuni Fetiches,” 2nd ARBE, 1888. 
(ii) ** Outlines of Zuni Creation Myths,” 18th ARBEH, 1891-2. 
(iii) “‘ Zuni Folk Tales,” New York, 1901. 


DALEY, C. : ‘* Remains of the Stone Age in Victoria,’”? AAAS, 12, 1910. 

Darton, EH. T.: ‘* Rude Stone Monuments in Chutia Nagpur and 
Other Places,’ JASB, 42, 1878. 

Danks, B.: ‘* New Britain and its People,’? AAAS, 4, 1892. 

Danks, S.: ‘‘ Some Notes on Savage Life in New Britain,’ AAAS, 
12 .1910, 


508 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


DARMESTETER, J.: ‘*‘ Ormazd and Ahriman,” Paris, 1876. 
Davipns, T. W. Ruys: ‘‘ Buddhist India,’ London, 1908. 
Daviss, N. DE G.: 
(i) ‘‘ The Mastaba of Ptahhetep and Akhethetep at Saqqarah,” 
Arch. Surv. of Egypt, Memoir IX, Vol. II, London, 1901. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Rock Tombs of Deir el Gebrawi,” id., Memoir XI, 
London, 1902. 
DEANE, W.: ‘“ Fijian Society,’’ London, 1921. 
DECHELETTE, J.: ‘* Manuel d’archéologie préhistorique, celtique et 
gauloise,’’ Paris, 1908. 
Denon, P.: ‘“ Religion and Customs of the Uraons,’’ MASB, 9, 1906. 
DeEUvUSSEN, P. : ‘‘ The Philosophy of the Upanishads,”’ Edinburgh, 1906. 
Dixon, R. D.: ‘The Mythology of the Central and Eastern 
Algonkins,’” JAFL, 22, 1909. 
DorseEy, G. A.: 
(i) ‘*‘ Traditions of the Caddo,”’ Carnegie Institute, Publ. No. 41, 
Washington, 1905. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Cheyenne,” Field Columbian Museum, Anthr. Sect. 
IX, 1, 1905. 
DorsrEy, J. O. 
(i) ** Teton Folk-Lore,” AA, II, 1889. 
(ii) ‘“‘ A Study of Siouan Cults,” llth ARBE, 1894. 
(iii) ‘‘ Siouan Sociology,” 15th ARBE, 1897. 
Durr, U. F.: ‘“‘ Some Exploded Theories Concerning South-Western 
Archeology,’”? AA, New Ser. 6, 1904. 
DunBAR, G. Durr-SUTHERLAND: ‘‘ Abors and Galangs,’’ MASB, 
V, Extra No., 1915. 
Dunn, 8S. C.: ‘‘ Ancient Gold Mining in the Sudan.” 
Du Pratz: ‘* Histoire de la Louisane,”’ 1758. 


HERDMANS, A. J. A. F.: ‘* Het landschap Gowa,’’ VBG, 50, 1897, 
EioT, C. N. G.: ‘* Hinduism in Assam,” JRAS, 1910. 
Ewa, S.: 
(i) ‘‘Samoa,’”’ AAAS, 4, 1892. 
(ii) ‘“* The Ancient Government of Samoa,” ibid., 6, 1895, 
(iii) ‘“*’O le tala le taema ma na-fanua,’’? JPS, 6, 1897. 
Euuis, W.: ‘‘ Polynesian Researches,’ London, 1832-6. 
EiMERSON, E. R.: ‘‘ The Book of the Dead and Rain Ceremonials,”’ 
AA, 7, 1894. 
ERKELENS, B.: ‘* Geschiedenis van het rijk Gowa.”’ 
ERMAN, A.: ‘“‘ Kin Denkmal memphitischer Theologie, Sitzungs- 
berichte der Kd6niglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissen- 
schaften,” 1911. 
Ks, L. J. C. vAN: ‘‘ Inlandsche Koperertsontginningen op Timor,” 
TNAG, 2nd Ser. 88, 1921. 
Evans, A. J.: 
(i) ‘‘ Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult.” 
(ii) “* The Palace of Minos,” Vol. I, London, 1921. 
Evans, I. H. N.: 
(i) “Ona Collection of Stone Implements from the Tempassuk 
District, British New Guinea,’ Man., 1913, 86. 

(ii) “A Grave and Megaliths in Negri Sembilan with an Account 
of some Excavations,’ Journal of the Federated Malay 
States Museum, 9, 1921, 


a oe . = + 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 509 


Evans, J.: “‘ The Ancient Stone Implements, Weapons and Orna- 
ments of Great Britain,’ 2nd ed., London, 1897. 


Fawcett, F.: 
(i) ** Notes on some of the People of Malabar,’ Bull. Madras 
Govt. Mus., 3, 1900. 
(ii) ‘* Nayars of Malabar,” ibid., 1901. 
FrerGusson : * Rude Stone Monuments in all Countries,’? London, 1872. 
FEWKES, J. W.: 
(i) * A Study of Certain Figures in a Maya Codex,” AA, 7, 1894. 
(ii) ** On Certain Personages who appear in a Tusayan Cere- 
mony,” ibid. 
(iii) “* Tusayan Snake Ceremonies,” 16th ARBE, 1897. 
{iv) ** The Group of Tusayan Ceremonies called Katcinas,”’ 
15th ARBE, 1897. 
(v) *‘ Archeological Expedition to Arizona,” 17th ARBE 
(1895-6), 1898. 
(vi) ‘‘ Hopi Katcinas,” 21st ARBE (1899-1900). 
(vii) ‘‘ An Interpretation of Katcina Worship,’ JAFL, 14, 1901. 
(viii) “* Two Summers’ Work in Pueblo Ruins,” 22nd ARBE 
(1900-1), 1904. 
(ix) ‘“‘ Antiquities of the Mesa Verde, National Park Spruce Tree 
House,”? BBE, 41, 1909. 
(x) ‘“‘ Ancient Zuni Pottery,’ Putnam Anniversary Volume 
New York, 1909. 
(xi) ** Mesa Verde, National Park Cliff Palace,’ BBE, 51, 1911. 
(xii) ‘“‘ Preliminary Report on a Visit to the Navaho National 
Monument, Arizona,’ BBE, 50, 1911. 
(xiii) ‘“*‘ Antiquities of the Upper Verde River and Walnut 
Creek Valleys, Arizona,’ 28th ARBE (1906-7), 1912. 
(xiv) ‘‘ Casa Grande, Arizona,” ibid. 
(xv) *“‘ Sun-worship of the Hopi,’”’ BBE, 1921. 
Fison, L.: “ Tales from Old Fiji,” London, 1907. 
FLETCHER, A. C.: 
(i) ‘“* Star Cult Among the Pawnee,” AA, New Ser. 4, 1902. 
(ii) ‘* The Hako, a Pawnee Ceremony,” 22nd ARBH, Pt. 2, 1904. 
(iii) “‘ Tribal Structure: A Study of the Omaha and Cognate 
Tribes,’ Putnam Anniversary Volume, New York, 1909. 
FLeTcHER, A. C., and LA Fi&scue, F.: ‘“* The Omaha Tribe,” 27th 
ARBE, 1911. 
Foorr, R. B.: 
(i) ‘‘ The Geological Features of the South Mahratta Country 
- and Adjacent Districts,’ MGSI, 12, 1876. 
(ii) **‘ Indian Prehistoric and Protohistoric Antiquities,’’ Madras, 
1916. 
Forspes, H. O.: “A Naturalist’s Wanderings in the Eastern 
Archipelago,’’ London, 1885. 
FORNANDER, A. : “‘ An Account of the Polynesian Race,’’ London, 1878. 
Fox, A. LANE: ‘‘ Remarks on Mr. Westropp’s Paper on Cromlechs,”’ 
JES, New Ser. 1, 1869. 
Fox, C. E.: ** Social Organization in San Cristoval, Solomon Islands,”’ 
JRAI, 49, 1919. 
Fox, C. E., and Drew, F. H.: ‘* Beliefs and Tales of San Cristoval, 
Solomon Islands,’ JRAI, 45, 1915. 


510 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


FRASER, J.: 
(i) ‘‘ Some Folk Songs and Myths from Samoa,” JRSNSW, 29, 
1895. 
(ii) ‘*‘ Folk-Songs and Myths from Samoa,” JPS, 5, 1896. 
(iii) “* Folk-Songs and Myths from Samoa,” ibid., 6, 1897. 
FRAZER, J. G.: 
(i) ‘‘ Adonis, Attis Osiris,’ London, 1906. 
(ii) ‘‘ Totemism and Exogamy,’”’ London, 1910. 
FreIrE-Marreco, B.: ‘‘ Tewa Kinship Terms from the Pueblo of 
Hano, Arizona,’”’ AA, New Ser. 16, 1914. 
FrRIEDERICH, R.: ‘* Voorloopig verslag van het eiland Bali,” VBG, 
23, 1850. 
Furness, W. H., 3rd: ‘‘ The Stone Money of Uap,”’ Univ. of Penn. 
Trans. of Dept. of Arch., I, 1904. 


Gait, E. A.: ‘‘ A History of Assam.” 

Gann, T. W. F.: ‘“ The Maya Indians of Southern Yucatan and 
Northern British Honduras,’ BBE, 54, 1918. 

GARDINER, A. H.: 

(i) ‘‘ The Goddess Nekhbet at the Jubilee Festival of Rameses 
Ill,” ZAS, 48, 1910. 

(ii) ‘‘Some Personifications: I. Hike’, the God of Magic,” 

PSBA, 38, 1915. 

(iii) Review of J. G. Frazer, ‘‘ Adonis, Attis Osiris,” Journal of 
Egyptian Archeology, 2, 1915. 

GatscHET, A. S.: ‘‘Some Mythic Stories of the Yuchi Indians,” 
AA, 6, 1893. 

GauTuHIER, H.: ‘“‘ Le Livre des Rois 4 Egypte,” Cairo, 1908-10. 

‘** Genealogies and Notes from Rarotonga,” JPS, 1. 

GERINI, G. E.: 

(i) ‘‘ Siamese Archeology,” JRAS, 1904. 
(ii) “‘ Researches on Ptolemy’s Geography of Eastern Asia,” 
Asiatic Soe. Researches, 1, 1909. 

GirrorD, E. W.: ‘‘ Dichotomous Social Organization in South 
Central California,’? Univ. of California Publications in American 
Archeology and Ethnology, 11, 1911-16. 

GILL, W. W.: 

(i) ‘“‘ Myths and Songs from the South Pacific,’’ London, 1876. 

(ii) “‘ The Genealogy of the Kings and Princes of Samoa,” 
AAAS, 2, 1890. 

(iii) ‘‘ The Genealogy of the Kings of Rarotonga and Mangaia,”’ 
AAAS, 2, 1890. 

(iv) ‘“* The Story of Tu and Rei,’? AAAS, 4, 1892. 

(v) ‘“‘ From Darkness to Light in Polynesia,’’ London, 1894. 
(vi) ‘‘ Remarks on the Legend of Honoura,” JPS, 5, 1896. 
GiuMoRE, M. R.: ‘‘ Uses of Plants by the Indians of the Missouri 

River Region,” 38rd ARBE (1911-12), 1919. 

GLAUMONT, M.: 

(i) Usages moeurs et coutumes des Neo-Caledoniens,” Rev. 
d’ethn. 7, 1888. 

(ii) *‘ La culte de Vigaune et du taro en Nouvelle-Caledonie,” 
A, 8. 

GoLpIE, W. H.: ‘* Maori Medical Lore,’’ TNZI, 38, 1904. 

GouDSWAARD, A.: ‘*‘ De Papoea’s van de Geelvink-Baai,”’ Schiedam, 
1863. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 511 


GRAEBNER, P.: ‘Die melanesische Bogenkultur und ihre Ver- 

wandten,’? Anthropos, 4, 1909. 

Gray, W.: ‘* Notes on the Tannese,’ AAAS, 4, 1892. 
Grey, G.: ‘“ Polynesian Mythology,” London (no date). 
GRIERSON, G. A.: 
(i) ‘“‘ Linguistic Survey of India,’ Vol. 2, Mon-Khmer and 
Siamese-Chinese Families, 1904. 

(ii) Ibtd., Vol. 4, ‘‘ Munda and Dravidian Languages,” 1906. 
GRIGNARD, F. J.: ‘* The Oraons and Mundas,”’ Anthropos, 4, 1909. 
GRINNELL, G. B.: ‘* Pawnee Hero Stories,’’ London, 18938. 
GROENENVELDT, W. P.: ‘* Notes on the Malay Archipelago and 

Malacca, Compiled from Chinese Sources,’ VBG, 39, 1877. 
GryYZEN, H. J.: ‘* Mededeelingen omtrent Belu of Midden-Timor,” 

VBG, 54, 1904. 

GuDGEON: ‘‘ The Maori Tribes of the East Coast of New Zealand,” 

JPS, 3, 1894. 

Guppy, H. B.: 

(i) ‘“* The Solomon Islands and their Natives,’? London, 1887. 

(ii) ‘‘ The Solomon Islands, their Geology, etc.,’? 1887. 

(iii) ‘‘ Observations of a Naturalist in the Pacific between 1896 

and 1899. 
Vol, I. ** Vanua Levu, Fiji,”” London, 1903. 
Vol. II. ‘* Plant Dispersal,’ London, 1906. 
GurRDON, P. R.: ‘“ The Khasis,’? London, 1914. 


HAAST, J. VAN: 

(i) ‘* On Certain Prehistoric Remains Discovered in New Zealand, 
and on the Nature of the Deposits in which they Occurred,” 
JES, New Ser. 2, 1870. 

(ii) ‘* Notes on some Ancient Rock Paintings in New Zealand,” 
JRAI, 8, 1879. 

Happon, A. C. (see also Torres Straits) : 

(i) “ The Religion of the Torres Straits Islanders,’? Anthropo- 
logical Essays presented to E. B. Tylor, Oxford, 1907. 

(ii) *‘ The Wanderings of Peoples,’? Cambridge, 1911. 

(iii) “‘ The Outriggers of Indonesian Canoes,’ JRAI, 50, 1920. 

HaGar, S.: 

(i) ‘‘ Izamal and its Celestial Plan,’? AA, New Ser. 15, 1918. 

(ii) *‘ The Maya Zodiac of Acanceh,” ibid., 16, 1914. 

HAGEN: ‘ Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Battareligion,’ TTLV, 28, 
1883. 

Hauu: “ Mittheilungen tiber Sitten und rechtliche Verhaltnisse auf 
Ponape, Ethnologisches Notizblatt herausgegeben von der 
Koniglichen Museums fiir Volkerkunde in Berlin,” II, 2, 1901. 

HALE, A. : ‘* Notes on Stone Implements from Perak,” JRAI, 17, 1887. 

HALL, R. N., and NEAL, W. G.: ‘** The Ancient Ruins of Rhodesia,”’ 
London, 1904. 

Hamitton, A.: ‘“‘On Rock Pictographs in South Canterbury,” 
TNZI, 30, 1897. 

‘* Hand-Book of American Indians.”’ 

Hanpy, E. S.: ‘‘ Some Conclusions and Suggestions Regarding the 
Polynesian Problem,”? AA, New Ser. 22, 1920. 

HARRINGTON, J. P.: ‘*“‘ The Ethnogeography of the Tewa Indians,”’ 
29th ARBE (1907-8), 1916. 


512 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


HarRRINGTON, M. R.: ‘* A Preliminary Survey of Lenape Culture,” 
AA, New Ser. 15, 19138. 

Harris, RENDEL : 

(i) ‘“‘ The Cult of the Heavenly Twins.”’ 
(ii) ‘‘ Boanerges,’”? Cambridge. 

HARTMAN: JAFL, 20, 1907. 

HaszAarp, H. D. M.: ‘‘ Notes on some Relics of Cannibalism,” 
TNZI, 22, 1889. 

HavucutTon, J. C.: ‘‘ Memorandum on the Geological Structure and 
Mineral Resources of the Singhbhoom Division,” JASB, New 
Ser. 20, 1854. 

HESSsLING, T. von: ‘‘ Die Perlmuscheln,” Leipzig, 1859. 

Hewett, E. L.: ‘‘ Antiquities of the Jemez Plateau, New Mexico,” 
BBE, 32, 1906. 

Hewitt, J. N. B.: ‘‘ Iroquoian Cosmology,’ 2ist ARBE, 1899-1900. 

Hewitt, J. P.: ‘* Notes on the Early History of Northern India,” 
JRAS, New Ser., 1888, 1890. 

Hickson, 8S. J.: ‘‘ A Naturalist in North Celebes,’’ 1889. 

‘‘ Hieroglyphic Texts from Egyptian Stelae (British Museum).”’ 

Hitt, J. M.: ‘* The Mining Districts of the Western United States,” 
USGS, Bull, 507, 1912. 

Hitt-Tout, C.: ‘* British North America,’ London, 1907. 

Hocart, A. M.: 

(i) ** Mana,” Man., 1914, 46. 

(ii) “* Note on the Dual Organization in Fiji,’ Man., 1914, 2. 

(iii) ‘‘ Chieftainship and the Sister’s Son in the Pacific,” AA, 
New Ser. 17, 1915. 

(iv) ** The Dual Organization in Fiji,’ Man., 1915, 38. 

(v) ‘* The Common Sense of Myths,’? AA, New Ser. 18, 1916. 

(vi) ‘* Early Fijians,’ JRAI, 49, 1919. 

Hopson, T. C.: ‘“‘ The Naga Tribes of Manipur,” London, 1911. 

HoFrMan, W. J.: 

(i) ‘“* The Mide’wiwin or Grand Medicine Society of the Ojibwa,” 
7th ARBE, 1885-6. 
“(ii) “* Mythology of the Menomini Indians,” AA, 3, 1890. 

Houuanpd, T. H.: ‘‘ Remarks on Crushing Mills used by Ancient 
Gold Miners in Chota Nagpur,’ PASB, 1908. 

Houtmes, W. H.: 

(i) ‘“‘ The Obsidian Mines of Hidalgo, Mexico,” AA, New Ser. 
2, 1900. 

(ii) ‘‘ Traces of Aboriginal Operations in an Iron Mine near 
Leslie, Missouri,» AA, New Ser. 5, 1903. 

(iii) ‘*‘ Bearing of Archzological Evidence on the Place of Origin 
and on the Question of the Unity or Plurality of the American 
Race,’”’ AA, New Ser. 14, 1912. 

(iv) ‘‘ Handbook of Aboriginal American Antiquities, Part I, 
Introductory and Lithic Industries,” Washington, 1919. 

‘* Honoura, The Legend of,’? JPS, 4, 1895. 

Hopxins, E. W.: ‘** The Religions of India,’ London, 1895. 

Hornet, J.: ‘‘ The Origins and Ethnological Significance of Indian 
Boat Designs,’? MASB, 7, 1920. 

Horst, D. W.: ‘‘ De Rum-Serams op Nieuw-Guinea of het Hinduisme 
in het oosten van onzen archipel,” Leiden, 1893. 

Hosr, C., and McDoucatit, W.: ‘‘ The Pagan Tribes of Borneo,” 
London, 1912. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 513 


Houcu, W.: “ Antiquities of the Upper Gila and Salt River Valleys 
in Arizona and New Mexico,” BBE, 35, 1907. 

Howitt, A. W.: ‘* The Native Tribes of South-East Australia,’’ 
London, 1904. 

HueETiInG, A.: ‘* De Tobeloreezen in hun denken en doen,” BTLV, 
77, 1921. 

HuGuENIN, P.: ‘“ Raiatea la sacrée,”’ Bull. de la Société Neuchateloise 
de Géographie, 14, 1902-3. 

HuntTinGron, E.: ‘“‘ The Climatic Factor,” Washington, D.C., 1914. 

Hutton, J. H.: 
(i) ‘‘ The Sema Nagas,’’ London, 1921. 
(ii) ““ The Angami Nagas,”? London, 1921. 


‘* Imperial Gazetteer of India.” 

‘‘ India, Census of,’’ 1901: 
(i) Part I, Report. 
(ii) ‘‘ Ethnographic Appendices.”’ 

INDONESIA: ‘‘ Encyclopedie van Nederlandsch-Indie,” Second 
Edition, ’s Gravenhage and Leiden, 1919. 


JACKSON, J. W.: ‘* Shells as Evidence of the Migrations of Early 
Culture,’? Manchester, 1917. 

JAMESON, H. L.: ‘‘ On the Identity and Distribution of the Mother- 
of-Pearl Oyster,’’ Proc. Zool. Soc., London, 1901. 


JASTROW, M., jun.: ‘* Die Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens,”’ 
Giessen, 1905. 


JATAKAS: See COWELL. 
JENKS, A. E.: 
(i) ** The wild Rice Gatherers of the Upper Lakes,’’ 19th ARBE, 
1901. 
(ii) ‘“* The Bontoe Igorot,’’ Manila, 1905. 
JONES, W.: ‘°* Episodes in the Culture-Hero Myth of the Sauks and 
Foxes,” JAFL, 14, 1901. 
JOSKE, A. B.: ‘‘ The Nanga of Viti Levu,’’ IAE, 2, 1889. 
Joyce, T. A. (see also C. G. SELIGMAN): 
(i) *‘ British Museum,’? Handbook to the Ethnographical 
Collections, London, 1910. 
(ii) ‘‘ Mexican Archeology,” London, 1914. 
JUYNBOLL, H. H.: ‘* Katalog des Ethnographischen Reichsmuseums, 
Band V, Javanische Altertiimer,’? Leiden, 1909. 


Kate, H. TEN: “ Verslag eener reis in de Timorgruppe en Polynesie,”’ 
TNAG, Sec. Ser. 2, 1894. 


KENRICK, J.: ‘* Phoenicia,’ London, 1855. 
Kern, H.: 
(i) ‘‘ Een spaansch schrijver over den godsdienst der heidensche 
Bikollen,’ BTLV, 1897. 
(ii) *‘ Dravidische Volksnamen op Sumatra,’ BTLV, 55, 1903. 
(iii) ‘* Austronesisch und Austroasiatisch,’”> BTLV, 60, 1908. 
KipDER, A. V.: ‘ Prehistoric Cultures of the San Juan Drainage,” 
19th ICA. 
Kine, L. W.: ‘“‘ A History of Sumer and Akkad,” London, 1910. 
KRAMER, A.: 


(i) ‘‘ Hawaii, Ostmicronesien Samoa,” Stuttgart, 1906. 
33 


514 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


(ii) ‘‘ Palau, Ergebnisse der Siidsee-Expedition,” 1908-1910. 
Hamburgische Wissenschaftliche Stiftung, Hamburg, 
1917-1919. 

KRAMER, F.: ‘‘ Die Samoa-Inseln,” Stuttgart, 1902. 

Krausk, G.: ‘ Bali,’? Hagen i. W., 1920. 

KRIEBEL, D. J. C.: ‘* Het eiland Bonerate,” BTLV, 76, 1920. 
KroesBer, A. L.: ‘* The Arapaho,” Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 

18, 1902. 

KROEBER, H. R. (Mrs.): ‘‘ Pima Texts,’? AA, New Ser. 10, 1908. 
Kruvyt, A. 

(ip ** Het ver in Midden-Celebes,” BTLV, 538, 1901. 

(ii) ‘‘ De rijstmoeder in den Indischen Archipel, ” VMKAW, 
Atd. Lett., 4th Ser. 5, 1903. 

(iii) ‘‘ Het Animisme in den Indischen Archipel,”’ ’s Gravenhage, 
1906. 

(iv) ‘‘ Measa, eene bijdrage tot het dynamisme der Bare’e- 
sprekende Toradja’s en enkele omwonende volken,” BTLV, 
74, 1918; 75, 1919; '76, 1920. 

(v) ‘‘De To Rongkong in Midden-Celebes,’”? BTLV, 76, 1920. 

(vi) ‘““De To Seko in Midden-Celebes,” ibid. 

(vii) ‘‘ Verslag van een reis over het eiland Soemba,’ TNAG, 
Sec. Ser. 38, 1921. 

(viii) ‘‘ Verslag van een reis naar Kolaka,”’ ibid. 

(ix) ‘‘ Verslag van een reis door Timor,” ibid. 

(x) ‘De Roteneezen,” TTLV, 60, 1921. 

Kruyt, A. C., and ADRIANI, N.: ‘‘ De Bare’e-sprekende Toradja’s 

van Midden-Celebes,” ’s Gravenhage, 1912. 

Kruyt, A. C.,and Kruyt, J.: ‘*‘ Een reis door het Westelijk deel van 


Midden-Celebes, Mededeelingen, Tijdschrift voor Zendingswet- - 


enschap,”’ 64, 1920, Oegstgeest. 

Kupary, J.: ‘‘ Ethnographische Beitrage zur Kenntniss der 
Karolinischen Inselgruppe und Nachbarschaft, Heft 1, Die Sociale 
EKinrichtungen der Pelauer,’’ Berlin, 1885. 

Kunz, G. E.: 

(i) ‘‘ The Magic of Jewels and Charms,”’ London, 1915. 
(ii) ** Gems and Precious Stones of North America,’’ New York, 
1890. 

Kunz, G. F., and Srevenson, C. H.: ‘“‘ The Book of the Pearl,” 

London, 1908. 


LA FLEscHe: ‘‘ Omaha and Osage Traditions of Separation,” 19th 
ICA. 
LAMBERT: “ Moeurs et Superstitions des neo-Caledoniens,’? Noumea, 
1900. 
LANGDON, S.: 
(i) ‘‘ Tammuz and Ishtar,’ Oxford, 1914. 
(ii) ‘‘ Sumerian Liturgical Texts,’ Univ. of Penn., Univ. Mus., 
Publ. Baby. Sect. X, 2, 1917. 
(iii) “‘ The Epic of Gilgamesh,” ibid. 
(iv) ‘‘ Three New Hymns in the Cults of Deified Kings,” PSBA, 
40, 1918. 
(v) ‘‘ Le poeme sumérien du paradis, du déluge et de la chute de 
Vhomme,” 1919. 
(vi) Article, ‘‘ Mysteries (Babylonian) ” in ‘‘ Hastings,’ Encyclo- 
pedia of Religion and Ethics.’’ 


SE eo eee 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 515 


La Toucue, T. H. D.: ‘A Bibliography of Indian Geology and 
Physical Geography with an Annotated Index of Minerals of 
EKconomic Value,’ Calcutta, 1917. 

LECLERE, A.: ‘* Histoire du Camboge,”’ Paris, 1914. 

Lreceatr, T. W.: ‘‘ Malekula, New Hebrides,’ AAAS, 4, 1892. 

Lepsius, C. R.: ‘‘Denkmaler aus Aegypten und Aethiopien,”’ 
Leipzig. 

LETOURNEAU, C. J. M.: ‘‘ La guerre dans les div. races humaines,”’ 1895. 

LIEFRINCK, F. A.: ‘“ Bijdrage tot de kennis van het eiland Bali,’ 
TITLV, 21, 1875. 

LINDGREN, W. (i), and Graton, L.: ** A Reconnaissance of the Mineral 
Deposits of New Mexico,” Contributions to Economic Geology, 
USGS, Bull. 285, 1906. 

LINDGREN, W. (ii), GRATON, L. C., and Gorpon, C. H.: ‘“‘ The Ore De- 
posits of New Mexico,’? USGS, Professional Paper, 68, 1910. 

LIPPMANN, E. O. von: ‘‘ Entstehung und Ausbreitung der Alchemie,”’ 
Berlin, 1919. 

Lock, A. G.: ‘* Gold,’’ London, 1882. 

Loisy, A.: ‘* Essai historique sur le Sacrifice,’ Paris, 1920. 

Lone, R. C. E.: ‘‘ The Maya and Christian Eras,’ Man., 1918, 70. 

LUMHOLTZ, C.: 

(i) ‘‘ Symbolism of the Huichol Indians.” 
(ii) “* Unknown Mexico,”? London, 1908. 

Lyauu, A. C.: ‘ Asiatic Studies,’ London, 1899. 


MacCau ey : ‘‘ The Seminole Indians of Florida,’’ 5th ARBE, 1887. 
MACDONALD, D.: ‘‘ The New Hebrides,’? AAAS, 4, 1892. 
MACKENZIE, D. A.: 
(i) ‘Colour Symbolism,” FL, 1922. 
(ii) ‘‘ Myths of Pre-Columbian America.” 
MACLAREN, J. M.: ‘* Gold,’? London, 1908. 
MAcLEAN, J. P.: ‘*“‘ The Mound Builders,”’ Cincinnati, 1885. 
MACPHERSON, S. C.: “‘ An Account of the Religion of the Khonds in 
Orissa,” JRAS, 18, 1852. 
Mapras: “ Bulletin of the Madras Government Museum.”’ 
MAHABHARATA: See Ray. 
Matcoum, J.: ‘* Essay on the Bhills,’? TRAS, 1, 1827. 
MALINOWSEI, B.: ‘‘ Baloma; The Spirits of the Dead in the Trobriand 
Islands,’ JRAI, 46, 1916. 
MANDHAR (CELEBES): ‘* Mededeelingen betreffende eenige Mand- 
harsche Landschappen,” BTLV, 62, 1909. 
MARIETTE : 
(i) ** Mastabas.”’ 
(ii) ‘‘ Catalogue d’Abydos.”’ 
MARINER, W.: ‘* An Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands,” 
London, 1818. 
MarspDEN, W.: ‘‘ A History of Sumatra,” London, 1811. 
MaspPErRoO, G.: 
(i) ‘* Un manuel de hiérarchie égyptienne, Etudes Egyptiennes,” 
Vol. 2, Paris, 1888. 
(ii) ‘“* The Dawn of Civilization.” 
MATEER, S.: ‘* Native Life in Travancore,’’ London, 1883. 
Matuew, J.: ‘* The Origin of the Australian Phratries and Explana- 
tions of some of the Phratry Names,” JRAI, 40, 1910. 


516 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Matrues, B. F.: ‘‘ Over de Ada’s of gewoonten der Makassaren en 
Beegineezen,” VMKAW, Af. Lett., 8rd Ser. 2, 1885. 
MATTHEWS, W.: 
(i) ‘‘ Ethnology and Philology of Hidatsa Indians,” Mise. Publ. 
No. 7, U.S. Geol. and Geog. Survey, Washington, 1877. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Mountain Chant, a Navajo Ceremony,” 5th ARBE, 
1887. 


(iii) ‘‘ The Prayer of a Navajo Shaman,” AA, 1, 1888. 

(iv) ‘‘ Navaho Legends,’ New York, 1897. 

(v) ‘‘ Myths of Gestation and Parturition,’ AA, New Ser. 4, 1902. 
Mazumpar: ‘“ Durga, Her Origin and History,” JRAS, 1906. 
McDona.p, Rev. Dr.: ‘“‘ Early Arabia and Oceania,’’ AAAS, 10, 1910. 
McDouGALL, W.: See Hose. 

McGeE, W. J.: ‘* The Seri Indians,” 17th ARBE, 1898. 

McLELiaN, J. F.: ‘* Studies in Ancient History.” 

Metos: ‘* Excavations at Phylakopi in Melos,” Society for the Pro- 
motion of Hellenic Studies, Supplementary Paper Number 1, 
London, 1904. 

MELTZER, O.: ‘* Geschichte der Karthager,’’ Berlin, 1879. 

MEYER, E.: 

(i) ‘‘ Aegyptische Chronologie,’” AKAW, Phil.-Hist. Klasse, 1904. 

(ii) ‘‘ Nachtraége zur aegyptischen Chronologie,” 7id., 1907. 

(iii) ‘‘ Geschichte des Altertums,” I, 2, 1909. 
Mryer, K.,and Nuri, A.: ‘* The Voyage of Bran,”’ London, 1895-7. 
MICHELSON, T.: ‘‘ Menominee Tales,’? AA, New Ser. 18, 1911. 
MINDELEFF, C.: 
(i) ‘‘ A Study of Pueblo Architecture, Tusayan and Cibola,” 
8th ARBE (1886-7), 1891. 

(ii) ‘‘ Aboriginal Remains in Verde Valley, Arizona,” 13th 
ARBE (1891-2), 1896. 

(iii) ‘‘ The Cliff Ruins of Canyon de Chelly, Arizona,” 16th 
ARBE (1894-5), 1897. 

‘** Mineral Resources of the United States,’? USGS (Annual). 

Mitra, P.: “ Prehistoric Cultures and Races of India,” Univ. of 
Calcutta, Jour. of Dept. of Letters, 1920. 

Mooney, J.: 

(i) ‘‘ The Sacred Formulas of the Cherokee,” 7th ARBE, 1889. 

(ii) ‘“‘ Cherokee Mound-Building,’ AA, 2, 1889. 

(iii) ‘‘ The Cherokee Ball Play,’? AA, 8, 1890. 

(iv) AA, 1890. 

(v) ‘*‘ The Siouan Tribes of the East,’? BAEK, 22, 1894. 

(vi) ‘‘ Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians,’’ 17th ARBE, 

1898. 
(vii) ‘‘ Myths of the Cherokee,’? 19th ARBE, 1900. 
(viii) ‘“* The Cherokee River-Cult,’? JAFL, 13, 1900. 
(ix) 20th ARBE, 1901. 
MoorueEAD, W. K. : ** Prehistoric Implements,” Cincinnati, Ohio, 1900. 
Moret, A.: 
(i) ‘Du caractére religieux de la royauté Pharonique,” Ann. 
du Musée Guimet, Bibl. d’Etudes, 20, 1902. 

(ii) “‘ Mystéres egyptiens,” Conf. au Musée Guimet, Ann. de Mus. 
Guimet, Bibl. de Vulgarisation, Paris, 1912. 

(iii) ‘‘ La royauté dans l’Egypte primitive : Totem et Pharaon,” 
Ann. de Musée Guimet, Bibl. de Vulg., 38, 1912. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 517 


(iv) ‘*‘ Les Statues d’Egypte, ‘ images vivantes,’’? Ann. de Mus. 
Guimet, Bibl. de Vulg., 41, 1916. 

MORGAN, J. DE: 

(i) ‘‘ Recherches sur les Origines de Egypte,” Paris, 1896-7. 
(ii) ‘‘ Mastaba de Mera.”’ 
(iii) ‘‘ Délégation en Perse,’ Vol. 13, 1912. 

Morean, L. H.: ‘“ Ancient Society,” 1877. 

Mor.ey, S. G.: 

(i) ‘‘ The Rise and Fall of the Maya Civilization in the Light of 
the Monuments and the Native Chronicles,” 19th ICA. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Inscriptions at Copan,’ Washington, 1920. 

Morris, E. H.: ‘* Preliminary Account of the Antiquities of the 
Region between the Mancos and La Plata Rivers in South- 
Western Colorado,” 38rd ARBE (1911-12), 1919. 

Morris, F. Bram: ‘‘ Het landschap Loehoe, getrokken uit een 
rapport van den Gouvemeur van Celebes,’? TTLV, 32, 1889. 

MoszKowsk1, JRAS, 1909. 

Movutton, J. H.: ‘Early Zoroastrianism,’ London, 1913. 

Movers, F. E.: ‘* Die Phonizier,’’ Bonn, 1841. 

Muir, J.: ‘* Original Sanskrit Texts,’’ London, 1872. 

MuuueR, S.: ‘ Reizen en onderzoekingen in den Indischen Archipel,” 
Amsterdam, 1857. 

MULueR (WisMAR), W.: ‘‘ Yap, Ergebnisse der Stidsee Expedition,” 
1908-10. Hamburgische Wissenschaftliche Stiftung, Ham- 
burg, 1917-18. 

Munn, L.: “ Ancient Mines and Megaliths in Hyderabad,’ Mem. 
Proc. Manchester Lit. and Phil. Soc. 54, 1921. 

Murray, M. A.: 

(i) “‘ Priesthoods of Women in Egypt,”’ Trans. Third Int. Cong. 
Hist. Rel., Oxford, 1908. 

(ii) ‘*‘ The Cult of the Drowned in Egypt,’’ ZAS, 51, 1913. 

(iii) ‘‘ Evidence for the Custom of Killing the King in Ancient 
Egypt,” Man., 1914, 12. 

(iv) ‘** Royal Marriage and Matrilineal Descent,” JRAI, 45, 
1915. 

(v) ‘‘ Index to Names and Titles of the Old Kingdom.” 

(vi) ‘‘ Saqqara Mastabas,” Egyptian Research Account, London, 
1905. 


NarasaAu, P. L.: ‘*‘ The Essence of Buddhism,” Madras, 1907. 

‘* Necker Island, Stone Idols from,’’? JPS, 3. 

NEWBERRY, J. S.: ‘*‘ Report of the Exploring Expedition from 
Santa Fé, New Mexico, to the Junction of the Grand and Green 
Rivers of the Great Colorado of the West in 1857,’ Washington, 
1876. 

NEWBERRY, P. E.: 

(i) *“* The Life of Rekhmara,”’ London, 1900. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Horus-Title of the Kings of Egypt,’’ PSBA, 26, 1904. 

NEWBOLD, CaptT.: ‘‘ Ancient Sepulchres of Panduvaram Dewal, 
in Southern India,” JRAS, 13, 1852. 

NEWELL, J. E.: ‘‘ Notes on Tokelau, Gilbert and Ellice Islanders,”’ 
AAAS, 6, 1895. 

‘* Nova Guinea.” 

NuTTALL, Z.: 

(i) ‘*‘ Chalchihuitl in Ancient Mexico,”” AA, New Ser. 3, 1901. 


518 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


(ii) ‘Some Unsolved Problems in Mexican Archeology,” AA, 
New Ser. 8, 1906. 


OLDEN, C.: ‘‘ Notes on a Discovery of Ancient Copper Smelting 
Apparatus at Rakkhan in the Dalbhum Pargana of Singbhum,”’’ 
JBORS, 5, 1919. 

OLpHaAM, C. F.: ‘** The Sun and the Serpent,’’ London, 1905. 

OPpPrERT, G.: “ The Original Inhabitants of Bharatavarsa or India,” 
London, 1893. 

Orr, R. B.: ‘* Pre-Columbian Copper in Ontario,” 18th ICA, 1912, 
London. 

Ossporn, H,. F.: ‘*‘ Men of the Old Stone Age,’’ London, 1921. 

OwEN, J. A. (Mrs.): ‘‘ The Story of Hawaii,’ London, 1898. 

OwEN, M. A.: “* Folk-Lore of the Musquakie Indians of North Amer- 
ica,’?’ London, 1904. 


PAHANG : ** Notes on Stone Implements from Pahang,” Man. 1904, 34. 
PARGITER, F. E.: 
(i) ‘“* Ancient Indian Genealogies and Chronology,” JRAS, 1910. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Purana Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age,” 
Oxford, 1913. 
(iii) ‘‘ Ancient Indian Genealogies: Are they Trustworthy ?” 
Commemorative Essays presented to Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, 
Poona, 1917. 
(iv) ‘‘ Ancient Indian Historical Tradition,’ Oxford, 1922. 
PARKER, A. C.: 
(i) ** Iroquois Sun Myths,” JAFL, 23, 1900. 
(ii) ‘* Iroquois Tree Myths and Symbols,”’ AA, New Ser. 14, 1912. 
(iii) ‘‘ The Origin of the Iroquois as suggested by their Archzeo- 
logy,’’ id., 18, 1916. 
PEARCE, J. E.: ‘‘ Indian Mounds and other Relics of Indian Life 
in Texas,’? AA, New Ser. 21, 1919. 
Peet, T. E.: “ New Light on Mining in Sinai,” Jourl. Manchester 
Egy. and Orien. Soe. (1918-19), 1920. 
Perry, W. J.: 
(i) *‘ The Orientation of the Dead in Indonesia,” JRAI, 44, 1914. 
(ii) ‘*‘ Myths of Origin and the Home of the Dead,” FL, 26, 1915. 
(iii) ‘‘ The Relationship between the Geographical Distribution 
of Megalithic Monuments and Ancient Mines,’ Mem. and 
Proc. Manchester Lit. and Phil. Soc., 1915. [See Rep. 
Brit. Ass., 1915.] 
(iv) ‘‘ The Geographical Distribution of Terraced Cultivation 
and Irrigation,” 7zd., 1916. 
(v) ‘‘ An Ethnological Study of Warfare,” id., 1917. 
(vi) ‘‘ The Peaceful Habits of Primitive Communities,’’ Hibbert 
Journal, Oct., 1917. 
(vii) ‘* The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia,’’ Manchester, 1918. 
(viii) ‘‘ War and Civilization,” Manchester, 1918. 
(ix) ** The Significance of the Search for Amber in Antiquity,” 
Jourl. Manchester Egy. and Orien. Soc. (1918-19), 1920. 
(x) ‘‘ The Development and Spread of Civilization,” Nature, 
March 81, 1921. 
(xi) ‘* The Isles of the Blest,’’ FL, 32, 1921. 
(xii) ‘“‘ The Problem of Megalithic Monuments and their Dis- 
tribution in England and Wales,’? Mem. Proc. Manchester 
Lit. and Phil. Soc., 1921. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 519 


(xiii) ‘‘ The Relation of Class Distinctions to Social Conduct,” 
Hibbert Journal, 1922. 
Petrie, W. F.: 
(i) ‘‘ History of Egypt,” London, 1894-1901. 
(ii) ‘“‘ Egyptian Beliefs in a Future Life,” AE, 1914. 
(iii) ‘“‘ The Geography of the Gods,’? AE, 1917. 
(iv) ‘* Prehistoric Egypt,’ London, 1920. 
(v) ‘‘ Medum,”’ London, 1892. 
Patrerson, R. H.: ‘‘ The New Golden Age, and the Influence of 
the Precious Metals upon the World,’”? Edinburgh, 1882. 
Puayre, A. P.: ‘‘ On the History of Pegu,” JASB, 1878. 
Pincues, T. EH. : 
(i) ‘“‘ Notes on the Deification of Kings, and Ancestor-Worship, 
in Babylonia,’ PSBA, 37, 1915. 
(ii) “The Legend of the Divine Lovers, Entil and Ninlil,”’ 
JRAS, 1919. 
PLreytE, C. M.: ‘“ Singa Mangaradja, de heilige koning der Bataks,” 
BTLV, 55, 1903. 
Pocus, J. E.: “ The Aboriginal Use of Turquoise in North America,” 
AA, New Ser. 14, 1912. 
PosEwitTz, T.: ‘‘ Borneo,’? London, 1892. 
PowEtL, J. W.: 
(i) ‘* Wyandot Government,” Ist ARBE. 
(ii) “‘ Linguistic Families of America North of Mexico,” 7th 
ARBE, 1885-6. 
PowEt., T., and Prart, G.: ‘On Some Folk-Songs and Myths 
from Samoa,” JRSNSW, 24, 1890. 
Pratt, G.: (See also PoweE1u, T.) 
(i) ‘* Genealogy of the Sun: A Samoan Legend,” AAAS, 1, 1888. 
(ii) ‘“‘ Some Folk-Songs and Myths from Samoa,” JRSNSW, 25, 
1891. 
(iii) ‘Some Folk-Songs and Myths from Samoa,” JRSNSW, 
26, 1892. 
Pratz: see Du PRATz. 
Prescort, W. H.: ‘“ The Conquest of Mexico,’? Everyman Library, 
London. 


Rapav, H.: “Early Babylonian History,” New York, 1900. 
Rapin, P.: “ The Clan Organization of the Winnebago,” AA, New 
Ser. 12, 1910. 
RatzeE., F.: ‘*‘ History of Mankind,’ London, 1897. 
Ray, P. C.: ‘‘ The Mahabharata,” Calcutta, 1892. 
Rawutnson, G.: ‘ History of Phcenicia,’” London, .1889. 
Rawtinson, H. G.: ‘Foreign Influences in the Civilization of 
Ancient India, 900 s.c.-400 a.D.,” JRAS (Bombay), 23, 1912. 
Rea, A.: 
(i) “Some Prehistoric Burial-places in Southern India,” JASB, 
57, 1888. 
(ii) ‘‘ Pallava Inscriptions,” ASI, Ser. 34, 1909. 
Ricuarps, F. J.: 
(i) ‘“* Cross Cousin Marriage in South India,”’ Man., 1914, 97. 
(ii) ‘‘ Some Dravidian Affinities and their Sequel.” 
Rices, S. R.: ‘‘ Dakota Grammar Texts, and Ethnography.” U.S. 
Geological and Geographical Survey of the Rocky Mountain, 


520 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Region. Contributions to North American Ethnology, Vol. 9, 

1893. 

Ristey, H. H.: ‘* Caste, Tribe and Race,’’? Chapter 11 of Census of 

India epee Vol. 1, Part 1, Calcutta, 1903. 

Rivers, W. H. R (See also Torres Straits Reports.) 

(i)c*The Todas,” London, 1906. 

(ii) ‘‘ On the Origin of the Classificatory System of Relation- 
ships,’’ Anthropological Essays presented to E. B. Tylor, 
Oxford, 1907. 

(iii) “‘ The Marriage of Cousins in India,” JRAS, 1907. 

(iv) Presidential Address, Section H, Brit. Ass., 1911 ; Nature, 
1911. 

(v) ‘‘ The Disappearance of Useful Arts,’ Festsscrift Tillagnad 
Edward Westermarck, Helsingfors, 1912. 

(vi) ‘‘ Survival in Sociology,”’ Sociological Review, 1913. 

(vii) ‘* The Contact of Peoples,’ Essays and Studies presented 
to William Ridgeway, Cambridge, 1913. 

(viii) ‘‘ Is Australian Culture Simple or Complex ?’’ Rep. Brit. 
Ass., 1914; Man., 1914. 

(ix) ‘‘ The History of Melanesian Society,’? Cambridge, 1914. 

(x) ‘“‘ Sun-Cult and Megaliths in Oceania,’’ AA, New Ser. 17, 1915. 

(xi) ‘‘ Sociology and Psychology,” Sociological Review, 1916. 

(xii) Art. ‘‘ New Hebrides,’ ERE. 

(xiia) “ Irrigation and the Cultivation of Taro,’”’ Nature, 1916. 

(xiii) Fitzpatrick Lectures, 1915; ‘‘ Medicine, Magic, and 
Religion,’’ Lancet, 1916. 

(xiv) ‘‘ The Statues of Easter Island,’ FL, 1920. 

(xv) Art. ‘* Mother-right,”” ERE. 

(xvi) ‘‘ History and Ethnology,” London, 1922. 

Rotu, H. Line: 

(i) ‘‘ The Aborigines of Tasmania,” Halifax, 1890. 

(ii) ‘‘ The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo,”’ 
London, 1896. 


Rotn, W. E.: ‘‘ North Queensland Ethnography,” Bull. No. 9, 
Burial Ceremonies and Disposal of the Dead, Records of the 
Australian Museum, Vol. 6, 1907. 

ROUAFFER, G. P.: 

(i) ‘*‘ Waar kwamen de radselachtig Moetisalah’a (Aggri-kralen) 
in de Timor-groep oorsprongkelijk van daan?” BTLY, 
Ser. 6, 6. 

(ii) ‘* Zijn er nog Hindoe-Oudheden in Midden-Borneo aan de 
Boven-Sekadan,” TTLV, 51, 1909. 

Rovutin: ‘‘ Rapport sur une collection d’instruments en pierre 
découverts dans Vile de Java, et remontant 4 une époque anter- 
iéure a celle o& commence pour ce pays lhistoire proprement 
dite.’”’ Comptes Rendus des Séances de l’academie des Sciences, 
Vol. 67, 1868. 

ROUTLEDGE, K. (Mrs.): ‘“‘ The Mystery of Easter Island, the Story 
of an Expedition.’’ 2nd Ed., London, 1920. 

Roy, S. C.: 

(i) ‘* The Mundas and their Country,” Calcutta, 1912. 

(ii) ‘* Magic and Witchcraft on the Chota Nagpur Plateau,” 
JRAI, 44, 1914. 

(iii) ** The Oraons of Chota Nagpur,’’ Ranchi, 1915. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 521 


(iv) ‘‘ A Note on some Remains of the Ancient Asuras in the 
Ranchi District,” JBORS, 1915. | 
(v) ‘‘ Notes on some Prehistoric Stone Implements found in 
the Ranchi District,’ JBORS, 1916. 
(vi) ‘‘ Relics of the Copper Age found in Chota Nagpur,” JBORS, 
1916. 
(vii) “‘ A Find of Ancient Bronze Articles in the Ranchi Dis- 
trict,’”> JBORS, 1916. 
RusseE.x, F.: ‘‘ The Pima Indians,” 26th ARBE, 1908. 
RusseEtu, R. V.: “ The Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces 
of India,’’ London, 1916. 
Rust, H. N.: ‘* The Obsidian Blades of California,’ AA, New Ser. 
7, 1905. 
RUTLAND, J.: 
(i) ‘‘ Ancient Human Occupation in Pelorus District,’ JPS, 3, 
1894. 
(ii) “‘On some Ancient Stone Implements, Pelorus District, 
Middle Island, New Zealand,’’ JPS, 5, 1896. 
(iii) ‘‘ Traces of Civilization,’’ TNZI, 29, 1896. 
(iv) ‘‘ Did the Maori discover the Greenstone ?” TNZI, 30, 1897. 
(v) ‘‘On the Ancient Pit Dwellings of Pelorus District, South 
Island, New Zealand, JPS, 6, 1897. 


SAFFORD, W. E.: ‘“‘ Guam and its People,” AA, New Ser. 4, 1902. 
SaHAacun, B. pE: “ Histoire générale des Choses de la Nouvelle- 
Espagne,” Paris, 1880. 
SALDANHA, J. A.: ‘Philology and Ethnology and their bearing 
on Customary Law in the Bombay Presidency,”’ JRAS (Bombay), 
25, 1917-18. 
‘*Samoa: Prehistoric Remains in Samoa,” JPS, 3. 
Sastri, H. K.: ‘‘ South Indian Images of Gods and Goddesses,” 
Madras, 1916. 
‘** Satapatha-Brahmana,”’? SBE, 44, 1900. 
ScHMIDT, P. W.: 
(i) ‘‘ Die Sprachen der Sakei und Semang auf Malacca und ihr 
Verhiltnis zu den Mon-Khmer-Sprachen,” BTLYV, 52, 1901. 
(ii) ‘‘ Grundzuge einer Lautlehre der Mon-Khmer-Sprachen,” 
Denkschriften der Kaiser 1. Akad. d. Wiss. in Wien. phil.- 
hist. Kl. Bd. III. 
(iii) ‘‘ Grundzuge einer Lautlehre der Khasi-Sprache, in ihren 
Beziehungen zu_ derjenigen der Mon-Khmer-Sprachen,” 
Abh. der Kon. Bayer. Akad. d. Wiss. Kl. I, Bd. 22, Abt. 3. 
(iv) ‘Die Gliederung der australischen Sprachen,” Anthropos. 
13, 1917-18. 
Scuorr, W.: ‘‘ The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea,” 1912. 
ScHootcraFrT, H. R.: ‘“ Information resp. the hist., condition, etc., 
of the Indian Tribes of the United States,’’ Philadelphia, 1853-7. 
Scuwarz, J. A. T.: ‘“‘ Tontemboansche Teksten,’’ Leiden, 1907. 
Scott, H. L.: ‘‘ Notes on the Kado or Sun Dance of the Kiowa,” 
AA, New Ser. 138, 1911. 
SELER, E.: ‘‘ Hiniges iiber die natiirlichen Grundlagen mexican- 
ischer Mythen,” ZFE, 39, 1907. 
SELIGMAN, C. G., and B. Z.: ‘‘ The Veddas,”’ Cambridge, 1911. 
SELIGMAN, C. G., and Joyce, T. A.: ‘*On Prehistoric Objects in 


522 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


British New Guinea,’ Anthropological Essays presented to 
EK. B. Tylor, Oxford, 1907. 
SELIGMAN, C. G.: 
(i) ‘‘ The Melanesians of British New Guinea,” Cambridge, 1910. 
(ii) Presidential Address, Section H, British Association, 1915 
(Manchester). 
Sempre, E. C.: ‘ Influences of Geographical Environment, on the 
Basis of Ratzel’s System of Anthropo-geography,” London, 1911. 
SETHE, K.: 
(i) ‘‘ Die Heiligthumer des Re’ im alten Reich,” ZAS, 27, 1889. 
(ii) ‘‘ Geschichte des Amtes (Vizier) im alten Reich,” ZAS, 28, 


1890. 
(iii) ‘“‘ Beitrage zur Altesten Geschichte Agyptens. I. Die 
Horusdiener. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und 


Altentumskunde Aegyptens,” Leipzig, 3, 1905. 

(iv) ‘“‘ Die Namen von Ober- und Unteragypten und die Bezie- 
hungen fiir Nord und Sud,” ZAS, 44, 1907. 

(v) ‘* Das Fehlen des Begriffes der Blutschande bei den alten 
Agypten,” ZAS, 50, 1912. 

(vi) “Zur altigyptischen Sage von Sonnenauge das in der 
Fremde war,’ Leipzig, 1912. 

(vii) ‘‘ Urkunden des alten Reichs,” Leipzig, 1903. 

SHAKESPEAR, L. W.: 

(i) ‘‘ The Lushei Kuki Clans,” London, 1912. 

(ii) ‘‘ History of Upper Assam, Upper Burma and North-Eastern 
Frontier,” London, 1914. 

Suanp, A.: ‘“‘ The Moriori People of the Chatham Islands,’ JPS, 3. 

SHERRING, M. A.: ‘* The Bhar Tribe,’? JRAS, 1881. 

Suortt, J.: ‘ The Fishermen of Southern India,” TES, 5, 1867. 

Stimpson, C. T.: ‘‘ Synopsis of the Naiades, or Pearly Fresh-Water 
Mussels,’’ Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 22, 1900. 

SirEtT, L.: ‘* Questions de chronologie et d’ethnographie ibériques,”’ 
Paris, 1913. 

SKEAT, W. W.: ‘* Malay Magic,’’? London, 1900. 

SKxEatT, W. W., and BLaGpDEN, H. O.: ‘‘ Pagan Races of the Malay 
Peninsula,’’ London, 1906. 

SKERTCHLY, J. B. J.: ‘‘ On the Occurrence of Stone Mortars in the 
Ancient (? Pliocene) River Gravels of Butte County, California,” 
JRAI, 17, 1887. 

SKINNER, H. D.: ‘‘ Evolution in Maori Art,” JRAT, 46, 1916. 

Smitu, G. Ewuior: 

(i) ‘‘ A Contribution to the Study of Mummification in Egypt,” 
Memoires présentes 4 l'Institut Egyptien, Tome 5, Fase. 1, 
1906. 

(ii) ‘‘ The History of Mummification in Egypt,” Proc. Roy. Phil. 
Soc. of Glasgow, 1910. 

’ (iii) ‘‘ The Ancient Egyptians,” London and New York, 1911. 

(iv) “‘ The Influence of Egypt under the Ancient Empire,” 
Rep. Brit. Ass., 1911; Man., 1911. 

(v) ‘*The Royal Mummies,” Catalogue Général des Antiquités 
Egyptiennes du Musée du Caire, 1912. 

(vi) ‘“* The Earliest Evidence of Attempts at Mummification 
in Egypt,’ Rep. Brit. Ass., 1912. 

(vii) ‘‘ Megalithic Monuments and their Builders,’ Rep. Brit. 
Ass., 1912; Man., 1912. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 523 
(viii) ‘“‘ The Origin of the Dolmen,” Rep. Brit. Ass., 1913 ; Man., 
1913. 


(ix) ‘‘ The Evolution of the Rock-Cut Tomb and the Dolmen,” 
Essays and Studies presented to William Ridgeway, Cam- 
bridge, 1913. 

(x) “Early Racial Migrations and the Spread of Certain Cus- 
toms,” Rep. Brit. Ass., 1914; Man., 1914. 

(xi) ‘‘ Discussion on Influence of Ancient Egyptian Civilization 
on the World’s Culture,’’ Rep. Brit. Ass., 1915, p. 667. 

(xii) “‘ The Migrations of Early Culture,” Manchester, 1915. 

(xiii) ‘‘ Pre-Columbian Representations of the Elephant in 
America,’ Nature, 1915, 1916. 

(xiv) ‘“ The Origin of the Pre-Columbian Civilization of America,” 
Science, New Ser. 44, 1916. 

(xv) “Primitive Man,” Proc. Brit. Accd., 1917. 

(xvi) ‘‘ The Influence of Ancient Egyptian Civilization in the 
East and in America,’ Manchester, 1916. [Bull. of John 
Rylands Library, 1916.] 

(xvii) “‘ Ships as Evidence of the Migrations of Early Culture,” 
Manchester, 1917. 

(xviii) ‘“‘ The Giver of Life,” Journal of the Manchester Egyptian 
and Oriental Society, 1917-18. 

(xix) ‘“‘ Ancient Mariners,” Jourl. Manchester Geogr. Soc., 1917. 

(xx) ‘“* The Evolution of the Dragon,’’ Manchester, 1919. 

Smitu, R. B.: ‘Carthage and the Carthaginians,” London, 1879. 


Smiru, S. P.: 
(i) ‘“‘ Tongareva, or Penrhyn Island,” TNZI, 22, 1889. 
(ii) “ Uea ; or Wallis Island and its People,” JPS, 1. 
(iii) ‘‘ Stone Implements from the Chatham Islands,”’ JPS, 1. 
(iv) ‘The Tahitian ‘ Hymn of Creation,’” JPS, 2. 
(v) “ The Tohunga-Maori,” TNZI, 32, 1899. 
(vi) ‘‘ Hawaiki: the Original Home of the Maori,”’ London, 1910. 
(vii) “‘ The Polynesians in Indonesia,” JPS, 30. 


SmirH, W. R.: 
(i) “* Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia,”’ 1885. 
(ii) “* Lectures on the Religion of the Semites,”’ Sec. Ed., London, 
1894. 
Smytu, H. W.: “ Notes on a Journey to some of the South-Western 
Provinces of Siam,’’? Geogr. Jourl., 6, 1895. 
SouTHAL.L, J. : ‘‘ On Pliocene Man in America,”’ Jourl. Victoria Inst., 
15, 1882. 
Speck, F. G.: 
(i) “‘ Notes on Chickasaw Ethnology and Folklore,” JAFL, 
20, 1907. 
(ii) ** Ethnology of the Yuchi Indians,” Univ. of Penn., Anth. 
Publ. of the Univ. Museum, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1909. 
(iii) ‘‘ Creek and Yuchi Ceremonial Songs,” id., 1911. 
(iv) “The Family Hunting Band as the Basis of Algonkian 
Social Organization,” AA, New Ser. 17, 1915. 
SPENCE: ‘‘ Myths of Mexico and Peru.” 
Spencer, B.: ‘‘ Blood and Shade Divisions of Australian Tribes,” 
Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, 24, 1921. 
Spencer, B., and GintEeNn, F. J.: ‘“‘ The Northern Tribes of Central 
Australia,” London, 1904. 


524 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


SPENCER, J.: ‘‘ Shawnee Foilk-Lore,’” JAFL, 22, 1909. 


SPINDEN, H. J.: 
(i) ““ A Study of Maya Art,” Mem. Peabody Museum, Harvard, 
1913. 


(ii),“‘ The Origin and Distribution of Agriculture in America,” 
19th ICA. | 
Starr, J. B.: 
(i) “*O le Fale-o-le-Fe’e, or, Ruins of an Old Samoan Temple,” 
JPS, 3, 1894, — 
(ii) ‘‘ Samoa, whence Peopled?” JPS, 4, 1895. 
(iii) ‘“‘ Early Samoan Voyages and Settlements,’ AAAS, 6, 1895. 
(iv) ‘‘ Flotsam and Jetsam from the Great Ocean,” JPS, 4, 1895. 
(v) “‘ Jottings on the Mythology and Spirit-lore of Old Samoa,” 
JPS, 6, 1897. 
(vi) ‘‘ Old Samoa,’’ London, 1897. 
STEMPELL: ‘ Die Tierbilder der Mayahandschriften,” ZFE, 40, 1908. 
STEVENSON, M. C. (Mrs.) : 
(i) ‘‘ The Sia,” 11th ARBE, 1894. 
(ii) ‘“‘ The Zuni Indians, their Mythology, Esoteric Fraternities 
and Ceremonies,” 28rd ARBE, 1904. 
Suas, J.: 
(i) ‘“‘ Mythes et Légendes des Indigénes des Nouvelles-Hébrides,” 
Anthropos., 7, 1912. 
(ii) “‘ Notes ethnographiques sur les indigénes des Nouvelles- 
Heébrides,”’ id., 9, 1914. 
(iii) “‘I Talu Tuei, les hommes d’autrefois, ou les premiers 
Hébredains,”’ id., 12-18, 1917-18. 
SWANTON, J. R.: 
(i) “‘ Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi,’? BBE, 1911. 
(ii) ‘A Foreword on the Social Organization of the Creek 
Indians,’”’ AA, New Ser. 14, 1912. 
(iii) ‘‘ The Creek Indians as Mound Builders,” AA, New Ser. 14, 
1912. 


Tanit1: ‘“ The Quest and Occupation of Tahiti,’ Vol. 8, Hakluyt 
Society, Sec. Ser. 43, 1918. 
TAUTAIN, Dr. : 
(i) ‘Sur Vanthropophagie et les sacrifices humains aux iles 
Marquises,’”’ A, 7, 1896. 
(ii) ** Notes sur les Constructions et Monuments des Marquises,” 
A, 8, 1897. 
TAYLOR, MEADOWS: 
(i) ‘“‘ On Prehistoric Archeology of India,” JES, New Ser. 1, 1869. 
(ii) “‘ Descriptions of Cairns, Cromlechs, Kistvaens, and other 
Celtic, Druidical, or Scythian Monuments in the Dekhan,” 
TRIA, 24, 1878. 
Taytor, R.: “ Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants,” 
London, 1870. 
THEOBALD, W.: 
(i) *‘ Notes on the Stone Implements of Burma,’”? PASB, 1869. 
(ii) “* On the Geology of Pegu,’? MGSI, 10, 1873. 
THoMAS, C. : , 
(i) “Curious Customs and Strange Freaks of the Mound- 
Builders,’ AA, 1, 1888. 


LIST OF AUTHORITIES 525 


(ii) “‘ Report on’ the Mound Explorations of the Bureau of 
Kthnology,” 12th ARBE (1890-1), 1894. 
(iii) ‘‘ Introduction to the Study of North American Archzo- 
logy,” Cincinnati, 1898. 
THOMSON, B.: 
(i) New Guinea: Narrative of an Exploring Expedition to the 
Louisiade and D’Entrecasteaux Islands,’’ PRGS, 11, 1889. 
(ii) ‘* Notes upon the Antiquities of Tonga,’’ JRAI, 32, 1902. 
(iii) ‘‘ The Fijians,’ London, 1908. 
THURSTON, E. : 
(i) ** Castes and Tribes of Southern India,” Madras, 1909. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Madras Presidency,’? Cambridge, 1913. 
TIDEMANS, J.: ‘* De Batara Gowa op Zuid-Celebes,’”” BTLV, 61, 1908. 
Top, J.: ‘* Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan,” 38rd Ed., 1880. 
Torres Straits: ‘‘ Report of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedi- 
tion to Torres Straits,’’ Vols. 5 and 6, Cambridge, 1904, 1908. 
Toy, C. H.: ‘* Mexican Human Sacrifice,’ JAFL, 18, 1905. 
TREGEAR, E.: 
(i) “‘ Polynesian Folk-Lore: Hina’s Voyage to the Sacred 
Isle,’ TNZI, 19, 1886. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Track of a Word,” 7d. 
(iii) *‘ Ancient Alphabets in Polynesia,” 7d., 20, 1887. 
(iv) ‘*‘ Polynesian Folk-Lore: 2. The Origin of Fire,” id. 
(v) ‘** Thoughts on Comparative Mythology,” TNZI, 30, 1898. 
TURNER, G.: ‘‘Samoa a Hundred Years Ago and Long Before,” 
London, 1884. 
Tytor, E. B.: ‘* Primitive Culture,’ 4th Ed., 1903. 


VIsHNU PURANA: see H. H. WILSON. 
VissER, M. W. DE: ‘‘ The Dragon in China and Japan,” VKAW, 
Afd. Lett., New Ser. 18, 19138. 
Voth, H. R.: 
(i) ‘‘ The Traditions of the Hopi,’ Field Mus. of Nat. Hist. 
Anthr., Ser. 8, 1905. 
(ii) Brief Miscellaneous Hopi Papers, zd., 11, 1912. 


WavbpvELL, L. A.: ‘A Trilingual List of Naga Rajas,” JRAS, 1894. 
WakE, C. S.: ‘ Traits of an Ancient Egyptian Folk-Tale compared 
with those of Aboriginal American Tales,” JAFL, 17, 1904. 
WatuouseE, M. J.: ‘‘ Notes on the Megalithic Monuments of the 
Coimbatore District, Madras,” JRAS, 1875. 

Wauuace, A. R.: “ The Malay Archipelago,”’ 3rd Ed., London, 1890. 

WALLACE, D. B.: ‘* Notes on Manihaki Island,’ JPS, 29, 1920. 

Waueu, R. W.: ‘ Iroquois Foods and Food Preparation,” Ottawa, 
1916. 

WeiL, A.: ‘‘ Die Veziere des Pharaonen Reiches.”’ 

WEILL, R.: ‘‘ Les Origines de ?Egypte Pharonique,’’ Ann. du Musé 
Guimet, Bibliotheque d’Etudes, XXV, Paris, 1908. 

WESTERMARCK, E.: ‘ The History of Human Marriage,” 5th Ed., 
London, 1921. 

WEsTMAN, S.: ‘“‘ Notes on Great Barrier Island,’ TNZI, 22, 1889. 

WeEsTON, J. M. (Miss): ‘*‘ From Ritual to Romance.” 

Westropp, H. M.: ‘‘ Cromlechs and Megalithic Structures,’’ JES, 
New Ser. 1, 1869. 


526 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


WEUuLE, K.: Art. in Helmholt’s ‘‘ History of the World,” Vol. II. 
WultneEy, W. T.: ‘* Atharva-Veda Samhita,’ Translated by W. D. 
Whitney, 1905. 
WIEDEMANN, A.: “ Religion of the Ancient Egyptians,” London, 
1897,, 
WiLKEN, G, A.: ‘‘ Handleiding voor de Vergelijkende Volkenkunde 
van Nederlandsch-Indie,’’ Leiden, 1893. 
WILKINS, W. J.: 
(i) ‘‘ Modern Hinduism,”’ London, 1887. 
(ii) ‘‘ Hindu Mythology,” Calcutta, 1892. 
WiuuiaMs, J.: ‘‘ A Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South 
Sea Islands,’ London, 1837. 
WitLoucHBy, C. C.: ‘‘ The Virginia Indians in the Seventeenth 
Century,” AA, New Ser. 9, 1907. 
Witson, H. H.: 
(i) ‘“* The Vishnu Purana,’”’? London, 1840. 
(ii) ‘‘ On the Sacrifice of Human Beings as an Element of the 
Ancient Religions of India,’ JRAS, 13, 1852. 
WiLson, T.: 
(i) *‘ Prehistoric Art,” Ann. Rep. U.S. Nat. Mus. for 1896; 
Washington, 1898. 
(ii) “* Arrowpoints, ‘Spearheads, and Knives of Prehistoric 
Times,’ Ann. Rep. U.S. Nat. Mus., 1899. 
Winsuip, G. P.: ‘ The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542,” 14th 
ARBE (1892-3), 1896. 
WISSLER, C.: 
(i) ‘“*‘ Material Cultures of the North American Indians,’ AA, 
New Ser. 16, 1914. 
(ii) ‘‘ The Influence of the Horse on the Development of Plains 
Culture,”’ id., 16, 1914. 
(iii) ‘‘ Comparative Study of Pawnee and Blackfoot Rituals,” 
19th ICA. | 
(iv) ‘‘ The American Indian.” 
Wray, L.: ‘‘ The Cave Dwellers of Perak,” JRAI, 26, 1897. 


Yarrow, H. C.: ‘* Mortuary Customs of the North American 
Indians,” Ist ARBE (1879-80), 1881. 
YetTts, H. P.: ‘* The Chinese Isles of the Blest,” FL, 30, 1919. 


<p a 


Gee Se gee rte 


Seri OT ets 


ne ee nt en ms 


INDEX 


(The numbers that appear in brackets after certain names of tribes and of 
places refer to the maps in which these names occur.) 


Aana, 304, 348 
Abnaki (Mound area), 252 
Abor (15. Assam), 53-4, 279 
Abydos (Egypt), 256, 273, 430, 431 
note 1, 454, 455 
Acvins, 166, 258 
Aditi, 147, 204, 205, 224, 243, 244, 
336, 363 
Adityas, 224, 243, 336, 363 
Adoption, 473 note 1 
Admiralty Islands (6), 32 
Adriani, 188 
Aegean, 458 
Afterbirth. See Ka. 202 
Aga’e, 299, 301, 375, 376 
Aga’etai, 299, 301, 375 
Aga’euta, 299, 301, 375 
Agate beads, 43 
Agni, 258, 283, 388 
Agriculture— 
abandonment of, 237 
early, 31, 43-4, 46, 47 
festivals, 235 
Great Mother and, 217, 218, 226, 
228, 230, 233, 234, 235, 236, 
237, 238 
head-hunting, human sacrifice and, 
222, 225, 226, 229, .231, 234-6, 
238 . 
important in religious ritual, 183, 
186, 189, 190, 193, 194, 195 
in North America, 10, 11, 12, 14, 
15, 16, 236, 250 
pre-Maori, 26 
sacred kings connected with, 130, 
131, 141, 217 
women and, 246 
Ahi, 132 
Ahmose, 464-5 
Ahom (Assam), 121, 279 
Ajudha. See Oudh 
Alabama, 71 
Algonquian (Mound area), 213, 252, 
315 
Ali’a family, 149 
Allahabad, 114 
Allen, W., 24 


527 


All-Father, Australian, 125-6 
and father-right, 249 
and magic, 396 
Aloalolela, 167 
Altamaha River (3), 68 
Amanatoen (16), 288, 289, 373 
Amanoeban (16), 288, 289, 373 
Amber, 215, 387 
Ambon (Amboina), 35, 340 
Ambrym, 108 
Amenemhet, 463 
America (1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 18). 
See Canada, Maya, Mexico, 
United States 
Anahuac. See Mexico 
Anaiteum (5), 149, 262 
Anal (Kuki), 121 
Anantapur, 49 
Andamana, 493 note 1 
Anderson, C. W., 90 
Andesite, 387 
Andree, R., 384 
Animals, clans, 332, 333, 335, 351 
descent from, 320, 342 
dual organization, 320, 322 
in calendars, 17 
laughing at, 341 
relations with, 333, 336, 340-1, 
342, 343, 356-7, 358-9, 364-5, 
430 
representations of, 346 
sacrificial, 229 
Animation. } See Images, animation of 
Anantagiri 88 
Ancestor— 
cult, 179, 
385, 398 
in underworld, 263 
of clans, 359 
of ruling houses, 261 
Ancestress, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 
254 
of dual groups, 295, 320 
Animism, nature of Indian, 183-4 
Anubis, 256, 435, 439 
Apache (Pueblo area), 16, 249 
Appalachian Mountains, 71-5, 315 


180, 181, 191, 195, 


528 


Arabia, 219, 242, 458, 460, 461 
Arapaho (2. Plains area), 350, 370 
Aratta (India), 245 
Archaic Civilization— 
2, 3, Chapters xxv, xxvi 
break-up of, 461-6 
characteristic elements, 406 
distribution, Chapters iii—vi, 31- 
2, 33, 38-42, 45, 47, 50-5, 406-8 
dual organization and, 323, 328 
later communities and, Chapter ix, 
412, 414 
mining, 72-3, 85, 87, 90 
origin of, Chapters xxv, xxvi, 3, 
460, 467, 473 
people visited Australia, 98 
polished stone implements and, 
95-101 
source of givers of life, Chapter 
XXIV 
spread of, and givers of life, 400 
totemism and, 335, 340 
Archambault, 27 
Arcot, 96, 427 
Area, cultural in the United States 
. (2), 6. See Mound area, Pueblo 
Area, Plains area (2) 
Areoi, 174, 263, 305, 399 
Arizona, 15, 58, 59, 61, 62, 65, 66, 251 
Arjuna, 165, 275, 336 
Arkansas River, 13 
State, 68, 75 
Armenoid people, 106 
Army, Egyptian, 155 
in South Celebes, 155-6 
Aru (6, 8. Indonesia), 289 
Aryan, 112, 118-20, 132, 135, 146, 
147, 155, 181-2, 198, 224, 227, 
243, 244, 257, 258, 259, 279-80, 
283, 335, 336 
Ashur, 146 
Assam (1, 15), 53, 90, 92, 95, 120-1, 
198, 226, 245, 255, 260, 278, 283, 
He Ti | 
Assam Census Report, 198 
Assiniboin (Canada), 252 
Assyria, 131, 146, 155, 204, 217, 218, 
223 
Asuras, 132-5, . 146-7, 172-3, "182, 
243, 257, 274, 283, 388, 389 
of Chota Nagpur, 51-2 
Atafu, 140, 299, 376 
Atharva Veda, 258 
Atlantic drainage of United States 
(3), 68 
Augite, 387 
Aurora (New Hebrides), 28, 29, 247, 
298 
Australia (1) 
All-Fathers, 125-6, 145, 156, 177, 
188, 208, 249, 396 


\ 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Australia (1)—continued. 
archaic civilization, 98 
coco-nut, 36 
compared with Melanesia, 32-3 
cross-cousin marriage, 281 
culture-heroes, 125-6, 145, 156, 
176-7, 188, 249, 313, 361, 396 
dual organization, 312-3 
food-gatherers in, 5 
givers of life, 395-8 
gold in, 56-7 
mother-right, 249 
mummification, 199, 200 
polished stone implements, 98-9, 
100 
reincarnation, 360 
stone circles, 33 
totemism, 345-6 
warfare, 156, 234 
Austral Isles (Polynesia), 
See Tubuai 
Austronesian (15), 95-6, 97, 101, 112, 
375 


23, . 77. 


- Avalon, A., 206, 224 


Ayodhya. See Oudh 
Azidahaka, 132 
Azimgarh, 112, 113, 114, 115 . 
Aztec, 17,° 18, °.59, , 150-1, “160, 
168, 170, 192, 234, 238, ° 353, 
354 
mountains, 59 


Babar Isles (Indonesia), 260, 340 
Babylonia (1), 131, 146, 155, 170, 
197, 203, 217, 218, 219, 429 

Baessler, A., 23 

Bahau (Borneo), 255 

Bajaw (British North Borneo), 97 

Baju (Java), 259 

Bakkers, J. A., 156, 286, 287, 374 

Bali (8), 135, 228 

Balingo, 384, 386 

Ball, V. A., 90, 91, 92, 95 

Ballas (India), 114 

Banana, cultivated, 35 

dispersal by man, 35 
home of, 35 

Bancroft, H. H., 15, 141, 168, 175, 
192, 211, 234, 265 

Banda Isles (Indonesia), 109 

Bandelier, A. P., 160 

Bandjermassin (Java), 109 

Bangalore (9), 89 , 

Banks Islands (5. New Hebrides), 28, 
169, 189, 231, 261, 295, 296, 298, 
345, 393, 394, 397, 398 ! 

Bantu, 161 

Barbeau, C. M., 144, 161, 268, 315, 
316, 318, 319, 359 

Barnett, L. D., 149, 223, 225 

Barth, A., 149, 182, 224, 225 


INDEX 


Bartle Bay (7. New Guinea), 29, 99, 
231, 246, 292, 343 
Barton, G. A., 131, 148, 155, 219, 242 
Basalt, 28, 89, 98, 100 
Bastian, A., 199 
Batak, 111, 166, 228, 259, 340 
Batara Guru, 166, 261, 373, 374 
Batavia, 83, 109 
Batta. Sce Batak 
Beads, 43 
Becker, G. K., 71 
Beckwith, M. W., 137, 138, 158, 167, 
174, 190, 211, 248, 264, 311 
Behar, 112, 113, 114, 115 
Behaviour, relations between  be- 
haviour and social organization, 
Chapter xxviii, 162, 239 
Bellary (9. India), 47, 48, 51, 87, 89, 
427 
Belu (16. Timor), 254, 260 
Benares, 114, 115 
Bengal, 35, 90, 121 
Benkulen (Sumatra), 41 
Berg, L. W. C. van den, 285, 287, 
341, 390-1, 456 
Bergaigne, A., 184 
Best, E., 24, 25, 103, 136, 139, 149, 
150, 167, 174, 175, 209, 210, 211, 
232-3, 264, 309-10, 380, 394 
Beuchat, H., 15, 16 
Bhandarkar, R. G., 132 
Bhar (India), 114-5, 121, 277 
Rajbhar, 112, 115 
Bhil (15. India), 51, 117, 118, 277 
Bhillas (India), 114 
Bicol (Philippines), 199 
Big Toco Mound, 70 
Bijapur, 281 note 3 
Biloxi (Mound area), 252 
Bima (16. Indonesia), 111, 287 
Bird. See Garuda, 172, 321, 336 
descent from, 320 
Bismarck Archipelago (Melanesia), 
149 
Bissing, F. W. von, 452 
Blackfeet (Canada), 321 
Blackman, A. M., 179, 272, 434 
Miss, 228 
Blake, W. P., 58, 59 
Blinkenberg, C., 384 
Blood, 222, 229, 233, 238, 385, 445 
Bloomfield, M., 388, 389 
Blumentritt, F., 199 
Blyth, W. H., 208, 209 
Boat, 8, 105, 133, 137, 158, 177, 228, 
229, 231, 254, 458, 461 
Bodo (Assam), 120, 121 
Boeton (8, 16. Indonesia), 287 
Bomai and Malu, 246, 253, 294 
Bonerate (8, 16), 287 
Boni (16. Celebes), 286, 287, 374 


34 


529 


Bontoc (Luzon), 40, 123, 176, 230 

Borchardt, L., 441, 450 

Borneo (8), 5, 7, 42, 57, 83, 97, 109, 
110, 122, 147-8, 185-6, 229, 255, 
384, 385, 386 

Botanical Gardens Report, 35 

Bottlicher, W., 501 

Bougainville (6. Solomon Is.), 32, 
80 


Bowditch Is. (5. Polynesia), 158 
Boylan, P., 446 
Brabrook, 24 
Brahma, 205, 243, 335 
Brahmins, 135, 182-3, 197, 198, 274, 
280, 283, 363 
Brahuia (India), 114 
Brasseur de Bourbourg, 192, 211, 
249, 314, 351, 400 
Breadfruit, 35 
Breasted, J. H., 129, 130, 154, 155, 
165, ;A715 1202, (220, , 2565), 272, 
273, 333, 334, 430, 431, 437-8, 
439, 442, 443, 448, 449, 459, 
460, 461-6, 479 
Breath, 178, 204, 258 
in underworld, 212, 265, 267 
*‘ soul ’’ or ‘‘ life,’’ 205, 207, 210, 
211, 213, 248 
Brenner, J. F. von, 111] 
Brick, 42-3, 52, 53, 113, 435-7 
Brigham, W. T., 22, 99, 138 
Brinton, D. G., 143 
British North Borneo, 110 
Brothers— 
elder and younger, 275, 321 
founders of communities, 277, 279, 
287, 289, 293, 303, 304, 331, 
377-8 
hostility between, 275 
twin, 276, 277, 305, 377-8 
with similar names, 274, 275, 279, 
290, 293 
Bronze implements, 97 
Brouwer, J. J. van L., 98 
Brown, A. R., 387, 493 
J. C., 90 
M., 27,81 
Browne, A. H., 399 
Bruni (Borneo), 110 
Buddha, 337 
Buddhism, 183, 497-8 
Budge, E. A. W., 222 
Bugi (Celebes), 109, 110-11, 135, 173, 
261, 285-7, 373-4 
Buin (Solomons), 345 
Bundelkund (India), 114 
Bunjil, 126, 208, 396 
Bunjogee (Assam), 255 
Burchardt and Pieper, 451 
Burial, 70, 75, 255, 256, 258, 262 
aim of, 254 | 


5380 


Burial, contracted 70, 197, note 1, 
215, 254, 256, 262, 268, 435 
extended, 70 
in stone coffin, 70, 435 
Burma (¥5), 95, 198, 255, 276-7 
Buru (8, 16), 340 
Bushnell, D. J., 267 
Buto (Egypt), 227, 430, 431 


Cabaton, A., 198 
Caddo (2. United States), 351 
Cairn, 52, 87 
Cairo, catalogue, 452 
Calcite, 387 
Calendar, American, 17, 19 
Egyptian, 440-2 
Calicut, 245 
California, 5, 56, 57, 58, 59, 65-6, 
249, 322, 350, 384 note 6, 386 
note 2 
Cambodia, 44-5, 86, 95, 155 
Campbell, R. E. M., 25 
Canada, 5 
Canarese (India), 113 
Candala, 114 
Candolle, A. de, 35, 36 
Cannibalism, 25, 113, 231, 232, 234, 
235, 237-8, 397 
Capart, J., 452 
Cardinal Points, 272, 273, 278, 283, 
291, 305, 309, 311, 320, 321, 322 
Carey, B. C., and Tuck, H. N., 198 
Carnatic (India), 116 
Carnoy, A. J., 132 
Carolina, North, 13, 71, 72, 75 
South, 13, 71 
Caroline Islands (6. Micronesia), 
29-31, 108, 136, 148, 155, 246, 
342 
Carthage, 501-2 
Cassis Shell, 387 
Caste, 116, 119-20 
Catlinite, 75 
Cauvery River (India), 89 
Celebes (1, 8, 16), 39, 41, 83, 97 
Central, 39, 45 note 3, 123, 135, 
176, 186-8, 199, 207-8, 228, 
229, 230, 384, 391 
Southern, 41, 42, 109, 110, 111, 
155, 173, 228, 285-7, 341, 373, 
379, 390, 391 
Ceremonial relationships in dual 
organization, 289, 292, 294, 297, 
305, 321, 322, 325, 371 
Ceylon, 113, 277, 284 
Chama River (New Mexico), 60, 62 
Chatham Islands (5), 24, 158, 248 
Chattahoochee River (3), 68, 71 
Chau-te-leur, 31, 136 
Cherokee (2. Mound area), 71, 72, 
73, 194, 211, 355, 401-2 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Cheros (India), 112 
Cherry, T., 428-9 
Cherus (India), 113 
Chert, 75, 387 
Chestatee River, 71 
Chevalier, M., 74 
Cheyenne (2. Plains area), 213, 315, 
321, 350, 351, 370 
Chiapas (Mexico), 17, 67 
Chichen-Itza (Yucatan), 160 
Chickasaw, 71, 251, 315, 317 
Children and theogamy, 214 
creation of, 205 
spirit, 360-2 
treatment of, 493 
Children of the Sun. See Theogamy. 
Chapter x, 149, 244, 257, 306, 
311, 322, 336 
absent, 153; as high priests, 179, 
182, 192; councils, 349; dis- 
appearance of, 140, 299, 307; 
divine birth, 130, 165-7, 169; 
dual groupings, 279, 299, 375-7 ; 
first appearance, 439; head. 
hunting, 142, 230; ‘hostility 
between, 143; marriages of, 
375-7; mummification, 197, 
199; reincarnation, 363; sky, 
171-6, 447; sun-cult, 179, 182 ; 
twins, 143, 151-2, 177, 321 
Chin (Burma), 51, 198 
China, 43 
Chinese, 57, 82, 83, 109 
Chingleput (India), 427 
Chinnery, E. W. P., 29, 33, 80, 98, 
124, 386 
Chintrala (9), 88 
Choctaw (2. United States), 251, 
267 note 3 
Chola (India), 116 
Cholula (12. Mexico), 17, 354 
Chota Nagpur (1, 14), 52-3, 90, 95, 
113, 114, 283 
Christian, F. W., 22, 30, 31, 136, 149, 
246, 264, 342 
Chronology, 2, 105, 106, 107, 109, 
110, 418, 461 
Church, A. J., 501 
Circumambulation, 134 
Clam, 387, 393 
Clan, Chapter xxi 
council, Chapter xxi 
fission of, 291, 294 
houses, 292, 293, 343, 371 
initiation ceremonies, 365-6 
in two groups, 318-9, 332 
marriage, 369, 372 
names, 359, 360 
nomes as, 429 
reincarnation into, 362 
relationship with animals, 332 


INDEX 


Classificatory system of relationship, 
369-70 
Class System— 
origin of, 446 
significance of, 490-5 
warfare, 490-3 
Clayton, A. C., 116 
Clifford, H., 44, 45, 84 
Climate. See Geographical Control 
Club houses, 28, 31. See Clan 
Cochin (9. India), 245 
Cochise County, New Mexico, 58 
Cocomes, 159 
Coco-nut, 36 
Codrington, R. H., 108, 169, 177, 189, 
208, 231, 247, 262, 295, 298, 
393, 394 
Coimbatore (9), 50 
Colastri, 245 
Cole, F. C., 43, 44, 50, 83, 403-4 
Colfax County, New Mexico, 62 
Colorado River (2, 11), 15 
State, 15, 58, 59 
Colours, and the dual organization, 
272, 273, 277, 278, 295, 296, 
305, 309, 312, 321, 322, 325 
Coman, K., 56 
Comanche (2. Plains area), 351, 370 
Comayagua River (Central America), 
17 


Comejos County (California), 59 
Commoners— 
and cults of gods, 180, 181-2, 185-6 
and spread of culture, 473 | 
go to underworld, 174, 260, 263, 
264-5, 269 
ignorance of sky-world, 188 
Conch shell, 136 
Continuity— 
between archaic civilization and 
successors, 92, 107, 108, 111, 152, 
398, 414, 416, 470 
development of civilization, 474, 
479 


distribution of settlements of 


archaic civilization, 461, 473, 
474 

Indian culture, 105, 106, 114-9, 
121 


Indonesian culture, 109, 110, 112 
Melanesian culture, 108 
Polynesian culture, 102, 106-8 
ruling groups, 107-8, 473 
United States culture, 13-18, 70 
Cook, Captain, 23 
Cook Islands (4), 76, 77 
Coorg, 50, 277 note 6 
Copan River, 17 
city (13. Maya), 17, 67, 100 
Copper— 
distribution, 61, 83, 87, 88, 92 


531 


Copper—continited. 
figured plates, 70 
implements, 52, 97, 203 
mines, 72-3, 83, 88, 92, 459 
smelting, 61 
use of, 43, 52, 53, 63, 72, 198, 429 
Coral, 387 
Corn Mother, 228 note 5 
Coronado expedition to Arizona, 64 
Coronation, 131, 1386, 365 
Councils, Chapter xxi, 105, 113, 119, 
134, 177, 265, 287, 293, 301, 310, 
501 
archaic civilization, 337, 349 
gods hold, 339, 349, 355 
importance of, 332, 349 
origin of, 337, 349, 355 
Cow, 220 
Crane, W. R., 61, 71, 73 
Crawfurd, 26 
Creation— 
by culture-heroes, 125, 144 
by potter god, 444-5 
by sculptor god, 203 
by sun god, 130, 140, 151, 207, 211 
from clay, 266-7, 319 
from images, 203, 207, 211, 212, 
213 
ideas of, derived from creative 
crafts, 203, 205, 207, 444-5 
in underworld, 177, 211, 212, 266, 
267 note 3 
of children, 205, 207, 209 
of land, 143 
portrait statues and, 213-4, 434-5 
Creek (2. Mound area), 71, 178, 
251, 315, 316-7, 370 
Cremation, 39, 117 
Crooke, W., 197 
Crow (2. Plains area), 252, 321 
Crucible, 87 
Cruelty, education of man in, 490-2 
Crystal, 172, 215, 257, 385, 400 
and sun, 172, 400, 401, 402 
Cuddapah, 49 
Culture, affiliation of, 109-10, 111, 122 
comparisons, 100-1] 
continuity, 11, 414, 416, 423, 470, 
473, 474 
effects of class system on, 496-9 
mode of transmission of, 122-3 
of Australian tribes, 32-3 
origins, Chapter xxvi, 12, 17, 18 
similarities, 101 
spread of, 7-9, 11, 12, 16, 38-9 
unity, 14, 15, 17, 39, 101 
Culture-degradation, 3, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 27, 29, 32, 37.43; 45p01, 
52, 53, 54, 90-2, 108, 113, 114- 
21, 233, 286, 412, 414, 461, 
465-6, 469, 470, 472, 474 


532 


Culture-hero. See Children of the 

Sun, 124, 125-6 
as animals, 344; ball game, 329; 

birth of, 169; clan system, 359; 
colours, 329; creators, 177, 208 ; 
dual organization, 294, 205, 297, 
313, 321; exogamy, 375 ; givers 
of life, 125, 144, 177; good and 
evil, 329; hostility, 298, 329; 
magicians, 396; mother-right, 
247, 249, 253, 295 ; no cult, 188- 
90; reincarnation, 361 ; right and 
left hand, 329; ruling groups, 
178, 329, 330; similar names, 
328 (see Names); sky, 40, 123, 
125, 142, 1438, 144, 145, 168, 
176-7, ' 178, 267, » 268, 358; 
twin, 143-4, 151, 329, 330; 
vui, 298; war, 156 

Culture-sequence method, 2, 470-3 

Cumberland River (3), 13, 68, 70, 71 

Cunningham, A., 112 

Cushing, F. H., 16, 64, 143, 151-2, 
175, 177, 211, 236, 249, 250, 251, 
265, 321, 380 

Cypress, 23 


Daevas, 172, 173 
Dakota, State, 68, 75 
Indians (Plains area), 175, 195, 
212, 252, 268, 320, 321, 402 
Daityas, 134, 248, 244, 257, 336 
Daksha, 205, 248, 275, 335, 336, 363 
Daley, C., 98 
Dalton, E. T., 90 
Danavas, 132, 134, 243, 244, 257, 336 
Danks, B., 32 
S., 295 
Dan: 132, 205, 243, 244, 336 
Darmesteter, J., 243 
Dasyus, 132 
Davids, T. W. Rhys, 337 
Davies, N. de G., 450, 451, 454, 460 
Deane, W., 157, 247 
Death in underworld, 258 
mask, 14 
origin of, 189, 211 note 1, 233 
Déchelette, J., 215-6 
Deccan, 50, 87, 88, 89, 91, 197, 281 
note 3, 427 
Dedefre, 440, 440 note 1 
Dedkere-Isesi, 440, 451, 453, 459, 462 
Dehon, P., 183, 226 
Delaware River, 70 
tribe (2. Mound area), 70, 252, 
318, 319 
Dendereh, 388 
Dene, 5, 469 
ares a Islands (7), 29, 99, 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Descent, Chapter xvi, 241, 295, 
297 
Destruction of mankind, 222 
Deussen, P., 182, 363 
Development of culture, 
61 
Dharwar (9), 87, 88, 281 note 3 
Diabase, 89, 386, 387 
Diamond mines, 83 
Dimapur (Assam), 53, 121 
Dieri (Australia), 346, 396 . 
Diorite, 26, 89, 98, 100, 386, 387 
Disappearance of cultural elements, 
301, 303, 304, 307 
Distribution of culture, causes of, 
62, 63, 64, 66-7, 74, 75, 91-2, 
121, 122 
Diti, 205, 243, 244, 274, 336 
Dixon, R. D., 144 
Djambi ( Sumatra), 109 
Dolmen, 14, 24, 27, 28, 39, 40, 51, 
87, 88, ‘90, 113, 117, 436 
Dorsey, J. O., 153, 176, 195, 213, 
268, 315, 320, 321, 402 
Double, 476 
Dragon, 110, 151, 276 
Dravidian (15), 96, 111, 112, 114-8, 
132-5, 147, 155, 172, 182-3, 
197-8, 205-6, 223, 224-5, 243, 
244, 245, 259, 
336 
Dual— 
chiefs, 320, 322 
communities, Chapter xxiii, 196, 
271, 297, 501-2 
coronation ceremony, 272, 432 
crown, 272, 432 
culture-heroes, 271 
divisions, origin of, 294, 320 
harbours, 501 
king, 272-3, 296-7, 311, 431 
land of dead, 261 
officials, 286, 301, 341, 348, 432, 
501-2 
palace, 272, 431-2 
priests, 273, 279, 291, 432, 502 
regalia, 320 


56-7, 


ruling groups, 172, 173, 261, 264, 


271, 285-7, 288, 289, 290, 371-8, 
502 

shrines, 322 

sky spirits, 211 

territorial divisions, 272, 278, 285, 
288, 289, 291, 293, 296, 301, 
303 note 1, 305, 321, 324 

tombs, 273, 431 note 4 

tribe, Chapters xvii-xx, 
168, 194, 324 

villages, 291, 293, 296, 297, 324, 
371 

wives, 126, 149, 289, 300 


153, 


. 
. 
q 


272-84, 335, 


INDEX 


Dual organization, Chapters xviili-xx, 
370-1 
archaic civilization and, 294 
break-up of, 286, 297 note 3, 303, 
304, 306-8, 320-1, 322 
definition, 273, 282 
exogamy, 368 
mother-right, 295 
origin of, 326, 430-2 
sources of pearls, etc., and distribu- 
tion of, 323 
Duau (D’Entrecasteaux Is.), 100 
Duff, U. F., 16 
Duke of York Island (Bismarck 
Archipelago), 295 
Dunbar, G., 279 
Dungi, 130, 217 
Dunn, 8. C., 92 
Du Pratz, 141, 175, 194, 211, 235, 
249, 378 
Dusun (Borneo), 255 


Ear-lobes, distension of, 110 

Earth, 210, 211, 213, 320 

Earth Doctor, 212, 267 

Easter Island (Polynesia, Oceania), 
21, 32, 107, 208, 311-2 


East Indian Archipelago. See Indo- 
nesia 

Eddystone Island (Solomons), 345, 
394 


Eerdmans, A. J. A. F., 285, 286, 382 
Egg, 203, 205, 229, 276, 277 
Egypt (1), Chapter xxvi 
agriculture, 428 
archaic civilization originated in, 
Chapter xxvi, 3 
burials, 256, 432, 435 
Children of the Sun, 129-31, 201-2, 
203 
clan system, 333-4 
coronation, 365-6 
culture-degradation, 461, 465-6 
dual organization, 272-3, Chapter 
XXvi 
expeditions, 92, 179, 458-61 
givers of life, 397 
gold, 92, 388 
great mother, 220-2, 227, 228 note 5 
king and hawk, 365 
marriage of relatives, 377 
mother-right, 241-2, 
mummification, 197 
peaceful people, 154-5, 463 
polished stone implements, 101, 
457-8 
ruling groups, 435-9 
sky world, 171, 202, 256, 447-8 
stone-work, 436 
sun-cult, origin of, 441-2 


533 


Egypt (1)—continued. 
sun-god, 130, 146, 165, 171, 179-80, 
201-2, 443-5, 447 
theogamy, 165, 443-5 
underworld, 256, 447-8 
warfare, 154-5, 239, 463-6 
Elam (1), 92 
Elder, 150 
and younger, 275, 287, 288, 321, 
o20e alisvate 
Elder Brother, 212, 237, 251, 266 
Elema (New Guinea), 293 
Eliot, C. N. G., 121 
Ella, S., 27, 157, 304, 348 
Ellice Islands (5, 6), 77 
Ellis, W., 22, 23, 107, 136, 137, 167, 
170, 174, 190; 209) 201, 232; 
263, 305 
El Paso, 62 
Elvado (11), 62 
Emerson, HE. R., 366 
Enki, 444, 445 
Ensigns, 133, 136, 341, 354, 429 
clan, 333, 343 
Erkelens, B., 173, 285, 286 
Erman, A., 435 
Ks, L. J. C. van, 83 
Espiritu Santo. See Santo 
Etowah Mound, 70 
Europe— 
paleolithic age, 215, 216 
neolithic age, 216, 500 
early civilization in, 499-502 
Evans, A. J., 500 
I. H. N., 41, 97 
J., 500 
Evolution, application of doctrine 
to human society, 467-9 
Exogamy, Chapter xxiii, 111, 246, 
25), 277;) 292, 2935) 295, 297; 
312, 322 
dual organization, 368 
incest, 369, 370 
origin of, 370, 375 
Expeditions, Egyptian, 92, 
458-61 
Experience, as basis of mythology, 
ideas first derived from, 476-86 
Eyeball of the Sun, 138, 174, 211 


179, 


Fa’a-Toafe, 303, 349 

Fanning Island (4. Polynesia), 22 

Farmington (12), 62 

Fasito-’otai and Fasito-’outa, 304 

Fawcett, F., 278 

Fear and war, 152, 157-8 

Feathers, 69, 136, 168, 321, 386, 401, 
460 

Fergusson, J., 89 


534 


Fewkes, J. W., 16, 58, 62, 143, 175, 
178, 193, 212, 265, 380 
Fiji (1, 5), 24, 32, 33-4, 77, 106, 136, 
149, 157, 166, 167, 232, 247, 
263, 296-8, 365, 394 
Fire clay mines, 75 
First mortal, 209, 211 note 1, 267 
Fison, L., 167 
Fission of communities, 
324, 371 
Fitiuta (Samoa), 140, 149, 299, 300, 
301, 302, 375=7 
Flag, 287, 341 
Fletcher, A. C., 213, 251, 320 
and La Flésche, 153, 169, 176, 
194-5, 212, 320, 380, 402 
Flint, 45-8, 75, 100 
early settlements, 63 
Ridge, 75 
River, 68 
Flores (8, 16), 111, 287 
Florida (United States), 13, 68, 69, 
71, 160 
(Solomons), 189, 344 
Fly River (7. New Guinea), 29 
Food-gatherers, Chapter ii, 5, 469 
no class system, 488 
peaceful, 154, 238, 490 
treatment of children, 493 
Food plants, 11, 383-7, 124, 228, 294, 
306, 374, 424 
Food-producers— 
food-gatherers, Chapter li 
occupy lands of food-gatherers, 81, 
87 


287, 291, 


origin of culture, 467 
Foote, R. B., 46-50, 89, 90, 427 
Forbes, H. O., 41 
Fornander, A., 139, 149, 311 
Fortifications, 24, 25, 27, 43, 47, 115, 
116, 161 
Fox. See Sauk-Fox 
A. L., 50, 89 
C. E., 28, 231, 296 
Fraser, J., 300, 302, 303, 349-50 
Frazer, J. G., 166, 222, 246, 252, 325, 
340, 343, 347, 350, 351, 360, 361, 
869-70, 413-14 
Friere-Marreco, B., 251 
Friederich, R., 135 
Friendly Islands. See Cook Islands 
Funafuti (Polynesia), 158 
Furness, W. H., 31 


Gabbro, 98 

Gaddanes (Philippines), 199 

Gait, E. A., 120-1, 226, 279 

Gajo (Sumatra), 340 

Galea’i title, 299, 301, 375, 376, 377 
Galela (Halmahera), 260, 289-90 

. Gambier Islands (Polynesia), 78 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Games, 105, 322, 325 
ball, 312 
in sky, 355 
reed, 297 
Gann, T. W. F., 18 
‘“ Garden Beds,’’. 14 
Gardiner, A. H., 129, 130, 434 
Garudas, 172, 275, 276, 336 
Gatschet, A. S., 317 
Gauthier, H., 454 
Geelvink Bay (6. New Guinea), 38, 
199, 260 
Gemnikai, 452, 453 
Genealogies, importance of, 103-4, 
107 
Geographical Control— 
boundary between food-gatherers 
and food-producers, 7 
later civilizations, 413 
theory of, 4, 92-3, 408-12, 416 
Georgia, 14, 70, 71, 72, 75 
Gerini, G. E., 86 
Gifford, E. W., 322 
Gila County (Arizona), 62 
River (10), 63, 64, 66 
Gilbert Islands (5, 6. Polynesia), 
77, 158, 232 
Gilgamesh, 131, 204 
Gill, W. W., 23, 139, 150, 158, 248, 
263, 305, 306-8, 309 
Gilmore, M. R., 11 
Givers of Life, Chapter xxiv, 457-9 
culture-heroes as, 127, 144, 177 
Glass beads, 43 
Glaumont, M., 27, 136 
Globe (Gila Co.), 62 
Gods— 
differentiation of, 217 ; disappear- 
ance of cults of, 193-207; first, 
477; origin of cults of, 373-4 ; 
potter, as creator, 203; sculptor, 
as creator, 203; sky, 135, 138-9, 
140, 150, 306, 320, 373; state 
gods and ruling groups, 180, 186 ; 
underworld, 139, 150, 263, 320, 
373 ; war, Chapter xi, 191 
Golaghat (India), 53 
Gold— 
attracts civilization, 56, 57, 63, 74 
distribution, 64, 65, 71, 79, 81, 
83-6, 87, 91-2, 135, 176, 390 
Egyptian expeditions for, 459, 460 
giver of life, 130, 388, 389, 392, 
457 
Great Mother and, 223, 457 
in underworld, 257 
mining, 39, 57, 60, 65, 66, 71-2, 
83, 84-6, 90-2, 276, 392, 457 
ornaments, 43, 110, 172 
use of, 14, 63, 72 
workings, remains in, 79, 80-1 


oh ee 


INDEX 


Goldie, W.‘H., 175, 209, 210, 233, 
899, 404 

Gond (15. India), 51, 91-2, 116, 
117, 147, 226, 277, 282 

Good and evil gods, 320 

Goodenough Bay (New Guinea), 100 

Gorakhpur, 114 

Goudswaard, A., 199 

Gowa (16. Celebes), 286, 287, 382 

Government, Chapter xxi 

by council, 334, 337, 347-9, 351-7 
in Egypt, 449 

Governor of the King’s Palace, 451 
note 1, 453 

Governor of the South, 451 note 1, 
453, 454, 455 

Graebner, P., 470 

Granite, 65, 386 

Grant Co. (New Mexico), 58, 62 

Grassias (India), 118 

Grave, 28, 39, 69, 70, 113, 177 

Gray, W., 296 

Great Barrier Island (New Zealand), 
26, 79 

Great Lakes (2, 3. North America), 
68, 402 

Great Mother— 

Chapters xv, xvi, xvii; agricul- 
ture, 228, 234, 236 ; as cow, 220; 
changes into god, 218-9; crea- 
tor, 212; destructive, 222, 223, 
225, 239; differentiation of, 
217-8, 220-1, 223-4, 234, 237; 
fertility, 218, 225; history of, 
269-70; images, 429; in Eur- 
ope, 215-6; in underworld, 150, 
210, 218, 256, 262, 263, 264, 
265, 266, 267, 268; king, 130, 
216-8, 220; of gods, 147, 204; 
sky, 222-3; superseded, 259; 
war, 222, 223, 229 

Greenstone, 25, 26, 209 

Gregarious instinct, no evidence for, 
489 

Grey, G., 211, 

Grierson, G. A., 96 

Griffith, 477 

Grignard, F. J., 114 

Grinnell, G. B., 161, 251, 404 

Groenenveldt, W. P., 82 

Gryzen, H. J., 260 

Guadalcanar (6. Solomons), 28, 295, 
344 

Guam (6. Mariannes), 246, 261 

Guatemala (13). See Maya, 17, 18, 
192 

Gucumatz, 351 

Gudgeon, 25, 158 

Gujarat, 281 note 3 

Guppy, H. B., 32, 33, 34, 36, 80, 98 

Gurdon, P, R., 96, 245, 246, 337 


585 


Haast, J. van, 26, 79 
Haddon, A. C., 125, 155 
Hematite, 48, 75 
Hagar, S., 314 
Hagen, 111 
Hahl, 148, 156, 169, 246, 291, 342, 
373 
Hale, A., 84 
Halmahera (8), 104, 109, 260, 289-90 
Hammurabi, 131 
Hand-Book of American Indians, 160, 
235 
Handy, E. S., 22 
Harbour, at Ponape, 30 
masters, 286 
dual, 292 
Harkhuf, 460 
Harrington, J. P., 62, 64 
M. R., 319 
Harris, R., 502 
Hartman, 314 
Haszard, H. D. M., 232 
Hathor, 217, 220, 221, 222, 388, 439, 
442, 446 
Hatshepsut, 220, 443-4, 459 
Hawaii (1, 4). See Oahu; 22, 77, 
103, 107, 138, 144, 167, 174, 
208, 209, 211, 232, 263,)°311, 
347, 377 
Hawaiki, 174, 310, 399 
Hawk, 130 
Head-hunting, 227, 229 
agriculture, 229, 230 
Children of the Sun, 230 
derived from human 
229, 230, 231 
house-building, 231 
new canoe, 231 
Heitiki, 209-10 
Heliopolis (Egypt), 130, 180, 201, 
202, 221, 273, 432, 439-452, 464 
Hervey Islands (Polynesia), 232, 248 
Hessling, T. von, 77, 78 
Hewett, E. L., 62 
Hewitt, J. P., 134, 223, 225, 226 
Hickson, 8. J., 246 
Hidatsa (2. Plains area), 153, 176, 
213, 237, 252, 268, 360-1 
Hieraconpolis, 273, 334, 430 
Hieroglyphic Texts from Egyptian 
Stele, 449 
Hill, J. M., 62 
Hina, 167, 209, 210, 233, 248, 264, 
305, 310 
Hindu— 
influence in Cambodia, 44 
influence in Indonesia, 38, 40, 42-3, 
45, 82, 109-112, 148, 285 
sects, 147, 183, 184, 223 
Hiranyakasipu, 133, 172, 243, 244, 
257, 274 


sacrifice, 


586 


Hiranyaksha, 244, 275 
Hiranyapura, 133, 172 
Historical experience and tradition, 
108, 173, 481-6 
Hocart, A. M., 22, 24, 35, 136, 156, 
166, 247, 297, 394 
Hodson, T. C., 121, 261, 279, 338 
Hofitman, W. J., 213, 402 
Honduras (13), 17, 67 
British (13), 17 
Honoura, Legend of, 305 
Hopi (2, 11. Pueblo area), 16, 63, 
64, 143, 177, 194, 212, 265, 322, 
380, 400 
Hopkins, E. W., 205 
Hornblende, 386, 387 
Hornell, J., 105, 106, 461 
Horse, 6, 16 
Horst, D. W., 38 
Horus, 130, 202, 217, 221, 272, 273, 
429, 431, 434, 435 
followers of, 429, 430 
Hose, C., and McDougall, W., 7, 8, 
83, 97, 110, 122, 149-50, 186, 
229-30, 384; 385-6 
Hostility— 
between culture-heroes, 148, 144, 
298 
effects of, 326, 491, 502 
Horus-Set, 273, 431 
in the dual organization, 278, 279, 
280, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 
294, 296, 305, 310, 311, 321, 
324, 326, 371, 430-1, 501, 502 
in ruling groups, 273, 279, 283, 
308-9, 310 
Kuru-Pandava, 173, 283 
War, 326 
House, 6, 8, 16, 21, 26, 27, 28, 30, 
106 
connected with the sky, 136-7, 140, 
172, 299, 300, 374 
human sacrifice and head-hunting, 
229, 231 
Hough, W., 62, 63 
Howitt, A. W., 125-7, 156, 177, 188, 
208, 234, 312, 346, 395-6 
Huastec (Mexico), 419 
Hueting, A., 290 
Huguenin, P., 77, 191, 490 
Huichol (Mexico), 400 
Hui-te-rangiora, 106, 107 
Huitzilopochtli, 151, 168, 170, 314 
Humphreys, C., 208 
Huntington, E., 408, 409 
Huron (Mound area), 143, 161, 178, 
252, 267, 318, 359, 360 
Hutti (9), gold mines, 87 
Hutton, J. H., 182, 279, 338, 384 
Hyderabad, 50, 87, 88 
Hyksos, 154, 180, 464 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Iban, 148 
Ibi, 454, 460 
Idaan (Borneo), 110 
Idi, 452 
Ifugao (Philippines), 40, 123 
Igorot (Philippines), 40, 43, 123, 199 
Ikshvaku, 197 
iLai, 187, 188 
Illanun. See Bajaw 
Illinois State, 70, 71 
tribe, 70 
Illusion, 191 
{mages— 
animation of, 203, 206, 211, 434-5 
creation from, 203, 207, 211, 212, 
213 
distribution, 21, 22, 23, 28, 29, 39, 
40, 41, 107, 113, 134, 207, 208-9, 
302, 305 note 5, 429 
ruling groups, 208, 209 
Tiki, 210 
Immortality, 172, 205, 208, 211, 258 
not in Sumer, 211 
Imperial Gazetteer of India, 89, 90, 
277, 280 
Incarnation, 333, 342, 365 
Incense, 134, 203, 434, 459 
Incest, 110 
development of ideas of, 495-6 
marriage regulations, 369, 370, 
381 
iNdara, 187, 188, 264 
India (1, 9, 14, 15)— 
agriculture, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 
115, 327 
archaic civilization, Chapter vi 
Children of the Sun, 135, 244, 257, 
336 
culture-degradation, 51, 52, 53, 
54, 90-2, 113, 114-2] 
dual organization, 274-84 
food-gatherers, 5 
food-plants, 35 
givers of life, 388-9 
great mother, 223-7 
mother-right, 243-8 
mumunification, 197-8 
polished stone implements, 48, 49, 
53, 95-7 
Polynesians, 104-6 
religious systems, 133-4, 181-4 
ruling groups, 132-5 
sky, 172-3, 204-6, 257, 258-9 
stonework, 50-4, 87, 110, 113, 116, 
337, 338, 339 
sun-god, 147, 165-6, 205 
totemism, 334-40 
theogamy, 165-6 
underworld, 172, 258 
warfare, 155, 220 
war god, 146-7 


INDEX 


Indiana, garden beds in, 14 
Indian territory, 68 
Indian tribes of North America, 70 
tribes of Mound area and mining, 
71-5 
Indo-China, 95 
Indonesia (8, 16)— 
agriculture, 39, 40, 41, 43, 45, 
228 
archaic civilization, Chapter iv 
Children of the Sun, 135, 142, 
148 
culture-degradation, 43, 45, 227, 
246, 286 
culture-heroes, 40, 123, 176 
culture-sequence, Chapter v, 147-8 
dual organization, 285-90 
food-gatherers in, 5 
food-plants, 35, 36, 37 
givers of life, 384-6, 389-92, 399- 
400 
great mother, 227-31 
mother-right, 246 
mummification, 198-9 
polished stone implements, 95, 
97-8, 101, 384-5 
sky, 40, 43, 135, 142, 147, 
174-5, 187-8, 192, 208, 
261, 287, 290, 373-4 
stone-work, 39-45, 97, 100, 
341, 356, 399-400 
sun-god, 207, 208 
totemism, 340-2 
underworld, 135, 259-61, 373-4 
Indra, 132, 147, 172, 243, 257, 283, 
388 
Initiation, 346, 365-6, 395 
Inland and seaward parts of settle- 
ments, 289, 299, 302, 304, 305, 
307, 309, 322, 501 
Inscriptions, rock-, 26, 27 
Institutions— 
their influence on human behaviour, 
Chapter xxviii, 4 
To, 210, 248 
Iowa, 68, 252 
tribe, 320 
Iron— 
distribution, 61, 121 
giver of life, 387, 391 
pyrites, 387 
settlement and, 121 
working, 8, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 
122; 207 
working, and ideas of creation, 205, 
207 
working discovered by people of 
archaic civilization, 88 
Iroquois (2. Mound area), 161, 236, 
252, 318, 353, 368-9 
Irrawaddy, 95 


148, 
259, 


245, 


537 


Irrigation— 
distribution of, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 
V6) PIE 2S 2a.V 27 Oeur ao. are 
39, 40, 41, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 
51, 52, 53, 82, 115, 227, 236, 237, 
250, 501 
early kings, 216-7, 445-6 
geographical control, 410-11 
great mother, 218 
human sacrifice, 222, 229 
maintenance, 446 
origin, 428 
Irular (India), 116, 117, 278 
Isis, 217, 241, 242, 442 
Islam, 39, 41, 109, 112, 285 


Jackson, J. W., 68, 69, 77 

Jade, 25, 26, 67, 386, 389 

Jainism, 183 

Jaintia Hills (Assam), 95 

tribes, 226 

Jalgars (India), 92 

Janpur, 114 

Japanese, pearl-fishers 
Straits, 82 

Jars, Chinese, 43 

Jastrow, M., 146 

Jataka tales, 275, 362 

Java, 35, 39, 40, 42-3, 83, 86, 109-10, 
135, 148, 228, 390 

Jemez (New Mexico), 60 

Jenks, A. E., 135 

Jet, 215 

Jewels, 43, 173, 389 

Jones, W., 319 

Joske, A. B., 24, 397 

Joyce, T, A., 18, 29, 32, 99-100, 159, 
160, 192, 234 

Juynboll, H. H., 40, 98 


in ‘Torres 


Ka, 130, 202 

Kabui Naga (Assam), 261 

Kachari (Assam), 53, 121, 226 

Kai (New Guinea), 124 

Kakian, 341 

Kanara (India), 281 note 3 / 

Kandala (India), 114 

Kane. See Tane; 167, 311 

Kansas River (3), 13 

tribe, 68, 252, 320 

Kapuas, 110 

Karen (Burma), 255 

Kariki, 139, 150, 308-9, 380 

Karushas (India), 113 

Kasyapa, 172, 243, 244, 275, 336 

Kate, H. ten, 39 

Katcina, 265 

Kathiawar (15), 89 

Kayan (Borneo), 7, 110, 122, 147-8, 
230, 259, 260, 385 © , 

Kei Islands (6, 8. Indonesia), 289 


538 


Keisar (Indonesia), 260 
Kenrick, J., 501 
Kentucky, 14, 70 
Kenyah (Borneo), 8, 122, 147, 148, 
230, 384, 385 
Kern, H., 96, 111, 199 
Khafre, 440, 440 note 1, 450 
Khanghar (India), 277 
Kharwar (India), 112 
Khasekhmoui, 272, 273 
Khasi (15. Assam), 51, 92, 95, 96, 
198, 245, 279, 337, 340 
Kher (India), 121 
Khmer (Cambodia), 44, 45, 96, 155 
Khnum, 203, 442, 443-8 
Khond (15. India), 114, 147, 226, 
277, 282 
Khufu, 440 note 1, 443, 449 
Kiche, 192, 265, 314, 351 
King— 
agriculture, 130, 131, 141, 178 
controls weather, 130, 131, 135, 141 
divine, 129, 130, 131, 135, 136-7, 
138-9, 141, 390-1 
first, of Samoa, 299 
gods and, 150, 222 
of dead, 256, 257-8, 259, 262, 263, 
264, 265, 448 
high priest, 141, 179, 180, 190, 192, 
273 
sky, 171 
son of great mother, 130, 216-8, 
220 
King, L. W., 181 
Kiowa (2. Plains area), 63, 
315, 321, 350, 370 
Kistna (India) district, 90 
river, 90, 427 
Kistvaens, 49, 116, 117 
Klemantan (Borneo), 8, 147, 148 
Koche (Assam), 121 
Kodaga (India), 114 
Koita (New Guinea), 292, 293, 343, 
386 
Kol (India), 112, 116, 117, 183 
Kolaka (16. Celebes), 97, 111, 173, 
287, 384 
Kolar (9), 88 
Kolis (India), 114 
Konkan, 281 note 3 
Korava (India), 114 
Korkai (India), 105 
Korku (15. India), 277 note 6 
Korwa, (India), 277 note 6 
Kos (India), 114 
Kosambi, 133 
Kramer, A., 292 
F., 140, 156, 167, 232, 299-304, 
348, 349, 375-6, 379 
Kriebel, D. J. C., 287 
Kroeber, A. L., 370 


168, 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Kruyt, A. C., 39, 40, 45, 82, 83, 109, 
111], 121, 173, 207, 208, 228, 229, 
246, 287, 288-9, 873, 884, 447, 
492 

and J. C. Kruyt, 39 
and N. Adriani, 135, 187-8, 207, 
229, 259 

Kshatriya, 120, 182, 183, 280, 283, 

363 


Kubary, J., 291, 292 

Kubu (Sumatra), 5 

Kudligi (9. India), 89 

Kuki (Assam), 121 

Kukulcan, 141, 160, 351 

Kulin, 126 

Kunz, G. E., 58, 59, 60, 388 
and Stevenson, C. H., 77 

Kurnai (Australia), 126, 156 

Kuru, 166, 173, 280, 283 

Kurumba (India), 51, 92, 96, 116,117 

Kusaie (6. Carolines), 31, 156 

Kuti (Borneo), 109, 255 

Kuyani (Australia), 125 


La Fe’e, 263, 299, 302, 376 

La Flesche. See Flétcher 

La Jara (California), 59 

Laki Tenganan, 147-8 

Lakshmi, 224, 228 

Lampong, 109 

Lancadones (Mexico), 18 

Landak (Borneo), 109 

Land of Dead— 

eommunity divides, 270, 448; for 

commoners, 174, 260, 263; on 
earth, 174, 259, 262, 263; place 
of origin, 254-5; ruler of, 270, 
448; sky, 171, 174, 175, 176, 
177, 208, 211, 256, 257, 258, 
261, 290, 447-8; underworld, 
Chapter xvii, 144, 172, 174, 175, 
176, 204, 207, 447-8 

Langdon, 8., 130, 131, 148, 172, 181, 
204, 216-8, 222, 227, 242, 256, 
445 

Languages, Austronesian, 95-7 

Lapis-lazuli, 172 

Lasaeo, 135, 142, 176, 186, 259 

Las Cruces (New Mexico), 59 

La Touche, 89, 90, 92, 95 

Lava, 26, 29, 65, 386, 387 

Le Apai, 303, 349 

Le Faga, 140, 300, 301 note 2 

Le Fale-o-le-fe’e, 23, 106 

Le Fanga, 302 

Lefanonga, 149, 300 

Le Folasa, 300, 301 note 2 

Leper’s Isle (New Hebrides), 32, 169, 
231, 262, 375 

Lepsius, C. R., 450, 451, 452 

Leti-Moa-Lakor, 260 


INDEX 


Leulumoenga, 304 
Libations, 203 
Liefrinck, F. A., 135 
Life— 
fluid of, 180 
illness, 187 
in possession of gods, 204, 269, 435 
in sky, Chapter xiv, 171, 172, 187, 
258-9, 267 
in underworld, 266 
of animals, 340 
Lightning, and sky beings, 131, 137, 
138, 201, 374 
Limestone, 98, 387 
Lindgren, W., 60, 61, 63 
Lippmann, E. O. von, 388 
Little Burro Mountains (New Mexico), 
58, 59 
Little Colorado River (10), 63, 64 
Little Hachita Mountains (New 
Mexico), 58, 59 
Little Red River (Arkansas), 68 
Lock, A. G., 60, 72, 90, 95 
Loisy, A., 235, 315 
Long, R. C. E., 421 
Lord Mulgrave Island, 77 
Los Cerillos (New Mexico), 58, 59, 
60 


Luang-Sermata (Indonesia), 260 

Lumawig, 135, 142, 176 

Lumding Junction (Assam), 53 

Lumholtz, C., 400 

Lumimu’ ut, 135, 166, 228 

Lushai (Assam), 121 

Luwu (16. Celebes), 110, 111, 135, 
261, 286, 374 

Luzon, 40, 43, 176, 403 

Lyall, A. C., 118-9 


Macassar (16. Celebes). See Gowa; 
110, 173,;261,, 285-6,. 373, 379 
Macdonald, D., 262 
Mackenzie, D. A., 389, 400, 479 
Maclaren, J. M., 67, 80, 83, 89, 90, 95 
Maclean, J. P., 15 
Macpherson, 8. C., 226 
Madang (Borneo), 384 
Madras (India), 95 
Madura (9. India), 50 
Magic. See Givers of Life; Chapter 
xxiv, 116, ¥3l, 132, 136, 138,..140, 
192 
Mahabharata, 106, 132, 133, 166, 172, 
173, 197, 243, 274, 275, 279, 283 
Mahar (India), 114 
Mairassi (New Guinea), 199 
Maize, 10-12, 13, 16, 195, 234, 235, 
236, 237 
mother, 235, 236 
Malabar (India), 50, 277, 278, 280 
Malachite, 429 


539 


Malaita (6. Solomons), 28, 295, 345 

Malay apple, 35, 36 

Malay Peninsula (8), 5, 41, 57, 83-6, 
94, 109, 389-92 

Malays, 96, 109, 246, 285, 389-92 

Malcolm, J., 118 

Male and female, earth and sky as, 
320 

Malekula (5. New Hebrides), 27 

Malinowski, B., 169, 362 

Mallas (India), 114 

Malo (New Hebrides), 27, 28 

Mana, 136, 393-4 

Manaar, Gulf of (India), 105 

Mandan (2. Plains area), 153, 176, 
213, 237, 252, 268 

Mandhar States (16. Celebes), 110, 
287, 374 

Mandegusu. See Eddystone Island 

Mangaia (1, 4. Polynesia), 23, 76, 
139, 150, 158, 246, 263, 306-8, 316 

Manipur, 121, 338 

Manu, 204, 244 

Manu’a (5. Samoa), 139, 140, 144, 
149, 157, 167, 174, 232, 298-303, 
308, 375-7 

Manzano (New Mexico), salt lagoons, 
64 


Mao Naga (Assam), 261 
Maori (New Zealand), 24, 25, 27, 103, 
104, 139, 167, 174, 178, 209-11, 
232-3, 248, 264, 309-11, 379-80, 
399 note 2, 400 note 2, 404 
Marae, 23, 107 
Marduk, 131, 217 
Marga Simbiring, 111 
Marianne Islands, 30, 77, 246, 261 
Mariette, 449, 450, 451, 452 
Mariner, W., 157, 247, 298 
Marquesas (4. Polynesia), 22, 176, 
77, 107, 208, 209, 282, 264 
Marriage— 
between clans, 369, 372, 381 
between moieties, 368, 369, 371-2, 
381 
between sky-world and underworld 
peoples, 135, 139, 261, 263, 276, 
286, 299, 302, 373-8, 379, 380, 455 
break-down of regulations, 369 
consanguineous, 241, 242, 377, 455 
cross-cousin, 281, 374 , 
in ruling groups, 373-8, 450-6, 501 
polygynous, 377 
prohibited between blood relatives, 
BYR REY, 
regulations in dual organization, 
285, 288, 289, 294, 368-9, 381 
Marsden, W., 390 
Marshall Islands (6), 77, 246 
Maruiwi (New Zealand), 24, 103, 232 
Chatham Islands, 158 


540 


Maspero, G., 333 
Massim (New Guinea), 29, 231, 292, 
343 
Mastaba, 171, 221 
early cults, 439 
origin of, "435-6 
used by nobles, 221, 448 
Matan (Borneo), 109 
Mateer, S., 245, 278, 283 
Mathew, J., 312 
Matthes, B. F., 286 
Matthews, W., 249, 251, 267, 268, 401 
Maui, 82, 210, 211 note 1, 233, 305, 


310 
Maya (1, 13)— 
agriculture, 193; animals, 351; 
calendar, 17; colonization of 


Yucatan, 17; country, 17, 67; 
cultural links with Mexico, 17; 
culture degradation, 18; dual 
organization, 314 ; earliest cities, 
17, 100; mother-right, 249; 
origin of Maya civilization, 18-9, 
418-25; religious system, 193; 
ruling groups, 141; turquoise, 
58; warfare, 159-60 
Mayapan (Yucatan), 141, 159, 192 
Mazumdar, 225 
McGee, W. J., 249-50 
McLellan, J. F., 248 
Mech (Assam), 121 
Medicine-men, 125, 396 
Mediterranean type, 106 
Meenas (India), 118 
Meeting-place, 105, 107, 138, 157, 
305, 399 
Megalithic monuments, 21-4, 25, 27, 
39-45, 50-52, 107 
Mekeo (7. New Guinea), 156, 293-4, 
343, 370-2 
Mekhong River (Indo-China), 95 
Melanesia (5, 6, 7), 80-1, 108, 372 
agriculture, 27, 29, 33 et seqg., 82, 
231, 344-5 
culture degradation, 29 
culture-heroes, 124, 126, 169, 177, 
188-90, 208, 247, 253, 294, 295, 
298, 329, 344, 375 
dual organization, 294-6 
givers of life, 393-5, 397 
mothereright, 246-7 
mummification, 199 
polished stone implements, 28-9, 
95, 98, 99 
population of, 21 
sky-world, 175, 177, 262 
stonework, 27-9, 343 
sun-god, 165 
totemism, 344-5 
underworld, 261, 262 
warfare, 156 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Melos, 458 

Meltzer, 501 

Memphis, 180, 202, 273, 430, 431 
note 4, 432, 435, 437, 449, 450-2, 
454, 455, 460 

Menangkabau (Sumatra), 109, 246, 
389, 390 

Menes, 430 

Menkure, 440, 440 note 1, 450 

Menomini, 213, 252, 320 

Mentawi Islands (8. Indonesia), 104 

Mergui Archipelago (15. Burma), 86, 
95 


Meri, 452, 452 note 1, 453 
Mernere, 440 note 1, 454, 460 
Metal— 
working in America, 7, 12, 63 
in India, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 55 
in Indonesia, 39, 40, 42 
by Phoenicians, 501 
Metalanim (Ponape), 30, 156 
Method, 467-473 
culture-sequence, 2, 470-3 
of study of arts and crafts, 54-5, 
470 
of study of tradition and myth, 
103, 126-7, 137-8 
Mexcala (Mexico), 66 
Mexican— 
designs in mounds of United 
States, 70, 71 
influence in United States, 71 
mining in the Pueblo area, 59 
Mexico (1, 12), 17, 66, 67, 192, 211, 
354 


agriculture, 14, 58, 193 
Children of the Sun, 141 
culture degradation, 17, 18 
culture spread, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 
59, 70, 71, 141 
dual organization, 314-5 
givers of life, 388 
great mother, 234-5 
mother-right, 249-52 
mummification, 200 
sky-world, 175 
sun-god, 234 
theogamy, 167-8 
totemism, 353-5 
underworld, 175, 264-5 
warfare, 160 
war gods, 150-1 
Meyer, E., 273, 431, 435, 440, 441, 
442 
K., and Nutt, A., 459 
Mhar (India), 114, 115 
Miami (10. Arizona), 63 
Mica, 75 
schist, 386 
Michelson, T., 320, 355 
Michigan (United States), 13, 14, 68 


INDEX 


Micronesia (6). See Guam Kusaie, 
Pelew Is., Ponape, Yap 
agriculture, 30-1 
Children of the Sun, 136 
dual organization, 290-2 
great mother, 246 
sky-world, 398 
stonework, 29-31, 290, 342 
totemism, 342; 347 
underworld, 261 
warfare, 148, 156 
war-god, 149 
Migration, Children of the Sun, 
135-6 ; choice of settlement, 64 ; 
degradation of culture, 121; 
effects of, on idea of land of dead, 
259-61, 263, 266, 268; in India, 
52, 112-3, 120; no tradition of, 
in Melanesia, 108; of culture, 
277; of ruling groups, 141; 
Polynesian, 106-8; search for 
raw materials, 90-2, 121-2; 
secondary, 329, 331; social 
institutions, 247 
Military organization, 18 
Milk, 236, 479 
Milne Bay (New Guinea), 292 
Mimbres Mts. (New Mexico), 61 
Minahassa (8, 16. Celebes), 39, 135, 
166, 228, 246 
Mind— 
civilization a product of the, 3-4, 
414 
similarity of the working of the 
human, 414, 468, 481 
Mindeleff, C., 62 
Mineral Resources of the 
States, 58, 59 
Minerals, attract civilized peoples, 61 
railways, 88-90 
Mindanao (8. Philippines), 260 
Mineral Park (Arizona), 59 
Mines— 
ancient, 59, 60, 61, 65-6, 72, 73, 
80-1, 83, 84-6, 87, 88, 93 
copper, 61, 72, 73 
gold, 60, 81, 84-6 
iron, 88 
native, 75, 76, 88 
turquoise, 59-60 
Mining settlements— 
as index of civilization, 57 
beyond boundary of food-pro- 
ducers, 93 
railways, 62-3, 66, 88-9, 90 
Minnesota, 68 
Mirzapur, 114 
Mishmi (Assam), 53 
Mississippi River (2, 3), 13, 68, 7, 
402 — 
State, 71 


United 


541 


Missouri River (2, 3), 13, 402 
State, 14, 68, 71, 252, 320 
Mleccha (India), 121 
Modjopahit (Java), 109, 110 
Mohican (Mound area), 252 
Moluccas, 38, 39, 40, 287 
Mon (15. Burma), 95 
Mongoloid people, 112 
Monolith, 28, 29, 39 
Montezuma, 67 
Moon, 212, 440, 442, 447 
Mooney, J., 169, 194, 211, 213, 252, 
316, 355, 401-2 
Moorhead, W. K., 100 
Moplas (India), 92 
Moqui Indians (Pueblo area), 15 
Moret, A., 130, 131, 165, 179-80, 
202, 220, 333, 351, 447, 448 
Morgan, J. de, 428, 452 
L. H., 252, 318, 352-5, 369 
Moriori. See Maruiwi 
Morley, 8. G., 19, 100, 159, 418-9, 
420-1 
Morris, E. H., 62 
F. B., 173, 261, 374 
Mortar, 29, 47, 65, 87, 98, 386 
Moszkowski, 285 
Mota (New Hebrides), 262, 296 
Motagua River (Central America), 17, 
67 


Mother-of-pearl. See Pearl 
Mother-right, Chapter xvi, 295, 
360, 362, 363, 375, 379, 398 
transition to father-right, 242-3, 
244, 247, 248-9, 250, 251-2 
Motoro, 307 
Motu (New Guinea), 292 
Moulton, J. H., 182 
Mound area (1, 2, 3), 6, 11-15, 68- 
168 14L54) 462-33: 160-15. 175; 
194, 200, 251-2, 267-8, 315-20, 
351-3, 401 
Mounds, 12, 13, 14, 24, 28, 52, 68, 
70, 71, 72, 73, 113,.401,..458 
Movers, F. E., 501 
Muiry J:,,:204—5,'227,; 257 
Miiller, S., 199 
W., 291, 325 
Multan. See Hiranyapura 
Mummification, 69, 197-200, 202-3, 
501 
origin of, 432-5 
Munda (15. India), 51, 52, 53, 112-3, 
147, 226, 277 
language, 95 
Munn, L., 51, 87-8, 89 
Mura-mura, 125, 396 
Murray, M. A., 222, 242, 449, 450, 
45] 
Mushkogean (United States), 315, 
317 


542 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Mysore (9), 50, 89, 280 
Myth, 137 


Naga people, 132, 172-3, 182-3, 227, 
275, 276, 277, 282, 337, 340 
snake, 133 
tribes (15), 121, 198, 226, 255, 261, 
278-9, 282-3, 337, 384 
Ao, 278 
Chiru, 279 
Kabui, 279 
Kacha, 338 
Mao, 279 
Marring, 279, 338 
Sema, 278, 337, 384 
Tangkhul, 279 
Nagpur, 51 
Nahua-speaking peoples, 17, 351, 420 
Nair (15), 134, 245, 277-8, 283 
Names— 
clan, 359 
similar, of ceremonial buildings, 
280 
similar, of men and women, 274, 
275, 276, 277, 279,: 287, 291, 
293, 295, 299, 304, 305, 308, 
311, 328 
of officials, 286 
of territorial divisions, 284, 288, 
289, 299, 304, 326 
of tribal divisions, 278, 317 
Nanga, 297 
Nan-matal (Ponape), 30 
Napu (Celebes), 135 
Naranjo (Maya), 17 
Narrinyeri (Australia), 125 
Natchez (2. Mound area), 141, 167, 
175, 194, 211, 235, 249, 315, 318, 
377 
Navaho (2. Pueblo area), 16, 249, 
251, 267, 322, 400 
Nayhassan (Mound area), 252 
Nduke (Solomons), 29 
Nebkere, 440 
Nebraska, 68 
Necker Island (4. Polynesia), 22 
Neferirkere, 272 
Neferkere, 440 
Neferseshemre, 452-3 
Neferseshemseshet, 452, 453 
Negri Sembilan (Malay Peninsula), 41 
Negrito of New Guinea, 81 
Nellore (9), 427 
Neolithic phase in India, 46-50 
in Europe, 458 note 1 
Nerbudda River (India), 50 
Neuserre, 440 note 1, 450, 452 
Nevada, 64 
Newar, 245 
Newberry, J. S., 60 
Py E.,°324 


New Britain (6. Melanesia), 29, 77, 
149, 295 
New Caledonia (5), 27, 32, 34, 76, 
77, 80, 99, 136, 149 
Newell, J. E., 311, 312 
New Guinea (1, 6, 7), 7, 28-9, 36, 
38, 77, 80-1, 95, 98, 99, 100, 101, 
124, 168, 199, 231, 246, 260, 
292-4, 343-4, 362, 370, 386-7, 
397 
New Hebrides, 27-8, 29, 30, 32, 77, 
80, 149, 169, 189, 231, 247, 261, 
295, 296, 298, 345, 375, 393 
New Ireland (6), 149, 295 
New Mexico, 15, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62-5, 
66, 241 
New Placer (New Mexico), 60 
New York, 68 
New Zealand (1, 5), 24-7, 48, 76, 
78-80, 103, 107, 139, 149, 158, 
167, 174, 200, 209-11, 232-3, 
309-11, 379 
Nias (8. Indonesia), 40, 208, 259, 
260, 340 
Nicobars, 95 
Nile, 203, 429, 440, 441 
Nilgiri Hills, 52, 117, 339-40 
Nilometer, 441 
Ninsun, 130 
Nirmal, 51 
Nobles, civil power, 291 
councils, 337, 341, 348, 354, 356, 501 
intermarry with royal family, 291, 
449-56 
in Timor, 280; lead expeditions, 
460; power of, 348-9, 456, 462 
royal family in Egypt and, 439 
underworld, 448 
Nova Guinea, 139 
Nubia, 95, 101, 388, 457-8, 460 
Nukulailai (Polynesia), 77 
Nun, 442 
Nut, 447 
Nuttall, Z., 67, 421 


Oahu (4. Hawaii), 77, 311 

Oa Rove Marai, 124, 156 

Oaxaca (12. Mexico), 66 

Obelisk, 442 

Obsidian, 22, 26, 28, 29, 64, 67, 99- 
100 

Oceania. See Australia, Melanesia, 
Micronesia, Polynesia 

Oding Lahang, 147, 148 

Ohio River (2, 3), 13, 68, 402 

State, 70, 75 

Ojibway (2. United States), 252, 366 

Olden, C., 90 

Oldham, C. F., 132-5, 172, 182, 245, 
337 

Olo Ngadju (Borneo), 229 


OE 


INDEX 


Omaha (2. United States), 153, 169, 
176, 184, 195, 212; 252, 268, 
320, 380, 402 « 
Ombos, 431 
Ootacamund, 89 
Opening of the mouth, 203, 434, 435 
Opoa. See Raiatea; 107, 136, 138, 
150, 170, 174, 208, 305, 309, 399 
Ophicalcite, 80, 386 
Oppert, G., 114-5, 116, 280 
Oraon (India), 51, 113-4, 183, 226 
Origin, from underworld, 143, 177, 
178, 255, 310; myths, 177, 195, 
481-2; of agriculture, 428; 
of the archaic civilization, Chap- 
ters xxv, xxvi; of calendars, 
440; of dual divisions, 294, 
295 ; of dual organization, 429-— 
32; of early food-producers of 
Pueblo area, 65; of irrigation, 
428; of Maori, 24; of Maya 
civilization, 18-19, 418-25; of 
mummification, 432-5; of Mun- 
das, 112-3; of Oraons, 113; 
of pastoral peoples, 242; of 
polished stone implements, 457- 
8; of Polynesians, 104, 106; 
of pyramids, 417 et seq.; of 
ruling classes, 173; of sun-cult, 
439-42; of warfare, 238-9; 
place of, and land of dead, 254-5, 
266 
Orissa, 95 
Oro, 107, 136, 138, 150, 167, 170, 174, 
305, 306 : 
Orr, R. B., 73 
Osage (2. Plains area), 169, 212, 
252, 320, 380, 402 
Osborne, H. F., 500 
Osiris, dead king, 129, 130, 217, 435 
drowned in flood, 222 
in land of dead, 256, 448, 464 
in mastaba texts, 439 
married sister, 24]-2 
moon, 440, 442 
vegetation god, 129, 217 
Ote (United States), 252 
Oudh, 106, 114, 115, 132 
Owen, J. A. (Mrs.), 311 
M. A., 213 


Pahang, 84, 85, 95 note 1 

Paharias (India), 114 

Paiute (Plains area), 5 

Palar River (India), 427 

Palaung (Burma), 95 

Palembang (Sumatra), 109 

Palenque (13. Maya), 17, 159 

Paleolithic age in Egypt, 428 
age in India, 46, 427 

Palestine, 460 


543 


Palk Bay (India), 105 
Pallas (India), 114 
Pallavas (India), 114 
Palni Hills, 50 
Pandavas, 166, 173, 197, 280, 282 
Panjab, 95, 112, 134 
Parada (India), 114 
Parava (15. India), 104, 105, 114, 
116, 283, 284 
Pargiter, F. E., 104, 426 
Pariah (India), 114, 115-6, 283 
Parker, A. C., 318 
Parsons, 322 
Pasir, 109 
Passumah (Sumatra), 41 
Pastoral peoples, patrilineal, 242, 244 
origin of, 242 
Patala, 133, 134, 172, 173, 257 
Patterson, R. H., 57 
Paumotus (4. Polynesia), 22, 77, 78, 
104, 150, 232 
Papa, 306, 380 
Pawnee (2. United States), 161, 213, 
236, 251, 315, 321 
Skidi, 161, 235-6 
Pazcuaro, 66 
Peace, side of community, 169, 320 
chiefs, 293, 294, 327 
council-house, 299 
shrines, 321-2 
titles of peace chiefs, 375-7 
Pearce, J. E., 68 
Pearl— 
distribution, 66-8, 76-8, 80, 81, 
83, 86, 105, 106, 284, 461 
fish-hooks, 76, 82 
fishing, 105, 106, 133 
giver of life, 387, 389, 393 
great mother and, 223 
in graves, 69 
mother-of-, 69, 76 
River, 267 note 3 
shell, 387, 393, 402 
Peet, T. E., 92, 444 
Pegu, foundation of, 276-7, 282 
Pelew (1, 6. Caroline Is.), 31, 77, 
246, 291, 342, 347, 373 
Pennsylvania, 58 
Penrhyn Island (4. Polynesia), 23, 
77, 108, 158 
Pentecost Island (New Hebrides), 
177, 231 
Pepi, 440 note 1, 448, 453, 454, 460, 
462 


Perabsen, 431 note 4 

Perak, 84, 85 

Perry, W. J., 38, 39, 42, 63, 76, 110, 
Lil,” 121, -124;" 185; ‘66; 7275, 
179, 185, 192, 227, 229, 254-8, 
290, 341, 384, 383, 392, 400, 
447, 459, 475, 489, 493 


544 THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Persian Gulf, 106, 322, 323 note 1, 
461, 501 
Peru, 12, 17-8, 165, 315 
Pestle, 29, 386 
Petrie, W. M. F., 171, 221, 443, 449 
Phallic emblems, 39 
Phayre, A. P., 276-7 
Philippine Islands, 39, 40, 43, 109, 
176, 199, 260 
Pheenicians, 83, 86, 324 note 1, 458, 
461, 501-2 
Phoenix (Arizona), 62 
Piedras Negras (13. Maya), 17 
Pigment mines, 75 
Pili, 167, 302 
Pima (2. Pueblo area), 
Zot, 201, 200, cae 
Pinches, T. E., 131 
Pitcairn Island (4. Polynesia), 23 
Placeres del Oro (12. Mexico), 66 
Plains Indians (2), 6, 153, 161-2, 
194, 195, 200, 212-3, 268, 315, 
350-1, 431 note 2 
Plantain, 23 
Plants. See Food-plants; 335, 336, 
371, 479 
Pleyte, C. M., 166 
Political nature of marriage regula- 
tions, 369, 370, 382, 454, 456 
influence on religious ideas, 149-50 
Polygyny, 493 
Polynesia (4, 5), 21, 32, 39, 102-8, 
190-2, 208-11, 232-4, 283, 399, 
404 
agriculture, 22, 24 
Children of the Sun, 136-40, 149, 
165-7, 306, 311 
culture degradation, 32, 37, 108, 
233 
culture-heroes, 297 
dual organization, 296-313 
food-plants, 22, 24, 26, 33 et seq. 
images in Java, 40 
mother-right, 247-9 
mumunification, 199-200 
polished stone implements, 27, 99, 
248 
sky, 138, 139, 149, 150, 174-5, 
200, 210, 211, 263, 299, 306, 309, 
379, 380 
sun-god, 1389, 140, 149, 210, 309, 
311 


193, 212, 


theogamy, 166-7 

totemism, 346-50 

underworld, 139, 150, 174-5, 209, 
210, 211, 263-4, 310 

warfare, 105, 156-9 

war-god, 149-50 

Ponape (1, 6. Caroline Islands), 30, 

136, 148-9, 156, 169, 246, 290-1, 
342, 373, 398-9 


Ponca (2. Sioux), 212, 252, 320 
Population, of Polynesia, 21 
of India, 112 
Porcelain beads, 43 
Posewitz, T., 57 
Potawattomy (2. 
252, 318, 319 
Pottery, degradation of, 50 
distribution, 6, 12, 14, 29, 32, 39, 
43, 47-50, 52, 249 
in Egypt, 429 
in ancient copper mines, 90 
Powell, J. W., 6 
T., and Pratt, G., 140, 301, 302 
Prajapati, 204, 205, 258 
Pratt, G., 139, 140, 149, 167, 232, 
299, 300, 301, 303, 304, 377, 379 
Precious stones, 43, 110 
Prescott (10. Arizona), 62 
W. H., 235 
Priest, as magician, 404; Bow 
Priests, 265; female, 221, 245; 
hereditary, 179, 181-2, 190, 191, 
192, 193, 194, 279, 398-9, 401; 
high priest of Heliopolis, 273, 
449, 451 ; high priest of Memphis, 
273, 449, 451; initiated, 186-7, 
192; king as, 141, 179, 273; 
quarrels between, 157 
Probability, and gaps, 471-2 
Prome (Burma), 95 
Ptah, 203, 388, 435, 439, 442, 450-1 
Ptahshepses, 450, 451, 453 
Pueblo Indians (1, 2, 10, 11), 6, 15, 
16, 59-65, 143, 151-2, 168, 175, 
177, 192-4, 200, 211-12, 236-7, 
249, 265, 315, 321-3, 350, 351 
Pueblo Viego, 16 
Pue mPalaburu, 187, 207 
Pulayar (India), 283 
Punan (Borneo), 5, 8, 385, 469 
Punt, expeditions to, 92, 458-61 
Puranas, 120, 132, 197, 223, 224, 243, 
244, 257, 362 
Purusha, 204, 227 
Pyramid, degradation of, 13, 462, 
463-4 


United States), 


origin of, 437-9 

platform, 17, 22, 23, 24, 30, ‘107, 
113, 297, 305 

royal family, 13, 171, 221, 439 

sun-cult, 439 


Qat, 169, 189, 208, 262, 298 

Quapaw (2), 320 

Quarries, 64, 76 

Quartz, 29, 80, 98, 386, 387, 395-6, 
400 

Quartzite, 427 

Quetzalcoatl, 17, 192, 314, 351. 

Quirigua (13. Maya), 17, 67 


INDEX 54 


Radin, P., 320 
Raiatea (1, 4). See Tahiti; 23, 77, 
106, 107, 136, 138, 139, 150, 157, 
174, 208, 305, 309, 399 
Railways, and mining districts, 61-2, 
66, 88-9, 90 
and remains of archaic civiliza- 
tion, 62, 66, 88-9, 90 
Rakshasas, cannibals, 113 
Rama, 115 
Ramman, 146 
Ranchi (14. Chota Nagpur), 51 
Rangapahar, 53 
Rangi, 150, 158, 248, 306 
Rarotonga (1, 4. Polynesia), 34, 103, 
104, 107, 139, 149, 158, 306, 
307, 308-9, 316, 379, 380 
Ratzel, F., 22, 29 
Rawan, 113, 133 
Re, 130, 163, 201, 220, 221, 222, 256, 
440-5, 464 
Rea, A., 89, 280 
Rebirth, 136, 365 
Redjang (Sumatra), 83 
Red River (3. Texas), 13 
Red Sea, 456, 457, 460 
Regalia, 140, 390-1 
Rehemisi, 451-4, 455 
Reincarnation, 173, 174, 360-4 
Religious systems, agriculture, 235 
derivation of, 192 
utilitarian nature of, 183, 192-5, 
201 
Resin, 198, 387, 459 
Rice, head-hunting, 230 
in Indonesia, 7, 8, 42, 43 
in Micronesia, 30 
limits of spread of, 45 
mother, 228 
Richards, F. J., 245 
Riggs, S. R., 321 
Right- and left-hand, connected with 
culture-heroes, 322, 375 
castes, 116, 280, 288, 292-5, 325 
cults, 225 
sides, 287, 325, 327, 348, 375 
Rio Grande (2, 10, 11), 15, 62 
Riouw-Lingga (Indonesia), 111 
Risley, H. H., 119, 120, 184 
Ritual, temple in Egypt, 179 
in India, 134 
Rivers, W. H. R., 4, 21, 22, 24, 28, 
29, 45, 52, 136, 149, 165, 198, 
199," 231,” 247; 248.'"252, 278, 
281, 285, 290, 295, 325, 339-40, 
345, 346, 372, 397-8 
Rome, 502 
Rongo, 105, 139, 150, 263 . 
Roro. See Mekeo (New Guinea), 124, 
342 
Roth, W. E., 200 


35 


Or 


Roti, 39, 40, 260 
Rotuma (Polynesia), 136, 296 
Rouaffer, G. P., 42, 43 
Roulin, 98 
Routledge (Mrs.), K., 311 
Roy, 8. C., 52-3, 90, 96, 112-3, 114, 
226, 277, 338 
Ruanuku, 105 
Ruins, 57, 60, 62, 63, 64, 66, 82, 90, 
112, 113 
Ruling Groups— 
absence of, 153, 175, 266, 267, 280; 
army, 155; become warlike, 
153-62; calendars, 191, 440-1, 
445-6; continuity in, 108, 110, 
111, 243, 283, 287, 385, 473; 
culture-heroes, 178, 384; des- 
cent from, 105-6; descent from 
sky-world, 147, 148; duality, 
E72) (118, 1.74," 176,”...196,5 275, 
276, 285-90, 292, 302, 327, 331, 
447, 448, 456 ; irrigation, 445-6; 
magic, 398; migrations of, 150 ; 
mounds, 13; mummification, 
197-200; origin, 173, 373, 374, 
445-7, 474-5; polished stone 
implements, 384-5; sky, 171, 
172, 208, 257, 447; spread of, 
500; state cults, 180, 181, 182, 
191; struggles in, 156; Tiki 
and, 210; war-gods, 170 
Ruling power, divided, 451, 455 
from sky, 300 
transference of, 301 
Russell, F., 193, 212, 237, 249, 251, 
322 
BR. Vi, . 226, 277 
Rust, H. N., 384 
Rutland, J.¢)) 20-6, 32.. 3057," 29, 
102 
Ruviana, 345 


Saa (Solomons), 189 
Sacramento River, 66 
Sacred and civil rulers, 288, 290-1, 
293, 297, 298, 327, 376-7, 378, 
449-56 
Sacrifice, animal, 23, 134, 229, 233 
human, 23, 25, 134,. 140, 151, 
222-39, 299, 306, 397, 501 
agriculture, 222, 225, 226, 234, 235, 
236 
disappearance of, 224, 232, 233, 
234, 235, 237, 299 
for canoe-building, 231 
for funerals, 229 
for house-building, 229, 231, 233 
great mother, 223 
head-hunting, 227 
sun-cult, 223 
war, 229, 236, 238 


546 


Sadan Toradja (16. Celebes), 110, 
111, 199, 228 

Safford, W. E., 31, 246, 261 

Sagar (India), 114 

Sahagun, B, de, 66 

Sahure, 440 note 1, 450, 458, 459 

St. Lawrence River (3), 68, 75 

Sakai, Malay Peninsula, 5, 86, 96, 
281, 391 

Sarde: 285 

Sakhya, 337 

Sakkara, 433 

Saldanha, J. A., 281 

Salem (9), 49, 50 

Salt, 64, 75 

Salt Old Woman, 64 

Salt River (10. Arizona), 61, 62, 63 

Samata (Samoa), 302-3 

Samoa (1, 4). See Manu’a, Savai’i, 
Tau, Tutulia, Upolu; 23, 34, 
77, 78, 103, 106, 107, 139, 167, 
169, 174, 191, 200, 209, 232, 
263, 298, 307, 308, 309, 346, 
347-9, 375-7, 379, 391 note 3, 
394 

San Bernadino Co. (California), 59, 
65 

San Cristoval (5, 6. Solomons), 28, 
99, 108, 136, 149, 165, 188, 189, 
231, 295, 296, 345 

Sandalwood, 82 note 2, 197, 198} 

Sandstone, 386 

Sandwich Island (New Hebrides), 345 

Sanggouw (Indonesia), 109 

Sangir Islands (Indonesia), 246, 259 

San Jose, 16 

San Juan River (New Mexico), 16, 
64. 

County, 62 

San Juan Tectihuacan (12), 67 

San Miguel (New Mexico), 60 

San Pedro Mts. (New Mexico), 61 

Santa Cruz (6. Melanesia), 77, 231, 
263, 347, 372 

Santa Fe (11. New Mexico), 58, 62 

Santal Parganas (India), 95 

Santa Maria (5. Banks Islands), 28, 
262 

Santa Rita (New Mexico), 62 

Santo (5. New Hebrides), 
le 

Saponi (Plains area), 213 

Sarasin, P. and F., 41 

Sarawak, 110 

Sastri, H. K., 223 

Satapatha Brahmana, 389 

Sauk-Fox (2), 213, 319, 355 

Savai’i (5. Samoa), 139, 150, 302-3, 
349 

Savannah River (3. Mound area), 68 

Savara (India), 112 


27, 29, 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Savo (Solomons), 262, 344 

Savu (8, 16. Indonesia), 39, 40, 42, 
254 

Sawerigading, 261, 287, 274 

Sawyer, F. H., 199 

Schmidt, P. W., 96 

Schoff, W., 46 

Schoolcraft, H. R., 12, 13, 73, 161 

Schwarz, J. A. T., 166, 228 

Scott, H. L., 491 

Sculpture, 12, 14, 52, 58, 434-5 

Sebop (Borneo), 229 

Secret Society, 27, 404 . 

Segregation, on geological forma- 
tions, 68, 91 

Sekhemkere, 450, 452, 453 

Seler, E., 314 

Self-torture, 134, 159 

Seligman, C. G., 29, 99-100, 124, 156, 
231, 246, 292-4, 343, 371-2, 387, 
457 

and Joyce, 29, 99-100 

Selung (Burma), 86, 95 

Semang (Malay Peninsula), 5, 86, 96 | 

Seminole (2. United States), 252 

Semites, 131, 219 

Semple, E. C., 29 

Seneca (Iroquois), 318, 368-9 

Senezemib, 450, 451, 452 note 1 

Seoris (India), 112 

Seran (8. Indonesia), 289, 340, 341 

Seri (2. United States), 249 

Set, 202, 272, 273, 431 

Sethe, K., 381, 430, 431, 450, 451, 
452, 495 

Settlement, early, due to desire for 
various substances, 56-7, 62, 
63, 69, 81, 82, 83, 88-9, 90-2, 
121-2, 389-90, 415-6, 427, 
456-61, 499-500 

theory of, 417 

Shakespear, L. W., 53-4, 90, 121 

Shakti, 223-5 

Shamash, 131, 146, 242 


Shand, A., 158 
Shawnee (2. United States), 70, 71, 
319 


Shell, 13, 25, 29, 70, 71, 105, 215, 247, 
250, 294, 321, 402, 456-7, 479, 
480-1 

Shepseskaf, 440 note 1, 450 

Sheravoy Hills, 49, 50 

Sherring, M. A., 115, 117, 277 

Shining Heavens, 138, 174 

Shiva, 225, 228, 283 

Sholaga (India), 278 

Shorapur, 87 &% 

Shortland Islands,(Solomons), 345 

Shortt, J., 116 

Sia (Pueblo area), 16, 177, 212, 237, 
251, 266,322 — 


INDEX 


Siaw Islands (Indonesia), 246 
Sierra Nevada (California), 65, 66 
Silver, 14, 72, 75, 172, 389 
Silver City (10. Pueblo area), 61, 62 
Simpson, C. T., 66, 67, 68, 71 
Sina. See Hina; 233, 248, 299, 300, 
302, 349 
Sinai, 92, 459 
Sinaugolo, 292, 293 
Singapore, 109 
Sintang, 109 
Sioux (Plains area), 153, 169, 175-6, 
194-5, 212-3, 252, 268, 315, 402 
Siret, L., 499 
Sirius, 223 
Sittaung River (Burma), 276 
Skeat, W. W., 389-92 
Skertchley, J. B. J., 386 
Skinner, H. D., 99, 209, 210 
Skulls, in stone images, 208 
Sky, and earth, 187, 188 
and underworld antithesis, 
378-81, 448 
beings and ruling groups, 214 
born rulers superposed, 257 
Children of the Sun from, 
171-6 
connection with broken, 149, 208, 
211, 263, 266, 268, 306, 355, 
447 
culture-heroes from, 40, 141, 
143, 144, 145, 287, 358 
former people in, 43 
gods, 135, 138-9, 150, 263, 
320, 373 
land of dead, 171, 174, 175, 
Be eS.) eh bp sucOs »s Sod > 
261, 290, 447-8 
life in, Chapter xiv, 258-9, 
267 
origin from, 169, 178, 373-4 
origin of, 447 
peaceful, 161 
people and earth people, 195 
people from, 200, 299, 373-4, 384 
ruling groups from, 147, 148, 267 
source of religious institutions, 192, 
373-4, 398 
spirits from, 398 
visits to, 168 
world, 202, 447 
Smith, G. Elliot, 4, 105, 129, 198, 
199, 200, 216, 221, 383, 432-4, 
436-7, 446, 453, 457, 461, 476-8, 
495 
R. B., 501 
S..F.. 102,. 105-6, 106, 107, 208, 
139, 157, 158,191, 233, 248, 
305, 308, 309, 380, 399, 404 
W. R., 181, 242 
Smyth, H. W., 86 


331, 


141, 


142, 


306, 


176, 
258, 


262, 


547 


Snake, 29, 133, 183, 218, 227, 234, 
256, 257, 292, 336, 401 
human sacrifice to, 227, 229 
Snefru, 272, 437, 440 note 1, 449 
Society Islands. See Tahiti, Raiatea 
Solomons (1, 6), 77, 80, 108, 262, 
295, 296, 344, 345, 372, 398 
Sonabait (Timor), 135, 289 
Soul, 202, 204, 206 
of rice, 228 
Southall, J., 65, 66 
Spaniards, in United States, 56, 59, 
CONT el ae boyd a 
sacrificed by Aztecs, 238 
Sparta, 502 
Speck, F. G., 165, 175, 178, 194, 211, 
252, 316, 317, 318,, 355, 358-9, 
360, 489 
Spence, L. H., 141, 160 
Spencer, B., 326 
and Gillen, F. J., 326 
J., 318 
Spider woman, 168, 212 
Spinden, H. J., 6, 11, 12, 17, 18, 19, 
419-20 
Spirit individual, 360-2 
Stair, J. B., 23, 139, 191, 304, 347-8, 
379 
Steatite, 75 
Stempell, 351 
Stevenson, M. C., 168, 175, 178, 193, 
211, 212, 236,'237, 249, 250, 251, 
266 
Stone bulls, 110 
distribution, 14, 21-4, 27-31, 39- 
45, 50-4, 107, 108, 110, 177, 
245, 297 
givers of life, 385, 392-5, 398-9 
money, 31 
platforms, 21, 22, 23, 28, 30, 342 
rings, 84 
sacred, 29, 39, 117, 398 
seats, 113, 139, 290, 337, 341, 342, 
343, 356 
settlements near sources of stone 
for implements, 63, 64 
transportation of, 24, 26, 44, 107, 
289, 393, 398, 399, 400 
use of, 221, 412, 435-9, 475 
use of, by existing peoples, 27-8, 
51, 107, 108 
walls, 24, 28, 105, 297 
Stone circles, distribution, 23, 28, 29, 
41, 50, 52, 87, 97, 113, 116, 337, 
338, 339 
for councils, 337, 338, 339, 343 
gods use, 339 
origin of, 436 
Stone implements, polished, archaic 
civilization and, 95, 96 
celt factory, 48, 49, 89 


548 


Stone implements, polished—contd, 
distribution, 27, 28-9, 48, 49, 53, 
65, 95-7, 98, 101, 248 
givers of life, 384-5 
heirlooms, 97-8, 384-5 
in gold and tin workings, 79, 80-1, 
84, 85, 86, 95 
origin of, 457-8 
Polynesians, 106 
use abandoned, 95 
used, 95, 99 
Suas, J., 32, 375 
Succession, 241 
matrilineal, 245, 246, 247 
Sudan, 459, 460 
Suiris (India), 112 
Sukadana (Borneo), 109 
Sula Islands (16. Indonesia), 109 
Sulu Islands (Indonesia), 109 
Sumatra (8), 40, 41, 42, 83, 86, 105, 


109, 111-2, 166, 228, 340, 
389-90 
Sumba (8, 16. Indonesia), 39, 40, 


45 note 3, 97, 111, 229, 246, 
260, 287-8, 373, 384, 391, 447 
note 1 
Sumer (1), 130-1, 146, 155, 170, 180-1, 
203, 216-20, 222, 227, 242, 256, 
388, 444, 445 
Sun-cult, 13, 135, 141, 146-53, 161, 
167, 179-80, 193, 221, 289, 
439-42 
Sun-god. See Children of the Sun; 
130, 139, 140, 146, 147, 153, 
161, 165-9, 171, 193, 201, 202, 
205-13, 309, 311, 400, 447 
changes to war-god, 146-153 
creator, 130, 140, 146, 151, 202, 
211, 212, 213, 268 
crystal and, 172 
descent from, 148, 443-5 
father of men, Chapter xii 
human sacrifice to, 140, 234 
source of life, 205, 208, 268 
Superior and inferior, 277, 278, 289, 
293, 294, 296, 297, 298, 325, 327 
Swanton, J. R., 316, 317, 370 
Swarga, 172 
Sweat-bath, 234 
Symbolism. See Thought; 476-86 


Taaki, 380 
Taaroa. See Tagaloa; 167 
Tabasco (Mexico), 17 
Taeotagaloa, 149, 169, 299, 300 
Tagaloa, 140, 169, 299, 300, 375, 
376 
cree 174, 299, 300, 301, 302, 
9 
’ Sa Tagaloa, 140, 375, 376, 378 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Tagaloaui, 140, 149, 299, 300, 349, 
376 


Tagalos (Philippines), 109 
Tagaro, 169, 177, 189, 208, 262, 298 
Tahiti (1, 4), 23, 34, 77, 78, 103, 104, 
106-7, 108, 136, 138, 144, 149, 
150, 157, 167, 170, 174, 190, 
208, 209, 232, 263, 305-6, 308 
note 4, 346, 347, 399 
Tai-Shan, 44, 121, 155, 279 
Tajan (Borneo), 109 
Takkha (India), 133, 245 
Talaut Islands (8. Indonesia), 246 
Tallo. See Gowa 
Tammuz, 130, 131, 146, 170, 204, 
216, 217, 239, 242, 256 
Tane, 105, 139, 150, 174, 210, 306-7, 
309-10 
Tangaloa, 178 
Tangaro, 298 
Tangaroa, 105 
of Mangaia, 139, 150, 263, 306 
Tangiia, 307 
Tanjore, 116 
Tanna (5. New Hebrides), 296 
Tanoans (Pueblo area), 64 
Tantras, 206, 223, 226 
Taro, 22, 26, 27, 29, 35, 246 
grown in Indonesia before rice, 43 
home in Indonesia or India, 35 
Tau. See Manu’a; 139, 140, 149, 
299-301, 375-7 
Tautain, Dr., 22, 232 
Tavake, 248 
Taxila, 123 
Taylor, M., 51, 89 
Pes 145 Olly GOU 
Tciwere (Plains area), 153, 213, 252 
Teeth as amulets, 215, 385 
Tennessee River (3), 13, 68 
State, 14, 69, 70, 71, 73 
Tenochtitlan, 17, 67 
Teotihuacan (12. Mexico), 17 
Ternate (Indonesia), 109 
Terraces, 15, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 29, 31, 40, 43, 46, 47, 48 
Teti, 202, 210, 440 note 1, 448, 451, 
453 
Teti Meri, 452, 452 note 1, 453 
Teton (2. Sioux), 320, 321 
Tewa (Pueblo area), 251 
Texas, 13, 68 
Tezcatlipoca, 151, 314, 315 
Tezcuco (12. Mexico), 17, 353 
Thado, 121 
Tha-htun, 276, 277 
Thebes, 146, 180, 464 
Theobald, W., 95 
Theogamy, Chapter xii, 214, 331, 
443 


5 
Thomas, C., 13, 69-71 


INDEX 


Thomson, B., 24, 81, 136, 297 
Thoth, 131, 443 
Thought, development of 
Chapter xxvii, 4 
Thunder, 195, 384 
-being, 153, 384 
sacred beings, 131, 137, 138, 311, 374 
Thurston, E., 47, 96, 284 
Tidemans, J., 285 
Tidore (Indonesia), 109 
Ti. See Tiki; 208, 209, 210, 305 
note 5 
Tikal (Maya), 17 
Tiki, 139, 209, 210, 265 
Tikopia, 77, 158, 247, 397, 398 
Timor (1, 8, 16), 39, 40, 42, 83, 97, 
111, 135, 199, 246, 254, 259, 260, 
288-9, 307, 340, 373 
Timor region, 97, 111, 340, 385 
Timiquanan, 252 
Tin, 63, 85, 86, 391-2 
Tinguian (Luzon), 43, 199, 403} 
Tipperas (Assam), 226 
Titles, royal, 348, 349, 375 
succession to, 376-7 
Tlacopan, 353 
Tlascala (Mexico), 17, 354 
To’ar, 166, 228 
To Bada (Celebes), 110 
To Belo (Celebes), 289-90 
Tod, J., 104 
Toda (India), 52, 198, 278, 338-40 
Toemailaring, 286 
Toh Bulu, 47, 230 
spirits, 230 
Tokelau (Polynesia), 136 
Tokong, 148, 229, 230 
Toltecs (Mexico), 17, 66 
Tombigbee River (United States), 68 
Tonga (5), 23-4, 77, 106, 136, 156, 
157, 158, 166-7, 232, 247, 263, 
296, 298, 346 
Tongareva, 103 
Tontemboan (Celebes), 166, 228, 356 
Toradja (16. Celebes). See Sadan, 
To Bada, To Seko, To Rongkong, 
123, 135, 186-8, 207-8, 230, 
259, 264, 362 
To Rongkong (Toradja), 111, 121 
Torres Straits (7), 7, 28, 36, 77, 82» 
124, 199, 246, 294, 344, 392-3, 
397 
Islands, 261, 345, 398 
Report, 247, 344, 392, 393 
To Seko (Toradja), 287 
Totemism, Chapter xxi 
archaic civilization, 335, 340 
artificial nature of, 362 
break-up of, 336-7, 343 
classificatory system of relation- 
ship, 369-70 


early, 


549 


Totemism, definition of, 335, 364 
distribution of, 335, 336, 340, 342, 
343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 350-1 
dual organization, 345 
Trade, early, 46 
Tradition, based on fact, 104, 108, 
112 
importance of, to tribes, 340 
Trap rocks, 89 
Travancore, 89, 245 
Tregear, E., 108, 208, 209, 210, 233, 
310, 400 
Trident, 134 
Trilithon, 24, 27, 28 
Trobriand Islands (7, New Guinea), 
169, 362 
Tu, 105 
Tubetube (New Guinea), 100 
Tubuai (Polynesia), 76, 77, 78 
Tuff, 387 
Tui chiefs, 136, 149, 296-7, 298, 299, 
300, 301, 302, 303, 349, 375, 376, 
377, 379 
Tula (Mexico), 17 
Tupai (Polynesia), 149 
Turner, G., 158, 167, 190, 191, 200 
Turquoise, 58, 59-60, 92, 459 
Tusaya. See Hopi 
Tu-te-rangi-atea, 106 
Tuticorin, 104 
Tutuila (Samoa), 303 
Tuxtla (Mexico), 420 
Twashtri, 205, 206 
Tylor, E. B., 161, 226, 469 
Tyre and Sidon, 501 


Ugi (Solomons), 295 
Ui, 140, 149, 167, 232, 299, 376 
Ulawa (Solomons), 231, 295, 345 
Ulca River, 17 
UDnas, 434, 400 nofe 1, 451 
Underworld, Chapter xvii 
archaic civilization, 259-61 
commoners in, 174, 260, 
264-5, 269 
death in, 210, 258, 262 
earlier than sky-world, 269, 447-8 
first mortal king ruler over, 256, 
257-8, 259, 262, 263, 264, 265, 
448 
gods, 139, 150, 263, 320, 373 
great mother in, 139, 150, 210, 
256, 262-8, 310 
interment, 255 
land of dead, Chapter xvii, 
172, 174, 175, 176, 204, 
447-8 
life from, 209, 211 
origin from, 143, 177, 178, 
310 


263, 


144, 
207, 


255, 


550 


Underworld, ruler of, 172, 210, 218, 
256, 261, 264, 267, 299, 373, 
374 | 
ruling groups in, 172, 263, 376 
United States (2, 3, 10, 11), Chapter 
ili, 68-76 
agriculture, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 
236, 237, 250 
Children of the Sun, 143, 167-8 
culture degradation, 13, 15, 16 
culture-heroes, 142-4, 151-2, 168, 
177-8, 267-8, 321, 358-9 
dual organization, 314-323 
great mother, 235-7 
mother-right, 249-52 
mumnmification, 200 
polished stone implements, 100 
sky, 141, 143-4, 161, 168, 169, 178, 
195, 266, 267, 268, 320, 355, 358, 
380 
sun-god, 142, 151, 161, 168, 193, 
211, 212, 213, 268, 400 
theogamy, 167-8 
totemism, 350-7, 358-61 
underworld, 144, 177-8, 265-8, 320 
warfare, 152, 160-1, 169 
war-god, 151-2 
Unity, of race, 102-3, 114, 117, 134, 
243, 312 
of culture, 102, 160 
and diversity, 413 
Upanishads, 223 
Upolu (5. Samoa), 106, 140, 149, 
167, 200, 303-4, 348, 349 
Urabunna (Australia), 125, 361 
Urali (India), 278 
Usumacinta River (13), 18, 67 
Utah, 15, 16 
Ute (Plains area), 5 
Utilitarianism of ideas about gods, 
201 
Uvea (Polynesia), 394 


Vanikolo (New Hebrides), 77 

Vanua Lava (Fiji), 177, 262, 298 

Varuna, 147, 243, 388 

Vasuki, 134 

Vatea, 263, 306 

Veda, 132, 147, 166, 172, 181-2, 204, 
205, 206, 223, 224, 225, 227, 243, 
257, 258, 279 

Veddas (Ceylon), 5, 112, 469 

Vella Lavella (Solomons), 345 

Vera Cruz (12. Mexico), 66, 419 

Verde River (10. Arizona), 62 

Vinata, 205, 243, 275, 336 

Violence, education in, 238-9 

Virginia, 13, 69, 71, 75, 356 

Visaya (Philippines), 199 

Vishnu, 223, 283 

Visser, M. W. de, 183, 337 


THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN 


Vizier, 273, 275, 285, 286, 287, 288, 
334, 449-456 
Voth, H. R., 194, 212 
Vritra, 132 
Vui spirits and animals, 394 
culture-heroes, 298; and magic, 
394, 397-8 
sacred chiefs, 298 
sky, 177 
stones, 177, 189, 393-4, 395 
underworld, 262 


Wa (Burma), 95 . 
Wadjo (16. Celebes), 110, 287 
Wagawaga (7. New Guinea), 100, 
231, 343 
Wainad, 88 
Wake, C. S., 366 
Walhouse, M. J., 50, 51, 89, 117 
Wallace, A. R., 42 
Wand, 476 
War, Chapter xi, 463-6 
beginnings of, 152, 153-162, 463 
degradation of culture, 120, 148 
dual organization, 326 
education in, 463-6, 490-3 
god, Chapter xi, 138, 300, 305, 
321-2 
gods once men, 169-70, 300 
great mother and, 218, 263 
human sacrifice and, 229, 238 
origin of, 238-9 
religious function, 156 
side of tribe, 169 
Waugh, R. W., 11, 236 
Weapons, 25, 156, 157, 500 
given by culture-heroes, 126, 156 
Weaving, 17-8, 429 
Weil, A., 449, 450 
Weil, R., 273, 431 
West Indies, 35 
Westermarck, E., 381 
Westman, S., 26, 79 
Weston, J. M. (Miss), 383 
Westropp, H. M., 23, 89 
Wetar (8, 16. Indonesia), 385 
Weule, K., 24, 158 
Whiro, 264, 310 
White River (Arkansas), 68 
Whitsuntide Island (Araga, New 
Hebrides), 169, 177, 298 
Wiedemann, A., 180, 202, 203, 220, 
222 
Wiimbaio (Australia), 126, 177 — 
Wilken, G. A., 109-10, 341 
Willoughby, C. C., 69, 356 
Wilson, H. H., 120, 132, 166, 172, 
197-8, 224, 243-4, 257, 325-6, 
363 
A Wh ¢ * 


INDEX 


Winnebago (2. United States), 153, 
213, 252, 320 
Winship, G. P., 64 
Wissler, C., 6, 10, 11, 14, 161, 236, 
251, 315 
Women, and agriculture, 246 
and clan names, 360 
and councils, 349-50, 353 
equality with men, 245, 246, 493, 
499 
rulers, 241, 245 
subjection of, 493 
Wray, L., 84 
Writing, 19, 31, 83, 418 
Wurunjerri (Australia), 208, 312 
Wyandot (2. United States), 
318, 359 


161, 


Xibalba, 265, 314 


Yam, 34, 35 

Yama, 257, 258 

Yankton (2. Sioux), 320 

Yap (1. Caroline Islands), 30, 156, 
291, 325 note 1, 399 


551 


Yarrow, H. C., 14 

Yaxachilan (Mexico), 17 

Yeravas (India), 277 note 6 

Yetts, H. P., 459 

Yima, 132 

Yokut (California), 249 

Ysabel (Solomons), 189, 344 

Yucatan (13). See Maya; 
67, 141, 159, 160 

Yuchi (2. Mound area), 165, 175, 
178, 194, 211, 251, 315, 317-8, 
355, 358-9, 360 

Yukon River, 57 

Yunnan, 44 


17, 18, 


Zamna, 141 

Zau, 452, 452 note 1, 453-5, 460 

Zimbabwe, 161 

Zoser, 437 

Zuni (2, 11. Pueblo area), 16, 63, 
64, 143, 161-2, 170, 175, 177, 
192, 211, 236, 250-1, 265, 321, 
380 note 5, 400 


- a , , ; Ais) 4 . ng ip 
i ih PREECE) at Tisai avy a 
. ti : i ; ’ ki ay) shi ty Tos “1 

a : male Shy . wh Vay, oti) Pt sk ’ . hs 


h i ; sce A A aboal y * ls 


y 


i fea Aa ih iat . i ‘ere vee wit abe 

; Gite Ae ‘une dav ie 

| ee RN eae ohecatiers jet ude Lan? 

DM Wah ie iy Absee tyre ely ree 

a Ry y Lin’ MOK, eke ut Os yy ) 

ee edie ie Bu Faun 

AT ULAR RL 1 UME ied ie ee 
Beare ce VEN ith Ith ‘ Sanh “ ‘ziayshery 


PR A en I 


uN ig 
SURF RNA! he ABE camera | 
Peet yt cee 
; ie | re ROM ORCC TS tae yi 
| Ake LGD AE Ei pep an ag Ay have NS Vaney Sai 
ly itt € fit faa velginteh: x SUS a 

" ; Wee | Ne vie Ali) ath aakt, ah if ad i 
i DA Ms aM at APS mil ght Bey rat rm: wt Oi: at a 
eal ti: Bi hes cue aests OOK 


bit ~ 


Ooty et a 4 Suk \ Ri . a 0 aks Me 0G hie i ih Pay, t 
pedi SAR AMG AS Prntel  Grot Btn hte 8 
Oe aa A Pues higie Butler & Tanner — * Land ub “is 


Se Sia tie Frome and London 


Wisp AY \ ; Hie i ae ee A de eG 


4 TH) ‘dey, facie te 
i ATES, NRE Rae ay 
3 Vi ; 
. ; ee j vs ae & tel ' " 
i at { 4 ; 4 j Ky ; i wv ra ae 4 v x : 
' i #: : { 
vip. iy Ai. i a i iY OF ta ea ft Aiwa oy 
. hy f e } a 
/ \ SO et CES 
¥ ' Whi | eh 
ey ae ty . ‘ , ed 
LWA sav inte, a Stet WA f Ke +3 7aet ed an Me <8 +m 
pe NM, Meena ; ‘ art a? De unl iy 
4 y Pi 1 iow ay 
pe aE eS, ai a } I OAR OR Thm me ag 
hs wir i i He. \ ae a i 
s,s ian at SK Chey i aN, Mahia), 
eh : ne hie 2 
¢ r ? bale 
rs 1 
t * int a AP ee aa A sac ‘ we ¢ 
; i“ 
. Hig ARE 
\ / 7 t ea 7) ad en « 
vey PS es aa ie / i : oe 
ae AD 1! | We » ty: he a4 x x , te. Fes ¥) Tt 
1 1 \ » n 7 ct ? \ 
Ris SN ii get ott ih ¥ Wes, a : 
Sa ae oe Nee 9s Ny dace MEA a 
: Le te = ih f Ss 
‘ ray i } Rai Yas ¥ ea uy 
} ‘ 
‘ ‘ te tr 
iy i ‘ ‘ % , 
1 oa vy . ¥ ‘ ao 
Ha) ei is 7 a 
De” ae ‘ ae 
q ugh yn . Pri ‘e? i Vii , ae 
f i bib '9) r 
ea iva fy Attar) cup e g EUNE tay Uyty AS tea nee stan 
, ee ait fete t : é f a ’ 
: BA ah, AP oe ae evan rhe 6) vena 
ik ; i 5 (ys 
a ‘ar ; . 
, Oe 2 WR oe et ek Naas) oe ‘ , Fa er by hUaE co 
' Ae ® ad OS AR. _~L "r ny , 
Wie BO ee LDA eae. Jase RE je ea ear aie) 
i ) , ‘ i ny) are j f phates 4 f ‘ 
' Ri Saat, ae ae Sone faa * Mae t Cs an 


Sh MRR SECA CET tok COR Tike eatin (0) Se, a 

| hus aie » A BIAOA ay ae Lo aah es Mite Pes ee 
Mare Ue a ont whe eet * | Ww pe nar ig Phi ow 

Oley a) vo es pay, re ; “i "Ma yi hae fine 

f \ EA he ti ‘f : ‘et 


} . vey i 4s a4 ‘ ant 
‘ 7 ( 5 Sg hie a, yt, tt | i oides ‘ } + WTA) -@e Ka ‘ taal 4 


| 
on ale 
are 

= 

= 

~ 

= 

é 


he 
Pa, * 
“, . 


- 
S ay ne 
Negrin ee thy 
te 
See 
— 
y 
» 
ae 
“i 
: aa 


ae Ae 
1 ‘ ‘ \ f vO * 
. 4 tale iP 
ry . Nl ae Pern A ci 
y 1 3 he Ae a 
P ‘ e Ag" “sh \ , F 
‘ " ‘ ¥ 4 2s Ly 
i i aay ere i fadsele’ eS ‘, 
» AXs ; oe Bf J \ ‘ fy 4 
'@ ( fi ¢ J é ny iO? et ‘ yy i ive ts ay \ 
| a is ¥ eon i J al 


MARCH, 1923 


A SELECTION FROM 


MESSRS. 


NEP ET Ua Nis 


PUBLICATIONS 


This Catalogue contains only a selection of the more important books 


published by Messrs. Methuen. 
may be obtained on application. 


W.). THE ART OF 
8vo. 6s. net. 


Armstrong (W. 
GRICKET: Cr. 

Bain (F. W.)— 
A Dicir oF tHz Moon: A Hindoo Love 
Story. Tur Dsscenr oF THE SUN: A 
Cycle of Birth. A Hirer oF THE DAWN. 
In tHe Great Gop’s Harr. A DRAUGHT 
OFTHE BLuz. AN ESSENCE OF THE Dusk. 
An INCARNATION OF THE SNOW. A MINE 
oF Fautts. Tue ASHES OF A GOD. 
BUBBLES OF THE Foam. A SYRUP OF THE 


Brees. Tur Livery or Eve. THE Sus- 
STANCE OFA DREAM. All Feap. 8v0. 5s. 
net. AN Ecuo oF THE SPHERES. Wide 
Demy. «2s. 6d. net. 

Baker (C. H. Collins), CROME. Illus- 
trated. Quarto. £5 5s. net. 


Balfour (Sir Graham). THE LIFE OF 
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. Twen- 
tieth Edition. In one Volume. Cr. 8vo. 
Buckram, 7s. 6d. net. 

Bateman (H. M.). A BOOK OF DRAW- 
INGS. Fifth Edition. Royal 4to. 
ros. 6d. net. 

MORE DRAWINGS, Second Edition. Royal 
4to. 108. 6d. net. 

SUBURBIA. Denty qto. 

Belloc (H.)— 

Paris, 8s.6d.net. HILLS AND THE SEA, 6s. 
net. On NorHING AND KINDRED SuB- 
jects, 6s. net. On EVERYTHING, 6s. net. 
On SOMETHING, 6s. net. FIRST AND Last, 6s. 
net. THIS AND THAT AND THE OTHER, 6s. 
net, MARIE ANTOINETTE, 18s. net. ON. 
Fcap. 8vo. 6s. net. THE PYRENEES. 
Cr. 8v0o. 8s. 6d. net. 

Blackmore (S. Powell) LAWN TENNIS 
UP-TO-DATE. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. 
12s. 6d. net. 

Carponter (G. H.), INSECT TRANSFOR- 
MATION. Demy 8vo. 12s. 6d. net. 

Chandler (Arthur), D.D., late Lord Bishop of 

Bloemfontein— 
Ara Cai: An Essay inMystical Theology, 
5s. net. FAITH AND EXPERIENCE, 55. net. 
Tue Cutt or THE PAssING MoMENT, 6s. 
net. THE ENGLISH CHURCH AND RE- 
UNION, 58. net. SCALA MUNDI, 4s. 6d. net. 

Chesterton (G. K.)— 


6s. net. 


Tur BALLAD oF THE WHITE Horse. ALL 
THINGS CONSIDERED. TREMENDOUS 
TRIFLES. ALARMS AND Discursions. A 
MISCELLANY oF Men. THE USES OF 
Diversity. All Fecap. 8vo. 6s. net. 
Wine, WaTER, AND Sonc. Feap. 8vo. 
Is. 6a. net. 


A complete catalogue of their publications 


Clark (Norman), HOW TO BOX. Illus- 
trated. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

Clutton-Brock (A.).§ WHAT IS THE KING- 
DOM OF HEAVEN? Fijth Edition. 
Fcap. 8vo. 5s. net. 

ESSAYSONART. Second Edition, Feap. 


8vo. 5s. net. 
ESSAYS ON BOOKS, Third Edition. 
Feap. 8vo. 6s. net. 


MORE ESSAYS ON BOOKS. Feap. 8vo. 
6s. net. 
SHAKESPEARE’S HAMLET, Fceap. 8vo. 


5s. net, 

SHELLEY : THE MAN AND THE POET. 
Feap 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

Conrad (Joseph) THE MIRROR OF 
THE SEA: Memories and Impressions. 
Fourth Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 6s. net, 

Drever (James), THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 
EVERYDAY LIFE. Third Edition. 
Cr. 8v0. 6s. net. 

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF INDUSTRY. 
Cr. 8v0, 55. net. 

Einstein (A.). RELATIVITY: THE 
SPECIAL AND THE GENERAL 
THEORY. Translated by Rosperr W. 
Lawson, Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo, 
5s. net. 

SIDELIGHTS ON RELATIVITY. Two 


Lectures by ALBERT EINSTEIN. Gr, 8vo. 
3s. 6d. net. 

THE MEANING OF RELATIVITY. Cr. 
8vo. 5S. net. 


Other Books on the Einstein Theory. 

SPACE—TIME—MATTER. By HerMann 
Wer. Demy 8vo. 18s. net, 

EINSTEIN THE SEARCHER: His Worx 
EXPLAINED IN DIALOGUES WITH EINSTEIN, 
By ALEXANDER Moszkowsxki. Demy 
8vo. 12s. 6d. net. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE THEORY 
OF RELATIVITY. By Lynpon Bo ton, 
Second Edition. Cr. 8vo. 5s. net, 

RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION. By 
Various Writers. Edited by J, Matco_m 
Birp. Cr. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

RELATIVITY AND THE UNIVERSE. 
By Dr. Harry Scumipt. Second Edition. 
Cr, 8vo. 5s. net. 

THE IDEAS OF EINSTEIN’S THEORY, 
By J. H. THrrrinc. Cr. 8vo. 5s. net. 
RELATIVITY FOR ALL. By Hersert 
Dincte. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 

2s. neét. 

Evans (Joan). 
Royal 4to. 


ENGLISH JEWELLERY. 
£2 12s. 6d. net. 


me ce 


2 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 


“ Fougasse.”” A Seer Bp OF GAMES. 
Fecap. 4to. 3s. 6d. 
DRAWN AT A VENTURE, Royal 4to. 
ros. 6d. net. 

Freundlich (Dr. Herbert) COLLOID AND 
Sabra CHEMISTRY. Demy 
8vo. 36s. net 


pitts). (Rose). FAIRIES AND CHIM- 
EYS. Fcap. 8vo. Fourteenth Edition. 
s. 6d. net. 

ak FAIRY GREEN. Seventh Edition. 
Fcap. 8v0. 3s. 6d. net. 

THE FAIRY FLUTE. Thira Edition. 
Feap.8vo. 35s. 6d. net. 

THE RAINBOW CAT AND OTHER 
STORIES. Feap. 8v0. 35. 6d. net. 

Gibbins (H. de B.). INDUSTRY IN 
ENGLAND: HISTORICAL OUTLINES. 
With Maps and Plans. Tenth Edition. 
Demy 8vo. 12s. 6d. net. 

THE INDUSTRIAL HISTORY OF 
ENGLAND. With 5 Maps and a Plan. 
Tweniy-seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo. 5s. 

Gibbon (Edward). THE DECLINE AND 
FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 
Edited, with Notes, Appendices, and Maps, 


by J. B. Bury. Seven Volumes. Demy 
8vo. Illustrated. Each 12s. 6d. net. 
Also in Seven Volumes. Unillustrated. 


Cr. 8vo. Each 7s. 6d. net. 

Glover (T. R.)— 
Tue ConFiicr oF RELIGIONSIN THE EARLY 
RomAN Empire, tos. 6d, net. Ports AnD 
Purirans, ros. 6d. net. FRomM PERICLES 
ro Pup, ros. 6d. net. VIRGIL, ros. 6d. 
set. THE CHRISTIAN TRADITION AND ITS 
VERIFICATION (The Angus Lecture for 
1912). 6s. net. 

Grahame (Kenneth) THE WIND IN 
THE WILLOWS. Twelfth Edition. Cr. 
8v0o. 7s. 6d. net. 

Also small 4to. 10s. 6d, met. Illustrated 
by Nancy BARNHART. 

Hall (H. R.). THE ANCIENT HISTORY 
OF THE NEAR EAST FROM THE 
EARLIEST TIMES TO THE BATTLE 
OF SALAMIS. Illustrated. Fifth Eds- 
tion. Demy 8vo. 21s. net. 

Holdsworth (W. S.). A HISTORY OF 
ENGLISH LAW. Seven Volumes. Demy 
8v0o. Each 25s. net. 

Inge (W. R.). CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM. 
(The Bampton Lectures of iad Fijth 
Edition. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 1 

Jenks (E.). AN OUTLINE OF ENGLISH 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT. Fifth Edition. 
Cr. 8vo. 5s. net. 

A SHORT HISTORY OF ENGLISH LAW: 
From THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE END 
OF THE YEAR I91I. Second Edition, 
Demy 8vo. 12s. 6d. net. 

vanee (Lady) of Norwich, REVELA- 

TIONS OF DIVINE LOVE. Edited by 
GRACE WaRRACK, Seventh Edition. (Cr. 
8vo. 5s. net. 

Keats (John), POEMS. Edited, with In- 

troduction and Notes, by E. DE SELIN- 


court. With a Frontispiece in Photo- 
gravure. Fourth Edition. Demy 8vo. 
I2s. 6d. net, 

Kidd (Benjamin). THE SCIENCE OF 
POWER. Ninth Edition. Cr.8vo. 7s. 6d.net. 

SOCIAL EVOLUTION, Demy 8vo. 8s. 6d.net. 

A PHILOSOPHER WITH NATURE. 
Second Edition. Cr. 8vo. 6s. net. 

Kipling (Rudyard) BARRACK-ROOM 
BALLADS. 228th Thousand. Cr. 8vo, 
Buckram, 7s. 6d. net. Also Feap. 8vo. 
Cloth, 6s. net ; leather, 7s. 6d. net. 

Also a Service Edition. Two Volumes, 
Square Fcap. 8vo. Each 3s. net. 

THE SEVEN SEAS. 161st Thousand, 
Cr. 8v0o. Buckram, 7s. 6d. net. Also 
ni 8vo. Cloth, 6s. net; leather, 7s. 6d. 
net. 

Also a Service Edition. Two Volumes. 
Square Fcap. 8v0. Each 3s. net. 

THE FIVE NATIONS. r29th Thousand. 
Cr. 8vo. Buckram, 7s. 6d. net. Also 
Feap. 8vo. Cloth, 6s. net; leather, 7s. 6d. 
net. 

Also a Service Edition. 
Square Fcap, 8vo. 


Two Volumes. 
Each 3s. net. 


DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES. 1o3ra 
Thousand. Cr. 8v0. Buckram, 7s. 6d. 
net. Also Fceap. 8vo. Cloth, 6s. net; 


leather, 7s. 6d. net. 
Also a Service Edition. Two Volumes. 
Square Feap. 8vo. Each 3s. net. 

THE YEARS BETWEEN. 95th Thousand. 
Cr. 8vo. Buckram, 7s. 6d. net. Feap. 
8vo. Cloth, 6s. net; leather, 7s. 6d. net. 
Also a Service Edition. JTwo Volumes. 
Square Feap. 8vo. Each 3s. net. 

A KIPLING ANTHOLOGY—VERSE. 
Fecap. 8vo. cloth, 6s. net. Leather, 7s. 64. 
net. 

TWENTY POEMS FROM RUDYARD 
KIPLING. 313th Thousand. Feap. 8vo. 
Is. net. 

Knox (E. V. G.). (‘Evoe’ of Punch.) 
PARODIES REGAINED. Illustrated 
by Grorcz Morrow. Fcap.8vo. 4s. 6d. 
net. 

THESE LIBERTIES. Fceap. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net. 

Lamb (Charles and Mary), THE COM- 
PLETE WORKS. Edited by E. V. 
Lucas. A New and Revised Edition in 
Six Volumes. With Frontispieces. Feap, 
8v0. Each 6s. net. 

The volumes are :— 
1, MISCELLANEOUS Prose. WW. ELIA AND 
tHE Last Essay or ELIA. 111. Booxs 
FOR CHILDREN. IV. PLays AND Poems, 
v. and vi. LETTERS. 

Lankester (Sir Ray) SCIENCE FROM AN 
EASY CHAIR. Illustrated. Thirteenth 
Edition. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

SCIENCE FROM AN EASY CHAIR, 
Second Series. Illustrated. Third Edé- 
tion. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

DIVERSIONS OF A NATURALIST, 
Illustrated. Third Edition. Cr. 800. 
7s. 6a, net. 


Messrs, METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 3 


SECRETS OF EARTH AND SEA. Cr. 


8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

GREAT AND SMALL THINGS. Illus- 
trated. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

Lesearboura (A.C.) RADIO FOR EVERY- 
cet Illustrated. Cr. 8v0. 7s. 6d. 
net, 

Lodge (Sir Oliver) MAN AND THE 
UNIVERSE, Ninth Edttion. Cr. 8vo. 
7s. Od. net. 


THE SURVIVAL OF MAN: A Srupy In 
UNRECOGNIZED HuMAN Facutry. Seventh 
Edition. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

MODERN PROBLEMS. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

RAYMOND; oor Lire anv De#atTu. 
Illustrated. Twelfth Edition. Demy 8vo. 
ros. 6d. net. 

RAYMOND REVISED. (Abbreviated 
edition). Cr. 8vo,. 6s. net. 

Loring (F. H.), ATOMIC THEORIES. 
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. 12s. 6d. net. 

Lueas (E. V.)— 

Tue Lire oF CHARLES LAMB, 2 vols., 21S. 
net. A WANDERER IN HOLLAND, Ios. 64. 
net. A WANDERER IN LONDON, Ios. 64. 
net. LONDON REVISITED, Ios. 6d. net. A 
WANDERER IN Paris, 10S. 6d. net and 6s. 


net. A WANDERER IN FLORENCE, Ios. 6d. 
net. A WANDERERIN VENICE, I0S. 6d. net. 
THE OpeN Roap: A Little Book for 


Wayfarers, 6s. 6d. net. THE FRIENDLY 
Town: A Little Book for the Urbane, 
6s. net. FIRESIDE AND SUNSHINE, 
6s. net. CHARACTER AND COMEDY, 6s. net. 
Tue Gent_est Art: A Choice of Letters 
by Entertaining Hands, 6s. 6d. net. THE 
Srconp Post, 6s. net. HER INFINITE 
Variety: A Feminine Portrait Gallery, 
6s.net. Goop Company: A Rally of Men, 
6s. net. ONE Day AND ANOTHER, 6s. "tet. 
Op LAmps FoR NEw, 6s. net. LOITERER’S 
HARVEST, 6s. net. CLOUD AND SILVER, 6s. 
net. A BOSWELL OF BAGHDAD, AND OTHER 
Essays, 6s. net. ’Twixt EAGLE AND 
Dove, 6s. net. THE PHANTOM JOURNAL, 
AND OTHER Essays AND DIVERSIONS, 6s. 
net. SPECIALLY SELECTED: A Choice of 
Essays, 7s. 6d. net. URBANITIES. Illus- 


trated by G. L. Srampa, 7s. 6d. net. 
GIVING AND RECEIVING. 6s. net. You 
Know WHAT PEOPLE ARE. 5s. net. 


Tuer British ScHoot: An Anecdotal 
Guide to the British Painters and Paint- 
ings in the National Gallery, 6s. net. 
Rovine East AND Rovine West: Notes 
gathered in India, Japan, and America. 


5s, net. Epwin AvuSsTIN ABBEY, R.A. 
2 vols. £6 6s. nef. VERMEER OF DELFT, 
ros. 6d. net. 

Masefield (John) ON THE SPANISH 
MAIN. Anewedition. Cr. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 
A SAILOR’S GARLAND. Second 
Edition. Cr. 8vo. 6s. net. 

SEA LIFE IN NELSON’S TIME. Illus- 
trated. Second Edition. Cr. 8vo. 5s. net. 


Meldrum (D.S.).§ REMBRANDT’S PAINT- 
INGS. Wide Royal 8vo. £3 3s. net. 


Methuen (A.). AN ANTHOLOGY OF 
MODERN VERSE. With Introduction 
by Rosert Lynp. Twelfth Edition. 


Feap. 8vo. 6s. net. Thin paper, leather, 
7s. 6d. net. 

SHAKESPEARE TO HARDY: An An- 
THOLOGY OF ENGLISH Lyrics. With an 
Introduction by Rosperr Lynp. Third 
Edition, Feap. 8vo, 6s. net. Leather, 
7s. 6a. net. 

MeDougali (William), AN INTRODUC- 


TION TO SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY. 
Eighteenth Edition. Cr.8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

BODY AND MIND: A History anD A 
DEFENCE OF ANIMISM. Fifth Edttion. 
Demy 8vo. 12s. 6d. net. 

NATIONAL WELFARE AND NATIONAL 
DECAY: Cr. 840. 6s. net. 

Maeterlineck (Maurice)— 
Tue Biue Birp: A Fairy Playin Six Acts 
6s. net. Mary MAGDALENE: A Play in 
Three Acts, 5s. net. DEATH, 35s. 6d. net. 
Our ETERNITY, 6s. net. THrt UNKNOWN 
GuEST, 6s. net. POEMS, 5s. net. THE 
WrRack OF THE StoRM, 6s. net. THE 
MIRACLE OF St. ANTHONY: A Playin One 
Act, 3s. 6d. net. THE BURGOMASTER OF 
STILEMONDE: A Play in Three Acts, 5s. 
net, THE BETROTHAL; or, The Blue Bird 
Chooses, 6s. net. Mountain Parus, 6s. 
net. THE STORY OF TYLTYL, 21s. néi. 
THE GREAT SECRET. 7s. 6d. neét. 

Milne (A. A,)— 


Nor tHatr 1r Matters. Feap. 8vo. 6s. 
net. Ir I May. Feap. 8vo. 6s. net. 
Newman (Tom), HOW TO PLAY BIL- 
LIARDS. Illustrated. Cr. 8vc. 8s. 6d. 

net. 
Oxenham (John)— 

Berges IN AMBER; A Little Book of 
Thoughtful Verse. Small Pott 8vo. 
Stiff Boards. 2s. net. ALti’s WELL; 


A Collection of War Poems. THe Kinc’s 
Hich Way. THE VISION SPLENDID. 
Tuer Fiery Cross. HicnH Attars: The 
Record of a Visit to the Battlefields of 
France and Flanders. Hearts CouRa- 
crous. ALL CLEAR! All Small Pott 
8v0. Paper, 1s. 3d. net; cloth boards, 2s. 
net. WINDS OF THE DAWN, GENTLEMEN 
—THE KING, 2s. nét. 

Petrie (W. M. Flinders) A HISTORY OF 
EGYPT. Illustrated. S#x% Volumes. Cr. 
8vo. Each gs. net. 

Vor. I. From tue Ist To THE XVITEH 
Dynasty. Tenth Edition. (12s. net.) 
Vor. Il. Tue XVIItH aND XVIIITH 

Dynastigs. Stxth Edition. 

Vou. Ill. XIXtrxH ro XXXtH Dywnasrtizs, 
Second Edttton. 

Vor. 1V. Ecyrpr UNDER THE PTOLEMAIC 
Dynasty. J.P. Manarry. Second Edition. 


Vor. V. Ecypr uNDER RomMAN RULE. 
J. G. Mitne. Second Ediiton. 
Vor. VI. Ecypr In tHE MippLe AGEs. 


STANLEY LANE ROOLE. Second Edition. 


4 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 


SYRIA AND EGYPT, FROM THE TELL ! 


EL AMARNA LETTERS. (Cr. 
5s. net. 
ECYPTIAN TALES. Translated from the 


8v0. 


Papyri. First Series, «vth to xmth 
Dynasty. Illustrated. Third Edition. 
Cr. 8vo. 5s. net. 


EGYPTIAN TALES. Translated from the 


Papyri. Second Series, xvimith to x1xth 
Dynasty. Illustrated. Second Edition. 
Cr, 8vo. 5s. net. 


Pollitt (Atthar W.). THE ENJOYMENT 
OF MUSIC. Second Edition. Cr.. 8vo. 


5s. net. 

Price (L. L.) A SHORT HISTORY OF 
POLITICAL ECONOMY IN ENGLAND 
FROM ADAM SMITH TO ARNOLD 


TOYNBEE. Eleventh Edition. Cr. 8vo. 
5s. net. 
Selous (Edmund)— 

Tommy SmMmiITH’s ANIMALS. Tommy 


SmitH’s OTHER ANIMALS. TOMMY SMITH 
AT THE Zoo. Tommy SMITH AGAIN AT 
THE Zoo. Each 2s. 9d. Jacx’s Insxcrts, 
3s. 6d. Jacx’s OrHEeR INSECTS, 3s. 64. 
Bhelley (Perey Bysshe). POEMS. With 
an Introduction by A. CLrurron-Brock 
and Notes by C. D. Lococx. Two 
Volumes. Demy 8vo. {1 1s. net. 
SHELLEY: THE MAN AND THE POET. 
By A.CLuTron-Brock. Feap 8vo. 7s.6s.net. 
Smith (Adam). THE WEALTH OF 
NATIONS. Edited by Epwin CAaNNAN, 
Thivd Edition. Demy 
8v0. £1 5s. net. 


Smith (S. C. Kaines) LOOKING AT 
PICTURES. Illustrated. Second Edi- 
tion. Fceap. 8vo. 6s. net. 

Sommerfeld (Prof. Arnold). ATOMIC 
STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES. 
Demy 8vo. 32s. net. 

Stevenson (R. L.). THE LETTERS OF 
ROBERT LOUISSTEVENSON. Edited 
by Sir Sipney Corvin. A New Re- 
arranged Edition in four volumes. Fourth 
Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Each 6s. net. 

Surtees (R. §.)— 

HANDLEY Cross, 7s. 6d. met. Mr. 
Sponce’s SportTinG Tour, 7s. 6d. nel. 
Asx Mamma: or, The Richest Commoner 
in England, 7s. 6d. net. JorRRocKs’s 


Two Volumes. 


JAUNTS AND JOLLITIES, 6s. net. MR. 
Facry Romrorp’s Hounps, 7s. 6a. net. 
HawBuckK GRANGE; or, The Sporting 
Adventures of Thomas ‘Scott, Esq., 6s. 
net. PLAIN OR RINGLETS? 7S, 64. net. 
HILLinGpon HALL, 7s. 6d. net. 

Tilden (W. bei THE ART OF LAWN 
TENNIS. llustrated, Fifth Edttion. 


Cr. 8vo. 6s. net. 

Tileston (Mar DAILY STRENGTH 
FOR DAILY NEEDS. Twenty-eighth 
Edition, Medium 16mo. 3s. 6d. net. 

Underhill (Evelyn), MYSTICISM. A 
Study in the Nature and Development of 
Man’s Spiritual Akan ED Pls Ninth 
Edition. Demy 8vo. 15s. 

THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT “AND THE 
LIFE OF TO-DAY. Cr. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

Vardon (Harry) HOW TO PLAY GOLF. 


Illustrated. Sixteenth Edttion. Cr. 8vo, 
. 6d. net. 
Wade (G. W.). NEW TESTAMENT 


HISTORY. Demy 8vo. 18s. net. 


OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY. WNénth 
Edition. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 
Waterhouse (Elizabeth). A LITTLE BOOK 


OF LIFE AND DEATH. Twenty-first 


Edition. Small Pott 8vo. 2s. 6d. net. 
Wells (J. A SHORT HISTORY OF 
ROME. bs Sonn Edition. With 3 


Maps. Cr. 8vo. 
wilde (Osear). TH ‘WORKS OF OSCAR 
WILDE. Fcap. 8vo. Each 6s. 6d. net. 
1. Lorp ARTHUR SAVILE’S CRIME AND 
THE PoRTRAIT OF MR, i. THE 
DucHEss OF PADUA. I. POEMS. IV. 
Lapy WINDERMERE’S FAN. v. A WOMAN 
oF No IMporRTANCE. vi. AN IpgAL Hus- 


BAND. VII. THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING 
Earnest. vu. A Houszt or Poms- 
GRANATES. 1X. INTENTIONS. x. DE PRo- 


FUNDIS AND Prison LETTERS. x1. Es- 
SAYS. xII. SALOME, A FLORENTINE 
Tracepy, and La SAINTE CouRTISANE, 
xz. A Critic IN Patt MAL. xiv. 
SELECTED Prose OF OsCAR WILDE. 
xv. ART AND DECORATION. 

FOR LOVE OF THE KING. A Burmese 
Masgue. Demy 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

Yeats (W. B.). A BOOK OF IRISH 
VERSE. Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo. 7s. net. 


ParT II.—A SELECTION OF SERIES 
The Antiquary’s Books 


Demy 8vo. 


ANCIENT PAINTED GLASS IN ENGLAND. 
ARCHZOLOGY AND FALsE ANTIQUITIES. 
Tur Brertts or ENGLAND. THE BRASSES 
OF ENGLAND. THE CASTLES AND WALLED 
Towns or ENGLAND. CELTIC ART IN 
PAGAN AND CHRISTIAN TIMES. CHURCH- 
WARDENS’ Accounts. THE Domrspay 
Ingurst. ENGLISH CHURCH FURNITURE. 
Enc.LisnH Costume. ENGLISH MONASTIC 
Lirz. ENnciisn Sats. Forx-Lore as 
AN HisTORICAL SCIENCE, THE GUILDS AND 
ComMPANIES OF LONDON. THE HERMITS 
AND ANCHORITES OF ENGLAND. THE 


10s. 6d. net each volume. 


With Numerous Illustrations. 


MANOR AND MANORIAL ReEcoRDs. THE 
MEDIZVAL HOSPITALS OF ENGLAND, 
O_p ENGLIsH INSTRUMENTS OF Music, 
Orv Enc.uisH LIBRARIES. OLp SERVICE 
Books OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH. PARISH 
Lirk in MEDI@VAL ENGLAND, THE 
ParRIsH REGISTERS OF ENGLAND. RE- 
MAINS OF THE PREHISTORIC AGE IN ENG- 
LAND. THE Roman ERA IN BRITAIN, 
RoMANO-BRITISH BUILDINGS AND EARTH- 
WORKS. THE Royat Forests or EnG- 
LAND. THE SCHOOLS OF MEDIAVAL ENG- 
LAND. SHRINES OF BRITISH SAINTs. 


MrEssrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 5 


The Arden Shakespeare 
General Editor, R. H. CASE 
Demy 8vo. 6s. net each volume 
An edition of Shakespeare in Single Plays; each edited with a full Intro- 
duction, Textual Notes, and a Commentary at the foot of the page. 
The Arden Shakespeare will be completed shortly by the publication of 
THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY IV. Edited by R. P. Cowt. 
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING. Edited by Grace TRENERY. 


Classics of Art 
Edited by Dr. J. H. W. LAING 
With numerous Illustrations. Wide Royal 8vo 


THe ArT OF THE GREEKS, 21s. net. THE ETCHINGS, 31s. 64. net. REMBRANDT’S 
ART OF THE ROMANS, I6s. net. CHARDIN, PAINTINGS, 635. net. RUBENS, 30S. mét. 
I5s. net. DONATELLO, I6s. net. GEORGE TINTORETTO, 16s. net. TITIAN, 16s. net. 
ROMNEY,1I5s. net. GHIRLANDAIO, 15s.neb. TURNER’S SKETCHES AND DRAWINGS, 
LAWRENCE, 25s. net. MICHELANGELO, 15s. I5s. neé, WVELASQUEZ, I5s. net. 


net. RAPHAEL, I5s. net. REMBRANDT’S 


The ‘ Complete’ Series 
Fully Illustrated. Demy 8vo 


Tur CompLetTE AIRMAN, 16s. net. THE 5s. net. Tue CompLetz Lawn TENNIS 
CompLetre AMATEUR BOXER, Ios. 6d. net. PLAYER, 125. 6d. net. THE COMPLETE 
THE CompLtetTEe ASSOCIATION Foor- Mororist, 10s. 6d. net, THE COMPLETE 
BALLER, 10s. 6d. net. THE COMPLETE MOUNTAINEER, I8s. net. THE COMPLETE 
ATHLETIC TRAINER, 10S. 6d. net. THE OaRSMAN, 15s. net, THe CoMPLETE 
COMPLETE BILLIARD PLAYER, 10s. 64. PHOTOGRAPHER, I2S. 6d. net. THE COMPLETE 
net, THE COMPLETE COOK, Ios. 6d. net. RucsBy FoorTBaLLer, ON THE NEw Zra- 
THe COMPLETE FOXHUNTER, I6s. net. LAND SYSTEM, 125, 64, net. THE Com: 
THE ComMPLeTE GOLFER, 12s. 6d. net. PLETE SHoT, I6s. net. THE COMPLETE 
Tue Compitete Hockxry Prayer, tos. 64. SwimMMER, 10s. 6d. net. THE COMPLETE 
net. Tue CompLteTe HORSEMAN, I5s. YACHTSMAN, 18s. "1. 


net, THE COMPLETE JujITsUAN. Cr. 8vo. 


The Connoisseur’s Library 
With numerous Illustrations. Wide Royal 8.9. £1 11s. 6d. net each volume 


EnciisH CoLourrp Booxs. ErTcuHincs. IvorRIEs. JEWELLERY. MEZzZOTINTS. 
EvuROPEAN ENAMELS. Fingz Books. MINIATURES, PORCELAIN, SEALS. 
Gass. GOLDSMITHS’ AND SILVERSMITHS’ Woop SCULPTURE. 

WORK. ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPTS. 


Handbooks of Theology 


Demy 8vo 
Tue Docrrin& OF THE INCARNATION, 15S. THE CREEDS, 125, 6d. net. THE PHILOSOPHY 
met. A History OF EARLY CHRISTIAN OF RELIGION IN ENGLAND AND AMERICA, 
DocrrRingE, 16s. net. INTRODUCTION TO 12s. 6d. net. THE XX XIX ARTICLES OF 
THE History OF RELIGION, 12s. 6d. net. THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, I5s. met. 


An INTRODUCTION TO tHE HiIsTORY OF 


Health Series 
Feap. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net 


Tue Basy, Fue CARE OF THE Bopy. THE Lonc. THE PREVENTION OF THE COMMON 
CARE OF THE TEETH. THE EYES OF OUR Corp. STAYING THE PLAGUE. THROAT 
CHILDREN. HEALTH FOR THE MIDDLE- AND Ear TROUBLES. TUBERCULOSIS 
Acrep, THE HEALTH OF A Woman. THE Tue HEALTH OF THE CHILD, 2s. net. 


HEALTH OF THE SKIN. How 70 LIVE 


mm a a ee ae 


Le 


6 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 


The Library of Devotion 
Handy Editions of the great Devotional Books, well edited 
With Introductions and (where necessary) Notes 
Small Pott 8vo, cloth, 3s. net and 3s. Od. net 


Little Books on Art 


With many Illustrations. Demy 16mo. 5s. net each volume 


Each volume consists of about 200 pages, and contains from 30 to 40 
Illustrations, including a Frontispiece in Photogravure 


ALBRECHT Ditirer. THE ARTS OF JAPAN. BOUCHER. HOLBEIN. ILLUMINATED 
BOOKPLATES. BortickLtl. BURNE- MANUSCRIPTS. JEWELLERY. JOHN HOPP- 
JonEs, CELLINI. CHRISTIAN SYMBOLISM, NER. Sir JosHUA REYNOLDS, MILLET. 
CHRIST IN ART. CLAUDE. CONSTABLE. MINIATURES, Our Lapy IN Art. 
Corot. EARLY ENGLISH WATER-COLOUR. RAPHAEL, RODIN. TURNER. VANDYCK. 
ENAMELS, FREDERIC LEIGHTON. GEORGE Watts. 

ROMNEY. GREEK ART. GREUZE AND 


The Little Guides 


With many Illustrations by E. H. New and other artists, and from 
photographs 


Small Pott 8vo. 
Guides to the English and Welsh Counties, and some well-known districts 


The main features of these Guides are (1) a handy and charming form; 
(2) illustrations from photographs and by well-known artists ; (3) good 
plans and maps ; (4) an adequate but compact presentation of everything 
that is interesting in the natural features, history, archzology, and archi- 
tecture of the town or district treated. 


4s. net to 7s. 6d. net. 


The Little Quarto Shakespeare 
Edited by W. J. CRAIG. With Introductions and Notes 


Poti 16mo. 40 Volumes. Leather, price ts. 9d. net each volume 
Cloth, 1s. 6d. net. 
Plays 
Feap. 8vo. 3s. 6d. net 
Miuestones. Arnold Bennett and Edward | TypHoon. A Playin Four Acts. Melchior 
Knoblock. Eleventh Edttion. Lengyel. English Version by Laurence 


IpEAL HusBanp, AN. Oscar Wilde. Act- 
ing Edition. 


Kismet. Edward Knoblock. Fourth Edi- 


tion. 
THe GREAT ADVENTURE. Arnold Bennett. 


Fifth Edition, 


Irving. Second Edstion. 

Ware Casz, THE. George Pleydell. 

GENERAL Post. E. Harold Terry. 
Second Edition, 

Tur HonEyYMOoN. Third 
Edition. 


Arnold Bennett. 


Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 


Sports 


Illustrated. 


Att Axsour FLyiInG, 3s. net, ALPINE 
Sx1-ING aT ALL HEIGHTS AND SEASONS, 
5s. net. CROSS COUNTRY SKI-ING, 5S. net. 
Gortr Do’s anp Dont’s, 2s. 6d. net. 
Quick Cuts Tro Goop GoLF, 2s. 6d. net. 
INSPIRED GOLF, 2s. 6d. net. DRIVING, 
APPROACHING, PUTTING, 25. net. GOLF 
CLuss AND How ro UsE THEM, 2s. net. 
THe SECRET OF GOLF FOR OCCASIONAL 


Series 


Fcap. 8vo 


PLAYERS, 25. net. LAWN TENNIS, 3S. ne. 
Lawn Tennis Do’s ann Dont’s, 2s. net. 
Lawn TENNIS FOR YOUNG PLAYER:, 
2s. 6d. net. LAwN TENNIS FOR CLUB 
PLAYERS, 2S. 6d. net. LAWN TENNIS FOR 
Matcu Piayvers, 2s. 6d. net. Hockey, 
4s. net. How To Swim, 2s. net. Punt- 
ING, 3S. 6d. net. SKATING, 35S. net. 
WRESTLING, 2S. net. 


The Westminster Commentaries 
General Editor, WALTER LOCK 


Demy 8vo 
Tue Acts or rHE APOSTLES, 12s. 6d. net. 16s.net. Jos, 8s. 6d. net. THe PasTorat 
Amos, 8s. 64. net. I CorINTHIANS, 8s, Epistves, 8s. 6d. net. Tue PHILIPPIANS, 
6d. net. Exopus, 15s. met. EZzEKIEL, 8s. 6d. net. Sr. James, 8s. 6d. met. Sr. 


12s. 6d. net. GENESIS, 16s. net. HEBREWS, 
8s. 6d. met. ISAIAH, 16s. net. JEREMIAH, 


MATTHEW, 15S. net. St, LUKE, 15s. net. 


Methuen’s Two-Shilling Library 
Cheap Editions of many Popular Books 
Fecap. 8vo 


Part III.—A SELECTION OF WoRKS OF FICTION 


Bennett (Arnold) — 


CLAYHANGER, 8s. net. Hitpa Lessways, 
8s. 6d. net. Tuese Twain. THe Carp. 
Tue Recent: A Five Towns Story of 
Adventure in London. Tuer Price or 
Love. Burizep Arivz. A MAN FROM 
gwHE NortH. Wuom Gop HATH JOINED. 
A Great Man: A Frolic. Mr. Prowack. 
All 7s. 6d. net. THe MATADOR OF THE 
Five Towns, 6s. net. 


Birmingham (George A.)— 

SPANISH GOLD. Tue SrarcH Party. 
Lavace’s Lovers. Tut Bap Timgs. UP, 
THE REBELS. THE Lost Lawyrr. All 
4s. 6d. net. INISHEENY, 8s. 6d. net. THE 
GREAT-GRANDMOTHER, 75. 6d. net, FOUND 
MoNneEY, 7S. 6d. net. 


Burroughs (Edgar Rice) — 

TARZAN OF THE APES, 6s, net. THE 
RETURN OF TARZAN, 6s. net. THE BEASTS 
oF TARZAN, 6s. net. THE SON OF TARZAN, 
6s. net, JUNGLE TALES OF TARZAN, 6s. 
net. TARZAN AND THE JEWELS OF OPAR, 
6s. net. TARZAN THE UNTAMED, 7S. 6d. net. 
A Princess oF Mars, 6s. net. THE Gops 
or Mars, 6s. met. THz WARLORD OF 
Mars, 6s. net. TuHuvia, Marp or Mars, 
6s. net. TARZAN THE TERRIBLE, 2S. 64, net. 
Tue MucKeEr, 6s. net. THE MAN wITH- 
out A Sout, 6s, net. THe CHESSMEN OF 
Mars, 6s. net. AvP THE EarRtTH’s CORE, 
6s. net. 


Conrad (Joseph) — 
A Set or Six, 7s. 6d. net. Victory; An 


Island Tale. Cr. 8vo. gs. net. THE 
Secret Acent: A Simple Tale. Cr. 8vo. 
gs. net. UNDER WESTERN Eves. Cr. 
8vo. 9s. met. CHANCE. Cr. 80. QS. net, 


a (Marie)— 


ROMANCE OF Two Wor tps, 7s. 6d. net. 
VenpeETta: or, The Story of One For- 
gotten, 8s. met. THetma: A Norwegian 
Princess, 8s. 6d. net. ARDATH: The Story 
of a Dead Self, 7s. 6d. nei. Tue Sout oF 
Lititx, 7s. 6d. net. Wormwoov: A Drama 
of Paris, 8s. net. Baranpsas: A Dream of 
the World’s Tragedy, 7s. 6d. net. THE Sor- 
ROWS OF SATAN, 7s. 6d. net. THE MASTER- 
CHRISTIAN, 8s. 6d. net. TEMPORAL PowER: 
A Study in Supremacy, 6s. net. Gop’s 
Goop Man: A Simple Love Story, 8s. 6d. 
set. Hory Orpgers: The Tragedy of a 
Quiet Life, 8s. 6d. net. THz Micury Atom, 
94s. 6d. net. Boy: A Sketch, 7s. 6d. net. 
Camzos, 6s. net. Tue Lirz EVERLASTING, 
8s. 6d. net. THe Love or Lonc AGo, AND 
OrHER Srorizs, 8s. 6d. net. INNOCENT, 
4s, 6d. met. THE Secret Powgr: A 
Romance of the Time, 6s. ne, 


Hichens (Robert)— 


TONGUES OF CONSCIENCE, 7s. 64. met. 
Fr1ix: Three Years in a Life, 7s. 64. net. 
Tue WoMAN WITH THE Fan, 75. 6d, net. 
THz GARDEN OF ALLAH, 8s. 6d. net. 
Tue CaLt oF tHE Buoop, 8s. 6d. net. 
Tue DWELLER ON THE THRESHOLD, 75. 64. 
net, THe Way oF AMBITION, 7s. 64. net, 
In THE WILDERNESS, 75. 64, net. 


8 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 


Hope (Anthony)— 
A CHaNnceE oF Air. A MAN oF MARK. 
Simon DALe. Tue Kinc’s MIRROR. 
Tur Dotty Dratrocurs. Mrs. Maxon 
PROTESTS. A Younc Man’s YRAR. 
BEAUMAROY HOME FROM THE WARS. 
All 7s. 6d. net. 


Many Carcors, 5s. net, Sea URCHINS, 
5s. net and 38. 6d. net. A MASTER OF 
Crart, 6s. net. LiGHtT FREIGHTS, 6s. net. 
THE SKIPPER’S WOOING, 5s. net. At SUN- 
wicH Port, 5s. net. DIALSTONE LANR, 
5s. net. Opp CrarFt, 5s. net. THe Lapy 
OF THE BARGE, 5s. tel. SALTHAVEN, 6s. 
net. SaiLors’ Kwors, 5s. net. SHORT 
Cruises, 6s. nét. 


WHITE FANG. Ninth 


London (Jack)— 
97s. 6d. net. 


Edstiion. Cr. 8vo. 


Lueas (E. V.)— 

ListENER’S Lure: An Oblique Narration, 
6s. net. OvER BEMERTON’s: An Easy- 
going Chronicle, 6s. net. Mr, INGLESIDE, 
6s. net. LoNDON LAVENDER, 6s. net. 
LANDMARKS, 6s. él. Tur VERMILION 
Box, 6s. net, VERENA IN THE Mipst, 
8s. 6d. net. Rosk AND Rose, 6s. net. 
GENEVRA’s Money, 7s. 6d. net. 


MeKenna (Stephen)— 
Sonta: Between Two Worlds, 8s. net. 
Ninety-Six Hours’ Lrave, 75s. 6d. net. 
Tue S1xtH SENSE, 6s. nef. Midas & Son, 
8s. net. 


Malet (Lucas) — 
Tue History or Sir RicHarp CALMADY: 
A Romance. tos. net. THE CARISSIMA. 
THe GarTeLrss BARRIER. DEADHAM 
Harp. All 7s. 6d. net. THe Wacers oF 
Sin. 8s. net. COLONEL ENDERBY’S WIFE, 
7s. 6d. net. 


(A. E. W.). CLEMENTINA. 
Ninth Edition. 7s. 6d. net. 


Mason 
Illustrated, 


Milne (A, A.)— 
Tue Day’s Pray. Tue Horrpay Rounp. 
Once A Weex. All 7s. 6d. net. Tue 
Sunny Sipe. 6s. net. THE Rep Housz 
Mystery. 6s. net. 


Oxenham (John)— 
THE Quest or THE GOLDEN Ross. 
ALL-ALONE. 75. 6d, net. 


Parker (Gilbert)— 


MARY 


Mrs. Fancnuion, THE TRANSLATION 
OF A SAVAGE. WHEN VALMOND CAME 
ro Pontiac: The Story of a_ Lost 
Napoleon. An ADVENTURE OF THE 


Nortu: The Last Adventures of ‘ Pretty 
Pierre.’ THe SEATS OF THE Micuty. THE 
BATTLE OF THE STRONG: A Romance 
of Two Kingdoms. Tuer TRAIL OF THE 
Sworp, NortTHern Licurs. JUDGEMENT 
House. All 7s. 6d. net, 


Phillpotts (Eden)— 


CHILDREN OF THE Mist. Tue RIvER. 


THe Human Boy AND THE War. All 
75. 6d. net. 

Rohmer (Sax)— 
Tue GOLDEN SCORPION. 78.6d.net. Tuk 


Drevit Docror. THE Mystery or Dr. 


Fu-Mancuu. THE YELLOw Claw, All 
3s. 6d, net. 

Swinnerton (F.) SHorps aNnpd Hovuszs. 
SEPTEMBER. THE Happy Famity. On 


Tue Staircase. Coguetre. THEe CHASTE 


Wire. All 7s. 6a. net. THE MERRY 
Heart, THe CASEMENT, THE YOuNG 
Ipra. All 6s. net. Tue THREE Lovers, 
4s. 6d. net. , 

Wells (H.G.). BEALBY. Fourth Edition. 
Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 


Williamson (C. N. and A. M.)— 

Tue Licurninc Conpuctor: The Strange 
Adventures of a Motor Car. Lapy Berry 
ACROSS THE WATER. Ir HappENED IN 
Eocypr. Tug SHOP Girt. Tue LIGHTNING 
CONDUCTRESS, My FRIEND THE 
CHAUFFEUR. Ser in SILVER. THE 
GREAT PEARL SECRET. Tue Love 
PIRATE. All 7s. 6d. net. CruUCIFIXx 
CorngErR. 6s. net. 


Methuen’s Half-Crown Novels 
Crown 8vo 
Cheap Editions of many of the most Popular Novels of the day 
Write for a Complete List 


Methuen’s Two-Shilling Novels 


Feap. 


8vo 


Write for Complete List 


J 


Y 

¥ 

* 
s 
f 

e's. 


aa 
~, 
7 SoG * 


- 
= 


CB301 .P46 
The children of the sun; 
Princeton Theological 


ii 


4 1012 0002 


inary-Speer Library
