Present Philosophical Tendencies: A Critical Survey of Naturalism, Idealism, Pragmatism, and Realism (Ralph Barton Perry, 1912)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/presentphilosop00perrgoog). Perry's critical survey of the warring schools — naturalism, idealism, pragmatism, realism — at their height.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


^


wa


^^^Br^


1


V.


■


^^^^ /^^^^^^^H 1


^^^^H


1


.


HUKD-SCWFOBDiIVmOR-WlVEHSITi'


[


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL
TENDENCIES


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL

TENDENCIES


A CRITICAL SURVEY OF NATURALISM
IDEALISM PRAGMATISM AND REALISM
TOGETHER WITH A SYNOPSIS OF THE
PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


BY

RALPH BARTON PERRY

ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF PHZLOSOPHY
IN HARVARD UNIVERSmr


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

FOURTH AVENUE & 80TH STREET, NEW YORK
LONDON, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA

1912


COPYRIGHT, 1012, BY
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.


All rights reserved


1 7 1037


• •


•• •


THB • PLIMPTON • PRB88

[ W D'O]
NORWOOD • MASS • U • S • A


DEDICATED TO THE DEA& AMD SEVERED

MEMORY OF

WILLIAM JAMES


PREFACE

To avoid any misunderstanding as to the scope of the
present book, let me say at the outset that with the excep-
tion of the Appendix, it is a critique, rather than a history.
I have attempted not merely to summarize, but to esti-
mate, present philosophical tendencies; and my criticism
is throughout based on the realistic philosophy which I
set forth constructively only at the end.

Since my method has been critical rather than exposi-
tory I shall doubtless be charged with having conmiitted
the error persanaCy with having attributed to certain writers
views which they would not recognize as their own. Be
this as it may, I have in any case formulated the views
which I have criticised, so that the merits of the question
may always be in the foregroimd of study. I have assumed
it to be more important to discover whether certain current
views were true or false than to discuss with painstaking
nicety the question of their attribution.

Furthermore, I realize that I have given to the several
tendencies which I have discussed the relative emphasis
which is characteristic of Anglo-American thought. This
appears in the importance which I have attached to the
blend of "critical" or Kantian, with metaphysical or
Hegelian motives in idealism ; in my identification of realism
with the "new" or non-dualistic realism; and in the prom-
inence which I have given both to realism and to prag-
matism. The difference in respect of distribution and

• •

vu


Vm PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

emphasis between an Anglo-American and a Continental
survey of contemporary philosophy may be observed
from a comparison of the present volume with Ludwig
Stein's excellent book. Die PkUosophische Strdmungen der
Gegenwari,

Portions of the present book are reprinted from
periodicals; and I have made due acknowledgment in the
proper places. I desire also gratefully to acknowledge
the help of my friends Professor E. B. Holt, Professor
£. G. Spaulding, Dr. M. P. Mason, Dr. H. M. Sheffer, and
Dr. GUnther Jacoby.

RALPH BARTON PERRY.


Cambsidgx, September, 1911.


CONTENTS

PART I
INTRODUCTION

PAOB
CSAPTBR L PhILOSOFHICAL T&EORY AMD ESTABUSHZD BSUKT . J

§ I. Discrepancy between Theoiy and Belief 3

§ 2. Theoiy and Belief as Fonns of Knowledge, Having the Same

Fundamental Value 4

§ 3. The Difference and Antagonism of Motive in Theoiy and

BeUef 6

§ 4. The Solidarity of Belief 10

§ 5. Galileo and the Inquisition la

§6. Descartes's Reconciliation of Theoiy and Belief ... 16

§ 7. The Natural Conservatism of Belief. Present Tendencies . 18

§ 8. The Need of Mediation between Theory and Belief . . ao

Chapter IL SciENTmc and Reugious Motives in Philosopht a4

§ I. The Difference between Science and Religion, and the Am-
biguous Position of Philosophy a4

§ a. The Theoretical Motive in Science 2$

§ 3. Rdigion and the Motive of Bdief a8

§ 4. The Confusion of the Philosophical Motive. The Place of a

Purely Theoretical Philosophy ig

§5. The Subordination of Science to Ethics and Religion in

Andent and Mediaeval Thought 30

§ 6. The Extension of Science to Rdigion in the Seventeenth and

Eighteenth Centuries 3a

§ 7. The Rupture between Science and Religion, and the Dilemma

of Philosophy 34

^ 8. The Scientific Philosophy, and the Religious Philosophy . 36
. §9. Naturalism and Idealism. The Rise of Pragmatism and

Neo-Realism 38

PART n

NATURALISM

Cbaftee IIL The Scope and Method op Soencb .... 45
§ I. Naturalism and Natural Science 45

DC


S 1. The Prestige of Sdcnce

S 3- The Agraemeat between Science and Common Sense . 48

S 4. The Properties of Bodies

t 5. ExplanalioD and Description in Sdence

{ 6. ConditionK of Scientific Description

f 7. niustiations of ScicDtific Method. Galileo's Conception

of Acceleration j$ 1

i S. The Conception of Mass 57

1 g. The Conservation of Energy 58

i 10. The Analytical Version of Scientific Concepts .... 60

Cbapter IV. NaIve and Critical Natubausu 63

i I. The Two Varieties of Naturalism 63

{ a. Three Characteristic PliiloaophicaJ Errors. 'The Specula-
tive Dogma' 64

5 3. 'Pseudo-simplicity,' and 'Indefinite Potentiality' ... 66

{ 4. Naive Naturalism. Bilchner's Monism of Matter ... 68

i s- Spencer's Moiusm of Force 70 f~m

I 6. Haeckel's Monism of Substance 7a

i 7. Critical Naturalism 75

{ 8. The Sensationalism of Karl Pearson 76

f 9. The Modified Position of Ernst Mnch 78

{ 10. The Experimentaliam of H. Poincari 79

t II. The Failure of Critical Naturalism, The Priority of Logic

and Mathcmarics 62

Chapter V. Reucion and the Limits of Science .... 85

t 1. Religious Philosophy and the limits of Sdence ... 85

i 2. Naturalism and Supernaturalism S8

{ 3. The General Character of Contemporary Critidsm of

Sdence 8g

1 4. The Fallibility of Science 51

{ 5. The DisparaKement of the Descriptive Method ... 03

{ 6. Theldealof DescriptiveEconomy q6

i 7. The Option of Hypotheses i»8

{ 8. The 'Real' Cause and 'Mere' Description 99

{ 9. The Unreality of Space and Time. The Kantian Argu-

i 10. Infinity and Continuity 103

Bu. The Priority of Consciousness loj

{ ta. Sdence as a Limited Body of Truth 108


CONTENTS la

PART m

IDEALISM

PAGE

Chapter VL The Casdinal Psinciple of Idealism .... 113

§ I. The General Meaning of Modem Idealism 113

§ 2. Platonic Idealism, or Tdeological Rationalism .... 114

§ 3. Rationalism Purged of Teleology by Spinoza .... 116

§ 4. The Idealistic Revolution 117

§ 5. The Beginnings of Modem IdealisnL The Dualistic Ver-
sion of Knowledge 119

§ 6. Berkeley's Refutation of Dualism 122

§ 7. Epistemological Monism 124

§ 8. Berkele3r'8 Proofs of Idealism. 'Definitionby Initial Pred-
ication' 226

§ 9. The Argxmient from 'the Ego-centric Predicament' . .128
§ 10. The Cardinal Principle and the Berkeleyan Proofs in Con-
temporary Idealism 232

Chapter Vn. Objective or Transcendental Idealism ... 135

§ I. The General Meaning of Post-Kantian Idealism . . . 135

§ 2. The Sceptical Crisis in Hume 136

§ 3. Kant to the Rescue. The 'Categories' and 'Synthetic

Unity' 139

§ 4. Kant's Relations to Idealism 142

§ 5. Diverse Tendencies. 'Critical' Idealism 144

§ 6. Metaphysical Idealism. Intellectualism 146

§ 7. Voluntaristic or Ethical Idealism 150

§ 8. Neo-Romantidsm 152

§ 9. The New Idealism and the Cardinal Principle . . . . 154

§ 10. The New Proof of Idealism from Synthetic Unity . 156

§ II. The Revival of the Berkeleyan Arguments 158

§ 12. Objective Idealism as an Escape from Subjectivism . . 162

Chapter Vm. Absolute Idealism and Religion 164

§ I. The General Meaning of Absolutism 164

{ 2. Formalism, Arising from the Logical Basis of Absolutism . 166
i 3. Equivocation Arising from the Attempt to Escape

Formalism 169

i 4. The Dogmatic Character of Absolutism. Agnosticism 171
§ 5. Transition to Absolute Idealism. The Absolute Cognitive

Consciousness 174

§ 6. Formalism in Absolute Idealism 175

§ 7. Equivocation in Absolute Idealism 180

§ 8. Dogmatism in Absolute Idealism 183


} g. Summuy of Idealism. Idealism and Civilixation . .
i lo. The Universalistic, or Leveling Tendency in Idealism .
t It. The Virtue and the Extravagance of Idealism


PRAGMATISM

Chaptek IX. The Pbagmatic Theoby of Knovt-eogb . . .

1 I- The General Meaning of Pragmatism

i 2. The Pragmatisl Conception of the Theory of Knowledge .

{ 3. The R61e of Ideas in Knowledge

( 4. The Meaning of Truth

{ J . Modes of Verification. Verification by Perception and by

Consistency

\ b. Verification by Operation and by Sentiment ....

I 7. Verification by General Utility

I 8. The Realistic Version of Pragmatism

I 9. The Subjectivistic Version of Pragmatism

f 10. Realistic and Subjectivistic Interpretations. Satisfaction,

The Making of Reality

I II. The Dilemma of Progmalisro

Cbaftex X. Ihhedutisu teriiu iNiELLeciuAUSU

I I. Definition of the Issue

} a. Non-intellecttial Eiperience, or Immediacy

{ J. Immediacy Implied in Mediate Knowledge

{ 4. The Abstractness of Concepts, ' Vicious Intctlectualism"
i 5. The Failure of Concepts to Giasp Reality. Radical Anti-

intellectualism

\ 6. The Failure of An ti -intellect ualism to Understand the In-
tellectual Method. Concept as Function and as Content.
{ 7. The Confusion between the Relations of Symliots and the

Relations Symbolized

\ S. The Supposition that Concepts are Necessarily Privative .

1 9, Tbe Misunderstanding Concerning Analysis 136

i 10, The Supposed Superiority of the Immediacy that P

Analysis

I II. Tbe Subjectivistic Version of Immediatism 139

t la. The Realistic Version of Imfflediatiam 340

Chaptzb XI. PLintALiBU, Indetekminieii and Religious Fattb . 241
\ I. Pluralism as the Sequel to Empiricism. The Additive

Character of Knowledge 141


CONTENTS XlH

PAGE

I 3. Pluralism and External Relations 244

I 3. Pluralism as a Philosophy of Religion 246

I 4. Indeterminism as the Sequel to Pluralism 249

I 5. Indeterminism and the Reality of Time 250

I 6. Indeterminism as the Sequel to Anti-intellectualism. Will

as itself the Author of Determinism 254

I 7. Determinism as an InteUectualistic Falsification of Tem-
poral Reality 255

I 8. Freedom as Creative Activity 261

I 9. The Pragmatic Theory of Truth Applied to Religious Faith 265

1 10. Pragmatism and the Spirit of the Age 267


PART V

REALISM

Chapter Xn. A Realistic Theory of Mind 271

I. IfUrodudary 271

§ I. Realism as a Polemic 271

§ 2. The Fundamental Importance of the Problem of Mind 272

n. Tke Method of IfUrospecHon 275

§ 3. Mental Content as Revealed by Introspection .... 275
§ 4. The Neutral Elements of Mental Content. The Need of a

Unifying Relation 277-

§ 5. Mental Action. The Alleged Self-intuition of a Pure

Spiritual Activity 279

I 6. Mental Action as the Feeling of Bodily Action . . . 283

m. The Method of General Observation 286

§ 7. The Alleged Impossibility of Observing the Contents of

Another Mind 286

§ 8. The Difficulty of Observing Mental Content. The Case of

Perception 289

I 9. Proprio-ceptive Sensations 292

1 10. The Content of Desire, Memory and Thought .... 295

1 11. The Alleged Impossibility of Observing Mental Action 297

§ 12. Mental Action as Nervous System 298

1 13. Mental Action as Interest 300

§ 14. Mental Content as Identified by Interested Action . . 301

1 15. A Summary Definition of Mind 303

Chapter xm. A Realistic Theory of Knowledge .... 306

I. The Theory of Immanence 306

I I. The Old Realism and the New 306


CONTENTS


S i. The Duality of Mind and Body as a DiSerence of Orgon-

iailion 308

S 3, Representation as an Immanent Relation

II, Tht Theory of Independence 313

\ 4. The Half -realisms. Independence of Finite Knowledge . J13

\ 5. Independence of Mediate Knowledge 314

( 6. Hiorough-going Realism, IndepcDdeDce of Experience

or Consciousness 315

5 7. The Arguments for Independence. The Negative Argu-
ment 316

\ 8. The Argument from the Exteroality of Relations . . 319
5 g. The Argument from the Distinction between Object and

Awareness 331

I 10. The Argument from the Nature of Mmd 311

m. Tndk and Error 323

S II. The Realm of Subject! vit]r 313

f i». The Sphere of Truth and Error 334

S 13. Mistaldng and Right Judging 336

Chapter XIV. A Realistic Poilosophv or Life 339

S I. Enlightenment and Disillusionment 3J9

\ 1. Realism and the Dependence o( Value on Desire . . 331

S 3. The Nature of Moral Value. The Right and the Best . 333
\ 4. The Objectivity or Absoluteness of Value. Contemporary

Confusion of the Issue 33s

S 5. The Difference between the Absoluteness and the Su-

ptemacy o( Value 339

S 6, Value as Cause or Determination 341

\ 7, Freedom, Positive and Negative . 341

j 8, The Grounds of Religious Belief 344

{ 9. The Hazard of Faith 34S

APPENDIX

THE PHILOSOPHY OF WHXIAM JAMES

L Philosophy of Mind 349

{ 1. The Place of the Problem of Mind in James's Philosophy . 349

S z. Mind as Interested and Selective 350

i 3. The Relational or Functional Theory of Consciousness . 332

\ 4. The Experience of Activity 3S4

II. Theory of Knouicdge 356

i S- The Function of Cognition . , . 356

i 6. The Pragmatic Nature of Truth 360


\


CONTENTS XV

PAGE

I 7. Empiricism 363

§ 8. Percq>ts and Concepts. The Critique of InteUectualism . 366

m. Philosophy of RdigUm 369

§ 9. The Right to Believe 369

§ 10. Reflex Action and Theism 370

§ XI. The Dilemma of Determinism 371

§ 12. Pluralism and Moralism 373

IV. Condusum 375

Index 379


PART I
INTRODUCTION


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL
TENDENCIES


Di9crepaj)i:]i


PBIWSOrBICAL THEORY AND ESTABUSHED

BELIEF^

§ I. It is impossible to undertake a summary of philo-
sophical tendencies without being sensible of the breach
between the philosophy of the schools and the
philosophy of the streets, between the latest
Theory and speculations, h>potheses, and definitions of
critical experts, and the general beliefs of man-
kind. This discrepancy is not peculiar to philosophy.
There is a similar difference between pure science and
popular science, between political theory and political
faith or tradition. But in neither case is the difference
so confusing or disturbing as in the case of philosophy.
Confusion between pure and popular science is avoided
by the development of an organized technique, which
makes pure science largely uninteUigible to the layman;
and there is little danger of a premature application of
scientific hypotheses, because of the material difficulties
which must be overcome before any such hypothesis
can be applied. The same holds, although much less
certainly, of politics. Political action is based on the
steady and widespread acceptance, within a commimity,
of certain general beliefs that are not immediately affected
by the fluctuations of theory. And here also the applica-
tion of theory must, except under extraordinary condi-

' Reprinted, with additions and alterations, from an article entitled
"Theories and Beliels," Harvard Theological Revivui, Vol. Ill, July, 1910.


4'- .'■ PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

,'tions, move at a slow pace because of the complexity of the
• instrumentalities employed.

It may be argued that the common philosophical beliefs
are similarly protected and rendered stable by their wide
interpenetration with social interests, and by the authority
of established religion. But the fact remains that a philo-
sophical revolution is more easily accomplished than a
political revolution. The reason for this lies in the fact
that a philosophy, unlike a polity, is an individual matter.
A man may reconstruct his Weltanschauung — establish his
world of thought upon a new foundation, and rearrange his
order of values — without encountering any greater resist-
ance than the inertia of his own habits. And such a revolu-
tion is the more easily accomphshed in an individualistic era
like the present, in which the church has relaxed its hold
upon the minds of men. If, then, there be any practical
risk in the exposure of belief to the variability of theory,
that risk will be peculiarly great in the case of philosophy.
And there is also a peculiar liability to confusion here,
because theoretical philosophy has never as yet succeeded
in developing a technique of its own. The terms of philo-
sophical research and speculation are largely the tenns of
reUgious belief; so that the layman too readily identifies the
tentative hypotheses of the investigator with the venerable
symbols of his faith.

§ 2. Both theory and belief, the new word of critical spec-
ulation, and the old assumptions of hfe, are forms of knowl-
edge. And although it is necessary that these
forms should be distinguished and even
separately organized, that necessity should
not blind us to the fact that their value is fun-
damentally the same. That the control of
nature through the advancement of knowledge is the
instrument of progress and the chief ground of hope, is the
axiom of modem civilization. This is more pecuharly a
modem idea than is commonly supposed. The ancient
world had its dogmatic and its critical idea of progress. The


I


Theory and
BdkfMForm
of Knowledge,
Having the
Same Funda-
menul Value


THEORY AND BELIEF 5

fonner was the idea of national or racial aggrandizement
by the conquest of territory and the usurpation of political
control. The latter, contributed by the genius of Greece,
was the humanistic idea of the intensive cultivation and
refinement of human nature. These ancient ideas were
superseded by Christian supematuralism, which referred
man's hope of salvation to another world which might be
won by the repudiation of this. As Christian Europe
became secularized, there developed the theocratic idea of
a fixed system in which all human activities should be
limited and controlled by religious authority. Finally, as
a reaction against the established order, there appeared
the idea of the Renaissance^ — an enthusiasm for antiquity,
and a desire to reverse the course of history.

The modern idea, though it borrows something from all
of these ideas, is fundamentally different. It bespeaks a
solidarity of mankind in the enterprise of life, and in this
manifests its Christianity; and it derives from paganism
a respect for human capacities, and a confidence in man's
power to win the good for himself. But these motives are
so united in the modem spirit as to produce something
geniunely new. The good is to be won by the race and for
the race; it lies in the future, and can result only from
prolonged and collective endeavor; and the power to
achieve it lies in the progressive knowledge and control of
nature. This is the Baconian idea. The incentive to
knowledge lies in its application to life. " For fruits and
inventions are, as it were, sponsors and sureties for the
truth of philosophies." Therefore, Bacon would have men
of learning begin and end their study with the facts of
their present environment. " For our road does not lie on
a level, but ascends and descends, first ascending to axioms,
then descending to works." In the last part of the New
Atlantis there is a remarkable description of the riches of
Solomon's House, the great museum and laboratory, the
treasure house and workshop, which was "the lantern of
this kingdom." The words with which the father of


6 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

Solomon's House receives his visitors are a terse and elo-
quent summary of that which Francis Bacon prophesied,
and which posterity has steadily achieved. "The end of
our foundation is the knowledge of causes, and secret
motions of things; and the enlarging of the bounds of
human empire, to the effecting of all things possible." '

The value of theory and beUef is in the end the same.
Both are forms of knowledge, and knowledge furnishes
the illumination and guidance of all conscious action.
But, as we shall now see, each of these forms of knowledge
has also a spccijic value, through which this more funda-
mental value is realized; and these more specific values
require not only a difference of procedure, but even a
certain incommensurability of terms.

§ 3. In an essay entitled "The Scepticism of Believers,"
Leslie Stephen remarks a common confusion between
The Difference w belief and Contrary beHef . The term 'belief
«nd is at any historical moment almost invariably

^Ni^eTn "^^^ ^° denote the established behef, that is,
Theory and the belief Supported by authority or by the
' consensus of opinion; while the term 'unbe-

lief is used to denote dissent from the established
belief, even when, as is most often the case, this dissent
is itself due to belief. The established belief resists
change, and must be attacked, weakened, or destroyed,
before it is possible for another belief to get a hearing;
hence assenters come to regard dissenters as destructive in
their primary intent, and are blinded to the fact that there
is another belief at stake, which may be as affirmative and
constructive in its own terms as that which at the time pre-
vails. Thus modem religious orthodoxy has condemned
as unbelief a certain secular tendency which really has
arisen, not from a love of mischief-making, but from a most

I Bacon : PhilasapkUat Works, Edited by Ellis and Speddbg, Vol. HI,
p. ts6; c(. Md, Vol, IV. pp. 73, 96. This reference to Bacon is in part re-
printed from an article entitled: "The Prophecy of Fronds Bacon," Pop-
ular Science Monthly, Vol. LXXVU, May, 1910.


THEORY AND BELIEF 7

devoted confidence in the uniformity of nature, and in the
power of man to save himself. It is not wholly unjust to
assert, as Leslie Stephen does assert, that, in opposing the
free advance of science and of individualism, defenders of
"the Faith" have virtually sought to prevent or destroy
that faith in the enterprise of civilization which has mainly
inspired the progress of the last two centuries.

But for our present purposes the significance of this lies
not in the issue between warring beliefs, both of which are
poative and confident, but in the issue between belief,
which puts heart into men, and that state of suspended
animation, of hesitation, and general impotence, which is
properly to be regarded as unbelief, "The man has most
faith, in the sense in which faith represents a real force,"
says our author, "whose convictions are such as are most
favorable to energetic action, and is freest from the doubts
which paralyze the wiU in the great moments of life. He
must have a clear vision of an end to be achieved, devotion
to which may be the ruling passion of his fife and the focus
to which all his energies may converge."' In the present
discussion, I use the phrase 'established belief to denote
faith, in this sense of conviction favorable to action; and it
is my purpose to show that the opposite state of mind,
imbelief , or the lack of convictions favorable to action, may
be induced by Ifieory. Before theory can become belief it 1
must be assimilated to a plan of life; it must be not only [
asserted, but also adopted. And when belief becomes ] '
theory, it means that an integral component of some man's
plan of life is withdrawn; making it necessary that his
hand should be stayed, and the plan suspended, if not
permanently abandoned. Without a recognition of this
radical difference between theory and belief, unless it be
understood that as moods, states of mind, or moments of
life, they are almost antithetical, one must remain blind
to the real tragedy of heresy and doubt.

The virtue of beUef lies in the application. Knowledge
■ Leslie Stephen, Ah Ainoslic's Apototy, p. so.


8 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

does not become belief until it is presupposed for the pur-
poses of action. This holds equally of the most elementary
common sense, of technical skill, and of religious piety.
Common sense consists of the manifold things that can be
taken for granted for the purposes of everyday life. Common
sense must be true to be useful; but it would still not be
useful unless it were habitually and implicitly trusted.
Technical skill is derived from science; but until scientific
principles are sufficiently well established to be relied on,
they cannot be applied. And piety, if it be not constant, if
a life be not founded on it, is not that good thing which is
called religion. He who makes plans for the morrow, or
constructs a bridge, or prays to God, believes. There
is, then, a specific value in belief, over and above the value
of truth which it must have in common with knowledge.
This value is that confidence and steadiness, without which
■ no consecutive endeavor is possible. And since this is the
case, it follows that there is a legitimate and powerful
incentive to belief, which may be distinguished from the
love of truth. So that they are not wholly unreasonable
who resent being robbed of their belief; or, seeking to have
it restored, pray God to help their unbelief.

Now it is clear that theory can no more take the place of
belief than a stone can take the place of bread. Theory
does not directly nourish and sustain life, as belief does;
because, unlike belief, it does not suit the humor of action.
To theorize is to doubt. The investigator must be both
incredulous and credulous, believing nothing, and prepared
to believe anything. While he remains theoretically
minded, he remains open-minded, receptive to evidence,
committing himself to assertions only tentatively or provi-
sionally. He may be preparing foundations, but he cannot
let them stand, and hence is not free to build on them.
Furthermore, for the very reason that the theorist is not
expected to put his theories into practice, he enjoys a
certain irresponsibihty. To him is allotted the task of
examining a question on its merits, without reference to


I


THEORY AND BELIEF 9

"ulterior motives. He is permitted a certain play of con-
jecture, a certain osdUation of mind between hypothetical
alternatives, that is fatal to administrative competence.
Nor b the theoretical mind held to those standards of
proportionateness which obtain in life. The scientist is
not infrequently likened to James's "myopic ant," who
tumbles into every microscopic crack and fissure, and
never suspects that a centre exists. But fatal as such
procedure would be to the proper conduct of life, it is neither
unworthy nor unfruitful as an incident of theoretical
analysis. Chesterton has remarked that "a man does not
go mad because he builds a statue a mile high, but he may
go mad by thinking it out in square inches." ' In the
latter case, judged by the standards of social efficiency, the
man is mad; but his madness is explained, or adjudged not
madness after all, when it is recognized that his interest is
theoretical. And a amilar allowance is made for a certain
difference of pace in life and in theory. There is a maxim
to the effect that "he that will believe only what he can
fully comprehend, must have a very long head or a very
short creed." In other words, when theoretically-minded,
one proceeds as though life permitted of being invariably
guided by good and manifest reasons; whereas practically,
if one were to adopt such a principle, one would never reach
the first milestone. Intelligent living proceeds not by
doubting, examining, experimenting, and proving, but by
assuming. There is an urgency and brevity about life
that makes it impossible that one should give the rein to
one's critical powers or weigh every affirmation in the
delicate balance of lo^c,

I hope it is clear that I am not attempting to divide men
into believers and theorists. I am distinguishing not
between classes of men, but between characteristic moods
or states of mind. The difference, however, is not so much '
psychological as it is moral. There is a different motive
in theory and in belief, a different human good. Hence it ,

' G. K. Chcslcrton, Orlhadaxy, p. 67,


10 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

follows that these moods may confront one another dramati-
cally both in individual life and in the history of society.
There is a party of theory and a party of belief, with a
loyalty to each. It may be that in our own time, for
example, there is more need of emphasizing the motive
of belief. We live in a rationahstic age, many of us in a
rationalistic fellowship or community, and incline to the
party of theory. It is the mark of such partisanship to
suppose that advocates of established belief are moved to
suspect or resist innovation only by stubbornness or inertia.
On the contrary, conservatism is not less passionate than
radicahsm, nor less moved by the love of good. For the
advocate of established belief is the advocate of established
life; of that present adjustment of interests which is daily
tested and proved, and to which the great majority of men
are wholly and irrevocably committed. It is less enlight-
ened to despise him as the enemy of truth than to pay
him some respect as the friend of peace and order.

§ 4. We shall not understand the strength of the motive
of belief, or the part which it plays in the vital economy,
The SoiidMiiy until we recognize its corporate character. An
oi Belief established belief possesses a value proportional

to the number of interest invested in it. And this solidar-
ity of belief manifests itself on every scale, individual, social,
and historical. It has been said that every man of action
is a fatalist. This is due to the need of a permanence of
belief, if the several acts of an individual life are to contrib-
ute to one end. A plan of acUon, in proportion to its
scope, requires time and manifold agencies for its execution,
and must be adhered to from moment to moment and from
act to act. Every plan of action is based on iimumer-
able assumptions concerning the natural and social environ-
ment; and if these assumptions be questioned, the plan is
virtually suspended. Action is ef&cient in proportion to
its range, and the greater its range the more necessary is
it that its components should be rigid and stable. Assump-
tions must be trusted implicitly in order that one may be


THEORY AND BELIEF 1 1

free to leave them behind one's back and face the work to


be done.


I the s


r the need of a fixed


The larger the enterprise, i
orientation, of a view that shall not dissolve until a thousand
tributary agencies have been assembled, coordinated, and
made jointly and cumulatively to achieve the designated
end. It follows that a steadiness of belief is more indispen-
sable to social than to individual action. Every variety of
cooperation requires that men shall occupy common groimd.
The best partners, like the best friends, are those who can
take the most for granted. That which is true of every
lesser sodal enterprise is supremely true of politics and
rehgion. The arm of society is the institution, and this
owes its power to a wide-spread community of belief. The
institution is the most delicate and complicated mechanism
of life, constructed out of the purposes and convictions of
innumerable individuals. And this mechanism cannot
remain intact, and be the instrument that it is designed to
be, unless the parts be firm and durable. In short, society
could not act, for the maintenance of order or the promotion
of civilization, if men's ideas were fluent and transitory.
This does not mean merely that social action would be ham-
pered, but that any political or organized commimity what-
soever would be impossible. Unbelief is equally fatal to the
full benefit of religion. That benefit is realized only when
a firm conviction concerning the ultimate source of human
fortune, or the supreme object of devotion, dominates and
unifies all the varied activities of hfe. This benefit is never
fully attained; but so far as it has been attained, it has
given to civilization something of the sweetness and vigor
of health. When science and art, common sense and mysti-
cal ecstasy, the outer maimer and the iimer propensity, in all
men different and yet in all alike, do but embroiderand enact
one theme, the circle is closed and the strength of man made
perfect. And such unanimity of imagination and enthusi-
asm, quickening and ennobling the concert of action, must
rest on unseen but deep-laid fotmdations of common belief.


I a PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

There remains one further proof of the solidarity of belief,
If society is to act effectively, it must remain in agreement
with itself not only breadthwise but also lengthwise. The
temporal continuity of civilization is the indispensable
condition of progress. When fundamental convictions are
altered, it is much like moving to a new planet; the work
must be begun all over again. Apparently the conquests of
civilization are gained by swift and sudden victories. But
revolution is only the beginning of reformation. It is the
slow process of reorganization and education that saves the
fruits of such victories, and constitutes that steady if
almost imperceptible advance on which the hope of civiliza-
tion must mainly rely. In order that this shall be possible,
it is necessary that beliefs should be transmitted together
with problems and opportunities. Unless the burden is to
fall, the young must not only grasp what the old have let
go, but they must obtain the same foothold.

There are, then, 5yi/cwwo/6e/Je/ which condition effective,
concerted, and progressive living. Such systems, it may
be further remarked, have their more and their less vital
parts. There are some beliefs which, like the keystone of
the arch or the base of the pyramid, cannot be dislodged
without overthrowing the whole structure. If there be a
good in all belief, that good will be greater in such beliefs;
and if there be a motive which rallies men to the support of
any belief, men will be moved most passionately when such
beliefs are at stake. For these are the beliefs most built
upon, to which men are most committed, and in which they
have invested all their possessions. When they are shaken,
it is like the trembling of the solid earth,

§ 5- Unless, in spite of all prepossessions to the contrary,
in spite of a justifiable impatience with every obstacle to
Gsiaeo and progress, we can see a certain rightness and
the inquisitino sound loyalty in conservatism, we shall remain
blind to the meaning of the great transitional eras. Thus
we are swift to condemn the Inquisition of the seventeenth
century, and the compromises of Galileo and Descartes.


I

I
I


THEORY AND BELIEF 13

The catholic orthodoxy of the time has been proved wrong,
cruelly and fatuously wrong; and Galileo and Descartes
doubtless lost an opportunity of displaying the heroism of
Bruno and Spinoza. But a powerful motive of the drama
will have been reduced to a nullity, if it be supposed that
the Holy Office was prompted only by malice, or Galileo
and Descartes by cowardice.

Galileo,' it will be remembered, was convicted of holding
that the earth moved. This doctrine was declared to be
"absurd, heretical, contrary to the test of Scripture"; and
Galileo was compelled to repudiate it. He defended him-
self on theground that Scripture was not science. " Hence it
appears," he said, "that when we have to do with natural
effects brought under our eyes by the experience of our
senses, or deduced fron absolute demonstrations, these can
in no wise be called in question on the strength of Scripture
texts that are susceptible of a thousand different interpre-
tations, for the words of Scripture are not so strictly limited
in their significance as the phenomena of nature."* But
this defence left out of consideration what was referred to in
the charge as the "absurdity" and "heretical" character
of the new theory. It was not its contradiction of Scripture
texts that made it dangerous, but its contradiction of the
prevailing behef. This was definitely committed to the
immobility of the earth; and in concluding that the Copemi-
can theory, advocated by Galileo, was a menace to it, the
Holy Office was not mistaken.

But why should the immobility of the earth be a cherished
belief, to be protected by the penalty of death? Men are
not soberly burned at the stake or submitted to torment
by due process of law, out of sheer bloodthirstiness, or on
account of trivial offences. It must all appear childish
and wanton, unless we can learn to recognize the immense
human importance which once attached to what is now

' 1564-1641.

' Quoted by Mfaires, "Trial of Galileo," Popular ScitHce Monthly,
vol. X, 1877, p. 389.


14 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

regarded only as an obsolete astronomy. For it was not
merely that men wondered how, if the sun did not move,
Joshua could have commanded it to stand still; the
Copernican theory contradicted the entire practical orienta-
tion that dominated the imagination and justilied the plans
of Christendom. Never in the history of European civ-
ilization has common sense been so comprehensive and so
highly imified as it was in Galileo's day. That synopsis of
heaven and earth which was the theme of Dante's Divine
Comedy, and the fundamental thesis of St. Thomas's
Summa Theologiae, was not an esoteric truth, but an illu-
mination shared by common men, and revealing to them the
objects of their daily hopes and fears. The earth was the
centre of a compact and &nite created world. It was pre-
pared by the hand of God for man's habitation, and sur-
rounded by sun, moon, and stars for his convenience and
delight. God himself dwelt at the periphery of the system,
where he could observe and regulate the human drama
enacted at the centre. Man's fall and redemption were the
very theme of nature, the key to its interpretation; and the
earth as the scene of these transactions was its true centre.
Now let it be remembered that this image of nature was
vividly present to the common mind, portrayed in every
form of art, repeatedly implied in the postures of religious
observance, and daily represented in common speech and
gesture. And let it be remembered, furthermore, that this
was an age in which secular and religious beliefs were not
sharply c^vorced; when what men believed in particular
was subordinated to what they believed on the whole, and
when, in spite of a growing worldliness, men could never
wholly forget the saving of their souls. Is it any wonder,
then, that men were shocked when they heard it said that
the earth moved, that it was only the loose swinging
satellite of a sun that was but one of many suns? When
the Christian imagination has never in the centuries that
have followed been able entirely to adapt itself to a decen-
tralized and infinite cosmos, with its limitless plurality of


THEORY AND BEUEF 1 5

worlds, Is it any wonder that a ChrisUan of the early
seventeenth century should have been unable to face such
a hypothecs? For a dozen centuries Europeans had been
growing accustomed to the world of the Biblical and Ptole-
maic imagination; this was for all practical purposes now
their world, in which Ihey had built their home and laid
their plans, and which was endeared to them by every
tradition and association. Surely, whatever the Inquisi-
tion may have been guilty of, it was not sheer bnitahty;
for it was the instrument with which this age thought to
protect itself and every good thing which it owned.

When I bring myself to feel the force of these considera-
tions, I am convinced that the tragedy of Galileo is not so
simple as is sometimes supposed. Neither he nor his
accusers could have enjoyed an imdivided mind. As they
were not merely the wicked enemies of truth, so he was not
merely a reckless iconoclast forced to keep silence from
fear of physical torture. For both must have felt the con-
flict between loyalty to the existing order and assent to
theoretical truth. The difference lay rather in the relative
strength of the two motives. The officers of the church were
in a position of responsibility ; Galileo, in the quiet and isola-
tion of the Belvedere, could free his mind from the thought
of social consequences, while dealing with "natural effects
brought under our eyes by the experience of our senses."

After his first trial Galileo attempted to avoid the
charge of disturbing the common belief, by publishing his
astronomical studies in the form of "a Dialogue ... in
which are discussed the two most important world-sys-
tems, . , . without any decision being arrived at between
them." ' In these dialogues the merits of both systems
are argued, with the result that, while the advocate of the
traditional system is the nominal victor, the evidence for
the Copemican system is actually more convincing to any
one qualified to judge. This was undoubtedly an attempt

> Published in 1631. Cf. H. Hafiding; Hiilory of Uadtrn PkUosopky,
tnu. by B. E. Meyer, Vol I, p. 175.


i6


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


to satisfy the general public by proclaiming in a loud voice,
"The earth does not move," while at the same time whis-
pering to his fellow-augurs, "but we know that it really
does move." Gahleo was by no means incapable of such
a stroke, and it was their resentment at what they regarded
as a bold trick that inspired Galileo's accusers with the
bitterness which they manifested at his second trial.
But taken in the light of the real conflict of motives which
Galileo must have felt, and in the light of the policy pursued
by other men by no means so witty and adroit as he, may
we not believe that these dialogues were in part conceived
as a serious attempt to reconcile theory and belief ? Galileo
was not a revolutionist, but he was jealous of his scientific
reputation. He wished to be true to the standards of
exact research and at the same time avoid disturbing
the public peace. And so he proposed to regard his
scientific conclusions as "hypothetical," meaning that
they were abstracted from belief. He thought that
science might be permitted to go its own way, and freely
entertain any idea that might recommend itself on purely
theoretical grounds, provided that society could be pro-
tected from the premature attempt to put such ideas into
practice. Society believes, the scientist affirms; they do so
for different motives, and with different values at stake. It
would be wise, then, to separate the theoretical and beheving
processes. They cannot, it is true, be absolutely separated,
nor would that be desirable even if it were possible; but
they can be regarded as different functions of society and
prevented from directly interfering with one another.

§ 6. If I am mistaken in attributing such reflections as
these to Galileo, there can at least be no doubt in the case
^^ , of Descartes.* The news of Galileo's convic-
Rccondiiacian tion in 1 633 reached Descartes Just as he was
^^^«fy ind ijj the act of publishing his De Mundo, in
which he maintained the doctrine of the
motion of the earth. Although, as Descartes himself
» 1596-1650. '


THEORY AND BELIEF


17


afterwards affinned, this doctrine was essential to his
whole philosophy of nature, he at once abandoaed the
project. And when he returned to the topic in his
Principles of Philosophy, he had found a way to reconcile
his theory with the accepted belief. He defined motion
as "the transporting of one part of matter or of one body
from the vicinity of those bodies that are in immediate
contact with it, or which we regard as at rest, to the vicinity
of other bodies." ' Now, according to the Cartesian theory
of planetary motion, the planet is embedded in a fluid which
sweeps vortex -fashion round the sun. It follows that,
while the vortex does move, the planet, in this case the
earth, does not move, since it remains fixed in relation to
the matter immediately adjacent to it.

Now why should Descartes attach importance to what
we do not hesitate to call a quibble? Is it merely a proof
of timidity and disingenuousness? Descartes was not, it
is true, of the stuff of which martyrs are made; but he
was nevertheless a man of more than average courage, and
of eminent intellectual honesty. The explanation lies
elsewhere. He did not pander to his age for purposes of
private advantage; but be did sympathize with his age,
and he did desire practically to identify himself with it.
The motion of the earth meant to his age much what the
abandonment of the institution of marriage or of the
principles of democracy would mean to ours; it was a
symbol of failure and of return to chaos. That Descartes
was profoundly concerned at the conflict between theory
ftnd belief, between that intellectual freedom which was
the condition of truth and that imiformity of sentiment
which was the condition of social stability, is proved beyond
doubt by the most personal of his writings, the famous
Discourse on Method. There he concludes that Just as when
we propose to rebuild the house in which we live, we must
nevertheless occupy some quarters while the work is going
on, so it is necessary to beUeve practically, even when the

' Descartes: Principles af Philosapky (1644), trans, by Vdtch, p. »4S-


i8


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


theoretical judgment is suspended. Descartes proposes,
therefore, to regulate his practice conformably to the
opinions of those with whom he has to live. And since
neither society nor the individual can make progress if
they are forever examining the ground at their feet, he
proposes for practical purposes to adhere steadfastly even
to doubtful opinions, once they are adopted; "imitating in
this the example of travellers who, when they have lost
their way in a forest, ought not to wander from side to side,
far less remain in one place, but proceed constantly towards
the same side in as straight a line as possible, ... for in
this way, if they do not exactly reach the point they desire,
they will come at least in the end to some place that will
probably be preferable to the middle of a forest," '

Galileo and Descartes were divided against themselves
through feeling the weight of two great human motives,
rationalism and conservatism, Bruno, Campanella,Ramus,
and Vanini, having identified themselves more uncom-
promisingly with the first of these motives, antagonized
the second and were overwhelmed by it. The history of
these six men testifies, not so much to the cruelty and du-
plicity of human nature, as to the almost unconquerable
resistance of an idea which society has built into its
foundations.

§ 7, It may be inferred from the fate of these intellectual
pioneers that established behef is capable of taking care of it-
self. Without doubt there is a heavy inertia in
CoraervBiLani ot belief, that saves it from being too easily over-
Btlief. Present thrown. Not Only are new ideas distrusted by
those whose enterprises they threaten to dis-
credit; but they have difficulty even in gaining access to the
mind. They must always meet and overcome the charge of
"absurdity" that bespeaks the settled habits of common
sense. The author of the Reltgio Medici shows a charming
indifference to the absurdities of his day. They are so re-
mote from common sense that they may be tolerated without
' Descartes: Discffuw on Method (1637). Irana. by Veitch, p. JS-


I

I


THEORY AND BELIEF


19


fear of any consequences for life. "Some," he says, "have
held that Snow is black, that the earth moves, that the
Soul is air, fire, water; but all this is Philosophy, and there
is no delirium." ' A recent writer tells us that "all men
who have lived to a certain age have learnt that there are
certain facts, certain experiences not at all connected with
the supernatural, which they dare not tell of for fear of
being put down as inventors. . , . Just as the old woman
was ready to accept her travelled son's yarns of rivers of
piilk and islands of cheese; but when he deviated into the
truth she stopped. 'Na, na!' she said, 'that the anchor
fetched up one of Pharaoh's chariot wheels out of the Red
Sea, I can believe; but that fish fly! Na, na! dinna come
any o' your lies over yer mither,' "'

But it is worthy of remark that common sense is not to
be conjured with as it once was. We have grown first
accustomed to absurdities, and then fond of them. I am
not sure that in our day the burden of proof does not lie
with the familiar fact. We expect to be surprised, and are
suspicious of a theory that lacks novelty. This has doubt-
less always been the case with intellectual radicals, but it
is fast becoming a general state of mind. Many reasons
may be offered for the change. First of all, it is due to
the high conductivity of modem society. The mood of
one individual is transmitted with incredible rapidity to the
entire community. The doubts, conjectures, and conclu-
aons of theorists are promptly communicated to the public,
which straightway itself strikes a theoretical attitude.
Again, the general triumph of democratic principles has
made a difference here. Intellectual exdusiveness does
not suit the temper of liberal societies. It must be share
and share alike with knowledge as with other commodities.
The best is none too good for every man; hence there can
be no living on the paternalistic bounty of a class of wise
men. It was once thought that if the eyes of a few were

> Sir Thomas Browne; ftrfijw Mediei (1646), Temple Edition, p. iij-
■ H. Fielding: fftortjo/Wfli, pp. 374-175.


20 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

opened they might lead the rest; but now none consent to
remain blind. And, finally, the humanitarian and utili-
tarian sentiment requires that all knowledge shall promptly
be put to use. In order that men may be saved by it, or
the conditions of life bettered, or mankind be brought a
step forward, knowledge must be instantly worked into
life and made to serve.

All these and other tendencies of the day conspire to
produce an impatience and over-haste in belief. We suffer
from a new kind of credulity. It was once complained that
men are too easily inclined to believe what their fathers
believed, that men lack originality and independence.
But there is now reason to fear that men may too easily
believe what no one has ever believed before. Men with
settled convictions may become as rare as were free-thinkers
in an earlier time. And the consequences must be scarcely
less detrimental to social welfare than the consequences
of the earlier complacency and narrow-mindedness. For
inquisitiveness and fluidity of mind, though they condition
the discovery of new truth, are intolerable in society at
large. Theory must correct and enlighten belief, but it
cannot, consistently with the conduct of any considerable
enterprise, replace belief.

§ 8. I cannot hope to offer any general solution of what
appears to be a recurrent and inequitable problem. It is of
,,>.,, the very essence of life that it should be both

The Need of ■' , , , , rr, • ,■ r

Mcdiition be- conserved and changed. To belief, soaetyowes
tween Theory j^g cohesivcness and stability; to theory, it

and Bebef . , , , ■' . i .

owes Its chance of betterment. And smce
every human motive is liable to exaggeration, society will
always suffer harm on the one hand from complacency
and tyranny, and on the other hand from reckless innova-
tion. Conflict between the mood of theory and the mood
of belief, or between the party of theory and the party
of belief, will doubtless remain to the end a source of confu-
sion and waste. And this conflict will be most bitter where
the most is at stake; respecting those ideas, namely, in


THEORY AND BELIEF 31

which sodety is most deeply involved. But I think that
we are justified in drawing certain inferences that are not
wholly insignificant.

In the first place, since there is a virtue in belief that has
no equivalent in theory, it is wise to surrender belief re-
luctantly, A due recognition of the gravity of such a crisis
permits no other course. Some degree of stolidity and
inertia is a mark of moral poise. Nor is this incompatible
with intellectual alertness and curiosity. It requires only
that one shall acquire reserve, and refuse to admit strange
theories at once to the circle of one's dear convictions.
Similarly, conservatism in social action is not incompatible
with the hveliest and most serious speculation concerning
human institutions; but if this is to be possible, society
must act more slowly than the curious-minded speculate,
and insist that ideas be long tested, and gradually absorbed.

There is also a certain obligation in this matter that rests
with theorists, and more especially with those who are
devoted to the examination of the most fundamental ideas.
It happens, doubtless because these ideas have not as yet
permitted of exact treatment, that there is here the least
barrier between theory and belief. Political, social, and
philosophical theory speak the language of common sense,
using terms that suggest the objects of daily life. It is as
though the anthropologist were to allude to his personal
friends. But there can never be any exact correspondence
between the terms of theory and the terms of belief,
because they are defined by different contexts, and belong
to different systems. All the more reason, then, why
different symbols should be employed, and the layman be
spared the needless fear that his bread or soul's salvation
bangs on the fortunes of an argument.
P" What I have said applies with peculiar force to the
philosopher. No one else debates such grave issues; nor
is there any other region of theoretical inquiry in which
differences and fluctuations of opinion are so marked. And
I refer here, not especially to those who proclaim themselves


22 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

metaphysicians, but to all theoretically-minded persons,
including sdentists and moralists, who busy themselves
with ultimate questions. It would seem to follow that
society is in special need of avoiding a hasty assimilation
of such theory. And yet the words which it ordinarily
employs are words which symbolize to mankind their most
trusted and cherished objects of belief. No one has taken
the name of the Lord his God in vain so frequently and
so unconcernedly as the philosopher. While philosophers
dispute, believers witness with dismay the apparent disso-
lution, not only of God, but of immortality, freedom,
marriage, and democracy as well. I wish that philosophy,
for theoretical purposes, might speak a language of its own,
and settle its disputes in a vernacular that does not arrest
the attention of the community. If this were possible,
philosophy would be better entitled to the full benefit of
that immunity from direct social responsibility which is
most conducive to clear seeing and straight thinking. And
society could afford to wait for the application of a more
refined and better-tested truth.

No theorist is under obligation immediately to give so-
ciety the benefit of his theorizing. It was said of Samuel
Clarke, who sought to overthrow atheism by scientific
argument, that no one had really doubted the eidstence of
God until he undertook to prove it. There will always be
an absolute difference between rational assent on theoreti-
cal grounds, and implicit belief. The theoretical mood,
even when a conclusion is reached, is a state of practical
doubt. When the transition is made from believing to
theorizing, the loss is certain; and he who lightly encour-
ages such a transition is guilty of recklessness and irrespon-
sibility. It is a grave matter to substitute one's own
theory, however well-reasoned, for another man's belief.
For the belief is a part of the believer's hfe, a condition of
the confidence and hopefulness of his action. It is a mis-
taken idea that honesty compels every theorist to be a
propagandist; it is true, rather, that in the great majority


I
I


THEORY AND BELIEF


»3


ol instances, the sentiment of humanity, and a serious
regard for the well-being of society, require that he shall
not.

The task of mediating between theory and life is perhaps
the most delicate and responsible task which it falls to the
lot of any man to perform. And it cannot be denied that
the theoretical habit of mind tends to disqualify one for
undertaking it. For the investigator is trained to neglect
every consideration but such present evidence as he can
obtain. The human probabihty that bis conclusions will
some day, perhaps tomorrow, be over-ruled by new evi-
dence, he properly excludes from his consideration. It is
not relevant to his problem. But while theories may be
changed with little cost and with certain gain, this is not
true of beliefs. Here the cost is more certain than the gain.
And the very consideration which the theorist is trained
to neglect, and must neglect if his mind is to be free, is
here of paramount importance. He who is to advise men
must be the friend of men. He must understand their
hopes and share their responsibilities. Hence he must
regard every idea with reference to its effect on that present,
concrete, human state of mind, from which all social action
must proceed. No one has proclaimed more eloquently
than Francis Bacon that it is to knowledge that man owes
his triumph over nature and his advancement in all noble
arts. But he would willingly, I think, have said of estab-
lished belief, what he said of antiquity, that it "deserveth
that reverence, that men should make a stand thereupon and
discover what is the best way; but when the discovery is
well taken, then to make progres^on."


§ I. The distinction between theory and belief is of
the utmost importance, not only for the understanding of

the relation of philosophy to life, but also for
betwMii sdencB the Understanding of the development and pres-
«nd Religion. gQ^ meaning of philosophical doctrines them-
Ainhiguotis selvcs. For philosophy, owing to its peculiar

relations with science and religion, has been

governed by both motives.
There are two fundamental differences between science
and religion, a difference of subject-matter, and a differ-
ence of motive.' Their difference of subject-matter corre-
sfwnds to the difference between proximate and ultimate
causes. Physical science has to do with particular inter-
relations and rearrangements among facts of nature; relig-
ion has to do with the general character of nature as a whole,
or with whatever may lie beyond nature and still belong to
the environment of life. Their difference of form corre-
sponds to that difference between theory and belief
which we have just discussed. Science is the most con-
spicuous example of the method and spirit of disinterested
research. Its development has been marked by the
purification of its theoretical motive; until, despite its
ulterior usefulness, it is in its own procedure of all human
activities the most indifferent to the clamor of interests.
Religion, on the other hand, is essentially a plan of action.


I


' The subject-maltcf of science will be discussed ii
We have here to do primarily wiUi its theoretical moti


SCIENCE AND RELIGION


25


Religion is man's hope or despair of salvation. Thus
while science expresses itself in neutral or indifferent terms,
the interests at stake being eliminated and the application
being held in reserve, in religion the application is already
made. Science is a description of its subject-matter; re-
ligion is something done, something feared, or something
hoped, in view of its subject-matter.

Philosophy has from the beginning served these two
masters. It has attempted in the spirit of sdence, and
with a like theoretical detachment, to carry knowledge
beyond the limits of science. But it has also attempted
to formulate religious behef, giving articulate expression
to the religious emotions and elaborating a plan of salva-
tion. Philosophy is thus resorted to by two classes of
persons. By some it is expected to afford a rigorous
theoretical solution of special problems that lie outside the
range of the positive sciences, problems such as ' conscious-
ness,' " space,' 'causality,' ' truth,' and ' goodness.' By others
it is expected to furnish the age, or any hungering soul, with
a summary ajid estimate of the world for the purposes of
life. To supply the former demand, philosophy must be
technical and free from ulterior motives; while to supply
the latter, it must be humane and keenly alive to all the
deeper needs and passions. Philosophy is thus at once a
recondite investigation, and a popular oracle; dispensing
logical subtleties to the learned and homely wisdom to the
vulgar. And in consequence of this double office, philos-
ophers divide among themselves, and speak a mixed lan-
guage.

§ 2. Science, as we have seen, is by no means exclusively
theoretical in motive. Indeed applied or popular science
The TbeorMical undoubtedly precedes theoretical science. The
Motive in liberation of the intelligence from immediate
^°™'* attendance upon action, and its independent

exercise in its own interest, is a reward of past service, as well
as an opportunity of higher service. The intelligence has
had to earn its place in the economy of life. As a primitive


26


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


necessity, intelligence is the capacity to do the right Iking
under given circumstances. The "right" act is always rela-
tive not only to drcumstances, that is, to the occasion or
environment, but also to some actuating interest. Its
rightness consists in its so meeting or modifying circum-
stance as to satisfy interest. Circumstance will accord-
ingly evoke one or the other of two types of right or
intelligent response. It will be resisted or evaded, disliked
or feared, on the one hand; on the other hand, welcomed,
used, or desired. In this immediate relation to life, then,
both causes and effects are regarded under the aspect of
their maleficence or beneficence. And from this view of
nature it is but a short step to animism, or the view that
natural causes are governed by animus. Certain typical
processes of the environment with which one is compelled
to treat, are regarded as governed by a consistent friend-
liness or hostility. The environment is socialized; and
the method of conciliation or retaliation is extended be-
yond the circle of human and animal associates to the wider
realm of natural causes. In other words, beneficent causes
are construed as henevolcnt, and maleficent as malevolent.
Wherever effects are regarded as good or bad, and their
causes as working good or working evil, this is probably
always the hypothesis wMch is nearest at hand and most
plausible. It appears, long after the development of
mechanical science, in the instinctive resentment or grati-
tude with which one greets a turn of fortune. There thus
arises a primitive science in which effects are benefits or
injuries, and causes friends or enemies; in which, in short,
natural events are wholly assimilated to life.

Out of this primitive science, mechanical or theoretical
science has gradually developed, chiefly through the opera-
tion of two motives. In the first place, the method of con-
ciliation and retaliation was experimentally discredited as a
mode of controlling nature. For the inmiediate exigency, at
any rate, it proved more efficacious to cultivate the soil and
observe the turn of the seasons than to sacrifice to Demeter,


I

I


SCIENCE AND RELIGION 27

to keep one's powder dry than to put one's trast in God.
In the second place, as soon as men could breathe more
easily and indulge themselves more freely in the play of
their natural powers, they grew in idle curiosity. They
came, in other words, to observe, regardless of their hopes
and fears. Astronomy was probably the first science in
the modern sense, because the stars, at once conspicuous
and relatively removed from the theatre of action, were from
the beginning objects of an apathetic curiosity. Through
the ojjeration of these two motives, effects were divested
of their practical coloring, and causes of their friendly or
hostile intent. This did not mean that either effects or
causes lost their bearing on life, but only that that bearing
was for the purpose of knowledge eliminated as accidental.
Thus a physical substance has certain distinguishing prop-
erties by virtue of which it is either food or poison; and
celestial bodies compose certain configurations by virtue
of which man feels the light of day or the darkness of
night, the warmth of summer or the blight of winter. But
it is the mark of developed science that these properties
and configurations are recorded without reference to
the sequel, and in terms purged of the comment of
passion.

The development of a purely theoretical science has, as
is well known, immeasurably increased the contribution
of science to life. In this case, at least, the independence
of the theoretical activity is the principal condition of its
usefulness. The reason for this is not obscure. In so far
as knowledge is restricted to the service of existing needs,
it confirms the belief in the finality of these needs; but when
emancipated from such service, it becomes a source of new
needs — stimulating initiative, and opening a prospect of
unlimited growth. The application of knowledge is the
more varied and fruitful because reserved for the unfore-
seen occasion. It thus becomes the function of science to
accumulate that unappropriated surplus of intelligence
from which life derives its resourcefulness and strategy,


28


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


and by which it is enabled to cany on the constructive
enterprise of civilization.

§ 3. Religion, like science, is grounded in the need of
doing the right thing under the given circumstance: like
Reiiponand sciencc, it is 3 matter of adaptation. It arises
tho Motive ol from the need of doing the right thing on the
whole, in view of Ihe totality of circumstance —
from the need of arriving at a final adaptation. Rehgion
is the attempt to deal with headquarters, to obtain a hear-
ing at the highest court, some guarantee of the favor of the
over-ruling authority. As theoretical science advances
and the phenomena of nature are referred to proximate
causes, the ultimate causes retreat steadily into the back-
ground, and, gathered into one, become God as opposed to
nature. The duality of God and nature may from thence-
forth be characterized by any degree of separateness.
Where God is conceived transcendently, or independently
of his works, it is assumed that a man may save himself by
treating with God directly, giving no heed to the course of
events in the temporal world. Where, on the other hand,
God is conceived in terms of the order of nature and history,
as their immanent or over-arching unity, his favor may be
gained only by complete adjustment to the ways of this
world.

Thus religion, like science at its dawn, views the environ-
ment under the aspect of its bearing on life. The over-ruling
powers are known and judged by the good or evil which
they work. But whereas this is the primitive form of
science, in which the scientific motive is not as yet special-
ized and refined, it is the final form of religion. God is the
name for the over-ruling powers as sources of fortune. In
so far, and only in so far, as these powers arc regarded with
love or dismay, with hope or fear, do they constitute the
object of religion. Religion is as essentially a matter of
Ufe and passion, as is science in its developed form a matter
of theoretical detachment. So that science and religion
have come to be identified, not only with their respective


I


SCIENCE AND RELIGION

fonns I


29

objects, but with their respective
Science, the interest in the proximate causes of things,
becomes the unique example of theory; and religion, the
interest in the ultimate causes of things, the unique ex-
ample of belief.

§ 4. It is clear, however, that this correlation is arbitrary.
Theoretical science is eventually assimilated to life, and
„ finds expression in popular and applied science.

The Confusion , ,, '^ j .u ■ 1. ;■ /

of the Phiio- "> Other words, there is a belief concemmg
'^^'''tI^pT proximate causes. And similarly there is a
of a Purely place for the dispassionate theoretical study of
TlicQwtiai! ulttTnalt causes. In other words, as popular or

Philosophy ,, , . . , , '^.'^

applied science is related to pure science, so
religion is related to pure philosophy.

If this correlation indicates the proper place of philos-
ophy, then it must be recognized that the traditional
philosophy has reached no such clear separation of its
theoretical motive as has been reached, on its part,
by science. And it may be objected that the cases
are not parallel. There is a reason why the practical
motive should outweigh the theoretical in the examination
of ultimate causes. For it is undoubtedly the pressure of
practical necessity — the brevity of life, and the momen-
tousness of the issues mvolved ^ which in this case forces
a conclusion when the evidence must necessarily be in-
complete. Whereas in the field of science theory may
advance far beyond belief, accumulating an ever increas-
ing surplus of knowledge over practice, here the reverse
is the case. For the saving of his soul, a man must convert
theoretical probabilities into subjective certainties: he
must believe more than he knows.' In the conduct of his
worldly affairs he may live within his means, but in his
religion he must run into debt. Thus a strictly theoretical
conclusion respecting ultimate causes will always be more
limited and tentative than the corresponding belief. And
belief, with its greater positiveness, with its daring and its

I Cf. below, pp. 265-367, 345-347. 369-370.


30


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


ar of finality, will tend to obscure the cautious hypothesis
of theory, and to fix itself in the minds of men as the only
expression of the interest in ultimate causes. That for
this reason the work of the human intelligence tends to b«
divided between scientific theory concerning proximate
causes and the religious belief concerning ultimate causes,
cannot be disputed.

But it is evident that if life is served by a theoretical
detachment in the one case, the same will be true in the
other case. A rigorously theoretical philosophy, in which
ultimate causes are examined by the method of critical
analysis, in which the passions are repressed and the appli-
cation held ia reserve, affords the greatest promise of an
enlightened, and therefore effective, religion. For the virtue
of belief, whatever be its object, whether it be the particu-
lar inter-relations of the parts of nature, or the ground and
constitution of nature as a whole, is its Irulh. And the
speediest and most reliable access to truth lies in the spec-
ialization and rigorous exercise of the theoretical method.
No faith will be sound at the core which does not contain
within itself whatever theory is available. Doubtless faith
must overlap theory, as it must be more stable and con-
servative; but the method of faith cannot supersede or
confuse the method of theory, without corrupting its most
faithful servant. Strictly speaking, it is as important for
religion to promote the development of a rigorously theo-
retical philosophy, as it is for engineering to promote the
development of theoretical physics.

I 5. The present ambiguous position of philosophy is due
to the modem opposition of science and religion, and to
this habit of linking pure theory with science,
and ultimate questions with religion. Those
philosophers who are governed by the theo-
retical motive, and to whom philosophy is
first of all a disinterested attempt at exact
lomigDc knowledge, tend to identify it with science;

those on the other hand, with whom the subject-matter


I


I


The Subordina-
tion of SdcDcE
to Ethics uid
Kdi^on in
Andent uid
Mcdirvd


SCIENCE AND RELIGION


31


of philosophy is of paramount importance, whose chief
object of interest is the ultimate cause or world-ground,
tend to identify it with religion.

But the disjunction between science and religion is a
comparatively recent development. In ancient and me-
diaeval times it was largely prevented by the general accept-
ance of the method of teleology. The dominant categories
of Greek thought were forged in the Socratic age, and
expressed its characteristic humanism and moralism. The
Platonic theory of knowledge, adopted by Aristotle, con-
tinued by the Neo-Platonists, and bequeathed to Christian
scholasticism, was centred in the conception of the good.
To understand a thing was to see the good of U. ' In so far
as this theory of knowledge prevailed there was no inevit-
able opposition between religion and science, other than
the general opposition between tradition and enlightenment.
The method of religion — ■ the interpretation of nature for
life, was also the method of science. In the application,
in the use or value of objects, was found also iheir theoreti-
cal explanation. The basal science, the model of scientific
procedure, was not a physics which abstracted from life,
but an ethics which rationalized life. And where science
and religion employed the same method, philosophy was
not compelled to take sides. It could be at once an
extension of science, and the refinement of religion. Phi-
losophy was simply the sustained and systematic pursuit of
wisdom: the finishing of knowledge, as distinguished from
the fragmentariness of science; and the grounding of belief,
as distinguished from the careless superfidatity and com-
placent dogmatism of religion.

The Platonic theory of knowledge was both retained and
reinforced by Christianity. In Platonism, teleology had
been derived from ethics g-nd extended to religion; in
Christianity, it was originally derived from religion. But
there was in both the same priority of the fundamental
principle of life. Mediseva! thought, like ancient thought,

' See below, pp. 115, 167.


32


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


was biocentric or antkropocentric. Nature was accounted
for and explained in terms of its bearing on man. It was
grounded in the dispensation and providence of God with
reference to the well-being of his creatures. The perfection
of the ultimate cause, the beneficence of the creative design,
was held to afford the most truthful account of the course
of nature. In short, theology displaced ethics in the sys-
tem of knowledge. And with theology as the basal science,
it is evident that there was as yet no ground for a radical
difference between science and religion. Nor was there
any radical difference between either and philosophy.
That which theology understood by the light of revelation,
philosophy explored by the natural light of reason; while
between philosophy, and science in the narrower sense,
there was no difference save that between complete and
partial knowledge.

§ 6. So long as science was thus dominated by the cate-
gories of religion, philosophy suffered no embarrassing
The EntensioD necessity of taking sides. When this domina-
oisdcaceto tioH came to an end with the decline of schol-
Se™t™th astidsm, an attempt was made to keep the
and EiBhteeDih peace upon a new basis. Whereas the cate-
entuncs gorfes of religion had formerly been imposed

upon science, the categories of science, independently de-
rived, were now to be extended to religion. In the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries philosophy derived its
impetus from the new scientific movement, and consisted
primarily in the attempt so to generalize the method of
science as to enable it to afford a proof of the great tenets
of traditional belief. This common motive appears in
the otherwise widely contrasted tendencies of these two
centuries.

The Cartesian movement, which dominated the seven-
teenth century, was inspired by the rise of mathematical
physics. In mathematics Descartes found a clearness and
cogency in which the traditional philosophy was notably
lacking. It revealed to him something of the possibilities


I
I


SCIENCE AND RELIGION


33


of knowledge, if the natural intelligence could but be freed
from ulterior motives and from the heavy burden of accum-
ulated tradition. He was astonished "that foundations,
so strong and solid, should have had no loftier superstruc-
ture reared on them." ' Such a superstructure Descartes
and his followers essayed to rear, adopting the " analytical
method" from mathematics, and applying it to a meta-
physic of God and the soul. This attempt culminated in
the system of Spinoza,' with its mathematical terminology,
its deductive order, its rigorous suppression of anthropo-
morphism, and its conversion of God into the ultimate and
indifferent Necessity.

The Baconian movement, which began coinddently with
the Cartesian movement, but did not assume the ascend-
ancy until the following century, was inspired by the rise
of empirical and experimental science. Bacon expressed
the spirit of discovery — the significance of Galileo's tele-
scope rather than of his analytical laws of motion. Hence
the movement which emanated from Bacon employed the
method of observation rather than the method of mathe-
matical deduction. Locke,* to whom the movement owed
its ascendancy in the eighteenth century, was associated
with the experimental physicists of his day, and was sus-
picious of a- priori necessities. He proposed to pursue
"the plain historical method." But neither Locke, nor •
the Deists who followed him, had any doubt of the possi-
bility of establishing the truths of religion by the method
of science. Christianity was not only "not mysterious,"
but was proved beyond reasonable doubt by empirical
evidence. God was a simple inference from effect to
cause; from the existence of nature to the existence of its
creator, and from the contrivances of nature to the intel-
ligence of its creator.

During these two centuries, then, there was no impassable


k


> Discomse on Method, tnuis. by Veitcb, p. 8,
» 16J1-1677-
• 1633-1704.


34


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


gulf between science and religion, and no dilemma for philos-
ophy. The philosopher was simply one who apphed the
method of science to the subject-matter of reUgion. Science
was opposed to religion only in so far as it was narrow; and
religion was opposed to science only in so far as it was un-
reasoning. It was the office of the philosopher to expand
the scope of reason, or to justify faith by enlightenment.

§ 7. The transition from the thought of ancient and
The Rupture mcdiieval times to that of the seventeenth
between sdence and eighteenth centuries, had been marked by
Mdthe''^'^' ^^ rejection of anthropomorphism. The cen-
DUemmi tring of the system of knowledge in ethics
of PhUo»op y ^^^ religion had been seen to involve an ini-
tial dogma, which both destroyed the cogency of knowledge
and confined it within narrow bounds. In declaring its inde-
pendence, the science of the Renaissance had represented
the ideal of disinterested knowledge, the acknowledg-
ment of necessities and facts without reference to the
bias of life. Physics had become the rallying-point of a
new army for the conquest of the unknown. This new
campaign had presupposed the possibility of extending the
conquest to the great problems of religion. Faith and
authority had been renounced only in the sure prospect of
getting a more valid title to their objects.

But the close of the eighteenth century was marked by
a new crisis, due to the failure of this attempt to extend
physics to religion, and precipitated by the charge, made
by the most eminent philosophers of the day, that the f;iil-
ure was necessary and hopeless. In England, David Hume '
argued the ambiguity and inconclusiveness of the inference
from nature to God, showing that such natural causes as
can be verified by observation fail utterly to satisfy the
demands of religion. On the Continent, Immanuel Kant *


I


' 1711-1776.

■ 1714-1S04. The ratiooalistic tdigion af Spintua. with its entire aban-
donment of teleology, had already been rejected by popular thought, as
CMcntialty irreligious. Cf. below pp. 115-117, 168,


SCIENCE AND RELIGION


35


confirmed the criticism of Hume, and added to it the
destruction of the venerable and feeble Cartesianism of
his day; contending that to deduce God from the idea
or definition merely, must fail to establish his existence.
In other words, the method of empirical science relying
on sensible fact, and the method of exact science re-
lying on mathematical or quasi-mathematical concepts,
had alike failed to justify religion. There resulted a
new division of thought, the division broadly charac-
teristic of the nineteenth century, between the party of
science and the party of religion. And at the same
time philosophy was confronted with the dilemma which
has made its present position so ambiguous. Apparently
compelled to choose between science and religion, it
has itself divided into two parties: those who have fol-
lowed science for the sake of its theoretical motive, and
those who have followed religion on account of its
subject-matter.

The division between the scientific philosophers and the
religious philosophers was further accentuated by the
passing of a certain type of thinker. The great scientists
and the great speculative metaphysicians of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries were in many instances the same
individuals. Such was the case, for example, with Des-
cartes, Hobbes, Leibniz, and even Kant. M. Abel Rey,
in La Philosophic Moderne, writes: "AH the great phi-
losophers were remarkable savants, and the great savant
never disdained to philosophize. So that one may regard
as peculiar and characteristic the complete separation
which existed for a time in the nineteenth century,
not between the investigations (this is legitimate and
necessary), but between the investigators." ' And the rea-
son for this lay, as M. Rey points out, not only in the move-
ment of ideas which has just been described, but also in
the circumstance that science had become so vast in bulk
as to exceed the capacity of any single individual. The


Pbilosophy


.36 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

man of all science was replaced by the man of one science,
confident of his ground in proportion to the narrowness of
his field, and suspicious of all attempts to deal with ulti-
mates or finalities. Unless the philosopher was himself
to become a specialist, and confine himself to the categories
of one science, he seemed in very self-defense to be com-
pelled to adopt an independent method of his own; a
method opposed, not to one science in particular, but to
science as a whole. And he found that method in religion,
already united with the proper philosophical subject-
matter.

§ 8. Professor Entile Boutroux sums up the admirable
Introduction to his Science et Religion dans la Philosaplne
„ . ., Contemporaine, as follows: "Science and Re-

TheSaenlific ,..,,, - . , .

PhUosophy and Iigion had no longer, as with the modem
rationalists, a common surety — reason: each
of them absolute in its own way, they were
distinct at every point, as were, according to the reigning
psychology, the two faculties of the soul, intellect and feel-
ing, to which respectively they corresponded. Thanks to
this mutual independence, they could find themselves
together in one and the same consciousness; they subsisted
there, side by side, like two impenetrable material atoms in
spadal juxtaposition. They had agreed explicitly or tacitly
to abstain from scrutinizing one another's principles.
Mutual respect for their established positions, and thereby
security and liberty for each ^ such was the device of
the period." ' Corresponding to this dualistic fashion
of thought, there appeared in the course of the last
century the scientific philosophy, or positivism, and the
religious philosophy, or romanticism.' Each of these types
of philosophy was connected with one of the great destroy-

' p. 35. This book has recently been translated into English by
J. Nield. Ci. the Introduction, passim.

■ I am tmng this tenn to mean & philosophy in which the spiritual ground
Of centre o( things Is potiulaitd. or accepted by an act of faith. It is the
philosophy in which the motive of religious belief is allowed to dominate.
Cf. below, pp. 153-154.


SCIENCE AND RELIGION


! of the philosophy of the [


37

- positivism with Hume,
and romanticism with Kant.

Hume's criticism was mimitigated. It placed the
objects of religious interest absolutely beyond the range
of reason. The book of divinity, since it consists neither
of "abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number,"
nor of "experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact
and existence," must be committed to the flames: "for it
can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion." ' Comte,
who followed a century later, gave to posiUvism a more
constructive and hopeful turn, extending to mankind the
prospect of the limitless growth of science, and the up-
building of civilization through the progressive conquest
of nature and improvement of man. But Comte's con-
demnation of the former religious metaphysics was, if
possible, more severe than that of Hume, for he correlated
it with the infancy and childhood of the mind. Finally,
with Herbert Spencer, the metaphysics of former times was
formally tried, convicted, and banished to the realm of the
'Unknowable.' The scientist, whether mathematician or
experimentalist, was left in absolute possession of the
sources of enlightenment; he became not only the coa-
sulting engineer, but oracle and wiseman as well.

With Kant, on the other hand, the negation of the older
rationalism paved the way for a philosophy of faith.
Although positive knowledge was restricted to the hie-
rarchy of the physical sciences, the reason was left in posses-
sion of the necessary and valid ideal of the ' Unconditioned ' ;
while God, Freedom, and Immortality, the objects of
religion, found their ground in the moral will. Although
they might no longer be judged true, according to the
canons of theory, they must be believed for the deeper and
more authoritative purposes of life. This provision of the
Kantian critique is the prototype of romanticism, the
philosophy dictated by religion. Romanticism did not

< Hume: Enquiry cotireming the Human Undcntandint (1749), Selby-
Bigge's edition, p. 16^.


38 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

seek, like the philosophy of the previous centuries, to
justify the articles of faith by the procedure of science,
but to justify the altitude of faith, and clothe it with
authority in its own right. Romanticism involved, there-
fore, no conversion of the passionate terms of religion into
the dispassionate terras of theory; it reaffirmed the claims
of religion in the spirit ajid language of religion, tranffonn-
ing them only in so far as was necessary to give them unity
and conscious expression.

§ 9. In positivism and romanticism the two motives of
philosophy became sharply separated and opposed. Posi-
tivism is philosophy driven into the camp of
idS"°T^ science by loyalty to the standards of exact
Riworpresnia- research; romanticism is philosophy merged
Ruiisnf '*'* '"*'* religion through its interest in the same
ultimate questions. These two tendencies de-
termined the course of philosophy in the nineteenth century ;
and they are represented today by naturalism and idealism
respectively. In ' naturalism,' the positivistic tendency de-
velops in the direction of a systematic materialism, or
in the direction of a more refined criticism of scientific
concepts. In 'idealism,' the romantic tendency amplifies
and reinforces the theory of knowledge upon which it must
rest its case — the theory of the priority of the forms and
ideals of the cognitive consciousness. But the difference
between naturalism and idealism, like that between science
and religion, with which they are respectively correlated,
lies not so much in the disagreement of theory as in an
opposition of attitude and method. The exponent of
naturalism is governed by that reserve and apathy which
belong to the scientist's code of honor; the idealist carries
into his philosophy all the importunity and high aspiration
of life. For him "the teleological standpoint, that of inner
meaning or significance," is "the standpoint of philosophy
itself." '

' E. Albee; "The Present Meuung of Idealism," PhUosophkal Review,
VoJ. XVra, 1909.


I


i


SCIENCE AND RELIGION 39

To naturalism and idealism have latterly been added
' pragmatism ' and the new ' realism.' Whether these more
recent tendencies represent the philosophy " qui commence,"
and naturalism and idealism the philosophy "quifinil," will
be certainly known only by those of a later generation. At
present they enjoy no such prestige as is enjoyed by their
rivals. Naturalism derives credit from the triumphs of
science, idealism from the loyalties and hopes of religion.
Both pragmatism and realism, furthermore, have begun
as revolts, and the very vigor of their protest testifies to
the strength of the resistance which they must overcome.
But there can be no doubt of their virility, and of their
capacity for growth.

Pragmatism and realism are agreed in opposing both
the narrowness of naturalism and the extravagance of
idealism. Both seek, to unite the empirical temper of the
former with the latter's recognition of problems that lie
outside the field of the positive sciences. They accept 1
neither the finality of physical fact nor the validity of the '
ideal of the absolute. Their differences are scarcely less
striking than their agreement, and may in the end drive
them far apart. Pragmatism is primarily concerned to
dispute the monistic and transcendental elements of ideal-
ism, and to construe life and thought in terms of that
human life and thought that may be brought directly under
observation, and studied without resort to dialectic. But
life and thought remain the centra! topic of inquiry,
and tend without sufficient warrant to usurp the centre
of being. In short, pragmatism is never far removed
from that dogmatic anthropomorphism, that instinctive
or arbitrary adoption of the standpoint of practical belief,
that is so central a motive in idealism. Realism, on the
other hand, reacts not only against absolutism, but
against anthropomorphism as well. Realism departs
more radically from idealism than does pragmatism.
Were the dilemma a real one, pragmatism would find
more in common with idealism, and reahsm with natu-


40


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


ralism.' For realism, like naturalism, detaches itself from
life, and attempts to see things in their native colors
through a transparent medium. But the dilemma is un-
necessary. It proves possible to be both empirical and
rigorous after the manner of science, and also emancipated
from exclusive regard for physical fact.

And it is this possibility that defines the opportunity of
realism. There are exact methods other than those of
manual experimentation; there are other entities than
bodies; and other types of relation and determination
than those of physics. There is room, as we have seen, for
a philosophy that shall search beyond the limits of science
for the solution of those problems which underlie religious
faith. Philosophy is rightly held responsible for the solu-
tion of these problems; if not in the form of verified cer-
tainty, then at least in the form of the most reasonable
probability. But as in the case of science, so here also,
that theory will best serve life which abstracts from life.
The profit of religion, like the success of any worldly enter-
prise, is conditioned by the truth of the presuppositions,
the correctness of the adaptation, on which it proceeds.
What nature will not tolerate, nature cannot be made to
tolerate through any sheer assumption of superiority.
Hence to cherish illusions is to buy a subjective satisfaction
at the cost of real failure. To know the worst, if such it
be, is as important as to know the best; and incomparably
more important than to dream the best. Religion is no
exception to the rule that man conquers his environment,
and moulds it into good, through forgetting his fears and
renouncing his hopes, until he shall have disciplined him-
self to see coolly and steadily. For what he then sees
becomes thereafter the means through which his fears are
banished and his hopes fulfilled. It is necessary that
human passions should be expressed, but their expression
is not the function of philosophy. It is necessary to instruct

' Thus Bergson the pragmatisl has much in ci
ideallim; tnd the realist, B. Russell, approaches
345-347-


SCIENCE AND RELIGION 4 1

human passions, to illuminate and guide them by knowl-
edge. But even this is not the first fimction of philosophy.
For the philosopher's is the prior task of seeking that
knowledge itself from which the passions may derive their
light and guidance.


PART II


NATURALISM


CHAPTER III
TEE SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE

§ I. By naturalism is meant the philosophical generaliza>
tion of science — the application of the theories of science
NaturaUsmaod to the problems of philosophy. Both philos-
Naiurai sdcnce gphy and Science have, as we have seen, a
permanent and institutional character. Each has its own
traditions, its own classic authorities, and its own dev-
otees. But naturalism proposes to make the institution
o( science serve also as the institution of philosophy.
This attempted unification of knowledge is perennial.
Each epoch of European thought has had its characteristic
variety of naturalism; in which its favorite scientific
theories have been used to satisfy its peculiar philosophi-
cal needs. Thus the atomic theory of the ancients, the
mechanical theory of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen-
turies, and the 'energetics' of more recent times, have
each in turn been presented in the form of a Wellatt-
sckauung or general view of life.

The scientist proper, the man of special research, becomes
a naturalistic philosopher only when he acts in a new
capacity. As scientist, in the strict sense, he is non-com-
mittal with reference to philosophical problems. He adopts
and employs a technique which is authorized by the con-
sensus of experts within his own field. His problems are
the unsolved problems of his forerunners and fellow-
workers; his method, a variation or refinement of methods
which have already proved fruitful. He is not troubled
by the supposed paradoxes of space and time, or by such
problems as the nature of causality, the unity of the
world, and the meaning of truth. He moves, in short,
within intellectual limits which he does not question, and


46 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of which he may be even unconscious. But a scientist is
also a man, and hence may readily become a philosopher
as well. In hours of unprofessional meditation, his mind
may turn to those more ultimate problems which are per-
petually pressing for solution. And he may then assert
that the solution of these problems lies in the application
of the discoveries of science. Such an assertion he can-
not prove in his laboratory; he can justify it only after
the manner of the philosopher. The principal source of
naturalism hes in this disposition of scientists, not infre-
quently men of weight, to assume the rflle of philosophers,
and to carry with them into the forum of philosophy the
traditions and hypotheses with which they are already
familiar.

There is a less evident, though scarcely less important,
source of naturalism in the popularization of science. When
science is diffused, and transmuted into the form of common
sense, it is almost invariably merged with philosophy. As
a rule it is not substituted for theories emanating from philo-
sophical sources, but is held along with them. Common
sense has no nice regard for the spheres of the several
branches of knowledge, and no repugnance whatsoever to
contradictions. The mechanical and the spiritual theories
of man, or the hypothesis of cosmic evolution and of divine
creation, are accepted in the same sense and accorded equal
weight; the one being learned from popular science, and
the other from the pulpit. There is, furthermore, as we
shall presently see, a peculiar readiness on the part of the
vulgar mind to fall in with the naturalistic view of things,
and to regard it as prior to all other views. For the nat-
uralistic view is, in a certain respect, the same as the
'practical' view, and has a source in organic habit inde-
pendently of the diffusion of science.

§ 2. Since naturalism is but science in the rflle of
The PrMtige philosophy, it has during the last century
oi sdeocc shared the unusual prestige which science has
acquired. Sdence has come to stir the imagination of


I
I


SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE


47


men to a degree that is unparalleled. This is due, in
part, to the fact that every member of a civilized com-
munity uses the results of science, and credits science
with them. Science is credited, and justly credited, with
the enonnous increase of convenience, comfort, and effi-
ciency, which human life has in the last century enjoyed.
Transportation, manufacturing, hygiene, every activity
employing physical means, has been revolutionized. And
this fact is brought home to every man in his daily occu-
pations. The telephone with which he orders his supplies,
the trolley-car or automobile which he takes to his place of
business, the elevator with which he rises swiftly to the top
of a towering structure of steel — these, and a hundred like
items, testify perpetually to the glory of science.

Even more impressive to the popular mind than the
applications of science, are its discoveries and inventions —
its perpetual novelties. Here is an enterprise whose steady
advance can be measured. Knowledge is added to knowl-
edge; and every increment opens new prospects of increase.
The miracles of yesterday are the commonplaces of today.
Science thus commands attention; it stirs the blood; it
even makes news!

But there is a deeper reason for the appeal of science to
the popular mind. The recent advancement of sdence
has fulfilled the Baconian prophecy, of power through
knowledge. Nature has lost its terrors. It has submitted
to the yoke of human interests, and been transformed from
wilderness into civilization. The brilliancy of scientific
achievement has given man a sense of proprietorship in
this world; it has transformed the motive of life from bare
preservation to conquest. And so frequently has science
overcome the accepted limitations of practical achieve-
ment, and disclosed possibilities previously unsuspected,
that man now greets the future with a new and unboimded
hopefulness. Indeed this faith in the power of life to
establish and magnify itself through the progressive mas-
tery of its environment, is the most significant religious


48 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

idea of modem times. And through its relation to this
idea science has been justly exalted.

There is a further explanation of the prestige of science,
and of naturalism as well, in the distinction and popularity
of scientific writers. The philosophical utterances of Spen-
cer, Darwin, Huxley, Tyndal!, Du Bois-Reymond, Lord
Kelvin, Ostwald, Haecke!, Arrhenius and others, have ob-
tained a publicity only very rarely enjoyed by the recog-
nized leaders of philosophy proper. The same difference
obtains between the lesser scientists and the lesser philos-
ophers. And this is not due to the accident of individual
genius, style, or manner. For the popular mind, scientific
ideas have an immediate intelligibility and a prima facie
probability, which philosophical ideas have not. If we
can explain this fact we shall have advanced tar in the
direction of a clearer understanding of what science is.

§ 3. There is a distinction made by logicians between
the denotation and the connotation of terms. A term is said

^ to 'denote' certain concrete individuals, and

The Agreemcnl , , . • rr.t t

between sdence to 'connotc' Certain properUes. Thus the
■nd Comnwo term 'planet' denotes Neptune, Jupiter, etc.,
and connotes the property or relation of ' satel-
lite to the sun.' The instances of a term constitute its
denotation; the meaning or definition of a term, its conno-
tation. Now it is a significant fact that the denotation of
scientific terms is peculiarly clear or uttambiguous to com-
mon sense. The instances of science are readily identified;
one knows what the scientist is talking about. We ain
follow his eye to the natural locality which he is observ-
ing, or take into our hands the natural body with which
he is experimenting. When the philosopher, on the other
hand, discourses on the true, the beautiful, and the good,
we do not know where to turn. If his face were to assume
a rapt expression, and we were sentimentally or mystically
inclined, we should feel moved or exalted. For we take
such things in good part when seers and poets utter them.
Or were his eye to twinkle, we should laugh with him —


I


SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE


49


and feel relieved. But ordinarily the philosopher looks
as secular aod literal as any scientist; and in proportion
to the hardness of our hearts, we are contemptuous or
embarrassed. The scientist alone seems to suit the word
to the mood of serious discourse. There is evidently a
tacit understanding between him and common sense which,
in the case of the philosopher, is wholly lacking. Science
speaks in the native tongue of common sense; philosophy
in unfamihar accents that shock and mystify.

The explanation of this lies in the fact that science and
common sense agree in unconsciously accepting a classification
or map of experience which it is the business of philosophy
consciously to criticise. This map or classification is some-
times referred to as 'the natural world-order.' In this
order, a tiring is a body, and the world is the spacial field
and temporal sequence of bodily events. The instance, case,
example, which a word denotes, is always some individual
body or group of bodies — ■ occurring somewhere, at some
time, and capable of being identified beyond doubt by
gesture or manipulation. To think in these terms is the
habit of common sense, and the method of science.

The strength of this habit is illustrated by the efforts of
the mind to deal with things the corporeal character of
which is expressly denied. An almost irresistible propen-
sity inclines the imagination to regard God, spirit though
he be, as having a place in the heavens, whither at death
the soul may resort. The soul itself, by definition the
antithesis of body, is nevertheless commonly imagined as a
diaphaaous or subtle body-within-a-body, moving with the
mortal body before death, and independently of it after
death. Similarly, the attempt at dear demonstration al-
most invariably impels one to the use of spacial diagrams.
And the spacial figure is so interwoven in ordinary speech
as to be well-nigh ineradicable. A great difference is a
'wide' difference, the better is the 'superior' or 'higher,*
the reliable is the 'solid,' and the distinct the 'tangible.'

This habit of thought and speech is not accidental on


50


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


the part of common sense, nor reprehensible on the part.l

of science. For it is the primary function of the human I
mind to discriminate and relate bodies. This function is |
first in order of practical importance. The human mind,
like the heart and lungs, is an organ, calculated to assist 1
the adaptation of one body to an environment of other
bodies. This function with reference to other bodies is
not only the mind's original function, but remains, during
a man's natural lifetime, its most indispensable function.
"Our intelligence, as it leaves the hands of nature," says
Bergson, "has for its chief object the unorganized solid.
When we pass in review the intellectual functions, we see
that the intellect is never quite at its ease, never entirely
at home, except when it is working upon inert matter, more
particularly among solids . . . where our action finds its
fulcrum, and our industry its tools." ' Intelligence is first
of all the attentive discrimination of bodies, and a respon-
Mveness to their proximity, motion, or change of property.
And when life becomes less preoccupied with its own
preservation and more largely engaged in constructive
enterprises, it is on its control of its bodily environment
that it mainly relies both for security and for power.
Science elaborates and perfects this form of intelligence.
Through science it becomes methodical and exact. The use
of speech and record makes it an institution supported and
utilized by society as a whole; its specialization and ex-
pansion beyond the demands of present exigencies renders
it a means of resourcefulness and initiative.

Common sense and science (the one unconsciously, the
other with an increasing degree of consciousness) thus
move within the same limits. They share the same unre-
flective classification of experience, employ the same axes
of reference, have the same notion of an individual thing.
This is thought's original sin, its inertia and line of least
resistance. It is responsible for the sympathy between
common sense and science; and for the somewhat strained

■ Creative Evolulum, Uuns. by A. Mitchell, pp. XS3"'S4, •*■


SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE


51


relations between both of these and philosophy, whose busi-
ness it has ever been to remind them that their favorite
assumption is uncritical and dogmatic.

§ 4. We must now attempt a more careful account of
that common sense notion oj a thing, which is the subject-
The properties matter to which science addresses itself, and
of Bodies which its terms denote. I have as yet .but

roughly indicated it by the terms 'body' and 'physical
event.' It is not to be expected that either common sense
or science should analyze this notion. They analyze one
body into lesser bodies, visible bodies into invisible bodies;
they distinguish and classify bodies; but they do not
attempt to enumerate the generic bodily properties. This is a
philosophical task which we must undertake for ourselves.

In describing the unambiguous denotation of the terms
of science, I have alluded to gesture and manipulation as
means of identification. A body can always be pointed to,
or one can 'lay one's hand on it.' Eliminating the acci-
dental human reference, this jneans that a body has local-
ity, or spacial position. It is somewhere. But when we
say 'it is somewhere,' we indicate that the body does not
consist of the position alone. There is sometHng which
is at the position, or bears to the position the relation of
'occupancy.'' Again, it b essential to bodies that they
have a history, and thus occupy time as well as space. They
are somewhere at some lirru:. The relation of that which
occupies space and time, to its spadal and temporal por-
tions, may be either of two kinds. The spacial position
may remain the same while the temporal position varies,
in which case we speak of a body's being at rest; or the
spacial position may vary continuously as the time varies
continuously, in which case we speak of motion.^ Finally,
except in the hypothetical case of material points, bodies

t The best account of the relation of space, time, body, and motion ii
to be found in B. Russell's writings. Cf. "Is Position in Time and Space
Absolute or Relalive?"ifi.id, N.S., Vol. X. 1901; and PrinetpUs 0/ Uatii«-


r, Ch. U, LIII, LIV.
* Foi tbe """'"g of


,' d. Russell, op. cU., Cfa. XXnt,


52


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


always occupy several positions simultaneously, and ac-
cordingly possess spadal extension and figure.

There is a certain convenience in so distinguishing 'body'
and ' matter ' as to use the term ' body ' to mean the distinct
individuals of the genus ' matter.' A body is ordinarily
regarded as that which moves as a unit; as whatever por-
tion of matter may maintain the mutual positions of its
parts unchanged, while their relations to other positions are
changed. It is this capacity of an extended unit to be
dislocated from its context, which is ordinarily regarded as
defining its boundaries. And its identity would then be
regarded as unaltered so long as this independence of in-
ternal on external relations continued. It is not evident,
however, that the possibility of motion is necessary for the
definition of an individual body. It is strictly necessary
only that a region of space should be marked by some dis-
tinguishing character that remains unchanged through time.
Matter, or physical being, on the other hand, would mean
any complex containing something occupying both space
and time. That which occupies space and time is indifferent;
it is the space-time occupancy that constitutes its material
or physical character.' Matter is commonly used also in a
narrower but not incompatible sense, to exclude the strictly
spadal and temporal properties. In this sense, matter would
mean only whatever occupies the space and time, and not
the whole complex.

Summarily expressed, then, we may say that 'physical*
(bodily or material) connotes two sets of properties: spadal
and temporal properties on the one hand; and, on the
other hand, space-time-filling properties.* The former are
such as latitude and longitude, shape, date, and motion;
the latter such as color, temperature, and sound. The

I II will, I think, be generally agreed Uwt neither ' hardness ' nor even
' impenetrability ' is regarded by modem science ils an essential property
of matter. CI. Sir Oliver Lodge: Life and MaUer, pp. 34-34,

■ I do not mention the more general logical, arithinetical and algebraic
properties, such as 'order.' 'number,' etc. because these are not distiitc-
tmly physical. See below, pp. 108-109, j'o-j".


I


SCOtC AW MFfHOn OF SOS9CE.


53


f onner msy be Bid to be Ae i

ties, beczDae die httcT dam Ofv pkynol c

thdr Fdation to Oc koMr. It trJwa that pineal

events — tbeiniMwfatrsrfiJBct-Matta-rfphyrialsdeaoe,

are of two genetal tfpe& tWsv is, fint, Ac dBage of ^nr

dal-tempaa] pi gp er tie s; aad secoad, tlK daageof ^aoe-

of state. Tliese evcatt it h tbe taA ef adence to "t****
§5. la wfau seaae docs sdcBoe seek to 'cspUa*?
pTpiaTiatifM is sopposed to sapply an ansoer to the qM9-
g. i j....L». tioo "Wby?" But tins mtenogattve pcanouu
uidpaci%aiB si^gests sevoal qnestians wfaicfa, in tbe course
" cf the drr tk pmept td sdeoce, have pr[>\'vd

inelevaiit to its special interest. For many miitds, and,
during a comideiable period, even bx the scientific mind,
the deinaad for fiplaaatton has been satis&ed by tbe refer-
ence of an event to a ^tner, regarded as sufficient to pn>>
duce it. Thus before Galileo's time, terrestrial motioQS
were accounted for by attributing them to powers of
"gravity" and "le^itj'." And amUarly Kepler explained
planetarj- motions by attributing them to celestial spirits.*
It seemed necessary to pro\-ide an agency having a capacity
for effort as great as. or greater than, the effect; and imme-
diately present to the effect, as the soul is present to the
body it moves. But Galileo and Kepler ha\'e contributed
to the advancement of science only because they ha\*e
added to such explanation as this, an exact accouttl 0/
the process or form of terrestrial and planetary motions.
Just how do bodies fall and planets move? This is the
question which for sdentihc purposes must be answered ;
and only such answers have been incorporated into the
growing body of scientific knowledge. Who or what moves
bodies, in the sense of agency or potency, is for scientific
purposes a negligible question; attempts to answer it
have been, in the course of the development of science,
not disproved, but disregarded.
■ Whewdl: Bislery q/ lit Inductive Scientes, tintd cdiiioa,Vo\. I, p. 315.


54


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


And the same is true of another sense of the interrogative
'why.' It is not infrequently taken to mean, "To what
end?" "For what good?" Thus, we are said to 'under-
stand' the beneficent works of nature, but to 'see no
reason' for vermin, disease, and crime. Or, if we do seek
a reason, we find it in some indirect beneficence that may
be attributed to these things, despite appearances. This
is the teleological or moral type of explanation. It appears
in the ancient regard for 'perfect' numbers and forms, in
the Platonic principle of the Good, and in the Christian
notion of Providence. But this species of explanation, too,
has been not disproved, but progressively disregarded by
science. It has come to be the recognized aim of science to
formulate what happens, whether for better or for worse;
leaving out of account, as an extra-scientific concern,
whatever bearing it may have on interest.'

It appears, in other words, that the common distinc-
tion between explanation and 'mere description' will not
strictly hold in the case of scientific procedure. For
science, to explain is to describe — provided only that the
description satisfies certain conditions.'

§ 6. There are two specific conditions which description
must fulfil, if it is to be sufficient in the scientific sense. In
Conditions of '^^ ^^^ place, scientific description must reveal
Sdentific De- Ifie general and constant features of its subject-
*^^'"' matter. It is a truism that thought tends to

unify. The bare quale of phenomena, their peculiar
individuality, gives way to certain underljing identities.
Or, since natural science deals primarily with changes,
bare novelty gives way to an underlying permanence. In
other words, scientific thought is interested in what is the
same, despite difference, or in what persists, despite change.*

• For Ihis purely thearttical motive in aeienee, cf. above, pp. 3$-7i.
'Cf. E. Mach: "The Economical Nature of Physical Inquiry" in hii

Pepiiiar Sctenlific Lectures, trans, by T. J. McCormack, p, i86.

* As we shall presently see. thU does not mean that science Torces identity
and permanence upon an alien chaos or flux, but only that science is inter-
ested in laying bare what identity and petmaoence is there.


SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE


55


Furthennore, science is interested in relating the difference
to the identity, and the change to the permanence; showing,
so far as possible, that the former is a determinate variation
of the latter.

And this brings us to the second condition which scien-
tific description must fulfil. It must be analytical or exact m
its final form. This does not mean imposing such a form
upon nature arbitrarily. Bodies, as we have seen, are
primarily spacial and temporal, and both space and time
possess what is called 'extensive' magnitude, such as
'ntmiber,' 'length,' 'breadth,' 'volume,' 'interval,' etc.
Furthermore, the space-time-filling properties of bodies
have a form of magnitude called 'intensive' magnitude,
such as 'intensity of light,' 'degree of temperature,' etc.
Changes of magnitude, whether extensive or intensive, can
be exactly described only in mathematical terms. And
underlying the strictly quantitative characters of bodies
are certain more abstract characters, such as 'relation,'
"order,* 'continuity,' an exact description of which leads
likewise to a mathematical or logical formulation. Where
such descriptions have been obtained, as in the case of
physics, we speak of 'exact science.' And such science
serves as the model of scientific procedure in general.

Scientific description, then, is governed by two motives,
on the one hand, unity, parsimony, or simplicity, the
reduction of variety and change to as few terms as pos-
sible; and, on the other hand, exact formulation. When
a scientific description satisfying these conditions is ex-
perimentally verified, it is said to be a law. And it is
certain that nothing more is required for purposes of
scientific explanation than the discovery oftlie law. Whether
this is a sign of the degeneracy of science, or of its logical
refinement, it will be our task presently to inquire,' But
we shall be better prepared to raise this question, and we
shall better understand what has gone before, if we now
turn to a brief examination of certain samples of scientific

' Sec below, pp. 9j-ioa


Illuilrations □(
Sdcntific
Method.
Galilm's Con-
ception of Ac-
celerslioD


56 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

procedure. The philosophical interpretation of science
turns not so much upon special scientific laws, as upon the
general character common to all scientific laws. And
this character is most evident in the case of certain mechani-
cal laws, which are at the same time relatively simple and
relatively fundamental. I shall therefore attempt to show
briefly what is meant by ' acceleration,' ' mass,' ' gravitation,'
and ' energy,' in relation to the empirical facts which they
are intended to describe.

§ 7. It has been said that modem science came "down
from heaven to earth along the inclined plane of Gali-
leo."' Galileo's imjwrtance lies not only in his spe-
cific contributions to mechanics, but in the example of

his method — the analytical description of '^
motion. In order to understand the concept
of acceleralion, which Galileo employed for
the description of a body's fall to the earth,
let us begin with the simpler concepts which
it imphes. Motion, as we have seen, means a continu-
ous change of place through a period (also continuous)
of time. In other words, a body is said to move when
a certain constant space- time-filling property is corre-
lated with a continuously varj-ing distance (d), measured
from the point of origin, and a continuously varying
period (l), measured from the moment of origin. The
scientist, seeking to disco\'er constancy even where it does
not at first appear, and to relate the constancy to the
variability, is led to conceive of a constant proporlion among
these variables. It may be, e.g., that whereas d and t
change, the fraction d/t remains the same. In other words,
whereas the distance and the time vary severally, it may be
that the ratio, 'velocity' {v), is uniform. This does not

'Bergson: Creative Evolution, trans, by A. Mitchell, p. 33S' The
best »ceount of Galileo's services lo science is to be found in Math's
Science of Mechanics (translated by T. J, McCormack). This book,
W- Oatwald's Natural Philosophy, trans, by T. Seltzer, and K. Pearson's
Grammar of Science, may be consulted for a more detailed statement of
■dentific


I


SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE


57


happen to be the case with freely falling bodies. Experi-
ment shows that even v varies. But the same procedure en-
abled Gahleo to define a more complex ratio, v/l, or the rate
of increase of velocity; and this ratio, called ' acceleration/
Galileo's experiments showed to be a constant. In other
words, v/t = g, where g is the so-called constant of ' gravity,'
that is, of acceleration at a given place on the earth's surface.

Now in this elementary mechanical conception of uniform
acceleration, appear all the most essential principles of
exact science. It is a description of motion, because it
simply records the behavior of the falling body, and does
not seek further to account for or Justify it. It is an
analylical description, because it expresses motion as a
relation of the terms, such as d, t, etc.. into which it can
be analyzed. It is an exact description, because the terms
and relations are mathematically formulated. And it is a
simplijicalion and unification of phenomena, because it
has discovered a constancy or identity underlying bare
differences. As we proceed to more complex concepts we
shall not, I think, meet with any new principles of method
as fundamental as these.

§8. Galileo's constant of acceleration describes bodies
falling to the earlh at a given place. The earth is taken as a
The Conception Unique individual, and the difference between
of Mass terrestial and celestial motions is left unrelieved.

But is it not possible to regard the earth as a special case
of some more general concept? Galileo regarded accelera-
tion as the evidence of ' force." The fact that bodies moving
in relation to the earth are accelerated to it in a fixed
measure, can be expressed by saying that the earth exerts
a fixed force upon other bodies. But why should not other
bodies also, in different but determinable degrees, exert
force, that is, induce accelerations in their neighbors? In
other words, why should force not be regarded as a general
property of bodies, and g. or the acceleration referred to
the earth, as only a special value of this property? It
would then follow that the falling body would exert force


SS PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

on, or induce acceleration in, the earth; and that the earth
would sustain like relations with other celestial bodies.
There would then be a quantity possessed by every body,
which would be the ratio of the acceleration it induced
in another body to the acceleration which the other in-
duced in it. Thus bodies Q' and ^ being accelerated
towards one another, there would be a ratio,

acceleration of Q' to Q'

acceleration of Q" to Q*
This is the mass of (>' relatively to Q' as a standard, and
so far as the motions of Q' as a. unit are concerned, it is
a constant.

Mass, in other words, is the fixed ratio of acceleration
which a body possesses in relation to each other body
or to some standard body. In the Newtonian mechanics
this generalization of Galileo's conception is finally extended
to the determination of the actual accelerations of any two
bodies, in terms of their masses (m,m'), their distance (r),
and a fixed number (c), the so-called constant of gravita-
tion. The formula for gravitation is thus expressed,

By the aid of the principle of the parallelogram of
forces, which makes it possible to analyze the present
orbits of the stars into component rectilinear motions, this
formula brings celestial as well as terrestrial motions into
one system, in which every body or configuration of bodies
possesses an amount of motion exactly calculable in terms
of the balance of the system. And this system means no
more than the most simple and exact description of bodily
motions that is verified by the facts of observation.

§ 9. But as yet we have dealt only mth those concepts
and formulas which describe the motions of bodies. What
TheConscTva- of the change of the space-time-filling prop-
lioDofEnerEy grties, such as heat, light, etc? Is there any
imderlying identity or permanence that relates such


SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE


59


changes to motion and to one another? The answer of
science is found in the conception of the conservation of
energy.^

This principle is derived historically from the Newtonian
formula />s = i mi^," where ps, the product of force (p ),
and distance (s), is the symbol for ' work,' and J «u*, a
function of mass (m) and velocity (v), is the symbol for
vis viva, afterwards 'kinetic energy.' A body held at a
certain distance from the earth's surface will, if allowed to
fall, acquire a certain kinetic energy (iwi>^), proportional
to the distance and the force exerted by the earth (ps).
In that the falling body will acquire this kinetic energy
by virtue of being simply allowed to fall, it is said to
possess ' potential energy ' (P) in its initial positioiL
As the body falls, this potential energy decreases and is
proportionally replaced by kinetic energy. Suppose the
body to be suspended by a string, and to swing from a
horizontal position. Then, when it has fallen as far as
the string permits, it will ascend again to the same height
above the earth's siuiace. In other words, having &-st
lost potential energy to the extent of its vertical fall, and
gained kinetic energy in its place, it will now reverse
the process, and lose kinetic energy while it gains poten-
tial energy. In other words, J mu* + P = c; that is, the
sum of its kinetic and its potential energies is constant,
or its energy is conserved.

But now suppose that the string is cut, and the body
allowed to fall freely. When it strikes the earth it possesses
a quantity of kinetic energy sufficient under the right
conditions to enable it to recover its original potential
energy. In this case, however, no such reverse motion
takes place; there is, supposing the bodies to be inelastic,
simply an apparent disappearance of motion, accompanied
by an increase of heat. Now the real fruitfulness of the
prindple of energy lies in the possibility of regarding this

1 For this conception, consult Mach: "On the Prindple of the Con-
lervation of Energy," Popular Scientific Lectures, p. tj;.


6o PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

increase of beat as analogous to the regaining of its origi-
nal potential energy.' If the analogy held this would
mean that in the new system the sum of kinetic energy
and heat would be a constant; or that the amount of heat
replacing the lost kinetic energy would in turn yield the
same amount of kinetic energy. And experiment has
proved this to be the case. Similarly, it has been dis-
covered that kinetic energy can be reciprocally and con-
servatively converted into light, electricity, etc.

When thus expressed, energy, lite mass, is a ratio. It
means that, despite the appearance of bare disjunction
when motion gives place to heat, or heat to light, etc.,
there is a certain permanence of relations. The amount
of motion, heat, light, etc., is the same in a certain specific
respect; in the respect, namely, that when one is converted
into another, the sum of the two remains the same, and
the amount of the second is such as to be again con-
vertible into the same amount of the first. This may be
expressed otherwise by saying that when such a qualitative
change takes place, that which is apparently lost is in a
certain sense conserved, in that it exists potentially in the
new quality. Thus energy, like acceleration, mass, and
the rest, is a constant relationship or proportion of vari-
able terms. And as in the case of the other concepts, so
here also, the terms are functions of space and time, or of
properties that occupy them ; and the relationship or pro-
portion is exact and mathematical.

§ 10. Such is the meaning of certain typical scientific
concepts, or descriptive formulas, so far as can be gathered

__.,., from a direct examination of them in relation
The Analybcnl ... , . , . . , <

Version of to the suDject- matter which they are mtended
St^tific Con. (.Q describe. There is a question which I am
sure will occur to many readers as proper

' It is not necessary to suppose that heat, e1ectiicity,etc., are mechanical,
in the strict sense, i.e., constituted of internal motions. "Nothing is con-
tained in the expresMon," says Mach. " but the tact ot an invariable quanti-
tative connexion between mechanical and other kinds of )
Cf. Principe! aj Mechanic!, p. 4g().


I


SCOPE AND METHOD OF SCIENCE


6l


and necessary to raise; the question, namely "What
really is mass or energy?" Upon the legitimacy of this
question turns the issue between naive and critical natural-
ism, with which we shall be occupied in the next chapter.
The question is evidently meant to convey the idea that
mass and energy cannot be merely ratios or formulas —
that they must be things, in some more reputable sense.
But if such be the case, at any rate it does not appear in
the exact records of science. There may be an antecedent
play of the imagination or a speculative after-thought, in
which mass is a simple substance and energy a simple
activity- But as exactly formulated, and experiment^y
verified, mass and energy are mathematical relarionships.
And if this analytical version of sdentific concepts will
suffice in the case of the simpler concepts, there is no reason
why it should not suffice also in the case of the more com-
plex concepts.

When motion is described it turns out to be a definite re-
lation to space and time, of something which occupies them
jointly. Such an account of motion is not imposed ufxin
it by any subjective predilection for a relational technique.
It is empirically characteristic of a moving body to be now
here, now there, and for every intermediate instant to
occupy an intermediate point. The calculus of motion is
merely the most faithful account of it which the mind has
been able to render. The same is true of the more complex
thing called velocity. It is the ratio of the distance factor
and the time factor in the case of a moving body. When
we pass from velocity to acceleration, mass, gravitation,
and even to energy, we are simply observing and recording
more complicated aspects of a moving or otherwise changing
body. The analytical version of these concepts corresponds
to the specific complexity on which observation has seized.
The supposition that there must be a real mass or energy
other than the analytical complex, simply betrays the
influence of words. Because 'mass' is one word like
'blue/ it is felt that it must be one indivisible thing


62


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


like blue. But it would be as reasonable to say that
motion is an indivisible thing because the word 'motion'
is single; whereas it is evident that motion contains both
space and time, and is therefore complex. I am led to con-
clude, therefore, that all of these concepts are essentially
ratios or relational complexes of the simple terms of experi-
ence, such as space, time, color, sound, etc.; and that each
of these ratios or relational complexes expresses some
specific complexity or configuration, which is found in
nature. And I judge that these concepts illustrate the
motive of science; which is simply to describe and record,
with special reference to their unity and constancy, the
actual changes of bodies.


I


CHAPTER IV

NAlVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM

§ 1. Natukalism, as we have seen, is not science, but
an assertion about science. More specifically, it is the
TiieTwo assertion that scientific knowledge is final,

Varietiesof leaving no room for extra-scientific or philo-
" sophical knowledge. Naturalism assumes two

forms. On the one hand there is a variety of naturalism
which adopts the traditional problems, and to a large extent
the traditional methods, of philosophy. It continues, e.g., ^
the philosophical search for a universal substance and a
first cause, and claims to have discovered these in some such
scientific concept as 'matter' or 'force.' The second
variety of naturalism repudiates not only the solutions of
the traditional philosophy, but the problems and methods
as well. It condemns the search for universal substance
and first cause as futile. Its last word is a theory of knowl-
edge, in which science is asserted to be final because
the only case of exact knowledge. In other words, the
second variety of naturalism claims less for the concepts
of a science, but nevertheless claims all. Science is not
the only knowledge that has been dreamed of, but it is
the only knowledge that is possible. The first variety of
naturalism is metaphysical, the second proclaims its
'anti-metaphysical' character. Or the first may be called .■
'materialism,' and the second 'positivism.'

The crucial difference between these two forms of natural-

fam is to be found, I think, in what they make of scientific

concepts. The first construes matter, mass, energy, and

the rest, as simple substances or powers. Owing to its

■ iaiiure to analyze these concepts, owing to its uncritical

mptioQ that whatever has a single name must be


64 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

an indivisible thing, I propose to call this ' naive naturalism. ' .
The second variety, on the other hand, accepts the analyti-
cal version of scientific concepts, as set forth in the last
chapter, and hence may be called 'critical naturalism.'

Naive naturalism, metaphysical naturalism, or material-v
ism, derives its form from philosophy — and its defects as
well. Indeed it affords the best example available of the '
characteristic defects of philosophy, of those errors to which
philosophy is perpetually and peculiarly liable owing to the
motives which rule it. We shall, therefore, be aided both
in the exposition and in the criticism of naive naturalism
if we have certain of these errors clearly in mind.

§2. In the first place, there is an error to which I propose ■
to give the name of 'the speculative dogma.'' By this I ,

mean the arbitrary assertion of the ideal of
<2^™c'phi£-'* thought. What that ideal is, when verbally
sophical Errors, formulated, may be inferred from our review
live^D^a^ of the procedure of science. The concepts of
sdence satisfy thought's peculiar bias for
identity and permanence. Thought seeks so far as pos-
sible to construe particulars as modes of the general,
to construe what is apparently unique as a special in-
stance of something that is common. It seeks also to
account for as much as possible of any individual phenome-
non, in terms of such a general concept. It seeks concepts,
in short, that shall be both general, and also sufficient or
adequate, to the things subsumed under them. Now
philosophy has especially to do with ultimates and finalities.
So the philosophical form of this general propensity of
thought gives rise to the ideal of a concept that shall be
of unlimited generality and sufficiency. The concepts of
acceleration and mass make possible the systematization
of the motion -properties of bodies. By virtue of these
concepts each body is regarded as a function of all other
bodies) and these concepts may thus be said to possess a

' For a


I


; thorough


of this error, see below, Ch. VIII,


NAiVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM


65


high degree of generality. But because they leave the
space-time-filling properties out of the account, they
lack sufficiency; that is, they do not measure up to the
concrete variety of an individual body's properties. They
account for something of all bodies, but not for all of any
body. The concept of energy, on the other hand, makes a
body's motion-properties commensurable with its heat, light,
sound, etc.; and thus makes the formulas of science more
sufficient, that is, more exhaustive of an individual body's
variety of properties. Hence it appears possible to define
a maximum in both directions; a concept that shall lack
nothing either in generality or sufficiency — that shall
provide for everything, and for all of everything.

Such a concept is the speculative ideal. Were it formu-
lated and verified it would mark the consummation of
thought. And it is characteristic of philosophy to assume
such a concept, without being rigorously critical concerning
either its definition or its proof. With many philosophers,
perhaps with the majority of philosophers, it is simply a
question of finding a content or a complete formulation for
this concept, its validity as an abstract ideal being taken
for granted. Philosophy is then only an attempt to find the ^
the value of x, where x is that something of which every-
thing is a case, and in terms of which every aspect and
alteration of everything may be expressed. And specula-^
tion has given rise to an uninterrupted hne of attempted
solutions, from Thales's "all things are made of water,"
down to the present-day "monisms" of force and energy.
It is the uncritical assumption that this speculative ideal
is valid — that such a concept is necessary, leaving only
its precise nature to be determined — that I have named
'the speculative dogma.'

§3. A second traditional philosophical error may con-
veniently be named the 'error of pseudo-simplicity.'' It^
consists in the failure to recognize the difference between
the simphcity that precedes analysis, ajid the simplicity

' Fot this sod the (ollowmj error, cf. also below, pp. 361-764, '79~>83.


66


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


that is revealed by analysis; between the apparent sim-
plicity of an iinanalyzed complex, and the real simplicity
'PKudo-iani- of the ultimate terms of analysis; or between
^"dSiiii^ the simplicity that is owing to the little that
PotcDiisUty' one knows, and that which is owing to the
much that one knows.

Thought begins with an undifferentiated that, roughly
denoted by a word or gesture. The object is as yet barely
distinguished. It is an undivided unity because some single
character, such, for example, as its position in space or
time, or a relation to some more familiar thing, has served
to identify it for the purpose of discourse and investigation.
But when the investigation is made, a variety of characters
is discovered; and if the investigation is carried far enough,
certain ultimate characters are arrived at, which will no
longer yield to analysis. The object is then exhibited as a
complex of simple properties, having a certain arrangement
or relational unity. Meanwhile the original unity, of
name, gesture, or denotative reference, hovers reminiscently
in the background of the mind, and unless it is understood
and discounted, it serves to discredit analysis. It endows
the object with an undivided unity which contradicts the
results of analysis. It construes the object as simply "that,"
whereas analysis construes it as many terms in relation. It
is eventually converted into the well-known notion of
'substance' or 'essence,' and as such plays the r6Ie of a
superior reality which analysis can never reach.

The fallacy is evident when once it is noted that this
undifferentiated unity is subjective and not objective. It
is the knowledge of the thing, which is simple, and not the
thing itself. It is not the thing, but the mind of the knower,
that is empty of diversity. And if it is not possible to
reach this simplicity by carrying analysis on, it is always
possible to reach it by reversing the process and returning
to the initial state of innocence.

Intimately connected with this error is a third, which
may be named 'the error of indefinite potentiality.' A


I
I

I
I

I


NAiVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM 67

substance or essence, construed as above, is supposed to
have some necessary relation to the characters which
analysis jields, and which are called its attributes. But
the substance or essence as contrasted with its attributes
is no more than a name, a gesture, or some one of its
attributes, arbitrarily singled out for the purpose of identi-
hcation. And between the essence or substance, and the
duster of its attributes, no direct relation of necessary con-
. nection is to be found. Thus one does not have a concept
of an indivisible essence 'gold, 'and then see that it impUes
'yellowness,' 'maUeability,' a certain specific gravity, etc.
The relation remains arbitrary. Gold is regarded as the
potentiality of these things; but there is no evidence
that it is the potentiality of just these things, or of these
things exclusively. It is an indefinite and indeterminate
potentiality, a 'that which,' with the sequel unaccounted
for.

How gold, simply, should reveal itself successively as
'yellow,' 'malleable,' etc., really becomes clear only when
psychological terms are introduced. An organism experi-
encing the real complex may begin with the name, or the
position, or with some associate, and pass on to the rest,
finally overlapping the full detail. In this case the detail
is not generated by the original simplicity itself; but, pre-
existing in the tHng from the start, is gradually uncov-
ered, or brought into consdousness. And this is a very
different matter. For now while there is a transition in
consciousness from simplicity to complexity, the thing itself
has been complex all the while. Indeed the subjective sim- ,
ph'dty owes its potentialities to the objective complexity.

These three errors have j>erpetually played into one
another, and have begotten certain well-nigh inveterate
habits in philosophical thought. The 'Absolute' or 'Ulti-
mate,* or ' Infinite' has become a commonplace. It is
already plausible and men are at once ready to entertain
the idea, because of the common supposition that every
individual t hi ng has an inward indivisible essence which


i


68


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


is its 'real' nature, as opposed to its diversity as revealed
by analysis. It is an easy step from such particular
essences to a universal essence. And the notion of an all-
general, all-sufficient entity, that shall be all properties to
all things, is readily entertained by a mind that is accus-
tomed to the notion of indeterminate and unlimited
potentialities. Such are the modes of thought character-
istic of a 'metaphysics' that is unfaithful to the method
of analysis.

§ 4. Naive naturalism regards 'matter,' 'force,' or

'energy' as the imiversal substance. Such a view is

, naturalistic, in that it attributes finality and

Naive Natural- . ,. , , ■ . 1

iun. Biichncr'a umversauty to these concepts of physical
Monism of scicnce; and naive, in that it puts a sub-
stantial rather than an analytical interpre-
tation on them.

During the latter half of the nineteenth century the most
influential materialist was Louis Buchner,' whose Kraft und
Stof has passed through twenty German and eight French
editions. This book expressed a reaction against idealistic
metaphysics caused by the rapid advance of the natural sci-
ences.' The author attributes the false philosophy of the
past to the abstract separation of matter and force. The
former abstracted from the latter — a matter with no inter-
nal attraction and repulsion, "a being without properties,"
is nothing at all ("ein Unding "). The form and movement
of matter constitute "its necessary attributes, and sine qua
non." On the other hand, force means nothing "without
the modifications and movements that we perceive in mat-
ter." The absurd notion of a disembodied force is chiefly
responsible for the spiritistic and creationist theories which
have distinguished loose specularion from true science.
"Keuie Kraft ohne Stoff , — kein Stoff ohne Kraft 1"
The balance of the chemist proves that matter is "immor-
tal," as the determination of the mechanical equivalent of


« CI. a


NAIVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM 69

heat by Mayer and Joule establishes the "immortality"
of force.^

Li other words, matter manifests itself in force, and force »
in turn manifests itself in various determinate and meas-
urable changes such as motion and heat. Matter itself is ^
that which thus manifests itself. "This 'something' is
what we call matter, the phenomena in question are its
activities, and the cause of these activities is the force
contained in the substance." What matter is in itself we .
cannot know. Hence we must not judge matter merely
by what is known of it. Indeed since its essence escapes
us, there is nothing of which it can be judged incapable.
Science is constantly finding it to possess unexpected prop-
erties. As a potentiality without assignable hmits, it
may be as reasonably endowed with " intellectual " force
as with "physical" force; and no man can foresee what
further powers it may in the future reveal,*

Now it is evident that such a 'monism of matter' neces- i
sarily employs the notion of substance — the notion of an
essence distinguished from its properties, and not defined by
them. Since matter is not identified with specific proper- '
ties, it is an indefinite potentiality; and were it not so, its
universality or metaphysical reality could not be asserted.
In short everything can be claimed for matter, just in
proportion as matter is not identified with anything in
particular. It is the pressure of the speculative dogma,
the assumption that there must be some conception having
unlimited generality and sufficiency, that leads the party of
matter to present their favorite conception in this rflle;
and to assume this r61e, matter must be divested of the
specific and determinate character which is assigned to it
in the limited operations of science.

§ 5. Now it happens that 'matter' is too well-known in
its private capacity to play becomingly the part of Univer-

> Op, cit,, (rota the French translation, by Victor Dave, of the Kventcentb
edition, pp. 3, 46; cf. Ch. II, 111, passim.
* Op. dt. pp. 43, 45, 46.


70


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


sal Being. Common sense has a comparatively dear
image connected with the term. It invariably suggests
Spenccr'B spacial discreteness and juxtaposition, a tri-

Moniauot dimensional aggregate of units of volume
"" bounded by hard surfaces. And if this be

matter, then evidently matter is not everything. So
characteristic an arrangement suggests contrasts as well
as analogies; if it provides for some things, like the
planetary system or the molecular structiu-e of gases,
it leaves out other things, such as color, thought, or the
ether. Hence the superiority of concepts like 'force' and
'energy.' For these have not only the specific mean-
ing which they obtain from the formulas of mechanics;
they have also the vague meaning which they have when
construed in terms of the inner experience of activity or
effort. Common sense recoils from the notion of a matter
that shall not be hard, discrete, and extended; but it is
prepared to hear anything of force or energy.

And there is a second morive which tends to the substi-
tution of these conceptions for matter. The indestructibil-
ity of matter is proved by the fact that matter changes its
form without loss of weight. EmpiricaUy, in other words,
it is the property of weight that remains constant. But
weight is a manifestation of force; and matter may there-
fore be regarded as one of these manifestations. Or one
may argue, as the philosophers Leibniz and Berkeley have
argued long since, that matter is known only by its prop-
erties, by its "forms and motions"; and if these are varie-
ties of force, why multiply substrata or essences needlessly?
Instead of conceiving a matter that manifests itself in forms
and motions, why not stop at force, and invest it with
finality and universality?

So the ' monism of force ' replaces ' the monism of matter.'
"As shown before," says Spencer, "we can not go on merg-
ing derivative truths in those wider truths from which they
are derived, without reaching at least a widest truth which
can be merged in no other, or derived from no other. And


I
I


NAIVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM


71


the relation in which it stands to the truths of science m
general, showS that this truth transcending demonstration
is the Persistence of Force. . . . But when wc ask what
this energy is, there is no answer save that it is the noumenal
cause implied by the phenoKienal effect. Hence the force
of which we assert persistence is that Absolute Force we
are obliged to postulate as the necessary correlate of the
force we are conscious of. By the Persistence of Force,
we really mean the persistence of some Cause which tran-
scends our knowledge and conception. In asserting it we
assert an Unconditioned Reality without beginningorend."'

The use of capitals in this paragraph is an expedient for
ridding terms of that precision of meaning which is so fatal
to the speculative interest. By ' force ' one can only mean
the P or/ of the formulas of mechanics; but by 'Force'
one can mean this together with anything else that it
may prove convenient to mean. The former is one
thing among others; the latter may be equal to anything
and everything. We are "obliged to postulate" it, to
satisfy the speculative dogma; and we are enabled to satisfy
that dogma, only by reducing a determinate concept to a
name, and then construing its very emptiness as signifying
unlimited potentiality.

The monism of force, as has been said, derives a certain
plauability from the experience of activity or effort. It is
signi&cant that it is the vagueness of this experience that
renders it useful in tlus connection. Were it a specific
experience, hke, e.g., that of the color blue, it would not so
readily lend itself to imlimited generalization. As a matter
of fact, the experience of actiAaty may be construed in one
of two ways: it may be taken in its initial or passing char-
acter as a fused experience, or it may be analyzed.' In the
first case, it possesses simplicity just in proportion as it
is not an experience of anything; it signifies, not the sim-

■ Speocer (1810-1903); First Prineiphs (i86j), sixth edition, pp.
17S-176.

• Cf. below pp. J61-164, 179-363.


73


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


plicity of the thing, but of the knowledge. It is, in short,
a case of 'pseudo-simplidty.' In the second case, that is,
when analyzed, it turns out to be a composite experience,
containing specific elements in a specific configuration.
Now activity in the latter sense is far too peculiar and rare
to be construed as an all-general and all-sufficient princi-
ple. But activity in the former sense is indeterminate;
and since the experience is familiar, it gives currency to a
similarly indeterminate conception of force, which is amor-
phous and plastic enough to suit the speculative purpose.
It is readily accepted as the principle which imderlies and
unites both the analyzed and determinate ' force ' of
physics, and the analyzed and determinate 'activity' of a
strictly descriptive psychology.

§ 6. The monisms of matter and force are restated,
brought up to date, and subsumed under a higher
Hacckel'3 " monism of substance," by Ernst Haeckel.

Monism of This author's Riddle of Ihe Universe is at
Substance present both the most widely read and influ-
ential defence of materialism, and also the most perfect
illustration of that doctrine's characteristic motive and
besetting sins.

"Under the name of 'the law of substance,'" Haeckel
embraces " two supreme laws of different origin and age —
the older is the chemical law of the 'conservation of matter,'
and the younger is the physical law of the 'conservation of
energy.'" "The sum of matter which fills infinite space,"
and " the sum of force, which is at work in infinite space
and produces all phenomena," are alike unchangeable.
And Just as all energies — heat, sound, light, electricity,
and the rest, are only particular varieties of one universal
energy, "dynamodes of a single primitive force," so the dif-
ferent forms of matter ^chemically diverse, ponderable and
imponderable, are only particular "condensations" of a
"simple primitive substance, which fills the infmity of
space in an unbroken continuity." But monism is not
yet complete. "Matter (space-filling substance) and


naIve and critical naturalism


73


energy (moving force) are but two inseparable attributes"
of a stiU more fundamental substance. And in this sub-
stance the dualism of body and mind is resolved as well.
For energy and spirit are one. Spirit is at once the
essence and the activity of substance; physical affinity
and resistance are but rudimentary forms of inclination and
aversion. "The irresistible pasMon that draws Edward
to the sympathetic Ottilia, or Paris to Helen, and leaps
over all bounds of reason and morality, is the same
powerful 'unconscious' attractive force which impels the
living spermatozoon to force an entrance into the ovum in
the fertilization of the egg of the animal or plant — the
same impetuous movement which tmites two atoms of
hydrogen to one atom of oxygen for the formation of a
molecule of water." Thus Haeckel arrives at the animism
and hylozoism with which human thought had set out
some 2500 years before, the notion of an indeterminate
matter, informed and animated by an indetemunate force
— a cosmic generalization, in other words, of the immedi-
ate feeling of desire and self-motion. And even this is not
the last substance; for it is but "the knowable aspect of
things," and is relative to our senses. "We are incompe-
tent ... to penetrate into the innermost nature of this
real world — 'the thing in itself.' " '

Thus the principle of substance in the end conducts
Haeckel, as it conducted Biichner and Spencer, to agnosti-
cism. And his procedure is in all essential respects the
same as theirs. He consistently assumes that a simple
unity corresponding to the name or initial aspect, must
underlie every analyzed and relational unity. For every
correlation of elements, there must be a 'that which' pos-
sesses them. And this assumption is applied to the cen-
tral concepts of physics. Weight, mass, force, and energy,

' Haediel: Th Riddle of the Vnivrrst. trans, by J. McCabe, pp. »ii-
aij, 116, 118, J»4, I9». The best reply lo Haeckel is to be found b Sir
Oliver Lodge, Lift and UaUrr. Cf. also Fr. Paulsen: Pluloiophia IliUlaiu,
p. Ill, "Enut tiaeclcel ats Philosoph."


74


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


are properly, as we have seen, constant ratios of variables:
mathematical proportions of the spacial, temporal, and
qualitative properties of things, as these are directly ob-
served. But with Haeckel, every such relational complex
is regarded as expressing some simple essence or unique
quality. Thus the Newtonian mechanics, he says, gives
us only the *' dead mathematical formula " the " quantita-
tive demonstration" of the theory of force; "it gives us no
insight whatever into the qualitative nature of the phenom-
ena." ' In other words, Haeckel is not satisfied with the
qualitative diversity represented by the several terms into
which a Newtonian formula may be analyzed. There must
be a deeper and more essential quality corresponding to
the formula itself. But such a quality is neither to be
observed nor discovered by analysis. It is assumed; and
once assumed, it is given a vague meaning either by refer-
ence to the subjective experience of effort, or by the linger-
ing and confused reminiscence of its exact mechanical
meaning.

And it is the latter of these means on which this doctrine
depends for its materialistic or anti-spiritualistic conclu-
sions. If the qualitative essence of force and energy were
interpreted in terms of psychical activity or appetency, the
outcome would be a ' panpsychtsm,'' in which it would be
as reasonable to reduce mechanism to freedom as freedom
to mechanism, or as reasonable to reduce matter to Ciod as
God to matter- Precisely this conclusion is reached by
those who, like Bergson, approach the primeval activity-
substance from the philosophical and psychological side."
But Haeckel's monism "definitely rules out the three
central dogmas of metaphysics — God, freedom, and im-
mortality."* And that such appears to be the outcome
is due entirely to the remnant of definite physical mean-
ing that still attaches to 'force' and 'energy' in Haeckel's
use of them. The underlying substance, or primitive


I
I


'Op. .


' Cf. below, p. 315.
• Op. eit., p. J31.


NAiVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM


75


force, cannot be identified with any of its observed and
described manifestations; and yet it is reached by pas^ng
Ihrougk arid beyond these. It is these manifestations so
qualified as to annul their specific characters, but without
destroying the suggestive power of their names. Precisely
as, in the mystical theology, God's attributes transcend
wisdom and goodness in their human significance, and yet
retain the specific associations of these terms, and so endow
God with a vague meaning; so here the primitive force,
the fundamental substance, is endowed with the narrower
physical meaning of terms despite the fact that that mean-
ing strictly construed forbids the assertion of their uni-
versality. The errors of pseudo-simplicity and indefinite
potentiality are meretriciously relieved of their real barren-
ness by the further error of 'verbal suggestion.' •

§ 7. Critical naturalism differs from naive naturalism or
materialism by its acceptance of what we have called 'the
Criiical Nat- analytical version ' of scientific concepts. Thia
""•■i^ involves the rejection, on empirical grounds,

of the traditional notion of substance. The term 'sub-
stance' may be retained; but if so, it is employed in a new
sense, to mean a quantitative and not a qualitative con-
stant. Thus, according to Ostwald, for example, the law
of the conservation of energy expresses "the quantitative
conservation of a thing, which may nevertheless undergo
the most varied qualitative changes." "With the knowl-
edge of this fact," he continues, "we involuntarily combine
the notion that it is the ' same ' thing that passes through
all these transformations, and that it only changes its out-
ward form without being changed in its essence." But
such ideas " have a very doubtful side to them, since they
correspond to no distinct concept." Experience affords
no idea of such a qualitative essence, but only of a complex
ratio that remains unchanged while its factors vary.'

In other words, a strictly empirical veraon of science


' Ct. below, pp. 180-183.

» W. Ostwald; NtUural FhUosopky, I


5. by T. SdUer, j


76


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


reduces nature to a qualitative variety and change, exhibit-
ing quantitative constancy. In order that such a version
of science shall yield a naturalistic philosophy, it is necessary
to show that nature so construed coincides with knowable
reality. This conclusion may be arrived at in one or both
of two ways. It may be argued that the ultimate quali-
tative terms of experience are somehow physical, or at
any rate such as to permit of being explained only in terms
of physical theories; or it may be argued that physical
theories are the only verifiable, and so the only valid,
theories. In other words, the priority of physical science
may be argued from the nature of fact or from the nature
of method. The former of these motives is represented by
' sensationalism,' and the latter by " experimentalism." Sen-
sationalism and experimentalism are ordinarily united; but
owing to a characteristic difference of emphasis, Karl Pearson
serves to illustrate the former, and Henri Poincare the latter.
§ 8. It is Pearson's central contention that the truths of
science are conceptions and inferences formed from sense-
The Sensation- imprcssiotts. The extemal object, which "at
BiismoiKEui first sight appears a very simple object,"
""^^ turns out to be a "construct" of sensible

properties, "a combination of immediate with past or
stored sense-impressions." So that the field of science is
"the contents of the mind." The sense-impressions con-
stitute the only subject-matter of thought, the only reality
that is directly given. The nund is shut up to sense-
impressions, as a hypothetical operator who has never
been outside a central telephone exchange, is shut up to
the messages received at the inner end of the wire. " Turn
the problem round and ponder over it as we may, beyond
the sense-impression, beyond the brain terminals of the
sensory nerves, we cannot get." "The 'reaUty,' as the
metaphysicians wish to call it, at the other end of the nerve,
remains unknown, and is unknowable." '

< KatI Pearson: Grammar ef Scititce, second edition, pp. 3<), 41,75,61,
63. 67.


NaIVE and critical naturalism 77

These sense-impressions it is the business of science to
"classify and analyze, associate, and construct." The
"law of nature" is "a resume in mental shorthand, which
replaces for us a lengthy description of the sequences among
our sense-impressions." "The object served by the dis-
covery of such laws is the economy of thought. " They
" enable the exertion, best calculated to preserve the
race and give pleasure to the individual, to follow on the
sense-impression with the least expenditure of time and of
intellectual energy." A scientific concept such, for ex-
ample, as the 'atom,' is either "real, that is, capable of being
a direct sense-impression, or else it is ideal, that is, a purely
mental conception by aid of which we are enabled to formu-
late natural laws." There is no ground for the assertion
of an existence that is both " supersensuous " and also
"real." '

Pearson thus apparently accepts the analy^s of phyacal
substances and forces into non-pkysical terms. And yet
he finds this view to afford sufficient ground for claiming
the universal and exclusive validity of natural science and
according metaphysics the doubtful honor of being ranked
with poetry.' Now upon further examination it appears
that this conclusion is due to the fact that "sense-impres-
sions" are not after all the ultimate terms of analysis, but
are themselves, in Pearson's sense, physical " constructs." In
regarding them as the ultimate terms of analy^s, Pearson
is virtually assuming the priority of the physical order.
The sense-impression is a derivative of the whole natural-
istic scheme, and means nothing apart from that scheme.
"What we term the sense-impression " is conveyed by a
sensory nerve, and is "formed at the brain," "A physical
impress is the source of our stored sense-impression."
The sameness of the external world depends on "the
amilarity in the organs of sense and in the perceptive
faculty of all normal human beings"; and the consciousness
of others is inferred from "physiological machinery of a

' tbid., pp. 66, 86, 78, 67, 96. » [bid., Ch. I, passim.


78 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

certain character, which we sum up under brain and nerves."
The "sequences of sense-impressions," "the routine of our
perceptions," are not only functions of physiological nerve-
stimulation, but may be conceived to have evolved as
aids in "the struggle for existence." ' It is perfectly evi- ■
dent, in short, that sense-impressions, in their structure
and given order, presuppose the whole physical system,
The real question is not how we can get "beyond the brain
terminal," but how we ever came to be shut up to it.
And the answer is, that in Pearson's philosophy we assume
a physiological relativism, and the whole physical world-order
in terms of which such a relalivism is defined.

§ 9. Much light is thrown on the dogmatic character of
Pearson's naturalism by the modified position of Ernst
The Modified Mach. According to this author, the physical '
Poutiooof order is essentially a relationship sustained by
cnsi K more primitive elements. " A color is a physi- '
cal object so long as we consider its dependence upon its
luminous source, upon other colors, upon heat, upon space,
and so forth. Regarding, however, its dependence upon
the retina (the elements K L M . . .), it becomes a psycho-
logical object, a sensation." The bare color is neither
physical nor psychical. A bullet, for example, turns
yellow before a sodium lamp, red before a lithium lamp.
Such a type of relationship may be represented by the
symbols ABC... But if we close the eyes or cut the
optic nerve, the bullet disappears. So the bullet is also a
function of a peculiar complex, the nervous system, repre-
sented by the symbols K L M. . . . "To this extent, and
to this extent only, do we call ABC... sensations, and
regard A B C zs belonging to the ego." In other words,
.4 5 C ... arc psychical only in so far as they belong to
the specific system A BC . . . K LM. . . . And similarly,
volitions, memory-images and the like, represented by the
symbols a /3 y . . . , owe their distinctive character to the
arrangement in which they are united. "The fundamental

' Ibid. pp. 41, 63, S7, 86, gg, 103.


I

I
I


NAlVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM


79


constituents of ABC., .a/iy... would seem to be the

same (colors, sounds, spaces, times, motor sensations ■ . .),
and only the character of their connexion different." In
other words, not only "thing, body, matter," but also
"perceptions, ideas, volition, and emotion, in short the
whole inner and outer world, are composed of a small num-
ber of homogeneous elements connected in relations of
varying evanescence or permanence." '

Now it is evidently improper to designate these elements >
themselves as "sensations," since a sensation is but one of
the complex arrangements in which they appear. '
"Usually," says Mach, "these elements are called sensa-
tions. But as vestiges of a one-sided theory inhere in that
term, we prefer to speak simply of elements (elementen)."
He continues, it is true, to speak of bodies as "complexes
of sensations," or definite connexions of "the sensory ele-
ments," and is thus in a measure responsible for the mis-
understanding on which Pearson s sensationalism is based.*
But it is evident that Mach's view can only mean a reduc-
tion of both the physical and the mental order to a manifold
of neutral elements; that is. elements which are ttcither
physical nor mental. Nor can it be said of these elements
that they are inherently disposed to those particular
relationships and arrangements in which they compose
bodies or physical events. The orders of logic and mathe-
matics, of mind and of conduct, stand upon the same footing
as those of mechanical nature. So the analytical method i
inevitably leads beyond naturalism to a 'logical realism,'
that is as independent of physics as it is of psychology.*

§ lo. Thus critical naturalism, while it is successful in

TheExpcri- '*^ polemic against every metaphysics of sub-

mcnuKsra of stance, fails thus far to establish itself. Its

■ """^ critical motive triumphs at the expense of

its naturalistic motive. There remains, however, another

• E. Mach: Anatyiis of SewalioKs, trans, by C. M. WiiliBnu, pp. 13-14,
tr-i8, 6. iS.

» llad. w. 18, yga. • Cf. below, pp. 310-311, 3:5-316.


8o PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

ground on which its claims may be urged. Even though
analysis may show that the primitive realities are not
physical, it may yet be argued that the physical bypotltesis
is the only verifiable hypothesis, and that the truths of
physical science are the only well-authenticated truths.
In other words, naturalism may be argued, not on ground of
fact, but on ground of method. Thus, for example, Pear-
son himself asserts that "the imity of all science consists
alone in its method, not in its material," and that if any
fields he beyond science, they "must lie outside any in-
telligible definition which can be given of the word knond-
edge."*

The most notable contemporary representative ot I
methodological naturahsm or experimentalism, is Henri
Poincar^. This ^Titer's view is best comprehended in the
light of its relation to the radical view of another contem-
porary French thinker, Edouard LeRoy. The latter,
adopting the extreme 'anti-intellectualistic' position, insists
upon the entire artificiality or conventionaUty of science,
both in respect of its facts and its laws. Science is an in-
vention for the purpose of action; and cannot, therefore,
be regarded as a revelation of reality. It follows that action
is prior to nature; and that action, since to define is to
reconstruct and falsify, can be known only by instinct or
intuition.^ It is evident that such a conclusion is not
naturalistic; and Poincare, in the interests of naturalism,
properly imdertakes to criticise it. If naturahsm is to be
maintained, facts cannot be regarded as wholly indeter-
minate, for that would imply the deriving of physical nature
wholly from subjective activity. It would then follow
that will is prior to body, and teleology to mechanism. \
It is necessary, therefore, to reserve for facts just enough
determinaleness to require the physical hypothesis and method

' Op.cil.,pp, 12, IS.

• SeeE. LeRoy: "Science et Phaoaophie," Rmu de UOaphysiqtu ti it
Morale, vol. VII, iSijq, pp. 375 sq. Cf. Poincart: The Value a/ Science,
trans, by G. B. Halsted, pp. 112-114. For a discussion of 'aati'inlellectual-
um,' Bee bebw, Ch. X.


I

I


NAIVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM 8 1

for tlteir explanation. And this is the poation which
Poincar^ adopts. The "crude facts" are such as verify
only physical hypotheses; they lend themselves only to
the method of experiment. Thus our author concludes
that "experiment is the sole source of truth. It alone can
teach us anything new; it alone can give us certainty."*

Now it appears upon reflection that Poincare's "crude-
fact," Uke Pearson's "sensation," is by no means simple;
and that it predetermines the physical hypothesis, or the
method of experiment, only because it is already itself
invested with a physical character. In other words,
Poincare's analysis, like that of Pearson, is not complete.
He believes that such is the case, when he reduces external
bodies, like the ether, e.g., to persistent relations. "It may
be said, for instance, that the ether is no less real than
any external body; to say this body exists is to say that
there is between the color of this body, its taste, its smell,
an intimate bond, solid and persistent; to say the ether
exists is to say there is a natural kinship between all the
optical phenomena, and neither of the two propositions
has less value than the other." ' But he overlooks the
fact that the correlation of qualities with spaces and time,
is itself a specific case of more primitive relationships.
This specific case, which is already physical, he simply
assumes to be universal. Were he to follow analysis to
the end, he would find that his "crude facts" presuppose
certain simpler "groupings" and "kinships" that are not
the subject-matter of physical experimentation at all, but
of logic and mathematics.

The unique validity of the experimental method de-
pends on an exclusive regard for the kind of fact for which
this method is available. Experimentalism, like sensation-
alism, involves a vicious circle. A certain type of method
is accredited by its apphcabllity to a certain type of fact;
and this type of fact, in turn, is accredited by its leading

' Poincarf: Science and Hypothesis, p. toi.
' The Valite of Sckace, pp. ij9-i4a.


82


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


itself to a certain type of method. For the facts to which
experiment or scientific verification can be applied, are
limited to what is observable in a place, at a time. An
hypothesis is tried by an ' observation ' ; but an observation
is 'taken' at a designated time and place, and it serves as
a test only so far as the space-time orientation is exact.
For example, the hypothesis on which the prediction of an
eclipse is based, is verified when it appears dark at a
specific instant, to an observer stationed at a specific place.
The appearance of darkness, not otherwise determined,
would verify nothing; nor would it ever suggest a mechan-
ical hypothesis to the mind of a scientist. Science arises
as a formulation of experiences that may be non-mechani-
cal in content; but they must be kad within a field in which
the mechanical axes of reference are already presupposed.
An equally good illustration is afforded by another of
Poincare's examples. "I observe the deviation of a gal-
vanometer by the aid of a movable mirror which projects
a luminous image or spot on a divided scale. The crude
fact is this: I see the spot displace itself on the scale, and
the scientific fact is this: a current passes in the circuit." '
A complete account of the "crude fact" would specify not
only that the spot shall appear on the scale, that is, at a
determined place, but at a determined instant as well; in
other words, it must not be too crude to be lacking in
specific spadal and temporal relations to other "crude
facts." Thus Poincare's facts are already virtually me-^
chanical, in that they verify only such hypotheses as
contain space-time variables and determine space-time '
events.

The FaUure ot § ^ ^ ■ Poincare's posiUon is an impossible com-
criticsi N.t- promise. Either the facts of nature are entirely
^o^'oILq^^ indeterminate, as LeRoy maintains; in which
indMaihe- casc the whole scheme of physical nature is
'""'" improvised by man in the interests of action.

Or they are determinate; in which case they are already
' Op. cil., pp. 11&-117.


I


NAlVE AND CRITICAL NATURALISM


83


endowed with a complex physical character, which presup-
poses certain simpler logical and mathematical characters.
In the latter case, the categories of logic, mathematics, and
physics are all alike factual and independent of the con-
structive activity of science. "AU the scientist creates tn a
/act," says PoincarS, "is the language in which he enunci-
ales it." ^ Then either science is all a matter of language,
in which case it is deducible from the practical exigencies
of discourse, as LeRoy would maintain; or we must limit
"language" to the function of words and symbols. But
logic and mathematics must then be distinguished from
discourse, and regarded as themselves sciences of fact. For
the truths of logic and mathematics are independent of the
conventions employed to express them. We shall then be -
led to conclude that physical hypotheses as descriptive of
physical facts, employ and presuppose logical and mathe-
matical h>potheses, which in turn are descriptions of
logical and mathematical facts. Ixigic and mathematics
describe the nature of 'relation,' 'order,' 'dimensionality,'
'number,' and 'space'; physics studies particular cases
of these. The concepts of physics are special values of
the variables of logic and mathematics; the hypotheses
of physics are alternatives supplied by the more abstract
principles of logic and mathematics. It follows that there
is no sense in which physics can be regarded as the funda-
mental science; nor is there any sense in which the facts
which are determined by physical hv-potheses can be
regarded as ultimate facts. And this conclusion is fatal ,
to naturalism. It gives to being, in the last analysis, a
logical, rather than a physical, character; and reduces the
experimental method of physics to the position of being a
special instance of logical method.

Thus a criUcal philosophy of science carries one beyond
physical science to simpler non-physical terms, and pro-
vides for non-physical methods and non-physical theories
with which to formulate these terms. ' Color,' 'sound,'

> Op.cit., p. lai.


84 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

'position/ 'order/ 'magnitude/ 'implication/ none of these,
nor any such relatively simple term of experience, is
physical; and the truths concerning these things are far
richer and more various than such as can be ascertained
by physical experimentation, or described by physical
theories, alone. Whatever testifies to the truth of physics
testifies to the wider and more basal truths of logic and
mathematics. Hence Descartes's astonishment, ''that
foimdations so strong and solid should have no loftier
superstructure reared on them."


RELIGION AND THE UMITS OF SCIENCE


§ 1. Naturalism, or the claim that physical science is
unqualifiedly and exclusively true, is equivalent to the

„ .. , n^. denial of optimistic relieion. If all being is
Religious Phi- , ... , ,, ,. , . , , ,

loaophy imd bodily, and ail causality mechanical, then there
tu Limiu ol can be no support for ^e belief that the cosmos
at large is dominated by goodness, life is
impotent; and the aspirations and hopes to which it
gives rise are vain. Enhghtenment destroys what the
heart so fondly builds. Man is engaged in a losing
fight. He may "develop a worthy civilization, capable
of maintaining and constantly improving itself," but only
"until the evolution of our globe shall have entered so far
upon its downward course that the cosmic process resumes
its sway; and, once more, the State of Nature prevails
over the surface from our planet." '

When in the course of the last century science became
so militant as to pretend to the empire of human knowledge,
religion was compelled in self-defence to challenge its title.
And once roused to arms, religion not urmaturally sought
to carry the war into the enemy's territory. The result
was to establish a habit of suspicion and hostility between
the party of science and the party of religion. They
became hereditary enemies.' There are already signs of
the dawn of a new era; perhaps the time is not distant
when the lion and the lamb shall lie down together. But
at present it is still generally assumed that the success of
religion is conditioned by the failure of science. The
major part of contemporary rcUgious philosophy is de-
voted to a disproof of sdence. If there is to be " room

' Huiley: EmliUion and ElhUs.p. 4S- ' See above, pp. 34-38.
8S


86


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


for faith," that room must be gained at the expense of
science. When a scientist confesses failure, as when Du
Bois-Reymond pronounces his "ignorabimus" concerning
the relation between matter and consciousness, he is
charged with treason by the partisans of science, but is
eagerly quoted and followed by those of religion.'

Now it must be admitted that religion's instinctive dis-
trust of science has a basis in reason. It is true, as we shall
presently see, that nothing could be more fatuous than the
hostility of religion to science. For both are human insti-
tutions; and whether a man be a scientist or a theologian,
he needs both. Nevertheless, religion of the optimistic
type, the belief that ci-\Tlization dominates and eventually
possesses the cosmic process, cannot survive, if the scien-
tific version of things be accepted without reservations.
Faith can be justified only provided limits be assigned to
science. And religion will be wise to avoid any reconcilia-
tion in which it is made dependent on the indulgence of
science.

There is some disposition at present to invest religious
capital in scientific novelties. Science now employs con-
cepts that seem less forbidding than its classic atomism.
May not energy, or the electrically charged ether, or radio-
activity, turn out to be the essence of God, or of man's
immortal soul? There are two reasons for distrusting such
suggestions. In the first place, they derive whatever
religious meaning they possess from a loose and anthro-
pomorphic version of science, and not from its rigorous
formulation. In order that these scientific concepts shall
serve as hints of a 'spirit' in nature, they must be con-
strued as substances and invested with characters drawn
from the confused feeling of effort.* Religion will indeed

' E. Du Bois-Reymond^ Vber die Crenien desKaiurerketuiens, an uddresa
at the Scientific Congress at Leipzig, 1E73; cf. ninth ediUon, p. 51, For
the sequel, d. Haeckel: Riddle of the Unhtrse. p. tSo sq.; Fr, Paulsen:
tntrBduclitm to Philosophy, trans, by F. TbiUy, p. 77; James: Humo»
Immortalily, p. «i; etc.

• See above, pp. 71-71.


I


LIMITS OF SCIENCE 87

be reduced to extremities when it is dependent on the
vagaries of the scientific imagination.

In the second place, even though such scientific concepts
were cooverted into spiritual substances, they would still
yield no profit to religion. Hylozoism, or even panpsy-
chism, as a theory of the ultimate matter, is for religious
purposes no better than atomism, and no worse. Religion
k indifferent to the question of substance. For religion is
made of hope and fear; it is a sohcitude for certain values.
Its justification requires that the cosmos, whatever it be
made of, shall in the end yield to desires and ideals — shall
in short, be good. And this requirement the new science
satisfies no better than the old. For science does not deal
with value, but with the quantilalhe constancies exhibited
in natural processes. Whether these processes take place
for better or for worse, it does not inquire.* The ex-
planation by ends, the reference of events to purposes, it
seeks to dispense with altogether. A philosophy of religion
must itself add the judgment of value. II faith is to be
justified, it must be shown that the good determines events
and is not a mere phosphorescent glimmer on their surface.*
Science does not deny any such conclusions; but neither
will science be led to any such conclusion — for the reason
that its subject-matter and its methods do not permit.
The intensive cultivation of science has led, and will always
lead, to the rejection of religious hypotheses as irrelevant.
In terms of its ' facts,' and its experimental technique, such
hypotheses are unwarranted and unverifiable.

The philosophical justification of optimistic religion
involves, then, a critique of science; not a refutation of
science, but a delimitation of science — a proof that science,
strictly construed, is not all. The critique of science thus
constitutes the religious sequel to science; and we shall
pass in review the several contentions upon which such a
critique is at present based.

§ 2. Before dealing with the criticisms of science that are
' C(. above, pp. is-jS. ' Cf. below, pp. 341-341.


88 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

peculiarly characteristic of contemporary philosophy, I de-
sire briefly to allude to a method of criticism that was once
N.turaUam»Qd common, but is DO w obsolescent. I refer to the
SuperaatursUsm argument for miracles. A miracle is a breach
of scientific law; that is, the failure of a scientific law to
obtain mlkin its proper field. Thus a motion that did
not obey the laws of motion would be a miracle; as
would a Euclidean triangle that did not conform to the
theorems of Euclidean geometry. But the notion of a
miracle in this sense reflects an antiquated conception of
natural law. When laws were thought of as divorced
from their subject-matter, and imposed upon it from with-
out, it was possible to think of their being obeyed or dis-
obeyed without ceasing to 'hold." But scientific laws
are now understood to be descriptions of their subject-
matter. And there can be no such thing as a breach of the
law, in this sense. For if things do not behave as the law
stipulates, it follows that the law is incorrect. Were a
Euclidean triangle found whose interior angles were not
equal to i8o°, it would be necessary to retract the corre-
sponding theorem; and were there empirical evidence of a
word's converting water into wine, it would be necessary
to amend the laws of chemistry to meet the case. For
when an event falls under the terms of the law, it consti-
tutes one of the data which the law purports to describe,
and which it must describe if it is to be a law at all.

The disputes between science and reUgion in the age that
has just passed have turned largely upon this issue. The
successive defeats of religion have been due to the fact that
its defenders have put it in a false position. The validity
of religion has been made to turn upon the failure of science
within its own field. And naturally enough, the apologists
of religion have, within that field, been no match for their
scientific opponents. The Copernican hypothesis of the
motion of the earth, the nebular hypothesis of its origin,
and the geological hypothesis of its age and history,

■ Cf. K. Pearson's Crammar of Science, Cb. HI, ^^m.


I


LIMITS OF SCIENCE 89

were arrived at by regarding the earth as a natural body
Uke other natural bodies. Religion, starting from the
unique place of the earth in the historical drama of salva-
tion, was led to assert its uniqueness in other respects also.
There resulted the ambiguous and untenable position of
acknowledging the earth's bodily character, and at the
same time declining to apply to it the conclusions of those
who, without ulterior motive, and with the maximum of skill
and information, devoted themselves to the study of bodies.

The same thing happened in the case of man. His
bodily functions come within the range of statics, hydro-
dynamics, aerodynamics, and chemistry; while as an animal
organism, he belongs to the subject-matter of biology and
physiological psychology. And similarly the Scriptures,
as historical documents, must necessarily be submitted to
the methods of historical, archaeological, and philological
research. The apwlogists of religion made the mistake of
disputing the findings of these several sciences, and under-
took an unequal contest with experts in their own fields of
study. The result was inevitable. Science, because free
from ulterior motives, and superior in technique, prevailed;
and religion, regarded as an ineffectual protest against
advancing enlightenment, lost prestige,'

§ 3. It is characteristic of the contemporary critique of
science to accept science as a whole. The philosophy of
religion no longer attempts to meet science
Charactcrol °" '^^ °^"^ grounds, and to dispute questions
Contemporary of detail that lie within its province. It is
^^^°' admitted that, relatively to its method and
subject-matter, the verdict of science is final
and unimpeachable. Science must be dealt with as a
system which is complete in its own terms. The dif-
ference between science and religion no longer turns upon
questions of fact, but upon a fundamental question of
point of view or method.

' CI. Andrew D. While's A Hiihry of the Warfare cf Scienee with

Thtalogy in Christendom, passim.


90


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


Religion must accept, once for all, "the concatenation
of phenomena"; and abandon the " self -contradictory re-
ligious supernaturalism " that "attempts self-satisfaction
by transfiguring a fragment torn from the temporal series
of history." Religion and true philosophy do not abide
here but in the "eternal,"' We must concede the scien-
tist's claim of the universal ramification of "causal con-
nections"; but the hope of deliverance lies in the immediate
qualification— "jo Jar as the scientific interest is concerned."
For the scientist forgets "that all this causal explanation
has no meaning whatsoever, and his statements no truth,
and his universe no reality, if he and we are not presup-
posing an idealistic belief in those absolute standards of
eternal values by which we can discriminate the true and
untrue, the good and the bad, the real and the unreal."*
"The deepest and most thorough reconciliation of Science
and Religion which it is possible to conceive," says another
philosopher, "puts an end in principle to the unworthy
bickerings between them about the territories of each, and
the futile attempts at the delimitation of their borders,"
permitting "each to claim the whole of experience — in its
own fashion." "Science may justly deal with all things
... so may Religion." But there is a deeper ground
for both, since "both are means of transmuting the crude
'matter' of 'appearance' into forms better, truer, more
beautiful and more real."'

Thus it may be said that the religio-philosophical critique
of science has on the whole abandoned the old super-
naturalistic ground. In other words, it no longer attempts
to make exceptions, and to dispute the rule of natural law
in specific localities of nature. The integrity of science is
acknowledged, and whatever criticism is urged against
science is urged against it as a system.

' R. M. Wcnlcy: Modern Tbougkl and Ihe Crisis in Bclitf, pp. 78, 119,
jj8.

' H. Mdostcrberg : Scienee and Idealism, p. 70 (iulics mine).

■ F. C. 5. SchiUer: Riddlei ef Ihe Sphinz, third edition, [^. 463-464
(last italics mine).


I

I
I


LIMITS OF SCIENCE 91

§ 4. But the old warfare between science and religion
has not wholly ceased. There is a lingering spirit of hos-
Tht Fallibility tility that still stands in the way of mutual
of Science sympathy and understanding. It appears on
the side of science, in the 'anti-metaphysical' polemics
of such writers as Pearson, and in the irreverent animus
of such writers as Haeckel. On the side of religious
philosophy it appears in a disposition to disparage science,
to behttle its achievements, and exploit its failures and
shortcomings.

This disposition pervades what is perhaps the most
monumental critique of science that has recently appeared
in the English language — James Ward's Naturalism and
Agnosticism. While this book aims to refute naturalism
rather than science, the author nevertheless repeatedly
argues from the incomplete success of science.' He
points out the "lacuna" of science, such as the gap between
the organic and the inorganic realms. He reminds us, in
other words, that there are scientilic problems that the
scientist has not yet solved! He suggests contradictions
within the body of scientific truth; and dwells upon the
uncertainty of scientific hypotheses that are not as yet com-
pletely verified. As if ail human knowledge did not, at
any historical moment, have its residual ignorance, its
outstanding difficulties, its transitive phrases, and its haunt-
ing doubts! Indeed, the frankness with which science
has avowed these limitations — these penalties of human
frailty, and risks of human temerity — merits confidence
and not distrust.

Professor Ward finds evidence of the unreliability of
science above all in the fact that its theories must perpetu-
ally submit to correction. He quotes Boltzmanni "Today
the battle of opinion rages tempestuously. . . , What

' The reader may be interested in referring lo tlic replies of J. E. Creigh-
ton, and of Professor Ward himself. lo this criticism. C(. Jm^nal 0/ PkU..
Psych., and Scientific Mrlhod!. Vol. I (1904), Nos. 10, u. The present
writer's rejoinder, from which parts of the present tcit are draurn, appeared
in the same Joumol, Vol. I, No. 13.


92


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


will the outcome be? . . , Will mechanical models in any
case persist, or will new, non-mechanical models prove
better adapted, and the component factors of energy con-
trol absolutely the domain? ... Is it possible that the
conviction will ever arise that certain representations are
per sc exempt from displacement by simpler and more
comprehensive ones, that they are true? Or is it perhaps
the best conception of the future to imagine something of
which one has absolutely no conception? " And the author
concludes a criticism of Principal Riickcr with the com-
ment, "after all, then, he is only defending a working
hypothesis, and one, moreover, that has lost greatly in
prestige in the last half century."'

Now the folly of such arguments lies in the fact that
they can be urged with equal force against any human
pretension. It amounts, all of it, to no more than the
hoary commonplace that mortal mind is fallible. Any
assertion whatsoever may prove to be mistaken, even
Professor Ward's criticisms, and the "Spiritual Monism"
of his own adoption. This fact of human fallibility, since
it may be urged against all knowledge, cannot be urged
against any. It justifies a certain modesty and open-
mindedness in thinkers, but can never constitute ground
for the rejection of any particular theory. Knowledge can
be disproved only by better knowledge. If a specific
scientific theory is doubtful, well and good; but it can
justly be regarded as doubtful only for scientific reasons,
and these had best be left to the scientist himself. It is
scarcely necessary to add, that if variety and change of
opinion are to be urged against any branch of knowledge,
the philosopher of religion can least afford to urge them.
For of all cognitive enterprises his is on this score the
most in need of indulgence.

Where the general fallibility of human knowledge is
urged against a special branch of knowledge, it betrays
an over-eager and blind partisanship. An apologist for

^ KaluralisM and Agnoitkism, sccoad edition, Vol. I, pp. 307, 314.


LIMITS OF SCIENCE 93

reli^ous orthodoxy writes as follows: " Men ot science may
be right or wrong in their deductions from the fragmentary
information possessed by them. Generally they are wrong,
as is clearly enough shown by the fact that a large part of the
work of each generation of men of science consists in over-
turning or modifying the theories of their predecessors."
Hence " the utter futility of setting up the deductions of the
human reason against the assertions of the Word of God."'
To such ideas as these Professor Ward virtually gives
countenance. But how reactionary, and how fatuous!
Science and religion are both institutions which serve man.
A religious believer, since he is a man, needs science; as a
scientist needs religion. Hence a philosopher of religion
who seeks to discredit science, injures himself. He abets
a domestic quarrel. There can be no victories for sdence
that do not promote man and all his works, including relig-
ion; nor any defeat of sdence that is not a common
disaster. For sdence and religion are the supporting
wings of one army engaged in the conquest of ignorance
and death.

§ 5. The critidsms of sdence to which I shall now
invite attention avoid in the main both the obsolete policy
^ „. of interfering in the affairs of sdence and the

The Disparage- , , " . , . ., „ .

mcDKjthe obsolescent ammus of partisan stnfe. Science
Descriptive jg jq be acknowledged as unimpeachable when

Mnbod , .... , i*i"i

it acts within its proper sphere; and is admitted
to friendly alliance with philosophy and religion. But it
is held to be inherently lacking in self-suffidency and
finality. It presupposes something else; and that which it
presupposes is more fundamental, or more 'real,' and
confers priority on philosophy and reb'gion.

I shall iirst consider what may be regarded as the
methodological critique of sdence.* According to this

' P. Mauro: "Life in the Word," published in a series of pamphleu
issued in defence of Christian orthodoxy, and entitled The Fundanteiiicls,
Vol. V, p. 47.

'This critique is intimately connected with the pragmAtist's attack
iqioo " iatcUectiutUsm," and will receive further treatment in Chapter X.


94


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


critique the concepts of science are 'mere' descriptions,
and the laws of sdence hypothetical or 'contingent.'
Science, although sj-stematic and complete in its own terms,
cannot, owing to the nature of its method, yield reality. Its
findings are true only in the limited sense of being conven-
ient. They are not necessary, but only expedient. Like
conventions, with which they may be classed, they are
not inevitable, but optional and arbitrary.

It is significant that this critique of science is based upon
the acceptance of what I have called 'the analytical ver-
sion' of scientific concepts.' It urges against science the
very refinement and exactness of its method. That which
in the judgment of critical naturalism commends science,
and justifies its exclusive claim to the title of knowledge, is
here regarded as a deficiency.

James Ward, again, will serve as an illustration. This
author traces with admirable lucidity the development
which such conceptions as 'matter,' 'mass,' 'force,' and
' energy ' have undergone in the history of science. He finds
that these terms now connote factors in the exact calcula-
tions and formulas of science, and are no longer charged
with the vague ontological predicates of common sense.
So far the author's exposition is unexceptionable and in-
structive. But somehow at the same time that science has
been growing more exact, it has lost its hold upon reality.
"To distinguish them from the old school, whom we may
furly term physical realists, we might call the new school
physical symbolists, . . . The one believes that it is getting
nearer to the ultimate reality, and leaving mere appearances
behind it: the other believes that it is ordy substituting a
generalized descriptive scheme that is intellectually manage-
able, for the complexity of concrete facts which altogether
overtask our comprehension." To this symbolistic version
of modem sdence. Professor Ward subscribes. He quotes

But it is by no means peculiar to pragmatism; it is, ia fact, empbyed by
the great majority of contemporary opponents o( naturalism.
'Cf. above, pp. 60-61.


I


LIMITS OF SCIENCE


95


approvingly Karl Pearson's characterization of scientific
laws as "conceptual shorthand." Or as he himself expresses
it, "the conception of mechanism enables us to summarize
details that would otherwise bewilder us," but "this cannot
possibly nullify our independence." "Such conceptions
may furnish an admirable descriptive scheme of 'the
motions that occur in nature,' but they explain nothing."
"In short, one may take it as definitely conceded by the
physicists themselves that descriptive hypothesis takes the
place of real theory,"'

But what can this disparagement of description possibly
mean? Is it possible to mention any motive of thought
more completely governed by the nature of its subject-
matter than the motive of description? Description means
the reporting of things as they are found. The gradual
substitution, in the procedure of silence, of description for
'explanation,' means simply that science has grown more
rigorously empirical. 'Explanation,' as contrasted with
description, suggests a reference to trans-experiential powers,
and mysterious essences, or a one-sided version of things in
terms of human interests.' Science has abandoned explana-
tion in this sense, because such attempts diverted the
attention from its proper subject-matter, and engaged it in
irrelevant speculation. If we are to believe some of the
critics of science, description is a sort of game, and the
adoption of this method a sort of senDe playfulness that has
overtaken science in its degeneracy. It happens, however,
that this descriptive period of science is the period of its most
brilliant successes. And science is of all branches of human
knowledge the one in which caprice is most fatal. For
science is engaged at close quarters; dealing as it does with
the proximate environment, its findings are promptly veri-
fied, or discredited; its day of judgment is always near at
hand. It is impossible that science should have succeeded,

•JwnesWaixl: ^>^ fit. Vol. I, pp. 304-305, 83; VoL H, r). jji, 88-89,
73-

'ScE above, pp. 53, S4-


96 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

save by a scrupulous fidelity to fact. This is what the
descriptive method properly signifies. It is a discrimi-
nating disregard of the irrelevant, and a single-minded
renunciation of ulterior motives.

And yet Professor Ward would have us believe that
description is somehow arbitrary, that it does not neces-
sarily reflect the nature of things. "To suppose," he says,
" that the rigorous determinism deducible from the abstract
scheme — for the simple reason that it has been put into
its fundamental premises — must apply also to the real
world it has been devised to describe, is just as absurd as —
to take a very trivial illustration — it would be to say that
a man must fit his coat, and not that the coat must fit the
man."' As though a coat could hefilkd to a man without
the man's fitting the coat, or a scheme be "devised to de-
scribe," the real world without "applying" to it!

§ 6. But what, it may be objected, are we to make of
the formal criteria of the descriptive method, such, e.g., as
The Idea] of simphcity? Is this not, after all, an festhetic
Descriptive OF subjective criterion, a matter of convenience,

°°""' rather than a revelation of reality? Professor

Ward can quote scientists, in their capacity as exponents
of naturalism, in support of such a view. But does science
justify such a view?

In the first place, it is necessary to distinguish within
the system of science itself, between written symbols or
signs, and the concepts, ratios, and laws to which they refer.
There is evidently a difference between the Greek letter jr,
or the mark \/, and wkai these signs mean. Signs are
conventions, arbitrarily chosen and agreed on; and their
abbreviation of complexity is a matter of convenience.
But this does not in the least affect the status of the things
which the signs mean. Because the signs which I use in the
equation, 2-1-2 = 4, ^re arable, lower font, etc., I am not
justified in concluding that the numerical equality expressed
is similarly contingent on the choice of language and type.
'Op. cit., Vol, n, pp. 67-68.


I


UMITS OF SCIENCE 97

Yet this confusion, obvious as it is, has played no small
part in the notion that descriptive analysis is artificial and
unreal.'

If it be admitted that the formulas of scientific descrip-
tion express definite logical and mathematical relation-
ships, whose meaning and truth is independent of the
exigencies of discourse, it may yet be contended that the
application of these relationships to nature is arbitrary. I
can only reply that just these relations are found to subsist
in nature; if they were not. the scientist would not account
them verified. If it be objected that nature never exactly
corresponds to such formula, I may then ask for specific
cases. And when the disparity between the case and
the formula is pointed out, some new and similar formula
will be at the same time exhibited.*

But, it may be asked, does not the formula always leave
something out; does it not, for the sake of practical con-
venience, always over*simplify nature? Of course it leaves
something out. In empirical procedure, it is as important
to omit the irrelevant as to include that which is germane.
And it is further true, as has been stated above,' that
science is peculiarly, if not exclusively, interested in dis-
covering identities and constants. And these find expres-
sion in the formulas of science to the exclusion of individual
differences. But it does not follow that this procedure
involves (roer-simplification. For that would mean either
that the formulas omit something which they intend to
cover; or that the idenrities and constants they do cover
are not actually present in nature. But neither of the
charges can be substantiated.* Science abstracts, but does
so deliberately. And to abstract is not to invent or
falsify — but only to discriminate and select.

" Sec below, pp. 7311-234. ' See below, pp. 136-137. ' See pp. S4-SS-
' Were sdence to assert that nature is only what is eipressed in the
[ormuia, it would be suilty of what Jmnes calls "vicious intellectual ism."
As a matter of [act science makes no such itsserlion. On the contrary it
q>ecific&Uy provides for individual differences by its use of 'variables.'
See bdow, pp. 334-135.


98 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

It will appear, in short, that the ideal of 'descriptive
economy' is not a fantastic hobby, but a canon of knowl-
edge. The discovery of this ideal has not debased science,
but has enriched logic and methodology. Through adopt-
ing it, science has not departed from reality, but has
acquired a closer and more sure grasp of reality.

§ 7. There is one further charge against the descriptive
method, that is held to involve not only physical science,
TheOpiionof but logic and mathematics as well. It is said
Hypoiheaes jj^at the cHoice of hypotheses is optional.' Now
as respects physical science, it is clear that this option has
to do with the preliminary stages of investigation, and not
with the conclusion finally adopted. The trial of a h>-pothe-
sis is optional ; but its success, or verification, is determined.
Furthermore, the internal relations of the hypothesis itself
are determined. The hypothesis selected for trial must
be logically and mathematically correct.

But it may now be urged that logical and mathematical
correctness is oprional. And this consideration assumes
a growing importance in the light of recent developments
in the philosophy of mathematics. It is often said that
logical and mathematical truths depend on the arbitrary
selection of posltdcUes? Time will show, I believe, that such
expressions are one-sided, and, when taken unqualifiedly,
misleading. There are evidently compensating considera-
tions. In the first place, no logician and mathematician,
however modem he may be, invents postulates in order
to build systems on them; like the physical scientist, he
searches for the postulates that mil determine certain facts.
As a recent writer expresses it, while postulates are not
'necessary from," they are "necessary for; namely, for

' Cf. e.g. F. C. S. Schiller: "Axioms as Postulates," in Ptrsonal Idtaihm.
Cf. on the other hand, T, P. Nunn: The Aims of Scimtijk llethod, Ch. V.

•Cf. e.g. E. V. Hunlingtnn: "Sets of Independent Postulates (or the
Algebra ot Lope," Transactions 0/ the Amer. Math. Sat.. Vol. V, 1904.
"These postulates are simply conditions arbitrarily imposed on the funda-
mental concepts," etc. (p. 290). Cf. also Poincar£: Stitnce and Bypotlusii,
pp. 37-39-


I


LIMITS OF SCIENCE


99


the solution of the problem." ' So postulates are in the
end verified, and not merely chosen. In the second place,
there are well recognized canons or criteria, by which
postulates may be judged, such as 'purity,' 'consistency,'
'independence,' etc.* And finally, all systems, whether the
postulates be chosen or not, are made up of terms, rela-
tions, propositions and implications, which, whatever is
done with them, are certainly not chosen to be what they
are. In short, here, as elsewhere, thought accommodates
itself to things, and its option is conhned to selection from
among them.

§ 8. In the background of every mind that hesitates
to accept the descriptive method as vahd and adequate,
will be found one or both of the notions of
Cause, aad explanation which science has gradually aban-
■Mere'De- doned, the notion of 'power' or the notion
of 'good.'' More commonly the two will be
fused in the notion of ' activity.' This is regarded as the
real cause, by which 'mere* description is judged and
found wanting.* It becomes a question as to whether the
development of scientific method has thrown light on
the meaning of 'cause'; or has simply abandoned it. The
answer depends, evidently, on the validity of this extra-
scientific notion of cause, which science once employed,
and which is now defended by the critics of science,

The notion depends entirely upon the inner experience
of activity. Fortunately this issue cannot be argued at
length. A man must look for himself, as Hume did, and
see whether he finds in the depths of his own nature, o power
to do, which is clear, simple, and self-sufficient. He who
makes the experiment, and resolutely declines to accept
the confusion and vagueness of famiUar immediacy as
profound insight, will, I beUeve, conclude as Hume did.

'Karl Schmidt: "Critique of Cognition and its Prindples." Jour, of
Phil.. Psych., and Sci^ific Utikals, Vol. VI (i^oq), pp. 181-181.
• Cf. Schmidt, ap. cii., pasnm. • See ftbove, pp. SJ-S4-

*Cf. e^. James Ward: op. cU., Vol I, p. 64; Vol. 11, pp. 75, 337, tAl-


100 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

He will find sensations of bodily tensions, feelings of
expectancy, etc., but no 'power.'' In other words, he will
find what empirical analysis finds everywhere, a manifold
of terms in relation. And when one proceeds to explain
such a manifold, one will be led, as science in its field has
been led, to the discovery of descriptive laws.

I conclude, in other words, that in adopting the descrip-
tive method, science has exchanged a naive and hasty
notion of cause for a refined and rigorous notion. In the
sense of the term that is most intelligible, the cause is the
law, or its implication. Not necessarily the mechanical
law; for analysis and description is, as we have seen, by
no means limited to the type exhibited in physical science.
But a logical cause, a mathematical cause, an ethical cause,
will, I believe, turn out, in each case, to be a law or con-
stant.' And if this is so, science is to be credited with the
descriptive method, and not debited.

§ 9. The critique of science which has just been examined
might be termed a 'methodological' critique, as distin-
guished from the 'metaphysical' critique to
^Sp^^d"" ^^'^ we must now turn. According to this
Time. The critique, scjence has to do with ' appearance ' or
^Mtiao gu- 'phenomenon' rather than 'reality,' because
of the nature of its basal concepts, space and
time. These concepts, it is argued, are inherently contra-
dictory or lacking in self-sufficiency; and physical nature,
as the realm of space and time, must be supposed to be in
the end resolved into something else. They must be
corrected, or 'overcome,' in some higher unity, as evil is
held to be transmuted into good in the providence of God.

The classic prototype of this critique is to be found in
Kant.' According to that writer, space and time are

' See below, pp. 161-J64. Cf. Hume; Enquiry Concemini the Buman
Undmlanding, Sclby-Bigge's edition, pp. 60-73.

• For a discussion of the application 10 ethics see below, pp. 116-117.

' BerRSon's critique of tiroe is a blend of the methodologicst and meta-
physical critiques; it is examined below, pp. 230, 134-135. 155-361, Fot
Rant, c(. Critique ef Pun Season, Max MUUer'i translation, second edition,
pp. 328 sq.


LIMITS OF SCIENCE : lOI

vitiated by "antinomies." This means that on thesupposi-
tioQ of the reality of space and time, it is possible to profV,
with equal certainty, several contradictory pairs of theses -
and counter- theses; such as that space has boundaries
and has not, time has a beginning and has not, space and ■
time have indivisible elements and have not, etc. The
moral, according to Kant, is that we must reject the original
supposition, and deny the reality of space and lime. If
we regard them merely as acts of synthesis, they become
indeterminate; or rather they derive their determination
from something else, such as the subject-matter to be
synthesized, or the motive actuating the operation of
synthesis.'' It is like saying that number is not indepen-
dently real, but is only the operation of counting.\ The
question as to how many numbers there are will then'bave
no meaning. There will be as many numbers as the
material counted requires, or as any one has occasion to
enumerate. Similarly, space and time are held to con-
form to the subject-matter to which they are applied, or
to the motive governing their employment. And it is in
terms of these non-spacial and non-temporal factors, in
terms of something 'higher' than nature or outade of it,
that the world assumes its final shape.

In more recent times the supposed paradoxes of space
and time have been traced back to a more fundamental
paradox involved in 'term' and 'relation.' It is argued
that if two terms are to be related, they must each be
related to the relation, and since these interpKilated rela-
tions must again be related, we are launched upon
an infinite regress. Thus the English idealist, F. H.
Bradley, is brought to the conclusion "that a relational
way of thought — any one that moves by the machinery
of terms and relations ■ — must give appearance, and not
truth." ' Or, as his disciple, A. E. Taylor, puts it, it is
in some "supra-relational" mode of experience, in which
even the concept of whole and part has been transcended,

' Appcaranct and Rcaiily, first edition, p. 33; cl. Ch. Ill, passim.


102.- ''fcRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

"tbat we come nearest to experiencing the real as it
ie^Hy is." ' Since the space-time world is essentially
.Relational, and afFords the most perfect instance of the
concept of whole and part, it is thus discredited, without
■ entering into the further difficulties added by space and
time themselves. Since, however, the critique of relations
does not apply exclusively to science, but applies equally
to all knowledge employing the analytical method, one
need not undertake the examination of it here. Suffice it
to say that Bradley's view has been repeatedly refuted, not
only by "outsiders," but by fellow-ideahsts who are in
thorough accord with his general philosophical position.'

A characteristic contemporary revival of the Kantian
proof of the unreality of space and time is to be found in
A. E. Taylor's EXemenls of Metaphysics, from which I have
already quoted. The supposition of the reahty of space
and time places us in the following dilemma. "We must
either arbitrarily refuse to continue the indefinite regress
beyond the point at which its difhculties become apparent,
as is done by the assertion that space and time have finite
boundsor indivisible parts, or we must hold that the absolute
experience actually achieves the summation of an unending
series." But "with the recognition that space and time
are phenomenal, . . . the difficulty disappears." For we
may now say "that space and time, being constructions of
our own, are really neither finite nor infinite series, but are
the one or the other according to the purposes for which we
use our construction," In other words, of space and time
per se, we can say neither that they have, or have not,
boimdaries and indivisible parts. They may be regarded
in the one way or in the other, according to the exigencies
of thought. In themselves they are ambiguous. And we
relieve ourselves of further responsibihty in the matter

' ElemcHls ef lietaphytUs, pp. 147. 153; d- Ch. IV.

• Cf. below, pp. 157-158. The best refutation of Bradley b to be found in
James's PturaOstic Universe. Appendix A. "The Thing and its Relations,"
passim. For an Idealistic reply lo Bradley, ct. J, Royce: The World and
tin Itidindual, Vol. I, Supplementary Essay.


I


UMITS OF SCIENCE


103


by concluding that this ambigiuty proves that in "the
absolute experience " they must be " taken up, rearranged,
and transcended" — although "precisely kow this is
effected, we, from oiu finite standpoint, cannot presume to
say." '

§ 10. Now what shall we say of this argument? In the
first place, it is notable and significant that the problems
Infinity and of Infinity and continuity, which underlie the
Continuity 'paradoxes' of space and time, are today
receiving marked attention from logicians and mathema-
ticians who have no metaphysical predilections. These
writers, having no "absolute experience" to which to rele-
gate their difficulties, are compelled to overcome them for
themselves. They proceed upon the naive assumption
that since there are such things as infinity and continuity,
whatever place they may turn out afterwards to hold in
the universe at large, it must be possible to examine and
describe them. The conclusions which they have reached
may for our present purpose be expressed very simply.*

Li the first place, it is held that the alternatives which
constitute a dilemma for Kant, Taylor, et al., are not
strictly coordinate. For the objection to one is empirical,
while the objection to the other is dialectical. Thus,
(or example, the least unit of spacial extension that can be
observed or defined is evidently divisible by two. There
is no gainsaying the foci. On the other hand, if one asserts
this and concludes that spacial extension is always divis-
ible, his opponent cannot point out that such is not the
fact, but only that it contradicts some preconceived notion,
such as, a ivhole is made up of parts, etc. Empirically,
then, it seems proper to conclude that since space is in point
of fact infinitely divisible, we must, if necessary, amend the

'A. E. Taylor, op. cit., pp. i6o, J63. 1 have disctassed this writer's
position mote (uUy in Uind, N. S., Vol. XVI, looS.

■For full details, the reader may consult B. Russell's Principlts
of Ualhemalics. Ch. XLII, XLIII; or E. V. Huntington's "The Con-
Unuura as a Type of Ordei," in the Annals of MoihettuUks, Vols. VI, VII
(190s).


104 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

notions which it contradicts.' In other words, non-meta-
physical mathematicians and logiciaiis agree that space and
time are infinite, and devote themselves on the one hand to
the description of the fact, and on the other hand to the
removal of the dialectical difficulties that it involves.

Thus it is contended that the notion of a whole as 'made
up of parts ' involves a confusion between the notion of a
whole as containing its parts, and a whole as arrived at by
the successive enumeration and s>Tithesis of its parts.
The latter notion is subjective and accidental. We may,
for example, define a line as an infinite class of points. It
is true that a line cannot be 'made up' by adding point
to point, but why should it be, since we can defne it as a
whole? An infinite series cannot be exhausted by the
successive enumeration of its terms; but why should it be,
when we can define the law oj the series? In other words,
there is no paradox in knowing an infinite whole, once we
rid ourselves of the notion that to kxiow means to take
a successive inventory of the content.

Or consider the ancient paradox of motion.' It is held
that Achilles cannot overtake the tortoise, because he can
cut down the tortoise's lead only by an infinite, that is,
endless, series of diminishing gaps. But this simply means
that the operation of overtaking is a continuous process. If
it were necessary for us to understand this process by
enumerating every least phase of it, we should never con-
clude, and would be brought in despair to say that Achilles
never can overtake the tortoise. But we need do nothing

' It may even be necessary lo conclude, contrary to the usual notion,
thai a part may in a certain sense be equal lo the whole, Cf. e.g. Royce:
The World and Iht Iiuiimdual, Vol. I, Supplementary Essay. I am not
■ure that this is the case; but it might be the cs.se. Tn other words, the
notion of whole and part is subject to correction in the light of any instances
of it that may be observed; and an 'infinite' and 'continuous' whole

• For an interesting popular discussion of this and similar paradoiea
in the light of modern mathematics, cf. James: Sone^Prabtrms oj FhHoscpky,
Chap. X, XI. What follows above is in part a critidsin of this author^s


LIMITS OF SCIENCE


105


of the kind, since we can define the particular series in
question, and provide by formula for all of its terms. And
if it be objected that Achilles, at least, in traversing the
intervening space, must successively pass through all of
its least units, we may reply that he has a like infinitely
divisible time in which to do it.

This very meagre treatment of the matter will serve, I
trust, to suggest the method by which the seeming para-
doxes of space and time may be dispelled. Such a method
serves not only to throw Ught on the nature of space and
time, and so to save the already over-burdened 'absolute'
from the necessity of assuming entire responsibiHty for
them; but it also justifies space and time, and establishes
their reality in their own terms. In short, if science be
defective or limited, it is not because space and time, its
fundamental concepts, are unreal.

§11, The most important critique of science is yet to
be considered: that critique, namely, which rests on the
assertion of the priority of consciousness. Since
J^^^^^'4"' ^^^ assertion constitutes the central thesis of
idealism, and, as such, will occupy us during
the nest three chapters, a brief mention of it must suffice
here.

In his book on Hume, Huxley writes as follows: "If the
materialist affirms that the universe and all its phenomena
are resolvable into matter and motion, Berkeley replies,
True; ft)ut what you call matter and motion are known to
us only as forms of consciousness; their being is to be
conceived or known; and the existence of a state of con-
sciousness, apart from a thinking mind, is a contradiction
in terms, I conceive that this reasoning is irrefragable.
And therefore, if I were obliged to choose between absolute
materialism and absolute idealism, I should feel compelled
to accept the latter alternative." ' Huxley's acceptance
of this argument is very significant. For in the great con-
troveraes of the last century, he has been one of the most
>T. H. Huxley; Burnt, p. 179.


I06 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

distinguished protagonists of science. Despite his sden-
tilic alEliations and habits of mind, he was prevented from
being an idealist only because he was an agnostic. The
" reasoning " which constitutes the chief support of idealism
he regarded as "irrefragable" — in common with the
majority of the philosophers pi his own and the present
generation.

Science, it is argued, abstracts things from their relation
to knowledge. Concretely, everything is 'object' for a
subject; something perceived, thought, or willed. This is
supposed to become apparent at the moment when one
becomes reflective or self-conscious — at the moment when
one recognizes the central place of that 'I' which is
naively overlooked, or, in the case of science, deliberately
omitted. The real nature of things is grasped only when
things are taken in this context. Viewed in this light,
the world of science loses its self-sufficiency. It is, to be
sure, internally systematic and consistent. But we are
now to recognize that it is literally the world of scietKe;
formed to suit the purpose of scientific thought, and express-
ing, in the last analysis, the capacities and motives of
knowledge. So it is to knowledge itself^ to sense, thought,
or purpose, that one must look for the root and stem of
reality.

The critical examination of idealism must be reserved
until we shall have become more fully acquainted with its
grounds. But it is important to point out the essential
agreement between idealism and the motive or standpoint
of religion. We have already seen that while science, on
the one hand, seeks to ehminate the personal equation, and
to banish from mind the hopes and fears that are at stake,
rehgion, on the other hand, makes the application and
draws the moral.' Religion, in other words, is essentially
a judgment of the bearing of reality on life. Now idealism
asserts that reality is grounded in life, and ultimately con-
trolled in its interests. Idealism not only construes things
' See above, pp. jS-ig.


I

■

I


\


LIMITS OF SCIENCE


107


in their bearing on life, as religion does; but affirms that
such a construction of things affords the only true insight
into their nature. It not only adopts the method of
rehgion, but affirms the priority of that method over the
method of detachment and self-elimination adopted by
science. Thus idealism comes to be identified with the
institution of religion; and to be recognized as its cham-
pion against naturalism.

But this alignment of intellectual forces is confusing
and misleading. In the first place, idealism, as a special
theory, acquires unmerited prestige through its alliance
with reUgion — which is a universal human interest. The
validity which attaches to the interest and the institution
in which it finds expression, is transferred to the theory.
For the religious method has its incontrovertible rights.
Reality does have a bearing on life, and it is necessary that
reality should be so construed. But it does not follow
that such a construction should, as the idealist would have
us believe, take precedence of all other constructions. It
may be that while reality affects life, it does so only acci-
dentally; for philosophy to overlook this possibility, by
employing the religious method exclusively, would be
sheer bias. To this bias idealism is peculiarly liable.

In the second place, the association of idealism with the
religious motive tends, as we have seen, to encourage the
belief that philosophy is the same as religion. Idealism
has not hesitated to identify the standpoint of philosophy
in general with its own special bio-centric doctrine. But
this is to exclude ab initio a philosophy which shall survey
the totality of things dispassionately.' It is to beg the
question of the place of Ufe in reahty at large, and thus
connmit philosophy with reference to a question *hich it
should treat in a spirit of free and critical inquiry.

The central thesis of ideahsm, to the effect that conscious-
ness, especially in the form of cognition, is the creative and
sustaining principle in things, thus obUuns a certain
' See above, pp. 39-30, 40-41.


108 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

adventitious support from prevailing ideas concerning the
relations of science, religion, and philosophy. It has also
the support of certain dialectical arguments, which we
shall presently examine. The outcome of that examina-
tion cannot fairly be anticipated here. But we shall find, I
believe, that the arguments for idealism fail; and if so, the
critique of science on the ground of the priority of con-
sciousness is invalid.

§ 12. Are we then to conclude that science has no bounds,
and that the claims of an optimistic religion must therefore
sdenceaas ^ abandoned? There remains a very simple
UraiudBodr alternative. Without prejudice to the truth
of Truth ^f science or to the validity of its methods,

without disparagement of the reality of physical nature,
or the reduction of it to dependence on consciousness, it is
still open to us to conclude that science is not aU of truth,
nor physical nature all of being. That which distinguishes
such a critique of science is its recognition of science and
nature, as they stand. They are not partially true or real;
they are simply parts of truth and reality. And the other
parts, while they do not undo or transmute the fact, may
nevertheless put a wholly new face on the total situation.
They disprove every claim to the exclusive truth of science;
and provide a balance that may justify religion.

The ground on which such a critique of science stands
has already been stated.' Analysis shows that physical
science presupposes logic and mathematics; or, that physi-
cal reality is complex, and decomposable into more simple
terms and relations. Physical science has to do, further-
more, with certain features of physical reality. It describes
the quantitative constancies exhibited by physical change.
And there are other features exhibited even by bodies;
such, tor example, as their control, in the case of living
bodies, by desire and will. Thus, being is neither physical
in substance nor is it excluavely mechanical in behavior.


I


' See above, pp. 81-^4. I shaJl resumi
rdigious applications, in the final chapter.


this argument, tiiid amplify itf


LIMITS OF SCIENCE


109


Logic is prior to physics, in the sense that it has to do with
more elementary fonns of being; and ethics is at least
correlative with physics, since what it describes is as truly
found in the world as that which physics describes. And
logic and ethics, taken together with other equally unim-
peachable branches of philosophy, not only disprove the
generalizations of naturalism, but afford a basis for religious
beUef.

It cannot, I think, be denied that naturalism has gained
rather than lost by the usual tactics of its adversaries. It
has been put in the position of being the more desirable
alternative. As between naturalism and the traditional
supernaturalism, no one would now hesitate to choose.
And the polemic of idealism and pragmatism has similarly
enhanced the credit of the very object of their attack.
The charge of failure, the attempt to make capital out of
the fallibility of science, has reacted upon its authors. The
attacks upon the method of science have tended to create
the suppoation that the only alternative to naturalism is
inexactness or unreason. The assertion of the unreality
of space and time has not only failed to carry conviction,
but has given rise to the more effective counter -charge of
agnosticism and mysticism. And the attempt to disprove
naturalism by claiming the universal priority of conscious-
ness, has driven into the camp of naturalism many who
shrink from the paradoxes of subjectivism. As the only
alternative to supernaturalism, obscurantism, irrationalism,
agnosticism, mysticism, and subjectivism, — naturalism
has acquired a place of intellectual distinction which it does
not in fact merit. The greater the opportunity, then, for
a critique of science that shall do it strict justice; a critique
that shall neither, on the one hand, concede the extravagant
claims which naturalism makes in its behalf, nor, on the
other hand, through the extravagance of its coiintei-daims,
produce a reaction in its favor.


PART III


IDEALISM


CHAPTER VI

THE CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM^

§1. "The constant presupposition is, that a spiritual
life which is a unified whole is at work in the depths of our
^ „ , soul." These words, written by Rudolph

The General -rii -j-ii i cii

Meaning or i-ucKen,' admirably express the message oi ideal-
Moiicm Heal- jsm [o modem times. Idealism is a fonn of
spiritualism in which man, the finite individ-
ual, is regarded as a microcosmic representation of God,
the Absolute Individual. Man's spiritual nature is a '
revelation of the principle of reality, and his ideals an inti-
mation of the perfect and eternal reality. So that, but for
his limitations, man would be God; and taken together
with the balance of spiritual life, which compensates for
these limitations, he is God.

But a. characterization of idealism in terms so general as
these, while it helps to define its place among religious and
ethical motives, throws little light upon its technical
plulosophical meaning. To understand this it is necessary
to examine its method and proofs. And we then discover
that ideal ism rests fundamentally upon a t heory of knowh
edge. The supremacy of spirit is argued from the theory
bl the priority of the knowing consciousness itself, over all
with which it has to do. All things, it is contended, are
primarily 'objects'; and to be object means necessarily
to be 'for' something, to be in some sense the expression
or creation of a 'subject.' The so-called 'external world'
being in this manner reduced to knowledge, and knowledge
being construed as spiritual, the supremacy of spirit is


■ Tlu Lift ofUie spirit, Iraoa. by F. L. Pogson, p. i


114 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

established. This is the reply of idealism to naturalism;
and the justification which idealism affords to the religious
belief that the world at large is governed in the interest
of goodness.

The assertion of tke priority of the cognitive consciousness, ^m
the assertion i'h&i being is dependent on the knowing of it,Tm,y, "
then, fairly be regarded as the cardinal principle of idealism, ^
Only in the light of this principle can either the applica-
tions of idealism, or its own inner dialectical movement,
be comprehended. I shall attempt in the present chapter
to throw this principle into bold relief, by exami
origin, and formulating its fundamental proofs.

§ a. Modern idealism, defined in the light of this princi-
ple, may be clearly distinguished from ancient idealism,
„ or Platonism. Platonism is primarily the cul- '

Plalonic Idei]- , . , . , , . , -r , . ,,

ism.D[Tcieo- Hunation of a tendency which manifested itself
logical Ra- among all the pre-Socratics : a tendency of
which the central motive was the assertion of
the superiority of systematic or well-grounded knowledge
to mere opinion. Thus Parmenides distinguished betweeny 1
"the unshaken heart of persuasive truth," and "the opin-
ions of mortals in which is no true belief at all." Heraclitus
remarked that the truth differed from opinion in being one
and universal. "Though wisdom is common, yet the
many h've as if they had a wisdom of their own"; just as
" the waking have one and the same world, but the sleep-
ing turn aside each into a world of his own." '

Similarly with Plato, philosophy is primarily a means of
escape from the relativity and conflict of opinion. The
philosopher is "he who has magnificence of mind and is the
spectator of all time and all existence"; who "will not rest
in the multiplicity of individuals which is an appearance
only, but will go on — the keen edge will not be blunted,
neither the force of his desire abate until he have attained
the knowledge of the true nature of every essence by a
kindred power in the soul." True knowledge is marked by
' Bumct's Early Gttek Philosuphy, pp. 184, 140.


I
■


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM


11$


the kiad of object which it discovers or seeks, "the abso-
lute, eternal, and immutable," or "the things themselves,"
which, like the absolute square and the absolute diameter
of mathematics, "can only be seen with the eye of the mind."
And this insistence on the objectivity and permanence of '
truth is united with the speculative interest in complete-
ness of truth- The knowledge of the philosopher will be
not only unerring in point of certainty, but also unlim-
ited in point of sufficiency and generality. Thus Plato
represents also that philosophical tendency which has
come latterly to be termed 'absolutism.''

So far, in this summary of Plato, no provision has been
made for the moral element. Plato's 'absolute' is defined «
as the good, and in the order of the sciences, ethics is ele-
vated even above mathematics, " The excellence or
beauty or truth of every structure, animate or inanimate,
and of every action of man, is relative to the use for which
nature or the artist has intended them." ' In other words,
for Plato the tekological calegories are fundamental. And
this motive doubtless tended to contradict his rationalism,
and to create a certain affinity between him and those very
sophists who were his dearest foes. The fact remains, how-
ever, that so far as method was concerned, ancient idealism
was opposed, not to physical or mathematical science, but
to the laxity of common sense.' This is proved by Plato's
high esteem for mathematics as a means of intellectual
discipline, through which the philosopher might be eman-
cipated from personal bias and the evanescent chaos of
immediate experience, and brought to apprehend definite
conceptions and fixed principles.

§3. This rationalistic motive — critical, scientific, and^
speculative, which dominated constructive philosophy
among the ancients, found a more complete expresaon many

' C(. Mow, Chapter Vm. especiAlly pp. 167, 169-172.

* Plato's fUpubtic, Jowetl's UunsUticm, 479, 4S6, 490, jio, 6ai.

' This w&s laigdy due to th« fad thst the physical and mathematical
idenccs themselves wen not wholly fiee from teleology. The mechanical
Uai of science was not yet developed. Cf. above, p. 31.


Il6 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

centuries later in Spinoza. But in Spinoza it is so far •.
freed from all connexion with teleology as to provoke
Raiionaijsni a whoUy different ab'gnment of forces. In
^^^^ '^'^' the famous Appendix to Part I of the Eihks,
Spiaoia it is argued that an explanation of nature in

terms of final causes is necessarily anthropomorphic. Man
is virtually attempting to account for the absolute origin of
things in terms of that value which they have for him. He .^
assigns as reasons for the being of things those reasons which
would have moved him to create them. And where he can
find no such reason he simply imputes one to God's in-
scrutable wisdom. "Such a doctrine," says Spinoza,
"might well have sufficed to conceal the truth from the
human race for all eternity, if mathematics had not fur-
nished another standard of verity in considering solely the
essence and properties of figures without regard to their
final causes." ' It will be observed that Spinoza prizes \
mathematics, not only for its exactness, but also for its
dispassionateness, for that very character that led Plato
to subordinate it to ethics. The philosopher of Spinoza is '
not the guardian of the State, representing the good of the
whole rather than the good of any part, or even the lover
of the absolute good, but the witness of those inexorable
necesMties which make no allowance for human ideals.
^ Thus in the rationalism of Spinoza the teleological
principle, derived through Plato and Aristotle from the
humanism of the Socratic age, and reinforced by the Scrip-
tural account of the creation and of God's dealings with
man, is replaced by the principle of mechanism. Science>,
has now become identified in men's minds with the quanti-
tative laws of motion. The Copemican revolution had •
further emphasized the meaning of the mechanical theory,
and brought out its essentially de-anthropomorphic charac-
ter, by removing the Earth from the centre of the stellar
system, and reducing man's historical career to a peripheral

> Elwes's translation, Vol. n, p. 77. The Elhks was first published in
1677.


I


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM


117


and incidental feature of the cosmos.' Man was now of
small account in that world which he had once been led to
believe was contrived for his especial comfort and salvation.
If the rehgious attitude was to be maintained with such a
philosophical background, only two possibilities seemed to
remain. Either, as in the case of Spinoza himself, the
religious consciousness must be reduced to the reason's
approval of truth; or religion as a whole must be conceived
with Hobbes' as a secular institution, used to pacify dis-
orderly men, and sharing the pettiness which under the
mechanical philosophy attaches to all human affairs. But
religion of the former type must be as rare as the spirit of
renunciation and the capacity for intellectual mysticism;
while religion of the latter type is a mere convention im-
posed by cynical enlightenment upon servile ignorance.
Hence, not without reason, Spinoza and Hobbes were
singled out and anathematized as the great prophets of
irreligion.

Spinoza and Hobbes do not, it is true, adequately repre-
sent the rationalism of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. It was on the whole characteristic of these \
centuries to believe that reUgion, even Christian orthodoxy,
could be established by strictly rational means,' But "^
Spinoza and Hobbes represent the rationalistic spirit of
this age in its freest and purest expression, and their phi-
losophies typify its logical trend. To keep one's eye single
to things as they are, to yield one's mind only to facts and
necessities, seemed to lead in the end to the belittlement ,
of man and the disallowance of his spiritual claims.

§ 4. We are now prepared to understand the service
wlUch modem idealism offered to religious belief. True
TheWmiiitic religion required to be defended, not, as in the
Revolution (j^yg of Socfatcs and Plato, against the preju-
dices and blindness of unthinking men, but against the claim
of scicTtce to have alienated the world from man. Faith and '

' Cf. above, pp. 13-15. * Cf. his Ltmi^han {1651), Cb. XII.

• Ct, above, pp, 3J-34.


Il8 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

revelation had been left unsupported in their demand that
the world should be subordinated to spirit. That nature
which religion had conceived to be the handiwork of God,
or the stage-setting of the moral drama, or at most merely
the principle of negation in the spiritual life, threatened to
swallow up both man and God. A new philosophy must
redeem nature from mechanism and restore its spiritual
centre. It must not be supposed that this was the con- '
scious aim of the idealists and their forerunners, or that
the tendency was not in large part due to purely theoreti-
cal motives. But it is this that accounts for the great
human importance of idealism, for its stimulating power
and widely diffused influence. And it is in this sense that
idealism is revolutionary. Kant, for example, compared
his theory of knowledge with the Copernican revolution in
astronomy. He proposed to assume that "the objects
must conform to our mode of cognition" rather than that
"our knowledge must conform to the objects," just as
Copernicus, " not being able to get on in the explanation of
the movements of the heavenly bodies, as long as he as-
sumed that all the stars turned round the spectator, tried,
whether he could not succeed better, by assuming the
spectator to be turning round, and the stars to be at rest," '
But Kant did not point out the fact, nor has its impor-
tance ever been sufficiently recognized, that the idealistic
revolution was virtually a counter-revolulion, through which
the spectator again became the centre of the system. Nor
did this counter-revolution either begin or end with Kant.
It is a movement of epochal proportions, supported by a
wide diversity of thinkers, and dominating philosophy
from the time of Berkeley down to the present day. Its
central motive is the restoration of the supremacy of spirit.
Its distinguishing characteristic as a philosophy of religion
is its subordination of nature to God by means of a prelim-
inary reduction of nature to knowledge. Science is to be /
I tranalatloQ, aecond


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM Up

allowed a free hand in nature; and having annexed nature,
its title is to be transferred to mind. That very mechani-
cal cosmos which had served to belittle man, is now made
to glorify him through being conceived as the fruit of in-
telligence. God, the discarded hypothesis of science, is
enthroned again as the master-knower of whom science
itself is only the imperfect instrument.

Thus, while the burden of ideahsm is a religious interpre-
tation of nature, its cardinal principle is a theory of knowl-
edge. For the purpose^ of technical philosophy it consists
in a single proposition, to the effect that knowledge is an
originating or creative process. Idealism's claims can be
substantiated only provided it is true that to know is to
generate the reality known. It must be proved that the
being and nature of things are conditioned by their being
known. In what follows, the attempt will be made,
amidst the confusing motives which attend the history of
idealism, to keep this cardinal principle constantly in
\iew, and to sift and test the evidence with which it has
been supported. And first, let us consider the manner in
which Descartes and Locke, the forenirmers of ideahsm,
prepared the ground for Berkeley, its founder.

§ 5. The strategy of idealism depends on the adoption
of a certain initial standpoint.' The world must be viewed
ThcBtpnnirKi Under the form of knowledge. Although the
olModem precise significance of the fact cannot yet be
v^^c vS* made dear, it is a fact that everything that
sionofKnowl- can be mentioned, such as the sun, gold, or
"^ Napoleon I, can be classed as an element of

knowledge, or idea. This generalization does, it is true,
require a qualification, the importance of which will
shortly appear. Elements of knowledge, or ideas, im-
ply a knower, which is not itself an idea, but which con-
fers the character of idea on what it possesses. With this
amendment, we may say that it is possible to regard the

mportance o( this staiting-poiDt will appear later.


120 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

world of all mentionable things, even the Copernican
plurality of worlds with their inflexible mechanical neces-
sities, as comprehended under the knower and his ideas.

Descartes ' adopted this standpoint only provisionally,
but the difficulty he met in extricating himself from it
demonstrated its dialectical possibilities. When you
record the knower and hh ideas, or all knowers and their
ideas, what is there left to account for? Descartes, of
course, thought that there were at least two things still to
account for, namely, God and nature. If asked whether
these too were not ideas, he would have replied, not merely
ideas — for they exist also in their own right. Neverthe-
less, from the Cartesian standpoint, God and nature are
primarily ideas, that being the most certain thing about
them. That there are such ideas is indubitable; that they
are more than ideas remains somehow to be proved from
what is known of them as ideas. The existence of God
must be argued from the idea of God, and the existence of
nature from the idea of nature.

The characteristic difference between Descartes and
Locke lies in the fact that the former seeks to establish
existence (as something other than the knower and his
ideas) first in the case of God, while the latter seeks to
establish it first in the case of nature. Let us consider the
procedure of Descartes. He believes that he escapes from
the circle of the knower and his ideas, through the peculiar
character of the idea of God, He here employs the tradi-
tional 'ontological' proof, according to which the idea of
an infinite and perfect being implies the existence of its
object; and further argues that the idea of God possesses so
high a degree of meaning as to require a being of like degree
to account for it. Once the existence of God was estab-
h'shed, and the circle broken, Descartes thought it safe to
infer that other "clear and distinct" ideas, such as the
ideas of nature, were also representative of existence.

Let us turn to the case of Locke. Nominally, he follows

■ Cf. bis Discourse on Mclkod (1637), and liedUations (1640), passim.


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM 121

Descartes, and proves God before he proves nature. But
logically he follows just the reverse order. Albeit with a
certain becoming hesitation, be sets aside the ontological
proof of God, and prefers those proofs that carried more
weight with Englishmen and deists of the eighteenth cen-
tury.^ God's existence is proved from the necessity of an
eternal and intelligent first cause of nature. The problem
of existence must, then, be first solved with reference to
nature. And here Locke's distrust of intellectualism leads
him to define a new criterion. The ideas, he asserted, that
are most significant of existence, are not those that are most
clear anddistinct, or most full of meaning, but those which
are directly imprinted on the mind by an ezUmal cause.
Existence is to be inferred, not from the import of ideas,
but from the circiunstances of their origin. It is not a
question of proving the trustworthiness or representative
validity of illuminating ideas; but of proving the extra-
mental source of vivid and forceful ideas, that are beyond
the mind's control. The imique case of such ideas is the
sense-impression . '

Owing to this difference of procedure between Descartes
and Locke, there came to prevail two notions of the relation
between existing nature and the idea of nature. According
to the Cartesian procedure, existent nature is essentially
that which corresponds to the idea of nature. Accord-
ing to the empirical procedure of Locke, on the other hand,
existent nature is essentially the cause of the idea of
nature. In the first case existent nature must resemble the
idea, and the real diiEcuIty is to distinguish it therefrom. In
the second case existent nature need not resemble the idea,
and the real difficulty is to give it any real character or
meaning at all. We are now prepared to understand the form
which idealism first assumed in the writings of Berkeley.

' Cf. Locke's Essay Cotufrning Human Undnstandini {1690), Bk. iv.
Ch. X. 57-

> Cf. op. cil., Bk. iv, Ch. XI, S '■ "No parU'cukr man can know
the cdatence of any other beinR, but only when, by actual oi)erftling upon
him, it m&kes itscU perceived by him."


122 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

§ 6. Berkeley, like Descartes and Locke, begins with the
assumption of the knower and his ideas, and feels the
Berkeley's difficulty of establishing the existence of any-
Rciutation of thing else. But Berkeley parts company with
Duabam ^^ predeccssors, and with common-sense, in

concluding that the difficulty is insuperable, and the
attempt to overcome it gratuitous. He asserts, in short,
that all existence may adequately be comprehended under
the knower and his ideas; and in this assertion modem
idealism first sees the light.'

With Berkeley, as with Locke, the question primarily
concerns nature. Is there an existent nature over and
above the idea of nature? The answer may be formulated
as a dilemma. If, as Descartes would have it, existent
nature agrees with the ideas of nature, then what is the
difference? But if, as Locke suggests, existent nature
does not agree with the ideas of nature, then what is
it, and how can it be proved ? Furthermore, why must
a thing be other than idea in order to exist? In the case
of nature, Berkeley asserts, it would appear that esse est
percipi.

Berkeley's argument is too well-known to require detailed
restatement, but it is highly important to discover just what
it proves. That Berkeley believed that he had established
idealism is bej'ond question; his whole religious philoso-
phy depended on a reduction of nature to spirit. But it is
/ certainly true of much of Berkeley's argument, that while
it serves to refute the dualism of Descartes and Locke, it
nevertheless does not establish idealism. There is a halting-
place short of that theory, where the issue is altered, and
where new alternatives arise and diverge. Consistently
with our purpose of disentangling the cardinal principle of
idealism, and of isolating the evidence offered in support
of it, we must therefore separate Berkeley the idealist

' Berkeley's Priacipta oj Unman Kmnikdge was published in 1710.
Malebranche, Norris. and Collict shoiJd be tiediled mth original contri-
butions to this doctrine, but Berkeley gave it its prominence and classic


I
I


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM


123


from another Berkeley, who is simply the vanquisher of
duaLism.

The dualistic position is thus summarized by Hylas,
the advocalus diaboli in Berkeley's well-known dialogue:
"To speak the truth, Philonous, I ihjnW there are two
kinds of objects: — tlie one perceived immediately, which
are likewise called ideas; the other are real things or
external objects, perceived by the mediation of ideas, which
are their images and representations. Now, I own ideas
do not exist without the mind; but the latter sort of objects
do." ' In attacking this position Berkeley first shows that
whatever answers to the name of a natural object, such, for
example, as "tulip," is perceived immediately, and hence
is idea. Its color is seen, its shape and size both seen and
felt, its odor smelt, and so with every quality or element
that is attributed to it. What, then, is the "real" or
"external" tulip "without the mind?" And what ground
is there for affirming it? There are, Berkeley believes,
only two conceivable alternatives, both of which are
untenable.

In the first place, one may contend, after the manner of
Descartes, that an idea, if it be clear and distinct, is a
trustworthy likeness of something that exists "without the
mind," But how can a thing that is in its substance or
essence non-mental be like a thing that is essenliaUy mental?
Surely a copy which must necessarily miss the essence of
the thing copied is no copy at all. Does it mean anything
to speak of absolutely invisible color, or inaudible sound?
In general, does it mean anything to speak of an object that
is like ideas in all particular qualities and attributes, and
yet possesses a fundamentally and radically different
nature? By means of these and similar considerations,
Berkeley shows that a non-mental world which corresponds
with the mental world but never coincides with it, is both
arbitrary and meaningless. And is it not also gratuitous?

' DialopM bctwettt Hylas aiid PhUonoiu (1713), Ftaser's edition, Vol.
I, p. 414-


114 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

This raises the question in the form in which it presents
itself to Locke.

For, in the second place, it may be contended that
certain ideas, sensations, namely, have an extra-mental
cause. They are forced upon the mind, and are not of its
own making. In this Berkeley is empiricist enough to
agree with Locke. But what is the cause? If it be con-
ceived as matter, then it reduces itself to an unknown
substratum, because everything that is known of matter is,
as we have seen, contained within ideas. And why should
a cause, to which none of the properties of matter can be
attributed, be regarded as material at all? Since here
it is not required that the exlra-mental reality shall be
like the ideas, but only that it shaU be thdr cause, why
should it not be conceived after the analogy of the only
cause of ideas with which we are directly acquainted,
namely, will or spirit? In this case, matter or physical
nature would simply coincide with perceptions caused by
God, There would be no matter behind appearance, no
duplicaUon of known matter through the assumption
of a likeness or prototype of it, and no discrediting of
knowledge through the assimiption of an unknown and
unknowable essence.

§ 7. Now without doubt Berkeley meant to assert that
whatever is content of ideas, such as matter in the above
Epirtemoiogicai sense, Is nccessarUy or essentially ideal; its
Monism ^55^ ig percipi. But this does not follow from

the argument as thus far outlined. For it is entirely possi-
ble that the real tulip should be, as Berkeley argues,
identical, element for element, with the idea of tulip, and yet
not require to be perceived in order to be. It is only neces-
sary to conceive of idea as an office, or relationship, instead
of as a kind of substance.' It is then possible to suppose
that a thing may occupy that office or relationship, and
thus assume the status of idea, without being idenlitied
with it.

' The view adopted by pragmatism. Ct. below, pp. 200-Joj.


I


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM


125


The principle involved is a very common one, and never
disputed in its more familiar applications. Thus when a
dtizcn of the United States becomes President, the citizen
and President are identical. There is no 'presidential'
entity substituted for the citizen — no correspondence or
representation. The simple fact is that a citizen, without
forfeiting his citizenship, may assume the status of Presi-
dent. But no one would think of contending that therefore
being President is a condition of citizenship, or that cit-
izens are essentially presidential, or that there can be no
citizens that are not presidents. Similarly, tulips may be
known, and when known called 'ideas of tulips.' There
is, as Berkeley justly contends, no substitution or represen-
tation, no duplication or mystification. The tulip simply
assumes a certain status, definable by the special relation-
ship percipi, and involving no forfeiture of its nature or
identity. But this does not at all imply that whatever
assumes the status of idea, must be idea in order to be at all,
or that there are no things that are not ideas. The confu-
sion doubtless arose from a convention to the effect that
mind and nature are different 'substances,' or different
domains, lying wholly outside of one another, and therefore
mutually exclusive in their content.' It would follow from
such a supposition that whatever belongs to mind or to
nature belongs to it absolutely and irrevocably. But
once this supposition is abandoned, there is nothing whatso-
ever to prevent a thing's belonging both to nature and to
mind; in which case it is impossible to argue that became
a thing belongs to mind it therefore owes its existence to
the fact.

Now the doctrine which results from the rejection of the
dualism between idea and existence, but which stops short
of idealism, deserves independent recognition and a name
that shall distinguish it. For it is accepted by contemporary

' Descartes is mainly responsible for the promiocnce of thb notion in
modern philosophy; but it probably arose mainly from the cmphAsiB
given to " the inner life " by introapeOivc ChiistUnity.


126 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

thinkers of opposing schools and can therefore be eliminated
from most present-day controversy. The phrase 'episte-
mological monism' has the virtue of suggesting that the
doctrine in question is essentially a doctrine about knowl-
edge, and not about being or existence, and also of suggest-
ing that the doctrine arose historically as a refutation of
dualism.* Epistemological monism means that when
things are known they are identical, element for element,
with the idea, or content of the knowing state. According
to this view, instead of there being a fundamental dual
division of the world into ideas and things, there is only
the class of things; ideas being the sub-class of those things
that happen to be known. That which is commonly called
the 'object' of knowledge merges, according to this view,
with the idea, or is the whole thing of which the idea is a
part. Thus when one perceives the tulip, the idea of the
tulip and the real tulip coincide, clement for element; they
are one in color, shape, size, distance, etc. Or, if one so
desires, one may reserve the name of 'real tulip' for the
whole of the tulip, as distinguished from whatever portion
of it is actually embraced within the idea. But in this
doctrine nothing whatsoever is asserted or implied of the
tulip, except as respects this particular question. Whether
it be essential or accidental to the tulip that it should be
perceived, and thus become an idea — whether all tulips
are ideas — is a wholly different question which must be
dedded on different grounds. And it is an answer to this
second question which constitutes the cardinal principle
of idealism. We may now turn to that principle as it is
formulated and defended in the philosophy of Berkeley.

§ 8. Berkeley only infrequently isolates his strictly
Bfikeity'i idealisUc arguments, but the passages in which
Proofs of Ideal- [jg (Jogg go are of the greatest historical im-
ism. Dtfiiu- , , ,. , , . , I

tion by laiiini portancc. In the dialogue to which we have
Prediaikm' aheady referred, we read: — "That the colors
are really in the tulip which I see is manifest. Neither

> This doctrine is ducussed more fully below, p. 308 ff. 1


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM 127

can it be denied that this tulip may exist independent of
your mind or mine; but, thai any immediate objects of the
senses — that is, any idea, or combination of ideas — should
exist in an unthinking std>stance, or exterior to all minds, is
in itself an evident contradiction." '

Now we shall understand Berkeley's meaning if we can
apprehend this "evident contradiction." "The tulip
which I see " is idea ; and it belongs to the essential charac-
ter of ideas that they should be in mind; hence it is con-
tradictory to assert that "the tulip which I see" is exterior
to mind. If all redundancy and quivocation is eliminated,
this amounts to the assertion that a tulip when seen, or
dehned as seen, is not a tulip unseen. But what Berkeley
sought to establish was virtually the proposition that
the tulip which I see can never be unseen; and th is
does not follow. For it is not contradictory to assert
that the tulip which I see today was unseen yesterday,
or that many tulips are "born to blush unseen" forever.
Berkeley's error lies in his inferring that because the tulip
is seen, therefore its being seen is its essential and exclu-
sive status.

Berkeley's reasoning at this point is so characteristic of
idealistic reasoning in general as to make it worth our
while to generalize it. It does not occur to him, apparently,
that a natural body, like a tulip, can belong both to the
order of ideas and also to another and independent order.
In other words, he assimies that an identical element can
belong to only one complex. But, as a matter of fact, such
is not the case. The letter a, for example, is the second
letter of the word 'man,' and also the fifth letter of the word
'mortal'; and it enters into inniimerably many other words
as well. It jKtssesses, in other words, a multiple and not
an exclusive particularity. And the fabe assumption to
the contrary gives rise to a specious argument. For
having found an entity, like the tulip, in the mental context,
where it is named 'idea,' and having assumed that it can
' Op. cit., Frascr'a edition, Vol. I, p, 406. (The italics are mioe.)


138 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

belong to only one context, Berkeley thereupon defitu
it as idea, and concludes that it is such exclusively. But
this is as though, having found the letter a in the word
'man,' we should propose to define it as 'the second letter
in the word man ' and so to preclude its occurring in any
other word.

This specious argument, involving the assumption of
'exclusive particularity," may be conveniently described as
'definition by initial predication.'' It consists in regarding
some eariy, familiar, or otherwise accidental characteriza-
tion of a thing as definitive. I may, for example, owing to
the accident of residence, first learn of Columbus through
the fact that the Columbia River was named for him;
but it does not follow that ' the man the Columbia River
was named for' may be substituted for 'Columbus' in his-
torical science, for the obvious but sufficient reason that
this characterization is not adequate. Similarly, Columbus
is ' the man I am now thinking of ' — the fact is not to be
impeached; but to treat him as such in all subsequent
discourse would be to assimie that his being thought of by
me was the most distinctive thing about him; which is, of
course, contrary to fact. Now idealists habitually con-
strue things as 'thought of,' and accordingly name them
'objects of thought,' or 'ideas.' But while, as we have
seen, it is proper to say that it is the thing itself, and not a
duplicate or representation of it that is thought, it does
not follow that to be thought of, or otherwise known, is
either necessary or important for things. And it is pre-
cisely this which idealism must prove if it is to justify itself.
It must prove that to classify things as ideas, objects of
knowledge, or experiences, is Oie most fundamental disposi-
tion that can be made of tliem. To classify them thus at the
outset, and then to prefer this classification to the many
other possible ones, is simply to assume the very thesis
under discussion.

§ 9. Berkeley's argument assumes a different form In
• a. also below, pp. 135, 158-16^.


I


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM 129

the following passage taken from the Principles 0/ Human

Kmnvledge: —

„ . "But, say you, surely there is nothing easier

from ■lie Egi>. than lor me to imagine trees, for instance, in a
centric Pcodit- park, or books existine in a closet, and nobody
by to [jerceive them, I answer, you may so,
there is no difficulty in it. But what is all this, I beseech
you, more than framing in your mind certain ideas which
you can call books and trees, and at the same time omitting
to frame the idea of any one that may perceive them? But
do not you yourself perceive or think of them all the while?
This therefore is nothing to the purpose; it only shows you
have the power of imagining, or forming ideas in your
mind ; but it does not show that you can conceive it possible
the objects of your thought may exist without the mind." '

In other words, one cannot conceive things to exist apart
from consciousness, because to conceive is ipso facto to bring
within consciousness. It is to this argument that Berkeley
appeals in the last resort, and his procedure is here again
so t>'pical as to deserve to be ranked with ' de&nition by
initial predication ' as one of the fundamental arguments
for idealism.

The argument calls attention to a situation that un-
doubtedly exists, and that is one of the most important
original discoveries that philosophy has made. ^1? tkinker
to w/iom one may appeal is able to mention a thing that
is not idea, for the obvious and simple reason that in
mentioning it he makes it an idea. No one can report on the
nature of things without being on hand himself. It
follows that whatever thing he reports does as a matter of
fact stand in relation to him, as his idea, object of knowl-
edge, or experience. In order to avoid making inferences
unawares, it is necessary to have a name for this situation
just as it stands. It will be convenient to call it ' the ego-
centric predicament ' *


: tuliy i


130


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


This predicament arises from the attempt to discover
whether the cognitive relationship is indispensable to the
things which enter into it. In order to discover if possible
exactly how a thing is modified by the cognitive relation-
ship, I look for instances of things oul of this relationship,
in order that I may compare them with instances of things
in this relationship. But I can find no such instances,
because 'finding' is a variety of the very relationship that
I am trying to eliminate. Hence I cannot make the com-
parison, nor get an answer to my original question by this
means. But I cannot conclude that there are no such in-
stances; indeed, I now know that / sJiould not be able to
discover them if there were.

Again, with a view to demonstrating the modification of
things by the cognitive relationship, I examine the same
thing before and after it has entered into this relationship
with some knower other than myself. But in making the
comparison, I institute this relationship with myself, and so
am unable to free the thing altogether from such relationships.

Again, within my own field of consciousness, I may
attempt to define and subtract the cognitive relationship,
in order to deal exclusively with the residuum. But after
subtracting the cognitive relationship, I must still 'deal
with' the residuum; and 'dealing with' is a variety of
the very relationship which I sought to banish.

Finally, just in so far as I do actually succeed in elimi-
nating every cognitive relationship, I am unable to observe
the result. Thus if I close my eyes, I caimot see what
happens to the object; if I stop thinking, I cannot think
what happens to it; and so with every mode of knowledge.
In thus eUminating all knowledge, I do not experimentally
eliminate the thing known, but only the possibility of
knowing whether that thing is eliminated or not.

This, then, is ' the ego-centric predicament.' But

utide entitled "The Ego-centric Predieament," Jour, ef PhU., Psyck., and
Sc. Melhods.VoX. VII, tgio, No. i. A part of what follows is reprinted from
that article. Cf. also below, pp. 133-134. "JS-


I


CARDINAL PRINCIPLE OF IDEALISM


131


wbat does it prove, and how does it serve the purpose of
idealisniP It should be evident that it proves nothing
at all. It is simply a peculiar methodological difficulty.
It does, it is true, contain the proposition that every men-
tioned thing is an idea. But this is virtually a redundant
proposition to the effect that every mentioned thing is
mentioned — to the effect that every idea, object of knowl-
edge, or experience, is an idea, object of knowledge, or
experience. And a redundant proposition is no proposition
at all. The assertion that an idea is an idea conveys no
knowledge even about ideas. But what the idealist re-
quires is a proposition to the effect that everything is an
idea, or that only ideas exist. And to derive this proposi-
tion directly from the redundancy just formulated, is
simply to take advantage of the confusion of mind by
which a redundancy is commonly attended.

It may be argued, however, that the ego-centric predica-
ment is equivalent to an inductive proof of the proposition
that all things are ideas. Every observed case of a thin g
is a case of a thing observed. Neglecting the redundancy,
which is sufficient of itself to vitiate the assertion, we
remark that the induction proceeds entirely by Mill's
" method of agreement," which is invalid unless supported
by "the method of difference," that is, the observation of
negative cases. But the ego-centric predicament itself
prevents the observation of negative cases. It is impossible
to observe cases of unobserved things, even if there be any.
In other words, there is a reason connected with the conditions
of observation why only agreements should be observed.
But where this is the case the method of agreement is
worthless; and the use of it is a fallacy. Thus, I cannot
conclude that English is the only intelligible form of speech
simply because whomsoever I understand speaks English.
On the contrary, my peculiar situation, as one acquainted
only with a single language, is sufficient to discredit my
results. If I should discover that I had been wearing blue
glasses, I would at once discoimt the apparent blueness of


132 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

everything that I had seen. And similarly, the genera]
circumstance that in observing I am compelled to supply
the very element whose real ubiquity or necessity I am
attempting to discover, must itself be discounted or cor-
rected, if I am to draw a true conclusion. In so far as
the idealistic conclusion depends on that circimistance itself,
it is fallacious.

§ 10. A study of the later development of idealism will
disclose the fact that it relies mainly, if not entirely, on
The Cirdioai ^^ Bcrkeleyan proofs — ' definition by initial
Principle and predication,' and ' argument from the ego-
PfooisinCu" centric predicament.' Despite the fact that
present day idealism prefers to attribute its
authorship to Kant, some ideaUsts expressly
credit Berkeley himself with having established the car-
dinal principle. "The truth is," says one writer, "that
Berkeley gave the coup de grace to all forms of material-
ism, when he proved, or led the way to the proof, that
matter (so-called physical reality) is a compound of qualities, ^m
and that every quality turns out to be an elemental form ■
of consciousness, a way of being conscious." '

But it is more usual to find Berkeley's proofs restated,
with slight variations to match ihe shade of the particular
idealism which the author represents. For the cardinal
principle lends itself to various interpretations. In its
general form this principle asserts the priority of the
cognitive consciousness; and it is therefore capable of as
many diverse formulations as there are diverse conceptions
of cognition. Thus there may be perceptual, rational, or
volitional idealists, according as knowledge is held to con-
sist essentially in perception, reason, or volition. And
Berkeley's proofs are capable of corresponding formula-
tions. With some of these diversities we shall deal in the
chapter that follows.' Meanwhile it will throw further

> M. W. Calkins: The PcrsisUiU Probitms oj PkUosopky, p. 400; d.
pp. 118-133.

' Cf. espedally, pp. 158-162.


CARDINAL PBINCIPLE OF IDEALISM


133


light on the meaning of Berkeley's proofs, and illustrate
their wider significance, if we have set before us a single
contemporary instance of each.

The use of ' definition by initial predication ' appears, for
example, in the common habit among idealists of adopting
what is called the standpoint of experience. This standpoint
being once adopted, and the meaning of experience formu-
lated, idealism needs no further proof. Thus Professor
Baillie writes; "We must start, in other words, from the
whole of experience as such. . . . Now we take experience
as a whole when we look upon the subject-mind, in which
alone experience exists, as the centre to which all forms of
experience refer and round which they gather. . . .
Experience always implies a relation between two distinct
elements: the one is that for which something is, and
the other the something which is presented. These are
the so-called subject and object." ' But nowhere does
this author show why we should start with experience
in this sense, or why having so started we should re-
gard that particular aspect of things as essential and
definitive.

When idealists do raise these last questions, they employ,
as a rule, the argument from the ' ego-centric predicament.'
We cannot avoid the standpoint of experience, if we are to
have anything before us at all; or eliminate the relation to
a thinking consciousness, if we are to think. "Find any
piece of existence," says Mr. Bradley, "take up anything
that anyone could possibly call a fact, . . . and then
judge if it does not consist in sentient experience. . . .
When the experiment is made strictly, I can myself con-
ceive of nothing else than the experienced. Anything,
in no sense felt or perceived, becomes to me quite unmean-
ing. And as I cannot try to think of it without realizing
eidier that I am not thinking at all, or that I am thinking
of it against my will as being experienced, I am driven to
the conclusion that for me experience is the same as reality.

' J. B. fiaillic- liealislic ConslruUion oj Experience, pp. 105. 108.


134 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

. . . You cannot find fact unless in unity with sentience." '
But all this proves no more than that finding is finding;
no amount of reiteration or verbal alteration can ever make
it prove what the ideahst wants it to prove — namely, that
being is finding, that in order to be or to be what they are,
things musl be found.

It is doubtless true that idealism has had a long and
eventful history since Berkeley; and there are many who
would maintain that idealism did not begin its history
until after Berkeley. But to any one who refuses to per-
mit the issue to be confused, it must be apparent that the
theory with which Berkeley startled the world in 1710 is
essentially the same as that which flourished in the nine-
teenth century in the form given it by Fichte and Hegel.
It is essentially the same, in that the agreement is far more
important than the difference. The two theories agree
in asserting that the cognitive consciousness is the universal
condition of being, or that to be is lo be eillier knoiver or
known; they differ in what they conceive to be the funda-
mental properties of consciousness and the nature of truth.
But it is the principle in which they agree from which both
theories derive their philosophy of religion, and to which
both have owed their popular influence. And this prin-
ciple obtains both its simplest statement and its original
arguments in the writings of Berkeley.

' F. H. Bradley: Appearana and Reality, pp. 145, 146.


I


CHAPTER Vn

OBJECTIVE OR TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAUSM

§ I. The militant and profoundly influential idealism of

contemporary thought traces its descent from Kant, and

only indirectly, if at all, from Berkeley. The

Gcoeril Mean- , ■" , ,- ,■ -j i- . ■ xi_

ingofPost- phrase objective idealism, in the sense in
Kantian Ideal- which it IS at present in vogue in English-
speaking countries, is intended to suggest
that Kantianism cures Berkelcyan idealism of a malignant
'subjectivism,' with which it is infected, and to which it
must otherwise succumb. For to reduce external reality
to the several percepts of the human mind, as Berkeley did,
is virtually to reduce it to tliat transiency, relativity, and
privacy of mere opinion, from which knowledge must per-
petually seek to escape.

According to objective idealism, Berkeley's error lay, not
in his reduction of external reality to mind; but in his
failure to recognize that the mind here in question is not
the human mind of psychology, but a universal mind, or
a subject oj knowledge in general, endowed with the princi-
ples of logic. The central conception of objective idealism,
in other words, is the conception of a super-personal, or
impersonal, logical consciousness. This consciousness con-
ditions being; and its enactments are binding on the
individual thinker, as his ' objective ' reality. ' Thus
objective idealism does not propose to reject the cardinal
principle of Berkeleyan idealism, but rather to correct and
improve uf)on it. It Is only when viewed in this light that
its inner dialectic can be understood. In the account

I As is well known, Berkeley himself antldpatid this theory 'o his con-
ceptioD of the divine mind. But that which to Berkeley was an alter-
tfaought, never satisfaclorily reconciled with iiis first principles, becomes
in objective idealisin tlie central motive.


136 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

which follows, I shall consequently seek to discover not
only whether objective idealism does actually succeed in
avoiding the pitfall of 'subjectivism,' but also whether it
in any way strengthens the case for idealism by reinforcing
Berkeley's original proofs, or by adding new proofs of its
own.

Kant's contribution to objective idealism consisted in
his discovery of certain 'categories,' or fonns of thought,
which he held to be the universal prerequisites of knowl-
edge. He employed the term ' transcendental ' to indicate
the peculiar status of these categories, and the metaphysics
of his followers thus derives the name 'transcendental
idealism,' or 'transcendentalism.'' As a rehabilitation of
rationalism, this view was opposed to the whole empirical
movement which had emanated from Locke and which
dominated the thought of the eighteenth century. But
it was opposed more particularly to the fatal consequences
of empiricism as exhibited in the hopeless predicament of
Hume. This writer was at the bediming, as he has
remained ever since, the awful warning to all who would
stray from the path of Kantian rectitude. We must,
therefore, begin our review of Kantianism with a brief
account of this unbeliever who perished for lack of the
gospel.

§ 2. Hume's sceptical predicament was the sequel to his
rriHrism of Berkeley. He showed that although Berkeley
The Scepiical had successfully vanquished the older dual-
Criasin Hume jg,^ bctwecH ideas and material substance,
he had at the same time given fresh emphasis to
another dualism, that between ideas and spiritual
substance. "Besides all that endless variety of ideas
or objects of knowledge, there is likewise Something
which knows or perceives them; and exercises divers opera-

< Idonot mean, of course, toimply that Kant hlmsetr is a metaphy^'dan,
or even that all al his followers are metaphysicians. It is possible to be
a Kantian, and yet not be an idealist in the sense intended in the present
chapter. Cf. below, pp. 144-14S.


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


137


tions, as williQg, imagiiung, remembering, about them.
This perceiving, active, being," says Berkeley, "is what I
call mind, spirit, soul, or myself." But spirit is not strictly
speaking an object of knowledge, "Such is the nature of
Spirit, or that which acts, that it cannot be of itself per-
ceived, but only by the effects which it produceth." ' And
the status thus assigned to spirit corresponds almost exactly
to that possessed by matter in the traditional view which
Berkeley had himself discredited; so that the same dilemma
may be urged against it. Spirit, like matter, must either
come within knowledge or fall outside it. If it comes
within knowledge it coincides with some idea or group of
ideas; if it falls outside of knowledge, as a mere "producer"
of ideas, it is arbitrary and meaningless. Hume adopts
the former alternative with reference to spirit, precisely
as Berkeley had adopted it with reference to matter: with
the result that both spirit and matter are reduced to one "^
manifold of ideas.

The question now arises as to the propriety of the term
pHidea,' as applied to these common elements to which both
spirit and matter have been reduced. If spirit be defined
as a group of ideas, then it is clear that ideas themselves
cannot be defined in terms of spirit. They become simply
ehments or qualities. Hume felt the force of this considera-
tion, and it led him to the tentative supposition that per-
ceptions can exist apart from the mind. Had he adopted
and fortified this view, he would have been the founder of
a new realism, instead of a link in the development of
idealism. He rejected the view, however, summarily and
unequivocally. He attributed his rejection of it to "those
experiments which convince us that our perceptions arc
not possessed of any independent existence," such as the
displacement of the field of vision by pressure on the eye-
ball. These and kindred phenomena, such as color-
blindness, are cited to prove that "all our perceptions are

' Berkeley: Principles of Human Knouiedge, Frascr'a edition, Vol, I,
pp. 358, 17'-


138 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

dependent on our organs, and the disposition of our nerves
and animal spirits," ' But since Hume has led us to
suppose that our bodies themselves along with the rest of
physical nature are no more than perceptions, he cannot
properly argue that perceptions in general are dependent
on the body. If relativity is to be advanced as an argu-
ment for idealism, it must be, not a relativity of ideas
to body, but of body to ideas. And this relativity
must be proved, if it is to be proved at all, by Berkeleyan
methods.

Hume was especially influenced, I think, by the error of
'exclusive particularity.' He agreed with Berkeley that the
elements of physical nature are the same as those of mental
states; and advanced beyond Berkeley in reaching the same
conclusion concerning spiritual nature. He found, in short,
that the traditional substances, material and spiritual, are
made up from the same manifold of elements. But instead
of recognizing their interchangeable character, ke named
Otese dements, following Berkeley, after one of the roles in
which they appear. Finding them in the succession of the
individual's mental states, he identified them with this
order, and regarded them as belonging to it essentially
and exclusively. The result is Hume's radical phenome-
nalism, or psychologism. To be is to be a particular
mental state; and a particular mental state has no being
whatsoever, other than its momentary presence. To be
perceived or thought, to occur in consciousness, is to come
into being; and to lapse from consciousness is to cease to
be. There can be no permanence, and no sameness, because
each unit of existence belongs wholly and exclusively to
the moment of its occurrence in consciousness. The world
consists, in short, of the coexistence and succession of
unique individuals which instantly arise and instantly
perish.

Hume not improperly regarded this outcome as equiva-

' Hume: Trtaiise of Human tfotwe (iTjg), Selby-Bigge'3 edition, pp.
ao7, aio-aii. Cf. below, pp- 306-J07.


I


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


139


lent to scepticism. It is, he thinks, the only conduaon
that can consistently be reached on strict theoretical
grounds. Nevertheless it is impossible for the ordinary
man, or even for the philosopher in his ordinary moods,
to believe it. The difficulty, according to Hume, is essen-
tially a practical one. In order to live, it is necessary to
regard the environment as having sameness and perma-
nence; it is necessary to assume that one may have dealings
at different times with an identical object, and that the
objects on which one acts persist in one's absence. Such
suppositions concerning the external world provide the
orientation which is necessary for action. But in Hume's
opinion they cannot be Justified theoretically. " Careless-
ness and inattention alone can afford us any remedy." *

§ 3. Kant agreed with Hume that the situation just
described was practically intolerable, but added that
it was theoretically intolerable as well. And it is not only
Kanttoihe Contradicted by the whole body of existing
Reinie. Tiie scicnce, but it IS also Je//-contradictorv. For

Cntegonea 1 ^ ■ .■ , ,

uid* Synthetic the ilux impues an order — at least a tem-
^■"W poral successiveness — which cannot be con-

tained within any merely momentary state. Furthermore,
Hume's whole procedure implies that this general flux-
character of things can he known by various knowers at
various times; so that this, at least, must possess sameness
and permanence. In other words, without order, same-
ness and permanence, no knowledge whatever is possible —
not even knowledge enough to warrant scepticism.

Kant doubtless rendered a service to all subsequent
thinkers in proving the necessity of the principles of order,
sameness, and permanence. Any object or world whatso-
ever must possess, in some measure, the structure and de-
terminateness which such 'categories' can alone supply.
But tke status which Kant assigned to tliem, is another and
more doubtful matter.

Let us coimder, first, the alternative which he neglected.
* Hume: op. cil., p. 118.


140 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

Avoiding the error of Hume, he might have declined to
identify the elements of experience with the experience-
manifold exclusively. Had he adopted this course, his
deduction of the categories would have amounted to prov-
ing that the elements of experience do stand ia other orders
besides the order of their successive and transient appear-
ance; and that there are principles of order, such as space,
time, substance, and causality, which cannot be identified
with any of the particular transient appearances that pre-
suppose them. In this case, neither physical nature nor
the categories would have been construed as in any sense
mental.

But Kant did not adopt this course. With Hume and
Berkeley, he regarded the terms of experience as essentially
"phenomena" or "representations." "They form an
object that is within us only, because a mere modification
of our sensibility can never exist outside us." Then,
recognizing that the merely psychological order of Hume
presupposed a more fundamental physical order, he re-
garded this also as an order of phenomena or representa-
tions, and its principles as forms of consciousness. "The
very idea that all these phenomena, and therefore all
objects with which we have to deal, are altogether within
me, or determinations of my own identical self, implies by
itself the necessity of a permanent unity of them in one
and the same apperception." The order, in other words,
borrows a mental character from its terms. A unity of
phenomena will be a unity of "apperception." The new
order is not, it is true, mental in the psychological sense.
But this leads not to the denial of its mental character
altogether, but to the new conception of a non-psychological
Of logical mind.

A second reason tor Kant's version of the categories is
his theory that a priori or necessary knowledge can be
possible only on the supposition that knowledge dictates
to its objects.' " If the objects with which our knowledge
n of this view. cf. below, p. i6o.


I


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


141


has to deal were things by themselves, we could have no
concepts a priori of them." To be able to know beyond
the present experience, to be able to know universally,
implies that knowledge shall be able to lay down the
conditions which all experience shall fulfil. Logic, for
C-xample, can hold of all experiences whatsoever, only pro-
vided it be construed as determining what can be experi-
enced. The categories thus appear as "the necessary
conditions of a synthetical unity of the manifold of intui-
tion in a possible experience."

But quite apart from these considerations, the quasi-
mental status of Kant's categories could be accounted for
by his adoption of the epistemological standpoint. He
undertook "to determine the possibility, the principles,
and the extent of all cognitions a priori." Then, when, in
fulfilment of this task, he discovered the categories, he '
named them after their role in cognilion. " I call all knowl-
edge transcendental," he says, "which is occupied not so
much with objects, as with our manner of knowing objects,
so far as this is meant to be possible a priori." The " tran-
scendental deduction" of the categories introduces them as
the indispensable condition of a priori knowledge. They
are the forms of a transcendental sjTithesis or "unity of
apperception," which is the supreme intellectual function.'
Introduced to meet the exigencies of knowledge, the
whole Kantian logic thus obtains at the outset a cognitive
or mental status which it never loses, even among its most
rigorously "logical" exponents.'

Kant is to be credited with proving that if any knowl-
edge is to be possible, then physical, mathematical, and
logical knowledge must be possible." The knowledge of
the momentary presence of a state, to which Hume had
sought to reduce all knowledge, is not self-sufficient. It

■ Kant: Crillgue of Pare Reason, Max MQtler's Irans., second edition,
pp. 105-106, 129, 1 (note), 9 (note), 100.

* See below, p. 147.

» CI. C. E. Moore: "The Nature of Jutlgineot," Mind. N. S,, Vol. VIII,
iBQ9,pp. igaaq.


142 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

presupposes other knowledge; and all knowledge in the
end presupposes logic. But Kant did more than to prove
the validity and priority of logic. Ee identified logic with
the cognitive consciousness; with the result that his proof
of the priority of logic confirmed the Berkeleyan assertioD
of the priority of consciousness.

§ 4. It will be worth our while briefly to consider Kant's
own version of his relations to idealism. He described his
Kant's RcIa- ^""^ position as "empirical realism" and
tioiu to Ideal- "transcendental idealism," as opposed to
"empirical idealism" and "transcendental real-
ism." "Empirical idealism," which reduces experience
to the psychological manifold, Kant rejects; because the
series of internal states is itself definable only in relation to
the more fundamental order of physical nature. Its time
is measured by physical events, and its subjective sequence
and conconutance is distinguishable only by contrast with
the standard arrangements of physical law. In other
words, "internal experience itself is possible, mediately
only, and through external experience." Tfiis is "empiri-
cal realism." It leaves us, however, with a new order of
experience, the so-called external experience. This is none
the less "experience" for being prior to the psychological
manifold. For "transcendental idealism," which is the
sequel to this empirical realism, "matter is only a class of
representations (intuition), which are called external, not
as if they referred to objects external by themselves (tran-
scendental realism), but because they refer perceptions to
space in which everything is outside everything else, while
space itself is inside us."

Thus Kant's empirical realism does not in the least
conflict with his assertion that "all phenomena are repre-
sentations only, not things by themselves." It is merely
a subordinate phase of a "transcendental idealism," in
which the psychological and physical orders alike are
grounded on the laws or necessary conditions of a conscious-
ness in general. Both alike are phenomenal in respect of


I


I


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


■43


Ikis universal consciousness, precisely as in empirical or
subjective idealism, the physical order is pbenomenal in
respect of the psychological consciousness.'

Kant, although he was the founder of a new idealism,
was not himself an idealist, in the metaphysical sense. He
dehned the categories as conditions imposed on things by
the knowing of them ; but he asserted that reality was under
no necessity of conforming to these conditions, except in
so far as known. That a thing must be known in order to
be, he expressly denied. But the promptness and apparent
ease with which Kant's view was transformed into a meta-
physical idealism, is proof of the instability of the situation
as he left it. Having established the essentially formative
and constitutive character of knowledge, nothing can be
independent of knowledge except that which lies beyond
even the possibility of koowledge. The forms of the cog-
nitive consciousness underlie all that is or can be experi-
enced. So that Kant's 'thing-in-itself,' like the material
substratum which Berkeley had so effectually disposed
of, is no more than a symbol of nescience.

The 'thing-in-itself once eliminated, the cognitive con-
sciousness enters into undisputed possession of the field.
And in order to be equal to this metaphysical r61e,
cognitive consciousness must be more liberally endowed
than it had been by Kant It is not enough that it should
be endowed with the categories of physical science, for
these do not form a self-sufficient world. The new idealism
gives "constitutive" validity to that "ideal of the Uncon-
ditioned," to which Kant had attributed only a "regula-
tive" validity. Thus enriched, the cognitive consciousness
assumes the authorship and proprietorship of reality.

The new idealism thus restates the cardinal principle
in a new form. Knowing is declared to be the ground of

' Knnt: up. ciJ,, pp. 300-301, 780. Had I desired to eiploit the subjec-
tiviatic strain in Kant, I could have dwelt upon hia theory of the subjectivity
of space and time. I have preferred to emphasize the element oj subjec-
tivity in those features of his philosophy, 'synthetic unity ' and the 'cate-
gories,' which have been most emphasized by his followers.


144 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

being; but knowing receives a new definition. It is no
longer the receptivity of an individual perceiver, but the
systematizing activity of a universal thinking. The new
idealism lays claim to the title 'objective' for having
rescued the object from tbe flux of the human individual's
mental states, and given it permanence, identity, and
orderly relations. But the object is thus rescued from
the psychological subject, only to be appropriated by its
deliverer, the transcendental subject. So that it is still
dependent on subjectivity in some guise, 'and the most
essential feature of the situation as Berkeley left it remains
unaltered.

§ S- The history of Kantian idealism is determined by a
conflict of the several motives represented by its founders.'
Divcne Ten- ^° Kant hiuiself, idealism assumed a 'critical'
dcncies. 'criii- foHH, opposed to the metaphysical form into
c^ Id an y,\jich it was promptly converted by Fichte
and Hegel. Fichte, again, developed an ethical or
voluntaristic idealism, to which was opposed the logical
or intellectualistic idealism of Hegel. All subsequent
idealists have been divided by these issues. Neo-
Kantians have advocated 'criticism' against metaphysics;
while Neo-Fichteans and Neo-Hegelians have disputed over
the relative priority of will and intellect. No sharp classi-
fication is possible, since such differences permit of an
indefinite variety of compromises and combinations. But
it will be worth our wHle briefly to examine these two
leading issues.

'Critical' idealism aims at a strictly logical interpretation
of Kant. It proposes, like Kant, to investigate the neces-
sary conditions of knowledge; and concludes, as Kant con-
cluded, that the categories which exact science employs are
only varieties, applicable to specific empirical data, of cer-
tain fundamental forms of synthesis resident in the nature

1 An admirable account o( the varieties nf contemporary idealism in
Gennany wiU be found in Ludwig Stda: Philesophhche SlrSmuxgcn det
Ceietmart, especially Ch. I. IV, DC.


I


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM 145

of thought itself. So that exact sdence is not a mere
description of empirical data a posteriori, but a determina-
tion of them in accordance with certain a priori principles.

Critical idealists are divided in their interests in a mamier
corresponding to that difference between inteUectualism and
voluntarism which we shall consider below. Members of the
so-called "Marburg School" have emphasized the logical
presuppositions of mathematics and physics.' Natorp,
for example, asserts that the nature of mathematical and
physical truth can be understood only by showing that
its special principles, such as 'number,' 'infinity,' 'space,'
'energy,' etc., are related to purely logical principles,
such as 'quantity,' 'quality,' 'relation,' and 'modality'
("die logischen Grundf unktionen ") , which in turn develop
from the principle of synthetic unity, which is the original
act of knowledge ("Grundakt der Erkenntnis"). Or, the
prindples by which the several sciences think their special
objects may be traced back to the general principles by
which anything assumes the form of object of thought
(Gegenstand).' The form of the exact sciences is thus linked
with the form of thought in general, which is incontrovert-
ible, since any attempt to dispute it must presuppose it.

A second school of critical ideaUsts emphasizes the
foundations of the moral sciences.' The critical philosophy

< The founder of Uiis school is H. Cohen; cf, his Logik der rdnen Er-
keitnlniis (1902). The reader will find the doctrines of this school presented
somewhat more dearly in Paul Natorp's Dit logiscktn Grundtairn irr
exakten WhietischafleH, and in Emst Cassirer's Substanzbegriff und Funk-
lioiubrgrijf. The writers of ihis school are by no means exclusively occupied
with mathematical and physical science; cf. Cohen; Die Elkik det ftinen
Waims.

' Natorp: of. cit., pp. lo-ii, 44-53.

' The Freiburg School (or "die sUdwestdeutsche Schule") is represented
by Wilhelm Windetband's PrOiudien; Heinrich Rickert's Der Gcgenstaiid
der Ertatntnis; and H. Milnatcrberg'a PkUosopkie der Wtrtt, and Eternal
Valuts. The writers of this school deal also with mathematical and
physical science (cf. Rickert's Grenien der natuniiisensckafllklien Be-
griftbildong. They lend also to be more metaphysical than the Marburg
Schod, and to merge into voluntaristic or ethical idealism. Cf. below, pp.


146 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of value is to rescue ethics, esthetics, history, and religion
from a merely descriptive empiricism, and establish them
upon a logic of the normative or ideal. There is, it is to
be observed, a virtual conflict between this and the
Marburg School, inasmuch as this regards logic itself as a
science of value, and truth as an ideal; whereas the other
regards value as in the end a form of intellectual synthe-
sis. The question of the relative priority of the 'is' and
the 'ought' {the "Sein" and the "Sollen") thus divides
critical as well as metaphysical idealists into the opposing
factions of intellectualism and voluntarism.'

The most interesting aspect of critical idealism is the
interplay of its two motives, its criticism and its idealism.
Its critical motive is most consistently expressed in its
polemic against 'psychologispi,' the Humian view which
reduces experience to the particular mental states of the
individual. 'Criticism' was bom in Kant's proof that
psychology presupposes physics and that both presuppose
logic. Since Kant's time, every revival of Hume has been
followed by a revival of this counter- thesis. The natural-
istic movement in Germany in the latter half of the nine-
teenth century stimulated the counter-movement "back
to Kant."' And similarly the present revival of 'psy-
chologism ' among pragmatists and positivists has provided
a new occasion for protest. Again we are reminded that
logic cannot be dissolved into the stream of human life
without self-contradiction, for every definition of life pre-
supposes logic. When in this mood 'criticism' seems far
removed from metaphysical idealism. It is simply the
assertion of the absolute priority of logic, with no more
regard for mind than for matter, "Without logical prin-
ciples, which lay hold of the contents of every impression,"
says Casarer, "there is for it (critical idealism) no more

' Cf. Natorp: op. cil.. p. 51; Cohen: Elhik da reintn WSieni, p. 791
and Rickert: op. eit., pp. 165-167.

' Cf. F. A. Lange, O. Liebmann, and E. Zcller. Conlempotary neo-E&n-
tianism is linked witb this earlier movement through Cohen.


I


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


147


an I-consdousness thao there is an object-consdousness.
. . . The thought of the I is in no way more original and
logically simple than the thought of the object." '

And yet the fact remains that there is a marked difference
between critical idealists and certain other contemporary
writers who also maintain the priority of logic, but who
have no Kantian affiliations.' The difference lies in the
fact that while Kantians regard logic as the sdence of
thought or knowledge ("Denken" or " Erkenntnis ") , these
writers regard it as a science of ' relations,' ' classes,'
'manifolds,' 'propositions,' 'prepositional functions,' or
other spedal entities, no more related to thought than are
the numbers of the mathematidan or the elements of the
chemist. The peculiarity of these entities lies in their
being so highly abstract as to be contained or implied in all
other entities. They are necessary for thought only in
that they are so ubiquitous that thought can deal with
nothing without dealing with them.

Now whether this practice among neo-Kantians of call-
ing logical prindplcs the 'acts' of synthetic unity, or the
'functions' of thought, or the 'presuppositions of knowl-
edge,' or the ' conditions of objectivity,' is no more than an
acddent of emphasis and hereditary verbal usage. I shall
not seek to determine.* But of several conclusions we
may be reasonably certain. In the first place, if the prin-
dples of logic are essentially inherent in thought or knowl-
edge, and we are to accept the priority of logic over all
other sdences, then an idealistic metaphysics is the only
possible condusion, if there is to be any metaphyacs at
all. The mind that owns the logical structure of reality
must own reality outright. That the thought or knowl-

I Op.cit..p.3<)].

* I tefet to the "lay" logicians, beginning with Schroeder and Boole
•nd represented most prominently today by Peano. Coutuiat, and Bcrtnuid
Russell. The reader will find Russell's Principles of Malhtmalies and
Priitcipia Matkimalifa the best source far this movement.

' The best discusBioD of the matter from the idealistic side is to be found
in Cassirer, op. cit., Chap. VII.


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


i of the finite


148

edge in question is not ttie mental process t
individual does not affect this general conclusion in the
least. It simply introduces a new conception of mind. The
central idealistic thesis, that reality is dependent on some
mind, is simply reaffirmed in a new sense. If, on the other
hand, the principles of logic are not in any sense mental,
then it is confusing and misleading to allude to them as the
principles of thought or knowledge. And in either case,
critical idealism is in unstable equihbrium. In so far as
its logical motive is emphasized, it tends to become a
special science like mathematics. In so far as its idealistic
motive is emphasized, it tends, as it did in the systems
of Kant's immediate successors, Fichte, Hegel, and the
Romanticists, to assume the form of a metaphysics and
philosophy of religion.

The English school of idealists, beginning with Coleridge,
and comprising T. H. Green, Edward Caird, F. H.
Bradley and Josiah Royce among its more recent exponents,
has from the outset offered a religious philosophy based on
the supremacy of consciousness. And the latter-day Ger-
man movement flows steadily from neo-Kantianism to a
neo-Fichteanism, neo-Hegelianism, or neo-Romantidsm, in
which the critique of 'psychologism' is only a subordinate
motive in the construction of a spirituahstic Weltan-
sckauung.

§ 6. Objective Idealism in its metaphysical form has
fluctuated between the two poles of intellectualism and
MeiaiAyacBi voluntarism. Its Central thesis, as we have
Idealism. sccn, is the dependence of being on a knowing

inicliKtudism j^jijj jjj^j transcends and envelops both the
physical and the psychical orders. But this subject may be
held to consist either in a process of thought governed by
logical motives; or in a primary activity, expressing itself
in thought, but governed primarily by ethical motives.
For Hegel, the classic representative of intellectualistic ideal-
ism, mind, or spirit ("Geist") is a primordial dialectic or
train of ideas; an "Absolute Idea," "externalizing" itself


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


149


in nature and reaching self-consciousness through the
historical development of culture.' There have been two
internal forces affecting the development of this version
of idealism.

In the first place, the categories themselves, the several
ideas with their own relations of logical necessity, tend to
replace and render unnecessary the unifjing conception
of mind. The Absolute Idea tends to assume the form of a
self-sufficient system, like logic or mathematics. As a
contemporary idealist complains, "the 'Absolute Idea' is,
in its self-evolution, of all things most inane, because it
figures as thought — 'the impersonal life of thought,' as
it has been termed — without a live Thinker." * "Thus in-
tellectualistic idealism tends to develop into a bare ratiou-
ab'sm or necessitarianism, that is really closer to mechanism,
than to spiritualism in the ordinary moral and religious
sense. So that in the so-called "left wing" of the Hegelian
school, idealism passed very easily and naturally over
into its opposite.'

In the second place, Hegel's account of the process of
mind, his enumeration and arrangement of the categories,
was soon shown to be inadequate. Science in its inde-
pendent development refused to comply. The special cate-
gories of nature, and even of history, had to be accepted
from the several sciences operating in these fields. As a
result the history of intellectualistic idealism has been
marked by the steady reduction of the strictly spiritual
categories — the a priori principles of pure thought — to
the scantiest and most formal terms. Indeed it is not far
from the truth to say that it now recognizes only one such
category, that of unity. This obtains diverse formulations,
such as the Caird's "self-consistent and intelligible whole";
Green's "unalterable order of relations"; Bradley's "Indi-

» C(. Hegel's Encyilopsdic (1816-1818), ${136-144, 381-381; trana.
by W. Wallace, in his Ufic of Hfgd, and Htgd'! Fkilosofihy cf Mind.

* James Lindsay: Stadia >n European Philosophy, pp, 113-114.

* Thb movement was represented by A. L. Feucrbach, David Strauss,
Karl Man, ftod olhets.


150 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

vidual" or "complete system"; and Joachim's "system-
atic coherence," or "completely individual, self-sustained,
significant whole." ^ In so far as these formulas purport to
define a maximum or ideal unity, I shall discuss them in
the next chapter.' Suffice it here to point out that the
terms are so abstract and colorless, that they do not legit-
imately affect that issue between spiritualism and material-
ism, in which idealism appears as one of the principal
champions.

This is true whichever of the two following courses is
pursued. It is possible, on the one hand, to adopt the
categories of science, and superimpose the philosophical
category of unity. The world is then simply that kind of
systematic unity which the several sciences are progres-
sively revealing, and idealism is no more than a formal
endorsement of these sciences. Or, on the other hand, it
is possible to pursue the agnostic course, and assert that
beyond the reach of our knowledge there are categories
which transmute the paradoxes of this world into a "total
unity of experience," which "cannot, as such, be directly
verified."' But such an absolute, concerning which
nothing more is known than that it is somehow one, self-
consistent, and all-inclusive, cannot property be said to be
spiritual; indeed, in so far as it signifies specific mental
and moral predicates, spirituality must be regarded as one
of those "partial aspects" which the absolute transcends.

1 7. The doubtful spirituality of a world defined
exclusively to suit an intellectual demand constitutes a
Voitiniirisiic powerful motive impelling idealism to shift
ot Eihioii its basis from intellectualism to voluntarism,
'"" Intellect, so the voluntarist asserts, is only a

special activity of consciousness. The general or funda-
mental activity of consciousness is not intellectual but

' E. Caird: "Tdealism and the Theory ot Knowledge," reprinted from
Proetedint! of the British Academy of Science. Vol. I, p. 8; T. H, Green:
ProUgomena to Elhits, pp. 3q, jo; F. H. Bradley: Appearance and Reaiity,
p. S4i; H, H. Joachim: The Naittre of Truth, pp. 76, 113.

» CI. especially, pp. 1S3-1S& » Bradley: op. eil., p. 53*


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


151


moral. Consciousness owns and employs the categories
in the service of its ulterior practical purposes. We are
thus led from Hegelianism to Fichteanism, With Fichte,
mind was the pure ego, endowed with freedom and
activity, and "positing" in obedience to moral necessities,
a "limited ego" in opposition to a "limited non-ego";
in other words, dividing itself into the counterpoise of
spirit and nature.'

But the same fate which befell the logical metaphysics of
Hegel, befell abo the ethical metaphysics of Fichte. He did
not succeed in moralizing nature any more than Hegel
succeeded in rationalizbg it. Mechanical science has
pursued its own independent course, steadily and irresist-
ibly; and voluntarism like intellectualism has been forced
to ratify its conquests. The result is that voluntarism is
forced either to hmit the scope of its categories to the field
of moral science proper, or to divest these categories of
their narrower and stricter meaning in order to maintain
their limitless scope.

The former alternative is adopted in so far as volun-
taristic idealism is simply a protest against attempts to
mechanize the sciences of value. When voluntaristic
idealism goes beyond this insistence on the autonomy of
moral science within its own limited field, and asserts its
ultimate priority, it becomes necessary to construe logic
also as a normative science. Judgment becomes an act
of will, and truth its norm. Reahty, being reduced to
knowledge by the usual idealistic arguments, is thus made
an expression of will.' But when the will is thus identified
with the will to know, it amounts to no more than the
reafGrmation of things as they are. The cognitive or
logical will is the will of the passionless sage who has

' Fichte: Crundlage da gtsammten Wissetischaflslckrt (Science oj
KtuaUdge) (1754). trans, by A. E. KrocgEr, pp. 79 sq.; and Dai System der
Siilenltkre (Sclenct of Elhki) (1798). U'ans. by Kroegcr, pp. 67 sq.

■ Cf. below, pp. 161-1G1. For the voluDtari^m arising from non-ideal-
istic motives, such as ' neo-vitalism,' d. Bergson, u treated below,
pp. 361-364.


152


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


renounced every special preference, and schooled himself
to an acquiescence in whatever is objective and necessary.
As knower, I will that there shall be a world; and having
once so willed, I must take it as I find it and yield to its
demands.' I have not interpreted the world to harmonize
it with will, but have emasculated will into an assent to
the world as it is.

The fate that befalls a strict voluntarism is thus similar
to that which befalls a strict intellectualism. Specific
categories drawn from thought or from the moral life, break
down when used for the purpose of interpreting nature;
and then when the categories are corrected to suit nature,
they lose their specifically spiritual character. There is
no saving grace in such a philosophy; and it does not con-
stitute a possible resting-place for the idealistic mind.*

§ S. The romantic alternative alone remains, as appar-
ently the inevitable destiny of idealism. It is generally
Neo-Romao- Tccognized that contemporary German thought
lidsm lias been repeating the phases through which

the Kantian movement originally passed.' Whether
neo-Kantianism, neo-Fichteanism, neo-Hegelianism, and
neo-Romanticism have observed the chronological order
of their prototypes is doubtful. But the interplay of
motives is strikingly similar to that of German thought
at the opening of the last century, and in nothing more
than in the emergence of romanticism.

Romanticism may take the agnostic form, and reduce the

• Cf. Mllnsterberg. See below, pp. 178-179.

' Wherever the metaphysical motive is strong, ethical idealiam tends
to approach romanticism. Thus MUnsterberg (0^. cil.) stands nearer to
romanticism than Windelbaud and Rickert. as be in turn falls short of the
advanced position of Th. Lipps (" Naturphilosophie." in Phttosophie im
BtgiriM des Zmtniigstat Jahrhunderls, Festschrift for Kuno Fischer, second
edition). Tlie common metaphysical motive in voluntarism and romanti-
cism is significantly expressed by the new idealistic organ, Lagos; ct. Vol. I,

IQIO. p. I.

• The so-called "review-course" (Repetitionskursus). Cf. Oscar Ewald:
"The Present Stale of Philosophy in Gennany," PkU. Retiea, Vol. XVI,
1907, pp. 338 sq.


I
I


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


153


various concrete manifestations of spirit to some ineffable
life which engulfs and negates them. This was the method
of Schopenhauer, and as revived in Hartmann's theory of
" the Unconscious," and in the earlier phases of Nietzsche's
thought, it plays no inconsiderable part in the present
movement. But there is another form of romanticism
that is more hospitable as well as more positive in lone. If
it is impossible to construe the world in terms of thought,
or in terms of moral life, there yet remains a further concep-
tion, complete enough to embrace these and every other
possible value, — the conception of a universal spiritual
life ("geistiges Leben"), that shall be infinitely various
and infinitely rich. Thus there arises the syncreristic and
developmental romanticism, which is the popular movement
of the day in German thought.

"I have shown," writes Ewald, "that it is more and more
the tendency of the most diverse thinkers to regard the
world as a fulness, exhibiting contradicrions and antinomies
only in the human spirit. In this way one-sided logidsm
is overthrown. Logic, morality, art, and religion enjoy
in their own realms complete sovereignty and cannot be
reduced by psychological or empiristic attempts to any-
thing merely relative or temporal. This sphere, however,
is not the whole, but only a part of inexhaustible reality."
Or, as it is expressed by Dilthey, for whom philosophy is
a study of the great interpretations of life (" Weltanschau-
ungslehre") in all their historical variety: "It is not the
relativity of every Weltanschauung, that is the final word
of the spirit which has passed through them all, but
rather the sovereignty of the spirit, as opposed to each
and every one of them; and at the same time the positive
consciousness that, in the different atritudes of the spirit,
the One Reality of the world is given us, the persistent
types of Wdtansckauung being the expression of the many-
sidedness of the world." The same philosophy finds an
eloquent and influential exponent in Rudolph Eucken,
who proclaims the self-sufficiency of the spiritual life


154 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

(" Selbstatandigkeit des Geisteslebens ") — of that "cosmic
life that forms the essence of things," and is apprehended
in a spiritual immediacy.'

Romanticism does not lend itself to vigorous criticism:
it is not so much a. philosophy as a faith. In romanticism,
"the cause of the Spiritual Life is loyally championed by
the soul against the pretensions of an alien or at least dissat-
isfying worldUness." Little attempt is made to free the
conception of the 'geisIigesLeben' from its indeterminate-
ness and proniiscuity; or to defend its priority by orderly
argument. Proof is as little congenial as analysis to such
a mood of riotous spirituality. The spiritual hfe is an act
to be performed, a privilege to be "freely appropriated,"
rather than an idea to be defined and estabUshed. Its
real motive force "lies in the impulse towards spiritual self-
preservation." It springs from " the desire for a philosophy
which seeks to regard reality from the inside and from the
point of view of the whole, and which . . . strives to raise
the whole of human life to a higher level."'

In other words it becomes in the end a question of the
function of philosophy. If philosophy be an attempt to
inspire men with noble and elevating sentiments, the roman-
ticists are perpetually right. But if philosophy be the
attempt to think clearly and cogently about the world, and
lay bare, its actualities and necessiries — for better or for
worse — then romanticism is irrelevant. It is not a false
philosophy; it is simply not, in the strict theoretical sense,
a philosophy at all."

§ 9. Before concluding, we shall do well to inquire
whether this great movement, with all the brilliancy and
versatility of mind which it has displayed, has proved its

' Ewald: Dp. cit. (con.}, Phil Ranw, Vol. XVTI, 1908, p. 416; W.
Dilthey: "Das Wesen der Philosophie," in Syslcmalisclu Philosopkit
<Hiiineberg's Kullur dcr Gegntrwarl), p. 63; R. Eucken: U/e of Ike Spirit,
trans, by F. L. Pogson, p. 3J7.

• Eucken: op, fit., pp. 33J, 403; and The Mtaning and ViU»e rf Lift,
trans, by L. J. and W. R. B. Gibaon, pp. 98, ij6.

' Cf. above, pp. »9-30, 40-41.


I


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


1J5


case. Has objective or transcendental idealism, the ideaJ-
ism of Kant and of those whom he inspired, established
The New or strengthened the general contention of

Idealism »nd ; j i ■ ■>

ih.cardi,ud idealism?

Principle In the first place, it is clear that the cardinal

principle of idealism remains what it was with Berkeley.
It is asserted that consciousness in some form, especially
consciousness in its cognitive form, is the one necessary and
universal condition of being. It is idle and misleading for
contemporary idealists to slur the fundamental place of the
conscious subject in their scheme of reality; to resort, for
example, to a seemingly neutral or colorless conception like
'experience.' This conception is used by certain non-
idealistic writers ' to mean the bare aggregate of entities,
not as yet brought under the form of either mind or body.
But for idealists experience means the contents of con-
sciousness, construed as such. Thus when Mr. Joachim
refers to that "Ideal experience" in terms of which he
defines truth, he means not the systematic totality of things
merely, but such a totality m/M«JC(f and compreliended. This
explains why he is not satisfied with the phrase "significant
whole." For "if 'experience' tends to suggest the experi-
encing apart from the experience, ' significant whole ' tends
to suggest the experienced apart from the experiencing."
" We want a term," he says, " to express the concrete unity
of both, and I cannot find one." Now I think that Mr.
Joachim is mistaken in thinking that the term experience
is defective in the respect to which he refers. The danger
is rather that, as used by idealists, it shall obscure the
fact that they mean content of consciousness, and not
merely things. Indeed I strongly suspect that it owes its
vogue to its ambiguity; otherwise I cannot account for the
abandonment of such downright terms as 'state,' 'percept,'
'idea.' Surely these terms answer perfectly to the demand
that things shall be construed as present to consciousness,
and consciousness as made up of content. In any case, it
I By Junes, for eiample; cf. b«low, pp. 364-365.


156 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

is clear that the "concrete unity" to which this author
refers is a unity of consciousness.'

An alternative phrasing of objective idealism is to be
found in the writings of Edward Caird. Thus he writes:
"The main result of modem philosophy and especially of
modern idealism has been to put a concrete, in place of an
abstract unity, or, in other words, to vindicate the essential
correlation of the self and the not-self."' Now this does
not mean merely that the self and the not-self are in some
sense necessarily related; and does not follow from any
general proof of the systematic unity of the world. It
means that it is essential to everything to stand in the
specific relation, for-a-self; that the simplest possible entity
is a self with its content, or an object engaged by a conscious
mind. The uiuty to which the idealist refers is not a unity
between consciousness and something else, but a unity of
consciousness.

§ 10. Supposing it to be granted, then, that objective
or transcendental idealism, like Berkeleyan idealism, is
„ „ , founded on the assertion of the primacy of

The New Proof , , . . -

oj McBiism consciousness; we may now ask whether this
fcom Synthetic version of idealism has advanced new arguments
in support of that assertion. One is compelled
to eiq>ress astonishment at the common failure of idealists
to separate this question, and deal with it proportionately
to its importance. But the new idealism does urge at
least one new argument — the argument from the 'syn-
thetic' function of consciousness. It is contended that con-
sciousness affords the only genuine unity, and that since the
world requires unity it must derive it from consciousness.


I
I

I


• H. Joachim; op. oil., pp, B3-84, note. The same comment will apply
to the use which Rickert and othccs moke of the conception of ' immanence '
to describe the most universal form of being. 'Immanence' is meaning-
less except in relation to ft subject, and the theory of universal immanence
does not really differ except in urclcamcss from a more explicit theory of
universal consciousness. C(. Rickert; Der Gttcutand dtr Erkemitnis,
pp. 14-1S.
* Edwud Caird: op. cil., p. 6.


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


157


Green, for example, asserts that reality must be regarded
as "an unalterable order of relations." "But a plurality
of things cannot of themselves unite in one relation, nor
can a single thing of itself bring itself into a multitude
of relations." They require the "combining agency"
— inteUigence. "Either then we must deny the reality of
relations altogether and treat them as fictions of our com-
bining intelligence, or we must hold that, being the product
of our combining intelligence, they are yet 'empirically
real' on the ground that our inteUigence is a factor in the
real of eitperience."'

SimQarly, Mr. McTaggart asserts that the only intelli-
gible kind of unity is that in which "the unity is at once
the whole of which the individuals are parts, and also
completely present in each individual." And "this rela-
tion between the individuals and the whole .... is that
particular relation of which the only example known to
us is consciousness."*

The only possible justification for this train of reasoning
is the supposition that terms must somehow penetrate their
relations and relations their terms, so that some peculiar
agency is required to prevent their either fusing or falling
apart. This is the so-called 'internal theory' of relations,
which is not only contrary to the usage of science and com-
mon sense, but incapable even of being expressly formu-
lated. Mr. Bradley is driven in despair to conclude that
"a relation always is self-contradictory," and that to find
a solution we must "pass entirely beyond the relational point
of view." He obtains no illimiination of the question from
the character of consciousness. For this simply repeats
"the old illusory play of relations and qualities," "at a
higher level than before." But for some inscrutable reason,
Messrs. Green and McTaggart find the intelleclual operation
of relating, or the consciousness of many in one, more intelli-

' T. H Green: op. at., pp. ao-31.

' J. M. E. McTaggart: Sludiei in Begilian Cosmology, pp. 14. 19. C(.
also M. W. CoUciiu: Tkt Penitttnt ProbUuu of FhUoiophy, pp. J73-379.


I 58 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

gible than bare relation itself, I can explain their proced-
ure only by attributing it to a willingness, exhibited by
modern thinkers in general, and by idealists in particular,
to abandon analysis and rigor of thought when conscious-
ness is in question.' If there be any peculiar virtue in
consciousness to relieve the difficulty of 'unity in plurality,'
it is a niiraculous virtue ; whose secret, if it has been discov-
ered, has certainly never been successfully communicated.

§ II. But the majority of idealists do not even attempt,
as do Green and McTaggart, to find a new proof of idealism;
The Revival o( '■^^J' ^^^ Satisfied to rest their case on the old
the Beckcieyan Berkeleyan grounds. The fallacy of ' argument
AfBumenti {^oja the ego-centric predicament' is precisely
the same, whether knowing be construed empirically with
Berkeley, or rationalistically with the followers of Kant.
Thus the categories cannot be known without being J
thought; from which it is falsely inferred that they cannot 4
be without being thought.

This fallacy is perhaps less characteristic of the new I
idealism than the other Berkeleyan fallacy of ' definition by |
initial precUcation.' Here one begins by discovering that (
the categories are conditions of knowledge. But having J
once taken their place upon the stage in this r61e, they i
are straightway idenlified with it, They are defined as]
what one needs in order to know. They become the instni- "
ments of a hypothetical activity governed purely by the]
cognitive motive. This activity becomes a will to know, |
which seeks its own by a definite procedure and imposes I
its conditions on everything with which it deals. Thel
necessities of knowledge are construed as its demandSfl
and the world of science as its conquest and domain. I

' F. H. Bradley; ep. cit., pp. iii, 44s. Professor Royce, like Mr. 1
Bradley, admits that th« diSiculty ol relations is aggravated rather than
relieved in the ease of coniciousness, but believes that the difficulty may
be met by the modem mathematical theory of infinity. Of, The World
and the Individual, First Series, Supplementaty E^ssay. On the 'internal'
and 'external' theory of relations, d. below, pp. 144-146, 319-310
above, pp. loi-ioa.


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


159


But the guise in which things first appear is not to be
assumed to be their native dress. It may be in any degree
accidental and external. That the categories may be con-
ditions of knowledge otUy accidentally, is apparent when one
reflects that any entity whatsoever may be cast in that rflle.
The color red may be used as a danger-signal; a spacial
distance, such as a metre or a foot, may be used as a unit of
measurement; the weight of water may be used as a stand-
ard for the determination of atomic weights. But one
does not therefore conclude that these things are essettttaUy
conditions of knowledge.

There is no difference between these cases and the cases
of the traditional formal categories, save the wider gener-
ality of the use to wMch the latter may be put. And the
explanation of this may at least as reasonably be found in
the nature of things, as in the nature of knowledge. If
knowledge must conform to its objects, then every necessity
in things is a necessity for true thought about those things.
Thus it one is to know right-angle triangles, one must judge
that the square on the hypothenuse is equal to the squares
on the other two sides. And as spacial implications are
necessary for geometrical thought; so, if there are any
universal implications residing in the nature of all things,
implications belonging to the province of logic, then they
are necessary for all thought. But the necessity lies ulti-
mately in the nature of things, and is binding on thought
only so far as IhougfU is bound to things. Were all things
blue, blue would then be an indispensable condition for the
knowing of anything; but it would not on that account
bear any closer relation to the cognitive subject than it
does now. All things are, let us assume, related. It follows
that it is impossible to know anything without knowing it
in relation. Not. however, because knowing implies relat-
ing; but because being implies relation, and knowing must
seize upon the nature of its ot^ect.

As a matter of fact, objective idealism has deduced the
categories from the object and not from the subject. To


i6o


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


deduce the categories from the subject it would have been
necessary to define the subject — which the idealist has
consistently omitted to do. The subject has been a by-
stander, whose familiar presence has gradually assumed
the appearance of indispensable necessity. It is, to be
sure, the contention of some idealists that it is possible to
know necessities only in so far as knowledge itself imposes
them. Knowledge, Kant said, must control its objects if
it is confidently to assert anything concerning them. But
it is to be observed that the necessities of thought are
derived by the objective idealist, not from thought
as the moral-psychical process of the individual mind,
but from thought standardized, from thought so far as
true. It is the pragmatist, and not the idealist, who
attempts to deduce the categories from the concrete, exist-
ent subject; and the idealist is the first to charge him with
subjectivism and relativism. The idealist deduces the
categories from the subject in so far as conformed to the
objective nature of things, and thus, in the last analysis, from
that objective nature of things. The actual subject, then,
does not impose necessities on nature, but yields to neces-
sities which are dictated to it by something beyond itself.
The idealistic version of the categories receives illegiti-
mate support from the fixed disposition in modem times to
regard sense as receptive, and thought as creative. While we
'receive' impressions, we are supposed to 'form' ideas.
But this is sheer prejudice or verbalism. A body must be
perceived in order to be known, and an implication must be
thought in order to be known; but there is no more reiison or
sense in asserting the knowing to be necessary to the being,
in the one case than in the other. The general question of
the dependence or independence of things known on the
knowing of them, has really nothing to do with the narrower
question of the priority of sense or thought. The more
general question cannot be discussed intelligently without
an analysis of the knowing subject, in which it is brought
from its functional place in the background and placed in


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM


t6t


the foreground of study, like any other entity. It may then
be possible to discover its particular nature ; and the partic-
ular nature of that peculiar relation which it sustains to
those other things which are its objects; and finally whether
that relation is or is not essential to the objects.

The procedure of voluntaristic idealism in establishing
the priority of will, purpose, or the judging activity with
its ideals and norms, affords a peculiarly clear illustration
of the Berkeleyan arguments. Thus Rickert writes: "We
know nothing of a being that is, except it be judged to be,
and no one knows anything of it, . . . for how could he
know without having judged, and how could he judge with-
out thereby recognizing an ought?" Now doubtless being
is a predicate of judgment; and doubtless judgment like
all activities is subject to a determinate obligation of its
own. When I set out to know, reahty is my destination,
and prescribes the course of my action. Or, as Professor
Royce expresses it, "the Other which Thought restlessly
seeks" is "nothing but the will of the idea itself in some
determinate expression."' But why identify things with
the cognitive adventure at all? I am no more justified in
defining that which is my norm or purpose, my goal or desti-
nation, in terms of this relation, than I am justified in defining
the office in terms of the office-seeking, or a geographical
locality in terms of travellers who journey toward it.

The reasoning of idealism has grown in popular effective-
ness as European thought has acquired the habit of viewing
reality as the idealist views it. So strong is this habit that
many idealistic books are written with no attempt what-
soever at proof. We are invited to view the world as
'experience,' 'task,' 'situation,' 'truth,' 'goal,' or, in some
others terms, as object of consciousness; and it is thereupon
assuuned without further ado that this aspect of the world,
simply because it is there and may be selected, is defini-
tive. But unless it can be proved that the relation of
things to hfe, when they do sustain such a relation, is the
> Rickert: op. eit., pp. 156-157; Royce: op. cit., pp. 5S8, 333.


Objcclivcldei]-


162 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

relation which bestows on them both their nature and
their being, there is no difference between such idealism
and a sheer romantic or spiritualistic bias.

§ 12, Before bringing this chapter to a close we must
inquire whether objective idealism has accomplished its
restricted domestic task of saving idealism
from a vicious subjectivism. There is but one
Escape from crucial Consideration here. Has idealism em-
u je vim pigygj gm-ji g_ subjectivism, or has it been able
to dispense with it? For it must be admitted that no
philosophy can without contradiction both employ and
reject the same assertion.

The answer would seem to be perfectly clear. Idealism
gets its proof from putting a certain construction on human
consciousness, that being the only instance that comes under
observation. The idealist must, then, first regard human
consciousness as consritutive of its objects. Where this
theory is strictly maintained, it holds not only of the
individual consciousness, but even of the momentary con-
sciousness. But the idealist himself sees that this involves
contradictions. It provides noway of distinguishing the true
or valid cases of knowledge from mere opinion. All cogni-
tive states are made equally authoritative with reference to
their objects. And where, as often happens, the same object
is differently and inconsistently known in several cognitive
states, there is no way of relieving the contradiction. So
objective idealism is led to attribute constitutive validity
only to some standard or universal consciousness, which
shall afford objects their true and permanent ground.

But this requires a correction of the initial interpretation
of the individual or momentary consdousness. We must
now suppose that these instances of consciousness do not
constitute their objects; but either conform to them or
misrepresent them. In other words, objects are now
independent of those concrete instances of consciousness
which first came under observation. And then what
becomes of the proof of idealism? Having construed his


I
■


OBJECTIVE IDEALISM 163

own and his neighbor's consciousness realistically, where is
the idealist to find the analogy for his hypothetical uni-
versal consciousness? And what occasion is there now for
a universal consciousness? Had the idealist begun with a
realistic version of human consciousness, the error of sub-
jectivism would never have arisen, and his universal
consciousness would have been a gratuitous as well as a
meaningless invention.

Thus the error which idealism corrects with so much cere-
mony proves to be indispensable to its own inner develop-
ment. The error must be cherished if there is to be any
demand for remedial intervention. Subjectivism cannot
be abolished; it must, as has been frankly avowed, be
retained as !i" DurchgangsUjdium" on the way to a complete
idealism.' But either objective idealism must be taken as
rejecting subjectivism, in which case it must banish it alto-
gether from its councils, and start from an account of human
consciousness that is wholly free from it; or it must be taken
as accepting subjectivism, in which case it stands condemned
by its own admissions.

The basal arguments for idealism are the same as those
for subjectivism. The arguments from 'the ego-centric
predicament/ and from 'initial predication,' if they prove
anything, prove subjectivism — even the extremes of rela-
tivism and solipsism. If they do not prove anything, then
idealism, subjective and objective alike, is left unproved.
In either case, the ground on which the idealistic system
has been erected affords no reliable support. Whether this
system is to be valued as an illumination of life cannot yet
be judged. For there is another primary motive, the motive
of absolutism, with which the cardinal idealistic principle
has come to be allied. And it is impossible to reach any
final estimate of idealism as a religious philosophy without
examining absolutism on its own independent grounds.
' Cf. Kickert. op. cU., p, 56.


CHAPTER Vin
ABSOLUTE IDEALISM AND REUGION

§ I. The religion of an idealist is not a forlorn hope, or
a. defence of last ditches, but an enjoyment of all the emo-
The General ^^^^ of Sovereignty. Idealism undertakes to
Meaning o( Substantiate the extreme claims of faith, — the
b3o utism creation of matter by spirit, the indestructible
significance of every human person, and the unlimited
supremacy of goodness. The terms of a devotional mys-
ticism — Spirit, Perfection, Eternity, Infinity — appear in
the very letter of its discourse. Nor has this promise of
good tidings been unheeded. Idealism has acquired pres-
tige and a position of authority. While it has httle if
any direct access to the popular mind, it is resorted to
habitually by the middle men of enlightenment, by clergy-
men, litterateurs, lecturers, and teachers. Hence it comes
about that many an honest man has invested all his hopes
of salvation in the adventure. And this is my apology for
undertaking to audit its accounts; the question of its
solvency being of no small human importance.

The religious creed of ideahsm may be said to contain
two major articles. The one of these is the cardinal prin-
ciple already examined — the assertion of the priority of
consciousness in the act of cognition. The second article
is the principle of absolutism, and with this we shall, in the
present chapter, be chiefly occupied.

The sense in which I propose to employ the term 'ab-
solutism,' is to be distinguished from two other senses in
which it is also currently employed. These other uses of
the term appear, it is true, chiefly in the writings of
idealists; but they may nevertheless be regarded as quite
independent. In the first place, 'absolute' is often taken
164


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 165

to mean the antitheas of ' reSative ' ; and Is used to char-
acterize such fact, being, or truth, as is independent of the
vagaries of a fallible mind. But it is quite possible to
accept absolutism in this sense, as indeed it is accepted
both by naturahsm and by realism, without accepting
any of the distinguishing premises of absolute idealism.*
In the second place, 'absolute' may be taken to mean
'certain,' as opposed to 'probable' or 'hypothetical.' Ab-
solutism in this sense signifies the theory that some truths
are indubitable; capable of being established dialectically,
and not subject to correction by experience. But thia
theory relates to a special question of methodology or
logic which may be treated quite independently of the
broader issues raised in the present discussion.

As I shall employ the term, absolutism means the
assertion of a maximum or superlative ideal having meta-
physical vahdity. This ideal, variously construed as "the
Good," "the Infinite Substance," "the ens realissimutn,"
"the Universal Will," etc., is Ihe Absolute; or, in the
language of religion, God. Absolutism in this sense may,
and commonly does, embrace absolutism in the first and
second senses; for one may maintain that such an ideal
alone possesses objective validity and certainty, and escapes
relativity and contingency. But I shall from thenceforth
employ the term in this third and most general sense.

It will be remarked that absolutism is closely related to
'the speculative dogma' which we have already encoun-
tered as a motive in naturalism.* This dogma consists in
the assumption of an all-general, all-sufficient first prindple;
and arises from the tendency to anticipate that complete
unification toward which knowledge appears progressively
to move. Absolutism is the expression of this motive in
its purity. It is the formulation of the goal of knowledge
from an analysis of the process and trend of knowledge;
and the assertion of that goal as necessary. So that while
absolutism is allied with naive naturalism in its acceptance
' C(. below, pp. 335-340. ' Sec above, pp. 64-*;.


1 66 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of the Speculative ideal, it is distinguished therefrom by
its method. It regards the speculative ideal as an ideal,
and expressly formulates it as such, Thus absolutism is
not merely monistic, as is naive naturalism; but is also
normative, in that its cosmic unity is the limit or standard
of the activity of thought.'

The motive of absolutism is evidently quite independent
of the cardinal principle of idealism. Absolutism, indeed,
had already had a long and significant historical develop-
ment of its own, prior to the advent of idealism. Hence
in order to understand ' absolute idealism,' the union of the
two, we shall do well first to isolate absolutism, and examine
it on its own grounds. And for this purpose it will be con-
venient to con&ne our attention to two great exponents of
this doctrine, Plato and Spinoza — the one ancient, the
other modern. These great thinkers are eminently repre-
sentative of an absolutism that did not enjoy the support
of idealism. The characteristic difficulties which beset their
philosophies are the characteristic difficulties of absolutism
proper; and having comprehended them, we shall be in
a position to judge of the success of absolute idealism
in overcoming them. These characteristic difficulties are,
I believe, three: formalism, etjuivocation, and dogmatism.

§ 2. Absolutism's first and only undisputed success
was the discovery of logic. This science began when it

was observed that the 'things' of practical
A^ig'^m common sense, the gross objects of motion,
the Loeicii manipulation, and social intercourse, could be
hiUi^ ^ analyzed; and that such analysis revealed

certain highly general and perhaps universal
terms o( discourse, such as 'being,' 'negation,' 'unity,'
' manyness,' 'space,' 'number,' etc' While the hst of these

> Iq other words, absolutism is 'idealistic' in the popular sense of the
term. I have employed this term exclusively to refer lo the theory of the
priority of consdousness. It is unfortunate that the same word should
refer to this, aod abo the quite different notion of ' ideals.'

* Plato is perh&ps the founder of logic in this sense. Cf., e.g., the Par-
matidei.


I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 167

'categories,' or 'logical constants,' is by no means finally
made up, there can be no doubt that there are such entities.
In other words there are some terms that satisfy the condi-
tion of unlimited getierality. And this fact alone would
entitle absolutism to respectful consideration.

But absolutism demands much more. These general
categories must be unified and proved all-sufficient. They
must either form a systematic whole or be deduced from
some supreme category; and this higher imity, in turn,
must explain the facts of esistence. Plato defined this
systematic unity or supreme category as the "good."
"When a person starts on the discovery of the absolute by
the light of reason only, and without any assistance of sense,
if he perseveres by pure intelligence, he attains at last to
the idea of good, and finds himself at the end of the intel-
lectual world." What, in the last analysis, Plato meant
by the good it is impossible to say, without falling into
those equivocations which I am going to treat separately
under the next heading. But confining ourselves for the
present to the relatively logical aspect of Plato's concep-
tion, we may say that he meant by the good, the significant,
the intelligible — that which has meaning. The categories, in
their own inner "dialectical" relations give meaning to
things, and so are not only " the author of knowledge in all
things known, but of their being and essence" as well.'

Now admitting that for logical reasons all things must
be regarded as significant, or as having meaning, it is no
less clear that an ultimate principle, such as this, in which
every concession has been made to generality, is grossly
inadequate to everyl/iing to which it applies. What has been
gained in breadth has been lost in thickness. The rich
nature of concrete objects is left wholly out of the account,
and has no necessary relation whatsoever to the first prin-
ciple. Why this particular world should be as it is, one
does not in the least understand from the bare conception

^RtfMk, trsa». by Jow«t, S3' A, joS E, jog B. C(. above, pp. 31,
114-11$.


1 68 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of significance or meaning. This sacriiice of sufficiency to
generality, this neglect of the insufficiency of purely logical
categories, is what I mean by the error of formalism.

Let us consider the same difficulty in connection with
the absolutism of Spinoza. That philosopher cleared him-
self of what he regarded as a confusion in Plato between
logic and teleology, and sought to establish his system upon
the firm basis of the deductive method. His supreme cate-
gory is substance; and by substance he means "that which
is in itself, and is conceived through itself."' In other
words substance is definite, that is, possesses certain inher-
ent attributes; and self-sufficient, that is, possesses all modes
of itself internally. Substance is not necessarily good, since
that conception refers properly only to human interests,
and is therefore limited in range; substance is simply an
eternal and inalienable nature, together with its inex-
orable implications. In this sense, according to Spinoza,
substance is the universal principle.

But though this may be a general characterization of
reality, it is hopelessly inadequate. It throws no light
whatsoever on what in particular things are, and on what
in particular they imply. They might be and imply any-
thing, so far as this conception is concerned. It is and
remains a logical conception, referring to the most general
or abstract aspect of experience, and leaving all that
remains, the vast bulk of nature and history, wholly out
of account.

It is true that Plato did not mean to define reality in
terms of bare intelligibility, and that Spinoza did not mean
to define it in terms of bare substantiality. Nevertheless
they did not, I think, succeed in doing more, in so far as
they confined themselves to strictly logical considerations.
And only so far as they did so conceive the absolute in
abstract logical terms, were they able to prove its unlimited
generality,

' Eihks, trans, by Elwes, p. 45; d. Put I, paiiim. Ci. tbove, pp. 33,


I


§3


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 1 69

e absolute is, then, to be all-suffictent as well
as aJl-general, it must be endowed with other than purely
logical characters. The logical first principle
Arising from the BQUSt be interpreted and amplified by bor-
Atteiapi to Es- rowing the more sufficient terms of nature or
life. But these terms while they are clear In
their limited application, at once become equivocal when
generalized.'

Let us consider, for example, Plato's attempt to construe
meaning or intelligibility in terms of some concrete human
variety of goodness. Experience doubtless affords analogies,
but only analogies that are essentially limited in application.
Thus a well-organized society, in which human interests
are harmoniously adjusted and brought to fulfilment, may
be said to owe its meaning to the propriety and excellence
of its activities. To be understood at all it has to be under-
stood as good. But the concepts of political theory are of
limited generality. Not even society in its historical form
can be said to be a true polity; while nature falls outside
the range of such principles altogether. Similarly, art,
where this is ideal, is also intelhgible in so far as good. But
neither is nature art, nor is all art ideal. The ultimate
good, then, can be neither a perfect society nor a perfect
work of art, because these conceptions, while they are
sufficient and illuminating in a certain context, are not
all-general.

There is a third sense in which the intelligible is good:
as the consummation of the theoretical interest — the
truth sought and won. But here again it is clear that we
have to do with a particular and complex process which it
is impossible to generalize. There is no reason to suppose
that all things whatsoever are comprehended within one
moment of ecstatic contemplation. Without the use of
the idealistic principle (of which Plato was quite innocent)
such a contention caimot even be made plausible. The

' We have already observed this fact in the case oF allempts to gen-
eralue pby^uil coaccpts. See above, pp. 6g. ;t ff.


lyo PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

truth that is enjoyed, is but a small fraction of the being
that is. Furthennore, though we narrow the world to
the process of thought, it must yet be objected that not
all thought is crowned with success.

What, then, is that perfect goodness which is the author
of the "being and essence" of all things? Clearly it is not
a case of moral goodness, or of beauty, or even of truth,
in the sense of intellectual happiness. And yet Plato
freely attributes all three of these values to it! But does
he mean to do so literally? It is impossible to say; for
at this point the absolutist begins to speak a strange tongue.
TTie good is not good in any known sense, only because it
is of surpassing goodness. It is more, not less — than
virtue, beauty, and insight. Now to be good, and to have
goodness enhanced by other values beside, this truly is to be
more than good; but to be lacking in goodness through
excess of it, to be more than good and yet not good at all —
this passes comprehension. And yet precisely this profound
and misleading equivocation lies at the root of all Platonic
myslicism.

An admirable illustration of this procedure of thought
is afforded by the theology of Dionysius the Areopagite,
the Christian neo-Platonist. I quote from Berkeley's
account.

"In his treatise of the Celestial Hierarchy, he saith that
God is something above all essence and life; and again,
in his treatise of the Divine Names, that He is above all
wisdom and understanding, ineffable and innominable;
the wisdom of God he terms an unreasonable, unintelligent,
and foolish wisdom. But then the reason he gives for
expressing himself in this strange manner is, that the
Divine wisdom is the cause of all reason, wisdom, and
understanding, and therein are contained the treasures of
all wisdom and knowledge. He calls God vir<pcro^« and
fiir^pfon; as if wisdom and life were words not worthy
to express the Divine perfections: and he adds that the
attributes unintelligent and unperceiving must be ascribed


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 171

to the Divinity, not tar" SKXtiipiv^ by way of defect, but
Ka0' imtpoxijy, byway of eminency; which he explains by our
giving the name of darkness to light inaccessible."'

In its endeavor to give concrete sufficiency to its first
principle, absolutism is thus driven from one error to
another — from formalism to eqmvocation. The truly
general, or logical, elements of experience having proved
insufficient to the complex objects in which they are found,
conceptions that are sufficient within limits are now ren-
dered equivocal through being employed symbolically or
analogically beyond those limits.

§ 4. The nature of the all-general, all-sufficient principle
thus remains problematic, because the most general cate-
™ ,, cories are insufficient, and the most sufficient

The Dogmatic " . ,. . , . ,, „„

Character uf Categories are limited m generality. What,
AbsoluiHin. now, shall be said of the proof of such a prin-
ciple? It is argued that knowledge employs
a principle which admits of degrees; that knowledge can
be complete only when this principle reaches a maximum ;
and that since we must attribute to reality the character
it obtains in complete knowledge, we must define it in
terms of such a maximum. It appears, however, that the
principles which knowledge employs do not define a maxi-
mum; and that were their limitations removed they would
at once lose their meaning.

Let us turn again to the case of Plato. He would say
that we know things in so far as we apprehend them as
good; and would proceed to infer their absolute goodness.
But in every verifiable case of such knowledge the good-
ness of things is limited. Thus, for example, the activity
of the wise ruler is good and intelligible in that it answers
to the demands of social hfe, and to concrete historical

• Berkeley: Altiphron or the Minute Philosopker, Fraser's edition. Vol.
n, pp. 183-183, Berkeley's comment is as follows: "Upon the whole,
although this method of growing in eipression and dwindling in notion, of
clearing up doubts by nonsense, and avoiding difiicultiea by running into
affected conttadictions. may perhaps proceed from a wcU-meont zeal, yet
it appears not to be according to knowledge."


172 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

exigencies. Without reference to these limiting conditions
it is impossible to define the goodness of the ruler; and if
that reference be condemned, then the method of definition
is condemned. There is no ground for the assertion of a
perfection so exalted that it shall be limited by no con-
ditions whatsoever.

Nor is the situation essentially altered if a more general
conception of value is employed. Suppose that we define
the activity of the ruler in terms of the demands of social
life, and then define these in terms of the demands of
human nature. Social life itself may then be understood
in the Platonic way, as the organization of activities neces-
sary to the expression of the ideal essence of man. But
even so, although what man does may now be understood
as good in terms of what man is, the ideal essence of man
has itself to be defined in terms of categories that are not
Ideological at all. And if this be regarded as vicious,
then the whole method is vicious. Similarly, every case
of knowledge by teleological principles involves the appre-
hension and acceptance of some elements which are not
determined by such principles. We are not justified in
projecting a good that shall be all good, or a teleological
system that shall be through and through teleological, for
this would be to contradict the meaning of goodness and
teleology.

Nor does absolutism succeed any better if we substitute
the mathematical-deductive logic of Spinoza for the teleo-
logical logic of Plato. Spinoza thought that the concep-
tion of substance implied the conception of an absolute
substance that is "self-caused" in that its "essence in-
volves existence"; and "infinite," in that it contains all
attributes in its definition, and implies all things and
events as its modes.' But precisely as there is no absolute
maximum definable in terms of goodness, so there is no ab-
solute maximum definable in terms of deductive necessity.
The actual deductive systems of human knowledge are

' Spinou: Ethics, loc. cit.


I
I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM


173


those in which, as in the case of Euclidean geometry or the
Newtonian mechanics, the axioms, postulates, indefinablcs,
etc. — that is, the tenns and propositions that are not
deduced — are few and fruitful. The investigator doubt-
less makes them as few and as fruitful as possible. But
there is no deductive principle that determines ftow few
or hffw fruitful they shall be. The deductive method,
which is the basis of Spinoza's system, clearly requires
some elements that are not deduced. These elements stand
in certain simple relations, such as difference, to one another;
but they are not brought under the determination of the
principles of the system itself. Now this being the case, it
is clearly absurd to infer an absolute system in which
every element shall be deduced — a system in which,
through excess of deductive cogency, the very conditions
of deduction shall be removed!

Or, if this be untrue to Spinoza's real intent, it is still
gratuitous even to infer that there shall be but one deduc-
tive system. There is, let us grant, a universal totality;' but
is there any reason why it should possess any definite degree
of deductive unity? Is there any reason why that totality
should not be composed of many systems which are related
to one another, as are the non-deductive elements within
these several systems? Now if it be contended that this is
equivalent to the assertion of a single all-embracing system,
of which the particular systems, such as geometry, me-
chanics, ethics, etc., shall be the axioms, then we have only
to remind ourselves of the entire insignificance of such a con-
tention. There is no ground for determining whether these
several systems, together with such sj-stems as exceed
present knowledge, form a highly coherent or a loosely
collective system. It is entirely possible that together
they imply nothing other than that which they imply
severally, except the collective totality of all that they

■ On tbc ground that all tbe componnits of the universe must be some-
how 'related.' That relation does not imply dependence and unity. Is the
n ol 'pluralism.' The issue is discussed bdow, pp. 34a-346.


174 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

imply. In other words, we arc justified in saying no more
than that if we knew all the first principles, we could deduce
all objects and events. No self-respecting philosopher
would go to the trouble of pro%Tng this, and it is certain
that Spinoza did not mean to assert so trivial and obvious
a proposition. But the dilemma is unavoidable. Either
he is limited to that conclusion, or he must be charged with
attempting to override his own logic — with seeking to
find an argument for an absolute deductive system by
condemning the deductive method itself.

Thus the proof of absolutism fails through the fact that
neither teleology nor deduction defines an absolute maxi-
mum or ideal. And this failure is fraught with serious
consequences. For in order to prove the necessity of
'absolute' knowledge, the actual instances of knowledge
are virtually discredited. In other words, the procedure
of absolutism involves more than inconsistency and failure
— it involves agnosticism, that is, the denial of positive
knowledge, and the substitution for it of an unrealized
project. It encourages the sweeping condemnation of
science, and an irresponsible and autocratic procedure in
philosophy.

Such, then, was the state of absolutism at the time of
Kant. Ambitious in the interests of the speculative dogma
to formulate an all-general and all-sufficient principle, it
neglected the essential formality and abstractness of logic
(the discovery of which was its great achevement); it
violated the meaning of ethical, physical, and other con-
ceptions by over-generalizing them; and disparaged actual
knowledge by arbitrarily asserting a problematic concep-
tion of ideal knowledge. We have now to consider whether
modem idealism, profiting by the insight of Kant' has
succeeded in avoiding formalism, equivocation, and dog-
matism.

§ 5. There is, as we have seen, a merely 'critical' u

' Inumucb as 'absolute idealism' ia idmtilicd with ehjtctivt idctlism —
it develops from Kant, rather than from Berkeley.


I
I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM


175


well as a metaphysical, Kantianism,' A critical or strictly
logical Kantianism commends that philosopher for his re-
Trsnsition to discovery of the categories, and for his con-
Absoiuie ' tributions toward their complete formulation
AW^c ^"" ^"^ systematic classification. If this interpre-
Cogoitive tatioD fac Set aslde, as having no necessary

oQsaousness (-QujiectioQ With the idealistic metaphysics,
only one alternative remains. If Kant's originality does
not lie in the formulation of the category of synthetic
unity, then it must lie in the contention that this and
other categories are supplied or enacted by consciousness.
And in this contention metaphysical idealists of all schools
are virtually agreed,'

We are now concerned, not with the merits of this con-
tention, but with its bearing upon absolutism. United
with absolutism it gives rise to the philosophy known
as 'absolute idealism.' Reality is defined in terms of an
absolute cognitive consciousness, that is both prior to things
known, in the ideahstic sense, and also a maximum or
ideal, in the absolutist sense. The Absolute Good of
Plato, and the Infinite Substance of Spinoza, are thus
replaced by the "Absolute Idea" of Hegel; and by such
contemporary conceptions as Professor Royce's "absolutely
organized experience inclusive of all possible experience,"
or "the absolute self-fulfilment, absolutely self-contained
significance" of the "one and only one" ideal experience,
described by Mr. Joachim.' Let us inquire, then, whether
idealistic absolutism, such as this, escapes the formalism,
equivocation and dogmatism of earlier absolutism.

§ 6. The absolute idealist, like the pre-Kantian absolu-
Formilisn. ^'^t, necessarily turns to those properUes of
Id Absolute things which have the maximum of generat-
idwiism jjy Like his forenmners, he depends for

the definition of his universal principle upon the logical

> See Chap. VTI, (s- ' See above, pp. iS4-iS6-

' J. Koyce: Coiueplion of God, p. ]t; H. H. Joachim: The Naiurt of
rrwtt, p. 78.


176 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

caUgories. And his universal consciousness must again be
defined exclusively in temis of these categon'es, since no
other attributes mil measure up la its unlimiUd generality.
The Kantian category which has assumed fundamental
importance is, as we have seen, that of synthetic unity,
or systematic totality. The absolute consciousness,
then, is that which contributes to all things, by the
thinking or the willing of them, those determinate inter-
relationships by virtue of which they form a consistent
and orderly universe. The world is one systematic whole,
thought or willed.

Now such is the power of words that this rings like an
important conclusion. And yet it explains so little that a
scientist, moralist, or religious believer would be justified
in conceding it without hesitation. For as respects the
issues of science, morality, even of religion, it is utterly non-
committal ; it is consistent with anyl/iing. When the idealist
proceeds further, and enumerates certain subordinate cat-
egories, such as difference, identity, quality, etc., where-
with the absolute consciousness effects this union of things
into a systematic whole, he has to reckon with the logician,
but he can still be safely ignored by everyone else. In
other words, if consciousness is to be generalized, it must
be defined in logical terms; and when so defined it serves
to explain the logical elements of experience, and nothing
more. To explain the other aspects of experience, one
must look to other, and, as will inevitably be the case,
less general principles.

It is significant that idealism loses its pragmatic value,
its fruitfulness of application and pertinence to life, in
proportion to the refinement of its logic. There was a
time when idealists believed that the specific characters of
spirit could be assigned a universal logical value, and so
be attributed to nature and history. But there has been
a growing tendency to abandon the logic of spirit; and to
accept, on the one hand, some general formal category
such as of 'relation,' 'unit>',' 'coherence,' etc.; and, on the


I
I

I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM


177


other hand, the speda] categories of the sciences as they
stand. In thus formalizing and neutralizing their universal
principles, idealists have bettered their logic, but at the
expense of their metaphysics. The old-inspired idealism
of art, literature, and life, the idealism that made a differ-
ence, has been discredited by idealists themselves.

Thus the weakness of Hegcl, from the later idealistic
point of view, lies not in his general programme, but in the
fact that he boldly set about carrying it out. He made
too many positive assertions. The fact that Hegel did
make positive assertions about natural evolution, about
historical development, and about international politics,
accounts for the fact that bis philosophy was of vital human
consequence, and to many a source of inspiration. But
today no one is more ready than the idealist to point out
that Hegel made the mistake of forcing 'psychological'
categories upon nature and history. He tried to deduce
the actual cosmic process from the laws of spirit; and it is
now generally conceded that he failed. Everyone but the
idealist explains his failure by the falsity of the project
itself; but he attributes it to the fact that Hegel's cate-
gories of spirit were not purely logical.

The new way is to identify spirit with 'synthetic unity'
in general; and, for the rest, with things as they are.'
Then, if you require more definite information you must
wait until scientists, historians, and others discover what
things really are. But this is what the world has long
since been doing anyway. The only advantage the idealist
enjoys is the hope that some day, when the returns are all

' Or with things as they are ootl For Mr. Bradley, who discredits all
the spcdal categories of science, the valid special categories must remain
problematic; cf. above, pp. loi, iso. CI. b this cooncction, McTaggait:
Sludia in Hegelian Dialet-lic, Ch. VII, passim. Admitting that Heel's
philosophy of nature and history cannot be sustained, the author B»ys:
"The practical value of the dialectic, then, lies In the demonstration of a
general principle ('the abstract certainty which the Logic gives us that all
reality b rational and righteous'), which can be carried into particulars or
used as a guide to action, only in a very few cases, and in those with great
uncertainty." (pp. Jjs, 156.) Cf. also, above, pp. 148-150.
13


1 78 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

in, he may rise triumphantly and say — "That is the
Absolute Spirit." But meanwhile he must wait like the
rest of us, or himself engage in the lowlier task of studying
nature and life. j

An analogous case is presented by the gradual devitaliza- I
tion of the Fichtean and Romanticist tendencies, One
would scarcely expect an orthodox neo-Fichtean to preach
a national uprising. Carlyle and Emerson would find
little to their taste in present-day accounts of the "over-
individual will." And the reason lies in the fact that the
absolute will has gradually been reduced to a will that
things shall be as they are, or rather to the will through
which things are as they are. It was once supposed that
the primacy of the will, or the creative originality of genius,
had something to do with a man's power over his environ-
ment. Idealism was the justification of the religion of
self-reliance. As an idealist a man might substitute his
affections for the alien categories of mechanical science,
and discern behind the hard outer aspect of nature a
response to his own longings. He might assert himself,
and yet claim the world as his own. Idealism was the
justification of faith in the triumph of the human spirit
over its adversaries — the triumph of the individual over
authority, of the nation over its conquerors, of humanity
over fate.

But this moving idealism is now condemned for its an-
thropomorphism. Its claims were so specific that they
were exposed to refutation. The universe is not necessarily
responsive to any historical individual interest. If, then,
'will' is to be retained as the originating condition of being,
it cannot be your will or mine, for these prefer special
claims which events in their neutrality are not disposed
to regard; it must be an "over-individual will," whose
essential character is that it shall will things as they are —
whatever they are.

"Cannot my will," asks Professor MUnsterberg, "aim
at the realization of an end which does not appeal to my


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM I 79

personal interest, but which I will because I enter into the
willing and feeling of the independent world, and because
I feel satisfied if its purpose becomes realized? All this is
possible, it is clear, only if two conditions are fulfilled:
the objective world must have a will of its own, and its
will must force itself upon me and must thus become my
own desire." In other words, there is one fundamental
act of will, the "demand that there be a world," The
rest follows as a matter of logical necessity and empirical
fact. "For everyone who wants to have a world at all,
all the relations which result from the self-assertion of the
experiences must be acknowledged as absolutely valid for
the true world." ^

But how does such a "self-assertion of the world" differ,
save in name, from that very impartiality or indifference
from which the romantic faith is popularly supposed to
have promised deliverance? One is reminded of Heine's
description of Catholicism as "a concordat between God
and the devil — that is to say, between the spirit and the
senses, in which the absolute reign of the spirit was pro-
mulgated in theory, but in which the senses were neverthe-
less practically reinstated in the enjoyment of their rights."*
Similarly, modem Fichteamsm of the more rigorous type,
under the influence of logical and scientific motives, has
virtually reduced will to an endorsement of necessity and
fact. The "pure will," "the only 'a priori' for the true
world," is the "will for identities."* In other words the
formal prindple of ' identity ' as the supreme logical cate-
gory, and the prindple of order in science, is virtiuUy all
that is left to define the meaning of spirit.

The 'eternity' or universality of value is thus con-
ceived so formally, as not to affect the really significant
moral and religious issues. Among the values for which
men actually contend, absolute idealism guarantees the

■ Scientr aitd Idcaliim, pp. 31-31; Thr Eltfnat Vatiut, pp. 75, 78.

* Prosf Wrilint^i trans, by Havelock ElIU, p. 155.

* Mdnitetbccg, op. cil., p. 79.


!8o PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

ultimate conservation of but one, the logical value of a
world-order. The attempt to invest will with the uni-
versality of logic has led to the reduction of mill to logic.
But a will so conceived, while it may claim universality,
must be insufficient and indeterminate with reference to
life.'

§ 7. In spite of the fact that when strictly interpreted
absolute idealism succeeds in grounding reality in spirit
Eqdvocaiion ^^'^V through having first reduced spirit to
■n Absolute logic, it has nevertheless been offered, and is
"" ^ still offered, as a confirmation of religious

belief. This is possible, I am convinced, only by
virtue of the suggestive power of terms borrowed from
religious tradition, and used without a strict regard
for their meaning. In other words, idealism, like pre-
Kantian absolutism, appears to escape fonnahsm only
by falling into the more serious error of equivocation.

The fundamental equivocation in idealism is its use of
terms that ordinarily refer to characteristic forms of human
consciousness — such as 'thought,' 'will,' 'personality,'
and 'spirit.' Whatever may be true of consciousness in
general,* tlie moral and religious significance oj consciousness
is bound up with those very elements which must be elimi-
nated if the conception is to be employed as an unlimited
generalization. Thus ' thought ' suggests a stage of develop-
ment in life, a prerogative of man, distinguishing him from
the greater part of his environment ; but a universal thought,
an absolute idea, must be coextensive with the totality —
and exhibited as truly in the mechanisms of nature as in
the purjKJses of man. Indeed, the greater the stress laid
on the universality of thought, the more is one compelled

'Cf. also, above, pp. 151, 151. The 'eternity' of value may be taken to
mean that true judgments of value, like other true judgments, must have
objective validity, or ht in some sense independent of the individual judging
mind. But this aSects n«ther the question as to iiikat u taiwAU, nor the
question as to i^kclher value skaU frevail. It Is thus non-committal both
with reference to morals and religion. Cf. below, pp. 335-340.

' Cf. Chap. XU.


I
I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM i8l

to identify it with nature rather than with mEin. The
tenn 'will' belongs inseparably to the assertion of particu-
lar interests in the face of indifferent circumstance, and
in the midst of other wills that may be friendly or hos-
tile. But an 'over-individual will' must coindde with all
particular interests and also with their environment. Its
over-individuality is better exhibited in the environment
than in the interests themselves. Similarly, "personal
self" refers to a coordination of "inner world, fellow-world,
and outer world," But Professor Munsterberg, neverthe-
less proposes to conceive the fundamental principle from
which all three are derived, as "selfhood without individu-
ality." "We might suggest it," he writes, "by the words
'over-self.' The over-self is therefore reached as soon as
the reference to the personal conditions in our experience is
eliminated. On the other hand, as soon as the over-self
posits in itself a limited personal self, its undifferentiated
content must at once separate itself into a self, a co-self,
and a not-self." '

Now such qualifications as 'over,' 'super,' 'absolute,'
attaching to words "by way of eminency," in the majority
of cases really alter tlieir meaning. But since the words
'thought,' 'will,' and 'self' are none the less retained, the
unsuspecting layman not uimaturaliy understands them
in the familiar sense, in that sense in which he can verify
them in his own experience. The suggestions of these and
other like terms must inevitably outweigh the techm'cal
meaning which they possess in the discourse of idealistic
philosophy. The layman is never really taken into the
confidence of the augurs. Hence he is readily led to
believe that he is guaranteed the triumph of civilization
over the mechanical cosmos, and of good over evil. He is

' Op. Hi., pp. 3«s, 3q8. Of all absolute idealists, Bradley most consis-
tently ftVMds such procedure as this, with the result that his first principle
u almost wholly devoid of characters. For bis discussion of the self, sec
Afpearance and Rea/iiy, Ch. X, especially p. 114. An excellent illustration
ol this procedure isafiorded by the conception so touch in favor with critial
ide&UsU, of a "non-ps>-chological subject" CI. above, kJ. 140, 144. ^i6-


iSa PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

persuaded that the Absolute takes sides with him against
his foes and promises him the victory. Little does he sus-
pect that such a being must by definition stand uncom-
mitted to any cause, the impartial creator and spectator
of things as they are.

The most signal equivocation of which idealism has been
guilty is its use of the terms 'good* and 'evil.' Equivoca-
tion is involved even in the project of such a solution as that
which idealism undertakes. Evil constitutes a problem
because it opposes, retards, or defeats the good will. If
evil were not in this sense uncompromisingly alien to good,
defined in contradistinction to it, there would be no prob-
lem. Now, to solve this problem in the idealistic sense
means to discover some way of regarding evil as conducive
to good, as ' good for ' good, as part of a whole that is better
for its presence. -But such a project necessarily involves
a new definition of good, in which the old good shall be
neutralized through the complicity of evil. And this is
undeniably the case with every interpretation of the
Absolute's goodness that idealism has formulated.' Good
and evil are united in a new conception of value, the very
essence of which is its implication of both good and evil.
Now assuming that it is possible to formulate such a con-
ception, and to attribute to it the unlimited generality that
absolutism requires, it is certainly impossible to call it
'good' without equivocation. For that term will con-
tinue to suggest what is now construed as only one of its
partial aspects. And the new conception appears to be a
solution of the original problem only because of this sug-
gestion. It seems to assert a victory of good over evil,
whereas it really asserts only a perpetual and doubtful
battle between the two, giving a certain fixity and finality
to the very situation from which it promised deliverance.

The same motive which leads absolutism to the equivocal

' Cf. McTiiggarl: Sludia in Htgdian Cosmoloiy, Chap VI, cspcdally
ii i8)-tS8. I retuiD to this subject m discuasiog plumlism. Cf. below, pp.


I
I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 183

use of words leads it to mysticism. For mystidsm is the
express admission that the first principle cannot properly be
characterized at all. Words can do no more than suggest
an experience that lies beyond the reach of their definite
meanings. Thus absolute idealists who seek to avoid both
formalism and agnosticism, and who, like McTaggart,
admit that self, will, and volition all involve relations and
limitations that cannot be attributed to an absolute, are
prompted to employ some less articulate version of spirit,
such as "love." In terms of this dissolving emotion he
ventures "to indicate the possibility of finding, above all
knowledge and volition, one all-embracing unity, which is
only not true, only not good, because all truth and all
goodness are but distorted shadows of its absolute perfec-
tion — 'das Unbegreifliche, well es der Begriff selbst ist,'"'

The equivocation into which absolute idealism so readily
falls, can scarcely be said to be an accident. It is the
result of an effort to escape formahsm. If equivocation
be strictly avoided, there is no content which can be attrib-
uted to the all-general principle, save the abstract and
insufficient categories of logic.

§ 8. We have now to inquire whether absolutism is en-
abled by the aid of idealism to escape dogmatism. The
DoBmatinn in P^o^f of absolutism depends, as we have seen,
Absoiiiie on the implication of a maximum of knowledge.

It must be supposed that as a curve can be
plotted from several points, so a progression can be defined
from the several instances of human knowledge. And
this progression, thus defined, must be supposed to define
a supreme or consummate knowledge as its upper limit.*
Employing the idealistic principle, and assuming that
reality is answerable to the demands of the cognitive con-
sciousness, we may thus attribute to reality the ultimate
demand or ideal of the cognitive consciousness.

' Op. cil., p. igi.

• "It b involved in the very idea of a developing consciousness such u
ourB, that ... as an intelli){ence, it presupposes the idea of the whole."
(Caird: "Idealism and the Theory o( Knowledge," pp. 8-g.)


l84 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

What, when I think, am I virtually postulating as the
perfect success of thought? What unlimited cognitive
attainment may I infer from the very limitations which I
seek to escape? Let me cite two contemporary exponents
of the doctrine. "Truth," writes Mr. Joacliim, "was the
systematic coherence which characterized a significant
whole. And we proceeded to identify a significant whole
with ' an organized individual experience, self-fulfilling and
self- fulfilled.' Now there can be one and only one such
experience: or only one significant whole, the significance
of which is self-contained in the sense required. For it is
absolute self -fulfilment, absolutely self-contained signifi-
cance, that is postulated; and nothing short of absolute
individuality — nothing short of the completely whole ex-
perience — can satisfy this postulate. And human knowl-
edge—not merely my knowledge or yours, but the best
and fullest knowledge in the world at any stage of its
development — is clearly not a significant whole in this
ideally complete sense. Hence the truth, which our sketch
described, is — from the point of view of the human intelli-
gence — an Ideal, and an Ideal which can never as such,
or in its completeness, be actual as human experience." '

Or compare the statement of Professor Royce. "In the
first place, the reality that we seek to know has always
to be defined as that which either is or would be present
to a sort of experience which we ideally define as organized
— that is, a united and transparently reasonable — ex-
perience. . . . Passing to the limit in this direction, we
can accordingly say that by the absolute reality we can
only mean either that which is present to an absolutely
organized experience inclusive of all possible experience,
or that which would be presented as the content of such
an experience if there were one."' Elsewhere, Professor
Royce describes this "absolutely organized experience"
as "an individual life, present as a whole, totum simul."


I
I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM l8j

"This life," he continues, "is the completed will, as well as
the completed experience, corresponding to the will and
experience of any one finite idea." And "to be, in the final
sense," he concludes, "means to be just such a life, com-
plete, present to experience, and conclusive of the search
for perfection which every finite idea in its own measure
undertakes whenever it seeks for any object." '

Now what content do these statements enable us to
attribute to the cognitive ideal? Do they mean, for
example, merely that it is "inclusive of all possible experi-
ence," that it is the knowledge of eDerythingf If so, then
absolute idealism has done no more than to add to the total
reality, whatever it be, a knower that envelopes it. And
this throws no light on the nature of the total reality; nor
is it of any special significance that there should be such a
mere spectator of things as they are, lotum simul.

Or do these statements mean merely that such a knower
of everything must enjoy a "completed will," or perfect
satisfaction, that is unattainable by the fallible mind of
man? If so, then it may be observed that the mere state
of complete satisfaction is relative and indeterminate.
Man does exjierience perfect satisfaction, often when he
might better be troubled by a "divine unrest." If it be
objected that man's satisfaction, despite its inward self-
suflaciency, is nevertheless imperfect, then this must be
because his ideab are not high enough. The Absolute
experiences the complete satisfaction of the highest cog-
nitive ideal. But what, then, is the highest cognitive ideal?
We can now no longer answer in terms merely of satisfac-
tion. It may be that the highest cognitive ideal is the
knowledge of everything, in which case the Absolute is the
being that is perfeclly satisfied to know everything. But
such an Absolute, even if there were any groimd for assert-
ing it, would be otherwise consistent with any kind of a
world whatsoever.

As a matter of fact, neither of these versions of the cog-
• Tkt Werld and the hiditidual. First Scriw, pp. 34i-34».


1 86 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

nitive ideal makes any use of the absolutist principle proper.
They simply employ the cardinal principle of idealism to
add to the world as it stands a consciousness that shall
support it. Since we must postulate a totality, and since
on idealistic grounds things cannot be without being known,
it follows that there must be a knowledge to correspond to
the totality. But if there is any virtue in the absolutist
principle itself, it must be possible to define a cognitive
ideal in other than quantitative terms, not a knowing of
everything merely, but a perfect knowing of everything.
From what it is to know well, it must be possible to infer
what it is to know best. And that the Ideal Experience is
a maximum in this sense is the really crucial contention of
such writersas Joachim and Royce. I have considered other
alternatives in order to clear this contention from confusion.

Mr. Joachim's Ideal Experience is "completely self-
coherent," and Professor Royce's "absolutely organized." '
'Coherence' and 'organization' are not essentially differ-
ent; and they are equivalent to the Kantian notion of
'synthetic unity.' All three express the same idea that
is expressed outside the idealistic school, by the word
'system.' The question now arises as to whether this
conception defines a maximum. Does it mean anything
to speak of absolute coherence, organization, or system?

That these expressions seem to mean something is due,
I think, to the loose quantitative suggestions of the terms
employed. Thus it is fair to say that a living organism is
more coherent than a sand-bank, in that there is a greater
cross-reference of parts and inter-dependence of function.
One gets more light on each element from its relations to all
the other elements, in the former case, than in the latter.
Similarly, it is possible to suppose an assemblage even
more coherent than the living organism. But between
this and the supposition of an absolutely coherent unity,
there is an immeasurable gulf. A coherent whole must
contain both relation, connection, and unity, and also

• Joachim: op. cil., p. 114; Royce: Conception of God, p. 31.


I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 187

an individuality and plurality of parts. And there is
nothing in the principle of coherence itself which defines
what proportion of unity and plurality shall constitute the
ideal coherence. Thus to insist that the universe must,
on general logical grounds, be conceived as a coherent
whole, is not really significant, even as repects the unity
of the world. Suppose It to be granted that all things must
be related. There still remains the question: How far do
these all-ramifying relations go toward defining the terms
so related? That the terms cannot be wholly defined by
these relations is obvious; nor is there any definite degree of
significance thai must be attached to them in order to satisfy
tin demands of bare relational unity. Grant that the world
is some sort of unity in variety, of permanence in change,
and the alternatives still range from a vital imity to a
loose aggregate.

It might, I think, readily be proved that this whole
procedure involves confusion and error. It is imposdble
in any given case of knowledge to say: "By this I know,
by that I am prevented from knowing; therefore if that
were wholly replaced by this. I should know without limit."
There is no negative element in knowledge, such as plural-
ity, unrelatedness, incoherence, or meaninglessness. There
is a negative cognitive element only in so far as I do not
know, that is, am confused or unaware. The conditions
of knowledge are fully satisfied when I know positively
and clearly. And from this it is possible to infer only that
things are precisely and detemunately what they are —
a conclusion which does not in the least support dther
absolutism or idealism.

Thus absolutism is neither more significant nor more
vahd for its alliance with idealism. The Absolute is now,
as formerly, no more than logic makes it — which is much
too Uttle to satisfy the metaphysical claims which are
urged in its behalf. An absolute defined in terms of the
system or unity of the logical categories is doubtless all-
general, but too formal or abstract to afford a suflBcient


Sumnuiy of


l88 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

explanation of anything. Nor does logic itself yield even
a definite ideal which may be postulated, even though it
remain problematic.

§ 9. A complete and rounded idealism contains two
principles, the priority of consciousness, and the validity of
the speculative ideal. Its central conception
is the Absolute Spirit; which, as spirit, con-
ditions the being of its objects; and, as abso-
lute, constitutes the superlative fulfilment of
every human aspiration. Waiving the question of its
proof, with which wc have thus far been mainly occupied,
— let us in conclusion summarize its significance as a
philosophy of life and of religion.'

In the first place, it is to be remarked that idealism is not
at heart sympathetic with the modern democratic con-
ception of civilization. Idealism is, it is true, an idedising
philosophy. But the ideal which this philosophy glorifies
is not the gradual amelioration of life through the human
conquest of nature; but rather the perfection that was
from the beginning and is forever more. The faith which
is most characteristic of today, is the faith in what an
enlightened and solidified mankind may achieve, despite
the real resistance and incompetence which retard it,*
The faith which is most characteristic of idealism, on the
other hand, is the faith that all things work together for
the glory of an eternal spiritual life, despite appearances.

It may seem paradoxical to charge idealism with being
excessively individualistic. And yet this has been the case
with absolutist philosophies from the beginning. For they
emphasize the relation between the individual life and the
universal life, and so tend to slight society. Both Plato
and Spinoza, in so far as they have affected the fundamental
motives of life, have tended to withdraw men from sodal
relations, and unite them directly, through speculation

' What follows nuy be compared with a similu aummary of pngma-
tism; cf. Ch. XI, { 7.


I
I

I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 1 89

mtemplation, with God. Idealism emphasizes, it is
true, the indispensableness of social relations to a developed
self -consciousness; but the socialized self is only a step
toward the realization of that absolute self in which a man
is encouraged to find his true sphere and only genuine
reality.' And as idealism tends to be out of sympathy
with the current notion of human society as the working
force of the spiritual life, so it tends to discredit the com-
plementary notion of progress, as the measure of work
done. Idealism does, it is true, emphasize historical de-
velopment, but of the sort in which the value attaches to
the progress itself rather than to the result; and in which
the merit of historical achievement is apparent rather than
real. " The consummation of the infinite End," says Hegel,
"consists merely in removing the illusion which niakes
it seem yet unaccomplished. The Good, the absolutely
Good, is eternally accomplbhing itself in the world; and
the result is that it needs not wait upon us, but is already
by imphcation, as well as in full actuality, accomplished,"'
§ 10. In the course of his well-known indictment of
idealism, Mr. Hobhouse writes as foUows: "Indeed, it is

_ „'. scarcely too much to say that the effect of

The UniveiM- . , ,. , , . - , • ■

lioic or Level- ideausm On the world m general has been
i'^tH^^j-^'"'^ mainly to sap intellectual and moral sincerity,
to excuse men in their consciences for profess-
ing beliefs which on the meaning ordinarily attached to
them they do not bold, to soften the edges of all hard
contrasts between right and wrong, truth and falsity, to
throw a gloss over stupidity, and prejudice, and caste,

'Cf. Royce: Studies of Good and Evii, " Self-consciousness , Social Con-
sdousDcsa and Nature." There is an idealistic school which has attempted
to deny this; d. Perional Idealism, edited by H. Stun; and G. H.
Howison: EvalulioH and Idealitm. That this poution is on strict
idealist (^unds untenable, is, I think, proved \)y Professor Royce's suc-
cessful refutation of it; cf. the discussion between Professor Royce and Pro-
fessor Howison in Royce: Camtption of God. A pereona! idealism or
"humanism" based on pragraatist grounds, is another matter; cf. below,
pp. j6i ff.

■ Encyclopadie, {itt, trans, by W. Wallace, £«;»; a/ £r«|«I, pp. 351-351.


1 90 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

and tradition, to weaken the bases of reason, and disincline
men to the searching analysis of their habitual ways of
thinking." '

In reply, Professor Henry Jones puts his finger, 1 think,
on the real point of the accusation. " In refusing to admit
differences which are absolute, in reducing all differences
into relative differences, or differences within or of a unity,
Idealism must seem to the ordinary critic, with his one-
sided way of thought, to render them of no account."
The critic " will have every question answered by a down-
right 'Yes' or 'No.' "' He objects, in other words, to the
universalistic or leveling tendency in idealism. He claims
that through his assertion that things find their real
meaning only in the unity of all things, the idealist
virtually overrules the flat differences and uncompromis-
ing oppositions that guide the empirical and practical
intelligence.

And this accusation is, I think, substantially just.
Idealism does not, it is true, attribute equal significance to
all things; but it does attribute necessary significance to
all things. It is essentially the all-saving philosophy, as
opposed to the philosophy of extermination. It encour-
ages the supposition that a profounder insight would rein-
state what ordinary discrimination rejects out of hand.
It rises above the plane of distinctions, and invites
attention to the broad synthetic features of the world.
This universalistic tendency in idealism accounts, I think,
for the significant fact that idealism has contributed
little or nothing to the solution of special problems, such
as the relation of mind and body; and for its comparative
lack of interest in special empirical discoveries, such, for
example, as those of modern psychology. But it also
accounts for the much more significant fact that idealism

' L. T. Hobhouse: Democracy and Reaction, pp. 78-79. For reference
and comment, cf. John Moriey: MUceUania, Fourth Serifs, pp. j6i,aq.;
James: A Pluralistic Uniwrse, II; and Henry Jones: The Working Paitk
ef Ike Social Reformer, Cb. VU, VIH.


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM


191


does not really touch those special issues with which religion
is concerned.

Thus, the religious belief in immortality arises from a
solicitude that is specific and unmistakable. Its root is
the dreaxi of annihilation, of the severance of ties and the
cessation of activities that are presently good. Immor-
tality is a prerogative by virtue of which man hopes that
he may continue thus to live, aiter that natural-historical
event called death. Idealism assures a man that his life,
whether long or short, is a "unique embodiment of pur-
pose." ^ By virtue of the world-sustaining thought or
will, he belongs to a timeless unity, within which he has a
determinate relation to all other things! It is doubtful
if such doctrines would be recognized as even remotely
relevant to the religious issue, were they not expressed in
such phrases as "the eternal life." In any case, after the
idealist has offered his consolation, the real object of hope
and fear — man's chance of life after death remains in as
great darkness as before.

Similarly, the religious belief in God relates to specific
good things of which God is the guarantee. But for ideal-
ism, God is "the unity and the spiritual purpose of the
world." where "spiritual purpose" is above the petty dif-
ferences and blind prejudices of this mundane life. God
is that "richer, purer, completer selfhood," in which the
temporal illusion is dispelled, and which when a man
attains it by a "maximizing of life," "elevates his disposi-
tion beyond immediate or finite interests."'

As a version of God, such a philosophy deserves the
comment which it has recently received from a theologian.
"As one contemplates the idea of the timeless Absolute
in its strict meaning — and espedally as one regards it from

' Roycc: The Conuption of Immiftolity. p. 49. Ci. Milnaterberg: Tha
Ettrnal Lift, passin. For the admission tiut the religious implications of
idealism are "almosl entirely negative," cf, McTaggarl; Some Dogmat
»f Religion, p. jgi.

' H. Jones: Idealism as a Froclieai Crttd. p. 196; R. M. Wenley:
iSodtrn Thought aitd the Crisis in Btlief, pp. 304, 30S. 310.


I()3 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

the standpoint of the ethical life with its constant activity
in the production of spiritual goods — it loses all power to
call forth our worship, and appears like a huge spherical
aquarium encompassing within itself motion and life, but
as a whole rigid, glassy, and motionless. Surely the time-
less Absolute is not the supreme solver of human problems,
nor the God to whose worship we should summon the
aspiring and struggling sons of men." ^

For the religious consciousness, if we except alone the
state of mystical contemplation, God is the will through
which the universe shall in the end prefer happiness to
misery, good to evil, life to death ^ and thus carry through
to some eventual triumph the adventure in wluch man is
presently engaged. Religious hope and fear, like all hope
and fear, are discriminating. They issue from the love
of some things and the dread of other things. The believer
looks to God for a boon, knowing well the sweet from the
bitter. Hence the assurance that things are one, eternal,
both infinitely rich and also orderly and coherent, — even
the assurance that as such they are thought or willed,
leaves him unmoved. He must know incomparably more
before, in his religious perplexity, he knows anything,

§ II. Conceding the utmost claims of its critics, idealism
is to be credited with two substantial contributions to

„ „ , contemporary thought, the proof of the funda-

The Virtue and i i- ■■ r i • i t i ■ i

the Eitrava- mental vahdity of logic, and ot the mdepen-
^^11™ "' dent rights of moral science. Through its

insistent promulgation of these truths, idealism
has won a fair and a decisive victory over naturalism.
Indeed, during the last century, idealism has almost alone
defended the citadel of reHgtous philosophy from this most
powerful and vicious adversary.

And the failure of idealism is very closely related to its

success. The source of its failure lies in the extravagance

of the claims which it has made for those branches of

knowledge which it has successfully vindicated. Foi

* E. W. hyman: Theology and Buman Problemi, p. ii.


I


I


ABSOLUTE IDEALISM 1 93

idealism has sought to prove not only the universality but
also the spirituality of logic; it has sought to prove not
only the independence of moral science, but its logical or
universal character as well. And the result has been to
confuse logic, and to formalize life. The extreme claims
of religious faith cannot be asserted without a contradic-
tion of the very motive from which faith springs. Spirit
so generalized as to coincide with the totality of things
has lost its savor. Such an utter consummation of hope
is possible only by the abandonment of those particular
values for which hope was first entertained. One who
demands the possession of the world must be satisfied
with the grim and ironical religion of last resort: the
promise that the world shall be his who asks of it only
that it shall be itself. This — the religion of renimdation
— is compatible with any philosophy, and most of all
with those philosophies which deny men's first hopes.
And if one is to have a religion of renunciation, it is better
that the lesson of disillusionment should be taught with-
out the creation of fresh illusions. If the first hopes are
to be abandoned, it is better also to abandon the language
in which they are traditionally expressed; or openly to
profess that such language is employed only in a poetic
and devotional sense, to make men brave and without
complaint in a merciless environment.

But renunciation is not the only religious implication of
philosophy. There is good ground for hope, provided
only that hope does not defeat itself through the very
extravagance of its claims; through denying the very fears
that gave it birth, and seeking to make peace while the
enemy is still in arms.


14


PART IV


PRAGMATISM


CHAPTER DC

THE PRAGMATIC THEOBY OP KNOWLEDGE

§ I. It is characteristic of pragmatism that it does not
readily lend itself to summary definition. It can neither
The Gcnaal ^^ identified with a fixed habit of mind, as
Meaning o! naturalism can be identified with the scientific
"*'^"™ habit of mind, nor can it be reduced to a single
cardinal principle, as can idealism. We are as yet too
much in the midst of it to discern its general contour;
indeed it is not so much a systematic doctrine as a ciiti-
d&m and a method. Nevertheless, it is not impossible, I
think, to give a preliminary characterization of it that
shall be roughly true, and shall serve as a guide to the
study of its diverse aspects. Pragmatism means, in the
broadest sense, the acceptance of the categories of life as
fundamental. It is the bio-centric philosophy. And it
must be added at once that the pragmatist means by
'life,' not the imaginary or ideal life of any hypothetical
being, not the "eternal" life or the "absolute" life; but
the temporal, operative life of animals and men, the life
of instinct and desire, of adaptation and environment, of
civilization and progress.

Although the pragmatic movement is new, pragmatism
is, as James acknowledges, "an old way of thinking." It
is dangerous, however, to identify contemporary pragma-
tism too closely with any of the earlier doctrines that
resemble it. Thus the whole 'experimentalist' tendency
in English science and philosophy may be said to have
anticipated the pragmatist theory that truth is achieved
by the trying of hypotheses. And Hume suggested at the
dose of his Treatise that we must be satisfied in the end
with a belief that is siuted to action.' But these antid-
> Cf. above, p. 139.
'97


1 98 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

pations of pragmatism are largely accidental, and more
negative than construcUve.

On the other hand, Rant, and the Fichtean idealists after
him, maintained "the primacy of the practical reason."
Pragmatism is doubtless related to this and other tradi-
tional forms of voluntarism. But from the idealistic form
of voluntarism, at least, pragmatism is sharply distin-
guished by its naturalistic and empirical leanings. Prag-
matism does, it is true, depart from naturalism in so far
as this assigns the fimdamcntal place to the mechanical
categories. Pragmatism would insist on the priority of
biology to physics; or at least upon the right of biology,
together with the moral and social sciences, to regard the
teleological method as independently valid. For if it can
be argued that the processes of life may be described as
quantities of mechanical force or energy, it can equally
well be argued that energy and force themselves are instru-
ments which serve the uses of lite. But while pragmatism
is opposed to a fundamental or universal mechanism, it
has much in common with naturalism. It may even in a
sense be called ' naturalistic' For it identifies reality with
"this world," with the sort of thing that is going on here
and now; and regards perception as the most reliable
means of knowledge,'

The polemic of pragmatism is mainly directed, not against
naturalism, but against idealism; and not against the cardi-
nal or subjectivistic principle in idealism, but against
idealism as the contemporary form of absolutism. The
perfect antithesis to i>ragmatism is Spinoza, and it is the
perpetuation of Spinozism in objective and absolute idealism
that is the real object of the pragmarist attack. Abso-
lutism is other-worldly, contrary to appearances; pragma-
tism mundane, empirical. Absolutism is mathematical
and dialectical in method, establishing ultimate truths
with demonstrable certainty; pragmatism is suspicious of
all short-cut arguments, and holds philosophy to be no

• See below, pp. 363-366.


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


199


exception to the rule that all hypotheses are answerable to
experience. Absolutism is monistic, deterministic, quiet-
istic; pragmatism is pluralistic, indeterministic, melioris-
tic. That which absolutism holds to be most significant,
namely, the logical unity of the world, is for pragmatism a
negligible abstraction. That which for absolutism is mere
appearance — the world of space and time, the interaction
of man sind nature, and of man and man, is for pragmatism
the quintessence of reality. The one is the philosophy of
eternity, the other the philosophy of time.

§ 2. Pragmatism like all contemporary philosophies v^

is first of all a theory of knowledge. It is in the applica-

tion of the vitalistic or bio-centric metiod to

Coinepiioa oi knowledge that all pragmatists are agreed.

the Tiieory -^g ^j^y hope to discover here a body of com-

of Knowledge "' '^ . , ^ ■ , l- l .1.

mon pragmatic doctnne from which the
various pragmatisms diverge.

The pragmatist has a characteristic way of setting the m
problem. In the first place, he means by knowledge a
process, and not merely a product. The term knowledge
is often used to mean what is known, in other words, com-
pleted knowledge, or science; and epislemology has been
taken to mean the analysis of such completed knowledge
with a view to discovering its universal principles or its
underlying ground.' With pragmatists, however, knowl-
edge means knowing: a complex event, involving an indi-
vidual knower, a something to be known, certain means of
knowing it, and then, finally, the cognitive achievement
or failure. Critics of pragmatism have attempted to dis-
miss this method of studj-ing knowledge by calling it
'psychological,' rather than 'logical.' It is certainly not
excluavely logical, because it takes into account the cir-
cumstances and agencies of knowledge, and not merely its
groimds. But, on the other hand, it is not psychological
in any limited or disparaging sense, because it seeks to


■ This b on the whole the idealistic conception of '
Cf. above, pp. 13^141.


; categoria.


200 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

distinguish the cases of true knowledge from the cases
of false knowledge. In short, it is both psychological
and logical; and for the reason that both psychological and
logical factors enter into that particular complex which we
call knowing.

Regarding the whole of the concrete process of knowing,
pragmatism finds that its form is practical. In its native
habitat, where the pragmatist seeks it out and observes it,
knowing is a phase of life, of action in an environment.
This holds equally of the kind of knowledge that is ordi-
narily called 'practical,' and the kind that is ordinarily
called 'theoretical.' Whether it be the execution of a
policy, the calculation of the price of a commodity, the
investigation of the properties of non-EucIidcan space,
or the demonstration of the attributes of God, knowing is
always an enterprise, projected on a particular occasion,
tried with particular means, attended with hope or fear,
and concluded with success or failure. This is the subject-
matter with which the pragmatist theory of knowledge
primarily deals. And there are two problems which the
pragmatist makes both prominent and fundamental: first,
what is the r61e of ideas in knowledge? second, what is
the difference between a true idea and a false idea?

§ 3. To understand the pragmatist theory of the r6Ie of
ideas in knowledge, it is necessary to insist on the interpre-
The Rile o( tation of knowledge which has just been given.
Ideas in The theory applies only in the cases where

Knowledge ^^^ f^ panoply of knowledge is present. And
in particular there must be a having of ideas about some-
thing, where the ideas and the thing are in some sense
different. In other words, we have here to do exclusively
with reflective knowledge, what James calls "knowledge
about" as distinguished from "knowledge of acquaintance."
Professor Dewey would not regard the latter as knowledge
at all, but would insist upon "an element of mediation, that
is, of art, in all knowledge." ' While it will be necessary
' John Dewey: Infiuenceo} DaTVnnon Philosophy, and oikrt Essays, p.Eo.


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 201

presently to inquire into these implied reservations, we
shall do well tor the present to exclude them. Just what,
then, is meant by an ' idea,' in the sense in what we are said
to have ideas about things?

The pragmatist answers, first, that an idea is whatever
exercises the function of 'meaning.' In other words, there'
is no peculiar quahty attaching to an idea as such — but
only an office.' Anything may be an idea, provided you
mean with it; just as anything may be a weapon, pro-
vided you do injury with it. The commonest instance of
an idea is probably a verbal image, and there is no visible
or audible form that may not serve as a word.' An idea
is, in short, what an idea does.

But what is this function of 'meaning,' which defines an^
idea? The pragmatist answers that meaning is essentially
prospective, that it is a plan of action terminating in the
thing meant. More specifically, an idea means a thing ,
when it projects a series of acts that would, if carried out,
bring that thing into the same immediacy which the idea
itself already enjoys.' Thus when I utter the word "cold,"
this verbal sound is so connected with a temperature quality
that were I to follow up the connection, I would sense
coldness. I may be said to have such a plan or incipient
train of action without actually executing it — just as a
traveller may be said to have a destination even though
circumstances should prevent his arriving at it. An idea
is like a railway ticket which will take you to a distant
place, though you should never make the journey, or like
a bank-note which has a cash-value though you should
never redeem it. And like bank-notes, ideas are negotiable ; '
they may be themselves used in place of currency for pur-
poses of reasoning or communication. The virtue of ideas
thus lies primarily in their being practical substitutes for ■
immediacy*

' Junes: MtaKint of Tnttk. pp. jo-jt.

■ Indeed the idea need not perhaps be an image at all.

' Jams: ep. cU.. pp. 43-5°; Dewey: af. cil., p. go.


202 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

But in order fully to grasp the pragmatist theory of the
functioQ of ideas we must inquire concerning their place in
life at large. We have found that an idea is an instrument
of meaning, that its function is to mean something other
than itself. But what is the use of meaning, what is the
function of the ideational process itself? The answer is
apparent when it is observed that immediacy is not suffi- m
dent for purposes of action. H

For one thing, only a part of the presented field of V
experience is pertinent to a particular action. It is neces-
sary to construe each situation; that is, to select from its
wealth of detail that aspect which relates to the matter in
hand. Ideas are in this sense 'modes of conceiving' the
given, a 'taking it to be' this or that. Discursive thought
interrupts 'the continuity of habit' when a doubtful or
ambiguous situation presents itself, which the organism
has no ready-made way of meeting. In other words, when
one doesn't know what to do about it, one thinks about it.
Such an occasion constitutes one of those "particular
crises in the growth of experience" to which, according to
Dewey, thought is always relative. On such an occasion
the idea is the "instrument of reconstruction," which
delivers the agent from his predicament. The situation
being reconstrued, life runs smoothly again on the new basis.'
Thus to ideate experience, to think it, is to represent it in ■
some special and suitable light. I

Again, the ideational process makes it passible to actv ■
on the remote environment, on things that lie beyond the
range of the individual's sensibilities. Ideal substitutes
for these things, ideas that mean them, may serve as well;
BO that man may be said to live actively not only in the
world he perceives, but in the limitlessly extended world he
knows about. And finally, by means of ideas it is possible
to unite range with compactness. Thus the formulas of
science put man in touch with the immense expanse

' Dewpy; Sludift in Logic, p. le; A. W. Moore; ExisttHce, Ueanimg,
and Reality (Chicago Decennial Publicationa), p. i6.


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


303


of nature, without overwhelming and bewildering him,
because they represent it through its constant features.
Their bulk is as small as their meaning is great.

This, then, is the pragmatist theory of the instrumental
function of ideas. The theory puts a double emphasis
on the pragmatic character of thought. An idea is defined
pragmatically, as a \irtual access to an immediate experi-
ence of that which it means. And the whole process of
ideation is again defined pragmatically, as the means of
acting on the environment.

§ 4. When we turn to the pragmatist theory of truth,
which in English-speaking countries is regarded as pragma-
The Meaning ti.sm's most notable contribution to philosophy,
oiTroU) ^ve find it again necessary to set the problem

with some care. I have placed this theory second in order
of exposition because it is properly to be regarded as the
sequel to the instrumental theory of ideas.

In the first place, the pragmatist is talking about the
kind of truth that is humanly attainable, lying within the
individual thought process itself. He not improperly
insists that if truth is to be conceived in hypothetical or
ideal terms, then this conception itself must be true for the
thinker who constructs or defines it. Thus if one asserted
that truth attaches only to the thinking of an absolute
knower or to an absolute system of thought, then this
assertion itself would be in some sense true for the finite
philosopher who maintained it. And it is this latter sense
of the term with which pragmatism has to do — not the
truth of God's knowledge, but the truth of my knowledge
of God.'

In the second place, truth for the pragmatist is invariably
an adjective of ideas; and by ideas he means not Platonic
essences, but the modes of an individual's thinking. When
are ideas, in this sense, true? What is the nature of knavt-
ing truly? Like all forms of practice, thinking, believ-
iog, or the fonning of ideas is essentially fallible. There

' Cf. below, pp. 242-J43.


204 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

is a right way and a wrong way. What on any given
occasion distinguishes the right way of thinking from the
wrong way? When is an idea 'a good idea,' and when
is it a 'bad' one? It is evident that you have not solved the
problem of truth in the pragmatist sense until you have also
solved the problem of error. For pragmatism, in short,
truth does not mean the same thing as reality or existence,
but is a property, exclusively, of that instance of existence
which we call 'idea' or 'belief/ in its relation to that second
instance of reality or existence which we call 'object'
of the first. Truth is a property of ideas as these arise
amid the actual processes of human thinking; it is some-
thing which happens to ideas in the course of their natural
history. And since ideas have a function, which they may
I or may not fulfil, truth is one of two opposite fortunes
which may befall ideas, the other being error.

We are now in a position to frame the pragmatist defini-
tion of a true idea. An idea is true wfien it works; that is,
when it is successful, when it Juljils its Junction, or performs
what is demanded of it. An idea is essentially for some-
thing; and when it does what it is for, it is the 'right' or
the 'true' idea.

Lest this should seem more obvious than unportant, it
should be contrasted with the view that has been commonly
held both by philosophers and common sense. According
to that view the truth of ideas lay in their resemblance
to their objects. Ideas were regarded as copies, pictures,
replicas, true in proportion to their likeness. Pragmatism,
on the contrary, insists that a true idea need not resemble
its object at all, precisely as a word need not resemble what
it denotes; if there is resemblance, it is accidental and
negligible so far as truth is concerned. The truth of an
idea lies not in the present relation of similarity, nor in any
present relation whatsoever, but in the practical sequel.
K If, in relation to the motive which prompted me to form it,
I my idea succeeds, the inciting interest being satisfied, my
idea is true. Ideas axe essentially instruments, and not


I
I


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


205


images; and the proof of the initrument is in the using.
The particular kind of excellence proper to this particular
kind of instrument is called ' truth.'

I 5. So much for the pragmatist theory of truth stated
in the terms common to all pragmatists. We must now

pass on to sharper distinctions, and to the
fiaiiiOTi'' Verifi- ambiguities, doubts, and criticisms to which
cation by Per- these distinctions give rise. The success or 1
^sT^Mi^''^ truth of the idea is relative to its use, and the \

verification of it consists in successfully using
it. But there are various uses which ideas may serve.
Are we to regard all of these uses as equally germane to an
idea's truth? I may, for example, be induced by various
motives to form an idea of my future state in the life after
death. Such an idea may serve the purpose of preparing
me for what I am going to see, or for what I am going to be
called upon to do. Such an idea may console me for the
loss of friends, or it may be demanded by the logical impli-
cations of my philosophical system. Suppose these tests
conflict. Can I discriminate among them as respects
priority? Or shall I attach equal weight to all, and deter-
mine the truth of my idea by the general preponderance of
utility? I find no clear answer to this question in the
writings of pragmatists. All four of these tests, and
possibly others, are recognized as valid; and the choice
from among them would seem to be not infrequently
governed by the exigencies of controversy. In order to
bring out more clearly the difference between these truth-
tests or modes of verification, I shall invent names for them
as follows: verification by percepiion, consislency, operation,
sentiment, and general utility.

Verification by perception, is simply the following up of
the meaning of an idea. An idea means something, as
we have seen, when it is so connected with something as to
lead to the presentation of it. The idea must be a sort of
handle to the object, a means of recovering it. And when
I try my idea by using it to recover its object, I verify it


ao6 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

in this first sense. It is true if the perception is what the
idea calls for, or what the idea leads me to expect. Thus
having an idea of my future state means having something
now in mind (it may be no more than a verbal complex)
that is so related to my environment as to conduct me to a
certain locus in experience; and it is a true idea in propor-
tion as it prepares me for the perception which would there
greet me. To verify my idea in this sense would be to
follow its lead into this perceptual presence, and so test
my preparedness. A shock of novelty and surprise would
prove the untruth of my idea; a sense of recognition would
indicate its truth.'

Verification by consistency, is the testing of the idea on
trial, by ideas already in good and regular standing. The
idea is proved true by this test when it is not contradicted
by other ideas, or is positively implied by them. Thus my
idea of my future state is proved by this test in so far as it
is not contradicted by the accepted physiological theory
of death, or is implied by the accepted theory of the nature
of the soul.

' Now verification by perception and by consistency evi-
dently stand apart by themselves. They correspond to
the traditional criteria of empiricism and rationalism. In
restating them pragmatism has simply pointed out that
in both cases verification is a series of acts, governed by
motives, and terminating in success or failure. Further-
more, pragmatists such as James regard these two modes of
verification as the strictly "theoretical" tests of truth.
They may not in any given case be sufficient, but so far
as they go they have a peculiar validity. "Between the
coercions of the sensible order and those of the ideal order
our mind is thus wedged tightly." The formation of ideas
that shall be determined by these two "coercions" is the
cognitive interest in the narrow sense. Such ideas have a
"subsequential utility" — that is, they may be usefully
employed by other interests; but they get their original
' For similar examples, d. James; op. cit., pp. 33, 104.


I


I


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 207

verification from perception or consistency. And "some-
times alternative theoretic formulas are equally compatible
with all the truths we know, and then we choose between
them for subjective reasons.''^ But there remains an
important difference between the grounds of the validation
of the alternatives, and the groimds of the validation of
such a choice from among them. All this strongly sug-
gests that it might be clearer if the term 'true' were
restricted to ideas verified in one of these ways — by per-
ception or by ideal consistency. "Subsequential utihty"
and "subjective reasons" would then remain as extra-
logical grounds of belief. One might readily agree that
truth in this narrower sense was an insufiacient criterion,
that the exigencies of life required belief in excess of proof.
But the stricter truth tests wouJd not be confused nor their
priority compromised. The virtue of such a course will
become more apparent as we proceed.

§6. By 'verification by operation' I mean the same
thing that James means by "subsequential utility." Or
VcrificatoQby ^° employ another distinction made by the
operaiion nnd same author, I mean verification by "active"
by beotuneni father than "passive" experience.' Thus my
idea of my future state is verified in this sense in so far as
the plans which I base on it succeed. Such would be the
case, for example, if I were to receive my reward in heaven
for sacrifices deliberately made in this world.

Pragmatism has rightly insisted upon the relation of
cogm'tion to collateral interests. That there is always
some such relation no one will be disposed to deny. The
cognitive interest is one of the functions of a complex
organism, and has developed because of its organic useful-
ness. Whatever is known is available for any uses of
which the organism is capable; it can be felt, acted on,
talked about, written down, thought about, or de&Itwith

* James: Fraimatism, pp. iti, 117; d. pp. »6-ii7; lf«MM| c/ Trvtk,
pp. }o6 sq.

' ifMHinj c/ Truth, p. no.


20S


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


in any of the other ways characteristic of human life. Mr,
Schiller goes to unnecessary lengths to show that there are
no useless truths. His conclusion could be drawn at once
from the unity of the psychophysical organism; the sen-
sory, associative, affective, and motor elements in himian
nature all contribute to a more or less common fund of
resources. And one may easily go farther, and show that
the solidarity of society and the ready means of communica-
tion and intercourse, make these resources available for
humanity at large. But this is very far from a proof that
truth consists in such uses. They are involved because of
the organic and social connections of the truth-seeking
function; but truth would not cease to be truth if some i

• organic or social abnormality were to make it impos- J
sible to use it. As a matter of fact, since the develop- I
ment of scientific method it has been customary to reach J
truths by the theoretical means above described, and to I
regard their truth as established quite independently of 1
the uses to which subsequently they may or may not !
be put.

The issue is somewhat confused by the fact that, entirely J
apart from the process of verilicalion itself, many truths J
are practical in their subject matter. The cognitive inter-
est, originally in bondage to the organism, is most lu'gently !
concerned with what may be called truths of use. The
most immediately important truths, the cash truths, so
to speak, are answers to questions of this form: What
will happen to me if I do o to &? Truths of physical
science are largely of this order; and it is natural to regard
these as generally typical because of their bulk and urgency.

/ But it will be observed that truth is here made, not by the

(practical sequel to the theory, but by embracing the prac-
tical sequel within the theory, and then testing the whole

' by 'perception.' If I find that c will happen to me if I
do fl to ft, I am esperiencing the nature of a temporal cir-
cuit, including terms belonging both to the envirormient
and to my own body. Experiment is here not an external


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


309


practical test, but the living through, the direct serial
experience of, a set of connected events.

It is proper to ask, then, whether verification by oper-
ation is an independent test of truth. For it would
appear to be either the employment of truths already
established by our two former tests, or only a special form
of these tests. Let me quote an example from Professor
A. W. Moore. " The idea of an ache as the ache of a
certain tooth is true, if an operation on the tooth alters the
ache."' This verification can be construed in one of two
ways. On the one hand, the judgment 'such a tooth is
aching' is verified by observing the localization of the ache,
or by inference from the diseased character of the tooth.
The latter would, I should suppose, be regarded as in the
last analysis the most rehable test; and both would fall
under one or the other of the strictly theoretical criteria
above described. And whether one thereupon has the
tooth pulled, or not, would not affect the truth of the
judgment so verified. The truth would be useful, but its "
uscfuhiess would be a secondary and irrelevant circum-
stance. Or, on the other hand, the judgment "were I to
have this tooth pulled, the pain would disappear" is
verified by observing the sequence loath pulled — ache gone,
where the judgment refers to an operation and is verified
by perceiving the operation. Thus in both cases truth is
tested by perception or consistency; and pragmatism
instead of adding a new test, is confined to showing the
pragmatic character of the old familiar tests of experiment
and inference.

Verification by sentiment, is the proof of an idea by its
immediate pleasantness or by its tonic effect upon the will.
Thus my idea of my future state is verified in this sense
if "I like the idea," or if it makes Ufe better worth living.
"We choose the kind of theory to which we are already
partial," says James; "we follow ' elegance ' or 'economy.'"
"No completely pessimistic system is ever judged com-
' Fraimalism and itt Crilki, p. 87.


f


210 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

pletely 'true,'" says Schiller; "because it leaves unre-
moved and unresolved a sense of final discord in existence,
it must ever stimulate anew to fresh efforts to overcome
the discrepancy.' But it is clearly recognized by both
of these writers that such considerations of sentiment are
to be allowed to weigh only when the tests of perception
or consistency are not decisive. Were the less parsimonious
or less harmonious hypothesis to be verified by an experi-
mentum cruets, or proved the only means of avoiding
contradiction, man's taste for parsimony and harmony
would not create the least presumption against it. The
perfectly agreeable hypothesis must yield at once before
iact or contradiction.
f Would it not be clearer and more accurate, then, to say
\ that while sentiment has nothing to do with truth, it may,aa
"y an extra-logical motive, be allowed to influence belief where
/ verification proper is impossible? Indeed this is, I think,
v^a fair rendering of James's famous "right to believe."
The religious hypothesis is essentially an unverifiable
hypothesis. Appeal to sensible facts and inference from
established truth both leave the issue doubtful. But
meanwhile it is necessary to act on some such hypothesis.
We must in the practical sense believe where we cannot
in the theoretical sense know. And here we are justified in
allowing our tastes and our hopes to incline the balance.
For we should be no better supported by proof if we
beUeved the contrarj', and should lose the emotional values
beside. Furthermore, in this case, belief contributes
evidence in its own support. For what I believe in is, so
^ far as I am actively concerned in it, the more likely to
prevail if I do so believe. Such a making true, means
making facts which will in time afford a sensible verifica-
tion for my belief. So in James's entire philosophy of
reUgion' it is constantly implied that there is a strict sense
of the term 'truth,' relating to the cognitive or theoretic

* James: Pragmatism, p. 117; F. C. S. Schillw: Humanism, p. 50.
' See below, pp. 369-370.


I
I


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 211

interest, and both independent of and prior to all senti-
mental grounds for belief.

§ 7, Verification by general utility, is the proof of an
idea's truth by the total satisfaction it affords, by its
Vilification by Suitability to all the purposes of life, individual
General Utility ^nd social. "Truth," writes Schiller, "is that
manipulation of [objects] which turns out upon trial to be
useful, primarily for any human end, but ultimately for
that perfect harmony of our whole life which forms our
final aspiration."' Thus, my idea of the future state
would be proved true on this ground, if it proved in all
respects a good idea to live by, borne out by facts, consist-
ent with my other ideas, a good working hypothesis, and
above all consoling and inspiring. And it would receive
additional verification of the same tj-pe if it satisfied the
needs of mankind in the aggregate and survived the test
of time.

The significant thing about this criterion is its indiscrimi- 1 ■«
nate merging of the more specific criteria discussed above. '
Pragmatists have repeatedly protested that the truth of an
idea is determined by the specific purpose and the specific
situation that give rise to the idea. Thus Dewey says,
" It is the failure to grasp the coupling of truth of meaning
with a specific promise, undertaking, or intention expressed
by a thing which underlies, so far as I can see, the criti-
cisms passed upon the experimental or pragmatic view of
the truth."' In this opinion Dewey is undoubtedly cor-
rect. Pragmatism has seemed to most of its critics to put i ^^ \
strictly cognitive considerations upon a par with considera- \ '^
dons of sentiment and subsequential utility. And prag- ,

matist writers are responsible for this impression — or
misunderstanding, if such it be. Owing perhaps to the

' Bwmanism. p. 61. .

< InfiuOKe of Darurin en PkUosepky. and alker Essayi, p. gj, note. C(.
also Siudiei in Lofk, pp. 30, 33, where he delines a logic coDcemed with
"description and interpretation of the (unction o( reflective thought," and
inMsts that thought cannot be judged "apart imm the limits of parlJcular
aises in Ihe growth of experience."


212 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

exigencies of controversy, or to a carelessness of state-
ment, pragmatists have taught us to believe that an idea
is true in so far as it works or satisfies in any respect what-
soever* Or they have referred now to one ideational value
and now to another, without consistently distinguishing the
cognitive value from the rest. It has not unnaturally
been supposed that pragmatism intends to make these
various values commensurable and interchangeable. And
it would be correct to infer from such a supposition that
an idea which was shown to be contrary to sensible fact,
or contradictory to accredited truths, might yet be proved
true by affording a surplus of sentimental or utilitarian
value.

But such a conclusion is very properly denoimced as
reactionary. Science has become solvent and prosperous
through regarding these values as fictitious, and exclud-
ing them from its accounts. Indeed enhghtenment and
criticism mean little more than conscious discriminarion
against these values. For the intellectual hero, this is the
great renunciation. He must forego the pleasing and the
hopeful hypothesis, and he must be resolutely indifferent
to the extra-theoretical uses to which his hypothesis may be
put. Knowledge advances pari passu with the specializa-
tion and refinement of the theoretic interest. The very
use of knowledge, the variety and fruitfulness of its applica-
tions, depend on its being first tried and proved independ-
ently of these applications. And knowledge is a means
of adaptation, not in proportion to its pleasantness and
hopefulness, but in proporrion as it dispels illusions, be
they ever so grateful and inspiring. In short the pragma-
tist handling of this question of truth is confusing and
dangerous in so far as it consists of loose generaliza-

' CI., e.g., such a sUtcmcnt as the following: "All that the pragmatic
method implies, then, is ibat truths should have practical consequences.
In England the word has been used more broadly still, to cover the notion
that the irulh o( any statement consists in the consequences, and pajticu-
laily in their being good consequences." James: Tke Ueaning of Tritlk,
p. sa,


I


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


213


tions concerning the practical or satisfying character of
truth; in so far as it tends to blur the difference between
the strictly theoretic value of ideas on the one hand, and
certain derivative and secondary values on the other.
Pragmatism is reactionary and dangerous in so far as it \
coordinates and equalizes verification by perception and 1
consistency with verification by sentiment and subsequen-
tiaJ utility.

There remains a strict and limited pragmatism which is
not guilty of this offence. Such a pragmatism consists in
the proof that the theoretic interest itself is in fact an
interest. Ideas are functional rather than substantial.
Their relation to their objects is not one of resemblance, ~
but of leading or guidance,/ Their verification is not a
matching of similars, but a process in which their leading
or guidance is followed to that terminus of fact or being
which they mean. And since the theoretic interest is an
interest, it is as a whole rooted in life, and answerable to
the needs and projects of life. In other words, truth, a
theoretic utility, has also, because of the auspices under
which it is begotten, a subsequential utility. Fmally, it
is the proper and consistent sequel to this to allow taste,
aspiration, and hope to incline the balance of belief when,
and only when, truth in the strict sense is not attainable.

§8. Epistemology and metaphysics are so intimately
related in contemporary philosophy, that a theory of
The Realistic fcf">™ledge is not infrequently accepted with-
Veraion oi out further ado as a theory of being. And
Pragmaiisni y^^^ ^ ^^ j^^^^ leamcd from our study of
idealism, such procedure begs a most crucial philosophical
question. What is the place of knowledge in reality?
To what extent does the order of nature conform to the
order of knowledge? Is the cognitive version of experience
final and definitive, or is it abstract and partial? These
are clearly independent questions, that are not necessarily
involved in an account of knowledge itself. We have thus
far confined our attention to the pragmatist description


/■


214 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of the knowledge process. We must now face the further
question: What is the pragmatist doctrine concerning the
metaphysical status of the knowledge process? And we
shall find, I beheve, that pragmatism is here divided
against itself on the same issue that divides idealism and
realism. Some pragmatists, such as James, are avowedly,
and on the whole consistently, realistic. Others, such as
Schiller, favor, if they do not unequivocally adopt, the sub-
jectivistic alternative.

Let us examine, first, the realistic version of pragmatism.
Knowledge, according to all pragmatists, is a specific com-
plex, comprising an idea or behef, an object ideated or
believed, and a relation of meaning and verification con-
necting the two. Now a realistic version of this theory
will assert that the various components of the knowledge
process are independent of their places in this process.
They are regarded as having other places besides, so that
their being is not conditional on their finding a place
in knowledge.' Thus a realistic pragmatist will in hi3
epistemology describe the sensible facts of nature as the
termini to which ideas lead, but he will not suppose that
such facts must be thus related to ideas in order to be.
Sensible facts are occasionally and accidentally the termini
of ideas, but not essentially so. And he is led naturally to
this view by his acceptance of the general biological cate-
gories. Knowledge is a form of adaptation to a preexisting
environment. Thought proposes, fact disposes. "If my
idea is to work," says Bradley, in criticising pragmatism,
"it must correspond to a determinate being which it can-
not be said to make."* In the name of pragmatism, James
accepts this very conclusion. "I start with two things, the
objective facts and the claims, and indicate which claims, the
facts being there, will work successfully as the latter's sub-
stitutes and which will not. I call the former claims true."

' For a full discussion of the relation between realism and pragmatism,
d. W. P. Montague's articles, "May a Realist be a Pragmatist?" Jow.
of Pkil., Psych., and Scientijic Methods. Vol. VI, Nos. i7-».

' "On Truth and PracUce," Uind, N. S., Vol. XIII, p. jH.


I


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


21J


And again, "For him [tJie pragmatist], as for his critic, there
can be no truth if there is nothing to be true about. . . .
This is why as a pragmatist I have so carefully posited
'reality' ab initio, and why, throughout my whole discus*
sion, I remain an epistemological realist."'

§ g. A subjectivistic version of pragmatism, on the other
hand, identifies the components of knowledge altogether
ThcSubjKiiv- ^^ ^^''' P'^<^^ i" "^it system, and there
iuJcVernoaof results a metaphysics in which reality coincides
•«™»"=n Tuiti, t^e history of knowledge. Reality is
either fact, idea, or " funded " belief, where tJiese are defined
as terms in the pragmatic process of verification. What-
ever is known is essentially such, owing its character and
its reality to the circumstance of its being known.

Thus Schiller writes, "That the Real has a determinate
nature which the knowing reveals but does not affect, so
that our knowing makes no difference to it, is one of those
sheer assumptions wliich are incapable, not only of proof,
but even of rational defence. It is a survival of a crude
realism which can be defended only, in a pragmatist manner,
on the score of its practical convenience, as an avowed
fiction." Since reality is essentially what it is in the
knowledge process, Schiller naturally concludes that
"ontology, the theory of Reality," is "conditioned by
epistemology, the theory of our knowledge"; and since the
knowledge process is essentially practical it is proper to
conclude that "our ultimate mclaphysic must be ethical."*

James has asserted that Schiller's view differs from his
own only in method of approach. "As I myself under-
stand these authors, we all three [including Dewey] abso-
lutely agree in admitting the transcendency of the object

' Thc.WMBinjn/ Truth, pp. rix, i<)i. Cf. Dewey: "So I beg to ranind
you that, according to pragmatism, ideas (judgmeDts and reasonings being
included for convenience in this term) are attitudes of response taken toward
ectn-ideal. eitm-mental things." {Infiuena aj Damin, lU., p. iss) But
d. below, pp. )JS. 3t4-3'S.

■ Bumamsm, pp. ii, note, q, 105.


2l6 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

(provided it be an experienceable object) to the subject,
in tlte Iruth-relalion. . . . What misleads so many of them
[the critics] is jxjssibly . . , the fact that the universes
of discourse of Schiller, Dewey, and myself are panoramas
of different extent. . . . Schiller's universe is the smallest,
being essentially a psychological otte. He starts with but
one sort of thing, truth-claims, but is led ultimately to
the independent objective facts which they assert, inas-
much as the most successfully validated of all claims is
that such facts are there. My universe is more essen-
tially epistemological. I start with two things."'

But the transcendency of the object 'Hn the truth relation"
is not realism. This means no more than that cognition
is essentially dual, and does not affect the question of the
transcendency of the object with reference to cognition
as a whole. Realism asserts not only that the object
transcends the idea, but that it in some sense transcends
even that status of objectivity in which it is cognitively
related to an idea. Nor does James recognize the crucial
importance, in connection with this issue, of the starting-
point. Because Schiller's universe of discourse is a psy-
chological one, it turns out in the end that his universe is
a psychological one also. He not only begins, but ends,
wilkin the knowledge process. Indeed he expressly adopts
the phrase " idealistic experientialism " " to designate
the view that 'the world' is primarily 'my experience,'
plus (secondarily) the suppleraentings of that experience
which its nature renders it necessary to assume. ... In
that case the worid, in which we suppose ourselves to be, is,
and always remains, relative to the experience which we
seek to interpret by it."'

Precisely the same objections which hold against idealism
in general hold against "experiential idealism." For its

' Meamng of Truth, Preface, pp. xvii-iix (italics mine). CI. also pp.
»43-i44-

* Humanum, p. lEi, nitcthei any praf^atist is wholly free from the
BubjectivUtic tniDl of the term 'experience,' is perhaps doubtful. See
below, pp. 314-jis-


I
I


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 217

grounds are precisely the same. Arguing from ' the
ego-centric predicament,' Schiller says: "The simple fact
is that we know the Real as it is when we know it; we know
nothing whatever about what it is apart from that process." '
And, his "ethical metaphysics" is virtually assumed when
he takes the world knowledge-wise at the outset. In otherll
words, he is also guilty of the fallacy of 'definition by initial)
predication.' It is unnecessary for me to repeat what t
have already said concerning these basal errors of the whole
subjectivistic way of thinking.' And the subjectivistic
principle in pragmatism is not only unproved, but here, as
elsewhere, is essentially vicious, Before pressing this criti-
cism further, however, I wish to consider the bearing of
the realistic -subjectivistic alternative upon several prag-
matist conceptions.

§ 10. There is, for example, a realistic and a subjec-
tivistic version of "satisfaction." Satisfaction, realistically
Realistic and construed,is grounded on a determinate relation
subjectiviitjc between interest, instrument, and environment.
s»t^^™"" Under given circumstances, and in behalf of
TheMakiogo/ the governing ioterest, a certain instnimen-
"" tality has an objective tightness or fitness.'

Thus an idea may 'satisfy' the situation, in the sense of
meeting it. The confrontation of interest and environment
is prior and independent, and imposes conditions upon
the idea. So that the idea which feels satisfactory to the
agent may not in fact work, f There is a difference between
a sense of adaptation and real adaptation., '

In subjecUvistic terms, on the other hand, the state of
felt satisfaction is decisive. The environment and the in-
terest have no inherent structure apart from the successes
of knowledge. They are the modes or the precipitates of
an inwardly harmonious life- From the subjectivistic
standpoint, accordingly, there is no difference of principle
between verification by contact with the environment and

' op. eii., p. 1 1, note. ' See below, pp. 333-334.

' See above, pp. iib-131.


2l8 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

verification by sentiment. Indeed the former tends to be
resolved into the form of the latter.'

Or consider the pragmatist doctrine that knowing makes
reality. For the realistic pragmatist this doctrine has a
very limited scope. Schiller sums up the realistic version
of the matter as follows:

(i) "Our making of truth really alters 'subjective'
reality." In other words, knowing adds itself to reality.
(2) "Our knowledge, when applied, alters 'real reality'
and {3) is not real knowledge if it cannot be applied.
Moreover {4) in some cases, e.g., in human intercourse, a
subjective making is at the same time a real making of
reality. Human beings, that is, are really affected by the
opinion of others." (s) "Mere knowing always oilers reality,
so far at least as one party to the transaction is concerned.
Knowing always really alters the knower." •

A. W. Moore gives a similar account of knowledge of
the past. The past can be modified by knowledge in so
far as the sequel to the past, or the past continued into
the present, can be affected by applied knowledge of it.
" Casar's act, like John Brown's, ' goes marching on.' Like
all other historic acts, it is not yet finished, and never will
be so long as it continues, through acts of knowledge, to
produce new 'results.'"* In other words, on realistic
grounds a thing is not modified simply by being known.
Knowledge modifies knowledge, and the thing which is
known is liable on that account to be acted on, and so
modified. But the past and the distant, though they may
be known, cannot be modified. Only the present con-
tinuation of the past or the near continuation of the dis-
tant can be modified, because modification requires a
propinquity that is not required for knowledge.

But this restricted modification by knowledge does not
satisfy the metaphysical yearnings of pragmatism. The

' C(. Schaier, Rumaniim, pp. 45-30.
' Sludin in Humanism, pp. 438-439.
• A. W. Moore: PratmatUm and Us Critics, p. 103.


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

\pragmatist as a rule prefers to state the matter 1
Ito assert the interesting and hopeful generalization that
iknowledge makes reality, rather than to specify in what
respects. Or he goes over altogether to the radical con-
tention that the environment is wholly plastic, and knowl-
edge an instrument of "creative evolution." In the essay
from which I have quoted above Schiiler fondly dwells on
such a speculative possibility. He suggests a hylozoistic
nature that responds socially as our fellows respond. He
emphasizes the incompleteness of reality, the freedom of
man, and the perpetual yielding of fact to art. And
though he nowhere removes the paradox in which he
admits the doctrine to be involved, he makes clear his faith
"that Truth is great and must prevail, because it has the
making of Reality."'

The issue is further complicated by the pragmatist doc-
trine concerning concepts; these, as distinguished from
percepts, being supposed to be peculiarly the creatures of
the knowing process. The conceptualized world, at least,
is a made world, a projection of practical needs. Bergson,
the arch-creationist of them all. rests his case mainly on his
theory of concepts, and we shall therefore return to this
matter again.

§ (I. We have already learned enough to enable us to
recognize the seriousness of the dilemma by which prag-
The Diinnni* matism is confronted. On its strictly epistem-
of Ptagmfltism ological Side pragmatism is naturalistic and
biological. The mind is conceived as operating in an envi-
ronment to whose decrees it must submit as the price of
adaptation. Upon this basis the complex process of knowl-
edge is made up of definable parts. Truth is a product
into which the environment enters as a prior and inde-
pendent component. The environment is not itself sub-
ject to the fluctuations and vicissitudes of knowledge;
and knowledge may be construed as a human and
doubtful enterprise without compromising the structure
' Studies in Humanitm, p. 451- CI. p. 41S.


320 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of the world from which it arises and to which it
addresses itself.

But when, on the other hand, the factors of knowledge,
and in particular its environment, are regarded as the
precipitate of knowledge itself -— then knowledge is left
suspended in mid-air. It must be conceived as somehow
spinning out of itself the very auspices and surroundings
which condition it and give it meaning. There arises the
same contradiction that vitiates the Fichtean idealism.
Activity must itself contrive the very foil and medium with-
out which it cannot act. And if the arguments for the sub-
jectivistic view are accepted as valid, there is no defence
against the vicious paradoxes of relativism. Individual
judgments conflict, your judgment and mine, my judg-
ment of today and my judgment of to-morrow, the belief
of one epoch, and the belief of another; and the objects of
these judgments, now regarded as their creations, are impli-
cated in this conflict. There is no court of appeal to arbi-
trate their destructive inconsistency. It is not that there
b no fixed truth; there is no fixed fact or being, not even
past events. For the subjectivistic pragmatist has des-
troyed the distinction on which pragmatism itself has
repeatedly insisted, the distinction between truth and
reality. There are, then, only two courses open to the
subjectivistic pragmatist. If he is to retain his subjectiv-
ism he must imitate the example of idealism, and accept
a cosmic or absolute knower. For if reality is to repose in
knowledge, there must be a knowledge which gives shape
and outline to the world. The voluntaristic idealist is on
subjectivistic grounds correct in charging pragmatism with
relativism; and his offer of "absolute pragmatism"' as a
harbor of refuge is both pertinent and opportune.

Thus if pragmatism is to avoid absolutism, and remun
within empirical and naturalistic hmits, it must adopt the
realistic alternative, as James has so successfully done.

■ Royce: WiUiam James, and etktr Essays, p. 254; cf. also "The Eternal
and (he PracUcal," PkS. Rtuew, Vol. XIII, 1904.


PRAGMATIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 221

And the pragmatist theory of knowledge cannot be less
illummating and important for being merely a theory of
knowledge. To it will still belong the credit for an original
and sound analysis of the process of reflective thought —
for a scrupulously empirical account of 4deas/ of 'mean-
ing/ and of ' truth' as a specific and characteristic form
of human success.


The pra^matist theory of knowledge, in the limited
sense, is an analysis and description of the concrete process
Deanition of of intellcction or reflective thought. It is an
ihe Issue account of medtaU knowledge, or knowledge

about — of that knowledge in which ideas of things are
entertained, believed, or verified. Pragmatism finds intel-
lection to be essentially a practical process, or operation.
But in the course of his exposition, the pragmatist is per-
petually attacking what he calls ' intellectualisw; ' by which
he means the uncritical use of the intellect. The pragma-
tist describes the intellect, and because he understands it, he
can discount it; the "intellectualist," on the other hand, re-
poses a blind confidence in it. The pragmatist sees around
the intellect, aod construes reality in terms of its process
and circumstances; while the horizon of the intellectualist is
bounded by the intellect, and he can only use it and con-
strue reahty in terms of the results. Whereas the pragma-
tist vitalizes the intellect, his opponent intellectiializes life.
It is the old issue between the intellectualistic and volun-
taristic views of the soul, revived in a new form; and it
appears at first as though it were merely a question as to
which of two parties shall have the last word. The intel-
lectualist asserts that the will is a case of knowledge; it is
what you know it to be; it must be identified with your idea
or definition of it. The voluntarist or pragmatist, on the
other hand, protests that knowing — the having of ideas or
the framing of definitions, is a case of willing. And we
seem to be launched upon an infinite series of rejoiners.

' portions o( this and the following chapter arc reprinted from " Notes
on the Philosophy of Bergson," Jour. 0/ Phii., Ptyck., and SeitnliJU 1
lietkods, Vol. VUI, tgii, Nos. 96, 37


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM

But such is not necessarily the case. For it is entirely
possible to regard both parties as correct. Suppose it to
be admitted that knowing is a kind of willing. What, then,
is willing? Is there any contradiction in supposing that
one can know; in supposing that one can will to know
what willing is? Bergson evidently believes that there is.
He argues that the intellect, because it is a special form of
life, cannot know the whole of life, "Created by life, in
definite circumstances, to act on definite things, how can it
embrace life, of which it is only an emanation or an aspect?
Deposited by the evolutionary movement in the course of
its way. how can it be appUed to the evolutionary move-
ment itself?"' Butwhynot? Unless we are to assume that
to know and to be known are the same thing, there is not
the slightest difficulty in supposing that a part can know the
whole. Assuming intellection to be a special act, there is
no difficulty in supposing that it addresses itself in turn
to the collateral parts of life; and in supposing that the
act itself is known through the mutual knowledge of
several intellects,* Furthermore, it is absurd to describe
knowing as 'willing unless one does know what wilhng is.

The purely dialectical question turns out, like most such
questions, to be a quibble. The real question is this: is
there a special variety of knowledge, namely mediate or re-
flective knowledge, the nature of which as a process can be
apprehended only by another more general variety of knowl-
edge, namely immediate knowledge? In these terms it is
possible to distinguish two theoretical opponents and adju-
dicate their quarrel. The pragmatist, on the one hand,
finds that reflective thought needs to be supplemented
by some variety of non-reflective experience. Reflective
thought, for example, implies sensible facts, which are
amply sensed, and no more. Or, reflective thought itself is
a process, which as such is directly felt. Again, certun
things, such as time, caimot in their native character be

* Betgion: Crulht Evolviien, titaa. by A. Mitchell, p, x; cf, p. 49.
' C(. below, pp. »SS. »9S-»9<S-


224 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

grasped by thought at all, but must be apprehended by
instinct. The intellectualist, on the other hand, insists that
all things must be identified with what we know of them,
and that there is but one way to know, namely, by reflec-
tive thought. In short, the real support of the pragmatisl
polemic against intellectualism is insistence on a non-intellec-
tual variety of knowledge, which is more fundamental and
more comprehensive than intellection; which affords, as
James expresses it, real "insight" as distinguished from
the superficiality and abstraction of intellection.'

§ 2. Pragmatists offer different versions of this non-intel-
lectual or non-reflective experience. With Bergson it is
NooinieUcc- "*^^ fringe of vague intuition that surrounds
lua] Experience, our djstinct — that is, intellectual — represen-
*" "^ tation." If he hesitates to call it knowledge,

it is only because it has more rather than less of cognitive
value than knowledge in the usual sense. "The feeling we
have of our evolution and of the evolution of all things in
pure duration is there, forming around the intellectual
concept properly so-called an indistinct fringe that fades off
into darkness." And intellectualism forgets "that this
nucleus has been formed out of the rest by condensation,
and that the whole must be used, the fluid as well as and
more than the condensed, in order to grasp the inner move-
ment of life. Indeed, if the fringe exists, however delicate
and indistinct, it should have more importance for philos-
ophy than the bright nucleus it surrounds. For it is its
presence that enables us to affirm that the nucleus is a nucleus,
that pure intellect is a contraction, by condensation, of a
more extensive power."' In short, intellectual knowledge
is surrounded and corrected by intuitive or immediate
knowledge. The former is defined and assigned limits by
the evidence of the latter.

James alone of pragmatist writers is always willing to refer
to the non-intellectual experience as a species of knowledge.
As he expresses it in his exposition of Bergson, there ii

■ Pluralistic Univerit, p. 346. * Op. cU., pp. 49, 46 (italics mine).


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM


22S


" a living or sympathetic acquaintance" with things, distin-
guished from the knowledge about them that "touches only
the outer surface of reality." "The only way in which to
apprehend reality's thickness is either to experience it
directly by being a part of reality one's self, or to evoke it
in imagination by sympathetically divining some one else's
inner life." If you are to really "know reality," you must
"dive back into the flux itself," or " turn your face
toward sensation, that 3eshbound thing which rationalism
has always loaded with abuse."'

Dewey's opinion would seem to differ from that of Berg- ■
son and James, mainly in his strict reservation of the term
'knowledge' for the intellectualized experience. The non-
intellectual experience is there in his view as in that of
Bergson and James, and it plays substantially the same r6Ie.
"Tilings are what they are experienced to be"; and knowl-
edge is by no means the "only genuine mode of experien-
cing." The " knowledge-object " is immersed in "an
inclusive, vital, direct experience." There is an "experi-
ence in which knowledge-and-its-object is sustained, and
whose schematized, or structural, portion it is." Knowing
being one mode of experiencing, "the primary philosophic
demand (from the standpoint of immediatism) is to find
out what sort of an experience knowing is — or, concretely,
how things are experienced when they are experienced as
known things."* In short, this extra-cognitive experience
is clearly an experience of things to be, an experience of
things as such and such; and thus a revelation of their
nature. As with Bergson and James, it affords the light
by which the cognitive process itself is circumspected and
discounted, and intellectualism denounced as rendering a
limited view of reality.

§ 3. Thus far, then, the pragmatist polemic against
intellectualism signifies that knowledge commonly so-called,

' A Plufolistk Unherit, pp. 149-151.

' "RckUly as Experience." in Jimr. of Phil., Ptyck., and Scientific
iietkodt. Vol. m, p. 356; tnfiutnet of Darvnn, tU., pp. iiB, iiq.


226 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

the knowledge mediated by ideas, is but one way, and
that not the most profoimd way, of knowing things. The
p essendally practical or instrumental character

im^riiedia of mediate knowledge suggests that it is knowl-
K*^wm. ^^^ '^'^^ * purpose,' a knowledge limited by
a governing motive. The full extent and native
quality of reality, including the ideational or mediating
process itself, is to be apprehended only by immediacy,
such as sensation or the feeling of life. We must now
examine the grounds of this pragmatist contention. We j
must ask, in other words, why it is that intellectual knowl- |
edge is limited, inadequate, and secondary. ,

In the first place, it is contended that mediation implies
immediacy. The mediating relation betiveen the idea and
its object, always implies the immediate presence oj the
idea, of the process, and eventually of the object or tenninus
of the process. " It is in the concrete thing as experienced,"
says Dewey, "that all the grounds and clues to its own
intellectual or logical rectification are contained." "Sen-
sations," says James, " are the mother-earth, the anchorage,
the stable rock, the first and last limits, the terminus a quo,
and the terminus ad quem of the mind." Or, as he puts it
more emphatically, "these f)ercepts, these termini, these
sensible things, these mere matters-of-acquaintance, are
the only realities we ever directly know, and the whole
history of our thought is the history of our substitution of one
of them for another, and the reduction of the substitute to the
status of a conceptual sign." ^

Thus not only is mediate knowledge tested by immediacy,
but it is never more than a second best, a mode of knowledge
to be adopted in default of immediacy. The best idea will
be that which renders its own existence unnecessary by
leading to "an actual merging of ourselves with the object,
to an utter mutual confluence and identification," — "a
completely consummated acquaintance,"' This follows

' Dewey:op. fii.pp. Jjs; James: Jfeaninj of Truth, p. 39 (italics mine).
* Juan: op. cit., p. 156.


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM


227


from the function of ideas. Their virtue lies in their sub-
stitutional and provisional character. They are means of
knowing beyond the limits of immediacy; but are valid
there only in so far as they refer to possibilities of imme-
diacy. It is not unfair to say that on anti-intellectualist
grounds, reality is revealed only when it is actually or
potentially present. Whether this be construed as a limit-
ing of knowledge in general or only of one kind of knowledge
in behalf of another, is a matter of words. Direct, presen-
talive, immediate experience, in which reality is itself in
mind, in which the knower and the known coincide, is more
comprehensive, fundamental, and penetrating than the
indirect, representative, mediate experience which implies
it, refers to it, and is formed out of it.

In examining further the grounds of the pragmatist
indictment of intellectualism we come at once upon the
question of concepts. Intellectualism is charged with a
blind and excessive use of concepts, with an exclusive
reliance on them despite the abstraclne^s and artijiciality
which vitiate them. This indictment of concepts suggests
their distinguishing marks. A concept is abstract in the
sense of being a discrimination, separation, and fixation of
some limited portion of a wider experience. Being the
work of analysis, a concept is clear and distinct. A concept
is unambiguous; once the identification has taken place
the concept is just what it is identified as being, and can
never be anything else. It is discrete and changeless, as
distinguished from the unlimited richness, the marginal
vagueness, and perpetual flux of sense and feeling. But
these virtues are offset by its artificiality. A concept is an
instrument, owing its existence and form to its use. As a
human artifact it is other than, and in a sense false to, the
primitive experience from which it is created and to which
it is applied. In other words, a concept is an idea, in the
pragmatist sense.' To this disparagement of concepts as
abstract and artificial we must now turn.

> Whether all ideas ore concqiU U cot deal; and lor our tmmedikU


228 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

§ 4. James bases his aiticism of concepts mainly on
their abstractness. He repeatedly emphasizes their sclec-

_ ,. tive or partial character. This would not ren-

Thc Abstract- , , "^ ^ ■ t • . ■ 11

neMotCon- der them false 11 it were understood, and due
ceptj. "vidous allowance made for it. But it is customary for

iDteUectiuUiEin . „ ,- > < ,

mtellectualists to use concepts as though they
were exhaustive of their objects, and to deny to the object
whatever is not contained in the concept. This is what
James calls "vicious" intellectualism or abstractionism.
He describes it as follows: "We conceive a concrete situa-
tion by singling out some salient or important feature in it,
and classing it under that; then, instead of adding to its
previous characters all the positive consequences which the
new way of conceiving it may bring, we proceed to use our
concept privalively; we reduce the originally rich phenome-
non to the naked suggestions of that name abstractly taken,
treating it as a case of 'nothing but' that concept, and
acting as if all the other characters from out of which the
concept is abstracted were expunged." '

In other words, "vicious intellectuahsm" proceeds as I
though a conceptual truth about a thing were the exclu-
Mve truth about the thing; whereas it is tRie only so far as
it goes. Thus the world may be truly conceived as perma-
nent and unified, since it is such in a certain respect. But
this should not lead us, as it has led certain intellectualists,
to suppose that the world is therefore not changing and
plural. We must not identify our world with one concep-
tion of it. In its concrete richness it lends itself to many
conceptions. And the same is true of the least thing in
the world. It has many aspects, none of which is exhaus-
tive of it. It may be taken in many relations or orders, and
be given different names accordingly. As it is immediately
presented it contains all these aspects, as potentialities for

it necessary to detennine. See below, pp, 331^131. The best


n of the matti


is 10 be found in James: Somi PrabUmi of PhUosth-


' Meamnt of Truth, p. 340 (italics mine); cf. ibid., p, i
ititcrsr, p. itS. Cf. also below, p. 365.


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM


3 29


the discriminating and abstracting operation of thought.
"Vicious intellectuaUsm " thus rests on the errors that I
have already referred to as 'exclusive particularity' and
'definition by initial predication': the false supposition
that because a thing has one definable character, it cannot
also have others; and that because it has been named first
for one of its aspects, the others must be reduced to it
or deduced from it.'

Now the fault of " vicious intellectuaUsm" evidently lies
in the misuse of concepts, and not in the nature of the con-
cepts themselves. There is nothing to prevent our supposing
that the abstractness of single concepts can be compen-
sated for by the addition of further concepts, or by some
conceptual system in which the presence and interrelation
of many concepts is specifically provided for. In this case
tke remedy for the sfiort-comings of concepts wotiid be more
concepts. But the indictment which pragmatism finds
against intellectualism is much more serious than this. It
is charged that concepts are such that they can never serve
as means of knowing the native and salient characters of
reality. To grasp these we must abandon concepts alto-
gether, and turn to the illumination or inspiration of
immediacy. To this charge, that there is an irremetUable
cognitive flaw in concepts, we must now turn.

§ S- Of eminent contemporary writers belonging to the
pragmatist school in the broad sense, Bergson is the most
radical 'anti-intellectualist.'' In his opinion
c^^To"* intellect not only divides and separates reality,
Giaip Rraiity. thus replacing its concrete fulness with
towikttii^^ abstracted and partial aspects; but is doomed
to failure, however far its activities may be
carried. Intellect cannot, in short, correct itself, and
atone for its own short-comings.

The cause of this irretrievable failure lies in the fact that

* Scekbove, pp. 136-iiS.

* Although his view is dpounded with evident approval by James, ia
A Plufalistk Univent, Lect. VI.


a30 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

intellect is essentially the instniment of action. For the
purpose of action it is necessary to specify and &xate some
present aspect of the environment. The object of action
must be distinguished and held by the attention. Through
the repetition of such attitudes the intellect elaborates a
scheme or diagram in which the several terms of analysis
are correlated. They remain distinct and external, but
are woven by relations into a system, which is like its com-
ponent terms in being stereotyped and fixed. The pattern
of all such systems is geometry, the most perfect expression
of the analytical method. The sign of the intellect's handi-
work is spacial " juxtaposition " and arrangement, the static
coordination of discriminated elements. In vain, then,
does the intellect seek to correct itself — for the further it
proceeds the more thoroughly does it reduce reality to this
form.

And it is this form itself, and not any specific or incom-
plete phase of it, that is foreign to the native, aboriginal
quality of reality. The latter abides, not in fixity, but in
fluidity; not in sharpness of outline, but in adumbration;
not in external Juxtaposition, but in "interpenetration;"
not in discreteness, but in continuity; not in space, but in
time. The helplessness of the intellect to escape its own
inveterate habits appears most strikingly in its treatment of
time. For it spadalizes even this, conceiving it as a linear
series of instants, whereas real time is an "enduring" {durie
rielle), a continuous and cumulative history, a "growing
old." And this real time we cannot think; we must "live
it, because life transcends intellect." '

A radical anti-intellectualisra may serve as the ground
of an attack upon science, as is illustrated by the views of
the French pragraatist LeRoy, and the Italian pragmatist
Papini. " Science consists only of conventions, and to this
circumstance solely does it owe its apparent certitude; the
facts of science and, a fortiori, its laws are the artificial work

> Bergson's Creatitt Evolution, trans, by A. Mitchell, pp. liv, 46. C(.
Ch. I, fiaisim.


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM


23"


of the scientist; science therefore can teach us nothing of
the truth; it can serve only as a rule of action."* But
there is a sequel. For with LeRoy and Papini, as with
Bergson, the failure of science is compensated by an imme-
diate sense of the power of life. Science manufactures
concepts, which misrepresent reaJity; but the life which
science serves, the creative agency which forges and uses
the instruments, is known to itself by instinct and faith.

§ 6. This wholesale indictment of the intellectual method
rests, I am convinced, on a misunderstanding of that
The Fuiute of method. It will be worth our while to seek
ADii-inieUtc- more hght on the matter. In the first place,
Uoderetand ^ ^^^ '^^^^ already suggested,* neither Berg-
ihe inteUictufli son Dor James is clear as to whether a concept
^J^'p^^' is to be distinguished by its function or by its
tionuidas Content. Is 'concept' the same as 'idea,' or

'"" is it a special class of ideas? This question is

of crudal importance. For if 'concept' b only another
name for 'idea,' and if an idea b essentially a function or
office, and not a content, then the failure of concepts must
mean simply the failure of the ideating or mediating opera-
tion of thought. But this operation, according to the
pragmatist account, is essentially a mode of access to imme-
diacy. The more it is perfected the more unerringly it
leads us into the presence of its object. To prove that
intellect is essentially instrumental, and then to attack it
in behalf of the very end for which it is useful, would be a
strange procedure. In fact the anti-intellectuaJist perpetu-
ally employs intellect in this sense, even with reference to
' reality.' He uses words and figures of speech which he
hopes will conduct the reader or hearer to the immediate
experience in which 'reality' is revealed. A pragmatist
can have no ground for maintaining that there is any
reality which cannot be represented, for he means by repre-

■ Quoted [rom aa expmition and criticism of L«Roy by PoiocarC, in
Th* Value cf ScUnce (trnos. by Haisted), p. tii. See ftlio ^Kive, pp. 93 S.
For Papini. d. below, p. 364.

' See above, p. 117.


333 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

sentation only a pointing or guiding, for which aoytbing
may serve. Whatever is experienced or felt can be repre-
sented in this sense, because it is necessary only that it
should have a locus or context to which one may be directed,
We may suppose, then, that what the anti-intellectualist
attacks is not the idea as such, but a certain class of ideas;
such, for example, as the logical and mathematical ideas,
'term,' 'line,' etc. But ' term' and 'line' are ideas only when
used in a certain way. In themselves they are simply char-
acteristic bits of experience. They may be immediately
known or presented, as well as used in discursive thought.
Even 'abstractions' may be apprehended by a direct act
of discrimination, and it is only in such direct apprehen-
aon that their specific character is revealed. It cannot be
claimed that such bits of experience as ' term ' and ' line '
are peculiarly ill-fitted to serve as ideas, because, as we
have seen, the content of an idea is irrelevant. Any bit of
experience will do, as is best iUustrated by the case of words.
In short the fault, if there be any, cannot lie in the intel-
lectual use of these elements; it must lie, not in their
employment as ideas, but in their inherent character. The
anti-intellectualist polemic must mean that reality is not
such as 'term' and 'line'; or that these characters are
somehow contradicted and overruled by the dominant
charapters of reality, such as continuity and life,

§ 7. But this contention rests, I thmk, on another mis-
understanding. There is an inveterate liabiUty to confuse
a sj'mbolized relation with a relation of symbols.
It is commonly supposed that when a complex
is represented by a formula, the elements of the
complex must have the same relation as that
which subsists between the parts of the formula;
whereas, as a matter of fact, Ihe formula as a
whole represents or describes a complex other than itself.
If I describe a as "to the right of b," does any difficulty
arise because in my formula a is to the left of 6? If I speak
of a as greater than &, am I to assume that because my


The Con-
[u^on betweei
tbe Rdaliona
of Symbols

Rdatmns
Symbolized


I


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALI5M


333


symbols are outside odc another that a and b must be out-
side one another? Such a supposition would imply a most
naive acceptance of that very " copy theory " of knowledge
which pragmatism has so severely condemned. And yet
such a supposition seems everywhere to underly the
anti-intellectualist's polemic. The intellect is described
as "substituting for the interpenetration of the real
terms the Juxtaposition of their symbols"; as though
analysis discovered terms, and then con/erred relations
of its own. Whereas, as James himself has been at
much pains to point out, terms and relations have the
same status. Terms are found in relation, and may be
thus described without any more artificiality, without
any more imposing of the forms of the mind on its sub-
ject matter, than is involved in the bare mention of a
single term.^

It is this misunderstanding which underhes the anti-
intellectualist's contention that continuity cannot be
described. "For," says James, "you cannot make con-
tinuous being out of discontinuities, and your concepts are
discontinuous. The stages into which you analyze a
change are slates, the change itself goes on between them.
It lies along their intervals, inhabits what your definition
fails to gather up, and thus eludes conceptual explanation
altogether."' I can understand this argument only pro-
vided the author assumes that the intellectualist tries to
explain continuity by adding concept to concept. The suc-
cessive and discontinuous acts of conceimng are then held to
be contrary to the continuity of the subject matter. But
the assumption is incorrect. A line, for example, may
be conceived as a class of positions possessing inter-
relations of direction and distance. This conception may
be represented by the formula, a. . . b. . . c. . . n. . . . One
may then add the statement that between any two posi-

• Bergson: Time and Fret Will, trans, by F. L. Pogsoo, ot Les donntet
immtdiatei dt la coHseienee, p. 134; Jmdm: A PlwaHitk Uimtrit, Ap-


234 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

tions such as a and c, there is a third position b, which is
after a and before c; thus expressly denying that there is
the same hiatus between the positions of the line as
between the symbols of the representation. The use of
the symbols, a, c, etc., indicates the manifoldness and
serial order of the positions, and the statement defines
their ' compactness.' ' With such a formula and such a
statement, one may mean continuity, despite the fact that
the symbols and words are discrete. The word ' blue '
may mean blue, although the word is not blue. Sinularly,
continuity may be an arrangement meant by a discon-
tinuous arrangement of words and symbols.

§ 8. In the third place, the anti-intellectualist polemic
is based upon the misconception that whenever concepts
TheSuppo- are used they must be used " privatively," in
wiioQ that James's sense. In other words, it is taken for
NccMsariiy granted that all intellectualism must be
Privative "vicious," or blind to its own abstractness, j

James, as we have seen, distinguishes this view as one
variety of intellectualism. To conceive a thing as a, and
then assume that it is only a, is to be "viciously"
intellectual. *

But it is evident that provided one recognizes that to
be a does not prevent a thing's being also b, c, etc., one may
be innocently or even beneficently intellectual. And this
possibility, Bergson, at any rate, appears to overlook.
Thus he constantly argues as though the use of the relational
logic involved tlie reduction of everything to it. The analyti-
cal method does imply that reality consists of terms and
relations. It does not, however, imply that this bare term-
and-relation character is all there is to it. Thus, blue is
difi'erent from red, which is a case of /* (R) P. But in the
concrete case, the bare logical term-character I is united
first with one quality and then with another; while R is
not merely relation in general but the specific relation of

■ Cf. RusscH^ Principles of Malliematics, p. igd.
' See above, pp. jiS-ajg.


I


\


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM 235

'difference,' And similarly the formulas of mathematics,
mechanics, physics, etc., while they are cases of logical
systems, have each their special superadded and distin-
guishing characters.

The abstract logical system is non-temporal; but a
temporal system may nevertheless be a case of a logical
system, provided the time character be introduced. Hence
it is absurd to say, as Bergson says, that "when the
mathematician calculates the future state of a system at
the end of a time /, there is nothing to prevent him from
supposing that the universe vanishes from this moment
till that, and suddenly reappears. It is the i-th moment
only that counts — and that will be a mere instant. What
will flow on in the interval, that is to say, real time, does
not count, and cannot enter into the calculation." ' I can
make nothing of this unless the author is regarding / merely
as a number. But as a matter of fact f is a number of
units of lime, hence an interval, or extended flow; and
multiplying this factor into the formula means that the
whole process has continued through that interval — it
means that the lapse of time is counted, is expressly
brought into the calculation.

Or, consider the same author's contention that to con-
ceive time is to spacialize it. Again he is misled by sup-
posing that because time is conceived as orderly, it is
therefore rtotking but order. Such an intellectualism
would indeed be vicious. Bare logical order is static;
and can never of itself exjiress time. But it is an utterly
different matter to regard time, like space and number, as
a case of order, having the specific lime quale over and above
the projjerties of order. 'Position,' 'interval,' 'before'
and 'after,' are then to be taken in the temporal sense;
and the terms of the series are to be taken, not as bare
logical terms, still less as spadal points, but as instants
possessing a unique time-character of their own.


236 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

§g. Radical anti-inteilectualism betrays, in short, a
misapprehension of the analytical method. This method
TbeMisuoder- '"^^"s Simply the discrimination and specifica-
RaDding Con- tiott of the detail of experience. It has led to
ccrmngAnalytij ^^^ discovcry of certain elements and rela-
tionships that possess a remarkably high degree of gener-
ality, such, e.g., as those of logic and mathematics. But
while these elements and relationships, because of their
generality, serve to make things commensurable on a
comprehensive scale, and are consequently of a peculiar
importance in knowledge, it does not follow that intellectu-
alism aims to abolish everything else. That which has
logical form is not puj-e form.

Furthermore, it is entirely incorrect to suppose that
analysis imposes the relational and orderly arrangement
regardless of the subject matter. The analytical method
is neither an accident nor a prejudice. It arises from the
fact that the subject matter with which science and philoso-
phy deal is complex. And this is virtually admitted in
every reference to it which anti-intellectualistic writers
make. ' Continuity,' ' duration,' ' activity ' and ' life'
present, even in the most immediate experience of them
which it is possible to obtain, an unmistakable multiplicity
of character. They may be divided, and their several char-
acters abstracted and named in turn; and simply because
they contain variety. The anti-intellectuahst is apparently
ready to admit their multiplicity, but balks at admitting
their "distinct multiplicity." ' But " distinctness" and
"indistinctness" are psychological and not ontological
differences. An "indistinct multiplicity" is simply a
multiplicity that is as yet but imperfectly known — a
distinct multiplicity qualified by an incompleteness of
discrimination.

Or is the anti-intellectualist troubled by the considera-
tion that the concepts of analysis are not exact enough;
that they over-simplify nature by trying to express it in
' Betgson: op. cil., p. xiv.


I


I


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM


337


terms of a few broad types? Thus it may be contended
that the boundaries of bodies are never absolutely straight
or circular, or that no orbit is perfectly elliptical. But
note what this criticism implies. It is based either on the
fact that there is a sensible discrepancy between the form
attributed to natural bodies in exact science, and the actual
form of these bodies; or on the presumption that such a
discrepancy would appear were our methods of study to
be improved. In either case, the discrepancy in question
is an analytical discrepancy, a difference of the same
definite character as the terms compared. If natural
boundaries or orbits are not of a relatively simple geometri-
cal character, then it must be because they are of a more
complex geometrical character; if not a straight, then a
broken line, if not circular or elliptical, then curved in some
other way. Such considerations as these, therefore, do
not tell in the least against the analytical method, or cast
doubt on the relational structure of reality.

§ 10. But anti-intellectualism is involved in a more
serious error. Not only does it misunderstand the view
which it attacks; but it puts forth a claim of its own
which is unfounded, the claim, namely, to the
immediate apprehension of a fused and inarticu-
late unity. It exploits the common error of
'pseudo-simplicity.' This error consists, as we
have seen, in projecting a verbal or subjective
simplicity into the object. The single word 'life,' e.g.,
is used to refer to the complex thing, life. It is then as-
sumed that behind the various characters of life, or infusing
them, there must be a corresponding unity. Or, at the
outset of inquiry, life is a problematic unity, a bare that,
a something to be known; and it is assumed that this
simple quale, this merging of elements, not-yet-but-to-
be-distinguished, must somehow be among the elements
themselves.

There are two ways of unifying experience. One way is
to carry analysis through, and discover the connections of


The Supposed
Supfriority q(
Ehc Immediacy
llut Prrcedea


238 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

the parts, and the articulate structure of the whole. The
other is to reverse the operation, to carry it back to its
vanishing point — to the bare word or the bare feeling of
attention. In the second case the experience is simplii&ed
— by the disappearance of the object! A perfect simplic-
ity, an ineffable unity, is attained at the point where the
object drops out altogether. But then knowledge has
ceased; and the experience, what there is of it, is of no
cognitive significance whatsoever.

Thus Bergson says: "The more we succeed in making our-
selves conscious of our progress in pure duration, the more
we feel the different parts of our being enter into each other,
and our whole personality concentrate itself in a point." '
What Bergson is here describing is, I am convinced, the
disappearance of cognition into an experience which is
not an experience of anything at all. Such a unification
may be obtained by falling asleep, or by auto-hypnosis.
It throws no light whatever on the nature of anything.
My experience of life has dissolved; but nothing follows
concerning the nature of life. I have simply closed my
eyes to it. I have blurred and blotted out my knowledge
of life; but life is not therefore blurred or extinct. In
the twilight all things are gray; in ignorance all things are
simple. Bergson speaks of the "feeling of duration,"
as "the actual coinciding of ourself with it"; and this,
he says, admits of degrees. But I am not more ^Jivewhen
I feel duration than I was before when I thought it. The
difference is that, whereas I formerly knew duration, or
something of it, now I know comparatively nothing; I
simply am duration. Duration itself is neither more nor
less complex than it was before; my knowledge only has
been simplified — to the point of disappearance. Bergson
speaks of an instinctive sympathy which, if it "could
extend its object and also reflect upon itself," "would give
us the key to vital operations."' But I believe that it
is safe to say that in proportion as there is reflection


> Creative Evolution, )


* Ibid., pp. 9


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM


239


upon instinct, its complexity is manifest; and that in
proportion as instinct is simple it has escaped experi-
ence altogether, and is, so far as cognition is concerned —
nothing.

§11. The pragmatist critique of intellectualism, like
the pragmatist theory of truth, tends to assume one or the
The subieciivb- o^^"" ^^ t"^ foHJis. Using Dewey's term
lie Veraon o( "immediatism " to express this pragmatist doc-
immcdutisin j^^^^g positively rather than negatively, we
may say that there is a subjectivistic or idealistic version,
and a realistic version, of immediatism.

The crucial issue upon which the idealistic and realistic
versions of immediatism divide is whether the activity of
the intellect is creative or selective. Does the intellect
generate concepts, or does it discover them? If we are to
judge from the Creative Evolution, Bergson regards the
intellect as an artificer. In other words, ideas, things, and
objects express, not the environment, but the agent. It
is by no means clear that this is consistent with the
Bergson view, that intellect is a means of adaptation.-
"If," as he himself says, "the intellectual form of the
living being has been gradually modelled on the reciprocal
actions and reactions of certain bodies and their material
environment, how should it not reveal to us something of
the very essence of which these bodies are made?" But
this query does not prevent Bergson from deriving "in-
tellectual form" from the intellect itself. The origin of it
is to be looked for "in the structure of our intellect, which
is formed to act on matter from without, and which suc-
ceeds by making, in the flux of the real, instantaneous
cuts, each of which becomes, in its fixity, endlessly decom-
posable. . . . Tkis complexity is Ike work of the understand-
ing." ' In other words, the relational texture, the grain of
things, is generated by intellect. Given matter, not-yet-
intellectualized, is pure fiux, in its own substance as
simple, smooth, and undivided as the life which acts on
I Ibid., InUoducUon, p. li, p. i$a (italics mine).


140 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

it — the life of which it is but the "inverse" movement.
According to this view, then, to conceive is to bring about
the existence of that which is called concept. Conceptual
discreteness is the derivative of the pure activity of intel-
lect, and is in no sense contained in that upon which
intellect operates.

§ 12. According to the realistic version of immediatism,
on the other hand, the intellect discovers, but does not
The Realistic "take, concepts. This is the view that is on
Verskmof the whole Consistently maintained by James.
"'^ Concepts are not merely functions of the intel-
lect, they constitute a "coordinate realm" of reality. "If
we take the world of geometrical relations, the thousandth
decimal of w sleeps there, tho' no one may even try to
compute it." "Philosophy must thus recognize many
realms of reahty which mutually interpenetrate. The
conceptual systems of mathematics, logic, festhetics, ethics,
are such realms, each strung upon some peculiar form of
relation, and each differing from perceptual reality in that
in no one of them is history or happening displayed. Per-
cepliml reality involves and contains all these ideal systems
and vastly more besides."' The crux of the matter lies
in this last statement. Reality is not olfter than the
conceptual order, but more than the conceptual order.
Intellect is an organ, not of fabrication, but of "dis-
cernment," a power men have "to single out the most
fugitive elements of what passes before them . , . aspect
within aspect, quality after quality, relation upon
relation."*

When thus construed, pragmatism's account of intellect
is consistent with its general naturalistic grounds. Con-
cepts work, because the environment is presented and
displayed in them. Since nature has logical and mathe-
matical properties, it is expedient to act as tho' it had;

' James: Meaning oj Trulh. pp. 49 (note), J03; Somr Problems of
PkUosephy, pp. io:-io3 (Italics mine). Cf. aim op. cit., p. 56; PlwaUilk
Unieerie, pp. 339-340 (note).

'James: Seme Problem! of Pkilosaphy, pp. $1, 52.


I


I


IMMEDIATISM VS. INTELLECTUALISM


241


while an intellect that was fatally predestined to falsify
the environment would be as misleading to action as it
would be inherently arbitrary and meaningless. And
this realistic version of concepts is entirely consistent with
a censure of their blind and uncritical use. Because
nature is logical and mathematical, it does not follow that
it is purely logical and mathematical. Such an intellec-
tuaiism is vicious indeed. The abstracting of some char-
acters of reality is beset by a characteristic danger, the
danger of ignoring the rest. This follows from the fact
that intellect is sekcHve; it in no way implies that intellect
is creative.

It is also true that in a sense the perceptual world is
richer than the conceptual, since the latter is abstracted
from it, leaving a residuum behind. James, it is true,
goes further than this, and contends, with Bergson, that
there are some properties of reality, the dynamic or
temporal properties, which cannot be conceived. But this
is due, I think, to a misunderstanding.' If to conceive
is not to alter, but only to distinguish, then conceiving is
not contrary to any property; to mention a property with
a view to showing its inconceivability is to conceive it.
And all properties stand on the same footing with reference
to the function of mediation. All may be known mediately;
but to know them mediately is only an indirect way of
knowing them immediately. This is as true of a mathe-
matical triangle, which is mediately known by means of
these words, as of color, life, or anything else.

When corrected in the light of these considerations, the
realistic anti-intellectualism of James escapes the verbalism
and abstractionism of "vicious intellectualism," without
that discrediting of analysis and lapse into uncritical intui-
tionism^that dissolution of order into chaos, which marks
an even more vicious immedialism.

' Ibid; pp. Si, 104; d. above, pp. 131 S.


CHAPTER XI

PLURALISM. INDETERMimSM AND RELIGIOUS
FAITH

§1. With pragmatism as a theory of knowledge — fl
definition of truth, and a critique of intellectualism, there^
Pluralism is '^ allied a more or less clearly defined meta-
tbe Sequel to physics. While this metaphysics is by no
The'^Ad^va "i^^ns Systematic, it is distinct and charac-
Characiec of teristic enough to afford an interpretation of
now edge jjfg^ ^jjj g^gjj ^ religion. Since pragmatism,
like idealism and realism, is primarily a theory of knowl-
edge, and a metaphysics only by implication, we shall do ]
well to follow this logical order in our exposition. 1

As furnishing the basis for a metaphysics and philosophy
of religion, pragmatism may best be summed up by the
term 'empiricism.' Pragmatism is empirical, in the first
place, in that it limits the term ' knowledge ' to the particu-
lar cases of human knowledge that may be brought under
observation. Its theory of knowledge is a description of
the manner in which you and I know, in this or that con-
crete situation. This is both the only knowledge which
can profitably be in question, since it is the only knowl-
edge that can be examined; and also the only knowledge
on which we can count. Every theory that may be held
is some particular body's particular theory. Even a
theory concerning infinite or divine knowledge is first of
all your theory or mine. And it follows that unless human
knowledge is to be credited, we must be sceptics. In other
words, if we exclude the sceptical alternative, and say that
we mean nothing more by knowledge than the most reliable
knowledge available, then we must identify knowledge
with human knowledge. Such is knowledge — for better-


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 243

or for worse. No hypothetical knowledge can be more
infallible or more certain than the processes of that human
mind which defines, proves, and believes it. It follows
that it is possible to know, as fully as it is possible to know
at all, a limited portion of reality. If one were to assert
that it is impossible fully to know anything without
knowing everything — then that assertion itself would be
discredited. It is itself a case of partial knowledge and is
entitled to no special privileges.

Now if it is possible to know parts of reality without
knowing all, it follows that such parts of reality are self-
sufficient. If knowledge can be additive, if things can be
known one at a time, then the things known must possess
their natures independently. Thus one can know the
laws of number, without knowing the date of Napoleon's
birth. The latter knowledge, when obtained, is simply to
be added to the former without modifying it. But this is
equivalent to saying that Napoleon's birth is not a part
of the nature of number. It is not asserted that one is
not related to the other, but only that it is not germane,
does not enter into its definition. And this, when general-
ized, is what is meant by pluralism. According to the
opposite, or monistic, view, the a//-relationship, the relation
of each to all, is definitive; according to pluralism it is
accidental. According to monism the universal inUrrela-
tionsltip determines the essential nature of every item of
being; according to pluraUsm certain limited relations
sufficiently determine the nature of each thing, the residual
relations being superfluous and unnecessary. According
to monism the totality is more unified than the parts;
according to pluraUsm the parts severally are more unified
than the totality.*

Pragmatism thus credits finite knowledge, and asserts
that knowledge grows from part to whole. Knowledge
is cumulative; omniscience would be a sum of knowledge,

' For pragmalist definitions of plurolisro. see James: Pragmatism,
Led. IV. On the "monistii: theory of tnitb," cf. below, p. 313,


244 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

a knowledge of a and b, in which the knowledge of a and b
severally is prior to the knowledge of them together. And
pragmatism infers that a universe in which this is possible
is a universe in which there is at least some irrelevance or
casual conjunction,

§ 2. But the empirical method contributes more direct
evidence for pluralism in that such casual conjunctions
KunJismidd ^'^ actually perceived. James, in particular,
EMcraii Reia- has emphasized the existence of 'external'
'™" rdalions}

Rationalism singles out and emphasizes the relations
of logical implication and organic unity. Such relations
are not to be denied; and it is in the interest of knowledge
to discover them wherever they can be found. Indeed,
the discovery of such relations may even be said to be the
principal motive of thought. But a thorough-going
empiricism will admit that such relations are never found
except in the company of other relations. "Everything
you can think of," says James, "however vast or inclu-
sive, has on the pluralistic view a genuinely 'external'
environment of some sort or amoimt. Things are 'with*
one another in many ways, but nothing includes every-
thing, or dominates over everything. The word 'and'
trails along after every sentence."* In other words, internal
definitive relationships are discriminated from casual
relationships. Science distinguishes in connection with
any subject of inquiry those things which are necessarily
or functionally related, and which must therefore enter
into the explanation, from those things which are there,
and in some sense related, but which are negligible. Every
definition, every determinate system, is obtained by exclu-
sion as well as inclusion. The skilful scientific mind is the
mind that readily fastens upon that which is germane,
to the exclusion of that which is irrelevant. And empiri-
cism is simply the willingness to accept facts, whether they

' Cf.. e.g., Plutdistk Universe, pp. 3ii-3j6, 356-361. C(. below, p. 371.

'Op. ciJ., p. 3".


■
I

I


r


PLURALISM, INDETEBMINISM AND FAITH 245

be conjunctive or disjunctive, it recognizes behind the
intellectual preference for unity, the more fundamental
cognitive demand that things should be taken as they are
— whether they satisfy that preference or disappoint it.

Empirically, then, the world is a mixture of oneness and
manyness, of relevance and irrelevance, of disjunction and
conjunction, of essence and accident, (^ empirical
grounds no other account is even plausible. And this has
virtually been recognized even by the opponents of pluraj-
ism. Monism has not been offered as a faithful description
of the world, Judging by appearances, but as a necessary
ideal that must be affirmed of the world despite appearances.
The issue then turns upon the considerations aheady set
forth in the discussion of absolutism.' Is the absolute
world-system a definite ideal; and can it be shown to be
Implied in the act of knowledge, so that to doubt it is to
a^rm it? Pragmatism concludes, as we have been led to
conclude above, that such a system is not only a dogma,
but a vague dogma. As a sentiment it is intelligible;
but as a hypothesis it is not only unverified but unverifi-
able. Owing to the extreme abstractness of the terms in
which it is formulated, in so far as it is formulated at all,
no crucial experiment can be devised which would decisively
determine its truth or its falsity. Unformulated, it is a
feeling for unity, a love of order, a "cosmic emotion."
Thus ■ the absolute ' is either a superficial commonplace,
to the effect that the world is one and interrelated, and
is what it is; or a symbol of mystical reverence.

To find the native and distinguishing characters of this
world, one must turn away from logical and mystical
unities, and observe it in its characteristic physiognomy.
It is a world that cannot be summed up in superlatives,
without oversimplification or confusion. It has unity, but
also variety; it is orderly, but only in a measure; it is
good, but also in parts bad and indifferent. For better
or for worse, it is just this homely, familiar old world,

' See above, Ch. VIII.


246 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

with some rhyme and some reason in it, but with much
that is arbitrary and inconsequential. Such opportunity
and hopefulness as it afiords are limited; but they cannot
be enjoyed more by exaggerating them. The rational life
and true religion begin, as the natural life begins, not by
taking the world to be the best, but by taking it as it is,
and making the best of it.

§ 3. It is evident that pluralism is readily convertible
into a philosophy of religion. As a Weltanschauung, it
piuraUamastt cvokcs a characteristic practical response and
Philosophy of inspires a characteristic faith.
Religion jj^ jj^g gj^(. pi^^g^ ;j applies directly to the

problem of e\'il. On monistic groimds, the world must be
approved or condemned as a unit. It is what it is, through
and through; every characteristic that it manifests is impli-
cated in every other characteristic. The meaning of the
part must be sought in the whole. Such a theory overrules
that empirical estimate of nature and of affairs which is
the guide to action. The difference between goodness, evil,
and indifference, which practice sharpens, is, in this type
of theory, dulled. In a monistic philosophy real goodness
is such as implies evil; real evil such as implies good; and
real value and real indifference are reciprocally implicative.
In other words, the real nature of each is revealed in its
connection with the others. In practice, on the other
hand, the real nature of each is intrinsic, the relation to
the rest being accidental, drcumstanlial, or derogatory.

And this practical version of the matter constitutes the
pluralistic philosophy of evil. It is not denied that good,
evil, and indifference are related. It is not denied that
value may come of indifference, or even good of evil. But
it is denied such relations define and explain the terms.
It is denied that value must be so defined as to embrace
indifference, or good so defined as to provide for evil.
Hence goodness is not to be charged mth or judged by the
evil that attends it. The pure nature of goodness is appre-
hended in proportion as evil is left out of the account.


I


r


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 347

An account of goodness with evil left out would not, it is
true, be adequate to life; but it would be adequate to good-
ness. The mixture of the two — temptation and struggle,
calamity and discipline, sin and repentance, is true to the
historical diama of existence; but the nature of goodness
itself is only confused by (he admixture of its opposite.

The supposition that goodness must be defined in terms
of life, and life in terms of the universal reality, has no sup-
port, save the monistic dogma. It rests on the more funda-
mental presupposition that the whole context must enter
into the definition of each thing. Because goodness is
opposed to evil and indifference, because the achievement
of goodness is in certain cases conditioned by evil and
indifference — it is inferred that goodness must consist
in these. It may even be urged that because the pragma-
tist glorifies the humanizaUon of nature and the victorious
battle with evil, he is therefore a good monist; having
reduced nature to humanity and good to evil.' Nothing
could more unmistakably betray the monistic bias. To
a mind habituated to monism, it is inconceivable that a
thing should have any relation whatsoever to the subject
of discourse, or should even be mentionable in the same
connection, without entering into its definition and expla-
nation. But does it follow that because nature can be
humanized, this sequel is the secret of its existence; or
that because a virtue can be made of necessity, that the
necessity arose in order to be made a virtue of? It would
be as reasonable to account for gold in terms of dollars;
or to argue that because a man may be lifted from the mire,
therefore mire is essentially that from which a man may be
lifted, and hence a condition of the higher life.

Now it is this difference, which is so easily confused,
and which may seem so slight as to be negligible, that
nevertheless eventually brings pragmatism and monistic

' It ii in this sense that "Religious IdealJsni regards Pragmatisia u
an Idealism in the Making." C(. W. R. Boyce Gibson, God Witi Ui,
p. 1S9; and Ch. X, patiim.


248 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

idealism into flat opposition. For pragmatism, the good
is, as a matter of fact, related to evil, but is not necessarily
so; it does not derive its meaning from the relation. For
a monistic idealism, the circumstance of evil is essenltal to
good. And no two religions could be more discordant, more
incommensurable, than those which spring from these
two theories. From the one springs the practical optimism,
or meliorism, which stakes its hope on the chance that
the worid may be made better; from the other springs the
contemplative or quietistic optimism, which consists in
the faith that the world is best. For the former the reali-
zation of goodness is a future contingency; for the latter
it is the eternal and necessary reality. For pragmatism
the perfecting of the world is by elimination, there must
be "real losses and real losers"; for a monistic idealism
the perfection of the world lies in its all-preserving totality.
For pragmatism, "evil is that which resists the evolution
of the world, and hghts a losing battle against the tendencies
of things"; for a monistic idealism evil is a flavor to the
sauce, or a r6!e in the drama, which, though it is subordi-
nate, cannot be dispensed with.'

The contrast appears finally and most vividly in the
corresponding conceptions of God. For pragmatism, God
is a part and not the whole. He is beneficent, without its
being necessary to judge his beneficence by all the works
of nature and life. "As God is not all things. He can be
an 'eternal (i.e. unceasing) tendency making for righteous-
ness,' and need not be, as on all other theories He must be,
the responsible Author of evil."' In short, pragmatism
justifies the ordinary procedure of the religious conscious-
ness. For the religious consciousness is ordinarily selective
and discriminating, construing God's nature in terms of
goodness in the specific and exclusive sense, and proving

' James: Pragmalism. p. 296; c£. Lett. VIII, passim; and "The DilemmK
of DeterminEsm," and "Is Life Worth Living?" in The WHl to Btliaa;
F. C. S, Schiller: Riddles of Ike Sphinx. iMrd edition, p, 353. For Ihe
monistic theory, cf. also above, p. i8:.


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 249

him by an appeal to some, but not all, o( the evidences of
reality. In a monistic religion, on the other hand, God is
"All," and his goodness must be interpreted accordingly.'
He is such as mechanical nature, and evil, as well as the
good contrasted with these, prove him to be. He is the
universal life, the promiscuous totality of things, exalted
into an object of worship; but not, as Plato would have
said, without disloyalty to the moral will. For it is not
possible in tlie long run to reverence one thing and serve
another. And a worship which eulogizes the neutral mid-
world of 'the spiritual life,' of 'struggle,' and of 'victory,'
and erects it into the supreme object of admiration must,
in the long run, convert moral effort into a conscious
pose, and its Everlasting No into stage heroics,

§ 4. Pragmatism implies pluralism, and this, as we have
seen, affords a characteristic version of evil and of God.
iDdetOTunism S"* pragmatists are not only pluralists; they
«ihe Sequel axc also indcterminists, and find in their in-
" ^ determinism additional ground for a philosophy

of religion. As will shortly appear, indeterminism is a
more ambiguous and doubtful doctrine than pluralism,
and may be approached in several ways.

In the first place, indeterminism may be regarded simply
as an aspect of pluralism. The latter doctrine emphasizes
both manyness and irrelevance; indeterminism singles cut
and emphasizes irrelevance. It means that there are
relations which are not determinative; that there are
juxtapositions of things and events which are actual but
not necessary. In a narrower sense, indeterminism means
that human individuals, and human actions, are dis-
junctively as well as conjunctively related to their envi-
ronment or context. There is something in a man or in
bis deed that is not deducible from anything beyond. It
is next to other things, along with them, related to them in
many ways, but without following from them.

This is, I think, the meaning of James's "genuine possi-

' C(., eg., Boyce Gibsoo, afi. cU., Ch. X.


250


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


bilities." * It is primarily a denial of the counter-thesis
that the world is pervaded by implication. There are
arbitrary transitions as well as necessary transitions. In
other words, there are situations of the type a + b + c,
where c is not implied in a + b, and is not deducible there-
from. In such a situation, it is true to say that in respect
oi a + b, something other than c, such as d, is possible;
or, that either c or d is consistent with a + b. After the
fact, a + 6 + d is as reasonable as a + 6 -f c. It cannot
be said that either c or d is exclusively determined by
a + b; although it may be said that some more general
character, m, of which c and d are the only instances, is
thus determined, so that the possibilities are confined to
c and d. In this sense, then, multiple possibility follows
from pluraUsm.

§ 5. Indeterminism in a still narrower sense, follows
indMenninism f''°™ ^'^^ application of thls general principle
■nd the Reality to time. In discussing the relation of prag-
"* ^""^ matist metaphysics to the concept of time, it

is important to make a distinction. For there are really
two issues involved.

In the first place, pragmatism, like naturalism, Uke all
empirical philosophies, maintains that time is a funda-
mental property of existence. Thus pragmatism is op-
posed to all theories which claim to deduce time from
something else; for example, from the nescience and rela-
tivity of the human mind. According to such a view, the
temporal aspect of things is due to the modification of
finite subjectivity. To reach truth means to escape this
limitation and see things sub specie elcrnitatis. Thus accord-
ing to the view held by Parmenldes, Plato, Spinoza, and
others, time is unreal; in the sense that it is one of the
appearance-characters which reflective knowledge elimi-
nates. Or time may be deduced from some higher


' C(. "The Dilemma of Delerminbm," in The Wilt to Bditvi, pp. iJS,
156; Schiller: Studies in Humanism, p. 404; Eergsoo; Timt and Fre*
WiU, pp. 189-190.


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 25 1

or ethical category, as is attempted by some modem
idealists. In this case, time is real, but only so far as it is
a manifestation of some higher principle. Sequence is
incidental to the dialectic of thought, or to moral progress.

Pragmatism, on the other hand, insists upon the original
and irreducible character of time, as well as upon its pecul-
iarly important part in existence. Time is more, and not
less, original than dialectic and progress, since the latter
contain the specific characters of sequence and change,
and add further characters to them. And existence is the
manifold that is in time, whether it exhibits these other
characters or not. So that instead of saying that existence
is a dialectical or ethical unity, embracing temporality, one
must say that existence is the series of temporal events,
with whatever of dialectical or ethical unity may happen
also to be added. This, then, is the first issue; and tte
position of pragmatism is entirely unambiguous.

But it is a second issue, and not this issue, that rdses
the question of indeterminisra. Uaw far is the series
of temporal events determined? The considerations just
adduced afford no answer to this question. It is entirely
possible to maintain the existential priority of time, and be
a vigorous determinist as well. It is precisely such a blend
of doctrines that is characteristic of naturalism. Pragma-
tism asserts "a really evolving, and therefore as yet
incomplete, reality." • But so does naturaHsm. And the
latter theory finds no difficulty in uniting with this asser-
tion the further assertion that the evolution in question
is strictly determined. The future cosmos is not yet; but
will unfold, coincidently with the passage of time, accord-
ing to the laws of physics.

Bergson makes much of the contention that "deep-
seated psychic states occur once in consciousness and will
never occur again."* The real temporal flux, revealed in
the inner life, is a grovnng old, in which no phase can recur,

' Schiller: op. cit.. p. 391.

' Bergson: op. cil,, p. iig. CI, tkbo Crtalive Esetulion, pp. 1-7.


252 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

because each phase is a r6sum6 of the past. But this
description would apply perfectly to a rigidly mechanical
nature. It is entirely consistent with the mechanical
theory that time is the 'independent variable.' The for-
mulas of mechanics contain the time-variable, which means
(as Bergson does not appear to recognize) lapse of lime,
together with other variables which are functions of the
time-variable. As the value of the time-variable increases,
the rest of the system alters according to the law which
defines its relation to the time-variable. In other words,
it ages, according to law. Such a process would be exem-
plified in the simplest conceivable mechanical system, that
of a single body moving in infinite space at a uniform veloc-
ity. Mechanics does not assume the possibility of periodicity
or recurrence, but only the possibility of the perast-
ence of some abstract relationship among variables.' .

Thus the pragmatist's assertion of the temporality of ]
existence is entirely irrelevant to the question of its de-
termination. A temporal existence may be a bare sequence
of disjointed events, or a lawless flux of interpenetrating
phases; or it may be an order which obeys a law. Which
of these it is, must be judged by other evidence than its
mere temporality. We are thus brought back, again to
the general pluralistic doctrine defined above. Since there
are disjunctions in the world, these may occur between
successive events as well as elsewhere. In other words, we
may construe a + b as prior in rime to the c or d which are
equally consistent with it. We may then say that at the
moment when o H- 6 is completed by the addition of b to a,
two futures are possible; in the sense that while m is im-
plied, the implication does not determine whether it shall
be m" or m"*. So far as a -|- b, or any other attendant
conditions arc concerned, either will serve.

In this sense it is intelligible, and on pluralistic grounds

correct, to say that there is a real contingency and novelty

in the world. Events occur which not only have not

' See above, pp. 56 ff.


PLURAUSM, INDETEBMINISM AND FAITH 253

occurred before, but which are not implied in what has
occurred before. "Those parts of the universe abeady
laid down " do not "absolutely appoint and decree what
the other parts shall be." ' Events occur which cannot be
inferred from the past. To predict them, it would be
necessary- to foresee them. The possibility of such foresight
does not contradict their contingency, any more than the
bare perception of simultaneous events contradicts their
disjimction. The essential point is that they are not
implied in something else, but can be known only after
the fact. An omniscient mind could know them only by
knowing each of them, or embracing them in an empirical


It is to be observed that thus far indetermination adds
nothing to pluralism. It justifies a belief in multiple pos-
sibility, and rids the mind of the necessity of judging
everything in the world by everj'thing else in the world.
It justi6cs a worship of some things, and an uncompromisii^
enmity to other things; and does not force man to take
the world as all one, tor better or for worse. It justifies a
belief that the future holds in store things which cannot be
inferred from what has already occurred; and hence the
hope that the world may be better than its promise. It
justifies an adventurous and hardy optimism, and puts
the religion of renunciation and acquiescence among the
obsolete superstitions. But despite all this it is none the
less true that indeterminism in this general pluralistic
sense contributes nothing toward proving human freedom.
Such indeterminism attaches to man no more than to any
other part of reality. It would be perfectly consistent
with it that man should be less free than the planets. It
proves that existence makes strange bed-fellows, and that
the course of events is surprising. But it does not endow
man, the moral agent, with any unique share in this (Us-
junction and novelty; nor with any peculiar power to
direct it or profit by it. There is an element of chance in

> James; op. (is., p. ijo.


2$i PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

life, but it is as likely to be the mishap of which man b
the victim, as the opportunity of which he is the master.

§ 6. But there are other pragmatist arguments for
indeterminism which will perhaps yield a more positive
freedom. Thus there is an indeterminism
aa the Sequd to that follows ffom aoti-intellectualism. It con-
Anti-inieiiee- sisj-g ;„ ^jje asscrtion that since determinism is
tualism. Will , . 1- . - ,1 .... ,

aaiiscifthc a oevice of the mtellect, it is relative to the
AuthoiofDe- interest which moves the intellect, and carmot
therefore be imposed on life itself. Instead of
being determined, the will is itself the author of the prin-
ciple of determination; this principle is not its master, but
its creature. Thus, according to Schiller, "determinism
is an indispensable Postulate of Science, " As such
it "has primarily a morai significance; it is an encour-
agement and not a revelation." And "it is quite easy to
accept it as a methodological assumption without claiming
for it any ontological validity." Whether we accept this
postulate or "the ethical Postulate of Freedom" is, in
the end, "a matter of free choice," based on their relative
serviceability.'

Such considerations as these support the indeterministic
theory, only provided two further assumptions are made.
In the iirst place, it must be assumed that the agency
which formulates and employs a certain category cannot
itself be subject to that category. This assumption plays, as
we have seen, a notable part in idealistic philosophies,' —
in all philosophies which seek to distinguish and separate
the subject of knowledge from the manifold of objects.
It is argued that known object implies knowing subject,
and that to make this subject itself object is to displace
and falsify it. The real subject is that which in every
case of knowledge functions as subject. The application
to the question of determinism is obvious. It is argued
that things are determined by virtue of being objectified,

' studies in Humanism, pp. 39S. 3<)6. 357.394.406-
• See above, p. 137; and below, pp. jqs-^gd.


I


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 2f$

and that the objectifying activity itself thus escapes
deteimination.

But there is no reason why the subject of knowledge
should not in turn be object of knowledge; or why, indeed,
it should not be object of knowledge {in relation to another
subject) at the same time that it is subject of knowledge. It
is necessary only to suppose that the same term may stand
in two or more different relations without forfeiting its
identity. And unless we are to discredit knowledge alto-
gether we must suppose that the real nature of anything is
revealed when it is object of knowledge, and in proportion
as that knowledge is reflective and critical. It follows
that the subject which objectifies other things, and renders
tbcm determinate, may itself be treated likewise; and that
only when so treated is its real nature revealed. The
subject is then free from determination only in so far as
at any given time it is merely knowing and not known.
Freedom in this sense is only a mode of nescience,

§ 7. The other assumption which is needed to complete
the argument, is the assumption that laws are artihcial.
DeiCTTninism In this application it means that determinism
M ui inieiiH:- jg ^ fabrication of the intellect, and imposed

tunluCic FusG- , . - ■ • < ■ 1

cation oi Tnn. on a plastic material whose real mwardness

ponl Re^ty jt distorts.

The most notable criticism of determinism on these
grounds is that offered by Bergson. It constitutes one of
the major appUcations of his most fundamental and orig-
inal thesis, to the effect that the intellect spacializes time,
and so necessarily falsifies every temporal process by
expressing it as a "multiplicity of juxtaposition." Real
time (dur6e reelle) is "heterogeneous" and "continuous";
the real temporal process is a multiplicity of " interpenetra-
tion." Action, as a real temporal process, is spacialized
and falsified by mechanism, by finalism, and even by the
majority of indeterminists. By all such "intellcctuahsts,"
action is represented as a discrete process, with its com-
ponent elements and successive phases in external juxtapo-


aje PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

sition to one another. Time is represented as a linear
series; and the conditions of action, the moment of choice,
and the result of action, are all correlated with the terms
of this series. But such a diagram is both discrete and
static; whereas the real action flows, and endures. The
in tell actual is tic representation necessarily excludes freedom,
because it is the representation of a completed action,
and not of an action as it goes on. It is impossible in
this way to represent alternative possibilities; for the
representation either contains both possibilities, and so is
contrary to fact, or it contains one of them to the exclu-
sion of the other, which contradicts the supposition of
altemalives. And the finalistic scheme is as rigid as the
mechanical scheme. For whether we conceive the later
terms of the series as the sequel to the earlier, or the earlier
as the foreshadowing of the later, in either case all the
terms are there, in place, simultaneously and exclusively.'

Bergson's objection to the intellectualist's version of
time rests, as we have seen, upon a mistaken conception
of the intellectual or analytical method.' The spatial
representation of time is intended to be a representation
of order; and to be a representation of time in so far, and
only in so far, as time is orderly. It is not intended to
suggest either that time is nothing but order, or that time
is spacial like the representation. The properties of order
are the same, whether in space, number, the color spec-
trum, the alphabet, or time. The points on a line furnish
a convenient case of order for purposes of demonstration;
and their use doubtless reflects the spacializing propenaty
of the imagination. But if Bergson were a better prag-
matist he would not assume, as he appears to do, that
representations are mere reproductions of their objects.
He would recognize the posability of meaning non-spadal
relations by spacial images. He would not insist, as he


I
I
I


' Bergson; Time artd Free Will, pp. i

• See above, pp. 131 B.


138, 119, 173 sq., and Ch. m, ,


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 257

does, that we know number by "picturing" it; and tliat
we cannot escape the characteristics of the graphic imagi-
nation. He would not fall into the loose common sense use
of the term 'conceive' as depict; and thus perpetually
confuse the arrangement of the instrumental image with
the arrangement which it enables us to know.'

Indeed, if it were not possible to employ spacial images
for the knowing of non-spadal things, Bergson himself
would be even more helpless than those whom he criticizes.
For his own favorite expressions are essentially spacial.
What images do the words "flux," "continuity," "inter-
penetration," "deep-seated," "interconnexion," "organi-
zation," and "fusion," suggest, if not spacial images? And
yet Bergson assumes that these images may so function as
to afford knowledge of that which is essentially non-spadal.
If a figure of speech can so function, is there any reason why
a geometrical figure, or algebraic formula, should not?
In short, Bergson arbitrarily imputes to his intellectualist
adversary a naive identification of object and symbol
which he disdaims in his own behalf.

It is not a question, then, of imputing to time the ar-
rangement characteristic of logical or mathematical symbol-
ism, but of imputing to time certain properties which may
be known by means of this symbolism. Is time an order,
or is it not? Is duration an extensive magnitude, or is it
not? Now the orderliness of time is implied in all that
Bergson has to say about it, e.g., in its continuity, and in
its duality of 'sense' or direction. While its multiplidty,
even though it be characterized as " qualitative" rather
than " juxtapositional," is orderly, in that if any phase, a,
be later or older than another phase, b, and 6 than a third
phase, c, then a is later or older than c. And as to time's
being an extensive magnitude, Bergson's argument would
appear to consist in pointing out that temporal processes
arc not merely extensive magnitudes; which no one, I think,
would be disposed to deny. Velodty, e.g., is an intensive
' Time and Fret Will, p. 78.


258 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

magnitude. But this does not in the least prevent its
being a ratio of the extensive magnitudes, d (distance)
and ( (lapse, or interval of time). It may even be ad-
mitted that every temporal process or change, every
function of time, has intensive magnitude; and this in no
way contradicts the conception of time itself as an exten-
sive magnitude. In other words^ an intensive magnitude 1
may be a function of extensive magnitudes, and may be '
computable or predictable in terms thereof.

That such is the case is proved by the predictions
which science is actually enabled to make. Bergson's
critique of astronomical prediction turns upon the asser-
tion that the symbol t in the equations of astronomy "does
not stand for a duration, but for a relation between two
durations, for a certain number of units of time, in short,
for a certain number of simultaneities." *■ In other words,
the ( of science is measured by some standard change,
such as the motion of the hands of a clock. So that if a
"mischievous genius" were to decree that all the move-
ments of the universe should go twice as fast, the predic-
tions of science would not be affected. Now, granting
this, it follows only that science cannot predict absolutely,
but only relatively. This, however, does not in the least
detract from the precision of the prediction, nor from its
reference to the future. Indeed the very statement of the
objection assumes that time is an extenave magnitude.
For if the movements of the universe may go "twice as
fast," then it must be possible that the same distances
should be covered in half the time. And if time can be
halved it must be an extensive magnitude.

Subsequently, Bergson has the temerity to speak of a
decree that lime itself "shall go ten times, a hundred
times, a thousand times as fast." Apparently the rate
of real time is to be measured by the immediate feeling
of the "enduring" or ageing of experience. If so, can
Bergson explain, without making use of the conception of

' Op, cU., p. 193.


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 3J()

a pure extended time, what is meant by "a psychological
duration oj a Jew seconds? "^ Or how temporal magnitudes
are commensurable; how, e.g., two lives with different
esperiences may be regarded as synchronous? Or how one
day may be regarded as fuller and richer than another?
The fact is that no quantitative judgments whatsoever
can be made concerning temporal processes that do not
employ the notion of a simple extended (not spadal)
temporal magnitude. And the predictions of science are
made in terms of this component of change. The I of the
equations of mechanics means this component.

As we have seen, Bergson is constantly confusing the
symbol with what it means. To one who falls into this
confusion, it may appear that an equation cannot refer to
time because the structure of the equation itself is not
temporal; because the symbols are simultaneously present
in the equation. But if / is one of the terms of the equa-
tion, and I means time, then the equation means a temporal
process. Furthermore, an equation may define a relation,
such as, = , < , or > , between temporal quantities, in
which case the full meaning of the equation is still
temporal. For changes, events, or even pure intervals,
may stand in non-temporal relations, such as those above,
without its in the least vitiating their temporality. The
supposition that an equation defining a relation can mean
no more than the relation defined is disproved by every
formula of science. The formula, t' = a* + b* — 2 ab. cos.-y,
does not mean merely equality, but a relation of equality
among the sides and an angU of a triangle. The formula
means something about triangles, by virtue of the meaning
of its component variables, and despite the fact that the
relation defined is the non-spadal relation of numerical
equality. And similarly, a fonnida in dynamics, such as
V = gt, means something about a temporal process.

There remains one further instance of Bergson's failure
) represent with any correctness the position of his det(


26o PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

ministic opponent. It is a question of Paul's ability to
predict Peter's choice, provided he knows "all the condi-
tions under which Peter acts."' Bergson argues that in
order to know absolutely all of the conditions under which
Peter acts, and to know all about these conditions (includ-
ing what they lead to), Paul would have to be Peter, up
to and including the moment of his choice — so that
instead of predicting the choice, he would be lumselE
making it.

But determinism does not rest its case on the possibility
of knowing all the conditions of an event. No such knowl-
edge has ever been attained in any instance. Determinism
rests its case upon the fact that it has sometimes proved
possible to find jusl those particular conditions upon which
the event depended. Prediction always abstracts, not
only causes, but effects as well. It finds cases of specific,
discriminated terms, antecedent and subsequent, that are
connected by a law. Its prediction is based on the spe-
cific antecedent, and confined to the specific consequence.
It assumes that whenever such and such conditions occur,
whatever else may occur, such and such consequences
will ensue, whatever else may ensue, And Bergson has
offered no reason for supposing that such is not the case
with human action, as well as with other temporal sequence.
As a matter of fact, it is the case. Human action is
predictable within limits; inasmuch as laws, such as those
of physiology, pathology, and psychology', have been found
and verified. So that Bergson's objection amounts to no
more than the contention that human action is not in all
respects predictable, which holds equally of every other
concrete event.

Thus the indetenninism that is founded on the polemic
against intellectualism, like that founded on pluralism,
means only that there is disjunction, irrelevance, and nov-
elty in the world, as well as law. Such indetermJnation
is enjoyed by life and moral action no more than by


I
I

I

I


top.<


., pp. 185, and sq.


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 261

its natural environment. There is thus far no ground
(or imputing to man any prerogative of freedom, by
which his nature is distinguished and exalted. Indeter-
minism in such a positive and eulogistic sense depends
entirely, then, on the further doctrine that man possesses
a unique activity, a real causality of another order,
through which he may be the original and spontaneous
author of events.

§ 8. Pragmatism's positive version of freedom follows
from the postulate of "dynamism," as opposed to "mech-
p.,jjj^„ anism." "Dynamism starts from the idea of
CnMive voluntary activity, given by consciousness,"

*^*"^ and "has thus no difficulty in conceiving free

force." From this point of view, "the idea of spontaneity
is indisputably simpler than that of inertia, since the
second can be understood and defined only by means of
the first, while the first is self-sufficient." Similarly,
Schiller says that the will is " the original and more definite
archetype, of which causation is a derivative, vaguer and
fainter ectype." '

Bergson has stated the issue clearly. It is essential to
his view that the free creative activity of will should be
regarded as a simple and self-sufficient experience. There
is, it is true, a suggestion of another view. We are told
that the free act is the act of which the "self alone" is the
author; the act which expresses " the whole of the self,"
as distinguished from "reflex acts."* But for Bergson
the whole of the self is not the sum of its parts; so that
it is impossible to construe its action as a more complicated
or masave reflex. The "whole personality" is indivisible
and unanalyzable; it appears only when conscious states
dissolve into a higher unity, and its action can only be felt
and not traced.

And this self-intuiting activity becomes the first prind-

> Bergson: of. cU.. pp. 140-141; Schiller: Riddlci of Ikt Sphinx, third
edition, p. 443. Cf. Appendix I, passim. For Jajiin's more critical and
Hmitcd acceplance of the same view, see below, pp. 352-353, 37'-

• Tim* Mrf Free WiU, pp. 165, 166, 168.


262 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

pie of Bergson's metaphysics. It connects his theory of
knowledge with his theory of will. True knowledge is
"that faculty of seeing which is immanent in the faculty
of acting." And activity is the universal substance.
Strictly speaking, "there are no things, there are only
actions." Activity is no longer predicated merely of the
organism as distinguished from the environment. As the
former is a reality which makes itself, the latter is "a
creative action wkich unmakes itself." If life is a movement,
"materiality b the inverse movement." They are two
" un(Uvided" currents, two "simple" movements, that run
counter to one another. And "God thus defined has
nothing of the already made; He is imceasing hfe, action,
freedom. Creation, so conceived, is not a mystery; we
experience it in ourselves when we act freely."' Thus
the sequel to the postulate of 'dynamism' is a metaphys-
ical 'activism' or creationism; and in so far as pragmatism
assumes this form, it allies itself with the voluntaristic
and romanticist forms of idealism.

The sole support of this metaphysics and philosophy of
religion is the postulate of dynanusm. If it be true that
the essential nature of causality is revealed in the experi-
ence of activity, then it follows that physical causaUty is
only a projection or inversion of will. Criticism, then,
must challenge the postulate. And, first of all, it is to be
pointed out that the origin of (/« idea of causality is an
irrelevant consideration. The causation exercised by the
will may have been the first to attract attention, and it may
remain the most familiar instance; but it does not follow
that causation was first understood in the case of the will,
or that the will is the clearest instance of it. As the first
and most familiar instance, it may be the most primitive
and ill-comprehended. It may be the instance to which
crude and imcritjcal modes of thought are, through the
operation of habit, most firmly attached. This suggestion

> CraMiM £t«(»lt>»i, pp. 150, 147. 348, 349, 348. For the idealistic form
of activiim, sec above, pp. 150-154.


I


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 263

receives support from the fact that the estperience of activ-
ity is held to reveal the operation of a simple, free, and
spontaneous "force," just in proportion as it is not ana-
lyzed. "The self, infallible when it affirms its immediate
experiences, feels itself free and says so; but, as soon as it
tries to explain its freedom to itself, it no longer perceives
itself except by a kind of refraction through space." '

This is Bergson's way of acknowledging that the ex-
perience, whether for better or for worse, can be analyzed.
Now it has already been pointed out that there is a very
significant difference between the simplicity that precedes,
and that which follows, analysis. The first is the amplic-
ity of knowledge that has not yet fully explored and
grasped its object; the second is the simplicity of the
object. The knowledge of anything whatsoever is ^mple
at the instant of its initiation; it begins at zero, or spreads
from a point which is the bare denoting of its object. To
attribute this accidental and subjective simplicity to the
object is to fall into the error which I have called the error
of 'pseudo-simplicity.' * " Dynamism" depends upon
this error. It unites the multiplicity of activity as a proc-
ess, the multiplicity which it reveals upon even the most
cursory examination, with that phase of knowledge in
which analysis has not yet begun. The as-yet-simple
knowledge of a complex thing is converted into a thing
which possesses a complex simplicity or simple complexity.

This is not the same as to say that activity is indefin-
able. It is not shown to be simple, in the sense of having
been tested and found unanalyzable. It is not an ultimate
term. As a matter of fact activity has proved definable,
both psychologically and physically. Pragmatists, like
James, have gone far toward defining subjective effort;*
and rational dynamics contains exact formulations of
'force' and 'energy' in the physical sense. No, — one

> Bergson: Time and Frtc WiU. p. 183.
' See above, pp. 1 38-131.

' C(. Jaraes^ "The Experience of Activity," in A Pturatittic Vnntn*,
Appeodii B. C(. below, pp. JS'-3S3-


264 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

must not attempt to define it; it is essentially a something-
Dot-yet-defined. In short, it is nescience presented in the
rdle of a revelation of reality. To lapse from knowledge
into nescience is always possible, — there is no law of God
or man forbidding it. But to offer nescience as evidence
of the nature of anything, to rank nescience above knowl-
edge for cognitive purposes, is to obtain immunity from
criticism only by forfeiting the right to a respectful hearing.

Pragmatism thus offers two versions of indeterminism.
On the one hand it is argued on pluralistic grounds that
necessity is not all-pervading. There are dislocations in
the universe, that make it possible to judge parts of it — such
as its good, its evil, and its indifference — independently.
It is possible to attack evil in behalf of good, without the
sense that one's client is guilty of complicity. Reality
is not a conspiracy; the game is not "fixed"; the world in
the all-inclusive sense is a contact of strange things, a
shock of independent forces; the adventure of life is an
honest warfare.

On the other hand, it is argued by pragmatists of the
radical wing that there is in man an indeterminate, incal-
culable, and creative power to do. But the proof of it
requires the abandonment of every tried method of knowl-
edge — both the logical method of "intellectualists," and
the observational, experimental method which pragmatists
themselves have so successfully practised on every occasion
but this. Radicalism of this type is not only unreasonable
and unverifiable, but it destroys the originality and dis-
tinction of pragmatism and allies it with forces of romanti-
cism, mysticism, and irrationalism.'

§ 9. In a resume of pragmatism Papini alludes to its
attitude toward religious questions as ' fideism."^ By this
is meant its application of the pragmatic theory of truth

' There U a po^tive sequel to plucalistic mdetemiinism, which does
not involve these encesses. Cf. below, pp. 340-341.

' Ct. G. Papini: // Crepuscoh dei Fitosofi; James: "G. Pagiinj and the
Pragmatist Movement in Italy." b Jeur. of Fkii, Ptyeh., and Scieiaific
Mtikods, Vol. Ill, 1906.


I

I
I


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 265

to the case of religious belief. Here again we shall find
it important to distinguish between the more moderate

pragmatism, represented by James, and the
•j-,,^.^^^'^ more radical pragmatism, represented in this
Tniih Applied case by Papini, LeRoy, and Schiller.
Faith**"" James's view is expounded in his essay "The

Will to Believe," and in the more recent "Faith
and the Right to Believe." ' He contends that in the case of
religion we are warranted in adopting that belief which is
most in accord with our hopes, and which gives most firm-
ness and courage to the moral will, even though the beUef is
not decisively proved, James does not advance this view on
the general ground that we may believe what we wish, but
on the ground of the special circumstances peciUiar to
reUgious belief. To state the issue clearly we must recall
the pragmatic theory of truth.'

Ideas or beliefs are essentially instruments of meaning.
They are good instruments in so far as they afford access
to their objects, and the test of their goodness in this sense
is to try them; i.e., employ them as means of access. If
they present to the mind what they have led the mind to
expect, they are true. But ordinarily one does not use
ideas merely to test them; one assumes their reliability
and employs them in the affairs of life. And if they work
here, they receive additional verification; for if they were
not good substitutes for parts of the environment, they
would not fit in with the rest of the environment. But
ideas acquire still a third variety of value through their
immediate agreeableness, or their power to impart vigor
to the agent. In other words, they possess a sentimental
or emotional value. This sentimental value, imlike their
operative value, does not confirm their primary value as
representations or means of access to things, A highly
agreeable or inspiring idea, or a belief that disposes the

< Published B3 an Appendix to Sopit Problrmi of Philosophy. Foi
(urthet references lo James, see below, pp. J67-368.
' Cf. above, pp. J03 S.


266 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


mind I


' be of all ideas the


) peace and contentment, may
least Etted to prepare the mind for what is to befall it In
other words, such emotional value is irrelevant to truth-
value, in the strict sense. But there are cases in which
this emotional value may nevertheless be allowed to weigh
and to determine the acceptance of belief. And religion
is such a case.

For here the idea cannot be decisively tested by the other
means. It is impossible to verify or disprove its truth, ia
the strict sense. The evidence remains indecisive. If one
were governed only by 'theoretical' considerations, one
would be compelled to suspend judgment. But that is
impossible. Some plan of action with reference to the
world at large, whether it move one to hope or despair,
must be adopted. There is a "forced option." If one
scrupulously refrains from taking the hopeful view, one
inevitably falls into renunciation or despair. But these
are no better justified, theoretically, than hope; indeed,
they are less justified, for there is a balance of probability
in favor of religion. It would be folly, then, to allow
one's "logical scrupulosity" to drive one to renunciation
or despair. Furthermore, if one's religious belief refers to
the future, and if the behef moves one to action, the very
acceptance of it tends to bring about its truth. Hope-
fulness may lead to the fulfilment of hope.

In this view the distinction between the theoretical
test of truth, and the emotional Justification of belief, is
renewed and emphasized at every step. The emotional
value is not offered as evidence of truth, but as justifying
behef where truth is doubtful. But the second or radical
view, on the other hand, merges these two tests, the
narrower truth-test and the emotional test. Both tests
are "practical"; both are cases of "working"; both are
cases in which the idea is justified by the " satisfaction"
it yields. Truth, in the broad sense, is that which " har-
monizes" with life all aroimd. No pessimistic system can
be true in this sense because it leaves "a sense of final


I


PLURALISM, INDETERMINISM AND FAITH 367

discord in existence." The final test of religion, then, is
its promotion of " that perfect harmony of our whole life
which forms our final aspiration." '

Now such a view as this has very serious implications,
and justifies a certain prejudice against pragmatism as a
philosophy of caprice and wanton irrationalism. For if
the test of truth is this general harmony with interests, the
cognitive interest being only one among the rest, then
verification in the narrow sense, and emotional con-
gniity, must be regarded as commensurable. And it fol-
lows that in any given case the latter may outweigh the
former. It is even conceivable that a religious belief
should be so pleasing and inspiring as to be true, despite
its being decisively disproved by theoretical means. With
James the theoretical test is final and authoritative, in so
far as it can be applied, and no amount of subjective satis-
factoriness can overbalance it. The right to believe is lim-
ited to the cases in which evidence is lacking or indecisive.
But were the full implications of the radical view to be
accepted, there would be a right to believe despite evi-
dence. Therewould bean end of discussion, and only a clash
of desires; in which the desire for theoretical truth could be
legitimately shouted down by the clamor of the rest.

§ 10. Pragmatism, both of the more moderate type,
represented by James, and in the main by his American
Prunutum allies and followers, or the more radical type,
and iht Spirit represented by Bergson, Schiller, Papini, and
oJtheAge j>Roy, is peculiarly significant of the present
age. Negatively, it is significant of the reaction against
absolutism, long enthroned in academic and other ortho-
dox circles. It signifies that the spell which absolutism
has long wrought upon the minds of inquiring and youthful
thinkers has lost its power. More positively, pragmatism
marks the maturing and the express formulation of certain
ideas that have long inspired European thought.

I Schiller: Bumonism, pp. 50, Oi; d. pp. 39 sq., i8q. Cf. &Uo above,
pp. Mg, aij.


268 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

In the first place, pragmatism employs for philosophical
purposes what may be termed the 'biological' imagina-
tion, as distinguished from the logical, the physical, and the
introspectively psychological. Pragmatism views knowl-
edge and religion as modes of life; and life it conceives not
in any vague eulogistic sense, but in the naturalistic sense,
as an affair of forced adaptation to an indifferent and, at
best, reluctantly plastic environment. Knowledge and
religion arise from the exigencies of life, and the erigena'ps
of life are real, perilous, and doubtful.

In the second place, pragmatism emphasizes the crucial
importance of human efforts. It teaches that the spiritual
life is in the making at the point of contact between man
and the balance of nature — between the ideals of man, and
the resistances, cruelties, and seductions with which they
are forced to cope. The hope of better things lies in the
continued operation of the forces that are even now yield-
ing good things. Civilization, not the totality of nature, nor
any higher synthetic harmony, is the work of God. This
is the Baconian prophecy renewed. Through the knowl-
edge that is power, and guided by his desire and hope of
better things, man may conquer nature and subdue the
insurrection of evil.

Thirdly, since man's efficiency lies in his collective and
not in his individual action, pragmatism emphasizes society.
It is non-pantheistic and non-mystical. It attaches less sig-
nificance to the direct relation between man and a dynastic
God, and more to that relation to his fellows which may make
a man a servant of the collective life, and so lead him to a
new conception of God as leader of common cause.

And finally, pragmatism is melioristic It speaks for
the spirit of making better, and denounces alike the spirit
of renunciation and the spirit of despair. It is the phi-
losophy of impetuous youth, of protestantism, of democ-
racy, of secular progress — that blend of naivete, vigor,
and adventurous courage which proposes to possess the,
future, despite the present and the past.


I


PART V
REALISM


A REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND
I. Introddctorv

§ I. Realism has thus far appeared in these pages mainly
as a polemic. This polemic may conveniently be summa-
Rcnliim IS ■ Hzed in terms of the general errors of which it
Poiemii finds rival tendencies to be guilty,'

'Argument from the ego-centric predicament,' that is,
from the circumstantial presence of the knower in all cases
of things known, is peculiar to idealism. 'Definition by
initial predication,' the assumption of the priority of a
familiar or accidental relationship, is based on the more
fundamental error of ' exclusive particularity,' or the
supposition that an identical term can figure in only
one relationship. These two errors together appear in all
exclusive philosophies, such as dualism, and monisms of
matter or mind. The error of 'pseudo-simplicity,' which
amounts virtually to the abandonment of analysis, and the
notion of 'indefinite potentiality,' which is the sequel
to the last, are characteristic of 'substance' philoso-
phies, and especially of all fonns of 'activism,' whether
naturalistic, idealistic, or pragmatistic. The 'speculative
dogma,' the assumption of an all-general, all-sufBcient
first principle, is the primary motive in 'absolutism.'
Finally, the error of 'verbal suggestion,' or 'equivoca-
tion,' is the means through which the real fruitlessness of
the other errors may be concealed, and the philosophy

1 will be found above, especklty pp.


272 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

employing them given a meretricious plausibility aad-l
popular vogue.

As has already appeared, reab'sm is nevertheless in agree- '
ment with naturalism, idealism, and pragmatism respecting
many important doctrines. With naturalism, for example,
it maintains the unimpeachable truth of the accredited
results of science, and the independence of physical nature
on knowledge; with idealism it maintains the validity and
irreducibility of logical and moral science; and with prag-
matism, the practical and empirical character of the knowl-
edge process, and the presumptively pluralistic constitution
of the universe.

A new movement invariably arises as a protest against
tradition, and bases its hope of constructive achievement
on the correction of certain established habits of thought.
Realism is as yet in a phase in which this critical motive
dominates and affords the best promise of initial agree-
ment. But war has developed a class consciousness, and
the time is near at hand, if, indeed, it has not already
arrived, when one realist may recognize another. This
dawning spirit of fellowship, accompanied as it is by a
desire for a better understanding and a more effective J
cooperation,' justifies an attempt to summarize the central |
doctrines of a constructive realistic philosophy.

§ 2. The crucial problem for contemporary philosophy
is the problem of knowledge. It is upon this question that
its chief tendencies divide, and it is from their
lmpot(anteo( Several solutions of this problem that these
*^ P/"!''"" tendencies derive their characteristic interpre-
tations of hfe. In giving a brief outline of a
realistic philosophy, I shall therefore have to do mainly J
with the realistic theory of knowledge. I propose, how- J

' Cf. "The Program and First Plalform of Six Realists." by E. B. Holt,
W. T. Marvin, W. P. Montague. R. B. Perry. W. B. PiUin. and E. G.
SpauWing, Jour, of Fhi!., Psych., and Scienfific Mtlkods. VoVVll. 1910; and
the fonhcoming work entilled Tin Nrw Realism, by the sxme writers. Cf,
kbo the author's "Realism as a Polemic and Program of Reform," /our.
14 PkU.. Psych., ami Scieniific Mttkods, Vot VII, iqio.


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


273


ever, to adopt a somewhat novel order of procedure. The
problem of knowledge reduces, in the last analysis, to the
problem of the relation between a mind and that which is
related to a mind as its object. The constant feature of /
this relationship is mi?id. Instead, therefore, of dealing
first with knowledge, leaving mind to be defined only inci-
dentally or not at all, I propose first to discover what
manner of thing mind is, in order that we may profit by
such a discovery in our study of knowledge.'

Accounts of mind differ characteristically according as
they are based on the observation of mind in nature and
society, or on introspection. What is said of mind by his-
torians, sociologists, comparative psychologists, and, among
technical philosophers, most notably by Plato and Aris-
totle, is based mainly or wholly on general observation.
Mind lies in the open field of experience, having its own
typical form and mode of action, but, so far as knowledge
of it is concerned, as generally accessible, as free to all
comers, as the motions of stars or the civilization of cities.
On the other hand, what is said of mind by religious teach-
ers, by human psychologists of the modern school, whether
raUonal or empirical, and, among technical philosophers, by
such writers as St, Augustine, Descartes, and Berkeley, is
based on self-consciousness. The investigator generalizes
the nature of mind from an exclusive examination of his
own.

The results of these two modes of inquiry differ so strik-
ingly as to appear almost irrelevant, and it is commonly
argued that it cannot be mind that is directly apprehended
in both cases. It is assumed, furthermore, that one's own
mind, or the mind at home, must be preferred as more gen-
uine than the mind abroad. The conclusion follows that the

* Cf. my article "A Division of the Problem of GpisCcmology," Jeur.
of FkU.. Psyck., and Scienlific Mttkods. Vol. VI, 1909. The remainder
of the present chapter is reprinted in part from a series of urtjclcs entitled
"The Hiddenness of Mind." "The Mind's Familiarity with Itself," and
"The Mind Within and the Mind Without." Journal oj Phil., Psyck.. and
Seitnlifie MOktidi, Vol. VI, 1909. Nob. 1, 5. 7.
19


274 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

latter is not mind at all, but a mere exterior of mind, serving
only as a ground for inference. Thus we reach the widely
popular view that mind is encased in a non-mental and
impenetrable shell, within which it may cherish the secret
of its own essence without ever being disturbed by inquisi-
tive intruders. Now one might easily ask embarrassing
questions. It is curious that if its exterior is impenetrable
a mind should give such marked evidence of itself as to
permit the safest inferences as to its presence within. It is
curious, too, that such an inward mind should forever be
making sallies into the neighborhood without being caught
or followed back into its retreat. It must evidently be
supplied with means of egress that bar ingress, with orifices
of outlook that are closed to one who seeks to look in.
But rather than urge these difficulties, I shall attempt to
obviate them. This is possible only through a version of
the two minds, the mind within and the mind without,
that shall prove them to be in reality one. To unite them
it is necessary to replace them by Ihe whole mind, in which
they appear plainly as parts. The traditional shield looks
concave on one side and convex on the other. That this
should be so is entirely intelligible in view of the nature of
the entire shield and the several ways in which it may be
sensibly approached. The whole shield may be known ,
from either side when the initial bias is overcome. Sira- ■
ilarly, I propose to describe the mind within and the mind \
without as parts of mind, either of which may assume
prominence according to the cognitive starting-point; the
whole mind by implication lying in the general field of
experience where every initial one-sidedness may be
overcome.

In addition to this difference of method, there is anotha;
distinction that it will prove not only convenient to employ,
but important to emphasize — the distinction between thea
action and the content of consciousness. Every type of j
consciousness exhibits this duality. There is ' thi nk ing'r
and 'thought,' 'perceiving' and 'percept,' 'remembering**


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


275


and 'memory.' A similar duality between sensing and
sense-content accounts for the ambiguity of the term
'sensation.' In the discussion that follows I shall employ
first the method of introspection and then the method
of observation; examining by each method, first, the
contents of mind, and second, the action of mind.


II. The Method of Intbospection

§ 3. It is well known that much the most convenient
method of discovering what is in my mind is to consult me.
Mmial Conient ^ ^*" affirm the fact with superior ease and
uRcveaJedby certainty. At the same time, of course, I may
lnu<»P«tk.Q ^ absolutely ignorant of the meanmg of the
fact. The subject of a psychological experiment is best
qualified when he has no ideas concerning the nature of his
mind. He is called on to affirm or deny awareness of
a given object, to register the lime of his awareness, or
to report the object (not given) of which he is aware.
Introspection thus yields an identification and inventory of
mental contents.

Suppose my mind to be an object of study. In the first
place, it is necessary to collect my past experiences. For
this purpose the method of introspection is convenient and
fruitful. I have myself been keeping a record of my expe-
riences automatically, and by virtue of the capacity of
recollection I can recover them at will. This method is
reserved for the use of the mind that originally had the
experiences. This does not mean that the facts cannot be
known except in so far as remembered by me. It would
be absurd to say that the fact that I saw the King of
Saxony in the year 1903, is lost to knowledge except in so
far as I can retrospectively recover it. An observant
bystander would have known it at the time, or it may
be a matter of general knowledge. But the convenience
afforded by my memory is apparent. For in this way I
may recall and verify the experience in question, and thus


276 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

secure something approximately equivalent to its empirical
presence; and, furthermore, my memory preserves not only
this, but also other experiences likewise mine, and so
already selected and grouped with reference to a study of
my particular mind.

Or, suppose that the study of my mind requires knowl-
edge of its present content. I, who must in the nature of
the case be having the object in mind, can have before me
simultaneously the additional fact of its being in my mind.
Such an introspective experience is commonly available,
and while it is not a penetrating or definitive knowledge of
the fact, it is a discffiery of the fact.

It is doubtless true, then, that a record of the contents *
of a mind is most conveniently obtained by introspection.
This superior or even unique accessibility of certain facts
to certain observers is not unusual; indeed, it is a corollary
of the method of observation. Every natural object has
what may be called its cognitive orientation, defining
vantage points of observation. Data concerning the sur-
face of the earth are peculiarly accessible to man, and
data concerning the twentieth century to those alive at
the time. But this does not mean that man knows the
earth best, or that we of the present day know the twentieth
century best. Still less does it mean that our knowledge
is exclusive. It means only that we are so situated as to
enjoy certain inductive advantages. If a man were to add
up his property as he accumulated it, he would always be
in a position to report promptly on the past and present
amoimt thereof; but it would not be profitable to argue
that property is. therefore, such as to be known only, or
even best, by its owner. So any individual mind is most
handily acquainted with its own experiences, past and
present. The circumstances of its history and organization
are such that without any exertion, or even any sp>ecial
theorerical interest, it is familiar with the facts. But this
argues nothing unique or momentous. It may easily be
that while introspection is the best method of collecting


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


277


cases of mental content, it is the poorest method of defining
their nature.

§ 4. When I attempt to discover the generic character
of the contents revealed by introspection, I meet at once
The Neutral ^^^ ^ most significant fact. Distribuiively,
Ekmmt! of these Contents coincide with other manifolds,
"^^'^'^' such as nature, history, and the contents of
Unifying Other minds. In other words, in so far as I

^' "^ divide them into elements, the contents of my

mind exhibit no generic character. I find the quality
'blue,' but this I ascribe also to the book which Ues
before me on the table; I find 'hardness,' but this I
ascribe also to the physical adamant; or I find number,
which my neighbor finds also in his mind. In other
words, the elements of the introspective manifold are in
themselves neither peculiarly mental nor peculiarly mine;
they are neutral and inkrchungeable.

It is only with respect to their grouping and interrela- ,
tions that the elements of mental content exhibit any
peculiarity.' When my attention is directed to this, I
find that mental contents, as compared, for example, with
physical nature, possess a characteristic fragmentariness.
Not all of physical nature, nor of any given natural body,
is in my mind. And the particular abstract that is in
my mind does not exactly coincide with the particular
abstract that is in my neighbor's mind. Furthermore, the
fragments of nature that find their way into my mind
acquire thereby a peculiar interrelation and compose a
peculiar pattern.

The so-called " relational theory of consciousness " has
emphasized this fact that mental content is dbtinguished,
not by the stuff or elements of which it is composed, but by
the way in which these elements are composed; in other
words, by the composing relation. "In consdousness,"


' For a


- lui a mote ample treatment of this mnlter, d. my article, "CoH'

ccptions and Misconceptions of Consdousness," FtyeHohgieol Review, Vol.


278 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

says Professor Woodbridge, "we have simply an instance
of the existence of different things together, . , . conscious-
ness is only a form of connection of objects, a relation
between them." As James expresses it, "consciousness
connotes a kind of externa! relation, and does not denote a
special stuff or way of being." ' Neither of these authors,
however, offers a clear account of what this peculiar rela-
tion or form of connection is. James at times identifies it
with "the function of knowing." When one thing means
or represents another, and thus assumes the status of idea,
it becomes a conscious element. But, as Professor Wood-
bridge points out, this relation can scarcely be the generic
relation of consciousness, because the terms between which
it holds are already 'experienced.' And James himself
explicitly recognizes the possibility of immediately experi-
encing, without the mediation of ideas at all. ' Meaning '
would seem to be the relation characteristic of discursive
consciousness, rather than of consciousness in general. As
respects such a general type of relationship, the results are
on the whole negative, James shows that it is di^eretU
from the physical type of relationship ("mental fire is
what won't bum real sticks"). Professor Woodbridge
"lays greater stress on what consciousness does not appear
to be than on . . . that type of connection which it con-
stitutes between objects." *

Now what light do such results throw on the nature of
mind? It seems to me clear that they contribute only a
preliminary induction. They doubtless afford unmistak-
able evidence of a special and important grouping of ob-
jects; but they do not reveal the principle which defines the
group. It is admitted that contents of mind coincide >

' F. J. E. Woodbridge; "The Nature of Consciousness," Jour, of PW.,
Psych., and Scie«lijic Methods, Vol. II. iqos, pp. no, 1J5; James; "Doea
CoDsciousQess Enist." !□ the same Journal, Vol. I. 1904, p. 486. Of. also
B. H. Bode: "Some Recent Definitions of Consciousness," Psycheloptal
Rarieai, Vol. XV, igoS.

' Woodbridge: loc. cil.; James, ofi. cU., pp. 478, 489. For the pragma-
list view of discursive consciousness, d. above, pp.200 fF. For James's
!W, d. below, pp. 350-354-


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


279


distxibutively, or element for element, with parts of nature.
It is important, then, to show how parts of nature be-
come contents of mind. Natural objects do not enter
wholly into mind. Then what determines their fore-
shortening and abridgment? An individual mind gathers
into itself a characteristic assemblage of fragments of
nature. Under what conditions does this occur? When
things are in mind, one may mean or represent another.
What constitutes being in mind?

Until such questions are answered realism cannot boast of
having greatly improved upon idealism. " Consciousness,"
says Professor Natorp, "is inexplicable and hardly describ-
able, yet all conscious experiences have this in common,
that what we call their content has this peculiar reference to
a center for which ' self ' is the name, in virtue of which refer-
ence alone, the content is subjectively given, or appears."
It is as important for the realist to show what he means by
his "form of connection " as it is for the idealist to show
what be means by " this peculiar reference to a center." •

§ 5. We shall find that it is impossible to find the com-
mon bond of things mental, until we abandon the intro-
Mentsi Artioa. spcctlve method and view mind as it operates
The AUegEd jj, jjjg ^pg^ f^gj^ ^f natuTe djid history. But

Self- intuition ' , , . , , , ,

ofaPureS[Miii- before adopting this course we have two other
lui AcUviiy alternatives.

In the first and more popular of these alternative views,
it is admitted that it is impossible to find a unique quality
in mental contents, or even a unique interrelation among
them. It is maintained that things derive their mental
character from that which acts on them. My contents are
the passive objects of my active perceiving, thinking, or
willing. This action of mind is not itself content, but is
the common and unifying correlate of all content. So far
this \'iew is, I think, substantially correct. The defining
relation of mind is a kind of action, and it will not be found

; quoted by


■ Paul Natorp: EinUilung in die Ptychologie, pp. 14, ■
les, op, cii; p. 47g.


28o PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

amidst the content which it defines. But in the present
view it is further maintained that the action of mind is
nevertheless inlrospeclively accessible in a peculiar way.

I refer to the time-honored theory that the action of mind
is revealed to the agent himself in an immediate intuition.
"Such is the nature of Spirit, or that which acts," says
Berkeley, "that it cannot be of itself perceived . . . though
it must be owned at the same time that we have some
notion of soul, spirit, and the operations of the mind."
The inner activity of consciousness is that "life-form of
immediate reality" which "is lost if the psychological
abstractions make it a describable object." '

Berkeley's view met its classic refutation in Hume. He
showed that the most exhaustive introspective analysis re-
veals no such ' creative power,' but only a manifold and
nexus of contents. Taken "psychologically," says Mr.
Bradley, "the revelation is fraudulent. There is no original
experience of anything like activity." The supposition that
■there is such a revelation is possible only provided one
refuses to analyze a certain experience into its elements.
When the so-called experience of mental activity is so
analyzed, no activity-element is found. The refusal to
analyze what can be and has been analyzed cannot be
justified by any canon of rigorous theoretical procedure.*
In other words, the intuitionist theory of mental acti\-ity
is an instance of the fallacy of 'pseudo-simplicity.' "The
simplicity, however, of the representation of a subject is
not therefore a knowledge of the simplicity of the subject,"
says Kant. The intuitionist argument rests upon a con-
fusion between the lack of complexity in the knowledge
of the subject matter, and a lack of complexity in the
subject matter itself.'

' Berkeley: Prinriplis of Human KmniiUdi«, Frasei'a edition, Vol. I,
p. »72; Milnsterberg: The Elemai Values, p. 393.

* Hume: Enquiry cancrrmnt Human Understanding. Section Vll,
Part I, passim; Bradley: Appearance and Reality, p. it6.

' Kunl: Critique 0/ Pure Reason, trans, by Mai MUller, Second E
pp. aS^-igo. Cf. above, pp. 161-364.


I
■

I


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND 28 I

Philosophy is peculiarly liable to this fallacy in the case
of self-knowledge, because of the extraordinary familiarity
of 'self.' No one is so well acquainted with me as I am
with myself. Primarily this means that whereas I have
known myself repeatedly, and perhaps for considerable
intervals continuously, others have known me only inter-
mittently or not at all. To myself I am so much an old
story that I may easily weary of myself. I do weary of
myself, however, not because I understand myself so well,
but because I live with myself so much. I may be familiar
to the point of ennui with things I understand scarcely at
all. Thus I may be excessively familiar with a volume in
the family library without having ever looked between the
covers. Indeed, degrees of knowledge are as likely to be
inversely, as directly, proportional to degrees of famiharity.
Familiarity is arbitrary like all habit, and there is nothing
to prevent it from fixing and confirming a false or shallow
opinion. The man whom we meet daily on the street is a
familiar object. But we do not tend to know him better.
On the contrary, our opinion tends to be as unalterable as
it is accidental and one-sided. Everyone is familiar with
a typical facial expression of the President, but who will
claim that such familiarity conduces to knowledge of him?
Similarly my familiarity with myself may actually stand
in the way of my better knowledge. Because of it I may
be too easily satisfied that I know myself, and will almost
ineWtably believe that my mind as I commonly know it
is my mind in its essence. It cannot be said, then, that
the individual mind's extraordinary familiarity with itself
necessarily means that its knowledge of itself is exclusive
or even superior. On the contrary, it means that in re-
spect of knowledge of itself every mind is peculiarly
liable to oversimplification — to the assumption that knowl-
edge is complete when, as a matter of fact, it has not yet
begun.

These considerations also discredit, I think, the virtue
so frequently attributed to self-consdousness. I am in-


282 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

dined to believe that the prominence of this experience in
traditional accounts of mind is due to the fact that it is
characteristically habitual with philosophers. What but
bias could have led to the opinion that self-consciousness
is typical of mind? Surely nothing could be farther from
the truth. If self-consciousness means anything, it means
mind functioning in an elaborately compUcated way. Now
one may test a definition by applying it to complex and
derivative forms, but one leams to isolate and identify a
genus from a study of its simple forms. It would be
consistent with sound procedure, then, to expect to under-
stand mind-knowing-itself, only after one has an elementary
knowledge of the general nature of mind and the special
function of knowing. Surely in this respect, at least,
philosophy has traditionally lacked the sound instinct that
has guided science.

But waiving methodological considerations, what is to
be said of the cognitive value of my self-consciousness?
Suppose me to be as habitually self-conscious as the most
confirmed philosopher. Have I on that account an expert
knowledge of self? There could not, it seems to me, be a
clearer case of the mistaking of habit for insight. Upon
examination my self-consciousness resolves itself mainly
into familiar images, and familiar phrases containing my
name or the first personal pronoun, such as 'I am,' 'I
will,' 'I think,' 'I act.' But these phrases are perfectly
typical of the fixed and stereotyped character that may be
acquired by a confused experience, or, indeed, by an expe-
rience that is nothing more than the verbal formulation
of a problem. And the more fixed and stereotyped such
experiences, the more their confusion or emptiness is
neglected. This is the true explanation, I think, of
what is the normal state of mind in the matter of self-
knowledge. Your average man knows himself, "of course,"
and grasps eagerly at words and phrases imputing to
him an esoteric knowledge of soul; but he can render
no intelligible account of it. That he has never attempted;


I


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND 283

he is secure only when among those as easUy satisfied as
himself.

Who is so famihar with farming as the farmer? But
he despises the imiovations of the theorist, because rou-
tine has warped, limited, and at the same time intensi-
fied his opinions; with the consequence that while no one
is more intimately familiar with farming than he, no one,
perhaps, is more hopelessly blinded to its real principles.
Now it is my lot to be a self-conscious mind. I have
practised self-consciousness habitually, and it is certain that
no one is so familiar with myself as I. But I have little to
show for it all; the articulatory image of my name, the
visual image of my social presence, and a few poor phrases.
There is a complex state to which I can turn when I will,
but it is a page more thumbed than read. And I am lucky
if I have not long ago become glibly innocent of my igno-
rance and joined the ranks of those who deUver confusion
with the unction of profundity, and the name of the prob-
lem with the pride of mastery. No — so far I cannot sec
that the royal road to a knowledge of self-activity has led
beyond the slough of complacency. Either appeal is made
to what everyone "of course" knows, to the mere dogma
of familiarity, or stereotjped verbalisms and other con-
fused experiences are solemnly cherished as though the
warmth of the philosophical bosom could somehow invest
them with life.

§ 6. I am confident that the natme of mental action
is discoverable neither by an analysis of mental contents
nor by self-intuition; that it is necessary, in
uthcF«liQ« short, to abandon the method of self-knowl-
of Bodily e(jgg altogether, and substitute that of general

observation. But in the interests of thorough-
ness it is desirable to examine what at first glance appears to
afford a reasonable compromise, I refer to the view that
construes mental action as a peculiar introspective complex.
This view is commorUy held by those who reject the last.
The intuition of a "Simon-pure activity," or an "activity


284 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

an sick" is rejected on grounds of introspective analysis.
But analysis at the same time reveals a characteristic
activity process, composed of sensations of bodily exertion
and strain, or of feelings of "the tendency, the obstacle,
the will, the strain, the triumph, or the passive giving
up." James has suggested that this process can be re-
duced to still smaller proportions. "Whenever my intro-
spective glance succeeds in turning round quickly enough
to catch one of these manifestations of spontaneity in the
act, all it can ever feel distinctly is some bodily process,
for the most part taking place within the head." " It would
follow that our entire feeling of spiritual activity, or what
commonly passes by that name, is really a feeling of bodily J
activities whose exact native is by most men overiooked."' -I

There are several objections to this version of mental *
action. In the first place, it is evident that the feeling
of action belongs to the content of the mind, and there^-
fore cannot be that general action by virtue of which things
become content. It is not the correlate of content in
general, but only of certain other content such as percepts
and ideas. There is need of a kind of mental action that
shall account for the presence in mind of this very activity-
complex itself.

Furthermore, there is an evident confusion in regarding
the feeling of action as itself action. It is necessary, as
the spiritists and transcendentalists have rightly main-
tained, to suppose some kind of action that shall bring
contents together, and give them the peculiar wUhin-mind
unity which they possess, A consciousness of a and b
is not a consciousness of a and a consciousness of b. And
the feeling of action is no more capable of effecting this
conjunction than is any other content. A consciousness
of " intra -cephalic movements" atul the movements of
an external body, a unity of consciousness in which these
are present together, cannot derive its unity from a con-

' James: Pluralistic Universe, pp. 376, 380; Principles of Ptyc/ul^ty* i
Vol I, pp. 300, 301-301; d. below, pp, 354-356.


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND 285

sdousness of the one aoy more than from the consciousness
of the other. Both movements must be subtended by
some action that operates on them Jointly. James is correct
in supposing that the experience of bodily action is pecu-
liarly significant. It constitutes a core or nucleus of con-
tent that is more constant than the rest. It constitutes
a permanent background which persists while the more
conspicuous objects in the foreground vary; and is thus
an important factor in the sense of personal identity.
But it is none the less content, and so prevented from
serving as the agency which defines content as such, and
gives it its characteristic unity.

The true solution of the matter lies near at hand. If
instead of defining mental action io terms of the feeling
of bodily activities, he had defined it in terms of the bodily
action itself, as he sometimes appears to do, these diffi-
culties would have been obviated.' But this would have
required- the abandonment of the introspective method.
For those bodily actions which now become most signid-
cant are only accidentally, if at all, felt by the conscious
agent himself. A sound 'listened to' or 'heard,' is, by
virtue of that action, mental content. Several sounds
listened to or heard jointly compose a mental unity. But
precisely what is the nature of listening or hearing ?
He who listens or hears is poorly qualified to say. The
way it feels to listen or hear has little if anything to do
with the matter. For listening and hearing are operations
of the living organism, or specific operations of the nervous
system, which lie in the field of general observation. And
it is no more necessary to suppose that their nature is
revealed to the agent which exercises them, than to sup-
pose that the nature of breathing is revealed to him who
breathes.


'persons,' sad conUuted and opposed to on 'ea-
in QUI body figure as our activities." {PlwalisUc


virooment,
Vniverje, p. 379,


a86 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


The Alleged
Impossibility
of ObMTViDg

the CoDtFnLi


ni. The Method of General Obsehvation
§ 7. While proceeding to treat mind as tliough, like'l
any other thing, it were open to general observation, tfl
shall at the same time seek to reply to thvl
objections which are ordinarily urged against '
such procedure. Most philosophers assume
that it is essentially characteristic of a mind
"" to be accessible only to itself. This prop-

osition is rarely supported by evidence; it is commonly
held to be sufficient to call attention to it. Thus it is
asserted that "the essence of a person is not what he is
for another, but what he is for himself. It is there that
his principium individuationis is to be found— in what he
is, when looked at from the inside."' As another writer .
expresses it, "That the mind of each human being fonnsJ
a region inaccessible to all save its possessor, is one of thel
commonplaces of reflection,"* 1

These are formulations of an almost universal presup-
position. I believe this presupposition, as ill-defined and
unreasonable as it is universal, to be the greatest present
obstacle to the dear and conclusive definition of mind.
There can be no doubt of the propriety of distinguisiiing
'internal' and 'external' views of the mind, and there
can be no doubt of the practical or other circumstantial
importance of emphasizing self-knowledge. But I do not
believe that such distinction and emphasis lead properly
to any generalization such as those which I have quoted;
nor do I believe that they contribute fundamentally to
the definition of mind.

The notion of the privacy of mental contents rests
mainly upon the fallacy of ' exclusive particularity.' It is
characteristic of content of mind, such as perceptions and
ideas, to belong to individual minds. My idea is mine;
and in some sense, then, falls within my mind. From

' H. Rashdall, in Personal Idtalism. edited by H. Sturt, p. 363.
■ M. F. Washburn, The Animal Mind, p. i.


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND 387

this it is hastily concluded that it is therefore exclusively
mine. Now it is clear that my idea cannot be alien-
ated from my mind, without contradiction. It must
not be attributed to the noUmy-mind which is the other
term of a disjunctive dichotomy. But it does not JolUntt
that my idea may twl also be your idea. There are many
such cases. Friends are essentially such as to belong to
friends, and my friend is veritably mine; but he may,
without contradiction, become yours also. Similarly, my
home, my parents, my country, although in order to be
what they are they must be possessed by such as me, may
without logical difficulty be shared with you.

But I may seem to have overlooked a vital point. Al-
though one thing can be the object both of my idea and of
yours, can my idea itself be also yours? Does not the whole
being of my idea lie in its relation to me? Doubtless
Neptimc may become my idea, and also yours; but can
my idea of Neptune ever become an idea of yours? Now
this clearly depends upon whether the determination of
Neptune which makes it my idea can itself submit to
another determination of the same type. There is no a
priori objection that would not beg the very question under
discussion. Here again cases from other classes of objects
are very common. The siun of three and three may itself
be added to three; you may paint me in the act of paint-
ing my model; the general may fear the fear of his army.
And, similarly, a thing's relation to me as my idea, may
enter into another such relation to you and become your
idea. It will doubtless remain true that my idea simply,
and your idea of my idea, will differ through the accession
of the last cognitive relationship; and that in this sense
my idea cannot be completely identical with your idea.
But it is impossible even to state this trivial proposition
without granting that you may know my idea, which is
the point at issue.

The mere fact, then, that ideas are always included
within some mind, and thereby excluded from what b


288 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

altogether not that mind, contributes no evidence for the
absolute privacy of mind. Any group whatsoever is
private, in the sense that what is in it cannot by definition
be outside of it, nor what is outside of it in it. But this
does not prevent what is inside of it from being also inside
of something else, nor does it prevent the entire group
from being inside of another like group. Everything
depends on the particular nature of the groups in question.
And we have already found it necessary to classify minds
among intersecting rather than exclusive systems. Indeed,
such a classification would seem to be necessarily implied
in the general conception of social intercourse. How,
then, are we to explain the widespread disposition to regard
minds as exclusive?

In the first place, we readily extend to our minds the
group relation which holds in the case of our bodies. There
is a special sense in which things are inside and outside of
the mind, but it tends naturally to be confused with the
sense in which things are inside and outside of the body. .
The tendency is partly a misuse of schematic imagery, and I
partly a practical bias for the bodily aspect of the mind. 1
Suffice it here to remark that the mutual exclusivencss
of our bodies is so highly emphasized, that even the vaguest
supposition that our minds are within our skins, is suffi-
cient to give rise to a notion that they too are wholly out-
side one another. Such a supposition is generally admitted
to be false, but it nevertheless lingers on the scene; and
not only falsifies the grouping of mind, but exaggerates the .
difficulty of knowing mind from the standpoint of general |
observation.

In the second place, various motives, melhodolopcal,
religious, and social, have so emphasized the difference
between mind and mind, or between the individual mind
and the outer world, that this difference tends to be trans-
formed into a relation of exclusivencss. Psychological
introspection, when superficially interpreted, defines a
region set apart from nature and society. Rehgioua j


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND 289

introspection heightens the difference between the inner
life and the life of the world. The problems of personal
morality under complex social conditions tend to heighten
the difference between individual lives. Such a proposition
as "No one else can understand me" has only to become
familiar and practically intensified, to be converted readily
into an absolute principle. Thus the difficulty of knowing
certain aspects of anotiier mind tends to be mistaken for
Ike impossibility of the entrance of mind into mind. Pro-
verbial difficulties easily become logical impossibilities.
To avoid gross confusion it is necessary to examine the
diflSculties concretely and circumstantially; to point out
the conditions under which they arise, and the elements
of mind which they tend to obscure,

§ 8. Beyond question the content of an individual
mind at any given time may be successfully hidden from
general observation. But this in itself does
^0^^^'*' °°^ ™P'y ^°y general proposition to the
MentKicoii- cffcct that a mind is essetUuiUy such as to be
iTpcre^^ "bsolutely cut off from such observation. It
may be that your inability to discover what I
am imagining, thinking about, or remembering, is only
like the assessor's inability to discover the amount of my
property; and no one has asserted that property is essen-
tially knowable oniy to its owner. Let us examine the
circumstances.

In the first place, it is evident that under favorable cir-
cumstances you have no difficulty in following my mind.
Where, for example, we are engaged in such intercourse
as involves a bodily dealing with physical objects, it is as
easy as it is indispensable for each to know what is in the
mind of the other. The objects themselves here provide
mutually accessible content in a manner that is unmistak-
able. A clear case in point is the exchange of currency for
merchandise; but to illustrate the experience exhaustively
would be to traverse nine-tenths of life. Such mutual
af^rehension of the physical things which you and I have


290 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

in mind is the condition of all intercourse between us;
we could not shake hands without it.

There is another way in which you readily follow my
mind, namely, through my verbal report. We do not often
sit down and deUberately disclose our minds to one another;
more commonly we use language to the end that we may
together think the same things. But if you are a psychol-
ogist, or an interpreter of dreams, I may "tell" you what
is in my mind. Now it is frequently assumed by the
sophisticated that when I thus verbally reveal my mind
you do not directly know it. You are supposed directly
to know only my words. But I cannot understand such
a supposition, unless it means simply that you know my
mind only after and through bearing my words. If it is
necessary for you to take a book from the shelf and turn
over its pages before you can discover the date of Kant's
birth, or walk across the street before you can discover the
number of your neighbor's house, do you therefore not
know these things directly when you do know them?
And if you must wait until I tell you before you know
what image is in my mind, do you therefore not know the
image directly when you do know it? If not, then what
do you know directly when the matter is concluded?
Surely not the word ; for this having served its turn, receives
no further notice. It is not the word which is communi-
cated, except in the wholly exceptional cases in which the
word is not understood and so does not fulfil its function.
And it is certainly implied in all of our subsequent action
and intercourse relating to the image, that we have access
to it jointly, just as we do to our money and our lands;
that you know it now even as I know it.

It is important to labor under no misapprehension con-
cerning the general function of language. Language does
not arise as the external manifestation of an internal idea,
but as the means of fixing and identifying abstract aspects
of experience. If I wish to direct your attention to the ring
on my finger, it is sufficient for me to point to it or hand


4

I


I


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


291


it to you. In seeing me thus deal with the ring, you know
that it engages my attention, and there occurs a moment
of communication in which our minds unite on the object.
The ring figures in your mind even as it does in mine ; indeed
the fact that the ring does so figure in my mind will prob-
ably occur to you when it does not to me. If, however, I
wish to call your attention to the yellowness of the ring,
it will not do simply to handle it. The whole object will
not suffice as a means of identifying its element. Hence
the need of a system of symbols complex enough to keep
pace with the subtlety of discrimination. Now the im-
portant thing to bear in mind is the fact that as a certain
practical dealing with bodies constitutes gross communi-
cation, so language constitutes refined communication.
There is no difference of objectivity or subjectivity. In
the one case as in the other, mind is open to mind, making
possible a coalescence of content and the convergence of
action on a common object.

For purposes of further illustration, consider the case of
disguised perception, I am watching you "out of the
comer of my eye," hoping to deceive you as to my real
thoughts. If the strategy is successful it proves that I
can render equivocal the evidence you commonly rely on.
But does any one seriously suppose that the direction of
my thoughts is not discoverably there in the retinal and
nervous process responding to your body, and in my in-
tention to deceive? Where my mind is the object to be
known, I can embarrass the observer because I can control
the object, I can even make and unmake my mind. As
you seek to follow my thoughts, I may accelerate them or
double on my tracks to throw you off the scent. But
I enjoy the same advantage over you if you are an assessor
seeking to know my property, and neither in the one case
nor in the other is it proved that the facts are not there
for you to know as well as I. Indeed the special qualifjing
conditions to which we are compelled to refer when describ-
ing the hidden mind, leave no doubt that the difficulties


292 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

in this case are essentially like the difficulties which check
or thwart any cognitive enterprise. Some things are
more difficult to observe than others, and all things are
difficult to observe under certain circumstances. This
is true of mind in no mysterious or unique way.

§ 9. Sensations of the internal states of the organism
itself present a peculiar case, that is of sufficient impor-
Proprio-ccpiive taficc to receive independent treatment. Con-
Seosationa ccming Certain happenings witliin my body,
I am, so to speak, the only eye-witness. This circumstance
plays a very important part in the unique self-knowledge
imputed to the mind, and in parUcular, I believe, lends
specious significance to the self-conscious and introspective
experiences which have just been examined. Let us first
set down the general facts in the case.

A leading physiologist writes as follows: "Bedded in
the surface layer of the organism are numbers of receptor
cells constituted in adaptation to the stimuli delivered by
environmental agencies. [These receptors the author
calls "cxfero-ceptors,"] But the organism itself, like the
world surroimding it, is a field of ceaseless change, where
internal energy is continually being liberated, whence
chemical, thermal, mechanical, and electrical effects appear.
It is a microcosm in which forces which can act as stimuli
are at work as in the macrocosm around. The deep tissues
. . . have receptors specific to themselves. The receptors
which lie in the depth of the organism are adapted for
excitation consonantly with changes going on in the organ-
ism itself, particularly in its muscles and their accessory
organs (tendons, joints, blood-vessels, etc.). Since in this
field the stimuli to the receptors are given by the organism
itself, their field may be called the proprio-ceptive field," '

Now my body lies beyond the periphery of every other
body, and can, therefore, be generally observed only by
" extero-ceptive " organs, such as those of vision, touch, etc.

' C. S. Sherrington: The Integrolitt Aelhn of Ike Nenoui System, pp.
1*9-130.


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


393


But while I may also observe myself in this fashion, my
" proprio-ceptors " enable me alone to know my body
in another way. There is no occult reason for this; it
is a matter of physiological organization. I am sensible of
interior pressure and strain, or of the motion and muscular
control of my limbs, in a manner impossible for any other
observer, simply because no other observer is nervously
connected with them as I am. I alone can be specifically
sensible of loss of equilibrium, because my semicircular
canals, though visible and tangible to others, have a contin-
uous nervous connection with my brain alone. More im-
portant is the fact that I am sensible in a very complex
way of states and changes in my visceral, circulatory, and
respiratory systems. Here, again, I am possessed of sen-
sations from which other observers are cut off for lack of
certain nerve fibres which connect these organs only with
my cerebral centres.

Now what is the inference from these facts? In the first
place, it is to be observed that these sensations constitute
knowledge of the body, and not of mind in the traditional
sense. I have a species of cognitive access to the interior
of my body from which all other knowers are excluded.
My heart palpitates for me as it palpitates for no one else.
But as it has never been argued that a physical organism
is a thing kno^Ti only to the mind inhabiting it, let us
present the matter in another way. My mind possesses
sense-contents that can not be similarly presented in
any other mind. I alone can "have" these sensations.
But does it follow that you cannot know them? Firstly,
there is nothing in the sensation that you cannot know.
The peculiar quality of heart-palpitation is known to you
in other instances; and the bodily locality which makes it
mine is immediately perceived by you. These factors must,
it is true, be put together by you. but the result is never-
Itbeless knowledge. And secondly, there is nothing about
' the sensation that you cannot know even better than I.
If I were to follow up the mere presentation of the sensa-


294 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

tion, and proceed to an adequate knowledge of it, I would
necessarily rely on anatomical and physiological methods
that have from the first been open to you. Indeed, here
I am seriously embarrassed; for as you are cut off from
proprio-ceptive sensations of my bodily interior, so I am
largely cut off from the extero-ceptive sensations which
are much more indispensable to a knowledge of sense-
structure and function. In short, certain things are pre-
sented in a characteristic way to me alone. I alone can
have proprio-ceptive sensations of my own body. In order
that you may know the interior of my body it is necessary
for you to use your imagination, or some other relatively
elaborate process.

Is this what is meant by saying that mind can be knovi]
only by itself? If so, then that contention loses all of its
momentousness. For this is only a case of a very large
class. It may even be contended that all existent things
are such as to be presented instantly and simply only to
a privileged group of knowers. In so far as spacial, events
can be sensibly known only by those who enjoy a certain
definable proximity, and in so far as temporal only by
contemporaries. But this does not withdraw them from
the general field of knowledge. I must use my imagina-
tion to know what the East Indian may know by opening
his eyes; but my knowledge may none the less exceed his.
And furthermore, even if it were granted that proprio-
ceptive sensations can be known only introspectively, I
can scarcely believe that those who emphasize the uniquely
internal character of mind mean that the mind consists in
a confused and partial knowledge of the interior of the
physical body!

A word more is necessary to show the full importance of
the matter. The experiences on which I most rely for a
knowledge of myself as mental agent or subject contain an
admixtiire of proprio-ceptive sensations. The very act of
self-consciousness is itself attended by characteristic sensa-
tions due to bodily posture and respiratory changes. But


I


r


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND 295

above all, the experience of self-activity or effort is largely
made up of sensations of internal motion and strain. These
experiences are stereotyped, obscure, and largely accidental.
But there is, nevertheless, a propriety not commonly
recognized, in regarding the proprio-ceptive experience
so far as it goes as really a knowledge of self. For my
proprio-ceptive experience is largely a knowledge of my
organic action on the environment, and it is this action when
construed in a certain manner that really constitutes
mental action.'

§ 10. As respects the accessibility of my mental con-
tents to your observation, the most important general
TTie Conicnt of ^^c* '^ ^'^' ^^^ V*^"' observation will be
Destt, MoDOfy baffled just in so far as my dealings with the
^*°** ' content of my mind are not peripheral. Con-
trary to a common philosophical opinion, my purpose,
intention, or desire is least likely to escape you. This
element of my mind is revealed even in my gross action,
in the motions of my body as a whole. Your apprehen-
sion of it is as sure and as indispensable to social relations
as your apprehension of the physical objects that engage
my attention. The content of my purpose, that is, the
realization proposed, and my more or less consistent de-
votion to it, are in your full view, whether you be a historian
of character or a familiar companion. It is not, then, the
desiderative element in mind that escapes observation,
nor is it any such typical element, but all content in so
far as the mind's dealings with it do not reach the visible
exterior of the body. But what is implied in this very
statement?

In the first place, we imply that the content in question

' Cf, Shem'tiglon, op. di.: "The other character ot the stimulations in
this 6eld (the proprio-ccpiivt) we held to be that the stimuli are given in
much greater measure than in the suriace beld o( reception, by actions o(
the organism itself, especially by mass movement of its pans. . . . The im-
mediate stimulus for the reflex started at the deep receptor is thus sup-
plied by some part of the organism itself u aseat" (p. 336). Cf. below,
pp. 198-301.


2^6 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

is such as to be knowable by me if I can identify it. Com-
monly, doubt exists only as to which of several thin gs, all
plainly known to you, is at the moment known to me. I
may tell you, and when I do, one is selected and the others
fall away. Or you may conjecture, and if your conjecture
be true you possess the content, though without being sure
of the relation to my mind.

But in the second place (and I here anticipate a charge
of grave omission) the relation of the content to my mind
must be supposed to be objectively and discoverably there,
even when I do not acknowledge it by a verbal report. It
is impossible to formulate a case of memory, for example,
without affirming a connection between the past event
which contributes the content and the locally present
mind that is recalling it. If I am in fact here and now
recollecting a visit to London in 1905, a complex is defined,
the essential terms of which are in your plain view. And
the connection must be homogeneous with the terms. The
past event as it was, must be engaged or dealt with by me
as I stand before you. In other words, the original per-
ceptual response must be continued into tfie present. But
this is possible only through the identity of the nervous
system. The link of recollection, connecting past and
present, lies in a retrospective functioning of my body,
which can be accounted for only by its history. And this
is as accessible as any natural or moral process. When you
know that I am looking at the moon, the salient facts are
before you, the focalized posture of my body and its organ
of vision, the concentration and consistency of my action,
and, most important of all, the moon. In the case of my
recollection of London the facts are more complicated, and
even in part inaccessible, but equally with the facts just
cited, they are in the context of your possible knowledge.
They consist in such elements as my central attentive
process, certain persisting modifications of my cerebrum,
my original dealings, practical and neural, with London,
and — London itself.


I
I


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


297


The same general consideration will apply also to thought.
When I am thinking abstractions, the contents of my
mind, namely the abstractions themselves, are such as you
also may think. They are not possessed by me in any
exclusive sense. And the fact that they are my contents
means that they are somehow bound up with the history
of my nervous system. The contents, and the linkage
which makes them mine, are alike common objects, lying
in the field of general observation and study,

§11. When mental content is thus arrived at by

general observation rather than by introspection, the

action which is correlative to it, which in-

imposaibLiiiy vests it With 3 new status and brings it

at Obaavias together in a new way, is revealed at the

McnlalAcUoo " _. ,, i_ , i_ , .. r

same time. You observe the contents of my
mind by following my glance or my words; so that at
the same time that you observe the contents, you may
also observe the action, namely my visual or verbal
response to these contents. But we must deal here with
the traditional objection that it is paradoxical or contra-
dictory to suppose that mental action can be observed, as
other things are observed. Mental action, it is argued, is
active; and to be observed it would have to become pas-
sive, and so lose its distinctive nature. Or, mental action
is subject, and so can never be object without forfeiting its
identity.

The objection rests obviously upon the error of ' exclusive
particularity.' It presupposes that what is active cannot
also be passive, or that what is subject cannot also be object.
Knowledge, it is asserted, always assumes the form (5)
R (0) (subject-knowing-object). And in this abstract
scheme, S cannot change its place without forfeiting its
nature, since, like the hypothenuse of a right-angle triangle,
its nature is its place. But it does not follow that the
same concrete entity may not change its place, and having
once been S now become 0; as the same straight line,
ha\Tng been the hypothenuse of one triangle may become


ipS PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

the side of another. The same soul or nervous sys
or whatever was filling the office of subject, might come to
fill also the oE&ce of object. Or, while a given entity was
filling the office of subject in relation to an object, it might
at the same time be itself filling the office of object in rela- I
tion to a second subject. And the nature of the office of '
subject, as exemplified in the first subject, could thus be
known in the ordinary way by the second subject. Thus
there is nothing whatsoever to stand in the way of the
supposition that the bodily action wherewith I deal with
things and make them my objects, may itself be similarly
dealt with and made object by another bodily agent; or
in supposing that the bodily process which in my own
experience functions as mental action, and does not appear '
as content, should be the content of another mind. And
on this supposition, it would naturally be agreed that the
person best qualified to report on the nature of my mental
action would be not myself, the user of it, but the phys-
iologist or moralist who is the beholder of it.

§ 12. We are now prepared for a statement of the 1
nature of mental action in terms of general observa- |
M.nt.1 Action tio"- And in the first place, it is to be ob-
u Nervoua served that mental action is a property of the I
y«em physical organism. This view is contained in '

principle in Mach's notion that an element is mental in
so far as it stands in a relation of functional dependence
to a certain specific set of elements, which he calls the
elements K L M . . .; these elements corresponding to
what is generally known as the nervous system." To this
notion of Mach's must be added the so-called "motor
theory" of consciousness, which is steadily winning a
general acceptance among psychologists. "We are com-
pelled to believe," says Professor McDougall, "that the
nervous processes of the brain are of the type of the reflex
processes of the spinal cord, and consist in the trans-
mission of physical impulses through channels of great

' Cf. above, pp. 78-79.


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


299


complexity from the sensory to, or towards, the motor
nerves, and to believe that all psychical processes are
accompanied by nervous processes of this character."'
We are thus led to the view that elements become mental
content wlien reacted to in the Specific manner characteristic
of the central nervous system.

This conclusion is approximated by at least two recent
writers of wide influence. Richard Avenarius, the founder
of the so-called "Immanence School" in Germany, em-
ploys a peculiar terminology of his own.^ The central
nervous system he terms "system C" This system he
conceives, after the naturalistic fashion, as situated in
an environment from which it receives stimulations
(" J?-values ") , and to which it gives back a characteristic
response {"£- values"). Elxperience or mental content
consists of these £-values, or responses of system C.
Avenarius, however, leaves us in doubt whether the reac-
tion of system C does not create contents. It would appear
that the "£-values" are more than actions; that they
embrace mental constructs not given in the environment.

The correct view is more closely approached in Bergson's
theory of pure perception. This writer concludes that
"the living body in general, and the nervous system in
particular, are only channels for the transmission of move-
ments, which, received in the form of stimulation, are
transmitted in the form of action, reflex or voluntary.
That is to say, it is vain to attribute to the cerebral sub-
stance the property of engendering representations." Its
function js selective; and those parts of the environment
which it selects by its action, whether virtual, nascent,
or actual, are the content of perception. "If wc suppose
an extended continuum, and, in this continuum, the center

> W. McDougdl. Phyriological Psychology, p. 7 (italics mioe). C[.
also H. MUnsterberg: Grundsilge drr Psycholope, pp. 515-561.

• C!. W, T. Bush; Avcaarius and the Standpoint of Putt ExperittKt, pp.
JQ 9q.; Avenaniu: Der UenscUickt Weltbegrif, paatitn. The present
leader of the " Itnmanence School" is Joseph Petzoldt; cf. his EinfUiirung
m dU PhUcttfMt dtr reintti Erfaiimnt.


300 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of real action which is represented by our body, its activity
will appear to illumine all those parts of matter with which
at each successive moment it can deal." In other words,
mental content consists of portions of the surrounding
environment "illumined" by the action of the organism.'

§ 13. Bergson's view does not sufi&ce as a thorough-
going theory of mind, because it is limited to perception.
MeniaJ AcHon A Creative function is reserved for mind in its
ha inietest other operatjons.* But he states with admi-
rable cJearness a principle which can readily be extended to
the higher functions of mind. And furthermore his state-
ment of the principle possesses the additional advantage
of emphasizing the essentially teleological character of
mental action. "Conscious perception," he says, "does
not compass the whole of matter, since it consists, in as
far as it is conscious, in the separation, or 'discernment,'
of that which, in matter, inkrcsls our various needs."*
The action of the nervous system is a function of the organ-
ism, and like the organism it exhibits the control of interest.
So that a physio I ogioil account of the action of mind must
be supplemented by a moral account. And content of
mind must be defined as that portion of tlie surrounding
environment which is taken account of by tix organism in
serving its interests; the nervous system, physiologically
regarded, being the mechanism which is employed.

As mind appears in nature and society, it consists prima-
rily in interested behavior. Such behavior is promptly
and almost unerringly distinguished by all save the most
rudimentary intelligences. Indeed, the capacity of making
such a distinction is one of the conditions of survival.
Upon the lowest plane of social intercourse a mind is a
potentiality of bodily contact, and is marked and dealt

1 Bergsoo: Mailer and Uemory, trans, by Paul and Palmer, pp. 81,
3og [bat italics mine). Cf, Ch. I, passim.

• Cf, op. cit., Ch. 11, III; and above, pp. j39-34a, 36i~)65.

* Op. di., p. 78 (italics mine). A similar idea is contained in Avenb j
rius's conception of the "£-va1ues" as determined by the endeavor dU
"system C" to maiDtain its equilibriuro. Cf. Bush, op. cii., pp. 40-41.


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


301


with accordingly. But even upon a comparatively low
plane there is recognition of a characteristic difference be-
tween minds and other bodily things. Minds exhibit
spontaneity and waywardness, a certain isolation of con-
trol in their own interest. Individually they manifest per-
sistent hostility, which is feared in them, or persistent
friendhness, which is courted in them. Such a recognition
of mind is already present in a mind's discriminating reac-
tion to anger, or to a hereditary foe, as denoting a marked
or constant source of danger.

Where sodal relations are more subtle and indirect, the
element of interest tends to supplant the merely physical
and mechanical element of mind altogether. In my dealings
with my neighbor I am most concerned with his desires or
his consistent plan of action. I can injure him by check-
mating his interests, or proht by him through combining
my interests with his. It is most important for me to know
what he consistently seeks. He is a living policy or pur-
pose of which I must obtain the key-motive if I would\
make either peace or war.

I am also familiar with my own propensities. In so far
as I am reflective, my impulses and ideals are repeatedly
the objects of my contemplation and scrutiny. They are
defined, adopted, rejected, or reaflSrmed in every moral
crisis. But if/be true that my interests are myself, in the
deepest sense, it is no less true that they are evident to any
intelligent observer. They are the defining forms of my
life. In so far as they move me they cannot be hidden
away within me. They mark me among my fellows, and
give me my place, humble or obscure, in the open field o(
history. It is possible, doubtless, to emphasize the intro-
spective factor of desire. But desire in so far as content,
merely, is not desire at all. Desire as moral, as a form of
determination, belongs not to the domestic mind, but to
mind at large in nature and society.

§ 14. And precisely as a mind's interests are evident to
general observation, so arc the objects on which it acts


302 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

interestedly. If I am to deal with my friend or enemy at
close range, it is clear that I must think with him, or
Meatal Content ^.Iways to some exteot traverse with him
u idcotified by the objccts in his field of view. Upon higher
Inieresied Artiun pj^jjgg gf jntercom'se, in narrative, in straight-
forward and companionable discussion, another's mind
consists more of objects than anything else. Its bodily
aspect falls away, and even its impelling interest tends to
be neglected. But it needs only a shifting of the atten-
tion to correct the perspective. I may deliberately take
pains to discover and supply a mind's objects. To do
so I have only to observe what the mind selects from its
environment.

Is this not what is done, for example, by the student of
the animal mind? We are told that the amceba has foiu:
general reactions of the organic type. One of these is
described as positive: "a pseudo-podium is pushed forward
in the direction of the stimulus, and the animal moves
towards the solid." The solidity of bodies enters into this
animal's practical economy: "the positive reaction
useful in securing contact with a support on which to
creep." ' Here is an element of the environment that is
marked and isolated by a response which expresses the
organism's self-preservative impulse. Do we, then, not
know the content of the amoeba's mind? Should I ever
understand the matter better by contracting my own mind
to amoeba-like proportions? I grant that as I have loosely
described the matter, much doubt exists as to how far the
amceba's discrimination goes, but in his studies of sensory
discrimination the comparative psychologist has already
devised methods which open the way to greater exactness.'
Conditions may be contrived which make it to the animal's
interest to notice differences, and these may be progressively
refined until the animal is pressed to the limit of his sensi-
bility. When after such tests the conclusion is reached that
the animal feels the solid or sees blue, what remains to be
' Washbum, op. cil., p. 40. » C(. ibid.. Ch. IV.


I
I


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND


303


said by way of "interpretation?"' The amceba does not,
it is true, feel the solid as we do. Therefore let us observe
the amteba, and not undertake to say how we should feel
ii we were amcebae. We shall then find that which is
presented to the amceba to be distinguished from the
fuller environment that lies before us, by the apueba's
interested action.

There will still persist, I feel sure, a belief to the effect
that mental content can never be known in this way.
Such behef appears to me to be due, at least in part, to
a curiously perverse habit of thought. It is customary
to look for the content ivithin the body, and then solemnly
declare that it is not to be found. Though long since
theoretically discredited, the 'subcutaneous' mind still
haunts the imagination of every one who deals with this
problem. But why not look for the object where it be-
longs, and where it is easily accessible — namely, in the
environment? Is it not in truth the environment which
the amceba or any other organism is sensing? If, then, we
are in search of content, why take so much pains to turn
our backs on it, and look for it where by definition it must
escape use. Such procedure is due, I think, simply to a
failure to group together behavior, and those elements of the
environment selected by the behavior — the reaction, and the
stimulus. It is true that neither behavior, nor even
conduct, is mind; but only because mind is behavior, or
conduct, together tuith the objects which these employ
and isolate.

§ 15, In conclusion let me briefly summarize the parts
of mind which the analysis has revealed.

(i ) In the first place, a mind is a complex so organized

' I hive reference here to such sUtenients of method u the (ollowing:
"Knowledge regarding the animal mind, like knowledge of human minds
other than our own. must come by way of infrrriuc from bekaviar. Two
fundatnental questions then confront the comparative psychologist. First,
by what method shall he find out how an animal behaves? Second, how
■hall he inltrfra the conscious aspect of that behavior?" (The italics are
mine.) Ibid., p. 4.


304 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

as to act desideratively or interestedly. I mean here to
iodicate that character which distinguishes the living organ-
A Summary '^'"> having originally the instinct of self-
De&niiiono! preservation, and acquiring in the courseof its
"""* development a variety of special interests. -

I use the term interest primarily in its biological rather
than in its psychological sense. Certain natural processes -
act consistently in such wise as to isolate, protect, and /
renew themselves. (2) But such processes, interested ^■^
their general form, possess characteristic instrumentalities, ,
notably a bodily nervous system which localizes the I
interest and conditions the refinement and range of its 1
intercourse with its environment. (3) Finally, a mind
embraces certain contents or parts of the environment,
with which it deals through its instrumentaUties and in
behalf of its interests.

The natural mind, as here and now existing, is thus sAM
organization possessing as distinguishable, but complemen- |
tary, aspects, interest, nervous system, and contents. Or, il
interest and nervous system be taken together as consti-
tuting the action of mind, we may summarize mind as
action and contents.

The evolution of mind appears on the one hand in
the multiplication and coordination of the interests which
govern it, and on the other hand in its enrichment of
content through gain in discrimination and range. The
latter, in turn, means the increase of that proportion of
the environment of which its improved capacities enable
it to take account. The human mind is preeminent in
respect both of discrimination and range. In other words,
it acts on abstractions and principles, on an innumerable J
variety of complex objects, and on remote regions of space I
and time; all of which lie outside the practical economy f
of animals comparatively deficient in sense, memory, l
imagination, and thought.

It is only Just to admit that mind as observed intrcKl
spectively differs characteristically from mind as observed I


il

1


REALISTIC THEORY OF MIND 305

in nature and society. But this does not prove that in
either case it is not directly known, or that what is known
is not the real mind. Every complex object presents its
parts in a different order when approached in different ways,
but in the object as wholly known these parts fit and
supplement one another. As introspection obscures the
instrumental and action factors of mind, so general observa-
tion obscures its content factor. But when these factors*
are united, they compose a whole mind, having a structure
and a fimction that may be known by any knower,
whatever his initial bias.


2Z


CHAPTER Xm

A REAUSTIC THEORY OP KNOWLEDGE
I. The Theory of Immanence

§ I. The new realism is a revival of what has been '
referred to as the "antiquated metaphysics, which talks
The Old Real- ^^out cjostence pcf se, out o( all relation to
imiaDdthe minds." ' But lest it be thought that this
"" theory is altogether antiquated, it is important

to point out its precise relation to earlier forms of realism.
The most remarkable parallel which the past affords is to
be found in a theory which Himie entertained provisionally
as a natural sequel to his analysis of mind. This parallel
is so instructive as to warrant its being quoted in full.

"We may observe," writes Hume, "that what we call
a mind, is nothing but a heap or collection of different
perceptions, united together by certain relations, and
suppos'd, tbo' falsely, to be endow'd with a perfect sim-
plicity and identity. Now as every perception is distin-
guishable from another, and may be consider'd as separately
existent; it evidently follows, that there is no absurdity in
separating any particular perception from the mind; that
is, in breaking off all its relations, with that coimected
mass of perceptions, which constitute a thinking being. . . .
If the name of perception renders not this separation from J
a mind absurd and contradictory, the name of object, '
standing for the very same thing, can never render their
conjunction impossible. External objects are seen, and
felt, and become present to the mind; that is, they acquire
such a relation to a connected heap of perceptions, as to
influence them very considerably in augmenting their

> G. H. Howison: Thi Limits of Evolution, and Otktr Essays, p. ti,

306


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


307


number by present reflections and passions, and in storing
the memory with ideas. The same continu'd and uninter-
rupted Being may, therefore, be sometimes present to the
mind, and sometimes absent from it, without any real or
essential change in the Being itself." '

It will be noted that Hume here regards things not
only as possessing being independently of the mind, but
also as identical with perceptions when present to the mind.
Indeed, he was first convinced of their identity with per-
ceptions, and suggested their independence only as an after-
thought. In this respect Hume's view is to be distinguished
from the "natural realism" of the Scottish School of Reid
and Hamilton. These writers were concerned primarily
to avert the sceptical and absurd consequences of the
"ideal philosophy," which merged external reality into the
mind's ideas. They sought to restore the traditional
substances, the mind within and the nature without; and
regarded both as distinct from the ideas that "suggest"
them. In the case of the "primary" physical qualities,
"extension, solidity, and motion," they did, it is true, assert
a doctrine of "real presentationism." But they did not
explain how bodies can be "suggested," "presented," or
"conceived," without becoming ideas; or how without the
mediating function of ideas, minds can know bodies. In
other words, the dualistic difficulty was aggravated and not
relieved.'

Modem realism is closer to the monistic realism of
"ideas," suggested by Hume, than to the dualistic realism
of mind and matter, propounded by the Scottish School;
and this in spite of the fact that the Scottish philosophy
was primarily a polemic, in the name of "realism," against

' Home: Treatiie of Buman Nature (Selby-Bigge's edition), p. J07.
Cf. above, pp. 137-138.

' Thomas Reid: Itujuiry into the Humon Mind (1764), ch. I, V. VIT;
Sir William Hamilton^ Nota B.C.D, appended to his edition ot the Pkilo-
tapkical Works «} Thomas Reid; especially, eighth edition, p. iiy C(.
J. S. Mill: An Examination of Sir WUliam Hamilton's PkUoiophv.
Ch. II.


3o8 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

Hume, as the last and most outrageous of the idealists.
The new realism, while it insists, as all realism must, that
tilings are independent, asserts that when things are known,
they are ideas of the mind. They may enter directly into
the mind; and when they do, they become what are called
'ideas.' So that ideas are only things in a certain relation;
or, things, in respect of being known, are ideas.

It is important, therefore, in expounding the general
realistic theory of knowledge, to distinguish two component
theories. The first I shall call the theory of 'imma-
nence.' This is the same theory as that which I have
in another connection termed ' epistemological monism.''
It means that when a given thing, a, is known, a itself
enters into a relation which constitutes it the idea or con-
tent of a mind. The second I shall caU the theory ot
'independence;' and it means that although a may thus
enter into mind, and assume the status of content, it is not
dependent on this status for its being, or nature. After
discussing these two theories, which deal with the problem
of the relation of knowledge to its objects, I shall apply
them briefly to the problem of truth.

§ 2. There are two varieties of duahsm which the theory
of immanence makes it possible to escape; the dualism
between mind and body, and the dualism
ots^d^ between thought and things. The theory of
Body u ■ Di(- immanence escapes these dualisms by employ-
(^oLaUoD '"S the notion of relation in place of the
notion of substance?

The dualism between mind and body received its clas-
sic formulation, as we have seen, in the philosophy of
Descartes. This was essentially a 'substance-attribute'

' Cf, Bbove. pp. 114-116.

* II has been suggested that the categories ol subitance, ^ttaltly, ftod
relation represent natural stages in the evolution and rcGaement of thought-
Cr. Ludwig Stein: "Der Neo-Idealismus unserer Tage," in ha Anhif filr
lyslemaliske PhilasapMe. Vol. IX, 1903; referred to by W. P. Montague:
"The Relational Theory of Consciousness and its Realistic lii4>Iicftlioiis,''
Jour, of Phil., Psych., and Scientific MethaJi, Vol. II, tgos-


I


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


309


philosophy. Mind and body were conceived as two self-
contained and mutually exclusive spheres, characterized
ajid distinguished by the two attributes, 'thought' and
'extension.' These two attributes Descartes regarded as
ultimately different, and as involving a complete disjunc-
tion between the substances which they quahfied. The
Cartesian dualism gave rise to the most baffling perplex-
ities. If mind and body be disjoined by dehnition, how
explain the empirical fact of their union? For those
facts which are so prominently in evidence in philosophy,
namely, the processes of perception and of voluntary action,
are neither exclusively mental nor exclusively bodily, but
a blend of the two. In perception a process which
begins as bodily ends as mental; and in volition a process
which begins as mental ends as bodily. Notwithstanding
these difficulties the Cartesian dualism has been perpetu-
ally confirmed by the habits of common sense; and still
remains the most plausible, and superficially the most intel-
ligible, doctrine. For it is customary and instinctive to
think of all duality as exclusive, like the duality of bodies
or non-intersecting spaces. Gesture and symbol — in short,
every method of sensuous representation, exhibit the same
type of duality; so that it requires more than the ordinary
precision of thought to avoid the assumption of its
universality.

Human experience abounds, however, in dualities of
another type. Social aggregates, for example, are dis-
tinguished not by the inherent nature of their contents,
but by some unifying relation. Thus the residents of the
United States are divided into sexes, pohtical parties, races,
ages, and innumerably many other groups; and these
groups overlap and intersect. They do not possess their
members exclusively, but share their members. The
difference between any two groups, such, for example, as
the Democratic party and the proletariat, is not a differ-
ence of members — for it is conceivable that their
membership should exactly coincide; but a difference of


310 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

principle of organizalian. In respect of one relation 1
members constitute one group, and in respect of another
relation the same members constitute another group.

The theory of immanence applies this tj^pe of difference
to the duality of mind and body. The application becomes
possible, indeed necessary, the moment it is recognized
that mind and body are both complexes capable of being
analyzed into more primitive terms. Neither mind nor
body is really simple; although common sense and philo-
sophical tradition have conspired to make them appear so.'
And when they are submitted to analysis, it appears that
the more primitive terms of which they are composed are,
in many cases at least, interchangeable. There are sen-
sible qualities and logical categories common to both.
Indeed it is impossible to fmd ground for asserting that
there is any term of the bodily complex that is disqualified
from entering the mental complex.

This view is best set forth in Ernst Mach's little book,
Die Analyse der Empfindungen, which deserves to be
numbered among the classics of modem reahsm.' The
elements of the physical and the psychical, according to
this author, are the same. But while physics studies one
type of relationship, such as the relation of a color to
the source of hght, psychology studies its peculiar relation
to the retina or nervous system of a sentient organism.
The color itself is neither physical nor psychical}

While Mach's statement of the theory is correct in
principle, it is colored by the author's naturalistic predilec-
tions. He neglects the logical aspect of knowledge.
Physical and psychical complexes have in common not only
sensible quaUties, but also certain more fundamental
formal relationships, such as implication, order, causation,
time, and the like. These relations in their purity can be
discovered only by carrying analysis beyond the bounds

' Cf. above, pp. S'-SS, 379-'83.

' There is an English translation by C. M. WilliamB, already wferred
to above, pp. 78-;!). Cf. also Mach: Erkenninis utid trrtum.
• Cf. above, pp. iTf-ijg; and below, pp. 364-365.


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


311


of sensible discrimination. They require, in short, logical
analysis.' Those who have adequately recognized the
importance of logic have, on their side, usually neglected
the specific question of the relation of mind and body. The
full scope of the theory of immanence appears only when
it is recognized that the same elements compose both min d
ajid body; and that these common elements embrace both
sense qudia and also logical abstractions. Then, instead
of conceiving of reality as divided absolutely between two
impenetrable spheres, we may conceive it as a field of
interpenetrating relationships, among which those de-
scribed by physics and psychology are the most familiar
and typical, and those described by logic the most ample
and universal.

When mind and body are so conceived, there is no
longer any peculiar difficulty involved in the perception of
bodily objects.' For the relationship which invests a
term with a bodily character does not preempt it; so that
at the same time that it is bodily by virtue of one relation,
it may also be content of perception by virtue of another
relation. When I perceive Mars, the sun's satellite (body)
is my percept (mind) ; and there is no more contradiction
than in supposing that my uncle is my father's brother.

§ 3. The second dualism which the theory of immanence
makes it possible to escape is that between knowledge and
R^Toeoution things. This dualism is not based merely on a
isnnimmaneni disjuncUoH of substanccs defined by dissimilar
Retation attributes, but on the alleged ' self -transcen-

dence' of knowledge. It would appear that knowledge is
'about' things other than itself. This has given rise to
the notion of the 'thing in itself,' as that to which
knowledge points or refers, but which is always 'other'
than the content of knowledge. The difficulty is evident.
All qualities and characters, in so far as known, are annexed
by knowledge and withdrawn from reality. The thing


> Ct. above, p. 108.
* Nor ID Uie voluntary c


.ttol ot bodily actions. Cf. below, pp. 341-341,


312 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

in itself, thus distinguished from all content, is reduced to
a bare X, entirely devoid of qualities and characters.
Thus the self-transcendence of thought seems to imply
agnosticism. Knowledge can do no more than point
beyond to the reality which it can never grasp. It is a
confession of failure.

The theory of immanence rectifies this dualism by assert-
ing that the difference between knowledge and things, like
that between mind and body, is a relational and functional
difference, and not a difference of content. In the first
place, we must distinguish between immediate knowledge
and mediate knowledge. In the case of immediate knowl-
edge, the thing and the knowledge are identical, except
as respects their relations. Thus a is knowledge by virtue
of its relation to a nervous system, and its presence in a
context of other elements similarly related. But a is
also 'thing in itself by virtue of its intrinsic quality, or by
virtue of its sustaining other relations than those of the
type just indicated. When I perceive Mars, it is knowledge
by virtue of its relation to my perceiving activity and to
my other percepts, my memories, plans, feelings, etc.;
but it is also 'thing in itself by virtue of its volume, and
its distance from the sun.

In the second place, however, it is necessary to recognize
that in mediate knowledge, or discursive thought, there
is a more complete difference between the knowledge and
the thing. There are even cases in which the knowledge
and the thing known possess little, if any, identical con-
tent. One may think about a, in terms of A, c, etc., as
when one thinks about Mars in terms of the words, "Mars,"
"sun," etc. The theory of immanence explains these
cases by saying that the thing thought about, and
the thought, are both experienced. The thing transcends
the thought, but it remains perceivable, or in some such
manner immediately accessible; and possesses the qualities
and characters which such an immediate knowledge re-
veals. "In such pieces of knowledge-of-acquaintance,"


I


I


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 3 13

says James, "all our knowledge-about must end." Or, as
Dewey expresses it, "the meaning is one thing; the thing
meant is another thing, and is ... a thing presented as
not given in the same way as is the thing which means." In
other words, things do not transcend knowledge, but the
thing mediated or ' represented ' transcends the representa-
tion; while this whole process of transcendence lies within
the field of things immediately presented.'

The theory of immanence thus recognizes two sorts of
transcendence: first, a thing's transcendence of the cogni-
tive relation by virtue of its possession of an intrinsic
quality of its own, or by virtue of its possession of other
relations, such, for example, as physical relations; second,
a thing's transcendence of its representation, within the
field of cognition itself.

II. The Theory of Independence
§ 4. The theory of immanence not only fails to estabUsb
realism;' but appears even to disprove it by bringing the
transcendent directly into mind. It is now
Urns. ind*pen- Hcccssary to show that the immanent may at
: oi Finiie thg same time be independent. It would not,
1 think, be far from the truth to say that the
cardinal principle of neo-reaJism is the independence of
the immanent* To prepare the way for the understanding
of this principle, it is necessary first to dispose of two
theories which approach it so closely as to be frequently
confused with it.

The first of these "half-realisms" is the doctrine pro-
mulgated by objective and absolute idealism, to the effect
that reality b independent of finite knowledge. Reahty is
a norm or ideal, that cannot be dependent on finite knowl-

' James: The Meaning of Ttvlk, p. 39; Dewey: Infiuenu of Damirt
on Pkilmopky, and olha Eisayi. p. 103, note (itnlioi mine).

■ Tht thmry of immanence a held in one form or luiocher by neariy all
contemporary philosophers.

'1 have discussed the lerm ' independence' more fully in"A Rcalislic
Theory of Indcpcndeoce," contributed to The New Rtoiiim.


Knowledge


314 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

edge because it is presupposed by it. Transcendental
idealism "discovers the final ground of every immaneot
being, neither in that being itself, nor in a transcendent
reality, but in a transcendent ideal which the knowing
subject has to realize." This transcendent ideal is inde-
pendent of all approximations to it, "because of the logical
priority of the ougkt (Sollen) to the is (Sein)." ■

But thi^ view (whether expressed in voluntaristic or in -J
intellectualistic terms) is non-realistic, for two reasons. In
the first place, "it accepts no being but that which is
immediately given in the idea" *— it moves entirely within
the limits of experience; and in the second place, "it sets
over against the judging subject as an object to which it
must conform, only an ought," which can have no meaning
apart from the activity of thought.' In short, things are
dependent on experience, and experience on thought; and
either form of dependence would be fatal to realism. [

§ 5. There is a much closer approximation to realism in
the pragmatist doctrine that experience is independent of
lodtpcndence ^hougkl. Indeed by many pragmatists this
of Mediate doctrfne b thought to constitute realism. Ae-
on edge cording to this doctrine thought is a special
process of mediation; which arises within experience,
and employs its terms, but without preempting them.
The subject-object relation, the relation of meaning, the
judgment of truth, these and other intellectual processes,
are not essential to experience; they are arrangements
into which experiences fall owing to certain practical
exigencies, such as the interrupUon of habit, or the insuffi-
ciency of immediate knowledge. The terms of the intellec-
tual process are intellectual only accidentally, and by
virtue of certain special relationships into which they enter.
But what shall we say of experience itself? Are things
essentially er/'erience, or is this,too, a peculiar and accidental
relationship? On this point, pragmatism, like most con-
temporary thought, is profoundly ambiguous. It would J

' H. Ricken: Dcr Ccgtnsland der Erkenntnls, p. i6j.


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


315


appear that while Dewey, for example, rescues reality from
dependence on intellect, he is satisfied to leave it in the
grasp of that more universal experience which is "a matter
of functions and habits, of active adjustments and re-
adjustments, of coordinations and activities, rather than of
states of consciousness." ' In any case the issue is clear.
A thorough-going realism must assert independence not
only of thought, but of any variety whatsoever of experi-
encing, whether it be perception, feeling, or even the instinc-
tive response of the organism to its environment.

§ 6. We are now prepared for a final statement of the

realistic theory of independence. It means that things

may be, and are, directly experienced without

dependmce of ctrcumstance.

Co^oll^i^ The radical character of this doctrine ap-
pears most clearly in connection with the con-
temporary use of the word 'experience.' According to
realism, experience may be expressed as (a) R", where o is
that which is experienced, and i? the experience-relation;
and where a is independent of R'. Now the term ' experi-
ence' may be used loosely to mean either a, R', or (o) if.
But if we are to regard experience as the most comprehen-
sive manifold, it is of crucial importance to distinguish
these uses of the term. To use it in either of the last two
senses, in which it embraces R', is to arrive at a phenom-
enalism or panpsychism, in which the ultimate com-
ponents of reality are experiences.* To use it in the former
sense, to mean what is or may be experienced, but which
need not be experienced, will lead to realism.

But it is better that realism should reject the term
'experience' (or even "pure experience")* altogether, in this

• Dewey: op. cit., p. tS7i d- above, p. J35.

» Cf. W. K. Clifford: "The elemenlaiy feeling is a thing in itsdf,"
Lttlura and Essays, pp. iBj, sq.

' Cf. James: ".^ World of Pure Experience," in Eisayi in Radical
Empiricism. For James's use ol the lerm experience, cf. abovG, pp. 1J4-
115 And below, pp. 164-365.


3l6 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

ultimate application — for it gives disproportionate em-
phasis , to an accidental feature of things. Since R" is
not necessary to things, there is no reason for limiting
' things ' even to what can be experienced. Such a circum-
scription is groundless and misleading. Professor Montague
has proposed the terra "pan-objectivisra"; ' but this is
not altogether satisfactory, because it suggests the correla-
tion of object and subject. The expression, 'neutral enti-
ties,' will perhaps serve better to emphasize the indifference
of the terms of experience, not only to their subjective
relations, but to their physical relations as well. We need
some such expression with which to refer to the alphabet of
being, as distinguished from any and all of the familiar
groupings which its elements compose.

The realist, in short, must resist every impulse to provide
a home for the elements of experience, even in ' experience '
itself. To bestow on them this independence may seem
but a bad return for their usefulness, "since thereby they
are turned out of house and home, and set adrift in the
world, without friend or coimection, without a rag to cover
their nakedness."* The idealist will doubtless inquire how
the facts can be "there independently and in themselves,"
without being somewhere;' and will be uneasy until he has
brought them home to consciousness. But the realist
must be satisfied to say that in the last analysis the ele-
ments of experience are not anywhere; they simply are
what they are. They find a place when they enter into
relationships; but they bring into these relationships
character which they possess quite independently and bj
themselves.

§ 7- We must now examine the arguments by which
neo-realism seeks to prove its cardinal principle of inde-

> W. p. Montague: "Contemporary Realism snd the Problenu of
Perccplbn," Jour, of Phil., Psych., and Sckniific Methods, Vol. IV, 1907,
p. 377-

* Kcid's comment on Hume, in his Inquiry into the Human Uiitd,
p. '03.

• H. H. Jaadum: Tht Nature of TrtOh, p. 40.


to


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


317


pcndence. Owing to the present state of the question,
realists have been largely occupied with the disproof of
TheAigumeais the contrary thesis to the effect that the cog-
telndepcn- nitive consciousness conditions being. This
NtgJivt Alga- contrary thesis, maintained by idealism, has
™°" obtained so wide an acceptance as to create

a presumption against the theory of independence. Be-
fore establishing realism, then, it is necessary to refute
idealism.

In the first place, realism contends that idealism has not
proved its case. It has depended for such proof upon fal-
lacious forms of procedure, such as those which I have
named 'argument from the ego-centric predicament,' and
'definition by initial predication.' Post-Kantian idealism
has contributed a further argument to the effect that the
synthetic unity, or logical structure, which must be im-
puted to reality, is an act of thought. But this argument
is also fallacious, in that it either virtually relies on
one of the former fallacies, or invests 'thought' with a
peculiar unifying power of which no one has ever given
any intelligible account. Since the proofs of idealism have
already been examined, it is unnecessary to enter into
detail here.'

We have also found, in the second place, that idealism is
beset with a difficulty of its own invention — the difficulty
of subjectivism or solipsism. If consciousness is construed
as owning its objects, so that they arise and perish with its
several acts or states, then the knowledge of the same thing
by different knowers or by the same knower at different
times becomes impossible. There can be no real idenrity,
but only a manifold of unique and irrelevant units of con-
sciousness. "If we say that they resemble one another,
we can only mean that the judgment that they resemble
one another exists, and this, in turn, can only mean that
some one Judges that this judgment exists, and so on.
And if we say that the same presentaUon may exist in

' See above, pp. 136-161,


318


PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES


difierent instances, this again can only mean that some
one judges it to be so,"^ When, in order to escape this
difficulty, idealism conceives of "a world already determined
by tkouglU," that is "prior to, and conditions, our indi-
vidual acquaintance with it," then idealism has virtually
withdrawn its initial version of consciousness as owning
its objects, with the result that both the difficulty and the
solution become gratuitous.' In other words, ideaUsm can-
not affirm its central thesis without taking up a position
which is on its own admission untenable.

This is a suitable occasion, in the tliird place, for intro-
ducing an objection which idealism in its turn urges against
reahsm. It is a negative application of "the ego-centric J
predicament,' If this predicament does not prove idealism, I
it is argued that it at least renders it impossible to prove '
realism. We cannot, perhaps, prove that everythhig is
known; but we certainly cannot, without contradiction,
know that there is anything that is not known. In so far
as this objection is purely dialectical, it has been sufficiently
answered by Mr. Russell. "When we know a general
proposition," he says, " that does not require that we should
know all or any of the instances of it. 'All the multiplica-
tion-sums that never have been and never will be thought
of by any human being deal with numbers over 1,000' is
obviously a true proposition, although no instance of such
a sum can ever be given. It is therefore perfectly possible
to know that there are propositions we do not know, in
^ite of the fact that we can give no instance of such a
proposition."'

The reasons for supposing that there are things that are
not known must now be introduced. We have thus far J

' B. Russell; "Meinong's Theory of ComplMCS and Asaumptions," 1
m, Hind, N. S.,Vol. Xm, 1904, p. stj. Cf. passim. 1

* T. H. Gteen: Prolegomena to Elhics, third edition, p. jS (italics nune).
Cf. above, pp. 161-163.

* B.Russell: "The Basis of Realism," /awf.ii/PAi7.,Pi>vA.,a>Hf5nMliifc
iietkods. Vol. VIII, iQii. pp. 160-161. For the id^istic argument,
d. J. F. Feriier, on "Agnoiology," or Theory of Ignorance, ttutit
Uttapkytia, pp. 405. sq-


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


319


done no more than to prepare the way for the realistic
thegry of independence, by refuting the contrary theory,
and by denying the charge that the realistic theory is
inherently absurd.

§ 8. The most general argument for realism is an appli-
cation of the theory of the external or extrinsic character of
„ relations. According to the contrary view, rela-

The Argument . ■ . . .

iromthe tions penetrate, possess, and compromise their

Eiiemiiiity tcrms, SO that it is impossible to separate the
terms from the relation without destroying
them. But according to the theory of the externality of
relations, terms acquire from their new relations an added
character, which does not either condition, or necessarily
alter, the character which they already possess.

The procedure of logic and mathematics — any procedure,
in fact, which employs the method of analysis — is necessarily
committed to the acceptance of the extemaUty of relations.
The method of analysis presupposes that the nature and
arrangement of the parts supplies the character of the whole.
If such were not the case the specification of the parts and
their arrangement would not afford a description of the
whole, and one would have to be content with an immediate
or mystical apprehension of it. Analysis and description
by specification would not constitute knowledge at all, did
not things actually possess the structure {a)R(b), made up
of the intrinsic characters a and b, in the relation R. This
does not mean that complexes may not be dependent on
one another, that {a)R{b) may not cause {c)R{d); but
only that if such is the case, the relations are nevertheless
something added lo the terms. Just as a does not derive its
content from R{b), so {c)R{d) does not derive its content
from the causa] relation to {a)R{b); it simply possesses that
causal relation over and above the content it possesses by
virtue of its component terms and relation. It happens
that that which is c and d in the relation R is also causally
dependent on {a)R{b).

Now what is the application of this to the question of the


320 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

dependence of things on knowledge?' It shows, in the
first place, that the content of things is in no case made up of
relations beyond themselves. So the content of a thing
cannot be made up of its relation to consciousness. Of
course, the consciousness of a thing is made up of the thing
and its relation to consciousness. Butthe thing then contrib-
utes its own nature to the conscious complex, and does
not derive it therefrom. If a is in relation to consciousness,
then consciousjiess-of-a is constituted in part of a, but a
itself is not constituted of consciousness. It follows, in the
second place, that whether the relation of a thing to con-
sciousness is a relation of dependence or not, is an empiri-
cal question. It is necessary to examine the relation, and
see. In other words, it is impossible to infer dependence
simply from the fact of relation. It is impossible to argue
that 'independent reals' must stand absolutely out of J
relation to consciousness, if they are to be independent. I
The theory of the externality of relations is not sufficient n
in itself to establish the case for realism. Indeed it is so
general in scope as to argue pluralism rather than rcahsm.*
It shows that the nature of things is prior to the relations
into which they enter, and that the nature of these relations,
whether of dependence or not, is an extrinsic fact. So that
we are left to conclude that many things are interdependent
or not, as the facts may prove. But it remains for realism
to investigate the precise nature of the relation of things
to consciousness, to discover whether or no this is a rela-
tion of dependence. And this is now a question of fact,
like the question of the relation of the tides to the moon,
or the relation of Mother Goose to the atomic weight
of hydrogen.

' Ct. Russell: op. cU., and " On the Nature of Truth," Prec. ArUt-M
tetiaH Set., n.s,, Vol. VU, 1906-1907, pp. 37-44; E. G. Spaulding: 'TAfjl
Icgkal Siruclure of Self-Refutini Systems," Phil. Rtmm. Vol. XIX. iQio^.V
pp. 376-301; and above, pp. 144-246. I

* Precisely as the contrary theory argues monism rather than Idealism^ I
d. Royce: "Tht World and Ikt Imlividual, Vol. I, Lect. in. For plur ■""
inn, d. above, pp, 141-149.


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


321


§ 9. The empirical argument for realism turns upon the
nature of mind, and the specific kind of relationship which
the mind's objects sustain to it. It must, of
fro^ihT™'"' course, be assumed that consciousness is a
Disiinctiun relationship, as has been shown in the fore-
wdA^JSSl g°"^g chapter. But first I propose to consider
an intermediate argument to the effect that
consciousness is different from its object This is the main
contention of Mr. G, E. Moore in the several papers which
he has contributed to this subject. The idealist "main-
tains that object and subject are necessarily connected,
mainly because he fails to see that they are distinct, that
they are two, at all. When he thinks of 'yellow' and when
he thinks of the 'sensation of yellow,' he fails to see that
there is anything whatever in the latter which is not in
the former." But it is evident that "sensation of yellow,"
contains over and above "yellow," the element, "sensa-
tion," which is contained also in "sensation of blue,"
"sensation of green," etc, "Yellow exists" is one thing;
and "sensing"' it is another thing.

In other words, the object of a sensation is not the sensa-
tion itself. In order that a sensation shall be an object, it
is necessary to introduce yet another awareness, such as
introspection, which is not at all essential to the meaning
of the sensation itself. And "the existence of a table in
space is related to my experience of it in precisely the same
way as the existence of my own experience is related to my
experience of that." In both cases awareness is evidently
a "distinct and unique relation," "of such a nature that
its object, when we are aware of it, is precisely what it
would be, if one were not aware."'

But what awareness is, further than this, Mr. Moore does
not inform us. Mr. Russell adds that it is " utterly unlike
other relations, except that of whole and part, in that one

' C. E. Moofc: "The Refutation ot IdcalUm," Mind, U.S.. Vol. XII,
'903. PP- 44'. 449, 453- Cf. also, "The Nature uid Reality of Objects of
Perception," Proe. ef tie AriiMeliaH Sec., n.s.. Vol. VI. 1905-06.


322 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of Us tenns presupposes the other. A presentation . . .
must have an object,"' But there is so little to stand for
it besides the object, that one could scarcely be blamed if
he allowed Mr. Moore's distinction to lapse. Furthennore,
while Mr. Moore's argument does prove that the object
does not contain or by itself imply being experienced, it does ■
not prove that it may not actually stand in some sortfl
of dependent relation to that circumstance. The 'table iaM
in my room,' does not contain awareness. But neither does *
it contain ' transpwrtation,' although it may, as a matter of
fact, have been put there by an expressman. And simi-
larly it may, despite Mr. Moore's argument, have been put
there by awareness. Such indeed woidd be the case,
were I merely imagining the table to be in my room, or
judging falsely that the table was in my room. As Mr.
Russell himself admits in a later discussion, it is possible
that 'table,' 'my room,' and the relation 'in,' should all
be related to mind, and compose an aggregate on that
account, although the table is not actually in the room.'
In other words, awareness creates an indirect relation
among its objects, by virtue of bringing them severally into
the direct relation of awareness. And it is open to anyone
to maintain that this indirect relation is the only relation
which things have inter se; or that any specific relation,
such as the physical relation, is a case of this indirect
relation; or that things are actually brought into new
cross-relations by means of this indirect relation.

§ lo. We need, in other words, to forsake dialectics, and
observe what actually transpires. We then find that
The Argument consciousness IS a species of function, exercised
irom the Nature by an Organism. The organism is correlated
oiMiiid ^^ ^^ environment, from which it evolved,

and on which it acts. Consciousness is a selective response

' B. Russell: of . «(., p. 515.

' "Every judgment is a relation of a mind to scvcml objects, one of
which U a relatioD; the judgment is true when the relation which is ou
of the objects relates the other objects, otherwise it is fiUse." B. Ri
FkUosopkkal Esiays, p. 181.


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


323


to a preexisting and independently existing environment.
There must be something to be responded to, if there is to
be any response. The spacial and temporal distribution of
bodies in its field of action, and the more abstract logical
and mathematical relationships which this field contains,
determine the possible objects of consciousness. The
actual objects of consciousness are selected from this
manifold of possibilities in obedience to the various
exigencies of life.

It follows that the objects selected by any individual
responding organism compose an aggregate defined by that
relationship. What such an aggregate derives from con-
sciousness will then be its aggregalioa, and nothing more.
A subjective manifold will be any manifold whose inclusion
and arrangement of contents can be attributed to the order
and the range of some particular organism's response.
The number of the planets, for example, and their relative
distances from the sun, cannot be so accounted for; but
the number of the planets wfnck I have seen, the temporal
order in which / have seen them, and their apparent distances,
can be so accounted for. In other words, the full astronomical
nature of the planetary system, together with the particular
circumstances of my sensibility, defines a limited manifold
which is called the planetary system for me, or so far as
belonging to my mental history. The physical planetary
system is thus prior to and independent of each and every
mental planetary system. And every question of subjec-
tivity or objectivity is to be tested in the same fashion.


ni. Truth and Error

§11. The proof of the independence theory from an
examination of the concrete nature of mind, defines at the
The Realm of Same time the principle which must be
Subjectivity employed in solving the problems connected
with subjectivity. We have found that the selective action
of consciousness not only invests things with the character


324 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

of 'object' or 'content;' but at the same time, accord-
ing as it excludes or includes, also defines characteristic
fragments, foreshortenings, and assemblages of things, that
may not coincide with physical and logical lines of cleavage.
And these may be said to be subjective.

The clearest instance of subjectivity in this sense is
perspective, or point of view; in which a projection defined
by the position of the organism is abstracted from the
plenum of nature. Such an experience does not create its
content but distinguishes it, by virtue of bringing some of
the environment into a specific relation that is not sustained
by the rest. The so-called 'secondary qualities,' such as
heat, color, sound, etc., must be dealt with by the same prin-
ciple. The simple qualities themselves evidently cannot be
subjective, any more than they can be physical. How far,
if at all, the spacial and temporal relarions of these qualities
may be regarded as subjective, will depend entirely on how
far these relations may be attributed to the sentient action
of the organism.'

Subjective manifolds, or fictions, once instituted by the
action of consciousness, may become stereotyped. They
may be remembered or described; and through tradition
and art, they may be incorjwrated more or less permanently
into the en\'ironmcnt. Such being the case, they may be
mistaken for what they are not, and thus give rise to illusion
and error.

§ 12, Subjectivity accoimts for the possibility of error;
but it does not in itself constitute error. It is possible
TheSphereof ^'^^ ^^^ mind to "entertain" daring and
Truth and original Speculations, go "wool-gathering,"

°' build "castles in Spain," or "imagine a vain

thing," without committing error, A highly speculative
or imaginative mind incurs a peculiar liability to error,

' For the itpplicalion of this method, d. W. P. Montague: "Gjotempo-
rary Realism and the Problems of Perception," Jour, of PhU., Psych., oW
Scimlific Methods, Vol. IV, 1507, No, 14; T. P. Nunn: "Are Secondary
Qualities lodependcDt of Perception?" Proc. Aristotelian Soe., M.S., Vol.


I


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


325


which is the price it pays for its greater chance of
truth. But there is no error until fiction is mistaken
for fact; and there is no truth in the correlative sense,
until a content of mind is rigbtJy taken to be fact.
Error and truth arise from the practical discrepancy or
harmony between subjective manifolds and the manifolds
of some independent order.

It is characteristic of truth, says Mr. Russell, to be a
"mixture of dependence upon mind and independence
of mind." Contemporary controversies concerning truth
have been largely due to the attempt to place it wholly with-
out mind or wholly within. The former attempt, illus-
trated by Mr. Russell's earlier view, leads inevitably to the
admission of "objective falsehoods," an admission which is
"the very reverse of plausible."' The attempt, on the
other hand, to place truth wholly within the mind, leads to
even more insuperable difficulties. This attempt is illus-
trated by Mr. Joachim's monistic-idealistic theory of truth,
according to which truth is the "systematic coherence" of
the absolute whole of experience. The distinction between
truth and error reduces to the difference between complete
and partial experience. But the result is that, humanly
speaking, there can be no truth, even the truth that there is
truth; since even Mr. Joachim's experience is partial,
and there is thus no way of distinguishing his theory of
truth from error.*

Pragmatism alone has consistently maintained that truth
and error have to do with the action of mind in relation to
an environment. Truth is neither coherence among things
merely, nor the complete internal coherence of thought; but
a harmony between thought and things. Similarly, error is
neither an incoherence among things merely, nor the incom-

» B. Russell: op. til., pp. 184, 177. "73- Cf- "On the Nature cA
Ttuth," Froc. ArisloUlian Sec., n.s., Vol. VII, 1906-1907, pp. 44-49.

' H. Joachim: The Nature of Trttlk, ch. Ill; d. above, pp. 184-188.
Mr. JoBchim hinuelf admiU the dilficulUes of his posilioo; cf. Cb. IV.
For Mr, Russell's critidsm. see "The MonislJc Theory ol Truth," Phile-
$9pkkal Eisayt.


326 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

plete coherence of thought; but a discrepancy between
thought and things. Pragmatism has maintained, further-
more, that the harmony and discrepancy in question is
practical. It is not sufficient to say that a true belief must
have a thing corresponding to it, for false belief has its
object as well. Nor will it do to say that a true belief
must resemble a thing: because, in the first place, that is
not sufficient, since a belief must mean its object; and
because, in the second place, it is contrary to fact, since it
Tteed not resemble its object. There seems to remain only
the alternative of regarding truth as a kind of right action
on a thing, and error as a kind of mistake.

But pragmatism, also, has been betrayed into a character-
istic difficulty. Through excessive emphasis on the practi-
cal aspect of truth, it has seemed to make truth after all
subjective; and without that insurance against a vicious
relativism which ideaUsm obtains from its conception of
an absolute subject.' It is possible, I think, to formulate
a theory that shall possess the merits of these views without
succumbing to their difficulties.

§ 13. Truth and error arise when some content of mind
is further dealt with in a characteristic fashion. It is pos-
Misiiiiiine and siblc for the mind to apprehend, speculate, or
Right Judging imagine, merely; but in this there is neither
truth nor error. It is also possible for the mind to believe.
that is, adopt, for the purpose of action. The truth or error
of the belief is then relative to the interest and the circum-
stances which determine the success of the action. Thus I
may accept the content of my perception as something to
be dealt with physically, in the interest of self-preservation.
In case such action is well taken, it is true; in case it is
mistaken, it is false, or illusory. But the same content may
be dealt with in another fashion without error. I may, for
example, disbelieve it, or discount it, with reference to my
physical action; or being interested, let us say, in the col-
lection of instances of illusion, I may count it as one.
' For the pragmatisl theory, cl. above, pp. 103-113.


I
I


REALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


327


On the other hand consider the case of an idea in the
discursive sense, an idea of something. It is an idea of
something by virtue of the fact that it is connected through
my plans or expectations with some portion of the environ-
ment. And in this case, there is nothing intrinsically
either true or false in a, or in any relation of a to 6, except
that of my intention. Whatever a be, whether fact or
fiction, it is then true only when the use I make of it is
successful; or false when the plans I form with it, or the
expectations I base on it, fail.

If this be regarded as subjectivistic, it can only be because
of the assumption that the determination of success and
failure is subjective. But such is not the case. Success
and failure are determined by interest, means, and circum-
stanced If it will not do to fish for mermaids, this is because
the facts are not consistent with the method I employ in the
interests of Uvclihood. In the last analysis the reason for
my folly lies in the fact that the image of a mermaid is a
composite generated by the selective abstracting and group-
ing of consciousness. The fact loosely expressed in the
judgment, 'there are no mermaids,' is that mermaid is a
subjective, and not a physical, manifold. Hence it must be
treated accordingly, if one is to deal with it successfully.
And similarly, if my theoretical hypothesis is a mistaken
one, this is because the locality to which my hypothesis
refers me thwarts the theoretical purpose for which I have
the hypothesis.

So far is it from being true that success and failure are
subjective, that the subjective satisfaction or discontent
may themselves be misleading. I may have the right idea
when I am most discontented; I may serenely mistake
fiction for fact, and heartily enjoy my illusions. And
success and failure may be foredoomed without being
consummated, as one may have the right key without
unlocking the door, or play the fool without paying the
penalty.

" a. bdow. pp. 33J-334-


328 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

The absolute thus reappears in the commonplace guise of
fact. Mind operates in an environment, and succeeds or
fails, according as it meets or violates the terms which the
environment dictates. Truth is the achievement, and
error the risk, incidental to the great adventure of knowl-
edge. But eternal being, and the order of nature, are not
implicated in its vicissitudes. So that if there be any
virtue in these terms "Eternal," "Order," or "Absolute,"
they can be transposed without loss.


CHAPTER XIV

A REAUSTIC PHILOSOPHY OF UFE

1 1, It will doubtless appear to most readers of this book
that realism is a philosophy of disillusionment. And in a
Eniightenmeni scDse tUs IS the casc. As a polemic, realism
and DiiiUusion- is principally concerned to discredit romanti-
""" cism; that is the philosophy which regards

reality as necessarily ideal, owing to the dependence of
things on knowledge. Realism, in other words, rejects the
doctrine that things must be good or beautiful or spiritual In
order to be at all. It recognizes the being of things that
are wholly non-spiritual, of things that are only acciden-
tally spiritual, and of things that, while they belong to the
domain of spirit, nevertheless antagonize its needs and aspi-
rations. The universe, or collective totality of being, con-
tains things good, bad, and indifferent. But before one
hastily concludes that realism discourages endeavor and
discredits faith, one will do well to recall that there is a
sense in which disillusionment is a source of power.

Life has maintained itself, and promoted its interests, in
proportion as it has become aware of the actual character
of its environment. It is the practical function of intelli-
gence, not to read goodness into the facts, but to lay bare
the facts in all their indifference and brutality; so that
action may be contrived to fit them, to the end that good-
ness may prevail. Well doing is conditioned by clear see-
ing. The development of intelligence as an instrument of
power has consisted mainly in freeing it from the imprortu-
nity of ulterior motives; and in rendering it an organ of
discovery, through which the native constitution of things
is illuminated and brought within the range of action.


J30 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

Achievement means taking advantage of things; and it is
the function of intelligence to present things, roundly and
fearlessly, so that they may serve advantage.

The civilization of nature has proceeded pari passu with
the abandonment of the notion that nature is predetermined
to human ends, and the recognition that nature has odd and
careless ways of its own. It is the discovery of the inde-
pendent mechanisms of nature, that has put tools into
the hands of man. The civilization of sodety has been
served best by those who have been most clearly aware
of its present failure. Similarly, within any field of in-
dividual endeavor it is the sanguine or complacent tem-
perament that is ineffective. It is the man who has no
illusions of success, that veritably succeeds — the man
that measures with a cool eye the length he has to go,
and can audit his own accounts without over-estimating
his assets.

All this would be too obvious to repeat, did it not have an
important bearing on the present state of philosophy. The
"new enlightenment," with which realism is allied, would
extend this principle of success to the larger issues with
which religion and philosophy have to do; but finds that the
ascendant philosophy, romanticism, is based upon another
principle. Men are to be reassured and comforted by
being guaranteed the eternal preeminence of the good.
Their hope is to lie in the fact that the indifference of
nature and the failure of man are apparent and not real.
Their hope is to be realized by that act of imagination
or thought which recovers the whole, and seeing it, judges
it to be good. Philosophy is itself to make things good;
since no more is necessary to the goodness of tilings than
their "synthetic unity."

Realism, on the other hand, proposes that philosophy,
like science, shall illuminate things in order that action may
be invented that shall make them good. Philosophy must
enable man to deal with, and take advantage of, his total
environment, as science adapts him to his proximate physi-


I


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


331


cal environment. It must exhibit a like forbearance; and
avoid confusing the present opportunity, mixed and doubt-
ful as it is, with the dream of consummate fulfilment. For
the question, "Wbatshalll do to be saved ?" is in principle
like any other question of expediency or policy : the answer
depends on what actual dangers imperil salvation, and what
actual instruments and agencies are available for the
achieving of it. To argue the eternal and necessary good-
ness of things from the implications of knowledge, is to
encourage a comfortable assurance concerning salvation,
when it is the office of religion to put men on their guard
and rouse them to a sense of peril.

If, then, realism is a philosophy of disillusionment, this
cannot be said to its disparagement. Realism does, it
is true, reject the notion that things are good because they
must be thought to be so; but it does not in the least
discourage the endeavor to make them good, or discredit
the hope that through endeavor they may become good.
On the contrary, in the spirit of all true enlightenment, it
removes illusions only in order to lay bare the confronting
occasion and the available resources of action.

§ 2, A philosophy of life must always contain two
principal components, a theory concerning the nature
H ^'^ goodness or value, and a theory concem-
tht Dependence ing the conditions and prospect of its reali-
oTValueaa zation. The former is the central topic of
ethics, and the second is the central topic of
a philosophy of religion.

In discussing the nature of goodness or value, 1 find my-
self in disagreement with certain eminent realists with
whom I should much prefer to agree. Mr. G. E. Moore
and Mr. Bertrand Russell both contend that goodness is an
indefinable quality which attaches to things independently
of consciousness. Thus Mr. Moore says: "If I am asked
'What is good?' my answer is that good is good, and that
is the end of the matter .... Being good, then, is not
identical with being willed or felt in any kind of way, any


332 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

more than being true is identical with being thought in
any kind of way." '

This view arises, I believe, largely from a misconception
of the precise scope of that fundamental realism to which
both of these writers subscribe. There are two realistic
contentions that are germane to the question of values,
In the first place, consciousness is a relation into which
things enter without forfeiting their independence. To
be conscious of a means that it is acted on in a peculiar
manner; and while this action gives a a new status and
new connections, it does not condition the being of a, or
give it its character as a. Thus if I desire a, it becomes a
Iking desired, and is connected in a new way with the
other things which I desire, or with the things I remember,
perceive, etc.; while it nevertheless is, and is a, quite inde-
pendently of this circumstance. But it is entirely conceiv-
able that the value of a should consist in its being desired;
in other words, in that specific relationship which the desid-
eraUve consciousness supplies. We should then say that
the being or nature of things is independent of their possess-
ing value, but not that tJicir possessing value is independent
of consciousness; any more than Mr. Russell himself
would say that a proposition's being true is independent of
consciousness, although the proposition itself is quite
independent of its being true.' J

In the second place, it is essential to realism to maintain I
that a proposition is independent of its being judged. But, '
as we shall presently see, this in no way contradicts the
supposition that values are functions of consciousness. For
it is quite possible that the proposition, ' I desire a,' should
be quite independent of all opinion in the matter. What I i
actually desire is dependent neither on what you think I
about it, nor even on what I think about it myself.

In any case, there seems to be no doubt of the fact that I

' Cf. Moore; FriiKipia Elhka.pp.d.ijj. Cf. Russdl: "The Elemealt J
of Ethics," in hb PhUosvphkal Eitays, pp. 4-15.
' Cf. above, p. 325.


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


333


tilings do derive value from their being desired, and possess
value in proportion as they are desired.' This is not to
be deduced, and so far, Messrs. Moore and Russell are
correct,* from the general idealistic arguments. It is not
to be argued from the fact that whenever values are found
they stand in relation to the finding of them. It is to be
argued only from the fact that whenever values are found
they stand in relation to some desire or interest, the present
finding being itself entirely negligible. Thus, if a value
may be represented as (a) R (M^), where a is anything, R
is the relation characteristic of consciousness, and M* a
particular desiring subject; then, the finding of value
must be represented as [(a) R (Af' )] R {M'), where M*
represents the finding subject, and where the smaller
relationship is quite independent of the larger. Neverthe-
less we find empirically that anything whatsoever acquires
value when it is desired. There is no quality, or combi-
nation of qualities, that is inherently valuable; or incapable
of possessing value; or exclusively valuable in the sense
that things must be valueless without it. Such interests as
that of desultory curiosity,or promiscuous acquisitiveness,
may invest anytlnng with value; and there is nothing so
precious that its value would not disappear if all needs,
likings, and aspirations were extinguished.

§ 3. As value in general arises from a relation to

„ », , interest, so moral value arises from the com-
TbeKatureof , ■ 1 1 1 ■ r ■ rw

Morsl Value, plcxity and mutual relations 01 interest, lo
The Righi imd understand the peculiar character of moral
value it is necessary to introduce two concep-
tions, that of Tightness, and that of comparative goodness.
Rightness is the character posseted by action that con-
duces to goodness. When an interest is confronted by an
occasion, or particular phase of the environment, there is an
action which will so meet the occasion as to fulfil the inter-


' Fat a fuller treatment of this topic, cf. my iloral Economy, Ch. 1, 11
Con montl value), and Ch. V (on aealhetic v»luc).
*a. Moote: of- f< H 77-Ss-


334 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

est. This is the right act in the premises. Thus an organism
governed by the instinct of self-preservation will act
rightly if it takes the food and leaves the poison, or attacks
the weaker enemy and shuns the stronger. The right
act is the act which takes advantage of circumstance;
advantage being relative at the same time both to the
interest which governs the agent, and to the situation
which confronts him.

But rightness is not necessarily moral; it may be merely
intelligence or expediency. Moral values appear only J
when there is a question of comparative value. And Has I
question arises from the contact and conflict of interests. 1
That which is one interest's meat is another's poison. The
act which is right in that it promotes one interest, is, by
the same principle, wrong in that it injures another interest.
There is no contradiction in this fact, any more than in the
fact that what is above the man in the valley is below the
man on the mountain. There is no contradiction simply
because it is possible for the same thing to possess several J
relations, the question of their compatibility or incom- 1
patibiUty being in each case a question of empirical fact. 1

Now just as an act may be both right and wrong in that
it conduces to the fulfilment of one interest and the detri-
ment of another; so it may be doubly right in that it con-
duces to the fulfilment of two interests. Hence arises the
conception of comparative goodness. If the fulfilment of
one interest is good, the fulfilment of two is better; and
the fulfilment of aU interests is best. Similarly, if the
act which conduces to goodness is right, the act that con-
duces to more goodness is more right, and the act which
conduces to most goodness Is most right. Morality, then,
is such performance as under the circumstances, and in view
of all the interests abetted, conduces to most goodness. In
other words, that act is morally right which is most right.

It follows that in the moral sense an act cannot be both
right and wrong. It is quite possible that the maximuiQ
goodness should be equally well promoted by several acts, J


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE 335

and in this case all such acts would be morally right. But
none of them could be morally wrong, because that would
require that it should be conducive to less goodness than
some other act, and this by definition is not the case.
The Objectivity § 4- We are now prepared to deal with a
or AbsDiuicness further qucsUon that has assumed prominence
temKiriiy'con- "^ Contemporary discussions, "Our question
[miooofiiic is," says Professor Mtinsterberg, "whether
'**"" we have to acknowledge anything in our world

as absolutely valuable." '

This question can be answered only by (Uviding it. In
the first place, values are not absolute in the sense of being
independent of all consciousness. They are relative to
desire or interest. Furthermore, values are not absolute
in the sense of being independent of individual or particular
interests. They are relative not only to individual inter-
ests, but to the conflict or opposition of interests; so that
they are at the same time both positive and negative, good
and bad.

But moral value transcends this relativity because it
includes it. There b a maximum value, or summum
bortum, which is not entirely relative to any particular
interest, simply because it is relative to all interests. It
is not a pure goodness or perfection, free from all the
qualifying conditions of life, but the best for existing inter-
ests under existing circumstames. Such a best may be said
to be absolute, however, in the sense that it is best
unambiguously; it cannot be also not the best.

Finally, and this is our most important conclusion, all
values whatsoever are absolute in the sense that they are
independent of opinion. If a is good, in that I need, like,
or aspire to it; that fact can be neither made nor un-
made by any judgment or opinion concerning it. The

' EUmal Voliia, p. 9. I h»ve dealt with this quotSon, with (pedal
reference to Its ambiguity, in an article entitled "The Question of Moral
Ohllgation," ImUr. Jimr. ef Elhia, Vol. XXI, igti. Some paragraphs of
this article are reprinted in triuit follows.


336 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

general acceptance of so obvious a truth is prevented
by a widespread confusion between simple desire, and
judgment of value; the relativity of value to the former
being construed as a relativity to the latter. This con-
fusion is due to the fact that there are a^ective judgments,
in which one both desires an object and at the same time
pronounces it good. To avoid the confusion, it is necessary
to deal with these components discriminatingly: and to
say that while the element of desire invests its object with
goodness, and is thus a fact of value; the element of
judgment is, like all judgments, liable to truth and error
according to its agreement or disagreement with fact.

This distinction is obscured and the whole experience
given a 'pseudo-simplicity' by such notions as 'apprecia-
tion,' and 'evaluation,' or Westermarck's "emotions of
approval." These hybrids are supposed to be at the
same time judgments in form, and facts as respects their
freedom from error. But this is simply to exploit the
equivocation which their dual nature makes possible.
"To name an act good or bad," Westermarck says, "iJti-
mately implies that it is apt to give rise to an emotion of
approval or disapproval in him who pronounces the judg-
ment." And again: "The moral concepts, then, are essen-
tially generalizations of tendencies in certain phenomena
to call forth moral emotions." By such considerations
Westermarck believes that he shows that " the presumed
objectivity of moral judgments thus being a chimera, there
can be no moral truth in the sense in which this term is
generally understood."' Now the "moral emotion" either
does or does not contain a judgment. If it does contain a
judgment predicating goodness of an act, then that judg-
ment is either true or false according as the act is or is
not " apt to give rise to an emotion of approval" in the
judge. If it does not contain a judgment, if it is simply an
"indignant" or "kindly" emotion evoked by the act, then
' Weatermarck, Origin and Development of Ike Moral Ideas, VoJ, I, pp.


I


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


337


it is merely evidence for the truth or falsity of a judgment
about the goodness of the act. In either case, there can be
no doubt of the objectivity or truth of moral judgments.

If it is not permitted to define simple goodness or value
in terms of an approving judgment, the prohibition is
more positive and unmistakable in the case of moral value.
For here it is not sufficient, as in the case of value in general,
that there should be a simple and direct relation to a cer-
tain form of consciousness. What one ought morally to
do is not simply what one wants to do; it must be proved
to be the right or the best, as having a certain more elaborate
determination. Thus a right act is an act which produces
good, that is, fulfils an inciting interest, in a given situa-
tion. It is therefore determined by such a configuration
regardless of opinion, which may be either correct or incor-
rect. Similarly, what is best, is a quantitative derivative of
what is good. It must depend on the prior nature of
goodness and whatever category of quantity is here applica-
ble. It is not uncommonly supposed that if what is desired
is good, then what is preferred is best. But the same
vicious ambiguity is present here. If preference is regarded
simply as a quantitative variation of desire, simply as more
of desire, then it may possibly afford a means of defining
quantitative variations of goodness. In this case, however,
the fact would have to be ascertained by some method
of measurement, and no authority could be attached to
the agent's mere profession of preference. If, on the other
hand, preference is taken to mean a judgment to the effect
that one act is better than another, then reference is made
to a predicate 'better'; which, since it stands in some
objective relation to another predicate 'good,' can be used
either correctly or incorrectly.

It would appear, then, that the de&nition of goodness in
terms of relation to desire, while it may easily lead to con-
fusion, does not in fact lend any support whatever to the
attempt to reduce moral values or obligations to the judg-
ments concerning them, and is therefore not relalivistic


338 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

in any vicious or sceptical sense. And such being the case,
there is no need of the characteristic idealistic remedy.
Value having been first defined as 'what I judge to be
valuable,' this is amended by idealists to read, 'value is
what I judge to be valuable, when I judge truly.' The
qualifying phrase is added as a means of averting the
sceptical consequences of the rest. Lest the conflicting
judgments of mankind shall so annul one another as to
reduce value to the caprice of private opinion, true value
is reserved for a standard or absolute judgment. J

The general theory of which this is a special applicatloitl
has already been examined; but the ethical application |
affords a striking illustration of its futility. For we are at
once set to inquiring concerning the distinguishing marks of
this true judgment of value, so that we may know it from
the false. We are as much enlightened as an astronomer
would be, were he informed that the weight of Neptune is
what a true judgment would pronounce it to be. And if
the term 'true' is replaced by such terms as 'eternal,'
'standard,' 'universal,' 'necessary,' 'objective,' or 'con-
sistent,' nothing is gained, for these are only figurative
or synonymous expressions for the same thing.

This accounts for the emptiness of Kant's famous
"categorical imperative."' To "act only on that maxim
whereby thou canst at the same time will that it should
become a universal law," cannot mean that you should
expect others to act as you do, or that you should merely
be able to will that they should Ifiink as you do. There is
no act which can be exactly repeated; and there is no
maxim which cannot as a matter of fact be willed to be
law universal. Kant can only mean that you should so
act as to be confirmed in your act by every impartial
critical judgment that is in possession of the facts. In
other words, you should act on a true maxim, or you ought
to do what it is truly right to do. But to determine what

' Kntit: Mtlapkysie o] Morals, trans, by Abbott (" KAiit't Thetny oj

Ethics"), p. 38.


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


339


It is tnily right to do, it is necessary to turn to the objective
context of action.

Thus to give values the absoluteness or objectivity of
fact, it is necessary only to distinguish carefully between the
fact of desire which invests its objects with value, and judg-
ments concerning such facts. "If one understands . . .
by valuing (Wertung) exclusively the affectional disposition
which lies at the basis of the value relation," says Ehrenfels,
"then it is dear that valuing either exists or does not exist,
but can be neither true nor fabe, inasmuch as these attri-
butes can attach only to judgments." ' The relativity
of value to 'valuing,' or to some desiderative action of
mind, no more prejudices its 'objectivity,' than does
their relativity to parents prejudice the objectivity of off-
spring. Values are in this epistemological sense as absolute
as any other fact — no more, no less.

§5. There is another possible meaning of 'absolute
value,' which I have purposely reserved for special
treatment. Is value absolute in the sense of
brtween^ite" possessum OT realization? Is value the uni-
Absoluunes versal or fundamental determination of things?
^"dv"^ To this question we must now turn. It is
important first to distinguish clearly between
the absoluteness of values in the above epistemological
sense, and in this metaphysical sense.

The discovery that values possess their natures, and obey
their laws, independently of opinion, does not in the least
guarantee their supremacy. Nor is their metaphyseal
status improved if they are denominated "eternal."
Whatever judgment is true, such as 'justice is right,' is
eternal in the sense that it is true regardless of the time
at which it may be pronounced. This would be the case

'C.V. EhrenIeU:5>j(«M A* WerUhtorit.-p. loi; c(. pp. io>-i07. It must
be Bdmitted, I think, that the substitution of Wertutif (valuing) [ot Begtk-
runt (ddiring) is unfortunate, owing to the readiness with which the
former teno is confused with judidaJ " evaluation." The writen of
this school ('the Austrian Schtxil') are by no means wholly guiltless of
CDofusion.


340 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

even if it happened that the rightness of justice was
relative to a temporal epoch of civilization. For there
would then be a proposition predicating its rightness of
that epoch, which would be true at all epochs. And a
like 'eternity' would attach to the proposition, 'I once
hked figs,' or, 'savages praise homidde.' It is, however,
possible to discover some propositions that hold of life
independently of any particular historical epoch, propor-
tions defining the broad generic features of life. Such
propositions will contain time, in that life is temporal; but
they will contain time as a variable or universal, and so
will hold at all particular times. Such propositions consti-
tute the fundamental principles of theoretical ethics.

But propositions concerning value may hold at all I
times, and even for all time, and yet be metaphysically
insignificant. It may be objectively and universally
true that justice conduces to abundance of life, but this
DO more insures abundance of life, than does the equal
objectivity and universality of the law, 'the wages of sin
are death,' insure the extinction of life. The principles of
value are abstract, and they themselves no more determine
the extent to which they shall be embodied m nature and
society, than do the principles of geometry define the
number of physical solids that shall actually exist.

It is this second question with which religion is con-
cerned. It is vain, therefore, to attempt to ground relig-
ious faith, as the Ritschlians have attempted to do,' on
the mere vatidiiy of values. For religious faith has to do,
not only with the truth that there are values, but with the
hope that they may prevail. And such a hope can be justi-
fied only empirically, by an examination of the relation of
values to existence. Are values effectual? Do they in any
sense constitute the ground of existence? Is there evidence
to show that they will, in the long run, control existence?

' Ct. W. Hermann; Die Uetapkysik in dfr Thtohgie; cf. criticism by
O. PSeidcrcr: Pkiiosopky of RcligioH, trans, by Stewart and Menaie% _
Vol. n, pp. 188, sq.


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


341


I 6. The first of these questions, concerning the effectu-
ality of values, can be answered only in the light of a
Value M Cause ^^'' coDccpUon o£ the natufe of causality or
or Detetmina- determination. Is there such a thing as
'""' moral causality? On the face of it, there is.

Nothing is more apparent than the fact that, within
limits, man does what he wants — reaches his ends, exe-
cutes his designs. But it is customary to suppose that
science in this case discredits appearances. It is supposed
that the claim for moral causation rests on a confused notion
of causation, the only clear and demonstrable causation
being exhibited in mechanical laws.

We should, I think, be forced to accept this conclusion
if moral causation were necessarily identified with the
feeling of activity. Naturalism is quite correct in asserting
that the only intelligible and verified cases of causation
are cases of determination by law.' But what if there be
cases of determination by moral as well as by mechanical
law?

Physics discovers mechanical laws by looking for the
constant features of physical change; especially such as
may be expressed as mathematical ratios of space, time,
and their complex derivitives. An event is said to be
explained by a law, when it can be deduced by assigning
particular values to the variables which the law comprises.
But when life is observed, it exhibits constancy of another
type, a constancy of interest. The complex motions of
an organism may be, and are, explained, by regarding
them as particular instances of self-preservation. Similarly,
the biographer seeks to discover certain general motives,
such as ambition, cupidity, or love; and having such mo-
tives in mind, he is enabled to show the unity and con-
sistency of a life that would otherwise be a mere aggregate
and sequence of actions. Steadiness of purpose is no less,
and no more, a matter of fact than conservation of energy.
If it be true that the kinetic energy of my actions is quanti-

' CI. above, pp. (jq-ioo.


342 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

tatively proportionate to the chemical energy of the nutri- 1
live substances which I consume, it is not less true that I
my actions exhibit a qualitative unifonnity which can only
be expressed in terms of the interests that govern me. In
the one case as in the other, the law is a descriptive sum-
mary of change; relating differences to an underlying
identity, and novelties to an imderlying permanence. .

It is customary to suppose that the accepted validity ]
of mechanical laws somehow stands in the way of the
operation of interest. But it would be precisely as reason-
able to argue that the de facto existence of interests stands
in the way of the operation of force and energy. The sup-
position of an absolute incompatibility between mechanism
and interest is, however, contrary both to reason and to
fact. There is no reason why an identical process should not
obey many laws, and laws of different types; once we are
rid of the fallacy of 'exclusive particularity.' It is entirely
possible, in other words, that a process should exhibit
constancy in several respects. Whether such multiple
determination is possible in any given case is a question
of fact.

And, turning to the case before us, it is evident that
such multiple determination is the fact. I weigh a certain
number of pounds in relation to the mass of the earth,
and at the same time am actuated by certain political
motives. Though my energy be proportionate to my
nutrition, it may none the less be expended to good or
bad ends. And though the race of mankind crawl upon
the surface of a planet from which they have sprung, and
though their every action must comply with conditions
imposed by a physical environment, it is not less true that
these actions exhibit the characters of civilization. They
satisfy needs, carry out wishes, and progresavely realize
certain common and ideal aspirations.

§ 7. There is sufficient ground, then, in reason and in 1
fact, for asserting that interests operate, that things take place
because of the good they promote. And this, I think, is


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


343


the meaning of freedom, both as an actuality and as a
prerogative. I can and do, within limits, act as I will.
Freedom Action, in other words, is in a measure governed

Postivp ind by desires and intentions. And this measure
**"'*'* is capable of being increased, as knowledge,

skill, and cooperation develop. There is even a possibility
and prospect of its increase to a point at which values shsdl
enter into possession of the world at large, as they have
already come to possess it in part.

There is also a negative freedom. There is freedom from
the exclusive control of mechanical laws. Indeed, it may
be said that, in a certain sense, the control of life by
moral laws takes precedence of its control by mechanical
laws. For the unit of life, the animal and human individ-
ual, is a moral and not a mechanical constant. An indi-
vidual life is distinguished by what it seeks to preserve
and promote. It is disjoined from the spacial and material
continuum in which it is immersed, by its partiality, by
the specific bias and preference which animate it. It may
even be said that in a measure life is independent of mech-
anism. For if an individual life is defined by its interests,
then it will be identified with a physical environment to
just the extent, and no more, that its interests are physical.
If any life can be said to consist of interests that are inde-
pendent of the spadal and temporal juxtaposition of things,
if its interests can be said to be capable of realization
under other circumstances and through other means, then
there is ground for saying that such an individual life is
non-physical, and not necessarily boimd up with the
fortunes of the body.

There is also a freedom from the control of sodal or
cosmic moral laws. There is a sense in which every indi-
vidual is morally a law unto himself. This means only
that his action cannot be explained altogether by the
larger purposes which embrace him along with others.
That there are such larger purposes, and that they are
effectual, will not, I think, be disputed by anyone who


344 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

admits that purposes are effectual at all. But social
purposes grow out of individual purposes, and never wholly
assimilate them. It is no more possible to explain a man's
action fully in terms of the motives which actuate a social
aggregate, than it is possible to explain any physical event
wholly in terms of the laws, if there be such, that determine
all physical events. The pluralistic character of the uni-
verse is reflected in life. Interests, like other things, are
more or less bound together. Indeed, in this case, unity
is more an advantage to be sought, than a necessity to be
deprecated. I

§ 8. All religion of the positive and hopeful type is based
on the belief that the good will prevail. As James has
TbeGioundsof SO successfully and so eloquently urged, this
Religious Belid jges not necessarily mean that the very being
of things is grounded in their goodness. If such were the
case, realism would, of all philosophies, yield least com-
fort to religion. For realism explicitly repudiates every
spiritual or moral ontology. But there is another meaning
of religious optimism, that is not less comforting for being
less extravagant. According to this second meaning,
religious belief is a confidence that what is indifferent will
acquire value, and that what is bad will be made good —
through the operation of moral agents on a preexisting
and independent environment. i

We have already found support for this beb'ef in the |
fact that the good is both objectively real and actually '
operative. There is promise and not discouragement in
the fact that nature has yielded life; and in the fact that
life, once established, has imposed its interests upon the
environment. Were it necessary that the good should
triumph only in the breach of mechanical law, then the
growth of science would indeed be ominous. But life
triumphs in and through mechanical law. The systems
of nature enter intact into the systems of life. The tem-
poral antecedence of mechanism is in no way prejudicial
to the subsequent ascendency of life. If life can have J


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


345


established itself at all, it can by the same meaos enlarge
its domain. And if interests can have freed themselves
as they have from preoccupation with immediate bodily
exigencies, tliey can by a further and like progression still
further reduce the tribute which they pay to the once
omnipotent environment.

There is in fact such a forward movement of life. It
becomes freer and more powerful with time. The fonns
of life which are most cherished — intellectual activity, the
exercise of the sensibilities, and friendly social intercourse —
are the very forms of life which are capable of maintaining
and promoting themselves. "If," says a living scientist,
"we make a curve of the ascent of vertebrates, ... we
find that, as the curve ascends, the ordinates of marital
affection, parental care, mutual aid, and gentler emotions
generally are, on the whole, heightened step by step. That
organisms so endowed should survive, in spite of the ad-
mitted egoistic competition that is rife, is nature's sanction.
The earth is the abode of the strong, but it is also the home
of the loving." ' And that which is true of the develop-
ment of animal life at large, is true in greater measure of
the development of human life. The liberalization and
betterment of life through the agencies of civilization —
the diversification and refinement of interests, the organiza-
tion and solidification of sodety, and above all the growth
of reason — is at the same time the guarantee of its stability
and further expansion.

§ 9. It is customary to assume that if man cannot be
proved to have possessed the world from the beginning, he
The Huud must renounce hope of possessing it in the end.
eiFuib xhus Mr. Russell apparently infers that if

"Man is the product of causes which had no prevision
of the end they were achieving," then it must follow that
his life is "brief and powerless," that "on him and all
his race the slow, sure doom falls pitiless and dark."


346 PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES

The rigorous and truth-loving mind will sacrifice hope on
the altar of science, and get what comfort it can from the
emancipation and freedom of reason. In this spirit Darwin
wrote: "The safest conclusion seems to me that the whole
subject is beyond the scope of man's intellect; but man
can do his duty." And to-day, in the name of the logical
method and the reahstic metaphysics. Mr. Russell concludes
that "for man ... it remains only to cherish, ere yet the
blow falls, the lofty thoughts that ennoble his little day;
. . , proudly defiant of the irresistible forces that tolerate,
for a moment, his knowledge and his condemnation, to
sustain alone, a weary but unyielding Atlas, the world
that his own ideals have fashioned despite the trampling
march of unconscious power." '

That such a philosophy of life is more admirable than
superstition, sentimentalism, or complacent optimism, few
will deny. But if martyrdom is to be proclaimed as a
gospel for men, it must be more than courageous; it must
be in the best sense wise and profitable. The conviction
that the abandonment of religious hope is the supreme
moral of science and philosophy, must rest entirely upon
the supposition that consciousness is impotent. It must
be supposed that interests and ideals can do no more than
create "a new image of shining gold," a dream of better
things, with which for the moment to embroider that
"outward rule of Fate," which no living hand can stay.*
But if ideals mof ft, if consciousness, instead of creating the
mere toys and playthings of the imagination, does actu-
ally make things good ; then renundation is as fatuous and
unreasonable as it is gratuitous.

It is true that the claims of religious optimism cannot
be proved. But neither can it be proved " that all the
labours of the age, all the devotion, all the inspiration,

' B. Russell: "A Free Man's Worship," in Pkilosapkicai Essays, pp.
tfo, 70; Darwin: Life and Letters, Vol. I, pp. 376-»7;.

* Russell: op. cit., p. 66. For a siiuilar view of the idealizing but
impotent (unction ot consciousness, d. G. Santayana, Li/e of Rti
I {Reason in Common Sense), Ch. DC.


I
I
I


REALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE


347


all the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined
to extinction in the vast death of the solar system, and
that the whole temple of Man's achievement must inevi-
tably be buried beneath the debris of a universe of ruins." '
To pretend to speak for the universe in terms of the
narrow and abstract predictions of astronomy, is to betray
a bias of mind that is little less provincial and unimagi-
native than the most naive anthropomorphism. What
that residual cosmos which looms beyond the border of
knowledge shall in time bring forth, no man that has yet
been born can say. That it may overbalance and remake
the little world of things known, and falsify every present
prophecy, no man can doubt. It is as consistent with
rigorous thought to greet it as a promise of salvation, as
to dread it as a portent of doom. And if it be granted
that in either case it is a question of over-behef, of the
hazard of faith, no devoted soul can hesitate. Justified
by the victories already won, he will with good heart
invite his will to the completion of the conquest.

There is nothing dispiriting in realism. It involves the
acceptance of the given situation as it is, with no attempt
to think or imagine it already good. But it involves no
less the conception of the reality and power of life. It
is opposed equally to an idealistic anticipation of the
victory of spirit, and to a naturalistic confession of the
impotence of spirit, In this sense all bold and forward
living is realistic. It involves a sense for things as they
are, an ideal of things as they should be, and a determina-
tion that, through enlightened action, things shall in time
come to be what they should be.

' Kussetl: op, til., pp. 6»4i.


APPENDIX


M JAMES


gnificant as that of
traditional problem,
nedium of personal
endes of an epoch.
There is no glory to
upon its unguarded
:tSy whether of com-
premature and inju-
e to be rendered to
is the most suitable
proportionate ezposi-
>m accidental empha-
and to the exigencies
f e, James himself felt
of giving it unity and
e system of thought,
er been made explicit,
this work himself is
efforts of mine can in
t to make a first rude
less and its bad draw-
hole and the proper

L XX, 1911; and from Tk$

Phfloaophy/' in wfaidi he
meat of his thotight; but
Ads, afford the raider the
cooipoted it. It hu beeQ
yoftfemr €f PkUoiopky.

34y


APPENDIX


oC Mind


THE PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES*

I, Philosophy of Mind

Si. a philosophy so complete and so significant as that of
William James, touching, as it does, every traditional problem,

„ „, , and expressine through the medium of personal
The Place of ■ .. . . r°. , , . , "^ ,

the Probrem gcmus the characteristic tendenaes of an epoch,
cannot be hastily estimated. There is no glory to
be won by pressing the attack upon its unguarded
defences; while solemn verdicts, whether of com-
mendation or censure, would surely prove premature and inju-
dicious. But there is perhaps one service to be rendered to
James and to philosophy for which this is the most suitable
time, the service, namely, of brief and proportionate exposi-
tion. Every philosophical system suffers from accidental empha-
sis, due to the temporal order of production and to the exigencies
of controversy. Towards the dose of his life, James himself felt
the need of assembling his philosophy, and of giving it unity and
balance. It was truly one philosophy, one system of thought,
but its total structure and contour had never been made explicit.
That James should not have lived to do this work himself is
an absolute loss to mankind, for which no efforts of mine can in
the least compensate.' But I should like to make a firet rude
sketch, which may, I hope, despite its flatness and its bad draw-
ing, at least suggest the form of the whole and the proper
emphasis of the parts.

< Rrprinted from the PkUosaphkiil Revirw, Vol. XX, tgit; and bom Tie
Barxard CraduaUs' itagatine, Vol. XIX. 1910.

* Jamrs Icit sn unfinished "Introduction to Philosophy." in which he
had mude a beginning oi a systematic restatement of his thought; but
owing to its incompleteness it does not. u it stands, afford tbs reader the
total view which was in the author's mind as he composed it. It has been
published since bis death under the title, Some Prablenu of PUletcfkf.
349


3J0


APPENDIX


IE one couM read James's writings in a day, and forget the
order of their publication, one would, I think, find that they
treated of three great topics — the nature of the human mind,
the structure and criteria of knowledge, and the grounds of
religious belief. Were one then to take into consideration the
writer's development, together with his interests and his apti-
tudes, one would be brought to see that the first of these topics
was original and fundamental. James's philosophy was a study
of man, or of life. The biological and medical sciences, psychol-
ogy, philosophy proper, and religion, were not for him so many
independent disciplines, from which he chose now one and now
another owing to versatility or caprice; but so many sources of
light concerning human nature. So that while one has diffi-
culty in classifying him within a curriculum or hierarchy of the
sciences, since he ignored such distinctions and even visited the
intellectual under-world when it suited his purpose, his mind
was none the less steadily focussed on its object. His knowledge
was on the one hand as unified, and on the other hand as rich
and diversified, as its subject-matter. In the summary which
follows I shall first Rive an account of his general views of the
human mind; after which I shall discuss his view of man's
great enterprises, knowledge, and religion.

§2. In one of his earliest published articles, on "Spencer's
Definition of Mind," ' James adopts a standpoint which he
Mind as In- "ever leaves. His object is man the organism, sav-
icrestcd and ing himself and asserting his interests within the
Selective natural environment. These interests, the irreducible
" teleological factor," must be the centre and point of reference
in any account of mind. The defect in Spencer's view of mind
as correspondence of "inner" and "outer" relations, lies in its
failing to recognize that such correspondence is relative to the
organism's interests. "So that the Spencerian formula, to
mean anything definite at all, must, at least, be re-written as
follows: 'Right or intelligent mental action consists in the
establishment, corresponding to outward relations, of such
inward relations and reactions as will favor the survival of the
thinker, or, at least, his physical well-being.'"' The mind is
not a "mirror" which passively reflects what it chances to come

' The Joumai of Specui/itivt PkUosapky, Vol. XII, Jnn., 1878.
• Loc. cU., p. s-


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


351


It i


5 and t


and its correspondence with the


t initiates a
"outer world" means that its effort successfully meets the en-
vironment in behalf of the organic interest from which it sprang.
The mind, like an antenna, feels the way for the organism. It
gropes about, advances and recoils, making many random
efforts and many failures; but is always urged into taking the
initiative by the pressure of interest, and doomed to success or
failure in some hour of trial when it meets and engages the
environment. Such is mind, and such, according to James,
are all its operations. These characters, interest, activity,
trial, success, and failure, are its generic characters when it is
observed concretely; and they are the characters which should
take precedence of all others in the description of every special
undertaking of mind, such as knowing, truth-getting, and
believing.

The action of the mind is not, however, creative. Its ideas
are not of its own making, but rather of its own choosing. At
every stage of its development, on every level of complexity,
the mind is essentially a selective agency, "a theatre of simul-
taneous possibilities." ' The sense-organs select from among
simultaneous stimuli; attention is selective from among sensa-
tions; morality is selective from among interests. And above
all, thought is selective. The unity and discreteness of " things"
first arises from interest in some special group of qualities, and
from among the group the mind then selects some to represent it
most truly as its "essential" characters. Reasoning is not the
mere mechanism of association. Ganulousness in which the
course of ideas is allowed to proceed as it will, is unreason, a
symptom of mental decay. To reason is to guide the course of
ideas, through discriminating and accentuating those whose
associates are to the point. Human sagacity and genius, as
well as the whole overwhelming superiority of man to bmte, are
to be attributed to a. capacity for extracting the right characters
from the undifferentiated chaos of primeval experience; the
right characters being those which are germane to the matter
in hand, or those which enable the mind to pass to similars over
a bridge of identities.'

' Principle] ofPsyeMety, Vol. I, p. sS8,

• Op. dl., Ch. V, IX. Xm, XIV, XXn. Cf. e^jecUlly, Vol. I, pp.
1S4-290; Vol. 11, pp. 329-366.


3j2


APPENDIX


83. Let us now look at mind from a somewhat different angle.
If its operations are selective rather than creative it follows that
The Relational '"^ derives its Content from its environmcDt, and
D[ Fuactiooal adds nothing to that content save the circumstance
'p>^'^ of its selection. If the term 'consciousness' be
used to designate the mind's content, that manifold,
namely, which can be held in view and examined by introspec-
tion, then consciousness is not a distinct substance, or even a
distinct quality; but a grouping, exclusive and inclusive, of
characters borrowed from the environment. James first offered
this account of the matter in the article entitled, "Does Con-
sciousness Exist?" published in 1904. But he then wrote:
"For twenty years past I have mistrusted 'consciousness' as
an entity; for seven or eight years past I have suggested its
non-eidstence to my students. " ' This theory is therefore
both closely related to his other theories, and also of long
standing.

In suggesting the non-existence of consciousness, James
meant, of course, to prepare the way for an account of its true
character. This turn of thought may perhaps be paraphrased
as follows. If by a thing's existence you mean its separate
existence, its existence as wholly other than, or outside of, other
things, as one planet exists outside another, then consciousness
does not exist. For consciousness differs from other things as
one grouping differs from another grouping of the same terms;
as, for example, the Republican party differs from the American
people. But this is its true character, and in this sense it exists.
One is led to this conclusion if one resolutely refuses to yield to
the spell of words. What do we find when we explore that
quarter to which the word ' consciousness ' directs us? We find
at first glance some particular character, such as blue; and at 1
second glance another particular character, such as roundness. J
Which of these is consciousness? Evidently neither. For there
is no discoverable difference between these characters, thus
severally regarded, and certain parts of nature. Furthermore,
there is no discoverable community of nature among these
characters themselves. But continue the investigation as long
as you please, and you simply add content to content, without

' Journal of Phil., Piych., and 5c Methods. Vol. I, 1904, p. 477. Th«
4TticIe has been reprinled in £iiayi in Radical Empiricism, I.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


3J3


finding either any class of elements that belong exclusively to
consdousness, or any conscious "menstruum" in which the ele-
ments of content are suspended. The solution of the riddle lies
in the fact that one term may be called by several names corre-
sponding to the several relationships into which it enters. It is
necessary only to admit that "every smallest bit of experience
is a multum in parvo plurally related, that each relation is one
aspect, character, or function, way of its being taken, or way of
its taking something else; and that a bit of reality when actively
engaged in one of these relations is not by that very foci engaged
in all the other relations simultaneously. The relations are not
all what the French call solidnires with one another. Without
losing its identity a thing can either take up or drop another
thing, like the log , . . which by taking up new carriers and
dropping old ones can travel anywhere witJi a light escort." *

I have quoted this passage in full because of its far-reaching
importance. But we have to do here only with the application
to the question of consciousness. The elements or terms which
enter into consciousness and become its content may now
be regarded as the same elements which, in so far as otherwise
related, compose physical nature. The elements themselves,
the "materia prima" or "stuff of pure experience," are neither
psychical nor physical.' A certain spatial and dynamic system
of such elements constitutes physical nature; taken in other
relations they constitute "ideal" systems, such as logic and
mathematics; while in still another grouping, and in a specific
functional relation, they make up that process of reflective
thought which is the subject under discussion in the author's
theory of ideas and of truth. The grouping or pattern which
is most characteristic of the individual consciousness as such,
is best described in connection with " the experience of activity."

But before turning to this topic it is important to call atten-
tion to a further corollary which B capable of a very wide appli-
cation. The common or 'neutral ' elements of pure experience
serve not only to connect consciousness with the various objec-
tive orders of being, but also to connect different units of
consdousness with another. Two or more minds become

' PSuralisiU Uiiiwerie, pp. 3'*— 3»3- Cf. Essayi in Radical Empiricism,
p. 140.

* Cf. below, pp. J64-36S.


co-terminous and commutable through containing the ■
elements. We can thus understand "how two minds can know
one thing. "' In precisely the same way the same mind may
know the same thing at <U£ferent times. The difierent pulses
of one consciousness may thus overlap and interpenetrate.
And where these pulses are successive, the persistence of these
common factors, marginal in one and focal in the next, gives
to consciousness its pecuhar connectedness and continuity.
There is no need, therefore, of a synthesis ab extra; there is
sameness and permanence and universality within the content
itself. Finally, just as several individual minds, and the sev-
eral moments of one individual nmid, are " co-consdous," so
there is no reason why human minds should not be "con-
fluent in a higher consciousness.'"

§ 4. A certain grouping of the elements of experience, a groui>-
ing in which activity and affectional states are the most marked
The Eiperi- characteristics, constitutes " the individualized
«nceof self." "Simon pure activity," or "activity an

Activiiy sich," is a fictitious entity. But we are not on that

account to banish the word ' activity ' from our philosophical
vocabulary, since there is a specific experience-complex for
which it may be rightly and profitably used. "If the word
have any meaning it must denote what there b found.
. . . The experiencer of such a situation possesses all that the
idea contains. He feels the tendency, the obstacle, the will,
the strain, the triumph, or the passive giving up, just as he feels
the time, the space, the swiftness or intensity, the movement,
the weight and color, the pain and pleasure, the complexity, or
whatever remaining factors the situation may involve." *
This specific train or pattern of experiences being taken to con-
stitute activity, it will constitute " my " activity in so far as it
is accompanied by certain affectional states; in other words, la
so far as it centres in certain experiences of my own body.
For affectional states are quasi-bodily. They do not belong

'Of. cU.,pp. 123 sq.

' Pluralistic VnivtTse, p. 190. ri. Lecture VII, passim. For the de-
velopment o( James's view concenimg the "compounding of consdousncM,"
cf. PrincipUs of Psychology, Vol. I, pp. 160, 161; "The Knowing of Thin^
Together," Psych. Rn., Vol, n, 1895; Pluralistic Universe, Lecture V.

' "The Experience ot Activity," in Phtratisiic Unitem, pp. j8a. 376-
377.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


355


excluuvely either to the mental or to the physical order. That
which is attractive or repugnant stirs the body as well as the
mind. "The ' interesting ' asf>ects of things " rule the consecution
of our several conscious streams; but they are "not wholly inert
physically, though they be active only in those small comers
of physical nature which our bodies occupy," ' The individual-
ized self is thus a peculiar assemblage or field of elements, which
"comes at all times with our body as its centre, centre of vision,
centre of action, centre of interest. . . . The body is the storm
centre, the origin of coordinates, the constant place of stress in
all that experience-train. Everything circles round it, and is
felt from its point of view. The word 'I,' then, is primarily a
noun of position, just Uke 'this' and 'here.' Activities attached
to 'this' position have prerogative emphasis. . . . The 'my' of
them is the emphasis, the feeling of perspective-interest in which
they are dyed." •

Precisely as there is no consciousness on sicA, and no ac-
tivity an sicli, so there is no mental power or "eSectuation" an
sich. The causality of mind Ues in the drama, train, conjunc-
tion, or series, which is peculiar to the mind-complex. "Sustain-
ing, persevering, striving, paying with eSort as we go, hanging
on, and finally achieving our intention — this is action, this is
etlectuation in the only shape in which, by a pure experience-
philosophy, the whereabouts of it anywhere can be discussed.
. . . Real effectual causation ... is just that kind of con-
junction which our own activity-series reveal." • We meet here
withatypeofprocessthatissutgCTicru. Whether human action
is determined primarily by this process, or by the elementary
processes of the nerve-cells, James does not attempt to dedde.
It is essentially a question between the activities of longer
and of shorter span; "naively, we beUeve, and humanly and
dramarically we Uke to believe," that the two are at work in
life together.'

D we assemble these various aspects of mind, we can picture
it in its concrete wholeness. The organism operates interestedly

I "The Place ol Affectional FacU in a World o[ Pure Eiperience,"
Essays on Radical Empirkiim, pp. 150-131, and passim.

' Plitralislk Vniterse, p. 380, note.

■ Ibid., pp. 3QO, jQi. Pot the bearing of ' as on the qucstioD of [reedam,
KC below, p. 373.
' Ibid., p. 387.


and selectively within its natural environment; and the mani-
fold of elements thus selected compose the mind's content.
But this content, when viewed by itself, exhibits certain charac-
teristic groupings, patterns, and conjunctions. Of these the
knowledge process is the most striking But as the body is the
original instrument of selection and the source of individual
bias, so bodily states and bodily orientation will be the nucleus
of each individual field of content.

n. Theory of Knowledge

S 5. To understand the originality and value of James's
contributions to this subject, it is indispensable that one should
_ sec his problem. One must respect the difficulty

The Function , , _: . l- 1 i- / -. i 1

of Cognition l^'ore one can appreaate his soluUon of it. James s
problem can perhaps be formulated as follows:
How can idea and object be iifo, and yet one be knowledge 0/ the
other, and both fall within the same individual conscious field?
And this problem James proposes to solve empirically, that is,
by an examination of cognition in the concrete. Just what is it
that takes place, just what is found, when I have an idea of an
object?

Although James's discussions of knowledge relate mainly to
this dual or mediated type, to knowledge about the thing b,
which I have by virtue of the idea a, he does not regard this as
the only type or as the standard type. " Knowledge about " is a
derivative of "direct" knowledge, or "knowledge of acquaint-
ance," and is never more than a provisional substitute for it.
Representation is cognitive only in so far as it is a virtual
presentation. In direct knowledge, or knowledge of acquaint-
ance, "any one and the same (Aoi in experience must figure
alternately as a thing known and as a knowledge of the thing, by
reason of two divergent kinds of context into which, in the
general course of experience, It gets woven." ' In knowledge of
this type, in other words, the thing ilself is acted on and felt
about in the manner characteristic of an individual conscious
field. The most notable case of this is sense -perception. In so
far as there is here any difference between the knowing and

' "Essence of Humanism," in The Meaning of Truth, p. i»7. Cd I
paitim, BJid "Function oi Cognition," Md., pp. 1-42.


I

I


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


357


the known, the knowing is simply the context, the company into
which the thing known is received. And the individual knowei
will be that nuclear bodily complex which has already been
described. The function of such knowledge is evidently to get
things thus directly acted on, or thus directly introduced into
life.

But, humanly speaking, if the range of life is not to be nar-
rowly circumscribed, it is necessary that most things should
appear in it vicariously, that is, represented by what is known
"about" them. "The towering importance for human life of
this kind of knowing lies in the fact that an experience that
knows another can hgure as its represenlative, not in any quasi-
miraculous ' epistemological ' sense, but in the definite practical
sense of being its substUule in various operations." ' Thus the
function of " knowledge about " is to provide substitutes for
things which it is practicaUy impossible to know directly, so that
the original function of knowledge may be widely extended. It is
only a special case of that which is characteristic of all organized
life — namely, the broadening of its scope by delegation and
indirection. And we are thus brought to the consideration of a
narrow and definite problem. When may one item be, for cog-
nilive purposes, substituted for another? That which may thus be
substituted is "knowledge about," or "idea of," the thing for
which it is so substituted; and the thing for which the substitu-
tion b made is the object. So that our question is equivalent
to the traditional question, 'What is the relation between an
idea and its object?' But it is important to bear in mind that
James's question cannot be answered simply by saying that idea
and object are identical. That in many cases they are identical,
and that in all cases they are virtually identical, he does not
deny. But he asks particularly about that respect in which they
are not identical; where there is an actual otherness of content,
or an actual temporal progression from the one to the other.
And it must also be remembered also that James does not per-
mit himself to deal with this question on other than empirical
grounds; in other words, he assumes that all the terms referred
to must be such as can be brought together within one field of
consciousness.' The older duaUsm, in which the something


' Essays in Radical Empiricism, p. to.
' For the meaning of "—"";"':"" " «-


bdow, M", 363-366.


350 APPENDIX

'inside' represents something 'outside' every possible erten-
sion of the individual's consciousness, is regarded as obsolete.'

The relation characteristic of an idea and its object can be
analyzed into two factors, intention and agreement.' In the first
place, the idea must somehow "mean" its object, that is, desig-
nate which thing is its object. And intention is prior to agree-
ment. It is not sufficient that an idea should simply agree with
something; it must agree with its object; and until its object has
been identified, no test of agreement can be appUed. "It is not
by dint of discovering which reaUty a feeling 'resembles' that
we find out which reality it means. We become first aware of
which one it means, and then we suppose that to be the one it
resembles." • But intention is essentially a practical matter.
What one intends is like one's goal or one's destination, in being
what one's actions converge on or towards. And the idea owes
its existence, as such, to an intention or plan of action of which
the 'intended' is the terminus. Intention is, of course, often
equivocal; but the intention is revealed, and becomes less and
less equivocal as the plan of action unfolds. It is this which
accounts for the superiority of gesture over words. If one can
hold up the object, lay one's hand on it, or even point to it, its
identity becomes unmistakable.' So we must conclude that
where the action on the object is not completed, the object is
intended in so far as there is an incipient train of action which,
if completed, would terminate in that thing. I may here and
now have an idea of "the tigers in India," that is, mean, intend,
or refer to them, inasmuch as what is in my mind is so connected
drcumstantialty with the actual India and its tigers, that if I
were to follow it up I should be brought face to face with them,'
In other words, to have an idea of a thing is to have access to
it, even when it is not present.

But an idea must not only intend its object; it must also, in
some sense, "agree" with it. And here again we find that the
essential tiling is practical connection; for identity, or even dmi-
larity, is evidently not necessary. "We are universally held

' Meanint a/ Trulh, pp. laS-uy.

• "Function of Cognition," op. cU., passim, and espedaliy pp. aS-3a.

• Ibid., p. 3S-

' Cf. &>id., pp. aSi 3S; bIso "MeaniDg of tbe Woid Tnitta," op. cil.,

p. 917-

• Op. eU., pp. 43-so.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES 359

both to inteDd, to speak of, and to reach conclusions about —
to know, in short — particular realities, without having in our
subjective consciousness any mind-stuff that resembles them
even in a remote degree. We are instructed about them by
language which awakens no consciousness beyond its sound; and
we know ivhick reahties they are by the faintest and most frag-
mentary glimpse of some remote context that they may have,
and by no direct imagination of themselves," ' Since it is not
always necessary that the idea should resemble its object, we
must conclude Uial the minimum agreement which is required
of all ideas catmot be resemblance. And we shall understand
that minimum agreement best where it is barest, where it is not
compUcated by the accident of agreement. The best example,
then, will be the agreement of words with their objects. Now a
word agrees with its intended object inasmuch as by an estab-
lished convention it leads to that object, or enables one to find it.
And what is true of single words will also be true of combina-
tions of words; they will " agree," when they are so connected
with a combination of things as to enable one to reverse the
verbalizing operation and substitute that combination of things
for them. But since it is possible that my idea should not
prepare me for what it intends, it is evident that we are already
within the domain of truth and error; agreement being the
same thing as truth, and disagreement the same thing as error.
And this is a matter for special and detailed ezamination.

Before leaving the present topic, however, it is worth while
once more to point out that for James all knowledge is virtually
direct or presentative. First, the safest and surest of our every-
day knowledge is sense-perception. Second, while it is not
necessary that the idea should resemble its object, the idea will
ordinarily be some fragment of the object, abstracted and made
to serve for the whole. And in so far as this is the case the idea
and its object are identical. Third, even mediated knowledge
is completed only when by means of it the object ia brought
directly into the mind. So that the best idea would be that
which would "lead to an actual mei^ng of ourselves with the
object, to an utter mutual confluence and identification." ' In
other words, knowledge, generally speaking, is the entrance of

' "Function of Cognition," af. cit., pp. io-ji.
' "A Word More about Trulh," op. cit.. p. 156.


things belonging otherwise to nature or some ideal order, into

the context of the individual lite. Mediated knowledge, in
which there is a difference and an extrinsic connection between
the idea and its object, is incidental to knowledge thus defined;
a means, simply, of extending its scope by the method of sub-
stitution.

5 6. The function of knowledge reveals the locus of the prob-
lem of truth. Truth is something which happens to ideas owing
The Pragma- to their relation to their objects, that is, to the
tic Nature oi things which they are 'about.' Ideas are true
'of their objects, it being assumed that the ob-
jects are both different from the beliefs and intended by them.
The pragmatic theory of truth means nothing except so far as
applied to this particular situation. If the specific complexity
of the situation be not taken account of, then the theory becomes
labored and meaningless. James convicts most of the objectors
to pragmatism of overlooking, or over-simplifying, this problem.
If one identifies truth with fact, one is simply ignoring James's
question as to how one fact can be true 0/ another, as is supposed
to be the case in all mediated knowledge. If one says that true
beliefs are beliefs in true propositions, truth being an indefinable
property of some propositions, one is evading the troublesome
question as to what is meant by belief in; and one is neglecting
the fact that in nearly all actual knowledge the content of the
believing state, or what is believed, differs from that which it is
believed about. So that James's question will simply reappear
as the question how a true belief about a ' true proposition ' (in
the opponent's sense) differs from a false belief about that same
proposition. Or, finally, if one defines truth in terms of a
hypothetical omniscience, one transfers the problem to a domain
where its empirical examination is impossible, and meanwhile
leaves untouched the question of that human truth that can be
empirically examined, including the truth of the hypothesis ol
omniscience.'

Let us, then, resort to that comer of the world to which James's
question invites attention. We find, on the one hand, some-
thing belonging, let us say, to the realm of physical nature. '

* The volume entitled The Meaning of Truth la devoted almost entirely 1
to the removal of these misapp^eosioiis. C(. especially the Preface, and I
Nob. VI, Vin, IX. and XIV.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES 36 1

find, on the other hand, some particular individual's particular
belief, idea, or statement with reference to that tiling. What,
then, do we find to be characteristic of the idea in so far as true
of the thing? We are not asking for a recipe for the making of
truth; still less for an infallible redpe. We desire only to under-
stand "what the word 'true' means, as applied to a statement";
"what truth actually consists of"; " the relation to its object that
makes an idea true in any given instance." ' We shall be faith-
ful Ic James's meaning if we articulate the situation expressly.
Let b represent a certain individual thing, assumed to exist;
and let a represent somebody's idea of b, also assumed to exist.
a may be similar to b, or dissimilar; but in any case, it must
' intend ' b, in the manner already defined. It should also be
remarked that a and b belong to one manifold of experience, in
the sense that the same individual mind may proceed from the
one to the other. Our question, then, is this: When is a true
of b? The pragmatist answer is as follows: ' a owes its existence
as an idea to some interest; if there were no interested minds at
work in the world, then the world would consist only of fc's.'
Ideas, whether ihey be mere convenrional signs for things or
selected aspects of things, arise only because of some practical
motive. Furthermore, the relation of intention which connects
an idea with some thing and makes that thing Us object, is due
to the same interest or motive which selected the idea,' Finally,
then, a is true of b, when this interest which selected a and related
it to b, is satisfied. In short, a is true of b, when it is a successful
ideating of b.*

We shall gain in clearness and explidtness if we now dis-
tinguish the cases of applied and theoretical truth. We may
suppose a to arise, first, as a mode of conceiving b for some use
to which i is to be put. Then, when by virtue of the conception
a I am enabled to handle or control b, and reach the desired

' Of. dr., pp. Iii,»34. IJS-

' Thit k not a close paraphraie of any portion of tie text, but is arrived
at by using the polemical statement in The Mtaning ef Truih to give greatu
preduon lo the constnictive BtalemcDt in Led. VI ol PntMotiim.

' See above, pp. jjo-^Si-

* See above, p. 358.

' This success may be actual or potential, What James meuu by
" potential " is clearly stated in Heanint 0/ Truth, p. 93. But in any oue
truth cannot be defined without reference to the success.


361 APPENDIX

end by so doing, I have a true idea of a, in the applied s
This kind of truth is much the more common. If we include
such knowledge as animals possess, and all of that human com-
petence and skill which is not exactly formulated — all of the
art which is not science — it is evident that in bulk it far
exceeds the knowledge which is immediately related to the
theoretical motive.

But pragmatism is not intended as a disparagement of theory.
James naturally resents the description of it "as a character-
istically American movement, a sort of bobtailed scheme of
thought, excellently fitted for the man on the street, who
naturally bates theory and wants cash returns immediately." '
Indeed, owing to the emphasis given the matter by the turn
of controversy, the pragmatist writers have devoted a some-
what disproportionate amount of space to the discussioii
of theoretical truth. That the theoretical process is itself in-
terested in its own way, that it has its characteristic motive
and its characteristic successes and failures, is a fact that no
one has ever questioned. And 'theoretical truth,' so-called, is
its success. An idea is true theoretically, when it works for
the theoretical purpose. It remains only to discover what
that purpose may be. What, then, is the theoretical motive
for the formation of ideas? Or what is the virtue of form-
ing ideas of things, different from the things themselves,
when there is no occasion for acting on the things? In order,
the pragmatist replies, to have a compact and easily stored
access to these things; in order to be able to find, should
one want them, more things than there are room for within the
mind at any one time. It follows, then, that the mark of &
good idea, from this point of view, is its enabling one by means
of it to come directly at a large number of particular facta
which it means. Verification is thus the trying out, the demon-
stration, of an idea's capacity to lead to its objects and obtain
their direct presentation to mind. Thus a is true of b, in the
theoretical sense, when by virtue of having a in mind I can
bring b into mind, a being more compact than b. And the
adequacy of a will depend upon the extent to which it puts me
in virtual possession of the full or complete nature of 6. There
is always a sense in which nothing can be so true of & as A itself,
' Meaning of Truth, p. iSj.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES 363

and were it humanly possible to know everything directly and
simultaneously, as we know aspects of things in sense-percep-
tion, then there would be no occasion for the existence of ideas.
But then there would be no truth, in the particular sense in
which James uses the term.

It is worth while to observe that when James defines truth
in t£rms of saUsfaction, he has in mind 3 very spedtic sort
of satisfaction, a determined satisfaction, of which the con-
ditions are imposed on the one hand by the environment,
and on the other hand by the interest which called the idea
forth.' This is by no means the same thing as to say that an
idea which is satisfactory is therefore true. It must be satis-
factory for a particular purpose, and under particular circum-
stances. An idea has a certain work to do, and it must do that
work in order to be commended as true. There is a situation,
again a special situation, in which the general usefulness or
liveableness of an idea may be allowed to count towards its
acceptance. But the case is exceptional, and is not neces-
sarily implied in the pragmatic theory. I have thought it on
the whole clearer and fairer, therefore, to consider it in another
connection.'

The pragmatic theory of truth is closely connected in the
author's mind with " the pragmatic method." It emphasizes the
particular and presentable consequences of ideas, and is thus
opposed to verbalism, to abstractionism, to agnosticism, and to
loose and irrelevant speculation. But pragmatism here merges
into empiricism, where the issues are wider and more diverse.

S 7. Jameswas an empiricist in the most general sense, in that
he insisted on the testing of an idea by a resort to that particular
experience which it means. An idea which does
not relate to something which may be brought
directly before the same mind that entertains the idea, is not
properly an idea at all: and two ideas are different only in so
far as the things to which they thus lead dlSer in some particu-
lar respect. "The meaning of any proposition can always be
brought down to some particular consequence in our future
practical experience, whether passive or active ... the point
lying rather in the fact that the experience must be particular


Empiricism


o Believe," pp. 36^371.


364 APPENDIX

than in the fact that it must be active." ' Similarly, "the whole
originality of pragmatism, the whole point in it, is its use of the
concrete way of seeing." ' Empiricism, or pragmatism, in this
sense, is essentially an application of James's theory of the
function of ideas. Since it is their office to pave the way for
direct knowledge, or to be temporarily substituted for it, their
efficiency b conditioned by their unobtrusiveness, by the readi-
ness with which they subordinate themselves. The commonest
case o£ an idea in James's sense is the word, and the most
notable example of his pragmaticor empirical method is his own
scrupulous avoidance of verbalism. It follows that since ideas
are in and of themselves of no cognitive value, since they are
essentially instrumental, they are always on trial, and "liable
to modification in the course of future experience."* The
method of hypothesis and experiment is thus the method imi-
versal, and the canon of verifiability appUes to philosophy as
weL as to science.

Empiricism in a narrower sense is the postulate," that the only
things that shall be debatable among philosophers shall be things
definable in terms drawn from e.tperience." * We find experi-
ence itself described as " a process in time, whereby innumerable
particular terms lapse and are superseded by others." ' This
caimot mean that experience is to be identified with the mani-
fold of sense-perception, for he refers repeatedly to " conceptual
experience."* Nor can it mean that experience is to be identi-
fied with the experienced, that is, with consciousness. For con-
sciousness, like matter, is a part of experience. Indeed, " there
is no general stuff of which experience at large is made." " It is
made of thai, of just what appears, of space, of intensity, of flat-
ness, brownness, heaviness, or what not. . . . Experience is only
a collective name for aU these sensible natures, and save for time
and space (and, if you like, for 'being'), there appears no uni-
versal element of which all things are made." ' E^qierience,

' Meaning of Truth, p. 110.

* op. cit., p. ii6. Foe the more pt^utor exposition of thU method, and
the illustrative application of it, cf. Pritgmalism, Lectuies II, IIL

» Wm to Believe, Preface, p. vii.

* Meaning of Truth, Preface, p. tii.

* lbid.,p. III.

* See below, p. n).

* "Does Consdousness Eiial?" Essays in Radical Empiricism, pp. »


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES 365

then, is a colorless name for things in their spatial-temporal
conjunctions. Things are experience when these conjunctions
are immediately present in the mind; in other words, when they
are directly known here and now, or when such a here-and-now
knowledge is possible. In other words, we are again brought
back to a fundamental insistence on direct or presentative
knowledge. In respect of this insistence James is a lineal
descendent of Berkeley, Hume, and Mill, and a brother of
Shadworth Hodgson and Ernst Mach. In all of these writers
the insistence on the immanence of the object of knowledge has
tended to lead to phenomenalism; and James, like the rest, is a
phenomenalist, in the sense of being opposed to dualism and
transcendentalism. But in his later writings, at least, he has
made it perfectly clear that while things are "what they are
known as," they need not be known in order to be. Their being
known is an accidental relation into which they directly enter
as they are.' To limit knowledge to experience means only to
limit it to what may be immediately apprehended as here and
now, to what may be brought directly before the mind in some
particular moment of its history.

James's empiricism means, then, 6rst, that ideas are to be
tested by direct knowledge, and second, that knowledge is lim-
ited to what can be presented. There is, however, a third con-
sideration which is both an application of these, and the means
of avoiding a difficulty which is supposed to be fatal to them.
This is what Jamescalls " radical empiricism," the discovery that
"the relations between things, conjunctive as weli as disjunctive,
are just as much matters of direct particular experience, neither
more so nor less so, than the things themselves." • "Adjacent
minima of experience" are united by the "persistent identity of
certain units, oreraphases,orpoints,orobjects,ormembers . , .
of the experience-continuum." * Owing to the fact that the
connections of things are thus found along with them, it is un-
necessary to introduce any substance below experience, or any
subject above, to hold things together. In spite of the atomistic

' Cf. "Does CoosdousneM Eiistf" with "The Knowing of Thingl
Together," Psyck. Rev.. Vol, II, 1895. Cf. alio below, p. 368.

■ UeantHt oj Truth, preface, p. lij. C(. Pluralistic Universe, pp. 179-
iSo.

' Pluratiilic Uaieerte, pp. 316, 336. Cf. PriitcipUs 0} Ptychohfy, Vol. t
P-45!)-


366 APPENDIX

sensationalists, relations are found; and in spite of Mr. Bradley,
relations relate. And since the same term loses old relations
and acquires new ones without forfeiting its identity, there is no
reason why a relation should not unite things and stiU be ad-
ventitious and variable. Thus the idealistic theory, which, in
order that there may be some connection, conceives of a trans-
experiential and immutable connection, is short-drcuited.' This,
handling of the question of relation at the same time proi
the efficacy of the empirical method, and the futility of
lectualism."

§ 8. The critical application of James's theory of knowledge

follows from his notion of conception and its relation to per-

, ception. "Abstract concepts . . . are salient

Percepts and "^ ^ , ^ ^. t- i_ c .

Concepii. aspects of our concrete experiences which we find
The Critique it useful to single out," ' He speaks of theip else-
ajism' ''"'' where as things we have learned to "cut out," as
"flowers gathered," and "moments dipped out
from the stream of time." ' Without doubt, then, they are
elements of the given and independent world; not invented,
but selected — and for some practical or theoretical purpose.
To knowledge they owe, not their being or their natures, but
their isolation or abstraction and the cognitive use to which they
are put. This use or function tends to obscure the fact that
they are themselves "objective." They have, as a matter of
fact, their own "ideal" relations, their own"'hnes of order,"
which when traced by thought become the systems of logic and
mathematics.'

The human importance of concepts and of ideal systems lies
in their cognitive function with reference to the manifold of
sense -perception. Therefore it is necessary to inquire just
what kind of a knowledge of the latter they aSord. Since Oiey
are extracts from the same experience-plenum, they may be,

' Cf. "The Thing and its Relations," in Pluralislic Uniwrie, pp. 34^-
369, passim. Cf. also above, p. 353, and beton. pp. 3T3-374'

• Mtaning af Trulk, p. 146.

• Pluralistic Universe, p. JJS' Cf. Frinciplts of PiytArfojy,
ceplion," and "ReasoninR," Chaplers XII and XXII.

• Essayt in Radical Empiriciim, pp. ij. i6- CI. Meaning of Tr^M,
pp. 4), 19s, DOte; Plvraiistic Vniterse, pp. 339-340; Principles of Piy-
eholeiy, Ch. XXVIII. Here as elsewhere of two apparently conflicling
statements I have token the later. The latest and best statemenl Jajaes*!
viewof concepts is to be ioaadmSomt PrabUms of Phiiosopky, Ch, IV-VL


M


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES 367

and to a large extent are, similar to their perceptual objects.
But it is never the primary function of an idea to picture its
object, and in this case, at least, a complete picturing is impossi-
ble. Because, in the first place, concepts are single and partial
aspects of perceptual things, and never a thing's totality.
Although conception exhibits these aspects clearly one by one,
sense-perception, apprehending the thing all at once, or con-
cretely, will, in spite of its inarticulateness, always convey some-
thing — it may be only the fullness of potential concepts —
which conception misses. It would follow, then, that a concept
b true of a percept only so Jar as it goes. But those who employ
concepts are prone to use them "privatively,"that is, as though
they exhausted their perceptual object and prevented it from
being anything more. This "treating of a name as excluding
from the fact named what the name's definition fails positively
to include," is what James calls "vicious intellectualism,"'

But, in the second place, there is a more spedlic reason why
concepts cannot adequately express the existential sense-mani-
fold. Not only are they unequal to it because abstracted from
it, but they are necessarily unlike it, in that the most character-
istic aspects of the sense- manifold cannot be conveyed in con-
ceptual form. This is the chief ground of James's indictment of
intellectualism, and is of critical importance to the understand-
ing of his philosophy. It is important once more to note that
the cognitive use of ideas does not depend upon their similarity
to their objects. They may be abstracted aspects of their
objects, or they may be entirely extraneous bits of experience,
Uke words, connected with their objects only through their
functional office. Now it is James's contention that the most
characteristic aspects of existence can be ideated only in this
second way. They cannot be abstracted, they cannot them-
selves become the immediate objects of thought, although they
can, of course, be led up to and functionally represented. Every
bit of experience has "its quality, its duration, its extension,
its intensity, its urgency, its clearness, and many aspects besides,
no one of which can exist in the isolation in which our verbalized
logic keeps it."* The error of intellectualism lies in its attempt

■ PluralUiu UnniTU, p. 60. CI. aiao pp. 2iie.,»nd Ucanint of Tnilk,
pp. 3^. J49 ^

ie Unhtrit, p. is6.


368 APPENDIX

to make up such aspects as these out of logical terms a
tions. The result is either a ridiculous over-simplification of
existence, or the multiplication of paradoxes. The continuity
of change, the union of related things, the fulness of the exist^ii,
world, has to be sensed or felt, if its genuine character is to
known, as truly as color has to be seen or music heard. So thai
so far as these aspects of existence are concerned, concepts
useful tor " purposes of practice," that is, to guide us to
sensible context, and not for " purposes of insight." '

"Direct acquaintance and conceptual knowledge are thiu^
complementary of each other; each remedies the other's
defects."' Knowing is always in the last analysis witnessing
— having the thong itself within the mind. This is the only way
in which the proper nature, the original and intrinsic character,
of things, is revealed. Thought itself is the means of thus
directly envisaging some aspects of things. But owing to the
peculiar conditions under which the mmd operates, it is practi-
cally necessary to know most things indirectly. So thought has
a second use, namely, to provide substitutes foraspectsof things
that can be known directly only by sense. The peculiar value
of thought Ues, then, in its direct grasp of the more univei
elements, and in the range and economy of its indirect grasp
those elements which, in their native quality, can be directl3F;
grasped only by sense.

Knowledge in all its varieties and developments arises fi
practical needs. It takes place within an environment to wh<
independent nature it must conform. If that environment
regarded as something believed, then it signifies truth already
arrived at obediently to the same practical motives. But if it
be conceived simply as reality, as it must also be conceived, then
it is prior to all knowledge, and in no sense involved in the
vicissitudes of knowledge. In short, James's theory is epis-
temology in the limited sense. It describes knowledge without
implying any dependence of things on the knowing of them.
Indeed, on the contrary, it is based explicitly on the acceptance
of that non-mental world-order which is recognized by common
sense, by science, and by philosophical realisn


uity

m

er's
iing
way
ter,
hus
the
cd-

lings
alue

i


'0(..


if., p. 390. Cf. Lectures V, VI, and VII, passim.


' C[. iltanin% of Truth, Preface, and pp. igo-197, 313-116.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


369


m. Philosophy of Religion

I Q. James's contribution to the study of religion is so consid-
erable and so important as to stand by itself, beside his psychol-
ogy and his philosophy. In the present meagre
to Btli'/ve summary I shall deal only with what is directly
related to the fundamentals of his philosophy,
namely, to his theory of mind and his epistemology. Religion,
Like knowledge, is a reaction of man to his environment. Its
motives are practical, and its issues, tests, and successes are prac-
tical. Religion is " a man's total reaction upon life." It springs
from "that curious sense of the whole residual cosmos as an
everlasting presence, intimate or alien, terrible or amusing,
lovable or odious."' The positive or hopeful religion says " that
the best things are the more eternal things," and " that we are
better off even now " if we believe so.' There is a practical
motive leading to some such belief, and there is an additional
motive for taking the hopeful rather than the despairing view.
Applying the theory of truth already expounded, it follows that
that religious belief is true which satisfies the demands which
give it birth. So far this might mean simply that it is important
for life to have an idea of the ultimate nature of things, and as
hopeful an idea as possible; in which case the true religion would
be the idea which succeeded in meeting these requirements. It
would be the verified hypothesis concerning the maximum of
hopefulness which the universe justifies. But the case is not so
simple as that. For no idea of the ultimate nature of things
can be verified, that is, proved by following it into the direct
presence of its object. And meanwhile it is practically necessary
to adopt some such idea. So the question arises as to whether
the general acceptability of an idea, including its service to
other interests than the theoretical interest, may in this case be
allowed to count. To accept an idea, or to believe under such
conditions and on such grounds, is an act of faith. What, then,
is the justihcation of faith?

Faith does not mean a defiiuice of proof but only a second best,
a substitute where the evidence is not coodusive. "Faith

' Varitlks 0/ fltUtioui Exptriiaci. p. 35. In the "Varietie*" the to|»e
(3 drcumsciibcd (or the sake of conveniencci cL p. 31.
* Will to BelUtt, pp. iS, 16.


370


APPENDIX


means belief in something concerning which doubt is stffl
retically possible; and as the test of belief b willingness to act,
one may say that faith is the readiness to act in a cause the
prosperous issue of which is not certified to us in advance." ' If
it can be certified in advance, so much the better; but if not,
then it may be proper to act confidently none the less. Now
such is the case, first when hesitation or suspension of action it
equivalent to disbelief in a prosperous issue. Thus, "if I mi
not believe that the world is divine, I can only express that
refusal by declining ever to act distinctively as if it were
which can only mean acting on certain critical occasions as if it
were no/ so, or in an irreligious way."' "I,ogical scrupulosity"
may thus over-reach itself, and lead one to a virtual denial even
in the face of probability. In the second place, there are "cases
where faith creates its own verification." Belief in the success
of an enterprise in which the behever is himself engaged breeds
the confidence which will help to make success. And religion is
such an enterprise. " Beheve, and you shall be light, for you
shall save yourself."'

In short, "there is really no scientific or other method by
which men can steer safely between the two opposite dangers
of believing too little or of believing too much."' We can
neither limit belief to proof, for that would be to cut ourselves
off from possibilities of truth that have a momentous importance
for us; nor exempt our belief altogether from criticism, for that
would be to forfeit our principal means to truth. There are
genuine " options " for belief, options that are" live " in that there
is an incentive to choose; and "forced," in that to decline to
choose is stiil virtually to choose.' Where such an option exists,
hope may be allowed to convert objective or theoretical proba-
bility into subjective certainty. And the one momentous case
of this is religion.

§ 10. That religious belief which is at once most probable
on theoretical grounds, and most rational in the broader sense
of making a "direct appeal to all those powers of our nature

' Op. cil., p. go; cf. p. i; and Meaning of Trtilh, p. 3$^.
' Wm to Beliae. p. 55.
' Op. cit., p. 97.

* Op. eil., p. ri. Ct. p. ia8.

• Op. dl., p. 3. C(. Some Problems of Philosophy, Appeadii, on
md the Right to Believe."


lUSt^H

3


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


which we hold in Wghest esteem,"' is theism,
ceived as " the deepest power i n the uni verse,"


nor"5urselv^, "which not only makes for rtght-

'" T^ coBperate with his creation b y *hp hi^t nnrf
lightest re spoiSse seems a fl He wants ni iia"' S^-J^ an int>Tpj^
■ -4 ii tT t iii ir f < l l l' Wiir \ i \ TtSosi: rnmjilptpl Y a ^ ^WCrS 0\n "p^'I'' "At a
s&lgte stroke, it changes the dead blank it of the world into a
living thou, with whom the whole man may have dealings."
" Our v^^ li tional "•''■ii-^ m imt iK^r^ ^ ^ i bjj ] ( |i f f.n | - | ,.f rimp , PYFr.r
J constaot pressure upon ^^i" olhtr dcpaiLmenl^ of the jiuiul,to
jndu ce them to fuacUon to ttisistic conclusions."* Here, then,
is the possible and the profoundly desirable religious truth. To
neglect it is to disbelie ve it, which is equally arbitrar y, and in-
votves~alI the^ practical [g MTJesIdesj^ wEile To "^c^TTT j a tJi
~ help make it t rue, since j^'iian gft^rtc ^^y a^figt 'lirjlnhlisliinc
the supremacy^Uie good. _ But what evidence may be adduced
in its support?

The answer to this question consists partly in the removal of
difficulties, such as the dogmatism of science, and the problem
of "the compounding of consciousness,"' partly in the applica-
tion to the religious eiperience of the theory of a " subconscious
self." " We have in the fact that the conscious person is continu-
ous with a wider self through which saving experiences come, a
positive content of religious experience which, it seems to me,
is hterally and objectively true as far as it goes."' When we
ask " how far our transmarginal consciousness carries us if we
follow it on its remoter side," our "over-beliefs begin;" but the
evidence afforded by mystical experiences, thus construed by
means of an established psychological theory, creates "a
decidedly formidable probability " in favor of the theistic
hypothesis.'

5 II. The belief in freedom, like the belief in God, cannot be
proved. Here, again, belief has an option between a rigidly
determined world and a world with alternative possibilities

' Op. cU., p. no, Cf. pp. 11S-116.
» Op. eil., p. u). ' Op. eU.. p. J41.

* Op. cU., p. 117. » Cf. above, pp. 3S3-3S4-

■ VaridUs of Rtlitiavs Eapmence, p. 515, Ct. alio "The Enerpcs of
Men," MemerUs and Studici. X,

' Op. cit., p. 513; PluraliiHc Unititu, p. 309.


37*


APPENDIX


ID it. Determinism "professes that tliose parts of the uni-
verse already laid doft-n absolutely appoint and decree what
The Dilemma *he Other parts shall be."' Indeterminism, on the
of Deter- other hand, means that several futures are really

minism possible, in the sense of being compatible with the

same past. After the fact the one sequel is as reasonable as the
other, and the fact itself throws no light on the question whether
"another thing might or might not have happened in its place."'
For this reason, the facts themselves can neither estabUsh deter-
minism nor disprove it. And since the facts are not decisive,
man is warranted in taking into account the grave practical
issues that are at stake. If the hypothesis of freedom be
true, it relieves man from what would otherwise be an in-
tolerable situation; and if he fails to accept the hypothesis
because his doubts are not entirely dispelled, he virtually
chooses the alternative which is worse without being any more
probable.

From a moral or religious point of view a determined world is
a world in which evil is not only a fact, as it must be on any
hypothesis, but a necessity. "Calling a thing bad means, if it
mean anything at all, that the thing ought not to be, that some-
thing else ought to be in its stead. Determinism, in denying
that anything else can be in its stead, virtually defines the
universe as a place in which what ought to be is impossible, — in
other words, as an organism whose constitution is afflicted with
an incurable taint, an irremediable flaw."' In such a universe
there are only two religious alternatives, despair or renunciation
— a hopeless complaint that such a world should be, or the culti-
vation of a subjective willingness that anything should be. To
adopt the latter alternative, or " gnosticism," as the only course
that will bring peace of mind, is " to abandon the judgment of
regret," and substitute an intellectual, sentimental, or sensual
condoning of evil for the healthy moral eSort to eradicate it.*
Indetenninism, on the other hand, is a doctrine of promise and
Ttlief.* It offers me "a world with a chance in it of being alto-
gether good; " an escape from evil " by dropping it out altogether,
if Detenninism."


*Op.c


.p. isa. Cf. pp. 146, is6.


' Op. cil., pp. 161-16J.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


373


throwing it overboard and getting beyond it, helping to make a
universe that shall forget its very place and name." '

Although the belief in freedom is in the end an act of faith,
there is evidence for its possibility or even probability. Freedom
is not incompatible with any uniformity that has been dis-
covered, but only with the dogma that uniformity roust be
absolute even if it has not been foimd to be so. If there be any
real novelty in the world, any respects in which the future is not
merely an unfolding of the past, then that is enough to leaven
the whole. In the case of freedom of the will all that is required
is "the character of novelty in activity-situations." The "ef-
fort " or activity -process is the form of a whole " field of con-
sciousness,"' and all that is necessary for freedom is that the
duration and intensity of this process should not be " fixed
functions of the object."' That the experience of activity
should contribute something wholly new when it arises, is not
only consistent with the facts ascertained by psychology, but
b also in keeping with the general principles of radical empir-
icism. Old terms may enter into new relations; the unity of
the world is not over-arching and static, but a continuity from
next to next, permitting of unlimited change without discon-
nection and disorder, Indeterroinism b thus no more than is
to be looked for in a pluralistic universe.

5 I a. Pluralism is essentially no more than the denial of abso-
lute monbm. "Absolute unity brooks no degrees"; whereas
pluralism demands no more than that "you grant
Muniitra "" ^"^"^ separation among things, some tremor of
independence, some free play of parts on one
another, some real novelty or chance, however minute."'
And pluralism in thb sense follows directly from James's
theory of knowledge. In the first place, absolute monbm
loses iu authority the moment its a priori necessity is
dbprovcd. To account for knowledge empirically is to render all
thb elaborate speculative construction unnecessary. As a
hypothesis it b not wholly out of the question,' but it will not
bear comparison with pluralism for intellectual economy, and

' Op. cil., p. IQ7; WiU to Btlint, p, 178. and pp. 173 fl.

• Pluraiistic Vnivene, p. 301, note. CI. above, pp. 354-356.

' PrindpUi of Psyclulogy. Vol. II. p. S7i- CI. pp. st^-^jg, pasiim.

* Pratnial''"; p. 160. Cf. Lecture IV, pasHm.

■ WiU te Bdiett, p. vii; Pturaliitk Vniverit, p. 191.


it brings a number of artificial difficulties in its train.* Second,
there is positive evidence for the pluralistic hypothesis in the
fact of " external relations." "Itb just because so many of the
conjunctions of experience seem so external that a phUosophy of
pure experience must tend to pluralism in its ontology." Rela-
tions may be arranged according to their relatively conjunctive
or disjunctive character: "confluence," " conterminousness,"
"contiguousness," "likeness," "nearness" or " siraultaneous-
ness," "in-ness," "on-ness," "for-ness," "with-ness," and
finally mere "and-ness." With its parts thus related the
universe has still enough unity to serve as a topic of dis~ J
course, but it is a unity of "concatenation," rather than of I
" ccv-imptication," • ^

The importance of such a conclusion for religious purposes is
apparent. On the one hand, as we have already seen, evil is
not necessarily implied by the rest of the universe, so that the
universe as a whole is not compromised or irremediably vitiated
by it. But, on the other hand, it must be admitted that the good,
is in a like position. The supremacy of the good is not guaran -

teed, but is only made pnaciKJp anA ie tlir^wn inln ihq f iitlllf flft

B" goal of endeavor. Pluralism "has no ^nving nifs.'4agp for
■incunibly sick souls."' It is no philosophy for th e "tender-
fiiinded;" it makes life worth living only for those in whom the
"^ghting spirit is alive.* In the Introduction to the Literary
3ffW3ini"of his father, James distinguished between the religious
demand for an ultimate v/ell-bemg, and that healthy-mindrd
moraiism in which "the life we then feel tingling through us
vouches sufficiently for itself, and nothing tempts us to refer it
to a higher source."' It is this note which dominates James's
philosophy of life. It accounts for his relatively slight interest
in immortality.' He did not feel the necessity of being assured
in advance of his own personal safety. With his characteristic
tenderness of mind where the interests of others were in question,

' JfMKing of Truth, pp. iij «l- i

• Pluralislk Vniverst, pp. 311, 3SS; 359, 361. Cf. Lecture VIII, and I
Appendix A, passim. Cf. also above, p. 353.

' Ueaning of Truth, p, ii8.

* Cf. Pragmatism, Lecture I, and "la Lite Worth Living?" in Will t
Believe.

' Literary Remains of Benry Jama. pp. 1 16-117.

' Varieties of Reliiious Experience, p, 314; Human Immortiiiily, p. 3.


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


375


he sympathized deeply with the more importunate and helpless
cravings of the religious spirit. But for himself, he was
"willing to take the universe to be really dangerous and adven-
turous, without therefore backing out and crying 'no play.'"'
'"Xhe esseoec of good, is simply u> witisfy demand." But the
tragic fact is, that demands conllict, and exceed tlie supply.^
"Though God be tbereas "nneol ihe d.uniLuUs," Itnding perspec-
li^na'hop..fijl)u-.< lu lik-. the via. TV i^ ;i...t yel won. If we
*fave the cour.i-e t.. a. ..-pi llii-- .Iv.uhllul aiid ]i..Tiluu.s ..iui.iiioii ^
^Slt is, "thcie i. i.iut "[„■ iiiici.[n!ili..!i..l o.ivi!ii:,ii.liiierit, which *
"is that we should seek hice.^anlly, with fe.ir :uni treml.lific, stj
■ to vote and to act a s to L'riii^ alxiuL the very Lirge^l total universe
of good which we can see." '

IV. COKCLOSION

These, I believe, are the bare essentials of James's philosophy,
and the thread of reasoning by which they are connected. A
summary such as this must altogether miss the pictorial and
dramatic quality of his thought. That which is most character-
istic of him cannot be restated; for his own style was its inevi-
table and only adequate expression. But I offer this rude
sketch in the hope that it may help those whi> seek to apprehend
this philosophy as a whole. James's field of study, the pano-
ramic view within which all of his special problems fell, was the
lot of mankind. On the one hand stands the environment, an
unbidden presence, tolerating ordy what will conform to it,
threatenigg and hampering every tnteresl, and yielding only
reluctantly and gradually to moral endeavor. On the other
hand stands man who, once he gets on good terms with this
environment, finds it an inexhauslble mine of possibilities. " By
slowly cumulative strokes of choice," he has extricated out of
thU, like a sculptor, the world he lives in. JamesjieyeLainfysed
the world with man's world, but he made man's world, thus
progressively achie\'ed, the principal object of his study, Man
conquers liis world first by knowing it, and thus presenting it
for action; second, by acting on it. and thus remoulding it to
suit his purposes. But these operations are the inseparable

' Pragmalism. p. iq6.

• "The Moral FUlosophcr and the Moral life," In WiU M BtHmt ff.
}oi, 112, 109, and paisim.


parts of one activity through which a humanized and mofalized

world is developed out of the aboriginal potentialities. So
philosophy becomes the study of man as he works out his salva-
tion. What is his endowment and capacity? How docs his
knowing take place, and what axe the marks of its success?
What forms does reality assume as it passes through the
medium of the human mind ? What are the goods which
man seeks? What are the grounds, and what is the justifica-
tion, of his belief in ultimate success?

The characteristics of James's mind were intimately connected
with his conception of the mission of philosophy. He was dis-
tinguished by his extraordinary sense for reality. He had a
courageous desire to know the worst, to banish illusions, to take
life at itsword,and accept itschallenge. He had an unparalleled
capacity for apprehending things in their human aspect, as they
fill the mind, and are assimilated to life. So indefatigable was
his patience in observing these conjunctions and transitions in
their rich detail, that few of his critics have had patience enough
even to follow his lead. True to his empirical ideals, he aban-
doned the easier and more high-handed philosophy of abstrac-
tions for the more difficult and less conclusive philosophy of
concrete particulars. And finally, he had a sure instinct for
humanly interesting and humanly important problems. He
sought to answer for men the questions the exigencies of life led
them to ask. And where no certain answer was to be had, ^ce
men must needs live notwithstanding, he offered the prop of
faith. Making no pretence of certainty where he found the
evidence inconclusive, he felt the common human need of forg-
ing ahead even though the light be dim. Thus his philosophy -,
was his way of bringing men to the wisest behef which in their
half-darkness they can achieve. He was the frank partizan of
mankind, undeceiving them when necessary, but giving them
the benefit of every doubt.

To attribute James's power to his genius is as much as to say
that it escapes analysts. He was felt in his time as an original
intellectual and spiritual force, that can no more be divided and
inventoried than his philosophy can be distributed among the
hackneyed classifications of the schools. It is easy to say that
he owed much to his style; but it is plain that his style owed
everything to him. He was, it is true, a lover of form, endowed j


PHILOSOPHY OF WILLIAM JAMES


377


with the finest sensibilities, and stirred by the creative impulse;
but his style was always his instrument. He found it above all
a means of communication; for nothing was more notable about
him than the social quality of his thought. He wrote for his
readers, his vivid imagination of their presence guiding him
infallibly to the centre of their minds. And his style was also
the means of faithfully representing his experience. It was
figurative and pictorial, because the world he saw was a proces-
sion of concrete happenings, abounding in novelty and unique-
ness. For his originality lay, not in his invention, but in the
extraordinary freshness of his perception, and in an imagination
which was freed from convention only to yield itself utterly to
the primeval and native quahty of the world as he found it. His
thought was always of the actual world spread before him, of
what he called "the particular facts of life." He relied little
on dialectic, but brought his powers of observation into play
where the traditional philosophy had abstracted the problem
and carried it off into the closet. And to this first-hand acquaint-
ance Mth particulars he added a keen zest for metaphyi^ical
speculation. He was curious, as the natural man is curious,
loving the adventure of exploration, and preferring the larger rid-
dles of existence to the purely technical problems of the schools.

His resources were by no means limited to the results of his
own observation. He probably read more widely than any
philosopher of his day. He did not, however, value erudition
for its own sake, but only as a means of getting light. His
reading was always selective and assimilative; he converted it
at once into intellectual tissue, so that it gave him strength and
buoyancy and never merely a burden to carry. And he learned
from men as well as from books. Always governed by his Uk-
ings rather than his aversions, generous and open-hearted, men
who shrank from others gave their imsuspected best to him.
In short, his mind was instinctively discriminating. He not only
knew the good from the evil, but he was guided by a remark-
ably independent judgment of proportion. He was never led to
accept a thing as important simply because it had acquired a
certain professional or academic prominence; and he was rarely
imposed on by the resp)ectable humbug, though he o[>encd bis
mind to whatever was humanly significant, even though it
might be socially disreputable.


378 APPENDIX

It is impos^ble to divorce his iDtclIectual gifts from his cbar-
acter. His openmindedness, which has become proverbial, was
only one of many signs of his fundamental truthfulness. Having
no pride of opinion, and setting little store by his personal pres-
tige, his mind remained flexible and hospitable to the end. His
very modesty and guileiessness were sources of power. For his
modesty was not a form of self -consciousness, but a preoccu-
pation with things or persons other than himself. And bis
Cguilelessness was not a childlike naivetd, but a sincerity and
openness of motive. He was possessed of a certain shrewdness
and directness— an ability to come to the heart of affairs at a
stroke — that made him the wisest of counselors. But he bad
no ambitions which he attempted to conceal, and no preroga-
tives of which he was jealous; so that he met his students and
his friends with a natural simplicity and an entirely uncalcu-
lating indifference to distinctions of sodal eminence. He proved
the possibility of possessing taste and personal distinction with-
out pride or aloofness. And his democracy was a matter of
conviction, as well as of impulse. He believed heartily in the
institutions of his country, and shared those hopes of freedom,
peace, and happiness, which unite men and nerve tfaero to take
part in the work of civilization.

James did not found a school. He was incapable of that
patient brooding upon the academic nest that is necessary for
the hatching of disciples. The number of those who borrowed
his ideas is small and insignificant beside the number of those
that through him were brought to have ideas of their own. His
greatness as a teacher lay in his implanting and fostering of intel-
lectual independence. He prized his own university for its
individualism and tolerance, and for the freedom whidi it gave
him to subordinate the scholastic office and the scholastic method
to a larger human service. So the circle of his inBuence widened
to the bounds of European civilization; while his versatility,
his liberal sympathies, the coincidence of his ruling passions
with the deeper interests of mankind at large, and above all the
profound goodness of his heart, so diversified and humanized
this influence that there were few indeed too orthodox or too J
odd to respond to it.


INDEX


Absolutism, ch. viii; general mean-
ing of, 164 ff.; and pragmatism,
198. (See also under Mind.)

Acceleration, 56 ff.

Acquaintance, 225, 310, 354, 366

Activity, 70, 7i» 99» i37» 261 ff.,
279 ff., 341, 354 ff.i 373

AoNOSTiasM, 150, 152, 174

Analysis, 55, 60 ff., 83, 233, 236 ff.,
256

AvENARius, 299

Bacon, s, 6, 23, 33

Baillie, J. B., 133

Belief, and Theory, cb. i, 264 ff.,
345 ff., 369 ff.; definition of, 7 ff.,
326; solidarity of, 10 ff.; con-
servatism of, x8 ff.

Bergson, H., 50, 74, 223, 224, 229
ff., 238 ff., 251, 255 ff., 261 ff., 299ff.

Berkeley, 122 ff., 135 ff., 171, 280

Body, properties of, 51 ff.; feeling
of, 283 ff., 292 ff. (See also under
Physical Reality.)

boutroux, e., 36

Bradley, F. H., xox, 133, 149, 150,

157, i77» i8ii 2i4i 280
Browne, Sir Thomas, 19

BUCHNSR, 68 ff.

Cairo, E., 149, 156

Cassirsr, E., 146

Categories, the, 139 ff., 149, 158 ff.

Causality, 99 ff., 355; moral, 341 ff.

Civilization, 4, 47, 188, z6S, 328,

343

Chestbxton, G. K., 9

CHRISTIANITy, 5, I4i 3^


Common Sense, 48 ff.

CoMTE, 37

Concepts, scientific, 56 ff.; analyt-
ical version of, 60 ff., 63, 75;
critique of, 227 ff., 256 ff., 365 ff.

CoNsaousNESS, alleged priority of,
105 ff., 126 ff., 156 ff., 218 ff.,
315 ff.; and experience, 155, 314 ff.
(See also under Mind.)

Continuity, 103 ff., 233

Deists, 33

Descartes, 16 ff., 32, 33, 120 ff.,

309
Description, and Explanation, 53,

99 ff.; conditions of, 54 ff.; 96 ff.;

disparagement of, 93 ff., 99 ff*
Desire, 295, 331 ff.
Dewey, J., 202, 211, 225, 226, 239,

3i3» 315

DiLTHEY W., 153

DiONYSIUS THE ArEOPAGITE, I70

Dogmatism, 171 ff., 183 ff.
DuAUSM, 119 ff., 122 ff., 136, 308 ff.,

357

Ego-centric Predicament, argu-
ment from the, 129 ff., 133, 158,

217, 271, 317, 318
Ehrsnfels, C. v., 339
EMPiRiasM, 242 iOf., 363 ff.
Energy, 58 ff.

Epistemology. (See Knowledge.)
Equivocation, 169 ff., 180 ff.

Error, 204, 3^3 ff*

Ethics, 145, 192, 331 ff. (See also

under Morality, Value, Good,

Right.)


379


380 INI

EncKEN, R-, 113. '53. 'S4
Evil, problem of, 181, 346 ff'. 37*
EwALD, 0., 153
Exclusive Pakticulaiuty. error

of, ij8, 13B, 171, 186, 30Q, 341
Experience, 155, 3"4S-. 353. 3^3.
364 ff.

EXPEBIUEHIAUSU, 79 S.

Explanation. (See under Dk-
.)


Faitb. (See Beuev.)
FlCHTE, 144, 151
FoKCE, 6S, 69, 70 ff-. T
FORUALisM, i66£[., i;sS.
Freedom, 153, ^54. ^^i ff., 343 2.,

373. (See also under Indeteb-

imnsu.)
Freibcbo School, 145

Calilko, ijS., s6ff.

God, conception of, 33, 37, uo,
191 ff., 343, 36>, 371. (See tJso
under Mind, the univenol.)

Good, 31. 114, >67. 169 ff., 181,

Gbeen, T. H., 149. >S7, 3"8

Raeckcl, E., 71 ff.

Hecel, 144, 148 ff., 177. iSg

Heine, 179

HOBBBS, 117

HOBSOUSE, L. T., 189 ff.

Hume, 34, 37, 99, i36ff'> '97, jSo,

306 ff.
Hdntington, E. v., 98
HuxLEV, T. H., los
Hypothesis, 98

Idealisu, cardinal principle of, 38,
105, cb. vi, 154 ff.; and reli^on,
J8, 107, iQoff,; Platonic, 114 ff.;
modern, 117 ff.; proofs of, ii6ff.,
'56 ff., 3'5 ff>; objective or trans-
cendental, ch. vii; empirical, 141;
metaphysical, 143, 144, 14S ff.;
critical, 144 ff.; intellcctualistic,
144, 146, 148 S., 177; voluntaris-


tic, I44i 146. 150 ff


161. 178,


198; absolute, ch. viii, 315; and

civilization, 188 S.; and prag-
matism, «(7ff., 139, 947; and
ethics. 338

Ideas, 137, looff., 226, 131, 365,
3'7i 35". 357 ff-. 3^31 ■greement
of, 358; intention of, 358. (See
also under Mind, as content,
Knowledge.)

IioiANENCE, theory of, 306 ff.

IMKEDIACY, 194 ff., 137, 359

luuEDiATtsu «i. intellectualiam
i; and subjectivism, 139; and

lUUOBTALITV, IQl. 374

Indefinite PoTENTiAtrnf, 66 ff., 73
Independence, theory of, 30S,

313 ff.. 331 ff., jjsff.

Indetesuinisu, 371 ff.; plumlism
and, 149, 253; and time, zjoS-j
and intellect ualism, 154 ff.

Inknity, 103 ff.

Initial Pkedication, definition
116 ff., IJ3, 158, ai7, »7', 3"7

Intellectualisu, 211; critique of,
ch. *, 366ff.: 'virious; Mgfl.
>34ff.i 367; and indeterminitm,
i;4 S, (See also under Ideui^

ISM.) 2

Interest, 300 ff., 333, 342, 351 1

Introspection, J73, 175 ff., 288 I


Jaugs, W., 9. 197, »o6, S07, W9,
210, 214, 215, 224, 226, 133, 140,
144, 248, 240, 253, 263, 265, j66,
278, J84, 312. 344; phikaophy ol.
Appendix; theory of mind of,
349 ff.; theory of knowledge of,
356 ff.; theory of truth of, j6oS.;
philosophy of religion of, 369 ff,

Joachim, H. H., ijo, 155,

186, J2S

Jones, H., 190, 191

Kant, 34. 37. "8. '3*. txqB.,

142 ff., 17S, 1B0.338
Knowleooe, value of, 4 ff., 3»g ff„ _
368; theory of, ii9ff., 187; ]


(See

Jl


ism

m


m


H^H INDEX 381 ^H


' nmtic tbfory of, ch. ii, 241 ff.,


MOBAUTY, 333 ff. ^^^1


356 ff.; realistic theory of, ch. xiH;


Motor Theory, of consciousness, ^^^|


mediate, looff., 336, aji, 314 ff.,


39SS. ^^H


3SI. (S« also under Immediacy.


MUnstekbebg, H., 90, i78ff., iSi, ^^^|


Ideas, Intelleciualism, Msan-


191. i8a. 299, 335 ^^H


INC, Representation.)


MvsnciSM, 170, 181 ^^^1


Uw. ss, 'oo, 'SS. 341


Natobp, p., 145, 279 ^^^1


Ijt Roy. E., So. 8j, 130


Naturalism, definition of, 38. 45 ff. ; ^^^|


Lite, 197, ajS, aftj, 341; realistic


Daive, 63, 64, 68 ff.; criUcal. 63, ^^H


75 S.; and religion, 74. ch. v, 34s ^^H


LocsB, 33. IJOff.. 14)


S.i and pragmatism, 39, 198, ^^^|


L4XI1C, eiS., i4SlT-. (66, t7s, iSo,


319; and realism 39 ^^^|


lOJ, 109. 134 ff.. H9. 310, 519, 367


Nature, the knowledge oF, no, 122. ^^^|


LVMAN, E. W., tgi


(See also under Naturalism and ^^^^^^H


Science.) ^^^^^^I


McDorcAO.. W., J98


NECtSStTY, 140, 160 ^^^^^^^H


Mach, E., 78 (f.. 198, 310


McTagcakt, J. M. £., IS7, 177,


344 ^^^^^^^H


183. 191


OsTWALD, W.. 75 ^^^^^^H


MAftsrao School, 145


Mass, s7 B-


Panpsycsish, 315 ^^^^^^^H


Matesiausm, 68 ff. (See also wi-


pAflNI, C, 330, 364 ^^^^^^H


der Natukalism.)


Peasson. K., 76 ff. ^^^H


Mathematics, Si ff., tt6, 319


Perception, 305 ff., 226, 3S9 ff., ^^^|


Mbanwc. roi a.. 378, 3S8, 363


199. 359. 30^. 307, 3<3s ff. ^^H


Mechawsm, 566., 108, 116, 198.344


PUENOMENAUSM, 365 ^^^H


Memory, 194


PuiLOSOPBV, and belief, 4, 31 S.; ^^^|


Mind, 78, 79; m substince. 136;


and body, 283 ff.. 291 ff., 298 ff..


ch. ii, 85 S.: theoretical, 29, 40, ^^H


107. 154. 319 ff- ^^H


aoiutc, 140, 143. 144. 148. iSo.


Physical World. 27;, 308 ff., 353. ^^H


183. iSsjas action of subject, 254,


(See also under Body.) ^^H


374, 379 ff., J97 ff.; realistic theory


Plato, 31, 114 ff., 167 S.. 171 ff. ^^^|


of, ch. xii; de&nitioti of, 303 fl.,


Pluralism, 242 fl., 371 ff.; and em- ^^^|


323; at content, 274, 275 ff.,


piricism, 343 B.; and external rela- ^^^|


286 ff.; relational theory of. 377 ff.,


tioDS, 144 ff-; and religion. 346 ff.; ^^^|


330, 3S»ff.; as interest. 3002..


and indeterminism, 149, 153, 344 ^^^|


3SO ff.; evolution ol, 304; the ani-


PoiNCARi, H., 79ff. ^^^1


PosnrviSK, 3S ^^^1


MlBACLES, 88


pRACMATisu. definiUoo of, 39. ^^H


Monism, of matter, 68 S.; of force.


197 ff-. 167, 3'^3. 364; theory of ^^H


70 ff.; of substance, ji ff.; episte-


mological. 114 ff., 308; absolutism


and naturalism, 39. 198, 319; ^^H


and, 166, 24s, 373


and realism. 213 ff.; and idealism, ^^H


Montague, W. P.. 316


217 ff.. 239. 247; and empiricism, ^^^^|


Moo»e. a. W.. 309, 218


243 ff.; and reliipon, 246 ff., 364 S. ^t^^^M


MooBE, G. E., 321 ff.. 331 ff.


(Sec also under James, W.) ^^^^H


382


., li, 189, 34S
pKopHio-CEPTrvE Sensations, jgiff.
PsEiiDO-siMPUcmr, 65 B., 75, 237 B.,

163. J71, 380 fi., 336
PsvcuoiXtciSM, 146, i9g
PsvcaOLOOY, 173, 303, 308, 3SI


Rasbdall, H., 386

Rationalism, ii+fi.

Realism, defioitbn of, 39; the new,
306 S., 3i3i and theoretical phi-
l'»sopiiy, 40. 3=9 ff- 345. =rgu-
mcDts for, 315 ff.; and idealism,
141, 1G3, 173; and pragrnatuim,
ai3ff., »40, 373; theory of mind
of, ch. lii; as a polemic, 371; and
naturalism, 39, 173; philosophy of
life of, ch. xiv; and religion, 344 S.

Reid, T., 307, 316

Relation, 101 B., 157, 334, 308,
3S3, 365; eiienml, 144 S., 319 S.,
3S3. 374

Relativism, 78, 133, 138, 333

Reugioh and philosophy, ch. it,
and belief. 38 ff., 364 B., 3456.,
367 B.\ definition of, 38, 369; jus-
tification of, 340, 344 ff.; and
science, 30 ff., 35, 8s ff-, and
idealism, 38, 107^ and absolutism,
ch. viii; and pragmatism, 346 B.,
364 S., 369 B.; and pluralism,
146 S., 373; and realism, 344 ff.

Representation, 201, 311 fl., 357.
(See alao under Ideas.)

Rev, a., 3s

RiCKEBT, H., 161, 163. 314
RlGHTNEBS, JI7, 337, 333 B.
RlTSCEUANlSM, 340

Romanticism, 37 B., 153 ff., 330
RovcE, ]., 161, 175, 184 ff., 191
Russell, B„ s'i 3is. 3>8, 315.
331 S., 34S ff-


Satisfaction, S17
ScEPTicFSH, 136 ff.
Sheshington, C. S., 2gj
SCHILLEB, F. C. S., 90. g3, 3


361, 366


319, 148, 951,


Schmidt, K., 98

Science and philosophy, cb.

theory, 35 ff.; definition of, »s ff-!
and religion, 30 S., 35, 85 ff.; lim-
its of, ch. v; fallibility of, 91 ff.;
scope and method of, cb. iiii
prestige of, 46 ff,; and common
sense, 48 B. ; and naturalism, 45 S.

Secondary QttALITiES, 334

Selt, 156, 161, 38t B. (See
under Mind.)

Sensatiok, 319, 351

Sensationaush, 76 ff .

Solipsism, 317

Space, reality of, 100 1
infinity of, 103 S.

SPEctnjinvE Dogha, the, 64
165, 371

Spenceb, H., 37, 70 ff., 350

Spinoea, 33, 116 ff., 168, 17:

Spisit, 153. (See also under M'

Stephen, L., 6, 7

Subjectivism, 133, 317. 337; ideal-
istic escape from, 163 ff., 318; and
pragmatism, 317 ff.; and imme-
diatism. 339

SuBjECTtviTV, 333 ff.

Substance, 66, 73 ff., 75, 115,
308

.Sdpebnatokalism, 88 ff,

SvNTBETtc Unity, 139 ff.,
iS6fl.,3'7


Dta^H


1


Taylor, A. E., loi, 103

Teleology, 115, 173, 341 ff.

Theory and belief, ch. i, 364 S.,
339 ff.; definition of, 8 ff., Jo6 ff.,
313, 361 ff.; and science, 35 S.

Thing IN Itselt, 311

Thought, 160. 397, 317. (See alao
under Khowledce,

Time, reality of, looS., 105, a_
'35. 350 ff., »ssK'! infinity t

103 B.
Transcendence, 311 ff., 314


INDEX


383


Truth, 184, 302 ff., 265 ff., 323 ff., Voluntausic, 198, 222. (See also
360 ff. under Idsausm.)


Valub, 180, 331 ff., absoluteness of;

335 ff.; realization of, 339 ff.; as

cause, 341 ff.
Verbal Suogsshon, 75, 170, x8x,

271

VSRinCATION, 30Sff.9 26$ ff., 362,

370


Ward, J., 91 ff., 94 ff.
Washburn, M. F., 286, 302, 303
WsMLXY, R. M., 90, 191

WsSTERlfARCK, 336

Will, 178 ff.

WooDBRnxsx, F. J. E., 277, 278

Words, function of, 290


1


9


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


avoid fine, this book should be returned or
*r before the da*^? '^<?t 'v ^y1 ' '


V •


;26


b28


4 ,n


M'28


'<J 1929
-B 1929


SEP 3 ISiil

1961 u mr
nni n ligi


•»»


■'■''■fe/.t-


'"(.-7a


Stanford University Ubrary

Stanfm^ California


In order that others may lue thii book*
please return it as soon as possible, but
not later than the date due.
